Space, Time, and Deity, Vol. 2 (Samuel Alexander, 1920)
==========================================================
Completes Alexander's system: mind, value, and deity in emergent evolution. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (in.ernet.dli.2015.85976).

UNIVERS/ 

LIBRARY 



OU 174371 > 


< 


NIVERSAL 








SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 



MACMIIXAN Axr> CO , Limited 

L()ND(^\ . H<)\in\Y- < AI Cirri A • MADls’AS 
MrA.HOCUNE 

THE MACMII.LAN COMPANY 

NEW YOKK ‘ HOSION • CHI (.ADO 
DAT I. \S ♦ SAN EK'ANCISCO 


THE MACMILLAN CO OF CANADA, Ltd 

'I(>K()NTO 



SPACE TIME AND 
DEITY 

THE GIFFORD LECTURES AT GIASGOW 

1916—1918 


S. ALEXANDER 

M.A., l,l,.l>., I- 1;. 

HON. FtLKOW OH IINCOIN (OlM-rE, OXIOKH 
PKOKESbOK OF PHILOSOPHY IN THl I\1\I K:IIV OF MANCHKSIFK 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON 
1920 



COPYRIGII r 



CONTENTS 

BOOK 111 

THE ORDER AND PROBLEMS OF EMPIRICAL 
EXISTENCE 

CHAPTER I 

'The Clue to Quality 
A. Mind and iTb Neural Bash 

IMGF 

Iniroductory ....... 3 

Identity of mental with its neural process . . .4 

Consciousness something new in life . . . .6 

Consciousness not an cpiphenomcnon . . . .8 

No parallelism of neural and mental processes . . .9 

Causality between mind and brain . . , .12 

Animism, (1) The argument from meaning . . • *3 

(2) The argument from fusion . . . . .18 

Unity of consciousness . . . . . .22 

Divided consciousness and the unconscious . . .25 

B. The Apprehension of other Minds 

Acquired not by analogy but direct experience . . .31 

The exper ence is of sociality . . . . .32 

The grades of such experience . . . . .36 


V 



VI 


SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


CHAPTER II 

The Order of Empirical (^ualitiel 
A. A Formula for Space-Time 

I'A(,L 

Time as the mind of Space . . . . .38 

Grounds of this formula. The relation of point-instants to one 

another . . . . . . .39 

Complexities of detail . . . . . .4' 

Mind a form of Time, not Time a form of mind . . 43 

B. The Ordi-r of Qualities 

Qualities as emergents . . . . . .45 

Tune as the generator of qualities . . . .47 

Space -Time anterior to material things. Misconceptions 

superseded . . . . . .48 

Matter . . . . . . . • 5^ 

Secondary qualities. ‘ ]\‘rmancnt secondary qualities ’ . . 55 

Life . . , . . . . .61 

Entelechy. The antithesis of mechanical and vital . . 64 

Summary. ‘ Minds ’ of various levels differ in kind . . 67 

Corollaries ...... 70 

CHAPTER HI 

The Empirical PROBLEM^ 

How the problems arise . . . . .74 

The problems stated . . . . . *75 

CHAPTER IV 

Mind and Knowing 
A. The Cognitive Relation 

Cognition as an instance of comprcsence. Problem 1 . . . 81 

Images and memory. Analogues . . . .83 



CONTENTS 


vii 

PAGE 

Comparison of this result with direct experience . . 87 

Mind never an object to itself ... .89 

The selectiveiiess of mind. Problem III. . . .90 

'Phings anc objects . . ... . .92 

Alleged refei mce in cognition to something behind presentation 95 
Aspects of selectiveness . . . . . -99 

Corollaries : (i) Various kinds of compresencc. (2) Extension 
to lower levels. (3) Higher cxistents than mind. (4) 'Ehc 
objccc not dependent on the mind . . . *.102 


B. Mind and Body 

Experience of the body in knowing .... 107 

The searchlight view of knowing. Its shortcoming . .109 


CHAPTER V 

Mind and its Acts 

Mental acts responses to objects . . . .116 

Mind made up of conations . . . . .118 

Practical and tlieoretical conation , . . .120 

Feeling . . . . . . .122 

The contents of the mental act : empirical determinations of 

categorial characters . . . . .126 

The spatio-temporal mental correlate of the quality of sensa- 
tion. Problem II. . . . . .128 

The universal clement in sensation . . . .131 

Intensity of sensing . . . . . .132 

Has thinking intensity ? . . . . .135 

Summary . . . . . . .137 

Secondary jualitics and the mind. Secondary qualities and the 

138 


sense-organs 



SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


viii 

CHAPTER VI 

Till Ways oi- Apprhhending Catecoriis and ^)uai<ties 

PAGE 


'J'hc question . . . . . . .143 

Intuition of Space and Time ..... 144 

C.iutions against misunderstanding . . . .148 

'riie unity of mind . . . . . .150 

Intuition and enjoyment of the categories — Substance, Causr^lity iji 
Causality as between mind and things . . . .135 

Apprehension of matter . . . . .158 

Apprehension of secondary qualities. Intrinsic extension and 

extent . . . . . .160 

Intensity of sensum intuited ..... 161 

Extent of sensum . . . . . .164 

History of ‘ extensity.’ Place as “ partial content ” of sensation 165 
Remarks on space-perception — Motor sensations. Local signs as 

IKripheral . . . . . . .168 

Apprehension of life . . . . . .170 

Apprehension of foreign life . . . . 174 

Apprehension of niiiul . . . . . .176 

Orticr of growth of the forms of apprehension . . .177 

Soppeementary No'it. On Localisation . . .178 


CHAPTER VII 

Appearances 


Thing as synthesis of appearances. Problem III. . *183 

d'he kinds of appearances . . . . .184 

Variations of real appearances : (i) due to position in place and 

time of percipient ; (2) due to varying sensitiveness . 187 

Mere appearances. Problem IV. . . . .191 

Variation in primary qualities. Real appearances. Reasin of 

the appearance . . . . . .192 



CONTENTS 


IX 


PAGF 

Mere spatial appearances . . . . .197 

How thf re can be mistakes in space-perception . . 200 

The superioritv of touch ..... 203 

Corrective of defects of intuition .... 205 


CHAPTER VIII 

Illusion and Ideas 

Illusory appearances. Problem IV. . . . . 209 

The source of illusory appearances . . . .211 

Their non-mental character ; and how they are possible . 213 

‘ Unreality ’ of illusions . . . .216 

Memory-appearances . . . . . .218 

Constructive imagination . . . . .219 

Assumptions and unrealities ..... 222 

Appearances in mind itself . . . . .225 

Public and private, personal and impersonal, experience. Inter- 

subjective intercourse : its function . . . 227 

Supi'LLMLNTARV NoEE. Oil thc Possibility of Many Spaces or 

'i'lmes . . . . . . .233 


CHAPTER IX 

Value 

A. Tertiary Qualities in General 
Values arise from amalgamation of mind with objects. Secondary 


and tertiary qualities . , . . .236 

Apy -^ciations arise from the community^ of minds . .239 

Thc character of the object of value . . . .241 

The experience of values. Values are not qualities . . 243 

The reality of values ...... 244 



X 


SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


B. Trlth and Krror 

Reality and truth 


y y 

247 

Belief ..... 


247 

The object (d judging . 

. 

249 

What inalvcs truth true. Not corrcspontlence 

coherence. What a science is 

to reality. But 

2 c;j 

Coherence as determined by reality 

• 

251- 

Incoherence and real opposition 

• 

2 56 

'rruth and error related to mind. Truth and reality 

257 

No truth or error for a mere individual 

. 

260 

Krror as the oblique judgment of reality 

• 

261 

Progress in truth. No degrees of truth or 
perfection . . . 

reality ; but of 

263 

Pragmatism .... 


265 

Mciital }iropositions. Mental error 


266 

The science o( mind 


268 

I.ogu- .... 


270 

C. CiooDNtss AND Evil 

Diiference ol goodness and truth 


273 

Nature of morality 


274 

Goodness and the good 


276 

Union of miiul and objects in goodness . 


278 

Moral evil .... 


280 

Progress in morals 


282 

Morality not scU-contradictory . 


282 

Good and evil in general 


283 

Moral values .... 

. 

285 


D. Beauty and Ugliness 

Moaning of beauty ...... 287 

Beaut) partly real, partly illusory. Natural beauty . . 287 

Contrast with illusion ...... 290 



CONTENTS 


XI 


Beauty due in part to mind . . . . .291 

Beauty a d coherence . . . . . .29^ 

Beauty in plies coherence ot minds .... 294 

i . The Relations of the Tertiary Oualities 


Goodness as inclusive ... . . 297 

Beauty as inclusive ...... 298 

All values included in truth . . . . 299 

F. Value in Gi neral 

'^Fertiary qualities as (i) relations ; (2) typical ; (3) social . 302 

Reflective and instinctive value. Economic values . . 304 

Value in general. Problem \^1. . . . . 307 

Darwinism and value , . . 309 

T'he range of value. A lacuna. . . .310 

Corollaries . . . . . .313 


CHAPTER X 

Fri M)0M 

Freedom as determination in enjoyment. Problem V. . *315 

Verification from experiences of freedom and unfreedom. Con- 
firmatory exceptions. Lower and higher freedom . .316 

Freedom and preference . . . . .321 

Freedom and prediction. The limits of prediction. The cal- 
culator of Laplace ..... 323 

Freedom and necessity. Freedom not indetermination . . 329 

Other mistaken criteria . . . . . -331 

Universality of freedom . . . . -332 

Summary of the Empirical Problems . . . -333 

SupPLEME^ CARY Note. Plavc all the Forms of Existence existed 

always ^ , . . - 33 ^ 



SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


BOOK IV 

DEITY 

CHAPTER I 

Deity and God 


Two ways of defining God . . . . .34.1 

Method ....... 343 

Deity the next higher empirical quality than mind . . 341; 

Kxtcnsion of the conception of' deity . . . ’ 3 f7 

Deity not spirit . . . . . .349 

'Idieorics of God as a spirit ..... 350 

God as universe possessing deity . . . .352 

Personification of this conception : (a) finite god . . 334 

(h) Infinite God . . . . . .356 

(jod’s infinitude. We are finitely infinite ; (jod infinitely infinite 338 
Ciod as actual . . . . . . -361 

God and other infinites. Unqualitied infinites actual ; but not 

quail tied infinites . . . . . . 362 

Finite gods and infinite (lod ..... 365 

H(nv can a variable C]od be tlie whole universe } Blending of' 

finite gods and infinite deity .... 366 

The world-soul ...... 368 

Comparison with the notion of an Absolute Spirit . . 369 


CHAPTER II 

Deity and the Religious Sentiment 


The religious sentiment and its object . 

'Fhc nature of its object. Not a mere imagination 
How a future quality can affect us 


373 

375 

378 



CONTENTS 


xiii 

PAGE 

Assurance of God and of foreign minds . . . . 380 

Religious riteria of the conception of God. (i) God greater 


than lan ; '2) universal ; (3) different in quality from 

man ; ^4) responsive to man, and worthy of man^s trust . 382 

Theism for i ligion and speculation. Its strength, and weakness 388 
Pantheism . . . . . . . 392 

Is the present conception thcistic or pantheistic ^ Transcend- 
ence and immanence of (jod .... 394 

Reflective notions of religion. Is God creative ? God’s father- 
hood. God’s supposed timelessness : its difficulties for 
theism ; Nid for pantheism .... 396 


CHAPTER III 

Deity and Valup 


The approach to deity . . . . . .402 

Religion and conduct. Religion not an outgrowth from morality 404 
Deity and goodness. Deity not a value but a quality . . 408 

The communal element in religion . . . .411 

Deity on the side of goodness. Comparison with life . .412 

Faith in the conservation of value. Religion as faith in deity . 416 

Conservation of evil . . . . . .419 

The problem of evil ...... 420 

Immortality . . . . . . .423 

Deity and feeling. Difference of God and finites in respect of 

feeling. Summary . . . . .425 

A brief index ....... 428 


INDEX 


431 




BOOK III 

THE ORDER AND PROBLEMS OF 
EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 




CHAPTER I 


THE CLUE TO QUALITY 

A. Mind and its Neural Basis 

Empirical things are complexes of space-time with their introduc- 
qualities ; and it is now my duty to attempt to show how 
the diiferent orders of empirical existence are related to 
each other, and in particular to explain more precisely the 
nature of qualities which hitherto have merely been 
described as being correlative with their underlying 
motions, the exact nature of this relation having been 
left over for further consideration. To do this is the 
second and perhaps the more difficult of the two problems 
assigned to metaphysics in the Introduction. The first 
was to describe the fundamental or a priori elements of 
experience. The second was to explain what empirical 
existence is and to indicate those relations among empirical 
existences which arise out of the a priori features of all 
existence, if any such can be discovered. In making 
this attempt I am met by a particular difficulty. My 
principal object is to ask whether minds do not fall into 
their appropriate place in the scale of empirical existence, 
and to establish that they do. It would be most con- 
vincing if minds were first mentioned in their place at 
the end of the scale. But this procedure would compel 
me to use conceptions which would remain difficult until 
their application to minds was reached. Moreover, the 
nature of mind and its relation to body is a simpler problem 
in itself than the relation of lower qualities of existence 
to their inferior basis ; and for myself it has afforded the 
clue to the interpretation of the lower levels of existence. 

3 



4 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


I shall therefore adopt a method of exposition (not of 
demonstration) which partakes of compromise, aid shall 
preface the inquiry with two problems as' to r ind, the 
solution of which can be used as a clue and a means of 
simplification. The one problem is the relatiorr of mind 
to the living organism with which, or with a part of which, 
it is correlated. The other is the relation of minds to 
one another. I shall then be able to state a hy^pothesis 
as to Space-Time and the kinds of empirical existence, — 
matter, life, mind, to name the most obvious distinctions, 
— which arise within the one Space-Time. 

i(k*ntity of Mind is at once the case which most urgently forces 
wit'h Its attention the problem of quality and at chc same 

neural titiic offcrs the readiest means for its solution. For our 
mind is experienced by us as a set of connected processes 
which have the character of being mental, possessing the 
quality of ‘ mentality,' or as I shall most frequently say, 
the character of consciousness. Whether there is any 
department of mind, which, remaining mind, may be said 
to be unconscious, and in what sense this is true, is a 
question I shall defer for the present. Any one who 
wishes can substitute for the quality of consciousness the 
quality of being mind, and can, if he pleases, continue 
to think of mentality as something less specified than 
consciousness. A mind, then, is for immediate experience 
a thing or organisation of processes with this distinctive 
property of being mind, and, however much interrupted 
it may be, it is normally linked up by memory in its 
various forms. Under consciousness I include without 
further ado those vague and indistinct mental processes 
on the extreme margin of consciousness which are some- 
times described as subconscious, such as, in general, the 
tone of the organic sensations when we are occupied with 
external events. Such then is mind as we experience it. 
But we experience also our bodies, and, moreover, in the 
organic and motor sensations, such as hunger and oreath- 
ing and the like, we experience our bodies as alive, while 
they are also experienced by touch and sight, etc., as being 
physical things of the order of external things. And, as 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


5 


we have seen in a previous chapter, experience leads us 
on to connect our mental processes with our body, and 
in partiv ular with our central nervous system, and more 
specifica ly still with a certain part of our brain, and to 
localise our mental processes in the same places and 
times ^ as certain neural processes. We thus become 
aware, partly by experience, partly by reflection, that a 
process with the distinctive quality of mind or conscious- 
ness is in the same place and time with a neural process, 
that is, with a highly dilTerentiated and complex process 
of our living body. We are forced, therefore, to go 
beyond the mere correlation of the mental with these 
neural processes and to identify them. There is but one 
process which, being of a specific complexity, has the 
quality of consciousness ; the term complexity being 
used to include not merely complexity in structure or 
constitution of the various motions engaged, but also 
intensity, and above all unimpeded outlet, that is, con- 
nection with the other processes or structures with which 
the process in question is organised. For failure in 
intensity may mean failure of an otherwise sufficiently 
complex process to be conscious, and so may any cause 
which disconnects it from the rest of the neural processes 
which in their connection give us mind. Correlation is 
therefore an inadequate and misleading word to describe 
the relation of the mental to the corresponding neural 
process, and is only used provisionally so long as the two 
are separated from one another. In truth, according to 
our conception, they are not two but one. That which 
as experienced from the inside or enjoyed is a conscious 
process, is as experienced from the outside or contem- 
plated a neural one. When we speak of them separately 
it is that we consider the same process first in respect of 
the character which allies it with simpler vital processes, 
and second in respect of the new quality which emerges 
at this higher stage of vital complexity. It has then to 
be accepted as an empirical fact that a neural process of 
a certain level of development possesses the quality of 
consciousness and is thereby a mental process ; and, 

^ For the qualifications as to position in Time see vol. i. pp. 130 fi^. 



6 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 

alternately, a mental process is also a vital one of a 
certain order. 

Conscious- Now it is iiot the character of being vital that gives the 

neissome- mental process its individuality, but its new quality of 

thing new ^ , i \ r 

in life. mentality or consciousness. Let us take as examples ot 
vitality such operations as digestion or breathing or 
secretion. There is no reason that I know for not 
reckoning with them physiological reflex action or any 
neural process not attended with consciousness or mind. 
But while mental process is also neural, it is not merely 
neural, and therefore also not merely vital. For, that 
mind should emerge, there is required a constellation of 
neural or other vital conditions not found in vital actions 
which are not mental. To use the word which Mill has 
made familiar, mind requires, as a fict of experience, a 
collocation of conditions which constitutes something 
new. What that collocation is, might be very difficult 
for any one but a physiologist to say, and perhaps not 
possible completely for him. I take it that in the main 
what determines the difference of the psychical from the 
merely physiological process is its locality in the nervous 
system, implying as this does the special structure of the 
living nervous elements in that locality. It may still 
be open for discussion at what level in the brain-structure 
consciousness is found, whether it may attend processes 
in some of the higher ganglia or whether it belongs ex- 
clusively to the cerebral cortex, or whether, again, it is not 
different if it belongs to a lower and a higher level in the 
cortex itself But assuming that the conception of local- 
isation of mental functions in specific regions of the brain 
is physiologically correct,^ we may safely regard locality 
of the mental process as what chiefly makes it mental 
as distinct from merely neural, or what distinguishes the 
different sorts of mental processes from one another. 
This is, however, a subsidiary matter for our purposes. 

^ Always of course with the proviso alluded to before (Bk. I. ch. hi. 
vol. i. p. io8), that the localisation of functions in a part of the bram 
does not mean that only that part of the brain is concerned in subserving 
the function, but only that it is the part principally so concerned. 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


7 


What counts Is, that without the specific physiological or 
vital constellation there is no mind. All less complex 
vital coi stellatlons remain purely vital. Thus not all 
vital proc jsses are mental. There is not, or not necessarily, 
to each neurosis a corresponding psychosis. The equiva- 
lent proposition is, that while all psychoses are neuroses, 
the psychoses imply the emergence of a new feature, that 
of mind. It would follow that mental process may be 
expressible completely in physiological terms but is not 
merely physiological but also mental. Its resolution Into 
physiological terms may be infinitely difficult, and even 
if it can be performed it remains that the statement of 
these condi^-ions only means mental action because we are 
already acquainted with the fact of their mentality. To 
put the matter in different terms : suppose we regard 
the description of mind as a chapter of physiology ; It 
would still be the physiology of mental action ; we should 
still be attending to this kind of physiological constellation 
because it is the basis of mind, and should be directed to 
It from psychology. Nor, as we shall see later, could any 
physiological knowledge of the physiological constellation 
implied in a mental action enable us to predict that it 
would have the mental quality. 

Mental process is therefore something new, a fresh 
creation, which, despite the possibility of resolving it into 
physiological terms, means the presence of so specific a 
physiological constitution as to separate It from simpler 
vital processes. I do not mean, to take a particular 
and interesting case, that the foresight of ends as 
distinguished from mere vital purposiveness, is not also 
vital. Every idea of an end to be gained, every thought 
of a universal, or of a combination to be made executive 
by some invention, I shall assume to be also a 
physiological process. I mean that such processes 
though they may be reduced to the class of vital processes 
are so distinct from the remainder of the class that they 
hold a privileged position in it. Precisely in the same 
way the king is a man and belongs to the same class with 
his subjects. But he is not one of his subjects. Abt 
Vogler in Browning’s poem declares of the musician 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Conscious- 
ness not a 
cpipheno- 
mcnon. 


‘‘ that out of three sounds he frames not a fourth sound 
but a star/’ Out of certain physiological conditions 
nature has framed a new quality mind, which is there- 
fore not itself physiological though it lives and moves 
and has its being in physiological conditions. Hence 
it is that there can be and is an independent science 
of psychology, and that the translation of mental processes 
into their physiological counterparts follows the lead of 
the more primary description of mind. Mind is thus 
at once new and old. No physiological constellation 
explains for us why it should be mind. But at the same 
time, being thus new, mind is through its physiological 
character continuous with the neural processes which are 
not mental. It is not something distinct and b»*oken off 
from them, but it has its roots or foundations in all the 
rest of the nervous system. It is in this sense that mind 
and mental process are vital but not merely vital. 

Hence it follows that we are entitled summarily 
to dismiss the conception that mind is but an inert 
accompaniment of neural process, a kind of aura which 
surrounds that process but plays no effective part of its 
own : the doctrine that mind is an epiphenomenon of 
nervous process, which nervous process would continue 
to work equally well if mind were absent. The doctrine 
is not simply to be rejected because it supposes some- 
thing to exist in nature which has nothing to do, no 
purpose to serve, a species of noblesse which depends on 
the work of its inferiors, but is kept for show and might 
as well, and undoubtedly would in time be abolished. It 
is to be rejected because it is false to empirical facts. 
The mental state is the epiphenomenon of the neural 
process. But of what neural process } Of its own 
neural process. But that process possesses the mental 
character, and there is no evidence to show that it would 
possess its specific neural character if it were not also 
mental. On the contrary, we find that neural processes 
which are not mental are not of the same neural order 
as those which are. A neural process does not cease 
to be mental and remain in all respects the same neural 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


9 


process as before. Even if it remains in the same place, 
its connection with the rest of the brain is in some way 
disturbec , and it cannot proceed freely on its course. 

The neural process which carries thought becomes 
changed into a different one when it ceases to carry 
thought. All the available evidence of fact leads to the 
conclusion that the mental element is essential to the 
neural process which it is said to accompany by way of 
embellisnment, and is not accidental to it, nor it in turn 
indifferent to the mental feature. Epiphenomenalism is 
a mere fallacy of observation.^ 

It is otherwise with the other well-known doctrines of Noparallel- 
the relation of body and mind. The statement which has , 

1 • y ‘ A .... neural and 

been given above is by no means new in principle nor mental 
for that matter in its particular form. It is a species of 
the identity doctrine of mind and body, maintaining that 
there are not two processes, one neural, the other mental, 
but one. We shall do well to deal shortly with these other 
doctrines, not in order to treat the subject with thorough- 
ness but to defend it sufficiently for our objects against 
the rival conceptions, or at least to exhibit the contrast 
between it and these conceptions. 

The mental process and its neural process are one 
and the same existence, not two existences. As mental, 
it is in my language enjoyed by the expericnt ; as neural 
it is contemplated by an outsider or may be contemplated 
in thought by the expcrient himself. There can therefore 
be no parallelism between the series of mental and the 
series of neural or physiological events, such as is postulated 
by the strict theory of so-called psychophysical parallelism. 

That theory was devised to give expression to the 
complete disparity of the merely physiological and the 
mental, and the reason for it disappears so soon as it is 

^ Mr, Bosanquet has an admirable sentence {Value and Destiny of the 
Individual^ London, 1913, p. 3) summing up the results of his previous 
treatment of the subject (Lect. v.) in his preceding volume. It seems 
to me that the fertile point of view lies in taking some neuroses — not all — 
as only complete in themselves by passing into a degree of psychosis.” 

See also the rest of the paragraph, which is too long to quote, where it is 
however taken for granted that the activity of mind is non-spatial. 



lO 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


recognised that what corresponds to the mental is not 
merely physiological but the bearer of a new quality. 
It solved or evaded the problem by regarding t^ e mental 
series as entirely independent of the neural and yet in 
precise correspondence therewith. The difficulties of 
establishing such precise correspondence in detail rhay be 
neglected here, and they are probably not insuperable. 
But it is evident (as Mr. Ward convincingly pointed 
out that an exact correspondence of two completely 
disconnected series, which do not influence each other, is 
no more than a restatement of the problem. The only 
solution it offers is that the problem must be left 
unsolved. It could therefore at most be rccepted for 
psychological purposes as a compendious statement of 
the fact that every psychosis has its corresponding 
neurosis. There still remains the metaphysical question 
whether the mind whose processes are mental is not a 
being which interacts with the brain, or whether, as I 
have urged, the mind is not itself identical with the 
totality of certain neural processes as they are enjoyed. 

But even as a psychological convenience, the theory 
is without justification and superfluous, and moreover 
false in what it suggests. Psychology is concerned with 
a parallelism between the mental series and another series 
of a different order, the series of physical objects of 
which the mental processes are aware. One of the draw- 
backs of the order of exposition I am adopting is that I 
must take for granted what will only be fully clear 
hereafter (though it has been formulated provisionally in 
the Introduction), that the object of the mind in any 
mental process is something non-mental, which is con- 
templated, while the mental process is enjoyed. To each 
non-mental object (and there is no mental process which 
is without its non-mental object, even if it be only a 
sensum which is the object of sensing, even if it be only 
the internal condition of the percipient’s body as in 
organic sensation) there corresponds a mental process 
which has the quality of conscious awareness. As the 

^ Naturalism and Agnosticism^ Pt. iii. Lect. xi. (vol. ii. ist ed , 
London, 1899). 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


1 1 

object varies, so does the neural process or the mental 
process vary. But there is no parallelism of the neural 
ana the menta^ series of which psychology should take 
account. They are one. Psychology considers the series 
from the point of view of the experient or enjoyer ; 
physiology from the point of view of the onlooker, or, if 
of the experient himself, not in his character of experiencing 
the mental process but of reflecting on its basis in neural 
process. 

I can only account for the admission of a metaphysical 
miracle as a convenient psychological fiction, by supposing 
that mental processes were believed to have not merely 
the quality cf consciousness, but other qualities disguised 
under the name of ‘ content ’ which varied with the object. 
If the sensory object blue or the image of a table is in 
some way contained in the apprehension of it, doubtless 
there is an unbridged chasm between the neural process 
which clearly has no such ‘ content ’ and the mental process 
which has. No one has indeed imagined that a mental 
process was itself blue or tabular. Yet these processes 
are supposed to be qualified correspondingly, or at least 
to have before them presentations or ideas which are not 
themselves merely external or a selection from what is 
external. The lingering tradition of representationism 
provides a mental process (hcJice called a mental state) 
with a mental object. But once we recognise that mental 
processes have no character, beyond the quality of being 
mental, other than such as all processes present, intensity 
or locality or velocity and the like, that is to say, empirical 
forms of categorial characters, all reason is removed for 
supposing the mental process to be a different existent 
from the neural one. That neural process differs with 
every difference in the object which stimulates it to 
activity, or upon which it is directed. The neurosis of 
green occurs for instance in a different place from that of 
sweet. The neuroses all possess the vital quality but are 
different configurations of categorial characters. In like 
manner the psychoses present, corresponding to the 
qualities of the object, differences in the process-features 
of the psychosis ; but there is nothing to indicate the 



12 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. lit 


Causality 
between 
mind and 
brain. 


difference of quality of the object but these process- 
features. The separation of the mental process from the 
neural one is therefore superfluous, for it is the same 
process-features which are in the- one case enjoyed and 
in the other contemplated. Ultimately this separation 
depends upon failing to recognise the distinctness of the 
mental process from its non-mental object. It is therefore 
not only superfluous but founded in error. 

If we do not regard the mind as the connected totality 
of its mental processes and therefore identical with the 
totality of the physiological processes of which they are the 
presence in enjoyment, the only alternative is some form 
of animism ; which conceives the mind as an independent 
entity which acts upon, or is acted upon by, the brain, or 
operates through it as the instrument of mind. On our 
view it still remains true that mind and brain interact if 
the phrase is properly interpreted. Just as we continue 
to speak of sunrise and sunset, though it is the earth that 
revolves, so we may continue to say under a certain proviso 
that the mind, as in an act of will, acts upon the brain 
directly and produces indirectly movements of the limbs ; 
or that a stimulus excites the mind through the brain and 
sets going a train of thought. The proviso under which 
such language is permissible is that no brain process shall 
be understood to cause its corresponding mental process 
and no mental process its corresponding brain process. 
Let large letters denote the psychical and small ones the 
neural series. What we have then in fact is a series, 

B/>, Cr, etc., where some of the small letters may have no 
corresponding large letter at all. Now A does not cause 
a but is identical with it ; but A being also a may cause 
the next member of the series and if b is equivalent to 
B, A causes also B. Strictly speaking, the effect of A is 
B and of b. But in so far as A docs not exist without 
<7, A also causes b. And where some of the steps in the 
causal chain as in willing are purely neural, A causes 
them because it is itself a neural process a. In like 
manner no sensory neural process a causes the corre- 
sponding sensing A, for it actually is that process ; but in 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


13 


so far as it is identical with A it may be said to cause the 
next psychical event B. In this way we may legitimately 
say that my determination to strike a man causes the 
blow of my fist ; or that a piece of yellow makes me 
think of an orange tree in a garden on the Palatine Hill. 

Just because mind is also vital it can act on my body, and 
because some neural results of stimulation are also mental, 
my brain may act upon my mind. There is therefore 
causality between the members of the mental series and 
between those of the physical series, and because of the 
identity of the mental with its physical correspondent 
there is causality in the sense defined between members 
of the two Series. 

Needless to say, it is not such interaction of mind Animism, 
with brain which is implied in the notion of animism. 

The mind is there distinct from the neural series. But 
the reasons which have been thought more recently to 
compel the adoption of animism have, more particularly 
in the impressive statement of Mr. McDougall,^ been 
coloured by antagonism to the notion of psychophysical 
parallelism. The argument has also assumed, or seemed 
to assume, the alternative to animism to be the so-called 
associationist conception of mind, according to which 
mind consists of a number of separate events corresponding 
to separate objects linked together by associative con- 
nections. There are sensations or ideas grouped together 
into wholes by contiguity or similarity. To this 
correspond on the neural side certain central excitements 
which are connected by association-fibres. This crude 
psychology, obsolescent in this country since the article 
‘Psychology’ of the ninth edition of the Encyclopedia 
Britannic a y may fairly be regarded now as obsolete. 

Mental processes are not grouped into wholes by 
association but are distinguishable processes within a 
mental continuum. The agglutinative conception of mind 
is replaced by the organic one. Mind has its structure 
and constitution as an animal body has. Moreover, as 
we have seen, the life of mind is essentially one of 
1 Body and Mind, London, 1911, chs. xix.-xxii. 



H 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. IIT 


transition, and substantive processes of mind like per- 
ceptions or images are but the more stable processes 
corresponding to things in the object wodd w})ich stand 
out in the stream, while the transitive ones are the vaguer, 
but still definite processes, which correspond to the 
relations among the objects. Now, when the notion of 
psychophysical parallelism is rejected in its natural form 
and the assumptions of associationism are dismissed, the 
arguments in favour of animism lose half their persuasive- 
ness. It will be as well to substantiate this proposition 
by indicating the considerations which on our hypothesis 
of identity modify these arguments. 1 am able to be 
shorter on this subject because much of what I have to 
say has been already said by Mr. Lloyd Morgan in the 
concluding chapter of his work on Instinct and Experience} 
The argument is that mind has certain specific char- 
acters to which there is or even can be no neural counter- 
part. It is not enough to say that there is no mechanical 
counterpart, for the neural structure is not mechanical 
but physiological and has life. Mind is, according to our 
interpretation of the facts, an ‘ emergent from life, and 
life an emergent from a lower physico-chemical level of 
existence. It may well be that, as some think, life itself 
implies some independent entity and is indeed only mind 
in a lower form. But this is a diflTerent question, which 
does not concern us yet. If life is mind, and is a non- 
physical entity, arguments derived from the conscious 
features of mind are at best only corroborative, and it is 
an inconvenience in these discussions that the two sets 
of arguments are sometimes combined. Accordingly I 
may neglect such considerations as the selectiveness of 
mind which it shares with all vital structures. These 
considerations really obscure the issue. For even if life 
is an entity of a different order from existences on the 

1 Instinct and Experience, London, 1912. 

2 I u3e the word ‘ emergent ’ after the example of Mr. Lloyd Morgan. 
It serves to mark the novelty which mind possesses, while mind still 
remains equivalent to a certain neural constellation. Consequently, it 
contrasts with the notion that mind is a mere ‘resultant’ ©f something 
lower. The word is used by G. H. Lewes {Problems of Life and Mind, 
vol. ii. p. 412), as Mr. Lloyd Morgan reminds me. 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


15 


purely physical level, it would still be a question whether 
mind is not so distinct from life as to claim to be a yet 
higher order of existence. Let us then confine ourselves 
at present to mind in its character of a conscious being. 

The important question is whether it must be conceived 
as discontinuous with the neural structure or (if the 
phrase be preferred) the neural mechanism. 

‘ Meaning,’ it is said, has no neural counterpart, but (0 The 
the use of meaning is the very life-blood of mind. Now 
it is important here to distinguish two senses of meaning, meaning, 
because the argument for animism has been used by 
different writers in the two senses. I may mean in the 
first place an object, as when I point with my finger to 
a person and say, I mean you. Meaning here signifies 
reference to an object, and in this sense every conscious 
process means or refers to an object other than the mental 
process itself. All mental action implies the relation of 
a subject to an object ; and it makes no difference whether 
the object is a perceived one present to the senses ; or an 
ideal one like a purpose consciously entertained, such as 
going to London as entertained in idea or in thought ; or 
even an imaginary object such as - i. What neural (or 
as it is sometimes irrelevantly asked what mechanical) 
equivalent can there be for this unique relation ? This 
sense of meaning corresponds to what the logicians call 
the meaning of a word in extension. On the other hand, 
meaning may signify what the logician calls intension ; a 
word is used with a meaning ; a flower may mean for me 
a person who is fond of it ; there’s pansies, that’s for 
thoughts ” ; and in general our minds may have a sensory 
object before them, but what we mean by it is a thought 
which has no sensory embodiment. In the words, ‘‘ when 
I say religion, I mean the religion of the Church of 
England as by law established,” these two senses of the 
word meaning seem to be combined, but on the whole it 
is mainly in the second sense that the word is used. 

Now meaning in extension raises a quite different 
problem from meaning in intension ; and that problem is 
not the question of the relation of mind to its alleged 
neural basis. It is the question whether the relation of 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


i6 

the conscious subject to an object which transcends it is 
unique, or whether it is not, as I shall maintain, found 
wherever two finites are compresent with each other. It 
is the problem of what is involved in the knowledge of 
what is not-mental. To be conscious of an object, to 
mean it, or to refer to it, may turn out in the end to be 
nothing but the fact that, to take a particular case, a table 
excites in my mind a conscious process of perceiving it. 
Accordingly in this sense of meaning, meaning does not 
belong here but to a later stage of our inquiry. Nor do 
I think that it would have seemed relevant were not the 
neural structure taken as alleged to be mechanical. For 
if it is a vital structure there is surely nothing very far- 
fetched in thinking that the stomata of leaves mean some- 
thing beyond themselves, the air, to which they are 
adapted. I may then neglect meaning in the extensive 
sense for the present. (See later, pp. 89 ff.) 

The other sense of meaning is undoubtedly relevant, 
and it offers real difficulty. For meaning is a conscious 
condition of mind. When I use a word, the meaning is 
in my mind (and of course besides this refers to something 
not in my mind). What then is meaning? Any part of 
a complex whole means for me the rest of the complex. 
A word, for instance, has been intimately connected with 
the characters of the things it names, and it means those 
characters. That is what it is to use a word with a mean- 
ing. My perception of the word means my thought of 
what the word stands for. The sight of the orange means 
for me the feel of it ; the sight of the marble means its 
coldness. The knight on the chess-board means the 
moves which I may make with that piece. The symbol 
I means its mathematical interpretation. Now what 
is there in meaning so described which prevents us from 
believing that the conscious meaning corresponds to or, 
as I should say, is identical with a certain neural process ? 
Doubtless if we imagine that our mind is made up of 
sensations connected together by mere indifferent lines of 
association, the solution is impossible. But if mental life 
is mental processes arranged in various complicated 
patterns, why should not a word set going in my brain, 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


17 

and also in my mind, that pattern of process which we 
call the meaning ? I have answered the question in 
anticipation when I pointed to the existence of imageless 
thought, customs of mind which may also be customs in 
the neural structure, not mere neural statical dispositions, 
but those neural exercises of a habit which are identical 
with the consciousness of a thought without its necessary 
embodiment in sense. When the exercise of the habit is 
more specific and detailed we may have the meaning turn 
into an illustration or concrete embodiment of the mean- 
ing, as when the word horse not only makes me think 
of hurse but of the particular foal whose affection I 
attach to m)'Self in the country by the offer of sugar. 
And when the marble looks cold the very essence of the 
condition of my mind is that the sight process is qualified 
by the ideal touch process, and the transition from the 
one to the other is in my mind. Even bare association 
of the orange with Sicily is more than the fact that I 
think of Sicily when I see an orange. Orange and Sicily 
are woven into a complex, of comparatively loose texture 
indeed as compared with the relation of cold to white in 
the marble, but still a texture in which the transition from 
the orange to Sicily is felt as a transition, and not as a 
mere juxtaposition. When I use a word like ‘govern- 
ment,’ a whole complicateei neuro-psychical pattern is set 
going in my mind and brain, which is transitive and 
elusive, but none the less conscious, and only called 
transitive because it is wanting in definite detail. I may 
go on to fill out this transitive outline with the pictures 
of the coalition ministry. But it is still the elusive 
complex which stands out as the main occupation of my 
mind. The figures of the ministers are the fringes of it, 
not it the fringe of them. Thus mental connections to 
which correspond neural connections are as much con- 
scious as what they connect, and meaning remains a unitary 
whole, while it still possesses its neural counterpart. 

If meaning is thus neural as well as mental, it follows 
that a very slight change in an object, or stimulus, may 
produce an overwhelming difference in the mental 
response if that change is charged with meaning. The 

VOL. II c 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


(2) The 
argument 
from 
fusion. 


famous telegram argument for animism loses therefore 
all its force. A telegram ‘ our son is dead ’ may find the 
recipient sympathetic but calm. Alter the word ‘our’ 
to ‘your/ a trifling change in the stimulus, and the 
recipient may be overcome with grief. On the other hand, 
change all the words into French, a large change in the 
stimulus, and the effect on the recipient is the same as 
when the telegram was in English. The facts present 
no difficulty in view of the constitution of the recipient’s 
mind. The little change of a letter makes an enormous 
change in the meaning of the telegram. But the words 
mean the same in French as in English. No conclusion 
in favour of a mind independent of the neural process can 
be drawn unless we are prepared to say that a spark 
should physically produce the same effect when it falls on 
a sheet of iron as when it falls upon a mass of gunpowder, 
or that a red ball will not cause the same bruise when it 
hits my body as if it were painted white. 

Very different and far weightier are the considerations 
drawn from the phenomena of so-called fusion, that is to 
say where two stimuli which would singly produce their 
corresponding sensations produce, when acting together, 
a sensation different from either. It is thought that 
where this occurs there must somewhere in the neural 
mechanism be compounding of the physical effects : that 
there can be no compounding of mental states.^ But in 
some cases at any rate there is said to be no such physical 
arrangement forthcoming. The subject is a technical one, 
and I cannot hope, nor am I fully able, to discuss it as it 
deserves. I desire only to remove a prejudice. It will 
be best to take a single case, that of so-called binocular 
fusion. Let the two eyes look at a disc or spot of light, 
the one eye through a blue the other through a red glass. 
Sometimes we see a disc of purple, but sometimes we see 
alternately either blue alone or red alone, in virtue of retinal 
competition. The possibility of this competition is taken 
to mean that the two stimuli are conveyed to different 

^ The words of W. James {Psychology, vol. i. p. 158) are ‘self- 
compounding of mental facts is inadmissible.* 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


19 


places in the brain and do not compound their effects 
physically. And yet in spite of this we can see purple 
on occasion. There is thus an action of the mind in the 
sensation of purple which has no correspondent in the 
brain. There is unity in the consciousness without unity 
in the cerebral neural structure which carries the separate 
sensations. Many other such facts arc described by Mr. 
McDougall in his chapter on the unity of conscious- 
ness, in particular those of U^inocular flicker.’^ Mr. 
Sherrington sums up his account of his experiments on 
this subject in the striking sentence : ^‘Pur^ conjunction 
in time without necessarily cerebral conjunction in space 
lies at the rcot of the solution of the problem of the unity 
of mind.” 

Now I confess that if a mental state is also neural in 
the sense I have assumed, it is difficult to understand 
how the mental states corresponding to the two stimuli 
can affect each other if there is not physical connection 
between them somewhere. But in the first place in- 
hibition between them, as in competition, seems to require 
some communication between the neural processes which 
the stimuli set up. In the next place, though there may 
be no connection between the sensory centres of the 
two eyes yet the efferent process from each eye is 
determined from both, as is indicated by the motor 
reactions of the two eyes.^ Mr. McDougall adds that 

^ I quote Mr. McDougall’s account of these phenomena or some of 
them, and his inference from them. If the retina is stimulated inter- 
mittently, the rate of succession of the stimuli may be increased until the 
subject ceases to perceive any intermittence or flicker of the sensation. 
This rate of succession is known as flicker-point ; it varies with the 
intensity of the stimulating light ; but we may take for illustration a case 
in which flicker-point is reached when the stimulus is repeated twenty 
times a second. Now if each retina is stimulated intermittently twenty 
times a second, but in such a way that the stimuli fall alternately on the 
two retinae, the flicker-point is not changed ; whereas, if the fibres from 
corresponding points converge to a common centre, flicker-point should be 
reached when the stimulus falls ten times a second on each retina; for 
then the centre would still be stimulated twenty times a second ” (p. 292). 
My concern is not with this inference itself but with the further inference 
to which it leads of the necessity of an intervening soul. 

2 C. S. Sherrington, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System 
(London, 1911), p. 384. ^ Sherrington, loc. cit, pp. 384 IF. 



20 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


KK. Ill 


the sensations are localised in the same external place and 
connects the “ identical motor tendencies ” of corre- 
sponding points with Lotze’s doctrine that ‘Mocal 
signature of the visual sensation is bound up with, or 
is a function of, the motor tendency excited by stimula- 
tion of that point.” ^ Whatever value may attach to 
Lotze’s doctrine, it is at any rate of the greatest im- 
portance to note that the sensations in question belong to 
( ‘ arc referred to ' or ‘ projected to,’ are the ordinary, very 
questionable, phrases) the same external place. Now as 
long as there is physical connection somewhere, it is not 
necessary that the connection should be sensory or 
cerebral and be a conscious one as it is in t!ie associative 
connections which were mentioned above. The signi- 
ficance of this will be apparent presently when we come 
to speak of the unity of consciousness. 

Even then, it will be asked, how in the absence of 
composition of the two processes can there be a fusion of 
the two colours into a new colour purple ? Must this 
not at least be attributed to the mind apart from its 
cerebral instrument? The question seems to presume 
the same misconception (or at least the same contradiction 
of my conception) which, as I have suggested, leads to the 
notion of a complete separation, of mere parallelism, of 
the psychical and the neural series. The assumption 
seems to be that the two mental processes, sensing blue 
and red, have blue and red for their ‘ content ’ or arc 
qualified by those colours ; and in that case it is im- 
possible to understand how the mental sensation of purple 
with its different content could arise in the absence of 
some new neural process resulting from the separate 
neural processes of blue and red. No wonder the fusion 
is then attributed to the mind itself. But if mental 
process is without quality or content save the quality 
of consciousness and corresponds to its object blue, or 
red, or what not, in virtue of its locality or the other 
spatio-temporal characters mentioned before, a different 
answer is possible and intelligible without difficulty. 

1 W. McDougall, Brain, vol. xxxiii., “On the Relations between 
Corresponding Points of the Two Retinae” (p. 380). 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


21 


Granted the union somewhere of the neural processes of 
blue and red, even if the union be only at a common 
efferent path, we should say that these neural arrange- 
ments were the neural arrangements, carrying conscious- 
ness, which are correlated with the object purple, and 
that under these circumstances we were conscious of 
purple. There is no common sensory centre, let us 
admit, for the different excitements of the corresponding- 
points in the two eyes. This is the arrangement, neural 
or mental, for seeing purple, when the purple is seen by 
both eyes in the same place. ^ There is another neural 
arrangement, in that case, for seeing purple when both red 
and blue stimulate the one eye alone. Yet there is no 
occasion to postulate an interfering soul. The alterna- 
tives are not between having a common centre for the 
two eyes, and assuming something which combines the 
two sensations into a different one. Both alternatives 
presuppose subtly that the quality of sensations belongs 
to the mind and a different one if not produced by 
external action in a brain centre must be manufactured 
by the mind. But there is a third alternative.'^ If we 
distinguish the sensing from the sensum, and hold that 
the sensum is in the external thing, then all our busi- 
ness is to note the difference in the neural machinery 
of response (carrying with it the quality not of the 
sensum but of consciousness) in the binocular in- 
stance. The brain centres being through the binocular 
arrangement affected neurally in the manner appropriate 
to purple, the mind sees purple. The “ specific 
synergy,” to use a phrase of Prof. C. Stumpf, is supplied 
neurally, though not by direct sensory connection, and 
the mind sees the object to which that specific synergy 
is the appropriately corresponding neural arrangement. 
What would need explanation is not so much why the 

^ There is of course no purple thing present. But neither is there 
when a disc of red and blue sectors is revolved before the single eye. 
For the presence of the object when the appropriate nervous arrange- 
ment is given, see later, ch. iv. A, p. 85. 

^ This alternative has been suggested in the Introduction, and remains 
to be justified. (See later, chs. iv. v.) 



22 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ilf 


Unity of 
conscious- 
ness. 


mind sees purple under such conditions, but rather why 
under certain other conditions it secs only either one or 
other of the component colours. From this point of 
view there seems to me to be, in a sense not perhaps 
the same as his, a profound importance in the sentence 
I have quoted from Mr. Sherrington above. Two 
simultaneous processes in the mind, not necessarily con- 
nected at the conscious level, may form a single act of 
consciousness with an object different from that of either 
of the two mental processes taken singly. 

The case of binocular flicker is a different one from 
the seeing of purple. The physical object is an inter- 
mittent illumination. The question is when the mind 
fails to detect the intermittence ; and it appears that in 
general the result is the same whether the stimulation 
is binocular or monocular. From Mr. Sherrington’s 
experiments it appears that there is a difference when 
the rate of intermittence is different in the two sets of 
stimulations ; but here the objective difference of the 
sensa affects the sensibility for detection of intermittence. 
In these experiments also the sensations belong to the 
same place, and this is intimately connected with the 
common issue of the reaction from the visual centres. 

This leads us directly to the problem of the unity of 
consciousness : how there can be such unity if the neural 
counterparts of the mental processes are not, as it is fairly 
clear is not always the case, united by connecting processes 
at the level of consciousness. This is one of two problems 
upon which our statement of the facts may perhaps throw 
light. The other problem is that of rupture of the 
unity of consciousness in spite of the existence of neural 
paths at the conscious level. If, as I have suggested, 
mental process is also neural there is no discontinuity 
(I mean disconnection) between those neural processes 
and processes occurring at lower levels of the nervous 
system or even of the organism taken as a whole. A 
conscious neural process may consequently be replaced 
(I purposely use a vague word to cover all cases) by a 
lower neural process which is not attended by conscious- 



CH. I. A MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS '23 

ness. Nor is it enough to urge that possibly there may 
be discontinuity in the neural structure itself, for at the 
bottom of this neural structure there lies, as at the bottom 
of all finite existences, the indefeasible continuity of its 
space-time ; and the problem is but deferred to an earlier 
stage in the history of things. 

Let us consider first the unity of consciousness. The 
case of fusion just discussed is enough to show that there 
may be unity of mind though the component processes 
are not connected at the conscious level. A still more 
obvious case is the unity of two experiences which do not 
fuse and arc entirely disparate, such as a vision of trees 
and the touch of the chair on which I sit. These are 
disconnected experiences, but they are felt to belong to 
the one mind. Yet their nervous counterparts, though 
united by no definite neural connection at the conscious 
level, so long as they are not noticed to occur together, are 
part of one neural structure and are physically not dis- 
connected at some level or other. Though these are 
united in time they are also connected somewhere in 
the neural space. Similarly there are gaps in time as that 
of dreamless sleep, where there is no consciousness in 
the ordinary interpretation of that word/ but where 
through some form of memory the interrupted history of 
our minds is united across the void. Our memory does 
not fill up this void but unites, to borrow the phrase once 
more, the broken edges of our mental life on the two 
sides of the gap. Thus the problem of mental unity 
assumes a different character. It is not how there can 
be mental unity without complete physical unification by 
lines of conscious connection, but how there can be unity 
in enjoyment when enjoyments are discontinuous though 
the neural structure as a whole is continuous. There is 
enough and to spare somewhere in the neural structure, 
to provide for everything in the mental life. The puzzle 
arises from the fact that while all psychoses are neuroses 
not all neuroses are psychoses. Hume, as 1 have so often 
pointed out, used the fact that the intermediate stages of 

1 If there is no really dreamless sleep, and no forgetting, the question 
disappears. 



24 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


a volition are not conscious but purely neural to contro- 
vert the notion that causality is a mental experience. We 
have, in other words, to account not so much for the 
apparent absence ot neural connections as for the presence 
of mental unity though there arc neural connections, but 
not direct mental ones. The fact of mental uiiity is 
beyond dispute. Our minds are normally unitary, and 
no matter how disconnected our experiences may be they 
are not experienced as merely juxtaposed to make a unity, 
but as differentiations of that unity. This is the initial 
and central fact of our mental life expressed by the some- 
what loose phrase that the mind is sensibly or to experience 
continuous. 

Now it is just because the neural structure is (at 
least relatively) continuous, so that all its parts are 
physically connected, that there can be unity between 
divided processes of consciousness, so as to make them 
belong to one mind. In other words, because conscious 
processes are parts of a larger whole which is not all of it 
conscious, in spite of the absence of conscious connections 
there is still connection^ This would be sufficient for 
our purposes, for it turns the flank of the contrary plea 
that for want of evidence of conscious connection we 
must assume an independent mind. Still the problem 
remains of how to understand the fact of experienced 
mental unity. Unity of substance, we have seen, means 
belonging to one contour of space-time. The unity of 
mind should be the unity of one enjoyed space-time. 
Yet though the mind is aware of its past stages as 
connected with the present ones, and though at any 
moment its various experiences belong to the one 
enjoyed space of the mind, there are gaps in time and 
gaps in space as it enjoys them, and we know, more- 
over, that there are such gaps. There are not gaps, 

1 We have here a particular case of the general question of how a 
substance may have different affections which are not themselves directly 
causally connected. Their connection may lie lower down in the intrinsic- 
ally simultaneous structure of the thing. They appear consequently to be 
merely juxtaposed, but they are in the end connected. (See ,Bk. II. ch. 
vi. A, vol. i. pp. 276 ff., and Bk. I. ch. iv. vol. i. pp. 135 ff., on mental 
juxtaposition.) 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


25 


as we have seen, in the physical basis taken as part of 
a larger neural structure. How then are we aware of 
these gaps in our enjoyment, and so enjoy our mental 
unity ^ 

The answer cannot be given till we come to learn 
how Space and Time themselves are apprehended. 
Various experiences palliate the difficulty but do not 
remove it. Soiuetimes we can by memory fill up the 
intervening time, going over the events between now and 
an hour ago. We cannot always do so, and never for 
the interval filled by dreamless sleep. Nor if we could, 
would the intervals of our memories be completely filled. 

From the reports of others we learn (as Leibniz observes) 
that we have continued to exist in sleep and can think 
of ourselves as existing in the interval, because we in 
turn have observed others to live in sleep, while from 
their reports they have not been conscious of the interval. 

Such experiences supplement but do not provide the 
direct consciousness we have of a mental unity containing 
gaps which we enjoy, though these gaps in our mental 
space and time are unfilled by mental events. In the 
external world two events of different date and place are 
observed as connected by a stretch of time or space how- 
ever much foreshortened. These conditions are not 
presented in enjoyment. We must leave the problem 
for the present at this point, to resume it later.^ It is 
enough to have shown what it really is, and that it- offers 
no support to animism but rather, however difficult of 
solution, it in fact admits no solution at all unless mind 
is identical with some physical counterpart and is con- 
nected by some physical connections which need not 
necessarily be themselves mental ones, carrying the 
mental quality. 

The second of these problems, that of divided Divided 
consciousness and of the unconscious, presents great 
difficulties to the psychologist and requires expert the im- 
knowledge of special cases for adequate discussion. All 
that I can hope to do here, or need to do, is to indicate on 
^ Below, ch. vi. pp. 1 50 f. 



26 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


what lines a solution might be sought in accordance with 
the view of identity between the conscious process and its 
neural correlate ; with the additional principle that such 
neural counterparts of mental processes are parts of a 
larger neural structure. The question of divided person- 
ality is more manageable than that of the unconscious. 
Whether the personalities alternate or coexist, it would 
seem that the normal personality, that is the total 
consciousness, is ‘ dissociated ’ ; and it is not difficult to 
suppose that normal lines of connection between processes 
which are normally continuous, are for some reason 
barred or broken. In this way groups of mental pro- 
cesses with their neural basis are formed which have no 
complete connection with one another ; though they may 
and do in certain cases overlap, each for instance using 
the common speech apparatus. They are comparable to 
those systematised groups of mental processes which 
constitute interests, when in persons of normal condition 
these interests are exercised almost in independence of each 
other, the week-day mind and the Sunday mind which 
in many persons seem to have so little to do with each 
other. Suppose the separation of these interests to 
become absolute ; each interest would then constitute a 
separate personality of a limited kind. So in the body 
politic there are groups which almost ignore each other, 
and have different standards of feeling and conduct. Such 
separate personalities are called by a happy term ^co- 
conscious,’ for in their case there is no good evidence to 
doubt that the split-off group really possesses a conscious- 
ness ot its own, and the one person may treat the other 
very much as one normal person treats another with 
whom he* has no such bodily alliance. That these 
co-conscious personalities mean the blocking of normal 
physical paths of communication (generally no doubt at 
the conscious level, as where there is actual loss of 
memory for tracts of a life), but possibly also at lower 
levels, is indicated by the process of restoration, where 
that occurs, of the original unity. Such restoration may 
assume a much more consciously deliberate siiape than it 
probably possesses. Thus in the famous case of ^ Miss 



CH. I. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


27 


Beauchamp ’ and her demon Sally,^ the ingenious physician 
persuades the demon to abdicate in favour of the rightful 
possessor of the body. This act of resignation on the 
part of the demon, who is by no means a good demon, 
but selfish and somewhat malignant, probably is only a 
pictorial representation of the fact that the blocked lines 
of association belonging to the original personality are 
becoming permeable once more.“ 

Now where the original unity breaks up into two 
persons, A and B, and where A, as sometimes occurs, does 
not happen to be aware of B as a foreign person, A is 
unconscious of B, but inc]uiry shows that B is itself a 
consciousness. A’s unconscious turns out to possess a 
consciousness of its own. But it by no means follows 
that we may extend this precedent and assume, where- 
ever what is unconscious can under certain conditions 
emerge into consciousness, that therefore the unconscious 
condition was all the while mental. We are here dealing 
not necessarily with pathological minds, but with the 
commonest facts of the normal mind. Thus incidents 
completely forgotten may at some time swim into memory, 
but must we assume that these processes were all the 
while preserved, not indeed as conscious but as an 
unconscious department of the mental ? Dreams, as is 
now well known, may be an expression of tendencies in 
the dreamer’s mind which cannot be expressed overtly, 
but which subsequent analysis of the person’s mind shows 
to have been there somehow preserved and seeking 
expression in the person. Evidence of this sort has 
become so abundant and has been marshalled with so 
much skill by Dr. Freud that to many it would seem 
natural to disregard the scientific scruples of those who 
in the face of such facts still question whether a truly 

1 Dr. Morton Prince’s famous case, in T^e Dissociation of a 
Personality (New York, 1906). 

^ Divided personality then seems to be perfectly explicable on the 
identity statement. On the other hand, it is difficult to see a reason why, 
for certain pathological causes, there should be two independent souls 
controlling p'^rts of one organism, and certainly why in the case of a cure 
the two souls should become one. How does animism conceive the 
splitting of a soul or the fusion of two souls ? 



28 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


unconscious state is ever mental, is ever, that is to say, 
more than a neural condition which may under appropriate 
circumstances lead to a conscious condition, and because 
this is so, may justly be called psycho-physical without 
being psychical. The other view leads to the conception 
of a larger mind of which the conscious mental states are 
but the appearance, somewhat in the fashion of a thing- 
in-itself, embodied no doubt in the neural structure, out 
of whose mysterious depths mental conditions emerge 
into the light of day. One may be very sensible of the 
enormous value for pure psychology (for I am not 
concerned with the therapeutic side of the matter) of Mr. 
Freud’s discoveries without necessarily pledging oneself 
to belief in the existence of an unconscious minci.^ 

On the contrary, with the identity interpretation of 
the relation of mind and neurosis, a mental process may 
leave its traces in a neural form which is purely physio- 
logical. A memory may remain latent as a physiological 
trace or disposition, awaiting the touch of an appropriate 
stimulation to take on the full vividness and complexity 
of a conscious memory. At what level an experience is 
preserved it may not be easy to say. Possibly at the 
highest level ; but possibly also a conscious process may 
be registered in a lower level of the vital structure which 
subserves the mind. On the view that mental processes 
are also vital and therefore connected with the rest of 
the vital nervous structure, this proposition presents no 
difficulty. Thus we may have neural dispositions at 
lower levels than the conscious level, which may at any 
time be completed neurally and so call into play the 
action of the higher level. They would thus form a 
permanent undercurrent of the mental life, but would 
remain purely physiological till called upon to enter into 
the psychical neural constellation. For this reason they 
may be termed psycho-physical to indicate their essential 
continuity with what is psychical, but there is some risk 
that the expression may be misunderstood to imply the 
presence of a psychical factor. I prefer to speak of 

^ See for Mr. Freud’s hypothesis the last chapter of Traumdeutung 
(Leipzig and Vienna, 1909, ed. 2), esp. p. 380. 



CH. A 


MIND AND ITS NEURAL BASIS 


29 


physiological dispositions, which are in themselves not 
psychical but may emerge into consciousness. Thus it 
would seem be"-ter to distinguish what are strictly mental 
dispositions, that is conscious plans, from dispositions 
secondarily acquired, automatic habits, which may remain 
entirely below the level of consciousness. With this 
explanation we can understand how a mental, that is a 
neural process at a certain level, may either become so 
lacking in intensity or so much disconnected with other 
processes as no longer to carry with it consciousness or 
may be replaced by and registered in a subjacent part 
of the structure ; and at the same time how owing to 
their continuity with the mental level such purely 
physiological conditions affect the course of the mental 
life and on occasioii enter into it. Just so, at an even 
extrcmer remove from the mental life, the state of the 
nutrition, though it may not be psychically perceptible, 
may affect the working of the mind. Instead then of 
the mythological or at least hypothetical larger mind of 
which the conscious mind is only a part or an appearance, 
we should have a very palpable and unhypothetical neural 
system (itself a part of the whole organism) of which the 
workings of a particular part correspond to and in fact 
are consciousness, and any part of which may affect con- 
sciousness or may register the traces of past experiences. 

Hence, to take an instance or two from a field whose 
details are matter for the specialist, it does not follow 
that because analysis after the event discloses the presence 
of a feeling in a dreamer’s mind which disguised itself 
in the manifest content ” of the dream, that that feeling 
was present in a mental form. The physiological tendency 
may have been enough, for example the stirring of some 
organic process contained within an emotional condition. 
In psycho-analysis the inhibition is removed which 
prevented the tendency from coming to the surface in 
its natural form. It may well happen that ideas, for 
instance of decorum, set going by the physiological 
stirring of a tendency reputed immodest, may give a 
different turn to the tendency. From this point of view 
the machinery of the ‘^censorship” exercised over the 



3 ° 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


unconscious wish may be only a mythological or pictorial 
way of representing something very real which is going 
on in some part ot the neural structure^ but does not 
imply that all of it is mental. In the same way in 
negative hallucinations where a patient is told not to 
see cards with odd numbers of pips, though it is Evident 
he must distinguish odd cards from even ones in order 
to notice only the even ones, it does not follow that he 
sees the card with odd pips and then suppresses the 
perception ; the visual stimulus may be suppressed or 
inhibited by his instructions before it reaches the mental 
level of development. 

It is by no means asserted that, where there is 
‘ unconsciousness ’ which can be seen to be conscious 
under certain conditions, it is really purely physio- 
logical. On the contrary, it may be co-conscious. I 
am only pleading that we must choose between the 
conscious (which includes subconsciousness in the sense 
that word sometimes and perhaps most conveniently 
bears of what is in consciousness but indistinctly separ- 
able from the mass of mental experience) and what is 
not mental at all but purely physiological though it 
remains continuous with the mental and may alFect the 
mental. The truly unconscious is not mental at all, 
though continuous with it ; if it is mental it is co-con- 
scious. It is only for the expert to say when there is 
co-consciousness and when there is not. Accordingly, 
on the statement here adopted I find myself in agree- 
ment with a passage of Dr. Morton Prince,^ which I 
will conclude this subject by quoting : “ We can say at 
once that considering the complexity and multiformity 
of psycho-physiological phenomena, there would seem 
to be no a priori reason why all subconscious phenomena 
must be the same in respect of being either co-conscious 
or unconscious ; some may be the one and some the 
other. It is plainly a matter of interpretation of the facts 
and there still exists some difference of opinion.” By 
unconscious processes the writer means processes which 
are wholly unconscious, that is, are purely physiological. 

^ The Unconscious (New York, 1914), p. 16 1. 



CH. 1. B 


OTHER MINDS 


31 


B. The Apprehension of Other Minds 

Another topic which 1 discuss here, out of its proper Acquired 
place, but for convenience in exposition, is how we come 
to recognise each other as conscious subjects. In a direct ex- 
previous chapter I was at pains to show that our belief in 
the intimate connection of mind with brain was founded 
on direct experience ; though that experience was helped 
out by reflection, as all our experience is ; the issue of 
such reflection upon experienced data, some of them 
enjoyed, some contemplated, has been to identify the 
mental process with a certain constellation of physiological 
processes. I shall now try to indicate what the experience ' 
is on the strength of which we believe in other minds 
than our own. For without some direct experience of 
other minds such recognition does not occur. The 
existence of other minds is commonly regarded as an 
inference by analogy from the outward behaviour of other 
persons’ bodies. Their gestures, actions, and speech in 
various circumstances resemble our own in those circum- 
stances, and we regard them, it is said, as proceeding from 
a consciousness like our own. Now it is true that when 
we already have the notion of other minds, we interpret 
outward behaviour on the analogy of our own experience, 
and can thus sympathetically enter into their minds in all 
manners of refined and subtle interpretation. But in the 
first place the doctrine in question cannot apply from the 
nature of the case to unreflective animals, such as dogs, 
who certaiiily appear in some of their behaviour to 
recognise other dogs as of the same kind as themselves. 

And in the next place it is flatly at variance with the 
history of our minds. It implies that we begin with a 
knowledge of ourselves and construe foreign selves in 
that likeness. Now it is almost a commonplace that the 
reverse is rather the case, that our reflective consciousness 
of ourselves arises in and through our consciousness of 



32 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


RK. Ill 


The experi- 
ence is of 
sociality. 


others. We are led, not of course to the enjoyment of 
ourselves but to noticing ourselves, through intercourse 
with others : the knowledge of ourselves and that of 
others grow up together. Our own individuality stands 
out for us against a background of other persons. 
Were we alone in a non -conscious world, we should 
enjoy ourselves and feel success and disappointment, but 
we should hardly experience ourselves as individual 
persons. But what is more important, mere inference by 
analogy cannot account for our original recognition of 
other minds. For the idea of a foreign consciousness, 
unless directly supplied by some experience to that effect, 
is somethinor to which we have no clue in ourselves. 

o 

We enjoy our own consciousness and our own conscious- 
ness only, and we do not contemplate it, but only our 
bodies. The idea of a consciousness not our own 
belonging to the body of some one else would be a sheer 
invention on our part. How should we invent such a 
conception of something totally new, if foreign conscious- 
ness were not in some manner revealed to us as such 
For it is safe to assert that we never invent in that sense, 
but only discover, though we may combine the materials 
we already know in all sorts of new combinations. We 
have then to search for the experience which assures us 
not inferentially but directly of other minds. 

That experience is a very simple and familiar one, 
the experience of sociality, and has a double aspect. Our 
fellow human beings excite in us the social or gregarious 
instinct, and to feel socially towards another being is to 
be assured that it is something like ourselves. Wc do 
not first apprehend that another being is a mind and 
then respond to him, whether positively as in affection 
or negatively as in aversion ; but in our tenderness or 
dislike we are aware of him as like ourselves. Just as 
the emotion of fear or the instinct to run away from 

^ Compare A. E. Taylor, Elements of Metaphysics (London, 1903), 
p. 205, for a clear statement of how inadequate the notion of inference by 
analogy is to account for our having the idea of a foreign self. Bk. III. 
ch. ii. § 3 of his book gives his version of the case. 



CH. I. B 


OTHER MINDS 


33 


certain things discovers them to be dangerous, the 
cognitive apprehension being given to us only in so far 
as vve practise, a certain response, so in seeking the 
company, or avoiding it, of our fellows we are aware of 
them as like ourselves. But while without the social 
instinct' we should not be led to this apprehension, we do 
not experience the satisfaction of the instinct of sociality till 
we have the experience that the creature towards which 
we act socially reciprocates our action, cither by co-opera- 
tion or rivalry. The emotion of sociality is a double- 
sided one ; it is a response on our part to the other 
being, confirmed by a response on his part to us. The 
double expeivence is necessary to sociality ; it takes two 
persons to make friends or two persons to make a 
quarrel. Without the instinctive response we should 
seek nothing from the other ; without the co-operation 
we should not be aware of him in the fullest sense as 
our fellow.^ 

Instances upon this merely instinctive level are the 
experiences of parental or filial affection, or sexual love, 
competition in pursuit of prey, or jealousy. We do not 
merely feel ourselves performing certain actions towards 
another but we want him, and in turn we find him 
playing his part in the joint experience in which we 
are both concerned. Without this reciprocation, our 
instinctive action would not have its peculiar flavour. 
Our social feeling towards him is the divination that he 
is like ourselves ; his reciprocation confirms it and makes 

1 The prior importance of the social instinct was omitted in my account 
of the matter in Mind, xxii. N.S., 1913, “Collective willing and truth,’’ 
§ 2, pp. 17 ff., which therefore was open to the objection that the resistance 
of a table to my pressure was a response to my action. The importance 
of the other element can be recognised by reflection on the similar problem, 
which will occupy us later, of how we come to have assurance of the exist- 
ence of God. d’here too God stands for something in the Universe which 
we find responding to our religious sentiment or desire (below, pp. 373 ft.). 

Mr. Laird {Problems of the Seif, London, 1917, p. 25) appears to 
miss my point when he urges that it is because a human hand behaves 
differently from a stuffed hand that the doctrine I am contending against 
explains the difference by another consciousness like our own. The idea 
of a foreign consciousness would be miraculous if it were not based on a 
direct experience of it. 

VOL. II D 



34 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


it assurance. Thus we feel tenderly to a child as we 
should not feel towards a soft warm cushion (the illustra- 
tion is from W. James), But we do rot feel socially 
towards him, the tenderness has not its distinctive flavour, 
except for the reciprocation of the child. It is felt more 
plainly towards an affectionate than towards a cold child, 
and felt more and differently towards a child than towards 
a puppy. It may be questioned whether we should feel 
tenderness to a fly in distress if we had not already 
acquired tenderness in respect of living creatures which 
can reciprocate. There is, to take a different example, 
all the difference between grasping a hand which returns 
the pressure and grasping an unresponsive piece of flesh 
in the shape of a hand. It seems to us inhuman and 
disappoints our expectation of a return, and we wonder 
whether we are not shaking hands with a fish or a statue. 
To have the warm human experience we require recipro- 
cation, Again, rivalry for the possession of food is a 
different experience from appetite for the food ; it 
contains the experience of jealousy or hate. Or again, if 
the rival is inanimate and cannot participate with us ; 
when for instance a cigar which I am smoking goes out 
I may be disappointed, but if it is knocked out of my 
mouth by a person I am angry. When the dog’s bone 
rolls away from him he grasps it more firmly ; but if 
another dog or a man seizes it, he growls. The experience 
of another man’s trying to get the same thing as yourself 
is a different experience from mere obstruction or difficulty 
in obtaining the object, and is the suggestion that he too 
wants it. It is of course true that when the experience 
of real rivalry has become familiar the obstructing 
inanimate agent may also be credited with consciousness ; 
and the dog may be angry if his bone slips or the man 
if his cigar goes out, or he may, like Sir Walter Scott, 
say that a letter which he cannot find has been hidden by 
the Devil. But he must have experienced rivalry to 
beijin with. Once more, the feelino; of love to the 
opposite sex is not the same when the love is not 
reciprocated, and accordingly love is different: from mere 
selfish lust though even the mere animal satisfaction 



CH. I. B 


OTHER MINDS 


35 


implies too complementary action of the other party.^ 
A lover may of course feel genuine love when it is not 
returned, but his expectation or hope is for reciprocation, 
and his disappointment implies that the person is capable 
of returning the emotion though he is not the chosen 
object. 

Thus it is because we are social beings anci have the 
social instinct that we become aware of others as like 
ourselves and the possessors of minds. The animals, 
like ourselves, are aware of each other as like. But their 
consciousness of the likeness being without reflection 
amounts to nothing more than behaving towards each other 
as if they were what we call alike. Since it is sociality which 
gives us this assurance, the consciousness of other minds 
comes to us from our relations to one another and we do 
not learn so directly from animals that they have minds. 
Now in this experience that other humans excite our 
social desires and in turn satisfy them, which gives us 
the assurance that they also are minds like ourselves, it 
is not their similarity of behaviour to us which describes 
the situation into which I and another human enter. 
Hence the radical mistake of supposing that analogy of 
behaviour assures us of the existence of other minds. 
In general the part which the two participants in the 
social situation play is not the same but different ; the 
child’s response to the mother is not the same as the 
mother’s caresses. In some cases, as in struggle for food 
or fighting for a female, the acts may be in most respects 
alike. “ But the likeness of behaviour is not a necessary 

^ Compare as to this the following interesting passage of Shaftesbury, 
Inquiry concerning Virtue and Merit j Bk. II. pt. 2,§ i,p. 128, ed. 1727: 
“ The courtesans and even the commonest of women who live by prostitution 
know very well how necessary it is that every one whom they entertain 
with their beauty, should believe there are satisfactions reciprocal ; and 
that pleasures are no less given than received. And were this imagination 
to be wholly taken away, there would be hardly any of the grosser sort of 
mankind who would not perceive their remaining pleasure to be of slight 
estimation.” 

2 The same thing is true in respect of moral judgments. The 
greater part of our practical action is the same, because the conditions are 
repeated, but morality recognises that the proper work of each may be 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The graces 
of such ex- 
perience. 


36 

incident. What is necessary is that the whole situation, 
of going out on the part of one person, does not exist 
without participation of both, and consequently the 
experience of either is incomplete without the response, 
whether it is by way of help or hindrance, of the other. 
We become aware in this direct experience of something 
like ourselves. 

The primary concerns of life and its appetites, and 
the simplest occupations of primitive man or the animals 
supply material for this experience of other minds. Such 
recognition is in the main instinctive, that is, is upon the 
instinctive level of life. On the basis of this experience 
the savage or the child or the animal even, may impute 
personality or something like it to inanimate things, the 
doll or stocks and stones or the wind and the sun. This 
is an act of projection which is perfectly intelligible when 
the mysterious object, a foreign mind, has been dis- 
covered by revelation of it through such experiences as 
have been described. It is the extension of the notion 
of a foreign mind to things which behave in some ways 
like persons or ourselves. But, intelligible as an extension 
of something already discovered, it is not intelligible as a 
foundation for the original belief in a foreign mind. 

Psychologists have explained for us in detail how our 
consciousness of others changes, not only in extent but in 
grade, with our years ; how for instance the father is to 
the child at first hardly more than a vague and unfathom- 
able and arbitrary being, but as the child measures itself 
against its equals it comes in the end to understand him 
and to conceive him more precisely as a person like him- 
self. All this too is intelligible as a further incident in 
the growth of the original fundamental awareness of a 
mind not our own. 

In the reflective growth of the apprehension of the 
minds of others we are soon beyond those simple 
situations on the instinctive level with which we have 

different, and it is not identity of conduct which makes morality (the 
identity is relatively accidental), but the conduct suitable fo the position of 
each person. 



CH. I. B 


OTHER MINDS 


37 


hitherto been dealing. We make ourselves intelligible 
to one another by speech so that external objects de- 
scribed by one party are brought before the mind of the 
other. Mutual understanding by speech in reference to 
objects ■ common to us is the most pervasive experience 
of reciprocity ; and to this is added the direct description 
of our own mind to another person. On the speculative 
side we have co-operation of many minds in the pursuit 
of knowledge or science. On the practical side we have 
the combination of wills in conduct, with its judgments 
of the kinds of action which make common intercourse 
tolerable and good. Moral judgments and scientific 
agreement are the highest expressions of the existence of 
other minds which we experience directly and on this 
level ‘ acknowledge.’ 

But although we thus have direct experience of the 
existence of minds in others, such experience is not 
knowledge derived either from contemplation of tne 
external or enjoyment of ourselves. We can enjoy only 
our own mind and not the mind of another. On the 
other hand we do not contemplate our own mind as if it 
were an external object, much less the mind of another. 
Thus 1 am not aware of B’s mind as 1 am aware of his 
body, so that 1 should be able to inspect it and say what 
it is. Yet experience assures me that he has a mind. 
What sort of a mind it is, how the other mind feels in 
a given situation, I am left to divine sympathetically on 
the basis largely of analogy with my own. But that a 
mind is there, is assurance. It is not invented by inference 
or analogy, but is an act of faith forced on us by a 
peculiar sort of experience. It is only the details of its 
nature into which we have to enter symbolically by 
imagining ourselves in the situation of the other person. 
It is sufficient for our purposes to have indicated that 
their existence is revealed to us by experience directly 
and by what experience it is so revealed. 



Time as 
the mind 
of Space. 


CHAPTER II 

THE ORDER OF EMPIRICAL QUALITIES 

A. A Formula for Space-Time 

With this clue in our minds wc may proceed to discuss 
the various empirical qualities that characterise existent 
things at their respective levels, as distinct from the 
categories. But it will help us to preface the discussion by 
attempting to sum up in a formula the relations of Space 
and Time as they have been exhibited in our analysis 
of Space-Time. The formula may be received as a 
hypothesis to be judged by its success in unifying the 
different forms of empirical existence, and it presupposes 
the conclusions reached in the preceding chapter. It is 
that Time as a whole and in its parts bears to Space as a 
whole and its corresponding parts a relation analogous to 
the relation of mind^ to its equivalent bodily or nervous 
basis ; or to put the matter shortly that Time is the mind 
of Space and Space the body of Time. According to this 
formula the world as a whole and each of its parts is 
built on the model with which we are familiar in ourselves 
as persons, that is as union of mind and body, and in 

1 In the following pages I sometimes use mind for the quality of 
mentality or consciousness, sometimes for the thing or substance which 
has this distinctive quality. The substance mind is the complex of mental 
processes contained within its proper contour of space-time. The mental 
processes are identical with their equivalent neural processes and are these 
processes as enjoyed. With a little goodwill on the part of the reader, 
there is no danger of confusion, and it avoids the use of the word 
‘ mentality ’ which is odious, or the constant substitution 6f consciousness 
for mind which in common speech is used both as a concrete and an 
abstract name. 


38 



CH. II. A 


FORMULA FOR SPACE-TIME 


39 


particular as a union of mind and brain. But as this 
may lead to the misapprehension that we are the standard 
and exemplar of things, the statement is better made in 
the reverse and truer form that we are examples of a 
pattern which is universal and is followed not only by 
things but by Space-Time itself. In any point-instant 
the instant is the mind or soul of its point ; in a group 
of points there is a mind of those points, which upon the 
primary level of Space-Time itself is the corresponding 
time of that complex. Qualities will be seen to be the 
special form which on each successive level of existence 
the mind clement assumes. In Space-Time as a whole 
the total Time is the mind of total Space. The difficulty 
of the formula arises from two sources, first, the com- 
plexity of the internal constitution of Space-Time, to 
which much discussion was devoted in a previous passage ; 
second, the fact that the relation of Time to Space is not 
absolutely identical with that of mind to its body (by 
which, to avoid repetition, 1 am to be understood to mean 
the corresponding neural basis) but analogous to it, or 
rather that which corresponds to it under the simpler 
conditions of the case. 

The identity between the relation of Time and Space 
and that of mind and body, on which the hypothesis is 
based, is that mind and its corresponding body are 
indissoluble and identical. Space and its Time are in 
like manner not two things but one, and there is no 
Space without Time nor Time without Space. The 
difference between the two relations, which prevents us 
from identifying them absolutely, is that in us mind is a 
new quality which belongs to physiological constellations 
of a certain kind, but these brain processes are in turn 
part of a vital body which exists as it were of its own 
right, in the sense that there are vital processes which 
have not the quality of mind. A certain constellation 
of such vital processes has the quality of consciousness. 
The quality of mind presupposes lower grades of existence. 
Accordingly the mind is able by reflection to think of 
its own corresponding neural processes, that is to con- 


Grounds 

of th>3 
formula. 



40 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The 

relation of 
point- 
instants 
to one 
another. 


template them, while also, though not in respect of the 
same act/ it enjoys itself. This is possible because there 
are things external to our minds, among which things are 
of course included our own bodily organism which we 
are aware of through organic and other sensations. We 
are able to think of our neural mental processes because 
we can count our brains as being included amongst non- 
mental things ; and because we can only enjoy ourselves 
as minds in so far as we are aware of and contemplate 
some object not our minds ; for consciousness without 
an object does not exist. Thus on our level there 
subsists the distinction of enjoyment and contemplation. 

. ^But in Space-Time as such this distinction has not 
yet emerged. Space does not exist of its own right and 
therefore Time is not a new quality which emerges from 
Space. Space or Time only exists with the existence of 
the other, and their relation is such as we might imagine 
that of mind and brain to be if neuro-mental processes 
could subsist by themselves without their presuppositions 
in a larger vital and hence in a physico-chemical world of 
things. Hence Time cannot contemplate Space nor the 
elementary parts of Space-Time contemplate each other. 
The relation of Time to Space is therefore something 
closer than that of being merely analogous to the relation 
of mind and its neural basis, and something less than 
that of being identical with it. Yet it is legitimate, and 
as we shall see fruitful, to regard Time as the mind of 
Space, just because while neuro-mental processes are also 
vital ones, they do not exist in their peculiar and 
distinctive constellation without being mind, while on 
tl'.c other hand mind is nothing apart from them. 

It would seem more natural to say that Space-Time 
and point-instants enjoy themselves. However, if we do 
so we use the term enjoyment in a sense not possible 
for ourselves, with whom enjoyment is correlative or 
compresent with a non-mental object. In fact the 
‘ experience ’ which Space-Time and point-instants have is 

^ It does not of course enjoy itself as seeing or hearing in* respect of the 
act by which it contemplates the neural process which is equivalent to 
seeing or hearing. Thinking of that is a fresh enjoyment. 



CH. II. A 


FORMULA FOR SPACE-TIME 


41 


something out of which enjoyment and contemplation, as 
w‘c know them in ourselves and can distinguish them on 
lower levels of existence than ours, both arise. This is 
but to say once more that Space-Time is the matrix of all 
empirical existence. But within Space-Time we can 
properly identify the relation of point-instants to one 
another with that of persons to one another, which are 
assured of each other’s minds not by contemplation nor 
enjoyment of foreign minds but by that experience of 
co-operation or competition which may fitly be called 
social. There is a society of instants which are minds 
established through their connections in space. This 
analogy will develop in significance as we proceed. It 
was with a view to convenience in stating this result that 
the problem of how minds come to acknowledge each 
other’s existence was introduced into the last chapter. 

The other and greater difficulty in envisaging our Compiex- 
formula arises from the immense complexity of the 
picture we have to draw of Time as the mind of Space. 

For these details we have to refer back to the previous 
chapters in Book 1. (chs. i. ii.). Primarily we are to 
think of each instant, say the instant of reference, as the 
momentary mind of its point. But in the first place 
that mind is not merely momentary ; for it is continuous 
with the minds of the points along its line of advance. 

This is the continuance of the mind of reference into 
its past and future. At the higher stage of real or 
conscious mind we have, correspondingly, enjoyment of 
the present as linked on to enjoyment of the mind’s 
past and of its future. In the next place the instant is 
also spread out in space over the points which each 
instant intrinsically occupies, and which are its structure. 

The minds of these points which are thus intrinsically 
synchronous overlap and arc one mind, one instant of 
time. We thus have first overlapping of several minds 
so as to form one mind spread out in time, and second so 
as to forg) one instant spread out in space. In the third 
place, any instant of reference is not only connected with 
all the past and future that lie on lines of advance passing 



42 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


through that point-instant, but owing to the extension 
of any moment in space there are points in the past ('or 
future) which are all at the same distance in time from 
any one of the points in the extension of the moment. 
a is the present instant and there is a line of advance 
from ^ to ; but there is also a line of advance from d 
to Cy and let us say, is synchronous intrinsically with 
a. b and d are thus in the past and they may be at the 
same date in the past with reference to the instant which 
is spread out over a and r, although there is no direct 
line of advance from d to a. If we combine these 
considerations we have a picture of Space-Time as a 
whole with regard to any point of reference. For that 
instant, Space is occupied partly with an extensive present, 
and partly with a past and future at various dates. This 
picture corresponds exactly to what we enjoy in our own 
minds, where there are tracts of present, past, and future 
enjoyments spread out in their appropriate spaces. As was 
said before. Space for itself at any instant not only con- 
tains present time but is full of memory and expectation. 

There is a further complexity. For besides the 
present of reference there are other point-instants arrived 
at by entirely independent lines of advance, which the 
supposed outsider looking on at total Space-Time can see 
to be synchronous, but which are not present to one 
another in the sense in which points intrinsically 
synchronous are. We have seen that if a suitable 
selection of point-instants be made from total Space-Time 
the whole of Space is filled at any instant, just as the 
whole of Time streams through every point of Space and 
each point is the seat of the whole time-history of the 
world. Now it is difficult to understand how in total 
Space-Time any moment can thus be the union of 
present instants which are apparently indifferent to each 
other. We have to think of disconnected point-minds 
which yet in the total mind belong to the same instant. 
Yet this condition of things also has its analogue in our 
experience of minds. 

For in the abnormal patient there may be co-conscious 
minds which are not aware of each other, or at least, as in 



CH. II. A 


FORMULA FOR SPACE-TIME 


43 


the Beauchamp case, one mind within the patient may be 
unaware of the other, while the second may still be aware 
of the first. The whole personality of the patient may 
be restored as in this case by the blending of the separate 
minds developed by dissociation within it. Sometimes a 
deeper hypnosis reveals a fuller mind which is aware of 
the person developed in a less deep hypnosis. The 
blending of co-conscious minds into the whole restored 
personality, a process already begun where one of the 
minds is aware of the other, suggests the solution of our 
problem.^ The disconnected but synchronous presents 
which are not present to each other are comparable to co- 
conscious minds within the same body. In the per- 
spective taken of Space-Time from any point of reference, 
these co-conscious elements do not exist and their 
space is filled by past or future. But in the total Space- 
Time, which unites the two minds thus synchronous but 
divided, the disunion is broken down and they belong to 
the same moment in the whole mind. It is in this way 
that we may represent according to our formula the fact 
that at any instant in the whole Space-Time’s life, the 
whole of Space is occupied. 

In some such fashion as this we may attempt to give Mind a 
fulness and some degree of explicitness and precision to 
the formula that Time is the mind of Space. There is Time a 
nothing in the mere hypothesis which is strange or un- 
familiar. The conception of a world-soul is an old one. 
Leibniz once described body as momentary mind,^ and it 

1 I have been led to this notion by an ingenious conjecture as to the 
relation of the divine mind and finite minds, which is made by Mr. A. E. 

Taylor in the course of his contribution to a Symposium with the title 
‘ Why Pluralism ? ^ in Proc. ArisL Soc, N.S. voi. ix., 1908-9, esp. p. 214. 

The point made there is that God’s mind may be contained in the 
Universe and be in community with our minds, and God may know us 
and yet our sinfulness be hostile to him, much as Sally hated Miss 
Beauchamp. I am not concerned with this account of the relation of God’s 
mind to man, mainly because what is distinctive of God is not mind but 
deity. I shall return to it in the sequel (Bk. IV. ch. i. pp. 350 f.). But 
I am using che spirit of the suggestion for my own different purposes. 

2 In Theoria Motus Abstractly referred to by Mr. Latta, p. 230, n. 34, 
of his edition of Leibniz. (Oxford, 1898.) 



44 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


is clear from the spirit of our inquiry that for it a point- 
instant and Space-Time as a whole are ^ material ' in an 
extended sense of that term. It is more important to 
explain, or rather to repeat, in what exact sense the 
formula is used. It does not mean that Time is mind or 
any lowest degree of mind. I do not mean as Leibniz 
meant that things on their different levels possess varying 
degrees of consciousness, from the distinct stage of 
intelligence down to the confused stage of matter. On 
the contrary mind is mind and Time is Time. Mind 
exists only on its own level of existence. I mean that in 
the matrix of all existence, Space-Time, there is an 
element Time which performs the same function in 
respect of the other element Space as mind performs in 
respect of its bodily equivalent. The points of Space 
have no consciousness in any shape or form, but their 
instants perform to them the office of consciousness to 
our brains. A similar caution will have to be put in 
presently in respect of the proposition that a point-instant 
is something material ; and because of the danger of mis- 
understanding, the caution is almost more important than 
the formula. Our hypothesis is merely that alike in the 
matrix of finite things and in all finite things there is 
something of which, on the highest level we know of finite 
existents, mind is the counterpart or correspondent. So 
far as the philosopher is concerned with empirical fiicts, 
it is his business to indicate what this element is on 
each level. On the bare level of Space-Time, it is Time. 
Rather than hold that Time is a form of mind we must 
say that mind is a form of Time. This second pro- 
position Is strictly true. Out of the time-element, as v/e 
shall see, the quality mind as well as all lower empirical 
qualities emerge, and this quality mind belongs to or 
corresponds to the configuration of time which enters into 
the space-time configuration which is proper to the level 
of existence on which mind is found. ^ 

^ Still less are minds, as Leibniz thought, monads. The only monads 
are point-instants. Consequently the monads are not for me minds of a 
lower order, but they contain an element comparable to mind. 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 


45 


B. The Order of Qualities 

We come now to the order of finites with their Qualities cs 
distinctive empirical qualities. Empirical things or 
existents are, it has been more than once suggested in 
accordance with our general conception, groupings within 
Space-Time, that is, they arc complexes ot pure events or 
motions in various degrees of complexity. Such finites 
have all the categorial characters, that is, all the funda- 
mental features which flow from the nature of any space- 
time, in an empirical form — each finite has its proper 
extension and duration, is built on the pattern of its 
specific univ'ersal, in a substance of a certain sort and the 
like. What remains to be described is its possession of 
quality. The fiicts can best be described as follows. 

New orders of finites come into existence in Time ; the 
world actually or historically develops from its first or 
elementary condition of Space -Time, which possesses 
no quality except what we agreed to call the spatio- 
temporal quality of motion. But as in the course of 
Time new complexity of motions comes into existence, a 
new quality emerges, that is, a new complex possesses as 
a matter of observed empirical fact a new or emergent 
quality. The case which we are using as a clue is the 
emergence of the quality of consciousness from a lower 
level of complexity which is vital. The emergence of 
a new quality from any level of existence means that at 
that level there comes into being a certain constellation or 
collocation of the motions belonging to that level, and 
possessing the quality appropriate to it, and this colloca- 
tion possesses a new quality distinctive of the higher 
complex. The quality and the constellation to which 
it belongs are at once new and expressible without residue 
in terms of the processes proper to the level from which 
they emerge ; just as mind is a new quality distinct from 
life, with its own peculiar methods of behaviour, for the 



46 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


reason already made clear that the complex collocation 
which has mind, though itself vital, is determined by the 
order of its vital complexity, and is theref )re not merely 
vital but also vital. If, to borrow the language of Mr. 
Lloyd Morgan,^ with whom on this matter I believe 
myself to be in general agreement (would that my ’faith 
were founded on knowledge comparable to his), the 
processes of a particular level are represented as a processes, 
a constellation of such processes is of such a kiiid as to 
be a new process ah wdth its quality B. That is, the thing 
which is based on that constellation of a processes has an 
emergent quality B, whose behaviour consists in ah pro- 
cesses ; and though ah processes are also a processes they 
are not merely such, and are on a different level from 
the processes which are sufficiently distinguished from 
other forms of existence as being merely a processes. 

Before proceeding to details, let me take a few 
examples.^ Material things have certain motions of their 
own which carry the quality of materials. In the presence 
of light they are endowed with the secondary quality of 
colour. Physical and chemical processes of a certain 
complexity have the quality of life. The new quality life 
emerges with this constellation of such processes, and 
therefore life is at once a physico-chemical complex and is 
not merely physical and chemical, for these terms do not 
sufficiently characterise the new complex which in the 
course and order of time has been generated out of them. 
Such is the account to be given of the meaning of quality 
as such. The higher quality emerges from the lower 
level of existence and has its roots therein, but it emerges 
therefrom, and it does not belong to that lower level, 
but constitutes its possessor a new order of existent with 
its special laws of behaviour. The existence of emergent 
qualities thus described is something to be noted, as some 
would say, under the compulsion of brute empirical fact, 

1 Scientia, vol. xviii., 1915, ‘ Mind and Body in their relation to each 
other and to external things.’ 

^ I fear I cannot assume that I should have Mr. Lloyd Morgan with 
me in all that I say in detail, especially as concerns secondary 'qualities of 
matter. 



CH. II. K 


47 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

or, as 1 should prefer to say in less harsh terms, to be 
accepted with the natural piety ” of the investigator. 

It admits no e^ planation. 

To adopt the ancient distinction of form and matter, 
the kind of existent from which the new quality emerges 
is the ‘ matter ’ which assumes a certain complexity of 
configuration and to this pattern or universal corresponds 
the new emergent quality. But whereas up to the 
present we have been content to treat the quality as 
something which is correlated with a certain configuration 
of its basis, wc can now, following the clue of the relation 
between mind and its body, identify the quality with its 
peculiar form of body. Quality is therefore the empirical 
fact which we accept, and prima facie there is no more 
difficulty in accepting the fact that a certain kind of 
arrangement of existents of a lower level should be 
qualified with a new quality, than there is in accept- 
ing (on the common unreflective view) the fact that 
bodies under certain physical conditions look to us red, 
or certain other physical dispositions give what wc call 
impressions of being hard or sweet. Quality belongs to 
things as mind or consciousness belongs to life-processes 
of a certain configuration. 

Further discussion of the relation of different levels to 
one another may be deferred till we have attempted in 
some fashion to exhibit the various levels themselves 
in the light of the conception of emergent qualities. But 
a few observations are still in place, some of a more 
general character, some designed to remove possible 
misconceptions. 

Empirical things come into existence, because Space- Time as 
Time of its own nature breaks up into finitesd the lowest 
such finites being simple motions of different velocities qualities, 
or intensities of motion and different extents of it. Time 
and Space, either of them, creates differences in the other 
or breaks it up. But in a special sense Time is the author 
of finitude, for it is the transition intrinsic to Time which 

^ I do not consider at present infinite existents. Whether there can 
be qualified infinites is discussed in Bk. IV. ch. i. pp. 363 f. 



48 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Space- 
Time ari' 
terior to 
material 
things. 


in the first place makes motion possible, and secondly 
provides for the ceaseless rearrangements in Space through 
which groupings of motions are possible Time could 
not do its work without Space ; but, this being presumed. 
Time is the principle of motion and change. It brings 
the future into present being and dismisses the present 
into the past. In the old Greek sentence it brings the 
unseen to light and buries it when it has appeared. 
Commonly it is personified in the figure of a sc)the-man 
mowing down the old to make room for the young. 
This figure represents rather the transitoriness of things 
than the real nature of Time. “Nothing stands but for 
his scythe to mow.'' It forgets that the same Time 
which mows down the grass produces the new crop ; and 
indeed when the simile, not intended to be pressed, is 
pressed, it seems to imply that conception of the world 
as a series of present instants, perpetually recreated, which 
as we have so often urged would destroy history and 
make even the present moment unintelligible. Time is 
in truth the abiding principle of impermanence which is 
the real creator. Or to descend from such high phrases, 
it is a kind of cosmic gendaryne who makes stagnation 
impossible, and at once creates the movements which con- 
stitute things and keeps things in movement. Cinulez^ 
Messieurs. If it be true that Time is the mind of Space, 
or rather if Space and every part of it has something 
standing to it in the relation of mind to body, and that 
something is Time, then for us, as for certain Greek 
philosophers, soul is the source of movement. 

Some current conceptions are superseded by this 
statement. The first is the conception that things and 
events are in Space and Time, which are relations between 
things. We need do no more here than recall what has 
been said on this topic before. For philosophy this con- 
ception must be inverted, though we need not cease to 
use the language, if only because common speech does 
not imply by the phrase, things are in Space, that Space 
is a mere relation. For us Space-Time logically, and in 
fact, precedes finite things which are difFerentiations of 



CH II. B 


49 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

that stuff. This Inversion, I may here recall/ is in prin- 
ciple one with that which was made by the late Osborne 
Reynolds, who treated Space as material and what we 
call material things as faults or strains in the uniform 
structure of Space. 

This leads directly to the question, in what sense is 
Space-Time material. Matter has a popular and a philo- 
sophical meaning. As a philosophical term matter is 
correlated with form ; and Plato regarded Space as the 
matrix in which things were made in the likeness of 
forms. For us the form or configuration of motion 
belongs not to Space but to Space-Time or motion, and 
form does not affect the matter from without, but belongs 
intrinsically to any finite piece of Space-Time. Space- 
Time then is the stuff which receives determination in 
the qualities it assumes as its complexity of grouping 
develops in Time. As stuff it is the recipient of quality 
in its various empirical or finite forms. 

In the popular sense of the term, matter is a generic 
name for physical substance, and it is very difficult to 
say what is its distinctive quality. Let us call it for the 
present, materiality. Now Space-Time, though the stuff 
of material things and of all other things, is not material, 
if that means to possess materiality ; it is anterior to such 
matter. But it is continuous^ with material existence 
which is one of the earlier outgrowths from it. It is 
not attenuated matter, nor is even the spatial element of 
Space-Time attenuated matter. The only advantage which 
arises from speaking of it as material is that of helping 
to make clear that neither Space nor Time are mere rela- 
tions between things or events, but if such impropriety 
of designation may be pardoned, they are themselves 
entities or rather Space-Time is an entity. Of the familiar 
types of existents, material existence is possibly closest 
to Space-Time and the stuff of reality may therefore most 
easily be conceived on the material analogy ; for the 

1 Bk. I. ch. vi. vol. i. p. 173, note. 

^ I am using the word continuous in the popular sense. There is 
no break in the chain of finite qualified existents. The qualities as such 
form a discontinuous series, but they are connected spatio- temporally. 

VOL. II E 



50 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Miscon- 

ceptions 

superseded 


phrases ‘ stuff of things/ ‘ the matrix in which things are 
precipitated’ are all physical descriptions. But if our 
hypothesis is sound, material existence is itself not purely 
material in the sense in which matter is opposed to mind. 
Matter like Space-Time contains an element of body and 
an element correspondent to mind which is its materiality, 
whatever that may be. Thus while Space-Time is con- 
tinuous with matter, so is it equally continuous with 
mind. For mind as an existent, not simply as the 
quality of mentality or consciousness, is a living (and 
therefore a material) body with the mental quality. 
My motive in anticipating the discussion of empirical 
qualities by the hypothesis that Time performed towards 
Space the office of mind, was, that by suggesting that 
something corresponding to mind was present from the 
beginning at the lowest finite level of mere motion, I 
might remove the prejudice against any attempt to 
exhibit all the forms of existence as a continuous series 
from Space-Time upwards through matter to mind. 

Certain minor difficulties may next be removed. The 
conception, once at any rate so widely current, that the 
ultimate constituents of things are matter and motion, 
must be modified. Matter it is thought is not itself a 
form of motion, or comparable with motion itself. It is 
so difficult to conceive motion as stuff, without something 
which moves ; we still suppose a something we call 
matter which changes its place in empty Space. But this 
difficulty vanishes when once we have learnt to think of 
motion as stuff, and as in fact the first form of animated 
body. For there is no reason to regard matter (whatever 
we may learn from physicists as to what distinguishes 
matter from other groups of motion), as other than a 
complex of motion, that is made out of the original stuff 
which is Space-Time. 

This conception that matter is in the end a complex 
of motions and not, like motion itself, ultimate, requires 
more courage (or rashness) to suggest than the last of 
these general pleas that I have now to urge, that another 
scientific conception, the ether, becomes ‘ unnecessary 
except possibly as a convenience of expression or imagina- 



CH. 11. B 


51 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

tion. For the ether has fallen on evil days and he who 
impugns it run*^ little risk. Regarded once as a substance 
^or medium filling all Space, it has become little more 
than a name for the possibility of the transference of 
energy. It is not too much to say,” writes Mr. Soddy, 
‘‘that the idea of an ether has been invented by scientific 
men for the express purpose of accounting for the flow 
of energy^ across empty space and is at present little more 
than a term to express the medium in which these trans- 
ferences occur.” ^ But the same process by which force 
has been attenuated into acceleration seems to do away 
with ether as a medium and leave it as a name for the 
motions in tvhich the transferences of energy consist. 
For the empty Space which this medium is supposed to 
fill is a figment. Space is already full of Time ; that is, 
there is no such thing as Space by itself, but the system 
of motions which in their continuity make Space-Time, 
and in all this there is no vacuum. “ There is no 
greater difficulty in conceiving the motions of light in 
Space-Time, that is as a complex within Space-Time, than 
in conceiving them to be motions of this alleged medium. 
And a medium which fills Space is now, it would appear, 
gratuitous and even contains a contradiction. For it fills 
Space which is already completely full with motion. 
Thus since the office of ether can be performed by Space- 
Time, either the ether is unnecessary or we can dispense 
with the idea of Space-Time. Since we already are 
familiar with Space and Time from everyday experience, 
it seems better to keep to them and to acquire a correct 
notion of them so that empty Space or empty Time shall 
be seen to be unrealities, than to invent a new medium 
which makes Space-Time superfluous. The phrase ‘ the 
ether of Space ’ ^ is therefore, so I must think, either a mis- 
taken conception if it means the ether which fills Space, or 
else a pleonasm, for it can only mean the ether which is 

^ F. Soddy, Matter and Energy (Home University Library, London, 
p. 184). 

2 Above, Bk. I. ch. ii. vol. i. p. 65. 

^ The title of a well-known volume of Sir Oliver Lodge (London, 
1909). 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Matter. 


52 

Space, or more properly, since Space is nothing without 
Time, is Space-Time. 

The interpretation offered in general of the meaning 
of empirical qualities has been an extension downwards, 
made without concealment, of what can be derived from 
considering mind, where we have an order of vital 
existence blossoming out in respect of a certain portion 
of the living body into an emergent quality. To verify 
the interpretation in detail is a task which requires special 
knowledge, which I do not pretend to possess. Roughly 
speaking, the different levels of existence which are more 
obviously distinguishable are motions, matter as physical 
(or mechanical), matter with secondary qualities, life, 
mind. Perhaps this assumes too much for a rough 
enumeration, for the position of the secondary qualities 
of matter is under dispute. Now it is just at the earlier 
levels that the interpretation is most difficult. All I have 
to say on the subject is very little, and that little is 
encumbered for me with perplexities arising from two 
sources. One is the state of physical knowledge at the 
present moment. The great discoveries in physics which 
are changing the face of our notions about material 
things have not yet run to their completion. The other 
is a personal and more oppressive difficulty which lies in 
my own incompetence even to resume this knowledge, 
still less to deal with it and use it independently. 1 do 
no more than suggest that there is nothing in present 
knowledge as I understand the position to conflict with 
the interpretation which 1 am proposing to extend to all 
levels, and that there are many indications in its direction. 
It is not indeed the business of the philosopher, but that 
of the man of science, to trace the history of things. The 
philosopher may hope to point out if he can the general 
and outstanding features of the advance, as supplying a 
connection between the orders of finites ; and I am hope- 
ful that in spite of its defects what I have to say may be 
useful in this sense. But 1 do not seek to excuse myself 
on the plea that a philosopher who may by tradition be 
expected to know something of psychology cannot be 



CH. II. B 


53 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

expected to be a master of all the sciences. For on the 
contrary it is my belief that the metaphysician who is 
to make the greatest advances will be one who, like 
the seventeenth-century philosophers, is familiar at first 
hand with the notions of the fundamental and simple 
forms of existence which are treated in physics and 
mathematics. 

The (^numeration of levels given above was, I said, a 
rough one. In the first place, it is not certain to my mind 
that matter with its chemical properties and its affinities 
is not a distinct level from physical matter. But the 
enumeration is probably most faulty at the beginning. 
From mere simple motion to matter is a far cry. It is 
by no means clear that matter is the next level to quality- 
less motion, that is to motion or groups of motion 
which have no other quality than to be motion. (For as 
we have seen it is indifferent whether we treat motion as 
the most developed category or as the first kind of quality. 
Finite motion is the category motion in finite form.) On 
the contrary it is most probable that there are intervening 
levels. The dissolution of the atom into elements in the 
electron theory shows physical matter to be an immensely 
complicated thing, and highly organised. He would be 
a bold man who would assert that the electron though 
our present ultimate may not be itself a complex of some- 
thing simpler. These things are for the physicist and if 
they belong anywhere belong to the distant future. But 
of greater importance is that it is not yet absolutely 
certain whether matter is distinct or not from electrons. 
There would be nothing extravagant in supposing that 
electricity or light, for instance, were a substance anterior 
to matter in the proper sense. Rather, as I understand, 
it is probable. 

The first question we have to ask is whether electricity 
or matter (supposing them for a moment not to be 
different in kind or level) deserve to be called finites with 
a distinctive quality, so as to be marked off from mere 
motion as a distinctive constellation of motions. I 
assume that this is so. But if so and if our interpretation 
be correct, their qualities should be expressible in terms 



54 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK III 


of motion. And of this there are, I understand, certain 
indications. Let us take inertia or mass and energy as 
at least items in this distinctive character of materiality. 
Electrical mass is said to vary with velocity, and to be 
itself due to the relation between the moving system 
and the energy of the surrounding ^ ether.’ Kinetic 
energy is a function of the mass and its velocity, and 
as to potential energy (a conception metaphysically so 
difficult), it is again as I understand referable to kinetic 
energy in the surroundings of the system,^ and if so 
ceases to present metaphysical difficulties. Thus, to say 
nothing of matter proper, it does not seem very far- 
fetched to suggest that the electron itself may be a 
complex of motion, with which its electrical quality is cor- 
related or rather identical. 

There remains the question whether matter is some- 
thing specifically distinct from electricity, or whether 
electricity is itself material and matter only a compound 
of electrons If it were so, the atom would not be on a 
different level of existence from the electron, but as 
compared with it might be like more complex forms of 
life as compared with the unicellular organism, displaying 
greater complexity of structure, but not of such an order 
as to lead to the emergence of a new quality, but still 
remaining on the same level of existence with the same 
distinctive quality. For on each level there may be 
variations within that order of existence which exhibit 
secondary differences so great as to be called in common 
parlance differences of quality or kind. 

This is all that 1 can venture to say upon this most 
fundamental subject. If it is asked further by what steps 
it is that mere motion under the guiding hand of Time 
leads to the emergence of the material complexes of 
motion which we find in the world of things ; how a 
specific motion like that of light is generated, with 
constant anci maximal velocity, and how atoms come into 
existence as combinations of electrons with or without the 

^ Cp. Sir J. J. Thomson, ‘ Matter and Ether,’ Adamson Lecture 
(Manchester, 1908). 

2 Cp. Soddy, loc, cit. p. 177. 



CH. II. R 


55 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

distinctively material nucleus, with relatively constant 
constitutions ; 1^ can only reply that I do not know, and 
that it is not for the metaphysician to say, in the absence of 
indications from the physicist himself Yet it is difficult 
to refrain from hazarding conjecture by way of asking 
a question. And so I dare to ask if there may not 
be in these ages of simpler existence something corre- 
sponding to the method pursued by nature in its higher 
stages, oT natural selection ; however natural selection is 
to be interpreted whether as operating upon insensible 
variations or upon large mutations. Whether that is to 
say, nature or Space-Time did not try various complexes 
of simple motions and out of the chaos of motion preserve 
certain types. The ground which justifies us in asking 
this question is that the beginnings of things present 
phenomena analogous to those of life ; for instance, in 
the ‘ organisation ’ of the atoms; in the law that the 
physical and chemical elements observe certain periods or 
cycles which are connected with the number of the atomic 
weights, or that the properties of an element are shown 
to be defined by a whole number which varies by unity 
from one clement to the next” ; ^ in the observed trans- 
formation of atoms into atoms of other properties ; all 
phenomena which suggest growth of a certain kind. If 
it were so the history of life and mind, and we may add 
societies, would not be so isolated a feature of things as 
it seems. But all this is rather a question which might 
be answered by those who know, if they do not dismiss 
it at once as fanciful, and is not asked as having any 
further pretension. 

The primary qualities of things are the empirical Secondary 
modes of categorial characters, such as size, shape, number, 
motion of various sorts. Mass, inertia, and energy, we 

1 This number is to be identified with the atomic number of the 
elements [that is ‘the number of the elements when arranged in order of 
increasing weight ’ |, and also with the number of units of electrical charge 
in the atomic nucleus.’^ This is the law discovered by H. G. J. Moseley. 

My information is taken from the obituary notice of him by Sir 
E. Rutherford in Proc. Royal Soc. 1916-17, vol. iciii. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


56 

have treated as belonging to a higher level of existence 
than the elementary categorial characters. Though they 
are the nearest derivatives from the primary qualities, 
they stand according to this view on a different footing 
from the primary qualities proper, and if called primary 
qualities, we must add primary qualities ‘of matter’ or 
of the material level of existence, merely to point the 
contrast with the secondary qualities of matter. They 
are in fact the distinctive features of materiality. In one 
sense it is clear that shape, size and motion and number 
(the traditional primary qualities) are not qualities at all. 
They are determinations of the thing, but are mis- 
named qualities because the secondary characters, colour, 
temperature, taste, and the like, are qualities, and the 
primary features are ranged into one class with them as 
a contrasting group within the class. It is the secondary 
qualities, in their strict sense of qualities whose position 
has now to be interpreted. In popular or non-philo- 
sophical notions, they arc regarded as belonging to the 
thing itself. As belonging to things themselves, they 
may be reflectively regarded as corresponding to certain 
disturbances, of whatever kind, in or amongst the material 
particles, which disturbances are then notified to our senses 
by certain movements of the media, so that we apprehend 
these qualities. For example, when white light strikes a 
‘ red ’ body certain processes are set up in the body, the 
nature of which 1 will not take upon myself to describe, in 
virtue of which all the other components of the light are 
absorbed, and only the movements of a certain wave- 
length are transmitted. The disturbances are initiated in 
matter, and whether the medium be itself material as air 
for sound, or liquid for taste, or sub-material as the ‘ ether ’ 
for light or heat, it is not the movements of the medium 
itself which are apprehended as possessing quality, but 
the material thing from which the movements of those 
media proceed.^ Thus it is the ochre which is yellow, or 

1 Strictly speaking, this goes too far. What we see or hear is a 
place which is coloured or sounds. Further experience shows the place 
to have also the other characters of the ochre or bell. (Compare later, 
chs. vi. and vii.) 



cn. II. B 


57 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

the vibrating string or the flute with its contained column 
of material air, which sounds. The movement in the 
‘ether’ which makes the passage of the light is not coloured. 
It is the bell which sounds, not the air between the bell 
and our ears. When the poet says to the skylark that 
“all the earth and air with thy voice is loud,” he means 
only as the context shows that the sound fills the air as 
moonbeams overflow the heaven. The ether wave is only 
seen whe*n it illumines some material mote in its path, or 
the air set vibrating by a tuning fork is heard when it sets 
another tuning fork into sympathetic vibration. Thus it is 
a matter of comparative indilFercnce whether the medium 
is material ©r sub-material. A material medium as in 
sound, or taste, or smell, introduces complexity into the 
statement without altering its general truth. For the 
air itself which is material may be the material body, or a 
part of it, which is the source of the sound as well as 
the medium of transmission ; as in the case already 
named of the air in the flute or organ pipe.^ Moreover, 
difficulties arise in respect of combination-tones, which 
are believed to be produced commonly within the ear 
and not externally. These difficulties are touched on in 
the note.“ 

Such may be taken to be a reflective statement of 
common speech, which itself is not reflective, and it is 
accepted here as furnishing the data which await interpre- 
tation. But it is not the view which has been current in 

^ “ Even tuning forks give at least the octave, if not other partials. The 
octave partial from a fork originates, not in the fork, but in the air as a 
result of certain physical processes.” H. J. Watt, The Psychoiogy of 
Sound (Cambridge, 1917), p. 19, note i. 

^ But see Watt, ioc. cit. p. 55. There is in recent years a growing 
trend of opinion towards the belief that the secondary tonal phenomena of 
combination tones, variation tones, and interruption tones, not to speak of 
beats, are not subjective, but rather like all audible tones, due to pendular 
components of the sound wave as it enters the inner ear.” 

Let us, however, suppose that such tones are subjective, whatever the 
account be of the physical internal stimulation which produces them ; the 
sound still remains non-mental. The physical stimulation throws the 
auditory centre into a neural and mental excitement of the kind to which 
the sound heard corresponds. The sound heard would still be physical 
though not really present where it is heard (see later, chs. iv. and viii.). 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


58 

philosophy and science in virtue of a long tradition from 
the days of Galileo. All that matter possesses in itself 
according to this view is the primary qualities, whether of 
the matter in bulk or of its insensible particles (macro- 
scopic or microscopic primary qualities). What exists in 
the thing is certain movements. They affect our senses 
in appropriate fashion through the medium, and the 
quality of colour or sound is thereupon apprehended by 
the mind. These qualities are then as in the matter, 
movements, but for the mind, sense-qualities, and the 
sense-quality would not exist except for the mind (or 
according to a later version of the doctrine, except for the 
physiological sense-organ). 1 cannot accept this inter- 
pretation, which depends to my mind on overlooking the 
distinction between the apprehending act of mind which 
is provoked by the medium and the non-mental external 
object which in this case is the sensum or sensibile. The 
sense- quality owes nothing on this conception to the 
mind itself (nor for that matter to the physiological 
organ), which is but the means or instrument whereby 
an external sense-quality belonging to the thing itself is 
revealed. The colour, though it does not exist as colour 
in the absence of light, exists as colour in the absence of 
the eye. If I am asked how I can venture so light- 
heartedly to question a doctrine so authoritative, I can 
only answer here, for the subject belongs to a later stage, ^ 
that at least in its accepted form the doctrine cannot 
stand. For since Berkeley’s day no one can doubt that 
primary qualities are on the same footing in their relation 
to the mind as secondary ones, that if the latter are 
mental objects only so also are the former ; that it is no 
more possible to understand how spatial and temporal 
characters should look and feel so than how colour and 
heat should look and feel so. Both or neither must 
depend on the mind. If neither depends on the mind 
the distinction of movement and colour belongs to things ; 
if both do, there still remains within the mental objects 
the distinction of kind between primary and secondary 
ideas. These questions arise later. And in the next place 
^ See below, ch. v. pp. 138 fF. 



CH. II. B 


59 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

my concern is not so much to controvert an existing 
doctrine, however firmly rooted, as to indicate an interpre- 
tation of facts which shall fall in with a comprehensive 
hypothesis and in this way supply indirectly the justification 
both for the general hypothesis and for the interpretation 
of particular facts ; and this implies anything but lightness 
of heart in the performance. 

Accordingly for me the sensible character of what we 
apprehend in the object, that is of the sensum, stands to 
the movements in the thing, that is to the primary 
determinations which underlie it, in the relation of con- 
sciousness to its underlying vital process. The secondary 
quality is the mind or soul of its corresponding vibra- 
tion or whatever the primary movement may be. Thus 
while we cannot say that the ether vibrations of a certain 
wave-length are red, we can say that the movements in 
the material thing, in virtue of which the ether transmits 
to our eyes only vibrations of a certain wave-length, are 
red. Secondary qualities are thus a set of new qualities 
which movements of a certain order of complexity have 
taken on, or which emerge with them ; and the material 
movements so complicated can no more be separated from 
the secondary quality (which is not merely correlated 
with them but identical with them) than the physiological 
processes which are also psychical can be what they are 
in the absence of their conscious quality. Thus a move- 
ment or process or act occurring in a material thing if it 
is of the right sort, is red or sounds or is fragrant ; such 
bodily acts have no longer merely categorial and material 
characters but possess secondary quality. The movement 
which may be thought of as being a complex of primary 
determinations is revealed to sense as a sensum with its 
so-called sense-quality. The philosopher may learn from 
the poets as well as from philosophy or science, and in 
regarding colour, for example, as the mind or spirit or 
soul of its primary movement I may appeal without 
scruple to Meredith’s Hymn to Colour for support to this 
conception, and shall afterwards appeal to it again in a 
more important connection. In this great poem colour is 
a kind of spirit of which we catch transitory glimpses in 



6o 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


moments of its rarest manifestations.^ Or we may refer 
still more appropriately to a sentence of Pater's in his 
essay on Botticelli in The Renaissance which Mr. Bosanquet, 
to whom I am indebted for it, quotes so effectively.^ 
Colour is a spirit upon things whereby they become 
expressive to our spirit." The words are used and 
quoted by Mr. Bosanquet in a different connection 
from ours. But they can be adopted here in their literal 
sense. 

‘permanenL The coiiceptioii that a secondary quality is the mind 
primary substrate may be carried further. Hitherto 
we have been speaking of the quality of the sense-datum, 
that is, of a primary process which though suostantial like 
all movement is transitory. Now the colour or taste of 
a thing usually means not a transitory but a permanent 
quality. Such permanence may be secured in things by 
the continuance of the light, or the solution of the stuff 
in liquid. The thing maintains in this case its colour or 
its sweetness as the mind maintains its activity of thought 
or vision. But in the dark the leaf is no longer coloured ; 
it is green then, only in that it is in its primary deter- 
minations such as to take on the secondary quality with 
the incidence of light. When not active as a sensum or 
sense-datum, the sensible quality slips into a disposition 
which is on the primary level. It awaits the entrance 
of the conditions which are to complete it and convert 
it into that constellation of primary movements which 
possesses or carries colour. Precisely in the same way 
in the absence of the completing conditions which evoke 
consciousness, the mind slips into a physiological or 
psycho - physical disposition, which is only potentially 

^ Meredith however still holds the depreciatory view of Time. He 
says of colour, thy fleetingness is bigger in the ghost than Time with 
all his host.’^ The stanza I think of more particularly is : 

Of thee to say behold, has said adieu. 

But love remembers how the sky was green, 

And how the grasses glimmered lightest blue ; 

How saintlike grey took fervour : how the screen 
Of cloud grew violet ; how thy moment came 
Between a blush and flame. 

2 Principle of Individuality and Value ^ P- bj. 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 6i 

conscious, but is actually unconscious. Thus the 
permanent secondary quality of a thing postulates the 
permanence or continuance of activity and the quality is 
such continuing activity. Taken by itself the thing 
possesses the quality in the potential form, in the above 
explanation of that phrase. 

One remark may be added, already hinted more than 
once, and here again repeated only in passing, which 
follows from the relation of the secondary quality of, say, 
colour to its primary basis. It is not true that the 
extension of a material thing is impossible without 
secondary qualities, as Berkeley taught. If we see 
extension always coloured, that is because we see it and 
not because it is extended. Mere extension is not enough 
for colour. It is true that colour is always seen occupying 
extension. But the colour is a determination of the exten- 
sion of it and the extension is not a property of the colour. 

The quality of mind we have regarded as an Life, 
emergent from the stage of living existence with its 
distinctive quality of life. Mind as a thing is a living 
be'ing with the mental quality or consciousness. Follow- 
ing this clue we may interpret life as an emergent from 
material existence. I pass over here as beyond my 

competence the question whether life is the next level of 
existence to matter, or whether chemical process is not an 
independent intermediate level between physical existence 
and vital : whether, that is to say, chemical matter is not 
so distinctively different in the way of complexity from 
mere physical matter that ‘ chemism ’ is properly a new 
quality emerging from physical existence. Such a question 
is one which can properly be answered only by the expert, 
from whom philosophy has to take its material. I am 
content here to follow the usual habit of thought and 
lump together physical and chemical processes as merely 
material. Life then would be an emergent quality taken 
on by a complex of physico-chemical processes belonging 
to the material level, these processes taking place in a 
structure of a certain order of complexity, of which the 
processes are the functions. A living process is therefore 



62 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


also a physico-chemical one ; but not all physico-chemical 
processes are vital, just as every mental process is also 
physiological but not all physiological ones are mental. 
Moreover, just as mental processes belong only to a part 
of the vital structure, so in life we are dealing with a 
body which performs processes and exhibits features 
purely material. Thus an organic body has weight, it 
exhibits the physical processes of filtration, of pressure of 
blood upon the walls of the arteries and the like. The 
total of physical processes which take place within the 
body, though all subserving life, is not all of it co- 
extensive with that limited set of processes which are 
identical with life. ‘‘We must not,” says Mr. J. S. 
Plaldane, “ mistake measurements of the balance of 
matter and energy entering and leaving the body, for 
information as to the manner in which this stream passes 
through the living tissues.” ^ 

It is thus a certain constellation or complex or 
collocation of physico-chemical processes which behaves 
vitally, and the presence of such constellations which 
makes the structure to which they belong an organism. 
To call it organism is but to mark the fact that its 
behaviour, its response to stimulation, is, owing to the 
constellation, of a character different from those which 
physics and chemistry are ordinarily concerned with, 
and in this sense something new with an appropriate 
quality, that of life. At the same time, this new method 
of behaviour is also physico - chemical and may be 
exhibited without remainder in physico-chemical terms, 
provided only the nature of the constellation is known — 
provided, that is, we remember, as Mr. Lloyd Morgan so 
rightly insists, that there is already a constitution in the 
organism, a certain collocation, to return to my own 
phrases, of movements, which may be called the moving 
structure, to indicate that it is not merely anatomical but 
physiological. Until that constellation is known, what 
is specially vital may elude the piecemeal application 
of the methods of physics and chemistry. Accordingly 

^ J. S. Haldane, Mechanism, Life, and Personality (London, 1913), 

p. 36. 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 


63 

I am prepared in this sense to believe that they may be 
right who ma ntain that biology must be treated as a 
special science, dealing with its own particular subject of 
organic life which is distinguished by its own delicate 
capacity of self regulation. This is the position of Mr. 
Haldane ; who at the same time admits to the full the 
triumphant contributions which have been made to the 
understanding of life by the physico-chemical method. 
There seems to me no more difficulty in believing this 
than in believing that psychology is a special science 
dealing directly and at first hand with mental process, 
though all mental process is identical in the end, when 
once the constellation is known, with its correspondent 
neural process. If the study of life is not one with a 
peculiar subject-matter, though that subject-matter is 
resoluble without residue into physico-chemical processes, 
then we should be compelled ultimately to declare not 
only psychology to be a department of physiology, and 
physiology of physics and chemistry, but, if we are 
consistent, to be a chapter, like all other sciences, of 
mathematics, which deals with motion and Space and 
Time. But in pleading that life is still also entirely 
physico-chemical, as a complex of processes or structures 
belonging to that level, I fear I am forgoing the support 
of such so-called neo-vitalists as Mr. Haldane. 

How the new emergent quality of life is to be 
characterised in detail it is not for me to say. Organisa- 
tion is of course insufficient, for even atoms are highly 
organised and crystals are often instanced as cases of 
organised things below organisms. Self-regulation has 
been mentioned above, and organisms exhibit in addition 
the property of plasticity in their responses, and, once more, 
the power of self-reproduction. But these characters are 
after all but the different ways in which the distinctive 
quality of life exhibits itself, or which are summed up 
by it, and for our purposes no advantage is gained by 
substituting the details comprehended under life for the 
simple quality of life itself.^ 

^ Mr. Haldane’s view, besides the volume cited, is expounded in 
many papers. It is largely founded on, or enforced by reference to his 



64 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Entelcchy, 


Life is thus intermediate between matter and mind. 
It is also material in that it is expressib’e (and we may 
hope may be expressed hereafter) in material terms, but 
it is not purely material. Life is not an epiphenomenon 
of matter but an emergent from it. On the other hand, 
there seems to be no need for postulating in its case 
any more than in the case of mind a new substance, a 
directing principle, or, as Prof. Hans Driesch calls it, 
an ‘entelechy’ or ^psychoid.’^ The new character or 
quality which the vital physico-chemical complex possesses 
stands to it as soul or mind to the neural basis. The 
directing agency is not a separate existence but is found 
in the principle or plan of the constellation. The con- 
siderations which have led Mr. Driesch to his conclusion 
are well known and their weight is undeniable, and it is 
most of all the empirical considerations which carry 
weight ; such as are derived from the phenomena of 
regeneration of lost parts or from the striking facts that 
‘‘ in the earliest stages of embryonic development the 
cells of the embryo may be completely separated from 
one another or their mutual arrangement may be com- 
pletely altered by mechanical means and yet one of the 
separated cells or the disarranged collection of cells may 

experimental observations of the delicate regulation of the respiration in 
response to minute variations in the air. One of the most attractive of 
these statements is to be found in an address on ‘ The Place of Biology 
in Human Knowledge and Endeavour ’ in the Transactions of the South- 
Eastern Union of Scientific Societies (1915). See his recent Silliman 
Lectures for fuller statement. The most recent is contained in a 
Symposium vaProc.Arist. Soc,y 1917-18, vol. xviii. N.S. between Messrs. 
Haldane, D’Arcy Thomson, Chalmers Mitchell, and Hobhouse (now 
reprinted in a separate volume with other papers). Unfortunately 
Mr. Lloyd Morgan^s view is not represented in this discussion. It is 
the one with which in the above interpretation I venture, not on grounds 
of scientific knowledge but on general philosophical grounds, to feel 
general agreement. This view is expounded in his Instinct and 
Experience (London, 1912), ch. viii. ‘Finalism and Mechanism.’ See 
also A. S. Pringle-Pattison, The Idea of God (Oxford, 1917, Lect. v.). 
It should be added that Mr. Haldane’s so-called vitalism altogether 
repudiates both the earlier vitalistic theory and Mr. Driesch’s new 
form of it. 

1 Science and Philosophy of the Organism (Aberdeen, 1908-9). Also 
his Problem of Individuality (London, 1914). 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 65 

develope in a perfectly normal manner (I quote Mr. 
Haldane’s sum’ nary ^), though if the animal grows from 
only half the embryo it will be only half the normal size. 

I am not in a position to discuss these facts technically. 

But is there anything in them which is inexplicable 
when the initial constellation is considered ? Instead of 
straightway postulating an entelechy to act as a guide, 

it would seem to me more reasonable to note that a 

% 

given stage of material complexity is characterised by 
such and such special features, and that these are part 
and parcel of the nature of the principle or plan of the 
new order of complex. It is quite true that no merely 
material comf)lex will regenerate itself or reproduce itself 
or grow up into a small perfect specimen from half the 
stuff of a full-sized one. But the fact is that the new 
complex is no longer purely material, though it is also 
material. By accepting this we at any rate confine 
ourselves to noting the facts, observing loyally the 
differences of these existents from existents of a lower 
order ; and do not invent entities for which there seems 
to be no other justification than that something is done 
in life which is not done in matter. Why should not 
matter whose quality has budded out from Space-Time 
bud out in its turn into a new quality, the ultimate stuff 
being throughout the same and the proximate stuff of 
life being matter ? 

Two causes appear to prejudice this inquiry and The anti- 
to stand in the way of a satisfactory interpretation, mechanical 
One is the false or at least ambiguous antithesis and vital, 
of the mechanical and the vital, or of mechanism and 
life. When life is identified with mind, the antithesis 
becomes still more acute. But ‘ mechanism ’ or the 
‘mechanical’ means two things which may be confused. 

It may stand for the behaviour which is distinctive of 
matter pure and simple or it may stand merely for deter- 
minate behaviour. Now it is possible for a thing to be 
mechanical in the sense of acting in a way determined 
infallibly by its structure and not mechanical in the sense 
of being purely material. Half the reason for holding 
1 Loc. cit. p. 29. 


VOL. II 


F 



66 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


that life (or mind) is an entity independent of its body and 
working through it is that no machine ^ an do what life 
or mind does. The question must be asked in what 
respects is mind different from a machine ? A machine 
is a structure which effects certain results. Now a living 
thing is not a material machine. Yet in so far as its 
structure enables it to perform certain vital processes, to 
react in certain ways to stimuli, it behaves determinately 
in accordance with its structure. The structure allows 
for a certain latitude of the response within limits, but 
the response is within those limits as determinate as if 
the structure were purely material. In this sense of 
mechanical the organism is mechanical axid we could 
understand it to be so, provided we knew the constellation 
of its structure. On the other hand, it is equally true 
that if we regard the organism as behaving according to 
the laws determined by its own peculiar structure, a 
material machine may, since it also obeys the laws of its 
structure, be said to be alive, and in many ways this is a 
helpful conception. The difference of the material and 
the organic ^ machine ’ lies in the comparative rigidity of 
the one and the plasticity of the other. Plasticity is not 
realised by matter but waits for life. But if we could 
secure the right sort of machine it would be an organism 
and would cease to be a material machine. We have no 
right therefore to confuse the definiteness of mechanism 
with its materiality, and on this ground cut off the con- 
tinuity between the material structure and the emergent 
order of vital structure. The true antithesis is that of 
the vital and the material and not of the vital and 
mechanical.^ 

The other cause is the dogma that mind or life (so 
far as life is taken to be the same as or allied to mind) 
presents us with a soul for which there is no precedent 
in the lower forms of existence. Life and matter seem 

^ This confusion of the determinate and the material also vitiates Mr. 
Haldane’s work, otherwise so moderate and careful in its statement. I 
should, however, add that I am not concerned with his conception of 
philosophy and indeed I do not see what a theory of knowledge has to do 
with the matter. 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 67 

to be parted by an impassable cleft. To account for the 
facts of life anc mind we need at least an entelechy. Now 
supposing the case were really so, we should still, in 
loyalty to the facts, be obliged, I think, to content our- 
selves with the interpretation that life is the quality 
distinctive of a certain material constellation. The 
mystery of it would remain deep. But it has ceased on 
our hypothesis to be so unintelligible. For though 
matter has no life, it has something which plays in it the 
part which life plays in the living organism and mind 
plays in the person ; and even on the lowest level of 
existence, any motion has its soul, which is time. Thus 
matter is not merely dead as if there was nothing in it akin 
to life. It is only dead in that it is not alive as organisms are. 
Compare matter with Space-Time ; there is as much reason 
for assuming an entity or entelechy ‘materiality’ distinct 
from the motions which are the behaviour of matter as to 
assume an entity ‘ life ’ or ‘ mind ’ distinct from the basis 
of life in matter. Always under the caveat that Time 
and materiality and life and mind are empirically not the 
same and not merely different degrees of one and the 
same thing, we are compelled to the conclusion that all 
finite existence is alive, or in a certain sense animated. 

Mind is the last empirical quality of finites that we Summary, 
know, and we have seen it to be an emergent from the 
level of living existence. We have thus verified, how 
faultily no one can be more painfully aware than I myself, 
on the inferior levels what was more easily discernible on 
the highest. Quality is something empirical which in 
every case but that of motion is seen to emerge from a 
level of existence lower than itself ; and as to motion it 
is to be described indifferently as empirical or categorial, 
for it is the meeting-point of the two. Each new type 
of existence when it emerges is expressible completely or 
without residue in terms of the lower stage, and there- 
fore indirectly in terms of all lower stages ; mind in 
terms of living process, life in terms of physico-chemical 
process, sense-quality like colour in terms of matter with 
its movements, matter itself in terms of motion. More- 



68 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


over, everywhere this result appears to be secured as it is 
in our own persons. There is a body or material of the 
lower level, of which one part is so complicated as to be 
endowed in fict with a new quality, which performs to it 
the office of soul or mind and may be called with proper 
caution its mind, body and mind being identical in this 
portion of the body in question. Life we have seen is 
a selection from a larger whole of physico - chemical 
processes. A secondary quality like colour belongs to 
one part or g^'ouping of primary qualities in the material 
body to which it belongs, other parts of which may be 
occupied by other secondary qualities, and others by mere 
matter without secondary qualities ; according to the 
conception reached at an earlier stage that a thing or 
substance was a volume of space-time occupied in diverse 
parts so as to fill its contour by qualities. 

Using symbols we may put the case briefly thus. A 
complex of processes on a level L with the distinctive 
quality / becomes endowed, within the whole A-thing or 
body, with a quality and the whole thing characterised 
by this quality rises to the level L The processes with 
the emergent quality V constitute the soul or mind of a 
thing or body which is on the level L. The mind of 
a thing is thus equivalent only to a portion of that thing. 
Hence, when in us the mind in the proper sense of that 
word apprehends its bodily organism through the organic 
sensations, we have one portion, a highly developed one 
which carries the mental quality, apprehending a part of 
the whole body which is at the lower level. Another 
corollary is the obvious one that a thing or body at the 
level L' is as it were stratified and, besides containing 
processes which have the quality is built up on 
processes of all the lower levels down to the spatio- 
temporal one itself. 

Thus the soul of each level is the soul of a body 
which is the stuff of which it may be called the form. 
There is a close connection between this conception and 
that of the universal (or as it was called in Gree^ 
philosophy, the form). The universal is, as we have 
seen, the pattern of construction of the particular. So 



CH. II. B 


69 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

far as the neural complex has a certain pattern of com- 
plexity it has tae mental quality. But we cannot say that 
the quality belongs to the universal in any sense in which 
it does not belong to the particular. The universal 
simply emerges with its quality on the higher level of 
existence. Owing to the historical associations of the 
word form it is better therefore to keep to the simpler 
designation of a quality as a quality rather than as form 
of its body. 

The body or stuff of each new quality or type of soul 
has itself already its own type of soul, and ultimately the 
body of everything is a piece of Space-Time, the time of 
which is the soul-constituent which is identical with the 
body-constituent. Beginning with spatio-temporal finites, 
there is a continual ascent to newer and more developed 
existents, so that the course of Time issues in the growth 
of ever new types of ‘ soul,’ and in this way all existence 
is linked in a chain of affinity, and there is nothing 
which does not in virtue of its constitution respond to 
ourselves, who are but the highest known illustration of 
the general plan ; so that there is nothing dead, or sense- 
less in the universe, Space-Time being itself animated. 

It will now be clearer that, as was insisted before, the ‘Minds' of 
minds of various levels are not merely minds with varying i^veinifter 
degrees of what is mind in the distinctive sense. Life is 
not a consciousness with something ot its powers left out, 
nor materiality consciousness with still larger omissions 
and imperfections. The difference is one of kind or 
quality and not of degree. Nor are we to suppose with 
Leibniz that the minds of lower orders of being, for 
example living beings, are monads like our minds which 
preside over the living beings. Such a supposition was 
natural if our mind is itself thought to be a monad. But 
if we begin with what comes first, Space-Time and its 
constituent point-instants, which may be called monads, 
we realise that our minds themselves are but special com- 
plexities of Time. That special complexity carries with 
it the quality of mind, and it is identical with its bodily 
neural equivalent. A lower complexity of Time carries 
the quality life ; a still lower one materiality or colour. 



70 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Corollaries. 


Always these qualities which perform th*" mental office 
towards their bodies are themselves complex, and in their 
order of growth the higher complexity arises out of a 
lower complexity. Thus the time-complexity contained 
in a material body as such with physical, and let us 
assume chemical, modes of behaviour becomes in life the 
foundation of a still greater complexity of time-configura- 
tion ; and similarly in the emergence of mind out of life. 
So much the more important is it to urge that in declaring 
all things down to point-instants and Space-Time itself 
to be fashioned on our plan, what we really mean is that 
there is a more fundamental plan of which we are only 
the highest known empirical illustrations ; and that there- 
fore it is truer to call mind the time of our body than to 
call time the mind of its space. 

The higher emergent has been described as based on 
a complexity of the lower existents ; thus life is a complex 
of material bodies and mind of living ones. Ascent takes 
place, it would seem, through complexity. But at each 
change of quality the complexity as it were gathers itself 
together and is expressed in a new simplicity. The 
emergent quality is the summing together into a new 
totality of the component materials. Just in this way, as 
our thoughts become more and more complex, some new 
conception arises in the mind of a discoverer which brings 
order into the immense tangle of facts and simplifies 
them and becomes the starting-point for fresh advances 
in knowledge ; or in social affairs some vivifying idea 
like democracy arises to create as it were a new moral 
order, in which again distinctions and divergences arise 
which demand in their turn a new practical key. Some- 
what in this fashion complexes of one stage of existence 
gather themselves for a new creation, and additional 
complexities mean new simplifications. 

It follows as part of this relation of the higher level 
to the lower, as an empirical emergent from ‘ material ’ 
already endowed with its own quality, that the empirical 
qualities of the ‘ material ’ are carried up into the body 
of the higher level but not into its new quality. Life is 



CH. II. B 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 71 

based on material existents which have colour or smell or 
weight. But life is not itself coloured, nor, except in a 
metaphor, sweet. The living thing has colour in respect 
of its body but in respect of its distinctive life it has not. 
Mind has no secondary qualities, nor even has it life, 
but only as identical with a living thing has it life. The 
thing called mind has not in respect of its mentality the 
lower empirical qualities. Energy is an empirical quality 
of matter and does not belong to mind or life. Yet it 
is easy to interpret the phrases ‘ vital ’ or ‘ mental energy ’ 
as the energy of the material equivalents ; and in this 
way, be it observed, the difficulties of the application of 
the principle of conservation of energy to life and mind 
disappear. For we have no need to think of any entity 
soul interfering, with its own peculiar energy. Con- 
trariwise the categorial characters are carried up into the 
emergent existent. For everything is a complex of space- 
time and possesses the fundamental properties of any 
space-time, which are the categories. Hence though life 
is not coloured it is extended and in time, and this we 
have seen to be true of mind as well. It is a substance 
and exhibits causality and the like. 

This difficult relation is made clearer by referring to 
what obtains in our own experience, and extending the 
conceptions used in describing it to other levels of 
existence. Our minds enjoy themselves, we have agreed 
to say, and contemplate external things on the level of 
life and lower levels. The brain which carries mind with 
it comes in the end to be thought of as an object con- 
templated. Thus the same thing which as contemplated 
is a living thing enjoys itself in its distinctive quality of 
mind, and enjoys its mind under all the categories. We 
can thus more easily understand how a thing which is 
not mind but has something which performs to it the 
office of mind can be at once a member of a lower level 
and ‘ enjoy ’ itself according to the mode of enjoyment 
proper to its ‘ soul ’ in its distinctive character. Its mode 
of enjoyment need not be ^ minding ’ as with us, but living 
or, shall we say ? materialising. It is for itself as it ex- 
periences itself directly in enjoyment. Its basis in its 



72 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


body or matter Is one of the class of objects it con- 
templates. The twofold way in which our minds are 
minded and our brains thought of, and in this sense 
observed, enables us to overcome the apparent difficulty 
of denying that the empirical characters of the basis enter 
into the emergent though the categorlal ones do, while 
at the same time we assert that there is only one and the 
same existent, which Is on the higher level but also 
belongs to the lower one, and is accordingly differently 
experienced. To the other things on its own level it is 
related as we are related to one another. Certain special 
difficulties in this statement I pass over for the moment, 
for we are definitely trenching on questions belonging to 
the theory of knowledge, without which it is now hardly 
possible to proceed a step further. 

It remains to add that upon any one level there may be 
several qualities which yet are of the same order. This 
is the case of the secondary qualities of matter, which 
apparently are all specifically different. On the level of 
life or mind we have the different types of plants or 
those of animals. Now in these two cases, the quality 
of life or mind seems to be one and the same, and the 
difference to lie in the bodily structure of the various 
types. There are on one level degrees of perfection ^ or 
development ; and at the same time there is affinity by 
descent between the existents belonging to the level. 
This difference of perfection is not the same thing as 
difference of order or rank such as subsists between 
matter and life or life and mind. But the various 
secondary qualities seem to be different in themselves 
and to have different bodies. It may be, however, that 
amongst them too there are degrees of development or 
perfection, so that they may be found in the end to be 
affined as the animals are or, to take the other instance, as 
the chemical elements are. 

A further question which is directly raised by the 
whole interpretation of new qualities as emerging from a 
lower basis is how far such new qualities can be predicted. 
The discussion Is better deferred till we can raise the 
^ For the notion of perfection, see later, ch. ix. B, p. 264. 



CH. II B 


73 


ORDER OF QUALITIES 

question of human freedom. Meanwhile it is enough to 
observe that there is only one respect in which the world 
is predictable with sufficient knowledge, and that is the 
spatio-temporal. A calculator given the state of the 
universe at a certain number of instants or at one instant 
with the law of its change could, given sufficient powers, 
calculate what the spatio-temporal condition of the world 
would be at any given later instant. But he could not 
on our interpretation predict what qualities would be 
evoked by the complexes he predicts in Space-Time, unless 
he lived to observe them. 



CHAPTER III 

THE EMPIRICAL PROBLEMS 

How the Qualities are the empirical as distinguished from the 
problems non - empirical or cate^orial features of existences, the 
brand of their finitude, or rather (since we must provide 
for the possibility of infinites with quality) of their being 
less than the whole of Space-Time. Qualities are to be 
noted and registered but accepted without the pretence 
of accounting for them. All that philosophy can do is to 
show that they correspond to and are identical with the 
spatio-temporal configurations which are their ultimate 
basis ; and, taking over from the sciences what can be 
learnt as to the actual order which exists among them, to 
exhibit, as the attempt has been made in the preceding 
chapter to exhibit, the way in which the higher quality is 
identical with a certain complexity in the existences of a 
lower order of quality. 

This account of the relation of what is strictly empirical 
to the non-empirical is one portion of the second of the 
two departments of philosophy which were described in 
the Introduction. The first department was to describe 
and account for the categorial features of things. The 
second department was to consider the relations of 
empirical things to the non-empirical, and their relations 
to one another which arise from their being complexes of 
space-time, and related to one another consequently on 
being contained within the one Space-Time. Empirical 
facts and laws are the subject of the so-called special 
sciences. Whatever questions arise from the generation 
of empirical existences within the matrix in which they 

74 



cn. Ill 


THE EMPIRICAL PROBLEMS 


75 


are, not lost, ! ut contained, falls to the special science 
of philosophy. One of these questions has now been 
answered, however imperfectly, in the philosophy of 
quality. The larger question remains. Its interest 
resides to a great extent in the position which is to be 
assigned to minds. Minds are one set of finites, the 
highest we know, whose life or ‘ minding ’ is experience. 
But then relations to other finites should be, if they also 
are in the end complexes of space- time, nothing but 
illustrations of universal relations, which hold between 
finites as such, in virtue of their spatio-temporal nature. 
Accordingly the prerogatives of mind, which seem at the 
first blush to place it in a unique position, will appear to 
be illustrations of more fundamental characters in which 
all things share alike. The answer to the question what 
knowledge is and how it is possible, will be to show that 
given a finite with the distinctive character or quality of 
mind or consciousness, knowing falls into its place in a 
common scheme. The so-called theory of knowledge 
becomes an incident in metaphysics and not the 
foundation of it. 

Some of these relations will now be enumerated. The The 
consideration of them I call the empirical problems. 

I. The first and simplest relation is that all finites are 
merely connected together within the one Space-Time. 
They may be successive, or co-existent with one another, 
but they all belong together. In order to use a word 
which covers both cases, I shall say they are compresent. 
Such compresence involves directly or indirectly con- 
nection by way of causality. When one of the finites is 
a mind, and the other of lower level, the compresence 
is the relation described as consciousness of an object, or 
in general cognition (ch. iv.). 

II. Finite things are substances, and as such are 
volumes of space-time with a determinate contour and 
internal configuration. That is to say, they are deter- 
minate volumes of space-time which are the scene of 
movements possessing their appropriate qualities, and 
they persist throughout the succession and interplay of 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


76 

these movements through a finite tim^, and have a 
beginning, a history, and a death. The spatio-temporal 
volume or contour is that which unifies all its qualities 
into a connected whole. There are therefore three con- 
stituent ^ elements ’ to be distinguished within a, thing. 
First, its space and time. Second, the processes with 
their qualities which take place within it. Third, its 
permanent plan of construction or configuration. Con- 
sidered in relation to a percipient (I use this word to 
cover a mind engaged in any mental operation whatever, 
not merely that of perception proper) the first is the place, 
date, extent, and duration of the thing. The second is 
the sensible qualities of the thing. As transitory or 
momentary these are the percipient’s sensa or sensibles. 
The sensible quality as we have seen is itself a substance 
or thing within the thing whose quality it is, it is a 
continuum of sbnsa or sensibles. The third, or plan of 
configuration or spatio-temporal pattern (itself a pattern 
of qualities), is the object of thought or conception. It 
is clear that these elements are not separable : there is no 
finite space-time which does not consist in movements 
and which has not its universal plan of configuration. 
But unless there is a percipient, these movements and this 
plan are not sensed or thought. To call them sensa or 
thoughts is to speak of them in their compresence with a 
percipient (ch. v.). 

Furthermore, each movement or let us say process or 
act of the thing, though itself transitory or momentary, 
being one act of the thing does not, or at least may not, 
leave the whole unaffected in its internal character, but 
the next act may be affected by the past act, or the thing 
may acquire a disposition in virtue of its history. This 
is the case, for instance, with the arrangement of the 
molecules in a permanently magnetised bar. In the 
case of percipients, this is the fact of retention of past 
experiencings, or reproduction. 

III. A thing affects another with which it is corn- 
present differently according to the latter’s relative position 
in space or time or its intrinsic receptivity. In conse- 
quence it presents to the second thing only a portion of its 



CH. Ill 


THE EMPIRICAL PROBLEMS 


77 


whole characten. For instance, a thing which is luminous 
on one side only, like a dark lantern, illuminates objects 
on that side but not objects on the other side. Again, a 
platinum crucible may be unaffected by acids contained in 
it which might enter into combination with a glass vessel. 
Flowers may blush unseen. It depends on the nature of 
the second thing how much of the first thing affects it. 
But the hrst thing is still the spatio-temporal unity of all 
its characters. 

In relation to a percipient, this is the simple fact that 
all experience is selective and depends on the position in 
space and time, and on the sensibility or other receptivity 
of the mind. An object wears partial aspects to the 
percipient on different occasions, and the thing perceived 
is collected from many experiences which are synthesised. 
The varying aspects of a thing are then called its sensible 
appearances ; and it is hardly possible to speak of the 
relations of things in general to one another in this regard 
without using the language of human experience. The 
table presents a different aspect to the fireplace and to the 
wall. The glass vessel is sensitive to acids which do not 
affect the platinum crucible; and the like (chs. iv. and vii.). 

IV. Since Space-Time is continuous, things are not 
cut off from one another, and a thing itself contains other 
things, and is part in turn of a larger complex. Thus 
the room in which I write contains chairs, and walls, and 
air, and me, and is also part of the house. At the same 
time fairly distinct lines are drawn in nature (in Space- 
Time) which make it artificial to speak of me together 
with my chair as a thing in the same sense as I am a thing 
or the chair is a thing ; just because we can be parted 
from each other. Now the characters which belong to 
anything intrinsically are those which are contained within 
its own spatio-temporal volume. These are presented to 
any compresent thing as the ‘sensible appearances’ of 
the thing. But the thing owing to its combination with 
something else may affect a compresent thing (A) 
differently from when it is alone. Thus when the stick 
is half immersed in a pool, the light proceeding from the 
stick to a lens (the lens of the human eye is only a 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


78 

particular case) produces an image of a bent stick, because 
the lower half of the stick is a stick in Water and not in 
air. Thus the aspect which the stick wears is not intrinsic 
to the stick in air. Again, it may happen that if A has a 
defect or is unlike in any way to things of its kind, and 
is thus abnormal, the thing will not produce on' A its 
standard effect but a distorted one ; as for instance if a 
hammer strikes a cracked metal bell, or a ‘ dud ’ shell 
buries itself in the ground without exploding. 

When A is a percipient we say that the sensible 
appearances of the thing which is masked by the co- 
operation of some other condition do not really belong to 
the thing ; that they are not its sensible appearances but 
its ‘ mere appearances.’ When the abnormal character of 
A affects the result, the appearances are illusory appear- 
ances, and A is the victim of illusion in his apprehension 
of the object (chs. vii. and viii.). 

V. The processes within a substance are in direct or 
indirect causal relation with one another ; the thing acts 
in a determinate way. In mind mental acts are also 
connected causally with one another, and the mind is 
subject to determination like all other things. But the 
mind enjoys its own life and the causal interrelation of its 
states is enjoyed freedom (ch. x.). 

VI. Every finite is a part which subsists within Space- 
Time, and so far as it retains its own individual character 
it is accommodated or adapted to its surroundings In 
Space-Time. Such accommodation means the return of 
a separate thing out of its relative isolation into participa- 
tion with the whole. In respect of minds, this adaptation 
to other minds which surround it and to the world of 
other things is the foundation of values — truth, goodness, 
beauty (as well as the special case of economic value). 
Unvalues — error, badness, ugliness — rest on the failure of 
adaptation and consequent impermanence of the thing In 
its evil form (ch. ix.). 

These are some if not all ^ of the relations (whether 
internal or external) among things which arise from their 
belonging to the one Space-Time. They are not primary 
^ See Uter, ch. ix. F, p. 312, for a possible seventh problem. 



CH. Ill 


THE EMPIRICAL PROBLEMS 


79 


categorial characters of things, for they presuppose the 
existence of tnings as empirical, that is as possessing 
quality. They arise out of the participation of things in 
Space-Time, and they are thus not empirical characters. 
They may be called derivative universal characters. Now 
it would be feasible, however difficult, to carry the inquiry 
further in detail along these general lines, and to exhibit 
in each case the corresponding features of mental life. 
But the procedure would be intolerably artificial. Already 
we have found it difficult to present the data without 
metaphors derived from human experience. In particular 
the last two problems, those of freedom and value, are 
almost unmeaning without prior reference to ourselves — 
the problem whether freedom is a unique privilege of 
man or, as will appear, a common feature of all finites 
when regarded from their own point of view ; and the 
problem whether values are confined to us or have their 
analogues lower down in the scale. Accordingly in the 
statement of these last empirical problems I have been 
obliged barely to name the general grounds of the rela- 
tions in question, without attempting to formulate it in 
such fulness as was possible with the other three, leaving 
the sequel to make the statement plausible. It is just 
because our minds are but one set of things amongst 
others, and at the same time are, in this connection at 
least, so much more familiar to us, that all the problems 
arise for us naturally in reference to our own experience, 
and traditionally are always so treated. 

Accordingly I shall treat these problems, in what 
remains, as they present themselves in mind, leaving the 
reader to translate the results back into the simpler 
general form, and return hereafter, so far as may be 
necessary, to things in general. I shall thus expound the 
general relations in their illustration by mind. Moreover, 
while the treatment still remains of the nature of a sketch, 
it will be necessary to enter into some detail as to the 
nature of the mental life ; partly because though in 
psychology and the sciences of values there is a large 
amount of results which are accepted, there is great doubt 
and disagreement as to the fundamental ideas of these 



8o 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


sciences — the middle propositions, as Bacon called them, 
are a vast and growing field, but the elementary concep- 
tions are open to revision ; partly because the mind has 
not generally been regarded from the point of view of 
these general metaphysical problems ; partly also because 
I am much more familiar with the subject-matter of these 
than of the other sciences. 



CHAPTER IV 


MIND AND KNOWING 

A. The Cognitive Relation 

The first and simplest relation between finite existences, 
under which name are included not merely things in the 
ordinary sense but components of them or aspects or 
parts of them, is their comprcsencc within the one Space- 
Time of which all alike are differentiations. The 
behaviour of finites to one another in this relation of 
compresence is determined by the character of the finites. 
The plant lives, grows, and breathes, and twines around 
a stick. The material body resists, or fills, or sounds 
when struck, or emits light when touched by the sun. 
The mind knows. Mind is for us the highest order 
of finite empirical existent. A mind is the substantial 
continuum of certain processes which have the conscious 
quality. These processes are experienced in their con- 
tinuity with one another, and are acts ot the mind 
which is the substantial totality of them. They are 
identical with certain neural processes which the quality 
of consciousness or mind marks off from less highly 
fashioned vital processes ; and while they therefore have a 
distinctive rank of their own, and are experienced by the 
mind as mental processes and not immediately or directly 
as vital or physical ones, they constitute through their 
basis in life and matter, and ultimately in Space-Time 
itself, one set of existents in the general matrix. When- 
ever a mental process exists in compresence with some 
existent of a lower order, it is aware of that existent which 

VOL. II 8i G 


Cognition 
as an 
instance 
ot com- 
prcscnce. 
Problem I 



82 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


is its object. It experiences itself as an enjoyment, and 
it is comprcsent with its object which is contemplated. 
Let knowing stand for all kinds of apprehension ot 
objects, whether sensation, or thought, or memory, or 
imagination, or any other. In the compresence of a mind 
with a lower finite, that is, a piece of Space-Time of a lower 
grade of quality, the mind in virtue of its conscious 
quality is aware or conscious of that object. It knows or 
has cognition of it. A and B are any two finites, which 
are therefore compresent with one another. Let A be a 
mind and B another finite, distinct from that mind and 
lower in order. Then A’s compresence with B- means 
that A is conscious of B. Cognition then, instead of 
being a unique relation, is nothing but an instance of the 
simplest and most universal of all relations. 

The object contemplated, unlike the enjoyment, is 
some existent which is non-mental, some part of the 
whole world of Space-Time, but distinct and separate 
from the mind A or its act of apprehension. But 
according to circumstances the apprehension of the 
object takes different forms. I'he case of easiest com- 
prehension is sensation. Let B be a patch or point of 
red and A, as before, the mind. B acts causally on the 
body of A and excites a mental process r/, a process of 
vision, which for the present we may describe as a 
process appropriate to B ; which means that the process 
would be different if B were a patch of blue or a hard 
surface or a sound. That is to say, while the processes 
in the different cases would have the identical quality 
of consciousness, they would differ in respect or their 
categorial features, in a manner to be considered here- 
after. The two compresents are B and the mental 
process which may be called by anticipation an act 
of the mind A because it is continuous with the other 
mental processes which are united in the mental sub- 
stance or thing A. B is here the sensum and a the act 
of sensing. The name sensation is unfortunately used 
sometimes for the sensing, sometimes for the sensum, 
and sometimes for the total situation, outside of which 
they never do as sensum and sensing exist. I cannot 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


83 

hope to avoid following the bad example of common 
usage, but I shall endeavour not to do so except when 
the context leaves no room for misconception. Now 
such a relation as exists in sensing a sensum is strictly 
comparable with the relation of two compresent physical 
finites, like the floor and the table, which are in causal 
relation. The difference is that one of the finites here 
is not merely physical but mental as well, or rather it is 
mental for itself and physical as well. 

But the compresent object does not always evoke imngcs and 
the mental act by a causal action. When I imagine a 
red patch the mental act is evoked by some precedent 
mental act or perhaps merely by some stimulant of the 
brain, a pressure of blood or some chemical affection. 

Still an object B is now before the mind or compresent 
with it, that is to say, an object not compresent in sense 
so as to act causally upon A’s sense organ but resembling 
one which has so acted on A in the past. When I have 
memory there is, as before explained,^ the additional 
modification in the mental process and its compresent 
object which makes the object not simply a red patch 
but a red patch I have experienced before, that is, 
which belongs to my past. Thus the object compresent 
with my mental act being the object appropriate to it 
may be absent from my senses. Still it is distinct and 
separate from the mental act of imagining and the 
image or ideatum belongs somewhere in the world of 
Space-Time. 

There is nothing in the relation of two material Analogues, 
finites comparable with this situation. But a material 
thing is not alive and still less conscious. On the vital 
level and certainly before we have imagination or memory 
we have acts on the part of the living being which are 
anticipations of some external thing which is to complete 
or fulfil them. The plaht grows towards the light. The 
hungry animal goes in pursuit of prey, without any 
forecast in consciousness, so far as we can judge, of 
what it wants. Its movements through the jungle 
^ Bk. I. ch. iv. vol. i. pp. 113 f. 



84 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


UK. Ill 


are prompted by internal causes but are adapted or 
appropriate to the real prey which is there to be found. 
The currents which lowly organisms create in the water 
with their cilia bring food into the mouth, but without 
it would seem even the vaguest consciousness of any 
object, if we are even justified in attributing to a 
paramoecium consciousness at all. Thus on the one 
hand when the tiger sees and is conscious of the antelope, 
he jumps, but he also makes the preparatory movements 
appropriate to the finding of an antelope and then when 
one comes he jumps. The organism is so adapted to 
the world in which it lives that it not only is affected 
causally by it but from internal causes initiates actions 
adapted to the external reality. Even in ourselves we 
can detect these uneasy or restless movements which 
have no definite object (or at most we are conscious 
only of ‘ something or other ’ to which our movement 
is directed) but which yet arc adapted to attain their 
real fulfilment, like strugglings to get rid of oppression 
in the lungs into a freer air, or the unquiet movements 
which attend adolescence. 

To understand the significance of the objects of 
ideation we must refer to such movements as these, 
which arc pre-adapted to real objects in the external 
world. Let the movements issue from mental acts, and 
the object to which that act is appropriate and of which 
we are conscious as an idea or ideatum is a non-mental 
one distinct from the mind. It may take many different 
forms : it may be a bare something or other ; it may 
be an object ‘ such as ’ has been experienced in sensation 
before, like an imagination of breakfast ; it may be a 
memory, that is an object of the past as it presents itself 
after the lapse of time, ready to be identified with a 
present percept of the same thing, as when we say this 
is the man I met yesterday. On the other hand, the 
object may have no actual existence, just as the tiger may 
be disappointed and find no food ; or if he ‘misjudge’ 
the distance or be old, he may miss his kill like Akela in 
the Jungle Book ; or it may not occur to sense in the 
same form as it exists to imagination, may be a sheer 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


85 

illusion, a mbre imagination. Yet, however unreal it 
may be, all the materials are in the non-mental world 
out of which it is built, or, to put the matter otherwise, 
reality provides the basis of the imaginary object. This 
will become clearer when we deal with illusion and error 
in detail. Always the mental movement is correlated 
with and adapted to some non-mental object, which has 
the characters of sensible experience (is spatio-temporal, 
has colour or life, etc.), as those characters appear in the 
image. There may be no golden mountain in reality 
but at least there are mountains and gold. It is the 
combination of mountain and gold which is fictitious, 
and yet a mountain must be of some rock or other, 
only perhaps not wholly of gold. Thus on the one 
hand a mental act has compresent with it the non-mental 
object, distinct from mind, which is appropriate to it. 
And on the other hand all our images are taken to be 
not only external but real or true until further experience 
shows us that there is no thing or substance to which 
they belong in the form they assume for us. From our 
side, all our objects, sensible or imaginary, claim to be 

real. Ideas are, in short, the aspects which things 

removed from our senses by distance of Space or 
Time wear to our mind owing to its capacity of 

dispensing with sensible presence ; and this capacity 
carries with it the liability to create combinations 

which have no counterpart in that form in the real 
world. 

Thus as no finite existent can affect our minds directly 
without evoking its appropriate conscious act, so no 
conscious act can exist without its appropriate external 
object in the spatio-temporal world. ^ Imagining an 
object is comparable to the physical act of turning round 
to see something behind our backs. Difficulties are left 
over to Interpret in respect of mere imagination and error. ^ 
But we dare not take the difficult cases as our guide, and, 

^ In coining to recognise this principle I was much helped by 
a remark made by a speaker at a discussion in the Aristotelian 
Society. 

2 Below, chs. vii. p. 193, and viii. p. 2J^. 



86 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


because we may err, declare that our objects alike in 
imagination and sensation are mental. We must begin 
with the plainer cases, those of sensation, where the 
non-mental object acts on the mind, and of veridical 
imagination, where we need only observe that the world 
is in Time as well as Space and we may be compresent 
therefore with objects removed from us in time or absent 
from our senses. 

The link of connection between sensible and ideal 
non-mental existence which enables us to see that in both 
cases the object is equally a non-mental or physical reality 
is found in perception. There the mental process is part 
sensing, part ideation, and the object part sensed, part 
ideateX In the familiar phrase, half of our percepts are 
seen, half comes out of our heads. Yet the percept is 
one external object. The shifting phases of perception 
itself demonstrate this truth. 1 have seen and felt and 
smelt an orange at one and the same time. Later I see 
the orange, and its feel and fragrance are ideal ; or 1 feel 
and smell it in the dark and its colour is compresent in 
idea. What was before a sensum has become ideatum, 
and what was before ideatum is now a sensum. Ideata 
and sensa declare themselves equally non-mental exist- 
ences, with the same right to be recognised as such, by 
thus taking one another's places. 

The cognition of objects is therefore a case of the 
compresence of two finites when one of these finites is a 
mind and the other one at a lower level of quality. A 
mind in any mental act or process is conscious of the 
appropriate object in so far as the act and the object which 
are appropriate to each other are in compresence, no 
matter how they are brought into this relation. The 
act of mind is the cognition, the object is the cognitum, 
the cognitive relation is the compresence between them. 
It is therefore only an ambiguity like that noticed in the 
case of sensation by which cognition itself, the mental act, 
is sometimes described as a relation. The relation is 
indicated in speech by the word of^ which is the ‘of’ of 
reference in distinction from the ‘of’ of apposition used 
when we describe an enjoyment as the consciousness of 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


87 

the mental process or act.^ Such consciousness is 
identical with the act of mind, which is or constitutes the 
consciousness and is not its object. The object is some 
existent distinct from the act of mind. Moreover, while 
there can be no act of mind without its object, any more 
than a body can breathe without air, it remains to be seen 
whether the object does not exist in the absence of the 
mental act. Clearly it cannot be an object to a mind in 
the absence of mind, but does it owe its existence to the 
act of mind ? The answer we shall see is that it does not ; 
it exists or rather it may exist, as for example a sensum, 
in the absence of mind. These and other questions are 
deferred for the moment. 

But, waiving further details, we have reached a broad Compari- 
general result. On the hypothesis that mind is one 
finite among others, albeit the highest in its empirical direct 
level of quality, we have found that the relation of 
cognition is what in the Introduction was declared to be 
the deliverance of direct experience ; that in every act of 
cognition there are two separate entities or finites in 
compresence with each other, the one an enjoyment, the 
other what in relation to that enjoyment is a contemplated 
object. The enjoyment of the mind’s self is at the same 
time the contemplation of an object distinct from it and 
non-mental. To know anything is to be along with it 
in Space -Time. Consciousness is indeed empirically 
unique, as being confined to a determinate order of 
empirical existents. But to be conscious of something 
else is not unique. It is the one term of the relation 
which has the unique flavour and not the relation itself. 

What direct experience, interpreted without the prejudice 
derived from some supposed singularity or privilege of 
mind, exhibits to the unprejudiced inquirer, has now 

1 'Above, Introduction, vol. i. p. 12. The word consciousness is 
similarly ambiguous in ordinary language. I use it for the quality of the 
mental act or the mental act itself. But it often, perhaps most commonly, 
stands for the relation of the mind to its object. This usage is adopted 
by Mr. C. A. Strong in his recent Origin of Consciousness (London, 1918). 

It leads however to the inconvenient result, either that we are not con- 
scious of our own minds, or else that our minds are objects to us. 



88 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK III 


been exhibited as a corollary from the simple proposition 
that all Unites are related to one another by compresence. 
The mind does not stand above things and itself ; but in 
being itself — enjoying itself in certain ways — it is conscious 
of or aware of or knows non-mental entities appropriate 
to its enjoyment. No one will, 1 trust, suppose that I 
imagine myself to have in this way demonstrated a 
proposition which was otherwise an unsupported statement 
of observation. I have only exhibited the same fact in 
its place in a scheme of interpretation, and this is the 
only demonstration of its truth which the circumstances 
admit. On the contrary, to pretend that it had been 
demonstrated would be manifestly circular. For the 
hypothesis that mind is one thing amongst other things 
in the empirical world of finites, though it does not 
presuppose the actual result that cognition is the com- 
presence of a knowing enjoyment with a contemplated 
finite, does presuppose that there is no mind above both 
empirical mental acts and physical things to which they 
are both alike objects or, in the Lockeian language, ideas. 
The interpretation of knowledge is therefore but an item 
in the system constructed on that hypothesis. Knowing 
is accounted for as the work of a purely empirical 
mind. The result of a theory confirms a simple result of 
inspection. 

At the same time the outcome is more significant 
than this admission implies. For suppose we had 
assumed that there was something called mind which 
could survey things and its own acts, so that in a non- 
empirical sense not only mental acts but physical things 
were mind-dependent, a candid examination of these 
mental objects or ideas would have exhibited all the 
features we have described in the world of things. They 
would still be differentiations of Space -Time. The 
empirical mental acts as connected in the substance, mind, 
would still do all the work of what we are familiar with 
as knowing, and thus in the end the all-observing unique 
mind would be seen to be otiose. All which makes us 
thinking beings, all which gives colour and richness 
to our world of things, would be there as much in 



CH.IV.A THE COGNITIVE RELATION 89 

the absence o; this supposed unique mind as in its 
presence. 

The consilience of the result of our hypothesis as Mind never 
applied to knowing with what we may learn by direct 
inspection of the cognitive experience at once indicates 
certain problems and helps us to shorten the inquiry by 
reference to the Introduction. Thus it follows at once 
that since the object is distinct from the enjoying mind, 
the mind can never be an object to itself in the same 
sense as physical things are objects to it. It experiences 
itself differently from them. It is itself and refers to 
them. All appearances to the contrary rest upon a 
mistake of analysis. Thus I may at this moment have 
in my mind the memory of how 1 felt on some past 
occasion. But I do not make that memory of myself an 
object. It is a partial enjoyment linked up with my 
present enjoyment (also partial) of myself Just as I 
contemplate some aspect of a physical object, say its past 
condition, as a portion of its whole history, so I enjoy 
a partial condition of my enjoyed substance, my mind, 
along with the rest of the enjoyments which as linked 
together and contained within my own enjoyed space- 
time constitute myself as enjoyed. The arrival of 
reinforcements was the reason why the enemy was over- 
powered ; here is a fact of the external world included in 
a larger complex of external fact. Seeing my friend 
reminds me of how I used in former years to rejoice in 
his society ; here is an enjoyed fact included in a more 
comprehensive enjoyed fact. 

Introspection has already been discussed.^ I do not 
in introspection turn my mind upon itself and convert a 
part of myself into an object. 1 do but report more dis- 
tinctly my condition of enjoyment. A mind which broods 
over itself in dangerous practical introspection abandons 
itself to the enjoyment of itself because of the subjective 
interest of that employment. Introspection for psycho- 
logical purposes is enjoyment lived through with a 
scientific interest, and introspective psychology is the more 
1 Introduction, vol. i. pp. 17 ff. 



90 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The selccl- 
ivcness ot 
mind. 
Problem 

III. 


accurate report of our mental acts than we need for the 
practical purposes of life. Most introspection is indeed 
retrospection and has been thought therefore to be 
obviously a case of self-objectifying. But it is in fact, as 
just before observed, enjoying or re-living our past. The 
reason why we use retrospection so much is that in 
memory the enjoyed condition is free from those practical 
urgencies of the present moment which take our attention 
from ourselves and turn it on to the object with which 
we are concerned and make the accurate record of what 
we are enjoying difficult or impossible. On the other 
hand it is a sheer mistake to suppose that it is by intro- 
spection that we know the images with which we are 
conversant in imagination or the objects which we 
remember as the objects of our remembered mental 
acts. The image of a tree is no more examined by intro- 
spection than the perceived tree. Both are objects of 
extrospection. It is only the act of imagining which we 
can introspect. Still less do we introspect when we 
observe our bodily condition in the organic or kin- 
aesthetic sensations. These sensa are objects to the mind, 
not enjoyments, and, as will be seen hereafter, are non- 
mental like colours or figures in external space. Thus 
introspection may be called observation but observa- 
tion is not necessarily the observation of external 
objects.^ 

The mere compresence of a finite existent with the 
mind accounts for the mind’s consciousness of that object. 
The object and the corresponding mental act vary together, 
and to every difference in the one there is a corresponding 
difference in the other, not in respect of the quality of 
consciousness but in respect of its categorial characters. 
But not only are finites compresent with each other but 
they are related to each other selectively. Applied to 
the special case of relation between physical finites and a 
mind, this proposition means that the objects of which 
the mind is conscious are partial revelations to the mind 

^ In the above I am necessarily repeating in a shorter form the 
remarks of the Introduction. 



CH.IV.A THE COGNITIVE RELATION 91 

of things.^ This was also the deliverance of our 
inspection of experience when to simple inspection is 
added reflection on the results of many connected 
experiences. 

Things are, on our hypothesis, pieces of Space-Time 
within which are contained those movements and that 
configuration or pattern of their combination, which are 
the phases of the history of the things and the universal 
character which the things possess. According to the 
condition of mind, into which it is thrown by a thing or 
in which for other reasons it happens to be in respect ot 
the thing, the object of the mind will be a different partial 
aspect or feature of the thing. I may see an orange as a 
patch of colour but may be too far off to smell it. I 
may see a flower but may for lack of interest fail to count 
the number of its leaves. I may perceive it but at best 
I only perceive it partially. Or the thing may be corn- 
present with me as that object which is the image of it, 
or the thought or general plan of its construction, or the 
memory of it as I saw it yesterday. The mind enjoys 
itself at any moment only partially ; equally the things 
which it contemplates are contemplated selectively as 
partial objects. In common language, we are said to 
apprehend the thing of which we are aware only in the 
partial aspect or feature which the mind has selected. 
Thus we are said to see the orange and not merely the 
patch of yellow colour of a certain shape, which is, strictly 
speaking, all that we apprehend in vision. We do so 
because many experiences of the thing, called orange, are 
synthesised in our mind in the course of our experience, 
that is, we become aware of them as all contained within 
the volume of space-time which is the substance of the 
thing. 

The object before our mind is nothing but the finite 
and distinct existent which we apprehend with the 

^ The distinction of an object from a thing as being a partial 
apprehension of the thing is the same I believe as is drawn by Mr. H. 
Barker in his contribution to a symposium in Proc. Arist. Soc., 1912-13, 
N.S. vol. iii. ‘ Can there be anything obscure or implicit in a mental 
state ’ p. 258. 



92 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Things and 
objects. 


character which it bears upon its face — icS face value — 
a coloured patch, a smell, an imaged orange, a thought 
orange, a colour qualified by a touch which is revived in 
idea. Experience enables us to connect all these objects 
together and be aware of them in their combination as 
belonging to the thing to which they all in some sense 
belong. We then say or can say that the orange reveals 
itself under the form of these different objects. The 
synthesis or combination spoken of is not to be under- 
stood as a creative procedure on the part of the mind, 
except where the mind creates, as in imagination, a 
combination not presented in nature. The synthesis is 
the union in the thing cognised of the various special 
features of it which have been cognised piecemeal, and 
whose substantial coherence the mind comes in experience 
to recognise. The clearest instance of such contemplated 
synthesis is found in perception where sensa are contem- 
plated by the mind as combined with ideal elements. 
The act of perceiving is a synthetic enjoyment ; the 
perceived object or thing, the perceptum, is a contemplated 
synthesis, which as will be seen is founded on the 
reference of the separate elements of sense and idea to 
the same bit of Space-Time. 

We have therefore to distinguish between objects 
which are the finite existents revealed to mind in any act 
of mind and those groupings of objects within a cer- 
tain spatio-temporal contour which are known as things. 
Sometimes the distinction is called that of the contents 
of mind and the objects respectively, but, for certain 
reasons already touched on and to be explained more 
fully, this usage seems to me undesirable and entirely 
confusing. Now in the simpler cases, there is no 
difficulty in the proposition that a thing, described as the 
space -time which exhibits at any moment and from 
moment to moment different features united in a sub- 
stantial unity, contains these partial features, and that 
they are selected by the mind according to circumstances, 
the selection being understood not as necessarily an active 
one, as when it is prompted by a purpose, but as varying 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


93 

from passive i cceptance or affection upwards to fully 
active selection. The orange contains its colour and 
smell and shape. Nor is there any real difficulty in main- 
taining that the sensum orange-colour being distinct from 
the sensation of it and being a movement within the 
thing, with the yellow quality, exists in the absence of 
any percipient. When the percipient is there the orange 
is revealed to him as this patch of yellow colour. Nor in 
maintaining that the remembered orange, if only the 
remembering be free from falsification, is actually contained 
in the history of the orange, and is in the same sense the 
orange revealed to memory after the lapse of time. 

But the selectiveness of mind extends further than 
these simple cases. For not only does the mind falsify 
by the introduction of objects which do not belong to the 
thing ; that is to say, being in a certain condition it 
apprehends in the object elements corresponding to that 
condition, which it may thus be said to impute to the 
object ; but according to the nature of the mind 
and its mere position in space and time, things wear to 
the mind varying appearances. The colours may look 
different with distance, or with colour blindness in the 
percipient. Even the spatial form varies, as in the varying 
appearances of the penny when it is seen from the front 
or sideways or end on. The question then arises, and it 
is a different one from the present, which of the varying 
appearances of things, which objects presented to the 
mind, belong really to the thing ; the question, not of 
the non-mental character of objects but of their reality or 
truth. It is the misfortune of a systematic exposition 
that it cannot answer all things at once, and this question 
must be delayed till its proper place. We must, however, 
follow the safe rule of beginning with the simpler facts and 
accounting later for the complex ones. But while we 
can, if our hypothesis of the nature of things or substances 
be correct, affirm that a thing is a combination of certain 
objects which it reveals to mind, we can also safely at 
this stage affirm that it is the foundation of all of them. 
Later on we shall see that, like the bent staff apprehended 
in water, the variable appearances of things which seem 



94 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


not to be contained so obviously in thei i as the colour 
and smell in an orange, are appearances of the thing not 
taken by itself but along with some other thing or 
circumstance. 

The partial revelation of a thing to mind in the form 
of objects which belong to the thing merely means in the 
end that no object, nor even a thing, is given alone, but, 
because it is a part of Space-Time, coheres in varying 
degrees of closeness with other objects and groups of 
such objects connected together by the categorial relation 
of substance, that is, belonging to the same volume of 
space-time. The thing which is partially revealed in its 
objects, whether of sense or memory or thinking or 
imagination, is thus of the same kind of existence as the 
objects themselves. One object may suggest the others 
which participate with it in the one substance : that is, it 
means the others and may be said, though only loosely, 
to refer to them. Moreover, no object is apprehended 
except as being the whole or a part of the space-time 
which contains them all. Thus even the patch of yellow 
is seen extended over the space which is part of the 
orange. No object therefore is apprehended by itself but 
points to other finites as well. It is spread over the 
space which is apprehended with it.^ But the space and 
time in which it is contained and the other objects which 
it suggests in virtue of experience are all of them on the 
same footing as regards the mind which apprehends 
them. In the act of knowing the mind refe^^s to its object 
as something non-mental, and it may and does refer to 
that object as part of a larger whole which is also included 
under the general name of object. There is thus no 
thing which lives as it were behind the objects which 
reveal it, no thing-in-itself which is itself unrevealed 
except through these partial objects. If the objects are 
physical, so is the thing. 

It is because the mind selects (actively or passively) 
from the total thing parts of it, which it contains or of 

^ The space it is apprehended as spread over is the perspective from 
the percipient’s point of view of the space occupied by the thing. See 
later, ch. vii. pp. 192 ff. 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


95 


which it is the foundation, that the objects of mind are 
thought to owe their esse to their per dpi. All that they 
owe to the mind is their selection, that is their penipi. 
But their esse, their existence and their qualities, they have 
as being finite existences in Space-Time, and thus non- 
mental. Were it not for the selecting mind they would 
not be noticed, and would not be objects to a subject. 
But they do not oWe to the subject their being but only 
their being apprehended by the subject. They exist 
apart from the subject before the subject can select them 
for contemplation, always under the proviso that the 
subject selects them truly without introducing extraneous 
material also non-mental. And so far as they are there, 
and in the form in which they are there, they are there 
whether they are contemplated by a mind or not. 


Agreeable as this result, derived from a consideration Alleged 
of the general relation of selectiveness of finites to one Cognition 
another, is to what we learn from simple inspection of ‘<> some- 
experience helped out by reflection on the history and behlLi pre- 
varieties of experience ; it contradicts a doctrine sup- >“ti>tion. 
ported, by high authorities (like Mr. Stout and the late 
O. Kttlpe'), that objects or, as they are then called, 
presentations point beyond themselves to a source or 
ground, and are immediately apprehended as pointing 
or referring to that ground. The presentations are our 
guide to the nature of the ground or condition of them. 

Thus, since the source or condition is given with the 
presentation or object, it must be said to be given in 
experience. But at any rate that experience is on this 
showing of a different order from the experience of the 
presentation or object. Sometimes it is said that it is 
thought which informs us or refers us to the thing (which 
may include the whole of reality) which conditions the 
presentation. Thus, to take a simple sense-datum, it is 
rightly held that if the mind is aware only of its own 
sensations, it could not transcend them so as to know 
independently existing things. Consequently, to quote 

1 Die Realisiru?igy Bd. i. (Leipzig, 1912). 



96 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Mr. Stout, ^ “ we must assume that the sin plest datum of 
sense-perception from which the cognition of an external 
world can develop consists not merely in a sensuous 
presentation, but in a sensuous presentation apprehended 
as conditioned by something other than itself.” It is 
not easy to discuss this doctrine shortly with fairness, 
especially apart from the consideration of the variability 
of sense-appearances which we have deferred. But I am 
more anxious to point out what is its relation to my own 
result, and what are the really true considerations which, as 
I think, it presents in a mistaken form. 

In the first place, if we are said in sensuous presentation 
to be aware of or to refer to something not a presentation 
which conditions it, the thought in question is not the 
thinking which is concerned with universals or concepts. 
Strictly speaking, though I do not think this has always 
been admitted, concepts should be in the same category 
with presentations and should be like them real appear- 
ances of the source or thing which conditions presentations. 
Such they obviously are for me, since they are, as con- 
figurations of space-time, in pari materia with sensa or 
images or percepta. The difference of the two senses of 
thought is made clear by Mr. Kolpe when he insists 
that the thoughts we think are to be distinguished from 
the things we think of, for we may think not only of 
universals but of particulars or even of a sensation.^ This 
statement is greatly to be welcomed, for it clears the way 
to an understanding of the real issue. The thought 
which tells us of a thing or condition or source different 
from the presentation but revealed by it is the experience 
in the mind of a reference to something not the mind. 
In the same way, to revert to a distinction indicated 
before, the meaning of a word may be either the ideas 
which it conveys, that is the facts which are contained in 
its logical intension, or it may be the actual things to 
which the word is applied — its extension. I may mean 
the prisoner, where meaning is the intellectual substi- 
tute for pointing to him ; or meaning may be what is 

^ Manual of Psychology (London, 1913, ed. 3), p. 432. 

2 Loc. cit. pp. 82 fF. 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


97 


suggested by . word or a symbol or any part of a 
complex which leads on continuously to the rest of it, as 
the first words of a line mean for me the rest. Now, so 
far as thought is the act of reference to something not in 
the mind itself, undoubtedly we can have no act of mind 
without such reference. The experience that we have of 
referring to something non-mental is the experience (and 
I have shown before that it is experienced in enjoyment) 
that we are compresent with an object distinct from 
ourselves. If we call this experience an act of thought, 
every experience contains a thought-reference to some- 
thing distinct from our enjoyment. This is the essence 
of our own result. 

But for us the reference is to the object, that is to 
the presentation itself ; for the theory under considera- 
tion the reference is to something beyond and behind it. 
For that theory the presentation is still psychical though 
it is the revelation of its underlying ground or condition. 
Though it is not subjective like the feeling of interest it 
is yet psychical. In a later paper Mr. Stout has compared 
the relation of the sensible to its condition with that of 
an image of a sensible like a black mark to the sensible 
itself. “In the very act of directly apprehending the 
image I think of or remember the sensible itself. I am 
not merely cognisant of the image but cognisant of it as 
standing in a peculiar relation to the previous existence 
of the primary sensible.'*^ This analogy is very instruct- 
ive for the purpose of understanding the theory, but it 
appears to me to be a misstatement of the experience of 
remembering the original sensible.^ What I have in my 
mind is the image of the black patch, that is, is a black 
patch more or less blurred in the way in which images 
differ from percepts, and along with that the note of 
pastness and that warmth or intimacy of connection with 
myself which assures me that it belongs to my past. 
This is all that I can find in the remembering act, and 
this is the experience of having had a thing before me 

1 Proc, Arist, Soc., 1 91 3-14, N.S. vol. xiv. (Symposium; ‘The 
Status of Sense-Data’), p. 384. 

2 Above, Bk. I. ch. iv. vol. i. pp. 113 fF. 

VOL. II 


H 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


98 

in the past. The original sensible is no in my mind at 
all. But if I again see it I can identify the black mark 
as what I remembered a moment before. It is some 
such other experience which has been imported into the 
experience of the memory image when it is alleged that 
that image actually refers to the sensible. If the sensible 
had been in the mind at the time there would not have 
been a mere memory but a recognition. But if it was 
not how could it be referred to ? We have therefore a 
mistaken description of memory in which something 
known about the object is imported into the actual object 
of acquaintance. It may be added that we may have an 
image of a black patch without any memory at all, and 
here it is still clearer that if we say we refer to a sensible 
of the same sort we are not construing our experience as 
we have it but importing something else into it which is 
known from a different experience. 

Based as it appears to be on some such misapprehen- 
sion, the whole statement that in presentation we refer 
to its condition is open to the old objection brought 
against the Lockeian doctrine, which it resembles, that 
our ideas are copies of their originals. How can experi- 
ence warrant a reference to this something conditioning 
presentation which we never have experienced and which 
is only a symbol for the non-mental ? For this condition 
is not in the same case with the vague ‘ something or 
other ’ which we have often referred to as playing so large 
a part in our experience. That vague something is 
merely an object awaiting further definition. But the 
supposed condition of presentation cannot be further 
known for it is not known at all. I do not merely mean 
that it is not known explicitly ; that is irrelevant. It stands 
not for anything experienced or any part of such but merely 
for a postulate that although the presentation is psychical 
it must be brought into relation with external reality. 

I am compelled therefore to conclude that the doctrine 
is a misstatement of either of two things which are both 
true. Either it stands for the truth that every mental 
act does refer as such to a non-mental object, in which 
case the object ceases to be a mere presentation and the 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


99 


reference is to the object itself. Or it stands for the 
truth that any object of mind points to or means other 
objects combined with it in the spatio-temporal unity of 
the thing and that any mental object is from the beginning 
spatio-temporal and implies a piece of Space-Time within 
which it belongs and which is apprehended, as we shall 
see, not by sensuous experience but by a simpler experience 
still. Even a sensum like blue is never mere blue but a 
patch of space-time filled with that quality. This space- 
time in which all the qualities are contained is the 
identifiable element in experience which is probably 
intended when presentations are said to imply a ground 
which is not mere presentation. But this space -time in 
which a colour is found is part of the presentation itself 
There is thus no reason to look for grounds behind or 
beyond objects or presentations. The object is itself a 
space-time occupied with movements apprehended not 
as movements but in their qualities. All that we need 
to do is to distinguish between the apprehension of the 
quality as quality and the apprehension of the space-time 
which it occupies. This distinction is indeed of the last 
importance, but it is not the distinction of a presentation 
and its ground or condition. 

Certain features of the mind’s selectiveness remain to Aspects of 
be described. A minor aspect of it is the following, 

Every finite is compresent with all other finites, being 
part of the one Space-Time. But a finite A is not 
necessarily compresent with a percipient finite B in 
respect of the distinctive character of B. Thus let B be 
a mind. A is compresent with the mind B only so far 
as it can evoke an act of B as such, or in any way corre- 
sponds to such an act. Thus I do not see a thing behind 
my back ; though if I have reason for doing so I may 
imamne it or think of it there. In the second case it is 

o 

compresent with my mind ; in the first it is not com- 
present with me as a mind. On the other hand it is still 
compresent with me, in so far as I have a body, for it 
attracts me, or at the very lowest it is compresent 
with me as a portion of Space-Time. Behind my back 



lOO 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. II 


it evokes no mental response, for I am not, under those 
conditions, susceptible to it. But since my mind is also 
a living material spatio-temporal thing, it never fails to 
be compresent with me in some capacity of me. Thus I 
may not be conscious of all the things which I have the 
means on appropriate occasions of perceiving. But the 
complementary proposition is also true that there may be 
qualities in the world of things below me in order of 
quality, which I may not be able to apprehend in that form 
at all (though I can apprehend them in their spatio- 
temporal character), because my body does not possess the 
appropriate organs. Thus our senses do not necessarily 
exhaust the sensible qualities of things. Colour is revealed 
to me because I have eyes, while it is not revealed to the 
plant as colour but only as something which affects the 
chlorophyll in the plant. Or I hear the sound of the 
tuning-fork, but the sound may be revealed to a tuning- 
fork which it sets in sympathetic vibration only as a 
vibratory material affection of the source of the sound. 

There is a more important aspect of the matter. 
Mind is selective (like any other finite) in the sense that 
it singles out for its special reference the object it is 
compresent with. But every object is connected with other 
objects, with some more closely than others, and being a 
piece of Space-Time it always is surrounded by the rest. 
The object is but a salient feature in a mass of which the 
mind is conscious in various degrees of distinctness. Some 
of them are united with the object of attention within its 
piece of Space-Time. Some of them are qualified objects 
in the remainder of the medium, and always there is at 
the extreme margin the suggestion of a beyond, ^ some- 
thing or other ’ which is really there and which is present 
to us in the feeling we have of what we afterwards call, 
in the language of reflection, the finitude of all we 
distinctly apprehend. On the side of the enjoyment, too, 
we never have the single act appropriate to the object, but 
an act linked up with other acts, themselves distinct or 
indistinct as the case may be. To be aware of a thing 
and enjoy the contemplation of it is also to be aware of 
or enjoy ourselves as substantial, so that the Cartesian ‘ I 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


lOI 


think therefore 1 am ’ is true not in the sense of an I unlike 
in kind to its acts but of an I which is their substantial 
unity. The connected enjoyments may be as in ordinary 
perception distinct, but around our enjoyment of the 
largest tract of nature or of thought there is still the 
vague mental functioning, which is our apprehension of 
the infinitude of things not ourselves. Our definite and 
particularised enjoyment is a fragment from this larger 
mass, as its object is a fragment from the infinite world, 
which includes the external world and our enjoyment as 
well. It is indeed only so far as we recognise ourselves 
as part of the one whole, enjoyed in a smaller part, 
contemplated for the rest, that our vague sense arises of 
our finitude, our sense of stretching out in enjoyment 
beyond our own limited portion of Space-Time which we 
enjoy ; only so far, that is, as our enjoyed space-time is 
realised as part of and continuous with the whole of con- 
templated Space-Time, that we realise what the vague 
sense of something beyond means, and can express in the 
language of thought the experience that things and our- 
selves do not merely make up by aggregation the infinite 
whole but are detached portions of it, which betray their 
dependence on and continuity with it by the feelers which 
they put out to grasp it. It is the consciousness of our 
finitude and of the finitude of things which has led 
some to declare that we see all things as in God ; and it 
is one natural spring of the religious sentiment. At any 
rate it is as much a fact of our experience (and a fact of 
reality independent of our experiencing of it) as the more 
pungent and practical experiences of our daily intercourse 
with finite things, and ourselves, and one another. To 
leave these further speculations, it is doubtless this feature 
of our experience which makes some writers say, like 
Mr. Bosanquet,^ that mind envelops the whole world like 
an atmosphere. It is not true as these writers think that 
minds which are but one set of empirical finites are in a 
peculiar sense connected with the universe, they only 

^ B. Bosanquct, The Distinctio?! between Mind and its Objects 
(Manchester, 1913, Adamson Lecture), p. 27. Compare the present 
writer’s ‘ Basis of Realism ’ {Proc, British Academy, vol. vi.), section 7. 



102 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Corollaries : 
(i) Various 
kinds 
at com- 
pres^nicc. 


know more of it and in greater wealth of colouring than 
inferior finites. But it is true that our enjoyments 
expand in correspondence with our objects, as we pass 
from a small room to a large one, to take a trivial 
illustration, and that our mind pursuing this process 
takes in the whole, summarising the indistinct fringes of 
its own enjoyments and of the world of external things, 
in the thought of an infinite. The infinite then is, 
however apprehended, prior for the common mind to the 
finite as it was declared to be by Descartes and his 
successors. 

Certain corollaries may be noted which confirm the 
results of simple inspection. One has been already 
described in the Introduction. Compresence is the most 
elementary of all relations, and all that knowing as such 
implies is the compresence of a mind and an object at a 
lower level. The mind and the object are but two 
existents amongst others, or if we designate the enjoyed 
by capital and the contemplated by small letters, it is the 
compresence of A and i'. But the relation of compresence 
between A and b also obtains between two physical 
objects a and b and between two mental enjoyments A 
and B. It goes without saying that if ab is known or 
contemplated there is a corresponding enjoyment AB, and 
if AB is enjoyed there is a corresponding object ab. 

This is no more than an elaboration of the central 
proposition. What we specially need to note is that a 
thing which is enjoyed and one which is contemplated 
may stand in the same categorial relation to each other 
as two things both of which are contemplated or both 
of which are enjoyed. An enjoyed existence is a real 
existence and its nature is not affected by its being 
enjoyed in relation to an object contemplated. In other 
words, the complexes Kb, ab, and AB are on precisely 
the same categorial footing. The only difference is in 
the character of the existences involved. When in a 
relation ab one of the terms is changed to A, the relation 
of causality between b and a may still be a relation of 
causality between b and A : A then is an existence 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


103 


which enjoys itself, being a mind, and it knows h. Thus 
the relation of the mind to its object h the table is 
precisely of the same order as that between the floor 
and the table. Only the floor is not conscious, and 
consequently is only affected by the table so far as it 
can be. 

From this we can pass back to consider lower levels (2) Exteri- 
of existence than mind, seeing that knowing is nothing 
but the empirical form which compresence assumes when levels, 
one of the partners has the empirical quality of conscious- 
ness. The same relation as exists in knowing an object 
exists as between any existent and any other which is on 
a lower empirical level. Just as objects are to our mind 
revelations, partial revelations, of the thing from which 
the object is selected ; so to life, to a living existence, 
things are revealed in their material characters, and to 
a material thing things are revealed in their primary 
characters. How much of what belongs to the lower 
level shall be revealed to the level above it depends 
on the ^ susceptibilities ’ of the higher existent, on the 
machinery it possesses for accepting what is revealed, on 
its ^organs.’ Thus the secondary qualities of matter are 
lower than life, but it does not follow that a plant must 
be aware of colour as colour. It has no sense-organ 
appropriate. Yet in so far as light affects the plant the 
plant has the revelation of light so far as that is possible, 
though in what form I find it difficult to say. In the 
same way a man may be partially colour-blind and see 
no difference between red and green ; or totally colour- 
blind and see no colours at all but greys ; or tone deaf, 
and the like. 

It is almost impossible to speak of the relations 
between lower levels of existence except in terms of mind, 
which though the highest empirical finite existent is only 
one finite amongst others and illustrates something in 
the relation of finites -which is universal and not peculiar 
to mind. Let us then use ‘knowing’ in an extended 
sense for the relation between any finite and those of a 
lower empirical order, and let us describe the empirical 
quality of any kind of finite which performs to it the 



104 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


{3) Higher 
existents 
than mind. 


office of consciousness or mind as its ‘mind.’ Yet at 
the same time Jet us remember that the ‘ mind ’ of a 
living thing is not conscious mind but is life, and has 
not the empirical character of consciousness at all, and 
that life is not merely a lower degree of mind or con- 
sciousness, but something different. We are using 
‘ mind ’ metaphorically by transference from real minds 
and applying it to the finites on each level in virtue of 
their distinctive quality ; down to Space-Time itself 
whose existent complexes of bare space-time have for their 
mind bare time in its empirical variations. 

Using then the terms appropriate to mind in this 
metaphorical fashion we may say that any finite ‘enjoys’ 
itself and ‘contemplates’ lower finites or has ‘know- 
ledge ’ of them. They are revealed to it so fiir forth as 
it has organs for apprehending them. Hence properties 
which belong to the lower finite may be unrevealed in 
their distinctive quality, but they are revealed in the 
character which belongs to their equivalents on a lower 
level still. Thus in my example of the floor and table 
the floor certainly does not ‘ know ’ the table as exerting 
pressure, it does not even know it as material (I return 
to this presently), but in some lower equivalent form as 
a persisting set of motions, as, say, accelerated towards it 
according to the gravitational law. At the same time 
each finite is related towards other finites of the same 
level as minds are related to one another. The material 
floor is assured of the materiality of the table. 

Thus each level has its specific ‘ enjoyment,’ and what 
it ‘ contemplates ’ is what from the nature of the case can 
be revealed to it, and so far forth as it can be revealed. 
We might have started with a hypothesis as to lower levels 
in this fashion and then treated mind as a special case. 
But the hypothesis would have assumed the analysis for 
mental knowing and would have been pedantic and 
unprofitable. 

A third conclusion, which is of less importance in 
itself than as illustrating the meaning of the relation of 
knowing, is the following. A higher order of existent 
than mind, whether conceived as finite, what I have 



CH. IV. A 


THE COGNITIVE RELATION 


105 


called an angel, or as an infinite God, would contemplate 
consciousness as consciousness contemplates qualities of 
a lower order. Consciousness enjoys itself in us, but 
for the angel it would not be enjoyed but contemplated. 

For such a being there would be no doubt that the 
relation of mind to its object is only an example of the 
relation of any other finite to a second finite ; and 
the notion that things depended on the mind except 
for the selection from them of the mental object would 
to him sound as extravagant, as it would sound to us 
if the tree should plead that the soil it lives in depended 
on the tree for its existence or its character. Just as the 
tree selects from the soil what it requires for its nutrition, 
and in growing reacts to the nutritive elements of its 
soil, so for the angefs contemplation mind selects what 
can feed it in the things which surround it and these 
are its objects to which it reacts in the conations whose 
purely speculative character is cognition. More precisely 
consciousness is contemplated by an angel in the way 
in which life which is next lower to us is contemplated 
by us ; that is, it is known for him in the first instance 
as the consciousness which belongs to his, the angefs, own 
^ body,’ whatever that body is. We also know life first in 
ourselves ; and the further description of our knowledge 
of life outside our own body is left to a subsequent 
chapter.^ 

This leads us to a final point which is of great (4) 
importance. The plant selects from the soil ; but the jepement 
phosphates are already there, and it docs not make them, on the 
Mind is equally a reaction to external things and what ' 
it selects for its object is present in the thing or in some 
other part of the universe. So far is the object from 
being dependent on the mind that, on the contrary, the 
mind is, at any rate for its original material, dependent 
on the object ; just as the silver must exist before it can 
be used as a shilling and be impressed with the king’s 
effigy. Thus the higher grade of finites grows out of 
the lower and enjoying itself contemplates the lower in 
turn. Hence although mind cannot be and act without 
^ Below, ch. vi. pp. 174 IF. 



io6 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


things from which to select its objects, neither the things 
nor the objects are affected in themselves by the presence 
of mind except so far as the mental conation alters them. 
What they are before the practical and alterative action 
takes place does not depend on the mind. So far as it is 
purely cognitive such alterative action is suspended. It 
follows that though for mind things are a condition, the 
presence of mind is not a condition of the existence or 
quality of things. All that they owe to mind is their 
being known. It follows that even sensa exist in the 
absence of mine or any mind, much more things of 
which sensa are only passing acts. The actual things and 
their acts which are called sensa because we sense them 
are irrespective of our mind, since they were before there 
were minds. The gleam of colour and the act of pressure 
are not noticed in their quality till there are beings with 
the appropriate apprehensive machinery. But they exist 
in their native qualities, some of which possibly even we 
do not perceive. Nor would there be any difficulty in 
realising this truth were it not for the interference of our 
minds with its objects and the interference of one object 
with another, which have yet to be considered. That 
difficulty may then as 1 hope be removed. 



CH. IV. B 


MIND AND BODY 


107 


B. Mind and Body 

Consciousness has been treated in the above in accord- Experience 
ance with a previous chapter as the quality of certain neural [fknoS- 
processes, and the conscious process as identical with the 
neural one. But neural processes or mental ones, being 
conations, issue in certain changes or movements of the 
muscles and viscera, by the first of which the organism 
reacts on the stimulating object. We have now to 
consider what part is played in the act of knowing by 
these ^ somatic ’ reactions and generally by the body as 
distinguished from the central nervous system. The 
mental partner in the cognitive transaftion enjoys itself 
as a conscious process, and consciousness is in fiict the 
enjoyed innervation of the appropriate neural process. 

It is the enjoyed beginning of a process which terminates 
in somatic changes. It might be thought that such 
enjoyment introduces once more the alleged sense of 
innervation felt by us as a sense of discharge of nervous 
energy, when we will a bodily movement. The alleged 
sense of innervation so interpreted has been discredited. 

But the enjoyment of which I speak resembles it only 
superficially. For the ^ sense of innervation ’ was believed 
to be a sensation, only a central not a peripheral one, and 
unlike all other forms of sensation. For us the enjoy- 
ment is not a sensation at all in that meaning of the term 
‘sensation.’ In the sensation of colour there are two 
partners ; one is the sensum colour, the other is the act 
of sensing it which is an enjoyment wherein we con- 
template the colour. The sensing is the beginning of 
the process which issues in certain movements of the 
eyes or other movements, and may be said to be the 
enjoyed innervation of the neural process which ends 
thus. In a motor sensation, the sensum is the movement 
of the muscles, and the sensing is the enjoyed innervation, 



io8 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE, 


PK. Ill 


principally that which proceeds from the kinaesthetic 
centre, wherein we become conscious of a muscular move- 
ment when it has been performed. For it is agreed that 
muscular changes are sensed like visceral ones or objects 
of the special senses, as the stimuli which provoke the 
consciousness of them. Part of the difficulty in under- 
standing the nature of knowing is this misunderstanding 
which confuses an enjoyment which is properly described 
as an enjoyed innervation with the so-called sense of 
innervation. 

Bodily changes, whether visceral or muscular, are 
always contemplated ones or objects, and the awareness of 
them always accompanies the awareness of an external 
object. When I see a colour 1 have, besides the enjoy- 
ment of seeing and the colour itself compresent with it, 
the contemplation also of movements in the eye, or other 
connected movements. It is in fact through such move- 
ments as those of the eyes when 1 turn to the light or 
fixate it that I become aware of my eyes and the colour 
as two physical objects in relation to one another in the 
physical world. 1 must have my eyes open to see at all, 
and accommodate them or converge them in order to see 
in certain places, and more than that, the colour is revealed 
to me in the act which issues in these or other movements. 
But the contemplation of the outward reaction of seeing 
is a different mental act from the consciousness of the 
colour and succeeds it. The movements of the eyes 
issue from the seeing conation, and then are apprehended 
in a motor or kinaesthetic conation whose neural process 
and equivalent enjoyment are distinct from that of seeing. 

It is not only sensory processes which are thus 
accompanied by the added consciousness of motor and 
visceral changes. In all experiences, however much they 
involve ideas, we have these secondary acts of contempla- 
tion of the somatic issues of the primary consciousness. 
Imagining a man issues in certain movements which may 
be actual, or if only anticipated in idea always tend to be 
actual, that is to be such movements as would actually 
occur if the imagined object were present. Sometimes 
they are movements, say of the eyes, round the contour 



CH. IV. B 


MIND AND BODY 


109 


of the object, sometimes they may be movements of 
speech, and there are indeed psychologists who regard 
speech as the distinctive somatic issue of imaging. It is 
the same with remembering and thinking, thinking being 
in a special manner the beginning of speech. Whenever' 

I am said to make myself an object of mind, it is never 
the self as subject, the mind, which I make an object — it 
can only be enjoyed ; it is always the bodily part of the 
person which is thus made into an object, whether 
perceived or imagined. In remembering my past state 
of myself, what I contemplate in the past is my body as 
it was when the remembered event occurred ; my 
remembered state of mind or enjoyment is not con- 
templated but enjoyed, and as we have seen enjoyed 
in the past. 

Thus in the transaction called knowing the partners 
are on the one side the neural act with its quality of 
consciousness or mind, on the other the object of which 
the mind is conscious in this act ; the bodily or somatic 
element in the transaction is incidental or sustains the 
primary transaction ; as the processes of fixation of 
attention sustain the attention. The mental response is 
what we have called an enjoyment, meaning by it that 
when we see a colour we are conscious of the colour or 
are aware of ourselves as seeing it. If, as observed 
already in the Introduction,^ in order to understand 
enjoyment we seek for something which can be an object 
to us like hunger or thirst, or even pleasure and pain, we 
can find nothing such in our experience, and because 
we do not look in the right direction we may declare 
that enjoyment, or an act of consciousness, is a fiction. 

Those who do so look at their mind from the outside and 
do not, as it were, put themselves into the place of their 
own minds. 

But I have now to take account of a view of the The search- 
transaction of knowing to which the present one is in of[noTing. 
general spirit closely allied, but which dispenses with or 
rejects the notion of consciousness as a quality carried by 
^ Vol. i. p. 20. 



I lO 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


the neural responses to the outside world — a view which, 
if it can be justified, is vastly simpler. It goes in 
psychology along with the method of ‘ behaviourism ’ 
which rejects introspection as a primary method. We are 
concerned with its metaphysical conceptions, which have 
been set out recently in their extreme form by Mr. 
E. B. Holt.^ According to this view we have the 
environing world of things provoking specific neural 
responses, and these responses select from the environ- 
ment those portions or aspects of it to which they 
correspond. Whether the objects are sensations or 
memories or imaginations or thoughts or even volitions, 
the case is the same. These are all of them portions of 
a mass of objects selected by the neural response itself 
from the world. The neural response is therefore 
compared to a searchlight which illuminates a certain 
portion of the outside world ; or with a variation of the 
metaphor it is said to determine a cross-section of the 
world, as though the neural response acted like a plane 
which should cut the world across and lay bare a certain 
surface. On the one side is the neural organism with its 
response, which is the cross-section of the organism by the 
plane ; on the other the cross-section of its environment. 
The total cross-section of the environment is conscious- 
ness or the mind, and its parts arc, in relation to the 
whole, sensations, memories, and the like. This is the 
transaction of knowing. There is no consciousness 
lodged, as I have supposed, in the organism as a quality 
of the neural response ; consciousness belongs to the 
totality of objects, of what are commonly called the objects 
of consciousness or the field of consciousness. Conscious- 
ness is therefore ‘‘out there” where the objects are, by 
a new version of Berkeleyanism. The objects and the 
totality of them are, it may be added, determinations of a 
neutral stuff which is not Space-Time, but into the nature 
of which I need not enter. Obviously for this doctrine 

^ E. B. Holt, T/ie Concept of Consciousness (London, 1914). 

2 What is meant by a specific response is best understood from an 
illustration which is Mr. Holt’s own. A plant responds to the sun, but 
its specific response is not to the sun as sun but merely to his light. 



CH. IV. B 


MIND AND BODY 


III 


as for mine there is no mental object as distinct from a 
physical object : the image of a tree is a tree in an 
appropriate form. 

The knower is thus the cross-section, of which the 
nervous system is the mere machinery. Strange as the 
doctrine may seem, it is in reality so simple as almost to 
compel assent. There is no need in it for enjoyment, 
and all the difficulties of that conception are avoided. 
Compared with its account of remembering and expecting, 
the account which I have given of the nature of remember- 
ing and how we enjoy ourselves in the past and future, 
seems to myself intolerably complex. No one who feels 
inclined to dismiss this searchlight doctrine as impossible 
and does not rather find it natural, or who differs from it 
without misgiving, can be said to have faced the real 
problem presented by knowing. Take the sight of a 
colour or a fire. Strip yourself of the notion that the 
colour is in any sense a creation of the mind though 
selected by it, realise that the red is just what it shows 
itself to be and that there is no such element as our 
consciousness which enters into its constitution ; and then 
ask yourself whether in knowing red there is anything 
more or less than the fact that the neural response has 
selected red from the universe of things, and whether the 
sight of red means anything more than that this red is 
included in the whole cross-section of objects which 
is consciousness or mind itself. 

If I am unable to accept a doctrine which goes beyond 
my own but is so simple and apparently so close to facts, 
and to which I find myself perpetually being drawn back 
and persuaded to adopt it, I am bound to state the reason 
why. It is that the doctrine fails to account for a vital 
feature in the cognitive situation, as we experience it, 
namely, that in being aware of the fire, the fire is before 
me^ or it is / who see it, or it is in a sense my fire. This 
is easy to understand if the response to the fire is an act 
of consciousness, for then not only is there a fire, but the 
response is not merely something which is there alongside 
the fire which it selects as its object and so is for itself, 
but something which experiences itself For every act of 


Its short- 
coming. 



I 12 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


consciousness is then self-consciousness, not in the sense 
of containing a reflection on itself, for this is just what is 
denied by calling it an enjoyment, but in the sense that 
whenever we know, we know' that we know, or that 
knowing and knowing that we know are one and the same 
thing. Now if consciousness belongs not to the neural 
response but to the cross-section itself which it makes, as 
a totality, how can any object be my object ? And yet 
experience says that it is. 

The only possible answer that 1 can see is that the 
self for which the fire is my fire is my body as presented 
to me in organic and motor and other sensations. This 
is always a part of the total cross-section at any moment, 
and it remains the permanent centre of reference, within 
the total which is consciousness, to which the other 
details of the cross-section may be said to belong. There 
is red, and there is a body, and both are contained within 
the mind or are parts of consciousness. Moreover, the 
colour depends on the eyes, for it appears when they are 
open, and disappears when they are shut. This means 
that consciousness possesses colour through the eyes, but 
not that / see the colour.^ We may learn also from 
physiology that red causes a specific movement in my 
nervous system ; and since the cross-section is in time as 
well as space, I may introduce into it the thought of the 
neural response which I do not sense at the moment but 
only introduce by reflection. Even this does not account 
for my seeing red. It connects red with the neural 
response in the cross-section. But to say that the cross- 
section contains my seeing of red is to import into the 
cross-section itself the theory that seeing happens when 
there is a cross-section containing colour and there is a 
neural response outside that cross-section. We cannot 
say that the neural response as in the cross-section is 
equivalent to seeing the red in the cross-section. That 

1 We should learn also that the colour is related differently to my 
body and to the light, without which also it would not appear in 
consciousness. But still this would not mean that it is / (i.e. my body) 
which possesses the consciousness of the colour. On the contrary, my 
body is possessed by the consciousness. The consciousness which sees 
is not mine in the same sense of ‘ mine ’ as the body is mine. 



CH. IV. B 


MIND AND BODY 


113 

would be to suppose that the neural response as in the 
cross-section not only is a seen or thought movement but 
itself sees. Or to put the matter otherwise, the neural 
response in the cross-section is a thought or image and 
the red is a sensum, but the first is not the consciousness 
of the second. It is only the cross-section as a whole 
which is consciousness. But it is not myself. On the 
other hand, my body which is myself is not conscious. 
On the view of the text there is no such difficulty, for 
from the first the colour is object to a conscious act of 
vision which is connected continuously by experience with 
the consciousness of open eyes as the condition of it, or 
of directing the eyes as the outcome of it. 

The same thing may be put, perhaps more clearly, 
thus. Instead of myself, suppose I am observing another 
person. I should observe the red and his neural response 
to it. Now I should observe that he is alive, and is 
behaving like a superior kind of plant. But how should 
I say that he has a field of consciousness of which the red 
is a part ? I cannot say that, because the totality of my 
objects is mind or consciousness, the totality of his objects 
is consciousness. For while I am aware of myself as a 
living thing with a field of consciousness, I am aware of 
him only as a living thing, making living responses which 
are indeed the same in kind as mine. We should be 
inventing once more the conception of a foreign con- 
sciousness. I could only attribute to him consciousness, 
if consciousness means not the field of objects known to 
me in my specific responses to it, but any field of objects 
to which anything responds specifically. The plant has 
consciousness in this sense equally with him or me ; 
but so too has the material body. Consciousness then 
becomes the name of any field of objects to which any 
thing whatever responds specifically. It becomes a mere 
name for compresence. We are back at Leibniz, but 
without the soul ; Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark. 
The difference between creatures is that their conscious- 
ness is large or small, articulate and detailed, or inarticulate 
and blurred — Leibniz would say distinct or confused. 
The idea of consciousness becomes universal but otiose. 


VOL. II 


I 



114 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


And how do we arrive at such a conclusion, which is of 
course not that of the doctrine in question but is forced 
upon it ? Only by starting with the idea of consciousness 
as the field of objects to which I make specific neural 
response and then eviscerating it of this specific relation 
to myself which it has in my original experience of what 
consciousness means. 

1 am compelled then to agree with Mr. Santayana, 
when he suggests ^ that consciousness is in fact the search- 
light itself. It is a quality of the creature which has it, 
as life is of the creature which has life, or materiality of 
matter ; not of the objects which are illuminated by the 
light.“ That field of objects, as will later I hope be made 

^ In an article on Mr. Holt’s book entitled ‘The Coming Philosophy ’ 
in Journal of Phil. Psych, and Sci. Methods, vol. xii., 1914, p. 457. 

2 My purpose is anything but polemical, but to set my own less 
simple but as J think more faithful view of knowing for comparison 
against Mr. Holt’s simpler but as I think too simple one. Still less is it 
to review Mr. Holt’s book. But I fancy I discern in it the intercrossing 
of our two views. Thus the spirit of the theory requires us to say tliat 
life as in a plant is a particular sort of complexity of the ‘neutral’ 
elements and consciousness a still higher one. Now, one part of the 
conscious cross-section may be a living plant. But the life of the 
plant as in my cross-section is not the objects which are a cross-section 
to the plant, but a property of the plant as an organism ; so that it 
would seem life belongs to that organism ; why not then consciousness to 
the animal or human organism } On the other hand, in one place 
(pp. 205-6) the plant is said to be “ conscious of that to which it specifically 
responds.” I'his is a different view, which would make consciousness 
not a character of a certain cross-section in a conscious being but would 
make life a sort of consciousness. We cannot stop with life, for every- 
thing responds specifically to its environment, and consciousness would be 
a name then for any cross-section of the objects of any being whatever, 
and then consciousness or mind would lose its place in the hierarchy. 
But in that case the differences between the members of the hierarchy 
— that is, in so far as they are material, or alive, or conscious — would 
seem to belong to the things themselves in so far as they are material or 
plants or animals. 

Mr. Holt’s doctrine that the hierarchy is a scale of complexity of 
elements made of neutral stuff is one with the general spirit of which I 
heartily agree. But my agreement does not go further. His neutral 
stuff is not spatio-temporal, but its elements are apparently first and 
fundamentally concepts of identity, difference, and number, and then 
secondary qualities. He constructs his world in the first instance out of 
categories. But I have said enough in Bk. II. to indicate how impossible 
I find this procedure, or to agree with Mr. Holt’s fundamental doctrine 



CH. IV. B 


MIND AND BODY 


evident, Is a perspective or revelation of the real world 
of things ; and whether the objects arc percepts or ideas, 
whether connected or disconnected, whether the revela- 
tion is true or false, the scene unrolled before us is the 
same in kind as the scene presented in sense. Yet the 
relation of these objects among themselves is one thing ; 
their emergence into our view is another, and is differently 
experienced, and it is this order of their occurrence which 
is our mental history, and is enjoyed and not contem- 
plated. It is ours, whether forced upon us or due to 
our initiative, and it consists of mental acts. To treat 
consciousness as the field of objects is like saying that 
breathing is the air, as altered in its chemical constitution 
by the breathing. Life exists in the intercourse of 
the living thing and its surroundings, and it is neither 
equivalent to its products nor exists without them. In 
like manner, consciousness exists in the intercourse of 
the conscious being and things, and is neither equivalent 
to the objects it selects, nor can exist without those 
objects. 


that propositions are active, '' liich I could only understand if they are 
taken to be relations of fact as in Space-Time and not as thoughts with 
which we can begin a deduction of the world. Hence it is that his 
‘neutral mosaic’ seems to me unacceptable. Space-Time is neutral in 
the sense that is neither matter as such nor mind as such but these are 
complexes of it. But Space-Time is not a mere thought but really a 
stuff. 



CHAPTER V 


Ment.il acts 
responses 
to objects. 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 

The partners to the transaction which is called the relation 
of cognition are the act of mind and the non-mental 
object. The various orders of non-mental finites were 
described briefly so far as was necessary for metaphysical 
purposes in a previous chapter. All that was said of 
mind was that it was the substance of mental acts or 
processes. It is time now to describe these processes 
more explicitly, which we could not well do before, 
because the description of them is intimately dependent 
on distinguishing them from their objects. At the same 
time it was not possible to take over from the relevant 
science of psychology any well-understood and accepted 
statement of the nature of mental processes, for the 
foundations of psychology are at present involved with 
the theory of knowledge, treated as an independent 
science and not, as here, as a chapter of metaphysics. 

There is no mental act but is correlative to its non- 
mental object ; the mind enjoys itself only as there is an 
object contemplated, which contemplation is the very act 
of enjoyment. A sensory object brings the mind into 
compresence with it ; an ideational act of mind puts the 
mind into compresence with its object, brings the object 
as we say before the mind. These facts have their 
analogues in the lower empirical levels. Mind stands 
nearest in the order to living organisms, and we have 
seen that vital actions either respond to external stimuli, 
or when they are provoked internally may relate the 
organism to some specially appropriate external thing, as 

Ii6 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


117 

when the drosera secretes the sticky substance which is 
to catch the flies on which it feeds. These specially 
preparatory processes may be peculiar to life and mind. 
But throughout finite existence there is no act which is not 
related to some other finite ; as I understand, within the 
atom there are direct acts of initiative in the emission of 
rays which thus in a manner briiig the atom into relation 
with other physical things. However this may be, how- 
ever far down analogies to ideation may exist, every 
action either is the effect of something outside, or alters 
the relation of a finite to what is outside. 

The mental act is thus the conscious response to some 
non-mental existent finite which is its object. I use the 
word response in order to avoid the word reaction, which it 
seems forced and unnatural to apply. For the organism 
is commonly said to react upon some actual or causal 
stimulus, and we should hardly describe the search for 
the absent food as a reaction upon the food, but rather 
as a reaction on the internal stimulus of depiction which 
sets the organism on its search. In the same way we 
cannot say that my remembering of a past event is a 
reaction upon the event remembered, for that event 
no longer acts causally upon my bodily organs. The 
recollection is evoked by and is a reaction to the internal 
Stimulation, whether it is physical or mental, which 
suggests the recollection. In a stricter sense, however, 
the language of reaction to the object is unexception- 
able. Though the internal stimulus causes the process of 
recollection, the form or pattern of the process is deter- 
mined by relation to its object. For it is an acquired 
neural disposition whose character is defined in the main 
by the past actual or sensory experience. It is only the 
strangeness of the notion of reacting to a past or future 
event which makes us stumble, because we are possessed 
by the prejudice in fiivour of the actual (to use Mr. 
Meinong’s phrase), and think that past and future are 
not real because they are not sensory. In truth, re- 
membering and expecting are the reactions that are 
possible to a past or future object. At any rate mental 
acts belong to the class of vital reactions. But to avoid 



Mind made 
up of 
conations, 


1 1 8 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

all these intricacies let us call the mental act the response 
to its object. What is essential is that there is no mental 
act without its appropriate object, and that this object is 
a distinct existence from the mental act, and may, as we 
have seen, exist without the mental act. 


In the next place, since the object is an existence 
distinct from the mind and only selected by it, there is 
nothing in the mind (with a possible reservation to be 
made on behalf of feeling^) but acts. ‘Act’ in this 
usage is equivalent to process and docs not imply the 
special activity which is felt in certain mental processes 
or acts like desire or endeavour or willing. It includes 
passive acts of sense as well as activities of volition. The 
term conation is commonly restricted in its usage to such 
active processes ; but in a more extended sense every 
mental act is a conation and is nothing else, except for 
the possible addition of feeling. It is equally legitimate 
to use the term employed by Mr. Ward^ and to identify 
consciousness with attention. The word ‘ conation ’ has 
the advantage, for it carries with it the meaning of practical 
action, and all mental action is primarily practical. 

Now, cognition is not a separate kind of action from 
conation. It is not even a separate element in a mental 
act which can be distinguished from a conative element in 
the act. Cognition is nothing but the conation itself 
in so far as it is compresent with and refers to an object. 
We do not in perception have an act of cognition which 
leads to an endeavour towards the perceived object. The 
object is there and excites our sense and with it the 
suggested elements of ideation. This mental excitement, 
partly sensory and partly ideational, is a conation which 
issues in certain external bodily actions appropriate to the 
object. As issuing in such actions the act is conative. 
But this conation is itself that consciousness of the object 
which Is called the perception. In behaving in certain 
manners towards the object we perceive It. And just as 


^ Discussed and dismissed below, pp. 122 ff. 

2 See his discussion in Psychological Principle, ch. iii. 



CII. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


119 

the animal goes in search of food, so in the act of prepara- 
tion for the taste of the orange we forecast it in idea. 
Thus the perceiving act is nothing, but the perceptual, or 
impulsive conation itself,^ in so far as that conation which 
is partly touched off by the external thing itself, say the 
orange, partly by the supplementing mind, refers us to 
the object or the perceptum. 

Illustrations might be multiplied indefinitely. We do 
not first perceive the apple to be a round red-cheeked 
thing which is edible, but we are aware of it as edible in 
and by the act in which we seek to eat it, which it 
provokes in us. In performing the mental act which 
ends in holding our hands so as to catch the cricket ball 
which is coming to us in a certain direction, we are 
conscious of the direction in which it is coming to us ; we 
do not first cognise its direction and then adjust our 
action to that ; it compels us to act in a certain fashion 
and we thus become aware of it. Simple sensation is a 
reflex act of attention evoked by the sensum (that is by 
the thing in so far as it contains the sensum), and 
referring to it. According as the sensum is red or green 
or sweet, it evokes by the light from it which acts on the 
retina, or the liquid containing it which acts on the 
tongue, a different reaction, which is the consciousness ot 
the sensum. In so far as the conative act refers to its 
object it is a cognition. The cognitive element, therefore, 
of a mental act is, to use a paradoxical expression, not 
anything distinctive of the act as a process taking place 
in the mental substance itself, it signifies rather that 
the mental act refers to a cognitum. Thus the sensory 
conation is correlated with the sensum, the impulsive 
conation with the perceptum and the like. It is because in 
our mental acts there is an object revealed to us that 
we speak of the act as a cognition and not as a conation. 

The reason why the cognitive aspect of the conation, 

1 The whole discussion is founded on Mr. Stout’s treatment of 
perception in connection with impulse or instinctive action ; one of the 
greatest contributions that have been made to psychology {Manual, 
Bk. III. chs. i., ii.). I am responsible for my own use of Mr. Stout’s work. 



120 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Practical 

and 

theoretical 

conation. 


for it is nothing more than an aspect, not something 
existent which differs from the conation, comes to be 
separated from conations, is this. Conations are of two 
kinds. Primarily conation is practical, and it issues in 
movements which tend to alter or destroy the object or at 
least to affect our relation to the object. Thus the per- 
ceptual conation of perceiving an apple is primarily one 
which issues in movements of seizing and eating the 
apple. Or the outward movement may merely remove 
us from the object, as from a wolf, or bring us nearer 
to it, as to a fire in winter. But besides such practical 
conation, the issue of the conation may be suspended, as 
in merely watching the object. Here too the conation 
issues in movements, but they are not directed to interfer- 
ing with the object but to sustaining our attention to it, 
that is to maintaining the conation as a mental process while 
inhibiting its normal reaction upon the object. Some- 
times the outward movement is switched off into speech 
or other gestures. Such conation is to be distinguished 
from the other kind of conation as speculative or 
theoretical. Ultimately it grows out of the inhibition 
of the practically directed issue of our mental acts. We 
do not stretch out our hands to the stars in the childish 
impulse to possess them, but observe them with a 
telescope ; nor cower in terror under a solar eclipse, but 
observe the edge of the sun. When we have resolved 
neither to hate nor love mankind but to observe them, 
we have changed from the attitude of practical to that of 
scientific study of man. Thus speculative conation, or 
cognition, is isolated from practical conation by diversion 
or suspension of the practical movements which alter the 
world. We learn to alter ourselves and leave the object 
alone. But though we call the second speculation or 
science or knowledge, there is no difference in the mental 
act so far as it is directed towards the object. The 
difference lies in the whole interest of the mind, which in 
the one case leaves the conation to its normal course, and 
in the other inhibits its normal issue or diverts it into 
speech, or to the suggestion of fresh conations which have 
their objects in turn, that is, leads it on to a train of ideas. 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


I2I 


It is of the last importance for psychology as well as for 
metaphysics to recognise that the object is cognised in 
and with the conation, and that we do not first cognise 
and then act, but know in acting. But our acting may 
take divergent courses. We do not do because we know ; 
but we know because we do, and we end by knowing 
without doing. Yet our mental action, whether speculative 
or not, remains to the end a doing. 

Thus of the two, cognition and conation, we must 
abandon one or the other, if we are attempting to 
describe what our mental acts are in the mental substance. 
Either, because there is an object which we cognise we 
must call mental action nothing but cognition (I defer 
feeling), and then conation merely marks the fact that all 
such mental process issues in movement of some sort 
which may be purely external, non-mental, bodily move- 
ment ; and always sooner or later after even the longest 
train of ideas does end in such movements. Or we 
must maintain that the mental act is a conation, which 
is something mental, and not merely physiological, and 
then cognition is simply the reference of this act to what 
is non-mental, that is to the object without which it is 
meaningless. I prefer the latter alternative as a statement 
of the truth. For it lays stress on the practical character 
of mind and brings mind into line with all other finites, 
like life and lower orders of being, the essence of whose 
life is to be movement. The word ‘ cognition ’ of itself 
suggests passivity, or at least is far from appropriate to a 
process whose being lies in its outward direction to a non- 
mental thing. Practical action becomes an accessory of 
cognition ; whereas in truth cognition taken alone is an 
outgrowth and arrest of practice. 1 shall therefore say 
that mental action is conation, and that cognition is the 
aspect of it which I have thus so often described. But 
cognition has no claim to be regarded as a separate 
element in any mental act ; it is not another sort of mental 
attitude from conation. The real distinction lies in the 
two different subclasses of the one class conation. 

Cognition is then nothing but conation as considered 
in its objective reference. Perceiving is seizing without 



122 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ilf 


its practical motor issue. Expecting is reaching out in 
speculation to the future ; remembering, as has before 
been indicated, is reaching backwards in speculative desire 
to the past. Judging or the apprehension of a judgment 
or proposition is willing in its mere objective reference : 
when I will to go to Glasgow, the object of my will is the 
proposition I am going to Glasgow ; when I judge the 
earth is round I am willing so to treat it, in a case where 
the outward issue of my willing is speech or the setting 
in motion of a train of free ideas. To this particular 
illustration, the identity of judging and volition, we 
shall have occasion to return.^ Greater detail is out of 
place in a metaphysical inquiry. It is the business of 
psychology and I have endeavoured elsewhere to supply 
a sketch of a psychology so conceived, to which I can 
now only refer. “ 

Feeling. This result would be simple and satisfying were it 

not for feeling, which is commonly regarded as a third 
element in all mental process with cognition and conation. 
The claim of cognition has now been dismissed. But 
what is to be said of feeling, that is of pleasure and pain, 
and whatever other kind of excitement we may reckon 
under this head ? What feeling is, is without doubt the 
obscurest elementary question of psychology. Feeling 
is certainly not a categorial character of mind but an 
empirical one, and it is certainly closely connected with 
conation ; so that it has been linked together with conation 
under the name of interest, and set against the second 
element of cognition.'^ Some have even gone so far as to 
regard feeling as what is distinctively mental, to which 
conation, if its existence is admitted at all, becomes 
secondary. The metaphysical probabilities are against 
such a doctrine, which cuts off mind from its alignment 
with other things. 

As an independent element in the analysis of a mental 

^ Below, ch. ix. B, p. 248. 

^ ‘ Foundations and Sketch-plan of a Conational Psychology,’ Brit. 
Journ. of Psychology, vol. iv., 1911. 

^ G. F. Stout, Groundwork of Psychology (London, 1903), ch. iii. 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


123 


process or even as a mere toning of cognitive experiences, 
as it is often represented to be, there seem to be insuper- 
able difficulties in the way of insight into its real nature. 
Feeling so regarded seems to repeat the characters of 
the sensory process to which it is attached, except for 
the disputable feature of differences in quality ; it has 
intensity, duration, and at least some degree of localisation. 
Its parasitical ” nature seems to be thus clearly indicated. 
The most satisfactory conception of it upon these lines 
treats it as arising somehow in the course of a conative 
process, according as the conation, or the underlying 
neural process, moves smoothly to its end or is obstructed. 
In sense-feeling pleasure attends the mental return to 
equilibrium after the mind has been disturbed by the 
sensory stimulation ; pain means impediment to this 
return. The theory is founded in its modern form 
largely on the pleasure and pain experiences of mental 
functions higher than sensation, such as the pleasures or 
pains of gratified or disappointed expectation, the pleasures 
of harmony or pains of disharmony in aesthetic com- 
position, or the simpler pleasures which arise from 
harmonious blending of two colour sensations. The 
theory in respect of simple sense-feelings is an extension 
downwards from these higher integrations. On this view 
feeling still is parasitic to conation, and conation would 
still claim to be the dominant feature of mental life.^ 

But many considerations tell against this conception 
and suggest that the clue must be found, if it can be 
found, in the sense-feelings themselves instead of the 
higher feelings. In general sense-feelings appear to 
follow the character of sensations. They are localised, 
sometimes very imperfectly, but sometimes quite definitely, 
in certain organs of the body. Sometimes indeed they 
are so diffused that we are apt to regard them as being 
purely psychical rather than bodily. Yet there is little 
but their want of specific character, I mean that pleasure 
and pain belong to any kind of sensation, to mark them 

^ In previous papers I have followed Mr. Stout in this view and 
have called pleasure and pain modalities of conation. But I think now 
that I have been mistaken. 



124 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


off from the order of the organic sensations, such as 
hunger and thirst. These might at first sight seem 
wholly psychical, but we have no great difficulty there in 
distinguishing the bodily affection of hunger from the 
psychical awareness of it. In the same way we can dis- 
tinguish pleasure from the consciousness of it.^ Thus the 
direct experience of pleasure and pain seems to fall in 
with what is suggested by the theory that there is nothing 
in mental acts but consciousness or conation, namely, that 
feelings are objective experiences of the order of organic 
sensa. Such sensations as 1 shall point out in the next 
chapter are experiences of the bodily life, as distinguished 
from the body as a merely physical thing, and the 
suggestion both of the facts and of theory is that pleasure 
and pain are not mental modifications but characters of 
life of which the mind has awareness, as it has of every- 
thing which it contemplates, and that the mind does not 
enjoy them, however strained the technical expression 
may seem in this connection. According to this a plant 
has pleasure as a condition of its living body just as it 
has hunger and thirst ; but it is not conscious of them, 
for they are phases of its life and unlike us it ^enjoys’ them 
in the extended sense of that word. 

What the conditions of bodily life are which constitute 
pleasure and pain remains to be discovered. It by no 
means follows that there are pleasure-localities ^ (which 
are certainly only hypothetical), comparable to the pain- 

^ The distinction of pleasure from the consciousness of it is insisted 
on by Mr. G. E. Moore, quoting Plato in support, in Principia Ethic a 
(Cambridge, 1903), ch. iii. § 52. 

2 In a well-known article, ‘ Uber Gefuhlsempfindungen ’ (Z//>. /. 
Psch. u, Phys. d. Sinn. vol. 44, 1906), Prof. C. Stumpf has proposed the 
doctrine that pleasure and pain are neither the feeling-tone of a sensation, 
nor a separate element in one, but an independent class of sensations, of 
which bodily pain (Schmerz) is one example. He does not assert that 
pleasure is in all cases peripheral ; it may sometimes have its physio- 
logical basis in central processes “ which come in as accessory effects of 
modifications of the circulation in the brain” (p. 22), and even where 
they cannot easily be dissociated from ordinary sensations like those of 
sound and light, they are central accessory sensations (Mitempfindungen). 
The doctrine may need to be revised and modified, but though in previous 
papers I have ventured to regard it as unlikely, I believe now that in 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


125 


localities which are known to exist. Still less that pleasure 
and pain are combinations or groupings of visceral or 
other bodily sensations. I have been careful only to say 
that pleasure and pain are of the order of vital sensations. 
It may be that pleasure is a character of the organism in 
so far as any function of a sense-organ goes on in harmony 
with the bodily welfare ; and pain or disagreeableness 
correspondingly. This would make pleasure and pain a 
fiict of ‘integration” as Mr. Watt supposes.^ But how 
such a life-condition of welfire or the reverse is conveyed 
to the conscious centre 1 do not know. The recent dis- 
covery by Messrs. Head and Holmes that lesions of the 
optic thalami intensify pleasure and pain ^ and also the 
emotions seems to imply some such arrangement for 
reception of pleasure and pain. All I am concerned to 
suggest is that pleasureableness and painfulness are not 
mental conditions as such but objects of them, and in 
themselves bodily or vital conditions of which we are 
conscious. If this is so, the higher pleasures like those 
mentioned above are greater complexities of more 
elementary feeling. In all probability then feeling is not 
a constituent of any mental act, nor a mere feeling tone ot 
the act, but is an independent act with pleasure or pain 
for its object.^ We have thus no reason to alter the 
conclusion that the processes of which mind consists 
are the highly complex movements carrying the quality 
of consciousness, which are described as conations. 

The one and distinctive quality of mental acts is their 
consciousness. What then are the contents of the mental 


treating pleasure and pain as objective and not as subjective, it is in the 
right direction. The conception is not extended by Mr. Stumpf to 
emotion. (See on this also an earlier article on Emotions in the same 
journal, vol. 27, 1889.) 

^ H. J. Watt: ‘The Elements of Experience and their Integration’ 
{British Journ. of Psychology, vol. iv., 1911, § 10, pp. 184 IF.). 

2 Brain, vol. 34, ‘ Sensory Disturbances from Cerebral Lesions,’ 
ch. ii. pp. 124 IF. 

^ Any previous expressions in this work (such as in Introduction, 
vol. i. p. 23) which seem to imply a different conception must be corrected 
accordingly. 



126 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The con- 
tents of the 
mental act : 
empirical 
determina- 
tions of 
categorial 
characters. 


act or enjoyment, and in particular what is it in the mental 
act which corresponds to or refers to the quality of the 
apprehended thing or selected part of the thing, with the 
intensity which goes with that quality, the loudness of 
the sound, intensity of the pressure and the like ? When 
I ask what the contents of a mental process are I am using 
the word in the same sense as when I ask what a glass 
which holds water is made of and what is its shape and 
size and thickness. In another sense the water is the 
contents of the glass which holds it. But though the 
non-mental object is distinct from the mental apprehension 
of it as the water is distinct from the glass, the object 
is clearly not contained in the mind in this sense. Some- 
times, as we have seen, the object of the mind is dis- 
tinguished from the thing of which it is the partial 
revelation, as being the ‘content’ of the mind. The 
only use of such a word is to indicate the selective action 
of the mind in determining its revelations of things. 
But it is an undesirable usage, for it is bound together 
with a mistaken theory and it conveys the idea that the 
object is still in some sense psychical. ‘ The contents of 
the mind’ is good English for what is really in the mind, 
and objects are not there. What is in the mind is 
whatever features can be discovered in the enjoyment. 

The question we are asking now is what arc the 
mental features which correspond to the qualities and 
their intensities or other features which are contained in 
things. We are not asking for an account of the various 
ways in which things, with the distinctive qualities they 
possess on their respective levels, are apprehended, 
according as we merely sense or perceive or imagine or 
remember them or make judgments about them. All 
this description is the special business of psychology and 
does not fall to our office. Such differences in the way 
of our apprehension of things may be called the ^ formal ’ 
element in the mind’s operations, as distinct from the 
‘ material ’ element, whereby the mind is aware of the 
character of non-mental things.^ It is in sensation that 

^ I note this difference after A. Messer {Empjindung und Denken^ 
Leipzig, 1908, p. 50), who however describes it, following W. Husserl, 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


127 


we meet these material features of our experience in their 
simplest form and we shall confine ourselves here to 
sensation. But the material features reappear in every 
form of mental activity, as e,g, when we remember a dog 
with its shape and colour and smell combined in a certain 
fashion or arrangement, or imagine a mountain of gold. 
Moreover, it is in the higher formal processes that it is 
easiest to verify the truth that all cognition is conative 
process, for in these we have various material elements 
combined, and it is easier to enjoy the process of holding 
these elements together in the mental transition from one to 
another (as for example in perception) than to be aware of 
the conative character of simple sensing. 

The question what is the conative feature which 
corresponds to the material elements of our experienced 
world, is different from still another question, what are 
the kinds of mental acts by which we apprehend in turn 
the different orders of empirical qualities ; which will 
form the subject of the following chapter. At present 
we deal with the ‘ material ’ side of mental life. 

Now the contents of the mental act or process are 
those which it possesses as a process, simple or com- 
plicated. They are thus empirical determinations of 
categorial characters, or in other words certain empirical 
determinations of Space-Time. It is these spatio-temporal 
features which make the difference between one mental 
act and another according to the object it apprehends. 
The sensing of green differs not from that of blue in 
quality, for sensings have no quality but consciousness, 
and the so-called quality of the sensing is really the 
quality of the non-mental sensum, blue or green or 
sweet. It is thus some empirical determination of a 
categorial feature of the mental process which is enjoyed 
differently according to the quality of the sensum. It 
is some determination of enjoyed space-time. In a 
previous chapter I said that according to the char- 
acter of the object we are vaguely aware of a difference 
in place and time and more particularly in enjoyed space 

as that of the quality and the matter of the mental act. I cannot 
obviously adopt the name quality and so I speak of the formal element. 



128 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


(for we are obviously aware of the occurrence and dura- 
tion of our mental acts in time). These vague deliver- 
ances arc supplemented by reference to the contemplated 
space of the brain where we have reason to believe that 
our mental processes are located. We may say then 
that we enjoy our acts of sensing, as they vary with the 
quality of the sensum, as the direction of our enjoyment 
in mental Space-Time, and this direction is identical with 
the locality and direction of the underlying neural pro- 
cess. Such a description is open to the quite intelligible 
misapprehension that the process is supposed to be in 
some manner directed upon the sensed object, whereas 
direction of the mental process means the actual move- 
ment within the neural space which is enjoyed as 
direction in the identical mental space. ^ It is possible, 
however, to explain the situation without the misleading 
word direction, but employing the same thought. 


'fhe sp.Uin- 
tcinpDtal 

ITUMlt.ll 

correlate 
of tlic 
quality of 
sensation. 
Problem II 


Necessarily any exacter answer to the question must 
at present be largely a matter of speculation or hypo- 
thesis. But it has been suggested by Mr. C. S. Myers 
in an important paper that the so-called ^ quality ’ of 
the sensation depends on the type or pattern of the 
neural reaction to the quality of the stimulus.^ I adopt 
the word ‘ pattern ’ or ‘ type of neural reaction ’ as a less 
vague and more accurate alternative for its direction.’ 
In my interpretation the meaning of the two descriptions 
is the same, but I hasten to add that in adopting Mr. 
Myers’s hypothesis I do not father on him the view that 
there is no quality in sensation or that the object has a 
quality irrespective of the mind. 


1 See above, Bk. I. ch. iii. vol. i. p. no and note. 

2 ‘‘ A sweet taste corresponds with one type of reaction, a bitter taste 
with another ; similarly with the sensations of colour and pitch, different 
types of reaction are evoked from longer or shorter waves. ... At 
bottom differences in type of movement must be the cause of differentia- 
tion in the quality of sensation; it would be of no advantage for the 
organism to experience different qualities of sensation, unless those 
differences were serviceable in promoting different types of response.” 
{Brit. Journ. of Psychology y vol. vi. ‘Are the intensity differences of 
sensation quantitative?’ II. § i.) 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


129 


I am assuming that the neural reaction or response 
includes the whole process of afferent, central, and motor 
parts, and that it is not possible to correlate sensation 
- solely with the afferent part of a sensory reaction to a 
stimulus. The neural correlate of a mental process is 
(as I believe, with my insufficient instruction, to be good 
physiological doctrine), not separable into parts but a 
whole. Indeed I gather that in Mr. Myers’s view it is 
of the two rather the movement or behaviour of the 
living being which is the essential feature of the reactive 
type. The mental act then, I assume, corresponds to 
the transition along the whole arrangement, as that transi- 
tion proceeds from afferent to efferent tracts. Perhaps 
it is the juncture between the two which is of chief 
importance, for it is there that the motion along one 
set of nervous elements is switched off into the other. 
Mr. McDougall has indeed put forward the well-known 
hypothesis that consciousness is situated at the synapsis 
or juncture between neurones, and with this the above 
statement is consistent. Thus the type or pattern of 
reaction would be the physiological plan of connection 
between incoming and outgoing process.^ Supposing 
this to be correct, the mind in the act of sensing enjoys 
in the space-time of the mind this configuration of 
movement, which issues in certain physical movements 
of the limbs or other organs, and the difference in acts 
of sensing according to the quality of the object sensed 
is not a difference in any quality of the mind, but in 
this empirical character of the place and time of 
the act. The enjoyed categorial determination in its 
empirical form is identical with the contemplated pattern 
of reaction which the physiologist can observe or suppose. 
And this result appears to me to be merely a more 
accurate statement of what we can very roughly discover 

1 Compare the theory of the late H. Munsterberg {Grundxuge der 
Psychologie (Leipzig, 1900, Bd. i. p. 531). “Sensation in the sensory 
terminus (centre) depends in its quality on the spatial relation of the 
afferent path ” ; with which the above agrees in correlating quality with the 
spatial relations of the neural process, but disagrees in not confining the 
spatial relations to the afferent path. 

VOL. II K 



130 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


in our enjoyment by simple inspection of more compli- 
cated acts of mind. 

This enjoyed spatio-temporal pattern or direction 
of sensing I shall speak of as the ‘ intrinsic extension ’ - 
of a scnsc-process (both in space and time) in order to 
distinguish it from the extension or extent of sensation 
which we experience when a sensation is prolonged in 
duration or when we experience a mass or group of like 
sensations. The alleged ‘ extensity ’ of sensation, or 
its voluminousness is, we shall find, a character which 
attends a number of sensations, but is not intrinsic to 
them but to the space they occupy. The ‘protensity’ 
of sensation is nothing but its continuance, that is, again, 
a continuous repetition of the sensation in time. Any 
act of sense has its place in mental time and space ; but 
what determines its empirical difference from other 
sensings is more particularly the enjoyment of the spatio- 
temporal pattern or direction. The sensing may be 
momentary or prolonged. But even so far as it is relatively 
momentary, it still has its pattern which is the intrinsic 
extension. 

How, it may be asked, if sensing is a spatio-temporal 
pattern, can it be enjoyed otherwise than as an extent ? 
Even if it exists but for a moment, does it not occupy its 
pattern and is not this an extension and spread out, if 
only in lines and not in area or volume ? The answer 
takes us back to the more elementary and fundamental 
considerations of a previous portion of this work. The 
pattern is not spatial merely but spatio-temporal, and its 
neural basis is not merely anatomical but physiological. 
The consciousness of sensing does not at any moment 
fill the whole neural structure of afferent, central, and 
efferent parts. I.et us suppose that a sensing is purely 
momentary, which it never really is. It occurs then at 
some point-instant (or group of such) ; let us think of 
the point-instant at which the afferent process passes over 
into the efferent one. But that point-instant has a past 
and a future. It lies on a line of advance or it is the 
point at which complex lines of advance are continued 
into another complex. It is the pattern of the sensory 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


131 

process which determines where the past and the future 
of the process are. The present moment of sensation 
is the point-instant where the direction of the future 
is determined by the past. Thus that moment of 
sensation sums up or ‘ integrates ’ the character of the 
whole pattern. The difficulty arises as said from 
thinking of the pattern as merely a geometrical one ; it 
is in fact a plan of motion. The intrinsic plan of 
reaction which gives the sensing its determinate character 
is therefore not to be conceived as a stationary plan like 
an architect’s ; it is a scheme of transition, and hence in 
this respect the idea of ^ direction ’ not only cannot be 
dispensed with in supplement to that of ‘ pattern ’ but 
is in fict the more expressive designation. The locality 
of the sensory act is included along with its direction 
or pattern, for certain patterns of reaction occur in 
determinate places in the neural structure. The dis- 
tinction between the intrinsic space-time of a sensation 
{i.e, a sensing) and its extent will occupy us more 
largely in the following chapter. It corresponds to that 
between the quality of blue which belongs to any point 
whatever in a blue patch irrespective of its position, and 
the whole extent over which that quality is spread. We 
have extent as distinguished from intrinsic extension or 
direction wherever we have many processes going on the 
mind at once, whether they are homogeneous, as in the 
vision of a coloured patch, or heterogeneous, as in any 
complex apprehension like perception or imagination 
corresponding to an object of complex qualities variously 
arranged. 

The pattern of configuration in any existent we have The 
seen to be its universal. In any sensory process (or in 
any other mental process) there are the categorial feature sensation, 
of existence as a particular and the categorial feature 
of subsistence, or existence as a universal. The same 
distinction is found in the object or sensum. As to 
sensing, its particularity depends on the particular time of 
its occurrence and its particular locality within the large 
sensory neural region devoted to that species of sensing, 



132 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Intensity 
of sensing. 


e.g, within the occipital area of vision ; on variations of 
intensity ; and on any variations of whatever kind which 
leave the pattern unaltered^ Psychologically this means 
that any sensing process is one of a certain kind and its 
object one of a certain universal quality. From the 
beginning of psychical life the universal and particular 
are united ; and this is a recognised commonplace of the 
subject, and is illustrated at any length in the charming 
transference which children make of words learned in 
connection with some particular object to any object 
which is reasonably like it in kind. In other words, 
though sensing is not thinking there is no sensation 
without its universal or thought. What thinking does 
is merely, as in conceiving, to contemplate the universal 
in the object, by itself, and detach it from its particular 
surroundings as a separate object of attention. Thinking 
is the corresponding mental act which apprehends the 
universal as such, and we have already verified the 
existence in consciousness of the distinct awareness in 
enjoyment of the plan of any complex. When we think 
a colour, blue, we in like manner enjoy the pattern 
of blue, which is intrinsically a spatio-temporal complex, 
however simple. Thus thinking is only one of the 
formal varieties of mental process, it adds no question 
in respect of the material side of the mental action, 
except the question whether thinking possesses also 
intensity, which is another material feature of sensing.^ 

We have now to ask what spatio-temporal or 
categorial character is enjoyed as the intensity of the 
sensing, in correspondence with the contemplated intensity 
of the stimulus. The answer is still more speculative 
than that we have just given to the question what 
corresponds in the sensing to the quality of the sensum. 
Mr. Myers suggests as the ground of variation in 
intensity of sensing the number of the nerve fibres, 

^ See below, ch. vi. p. 164. 

2 The above appears to say the same thing as Aristotle’s dictum that 
we perceive the particular roh tl, but perception is of such and such (tot 

T010L’5€). 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


133 


afFerent and efferent, which are called into play in 
response to the intensity of the stimulus, so long as the 
type of reaction remains unaltered. It is the moreness 
or lessness of a reaction of the same type.^ While the 
quality of the sensation depends on the pattern of the 
reaction, the intensity depends on the extent of the lines 
of the pattern. Another physiological hypothesis put 
forward by H. Munsterberg*^ regards the intensity as due 
to the quantity of excitement of the nerve fibre, or fibre, 
supposed to be the afferent ones. This implies that as 
is commonly believed a fibre can respond more or less to 
different degrees of stimulation. I imagine that greater 
excitement within a fibre would mean a larger use of 
nervous elements, the greater stimulus breaking down 
elements which resist the lesser stimulus. The other 
hypothesis is based on the view that the response of a 
fibre does not vary with the amount of stimulation, but 
is of the ^ all or none ’ kind, that is, the fibre cither 
responds uniformly and completely or not at all. This 
question is one for physiologists to settle. Mere refer- 
ence to the number of fibres involved, while simpler, 
presents obvious difficulties, for it would seem to imply 
a discontinuous scale of intensities of sensation ; and 
whether this is so or not is one of the vexed and very 
difficult questions of psychology. A purely psychological 
hypothesis had already been propounded by Prof. Franz 
Brentano, that sensory intensity is the measure of the 
^ density ’ of the sensation (that is the sensation on its 
objective side) in what he calls the space of sensation 
{Sinnes- or Empfindungsraum), That is, he imagines the 
sensation (I must not call it the sensum, for that carries 
with it the implications of my own view, but I may use 
the non-committal word sense-datum) to be stippled over 
the sense-space, leaving gaps, and the denser the stippling 
the intenser the sense-datum.^ On the subjective side 

^ C. S. Myers, loc, cit. II. §§ 5 ff. 

2 H. Munsterberg, loc, cit, p. 531. 

^ Thus, though he does not allow colours to possess intensity, but 
only brightness, a pale red is less bright than another red because the 
red is stippled more sparsely in the first case than the second. The refer- 



134 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


RK. Ill 


there is correspondingly more or less of the sensing, 
positive sensing mixed up with privations of it. The 
intensity is in either case the ratio of the full and void, 
and obviously the intensity is precisely the same on 
both sides. We may adapt the idea of density thus pro- 
pounded and give a spatio-temporal interpretation not 
merely to the intensity of the object but to that of the 
sensing, falling back on the more physiological aspect of 
sensing. The spirit of the hypothesis is the same as that 
of the physiological ones I have described. For on the 
view of Mr. Myers the maximum available extent of the 
pattern is occupied more or less densely and the idea 
applies obviously to Munsterberg’s doctrine. 

But in using the notion of density whether in the physio- 
logical form or not, a proviso must be made. Density, 
being a ratio, is enjoyed in the mind (or contemplated in 
the object) not as an extensive quantity or as merely a 
matter of number, but as an intensive quantity. In 
accordance with the abstract description of the category 
of intensity given in a previous chapter, the intenser 
sensing occupies a greater space in the same time. But 
the space-time so occupied is enjoyed together and as a 
whole. It may be resolved into numerical parts, but 
this is something true about it and not what we are 
acquainted with. We are not to suppose (taking Mr. 
Myers’s hypothesis) that the diflFerence between one 
intensity and another is the mere addition of the n+ \th 
fibre to the 7i fibres of the less intensity, as if it were 
merely a matter of adding another unit. For the \th 
fibre only comes into play when the n fibres are already 
used. In other words we cannot suppose that this 
;/+ \th fibre, call it fibre v, might indifferently have been 
one of the n fibres which made up the lower intensity. 
We must suppose that within the available maximum 
extent of the nerve, the fibres are called into action in 
a certain order according to the intensity of the stimulus. 
In the same way when fresh doses of manure are added 


cnee is to Untersuchungen zur Sinnespsyc/iologie (before cited, Bk. II. 
ch. vi. A, vol. i. p. 276), ch. 2. 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


135 


to land we cannot say merely that more bits of the soil 
come to be fertile, as if the fertility depended on 
numerical addition of bit to bit, though it can be so 
expressed. The last bit of production by the soil is 
only brought into play through the last dose of manure 
and is therefore not as it were a unit which might have 
occurred indifferently anywhere in the process of reaching 
this stage of productiveness. Fertilities form a scale 
each member of which is a unitary whole, and the unit 
in such a scale is the unlikeness of one member of the 
scale to the next higher fertility. Only indirectly by 
correlation with the amounts of manure can the scale of 
fertilities be measured by units in the strict sense, as a 
line is composed of inches all exactly alike. Similarly, 
though the intensity of the sensing may be resolved 
into or correlated with greater or less number of the 
conscious excitements in the sensing, it is not the mere 
numerical difference which makes the greater intensity, 
for the numerical difference must according to Weber’s 
law be at a certain rate or ratio in order to produce 
differences of number that are appreciated as differences 
of intensity. In other words, the numerical or extensive 
formulation of the intensity is but the extensive equivalent 
of the intensity. Thus the brightnesses in the illumination 
from a number of candles may be represented as depending 
on the density of illumination by separate candles, but that 
density is experienced not as an addition of units but as a 
whole. Each member of the scale is an individual, not 
resoluble in the intensive experience into units ; though 
so expressible. We do not enjoy the supposed neural 
stippling as a number but as intensity.^ 

Sensation, we saw, whether the sensing or the sensum, 
contained a universal as well as a particular, the universal 
being the grouping of its elements, or the plan of their 
construction. The higher mental acts up to thinking are 
more complex groupings of sensory or ideational elements 
and involve universal plans. Now, it is clear that think- 

^ See above, Bk. II. ch. vii., for the discussion of intensity as a 
category, of which the above is an illustration and partly a repetition. 


Has 

thinking 
intensity ? 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


136 


ing being the explicit consciousness of the universal 
wh^ether taken by itself as in bare conception or (as in 
fact it always does occur except by an abstraction) as a 
component element of judging or inference, is the con- 
sciousness of a plan and is itself a plan of mental action 
and has in this sense a kind corresponding to the kind of 
the universal in the object. The thinking process whose 
object is dog is different in kind (though not in quality) 
from the thinking of cat or house. But does thinking 
possess intensity ^ Mr. Brentano in the same chapter 
answers unhesitatingly no, for there is no possible 
variation of density in either the thought or the act of 
thinking. The answer is clearly correct so far as we 
have pure thinking or pure thought or a universal. A 
plan of grouping has no intensity ; as we have seen, the 
category of universality does not communicate with that 
of intensity. But the plan is such as to admit intensity 
in the particular or individual cases of the universal ; it 
includes intensity but has none. The same thing is seen 
to be true of the thinking. It is the consciousness of a 
custom of mind or disposition, and a custom has not 
intensity, though it may be more or less lively in the 
sense that the mind may possess a greater or less readiness 
to act along the line of certain customs, a greater suscepti- 
bility or suggestibility in respect of them than of other 
customs. The object of such custom is the imageless 
thought or universal. 

Still at the same time thinking is a particular mental 
act and can no more exist without some particularity than 
a sensation without its universal. Some poin^ d'appui is 
needed for our thinking. It may be and perhaps most 
commonly is a word ; it may be a particular illustration 
of the thought in perception or image ; it may be some 
heterogeneous percept or image. Intensity belongs to the 
thinking in so far as it is clothed in particular circumstance, 
and it never can dispense therewith in fact. But this 
intensity is not intensity of the custom. There is a 
custom which allows for intensity in its elements, but no 
intensity of the custom. Only, just so far as the particular 
circumstances to which the custom is attached are faint or 



V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


137 


intense must the thinking have the intensity which 
appertains to them. Hence in an imageless thought any 
part of the thought may at any moment take on the 
particularity of an illustration. It may, if I may judge 
from my own case, be difficult to prevent it from straying 
out of the imageless region of thought, and then it 
becomes endowed with intensity. Plans of mental action 
are in fact the transitions from element to element, and 
though transitions may be swift or slow, lively or dull, 
that is not a feature of the transition itself in so far as 
it is the consciousness of the grouping which is the 
universal. Apart, then, from the intensity which belongs 
to thinking indirectly as related to some particular, 
thinking has not intensity. The intensity of thinking, 
which as we have seen is speculative willing, is either a 
name for the effort of attention which it involves and 
which arises from its particularising circumstances and 
which largely also consists in bodily experiences of a 
sensory character ; or it attaches to belief, with its emotional 
character, which may vary from languid acceptance to 
‘ intense ’ conviction. Thinking is in fact on the same 
footing as sensing. In sensing it is the particular with its 
intensity which is salient and the universal in it is not 
detached. In thinking the universal is detached but it 
still remains attached to some particular and thereby has 
intensity. 

So much then by way of suggestion towards a more Summary, 
exact description in terms of space and time of the kind 
and intensity of sensing. These are its material contents, 
its pattern and its density. All its other contents are 
equally spatio-temporal, and have no quality but that of 
being conscious and so enjoyed. Of its so-called 
‘ extensity ' and localisation more remains to be said in 
the following chapter ; but these and its duration and 
date plainly belong to its space and time. A sensation 
has other categorial features : it is a substance, stands in 
relation to other sensations, etc. In particular it has 
order, and we have noted the application of the idea of 
order to the various qualities within any modality of sense, 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Secondary 
qualities 
and the 
mind. 


138 

like the pitches of tones. As for the liveliness or 
obtrusiveness (Eindringlichkeit) or impressional intensity, 
as Mr. Stout calls what Hume described as vivacity, 
it appears to me at present to be of the formal 
rather than the material order of characters of sensing ; 
and the other categorial features of relation, substance, 
and the like, call for no remark. And since the higher 
mental acts of perception, etc., are but groupings of simple 
elements of sensory or ideational kind in a spatio-temporal 
plan, we have the result that the only contents of mental 
acts of whatever kind are empirical determinations of 
purely categorial characters, and have no quality but that 
of being conscious and enjoyed as such. Above all, the 
object of consciousness is in no real sense the so-called 
‘ content ’ of it. 

Here appears to be the place for reverting to a 
deferred problem, and defending the thesis that secondary 
qualities do not owe their character to the mind, but only 
owe to it the fact that they are seen or tasted. It is 
difficult enough, in consequence of philosophical tradition, 
to maintain the position that colour or heat reside in 
the external things themselves, when the necessary 
physical conditions are fulfilled, such as the presence of 
light ; and the position is still more difficult when the 
proposition is extended from colour or heat to taste or 
smell. But at least to think of a material process carrying 
the quality of colour is no harder than to think of a 
neural process as carrying the quality of mind — facts 
which we have to note and accept as the way of the 
world — or than it is to think that in hunger we are 
sensing a bodily or vital process called depletion. We 
are so apt to think that in this last case the mind is in a 
manner hungry, whereas the mind is only aware of a vital 
condition called hunger. 

But now that we have attempted, however hypotheti- 
cally, to identify what the process of sensing a quality is 
as in the mind, and find it to be a pattern or type of 
response enjoyed by the mind as direction, which varies 
with each type of quality sensed, the theoretical difficulty 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


139 


belongs rather to the philosophical theory that colour or 
taste owe their being to the mind. This theory, while it 
has no support in unsophisticated thought which does not 
ask such questions, receives no support either from 
physics or physiology, which deal with the facts of 
sensation, the one by inquiring into its physical conditions 
and the other its neural conditions, but do not concern 
themselves further. Indeed it may be supposed that the 
notion would never have arisen had it not been in the 
first place for the difference between qualities proper 
and the primary characters or ‘ qualities ' of matter ; 
and secondly, for the interpretation of images as the work 
of mind. If it is true that the image of a red rose is 
mental, then since it includes the colour red, that colour 
is mental as well, and may be equally mental when it is 
perceived. But when the imagining is distinguished 
from the image, and when further we can say what 
corresponds in the imagining to the quality of redness, 
the notion that the colour is in any sense a creation of the 
mind in its co - operation with physical movements 
proceeding from the external rose ceases to be even 
plausible. There is in fact something unintelligible in 
the idea that out of heterogeneous material the mind 
could fabricate a colour or taste or smell. The only thing 
which makes such a notion plausible is the variability of 
the sensible qualities of things as the conditions vary 
which affect the perceiving mind : the disappearance of 
taste or smell with a cold in the head, the confusions of 
the colour-blind, the purple of the hills at a great distance ; 
matters which await discussion in a subsequent chapter 
(ch. vii.). 

But when we have abandoned this conception, a more 
insidious one sometimes takes its place. The mind 
indeed, it is’ said, does not create colour, but colour owes 
its existence to the physiological organism ; it does not 
depend on the mind but upon the eye.^ In what precise 
sense this is understood has not been definitely explained, 
and two alternative interpretations are possible. On the 
one interpretation, colour is an affection of the eye which 

1 B. Russell, Our Knowledge of the External World, pp. 78 fF. 


Secondary 
qualities 
and the 
sense- 
organs. 



140 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


the mind apprehends ; on the other, it is a product of 
the action of the eye on the light, comparable to the 
peptones produced by the action of the gastric juices on 
food, or the uric acid secreted by the kidneys as the 
blood is strained through them, or the carbonic acid 
generated in the air of the lungs. In neither of these 
ways can secondary qualities be held to depend on the 
bodily organism. 

On the first alternative, which has probably not been 
consciously entertained, colour is an affection of the body, 
and in particular of the eye, which the mind apprehends 
as it apprehends depletion as hunger, so that in vision the 
eye, to adopt a convenient Aristotelian phrase, is in a 
manner coloured,^ All the sense qualities then would be 
of the same order as hunger and thirst. But these are 
felt in the body and localised in the same place where we 
learn to localise the stomach or throat, and consequently 
we feel them in the stomach or throat ; whereas colours 
and smells are not localised in our bodies but in coloured 
and fragrant things. Our plain experience is that we do 
not see colours in our eyes, but only with our eyes and 
in the rose or apple. Further, if we are aware of colour 
as an affection of the body, why is it more difficult to 
suppose that we see it in the rose ? It will not do to say 
that chemical effects produced in certain substances in the 
eye are sensed as red though not red in themselves. For 
then we revert to the notion that it is the mind which 
apprehends as red what is not red at all. 

The alternative analogy of the colours and tastes of 
things with the products of vital processes, such as 
digestion and respiration, is open to even greater 
objections. In the first place it also assumes that the 
mind is a passive spectator of the results of the interaction 
between the body and the external thing, and like the 
first alternative fails to account for the localisation of the 
sensible datum in the external thing. Moreover, it would 
appear to exclude from the physiological participants in 
the interaction between organ and stimulus the neural 
process itself. For if it is true that the mental and the 
^ ''ErjTtv ws Kexpw/xaTtCTTac (De an, iii. 2). 



CH. V 


MIND AND ITS ACTS 


141 

neural process of sensation are identical, if the mind does 
not participate, neither can the neural process. What 
participates must be the non-neural processes in the organ ; 
for example, the action in the rods and cones before the 
neural elements of the retina are excited. The bodily 
organ which enters into the transaction which creates 
colour is comparable therefore to the blue spectacles 
which are not themselves seen but colour the world blue. 
But the comparison breaks down. For the blue spectacles 
do not account for the world's appearing coloured, but 
only for its having the blue tinge. The spectacles being 
coloured add their colour to things which already have 
colour ; much as the intervening air makes the mountain 
look purple. The supposition is therefore irrelevant ; 
and it leads also to the strange conclusion that eyes which 
are adapted for seeing things serve only to distort their 
true characters. 

This leads us to what is the fundamental difficulty in 
the notion. It supposes that out of physico-chemical 
substances, the external thing and the bodily organ, life 
can create a new quality of colour which is not itself 
physico-chemical. Whereas for experience life reacts on 
such substances and produces substances higher or lower 
in structure but chemical substances still ; it may 
transform their colours if colours already exist, but it 
does not create a new thing, colour. This objection is 
fatal if the theory meant merely that the colour of a thing 
is a quality which it receives in the course of living 
reaction upon it. I am inclined, however, to think that 
in treating colour as dependent on life in a way in which 
it is not dependent on mind, there is lurking a notion 
that the creation of such products is the business of life, 
while it is not the business of mind ; that life consists in 
such production while mind does not. In truth, life is 
a set of processes, of breathing, digestion, and the like, 
whereby ingested material is transformed into excreted 
material, and the organism regulates the production of 
these changes with supreme delicacy. But these trans- 
formations are only changes of material substances into 
other material substances ; life does not consist in these 



142 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


transformations, which are the incidental results of life. 
It consists in the bodily movements or processes by which 
they are brought about. Life does not reside in the 
air which the body takes up and breathes, but in the 
actions of its parts by which the composition of the 
air is affected. But, so understood, cleared from the 
misconception that the living body is a machinery for 
transforming matter from one shape into another, life is 
in all respects parallel with mind, and the production of 
secondary qualities by mind no more difficult to under- 
stand than their production by life, and no advantage is 
gained by the substitution of the physiological organism 
for mind. In fact, the modification of ingested substances 
by the body has its exact parallel in mind in the process 
by which the mind adds to the objects which are presented 
to it in sense ideas, that is ideal objects, corresponding to 
acts of imagination or reproduction.' In neither case is 
something new created which is of a different rank from 
the subject-matter which either life or mind operates upon. 

We are compelled then to deny that either mind or 
the living sense organs give to secondary qualities their 
being, and to affirm that these reside in the material 
things themselves. We have to accept the fact that 
besides the categorial element in things there is also the 
strictly empirical element of quality of which the secondary 
qualities of matter are an example. At the same time 
these two elements are not disconnected, for quality is 
carried by particular complexities of the a priori founda- 
tion of all things, Space-Time, whose fundamental features 
the categories are. Miraculous we may call the exist- 
ence of quality if we choose. But it is at least a miracle 
which pervades the world of things. The relation of 
the secondary qualities to matter is not stranger than the 
relation of life or mind to that which carries them. On 
the other hand, to attribute the secondary qualities to the 
work of mind is to believe in a miracle which is unique 
and does not conform to the ways of things. 

1 See later, ch. viii. pp. 213 ft'. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE WAYS OF APPREHENDING CATEGORIES AND QUALITIES 

All our experience of external things is provoked in us The 
through the organs of sense, and since we have no 
enjoyment of ourselves which is not the contemplation 
of a non-mental object, all our experience whether enjoyed 
or contemplated is provoked through the sense-organs. 
The most complicated objects or enjoyments are resoluble 
into elements of sense, or its derivative idea, and their 
groupings in some empirical plan, and from beginning 
to end these experiences are qualified by categorial as 
well as empirical features. Moreover, not only do our 
categorial experiences come to us through the medium 
of sense, but those senses are the organs for the secondary 
qualities of matter. I speak at present of the special 
senses and not the organic and kinaesthetic ones. We do 
not see or feel or otherwise experience Space or Time 
except through vision or touch or some other appre- 
hension of secondary qualities. The primary qualities 
which are empirical differentiations of Space and Time 
never reach our minds, as Berkeley saw, except along 
with secondary ones. The nearest approach we have 
to a hint of the separation of them in our experience is 
found in the fiict that a thing may be detected further 
to the side of the field of view or with a fainter intensity, 
when it is moving than when it is at rest. But though 
our experience of Space and Time is thus provoked in us 
through sensation it does not follow and it is not the 
case that they are apprehended by the senses. We have 
first to ask how the mind apprehends Space and Time 

143 



144 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


and with them the categorial features of things. The 
apprehension of the primary qualities offers no particular 
problem when once we know how Space and Time are 
apprehended, and in fact we only immediately apprehend 
Space-Time and its fundamental characters the categories 
in their empirical determinations. To apprehend Space- 
Time as such, and as a whole, and the categories as such, 
we have to add reflection to our immediate apprehension. 

Intuition of We wcrc coiitcnt in an earlier book to distinguish 

Space an<i categorial from empirical characters as belonging to all 
existents alike. They were enjoyed in minds and con- 
templated in external things and existed equally in both. 
But now that minds are seen to be compresent with 
things and thereby to have cognition of them, we can see 
further that not only are the categories features of both 
minds and things, but that the mind enjoys itself cate- 
gorially in contemplating the corresponding categorial 
feature of the object which it contemplates. Let us 
confine ourselves in the first instance to Space and Time 
as such, and for convenience treat them in abstraction one 
from another. In being conscious of its own space and 
time, the mind is conscious of the space and time of 
external things and vice versa. This is a direct conse- 
quence of the continuity of Space-Time in virtue of 
which any point-instant is connected sooner or later, 
directly or indirectly, with every other. That relation 
was described more explicitly by the hypothesis that the 
instant performed to the point the office of mind, and 
that in an extended sense of ‘ awareness ’ each point (to 
confine ourselves to Space) might be said to be aware 
of every other in the way in which minds are aware of 
one another. 

For clearness’ sake let us take a particular case and 
suppose a line of colour ab which we see. It excites 
through our eyes a certain spatial tract in the visual 
region (not necessarily a line or even a continuous tract), 
and that neural excitement of the centres is the conscious- 
ness of colour. Call the neural tract AB. The points 
or other parts of it are, as merely spatial, ^ aware ’ of ab. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


H5 

Moreover, they are aware, in the same extended sense of 
‘awareness," of the points in ab as being the origin of 
the whole transaction of light-movements which connect 
those points with the corresponding neural centres. 
Thus for example A is aware of a in general just as it 
is aware of every other point. But it is also aware of a 
as the beginning of the line of advance which ends at 
itself. A line of advance, in the pattern of a movement 
of light, which started from a different point would not 
at the same moment end in A but some other brain 
position. Now if there were no consciousness belonging 
to the excitement of AB, our minds would know nothing 
of the place of ab. That knowledge would belong to 
those brain centres merely as points of space ; much in 
the same way as when something is behind our back, 
which we do not see, that object is still ‘apprehended" 
not by our mind but by our body. And the knowledge 
would not be of the order of contemplation but would 
be comparable to the kind of assurance we have of one 
another's minds. But AB is a conscious excitement and 
contemplates the colour ab. Now that consciousness 
of colour is (or contains) the conscious enjoyment of the 
spatial tract AB. Thus we have AB conscious and the 
mind is therefore conscious of^ that is contemplates, the 
tract ab as spatial and in its locality in space. Though 
the brain centres are excited only by visual stimuli, the 
excitation is that of a space already ‘ aware ’ as merely 
spatial ‘of" its definite connection with AB according 
to special and definite lines of advance. Lifted into 
conscious enjoyment through the sensory excitement, 
that space is now aware as consciousness, or consciously, 
of the non-mental or external spatial character of ab. 

5 To put the matter shortly, a space which enjoys itself 
consciously or mentally as space contemplates the space of 
the object, or rather has for its object an external, non- 
mental, contemplated space, contemplated that is in its 
form and position in total Space. And as we cognise the 
colour as a sensum in the act of response to it which 
issues in movements of the sensory organ or other motor 
action, so likewise in this response we contemplate 

VOL. II L 



146 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

in addition the place of the colour. According to the 
place of the colour excitement, these motor issues are 
specialised ; the eye or hand moves to the right or the 
left. Yet this specialised response remains a response to 
the sensory, tactual or visual, excitement and is not, as it 
were, the response to a place-sensum. It is part and 
parcel of the machinery for apprehending and sustaining 
the apprehension of the sensory quality. For our 
responses to things are practical actions designed to obtain 
or avoid things in virtue of the qualities they possess. If 
the eye moved to the right when the illuminated point 
is to the left the colour excitement would be lost. The 
specific motor-response in which the pattern of colour- 
sensing issues according to its place in the brain is still 
a colour-response, designed to fixate the stimulus, not 
a place-response. It is only a place-response in so far 
as it forms part of the visual response, and the appre- 
hension of the place remains different from the sensing. 

It is convenient to defer the fuller consideration of 
the apprehension of Space till we can consider the 
secondary qualities. I need only note here that according 
to the present doctrine there is no need for any specific 
local sign belonging to a visual or touch centre, whether 
that local sign is conceived to be central in its character 
or peripheral. The place of the brain centre is sufficient 
as the basis of apprehension of the place from which the 
stimulation proceeds. Finally, there is no assumption 
that the brain space AB in any way resembles the external 
space ab^ nor that if ab is apprehended both by touch and 
vision, the space AB of the visual region at all resembles 
in shape that of the tactual region of the brain correspond- 
ing to the same external shape ab. Whatever group of 
places in any sensory region of the brain is excited to 
consciousness by the external thing, the enjoyment of 
that space is thereby the contemplation of the space and 
place of the stimulus sensed. The places excited in the 
touch region might be spread out over twice the extent of 
the places in the visual region, and to a square object 
there may correspond a fantastically irregular geometrical 
distribution of brain places ; the result will be unaffected. 



Clt. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


H7 


The shape and extent of the brain affection depends on 
the sensory arrangements of the brain, not on the shape 
and extent of the object. 

The mind therefore does not apprehend the space 
of its objects, that is their shape, size, and locality, by 
sensation, but by a form of apprehension simpler than 
sensation, for it depends for its character on mere spatio- 
temporal conditions, though it is not to be had as 
consciousness in the absence of sensation (or else of 
course ideation). It is clear without repeating these 
considerations that the same proposition is true of Time ; 
and of motion in which the space and time elements of 
external things are inseparably united ; that the enjoy- 
ment of the date and duration of mental events is the 
contemplation of the external time and duration of their 
objects ; and similarly for motion ; and that this appre- 
hension too is not had without sensation but is anterior 
to it. At the risk of attaching a new interpretation to 
a much used and misused word, I shall call this mode of 
apprehension in its distinction from sensation, intuition.^ 
We contemplate Space-Time and Space and Time 
intuitively and we enjoy it intuitively. Intuition corre- 
sponds to that bastard kind of reasoning ’’ whereby 
according to the speaker in the 'rimaeus the soul 
apprehends Space, the matrix of things. Only I repudi- 
ate the depreciatory adjective bastard.” Intuition is 
different from reason, but reason and sense alike are 
outgrowths from it, empirical determinations of it. 
They are its legitimate children. And as a father may 
learn from his child, reason may clarify the intuition, 
as it does in the practical working of the mind in every- 
day life or in the exercise of philosophical speculation, as 
the present investigation illustrates in the measure of its 

1 I am following Kant’s use of the word Ansc/iauung, as distinguished 
from sensation {Empfindung) and perception {Wahrnehmung)^ without 
the implications of Kant’s subjective doctrine of Space and Time. Un- 
fortunately the word intuition suggests direct or self-evident apprehension 
as contrasted with indirect. It has no such implication here. Intuition 
is no more direct than sensation and thought. All our apprehensions bring 
us face to face with their objects. 

^ AoyKTpui TiVi voOlo, 52 b. 



Cautions 

against 

misunder- 

standing. 


148 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

capacity. It is thus the intuitively enjoyed which is 
cognisant of the intuitively contemplated. 

Every sensory act contains in itself, and consequently 
conceals or masks, a simpler act of intuition. The 
brevity of this statement may lead to certain misunder- 
standings which it is desirable to remove, even at the 
cost of excessive detail. How, it may be asked, do we 
know that the place we are aware of as place is the place 
of the colour or the touch ? We do but refer the colour 
sensed to the place intuited, and how is this co-ordination 
effected } Now in sensing a colour we have not two 
separate acts of consciousness whose objects we refer to 
one another. There is no separate consciousness of the 
place, to which to refer the colour ; for the consciousness, 
or intuition, of the place is only excited so far as we have 
the sense of the colour. The monad or point-instant by 
itself has no consciousness ; though it has awareness in 
the extended sense of that word, which does not imply 
the existence of mind but only of something which 
performs the office of mind. Consequently there are not 
two acts of mind but only one act of mind, which in its 
sensory character apprehends the colour, and in its 
intuitive character apprehends the place of it. We are 
conscious of a place coloured or of colour in a place. 
The monad’s excitement exists as conscious only in so 
far as it is taken up into the sensory excitement of the 
place of the reception of the sensory excitement. To be 
aware of the colour, and in and by the same act of a 
place, is to have revealed to the mind the place of the 
colour. 

1 have deliberately neglected for the present the 
problem which arises from the variability of the spatial 
appearances of things, like the shrinking of a plate to 
sight as it recedes.^ But a general remark may be made 
here, because of its importance, which follows from those 
of the preceding paragraph. If in seeing a colour we 
intuite its place, it is equally true that we intuite the 
place only so far as we see the colour. Consequently 
^ This problem is discussed in ch. vii. pp. 192 fF. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


149 


whatever makes the sensory excitement in the brain 
indistinct, by which I mean numerically indistinct, wanting 
in individual separateness, affects the intuition of the 
place of the sensum. Such indistinctness may consist 
in diffusion of the sensory excitement, as when a point 
of light is seen by the unaccommodated eye as a halo. 
Or the indistinctness of the sensation may betray itself 
by confused or diffused movements of reaction of the 
organ or body. Such indistinctness in the sensory 
reaction according to the place excited in sensing would 
mean a corresponding indistinctness in the intuition of 
the place of the sensum. 

Minor difficulties may be met upon the same lines. 
Why, it may be asked, if the brain-patch AB is aware of 
the lines connecting it with a colour-patch ah^ do we 
not see these lines as well* as the patch itself.^ The 
answer is that the lines of light are not coloured. If a 
mote is in the way which they illumine, this we do see. 
Or it may be asked : since the monad taken up into 
conscious awareness by a sensory excitement knows the 
place and the spatial characters of the sensum, why then 
are we aware of a colour simply as colour, and not aware 
along with it of the movements in the coloured thing as 
well as of the vibrations of the ‘ ether.’ Locke indeed 
would have no difficulty in answering that we fail to 
recognise these movements because of the coarseness of 
our senses, and that if we were as delicately sensed as the 
angels we should see them, and the secondary sensations 
would accordingly disappear. Such an answer lies com- 
pletely outside our view, because the primary qualities 
are not objects of sensation at all. But the real answer 
to the question follows the lines of the previous answers. 
The vibrations in the coloured body are ^ apprehended ’ 
by the monad, or it is aware of them, so far as it is purely 
spatio-temporal. But in order that they should be appre- 
hended in consciousness the sensory scheme must be 
present also. Now in seeing colour the sensation is of 
colour. There is no visual picture of the movements in 
the body which underlie the colour. Thus the monad 
which is conscious of the place of the colour has no 



150 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The unity 
of mind. 


consciousness of the constitution of the colour stimulus 
though it is aware of it in the extended sense of that 
word/ 

Before proceeding further I can now revert to the 
problem left over from a previous chapter^ of how we 
enjoy our mental unity in spite of the unfilled gaps in 
mental space and time, and with the consciousness that 
there are such gaps. Hitherto I have been speaking of 
the intuition of external spaces and times. But the same 
considerations apply to our enjoyments. I wake up from 
dreamless sleep to see the light streaming through the 
blinds and am aware that I am the same mind as enjoyed 
last night reading Moliirc before I slept. Let the 
present enjoyment be A and the remembered one B. The 
point-instants of A and B are through the mental excite- 
ment lifted up into conscious enjoyment of their own 
mental places and times, and they also have ‘ assurance ' 
(in the wider sense) of the intermediate point-instants. 
It was comparatively easy to see that any mental event 
contemplated intuitively the place and date of its object 
and the rest of Space-Time. It is not so easy to see that 
A enjoys the interval of mental space-time between itself 
and B. If B were a foreign mind, A would merely have 
assurance of B’s mind and contemplate its place and time. 
But B is not a foreign mind, and is enjoyed as well as A, 
and the two point-instants are enjoyed together. Thereby 
the intermediate point-instants between those of A and B 
are lifted up into enjoyment, just as before the assurance 
which a point-instant had of the place and date of the 
object and all other point-instants was lifted up into con- 
templation. The assurance which the point-instant A or 
B, as a mere point-instant, has of the intermediate stretch 
of space or time modifies the two enjoyments which are 
together, and these stretches are enjoyed. Only they are 
not enjoyed as A and B are ; there are no mental events 
to fill the empty stretches. They enter into the enjoy- 

^ For further discussion of localisation see Supplementary Note at the 
end of the chapter. 

“ Above, ch. i. A, p. 25. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


ment not as memories but as modifications of the present 
enjoyed event A and the past enjoyed event B ; in the 
same way as in perception of an object the past experience 
of it modifies the present object without being an actual 
memory. The time-gap (and the same is true of the 
space-gap) is contained in the enjoyment without being 
filled with mental events. And this agrees with the 
common apprehension we have of the gap in time, of 
which all we can say is that there is such a gap, and 
nothing more. The subsidiary experiences which were 
mentioned in the previous passage come in to inform us 
how the gap was filled, if it was filled at all, with mental 
events. We are merely aware otherwise that there has 
been a gap between our event A and our memory B and 
that the gap is mental. This is to enjoy the mental gap 
and enjoy our mental unity. 

What is true of Space and Time is true equally of the 
categories which are but fundamental characters of Space- 
Time. Not only have minds equally with external things 
categorial characters, but we enjoy the categorial characters 
of mind in the act of contemplating the corresponding 
categorial characters in the object. We are aware of 
ourselves or our acts as having intensity in so far as we 
contemplate intensity in the object and not without such 
contemplation ; we are, or enjoy ourselves as, substances 
in cognising external substances, in thinking or intuition 
of a number our enjoyment has number. It would be 
tedious to pursue this proposition through all the cate- 
gories. Some remarks, however, seem desirable in the 
case of the two categories of substance and causality, 
more particularly the second. One point of difficulty is 
common .to both, and may be removed at once. Our 
mind is always substantial even in a single act, and it 
is also substantial as a whole. There is a substantial 
coherence between all its acts, and within this larger 
whole of mind there are smaller substantial groups of 
cohering activities. This corresponds to the separation 
of substances in the external world which itself is, 
though only in a metaphor, one great substance. It is 


Intuition 
and enjoy- 
ment of 
the cate- 
gories — 
Substance, 



152 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Casuality. 


experience guided by scientific method which teaches 
us what objects cohere together more closely ; and in 
correspondence therewith we learn that acts of mind 
which may be present as a matter of fact contempor- 
aneously and do belong together within the one mind, 
do not otherwise belong together. Thus the various acts 
cohering together within the substantial experiencing of 
an orange do not cohere closely with the experiencing 
of a chair on which I am sitting. In the same way, in 
causality, some acts of mind lead on by way of causality 
to others as in ordinary association of ideas, but they are 
prima facie unconnected with others occurring at the same 
time, though there is some causal reason in the whole 
mind for their appearing there simultaneously.^ Experi- 
ence teaches us to correlate events in the external world 
with one another as cause and effect and to treat other 
connections in space and time as not causal but as we say 
accidental. Similarly with the corresponding mental acts 
in which the events are apprehended. There is ultimately 
some direct or indirect causal connection between all 
finites. But the connection may be highly indirect. 

Now there is no special difficulty in recognising the 
truth of the proposition laid down, in respect of substance. 
But causality offers peculiar problems, and both on its 
merits and on account of its philosophical history causality 
is at once the hardest and most instructive of the categories 
to study in detail. Causality is contemplated most 
obviously in observing the causal sequence of two ex- 
ternal events ; and enjoyed most obviously in observing 
the influence of one thought in our minds over another, 
as when thinking of Raphael leads me on to thinking 
of Dresden and the Sistine Madonna ; or as when we 
actively suppress an idea. Yet it seems at first blush 
paradoxical to hold that our minds enjoy their own 
causality in following an external causal sequence, and still 
more that in influencing the course of our thinking we 
contemplate causal sequence in the objects. Again, 
when we are willing an external change and feel ourselves 
active, the beginning of the process seems to be enjoyed 
^ See above, Bk. 11 . ch. vi. A, vol. i. pp. 276 fF. 



WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


CH. VI 


153 


and the end contemplated. How can the formula apply 
in such a case ? 

A little inspection dispels these doubts. Causation, 
we saw, was the continuous connection in sequence of 
two events within a substance. In contemplating the 
action of the wind in blowing down a chimney, we enjoy 
first the act of contemplating the blowing wind and the 
standing chimney, and this enjoyment passes continuously 
into that of contemplating the fallen chimney and the 
wind passed by.^ We pass in enjoyment through mental 
processes corresponding to this determinate connection, 
and though each stage in the enjoyment is provoked from 
the outside, there is the experience which is characteristic 
of causation. It only seems strange to' say that the first 
enjoyment causes the second in such a case because the 
enjoyments are not initiated from within, in which latter 
case we say without reserve that we are the cause of the 
next enjoyment. But seeing the chimney fall when the 
wind blows against it with sufficient strength flows from 
observing the wind blowing and blowing against the 
chimney, and arises out of the first act of mind, so long as 
we continue to observe and our minds are thrown into 
the attitude of receptivity to nature. The second act is 
the fulfilment of the first when the first is taken in its 
completeness. When we do not see, we expect, provided 
we have seen before ; and in fact when Hume declared 
our experience of causality to be the consciousness of the 
expectation, he was saying something true and vital, 
though he used it metaphysically in a diflFerent way from 
ours. We may thus be aware of causality within our 
enjoyments though no part of the process is initiated by 
ourselves. We only miss this so far as we take the wind 
and the chimney by themselves ; but we cannot miss it 
when we take the two events as a determinate sequence 
within the substance of which wind and chimney are both 
parts. Or we may miss it, if we think causality to mean 


1 Pictorially this transition of one movement into another is repre- 
sented by depicting two stages of the movement separately, as in Michael 
Angelo’s representation of God’s creation of the sun (another observation 
which I owe to the late Hermann Grimm). 



154 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


that the observing of the wind blowing against the chimney 
has some mysterious force in it to produce observation 
of the fallen chimney, whereas it only means that the 
one observation is felt to be continued into the other. 

On the other hand, when 1 actively suppress a thought 
like the thought of striking a person who has annoyed 
me, there is clearly enjoyed causality, but also the non- 
mental object which comes first, namely, the hindered 
attempt to strike the man, is in causal connection with 
the object, the man uninjured. Only here the contem- 
plated objects are all ideal and may have no sensible 
correspondent in the perceived world, and the causal 
relation contemplated is equally ideal. I may call up the 
spirit of Plato to unfold the habitation of the soul (pardon 
me, shade of Milton, the abbreviation !), and Plato in my 
dream tells me his message as he would in reality. When 
thinking of Dresden makes me think of Raphael, so that 
I feel my own causality, Dresden is not indeeci contem- 
plated as the cause of Raphael, but Dresden and Raphael 
are contemplated as connected by some causal relation 
in the situation which is then my perspective of things, so 
that there is some reason for their being together and not 
merely for my thinking them together. 

I/astly, when, in the mixed variety of causation, I will 
to strike a man and strike him, I am enjoying causality 
as the determinate sequence of my perceiving of him 
struck upon the ideation of striking him ; but on the 
object side there is the equally causal transition from 
the external preparation to strike to the actual blow. 
But here the beginning of the whole enjoying is initiated 
in mind and the end is provoked by the object. Thus 
causality stripped of all adventitious notions of power 
may be enjoyed whether it is actively initiated or guided 
passively from the object, or half one way and half the 
other. The consciousness of activity adds to that of 
simple causality another element, that of self-initiation. 
“This making and unmaking of ideas/' says Berkeley, 
“doth very properly denominate the mind active." 


The experience of willing in which an idea in the 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


155 


mind (whether it be a free or a tied idea) results in a Casuaiity 
change in the external world, and that of sensation in 
which a mental act is the effect of an event in the external things, 
world, introduce us to a fresh intimacy between mind and 
its object in respect of categories, that is to say as regards 
the mind's intuitions. Not only is a category enjoyed 
along with cognisance of the same category contemplated ; 
but since the mind and its objects are compresent 
existents, there are also categorial relations between mind 
itself and the objects. I'hus not only does mind enjoy 
its own space through intuition of its object’s space, but 
the enjoyed and the contemplated spaces both belong to 
the same Space.* The same is true of Time. In the 
Introduction^ we saw that inspection of experience shows 
that we are aware of ourselves as in the same Space 
and Time with our objects. We enjoy our togetherness 
with them in space and time. The togetherness itself, 
as we saw, was enjoyed and not contemplated. If we 
contemplated the object as together with us, we should 
also be contemplating our minds as the other end of the 
chain, and we cannot contemplate our minds. The 
enjoyer and the contemplated are in fact two existents in 
one Space, and this togetherness is experienced by the 
enjoyer in enjoyment. (In the extended sense of the 
word, the object in turn ^enjoys’ its compresence with the 
mind, that is with its non-mental basis or equivalent.) 

Similarly the mind not only enjoys itself as substance 
through intuition of an external substance, but it belongs 
to the larger stuff of Space-Time which comprehends it 
and that external object. In like manner our mind and 
external things are, as compresent existences, in causal 
relation to one another, and we enjoy ourselves as causes 
in respect of the things we affect and as effects of the 
things which act upon us, as they do primarily in 
stimulating us to the act of sensing. Indeed, as Mr. 

Stout has made clear, it is the experience of our manipu- 
lation of external things which is the immediate source 
of our consciousness of causality, and I add that we use 
this experience of causality in ourselves not to discover 
/ See also Bk. 1. ch. iii. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


156 


causality as between things but to interpret it and realise 
its meaning. Simple inspection of experience assures us 
that in voluntary or impulsive action we are aware of 
ourselves as causal in respect of things, or active, and 
that in sensation we are passive in respect of the sensum ; 
and once more it accords with the results of our 
hypothesis. 

It has sometimes been affirmed that in sensation we 
must postulate that there is an object which causes the 
sensation.^ Postulates are to be regarded in metaphysics 
with the deepest suspicion ; and no postulate is needed for 
what experience, which is our only ultimate test, asserts. 
We only need to explain more precisely the nature of the 
experience. We enjoy our sensing as the effect of the 
sensum, and this enjoyment has the characteristic vivacity 
of all sensory experience. To enjoy ourselves as the 
effect of the sensum is the whole experience we have of 
the causal relation between the sensum and ourselves. 
We do not contemplate the sensum as the cause, except 
in this sense. To contemplate it as cause in the same 
way as we contemplate it as the cause of some other 
external event, would be either to contemplate ourselves 
as effect, which is impossible, or to experience the relation 
of causality twice over, first as contemplated and then as 
enjoyed. This is but repeating what was said above of 
togetherness in space and time. To enjoy ourselves as 
effect of what we contemplate in sense is the experience 
we have of the relation of causality where one of the 
partners is an external existence and the other an enjoyed 
one. Similarly when we act upon the external world we 
are enjoying ourselves as cause, not of course of the 
immediate object of our ideation (this has been commented 
on already) but of the change we produce in the thing, 
and when that change is produced we become, in sensing 
it, in turn effect towards it. 

At the same time this discussion helps to reinforce 
the truth of the fundamental principle of cognition that 
the object is revealed to us and that it is in no sense in 
the mind. It might be urged that, after all, the effect of 
^ See before. Introduction, vol. i. p. 28. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


157 


the external object upon us is a brain process, and, since that 
is not known to us in the act of sensing, we are not aware 
of any causal relation. This objection would be much in 
the spirit of Hume’s famous criticism of the assertion that 
we are aware of causality in the act of willing. But it is 
at once irrelevant and helpful. It is irrelevant because 
the neural effect though not known is identical with the 
conscious enjoyment which we have. And it is helpful 
because our ignorance of the neural effect and our enjoy- 
ment of the corresponding (and identical) act of conscious- 
ness compel us to see that what we know or contemplate 
is the object itself directly and not the effect it produces 
in us. Thus the sensum which is the cause of the sensing 
is not experienced by the patient as the effect which it 
produces in him but is experienced in and for itself as 
what it is contemplated to be, and, in our language, is 
revealed to the patient. The patient is not cognisant of 
the effect but is it ; he is cognisant of the object which is 
the agent. Hume was right in seizing on the problem of 
causality as the vital question in knowledge. It is reflec- 
tion on causality which is the best, if not the most obvious 
way, of approaching the whole problem of the nature of 
knowing.^ 

Thus the categories obtain not only as between 
external finites or between acts of mind, and not only are 
they enjoyed in the actual contemplation of the same 
categories in the external world, but they obtain as between 
a mental and a non-mental finite ; as should be expected 
in accordance with the whole principle of explanation, 
which in its turn is attested by direct experience. 

It must be added that though we only enjoy causality 
or other categories so far as there are external objects to 
be known under those categories ; the converse proposition 
is not true : namely, that there are external things under 
the categories only so far as there is corresponding en- 
joyment in us under those categories. Finites below the 
level of mind and before the emergence of minds in the 
order of empirical history stand in categorial relations to 

^ For the above see Mind, vol. xii. N.S., 1912, “On relations, etc.” 
§ 7 » PP- 323 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


Apprchen* 

of 

matter. 


158 

one another though there is no mind to know them. 
Only they are not consciously experienced. 

Of the primary qualities of matter nothing further 
need be said in this connection. They are empirical 
determinations of Space and Time and motion, and are 
apprehended by intuition. But the answer to the question 
by what kind of mental act we apprehend the materiality 
of matter, which as I have supposed includes its mass 
and energy, is one of great difficulty. The question is 
not of the reality of matter. Matter is not the only 
reality ; the mind too is real and is not apprehended as 
material ; for the materiality of the material basis of mind 
is not a categorial character and is not carried up, like 
those characters, into the enjoyment. But if I am right 
in thinking that materiality is really an empirical quality 
of a certain level of existence, though resoluble like all 
empirical qualities into modes of Space-Time, we have to 
identify the apprehension of it amongst our modes of 
mental action. It is, I think, apprehended in the sensation 
of resistance offered to our bodies. The sensum which 
we are aware of in feeling resistance is a complex one. 
Primarily resistance is one of the kinaesthetic sensations 
and closely related to the organic ones, and it has for us 
another interest as well as the present one, namely, in its 
connection with life.^ But in the sensing of resistance I 
not only sense my own body but also the opposition to 
it of something or other which resists. That something 
or other is the materiality of the foreign object. The 
sense of resistance is not so simple as the sense of motion 
in my joints or that of hunger or thirst. In them I sense 
my body alone, and as we shall see as a living thing. In 
sensing resistance I sense the strain in my body, and I 
sense it not as something material but as a determination 
of my ‘ life ’ ; but also I sense the something which resists. 
And the whole situation is mediated through touch, which, 
however, only lets resistance in to our minds as colour or 
touch itself lets in categories like Space and the rest. The 
significance of the sense of resistance seems to lie in its 
^ See below, ch. vi. p. 175. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


159 


thus supplying the link of connection between one very 
intimate thing, my living body, and another and foreign 
thing, matter. 

Inertia as commonly understood implies on the part of 
matter resistance to any attempt to change its condition, 
whether of motion or rest. Having learnt in the case of 
our living bodies what this resistance of a foreign body is, 
and through the mediation of the secondary sensation of 
touch, we understand what the inertia of a material body 
is as displayed in its relation to another body not ours, 
when that situation is revealed to us by sight and not by 
touch. We have then an illustration of how something 
experienced directly in one experience may be used to 
interpret a different but allied experience. For it would 
follow that if matter is apprehended in its materiality by 
resistance felt through touch, sight does not itself reveal 
materiality, but a seen object is cognised as material 
through reference to what is learnt, not indeed by touch 
but by resistance provoked through the medium of touch. 
This agrees with our common experiences. For when we 
see colour we do not see materiality but colour. It is 
true that colour does as has beeir described reside in 
matter, but as colour it is not matter. The materiality 
of what is coloured is not carried up into the higher level 
of empirical existence which is colour. 

In identifying the sense of resistance as containing the 
apprehension of materiality, 1 am having recourse to a 
form of sensation which in older theories of knowledge 
and of psychology played a large part, but has fallen 
now into something of discredit. There is no peculiar 
revelation of reality, it is urged, which is conveyed to us 
by this kind of sensation. And it is quite true that the 
resistance of a thing when we touch and push it no 
more teaches us the reality and independence of the 
thing than any other sensation. It is only one instance 
of how we come to be aware that there are things to 
which we must adapt ourselves, and which we have to 
humour, so that if we desist we Jose them, as I should 
lose the table if I continue to move my fingers on 
in the direction of its edge beyond the corner where the 



i6o 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Apprehen- 
sion of 
secondary 
qualities. 


Intrinsic 
extension 
and extent 


edge turns at right angles. This happens to me equally 
with colour where if I turn my eyes away I lose the 
colour. But, to repeat myself, I am not suggesting that 
the sensing of resistance has any prerogative to inform 
us of reality ; but only that it informs us of the empirical 
quality of being material. If I am right it does supply 
not a peculiar but a special revelation of that. 

The primary qualities are apprehended by intuition 
but through sensation. The secondary ones are appre- 
hended by the specialised empirical forms of spatio- 
temporal mental response of the special senses. We 
have seen that each act of sensing has its intrinsic extension 
which is the pattern of the response. Correspondingly the 
sensum has its intrinsic extension, which is its extensive 
pattern in the external thing, but it is not apprehended 
in the act of sensation as extensive but as the quality 
of the sensum, blue or hot or sweet or hard. 

The place of the sensum and that of the sensing are, 
to speak strictly, not part of the intrinsic extension but 
are intuited, and are extrinsic to the sensation in so far 
as the sensation has sensory character. Hence it is that 
while in the sensing the pattern is purely spatio-temporal, 
in the sensum it is a quality, but the place of the sensum 
(not necessarily or indeed ever a geometrical point) is 
apprehended, as all purely categorial characters are, in 
correspondence with the enjoyed place of the sensing. 
The intrinsic extension of sensation is thus to be dis- 
tinguished from the extrinsic extension of sensation, 
which is what is commonly called its extension, but does 
not belong to it in virtue of its quality (that is, its 
occupying space according to a certain pattern) but in 
virtue of its occupying a space in the sense of greater 
or less repetition of that pattern in space. The greater 
or less exu»/ (to describe the extrinsic extension by a 
special word) of sensory experience depends on the 
greater or less space which it fills, that is to say on the 
multiplicity of the sensory objects or enjoyments. A blue 
thing is blue as a whole because the blue material processes 
are spread over the area of the thing when it is subject 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


i6i 


to the action of the light. And as we have seen the 
blue does not fill the whole area but is stippled over it in 
more or less density, leaving room for those processes 
which are sensed with other sense-qualities.^ A single 
point of blue colour is nothing but the smallest area 
filled with that quality, and the place of such a point is 
thus the minimum sensibile of extent which is coloured blue. 
The whole extent of the area is seen coloured because the 
sensory qualities which provoke our intuition of their 
places are not finely enough delimited from each other. 
Under the microscope this discrimination may occur and 
the blood which seems red to the naked eye is seen as 
a yellowish extent in which red corpuscles are seen 
separately. At the same time such undistinguished sen- 
sation of a coloured area is possible because the space 
of the area is itself continuous and is so apprehended in 
our intuition. What is true of the sensed colour and 
its extent is true also of the sensing of it. A larger area 
of vision is a larger extent of enjoyed space in the 
neural region engaged, and the separate points of vision 
are not enjoyed separately because, as we must suppose, the 
excitement provoked by sensation in those points spreads 
over the intervening places. 

The place of a sensed minimum forms the transi- 
tion between the intrinsic extension and the extent 
of sensory experience. The place is the lower limit of 
the extent. At the same time, even the minimum sensed 
has intensity, and intensity seems at first sight to belong 
intrinsically to a sensation as sensory. It is probably 
referable as we have seen to the spatial density of the 
sensum, that is the filling of the place in the same time. 
The notion of density was illustrated by Mr. Brentano 
by the paling of the red in brightness when red points 
are scattered sparsely over an area otherwise black. ^ And 
within a minimum of intuited extent we have accord- 
ing to the intensity a varying density with which the 
sense-quality fills it, and this density apprehended not 

^ See above, Bk. II. ch. vi. A, vol. i. p. 275. 

2 Above, ch. v. p. 133. Brentano, Untersuckungeriy p. 14. 

VOL. II M 


Intensity 
of sensum 
intuited. 



i 62 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


numerically or extensively but taken in at once in the act 
of sense and integrated in the actual external fact as the 
intensity of the sensum, to which corresponds that of its 
sensing/ 

It seems very difficult to separate the intensity of a 
sensation from its quality. Yet^ to speak strictly, the in- 
tensity of the sensation is not sensed any more than its 
extent is sensed. We must hold, however strange the 
conception may be, that it is only the quality which is 
sensed ; while the intensity is an intuition. But so close 
is the intimacy of the quality and the intensity, that the 
intensity which is the density even ot a point of sensation 
appears to be and is commonly assumed to be a feature 
of sensation on a level with its quality. It is the intensity 
of a quality, whether that quality be blue or sweet or life 
or motion. In some cases a change of intensity is even 
confused with one of quality, as sounds of increasing 
intensity seem to rise also in pitch. Some writers have 
gone so far as to say (for instance, Mr. Bergson) that 
intensities really are qualities and every difference of 
intensity a difference of quality. This seems however 
not to be in accordance with inspection of experience, 
whicli distinguishes quality clearly from intensity. 

When we turn to theory we can and must separate 
the two different integrations of Space-Time which 
underlie quality and intensity respectively. Quality is 
the integration of an extensive pattern. The apprehen- 
sion of it is an enjoyed extensive pattern enjoyed as an 
extensive whole, but in the sensum what is contemplated 

^ When the whole liand or arm is plunged in hot water the water 
seems hotter than when only a finger or a finger-tip is immersed. This fact 
is of a different kind from that in the text. There the intensity or bright- 
ness is lowered by leaving unexcited places. Here we have a larger extent 
of the same density of stippling confused with a greater intensity. 'Fhe fact 
is a further illustration of the truth that intensity is dependent on an 
extensive condition. The larger extent of the heat besides being felt as 
larger appears to be taken in as a whole and to be equated with a greater 
density of the heat. There arc other illusions which are perhaps 
cognate, lo the touch a line of points feels shorter than a continuous line 
of the same length. Oddly enough this is an ‘illusion’ opposite to that 
of vision, for as is well known a line of points looks longer than a continuous 
line of the same length, at any rate within certain limits of length. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


163 

IS quality. Intensity is the integration of the frequency 
with which that pattern occupies its space-time, and is 
apprehended both in the sensum and the mind as such 
an integration, which in both cases is spatio-temporal 
and has no quality, though it attaches to a quality. To 
point this contrast of the two integrations ; consider the 
pattern of a sound vibration which carries the sound in 
its appropriate pitch, as compared with the amplitude of 
the vibration which is the intensity of that sound. The 
greater amplitude means that in the same time there is 
more of the vibration, or it occupies more space in the 
same time. The less intense sound leaves part of the 
space of a greater amplitude unfilled and may thus be 
brought under the conception of less density. Thus 
quality is a purely empirical integration ; intensity is a 
categorial one, though of course it has its empirical 
variations, just as Space or universality has. 

Hence, intimate as is the connection between intensity 
and quality of sensation, so that there is no intensity of a 
sensum unless there is quality, intensity is and remains 
purely spatio-temporal. The intensity of sensation be- 
longs with its extent and duration and not with its quality.^ 

But because intensity belongs even to the minimum 
extent or duration of a sensum, it is the connecting link 
between the purely sensory element in the sensum, its 
quality, and its categorial characters or primary qualities, 
place, extent, date, duration, to which intensity properly 
belongs. These characters though revealed to the mind 
through sensation are apprehended by the intuition which 
the sensing act contains and which cannot be had apart 
from the sensing. In other words, the sensing act is a 
conscious spatio-temporal process, a specialised form of 
intuition, which in respect of one of its elements, the 
pattern of response, is aware of the quality of the sensum 
and performs the sensory function proper ; in respect of 
its other elements is purely intuitive. It is the intuitive 

1 There is therefore no extravagance in the suggestion sometimes made 
(as by Messrs. Miinsterberg and Brentano) that the intensity of different 
orders (or modalities) of sensation, e.g. touch and sound, may be compared 
and equated. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Extent ot 
sensuni. 


164 


elements which give the sensing act its particularity, 
or individualise it ; even as their objects individualise 
the quality of the sensum. The current statement of 
psychologists, that sensations possess quality, intensity, 
extensity, etc., fails to distinguish the different levels to 
which these two sets of characters belong. It fails also to 
distinguish between sensing and sensum. For though 
the sensum possesses quality, blue or sweet, the sensing 
possesses no such quality but only that of consciousness.^ 


Leaving intensity let us return to the extent of a 
sensory object, like a patch of blue, which is an extended 
multiplicity of sensa. When a sensum is said to have 
extent it is always such a multiplicity. The extent is 
extrinsic to the quality of the sensum, which has its own 
intrinsic extension. It follows that when I see a blue 
patch 1 see its blue quality, but 1 have intuition of its 
extent. 1 do not see a blue which possesses an extent but 
I intuite an extent of space which I see blue. I do not 
apprehend an extended colour but a coloured extent. The 
extent is not a property or character either of the mental 
act of sensing in its sensory character or of its object. It 
belongs to the act or object of intuition. An important 
consequence already mentioned more than once follows, 
not so much for psychology as for the theory of knowledge. 
If we suppose that our colours are extended and our 
touches also, we are faced with the problem of correlating 
the Spaces of vision and touch. They are in that case, as 
Berkeley rightly held, distinct Spaces, and they do but get 
connected by custom, though it is difficult to understand 
how. Now if extent docs not belong to colour as such, 

1 I add a note on order. Both the sensum and the sensing possess 
order in respect of any of its characters. The order in quality of the sensum 
is its place in the series of qualities, e.g, if it is a sound, in the series of 
qualities called pitches. The corresponding order in the sensing is that of 
the patterns of response. These are without sound quality and it is in 
respect of the sensings of sounds, not of the sensa themselves, that Mr. 
Watt’s proposition is true, that pitches are not differences of quality but of 
order. Thus the order of quality in sensation belongs to the sensory side 
of sensation, not to the intuitive side. (This repeats a note on a previous 
page, vol. i. p. 265.) 



cH.vi WAYS OF APPREHENDING 165 

but colours are seen in their places within an extent, and 
the like is true of touch, it follows that when we apprehend 
the same object by sight and touch we are apprehending 
the same extent, and in the one case seeing its colours and 
in the other feeling its pressures, and these objects though 
they do not ultimately occupy, microscopically, the same 
places do all fall within the same area or volume and macro- 
scopically coincide. There are not two distinct spaces which 
have to be connected by custom or otherwise, but one space 
which is the scene of different qualities. What experience 
docs is to correlate colours and touches (and the same 
thing applies to all the other sense qualities) with one 
another as belonging to the same space, and this is what 
our experience of things actually enables us to do.^ 

Instead of having a variety of different Spaces which we 
never can make one, except by assuming some Space not 
given in experience which is the condition of all these 
various Spaces, our intuitive apprehension of things 
supplies us with the identical framework of a piece of 
space, within which the sensible qualities of the things are 
found. Extent remains a categorial feature of experience, 
varying of course in empirical differences, and not sensed. 

It still remains true that what is sensed has its intrinsic 
spatio-temporal characters, but these are sensed as quality, 
and not as extended, nor even as having position or place. 

Hence the necessity of distinguishing the intrinsic exten- 
sion of the sense-quality as such from the extent (including 
the place) of the whole sensory experience. 

It may be added that with proper changes the same 
account has to be given of the duration and date of sense 
experience. 

This analysis of the connection between sensation and History of 
intuition of any space is at variance, though not by any ‘extensity.’ 
means so sharply as would at first sight appear, with the 
current doctrine that sensation besides quality and in- 
tensity possesses what is called extensity. Were it not 
for the established use of the word, I should have liked 

^ I am once more neglecting the variation of spaces in our sensible 
experience. 



i66 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


PK. Ill 


to give the name extensity to the intrinsic extension of 
a sensum, which is not contemplated as such but as quality, 
and reserve ^ extension ’ for the intuited bigness of a 
sensory object which arises from the plurality of simple 
sensa, and is the space in which they are contained. At 
any rate if the above account be true, sensation as sensory 
has no extensity as in the commonly accepted doctrine. 
That doctrine was historically inevitable in view of the 
failure of the English attempts to derive the percept 
extension from combinations of touch or colour with 
motion, and of the resembling theory of Herbart, and 
in view of the change wrought in the state of the dis- 
cussion by Lotze’s theory of local signs. For Lotze 
the experience of Space itself was an a priori one : the 
mind had a native tendency to view its sensory objects 
as contained in Space. The local signs were needed as 
indications to the mind so as to assign the various sensory 
objects to their different places in this Space. His account 
of them varied in the history of his thought : at first they 
were mere physical neural processes, apparently noted 
by the mind unconsciously ; but in the end they were 
described explicitly as sensations, which attended an 
ordinary sensation in virtue of the place at which it 
affected the sense-organ of touch or sight. Still, through- 
out, they remain indications for discriminating place and 
not experiences of place. Space itself was given to the 
mind by the mind’s own habit. In the justifiable revolt 
against explaining our experience or any part of it by 
mental habits, as a method of stating theoretically that 
we have to accept Space, for instance, as given to us and 
can offer no further account of it, what could be more 
natural than to empty this spatiality of experience into 
the elements of experience itself and declare that our 
sensations possessed extensity } The doctrine of the 
extensity of sensations is the inevitable outcome of 
Lotze’s teaching. But the variability with which the 
local signs have been treated in different expositions of 
the doctrine of extensity since Lotze is enough to indicate 
how indistinct the whole doctrine is. Mr. Stumpf dis- 
penses with them altogether. For James they appear to 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


167 

be purely peripheral sense-characters. For Mr. Ward a 
local sign is the relation of any particular sensation to the 
presentation-continuum as a whole with its property of 
extensity. Each presentation has or may have two or 
more of such local signs, so that each presentation 
possesses extensity as well as quality.^ Similarly for Mr. 

Stout the local signs blend together into extensity and 
a local sign is a differentiation of extensity. These 
variations in the doctrine, which is much altered from 
Lotze’s, suggest to me that extensity is being all the 
while regarded as something different from sensation 
and only connected with it independently ; and that is 
why I said above that my own statement is not so sharply 
different as it seems. To add to the indistinctness, on 
some of these theories experience of motion (either 
kinaesthetic sensation or sensation of external motion) is 
regarded as an integral constituent of the experience of 
extension as developed from sensory extensity, and by 
some James) is treated only as a help towards exacter 
experience. 

The earlier doctrine of Mr. Stumpf is free from these Place as 
perplexities, and it will be helpful to touch briefly upon ^ 

it. F or him every sensation possesses four elements or as sensation, 
he calls them partial contents “ : quality, intensity, time- 
character, and place. These are psychological parts ” 
of the sensation. Local signs have no part to play in this 
analysis. Moreover, he suggests, not of course with the 
same implications as the present doctrine, that the neural 
counterpart of the place which is a psychological part of 
the sensation is the place of the sensory excitement and 
nothing more.^ What is meant by calling place a partial 
content of sensation is that quality and place are insepar- 
able from one another, there is no quality which has not 
extent and no extent without quality. But they are 
distinct elements and vary independently : the colour 

1 See Art. EncycL Brit. ed. ix. p. 54. Psychological Principles^ pp. 

147 £ 

2 Ueber den psychologischen Ursprung der Raumvorstellung. Leipzig, 

1873, PP- ff. 

® Pp. 149 ff. 



i68 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


Remarks 
on spacc- 
pcrception 
—Motor 
sensations, 


of a patch may remain the same though the patch varies 
in size. At the same time the quality participates in 
a certain fashion in the change of the extent,” for the 
colour diminishes with the extent till, when the extent 
vanishes, the colour vanishes too. 

My only quarrel with this statement is that it fiils 
to mark the difference of mental function in the appre- 
hension of quality and place (and the other partial 
contents). Both alike are of course contained within 
the sensation taken as a whole, but they are contained 
differently. For the purely sensory function is provoked 
by the quality of the sensum as its stimulus. But the 
place of the sensum is not a stimulus ; the attempt to 
make it one lay at the bottom of the conception of 
local signs. Accordingly the place is not a sensory but 
an intuitive character, and distinct from it to a much 
greater degree than is suggested by the statement 1 am 
considering. The remark quoted that quality in a way 
participates in the extent proves only that where there 
is no extent there is no quality. Doubtless it is because 
quality and place are treated as ‘‘ contents ” of sensation, 
and not as objects of the sensing, that this distinctness 
of the sensory and intuitive functions in sensation is 
minimised. 

My inquiry is not primarily psychological and I 
am concerned only to identify the apprehension of Space 
and to place it, in its relation with sensation, in a scheme 
of the modes of mental apprehension corresponding to 
different levels of existence. Accordingly I am not to 
discuss those details of how spatial perception is elaborated, 
which are supplied in such invaluable fulness in recent 
treatments of the subject.^ But I will allow myself the 
luxury of commenting upon two matters which fall 
perhaps outside my scope. The one topic is that of the 
part played in space-perception by motor or kinaesthetic 
sensations ; they cannot be elements of extension as 
integral components of it. The case of sensations of 
motion in things outside us {e,g, a shooting star or a flying 
1 Cp. Mr. Stout’s chapters in Manual, ed. 3 , Bk. hi. pt. ii. chs. iii., iv. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


169 

bird) is different. Motion is intuited and Space is only 
the framework of motion, and though we apprehend the 
motion through sight or touch yet the material derived 
thus may and must be integral in the direct perception 
of Space, for it is of that order. But kinaesthetic or motor 
sensations do not tell us directly of anything outside our 
bodies which we are contemplating, but only of ourselves, 
and even then they do not inform us of material motion 
but of motion within a living thing — vital motion. In 
exploring with my finger the edge of an object, my finger 
gives me changing sensations of the touched object and it 
gives me motion in my body, but the motion does not 
belong to the body touched. Hence all that such motor 
sensations can do for space-perception they do not directly 
but through their correlation with places and extents other- 
wise known. Their sensa are not ingredients of the 
extent of place, but they may enable us to refine our 
apprehension of those places and extents. This would 
apply to Lotze's attempt to identify the local signs of 
the eye with sensations of movement or strain in the 
motor arrangements of the eye. They are not fitted to 
be local signs, for they tell us of the place of the eye not 
of the coloured point seen by it. Hence, unless that 
position is otherwise known, it is difficult to see how 
this motor sensation could discriminate sensations as 
belonging to various places in external Space. For the 
sensations from the thing seen are seen by the mind as 
external in space to my body, but the motor sensations are 
felt as in my body. They could not therefore serve as 
the sign of difference of locality of the sensation. 

My other remark concerns the attempt to treat local Local signs 
signs as purely peripheral, I mean as tactual or visual 
in some shape or form. This was Lotze’s own view as 
to the tactual local signs ; they were the differences 
in the feel of touches according to the nature of the 
underlying structures in different places of the skin. He 
found no such differences in the retina, and accordingly 
looked elsewhere for the local signs of the eye. James 
apparently treats them even in the eye as different feel- 
ings at each retinal point. Now it is gravely doubtful 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK, III 


Apprehen- 
sion of life. 


170 

whether there is anything like fine enough discrimination 
supplied in the skin in this way for the purpose, and 
these different colourings of the touches admit a much 
simpler interpretation. For the skin not only explores 
but is explored and is a particularly interesting object 
of exploration. The different touch experiences from 
different parts of it serve the same purpose as different 
colours on a surface, which enable us to sec the contours 
more easily than if the colour were uniform. A body is 
more easily felt when the surface does not give us uni- 
form touch sensations. Supposing the eyes could see 
each other, there might be similar variations in the 
retina, and that they cannot is perhaps the reason why 
no such differences have been discovered with any 
certainty. 

We must conclude that local signs which arc really 
signs, that is are non-local experiences, cannot do the 
work required ; and that the only local signs which can 
do the work, namely, central consciousness of the place 
affected, are not signs at all but are direct consciousness 
in intuitional form of the place and extent of the external 
object. 

Though I have said nothing of the third dimension, 
I am assuming that the Space we cognise by intuition is 
three-dimensional, and the places stimulated in the brain 
and therefore the places enjoyed in the mind as well 
as the places in the external thing are places in three- 
dimensional wholes. Fortunately I am not called upon 
to raise the question of the optical machinery for appre- 
hension of the third dimension by sight. 

The next level of existence above that of the secondary 
qualities of matter is life, and the quality of life is 
apprehended in ourselves by the organic and kinaesthetic 
sensations. In these, as in the special sensations, the act 
of sensing is distinct from the sensum ; the one is an act 
of consciousness, the other a process of life. The sensum 
is not sensed through the organic or motor sense as 
material, which it also is. For this it must be sensed 
through other sensations. Yet it is as much non-mental 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


171 

as the objects of the special senses. To verify this and at 
the same time to realise that the object is life and not any 
mere form of matter, compare in series the sight of an 
external motion, the sight of one’s own moving arm, and 
the internal sensation of the movement which takes place 
at the joint. For the visual impression of the moving 
arm we may even substitute the visual imagination of the 
movement as taking place at the joints. Now it is the 
living motion which the motor sensing contemplates ; In 
the other cases it is material motion which is contem- 
plated, though in the one case located in the body, in 
the other located in the external world, outside the body. 
Pass from this simpler experience to the organic sensa- 
tions. My object in the sensation of hunger or thirst is 
the living process or movement of depletion, such as I 
observe outside me in purely physiological form in the 
parched and thirsting condition of the leaves of a plant, 
which thus lives through its thirst or ‘ enjoys ’ it, but is 
not conscious of it, and does not contemplate it as we do 
our thirst ; or the object may be the vital movements 
implied In suffocation or nausea ; or I may have that 
intensely disagreeable sensum of the laceration of my 
flesh in a wound, which in its vital quality we speak of 
as physical pain. In all these instances of motor and 
organic sensation what we have to do is to separate the 
consciousness from the object and to recognise that the 
object- process has the empirical quality of life, which 
distinguishes it from a primary movement (or from a 
secondary quality) in matter. The separation is not easy 
to perform. For we tend to take the hunger as a whole 
including its conscious character, while at the same time 
we correlate it with a part of the body in which it is felt. 
We are the more apt to do so because the unpleasantness 
of hunger is thought to be eminently psychical, and so 
hunger tends to be treated as a state of mind. It is no 
wonder then that we should suppose such a condition to 
be something mental which Is as it were presented to a 
mind which looks on at it ; and that we should go on to 
apply the same notion to colours and tastes and sounds 
and regard these as mental in character. Many at least 



lyi 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


find it difficult not to think of hunger as mental affections, 
arising no doubt from the body. 

But the localisation of hunger in the body (however 
vague) is enough to dispel this misinterpretation and to 
set the organic and motor sensa on their proper footing. 
We localise them in our body because we are contem- 
plating an affection of our body, and just for the same 
reason we localise our touches or pressures not only in 
the object touched but in the skin which is touched 
where the pressure also occurs, for within limits the skin 
and the surface of the thing touched are one and the 
same surface. For the opposite reason we do localise 
our sensa of cohnir in the eye, but in the thing seen, 
and we are said in misleading and unjustifiable phrase to 
project our visual sensations (unjustifiable I mean if we 
really imply that we first feel the sensa in ourselves and 
then project them beyond us). We only know in fact 
that our eyes arc concerned in seeing colours of things 
from the sensations of movements in the eyes in regard- 
ing the thing, or from the experience that we sec or do 
not sec according as the eyes are in the open or shut 
position, which is revealed by sensations of position. 
Rightly understood the organic and motor sensations 
confirm the general analysis of sensation into an enjoy- 
ment compresent with its non-mental object. Begin 
with a superficial regard for them and the theory of the 
special sensations also is corrupted. 

The same considerations as we have urged in the 
preceding chapter enable us to discriminate the con- 
sciousness of pleasure and painfulness from these affec- 
tions themselves, and lead us to believe that pleasure 
and pain arc data not of the mental but of the vital 
order, of the same class as the organic sensations, but 
whose precise nature it is not at present possible to 
state. ^ 

1 There is a point of difference between the organic and kinaesthetic on 
one hand and the special senses on the other which has been already men- 
tioned in connection with the subject of remembering emotions, ^ but which 
may be repeated shordy here because it has importance for the theory of 


^ Bk. II. ch. iv. vol. i. p. 13 1 note. 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


173 


A special interest attaches to the sense of resistance, 
which is one form of motor sensation. There, as we just 
saw, not only have we the consciousness of the vital 
process of strain but of something which is not merely 
touched but has the quality we speak of as resistance, 
that is of materiality. It is the consciousness of a vital 
process opposed by something material, not of matter as 
opposed by matter, such as we have when we contemplate 
the shock of two billiard balls. This last we understand 
only when we have arrived at the experience of both 
halls as material, in the way before described. But our 
understanding is helped in the matter by the experience 
of resistance from one part of our own bodies to another 
part of the same body. When I press my finger against 
the ball of my thumb, besides the awareness of my 
thumb as resistant and material, I am aware of it as itself 
the seat of a strain and vital. Each of the two parts of 
the body is experienced as at once resisted and resistant, 
each suffers and offers resistance. There are two objects 
each of which as resistant is material and suffers resist- 
ance as vital. It is in consequence of such an experience 
that when we press a merely material object we describe 
our sense of strain as the sense of resistance on our part 
to matter. But this experience helps us also to under- 
stand (and this is its chief significance) material inertia as 
the resistant act or activity of a body which is not vital, 


knowledge as well as for psychology. The sensum of the special senses is 
in general external to the body ; but that of the organic and motor senses 
is the living body itself, of which body the neural equivalent of the con- 
sciousness of the sensa is itself a part. The consequence is that ideas of 
these vital sensa tend to become sensational, that is hallucinatory. Except 
in certain well-attested cases this is not true of the special senses. We do 
not by imagining a sensory quality make it present to ourselves in sensation. 
Who can hold a fire in his hand by thinking of the frosty Caucasus ? But 
a motor or organic idea tends of its own motor character to stir up the 
organs themselves, which are the source of the experience and so to pro- 
duce the conditions of sensation. Even with the special senses we try, if 
the object present to sense is agreeable, to get more of it, but this is 
not possible in idea. What is unusual here is normal with the vital 
sensibility ; the idea repeats itself in sensory form, because its object is the 
body itself. 



174 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


RK. Ill 


and the mutual relation between two material foreign 
bodies as resistance between them. 

Apprchen- But our Contemplation of vitality is in the first 

foreign life i^'^^tancc of our own. How do we apprehend life in the 
’ tree outside our body ? For we perceive other living 
things only in their material qualities and their motions 
and other primary qualities. Their motions are complex 
and may be self-initiated, but examination shows them 
to be dependent like everything else, including ourselves, 
upon their surroundings. Their motions arc set going 
partly by internal stimuli ; but they act within their 
external circumstances. What distinguishes them from 
a machine is their vitality, which includes plasticity. In 
one respect they are machines of a certain high order, 
just as in that respect our bodies arc, when we exclude 
the vitality which is in the same place as our body and 
is thus possessed by it. How then are we aware of 
the tree’s life ? Not certainly by projecting our life into 
the tree, for I may certainly see the tree to be alive 
without being sensible of my own life. I am sensible 
of myself in being conscious of the tree and of its life, 
and do not refer to my own life. When we discussed 
the consciousness we have of other minds we saw how 
impossible the conception of projection was in that case, 
and how we could not be aware of other minds even 
by analogy with our own. For we enjoy only ourselves, 
and that there could be something else which enjoyed 
itself was a new discovery which depended on a special 
sort of experience. 

But in the case of life outside ourselves, though there 
is no projection, there is something which may be called 
analogy. For our life is not enjoyed by us, but it is 
contemplated. We are aware through appropriate sensa- 
tions of something non-mental which is life. We do not 
become aware of it as limited to us and our bodies, 
though as a matter of fiict we contemplate it then only 
in connection with our bodies. Accordingly, a set of 
external motions of the same kind as our own is appre- 
hended as alive. If this be called analogy I am content, 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


175 


but it is the same process as we use in extending through- 
out our experience a quality learned in connection with 
one example of a kind of things to another example. 

I contemplate life in a body which is my own ; and I 
contemplate also in that body the motions or behaviour 
which are apprehended as vital because they are in the 
same place as the vital motions and are identical with 
them. In other words, what I apprehend as external 
material behaviour is also apprehended as alive. Just 
because the vitality in that body of mine is contemplated 
and qualifies the same body apprehended as material 
with its primary and secondary qualities, I can qualify a 
foreign body which behaves in the same sort of way as 
alive. I have touched a piece of ice and found it cold. 

I see another piece of ice and I c]ualify it as cold without 
having touched it. I see the plant alive just as I see 
the ice cold. The only difference is that there is only 
one body in the case of which I make direct acquaint- 
ance with life, while there are many pieces of ice from 
which to learn the connection of cold with the colour 
and shape. Such an instance of the ordinary process of 
extending our experience from one thing to another, 
subject to verification, is hardly to be dignified with the 
grave name of analogy. Yet the process is a less explicit 
form of analogy. The assurance we have of other minds 
was not derived from analogy at all but demanded a 
special experience. The reason is that mind is not 
contemplated but enjoyed, and enjoyment is as such 
unique to the individual and cannot be shared with 
others. But I do not experience life as mine or peculiar 

to me ; and life is not enjoyed but contemplated, and 
consequently, without any fresh revelation, is extended 
to other bodies of a certain sort. This being granted, 
analogy in the stricter sense has also its place in the inter- 
pretation of foreign life as it has with foreign mind. The 
details of our own life may be used to interpret more 
finely and exactly, whether in the way of extension or 
limitation or discrimination, the bodily foundations of 
life which we observe outside ourselves. We may better 
understand the thirst and hunger of the plant, and learn 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. HI 


Apprehen- 
sion of 
mind. 


176 

how its life differs from ours in range and subtlety. 
This also is in the end what we do in interpreting one 
physical body in the light of another. 

Hence we can attach a more precise meaning to the 
statement of a previous chapter, that a being of superior 
order to consciousness, whom we called an angel, would 
contemplate consciousness, which for us is only enjoyed, 
in much the same way as we contemplate life. Such a 
being would doubtless contemplate consciousness only 
as it was presented to him in the consciousness which 
would belong to his own body ; though we must beware 
of supposing that his body would be necessarily the same 
kind of body as ours. All that is necessary is that he 
should have a body which at any rate was of the conscious 
order. It might be asked, Would the angel in like 
fashion know vitality directly only in his own body ? We 
cannot answer the question. It would not be strange if 
it were so ; on the other hand, there might be a special 
machinery in the angefs ‘mind’ whereby he ‘perceived’ 
life anywhere in living things as we perceive colour 
anywhere where it exists. But it is useless to follow 
such speculations where from the nature of the case no 
certainty is possible. 


This requires no further discussion. We enjoy our 
own minds, and of other minds we ’ have assurance as to 
their existence derived from the experience we have 
before described out of its place. What further we know 
of their minds besides the assurance of their existence is 
the work of sympathy founded on our acquaintance by 
an enjoyment with the working of our own, which is then 
transferred analogically to theirs at the suggestion of their 
outward behaviour. 

Thus in the widest sense of the phrase ‘ cognition of,’ 
in which it may include the last-named cognition of 
other minds, we have cognition of Space-Time and the 
primary ‘ qualities ’ of matter by intuition, of matter by 
the sense of resistance, of secondary qualities by the 
special senses, of life by the organic and kinaesthetic 



WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


CII. VI 


177 


senses, of other minds by assurance which is supple- 
mented by sympathetic imagination. 


It is not, however, to be supposed that because the order of 
objects of these cognitions have been taken in their 
historical order in the world’s development, that this is of appre- 
the order in which the corresponding mental machinery 
is developed in the mind. It is clear that enjoyment of 
our own mind is the simplest of all and the condition of 
all the rest ; and as to the cognition of other minds in 
the significant sense of those terms, this must be very early 
at least in the case of the minds of mammals. But the 
caution is most necessary in respect of organic sensations, 
which apprehend something higher than secondary qualities. 

Yet there is good reason to think that the special senses 
have been differentiated from a more elementary sensi- 
bility which is allied to the organic sensibility if not 
identical with it ; and the more primitive character of 
organic sensing is shown by the absence of differentiated 
nerve-endings in their case, though not in the case of 
kinaesthetic sense. The order of the development of 
these various forms of apprehension has nothing to do 
with the order in which their objects are developed in 
the world’s time. It is merely the history of the special 
arrangements in the life of the conscious being, or the 
machinery by which these external qualities are revealed. 

This will doubtless be determined by the importance of 
such cognition for the welfare of the mind and the being 
which possesses it. The bodily life is the nearest concern 
of the self, and it is intelligible therefore that the means 
of conscious acquaintance with it should have precedence 
in the order of growth over conscious acquaintance with 
the materiality and the secondary qualities of things 
outside it. If pleasure and pain belong, as I believe, to 
the organic order and are conditions of the living body, 
there is all the more reason why organic sensibility should 
come before special sensibility, for pleasure and pain 
attend respectively beneficial and detrimental conditions 
of the organism. Moreover, the conscious being is 
already adapted like a plant, in virtue of being a living 

VOL. II N 



EMPIRICxYL EXISTENCE 


EK. Ill 


178 

beingj to a certain range of externa] objects, such as the 
air or things in contact with the body. External things 
act upon the aniniars body without being revealed to 
consciousness. Physiological reflexes may be even more 
efficient for having no conscious object to which they 
arc correlated ; Le. if they only enter into consciousness 
so far as the motor response itself is sensed and the 
animal knows what state of his body is the outcome. 
Thus a conscious being may do without external sensi- 
bility, provided it is aware consciously of its own bodily 
self. 

But though the order in time of the senses does not 
necessarily agree with the order in time of their sensa, 
categorial cognition, or intuition, precedes all sensation, 
not as an isolated form of apprehension, but in the sense 
that it is contained in sensation and masked by it. 


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 
On Localisation 

The above conception of the apprehension of locality as 
distinct from sensation and as belonging primarily to the place 
of the nervous system which is excited by the sensation said to 
be ^referred ’ to the jilace in question is, it must be admitted, one 
of some difficulty. It is in accordance with the general scheme 
elaborated in this work, but it may be suspected of being nothing 
more than a mere hypothesis invented to this end, and of con- 
flicting with known facts of psychology, and more particularly of 
neurology. Some further commentary and explanation are there- 
fore added in an appendix. 

Its conflict with the current theory of local signature and of 
the movement-experiences required to determine exact locality, 
apartness of two touches or colours, shape, size, etc., is not so 
serious a difficulty and has been met in the text. The whole 
notion of extensity and local signature as characters of sensation 
is obscure in the extreme, and is in fact invented rather upon 
psychological grounds than on any distinct neurological evidence ; 
while the doctrine that definite localisation and shape require also 
movement sensations is for the reasons given above still more 
debateable. In its general feature of separating spatial experience 
from sensation of qualities it is in agreement with the doctrine 
of Dr. H. Head and his collaborators, for whom localisation of 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


179 


touches and also discrimination of co-existent touches are con- 
veyed by impulses distinct from those of touch or movement. 
On the other hand, the agreement is at first sight only general 
and limited to the proposition that spatial experience and sensory 
experience arc distinguishable and separate. Moreover, the above 
theory seems at first sight difficult to reconcile with some of the 
facts established in the latter remarkable set of experimental 
investigations. They are reported in Braln^ vols. xxix., xxxi., 
xxxiv. (1906-12), and recently xli. (1918). 

By localisation is meant ability to determine the place on the 
body of a spot touched, whether by naming it or pointing to it 
with the finger, or pointing to the corresponding place on a 
picture of the limb, or, better still, of the same limb of another 
person. Discrimination is the ability to distinguish two simul- 
taneous touches, or, in Mr. Stout’s language, to recognise their 
apartness. Fhere are separate impulses for these two processes, 
which are also distinct from touch impulses and from those of 
posture and movement. But according to these researches, which 
are founded on a number of cases of nervous lesions in the spinal 
cord, the optic thalamus, and the cerebral cortex, these various 
impulses and those of heat and cold and pain become variously 
regrouped in their course through the spinal cord and above, 
before they cross to the other side of the body. Pain, heat, and 
cold impulses cross in the spinal cord first, touch impulses later. 
Localisation and discrimination remain at first grouped with 
touch impulses. The localisation impulses remain grouped with 
touches (whether deep touches or light ^ epicritical ’ ones) below 
the spinal level, but in the brain-stem they may be separated. 
On the other hand, tactile discrimination and posture impulses do 
not cross at the spinal level nor until they reach the medulla 
oblongata. Lesions of the optic thalamus show that localisa- 
tion or spot-finding is separate from touch, and lesions of the cere- 
bral cortex show tliat neither localisation nor discrimination is 
dependent on touch, nor again upon posture, the sense for which 
is often gravely disturbed in lesions of the cortex. Finally, in 
the last of these researches,^ the result is arrived at roundly that 
the optic thalamus is the special seat of sensation so far as its mere 
quality is concerned, while the special function of the cortex is 
the apprehension, not of the quality of sensations but of their 
differences of intensity, the likeness and difference, the weight, 
size, shape of things, or in general the spatial aspects of sensation. 

The great importance of these inquiries for psychology is the 
distinction they establish on empirical evidence between tactual 


1 Which I have made acquaintance with while this work is in course 
of printing. 



i8o 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


(or Other cutaneous) sensibility and the apprehension of the precise 
spatial and temporal characters of touch as requiring a separate 
machinery. 7 'hc meaning of them is not, as I take it, that these 
are two distinct groups of sensations brought to consciousness, 
as sensations are commonly understood to be, by separate neural 
paths ; but rather that, in the language used more particularly in 
the last of these researches, place and quality are distinct aspects 
of the whole sensory process, the mere tactile aspect or function 
being specially provided for in the thalamus, the spatial aspects 
more specially provided for in the cortex. Touch sensation 
belongs to both, but the cortex is the instrument which performs 
the function of discrimination of all sorts, direct spatial dis- 
crimination of touches, that of intensities, and the like. So 
understood, the generalisation is not open to the objections 
brought against it (e.^. by Mr. Stout, Manual^ p. 245) of running 
counter to ordinary ideas of sense-stimulation. No theory is 
offered (as in the speculation of my text) as to the nature of the 
difference, but only as to the physiological basis of it. I venture 
to think that my speculation as to the nature of the distinction 
is not incompatible with these results, but merely gives them a 
different speculative reading. Holding that spatial intuitions are 
elicited through touch sensations by the excitement of the places 
where they occur, I should have to say that while any touch 
sensation gives an intuition of place, it is onlv in the cortex that 
the local touch excitement is accurately differentiated in the 
reaction which it gives according to its locality. 

'There remains the initial and fundamental difference that 
Mr. Head and his colleagues treat quality and spatial characters 
as being characters of the sensation as a whole, whereas for me 
quality and place are objects and the sensing process is purely 
spatio-temporal and has no quality but that of being conscious. 
'This question is of course not raised in these researches. It 
makes a great difterence in the end. For in the first place the 
view of the text dispenses with the notion that the place of a 
stimulus is a stimulus in the same sense as its pressure or colour ; 
secondly, it enables us to understand how a touch and a colour 
can belong to the same place, while otherwise we are beset still 
with the old problem of how to correlate the place which is an 
aspect of touch sensation with the place which is an aspect of 
colour sensation ; and thirdly, it does away with the funda- 
mental difficulty of how sensations can be projected and referred 
to the external world, whereas if place is a character of sensation 
itself, it does not help us in referring a touch or colour outside 
the mind. 

On the other hand, the speculation of the text labours under 
objections which at first sight seem difficult to overcome in view 



CH. VI 


WAYS OF APPREHENDING 


i8i 


of the facts established in these researches. It would seem to 
imply that when there is a touch there is not only intuition of its 
place and other discriminative characters, but an infallible one. 
Yet with a cerebral lesion touch may be preserved, while localisa- 
tion and discrimination are injured or destroyed. Something has 
been said briefly to anticipate this objection, and more will be 
said in the next chapter, to the cftect that intuition goes no 
further than sensation gives it warrant, and suffers from the dis- 
abilities which attend the sensory, or qualitative, function proper. 
I will therefore refer briefly to a few of these points. 'Fake 
localisation or spot-finding on the body. I'o be aware of the 
place of a touch does not mean to localise it in its place in the 
body. That, as is pointed out [Brain^ xxxiv. p. 187) implies a 
body schema, which is a touch schema. Now the monad lifted up 
into intuition through sensation has not consciousness of its own 
right in virtue of which it should localise the touched place in the 
spatial schema as identified with the body. 'I'o do this it would 
need a touch schema, and it is limited to its own touch. Dis- 
crimination, again, implies an unexcited interval. But if the 
touches are indistinct in the sense described, their distinctness of 
place will be similarly affected for the monads of the two touches. 
Another striking observation is the radiation or diffusion of 
sensations of heat and cold and pain in the protopathic state, 
when there is no epicritical sensibility to control it ; and besides 
their diffusion, their reference to remote parts of the skin. The 
diffusion means, I imagine, that the sensations are blurred in their 
reaction, and thus the intuitions of their places in the brain 
indistinct. This is the case also with the organic sensations to 
which protopathic sensations are allied. T'he misreference of the 
sensations I cannot explain, but it is analogous to the tenderness 
felt in allied parts of the skin from internal pains, as Mr. Head 
himself points out, and appears to be connected with the character 
of the reaction. Guarded in fact as I have guarded the statement 
of the text, it appears thus to say the same thing as Mr. Head’s 
doctrine in other words. The office of sensation of touch or 
colour is to give us touch and colour and not place. But to have 
these sensa distinct is to have distinct intuition of their places ; 
to have them indistinct is to have failure of the intuition. The 
conclusion is that distinctness of mere sensory quality is ultimately 
spatio-temporal. What the text does is thus merely to offer a 
speculative theory of the more elementary nature of the intuitive 
characters. Finally, having regard to the conclusion arrived at 
in this chapter that intensity is spatio-temporal and not qualitative, 
I cannot help pointing out the importance of the observations 
which seem to show that difference of intensity of sensations is 
an affair of the cortex and therefore on a level with space-difference, 



i 82 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


while in the thalamus, where spatial sensitiveness is undeveloped 
and primitive, the reaction is of the ‘all or none’ type. 

The question may still be asked how, if Space and Time are 
the simplest and most fundamental characters of the world, the 
apprehension of them should be entrusted to the latest and most 
highly developed part of the nervous system. A similar question, 
in the reverse form, met us at the end of the chapter, how the 
organic sensations which apprehend a higher level of existence, 
life, than the special senses, should be earlier and more primitive 
in development. The answer is that spatial character, as I under- 
stand these inquiries, docs belong to sensory process below the 
cortical level, but it is vague and undifterentiated ; and so also does 
intensity. And, secondly, the vaguer, more extensive reactions 
are suitable to that stage of life, and the precise apprehension of 
Space and 'rime made possible by the cortex is appropriate to the 
higher type of mental life. 



CHAPTER VII 


APPEARANCES 

Considered in itself, a thing is, we have seen, a portion 
of Space-Time with a certain contour of its own and a 
plan of configuration of the various motions which take 
place and are connected together within it. As a piece of 
Space-Time it has substance. As the whole within which 
the motions take place, it is the synthesis of them, and 
they are its changing and connected features or acts, or 
the accidents of its substance. This description applies 
equally to physical things and to minds, the whole and 
its details being in the case of mind enjoyed and not 
contemplated. The mind is the synthesis within its space 
and time of all the mind’s acts or processes. The unifier 
which makes a thing a thing is its space- time. But 
considered as related to a mind and contemplated by it, 
a thing is seen, in the light of the general theory or 
hypothesis, to be a synthesis of sensa, percepta, images, 
memories, and thoughts or plans of configuration, whether 
of the whole or of parts of the whole. All these are 
partial objects which in their synthesis constitute the 
thing. The same result is arrived at from the deliverances 
of the mind itself. The thing as a whole is experienced 
as the synthesis of the various objects which in the course 
of the mind’s experience of them (helped out by the ex- 
perience of other minds) the mind finds integrated within 
the piece of Space-Time which is intuitively apprehended 
as that within which each partial object which belongs to 
the thing is found. Thus, for example, when a percept 
is identified with a memory, both the memory and the 
percept are discovered in the history of the mind to be 

183 


Thing as 
synthesis 
of appear- 
ances, 
Pioblem 
III. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The kinds 
of appear- 
anccs. 


184 

unified within the space-time to which they both belong. 
Belonging as they do to different times, and unified by 
the same space, they are seen to belong to the one space- 
time of the thing. The mind in this experience enjoys 
correspondingly the unification of its acts of perceiving 
and remembering within its own space-time. Thus the 
synthesis characteristic of the thing is in no sense the 
work of the mind but discovered by it ; and the mind’s 
own thinghood is the mind’s own unity, which also it 
does not make, but is, or enjoys. 

But this synthesis of what really belongs to a thing is 
at the same time rejection of what does not belong to it. 
The thing is the synthesis or, if I may use without risk a 
simpler word, the sum or totality of its own parts. Con- 
sidered as objects to a mind they may be called its real 
appearances, or its partial revelations to the mind. More- 
over, they vary indefinitely according to the situation in 
time or place, or to the deficiencies, of the contemplating 
mind. It will be simplest to neglect for the moment 
these deficiencies of minds, such as we have in colour- 
blindness, for the objects selected by such defective minds 
are on the border between true or real appearances and 
illusory ones. Let us suppose standardised or normal 
minds. They will apprehend different real appearances 
of the thing in virtue of their position relatively to it in 
place and time ; and therefore it is all one whether we 
suppose different appearances presented to the same mind 
at different times in different places, or to several minds 
at the same time but at different places. The question of 
the unification of appearances to many minds comes later. 
These then are real appearances of the thing ; and whether 
sensa or images or thoughts, all alike are appearances, 
that is, partial revelations of the thing. 

The appearances which do not belong to the thing 
itself are such as arise from the combination of the thing 
with other things, or from the intrusion of the mind 
of the observer into the observation. The first set of 
objects may be called mere appearances of the thing ; the 
second set, illusory appearances or illusions. Familiar 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


185 

examples of the first are the blue of a distant mountain, or 
the stick bent in water ; of the second, the colours seen 
by contrast, or the plane picture of a box seen solid. In 
the first case it is not the thing alone which we apprehend, 
but along with some other thing. Although in the 
widest sense there is only one ‘ thing ’ in the world, 
yet motions do cohere together in groups and form 
things, so that a plant is clearly a distinct thing from 
a stone ; and although what we shall call a thing is 
largely determined by our interest, so that a book is 
one thing from the bookseller’s point of view and two or 
three hundred things or pages from a publisher’s, yet also 
our interests are determined by the things, and we cannot 
help regarding the plant as a single thing. But it may be 
impossible to perceive a thing alone, and the foreign thing 
may distort the object and make it not a real appearance 
but a mere appearance. Illusory appearances always 
imply omission or addition or distortion owing to the 
abtiormality of the percipient. Thus the thing itself 
accepts its real appearances and rejects mere appearances 
and illusory ones. 

Now, it is the variability of the real appearances of 
a thing, such as, for instance, its varying hotness with the 
distance of the percipient, and the fiicts of mere appearance 
and illusory appearance which induce us to believe that 
appearances of physical things are mental and not non- 
mental objects. It is therefore of great importance to dis- 
criminate and discuss the different kinds of cases as briefly 
as is possible consistently with the great number of relevant 
data. I shall seek to show that in no case is the appearance 
mental. Even illusory appearances are non-mental. For 
they are prima facte on the same level as other physical 
appearances. The green we see on a grey patch by 
contrast with a red ground is as much non-mental and 
objective as the red. It is not an illusion that we see the 
green ; it is only an illusion that we perceive the grey 
paper green. An illusory appearance is illusory only in so 
far as it is supposed (whether instinctively in perception 
or by an act of judgment) to belong to the real thing of 
which it seems to be an appearance. In so far as it is 



i86 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


illusory it is not a revelation of that thing at all but of 
something else. The illusion consists in the erroneous 
reference of it to where it does not in fact belong. But 
in itself the illusory appearance is as much object as the 
real appearance ; and only experience shows it to be mis- 
placed. The difference between an illusory appearance 
and a mere appearance is that if it is wholly illusory it 
comes from the subject ; that is to say, whereas in the one 
case the distorting thing ^ is physical, in the other case 
it is the mind itself which produces the distortion. 

It will, then, I think, appear that real appearances are 
indeed selected by the subject but are really contained in 
the thing ; that mere appearances arise from the failure to 
separate the thing from other things with which it is 
combined as apprehended ; while illusory appearances 
arise from the introduction by the mind of new objects 
into the thing, or, what in certain cases comes under the 
same heading, the omission of objects which do belong to 
it. It should be premised th*at the distinction of illusory 
appearances from mere appearances is not always easy to 
carry out, and indeed in common usage the stick bent in 
water is spoken of as illusory, while I call it here a mere 
appearance. The real point of distinction is that a real 
appearance and a mere appearance really do belong to the 
things apprehended (though in the latter case not to the 
thing which seems alone to be apprehended) while an 
illusory appearance does not. It is introduced by the 
mind ; that is to say, there is some mental condition, not 
congenial to the true interpretation of the object, to which 
condition corresponds an object which is thus introduced 
into the true object and falsifies it. Illusions will con- 
sequently be conveniently treated along with the discussion 
of imagination, after the other kinds of variation. I shall 
begin with the simpler cases of sensations and pass from 
them to those of intuitions, which present much greater 
difficulty. 

A simple example of variation of a real appearance is 

^ Unless of course the thing is itself mental (cp. later, ch. viii. 
pp. 225 flf.). 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


187 


the change in the hotness of the fire as' we move away 
from it, or in the brightness of a light. At the greater 
distance the illuminated thing affects the mind less 
according to a certain law. The mind, situated further off, 
selects a portion of the real brightness of the thing. The 
real bright colour of the thing is the quality and degree 
of the relevant movement which is in the thing. The 
quality does not change with the distance, other things 
remaining the same, but the brightness does. This 
selection, however, of the lower brightness from the real 
brightness does not mean that that real brightness is 
divisible into parts, as if intensities could be obtained 
by addition. It means simply that the distance of the 
eye (not the eye itself) secures that the larger intensity 
is apprehended as a lesser one. The larger intensity 
contains in this sense the lesser. The brightness contains 
all the degrees of brightness which are lower than itself 
on the scale. Or again the distance from a sound selects 
that amplitude of the same qualitative vibration which 
represents the diminished intensity produced by distance. 
For an ear at that distance the vibration has a diminished 
amplitude. We can therefore say the sounding body or 
the illuminated body contains these varying degrees of 
intensive quantity. The varying hotnesses of a hot body 
are less easy to understand. For heat is a ‘localised’ 
sensation, and is not, like touch, both ‘ localised ’ and 
‘ projected.’ With eyes shut, we experience heat at our 
skin, and unless we also touch the object, in which case 
we project the heat also, we know nothing by heat of 
the hotness of the external body. So far as mere heat- 
sense goes, what we feel as our distance varies is merely 
changing degrees of hotness. It is when we are otherwise 
aware of the source of heat that we say the fire feels less 
hot at a distance ; as when for instance we first touch 
a hot brick and then feel it grow less hot as we retire. 
That we do select is verified by common speech, which 
does not say the fire is less hot when we move away, but 
less hot here. I am not able, therefore, to adopt, except 
with this reservation and with this interpretation, Mr. 
Nunn’s statement that the fire possesses different hotness 


Variations 
of real ap- 
pearances : 
(i) due to 
position in 
place and 
time of 
percipient 



i88 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


at different points,^ as if the fire extended wherever we felt 
an impression of heat in our skins which we refer after- 
wards to the fire we see, or the candle flame we touch. 
The hotness of the fire resides in the fire itself. The 
hotness of the fire is in the fiery matter a real motion 
with its quality and intensity. When owing to the 
variation of our sensa we use instruments of measure- 
ment which are relatively independent of our senses, and 
at any rate independent of our sensation of heat, we 
measure the real hotness of the fire by the temperature. 

These are the simplest illustrations of what is called 
the relativity of sensations, which is thought by some to 
mean that sensations are mental in character. In these 
cases, in fact, the mind in virtue of its position in space 
and time is affected by only a portion of the real characters 
of the thing revealed to it. The same explanation applies 
to other illustrations of the law, when we take into account 
that the selectiveness may be the result of the mind’s 
organisation, or, what is the same thing, the organisation 
of the living organism which in a particular part is iden- 
tical with the mind and wholly subserves it. Illusion is 
excluded at present, but it accounts for some cases which 
will be mentioned. The general statement is that because 
of the condition of the organism the real thing is appre- 
hended only in part. Thus the familiar experience that 
if one hand has been in hot water and the other in 
colJ, the same lukewarm water will seem cold to the one 
hand and hot to the other, arises from the previous altera- 
tion of the physiological zero of sensibility in the two 
hands. The degree of heat or cold felt depends on the 
difference between the real heat of the thing and the 
temperature of the hand itself. The water is really hotter 
than one hand and less hot than the other. The same 
thing happens when we change from winter to summer, 

^ 'r. P. Nunn : ‘ Are Secondary Qualities Independent of Perception ? ’ 
{Proc, Arist. Soc.^ 1909-10, N.S. vol. x. pp. 205-6). The case of hotness, 
as Mr. Nunn observes, is complicated, “ for here the condition of the body 
that acts as perceiving organ partly determines the object to be perceived ” 
(that is, what we perceive in the object is the difference between its hotness 
and our own). This introduces a further element of selection apart fron-^ 
the distance, and is mentioned lower on this page of the text. 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


189 

and the body adapted to winter feels a slight warmth as 
if it were much greater. On the other hand, in the well- 
known paradox of sensation that, when a cold point of 
the skin, that is, a point specifically sensitive to cold, is 
touched by a hot metal point, we have the sensation of 
cold, we have illusory appearance. This is an illustration 
of the specific energy of the sensory nerves. When for 
any reason a certain part of the body is stimulated and a 
certain neural pattern of reaction ensues, that pattern of 
reaction is excited even by a disparate or inadequate 
stimulus. The mind then responds according to its normal 
method, and its object is that which corresponds to such 
reaction. Here is a genuine illusory sensum due to the 
mind’s own action. Such illusions are the price we pay 
for adaptation to our normal surroundings. 

Some variations are due to the limits of the mind’s (2) due to 
susceptibility. Stimuli below the threshold of stimulation 
are not sensed at all. When two stimuli are apprehended ness, 
together or in close succession their difference may not be 
sensed. Under these conditions the higher stimulus is 
not noticed to be different from the lower. The difference 
is there but not sensed, or at least not sensed as difference. 

In such cases the real thing, that is, the difference, does 
so far not reveal itself at all. This applies to all normal 
or standardised individuals. But sensitiveness varies in 
different individuals, whether it be sensitiveness to the 
intensity of a single stimulus or to difference of intensities 
of two stimuli. Or the defect of sensibility may be to 
quality of stimulus. A person may be tone-deaf and 
not distinguish the octave from its fundamental tone, or 
he may be colour-blind. Now in such cases of defect 
of sense for quality it is very difficult to say whether we 
are to attribute the variation to mere defect, so that what 
the person fails to sense is really present in the thing, only 
is not sensed, or are to set it down to illusion. It is 
impossible to say that the octave which is sensed not 
differently from the fundamental contains the fundamental, 
in the sense in which a higher intensity may contain the 
lower one. At most we can say that the real difference 
of quality is not sensed, and that so far as the note of 



190 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


higher pitch is taken to be of the same quality as the 
lower, the appearance is illusory, as in the case of the 
paradoxical sensation of cold from stimulation of a cold 
point by the hot rod. The two stimulations excite the 
same reaction, and correspondingly the sounds are heard 
identically. 

The same difficulties arise in the case of colour-vision, 
and the discussion of them is more than ordinarily 
restricted for one who is not an expert in this department, 
because of the diversity of theories current in the subject. 
The extreme case is that of total colour-blindness where 
no colours are sensed but only brightness. Now, bright- 
ness is an ingredient of all colour-sensation, and such 
colour-blindness may be taken to be selection of a certain 
part of the real stimulus. The totally colour-blind person 
is in the position of a person the whole of whose retina is 
like the peripheral region of the normal person’s, which 
also perceives only brightness. But here too there arise 
doubts, for the brightnesses which the abnormal person 
perceives in the various colours in full light are not in all 
respects agreeable to those of the normal man under the 
same conditions, but only when the colours are seen under 
a dim illumination which obliterates the colour for the 
normal eye also and leaves only greys. In ordinary red- 
green blindness, on one theory the patient simply confuses 
red and green because one of the ‘ substances,’ the red 
and the green, in the retina is missing. This comes 
under the same head as tone-deafness, and is due to 
defect. On a different theory he sees neither red nor 
green but confuses the two because he really sees blue or 
yellow. The difficulty is especially strong on this second 
theory of supposing the confusion of quality to be other 
than a case of illusory appearance, due to the circumstance 
that the visual apparatus responds only in certain limited 
methods of response, whatever the quality of the stimulus. 
So in the normal person a colour seen as red when it falls 
on the centre of the retina changes to a brown in the 
middle zone of the retina, which is the appropriate 
response of vision to stimulation there. 

Thus in many instances, and more particularly where 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


191 

variation of quality and not mere intensity is concerned, it 
may not be possible to attribute the variations to selection 
on the part of the mind from what actually is in the reality. 

There may be illusory appearance arising from the pre- 
adaptation of the mechanism which substitutes for the 
real sensum in the thing a sensum corresponding to the 
normal pattern of response. The real thing does not 
contain the substituted quality, but only it contains the 
foundation for the substituted quality. Thus defect may 
in such cases really act as illusion. 

Let us turn to mere appearances, of which illustrations Merc ap- 
have already been given. Here we do not sense the p^obTriT* 
thing, of which we apprehend the mere appearance, taken iv. 
by itself but in connection with some other thing which 
modifies it. What we sense or otherwise apprehend is 
not the thing by itself, but a new thing of which the thing 
forms a part ; and there is no reason to suppose that, 
illusion barred, the compound thing does not really possess 
what we sense. Thus the whistle of the express engine 
travelling away from us, to take Mr. Nunn's example, is 
the whistle of an engine in motion and has a different and 
lower note from a whistle at rest. The colour of the 
distant mountain is not the colour of the mountain alone 
but of the mountain and the atmosphere whose haze 
modifies the colour. Directly we know of the inter- 
vention of the modifying condition we cease to attribute 
the appearance to the thing itself. When we notice an 
opalescence in our glasses we know that the colours of 
things seen through them are not their own. Mr. Stout, 
who has rendered so great service to the discussion of 
these matters,^ seems to treat all the sensible appearances 
of things, including their real appearances, as on the level 
of what I call mere appearances. For in real appearances 
one of the things which intervene between our apprehen- 
sion and anything is our own body with its sense-organs. 

For us this position is unacceptable, because the action of 
the sense-organ is part of the process of sensing the 

1 Mama/y ed. 3, pp. 455 fF. But his question is a different one, 
how we distinguish real change in a thing from apparent. 



192 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


UK. Ill 


Variation 
in primary 
qualities. 
Real 
appear- 
ances. 


sensum, not its object The sense-organ cannot be 
treated merely as a thing which modifies the real thing in 
the way that motion added to a whistle modifies the pitch 
of its note, or as spectacles, themselves coloured, dis- 
colour the objects around us. The distorting or qualify- 
ing thing must be either observed or observable in the 
sensible object. In truth, all appearances are prima facie 
real ones, and later are sorted out. 

We conclude then, allowing for illusion, that the 
sensum in the thing itself is the qualitied configuration of 
real motion within the space-time itself of the thing, and 
that the real appearances of it are the whole or part of it 
as it is contained in the thing. It is only the selection 
which depends on the mind. 

We come now to the variability of the shape, size, and 
position of things as they appear to the senses, that is to 
the varying appearances of the primary qualities of things 
which are not objects of sense at all but of intuition. By 
real shape I mean, in accordance with our hypothesis that 
things are complexes of space-time, the geometrical shape, 
and we have to account for its variation, in our experience 
of it. When a moment ago I spoke of sensa in the external 
thing as beiiig real complexes of motion within it, I was 
speaking in the language of this hypothesis. The question 
of how we are aware of such motions did not arise, for in 
apprehending the quality and intensity of sensa we are 
not aware of their geometrical shape as extensive. Rut 
we have now to deal with the question direct, and as 
before we shall have to distinguish between real ap- 
pearances of primary qualities and mere appearances and 
illusory ones. As an example of the first class let us take 
the fiimiliar elliptic shape of the penny or the plate when 
seen sideways, or its varying size as the distance of the 
observer alters. As an example of the second, the stick 
bent in water, or the simpler instance of virtual images 
which we have in a looking-glass. I repeat an observa- 
tion made before that from the point of view of 
knowledge it is indifferent whether we consider the con- 
tradictoriness of these appearances to various individuals 



APPEARANCES 


CH. VII 


193 


at the same time or to one individual at different 
times. 

As we move away from the plate at right angles to 
its centre the plate retains its circular shape but diminishes 
in size. Owing to the nature of the medium (and the 
illuminated plate does not exist without transmitting its 
light) the retinal image decreases and the coloured disc 
is seen in the corresponding size. It is seen as if it had 
the size of a smaller disc placed at normal distance for 
sight, which is, as James says, the distance at which it 
is conveniently touched ; which visual size we are in the 
habit of calling the real size as seen. The size of the 
visual object depends on the angle the thing subtends at 
the eye, because that determines the size of the retinal 
image. In saying that we see the plate as we should see 
a small plate situated at normal distance, I do not mean 
that we judge the size according to our usual experience. 
The size is not determined by any judgment but by what 
the actual size of a patch of colour at the actual distance 
of the plate is which corresponds to such and such a size 
of retinal excitation. The visual response in respect of 
the size, that is to say the intuitional response in respect 
of the extent of the thing which is called into play along 
with the colour excitement, has this seen size for its 
corresponding external object. It is not open to us to 
say, as may be thought natural, that we see the plate 
smaller at a distance because by experience we have learnt 
to connect the smaller retinal excitement with a smaller 
object. There is no precedent experience required, still 
less an act of judgment, comparable to that which enables 
us to interpret our sensations by ideas and so to fashion 
perceptions. The sight of the smaller visual object is 
immediate and sensory. To a smaller retinal excitement 
corresponds a smaller seen object, which is located where 
it is seen, namely, at the more distant place. We may if 
we choose call such a seen object an hallucination, but in 
that sense all sensation is equally hallucination. The 
large plate further off and the small plate near excite 
the same visual tract and are seen in equal size at their 
respective distances. The same plate when near and far 

VOL. 11 o 



194 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


excites different extents of retinal tract and is seen in 
different size. Custom may indeed produce illusion, and 
so may an inadequate stimulus, like that of the hot touch 
on a cold point, produce hallucination, but there is here 
no question either of custom or hallucination. 

The distance of the eye then from the plate acts 
selectively as with the varying degrees of brightness. 
The size which we see is a portion of the real geometrical 
size of the plate (for I may leave out of account the 
enlargement of the plate when it is too near for accom- 
modation and we see it with a halo round it), and the 
varying sizes are real appearances and contained within 
the real size.^ The position of the eye, it might be 
thought, acts like the water in which a stick is seen bent, 
and the size is a mere appearance of the plate. But the 
position of the eye is not apprehended as the water is or the 
blue spectacles may be, and it merely acts, owing to the 
optical medium, as determining the mental selectiveness. 

It may be urged, that the plate at a distance, when it 
looks small, is seen (not indeed in position as a whole but 
in its contour and extent) in a different place from its 
touch appearance ; and that this is accordingly contradictory 
to the proposition laid down as to intuition, that we do 
not apprehend different spaces of sight and touch and 
learn to co-ordinate them, but that we intuite the same 
space, and refer touches and colours to it as existing 
within it. But the apparent separateness of place does 
not in point of fact exist. We have only to hold the 
plate in our hands and move it away (which is the same 
thing as retiring from it) in order to assure ourselves 
that the touch and the colour of the plate are in the same 
place. The touch remains of the same felt extent ; the 
colour varies in size, but the seen contour of the plate 
coincides in place with the felt contour. I emphasise the 
words ‘ felt contour,’ for it is not merely a case of seeing 
our hand shrink along with the plate, which of course it 
does to sight. This very simple experiment is of great 

^ Cp. J. W. Scott, ‘ On the common-sense distinction of appearance 
and reality,’ Proc. Arist. Soc, N.S. vol. xvi., 1915-16, who uses the same 
idea of perspectives contained within the common-sense reality (pp. 67 fF.). 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


195 


importance for this and subsequent cases. For it shows 
that it is only in reference to Space as touched, and thought 
of in terms of touch, that the plate itself seems to shrink 
as it moves further off. Considered in themselves as 
purely visual objects (and they must be so regarded if 
we are to avoid confusion), the one patch of colour 
merely looks smaller than the other. If we know otherwise 
than by sight that they are appearances of the same thing 
we say that the thing shrinks to sight as it recedes. 
But if we do not know this, there is no thought of 
shrinkage. Now the experiment shows that the relative 
place of every part of the contour and of the interior 
of the contour remains the same place, and the extent is 
consequently the same. But if we suppose that touch 
conveys to us the real space, that is the relative place of 
every part of the thing, we naturally think that the eye 
misleads us. We might with equal right maintain that 
the touch in remaining constant is at fault. In fxct 
neither is. There is a different vision of the one extent 
and shape under the different conditions, but it is still the 
same shape and size which is seen differently, that is the 
perspective is different. 

The same considerations apply when the plate is seen 
obliquely. If it Is turned round a vertical axis, the eye 
retaining its position, the horizontal axis shrinks and the 
circle becomes an ellipse with horizontal minor axis, for 
the horizontal diameter subtends a smaller angle at the 
eye than when seen from the front at the same distance. 
As the plate turns till it is end on, all the horizontal 
sections of the plate diminish and vanish and the plate is 
seen as a straight line. Thus, as before, the eye sees, 
owing to the selectiveness due to its position under the 
conditions of vision^ only a portion of the geometrical 
horizontal sections of the plate. But though the space 
thus decreases for sight, the plate however elliptical it 
looks is still the same space as is touched ; a fact which 
is verified as before by holding the plate and turning it. 

All perspectives, where the thing is seen without 
distortion by other conditions, follow the same plan. 
They are selected portions of the thing presented to 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Rc.ison 
of the 
appeaiance. 


196 

sight, as in the instance of the plate. In this sense it is 
true to say that the real thing, in its intuitional character, 
is the totality of its perspectives, which are contained in 
it. It is not the ‘‘ class of its perspectives ” in the 
language of Mr. Russell, but it is that from which its 
perspectives are selected by the finite observer according 
to his position. It is the piece of real or geometrical 
space which synthesises all its perspectives. Perspectives 
(if no illusion or distortion creeps in) are not unreal 
because they are only perspectives ; they are partial, and 
the part need not falsify the whole from which it is taken, 
and if it is a spatial part it does not.^ 

We have still to ask why it is that sight acts in this 
fashion, so as to apprehend a geometrical size at a greater 
distance as, in our language, a selection from the so-called 
real geometrical size which we touch, or which we see at 
a convenient touching distance. The above experiment, 
which shows that we see at a distance the whole extent 
which we touch at that distance, points the way. We 
have to go back to the fundamental character of any 
space that it is intrinsically temporal. What we see is an 
illuminated disc, whose various parts are at different 
dates because of the conditions of vision. The ends of 
the diameter are later than the centre. When the disc is 
moved off, its geometrical shape and size are unaltered, 
but its points as illuminated alter their times with the 
distance. Simple geometry shows that at a greater 
distance the time-interval between the end and the centre 
is reduced, because the distance of the ends from the eye, 
the path which the light has to travel from them, is 
increased relatively less than the distance from the centre 
is. Consequently the ends are later than the centre by 
so much less when the disc is far off than when it is 
near. Thus while it is still the whole disc which is seen 
in its full geometrical extent, that extent looks smaller 
because it is filled with the qualitied events of illumination 
and is only apprehended through them. We see a smaller 

^ A word will be said presently as to why one of the visual 
perspectives is taken to represent the real spatial character of the 
thing. 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


197 


disc because the disc occupies less time under the con- 
ditions of vision. Were it not for these conditions there 
would be no such appearance.^ 

We come next to the mere appearances of spatial char- 
acters of things due to the presence along with the thing 
of another thing. In the looking-glass (which is supposed 
flawless) there is no distortion of the luminous point or 
thing in colour or brightness. The mirror is a contrivance 
for seeing things not visible directly by the eye, such as 
one’s own face, and the object seen is called a virtual 
image because its position in touch-Space is that from 
which the rays of light would come if the real luminous 
point were there. But the seen image is a genuine sensum, 
seen under this arrangement. 

It may be noted in passing that such virtual images, 
whether of oneself in a mirror or a stick in water, afford 
us an excellent commentary on the statement that a 
memory is the revelation of a past event as past. The 
optical image is not actual or, as is said, ‘real,’ but 
only ‘virtual,’ and is thus next door to an image in the 
psychological sense. The difference is that it is sensory, 
but it is still an actual revelation of the thing by the help 
of the mirror. Now in memory Time takes the place of 
the mirror, and it is a distorting memory to boot. There 
is no sensum present, only an image, but that image is 
the past object revealed, just as the virtual image in the 
mirror is the actual present object revealed. There is 
however a further difference which is vital. The mirror 
is separable from the thing it reflects. Time, however, 
is an essential part of the object remembered. Con- 
sequently the memories of a thing or event are its real and 

^ Considerations of this kind were used in Bk. I. ch. ii. in expounding 
the perspectives of Space-Time pure and simple. Mr. Russell has said 
somewhere a propos of the appearances of the penny that the time- 
element enters into the explanation, and the same hint as to this problem 
reached me privately from Mr. Nunn. In the above I have attempted 
to follow these hints and suggest what may be the lines of the solution. 
I am persuaded that similar considerations apply to all cases of real and 
mere spatial appearances, though I have not the capacity to undertake 
the task. 


Mere 
spatial ap- 
pearances. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


198 

not its mere appearances, except so far as Time introduces 
foreign objects as well. Accordingly the memory is 
apprehended as past, as containing Time, whereas the 
mirror itself is no part of the face seen in it. This 
arraying of different facts in their likeness and unlikeness 
may be helpful to the understanding of all of them alike. 

The mere appearance in this example belongs to the 
place of the image which seems, in reference to the Space 
which is touched, and also seen without the mirror, to be 
displaced to a point behind the mirror. We cannot say 
here that we see, as in the first set of examples, only a 
part of the real thing. We see the real thing exactly 
as it is, only it is displaced.^ A baby may feel for the 
thing behind the mirror. In a well-known observation, a 
boy blind from a few days after birth but later at seven 
relieved of the cataract did the same thing. For visual 
Space is measured by the Space we touch. The displace- 
ment is due to the mirror, not to the selecting mind. 
Yet in spite of this displacement we have not two places, 
one visual, and one tactual, but one place which is 
seen luminous by the eye and may be felt by touch. 
Another metaphysical experiment, so simple that to call it 
an experiment seems ridiculous, demonstrates this. Stand 
before the mirror and touch your shoulder or anything 
which you do not see with the eye direct, but only see along 
with the finger in the mirror ; and then ask yourself 
whether the touch you feel and the colour you see are not 
in the same place, felt in the one case and seen in the 
other.'*^ If you touch a thing like a pencil which is in 
front of you, so that you see it direct and also in the 
mirror, the judgment is troubled. For the virtual image 
is only seen with the help of the mirror, and the real 
pencil is seen as well as touched ; and there are thus 
two visions of Space at once. In the same way in the 
classical example of pushing one eye outwards and thus 
with the two eyes seeing a candlestick double, if you 
touch the candlestick and then observe alternately with 

^ The interchange of right and left goes with the displacement of 
Space under the conditions of vision. 

“ Similarly in shaving before a mirror. 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


199 


either eye, you at once feel and see the candlestick in 
either case in the same place ; but with both eyes open 
there is the disturbing fact of two visual appearances of 
Space, and the feel is located with the object of the undis- 
turbed eye. It is only when we have the normal visual 
intuition of Spage, that is the bare intuition of it without an 
intervening apparatus, that we realise that the displacement 
in the mirror is a displacement at all and a mere appear- 
ance. In the Space of touch and normal sight the whole 
of the space in front of the mirror which is not seen direct 
by the eye is as it were swung round so as to seem behind 
the mirror. But it is the same space under this mere 
appearance. I imagine that if mirrors were organic to us 
and part of our visual apparatus we should have the same 
view of the world as we have now, and we should localise 
the touches of things and the colours of them precisely as 
we do at present. At any rate the displacement is a mere 
appearance of the primary characters of the thing seen, 
because we do not at present see the thing by itself but in 
its combination with a mirror. The displacement is a 
real character of that combination, and so when everything 
is treated equally no difficulty arises. 

I cannot help confessing here how much simpler it 
would be and how much laborious explanation it would 
save, if only it were true that our intuitions and sensations 
were mental as is commonly supposed, and how easy it is 
compared with our procedure to refer all these variations 
in part to the mind or its body. The way of sin is always 
easy and that of virtue difficult. But in the end the easy 
road leads, it is said, to destruction ; and it is so here. 
We should be living in a world of sensations, which 
would be hallucinations, and of images ; some would be 
veridical and some not. But we could only discriminate 
the veridical ones by means of sensation, that is by other 
hallucinations. For it is of no use to urge that our 
appearances are partly determined by the thing and partly 
by our bodies. How shall we know what part is due to 
things except through observation, for which in turn 
we are dependent in part upon our bodies ? We are 
reduced to a world of consistent hallucination. But we 



200 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


How there 
can be 
mistakes 
in space- 
perception. 


cannot pass from it to a world of things independent of 
our individual selves except by recourse to such means 
as were adopted by Berkeley, of assuming a God who 
impressed these hallucinations upon us, an assumption 
necessary if things are to be independent of the single 
individual, but otherwise rather the statement of the 
problem than a solution of it. Or we may suppose that 
thought informs us of a world of things to which our 
appearances are the guide. But I do not know how that 
thought could have experience of its object or what 
sort of an object it could be ; and indeed the real world 
remains in this way an unknown. I cannot help adding 
that it deserves to remain so. 

But we are faced with a grave problem of our own. 
We saw that we apprehend spatial characters by intuition, 
because the sensory stimulus excited places in our brains 
which as being attended by consciousness were aware of 
the space of the object. No local signs arc needed because 
the place of our sensation in the mind is aware of the 
place of the object sensed. How then, it may be asked, 
can our intuitions ever vary as they do, whether there are 
distorting additions to the thing perceived or not } The 
monad correlated with any point of the retina, that is 
the point-instant which is situated at the point of the 
visual region of the brain corresponding to that retinal 
point, is in communication with every point-instant in 
Space-Time, and it is aware of or ‘ knows ’ the line of 
advance of the light from the real thing to the eye. Why 
then should the diminution of the retinal image as the 
eye recedes from the disc make any difference to the 
intuition of the disc’s size or of its place in tactual Space, 
which is the same real Space as the visual one ? Or 
again, with the mirror, why does the monad stimulated in 
the brain by a point of light not follow the light and, 
knowing whence it came, see the thing reflected in the 
mirror where it is in reality, or geometrically ? The 
answer is got by considering the difference between the 
^ knowledge ’ (in the extended or metaphorical sense of that 
term) which a point-instant or any complex of them 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


201 


possesses as being merely spatio-temporal, and the conscious- 
ness in the strict sense which only belongs to them in virtue 
of being thrown into action by a sensory or other stimu- 
lation. The monad as such, as a mere point-instant, is 
infallible and any complex of them infallible : that is, in 
reference to Space-Time and its elements and whatever 
complexities there may be in it of a purely spatio-temporal 
and non-qualitative character. But when a piece of Space- 
Time is awakened into consciousness, and this is of course 
not possible in fact to a single monad but only to a com- 
plex of them, the case is different. As having consciousness, 
that is as having that quality, they are limited by the 
conditions under which their consciousness is evoked, and 
in ourselves consciousness is evoked in the first instance 
through sensation, though intuition pure and simple is 
more elementary than sensation. Hence the conscious- 
ness belonging to a piece of neural (that is mental) space 
is limited to the object which is presented in sensation. 
Though it possesses perfect ‘ knowledge,* as spatio- 
temporal, of all parts of Space-Time, it is conscious only of 
the space and time of its object, and that object is a sensory 
one as well, and has secondary as well as primary qualities. 
Thus we have intuition in vision only of the primary 
qualities of the visual object, and we intuite, not place or 
shape or size in and for itself, but the place, shape, and size 
of a colour, that is which is occupied by colour. The 
parts of the optic centre affected by the coloured patch of 
my face seen in the mirror do not know the real place 
of the face but the place of the colour seen, and they 
suffer variation or distortion or displacement in accordance 
with that of the colour. When the colour of the disc 
shrinks in extent with the ciistance, it is that extent of 
which the intuition is conscious. 

Thus our intuitions are affected by whatever conditions 
affect the perception by sense of a thing. Illusion being 
excluded, the sensa are determined by the thing itself 
taken along with the medium by which its sensa are 
transmitted and without which as in colour the sensa 
would not exist, for there are no colours in the absence 
of illumination ; or else they are determined by the 



202 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


participation of some other thing in the total which is 
contemplated. The body and mind of the percipient act 
only selectively and do not determine the nature of the 
sensum. The mirror then is a contrivance by which I 
can see my shoulder which is otherwise invisible. The 
rays from a luminous point are deflected from their course 
and the thing is seen where seen — not in its geometrical 
place, which is equivalent on the whole to the place of 
Space which is apprehended by the touch or undisturbed 
eye. The conditions of direct vision are such that rays 
of light proceed to the eye from the luminous point. By 
the mirror the rays of light which reach the eye produce 
the same effect on the eye as rays proceeding from a point 
behind the mirror in geometrical Space. For vision then 
the space in front of the mirror is displaced by the mirror. 
This is the consequence of a contrivance necessary for 
seeing the colour at all. Hence the intuition of the place 
follows the conditions which determine the sensing ot the 
colour. 

We are now in face of the solution of the problem. 
The senses are not adapted to perceive Space but to 
perceive the quality of their own specific secondary 
qualities. The eye is not an organ for apprehending 
Space but colour. The apprehension of Space is a con- 
comitant incident and is not the work of vision but of 
the space of the nerve centres, or of the mind, provoked 
into consciousness through sensory stimulation. Now 
the price we pay for having our intuitions of Space aroused 
through sense is that they are subject to whatever 
variations may be necessary for the proper business of 
vision. The same thing is true of the other senses as 
well, but is operative in different degrees. The proper 
object of the skin is pressure, not form or size ; of the ears 
sound, and not the place of it. But the nature of the 
medium which renders the object at once what it is and 
sensible to our sense-organs affects our intuition of its 
primary qualities. In order that we may see the colours 
of a disc at a distance clearly the angle subtended at our 
eye according to the laws which the medium obeys grows 
smaller ; and the like. Sight is indeed a finely discrimin- 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


203 


ative means of intuiting place and form, more so than 
touch, and while touch remains the standard sense, 
sight is used in optical instruments to help out touch. 
But the laws of the medium subject the intuition of Space 
to the conditions which affect the sensing of colour, and 
thus produce variability of appearance in a high degree. 
Hearing is notoriously uncertain in its deliverances as to 
locality. Touch on the other hand is in contact with the 
thing, so far as the contact is complete — and it never is. 
Hence relatively to sight, we attain by touch a closer 
approximation to real or geometrical space than by sight. 
For other reasons than his we can echo the poet Lucretius, 
who when he mentions touch becomes lyrical and appeals 
to Heaven. Tactus enlm^ tactus^ pro divum nuniina 
sancta. 

Hence it is, namely on account of its relative freedom 
from variation as compared with the other senses, that in 
respect of the apprehension of primary qualities which it 
does not indeed supply but mediates, touch is used as the 
standard sense. We call then the real shape of the object, 
as we see it, that which we see when the look of the thing 
coincides with its touched appearance. When the touch 
is circular the real visual shape is taken to be the circular 
one ; and in general it is the one we have of the object 
when seen from the front at about touching distance. 
Every visual shape belongs to the thing as well as this. 
But this particular shape is found to be the one whose 
possession accounts for the others as partial appearances 
of it, and is thus the foundation of them. If the disc 
were geometrically elliptic it would not be seen in the 
actual elliptic form it has when seen obliquely. But if it 
is really circular it would be. Moreover if it were seen 
circular from the side it could not be really circular. 
When once we have established a particular visual ap- 
pearance as the closest approximation by sight to the 
geometrical character of the object, we can go on and draw 
inferences as to the geometrical character of the thing from 
its appearance under optical instruments like magnifying 
glasses or microscopes. 


The 

superiority 
of touch. 



204 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Touch does but give us the closest approximation we can 
get through the naked senses to the real primary qualities 
of thingsd It is itself by no means a perfect messenger 
of the outside world. It varies in discriminativeness for 
place at different parts of the skin. Thus outlines are 
more delicately apprehended by the lips than by the 
fingers, or by the fingers of a blind man, which are trained, 
than by the fingers of a normal person. On this varying 
discriminativeness are founded various illusory judgments, 
as when two compass points passing from the cheek so as 
to touch the two lips seem to move apart. Mistakes of 
judgment are mixed up in these phenomena as elsewhere, 
e.g, the familiar experience of seeming to touch two things 
and not a single one when two fingers are crossed, the so- 
called paradox of Aristotle. Even apart from all illusions 
whether of perception or judgment we have such varia- 
tions as the one mentioned previously, that two touched 
points feel further apart than if the interval between them 
also contains touched points. Now the superiority of 
touch over sight, in general, is due to the nature of its 
object, which docs not need like colour a medium but is 
conveyed to the body direct. Hence the variations in 
the case of touch appear to be due in the main to defect 
on the part of the sense-organ and not to any requirements 
like those of sight which produce alteration or distortion 
in the sense-object. Thus a polygon with a large number 
of sides may be indistinguishable to the feel from a circle. 
The polygon’s contour has slightly projecting points, but 
the difference from the smooth circle is below the thresh- 
old of discrimination in respect of the intensity of the 
pressure, and the touch cannot discriminate their place 
either. That is, the point of the polygon and the point 
which corresponds to it on the circle fail when they are 
felt together or in close succession to evoke in the touch 
centres a consciousness which is aware of difference of 
locality. They may even fail to affect actually different 
places, owing to the arrangement of the nerve fibres to 
various places. Thus the circle and the polygon are 

1 Mr. C. D. Broad, Perception, etc., has many valuable remarks on 
illusions of touch and vision (ch. iv. pp. 254 ff.). 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


205 


confused much in the same way as two intensities of a 
quality of sense are confused. The case is one of defective 
receptivity for the external world and not of illusory 
appearance. That defectiveness is owing to the 
dependence of the places in the brain which apprehend 
locality upon the qualitative sense-excitements which let 
in the intuitions. 

All our intuitions thus bear the defects of our senses. Correctives 
This is the disability under which we labour, which °nntuTtimi. 
compensates the privilege of consciousness and the greater 
wealth of revelation which consciousness renders possible. 

We can sense the qualities of matter and life, but the 
price we pay is that we are denied the exact awareness of 
Space-Time which every monad has. This disability is 
not confined to the conscious order of existents but to 
every order above that of bare Space-Time. Complexity 
of space-time, when it carries with it in the empirical 
order of the world’s development an empirical quality, 
means also that the being endowed with that quality 
is shut off from perfect apprehension of Space- 
Time. For he apprehends it, as we through conscious- 
ness, so he through his own acts with his distinctive 
character, and is limited by their conditions as we by 
sense-perception. It is only the bare point-instant, the 
element of motion or Space-Time, which is in sympathetic 
communion with the places and shapes and sizes of things. 

In this respect the mere monad or point-instant ^ knows ’ 
Space-Time better than Newton or Laplace or Mr. 

Russell. Your monad is your only natural mathematician, 
who neither has nor needs the science of mathematics, but 
lives mathematically, and consorts so with his fellows. 

For point-instants are related to one another, so far as 
may be, as minds are with one another, and they know 
each other by sympathy. Yet this is not knowledge or 
intuition of Space-Time, for point-instants can no more 
contemplate each other than we can each other, and there 
is nothing below them for them to contemplate. They 
have no science. But what is perfect and exact com- 
munion for them is unattainable by us. We cannot 



2o6 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


contemplate primary qualities in their exact being, but we 
can have science of them and that science is mathematics. 
Thought in the form of mathematical science takes us 
back indirectly to what the monads or point-instants know 
directly. We in a manner get rid of our consciousness 
and go back to a more primitive condition. 

Our remedy for the disabilities under which our 
Intuitions labour is found In our capacity for reflection, 
for contemplating not merely the particular but the law 
of its configuration. This capacity helps us in two ways. 
Being aware of deviations of particular observations from 
real spatio-temporal fact, it invents instruments to make 
the observations more exact (both in respect of the 
primary and the secondary qualities) ; and though we are 
in the end always dependent on our senses for the 
observations, it devises methods, for controlling the 
instruments themselves and for cancelling errors of the 
observer, which as far as possible make us independent 
of our own defects. In the next place it invents science, 
and In particular in respect of intuition it makes mathe- 
matics. For the minute first-hand and perfect acquaintance 
which the monad has of the world, it substitutes spatio- 
temporal laws as contained in arithmetic and geometry, 
and their progeny. Exact intuitions of things being 
unattainable and also useless, it gives us something better 
and more valuable. Mathematics is thus engendered 
from the defects of our intuitions, as the other sciences 
from the defects of our senses. And it is the funda- 
mental science because it deals with the fundamental 
material of which all qualities represent complexities. It 
docs not as we have seen before differ from other sciences 
except in this simplicity of its material. Not in virtue of 
the hypothetical character of triangles or numbers ; for all 
science is conversant in like manner with such hypo- 
theticals, and these hypothetical are not inventions of the 
mind but, so far as valid, universals in things — realities 
therefore, so far as established, and not mere hypotheses. 
Not because of its alleged a priori character. ¥or in fact 
it is experimental and deals with empirical determinations 
of Space-Time like triangles or integers or irrationals. It 



CH. VII 


APPEARANCES 


207 


is only its material which is a priori and not its methods. 
The material is a priori because it is categorial ; and 
mathematics is unlike metaphysics in that it does not 
explain what Space and Time are but is concerned only 
with the discovery and inter-connection of its empirical 
determinations. So understood it remains the basal 
science ; and being unencumbered with regard for quali- 
ties it is concerned only with the laws of intuitional 
objects. 

Nothing however can be further from the truth than 
the doctrine inherited from Locke that our ideas of 
primary qualities resemble their originals in things, while 
those of secondary qualities do not. The language of 
representation is not available for us and indeed is uni- 
versally obsolete. For us ideas are things or partial 
selections from them (and, if we include imaginations 
and illusions, rearrangements of them), and we are at one 
with Berkeley except that whereas for him things were 
ideas and there are no things which were not ideas, for us 
reversely there are no ideas which are not, or do not 
belong to, things. But let us for a moment retain the 
Lockeian conception of copying. It is then untrue that 
our intuitions are exact copies of things any more than 
our ideas of secondary qualities are. We are not less 
bantered by our intuitions than by our senses, and we 
are so because we cannot rid ourselves of the defects of 
our senses. It is true that our intuitions never deceive 
us as to quality ; but that is because in the strict sense 
they have no quality, being merely spatio-temporal. But 
otherwise they are never copies just because they are 
provoked in our apprehension by the sensing of the 
sense-qualities. If we are to choose we must rather 
say that we are nearer to reality in our sensations of 
secondary qualities than in our intuitions of primary 
ones. For in respect of the one we arc cheated at first 
hand and with respect to the others at second hand. In the 
one case we are cheated, when we are cheated, by the 
principal ; in respect of the other we are cheated by an 
innocent person who is compelled to be a confederate. 
Our senses only cheat us by their weakness and partiality 



2o8 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


of selection, but our intuitions cheat us because our 
senses are cheats. 

I have thought it tedious to introduce into this 
discussion the variations of our intuitions of Time. 
There too we are restrained by the senses without the 
mediation of which time-intuitions would not be evoked. 
Very largely the variations in the appearances of Time 
are matters of illusion and the eifect of past experience, 
as in the familiar illusions of the varying durations of our 
experiences in actual occurrence or in retrospect. 

1 end by repeating an observation with which I began ; 
that all these variations of sense or intuition are but 
illustrations of what arises out of the relation of finites of 
any kind to one another according to their position in 
space and time, and the limitations of their organisation 
which prescribe how much shall be revealed to them 
and how much not. The history of our experience of 
these variations of them verifies in the special case of 
minds a universal rule. This is the really important 
result for us of the inquiry. 



CHAPTER VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 

Illusory appearances of things differ from other appear- iiiusory 
ances in not beinp: veridical. Real appearances belong to 
the thing itselt and are contained in it ; they are its Picbiem 
perspectives ; the thing is the synthesis of them effected 
in the space-time to which they belong ; and corre- 
spondingly the mind in its experience of these various 
appearances collates them or rather discovers them to be 
collated without any exclusion. Mere appearances belong 
to the thing only under conditions which do not leave it 
to manifest its appearances by themselves ; and, when 
these conditions are allowed for, such mere appearances 
are accounted for by the real nature of the thing taken 
in conjunction with the foreign thing ; and are thus real 
appearances of the two combined and mere appearances 
of the thing itself But illusory appearances do not 
belong to the thing of which they are appearances ; and 
the illusion consists in their being so referred.^ Only 
in so far are they illusory ; there is no illusion until an 
element in the appearance which does not belong to the 
thing is perceived as belonging to it : until for instance 
the green seen by contrast on a piece of grey paper lying 
on a red ground is seen as an affection of the place of 
the grey paper. The green by itself is not illusory ; but 
the patch, occupied by the grey, seen as green. In like 

1 For the truth that illusion lies in reference of the imaginary 
element to the thing to which it belongs see Mr. Russell’s remarks in 
Scientia, 1914 {Mystichm and Logic, p. 176) and again in External 
World, p. 85, which make clear wherein illusion consists. 

VOL. II 209 


P 



210 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


manner the paradoxical sensation of cold from a point on 
the skin touched by a hot metal is not in itself illusory, 
but only when we feel ourselves touched by a cold thing. 
Hence it is that mere appearances shade off into illusory 
ones. To see a stick half straight in air and half bent in 
water is not an illusion. But to see the bent part of the 
stick as part of the whole straight stick is illusory. When 
we go further and believe that the straight stick is bent 
in water, we take a step beyond illusion and are victims 
of error. For illusion is perceptual error, or it has the 
same relation to perception as error to judgment. It is 
undeveloped error ; not diverse from it, but error in the 
germ. Even a real appearance, like the elliptic appearance 
of the disc when seen obliquely, may become illusory if 
the disc is viewed as being actually an ellipse, that is if 
the space it fills is not merely seen with elliptic shape but 
is seen as being elliptic ; and if it is believed to be really 
elliptic and a judgment made, there is error. So difficult 
is it to separate the different kinds of appearances from 
one another, and in particular to separate mere appear- 
ances from illusions, while illusions are first cousins to 
error.^ 

The illusory appearance of a thing is commonly said 
to be an illusion it the thing in question is actually 
present but misinterpreted, as if for instance we perceive 
a white shirt stretched on a clothes-line as a man returned 
from the dead, or feel a pencil double with crossed 
fingers. When the thing is not present at all we are 
said to have an hallucination. In hallucinations there 
is always a sensory excitement and not merely an ideal 
one. The stimulus may be purely internal and involve 
the sensory neural apparatus as in some reported cases 
of visual hallucination, or it may be external but pro- 
duce an inappropriate sensation as when a cold point of 
the skin is touched by an actually hot piece of metal. 
There is however no difference psychologically in the 

^ An illusion is a mistake of perception, not of judgment. It is 
quite possible that illusions may themselves be founded upon preceding 
judgments, as is maintained for so many cases of geometrical illusions by 
Lipps. But there is no explicit judgment in the illusion itself. 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


211 


Structure of the two kinds of experience. In the case 
of illusion the thing revealed in sense-perception is 
supplemented by an idea which does not fit it in fact ; 
in the other case the ideal supplement is that of the 
thing which normally gives the sensation. In the one 
case the mind supplies the interpretation, in the other it 
supplies the thing of which the interpretation is sensed. 
Hallucination is thus an inverted illusion. The mistake 
is discovered only by further experience of the circum- 
stances. It may be in hallucination that there is no 
thing at all present corresponding to the sensory 
experience. It may be that something is actually present 
which caused the sensation but it is not the normal 
cause of that sensation. Both the idea in one case and 
the sensation in the other are, as referred to the thing, 
illusory objects and differ only for our purposes in 
respect of being ideal or sensory. 

The other two classes of appearances have their The source 
source in the thing of which they arc the appearances, 

Illusory appearances have their source in the mind itself, 

Mere appearances come from the interference of some 
other thing with the thing itself ; illusory ones from 
the interference of the mind. They are therefore sub- 
jective in their origin, while as we shall see remaining 
non-mental in themselves. In other words the appre- 
hending is initiated from the corresponding object in 
the first two sets of cases, but in illusion from the mind 
itself. Consider ordinary correct perception of a thing. 

The yellow colour and spherical form of the orange set 
going certain intuitional and sensory processes in the 
mind. These set up connected processes whose ideal 
objects are fragrance and juiciness — that is, processes to 
which correspond the physical qualities of fragrance and 
juiciness, as presented in the form of idea ; the ideal and 
sensory elements are united within the same space-time, 
and we have the perception of the thing, orange. 
Accordingly illusion may arise if the qualifying pro- 
cesses initiated by the mind itself at the touch of external 
experience are not those whose objects really belong to 



212 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


Ill 


the thing which is contemplated. Whenever this happens 
the mind interferes with the world of things and 
disarranges it. The mind which is free from illusion 
supplements what is forced upon it by elements which 
are verified by the things themselves when further 
experience supervenes. Thus there is opportunity for 
misinterpretation wherever the mind is defective. We 
cannot take in things at one moment, but only by 
degrees and in the lapse of time, and the thing is 
therefore for us always presented partly in sense and 
partly in idea. But our ideas are affected by whatever 
affects us. 

The causes of such misinterpretation are many. 
The most obvious are custom, and the predominant 
interest of the moment. But every idiosyncrasy of 
every sort may prevent the mind) from responding 
correctly to things : passion or prejudice, or some mental 
twist or perversity. These are the defects which are 
corrected by experience, as acquired not in the haphazard 
way which leaves us slaves to custom, but systematically 
and with precautions, or in a word, scientifically. Besides 
these personal idiosyncrasies which make an individual 
a bad observer, there are the defects which are normal 
and common to all persons such as operate, for instance, 
in some of those geometrical illusions which are so 
familiar and which are not merely differences of per- 
spective. Sometimes the illusion is engendered by the 
limitation under which the mind labours, that it is 
adapted to the general case and its organisation is fixed, 
not by custom, but physiologically. A simple illustration 
is the natural illusion we have when we hold a pin close 
to our eye and look through a hole in a card held in 
front of our eyes at a source of light, which throws the 
shadow of the pin on to the retina. We see the pin 
then, on the other side of the hole, black but inverted. 

The interference of the mind is not however con- 
fined to the introduction of inappropriate ideas. It may 
produce illusory sensations. Defects in the sense-organs 
and therefore in the mind, such as those of colour- 
blindness and tone-deafness, illustrate this. These are 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


213 


personal defects and abnormal. But the abnormality 
of response may be universal and normal as in the 
paradox of cold sensation, because of the determination of 
the sensation in this case not by the real cause but by the 
fixity of the mind’s response to stimulation in certain 
places. 

In all these examples the mind itself interferes and 
apprehends an object that is conformable to the mental 
act which for one reason or other is set at work. So long 
as the object is contemplated in and for itself there is no 
question of illusion. When the mind goes on to refer 
these illusory objects, illusory in reference to the real 
thing, to the thing, then it is in a state of illusion, and 
we have an illusory appearance of the thing. 

We may now restate the difference between illusory 
and mere appearances. In mere appearance we have the 
appearance of a thing distorted by the presence of some 
other thing and both things are contemplated. But in 
illusion the distorting thing is replaced by the mind itself, 
or what is the same thing its neural process or organ of 
sense, which in different ways are instrumental to the 
mind ; and neither the mind nor its instrument is, in the 
apprehension of the illusion, contemplated. The face 
behind the mirror is a mere appearance of the face which 
is in front of it. In illusion the mind as it were carries 
its own mirror with it. We do not see our eyes and still 
less our occipital cerebral tracts, as we see the mirror. 

On the other hand when the mind is taken along with 
the thing seen, the illusory appearance of the thing is a 
real appearance of the combination and a mere appearance 
of the thing. The angel would see the illusory appear- 
ance as a mere appearance of the thing. Hence too as 
we shall presently see the affinity of an illusory appear- 
ance to a work of art.^ 

But though illusory appearances are inappropriate to Their non- 
or disparate with the thing to which they are perceived 

1 In the above I am omitting for the present illusions and other they^arr 
appearances in the mind itself. They are described later. I am dealing possible, 
here with illusions as to external things. 



214 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


to belong and owe their presence to the initiative of mind 
rather than to that of the thing itself, they are not the 
creation of the mind. What the mind does is to choose 
them from the world of reality. They also are an 
instance of the mind’s selectiveness, only the selection is 
uncontrolled by that part of reality which purports to be 
perceived. The illusory object is as much non-mental 
as the real appearance. Yet it is chosen by the mind 
from the world of things not directly connected with the 
thing to which it is referred. The grey piece of paper is 
seen green by contrast on the red ground. The paper 
itself is not green. But there is green in the world. 
The appropriate response of the mind to green is the 
kind of sensory act which the mind is at the moment 
performing, and accordingly it sees green. Moreover 
the act is a sensational act and has its individuality, 
determined by its spatial extent and situation. It is not 
merely the apprehension of a universal green, as a corre- 
spondent of mine suggests ingeniously after Aristotle’s 
dictum. I apprehend an individual sensum. The illusion 
consists in seeing a sensum of that quality in the grey 
piece of paper. But though the paper is not green the 
excitement produced in the corresponding places in the 
optic centre, part sensory, part intuitional, is the mental 
process which apprehends sensationally a green patch of 
that shape in that place. ^ 

We can see now how illusion is possible. The object, 
with which the mind is brought into compresence by 
virtue of an act initiated by itself, is transferred from its 
place in the world into a place to which it does not belong. 
The illusion is a transposition of materials. Moreover 
the form of the combination is also real. I see the grey 
patch green and believe it to be so. The actual intuited 
space of the grey patch is filled with green quality 
according to the universal pattern of the combination of 

^ For this view of illusion (and error) as displacing elements in 
reality and combining them according to real modes of combination see 
Mr. Stout’s paper ‘The object of thought and real being’ in Proc, 
Arist. Soc. N.S. vol. xi., 1910-1 1. His important addition to the matter 
is that the combination follows real lines, as well as the materials. 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


215 


qualities within the space of a substance, and the same 
account applies to all the kinds of illusion we have 
mentioned. We combine elements not really combined, 
but both the elements and their form of combination are 
features of the real world when that world is taken large 
enough. Sometimes the dislocation involved is more 
thoroughgoing still. In a rational dream I have not only 
appearances, but things which behave in the dream-space 
precisely as they would in reality. They obey physical laws 
and are thus physical, though apprehended only in idea. 
The dream may be a perfectly connected and coherent set of 
related things. The illusion of the dream consists in the 
disagreement of this world of dream-things with the 
greater world, which is the whole world of Space-Time, 
not limited to this particular dream-vision of it. Every- 
thing in the dream is real, the materials of it and the ways 
in which they are related, including the thinghood of its 
things. But in the larger world they are not found in 
these arrangements and thus they cannot bear the test of 
the wider reference. 

What my mental act does is comparable to the 
physical act of turning round and seeing an actual piece 
of green which is not in the first instance presented to 
my eyes. My mental act brings me face to face with the 
green in the world. Thus I do not make the green 
which I see in the illusory sensation or hallucination. All 
I do is to act in the appropriate way for seeing it. 
I select it out of the great external whole of Space- 
Time with all its contained qualities. Not only therefore 
is the object non-mental, but it is part of the world. The 
selectiveness of illusory appearances is but an extension 
of the selectiveness involved in all appearance. But the 
mental initiative leads me to select my object from a 
wider world of things, and the object selected is not 
appropriate. 

A well-known psychological observation may serve as 
an analogy of what takes place in the mind, and as yet 
another metaphysical experiment. Fixate with the eyes 
the point of a pencil held in front, and by shifting the 
pencil about find out what external object is seen, by 



2i6 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


PK. HI 


each eye respectively, in the direction of the pencil-point 
and partially covered by it, when the other eye is closed. 
I happen thus to see two Japanese pots of different shapes 
at the top of the bookcase in my study. Then open the 
two eyes again, and the two pots will be seen overlapping 
each other in the same place, as if they were being seen 
by a single eye, placed at the base of the nose, in the 
direction of the pencil point. The eyes then are squinting 
and the two pots seen together. Now this is what happens 
in illusion. The mind squints at things and one thing 
is seen with the characters of something else.^ 


‘Un- 
reality ’ of 
illusions. 


We are therefore not free to suppose that illusory 
appearances arc the creations of the mind or owe to it 
anything but their selection. They are perspectives of 
the real world as seen by a mind in abnormal condition. 
Nor arc we free to suppose that there is a neutral non- 
mental world containing illusions amongst other neutral 
objects, neither mental nor physical. The real world is 
not got by adding something to this neutral world. The 
alleged neutral world is got by taking something away 
from the one real world. Illusions do not belong to a 
wider world of which reality is a selection plus an addition. 
Illusions are the real world seen awry or squintingly. 
The world of illusions is the same as what we call the 
real world, but dislocated, its parts taken from their 
proper places and referred amiss. That dislocation is the 
mind’s own work. Illusion is due to the intrusion of 
the mind’s own idiosyncra^^ies into the apprehension of 
reality. But It docs not create but only rearranges what 
is already there. Hence illusion and in like manner 
error or mistakes of judgment are truly the result of 
overhaste on the part of the mind. Could it suspend its 
habit of reference, it would not be the victim of illusion. 
Descartes said of error that it was the result of the 
intrusion of the will into the judgment : overhaste of the 


^ The king in Hamlet admirably describes his own hypocrisy and 
the illusion he wishes to produce in others of his sorrow for his brother’s 
death : “ with an auspicious and a dropping eye.” 



CH. VJII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


2 1 7 

will precipitated the judgment. This is perfectly true of 
error. Extend the explanation to illusion and we have 
the intrusion of personal defect of all kinds into per- 
ception. Thus all the materials of illusory percepts are 
real, and, if the world of reality is taken wide enough, 
the percept itself is a perspective of the real world, and is 
just as objective and non-mental as any other percept ; 
and if it is a percept of a physical thing it obeys the laws 
of physics and is not merely non-mental as being neither 
mental nor physical, but is physical. But the percept is 
unreal in the sense that it is untrue^ though like any error 
it is perfectly real when taken along with the mind which 
possesses it. 

Illusions therefore introduce us to the subject of 
values ; they are unreal as being untrue, and unrecon- 
cileable in their illusory form with the whole world of 
reality. To understand illusion fully we must place it 
in its relation to images on the one side and to art on 
the other. It is more than a mere image, for it contains 
an element corresponding to belief, though not actually 
belief, which belongs not to perception but to judg- 
ment. But it is less than a work of art, for it is 
undesigned. In virtue of the distorted selection of its 
materials from the real world it is a mental construction. 
On the other hand, whereas the work of art is designed 
by the mind and can be beautiful or ugly, because the 
mind is an essential ingredient of it ; the illusory percept 
is as naive as any other percept, and stands over against 
the mind and distinct from it. And accordingly it is not 
as such beautiful or ugly. Correspondingly the work 
of art in its turn always involves illusion. Illusion is 
next door to art and truth or error ; but I connect it 
with art rather than truth and error because like art it 
is a perceptual object and not a judgment.^ Values are 
to be treated in the next chapter, and we merely note 
here the affinity of illusion to value, to which it 
naturally leads on. It remains to consider images and 
ideas and to see that mere ideas begin to show the 

^ Wc shall see however that though the work of art is a percept, 
its beauty also involves judgment (ch. ix. D, p. 295). 



Memory- 

appear- 

ances. 


2 1 8 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 

same feature which condemns illusions to be called 
unreal. 

The images of things are appearances of things, 
although not sensible ones, and are included for synthesis 
or rejection in the space-time of the thing. As images 
of memory or expectation they are in part veridical, but 
they are in part illusory, and it would be difficult to 
find any cases of memory free from illusion. For the 
time between us and the past or future of the thing acts 
so as not only to produce omissions in our minds, which 
need not destroy the veridical character of the memory, 
but also to produce additions from ourselves and falsify 
the thing. Hence since Time acts on our images 
through first altering the complex of mental acts which 
correspond to the thing, the faults of memory may be 
of the nature of illusory appearance. All our images of 
things in memory or expectation are, it is safe to say, 
part true, part false. We discover the truth as well as 
the falsity of them by reference to the test of sensory 
experience, with which imagination is continuous. There 
is good reason for taking sensory experience as the 
standard, for in sense things act upon us directly, and 
there is no appreciable intervention of Time which throws 
us back upon our own initiative and may, in proportion 
as our minds are not faithful, introduce illusion. But 
though sense is pungent and compulsive, and memory 
or expectation pale and unstable and unfaithful, the 
remembered and the expected are none the less, so far 
as they are trustworthy^ as much genuine appearances of 
the reality as the sensory ones. They are revelations of 
the past as past, or future as future, and to be a past 
object does not mean to have sunk into unreality but 
into the past. The past, if Time be real, has such reality 
as pertains to the past. Indeed while memories are 
outgrowths of present perception, it is also true that 
memories or expectations may enlarge and anticipate 
sensory experience. Thus features of the thing may 
stand out in memory wffiich were overlooked or blurred 
in the hurry and pressure of sensory contact with the 



cn. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


219 


thing. And imagination may by way of hypothesis or 
otherwise suggest features unobserved which subsequent 
sensation may verify. 

Thus memories and expectations are equally with 
perceptions revelations of the thing to which they refer, 
and the thing synthesises and accounts for them, both in 
actual reality and in our experiencing of that reality. 
Such synthesis is also rejection of what is false in 
imagination or sensation. Now it is in this inter-play 
between sensation and idea that the distinction of 
images and perceptions comes to be established. When 
images fail to fit in within the one portion of space-time 
with veridical sensations, they are distinguished as being 
only images. If they were wholly veridical, the distinc- 
tion would perhaps not be made. The image would be 
a perfect substitute for the sensory appearance. As it 
is they are subject to the introduction of illusory 
elements and are in part rejected by the thing. Thus we 
get to know the real characters of things in two ways ; 
first by actual handling of them in sense, secondly 
because our images of them are limited or checked or 
even annihilated by contact with sensory experience, and 
with ideas as faithful to that experience. Success and 
disappointment are thus the two means by which the 
mind is led into the truth of things ; and this means 
from the other side that thinijs on the one hand contain 
or account for certain partial objects, and reject others as 
not belonging within their contour of space-time. Thus 
neither sensa and percepta nor memories are mental, but 
because they are non-mental they force on us the distinc- 
tion between what in them is real in the thing and what is 
only imaginary. Prima facie sensa and images are on the 
same footing. It is the experience of reducing them to 
coherence which betrays their inadequacies, which are 
most obvious and ubiquitous in the case of images, but 
occur also in sensations when they are hallucinatory. 

The illusory part of our images arises then from the 
liberty of the mind, released from the control established 
in sense by things. In constructive fancy that freedom 


Construct- 
ive imagin- 
ation. 



220 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


RK, III 


is at its height. We follow a creative impulse and 
imagine a result which satisfies that impulse. In doing 
so we may get far away from anything that we can verify 
in sensory experience ; but the remoteness depends on 
the kind of impulse which inspires us. In scientific 
imagination as employed in the creation of hypothesis, 
or in practical imagination inspired by the desire to 
produce apparatus to serve an end, we are manifestly 
controlled at every point by the realities we deal with. 
We are using imagination with a speculative or prac- 
tical purpose, to anticipate the facts presented in sense. 
Illusion is eliminated, as fast as it is generated, by the 
requirements of the task. Imagination in these cases 
shows itself the servant of fact, and there is no difficulty 
in recognising that however new the combinations struck 
out by desire to solve the problem before us, we arc all 
the while handling real things in the external world. In 
the mere play of fancy for fancy’s sake or in artistic 
production, the creativeness of the mind, as backed by 
passion or thought or both, which is expressed in our 
fancies and may be embodied in words or stone, seems 
to operate unchecked. The result does not exist in the 
external reality till we put it there. But fancy not only 
borrows its materials from reality, but as hinted in speak- 
ing of illusion, it combines them according to the laws 
of its materials. Thus not only do the objects of fancy 
obey, as in reference of an illusory quality to a thing, 
the categorial combinations which are universal ; but it 
is bound by the special laws of its own creations, though 
the limits within which it is so bound are very flexible. 
To go back to an old instance, I may fancy a diamond 
mountain. A mountain must be made of some stone 
or other ; I have only chosen in my freedom an alter- 
native which never in fact exists. A fish to be a fish 
must have some head and body as well as a tail ; I 
give it the head and trunk of a woman and fancy a 
mermaid. When we deal with error the same thing 
will be seen, and in a more convenient place. While 
thus the forms in which materials are combined are forms 
of combination found somewhere in reality, though not per- 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


22 1 


haps as between the things which fancy combines in those 
forms, it is a commonplace that the materials themselves 
are so found. This is quite consistent with the possi- 
bility that, by some chance internal stimulation, imagina- 
tion may envisage an object never presented to it in 
actual experience, some shade of colour never before 
perceived, or certainly some intensity of sensa which may 
not have been sensed. How far some positively new 
sensum may be fancied is a point I will not raise, but it 
is gravely questionable whether if the nerves have not 
responded to stimulation from without they can be so 
far functional as to present images from within.^ Even 
so the ideatum would be a non-mental object. 

What fancy does, in fact, is precisely in a speculative 
way what the mind does in the practical handling of 
things to create fresh combinations like steam-engines. 
We take material things and recombine them according 
to their own laws, which we must obey to suit our 
purposes. Just so in fancy, we are taking from the 
physical world what we find there, and reconstituting 
them at our will into fresh combinations. We handle 
them in thought, though not in practical reality. The 
result always contains the element of illusion in so far 
as it is not reproduced in its fancied form anywhere in 
things. But in proportion as it is scientific or artistic, 
it embodies in illusory garment the outlines of things as 
they are, like a robe which betrays the shape of the 
limbs. Because all great scientific imagination or artistic 
creation starts from realities and returns to them again, 
the discoverers or artists seem to themselves to owe their 
creations not to themselves but to inspiration from with- 
out. There are abundant testimonies in this sense ; ^ 
not only do their creations come to them as it were 

1 See later, ch. x. p. 325, and above, vol. i. p. 333. 

2 I quote one such testimony from what is reported of George Eliot 
by her biographer ; “ She told me that in all that she considered her 
best writing there was a ‘ not-herself ’ which took possession of her, and 
that she felt her own personality to be merely the instrument through 
which the spirit, as it were, was acting. Particularly she dwelt on this 
with regard to the scene in Middlemarch between Dorothea and 
Rosamond, saying that although she always knew they had sooner or 



222 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Assump- 
tions and 
unrealities. 


from without, but in working out their fate, the authors 
feel themselves to be following not their own will but 
that of their creations. The wilder the fancy the less 
I suppose is this sense of government from without. 
But just so much greater is the measure of the illusion 
involved. This humility of the great is prompted by a 
true feeling for the situation. They are minds attuned 
to reality and able to anticipate it. 

From images and mere ideas we may now pass to 
certain other cases. First of all we may here conveniently 
trench upon a subject of the next chapter and allude to 
the whole class of what are called assumptions or supposals. 
In his famous book {Ueber Annahmen) Mr. A. Meinong 
has exhibited systematically the immense part played in our 
experience by assumption. Examples are the antecedent 
clause of an ordinary hypothetical judgment ; or again a 
scientific hypothesis ; a question ; a fanciful representation 
of events, a make-believe ; in all which an assertion is 
not made but is as it were suspended. In all of them 
predications are made, without the characteristic mark of 
propositions about reality, which is belief. It might be 
thought that such supposals are additional testimony to a 
neutral world which is neither mental nor physical ; but the 
conclusion would be erroneous. Such assumptions stand 
to propositions or ‘ facts ’ in the real world in a relation 
comparable to that of ideas to percepts ; with this 
difference, that ideas presuppose and succeed percepts, 
whereas an assumption is an inchoate proposition, and 
precedes it. As an idea lacks the fulness of context which 
a percept possesses, so an assumption lacks that reference 
to the whole context of reality which carries with it 


later to come together she kept the idea resolutely out of her mind until 
Dorothea was in Rosamond’s drawing-room. Then abandoning herself 
to the inspiration of the moment, she wrote the whole scene exactly 
as it stands, without alteration or erasure, in an intense state of 
excitement and agitation, feeling herself entirely possessed by the 
feelings of the two women” [Life and Letters, by J. W. Cross, vol. iii. 
p. 424). 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


223 


belief.^ Supposals may be either veridical or not ; if they 
are not they involve illusion or unreality, but they remain 
apprehensions of reality in the same sense as ideas which 
also may be verified or may be mere ideas. 

Of another class of objects we have had an example 
already in the so-called ^ Spaces ’ of more than three 
dimensions. They are constructions of thought founded 
on the spatio-temporal conception of dimensions, which 
they extend by unlimited combination with the equally 
spatio-temporal conception of number. In themselves 
they are mere thoughts or ideas, and if believed to exist 
are fictitious or unreal. They owe their value to two 
considerations ; one is their internal consistency, which 
puts them on a level with any other work of art ; the 
other, and for our purposes the more important one, is 
their connection with the real Spaces from which they 
arise. The foundation of the elements combined in them 
exists in Space-Time, and because this is so, and because 
having ascended in thought from Space-Time we can 
return to real Space from our height again, they are 
(according to the testimony of mathematicians) useful for 
the understanding of real Space. They arc thus in part 
illusory or at least mere thoughts ; in part they are tied 
fast to real Space, and are thus once more perspectives of 
reality from the point of view not of a distorted mind but 
of a mind giving play to its artistic fancies along lines of 
thought which begin in reality. 

We must distinguish from such legitimate fictions the 
idea of a great number of three-dimensional Spaces or of 
many Times, which has been used to cast doubt on the 
ultimate reality of Space and Time and condemn them to 
the rank of appearances of an ultimate Absolute. The 
Space of a hashish dream is as objective as our Space ; the 

^ A similar conception of assumptions was stated by Mr. Russell in a 
paper on Mr. Meinong’s book {Mind, N.S. vol. xiii., 1904, p. 348), but 
withdrawn, I believe, by him subsequently. Mr. Meinong’s answer 
{Annahmen, ed. 2, pp. 132 ff.) is directed to showing that supposals are 
not simply ideas. I have been careful to say only that they are related to 
judgments as ideas to percepts. For the connection of supposal and 
judgment, on the conative side, in the act of willing, see a suggestion later 
(ch. ix. B, p. 248). 



224 


EMPIRICAL EXISTCNCE 


BK. Ill 


adventures of Sinbad occur in Time but not in ours. 
There may thus, Mr. Bradley thinks,^ be a multiplicity of 
Spaces and Times ; and with regard to Time he even goes 
so far as to say that not only may there be many Times 
going on along with ours, but we may think a Time 
whose order is the reverse of ours, in which say death 
precedes birth. Thus it is supposed there may be on the 
one hand independent Spaces or Times ; on the other 
hand a Time of a different order. The interest of these 
speculations for metaphysics is different from that of the 
present topic, and details are left to a note.^ But as 
regards the notion of independent Spaces and Times (an 
example of which is the notion we have already met of 
the alleged separate Spaces of touch and of vision) we 
have only to say that when not false like the last example 
they are again nothing but perspectives of one and the 
same Space or Time. They are certainly objective ; we 
cannot, as Mr. Bradley points out, correlate the time of a 
fairy tale with ours merely by considering the time in 
which the teller tells it. They are real Time or Space 
perceived under the conditions introduced by the subject 
which may distort them as in the magnification of an opium 
dream. The dream-time or the time of Sinbad’s advent- 
ures may have no determinate date ; the fairy history 
occurred only once upon a time.’’ But the same con- 
sideration applies to the most significantly real part of our 
knowledge, our universal concepts. The idea of a Time 
reversed is, I submit, a mistake. 

The next set of objects are unrealities^ whose status has 
been already touched upon, but is mentioned here again 
for completeness, and for further remark. Such un- 
realities are either empirical ones like the golden mountain, 
which is as a matter of fact unreal ; or categorial, like the 
round square, which is self-contradictory and impossible, 
but yet can be entertained in thought. An intermediate 
case is that of a mare’s nest. Since we can think un- 
realities, where do unrealities live } If there is no neutral 
world of objects of thought as such, are we not driven to 

1 Appearance and Reality, ch. xviii. and ch. xxii. pp. 286, 287. 

Sec Supplementary Note at the end of the chapter. 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


225 


say that unreals are in the real world which then must 
contain errors and illusions in their proper shape ? The 
answer is that unreality is a mark neither of neutral nor 
of real being but of value, and value arises within reality. 
When we say the round square or golden mountain is 
unreal, we mean that it is incompatible with the rest of 
reality ; we do not mean that it belongs to a world outside 
the real world. Unreality introduces the notion of falsity 
or error. The reality which belongs to the unreal belongs 
to it in virtue of its falsity which we shall see implies its 
possession by the mind, and always involves judgment. 
Illusion is ever on the brink of being an unreality ; and 
becomes so when it is believed. In its naive character of 
a misinterpreted perception, it falls short of error and 
unreality and is simply a dislocation of elements in reality, 
a mentally distorted perspective of the real.^ 

Besides physical things which are the objects of con- 
templation, the world contains in itself and for us the 
enjoyed thing which is our mind and those other things 
which we neither enjoy nor contemplate directly but are 
assured of and acknowledge, the minds of others. 
Hitherto we have been dealing with physical or external 
things and examining what we can know of them, partly 
by reference to the whole scheme of things in Space-Time 
to which they belong, partly by reference to simple inspec- 
tion of our contemplations ; and we have found the two 
methods to confirm each other. But we also know our- 
selves by enjoyment ; though we have not knowledge of 
ourselves, but on the contrary every act of enjoyment is a 
part of ourselves. I have already spoken of knowing our 
own mind and shall continue to do so. Now in our 
enjoyments of ourselves we find the same distinctions as 

^ An excellent illustration of the usefulness of this method of compar- 
ing the different kinds of the objects of our experience, as if they were 
varieties of a species or species of a genus or specimens of development 
within a case in a museum, will be found in Miss L. S. Stebbing’s 
recent paper on ^ The philosophical importance of the verb “to be ” ’ in 
Arist, Soc. Proc. N.S. vol. i., 1917-18. I do not accept all its details. 
It has suggested to me to add the present section by way of a fuller 
prosecution of the matter than I had originally written. 

VOL. II Q 


Appear- 
ances in 
mind itself. 



226 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


we find in the objects we contemplate. We enjoy our- 
selves in the form of intuitings, sensings, imaginings, 
rememberings, thinkings ; and each of our acts is the 
appearance of the whole self as contained within its proper 
spatio-temporal enjoyed contour. It is not the appearance 
of the mind to itself, for it cannot be an object to mind, 
but it is a partial act which appears in the mind itself. 
The minci is the synthesis of all these appearances. 

Not only is the mind in this way exactly comparable 
to an external thing, but in becoming aware of external 
things as a totality of appearances, sensory, ideal, or of 
thought, and some real, some mere appearances, some 
illusory, we enjoy ourselves under the same denominations. 
Wc have seen before that every categorial intuitum is 
intuited by a categorial intuiting ; that imagining an 
image is an enjoyment of ourselves in imaginative form, a 
remembered mental state is the enjoyment of ourselves in 
the past, just as the remembered object is an object con- 
templated as past. We can now see that there is the 
same distinction in mind between what is truly itself, even 
though, as in memory, remoteness makes it appear only in 
partial form, and what is partly due to other elements in 
the field of view and what is illusory. When we make a 
mistake about an external thing, our enjoyment is also 
mistaken ; but we rarely notice that we are subject to 
illusions and errors about ourselves except when we are 
directly interested in observing ourselves carefully in 
enjoyment, as when for instance we imagine ourselves by 
an illusion to be advancing a man’s interests from a sense 
of public duty when we are really doing so from friendship ; 
or imagine ourselves to be in love with a person when, as 
novelists say, we are really in love with the idea of being 
in love.^ When we separate out from our enjoyments 
tho§e which are illusory in this way or mere appearances, 
e.g. the mere appearance that we are enjoying ourselves 
seeing the stick bent in water or our own face in a mirror, 
we distinguish between what is really ourselves and what 

1 This illusory condition is the standing diagnosis which the eminent 
K.C. makes of his clients in one of Mr. Shaw’s plays : “ You think you 
do, but you don’t.” 



ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


CH. vrii 


227 


is not, that is between our true self and what is accidental 
or illusory. 

There is however a difference between our appearances 
in enjoyment and the appearances of external things in 
contemplation ; namely that our enjoyed appearances all 
are in the mind whether true or distorted or fiilse. We 
enjoy our illusions as well as the correction of them which 
may ensue upon reflection, and equally, to turn to mere 
appearances, the enjoyment corresponding to the distorting 
circumstance, whether it be another external object or mere 
distance in time or space, is contained within the mind. 
Whereas the external thing does not contain its mere 
appearances or its illusory ones. In fact, as we have seen, 
our illusions are always in a manner artefiicts of our own and 
their reality in the form which they possess is owing to the 
mind which entertains them. Thus the distinction of the 
true self and the unreal self is a distinction which grows up 
within and is contained within the self Here we must be 
content to leave the matter for the present. In a later 
chapter, when we discuss error in general, we shall see that 
this state of affairs in ourselves is one way by which we 
can help ourselves to understand what error is (pp. 267-8). 


It remains to apply these considerations as to the Public and 
objective physical character of images of physical things to 
an ancient problem. In every experience we can distin- and imper- 
guish a personal and an impersonal element in the situa- expelicnce. 
tion. What is personal in the strictest sense is the act of 
enjoyment, which no other person but the experient can 
enjoy and which neither the experient nor another person 
can contemplate. Enjoyments cannot be shared, and are 
private. Objects contemplated can be shared, and in 
general are public. But besides the act of enjoyment 
which is strictly private, illusory objects are also private 
because they are due to the intrusion of the individual’s 
idiosyncrasy. One man sees the ghost, another man does 
not see it ; the first has in his mind from education or 
other sources the distorting idea which is peculiar to him. 

Even this statement is to be received with qualifications. 

The illusory object is private only so far as it cannot be 



228 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


shared. In the first place, though you do not see the ghost 
I see, the ghost is so far public that 1 can make it by 
description an object to you also, or you can understand 
it. Secondly, some illusory objects like colours seen by 
contrast are universal. Still the illusion is not strictly 
public. We all see the same patch of space, and we all 
fancy it coloured. But we do not see the same colour of 
the patch, for there is no such colour in the patch, but we 
imagine we do because our experiences are of the same 
sort. The same thing is true of collective hallucinations 
induced by hypnotising several persons at once. Hence 
it is that a subjectivist philosopher can maintain the idea 
that real things are collective hallucinations. 

Sensa and images are thus not private but public, 
except so far as they contain illusory features. It happens 
that my sensum is sensed only by me, but any one else in 
my place would have the same sensum, if we are both 
standardised minds. So if we are not subject to illusion, 
our objects are either real appearances or mere appearances, 
and belong as such not to us but to the external world. 
Now sensa perhaps you will admit to be public. But 
images, how can they be so } Are they not eminently 
private ? The answer is no, except for the personal idio- 
syncrasy of the imager. If you could put yourself in my 
place you would have the same image. Even without 
performing that feat which is practically not possible, I 
can describe my image to you and you can have the image 
too. If it were not so, how should we hear another 
person say, my memory of this event coincides exactly 
with yours ? The acts of imaging are numerically 
different, but the images agree with allowance for the 
difference of perspective, which happens in such a case to 
be inappreciable. If I put myself in your place and we 
are both standardised, there is no difference of perspective 
at all. Let the image be one of a man whom we remem- 
ber to have seen before in a certain place. Our images 
of him may be without place or date ; our memories of 
him are the man at that place and date. It is true that 
memory may falsify, and distance in time and place may 
make us date and place the event of meeting him 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


229 


differently in our two cases. But it is still the man in 
that place and date whom we remember under these dis- 
torting conditions. If there is no distortion the date and 
place coincide even in our perspective objects. If you fall 
into a mistake discussed before and urge that the real man 
is out of sight and cannot be revealed in the two images, 
I remind you that you only know him in imagination as 
his image, and you only remember him as the memory- 
object which you have of him. Let the man come into 
our presence and we should identify our images with the 
seen man, and though in the case of memory we should 
remember him as being before in a different situation in 
the whole of Space-Time, we should still refer both our 
memory-image and our perception of the man to the same 
contour of space-time. For though he occupies different 
places now and then, his contour remains the same. The 
individual is universal in respect of the different dates and 
places he occurs at, but he remains one and the same (of 
course within limits) because Space-Time is uniform, and 
though he changes his situation he retains his configura- 
tion. It is in this sense that two images of two different 
observers can be images of one and the same thing ; and 
1 may add that an imaged space can belong to the seen 
space which it reproduces. Even a virtual optical image, 
we saw in actual experiment, belongs to the same place as 
the touched thing. 

Accordingly the important distinction is not that 
between private and public experience but that between 
personal and impersonal experience. The things we 
know are independent altogether of our enjoyments, and 
they reject what is imported into our objects by our 
personal bias, our idiosyncrasies or illusory interpreta- 
tions ; they are the depersonalised syntheses of the objects 
which are selected from them by our own or other minds. 
On the other hand the so-called private experience is but 
each man's individual perspective of the thing, and it is 
from the beginning (illusion barred) public. This follows 
at once when we are considering knowing as merely one 
illustration of the relations between finites. For then the 
perspective or private view of a thing is but the revelation 



230 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


Intersub- 
jcctive 
intercourse: 
its function. 


of the thing to a mind at that point of view. It follows 
also from simple inspection of our experience which 
assures us that the object is something not-mental and a 
distinct existence from ourselves. But according as we 
take one or other point of view we express our experience 
differently. If we begin from the world of things and 
consider its relation to minds, we say that ten men see the 
same sun, for it is the one thing, the sun, which gives the 
ten men their experiences of it. But from the point of 
view of simple inspection which is the point of view of 
the individual man in his position, the ten men see not 
indeed ten different suns but ten objects called sun, that 
is, they see ten different appearances of the one sun. These 
different objects (whether they are objects for ten persons, 
or for one and the same person as he occupies ten different 
positions) are found by experience to coalesce and be 
contained in the one thing, the sun, and when that has 
happened each can say that he has seen a different appear- 
ance of the sun. It is from the confusion of these two 
points of view that the belief arises that our objects are 
mental, the objects of imagination most clearly so and 
after them even the objects of sense. We do not in 
apprehending the sensum or the ideatum apprehend the 
whole thing. We say therefore, shifting over to the 
absolute point of view, that our sensa and ideas belong to 
us and guide us to things. By this confusion we distort 
our mental history. We know in the first instance 
objects ; then we know things, by discovering the syntheses 
of these objects ; then we know our objects to be selected 
from the things. 

Now were not objects (illusion excluded) public from 
the beginning no experience of their unification in the 
thing would be possible, whether for the individual or 
through the co-operation of many individuals. No 
collection of private objects, which were not already 
public in so far as they were altogether distinct from the 
persons whose objects they are, could make up a public 
one, any more than, as Hamlet says of Laertes’ love for 
Ophelia, forty thousand brothers could with all their 
quantity of love make up his sum ; meaning that his love 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


231 


was of a different kind. But because the perspectives are 
public, their personal ingredients, if they have any, are 
eliminated when many objects are put by many persons 
into the common stock and we are left with truth. Thus 
intersubjective intercourse (the phrase is Mr. Ward's), 
depersonalises experience ; but it does not change it from 
a private to a public experience. Nor in the individual 
taken by himself could his various objects, if they were 
merely his, give him experience of any thing or substance 
in which they are united. But every object being of 
itself public, the discovery of the thing of which it is the 
revelation is a matter of more experience, that is of the 
collation of experiences with one another so as to recognise 
their coherence within one space-time contour. Hence 
the objection to solipsism as a philosophical doctrine is not 
that it would isolate us from one another, or that as Mr. 
Bradley has shown it would equally isolate any one part 
of my experience from any other ; and certainly not in 
any repulsiveness such as it seems to many to possess. 
Its impossibility lies in its infidelity to the facts of 
experience whether as delivered to simple inspection or 
as derived from a consideration of finite existence in 
general. 

It might be thought that intersubjective intercourse in 
making us aware of things as distinct from individual 
knowledge of them establishes the connection of the 
individual mind with a universal mind for which the thing 
is object. Now of a universal mind experience tells us 
nothing, and in the sequel we shall see that when we seek 
to transcend finite mind we arrive not at universal mind 
or consciousness as such " but at something different. 
Universal mind is, within our experience, nothing but the 
universality of mind which is its law of configuration as 
universality is everywhere. In truth what the combina- 
tion of many objects into one thing, the recognition of 
their belonging in themselves to one thing, does for us in 
respect of mind is something different and much simpler. 
So far as these objects belong to one mind alone and that 
mind realises their unity in the thing, it correspondingly 
realises its own unity of substance as the substance of its 



232 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


own enjoyments. We thus come by the enjoyed experi- 
ence of ourselves as the totality of our acts within our 
mental space-time, and we learn also to exclude the 
elements of illusion which may creep into our enjoyments. 
The thing called mind enjoys and ‘ knows ’ itself just in so 
far as it contemplates and knows external things. In so 
far as the objects of many minds are synthesised in the 
thing, we become aware of truth on the one hand and 
social connection on the other. But of mind as such we 
learn nothing ; only of finite minds we learn to know more 
and better. 

One particular but fundamental illustration of these 
remarks must be mentioned again at the cost of repetition ; 
it is that of Space and Time. Our intuitions (intuita) 
follow the same lines as sensa, in which they are included, 
and are subject to the same variations of perspective and 
illusion. But real Space is not public as distinct from 
private space. Private spaces are but public spaces as they 
happen to be observed by individuals at different points ot 
view. Real Space is their synthesis, and they are discovered 
to belong to it as sensa or images do. Thus just as 
there is no such thing as the Spaces of touch and of sight 
which experience connects by a customary bond, but 
touches and colours which are correlated within their single 
extension, so the various intuita of Space are appearances 
of the one Space of which they are appearances. In the 
same way we do not arrive at public Time by union ot 
private times. The private time of the events which I 
experience in the outer world is the one Time in which 
all events occur, seen by me from my angle. The 
universal Time is arrived at by depersonalising the per- 
spective times of many persons, that is, correcting the 
illusions to which they are subject. I can say, this will 
not happen in my time, but it will in yours, meaning that 
my bit of the one Time will not last long enough to 
include your experience. By what means the standard 
Time is reached 1 will not pursue. Along with this 
reference of many times to the one Time there goes the 
awareness of the time-order of my enjoyments, and in the 
end I come to assign the time of my mind to its proper 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


233 


place in the one Time which is both contemplated and 
enjoyed ; just as I learn to locate mental space in the one 
Space. 


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 
On the Possibility of Many Spaces or Times 

For Mr. Bradley these notions are fresh evidence that Space 
and Time are appearance and not reality. It is all the more 
necessary to indicate where I think he is proceeding on a mistaken 
basis, because of his clear insistence on the objectivity of all these 
Times and Spaces. I do not know if other persons have had the 
same experience, but it was this very passage on the space and 
time of ideas which taught me convincingly the non-mental 
character of ideas. 

Of independent Spaces and Times I have little more to say 
than in the text. The difficulty of recognising the spaces and 
times of our ideas to be in the one real Space and d ime is that of 
dating or locating them, assigning them to their proper places. 
The events may have no determinate date ; or they may be 
fictitious events occurring at a real date ; or as in an historical 
romance the dates may be real but the events half-real and half- 
fictitious. In all instances, as in the supposed independent Spaces 
of touch and sight, the problem is not how to correlate dilferent 
spaces or times, but how to correlate different sets of sensible 
events within the one Space or d ime ; or how to correlate distorted 
intuitions of Space and d'ime itseU, as in the opium dream, with 
true physical Space-Time or with mathematical Space and d'ime. 
The synthesis by which in experience we discover the unity of 
Space or Time shows us at the same time how much of our space 
or time experiences is mere idea or illusory or erroneous. 

d'he empirical arguments for independent Spaces or Times 
break down on consideration of the relation of imagination to its 
objects. On the other hand the a priori possibilities which are 
alleged of different orders, especially of d'ime, arise from neglecting 
the empirical character of Space-Time, like the considerations of 
relation discussed in a previous chapter.^ Take first the notion 
that in the Absolute there may be included a time series of the 
reverse order, in which death precedes birth. This clearly neglects 
the empirical fact that Time within our experience is of one 
direction. But the thought of a reversed series in Time would 
have no meaning unless Time were considered as a mere relation 


^ Bk. II. ch. iv. vol. i. pp. 25 ff. 



^34 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


not between times but between events like death or birth which 
take place in time. In other words events like these which owe 
their character to the forward movement of Space-Time as we 
experience it are now taken by themselves independently of the 
Time in which they occurred, and referred to an abstract Time 
supposed to have a reversed order. Complex events are considered 
by themselves apart from the very spatio-temporal events which 
are their material. Death is a particular kind of motion which 
is supposed to go backward and to cease therefore to be death. 
It is fairly evident that here again the error arises from separating 
l ime from Space. To suppose concrete events to occur in the 
reverse order ^ is to alter their spatial character as well. You 
could only save yourself from this conclusion by supposing Space 
too to be, as it were, turned inside out. But the result of that 
would be to leave you with precisely the same world as before, 
and the fancy of a reversed Time becomes gratuitous. 

Nothing in what has been said conflicts with the fact that 
there are in our world symmetrical objects with the same character, 
like Kant’s right-hand and left-hand gloves. But the fancy in 
question would require us to have left-hand gloves which fitted 
the right hand. This they could only do if the right hand 
became the left ; in which case things would remain precisely as 
before, with perhaps a change of names. 

When once it is recognised that a forward movement of 7'ime 
is nothing by itself, but is a forward dating of points of Space in 
Time, the hypothesis of a reversed Time loses all its support. 
With it there vanishes also the fancy of a reversible order of 
causation. 

We cannot then suppose that the same sensible events may 
occur in different worlds in changed orders of Time. But it may 
still be urged there arc or may be contained in the Absolute 
different orders of Ihme, not on the previous epistemological 
ground, but on the ground that there is nothing a priori impossible 
in the supposition. Let us turn again to the empirical nature of 
Space-Time. It is true there are independent lines of advance ; 
and so far different time-series are suggested. But since Time is 
spatial, the unity of these time-series in Time is secured by their 
unification in Space, by their belonging to the one Space. 
Occurring in the one Space, these time-series are connected in 

^ Of course to two individual observers, events may occur in the 
reverse order, the one may hear before he secs, the other see before he 
hears. But this is a reversal of the order of experiencing and not of that 
of the events experienced ; and further to each observer no matter in 
what order his experiencings occur, for him the order of the objects is 
irreversible. In fact we discover the true order of events by making 
allowance for these subjective variations. 



CH. VIII 


ILLUSION AND IDEAS 


235 


Time by the temporal relations between their respective places. 
Correspondingly the unity of all Spaces is secured by their belong- 
ing to one and the same time-series. The independent lines of 
Time are thus unified when they are taken along with their Space. 
If we once separate 'Time from Space we may doubtless conceive 
the notion of various time-orders which are unified in the Absolute, 
not in time (it is not suggested in space), but in some other way 
to us unknown. This leads to the contradictory conclusion that 
several moments of time which for the Absolute are each ‘ now ’ 
in its own series are not identical instants. Whereas if an instant 
is treated as being also a point, we may have the same instant 
repeated at many (indeed at all) points and the same point occur- 
ring at every instant. Thus when Time is regarded as it must 
be spatially, there arc no Times which do not all belong to the 
one rime, belonging as they do to the one Space. Repetition of 
instants in Space is in fact a feature of Space-7'ime. 

If any one still insists on a possible multiplicity of Times or 
Spaces, he can but assert that the whole of Space- Time is repeated 
in the Absolute. In other words the Absolute contains the same 
world over and over again. Such an absurdity it needs not be 
said is not contemplated by the absolutist theory. And yet when 
Space and Time are undivorced, that is the only way in which we 
can have a possible multiplicity either of Spaces or Times. 

No one has contended more forcibly than Mr. Bradley for the 
Kantian principle that the possible is only what may be thought 
in accordance with the conditions of experience. It is just 
because neither Space nor I'ime is taken as it presents itself 
in experience, each united with the other, that he has been 
able to indulge himself in the hypothesis (to which of course he 
does not attribute reality) of dift'erent worlds of Space and different 
orders of Time. 



CHAPTER IX 

VALUE 

A. Tertiary Qualities in General 

Values arise The study of the appearances of things has introduced 
from amai- distiiictioii of truth and error and brought us 

gamationof . • , , ♦ r i -ii 

mind with iiito coiitact With the region or values, ror illusory 
objects. appearances have been seen to lie between veridical ideas 
or images and errors. In themselves, as appearances, 
they are perspectives of the real world from the point of 
view of a mind diseased ; they are objective and non- 
mental and owe to the mind nothing but their selection 
from the real world. They have all the characters of 
reality, and like other ideas are claimants to reality, await- 
ing sentence. When they are believed, when, for example, 
1 say not merely that I see the grey paper green, but that 
the paper is really green, they are errors, and are false or 
untrue beliefs. As half-way towards errors (and they 
are always on the point of being believed), they are rightly 
called unreal. For reality, as will presently be urged, is 
a compendious name for Space-Time and whatever occu- 
pies it. But illusory appearances, in the form in which 
the appearances present themselves, do not truly occupy 
Space-Time. Thus they may be described either as 
embryo errors or undesigned works of art. We have 
thus to investigate values and to ask in what sense they 
belong to things and what their spatio-temporal founda- 
tions are. 

The so-called tertiary ‘qualities’ of things, truth, good- 
ness, and beauty, are values (and for us are the most 

236 



CH. IX. A TERTIARY QUALITIES 237 

important of the values^), and imply and are unintelligible 
without a contrast with their unvalues of error, evil, and 
ugliness. These values are not qualities of reality in the 
same sense as colour, or form, or life. Reality is not 
true nor false ; it is reality. Not even is the mental 
state of illusion or error as a reality true or false ; it is a 
mental reality. Objects are illusory or unreal only in 
relation to the mind which has them. Facts are true only 
in relation to the mind which believes them. In the 
same way there is no goodness in a physical fact as a mere 
external reality ; its goodness, say it is the fact that a wall 
is built, lies in the relation it has to the practical mind 
which wills it, to its being the honest work of the mason. 
Things are good only in so far as we extract their goodness 
by using them to our purposes. That physical things are 
beautiful only in relation to us is a proposition which 
may seem paradoxical and even revolting, and it needs 
and shall receive its justification, when it will be seen that 
a landscape has beauty not in and by itself, but in the 
same way as a poem has beauty, which is made by a man 
and when it has been made is also a physical thing, out- 
side the maker. That truth and reality are not the same 
thing, but that truth belongs to real propositions only in 
their relation to mind, may to some seem obvious and to 
others false,‘^ but I shall maintain that though not obvious 
it is true. Consider the proposition that this rose is 
red. The rose is real, its redness is real, and the redness 
belongs really to the rose. The elements of the proposi- 
tion and the fact that they belong to each other are 
altogether independent of me. This rose would be red 
whether known to me or another and before there 
were eyes to see it. But the proposition is true only if 
there is human appreciation of it. Similarly the colour 
of the rose belongs to it irrespective of any human 

1 Their relation to the other so-called values will be discussed later 
in section F of this chapter. 

2 In my articles on ‘ Collective willing and truth ’ {Mind, N.S. 
vol. xxii., 1913), which are freely drawn upon in this chapter, I still 
assumed truth and reality to be identical. I have since learned 
better. 



238 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE ek. m 

spectator ; but it is not beautiful except for a contemplat- 
ing mind. 

Secondary Valucs then are unlike the empirical qualities of external 
things, shape, or fragrance, or life ; they imply the amal- 
gamation of the object with the human appreciation of it. 
Truth does not consist of mere propositions but of pro- 
positions as believed ; beauty is felt ; and good is the 
satisfaction of persons. In dealing with mere knowing 
we have had on the one side the knowing subject and on 
the other the known object, the two in compresence with 
one another and distinct. We have values or tertiary 
qualities in respect of the whole situation consisting of 
knower and known in their compresence. Strictly speak- 
ing, it is this totality of knower and known, of subject 
and object, which is true or good or beautiful. The 
tertiary qualities are not objective like the secondary ones, 
nor peculiar to mind and thus subjective like conscious- 
ness, nor are they like the primary qualities common both 
to subjects and objects. They are subject-object deter- 
minations. It is the fact believed after a certain fashion 
which is true, and the person who believes truly is the 
mind whose bclievings are determined in a certain fashion 
in accordance with the objects. It is the object which 
pleases after a certain fishion which is beautiful, and the 
person who feels aesthetically is he who feels after a certain 
fashion for certain objects. What this certain fashion is, 
it remains for us to describe. 

But the amalgamation of subject and object, the reality 
constituted of the two is diversely close. In truth, the 
appreciation is determined by the object, for reality is for 
knowing discovered, not made, and our appreciation of 
its truth follows reality itself. In goodness, since we are 
practical and make the results we will, always subject to 
the laws of external reality, good is determined in the 
first instance or primarily by us. Hence in common 
speech we say either that the objective beliefs are true 
or that the person believes truly, as if truth belonged 
indifferently either to the knower or the known. But 
while we call the beliefs true, it would seem unnatural to 
call the acts of believing true ; we say merely we believe 



CH. IX. A TERTIARY QUALITIES 239 

truly.^ On the other hand in morals we call the mind’s 
action good by preference and we do not regard the 
object willed, like the building of the wall, as possessing 
goodness but as being ‘a good.’ In the case of beauty 
the connection between mind and object is much more 
intimate and the beautiful object is not merely considered 
along with its contemplating subject, but they are organic 
to each other. The object then seems to us to possess 
as it were a new quality, comparable to that of colour. It 
is charming as well as red or sweet. 

We have to inquire what characters they are in the Apprecia- 
object which fit it to enter into this amalgamation with 
our appreciations, and again what the nature of the community 
appreciations is in correspondence with their object. At 
present let us deal with the appreciations. They arise 
out of intercourse between minds. For without that 
intercourse the individual mind merely finds itself set 
over objects with which it is compresent, but does not 
recognise that in certain respects they owe their character 
to the mind. We only become aware that a proposition 
is false when we find it entertained by another and our 
own judgment disagrees with his. We then are aware 
that it is not merely possible for us to make mistakes, as 
we find ourselves doing in the course of our experience, 
but that an error may be somehow a real existence. 
Thereafter, when, with this consciousness, this acquaint- 
ance with error, we turn our minds upon ourselves, we 
can judge ourselves with the eyes of the community, and 
recognise that we are or were in error. We judge our- 
selves, in enjoyment, as if we were in our mistake another 
person. In our better mind about the same reality we 
represent the collective mind, and our worse mind was 
then the victim of error for us, and the object of its belief 
an error or erroneous. Thus we do not merely need 
other minds to supply us with facts which may escape 

^ Or, as Mr. J. S. Mackenzie reminds me {Constructive Philosophy, 

Bk. I. ch. viii.), ‘rightly’ or ‘correctly.’ I am not, however, inclined 
to accept the distinction he draws between correct beliefs and true 
judgments. 



240 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


our notice because of our short life and limited oppor- 
tunities. We need them for thinking truly in order that 
we may learn the very contrast of thinking truly and 
falsely. In the same way and more obviously, my 
appreciation of a certain end or object secured by practice 
as being morally good arises in social intercourse, which 
presents me with persons who have willed incompatible 
ends, or who will ends of the same sort or compatible 
with mine. They and I approve certain ends and secure 
them ; they and I secure other ends which fail of approval. 
Such ends are judged bad whether secured by myself or 
another. But it is by this contrast between different 
ends and the wills for them that the appreciation of good 
and bad arises. Thereafter, just as with knowledge, I 
may be myself the representative of the collective mind 
and, when I have willed certain ends myself, may con- 
demn myself and call the end bad and myself who will it 
bad also. 

It is social intercourse, therefore, which makes us 
aware that there is a reality compounded of ourselves and 
the object, and that in that relation the object has a char- 
acter which it would not have except for that relation. 
The rose is red whether we see it or not; and a man dies 
whether naturally or by our act. But the redness of the 
rose is judged true, and the dying of the man by our act 
is judged a wrong, only through the clashing and con- 
firmation of our judgments. Hence it is that these 
experiences of apprehending truth or error, goodness or 
evil, beauty or ugliness, are the culmination and the most 
potent variety of the experiences of co-operation and 
helpfulness, or conflict and dissidence, whereby we come 
to be aware of the existence of other minds or selves as 
well as our own, or to speak more accurately of ourselves 
as merely one unit in a group of selves. In judging our 
objects as true or false, right or wrong, beautiful or ugly, 
we attend to ourselves as like or different from other 
selves. 

Values then or tertiary qualities of things involve 
relation to the collective mind, and what is true, good, 
or beautiful is not true or good or beautiful except as 



cH. IX. A TERTIARY QUALITIES 241 

so combined with the collective mind. By collective 
mind I do not mean a new mind, which is the mind of a 
group. There is no sufficient evidence that such a mind 
exists. It is but a short symbol for that co-operation and 
conflict of many minds which produces standards of 
approval or disapproval. Appreciation is exercised by 
the individual mind in agreement with other minds which 
like him judge well, and in disagreement with minds 
which judge ill. A mind which judges according to the 
standard is a standard mind. For convenience we may 
think of the standard as embodied in the fiction of the 
impartial spectator beloved of the eighteenth century, who 
is not subject -to the weaknesses of varying individuals 
but represents the judgment of the collective as a whole. 
The mind which appreciates value judges it coherently 
with other such minds and is a standard mind ; the mind 
that appreciates amiss judges incoherently with the 
standard mind. Only, a standard mind is not like a 
standard machine, one of which all minds are repetitions. 
On the contrary, it may have in certain respects a highly 
individual part to play. Thus a man may be scientific 
and judge truly though he is confined to one special 
branch of knowledge ; or in practice he may have special 
gifts which mark out for him special duties in life ; or he 
may be perfect in miniatures and incapable of the grand 
style. What makes him a standard man is that whatever 
his role he performs it consistently with the common re- 
quirements, which approve in turn of his specialising. 
He possesses in other words the spirit of truth and good- 
ness and beauty.^ 

But while the appreciation of the mind is needed to 
make the object true or good, to give it the character of 
truth or goodness or their opposites, there is a corre- 
sponding character in the object, of which in our apprecia- 
tion of it we are aware. Just as we apprehend a thing as 

1 The most striking statement of this which I know is in a paper of 
Mr. J. MacCunn on ‘ Local Patriotism and Education/ in his Ethics of 
Social Work (Liverpool, 1911), especially p. 117. His point is that the 
life of the student is his contribution to citizenship. 

VOL. II 


The char- 
acter of the 
object of 
value. 


R 



242 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


spatial through intuition or as coloured through sense, so 
we apprehend through appreciation or valuation a corre- 
sponding character in the object of our appreciation. 
Contrast the beauty of an object with its pleasantness. 
Sugar is pleasant simply because it gives pleasure ; to 
call it pleasant means nothing more than this. There is 
no quality of pleasantness in the sugar in addition to its 
taste or nutritive properties. The pleasantness is the 
effect produced in us by these qualities. So far indeed 
as the pleasantness of a thing lies in its relation to us, 
pleasantness is an anticipation of value on a lower level. 
There would be no pleasantness in the sugar were there 
not living bodies which it affects. But beauty is not 
merely the ability of a thing to please us, still less to give 
us merely sensuous pleasure in virtue of its sensible 
qualities. Beauty means ability to please in a certain 
way, in such a way as to call forth the appreciative aesthetic 
judgment. There is some character then in the beautiful 
object which it possesses over and above the characters 
which it has as an object of sense or mere thinking; this 
character is the object of the act of appreciation. The 
pleasure which the sugar gives me is an affection of 
myself (my body) apprehended in the consciousness of 
pleasure, and it is not a character of the sugar. But my 
appreciation of the beauty of a poem, while it carries with 
it all kinds of sensible pleasures, though it is itself a 
pleasing act of mind, is a reaction to something in 
the poem itself. In like manner, any reality is real 
and known for such, but a proposition to be true 
or false has a character of its own which is re- 
vealed to the act of appreciation by the collective 
mind. 

We shall have to indicate what it is in the object 
which qualifies it to be the object of collective appreciation 
and so to receive in this combination the character of truth 
or goodness or beauty. We shall find in each case that it 
is coherence within the object of value. Thus there is 
no truth nor goodness nor beauty in reality by itself ; 
there is only reality. Reality cannot be either coherent or 
incoherent. But there is coherence in knowledge, in 



CH. IX. A TERTIARY QUALITIES 243 . 

acts of will, in the productions of art or in the beautiful 
aspects of nature. 

Yet this objective character in objects of value, this Theexperi 
coherence amongst our perspectives of reality, differs 
from qualities of things. These are indeed selected by Values 
the mind, as when in looking at marble we see its colour ^uai-tTeg. 
but not its hardness, but they are selected from the thing. 

But coherence and incoherence, though founded in reality, 
are themselves the results of our selection. For objects 
of value, as we shall see, are judgments or imply them. 

Now in judgment, unlike perception, we dissect to 
reunite : we single out some aspect of a thing and then 
assert it of the thing. We unpiece the world in order to 
repiece it. Thus the value of the object, its coherence, is 
not something which is already in the things themselves, 
but is born along with the act of appreciation. Values 
are therefore mental (and the tertiary qualities are even 
human) inventions, though like all inventions their 
materials are independent of the inventor. The property 
of coherence in the object of value belongs to it in so fir 
as the valuing subject appreciates it. But it remains a 
property of the object distinguishable from the act of 
the subject though not existent apart from the subject. 

Values thus belong to the object as it is possessed by the 
mind and not outside that relation. This distinguishes 
value from pleasantness, for the qualities in the sugar 
which made it pleasant are actually in the sugar irrespective 
of the mind to which it gives bodily pleasure. 

We cannot regard value then as a quality of things, 
as if real things were true or filse in themselves, and truth 
or falsity were perceived like colour or taste or life. 

What we apprehend in objects of value is their coherence. 

There is no new quality of things called truth or beauty. 

How then is it that truth and goodness and beauty appear 
to be a distinctive flavour of things } It is because 
coherence satisfies. There are three elementary tendencies 
of which tertiary qualities are the satisfactions and dis- 
satisfactions : the tendency or desire to learn which is 
curiosity, the desire to do, and the desire to produce or 



244 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The reality 
of values. 


give expression to ourselves in outward form. In so far 
as the mind in its appreciations possesses its objects these 
desires are gratified, and it is the glow or warmth in which 
the satisfaction of these tendencies issues which may make 
us fancy that value is something more than mere coherence 
whether in the object of value or in the subject of appre- 
ciation. We may describe truth in knowledge as its 
satisfactoriness to the knower ; but we must beware of 
inventing a quality of satisfiictoriness ; just as much as 
of supposing that pleasantness is a quality of something 
which is sweet to the taste. The character which satisfies 
aesthetically or morally or, to use the usual but infelicitous 
word, logically, is the coherence of the object, and this as 
we have seen exists only in relation to the subject. 

The tertiary qualities, truth and goodness and beauty, 
though they differ from the secondary and primary ones 
in being creations of mind, are not the less real. They 
belong strictly to an amalgamation or union of the object 
with the mind. But their dependence on the mind does 
not deprive them of reality. On the contrary, they are a 
new character of reality, not in the proper sense qualities 
at all, but values^ which arise through the combination of 
mind with its object. What experience of every kind is 
often thought to be, namely, something in which mind and 
its object can be distinguished but cannot be separated, so 
that there can be no space nor colour without an experi- 
encing mind, is true of values but nowhere before. In 
our ordinary experience of colour the colour is separate 
from the mind and completely independent of it. In our 
experience of the colour’s beauty there is indissoluble 
union with the mind. It might be thought that to admit 
value to be the work of mind is to give up the case for 
believing colour and the other secondary qualities to be 
independent of it. This would be a misconception, for 
the cases are not parallel. If colour were, as it is alleged 
to be, the work of mind, we should have the unintelligible 
result that a set of vibrations is seen not as vibrations but 
as colour. No such paradox arises in seeing the colour 
beautiful. For the colour in being judged beautiful is 



CH. IX.A TERTIARY QUALITIES 245 

still seen as colour ; its beauty is a character superadded 
to it from its relation to the mind in virtue of which it 
satisfies, or pleases after a certain fashion, or aesthetically. 

The tertiary qualities are as real as the primary or 
secondary, but more complex in their conditions, and they 
are not properly qualities.^ Strangely enough it has been 
thought that if they depend, as in our view they do, on 
mind, and are its creations through social intercourse, they 
are therefore in some way unreal ; as if the combination 
of two realities could beget an unreality. The mind is the 
highest finite empirical reality we know. Strange that its 
touch should be thought to de-realise its creations. The 
misconception would appear to be the lingering on of an 
old tradition. When the ideas of primary qualities were 
believed to be copies of reality, and those of secondary 
qualities merely the effects produced by realities upon 
our minds, reality belonged in a special way to primary 
qualities, and secondary ones were merely subjective and 
not real. It seems to be thought that values because they 
do not exist without minds are similarly subjective, and 
with nothing in reality corresponding to them. But for 
us mind is one of the realities, and is itself in the end a 
complex of Space-Time stuff. Values arise in the relation 
of these realities to other realities, in virtue of which a 
fresh reality is constituted. The simplest example of a 
reality which is compounded of mind and a non-mental 
thing is the ^person’ itself in which mind and body are 
connected together, and the person is neither the subject- 
self alone nor the object-self alone, but the union of the 
two ; it is the body along with the consciousness of it or 
the consciousness along with the body which is its object. 
In the same way we have a reality which is not merely the 
fact that water boils at 212'' F. but that fact related to the 
mind which believes it, or to put the same thing otherwise 
that fact as possessed by the mind, that is, a truth. Or 
we have a statue of a certain form which in its relation 
to the mind which judges it beautiful is beautiful. The 
realities which furnish objects of the appreciation of value 

1 The primary qualities are not, properly speaking, qualities either. 
(See above, ch. ii. p. 56). 



246 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


are thus joined to the mind or organic to it (though in 
various degrees of closeness in the connection) in like 
manner as the body is conjoined with the mind in the 
personal experience. 

Strictly speaking, it is this compound whole to which 
value belongs. And in each such whole we can distinguish 
on the one side the object of value and on the other the 
valuing subject. As in this relation, the value, truth, 
goodness, or beauty is attributed to the object, known 
or produced ; the appreciating subject thinks, wills, or 
judges accordingly. Values have thus a status of their 
own different from that of either primary or secondary 
qualities. 

In dealing with the other empirical problems we 
have at the beginning indicated the place of the feature 
discussed in the whole empirical system. It would be 
natural, following this plan, to show that the tertiary 
qualities do not stand in the world unique but have their 
analogues on lower levels. This would, however, be 
difficult to do without further explanation. I shall try 
first to show in some greater detail how the different tertiary 
qualities verify the general account given of them ; and 
in particular in what different ways the subject is united 
with its object in the three cases. 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


247 


B. Truth and Error 

Reality and truth are not identical, and they are differ- 
ently apprehended by the mind. The real is Space-Time 
as a whole and every complex or part within it. Our 
consciousness of reality is the consciousness that anything 
we apprehend belongs to Space-Time. For nothing in 
our experience, as we have seen, is isolated and stands 
absolutely by itself, but is apprehended with its surrounding 
fringe of Space-Time. We are aware of our own reality 
so far as we enjoy ourselves as a part of Space-Time 
belonging to the whole ; the objects we contemplate are 
real in our experience in so far as they are apprehended 
as parts of Space-Time distinct from ourselves. This 
distinctness of external objects from ourselves gives to 
our experience of non-mental reality the consciousness we 
have of being controlled from without or objectively. 
The non-mental reality is something which as occupying 
a part of Space-Time distinct from ourselves is something 
which we accept as given, and whose shapes and qualities 
we follow in our awareness of it. Such recognition of the 
given is the speculative shape assumed by the necessities 
of practice. In order to act we must obey. Stone walls 
do not imprison our imaginations, but they imprison our 
bodies and therefore control our perception of the walls. 
For perception of an object is the speculative side of 
practical response to it. This consciousness of control 
from the object is indeed not the consciousness of its 
reality, but only of its not being ourselves. But it 
accounts for the importance of sensation, with its vivacity 
and intrusive character, its manner of breaking in upon 
us,” in assigning the different appearances of separate 
things to their right places. 

Reality is, then, experienced whether in enjoyment or 
contemplation as that which belongs to Space-Time, or 


Reality and 
truth. 


Belief. 



248 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

the character of reality is the character of so belonging. 
So much for the perceptual experience. When we judge, 
our consciousness of the reality of what we judge is 
experienced in belief. Belief, in a judgment (and when- 
ever we judge we believe), is the awareness that what is 
judged belongs to Space-Time as a whole. So far there 
is truth in the analysis of judgment performed by Mr. 
Bradley, that every judgment is ultimately about the 
whole Reality.^ In believing that the rose is red, I am 
aware that redness belongs as a quality within the space- 
time of the rose, and that this space-time is a part of 
the whole. For judging is the speculative side of 
volition, and what is willed in willing is the proposition 
or object judged.^ The object of the will to strike a 
man is the proposition ^ the man is struck,’ or ^ I strike 
the man.’ Now the process of willing is this : there is 
first the act of preparation for my end, to which corre- 
sponds the assumption or supposal of the end, the 
supposal that the man is struck. Willing occurs when 
this preparatory act, which is a relatively detached portion 
of myself, is clinched with my whole self, and we have 
the consciousness of consenting to the act, the so-called 
fiat of the will. The preparation for the end then 
becomes effective and passes into performance. In being 
adopted by the self the assumption becomes a judgment, 
the mere predication becomes an assertion, and the belief 
is the speculative aspect of the act of consent. Corre- 
spondingly the judgment, ^ the man is struck,’ is re- 
cognised as belonging to the world of Space-Time of 
which my contemplated self is a part, and which surrounds 
that self as a fringe. Believing is thus the fiat of the 
speculative will, and its object is the reality of what is 
judged as a part of reality in general, asserted Instead 
of merely being predicated. Seeing that percepts and 

1 I say so far, for it is not I think true that in judging the rose to be 
red, I attribute to Reality the rose-being-red as an ideal content as Mr. 
Bradley thinks. Rather the case is that I attribute the redness to the rose 
which, itself spatio-temporal, is recognised in belief as a part of Space- 
Time, vaguely adumbrated as a whole. 

2 See before, ch. iv. p. 122, and the reference to Brit, Journ. of 
Psych, vol. iv. ‘ Conational Psychology.’ 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


249 


memories are undeveloped or implicit judgments, we 
may, without impropriety, also say that we believe in 
our percepts and memories, or that these come to us 
with a ‘^coefficient of reality,” which is the awareness 
of their belonging to Space-Time as a whole. 

To be real then is to belong to Space-Time, as our 
hypothesis implies and experience attests. The appre- 
hension of truth, and of what corresponds to it on the 
perceptual level, arises when we proceed to sort out our 
spatio-temporal objects into their groups. For then we 
find that our objects do not all of them belong to Space- 
Time in the form in which they pretend to belong to it, 
or in the places to which they make claim. Some of our 
objects are illusory ; they are real so far as they are 
perspectives of Space-Time, but they contain an element 
introduced by our personality, and do not belong where 
they seem to belong. We become aware of the difference 
of real appearances and illusory ones or mere images. In 
like manner we discover in sorting out beliefs that some 
are erroneous. They are still believed and we have the 
consciousness of their reality. For errors are believed, 
and error differs from a lie by its sincerity. But their 
objects though rooted in reality do not belong where 
they seem. In some judgments we apprehend reality 
truly ; in others falsely or erroneously. This contrast 
of true and false judgments, and that of reality and mere 
images, are of the same order. We do not, however, call 
percepts true, because a percept contains no judgment ; 
it contains only the germ of judgment, for in the percept 
the elements united in it are not apprehended in their 
relations, that is, with a consciousness of their relations 
as such. 

The act of judging or believing stands in us over The object 
against its object, which is the judgment, proposition, 
or belief. None of the names is free from ambiguity : 
‘judgment’ has the usual double application either to 
the act or its object or both combined ; so too has 
‘ belief,’ though ‘ beliefs ’ in the plural stands for what 
is believed ; ‘ proposition ’ contains a reference to 



250 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


language, and ‘ propositum ’ would be a better, though 
a pedantic name. The best name of all is ‘ fact,’ were 
it not for the awkwardness of describing erroneous 
judgments as facts. For what is judged is a fact or 
claims to be one. Now, a fact is a relation whose terms 
are at once apprehended in distinction and referred to 
the reality to which they both belong and thereby to 
reality as a whole. This reference is the element of 
assertion. ‘ A’s going down the street ’ is a relation 
which I perceive ; ‘ A is going down the street ’ is the 
same relation judged, and is a fact. The same relation 
which is apprehended within reality in the percept is 
apprehended explicitly in the judgment. The difference 
in contents of the judgment from the percept is in the 
form. It is from the idea, or rather from the supposal, 
that judgment differs in its material, for it adds to the 
supposal the reference to the whole reality.^ The 
judgment is the percept dissected and reconstructed ; 
it is not merely a perspective of reality but a perspec- 
tive containing an assertion : 1 shall say, an asserted 
perspective. 

But the unpiecing and repiecing contained in our 
apprehension of the asserted perspective does not make 
what is judged a creation of the mind, any more than 
counting makes number so. The pieces and their unity 
are contained in the reality. Accordingly, when we judge 
physical objects, the fact which is judged is the actual 
physical relation. The propositum, ‘ Caesar crossed the 
Rubicon at such a date,’ is not different from the actual 
event so described which happened in the past, save 
of course that it is only a perspective of that event. 
And since universals are plans which really subsist, the 
presence of universals in propositions : ‘ this rose is red,’ 
^ this red thing is a rose,’ or even ‘ the lion is carnivorous ’ : 
does not make that which is judged less a fact. The 
singular proposition is a singular, the universal proposition 

^ I believe, therefore, with Miss Wodehouse {Presentation of Reality^ 
Cambridge, 1910, ch. xii.) that the difference of supposal and belief is not 
merely, as Mr. Meinong thinks, one of mental attitude but of the 
contents of the object. 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


251 


a subsistentj fact On the other hand, just because in 
judgment the percept is unpieced and repieced, because 
the perspective is asserted and is declared to be, as such 
or as stated, real, the fact cannot be apprehended without 
raising the question, Is it truly real ? Facts are not true 
or false, but of a fact we must ask. Is it truly a fact as 
it claims to be ? 

Besides the non-mental ‘ facts ’ which are propositions 
or beliefs, there are mental facts which consist of enjoy- 
ments, related to one another under all the forms of the 
categories, which may be called mental propositions. 
They are not the objects of believing but they are the 
judging itself They are, in the strict sense of that word, 
the contents of the act of judging. Truth and error are 
possible with respect to enjoyed propositions as well as 
contemplated ones. But I shall deal first with con- 
templated propositions and return later to the mental 
ones. The science which systematises mental propositions 
is psychology. 

What then do we apprehend in apprehending the 
truth of a judgment ^ 

We may ask the question, what makes truth ? in 
different senses. We may mean, what propositions must 
I believe to have truth ? The answer to this question 
is supplied by the sciences, including the science of 
philosophy. Every science consists of a body of pro- 
positions organised and systematised in a certain fashion, 
and in so far as these propositions • are related to the 
mind which contemplates (or enjoys) them. That is to 
say, a science is all the true physical (or mental) facts 
belonging to any department of reality, in so far as they 
are the possession of minds which think truly. Physics 
is the universal and particular facts comprehended within 
physical existence, regarded as true, that is, as possessed 
by minds which are scientific. Outside the relation to 
the minds which know them, and without which they 
would not be true, there Is nothing in a science but that 
reality with which it deals. 

The other meaning of the question is, what makes 


What 
makes 
truth true. 



252 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Not corre- 
spondence 
to reality. 


But 

coherence. 


truth true ? This is the question to which metaphysics 
has to supply the answer. There is a further question 
which is answered by the science of logic : what are the 
relations subsisting between the propositions of any 
science in virtue of which they assume their systematic 
form ? We are dealing here with the abstract or 
philosophical question. 

There is one mode of answering this question to 
which we are compelled by the whole spirit of our inquiry 
to give short shrift. It is the so-called correspondence 
theory of truth : a proposition is true if it agrees with 
reality, false or erroneous if it does not. For how shall 
we know reality and bring our beliefs to that test, except 
in the form of other propositions ? If the reality is 
something other than what appears to us ‘‘ by all the 
ways” of sense, ideas, imagination, memory, conception, 
judging, it cannot be appealed to. Our beliefs are then 
conceived to float as it were midway between the actions 
of our minds and some reality to which we are perhaps 
said to refer. They belong somehow to the mind and 
are not distinct non-mental existences, which they truly 
are, just as are the objects of our sensings or rememberings. 
On the other hand, if truth is tested by reference to other 
propositions the test is not one of correspondence to 
reality but of whether the proposition tested is consistent 
or not with other propositions. This is the test of 
‘ coherence.’ 

Our answer must be that truth and error depend in 
any subject-matter on whether the reality about which 
the proposition is conversant admits or excludes that 
proposition in virtue of the internal structure of the 
reality in question ; that this truth is apprehended 
through intercourse of minds of which some confirm the 
true proposition and reject the false, and that truth is the 
proposition so tested as thus related to collective judging. 
Any reality is an occupation of Space-Time in a particular 
configuration. I call that its internal structure. Pro- 
positions made about this reality are asserted perspectives 
of it. True propositions belong to the reality ; false ones 
introduce elements from elsewhere. True propositions 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


253 


are thus also real ; but their truth is different from their 
reality. True propositions cohere ; or rather false 
propositions are incoherent with true propositions and 
are rejected by us. But that rejection is determined by 
the reality itself, for it is by experience of reality and 
experiment upon it that the propositions become sorted 
out into groups. The one group, which the internal 
structure of the reality allows us to retain, are truths ; 
those which are rejected are errors. The rejection of 
error is performed at the guidance of reality through the 
clash of minds. For the reality itself cannot be said to 
exhibit incoherence, since all occupation of Space-Time 
is orderly. Nor can the reality be said to reject an 
erroneous proposition ; it only exhibits features which are 
different from those contained in the error and compel us 
to reject belief in the error. The conflict and co-operation 
is between the perspectives or judged objects as possessed 
by the observing minds. 

All the propositions which are asserted perspectives what 
of any subject-matter are the beliefs about it. The 
aggregate of true beliefs is knowledge, and as exhibited 
in their inter-relations the knowledge is science. It is a 
complex system of facts, some singular, some general, 
some descriptive, some explanatory, forming an inex- 
haustible total. Moreover, when the subject of the 
science is sensible, some of its propositions deal with 
things in their sensible characters. A science always 
begins by being a collection of propositions with sensible 
material, and to the end it is never a mere organisation of 
universal propositions, though these are its highest achieve- 
ments. Hence the part played by sensible verification 
in the discovery of true knowledge. Now it is the 
selection of such propositions by the minds which believe 
truly, which makes the propositions true ; the error is 
not a real fact but a pretender which is rejected. Hence 
since knowledge and science are generally understood 
with the implied emphasis on their truth, they are not 
reality itself but that reality as possessed by minds. 

But the propositions themselves which possess the 
character of truth are real facts contained within the 



254 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Coherence 
as (letcr- 
mincd by 
reality. 


reality Investigated, and when their truth is disregarded 
they are not different from reality. Apart from its mere 
registration In books, a science such as physics is nothing 
but the actual world as more fully revealed to us than 
to ordinary observation, in its details and inter-relations, 
as they are contained in propositions singular and 
universal. This does not mean that he who possesses 
physical science carries the physical world about with 
him, but only that he is compresent with it. Proposi- 
tions, like other cognita, are perspectives of the world, 
and when they are true are really in it, and in the places 
where they pretend to be. 

To verify this account of truth, let us take the 
simplest case — that in which the subject-matter is a 
singular existent, judged in a singular proposition, ^this 
rose is yellow.’ If the rose is really yellow its internal 
structure is different from that of a white rose, and it 
compels us to reject the attribution to it of whiteness. 
The agreement of many persons In the belief that the 
rose is yellow and not white does not make the rose 
really yellow, it only follows that reality ; but their 
discovery that It is yellow and not white, as believed 
by some one else, makes the belief ‘ the rose is yellow ’ 
true and ^ the rose is white ’ an error. Here the sphere 
of reality is no more than the colour of the rose. The 
erroneous belief accepts from somewhere in reality as a 
whole the colour white, which is one of the alternative 
colours of things in general and roses in particular, and 
attaches white to the rose. Owing to some defect in 
the erroneous observer, whether of sense or of careless- 
ness or haste. Instead of seeing the colour which is before 
him in the reality, the yellow rose, he as it were squints 
at reality as a whole, and his mind is compresent with 
white instead of yellow. One eye sees this rose in its 
shape ; the other sees not the yellow within the shape 
but a white. Thus two new realities have come into 
being ; one is the union of the real yellow rose with 
the mind of a true observer ; the other is the union of 
reality, though not merely this particular reality of the 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


255 

yellow rose, with the mind of the observer who squints 
or has a twist in his mind. That reality is the erroneous 
belief ; it is the artificial product of the mind and reality 
as a whole, which contains this rose and colours and 
relation of the rose to colour — the fact that the rose has 
some colour, as that fact operates on a twisted mind. 
The true belief in so far as true is equally an artificial 
product of reality and the minds which suffer no twist. 
Which of the two new realities is true in respect of the 
subject-matter, what is the colour of this rose, is settled 
by the experimental testing of the rose, but the distinc- 
tion of truth from error consists in the rejection of the 
false belief by those who hold the true one. Thus 
the proposition ^ the rose is yellow ’ owes its reality to 
itself, but its truth to the rejection of the error, which 
takes place in the refusal by the true minds of the 
erroneous one. 

When we pass to a more complex subject-matter 
such as life or living beings, we find the same mark of 
error and truth as in the simpler case we have just 
discussed. Here the intrinsic structure of the reality, 
the relations between its parts, is expressed by a multi- 
tude of propositions instead of a single one. True 
propositions are those which settle down into a system 
with one another ; errors are propositions which do not 
cohere with the rest and are discarded. But what is this 
incoherence of the error ? For by calling it incoherent 
with true rropositions which are real we seem to be 
making the error also real, in the erroneous form which 
it has. The error, however, only has reality as being 
possessed by the mind. Accordingly, it is incoherence 
which must be accounted for in order to understand 
what is meant by coherence. Now, a proposition is 
incoherent with other propositions about that reality, in 
so far as the internal structure of the reality is different 
from the features contained in the erroneous proposition ; 
and this is discovered by experiment. Physically, the 
thing judged is in a certain respect different from the 
property imputed to it in the erroneous judging. Take 
for example the erroneous belief that an animal can live 



256 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Incoher- 
ence and 
real opposi- 
tion. 


in an atmosphere deprived of oxygen. Experiment shows 
that life ceases in such an atmosphere. The proposition 
which declares that an animal dies under such conditions 
is true ; but, since the conduct of life contains something 
dilferent from the absence of oxygen, the proposition 
stated at first is erroneous, and incoherent with the true 
propositions. We take the reality life and this same 
reality in air deprived of oxygen, and, since life disappears 
at the contact, the conditions of life are different from 
such atmosphere. Thus neither do we treat the error 
as if it were a real fact of life, which it cannot be, nor 
on the other hand do we treat it as a mere suggestion of 
our minds, something which has an existence somewhere 
in a non-mental world of neutral being. We experiment 
so as to test it in the only way we can. We take the 
realities with which it deals, life and the atmosphere 
described, and discover whether the one reality is 
compatible with the other. It is in this sense then 
that the coherent propositions which make up a given 
department of reality are incoherent with errors. 

Hence the incoherence in every department of an 
erroneous proposition with true ones is not to be con- 
fused with the real opposition between propositions 
which arc both true. Such conflicts are of the very 
essence of reality and contribute to its reality. Thus a 
body may be acted on by two equal and opposite pulls, 
and in consequence is at rest. There are two conflicting 
causes at work within the reality, but there is no 
incoherence. If the body were not at rest the two 
opposite forces would not be equal. There would only 
be incoherence if the two propositions asserted were, 

‘ the body is actually moving to the east,’ and ‘ is 
actually moving to the west.’ Thus there is no error 
within a given reality itself. An error is concerned with 
a piece of reality which is outside and does not belong 
to the given reality, though, as we saw in the case of 
the colour of the rose, the reality it deals with (the white 
colour) belongs to a class of realities (colours) which has 
its representative (yellow colour) within the given reality. 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


257 


Nor again does the incoherence of the error with the 
truth lie solely in the conflict of the true believing with 
the erroneous one. That conflict does exist. But it 
follows and is parallel to the contemplated incoherence. 

For in cognition we watch and do not make. Our 
believings are guided by the reality outside us, and we 
do not make the reality but find it. It is only the truth 
that we make when we compare ourselves with one 
another. Hence it is that in respect of all empirical 
matter the proposed test of truth which consists in the 
inconceivability of the opposite is useless. We cannot 
tell what is empirically inconceivable till we have tried. 

The test is only valid in respect of categorial material, 
for there we enjoy these determinations within ourselves 
as well as contemplate them outside us. We cannot 
believe a thing to be moving up and down at once, for 
in this case the believings also are incompatible. If A 
is greater than B and B than C, A is greater than C. 

We cannot conceive the negative, and our impotence is 
a test (though not the ground) of such truths. But 
such truths are limited in their range. In fact the real 
value of the proposed test lies, not in its practical useful- 
ness, but rather in its calling attention to the difference 
between empirical qualitative determinations and the 
determinations of categorial features. 

For simplicity’s sake, I have assumed that the error is 
completely incoherent with the propositions that make up 
the reality. In the practical work of discovery this is not 
always or necessarily so. We have propositions which we 
discover to be partly true and partly false. A new pro- 
position tested by previously discovered ones may show us 
that our old truths have to be modified in rejecting the new 
proposition. These details though vastly important for 
the method of science may be omitted. 

The test of whether propositions believed are real at Truth and 
their face value is thus the coherence of certain proposi- 
tions with one another and their incoherence with others, mind. 

It is reality itself which determines this distinction. 

Beliefs get sorted out, and one set are real in themselves, 

VOL. II s 



258 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


the others belong to a different reality. But this distinc- 
tion only comes into existence through the conflict and 
co-operation of many minds, and the reality, or real pro- 
positions, are true only in their relation to the minds 
which have reality for their possession and reject the 
judgments of the erroneous minds. Truth and error are 
in this sense creations of mind at the bidding of reality. 
Moreover, they imply relation not to the individual mind 
as individual but to the individual mind in its attitude to 
the social mind, that is to the individual as a standard mind. 
The mind which has truth has it so far as various minds 
collectively contribute their part to the whole system of 
true beliefs ; the mind which has error is so far an outcast 
from the intellectual community. Thus while on its 
objective or contemplated side, error is detected by being 
convicted of introducing an element of reality which does 
not belong to the reality investigated, on its subjective or 
believing side it fails to cohere with the social believings. 
In this process of discrimination of believings there occur 
all manner of adjustments of one believing to another, 
always at the guidance and under the control of appeal to 
the contemplated fact, but in one way or another truth 
means the settling down of individual believings into 
a social whole and the condemnation of the heretical or 
unscientific believing ; just as in practical matters by 
interchange of counsel men settle down into a common 
course of action which may be the initial proposal of some 
one, or a number, which wins assent, or may turn out in 
the end to be a proposal different from the original pro- 
posal of any one person ; while some again dissent. 

Truth and True knowledge therefore owes its truth to the 
reality. collectivc miiul but its reality to the proposition which is 
judged. The divergences of standard minds from the 
isolated minds of the victims of error are the mode by 
which we come to apprehend propositions as true, by 
their contrast with error. Thus in being aware of a real 
proposition as true, we add nothing to its reality. On 
the contrary the truth follows in the wake of the reality. 
There is no property ot coherence in reality itself. 
Coherence is a property of the perspectives which we have 



CH. IX. 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


259 

ourselves selected ; it is we who take them piecemeal, and 
we who reunite them, and their reunion is performed 
throutjh their exclusion of the incoherent error. Hence it 
was said above that the coherence of true propositions was 
generated in the relation of the reality to the mind. In 
entering into this relation the reality gives rise, in its com- 
bination with the standard mind, to truth, and may be said 
to become true. For it is the intrinsic structure of the 
reality which compels the distinction amongst ourselves 
between apprehending truly or falsely and between truth 
and falsity in our propositions. Hence for reality to be 
true it must be possessed by us. Whereas merely to be 
known, that is to be apprehended or cognised, even to 
be believed, reality does not need to be so held. To be 
known is to be compresent with a mind. The reality 
owes to mind its being known, but it would be what it is 
without being known. Not its esse is its fercipi^ but 
merely its percipi is its percipi. The same thing is true so 
fir of its truth. Its reality, being independent of its being 
known, is independent of its being known truly. But its 
truth cannot be detached from its true or false knower, 
for it is the reality itself in virtue of the way in which it 
occupies its space-time which resists and is known to resist 
the attempts on the part ot certain minds to attach to it 
certain features of other reality which do not belong to it. 
Therefore merely to be known is indeed to stand in rela- 
tion of compresence to mind, but to be known truly or 
falsely is not only to be compresent with a mind but to 
be united with it in one whole situation, to be part of a 
reality compounded of what knows it and itself. As 
entering into this total, the object is true or false and the 
mind judges truly, or falsely. Were all minds perfect 
instruments of apprehension, mirrors of reality without 
inequalities of the surface (in Bacon’s phrase), there would 
be no truth, tor there would be no error. It is because 
minds differ and vary from normality that reality compels 
minds to distinguish among one another and thereby to 
create truth, in their objects and in themselves. 

Why, it may be asked, should truth and error require 



26 o 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


No truth 
or error 
for a mere 
individual. 


the contrast of more minds than one ? Does not the 
individual by himself distinguish truth and error ? Does 
he not make mistakes and on testing them pronounce them 
to be errors ? It is true that owing to our limitations, a 
single individual can hardly become fully acquainted with 
any reality, that he needs to be supplied with information 
from others who view the topic from different angles, 
which his own life is not long enough for him to occupy 
in turn, and that it is easier for him to recognise error 
when it is brought before him in other persons as well. 
Give him time enough to see the topic from all sides, and 
he would arrive at truth and discard error in his own 
person. 

Now it is of course true that in practice the individual 
does this. But then the individual in practice never is a 
solitary individual. He may investigate alone. But each 
of us has been trained to be on his guard against error, and 
as Robinson Crusoe carried into his solitude the tradition 
of civilised life, so the individual working alone represents 
social intellectual tradition. He judges himself with the 
social eye, as in conduct we judge our own morality by 
our conscience, which is the vicegerent of society. We 
deceive ourselves if we confuse such an individual with a 
real solitary. Imagine such a real solitary, an individual 
who learns entirely for himself He would make mistakes 
of sense or judgment, and, acting on them in practice, or 
pursuing his purely intellectual inquiry on the strength of 
such belief, would find that the facts were different, and 
would change his mind, supposing his mistake had not led 
to his own destruction. He would say I thought this 
thing was so but I find it is not so. My old belief does 
not work, and I abandon it. His mistakes would be mis- 
adventures. But he would not say 1 was in error. He 
would only say I entertained a belief which I am compelled 
by the facts to abandon, and in general he would abandon 
his old belief without thinking about it at all, just as when 
we find we are cold with one coat we put on a thicker one, 
not saying to ourselves I was foolish to put on the thin 
coat, but simply exchanging it for another. He would 
not be aware of an error, for he would only know that 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


261 


the reality was not as he thought it to be ; he would 
only notice that things were not so, not that it was his 
mind, his believing, which was at fault. For, to repeat 
a thrice-told tale, in the absence of other minds he would 
not notice his own. But when his fellow entertains the 
belief which the reality rejects, he can say it is your mind, 
your believing which is at fault ; not only does your 
belief fail to work, but you are in error. When he has 
once realised what error is, as the product of a mind and 
reality, he can then, with this experience, consider his own 
belief as if he himself in entertaining it were another 
person, whom he happens to identify with himself, and say 
not only was my belief a failure which I changed, but it 
was an error. Thus to suppose that a really solitary 
individual can be aware of error in his own person is to 
commit that mistake of ‘ introjection ’ which is responsible 
for so many fillacies in philosophy. It is to read into 
ourselves what we discover in feet from observation of 
others. We treat ourselves as if without others we could 
discover in ourselves what we only discover from them. 

Truth and error are therefore as much social products 
as moral good and evil ; as indeed would follow from the 
principle that speculation is suspended practice. What is 
true of the one is true with appropriate changes of the 
other. Sociality is a feature which they have in common, 
being fundamental, Flence the mere individual is not, as 
such, the subject which judges truly or falsely ; he is the 
subject of appreciations of truth and error, only so far as 
he represents the social mind ; and here as in other cases 
value is something objective like language. Truth for the 
individual is a secondary conception. It is not curiosity 
alone which furnishes truth, but curiosity chastened by 
comparison with the curiosity of others. 

Many minds are needed then for truth, not because 
the many fecets of reality are visible only to a multiplicity 
of minds, but because in the intercourse of minds the truth 
is created as truth, at the guidance of reality, by mutual 
confirmation or exclusion of beliefs. Thus just as truth, 
as truth, is real in arising out of the relation of a reality to 


Error as 
the obhque 
judgment 
of reality. 



262 


p:mpirical existence 


BK. Ill 


the mind that is blended with it, so also error is real only 
as possessed by the unstandardised believer. The erroneous 
proposition at its face value is not real ; it is unreal, that 
is, it is false. It is not merely, like an illusory appearance, 
what reality reveals itself to be to the mind with a twist or 
squint. For it is believed. The illusory appearance so 
long as it remains merely such is not believed, but only 
received. Accordingly with changed conditions it may be 
replaced by a real appearance. Withdraw the grey paper 
from its red ground and it looks grey. The appearance 
would not be there but for the perversity of the observer’s 
mind. But he does not identify himself with it. This is 
just what the victim of error does. For he judges ; he 
brings the elements of his judgment into explicit relation 
with each other and holds the combination to be real. 
Hence his proposition is not merely his perverse perspec- 
tive of the world, but it is his making. The reality of the 
error resides therefore in the new reality composed of 
himself and the external reality : and because of this can 
be rejected by the standard minds. 

At the same time, as has been abundantly illustrated 
from the simple case of the misjudgment of the colour of 
the rose on a previous page, error is always in contact with 
reality and is partial truth. Moreover, it is in partial 
contact with the reality about which it is erroneous. It is 
always, as Mr. Stout ^ has explained, the adoption of an 
unsuitable real alternative amongst the alternatives open 
to the kind of thing to which the subject belongs. Mere 
unmeaning combinations of ideas are not errors. The 
error is founded on the topic in question and on the 
characters which are appropriate to its sphere but do not 
happen to fit this member of the sphere in question. 
Thus to say that virtue is red is not an error but mean- 
ingless ; but to say that it is physically necessary and not 
free is, or may be, erroneous because virtue belongs to 
the class of actions, some of which are compulsory and 
others free. It is only erroneous to believe that a menace 
inspires terror in a given case, because menaces may 
inspire terror or anger or some other emotion or, to 
^ ‘ Error,’ /oc, cit. 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


263 

take the alternatives still more widely, must have 
some effect upon the human mind to which they are 
addressed. 

True propositions exist, it was said, in the sphere of Progress 
reality to which they are referred. But the sphere to 
which they are referred docs not exhaust the whole of 
that department of reality. Thus propositions about life 
belong to life as it reveals itself to minds, and that 
revelation Is partial. It is only therefore within the sphere 
of reality as revealed (the only meaning which minds can 
attach to any department of reality, for example life) that 
the true propositions are real. As knowledge grows life 
may be revealed more fully, and propositions true for the 
older revelation may need to be readjusted for the fuller 
one. The once true proposition may turn out even to be 
erroneous for the newer knowledge, while it remains true 
and real as such within the narrower range of ancient 
revealed fact. Thus truth is at once eternal and pro- 
gressive. ‘ Once true always true,' so long as the range of 
facts is restricted as before. But truth varies and grows 
obsolete or even turns to filsehood. Hence a theory may 
be true for one generation and false for the next. Yet it 
remains true for the range of facts open to the minds of 
the earlier generation. This is possible because truth is 
different from reality and implies possession by a standard 
mind. Reality determines what is true, but reality includes 
more than that part of it which affects any one generation. 

The atoms really are simple to the minds which used 
methods different from the present physical ones. They 
have not ceased to have the simplicity imputed to them 
then. But they are no longer simple for us. The reality 
which is known by true knowing Is still only a human 
selection from the whole reality or even from the whole of 
any specific department of reality, like life or light. The 
truth, that old truth may be new error, does but help us 
better to see that truth like error is a product of mind 
and reality ; that error is always partial truth, and truth 
in its turn may contain the seeds of error, but that truth 
does not distort the reality which it contemplates, and only 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


264 


No degrees 
of truth or 
reality j 
but of 
perfection. 


becomes error if the reality reveals itself to be larger and 
perhaps different than it was before revealed. The only 
propositions which are true and cannot change are those 
which embody categorial characters, as that every event 
has a cause. Even mathematical propositions since they 
are concerned with empirical determinations of space and 
time may be subject to error because of the defects to 
which our intuitions are subjected. Truth is thus the 
ever-increasing adaptation of minds to the reality which 
they know, which is the same thing as to say it is the 
progressive revelation of reality to the minds which know 
it. As lower types of life can sustain themselves in their 
surroundings along with the higher types which make use 
of them, so lower ranges of truth persist and remain true 
for their apprehended world while at the same time they 
give way to fuller and higher or more perfect truths which 
are built upon them. 

There are therefore, I must fain believe, no degrees of 
truth and much less of reality. What is real is real, though 
any portion of reality is incomplete. What is true is true. 
But while there are no degrees in the truth of knowledge 
there are all manner of degrees in the perfection or range 
of knowledge. This variation occurs in two ways. In 
the first place later truth about the same kind of subject, 
for example light, may be fuller than earlier, and this may 
so alter the relative proportion of a given proposition that 
it becomes inapplicable to the wider range of reality and 
becomes untrue. The electromagnetic theory of light is 
not truer than the emission theory but more perfect, and 
renders the old incomplete and in some respects erroneous. 
Truth may also be in a different way not truer but more 
perfect, in correspondence with the perfection of the reality 
which is apprehended through it. Life is not more real 
than matter but a fuller kind of reality. Their reality 
is one and the same, the occupation of a space-time with 
a certain configuration. But one reality may be more 
comprehensive than another, as for instance number is 
more comprehensive than life or mind, to both of which 
number is applicable. Or again one kind of reality may 
from its complexity be more harmonious than another in 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


265 

the sense that its parts are in more intimate connection.^ 
These things make the reality and its correspondent truth 
more perfect but do not affect its intrinsic reality or truth. 

It is only that there is more to the reality or truth in one 
case than the other ; a wider range or richer contents in 
one case than the other. The doctrine of degrees of truth 
or reality rests on the belief that finites lose their value 
or at least alter it by being taken along with others. If 
all finites are spatio-temporal complexes this belief cannot 
be well founded. One finite may be more complete or 
more highly organised than another, but the second 
occupies its space-time as much as the first, and is equally 
real ; and the propositions about it equally true. 

It is doubtless the constant change in the contents of Prag- 
truth as knowledge grows that has led to the doctrine that 
truth is nothing but efficiency, that the test of truth is that 
it works, not merely or only in the way of securing practical 
success, but in the way of securing theoretic or scientific 
consistency and organisation. That truth is a coherent 
whole of knowledge which works in organising our 
experience and achieving success, is, standing by itself, so 
self-evident as to be a commonplace. All science is the 
unification of propositions of experience, and a proposi- 
tion is true if it works with other propositions. Were 
the doctrine of pragmatism nothing but an assertion of 
this fact it could hardly claim to be a novelty. Its 
significance is that it maintains that there is nothing more 
to be said of truth. It excludes and deprecates any inquiry 
into the reason why truth is true. So apprehensive is it of 
the doctrine that reality is a closed system, fixed and 
eternal, into which all finites are absorbed and lose their 
finite character in the supposed Absolute, that it dispenses 
with all inquiry into the ultimate nature of reality. Truth 
is indeed what works. But it works because truth is 
determined by the nature of reality. Reality is indeed 
no fixed thing, but being temporal is evolving fresh types 

^ These characters of comprehensiveness and harmony applied to per- 
fection are of course taken from Mr. Bradley’s great chapter on degrees 
of truth and reality {Appearance and Reality ^ ch. xxiv.). 



266 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Mental 

proposi- 

tions. 


of existence. But a truth which is not guided by reality 
is not truth at all. There is only one case in which it is 
completely satisfactory to declare that truth is what works. 
For the solitary individual described in a previous page 
it is a full account of reality that it is what works. There 
is for him no other test. But for him there is no such 
thing as truth at all just because he lacks that intercourse 
with others through which at the bidding of reality the 
distinction of the true and false is struck out. Prag- 
matism, however, is a perfectly adequate account of all that 
is open to him in the way of assigning value to one part 
of his experience over another. 

Hitherto we have been considering only propositions 
belonging to non-mental reality. But there are also 
mental propositions which are not the object of the mind 
but in a strict sense the contents of it. To every 
external object there corresponds an enjoyment, sensing, 
perceiving, remembering, imagining. Judging is no 
exception, and the enjoyment of judging is a mental 
proposition. It is a relation within our enjoyment of 
two distinguishable features in it, as, when I say 
‘Glasgow is a ‘five hours’ journey from Manchester.’ 
1 have in the object the relational union of all these 
complexes in external reality, and in myself the enjoyed 
union of the enjoyments in which I am aware of them. 
These enjoyments are united within my whole enjoyed 
self, and in the end every enjoyed proposition is believed 
as a part of my whole self, just as every contemplated 
proposition is contemplated as belonging in the end to 
reality in general, of which my mental reality in general 
is the counterpart. Such propositional enjoyments are 
observed by introspection ; but they do not for that 
become objects of contemplation ; any more than in 
observing my perceiving I turn the perceiving into an 
object. I need not after previous remarks about intro- 
spection labour this matter further. We may even have 
a mental judgment about another mental judgment and 
still the included enjoyment is not the object of the 
including one. For example ‘in judging you to be a 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


267 

liar, my mind was clouded by prejudice against you.’ 

The first judgment is simply included as a part within 
the larger whole of enjoyment. Precisely so I may have 
an external judgment about another external one, as e,g. 

‘ the reason why so many died in the town from cholera 
was that the water supply was infected ’ : the one pro- 
position is included in adarger proposition. 

Not only are there mental propositions but there are Mental 
mental truth and error. The only difference from truth 
and error as to external realities is that the propositions 
here are the contents of the believing, and there is in 
general ^ no necessary inclusion with the true or erroneous 
proposition of the contemplated proposition with which 
it is of course compresent. I may be in error about my 
own mind. A man has committed a trifling peccadillo 
and I say I was indignant with him because 1 disliked 
his action. In fact I bore the man malice and seized on 
the fault as shocking my sense of duty — a way we have 
of hiding our innermost motives to pass what Mr. Freud 
calls the censorship of our respectable selves. 1 am not 
lying but do really deceive myself into thinking what I 
say. But I am in error because I connect my indig- 
nation with the sense of right which is somewhere 
dormant in my conscience, but not with the really active 
feeling of malice which I really felt but owing to my 
mental squint did not see. The judging is not the 
reality which I really enjoy in connection with my action, 
but distorted by the intrusion of an alien element. I do 
not represent my mind as it really is, but what I judge 
has its foundations in the whole reality of my mind. 

The same account then holds of error as to mind and of 
error as to external things. Only, the erroneous judging 
is itself a real enjoyment of the mind, whereas in external 
propositions the erroneous proposition does not really 
exist at its face value. The reason of the difference is 
that here the erroneous judging (though it has its corre- 
spondent external proposition) is itself, is its own contents. 

It is not real in the same sense as it is erroneous. It is 
real as having actually occurred ; it is erroneous as not 
^ See later, section C, p. 279, note i. 



268 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. in 


The 

science of 
mind. 


being the real state of mind which it pretended to 
describe. Hence when I judge my mind subsequently 
after the error has been dispelled, I say this proposition 
occurred but was not the reality of my mind when I 
acted, or did not represent my mind truly. I regret the 
state of mind from which I really acted, I declare my 
description of it to have been false. 

This may be regarded as an application of the general 
explanation of error to the case of mental propositions. 
On the other hand, we have seen that it is often easier to 
discover in the case of mind what is true both in mind 
and external realities, than from inspection of these realities 
themselves. Any one who recognises that in mental error 
an enjoyment is displaced from its proper connections 
and referred somewhere else in the mind, could pass 
from this to the case of error as to external reality and 
understand that it too is a displacement within reality, 
and that the reality of the error as such comes about 
from the union with reality of a distorted mind, and that 
the erroneous proposition is the way in which reality is 
revealed to a mind in this condition, but does not exist 
at its face value in reality by itself. 


But attention to error in the mind comes much 
later in our history than attention to external error and 
truth. The individual who finds truth and error in his 
enjoyments is already familiar with truth and error in 
contemplated propositions and is a socialised individual, 
who either agrees with or deviates from his fellows. 
Indeed truth and error of mind arise only when we are 
at least capable of communicating our minds to others 
and out of the desire so to communicate. When we 
judge our own minds truly or falsely we judge them as 
in the sight of others. 

When propositions about individual minds are so 
systematised by communication from mind to mind, one 
mind supplementing another, leading another to dis- 
cover in himself what otherwise he might have passed 
unnoticed, and stimulating the curiosity of the indi- 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


269 

vidual as to himself, we have the science of individual 
mind which is psychology. It is no less a science 
than the sciences of external reality, but it is limited 
by the nature of its subject-matter. At first sight 
it might seem as if there could be no such science, 
seeing that no other individual can enjoy my enjoy- 
ments ; whereas external propositions are the common 
object of many minds. But it is by co-operation or 
rivalry in practice that we become aware of each other’s 
minds, and as our co-operations extend from mere 
practice to the satisfaction of those practical desires 
which are desires for knowing or theory apart from 
practice, we deepen and widen our acknowledgments of 
one another. Intelligible speech is the chief means of 
such enlargement, and while it is directed in the first 
instance to explaining to one another the nature of the 
external objects we contemplate, it comes to be used to 
make clear to others the nature of our enjoyments. At 
first we make bare our minds for practical purposes, 
relying on others to relieve us when we shiver or moan 
or say we feel cold or ill. Later our purposes become 
purely speculative. We satisfy our own curiosity and 
the curiosity of others. Thus arises the science of indi- 
vidual mind. Not only can we then compare one process 
in ourselves with another, and arrive at generalisations, 
like laws of association or the effect of imagination 
on our feelings, but we compare ourselves with others 
as declared in their statements as to their minds ; we are 
able to verify that their minds work as ours do in some 
respects, differently in other respects. Psychology goes 
so far towards being a science as is allowed by its 
limitation to enjoyments whether in me or in another.^ 
A superior being looking on at our minds as we look on 
at living beings would possess our psychology as one 
of his external ^ sciences,’ if the name science may be 
extended to his apprehension. It is therefore a mere 

^ The method of study is of course not limited to introspection. A 
mental process does not exist without its object, nor without external 
action. Both of these supply information (and the larger part of it) as 
to the mental process. 



270 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Logic. 


prejudice to suppose that sciences must all be of the 
external world. 

Logic is sometimes regarded as a mental science, but 
is only so, qualifiedly. It is concerned with the dis- 
tinction of truth and error, and is only so far concerned 
with mind as truth and error are. But truth follows the 
reality which is known and is determined by it, though it is 
true on account of the mind which knows it. Logic may be 
called the formal science of truth. The special sciences, 
whether of external realities or of individual minds, con- 
sist of systematised and coherent propositions, whose 
coherence is determined by the particular empirical char- 
acter of their subject Now propositions have a formal 
as well as a material character. Thus the fall of a stone 
and the attraction of the planets to the sun are materially 
coherent ; they obey one material law. But these truths 
are not merely truths about stones and planets but are 
propositions. Logic investigates the formal coherence of 
propositions in their character of propositions. These 
formal characters are the categorial relations which are 
expressed in propositions of various sorts, the relation of 
substance and accident, of universal and particular, of 
cause and effect, of order in time or space, of magnitude, 
and the like. The relation of subject and predicate in a 
proposition is not to be confused with these formal rela- 
tions. Though itself logical, it rests on a psychological 
distinction ; the subject being the immediate matter of 
interest and the predicate describing how it is qualified. 
It is always possible to institute this distinction. But it 
is not the real relation which propositions as such contain, 
in their character of reality or claimants to reality. Most 
of the propositions used in the so-called formal Logic 
belong to the substance-attribute or to the universal- 
particular relation, but they are only a selection, a very 
important and comprehensive one, from the list of forms, 
and it is mere distortion to force them all into the shape 
of a substance-attribute relation. Now logic describes 
these forms of proposition which are the stuff of the 
sciences, and it shows in what way these propositional 



CH. IX. B 


TRUTH AND ERROR 


271 


forms are combined with each other so as to secure 
coherence and avoid error. This aiming at truth and 
avoidance of error make it a normative science. The 
methods of science are the rules to which we must con- 
form in attaining truth, but they are discovered by the 
mind from the nature of reality. A method of proof 
means a certain relation among propositions themselves, 
as propositions with certain formal characters, in virtue of 
which, given certain propositions, other propositions may 
coherently be stated ; that is, it supplies rules for infer- 
ence. This is quite in keeping with the traditional logic 
of the syllogism which is concerned with propositions 
about substance and attribute and universal, particular, 
and individual. Given certain propositions involving 
those real relations, it tells you what other propositions 
belong to the same subject-matter in virtue of them or 
consistently with them. The logic of scientific method is 
an extension of the same principle to include all legitimate 
inferences from propositions of all varieties of formal 
character. 

It is clear that such a science is neither a science of 
things nor of mind but of things as possessed by mind. 
It is a subject-object science. Our propositions are per- 
spectives of the world and unpiece it, and may do so 
wrongly. In constructing truth at the guidance of things 
we are piecing together by an act of will or judgment 
what we have unpieced by acts of will or judgment. 
Experiment is our control as to the material or empirical 
details. Logic controls us in the formal nature of this 
process, for it is concerned not directly with the empirical 
features of reality but with its categorial ones. 

The different chapters of this subject-object theory 
throw into relief one or other of the elements which are 
blended in it. The mental element exhibits itself more 
and more as we pass up the scale of the forms of judg- 
ment to inference ; in the negative judgment, in imputing 
to the subject a predicate which the subject rejects ; in the 
disjunctive judgment, in the expression of a real alterna- 
tive under the form of hesitation ; in modal judgments 
the mental nd objective elements almost balance each 



272 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Other ; finally, inference betrays most plainly that truth 
is not merely reality but its unity with mind, for inference 
weaves propositions into a system, and system or coher- 
ence belongs not to reality as such but only in its rektion 
to mind. Hence it is that, as noted in an earlier passage/ 
logical grounds are more comprehensive than real causes, 
for anything which may bring disconnected propositions 
into coherence may furnish truth, though it may be but 
our method of approaching the reality within which truth 
is constructed as a new reality. 

^ Bk. II. ch. vi. B, vol. i. p. 297. 



CH. IX. C 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


273 


C. Goodness and Evil 

Goodness and badness in things and good and evil in the Difference 
objects which satisfy them have a wider range than moral 
goodness and badness, or what is morally good or evil. 

Value does not begin at the human level, but exists in its 
appropriate form at an earlier level. 1 shall speak first of 
moral goodness and moral evil and return to the wider 
goodness and evil. Moral goodness is distinctively 
human, belongs to conduct as it issues from will and is 
social. 

Morality differs from science or knowledge in the 
proper sense in that morality is practical and science 
speculative. From this fundamental difference all the 
other aspects of their difference follow.^ Science is reality 
as possessed by a mind which thinks truly ; and such a 
mind is one which judges coherently with the judgings ot 
other minds, and therefore, in so far as it reflects or 
represents those minds, coherently with its own judi^ings. 

But the coherence among the acts of judging follows and 
is determined by the character of the reality judged, which 
includes what it contains and compels us to reject what it 
does not contain. 

In morality the conditions are reversed. There too 
we have a composite situation, which on the one side 
contains the acts of will whereby we make or bring into 
existence certain external relations among real things 
corresponding to the idea first entertained in our mind, 
and on the other the objects aimed at in the willing. Now 
while truth in our believings followed in the wake of the 

1 In the articles on ^ Collective willing and truth ’ I began with 
goodness and evil, and discussed truth and error in the light of them. 

Practice is more general than learning, which is suspended practice, and 
the nature of goodness and evil is easier to understand. In psychology 
this procedure is dictated by the principle of looking to the conation 
before we discuss its corresponding cognition. But here I have foregone 
this advantage, and have taken cognitive value first. 

VOL. II 


T 



274 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Nature of 
morality. 


reality, the moral good of the reality produced by the will 
follows the coherence of the willings. The reality which 
we produce is good in so far as it satisfies coherently the 
persons who bring it about. Goodness is of course sub- 
ject to the conditions imposed by the nature of the non- 
human circumstances of action ; it is right, for example, 
(being prudent), to change one’s clothes when they are 
drenched with rain. Human satisfactions must take 
account of the laws of external and of human nature. 
But the facts we seek to bring about are, so far as their 
good is concerned, determined by how far they satisfy 
persons and are approved by them. All action is response 
to the environment, but one part and the more important 
part of our environment in moral, that is in social, action 
is our fellow-men. For not only do we take account of 
their approbations as we do in the prosecution of know- 
ledge, but they are themselves the objects of our appetites, 
as food and drink are. Now it is in taking account of 
their wants, as in taking account of their opinions in 
learning, that we settle down into the system of moral 
principles. Accordingly it is indifferent to say that 
morality is the adaptation of human action to the environ- 
ment under social conditions, or that it is the system of 
actions approved by man under the conditions set by the 
environment. 

Morality arises out of our human affections and desires 
which we seek to satisfy. Some of them are self-regarding, 
others are natural affections for others. In willing the 
realisation of these desires we come into partnership with 
others, partly by way of co-operation, and partly by way 
of rivalry. We sympathise or dissympathise, according 
to Adam Smith’s doctrine, with certain impulses or tend- 
encies of others. Morality represents the solution of the 
problem set by this state of affairs. The good wills are 
those which cohere with each other ; the bad ones are 
those which fail to fit into the system thus arrived at, and 
are excluded. Those practical acts which are thus co- 
herent are approved, the others are disapproved. The 
clash of wills is a consequence of their practical character, 



CH. IX. C 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


275 

for though a speculative judgment does not conflict with 
another, except in so far as the reality forces the rejection 
of the false judgment, practical acts of mind have hands 
and feet and oppose or reinforce each other of themselves. 
Before entry into the system, the individual members of 
the social whole have wants and prefer claims ; these 
claims so far as approved, that is in the degree to which 
their satisfaction can be admitted consistently with the 
claims of the other members, if they can be admitted at 
all, become rights, and the performance of them an obli^ 
gation. The good act, approved as pleasing the collective 
wills and not merely the individual’s own will, may vary 
according to the nature of the individual and the place he 
holds in the society. Still, so fiir as it is allowed, it is 
approved for any one in those circumstances and of that 
nature or temperament, and the approbation of the com- 
monalty belongs to it not as a favour to this inciividual 
but to any such person under such conditions. Any good 
act is thus universal in the sense that it would be required 
from any individual, and however much allowance is 
made for the peculiar circumstances of the individual, the 
act approved and required is impersonal, in the sense 
in which truth is impersonal, or in the sense in which 
speech spoken intelligibly, however it varies with the 
voice and style of the speaker, is, so far as it is intelli- 
gible to others within the spirit or genius of the language, 
impersonal. 

This is the true universality of moral requirements, 
that they would be binding on any individual under such 
conditions. But also since human nature is in so many 
respects alike and the circumstances of action are per- 
petually recurring in the same form (we are perpetually 
being asked questions to which a truthful answer may be 
returned and called on to consider other persons’ property), 
there are many moral rules which have a high ciegree of 
generality and are, within limits, universal in this sense 
too. Elementary rules of conduct like most of those of the 
decalogue are universal in this sense, that, being the kind 
of action called for by simple and elementary situations, 
on the response to which the very existence of society 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


RK, III 


Goodness 
and the 
good. 


276 


depends, they are approved everywhere, and in all persons. 
But all of them admit exceptions in special cases, provided 
the exception is not made by the individual in his own 
favour but impersonally. It was because Kant thought 
exceptions could not be made impersonally that he dis- 
allowed them altogether under any circumstances, giving 
thus to the moral law an a priori instead of an empirical 
character. 


By the phrase ‘ coherence amongst wills ’ we are but 
expressing in a more scholastic and technical manner the 
social character of morality. But the wills in question 
which are approved as good or bad are wills for certain 
objects, and are taken along with those objects. The 
object of willing is some fact in the external world which 
I first entertain in idea and then realise in practice. 
Every such object takes the form of a proposition ; this 
food or drink is eaten or drunk ; this life is saved ; this 
property is distributed to certain individuals. When 
the will is purely internal, as in the suppression of an 
illegitimate thought or the stimulation of a legitimate 
one, instead of an external object willed we have an internal 
enjoyment which forms the contents of the will.’ The 
will therefore is always a will for something, and that 
something is most often an external fact, and is then the 
object of the will ; or it is some enjoyed fact, and it is 
then not the object but the contents of the will. 

For simplicity let me confine myself to external pro- 
positions, leaving the reader to make the necessary 
qualifications for facts of enjoyment or mental facts. The 
object of willing is then the existence of some fiict in the 
external world. The sum of such propositions constitutes 
the conditions by which moral institutions such as property 
or family or liberty are maintained. The consummation 
of such acts of will is the satisfactions of human persons 
secured by these conditions. Thus I cannot will another 
person’s happiness or misery ; but I can will the conditions 

1 There is of course also the compresent external object, e.g. stealing, 
driven from the perspective by some antagonistic thought (cp. above, 
ch. vi. p. 1 54). 



CII. IX. c 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


277 


which when realised secure his happiness or misery. The 
willed objects are the facts to which the satisfactions of 
persons are the response. Such satisfactions are what are 
called moral goods ; and correspondingly moral dissatis- 
factions or the satisfactions of immoral wills are moral 
evils. The objects secured by willing are not in them- 
selves good or bad but only in so far as they supply such 
satisfactions. For example, riches are not in themselves 
morally good or bad, but only in so fir as they satisfy the 
needs of persons and satisfy them in a way sanctioned by 
the collective approval. An unjust distribution of pro- 
perty, such as is effected by robbery, does indeed bring 
satisfiiction, but to the wrong persons. 

The good is thus a system of satisfactions of persons 
which is effected by right willing. Mere satisfactions, 
such as possession of wealth, or pleasure, or, in general, 
happiness, or having good looks, or an even temper, are 
not of themselves good in the moral sense, though they 
are good in the general sense of bringing pleasure. What 
makes them morally good is that these satisfactions of 
persons should be organised and made coherent within 
the individual, and in the relation of individuals to one 
another within the social group, and thus ‘^maximised” ^ 
or made as great as possible consistently with the 
conditions of social life. We may think of this Good 
apart from the wills which sustain it, but it does not 
exist without them. Just as truth resides in the union of 
reality with the minds which possess truth, so goodness 
resides not in the bare satisfactions of appetites alone nor 
in the will alone, but in the union of satisfying objects 
with the wills which sustain them. In a word, goodness 
belongs to moral institutions themselves which are made 
by collective men out of the needs and passions, selfish or 
altruistic, of individuals. The characters are good which 
act in the spirit of these institutions, and the various types 
of their oroodness are the virtues of character. The non- 
mental facts which are the purely external aspect of the 
institutions are not good in themselves but only as 

^ The word is due to G. Simmel, Einleitung in die Moralwissenschaft 
(Berlin, 1892-3), who speaks of the ‘‘ maxima tion ” of happiness. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Union of 
mind and 
objects in 
goodness. 


278 


securing in a certain fashion, that is coherently, the satis- 
factions of the passions of the persons engaged. 


Thus in both goodness and truth there is the union of 
mind and its objects, the non-mental reality. But in the 
case of truth it is the character of this non-mental reality 
which compels the divergence between the truly and the 
falsely judging persons. In the case of good there is no 
antecedent coherence or structure in the non-mental 
reality, for the good non-mental reality is brought about 
by persons themselves through their wills, always in 
obedience to the conditions imposed by the nature 
of things. The wills satisfy the passions by aiming 
at objects which when attained constitute in relation 
to the persons their satisfaction. By persons is meant 
unions of mind and body, and persons satisfied according 
to moral laws constitute the system of moral institutions. 
It follows from this statement that good institutions are 
a creation of men by which they live well in their non- 
mental environment, and are adapted to it. Any success- 
ful organic type is a kind of organism which can sustain 
its life under outward conditions, and moral persons are a 
type of beings which maintain their existence under their 
conditions, and do so by becoming socialised, that is by 
adopting conduct which they mutually approve. 

Morality means then a type of existence in which 
passions of all sorts are regulated socially, and can be so 
regulated because they are satisfied in willing the objects 
which satisfy those passions. Men’s nature drives them 
into society, or rather men do not exist outside society, 
and social Institutions are the product of open-eyed 
intercourse between individuals. Founded on animal 
passions, they regulate the satisfaction of them, and 
regulate them by interchange of judgments about the 
results aimed at. For all willing involves anticipation 
of its object or end in idea. It is equally essential to 
observe that the wills which are thus interacting with each 
other in the creation of moral institutions are wills for 
these institutions, that is, they are not taken apart from 
the objects on which they are directed. Sometimes it has 



CH. IX. C 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


279 


been supposed that goodness belongs to the will in itself 
as a mere mental function. But this is erroneous. Will- 
ing may be considered as it is by the psychologist as a 
mere mental process compresent indeed with the object 
willed, but a distinct existence. But the will which is 
good, which is engaged practically in making and sustain- 
ing goodness, and is the subject-matter of the science of 
ethics, is the will in its interrelation with other wills. 
Now intercourse of mind with mind comes to the con- 
sciousness of these minds, as we have so often seen, only 
in so far as these minds are concerned with non-mental 
objects which are contemplated by the minds in common.^ 
Minds can judge each other as good or bad only as 
directed upon these objects. I can judge you to be doing 
right or wrong only so far as I see you willing an object 
which I approve or condemn. It is not your will I 
approve merely as a mental process ; what I approve is 
your will for temperate drinking or preservation of pro- 
perty. There is no such thing as inner morality, if it is 
thought of as independent of what is willed. Nor do I 
believe that Kant’s conception of morality, which is I 
suppose the subject of those who censure inner morality, 
is really open to the censure. The fault of Kant was not 
that he imagined a will which could be irrespective of its 
object, but that he sought a criterion of goodness in 
formal features of will, which do not in truth exist. He 
was so anxious to free morality from regard for the con- 
sequences of action that he fiiiled to notice that willing is 

^ This might seem to be inconsistent with the description of mental 
error in Section B, p. 267, but is not really so. There we were dealing 
with error as to the mind itself; here with a wrong which consists in an 
external act or result. There the mind was occupied with its own 
contents; herewith its non-mental object. We should have the same 
state of affairs here, if we were concerned with the badness of wrong 
thinking, e.g. thinking something unwholesome. It still remains true, 
however, as pointed out on p. 260 of Section B, that as error implies 
sociality, I can only be aware of it in myself as representing a community, 
and ultimately this implies reference to the non-jmental object of my 
state of mind. In fact we can only convict our minds of mental per- 
versity so far as we have acquired the habit of communicating with one 
another about our minds as such, and this is done in the first instance 
through reference not to the mental state itself but its objects. 



28o empirical existence bk. Ill 

after all only an empirical existent and subject to empirical 
limitations. 

Goodness then like truth is an amalgam of mental 
and non-mental existence ; is a new reality whose internal 
coherence is its goodness. Goodness and badness come 
thus into existence together. Goodness is the kind of 
conduct, or the kind of satisfaction secured by conduct, 
which can cohere with the claims of other persons. In so 
far as the individual is good he represents the collective 
wills of the society. His approbations whether of himself 
or others coincide with theirs. He is himself a microcosm 
which in his place mirrors the larger society, and is trusted 
to judge himself by his conscience, just as the solitary 
scientific worker judges truth with the eyes of the collec- 
tive judgment. According to his special gifts of passion 
or temperament or endowment he has his allotted conduct 
which squares with the rest of social conduct. His part 
in maintaining social institutions is at once peculiar to him- 
self and sanctioned by the general. So far as he is good 
he embodies the common judgment; he is the wise man 
of Aristotle, or the impartial spectator of Adam Smith, 
who judges that to be good which is attuned to the needs 
of all ; or he is the standardised man. 

Moral evil. Moral evil, whether in the character, or in the result 
of conduct, corresponds to error in speculation. It is 
excluded from the system of good. Error we saw was a 
reality, but it was not true. Badness is more plainly a 
reality, just as much as goodness ; but it is not good, and 
it is incoherent with what is good. And just as error is 
reality seen awry, so badness or moral evil is the same 
reality with which morality is concerned, handled amiss. 
The problem of morality is to secure a coherent distribu- 
tion of satisfactions among persons. Evil is misdistribu- 
tion, and vice is a feature of character which wills such 
misdistribution. Drinking wine is not in itself evil. 
What is evil is the intemperance. The passion is gratified 
to the full. This may be legitimate in the case of certain 
affections, but it is not legitimate 'in this case when the 
full extent of the passion is for more wine than is consistent 



CH. IX. C 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


28 1 

with the man’s own health and work or his intercourse 
with others. A private person who demands my purse is 
a thief and bad, but the Chancellor of the Exchequer may 
demand it legitimately if he has the sanction of Parliament. 
The surgeon does me no injury by inflicting pain on me 
to relieve me ; but the murderer does wrong because he 
uses the knife at the wrong time and place and without 
sanction from the General Medical Council. The Greeks 
were right when they sometimes identified justice with 
virtue as a whole. For the essence of justice is in dis- 
tribution ; and all badness is injustice either to oneself or 
others or both. A man who drinks too much works too 
little ; the burglar has courage and enterprise, qualities 
which are useful material for good conduct, but he mis- 
places them. He might with proper training make a 
good explorer or soldier, but as it is he is a bad citizen. 
The materials of virtue and vice are identical ; they are 
the human affections and passions and the external things 
in the midst of which men live. Vice is a use of these 
materials which is incompatible with the claims of others, 
and the distribution of goods it creates is a social misfit. 
But it is the same human nature which is handled success- 
fully in the one case and unsuccessfully in the other. 
Hence it is that, in the first place, it is possible within 
limits for the vicious person to become good by correcting 
his standard ; and, in the second place, some vice is merely 
antiquated virtue, legitimate once, like marriage by capture, 
but not suitable to changed circumstances. 

But this does not state the full intimacy ot vice and 
virtue. Vice is not merely misdistribution ; it is the 
application to one set of circumstances of a mode of action 
which has some inherent connection with those circum- 
stances but is not as it happens suitable. Error we saw 
was connecting something with one of a set of alternatives 
which are congenial to a thing of that class, when the 
alternative chosen is not appropriate to this particular 
thing. Not only does evil deal with the same elements 
as good, but the bad act would under other circumstances 
be right. To revert to the case of the thief who takes 
my money. My property is subject to the assent of 



282 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Progress in 
morals. 


Morality 
not self- 
contra- 
dictory. 


societyj and society does not grant me absolutely undis- 
turbed possession. One alternative treatment of money 
is demanding it for purposes of the common good. The 
thief allies this method to private property, that is to 
property of which the society leaves me the undisturbed 
possession. Badness is not the mere casual combination 
of elements but the mixing up of elements belonging to 
classes which have a moral connection with each other. 
Evil is not therefore wholly evil ; it is misplaced good. 

The realities which the collective wills of persons make 
into morality or moral institutions are human nature 
under the external conditions of its existence. There is 
hence progress in morals, more perfect institutions growing 
up as fresh opportunities arise for adjustment of man first 
of all to his natural surroundings and next to his fellow- 
men. I have no space here to refer to the changes in 
institutions by which larger and larger bodies of men are 
taken in within the moral society ; the topic has been 
admirably expounded by T. H. Green. ^ Nor for the 
changes introduced by discoveries like the railway or the 
telegraph, which are but a few among many causes which 
facilitate and refine intercourse. Human nature need not 
be supposed to change, but the enlargement of social 
relations and the complexity of living mean a constant 
revision of moral standards and a change in the system of 
conduct. But while there are thus degrees in perfection 
ot moral life just as there are degrees in perfection of 
animal types, there are no degrees of goodness. To be 
good is to be good, and though the goodness of one age 
may be inferior to that of another age, and some part of 
goodness may lapse into evil, what is good once, like what 
is truth, remains good or true for the circumstances under 
which it was good or true. Values acquire a fuller reality 
but no greater reality. 

Nor does morality any more than any other spatio- 
temporal existent labour under the contradictions which 
have been found In it, the opposite or divergent features 
^ Prolegomena to Ethics, Bk. III. ch. iii. B. 



CH. IX. C 


GOODNESS AND EVIL 


283 

of self-cultivation and self-sacrifice. Self and others 
are claims which are antecedent to morality and are 
reconciled by the moral judgment itself. For morality 
approves both sets of claims in their measure. It may 
even be a failure of duty for an artist to devote himself 
to philanthropy, but it is moral judgment itself which 
sanctions this preference. For it counts the gifts of a 
man as material which he can contribute to the common 
good, and decides how far he is to use those gifts, and in 
what proportion to the other claims which it also sanctions. 

The reconciliation of conflicting claims may be inadequate, 
but it is only claims which conflict and not duties. Much 
suifering and heart-burning may be endured in the social 
adjustment of claims and exaltation of what is approved 
of them into rights, till the individual has learnt the 
difficult lesson of finding more pleasure in following the 
right than he loses from the sacrifice of his desires. There 
are even claims which must be called natural, though 
there can be no natural rights. Such are the elementary 
claims for freedom and life, which no society can refuse to 
turn into rights without compassing its own destruction. 

They are distinguishable from claims which are themselves 
of social origin, such as the claims of certain classes to the 
franchise. The natural claims are inherent in the indi- 
vidual. But the pains incident to the reconciliation do not 
make the solution contradictory. Nor can goodness be 
contradictory because it opposes the individual to the 
collective. For the collective is not itself an individual 
but the individuals themselves working in system ; and 
to make the society a unit is comparable with the mistake 
of supposing a complex to be dominated by a monad of a 
new order. 

Following the authority of Aristotle and Kant, I have Good and 
treated moral goodness as residing, on the side of the 
subject, in habits of will and have found the Good in the 
regulated system of satisfactions which make up moral 
institutions like family, or property, or business, which 
are sustained by acts of will. But moral good and evil 
are but one kind of good and evil. For man is not 



284 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


merely a judging person but an animal, and there are 
animals which display sociality of an instinctive kind as 
distinguished from the open-eyed sociality of moral life. 
As the relation of enjoyment and object contemplated 
begins before knowing, so practical ^values’ begin before 
morality. In general a being has goodness which is an 
efficient example of its type, and any quality is good 
which tends to the efficiency of the being’s life. Even 
inanimate things are good which are able to do well the 
work for which they are made, as a good knife, to quote 
an illustration of Plato’s and H. Spencer’s, is one which 
cuts well. Correspondingly, anything is good which 
satisfies the appetites, and evil which frustrates them. 
The kindly powers of nature are good and its convulsions 
evil. Whatever brings pleasure when it is used is so far 
good and whatever carries pain is so far evil ; and in 
general, owing to the adaptation of life to its natural 
conditions secured by natural selection, there is a corre- 
spondence between pleasure in the results of action and 
efficiency in the action itself. In this wider sense of 
goodness, gifts of disposition, like physical courage or 
calmness of temper which make it easier for man to be 
efficient, are admired and win ‘ approval ’ in ourselves, 
and are regarded with sympathetic approval in the case of 
lower creatures. But we hesitate to call them virtues, 
because while they promote the efficiency of the animal, 
it is the use which we make of them in relation to our 
fellows that makes them virtues. We distinguish physical 
pluck from bravery, and kindness of heart from benevol- 
ence. Still less can we regard a gift of intellect like a taste 
for philosophy as a virtue, but only the single-minded 
pursuit of it. Once more we may learn from the Greek 
description of virtue as merely one department of ex- 
cellence. Various excellences of mind or of body (like 
beauty) or of external fortune (like riches) adorn the life 
of virtue but are not themselves good except in this wider 
sense. They form one ingredient in the perfection ot 
moral life ; the other being the degree to which virtue is 
attained even in their absence. Hence our ideals of 
perfect life sway between the two extremes, of fortunate 



GOODNESS AND EVIL 


CH. IX. C 


285 


circumstances well used, and the strength of mind which 
triumphs over unfortunate ones. 

Efficiency of life, whether in the animals or ourselves, 
we contemplate from without, and it affords us a 
sympathetic pleasure which is to be distinguished from 
moral approval. But the distinction is not always easy to 
maintain, particularly with the domestic animals, because 
we admit them as resident foreigners into some of the 
privileges of citizenship by crediting them with a life 
higher than they possess, and the same sympathy makes 
us confuse our admiration of their good qualities with 
moral approval of them. Thus we praise the tyke and 
despise the cur. Yet our praise is rather the pleasure we 
take in beholding useful qualities, and resembles not so 
much moral approval as the kind of sympathetic pleasure 
we feel in seeing one of ourselves eat heartily, or betray 
by patting a dog we do not fear during his meal. 


The lesson of this ambiguity in the use of terms 
expressing praise and blame is that the moral character in 
its contrast with the immoral one is a particular instance 
of the contrast established within the organic world 
between the successful type and the individuals which 
conform to it, and that which fails in competition with 
it and in nature tends to destruction. The terms of 
moral disapproval indicate the process by which the un- 
social type is discarded in human life. The elimination 
which in nature is accomplished by death is here accom- 
plished not by death, except in extreme cases where the 
deviation from the type is too great for mercy, but by 
the sentence of exclusion, which leaves room for the 
individual censured to return to the type on condition of 
altering his character if he can. Since none of us is com- 
pletely virtuous,^ each of us is perpetually experiencing 
the struggle within himself of the good type and the bad, 
and so far as he represents in his own person the tribal 

1 The perfectly good man is of course an ideal, and exists not as an 
individual existent but as a concept. No man is wholly good. I suppose 
that, roughly speaking, three-quarters of us may be good for, roughly 
speaking, three-quarters of the time. 


Moral 

values. 



286 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


conscience, is left to reform himself. Moral good is a 
type of life which is engaged in the same struggle with 
the evil type as appears in a cruder form in the organic 
world in general. But it changes its character because 
the struggle is carried on within the region of the judging 
and willing mind. One complex of institutions displaces 
another by virtue of its ability to maintain the human life 
under the conditions of its existence.^ 

^ This paragraph is left in this place for completeness, but it anticipates 
the fuller discussion of Section F. For the general conception of morality 
used in this section compare Moral Order and Progress (London, 1889). 



CH. IX. D 


BEAUTY AND UGLINESS 


287 


D. Beauty and Ugliness 

I mean by the contrast of beauty and ugliness that of Meaning of 
the aesthetic and the unaesthetic, or of the aesthetically 
pleasing and unpleasing. There is a special sense of 
ugliness in which the ugly is one kind of the beautiful, 
such as a grotesque in architecture or a very ugly but 
highly aesthetic drawing of an old man’s head amongst 
Leonardo’s drawings in the Louvre, or, when the ugly 
object has less self-dependence than these two examples, 
where an ugly figure is resolved like a musical discord 
into the whole structure of the work of art, like the 
figures of devils in Signorelli’s or Michael Angelo’s Last 
Judgment. Where such ugliness is more or less self- 
dependent we even commonly speak of it as beautiful. 

It is an example of what Mr. Bosanquet so aptly describes 
as ‘difficult beauty.”^ Beauty has also two meanings, 
that of obvious beauty, like that of the Hermes of 
Praxiteles, or that of what pleases aesthetically. I am 
dealing here with beauty in general and ugliness in 
general, and my concern is with the question what kind 
of reality the aesthetic object possesses or what place it 
occupies in the scheme of things. Partly for reasons 
of proportion, but mainly because of my own imperfect 
acquaintance with the vast and difficult literature of the 
subject, I am compelled to be brief and even dogmatic, 
doing the best I can with the problem as it presents 
itself to me in its connection with truth and goodness. 

Perhaps the simplest way to understand beauty is to Beauty 
contrast the beautiful object on the one hand with a 
percept and on the other with an illusion. As contrasted illusory, 
with the percept, the beautiful is illusory, but it differs 

1 Three Lectures on Aesthetics (London, 1915), Lect. iii. 



288 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Natural 

beauty. 


from illusion in that it is not erroneous. Considered 
from the point of view of cognition, the beautiful object 
is illusory for it does not as an external reality contain 
the characters it possesses for the aesthetic sense. I 
perceive the tree in front of me to have a reverse side 
though I see only the front ; but the tree really has a 
reverse side, and if I change my position the back of it 
is now seen and the front is supplied in idea. The 
marble is seen cold, to revert to the trite example, but 
the cold which is only present in idea really belongs to 
the marble, and I may in turn feel it cold and with 
eyes shut represent its whiteness in idea. The painted 
tree on the other hand looks solid but is not, and no 
change of my position helps me to sec its other side. 
The Hermes is a marble block of a certain form and is 
perceived in its real qualities of solidity and hardness, 
but the block does not possess the repose and playful- 
ness and dignity that I read into it aesthetically. The 
words of a poem are not merely descriptive of their 
object, but suffused with suggestions of feeling and 
significance which a mere scientific description would 
not possess. The more perfect the artistry the more 
definitely does the work of art present in suggestion 
features which as a cognised object it has not. Mr. 
Berenson compares the two Mg.donnas that stand side by 
side in the Academy at Florence — the one by Cimabue, 
the other by Giotto.^ The Cimabue Madonna is flat 
and looks flat, though otherwise beautiful. The Giotto 
is flat but looks three-dimensional, and so fiir is the more 
perfectly beautiful. 

What is true of works of art is true of natural 
objects, with the necessary qualifications. In general 
the natural object is, when its beauty is appreciated, 
perceived incorrectly, or if it actually has the characters 
which we add to it, that is for aesthetic appreciation an 
accident, and is the source of a different and additional 
pleasure. Like the artist in painting a landscape, we 
select from or add to nature in feeling its beauty. Literal 

1 Florentine Painters of the Renaissance (New York and London, 
ed. 3), p. 13. 



CH. IX. D 


BEAUTY AND UGLINESS 


289 


fidelity is, or at least may be, fatal to beauty, for it is 
the means of securing not beauty but truth and satisfies 
our scientific rather than our aesthetic sense. If this is 
true for the mere onlooker, it is still more so for the 
painter or poet who renders the work of nature in an 
alien material which has its own prescriptions. Or we 
read our moods into the scene ; or endow animate or 
even inanimate objects with our feelings ; see daffodils 
for instance outdoing in glee the waves which dance 
beside them, or fancy a straight slender stem as springing 
from the ground, or liken with it as Odysseus did the 
youthful grace of a girl. 

The cases of natural beauty which most obstinately 
resist this interpretation are the graceful movements of 
animals or the beauty of human faces, a large part of 
which arises from their expressiveness of life and 
character. You may see a face as majestic as that of 
the Zeus of Otricoli and the man may perchance possess 
that character ; or the horse’s arching of his neck may 
really proceed from the self-display we read into it in 
finding it beautiful. But in the first place we read the 
feeling or the character into these forms before we learn 
that the creatures in question possess them ; and in the 
next place though a natural form may thus in reality 
happen to possess the supplement which we add from 
our minds, and may so far be unlike the work of art, 
yet the intellectual recognition that it does conform to 
the aesthetic appreciation is not itself aesthetic. This is 
best shown by the truth that the artistic representation 
may be more beautiful than the original, like the sug- 
gested movements of the winged Victory or of the 
figures in Botticelli’s Spring. But also the knowledge 
that the natural object possesses the imputed characters, — 
which is aesthetically indilferent, — may even mar the 
aesthetical effect, for when we learn that a man is really 
as fine a character as he looks, our appreciation is apt 
to turn to moral instead of aesthetic admiration. In 
place of aesthetic contemplation we may have sympathy 
or practical respect. We may then safely follow the 
guidance of the beauty of art and declare that in natural 

VOL. II u 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Contrast 

with 

illusion. 


290 


objects beauty, so far as it Is appreciated aesthetically, 
involves illusion. 


But aesthetic semblance is not error, not illusion In 
the accepted sense, which is cognitive. To express the 
matter by way of paradox, the aesthetic semblance is 
vital to aesthetic truth, or it is an ingredient in a new 
reality which is aesthetic. Cognitive illusion Is in fact 
the transitional stage between reality without value and 
reality with aesthetic value. Illusory appearance, we saw, 
is the appearance of reality in some of its parts to a 
mind which for one reason or another is perverse or 
twisted. It only becomes unreal in the sorting out, 
in so far as it is believed. As believed in, it is unreal, 
but it then becomes an element in a new reality which 
is error. The illusory thing in its illusory form, though 
founded in reality, has as such, in its illusory form, no 
reality at all, but only as possessed by the mind. But 
whereas the error is erroneous because it is excluded by 
the real thing about which it is concerned, the aesthetic 
semblance is not attributed to any real object outside 
the aesthetic experience itself. Watch for a short time 
a revolving drum, on the paper of which are drawn 
vertical lines. When the drum is stopped the paper 
seems to move in the opposite direction. That is an 
illusory appearance, and is illusion if it is taken to be 
reality. Contrast this with the aesthetic illusion of 
the figures in the picture of the Spring. It would be 
cognitive illusion if we thought the figures to be really 
moving. But they arc really in motion in the aesthetic 
reality in which the pictured form and the aesthetically 
imputed motion are indissolubly one. Thus it is because 
a cognitive illusion is pinned down by the reality which 
it cognises, and cognises falsely, that it is unreal. In so 
far as it is a reality, it has become an artificial product 
of the reality it cognises and of mind, and was therefore 
described before as a work of art. When we pass into 
artistic imagination, whether its object is externalised in 
stone or words or remains a vision of things, we have 
a work of art in the proper sense. Illusion is half art. 



CH. IX. D 


BEAUTY AND UGLINESS 


291 


half truth. It fails of being either truth or art for the 
same reason ; it is personal, while both truth and art are 
impersonal. 

Thus in the beautiful object, whether of art or nature, 
one part is contributed by the mind, and it is relatively 
a matter of indifference whether the mind in question is 
that of the person who creates the work of art or that 
of the mere spectator, who follows in the artist’s traces. 
In the case of natural beauty, the spectator and the 
creator are one. The element contributed by the mind 
may vary from the mere addition of external properties, 
as in seeing the flat picture solid, e.g, in the bare aesthetic 
effect of the drawing of a cube or a truncated pyramid, 
up to distinctively human characters of feeling or 
character, as in animating a statue with pride, or words 
or sounds with emotion as in a lyric or in music. 
Animation with life is intermediate between these 
extremes, for life though less than mental, and still for 
us something external which we contemplate, is yet on a 
higher level of external existence than solidity of form. 
It is only through what is thus added that the beautiful 
object has meaning or character or expressiveness. 

I add that the expressiveness need not be some- 
thing characteristic of man. The expressiveness of the 
work of art is to be itself, to be what it represents, to 
have the significance appropriate to it ; for the painted 
animal or tree to seem alive and to grow or move 
according to its kind ; for the drawn cube to look solid ; 
for the pillar to seem (and to be) perfectly adjusted to 
support the weight it bears, and to bear it with ease. 
An ugly portico with stunted Doric columns gives the 
impression that the weight which the columns bear is 
crushing them ; the tall columns of the Parthenon 
suggest that the roof is a light burden ; the suggestion 
in neither case being true in fact. We may naturally 
enough render these impressions by investing the columns 
with life — springing up from the ground, and the like — 
but they belong really to the mechanical order. Thus 
the imputation of life and character enter into the express- 


Bcauty due 
in part to 
mind. 



292 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk.hi 

iveness of the beautiful object, only when that object 
means life or character. They are but one species of 
expressiveness. Further in every case, no matter how 
much of mind or character is read into the thing by the 
mind for which it is beautiful, the expressiveness remains 
that of the thing and not that of the creating or appre- 
ciating mind itself.^ In choice and treatment of his 
subject the artist impresses himself indeed upon his work, 
which so far expresses or reveals him. But to feel Shake- 
speare in Hamlet is not to appreciate Hamlet aesthetically 
but to judge it critically. In the expressiveness which he 
adds to his material from his very personality the artist 
depersonalises the work of art. Even in a beautiful 
lyric the passion ceases to be merely that of the artist. 
It is the paradox of beauty that its expressiveness belongs 
to the beautiful thing itself and yet would not be there 
except for the mind. Under the conditions of the 
material in which it is expressed, the beautiful owes 
some part of its meaning to the mind, and so far it 
owes to the mind not only its percipi as every perceived 
object does, but its esse, Wc have therefore all the 
greater need of caution in extending what is true of 

1 I am aware that in the above paragraph I am raising (and 
evading) several difficult questions. How far may human meaning be 
read into the aesthetic object consistently with beauty } Beyond a 
certain point the practice of personification may become sentimental. 
There is, in addition, the question of legitimacy of different effects 
in different arts. A painter could not paint the flowers dancing with 
glee as the poem on the daffodils does. It would be interesting to 
inquire whether Wordsworth always preserves the legitimate limitations 
of art. These questions illustrate the difficulties raised by Lipps’s doctrine 
of Einfuhlung or empathy (see his Aestketik, from which as well as 
from his earlier and well-known Raumaesthetik I have learned much). 
Perhaps in the paragraph I am describing rather an ideal, in urging 
that the expressiveness of the object belongs to the object itself, and 
I should rather say that the object is beautiful in proportion as it 
conforms to this standard. And I quite admit that what is said of 
beauty in this sub-chapter applies more easily to the arts of sculpture 
and painting than to the other arts. Of music I have hardly dared 
to speak at all, for I do not know whether sounds and their arrange- 
ment suggest emotion as sculptured shapes suggest life and character, 
which I suspect to be the truth; or whether they mean emotion as 
words mean the things they name (see note 2, p. 296). 



CH. IX. D 


BEAUTY AND UGLINESS 


293 


beauty to the objects of knowledge, whose esse is not 
percipi^ but esse^ independently of the mind which is 
compresent with them. 

The beauty of the beautiful object lies in the con- Beauty and 
gruence or coherence of its parts. According to the 
ancient doctrine it is the unity within that variety. Of 
these elements some are intrinsic to the beautiful thing, 
and some are imported from the mind and thereby belong 
to the thing ; and it is a condition of the beauty that its 
external form must be such as to bear and compel that 
imputation. Disproportion or want of perspective, to 
take the simplest illustrations, may mar the beauty. Or 
the material may be inadequate to the effect, as when an 
architect builds in terra-cotta what requires stone for state- 
liness. In virtue of the harmonious blending within the 
beautiful of the two sets of elements, some existing in 
reality and some supplied by the mind, the unity in 
variety is also expressive or significant. The beautiful 
satisfies both the ancient and the modern criterion ; and a 
new reality is generated in which mind and the non- 
mental have become organic to each other, not in the sense 
that the beautiful necessarily contains mind, though it may 
do so, e.g.^ in a picture of a man, but that its expressiveness 
is due to the blending of elements supplied from two 
sources, and the external beautiful thing is beautiful only 
through this fitness of the externally real elements to their 
expressiveness. Like truth and goodness, beauty exists 
only as possessed by mind, but whereas in them mind and 
the external still sit loosely to each other, and in the one 
case the mind contemplates an external reality which owes 
to the mind its truth but not its reality, and in the other 
case the mind alters reality practically but the practical 
results do not owe their character to mind but only their 
goodness ; in beauty external reality and mind penetrate 
each other, and the external thing receives its character of 
coherence from its connection with mind. 

Thus when Kant declared that beauty was so judged 
because it set the understanding at work in harmony with 
the imagination, he spoke truly, but according to his 



294 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Beauty 
implies 
coherence 
of minds. 


fashion in subjective terms, and so far inadequately. 
Truly, because, whereas in perception of an external 
object the imaginative elements are but a part of the real 
object which is cognised, in beauty the supplementing 
imagination is independent of what is perceived and yet is 
blended with what is perceived into a new aesthetic whole. 
Inadequately, because the beauty or coherence between the 
elements supplied in sense and in imagination belongs to 
the aesthetic object, and the interplay of cognition and 
imagination describes only the condition of the mental 
process involved in the aesthetic appreciation and not the 
beauty of the aesthetic thing itself Such an account 
considers beauty as a purely subjective character, whereas 
beauty belongs to the complex ot mind and its object, or 
as I have so often expressed it, to the beautiful object as 
possessed by the mind. Since the beautiful object owes 
one part of its constituents to the actual participation of 
the mind, beauty is in this sense a tertiary ‘ quality ’ of the 
beautiful object, thus conceived. 

But the analysis of beauty implies something further. 
The coherence of real external elements with other 
elements supplied from mind, while constituting beauty, 
distinguishes beauty from ugliness, and therewith dis- 
tinguishes the mind which appreciates beauty from that 
which fails to do so or which sees beauty in ugliness, and 
unites together the minds which appreciate the beautiful 
as beautiful. Coherence in the internal constitution of 
beauty is also coherence among the minds which appreciate 
it, and exclusion of other minds. The mind for which 
an object is beautful is not any mind but one which 
apprehends or appreciates impersonally or disinterestedly. 
Beauty in this way involves reference to other minds, and 
the reason of this or rather the explanation of its possi- 
bility is no easy matter. Beauty is not merely something 
which gives pleasure but which pleases in a certain way, and 
in a way which can be shared by other minds. For the 
beautiful object is unlike percepts in this respect, that 
while a cognised percept is the basis of a judgment, the 
beautiful percept is the result of judgment. 1 do not 



CH. IX. D 


BEAUTY AND UGLINESS 


295 


of course mean that in apprehending beauty we first 
make the judgment, ‘this is beautiful.’ 1 mean that 
judgments as to the constitution of the beautiful object 
are a precondition of recognising its beauty. The 
imagination is detached in the first instance from the 
perceived external object, say the picture of an animal, 
and then united with the percept. The beautiful animal 
implies the judgment, ‘1 see this painted form alive.’ It 
was the paradox of beauty that expressiveness belonged 
to the object itself and yet could be there only because 
the mind which docs not enter into the object was yet 
present and possessed it. Just because such judgments, 
‘ I see this alive,’ ‘ I see this form solid,’ ‘ I see this 
statue majestic in mind,’ are implied in the beautiful 
work, it is possible for others to take note of my attitude 
and at once to find the same object beautiful and to share 
my attitude : to approve both the beauty, and me in my 
pronouncement that it is beautiful. Thus beauty falls 
into line with truth and goodness in that like them it is 
concerned with propositions, and it is only the immediacy 
of the beautiful object, its likeness to a percept, which 
conceals from us this truth. Only, the propositions we 
are dealing with in beauty arc different from the pro- 
positions of truth and goodness. They are neither 
ordinary external propositions, nor are they mental 
propositions, but they are propositions in which inind 
and the non-mental are combined. When I say, ‘ I see 
this painted form alive,’ subject and object are linked 
together in a judgment ; whereas when I say, ‘This rose 
is red,’ or ‘ When I am at Stratford-on-Avon I think 
of Shakespeare,’ or ‘ I am determined to do so and so,’ 
either object and object are linked together in the judgment 
or subject and subject. 

All values thus depend on propositions, and this is 
the reason why they are exchangeable between persons, 
and can exclude unvalues. The intimacy of connection 
between subjective and objective elements in beauty, as 
contrasted with the relative detachment of them in truth 
and goodness, seems to give beauty a special and 
distinctive character. In truth and goodness we have a 



296 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

relation which may be represented either as between 
minds or objects ; in beauty, try as we may to exclude 
the mind from the object felt to be beautiful, we cannot 
separate them because one part of the beauty comes from 
the mind, and one part from the external thing. Even 
when the thing is a simple colour or tone, its beauty does 
not lie in itself alone, but at least along with the sugges- 
tion supplied by the mind, though as it happens verified 
by the actual object, of its freedom from admixture, its 
purity.^ 

For reasons dictated by the nature of my inquiry, I 
have said little or nothing of the psychology of beauty. 
Beauty pleases in a certain way ; but if we identify what 
way this is, we shall inevitably be led into tracing mental 
processes corresponding to what has here been described 
as coherence within the object, and all that that coherence 
entails. Doubtless too we shall have to recognise an 
impulse to identify ourselves with the external thing, so 
as to reflect into it something from our own experience. 
But it is not possible to treat beauty as distinctively self- 
expression. Truth and goodness are equally self- 
expressive. The impulse to produce stands on the same 
level as the impulse of curiosity which makes us learn 
and that of doing which makes us behave ; and in fact 
all three are practical impulses of different sorts. ^ 

1 See Bosanquet, History of Aesthetic (London, 1892), p. 269. 

On the topics mentioned in p. 292 note, 1 may refer to A. 
McDowall, Realism: a Study i?i Art and Thought (London, 1918). 



CII. IX. E 


RELATIONS OF VALUES 


297 


E. The Relations of the Tertiary Qualities 

We have still to trace the relation of the different Goodness as 
values one to the other. Each in turn seems to include 
the others, and this is at first sight puzzling and con- 
tradictory. But it is not difficult upon reflection to see 
that they include and are included in the others in 
different senses. Thus practice includes both truth and 
beauty, for each of these is a good or human satisfaction 
and enters into the Good as a whole. Intellectual and 
aesthetic satisfactions are as much part of the Good as 
material satisfactions, such as those whose virtue is 
temperance. Moreover there is a virtue of truth or 
beauty as well as of ordinary practical life. For the 
pursuit of knowledge or of beauty is a practical endeavour 
and is acknowledged as a matter of moral approval ; 
partly as a general duty to cultivate these powers, but 
partly also, in the case of persons specially gifted in these 
respects, as one principal part of their contribution to the 
social good. The artist or the scientist or the philosopher 
are not, as some Greek philosophers tended to think 
them, set apart from society because of their special 
qualifications, but are on the contrary included in the 
society, whose interest or good it is that its members 
should do the work for which they are best fitted. The 
philosopher is morally no different from the blacksmith 
or weaver, but his business is very different, and may be 
it is a higher or more perfect business.^ The pursuit 
of truth or beauty is good in so far as it is carried on 
industriously and to the full measure of the individual’s 
skill and with due regard for other duties which fall to 
him as a man. He is to do his special work well, as the 
weaver his. 

Now it is clear that science and the pursuit of it are 
^ Compare p. 241 above, and the note. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Beauty rs 
inclusive. 


298 

not good in the same sense as they are true or scientific. 
A man is not a bad man because he is in error, unless the 
error is avoidable with due care. The moral defects of 
the thinker are such as make him unfaithful to his work, 
e.^^. laziness or prejudice. His defects as a thinker are 
his idiosyncrasies which make him an uneven mirror to 
things. No doubt the two sets of defects (and corre- 
spondingly of merits) may slide over into each other : 
defects of temper or character may mean (as where there 
is prejudice or prepossession) defects of insight. Thus 
truth is a good, as the satisfaction of a human impulse 
according to the measure of its claims as considered along 
with the claims of other human impulses ; it is true, in 
so far as it achieves its own purpose. Compared with 
the moral end, truth as truth is technical, just as being 
a skilful blacksmith or surgeon is technical. Truth is 
involved in goodness in yet another and more obvious 
way, not as a department of the moral end but as a means 
of guiding action, which needs knowledge of human 
nature and of the conditions of action. Here plainly 
truth is technical ; it is the element of wisdom or insight 
which has always been acknowledged as an ingredient in 
goodness and sometimes has been treated as a virtue. 
Whether truth is a special part of the moral end, or in 
the shape of wisdom an ingredient in moral action of all 
kinds, truth as truth is technical for morality, which is 
concerned with the value of human character and with 
truth only as part of it or a means to it. 

In the same way, just as beauty is one part of the 
good and to pursue it is a virtue, so goodness and truth 
are species of the beautiful, or they have their aesthetic 
side. Some parts of mathematics have been described 
as poetry and certain methods in science are, to indicate 
an exceptional excellence, justly called beautiful ; and 
good actions may have beauty or grace or sublimity, or a 
life may be a true poem. The aesthetic feeling in these 
cases in distinguishable from the mere ‘logical’ sentiment 
for truth or the moral sentiment of approval. What is 
true or good is treated much as we treat a piece of 



CH. IX. E 


RELATIONS OF VALUES 


299 


natural beauty, where as we have seen the supplement 
imported by the spectator may happen as a matter of fact 
to be present in the thing, but this is only accidental for 
the aesthetic appreciation. Thus the beautiful theory 
seems to us animated by a purpose or appears to be the 
creation of some constructive mind, which though it is 
not in the theory in itself is true of\L Or the noble life 
is for us a work of art, the outcome of some imagined 
exaltation of mind or refinement, like the life of Pompilia 
as the Pope fancies it in Browning’s poem.^ It is not the 
goodness of the life as judged by mere morality that is 
beautiful ; the spectator does not so much sympathise 
with it morally as blend himself with it into a new unity. 
Thus as before what is true is not beautiful in the same 
sense as it is true. To be true it follows the tests of science. 
It is for beauty technical, just as the material which is to be 
the Hermes observes the technical limitations of marble. 
And in like manner of the beauty of goodness. Conse- 
quently badness may (like lago’s) be beautiful, but not 
for the same reason as it is bad ; and even error, like a 
well-wrought but fallacious theory, but not because it is 
fallacious. 

The case of truth is somewhat more complicated. 
There is a goodness of truth-seeking and a beauty of 
truth. But also goodness and beauty are each of them a 
department of truth. This must be understood in a 
double sense. In the first place goodness has its truth, 
much as truth has its goodness ; goodness (or beauty) is 
technical for truth. That is, goodness is the truth of 
human nature, and badness the error of it, and in the same 
way beauty is true and the ugly erroneous. And even 
as truth prevails over error and excludes the erroneous 
proposition from the realm of reality, so goodness tends 
to supersede badness and beauty ugliness. The unvalues 
are morally false or aesthetically false, just as the erroneous 
proposition is false. Yet, goodness and beauty, though 

^ The marvel of a life like thine, Earth’s flower 
She holds up to the softened gaze of God. 

The Ring arid the Book, X. 11 . 1018-19. 


All values 
included 
in truth. 



300 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


they thus share in the nature of truth, follow each its charac- 
teristic nature. They are not true for the same reason 
as they are good or beautiful. Consequently a murderer 
may possess profound knowledge of anatomy, and a learned 
historian of poetry be a poor poet. In this respect then 
goodness and beauty are technical for truth. 

But there is a different sense in which these considera- 
tions do not arise and in which goodness and beauty are 
not technical but merely parts of truth or reality. For 
goodness and badness, and beauty and ugliness, are, like 
truth and error, themselves new realities and take their 
place in the whole of reality, alongside realities of a lower 
order. The tacts expressed in the sentences ‘ this is good' 
or ^ this is beautiful ’ are realities. Moreover not only are 
the moral and aesthetic] udgments realities, but also the good 
or bad acts or good or bad volitions (the constituents of the 
moral situation), and likewise the objects, which are beauti- 
ful or ugly, taken apart from the aesthetic judgment of 
them, are real. Thus truth and error, goodness and 
badness, beauty and ugliness, are all realities among the 
sum total of reality. Now truth we have seen is reality as 
possessed by mind, and hence in this sense the other 
values are parts of truth and truth is all-inclusive, 
because its object is reality. True knowledge therefore 
comprehends the whole of existence, including truth and 
error itself. It must not be said that we are introducing 
here the much talked of infinite regress, that if truth 
itself is part of truth we are making truth a mere object of 
knowledge, which it cannot be. For truth is already a 
possession of the mind and the truth of truth is but truth 
over again. In the same way the truth of those realities 
which are goodness or badness is but those partially 
mental realities over again. We may judge ‘ such and 
such is good ' practically. But to do so is also to possess 
that reality as something which, although we first bring it 
into existence, we find and watch when it has been made. 
We make the work of art, but when we judge it beautiful, 
its beauty is something which then we find in reality. An 
angel looking on at our world would see our truth and 
goodness and beauty and their corresponding unvalues as 



CH. IX. E 


RELATIONS OF VALUES 


301 


parts of one reality with rocks and stones and trees. 
What we do in including them along with purely 
external things within our purview of true knowledge is to 
possess them, some by contemplation (the rocks, etc.) ; 
others by enjoyment, like the proposition ‘ I am envious ’ ; 
others like goodness or beauty or truth partly in enjoy- 
ment and partly in contemplation. 

Thus all things of whatever grade of reality enter into 
truth or true knowledge, because truth follows reality and 
leaves it undisturbed in taking possession of it. Hence it 
is there can be science of everything, so far as things are 
revealed or adumbrated for us. We can hence speak of 
deity as real though wc cannot know it except by fore- 
shadowing it in thought, as shall soon be indicated, or 
including it as something that satisfies the religious 
sentiment. Th US from the point of view of philosophy, 
all things in space and time fall within truth so far as 
mind can possess them. Science is supreme, for it is 
another name for reality in all its forms as possessed by 
minds which think rightly or are attuned to reality. On 
the other hand from the point of view of man, practice is 
all-inclusive, for the quest of truth and that of beauty, like 
the quest of material bodily satisfaction, are practical 
tendencies. Regarding man as the highest finite, his 
practice, which includes discovery of truth and creation of 
beauty, we must pronounce to represent man at his fullest. 
But the discovery and pursuit of truth are not truth itself, 
and since truth means the possession of reality by mind, 
we must say that while goodness is the highest manifestation 
of finite existence which we know, truth represents the 
whole of reality, while beauty is intermediate in position 
between the two, being that kind of existence in which 
neither does mind follow reality as in truth, nor is reality 
moulded by mind as in willing, but the two are inter- 
woven. 



302 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Tertiary 
qualities as 
(i) rela- 
tions 5 


F. Value in General 

The tertiary qualities are not the only kind of values, 
though it is they which in the strictest sense have the 
right to the name. The more general sense of value has 
been already indicated in the case of good and evil. 
Within the human region there are the values we attach to 
such qualities as courage or good health ; and there is the 
whole department of economic values. These transitions 
between the different sorts of value in man suggest that 
value in a more extended sense reaches lower down than 
man, and perhaps is a common feature of all finites. I 
shall first trace the gradations of human values, and then 
attempt to show how value appears on lower levels than 
that of consciousness or mind. 

Certain features of value have emerged from the study 
of tertiary qualities, which it is desirable to recapitulate, 
because they furnish the clue. 

In every value there arc two sides, the subject of 
valuation and the object of value, and the value resides in 
the relation between the two, and does not exist apart from 
them. The object has value as possessed by the subject, 
and the subject has value as possessing the object. The 
combination of the subject and the thing which is valued 
is a fresh reality which is implied in the attribution of 
value to either member. Value as a ‘quality' belongs to 
this compound, and valuable things, truths, moral goods, 
works of beauty, are valuable derivatively from it. The 
same thing holds of the subject which values and is also 
valuable, — the true thinker, the good man, the man of 
aesthetic sensibility. 

Value is not mere pleasure, or the capacity of giving it, 
but is the satisfaction of an appetite of the valuer. It 
satisfies the liking for knowledge, or for doing, or produc- 
ing, Even the breast is valuable to the infant because it 



CH. IX. F 


VALUE IN GENERAL 


303 


satisfies a need for food. Values arise out of our likings 
and satisfy them.^ 

Value pleases but it pleases after a certain fashion. (2) typical 
What this fashion of pleasing is has been shown to be 
social. But this criterion contains two features, one of 
which is special to the tertiary qualities, the other is more 
general, and it is this more general feature which concerns 
us. Value has reference to a type, and it relates to the 
individual only in so far as he represents a type. The 
individual may like or dislike certain things, but in the 
proper sense they have value for him, if they satisfy him 
as typical ; and his individual liking may be altogether 
disproportionate, as the liking for alcohol, to the value 
of what he likes. What is called ‘subjective value’ 

{IV erthhaltm^ is not in itself value but is a derivative 
conception, and so far as it is value implies the existence 
of ‘ objective,’ which is really the only, value. There is 
no such thing as truth for an individual. A mere belief 
entertained by him has not truth as an individual belief. 

It is only true if he has the truly judging or scientific 
mind. When a person says he values something, though 
it may not be valuable in itself, or he has a sentimental 
value for something, he is using language borrowed from 
the current conception of typical value, or else he is 
counting on the truth that his particular likings are 
legitimate and would be so approved. For the typical 
standard recognises the greatest diversity in the particular 
applications of it by individuals, provided they possess the 
spirit of the type. 

The other or distinctive feature in the value of the (3) social, 
tertiary qualities is that they are not merely typical or have 
relation to the human type of animal but belong to a type 
which is intrinsically social. Its sociality is displayed or 
expressed in its use of language, which consists of pro- 
positions. In all the tertiary qualities the perspectives of 
reality before the mind are judgments. Even the beautiful 
thing, though an object of perception, depends on judg- 

1 The contrast of liking and pleasure is taken from Mr. J. S. 
Mackenzie. It corresponds to Mr. W. M. Urban’s contrast of feeling- 
attitude and feeling-tone. For the works referred to, see note, p. 307. 



304 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Reflective 
and in- 
stinctive 
value. 


ments. Judging and sociality are convertible. For in 
judgment our objects or propositions come directly into 
relations of agreement or conflict with other persons. In 
judging a fact or willing one, our objects are patent to the 
observation of others as ours. In judging, it is we who 
take the reality to pieces and rebuild it so as to discover 
its real structure ; in willing, the deed is not merely the 
reaction to a percept but is our deed. We are not merely 
like dogs quarrelling for a bone, aware of each other per- 
ceptually, but are aware of each other as like or different 
from ourselves. Language is the direct communica- 
tion with one another about our objects. Even our 
percepts when described become judgments. Judgment 
accordingly contains in itself a social suggestion, and a 
judgment of value is intrinsically social, and is related to 
a social type. 


Thus value in the form of the tertiary qualities 
emerges not with consciousness or mind as such, which 
the animals also possess, but with reflective consciousness, 
or judgment. But men are not merely social beings but 
are animals of a certain type. Accordingly like the 
animals they pursue objects which are relative to the animal 
type and have what may be called instinctive value or 
quasi-value. The breast has instinctive value for the 
child, as the lion or tiger values instinctively its prey, or 
the bird its worms. Such objects are valuable in so far 
as they promote the type, are necessary to the infant’s 
growth and the like. 

With human beings, these instinctive values are over- 
laid by the values proper and they are not commonly 
regarded as values. But they are familiar in the habits of 
personal cleanliness or other regard for one’s body, or in the 
coyness of the female ; such habits are typically liked or 
^approved’ but instinctively. They may in their turn 
become the subject-matter of reflective judgment, as 
when the modesty is injured, and then we have the 
feeling, half-instinctive, half-reflective, that such a habit 
as modesty is a duty to oneself — a notion derived from 



VALUE IN GENERAL 


CH. IX. F 


305 


the grafting of the social judgment upon the instinct- 
ive oned 

Still within the range of instinctive or quasi-value but 
with the social element superadded, or beginning to be 
superadded, is the admiration we feel for qualities good 
for the type ; e,g. for courage, not as a habit of will 
but as a personal endowment — pluck, or for high spirits, 
or good looks, or strength, or hearty appetite. Such 
admiration is not approbation in the sense of moral 
approbation, but it is next door to it. It has a very 
extensive range and may be called instinctive approbation. 
It enters into our social or moral judgments in so fir as 
the possession of natural gifts makes the character a bigger 
or more perfect one, though not a better one, and lies at 
the foundation of degrees of merit, as distinct from good- 
ness. Even mere strength of will is meritorious as a 
personal excellence, and, as has been observed before, it 
accounts for our sometimes preferring the character 
which prevails against temptation, while the instinctive 
approbation for natural gifts accounts for our seeing 
greater merit sometimes in the other class of cases. 
In like manner our sympathy with mere outward 
good fortune in our fellows is the source of our 
admiration for such persons, though this consideration 
was stronger with the Greeks than perhaps with our- 
selves. 

An approximation to this overlaying of instinctive by 
social values is found among the animals which live in 
societies, where there is yet no judgment and the sociality 
is not so much intrinsic as with ourselves but remains 
instinctive gregariousness. There is approbation and dis- 
approbation, but it remains purely unreflective. Instances 
are the ‘justice’ meted out amongst rooks and bees. 
How instinctive the values are may be seen from the 
interesting experiments of Mr. A. Bethe on ants. When 
individuals of an enemy tribe were smeared with an 
infusion of the chopped-up bodies of the first tribe they 
were received into the nest, and friendlies smeared with 

^ An illustration occurs in Mr. Galsworthy’s novel The Man of 
Property, towards the end. 

VOL. II 


X 



EMPIRICAL EXIS PENCE 


BK. Ill 


Economic 

values. 


306 


a hostile infusion were repelled ; apparently in both cases 
on the ground of the smelld 

Economic values stand midway between instinctive 
values and the tertiary qualities. They do not so much 
blend with moral valuation as in the cases just discussed, 
as rather they exhibit the operation of reflective judgment 
upon instinctive values. As they are, of course, affected 
in all manner of ways by moral considerations, it will be 
best for simplicity to take the economic society whose 
interests are directed solely to securing livelihood, as in the 
Platonic State of pigs.’’ So far as this is true, things 
and services have merely instinctive value — food, drink, 
the service of the mother to the child and the like ; and 
there is no moral value proper, just because there is only 
one, namely living itself. But since men are not merely 
conscious beings, but judge and are related to one another, 
the problem set them is how to distribute diflFerent goods 
so as to secure the maximum satisfaction of vital wants. 
This is done by the reflective process of demand and 
supply. The determination of values which this process 
secures reproduces on a lower level all those features of 
the settling down of moral claims into equilibrium upon 
which moral values depend, which were described before. 
It is however merely using reflective machinery to satisfy 
the wants of life and is therefore instrumental to this end. 
It involves reflection and is thus akin to moral valuation ; 
reflection comes in to modify mere perceptual experience. 
But the individuals co-operate and compete, not as they 
do in moral valuation, so as to determine in the issue what 
the moral or social type shall be, but so as to secure 
the most effective distribution within a type of social 
existence already fixed. Such a simple state of affairs is 
only an abstraction, to which primitive societies, whether 
of a nomadic hunting type or an agricultural one, are 
approximations. 


1 A. Bethe, Durfen wir Bienen und Ameisen psyckisc/ie Quaiitaten 
zuschreiben P (Bonn, 1 898) ; from Arch, f, d. g. Physiol. Bd. 70. In W. J. 
Courthope’s Aristoplianic comedy, The Paradise of Birds, there is a 
delightful passage describing the justice of rooks as the exemplar of 
human justice. 



CH. IX. F 


VALUE IN GENERAL 


307 


When we advance beyond the state of pigs to a society 
with moral values, we find that the relation of economic 
to moral value remains the same. Life has ceased to be 
the only interest ; other interests compete with mere sus- 
tenance of life, though that remains fundamental. Moral 
valuation determines what the persistent type of distribu- 
tion of satisfactions shall be, how far for instance it is right 
for me to gratify a taste for possessing pictures, or for 
business, or for helping my neighbours. But economic 
valuation merely determines what place in the system of 
commodities and services a picture has ; there is no 
question of the legitimacy of my taste for pictures, but 
only of how much I must exchange of other commodities 
in order to possess them. In other words morality deter- 
mines what the type of society shall be ; economics assumes 
this type and considers the machinery for sustaining it. 

Its values are instrumental, while those of morals are 
described as intrinsic. Moreover in the more highly 
developed social type the instrumental character of 
economic valuation becomes clearer ; because there are 
other ends than mere living. In the state of pigs the 
instrumental process and the process of living, which 
consists in eating and drinking and the like, tend to be 
coincident. Economics therefore stands to ethics in the 
relation of individual to social psychology. In practice 
the distinction can never be maintained with this rigidity, 
because of the constant repercussion of morals upon 
economics. The social type of distribution is perpetually 
changing, and moral considerations come in to correct 
the economic inequalities or unfairness of the existent 
social type.^ 

These gradations amongst the various forms of value Value in 
in men from the tertiary qualities which are values in the 
strictest sense, down to instinctive values, through the vr. 

^ In the preceding paragraph I have derived much help for thinking 
out the problem from the Austrian philosophical writers on value : A. 
Meinong, Psychologisch-ethische Untersuchungen zur Werttheorie (Graz, 

1894), Ch. Ehrenfels, System der Werttheorie (Leipzig, 1897-98), and 
also W. M. Urban, Valuation^ its 'Nature and Laws (London, 1909), a 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


308 


intermediate stages of blended values and economic 
values^ prepare us to find that value exists, below man, or 
reflective consciousness, and is found in its essential 
features on the level of mere life, amongst the plants and 
animals ; and that it is not the intrinsic features of value 
which vary, but only the subjects of valuation, and with 
them their objects, which are different at different stages 
of development in Space-Time. On the level of life value 
exists as the persistence of adapted forms of living being. 
To an adapted type that part of its environment on which 
it can react so as to sustain its life has value for the type, 
and the individual of the type is the corresponding subject 
of value, or it is a valuable form of life. The unvalues 
arc those individuals or types which in their conjunction 
with the environment fail in competition with the values, 
and arc eliminated ; and they include not merely the 
unsuccessful types but the individuals of the successful 
type which vary too far from the standard and correspond 
to those human individuals whose idiosyncrasies are too 
marked to be compatible with the social type. 

All the essential marks of value as exhibited in the 
tertiary qualities are here reproduced in the form suitable 
to the level of existence. In both cases value resides in 
the compound of the subject with its object. A creature 
may have value under one environment (like the blind 
animals that live in caverns) which would have none or 
less in other surroundings. The process by which 
permanence of valuable type is secured is the rivalry by 
which the failures are excluded. But it is more important 
to state the case reversely. The values of truth, good- 
ness, and beauty, and their unvalues, arise by a process 
of competition amongst reals which has begun below the 
human level. The minds which judge truly, or behave 
rightly, or produce or recognise beauty, are the successful 
types developed on the level of mind, when to conscious- 


work belonging to the same school and full of suggestions in detail, and 
from Mr. J. S. Mackenzie’s Elements of Constructive Philosophy (London, 
1917), Bk. II. ch. viii. (Sec also his article in Mind, N.S. vol. iv., 1895, 
‘ Notes on the theory of value,’ describing and criticising the Austrian 
writers.) 



CH. IX. F 


VALUE IN GENERAL 


309 

ness are added reflection or judgment and with it intrinsic 
sociality. The differences which seem to separate the 
tertiary qualities so completely, and are thought to make 
human life unique, arise merely from this difference in 
the subjects. In the first place the competition of valuable 
minds implies the rejection of the unvaluable ones, but it 
does not as on the level of life imply their destruction. 
It is only the error or wickedness which is rejected, not 
the sinful or misunderstanding man himself For the 
prevalence of truth it is enough that he recognise his 
error ; for the prevalence of goodness that he be reformed. 
Minds can within limits take new perspectives of things 
“on better judgment making,” without the destruction of 
the body to which the mind belongs. They have the 
superior plasticity of the reflective consciousness. In the 
second place, because the tertiary qualities are values of 
judging subjects, their values are settled not merely by 
competition with unvalues but by co-operation amongst 
themselves. That is their social character. There is in 
general no such sociality among mere living forms. The 
type is given in individuals of the same kind, but it is not 
in general a type in which individuals have their special 
contributory role towards a common good. If a parallel 
is wanted for the social constitution of man it is to be 
found in the organisation of cells within the individual. 

Darwinism is sometimes thought to be indifferent to 
value. It is in fact the history of how values come into 
existence in the world of life. How the successful 
organism itself comes into being is a matter of controversy 
on which the layman is not free to enter ; whether by 
slow accumulation of small variations, as Darwin himself 
supposed, or by large mutations. The doctrine of 
natural selection explains not how types are generated, 
but how they come to have value. It is so far from being 
indifferent to value that it is wholly concerned with 
value ; its very meaning is that values emerge through 
the trial of various types under certain external conditions, 
which trial determines whether in virtue of its gifts or 
constitution a type is worthy. For like our human 


Darwinism 
and value. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The range 
of value. 


310 


values, value In the organism belongs not to the organism 
in itself, but in its relation to the conditions of life, and 
accordingly a type which can persist under certain con- 
ditions may be unsuited to different circumstances, much 
in the same way as we approve conduct which is forced 
upon us by the stress of circumstances, though under 
normal conditions we should condemn it. The doctrine 
of natural selection gives us thus the natural history of 
values in the world of life, and we now see that it supplies 
equally that history in the world of mind. 

The reason why Darwinism has been thought to be 
indifferent to value is that natural selection has been mis- 
understood to be, not what it is-- the process by which 
values are established, but the actual cause of successful 
types. On this misconception the fittest is what survives, 
and the survival of the fittest is equivalent to the tauto- 
logy — the survival of that which survives. Value appears 
therefore as an impertinent intruder. But as was clearly 
enough indicated by the title of Darwin’s own work, the 
survival in question is that of the most favoured races. 
It is not natural selection which is the cause of success, 
but the gifts of the types engaged in competition, and 
competition is but the process through which their gifts 
receive expression. The cause of success in war is not 
fighting, which is warfare itself, but the character and 
resources of the combatants. To believe otherwise is 
parallel with another half-truth, that because nations 
establish their ideals by force, force is the ideal of national 
life. When this misconception is dissipated, natural 
selection is recognised to be wholly conversant with value. 
Competition is the means to the supremacy of the adapted 
over the unadapted types, and brings value into being by 
the rejection of unvalue. 


How far downwards below the level of life the 
principle of adaptation or valuation extends is at present 
matter of speculation. I have ventured to suggest that 
the permanent forms of matter (chemical elements) and of 
energy are themselves the outcome of a corresponding 
process. Even if this cannot be regarded as more than 



CH. IX. F 


VALUE IN GENERAL 


311 

a guess we can see why it may be expected to be true. 

For values imply in their simplest expression something 
which does not depend on the living or conscious character 
of the subject of value but applies to any finite complex 
of space-time. Things are relatively independent volumes 
of space-time with a certain internal and external con- 
figuration ; into which the whole Space-Time breaks up. 
Adaptation is the return of these complexes out of separa- 
tion from the whole into unity with it. Only point- 
instants which have no complexity of structure are from 
the first and always adapted to their surroundings. The 
complex combinations of them may be, and in the case 
of living and higher forms sometimes are, inconformable 
to the other complexes to which they respond and in 
responding maintain themselves. The competition of the 
reals which are composites of things and their environment 
is the settling down of this variety into stability. It is 
not man alone who experiments ; he does but experiment 
consciously. Nature herself is the scene of ceaseless 
experimentation, of which there are many grades trace- 
able downwards, from conscious experiment, through the 
plasticity of trial and error by which living and especially 
conscious types are able to vary within certain limits 
without destruction, down to the simpler process of the 
extirpation of the unfit, and perhaps to a process simpler 
still. The values strictly so-called, the tertiary qualities, 
are but the highest instance we know of a feature of 
things which extends over a much wider range, and is 
founded in the nature of Space-Time itself ; and may 
even be empirically universal. Supposing that the process 
begins with living forms and does not obtain below, we 
must be content to say that the empirical things on the 
lower levels are so simple in structure that they do not 
come into competition with one another. But what 
evidence there is points in the direction of the universal 
prevalence of the process. 

There is however in this exposition of value a weak- a lacuna, 
ness, arising from the presence of an unsolved problem, 
which has been mentioned before^ and must be named 
^ Bk. II. ch. iii. vol. i. p. 229, 



312 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


explicitly again in this place. Value depends on adapta- 
tion, and adaptation is an a priori character of empirical 
things, their return from isolation into communion with 
the rest of the finites in Space-Time. And adaptation 
assumes the character of value through the rejection of 
the unadapted unvalues. This process involves the 
existence of many more or less closely allied forms 
between which the competition takes place. It implies 
the empirical fact of the actual repetition of universals in 
a multiplicity of particulars. For it is all one whether we 
consider a multiplicity of individuals, or a multiplicity of 
types falling under a wider universal, and indeed the 
competition of types takes place between individuals of 
those types. Valuation then presupposes this unexplained 
empirical feature of things. Can any explanation ot this 
empirical feature be found ? If not, then it must be 
accepted, like quality which we have regarded as the dis- 
tinctively empirical element in things, as another empirical 
element. The grave metaphysical lacuna in our scheme 
which would then be left has been mentioned in the 
previous passage. A universal implies the possibility of 
many particulars in which it is realised. But the actual 
multiplicity of particulars remains as a mysterious residuum. 
It is more hopeful to believe that we have here not a mere 
empirical feature of things, like quality, but a feature 
which has its foundation in some fundamental character 
which belongs to all empirical or qualitied finites, and 
constitutes another of what we have called the empirical 
problems. For it is clearly not on the same footing as 
quality. Quality is always equivalent to a certain spatio- 
temporal complex. What was distinctively empirical in 
it was that such a complex should be the bearer of a 
quality. Now multiplicity in the realisation of a universal 
is itself something spatio-temporal, being a numerical 
determination. 

But if, as thus seems probable, it is one of the a priori 
empirical problems, I can see at present no solution of 
it : no way of connecting it as in the other empirical prob- 
lems with Space-Time as such. Why there should be 
finites within the general matrix, we can understand ; for 



CIL IX. F 


VALUE IN GENERAL 


313 


Time and Space, being indissolubly interwoven, do not 
remain extended blanks, but break each other up into 
differences. We cannot however see, at least I cannot, 
why these finites should exhibit actual repetition in their 
kinds. Perhaps we know too little at present about the 
repetition of individuals among organic forms to be able 
to face the more general and simpler problem. Molecules 
of carbon or gold are repeated in vast numbers, like oaks 
and men. Is the multiplicity of individuals like men or 
oaks due to the sporadic birth of these types in different 
quarters of the globe, or to reproduction from one or a 
pair of individuals ^ Are we to suppose that the multitude 
of carbon molecules were generated independently of each 
other : or is there something in every finite which we may 
compare with the proliferation of cells or the reproduction 
of organisms in their progeny ; or with imitation and 
tradition, such as we find amongst men And if the 
latter, how is this something connected with the purely 
spatio-temporal character of every finite ^ 1 can give no 

answer, and until the answer can be given I must admit 
that the scheme of things which has been suggested as a 
hypothesis, and has so far been verified, presents a grave 
defect ; equally so, whether the actual multiplicity of 
individuals in their kinds is accepted as a purely empirical 
feature not admitting of explanation, or as an unsolved 
empirical problem. 

Two observations are worth making upon our result Corollaries, 
that mind in its highest manifestation, that of the tertiary 
qualities, is no isolated or exceptional thing, but as in its 
knowing, and as we shall presently see also in its freedom, 
is but a specimen of something more general. The first 
is almost obvious, that the human values are none the 
less precious for that. He who fancies that the com- 
munity of our values with the lower ‘ values ’ destroys the 
fine flavour or sacredness of truth or goodness or beauty, 
forgets that to describe correctly does not alter the reality 
described. If the doctrine of Berkeley were true that 
things owe their existence to mind, the solid material 
world would remain solid and material as before, and Dr. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


314 

Johnson’s refutation of the doctrine still irrelevant. The 
preciousness of the values consists in their being values, 
and there is no standard of value by which to judge values 
themselves. On the contrary the human values by being 
thus related to other values do not lose their preciousness, 
but in fact preserve it by forfeiting their mystery. Human 
nature does not lose by becoming intelligible but comes 
into its own. 

The second observation is less obvious, but is a 
corollary. It takes the form of a protest against that 
philosophical method which adopts value (by which is 
meant human value) as the clue to the nature of reality, 
because it is the highest of our experiences about finite 
things. The values are practically precious, but not 
therefore more real than other realities. They take their 
proper place in the scheme of empirical things, and they 
do exhibit to us a fundamental feature of reality as a 
whole. But we dare not start with the unanalysed con- 
ception of value and measure reality by it. To do so is 
to erect what weighs most in our human existence into 
the exemplar of reality, and to assign to value blindly a 
function which it cannot perform. It discolours the truth 
with our affections, and it interferes with what Goethe 
described as our business in acquiring knowledge, of 
laying our minds alongside things. It has authority in 
the example of Kant. But Kant’s exaltation of one of the 
values was the price which he paid for his fiiilure in 
theoretical speculation to discover the a priori features of 
things in the things themselves. Whereas when values 
arc analysed or described, they are seen to fall into their 
places as incidents (though of the highest interest for us, 
outside the religious interest) in the empirical growth 
of things within what is really the primary reality of 
Space-Time. 



CHAPTER X 


FREEDOM 

Man is free, and his freedom has been supposed on one Freedom as 
ground or another to separate him from the rest 
creation. As free, he has been thought either to be enjoyment, 
exempt from causality, or to possess a causality of a 
different sort so as to be independent of determination, 
like the rest of the world, by some antecedent cause. If 
it were so, causality would no longer claim to be a category 
as entering into the constitution of every form of finite 
existence. But we are already familiar with the notion 
that mental processes affect each other causally, and that 
a mental process may be the cause of a non-mental one or 
the effect of it. It remains then to identify the conscious- 
ness of freedom that we possess. It will be seen that 
freedom is nothing but the form which causal action 
assumes when both cause and effect are enjoyed ; so that 
freedom is determination as enjoyed, or in enjoyment, and 
human freedom is a case of something universal which is 
found wherever the distinction of enjoyment and con- 
templation, in the widest sense of those terms, is found. 

Enjoyed determination is that species of determination 
in which both the determiner and the determined are 
enjoyed. Contemplated determination is that species in 
which both events are contemplated, and it comprehends 
all instances of causal relation in the non-mental world, in 
so far as these are treated merely as objects of contem- 
plation to some mind, and not regarded as themselves 
subjects of enjoyment, in an extended application of that 
last term. Besides these two, we have the third species 
to be mentioned, where one of the members of the relation 

315 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Verifkation 
from ex- 
periences of 
freedom and 
unfreedom. 


316 

of determination is contemplated and the other enjoyed. 
Since in this third species, though the other member of 
the relation is contemplated, I do enjoy being determined 
or determining, it is perhaps better to call that kind of 
determination in which both members are enjoyed, not 
simply enjoyed determination, but determination in 
enjoyment. 

The proposition that freedom is determination in 
enjoyment is of the same sort as the familiar doctrine that 
freedom is self-determination, though it is more general. 
All that it does is to translate self-determination into other 
terms. I may illustrate its meaning and its reasonableness 
from common experiences of the occasions when we feel 
ourselves free, or unfree. Begin with the case last 
mentioned. We are free to open our eyes or not, or 
to direct them anywhere, but we are not free to see or 
not : we are passive or under compulsion in respect of 
our sensations. At the other extreme, in willing freely, 
we enjoy the determination of one mental state by another. 
A passion of anger induces the idea of striking and this 
idea passes into realisation : as Mr. Bradley says, an idea 
realises itself. The consciousness of willing is the enjoy- 
ment of the passage of such an idea into fact, and has been 
analysed before.^ The real nature of willing is clearer from 
such cases of internal willing than from those of willing 
an external action. Yet it is clear in these cases too. 1 
will to strike a man, and the idea of striking him is 
realised in the last mental state which is effective and 
issues in the actual striking. In the continuously enjoyed 
passage from motive to idea of action and thence to 
this last eifective mental act I enjoy myself as willing 
and as willing freely. This continuous enjoyment is 
prolonged into the perception of the blow. The blow 
itself is indeed a physical event and contemplated, and 
in respect of it we have a case of mixed deter- 
mination. But while I should say undoubtedly that 
the blow was caused by me, it is only in so far as I 
perceive the blow (by kinaesthetic sensations and per- 

1 Above, ch. ix. B, p. 248. 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


317 


ception of the results of the blow) that I am aware of 
myself as being free in the mere act of striking. If 1 
were anaesthetic and unaware of the effected act I should 
so far as that part of the situation is concerned not be 
aware of having struck freely. As it is, I am aware of 
the perception of the blow as determined by my previous 
mental states, and I feel myself free from one end of the 
self-determined process to the other. 

Willing is not the only kind of action or condition in 
which we may feel free. For example, we have this con- 
sciousness in instinctive processes, where one mental state 
leads on to another ; or in what we call the free play of 
the imagination, one fancy suggesting another, where the 
word free does not merely mean the absence of interfer- 
ence from thought or the higher self. In the same way 
we experience unfreedom not only in antithesis to freedom 
in willing, but otherwise. The most obvious case of un- 
freedom of will is that of action under physical compulsion. 
Our action is determined not by an enjoyment but by a 
physical cause, and the case is on the same level as the 
passive reception of sensations. Here the will might 
have come into play and did not. But there are cases 
which do not concern the will at all. An unaccount- 
able outburst of anger, or a mental obsession, makes us 
feel unfree, because of the absence of any determining 
mental state. There are also conditions in which we feel 
partly free and partly constrained. Thus a train of in- 
stinctive or perceptual action is free so far as it follows 
the line of mental predetermination, but it is also guided 
by external objects to which we feel ourselves compelled to 
adapt ourselves, and are, so far, unfree. Even in the free 
play of imagination we are continually subject to constraint 
by the objects created by our fancies: ^‘we depend on 
the creatures we have made ; and, so far, imagination is 
like perception. As we grow, we learn that our imagina- 
tion is most truly free and most our own when it most 
conforms to verisimilitude — the lesson which underlies 
Plato’s use of the imagination in education ; just as in 
conduct we find as we grow that our highest freedom 
consists in recognition and welcoming of lawful restraint, 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Confirma- 

tory 

exceptions. 


318 

SO that from the mere action of our selves we act 
within the limits of general human advantage. So, again, 
in willing we have the mixed experience of freedom 
and unfreedom where we yield to threats or force majeure 
of any sort and do actions we should not under normal 
circumstances have willed. We feel ourselves unfree 
because of the external compulsion, but free so far as the 
act issues from our intention, however formed. 

In all these cases the experience of unfreedom is 
compatible with responsibility, and the two questions, of 
consciousness of freedom, and responsibility, are to be 
distinguished. A drunkard may do in a fit of drunken- 
ness an act of which he is unaware or, at any rate, of 
whose meaning he is unaware ; and yet he may be 
responsible. Even an obsession, or an outburst of fury, 
may leave a man responsible though he feels himself the 
victim. Responsibility depends on whether the man’s 
own previous conduct has contributed to his enslavement. 
On the other hand, there may be cases where, as Mr. 
Bradley has pointed out,^ the passive compulsion may be 
of such a nature as to paralyse the will and destroy the 
conditions of willing ; and the person, for all his remorse, 
may really be unfree and not responsible. 

Certain facts which seem at first sight contradictory to 
the general statement that we feel free or unfree according 
as a mental state is or is not enjoyed as determined by a 
prior mental state or the outcome of it,^ confirm the state- 
ment on examination. Thus in the play of fancy we feel 
free ; but relatively to this a mere routine association of 
ideas seems, as we say, mechanical. Sometimes we feel 
ourselves the slaves of such routine habits ; as in Locke’s 
case of the young man who could only dance in a lumber 
room because it was in a lumber room he had learned 
dancing ; or in James’s case of a man who, having gone 
to his room to change his clothes, went to bed by force of 

1 Ethical Studies^ Essay I. Note A. 

^ Compare Mr. Stout’s Analytical Psychology^ vol. i. Bk. II. ch. i., 
‘Concept of Mental Activity,’ esp. p. 148. “Mental activity exists 
when and so far as process in consciousness is the direct outcome of 
previous process in consciousness.” I am of course greatly indebted to 
this chapter in the above. 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


319 


habit. The reason why such processes seem mechanical, 
though the person may not at the time be aware of any 
compulsion, is the want of intrinsic connection between 
the actions. One mental state is succeeded by another, 
but the connection is an accidental one, due to the external 
conditions. I have experienced A and B together, and 
so the apprehension of A is succeeded by that of B, 
but there is no development of B from A so that corre- 
spondingly the one mental state should be an outcome of 
the other. Thus so far the feeling of determination of 
one enjoyment by the other is missing. In proportion as 
this occurs will be the feeling of unfreedom, unlike the 
case of a spontaneous process of reflection where one idea 
is felt to be the outgrowth from another, and not a mere 
artificial sequence on it. 

Another apparently exceptional case is that of the 
sudden upspringing of new mental states which may mean 
giving a new bent to a person’s life or a new direction to 
his thinking ; for example, in conversion or in inspiration, 
where a new idea comes into the mind like those un- 
accountable outbursts of passion mentioned before. From 
one side these cases confirm our statement. For the 
person himself regards these sudden changes as coming 
to him from elsewhere, for example from God, and im- 
posed upon him.^ It may happen indeed that a person 
is conscious, in these cases, of intense personal initiative ; 
but this is because he disregards the passive or mentally 
uncaused uprush of the exciting emotion and is vividly 
attentive to the passage of the emotion, once it has 
possessed him, into the action he adopts. On the other 
hand these facts are often taken to suggest that whatever 
a man’s conduct or thinking may have been he still has 
power to change ; and so regarded they are treated as 
evidence not of unfreedom but of freedom. But this 
must I think be regarded not as a first-hand experience 
on the part of the persons in question, but as an interpre- 
tation of that experience or a theory about it. So far as 
the direct experience goes, it is in favour of passivity. 
What is meant is that there must be something in the 
^ See above, ch. viii. p. 221. 



320 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Lower and 

higher 

freedom. 


person to account for such revolutions. It is however 
easy enough by a counter theory to urge that these unex- 
plained resources are to be found in elements of the man’s 
whole nature, including his body, which have not yet come 
within enjoyment. In other words the outbreak is 
determined by contemplated conditions and the experience 
of unfreedom, which is what the person actually has, is 
justified. 

But the best support of our proposition is to be found 
in comparing lower and higher experiences of freedom. 
The more we feel ourselves determined by our own 
enjoyed mental states, the keener the consciousness of 
freedom. Hence freedom in a special sense belongs to 
the will. For in willing not only does the idea of a wanted 
object realise itself, but in that process it is supported by 
large masses of ideas and dispositions which constitute 
interests, and in the end it is supported by the whole self, 
and freedom is eminently the consciousness that the whole 
or large masses of the self are consenting to the adoption 
of an object. Here also eminently we have determination 
in enjoyment. Relatively to such action of the whole self, 
isolated streams of enjoyed determination seem less free, 
mechanical. Moreover, experience shows us that such 
complete determination by the personality on all its sides 
is more attainable in the good man than the bad one. For 
goodness is essentially the balanced development of all 
sides of human nature, its personal and its social elements 
all included ; and though the bad man may exhibit a high 
degree of organisation under some mastering impulse, he 
in general leaves certain sides of his nature undeveloped 
or else is wanting in certain necessary elements of char- 
acter. Hence the distinction of two senses of freedom, 
the one in which it means merely freedom from external 
determination, that is, it means determination by the man 
himself ; the other in which it is equivalent to goodness. 
In the first sense the bad and the good are both free ; in 
the second sense only he whose self is an exhibition of 
law is free, and badness is the slave of its passions. 
Benjamin Franklin had the idea in earlier life of forming 
a sect of “ virtuous and good men of all nations ” which 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


321 


he proposed to call the “ Society of the Free and Easy”^ — 
a title which we should hardly use with the present mean- 
ing of those words. Thus as the outcome of examining 
our experience of freedom it appears that we are most 
eminently free when we most enjoy determination by our 
mental states and dispositions. 

Returning from this survey of the data, we have now Freedom 
to see that the notion of freedom as determination in fe'^rcrfcT. 
enjoyment is proof against the difficulties which may be 
and have been urged against it, or have been thought to 
make freedom something sui generis. 

Freedom in willing or freedom of will is felt most 
obviously in choosing between two or more alternative 
courses. The consciousness of freedom is the con- 
sciousness that we choose between them. The so-called 
fiat of the will is in fact nothing more or less than the 
consciousness that it is we who are consenting to the act, 
or that the motive adopted proceeds from the self or 
character. But choice between two alternatives seems at 
first sight to distinguish completely between voluntary 
choice and ordinary physical causality. For when two 
forces are operative upon a physical body the effect is 
the resultant of the two effects of the separate causes ; 
whereas in choosing, one or other motive is adopted and 
the other disregarded. In general we do not in con- 
sequence of solicitation by two sets of considerations 
choose a course which is midway between them. We 
adopt one or the other ; and the defeated inducement is 
rejected entirely. We have however to observe that the 
rejected inducement does not or may not cease to exercise 

1 Franklin’s explanation is : “ free, as being by the general practice 
and habit of the virtues free from the dominion of vice ; and particularly 
by the practice of industry and frugality, free from debt, which exposes 
a man to confinement and a species of slavery to his creditors ” {Autobio- 
grapky, ed. Bigelow, New York, 1909, p. 207). The phrase “free and 
easy ” was generally used at that time to mean well-bred and elegant ease 
of manner, and it implied merit. “ Lady Darnford also made me a fine 
compliment,” writes Pamela on “ Sunday the 4th day of my happiness,” 

“ and said I looked freer and easier every time she saw me ” (Everyman’s 
edition of Fame la, vol. i. p. 344). 

VOL. II Y 



322 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


its effect. The temptation we resist may continue to 
tug at our hearts and we persist in its despite — a fact 
familiar in cases of what is called action in the line of 
greatest resistance. Strictly speaking, we act in the line 
of least resistance because we act from our characters. 
But the inducement, which appeals to one part of us and 
is defeated with effort by summoning up to the help of 
the other part all the reserves of our character, may 
continue to exert its fascination. 

This observation indicates the real answer to the 
difficulty. Consciousness attends, or is borne or carried 
by, a structure or body more complex than a physical 
body, less homogeneous in its constitution but at the 
same time exhibiting closer co-ordination of its parts. 
The greater complexity in the constitution of the higher 
existents means that their response to stimuli is more 
plastic in character. The mechanical and the mental are 
not, as has been observed before, separated from each 
other by absolute differences. In the mechanical there is 
an element which performs the office of mind, and in the 
mental there is something which performs that of body. 
Each responds according to its constitution. Even the 
mechanical body responds differently to a blow according 
as the body is a wall or a piece of putty. The relative 
simplicity of the physical body excludes preference of one 
stimulus to another ; each exerts its effect and the two 
effects are combined in the resultant. Preference implies 
a greater complexity ; but it does not begin with man, 
but with life. Lowly organisms like algae may exhibit 
preference, avoiding one form of stimulus and pursuing 
another. There are various familiar facts which mark 
the transition from such simple preference which is not 
choice to voluntary choice in man. In the animal body 
with nervous ^ mechanism ’ it is now well established that 
in order to the performance of certain actions, not only 
are the appropriate muscles innervated, but it is part and 
parcel of the action that the antagonist muscles are 
inhibited. It is but a step from this to the total disregard 
of the alternative stimulus. Between the two we have 
the above-noted isolated persistence of the alternative 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


323 


when the choice has been made, and the preparatory 
condition of irresolution of which Buridanus’ ass is the 
standing illustration. 

There is nothing in free mental action which is in- 
compatible with thorough determinism. Neither is such 
determinism incompatible with novelty. Novelty may 
however be understood in a less important and in a more 
important sense. It may be understood merely as a 
protest against the notion of bare repetition ; or it may 
be understood as implying the impossibility of prediction. 

Let us take the former sense first. Every mental 
action, and more specifically every act of willing, is 
unique. Novelty W. James ^ describes as ^‘a character 
of fresh activity-situations.” But such uniqueness they 
share with every other individual in the universe. No 
mere combination of universals explains individuality ; 
things or events have their own special and particularising 
features, even if no more than their place and date. 
Novelty in this sense is not distinctive of human action. 
But the novelty alleged to be distinctive of free-will 
means more than this. It turns on the belief that 

^ As a matter of plain history,” writes W, James {Radical Empiricism y 
p. 185, note), defending himself against the charge of invoking free-will 
as a supernatural agent, ‘‘ the only free-will I have ever thought of 
defending is the character of novelty in fresh activity-situations. If an 
activity-process is the form of a whole ‘ field of consciousness,’ and if 
each field of consciousness is not only in its totality unique (as is now 
commonly admitted) but has its elements unique (since in that situation 
they are all dyed in the total) then novelty is perpetually entering the 
world, and what happens there is no pure repetition^ as the dogma of the 
literal uniformity of nature requires. Activity-situations come, in short, 
each with an original touch.” This contradicts nothing in what has here 
been said. Exception might indeed be taken to the statement that 
activity -consciousness implies a whole field of consciousness, as being 
unduly restrictive ; but more particularly to the notion that the elements 
of a total field are unique because they arc dyed in the total. They may 
receive a new value from entry into an organic whole (to borrow an 
expression from Mr. Moore), but the new character which they thus 
receive does not necessarily alter their intrinsic nature. Interpenetration, 
if so understood, would make a colour red different in itself because it 
may mean blood, or a point defined as the intersection of two straight 
lines different in itself because it is also a focus of an ellipse. But apart 
from these objections, every act is so far unique. 


Freedom 
and pre- 
diction. 



324 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


human action is not wholly predictable. An examination 
of this belief will show both that within limits it is well 
founded and why ; and secondly that unpredictability is 
not limited to human determinism. 

Undoubtedly human action is partially predictable. 
The intercourse of men with one another implies it and 
is based upon it. We resent equally (as Mr. Bradley 
has said) that our action cannot partly be predicted and 
that it can wholly be predicted ; for instance, if a person 
tells us he could not be sure that we should speak the 
truth, or if he tells us he knew precisely what we should 
do. Our resentment in the second case is in practice a 
protest against encroachment on our privacy, and it has 
its good theoretical justification. For I myself am a thing 
enjoyed, which 1 myself do not contemplate, and still less 
a stranger. Still it is true that my mind is, after all, also 
bodily ; and the more another knows of me, mind and 
body, the better can he forecast my action. A skilled 
observer, knowing a person’s general bodily constitution, 
the latent tendencies in his bodily ^ make-up,’ might, 
apart from the difficulty of the calculation, which is 
supposed to be negligible, go far towards predicting a 
revolution in his character under certain circumstances. 
But the observer could only do so on the basis of present 
knowledge of human tendencies, combined with tendencies 
suggested by the bodily condition. He could not fore- 
tell something outside of the range of past experience ; 
though of course after the event had happened he could 
see the connection of the strange event with its conditions, 
which would then be seen to have determined it. 

This brings us within sight of the deeper justification 
for the belief that human action cannot wholly be pre- 
dicted. Human nature is a growing thing, and with the 
lapse of real Time may throw up new characters which 
can only be known to him who experiences them. It 
may be possible to predict, if not from the knowledge 
we have of minds, at any rate from the knowledge we 
have of the underlying neural processes, what combination 
of ideas may possess a man at some future date. But 
the meaning of the ideas, the spirit of them, the objects 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


3^5 


to which they refer, may be beyond our calculation. It 
is not, however, so important to recognise this possibility 
as to determine the limits of prediction, and discover 
where prediction becomes impossible. 

Let me illustrate by cases. First let us take Hume’s The limits 
famous assertion of how imagination may in rare cases 
be aware of its object without actual impression. We 
may imagine, he thinks, a shade of grey between two 
given shades, without previous experience. The alleged 
fact is gravely open to doubt. To think of an intermediate 
shade is to be aware of a shade thought of as intermediate 
— a problem to be solved. We should not know what 
that which is described as an intermediate shade would 
look like. As a matter of fact, we should solve the 
problem by taking a brush and mixing our colours in 
the intermediate proportions and then we should see that 
this was what we sought. And this is, in general, the 
method on which we proceed in order to find what is the 
object of which the conditions, but not the object itself, 
are given in our thought. We only discover by getting 
the experience. I am not denying that possibly the 
precise neural process may occur from internal causes to 
which the shade in question corresponds as object, and 
that consequently without having actually seen the shade 
in the outer world a man may conceivably see it in fancy. 

I only deny that he would imagine it by thinking of it 
as the intermediate shade ; and if he imagined it accidentally 
he would only recognise it as being the shade he sought 
in the same way as if he had mixed the pigments. If 
this is true of the subject himself, still more is it true 
for the outsider who observes him and predicts. Even 
if the subject could by a chance anticipate in fancy in 
the way described an experience not yet impressed from 
without, the outsider could not tell what it would be, 
unless he were identical with the subject. To take 
another example, how could the outsider predict, without 
previous knowledge of the experiment, that blue exposed 
to one eye and red to the other would give me purple. 

He might know the two nervous processes excited in the 
two halves of the brain. If they are not entirely distinct. 



326 EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE bk. m 

if there is any co-operation between them, any synergy,” 
he might conceivably calculate their resultant process. 
Yet he would not know that this resultant process meant 
for the subject the consciousness of purple, unless he 
knew it already, which is supposed not to be the case. 

In such cases prediction seems impossible, because it 
is new mental meanings, new objects, which are in 
question. The same thing is true of practical action. 
For minds by their action project new combinations and 
are creative : they bring new things into the world. 
Thus to an observer in France in the eighteenth century 
it might have been plain that some revolution and 
reconstruction was inevitable. He might with sufficient 
knowledge have calculated beforehand the movements in 
mechanical, or even physiological, terms of all the actors. 
Rut he could not predict that these movements meant 
for the actors the new idea of democratic freedom. He 
would only predict its appearance in forms of movement 
or at most of life. A third instance will show where it 
begins to be arguable that in such cases prediction really 
is possible. Might not the observer from previous 
knowledge calculate that at such and such a moment an 
idea would enter a Prime Minister’s mind of optional 
and temporary exclusion of the counties of Ulster from 
the Irish Parliament ; that his mind should work in a way 
which corresponded to this arrangement outside him ? 
It may be so. But only, I imagine, if it is true that this 
arrangement means nothing more than rearrangement 
among familiar things, and so long as this proposed 
arrangement introduces nothing specifically new, no new 
creation of the human spirit, in political life. 

Thus while the limits of unpredictability are very 
difficult to fix, it would seem that in certain cases pre- 
diction is impossible, even on the supposition of the 
vastest powers of calculation. In other cases predic- 
tion is possible theoretically, though impossible practically 
because of the coarseness of the calculating instrument. 
Even then it must be understood that calculation can only 
succeed so far as the data are exact and individual. This 
however applies to physical as well as to human concerns. 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


327 


Determinism in mind is therefore not incompatible with 
unpredictability ; and we have seen the reason, that the 
predictor is a mind, and while he may predict human 
future regarded as a contemplated object, that is in 
physiological terms, he cannot predict it wholly in mental 
terms. Now this fact is not peculiar to human deter- 
minism ; but it arises wherever the change from one 
level of existence with its distinctive quality to another 
occurs ; or in other words wherever the distinction of 
enjoyment and contemplation, in the extended sense, 
arises. 

A being who knew only mechanical and chemical 
action could not predict life ; he must wait till life emerged 
with the course of Time. A being who knew only life 
could not predict mind, though he might predict that 
combination of vital actions which has mind. But the 
limits of prediction are still narrower. In general, let A 
be a lower level and B the next higher level. A being on 
the level A could not predict B. A being on the level 
B could possibly predict the whole future in terms of A 
and lower levels, but not in terms of B, e.g,^ if he lived at the 
beginning of life, he could not predict the forms of life, 
except possibly in terms of physico-chemical action. I use 
the word possibly in order to point out a qualification. 
For not only are there differences of level in existence, 
but within any level of existence, e.g.^ animal life, there are 
differences, like those of animal species, emerging in the 
course of Time, which may approximate to differences of 
quality, like those that occur in the growth of humanity 
of which I have given an example from the French 
Revolution. Now it is an open question whether such 
differences on the level A could be predicted by a creature 
on the level B. For instance could an angel or God fore- 
tell all the new creations of human advance } It may be 
not ; though on the other hand the cyclical recurrence of 
groups of physical properties even among the elements 
might indicate that there is some calculable order of forms 
of existence. Be this as it may, about one stage of 
existence no question seems to arise : the lowest of all, 
changes in space and time. In terms of Space and Time 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


The cal- 
culator of 
Laplace. 


328 

the future can be predicted for a being on any stage 
higher, sufficient calculating capacity being presumed. 

The famous puzzle of the Laplacean calculator is full 
of confusions but contains a truth. A person who knows 
the whole state of the universe at any moment can 
calculate, so it urges, the whole future. Now it is true, I 
understand, that, given the condition of the universe at a 
certain number of instants in terms of Space and Time, 
the whole future can be calculated in terms of Space and 
Time. But what it will be like, what qualities it shall 
have more than spatial and temporal ones, he cannot know 
unless he knows already, or until he lives to see. He will 
be able to say that this morning certain vibrations at a rate 
of so many billions a second will impinge upon a certain 
group of motions of a highly complicated character, but 
unless he knows what green is and what life and mind are, 
he will not be able to say that I shall this morning see the 
green of my garden. How much of the future he will be 
able to predict depends on the time at which his calculation 
begins, that is, on the state which the universe has then 
attained in the unfolding of its characters. Certainly, if he 
is only present during the nebular period, he will never 
predict you and me, though he may predict the groups of 
changes in Space and Time which go by the names of you 
and me. Suppose he begins when human minds exist, he 
cannot, as we have seen, predict their future completely, 
because he only enjoys mind ; and it is an open ques- 
tion whether he may foretell all possible developments at 
lower levels. Except in the limited sense described, the 
hypothesis of the calculator is absurd. He is supposed to 
be predicting as a man, though with more than human 
skill. Yet, if he exists at a stage earlier than the arrival of 
mind, he is an impossibility and, anyhow, he has not the 
materials for complete prediction except to the extent 
indicated. If he exists at the human stage, he is supposed 
to be contemplating human development instead of being 
involved in it himself, and the one thing which for that 
reason he cannot do is to foretell completely the future of 
man and still less of stages higher than mind. He stands, 
in fact, for little more than the proposition that at any 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


329 


moment of the world’s existence the future of the world 
will be what it will be.”^ But what it will be he cannot 
foretell, for the world itself is in Time and is in perpetual 
growth, producing fresh combinations. 

Either, then, the infinitely calculating mind of the 
hypothesis is unable to predict, or it is supposed by a 
petitio principii to know more than it really knows, and 
prediction is unnecessary. In the end it assumes Time to 
be unreal, or, what is the same thing, that the universe is 
completed : that, in Mr. Bergson’s phrase, tout est donnL 
Nor is it of the least help to identify the supposed 
infinite mind with God. For whatever deity may be it is 
not merely infinite mind, if that phrase has any meaning, 
but something higher. The only meaning which can 
rationally be attached to the notion that God can predict 
the whole future is that the future will be what it will be. 
And there is one part of the universe which in any case 
even God cannot predict, and that is his own future.^ 

Determinism and prediction are therefore distinct 
ideas, and determinism is compatible with unpredictability, 
and freedom with predictability. 

Not only may mental action be determined and yet 
unpredictable, it may be free and yet necessary. Necessity 
conflicts with freedom only if it is taken as equivalent to 
compulsion which removes the conditions of freedom or 
makes choice impossible. An external compulsion like a 
physical force may put the will out of action, or like immi- 
nent death it may under certain circumstances unman a 
person and reduce him to the condition of a brute. But 
the necessity which the will obeys is the ‘ necessity ’ of 
causation, the determinate sequence of event upon its 
conditions. Nor need we perplex our minds with the 
puzzles of fatalism. If our acts can be predicted, it is 

1 Mr. Russell’s phrase in the paper, ‘ On the notion of cause,’ Proc. 
Arist. Soc. N.S. xiii., 19 12 -13, p. 22. (Also in Mysticism and Logic) 

2 Some of these remarks about the calculator, and on the general 
subject of this section are in agreement with what is said by Mr. 
Bosanquet {Individuality and Value, Lect. iii. pp. 107-17). See also 
J. S. Mackenzie, Constructive Philosophy (London, 1917), p. 375. 


Freedom 

and 

necessity. 



33 ° 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


F rccdom 
nut indcter- 
mination. 


said, we cannot be free. Yet the only way in which we 
can predict human action, so far as it can be predicted at 
all, is to assume it to be free, and aware of its freedom. 
To disown the responsibility of choosing rightly because 
our future is determined is to suppose it to be deter- 
mined by something which is not ourselves. 

It follows that freedom does not mean indetermination. 
When indetermination is used to mean that free action 
cannot practically be predicted or in certain cases cannot 
even be predicted theoretically, in both these senses 
human action is indeterminate or novel, but in both these 
senses indetermination is true of the non-mental world as 
well. It is certain that to predict the individuality of 
every physical event exceeds the practical resources of 
science. And for the same reason as we ourselves are 
beyond certain limits totally unpredictable by ourselves, 
events in nature are at their own level equally unpre- 
dictable. If indetermination means novelty, it is not 
distinctive of freedom and cannot be used as a criterion 
of freedom. 

On the other hand if indetermination means con- 
tingency, that, in spite of its antecedents, the free act 
might have been different, the criterion is false. As 
there is no ‘ must ’ for science or philosophy, neither is 
there a ^ might ' or ^ might not be ’ ; science has to deal with 
what is. ‘ Might be ’ for it means not variation from 
what it finds, but variation within limits where not all the 
conditions are known. The determinism of the free act 
means no more than this, that it has followed in fact from 
its antecedents, as they exist in the character of the agent 
and the circumstances which appeal to him for action. 
The freedom consists in the act of choice ; there is no 
power of choosing behind the choice itself, no freedom of 
choice but only freedom experienced in choice. Had the 
character and other antecedents been different, the act 
would have been different. Too often this criterion of 
indetermination is merely misreading the consciousness 
which we may have, not that the act might have been 
different but that it should or ought to have been 
different. It is not the criterion of freedom, but the state- 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


331 


ment of the difference between positive and negative 
freedom. 1 have done wrong ; had I been good or truly 
free, 1 should have done otherwise. Or perhaps I have 
done right, but I am conscious that if I had not been 
truly free, I should still have been free, as acting from 
my own character which was not truly good. Remorse 
is the awakening of my true character which had been 
partially lulled into oblivion, or the growth of a more 
perfect character after the act which the new character 
condemns. 

We may enumerate one or two more of the criteria by 
which freedom has been mistakenly distinguished. Free- 
dom does not mean action which proceeds from the whole 
personality, though that is true of the completest freedom. 
The physical body, which for us is not free, thrills also to 
its depths at the touch of circumstance. Freedom does 
not mean ignorance of the real causes of action. On the 
contrary it means awareness of them. We are most fully 
conscious of freedom when we are most aware of our acts 
proceeding from ourselves. It does not mean purpose, if 
only because actions may be attended by consciousness of 
freedom which are not purposed. Freedom of the will 
always involves purpose, but purpose, though essential to 
the willing, is not essential to its freedom, that is, does not 
define its freedom. Purpose is the idea of an end which 
precedes the action. But this idea (I mean the ideation 
of it) is itself determined by antecedents and in turn it 
determines action. Willing is eminently free because 
throughout its stages we have the awareness of enjoyment 
determined by enjoyment. But that the determining 
enjoyment is the anticipation of the determined one is 
indeed vital to the will but not to its freedom. 

Finally it implies no contrast of any intelligible char- 
acter of human nature with its sensible character, such 
as Kant regarded as necessary to account for obligation. 
Human nature is wholly empirical, and obligation arises 
within its empirical limits. The consciousness of obliga- 
tion is the consciousness we have that right action is the 
judgment of the standard mind; that it is what the 


Other 

mistaken 

criteria. 



332 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


Univer- 
sality of 
freedom. 


Standard or collective mind wills. The sense of guilt is 
the sense that our will is inconformable thereto. These 
distinctions grow up within the collective of persons, or 
within the individual as he represents in his own person 
that collective. That acts of a certain sort are typical is a 
fact not confined to human nature but common to it with 
at least all organic forms. We possess but the reflective 
consciousness of it. Nothing but an empirical existence 
is needed for these facts ; and indeed I do not know how 
the mind should ever have been regarded as anything else 
than purely empirical, were it not that it is supposed to 
contemplate itself, which in fact it never does. 

Freedom, then, is determination in enjoyment, and we 
have seen that it involves no feature save enjoyment which 
distinguishes it from natural or physical action, which is 
contemplated. Not all human action is free. When it is 
unfree its determinants are not present in enjoyment. But 
when free action in turn becomes the object of contempla- 
tion it falls into the class of determined natural action. At 
the same time the angel or God who sees our action as 
determined may know also that for us it is enjoyment and 
free, though he cannot enjoy our freedom but only knows 
//la/ we feel it. Let us extend the usage of enjoyment 
and contemplation, and we shall then see that each con- 
templated thing enjoys its own peculiar level of existence 
while it contemplates the levels below it. Hence the 
action of the plant which for us is natural determination 
is for the plant itself the enjoyment of its freedom. The 
stone which for us is compelled from our point of view 
is free in its internal actions for itself. It acts, in the 
Spinozistic phrase, from the necessity of its own nature. 
It is only to the higher level of creatures that free deter- 
minism or enjoyment in determination becomes mere 
determinism. Thus freedom in general is the experience 
which each thing has of the working of its own nature ; 
and a distinction parallel to ours of freedom and un- 
freedom exists for the plant and for the stone or the 
atom. The plant undergoes the wind which bends it, or 
the air which sets its respiration at work. But it enjoys 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


333 


its own free act of respiration. The stone is passive to 
the freezing water that splits it, but free in its resilience 
to deformation. Physicists are now occupied with the 
free actions of the atom. 

Thus freedom is not an exceptional privilege of human 
life, but as enjoyed determination is, as Wordsworth said 
of pleasure, “ spread through the world.” ^ 

With freedom we have completed the survey of those Summary 
characters of mind which appear at first to make mind 
unique among things. In each case we have been able Problems, 
to verify the proposition that the distinctive features of 
mind belong to it in virtue of its character as a conscious 
being, not in virtue of anything which separates it from 
other finites. All finites according to their level of 
existence possess the character distinctive of that level, but 
all of them alike stand in relations to one another which 
they derive ultimately from being spatio-temporal com- 
plexes which are contained within the one Space-Time. 
Knowing, the distinction of things and appearances, 
freedom, even values, are characters which have their 
analogues at lower levels of existence, and are but 
particular instances of general characters of all things, 
as those general characters are modified in the case of a 
finite which is conscious. To know an object is but an 
instance of universal comprcsence of finites with one 
another, and hence we were led to extend the contrast of 
enjoyment and contemplation to every case in which a 
finite of one level was compresent with one of a lower level, 
or with a feature of another finite which belongs to a 
lower level. The contrast of the whole of a thing 
with its partial characters obtains throughout the rela- 
tions of finites with one another, and is not con- 
fined to the relations between mind and other things. 

The universality of freedom has been the subject of this 
chapter. Only in the case of value was the conclusion 
imperfect, because of our inadequate knowledge of 
the history of material things. Thus, with allowance 

1 The larger part of the preceding pages of this chapter is taken from 
an article on ‘ Freedom ’ in Proc. Arist. Soc, N.S. vol. xiv., 1913-14. 



334 


EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


I3K. Ill 


made for this imperfect conclusion, we have found that 
our familiar ways of regarding ourselves in relation to 
other things are the forms which relations of a simpler 
or more universal character assume in the case of the 
highest of known finites. 

The method has been, not the more difficult one of 
attempting to show from the general character of finites 
that certain relations obtain between them which in 
human minds assume these forms, but, starting with 
the ways of mind, to express them in terms of a more 
general character. We have thus sought to verify the 
fundamental hypothesis, that all finites are differentia- 
tions from the same matrix. In every finite there is one 
element corresponding to body in ourselves and another 
corresponding to mind. The business of metaphysics was 
upon each level of existence to identify the different forms 
which these two elements assume, and in particular to 
indicate what in each case was the element which played 
the part of mind. On the lowest level, which has purely 
spatio-temporal character, the mind was Time itself. 
Hence we ourselves are built on a universal pattern of 
which Space-Time itself or any of its purely spatio- 
temporal differentiations is the simplest exemplar. As 
we pass from one level to the next higher, we find that a 
portion of an existent on that level is set aside to be the 
bearer of a new characteristic empirical quality which is 
distinctive of the next level, and between that specialised 
body of the lower and the characteristic of the higher level 
there is identity in the same sense as a mental process is 
identical with its equivalent neural process. The orders 
of the finites being thus described, we find that they enter 
into various relations with one another in consequence 
of their all being contained within the common matrix. 
These relations are those which we have examined at 
such length, and they arise out of the categorial characters 
of these empirically distinguished orders of finites. 

In this way, mind is discovered not to stand apart from 
other things in some kind of isolation, nor to impress 
upon things its own mental character. The fundamental 
features which mind shares with other things and the 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


335 


relations into which it enters with other things are the 
witnesses that minds and things which are not minds 
share in the consequences of their common origin. The 
affinity which exists between them is that which links 
together all creatures, minds and material things alike, as 
all alike children, in various degrees of perfection of growth, 
of the one parent. Time which inspires Space and makes 
it a continuum of motions, when it reaches in man the form 
of mind, inspires knowing and freedom and value. In a 
poem which he calls ‘ Meditation under Stars,’ Meredith 
has described this affinity between us and the stars, and 
how in the view of it our earth acquires a meaning which 
it has not otherwise. “ The fire is in them whereof we 
are born ; the music of their motion may be ours.” ^ 

The picture we have then before us is that which was 
sketched hypothetically at the beginning of this Book. 
In the course of Time which is the principle of movement 
the matrix of Space-Time breaks up into finites of ever 
increasing complexity. At certain points in the history 
of things finites assume new empirical qualities which 
are distinctive of levels of existence, primary qualities, 
matter, secondary qualities, life, mind. The distinctive 
quality of the finite at its level is the ^ mind ’ of that finite. 
The highest of these empirical qualities is mind or con- 

^ I quote the passage in full. We have to allow for his deprecia- 
tion of Space and of Time. 

So may we read and little find them cold : 

Not frosty lamps illumining dead space. 

Not distant aliens, not senseless Powers. 

The fire is in them whereof we are born ; 

The music of their motion may be ours. 

Spirit shall deem them beckoning Earth and voiced 

Sisterly to her, in her beams rejoiced. 

Of love, the grand impulsion, we behold 
The love that lends her grace 
Among the starry fold. 

Then at new flood of customary mom. 

Look at her through her showers. 

Her mists, her streaming gold, 

A wonder edges the familiar face : 

She wears no more that robe of printed hours ; 

Half strange seems Earth, and sweeter than her flowers. 

PoemSy vol. ii. p. 171, ed. 1907. 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


336 

sciousness. But the lower finites are not minds in the strict 
sense but only in an extended and metaphorical sense. 
There are no degrees or kinds of consciousness lower 
than consciousness itself, as Leibniz thought, but different 
grades of reality each with an element which is not mind 
but corresponds to mind in its office. Not even the 
universe of Space-Time has mind ; but in so far as it has 
Time, it is parallel, with the qualifications noticed before, 
with the empirical finite which is both mind and body in 
one. The only mind in the universe is those finites which 
are conscious. There are consequently minds in the 
universe but no mind in general. The notion of a mind as 
such which pervades things is a fiction generated by the 
illegitimate extension of an empirical finite thing mind. 
Infinite mind is unknown to us ; infinite Time is known 
to us. If there is an infinite something which is more 
than Time, it is more than mind. 


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 

Have all the Forms of Existence existed always ? 

A DIFFICULTY remains which might be felt, and which if it were 
well founded would mar the clearness of the picture ; but it rests 
on a misapprehension and may be dealt with in a note. All the 
forms of finite existence, from primary shapes in Space-'Fime 
down to mind, are born in Time. But since Time is infinite, it 
might seem that every form of existence must have existed in the 
past. Every form of motion must have been tried, and therefore 
in the strictest sense the universe is not an evolution at all, but 
the whole of its varied riches exists already, no matter at what 
point in the history we are imagined to stop. This objection 
recalls the notion of Leibniz that each portion of matter contains 
the whole universe of forms, and perhaps at bottom it involves the 
same notion of representation of the universe by each finite as 
his. For us the idea of representation of the universe has no 
place. Each finite does indeed stand in relation to the whole 
universe, because it is a portion of Space-Time. But it does not 
represent the universe, any more than our minds which are related 
to their objects, and related correspondingly so that to each object 
there corresponds a distinct mental process, represent these objects 



CH. X 


FREEDOM 


337 


so as in any sense to resemble them or contain them. The mind 
is a mode of being of its own, distinct from that kind of being 
which the objects possess ; and in like manner every finite has a 
mode of being of its own distinct from the rest of the universe to 
which it stands in relation. The parts do not reflect the whole 
but are parts of it. But we may leave this possible motive of the 
objection, and trace it to its real source in its misapprehension of 
the infinity of Time. 

It misunderstands in the first place the notion of infinity. 
Because an infinite time has elapsed down to and including the 
origin of man, we may not therefore conclude that man must 
have existed before. It is true that there are as many instants in 
the time which elapses down to a given event as in the time 
which elapses down to an hour before that event. But this does 
not mean that every event in the longer time has occurred earlier. 
The infinite series of numbers from the number 3 onwards does 
not include the numbers i and 2, though there are as many 
numbers in the one series as the other. Or to take a case which 
is more strictly parallel, the infinite series of negative numbers 
which ends at - i does not include the numbers o and i. The 
very definition of an infinite collection is that its image or repre- 
sentation is only a part of the original, though in the derived 
infinite there is an exact correspondence with the original. Thus 
though there is an exact correspondence between the number of 
instants in an hour and a minute, the hour is still longer than the 
minute. 

In the next place the objection neglects the distinctive char- 
acter of Time which is to be a succession within duration ; it 
conceives of Time as given all at once as if it were a line. In 
other words it conceives of Time as if it were precisely the same 
as Space. But Time in the abstract is distinct from Space in the 
abstract. The one is in the abstract mere coexistence ; the other 
mere succession. Since the instants of abstract Time are homo- 
geneous, the conclusion is drawn that in an infinite Time every- 
thing which can happen has happened. But this overlooks what 
is essential to Time, that it is creative : that something comes 
into being which before was not. 

Just because Time is taken in the abstract it is treated as if it 
were given at once, as if there could be at any one moment a 
completion of what is essentially successive, and therefore cannot 
be at once. But the deeper cause of the misunderstanding is that 
Time, as we have more than once seen to be the case in philo- 
sophical discussions, is taken apart from Space. There is no such 
thing as a Time which subsists alongside of Space. There is only 
one reality which is Space-Time. When we separate Time from 
Space, Space becomes purely geometrical. In such a Space all the 
VOL. II Z 



EMPIRICAL EXISTENCE 


BK. Ill 


338 

spatial patterns of finite existents are already contained. But a 
finite existent is not a merely spatial pattern but a spatio-temporal 
one, a configuration of motion. Thus we cannot say that because 
the spatial pattern of man exists in Space at any moment there- 
fore man also exists at any moment. We are dealing with 
patterns as traced out in time. But to arrive at a higher or more 
complex order of finite existent takes time, 'Fime is taken in the 
abstract, separated from Space, and accordingly things in the real 
stuff' of Space-Time are emancipated from the history of their 
becoming. But when we think of things as generated in time 
out of the fundamental stuff, they have all of them a history. 
The time which has elapsed down to man is infinite, but it is an 
infinity which has been occupied with the generation of certain 
forms, and will be occupied with the generation of other forms. 
Though 'Fime is infinite, experience as registered in historical 
records tells us that in times before the birth of man there was no 
man. That pattern had not yet been traced which is the con- 
dition of the emergence of human mind. 

'Fhe same reality of Time which has evolved the various forms 
of finite existence leaves room for still higher births. Except for 
the belief that development is finished with the highest thing we 
know, there is no ground for the doctrine of cyclical periods of 
the world’s history, a cataclysm follow^ed by a fresh beginning, 
such as are supposed by many philosophies, from Heraclitus and 
Zarathustra and the Stoics down to Nietzsche. On the contrary 
the notion of a fresh beginning vaguely assumes the finitude of 
'Fime, which in reality has no beginning or begins at each 
moment indifi'erently. Real Time hints, by analogy with the 
past, the movement towards higher empirical qualities of existence. 
On this is founded the possibility of understanding deity. 



BOOK IV 
DEITY 


339 




qHIAPjOlEiR I 


DEITY AND GOD 

In a universe so described, consisting of things which 
have developed within the one matrix of Space-Time ; 
we ourselves being but the highest finite existences 
known to us because the empirical quality which is 
distinctive of conscious beings is based on finites of a 
lower empirical quality ; what room is there for, and 
what place can be assigned to, God ? 

Primarily God must be defined as the object of the 
religious emotion or of worship. He is correlative to 
that emotion or sentiment, as food is correlative to 
appetite. What we worship, that is God. This is the 
practical or religious approach to God. But it is 
insufficient for our theoretical needs. It labours under 
the defect that so far as religion itself is able to assure 
us, the object of religion, however vitally rooted in 
human nature, however responsive to its needs, may be 
disconnected with the rest of the world. God may be 
but an ennobling fancy, a being whom we project before 
us in our imagination, in whom to believe may sustain 
and inspire us and have its own sufficient justification in 
its effects on our happiness, but to whom no reality corre- 
sponds which can be co-ordinated with familiar realities 
of the world. The appetite for food arises from internal 
causes, but the food which satisfies it is external and 
independent of the organism, and it is known to us apart 
from the satisfaction which it gives to our hunger. The 
passion for God is no less a real appetite of our nature, 

341 


Two 
ways of 
defining 
God. 



342 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


but what if it creates the very object which satisfies it ? 
Always, indeed, the religious emotion believes in the 
reality of its object, as something greater than man and 
independent of him, in whom the finite creature may 
even in some phases of feeling be submerged ; and it 
would reject as preposterous the suggestion that God 
may be a fancy with which it plays, like a lover with a 
dream of perfection. But the religious sentiment itself 
can supply us with no such theoretical assurance of 
reality, and it needs to be supplemented with a meta- 
physical inquiry, what place if any the object of worship 
occupies in the general scheme of things. 

On the other hand from the metaphysical approach, 
God must be defined as the being, if any, which possesses 
deity or the divine quality ; or, if there arc more Gods 
than one, the beings which possess deity. The defect 
of this definition (which is only apparently circular) is 
that the being which possesses deity need not necessarily, 
so far as the bare metaphysical description goes, be the 
object of religious sentiment. It has to be shown that 
the being which possesses deity coincides with the object 
of religious passion and is its food. Neither definition 
is therefore for theory complete in itself. The religious 
description wants authentic coherence with the system 
of things. The metaphysical one wants the touch of 
feeling which brings it within the circle of human 
interests. Were the passion towards God not already 
lit, no speculative contemplation or proof of the existence 
or attributes of a metaphysical God would make him 
worshipful.^ Even the intellectual love of God which in 
Spinoza’s system has the force of religion can do so, not 
as a mere passion for truth in its fullest form, but because 
it presupposes a religious passion. Were it not on the 
other hand for the speculative or reflective justification, 
the God of religious sentiment would have no sure root 
in things. Religion leans on metaphysics for the 
justification of its indefeasible conviction of the reality 
of its object ; philosophy leans on religion to justify it 
in calling the possessor of deity by the religious name of 
^ Cp. James, Varieties of Religious Experienee (London, 1902), p. 431. 



DEITY AND GOD 


CH. I 


343 


God. The two methods of approach are therefore 
complementary. 


But whichever method of approach be adopted, in Method, 
either case God is defined indirectly. Religion is not 
the sentiment which is directed upon God ; but God is 
that upon which the religious sentiment is directed. 

The datum of experience is that sentimeiit, and what 
God is is known only by examining its deliverances. 

In metaphysics, deity is not so much the quality which 
belongs to God as God is the being which possesses 
deity. The quality of deity is here the datum of 
experience. It is idle to hope that by defining God in 
conceptual terms, whether as the sum of reality, or the 
perfect being, or the first cause, or by other device, we 
can establish the connection between such a being and 
the rest of our experience. We do but start with an 
abstraction and we do but end with one. Proofs of 
God’s existence and nature there are none, if such a 
God is to be identified with the object of worship. 
Granted that there is a sum of reality ; in what respect 
does it stir the religious passion ? The answer must be : 
because of its deity, and on what this deity is the 
conception of a sum of reality offers no light. The 
same thing holds in different degrees of the conceptions 
of a first cause or a supreme designer. 

Nor can we even prove the existence of a being 
called God, whether worshipful or not, except on the 
basis of experience. No one now is convinced by the 
traditional arguments for God’s existence. The reason 
is that at some point or other they introduce conceptions 
which are a priori in the bad sense of that phrase, in 
which it means not something experienced which is 
pervasive of all things but something supplied by the 
mind ; or in other words they desert the scientific 
interpretation of things, along the lines indicated by 
experience itself, by a rigidly limited use of analogy.^ 

^ The famous ontological argument proves nothing more than that 
the totality of things is real ; which is a bare tautology. The argument 
assumes the form that the idea of the universe cannot be a mere idea as 



344 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


The only one of the three which at all persuades is the 
argument from design which is based on the wonderful 
adaptation of living forms to their surroundings and on 
“ the hierarchy of ministration ^ amongst the forms, by 
which the lower serves the purposes of the higher. 
Because such adaptation implies in human products the 
operation of a designing mind, the conception is extended 
from this particular case, by an illegitimate use of analogy, 
to experience as a whole. The easy conception of a 
designing mind was foisted upon nature as a whole, 
without considering whether it could be used under 
conditions which required it to be infinite and to create 
its own material.*^ Subsequent knowledge has shown 
that the experience which was thought unintelligible 
without such a conception points in the opposite direction. 
For adaptation to the surroundings, or the internal 
teleology of forms, is the result of selection operating 
on variations ; and the external teleology of ministration 
is not to be assigned to a force operating in the past but 
is an incident of passage to the future. Who does not 
see that sheep were not created for man, but that man 
survives because he is able to live on sheep ? On the 
other hand, if for this external designer we substitute 
the notion of an immanent design, we do but name the 
fact that the world works out so as to produce a plan. 
We may call the world so conceived by the name of God, 
and forget or possibly explain the wastefulness and 

the idea of a finite thing may be, but its object must be real. In truth 
the idea of all reality is nothing but all reality over again. Mr. Bradley 
accepts the argument but adds the proviso that the idea of the Absolute 
though it must exist need not exist as such, that is in the form of the idea. 
But if I am thinking of all reality, if it really is all reality I think of, 
ray idea can be nothing but that reality, and there can be no difference 
between my object and the reality. This corresponds to the assertion 
made on a previous page (Bk. I. ch. ii. vol. i. p. 76, note i) that a 
complete perspective of Space-Time taken both from the place and date 
of any point-instant is nothing but the universe itself. In other words 
there can be no perspectives consisting of the whole of reality, and so in 
the strict sense there is no such thing as an idea of it. For all ideas are 
perspectives of the things they are ideas of. 

^ The phrase is St. George Mivart’s. 

2 Difficulties raised by Spinoza and Kant. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


345 


destruction involved in the process. But in what sense 
is such a God worshipful He is worshipful only if we 
silently reintroduce into the notion of an immanent 
design, which in the end is a bare compendious descrip- 
tion of certain facts, that of a designer, and fall back on 
the previous and invalid view. 

What we can hope to do is something more modest, 
and more consistent with scientific procedure in other 
matters. Abandoning the attempt to define God directly, 
we may ask ourselves whether there is place in the 
world for the quality of deity; we may then verify the 
reality of the being which possesses it, that is of the 
Deity or God ; and having done so, we may then consult 
the religious consciousness to see whether this being 
coincides with the object of worship. Where then, if at 
all, is deity in the scheme of things ? 

Within the all-embracing stuff of Space-Time, the 
universe exhibits an emergence in Time of successive 
levels of finite existences, each with its characteristic 
empirical quality. The highest of these empirical 
qualities known to us is mind or consciousness. Deity 
is the next higher empirical quality to the highest we 
know ; and, as shall presently be observed, at any level 
of existence there is a next higher empirical quality 
which stands towards the lower quality as deity stands 
towards mind. Let us for the moment neglect this 
wider implication and confine our attention to ourselves. 
There is an empirical quality which is to succeed the 
distinctive empirical quality of our level ; and that new 
empirical quality is deity. If Time were as some have 
thought a mere form of sense or understanding under 
which the mind envisages things, this conception would 
be meaningless and impossible. But Time is an element 
in the stuff of which the universe and all its parts are 
made, and has no special relation to mind, which is but 
the last complexity of Time that is known to us in finite 
existence. Bare Time in our hypothesis, whose verifica- 
tion has been in progress through each stage of the two 
preceding Books and will be completed by the conception 


Deity the 
next higher 
empirical 
quality 
than mind. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


346 

of God, — bare Time is the soul of its Space, or performs 
towards it the office of soul to its equivalent body or 
brain ; and this elementary mind which is Time becomes 
in the course of time so complicated and refined in its 
internal grouping that there arise finite beings whose 
soul is materiality, or colour, or life, or in the end what is 
familiar as mind. Now since Time is the principle of 
growth and Time is infinite, the internal development of 
the world, which before was described in its simplest 
terms as the redistribution of moments of Time among 
points of Space, cannot be regarded as ceasing with the 
emergence of those finite configurations of space-time 
which carry the empirical quality of mind. We have 
to think upon the lines already traced by experience of 
the emergence of higher qualities, also empirical. There 
is a nisus in Space-Time which, as it has borne its 
creatures forward through matter and life to mind, 
will bear them forward to some higher level of existence. 
There is nothing in mind which requires us to stop and 
say this is the highest empirical quality which Time can 
produce from now throughout the infinite Time to come. 
It is only the last empirical quality which we who are 
minds happen to know. Time itself compels us to think 
of a later birth of Time. For this reason it was legitimate 
for us to follow up the series of empirical qualities and 
imagine finite beings which we called angels, who would 
enjoy their own angelic being but would contemplate 
minds as minds themselves cannot do, in the same way 
as mind contemplates life and lower levels of existence. 
This device was adopted half-playfully as a pictorial 
embodiment of the conception forced upon us by the 
fact that there is this series of levels of existence. It 
was used illustratively to point the distinction of enjoy- 
ment and contemplation. But we now can see that it 
is a serious conception. For the angelic quality the 
possession of which enables such beings to contemplate 
minds is this next higher empirical quality of deity and 
our supposed angels are finite beings with this quality. 
We shall have to ask how such finite deities are related 
to the infinite God, for they themselves are finite gods. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


347 


Deity is thus the next higher empirical quality to 
mind, which the universe is engaged in bringing to birth. 

That the universe is pregnant with such a quality we are 
speculatively assured. What that quality is we cannot 
know ; for we can neither enjoy nor still less contemplate 
it. Our human altars still are raised to the unknown 
God. If we could know what deity is, how it feels to be 
divine, we should first have to have become as gods. 

What we know of it is but its relation to the other 
empirical qualities which precede it in time. Its nature 
we cannot penetrate. We can represent it to ourselves 
only by analogy. It is fitly described in this analogical 
manner as the colour of the universe. For colour, we 
have seen, is a new quality which emerges in material 
things in attendance on motions of a certain sort. Deity 
in its turn is a quality which attends upon, or more 
strictly is equivalent to, previous or lower existences of 
the order of mind which itself rests on a still lower basis 
of qualities, and emerges when certain complexities and 
refinements of arrangement have been reached. Once 
more I am leaning for help upon Meredith, in whose 
Hymn to Colour^ colour takes for a moment the place of 
what elsewhere he calls Earth : a soul of things which 
is their last perfection ; whose relation to our soul is 
that of bridegroom to bride. He figures the relation of 
our soul to colour under the metaphor of love ; but as 
I read the poem, deity as the next higher empirical 
quality is not different from colour as he conceives it ; 
save only that for him the spirit of the world is timeless, 
whereas for us deity is like all other empirical qualities 
a birth of Time and exists in Time, and timelessness is 
for us a nonentity, and merely a device for contrasting 
God’s infinite deity with the relative imperfection of the 
finite things we know, a conception which shall appear 
in due course. 

We have not yet asked what the being is which Extension 
possesses deity. But before attempting to raise the conc^'ption 
question we may still linger over the quality of deity of deity, 
itself. In the first place it is clear that, while for us 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


348 

men deity is the next higher empirical quality to mind, 
the description of deity is perfectly general. For any 
level of existence, deity is the next higher empirical 
quality. It is therefore a variable quality, and as the 
world grows in time, deity changes with it. On each 
level a new quality looms ahead, awfully, which plays 
to it the part of deity. For us who live upon the level 
of mind deity is, we can but say, deity. To creatures 
upon the level of life, deity is still the quality in front, 
but to us who come later this quality has been revealed 
as mind. For creatures who possessed only the primary 
qualities, — mere empirical configurations of space-time, — 
deity was what afterwards appeared as materiality, and 
their God was matter, for I am supposing that there is 
no level of existence nearer to the spatio-temporal than 
matter. On each level of finite creatures deity is for 
them some ‘ unknown ’ (though not ‘ unexperienced ’) 
quality in front, the real nature of which is enjoyed by 
the creatures of the next level. I do not mean that a 
material being would in some way think or forecast life ; 
for there is no thinking in the proper sense till we reach 
mind. I do not even mean that matter forecasts deity 
in the sense in which it is sometimes said that to a dog 
his master is God. For the dog though he may not 
think, does feel and imagine, and his master is a finite 
being presented to his senses, for whom he feels attach- 
ment. I mean only that corresponding to the sense of a 
mysterious something which is more than we are and 
yet is felt in feeling and is conceived by speculation, 
there is some quality in the purview of material things 
which lies ahead of material quality. If we think our- 
selves back into material existence, we should feel 
ourselves, though matter would be the highest that we 
know, still swept on in the movement of Time. A 
merely material universe would not be exhausted by 
materiality and its lower empirical qualities ; there 
would still be that restless movement of Time, which 
is not the mere turning of a squirrel in its cage, but 
the nisus towards a higher birth. That it is so, events 
show. How its being so would be ‘ experienced ’ in the 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


349 


material ‘ soul ’ may need for its description a greater 
capacity to strip off human privileges and sympathise 
with lower experience than most persons, and certainly 
I, possess. 

Having thus realised that the relation of deity to Deity not 
mind is not peculiar to us but arises at each level between 
the next higher quality and the distinctive quality of that 
level, we can at once pass to another observation. We 
cannot tell what is the nature of deity, of our deity, but 
we can be certain that it is not mind, or if we use the 
term spirit as equivalent to mind or any quality of the 
order of mind, deity is not spirit, but something different 
from it in kind. God, the being which possesses deity, 
must be also spirit, for according to analogy, deity pre- 
supposes spirit, just as spirit or mind presupposes in its 
possessor life, and life physico-chemical material pro- 
cesses. But though God must be spiritual in the same 
way as he must be living and material and spatio-temporal, 
his deity is not spirit. To think so would be like thinking 
that mind is purely life, or life purely physico-chemical. 

The neural complexity which is equivalent to mind is not 
merely physiological, but a selected physiological con- 
stellation which is the bearer of mind, though it is also 
physiological, because it has physiological relations to 
what is purely physiological. That complexity and 
refinement of spirit which is equivalent to deity is some- 
thing new, and while it is also spirit it is not merely 
spirit. Deity is therefore, according to the pattern of 
the growth of things in time, not a mere enlargement of 
mind or spirit, but something which mere spirit sub- 
serves, and to which accordingly the conception of spirit 
as such is totally inadequate. Spirit, personality, mind, 
all these human or mental characters belong to God but 
not to his deity. They belong as we must hold not to 
his deity but to his ‘ body.’ Yet since it is through 
spirit that we become aware of God, whether in the 
practical shape of the object of religious feeling or 
philosophically as the possessor of deity, since what is 
beyond spirit is realised through spirit, and since more 



35 ° 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


Theories of 
God as u 
spirit. 


particularly spirit is the highest quality whose nature we 
know, and we are compelled to embody our conceptions 
in imaginative shapes, it is not strange that we should 
represent God in human terms. Instead of the shadowy 
quality of which we can only say that it is a higher 
quality than mind, God is made vivid to us as a greater 
spirit ; and we conceal the difference in kind of the divine 
and the human nature under magnified representations 
of human attributes. These are the inevitable devices 
of our weakness and our pictorial craving. But, for 
philosophy, God's deity is not different from spirit in 
degree but in kind, as a novelty in the series of empirical 
qualities. 

When on a former occasion I endeavoured to explain 
the relation of the mind of total Space-Time to the minds 
of the separate point-instants, I referred (in a note to 
a hypothesis that had been advanced as to the nature of 
God, which was founded on the coexistence of a superior 
mind with an inferior one within the same abnormal 
body or personality. I made use of the notion of 
co-conscious minds not aware of each other, in order to 
elucidate certain features in Space-Time when Time is 
regarded as the mind of Space. This hypothesis in its 
reference to God I am compelled to reject and the reason 
will now be clear. The sequel will show that the position 
adopted here as to God is not dissimilar, at least to the 
extent that God is also for us, ideally speaking, an 
individual within the world. But it would be difficult 
on this hypothesis to admit an infinite God ; “ and what 
is more important it would commit us to making of God 
a being not higher in kind than minds. 

1 Bk. III. ch. ii. A, vol. ii. p. 43, note i . 

2 For physiological bodies with minds are finite. An infinite mind 
would require for its body the whole universe (see later) and would not 
then be one mind subsisting along with others but inclusive of them all, 
and would thus come under the suggestion of the next paragraph. 
There may indeed be an infinite part of the universe, e.g, a line. But 
this would not be the bearer of mind. In other words either God’s 
mind is really a mind and then it is finite ; or if it is infinite, it must 
either be an all-inclusive mind (which is merely Time), or not mind at 
all but deity. 



cn. 


DEITY AND GOD 


351 


On the basis of the same data as were used in the 
above hypothesis, we might again be tempted to compare 
God with the total personality in which the separate 
personalities are merged when the hysteric patient is 
restored to health ; and to conceive of God as a society 
of minds. There is, however, nothing to show that the 
minds of distinct bodies are actually connected together 
so as to constitute a single all-embracing mind. Where 
dissociated personalities within a single individual are 
reunited, their physiological connection is re-established. 
Between the separate minds supposed to be contained 
within the mind of God there is no such physiological 
connection. In its application to the supposed mind of 
God accordingly the reference to dissociated person- 
alities fails of relevance. 

Nor can we help ourselves to think of God as an 
inclusive mind by the current metaphors of the mind of 
a state or a crowd. Where many persons are grouped 
together in co-operation there is no real reason for 
imagining the whole society to possess a mind. It is 
sufficient that the persons communicate with one another, 
'and that while on the one hand their gregarious instinct 
brings about their juxtaposition, their juxtaposition 
supplies thoughts and passions which are not experienced 
by the persons in isolation. The mind of a crowd is 
not a new single mind ; the phrase represents the con- 
tagious influence upon an individual of the presence of 
many others. An incendiary oration addressed to one 
person might leave him cold, but in a meeting each 
catches infection from his neighbour (just as patients in 
a hospital will fall into a hypnotic sleep from sympathy 
with another patient who is receiving suggestion) and 
the oration may produce a riot. The individuals gather 
together to hear, the orator and then their assemblage 
fans the flame. The institution of the family arises out 
of the mutual needs of persons and in turn evokes fresh 
ones. But there is no new mind of the family ; only 
the minds of its members are affected by their participa- 
tion in the family. In the same way there is no mind 
of the state or the nation which includes the minds of 



352 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


God ns 
universe 
possessing 
deity. 


its members. The state is not a new individual created 
by the union of isolated individuals. The individuals 
are driven by their own sociality into union, and the 
union alters their minds. It affects the individuals 
because it is in the first instance the issue of their in- 
stinctive gregariousness. The general will is not a new 
individual will which contains the individual wills ; it is 
but the will of individuals as inspired by desire for the 
collective good. T. H. Green seems to me to have been 
right in insisting that a nation or a national spirit is as 
much an abstraction unless it exists in persons as the 
individual is an abstraction apart from the nation.^ It 
is true that a state or nation has features not recognis- 
able in any one individual ; but this is only to say that 
groupings of persons are not merely personal. 

In a later page I shall return to this matter when I 
attempt to show the bearing of the doctrine that God’s 
distinctive character is not mind or spirit but something 
new, or deity, upon the current theory that the Absolute 
in which all finites are merged is spirit. 

In the religious emotion we have the direct experience 
of something higher than ourselves which we call God, 
which is not presented through the ways of sense but 
through this emotion. The emotion is our going out 
or endeavour or striving towards this object. Speculation 
enables us to say wherein the divine quality consists, and 
that it is an empirical quality the next in the series which 
the very nature of Time compels us to postulate, though 
we cannot tell what it is like. But besides assuring us 
of the place of the divine quality in the world, speculation 
has also to ask wherein this quality resides. What is the 
being which possesses deity ? Our answer is to be a 
philosophical one ; we are not concerned with the various 
forms which the conception of God has assumed in 
earlier or later religions. Ours is the modester (and let 
me add far less arduous) inquiry what conception of 
God is required if we think of the universe as Space- 

^ Prolegomena to Ethics, sect. 184; taken from the table of contents, 
p. ixi. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


353 

Time engendering within itself in the course of time 
the series of empirical qualities of which deity is the 
one next ahead of mind. God is the whole world as 
possessing the quality of deity. Of such a being the 
whole world is the ^ body ’ and deity is the ^ mind.’ But 
this possessor of deity is not actual but ideal. As an 
actual existent, God is the infinite world with its nisus 
towards deity, or, to adapt a phrase of Leibniz, as big or 
in travail with deity. 

Since Space-Time is already a whole and one, why, 
it may be urged, should we seek to go beyond it ? Why 
not identify God with Space-Time ? Now, no one could 
worship Space-Time. It may excite speculative or 
mathematical enthusiasm and fill our minds with in- 
tellectual admiration, but it lights no spark of religious 
emotion. Worship is not the response which Space- 
Time evokes in us, but intuition. Even Kant’s starry 
heavens are material systems, and he added the moral 
law to them in describing the sources of our reverence. 
In one way this consideration is irrelevant ; for if 
philosophy were forced to this conclusion that God is 
nothing but Space-Time, we should needs be content. 
But a philosophy which left one portion of human 
experience suspended without attachment to the world 
of truth is gravely open to suspicion ; and its failure 
to make the religious emotion speculatively intelligible 
betrays a speculative weakness. For the religious 
emotion is one part of experience, and an empirical 
philosophy must include in one form or another the 
whole of experience. The speculative failure of the 
answer is patent. It neglects the development within 
Space-Time of the series of empirical qualities in their 
increasing grades of perfection. The universe, though 
it can be expressed without remainder in terms of Space 
and Time, is not merely spatio-temporal. It exhibits 
materiality and life and mind. It compels us to forecast 
the next empirical quality or deity. On the one hand 
we have the totality of the world, which in the end 
is spatio-temporal ; on the other the quality of deity en- 
gendered, or rather being engendered, within that whole. 

VOL. II 2 A 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Personifi- 
cation of 
this concep- 
tion : (a) 
finite god. 


354 


These two features are united in the conception of the 
whole world as expressing itself in the character of deity, 
and it is this and not bare Space-Time which for 
speculation is the ideal conception of God. 

Belief in God, though an act of experience, is not an 
act of sight, for neither deity nor even the world as 
tending to deity is revealed to sense, but of speculative 
and religious faith. A word will be said later to compare 
the faith we have in God with the faith we have in the 
minds of other persons than ourselves. Any attempt, 
therefore, to conceive God in more definite manner must 
involve a large element of speculative or reflective 
imagination. Even the description of God as the whole 
universe, as possessing deity, or as in travail with deity, 
is full of figurative language. If we are to make our 
conception less abstract we must try to represent to 
ourselves some individual in whom deity is related to 
its basis in the lower levels of empirical quality as far 
down as the purely spatio-temporal ; and a being of 
this kind is, as we shall see, rather an ideal of thought 
than something which can be realised in fact in the form 
of an individual. What we have to do is to be careful 
to conceive the ideal in conformity with the plan of what 
we know of things from experience. 


The simplest way of doing so is to forget for a 
moment that God being the whole world possessing 
deity is infinite, and, transporting ourselves in thought 
to the next level of existence, that of deity, to imagine 
a finite being with that quality, a god of a polytheistic 
system, or what we have called an angel. We must 
conceive such a being on the analogy of ourselves. In 
us a living body has one portion of itself specialised and 
set apart to be the bearer of the quality of mind. That 
specialised constellation of living processes, endowed 
with the quality of mind, is the concrete thing called 
mind. The rest of the body in its physiological, material, 
and spatio-temporal characters, sustains the life of this 
mind-bearing portion, which in its turn is said in the 
physiological sense to represent the rest of the body. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


355 

because there is a general correspondence between the 
affections of the body and the excitements of the mind- 
bearing portion which are enjoyed as mental processes. 
In virtue of some of these mental enjoyments the mind 
contemplates the things outside its body, in virtue of 
others it contemplates its own bodily conditions in the 
form of organic sensa or sensibles, or of other sensibles 
of movement, touch, and the rest. In the superior finite 
which has deity, we must conceive the immediate basis 
of deity to be something of the nature of mind, just as 
the immediate basis of our mind is life, and the mind 
of the finite deity will rest on a substructure of life as 
with us. One part of the god’s mind will be of such 
complexity and refinement as mind, as to be fitted to 
carry the new quality of deity. Thus whereas with us, 
a piece of Space-Time, a substance, which is alive, is 
differentiated in a part of its life so as to be mind, here 
a substance or piece of Space-Time which is mental is 
differentiated in a portion of its mental body so as to 
be divine, and this deity is sustained by all the space- 
time to which it belongs, with all those qualities lower 
than deity itself which belong to that substance. More- 
over, as our mind represents and gathers up into itself 
its whole body, so does the finite god represent or gather 
up into its divine part its whole body, only in its body is 
included mind as well as the other characters of a body 
which has mind. Now for such a being, what for us are 
organic sensibles would include not merely the affections 
of its physiological body, but those of its mental ‘ body,’ 
its mental affections. To speak more accurately, its 
mental affections, the acts of its mind-body, would take 
the place of our organic or motor sensa, while sensa, like 
hunger and thirst, which are the affections of its life- 
body, would fall rather into the class of sensa which with 
us are, like the feel and visual look of our bodies, 
contemplated by special senses. For such a being its 
specially differentiated mind takes the place of the brain 
or central nervous system with us. The body which is 
equivalent with the deity of the finite god, that is to say, 
whose processes are not parallel to but identical with the 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


356 

‘ deisings ’ or enjoyments of the god, is of the nature of 
mind. 

Only this proviso must be added. The mental 
structure of which a portion more complex and subtle 
is the bearer of deity, must not be thought necessarily 
to be a human mind or aggregation of such, but only 
to be of the mental order. To assume it to be of the 
nature of human mind would be as if a race of seaweeds 
were to hold that mind when it comes (the quality of 
deity for seaweeds) must be founded on the life of 
seaweeds, and minds the offspring of seaweeds. What 
form the finite god would assume we cannot know, 
and it is idle to guess. The picture has been drawn 
merely in order to give some kind of definiteness to 
the vague idea of a higher quality of existence, deity 
as founded upon the highest order of existence we know. 
There is always a danger that such attempts at definite- 
ness where precise knowledge from the nature of the 
case is out of the question may seem a little ridiculous. 
Fortunately when we leave the finite god and endeavour 
to form a conception of the infinite God in his relation 
to things, we may avail ourselves of what is useful in 
the picture and avoid the danger of seeming to affect a 
prevision of how things in the future will come to be. 
We use the picture merely in order to understand how 
the whole world can be thought of as possessing deity. 

(b) Infinite We havc now to think, not as before of a limited 
portion of Space-Time, but of the whole infinite Space- 
Time, with all Its engendered levels of existence possessing 
their distinctive empirical qualities, as sustaining the 
deity of God. But when we imagine such an Individual, 
we discover two differences which mark him off from 
all finites, including finite gods. The first is this. Our 
experience is partly internal and partly external ; that 
Is, the stimuli which provoke our enjoyments and through 
them are contemplated by us (and the same account 
applies with the proper extension of the terms to all 
finites) partly arise within'’our bodies and partly from 
external ones. The objects which we contemplate are 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


357 


partly organic or motor sensa and partly special sensa, 
in which are included our bodies as seen or touched or 
similarly apprehended. Now the body of God is the 
whole universe and there is no body outside his. For 
him, therefore, all objects are internal, and the distinction 
of organic and special sensa disappears. Our minds, 
therefore, and everything else in the world are ‘ organic 
sensa ’ of God. All we are the hunger and thirst, the 
heart-beats and sweat of God. This is what Rabbi ben 
Ezra says in Browning’s poem, when he protests that 
he has never mistaken his end, to slake God’s thirst.^ 
For God there is still the distinction of enjoyment or 
deising and contemplation, for God’s deity is equivalent 
only to a portion of his body. But it is only for the 
finites which belong to God’s body, all the finites up to 
finites with mind, that the objects of contemplation are 
some organic and some external. 

The second difference, and ultimately it is a repetition 
of the first, is this. God’s deity is lodged in a portion of 
his body, and represents that body. But since his body 
is infinite, his deity (I allow myself to turn deity from 
a quality into a concrete thing just as I use mind 
sometimes for the mental quality, sometimes for the 
concrete thing, mental processes), which represents his 
body, is infinite. God includes the whole universe, but 
his deity, though infinite, belongs to, or is lodged in, 
only a portion of the universe. The importance of this 
for the problem of theism will appear later. I repeat 
that when God’s deity is said to represent his body, 
that representation is physiological ; like the representa- 
tion on the brain of the different portions of the body 
which send nervous messages to the brain. Deity does 
not represent the universe in the mathematical sense, in 
which, for example, the odd numbers represent or are an 
image of the whole series of numbers. Such mathematical 

^ “ Frances, when a little one, had been told by her parents that ‘ in 
God we live and move and have our being ’ : and then was overheard 
one day, when she was five years old, explaining to her younger brother 
that God had a stomach so big—— everything in the whole world was 

inside it.” TAe Dawn of Reiigion, by Edith E. Read Mumford (London, 
1915). P- 32 - 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


God’s 

infinitude. 


We are 
finitely f 
infinite ; 
God 

infinitely 

infinite. 


358 

representation would require God’s deity also to be 
represented in his deity ; and it is not so represented 
in the same fashion as his body is represented. 

The infinitude of God’s deity marks the difference 
between him and all other empirical beings. Deity is 
an empirical quality, but though it is located in a portion 
only of the universe, which universe of Space-Time with 
all its finites of lower order is God’s body, yet that 
portion is itself infinite in extent and duration. Not only 
is God infinite in extent and duration, but his deity is 
also infinite in both respects. God’s body being the 
whole of Space-Time is omnipresent and eternal ; but 
his deity, though not everywhere, is yet infinite in its 
extension, and though his time is a portion only of 
infinite Time his deity is, in virtue of what corresponds 
in deity to memory and expectation in ourselves, infinite 
in both directions. Thus empirical as deity is, the 
infinity of his distinctive character separates him from 
all finites. It is his deity which makes him continuous 
with the series of empirical characters of finites, but 
neither is his ‘ body ’ nor his ‘ mind ’ finite. 

For clearness’ sake I must linger a little over this 
important and difficult matter ; for in one sense our 
minds and all finite things are infinite as well. We 
are, however, finitely infinite ; while deity is infinitely 
infinite. We are finite because our minds, which are 
extended both in space and time, are limited pieces of 
Space-Time. We are infinite because we are in relation 
to all Space-Time and to all things in it. Our minds 
are infinite in so far as from our point of view, our place 
or date, we mirror the whole universe; we are corn- 
present with everything in that universe. I need not 
repeat at length what has been said more than once. 
Though only a limited range of distinct things comes 
within our view, they are fringed with their relations 
to what is beyond them, and are but islands rising out 
of an infinite circumambient ocean. The whole of which 
they are parts may shrink in our apprehension into a 
vague object of feeling or be conceived more definitely 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


359 


as infinite. Still it is there. But this infinite world of 
Space-Time with its finite things engendered within it 
finds access to our minds only through our bodies and 
thence to our brains, and is cognised through our neuro- 
mental processes and the combinations of them. Our 
minds consist of our mental processes, which are also 
neural ones. If we follow a dangerous method of 
language, or of thinking, and fancy that the objects 
we know are the ‘ content ’ of our minds we may be 
led into the belief that, since our minds contain repre- 
sentations of all things in the universe, our minds are 
infinite, in the same way as God’s deity. If, however, 
we recollect that our minds are nothing but the pro- 
cesses of mind and have no contents but their process- 
characters we shall avoid this danger. We shall then 
understand how our minds can be finite in extent and 
duration and yet be compresent with and correspond to 
an infinite world. 

We may distinguish two sorts of infinity, which I 
will call internal and external. An inch is internally 
infinite in respect of the number of its parts and 
corresponds to an infinite line of which it forms only 
a part. But it is itself finite in length. In the same 
way our minds, though finite in space-time, may be 
infinite in respect of their correspondence with the 
whole of things in Space-Time. 

We said that our minds represented our bodies, 
because to speak generally the various parts of our body 
were connected neurally with their corresponding places 
in the cortex. External objects excite our minds through 
first impinging on our organs of sense. As such repre- 
sentations of our body, our mind is finite. But through 
that body it is brought into relation with the infinite 
world. Thus though finite in extent of space and time 
we are internally infinite. We are so as pieces of Space 
and Time. But also within the brain there is room for 
multitudinous combinations initiated from within and 
enjoyed as imaginations and thoughts, and, for all I 
know, these are infinitely numerous in their possibilities 
of combination. We have at least enough of them to 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


360 

comprehend the universe as a whole so far as such 
apprehension is open to our powersd It is sufficient for 
our purposes of argument that our minds as spatio- 
temporal substances are like all spatio-temporal extents 
internally infinite. Externally we are finite. 

But there is nothing whatever outside the body of 
God, and his deity represents the whole of his body, and 
all the lower ranges of finites are for him ‘ organic 
sensa.’ The spatio-temporal organ of his deity is not 
only internally but externally infinite. Deity, unlike 
mind, is infinitely infinite. 

Thus when we are said to represent the universe in 
our apprehensions we must be careful to distinguish this 
sense of representation, which in truth signifies only the 
fact of compresence, from the physiological sense in 
which the brain is said to represent the body, the sense 
in which I have used the term in this chapter, in which 
the mind represents the bodily organism in which it is 
placed. Failing to make this distinction we should 
conclude as Leibniz did that the monad, since it represents 
the whole by standing in relation to every part of it, is 
in itself infinite and eternal. The mind is thus removed 
from the limitations of Time and Space. From our 
point of view, the mind exists both in time and space ; 
and if it is true that Time is nothing without Space, it 
is difficult to understand speculatively how an eternal 
existence of the mind could be possible without that 
specialised complex of space which experience tells us 
is the basis of mind. If convincing experiment should 
in the future demonstrate the persistence of mind without 
its body which here subserves it, I should have to admit 
that the doctrine of this work would require radical 

^ To illustrate this qualification. If it is true that our enjoyment of 
the past is a past enjoyment, as has been maintained in a previous chapter 
(Bk. I. ch. iii.), must our minds not then, it may be asked, be eternal ? 
This would be so if we had memory of all the past and anticipation of all 
the future. But I do not remember the death of Julius Caesar, but only 
think of it as a past event. The past which I have not been present at, 
and the future at which I shall not be present, shrink into a thought of 
past and future time, just as I think of the whole of Space without being 
sensible of all its parts. 



CH« I 


DEITY AND GOD 


361 

alteration and, so far as I can judge at present, destruction. 
But this is not the only word which I should wish to 
say on so tender and, to many persons so precious, a 
belief.^ 

We are now led to a qualification of the greatest 
importance. The picture which has been drawn of the 
infinite God is a concession to our figurative or mytho- 
logical tendency and to the habit of the religious con- 
sciousness to embody its conception of God in an 
individual shape. Its sole value lies in its indication of 
the relation that must be understood upon the lines 
traced by experience to subsist between deity and mind. 
This is adequate for finite gods, supposing the stage of 
deity to have been reached. But the infinite God is 
purely ideal or conceptual. The individual so sketched 
is not asserted to exist ; the sketch merely gives body 
and shape, by a sort of anticipation, to the actual infinite 
God whom, on the basis of experience, speculation declares 
to exist. As actual, God does not possess the quality of 
deity but is the universe as tending to that quality. 
This nisus in the universe, though not present to sense, 
is yet present to reflection upon experience. Only in 
this sense of straining towards deity can there be an 
infinite actual God. For, again following the lines of 
experience, we can see that if the quality of deity were 
actually attained in the empirical development of the 
world in Time, we should have not one infinite being 
possessing deity but many (at least potentially many) 
finite ones. Beyond these finite gods or angels there 
would be in turn a new empirical quality looming into 
view, which for them would be deity — that is, would be 
for them what deity is for us. Just as when mind 
emerges it is the distinctive quality of many finite 
individuals with minds, so when deity actually emerges 
it would be the distinctive quality of many finite 
individuals. If the possessor of deity were an existent 
individual he must be finite and not infinite. Thus there 
is no actual infinite being with the quality of deity ; but 
^ Later, ch. iii. pp. 423 ff. 


God a3 
actual. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


God and 

other 

infinites. 


Unqualitied 
infinites 
actual j 


362 

there is an actual infinite, the whole universe, with a 
nisus to deity ; and this is the God of the religious 
consciousness, though that consciousness habitually 
forecasts the divinity of its object as actually realised in 
an individual form. 

The reason why the universe as possessing deity is 
purely ideal is found in the contrast between God so 
described and other empirical infinites. God is not the 
only infinite. We have, in the first place, the infinite 
Space-Time itself which is a priori^ and besides this we 
have infinites which are generated within Space-Time 
and are empirical. Instances are infinite lines in Space 
and infinite numbers. These are empirical determina- 
tions of categorial characters and belong to the class 
of existents with purely primary qualities. Hitherto in 
the preceding chapters we have confined ourselves to 
finites, but it now remains briefly to discuss these em- 
pirical infinites, which are always less than the a priori 
infinity of Space- Time itself. God is no exception to 
this statement, for though his body is the whole universe, 
his deity (and deity is what distinguishes him) is lodged 
in an infinite portion only of this whole infinitude. 
Empirical infinites with primary qualities were touched 
upon in a preceding chapter, and in view of this very 
question how far they were ideal and how far real.' 
Along with the empirical infinites go the beings which 
are infinitely small. 

In both cases there is an ideal or conceptual element 
involved as well as a sensible or, to speak more properly, 
an intuited one. Neither the infinitely great nor the 
infinitely small is presented to intuition without the help 
of reflective concepts. But since concepts are as real 
as percepts their presence does not destroy the actual 
reality of the thing into which they enter. I do not 
propose to discuss the status of the various kinds of 
infinite numbers and to consider how far, if at all, 
any of them are to be treated as on a level with the con- 
ceptual creations of mathematics such as imaginaries or 
^ Bk. II. ch. ix. vol. i. pp. 324 fF. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


363 

^-dimensional ‘ Spaces.’ ^ I am speaking of such empiri- 
cal infinites as infinite lines or the number of, say, the 
infinite system of integers. It might be thought that 
such infinites cannot be more than ideal because it is 
impossible to possess them completed. There seems, 
however, no reason to doubt the actuality of infinite 
lines, nor of the number of the integers, whether 
number is defined extcnsionally or, as we have preferred, 
intensionally. For infinite number is the number be- 
longing to classes containing infinite members. The 
fact that an infinite system cannot be completed is 
irrelevant to its actuality. For infinity means only that 
the infinite system can be represented in the mathe- 
matical sense by a part of itself, and it is indifferent 
that we cannot in intuition complete an infinite line. 

To suppose that the infinitely great must be completed 
is to eliminate Time from its nature ; just as to suppose 
that the infinitely small is an indivisible self-subsistent 
entity or infinitesimal is to eliminate Time from its 
nature. Infinites, whether of division or of composition, 
are actual, just because of the element in them which 
makes them conceptual for us. Points and instants are 
not fixed minima but the elements of things, and their 
characteristic is that we can never come to a stop with 
them. Hence it was said before that points and instants, 
or more properly point-instants, are real and actual just 
because they are ideal. If we could take them in at once 
they would not be continuous with one another. The 
same thing holds of empirical infinites. Lines are actual 
and infinite and can be selected from Space, and infinite 
numbers, or at least some of them, from actual Space-Time. 

Now these infinites are without quality. God as the but not 
possessor of deity, on the other hand, is a qualitied infinite, 
and we learn from experience that quality is borne by 
finite complexes of space-time. There may be actual 
infinites with none but primary qualities, for these are 
not qualities at all, and the entities in question are 
infinite portions of the infinite Space or Time. But the 
qualitied infinite is not merely ideal as implying, like all 
Touched upon in Bk. I. ch. v. vol. i. pp. 158 ff. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


364 

infinites, a conceptual element, but it is ideal because it 
is not actual. At any level of existence there is a claimant 
to be a qualitied infinite, and that claimant is not actual. 
It is a projected picture of an actual infinite, in which 
that quality is being engendered but has not actually 
come to birth. 

The qualitied infinite, if the quality could be actually 
realised, would present overwhelming difficulties, when 
we ask if it is subject to the categories. God’s body, 
being the whole universe of Space-Time, is the source 
of the categories but not itself subject to them. Since 
his deity is realised in a portion only of the universe, it 
might be thought that deity at any rate, which is 
equivalent to some complex of mind, might be subject 
to the categories, and be a true individual substance. 
It is not however an individual, for an individual is the 
union of particular and universal. And realised deity is 
not universal, since, representing as it does the whole, 
it admits of no repetition, which is vital to a universal.^ 
We can only say that, like Space-Time itself, it is singular. 
Neither is it a substance, for the same reason. Represent- 
ing the whole in the physiological sense, it admits no 
relation to other substances, but is the whole of Space- 
Time on a reduced scale. In this breakdown of the 
attempt to apply to it the categories (for the same con- 
siderations can be advanced in the case of the other 
categories as well) it betrays its merely ideal character 
of a picture and nothing more. The picture is not the 
less eminently worth drawing. Only nothing actual 
corresponds to it. We have an individual forecasted 
which is not a real individual. The actual reality which 
has deity is the world of empiricals filling up all Space- 
Time and tending towards a higher quality. Deity is a 
nisus and not an accomplishment. This, as we shall 
note, is what prevents the conception from being wholly 
theistical. Finite gods, on the other hand, are of course 
subject to the categories. 

Two different questions accordingly may be asked 

^ It is of course a ‘ concrete universal 1 ; but that conception has been 
already examined (Bk. II. ch. iii. vol. i. pp. 233 ff.). 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


365 

as to the existence of deity, to which different answers Finite gods 
must be given. The first is, do finite beings exist with 
deity or are there finite gods ? The answer is we do 
not know. If Time has by now actually brought them 
forth, they do exist ; if not, their existence belongs to 
the future. If they do exist (“ millions of spirits walk 
the earth”) they are not recognisable in any form of 
material existence known to us ; and material existence 
they must have ; though conceivably there may be such 
material bodies, containing also life and mind as the 
basis of deity, in regions of the universe beyond 
our ken. 

That is a scholastic and trivial question. The other 
question admits an answer. Does infinite deity exist ? 

The answer is that the world in its infinity tends towards 
infinite deity, or is pregnant with it, but that infinite 
deity does not exist ; and we may now add that if it 
did, God — ^the actual world possessing infinite deity — 
would cease to be infinite God and break up into a 
multiplicity of finite gods, which would be merely a 
higher race of creatures than ourselves with a God 
beyond. 

Infinite deity then embodies the conception of the 
infinite world in its straining after deity. But the 
attainment of deity makes deity finite. Deity is an 
empirical quality like mind or life. Before there was 
mind the universe was straining towards infinite mind. 

But there is no existent infinite mind, but only many 
finite minds. Deity is subject to the same law as other 
empirical qualities, and is but the next member of the 
series. At first a presage, in the lapse of time the quality 
comes to actual existence, animates a new race of creatures, 
and is succeeded by a still higher quality. God as an 
actual existent is always becoming deity but never 
attains it. He is the ideal God in embryo. The ideal 
when fulfilled ceases to be God, and yet it gives shape 
and character to our conception of the actual God, and 
always tends to usurp its place in our fiincy. 

I may pause for a moment to anticipate a possible 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


How can a 
variable 
God be the 
whole 
universe ^ 


Blending of 
finite gods 
and infinite 
deity. 


366 

objection to this notion of a variable God, which is, as 
it were, projected in front of each successive level of 
existents. Since God’s deity is different for plants and 
men and angels, and varies with the lapse of time, how 
can we declare him to be the whole universe ? Must 
not God be different at each level ? I answer that the 
variation lies in the empirical development within the 
universe, and therefore not in God’s totality but, first of 
all, in his deity, and secondly, and in correspondence 
therewith, in the orders of existents within his body 
which have as yet been reached. It is still one Space- 
Time within which grows up deity in its successive 
phases, and within which the body of God varies in its 
internal composition. Yet God’s body is at any stage 
the whole Space-Time, of which the Unites that enter 
into God’s body are but specialised complexes. Only 
certain existents, qualitied or unqualitied, are at any one 
moment actual or present. The rest are past or future, 
but they are included as past or future in total Space- 
Time as it is in any one moment of its history. They 
are only not actual. It is thus always the one universe 
of Space-Time which is God’s body, but it varies in its 
empirical constitution and its deity.' For we are not to 
think of the matrix, Space-Time, as something which 
grows bigger in extent with the lapse of Time ; its 
Space is always full and it grows older through internal 
rearrangements, in which new orders of empirical 
finites are engendered. No matter therefore what 
quality the deity of God may be, his body is always the 
whole Space-Time. 

Thus the conception of finite gods and that of infinite 
God are different conceptions in metaphysics. In the 
one we are transporting ourselves in thought to the next 
order of finites ; in the other we think of the whole 
world as tending towards deity or godhead. But in the 
inevitable blending of speculation and pictorial mythology 
the two conceptions may be confused. This occurs, for 
instance, wherever God is conceived merely as the chief 

1 Cp. the same topic discussed in another connection, Bk. II. ch. r. 
vol. i. p. 339. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


367 

in the hierarchy of gods and not different in quality 
from them. For as we have seen, in speculation, either 
there is an infinite God, which is an ideal, and there are 
then no angels or finite deities ; or if there are finite 
gods, the infinite or supreme ideal has ceased to be 
God. Polytheism represents the attempt to secure deity 
in finite forms, and it is not unnatural that in this 
imagination the divine quality should also be construed 
in terms of our humanity and the gods be conceived as 
transcendent human beings. Polytheism seeks to do 
justice to the claim of religion and speculation for a 
higher quality of existent. But it misses the conception 
of a God who is in his body coextensive with the whole 
world. In some polytheisms, like that of the Greeks, 
this defect is made good by recognising a rule of necessity 
or fate to which even Zeus is subject. Here we have 
the totality of things in its infinite quality. I have not 
knowledge enough to say how far in other polytheisms 
a corresponding element is to be found. But if the 
contention of certain anthropologists is sound, ^ there 
is in savage theologies a stage of pre-animism which 
precedes the belief in more or less human spirits or 
ghosts, resident in trees or stones and corresponding in 
their definiteness to what we have called finite gods or 
angels. The sense of something mysteriously spiritual, 
not definite but vaguely animating the world, would be, 
if these contentions are sound, the imaginative presage 
of what our speculation calls the ideal infinite deity, 
expressed in the forms natural to the mind for which 
deity as the next empirical quality would seem to be a 
vague abstraction. 

It remains to observe that the conception of an 
infinite world contains nothing which does not follow 
the lines of experience. The nisus in the world which 
drives it, because of Time, to the generation of fresh 
empirical qualities is a verifiable fact. Its extension from 
mind to deity is an application of analogy, but an analogy 
which is no more than an extension of what can be traced 
as existent already. But the notion depends undoubtedly 
1 R. R. Marett, The Threshold of Religion (London, 1909), ch. i. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


368 

on the hypothesis which has inspired hitherto our whole 
interpretation of things. We have still to ask whether 
the existence of God required by the hypothesis is 
verified, not in sense but in the religious emotion. To 
this I proceed in the next chapter, delaying for a moment 
over two incidental topics. 


The worhi- Philosophy has often used the conception of a world- 
soul, and it might seem that we had saddled the world 
with a superfluity of souls. For Time has been described 
as the soul of Space-Time, with Space for its body. 
And deity also performs to God’s body the office of soul 
and God’s body is the whole world. In truth the world 
is considered diflerently in the two conceptions. The 
world whose soul is Time is the world which precedes 
quality. The world for which deity is the soul is this 
same Space-Time but with qualitied finites evolved within 
it up to the level for which deity is the next quality in 
advance. If the Ideal God could be actual, and his deity 
realised, deity would truly be the soul of the world in 
strict analogy with the human soul or the colour of things 
to which it has been compared, lodged like our soul or 
like colour in a portion of the body whose soul it is. We 
should only have to remember that the world-soul so 
conceived is a variable quality, according to the level 
for which it is the next in the hierarchy of qualities. 
But It is never realised and remains prophetic only — 
in the immortal phrase, “the soul of the wide world 
dreaming of things to come. ” ' There is thus no true 
world-soul, but only a soul of Space-Time and a nisus 
in the world to deity. Soul and body are distinctions 
within finite things. When we take Space-Time as a 
.whole in its purely spatio-temporal character, its soul is 
coextensive with its body. When we take the world of 
things with qualities, its soul is only ideal not actual. 

1 Perhaps from this point of view, though it reverses the Leibnizian 
order of things, we may be more inclined to find a justification for his 
conception of God as a transcendent monad, usually regarded as the part 
of his system which is most open to cavil, than if we consider only its 
obscurity and inconsistency. 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


3^9 

Whether we think of Time or deity, in either case we 
may use the designation of a world-soul, but in either case 
with a qualification which is different in the two cases. 

Before leaving this purely metaphysical discussion Compari- 
we may however profitably compare the conception of HI 
empirical deity with that of the Absolute Spirit of the of an 
current doctrine of idealism.- According to that doctrine, spw,'*" 
as we have seen more than once, finites though real are 
not real in their own right but are real appearances of 
the one Absolute. The God of religion does not escape 
from this description and is in turn a real appearance 
but not ultimately real. All these appearances are con- 
tained within the Absolute but, as in it, are transformed. 

At the same time it is declared of the Absolute itself that 
it is spirit. 

Now as to the first half of this statement it is not 
necessary to repeat at length the results of earlier dis- 
cussions. Finites, though partial, are real in their own 
right and are not affected by their being only parts of 
the whole. For in the end all finites are pieces of Space- 
Time with that distinctive complexity of spatio-temporal 
structure which makes them the bearers of their dis- 
tinctive empirical qualities. The finites are not lost in 
the whole but constitute it, and all the while are (if only 
as spatio-temporal complexes) in continuous connection 
with the whole. The finite things may through their 
interactions change or be destroyed or modify each 
other ; but in this process it is their empirical characters 
which vary. Their reality is not affected at any moment. 

They are what they are. Nor, as we have urged, is there 
contradiction in finitude nor in the categories that 
describe and are constitutive of it. The measure of 
what is self-consistent is the nature of Space-Time itself, 
which for our view is the only absolute. We have 
avoided the designation of absolute, because it suggests 
mistakenly the unreality of what is relative, and prefer 
to speak of total Space-Time, a designation which 
indicates the ultimate homogeneity of the infinite whole 
with the finite parts. 

VOL. II 2 B 



370 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


Still, though the parts are not transformed in the 
whole, the conception of transformation when understood 
in a certain sense is legitimate and corresponds to facts. 
Finites of a lower order are combined to produce a 
complex which carries a quality of a higher order. Thus 
physiological complexes of a sufficient complexity carry 
mind or consciousness. They may be said to be ‘ trans- 
formed ’ in the consciousness they carry. This is the 
empirical fact. But in the complex which thus acquires 
a new quality the parts retain their proper character and 
are not altered. The physiological elements remain 
physiological. So does the complex of them ; though 
since it is also psychical, it is not merely physiological 
but something empirically new. All the chemical 
substances which exist in the organic body perform 
their chemical functions. The water in our bodies 
remains water still. It is the physico-chemical constella- 
tion which carries life. Thus even when we go beyond 
bare spatio-temporal forms which are the basis of all 
finites and consider things with their empirical qualities 
of colour, life, and the rest, we see that the parts are 
used up to produce something different from them and 
transcending them, but, used up as they are, they are not 
altered or superseded but subserve. In this special sense 
there is ‘ transformation ’ of the parts in building up a 
higher existence, but the parts remain what they were. 

In the same way a complex of parts which are of the 
nature of mind becomes the bearer of a quality of deity 
higher than mind or spirit. In this sense there is trans- 
formation of lower quality into deity. But neither is 
this deity spirit ; nor is deity a property of the Absolute 
as such. Deity is located only in a portion of the infinite 
whole of Space-Time, and therefore God, though infinite 
both in respect of his body and his deity, is only in respect 
of his body coextensive with the absolute whole of Space- 
Time, while his deity is empirical and belongs only to a 
part of the Absolute. Thus the Absolute is not deity 
as if it were permeated with that quality, any more than 
the human organism is mind, but only that part of the 
organism has mind which is equivalent to it. Hence 



CH. I 


DEITY AND GOD 


371 


even if we could think of spirit as the highest quality 
in the universe — which we cannot, unless it means 
something not merely different in degree but in kind 
from the human spirit — we still could not declare the 
Absolute to be this spirit but only to contain it as an 
empirical quality of an infinite part of itself. And we 
have already seen how the realisation of such a quality 
means the appearance in the world of finite deities, so 
that infinite deity is but an ideal. But while on the 
one hand deity, that is God’s mind, does not belong 
to the Absolute, in God’s body which is the whole of 
Space-Time and is absolute the finites are not submerged 
nor transformed ; they are constituent portions of the 
Absolute. Thus, where we are dealing with what is 
absolute or total, the parts are neither lost nor are they 
transformed ; where we are dealing with transformation, 
we are referring to what is not absolute but empirical. 

Thus it is true, as absolute idealism contends, that God 
is (at least in respect of his deity) on the same footing 
as finites and if they arc appearances so is he, though 
an infinite appeai'ance. But both God and finites are 
appearances only in the proper interpretation of that 
term, as parts of the thing to which they belong, and in 
which they are not submerged but retained. It still 
remains that neither is God a spirit, nor far less is the 
whole or Absolute which includes spirit itself spirit ; 
nor is it deity but includes deity. Yet the fact that 
finites of a lower quality subserve a higher quality 
gives an intelligible meaning in accordance with ex- 
perienced fact to the notion of transformation of finites 
which, as I think, absolute idealism maintains in the 
perverted sense of forfeiture or alteration. The well- 
attested fact that the lower life subserves in the course 
of time the higher is perverted into the erroneous doctrine 
that there is a higher something or Absolute in which 
all lower life is submerged and transformed, and this 
Absolute is spirit, which is not even the highest empirical 
quality. Dowered with this empirical quality the 
Absolute claims to be above the empirical, but would be 
itself empirical. This result is to my mind the inevitable 



372 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


outcome of the procedure, which I need not again criticise, 
of taking the measure of consistency and contradiction 
from our thoughts instead of from things themselves, 
of pronouncing Space and Time to be contradictory ; 
whereas it is only obedience to the nature of the one 
“mother” and “nurse of all becoming” which determines 
consistency and freedom from contradiction. 



CHAPTER II 


DEITY AND THE RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT 

The metaphysical notion of a reality which is the whole 
world in its endeavour towards a new and higher empirical 
quality than the highest we know is verified by the 
religious sentiment itself. Various emotions enter into 
the full constitution of the religious sentiment — fear, 
admiration, self-abasement— but its distinctive constituent 
is the feeling of our going out towards something not 
ourselves and greater and higher than ourselves, with 
which we are in communion, a feeling whose object is 
not that of any of these subsidiary or suggesting emotions, 
nor of any combination of them. Like the other senti- 
ments, it is fed from many sources, but it gathers around 
some distinctive constituent as its primary nucleus. The 
nucleus of the sentiment of love is the tender emotion, 
around which gather in a system which is dominated 
by that emotion all manner of other emotions— fear for 
the safety of what is loved, anger against those who 
injure it, joy in its success, depression at its misfortunes.^ 
Even in the aesthetic, moral, and logical sentiments 
there is a dominating and distinctive passion— the passion 
for production, the passion of sociality, and the passion 
of curiosity. Without this distinctive element, a senti- 

^ The doctrine that a sentiment is a system of emotions is due to Mr. 
A. Shand (MW, 1896, and Foundations of Character, 1914). My state- 
ment is closer, I think, to the version of Mr. M'Dougall in his Social 
Psjcholo^j, though I annot enter into the controversy between these 
writers. But in what is said later on the specific element of the religious 
sentiment I find myself at variance with Mr. M'Dougall’s account in 
the same work (ch. liii.). 


The 

religious 
sentiment 
and its 
object. 


373 



374 DEITY BK. IV 

ment would be a mere composite without its peculiar 
flavour^ 

Moreover, it is this distinctive religious appetite, 
comparable to the appetite for food or drink, which 
though it does not make its object discovers it. Here 
too the religious sentiment is in line with the other 
emotional tendencies. We do not first learn to know 
the objects to which we respond, but in responding to 
objects we discover the properties which they possess. 
Knowledge comes with action or the response to the 
things which we know. The food is presented to us as 
flesh or grain through one sort of response ; it is in 
another sort of response, the expression of the appetite 
which it arouses, that we discover it to be food and 
capable of satisfying our hunger. The child we love is 
presented to us as a small and perhaps helpless human 
being, but we cognise it as lovable in the caresses and 
tender care which it elicits from us by the instinctive 
reaction. Without the reaction which they provoke in 
us the objects of our emotions would not reveal to us 
the properties which make them into such objects. If 
we are inclined to overlook this truth, it is because, 
as experience grows, familiarity with things may bring 
about the reaction through a previous cognition. Thus 
I may dislike a person because I have first learnt he has 
certain qualities which in general excite repulsion. In 
the developed life cognition and emotion become inter- 
twined, so that the cognition may seem to be the prior. 
But in our original experience it is the emotion which 
discovers the corresponding object of cognition. 

Hence it is impossible to explain the religious senti- 
ment as a composite of various emotions, not specifically 
religious, which we feel towards God. For this presumes 
that we can begin with a cognition of God and that 
towards the object so presented we feel these emotions. 
The question we have rather to ask is, how is the 

The religious sentiment is however unlike the sentiments of the 
tertiary qualities that the religious response does not create its object, in 
the sense explained in Bk. III. ch. ix., but finds it. In this respect it is like 
appetite or simple emotion, or the other sentiments, such as love. 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


375 

intellectual notion of God revealed to us ? The fear of 
the thunderstorm is not the fear of God, though such 
fear may be the first channel by which the religious 
sentiment is provoked {primus fecit deos timor). It is 
merely the feeling that the thunder is terrible. That 
God is present in the thunderstorm is discovered only 
in the feeling which is our outgoing towards something 
or other which works through the thunderstorm or 
resides therein. That there is this something or other 
is not the discovery of reflection. The metaphysical 
interpretation of deity as that to which the world is 
tending, or any other metaphysical interpretation of 
God, is as far as possible from being an original discovery 
of knowledge ; it is only possible to reflection working 
upon primitive notions already acquired. Even the idea 
that there is something mysterious which we fear or 
reverence is never in the first instance a piece of cognition ; 
but is revealed to our wondering response, our uneasy 
astonishment and curiosity. It is the feeling or emotion 
which images the object, not the idea which induces the 
emotion. When we ask how we come by the cognition 
of God we must answer that, as with love and hate and 
appetite and aversion, it is because the world itself 
provokes in us a specific response which makes us aware, 
no matter in how primitive a form, of God, and this 
specific reaction is what has been described above as a 
going out to something in the world with which we are 
in communion. 

In order further to explain the nature of this reaction 
and the object which excites it, I may refer to the 
conclusion of William James’s famous inquiry. His 
method has been subjected to many criticisms, that he 
neglects the ordinary calm religious sentiment of the 
ordinary man in whom it does not usually rise into 
enthusiastic exaltation or fall into the complementary 
depression, and confines his attention to exaggerated or 
even pathological forms of the sentiment, and that his 
data are to a very large extent drawn from the records 
of evangelical protestantism. These criticisms have 


The nature 
of its 
object. 



DEITY 


BK, IV 


376 

their weight, but at least it is true that truth is most 
likely to be found in the beginning in what Bacon 
calls flagrant instances. The gleams of religious feeling 
which the common man from time to time detects he 
may interpret by the experiences of mysticism or of 
conversion. 

The conclusion James drew from his data was that 
in religion “ the conscious person is continuous with 
a wider self through which saving experiences come”;^ 
and impressed by the automatisms of inspired leaders 
of religion, he supposes that it is from out the 
subliminal strata of our personality that the religious 
emotion arises into consciousness by a kind of uprush 
from below. Now without attributing to the sub- 
liminal any superiority over the conscious, and inter- 
preting it rather, as has before been suggested,^ as in 
reality something physical or physiological into which 
the conscious sinks when it ceases to be conscious 
and out of which it can rise in turn, we may I think 
adopt this general conception and add to it that the 
world as a whole in its forward tendency acts upon our 
bodily organism and that the religious sentiment is the 
feeling for this whole. Parts as we are of Space-Time 
we throw out feelers towards the rest of it and we are 
accessible to its influences. The body of the universe 
affects our body, and the ultimate response in conscious- 
ness is this emotion. lake hungry appetite it is a 
conation whose object, God, is to it as food to hunger. 
The religious conation which sets us in search of God 
is our groping out to the reality which is God. This 
religious appetite may either be stirred in us directly by 
the impact of the world with its tendency to deity, or 
it may first be felt by us as a need of our nature ; just 
as the appetite of hunger or the sexual impulse may 
be stirred by the presence of an appropriate object, but 
may also set the organism in search of satisfaction, though 
the object may not be definitely apprehended till it is 
found. In either case it is the world in its nisus forward 


^ Varieties of Religious Experience^ p. 515. 

^ Compare above, Bk. III. ch. i. A. pp. 25 ff. 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


377 


that grips the finite conative complex which is fitted to 
it. It excites religion In us, and we in turn feel the 
need of it. 

The religious emotion or appetite has no specific 
organ through which it works. Other appetites have, 
and even the other emotions depend upon specific 
mental and bodily reactions. But the religious appetite 
or emotion depends upon the whole make-up or con- 
stitution of the mind and body, and is the response of 
it to the whole of reality in Its nisus towards a new 
quality. In that forward movement due to the onward 
sweep of Time our minds with their substructure of 
body are caught, and our religious response is at once 
the mark that we are involved in that nisus, and that 
our minds contribute in their part towards it. The 
world in Its bearing towards a new empirical quality 
may be concealed from the cognitive mind, for though 
we are always in cognitive compresence with what is 
outside us, neither can the new empirical quality be 
contemplated, for we know not what it is, nor even 
enjoyed, since it Is higher than mind. It makes itself 
felt in the religious sense, which thus discovers the world 
It sees to be clothed with divinity. For the world Is not 
merely what it is for intellect alone ; its nisus towards 
what is higher enters Into its constitution, and as 
impregnated with this tendency it affects the mind by 
ways other than cognition, though interpretable in the 
ways of cognition. The whole world with its real 
tendency to deity stirs in us from the depths of our 
nature a vague endeavour or desire which shadows forth 
Its object. Then intellect comes Into play, and discovers 
in detail the characters of this object, and finds at last 
what it truly is, the tendency of the world forwards 
towards a new quality. 

Thus, if this interpretation be correct, the object 

^ ... , imagina- 

01 religious sentiment is no mere imagination which tion. 
corresponds to a subjective and possibly illusory move- 
ment of mind. We are in perpetual presence of this 
object, which stimulates us, some of us more, some less ; 
is sometimes felt and sometimes left unexperienced 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


How a 
future 
quality can 
affect us. 


378 

according to our condition, just as the most appetising 
luxuries leave us cold when we are satisfied. It may be 
entirely absent from some who are insensitive to its 
peculiar flavour or only faintly sensitive ; a man may 
be partially or wholly deity-blind, as he is tone-deaf, 
or has no attunement with scientific truth : he may 
lack the en^otional suggestibility for deity. Yet most 
are suggestible to it in their degree, as most see colours 
and not mere greys. Of this world with its deity in 
advance it is true to say what James says of “the 
mystical or the supernatural region”: “the unseen 
region in question is not merely ideal, for it produces 
effects in this world. When we commune with it, work 
is actually done upon our finite personality, for we are 
turned into new men, and consequences in the way of 
conduct follow in the natural world upon our regenerative 
change. But that which produces effects within another 
reality must be termed a reality itself, so I feel as if we 
had no philosophical excuse for calling the unseen or 
mystical world unreal.” ^ I only demur to calling the 
mystical world unseen or even mystical. It is partly 
seen and partly object of thought, but it is its new 
quality, which is higher than anything we know, that 
cannot be seen or understood, though its presence 
in reality is forced upon us both in philosophical con- 
ception and in the feeling it evokes in us of itself. 

Thus religious feeling itself suggests the notion of 
God which when elaborated by reflection is discovered 
to be that of the world big with deity. And in turn when 
we start with this notion which is forced upon us specu- 
latively by the behaviour of the world, we verify it in 
its effects, as we verify the existence of ions, or observe 
a predicted comet or planet through our telescopes, 
by finding what element it is in our human experience 
which corresponds to it, and indeed in practice 
discovers it. 

Only one point seems to me obscure in this account 
of how God’s deity makes itself felt in the individual 
^ Loc. cit, p. 516. 



CH. ri 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


379 


soul. Deity is some quality not realised but in process 
of realisation, is future and not present. How then, it 
may be asked, can the future make itself felt energetically 
in our minds, draw them towards itself and satisfy them ? 
Now we must remember that deity is not as such 
cognised, is not before our minds as a matter of con- 
templation. The reflective contemplation , embodies the 
feeling and follows on it. All that we have for cognition 
is the world of cognition interpreted by the notion of 
infinitude and of its tendency to deity. The world 
which works upon our religious suggestibility is the 
actual world, but that actual world contains the seed of 
its future, though what future forms it will assume is 
hidden from us, except so far as we can forecast it in 
spatio-temporal terms. What acts upon us is what is 
to bring forth deity. I may illustrate by reference to 
clairvoyance. I do not raise the question whether there 
are or have been persons who can foresee the future. 
Yet at least I see nothing (consistently with what was 
said in a previous chapter about the limits of prevision 
of the future) extravagant or startling in the claim. The 
future will be what it will. But since it will be the causal 
outcome of what is present actually, there may be minds 
so sensitive to the influences at work in the world that 
they may divine certain future events. What seems to 
me open to the gravest question is that any character of 
the future which transcends our hitherto experienced 
orders of fact should be foreseen. Yet the clairvoyant 
might be like a person of genius — more sensitive to things 
than the ordinary run of persons. Imposture to some 
limited extent, and to a very large extent suggestion 
from subtle sources of knowledge, perhaps not clearly 
known to the person himself, arising perhaps from 
telepathic communication from those who have experi- 
ence, play so great a part in these phenomena that we 
may well suspend judgment. But there Is no Intrinsic 
impossibility or even improbability in the alleged powers. 
In the same way we may suppose that in religious experi- 
ence the vague future quality of deity is felt, not in its 
quality, for that cannot be known, but as giving a flavour 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Assurance 
of God and 
of foreign 
minds. 


380 

to the experience of the whole world which it does not 
possess as merely an object of sense or thought. 

In a famous passage, Berkeley affirms that we know 
God by evidence of the same sort, but wider, as we 
know each other. The world of nature is the external 
sign, the divine visual language, by which we know 
God’s mind, as we know each other’s minds by their 
gestures. How entirely the alleged inference of other 
minds from their bodily gestures fails to account for 
our belief in them we have already seen. The notion 
of a foreign mind would on this showing be a miraculous 
invention. Berkeley was so far right that our appre- 
hensions of other minds and of deity are nearly related, 
because in both cases we go beyond sight. But he did 
not recognise that in the end, alike in sensation and in 
faith, it is our mental responses to objects that discover 
the objects to us as objects of cognition : that there is no 
apprehension distinct from our conations, but only objects 
which as apprehended through our responses to them 
are co^nita. 

It is of greater importance to dwell upon the difference 
in our apprehension of other minds and of deity, which 
is not mind at all but a higher quality. We are assured 
of other minds through the social emotion,^ and of deity 
through a different response, the religious emotion. 
Each of them is specific to the object it discovers, which 
in both cases is neither contemplated nor enjoyed, but 
is that which corresponds to assurance, or faith. Faith 
in other minds may be called practical assurance. 
Faith in God we may be content to describe simply as 
faith. Now we are sure of one another’s minds because 
we are social beings ; but the social instinct is satisfied 
only by reciprocal actions on the part of others. There 
is no such reciprocal action from God. For though we 
speak, as we inevitably must, in human terms of God’s 
response to us, there is no direct experience of that 
response except through our own feeling that devotion 
to God or worship carries with it its own satisfaction. 

^ Above, Blc. III. ch. i. B. 



cn. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


381 

The universe does not answer to our prayers by overt 
external actions as our fellows respond to our social 
approaches to them, but in the strength and sustainment 
which in its tendency to deity it gives to our minds. In 
both cases it is intercourse with the object which 
discovers it to us, but religious intercourse is different 
from social intercourse, and only called such by a 
metaphor. In this respect our faith in Ood is nearer 
to simple sensation than our assurance of other minds. 
The assurance of the reality of God we cannot call surer 
than our assurance of each other’s minds ; both are 
equally sure ; but it is simpler. Moreover, being 
infinite, God has the wider and deeper attachments in 
the nature of things, as Berkeley recognised. 

There is a further difference between the two. Were 
it not for the social experience, we could not speculatively 
invent the idea of another mind than our own, the one 
which we enjoy. Analogy does not help us specula- 
tively. Now, the notion of God comes to us also through 
emotion or instinct, and it is only subsequently that we 
are led to look for a speculative statement of the object 
which corresponds to it. Yet it remains true, that 
speculatively, even without the practical revelation of 
God, we can arrive at the postulate of a world tending 
to deity, though we could not discover it to be worshipful. 
There is no such miracle as is involved in the speculative 
or intellectual discovery of a foreign mind in conceiving 
a higher type of empirical quality than mind, provided 
only we do not attempt to describe what it is. For we 
become familiar with levels of different quality, and we 
may by analogy conceive a higher type unfolded by the 
onward pressure of Time. There is no invention here, 
but only extension of a series whose principle is known, 
to another term. Even without the religious emotion, 
we could on purely speculative evidence postulate deity, 
on the ground of the general plan on which Space-Time 
works. Thus we are sure of other minds only on the 
ground of specific experience ; we are assured of God’s 
reality on the ground both of specific experience and 
speculative evidence, derived from experience itself. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Religious 
criteria of 
the concep- 
tion of 
God. 


(i) God 
greater 
than man j 


382 

The belief reposes on this double basis ; or at least when 
emotion assures us of God, we can look for speculative 
evidence of him in experience, and the direct experience 
and the speculative one support and supplement each 
other. 

So far then the speculative conception of God 
satisfies the Irequirement of the religious sentiment in 
its unquestioning faith in the reality of its object. If 
religion is a man’s outgoing to the whole in its divine 
quality, felt unrcflectively in the peculiar flavour of that 
sentiment, it is justified of philosophy, and the ground 
is cut from the feet of any attempt to treat religion as a 
mere practical necessity of man’s nature, which might 
have no foundation in fact and yet might be precious 
because of the contentment it brings, or as some have 
thought, because of the usefulness of the belief for 

securing morality. The feeling for the whole in its 

divine quality is a feeling whose object is postulated 
by philosophical experience. Some of the tests by which 
the sufficicncc of a philosophical conception of God for 
the religious sentiment itself are judged have been 
already included more or less explicitly in this exposition. 
To speak roughly, there are four such criteria. The 
religious sentiment requires of God that he should be 
greater than man, a ‘ universal ’ or all-inclusive being, 
diflerent in quality from man, and, finally, responsive 

to man, so that he offers us, in W. James’s language, 

‘‘a solution of our uneasiness,” whether that uneasiness 
is derived from our feebleness and finitude or from the 
more intimate sense of our shortcomings and sin. 

Of the first two of these criteria little need now be 
said. Even the blind fear of natural forces, which is 
declared to be in part the origin of primitive religion, 
and remains an element in the most advanced religion, 
attests the religious conviction of some overpowering 
thing in the world. Magic, which is so closely allied 
with religion, is in the first instance the arts by which 
it is supposed that this mighty being may be persuaded 
or cajoled into satisfying the wishes of his worshippers. 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


383 

It has been said to be the foundation of science which 
acquires power for man over nature by obedience to her, 
by searching out her secrets. But I do not enter into 
the controversial question whether for this reason magic 
is to be sharply distinguished from religion, any more 
than into the old controversy, now surely grown some- 
what tedious and obsolete, whether science and religion 
are irreconcilable or harmonious — as if ih the end a 
just conception of what is true about one element in the 
universe could be at variance with a just conception about 
what is true of another element in it. 

Not only is God a mightier being than man ; his (2) uni- 
empire, whether directed by a single God or put into 
commission as in polytheism, is extended over the whole 
universe. In some sense .God acts through the whole 
— we have said that the whole of Space-Time with its 
finites engendered within it is the body of God ; or if there 
are many gods they act through allotted parts of it — fire 
or storm or even minute departments like mildew or rust; 
they have domains allotted to them as in Greek mythology, 
where the idea of fate or moira is that of allotment.' 

The other two tests are for developed religions the (3)(iiffcrent 
more significant, and I am speaking of the developed ''' 
religious consciousness, though there is a certain temerity 
and at any rate difficulty, for a person who does not possess 
it in a marked degree or except fitfully at all, in the under- 
taking. Sympathetic intelligence may to some extent 
in such a person take the place of direct and vivid experi- 
ence. In the first place, the religious consciousness 
recognises that God’s divinity is not merely a higher 
humanity but something different in kind. Omniscience, 
omnipotence, infinite goodness, eternity, which popular 
religious reflection attributes to God, are, as Hegel 
observed, the figurative disguises of a faith in something 
of a different order from man. Omniscience does not 
so much mean a vastly extended knowledge. Infinite 
wisdom is not merely a wisdom greater than any 
conceivable wisdom ; nor infinite goodness merely a 

1 Cp. F. H. Cornford, From Religion to Philosophy (London, 

1912), ch. i. §6. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


384 

thoroughgoing morality, but a new strain of character. 
But since we cannot picture this higher quality to our- 
selves but only have faith that there is such, we satisfy 
our pictorial and mythologising instinct by imagining a 
man or personality of vaster power, intelligence, wisdom 
and goodness than ours. Men have even been persecuted 
for holding that eternity of punishment meant not a 
punishment indefinitely continued but some new flavour 
of retribution. Now we have seen that deity in a 
monotheistic God, though lodged in a portion only of 
the universe, is lodged in an infinite portion and is 
therefore eternal, but that this conception is valid only 
so long as deity is in process and not actually realised. 
On the other hand omniscience and perfect goodness 
do not belong to deity at all. Deity does not know, but 
only the minds know which are included in the body of 
God. Deity knows only in the extended sense of 
knowing which is not human knowing nor any extension 
of it. God’s ‘ knowing ’ is his contemplation of things, 
his ‘ knowledge ’ the objects of his acts of enjoying his 
deity. Moreover, infinitely as his deity is extended in 
space and time, and though he contemplates the whole 
of Space-Time, even deity contemplates only those 
qualities which have been hitherto developed within 
Space-Time, and he cannot foretell the quality which 
shall in good time supersede his deity, any more than 
we humans can foretell what qualities shall supersede 
mind. There is always impending over him the menace 
which Prometheus levels against Zeus of supersession 
by a higher God. In this way God's ‘ knowledge ’ is 
limited and it is something higher than knowledge. 
In the same way all goodness is included in the body of 
God, for goodness belongs to the minds which are within 
that body. But for those minds there is no perfect 
goodness, no limit to perfection in conduct ; while on 
the other hand, deity being raised above willing is not 
goodness at all. These discussions belong, however, to 
a later stage of our exposition where the relation of deity 
to value is discussed. 

The responsiveness of God to man is the most vital 



CH. 11 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


385 

and distinctive feature in the religious sentiment, most (4) respon 
patent in the higher religions, but traceable faintly 
throughout the history of religion. Even in elementary 
religion, though there is so large an ingredient of fear 
or awe, there is also the dependence of man upon God. 

At a more advanced stage we have the consciousness 
which is described in the language of philosophy or 
theology as the sense of identity of God and man: 

that art thou ’’ in Brahmanism. The current notion 
represented by T. H. Green in this country of a divine 
mind which makes human minds organic to itself and 
works through them (a notion affiliated historically to 
Kant’s doctrine of mind or ‘‘ consciousness as such ” 
{ueberhaupt) which is objective, as contrasted with the 
empirical mind which in Kant’s conception is psycho- 
logical), is not far removed from this older philosophy. 

This is the pantheistic sense of the divine response, and 
it tends towards the feeling of absorption in the divine. 

In the more theistic religious consciousness this respon- 
siveness culminates in the fatherhood of God. In this 
conception may be traced the primaeval mystery which 
is the root of religion ; for to the child the father is the 
mysterious something which he discovers to be like 
himself, a person by whom he is sustained but who 
issues arbitrary commands which the child must obey. 

When religion deepens and is moralised, the apparently 
arbitrary interpositions of God are attributed humbly 
not to caprice but to good reasons on the part of God, 
inscrutable still, but a wise and just providence. But 
also in the feeling of God’s fatherhood, the sense of 
mystery is coupled with and overshadowed by the sense 
of sustaining love in his relation to his children and of 
trustful dependence on their part which is not disappointed 
but, rather, relieved. Whatever God is, and however 
he Is conceived, there is then this affinity between him 
and us, and In its higher moods the religious mind 
conceives itself as doing God’s work in doing best the 
work of man (^'then most godlike, being most a man ”), 
and conceives God as speaking to man in his conscience 
or In his passion for truth or beauty. 

voT. TT 2 c 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


386 

and worthy But the Community is one of co-operation. The 

mi's" " ' individual is sustained by trust in God but he wants and 
claims the help of God as a child his father’s, and in 
turn God reciprocates the worship man pays him and 
the confidence he reposes in him. There is always 
the double relationship of need. If man wants God 
and depends upon him, God wants man, and is so far 
dependent. '’Or the same thing may be put otherwise 
in respect of our feeling of dependence upon God. That 
feeling is not simply one of helplessness. It is the 
claim we make for some one to help us. In his admir- 
able book. The Philosophy of Religion^ Mr. H. Hbifding, 
criticising Schleiermacher’s famous reduction of religion 
to the feeling of dependence, observes that “ he does not 
sufficiently emphasise the point that this dependence is 
conditioned by an activity, and that it appears at the 
limits of this activity. Nor does he make it sufficiently 
obvious that this dependence makes itself felt in the 
struggle for those values which appear to man to be the 
highest.”' In other words, if I understand aright, our 
dependence is not merely the sense of our feebleness 
which we discover to be relieved by God, but it is the 
demand on our part for relief from some one who fulfils 
our needs and is perfect where we are imperfect. I 
shall have to speak in the next chapter of whether God 
is most fitly conceived in the language of values, but 
apart from this question the above observation appears 
most just. Even in mysticism this claim for God 
to satisfy us is retained. Mysticism does not mean 
utter self-abandonment. It contains, as I remember is 
remarked somewhere in the book I have been referring 
to, an element of egotism, which is apparent in the 
records by St. Theresa of her ecstasies. And indeed a self- 
abandonment in which there was on one side complete 
loss and on the other side no gain is scarcely conceivable. 

Thus in the more developed religious mind our trust 
in God is given freely, and the obedience to him is a 
‘‘ dignified obedience,” ^ rendered by a person, in his 

1 Philosophy of Religion (London, 1908; Eng. trans.), p. 

2 The phrase is of course Burke’s. 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


387 

limited and imperfect fashion independent, with his 
standards of what is great and highest, to a higher being 
who sustains him but whom he regards as worthy of such 
trust. There is not merely reliance upon God but 
co-operation between the two parties to the religious 
transaction. We do not merely resign ourselves to 
something greater, but that something is a partner with 
us. Mr. Hbffding traces the growth of polytheism to 
“ this need of feeling that in the midst of the struggle we 
have a fellow struggler by our side, a fellow struggler 
who knows from his own experience what it is to suffer 
and to meet resistance.”^ I cannot judge how far this 
motive can be said to be the principal root of polytheism. 
But monotheism admits the same feeling of fellowship 
between God and man. At any rate what is important for 
our purpose is that the religious consciousness involves 
this element as well as that of dependence. Doubtless 
the feeling that what we are matters to God, and that by 
our action we may affect him, is the less prominent in 
the religious mind. The primitive crudity of religion 
and magic still attaches to the most developed beliefs 
of God. The being to whom men pray may be prayed 
to in the spirit of the naive mind which calls upon his 
God to help him to secure his ends : the spirit which is 
ridiculed in Sheridan’s play. In a more exalted but still 
primitive spirit two warring nations fighting for opposed 
ideals may call for support upon God, a God whom they 
believe to be the same God in both cases. Such appeals 
for aid are different from the mere prayer for selfish 
ends, because God is thought of as the supporter of the 
right, and each side claims his own ideal as the right. 
Yet inconspicuous as it may be, the higher element is 
still present in the religious consciousness : that our trust 
is given to what we ourselves approve and that God is 
not merely a being whom we find and have to placate or 
win over but whom we desire. It appears in the conscious- 
ness that goodness or even a certain ritual is not merely 
demanded by God but pleasing to him. It is seen 
inversely in the despair which overcomes certain minds, 

^ Loc. cit. pp. 162-3. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Theism for 
religion and 
speculation. 


388 

and is a kind of negative religious feeling, that if certain 
misfortunes can attend us or certain kinds of wickedness 
be allowed there can be no God. And it is, I believe, 
felt (though perhaps I am misled by philosophical 
prepossessions) as the sense that we also help to maintain 
and sustain the nature of God and are not merely his 
subjects; that God himself is involved in our acts and 
their issues, or, as it was put above, not only does he matter 
to us, but we matter to him. 

So far as this is the case, the religious consciousness 
attests the philosophical conception that God's deity 
is the issue in Time of a tendency or nisus in the world, 
of which our minds and everything else of the nature of 
mind is the proximate highest outcome — an issue which 
is dependent on the nature of things lower than itself. 

It is natural to turn from this imperfect statement 
of what the religious consciousness contains to the 
comparison of our metaphysical conception with pan- 
theism and theism respectively. For though these 
conceptions may be treated as purely metaphysical, they 
belong also to the philosophy of religion ; they are a 
blending of data derived both from philosophy and 
religious experience. They appeal to different elements 
in the religious experience, and their merits and defects 
as philosophical conceptions of God and his relation to 
the universe are paralleled by their merits and defects 
as attempts to satisfy the religious demand. I shall 
first of all compare them in these respects with one 
another before proceeding to compare the conception 
of God as the whole world tending to deity with either 
of them.^ 

For theism, God is an individual being distinct from 

1 In the following pages I am giving theism a twist in the direction 
of deism, or rather I am neglecting the distinction between the two, as I 
am reminded by reading Mr. Sorley’s recent work. Moral Values and the 
Idea of God (Cambridge, 1918). Theism, it is said, means not merely 
transcendence but immanence. Not every form of theism can be said to 
assert immanence. And it is precisely the possibility of immanence along 
with transcendence that has to be explained (see later). If immanence 
means simply working in some department of creation, as in human 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


389 

the finite beings which make up the world ; whether 
as in the popular theistic belief he is regarded as their 
creator or as in the doctrine of Aristotle moves them 
from without as the object of their love, as a man's good 
sets his appetite into operation. In either case he 
transcends finite things. For pantheism, on the contrary, 

God is immanent in the universe of finite things. In 
the more popular or easy-going form of it, which has 
received classical expression in the fiimous passage of 
Pope (“warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze, etc."), 

God is a pervading presence. In the profounder forms 
of it, as in Spinoza, everything is a fragment or mode 
of God, is unreal or only relatively real apart from God, 
and finds its reality in God. It is not so much that God 
is in everything but rather (I am again quoting Hegel) 
that everything is in God. The Absolute in the current 
idealism takes the place of God in pantheistic meta- 
physics, while God himself becomes an appearance, and 
that is the reason at once why the name of pantheism is 
not applicable to such a system of thought and why the 
position of God in the system is so indefinite.^ 

Theism makes appeal to the personal or egotistic Theism: 
side of the religious consciousness, the feeling that in 
surrender the worshipper still retains his individuality 
and achieves it in the surrender ; much as in pursuing 
truth it is still the supreme effort of the investigator to 
depersonalise himself — so that the candid recognition of 
facts and the putting aside of prejudice or pettiness are 
at once a surrender to things and the fulfilment of the 
truth-seeking personality. It is the religion of the ' free ' 
man, who consorts with God on terms which still leave 
the creature independent according to his finite measure. 

God is the divine individual, awfully removed from man, 

values, this is not immanence in the natural sense which pantheism 
attaches to the conception, that of working in every part of creation. 

I leave the passage therefore unaltered. I'heism, any how, is at least 
what I describe. 

^ “We may say that God is not God till he has become all in all, 
and that a God which is all in all is not the God of religion. God is 
but an aspect, and that must mean an appearance of the Absolute ” 
{Appearance and Reality ^ p. 448). 



390 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


with a quality which man does not possess, and who yet 
does not so much engulph as fulfil man, standing by 
him as a helper and sustaining him as a father. Its 
speculative weakness has always lain in its detachment 
of God from the finites in- his world, and more particularly 
from the world of nature. Continuous as God is felt 
to be with man, his continuity is only felt and not clearly 
conceived. This continuity is in fact just the element 
in religion which is pantheistic in its tendency. Most 
often God is conceived by theism as a creator, existing 
before the world in his perfection and bringing the world 
to birth by his will as guided by his intelligence. “ The 
worlds were made by the word of God.” But this is 
understood sometimes in a more obvious, sometimes in 
a profounder sense. The materials out of which things 
are made may be supposed to be already in existence, 
and God shapes them, as in Genesis or the Timaeus of 
Plato. God becomes then an artificer shaping or im- 
posing form upon what is not a part of himself ; he is 
what Kant, speaking of this conception, called aptly but 
slightingly an architect-god. 

nnd weak- On the other hand, if God’s word is at the same time 

ness. coming into being of the material as well as the form 

of his creatures ; if the theism becomes according to 
the current phrase an immanent one, we are at a loss to 
understand how this God, whose acts are his creatures, 
can also lead an existence separate from them, and can 
ever have been, as he is supposed to have been, with- 
out them. The transcendence and immanence of God 
are postulated together without reconciliation. Theism 
endeavours by this device to satisfy the other side of the 
requirements of religion, its demand for unity of substance 
of man with God. But the speculative transcendence 
conflicts with the speculative immanence, when God is 
understood to be both transcendent and immanent in 
respect of his whole nature, that is to say, if his deity at 
once permeates his creatures and transcends them. To 
come to speculative systems, it is this difficulty which 
besets the student of Leibniz, for whom God is himself 
a monad, supreme among the monads, and yet the monads 



cn. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


391 


other than God are created by God and the world as it 
exists is selected by God out of the infinite possibilities 
of worlds open to God to create. The monads at once 
mirror God and are his creations. Thus the so-called 
immanent theism has never, so far as I know, been clearly 
distinguished from pantheism ; there is always lingering 
about the conception a suspicion that without much 
regard for consistency it seeks to combine the religious 
attraction of theism with the speculative attraction of 
pantheism. If theism is to contain and include imman- 
ence it cannot remain a simple doctrine of creation. 

The God of a strict theism is therefore artificially 
related to his creatures. He is one of a multitude of 
beings, infinite while they are finite, but does not live 
their life (as in some sense the pantheistic God does), but 
remains outside them, ruling them by his power or wise 
governance or attracting them through love for him. 
Hence the need that is felt of mediators between the 
creatures and God which bridge the interval between 
him and them.^ God may be conceived embodied in 
some perfect type of manhood who is at once both 
human and divine. And if the relation of man with 
the perfect and unchanging individual God is artificial, 
still more so is the connection of God with nature. All 
the perplexities which experience makes us so familiar 
with of the imperfect subjugation of nature to the 
purposes of man,^ arise in respect of the God of theism. 
The god-man is finite and dies. Even God’s control 
over nature though complete is arbitrary, obeys no 
principle, and is postulated rather than explained. He 
binds the sweet influence of the Pleiades ; but they are 
not part of him, and neither do they appear necessitated 
by him nor he by them. Hence the God of undiluted 

1 But O th’ exceeding grace, 

Of highest God, that loves his creatures so, 

And all his workes with mercy doth embrace, 

'Fhat blessed angels he sends to and fro, 

. To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe. 

Faery Queene, II. canto viii. 

^ Compare the famous passage in Newman^s Apologia^ ch. v. (ed. 
1908) : “To consider the world in its length and breadth, etc.” 



392 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


I-’antluMsiii. 


theism becomes merely the greatest thing in a universe 
of things and tends consequently in the mythologising 
imagination, which the religious sentiment naturally and 
inevitably employs, to be dowered not with a new and 
divine quality but with finite qualities on a vaster scale. 

Pantheisgi, on the other hand, is strong where theism 
is weak and weak where that is strong. It appeals to the 
self-surrendering element in the religious mind, but its 
defect is the difficulty that it oft'ers when strictly under- 
stood to the retention of independence or freedom in the 
attitude of the worshipper. For the individual is lost 
in God, and the religious feeling of trustful dependence 
on a greater sympathetic power, which in some types 
of religion is normal^ is either absent or is replaced by 
mystical ecstasy. “ The imperfect offices of prayer and 
praise” are transcended in the feeling of “blessedness 
and love.” With that unconscious blending of theistic 
and pantheistic elements by which the western mind 
saves itself from the speculative fascination of pantheism, 
Wordsworth describes this feeling as being still a “ thanks- 
giving to the power that made him.” ' 

It is characteristic of pantheism that the individual 
demands no return from God. Spinoza’s intellectual 
love of God is part of the infinite love with which God 
loves himself, and asks nothing for itself. It was this 
which recommended it to the mind of Goethe.^ But 
not merely does it demand no return in the sense that it 
seeks no reward ; it makes no claim that the individual 
in his devotion should matter to God or help him to be 

1 Jii such access of mind, in such high hour 
Of visitation from the living God, 

Thought was not : in enjoyment it expired. 

No thanks he breathed, he proffered no request. 

Rapt into still communion that transcends 
The imperfect offices of prayer and praise. 

His mind was a thanksgiving to the power 
That made him ; it was blessedness and love. 

Excursion, Bk. I. 

^ Goethe refers to Philine’s saying to Wilhelm, ‘‘Wenn ich dich 
licbe was geht’s dich an ? ” — ‘‘ If 1 love you, what is that to you ? 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


393 


what he is ; and yet this relation is implied in the religious 
service of the man who is truly free. 

One consequence of this characteristic of pantheism 
is that the transition between God’s divinity and human 
morality is made difficult for reflection. We shall see 
that deity and goodness are indeed notions of a different 
kind, but there is at least an intimate connection between 
them, and reflection may trace this connection. In 
pantheism the links are neglected or broken. For if 
everything finite is a mode of God, good and evil are 
alike contained in him. But it is an old familiar difficulty, 
that if the evil belongs to God as well as the good he 
cannot be worshipped, God being at least in the line of 
what is highest. Hence it is easy to understand why 
persons who cannot reconcile pure theism with their 
speculative convictions, and at the same time lack the 
religious passion which finds its satisfaction in absorp- 
tion into God, should substitute enthusiastic devotion to 
goodness for religion proper. 

From the speculative point of view, on the other 
hand, pantheism supplies that unlaboured connection of 
God and nature and man which theism as such fails 
satisfactorily to supply. But it does so at the price 
of merging individuality into the nebulous whole ; a 
speculative defect which lies at the root of its religious 
insufficiency. This has been expressed in a well-known 
fashion in the statement that while we can understand 
upon the pantheistic metaphysics how all things are 
contained in God, we cannot equally well understand 
how they proceed from him. It is true that pantheism 
may stoutly proclaim that absorption in the Absolute 
leaves the individual self-sufficient and independent so 
far as that is possible for finite creatures (and therefore 
not truly or ultimately). Yet in doing so it rather 
postulates something which human practice requires 
than is consistent with itself ; and it becomes obnoxious 
to the same reproach as theism when, with a principle 
of transcendence, theism saves itself for religion by 
postulating immanence as well. 



394 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


lathe If the question is asked, whether the speculative 

concepLn coHception of God or deity which has been advanced 
theisticor here as part of the empirical treatment of Space-Time 
Tnmsc'fn'rf- lias appeared to be verified by religious experience 
ence an.i bcIongs to thcism or pantheism, the answer must be 
inimantnce sti'ictly referable to either of them, taken 

by itself ; tlvat in different respects it belongs to both ; 
and that if a choice must be made it is theistic. For 
God for us is conceived as built on the same pattern as 
every finite, and as the whole of Space-Time, and of the 
particular finite which is the human being. He is both 
body and soul, and his soul is his deity. Since God’s 
body is the whole of Space-Time, God in respect of his 
body is all inclusive, and all finites are included in him, 
and in their continuous connection as pieces of Space- 
Time and linked by spatio-temporal continuity they are 
fragments of God’s body, though their individuality is 
not lost in it. But in respect of his deity the conception 
of God is theistic, and since his deity is what is distinct- 
ive of him, this notion of God remains predominantly 
theistic. 

Deity according to our conclusion from the empirical 
order of qualities is an empirical quality and is not a 
priori or categorial ; and it does not belong to the whole 
world, as if every part of that world were permeated with 
deity, as it must be in a strict pantheism, but only to that 
part of it (infinite though that part is) which is fitted to 
carry the empirical quality. In the picture which was 
drawn, in concession to the mythologising habit, of this 
infinite being as realised, we had to think of God’s 
deity as carried by some differentiation of the stuff of 
mind, belonging to a certain portion of the universe. 
In reality, God is never thus realised in the contradictory 
form of an infinite qualitied individual, but he is in 
process towards this quality of deity ; and if we conceived 
deity realised in a finite god or angel, deity was finitely 
extended In space and time. Since then deity is carried 
only by a portion of the universe, God is so far an in- 
dividual being just as man or any other finite is, only 
that he is infinite. But since his distinctive quality is 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


395 


not mind but the next higher quality, he is not a being 
on the level of man, with personality and mental powers 
like man’s, raised only to a higher pitch, but transcends 
all Unites, because he is the whole world as tending 
to a higher order of finites. In this, which is the more 
important respect, the conception is theistic. ' 

On the other hand, though he transcends all finites 
in quality, his deity remains within the world and he 
is in no sense outside it. Yet his deity is not localised 
in any special class of finites, as they suppose who treat 
a theistic God as also immanent because they find God 
in the region of values. Since his deity depends on 
mind, and this in turn on finites of a lower order, until 
ultimately we reach the simple matrix of Space-Time ; 
there is no part of the universe which is not used up to 
sustain the deity of God. Everything in the world is 
represented (in the physiological sense of that term) in 
his deity, and we and all finites are, in the phrase we 
have used, comparable to organic sensa which God 
contemplates in enjoying his deity. Once again the 
theistic dualism of a God whose deity is compresent, 
whose divine enjoyments are compresent, with the 
things which are his objects, reappears. But all these 
things are part of his body and belong to himself. He 
possesses therefore the totality which pantheism assigns 
to God. But while, as above observed, the finites which 
arc included in his body are not lost or absorbed therein, 
so as to lose their identity, there is an intelligible 
connection between these finites and his deity, — the 
connection which pantheism finds so difficult to make 
clear. For his deity is the outgrowth in Time of the 
preceding qualities of existence as contained within 
Space-Time, and while his deity is fed by lower finites, 
he himself not only transcends them in quality but, 
including them all within his body and representing in 
his deity the goal of their efforts, releases them from 
their isolation as individuals and sustains them and 
gives them a significance which as mere individuals they 
do not possess. 

God is thus immanent in a different respect from 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


RcHcctive 
notions of 
religion. 


396 

that In which he is transcendent. The phrase Immanent 
theism seems to me to cover so much obscurity of 
thinking that 1 prefer to avoid it altogether. Theism 
and pantheism, transcendence and immanence are two 
extremes of thought about the divine. They are rarely 
found in complete purity, but are combined in practical 
religious beliefs in various proportions. They represent 
the two essential characters which God shares with all 
other things and with Space-Time itself, of being both 
body and soul. God is immanent in respect of his body, 
but transcendent in respect of his deity. 

We may now revert to the religious consciousness 
itself. Though our conception satisfies that conscious- 
ness, it seems to contain features incompatible v/ith the 
philosophical or rather theological and traditional or 
conventional formulae which are inevitably mingled 
with the unrcflective deliverances of religious feeling. 
Hence it was better to test our metaphysical conception 
in the first instance without reference to these other 
notions. But we may now ask ourselves two questions 
which the current reflective theism would answer 
affirmatively : Is God a creator ? and the second 
question, which has already been answered, Is God in 
Space and Time or beyond them, so that he exists 
independently of the process in Time ? In comparing 
the speculative answers to these questions we have 
only to remember that while the immediate deliverances 
of the religious emotion as to what it feels are data for 
science, the same value cannot be set on its semi- 
speculative conceptions about these data. The plain 
man’s attempts at a theory of his experiences have 
indeed a certain value just because they are attempts at 
a theory. But they are not entitled to particular respect 
because they are the plain man’s beliefs. Thus, if a 
man tells me his God is terrible and demands the sacrifice 
of children to appease him, I know what he means by 
God, what kind of an object it is which satisfies his 
religious need. Or if he tells me that God is the father 
in whom he trusts and on whom he leans, I know what 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


397 

he means by God. But If he tells me that God existed 
before the world and created it in so many days in a 
certain order, I recognise here only attempts to formulate 
in scientific terms his conception of the relation of God 
to the universe. Such attempts may vary in value from 
the crudest imaginations of mythology to the profoundest 
doctrines of theology. Moreover, these theories are 
affected in all manner of ways by tradition and even by 
customs which may have survived when their religious 
meaning has been sublimated. At any rate they are 
theories about God, not facts about what God is felt 
to be, facts comparable to the green which we see in 
leaves or to the fragrance of mignonette. In the same 
way it is of the last importance to know men wish to 
be immortal, and why they wish it, that they may be 
reunited with those they love, that they may have the 
opportunity of growing better, that their life and its 
work and happiness may not be snapped off, and the 
like. But it is of comparatively little importance to know 
that they think their soul must be immortal because 
it is immaterial. Thus a metaphysical theory, we may 
be prepared to find, may satisfy religious feeling and 
yet not altogether satisfy the current reflective conceptions 
about God ; and at the same time we may find that in 
spite of this it may offer a better hope of solution of 
some of the practical difficulties of the religious mind. 

Turning then to the first question, whether God is 
a creator, we must say that as being the whole universe 
God is creative, but his distinctive character of deity is 
not creative but created. As embracing the whole of 
Space-Time he is creative ; because Time is the moving 
principle that brings out that constant redistribution in 
the matrix which is equivalent to the birth of finite 
forms. Even then It Is, properly speaking, Space-Time 
itself which Is the creator and not God. The body of 
God includes all the finites which have hitherto been 
evolved in the lapse of time, and what God is creative 
of is not these finites but the next empirical quality of 
deity. It is only when we look back and identify God’s 
body with its previous stages and ultimately with Space- 


Is God 
creative ? 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


God’s 

fatherhood. 


398 

Time itself that we can speak of him as a creator. God 
himself, that is the universe as tending to deity, is 
creative only of deity. On the other hand, deity owes 
its being to the pre-existing finites with their empirical 
qualities, and is their outcome. God then, like all things 
in the universe — for Space-Time itself is not in the 
universe, whereas God, since his deity is a part of the 
universe, is in it — is in the strictest sense not a creator 
but a creature. I need hardly say I do not mean that 
he is a creature of our imagination or of our thought. 
He is an infinite creature of the universe of Space-Time. 

It was this generation of deity from lower stages of 
existence that made intelligible to us the mutual respon- 
siveness of man and God which religion demands. On 
the one hand, we finites reach out to God, who is the 
goal of our desire ; on the other hand, God who is 
sustained by us^ meets us with support and the ^‘solution 
of our uneasiness.’’ Worship is co-operation ; and if 
our sentiment proceeds from a conation adapted to the 
universe in its forward tendency, God in his turn is 
adapted to that conation and satisfies it, and it is as 
satisfying it that we discover his deity. But if this were 
the whole case the fatherhood of God, though it would 
describe the relation of love between the two parties 
to the religious transaction, would be a singularly 
inappropriate expression of God’s relation to us. It 
becomes appropriate when we reflect that God’s deity 
is sustained by the whole world, and that the contribution 
of the individual to it is infinitesimal. Our dependence 
on God, which partly makes us think of him under the 
figure of a father, is our sense of how God gathers up 
for us in his person the whole infinite world to which 
we belong, so that in trusting ourselves to his divinity 
we are aware of our continuity with the whole in its 
divine quality. This is the meaning which may be 

^ Cp. the lines of the song to Italy sung by Vittorla, in Meredith’s 
novel, in the theatre at Milan : 

“ You dedicate your lives 
To her, and you will be 
The food on which she thrives, 

Till her great day arrives.” 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


399 


attached to such phrases as being lifted up in the arms 
of God or lying in Abraham’s bosom. It is the sense of 
resolution into this infinite deity, which represents the 
whole, that lies at the basis of such ideas (I speak 
diffidently as wholly deficient in theology) as grace and 
redemption or forgiveness of sins. At any rate it is this 
mysterious largeness of sustainment in virtue of which 
God is felt as a father where he is so felt. ‘It is not with 
any glance at the order of generation, or if this is so, 
it is either a pictorial representation or a naive reflective 
theory. When we think of God as that to which all 
things owe their existence we are reversing the order of 
fact and are regarding the universe of Space-Time, which 
does create all things, in the light of its highest empirical 
quality, which is not first but last in the order of genera- 
tion. The notion of a creator God is a hybrid blending 
of the creative Space-Time with the created deity. It 
searches for deity by a backward instead of a forward 
view. Accordingly, in its relation to conduct, religion 
does not so much command us to perform our duties 
with the consciousness that they are the commands of 
God, as rather it is religion to do our duty with the 
consciousness of helping to create his deity. 

The question whether God is in Time or out of it 
has been answered explicitly, and is answered implicitly 
by the whole tenor of the inquiry. God’s body is not 
spaceless nor timeless, for it is Space-Time itself. His 
deity is located in an infinite portion of Space-Time, 
and it is in fact essentially in process and caught in the 
general movement of Time. 

The supposed timelcssness of God is responsible 
for certain difficulties in ordinary theism as soon as it 
becomes a little reflective. For God is for it a being, 
not caught in the machinery of the world, but a spectator 
who directs from without. The religious consciousness 
is always troubled with the spectacle of apparently futile 
suffering endured perhaps by the just. If God precedes 
the world (to use a useful but inexact phrase) and all 
things are determined by his will, why should a benevolent 
being not take a course which spares his creatures pain 


God’s 
supposed 
tinudess- 
ncss j 


its diffi- 
culties for 
theism ; 



400 


DEITY 


BK. rv 


The atheistic or anti-theistic chorus in Atalanta in Calydon 
(“ All we are against thee, against thee, O God, most 
high ”) is a classical expression of the human revolt 
against these unintelligible miseries. The believer can 
only shut his door against reflection : “ He hath made 
man thus and he doeth right.” The struggle for mastery 
between two ideals of civilisation has been carried on 
before our eyes at the cost of endless sacrifice of precious 
lives which might we must think have made the world 
better and accelerated knowledge. For those who have 
lived in the midst of this disaster, however much 
illumined on either side by the most exalted and con- 
flicting hopes, how is it possible to rest content with 
the idea of a God who does not share these vicissitudes 
of his creatures but suffers them to exist } The case is 
changed if deity itself is the outcome of the world’s 
movement and in particular, to the extent of their value, 
of the efforts of human beings. It is not God then who 
allows the struggle, but the struggle which is to determine, 
it may be not at once but in the end, what deity is to be ; 
which ideal if either is on the side of the divine. God 
is then not responsible for the miseries endured in 
working out his providence, but rather we are responsible 
for our acts, seeing that on the issue of them depends 
in their measure the character of God. Nor is it otherwise 
than natural that men so engaged should send up their 
prayers to a God whom they suppose to be already 
in being and to favour their particular ideals. They 
embody the forecast of what they hope in a present 
form. The God they pray to is the God to whose nature 
they contribute, but the call of their ideal is the call of 
the universe as a whole as it appeals to them. God 
may be conceived as a being liberated from the course 
of events only because his deity is the tendency of the 
whole world towards which the individual goes out in 
religion as he conceives the outcome of that tendency. 
A created deity makes our human position more serious 
but frees it from the reproach of subjection to arbitrary 
providence. 

Not only is the supposed timelessness of God 



CH. II 


DEITY AND RELIGION 


401 


accountable for these obvious perplexities of the theistic and for 
religious mind in its reflective moods ; it accounts also for 
the purely speculative difficulties of pantheism which 
we have mentioned before. For Spinoza, for instance, 
infinite Space is an attribute of God, and Extension is part 
of God's constitution. But the other attribute which 
our minds can know of God is not Time but Thought. 
Hence since Time is not an essential p:frt of God's 
constitution, no satisfactory account can be given of 
how finite things come into existence. We understand 
why they are resolved into God but not how they 
issue from him. God is the reason or ground of finite 
things, but causality in the proper sense which requires 
Time subsists only in the concatenation of finite things 
with one another, not in their relation to God. Whereas 
if in this scheme we substitute Time for mind, the 
world of finites arises out of the mere restlessness of 
Space-Time. Mind then becomes nothing but a finite 
of a particular empirical rank. It is true also that the 
God or Substance which is Space-Time ceases also to 
be the object of worship — that is, ceases as such with 
mere attributes of Space and Time to be God. He 
needs the empirical quality of deity. The extent of 
such modifications shows how much a great speculative 
system like Spinoza's is disturbed by the alteration of a 
single item.^ 

1 Perhaps the reader will allow me to suggest to him to consider two 
other illustrations of this truth. Let him in the doctrine of the Platonic 
Timaeus introduce 'Lime into the Space of which things are made by the 
Creator. Or let him take Kant’s conception of a pure manifold of intuition, 
and consider what changes are made in it if Space and Time cease to be 
contributions of the mind and forms of sense but are constituents, a priori 
constituents, of things. 



CHAPTER III 


The 

approach to 
deity. 


DEITY AND VALUE 

Religion as a sentiment is thus the sense of outgoing 
to the whole universe in its process towards the quality 
of deity ; and just as Space is apprehended by intuition, 
sensible qualities by sensation, universal by thought, 
and values by appreciation, so God is apprehended 
cognitively through the religious emotion by the assur- 
am:e we call religious faith. However many other 
elements gather around it and swell the full tide of the 
religious sentiment, its essential constituent is something 
with a unique flavour of its own, corresponding to its 
specific object, and is distinct from other emotions, and 
its apprehension of its object distinct from other kinds 
of apprehension. 

13ut the approach to God may be made in various 
ways : through the phenomena of nature, through the 
pursuit of truth, through art, or through morality. Being 
one function of human nature, the religious sentiment 
does not exist in isolation from the rest, but is blended 
and interwoven with them ; and all our experiences 
may in their various degrees be schoolmasters to teach 
us the reality of God. In its primitive form it is the 
religious sense of awe which is felt in the presence of 
natural powers. No irreverence is implied in asserting 
that in its elementary character it is less closely allied to 
morality than to the uneasiness or sensitiveness which 
all persons feel in some degree, and some in a more 
pronounced degree, in the presence of natural mysterious 
occurrences ; like the presentiment of a coming storm, 

402 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


403 

the sensitiveness which some persons feel to the electric 
condition of the atmosphere/ the depression or exaltation 
of feeling with the climate, or that sense which Goethe, 
according to his biographer, professed to have, and which 
he called the ‘‘telluric'' sense, of disturbances taking 
place somewhere in the world. In his case it was a 
feeling which occurred at the same time as aji earthquake 
was afterwards reported to have taken plac^ in Messina. ^ 
The universe in its nisus towards deity acts on the mind 
in a manner more closely allied to the affections produced 
by purely physical conditions than to the feeling of 
goodness or beauty. Though fear of the thunderstorm 
is not itself religion, it may be the occasion of it, and at 
least a person who takes refuge in uncontrollable panic 
from a thunderstorm may with as good right be said to 
be hiding himself from the fxce of God, as one who is 
oppressed with the consciousness of sin. Or it may be 
through aesthetic contemplation that the religious senti- 
ment is first evoked.^ Music and the other arts h^e 
generally formed a part of religious ritual. Or science, 
which, if it brings us knowledge, brings us to the limits 
of knowledge, may impress on the investigator's mind 

1 These moods are real enough with many people, no matter how 

much Dr. Johnson pooh-poohed them. Pie had, says Boswell, till very 
near his death a contempt for the notion that the weather affects the 
human frame (ii. p. 352, ed. Birkbeck Plill, April 14, 1775). “ I'his 

distinction of seasons is produced only by imagination operating on luxury ” 
(quoted from Idlet\ i. 338), “I never felt any difference upon myself 
from eating one thing rather than another, nor from one kind of weather 
rather than another, 'fhere are people, I believe, who feel a difference. 
But I am not one of them ” (iii. 305). There is, as I understand, very good 
explanation of these affections in the condition of the atmosphere at the 
earth’s surface. 

2 Conversations with Eckerma 7 in (Nov. 13, 1823, Eng. transl. p. 36. 
Bohn’s edit.). 

^ Confessions of a Convert (R. PI. Benson), I. § 4, p. 23. ‘‘I began 
to go to communion every week and to attend any other services that I 
could possibly manage — sometimes in the organ - loft, watching the 
mysteries of the keys and stops, sometimes sitting in the stalls. I did not 
in the least appreciate the sermons, though I was vaguely affected by 
Canon Liddon. It was the music first and last, and it was through that 
opening that I first began to catch glimpses of the spiritual world ; and 
my sense of worship was further developed by an absolute passion that I 
conceived for Mr. Shorthouse’s book, John Inglesanty 



404 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


Religion 

and 

conduct. 


the vast beyond which is unknown, so that he feels like 
a child gathering pebbles on the sea-shore. 

Undoubtedly it is conduct which affords the readiest 
approach to religion in any mind removed from the 
primitive. Moreover, even in the primitive mind, religion 
is so linked with social observances that these are part 
of its ritual. Custom is from the beginning hallowed. 
As civilisation grows, ritual observance comes to be 
separated from morality, and the performance of religious 
observances a part of the moral law. At the same time 
moral laws retain for the mind their ancient connection 
with religion and are thought of as ordinances of God. 
Religion and morality are not at first distinguished from 
one another, but are differentiated later. Just in the 
same way the separate branches of science do not exist 
for early thought, but, as in the history of Greek science, 
there is but one science which is philosophy, and from 
thi-j the special sciences gradually get singled out, while 
they still carry with them a fringe of metaphysics which 
they retain to this day. Moreover, there is another 
reason for the intimacy of connection between religion 
and morality. For religion is not a merely personal 
feeling, which exists “in the sanctuary of the heart” but 
is communal. Like conduct, it binds the community 
together in divine observances and it has from the outset 
an institutional character. This raises questions of the 
distinction of religious community from morality which 
may be deferred for a moment.^ But they are doubtless 
right who dwell on the strength of this element ; by 
which, for instance, the Roman Catholic church has 
always profited. The late J. Royce even maintains that 
the explicit recognition of such community was Paul’s 
distinctive contribution to the religious life.^ The inter- 
relation therefore of religion and morality is of the 
closest. 

But though religion and morality begin with union 
and religion always envelops conduct, the sentiment of 

^ Below, p. 41 1. 

* The Problem of Christianity (New York, 1914). 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


405 

religion and the sense of moral value are distinct, in a 
far greater degree than philosophy is distinct from physics 
which was separated out of philosophy. If further proof 
of their distinctness were needed than is found in the 
varieties of approach to religion, it may be found in the 
paradox that the religious sense may exist in an intense 
form in a mind which has no special feeling for goodness, 
ana even in downright bad characters or people who have 
no conscience at all.^ We call such persons hypocrites, 
because their life seems incompatible with* their religion, 
which we think of as also commanding goodness. We 
entertain a natural suspicion of a sentiment which seeks 
nothing but its own satisfaction, without colouring the 
rest of our lives. Yet there is no good reason to doubt 
the sincerity and strength of the feeling towards God 
which they have. Fraud and tartuferie may account for 
some of those cases, but not for all. Per contra^ it is 
common enough to find virtuous persons who are deity- 
blind. Their case is not the average one, because.for 
the reasons mentioned above good conduct is a normal 
avenue to religion. Yet they exist not seldom. Since 
experience then shows that there may be religion without 
virtue, and virtue without religion, we conclude that, 
however closely related, the two sentiments, that for 
deity and that for goodness, are distinct. 

It appears then to be a mistake both in respect of 
fact and in speculation to regard religion as in some way 
an outgrowth from morality. The religious emotion is 
as unique and self-sufficient as hungry appetite or love. 
“ The existence of the religious feeling is only possible 
on the presupposition that men have experienced life, 
truth,, beauty, and goodness. The religious feeling 
comes into operation when these values are compared 
with actual reality.” The over-emphasis which Mr. 
Hoffding, from whose book these words are quoted,^ 
lays on the secondary character of religion in relation to 
goodness among other values is, I believe, a real defect 

1 “Johnson : A wicked fellow is the most pious when he takes to it. 
He’ll beat you all at piety ” {Boswell, iv. p. 289, June 1784)- 

* Philosophy of Religion, p. 113. 


Religion 
not an 
outgrowth 
from 
morality. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


406 


of that admirable workd According to other conceptions 
religion arises at the limits of morality. Morality/' 
says Mr. Bradley, “ is led beyond itself into a higher form 
of goodness. It ends in what we may call religion." ^ It 
is a moral duty not to be moral,"® runs the paradox, and 
this is “the duty to be religious."^ We might equally 
well say that it is a scientific duty to be unscientific, and 
that that is the duty to be religious ; and indeed a great 
number of persons would welcome such a solution of the 
supposed conflict of science and religion. They would 
take it to mean that science herself proclaims that there 
is something beyond what falls under the purview of 
science. Whereas if there is to be, I will not say a 
reconciliation of science and religion, for that would be 
an admission that there ever could be a quarrel, but I will 
say a harmonious connection between science and religion, 
it must be by the simple recognition that there is a fact 
or tendency, that of deity, which is beyond natural or 
human qualities and yet empirical, and that this fact is 
itself included in science in the fullest sense of that term 
as the methodical pursuit of knowledge. 

In the same way the duty to be religious cannot be a 
duty not to be moral. There is in fact no duty to be 
religious any more than there is a duty to be hungry.^ 
The religious sentiment arises from a brute or crude 
instinct, or if the fitness of the term instinct be questioned, 
a brute conation of human nature. I mean by calling 
it a brute instinct not that it is on the level of bodily 
instincts, for it is the highest we possess in so far as it 
aims at the most perfect object ; but only that it is given 
in our constitution, and that it is not, as it were, something 
which needs morality or art to reveal to us, but, ©n the 

1 “ Religious judgments therefore are secondary judgments of value ; 
ill comparison with the primary judgments of value in which the first 
two groups of values find expression, they arc derivative’^ {ib. p. 107). 
The two groups of values are, those connected with self-assertion, and 
the moral, intellectual, and aesthetic values. 

2 Appearance and Reallfy, p. 438. 

3 Ibid. p. 436. 

^ Ibid. p. 441. 

^ There is not even a duty to eat, but only to eat neither too much 
nor too little. 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


407 


contrary, is merely stimulated to action through these 
among other means. The only reasonable sense in 
which there is a duty to be religious is that the instinct 
should be gratified, like any other, to the extent to which 
such satisfaction is compatible with the rest of our nature 
and the claims of others ; that consequently we may have 
duties of religious observances towards others with whom 
we are united in a community of worship, a duty of 
letting other persons alone if they differ from our own 
religious beliefs or have none, and a duty* of recognising 
in the case of persons specially gifted for religion a special 
function in society which is their contribution to the 
good of it, just as we recognise special functions in those 
who are gifted for art or science. But all such religious 
duty is not a duty not to be moral but, on the contrary, 
part of moral duty, which includes the tendency towards 
God as one of the emotions which may be subject to 
social regulation. 

“ Like love, like wrath, like hope, ambition, jealojjsy, 
like every other instinctive eagerness and impulse,” says 
James of religion, in a striking passage, “ it adds to life 
an enchantment which is not rationally or logically 
deducible from anything else. ... If religion is to 
mean anything definite for us, it seems to me we ought 
to take it as meaning this added dimension of emotion, 
this enthusiastic temper of espousal, in regions where 
morality strictly so called can only bow the head and 
acquiesce.” ^ Hence it is that in our experience the sense 
of religion is distinguishable from the enthusiasm and 
passion with which we may regard nature, or beauty, or 
morality, or truth. These passions may be happiness 
enough in the lives of some and serve them in place of 
religion, but they are not the religious passion and only 
simulate it.^ Morality may be penetrated with religion, 
but by itself is not a substitute for it. In other words, 
were it not for the brute sentiment for deity we should 
never arrive at religion from thinking of the problems 

1 Varieties of Religious Experience^ p. 48. 

^ Those admirable institutions, the Ethical Societies, do not for that 
reason seem to me to supply a really adequate solution of the problem. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Deity and 
goodness. 


408 

that arise in our moral life. On the other hand, the 
passion for deity being there, it seizes on the moral and 
other values, treats them as conditions to the enjoyment 
of itself, and offers a solution of the problems which they 
present. Hence, since all human interests are interwoven, 
it is no wonder if religion reinforces morality, and if the 
men of experience and insight are perhaps in the right 
who say that 'but for the sanctions of religion men would 
be even less virtuous than they are. And in its turn, 
the consciousness of right doing may become itself 
religious and that of wrong doing take on the colour of 
sinfulness, and further than that, however much we may 
strive to do good and the more we do so, the more acute 
and lively may become the sense of our failing, not in 
the eyes of men, but of the being in front of us, towards 
whom our brute instinct impels us. 

The sense of deity having thus been described as in 
its ..fundamental character a feeling of our going out 
towards the world in a new and higher quality than that 
of mind or any of the tertiary qualities which have been 
called values, I must attempt to explain the relation of 
deity to value, and in particular to goodness which is our 
practical value, and in that sense the highest human value 
since good conduct takes in all our tendencies, including 
even the religious one. I shall try to show that deity, 
though not equivalent to goodness, is on the side of good- 
ness. In a striking formula Mr. Floffding has defined 
religion as' the faith in the conservation of values. God 
is the principle of that conservation, and religious feeling 
is felt in the comparison of value with reality. My 
criticism of this conception is not that it is untrue, "for it 
is true and of the highest importance, but that it is too 
reflective and describes rather something which is true 
of religion than what religion is. The faith of religion 
was, as we saw, a faith in the existence of deity, not in the 
conservation of value ; and we do not need a faith in the 
conservation of valuable existence to tell us that we are 
sustained by something greater than ourselves, for this 
is an immediate consciousness evoked in our preadapted 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


409 


nature by the world of reality itself. But inquiry into 
this object of faith, God, does show us that deity is 
in the line of value ; and I find myself regretfully ex- 
pressing dissent from this writer, while seeming to say 
the same thing, on the ground that he appears to me to 
do less than justice to the immediately felt reality of God. 

I shall use value in the more restricted sense of the tertiary 
qualities, rather than his more general seifte of anything 
that brings satisfaction. 

In the first place deity is not itself a value, for values Deity not a 
are human inventions and deity is ultra-human. Deity 
belongs to the order of perfection and not to that of value. 

It may be well to recall how these conceptions differ. 

Value is contrasted with unvalue ; goodness with evil. 

But perfection is a notion based on the empirical fact 
that there are various types of good life, comparable, as 
we saw, to the various types of successful animals or 
plants, which can be arranged in their order of complexity 
or development. For example, there is a primitivejype 
of social life with its corresponding individual virtues 
which satisfies the social needs of man under elementary 
conditions ; which, for instance, respects life within a 
family or tribe, keeps faith within defined limits, allows 
of marriage within certain degrees of affinity determined 
by rules. Here we have an organisation of simple needs 
which to us appears so crude, because while on the one 
hand it includes so little, on the other hand it runs into 
such complex detail, as in the marriage laws described by 
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen among certain native tribes 
of South Australia. Proceeding a stage higher to a 
semi-barbarous civilisation like that of ancient Greece, 
we find a code much more advanced, governed by the 
principle of social life within a city-state, but still bearing 
traces of its proximity to early notions in being a rule of 
custom or status. In contrast with it, the moral type of 
the modern man, affected as it is so largely by Christian 
conceptions, appears free and, in Kant’s language, self- 
legislative ; though it is as important not to exaggerate 
the contrast as not to ignore it. At any rate the type of 
the free individual is more developed or perfect than the 



410 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


type of custom, and it implies, as Green showed, a greater 
extension in the range of persons to whom duties are 
owing and a completer organisation of the moral life. 
Again amongst men of the same age there are national 
distinctions of moral type, and of these we cannot or 
may not be able to say that any one of them is bad, but 
only that one may be more perfect than another, or that 
they are equally perfect. The idea of perfection is 
founded on these differences of development. But 
while there are grades of perfection, there are not grades 
of value. Value is at any stage the distinction between 
what on that level is fitting and what is defeated in the 
contrast or struggle with it. 

Deity belongs to the order of perfection. It is a 
quality, and God who possesses it is a being on a higher 
level of existence in the nature of things. The order of 
the empirical qualities is one of perfection, and values 
are evolved within the level of mind, and indeed with 
proj^cr qualifications within every level. God is for us 
the highest being in the universe, but he cannot be called 
the highest value, for there is no unvalue with which he 
can be contrasted. As the universe flowering into deity, 
God has no rival, just as on the level of mind there is no 
such quality as ^;/mind. It is only when deity is realised 
and actual and there are finite deities, that value may arise 
amongst these gods or angels. Satan and his fellows 
are bad angels, who misconduct themselves angelically; 
their deising breaks the rules of the angelic game. 
There is a good speculative meaning in this fiincy, for 
value breaks out wherever there is finite existence of 
however high a level. But if deity is realised, we have 
passed beyond the conception of actual God, the infinite 
world tending to deity ; and God for the angels is an 
infinite being still transcending them in quality. 

It is a tempting hypothesis to construe God in terms 
of value, and, neglecting his characteristic quality of deity, 
to think of him as representing in the universe the line 
of values, from subhuman ‘ values ’ upwards. He would 
then be the linked succession of types, varying in their 
perfection, which have demonstrated their value whether 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


41 1 

in the natural or the human world by defeating their 
rivals, the line of values as distinct from the chaos of 
unvalues. This Manichaean conception divides the 
universe between good and evil, between God and Devil. 
Tempting as the conception is, it will not bear examination. 

It allows indeed for the intimate connection of God with 
goodness in all its stages. But it destroys the connection 
of God with the totality of things. Moreover, there is 
no such clear-cut continuity in values as is here supposed. 

For a higher value may make use of what on a lower 
level is unvalue. God may use Satan to his own purposes. 
Elements emerge from the chaos of evil and are built up 
into good, as crops are nourished by excrement, or as 
one animal type may feed on the weaklings of a lower 
type which are not swift enough to escape. If the whole 
universe is, according to our conception, the body of God, 
this difficulty does not arise, for evil and good are present 
there together. 

Mention has been made above of the communal or The . 
institutional element in religion, and it might seem as if 
in separating religion from morality, and refusing to ioiii;ion. 
rank religion with values, I was contradicting myself. 

But the community which is established by religion is 
of a different sort from the moral community. The moral 
community is an organisation of individuals who, though 
they have in general similar needs, differ from each other 
in all manner of ways, not merely in the degree in which 
they feel these needs, but in their fitness for the perform- 
ance of tasks useful to the society. Hence even in the 
simplest social communities, the problem of morality is 
to sacure such a distribution of satisfactions as shall make 
the society happiest and most efficient. If good conduct 
consisted merely in a general observance of certain rules 
equally general — be temperate, be brave, be truthful, 
and the like — it would be far easier of attainment than it 
is. What matters is the discovery of how much and 
what each individual is to do according to his instincts 
and appetites in order to be temperate, truthful, brave, 
and the like. However much the broad lines of conduct 



412 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


agree for all individuals, each of them is different from 
the rest, and each according to his place has a par- 
ticular contribution to make to the common good. Now 
religious community is not an organisation of differing 
individuals so much as a union of them to support and 
sustain each other in an identical service. It is com- 
parable to the gathering of persons together for meals, 
and indeed this conception of convivial assembly plays 
an important part in many religions, and religion has, I 
believe, been thought by some to arise out of such gather- 
ings. Though religion does not exist only “in the 
sanctuary of the heart,” the community is still one of 
individuals as “ congregated in that personal capacity.” 
In the famous passage from which I am quoting,^ Burke 
goes on to speak of religious observances by individuals 
in their corporate capacity as members of a civil society, 
where religion has been recognised as one of the expres- 
sions of social sentiment and has received its place in 
the national life. But in the merely religious congregation 
which is the foundation of institutions of religion, there 
is common worship but there is not the mutual criticism 
which organises men into a moral society. There is of 
course, however, organisation in religious institutions 
when different parts are allotted to persons in a religious 
community, in the distinction of laity and clergy and of 
clerical hierarchy, and specific moral obligations may 
arise within the congregation out of this, just as in a 
convivial gathering there may a host or a symposiarch. 

Deity on The question whether deity is or includes goodness, 

thc si.icof commoner question whether God is good, have 

now been answered. Deity is a type or perfection 
transcending human goodness (or truth or beauty), and 
any lower form of valuable life and different in its quality. 
To call God himself good is, if we think of his deity, a 
wholly inadequate designation, only legitimate because 
we use human terms and mean by it that God is the 
highest perfection. On the other hand, if we are thinking 
of him as the whole world with a soul of deity he is neither 
^ Trench Revolution, p. 115 (ed. Payne, Oxford, 1877). 



CH. in 


DEITY AND VALUE 


413 


good nor evil, for in his body he includes both. This, 
as we saw, was one of the reasons why a pantheistic God 
fails of satisfying the religious mind. But though as 
deity God is beyond good and evil, his deity is on the 
side of goodness. For goodness, whether we are con- 
sidering the human values or the subhuman values, is 
the character of the permanent as opposed to the im- 
permanent contrasted evil. The universe works in 
experience so as to secure the survival of good, or rather 
that which survives in the long run in the contest 
establishes its value thereby and is good. To repeat a 
saying already quoted, “ morality is the nature of things.” 
The history by which new types of finites come into 
existence is, we have seen, the natural history of values. 

Now the victory of the lower type which is good 
makes possible the rise of its successor on the higher 
level. The higher lives by making use of its predecessors, 
and so the succession of types presents the appearance, 
when we use human analogies, of having been arranged 
or designed by some superior power for the sake of its 
highest type. Space-Time itself, by virtue of its own 
nisus, elaborates without forethought a “ hierarchy of 
ministration ” which if it were produced by mind would 
imply a vast and all-wise forethought or providence. If 
we apply to the new quality of deity what we learn from 
the succession of lower empirical qualities, we conclude 
by analogy that the process by which good overcomes 
evil in the region of mind is one of the conditions of the 
emergence of deity ; so far, that is, as human endeavour 
contributes to the generation of this quality. Thus 
goodness or good will is material on which deity is built, 
and deity is in the line of goodness not of evil. Or we 
may put the matter otherwise thus, still following the 
biological and moral precedents. Good will and each 
lower form of ‘ goodness ’ are types adapted to the world 
under the conditions of which their existence is carried on. 
Such adaptation carries with it the victory over ill-adapted 
types, which are evil. Deity is the distinctive quality 
of the higher type of perfection in this line of forms. 

It will be answered that, after all, evil exists, and 



414 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


Compel ison 
with life. 


since the world is the body of God, evil cannot be 
dismissed from the nature of God. But the assertion 
we have made is not that evil does not exist in God — on 
the contrary it has been maintained to exist there, in 
God’s body — but only that God’s deity is on the side of 
good and not on the side of evil. The reason why this 
conception, difficult as it is, is necessary, is that God is 
infinite, whereas the beings in the struggle and contrast 
between which the distinction of good and bad and all 
other values is ,born are finite. Consequently the finite 
being, whether merely living body, or conscious one, or 
society, is distinct in space and time from or external to 
its rivals ; or in so far as it is healthy puts away from 
itself its disused or dead parts, or protects itself against 
disease by inflammation and the destruction of the 
noxious element. There is a Space outside into which 
these excrements can be discharged and maintain an 
independent existence. But since God is infinite there 
is no extrusion possible beyond his limits ; there is no 
Space outside him. 

We may for clearness and fulness put the case thus, 
still preserving our imaginative figure of an infinite being 
with infinite deity existing in it, though we know that 
his deity is a tendency rather than an achievement. 
Deity in the universe as a whole is like life in a healthy 
body. I.ifc is equivalent to a certain portion or con- 
stellation of the material processes which make up the 
whole body, the remainder being not living processes 
and yet essentially subserving the living portion of them. 
Now life means also the continual death of parts of the 
body and the exclusion of material which is no longer 
utilisable in that form. All living involves partial death. 
But the life resides not in the disused elements but in 
the parts which remain and are active. Life, then, is on 
the side of material elements in the body which are organic 
to it. In the same way it not only excretes and gets rid 
of useless material, as in the excrement of food, but it 
rids itself of poisons which its own functions generate, 
clearing the blood and the muscles by expiration and 
transpiration ; and so far as its powers extend it makes 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


415 


disease innocuous. So too the individual mind suppresses 
or diverts unhealthy activities and the society reforms 
or at need suppresses its unhealthy members. 

In the same sense, deity is on the side of that which 
it uses, or so far as it is utilisable, and not on the side of 
that which it discards. If we consider deity in its relation 
to its immediately lower level of mental existence, we 
shall think of it as equivalent to some form of goodness 
(that is of permanent mental, not necessarily human, life) 
and sustained by other kinds of mental process just as 
mind is equivalent to certain vital processes and is 
sustained by others. Thus the maintenance of the life 
of deity means also the death or discarding of certain 
parts of its basis, that is, certain forms of mental life. 
Now in the case of the finite the discarded material is 
ejected outside itself and goes on existing elsewhere. 
But since the mental existence which is discarded in the 
life of deity is retained in the body of God, and cannot 
go on existing independently outside him, it must be 
regarded as that kind of mental existence which, as such, 
that is, in the form which it now possesses, is impermanent. 
That is to say, it is the evil mental life, which does not 
maintain itself in the struggle with good, but passes into 
lower forms. The material excreted from a finite living 
body, e.g. carbonic acid, is still material which may 
persist, and it is not bad material. But the ‘ material ’ 
which deity discards cannot persist as such, cannot be 
good mental life, or it would be used up to sustain deity. 
It suffers therefore dissolution in its character of mental 
existence, and can be used again only when it has been 
“ unmade to be remade,” ^ and may again be taken up and 
utilised for the purposes of deity ; as the corruption of 
a battlefield may serve the growth of crops and ultimately 
be made serviceable for good human life. Thus both 
in the case of the finite and the infinite being, there is 
an internal selection which results in the creation of 
waste products. But whereas in the case of finites the 
waste is not the evil of the lower stage, but only material 
which is not utilisable for the higher stage ; in the case 
Adapted from Browning ; see below, p. 420, note. 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


Faith in 
the con- 
servation of 
value. 


Religion as 
faith in 
deity. 


416 

of the infinite divine being, the waste is equivalent to 
the evil of the lower stage. 

What has been said here more particularly with 
regard to goodness applies also to the other human values 
of truth and beauty. Good in all of these directions is 
directly utilisable for the life of deity, while evil appears 
as that which deity discards, which accordingly needs 
transformation before it can be utilised. Since deity is 
equivalent to some complex of mind, just as mind is 
equivalent to some complex of life, deity is not only the 
next higher quality to mind, but grows out of mind and 
out of valuable mental life, for this is the mental life 
which is permanent and can give rise to higher existence. 
Deity is in the line of mental values and grows out of 
them. But human values are only one example of value, 
a notion which essentially marks the fitness of what is 
valuable to persist in the one reality of things, or, as it 
was put before, the return of the isolated finite into 
communion with reality. In this wider sense of value, 
deity remains next to mental and even human values, 
but it is also in the line of all value, and our values are but 
its proximate material. In this sense deity represents 
the conservation of all values or valuable existence what- 
ever, and is an outgrowth from them. All values are 
conserved in God’s deity. 

Important as this proposition is, it does not entitle 
us to say that religion is faith in the conservation of value. 
Religion is faith in deity, or in God with the quality of 
deity ; and deity, when we come to make reflection upon 
it, is seen to be in the line of value. But the religious 
sense is something more primitive and crude, and needs 
to be described as it is actually experienced, not as it is 
reflected about. I am so anxious not to seem captious, 
and at the same time to insist that deity is a quality and 
not a value, that I will linger yet awhile upon the topic. 
In its essence religious sentiment is not a matter of value 
or appreciation at all. It is the crude recognition on 
the part of, a mind that there is something with a dis- 
tinctive quality above his own distinctive quality of mind. 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


417 


It is like the apprehension of colour or life, except that 
we cannot say what the new quality is like, for it is not 
revealed to sense or thought. We are only sure that it 
is there. Reflection shows it to be the outcome of our 
values ; but at the same time to be in the line of all 
value whatever, whether human value or living value or 
natural value. Deity is even for reflection the conserva- 
tion not merely of what is precious to us, but of what is 
precious to itself everywhere. 

Hence it is that, though deity is seen on reflection to 
be born proximately from the human values of truth and 
goodness and beauty, the sense of it is not the claim for 
their conservation but something simpler, the sense of 
a new quality above man, to which the whole world tends. 
Consequently it may be stirred by other aspects of the 
world than what are valuable in the eyes of man. The 
rascal or profligate, to revert to him, who has a sense of 
religion, is not moved by morality, but is moved by deity. 
The cruder mind is inspired by the elemental forces 
of nature, storm and light, or the sun, or life in the trees. 
For it is not the mere sublimity of the thunder nor the 
glory of the sun, in their aesthetic value, which stirs him, 
but the recognition of the godhead to which they tend. 
These are as much contained in God’s body as human 
beings with their claims for satisfactions. The finite 
body does but adapt itself to these fundamental powers; 
but in God’s infinite body they are actually contained 
and are part of his organic life. Deity is the outcome 
of the onward sweep of all that is persistent and counts 
in the economy of the world. Human values are but 
the apex of that movement. Any facet of the advancing 
column of values may make the directer appeal to the 
mind, according to its capacity. 

The difference and at the same time the connection 
between deity and value may be expressed in more 
comprehensive and fundamental terms by reverting to 
the real nature of value which was recalled a moment 
ago. The establishment of value and the extirpation of 
unvalue is the sign of adaptation. Value means in its 
simplest terms that the individual or type, any function 

VOL. II 2 E 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


418 


of which is valuable, is not self-dependent entirely but 
in its independence belongs to the whole Space-Time 
of which it is a complex. Unvalues are indeed realities, 
but in their iinvaluable form do not fit in with the world 
of empirical things generated within the whole Space- 
Time and cannot therefore persist in the measure assigned 
empirically to their kind. There would be value if the 
nisus in Space-Time stopped or could be imagined 
stopping, say at mind. Now the hierarchy of qualities 
arises out of the restlessness of Space-Time and depends 
therefore on a different fundamental feature from value. 
At the same time, since value is the persistent type of 
existence, it is only in so far as value is established that 
the nisus forward becomes effective in the generation of 
a new quality. Every being has value or unvalue as 
part of the whole Space-Time ; it has the nisus to a 
higher form in so far as it contributes to the general 
nisus of the world. Thus to take our human case, we 
are good in so far as we cease to be isolated, for “ morality 
is the nature of things.” We help to the creation of 
deity in so far as through our goodness we are qualified 
to share in the universal bent towards a higher quality. 

There is a further consequence of the difference 
between deity as a quality in the hierarchy of qualities 
and the idea of value. Good and great men seem to us 
to have in them something divine, and the description 
is just if it is taken to mean that, being better and greater 
than the rest of us, they point the way to deity, and 
prepare the way as leaders in the human contribution 
to the world-endeavour. Even God himself does not 
as actual God possess deity attained, but only the nisus 
towards it. Men of transcendent gifts of perfection are 
thus in their degree exemplars of this nisus. The 
description is false if it means that they in any sense 
possess the divine quality or even adumbrate it. Deity 
on such conception would be no more than the perfection 
of manhood, whereas it is something which transcends 
in kind the most transcendent manhood. The ordinary 
theism, therefore, when it postulates a human inter- 
mediary between us and a God who is conceived as 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


419 


endowed with deity actually attained, acts consistently 
in believing the intermediator to be more than man, 
human and divine at once — purchasing consistency at 
the cost of interposing the conception of a miraculous 
person without parallel in the world. 

Value is in the above sense conserved in deity. But 
withal we have to recognise that, not in deity, but in 
God, unvalues also are contained ; not merely badness 
and ugliness and error but in the end a’l impermanent 
forms of finite existence. At the same time this recogni- 
tion secures a better understanding of the place of evil. 
For since God’s deity ‘ represents ’ his whole body, evil 
which forms a part of that body is contemplated by God 
as a part of that body on which also his deity, in which 
there is no evil, is based ; and secondly, evil is implicated 
in the life of his deity, since all life carries with it death. 
Though God’s deity is in the line of value, it involves 
evil as well as good in its substructure. Evil is, therefore, 
redeemed as part of God’s being, of the matter of him. 
And since the whole of his body supports his deity, 
what is evil from the point of view of the lower or material 
level (the human level) undergoes change so as to support 
the divine. On the human level, only such transforma- 
tion is possible as means reform. The evil which has 
been done or thought or felt is not undone by reformation.^ 
But in being discarded and remade it becomes utilisable 
for deity. Thus evil is at once a reality and has its finite 
existence, and by being resolved into the infinite whole 
out of which it sprang it undergoes alteration into value. 
This corresponds with what we learnt before as to 
unvalue, that it is the human and wilful distortion of 
what is real. Error and ugliness and wickedness are 
finite realities and remain as such unvalues, in the body 
of God. But perishing in that form they are used up 
in a changed form for the purposes of deity. We have 
here the foundation for reflective religious ideas of 
ultimate redemption of evil in all its shapes by purgation 
or other process whereby God “ unmakes but to remake 
^ Cp. J. Royce, Problem of Christianity, vol. i. pp. 259 ff. 


Cdiiserva- 
tion ol evi'. 



420 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


the soul.” ‘ It remains that deity is neither good nor 
evil, not a value at all but a new perfection, in which so 
long as it is infinite and an ideal there is no distinction 
of values. But God considered as his body contains 
both evil and good, though as a whole he is neither, 
since terms of value belong only to finites. 

The I find I have, almost unawares and without intention, 

problem of drawn into the ancient problem, as it is called, of 
the existence o^evil, and half tremble at my own audacity. 
What I venture to add here is that the problem is indeed 
insoluble either so long as, on the purely pantheistic 
conception, deity is conceived to animate all parts of the 
world alike, and not rather that part which in due time 
is fitted to carry deity ; or so long as, in purely theistic 
doctrines, God is regarded as separate from his world, 
and existing perfect independently of it, and for imagina- 
tive purposes before it. But the problem becomes less 
of a mystery when Time is conceived to be essential to 
God, deity and body alike, and when deity is regarded 
as an outgrowth from lower empirical qualities and 
succeeding them in time. “ Evil, O Glaucon,” says 
Socrates in Plato’s dialogue, “ will not vanish from the 
earth.” How should it if it is the name of the imper- 
fection through whose defeat the perfect types acquire 
their value i 

Our revolt against the existence of evil appears to 
me to spring from two sources, a theoretical fault and 
a defect of temper. The theoretical fault is that of 
emancipating God from Time. If God allows evil to 
exist we ask why he did not make the world otherwise. 
But if God’s deity is sustained by our goodness and our 
evil is what deity discards, we should in asking the 
question be reversing the order of things. God is 

^ Tht Ring and the Book (the Pope is summing up his sentence on 
Guido) ; 

“ Else I avert my face, nor follow him 
Into that sad, obscure, sequestered state 
Where God unmakes but to remake the soul 
He else made first in vain : which must not be.” 

11 . 2 I 20-12. 



CH. in 


DEITY AND VALUE 


421 


helpless to prevent evil, for his deity is the outgrowth 
of good, and God does not foresee the evil or the good, 
but so far as he is equivalent to the whole world is 
himself the theatre of the contest between value and 
unvalue. It is just so far as deity is a quality which 
we project in front of us, and on empirical grounds 
are justified in so doing, that God helps us to support 
values, through the direct impact of the whole world 
in its divine tendency upon our individual minds, or 
through the corresponding subjective condition of 
religion and prayer. But no theoretic consideration 
sustains the belief in a God who precedes his universe. 
Design we have seen is the effect of Time, successive 
forms making use of their predecessors and perishing 
if they cannot. The other evidence of providence, that 
men’s purposes are so often turned to an issue which 
they have not imagined, proves indeed that men’s 
purposes are finite and that the whole is greater than 
its parts and may exhibit features beyond their ’ken, 
but does not prove a pre-existing overruling purpose. 
Theoretically, too, it seems to follow, as I have attempted 
to show, that evil is in a certain manner redeemed and 
made subservient to deity. Evil has often been likened 
to a discord which has been resolved. It must be added 
that both such discord and the passage in which it 
occurs are alike music. But there is no resolution of the 
discord which is evil and unmusical on the level on 
which good and evil both exist. The resolution, so far 
as it is effected, is effected on the higher level. The 
evil remains done, but by perishing in its evil form it 
may subserve deity. The discord remains a discord, 
but .here is no discord in the higher quality, which it 
subserves but does not enter into as an ingredient. I 
need not do more than refer to what was said before 
of the difference between this new quality and some 
form of spirit such as is assumed on the hypothesis of 
the current idealism. 

The defect of temper which I suggested is the 
disinclination to accept the facts of experience which 
do not accord with our wishes. If indeed this is a 



422 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


fault ; for it is partly at least the reverse side of the 
virile resolution to overcome evil, a resolution which 
finds vent in impatience that there should be evil to 
overcome. Partly it is, however, mere indignation at 
disagreeableness, and imputation of the wrong to God, 
the spirit of the little boy who angrily asks. Why did 
God make nettles ? when his bare legs are stung by them. 
Partly, again, it has its fairer side in the shame we feel 
at our own weakness, and in pity for the weakness or 
distress of others. But I am speaking of the temper 
which makes the presence of evil an insoluble problem, 
and this is the temper which believes that there must 
be something amiss or else inscrutably right in a world 
which is so full of pain and bad will. The facts of 
experience are that we are children of the very nature 
which sometimes overwhelms us, and are suckled at her 
breasts ; that the permanent and adapted forms of life 
are discovered by experiment accompanied by prodigal 
loss; that goodness itself is the issue of such experimenta- 
tion made to discover what form of social adjustment 
is best able to satisfy our wants under the helps and 
hindrances of our non-human surroundings. We cannot 
say that it is good or bad that it should be so ; we can 
only accept.^ Such acceptance of fact is not the same 
thing as practical acquiescence. On the contrary the 
intellectual acquiescence is the incentive to the practical 
effort for amelioration, in accordance with our impulse 
to mould things to the heart’s desire. And if it is not 
submissive resignation to an inscrutable will, neither is 
it the belief that evil is created in order to brace our 
spirits to exertion. There is no overruling and pre- 
existing purpose in the world upon which we should 
throw the blame for what we cannot help, or which we 
need thank for its subtle device of helping us by pain, 
still less of selecting a few who should profit by the 
pain of others and feel their own happiness enlarged 
thereby, as the blessed are said to feel in Augustine’s 
heaven. The temper of acquiescence is at the same 

^ Cp., again, Meredith’s poem, ‘ Outer and Inner ’ in ^ Reading of 
Earth, 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


423 


time the temper which impels to amelioration without 
the fond expectation that the springs of pain will ever 
be sealed ; and when it takes in the relation of God to 
the world, it prompts the recognition that this same 
attempt at betterment is at once implanted in us by the 
Space-Time out of which we are precipitated, and secures 
the deity to which the world is tending. 

I may as well introduce here what few remarks I immor- 
can make on the subject of immortality, which for some 
reason appears always to be considered an eminent 
interest in religion. For here too we seem to have 
prejudices of theory and temper. The subject is not 
easy to handle, for no one would care to wound the 
sentiment of longing to rejoin in a future life our com- 
panions in this life. “ If our ideals,” says Wm. James,^ 

“ are only cared for in ‘ eternity ’ I do not see why we 
might not be willing to resign their care to other hands 
than ours.” The mere desire that we feel to be present 
ourselves and continue our work begun here, admirable 
as it is, because the passion to do things ourselves is at 
the root of all our endeavours, cannot overrule the facts 
of our apparent limitation to the time and place of our 
bodily life. The data do not allow us to suppose, so 
far as we have seen, that our minds, even if we believe 
that they only use the body as an instrument, do exist 
without the instrument, and we are certainly not 
entitled because of our desire of a continued existence 
(possessed by different persons in very different degrees 
of strength, and by some not at all) to influence our 
metaphysics of mind, so as to support a thesis which 
would lend itself to that wish. For that wish of continued 
existence may be replaced, and perhaps with greater 
humanity, by resigning our work to others, as we are 
accustomed to do here, when the occasion demands. 

Wish for a future life is not on the same footing as 
the sentiment of religion ; for there the object of the 
sentiment could be traced in the actual experienced 
world in its solicitation of the mind. But the future 
^ Varieties, p. 524. 



424 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


life cannot be known from experience unless the con- 
tinued existence of our minds after death can be 
established experimentally. Failing such demonstration, 
we do no injustice to this desire if we suppose it to be, 
like so much of our more definite religious beliefs, an 
attempt to convey something else in a form more obvious 
to our minds. Accordingly it may be a more personal 
and egotistic way of expressing the continuance of our 
work by others in a tradition of effort. Such tradition 
of an enterprise through many generations is accredited 
by experience. The personal continuance of our lives 
beyond the life of our bodies is fully accredited by 
none. Pending the experimental evidence I cannot but 
think that not only must we acquiesce in what we know 
and find our account therein as we well can do, but also 
we are bound to scrutinise the evidence presented to us 
with more than ordinary rigour, and not rather to accept 
it with more than ordinary welcome because it happens 
to acrord with a wish. I can only repeat what I have said 
before, that should the extension of mind beyond the 
limits of the bodily life be verified, so that a mind can 
either act without a body or may shift its place to some 
other body and yet retain its memory, the larger part of 
the present speculation will have to be seriously modified 
or abandoned. 

With this temper of belief there goes in this question 
a certain theoretical prejudice which is I think erroneous. 
The conservation of value might be understood to mean 
the persistence of myself because my life is valuable or a 
value. But to hold this seriously would be to be misled 
by a phrase and to neglect experience. For values arise 
in the contest of types and are established among fi.iitcs 
by inheritance and tradition. They are exhibited in 
individuals, for types are always so embodied. Thus 
the conservation of value is attained in fact, not through 
persistence of one valuable individual but, as James puts 
it, through conservation of his ideal. If we are to follow 
the clue of experience, we must therefore believe that 
theoretically the claim for the future life is founded on 
error. We must content ourselves with the continuance 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


425 


of species rather than of persons, and I must add that to me 
at least this limitation of desire seems not only imposed 
on us by such knowledge as we have, but is practically 
a higher object of desire. And if mere continuance of 
human ideals does not satisfy us, for nature may involve 
the physical destruction of mind, there is the other and 
higher satisfaction of thinking that the persistence of 
our human effort in tradition is doing the work of pre- 
paring deity, according to the well-justified phrase, in 
God's good time and, it must be added, pLce. 

There is an old question * whether God suffers pain Deity nn.i 
or is on the contrary completely happy. It sounds at 
first as remote as some of the metaphysical puzzles of 
the schoolmen which are so often held up to ridicule. 

Yet it is not without real significance, and the answer, 
which is on the same lines as that to the question of God’s 
goodness, helps to make clearer the position that God, 
regarded as the infinite ideal, is of the same structure, 
body and mind, as we and all existents and Space-Time 
itself. Pain exists in the body of God as moral evil does, 
that is, in so far as God includes within his body the 
creatures which suffer pain, with whom for whatever 
reason there is defect or hindrance in the performance 
of their functions. But in God’s deity there is no pain, 
nor anything corresponding to it. Neither is there 
pleasure, if pleasure means the feeling of agreeableness 
which we have when our work goes on without let or 
hindrance. 

We saw reason to believe that pleasure and pain 
belong to the organic order in the case of ourselves ; 
they are not modifications of consciousness but are 
vital conditions which we contemplate or are conscious 
of, much in the same way as we are conscious of hunger. 

Still less does pleasure or pain belong to deity in its 
character of deity. On the other hand, as life is to mind 
so is mind to deity, and deity is equivalent to some 
complex of mental activities. Deity might be supposed 

^ It is raised of the Absolute and discussed by Mr. Bradley in 
Appearance and Reality, ch. xxvii. pp. 533-5 ; also ch. xiv. pp. 157-8. 



426 


DEITY 


BK. IV 


Dificrcncr 
of God nnd 
finilea in 
respect of 
feeling. 


then to possess something analogous to our consciousness 
of pleasure or pain which we call feeling, in so far as 
deising is or Is not subject to let or hindrance in its goings 
on. The first alternative cannot be adopted. We may 
therefore adopt the Aristotelian saying that God enjoys 
continuous pleasure. Such pleasure is comparable to 
the pleasures of sight and smell, if Plato is right in calling 
them pure or unmixed pleasures because they are not a 
relief from pain ; but it is so doubtful whether pleasure 
would be so feh if there were no antecedent craving for 
them, as when the eyes have been in darkness, that the 
comparison is merely a help and nothing more. 

The reason of this difterence between God and 
ourselves is the' old one that God’s deity is infinite as 
well as his body, though it is lodged only in a portion of 
that body. Now painfulness (and pleasantness as well 
in the way in which we experience it) means finitude. 
The obstruction may arise from without or it may arise 
from within the body or the mind. But what makes 
pain is the threat to the destruction of our pattern of 
existence, to the retention of the equilibrium required 
by the maintenance of our organic or individual character. 
To an infinite being there can be no such menace. There 
is no form which it has to maintain in the face of other 
beings. The conditions do not here exist upon which 
painfulness and pleasantness depend. 

In his work on ethics, von Hartmann spoke of man’s 
goodness as a co-operation of man with God, whereby 
man helps to assuage God’s suffering.’ This conception 
is based on the pessimistic dogma that pain is positive 
and pleasure merely negative relief from pain. I do 
not mention his saying here for that reason, in order 
to point out by the way how contradictory to fact is the 
conclusion of pessimism that non-existence is preferable 
to existence. For it makes choice, which is directed to 
securing permanent existence and therefore to what 
brings pleasure, choose annihilation of pleasure, and 
impermanent existence. What experience informs us 

^ Phcinomenologie des sittUchen Bewusstseins (Berlin, 1879), last 
chapter, esp. pp. 868 IT. 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


427 


is, not that there is more pleasure than pain or more pain 
than pleasure in the world, but only that according to 
the way of the world those kinds of being persist with an 
overplus of pleasure who, working out their type of life, 
are so endowed as to maintain themselves ; and this 
choice is not primarily determined by pleasure and pain 
but by the objects which satisfy the active needs of a 
being according to its kind. I mention the s.iying for two 
other reasons. First to express my own obligation to it 
for the truth which I learnt from it mure clearly than 
elsewhere, that man does not merely serve God but helps 
him and therefore, as I add, in the measure of his smallness, 
creates deity. The other reason was more relevant to 
my immediate purpose. In making virtue a process of 
relieving God’s pain, it committed the error of anthropo- 
morphising God’s deity. God is not finite that he should 
feel pain or pleasure. It is only when deity emerges in 
finite beings, finite gods or angels, that something which 
corresponds to pain and pleasure in our experience of 
them exists. Finite deities would be aware of pleasures 
and pains in their bodies, like the rebel angels in Paradise 
Lost, but also their deity would be aware of the defects 
and smoothness of the working of their mental sub- 
structure, and this would be felt by them as something 
analogous to our pains and pleasures, though what form 
it would take for them cannot be known, since deity and 
deising are on a level above consciousness and we cannot 
tell what kind of an object the smooth or hindered 
operation of mental elements would assume for them. 

We are brought back again to the point from which Summary, 
we started, that deity is a quality different from spirit, 
while it owes its existence to the travail of a world which 
has reached the level of spirit. It followed from this 
that deity was subject, so long as it is the infinite deity 
of God, to no distinction of evil and good or of any other 
values. It depends on values and is in the line of what 
is good, but is itself a perfection not contrasted with 
imperfection. Values are secured by the beings which 
think in their language. There is a saying of Matthew 
Arnold that God is the eternal not-ourselves which makes 



DEITY 


BK. IV 


A brief 
index. 


428 

for righteousness. It brings God down to the level 
of man. If the power which makes for righteousness 
is not ourselves, there is no other power which makes for 
righteousness. God is, if we may use such language, 
the power which makes for deity. It is because we 
ourselves make for righteousness that we have faith in 
this further nisus of the universe, and are sustained by 
that sentiment so as to derive help from it in doing 
righteousness. Our minds and the values they create 
do not end the series of empirical qualities. Our virtue 
is only part of the presupposition on which depends the 
emergence of the next higher quality to mind which we 
call deity. 

I have no intention of recapitulating the loii|; argu- 
ment of this book. But I will conclude with a few 
propositions which supply a brief index to the whole. 
They are the following : 

Space and Time have no reality apart from each other, 
but are aspects or attributes of one reality, Space-Time 
or Motion. This is the stuff of which all existents are 
composed ; and it breaks up of itself into these complexes 
within the one all-embracing stuff. Any portion of it, 
any space-time, possesses certain fundamental features 
which therefore belong to every existent generated 
within the universe of Space-Time. These fundamental 
pervasive features of things are the categories. Besides 
these fundamental features, things possess quality which 
is the empirical feature of things. Qualities form a 
hierarchy, the quality of each level of existence being 
identical with a certain complexity or collocation of 
elements on the next lower level. The quality performs 
to its equivalent lower existence the office which mind 
performs to its neural basis. Mind and body do but 
exemplify, therefore, a relation which holds universally. 
Accordingly Time is the mind of Space and any quality 
the mind of its body ; or to speak more accurately, 
mind and any other quality are the different distinctive 
complexities of Time which exist as qualities. As 
existents within Space-Time, minds enter into various 



CH. Ill 


DEITY AND VALUE 


429 


relations of a perfectly general character with other 
things and with one another. These account for the 
familiar features of mental life : knowing, freedom, 
values, and the like. In the hierarchy of qualities the 
next higher quality to the highest attained is deity. God 
is the whole universe engaged in process towards the 
emergence of this new quality, and religion is the senti- 
ment in us that we are drawn towards h^m, and caught 
in the movement of the world to a higher level of 
existence. 




INDEX 


Where references are ginjen to chapters^ see the Tables of Contents [Bks. I and ll. m njol, 
Bks. Ill, and IV, in -z/ol, //.). Only the first page of a passage referred to is given. 


Absolute: Space and Time, i. 8i ; motion 
and position, 85 ; in Newton, 83 j 
opposed to relational and relative, 84 ; 
and relational views of Space and Time, 

38, 145, 172 j Spirit, and God, ii. 369 
Action and reaction. See Reciprocity 
Acts of mind : and objects, i, 1 1, 1 3, 26 j 
responses to objects, ii. 117 j conations, 

Bk. in. ch. V. 

Angels : contemplation of our conscious- 
ness, i. 19, ii. 105 j finite gods, 346 
Animism : argument for, from meaning, 
li. 15 j from lusion, 18 
Appearances: and things, ii. 183 j real 
^nd mere appearances, Bk. III. ch. vii. j 
illusory, Bk. III. ch. vili. 

Appreciation : and value, ii. 237 j and com- 
munity of minds, 239 j its object, 241 
Apptehending : ways of, Bk. III. ch. vi. ^ 
Space and Time, ii. 144} calegoiies, 

151 ; matter, 158 j secomlary qualities, 

160 5 life, 170 j mind, 176 ; other 
minds, Bk. III. ch. i. B j value {see 
Appi eciation) j God, 380 
Aristotle: place of mind, i. loi j univcrsals, 
221, 227 n. ; universal in sensation, ii. 

132 n. 

Arnold, M. : God, ii. 427 
Assumptions (supposals), i. 202 : relation 
to propositions, li. 223, 248 
Assurance : of other minds, ii. 37 j God, 380 
Atten^'on : enjoyments, forms ot, i. 23 } 
and consciousness, ii. 118 

Barker, H. : objects and things, ii. 91 «. 
Beauchamp, Miss, ii. 26, 43 
Beauty : and ugliness, Bk. III. ch. ix. D j 
relation to truth and goodness, HI. ix. £ j 
Because : and cause, i. 297 | 

Being : (Bk. II. ii.), i. 197 j and not-being, 

198 ; neutral, 200 j Hegel on, 203 
Belief : and will, ii. 247 j in God, 354 
Bergson, H. : on Time, i. 36, 44 j Time 
and Space, 140 j spatialising of Time, 

431 


148; and Hcr.iclitus, 130; not-being, 
199 J motion as unitary, 321 ; change, 
329 ; intensity of sensations, li. 162 
Beikclcy : idcab and things, i. 16, 11. 207 ; 
abstract univeisals, i. 231 j substance, 
276 J knowledge of God, ii. 380 
Bethc, A. : ants, li. 305, 306 n. 

Bosanquet, B., i. 7 j on umversals as 
habits, 214 w. 5 existence of univeisals, 
222; bare repetition, 230; concictc 
universal, 233 j system in knowledge, 
237 ] cause and ground, 296 j psychosis 
and neurosis, li. 9 n. j mind as enveloping 
world, 101 ; logic, 272 n. ; difHciilt 
beauty, 287 5 beauty of simple tones, 296 
Bradley, F. H. : 1. 7 j extension and 

secondary qualities, 1. 39 u. j solipsism, 
i. 90, 11. 231 ; likeness and identity, 
i. 24S J contiadictions in categories, 206 ; 
in relations, 253 ; in Space and 'Fime, 
257 J in causality, 297 ; numbers, 316/;.; 
and counting, 3*9; multiplicity of 
Spaces and Times, 11. 224, 23^ j reality 
and judgment, 248 j degiees of truth, 
265 ; logic, 272 V. J willing, 316; 

responsibility, 31S j prediction of action, 
324 J ontological argument, 344 ; God 
as appearance, 389 * morality and leligion, 
406 

Brentano, F. ; sense-qualities, i. 276 n. ; 
intensity of sensations, ii. 133 j of 
thinking, 136 

Broad, C. D, : relativity, i. 89 n. j Euclidean 
Space, I 52 substance, 269 w.j causality, 
279 «., 298 -y illusions, li. 204 n. 
Browning, K. : Time for God, i. 36 j 
the musician, ii. 7 ; man and God, 357 
Burnet, J., i. 150 227 w., 3 1 5 3 30 ti. 

Cardinal number, i. 169 
Carslaw, H. S. : non-Euclidean geometry, 
i. 1 58 n. 

Categorial. See Empirical 

Categories, Bk. II. : their nature, Bk. II. 



SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


ch, i. j in Kant, i. 185, 190 j in Plato, I 
186 j in Hegel, 205 j communication I 
of, 1915, 245, 263, 266, 281, 314, , 
323 ; their grades, 322 j <lo not include 1 
quality, 326 j nor change, 328 j their 
origin, 330 j apprchendefi by intuition, 

11. 14^, 131 ; enjoyed and contemplated 
at once, 1 5 1 

Causality, Jlk. II. vi. B j and substance, 
i. 280 j transeunt and immanent, 283 j 
in mind, objects, and between them, i. 
27» ^55) ci'ijoycd in being contem- 

plated, ii. 152. See Hume 
Cause: and because, i. 97 
Change: not a category, i. 328 
Choice: and freedom, n 330 
Claims; and rights, li. 275 
Clairvoyance : ii. 379 
Co-consciousness : 11. 26 
Cognition: and conation, ii. 118 j as 
theoretical conation,, 1 20 
Cognitive rcbition, i. 26 j Bk. III. ch. iv. A 
Coherence: in tiutli, 11. 252; determined 
by reality, 254; amongst wills, 274; 
in beauty, 295, 294 

Collective: and universal, i. 216;?., 267 j 
mind, ii. 241 

Compiesence; of miml and objects, i. i i, ii. 

8 i (Bk, III. ch, iv. A) ; how experienced, 
i. 20* its kinds, 1. 27, ii. 102 
Conation: as mcnt.il act, Bk. III. ch. v. ; 
relation to cognition, Bk. HI. ch. 
iv. A 

Concrete Universal: i. 233 
Consciousness: — mentality, ii. 4, 38 w. ; 
quality of mental acts, 125 i something 
new m life, not epiplienomenon, 8j 
unity of, 22, 1 50 ; divided, 25 j and self- 
consciousness, 1 12; consciousness 1. 

12, 11, 82, etc. j as cross-section, 11. 1105 
ambiguity of term, 87 

Conseivation : of value, ii. 408 j evil, 419 
Contemplation : and enjoyment, 1. 12 
Contents: ot mind, li. 92 j two senses of, 
126; as empirical determinations of 
categorial characters, 126 
Continuity: crude, i. 405 as comprehended, 
40, 147 

Contradiction : Law of, i. 205 
Cornford, F. H. : fate in Greek mythology, 
li. 383 n. 

Correspondence : to reality, not criterion of 
truth, 11. 252 

Counting: and number, i. 318 
Cross-section : consciousness as, ii. no 
Curvature: of Space, i. 209 //., 216 n. 

Darwinism: and value, ii. 309 
Date: of images, i. 1195 of universal, 
222 

Dedekind, R.: numbeis, i. 145 i irrational 
number, 159 


Deity, Bk, IV. j ano God, ch. f. ; and 
religious sentiment, ch. ii. j and value, 
ch. iii. 

Density: and sensation, ii. 134 
Descartes: re-creation of world, i. 45; 

‘cogito, etc.,’ li. 100; crior, 216 
Design: argument from, ii. 344, 413 
Diversity: identity and existence, Bk. II. 
ch. li. 

Divided consciousness, ii. 25 
Driesch, H.: entelcchy, ii. 64 
Duration: =Time, i. 37; and succession, 
124 

Ebbinghaus, H.: rise of sensation, i. 122; 
threshold of sensation, 123 r;. ; extensive 
and intensive quantity, 307 j measure- 
ment of intensities, 308 
Ehrenfels, Ch.: value, 11. 307 n. 

Einstein, A.: Space-Time, 1. 58 j Relativity, 
87 j generalised Relativity, i. p. vii. 
Eliot, George: inspiration, ii. 221 n. 
Emergents, ii. 14, 45 

Empirical : and categorial or a prtot t 
characters,!. 4, 184; distinction fluid, 
343; method in philosophy, 45 its 
attitude tow .irds minds, 6 j the Problems, 
Bk. III. ch. iii.: ProbleniL, ii. 81J II., 
128 j III., 90, 183 i IV., 191 j V., 315 i 
VI., 307 

Enjoyed: an<i contemplated, i. 12 (and 
passim) j Space and 'I'lme, Bk. I. chs. 

111. IV. 

Entelcchy: and life, li. 64 
Epiphcnomenon : consciousness not, 11. 8 
Error : and illusion, ii. 210 j truth and, 
Bk. III. ch. IX. B; oblique judgment 
of reality, 261 ^ mental, 267 
Esse and percspi^ li. 95, 105 
Ethei 5 unnecessary, ii. 51 
Eucliilean : and other geometiies, i. 
156 

Eurytus: number and form, 227 n. 

E-vents: pure, i. 48; qualitied, 72 
Evil; and goodness, Bk. HI. ch. ix. Cj 
moral ii. 280 j in general, 283*, con- 
servation of, 419 • problem of, 420 
Excluded middle, law of, i. 205 
Existence, i. 197'j and not-bemg, 198 j 
and subsistence, 220 
Existential judgment : i. 201 n. 
Experiencing: and experienced, i. 12 
Experiment: in metaphysics, ii. 194, 198, 

Extension: = Space, i. 37 j how related to 
colour and touch, 1. 37, ii. 165 ; intrinsic, 
of sensation, 130,160; extrinsic (extent), 
160 ; and intension (logical), in relation 
to mathematics and metaphysics, i. 176; 
and to meaning, ii. 13, 96 
Extensity: history of, ii. 165 
Extent : of sensation, ii. 160 ; intuited, not 



IJNJUliX 


433 


sensed, 164.; colours and touches localised 
within one extent, 165 
External and internal: relations, i. 249 
Extrinsic and intrinsic: relations, i. 251; 
extension of sensation, ii. 130, 160 

Faith : in God, ii. 380, 416 
Fancy, ii. 219 

Feeling: relation to conation, ii. 123; to 
organic sensation, 124, 172; in plant, 
224; in God, 425 
Finite. See Infinites, and Infinity 
Finitude: consciousness of, ii. 101 
Force: and causality, i. 290 
Freedom, Bk. II. ch. x. 

Frege, G. ; caidinal number, i. 169 
Freud, S.: dreams, li. 27; unconscious 
mind, 28 

Fusion: and animism, ii. 18 
Future: and past, enjoyed as future and 
past, i. 124; how a future quality can 
affect us, ii. 379. See Past and future 

Gallinger, A. : experience of past, i. 128 
Geometry : and Space, i. 1 34 j Euclidean 
and other, 156J arithmetised, 170; 
geometrical figures, ideal selections from 
Space, 1 5 1 

God: Deity and, Bk. IV. ch. i. ^ object 
of religious sentiment, li. 376 ^ assurance 
of, 380; characteristics of, ;82j tran- 
scendence and immanence of, 394 ; 
creator or created^ 397 j fatherhood, 398 j 
alleged timelessness, 399 j ami Devil, 
41 1 j is he good ^4125 and feeling, 425 
Goethe: ana Spinoza, 11. 3923 telluric 
sense, 403 

Good: and goodmss, ii. 2765 the good, 
277 j ‘divinity’ of good men, 418 
Goodness: and evil, Bk. III. ch. ix. C; 
difference from truth, ii. 273; icla- 
tlon to truth and beauty, ch. ix. E 
Green, T. H.: i. ibh ; progress, ii. 282 * 
mind of nation, 3S~ j divine mind, 385 
Grimm, H.: singular universals and 
portraits, i. 210 w.j movement, ii. 153 
Ground : and cause, i. 297 

Haldane, J. S. : life, ii. 62 
Hallucination: and illusion, ii. 210 
Hart.nann, E. von : man and God, ii. 426 
Head, H.: pleasure and pain, li. 125; 
quality and spatio-temporal aspects of 
sensation, Suppl. Note, ii. 178 
Hegel: being and not-being, i. 2035 cate- 
gories, 205 n . ; attributes of God, ii. 383 ; 
pantheism, 389 

Heraclitus: and Bergson, i. 150 
HSffding, H.: man and God, ii. 386; 
religion and value, 405 j conservation 
of value, 416 

Holmes, G. : pleasure and pain, ii, 125 
VOL. ‘I 


Holt, E. B. : place of images, i. 99 ; con- 

sciousness as cross-section, ii. 1095 
neutral stuff, ii4«., and i. 201 ti. 
Hume: experience of causality, ii. 153; 
of willing, i. 9, ii. 157; causality ami 
power, i. 290 j ideas and impressions, 
1. 165 J ideas without impressions, li. 

325 

Idealism: and realism, 1. 7; One and the 
Many, 346; and Absolute Spirit, ii. 369 
Ideas: non-ment.i’ objects, i. 24, ii. 83; 
analogues in f'ung movement, ii. 83, 
ii7j in perception, 86 j and illusion, 
Bk. HI. ch. viu. 

Identity ami diversity: numerical, Bk. II. 
ch. ii. 5 generic, Bk. II. ch. iii,; of 
substance, i. 272; Law of, 205 
Illusion, Bk. III. ch. viii.j and hallucina- 
tion, ii. 210J relation to images and 
art, 217, 290 J private experiences, 227 
Images: place of, i. 99^ imageless think- 
ing, 213; illusory element in, ii. 219. 
See Ideas * 

Imagination: constructive, ii. 219 
Immanent: causality, i. 283; tlieism, ii. 
390, 396 

Immortality, 11. 423 

Incoherence: how determined, ii. 255; 

and leal opposition, 236 
I ndeterminntion : and freedom, ii. 330 
Individual, i. 208 

Infinites: empincal, i. 324; qualitied and 
unqualitied infinites, ii. 362^ finitely 
ami infinitely, infinite, 338 
Infinity: crude, i. 40; comprehended, 40; 
prior to finite, 42 

Innervation: and knowing, ii. 107 
Inspir.ition : in construction, 11. 221 
Instant: abstraction from point - instant 
(y. 7 -.), i. 48^ as ‘mind’ of point, ii. 39 
Intensity: and quantity, Bk. H. ch. vii. ; 
measurement of, 1. ^07 ^ of sensing, ii. 
132; of tliinking, 133 ; of sensa, 16 1 ; 
and qu.ility, 162 

Intersubjective intercourse: its function, 
ii. 230 

Introspection: i. 17, ii. 89; and retio- 
spection, ii. 90 

Intuition: of Space and Time, ii. 144 j 
includcrl in sensation, 148 j of categories, 
151; of primary qualities, 158; ap- 
pearances in, 192 ; how affected by 
conditions of sense, 200 

James, W. : substantive and transitive, i. 
94 J memory, 1 13 j feeling of past, 1 16 j 
spatial relations, 165 j relations, 238, 
247 ; likeness and identity, 248 j origin 
of categories, 333; visual size, ii. 193; 
novelty, 323; freedom, 323^.5 proofs 
of God’s existence, 342 j religion, 376, 

2 F 



SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


434 

407; reality of God, 378; immortality, 

423 

Judgment: and willing, li. 2485 its object, 
249; and perception, 250 

Kant; Time for God, 1. 36; forms of 

intuition, 39 n. \ infinity of Space, 147 \ 
categories, 183, 190^ intensive and ex- 
tensive cju.mtity, 307 ; anticipations of 
perception, 309 j origin of categories, 
331 ; intuition of Space and Time, li. 
147 n. j conception of mor.ility, 279; 
beauty, 293; value 314J intelligible 
character, 331 ; design, 344 >/., 390 j pure 
manifold of intuition, 301 
Kinaesthetic (motor) sensations: levival 
of, i. 1 31 w., li. 172 and apprehension 
of matter (resistance), ii. 158 ^ in space- 
perception, 168; in apprehension of life, 
170, 173 

Knowing: see Cognition 5 extencled sense 
of, ii. 103 

Kiilpe, O. : icference of piesentations, 
ii. 93. 

Eaiid, J., 1. zo tt. 5 apprehension of other 
minds, ii. 33 u. 

Langevin, P. ; Relativity, i. 87, 91 
Laplace: his calculator, 11. 328 
Laws of 'riiouglit : 1. 205 
l.eibniz : vacuum, i. 633 unity of con- 
sciousness, li. 23 3 degrees of conscious- 
ness, 69, 33b ; body as iiiomentaiy 

mind, 43; 1 epresenlation of universe, 
336 (Suppl. Note) 3 God, 390, ami 368 n. 
Life: emergent (juality, li. 6i 3 and en- 
telcchy, 64 ; ami mechanism. 65 3 fiow 
apprehended, 1703 toieign hie, 1743 
and deity, 414 

Likeness, i. 2.^"? 3 .md identity, 238 
Ihpps, Til. : geometrical illusions, i. 242, 
li. 210;;. 5 empathy, 11 292 
I.ocal signs: and space-perception, i. i 17 ?/., 
11. 169 

l.ocalisation, Rk. 111 . cli, vi. Suppl. Note, 
ii. 1 78 

Locke : causality, 1. 8 3 infinite Space, 
147 3 ideas as copies, ii, 207 
Logic : science of, 11. 270 
Lorentz, H. A., i. 58 

Lotze : science, i. 23 dress, 1053 singular 
universals, 209 3 universalsas equations, 
220 3 local signs, ii. 168 

MacCunn, |. : varieties of good citizenship, 
ii. 241 «. 

McDougall, W. : animism, ii. 133 place 
of consciousness, 129 3 religious senti- 
ment, 373 

McDowall, A. : beauty, ii. 296 
Mach, E. : relative motion, i. 86 


Mackenzie, J. S. : truth and correctness, 
ii. 239 n. 3 liking and pleasure, 303 3 
value, 308 n. 

Marett, R. R. : pre-animism, ii. 367 
Materialism, i. 97 

Mathematics : empirical science with a 
prion material, i. 154, ii. 2063 and 
metaphysics, i. 175 

Matter ; ami motion, ii. 50 3 quality of, 
] 32 3 quasi-matter, 33 3 origin of, 555 

how apprehended, 158 
I Meaning : two senses, (i) reference to, ii. 
j 15, 963 (2) intension: its neural 

counterpart, 16 

I Mechanical : and organic leaction, i, 3023 
I antithesis to vital, ii. 65 
I Meinong, A. von : subsistence, i. 203 3 
I int<‘rval and nnlikcness, 241 ; sup- 

! posals, 1. 202, 11. 222, 223 //., 248, 250 ;;.3 

value, 307 n. 

Memory : of objects, i. 1133 a memory 
not a present object, 1143 quasi- 
memorics, 119 3 of emotion, 128 3 anu 
virtual images, ii. 197 3 partly veridical, 
218 

Mental: ree Acts of mind, and Space and 
Time 3 dispositions, i. 2123 and neural 
process, ii. 5 3 causality between, 12 ; 
appearances, 2233 propositions, 266 3 
error, 267 
Mentality, ii. 38 n. 

Meredith, G. : colour, li. 59 3 community 
of things, 333 n. 3 deity, 347 
Messer, A. : formal and mateiial elements 
' in mental acts, 11. 126;/. 

Metaphysics: and naathcmatics, 1. 1753 
and the po'-sibh', 177. Sec Philosophy 
Mill, J. S. : mathematics, i. 2 32 3 rela- 
tions, 240 

Mind: and objects, i. 11 (and pa sum) 
not object to itself, 1. 16, ii. 893 and 
Its neural basis, Rk. II. ch. i. A 3 use 
of term, ii. 38 //. 3 a foim of Time, 43 3 
‘minds’ of vaii'ous levels, 673 other 
minds how apprehended, Rk. III. ch. 1. 
R 3 and body, Rk. III. ch. iv. R 3 col- 
lective, 241 3 science of, 268 
Minkowski, H. : Space-Time, i. 58, 180 
Mivart, St. George, li. 344 n. 

Monad: as = point-instant, ii. 44 w., 69, 
148, 181, 201, 205, etc. 3 not ninds, 
44 «• 

Montague, W. F. : subsistence, i. 201 
Moore, G. E. : mind and object, i. ii ; 
identity, 247 n, 3 pleasure and conscious- 
ness of it, ii. 124^.3 organic wholes, 
323 «. 

Morality : nature of, ii. 274 3 inner, 279 ; 
not self-contradictory, 282 3 and natural 
selection, 285 

Morgan, C. Lloyd: -ing and -ed, i, 123 
his Instinct and Experience^ ii, 14; 



INDEX 


emergent qualities, 14, 465 organic 
constitution, 62 

Motion : = Space-Time, i. 61 5 as category, 
Bk. II, ch. ix. ; unitary character of, 

i. 321 

Motor sensations. See Kinaesthetic 
Mumford, Edith E, R,; God and organic 
sensations, ii. 3^7 n. 

Miinsterberg, H.: quality of sensations, 

ii. 129 r7, ; intensity, 133 

Myers, C. S. ; quality (pattern) of sensa- 
tions, ii. 128 j intensity, 132 

Necessity ; in philosophy, i. 475 and 
freetlom, ii. 329 

Neurosis: and psychosis, identical, i. 109, 
ii. 4, 9 n. (Bosanquet)'' 

Neutral: being and subsistence, i. 200; 
stuff (Holt), ii. 1 14 w.j world, and many- 
dimensional Space, i. 16 1 ; and illusion, 
ii. 216 

Newton: absolute Space and Time, i. 83; 
and Relativity, 91 5 times and spaces 
places of themselves, 145 ; action and 
reaction, 300 

Number : generalised, i. 159, 162 ; cardinal, 
169 5 Bk. II. ch. viii. 

Nunn, T. P. : limits, i. 222 j secondary 
. qualities, ii. 187,188;;.; time-element m 
spatial appearances, 197 

Objects: and things, ii. 92 ; non-<lepend- 
ence on mind, ii. 105 

One: and Many, Bk, II. ch. x., esp. 

i. 336 ; unity, 316 

Ontological argument, i. 76 ii. 343 n. 
Order, i. 56, and Bk. II. ch. V. ; in sensa- 
tions (Watt), i. 265, ii. 164 ;/. 

Organic sensations: revival of, i. 13 1 

ii, 172/;.; and life, ii. 170; and feeling, 
124, 172 ; and God, 357 

Organisation, organism, ii. 62 

Pain. See Feeling 
Pantheism, ii. 392 

Parallelism : psychophysical, none, ii. 9 ; 

of mind with objects, 10 
Particular, i. 208 ; relation to universal, 
220, 247 

Past anv future : contemplated as such, 
i. 1135 enjoyed as such, 124 ; what is 
present in them, 130; may be sensory, 
120 ; penetration of present by past 
(Bergson), 140 
Pater, W. : colour, ii. 60 
Pearson, K. : causality and correlation, 

*• ^95 

Perfection: in nature, ii. 72; degrees of, 
and truth, 264 ; and goodness, 282; and 
deity, 410 

Person: union of body ami mind, i. 103; 
its stages, i. 103; and value, ii. 245 


4.35 

Personal: identity, i. 273 ; and impersonal 
experience, ii. 229 

Perspectives : and sections of Space-Time 
[see Space-Time); of finites, ii. 187, 
195 ; and illusions, 216; ‘asserted,’ 250 
Philosophy: and science, i. i; empirical 
method in, 4 

Plant: pleasure in, ii. 124; hunger and 
thirst in, 175 

Plato: ‘m.ithemnticals,’ i. 153,219; Space, 
173; categories, 186; not-being, igq; 
forms, Bk. II. cby iii. ; defects of 
forms, 226, 22^;;.; number and in- 
determin.ite dyad, 315, 324; motion 
and rest, 321 ; change, 330;;. ; apprehen- 
sion of Space, ii. 147; cieatoi God, 
390; Space and Time, 401 
Ple.asure: see Feeling; and consciousness 
of it, ii. 124 

Poincar6, H.: geometries, i. 157 
Points: abstractions from point-instants, 

i, 48 ; their legitimacy, 41 ; not fictions, 
144; both ideal and real, 151, 325; 
how individual, 155. See-also Instant 

Point-instants, i. 48 and pasum ^ both leal 
and ideal, i. 325 ; as monads, ii. 44 
69, etc. (jtr Monad) 

Polytheism: ami finite gods, ii. 367 
PovNer: and causality, i 290 
Pragmatism, ii. 263 f 

Pre-aniniism, ii. 367 
Prediction: and freedom, 11. 323 
Piesent, i. 44; past and future not ex- 
perienced as, ti6, 124 
Primary ‘qualities,’ ii. 55; how appre- 
hended, 138 

Prince Morton: co-conscious personalities, 

ii. 26 ; unconsciousness, 30 
Piivatc: experience, ii. 227 
Problems: the empirical. See Empirical 
Psycho-analysis, ii. 29 

Psychology; science of, ii. 268 

Psychosis. See Neurosis 

Public: and private, experience, ii. 227; 

Space-Time not private, 232 
Pythagoreans, i. 226, 227 n, 

^ualilied: events, i, 72; infinite, ii. 362 
Ouality: its spatio-temporal basis, i. 
183 ; qualities of substance not inter- 
penetrating, 275 ; their connection, 276 ; 
not a category, 326; clue to, mentality 
the quality of its neural process, Bk. 
III. ch. i. ; relation to Time, li. 39; 
and form, 47 ; generated by Time, 47 ; 
order of, Bk. III. ch. ii. B ; primary 
(y.7^').; secondary (^.'T').; empirical quality 
and categorial characters of things, li. 
70; prediction of new'' qualities, 73, 
323 ; of sensation, its spatio-temporal 
correlate, 128 ; and deity, Bk. IV. ch. i. 



SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY 


436 


Quantity: extensive and intensive, Bk. II. 
ch. vii. 

Reaction. See Reciprocity 
Realism: and idealism, i. 7 
Reality : consciousness of, ii. 247 ; of 
values, 244 j and truth, 247, 2585 
asserted in judgment, 248 
Reciprocity, Bk. II. ch. vi. C 
Relatedness, i. 256 (Stout) 

Relation, Bk. II. ch. iv. ^ In Space and 
Time, Bk. I. ch. v'- 

Relativity: theory of, i. 87, and i. p. vii. 
Religion : reflective notions of, ii. 396 ; 
and morality, 403 5 communal element 
in, 404, 41 t; faith m conservation of 
value, 408 : faith in deity 
Religious sentiment: and deity, Bk. IV. 
ch. ii.; affinity with physical feelings, 
402; founded on a brute instinct, 406; 
faith in conservation of value, 408 ; 
faith in deity, 416 

Remembering, i. 117; and desire, 118 
Repetition: in Space and 'I'ime, i. 48; of 
universals in particulars, i. 227; the 
pioblem of, i. 229, ii. 311 
Resistance: and matter, ii. 158; and life, 

173 

Rest and motion, i. 83 ; IMato on, 321 
Reyno'. Is, Osborne : Space and matter, 

i. 173 ii. 49 

Ribot, 'I'h. : memory of emotions, i. 128 
Rodin, A. : ancient statues, i. 226 w. 
Royce, J.: communal clement in religion, 
11. 404; reformation, 419 
Russell, B. : on Time, i. 36 ; past, 

present, and future, 44 ; ‘ perspectives,’ 
68 ; continuity, 147 ; cardinal number, 
169; relational view of Space and Time, 
169; scientific method, 171 meta- 
physics and the possible, 177; sense of 
relations, 244 n. ; infinite regress, 239 n. ; 
order, 262/7., 264/7.; causality, 293; 
measurement, 308 n. ; things and per- 
spectives, ii. 196 ; time in spatial appear- 
ances, 197 77.; illusory appearances, 
209 

Santayana, G. : searchlight theory of con- 
sciousness, ii. 114 

Schuster, Sir A.: method in science, i. 179 

Science: its nature, ii. 253 

Scott, J. W. : appearances and perspectives, 

ii. 194 n. 

Searchlight view of knowing, ii. 109 
Secondary qualities: and mind, ii. 138; 
and sense-organs, 139; apprehension of, 
160; and tertiary, 238. .See Quality 
Sections : of physical Space-Time, i. 66, 
81 (Bk. I. ch. ii.) ; of mental Space- 
time, 138 (ch. iv.) 

Selectiveness: Problem III., ii. 76; of 


mind, 90; various aspects of, 99. See 
Appearances 

Self: subject and object self, 1. 103; place 
of subject self, 106 

Sensation: (a) sensing: its pattern, ii. 
128; intensity, 132; liveliness, 138; 
(/>) sensum : its quality, 160; intensity, 
161 ; extent, 164 
Sense: of relations, i. 242 
Shaftesbury: on reciprocation, ii. 35 n. 
Shand, A. F. : sentiments, ii. 373 /7. 
Sherrington, C. S. : binocular flicker and 
fusion, ii. 19, 22 
Smith, Adam : sympathy, 274 
Sociality : and apprehension of other minds, 
ii. 32 

Solipsism : and theory of relativity, i. 90. 
See Bradley, F. H. 

Sommcrville, D. M. Y. : curvature, i. 
209 /?. 

Sorley, W. R. : theism, 388 //. 

Space : see Space and Time, and Space- 
Time ; never empty, i. 65 ; mathe- 
matical and empirical, 150; geometry 
an<l, 154; many- dimensional ‘Spaces,’ 
138; unitormity of, 215, and i. p. vii.; 
of touch and sight, not two Spaces, 
ii. 165, 198; public and private, ii. 232 
Space and Time: physical, as experienced, 
i. 37 ; dependent on one another, 44 ; 
each repeated in the cither, 48 ; three 
dimensions of Space and the characters 
of Time, 44, 32, 34; abstractions from 
Space-Time, 48 ; total, 80 ; absolute, 
81 ; menial, Bk. I. ch. iii. ; absolute 
and relational views of, 38, 168; 

iclations in, Bk. I. ch. vi. ; multiplicity 
of Spaces and Times, ii. 224, 233 (Bk. 
III. ch. viii. Suppl. Note) ; related as 
body and mind, 39 ; apprehendeil by 
intuition, 144 

Space-Time: physical, Bk. I. chs. i. ii. ; 
as four-dimensional, i. 58 ; mental, Bk. 
I. ch. iv. ; and categories, i. 189; uni- 
formity of, 215, and i. p. vii.; not 
subject to categories, 337 ; stuff of 
existents, 172, 183, 341, and passim y 
anterior to matter, ii. 49 
Specific synergy, ii. 21 
Specious present: a succession, i. 120 
Spencer, H. : society as species, i. 236 //. ; 

origin of categories, 332 
Spinoza: design, ii. 344 ; pantheism, 389; 
intellectual love of God, 392 ; Time 
and Thought, 401, and note 
Stebbing, L. Susan: unrealities, etc., ii. 
225 «. 

Stout, G. F. : ‘awareness of,’ i. 12 //. ; con- 
tradiction in the categories, 206 n, ; rc- 
latedness, 256; one and many, 346/7.; 
presentations and objects, ii. 95 ; per- 
ception, 119/7.; pleasure and pain, 123/7.; 



INPEX 


437 


local si^ns, 1*675 appearances, 191 5 error, 
214 62 } mental activity, 318 n. 

Strong, C. : relations, i. 239 j conscious- 
ness as relation, ii. 87 «. 

Structure of things, 1. 50, 277, 302 
Stumpf, C. : “specific synergy,” ii. 21 ; 
pleasure and pain, 124«. 5 “partial 
contents” of sensation, 167 
Subconsciousness, ii. 4, 30 
Subsistence : as neutral being, i. 201 [see 
Montague); tinielessbeing(i(r Meinong), 
203; and existence, 220 
Substance, Bk. II. ch. vi. A ; and causality, 

i. 280; enjoyed in being contemplated. 

Substantive: and tmnsitivc states of mind, 

*•94 

Sully-Prudhomme : reviveil emotions, i. 
128 

Supposals. See Assumptions 

Taylor, A. E. : ‘third marv,’ i. 218//.; 
other minds, ii. 32 divine and finite 
minds, 43 n. 

Temporal signs, i. 117 
Tertiary ‘qualities,’ Bk. III. ch. ix. A; 
imply union of subject and object, li. 
236 ; relation to secondary and primary, 
2385 their reality, 244 
Theism : its strength and weakness, ii. 

388 5 immanent, 390, 396 
Thing: synthesis of appearances, i. 135 
within a piece of Space-'l'ime, ii. 183; 
objects and, 925 as complexes of space- 
time, passim 

Thinking: imageless, i, 213 ; intensity of, 

ii. 13s ; fwo senses of thought, ii. 95 
Third man, i. 218 and note 

Time; sec Space and Time, and Space- 
Time *, Bergson on, i. 140, 1485 ‘mind’ 
of Space, ii. 38 5 generator of qualities, 
q7 ; in spatial appeal anccs, 196 
Titchener: measurement of sensations, i. 
308 

Togetherness, i. 1 1 j how experienced, 20 
Touch: touch-space and colour-space not 
two spaces, ii. 165, 198 ; and vision in 
determining extent, 195; superiority of 
touch, 203 


Truth: and Error, Bk. III. ch. ix. Bj 
relation to goodness and beauty, ch. ix. E 

Ugliness: and beauty, Bk. III. ch. ix. D 
Unconsciousness, ii. 25 
Unity of mind, ii 22, 150 
Universality : as category, i. 215 
Universals; Bk. 11 . ch. iii. ; time of, 

i. 222 ; universal clement in sensation, 

ii. 131 

Unrealities : status of, ii. 224 
Uib.in, W. M. : baling attitude, ii. 303 ; 

value, 307 n. 

Value, Bk. Ill.^di. ix.; how value arises, 
ii. 236 ; not a quality, 243; leality of, 
244 ; siibjcitive and objective value, 
303; instinctive and reflective, 304; 
economic, 306 ; and Darwinism, 309 ; 
its general nature, Bk. HI. ch. ix. F ; 
and deity, Bk. IV. ch. iii. 

Ward, J. : succession, i. 116; temporal 
signs, 117 ; psycho-physical parallelism, 
ii. 10; attention = consciousness, 118; 
local signs, 167; intersubjective intei- 
coursc, 231 ; art. ‘Psychology,’ 13 
Watt, H. J. : order in sensations, i. 265, 
ii. 164 f/.; on sound, quoted, 'i. 37 ; 

pleasure and pain, 125 
Whitehead, A. N. : philosophers and 
mathematics, i. 1 56 n. ; mathematics 
and generality, 162, 175 ; relational 
view of Space and Time, 169 
Whole and parts, Bk. II. ch. viii. 

Willing : and judgnaent, ii. 248 ; and 
causality, 157 (ifc Hume); process of, 
316 

Wodehouse, Helen M. : supposal and 
belief, ii. 250 w. 

Wolf, A. : correlation and cause, i, 295 n. 
Wordsworth : i. 13 ; pantheism, ii. 392 
World-soul: and Time, ii. 368 ; and deity, 
ibid. 

Young, J. W. : his Fundamental Concepts 
of Algebra and Geometry quoted, i. 157, 
158, 159, 162, 170 


THE END 


Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh. 




NEW WORRS PHILOSOPHY 

THE -(DEA OF PROGRESS : An Inquiry into its 

Origin and Growth. By J. B. BuRY, M.A., Regius 
Professor of Modern History in the University of 
Cambridge. 8vo. 

MIND-ENERGY. By Professor Henri Bergson. 
Translated by Professor H. WlLDOl/ Carr, in col- 
laboration with the Author. 8vo. 

IMPLICATION AND LINEAR INFERENCE. 
By Bernard Bosanquet, LL.D., F.B.A, Crown 
8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

THE REIGN OF RELIGION IN CON- 
TEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY. By S. Radha- 
KRISHNAN, M.A., Professor of Philosophy in the 
University of Mysore, Author of “ The Philosophy of 
Rabindranath Tagore.'' Extra Crown 8vo. 

A CRITICAL HISTORY OF GREEK PHILO- 

SOPHY. By W. T. Stack, B.A. Crown 8vo. 

ESSAYS IN CRITICAL REALISM : A Co- 
operative Study of the Problem of Knowledge. By 
Durant Drake, Professor of l^hilosophy in Vassar 
College ; ARTHUR O. LOVEJOY, Professor of Philosophy 
in Johns Hopkins University ; James Btssett Pratt, 
Professor of Philosophy in Williams College ; ARTHUR 
K. Rogers, Professor of Philosophy in Yale University ; 
George Santayana, Late Professor of Philosophy in 
Harvard University ; RoY WOOD Sellars, Associate 
Professor of Philosophy in the University of Michigan ; 
C. " A. Strong, Late Professor of Psychology in 
Columbia University. 8vo. 


LONDON : MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd. 



OTHER WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF RABINDRANATH TAfiORE. 

By Professor S. RADHAKRiSHi^fAN. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

PROBLEMS OF THE SELF. An Essay based on the 
Shaw Lectures, 1914. By Professor John Laird. 8vo. 
I2S. net. 

THE INTUITIVE BASIS OF KNOWLEDGE. An 
Epistemological Enquiry. By Professor N. O. Lossky. With 
Preface by Professor G. Dawes Hicks. 8vo. i6s. net. 

MENS CREAIRIX: an Essay. By Rev. Canon W. 

Temple. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

DEVELOPMENT AND PURPOSE. An Essay towards 
a Philosophy of Evolution. By Professor L. T. Hobhouse. 
8vo. I 2 S. 6d. net. 

DICTIONARY OF PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHO- 
LOGY. Indited by Dr. James Mark Baldwin. With 
Illustrations and Extensive Bibliographies. Crown 4to. 
Vol. 1 . New lulition. 60s. net. VoL II. New Edition. 
60s. net. Vol. III., in two parts, 70s. net. 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL 
SCIENCES. Edited by Wilhelm Windelband and Arnold 
R iroE. English Edition under ^ the Editorship of Sir Henry 
Jones. 8vo. 

Voi.. L LOGIC. By Arnold Ruge, Wilhelm Windel- 
BAND, Josiah Royce, Louis Couturat, Benedetto Croce, 
Federico Enriques, and Nicolaj Losskij. ios, net. 

THE SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY. A History of 
the Evolution of Philosophical Thought. By Various Writers. 
Edited by Sir Henry Jones. 8vo. 

THE EVOLUTION OF EDUCATIONAL THEORY. 
By Professor John Adams, LL.D. 12s. 6d. net. 

GREEK PHILOSOPHY. Part I. Thales to Plato. By 
Professor John Burnet, LL.D. 12s. 6d. net. 

THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY FROM 
HOBBES TO REID. By Professor G. F. Stout. 

[/n preparation. 

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd. 


a 












