LOCKE


S.  Alexander


Published  on  demand  by

UNIVERSITY  MICROFILMS
University  Microfilms  Limited,  High  Wycomb,  England
A  Xerox  Company ,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan,  U.S.A.


1297

A4


NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE


TRENT  UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


Kahle/Austin  Foundation


LOCKE


J*'  By

S.^ALEXANDER

M.A.,  Ll.D.,  rROTESSOR  OF  FHlLOSOrHY  AT  TH*
UNIVERSITY  Of  MANCHESTER


LONDON

ARCHIBALD  CONSTABLE  fcf  CO  Ltd

1908


NOTE


As  a  consequence  of  the  success  of  the  series  of  Religions
Ancient  and  Modern ,  Messrs.  Constable  have  decided  to  issue
a  set  of  similar  primers,  with  brief  introductions,  lists  of  dates,
and  selected  authorities,  presenting  to  the  wider  publio  the
salient  features  of  the  Philosophies  of  Greece  and  Rome  and  of
the  Middle  Ages,  as  well  as  of  modern  Europe.  They  will
appear  in  the  same  handy  Shilling  volumes,  with  neat  cloth
bindings  and  paper  envelopes,  which  have  proved  so  attractive
in  the  case  of  the  Religions.  The  writing  in  each  case  will  be
confided  to  an  eminent  authority,  and  one  who  has  already
proved  himself  capable  of  scholarly  yet  popular  exposition
within  a  small  compass.

Among  the  first  volumes  to  appear  will  be  : —

Early  Greek  Philosophy.  By  A.  W.  Benn,  author  of  The  Philo¬
sophy  of  Greece,  Rationalism  in  the  Nineteenth  Century.

Stoicism.  By  Professor  St.  George  Stock,  author  of  Deduc¬
tive  Logic,  editor  of  the  Apology  of  Plato,  etc.

Plato.  By  Professor  A.  E.  Taylor,  St.  Andrews  University,
author  of  The  Problem  of  Conduct.

Scholasticism.  By  Father  Rickaby,  S.  J.

Hobbes.  By  Professor  A.  E.  Taylor.

Locke.  By  Professor  Alexander,  of  Owens  College.

Comte  and  Mill.  By  T.  W.  Whittaker,  author  of  The
Neoplatonists,  Apollonius  of  Tyana  and  other  Essays.

Herbert  Spencer.  By  W.  H.  Hudson,  author  of  An  Intro¬
duction  to  Spencer's  Philosophy.

Schopenhauer.  By  T.  W.  Whittaker.

Berkeley.  By  Professor  Campbell  Eraser,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.
Bergsea.  By  Father  Tyrrell.


Alexander,  Samuel,  1859-1938.

Locke,  by  S.  Alexander  ...  London,  A.  Constable  &  co^


1

S

*3



I


2

••

5


I


t


(M


a


a

*



8



a

•P

*


I

dS  §


1

i-t

£


3  el


2


d

O


5*


O


•O  S

°’o

*}  O  £*

tfl  g

OS  A

<M  a J

rH  «  t,

«  ££


%


Philosophies  Ancient  and  Modern


LOCKE


s'


PREFATORY  NOTE


I  desire  to  acknowledge  my  obligations  to  Prof.
Campbell  Fraser’s  books  on  Locke  (especially
the  introduction  to  his  edition  of  the  Essay),
and  to  Mr.  H.  R.  Fox  Bourne’s  very  valuable
Life  of  John  Locke  (London,  1876).  In  the
concluding  chapters  I  have  derived  help  from
Sidgwick’s  History  of  Ethics,  Stephen’s  History
of  English  Thought  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,
and  Prof.  Ch.  Bastide’s  John  Locke:  ses  theories
politiques  (Paris,  1906).  I  am  indebted  to  Prof.
G.  F.  Stout  for  several  useful  suggestions.

S.  A.


192267


CONTENTS


mAr'  PAGE

*•  . . .

ii.  Philosopht— (the  Essay) . 24

hi.  Observations  on  the  Essay  ....  52

nr.  Ethics . 69

v.  Politics . 75

vi.  Religion .  34

Books  which  mat  be  consulted  .  .  91


LOCKE


CHAPTER  I

LIFE

Locke’s  life  is  one  of  those,  not  rare  in  the  history
of  English  letters  and  science,  in  which  the
scholar  is  doubled  with  the  man  of  the  world  and
of  public  affairs.  His  instinct  for  speculation  and
his  delicate  health  marked  him  out  for  a  life  of
academic  retirement;  his  talent  for  business  and
his  practical  capacity  secured  him  weight  in
politics,  and  put  within  his  reach,  had  he  chosen
to  accept  them,  important  state  employments.
Ho  combined  scholarly  soclusion  with  public  in¬
fluence.  In  his  latest  years  he  held  for  a  time
high  office  as  a  commissioner  of  trade;  and  all
his  life  he  was  in  the  background  of  politics,  tho
trusted  adviser  of  Shaftesbury,  of  the  party  who
aimed  at  the  establishment  of  William  of  Orange,
and  finally,  of  Somers  and  Charles  Montague.
Though  he  was  always  known  as  a  man  of  eminent
parts,  his  fame  as  a  writer  was  confined  to  his  last

A


I


LOCKE


fifteen  years.  He  himself  chose  as  his  profes¬
sion  the  more  active  work  of  medicine,  though
he  practised  it  only  for  a  few  years  in  Shaftes¬
bury's  family,  and  occasionally  afterwards.  His
life  was  in  fact  that  of  a  savant,  who  lived  in  close
relation  to  the  men  of  science  of  his  time,  such
as  Boyle,  Sydenham,  and  Newton,  and  who,  like
Lord  Acton  in  our  own  day,  was  at  the  same  time
the  confidential  friend  of  statesmen.  It  cannot
be  doubted  that  his  intellectual  and  practical
interests  acted  and  reacted  upon  each  other.
Though  not  himself  the  author  of  great  public
measures,  he  took  his  share  in  many  and  he
voiced  the  principles  of  liberty  which  inspired
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  devotion  to  truth
which  compels  him  to  see  things  for  himself,  as
they  are,  within  the  limits  of  his  vision,  is  accom¬
panied  in  him  by  a  native  sagacity  and  caution,
an  insight,  perhaps  acquired  in  affairs,  into  the
character  of  men,  and  a  sympathy  with  the  needs
of  the  plain  average  man,  which  fitted  him  to
be  the  exponent  of  a  new  method  of  thinking
and  to  set  the  tone  of  thought  to  the  century
which  succeeded  him.  More  than  in  the  case  of
most  philosophers,  Locke’s  nistory  is  varied  with
incident  and  involved  with  the  history  of  the
anxious  and  seminal  time  in  which  he  lived.


2


LIFE


He  was  bom  at  Wrington,  a  village  in  Somerset¬
shire,  on  the  29th  of  August  1632.  His  father,
John  Locke,  was  Clerk  to  the  Justices  of  the
Peace,  one  of  whom — Alexander  Popham — took
command  of  a  volunteer  regiment  of  horse  raised
in  the  parliamentary  cause  in  1642.  The  elder
Locko  took  up  arms  under  him  as  a  captain.  He
suffered  heavily  in  property  by  the  Civil  War.  Of
his  mother  the  younger  John  Locke  expressed
himself  in  affectionate  terms.  His  father  educated
him  with  great  care,  treating  him  with  rigour  as
a  child,  but  admitting  him  to  friendship  as  he
grew  up, — a  practice  which  Locke  approves.  A
letter  to  his  father  is  preserved  which  testifies  to
the  tenderness  Locke  felt  for  him.  Early  years
are  impressionable,  and  Locko  writes  in  1661, ‘I
no  sooner  perceived  myself  in  the  world,  but  I
v  found  myself  in  a  storm  which  has  lasted  almost
hitherto.’  By  Popham’s  offices  he  was  sent,  pro¬
bably  in  1646,  to  Westminster  School,  then  under
the  government  of  the  famous  Dr.  Richard  Busby,
and  was  there  put  through  an  incessant  drilling
in  Greek  and  Latin,  which  may  have  made  Locke
the  good  scholar  he  was,  but  may  also  explain  the
depreciation  which  he  afterwards,  in  his  Th.oughts
upon  Education,  expressed  for  such  exercises.
From  Westminster  he  proceeded  in  1652,  as  a

3


LOCKE


junior  student,  to  Christchurch,  Oxford,  the  Dean
of  which  was  then  Dr.  J ohn  Owen,  appointed  by
Cromwell.  Owen  was  also  Vice-Chancellor  of
the  University,  and  he  and  his  Puritan  colleagues
worked  with  a  will  towards  redeeming  the  Univer¬
sity  from  the  idleness  and  contempt  of  learning
into  which  it  had  fallen.  Owen  proclaimed  and
taught  the  doctrine  of  toleration — a  fact  not  to  be
forgotten  in  the  life  of  the  future  author  of  the
Letters  concerning  Toleration.  Locke  did  not
relish  the  studies  of  the  place,  and  regretted  that
his  father  had  sent  him  to  Oxford.  He  disliked
the  public  disputations  in  the  schools,  which  he
thought  ‘invented  for  wrangling  and  ostentation,
rather  than  to  discover  truth.'  He  regarded  his
early  years  at  Oxford  as  wasted,  because  the  only
philosophy  then  known  there  ‘was  the  peripatetic,
perplexed  with  obscure  terms  and  useless  ques¬
tions.’  He  spent,  we  hear,  a  good  part  of  his  first
years  in  the  University  in  reading  romances.  But
he  attended  the  lectures  of  the  mathematicians
Wallis  and  Ward,  and  was  intimate  with  Pocock,
the  professor  of  Arabic.  It  was,  however,  the
study  of  Descartes  which  first  ‘  gave  him  a  relish
of  philosophical  things.  He  was  rejoiced  in  read¬
ing  them,  because,  though  he  very  often  differed
in  opinion  from  this  writer,  he  yet  found  that

4


LIFE


what  he  said  was  very  intelligible,  from  whence
he  was  encouraged  to  think  that  his  not  having
understood  others  had  possibly  not  proceeded
from  a  defect  in  his  understanding.’  It  is  not
easy  to  make  out  the  sources  of  Locke’s  philo¬
sophical  thought — except  Descartes,  and  the  Port
Royal  Logic.  Bacon  he  knew,  and  also  Hobbes
(though,  he  says,  not  intimately),  and  he  appears
to  have  been  influenced  by  the  atomism  of
Gassendi.  Leibniz  he  knew  little,  and  expressed
in  later  life  a  low  opinion  of  him.1  Malebranche
he  studied  and  criticised.  But  we  can  well  believe  >
his  own  statement  that  he  learned  more  from
intercourse  with  men  than  from  books.

Locke  became  a  senior  student  of  Christchurch
in  1659,  and  the  emoluments  of  that  office  were,
with  a  small  property  inherited  from  his  father  of
about  £70  a  year,  his  main  source  of  income  till
1684,  when  he  was  deprived  of  his  studentship.
Even  when  he  lived  in  London,  he  paid  frequent
and  long  visits  to  Oxford.  After  the  Restoration,
a  new  order  of  things  arose  in  the  University,
which  Locke  welcomed.  His  bringing  up  as  a
Puritan,  combined  with  his  disappointment  with

1  The  Nouveaux  Essaix,  in  which  Leibniz  expounded  and
reviewed  the  Exsay,  Locke  never  saw,  and  indeed,  owing  to
Locke’s  death,  it  was  not  published  in  Leibniz’s  lifetime.

5


LOCKE


the  Puritan  rule,  may  have  fostered  the  bent  of
J  his  mind  towards  latitudinarian  views  of  theology,
and  towards  dislike  of  extreme  fanaticism  or  *  en¬
thusiasm.’  He  was  appointed  to  lectureships  at
Christchurch  usually  held  by  clergymen.  His
father  had  designed  him  for  the  ministry.  But
Locke  declined  a  tempting  offer  leading  to  prefer¬
ment  in  the  Irish  Church,  not  desiring  to  commit
himself  to  a  profession  which  he  could  not  divest
himself  of,  supposing  that  he  failed  in  it.  Finally,
he  decided  upon  the  profession  of  medicine.  He
had  for  some  years  pursued  the  study  of  physical
science,  and  had  consorted  with  Boyle  and  the
other  members  of  the  Oxford  branch  of  the  Royal
Society.  Boyle’s  History  of  the  Air,  which  Locke
edited  after  Boyle’s  death,  contains  observations
registered  by  Locke  from  1660  to  1667.  He  never
obtained  the  doctorate  in  medicine,  and  there  was
some  difficulty  in  securing  for  him  the  degree  of
Bachelor,  because  he  had  not  attended  the  regular
courses  of  lectures  in  medicine.  He  began  practico
at  Oxford,  as  an  amateur  partner  of  his  friend
Dr.  Thomas.

In  1665  Locke  obtained,  in  a  way  which  is  not
clear,  the  appointment  of  secretary  to  Sir  Walter
Vane,  who  went  to  Cleves  on  a  special  embassy  to
the  Elector  of  Brandenburg.  Letters  to  his  friend

6


LIFE


John  Strachey  describe  with  somewhat  heavy
humour  the  incidents  of  his  stay  there.  Locke
must  have  shown  his  abilities,  for,  on  his  return,  he
was  offered  an  appointment  in  an  embassy  to  Spain.
Though  he  was  plainly  much  tempted,  his  good
genius  saved  him  from  diplomacy  for  philosophy,
and  he  remained  at  Oxford  practising  medicine.

It  was  in  16G7  that,  by  an  accident  arising  out  of
his  profession,  he  became  acquainted  with  Shaftes¬
bury — an  event  which  determined  his  future  life.
Shaftesbury  (then  Lord  Ashley)  came  to  Oxford,
to  drink  the  waters  of  the  village  of  Astrop,  not
far  off,  which  were  then  much  recommended.
Owing  to  some  delay  in  tho  supply  of  the  waters,
Locke,  in  the  absence  of  Dr.  Thomas,  waited  upon
Ashley  to  explain.  The  impression  the  two  men
left  upon  each  other  was  such  as  to  lead  to  a
lasting  friendship.  Locke  went  to  London  in  1667
at  Ashley’s  invitation,  and  thenceforth  became  a
member  of  Ashley’s  household.  He  acted  as
physician  to  the  household,  though  he  also  prac¬
tised  to  some  extent  outside.  Ashley  himself
owed  his  life  to  an  operation  performed  by  Locke.
But  he  was  not  only  the  doctor,  but  was  intrusted
with  intimate  private  affairs  of  the  family,  arrang¬
ing  the  marriage  of  Ashley’s  son,  and  becoming
thereafter  tutor  of  the  little  boy  who  was  to  be  the

7


LOCKE


Shaftesbury  of  the  Characteristics  and  to  disown
the  philosophy  of  his  tutor.  More  important  still,
he  became  Ashley’s  confidential  adviser,  though  it
is  not  necessary  to  suppose  him  privy  to  all  the
statesman’s  political  actions.  He  helped  in  draw¬
ing  up  in  1663  the  Fundamental  Constitutions  for
the  government  of  Carolina,  of  which  settlement
Ashley  was  one  of  the  proprietors.  A  draft  of  the
scheme  exists  in  Locke’s  handwriting,  and  whether
this  scheme  is  due  to  him  wholly  or  only  in  part,
its  liberal  provisions  for  freedom  of  religion,  if
only  belief  in  God  is  avowed,  are  in  keeping  with
Locke’s  opinions.  When  Shaftesbury  became
Chancellor  in  1672,  Locke  became  secretary  of
presentations  (to  benefices),  and  later,  secretary  of
the  recently  established  Council  of  Trade  and
Foreign  Plantations  (or  Colonies),  an  office  which
he  retained  till  the  Council  was  dissolved  in  1675,
though  he  does  not  appear  to  have  received  the
salary  due  to  him.  While  he  was  thus  occupied
in  practical  affairs,  he  still  carried  on  his  work
in  medicine,  and  was  allied  in  friendship  with
Sydenham,  who  commends  him  in  no  measured
terms  in  the  preface  to  the  third  edition  of  his
Method  of  curing  Fevers  (1676).  In  1668,  ho
became  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  Though
he  was  more  than  once  a  member  of  Council,  he

8


LIFE


does  not,  however,  seem  to  have  taken  any  active
part  in  its  proceedings.  But  about  this  time  in  a
small  circle  of  friends  there  occurred  the  famous
meeting  from  which  the  Essay  took  its  origin.
‘  Five  or  six  friends/  he  says,  ‘  meeting  at  my
chamber,  and  discoursing  on  a  subject  very  remote
from  this,  found  themselves  quickly  at  a  stand  by
the  difficulties  that  rose  on  every  side.  After
we  had  awhile  puzzled  ourselves  without  coming
nearer  resolution  of  those  doubts  which  perplexed
us,  it  came  into  my  thoughts  that  we  took  a
wrong  course,  and  that  bofore  we  set  ourselves
upon  inquiries  of  that  nature,  it  was  necessary  to
examine  our  own  abilities,  and  see  what  objects
our  understandings  were  or  were  not  fitted  to  deal
with.  This  I  proposed  to  the  company,  who  all
readily  assented,  and  thereupon  it  was  agreed
that  this  should  be  our  first  inquiry.  Some  hasty
and  undigested  thoughts,  on  a  subject  I  had  never
before  considered,  which  I  set  down  against  our
next  meeting  gave  the  first  entrance  into  this
discourse.’  Wo  know  the  names  of  two  of  his
friends,  Tyrrell  and  Thomas,  and  that  tho  dis¬
course  was  about  the  principles  of  worship  and
revealed  religion,  A  short  paragraph  dated  1671
of  his  common-place  book  has  been  preserved,
which  marks  the  beginning  of  Locke’s  work.

9


LOCKE


Relieved  of  his  office  in  1675,  Locke  spent  the
next  four  years  in  rest  and  travel  in  France.
His  chest  always  was  weak,  and  from  this  time
forward  he  had  constantly  to  struggle  against
asthma,  for  which  the  smoke-laden  air  of  London
in  the  winter  was  peculiarly  unfavourable.  We
possess  journals  of  his  sojourn  in  France,  which
enable  us  to  follow  his  movements  and  the  obser¬
vations  he  made  there  (eg.  his  report  on  the  vine¬
yards  made  for  Shaftesbury).  Most  of  his  time  was
spent  at  Montpellier,  the  great  medical  school,  and
Locke  describes  the  initiation  of  a  young  doctor
there,  in  terms  which  recall  the  famous  passage
of  Moli^re’s  Malade  Imaginaire.  Some  consider¬
able  time  he  also  spent  in  Paris,  in  the  society
of  learned  friends.  But  he  returned  in  1679  to
serve  again  as  adviser  to  Shaftesbury  during  the
troubled  years  of  the  Exclusion  Bill  and  the  Whig
Plots,  in  which  his  movements  can  only  obscurely
be  traced.  Shaftesbury  was  obliged  to  escape  to
Holland  in  1681,  where  ho  died  the  next  year,
and  Locke,  whose  political  associations  brought
him  into  suspicion,  thought  it  prudent  to  leave
England  for  Holland  in  1683,  and  there  ho  re¬
mained  till  after  the  Revolution,  returning  in  1689.

In  Holland  he  made  many  friends,  one  of  them
in  particular  Van  Limborch,  the  head  of  the  Re-

io


LIFE


monstrant  (or  Arminian)  College,  to  whom  he
addressed  the  Epiatola  de  Tolerantia  in  its  Latin
form.  After  some  travelling  he  settled  at  Utrecht
in  1684,  where  he  learned  that  Charles  11.  had
compelled  Fell,  the  Dean  of  Christchurch,  to
deprive  him  of  his  Studentship  as  having  behaved
‘factiously  and  undutifully  to  the  Government.’
He  was  left  now  for  his  support  to  his  small
private  property  and  the  annuity  of  £100  which
Shaftesbury  had  provided  for  him.  Not  long
after,  his  name  was  attached  to  a  list  of  persons
whom  James  n.  requested  the  Dutch  Government
to  hand  over  on  suspicion  of  being  implicated  in j
Monmouth’s  insurrection,  from  which  Locke  hacy
carefully  held  himself  aloof.  Locke  remained  in
hiding  for  some  time  at  Amsterdam  and  after¬
wards  settled  at  Cleves  under  an  assumed  name.
The  danger  was  probably  not  so  great  as  he  feared
— the  Dutch  Government  would  probably  not
have  surrendered  him.  His  friend  Pembroke
secured  him  James’s  pardon  and  begged  him  to
return.  Locke  proudly  declined  the  pardon  as
having  been  guilty  of  no  crime.  But  the  danger
was  past,  and  he  was  free  to  consult  his  own  desire
for  leisure  for  study  and  removed  to  Rotterdam,
where  he  lived  in  the  house  of  a  Quaker  friend,
Furly,  and  was  in  close  association  with  the

1 1


LOCKE


English  exiles,  more  particularly  Mordaunt,  after¬
wards  Peterborough,  and  it  appears  even  with
William  of  Orange  himself.  He  followed  William
to  England  in  1689.

With  his  return  to  London  Locke's  appear¬
ance  as  an  author  begins  in  England.  In  1690
appeared  both  the  Essay  concerning  Human
Understanding  and  the  Two  Treatises  of  Govern¬
ment,  the  latter  work  anonymously.  The  Letter
concerning  Toleration  had  appeared  in  its  Latin
form  ( Epistola  de  Tolerantia)  in  1685,  but  the
English  translation  (by  William  Popple)  appeared
in  London  in  1689.  This  was  also  anonymous,
and  great  was  Locke’s  anger  when  he  discovered
subsequently  that  his  friend  Limborch  had  di¬
vulged  his  authorship,  even  to  an  intimate  friend.
It  was  never  acknowledged  by  him  except  in  his
will.  Locke  is  thus  one  of  the  great  writers  whose
writings  have  appeared  in  advanced  age,  for  in
1689  he  was  fifty-seven.  But  tho  entries  in  his
common-place  books  and  journals  show  that  tho
Essay  was  in  preparation  evor  since  1671,  and  had,
as  he  said,  been  the  subject  of  interrupted  labours
during  his  travels  in  France.  Thoro  is  evidonco
that  a  draft  of  it  was  soon  by  Shaftesbury  boforo
1683,  but  it  was  finally  prepared  during  his  exile
in  Holland,  where  he  had  already  published  an

12


LIFE


abstract  of  it  in  his  friend  Leclerc’s  Bibliographic
Universelle  in  1689.  Nothing  is  more  interesting
than  to  trace  the  preparation  in  Locke’s  mind  for
his  authentic  deliverances,  and  the  papers  pre¬
served  to  us  show  rather  how  early  than  how  late
the  central  ideas  of  his  various  doctrines  took
shape.  Of  particular  interest  are  writings  which
the  industry  of  Mr.  Fox  Bourne  has  discovered
among  the  Shaftesbury  papers,  written  by  Locke
at  various  times  and  bearing  specially  on  his
views  of  religious  liberty.  One  of  these  dates  from
1660:  ‘Whether  tho  civil  magistrate  may  lawfully
impose  and  determine  the  use  of  indifferent  things
in  reference  to  religious  worship  * ;  which  shows
Locke’s  impatienco  of  the  intolerance  shown  by
the  Puritans,  and  the  hopes,  doomed  to  disappoint¬
ment,  which  he  derived  from  the  accession  of
Charles  n.  Another  is  a  paper  of  ‘  Reflections  on
the  Roman  Commonwealth’  (written  before  1667),
in  which  Numa  is  praised  for  his  moderation  in
what  ho  rogardod  as  tho  requirements  of  religion.
A  still  more  important  ‘  Essay  concerning  Tolora-
tion  (1667)  ’  published  in  full  by  Mr.  Fox  Bourne
anticipates  almost  completely  the  Letter.  It  ex¬
hibits  tho  samo  dosiro  towards  non-intorforonce
of  the  civil  power  with  religion,  oxposing  also  the
folly  of  such  interference;  the  same  desiro  for

13


LOCKE


a  comprehensive  religion  which  should  unite  all
sects  in  one  national  church ;  the  same  exception
from  toleration  of  atheists  and  also  of  sects  like
the  Catholic  in  so  far  as  they  set  up  another
temporal  authority  against  the  civil  authority  of
the  land.  The  main  outlines  of  Locke’s  famous
Letter  have  become  part  and  parcel  of  our  ordi¬
nary  political  thinking,  and  this  diminishes  our
interest  in  it  and  perhaps  leads  us  to  forget  the
audacity  and  originality,  which,  though  the  Letter
had  precedents  in  previous  writers  in  England  and
in  the  practice  of  Holland,  we  must  still  acknow¬
ledge  in  it,  and  which  gave  it  its  influence  over
the  mind  of  Europe.  All  the  more  value  attaches
to  the  earlier  writings  which  enable  us  to  detect
the  existence  of  these  doctrines  in  the  history  of
Locke’s  own  mind.

Locke’s  years  from  1690  to  1704,  or  at  least
from  1691,  were  spent  in  semi-retirement  in
Essex,  varied  by  public  business  in  London.  He
held  olfice  under  the  Crown  as  Commissioner  of
Appeals  for  eleven  or  twelve  years,  and  in  the
more  important  office  of  a  Commissioner  of  Trade
from  1695,  in  which  office  he  received  a  salary  of
£1000.  He  accepted  this  last  office  only  under
pressure.  He  appears  to  have  been  in  fact  the
chief  member  of  the  Board,  and  projected  im-

14


LIFE


portant  work  in  promotion  of  Irish  linen  manu¬
facture  and  of  reform  of  the  poor  laws,  though  his
proposals  in  these  respects  were  not  put  into
effect.  His  inability  to  bear  the  London  winter
led  to  an  early  resignation  which  Somers  pressed
him  to  reconsider,  but  he  finally  withdrew  from
office  in  1700.  His  influence  was,  however,  not
confined  to  his  official  work.  In  the  early  years
of  William’s  reign,  letters  from  Somers  show  how
much  value  was  set  upon  his  advice.  One
incident  of  peculiar  interest  occurred  in  1689,
when  he  was  offered  the  post  of  ambassador  to
Frederick  i.  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg.  Again
his  good  genius  persuaded  him  to  decline,  on  the
pretext  of  his  weak  health,  the  cold  climate,  and
his  inability  to  support  the  ‘  warm  drinking  ’
necessary  in  those  parts  for  one  who  was  to  make
himself  acceptable.  And  though  he  was  invited
to  go  to  Vienna  instead,  Locke  persisted  in  his
refusal.  William  showed  the  value  he  set  upon
Locke’s  services  by  summoning  him  urgently  at
a  later  date  from  Essex  in  the  winter,  for  some
purpose  not  sufficiently  made  out,  but  probably
again  of  a  diplomatic  character;  but  the  summons
cost  Locke  several  days  of  severe  illness.  During
these  later  years  Locke  concerned  himself  largely
with  economic  questions.  In  1692,  he  published

15


LOCKE


anonymously  some  letters  (addressed,  Mr.  Fox
Bourne  thinks,  to  Somers)  on  *  The  consequences
of  the  lowering  of  interest  and  raising  the  value  of
money’  which  had  reference  to  a  proposal  that
had  been  made  to  lower  the  rate  of  interest  by  law,
and  to  the  serious  problem  of  the  depreciation  of
the  currency  which  caused  Locke  great  anxiety.
When  Lowndes,  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,
made  a  proposal  in  1695  for  raising  the  value  of
money,  Locke  returned  to  the  subject  and  rendered
service  to  Somers  and  Montague,  who  had  con¬
sulted  him,  in  their  legislation  for  reform  of  the
coinage.  In  this  year  also  some  strictures  which
Locke  had  written  on  the  Licensing  Act  (which
maintained  the  censorship  of  the  press)  were  read
in  a  conference  of  the  two  Houses,  and  helped
towards  the  demolition  of  the  Act.

Locke’s  country  residence  was  at  Oates,  in  Essex,
where  he  finally  took  up  his  abode  in  1691,  in  the
house  of  Sir  Francis  Masham,  as  soon  as  he  could
persuade  that  gentleman,  at  whose  house  Locke
had  frequently  been  a  visitor,  to  accept  him  as  a
permanent  guest  upon  suitable  terms.  Masham’s
wife  was  the  daughter  of  Cudworth  the  Cambridge
Platonist,  with  whose  family  Locke  had  long  been
on  terms  of  friendship.  Lady  Masham  devoted
herself  with  unfailing  affection  to  her  friend,

16


LIFE


whose  declining  years  and  fragile  health  she
cheered  with  her  intellectual  companionship.
Her  letter  to  Leclerc,  written  after  Locke’s  death,
is  a  principal  source  of  our  knowledge  of  his  life.
Masham’s  daughter  Esther  (his  child  by  a  former
wife)  became  a  great  friend  of  Locke,  and  a  lively
correspondence  passed  when  either  was  away  from
home  between  ‘Laudabridis’  and  ‘Joannes.’  Whil
at  Oates,  Locke  carried  on  the  greater  part  of  th
immense  literary  work  of  his  later  life.  Th
details  may  be  mentioned  briefly.  A  second  letter
concerning  Toleration  had  appeared  in  1690,  in
answer  to  a  criticism  of  the  first  by  Jonas  Proast,
and  the  long  third  letter  published  in  1692,  was
a  rejoinder  to  Proast’s  rejoinder.  In  1693  Locke
published  his  Thoughts  concerning  Education,
containing  the  substance  of  letters  written  from
Holland  to  his  friend  Clarke  about  the  education
of  Clarke’s  son.  Locke  used  his  medical  know¬
ledge  with  much  effect  in  the  earlier  part  of  his
treatise.  The  general  body  of  the  work  reveals
his  sagacious  caro  for  the  growth  of  character,
and  his  aversion  to  studies  calculated  to  cul¬
tivate  address,  rathor  than  progress  in  knowledge.
In  all  the  methods  of  education,  he  loo  bed  to
their  effect  upon  the  pupil’s  mind.  But  he  put
virtue  and  practical  wisdom  first  and  learning
B  1 7


LOCKE


i  last.1  Probably  Locke  under-rates  the  value  of
\  learning  as  itself  a  means  of  educating  character
1  — the  topic  on  which  it  was  reserved  for  Herbart
to  insist.  But  his  work  deserves  its  place  in
educational  literature  for  its  wisdom  and  sense
of  life,  and  it  has  the  historical  importance  of
having  affected  the  Emile  of  Rousseau.  Locke
was  engaged  continually  in  modifying  the  Essay,
of  which  a  second  edition  appeared  in  1694,  and
a  much  amended  fourth  edition  in  1700.  In
1695,  he  published  anonymously  his  Reasonable¬
ness  of  Christianity  (followed  by  two  *  Vindica¬
tions  ’  of  it).  Stillingfleet,  Bishop  of  Worcester,
recognised  in  the  writer  of  this  work  the  author
of  the  Essay ;  and  when  Toland,  the  deistical
writer,  published  next  year  his  Christianity  not
Mysterious,  which  he  professed  to  found  upon
Locke’s  Essay,  attacked  the  Essay  itself  by  way
of  a  defence  of  the  Trinity  against  Toland  and
the  Unitarians.  Locke  replied  to  Stillingfleet’s
attacks  in  a  series  of  letters,  between  1697  and


1  R.  H.  Quick  (Educational  Reformers),  observes  that  this
work  should  be  read  in  connection  with  the  Conduct  of  the
Understanding,  where  instead  of  considering  subjects  of  study
from  the  point  of  view  of  their  usefulness  for  a  young  gentle¬
man  (as  in  the  Thoughts),  Locke  considers  them  as  means  of
training, i  and  urges  that  the  value  of  study  is  to  enable  the
youth  to  use  bis  reason  for  himself  hereafter.

1 8


LIFE


1699,  which  supplemented  in  certain  respects  the
doctrine  of  the  Essay,  and  overwhelmed  his  op¬
ponent  with  argument  and  irony.  Of  Locke’s
posthumous  writings  the  most  important  philo¬
sophically  are  a  paper  on  Malebranche  and  T)ia
Conduct  of  the  Understanding.

Many  friends  came  to  see  Locke  during  his  re¬
tirement  at  Oates,  or  received  visits  from  him.
Among  these  was  Newton,  between  whom  and
Locke  there  subsisted  a  real  affection.  Locke
took  some  part  in  securing  for  Newton  his  ap¬
pointment  at  the  Mint.  But  Newton  was  not
always  easy  to  deal  with.  Once,  in  consequence
of  prolonged  insomnia  (due  to  dozing  by  the  fire
in  his  room),  he  imagined  a  grievance  against
Locke.  A  reader  who  remembers  the  greatness
of  the  two  men  will  find  something  very  touching
in  the  letter  in  which  Newton  contritely  asks
forgiveness  for  entertaining  and  expressing  an
ovil  opinion  of  his  friend,  and  in  Locke’s  reply
of  surprise  and  generous  affection.  Another  friend
of  this  later  time,  whom  the  Essay  brought  him,
was  William  Molyneux,  ‘the  ingenious  gentle¬
man’  of  the  Essay  ‘whom  I  am  proud  to  call
my  friend,’  an  Irish  patriot  before  Swift,  who
introduced  the  Essay  into  Trinity  College,  Dublin,
whoro  it  was  to  be  read  shortly  by  the  young

19


LOCKE


Berkeley,  and  has  ever  since  remained  a  text¬
book.  Molyneux’  discussion  of  the  Essay  helped
Locke  to  several  amendments,  and  he  visited
Locke  at  Oates.  Another  new  friend  was  Anthony
Collins,  a  young  neighbouring  squire,  who  after¬
wards  wrote  one  of  the  best  known  of  the  deistical
writings.  Locke  took  a  warm  interest  in  a  rela¬
tion  of  his,  Peter  King,  a  young  lawyer  and
member  of  Parliament,  who  became  his  sole
executor.  It  was  King’s  descendant,  Lord  Chan¬
cellor  King,  who  published  in  1829  the  Life
of  John  Locke.  Still  another  young  friend  de¬
serves  mention,  Pierre  Coste,  French  tutor  to
the  boy  Francis  Masham,  who  wrote  of  Locke  in
Bayle’s  magazine  Les  Nouvelles  de  la  IUpublique
des  Lettres.  Locke  died  on  the  28th  of  October
1704,  and  was  buried  in  the  churchyard  at  High
Laver,  the  parish  where  he  used  to  attend  service.

1  Locke’s  capacity  of  friendship,  which  included
i  love  of  children  and  young  people,  is  apparent
from  his  whole  history.  Lady  Masham  and  Coste
have  left  us  a  charming  and  amiable  picture  of
his  personality — ‘  his  singular  humanity  and  good
breeding,  which  made  him  alike  conversible  with
all  sorts  of  people,’  and  made  him  lead  people  to
talk  of  what  they  understood  best;  his  fondness
of  raillery  and  banter,  ‘  though  rarely  if  ever,  to

20


LIFE


the  least  offence  of  any  person,  but  rather  to  dwell
on  some  very  slight  fault,  or  else  that  which  was
usually  commendable  and  for  their  honour  to  be
known  * ;  his  wit  in  conversation ;  his  kindness  and
charity,  which,  however,  were  always  directed  to
encourage  industry.  ‘  He  was  a  great  lover  of
economy,  and  an  exact  keeper  of  accounts  ’  and  he
was  very  neat  in  his  dress  and  habits,  without
any  affectation  or  singularity.  He  was  quick¬
tempered  and  sometimes  against  unfair  assailants
he  did  not  conceal  his  anger,  but  he  was  easily
appeased.  When  some  one  quoted  in  his  hearing
some  words  of  Horace,  ’Ah,’  said  Locke,  ‘  I  am  like
Horace  in  both  these  things.  I  love  the  warmth
of  the  sun,  and  though  I  am  prone  to  be  angry,  >
my  hot  temper  soon  goes  down.’

If  we  had  not  his  letters  and  the  testimony  of
these  friends,  we  could  easily  guess  from  the  style
of  his  writing  and  particularly  of  the  Essay  what
manner  of  man  he  was.  It  suggests  a  man  saga¬
cious,  cautious,  skilled  in  tho  knowledge  of  men
and  regardful  above  all  things  of  what  it  concerns
man’s  happiness  to  know  and  to  be,  a  foe  to  ‘  en¬
thusiasm,'  but  of  broad  spirit  and  sympathy.  Ho
writes  leisurely,  as  if  he  were  talking  out  of  a  full
mind;  determined  to  seo  things  clearly ;  anxious
to  make  his  meaning  plain ;  yet  not  over-care-

21


LOCKE


fill  of  precision,  but  content,  as  a  man  of  the
world,  to  allow  one  part  of  his  discourse  to  supply
the  qualification  of  another  part.  Prolix  his  style  is,
exceeding  the  measure  of  our  less  spacious  times,
and  when  it  is  controversial,  protracted  into  tedi¬
ousness.  Its  uniform  level  is  diversified  here  and
there  by  phrases  of  striking  and  even  pungent  wit
(‘  God  when  he  makes  the  prophet  doth  not  un¬
make  the  man'),  more  often  by  quiet  humour
(‘every  drowsy  nod  shakes  their  doctrine  who
teach  that  the  soul  is  always  thinking  ’)  or  irony,
which  is  always  courteous  (and  therefore  more
effective)  except  when  it  is  directed  against  an
unworthy  criticism.  It  betrays  little  imagination,
though  occasionally  there  is  a  touch  of  tenderness
and  fancy  as  in  the  passage :  ‘  The  ideas  as  well  as
children  of  our  youth  often  die  before  us;  and  our
minds  represent  those  tombs  to  which  we  are
approaching ;  where  though  the  brass  and  marble
remain,  yet  the  inscriptions  are  effaced  by  time
and  the  imagery  moulders  away’;  or  when  he
allows  himself  to  consider  the  possibility  of  con¬
tinuous  grades  of  spirits  in  the  world,  though
there  tho  imagination  belongs  rather  to  the
thought  than  to  the  style.  Often  there  are  pas¬
sages  of  sustained  eloquence  like  the  concluding
pages  of  the  Reasonableness  of  Christianity.  But


LIFE


its  general  tone  is  that  of  equable  common-sense,
without  emphasis,  without  enthusiasm,  restrained
in  its  judgment,  careful  of  measure,  never  dull
but  reflecting  evenly  from  a  candid  surface,
modest  when  it  is  most  original,  because  con¬
cerned  with  the  faithful  presentment  of  things,
rather  lambent  than  fiery,  an  inspired  pedes-
trianism.


23


CHAPTER  II


PHILOSOPHY — (THE  ESSA  Y)

Nothing  enables  us  so  well  to  understand  the
meaning  of  a  philosophic  writer  as  to  know  the
spirit  in  which  he  undertook  his  inquiries,  and  it
is  fortunate  for  us  that  the  more  personal  and
autobiographical  method  of  writers  like  Descartes,
Locke,  and  Spinoza  (in  one  of  his  treatisos)  and
others,  admits  us  into  this  secret.  Locke’s  spirit  «
is  that  of  criticism.  The  method  of  criticism  in
philosophy  is  principally  associated  with  the  name
of  Kant,  who  avowed  and  described  it.  It  is  the
method  of  determining  the  limits  of  our  know-  %
ledge  by  an  inquiry  into  the  instrument.  In  this
sense  Locke  has  been  rightly  described  as  ‘  the
first  critical  philosopher,’  and  different  as  his  pro¬
cedure  was  from  Kant’s,  and  different  as  was  the
outcome  of  their  thinking,  their  affinity  of  spirit  is  j
profounder  than  their  divergence.  The  words  in
which  Locko  describes,  at  the  opening  of  the
Essay,  the  occasion  of  his  writing  it  remind  us  of
the  later  words  of  Kant  in  his  proface  to  the

24


PHILOSOPHY


Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  *  I  thought/  Locke
says,  ‘  that  the  first  step  towards  satisfying  several
inquiries  the  mind  of  man  was  very  apt  to  run
into,  was  to  take  a  survey  of  our  own  understand¬
ings,  examine  our  own  powers,  and  see  to  what
things  they  were  adapted.  Till  that  was  done  I
suspected  we  began  at  the  wrong  end  and  in  vain
sought  for  satisfaction  in  a  quiet  and  sure  posses¬
sion  of  truths  that  most  concerned  us,  whilst  we
let  loose  our  thoughts  into  the  vast  ocean  of  being ;
as  if  all  that  boundless  extent  were  the  natural
and  undoubted  possession  of  our  understandings,
whorein  thcro  was  nothing  oxompt  from  its  de¬
cision,  or  that  escaped  its  comprehension.  Thus
men  extending  their  inquiries  beyond  their  capac¬
ities,  and  letting  their  thoughts  wander  into  those
depths  where  they  can  find  no  sure  footing,  it  is
no  wonder  that  they  raise  questions  and  multiply
disputes,  which,  never  coming  to  any  clear  resolu¬
tion,  are  proper  only  to  continue  and  increase
their  doubts,  and  confirm  them  at  last  in  perfect
scepticism.  Whereas  were  the  capacities  of  our
understandings  well  considered,  tho  extent  of  our
knowledge  once  discovered  and  the  horizon  found
which  sets  tho  bounds  between  the  enlightened  ,
and  dark  parts  of  things — between  what  is  and
what  is  not  comprehensible  by  us — men  would

25


LOCKE


perhaps  with  less  scruple  acquiesce  in  the  avowed
•  ignorance  of  the  one,  and  employ  their  thoughts
and  discourse  with  more  advantage  and  satisfac¬
tion  in  the  other.’  With  Locke  the  speculative
,  impulse  is  an  out-growth  from  practical  needs.
‘  Our  business  here  is  not  to  know  all  things  but
those  which  concern  our  conduct.’  He  is  per¬
suaded  that  for  two  evils  to  which  the  mind  is
liable  :  scepticism  which  bids  us  doubt  everything
because  there  are  some  things  which  cannot  be
understood ;  and  on  the  other  hand  extravagant
pretensions  to  knowledge:  there  is  but  one  cure,
-  to  know  how  much  we  can  know.  The  Essay  is
thus  a  doctrine  of  the  limits  of  knowledge.  ‘

All  its  multifarious  inquiries  converge  to  this
end.  The  extent  of  knowledge  is  indeed  the
proper  subject  of  only  one  book,  the  fourth  and

I  last.  Knowledge  is  to  Locke  the  perception  of
the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas,  that
is  to  say,  of  the  objects  of  our  understanding.  A
preliminary  survey  was  therefore  necessary  of
these  ideas,  and  because  to  him  words,  the  signs
of  ideas,  were  an  index  to  the  nature  of  ideas
themselves,  and  the  misuse  of  language  was  partly
provoked  by  uncleamess  in  our  ideas,  and  partly
provoked  it,  the  study  of  ideas  and  the  study  of
words  are  conjoined.  These  inquiries  occupy  the

2  6


PHILOSOPHY


major  part  of  the  Essay  in  Books  n.  and  in.  It
|  is  a  method  Locke  describes  as  the  ‘plain,  his-
1  torical  method.’  But  history  means  to  him  not
|  simply  or  primarily  the  record  of  the  origin  and
\  growth  of  our  idoas,  but  rather  it  has  the  sense  in
(  which  Bacon  and  Aristotle  used  the  word  before
him,  and  in  which  we  still  speak  of  Zoology  as
[  natural  history.  The  history  of  our  minds  means
I  a  description  of  the  contents  of  our  mind  as  wo
find  them,  arranging  them  into  sorts,  and  assign¬
ing  them  to  their  appropriate  faculties.  The
"t  second  book  of  Locke’s  Essay,  which  is  a  survey
i  of  ideas,  is  in  fact  an  inventory  of  our  experience.

•  But  Locke  does  not  distinguish  the  inquiry  into
j  the  contents  of  our  ideas  from  the  inquiry  into
|  their  origin,  and  hence  arises  one  of  the  chief
detects  of  the  Essay.  For  in  analysing  our  ideas
into  their  simples.t_elfimQnts,  which  is"  his  prin¬
cipal  object,  he  implies  and  even  says,  that  thP^p_
simple  elements  exist  first  and  that  the  more

complex  ones  are  constructed  out  of  them.  But
the  ‘  history  which  may  be  true  as  a  description
and  an  analysis  is  not  necessarily  true  as  an
account  of  the  order  of  growth.

Locke’s  method  has  sometimes  been  described
as  psychological,  and  it  has  been  made  a  charge
against  him  as  well  as  against  his  successors,


2  7


LOCKE


Berkeley  and  Hume,  that  they  give  us  psychology
instead  of  philosophy.'  This  charge  is  founded
upon  a  misunderstanding  of  the  spirit  of  their
work.  While  they  are  founders  of  English
psychology,  their  primary  interest  is  philosophical
or  metaphysical,  and  they  are  only  incidentally
psychologists.  The  object  of  psychology  is  to
describe  the  process  by  which  the  mind  acquires
its  experiences.  Necessarily  such  a  classification
as  Locke  gives  of  these  experiences,  referring
them  to  the  mental  capacities  by  which  we
acquire  them,  supplies  at  the  same  time  the
material  of  a  psychology.  But  Locke’s  object  is
to  describe  the  different  kinflsof  objects  the  mind
thinks  about;  and  in  fact  the  processes  of_oj>
servation,  perception,  willing  and  the  like,  which
are  the  subject-matter  of  psychology  (a  word
which  Locke  himself  does  not  employ),  are  for
him  merely  one  portion  of  the  contents  of  human
experience,  that  which  he  describes  as  ideas  of
reflection.

!By  ‘idea’  (a  term  which  he  borrows  from  Des¬
cartes)  Locke  means  ‘whatever  is  the  object  of
the  understanding,  when  a  man  thinks  ’  or  ‘  what¬
ever  it  is  which  the  mind  can  be  employed  about
in  thinking.’  It  includes  thus  the  simplest
experiences  like  heat,  and  the  most  complex  like

28

/

/

/


PHILOSOPHY


those  of  civilisation  or  mathematical  relations ;  and
not  merely  experience  of  things,  but  of  events,
whether  in  the  external  world,  or,  like  the  process
of  conceiving,  in  the  mind  itself ;  not  only  ideas
of  particular  things  but  general  or  abstract  ideas.


Careless  as  Locke’s  use  of  language  is,  there  is
never  any  doubt  as  to  his  use  of  this  word.
'Sometimes  he  describes  an  idea  by  reference  to
the  capacity  which  supplies  it — an  idea  of  sensa¬
tion  is  thus  an  idea  supplied  by  sense ;  sometimes
by  reference  to  its  contents,  as  when  he  speaks  of
an  idea  of  heat,  in  other  words  heat  so  far  as  it
is  experienced.  They  are  objects  of  mind:  they
would  not  be  what  they  are  if  they  were  not  ex¬
perienced  ;  but  they  are  objects  still.  They  are  in
fact  the  appearances  of  things,  in  so  far  as  these
appearances  are  presented  to  the  mind,  or  as
Locke  and  his  followers  more  often  say  ‘are  in
the  mind.’  But  he  does  not  answer,  because  he
does  not  raise,  the  question  as  to  what  the  nature
of  these  ideas  is  or  how  they  arise.  He  is  content
to  say  that  when  a  hot  thing  excites  the  skin  and
the  movement  is  continued  to  the  brain,  it  pro¬
duces  in  the  mind  the  idea  of  heat — in  this  case
an  idea  of  sensation  or  perception.  He  assumes
that  there  is  an  external  thing,  and  a  mind,  and
that  upon  suitable  occasion  the  mind  apprehends

29


LOCKE


an  idea  related  to  the  thing.  But  while  these
ideas  are  for  Locke  appearances  of  things,  they
cannot  be  described  as  being  identical  with  things
in  so  far  as  the  things  appear  to  us  under  different
aspects.  The  ideas  are  not  attributes  of  the  things
themselves,  they  are  to  Locke  copies  of  the  things
to  which  they  refer.  Locke  insists  that  we  cai.
only  know^reality  through  ideas  which  are  its
copies,  that  ideas  or  their  relations  are  the  proper
objects. of  mind,  and  in~fact  his~wHole  effort  is  to
determine  just  how  much,  in  extent  and  in  kind,
these  ideas  can  tell  us  of  the  real  world  which  he
assumes.  The  world  of  ideas  constitutes  therefore
(to  neglect  certain  qualifications  to  be  mentioned
hereafter)  a  body  of  representations  of  real  things.

But  while  he  thus  assumes  that  the  objects  of
mind  are  themselves  mental  in  character  Locke
never  describes  them  in  the  modern  phrase  of
‘  states  of  consciousness.’  He  never  says  (and  does
not  believe)  that  we  know  nothing  but  our  own
states.  He  does  indeed  constantly  speak  of
ideas  as  being  ‘  in  the  mind,’  and  it  is  easy  to  find
passages  which  suggest  that  the  ideas  are  mental
affections.  ‘  The  pictures  drawn  in  our  minds,’  he
says,  *  of  the  ideas  of  memory  ’  (what  we  should
now  call  the  images  of  memory)  ‘  are  laid  in  fading
colours,  and  if  not  sometimes  refreshed,  vanish

30


PHILOSOPHY


and  disappear.’  But  it  is  clear  that  an  idea  of
perception,  e.g.  the  idea  of  a  tree  is  not  an  affec¬
tion  of  the  mind  in  the  same  sense  as  the  act  of
perception  itself  is.  Nor  does  Locke,  who  main¬
tains  that  mathematical  ideas  have  a  reality  of
their  own,  mean  that  a  triangle  is  a  mere  affec¬
tion  of  the  mind  which  vanishes  when  we  cease  to
think  of  it.  Locke  does  not  in  the  Essay  raise  the
problem  which  is  involved  in  this  phrase  affec¬
tion  or  modification  of  mind — a  problem  which
agitated  the  followers  of  Descartes;  and  when
he  meets  it  .in  his  posthumous  treatise  on  Male-
branche  he  i3  impatient  of  it  and  pushes  it  aside.
To  have  the  modification  of  mind  involved  in
seeing  the  purple  colour  of  a  violet  (Malebranche  *
called  this  sensation  a ‘sentiment’  in  distinction
from  the  idea),  is  the  same  thing  as  ‘  to  have  the
idea  of  purple  in  my  mind.’  To  Locke  what  is-\
important  is  that  ‘  when  wo  think  of  a  colour  ora/
figure  which  we  did  not  think  of  before  there  is  V
some  alteration  in  the  mind.’  But  how  we  come  l
to  have  ideas  he  cannot  explain.  ‘  I  see  or  per- )
ceive  or  have  ideas  when  it  pleases  God  that  I

should,  but  in  a  way  that  I  cannot  comprafipjiH  *
The  phrase,  that  ideas  are  in  the  mind,  cannot
therefore  be  pressed — it  might  be  replaced  by  the
phrase,  ideas  are  before  the  mind.  The  word  ‘  idea,’

3i


LOCKE

i

therefore,  contains  for  Locke  no  theory ;  it  means
simply  an  object  of  the  understanding  when  we
think.  Unfortunately  ho  also  did  not  inquire
what  was  involved  in  assigning  to  idoas  a  twilight
existence  between  the  things  they  represent  and
the  mind  which  understands  thorn.  That  ho  did
not  do  so  is  a  philosophical  defoct,  but  if  we  are  to
apprehend  his  meaning,  we  must  bewaro  of  import¬
ing  into  his  philosophy  doctrines  that  he  does  not
maintain.

/I  Let  us  follow  Locke  in  his  inventory  of  ideas,
uhey  may  be  distinguished,  in  the  first  place,
according  to  their  ‘original.’  All  our  ideas,  all
the  materials  of  our  thought  and  knowledge,  are
derived  directly  or  indirectly  from  experience,  and
from  two  sources  of  it.  sensation  and  rp.fW.t.inp
External  sensible  objects  supply  us  with  the  ono
set  of  ideas,  ideas  of  sensation;  our  own  opera¬
tions  about  the  ideas  got  by  sensation,  when  the
mind  comes  to  reflect  upon  these  operations,  .
supply  us  with  the  other  set,  the  ideas  of  reflec¬
tion  :  such  ideas  as  the  acts  of  perceiving,  willing,
thinking,  feeling.  Apart  from  experience,  then,
directly  or  indirectly  received,  the  mind  is  to
Locke  a  white  paper,  void  of  all  characters,  with¬
out  any  ideas,  a  tabula  rasa ;  or  it  is  compared  to
a  dark  cabinet  into  which  the  senses  let  in  light.

32


PHILOSOPHY


That  we  have  no  innate  ideas,  no  objects  of  ex¬
perience  not  derived  from  these  two  poiirnfM,  is  tho
implied  doctrine,  the  subject-matter  nf  Book  n
whose  significance  may  be  doforred.  Nor  does
the  mind  think,  except  so  far  as  it  has  ideas
before  it;  wo  cannot  say  with '  Descartes  that
because  the  essence  of  mind  is  to  think,  the  mind
ib  always  actually  thinking.  *  Every  drowsy  nod
shakes  their  doctrine  who  declare  that  the  mind
thinks  always.’  But,  while  the  mind  is  passive  in
respect  of  these  two  sources  of  experience,  sen¬
sation  and  reflection,  the  mind  is  also  active :
it  can  attend,  it  can  compare,  distinguish  and
abstract.  Honce  arises  the  first  important  classi¬
fication  of  ideas  into  two  classes  —  simple  and
complex  ideas.  Simple  ideas  are  the  ultimate
constituents  of  experience,  the  uncompounded  ap-~
pearances  of  things ;  complex  ideas  are  the  work¬
manship  oFthglnind.  Simple  ideas  are  either
the  ideas  of  the  sonsiblo  qualities  of  things  de¬
rived  by  sensation  of  all  kinds,  the  ideas  of  white¬
ness,  heat  and  the  like,  or  else  they  are  the  ideas
of  the  operations  of  our  minds  which  come  to  us
by  reflection,  or  else  they  are  like  pleasure  or
pain  or  existence,  ideas  which  convey  themselves
into  the  mind  by  sensation  or  reflection  indiffer¬
ently,  ‘by  all  the  ways  of  sensation  and  reflec-
c  33  ‘


LOCKE


'tion.'  These  simple  elements  of  experience  the
mind  can  neither  make  nor  destroy,  it  can  only
receive ;  had  we  fewer  or  more  senses  we  should
receive  fewer  or  more  such  ideas.  Among  simple
-  ideas  of  sensation  the  most  important  distinction
I  is  that  between  the  ideas  of  the  primary  qualities
t  and  the  ideas  of  the  secondary  qualities  of  bodies
— a  distinction  inherited  by  Locke  from  Descartes
|  but  introduced  into  philosophy,  in  its  modem
shape,  by  Galileo.  Extension,  figure,  number,
motion  or  rest,  solidity, — these  are  qualities  which  /

bodies  possess  no  matter  what  changes  they

undergo.  Pound  an  almond  or  melt  wax,  the
colours  may  change,  but  some  figure  and  exten¬
sion  they  still  have.  These  qualities,  then,  are
powers  in  bodies  themselves,  and  really  in  them,
whether  any  one’s  senses  perceive  them  or  no;
in  virtue  of  which  they  produce  exactly  corre¬
sponding  ideas  in  us.  But  secondary  qualities,
Jiko  colour,  taste,  and  smell,  which  change  with
varying  circumstances,  which  may  vanish  for  ex¬
ample  with  the~ absence  of  illumination,  or  be.
unfelt  by  a  person  who  suffers  from  a  cold_nr.
may  change  in  character  according  *o  Gin  rnndL.
tion  of  the  percipient,  are  not  qualities  in  bodies
__thmnsfdvr>s.  but  are  powers  which  they  possess  of
producing  certain  ideas  in  ns  in  virtue  .nf-tbeir


34


PHILOSOPHY


internal  structure ;  that  is,  in  virtue  of  the  primary
qualities  of  the  insensible  particles  of  which  they
are  composed,  for  Locke  assumes  material  bodies^
to  be  ultimately  atomic  in  structure.  It  may  be
added  that  there  is  a  third  sort  of  qualities  of
bodies,  powers  which  they  possess  to  affect,  other
external  bodies,  like  the  power  of  the  sun  to  melt

wax-j-  It  is  these  last  which  are  commonly  called

powers.  The  ideas  of  the  secondary  qualities  -are,
therefore,  in  one  important  respect,  unlike  those
of  the  primary  qualities ;  they  do  not  resemble  /
anything  in  the  object,  though  popular  thought  \
thinks  that  bodies  are  in  themselves  red  or  sweet,
in  the  same  way  as  they  are  extended.

Simple  ideas  of  reflection  may  be  grouped  under
the  two  Leads- of  thinking  and  willing.  Sensible
•objects  give  us  ideas.  The  acts  of  the  mind,  as
engaged  upon  these  ideas,  give  us  the  ideas  of
reflection  by  a  kind  of  inner  sense.  Perception  is
the  simplest  operation  we  can  thus  be  aware  of,
for  apparently  the  act  of  sensation  is  nothing  but  \
bodily  motion  in  the  brain ;  the  simplest  idea  of
sensation  is  really  an  idea  of  perception.  Re¬
tention,  discrimination,  comparison,  nhgfrnMirm
(which  puts  a  limit  between  man  and  brutes),
are  other  examples.  It  is  characteristic  of  Locke’s  S
imperfect  consideration  of  what  an  idea  is,  that,

35


LOCKE


while  strictly  speaking,  it  is  only  ‘retention’  or
‘memory’  itself  that  should  be  an  idea  of  re¬
flection,  he  yet  constantly  speaks  of  remembered
objects  as  ideas  of  reflection ;  though,  in  itself,  a
remembered  person  is  no  more  an  object  of  reflec¬
tion  than  a  perceived  person.  By  doing  so  he
seems  to  make  the  inner  sense  not  only  a  source
of  ideas  of  mental  operations,  but  a  source  of  ideas
which  are  not  operations  at  all  but  in  some  senso
a  special  mental  reduplication  of  ideas  of  sensa¬
tion — a  doctrine  full  of  fatal  significance  for  sub¬
sequent  thought.

The  complex  ideas  introduce  distinctions  which
present  at  once  nfore  interest  and  greater  diffi¬
culty.  They  gfe  the  voluntary  creations  of  tho
mind,  which  manipulates^h8--ffi^t6liak  derived
from  sensation  and  reflection;  or  thoy  mightta^
described  as  resoluble  into  these  elements  to¬
gether  with  an  active  element  of  construction
referable  to  the  mind  itself.  Locke  distinguishes
three  sorts,  Modes,  Substances,  and  Relations,  of
which  Modes  and  Relations  stand  on  an  alto¬
gether  different  footing  from  Substances.  Modes
are  complex  ideas  like  jumping,  triangle,  grati¬

tude.  which  are  not  regarded  as  self-subsistent
but  as  affections  of  substances.  They  are  either
simple,  or  mixed,  according  as  their  simple  con-

36


PHILOSOPHY


stituents  are  of  the  same  or  different  sorts.  Thus,
twelve  is  a  mere  repetition  of  unity ;  beauty  is  re¬
soluble  into  the  heterogeneous  elements  of  colour,
figure,  pleasure,  etc.  Simple  modes  are  thus-
variations  of  one  simple  idea — e.g.  tho  different
figures  of  extension,  different  sorts  of  motion,
different  numbers.  Ono  particularly  interesting
mode  is  infinity  or  immensity,  whether  of  spaco
or  duration,  which  we  get  by  (or  is  resoluble
into)  the  addition  of  unit  to  unit  and  joining  to
this  the  negative  idea  that  the  process  of  additioh
may  be  carried  on  without  limit,  never  coming  to
an  end.  Anticipating  the  more  famous  discussion
of  the  same  problem  by  Kant,  Locke  denies  in¬
finity  to  bo  a  positive  idea — there  is  no  idea  of
a  positive  completed  infinite — ‘  you  cannot  adapt
a  standing  measure  to  a  growing  bulk.’  The  chief
examples  of  mixed  modes  (thoso  which  are  re¬
soluble  into  heterogeneous  elements)  are  to  bo
found  in  moral  ideas,  e.g.  motive,  justice.  It  is
true  that  combinations  of  qualities  in  the  real
world  may  correspond  to  these  ideas,  or  even
suggest  them.  But  in  themselves  they  are  put
together  arbitrarily  by  the  mind,  and  the  im¬
portant  consequence  follows  (for  these  and  simple
modes  as  well),  that  they  have  no  standard  ex¬
ternal  to  themselves  with  which  they  can  be  com-

37


LOCKE


pared:  they  are  their  own  archetypes,  they  are
their  own  guarantee  of  reality.  This  same  account
applies  to  ideas  of  Relation,  such  as  relation  of
king  and  subject,  identity,  cause  and  effect,  and
the  like.  All  of  them  ‘  terminate  in  simple  ideas/
are  ‘concerned  with  their  simple  ideas/  and  are
products  of  the  mind’s  activity  in  considering
them,  ‘so  as  to  carry  its  view  from  one  to  the
other/  Some  of  the  more  special  sorts  of  relations,
and  in  particular  moral  relations,  will  occupy  us
later.

The  ideas  of  Substances  are  of  a  different
nature.  They,  too,  are  the  workmanship  of  the
mind.  We  find  a  number  of  ideas  of  simple
qualities  going  together  in  our  experience,  and  we
combine  these  ideas  together  under  a  single  name,
and  regard  them  as  belonging  to  one  thing,  but
we  also  go  on  to  supposo  soino  support  or  sub¬
stratum  to  the  qualities  in  tho  thing  which  pro¬
duces  these  simple  ideas  in  us.  We  do  not  know',
what  that  support  is,  any  moro  than  tho  Indian
philosopher  Locke  loves  to  quote,  who  declared
that  the  world  was  supported  by  an  elephant,  the
elephant  by  a  tortoise,  and  the  tortoise  by  he
knew  not  what.  This  obscure  idea  of  some
support  wo  know  not  what  is  tho  idea  wo  have
of  substance  in  general,  and  ‘  it  is  the  same  every-

38


PHILOSOPHY


where.*1  A  particular  kind  of  substance  ia  then
nothing  but  a  group  of  simple  ideas,  regarded  as
so  supported,  and  as  flowing  from  the  internal
constitution  of  this  unknown  somewhat

The  Church,  in  the  person  of  the  Bishop  of
Worcester,  alleged,  in  alarm  for  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity,  that  Locke  was  almost  discarding
substance  out  of  the  world.  Locke  could  answer
easily  enough,  that  so  far  from  discarding  it,  he
had  catalogued  it,  vague  as  it  was,  in  his  in¬
ventory  of  experience,  and  had  explained  what
kind  of  an  idea  it  was.  Locke  might  have  boon
more  embarrassed  if  he  had  been  asked  to  explain
how  the  mind  could  not  only  group  together
simple  ideas  as  the  ideas  of  onfe  thing,  but  was
able  to  invent  the  new  idea  of  a  support  however

indefinite.  He  was  content  to,  note  in  his  in-

•*

ventory  the  existence  of  this 'idea  without  more
narrowly  analysing  its  naturo.

But  two  consequoncos  ho  drow  from  his  account
of  substance,  which  are  of  groat  importance.  The
first  is,  that  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  substance  is  no
less  clear  than  that  of  a  material  ono.  A  material
substance  is  the  unknown  support  of  sensible
qualities ;  spiritual  substance  is  tho  unknown
support  of  tho  qualities  corresponding  to  tho

1  First  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Worcester.

39


LOCKE


ideas  of  reflection.  At  the  same  time,  this  victori¬
ous  conclusion  needs  to  be  qualified.  Bodies  and
souls  are  alike  the  unknown  supports  of  attri¬
butes.  But  bodies  to  Locke  have  a  microscopic
atomic  constitution :  a  notion  familiar  to  him
from  the  speculations  of  Gassendi,  or  indeed  from
those  of  Bacon.  It  is  but  the  coarseness  of  our
senses  and  of  our  intelligence  which  conceals  this
constitution  from  us.  Spirits  more  finely  endowed
than  ours,  like  the  angels’,  may  penetrate  further
than  ours  into  the  constitution  of  bodies.  But  in
regard  to  the  soul,  there  is  a  peculiar  obscurity.
A  substance  it  is,  but  we  do  not  know  whether  it
is  an  immaterial  substance,  or  merely  a  material
substance  to  which  God  has  attachod  the  power
of  thinking.*  The  first  hypothesis  may  be  the
more  probable,  and  only  those  ‘  whose  thoughts
are  immersed  in  matter’  find  it  harder  to  con¬
ceive  a  spiritual  than  a  bodily  substance.  But
though  God  Himself,  from  whom  all  proceeds,  is
certainly  an  immaterial  substance,  there  is  no  con¬
tradiction  in  the  second  hypothesis,  which  holds
Him  to  have  added  thought  to  certain  systems  of
senseless  matter.  *  All  the  great  ends  of  worship
and  religion  are  well  enough  secured  without
philosophical  proofs  of  the  soul’s  immateriality.’
The  identity  of  the  soul,  whichever  view  be

40


PHILOSOPHY

taken  of  it,  oonsists  in  the  identity  of  conscious¬
ness.

The  second  conclusion  is  of  a  different  nature.

A  distinction  was  current  in  the  schools,  between
the  real  essence  of  substances  and  the  nominal
essence  or  definition.  Locke  spends  himself  in
argument  to  prove  that  we  know  only  nominal  „
essences,  and  that  they  are  the  names  of  sorts  of
things  by  which  we  identify  a  particular  things  as
belonging  to  a  class. — they  are,  groups  of- ideas,
connected  together  by  names^  They  are  thus
general  ideas  formed  by  abstraction.  The  real
essence  is  ‘  that  real  constitution  of  anything,
which  is  the  foundation  of  the  qualities  combined
in  the  nominal  essence,’ — it  is  to  him  that  minute
microscopic  constitution,  from  which  the  obvious
sensible  qualities  combined  in  the  definition  are
supposed  to  How.  This  real  essence  of  things  we  ~)
do  not  know,  because  our  senses  fail  to^arry_us  J
IcT far.  It  follows,  to  anticipate  a  little,  that  our
knowledge  of  substances  is  confined  to  the  abstract
collections  of  ideas  which  are  signified  by  the
general  names  of  substances.  ^

Our  brief  rdsumi  of  the  chief  titles  in  Locke’s
inventory  of  experience  is  not  intended  to  do
more  than  indicate  the  wealth  of  detailed  descrip¬
tion  which  makes  the  second  book  of  the  Essay

4i


LOCKE


a  storehouse  of  metaphysical  and' psychological
knowledge.  Nor  does  it  attempt  at  all  to  follow
Locke  in  his  survey  of  words  in  the  third  book.
But  we  may  conveniently  stop  for  a  moment,
before  passing  on  to  consider  Locke’s  theory  of
knowledge,  in  order  to  review  the  picture  here
presented  of  the  ideas  which  wo  possess,  the
objects  of  our  mind  when  we  think.  They  are
all  resoluble  into  two  kinds  of  simple  experiences,
ideas  of  sense  qualities,  and  of  mental  operations.
These  simple  ideas  all  correspond  to  the  real
things,  whose  existence  Locke  assumes,  and  which
are  supposed  to  produce  them  in  our  minds :  they
are  *  such  perceptions  as  God  has  fitted  us  to
receive,  and  given  power  to  external  objects  (he
is  speaking  of  simple  ideas  of  sensation),  to  pro¬
duce  in  us  by  established  laws  and  ways,  suitable
to  his  wisdom  and  goodness,  though  incompre¬
hensible  to  us.’  They  are  in  Locke’s  language
real,  adequate,  and  true.  Some  of  them  are  exact
copies  of  their  originals,  others  do  not  resemble
them.  But  they  are  but  the  materials  of  our
experience.  The  finished  objects  of  our  experi-  v
ence  are  our  own  handiwork.  On  the  one  hand,
we  have  a  set  of  objects,  of  which  the  chief  are
mathematical  and  ethical  constructions,  which
are  real  and  adequate  in  their  own  right,  self-

42


PHILOSOPHY


contained  because  not  fashioned  according  to  any
exemplar  beyond  them.  These  objects  contain  a
wealth  of  properties,  which  may  be  drawn  from
them  by  demonstration.  On  tlio  other  hand
we  have  substances,  whether  material  things  or  ]
minds,  and  these  we  do  not  experience  in  them-  j
selves,  but  only  so  far  as  we  receive  simple  ideas 1
from  them.  We  are  left  then  strangely  with  a
twofold  reality.  There  is  one  reality,  which
belongs  to  certain  of  our  ideas,  like  the  mathe¬
matical  ones,  because  they  are  wholly  of  our
making.  There  is  another  reality  of  substances
which  supply  us  with  the  ideas  that  we  receive
from  them ;  which  are  behind  the  veil  of  the  ap¬
pearances  by  which  we  know  them.  /This  reality  we  v
know  only  partially,  and  cannot  thoroughly  know.  '  '
This  survey  of  ideas  anticipates  the  answer  to
the  problem  of  the  limits  of  knowledge,  which  it
was  Locke’s  main  object  to  solve.  I  Knowledge,  as
already  explained,  is  the  perception  of  the  agrcc-

ment  or  disagreement  of  ideas.  Ideas  aro  but
the  elements  of  knowledge,  we  have  knowledge

when  wo  perceive  their  connections.  What  is  ,
known  is  thus  ideas  in  their  connection.  Accord¬
ing  to  Locke,  tho  connection  may  be  one  of  four
kinds.  It  may  be  that  of  identity  or  diversity,  as
when  we  perceive  that  white  is  white,  and  is  not

43


LOCKE


black;  or  of  relation,  e.g.  three  is -greater  than
two ;  or  co-existence,  e.g.  gold  is  *  fixed/  which
means  the  co-existence  of  fixedness  with  the  de¬
fining  qualities  of  gold ;  or  lastly,  there  is  a  fourth
kind  of  agreement  or  disagreement,  *  that  of  actual
real  existence  agreeing  to  ftn  idea/  which  may  be
reserved  for  later  explanation?

Knowledge  so  defined,  to  be  really  knoAvlodge,
is  either  directly  or  indirectly  intuitive.  Direct
intuition  is  the  immediate  perception  of  such

agreement  or  disagreement :  it  is  immediate  cer¬
tainty— ^irresisnhIe/_TIke-bright  sunshine ’ ;  and
on  it  all  certainty  of  knowledge  depends.  Indirect
intuition  is  demonstration,  where  our  ideas  ■  are
brought  into  relation  by  the  mediation  of  a  third-
each  step  in  the  demonstration  being  itself  in¬

tuitive.  Supposing  that  there  could  be  innate
ideas  and  principles  which  the  mind  brings  along
with  it,  their  intuitive  character  would  accord¬
ingly  not  serve  to  distinguish  them  from'  any
other  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  knowledge  in
the  strict  sense.  But  there  are  three  questions
which  may  profitably  bo  asked  about  knowledge,
concerned  as  it  is  with  ideas.  How  far  does  it
extend?  How  far  is  it  real  or  conformable  to
things  ?  How  much  can  it  tell  us  of  actual
existence  ?


44


PHILOSOPHY


The  answer  to  the  first  two  questions  turns
entirely  on  the  difference  between  ideas  of  sub¬
stances  and  all  other  ideas.  Our  senses  are  not
acute  enough  to  tell  us  of  the  primary  qualities  of
the  minute  particles  of  bodies,  nor  our  intelligence
to  inform  us  of  the  structure  composed  by  these
particles.  We  can  therefore  neither  know  why
the  body  produces  in  us  the  ideas  of  certain
qualities  includod  in  thoir  nominal  ossonco,  nor,
what  is  more  important,  what  is  the  connection
between  these  qualities  themselves,  and  conse-*
quently  between  these  qualities  and  other  qual¬
ities  which  we  may  discover  in  them.  Further
we  have  to  remember,  as  Locke  says  in  a  striking
passage,  that  substances  do  not  stand  alone,  but
are  related  to  one  another,  and  dependent  for  theh
qualities  on  remote  causes  which  may  be  unper-
ceived.  ‘Separate  a  piece  of  gold  from  all  other
bodies,  and  it  would  lose  all  its  colour  and  weight
and  perhaps  malleableness  too.'  ‘We  see  and
perceive  some  of  the  actions  and  grosser  opera¬
tions  of  things  here  about  us,  but  whence  the
streams  come  that  keep, all  these  curious  machines
in  motion  and  repair,  how  conveyed  and  modified,
is  beyond  notice  and  apprehension.  .  .  .  Things,
however  absolute  and  entire  they  seem  in  them¬
selves,  are  but  retainers  to  other  parts  of  nature

45


LOCKE

for  that  which  they  are  most  -taken  notice  of
by  us.’

It  is  plain  then  that  our  knowledge  cannot
extend  beyond  our  ideas,  but  also  that  it  must  fall
.short  of  the  range  of  our  ideas,  whenever  we  fail

to  bring  our  ideas  into  relation  with  one  another.

Thus  though  we  have  an  idea  of  matter  and  of
thinking  we  may  never  be  able  to  know  whether
matter  thinks.  We  are  limited  in  our  knowledge
of  the  co-existence  of  qualities  in  bodies  because
we  do  not  know  the  ultimate  constitution  of
things.  We  can  go  little  further  than  our  ex¬
perience.  And  if  this  is  true  of  bodies,  it  is  still
more  true  of  spirits  which  are  only  known  in  our
persons,  while  we  know  nothing  of  other  possible
spirits  in  the  universe,  but  can  only  conjecture.
Whereas  the  extent  of  our  knowledge  of  mathe¬
matical  and  moral  relations  appears  to  be  inde¬
finite  and  inexhaustible.

When  we  ask  how  far  our  knowledge  is  real
or  true — how  far,  that  is,  it  differs  from  mere  im¬
agination  and  conforms  to  things — the  answer  is
similar.  Mathematical  and  moral  knowledgg^mce
these  ideas  are  their  own  archetypes,  is  real  and
true.  But  our  ideas  of  substances  are  referred  to
archetypes  existing  beyond  ideas.  Our  knowledge
of  them  can  only  therefore  be  true  so  far  as  it  is

4  6


PHILOSOPHY


founded  upon  experience  and  sensible  observa¬
tions,  Hence,  to  state  the  same  thing  otherwise,
the  important  result  that  adefinjtaJimit.  is  set  to
our  acquisition  of  universal  knowledge.  So  far  as
ideas  are  abstract  their  agreement  or  disagreement
will  constitute  universal  knowledge;  wherever
therefore,  as  in  mathematics,  we  have  abstract
ideas  we  can  obtain  universal  knowledge.  Now  of
substances  we  know  only  their  nominal  essences.
These  are  abstract,  but  we  can  derive  very  little
further  knowledge  from  them  because, as  explained,
not  knowing  the  constitution  of  things,  we  do  not
know  the  connection  between  the  qualities  which
make  up  the  nominal  essence.  We  are  then
limited  to  the  particular  knowledge  of  substances
derived  from  particular  experiences.  Such  gener¬
alisations  as  we  can  make  as  to  the  co-existence
of  their  properties,  wanting  as  they  are  in  adequate
foundation,  do  not  amount  to  more  than  pro¬
bability,  useful  enough  for  practice,  but  falling
short  of  science.  They  are  not  matter  of  know-
lodge  but  of  judgment.  Science,  which  is  uni¬
versal,  is  thus  only  possible  in  the  unfolding  of
an  abstract  idea,  and  consequently  Locke  is  ‘apt
to  doubt  a  science  of  physical  bodies  as  out  of
our  reach’;  our  physical  knowledge  is  at  best
empirical.


47


LOCKE


The  inadequacy  of  our  knowledge  nf  mihatancoH
is  plainer  still  if  we  ask  ourselves  what  are  the
things  of  which  we  are  warranted  in  holding  not
merely  that  they  are  real  or  true  like  mathe¬
matics  but  that  they  have  actual  existence.  At
first  sight  it  might  seem  difficult  to  understand
how,  if  knowledge  is  the  perception  of  the  agree¬
ment  of  ideas,  we  can  have  knowledge  of  actual
existence  at  all.  For  actual  existence  outside  the
world  of  ideas  is  not  itself  an  idea  and  cannot  be
compared  with  other  ideas.  But  what  Locke
means  is  clear  enough:  it  is  the  undoubted  fact
that  certain  ideas  come  to  us  with  a  ‘  coefficient
of  reality,’  as  it  has  been  called,  a  *  tang  ’  which
distinguishes  them  from  mere  ideas  or  imagina¬
tions.  They  carry  us  beyond  the  mere  idea  to
something  else,  which  is  what  we  call  real  exist¬
ence.  There  are  two  such  ideas  of  whose  existence
we  may  have  cortainty:  ourselves  and  God.  Of
our  own  existence  we  have  intuitive  knowledge^
to  doubt  it  is,  in  Descartes’  language  which  Locke
accepts,  to  be  assured  of  it  in  the  very  act  of
doubting.  Of  God’s  existence  we  have  demon:
strative  knowledge.  For  I  myself  exist;  there
must  therefore  be  some  real  being  to  account  for
my  beginning  to  be,  and  this  real  being  must

exist  from  all  eternity  (or  it  too  would  have  had

48


PHILOSOPHY


a  beginning  and  therefore  a  further  cause).  More*

over  this  being  as  the  source  of  all  our  powers

and  knowledge  must  he  most  powerful  and  rnnst
knowing — in  a  word,  it  is  God.  The  pungency  of
my  own  existence  is  thus  by  this  argument  com¬
municated  through  tho  principlo  of  causality  to
God.  But  Locke,  though  he  regards  it  as  an  intui¬
tive  truth  that  nothing  can  begin  to  be  except  it  is
produced  by  some  real  thing,  does  not  ask  himself
how  tho  idea  of  causation,  gathered  according  to
his  own  account  from  the  suggestion  of  connected
changes  in  things,  can  be  extended  so  as  to  apply
to  a  cause  like  God  which  never  can  be  presented
in  sensible  or  reflective  experience.

Of  the  existence  of  ourselves  and  of  God  we
have  thus,  according  to  Locke,  complete  con¬
viction.  When  we  turn  to  material  things,  we
find  that  while  we  can  at  pleasure  call  up  or  lay
by  the  ideas  of  memory  or  fancy,  we  are  passive
in  respect  of  external  objects.  When  we  look  at
the  sun,  we  cannot  avoid  having  the  idea  of  light.
There  must  needs  be  *  some  exterior  cause  which
produces  these  ideas  in  my  mind  whether  I  will
or  no.’  Moreover  a  present  material  thing  affects
us  with  a  certain  force  or  vivacity  which  distin¬
guishes  it  from  a  mere  imagination.  It  is  the
difference  between  seeing  the  sun  by  day  and  think  -
D  49


LOCKE


in g  of  it  by  night.  To  the  objector  who  urges  that
the  fire  may  be  all  a  dream,  Locke  never  tires  of
')  ^begging  him  ‘  to  dream  this  answer  ’ ;  that  there
J  is  a  manifest  difference  between  dreaming  of
ybeing  in  the  fire  and  being  actually  in  it,  and  at
/  any  rate  the  pain  of  the  second  experience  makes
'  the  difference  between  our  weal  and  woe,  and  de¬
termines  us  practically.  Such  knowledge  Locke
calls  sensitive  knowledge.  It  is  less  than  intui¬
tion  and  is  therefore  less  than  knowledge  proper,
but  it  is  more  than  mere  ‘judgment.'  Our  know¬
ledge  of  the  nature  of  sensible  things  is  thus  the
particular  knowledge  of  our  observations  of  them,
and  our  knowledge  of  their  actual  existence  is  the
sensible  experience  of  their  presence  so  long  as
they  are  present ;  or  it  may  be  added,  the  memory
that  they  were  once  so  sensibly  perceived.

What  falls  outside  the  range  of  knowledge  thus
described  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  judgment  or
probability,  and  it  thus  includes  the  greater  part
of  our  beliefs  and  the  propositions  we  make,  in
particular  the  greater  part  of  what  is  thought  to
constitute  physical  science.  It  supplies  what  is
necessary  for  conduct,  where  the  conviction  or
intuition  necessary  for  knowledge  fails  us.  Such
propositions  are  attonded  not  by  certainty  but  by
assent.  The  mind  puts  ideas  together,  when  their


50


PHILOSOPHY


agreement  is  not  perceived,  but  only  presumed-
It  may  do  this  in  respect  of  matter  of  fact,  either
because  of  conformity  to  our  own  observation,  or
the  ground  of  probability  may  be  the  testimony
of  others.  In  matters  which  are  not  open  to  the
observation  of  the  senses,  like  the  minute  con¬
stitution  of  things,  we  rely  in  our  judgments  upon
analogy.  The  strength  of  our  assent  varies  in
degree  according  to  various  circumstances,  the
concurrence  of  testimony,  the  agreement  of  testi¬
mony  with  experience,  the  remoteness  of  the  testi¬
mony  and  the  like.  But  Locke  has  supplied  no
rules  by  which  we  may  judge  the  relative  pro¬
bability  of  judgments,  such  as  are  offered  by
‘  inductive  ’  logic.


CHAPTER  III


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESS  A  Y

Like  other  great  writers  and  thinkers,  Locke
leaves  many  strands  of  thought  not  woven  into
one  perfect  tissue ;  loose  ends  are  not  connected,
gaps  are  left  to  be  filled  in  the  structure.  It  is
not  difficult  to  point  out  these  defects,  and  his
successors  were  occupied  in  overcoming  them.
But  it  is  more  helpful  to  begin  by  indicating
certain  features  of  the  Essay  which  are  impres¬
sive  by  their  fertility  of  suggestion.

1.  The  general  character  of  his  method,  in
reviewing  the  contents  of  experience  as  a  means
towards  indicating  the  limits  of  knowledge,  follows
the  habit  of  the  practical  man,  which  begins  with
certain  loose  assumptions  that,  in  the  course  of
the  inquiry,  take  on  a  changed  aspect  and  receive
a  new  signification.  Locke’s  assumption  of  real
substances,  to  which  knowledge  conforms  in  vari¬
ous  degrees,  is  easy  enough  to  criticise.  [  If  the
only  objects  of  our  minds  are  ideas,' how  can
things  which  are  not  themselves  ideas  be  made

52


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESS  A  Y

the  object  of  thought,  still  less  be  compared  with
ideas  ?  The  answer  is  that  Locke,  insisting  on  the
philosophical  doctrine  that  all  the  objects  of  our
thought  aro  mental  in  tho  senso  beforo  defined,
is  content  to  assume  side  by  side  with  these  the
existence  of  minds  and  of  material  things.  But
things  which  at  tho  beginning  of  the  Essay  are
the  mysterious  causes  of  our  ideas  turn  out  in
tho  end  to  be  merely  the  limits  of  our  knowledge.1
Step  by  step  as  he  proceeds  in  the  inquiry  the
material  thing  receives  definition.  The  ideas  of
the  primary  qualities  are  exact  copies  of  the
primary  qualities  themselves,  or  in  other  words,
in  certain  vital  respects  the  contents  of  the  real
object  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  representative
one.  The  secondary  qualities  are  still  as  in  the
thing  entirely  unlike  their  ideas.  But  even  this
apparent!  breach  is  narrowed.  For  the  ultimate
nature  of  the  thing  is  held  to  be  a  structure  of
particles  insensible  to  us,  and  were  our  senses  and
our  intelligence  acute  enough  to  know  the  primary
qualities  of  these  particles  and  the  plan  of  their
combination,  we  should  have  an  exact  repre¬
sentation  of  tho  thing.  ‘The  now  secondary
qualities  of  bodies  would  disappear  if  wo  could

1  The  same  observation  is  true  of  Kant,  though  Kant’s  result
is  different.


53


LOCKE


discover  the  primary  ones  of  their  minute  parts.
...  We  should  see  an  admirable  texture  of  parts  of
a  certain  size  and  figure.’1  The  sensible  qualities
and  the  gross  superficial  (macroscopic)  primary
ones  would  be  replaced  by  microscopic  primary
ones.  Were  this  result  but  attained  (and  we
must  add,  the  connection  of  things  with  other
things  also  observed),  knowledge  would  be  en¬
tirely  adequate.  For  though  our  knowledge
would  still  be  of  ideas,  there  would  be  nothing
in  the  things  themselves  which  would  not  have
its  exact  counterpart  in  ideas,  except  the  un¬
known  something  which  makes  the  difference
between  ideas  and  actual  things.  Ultimately
therefore  the  limit  to  our  knowledge  of  things
is  set  by  our  defective  sense  and  intelligence.
Though  no  finite  spirit  which  knows  only  by
ideas  could  behold  reality  face  to  face,  reality  is
in  the  end  something  not  remote  from  ideas,  for
it  corresponds  to  them,  and  it  is  but  our  defi¬
ciencies  which  prevent  us  from  knowing  it,  as  far
as  it  can  be  known  at  all.  Locke  declines  the
question  of  the  real  constitution  of  spirit,  whether
it  is  an  immaterial  substance  or  a  material  sub¬
stance  to  which  is  attached  the  power  of  thinking,
i  But  he  speaks  of  ‘  thinking  and  willing- as  primary
1  Essay,  Book  II.,  ch.  xxiii.  §  11.

54


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESS  A  Y

qualities  of  spirit.' 1  Had  he  asked  himself  what
r^asomthere  was  for  supposing  thinking  as  in  the
mind  to  be  different  from  the  thinking  which  we
apprehend — the  idea  of  thinking — he  might  have
seen  that  his  separation  of  ideas  in  general  from
things  was  needless.

2.  One  of  Locke’s  cardinal  merits  is  his  insist¬
ence  that  no  mere  words  shall  take  the  place  of
a  clear  description  of  the  contents  of  our  experi¬
ence,  or  shall  make  us  think  that  we  have  ideas
which  we  cannot  find  in  our  experience.  Books  i.
to  in.  are  a  long  descant  upon  this  theme.  And
it  is  this  which  gives  point  to  a  famous  portion  of
Locke’s  theory  which  we  have  not  yet  described,
his  denial  of  innate  ideas  whether  in  thinking  or
in  morals.  In  the  abstract  which  he  wrote  of  the
Essay  for  Leclerc’s  Bibliotheque  Universelle  he
omits  this  topic  which  occupies  the  whole  first
Book  of  the  Essay,  with  the  remark  that  it  was
designed  to  overcome  the  prejudices  entertained
against  the  belief  that  the  mind  was  tabula  rasa.
Readers  of  the  Essay  are  often  provoked  with
what  they  think  the  triviality  of  Locke’s  attempted
refutation  of  innate  ideas,  amounting,  they  think,
to  little  more  than  the  proof  that  we  do  not  have
these  ideas  at  birth,  and  that  we  acquire  them

1  Essay,  Book  II. ,  ch.  xxiii.  §  30.

55


LOCKE


only  by  experience,  after  we  have  acquired  other
portions  of  knowledge  no  less  evident.  Such
innate  ideas,  it  is  urged,  are  not  those  which  Lord
Herbert  of  Cherbury  assumed,  or  Descartes  in¬
tended  by  his  innate  ideas,  nor  are  they  such  as
have  been  intended  by  others  after  Locke  who,
admitting  that  experience  is  needed  to  evoke  these
principles  to  explicit  operation,  have  urged  that
they  themselves  are  implicit  in  the  mind.  Now
it  was  just  this  conception  of  implicit  knowledge
which  Locke  desired  to  repudiate.  ‘To  imprint
anything  on  the  mind  without  the  mind’s  perceiv¬
ing  it  seems  to  me  hardly  intelligible.'  Whatever
is  in  the  mind  must  be  discoverable  there,  and
he  thought  that  the  notion  of  innate  principles
clouded  the  issue  with  words  and  substituted
empty  language  for  the  real  effort  to  discover  ideas.
He  did  not  deny  the  truth  or  the  self-evidence
of  these  principles,  and  he  even  thought  them  use¬
ful  as  a  means  of  avoiding  sophistry  in  controversy.
Still  less  did  he  maintain  that  the  mind  itself
though  a  white  paper  to  the  world  of  objects  was
itself  a  passive  instrument.  But  he  claimed,  and
he  claimed  rightly,  that  the  mind  should  not  be
credited  with  mysterious  knowledge,  not  verifiable
as  an  idea,  and  his  answer  is  still  valid  against
those  who  would  endow  the  mind  with  methods

56


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESS  A  Y


of  envisaging  objects  (categories  and  the  like)
which  it  imports  into  the  object  itself.  It  is  this
consideration,  that  what  is  claimed  to  be  a  factor
in  experience  must  be  found  there  and  catalogued
in  the  inventory,  which  gives  its  philosophical  im¬
portance  to  Locke’s  polemic.  And  it  is  therefore
not  strange,  that  the  attack  upon  innate  ideas
should  have  come  to  be  that  part  of  Locke’s  teach¬
ing  which  the  public  connected  habitually  with
his  name.

So  far  as  Locke  himself  attempted  the  problem
raised  by  such'  categories’  of  thought,  and  he  did
not  seriously  attempt  it,  he  supplied  indications
of  a  better  way.  He  looked,  for  instance,  for  the
relation  of  causality,  or  power,  to  experience  itself,
and  crude  and  imperfect  as  his  description  of  it
is,  he  found  it  there.  But  he  added  that  it  is  less
obviously  experienced  in  the  relations  of  material
bodies  than  in  the  operation  of  the  mind  itself
when  it  wills  the  direction  of  its  ideas,  or  controls
the  movement  of  its  body — a  just  view  though
misunderstood,  and  therefore  rejected,  by  Hume.
v  So  far,  at  least,  he  sought  to  find  for  what  after¬
wards  wero  called  categories  their  real  counter¬
parts  in  his  experience.  And  what  he  did  went
but  a  little  way.  He  never  applied  tho  same
principle  to  the  better  understanding  of  the

57


LOCKE


nature  of  substance  from  observation  of  the  con¬
tinuity  of  mental  operations.  Had  he  carried  this
line  of  thought  a  little  further,  he  might  have
recognised  in  the  structure  of  the  system  of  ideas,
whether  of  sense  or  reflection,  certain  fundamental
ideas  which  form  the  skeleton  of  the  structure
and  have  thus  a  prerogative  place  in  experience.

3.  Locke’s  declaration  that  physical  science  is
impossible,  because  universal  knowledge  can  only
be  derived  from  abstract  ideas,  is  notable  be¬
cause  it  makes  mathematics  the  ideal  of  scientific
thought.  Compared  with  mathematics,  physics
as  a  collection  of  empirical  knowledge  supplies
only  probability.  He  stands  thus  in  strong  con¬
trast  with  those  of  his  successors  (like  J.  S.  Mill)
who,  attempting  to  put  mathematics  on  an  empiri¬
cal  basis,  have  sought  to  reduce  it  to  the  level  of
the  physical  sciences.  At  the  same  time  Locke’s
doctrine,  that  if  there  is  to  be  physical  science
at  all  it  must  be  derived  from  the  investigation
of  abstract  ideas,  has  been  the  parent  of  much
similar  thought,  and  it  is  revived  without  Locke’s
pessimism  as  to  physics. in  a  doctrine  which  at
the  present  time  is  at  any  rate  highly  accredited,
that  scientific  conceptions  and  truths  are  con¬
venient  abstractions  which  happen  to  be  attested
and  verified  by  facts,  but  are  themselves  merely

58


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESSAY

creations  of  the  mind,  whioh  serve  as  a  short¬
hand  or  compendious  description  of  physical  data.
Both  Locke’s  doctrine  and  its  modern  counterpart
have  their  characteristic  difficulties.  Locke  held
that  mathematics,  while  derived  from  the  con¬
struction  of  mind,  is  no  mere  analysis  of  what
was  contained  in  certain  conceptions,  but  led  to
new  truths :  it  discovered  not  *  trifling  ’  or  ‘  verbal  ’
but  ‘instructive’  propositions.  But  he  neither
inquired  what  compulsive  force  there  was  in  fig¬
ures  or  numbors  which  drove  their  investigators
into  fresh  discovery,  nor  how  or  in  what  sense
these  abstract  creations  could  be  exemplified  in
the  world  of  fact.  The  same  difficulties  may
be  objocted  to  the  curront  revival  of  Locke’s
doctrine  in  physical  scienco.

Tho  last  topic  naturally  leads  on  to  the  mention
of  some  of  Locke’s  palpable  defects,  which  not  all
his  cautious  efforts  to  trace  the  boundaries  be¬
tween  the  enlightened  and  the  dark  parts  of
things  can  conceal.  But  Locke’s  defects  had  the
value  of  stimulating  the  thought  of  his  successors.
Out  of  Locke  grew  not  only  Berkeley  and  Hume,
but  indirectly  Kant  and  Reid.  These  defects  turn
upon  one  or  two  main  points — his  imperfect  con¬
nection  and  imperfect  disconnection  of  the  mind
and  external  things,  the  individualistic  character

59


LOCKE

of  his  philosophy,  his  oversight  of  the  central  fact
of  continuity.

1.  The  antithesis  between  the  two  kinds  of
realities,  the  constructions  of  the  mind  and  sub¬
stances,  raises  at  once  difficulties  which  Locke
never  resolved.  Mathematical  figures,  to  take
them  as  incontestable  examples  of  modes,  owe
their  elements  to  sensp,  but  their  construction  to
the  mind.  Now  Locke  admits  that  moral  ideas,
which  he  places  on  the  same  footing  as  mathe¬
matical  ideas,  may  be  gathered  from  observation.
This  is  obviously  true  of  mathematical  ideas  also.
But  how  can  it  be  more  than  a  coincidence  ?  He
does  not  explain  how  mathematical  and  moral
reality  can  be  applicable  to  sensible  reality.  Modes
are,  indeed,  defined  as  groups  of  ideas  regarded
not  as  independent,  but  as  affections  of  sub¬
stances.  Yet  in  the  sequel,  they  are  treated  as
real  in  their  own  right,  and  floated  off  into  an
atmosphere  of  their  own.  At  the  same  time
Locke  sees,  as  has  just  been  noticed,  that  crea¬
tures  as  they  are  of  the  mind,  they  constrain  us
to  think  about  them  in  certain  ways  as  much  as
if  they  were  sensible  objects.  And  yet  they  do
this,  not  because  they  correspond  to  anything  in
the  nature  of  the  mind,  but  because  they  are
triangles  or  circles  or  moral  ideas.  They  are  as  real,

60


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESSAY


as  substances,  but  they  have  no  actual  existence,
and  yet  they  are  exemplified  in  the  world  of  actual
existence..  It  was  this  problem  left  unsolved  or
rather  unraised  by  Locke  which  Kant  attempted
(impelled  no  doubt  in  part  by  Locke),  when  he
asked  how  mathematics  can  be  true  of  the  real
world — or  in  the  technical  phraso  how  the  syn¬
thetic  propositions  of  mathoinatics  are  possible.
His  answer,  or  at  least  part  of  it,  was  that  space
and  time  were  brought  by  the  mind  itself  to
experience.  Whatever  value  can  be  attached  to
the  solution,  it  was  of  the  highest  importance
to  raise  the  problem.  Locke  would  have  rejected
the  solution,  but  his  own  conception  of  mathe¬
matics  and  their  place  in  experience  prepared
the  way  for  it.

2.  Locke’s  object  was  to  describe  the  contents
of  experience,  but  his  method  was  a  mixture  of
description  and  assumption,  and  the  severance  of
ideas  from  things  as  the  mental  copies  of  them
arises  from  this  defect.  Had  he  described  without
assumption  what  he  found  in  his  mind,  he  would
have  discovered  nothing  but  objects  of  various
sorts ;  which  he  might  have  called  ideas  to  indi¬
cate  their  relation  to  mind.  There  would  have
been  substances,  possibly  vaguely  apprehended,  in
which  simple  qualities  inhered,  but  there  would

61


LOCKE


have  been  no  world  behind  the  ideas.  But  he
assumed  from  common  thought  the  existence  of
permanent  things  independent  of  our  apprehen¬
sions  of  them,  and  he  maintained  with  this  the
philosophical  tenet  derived  from  Descartes  that
the  only  objects  we  know  must  be  ideas.  Tho
true  proposition,  that  things  show  themselves  to
be  related  to  mind  in  so  far  as  we  apprehend
them,  he  converted  like  his  teacher  into  the  pro¬
position  that  we  do  not  know  things  directly  but
only  through  mental  phantasms,  which  are  not
indeed  mere  affections  of  mind,  but  are  suspended
somewhere  betwixt  mind  and  real  things,  and
sometimes  dangerously  approach  the  condition
'  of  mental  affections.  This  is  what  Hume  after¬
wards  described  as  the  philosophical  invention  of
a  twofold  existence — a  doctrine  fathered  by  philo¬
sophy  upon  common-sense,  but  which  common-
sense  does  not  entertain,  because  it  has  not  faced
tho  question.  It  is  true  that  Locke  himself,  as
has  been  insisted,  cared  little  about  the  problems
he  had  so  raised,  and  that  his  whole  interest  lay
in  knowing  how  far  these  ideas  could  give  us
knowledge  of  their  exemplars.  But  subsequent
philosophy  has  employed  itself  with  varying
success  in  ridding  itself  of  the  phantasms  which
Descartes  and  Locke  have  conjured  up.  Locke

62


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESSAY

himself  saw  that  ideas  of  primary  qualities  stood
in  an  intimacy  of  relation  with  their  archetypes
which  half  destroyed  their  separateness.  It  was
easy  for  Berkeley  to  show  that  there  was  no  reason
for  preferring  them  to  the  ideas  of  secondary
qualities  in  this  respect.  And  therefore,  he  denied
the  existence  of  sensible  things  in  Locke’s  sense,
denied,  that  is,  the  distinction  of  sensible  things
from  ideas  of  sensation.  Reid  took  a  different
line,  and  insisted  that  our  elementary  experiences
are  judgments,  that  our  sensations  ‘  suggest’  real
external  things,  that  is,  are  the  occasions  upon
which  we,  according  to  a  natural  law,  ipprehend
external  things,  of  which  we  are  therefore  directly
aware.  Had  Locke  confined  himself  to  ideas  in
his  own  sense,  he  would  have  recognised  (as  he
does)  that  we  experience  both  minds  and  sensible
things,  as  supplied  by  reflection  and  sensation
respectively ;  and  that  sensible  things,  while  they
claim  a  real  existence,  are  mental  in  character  in
so  far  as  they  are  inter-related  with  minds  in  the
same  universe  and  affect  them.

3.  One  vital  consequence  followed  from  Locke’s
conception  of  ideas.  So  far  as  ideas  are  presented
to  (or  are  in  the  mind),  these  objects  are  the
peculiar  possession  of  the  individual  mind  which
thinks  them.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  they

63


LOCKE


are  always  regarded  as  corresponding  to  some
thing,  which  by  God’s  good  pleasure  produces
them,  we  tend  to  forget  their  individual  char¬
acter.  Locke  faithfully  describes  the  world  as  he
finds  it,  but  because  there  is  the  background  of
independent  real  things,  we  forget  that  the  ideas
are  relative  only  to  the  individual.  Locke,  in
fact,  invests  his  ideas  with  all  the  characters  that
belong  to  the  real  w<Srld  of  objects,  which  are  not
confined  to  one  man’s  inspection,  but  are  open  to
all.  Strictly  speaking,  the  ideas  belong  only  to
the  individual,  and  Locke  is  ready  to  admit  that
this  is  so.  Tho  common  use  of  language  between
man  and  man  implies  that  they  give  the  same
names  to  corresponding  ideas,  but  ‘  when  he  re¬
presents  to  himself  other  men’s  ideas  by  somo  of
his  own,  if  he  consent  to  give  them  tho  same
names  that  other  men  do,  it  is  still  to  his  own
ideas.’1  But  when  mental  objects  are  thus  indi¬
vidual,  they  fail  of  the  universal  character  which
we  attribute  to  the  objects  of  knowledge.  To  quote
the  famous  example  of  Kant,  there  is  a  great
difference  between  tho  experience  that  when  I  see
the  sun  shine  I  feel  the  stone  grow  warm,  and  the
experience  that  the  sun  warms  the  stone.  The
second  proposition  is  knowledge,  and  is  the
1  Essay,  Book  in.,  ch.  ii.  §  2.

64  ’


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESSAY


common  object  of  all ;  the  first  is  part  of  the  con¬
tents  of  the  mind  of  an  individual,  or  if  we  use
the  word  history  in  Locke’s  sense,  it  is  part  of  the
life-history  of  an  individual.  Strictly  speaking,
knowledge,  as  Locke  conceives  it,  is  part  of  the
life-history  of  an  individual.  Such  individualism
is  inevitable,  if  the  objects  we  know,  the  ideas,
are  detached  from  the  objects  themselves.  We
can  no  more  acquire  common  knowledge  from
putting  together  the  life-histories  of  individuals,
than  we  could  get  a  state  from  putting  together
a  number  of  purely  self-seeking  agents.  It  was
Kant’s  great  merit  to  have  recognised  this
problem,  though  it  by  no  means  follows  that
we  must  accept  his  solution  of  it.  What  we  may
do  is  to  deny  the  existence  of  ideas,  as  copies  of
things,  and  to  recognise  that  wo  directly  appre¬
hend  the  things  themselves.

4.  Locke’s  individualism  arose  from  his  sever¬
ing  ideas  from  things.  Had  ho,  describing  experi¬
ence,  omitted  ideas  or  omitted  things,  he  need
not  have  been  open  to  this  charge.  He  can  only
bring  mind  and  mind  together  by  the  happy
accident  that  they  think  alike.  But  in  another
important  respect  he  falls  short  of  his  own  ideal
of  describing  the  contents  of  experience.  He
overlooks  the  fact  of  continuity.  The  objects  of
E  65


LOCKE


experience  are  to  him  fragmentary  and  discon¬
nected.  It  is  not  strictly  true  to  say,  as  has  some¬
times  been  said,  that  for  him  every  idea  must  be
gone  as  soon  as  apprehended.  For  ideas  may
contain  the  relations  of  persistence  and  identity, — -
These  relations  are  themselves  part  of  our  world
of  ideas.  What  is  true  is  that  the  connections
between  ideas  are  external  to  them.  Qualities  are
grouped  together  by  the  mechanical  bond  of  an
underlying  support  or  substance.  Effect  follows
cause  in  the  external  world  in  empirical  succes¬
sion.  Ideas  have  identity  ‘  when  they  vary  not
at  all  from  what  they  were  at  that  moment
wherein  we  consider  their  former  existence,  and
to  which  we  compare  the  present,’  i.e.  their
identity  is  not  individual  continuity  but  like¬
ness  of  quality.  The  same  account  applies  to
all  the  other  ‘  relations  ’  between  ideas  which
knowledge  directly  apprehends.  For  though
when  the  ideas  are  ‘considered  together’  their
agreement  or  disagreement  is  not  external  but
follows  from  the  nature  of  the  ideas,  yet  the
ideas  must  first  be  ‘  considered  together 1  for  their
relation  to  be  perceived.  Three  is  known  to
be  greater  than  two,  and  white  different  from
black  as  soon  as  they  are  compared,  but  there  is
nothing,  so  far  as  Locke’s  description  goes,  in

66


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ESSAY


three  or  in  white,  which  compels  us  to  compare
them  with  two  or  with  black.  It  is  true  that
Locke  is  feeling  after  the  real  nature  of  causality
when,  as  already  mentioned,  he  seeks  for  it  in  the
experience  of  our  volitions.  But  to  all  intents
and  purposes,  in  spite  of  his  urging  the  inter-re-
latedness  of  things,  the  world  is  to  him  a  number
of  isolated  atoms  grouped  together  in  the  last
resort  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  as  indeed
his  follower  Berkeley  explicitly  affirmed.  Locke’s
badinage  of  Malebranche’s  opinion  that  ‘  we  see
all  things  in  God’  is  a  good  illustration  of  his
insensibility  to  the  cardinal  fact  of  continuity.
Malebranche  had  said  that  ‘  when  we  would  think
of  anything  in  particular,  we  at  first  cast  our  view
upon  all  beings,’ — meaning  that  each  thing  is
seen  as  a  fragment  or  a  limitation  of  the  whole
vague  universe.  ‘  I  do  not  think,’  says  Locke,
‘  that  my  country  neighbours,  when  they  first
wake  in  the  morning,  find  it  impossible  to  think
of  a  lame  horse  they  have,  till  they  have  run  over
in  their  minds  “all  beings"  that  are,  and  then
pitch  on  dapple.’

The  omission  of  continuity  in  the  description
of  experience  is  a  case  of  oversight — inexplicable
enough,  were  it  not  that  description  is  the  most
difficult  of  tasks,  but  shared  with  Locke  by  a  long

67


LOCKE


line  of  successors.  The  failure  to  recognise  it  led
to  frank  scepticism  in  Hume,  it  led  in  Kant  to
attempts  to  overcome  the  disconnectedness  of  the
world  by  mechanical  inventions  like  the  categories.
The  oversight  was  not  confined  to  sensible  things ;
it  applied  to  the  mind  also.  For  the  mind  as  de¬
scribed  by  Locke  is  as  disconnected  as  the  qualities
of  external  things.  There  is  nothing  but  the
spiritual  substance  which  supports  the  group  or
succession  of  mental  operations.  Locke  over¬
looks  the  fact,  as  important  and  as  plain  to  us  as
thinking  or  willing  itself,  that  the  mind’s  action
is  ‘sensibly  continuous.’  It  was  not  till  recent
years  that  tho  face  of  psychology  was  changed  by
substituting  the  experienced  fact  of  mental  con¬
tinuity  for  the  inherited  conception  or  prejudice
that  the  mind  is  known  only  as  a  series  of  mental
events.


68


CHAPTER  IV

ETHICS

Locke’s  contribution  to  Ethics  in  the  Essay  is
short,  but  it  is  remarkable.  Good  and  evil  are
nothing  but  ‘pleasure  and  pain  or  that  which
occasions  pleasure  and  pain  to  us.’  *  Moral  good
or  evil  then  is  only  the  conformity  or  disagree¬
ment  of  our  voluntary  actions  to  some  law  where¬
by  good  and  evil  are  drawn  on  us  from  the  will
and  power  of  the  law-maker ;  which  good  or  evil,
pleasure  or  pain,  attending  our  observance  or
breach  of  the  law,  by  the  decree  of  the  law-maker,
is  that  we  call  reward  and  punishment.’  Moral
good  or  evil  is  thus  a  relation  of  human  actions,
which  are  modes,  to  other  modes  which  are  rules
of  action.  Locke  enumerates  three  sorts  of  moral
codes,  with  their  enforcements  or  ‘  sanctions  ’ — the
divine  law,  ‘  which  is  the  measure  of  sin  and  duty,
given  by  God  whether  by  revelation  or  the  light
of  nature’;  the  civil  law,  the  measure  of  crime  >-
and  innocence ;  and  the  law  of  opinion,  reputation  ^
or  fashion,  which  is  the  measure  of  virtue  or

69


LOCKE


vice,  these  terms  being  partly  coincident  with
the  divine  law,  but  only  so  far  as  the  opinion  of
societies,  tribes  or  clubs  of  men  agrees  with  that
law,  which  it  in  a  great  measure  does.  When  we
ask  what  the  contents  of  the  moral  law  are,  Locke
offers  us  a  startling  doctrine.  ‘The  idea  of  a
Supreme  Being  infinite  in  power,  goodness  and
wisdom,  whose  workmanship  we  are  and  on  whom
we  depend;  and  the  idea  of  ourselves  as  under¬
standing  rational  beings,  being  such  as  are  clear
in  us,  would,  I  suppose,  if  duly  considered  and
pursued  afford  such  foundations  of  our  duty  and
rules  of  action  as  might  place  morality  amongst
the  sciences  capable  of  demonstration ;  wherein  I
doubt  not  but  from  self-evident  propositions,  by
necessary  consequences  as  incontestable  as  those
in  mathematics,  the  measures  of  right  and  wrong
might  be  made  out.’  The  science  which  Aristotle
regarded  as  less  certain  even  than  physical  science
Locke  puts  on  the  level  of  mathematics.  He  gives
as  illustration  two  propositions  '  as  certain  as  any
demonstration  in  Euclid :  ‘  where  there  is  no  pro¬
perty,  there  is  no  injustice  ’ ;  and  ‘  no  government
allows  absolute  liberty.’  The  complexity  of  moral
ideas  and  their  want  of  sensible  representation  are,
he  thinks,  the  reasons  why  as  compared  with
mathematics  morality  is  thought  incapable  of

70


ETHICS


demonstration.  Molyneux  urged  Locke  to  publish
a  treatise  of  Ethics  based  on  this  conception,  and
Locke  seems  to  have  entertained  the  idea  of  doing
so,  which  was  not  however  realised.  How  much
he  recognised  that  human  reasoning  unassisted
by  religion  falls  short  of  what  is  roquired  by  his
ideal  of  Ethics  may  bo  seen  from  a  passage  of
the  Reasonableness  of  Christianity .  ‘  Experience

shows  that  the  knowledge  of  morality  by  mere
natural  light  (how  agreeable  soever  it  be  to  it)
makes  but  a  slow  progress  and  little  advance  in
the  world.  And  the  reason  of  it  is  not  hard  to  be
found  in  men’s  necessities,  passions,  vices  and
mistaken  interests,  which  turn  their  thoughts
another  way;  and  the  designing  leaders  as  well
as  following  herd  find  it  not  to  their  purpose  to
employ  much  of  their  meditations  this  way.
Human  reason  unassisted  failed  men  in  its  great
and  proper  business  of  morality.  It  never  from
unquestionable  principles  made  out  an  entire
body  of  the  “law  of  nature.’”  Wo  can  only  con¬
jecture  what  the  science  would  have  been.  God
and  His  attributes  are  known  to  us  by  demonstra¬
tion,  and  ourselves  by  direct  intuition,  and,  as  the
sentence  just  quoted  indicates,  Locke  would  pro¬
bably,  as  Sidgwick  suggests,  have  demonstrated
from  man’s  nature  the  body  of  laws  which  under

7 1


LOCKE


the  name  of  laws  of  nature  he  inherited  from
Grotius  and  Puffendorf.  It  is  certain  that  in
Locke’s  view  the  value  of  moral  laws  is  not  de¬
rived  from  the  pleasure  and  pain  they  bring  by
way  of  sanction.  He  does  not  even  allow  with
Bentham  and  his  school,  the  so-called  Hedonists,
that  human  action  is  determined  by  the  prospect
of  pleasure  or  pain.  On  the  contrary,  he  maintains
that  it  is  determined  by  present  ‘  uneasiness  ’  or
desire.  Though  we  all  do  desire  happiness  and
in  the  end  good  is  what  is  productive  of  pleasure,
the  laws  of  morality  are  not  based  upon  a  utili¬
tarian  foundation  but  follow  from  the  nature  of
man  and  his  relation  to  God.

But  the  same  unsolved  problem  which  met  us
in  his  treatment  of  mathematics,  how  mathe¬
matical  laws  can  be  valid  of  sensible  facts,  con¬
fronts  us  again  in  a  corresponding  form  in  Ethics.
How  can  propositions,  which  follow  from  abstract
human  nature,  be  applicable  to  or  true  of  a  world
of  concrete  men  ?  Moral  judgments  vary  from
country  to  country  and  from  age  to  age.  This
was  one  of  Locke’s  reasons,  and  a  correct  one,  for
denying  the  innateness  of  moral  principles.  But
it  does  not  seem  to  have  disturbed  his  belief  in
the  abstract  character  of  moral  laws.  Yet  it
implies  either  that  these  varying  and  conflicting

72


ETHICS


judgments  are  not  moral  or  else  that  morality  is.
not  abstract.  The  greater  the  difficulty  there  is
in  arriving  at  an  abstract  conception  of  human
nature  or  of  what  God  intended  man  to  be,  the
more  it  seems  we  must  turn  for  a  basis  of  moral
judgment  to  considering  the  actual  passions  and
circumstances  of  mankind.

The  only  other  memorable  chapter  which  Locke
writes  on  Ethics,  or  rather  the  psychology  of
Ethics,  is  the  extremely  perplexed  and  perplex¬
ing  discussion  of  the  freedom  of  the  will — which
he.  modified  considerably  in  his  life-time,  and
professed  himself  dissatisfied  with  to  the  end.
Locke  denies  that  we  can  speak  intelligibly  of
freedom  of  the  will,  since  the  will  is  one  power
and  freedom  is  another.  It  is  the  whole  man
who  is  free.  We  are  free  so  far  as  we  can  act  or
forbear  action ;  yet  we  are  not  free  to  act  other¬
wise  than  we  do;  to  maintain  that  we  are  would
be  to  declare  that  a  man  is  not  pleased  to  do
what  he  is  pleased  to  do.  Yet  just  when  Locke
appears  to  be  committing  himself  to  determin¬
ism,  he  declares  that  true  freedom  is  found  in  tho
power  we  have  of  suspending  judgment  before
action,  and  consequently  the  right  improvement
of  our  liberty  consists  in  right  consideration,  in
the  government  of  tho  passions,  in  the  constant

73


LOCKE


determination  of  ‘prosecuting  true  felicity,’  and
*  suspending  this  prosecution  in  particular  cases,
till  they  have  looked  before  them,  and  informed
themselves  whether  that  particular  thing  which
is  then  proposed^ or  desired  lie  in  the  way  to  their
main  end,  and  make  a  real  part  of  that  which  is
their  greatest  good.’


74


CHAPTER  V


POLITICS

1  The  power  of  the  civil  law,'  Locke  says  in  the
Essay, 4  is  the  force  of  the  commonwealth  engaged
to  protect  the  lives,  liberties  and  possessions  of
those  who  live  according  to  its  laws,  and  has
power  to  take  away  life,  liberty  or  goods  from  him
who  disobeys.’  He  uses  precisely  identical  terms
in  defining  political  power  in  the  second  and  more
famous  of  the  two  Treatises  of  Government  which
were  published  in  1690,  in  the  same  year  as  the
Essay.  Half  of  what  he  wrote  or  designed  appoars
to  have  been  lost,  but  Locke  hopes  that  the
papers  which  remain  4  are  sufficient  to  establish
the  throne  of  our  great  Restorer,  our  present
King  William,  and  make  good  his  title  in  the
consent  of  the  people ;  which,  being  the  only  one
of  all  lawful  governments,  he  has  more  fully  and
clearly  than  any  prince  in  Christendom ;  and  to
justify  to  the  world  the  people  of  England,  whose
love  of  their  just  and  natural  rights,  with  their
resolution  to  preserve  them,  saved  the  nation

75


LOCKE


when  it  was  on  the  very  brink  of  slavery  and
ruin.’  The  first  treatise  is  a  destructive  criti¬
cism  of  Filmer’s  Patriarcha,  a  work  designed
to  establish  the  claims  of  absolute  monarchy  as
inherited  from  Adam.  Filmer  appears  to  have
been  so  far  historical  in  his  method  as  the
Pentateuch,  which  he  took  for  his  authority,  gives
us  a  picture  of  patriarchal  society,  which  at  any
rate  was  one  form  of  government.  But  neither  it
nor  Locke’s  criticism  of  it  interests  us  here.

The  second  treatise  explains  the  nature  of  civil
society,  by  tracing  its  growth  from  the  state  of
nature  or  primitive  condition  of  man,  conceived
in  the  fashion  in  which  it  had  come  down  from
the  Stoics  and  Roman  lawyers,  who  identified
it  with  the  Age  of  Gold.  It  is  a  state  of  peace,
and  is  governed,  if  the  term  may  be  allowed,  by
the  law  of  nature  supposed  to  be  given  to  men  by
the  ‘  light  of  nature.’  According  to  this  law  men
are  free  to  dispose  of  themselves  and  their  pos¬
sessions  as  they  think  fit;  they  are  equal,  and
bound  in  virtue  of  thoir  equality  to  mutual  bene¬
volence.  Their  liberty  is  no  licence ;  reason
toaches  men  that  no  one  has  a  right  to  harm
another  in  his  health,  liberty  or  possessions.  But
as' he  is  bound  to  preserve  himself,  so  he  is  to
preserve  them.  In  the  state  of  nature  every  man

76


POLITICS


has  a  right  to  punish  a  transgressor,  requiting  him
as  reason  and  conscience  dictate.  Two  doctrines
are  of  special  interest  and  importance.  The  right
of  property  belongs  to  any  man,  in  so  far  as  he
takes  any  part  of  the  common  possession,  and
mixes  his  labour  with  it — a  doctrine  fruitful  of
consequences  in  subsequent  thought.  The  rights
and  duty  of  the  parent  arise  from  the  weakness
of  the  children,  and  the  necessity  of  rearing  them
through  infancy^  and  Locke  thinks  that  the  in¬
stitution  of  marriage  depends  on  that  of*  the
family :  it  is  the  fact  that  a  second  child  may  be
born  before  the  first  is  independent  of  its  parents
that  leads  to  permanent  marriage.

From  the  inconveniences  of  this  state  of  nature
civil  society  arises.  For  there  is  no  settled  law
allowed  by  common  consent;  the  law  of  nature
is  indeed  plain,  but  men  are  biassed  by  their
interest;  there  is  no  ‘indifferent’  judge  and  no
sufficient  power  of  enforcement.  Men  therefore
by  consent  divest  themselves  of  their  natural
liberty  by  uniting  into  a  community  ‘  for  their
comfortable,  safe  and  peaceable  living  in  a  secure
enjoyment  of  their  properties’;  the  united  body
acting  through  the  will  of  the  majority.  This  is
the  institution  of  commonwealth  in  a  contract  of
citizens  with  tme  another.  The  first  result  of  this

77


LOCKE


compact — ‘  the  first  and  fundamental  positive
law  ’ — is  the  establishing  of  the  legislative  power,
the  supreme  power  to  which  government  is  dele¬
gated  in  trust.  But  the  law  of  nature  is  not
abandoned  by  the  individual’s  surrender  of  his
liberties  to  the  state,  but  on  the  contrary,  ‘its
obligations  are  only  in  many  cases  drawn  closer,
and  have  by  human  laws  known  penalties  an¬
nexed  to  them,  to  enforce  their  observation.'
The  legislative  power  receives  therefore  no  arbi¬
trary  authority,  but  it  is  limited  by  the  public
good  of  the  society.  An  executive  is  established
for  permanent  enforcement  of  the  law,  but  may
be  removed  by  the  legislative.  The  prince  or
monarch  holds  his  commission  therefore  as  a
trust  conferred  on  him  by  the  law ;  his  preroga¬
tive  is  but  ‘  the  power  left  in  his  hands  to  provide
for  the  public  good,  in  such  cases  which,  depend¬
ing  on  unforeseen  and  uncertain  occurrences,  cer¬
tain  and  unalterable  laws  could  not  safely  direct.’
When  the  prince  abuses  or  neglects  his  trust,  or
when  the  legislature  abuses  its  trust,  the  govern¬
ment  is  dissolved,  and  the  people  can.  provide  for
themselves  by  establishing  a  new  one.J

Locke’s  conception  of  civil  society  and  govern¬
ment  is  thus  completely  foreign  to  that  of  a
theocracy,  and  is  directed  against  such  a  concep-

78


POLITICS


tion.  He  maintained  that  civil  society  and  the
church  have  entirely  different  concerns.  ‘  The
power  of  civil  government  relates  only  to  man’s
civil  interests.’  But  ‘a  church  I  take  to  be  a
voluntary  society  of  men  joining  themselves  to¬
gether,  of  their  own  accord,  in  order  to  the  public
worshipping  of  God,  in  such  a  manner  as  they
judge  acceptable  to  Him  and  effectual  to  the
salvation  of  their  souls.’  The  whole  doctrine  of
the  Letter  Concerning  Toleration,  from  which
these  words  are  taken,  follows  from  this.  The
magistrate,  as  such,  has  no  concern  with  religion ;
he  cannot  interfere  with  worship  and  belief.  He
can  only  do  so  legitimately  in  so  far  as  religious
worship  or  doctrine  brings  the  members  of  a
church  into  conflict  with  the  good  of  the  civil
society.  And  it  is  only  so  far  as  this  is  the  case
— so  far,  that  is,  as  they  may  be  influenced  in
their  civil  relations  by  obedience  to  an  external
authority — that  Locke  denies  toleration  to  Roman
Catholics ;  and  only  because  to  disbelieve  in  God
readers  a  man  unfit  for  civil  life  that  he  excludes
Atheists  from  the  benefit  of  the  toleration  which-
he  would  extend  to  Mahomedans.

The  effort  of  Locke’s  political  doctrine  (and
hence  its  histcrical,  as  distinguished  from  its  philo¬
sophical,  importance)  was  to  *  establish  William’s

79


LOCKE


throne  on  the  consent  of  the  people.'  The  effort
of  Hobbes’s  doctrine  of  the  State  in  the  Leviathan
was  to  justify  the  divine  right  of  the  Stuarts.
With  Hobbes  the  state  of  nature  is  one  of  warfare
from  which  the  law  of  nature  or  reason  bids
man  depart  in  order  to  self-preservation,  handing
over  their  rights  to  a  man  or  body  of  men,  the
sovereign.  The  sovereign,  with  Hobbes,  bears  the
rights  of  all  the  members  of  the  society,  is  the
‘person’  of  the  commonwealth,  and  is  therefore
distinct  altogether  from  Locke’s  monarch,  or  prince,
whose  capacity  is  only  fiduciary.  With  Locke,  on
the  other  hand,  the  state  of  nature  is  not  left
behind,  but  the  law  of  nature  which  regulated  it
is  continued  into  civil  society  and  enforces  the
ideal  conditions  of  the  state  of  nature.  Both
writers  employ  the  fiction  of  a  social  contract,
arising  out  of  the  supposed  state  of  nature  after
experience  of  its  inconveniences.  Locke  pleads
that  the  state  of  nature  may  actually  still  be
traced  in  the  relations  of  princes,  and  even  in
certain  peoples  who  act  by  popular  consent.  But
he  says,  in  answer  to  those  who  doubt  the  genesis
of  commonwealth  from  a  state  of  nature,  that
naturally  enough  the  state  of  nature  eludes  our
historical  search,  for  ‘government  is  everywhere
anterior  to  records,’  and  early  peoples  are  actually

80


POLITICS


found  already  under  paternal  government,  the
head  or  father  of  the  group  being  chosen  as  the
fittest  to  govern.  In  truth,  the  picture  of  the
origin  of  society  from  a  state  of  nature  by  an
original  compact  only  illustrates  the  natural
tendency  to  account  for  society  by  analysing  it
into  its  fundamental  elements  and  then  making
the  historical  assumptions  that  these  elements
existed  before  the  society  itself  was  created.  Ac¬
cording  as  the  imagination  of  the  writer  was  more
impressed  by  the  Yahoo  or  the  Houyhnhnm  in
human  nature,  he  described  the  state  of  nature  as
one  of  war  or  of  benevolence.  In  Locke  this
tendency  is  parallel  to  that  which  led  him  in  his
philosophy  partially  to  confuse  the  analysis  of
complex  ideas  into  their  simple  elements  with  the
historical  statement  or  fiction  that  simple  ideas
precede,  and  are  combined  by  the  mind  into,  com¬
plex  ideas.

The  fiction  of  the  original  compact  by  consent
of  the  people  (a  fiction  almost  unavoidable  if
abstract  theories  must  be  clothed  in  the  language
of  concrete  life)  really  did  attach  the  belief  of
Locke,  as  it  did  that  of  Hobbes  and  of  the  writers
to  whom  Locke  owes  most  for  his  political  specu¬
lation,  of  whom  Hooker  was  the  chief.  It  was
shared  by  the  later  writer,  Rousseau,  whom  he
F  8 1


LOCKE


anticipated  In  an  important  respect  Locke  fell
short  of  Rousseau ;  he  did  not  reach  that  writer’s
conception  of  the  ‘  general  will  ’  as  the  sovereign,
but  contented  himself  with  the  consent  of  the
people  acting  by  the  majority,  by  what  Rousseau
called  the  ‘  will  of  all.’  He  missed  the  organic
or  personal  feature  in  civil  society.  In  this  re¬
spect  Hobbes’s  conception  of  the  sovereign  as  the
*  person  ’  or  bearer  of  the  rights  of  the  common¬
wealth  is  superior  to  Locke’s.  Only  once  does  he
approach  this  conception,  when  he  points  to  the
natural  or  ‘  federative  ’  power  of  a  commonwealth,
whereby  (as  in  war)  it  acts  as  one  body  against
an  external  nation.  The  body  politic  is,  for  Locke,
an  aggregate  of  consenting  individuals;  just  as  in
metaphysics  the  knowledge,  which  is  the  common
property  of  all,  appears  to  be  the  propositions
which  all  happen  to  make  identically.  And  as  in
his  metaphysics  this  defect  was  concealed  by  his
assumption  of  a  world  of  real  existences,  which
was  there  for  every  one  to  acquire  knowledge  of
through  ideas,  it  was  concealed  in  his  political
theory  by  the  persistence  of  the  supposed  objec¬
tive  and  universal  ‘  laws  of  nature,’  from  the  state
of  nature  into  civil  society.

Locke’s  doctrine  of  civil  governiaent  may  be
said  to  have  represented  the  better  spirit  of  the

82


POLITICS


Revolution.  But  neither  that  doctrine  nor  the
doctrine  of  toleration  was  received  with  universal
or  immediate  acceptance  in  England.  But  they
set  up  the  ideal  of  thinking  in  matters  of  civil
and  religious  liberty  for  the  next  century.  Tolera¬
tion  was  introduced  in  England  not  at  once,  nor
in  the  form  which  Locke  demanded  as  the  non¬
interference  of  the  state  in  religion,  but  in  the
form  of  indulgence,  of  removal  (and  a  qualified
one)  of  the  restrictions  on  dissenters  as  com¬
pared  with  the  favoured  church.  The  specula¬
tive  foundations  of  Locke’s  political  doctrine  have
given  way  or  have  needed  repair.  But  its  politi¬
cal  influence  was  great,  and  due  allowance  being
made  for  its  speculative  defects,  it  represents  not
only  the  ideals  of  the  finer  minds  of  1688,  but  in
substance  the  common-sense  of  our  political  con¬
stitution  as  we  have  come  to  understand  it.  It
exercised  a  most  powerful  influence  through  its
effect  upon  Montesquieu,  When  the  terms  of  the
fundamental  declaration  of  American  independ¬
ence  were  borrowed  as  they  were  from  Locke’s
political  treatise,  Locke  rendered  a  greater  service
to  political  liberty  than  when  he  drafted  or  helped
to  draft  the  constitutions  of  Carolina,  which  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  inoperative.


83


CHAPTER  VI


RELIGION

The  concluding  chapters  of  the  Essay  set  forth
the  boundaries  between  faith  and  reason.  Assent
in  Locke’s  sense  varies  in  its  degrees  according  to
the  grounds  of  probability  and  it  is  always  less
than  knowledge.  But  there  is  *  one  sort  of  pro¬
positions  which  challenges  the  highest  degree  of
assurance,  whether  or  not  the  thing  proposed
agrees  or  disagroes  with  common  experience  and
the  ordinary  course  of  things.’  These  are  the
truths  of  revelation,  the  assurance  of  which  is
faith.  While  reason  is  the  ‘discovery  of  the
certainty  or  probability  of  propositions  by  ob¬
servation  from  ideas  got  by  sensation  or  reflect
tion,'  faith  is  *  the  assent  to  any  proposition  not
thus  made  out,  but  upon  the  credit  of  the  pro¬
poser  as  coming  from  God  in  some  extraordinary
manner.’  Revelation  can  indeed  give  us  no  new
simple  ideas  which  we  had  not  before  by  sensation
or  reflection ;  and  though  it  may  make  us  know
propositions  already  known  through  reason  it

84


RELIGION


cannot  be  admitted  against  the  clear  evidence
of  reason.  If  this  is  true  of  direct  revelation,
still  less  can  revealed  truths  be  accepted  merely
on  the  authority  of  tradition,  or  of  a  book,  unless
reason  convinces  us  that  the  book  itself  is  in¬
spired.  But  there  are  subjects  which,  not  being
contrary  to  reason,  are  above  reason,  and  these  if
revealed  are  matters  of  faith  to  which  we  can  give
a  full  assurance,  provided  always  that  reason
judges  whether  the  revelation  is  such,  and  what
the  words  mean  in  which  it  is  contained.  It
follows  that  even  when  we  can  judge  by  our
natural  powers,  ‘  an  evident  revelation  should
dotormine  our  assent  even  against  probability.’
In  the  case  of  miracles  when  properly  attested
their  very  strangeness  makes  them  fitted  to  pro¬
duce  belief,  when,  Locke  adds  in  significant  words,
‘  they  are  suitable  to  ends  aimed  at  by  Him  who
has  power  to  change  the  course  of  nature.’

This  definition  of  the  separate  powers  of  faith
and  reason,  according  to  which  faith  ‘cannot  be
afforded  to  anything  but  upon  good  reason’  and
so  cannot  be  opposite  to  it,  and  at  the  same  time
is  described  as  an  ‘  assent  founded  on  the  highest
reason,’  makes  Locke  at  once  a  believer  and  a
rationalist.  All  that  he  does  in  the  Essay  to
elucidate  his  doctrine  is  to  protest  against  what

85


LOCKE


he  calls  enthusiasm,  what  we  should  call  fanati¬
cism,  upon  which  he  added  a  chapter  in  the  fourth
edition,  which  admirably  illustrates  both  his
breadth  and  his  cautious  restraint.  ‘Revelation
is  natural  reason  enlarged,’  but  enthusiasm,  which
persuades  itself  of  immediate  intercourse  with
God,  without  help  of  reason,  but  *  from  the  con¬
ceits  of  a  warmed  or  overweening  brain,’  pretend¬
ing  to  an  internal  light,  sins  against  the  supreme
arbitration  of  reason.  It  takes  away  reason  to
make  way  for  revelation  and  puts  out  the  light
of  both.  ‘For  God  (he  adds  in  a  well-known
phrase)  when  He  makes  the  prophet  doth  not  un¬
make  the  man.’

But  the  real  meaning  of  Locke’s  blending  of
faith  and  rationalism  and  of  the  credence  which
he  attaches  to  miracles,  is  only  adequately  seen
when  we  take  into  account  his  Reasonableness  of
Christianity,  a  book  which,  besides  many  tedious
pages,  contains  some  of  Locke’s  finest  work.  Locke
determined,  he  tells  U3,  to  put  aside  all  works  of
divinity  and  endeavour  to  discover  the  message
of  the  New  Testament  itself  as  it  presented  itself
to  a  candid  and  unbiassed  reader.  The  plainness
of  the  doctrine  made  him  surprised  that  every¬
body  did  not  see  and  embrace  it.  Though  at  his
first  setting  out  he  was  ignorant  where  his  search

86


RELIGION


would  conduct  him,  he  was  impressed  by  the
« wonderful  harmony  leading  to  the  same  points
in  all  the  parts  of  the  sacred  history  of  the
Gospels.’  Two  things,  and  only  two  things,  he
found,  besides  belief  in  one  God,  are  taught  by
Jesus  and  by  His  apostles  as  the  condition  of
the  new  covenant:  faith  and  repentance — believ¬
ing  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  through  this
faith  adopting  a  good  life.  This  replaced  the
Mosaic  law  of  wo’-ks  and  the  morality  of  the
heathen.  All  else  contained  in  the  Scriptures
beyond  these  fundamental  articles,  though  truths
and  to  be  believed  by  one  who  knows  them,  a
man  may  still  be  ignorant  of  and  yet  be  saved,  or
may  interpret  differently  from  other  men  accord¬
ing  to  his  lights.  That  there  is  one  God,  that  J esus
is  the  Messiah,  and  that  we  must  live  a  good
life,  are  enough.  The  essential  reasonableness  of
Christianity  consisted,  to  Locke,  therefore,  in  its
declaration  of  God’s  unity,  no  longer  restricted
to  one  people  but  delivered  to  all  mankind,  and
its  bringing  to  righteousness  through  this  faith
weak  men  who  cannot  by  reason  attain  to  rules  of
morality.  ‘  Natural  religion  in  its  full  extent
nowhere  had  been  taken  care  of  by  the  force  of
natural  reason.’  ‘  Nobody  that  I  know  before  our
Saviour’s  time  ever  did  or  went  about  to  give  us

87


LOCKE


a  morality  .  .  .  which  mankind  might  have  re¬
course  to  as  their  unerring  rule.  Such  a  law  of
morality  Jesus  Christ  hath  given  us  in  the  New
Testament,  but  by  the  latter  of  these  ways,  by
revelation.’

It  is  plain,  therefore,  from  the  spirit  of  this  work
(as  well  as  from  the  little  posthumous  Discourse
on  Miracles)  that  for  Locke  not  only  the  belief  in
Christian  revelation  but  in  the  miracles  by  which
it  was  supported  depended  on  the  evidence  which
the  revelation  supplies  of  the  ‘  ends  aimed  at  by
God.’  *  The  miracles  are  to  be  judged  by  the
doctrine,  not  the  doctrine  by  the  miracles.’1  Their
significance  to  him  lies  not  so  much  in  their  con¬
trariety  to  ordinary  events,  as  in  the  light  they
threw  upon  the  divine  nature,  which  could  use
them  to  enforce  a  system  of  morality,  thoroughly
acceptable  to  the  human  reason.  Locke’s  pro¬
found  belief  in  the  concern  which  God  has  for  His
universe  which  Ho  creates,  and  his  willingness  to
base  our  theoretical  conviction  of  God’s  existence
on  a  precarious  use  of  the  conception  of  causality,
leave  as  many  questions  unsolved  as  they  solve.
But  at  least  they  do  not  blur  the  problem  by
omitting  one  portion  of  the  data.

1  From  the  Journal.  See  Fox  Bourne,  vol.  i.  p.  4C4  (quoted
by  Fraser).


88


RELIGION


The  rationalism  of  Locke  made  him  the  parent
of  Deism,  which  neglected  the  faith  which  he  com¬
bined  with  his  rationalism.  In  the  controversy  over
the  question  whether  natural  or  rational  religion
could  be  reconciled  with  Christianity  as  a  revealed
religion  supported  by  miracles,  the  Deists  were
those  who  upheld  natural  religion  and  directly
and  indirectly,  with  irony  more  or  less  concealed,
depreciated  Christianity.  The  latitude  practised
by  the  orthodox  writers  made  them  not  always  or
easily  distinguishable  from  the  Deists,  one  of  whom
indeed  claimed  Archbishop  Tillotson  as  the  source
of  Deism.  It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  though
Locke  must  be  reckoned  on  the  side  of  the  ortho¬
dox,  the  Deists  should  have  derived  their  inspira¬
tion  from  him.  The  circumstances  have  been
related  which  brought  Locke  into  conflict  with
Stillingfleet.  Toland’s  argument  to  show  that
the  Gospels  contained  nothing  ‘  above  reason’  was
based  by  him  on  Locke’s  Essay  and  repudiated
by  Locke.  Collins  who  had  been  an  ardent  pupil
of  Locke  wrote  in  his  Discourse  of  Free-thinking
one  of  the  deistical  books  which  excited  the  live¬
liest  controversy.  The  deistical  doctrine  passed
through  various  phases  in  England  during  the  first
half  of  the  eighteenth  century  and  then  died  out.
But  it  left  its  traces  in  two  minds  of  tho  first
a  89


LOCKE


order.  In  England  it  led  to  Hume’s  Essay  on
Miracles  and  his  Dialogues  concerning  Natural
Religion.  Abroad  it  led  to  the  deism  of  Voltaire,
who  left  England  in  1728  to  become  the  mission¬
ary  in  Europe  of  the  philosophy  of  Newton  and
Locke.  Hume  and  Voltaire  represent  (not  in
religion  only)  the  disintegrating  and  sceptical
tendency,  which  was  one,  but  only  one  element
in  Locke  s  philosophy.  A  new  construction
followed  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century,  first
in  Rousseau  and  then  in  Kant.


90


BOOKS  WHICH  MAY  BE  CONSULTED


Cheap  Editions  of  the  Essay,  the  Treatiiet  of  Government,

and  some  others  of  Locke’s  writings  may  be  obtained.  There

is  a  collected  edition  of  Locke’s  works,  now  out  of  print,  but

to  be  found  in  most  libraries.

A.  Campbell  Fraser.  Locke.  (Blackwood’s  Philosophical
Classics.)  Edinburgh,  1890.

- Locke’s  Eseay.  Clarendon  Press,  1894.

- John  Locke  as  a  factor  in  Modem  Thought.  ( Proceed¬
ings  of  the  British  Academy ,  1903-4.)

H.  Hoffdino.  History  of  Philosophy,  vol.  I.  Chapter  on
Locke.  London,  1900.

R.  Adamson.  Development  of  Modern  Philosophy,  vol.  I.
Chapter  on  Locke.  Edinburgh,  1903.

T.  H.  Green.  Introduction  to  Hume’s  Treatise.  (Green’s
Works,  vol.  i.,  London,  1885 ;  or  Green  and  Grose’s
edition  of  Hume’s  Treatise,  vol.  i.,  London,  1874.)

T.  Webb.  The  Intelledualism  of  Locke.  Dublin,  1857.

T.  Fowler.  Locke.  London,  1880.

H.  Sidowick.  History  of  Ethics.  Loudon,  1886.

Sir  L.  Stephen.  History  of  English  Thought  in  Eighteenth
Century.  (‘  Deism’  in  vol.  I. ;  ‘  Political  Theories,’  vol.  ii.)
London,  1876.

D.  G.  Ritchie.  Natural  Bights.  London,  1895.

Ch.  Bastide.  John  Locke :  ses  Theories  politiques.  Paris,
1906.

Sir  F.  Pollock.  Locke’s  Theory  of  the  State.  (Proceed¬
ings  of  the  British  Academy,  1903-4.)

Lord  Kino.  The  Life  of  John  Locke,  with  Extracts  from
his  Correspondence,  Journals,  and  Common-place  Books.
London,  1829.

H.  R.  Fox  Bourne.  The  Life  of  John  Locke.  London,  1876.


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printer*  to  HI*  Majesty
at  the  Edinburgh  Unlrerelty  Pres*
