Space, Time, and Deity, Vol. 1 (Samuel Alexander, 1920)
==========================================================
The Gifford lectures: emergent evolution as metaphysics; deity as the universe's nisus. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (spacetimedeitygi0001sale).

ee


StS Sheea SAP


Accession NuMBER SHe_r NuMBER


Ek 022 Tape


The Birginta KDLar py


Hc Cormick
Theological Seminary
of the
AW reshyterian Church, Chicagn


826 Belien Avenue


From


‘ano GFX il = 2 OF


Tong aa
ae a


_ SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, L1p. a
a.


SPACE-TIME-AND
DEITY


THE GIFFORD LECTURES AT GLASGOW
1916-1918


BY


S. ALEXANDER


M.A., LL.D., F.B.A.


HON. FELLOW OF LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD


IN TWO VOLUMES
VO, «f


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON


1920


PREFACE


Tue following work was written, and, except for some
revision, in its present form, for the Gifford Lectures
delivered at the University of Glasgow in the sessions
1916-18. The spoken lectures were based upon the
book, but for reasons of time did not follow the text
closely. I have accordingly omitted all reference to them
in the division of the subject. I take this opportunity
of expressing my thanks to the University of Glasgow
for the honour they did me in entrusting me with the
office of Gifford Lecturer ; and to my audience for the
attention with which they listened to me.

The substance of various published papers has been
incorporated into the book, and in several places, notably
in the chapters on Freedom and Value, passages have
been repeated verbally with the kind permission of the
editors of Mind and the Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society.

The first volume and the first two chapters of the second
were in pages before the summer of last year, and accord-
ingly I have made no reference to Mr. A. N. Whitehead’s
work on The Principles of Natural Knowledge, nor to Mr.
Einstein’s generalised form of the Theory of Relativity
(the earlier restricted form I have ventured to refer to)
which has lately become generally known in this country
through Mr. Eddington and other exponents. The
original papers of Mr. Einstein appeared in 1915 and
1916, and I saw the later one, but felt unequal to it


Vv


632
A378


vi SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


without interpretation. In any case the physical theory
is beyond my province, and the metaphysical theory
developed in this book, which deals with the same topic
but from a different approach, is best left to tell its own
tale. But, as Bk. II. ch. iii. contains an apparent contra-
diction to one part of the new relativity doctrine, I have
added a postscript to remove misapprehension, which the
reader will find on p. vii.

Some suspicion is entertained of system in philosophy,
though I can see no good reason for it. This book is at
any rate an attempt at system, but its fault in my own
eyes is not that it is systematic, but that it is not system-
atic enough. Parts of it I may hope to fill out with
better knowledge and reflection, in which process I have
no doubt that many things in it will need to be revised
or abandoned. I am most concerned for the general
outline.

Criticism does not occupy a large proportion of the
whole, but I have not been able to dispense with it alto-
gether, as I should have preferred. It is, at any rate,
not introduced for the sake of criticism, for which I
have no taste, but in order to make my own statement
clearer. Naturally enough, most of it is directed against
those writers from whom I have learned most, and may, I
trust, be taken by them as a mark of respect and grati-
tude. My general obligations will be fairly clear.
Apart from these, I have, I hope, indicated where I
know myself to have borrowed from others ; but there
will be many places where I do not know whether I have
done so unconsciously or arrived independently at similar
conclusions. My work is part of the widely-spread
movement towards some form of realism in philosophy,
which began in this country with Messrs. Moore and
Russell, and in America with the authors of The New
Realism. It is, I think, matter for congratulation that


PREFACE | vit


there should be such marked differences amongst the
independent workers ; because there is better hope that
something permanent may be reached amongst them.

My warm thanks are due to Mr. J. S. Mackenzie,
who undertook the labour of reading the whole of my
proofs, and gave me valuable comments; and to my
colleague the Rev. S. H. Mellone, who read the book
for me in pages. Several other friends have allowed me
to consult them on special points, in particular Mr. T.
P. Nunn, who did me a great service (not the first he
has done me, by his writings or privately) by criticising
certain chapters of the book, for which I can hardly
thank him enough. I add that neither he nor my
other friends are to be held accountable for anything I
have written.


S. ALEXANDER.


MancuesTer,
February 1920.


POSTSCRIPT (to Book II. chapter iii.)


In the above chapter I have attempted to refer the category of
universality to the empirical uniformity of Space-Time, and have
expressed this feature by saying that Space is of constant curva-
ture. This seems at first sight to be directly contradictory to
Mr. Einstein’s doctrine (in his generalised form of the Theory of
Relativity) that Space is warped wherever there is matter, and the
more so the nearer to matter, or in other words that Space has a
variable curvature. The contradiction is, however, only apparent.
When I say that bodies do not change their configuration by
displacement in Space-Time, I mean this only so far as Space-
Time itself is concerned. On the relativity theory too, Space- °
Time in which there is no gravitational field is uniform (Eucli-
dean). A body may on the view of the text undergo distortion
through its relation to other bodies, as in the familiar instance
of the street-urchin who, eager for a cake in a confectioner’s


vii © SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


window, finds his nose flattened against the pane. And I
assume that the presence of matter in Space-Time is properly
represented mathematically by the idea of warping.

On Mr. Einstein’s view, as I gather, bare Space-Time is
merely a limiting conception, and there is no Space without
matter. It is of course of profound importance for philosophy
which of the two, material events or Space-Time itself, is re-
garded as primary. A similar topic has been touched upon in
chapter vi. of Book I.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
€ PAGE
Philosophy and science . : : " : I
The method of philosophy IF eas ‘ ; ; é 4
The problem of knowledge. Attitude of the empirical method.
Idealism and realism 5
The study of mind in metaphysics : : ; : 8
Alternative courses : 9
Mind and its objects. ‘Enjoyed’ and ‘contemplated’ eke
Acts of mind and appearances of things : ; So
The object distinct from the mind Sek;
The mind not a contemplated object to itself. Introspection is
not contemplation. Introspection and extrospection. The
angel’s view : ; , : , Ghee >)
Experience of togetherness : : : 3 Ge Oe
Elucidations. 1. Mind and body. 2. Range of objects.
3. Fluidity of every experience. 4. Enjoyments forms of
attention. Images not mental. 5. Mental acts vary with
the object . 21
- The cognitive relation not unique 26
Transition to problems of Space and Time } : ral GH
Summary : é : : ‘ , 329


1x


x SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


BOOK I
SPACE-TIME


CHAPTER I
Puysicat Space-TIME


Extension and duration

Space and Time as experienced. The relational view of Space
and Time .

The empirical characters of Space and Time

Infinity and continuity as comprehended ; :

The interdependence of Space and Time. (1) Time and
Space. (2) Space and Time

Repetition in Space and Time .

The three dimensions of Space, and the characters of one-
dimensional Time. Irreversibility of Time and a second
dimension of Space. Betweenness of Time and a third
dimension of Space. Order. A caveat

Space-Time : (1) in mathematics

- Space-Time : (2) in metaphysics


Pictorial representation of Space-Time .


CHAPTER SIT


PERSPECTIVEs AND SECTIONS OF PuysicaL Space-TIME


No empty or immoveable Space
Perspectives and sections

Perspectives of Space-Time from an instant
Empirical verification


Perspectives from a point


PAGE


35


37
39
42


44
48


50
58
60
62


65
66
69
72
74


CONTENTS xi


x és , PAGE
Relation of the perspectives to one another. (1) Differences of


perspectives. (2) Their connection 7 : ey
Total Space and Time . d : , F eRe
Absolute Space and Time. Rest relative. Absolute position

or motion . 3 : < : ‘ ref
The Principle of Relativity. Its metaphysical bearing . ee Ree


‘


CHAPTER III


Mentat Space anp TIME


Introductory . e : : : é ese! 1
Mental time part of the same Time as physical Time . : 94
Mental space and physical Space belong to the same Space. |
The place of animage. : : : cons 7
Place of mental space . . : : 2 OO


Localisation of mental space ; how effected. Subject and object


self. Subject and body referred to same place. Mental


process continued into bodily movement . ; i tLOS
‘The map of mental space : : ; , seks
Mental space-time : the problem , : : pean © i |


CHAPTER IV
Menrat Space-Time


Memory of objects. No reference to the perceived. A memory


not a present object ; : ; é se oe,
The act of remembering ‘ 4 : Mes
Quasi-memories : : f » ig
The ‘specious present’ a succession. "The present has breadth

but not depth : : : é : Pa 62-46)


Enjoyed past and future enjoyed as past and future. Difference
of ‘as present’ and ‘at the present.’ Illustration from


memory of emotion é : F | LOSES A,


Xil SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


What is present in an enjoyment of the past .
Mental space-time. Mental space and time involve each other.


Perspectives of mental space-time .
The mental correspondent of Total Space and Time. Sections
of mental space-time


Mr. Bergson on Time and Space


CHAPTER V


MaruematicaL Space AND TIME


Are points fictions? Isolation of points corrected by conception
of continuity

The spatialising of Time

Mathematical and empirical Space. Not different as conceptual
and perceptual; but differently treated.. Geometry deals
with figures, not Space

Space and geometries of it

Generalised ‘ Space.” A product of art


Relation of the generalisations to empirical Space and Time


CHAPEERR AVI
Revations In SPACE aND TIME


Spatial relations exist within Space itself

Absolute and relational Space and Time

Assumptions of relational theory. Contrast with empirical
theory :

Mathematics and metaphysics of Space. Mathematics deals
with extension; metaphysics with intension. Is meta-
physics of the possible or the actual? The need for meta-
physics


Summary


PAGE
130


133


137
140


144
148


150
156
158
163


165
168


170


175
180


CONTENTS


BOOK II
THE CATEGORIES


CHAPTER I
Nature or THE CaTecoriEs


Categories and Qualities

Why the categories are pervasive : not because they are due to
mind ;

but because they are fundamental properties of Space-Time


Kant’s treatment of the Categories


CHAPTER Il
Ipentity, Diversiry, anp ExIsTENCE


Numerical identity and diversity

Defence against objections

Being as the union of identity and difference
Being and not-being

Neutral being . ; : : :
The Hegelian identity of being and not-being .


The law of contradiction


CHAPTER III


Universat, Particutar, and InpIvipUAL


Introductory

Singular universals ; :

Generic universals. Mental dispositions, Habits of Space-
Time. Why Space is uniform

Objections and elucidations


Subsistence and existence


Xili


PAGE


183


186
189


190


494:
105
Eg7
198
200
203


205


208


209


210


217,


220


xiv SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


Universals not lifeless . ; 5 F
Universals and repetition. ‘The problem of multiplicity
The distrust of repetition ,
The ‘concrete universal ”


Postscript : Preface p. vii.


CHAPTER IV


RELATION


The category

Empirical relations

Sense of relations

Relation and other categories
Relations not merely mental
Likeness

Are relations internal or external ?
Intrinsic and extrinsic relations
The ultimate question raised
Alleged contradictions in relations


Space and Time—their alleged inconsistency


CHAPEER V


ORDER


The category
A universal character of things .


Order and the other categories .


CHAPTER VI
Supsrance, Causatity, Reciprociry


A. SupsTance
The category


Identity of substance


PAGE
225


29%
230
233


238
239
242
244
245
247
249
251
254
255


257


262


266


272


CONTENTS


Qualities do not interpenetrate .


_ Connection of qualities


B. Causatiry

The category. Causality and Substance
Causality and uniform motion
Transeunt and immanent causality. Summary .
Cause and effect different. Cause prior to effect.

limited relation
Causality no power, nor force
Objections to causality : (1) from logical atomism
(z) from logical idealism


(3) from metaphysics


C. Reciprocity


The category
Corollaries


Mechanical and organic reaction


CHAPTER VII
QuanTITY AnD INTENSITY


The categories .
Measurement of intensity


Comparison with Kant’s doctrine


CHAPTER VIII
Wuote anp Parts; anpD NuMBER


Whole and parts as categorial
Number

Number a universal

Unity .

Number in extension


Number and counting ..


Causality a


XV
PAGE
275
276


279
281
283


285
290
292
295
297


300
301


302


025
307
499


312
313
3t4
316
317
318


XV1 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


CHAPTER IX


Morion ; AND THE CaTEGORIES IN GENERAL


The category of motion
Grades of the categories
Point-instants and infinites
Quality not a category .
Change not a category .


The categories have no origin


CHAPTER X


Tue Ong anp THE Many


The categories indefinable

Space-Time not subject to the categories
Not a whole of parts

Not a substance : :
Space-Time as the stuff of things
Categorial and empirical


The One and the Many


PAGE
320
322
324
326
328
330


336
337
339
339
341
343
345


™—


INTRODUCTION


Tue title of this book names what is simplest in the
universe, and what is, for us, most complex init. A very
large part of the book will be occupied with the mind ;
but I shall endeavour to exhibit minds in the order of
realities which begins with mere events in space and
time and ends with God. No explanation is needed
for leaving the notion of deity to the end. However
immediately we may be aware of God in the religious
sentiment, in philosophy there is no short road to deity.
But I propose in this introductory chapter to explain
the reasons why I begin with Space and Time and not
with mind; and by a preliminary and provisional
description of the relation of mind to its objects, to
show how an inquiry into this secondary topic leads on
to the more fundamental one.


Philosophy, by which I mean metaphysics, differs
from the special sciences, not so much in its method
as in the nature of the subjects with which it deals.
They are of a peculiarly comprehensive kind, and are
revealed to the most superficial glance cast at the things
or existences in the world. These things fall into
groups distinguished from one another by specific
characters which some have and others have not. Thus
there are material bodies, ranging from ordinary things
like stones down to molecules and ions, if these may
be called material ; there are living things; and there
are beings with minds. What is the relation of these
different orders of existence to one another? Is there
any fundamental nature which they have in common,

VOL. I B


Philosophy


and science.


2 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


of which they are specific examples, and what meaning
can we attach to such specification? What is the
primary form of being, and how are different orders of
being born of it? In the next place, alongside of the
diversity of kind amongst things, there are certain
pervasive features, which, if they are not found in all
things alike, have at least an extraordinary universality
of range. Such are the permanence in change by
virtue of which things are described as substances,
quantity, spatial and temporal character, causality.
Individuality is a pervasive character of things, but so
also it would seem that there is nothing individual
which has not in it a character recognisable by thought,
and known as a universal. Metaphysics is thus an
attempt to study these very comprehensive topics, to
describe the ultimate nature of existence if it has any,
and these pervasive characters of things, or categories.
If we may neglect too nice particulars of interpretation
we may use the definition of Aristotle, the science of being
as such and its essential attributes.

But comprehensiveness within its subject-matter is
the very essence of every science. What else does a
science do but bring system and connection into the
haphazard facts which fall within its view, elevating
(to use a phrase of Lotze’s) coincidences into coherences
by the discovery of laws, simplifying under concep-
tions, unifying what is at first multiplicity ? Philosophy
does but carry the same enterprise to its furthest limits,
and its spirit is one with the spirit of science. Two
things attest this community of spirit. The more com-
prehensive a science becomes the closer it comes to
philosophy, so that it may become difficult to say where
the science leaves off and philosophy begins. In history
the chronicle or newspaper is replaced by the scientific
discovery, based in turn on scientific criticism of docu-
ments, of the underlying movements in men’s minds.
When, going a stage further, the science undertakes
to exhibit the growth and change of the conception
of the State in universal history, as Hegel did, it may
claim to be a philosophy of history, not because it is


INTRODUCTION © 3


: ery but because it is so comprehensive. The

highest generalisations in biology, in chemistry and
physics are different illustrations of the same thing.
Philosophy, if it is well advised, does not count these
doctrines as philosophy; it ‘learns from the sciences
what is life or matter or mental action, and its problem
with regard to them is to ask how these orders of
fact are related to one another and to the fundamental
nature of things. But it is just because philosophy is
concerned, amongst other matters, with these compre-
hensive ideas that the sciences at their upper limit border
on philosophy.

: The other witness to the unity of spirit, which
makes philosophy only one though the most com-

_ prehensive of the sciences, is the historical truth that
the special sciences are, at least in our Western world,
outgrowths from philosophy. It is the vaguer, simpler,
and more comprehensive problems which excite men’s
minds first, when special knowledge is more limited.
Gradually specific bodies of facts are separated from
the general body of knowledge which is called philo-
sophy. In our own day we are witnessing the separa-
tion of psychology from its parent stem.

Common usage corroborates the description that
philosophy like science is the habit of seeing things
together. A person is said to take things philosophic-
ally who sees and feels things in their proper pro-
portion to one another—a habit of conduct which is
not always possessed by the professional philosopher.
On a certain occasion Boswell had invited Johnson
with some others to supper at his lodgings. But, the
landlord having proved disagreeable, Boswell was
obliged to change the place of meeting from his house
to the Mitre, and waited on Johnson to explain the
“serious distress.’ ‘Consider, Sir,” said Johnson,
“how insignificant this will appear a twelvemonth
hence.”! That was a philosophic answer, and Johnson
had in practical conduct, though certainly not in specula-

1 Boswell, Life of Foknson, July 6, 1763, vol. i. p. 422 (Oxford,
1887, ed. G. B. Hill).


The
method of
philosophy
empirical,


4 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


tion, the philosophic mind. So true it is that, as Plato
puts it, the metaphysician is a “ synoptical” man.


Since, then, philosophy differs from the sciences
nowise in its spirit but only in its boundaries, in
dealing with certain comprehensive features of ex-
perience which lie outside the purview of the special
sciences, its method will be like theirs empirical. It
will proceed like them by reflective description and
analysis of its special subject-matter. It will like them
use hypotheses by which to bring its data into verifiable
connection. Its certainty like theirs will extend no
further than its efficiency in providing a reasoned
exhibition of such system as can be discovered in these
data. But the word empirical must not be too closely
pressed. It is intended to mean nothing more than
the method used in the special sciences. It is a
description of method and not of. the subject-matter,
and is equivalent to experiential. On the contrary, the
subject-matter of philosophy is, in a special and more
valuable sense of the word, non-empirical. Taking it
as self-evident that whatever we know is apprehended
in some form of experience, we can distinguish in
experienced things, as has been indicated above, the
variable from the pervasive characters. I shall call this
the distinction of the empirical from the non-empirical
or @ priori or categorial. These a priori elements of
things are, however, experienced just as much as the
empirical ones: all alike are parts of the experienced
world. Philosophy may therefore be described as the
experiential or empirical study of the non-empirical or
a priori, and of such questions as arise out of the rela-
tion of the empirical to the a priori. It is thus itself
one of the sciences delimited from the others by its
special subject-matter.

Still less do I mean that an empirical philosophy is
in some prerogative manner concerned with sense-
experience. The senses have no privilege in experi-
ence, but that they are the means by which our minds
through our bodies are affected by external objects.


INTRODUCTION 5


Sensations though integral parts of experience are not


_ the only ones. Thoughts are experienced as much as


sensations, and are as vital to experience. It may even


appear that there are experiences simpler and of a lower


order than sensation itself; and it may be possible to


indicate the precise relation of these various forms of
Our experience in the economy of things. A philo-
sophy which pursues an empirical method is not


necessarily a sensationalistic one. It deals with the


actual world, but the parts of it with which it deals
empirically are non-empirical parts of that actual world.


The contrast of thought and sense is from this point


of view irrelevant.


One of the most important problems, some think
the most important problem, of philosophy, the problem
of knowledge or of experience itself, is dictated at once
by the general nature of the task which philosophy
undertakes. The most striking classification of finite
things is into minds on the one side and external things


on the other. The relation between any member of


the one group and those of the other is the relation
of cognition or, in general, of experience. Mind knows
or experiences ; external things are known or experienced.
The one is the experiencer, the other the experienced.
What is this relation? Is it singular and unlike any
other relation between other groups, between, for
instance, any two material things, or between a living
and a material thing? What is implied in the very
fact of experience, in virtue of which we know all that
we can know? Some have answered that experience
is something unique, and have assigned a privileged
position to mind. They have not claimed that privilege
in its full extent for the individual minds of you and
me, but they have claimed it for mind in some shape
or form, whether it be the mind of God, or mind as
such, the so-called universal mind. They have been
impressed by the inseparability of mind and things
within experience. No object, no mind: the mind
cannot exercise itself in the void, but only upon some


The
problem of
knowledge.


Attitude
of the
empirical
method.


6 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


object. That proposition is accepted by all parties.


But they have added; no mind, no object : in the


absence of mind there would be not only no experience
in the sense that there would be no experiencer, but
nothing to be experienced. Not all forms of so-called
idealism have been so thoroughgoing as the Berkeleyan.
Some have been content to insist that what is
experienced is dependent on mind and to treat the
experienced objects as appearances of an assumed
ulterior reality. Even for Kant the world of empirical
reality is a world of ideas, unthinkable therefore apart from
mind. In this respect, great as was his advance upon
his predecessors, he was of their family ; and the value
of his achievement can only properly be realised when
his doctrine has been purged of its disproportionate
respect for mind and regenerated by that purgation.

Now the effect of the empirical method in metaphysics
is seriously and persistently to treat finite minds as one
among the many forms of finite existence, having no
privilege above them except such as it derives from its
greater perfection of development. Should inquiry prove
that the cognitive relation is unique, improbable as such a
result might seem, it would have to be accepted faithfully
and harmonised with the remainder of the scheme. But
prima facie there is no warrant for the assumption, still
less for the dogma that, because all experience implies a
mind, that which is experienced owes its being and its
qualities to mind. Minds are but the most gifted
members known to us in a democracy of things. In
respect of being or reality all existences are on an equal
footing. They vary in eminence ; as ina democracy, where
talent has an open career, the most gifted rise to influence
and authority. This attitude of mind imposed by the
empirical method is and may rightly be called in philo-
sophy the attitude of realism, if a name which has borne
sO many meanings may be so used. By whatever name
the method may be called, it does not deprive mind of its
greatness 1n questioning its pretensions. Rather it leaves
these pretensions to be examined in their place ; and there
is no rashness in predicting that the real greatness and


INTRODUCTION 7


value of mind is more likely to be established on a firm
and permanent basis by a method which allows to other
existences than mind an equally real place in the scheme
of being.

It follows that for the empirical method the problem
of knowledge, the subject-matter of epistemology, is
nothing but_a chapter, though an important one, in the
wider science of metaphysics, and not its indispensable
foundation.

Let me hasten to add that the contrast of the empirical
method with the forms of idealism hinted at above is not
in all respects, perhaps not in the gravest respects, valid
of the form of idealism which, under the usual name
of absolute idealism, has been and is so influential on
thinking in this country. That doctrine does indeed
maintain that reality is experience and penetrated with
mind, lives in a medium of mind, and, whatever it is
ultimately, is at any rate spirit. But it would accept with
qualifications the empirical principle that minds are
existences in a world of existences and alongside of them.
One of its tenets is in fact that minds are no more
ultimately real than material things. In truth the essence
of this creed consists not so much in its idealism as in its
faith that the truth is the whole, in comparison with which
all finites are incomplete and therefore false. With the
omission of the concluding phrase, ‘and therefore false,’
the proposition might be accepted by other doctrines than
idealism. At least the grounds of the proposition are
quite other than the grounds of ordinary idealism. I
have come to believe that the foundation of it as con-
ceived by absolute idealism is erroneous, for reasons which
will, I hope, be clear as I proceed. But if I may for a
moment touch a personal note I am all the more anxious
not to overestimate differences from a school of thought
in which 1 was myself bred, and to whose leaders, Mr.
Bradley and Mr. Bosanquet, I owe so much of whatever
capacity I may have attained, however unable I may have
proved myself to see things with their eyes.

As to the terms idealism and realism, I should be


heartily glad if we might get rid of them altogether :


Idealism
and
realism,


nee, Pe


The study
of mind
in meta-


physics.


8 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


they have such shifting senses and carry with them so
much prejudice. They serve, however, to describe a
difference of philosophical method or spirit. If idealism
meant only that philosophy is concerned with experience
as a whole, it has no exclusive title to be considered the
true philosophic method ; for all philosophies are con-
cerned with experience as a whole. The real difference
between idealism and realism lies in their starting-point
or the spirit of their method. For the one, in some form
or other, however much disguised, mind is the measure
of things and the starting-point of inquiry. The sting
of absolute idealism lies in its assertion that the parts of
the world are not ultimately real or sve but only the
whole is rue. For realism, mind has no privileged
place except in its perfection. The real issue is between
these two spirits of inquiry ; and it is in this sense that
the following inquiry is realistic. But no sane philosophy
has ever. been exclusively the one or the other, and where
the modern antithesis has hardly arisen, as with Plato, it
is extraordinarily difficult to say under which head the
philosophy should be classed.


But though we do not assume in mind any prerogative
being or reality which should make other reality in some
way dependent for its existence upon mind, it by no


/ means follows that the study of mind may not be of


special importance and value for philosophy. The reason
is that our minds are so directly open to our own
inspection, and we may become by attention so intimate
with their working, that what escapes us in the external
world may be observed more easily in our own minds.
An illustration is found in the notion of causality. After
naively describing how the behaviour of the sun towards
a piece of wax enables us to collect the idea of a power in
the sun to melt the wax, Locke says that this power may
be most easily discovered in the operations of our wills,
or in the power of our mind over its ideas. Locke’s
instinct guided him right. If you wish to discover the
nature of causality, look first to your mind. You are
conscious of your own power in willing in so far as you


INTRODUCTION 9


experience the continuous transition of an idea of some
end into the consciousness of taking the final steps to its
attainment ; for example, are aware that you have dis-
missed a troublesome imagination, or that an idea of some
object to be attained by your action has been replaced
continuously by an act which ends in the perception of
the end as attained ; that experience is the experience of
power or activity. You do not, as some suppose (including
even Hume in a famous passage which misunderstands
the argument), you do not compare your action with a
notion of power or activity, and find it to be a case which
falls under that designation. It is itself the experience of
exerting power. With this analysis in our mind we may
ask ourselves whether causality in the physical world is
not in turn the continuous transition of one physical
event into another. To do so is not to impute minds to
physical things, as if the only things which could be active
must, on the strength of the experience referred to, be
minds. It is merely to verify under obscurer conditions
what is manifest in the working of our mind. It is likely
therefore that in respect of the other categorial features of
things which may be shared by the mind with things, our
readiest approach is through the mind, and the help may
extend beyond such cases to those questions which arise
out of the relations of various grades of existence to
one another.

All such inquiry into the operation of mind must
be borrowing a page from psychology. But we need
not be deterred by the objections of metaphysical purists
from gathering material from every relevant source.
The problems of metaphysics are anxious enough without


allowing ourselves to be disturbed by punctilios. ae


a


There are two ways of procedure which seem open to Alternative


me to pursue. One is that which I have elsewhere
followed hitherto,’ to begin by examining in detail the
relation of mind to its objects, always on the empirical

1 See various papers in Proc. Arist. Soc. N.S. vols. viii. to xi.


(1908-11); Mind, N.S. vols. xxi.-ii. (1912-13); Proc. British Academy,
vol. vi. (‘The Basis of Realism,’ 1914) ; Brit. fourn. of Psych. iv., 1911.


courses.


fo) SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


method of analysing that relation in our experience of it ;
and to draw from thence what indications are legitimate
as to the general nature of things, and of their categorial
features. The other way is the one which I propose to
follow here: to examine in their order the various
categorial features of existence and to exhibit the relation
of mind to its objects in its proper place in the system of
finite empirical existences. ‘The first way leads ultimately,
as will be explained, to this. Only by such an enterprise
can the difficulties which present themselves in the
problem of knowledge be satisfactorily cleared away.

I propose, however, in the remainder of this intro-
ductory chapter briefly to pursue the earlier method and
to study the problem of knowledge. I do so partly
because it is by that road that I have come myself to
consider the larger task, and I cannot help thinking that
a man is likely to be more persuasive if he follows the
course of his own mental history; but secondly, and
mainly, in order to do something to meet an objection
which will inevitably be taken to the other procedure.
You are about, it will be said, to examine empirically Space
and Time and the various categories of experience. How
can you treat these as objects for the mind to examine as
it were ab extra, when they are unintelligible except in
relation to mind? Has not Kant declared them to be
forms of sensibility or understanding, supplied therefore
by mind? Nay, is not your empirical method based
upon a sheer mistake ? For in the first place you are
treating the objects of experience as if they could be
without mind, and yet maintain they are to be open to
the mind’s inspection. And, as if that were not enough,
you are including amongst the things to be examined not
merely physical objects but minds themselves. You
propose to treat the mind both as an instrument of
knowledge and as its object. Before you examine the
contents of knowledge you must examine knowing itself.

Now it would be a legitimate reply to these re-
monstrances, that the existence distinct from mind of the
various groups of physical things and the existence of
minds as one group among the existences of the world,


INTRODUCTION 11


as thus postulated by the empirical method, may be
taken as a hypothesis for investigating reality. Without
troubling our minds as to how things are related to our
minds, or how we are ourselves related to our minds, let
us make the assumption mentioned and see what comes
of it. This is of the essence of the empirical method as
a scientific method. You do not raise these questions in
science. You assume the existence of life or matter and
you ask what it is. Let us in philosophy make the same
assumption and see whether in the end we do not get
illumination as to our minds and knowledge.

This is all I need, and on which I fall back in the last
resort if the hearer remains unconvinced by my version
of the fact of experience itself. But in the first place I
should wish to incline him from the beginning to the
initial soundness of the hypothesis as expressing the
nature of our experience. In the next place, it will, I
believe, serve us usefully by suggestion, and in particular
it will throw light on the sense in which it can be
maintained that our mind is an experience for us along-
side of the other existences in the world, though it is


experienced differently from them. on


Any experience whatever may be analysed into two
distinct elements and their relation to one another. The
two elements which are the terms of the relation are, on
the one hand the act of mind or the awareness, and on
the other the object of which it is aware’; the relation
between them is that they are together or compresent in
the world which is thus so far experienced. As an
example which presents the least difficulty take the
perception of a tree or a table. This situation consists
of the act of mind which is the perceiving ; the object
which is so much of the thing called tree as is perceived,
the aspect of it which is peculiar to that perception, let
us say the appearance of the tree under these circumstances
of the perception ; and the togetherness or compresence


1 The distinctness of these two elements was made clear in Mr.
G. E. Moore’s paper on ‘The Refutation of Idealism’ in Mind, N.S.
vol. xii., 1903.


Mind and
its objects,


‘Enjoyed’
and *con-
templated,’


12 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


which connects these two distinct existences (the act of
mind and the object) into the total situation called the
experience. But the two terms are differently experienced.
The one is experienced, that is, is present in the experience,
as the act of experiencing, the other as that which is
experienced. To use Mr. Lloyd Morgan’s happy nota-
tion, the one is an -ing, the other an -ed.' The act of
mind is the experiencing, the appearance, tree, is that
upon which it is directed, that of which it is aware.
The word ‘of’ indicates the relation between these two
relatively distinct existences. The difference between the
two ways in which the terms are experienced is expressed
in language by the difference between the cognate and
the objective accusative. Iam aware of my awareness as
I strike a stroke or wave a farewell. My awareness
and my being aware of it are identical. 1 experience the
tree as I strike a man or wave a flag.?, I am my mind
and am conscious of the object. Consciousness is another
general name for acts of mind, which, in their relation to
other existences, are said to be conscious of them as
objects of consciousness.

For convenience of description I am accustomed to
say the mind enjoys itself and contemplates its objects.
The act of mind is an enjoyment ; the object is contem-
plated. If the object is sometimes called a contemplation,
that 1s by the same sort of usage by which ‘a percep-
tion’ is used for a perceived object or percept as
well as for an act of perceiving. The contemplation of
a contemplated object is, of course, the enjoyment which
is together with that object or is aware of it. The choice
of the word enjoyment or enjoy must be admitted not to
be particularly felicitous. It has to include suffering, or
any state or process in so far as the mind lives through
it. It is undoubtedly at variance with ordinary usage,
in which, though we are said indeed to enjoy peace of


1 See his Instinct and Experience (London, 1912).

2 The distinction is borrowed from some remarks of Mr. Stout,
Proc. Arist. Soc. N.S., vol. ix. p. 243. See also vol. viii. p. 254, where
the ‘of’ in ‘aware of myself’ is described after him as the ‘of? of
apposition.


INTRODUCTION 1


mind, we are also said to enjoy the things we eat, or, in
_ Wordsworth’s words, a flower enjoys the air it breathes,
where I should be obliged to say with the same personi-
fication of the flower that it contemplates the air it
breathes, but enjoys the breathing. Still less do I use
the word in antithesis to understanding, as in another
famous passage of the same poet, “contented if he might
enjoy the things which others understand.” Both the
feeling and the understanding are in my language enjoyed.
I should gladly accept a better word if it is offered.
What is of importance is the recognition that in any
experience the mind enjoys itself and contemplates its
object or its object is contemplated, and that these two
existences, the act of mind and the object as they are
in the experience, are distinct existences united by the
relation of compresence. The experience is a piece of
the world consisting of these two existences in their
togetherness. The one existence, the enjoyed, enjoys
itself, or experiences itself as an enjoyment; the other
existence, the contemplated, is experienced by the enjoyed.
The enjoyed and the contemplated are together.


We have called the two elements united in an ex- Acts of
perience an act of mind and the appearance of a thing. In pie
strictness they are but an act or event with a mental char- of things.
acter and a non-mental object of just such character as it
bears upon its face. But it is hard to speak of the
perceived table except as being the thing table as it looks
from a particular point of view under particular circum-
stances ; or of the mental act except as an act of the
mind. .

The anticipatory language was justified, for, in fact, no
mental act is ever found by itself in the limited and
precisely defined form above described ; and the like is
true of the object. A mental act is only a salient and
interesting act which stands out in the whole mental
condition. At any one moment a special mental act or
state is continuously united with other mental acts or
states within the one total or unitary condition ; eg. the
perceiving of the tree with the sight of adjacent objects,


14 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


the sensation of the cold air, the feeling of bodily comfort
and the like ; not juxtaposed with them, but all of them
merely elements which can be discriminated, according to
the trend of interest, within the whole mass. Moreover,
not only is the mental act continuous with others at the
same moment, but each moment of mind is continuous
with preceding, remembered, moments and with expected
ones. This continuum of mental acts, continuous at each
moment, and continuous from moment to moment, is the
mind as we experience it. It is in this sense that we
have to describe any limited element of mental action as
an act of mind. In the same way the object of the
mental act does not exist by itself disconnected from
other such objects. It is not relevant for our immediate
purpose that a single thing is itself but selected
from avast background. What is relevant is that the
limited object is found to cohere with other such
objects, and this intimately blended continuum is called
the thing, the table or tree, which appears partially on
various occasions. Even the single percept of the table
or tree betrays this continuity of different separate
objects with one another. For a percept is only partially
presented in sense. Part of it is suggested by what may
loosely be called memory. The tree is only seen from
one side by actual sight ; its other side is presented only
in idea, in virtue of a past sensory experience of that side.

Thus, immediately, or by a union of many experi-
ences, we are aware not merely of a mental act but of a
mind to which that act belongs, which we experience in an
enjoyed synthesis of many mental acts, a synthesis we do
not create but find. In like manner we become aware of
a thing as the synthesis of its appearances to mind on
different occasions, where again the synthesis must not
be supposed to be made by the mind, but to be in the
actual objects themselves ; it is made manifest to us in
the tendency of the separate appearances to link themselves
together. The ultimate basis of this continuity or syn-
thesis we shall examine in the sequel.’ Meantime, let us
observe that once we have realised this unity of mind or

1 Bk. TIT. ch: vii;


INTRODUCTION 15


of thinghood, we can express the fundamental analysis of
experience thus: that in experience things are revealed to
mind under various aspects, or in various respects, and
that the mind in any experience is compresent with the
revelation of the world of things so far forth as it is
contained in the experience. The name object may be
retained conveniently as a general name for all that is
contemplated, whether it be the partial appearance of a
thing, or the thing itself.


Always, however, the object is a distinct existence from
the mind which contemplates it, and in that sense independ-
ent of the mind. At the same time every object implies a
selection from the world of being. The selection may be
a passive one; only those features of the world can be
revealed to a mind for which the mind possesses the
appropriate capacities. The colour-blind man may be
unable to distinguish red and green, the tone-deaf man
to distinguish a tone from its octave. In part the
selection is determined actively by the interests of the
mind. In the one case the objects force themselves upon
the mind as a bright light upon an open eye. In the
other case the chief determinant in the selection is the
direction of a man’s thoughts or feelings, so that, for
instance, he will not hear suspicions of a person whom he
loves, and forgets the risk of death in the pursuit of duty.
This selectiveness of the mind induces the belief that the
objects of mind are made by it, so that they would not be
except for the mind. But the inference iserroneous. If
I stand in a certain position I see only the corner of
the table. It is certainly true that I am responsible for
seeing only that corner. Yet the corner of the table
belongs to the table. It belongs to me only in virtue of
my confining myself to that aspect of the table. The
shilling in my pocket owes it to me that it is mine,
but not that it is a piece of silver. In the same way
it is the engine-maker who combines iron and steel
upon a certain plan of selection, but the steam-engine
only depends on him for this selection and not for its
characters or for its existence as a steam-engine. On


The object
distinct
from the
mind.


The mind
not a con-
templated
object to
itself,


16 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


the contrary, if he is to use it, he must learn its ways and
adapt himself to them for fear of disaster. :

Object is, in fact, a question-begging word. It implies
a subject. A table cannot be an object to my mind
unless there is a mind, to which it is an object. It must
be selected for contemplation. It cannot be known
without a mind to know. But how much does it owe to
that mind? Merely ‘that it is known, but neither its

ualities as known nor its existence. We cannot there-
ore conclude legitimately from the obvious truth that an
object would not be perceived without a percipient, that it
owes its being and character to that percipient. Berkeley
saw the truth that there is no idea to act as middleman
between the mind and external things, no veil betwixt
the mind and reality. He found the reality therefore in
the ideas themselves. The other alternative is not to
discard the supposed world of reality behind the ideas
but to discard the ideas, regarded as objects dependent on
the mind. Either way ideas and reality are one. But
for Berkeley reality is ideas. For us ideas are reality.
In so far as that reality enters into relation with the mind,
it is ideas.

When the prejudice is removed that an object, because
it owes its existence as an object to a subject, owes to
that subject its qualities of white or green and its exist-
ence; the appeal lies from Berkeley to experience itself.
So appealed to, my experience declares the distinct exist-
ence of the object as something non-mental. I will not
yet say physical, for so much is not implied in every
experience, for example the experience of universals or
of number, but only where the object is physical. But
the distinct existence of my object from my mind is
attested by experience itself. This is a truth which a
man need only open his eyes to see.


I do not underestimate the difficulty of that operation.
Some of the difficulties of a minor sort will perhaps be
met by the exposition itself. But the first condition of


1 For our apprehension of the minds of others, see later, Bk. III.
Fe ity 18


INTRODUCTION 17


success is to distinguish between the different experiences
which the mind has of itself and of the object. Only so
can we realise that experience declares mind and things
to be fellow members of one world though of unequal
rank ; and this was the purpose of our reference to
knowledge. To be an experiencer of the experienced is
the very fact of co-membership in the same world. We
miss this truth only because we régard the mind as con-
templating itself. If we do so the acts of mind are
placed on the level of external things, become ideas of
reflection in the phrase of Locke ; and thus we think of
mind as something over and above the continuum of
enjoyments, and invent an entity superior both to things
and to passing mental states. Such a mind is never
experienced and does not enter, therefore, into the view
of an empirical metaphysics. Nor is it of any avail
to answer that, although not experienced, it must be
postulated to account for certain experiences. The
empirical method approves such postulation, which is
habitual in science. But the unseen entities, atoms
or ions which physics, for instance, postulates, or the
molecules of the chemist, are all of them conceived on
the analogy of something else which is known to ex-
perience. The mind, however, which is postulated in
our case, is a mere name for something, we know not
what, which claims all the advantages of the mind which
we do experience, but accepts none of the restrictions
of that mind, the most important of which that it shall
not go beyond what is found or suggested by experience.
Whatever else the evidence entitles us to say of the mind,
its connection with mental acts must be as intimate as the
connection of any substance with its functions, and it
cannot be such as to allow the mind to look on, as it
were, from the outside and contemplate its own passing
states. ; :
The possibility of introspection might seem to falsify
this statement. It might be thought that in observing
our own minds we were turning our mind upon itself and
making itself an object of contemplation. But though
looking into one’s mind is sometimes described, with our
VOL. I Cc


Introspec-

tion is not
contempla-
tion,


Introspec-
tion and


_ extrospec-


tion.


18 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


objectifying tendency, as looking into one’s breast, which
is a contemplative act, it is very different. Introspection
is in fact merely experiencing our mental state, just as in
observation of external things the object is contemplated.
The accompanying expression in words is extorted from
us, in the one case by the object, in the other case by our
own mental condition. Now except in refinement and in
purpose there is no difference of kind between the
feeling expressed in the ejaculation of disgust and the
reflective psychological analysis of that emotion. Replace
the interjection Ugh! by a whole apparatus of elaborated
speech ; instead of the vague experience of disgust let us
have the elements of the emotion standing out distinct in
enjoyment, and we have the full-blown introspection of
disgust. The interest which prompts that subtle enjoy-
ment is a late acquisition, when the natural preoccupation
with external things has ceased to monopolise our minds.
And it is small wonder that we should regard our intro-
spection as turning our minds into objects, seeing how
largely the language which expresses our mental state has
been elaborated in pursuit of practical interests and in
contact with physical objects.

Moreover, we are sometimes victims of a misap-
prehension as to what it is that we introspect. I am
sometimes said to discover by introspection the images
that flit before my fancy or the subject of my thoughts.
But the landscape I imagine, or Lorenzo’s villa on the
way down from Fiesole that I remember with the
enchanting view of Florence from the loggia, are no more
discovered to me by introspection than the rowan tree
which I perceive in front of my window as I write.
These objects are presented to me by imagination or
memory or perception, not by introspection, and are the
objects not of introspection but of extrospection, if such a
word may be used, all alike. What I introspect is the
processes of imagining and thinking or remembering or
perceiving. Hence it is that introspection is so difficult
to the untrained person to perform with any niceness,
unless it is the introspection of some complicated and
winding process of mind, as when we describe the growth


INTRODUCTION 19


of our feelings, as distinguished from the objects to which
those feelings relate,’ or some of the less simple mental
processes such as desire where it is easy to note how the
mind is tantalised by straining after a fruition which is
still denied. In so simple a situation as mere sensation
of green introspection can tell us next to nothing about
the actual process of sensing, only its vaguely enjoyed
‘direction.’ The green which is the object sensed, the
sensum, is observed by extrospection.

Thus my own mind is never an object to myself in
the sense in which the tree or table is. Only, an -ing
or an enjoyment may exist in my mind either in a
blurred or subtly dissected form. When that condition of
subtle dissection arises out of set scientific interest, we
are said to practise introspection, and the enjoyment is
the existence which is introspected. Such introspection
displays the complexities of our mind as careful scientific
observation of external things displays their complexities
and the relations of their parts or features.

If I could make my mind an object as well as the tree,
I could not regard my mind, which thus takes in its own
acts and things in one view, as something which subsists
somehow beside the tree. But since I cannot do so, since
my mind minds itself in being aware of the tree, what is
this but the fact that there is a mind, whose conscious-
ness is self-consciousness, which is together with the tree?
Imagine a being higher than me, something more than
mind ; let us call him an angel. For him my conscious-
ness would be an object equally with the tree, and he
would see my enjoyment compresent with the tree, much
in the same way as I may see a tree compresent with the
earth. I should be for him an object of angelic con-
templation, and he would have no doubt that different


1 Cp. Browning’s :


“Hardly shall I tell my joys and sorrows,
Hopes and fears, belief and disbelieving : ”


these are described introspectively.
“‘T am mine and yours—the rest be all men’s,


Karshish, Cleon, Norbert, and the fifty.”


These are the objects of extrospection.


The angel’s
view.


Experience
of together-
ness,


20 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


as are the gifts of minds and trees they are co-ordinate in
his contemplated world, as external things are in mine.
Now I cannot do as an angel and contemplate myself, in
so far as 1 am mind (for, of course, I contemplate my
body). But in recognising that in the cognitive relation
to the tree, the tree and I are distinct and relatively
independent existences compresent with each other, I am,
under the limitations imposed on me, anticipating the
angel’s ‘vision’ (I have to use mental terms for what is
higher than mental and different from it). Hence I have
sometimes allowed myself playfully to speak of what here
I call seriously the empirical method in philosophy as the
angelic method. What the angel sees as the compresence
of two objects 1 experience as the compresence of an
enjoyed mind and a contemplated non- mental object.
And if you fail, as many persons appear to fail to whom
I have spoken, to find in your experience the act of
experiencing the enjoyment, but find only the object and
nothing else ; for instance, if you find the tree but not
the enjoyed perceiving of it; the reason is that you are
seeking for the enjoyed as if it were an object contemplated,
and naturally can find no perceiving or imagining or
thinking which stands to you in the same relation as the
tree, no idea of reflection or inner sense comparable with
an idea of sensation. All that you then find that can be
called your self is your body. On the other hand, seek
for the enjoyment as something which you mind or live
through, and which you are, and, beginning with acts
highest in the scale like willing or desiring, where the
enjoyed act is palpable, descend in the scale through con-
structive imagination to remembering, perceiving, and at
last to bare sensing of a sensum, where the enjoying act is
least distinct,’ you will assure yourself of the compresence
of the non-mental object with your enjoyed mind.


But a word is needed to explain what has been omitted
till now, how the fact of compresence or togetherness is
itself experienced. It means the bare fact, as the angel
sees it, that I and the tree are together. That together-


1 T owe this point to Mr. Laird.


INTRODUCTION 21


ness is the togetherness of an -ing and an -ed; and this
is for the empirical method .the fact of their belonging
together in their respective characters in the situation.
But since the one term is an enjoyment and the other a
contemplation, and the relation relates the terms, how, it
may be asked, is the togetherness experienced? Is it
an -ing or an -ed? Now from the angel’s point of view I
am together with the horse I see and the horse together
with me, we are together both. But when we ask how, in
the knowing relation, the togetherness is experienced we
ask the question from the point of view of the being
which has the experience, that is, the mind. Thus the
mind in enjoying itself enjoys its togetherness with the
horse. It does not contemplate the horse’s togetherness
with itself, the mind. When I say I see a horse, the
object is not the horse as seen but an object with certain
colours and shape. The horse as seen or the seen horse
is a description of the horse from the philosopher’s point
of view in discussing the matter, not from the point of
view of the experient himself. What I see is therefore
not a horse which I see to be together with me. But in
contemplating the horse, I, the experiencer, am experien-
cing the fact of my togetherness with the horse. The
horse’s togetherness with me is experienced by me as my
togetherness with the horse ; which I express by saying
I see ahorse. If we could suppose the horse to rise to
our point of view he would in turn enjoy himself as
together with me, that is, with what he apprehends of me ;
but this would not be the same experience. It would be
the horse’s experience and not mine. In fact, for me to
say that I contemplate the horse as together with my enjoy-
ment is merely a linguistic variation, and consequently a
repetition, of the statement that I enjoy myself together
with the horse. 1 neither ought to count the relation twice
over nor can I in fact do so. I experience the string
which unites us only, as it were, from my own end.’


Before proceeding further, let us touch lightly on


1 See, further, Mind, N.S. vol. xxi.. 1912. ‘On relation, and in
particular the cognitive relation,’ §§ 5, 6, pp. 319-323.


Elucida-
tions,


1, Mind
and body,


z. Range
of objects.


ae SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


certain points where difficulties are likely to be felt or
doubts to be raised.

1. When in any cognitive experience the mind or
its act is said to be compresent with a distinct and
independent object which is non-mental, it will not be
supposed that the mind is as it were floated off from
connection with the body. Nothing is said as to the
body because the body does not as such enter into
the experience. It is commonly believed on sufficient
grounds that when I see a tree there is excitement of
the occipital region of the cerebral cortex. But it is
certain that I do not experience this cerebral excitement
when I see the tree, and that when I experience the
cerebral excitement as such I do not see the tree, but
think of the excitement. We are describing experience
as we have it by direct knowledge or acquaintance, not
importing into it what we may know indirectly or, as
it is said, by knowledge ‘about’ it. There are indeed
experiences of the contemplated body which accompany
the enjoyment of vision, such as movement of the eyes
or their accommodation. These are added experiences
and are not part of the experience of seeing the horse,
but are experiences of other objects, located in my body.?

2. The analysis of experience is claimed to be true
of any experience. But it is often urged that the distinc-
tion of subject and object is a late experience, and is
preceded by an experience where the contrast has not
yet arisen, an undifferentiated form of “feeling” which
is below the level of relational experience. We have,
it is admitted, only verifiable approximations to such
experiences ; if they do exist they would be comparable
to a life which was lived within itself, not needing the
stimulus of a surrounding world to which it reacts.
It may be gravely questioned whether they are rightly
described. In some cases the object felt is a mass of
bodily states. In other cases, which are more probably
the ones hinted at, the apparent absence of an object
distinct from the enjoyment arises merely from the
vagueness of the object, in which no specific qualities

1 This subject is discussed in a later chapter, Bk. III. ch. iv. B.


INTRODUCTION 23


can be detected, no parting of the mass into things
with their shapes and colours and smells. Great is the
importance in the mental life of the non-mental object
which can only be described as ‘ something or other.’

3. No experience, we have said, ever is isolated or
has boundaries which shut it off rigidly from the rest
of the world. Rather it is true alike of the enjoy-
ment and of its object that they swim in a surrounding
atmosphere or medium. As we turn our eyes, or move
our heads, or vary anyhow from one moment to another,
the old vague field shifts into a new, and we have the
experience of an unending or at least indefinitely shaped
and uncircumscribed volume. Every experience has
its fringes, or shoots out its corona into some larger
whole which encircles it. Some of these surroundings
are supplied in memory or imagination, some in present
consciousness, and thought with its symbolic process
carries us still further beyond. Even the shapes and
dates of things are merged into Space and Time as
wholes. We have on the side of mind, flashes of light
on a dim background of consciousness; and on the
object side, more vivid or interesting particulars rising
like peaks out of a continuous range of mountainous
country. Thus rather than to say we are definite acts
of mind which take cognisance of a definite object, it
is truer to say that every object we know is a fragment
from an infinite whole, and every act of mind is corre-
spondingly a fragment out of a larger though finite mass.

4. Experience varies from that of ‘something or
other’ through all the grades of mental life, sensation,
perception, imagination, memory, thought. In each
case the -ing and the -ed are distinguishable and the -ed
is non-mental, and in some cases patently physical. All
these mental phases are different forms of attention with
its accompanying pleasure or pain. The act is cognitive
not because there is any act of cognition distinct from
the attention or interest, but because that interest is
directed upon a cognised object. In sensation we can
distinguish the sensing from its object, the sensum, which
is external to it. In like manner we have on one side


3. Fluidity
of every
experience,


4. Enjoy-
ments
forms of
attention.


Images not
mental,


24 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


the perceiving, imagining, remembering, and on the
other the percept, the image, the memory, the thought,
the object in every case being attested by experience
itself as a non-mental existence. Many difficulties are
thus raised which I dare not here discuss for fear of
repetition. They will, I trust, be removed or enlightened
when the mind appears in its due place in the order
of things. The externality and physical nature of
sensations is a particularly disputable matter; for to
some they appear to be immediate experiences utterly
dependent on mind, though objective in their reference
as distinguished from subjective acts like desiring or
attention. I will only say that to me every mental act
is equally immediate, thinking as much as sensation,
and the sensum no less external and non-mental than
the thought.

Imagination, however, requires more than a passing
mention. It seems in the last degree paradoxical to
ascribe to the image of a landscape regained in the memory,
and still more of one which has never been seen, an
existence, in this case a physical existence, independent
of the mind. However objective in character, images
appear to be patently psychical, to be mere ideas and
in no sense realities. Impressed by the mental character
of images, philosophers have construed the rest of
experience in their likeness. If an image is the creature
of the mind, may not perception be equally so? Error
comes in to reinforce this procedure, for an error or
an illusion is demonstrated by its discordance with
reality to be a mere idea. This way of thinking has
led in the past to the doctrine that the objects of our
minds are but copies or representations of real things
which we therefore do not know directly. When
Berkeley reduced all sensible reality to ideas, repre-
sentationism received its deathblow, but its influence
cannot be said to have been eradicated.

The circumstances are altered when instead of
beginning our inquiry into knowledge with images, we
begin it, as we deliberately did, with perception, where
there is less difficulty in believing ourselves directly in


- *>§earees


INTRODUCTION 2


contact with the sensible thing. We can then construe
the more difficult cases in the light of perception, passing
through the images of memory which are nearer to
perception because the memory is of something which
was once perceived ; thence to an image of an object
once experienced but presented again in imagination
without the consciousness that it is familiar from the
past; and thence to the constructions of fancy. In
the memory-image of my friend I have before my mind
the revelation of my friend just as much as I have a
revelation of him when I see him. The first differs
from the second only in the absence of the friend from
my organs of sight, in his removal from me in time,
and further in that, not being limited and constrained
by the presence of the thing to my senses, the subsidiary
operations of my mind may introduce into the object
features which do not belong to the thing. He is
revealed to me through the haze of remoteness in Time
and Space, and under the distorting influence of myself
adding or subtracting or rearranging. As we pass to
constructive imagination the element of personal inter-
ference increases. The problems raised by the con-
structive action of the mind, and, in particular, how in
imagination or error we can be in compresence of an
object which is a revelation of something in the world
of reality, must again be deferred to their place." Mean-
time let us only observe that no action of the mind is
possible without its object any more than a plant can
breathe without air. In sensory experience compresence
with the physical revelation of a physical thing is brought
about through the direct operation of the thing upon
the senses. In imaging the act of mind is provoked
from within, but in the one case as in the other the
act of mind is face to face with its appropriate revelation.
The very constitution of a perceived object, as already
observed, verifies this description. For it is a common-
place that only part of it is sensed, the rest of the object
is supplied by the action of the mind itself.

5. Lastly, the acts of mind are not colourless. They


1 Bk. III. chs. viii. and ix. B.


5. Mental
acts vary
with the
object.


The
cognitive
relation not
unique.


26 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


are different with every variation of the object. They
vary according as the object is a sensum, a percept, an
image, or a thought. Moreover they vary according to
the qualities of the object. It is not the same act of
mind which apprehends green as apprehends red, still less
as apprehends sweet, and my response to a tree differs
from my response to a man. Briefly, as the object varies,
however minutely, so does the corresponding enjoyment
vary however minutely. But this variation in the mind is
not a variation of quality. The mind to experience has
only the quality of being mind, that is of being conscious.
This proposition is almost the same thing as saying that
cognition is being in presence of, in compresence with,
the cognitum. The so-called “content” of the mind is
the object which is distinct from it, and is revealed to the
mind, but in no other sense in the mind. I call the
variation of the mind with its object a variation of
‘direction,’ but must leave the more exact meaning and
justification of the description to a later stage.’


Let us now return from pursuing these hints which
are intended to smooth the way for acceptance of the
fundamental proposition to the fundamental proposition
itself ; and consider what conclusions of a more general
metaphysical nature may be drawn from the character of
the fact of cognition; and, further, what problems it
suggests. There is nothing in the compresence between
the mind and its objects to distinguish that relation from
the compresence between any two objects which it con-
templates, like the tree and the grass. To the supposed
superior being or angel this would be obvious. We
only conceal it from ourselves, as has been explained,
because we fancy that the experient is himself con-
templated. When we take the deliverance of experience
without prepossessions, we realise that our togetherness
with our object and the togetherness of two objects are
so far forth as togetherness is concerned identical. ‘The
difference between the two situations is, precisely as the
angel would recognise, to be found not in the nature of

1 Bk. III. ch. vi.


INTRODUCTION 27


the relation, but of the terms related. In the case of two
physical objects both terms are physical. In the case of
cognition of a physical object, one of the terms, our mind,
is a mental or conscious being. When such a conscious
being is in a process or act of mind appropriate to a
certain object, we are conscious of that object. The little
word of is the symbol of the compresence. So far then
as the cognitive relation is concerned, it appears not only
not to be unique, but to be the simplest of all relations,
the mere togetherness of two terms, their belonging
together to a world.

Not only is there a togetherness between the enjoyed
and the contemplated, which is the same as that between
two objects contemplated, but there is togetherness in
enjoyment, as when two acts of mind are distinguished
by us as enjoyed, whether at the same time (e.g. I see
a friend and hear his voice) or in succession. If we
indicate objects contemplated by Roman letters, and enjoy-
ments by Greek ones, we have three instances of together-
ness which may be indicated thus, AB, aA, and af.


At once a problem is raised. The togetherness of
physical things is at least, it would seem, a spatial and
temporal relation ; the things or events belong to one
Space and to one Time. (It may be observed in passing
that togetherness in time or compresence in it includes
both simultaneity and succession.) Do mental acts,
then, belong together in Space and Time? and is the
mind together with its objects in Space and Time? It
would be at once admitted that mental acts are related in
time, they are either simultaneous or successive, but it
would not universally or even commonly be admitted
that they are spread out in space. Further, it is clear
that the mental act stands in a temporal relation to its
object; whether of simultaneity or succession is not
obvious from direct experience. I am aware that my
act occurs in time, and the event contemplated also, and
the two moments belong at least to one inclusive Time.
Does the experience declare that the object and the mind
are correspondingly together in Space? The object is


Transition
to problems
of Space
and Time.


28 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


contemplated in Space. Even if it is an image, for
example of a landscape once seen, not only is it spread
out, but also, however vaguely and indefinitely, it is referred
to the place to which it belongs in the one Space which we
both perceive and imagine.’ Moreover I seem to enjoy
myself as being somewhere in Space, a place which with
further experience I assign to somewhere in the region
of the contemplated space of my body. Whether these
experiences are or are not rightly reported, at any rate the
problem of whether mind like physical things is not only
in Time but in Space, and of the relation of the space
and time contemplated to the time and the problematical
space which we enjoy, is pressed upon us for solution.
But the tale of experience is not yet completed. Space
and Time are not the only forms of relation or features
of things which may make a claim to belong to mind as
well as to physical things. All the so-called categories like
causality or substance or quantity belong both to the
A order and the a order, and where that is possible to
the order in which an A and an a are together. Take, for
example, causality, which is contemplated as between events
in the physical world. It obtains also as between the
mind and some physical objects. When I receive a
sensation from an external object, I feel myself passive to
that object ; I enjoy my sensing as an effect of the sensum,
which is its object. This is not a mere postulate made
by philosophers for theoretical purposes—that there is an
external cause of my perceptions. It is a direct deliverance
of experience, and Locke and Berkeley, who insist (par-
ticularly Berkeley) on our passivity to sensations in
contrast with our activity in imagination, were rendering
a fact of experience and not a dogma. I enjoy myself
as the effect of an object which acts on my senses, and
only in this sense do I contemplate the object as the cause
of the effect inme.” Moreover, besides causality between
1 On this last difficult point see later, Bk. I. ch. iii. That the


image is spatial in itself is enough for my purposes; it indicates a
problem.

® See the parallel remarks above on the experience of togetherness
(p- 21), and further, Mind, N.S. xxi., 1912, ‘On relations, etc.,’ § 7,
pp. 323_f.


INTRODUCTION 29


things and me, there is causality between my mental acts
or processes ; as when the thought of my friend leads me
by association to remember a reproof, which in the fashion
of friends he administered to me. The causal relation, as
we have before observed, is, in fact, more easily noticed
and analysed as we experience it in ourselves than as we
contemplate it outside us.

What is true of causality is true of other categories.
We enjoy ourselves as permanent amid our changes, that
is, Our mind is in its own enjoyment a substance. It
enters into relations within itself as well as with external
things. Its processes have at least intensity: they have
that species of quantity. Whether it may be qualified by
all the categories remains to be seen, and is proposed as a
problem. At any rate it would seem that some of them
belong both to mind and to things, and that these
categories, and, if it is true of all of them, that all the
categories, are parts of experience which are features alike
of the mental and the physical world. If this is to be
regarded as a mere coincidence it is a highly interesting
one and would correspond to the superior importance
attached in some philosophies to these categories. Is it
more than a coincidence, dependent on some deeper reason?

Some, at any rate, of the categories bring us back once
more to the earlier problem. Causality is, as physical, a
relation which can only be described in terms of Space
and Time. What is the connection of this category with
Space and Time? Finally, is there any connection
between the other categories and Space and Time? We
are thus faced again with the duty of investigating these
two things (shall I call them entities or forms of relation
or features of reality?) as fundamental to any meta-


physics.


Thus our analysis of the experience of experience
itself has led us to two results. It has shown us that
minds and external things are co-ordinate members of a
world, and it has so far justified the empirical method
which proceeds on that assumption. In the next place it
has suggested, with the help of additional experiences all


Summary.


30 SPACE, TIME, AND DEITY


intimately connected with that analysis, that Space and
Time may be in some peculiar fashion basic to all being.
At the same time Space and Time, whatever they may be
and whatever may be their relation to one another and
to the categories, have been treated as something which
can be contemplated and cannot therefore be regarded as
dependent on mind, though they may be concerned with
the constitution of mind as well as of external things.
This is only an extension to them of the empirical method.

I have introduced this long review of mind, which is
yet far too short to be convincing, for the reasons which
I mentioned before, that it is the natural method of
approach and the one I have followed in my own thinking.
It may, I trust, have removed any prejudice against the
empirical method in metaphysics. If I have failed, I can
only beg that my readers will be content to treat the
fundamental implications of the method as a hypothesis,
a hypothesis of method. That is all that is needed for
what is to follow. Let the examination be an empirical
examination of the world in its @ priori features, and
without demonstration of the position taken up by any
particular form of realism, let us put aside any postulate
as to the nature of knowledge, and let the relation of
mind to its objects develop if it can in the course of
the inquiry. The outline which I have given of the
analysis of knowledge will at least have served the purpose
of an explanation of certain terms which may be used
henceforth without commentary.

The plan I shall follow is this: I shall begin with an
inquiry into Space and Time, designed more particularly
to exhibit their relation to one another, and after this
into the categories. This will occupy the first two Books.
In the third Book I shall seek to treat, so far as this
falls to the business of philosophy, the various types of
existents, so as to bring out their relations to one another
within Space and Time. We shall have to ask, for
instance, whether the relation of mind to body is unique
or not, and in the same way whether its relation to its
objects is unique or not, a question already answered
provisionally by reference to the fact of experience itself.


INTRODUCTION 31
Finally, I shall discuss what can be known as to the
nature of deity, consistently with the whole scheme of
things which we know, and with the sentiment of worship
which is directed to God. In attempting this enterprise
I can but regret that I am hampered at many points by
want of relevant knowledge, especially mathematical and
physical knowledge, but it may well be that an outline
which is defective in detail may be correct in its general
movement. Whether this is so or not I must leave to
the result to determine.


SPACE-TIME


VOL. I 33


CHAPTER |
PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME


Ir is not, I believe, too much to say that all the vital Extension
problems of philosophy depend for their solution on the 74°"
solution of the problem what Space and Time? are and
more particularly how they are related to each other.
Weare to treat it empirically, describing Space and Time
and analysing them and considering their connection, if
any, as we do with other realities. We do not ask
whether they are real in their own right or not, but
assume their reality, and ask of what sort this reality is.
Kant believed them to be empirically real but contributed
to experience by the mind, unlike the varying qualities of
things which were contributed to experience from things
in themselves. Other philosophers have turned to the
alleged contradictions in Space and Time, and while
assigning to them their due reality as appearance have
denied that they are ultimately real, and have maintained
that the whole or ultimate reality is spaceless and timeless.
Events which in our experience appear in time, that is,
are laid out in succession, lose that character in the
absorbing whole. This depreciation of Time in particular
is a widely spread sentiment among thinking men.
When the dying Pompilia ia Browning’s poem wishes to
assure her priest-lover of their true union hereafter, she


1 [ use for convenience capital letters for Space and Time when I
am speaking of them in general or as wholes. Small letters are used
for any portion of them (thus a space means a portion of Space) ;
or in adjectival phrases like ‘in space’ or ‘of time.’ The practice is
not without its disadvantages, and I am not sure that I have followed
it rigorously.

35


36 SPACE-TIME LS


sends him the message, “So let him wait God’s instant
men call years.” Ina famous passage Kant, speaking of
our need of immortality in order to approximate to
perfect virtue in an infinite progress, says, “ The infinite
being for whom the condition of time does not exist sees
what for us is an endless series, as a whole in which
conformity with the moral law is attained ; and the
holiness which his command inexorably requires is
present at once in a single intellectual perception on his
part of the existence of rational beings.” Neither the
poet nor the philosopher means merely that what is years
to us is a moment to God, in the same way as a moment
toa man may be hours toa fly with his microscopic measures
of duration. Aperson might well becontent to be an idealist
in philosophy in order to Have the right of saying these
noble things.’ But all these questions arise not before


but after the empirical inquiry into the nature of Space


and Time, and this inquiry should answer them directly or
indirectly in its course or in its outcome. At the present
moment the special question of the exact relation of Time
to Space has been forced into the front, because Time
has recently come into its full rights, in science through
the mathematical physicists, in philosophy also through
Prof. Bergson, who finds in Time conceived as durée, in
distinction from Time as measured by the clock, the
animating principle of the universe. Unfortunately his
conception of the relation of Space to Time is at once the
most important and difficult doctrine of his philosophy
and the most obscure. But one welcome consequence of


1 Even Mr. Russell writes (Our Knowledge of the External World.
pp. 166-7), “‘ The contention that time is unreal and that the world of
sense is illusory must, I think, be regarded as based on fallacious
reasoning. Nevertheless, there is some sense—easier to feel than to
state—in which time is an unimportant and superficial characteristic
of reality. Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the
present, and a certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential to
philosophical thought. The importance of time is rather practical
than theoretical, rather in relation to our desires than in relation to
truth... . Both in thought and in feeling, to realise the un-
importance of time is the gate of wisdom.” I should say that the
importance of any particular time is rather practical than theoretical]
and to realise the importance of Time as such is the gate of wisdom. ‘


ee.


-


CH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 37


his work is that it imposes on philosophy the duty of
considering, like the mathematicians in their way, what
exactly Space and Time are in their relation to one
_ another.


Space and Time as presented in ordinary experience space and
are what are commonly known as extension and duration, 7™°.*
entities (let us say provisionally) or forms of existence, enced.
in which bodies occupy places, and events occur at times
or moments, these events being either external or mental.
We shall deal first with physical Space and Time, leaving
mental occurrences to a later stage. Now in order to
examine empirically what Space and Time are, it is neces-
sary to consider them by themselves, in abstraction from
the bodies and events that occupy them, and this offers
great difficulty and may seem to some illegitimate. The
difficulty is partly derived from our practical habits, for
we are not accustomed to think about Space and Time
themselves, but about the things contained in them. But
it also has a theoretical basis. For we have not any sense-
organ for Space or Time ; we only apprehend them in and
through our sensible apprehension of their filling; by
what mode of our apprehension we shall inquire later. I
shall call it intuition. It is only by analytic attention that
we can think of them for themselves. This leads to two
alternative or partially alternative beliefs. Sometimes it is
thought that spatiality and temporal character are but pro-
perties of sensible things. Extension (to confine ourselves
for the moment to this) belongs to colours and touches.
In psychology this consideration has brought into authority
the doctrine that our sensations, some or all of them, have
a certain bigness or extensity just as they have quality or
intensity. The other alternative is to declare Space and
Time to consist of relations between things or entities,
these entities with their qualities coming first, and Space
and Time are then respectively the order of coexistence and
succession of entities. This is the relational doctrine of
Space and Time, and it will come up for discussion in
its place, where we shall have to ask how far it is justified
and whether relations of space and time (whatever they


The rela-
tional view
of Space
and Time.


38 SPACE-TIME BK. 1


are) are relations as the doctrine suggests between
things or events, or relations between places or times
themselves.

At first this relational view seems imperative. The
ordinary mind, impressed with things and events, naively
thinks of Space and Time as if they were a sort of recep-
tacle or framework in which things and events are found.
The helplessness of such a belief, which makes the con-
nection of things with their space almost accidental, drives
us into the relational view. But whatever we may learn
later about this relational view, which is of course a legiti-
mate and workable one, it seems clearly not to represent
our direct experience of Space or Time. For bodies are
not only in relations of space to one another, but they
themselves occupy spaces and have shapes ; and though
we may regard these in turn as relations between the parts
of the bodies, this is surely a theory about them and not
a description of what the shapes of things look and feel
like. They look and feel like extensions. But in fact
the relational view is not the only permissible hypothesis.
Another hypothesis as to the connection between things
or events and the Space and Time they occupy places in
is that Space and Time are not merely the order of their
coexistence or succession, but are, as it were, the stuff
or matrix (or matrices) out of which things or events are
made, the medium in which they are precipitated and
crystallised ; that the finites are in some sense complexes of
space and time. In the language familiar from the seven-
teenth-century philosophy, things and events are ‘ modes’
of these ‘substances,’ extension and duration. Inthe same
way instead of supposing that extension is a partial char-
acter of a colour or a touch, we may suppose colour to
be a character of the extension, that what we see is not ex-
tended colour but coloured extension. We may even think
it possible, as has already been suggested, that although we
on our level of existence can see extension only through
colour, extension itself may be an ‘ experience’ on a lower
stage of finite existence. A world is capable of contempla-
tion by us (though only through our thinking or analytical
attention, and though we can only apprehend Space and


cM. t PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 39


Time through the special senses), which is anterior to
qualities and contains nothing else but Space and Time.
These, however, are speculations for the future. But
enough is said to show that to consider Space and Time
by themselves, abstract and difficult as it is, is not an
illegitimate abstraction, but is in fact nothing but the
consideration of things and events in their simplest and
most elementary character. The reproaches which have
been urged against Kant because he said that you may
think away material bodies in Space but you cannot think
away Space have no justification.’ Difficult indeed the
process is, and in practice I am accustomed in thinking of
Space and Time by themselves to keep constantly pictures
of material things and events before my mind and then
forget their richness of colours and smells and other
qualities ; and I recommend this practice to my readers.


Physical extension then is presented to us in experi-
ence as something within which bodies are placed and
move, which contains distinguishable parts but is continu-
ous, so that the parts are not presented as having a separate
existence, and which isinfinite. Ultimately when we intro-
duce intellectual construction we may distinguish points
within Space which again are not independent but con-
tinuous. The parts of Space are experienced as co-
existent. In like manner Time or duration is experienced
as a duration of the successive ; it is continuous, so that
its distinguishable parts are not isolated but connected ; in


1 These reproaches suggest a reflection. An eminent philosopher,
Kant, declares that things in space can be thought away but
Space cannot, and at the same time regards this Space as a
‘form’ of intuition (Amschauung). Another eminent philosopher, Mr.
Bradley, declares that without secondary qualities extension is not
conceivable (Appearance and reality, p. 16). The conclusion is that
the truth of the matter cannot depend on whether this or that person
finds himself in possession of a gift denied to others, but upon the
facts of experience. If Kant had maintained pure Space to be conceiv-
able by some kind of apprehension and had not asserted it to be a sub-
jective form, and if Mr. Bradley had not denied it altogether to be
conceivable in its own right, both of them would have been in fact
right. But the decision is a matter of fact and can only be made by
examination of the facts conducted with the help of hypothesis.


The em-
pirical
characters
of Space
and Time.


40 SPACE-TIME BK. I


the end it may be distinguished into moments or instants
with the help of intellectual construction, and its parts are
successive, and, like Space, it is infinite. ;

The continuity and infinitude of Space and Time thus
spoken of as presented in experience are crude, original
characters! of them. They do not in themselves imply,
though still less do they deny, a theory of the nature of a
continuum or an infinite, such as is current in the mathe-
matics of the day. There is something in Space and Time
of the nature of uninterruptedness which can be described
by no other word than continuity ; and something which
is described by the word infinity. Mathematical theories
of them are arrived at in the effort to render these crude
characters into terms of thought, and they come to crown
a precedent reflection which is already contained in ordinary
experience of Space and Time.

Spaces and times are apprehended in the first instance
just as other things are, if not by sense, at any rate through
sense. But sense carries us but a little way in this experi-
ence. Only finite spaces and times are presented through
sense. But even so our senses give us such evidence as
they can of these original characters. For no finite space
or time is experienced without a surrounding space or
time into which it sensibly flows. And every finite time
or space is sensibly continuous or uninterrupted ; it is not
an aggregate of parts, but something in which parts can be
distinguished as fragments of the whole.

Our further ordinary experience of Space and Time
involves the recognition of elements given to us in
thought. When we proceed to speak of Space and Time
as continuous wholes and distinguishable into points or
instants, we are going beyond what we learn through sense
and employing ideas, or what are sometimes called intel-
lectual constructions, and are employing also thoughts in
the special and proper sense of concepts. Nor is there any
reason, supposing the ideas to be well chosen, why we
should not do so. For the simplest objects of experience
are full of our ideas. A thing of a certain sensible colour


1 A remark to much this effect which I heard in a discussion
induces me to make this explicit statement by way of clearness.


CH. I PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 41


and shape is seen asa man. Half the object is ideal, due
to our interpretation of what we see. What we perceive
is the object which we sense as supplemented by what we
image or think. Space and Time are only in the like case
with other experienced things, and to apprehend them we
need to use imagination and conception. I can see and
touch only limited spaces. But I discover that one space
is continuous with another, or is included within a larger
space, and I can think of a very large space, such as a
country two hundred miles square, partly by imagination
but largely by conceptions founded on experience of the
plan of construction of one space out of smaller ones, and
on exact measures of length. We take a sensible space
and elaborate and extend it by ideas and concepts. It is
still plainer that infinite Space is apprehensible only
with the help of thought. Similarly there are no per-
ceptible points or instants, but only durations and extents.
But we discover in experience that an extent or a duration
admits division continually. Space and Time are so con-
stituted. Accordingly we can construct the idea of a point
or instant in a way the reverse of that by which we con-
struct an infinite Space or Time. We start with a finite
extent or duration, we imagine it divided, and then we
interpret this imagination by the concept that there is no
end to the division. A point is thus something which,
founded on apprehended reality, is constructed by an act
of analytical imagination, which involves also besides the
image or idea of a point, the concept of point as the
element out of an infinitude of which an extent is made.
Such an intellectual construction, or construct, is legiti-
mate, provided at least we make no assumption that the
point or the instant can be isolated from other points
or instants. By using the constructive idea of point or
instant we do not falsify the experienced object, Space or
Time, but dissect it into its elements, following the plan
of its construction. We must not imagine that the ele-
ments are unreal because they are ideal constructions, as
the word construction is apt to suggest, any more than
we must imagine that a man’s back is unreal because I do
not see it but only imagine it or have it in idea. For sense


Infinity
and con-
tinuity as
compre-
hended.


42 SPACE-TIME BK. 1


has no monopoly of reality. We reach reality by all our
powers. All we have to be sure of is that we use them
rightly so that the whole, by whatever powers of ours it
is apprehended, shall be itself and self-consistent. When
we come to the mathematical treatment of Space and
Time we shall return to these intellectual constructions.


The infinitude of Space or Time is another of their ex-
perienced features and like their continuity is a percept
extended by thought. It is indeed the other side of their
continuity. It expresses not their uninterruptedness but
their single wholeness. And, as with continuity, our
thinking discovers but does not make, it only finds, an
element in Space which is not discoverable by unaided
sense. The sensible or perceptual datum is that each
finite space is part of a wider one. The infinite Space is
the perceptual datum as qualified by the introduction of
this conceptual element. The something or other which
we feel to be the larger space of which a finite space is
a fragment becomes extended into totality. Thus the
infinity of Space does not merely mean that we never can
reach the end of it however far we go, though it implies
that as a consequence. That would be to describe Space
in terms of our infirmity. But we are not concerned with
our ways of thinking Space but with Space itself. The
infinite Space is thus the positive object of which the
finitude of any given portion, apprehended as finite, is
the limitation. Infinite Space is positive ; finite space is
negative. The infinite is not what is not finite, but the
finite is what is not infinite. In this sense Space (or
Time) is presented as an infinite thing which is prior to
every finite piece of it. ‘ How can finite grasp infinity ?”
asks Dryden. He had already been answered by Des-
cartes that however difficult to comprehend, the Infinite
is known or apprehended directly and before the finite
things which are easier to comprehend. It is thus that
infinite Space is given to us in experience.

To comprehend it, reflective (mathematical or philo-
sophical) thought is needed which does not merely
embody a formulation of the surface aspect of space- or


CH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 43


time - experience, (for that is all the thought that is
needed to be aware of infinite Space, so patently is its
infinitude displayed), but analyses and probes. What
philosophers have adumbrated in this regard, the mathe-
maticians have made luminously clear. Space is infinite
because it is self-contained. Choose any selection of its
parts according to some law of selection and you find that
that selection is itself infinite and contained within the
original. It is thus that the sphere or the’circle have
been used as symbols of a totality because they return
with revolution into themselves. An infinite class is
defined by mathematicians as one to which a class can be
found corresponding, one to one, to the original class and
yet a part only of the original class. The series of
integral numbers is infinite, not because it has no end,—
a mere mental or subjective criterion,—but for that
reason. Double, for instance, all the numbers of the
series I, 2, 3, etc. The series 2, 4, 6, etc., corresponds
to the whole series one to one, but falls wholly within
it as a part of it. In this case on account of the
infinity of the derived series we cannot say that the
whole is greater than its part. Whereas if we take a
finite series, 1, 2, 3, 4, the doubles of these numbers fall
some of them outside the original series, and there is no
operation we can perform on them which will yield a
different result. Space and Time are infinite in this com-
prehensible and again perfectly empirical sense.

In like manner, reflective thought attempts to com-
prehend the given apprehended feature of continuity of
Space or Time (or any other continuum). But for con-
venience I defer the few remarks I can make upon this
difficult matter to a later page.! It is enough to say that,
in a continuum, between any two members another can
be found. os

Space and Time then are presented to us as infinite
and continuous wholes of parts. I shall call these parts
points and instants, availing myself of the conceptual
description of them, and meaning by their connectedness
or continuity at any rate that between any two points or

UNG Re, MEM


The inter-
dependence
of Space
and Time,
(1) Time
and Space.


44. SPACE-TIME BK. I


instants another can be found. ‘To me, subject to what
may be said hereafter, this is a way of saying that the
points and instants are not isolated. But if any reader
jibs, let him substitute lengths and durations ; he will
find that nothing is said in what follows except what
follows equally from the notion of parts.


Other features will declare themselves as we proceed,
some obvious, some less so. But they will be found to
require for their understanding the understanding of
how Space and Time are related to each other. These
are often thought, perhaps commonly, to be independent
and separate (whether treated as entities as here or as
systems of relations). Buta little reflective consideration is
sufficient to show that they are interdependent, so that there
neither is Space without Time nor Time without Space ;
any more than life exists without a body or a body which
can function as a living body exists without life ; that
Space is in its very nature temporal and Time spatial. The
most important requirement for this analysis is to realise
vividly the nature of Time as empirically given as a
succession within duration. We are, as it were, to think
ourselves into Time. I call this taking Time seriously.
Our guides of the seventeenth century desert us here.
Besides the infinite, two things entranced their intellects.
One was Space or extension ; the other was Mind. But
entranced by mind or thought, they neglected Time.
Perhaps it is Mr. Bergson in our day who has been the
first philosopher to take Time seriously.

Empirically Time is a continuous duration, but it is
also empirically successive. Physical Time is a succession
from earlier to later. As Mr. Russell points out,! the
succession from past through present to future belongs
properly to mental or psychical time. But so long as
we take care to introduce no illegitimate assumption we
may conveniently speak of past, present, and future in
physical Time itself, the present being a moment of
physical Time fixed by relation to an observing mind and


1 The Monist, vol. xxv., 1915, ‘On the Experience of Time,’ pp.
225 fi.


cH, 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 45


forming the boundary or section or cut between earlier
and later, which then may be called past and future. In
a manner, earlier and later are, as it were, the past and
future of physical Time itself. I shall therefore use
liberty of phrase in this matter. Now if Time existed in
complete independence and of its own right there could
be no continuity in it. For the essence of Time in its
purely temporal character is that the past or the earlier


- is over before the later or present. The past instant is no


longer present, but is dead and gone. Time’s successive-
ness is that which is characteristic of it as empirically ex-
perienced, in distinction, say, from Space, which also is
continuous. This is the plain conclusion from taking
Time seriously as a succession. If it were nothing more
than bare Time it would consist of perishing instants.
Instead of a continuous Time, there would be nothing
more than an instant, a now, which was perpetually being
renewed. But Time would then be for itself and for an
observer a mere now, and would contain neither earlier
nor later. And thus in virtue of its successiveness it
would not only not be continuous but would cease even
to be for itself successive. If we could suppose an
observer and events occurring in time, that observer could
distinguish the two ‘nows’ by the different qualities of
the events occurring in them. But not even he could be
aware that the two ‘ nows’ were continuous, not even with
the help of memory. For memory cannot tell us that
events were connected which have never been together.

Descartes did, in fact, declare the world to be perpetually
re-created. For him the idea of a Creator presented no
problemor difficulty,and with his imperfect grasp of the real
nature of Time the step he took was inevitable and impera-
tive. For us the case is not the same, even if re-creation
at each moment by a Creator left no difficulty unsolved.
But in any case the universe at the stage of simplicity
represented by mere Time and Space has no place for
so complex an idea as creation, still less for that of a
supreme Creator. Time and Space are on our hypothesis
the simplest characters of the world, and the idea of a
Creator lies miles in front.


46 SPACE-TIME BK. 1


Thus the mere temporality of Time, its successive-
ness, leaves no place for its continuity or togetherness
and seems to be contradictory to its continuity. Yet the
two are found together in Time as we experience it. If,
therefore, the past instant is not to be lost as it otherwise
would be, or rather since this is not the case in fact, there
needs must be some continuum other than Time which
can secure and sustain the togetherness of past and
present, of earlier and later. (‘ Togetherness’ here is
used obviously to mean merely connection and not as in
ordinary usage contemporaneity.) This other form of
being is Space ; that is, Space supplies us with the second
continuum needed to save Time from being a mere ‘ now.’

The same conclusion follows if, for instants, we sub-
stitute durations. The earlier duration, if Time stood
by itself, would not be continuous with the later. We
should but have a duration, a particle of time, per-
petually re-created. There would then, moreover, be the
additional problem of how a particle of duration could be
temporal if it did not itself exhibit differences of before
and after.

It was not open to us to say that since the successive-
ness of Time and its continuity are contradictory Time
is therefore not real but only appearance. Time is an
object given to us empirically. We had thus to ask
whether this Time is independent of Space, as it appeared
to be. With the necessity of Space to the existence of
Time the contradiction is removed. It may, in fact,
be suggested that the reason why Time and Space are
believed to be contradictory in themselves is that the
Time and Space in question are not really Time or
Space, as they are experienced. Time is considered
apart from Space and Space from Time.

The only other way of evading the force of this
analysis of facts is on the relational view of Time where
an instant is defined by events in relation. But this
method is contrary to our hypothesis, and it would be
out of place to consider the alternative here.

One word to anticipate misunderstanding. I said
that to supply continuity to the successive there must


———


cH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 47


be a non-successive continuum, simulating by the word
‘must’ the deductive form. But I am making no
attempt to prove the existence of Space. There is no
room for ‘must’ in philosophy or in science, but only
for facts and the implications of them. I might have
said simply the continuity is, as a matter of fact, supplied


__ by the connection of Time with the other continuum


Space. The apparent ‘demonstration’ was a piece of
analysis of an entity given in experience.

But if Time cannot be what it is without indissoluble
relation to Space, neither can Space be except through
indissoluble connection with Time. For Space taken
by itself in its distinctive character of a whole of co-
existence has no distinction of parts. As Time in so
far as it was temporal became a mere ‘ now,’ so Space so
far as merely spatial becomes a blank. It would be with-
out distinguishable elements. But a continuum without
elements is not a continuum atall. If Space were without
elements it would be open to the difficulties urged with
so much force against Spinoza’s conception of the infinite
Substance or of its attributes: that it swallowed or
absorbed everything which might be said to be contained
in it, but left no means for the existence within it of
the multiplicity of things or indeed of anything. Thus
the empirical continuity or totalness of Space turns out
to be incompatible with the other empirical feature of
Space, that it contains distinctness of parts.’ That distinct-
ness is not supplied by the characteristic altogetherness
of Space. There must therefore be some form of
existence, some entity not itself spatial which distinguishes
and separates the parts of Space. This other form of
existence is Time. Or in order once more to avoid the
appearance of an attempt to demonstrate the reasons for
the universe, let us say that Time is discovered to supply
the element in Space without which Space would be a
blank.

Thus Space and Time depend each upon the other,
but for different reasons. But in each case the ultimate
reason of the presence of the other is found in the
continuity which in fact belongs to each of them as we


(2) Space
and Time,


Repetition
in Space
and Time.


48 SPACE-TIME 7 se


find them in fact. Without Space there would be no
connection in Time. Without Time there would be
no points to connect. It is the two different aspects
of continuity which compel us in turn to see that each
of the two, Space and Time, is vital to the existence
of the other.

It follows that there is no instant of time without
a position in space and no point of space without an
instant of time. I shall say that a point occurs at an
instant and that an instant occupies a point. There are
no such things as points or instants by themselves. There
are only point-instants or pure events.’ In like manner
there is no mere Space or mere Time but only Space-
Time or Time-Space. Space and Time by themselves
are abstractions from Space-Time, and if they are taken
to exist in their own right without the tacit assumption
of the other they are illegitimate abstractions of the sort
which Berkeley censured. How they come to be distin-
guished apart from one another and on what terms this
is legitimate and useful will appear in due course. But
at least they are not merely two concurrent though
correlated continua. The real existence is Space-Time,
the continuum of point-instants or pure events.


The characters which Space and Time present to
experience and the relation of the one to the other as
founded on those characters are not exhausted by the
simple statement that each is necessary to the existence
of the other. So far as the exposition has gone, their
correspondence might be a one to one correspondence,
to each instant a point. As a matter of fact it is a
one-many correspondence. One instant may and does
occupy several points, that is, Time is repeated in Space.
In the more familiar but less elementary and more
complex language of our experience of things and events
with their qualities, several such physical events may
occur in different places at the same time. Again Space
is repeated in Time; one point may and does occur


1 I speak of pure events in distinction from events with qualities
or ‘qualitied’ events, ¢.g. a flash of red colour.


oe


cH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 49


at more than one instant; or to revert to the familiar
language of unspeculative experience, several events at
different times may occupy the same place. Time, as
it were, returns to its old place at a later instant. These
mere empirical facts are sufficient to show that the
correspondence of point to instant is not one to one.
Now it may be seen that our previous statement of
the relation of Space and Time was defective, and besides
not making provision for the repetition of Space in Time
and ‘Time in Space, would be insufficient even to account
fully for the continuity of either Space or Time, either
an extended continuum or a successive one.

If the correspondence were unique, neither would
Space be able to perform its office of saving the instant
from perishing, nor Time its office of saving Space from
blankness. For each would in that case be “ infected,”
if I may borrow from Mr. Bradley a picturesque habit
of speech, with the character of the other. Consider
Time first. If the point corresponded uniquely to the
instant it would share the character of the instant, and
Space would cease to be the Space we know. The point
would lack that element of permanence, that is, inde-
pendence of its particular instant, in virtue of which
it can as it were detain the instant and save it from
perishing utterly and being a mere ‘now’ without con-
nection with other instants. But the repetition of a.
point at many instants, its recurrence, secures to the
point this capacity ; or if the more demonstrative form
of words be preferred, in order that Time should linger
Space must recur, a point must be repeated in more
than one instant. All that our previous analysis effected
was to show that a continuous succession depended on
something different in itself from a succession. But just
because of its intimacy of relation to Time, this something
different must be something more than merely different
from Time, and that more which it has is what I shall
call, for reasons to be made clearer hereafter, the intrinsic
repetition of a point in several instants.

Similarly, if there were unique correspondence, Time
would share the character of Space, be infected with

VOL. I E


The three
dimensions
of Space,
and the
characters
of one-
dimen-
sional
Time.


50 SPACE-TIME ae


bare blank extendedness, would in fact be mere extension
and cease to be the Time we know, which is duration
in succession. In order that it should be in its own
nature successive and so be able to discriminate points
in Space, the instant of Time must be repeated in or
occupy more points than one ; that is to say, the occupa-
tion by an instant of several points gives ‘structure’
to the instant, and thereby enables it to distinguish one
point of space from another.’

This abstract or elementary relation of Space and
Time lies, it will be seen, at the bottom of our experience
of empirical substances. They possess temporal per-
manence and spatial structure: the parts of a substance
are always changing. There would be no substance
were it not that at any instant of its life several parts
were of the same age, and each part of its space could
be occupied by different moments of time. If the
substance changed all at once and its parts were not
repeated in time, or if none of its parts occurred together
at the same instant it would not be a substance. What
I have done above is to exhibit these same relations in
respect of any part of Space and Time themselves.
Later on we shall realise the importance of this analysis
of permanent structure in things, when we come to


speak of categories, a topic which I must not here
anticipate.


The relation of Space and Time is, however, still more
intimate. So far as we have gone Space might be one-
dimensional like Time, but physical Space as presented in
experience has three dimensions. Time also, besides being
a one-dimensional continuum of duration in succession,”
has two other features as experienced. It is irreversible in
direction, that is, an instant which is before another cannot
be after it. In technical phrase the relation of instants is


. : : :
_+ Observe that only the point or the instant is repeated. ‘The
point-instant is not repeated.
4 ; : :
By succession I mean bare succession. In ordinary usage a


succession would be understood to include the two other features of
irreversible direction and betweenness.


cH. I PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 51


asymmetrical. Secondly, each instant is detween two
instants, before the one and after the other ; or, to put the
same poe otherwise, the relation of ‘ before’ is transitive,
that is, if an instant A is before an instant B, and B
before C, A is before C. Now the three dimensions of
Space are, considered. spatially,’ independent : position
may vary according to each independently of the
others. To say that Space is a three-dimensional form of
externality is the same thing as to say there are three
independent one-dimensional forms of externality. It is
not so obvious that the three features of Time, its succes-
siveness, the irreversibility of the succession of two
instants, and the transitiveness of ‘ before,’ or ‘ between-
ness,’ are independent. The second is clearly enough
different from the first, there is nothing in the relation of
successiveness as such which makes it irreversible. But
even if Time is irreversible it is not necessarily uniform in
its direction. The movement of Time might be pendular,
and a movement might be from A to B and from B to C
and both irreversible, but that from B to C might be in
the opposite direction in spatial representation. It would
not in that case necessarily be true that if A is before B
and B before C, A is also before C.


C A C B C3


Any of the three relative positions of C is possible,
and it could not be said whether A is before or after C—
the relation of A to C isindeterminate. In fact, movement
in time might be subject to constant reversals of direction
by jumps, and any one interval would be irreversible,
but the whole Time not uniform in direction, which is
necessary to ‘ betweenness.’

Now the three features enumerated in Space and
Time being independent, we might content ourselves with
saying that as between spatiality and successive duration
there subsists such a connection of interdependence that
each new feature in Time is rendered possible by a new
dimension of Space and conversely renders it possible.
But I do not like to leave the matter in this vague


1 See note 1 on p. 59 for the reason of this limitation.


Irreversi-
bility of
Time and
a second
dimension
of Space,


ag SPACE-TIME BK. I


condition ; and therefore I shall try to make the connec-
tion of Time’s properties and the dimensions of Space
more explicit ; hazardous as the undertaking TS Ele
essential to bear in mind the one-dimensionality of Time
and the independence of the three dimensions of Space of
one another. I shall use capital letters to designate
instants and small ones to designate points.

Let us begin with the fact of irreversible, that is,
determinate, order in time ; we can see then that a one-
dimensional Space would not suffice to secure it. aA and
6B are two point-instants. The points a and 4 which
occur at those instants suffice to distinguish the instants
as well as making them possible, but not to determine
whether A is prior to B or posterior. So far as the
points are concerned A might be before or after B in
time. For the instant A is repeated in space at say the
point a,, and if there were only one dimension of Space
and we take the line ad as we may to represent the time-
dimension as well, there would be nothing to distinguish
aA from a,A, which has the same time. But a, might
be on the other side of 4 from a and thus A might be
either before or after B.1 Hence since the order is
irreversible it follows that the instant A cannot be re-
peated in the one-dimensional line ad. For it is clear


A B A A B


a, a b a, a b x
A


a


that A cannot be repeated at two points a and a,, both
on the same side of 4, because in that case their dates


_ 1 Lassume the one-dimensional Space to be spatially ordered, as
it empirically is (for our inquiry is an empirical analysis). Since order
of Space is said later (p. 56) to be due to Time this may seem to bea
circular procedure; but it is not really so. The argument is that
empirical ‘Time being intrinsically repeated in Space, its irreversibility
is not secured by a one-dimensional Space,-but requires a second
dimension. In the end we see that its irreversibility in one-dimen-
sional Space as expressed in the difference of right and left implies


a second dimension, and that a one-dimensional Space is in fact an
abstraction.


cH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 53°


would be different Now with a second dimension
of Space A can be repeated outside the line ad, and
since this second dimension is independent of the first,
the possible contradiction is removed. The point a
is before so far as one dimension is concerned, and
the point a, before 4 so far as the other is concerned.
The second dimension is accordingly not only necessary
but sufficient. Thus if succession is irreversible there
needs more than one dimension of Space.

Conversely if Space has two dimensions succession is
irreversible. Let XB now represent the one-dimensional
time-line, X and B occupying the points « and 4; and
let a2 be a point outside x occurring at the instant A,
which is before B.?, Now every point is repeated in time
and a therefore occurs at some other instant A, which may


a (A)
xX A, A B A,
x b


be represented on the time-line on either side of B from
X. But unless the order in time is irreversible there is
nothing to distinguish A from A, since they both occupy
the same point, though the two point-instants are different.
A, might be before B or after it, so far as Space is concerned.


1 This does but represent the empirical fact that in a motion in
one dimension no date recurs on the line. A friend who has favoured
me with valuable criticism urges that this assertion is made without
sufficient ground. Ina purely one-dimensional Space, 2 and a, might
still be on the same side of 4 and yet contemporaneous, that 1s, have
the same instant. We might imagine a subsequent movement along aé
which arrived at 4, at the same moment as the previous movement at
a; for instance puffs of smoke might be blown along at intervals.
But directly we realise the extreme simplicity of the data we are
dealing with, we see that such a suggestion implies the ordinary three-
dimensional world we are familiar with. We should be thinking in
terms of physical things and their movements in Space, not of the pure
movements which constitute Space-Time itself. Whereas we are in
this inquiry watching in thought the generation of Space in Time, and
we cannot go back and think of the world as beginning over again.

2 The instant of @ is represented on the time-line A. I write A
beside a in the figure, but in brackets, merely to indicate that @ has an
instant.


Between-
ness of
Time and
a third
dimension
of Space.


54 SPACE-TIME BK. I


There must be something therefore in Time to distinguish
the two-point instants aA and aA,. This is secured by
the irreversibility of the time-order. A, is after B, or if
before B at a different date from A.

Note in passing and by way of introduction to what
follows that nothing has been said as to whether A is or is
not before A,. All we need is that A, if after B shall not
also be before B, and irreversibility secures this. It is
therefore not only necessary for distinguishing aA from
aA,, but it is sufficient for the purpose.

The third correspondence, that of the betweenness of
Time to a still further independent dimension of Space, is
more difficult to establish. Suppose, in the first place, that
succession possesses betweenness or is a transitive relation.
Then it may be seen that two dimensions of Space are
insufficient. Let there be a movement in such Space
from a to 4 and from 4 toc, so that the instant A of a is
before B and B before C. Since Time is one-dimensional
we may represent times, as was done before, on the line
ab; and on this C also may be represented. Now the


¥ (C)
C A C B re
ly a Pa b &


instant C of the point ¢ is repeated in space, and not in
the line dc, and since ad represents the time-line, we may
represent the various repetitions of C in space by points
on the line ad. But C is then represented ambiguously
by any one of the three points ¢,, ¢,, or ¢,. For whichever
of the points repeats the time C, the postulate of irrever-
sible succession is satisfied. If C is at c,, A is before B,
but B may still be before C, for Time may change its
direction within the line ad, but still C will be after B.
So, for example, there is irreversible succession in the
swings of a pendulum, but as represented by the excursion
the time changes its direction. There is irreversible order
in each of the two times AB, BC; but there is no be-
tweenness unless C falls at c,. There is thus no guarantee


CH. 1 PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 55


of betweenness of Time if the repetition of C be confined
to two-dimensional Space. But this is possible if C be
repeated outside the plane adc. Moreover, since the
third dimension is a new dimension and independent of
the other two, the necessary condition is also sufficient.
For if the relation of A, B, and C is transitive, we must
represent the priority of B to the instant C in the new
independent dimension by the same spatial convention as
we represent priority on the line ad, that is, C occupies ¢,
and not ¢, or ¢,.

Conversely, if Space is three-dimensional Time is transi-
tive, there is not merely irreversibility of direction in Time
but uniformity of direction. Let the line XB represent the
time-line, these being the instants of x and 4. B is before
C, which is the instant of the point c, and there is a point A


c(C)
xX A 13 ioe! Peg © AF
x b


outside the plane of the paper whose time A is before B.
But a is repeated in time at the instant A,, which may be
represented on the time-line on either side of C from B.
Whether @ occurs at A or A, there is irreversibility of
succession. But there is nothing so far as Space is con-
cerned to distinguish A and A, since they occupy the
same point a, although the point-instants aA and aA,
are different point-instants. Hence if we only know
that a occurs at an instant A before B, we cannot tell where
that instant is to be represented on the one-dimensional
time-line, unless there is some property of Time which
is different from irreversibility. On the other hand,
betweenness secures the definite place of 4 upon the time-
line, and is thus not only necessary but sufficient if there
is to be a third and independent dimension of Space. ~As
in the earlier case of the proof of determinate order as
necessary with a second dimension, the reasoning depends
on securing the unambiguous distinction of point-instants.
For no point-instant can be repeated, while both the point
and the instant may.


Order.


56 SPACE-TIME BK. I


It follows as a matter of course that since every
instant is connected with other instants continuously, in
definite order and in the transitive relation, every point is
related to other points in three dimensions, and is there-
fore voluminous. The physical point is in fact the
limit of a volume.

It is difficult in discussing the elementary relations of
Space and Time to avoid questions which belong to a later
stage of our inquiry. One such question will have at
once arisen in the minds of some. Irreversibility and
betweenness have been on the faith of experience attri-
buted to Time, and tridimensionality to Space. But why, it’
may be asked, is not Space credited with irreversibility of
order and betweenness? Certainly if a is to the right of
b, b is not to the right of a; and if a is to the right of d
and & to the right of c, dis between a andc. Has not
the character of Time been represented by a line in Space
so as to imply these characters of points of Space? The
truth is that these are characters of order, and are so
because they belong intrinsically to Time, and they belong
to order because all order presupposes Time. Points in
space are ordered in virtue of their time - character.
This does not mean that they assume an order through
our act in arranging them or selecting them by a process
which takes time. Our procedure in dealing with
positions in space or time has nothing to do with these
positions themselves ; at least it is the hypothesis of the
present inquiry that the mind is merely contemplating
what it finds in Space and Time. Our proposition means
that positions in space are really ordered themselves, but
that they are so ordered in virtue of the time-character
which is essential to them. Merely as points, as positions
in space, they do not possess order, any more than instants
merely as temporal possess position in time—supposing
that it is possible to think of points apart from their time
or instants apart from their space, which we have seen it is
not. Order arises out of the temporal character of
positions in space; and it is this fundamental or
elementary order which is presupposed in any order of
more complex or qualitative things which are in any way


cH. I PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME $7


ordered, like pebbles in a row, or terms in a progression,
or officials in a hierarchy.’

_ Let me, at the conclusion of this inquiry (which, be
it observed, is entirely non-mathematical) into the precise
relation between Space and Time, once more remark that
it contains no attempt at a construction of Space and
Time, as if we were giving reasons for them and for their
experienced features, and in a manner affecting to preside
over their creation. Such an attempt would be as foolish
as it is unscientific. I have merely attempted to show
how the various features of the one depend for their
character on those of the other. The reason why Space
has three dimensions is that Time is successive, irreversible,
and uniform in direction. If we could imagine a Creator
who had determined to make Time an asymmetrical
transitive succession, he would, to carry out his purpose,
have made a Space of three dimensions ; and vice versa
if he had determined to make a three-dimensional Space
he would, to carry out his purpose, have made Time a
transitive asymmetrical succession. This does not mean
that one who knows the characters of Time could conclude
from them to the three dimensions of Space, but only that
he finds on examination that there is an intimate relation
between the one and the other, a relation which requires
reflective analysis to discover. The word ‘must’ or ‘needs’
which I have occasionally used means no more than that
we are forced to look for something, which we may or
may not find. We cannot say that Time implies Space
in the sense in which the working of two laws in con-
junction implies their resultant. The point is of sufficient
general importance to be worth a few remarks even here.
Suppose a man thought, I will not say that he could see a
reason why there must be Space, but that he could see a
reason why if there was to be Space there must be Time
or vice versa, he might be asked how in the absence of an
experience of Time he would be able to invent the idea
of Time. All that he can do is to see that in Space as
empirically presented there are features which are those of
Time as empirically presented, and that the mutual relation


1 See further later, Book II. ch. v.


A caveat.


Space-
Time:
(1) in
mathe-
matics ;


58 SPACE-TIME eet


of Time and Space is so close and ramified that they
cannot be considered as separate entities but only as the
same entity described in terms of its different elements.
Other ‘must’ metaphysics does not recognise—except
the must of logical implication, and wherever I have
spoken of implication I have been careful to limit
it to what the experience with which I have been
dealing itself demands, and only so far as it demands it.
The undertaking is hazardous and even presumptuous
enough (and I cannot feel complete confidence that
some error may not have crept in) not to be burdened
with the suspicion of pretensions which are foreign
Olt


We have thus by purely analytical or metaphysical
and non-mathematical methods applied to a subject-matter
presented in experience, arrived at a notion of Space-Time
which at least in spirit is not different from the notion
of a world in Space and Time which was formulated
by mathematical methods by the late H. Minkowski,
in 1908. The underlying conception had been used or
implied in the memoirs of Messrs. Lorentz and Einstein,
which along with Minkowski’s memoir laid the basis of
the so-called theory of relativity, which is now, I believe,
common property amongst certain mathematicians and
physicists. In Minkowski’s conception the Universe is
a system of world- or cosmic points ; it is assumed that
at each point-instant (the name’ is due to Mr. Lorentz,
Ortszeit) there exists some perceptible “ substance,’”’ and
the course of such a substantial point is called a cosmic
line (world-line, We/tlinie). Space and Time are described
as being shadows of the Universe. Only the Universe
has self-existence. Every point has four co-ordinates,
the time co-ordinate being the fourth. Hence it follows,
as Minkowski writes, that geometry with its three
dimensions is only a chapter in four-dimensional physics.
There are infinite Spaces in the physical world, just as
there are infinite planes in our Space. In fact, Space


1 The term point-instant is used by Mr. A. A. Robb in 4 Theory
of Time and Space (Cambridge, 1912).


-


CH. I PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 59


becomes merely the assemblage of all events which
_ belong to the same moment of Time.

Now I understand the essential spirit of the doctrine
to be that Space and Time are not independent of each
other but united in the one four-dimensional world, and
with this the result of our empirical or metaphysical
inquiry is in agreement. But there are some respects
in which there is (as I must with becoming misgivings
admit) divergence. I take for granted that to think of
Time as a fourth dimension in a world in which the other
three dimensions are spatial is a legitimate and the only
possible way of representing mathematically the nature of
the world or Space-Time. But if the empirical analysis
is correct, this representation cannot be regarded as other
than a means of mathematical manipulation. For it
seems to treat Time as an additional dimension, not of
course a spatial one, much in the same way as the third
spatial dimension is additional to the other two, that is, as
a further order in which three-dimensional Spaces are
arranged. But the relation between Space and Time
which we have found empirically appears to be of a much
more intimate kind than is thus suggested. For not only
are Space and Time indispensable to one another (as in
the conception of Minkowski), but Time with its dis-
tinctive features corresponds to the three dimensions of
Space, and in a manner of speech Time does with its
one-dimensional order cover and embrace the three
dimensions of Space, and is not additional to them. To
use a violent phrase, it is, spatially, not temporally,
voluminous. Metaphysically, (though perhaps mathe-
matically), it is not therefore a fourth dimension in
the universe, but repeats the other three. Space, even
to be Space, must be temporal.’ At a later point”
I shall propose a non-mathematical formula which seems
to me to express this relation with metaphysical pro-
priety, without attempting to question the mathematical


1 Jt follows also that the three dimensions of Space, just because
they correspond to the characters of Time, are not in reality independent
of each other (see before p. 51, note).

2 Book III. ch. i. A.


Space-
Time:
(2) in
meta-


physics,


60 SPACE-TIME BK.


appropriateness of Minkowski’s formulation. Beyond
this, I call attention only to two other matters. Accord-
ing to the method customary in mathematics, it is
taken for granted that there is a substance, electricity or
matter or what not (the word substance is used ex-
pressly in order to avoid the question), which occupies the
point-instant. On our hypothesis, whatever substance
there is must be a fragment of the one stuff of Space-
Time, and therefore is not to be assumed within the
metaphysical account of Space-Time. Secondly, as will
be mentioned presently, the definition of Space as the
assemblage of events at one instant, which may be derived
from Minkowski’s doctrine and is formulated so by
M. Langevin,! is connected with the same assumption of
material events occurring at a point-instant, and while
legitimate in one way, and true, does not tell us the
essential character of Space but a consequence of it.


Meantime, I may proceed with the metaphysical ex-
position. We have then to think of Space and Time in
much the following way. (a4) By themselves each con-
sists of elements or parts which are indistinguishable so
long as the elements of the other are excluded. (4) In
reality each point of space is determined and distinguished
by its instant in time, and each instant of time by its
position in space. The elements of the one reality which
is Space-Time, and not either Space or Time alone, owe
their distinctness in either kind to the complementary
element. We have not yet arrived at an examination of
the notions of identity and diversity. But using these
terms in their common sense, either of the two we may
regard as playing the part of identity to the othet’s
part of diversity. It is worth while observing this,
because previously Time was shown to supply discrimina-
tion in the otherwise blank Space. But Space may
equally well be regarded as introducing diversity into
time. For without Space Time would be a bare ‘now’


1 Le temps, Pespace et la causalité dans la physique moderne. Bulletin
de la Société Francaise de Philosophie, 12° année, No. 1, janvier 1912.
Paris.


pe cet PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 61


__ always repeated, and there would be no such thing as
diversity. But the reality of Space and Time is in

Platonic phrase’ the “substance” which contains the
_ identity and the diversity in one.

Space must thus be regarded as generated in Time,
or, if the expression be preferred, by Time. For Time is
the source of movement. Space may then be imaged as
the trail of Time, so long as it is remembered that there
could be no Time without a Space in which its trail is
left. It would be inept to say that Time is in its turn
the trail of Space, for Space of itself has no movement.
The corresponding proposition is that Time as it moves
from past through present to future (from earlier to later)
is the occupation of a stretch of Space.

Space-Time thus consists of what may be called lines
of advance connected into a whole or system in a manner
to be described. Ina line of advance c 4 a we have the
displacement of the present from c through 4 to a, so that
a becomes present while 4 becomes past and « still further
past. The present means as before the point of reference.
In terms of earlier and later, 4 having been later and c
earlier, a becomes later and cé earlier. Now this is the
meaning of motion. Points do not of course move
inthe system of points, but they change their time-
coefficient. What we ordinarily call motion of a body is
the occupation by that body of points which successively
become present, so that at each stage the points traversed
have different time-values when the line of motion is
taken as a whole. Thus Space-Time is a system of
motions, and we might call Space-Time by the name of
Motion were it not that motion is in common speech
merely the general name for particular motions, whereas
Space easily and Time less easily is readily seen to be a
whole of which spaces and times are fragments. Hence
Descartes could identify Space with matter, and there is
nothing astonishing in the hypothesis that Space as
qualified with Time is the matrix of all being. But
Motion we find it difficult so to represent to ourselves.
It seems paradoxical consistently with the ordinary use of


1 In the Timaeus (ovcia).


62 SPACE-TIME BK. I


language to speak of a single vast entity Motion, though
to do so is to do the same thing as to speak of Space-
Time.


Pictorial But the notion that Space is generated in Time in the
representa” form of motion is apt to be misinterpreted. _ We may
space. think of fresh Space as being swept out in Time. We
Time. figure advance in Time, the growth of the world, as an
advance in column, and it is then easy to go on and treat
the present moment as determining a section along this
advance, so that Space becomes the arrested events of the
present or any one moment. We then have the idea
of an infinite spatial present sweeping forward in Time.
Space is defined as the assemblage of events at one
moment. We shall find that this proposition has under
proper conditions a good and important meaning. But
both it and the previous proposition that Time sweeps
out fresh Space in its advance are open to fatal objections.
First of all, to suppose that Time generates new
Space is to neglect the infinity of Time (and indeed of
Space). It supposes a part of Space to be generated at
the beginning and pushed forward. Buta beginning of
existence is itself an event in Space-Time which is the
system of point-instants or pure events, and it is clear
therefore that Space-Time as a whole begins either every-
where or nowhere. Infinity is understood here as
explained before in its true sense of self-containedness.
Secondly, the notion that Space is what is occupied by
any moment fails to give a true insight into the intrinsic
nature of Space. A present which occupies the whole
of Space would suffer from the same defect as a mere
instant disconnected with other instants. We saw that
an instant which was not through Space connected with
its past would not be an instant of Time at all, because its
past would have perished and it would perish too. The
present so described would be all that there was of Time,
a ‘now’ perpetually re-created. If it were spread over
the whole of Space, it and its Space would need to be
re-created at each moment.


We have then to abandon the notion of an advancing


cmt PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME 63


eet, a Bee


column and of Space as a mere instantaneous section of
that advance. We have to think of lines of advance as
displacements of the present in relation to past and
future over positions in Space. In this way we conceive
of growth in Time, or the history of the Universe as
a whole, or any part of it, as a continuous redistribution
of instants of Time among points of Space. There is no
new Space to be generated as Time goes on, but within
the whole of Space or the part of it the instants of Time
are differently arranged, so that points become different
point-instants and instants become also different point-
instants. I believe that this very abstract (I mean very
simple, yet highly concrete) conception lies, in fact, very
near to our common notions of a growing world.

But an abstract conception is difficult to retain without
a pictorial and more complex representation, and there are
several at hand to replace the misleading image of an
advancing column. The simplest way is to imagine a
limited space, and motions taking place within it. We
may choose a disturbed ant-heap or the less pleasing
instance of a rotten cheese seen under the microscope.
But a severer and more useful picture is that of a gas ina
closed vessel, conceived according to the kinetic theory of
gases. [The molecules of the gas dash against the sides
of the vessel and each other in all manner of lines of
advance, whether straight lines or not is for us indifferent.
The molecules stand for instants of Time with their
dates, some being earlier and some later, in various
degrees of remoteness, than the point-instant which is the
centre of reference ; some simultaneous with it, that is,
possessing the same date. The gas is not considered as
it is at any moment but as it exists over a lapse of time.
We are not supposing the internal motions to be arrested
at a given instant which is taken as the point of reference,
which would be to suppose arrested what is intrinsically
a movement. For us it is perfectly easy to contemplate
the motions of the gas over such a lapse of time, for we
have memory to help us and expectation, and we can keep
in our minds at once a limited piece of the history of the
gas. Subject to this explanation we can revert to our


.


64 SPACE-TIME on


usual form of speech and say the molecules are some of
them present instants, some past, and some future instants,
and the incongruousness of future instants disappears,
for they are objects of our minds, that is, objects in
expectation, equally with present and past instants. Like
all pictures which symbolise a conception the image halts ;
and in two respects. First, the instants of identical date
are separate molecules, whereas simultaneous instants, as
we have seen, are the same instant, and have no temporal
but only spatial difference. Here both the molecules
and their places are distinct. Secondly, there need not
always be a past molecule to take the place of the
‘present’ one as the present one moves on to a new
point in space, leaving its old place to be past or earlier.
There are places in the gas empty of molecules. But in
Space-Time there is no place without time. Still the
picture conveys fairly well the notion of redistribution of
instants among points. In some respects the streaming
of protoplasm in a cell would be a more manageable
image. Best of all perhaps, and certainly very useful, is
the picture of the condition of a growing organism where
we find a perpetual alteration or redistribution among the
cells of distance from maturity ; some being mature (the
present), some moribund, in different stages of senescence,
and still others adolescent.

We have now to see how Space is to be thought of
more accurately as saturated with Time, that is to say, as
the theatre of perpetual movement; and secondly, in
what sense it is true to say that any instant occupies


the whole of Space, or that any point occurs in the whole
of Time.


rive ce 1h


PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS OF PHYSICAL SPACE-TIME


Tue physical universe is thus through and through
historical, the scene of motion. Since there is no Space
without Time, there is no such thing as empty Space or
empty Time and there is no resting or immoveable Space.
Space and Time may be empty of qualitative events or
things, and if we are serious with Time there is no
difficulty in the thought of a Space-Time which contained
no matter or other qualities but was, in the language of
Genesis, without form and void before there was light or
sound. But though empty of qualities Space and Time
are always full. Space is full of Time and Time is full
of Space, and because of this each of them is a complete
or perfect continuum. If this might seem a quibble of
words, which it is not, let us say that Space-Time is
a plenum. Its density is absolute or complete. There
is no vacuum in Space-Time, for that vacuum would be
itself a part of Space-Time. A vacuum is only an
interval between bodies, material or other, which is empty
of body ; but it is full with space-time. Hence the old
difficulty that if there were no vacuum motion would be
impossible is without foundation, and was disposed of by
Leibniz in answering Locke.’ If it were completely full
of material bodies with their material qualities there
would be no room for locomotion of those bodies with
their qualities. But it is only full with itself, Material
bodies can move in this absolute plenum of Space-
Time, because their motion means merely that the time-
coefficients of their spatial outlines change.
1 Nouveaux Essais, Preface (Erdmann, p. 1994, Latta, p. 385).
VOL. I 65 F


No empty
or immove-
able Space.


Perspec-
tives and
sections.


a


66 SPACE-TIME DK. I


In the next place, there is no immoveable Space. In
one sense, indeed, Space is neither immoveable (or at rest)
nor in motion. Space as a whole is neither immoveable
nor in motion. For that would suppose there was some
Space in which it could rest or move and would destroy
its infinitude. Even when we speak of Space as a whole
we must observe that it is not a completed whole at any
moment, for this would omit its temporality. Under
a certain condition, to be explained presently, we may
indeed contemplate Space as an infinite whole when we
consider only the points it contains. Directly we allow
for its Time, we realise that while there may be a complete
whole of conceived timeless points there cannot be one of
real point-instants or events. For incompleteness at any
moment is of the essence of Time. Neither strictly can
the universe be said to be in motion as a whole. It zs
motion, that is in so far as it is expressed in its simplest
terms.

But it is not Space as a whole which is understood to
be immoveable. The immoveable or absolute Space of
Newton is the system of places which are immoveable.
Now since every point is also, or rather as such, an instant,
a resting place is only a place with its time left out.
Rest, as we shall see more clearly presently, is only a
relative term.


With this conception of the whole Space-Time as
an infinite continuum of pure events or point-instants let
us ask what the universe is at any moment of its history.
The meaning of this obscure phrase will become clearer
as we proceed. The emphasis rests upon the word
history. Space-Time or the universe in its simplest
terms is a growing universe and is through and through


‘historical. If we resolve it into its phases, those phases


must express its real life, and must be such as the universe
can be reconstructed from in actual reality, they must be
phases which of themselves grow each into the next, or
pass over into each other. We are to take an instant
which occupies a point and take a section of Space-Time
through that point-instant in respect of its space or time.


cH. 1 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 67


The point-instant in question we may call the point or
centre of reference. What will this section of Space-
Time be, or what would it look like to an observer
supposed to be looking at it from the outside, if we make
such an impossible assumption of an observer outside the
whole universe? The natural and immediate answer
would be, the time-section consists of the whole of Space
as occupied in every point by events occurring at that
moment. For we are accustomed to think of Space as so
occupied. It is true that at this moment some event or
other is occurring at every point of Space. I may not be
aware of them directly, but I can know of them by report,
and can anyhow think of all those events that occur at this
moment. Accordingly it would seem that any moment a
section of the universe would be nothing other than the
whole of Space ; and Space may then be described as the
assemblage of events which occur at the same moment
of time. Now I shall try to show that this Space so
described is under certain conditions something real and
legitimately conceived. It is a legitimate selection from
the whole of Space-Time. But it does not represent
what Space-Time is at any moment of its history. The
fuller reasons will appear later. At present it is enough
to observe that if Space is the assemblage of all events
occurring now, it is open to the same objections as were
urged against the notion of a single point or a single
instant. It does not matter whether the instant occupies
a point or the whole of Space; the universe cannot be
composed in reality of such sections. An integration of
such sections does not represent the history of the world.
The world would need to be re-created at every moment.
To insist-on this is but repetition. For the moment
which is now would be a now which perished utterly and
was replaced by another now. Time would cease to be
duration and would be nothing but a now, for the
different nows would have no continuity. We should
vanish utterly at each moment and be replaced by some-
thing like ourselves but new ; to the greater glory perhaps
of a Creator who would be completely unintelligible, but
to the confounding of science in his creatures.


68 SPACE-TIME BK. I


We have to distinguish from this legitimate but
artificial selection a selection of point-instants which shall
be the state of Space-Time at any historical moment of its
continuous history. I shall describe such a section as
Space-Time considered with reference to the point-
instant which is taken as the centre of reference, and I
shall call it a ‘perspective’ of Space-Time taken from that
point of reference ; and for convenience I shall speak of
the previous selection distinctively as a ‘section.’ Both
are in fact sections of Space-Time, but in different senses ;
and it is useful to have different terms. The justification
of the term perspective will appear presently. The per-
spectives of Space-Time are analogous to the ordinary
perspectives of a solid body. They differ from them in
that these are taken from some point outside the body,
whereas the point or instant from which a perspective of
Space-Time is taken is included in the perspective itself.
The choice of the word is suggested, of course, by Mr.
Russell’s use of it in recent inquiries in his work on
‘External Reality,’ as that in its turn is affiliated with
Leibniz’ conception of the monads as mirroring the
universe from their several points of view. Meantime
we may contrast the two conceptions by illustrations. At
any moment of a man’s history his body is a perspective
at that instant of his whole life. But it consists of cells
at all degrees of maturity. We have the space of his
body occupied by parts, some mature at this moment, and
others which are immature or senescent. In other words,
his space is of different dates of maturity. We might, on
the other hand, think of his space as occupied with cells of
the same maturity, and we should have the same space,
and it would all be of the same date, but it would not be
the man’s body as it is at any moment whatever but a
selection from various stages of his history. It would
however, give his shape. Once more the illustration limps
because the man’s space changes in volume with his
growth. But we may suppose him not to alter ; and in
Space-Time since Space is infinite the difficulty does not
arise. Or we may illustrate by a section of a tree. As
mere dead wood the space of the section is given to us at


cH. 1 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 69


one moment. But in the history of the plant, the
concentric rings of the wood are of different dates. To
the eye of the botanist the section is variable in its time ;
to the eye of the carpenter, or better still of the person
who sits at it when it is a table, it presents no such variation.


When therefore we consider Space-Time with reference
to an instant of time, that is to a point-instant in respect
of its time, we shall have the whole of Space, not occurring
at one instant but filled with times of various dates.
There is a continuum of events filling Space but divided
by the point of reference into earlier and later, with the
exception of those points in which the instant of the
centre is intrinsically repeated, and which have the same
instant. The other points will be earlier and later at
various dates, and since any date is repeated in space
there will be at each date points contemporaneous with
each other,’ but earlier or later than the centre and its
contemporaries. There are, if we choose to use a tech-
nical term, equitemporals or isochrones in space (just as
there are in a perspective from a point equispatials or
isochors in time). Call O the instant of reference. One
of its points is 0; there are points intrinsically contemporary
with 0. A point a is earlier than 0, and if we call the
time of o the present, a is past. The point a is of the
same date as 4 and is earlier than c. For example, @ and
b may be contemporary points of the same structure, e.g.
my hand ; ac may represent a transaction of causality, for
example a bullet killing a man, that is, with reference to
0, a and ¢c are occupied by the events in question. Now
the meaning of such reference in date to o is that the
events a, b, and ¢ lie on lines of advance which connect
them with o. Directly or indirectly 0 is connected by
spatio-temporal events with every point in Space, as for
instance the cells in a body are connected directly or
indirectly with one another. The lines of advance need
not necessarily be straight (as when, for instance, we’see
events in space by light, which proceeds, or is thought to

1 £.g. all the points on the same spherical surface if the lines of
advance are those of light.


Perspec-
tives of
Space-
Time from
an instant,


70 SPACE-TIME BK, I


proceed,! in straight lines) but may be of the most
complicated character. The comparison with light is the
reason why the term perspective is appropriate to such a
picture as we have drawn. For not only is it true that
to an outside observer the various points of space would
be at different dates, but he would get that perspective by
being situated at the point of reference.

Accordingly I may illustrate the difference of dates in
Space in the perspective from any instant by reference to
a human percipient, supposed to be at the point of refer-
ence. Only whereas in his case the lines of advance by
which he apprehends events outside him are the very
developed and differentiated movements by which his
senses are affected, with a pure event or point-instant the
lines of advance are but the movements in Space-Time by
which the centre is related however circuitously to the
other points of Space. Moreover, in using the illustration,
we assume according to our hypothesis that what the man
perceives and the act of perceiving it are separate events
whose reality is not dependent on or does not owe its exist-
ence to the reality of the other. As an example of a line
of advance connecting the past or earlier point with the
centre, I might take any sensation, for it is certain that
the act of sensing a flash of light follows by a small but
measurable interval the flash itself as a physical event.
A better instance is the familiar case of apprehending
Sirius and his place in the sky by means of the light from
him which reaches my eyes some nine years after the event.
What I see is an event which happened nine years ago at
the place where I see it (though I see the distance very
roughly) ; and Heaven knows what may have happened
to Sirius between the date of what I see and now when I
see him.

In the same way I may apprehend in my imagination
a later event which, in reference to now, is future. Nine
years hence | may apprehend what is taking place at Sirius
at this moment, if Sirius now exists. (We have yet to


1 J add the reservation because I understand that according to Mr.


mea most recent work light may not travel in perfectly straight
ines,


cH, PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 71


see how we can with propriety speak of Sirius as existing
at this present moment at all, since I only see him nine
years late.) I mean by thinking of Sirius and his position
in the future that there is a system of transactions now
begun which will end by enabling me to see Sirius then.
This system of transactions is begun on my side by the
expectation in my mind of seeing Sirius ; it was begun on
the side of Sirius by the causes which lead to his continu-
ance. Generally, the point c is future too in that transac-
tions in Space-Time are set up which will enable me at
some future time to date ¢ as contemporary with my
present moment. There isa line of advance from 0 to ¢
as well as a line of advance from some other event before
¢ toc. Again, when a and 4 are contemporary events in
the past they are connected by different lines of advance
with o ; and when a is before ¢ the two points are succes-
sive in reference to 0 as when a percipient follows the
causal succession in a bullet’s hitting a man.

Continuing the human metaphor, which we shall find
at long last’ to have its justification, we may personify
Space, and having regard to the differing dates of its points
with reference to the centre, which is the present of that
perspective, we may say that Space at any moment is full
of memory and expectation. The objection may be made,
how can reality contain at this moment the past, for the
past is past and exists no longer? But the difficulty is
only apparent. It arises from identifying reality with the
present or actual reality ; it assumes in fact that Time is
not real. The past event, it is true, does not exist now,
and if. existence is taken to be present existence, the past
clearly does not exist. But if we avoid this error and take
Time seriously, the past possesses such reality as belongs
to the past, that is, to what is earlier than the point of
reference ; it does not exist now but it did exist then, and
its reality is to have existed then. As to the later or
future, there is at bottom no greater difficulty in speaking
of the future as being real and existing really than there
is in respect of the real existence of the past. A future or


1 See later, Bk. III. ch. ii. A, where it will be suggested that the
instant of a point is its ‘ mind.’


Empirical
verifica-
tion.


"9 SPACE-TIME BK. 1


later point does not occur now, and therefore it is now not-
yet, just as the past is now no longer. It has what reality
belongs to it in the real Time. Thus in describing Space-
Time in reference to a centre of reference which is now-—
its perspective from that point of view—we are not sup-
posing that the universe is stopped at that moment arti-
ficially, in which case there would, as some think, be a now
spread out over infinite Space. They are mistaken ; for
there would then be no Time and no Space. We are
determining which among the instants of the whole of Time
belong to the points of Space in their relation to the
centre. We find that so far is it from being true that at
any moment in its Aistory Space is completely occurring
now, that the only points which occur now or are filled
with the present are the points in which the instant of
reference is intrinsically repeated.


This proposition that Space considered at any moment
is of various dates is very elementary and in that sense
abstract. But before proceeding 1 may note that as
an empirical fact Space, when we apprehend it through
the senses and, therefore, as filled with ‘qualitied’’
events, and not merely with pure events, is not pre-
sented to us as simultaneous. I assume, for the
reasons just mentioned, that what we sense is anterior to
our act of sensing it, because of the time it takes the
physical event to stimulate our organs. Bearing this in
mind we can conclude what the time-relations are, not so
much to ourselves, for that is not relevant to our purpose,
but among the different objects perceived. If I am using
eyes to apprehend Space through (I am not saying that we
apprehend Space by sight but we do apprehend it through
sight), it is clear that since different points of space are
at very different distances from the eye, and the light
reaches it from them in different times, however slight
the difference of distance from my eyes may be, more


* The word has Dr. Johnson’s authority. ‘Lord Southwell was
the highest-bred man without insolence that I ever was in company


with, the most qwalitied 1 ever saw” (Boswell, March rae eh Wy ode
G. B. Hill’s ed., vol. iv. p. 174),


cH. 11 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 73


distant points must in general have occurred earlier than
nearer ones, in order that my acts of seeing the various
sets may occur at the same moment. This applies not
only to vast differences of distance, as between my lamp
on the table and Sirius, but to points only slightly remote
from oneanother. There will also be certain points which
are equidistant from the eyes and are simultaneous with
one another. So much for sight. Even with the hand it
would be difficult to prove that all points touched by the
hand can send their messages through to our mind in
equal times, as they must if the sensing of them is to
occur at the same time. Empirically then, though we may
take in an immense space in an act which, however com-
plex, occurs all together, the Space which we apprehend is
presented with different dates, though to discover this
may need reflection.

Two kinds of retort may be imagined to this state-
ment. It is based on the deliverance of the senses ; and
the senses deceive. To which the answer is, that with all
allowance for the feebleness and treachery of the senses,
they have established themselves, if there is any truth in
the doctrine of natural selection, by adaptation to the
very objects which it is their office to observe. We are
‘miserably bantered by our senses,” and, moreover, we
shall learn that, since we only apprehend Space and Time
by the help of the senses, we pay for the privilege of seeing
colours, and for the delicate touches and movements: of
the wood-worker or the etcher, by making mistakes about
position in space or time. But we cannot believe that
though. the senses may confuse our apprehension in this
respect, they are there to pervert it.

Let me add the application of this remark, or its
extension, to the bare point-instant which is the point of
reference. There, too, it might be asked how we can be
sure that two contemporary points 2 and 4, in which the
same instant repeats itself intrinsically, are contemporary
for O, or if a is really before c, that it will precede c for O.
The date in reference to 0 is determined by the line of
advance from the point to 0. How can we know that the
dates are, as it were, ‘apprehended’ accurately by oO?


Perspec-
tives from
a point.


"4 SPACE-TIME BK. I


The doubt is really suggested by humanising o O and treat-
ing it as if it were a sensitive subject, with all the draw-
backs possessed by such. But consider 0 and a, b, and ¢
in their purely spatio-temporal character. If a and 4 are
intrinsically isochronous and a A and 4 A are in the perspec-
tive from O, that means that Space-Time is such, and its
point-instants so connected with each other by lines of
advance, that two intrinsically isochronous points belong
to the same perspective of Space as 0. If they were not
isochronous relatively to 0, they would not appear in the
perspective from O. For 0 is itself part of the perspective.
It is only because we suppose it to be looking on at Space
from the outside, and endow it with something like our
sensibility, that we think of it as open to misapprehension.
Being so simple, it is infallible. On the other hand, if
any two points « and y are not intrinsically isochronous,
but only happen to be so for this perspective, they may
not be so in a different perspective.

The second retort is that perhaps it is true that, percep-
tually, empirical space-positions occur at different times ;
but, conceptually, they are all simultaneous. Something
will be said hereafter of the relation of concepts to per-
cepts. But at least it is not the business of concepts to
distort perceptual objects but to indicate the pattern on
which they are built. If perceived Space is full of Time
there is no conceived or conceptual Space which is unfilled
with Time. On the contrary, the concept of Space must all
the more urgently provide for the change of Time within
Space. It is true that our familiar notion of Space as a
framework in which events occur all over it at the same
moment is, as we have said, a legitimate and real notion,
and we are yet to explain how it arises. But though it
implies thought, it does not rest on the difference of con-
ceptual and perceptual Space but on another distinction,
namely on the distinction between partial and total Space-
Time, between spatial perspectives of Space-Time and
Space-Time as a spatial whole.


Hitherto I have been dealing with perspectives of
Space-Time from the point of view of a single instant as


cH. I PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 783


located at a point. But in the same way there are per-
spectives from the point of view of a point of space as
located in its instant of time. Once more the section of
Space-Time across a point might seem to be the whole of
Time, and Time might be described as the assemblage of
events which occupy a single point. Metaphysically this
would be open to the same objections as the notion of
Space as an assemblage of events occurring at the same
time. The point would be discontinuous with other
points, would be a mere ‘here,’ and would require as
before re-creation of the world in each ‘here.’ But when
we take not the section of the world through a point but
its perspective, we shall have the whole of Time occupying
not the same point but points of Space at all manner of
distances from the central point of reference. That is
just as a perspective from an instant is spread out over
the whole of Time and presents all variety of dates, a
perspective from a point is spread out over the whole of
Space and presents all varieties of locality. It would be
tedious to enter into the details which correspond to the
details of the preceding picture. I will only note that in
our empirical experience this state of things is as much a
fact as in the other case. Still, assuming the hypothesis
that what I remember and what I expect are distinct
existences from me, we realise that in thinking of the
history of the past or divining the future, the events are
located not in one place and still less in no place at all,
but in the places where they occurred or will occur, how-
ever inaccurately we may apprehend their positions.
The full development of these matters belongs more
properly or more conveniently to the next chapter, and I
must ask something from the sympathetic imagination or
patience of the reader. There is a machinery of imagina-
tion and memory for sorting out events into the places to
which they belong.

A perspective from an instant of time and one from a
point of space are different perspectives, and cannot be
combined into a single perspective. This may at first
present a difficulty. The instant from which a perspective
is taken occupies a point or points. O occupies 9 and


Relation
of the per-
spectives
to one
another.


76 SPACE-TIME >


its contemporaries. But o is itself intrinsically repeated
in time. Why are these repetitions of 0 in time left out
of the perspective? The answer is, that if is repeated at
O’ and oO’ is taken into the perspective, the perspective
would be taken not from the instant O but from O’ as
well. We include in the point of view O all the
contemporary points occupied by O, but we cannot 1n-
clude the other times which occupy 9. In fact, a per-
spective from an instant gives us a picture of Space ; a
perspective from a point gives us a picture of Time. If
we attempted to combine the two pictures, and to get a


“perspective’ of Space-Time from the point of view


both of the place and time of the point-instant 0O, we
should have, as a little consideration will show, not a per-
spective at all but the whole of Space-Time. Space-
Time considered in reference to a point-instant from the
point of view both of the point and the instant is
nothing but Space-Time.


Total Space-Time is the synthesis of all partial space-
times or perspectives of Space-Time. I use the awk-
ward word ‘total’ in order to avoid two others, either of
which might be misleading. The one is the adjective
‘universal,’ which is ambiguous and might suggest just
what it is desired to avoid, namely, that the whole con-
tinuum of point-instants is a concept derived from special
bits of Space-Time or even from perspectives or partial
space-times. Whereas it is, to use language borrowed
from Kant, which may pass muster at present, a single
infinite ‘individual.’? The other adjective ‘absolute’
I avoid because of its historical associations with Newton’s
doctrine of Absolute Space and Time.

What we have to see is first, what information we can
draw from our experience, in pursuit of our empirical
method, as to the differences between different perspec-
tives ; and secondly, that these perspectives are of them-
selves connected with one another, so that the synthesis


1 See later, Book IV. ch. i., for the connection of this with the so-
called ontological argument.


® Later it will be seen that Space-Time is not an individual.


———


cH. 11 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS ii)


of them is not an operation which we, human subjects
who think, perform upon them, but one which they, as
it were, perform on themselves. For a perspective of
Space-Time is merely the whole of Space-Time as it is
related to a point-instant by virtue of the lines of con-
nection between it and other point-instants.

The information we get from experience is first, that
points of space which are simultaneous in one perspective
may be successive in another, and points which are
successive in one may be simultaneous in another. A
simple instance of the first is that on one occasion two
points in my hand may be isochronous for me or my
brain, but on another occasion, when the time has
changed and the point-instant of reference therefore with
it, the one may precede the other. For example, in a
new perspective an electric current may have been sent
from one point to the other, and the points are successive.
Observe that it is not the physical or qualitied events at
the two points of my hand which have changed their
relation in Time ; but only that in the two perspectives
the points of Space have become differently dated.
Again, suppose that a is earlier than the centre o. Ina
different perspective a4 may have the same date as o.
Thus let us go back to Sirius, and merely for simplicity’s
sake (and because without some simplification, however
impossible in fact, the mind is apt to reel before the com-
plexity of things) let us assume that Sirius and I remain
fixed with relation to each other. The event which I
now see in him by the light from him is nine years old.
But, on a different line of advance in the universe from
the path of transmission of light, an event may be, and
probably is, occurring in Sirius which is nine years later
than the event there which I now see. If it comes into
my present perspective at all it is as a future event.
For simplicity let us suppose I am not expecting it and
that it does not enter into the perspective. Still, it
occurs in fact at the same instant as 0 ; that is, from some
point of reference different from 0O the points 0 and a
will be of the same date. Again I observe, that it is not
the real physical events, my sight of Sirius now and the


(1) Differ-
ences of
perspec-
tives.


78 SPACE-TIME sens


past physical event in Sirius, which will have, as it were,
become contemporary, but only that the points at which
they occur have become differently dated, that is, in the
new perspective are occupied by different physical events.
In the new perspective the future event in Sirius enters
as contemporary with my present sight of him. It is not
the same event as aA, but it occurs we are supposing at
the same point. In other words, the points of Space are
filled with different instants owing to that redistribution
of instants among points which makes the history of
Space-Time. Thus there are isochrones of o in the
whole of Space, which are not related to it as its iso-
chrones are in its own perspective, and which do not
appear as isochrones in that perspective.

In general a perspective of Space-Time from one
point-instant differs from the perspective from another
point-instant, whether the perspectives be taken in re-
spect of the instants or points. Points which were
simultaneous in the one may be successive in the other ;
the interval of time or space may be altered, and even
two points may reverse their dates in the different per-
spectives. For though a perspective takes in the whole
of Space or the whole of Time, it does not take in the
whole of Space-Time, the totality of point-instants ; it
would otherwise not be a perspective. If we endow
point-instants with percipience, all these changes in the
distribution of points among instants will be perceived
accurately ; for the percipient sensibility of so simple
percipients must be also supposed perfectly simple.1 We
are here within the region of Space-Time pure and simple,
before qualitied events, like the fall of a stone or the
birth of a flower, or the existence of complex percipients
like plants or ourselves. Hence I have been obliged to
repeat so often that qualitied events do not occur in
different places or at different times because their dates
and places may be changed in two perspectives. The
place at which they occur or the time which they occupy
if the event in question remains within the perspective,


1 For the questions raised by this idea (cp. above, p. 74) of the perfect
accuracy of perception of point-instants, see later, Bk. III. ch. vii.


_—s~"°
=


ox PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 79


alters its date or its place ; their place or date in the first
perspective is now occupied by some other event. We
must add that such changes may not be noticeable to more
complex percipients, because the extent of them may not
fall within the limits of the discrimination of the percipient
or class of percipients even with the help of instruments
of precision, or because the difference is for them of no
practical importance. Simultaneous events may seem
to them still simultaneous, or the intervals, spatial or
temporal, not to have altered, because the change is not
perceived or is not interesting. One illustration we have
already had, in the belief that what we see of Space is all
contemporaneous.

Next let us note that the various perspectives of the (2) Their
universe viewed from points or instants, or the contents °""°°™
of the universe as referred to a centre of reference, are of
themselves connected, and together constitute the whole
universe. Each perspective leads on to some other.
The redistributions of dates among points are linked in
one continuous process. For a point of reference is a
point-instant. Its place is temporal, and merely an ideally
separated position in a movement ; is, in fact, a movement
at its limit. Whether we consider the time-element or
the space-element in it, both alike are transitional. Point
merges into point and instant into instant, and each does
so because of the other. Our centre 0O is the next
instant at the time O/ and becomes 00’, or to keep our
notation uniform dO’, and the world referred to this new
point-instant is a different selection from the world of
point-instants." The mere fact that each perspective is
from the beginning a selection from a whole, and not a
construction by the centre to which it is referred, is
enough to show that the perspectives are in their own
nature united, and need no combining hand. It is in
this sense that the whole of Space-Time is the synthesis


1 Not of course from the world of points. Every perspective includes
the whole of Space and the whole of Time, but not the whole of
Space-Time. That is, every point in Space is there with some date,
and every instant in Time with some place; but not the whole mass
of point-instants.


fas enn nt


pervert tne”


Total Space
and Time.


80 SPACE-TIME BK, I


of partial space-times or perspectives. At a later stage’
we shall see how important this consideration is for
understanding the relation of perspectives, in the ordinary
sense, of finite things like houses.

Corresponding remarks may be made about perspec-
tives from points. Moreover, the two sets of perspectives
are not only internally connected but connected with one
another. ‘The instant from which a perspective is taken
being located at a point, the perspective from it is connected
with the perspective from the point.


Total Space-Time is thus the synthesis of all per-
spectives, which is, in fact, only another way of saying that
the perspectives are real perspectives of it or are its
historical phases. Owing to the infinite interconnection
of point-instants on different and independent lines of
advance, independent, that is, of those which pass through
any given point of reference, there is an infinity of such
perspectives. Not limiting ourselves therefore to any one
centre of reference but admitting infinite such centres, we
can see first of all that when we are considering all the
perspectives from every instant, any point of Space is
occupied, not as in the single time-perspective by some
one moment of Time but by the whole of Time. The
whole of Time in the totality of such perspectives streams
through each point of Space. Thus while the state of
Sirius nine years hence may not enter into my present
perspective (except in expectation) it occurs on some
independent line of advance (not included in my perspec-
tive) at the present time in the total ; and extending our
view to all perspectives, we see that the position of Sirius
is occupied by some time or other through infinite Time.
The position in Space is occupied by only one time in a
given time-perspective, but by all Time in the totality of
perspectives.

In the same way consider the totality of point-
perspectives, that is, perspectives from the point of
view of a point. Ina single such perspective an instant
is localised in only one position of Space. But in the

1 Bk. IIT. ch. vii.


CH. 11 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 81


totality of them each instant is localised in all positions
in Space. We saw that it was a condition of the very
nature of Space-Time that each instant was repeated in
space and each point in time. But we now see that
while for any perspective (which is of course three-
dimensional and possesses the corresponding characters of
time) there is this intrinsic repetition, every time having
its appropriate isochors and every point its appropriate
isochrones ; in total Space-Time each point is in fact
repeated through the whole of Time and each instant over
the whole of Space. Now when these particular selections
are made of point-instants, the one from the total of one
set of perspectives and the other from the other set, we
have a total Space which occurs at one instant and a total
Time which occupies one point.

The total Space and Time so arrived at are what we
called, in distinction from perspectives, sections of Space-
Time. They do not represent what the world of Space-
Time is historically at any moment or at any point. For
at any moment of its real history Space is not all of one
date, and Time is not all at one point. But Space and
Time so described can be got by an arbitrary selection from
the infinite rearrangements of instants amongst points.
And the result of the selection is to give us Space apart
from its times and Time apart from its places. That
Space and that Time are what is meant by the definitions
of them as assemblages, the one of all events of the same
date, the other of all events at the same place. Moreover
real Space with its varying dates coincides with this total
Space when the variation of dates is omitted ; and corres-
pondingly for Time. Hence from considering the true
perspectives of Space-Time we can arrive at the notion of
Space occurring at one time or Time occupying one place.
But from these sections we cannot arrive at the notion of
true perspectives or at true Space-Time. I need not now
repeat the reasons why.


It is because Time is intrinsically repeated in Space and absolute
Space in Time that it is possible at all to speak of Time or [fare an
Space by themselves, when in fact neither exists apart

VOL. I G


82 SPACE-TIME BK. I


from the other. They get shaken apart from each other
in thought, just as the shape of billiard balls of varying
colour gets shaken apart from the varying colour. But
when we go on to consider the whole of Space-Time and
discover that the whole of Time when you choose from
all the perspectives, or when you make an arbitrary
selection of space-points, streams through every point,
and the whole of Space can be filled out with places of
the same date, we then formulate the two conceptions,
one of a Time which flows uniformly on and the other
that of a Space immoveable : what are commonly known
as Absolute Time and Absolute Space, and, so far as I can
judge, the ordinary or ‘common-sense’ notions of Time
and Space. Arbitrary as the selections are, they are
possible, and it is easy to see under what conditions the
conceptions are valid, or the Space and Time in question
can be regarded as real. They are valid so long as
Absolute Space is understood to be total Space and not
supposed to exclude Time, or Absolute Time to exclude
Space, with their respective variations of date and place.
They are the fully formulated Space and Time when
these are shaken apart from each other. What is false in
them is to suppose them real if Space is understood to
occur at one instant or Time at one point. But if no such
assumption is made, (and I believe no such assumption is
made in mathematics, but the two are considered merely
apart from one another without any ulterior view as to
their relations,) then the whole of Space is the same frame-
work as belongs alike to the real and the arbitrary
selection from Space-Time at any instant; and the
whole Time is the framework of the real and the arbitrary
selection from Space-Time at any place. So understood,
not only are they useful and valid conceptions, but they
are real, in the same sense as the material body of an
organism can be said to be real and the life of it also real,
though the life does not exist without a body of a certain
sort, and the body, to be the kind of body that it is
depends on life. In other words, the reality of Space-Time
may be resolved into the elements total Space and total
Time, provided only it be remembered that in their


—


cH. 11 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 83


_ combination Space is always variously occupied by Time
and Time spread variously over Space.

Hence we may note the impropriety of distinguishing
total Space as conceptual from empirical Space (the only
Space we know) as perceptual. Space and Time are
shaken apart from each other. But total Space is no
more the concept of Space than the shape of the billiard
ball is its concept while the whole ball is a percept.
Total Space is the same as real Space with the Time left
out, by an abstraction which is legitimate or not according
to the use made of it. If the concept of Space were got
by omitting Time which is vital to it, the result would
be not a concept but a false product of thought. The
separation of the Space from its Time involves abstraction
and, so far, thought, but concepts are not arrived at by
abstraction.

I have so far spoken of total Space and total Time. Rest
In dealing with the conceptions of them as absolute I "#4"
am partly beset with the historical difficulty of interpreting
Newton’s ideas, a task to which I am not equal, but
mainly I am concerned with the question how far we can
validly speak of an absolute Time and Space. I leave it
to others to say whether it is not the idea of what I call
total Space and total Time, Time and Space taken as
wholes, which is in the background of Newton’s mind.
His familiar illustration of absolute motion at any rate,
which I give in the note,’ suggests this interpretation.
What is defective in Absolute Space is the notion of


1 Principia, Bk. I., Scholium to Definitions.

“Tf the earth is really at rest, the body which relatively rests in the
ship will really and absolutely move with the same velocity which the
ship has on the Earth. But if the earth also moves, the true and
absolute motion of the body will arise partly from the true motion of
the Earth in immoveable space ; partly from the relative motion of the
ship on the Earth: and if the body moves also relatively in the ship ;
its true motion will arise, partly from the true motion of the Earth in
immoveable space, and partly from the relative motions as well of the
ship on the Earth as of the body in the ship; and from these relative
motions will arise the relative motion of the body on the Earth.”

In other words, the true or absolute motion is the motion when you
take it in the whole of Space and not in relation to any one body in
Space.


84 SPACE-TIME as


resting places. Space as a whole we have seen is neither
immoveable nor in motion. But neither can a place be at
rest if Space is only one element of Space-Time. Rest, in
fact, appears to be purely relative and to have no real
existence. Every place has its time-coefficient and is the
seat of motion. In general, we speak of rest only where-
ever the motion is irrelevant for our purposes. This
may arise from various reasons. Two motions may be
the same, and the moving bodies, though each in motion,
are at rest relatively to each other. Or I may rest in my
chair while the mosquitoes move around me, but I am
moving with the earth. I neglect that motion because I
am interested in the mosquitoes, and because the mos-
quitoes also in following me move with the earth. But
while I do not change my position relative to the earth
they do. It seems, in fact, clear that if anything could be
absolutely at rest everything must be at rest. For if any
point in space retained its time, this would dislocate the
whole system of lines of advance within Space-Time, a
point being only a point on such a line.

Thus if absolute rest means the negation of motion,
there is no such thing in reality. Rest is one kind of
motion, or, better, it is a motion with some of its motional
features omitted. But if absolute rest means merely
position in space with its time left out, it is a legitimate
abstraction if so understood. It may be gravely doubted
whether anything else is ever intended by those who
speak of absolute rest, though once more I do not enter
into the interpretation of Newton, as being beyond my
competence.

It is important to distinguish the different antitheses
into which the idea of Absolute Space or?Time enters.
Absolute may be opposed to relational. Space may be
treated as a stuff or as a system of relations. Or
absolute may be opposed to relative. The two questions
are not easily separable. It may be doubted if Newton,
for whom Space and Time are non-relational, distinguished
them ; but they are distinct. Now with the relativity of
position in time or space or of motion as commonly
understood nothing in our conception of Space-Time


CH. 11 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 85


conflicts. When motion or position is declared to be
relative, we are thinking of the material bodies or the
qualitative events which occupy times and places and
are moving. Relative for Newton refers to the sensible
measures of space or time. In regard to them all the
commonplaces of the subject are evident. A thing is to
the right of A and to the left of B; or more important, A
which is to the right of B is also from the point of view
of another observer to the left of B. An event is before
another event and after a third. A train may be at rest
with respect to another moving train but in motion with
respect to the telegraph poles. Or the train may seem at
rest and the telegraph poles to move. In fact a motion
of A with respect to B which is at rest is equally a motion
of B with respect to A which is at rest. This relativity
has sometimes been urged by philosophers to demonstrate
that Time or Space is self-contradictory and therefore
unreal. A present event is next moment past and some
other event is present, as if to call both events by the
same name in different connections made any difference
to the real position of an event.

But the case is different when instead of qualitied
bodies or events we think of the pure events or point-
instants which in their continuity make up Space-Time.
It is true that these events are related to each other. But
to call position or motion absolute is merely to say that
these positions and motions are what they are in their own
right. It is simply untrue to say that two point-instants
or pure events may be indifferently either before or after
each other. The same points may be occupied by times
which are before or after each other, but the two point-
instants in total Space-Time are not the same in the two
cases. We may help ourselves in this situation according
to our custom by reference to human affairs. All good
actions are relative to their circumstances and good under
those circumstances ; and it is sometimes thought that
they cannot therefore be absolutely good or good in their
own right. Absolute goodness is then regarded as some
ideal which serves as a standard to which we can only
approximate. On the contrary, it is because good actions


Absolute
position or
motion,


86 SPACE-TIME BK. I


are relative to or determined by their circumstances that
they are absolutely good. Other good there is none.
We fancy a perfect good because there are certain rules
of action which apply to sets of circumstances compara-
tively so simple and perpetually recurrent, like telling truth
and respecting life, that we confuse the universality of
these rules with some special sort of absoluteness and
construct an ideal of a perfect good. 1n analogous fashion
point-instants and, what is the same thing, motions are
related ; to be an unrelated point-instant (absolute rest)
is a contradiction and does not exist; it is in fact a
contradiction because it is incompatible with the nature of
Space-Time. A point-instant is essentially an element
of a movement and is between other point-instants.
Motion is related to other motion. But each point-
instant and each motion is what it is and is in this sense
absolute. The bare framework of such absolute order is
Absolute Space or Time or Absolute Motion. Again, I
leave it to others to judge if this is or is not the meaning
of Newton.

From this point of view I may approach the old
controversy whether it makes any difference to say the
earth goes round the sun or the sun round thé earth.
To an influential school of thought, headed by the late
E. Mach in our day, the difference is one of convenience
and economy in description. Neither is truer than the
other. Now it is quite true that a motion round the
sun may be represented equally well by a motion round
the earth. But in doing this we are representing either
motion as merely a series of points in space, and omitting
the intrinsic time. We are giving, in fact, a purely
geometrical account instead of a physical one. Physically
the two descriptions are not indifferent. It is, rather,
because there is only one physical description that we can
find two indifferent spatial descriptions. Let us say then
that total Space-Time involves as two elements total
Space and total Time, these two being the framework of
places and instants within which point-instants (and with
them the material or psychical events which occupy them)
exist. Each of them is an abstraction from the real world


cam PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS $4


_ of Space-Time; not an abstraction in the sense of a
mere creation of the human mind, but each of them real
under the limitations before described. Absolute Time
and absolute Space mean for us only these two elements
or factors in the whole, factors which are not juxtaposed
but interrelated in the complex history of point-instants.


Having ventured to suggest that absolute Space and The Prin-
Time, interpreted as of total Space and Time, have a very ee
good meaning as understood within the one Space-Time 5
or world from which they never do exist in abstraction, I
am impelled in spite of natural hesitation to go further
and make some brief remarks upon the philosophical
bearing of the current principle of relativity which claims
to displace the Newtonian conceptions of Space and Time.

Our purely metaphysical analysis of Space-Time on the

basis of ordinary experience is in essence and _ spirit-
identical with Minkowski’s conception of an absolute
world of four dimensions, of which the three-dimensional
world of geometry omits the element of time. The
principle of relativity as enunciated by Mr. A. Einstein
is taken up, as I understand the matter, into the body
of Minkowski’s doctrine. And it would be strange,
therefore, if our metaphysical doctrine should be in con-
flict with it, considered as a mathematical doctrine. The pape
principle of relativity means that the laws of physics are !—
the same for all observers in uniform motion with respect

to each other; so that in Mr. Paul Langevin’s phrase
purely mechanical observations interior to two such
systems would not reveal the motion of the systems
relatively to each other.1_ The principle was suggested by
certain experimental evidence which need not be men-
tioned here, and it carries with it certain consequences of
which, for the layman like the writer, the simplest and, at

the same time, the most paradoxical are these. Time, it
should be mentioned, is determined by means of clocks
whose synchronism is tested in a certain method by means

of a flash of light flashed from one clock to the second

and then flashed back: the clocks are synchronous when


1 Le Temps, Pespace, et lacausalité, p.6. Referred to in note on p. I.


Ss


88 SPACE-TIME BK. I


the reading of the second clock is half the two readings
on the first. Now it follows from the relativity principle
that two clocks which are synchronous with one another
in one system supposed to be at rest will for an observer
who moves along with them not be synchronous, and
hence events simultaneous to one set of observers are not
so for the other set in uniform movement of translation
with respect to the first. Secondly, a stick of a certain
length lying in the direction of the translation will not
be of the same length to the two sets of observers but
will shrink for the resting observer in a certain ratio.
The conclusion is that Space and Time are entirely relative
and vary for each observer.

This is precisely what we should expect on the meta-
physical statement (apart from the exact numerical deter-
minations) if different sets of observers have different
views or perspectives of the one Space-Time. Each such
perspective is perfectly real and in no sense illusory, just
as the perspectives we have of solid objects are the object
as seen under certain aspects and are perfectly real.’ The
motion of the one system S’ with regard to the other system
S changes the perspective for the two sets of observers.
Consequently though the material events of sending and re-
ceiving flashes of light at two stations are not altered in their
relations in Space-Time, they will have different dates in the
two cases ; for the places at which the events occur will
change their dates relative to the observers. In the same
way, totake the case of the stick, times appropriate to the ends
of the moving stick will occupy different places for the two


‘sets of observers, and the stick will alter in length. There


is no such thing as a purely spatial or temporal interval.
A distance in space is a system of events, whether it is
distance pure and simple or is occupied by a stick. The
length of the stick in total Space-Time does not alter, but
the dates of its points do, according to the perspective.
Only when we forget this does it seem paradoxical to us
that the length should vary to different observers. So
too, the retardation of the clock may seem paradoxical for
though we are familiar with the spatial character of Tie

1 See later, Bk. III. ch. vii.


cH. 1 PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS 89
since we estimate it for purposes of accuracy by spatial
marks, as in clocks, yet we forget that these spatial measures
are themselves temporal.

The same thing may be expressed otherwise thus.
We are dealing in the theory not with point-instants or
pure events as such, but with the measurements of Space
and Time by means of sensible or material events ; in
fact, by light-signals. What the theory does is to establish
the relations between Space and Time as thus sensibly
measured in such a way as to express the persistence in an
identical form of physical laws for observers in’ uniform
motion of translation with respect to each other. But
this is not in any way inconsistent with there being pure
events or point-instants which have their ‘absolute’ posi-
tion in Space-Time. To illustrate the point, let me take
the conclusion drawn by Mr. Langevin that under certain
conditions events may have their order of succession re-
versed for the two sets of observers ; if, that is to say, the
distance between the events is greater than can be travelled
by light in the time between them. It is inferred that
there can be no causality between events at such a distance.
But if the time of events were measured by sound-events
at comparatively inconsiderable distances, events which are
known to be in causal relation would have their succession
reversed for observers in appropriate positions.’

Now the principle of relativity is a physical or mathe-
matical principle, and is not primarily concerned with
metaphysics (or even theory of knowledge, which for me is
only a part of metaphysics). But we are concerned here
with the metaphysics of it. It would seem at first sight
to mean that while the laws of physics are the same for

1 I do not of course mean slightingly that the principle of rela-
tivity is a mere affair of measurements, but rather that measurement
when you press it to its ultimate foundations always implies the
introduction of time considerations into spatial quantities and space
considerations into temporal quantities. This is a matter of the
highest importance, and it is of a piece with the principle that a space
without its time or a time without its space is a fiction. ‘This second
point is what I miss in Mr. Broad’s treatment of the subject of
relativity in his Appendix (Perception Physics and Reality, Cambridge,
1914, pp- 354 ff.), from which I have learnt much on the relation of
the principle of relativity to measurement.


pea


afore BONUAL


Its meta-
physical
bearing.


go SPACE-TIME BK, I


every observer, each one has his own Space and Time and
lives in that world. But if that conclusion is drawn, and
I do not feel sure that it is, the relativist seems compelled
philosophically to go beyond his own Space-Time and
arrive at a total Space-Time in our sense. It is some-
times said that the very reasonings which establish the
relativist results (those paradoxes which are so beautifully
natural) presuppose and postulate an absolute world ; but
I cannot find that this can be maintained. But they cer-
tainly seem to me to lead on to it. For the different sets
of observers compare notes, or if they do not, the mathe-
matician who supplies the formulas of transformation
whereby equations expressed in the co-ordinates of one
world can be expressed in the co-ordinates of another


y
Tune fori world, thereby contemplates a world in which the worlds


nly, 6 plain,


of the two sets of obse are unified. Moreover, even
within one world the various persons who read the clocks
are supposed to communicate with each other, and they


ys te not the same persons and may havea slightly different


perspective. The only way in which the conclusion from
this comparison of the observers at least in the two systems


byutn AM’ (to say nothing of observers within each system) can be


hunt
nuns:


turned is by the reply that the formulae are numerical and
independent of Space and Time. For reasons which I
cannot at present explain, I should regard this answer as
unavailing, because number is itself dependent on Space
and Time.

Thus the position metaphysically of the relativist is
apparently one of solipsism, or rather the same question is
raised as in solipsistic theories of knowledge. Solipsists,
as has often been pointed out, could not talk to each
other. Moreover, as Mr. Bradley has shown, a solipsist
at one moment could not talk to himself as he was at a
previous moment; he would have no continuous self.
Now all such metaphysical difficulties are avoided if we
start with the empirical fact that we do communicate
with one another about a common world which each sees
from his own view, and moreover that each remembers
himself. If relativism means philosophically (and I
repeat that I do not know that it does mean this) that


cz. PERSPECTIVES AND SECTIONS gt


Space-Time for each observer is his own, it inevitably
leads on to a total Space-Time which combines these
worlds.

I venture, therefore, to suggest that the importance of
the doctrine does not lie in any supposed annihilation of
absolute Space-Time as understood in the sense explained
here, but in two other respects. Of the first a philosopher
can judge. It is the truth that the world is not a
geometrical but a physical one, and that Space and Time
are indissoluble. This seems to me a result of the last
importance and fundamental to metaphysics. The second
is the exact determination on the basis of experimental
evidence of how formulae are to be transformed in the
case where one system moves in uniform translation with
respect to another system. Such transformations are
required in the Newtonian mechanics, but the contention
of relativists is that they are only a first approximation.
Later knowledge shows the transformations to be less
simple.’ If this contention is well established, and this
is a matter for physicists and certainly not for me, the
principle means a vast advance for physics itself over and
above the fundamental reconstruction of the relation of
Space and Time. But whatever modifications it in-
troduces into the Newtonian mechanics it leaves Time
and Space and Motion in their ancient reality, or rather


which perspectives are selections ;/ and therefore in that


ig ta
a


Cem .


Gy Nealon
see pees


ana JMG


Kor pra
it leaves us still with Space-Time in itself as a total from on


sense absolute and independent of the observers. |And I.
do not feel sure that any relativist would object to this in
a metaphysical sense. Time and Space in their ancient
pure reality remain as the framework of history, and the
new doctrine is a new doctrine of their sensible measures.’


1 Possibly this new system may not be final. See this suggestion
as made by Mr. Langevin, p. 27, “ Peut-étre des expériences nouvelles
nous obligeront-elles 4 retoucher le groupe de Lorentz, comme nous
venons de retoucher le groupe de Galilée,” and Mr. Silberstein (Theory
of Relativity, London, 1914, p. 108).

2 There is a very serviceable statement with very little mathematics
of the relativity doctrine by Mr. Langevin in the Bulletin de Ja
Société Francaise de Philosophie, 12me Année, No. 1, Jan. 1912,
whose language I have several times used. (Sce also his paper in


Alpen omar


mr \


belief that such perspectives are therefore illusions, instead of be
they are realities and physical realities. See later, Bk. III. ch. vii.
Mr. Russell’s treatment of perspectives in recent works.


r #


> ; G oe Loy oon
The memoirs of Messrs. Lorentz, Einstein, and Minkowski are n


conveniently collected in a single volume, Das Relativitdtsp1 in p
Leipzig and Berlin, 1913. On p. 58 above I have omitted to mention
the name of the late P. Fitzgerald along with these writers. —


PS


CHARTER HI
MENTAL SPACE AND TIME


By mental or psychological time I mean the time in Intro-
which the mind experiences itself as living, the time which ““°™
it enjoys ; by mental space I mean, assuming it to exist,
the space in which the mind experiences itself as living or
which it enjoys. They are contrasted provisionally with
the space and time of the objects of mind which the
mind contemplates. I hope to show on the strength of
experience that mental space and time possess the same
characters and are related in the same intimacy of relation
as physical Space and Time ; that the time of mental events
is spatial and their space temporal precisely as with
physical Space and Time, and further that mental time,
the time in which the mind lives its life or minds its
mind, is a piece of the Time in which physical events
occur ; and similarly of mental space. In many respects
it would have made the task of analysing physical Space
and Time in the preceding chapters easier if, following
the method of the angels and assuming mind to be an
existence alongside of physical existence, I had examined
first the simplest elements in mind rather than in physical
objects, and with the results of the analysis of the familiar
thing mind, had passed to the analysis of the less familiar
external world. But I felt myself precluded from this
procedure because it would have meant before approaching
physical Space and Time that we should need to accept
two very disputable propositions, first that the mind is
spatial, that is, is enjoyed in space, and second, that this
enjoyed space is at any instant occupied not merely by
the mind’s present but also by its enjoyed past and future.
93


94 SPACE-TIME a


Accordingly I have endeavoured to examine physical Space
and Time without encumbrance by these difficulties.


NAcneat That the mind as the experienced continuum of
time part mental acts (the nature of what underlies this continuum
Ee tTine 18 a subject for later inquiry) is a time-series, and in
as physical that sense is in time, or has Time in its very constitution,
Time. . 2 e 5
would be admitted on all hands. By continuity is meant
mental or felt continuity, so that, by memory or other
means, in a normal mind no event occurs which is
disconnected with the rest. There may be intervals of
time, as in sleep without dreams, or in narcosis, when the
mind apparently ceases to act: “the mind thinks not
always.” But consciousness, as William James puts it,
bridges these gaps, so long as it is normal, and it feels
itself one. The elements of this continuum are conscious
events or processes. There is no rest.in mind but a
relative one. We only think there is, because with our
practical interests we are concerned with the persistent
objects—the trees and men, which we apprehend in what
James calls “substantive” conditions of mind. If we
overlook the transitions between these objects, their
repugnances and likenesses, how much more easy is it to
overlook the transitions in our minds, the feelings of
‘and,’ and ‘ but,’ and ‘ because,’ and ‘if’ or ‘like ’—the
“transitive” states. We catch them for notice when we
happen to be arrested in our thinking, when we leave off,
for instance, in a sentence with a ‘because,’ when the
forward and defeated movement of the mind is directly
made the centre of our attention.! The sense we have in
such cases that the flow of our meaning is stopped is
accompanied by caught breath or tense forward bending
of the head or other bodily gestures, but it is not to be
confused with the consciousness of these gestures. They
are but the outward bodily discharge of the mental arrest.
It is these transitive conditions which betray the real
nature of the mind. The substantive states are but


} There are many happy examples in Humpty Dumpty’s poem in
Through the Looking-Glass: “Vd go and wake them, if » «We
cannot do it, Sir, because 3


cH. 111 MENTAL SPACE AND TIME AOE


persistence in movements which have the same character
and correspond to objects of the same quality. In itself
the mind is a theatre of movement or transition, motion
without end. Like all other things it has the glory of
going on.

But not only is mind experienced in time, but the
direct deliverance of our consciousness of external events
is that the time in which we enjoy our mind is part of
the same Time in which those external events occur.
It is only when philosophy steps in with its hasty inter-
pretations, that we can say that Time belongs, as Kant
believed, to external events because they have a mental
or internal side in our experiencing of them. On the
contrary, to be aware of the date or duration of physical
events is the most glaring instance, derived from direct
experience, of how an enjoyed existent and a contemplated
existent can be compresent with one another. In this
case the compresence is a time-relation which unites both
terms within the one Time (I am assuming, let me
remind my reader, the hypothesis of direct apprehension
of the external object). In memory or expectation we are
aware of the past or future event, and I date the past or
future event by reference to the act of remembering or
expecting which is the present event. An event five years
past occurred five years before my present act of mind.
We have seen, in fact, that physical Time is only earlier or
later, and that the instants in it are only past, present, or
future in relation to the mind which apprehends. Now
without doubt, when I remember that a friend called at
my house an hour ago, I mean that that event occurred an
hour before my present condition of myself in the act of
remembering that event, and that the mental and the
physical event are apprehended within the one Time.

Only in regard of present physical events does doubt
arise. We are accustomed to call those physical events
present which are contemplated by us in sensory form
in the present moment of consciousness. Now it is
certain that the physical events which I contemplate
precede by a small but measurable interval my sensory
apprehension of them, and this is true not only of events


96 SPACE-TIME BK. I


outside me but of the events in my body which I
describe as occurring at the present moment. They areall
anterior to my apprehension of them. But this is not the
deliverance of unsophisticated experience, but a fact which
we learn about our process of perceiving external events,
and is not given directly in our acquaintance with them.
Ask an untrained man whether the events which he sees
occur at the same time as his perception of them, and he
is merely puzzled by the question. For him the present
events are those which he perceives, and he has not
asked himself, and does not understand, the question
whether they really are simultaneous with the perceiving
of them or not. Further experience of a reflective sort,
experimental experience of the times of reaction to
external objects, shows him that they are not. But
equally he may find by reflection or scientific methods
that the event he remembers as occurring an hour ago
occurred in reality an hour and five minutes ago or
longer. Thus the philosophical question of the precise
time-relation between our perception and its objects does
not arise for us in practice. It remains true that all our
mental events stand in some time-relation, whether
rightly apprehended or not, to the contemplated physical
events. The enjoyed mind is compresent in a time-
relation with those objects. This is the whole meaning
of a time-relation in which the terms are not both con-
templated, as they are when we are dating two physical
events with reference to one another in physical Time,
but when the one is contemplated and the other enjoyed.
That the mental duration or instant stands thus in relation
to the contemplated instant in time shows, then, so far as
experience directly gives us information, that the times of
both terms are parts of one Time.

From this mere vague experience that I who enjoy
am in Time along with the event contemplated which is
in Time, we may easily pass to a more definite statement.
We may date the physical event with reference to the
physical events going on in my body at the ‘present’
moment. Then I am contemplating a stretch of time’
between the event and me (I may even, as we shall see


cH. m1 MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 97


later when we come to discuss our memory of the past,
enjoy the interval between me and my apprehension of the
physical event). At a later stage in my experience, when
I have learnt that my mental act occurs really at the
same time as a certain physiological process which cor-
responds to it, I may. contemplate the time-interval
between that process and the cognised physical event,
and then we have a still exacter notion of the time-relation,
but clearly one which is only possible for more advanced
experience and not given in the mere cognition, in the
mere memory, for example, of my friend’s visit an hour
ago.


Turning to Space, we find that mind enjoys itself Mental
spatially, or is extensive, in the same sense as it is iat
successive and endures in enjoyed time. But while it is Space
admitted that mind as experienced is in time, the pro- ons‘
position that it is extended meets with direct and even Space.
contemptuous opposition. Partly the repugnance is
moral; it seems to some to savour of materialism. Now
if materialism in philosophy were forced upon us by
inquiry we should have to make our account with it and
acquiesce. Nothing can in fact be further from the spirit
of the present investigation, as the whole issue of it will
demonstrate. But even now it is plain that if mind is
spatial like matter, Space is as much in affinity with mind
as it is with matter and the fear of materialism is ground-
less. The other objection arises from the mistaken belief
that a spatial mind must be apprehended like a spatial
physical object. This, however, would be to imagine that
the mind is asserted to enjoy itself in contemplated Space ;
whereas the assertion is that mind enjoys itself in enjoyed
space, and we shall presently see that the space which we
enjoy as occupied by our minds may also be contemplated
as occupied by a physical thing. Bearing this proviso in
mind, turn to experience itself. My mind is for me,
that is for itself, spread out or voluminous in its enjoy-
ment. Within this vague extension or volume the
separate and salient mental acts or processes stand out as
having position, and ‘direction.’ My mind is streaked

VOL. I H


98 SPACE-TIME BK.I


'
with these more pungent processes, as when a shoot of —
painful consciousness is felt or a sudden thought produces
a new distribution in this extended mass. These streaks
and shoots of consciousness have the vaguest position,
but they have it, and such position and direction are most
clearly marked in the higher acts of mind, imagination, or
desire, or thinking, and especially when there is a change
in what we call the direction of our thinking. There is
verifiable truth in the words of Tennyson “As when
a great thought strikes along the brain and flushes all
the cheek”; though he has described the enjoyed
direction in terms of its position in contemplated Space.

Thus just as we enjoy a time filled with mental
events, so we enjoy an extension or space filled with
mental events. Further, as with time, so here the deliver-
ance of experience is that in apprehending . physical
extension, say a physical object in space, we are aware in
our act of enjoyment of an enjoyed space as related to
the extension of the physical object within the one Space.
Our mental space and our contemplated space belong
experientially to one Space, which is in part contemplated,
in part enjoyed. For all our physical objects are appre-
hended ‘ over there’ in spatial relation to our own mental
space. This is evident enough, when once the terms are
understood in the case of sensible apprehension of objects
in space. The contemplated and the enjoyed spaces are
in spatial relation, though distance is only vaguely appre-
hended as somewhere there away from me. But what is
true of perception is true also in imagination. The con-
templated space is now only imagined, but it is still some-
where there away from me. Once more I cite Tennyson.
The words on Gordon “ Somewhere, dead, far in the waste
Soudan” illustrate the relation of enjoyed to imagined
space, both of them being equally real space, though
their distance if vague in perception is still vaguer in
imagination. I will add two less simple examples which
I have used elsewhere.’ Let any one whoat all possesses
sensory imagination think of the lines


1 Mind, vol. xxi., 1912, ‘On relations.’


Olas 9! ea


CH. I MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 99


The same that ofttimes hath
Charmed magic casements, opening on the foam
Of perilous seas, in fairy lands forlorn ;


and ask himself whether he is not conscious of the object
described as somewhere in Space along with himself,
that is, does not enjoy himself in an enjoyed space, along
with an object somewhere in contemplated Space. Here
the Space is the Space of fancy, of fairyland. Or let
him try the same experiment on

The antechapel where the statue stood

Of Newton with his prism and silent face,


The marble index of a mind for ever
Voyaging through strange seas of thought alone,


when he will enjoy himself in space, not only along with
the statue of Newton somewhere there in Trinity College,
Cambridge, but also with the strange seas over which
Newton’s mind is supposed to be travelling, the world of
contemplated things before Newton’s mind.

In saying that when I imagine an object I locate it
somewhere in the same Space wherein I enjoy myself,
I do not mean that I locate it somewhere in front of my
eyes.’ On the contrary, I locate it in the place in Space
to which it actually belongs. If it is the image of the
Soudan I locate it in the south of Egypt. For the
imaged Space is but perceived Space as it appears in an
imaged form. All images of external objects are them-
selves spatial in character, and their parts have position
relatively to each other. But also they have position in
the whole of Space so far as we imagine the rest of Space.
Now images are for the most part isolated objects,


1 [ believe that I have said so in one of my papers. From this
disloyalty to my own principles I was saved by the admirable
treatment of this subject in Mr. E. B. Holt’s Concept of Consciousness
(London, 1914), chap. xii. pp. 230 ff. I borrow from him the state-
ment that the image taken by itself has no position at all. But I
doubt if an image ever is cut off completely. And so I persist in
holding that the image of a town belongs to the actual place of the
actual town, only of course under the indistinctness and falsification
which attach to any imagination. The matter becomes clear only at
a later stage when we come to speak of illusions and imagina-
tion. See in particular the mirror experiment described in Bk. III.
ch. vii.


The place
of an
image.


Place of
mental
space.


100 SPACE-TIME | sa


cut off more or less completely from their surroundings,
and so far as this is the case the image as a whole cannot
be said to have position at all. But directly we ask
where the image is we begin to supply in image the rest
of Space. Thus if I can remember the map and bear in
mind the way I am facing, I image the Soudan more or
less accurately where I know it to be, or in other words
where it actually is. The place of an image is its position
in imaged Space, and according to the fulness of that
imagination will its place be determined accurately or
become so shadowy as almost to vanish. How the place
in imaged Space is correlated with the place in perceived
Space which is imaged in imaged Space, is discovered by
experience, as for example, to take a very simple case, I
recognise that the image of a person in front of me when
I first look at him and then shut my eyes belongs to the
same place as the percept of the same person. When
the image is not the image of anything actual its place in
actual Space is of course not actual either. This only
means that the object imaged is not actual in the form
which it assumes. It purports to have a place in Space,
which is not actually filled by any such object. The
Space which is imaged is still the same Space as is per-
ceived, but it is occupied with imagined objects. Further
discussion of the problems thus suggested belongs to a
later part of our inquiry.’


But this vague experience of interval in space between
myself and the place of physical objects in space becomes
more definite when I ask where is my mind and its
enjoyed space in the whole of Space. I cannot ask where
I am in enjoyed space, for the space and time I enjoy are
the whole of enjoyed space and time. I can date a
mental event in my past ; and I can dimly localise a mental
event in my space: I can distinguish the outstanding
point, or if it is a connected event, the streak in my space
which it occupies. But when I ask when I occur in Time
as a whole I answer by reference to some physical event
in my body with which Iam simultaneous. When I ask

1 Bk. III. ch. vii.


CH. It MENTAL SPACE AND TIME IOI


where I am in the whole of Space I answer by reference
to my body. My mind is somewhere within my body,
or within my head, or when | have acquired knowledge
about my central nervous system it is for me recognised
as being im the same place as that system or more
specifically as the brain or some part of it. In this way
I localise my mind in Space by recognising it as occupy-
ing the same place as some physical object. Now this is
our constant and early acquired experience. 1 feel my-
self somewhere in my body or more particularly in my
head. I am now contemplating the whole of Space and
localising my enjoyed space in the same place as a con-
templated object my body ; just as I localise myself in
time in the same part of physical Time as is occupied by
my bodily ‘ present’ events.

All this will seem to some to be founded on an
elementary blunder of confusion between the locality of
consciousness and the sensations derived from the scalp
or the movements of the eyes. All our mental life is
accompanied by these experiences, and when we talk of
enjoyed space we are thinking of and misinterpreting
what we learn about our head. And this kind of localisa-
tion is an arbitrary matter. Did not Aristotle regard the
mind as seated in the heart, and the brain as merely a
cooling apparatus to the heart? He attended to the
cardiac region, we to the head and brain. The case of
Aristotle is really not damaging to our contention as it
seems, but rather supports it. For though Aristotle 1s
so far removed from us in time, it may reasonably be
supposed that like us he felt his headaches and fatigue of
attention in his head. If then he still located his mind
in the heart, he must have done so, not because he was
guided by direct experience of the parts most affected in
mental process but from imperfect anatomy. His mistake
is therefore irrelevant.

But, Aristotle apart, there is a clear distinction in
experience between the contemplated sensa (or objects of
sensation) belonging to the body and the movements of
consciousness itself. In my own caseachange of thought
is nearly always accompanied by sensations of movement


102 SPACE-TIME BK. I


in the eyes; but I distinguish these from the acts of
thought. The consciousness of colour is different from
that of eye-movement, and is particularly easy to dis-
tinguish from it because vision is not localised in the body
like touch, but projected. I see a colour in the external
coloured object but I do not refer it (I mean in my plain
experience, apart from theories) to the eye. In localised
sensations like touch, the bodily object, say the hand,
does intrude into the felt pressure, and so it is easier here
to imagine that when we speak of the enjoyed place of a
touch sensation, we are thinking of the place where the
touch occurs.. But even here it is possible to get a faintly
accentuated experience of the movement of consciousness
in sensing a touch as distinct from the actual sensum or
pressure of which we are conscious. This is best done
when there are two distinct sensa in the mind at once, as
when, leaning against an armchair, one is seeing a bright
light. There are then two differently localised move-
ments of consciousness. Thus in the first place we may
distinguish the course of the thoughts from the accompany-
ing bodily sensations. And in the next place in sensation
there is besides the sensum (the object sensed) the mental
act of sensing it, and it is this, not the other, which is
enjoyed. Thus it cannot be because we have sensations
from the region of the head that we assert our experiencing
of external objects to be located in enjoyed space within
the head. For the same problem arises with regard to
these sensations from the head, it is their objects which
are in the contemplated head ; the enjoyments of appre-
hending them are in an enjoyed space, whose place
is identified with the place of the head. It is indeed
difficult, if not impossible, to understand how we could
ever correlate a particular mental process as we do with a
particular neural process possessing its contemplated or
physical character, had not mind already its own spatial
enjoyment. The correlation, if that is the right term to
use, is the identification of an enjoyed space with an
observed or contemplated one.


The identification of the place of mind with that of


CH. II MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 103


the body which begins by locating the mind roughly
within the body and ends by the more accurate correlation
of mental with physiological processes within the central
nervous system is not mere matter of theory but is de-
rived from empirical experience ; and experience which
in its earlier stages is of a quite elementary character. It
is an essential part of the history whereby we become
aware of ourselves as a union of body and mind, a body
organic to a mind, a mind whose functioning is conditioned
by a body. I shall call this union of mind and body the
person. In every stage of the growth of our self or
person two elements are palpably present, one the body
and the other the subject or consciousness. Sometimes
it is the bady which is predominant, as when | say I have
a headache or a cold and do not feel quite myself ; some-
times it is the subject or mental factor, as when I say I


-am most myself when I let myself go dreaming by day,


or I never feel like myself when I am doing something
so distasteful as reading examination papers or books of
travel, or that I wish myself “like to one more rich in
hope.” In the first case myself is an embodied self, in
the second it is the inner self, the self which thinks,
desires, imagines, wishes, wills. The most developed
stage of the person is the personality, the persistent stable
organised set of habits of action, thought, and feeling by
which I am to be judged, by which I stand or fall. I say,
for instance, I was not myself when I lied or cheated.
The person is in the first case mainly a body, in the second
it is mainly something psychical, in the third it 1s some-
thing spiritual. The two elements are, however, trace-
able everywhere in the history ; the one the body, what
Locke called the man, the other the subject, the element
of consciousness itself.’

The bodily self or person is the one with which we
are chiefly concerned. We experience it in the form of
organic and motor or kinaesthetic sensations as well as
the special sensations of touch, sight, or other sensations


derived from the body itself. The body is a percept, in


. 2
1 For fuller treatment see ‘Self as Subject and as Person’ (Pro-
ceedings Aristotelian Society, 1910-11, vol. xi.).


Localisa-
tion of
mental
space; how
effected.


Subject and
object self.


104 SPACE-TIME BK. I


which various sensa or sensed elements and corresponding
ideational elements are revealed. It is like other external
things a synthesis of these various sensa, some felt, some
suggested. But the bodily self or person is never the
body alone but the body with the apprehension of it It
is the experienced body along with the experiencing of it,
these two forming a whole. This bodily self is the
nucleus of the later stages of the self; but it is only the
person with its two elements which could thus serve as
their foundation, and not the body alone. How inti-
mately the bodily experience is involved in the inner self
or in the personality is easy to recognise. For motor
sensations in a very high degree, and organic sensations
as well, are present in all the higher life of thought,
emotion, and will, and sustain that life and give it richness
and resonance. ‘Thinking is not, indeed, identical with
the tense movements and strains of attention, but it is
sustained by them, and the emotions without organic
sensations and the other sensations of the expression of
the emotion would be like an old vintage of port wine
which has lost its colour and ‘ body.’ Even where these
elements are less apparent they betray themselves to closer
inspection. When I feel myself ill at ease, or not myself,
in the company of a person whom I dislike, what may be
uppermost in my mind is the hindrance which his presence
offers to the free working of my inner thoughts and
wishes. But I may soon discover that these impediments
to my spiritual activity mean also restriction of my motor
freedom, or other reactions of bodily uneasiness. I
recognise here that I am both spirit and body, and the one
will not work freely without the other. Other facts of
the normal and the abnormal life of mind supply ad-
ditional and familiar evidence. Changes and disturbances
in the organic and motor sensations or, apart from them,
in the organs of sense and connected parts of the body,
though we may not be aware of them through means of
organic or motor sensations, may and do alter the tone
and build of the whole personality. Such changes occur
normally at the climacteric epochs of life, like the time of
teething or adolescence. In abnormal cases, failures in


CH. Ill MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 104


Organic or tactual or visual sensibility, or any functional
breakdown, may be an important factor in violent altera-
tions of temper and thought, or even lead to division of
personality.

The difference of the bodily stage of the personal life
and the higher stages is in fact mainly one of emphasis.
We are absorbed in the practical urgency of our bodily
needs and changes and the subject-side of the self does
not stand out in our experience. Even in ideation or
volition, it is still the things we think about, or imagine,
or desire, which interest us most. If we were confined
in our inner life to the sensations we have from external
objects we should still have an inner life, but should
hardly notice it. But imagination, and, above all, willing
and desiring, which go on in the absence of sensory
objects corresponding to our ideas, begin to bring the
mental action as such into relief. Even then it may be
doubted whether the inner life of the subject would be
attended to for its own sake were it not that in the inter-
course with other persons, to which we chiefly owe the
unfolding of the personality proper, we are thrown back
upon ourselves by the effect of contrast, or imitation, or
co-operation or rivalry, and we become definitely aware
of ourselves as subjects of experience. It is then we can
begin to see that even in sensation it is we who have the
sensations, and it is then that the conditions arise for the
birth of the science of psychology.

The higher self is thus in all its stages a continuation
and expansion, and refinement of the bodily self. The
body, it may be observed, is capable of indefinite extension.
We feel the ground at the end of the stick we carry, not
at the finger which holds the stick: the stick has become
part of our body. So may anything in contact with our
bodies ; like our dress, injury or offence to which we resent
as we do offences to our body. All this has been described
by Lotze in a well-known passage. But my ‘body’ may
include things not in contact with me, or indeed any of
the external objects I am interested in—my room, my


1 Microcosmus, ‘On dress and ornament,’ Bd. ii. pp. 203 ff. Engl.
transl. vol. i. pp. 586 ff.


Subject and
body re-
ferred to
same place,


106 SPACE-TIME BK, I


books, my friends, and all the things I care about, philo-
sophy or psychology, which are systems of knowledge,
the works of Plato, the history of my country. All these
things may become extensions of my body and the experi-
ences I get from them may be for a time of a class with
my organic and other bodily sensations. The self, if 1 may
quote a happy phrase of Mr. Henry James in one of his
novels, ‘‘ overflows into” these objects. Damage to my
property, or disaster to philosophy or my country, is like
a blow in the face. I may in certain moods feel myself
one with the universe : the universe has become part of
my body. Many or most of these extensions of the
body are only possible to a life which has gone far beyond
the interests of the body itself. But still these higher
objects of interest may become as intimately organic to
meas my proper body. This is the interpretation of that
exchange of the self and the not-self which has sometimes
been thought to demonstrate the ultimate unreality of
the self. The not-self becomes part of the self and I may
even turn myself outside me so that it becomes part of
the not-self. Yet the not-self in such cases never becomes
part of the subject nor the subject part of the contemplated
world. I may take external things into my body or loose
my body into the external world. But it is but a shift-
ing of the borders within which I have the experience of
intimacy or organic connection. My body may expand
to include the world or it may shrink and be lost in a re-
mote and independent system of things outside me.

The bodily person is thus the type and beginning of
all forms of the self, and we may return to the question
of the experience by which in the self the subject and the
body come to be apprehended as unified into a whole
or person, which is more than a mere aggregate. Their
unity is known in its simpler stages through very element-
ary experiences. In the first place we have the direct
identification of the place of mind and body. The enjoyed
space of the one is identified with the contemplated space
of the other in precisely the same way as we identify a
colour as occupying roughly the same space as a hardness
or a tone, or as we identify again roughly the place of an


a
CH. 11 MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 107


organic sensum of, say, cramp in an area of the skin with
a touch sensum in that area of the skin. In both these
cases we have two external objects localised within the
same contour. In the case we are considering we localise
the mind and the body within the contour of the body
and declare it to be in the body or even more narrowly
in the head. There is no difference in the two cases
except that one of the things whose space is identified is
spread out in enjoyed and not in contemplated space.
This identification is accomplished experientially. More-
over, we do not necessarily refer the consciousness always
to the place of the body, we may refer the body to the
consciousness as being in part of it in the same place.
Here too we have a parallel in external experience. Pain
in the toe is an organic sensum and the toe itself is seen.
But W. James has said with as much truth as wit that
when a baby feels a pain in its toe it is really feeling the
toe in the pain. Now the pain, though a sensum and
not a mere feeling of painfulness, is notwithstanding more
personal, nearer to mind than the seen toe. It is but a
step from this to identifying the seen space of part of the
body with the enjoyed space of the mind. Mental events
and bodily,events are thus realised to belong to one place,
and we may add by similar considerations, roughly speak-
ing, to one time. Mind and body are experientally one
thing, not two altogether separate things, because they
occupy the same extension and places as a part of the
body.

Besides this direct spatial identification, the union Mental
of mind and body is experienced by us in the bodily Pospcor
movements into which the mental response to external bodily
things is continued. The mental process of perception "°“™™
of the apple is continued into the movement of seizing
the apple, which movement in its turn is perceived.
Moreover, there is a difference in these responses with
the difference in the mental processes—with their more
or less vaguely experienced differences of locality within
enjoyed space. In securing its ends the mind’s actions
issue into appropriately distinct bodily actions. The
body is experienced as an instrument of the mind.


The map
of mental
space.


108 SPACE-TI ME BK. I


This is true not only in the life of the senses and
appetites, but also in the life of intellect. We experience
that these activities issue in bodily movements which
sustain them and affect the external world, were it only
in the form of speech. Thus the person is experienced
as no mere aggregate of mind and body, because these
have place (and time) in common and their move-
ments are in experienced connection. And all the facts
before referred to which indicate how changes in the
one determine changes in the other come in, when the
person reflects, to swell the tide of evidence flowing in
that direction.


So much, except for such phrases as imply a slightly
more extended knowledge or reflection, may be taken
as describing the ordinary history of how mind and
body come to be recognised as connected; and it is
compatible with different hypotheses as to the ultimate
nature of that connection. That experience teaches us
that the mind is somewhere within the body and is felt
in particular within the head; and it answers roughly
the question, Where is the enjoyed space of mind in the
whole Space which is contemplated? But from what
we learn about our own bodies and from the bodies
and, above all, the brains of others, we are able to establish
a much more detailed and intimate connection between
mental processes and physiological ones. Let us assume
for shortness that consciousness is conditioned by
physical events in the cerebral cortex. This must not
be taken to mean that there is some place in that cortex
at which the mental event is located, as if the rest of
the brain or the central nervous system were indifferent.
No conception could be so naive. Rather what is
meant is that certain processes occurring in specific
parts of the cortex are so vital for a particular sort of
mental event that unless the affection reached this part


: Written before the appearance of Dr. Head’s recent paper in
Brain, xli., 1918, on ‘Sensation and the Cerebral Cortex.’ (Cp. later,


Bk. IN. ch. vi. Suppl. Note.) The precise localisation of mental pro-
cess 1s, however, indifferent for our purpose here.


i


=


CH, 11 MENTAL SPACE AND TIME 109


of the cortex the mental event would not occur: We
learn then that specific consciousness such as vision is
correlated with specific movements in the occipital region
of the brain. Plainly this kind of knowledge is not
direct experience of my own vision or of its relation
to the brain. For it is a commonplace that in seeing
a tree I know nothing of the occipital movement, and
when I think of the occipital movement I am _ not
seeing the tree. But it is knowledge about my
own vision, and extends my experience of vision, for
when I see I can think of these processes in my own
brain, in ideal contemplation, and when I think of them
I can think of vision in ideal enjoyment. Having learnt
from other brains what underlies vision I can use that
knowledge to understand my own.

Now if we accept the commonly held results of
correlation between specific mental acts and _ specific
neural processes, we arrive at a much closer conception
of how the psychosis is related to the neurosis. Instead
of roughly feeling our mind within our heads we can
think of a psychosis as occupying the place of its corre-
lative neurosis. Once more no particular theory is here
implied of the ultimate connection of psychosis and
neurosis. The doctrine that they are correlated or even
parallel, regarded as a bare compendious statement of
facts, is sufficient for our purpose. There may be inter-
action between mind and brain ; there may be, as indeed
I believe to be the case, identity of psychosis with its
own neurosis.’ But this is not necessary here to affirm.
Those who think that secondary qualities like colour
and sound interpenetrate, that is, are found in precisely
the same place, may well believe that a psychosis may
occur in the place of a neurosis and yet be something
distinct from the neurosis. We have made no such
supposition as to the coincidence of a colour and a
smell, for we have only supposed them to coincide in
the rough.2? The question may be left open and we
may be content with the hypothesis founded on cerebral


1 See later, Bk. III. ch. 1. A.
2 See later, Bk. I. ch. vi. A, p. 275.


1 Ke) SPACE-TIME BK. I


localisation that mental events, with their specific enjoyed
place, are in the very contemplated place of their
neurosis. ‘This is a mere extension of the experienced
rough identity of place between mind and body.

This picture of our neural space is painted by
inference. But it enables us to derive two results.
First it substitutes, as said, for the vague blur of enjoyed
space a map of that enjoyed region, and we can attach
a definite meaning to the proposition that our mental
states are enjoyed as having place and direction. So
far as any one mental process is defined against the
general mental background, its direction is that of its
specific anatomical or physiological path. The direction
is defined within the brain itself and it does not change
if I alter the position of my body by turning round.
For my brain, or at least my central nervous system, is
the whole region which I can experience in enjoyment.
I am my own microcosm so far as enjoyment goes.
When I turn round, my brain processes may change
their direction according to the compass used in con-
templated Space, but not in relation to my brain as
taken by itself. The orientation of its constituent
movements does not change when the orientation of the
contemplated brain changes in the rest of contemplated
Space. It is therefore irrelevant if any one objects that
a mental direction would vary with every movement
of my body."

Some of these anatomical or physiological paths are
occupied by present states of mind ; some of them by


1 I may note here that the direction of a mental process is thus
understood by me literally, in its spatio-temporal sense. Sometimes
it is said, and I have myself on various occasions said, that in any
act of cognition, ¢.g. in seeing a tree or colour, the mental act is
directed upon the object contemplated. I suppose it is this which
may have led to the criticism that the direction of a mental process
alters with the position of the head. But direction is understood
in these other statements metaphorically, as when we speak of
directing our attention to an object. It means strictly in such
phrases little more than being concerned with, and expresses the
correlation of the mental act with its object, the parallelism of mental
act (or its neural process) with the external object with which it is
in my language compresent. (See later, Bk. III. ch, i. A.)


CH. 11 MENTAL SPACE AND TIME Vit


the mental states which are the enjoyments of remembered
or expected objects, that is, which are in ordinary language
memories or expectations of ourselves. Not all of our
brain is necessarily at any one moment occupied by
mental events, except so far as the whole brain may be
needed to function in order that there may be specific
functioning of any one path within it. This apparent
lapse or abeyance of mental action in certain parts of
our neural system raises a problem. But we need not
discuss it now. The fact is that not every part of our
brain is mentally effective at once : we may see without
hearing.


Secondly, with our picture before us, we can begin Mental
to understand better the connection of enjoyed space ‘Pac:
and time. For mental events are processes in time problem.
and occupy our enjoyed space, and different mental
events are connected together either as contemporaneous
with or following one another within this space.
Hence in this microcosm of enjoyed space and time,
time, that is, enjoyed time, is laid out in space,
primarily in enjoyed space but also in the contemplated
space which is identical with it. It is therefore no
mere metaphor or illusion by which we represent the
passage of mental life in time by spatial pictures. For
now we recognise that in fact mental time enjoyed in
mental process occupies space, or like physical Time it
is experientially spatial.

So far we can see; but what we learn is little more
than a recognition that mental processes which occur in
time, and which are related in time-relations, occupy
space. But to go further requires us to determine the
relation of the time of the mental process, that is, the
enjoyed date, to the time of the physiological process
which corresponds to it. This is a matter which presents
great difficulty. Strangely enough, though we accept at
once the proposition that the mind is in Time and with
difficulty the proposition that it is in Space, yet it is easy
to see that if the mind is in Space the place of a mental
process is identical with that of its brain process, but the


112 SPACE-TIME BK. I


question, Are their times identical or not ? seems to us
half unnecessary to ask and exceedingly difficult to answer.
The reason is, that the time of a present mental event is
clearly and palpably itself the date from which we reckon
Time, and we need to ask no more about it. But we can
only give definiteness to the place of a mental event by
correlating and identifying it with the place of some
contemplated event. '

Let us state the problems before us more distinctly.
lam at this moment seeing a colour and hearing a sound.
The corresponding parts of the brain in the occipital and
the temporal regions are excited at one and the same
time : certain phases of the movements are contempo-
raneous. But suppose that while I am at this moment
seeing a colour I am remembering part of a friend’s con-
versation in which the predominant images are auditory.
The corresponding enjoyments which occupy my brain
are the present enjoyment of the colour, that is, the
seeing of it, and the renewal in memory (I purposely
leave the phrase vague) of the hearing of the conversation.
Is that renewal by way of memory wholly a present
enjoyment? If so, then, since the like would apply to
expectations, and my mind is filled with present thoughts,
images, rememberings, and expectations, my brain would
be occupied at this moment by a mass of present enjoy-
ments. The time of an enjoyment would be identical
with the time in contemplated Time of its corresponding
neurosis. Since the time of every part of the brain
corresponding to mental action would be the same, we
should have in mental space an exception to what we have
learned of contemplated Space, that it is primarily not all
simultaneous. We are forced, therefore, to ask ourselves
whether the time of a mental enjoyment is always that of
its underlying neural process, or in other words whether
a remembered enjoyment is not itself a past enjoyment,
not a present one. We shall find, strange as the state-
ment may seem, that this is the truth. But the inquiry
cannot be an easy nor a short one.


™


Cra e rR TV
MENTAL SPACE-TIME


Ler us for the sake of clearness begin, not with the Memory of
memory of ourselves, but the memory of objects, that is °et
to say, of things or events which we have experienced
before, and in remembering are aware that we have so
experienced them. This is the fully developed kind of
memory, to which other acts of so-called memory are only
approximations. James writes :* “The object of memory
is only an object imagined in the past (usually very
completely imagined there) to which the emotion of belief
adheres,” and in substance there is little to add to this
statement. I prefer to say the object of memory (what I
shall call ‘the memory’ as distinguished from the mental
apprehension of it, which is ‘remembering ’) is an object
imagined or thought of in my past. I say ‘my past,’ for
I may believe in the assassination of Julius Caesar as a past
event without being able to remember it. The object,
then, is before my mind, bearing on its face the mark of
pastness, of being earlier than those objects which I call
present. In the mind there corresponds to it the act of
imagining or conceiving it, and there is in addition the
act of remembering it, the consciousness that I have had
it before.

The pastness of the object is a datum of experience,
directly apprehended. The object is compresent with me
as past. The act of remembering is the process whereby
this object becomes attached to or appropriated by myself,
that is, by my present consciousness of myself which has
: been already described, in which may be distinguished
| 1 Psychology, vol. i. p. 652.

VOL. I 113 I


No refer-
ence to the
perceived,


114 SPACE-TIME | oat


a subjective and a bodily element unified in the person.
The past object is earlier than my present act of mind in
remembering, or my equivalent bodily state, whichever
may happen to be more predominant in my mind. When
the past object is thus appropriated by myself 1 am aware
of it as belonging to me, as mine, as occurring in my past.
This is the consciousness that the object is remembered.
In precisely the same sense as I am aware of a perceived
object when I have before me a sensory experience, I have
a memory when I have before me an experience of the
past and appropriate it to my personality. The object is
then not only past but belongs to a past in which I
contemplate myself (that is my body) as having been
existent also and related to the object.

In this as in many other psychological inquiries, error
may arise from reading into the experience more than is
there. The actual past event as we once perceived it is
remembered as the memory of it which has been described.
I may not say that in memory I am aware of the memory
as referred in thought, or in some other way, to the
actual object I once perceived. It is true that I can
in reflection, in a sophisticated mood, so speak. But this
is not the deliverance of the experience itself called
having a memory. For example, I may see a man and
remember that I heard his conversation yesterday. Here
I have the actual man before me ; but my memory of his
conversation is not first taken by itself and then referred
to him as I heard him yesterday. The memory-object is
itself the object, and the only one I have, of the conscious-
ness that I heard him yesterday. So far as I remember
that, there is no reference to any former perception of the
man, even though he is now also present in perception.
The percept of him and the memory of him are two
different appearances which in their connection reveal the
one thing, the man, whom we now know to be to-day by
perceiving, and to have been yesterday by remembrance.
Moreover the memory is as much a physical object as
the percept. He is physical in so far as, in Mr. Russell’s
happy phrase, he behaves according to the laws of physics.
The remembered man does not speak now, but he is


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME IIS


remembered as speaking, or, to vary the example, the
memory-object is the physical man cutting physical trees
yesterday.

Thus we have not in memory itself any reference to
the perceived. The memory itself is the only knowledge
we have that there ever was something perceived. But
there is a real truth misrepresented by the erroneous
statement. Like a single perception, a single memory is
incomplete. The particular percept is full of movement
towards other aspects of the thing perceived, and the
memory in like manner throws out feelers to other
memories. These memories through their internal
coherence and continuity build up for us our memory
of the whole thing of which they are partial representa-
tions, and, as in the case just given, may blend in turn
with fresh perceptions, or, again, with expectations of the
future. It is then that in our unsophisticated experience
(as distinct from the sophisticated deliverances of the
reflective psychologist or philosopher) we can think of
our friend as the same thing compresent with us in more
thanone memory. Even then we only introduce into our
experience of him the element of his having once been
perceived, through familiarity with the blending of per-
ceptions with memory-ideas of the same thing.’ For
this reason it is that, as has often been observed by
psychologists, we learn so much more directly about the
nature of Time from expectation of the future than from
remembrance of the past. Expectation is precisely like
remembering except that the object has the mark of
future, that is of later than our present, instead of past or
earlier. Now we are practical creatures and look forward
to the satisfaction of our needs, and the past interests us
only theoretically or, if practically, as a practical guidance
for the future. But in expectation the anticipated object

1 For the synthesis of many objects or appearances of a thing into
a thing see the discussion later, Bk. III. ch. vii. vol. ii., where it will be
seen that the unity of a thing which underlies its various appearances,
the objects of perception or memory, is the volume of space-time
which it occupies. That volume is filled by each of its appearances,


and that is why a single percept or a single memory can be the
appearance or ‘ presentation’ of the thing.


A memory
not a
present
object.


116 SPACE-TIME BK. I


is, or very often is, replaced continuously and coherently
by the percept, and the expected object may now become
a memory. I remember now how the object appeared
to me an hour past when I expected it. But whereas
the expectation is in the ordinary course succeeded by
fulfilment in perception, memory need not be so succeeded
and most often is not.

Now it is not the whole thing which we need have
before us in memory, but only its appearance altered by
the lapse of Time, seen through the haze of Time, as
things distant in Space are coloured by their remoteness.
The lapse of Time may distort, and when to Time is added
the subjective prejudices of the experient the memory of
the thing may be highly distorted. But it remains what
it declares itself to be when supplemented by similar
appearances, nothing but the revelation of the thing
through that mist of intervening Time, and the thing
itself is only given in the actual memory through the
mere reaching out of any experience to other experiences
of the like sort.

Thus we avoid the first error of interpreting memory
to mean more than it contains. No wonder memory is
regarded as so mysterious if it is supposed also to inform
us of the perceived past, as if that perceived past could
be thought of except through some idea other than the
memory. AA second error is to suppose that the memory
is in some sense present and that it is referred to the past
through certain indications of a subjective or personal
kind. In one form or another this doctrine is very
common. Our ideas come to us in succession it is said,
but the succession of ideas is not the idea of their
succession. To be distinguished as past or future from
the present they must all be present together. “All we
immediately know of succession is but an interpretation

. of what is really simultaneous or coexistent.’ !
Even for James the feeling of the past is a present feeling.
How far this is true of the feelings of past, present, and
future we shall inquire presently. Of the objects, it is, I


1 J. Ward, Psychological Principles (Cambridge, 1918 é
Art. Encycl. Brit. ed. ix. p. 64b. gee hi ge, 1918), p. 2145


cH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 117


_ venture to think, in flat contradiction to experience which
declares the memory to have the mark of the past on its
forehead, and the expected that of the future. Not all the
subtle and important discovery of temporal signs,’ whereby
places in time are discriminated as local signs discriminate
positions in space, avails to explain how objective past or
future could be known as past or future were they not
already so presented. For whether these temporal signs
are drawn from the movement of attention or are bodily
experiences with a rhythmical character like the breathing
or the heart-beats, they tell us of our person or rather of
our body, but they tell us nothing directly of the objects
remembered or expected.» When we have correlated
these personal acts of mind with the time-order of physical
events we can use them to compute more accurately the
dates of external events. They are indirect measures of
succession, but not direct apprehensions of it. On the
contrary, they are themselves successive and require some
other indication of their own time-order. But if they
carry their time-record with them, then past and future
need not be simultaneous with the present in our appre-.
hension of events.

The truth is that remembering and expecting do occur
at the present moment ; but we are not entitled, therefore,
to declare their objects simultaneous with the present.
To be apprehended as a memory in the act of remember-
ing simultaneously with an act of present perception is
not to be apprehended as simultaneous with the ‘ present’
object. The simple deliverance of experience is that it is
apprehended as past. The notion that it must be simul-
taneous with the present in order to be referred to the
past is thus the intrusion of a theory into the actual
experience.


Remembering has been described as an act whereby a Theat oh
. . * € -
memory is appropriated by the self and recognised as my ing.


1 J. Ward, Art. Encycl. Brit. p. 64b, Psychol. Princ. pp. 197 ff.

2 The same thing is true of the local signs. They tell us directly
of our own bodies, but not of the external extension or position,
except through correlation and indirectly (see later, Bk. III. ch. vi.).


118 SPACE-TIME - BK


past object. The features of the act of appropriation are
more easily seen in the act of expectation. There the
mind reaches out towards the imagined future event, and
as the expectation becomes more distinct and intensive
the image rises out of isolation and is incorporated with
the personality. At first there is an image with a future
mark but relatively disconnected from the personal life.
Gradually it acquires what James calls intimacy, becomes
warm with the personal attachment, is attended by emotion.
Think of the expectation of some promotion or the fear
of some disaster. Expectation is thus a desire or aversion
whose aim is not practical but theoretical ; it is satisfied
by fuller cognition; and in turn all desire is, on its
cognitive side, expectation. If we turn to remembering
with this clue we discover the same features. There, also,
is an isolated image, the memory with the mark of the
past. As we remember, it invades us, comes out of its
isolation. If the image is of Caesar’s death, which we
cannot remember, it may be vivid but it fails to invade
our personality and link up with our life. It is not a
memory but only an imagination and a conceptual ex-
tension of past time into a past century with which we
had no personal touch. Let it be the thought of a verse
once heard but barely rising and in fragments into our
mind. We search for the missing or defective words
until they at last spring into view and our aim is achieved
and we remember that we heard them once. Thus
remembering is a kind of desire, but, unlike expectation,
directed backwards.t It is a retrospective desire ; and
just as in expectation we find it difficult at times to
distinguish the calm contemplation of a future event from
the passionate movement to meet it, so in remembering,
especially if it does not proceed with ease, we can feel
sometimes the passionate effort to drag up the remembered
event into clear vision of it. When Odysseus meets his
mother in the shades, he asks her the manner of her
death, whether it was by disease or the arrows of Artemis.
She answers him that it was none of these things, “but
longing for you and your counsels, Odysseus, and for
1 See Art. ‘Conational Psychology,’ Brit. F. of Psych. vol. iv., Igit.


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 119


your loving-kindness, which robbed me of my sweet life.” !
Substitute in this passage remembering for longing ; the
tenderness of the passage would in part disappear, but its
psychology remains unaltered. Just as expecting is part
of the practical effort towards bringing the desired future
object before us, so remembering is the speculative desire
of reinstating the past or rather of reinstating ourselves
in compresence with it, or, as we say, in presence of it.
And it brings the past out of the depths in that form in
which an event or thing which was really past can be
apprehended at a later date. For Time is real and the
past is real as past. It is not real as being present ; it is
now no longer. But it was real, and reveals itself to
speculative or theoretical desire in the form of a memory
which is made the personal property of the experient.


So far, we have been concerned with memory proper, Quasi-
where the object is an image or thought with a date, memories.
however imperfectly the date is apprehended. It is not
necessary for our purpose to describe how we come to be
aware of the accurate date, which involves conceptual
processes, even in dating a past event five minutes ago.
This is a question of the measuring of Time. But partly
because of the intrinsic importance of the subject and
partly for future use we may make certain observations
about the time-characters of ideas in experiences which
are not proper memory, but are often loosely called so.
In every contemplation we enjoy ourselves, as we have
seen, in a time-relation with our object. But the object
may have no date. It has its internal time-character, as
when I call up in my mind a picture of a man running,
or even a thing like a landscape where there is no move-
ment but where the spatial extension involves Time in its
intrinsic character. In such a case the image, being a
time-saturated object, is contemplated as somewhere in
Time, but the position of it as a whole in Time is not
dated. This distinguishes a mere revival without
memory, or a mere fancy, from a memory proper. It
belongs to Time but has no particular date. In the next

1 Odyssey, X1, 202-3, ;


The
“specious
present’ a
succession.


120 SPACE-TI ME ey


place, there are reproduced mental objects or characters of
things which are not even images at all. Such are
the ideal supplements which qualify a sensory object and
with it constitute a percept. This supplement has again
its internal time-character, but it is not an object distinct
from the sensory object. A simple example is the per-
ception of a certain group of colours and shapes as a
man. The human characters are only elements in the
total which are supplied in ideal form. Consequently
they share the date of the present sensum, and in this
qualified sense the past is contained in the present.’
Lastly, I may have ideas which are apprehended as past,
which are parts of a successive experience and are retained
in the mind but are not memories proper. For instance,
the first words of a sentence which are still in my mind
at the end or in the middle of the sentence. It would be
a mere misdescription to say that the idea was first present
and then referred to the past. It isa past object. But
it is not a memory ; for, though retained from the past, it
is not, like a memory, recovered from the past.


Thus an image may either be dated and remembered,
or, like Caesar’s death or other non-personal event, be
dated but not remembered, or it may have no specific
date, or having a date it may be merely retained. But
further, an object may be in the past and yet not an image
at all but a sensum. We are thus led to the so-called
“specious present.’ Sensory objects, though as a matter
of fact they precede the moment of apprehending them
by a very small interval, which is not experienced as such
but only discovered by reflection and experiment, are in
general called present in so far as they are the objects of
the present sensing, and this is a mere matter of words,
for such objects are the point of reference for earlier or
Jater objects. When I apprehend a sound and a light at
the same moment, they are for practical purposes taken as
simultaneous though they are not so in fact. But we
have mental processes which take place successively where
yet the objects are present in sensory form. Such an

1 See later at end of the chapter.


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME P20


experience is an example of what is called the ‘specious
present,’ because it is not a ‘mathematical’ moment but
experienced as a duration. The familiar example is that
of the path of the meteor where the whole movement is
sensory and the path of light is seen at once. We never
sense an instant of time, which is, taken by itself, a con-
cept or implies conception. Our sensible’ experience of
Time is primarily that of a duration ; and experiment has
determined what are the smallest intervals between two
stimuli of sound or other kinds which are experienced
as durations, and what interval of time filled by inter-
mittent experiences of certain kinds, for example the
strokes of a bell, can be held together at once in the mind.
The specious present does not mean necessarily a duration
which is filled with sensa. It is commonly taken to
include also the fringe of past or future objects which
have ceased to be sensory, or are not yet so, and approach
the state of images, as in the case of a succession of
sounds retained together in the mind, for example, in
hearing strokes of a metronome, or the words of a con-
nected sentence. Let us confine ourselves to the span of
sensory consciousness. In that duration some of the
elements though sensory are not only past in the order
of the actual occurrence of their stimuli, but are past to
an unprejudiced experience of them. Thus though the
meteor’s path is given to us in a line of light, we are
aware of the meteor’s movement through that line.
Rapid as the movement was we are aware of the meteor’s
having been at one end before it was at the other. Two
reasons may blind us to this truth that the meteor’s path
is seen as a succession. The first is the fear that the
movement would, on this account of the matter, be
resolved into a mere series of successive separate positions
and its unity be destroyed. The movement is unitary
and it isapprehended assuch. Undoubtedly, but equally
it is apprehended as occurring in a space and occupying a
time. How groundless is this fear that a movement so


1 T use this word for convenience. It does not imply that Time (or
Space) is sensed but only that it is apprehended through sense. (For
the proper apprehension of Time and Space, see later, Bk. III. ch. vi.)


The
present has
breadth but
not depth.


122 SPACE-TIME BK. I


described is a mere succession of separate point-instants,
as if these could be discontinuous, is clear enough from
the general notion of Space and Time, and will be more
fully seen in the next chapter. The other reason for
neglecting the successiveness experienced within the
duration of the meteor’s path is the fact that, owing to
persistence of the sensory stimulation in the retina, the
line of movement is before the mind as a stretch of space.
This arises from the character of our vision. The
separate stimuli leave their after-effects along the retina.
This does not carry with it, as is hastily assumed, the
consequence that the sensory object is seen all of it in
the present. On the contrary, not only is this in ex-
perience not so, but the spatial path of the meteor seen
‘all at once,’ that is, taken altogether in vision, is the
best illustration of the essentially temporal character of
Space. The visual arrangements actually enable the path
to be dated instead of occurring all at one moment. The
sensa earlier than the point of light directly present do
not in this case fade away into real images. In the case
of a specious present occupied by strokes of a metronome
I will not undertake to say whether the preceding strokes
are retained as after-sensations or are images. I have
not the requisite experimental intimacy with the facts.
But if they are ideas they are at least past, and if they are
not sensations it is because there may be no apparatus in
hearing for retaining past sensations in different places, as
is the case with the eye.

Thus the ‘specious present’ is not present at all,
but includes within it distinctions of past and present.
We may add of future as well. For the broad present
may contain at least dawning ideas of what is to come, and
even dawning sensory objects, for in vision anyhow we
have, corresponding with after-sensations, ‘ before-sensa-
tions’ in the process during which a colour sensation
is gradually rising to its full intensity or saturation.
(‘Anklingen der Empfindung,’ H. Ebbinghaus calls it).
Within this broad duration there is succession experienced


1 See H. Ebbinghaus, Grandzige der Psychologie, Bd. i


(ed. i., Leipzig, 1902). me cer


Beri MENTAL SPACE-TIME 123


assuch. It has been compared by James toa saddleback as
opposed to the present instant which is a knife edge. But
there is no reason in the facts to declare that the present is
saddlebacked, except so far as sensory objects are simul-
taneous and not successive as when we see red and blue at
once. In other words we should distinguish the ‘broad’
from the ‘deep’ present. The present always has breadth
as including many simultaneous objects. But it has not
depth, that is, breadth in time. Its depth is a succession
within duration. No doubt ‘the specious present’ is a
useful conception if it serves as a reminder that we never
sense the present instant or the present object by itself, but
that we always apprehend a bit of duration, and as a rough,
practical description of the present, as rough as the habitual
description of present objects as present when they are
really slightly past. But otherwise we are compelled to
conclude that what it describes is not a fundamental fact
of our time experience, and that rather it misinterprets
that experience. It describes merely the interesting and
important fact that our minds are able to hold together
a certain number of objects without having recourse to
memory proper, and in particular that a certain number
of sensa occupying time in their occurrence can thus be
held together in our minds. The length of the time
interval so filled varies with the sensory events which
occur in it. If the specious present is understood in a
different way it is specious in the other sense of deceiving
us. Perhaps it may be compared with that other interest-
ing and important fact of the existence of a threshold of
sensation below which amounts of stimulation are not
felt. This was interpreted by Fechner to mean that the
threshold was in some special sense the zero of sensa-
tion. Whereas any sensation whatever may be taken as
zero if we make it the beginning of our scale.

The “specious present’ is a comparatively consider-
able time interval of some seconds. ‘The minimal duration
which we apprehend as duration is vastly smaller.2 But


1 On this topic see the discussion in Ebbinghaus, Bd. i. pp. 507 ff.
2 For the data see ch. i. of Psychologie der Zeitauffassung, by
V. Benussi (Heidelberg, 1913).


124 SPACE-TIME BK. I


if we learn by experience that the first contains succession
within its duration we may conclude that the elementary
duration is successive too, that in fact there is no duration
which is not a duration of succession, though the success-
ive moments in a very small duration may not be and
are not distinguishable. Or if this is too much to say,
then we must urge at least that succession is not something
new and additional to duration, but past, present, and
future represent distinctions drawn within duration.
There is as much difficulty in conceiving elementary
durations succeeding one another within a longer duration
as in conceiving any duration to be intrinsically a lapse in
time and therefore intrinsically successive. We have yet
to see how mathematical or conceptual instants can be
real. But that our elementary experience of Time should
be extensive and yet admit of succession within it is no
more difficult to understand than that a blur of red blood
should under the microscope reveal itself as a number of
red bodies swimming in a yellow plasma, or that sensations
we cannot distinguish from one another may under other
conditions be known to be distinct. The conclusion is
that our sensibility to succession is not so great as our
sensibility to duration. Where both can be apprehended
the duration and the succession are seen to be of the same
stuff. This is true of contemplated or objective Time.
In what sense it can be held that Time as we experience it
in ourselves is other than a duration which is intrinsically
successive passes my understanding.


pies We have been dealing hitherto with the time of objects
oe and have found that the past is in no sense present but is


ite revealed as past. We have now to turn to the much
and future. More difficult matter of enjoyed time. It may be said :
past physical events are presented as past, but when the
past is declared to be somehow present, the reference is to
the apprehension of it, as when, for instance, the feeling
of the past is called by James a present feeling or the
immediate apprehension of a short succession of events a
specious present. I do not feel sure that this is what is
meant in all cases. But we may use the easier analysis of


“CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME Ns


the experience of past and future objects as a clue to
understanding our enjoyments of Time. We shall find
that past enjoyments are not experienced in the present
but as past, and future ones as future. Let us analyse the
experience of remembering a past state or act of mind as
distinguished from the. past object. I never indeed do
remember myself without the object, for without an
object a mental state is nothing. Even when I project
my personality back into the past or forward into the
future, I have before my mind either the external objects
about which I was engaged or at the lowest the bodily
and contemplated constituents of myself. But I may
attend to the self rather than to the object, or in other
words it may be the self which predominates in my
experience. This most often happens when the past event
was highly coloured with emotion, and the emotion is
renewed in memory. I remember how elated I felt at a
piece of good fortune or how depressed with a misfortune.
Even without emotion I can faintly remember how


highly invigorated I felt by my first bicycle tour when I


-was young. But though we do not often attend to our


past mental states, we never remember a past object with-
out some consciousness however faint of the past state.
I remember hearing my friend’s conversation, and do it
by an act of imagination which is the renewal (to use a
neutral term) of that past. Let us suppose ourselves
then to be remembering our past state. There are two
elements in the mental condition. First, there is the act
of remembering, and secondly, there is the imagination
(or thought) of my past self. The mere process of
remembering offers no difficulty. The imagined state of
my mind is lifted from its relative isolation or indifference
into intimate connection with myself, and is appropriated
by that self. It is from the beginning continuous with
the rest of the mind, for otherwise it would not be the
image of a past state of mind, but it is in the act of
remembering attached more closely to the present con-
sciousness of my personality. And as it grows into
intimacy the remembered state of mind deepens and
expands (always of course with the help of the past object),


126 SPACE-TIME BK, I


and its emotional colour is more vividly revived until
it approaches the character of hallucination and we seem
half to be actually repeating the old experience.

This act of remembering is enjoyed as present ; it is
contemporaneous, for instance, with the sight of the friend
whose past conversation his renewed visit puts me in
mind of, or I remember him at the same moment as I
hear a voice like his. We say I remember now that I
heard him say such and such a thing then, or 1 remember
vividly 2ow how much moved I was at reading his letter.
I enjoy here the imagination of the past event. Is this
enjoyed imagination of my past state of mind enjoyed as
past or as present? Now with regard to the object there
was comparatively little difficulty in the answer. The
object remembered has the mark of the past. But the
object is an existent distinct from the mind and contem-
plated by it. On the other hand, the remembered state
of myself is not an object of contemplation, but is only
enjoyed. It is itself a mental act which is in the act of
remembering welded into the present personality. Once
more we must turn without prepossession to the ex-
perience itself, and the answer which it gives is that the
imagination of myself which I have in remembering
myself is not enjoyed as present but as past. Its enjoy-
ment has pastness written upon its face. What we
remember is past as much in our own case as in the
case of the external event which is remembered. The
remembering is present, but both its object and what we
may call its mental material (the past act of mind which
experienced it) are past. The appeal is to the bare facts.
There may be a good meaning to be assigned to the
statement that the renewed mental past is present. But
it is not so enjoyed by the experient himself. It can
only so be described, if at all, from the point of view of
the looker-on, who separates the renewal of the past state
from the mind of the experient, and cuts it off from its
intimacy both with that experient’s self and above all with
the object. But as so described it is not the remembered
state at all. Looking at it from the outside the psycho-
logist may note that something is happening to the patient


_


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 27


which is present for the psychologist, but it is not there-
fore present for the patient, and if the psychologist so
misreads it, he is not putting himself inside the patient’s
mind and is failing of his duty as a psychologist. Or,
again, there is a physiological process in the patient’s
brain which is simultaneous with the patient's present.
But it does not follow so evidently that the mental
process which ‘accompanies it’ is felt or enjoyed as
simultaneous. There may be something present in one
sense which is not present in the vital sense of being
the patient’s present and therefore enjoyed by him as
resent.

In like manner the expected future event, e.g. that I
shall be seeing a friend, is enjoyed not as present but as
future. It has the mark of the future on it. The act of
expecting it on the other hand is present.

This result appears strange only because of the
persistent intrusion into the observation of fact of a
theory that all mental process is experienced in the
present or as present. Once the facts are accepted as
experience supplies them, their interpretation offers no
more difficulty than the interpretation of a past object in
memory. My enjoyment is a past enjoyment, and it is thus
that a being which does not make its own states objects to
itself is aware of its past. Precisely so, the past object of
memory is the appearance to me of the past thing in
the present act of remembering. The past enjoyment,
which I have called the material of the act of remembering
my past state, is the way in which the actual past of the
mind is revealed in the present. But it is not revealed
as present. Nor is it revealed im the mind’s present,
though it forms one part of the total of which another
part is the mind’s present. Because it forms one part of
that total it is imagined to persist into the present. And
so it does, but it persists as past. If Time is real, if the
past is not a mere invention of the mind, and this is our
original hypothesis, the mind at any present moment
contains its past as past. Otherwise, to fall back on an
argument used ad nauseam in respect of physical Time,
there would be no mind at all but a continual re-creation


Difference
of ‘as
present”
and ‘at the
present.’


Illustration
from
memory of
emotion,


128 SPACE-TIME ee


of quite independent and molecular mental states, which
is contrary to elementary experience.

Thus a remembered mental state is a past enjoyment,
as it is enjoyed after the lapse of time, the machinery for
such awareness of the past being the process by which for
one reason or another the brain is thrown into a corre-
sponding, or a partially identical state with the actual past
state of the brain during the past experience. The past
is revived in imagination of my mental state just as it is
revived in imagination of a past object. I know my own
past only through the enjoyment of it as past.’

The truth that the renewal in memory of a past state
of myself is not merely a fresh excitement of myself in
the present may perhaps best be seen in the memory of
emotions. It is sometimes thought that there is no such
memory, but only memory for the exciting object of the
emotion and a new present emotion aroused by this
memory. An interesting census was taken by Th. Ribot,
the results of which will be found in his Psychology of the
Emotions, ch. xi. He concludes to the existence in some
cases of an emotional type which does remember emotions.
But the question is rather how emotions are remembered ?
Are they really memories or are they real or actual new
emotions which are excited by an image? that is to say,
not different from a present emotion. All revived feeling
is new feeling, it is said, attached to an ideal object. This
seems to be the meaning of the poet Sully Prudhomme,
quoted by Ribot, who says, speaking of some past inci-
dents of an emotional character, that he is now a stranger
to the feelings he remembers in connection with them ;
“‘but as soon as by an effort of recollection 1 make these
memories more precise they cease ipso facto to be
memories only, and I am quite surprised to feel the


1 On the whole question of experience of the past, see a very useful
discussion by A. Gallinger, Zur Grundlegung einer Lehre von der Erinnerung,
Halle, 1914. “To be aware of something at the present is not the
same thing as to be aware of it also as present” (p. 92). “In remember-
ing we have a knowledge of past experiences (Er/ebnisse), but not a
knowledge of the present consciousness of past experiences, nor even
of present memory pictures of past experiences” (same page). But
I do not claim the writer’s support for my general doctrine. .


eal


ror...
C4


‘


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 129


movements of youthful passion and angry jealousy revived
inme. And again I am almost inclined to ask myself if
every recollection of feeling does not take on the character
of an hallucination” (p. 155).

So far as I can trust my own experience I believe we
can observe a distinction between a remembered and a
present emotion. I remember the feeling of shame felt
at a social blunder ; and the more vividly I represent the
circumstances the more intense the emotional excitement
becomes, and the more completely it includes the bodily
expression proper to the emotion and invades me. Still
all this personal experience is detained in attachment to the
past object, and despite the urgency of the feelings I am lost
in the past, and the whole experience, object-side and
subject-side alike, has the mark of the past. But suddenly
I may find myself arrested ; I forget the past object and I
become aware of the emotion as a present state, in which
the object is for the most part the bodily reactions, the
flushed face and qualms about the heart. I change from
a past enjoyment to a present one. What the difference
is I find it hard to say ; the pastness of the image seems
to draw the feeling after it into the past as well. It may
be that the whole difference lies in the compresence with
the past object. But the difference is for me palpably
there. Thus a new or actual emotion, with its sensorial
character, ceases to be a present emotion when it is com-
present with a past object; whether it is neurally or
mentally slightly different from the emotion roused by a
present object or not, it becomes a past enjoyment in this
connection. Its actuality no more makes it a present
emotion than the sensory character of the beginning of
the meteor’s path in the sky makes it present, when the
real present is the end of the path.

Before pursuing further the ideas suggested by these
facts let us note briefly that where there is not memory
proper but only retention in the mind, the earlier stages of
the mental enjoyment are past and not present, and that
the specious present, the present with a depth, is not
really a present in enjoyment, and that consequently, to
sum the whole matter up, we cannot hold that the

VOL. I K


What is
present in
an enjoy-


» ment of


the past.


130 SPACE-TIME - BKLI


experience of the past is a present feeling, whether we
speak of the past object or the past state of mind.


We may now ask ourselves what is really present in
the strict sense when there is a past enjoyment ; what it
is which lends colour to the belief that the remembered
state of mind is actually present. The answer is that the
underlying neural process is present, and that process is
partially at least the same whether the act of mind be a
perception of a present or a memory of a past object. I
do not raise the vexed question whether images occupy
the same places in the brain as their corresponding per-
cepts, or different places. If the same, then the same
tract of brain may be occupied at one time in the observer’s
present and at another in his past. If not, yet since
a percept already contains elements of an ideal character
complicated with the sensory elements, the seat of per-
cept and image is at least partially the same. Moreover,
it is quite possible that though image centres may not be
the same as sensation centres, yet since they cannot be
supposed disconnected, the excitement of ideas may over-
flow into sensory centres. Thus a revival in imagination
partially at any rate occupies the same place as if it werea
sensory experience. A present and a past enjoyment may
be in the same contemplated or enjoyed space but belong
to different enjoyed times, or, to put it otherwise, a tract
of brain may be occupied either by a present or a past
enjoyment.

The case of remembered emotion illustrates this
matter well. Why is it, the question is asked, that we do
not confuse an image of a past event with a present event,
and yet a remembered emotion is or tends to be hal-
lucinatory? The answer might be suggested that an
image becomes hallucinatory only when sensation is
involved. Now, normally, sensations require the presence
of the actual stimulus from without. Thus, for instance,
the imagination of a coloured disk is not usually sensory,
for although it may lead to various movements of the
eyes or other organs, those movements do not excite
colour sensations. But the case is different with the


—_


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 131


emotional excitement produced by such an object. That
excitement issues or tends to issue in the appropriate
bodily movements of the emotion, and these movements.
are felt in the form of actual sensations, organic or
kinaesthetic. The bodily resonance which forms so large
a part of an emotion is brought into existence by the
imagined emotion itself. On the other hand, the move-
ments induced by an idea of a picture do not reinstate in
a sensory form the details of the picture, because that is
outside the bodily organism ; they only give us bodily
sensations, not sensations of colour or smell. To have
an hallucination of colour, the internal conditions must be
the exceptional ones under which an image overflows
into the sensory centres."

It is a familiar fact that to an observer in motion two
events may occur at different times at the same place


1 Though my interest here is not primarily psychological I may
stop to raise in a note the question, which is naturally suggested by
the above, of the revival of organic and kinaesthetic sensations. I find
it very hard myself to get images of them, but others do, and there
is no reason why these sensa which are external though personal
should have no images. ‘There are real reasons, however, which
distinguish these sensations from specific sensations. For their sensibles
or sensa are bodily conditions, and the neural process which underlies
the -sensation, the sensing of them, is also bodily. Whereas, as
explained in the text, in the case of colour the sensing has a bodily
neurosis which underlies it, but the sensum is outside the body. But a
kinaesthetic image leads to a movement which continues the excitement.
The movements of reaction produced by the image sustain the image,
and dosoin asensory form. The reaction is, in Mr. Baldwin’s phrase,
acircularone. Hence, like emotions, these representations tend to be
hallucinatory, as in my case they generally are. Thinking of moving
means really beginning to move. Now it may very well be with these
and the organic sensations that though their representations tend to be
hallucinations, their associates may give them a pull into the past or
future, and in that case they wou'd still deserve to be called images.
The same thing applies to organic sensations. Some psychologists
declare (and I followed them myself in a paper in Arist. Proceedings,
1909-10) that they do not admit of representation at all. At any rate
their behaviour in this respect puts them for purposes of knowledge in
a class by themselves, Seeing that our minds are correlated with our
bodies, and these are the sensations from our bodies, it is not surprising
that they should occupy a peculiar position in the rank of sensations.
(The sensa are in fact living conditions which we apprehend directly
in our bodies. See later, Bk. III. ch. vi.) ,


132 SPACE-TIME BK. I


which to an observer at rest occur at different places.
Mr. Langevin’s instance is that of dropping stones through
the floor of a railway carriage in motion. To the traveller
in the carriage two such events will occur at different
times but at the same place. To the outside observer at
rest the stones will fall at different places. In both cases
the space is contemplated. Take now enjoyed and con-
templated space. The space I enjoy is that of a part of
my body. But my body, say my head, may change its
place in the wider contemplated Space to which it belongs,
but its parts retain their internal relations as enjoyed,
and, as we have seen, mental directions remain unaltered.
Thus what is the same place for enjoyment may be in two
different places for contemplation.

A similar account applies to the connection of enjoyed
and contemplated time. My remembered time 1s past in
enjoyed time. But it occurs in a space which is the same
or partially the same for the outside observer, whether
the mental process is a present or a past enjoyment. Let
us recur to the old case of a conversation remembered
at the moment I hear a voice or see a photograph. The
physiological process underlying the remembered past is
occurring to the observer at the same time as my sight of
the photograph. And the enjoyment of the past occupies,
at least in part, the same place as if the event were present.
To the experient the event is past. To the outsider it
might, for all he knows, be either past or present, at least
so far as the identical parts of space are concerned. The
contemplated present neural event may be either a present
or a past enjoyment. Suppose, now, an angel contem-
plating me. For him my mental process is exposed to
his contemplation as well as the neural process, while to
me or you it is not. The angel would see the neural
process physically synchronous with my present. But the
mental event would be seen by him to have the mark of
the past, because he could see into my mind as I enjoy it.
He would distinguish the past enjoyment from the present
enjoyment at the same place, and would see that two
events by way of enjoyment might share the same neural
process. He would, I suppose, make the distinction of


Sete Se on


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 133


past or present directly in the mental events, and would
also, I suppose, see differences in the neural process before
him which we might with sufficient knowledge see. When
I take the point of view of the angel I can understand
how my enjoyed time may return to its old place and
partially at least occupy a present contemplated process,
whether it is a past or a present enjoyment. If I am
right in my account above of the change from an emotion
referred to the past to the emotion referred to the present,
this is what I actually do experience in such a case.

Thus when a remembered state of mind is declared to
be a present feeling, we are, as I said, making a psycho-
logical mistake which can be accounted for either because,
being an enjoyment, it enters into the total mass of our
enjoyment at our present moment ; or because the neural
process corresponding to it does occur at the present in
the neural space as contemplated from outside.


Whether in the study of past and future objects or in
that of past and future states of ourselves, we have thus
seen that our consciousness of past and future is direct, and
is not the alleged artificial process of first having an experi-
ence of the present and then referring it by some method
to the past or future. There is no such method given in
our experience, and we have therefore no right to assume
it just because we start with the fancy that all our experi-
ences must be present. If difficulty is still felt in the
unfamiliar notion that we enjoy our past as past and our
future as future, the answer must be that in the first place
facts, however strange the description of them may be,
must be accepted loyally and our theories accommodated
to them; secondly, that as to the special explanations
suggested above, of how a present neural process may be
felt as a past enjoyment, an explanation like this is theo-
retical and designed to remove a theoretical difficulty.
For immediate acquaintance with our past and future tells
us nothing about neural processes, and if we confine
ourselves to our enjoyment of ourselves, we find that the
memory or the expectation of a past or future state is the
way in which we enjoy past or future, and that there 1s no


Mental
space-
time.


Mental
space and
time in-
volve each
other.


134 SPACE-TIME vate


more to be said ; just as our memory of the past object is
that past object as contemplated now in the act of remem-
bering, and there is no more to be said.

But now that by an appeal to experience we have
rid ourselves of the confusions as to our past and future
enjoyments which were engendered by a mistaken read-
ing of experience, we can proceed to examine the space
and time of the mind in their mutual relations, and we
shall see that they do not exist separately but are only
elements in the one mental space-time which exhibits to
inspection of ourselves the same features, with such quali-
fications as may be necessary to note, as the Space-Time
of the external world, with a part of which it is identical.

We have in the first place at any moment a mass of
enjoyments (that is, experiences of ourselves, or experien-
cings), part of which is present, part memories or remem-
bered enjoyments, part expected enjoyments with the mark
of the future. These enjoyments occupy diverse places
in the mental space. Present enjoyments are in different
places from past and future ones. The enjoyed space is
not full of mental states all occurring at one and the same
time, but it is occupied, so far as it is occupied, with
mental events of different dates. But, as we have seen,
what is now a present enjoyment may at another moment
be replaced by a remembered one; and what is now a
memory may on another occasion be replaced by a present
occupying partially at least the same place ; the dates or
times being on different occasions differently distributed
among the places. Thus enjoyed space is full of time.
In the same way enjoyed time is distributed over enjoyed
space, and spreads over it so as not to be always in the
same space. Thus empirically every point in the space
has its date and every date has its point, and there is no
mental space without its time nor time without its space.
There is one mental space-time. Our mind is spatio-
temporal. The easiest way to make ourselves a picture
of the situation is to suppose the identification of mental
space with the corresponding contemplated neural space
completed in details, and to substitute for the enjoyed
space, for pictorial purposes, the neural space with which


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 135


it is identical, that is, to think of specific mental events as
occurring in their neural tracts. When we do so, we see
mental past, present, and future juxtaposed in this space ;
or the places of mind succeeding each other in their
appropriate times.

_ Such a picture of mental space-time at any moment
is the perspective we enjoy of it at any moment or from
the point of view of that moment. But the picture
is not complete. The present enjoyment and the
remembered one are enjoyed as juxtaposed. But
they are not in bare unrelated juxtaposition. For a
remembered past state is in remembering linked up with
the present. There is a felt continuity between them.
The same thing is more obviously true where there is
not memory proper but a past condition is experienced
as retained in the mind only, being at the fringe of a
total experience, as when we retain in our minds at this
moment the lingering remnants of our past condition, in
going through some complex experience, as, for example,
in watching the phases of an incident which stirs our
feelings. That there is this transitional relation of
movement from the one element to the other, is shown
by the familiar fact that when one member of a series
of mental states is repeated in experience the others
also are revived in their time-order.

We have thus to make a distinction, which will
prove important also in the sequel in another connec-
tion,’ between two kinds of process enjoyed in mental
space-time, which corresponds to the distinction between
‘substantive’ and ‘transitive’ states. First, we have
the process intrinsically belonging to any mental act
independently of others, for instance, the process of
sensing a colour. No matter what the underlying and
corresponding neural movements may be, we have, as
was mentioned before, the mental process of the
dawning of the sensing to its maximum and the sub-
sequent evanescence. Thus to be aware of any
particular sensum is to enjoy a mental movement


1 See the distinction drawn later between the intrinsic and the
extrinsic extension of a sensory quality. Bk. III. ch. vi.


Perspec-
tives of
mental
space-time,


136 SPACE-TIME aod


appropriate to it. But besides this intrinsic movement,
there is also the movement from one sensing to another
of a different (or to a repetition of the same) sort, as
when a colour sensation is succeeded by one of sound.
A mental process of one direction (that is compresent
with an object of one quality) is linked by a movement
of transition, apprehended as such, to a movement with
another direction, that is compresent with an object of
another quality ; or in other words, there is a change
in the quality of the experience. Thus while there are
two independent lines of advance in the mental space-
time corresponding to the two different qualities, there
is also a line of advance which connects these two lines,
the neural path being, from the purpose which it sub-
sequently serves, known as an association-path (or fibre).

Even when two mental events occur simultaneously,
as when I hear a voice and touch a hand at the same
moment, this is not bare juxtaposition in space, if that
word implies accidental or disconnected occurrence. On
a subsequent occasion the image of the voice may recall
the touch or vice versa. We have here a case of two
different perspectives where events contemporaneous
in the one perspective become successive in the other.
Though the original relation appeared to be purely
spatial, the mental events occurring side by side, a later
perspective shows it to be also temporal. The two
events belong to the same date, or the time was repeated
at the two different points at which they occurred.
They are connected in the mental space-time. This
is our enjoyment of the relation of ‘and,’ corresponding
to the contemplated relation of ‘and’ between the
objects. A subsequent experience reveals that the two
events are somehow connected in mental space-time by
lines of advance. We may bring our awareness of
‘and’ into coherence with the relation of transition
by passing from one object to the other in either order.

Among mental events which are simultaneous are
those which belong together as part and parcel of one
complex occurrence. Every mental event is spread out
in fact. (It has even been suggested that a more


eur MENTAL SPACE-TIME 137


intense act of sensing means a greater spatial extension
of it.) The best instance is derived from ordinary
perceiving. There is the sensory excitement and the
ideal qualification of it. These belong together in
mental space, but they do not in general occupy the
same parts of space; for example, the sight of the
marble qualified by the ideal feeling of cold. We have
here a mental act with a structure; that is, parts of it
are inherently in mental space at the same moment, or
the mental instant is repeated in space.

In the same way, as we have seen abundantly in
dealing with memory of mental states, we have mental
space repeated in time; that is, several events of the
same sort occurring at different times but belonging to
the same space ; that is, we have time coming back to
its old place. And we may repeat a remark like one
made before in Chapter I. of physical Space-Time, that
the repetition of time in space, which is the fact of the
broad (not the deep) present, and of space in time, which
is the fact of memory, are of the essence of mind as
something with a structure and persistence.

We have thus found from simple inspection of our
minds, and bringing to bear on the question the most
commonplace kind of psychological observation, that
space and time in mind are in experienced fact related
in the same way as we have seen them to be related
in physical Space and Time. Space and time in the
mind are indissolubly one. For myself it is easier
to be satisfied of this relation between the two, and all
the details which enter into it—repetition, variation in
the perspective whereby the contemporary becomes
successive, and the like—in the case of mind, than in
the case of external Synace and Time, and to use this
result as a clue to interpreting external or physical Space-
time. But I have explained already’ why I have not
adopted what for me is the more natural order.


We may now approach the more difficult question,
in what sense it is possible, as it was in the case of
VW Chi int p73.


The
mental
correspond=
ent of
Total
Space and
Time.


Sections of
mental
space-time,


138 SPACE-TIME ors


physical Space-Time, to make a selection from all the
perspectives which the mind enjoys of its own space-
time and treat the whole of mental space as occurring
at the present and the whole of mental time as occupying
one point of mental space. In the case of physical Space-
Time we saw that an all-comprehensive observer whom
we ourselves follow in thought could make such a
selection, and we arrived thus at the ordinary notions
of a Space in which at a given moment some event or
other was occupying every point—Space as the frame-
work of Time ; and of Time as the framework in which
Space occurred, that is of a Time the whole of which
streamed through every point of Space. In mental
space-time such results are obtainable, but only approxi-
mately and with a qualification.

At first sight it might appear that there was no
difficulty in taking a present ‘section’ through the
whole of our mental space. We have only to identify
the neural space, say the brain, with the mental space,
and then it would seem that at any instant of our life
every point in that space was occupied by some event
or other that occurred in our history. But mental space
enjoyed in any mental state is not merely neural space,
but that neural space which is correlated with the mental
action. There may be events going on say in the
occipital region which happen there but which are not
of that particular sort which is correlated with vision,
or, as I shall often express it, which carry vision.
Though the whole contemplated space within which
mental action takes place may be considered by proper
selection from all the moments of its history as occupied
by some present event or other contemporary with the
present, they will not necessarily be mental events.
They may be unconscious.

When we consider mental events as such and neural
processes only so far as they carry mind, we cannot find
a section of mental space-time which is either the whole
mental space occupied by contemporary events or the
whole mental time streaming through one point. In
Our own experience it is clear we get no such thing.


Ff _.= Se


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 139


Our enjoyed space in a moment of experience may on
occasion be so limited that it contains neither memory
nor expectation but is wholly present. For example, we
may be absorbed in perception. We are then entirely
present, for the ideal features in perception are, as we
have seen, not expectations or memories, but are merely
qualifications of the present, which are there indeed as
the result of past experience, but have not the mark
of the past nor even of the future. But though in such
a perspective our mental space is all present, it is not
the whole of our mental space, but only a part of it.
Or again I may be seeing a man and also remembering
something about him. The one place in the mental
space which is common to the perception and the
memory may belong both to the perception and to the
memory. But it does not belong to them both at the
same time, and is alternately part of the present per-
ceiving and the past remembering.

This is as far as I can get by actual acquaintance.
Even the angelic outsider, though he will go farther, and
though we may anticipate him by thought, will not get
a complete section. He cannot see the whole of our
mental space occupied by the present moment. He can
realise that any neural process which at this moment of
my mind is for me a memory might have been occupied
by a mental event contemporary with my present. But it
is not certain that he can find such events. Potentially
the places now occupied in my perspective by memories
or expectations may be occupied in other perspectives by
perceptions of the present date. But the selection 1s
only a possibility and nothing more. In the same way he
may think that the place of my present mental act may
potentially be the scenc of some mental event at every
moment of my history. But again this is only a remote
possibility.

The reason for this difference between mental space-
time and physical Space-Time is that the second is infinite
and the first finite. We are finite beings, and part of
that finitude is that our neural space performs only specific
functions. Hearing does not occur in the occipital, nor


Mr. Berg-
son on
Time and
Space,


140 SPACE-TI ME BK. I


vision in the temporal region. But in physical Space-
Time the reason why in the summation of perspectives
a selection could be made of events filling the whole of
Space at one moment, or the whole of Time at one place,
is that the quality of the events was indifferent in the
infinite whole. In one perspective a point of space is
past, but in some other perspective a quite different sort
of event might occupy that point in the present, that is
at a moment identical with the point of reference. I see
in front of me a point in a tree where a bird alighted a
quarter of a second past. But a quarter of a second later,
that is at the same moment as my act of seeing the bird,
a bud sprouts on the tree at that point. That event is
future for me, but for you, the onlooker, it occurs at the
same moment as my act of sight, that is, you see them
both as contemporary. There is thus always in some
perspective or other some event or other at any point of
space contemporary with my present. But places in
mental space-time are, because of the specific character of
the events which happen there, only occupied when there
are events of the same sort. Now Iam not every moment
using my eyes, still less seeing a particular colour, such as
red, at every moment of my history. We cannot, there-
fore, have a section of our whole history in which our
whole space is occupied at each moment with some event
or other; nor one in which each point is occupied by
some event or other through the whole of our time.

Except for this failure to find corresponding artificial
sections in mind, the microcosm, to infinite Space-Time,
the macrocosm, a failure founded on the finitude of mental
space-time, the relations of Space and Time to one another
are identical in the two. It is obvious that the exception
would apply equally to any limited piece of Space-Time
which is occupied by the life of a finite thing, whether
that thing is mental or not, provided it has specific
qualities.


In Mr. Bergson’s conception of Time or durée which is
mental or psychological and is real Time which is the
moving spirit of the universe, the past is said to penetrate


CH. IV MENTAL SPACE-TIME 141


the present. Upon our analysis of memory there is a
very good meaning to be attached to the penetration of
the present by the past. It has been illustrated more
than once by the qualification of the sensory present of
perception by ideal elements which are an inheritance
from the past. The past here leaves its traces in the
conscious present. Other illustrations are the persistence
of past experience in the form of dispositions which affect
the present experience ; which may favour the emergence
of one thought in our minds rather than another, or which
may break in on the course of our thoughts and determine
them, as for example a latent prejudice against a person.
Whether these dispositions are properly psychical in all
cases, or may not sometimes be physical traces which can
condition and affect what is strictly psychical, we may
leave undetermined. But in all these cases the inheritance
from the past has the date of that which it conditions and
into which it is merged.

Such present deposit in the mind of traces of the
past are not, however, peculiar to mind, but are found in
physical, to say nothing of organic, bodies. A storm blows
and a tree or chimney leans out of the straight. The
ground subsides and a tower leans. The storm and the
subsidence belong to the past of these bodies, but the past
persists in its effects, in the altered inclination, and this
inclination is a factor in the response which is made to a
fresh shock. Now to the outside observer these present
conditions are traces of the past. So, too, the outside
observer, knowing that I have seena man already, may see
in my recognition of him as a man that I am experiencing
the traces of the past. But I should not myself experi-
ence them as past, for there is no true memory in my
mind. Per contra, if we endow the tower with a mind
and true memory it would perhaps remember the subsid-
ence of the ground which made it sink, but it would
remember this’event as belonging to its past, and would
not be conscious of it merely in the present effects left
behind by the past.

But if there is real consciousness of the past, whether
in the mere form of a past retained as such or in the form


142 SPACE-TIME BK. I


of true memory, the enjoyment of the past has not the
mark of the present but of the past. It is only from the
outsider’s point of view that, as we have seen, it is pos-
sible to describe a conscious past as present. Strangely
enough Mr. Bergson, whose method is distinguished by
its effort to take the inside view of things, fails, as it
appears, to distinguish the act of remembering, of appro-
priation of the past, which is really present, from the re-
membered past itself.

Now if the remembered past is past, and only in that
way have we memory of our past which was once present
to us, then penetration by the past can, as it appears to
me, have no significance which Space does not also share
with Time. It means two things : first, that Time is con-
tinuous ; and secondly, that each event in time is affected
by what went before. These are indeed the same thing
from two different points of view. Now, in the first place,
the parts of real Space penetrate as much as the parts of
Time, and for the excellent reason that every part of Space
is animated by Time which drives it on to merge continu-
ously in the rest of Space. Further, if Space were not a
penetrating continuum, Time, as we have seen, would be
none either. It would be once more a moment which
would not know itself to have a past.

Secondly, it is part of the continuity of Time that
material events (and pure events as well) have a different
meaning because of their preceding events. This is both
true and important. But, again, it does not distinguish
Time from Space. It confuses the value which elements
have in their combination from their intrinsic nature. A
man is the same man by himself or in a crowd, but he
may be fired by a crowd into doing acts which he would
not do alone. A sensation of white is not the same in
all respects when it is experienced the second time as the
first time ; it has become familiar. But the white is the
same as before ; only it is modified by assimilation ; it is
qualified by the trace of the past. We no longer have, as
before, the bare sensation, but something more complex.
So, again, if white and sweet are connected in a continuous
whole, the white remains white and the sweet sweet. But


$


ee MENTAL SPACE-TIME 143


the elements have a new value in this combination. The
sweet is that of sugar. But equally it is true that a point
has a different value as a point on a circle and as a point
on a straight line, while it remains the same point. It
lies on different lines of advance.

The main result of our discussion has been to show
that Time is really laid out in Space, and is intrinsically
spatial. The representation of Time as spatial, Mr. Bergson
regards as depriving Time of its real character. What he
regards as a habit founded upon the weakness of our im-
agination has now been shown to be vital to the nature
of Time. But his antagonism is determined by his belief
that the Space in which Time is so spread out is the
abstract Space which he believes is the Space of mathe-
matics ; and the Time which is thus spatialised is there-
fore not real Time but only abstract Time. It is impossible
to do justice to him without discussing what mathematical
Space and Timeare ; and to this task I shall now proceed.


CHAPTER V


MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME


Are points. PuysicaL Space and Time are thus one with mental space


fictions?


and time, or, more strictly, portions of the one Space and
Time may be enjoyed and are identical with parts of the
one contemplated Space and Time. Space and Time as we
have regarded them are empirical or experienced extension
or duration, though as continua of moments or points
they have been described by help of conceptual terms.
Are Space and Time so regarded the Space and Time of
the mathematicians, and if so, what is the difference be-
tween the metaphysics and the mathematics of them ? Our
answer will be, that directly or indirectly mathematics is
concerned with empirical Space and Time, and that, how-
ever remote from them mathematics may seem and be, they
are never in mathematics torn away from their original.
But a difficulty meets us at the outset because of the
different conceptions of mathematics entertained by mathe-
maticians themselves. According to some, Space and Time
are the absolute or total Space and Time consisting of en-
tities called points or instants. According to others, and
they are the more philosophical mathematicians, Space and
Time are not extension or duration, not in any sense stuff
or substance,’ as Descartes, to all intents and purposes,
conceived particular spaces to be, but relations between
material things which move in them. This is the rela-
tional conception ; as distinguished from the absolute con-
ception, which is expressed by Newton in the sentence,


1 See, for the qualification of the use of the word substance, Bk. II.
ch. x. p. 341: Space-Time is not substance at all, but stuff.


144


cx.v. MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 145


“‘For times and spaces are as it were the places as well
of themselves as of all other things” (Princ. Book I.
Schol. iv.). The contrast of absolute and relational is
as we have seen entirely different from that of absolute
and relative. But the relational conception of Space and
Time carries with it, especially in its more recent forms,
consequences which make it seem almost impossible to
affirm that there is only one Space and Time, namely,
the empirical one, with which mathematics is concerned.
Rather it would seem that empirical Space and Time are
but particular examples of constructions of a much wider
scope.

The Space and Time of the previous chapters are then
empirical. In essentials they are absolute Space and Time,
though, regarded merely as constituents of the one reality
which is Space-Time, they are purged of the errors which
attach to them when they are considered independently of
one another. All Space in fact is full of Time and there
is no such thing as empty Space; all Time occupies Space
and there is no such thing as empty Time. Ido not think
that the ordinary geometry (Euclidean or other) assumes
Space to be divorced from Time. It makes no assumption
on this point at all. On the contrary, whenever its purpose
is suited it conceives of a figure genetically as traced by
movement in time. Nor does mathematics in dealing
with Time assume it to exist by itself. It treats Time by
itself, though for the most part Time enters as being an
element of motion, and consequently so far in space. But
to treat Space or Time by themselves is not to assume that
they can exist apart from one another. There is nothing
in the procedure of geometry (I say nothing of the views
of geometers themselves in the history of the subject)
which implies that Space is a system of resting points, or
Time a uniform flow which has no habitat.

The entities called points, of which Space is composed
(or the instants of Time), are, it is said, commonly regarded
by mathematicians as fictions. Mathematicians are very
prone, indeed, to regard the notions and the methods
they employ as fictions, as if they were mere constructions
of our minds. The famous writer, R. Dedekind, himself

VOL. I L


Isolation of
points cor-
rected by
conception
of continu-


ity.


i 46 Sr ACE-TIME BK. I


one of the authors of that movement which has made
geometry by an immense generalisation a department of
arithmetic, pronounces numbers to be “ free creations of
the human mind.” ! Under these circumstances we may
ask ourselves the preliminary question, When is a fiction
fictitious? I adopt, for instance, a son who becomes my
son by a legal fiction, by a generalisation or extension of
the notion of son. How much of this fiction is real and
how much unreal? So far as I treat him as a son, ex-
change with him affection and care and perform certain
legal and moral obligations to him, the adopted son is
really in the place to me of a son. There is no fiction
here. There is only fiction if I strain the relation: if I
should, for instance, go on to pretend that he owes his
height to me and his wit to my wife, that his colour-
blindness is traceable to her and may be found in her
brother, and a little pit in the skin beside his ear to my
father. Here the fiction becomes fictitious. The legal
and moral relation of sonship must not be interchanged
with the natural one of inheritance. But in other respects
the fiction is a true description of the new facts initiated
by the adoption.

Now the assumption of points as elements of Space in
a continuous series is an attempt to describe in ideal and
partly conceptual terms the given or empirical fact of the
continuity of Space, that any stretch of space however
small is divisible, and that there is no smallest part. So
far as the point is thought to be a self-subsistent entity
by aggregation of which with other points Space is con-
stituted, the point is fictitious. But such an assumption
is not in fact, and never need be, made. On the contrary,
the idea of the separate point is a first approximation,
which is corrected by the notion of its continuity with
other points. This happens even in the ordinary ele-
mentary geometry. For more thorough-going or philo-
sophical mathematical analysis the concept of continuity
taken over from sensible continuity is deepened into the
analysis of continuity, which then supersedes that merely

1 Was sind und was sollen die Zaklen, Preface, p. vii. (Brunswick,


IgI1, ed. 3).


cu.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 147


sensible continuity. This analysis is a crowning achieve-
ment of mathematical speculation. It has been described
recently by Mr. Russell.! Like infinity, which has been
touched upon before, it is not a mere negative but a
positive conception. It does not rely upon or refer to
any mental incapacity in us, that we are unable to reach
an end of the division, but upon a real characteristic of
the continuous series. We can think of Space extended
indefinitely, said Locke, but not of Space infinite, because,
in the happy phrase which contains the substance of Kant’s
later and more famous discussion of the same problem, we
cannot “adjust a standing measure to a growing bulk.”’?
In reality, infinite Space precedes any finite space. In the
same way Space is not merely infinitely divisible in the
sense that its division admits no end, but is in itself
infinitely divided in the sense that between any two
elements there exists another element ; so that no two
elements—we may call them points—are next or adjacent.
Thus, just as before with the infinite the finite meant
defect and the infinite self-subsistence, so here the division
into a finite number of parts implies selection from the
infinite of parts in the real continuum.

In this way the point which is an unextended entity
with a fictitious self-subsistence is brought into conformity
with facts by the correction of the conception. The defini-
tion of continuity starting with separate points screws them,
or squeezes them, up into that closeness which is needed
to express the nature of Space. Even this degree of close-
ness is not enough for the perfect definition of the con-
tinuum. But the further criterion which ensures that the
series of points shall be not merely ‘compact,’ according
to the description given that no two points are next points,
but ‘dense,’ is more tecknical than I can take upon me
to reproduce here. The effect of it, however, may be
illustrated from the old puzzle of Achilles and the tortoise.
In that puzzle the steps taken by the two competitors
form two series which do not reach in any number of


1 B. Russell, Our Knowledge of the External World (Chicago and
London, 1914), ch. v. ;
2 Essay, Bk. II. ch. xvii. § 7.


The spatial-
ising of
Time.


148 SPACE-TIME mer


steps the point at which as a matter of fact Achilles over-
takes the tortoise. That point is the limit of the two series.
But though the limit is not reached, and is not the end or
any member of the two series, it is a point on the actual
line of the journey which both Achilles and the tortoise
make. The fact that Achilles does overtake the tortoise is
the very mark that their course, which has been artificially
broken up into discrete lengths, is really continuous.

The mathematical notion of continuity contains no
dreaded infinite regress ; the infinitude is of the essence
of the datum and expresses no repetition of steps upon
our part. On the other hand, if it be asked what is there
in space-points which makes them continuous, we are
asking a different question from the question what is the
criterion of their continuity. The answer, if I am right,
must be that points are continuous because they are not
mere points but are instants as well. It is Time which
distinguishes one point from another, but it is Time also
which connects them. For the point is really never at
rest but only a transition in a motion. Now it is this
restlessness of the point which is expressed in terms of
Space itself by the criteria of continuity which the mathe-
matician adopts in order to free his points from their
apparent isolation and self-dependence. We are brought
back to the conclusion that the mathematical notion of
continuity as applied to Space or Time is an attempt to
render in terms of points or instants their crude original
continuity, and carries with it the corrective to the apparent
isolation of points and instants. At the same time, it must
be insisted that the mere concept of continuity of either
points or instants is only adequate to the crude continuity
of actual Space. or Time when the points are recognised
as being intrinsically instants and the instants points ; just
as the concept of dog can only be adequate to a particular
dog when it is embodied in individualising circumstance.


We may pause, before passing on, to complete the
remarks which were made in the last chapter on Mr.
Bergson’s repugnance to the spatialising of Time. Mental
time or durée was, we saw, laid out in space, where Space


cx.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 149


was understood to be the Space common to both the
physical world and the mind. Thus the spatialising of
mind or Time, which Mr. Bergson regarded as a common
and natural vice, is in fact of the essence of Time and
mental life. But the Space which Mr. Bergson fears and
regards as the bare form of externality, the dead body into
which the world resolves when Time is arrested, is what
he supposes the Space of the geometer to be. Now if
mathematics understood by Space or Time the Space
of absolute rest, or its counterpart and mirror in mere
undifferentiated, and inert, inefficacious, Time (and this
is what Mr. Bergson is contending against), his fears
would be justified. Such Space and Time are abstrac-
tions and correspond to nothing real. But, as we have
seen, the Space and Time of the mathematician are not
such, or at least are not necessarily such, and we are assured
that they are not in fact so treated. Space is legitimately
considered by itself and Time likewise. But they are not
considered as made up of separate parts but as continuous,
and their continuity is defined. In like manner motion
is not for the mathematician made up of separate positions,
but of separate positions corrected by continuity. Mr.
Bergson’s main concern is with motion, and he rightly
insists that motion is a whole and continuous, having in
his mind the original continuity which is given empirically
and is antecedent to the conceptualisation of it in
mathematics. This conceptualisation he mistakes appar-
ently for destruction, and supposes that Space has been
reduced to a series of separate points, and Time with it to
a series of separate moments. It is true, moreover, that
since geometry omits Time from Space there is a certain
artificiality in the reconstruction of continuity within
Space in purely spatial terms, and there is a correspond-
ing artificiality in the continuity of Time without reference
to Space. This arises from the nature of the case, and
indicates that mathematics is not, like metaphysics, an
ultimate treatment of its subject matter—on which topic
more anon. What Mr. Bergson appears to forget is that
this science works within its limits, but in doing so does
do justice to that very continuity and wholeness of Space


Mathe-
matical and
empirical
Space.


150 SPACE-TIME BK. I


and Time, and with them motion, for which he himself is
pleading. Pag os
The consequence of this misapprehension is visible
through the twilight which envelops Mr. Bergson’s con-
ception of the relation of Time to Space and, with Space, to
matter. Noone has rendered such service to metaphysics
as he has done in maintaining the claims of Time to be
considered an ultimate reality. Moreover, Space is for
him generated along with Time. The movement of Time,
the swing and impulse of the world, the é/an vital, is also
a creation of matter. The two mutually involved pro-
cesses remind us of the roads upward and downward of
his prototype Heraclitus. But with his forerunner this
relation is conceived quite naively : we are told that the
unity of opposites means nothing more with Heraclitus
than that opposites were two sides of one and the same
process, so that day and night were but oscillations of the
“measures” of fire and water... With Mr. Bergson, on
the other hand, Space is a sort of shadow or foil to Time,
and not co-equal. It implies degradation and unreality,
relatively to Time. Time remains the unique and ulti-
mate reality. We have seen reason to regard them as so
implicated in each other that each is vital to the other’s
existence. But whether this feature of his doctrine,
at once the most interesting for the metaphysician and
the most obscure and tantalising, is the outcome of his
apparent misapprehension of the purpose and legitimacy
of geometry, or the latter misapprehension a consequence
of his incomplete analysis of the true relation of Space and
Time, I leave undetermined, my aim being not to offer
criticism of current or past philosophies, but to indicate
where the analysis here maintained differs, whether to my
misfortune or not, from a deservedly influential system


of thought.


The points of space and instants of time when inter-
preted aright are no fictions, in the sense of being ficti-
tious, but the elementary constituents of Space and Time,
as arrived at bya process which we have described already

+ J. Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy (London, 1908, ed. 2), p. 186.


xv MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 151


as being partly imaginative and partly conceptual. That
1s, we suppose the process of division continued without
end, and we think of any space as integrated out of
points so as to be a continuum, and thus we use the con-
cept of point. But points though in this way ideal are
none the less real. They are not made by our thought
but discovered by it. To repeat what has been said
before, reality is not limited to sensible constituents but
contains ideal and conceptual ones. The back of a solid
object which we see in front, the taste of an orange which
we feel or see are ideal, but they belong none the less to
the real solid and the real orange. Likewise the concept
or thought of a dog is as real a constituent of the dog as
what makes him a singular thing. It is its structural
plan. Like all the objects of our experience, any part of
Space contains the two aspects of singularity and univer-
sality. It is itself and it follows a law of structure.
Points are singular, but they have such structure as
becomes a point and are so far universal. In like manner,
the figures of the mathematician, straight lines, triangles,
conic sections, etc., are discovered by a process of idealisa-
tion, by an act of selection from the whole of Space. It
is easy enough to recognise that this is the case with the
geometrical figures taken apart from Time. For from
Space we may select, by an ideal act, what Mr. Bradley
calls an ideal experiment, the various geometrical figures.
We do so whenever we draw them, and disregard the
sensuous or sensible irregularities of our draughtsman-
ship, idealising these irregularities away. The construc-
tion of a parabola is an ideal drawing, or rather an ideal
selection of points from Space in conformity with a certain
law, expressed in the definition of the parabola. Such con-
struction is in no sense a mere result of abstraction from
sensible figures, but a discovery by thought that Space
contains the geometrical figures which are thus dissected
out of Space. Accordingly, in the history of the subject,
geometry has proceeded from very simple figures like
triangles to the discovery of more and more complex ones.

In maintaining that geometrical figures are ideal
selections from Space, but really parts of that Space, I


Not differ-
ent as con-
ceptual and
perceptual ;


I §2 SPACE-TIME BK. I


may be thought guilty of inconsistency with my own
principles. Experienced reality I have said is not Space,
but Space-Time, of which the constituents are not spaces
or times but motions. The geometer himself, it will be
urged, treats his figures as the locus of motions. Now
in physical reality we find no perfectly triangular or
parabolic motions ; there can be no meaning in the attempt
to select such perfect movements from the motions which
actually exist. Something might indeed be said in
defence of the attempt: that where we have three inter-
secting directions we have the triangle. In the end,
however, it will be seen that the notion of a direction
prolonged into a straight line is incapable of defence if it
is supposed to exist in the real world of motions. But
in fact the objection taken is not relevant. The mathe-
matician’s Space is that Space which we have identified as
the framework of real motions. It is within this Space,
whose reality has been already maintained as essentially
involved in Space-Time, that the mathematician draws
his lines and circles and parabolas by an ideal selection.
In this sense the figures of the geometer are real construc-
tions, and geometry (and the same thing is true of the
numbers of arithmetic) is a basal science of reality. When
such figures are thought, the geometer can then pro-
ceed to treat his figures as the locus of points moving
according to a certain law. But such conceptions in no
way commit us to the belief that these movements,
elaborated as it were by an afterthought, claim to be
selected from the real world of motions.

We can now ask ourselves the question, what is the
relation of empirical Space to geometrical Space, and
answer it by saying that they are the same, but that
geometry treats Space differently from ordinary experience.
Mathematical Space and Time are sometimes contrasted
as conceptual or intelligible with empirical Space and
Time as perceptual. The contrast, in the first place, is not
strictly correct." For Spaces and Times are not objects


ny In an article, ‘What do we mean by the question : Is our Space
Euclidean ?? in Mind, N.S. vol. xxiv. p. 472, Mr. C. D. Broad remarks
similarly upon this distinction ; though not to the same purpose.


cx.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 153


of perception as trees or houses are. We have no sense
for Space or Time, nor even in the proper meaning of
sensation, for movement ; they are apprehended through
the objects of perception, the things which fill spaces and
times, but not y sense. They are more elementary than
percepts. Half our difficulties have arisen from attempt-
ing to regard Space as given to us by touch or sight
instead of only through touch and sight. Hence it is
that some have entertained the naive and impossible
notion that geometrical figures are got from material
objects by a process of abstraction. They are got, as we
have seen, by a selection from Space, which is always an
ideal discovery. The only resemblance between figures
of empirical Space and percepts is that they are individual
or singular. Let us, however, overlook the inaccuracy of
holding Space to be sensible at all, because the question is
not ripe for our discussion in spite of the danger which
such a notion involves that Space may bethought dependent
on us in much the same way as colours and touches are
supposed to be. It still remains true that the distinction
of perceptual and conceptual is not sufficient to distinguish
the Space of things from that of geometry. For empirical
spaces besides being singular (and perceptual) are also
conceptual. Each point is distinct from the other,
because it is a point-instant and its time discriminates it ;
but empirical Space involves also the concept point or
point-instant. Its point-instants have a universal character
or structure. Like material or sensible empirical things,
spaces (and times)are saturated with concepts. On the other
hand, the Space of geometry also consists of points, and the
figures which it deals with are different instances of figures
of one and the same kind. There are various triangles
and parabolas. These are the so-called ‘ mathematicals’ of
Plato, which he regarded (mistakenly as we shall see later)
as intermediate between sensible things and universals.
There are individual parabolas as well as the universal para-
bola. Thus empirical Space contains concepts and mathe-
matical Space contains percepts. I am speaking here of
the Space of elementary geometry, and am not considering
as yet the speculative or arithmetised form of that science.


but differ-
ently
treated.


Geometry
deals with
figures, not
Space.


154 SPACE-TIME Ee


The difference lies not in there being a difference of
empirical and geometrical Space but in the treatment of
it. Geometry treats it wholly conceptually. Though
there are many triangles and parabolas and points it
considers the universal parabola or circle or point. It
deals not with circles but with the circle or any circle.
And it is able to do so, and is justified in doing so,
because it abstracts from the Time of Space, though it does
not as we have so often said exclude it. Conceiving the
point without its time, it regards one point as the same as
another. But that, even so, it does not exclude the real
individuality of the point is evident from the fact that
though its parabola has no definite place in space but may
be anywhere, yet there is a relative individuality. For
supposing the axis and the focus of the parabola fixed, all
the other points of the curve are fixed in relation to it.

This leads us on toa more significant point of difference
which in the end is identical with the one we have
mentioned. Geometry omits Time from its Space, or
introduces it again by a quasi-spatial artifice in the use of
a fourth co-ordinate, the time co-ordinate, and consequently
it treats its Space conceptually. But geometry is in
strictness not concerned with Space as such at all; that is
the office of metaphysics. Geometry is concerned with
figures in Space; its subject matter is the various
empirical or varying determinations of that @ priori
material, Space. It is the empirical science of such
figures which are its data, which accordingly, like any
other empirical science, it attempts to weave into a con-
sistent system. Metaphysics, on the other hand, is not a
science of empirical figures in Space. But one of its
problems is what is the nature of Space and how there are
figures within it. In like manner, arithmetic is not
concerned with number as such, but with the empirical
numbers (of all kinds) which are discoverable within the
region of number, as empirical or varying determinations
of that a priori material. The mathematician is not as a
mathematician concerned with these ultimate questions ;
he is only concerned with them, by the interchange of
friendly offices between metaphysics and the special


cx.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 155


sciences, by which the special sciences have been enabled to
contribute so helpfully to metaphysics ; because the student
of a special department may also, if he has the eye for
its ultimate questions, approach them with a fulness of
knowledge. He may at the same time view these
ultimate problems for his own purposes in a different
light from the metaphysician, and this we shall see to be
the case with the mathematician.'_ Now, just because the
metaphysician deals with Space and number as such, it is
of prime importance for him that individual points and
circles are different from each other. But geometry not
dealing with the problem of the individuality of its points
and circles concerns itself with points and circles as such,
and thus becomes wholly conceptual.

There are thus not two Spaces, the Space of ele-
mentary geometry and empirical Space, but one Space
considered in metaphysics and mathematics with a different
interest. The interest of mathematics is in the figures
which are the empirical variations of the a priori Space ;
the interest of metaphysics is in the nature of Space itself.
The question may be asked, How can a point or rather a
point-instant be individual, each one different from all
others, as metaphysics insists, and yet a point-instant be
a universal? What makes the difference between the
universal and its particulars ? We have not yet reached
the stage at which this inquiry can be answered. We
shall see that the very difference of universal and particular
depends on the fact that each point-instant is itself, and
yet of the same character as others. At present it is
enough to observe that the elementary universal, point-
instant, is comparable to a proper name like John Smith,
the whole meaning of which, as Mr. Bosanquet has said, is
to indicate any particular individual; so that while any
number of persons have that name, the name does not
so much imply properties which are common to them
all, but merely designates in each instance of its use a
single individual, and is thus used in a different sense
with each. I need hardly stop to reject the supposition


1 The possible helpfulness of metaphysics, within its limitations, to
the special sciences has not so generally been recognised by them.


Space and
geometries
of it.


156 SPACE-TIME Ket


that a point-instant is as it were the meeting-place of two
concepts, point and instant, as if a combination of two
concepts could confer individuality. For, firstly, no com-
bination of concepts makes an individual. Secondly, point
and instant are not concepts combined to make that of
point-instant, as hard and yellow are combined in gold.
For point and instant are not separable from one another,
but each implies the other, and the concepts point and
instant are merely elements distinguished in the concept
point-instant. But all these matters belong strictly to a
later stage of our inquiry. They are mentioned here
only to anticipate difficulty.


The starting-point of geometry is then empirical Space
presented in experience as what can only be described in
conceptual terms as a continuum of points. The elaborate
analysis of continuity by the speculative mathematicians
does but explain what is given in this empirical form.
But when I go on to ask what more precisely geometry
does, and have regard to the history of the various
geometries and to the most recent reduction of geometry
to the status of an illustration of algebra, I find myself
in danger of the fate which is said to overtake those who
speak of mathematics without being mathematicians.’ I
have to do what I can, and I hope without presumption,
with such information as is open to me. My object is
the modest one of setting the empirical method of
metaphysics as occupied with spaces and numbers in its
relation first to elementary geometry of three dimensions,
and next to the more generalised conceptions of mathe-
matical procedure for which geometry is but a special
application of arithmetic, or rather both geometry and
arithmetic fall under one science of order.


Starting then with empirical Space, geometry, like


1 “On the other hand,” says Mr. A. N. Whitehead (Introduction to
Mathematics, p. 113), “it must be said that, with hardly any exception
all the remarks on mathematics made by those philosophers who have
possessed but a slight or hasty and late-acquired knowledge of it are
entirely worthless, being either trivial or wrong.”


He is pointing the
contrast with Descartes. 2


-


cu.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 157


any other science, proceeds by means of axioms, definitions,
and postulates, to discover what may be learnt about
figures in space and, in general, about spatial relations.
Thus Euclid from his premisses arrives at properties of
triangles. The axioms and postulates of geometry are
its hypotheses. Even the assumption of points when
they are given a semi-independent existence in order to
give support to the imagination is hypothetical. But
Euclid’s axioms are not the only ones out of which a
body of geometrical truths can be constructed which still
are applicable to empirical Space. There are many
geometries though there is but one Space. Strictly
speaking, it is only by a mistake of language that we
speak of non-Euclidean Space or even of Euclidean Space;
we have only Euclidean or non-Euclidean geometry. In
the first place, while Euclidean geometry is metrical and
involves magnitude and measurement, there is the more
abstract geometry of position, or projective geometry,
‘which involves only the intersectional properties of
points, lines, planes, etc.,’’* and in metric geometry there
are the modern systems which introduce notions of order
or motion. But besides these there are the geometries,
still three-dimensional, which are not Euclidean at all.
The late H. Poincaré, as is well known, thought that it
was impossible and indeed meaningless to ask whether
Euclid or these other geometries were true. They differ
not in respect of truth but of practical convenience.
Euclid’s is the most convenient. It is by no means
involved in empirical Space that a straight line should
be the shortest between two points. Poincaré imagines
a spherical world where the temperature changes from
centre to circumference, and bodies shrink or grow with
the fall or rise of the temperature. Apparently such a
geometry (in which the shortest lines are circles) would
apply to empirical Space “within the possible error of
observation.” 2 In other words, the difference of its


1 Fundamental Concepts of Algebra and Geometry, by J. Wesley
Young, p. 135 (New York, 1911), to which I am deeply indebted in
what follows for information.


2 J. W. Young, Jvc. cit. p. 23.


Generalised
‘Space.’


156 mere SPACE-TIME BK. I


conclusions from those of Euclidean geometry would
not be capable of detection by our instruments.

This also, I understand, applies to the non-Euclidean
geometries of Lobatchewsky and others, the so-called
hyperbolic and elliptic geometries. Now, in the case
of these geometries, the question does not arise whether
they take us into a world different from our experienced
Space. They are merely different systems of explaining,
not the ultimate nature of Space, but its behaviour in
detail, They employ different postulates. At the same
time they introduce us to another feature of geometry
and of mathematics generally, its method of generalisation.
Euclidean geometry is only one instance of geometry of
empirical Space. In it, a parallel may be drawn through
any point outside a straight line to that line, and only
one. In hyperbolic geometry there are two parallels ;
in elliptic geometry none. Or we may put the matter
differently by reference to what is called the space-constant,
or to what is less accurately spoken of as the ‘curvature’
of the Space. This constant has a finite value, positive
or negative, in the other two geometries ; in Euclidean
geometry it tends to infinity. In the less accurate
language the curvature of Euclidean space is zero, in
the other two cases it is positive or negative. Now it is
the generalising tendency of mathematics which has led
ultimately to the reduction of geometry to arithmetic,
and it raises the question in what sense the world of
mathematical entities so conceived is real, whether it is
not a neutral world, and empirical geometry only an
application of its laws to sensible material.


The simplest though not the most important example
of such generalisation is found in geometries of more
than three dimensions. Dimensionality, as Mr. Young


1 “The geometrical system constructed upon these foundations
(i.e. those of Lobatchewsky and Bolyai) is as consistent as that of
Euclid. Not only so, but by a proper choice of a parameter entering
into it, this system can be made to describe and agree with the
external relations of things ” (H. S. Carslaw, Elements of Non-Euclidean
Plane Geometry and Trigonometry, London, 1916).


cxw.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 159


points out,’ is an idea of order. A point by its motion
generates a straight line, a linea plane, a plane solid Space,
and this exhausts all the points of Space. We may think
then of Space as a class of points arranged in three orders
or dimensions. But this notion, once drawn from
empirical Space, may be extended or generalised ; and
we may think of a class of any number of dimensions
which will have its geometry or be a new so-called ‘Space.’
We have taken a notion and generalised it, cutting it
loose as it were from its attachments to the one empirical
Space. Such generalisation is of the very life of mathe-
matics, and its most important example is the process by
which the notion of number has been extended. The
study of numbers begins with the integral numbers,
however they are conceived ; but the notion of number
has been extended by successive steps, so that there have
been included in the number-system fractions as well
as integral rational numbers, negative as well as positive
numbers, irrationals, imaginary numbers, complex numbers
consisting of a rational combined with an irrational number,
and now the class of infinite or transfinite numbers. All
these symbols have been so defined as to preserve the
general laws of ordinary numbers, and great advances in
the understanding of numbers have been marked by
successful definitions, like the famous definition of an
irrational number by R. Dedekind. To a certain
extent it may be sufficient to describe these numbers
as conventional, but that they are not mere conventions
is shown partly by their having been suggested in some
cases by geometry (as incommensurable numbers, for
example, by the relation of magnitude between the side
and the diagonal of a square) ; partly by the possibility
of interpreting them geometrically. Mr. Young quotes
a saying of Prof. Klein, that it looks as though the
algebraical symbols were more reasonable than the men
who employed them.”

Now I assume that the notion of an z-dimensional
geometry is fruitful and profitable as a topic of inquiry.
And if so, it seems to me to be as unreasonable to deny


BS LG¢. cif. ps 170: a Petize


A product
of art.


160 SPACE-TI ME BK. I


the value of it, which some philosophers are inclined to
do, as it would be to reject imaginaries because there are
no imaginary points in real Space. What we have in
both cases alike is the investigation of certain notions
for their own sakes when taken apart from their attach-
ments ; and the question rather is not whether they are
legitimate, for I do not see how their legitimacy can be
questioned, but the much more interesting question of
whether they ever lose their original connection with the
empirical so as to constitute a ‘neutral’ world of thought
which is neither physical nor mental.

This question, so far as it is raised, even at this
stage appears to admit of an answer. The idea of
dimensionality taken by itself is combined with that
of number, and a system is constructed by thought of
elements in an #-dimensional total, and the consequences
are worked out of this assumption. The systems are
not, properly speaking, Spaces at all, nor their elements
points in the empirical sense, but three - dimensional
Space may be treated as derived from such a ‘ Space,’
e.g. from four-dimensional ‘Space,’ on the analogy of
the derivation of two-dimensional Space (which after
all is an abstraction) from three-dimensional Space. Now
if we may assume for the moment what will appear later,’
that integral number itself is but a conception founded
in empirical Space-Time, what we have here is nothing
more in kind than the imagination of a gold mountain
or any other work of imagination, only that in imagina-
tion the elements are sensory and found in the sensory
world, whereas thought liberates itself from this con-
dition. If the notions of dimensionality and number are
rooted in Space-Time, the construction of a more than
three-dimensional ‘Space’ does not lead us into a
neutral world but takes notions which are empirical
at bottom and combines them by an act of our minds.
But just as the arbitrary act of imagination by which


' It is a great disadvantage for me that I cannot anticipate the
discussion of this point. Without it my assertion may appear to be
dogma. See Book II. where number is described (as well as order)
along with the other categories in its place.


cu.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 161


we construct a chimaera leaves us still dealing with
physical features, though combined in a way which is
not verified in physical fact, so in these thought con-
structions we are dealing all the time with ideas
belonging to the empirical world. No new or neutral
world is established, but the freedom of thought gives
rise to fresh combinations.

No one would admit that a chimaera belongs to a
neutral world ; but rather so far as it claims to be real its
claims are a pretence. The question then we have to
ask is, are such intellectual constructions as many-
dimensional ‘Spaces,’ or imaginary numbers, merely
imaginary or are they true. A chimaera is not true,
though it may have its place in a world of art as a work
of pure imagination ; and it is not true because it does
not follow the lines of nature in the organic world. But
a concept which is founded in the nature of Space-
Time may admit of extensions or generalisations which
are the work of pure thought, and discovered by it,
and yet being on the lines of nature in the empirical
world of Space-Time may be coherent with the spatial
or numerical system and, at whatever degree of remote-
ness, be applicable again to the nature from which it
sprang. Thus, to take an instance which supposes very
little acquaintance with geometry, the idea that all circles
pass through the same two imaginary points at infinity
is a pure construction of thought. It is founded on
the general proposition that two curves of the second
degree intersect each other in four points. Two inter-
secting circles also intersect at these circular points at
infinity. But by the use of this intellectual construc-
tion we can pass by projection from properties of the
circle to properties of the ellipse. Such intellectual con-
structs are thus not mere exercises of thought, like a
chimaera, but are coherent with the system of thoughts
which have correspondents in real Space. They have
therefore a double value, first in themselves, and secondly
in the application of them.

Now as to the various kinds of numbers which have
been discovered and introduced into arithmetic in virtue

VO lend M


7
185 SPACE-TIME ct ae


of the tendency towards that generality which, Mr.
Whitehead says, the mathematician is always seeking,"
their connection with the integral numbers has been
observed above, where I have mentioned the fact that
they admit of spatial interpretation. As to the useful-
ness of the extensions of the notion of dimensionality,
I can but quote the words of Mr. Young (p. 174):
“It may be stated without fear of contradiction that
the study of such spaces has been of the greatest
practical value, both in pure mathematics and in the
applications of mathematics to the physical sciences.”

Thus in one respect the extensions in which geometry
deserts empirical Space and creates new ‘Spaces,’ or
the constructions within the system of number, are,
it would seem, comparable to the scaffoldings by the
help of which we build great buildings or ships. They
allow us to raise the structure with which we are con-
cerned, and to come indirectly into contact with it.
Sometimes, as in the scaffolding of a building, parts of
the scaffolding may be inserted into the building itself
which is being raised. Sometimes they may be detached
like the great framework of steel within which a ship
is built, such as one sees as one steams down the river
at Belfast or. other great dockyard. These are still
material structures, and belong to the same world as
the ships or buildings. In higher geometry or arith-
metic we have in like manner works of art whose
materials are derived from experienced Space-Time,
however intricately combined by thought, and they
also have their utility in their application. But in
another respect the comparison is faulty. For the
scaffoldings of houses and ships exist only in order to
build houses or ships. But the mathematician’s con-
structions are made for their own sakes and are dis-
coveries within geometry and arithmetic itself; like
all scientific constructions they have a value irrespective
of utility. Still, also like them, they are based upon and
draw their life from the empirical material with which
they are in organic connection.


1 Introduction to Mathematics, p. 82.


J cu.v MATHEMATICAL SPACE AND TIME 163


_ I am far from supposing that the notion of many- Relation of
dimensional ‘Spaces’ is comparable in importance thegeneral-


.


isations to


philosophically with the numerical constructions which empirical
have given us in arithmetic the irrational, imaginary, or Spe ™4
transfinite, numbers. I am not able to judge. But it —
seems fairly clear that the intimacy of connection between
the first set of constructions and the empirical world
is much less than in the case of the second set. A
four-dimensional ‘Space’ is not a Space at all, and it
appears to be rather a means for discovery in three-
dimensional Space than itself the discovery of something
in the world of Space; rather a work of art than a
discovery. But the numbers are discoveries within
the system of numbers. My object, however, has not
been to assign to these different constructions their
grades of value; it has been no more than to indi-
cate that they do not take us into a neutral world of
thought but keep us still in contact with the one
Space and Time which we apprehend in experience, and
seek to understand in mathematics in their empirical
determinations by the selective analysis and intellectual
construction employed in mathematics. In other words,
we are not entitled to say, because by generalisation we
arrive at a world of thoughts, that that world of thought
is for metaphysics a neutral world of which our empirical
world is the manifestation under certain conditions of
sensible experience ; that empirical Space, for instance, is
a particular example of a system of complex numbers.
We have in fact started from the empirical world itself,
in particular from empirical Space and Time, extended by
thought the conceptions derived from it, and descended
again to empirical Space. The procedure is legitimate,
but it does not establish the primacy of a neutral world.
Metaphysically, empirical Space and Time are themselves
the foundation of this neutral world. There is however
another problem set to us, which belongs to the theory of
knowledge, that is to that chapter of metaphysics. We
have to ask what kind of reality belongs to such
thought-constructions, and this runs into the general
question, what reality belongs to ideas and to hypotheses


164 SPACE-TIME BK. I


and all assumptions and to mere imaginations and illusions,
and ideas which are commonly called unreal, like a
round'square, which still remain objects of thought or we
could not speak about them. Now it is only one solution
that there is a world of neutral being simpler than the
world of physical or mental things which exist. There
may be the world of truth and error or art (suggested
above) which is not to be characterised as neither physical
nor mental but as both physical and mental.1_ For our
present purpose it is enough to insist that metaphysically
all these constructions are rooted in the empirical world
of existence, and ultimately in empirical Space and Time.

But in order properly to understand what is implied
in the generalisation by which geometry and arithmetic
become one science, we must go further and discuss a
fundamental question which has been reserved. Dimen-
sionality is an idea of order and order is connected with
relation. I have assumed provisionally that for empirical
metaphysics order and number can be exhibited as derived
from Space-Time and dependent on it. But we can only
satisfy ourselves that the concepts of mathematics are still
attached to empirical Space-Time by examining the view
that Space and Time are relations and not as we have
supposed a stuff. We shall then see that the concepts in
which mathematics appears to move away from Space-
Time are in the end saturated with the notion of Space-
Time. We have thus to ask ourselves, what are relations
in Space and Time, and under what conditions Space and
Time can be treated as systems of relations.


1 See later, Bk. IIT. ch. ix. a.


CHAPTER’ VI
RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME


Tar was a profound maxim of Hume, when inquiring
into the value or the real existence of an idea to seek for
the impression to which the idea corresponded. In more
general language it is the maxim to seek the empirical
basis of our ideas. It is true that Hume himself over-
looked in experience facts which were in the language of
Plato’s Republic rolling about before his feet ; and hence
failing to find in experience any impression of the self or
of causality, he was compelled to refer the ideas of
self or causality to the imagination, though in the case
of self, for instance, we can see that while he noticed the
substantive conditions he overlooked the transitive ones,
and missed the essential continuity of mind against which
the perceptions are merely standing out in relief. A
thorough - going empiricism accepts his formula, but
having no prejudice in favour of the separate and
distinct existences which attract our attention, insists that
in surveying experience no items shall be omitted from
the inventory.

Following this maxim, if we ask what are relations in
Space and Time the answer is not doubtful. They are
themselves spaces and times. “ Years ago,” says James
in one of the chapters of his book, The Meaning of Truth
(chap. vi. ‘A Word more about Truth,’ pp. 138 ff.), “ when
T. H. Green’s ideas were most influential, I was much
troubled by his criticisms of English sensationalism.
One of his disciples in particular would always say to me,
‘Yes! serms may indeed be possibly sensational in
origin ; but re/asions, what are they but pure acts of the

165


Spatial
relations
exist within
Space itself,


7


166 SPACE-TIME BK. I


intellect coming upon the sensations from above, and
of a higher nature?’ I well remember the sudden relief
it gave me to perceive one day that space-relations at any
rate were homogeneous with the terms between which
they mediated. The terms were spaces and the relations
were other intervening spaces.” The same kind of feel-
ing of relief may have been felt by many besides myself
who were nursed in the teaching of Green and remember
their training with gratitude, when they read the chapter
in James’s Psychology (vol. ii. pp. 148-53) where this truth
was first stated by him ; for example in the words, “The
relation of direction of two points toward each other is the
sensation of the line that joins the two points together.”
Other topics are raised by the form of the statement,
whether the alternative is merely between relations con-
ceived as the work of the mind or as given in experience,
and whether the relation which is a space is reallya sensation.
These matters do not concern us, at any rate at present.
Nor have we yet to ask whether what is said of spatial is
not true of all relations, namely that they are of the same
stuff as their terms. What does concern us is that
relations between bits of Space are also spaces. The
same answer applies plainly to Time. If the bits of Space
are points they are connected by the points which inter-
vene. A relation of space or time is a transaction into
which the two terms, the points or lines or planes or
whatever they may be, enter ; and that transaction is
itself spatial. Relations in space are possible because
Space is itself a connected whole, and there are no parts
of it which are disconnected from the rest. The relation
of continuity itself between the points of space is the
original datum that the points are empirically continuous,
and the conceptual relation translates into conceptual
terms this original continuity, first regarding the points
as provisionally distinct and then correcting that pro-
visional distinctness. The “impression”—the empirical
fact—to which the idea of continuity corresponds is
this given character of Space which we describe by the
sophisticated and reflective name of continuity. Relations
in space or spatial relations are thus not mere concepts,


cx. vi RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 167


still less mere words by which somehow we connect
bits of space together. They are the concrete connec-
tions of these bits of space, and simple as Space is, it is
(at least when taken along with its Time) as concrete as
a rock or tree. Moreover, when we introduce into Space
the element of Time which is intrinsic to it, relations of
space become literally sransactions between the spatial
terms. All Space is process, and hence the spatial relation
has what belongs to all relations, sense, so that the
relation of a to 4 differs from the relation of 4 to a.
Thus if a and 4 are points, the relation is the line between
them, but that line is full of Time, and though it is the
same space whether it relates a to 4 or J to 4a, it is not
the same space-time or motion. The transaction has a
different direction.

All relations which are spatial or temporal are thus
contained within the Space and Time to which the terms
belong. Space and Time, though absolute in the sense
we have described, namely that spaces and times are in
Newton’s words their own places, are relational through
and through, because it is one extension and it is one
duration in which parts are distinguishable and are dis-
tinguished, not merely by us but intrinsically and of
themselves : as we have seen through the action of Space
and Time upon each other. Whether we call Space and
Time a system of points and instants or of relations is
therefore indifferent. Moreover, in any given case the
relation may be of more interest than its terms. James
has pointed out that while in general the relations between
terms form fringes to the terms in our experience, so that
the terms are substantive and the relations transitive, yet
on occasion it may be the transition which is in the fore-
ground—it may become substantival and the terms
become its fringes. For instance the plot of a play may
be distinct and impressive, and the persons shadowy,
points of attachment to the plot. In a constitutional
monarchy it is the relations of king and subjects which
are substantive, the person of the king or of his subjects
are merely the dim suggestions of things which the
constitution unites.


Absolute
and rela-
tional
Space

and Time.


168 SPACE-TIME BK. I


Thus Space as extension and Time as duration are
internally orderly, and they are orders, the one of co-
existence and the other of succession, because order is a
relation, and a comprehensive one, within extension and
duration ; or rather it is a relation within Space-Time, for
it implies sense, and neither Space alone nor Time alone
possesses sense. In other words, given empirical Space-
Time, order of the parts of Space-Time is a relation, in the
meaning of transition from part to part. Just as conceptual
continuity corresponds to empirical or apprehended con-
tinuity, so conceptual order determined by some law or
principle corresponds, as a relation between points or other
bits of space and time themselves, to the empirical transi-
tions between those bits. These empirical transitions in
virtue of which one part of space and time is between
others are the “impressions” which are the originals of
the conceptual order.

How far a science of order could be founded on this
bare conception of ordered parts of Space-Time I do not
know. Butat any rate the more comprehensive theorems
of speculative mathematics at the present time do not
thus proceed. They appear to use the conception of
Space and Time not as being stuffs, as we have taken them
to be, within which there are relations of the parts of
Space and Time themselves, but as relational in the sense
that they are relations between things or entities. This is
the antithesis between absolute and relational Space and
Time.


In the one philosophical view, the one which I have
adopted, Space and Time are themselves entities, or rather
there is one entity, Space-Time, and there are relations
spatio-temporal within it. In the other, Space and Time
are nothing but systems of relations between entities
which are not themselves intrinsically spatio-temporal.
In the simplest form of the doctrine they are relations
between material points. They may be, as in some sense
with Leibniz, relations between monads. But in every
case the presupposition is of entities, which when the
relations are introduced may then be said to be in Space


cx.vi RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 169


and Time. We are, it seems, at once transported into
a logical world of entities and their relations which
subsist, but do not belong in themselves to either
physical or mental empirical existence. For it must be
admitted, I think, that it would be impossible to take
Space and Time as relations between, say, material bodies,
and at the same time to postulate an absolute Space
and Time in which the bodies exist. The physical
bodies, besides standing in spatial and temporal relations
to one another, must then stand in a new relation to the
places they occupy. But this offers an insuperable
difficulty. Space and Time cannot at once be entities in
their own right and at the same time merely be relations
between entities ; and the relation supposed between the
place which is an entity and the physical body at that
place is either a mere verbal convenience or it stands for
nothing. All we can do is to define the place by means
of relations between physical entities ; and this it is which
has been attempted by Messrs. Whitehead and Russell
in a construction of extraordinary ingenuity, expounded
in Mr. Russell’s recent book on Our Knowledge of the
External World. There the elements of the construction
of a point are various perspectives of a thing, which is
usually said to be at that point, arranged in a certain
order, these perspectives being themselves physical objects.
Not to enter minutely into details for which I am not
competent, I may illustrate the character of this mathe-
matical method by reference to the number system,
which shows how completely the method takes its start
from assumed entities. Cardinal numbers are defined by
the independent investigation of Messrs. Frege and
Russell as the class of classes similar to a given class.
The number 2 is the class of all groups of two
things, which may be ordered in a one-to-one correspond-
ence with each other. From this definition of number
in neutral terms, for entity is any object of thought what-
ever, we can proceed to define the whole system of real
numbers ; first the fractions and then the surds, finally
arriving at a purely logical definition of the system of
real numbers, involving entities, certain relations of order,


Assump-
tions of
relational
theory.


146 SPACE-TIME ; Bi. t


and certain operations. But once arrived at this point
we may go farther. “Jt is possible, starting with the
assumptions characterising the algebra of real numbers, to
define a system of things which is abstractly equivalent
to metric Euclidean geometry.”* So that real algebra and
ordinary geometry become abstractly identical. This is
one stage in the arithmetisation of geometry which 1s the
outstanding feature of recent mathematics. In the end,
as I understand, there is but one science, arithmetic,
and geometry is a special case of it.

It is no part of my purpose to question the legitimacy
of this method. On the contrary, I take for granted that
it is legitimate. Our question is whether it really does
leave empirical Space behind it, and what light it throws
on the difference, if any, between metaphysics and mathe-
matics. For, as we have seen, in the simpler theory of
mathematics which takes absolute Space and Time for
granted, even if as fictions, geometry was concerned with
the properties of figures and their relation to the principles
adopted for convenience in the science, and the metaphysics
of Space was an analysis of empirical Space; and the demar-
cation of the two sciences was fairly clear. But if it is
claimed that mathematics at its best is not concerned with
empirical Space at all, but with relations between entities,
then we are threatened with one of two results. Either
our metaphysics in dealing with empirical Space is con-
cerned with a totally different subject from geometry, not
merely treating the same topic in a different way or with a
different interest, or else we must revise our conception


of metaphysics and identify it in effect with mathematics
or logic.


We may most clearly realise the contrast of this method
with the empirical method of metaphysics if we recur to
the importunate question, What then is a relation if Space
and Time are relations? Empirical metaphysics explains
what relations are.* But the mathematical method can
clearly not avail itself of the same answer. Relation is


1 Young, Joc. cit. p. 98. fr Leecett, py 1833
3 See later, Bk. II. ch. iv.


cx.v1 RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 117i


indeed the vaguest word in the philosophical vocabulary,
and it is often a mere word or symbol indicating some con-
nection or other which is left perfectly undefined ; that is,
relation is used as a mere thought, for which its equivalent
in experience is not indicated. For Leibniz there is still an
attachment left between the relations which are spatial and
- the Space we see. For empirical Space is but the confused
perception by the senses of these intelligible relations.
He never explains what the intelligible relations are. But
our mathematical metaphysicians leave us in no doubt.
‘A relation,” says Mr. Russell (Principles of Mathematics,
P- 95), “is a concept which occurs in a proposition in which
there are two terms not occurring as concepts, and in
which the interchange of the two terms gives a different
proposition.” This is however a description of relation
by its function in a proposition, and is a purely logical
generalisation ; it does not profess to say what relations
are in themselves. To do this, we must have recourse
to the method used in defining numbers, which gives us
constructions of thought, in terms of empirical things,
that are a substitute for the so-called things or relations
of our empirical world. An admirable statement of the
spirit of this method has been supplied by Mr. Russell
himself in an article in Scientia. Thus, for instance, if
we define a point, e.g. the point at which a penny is, by
an order among perspectives of the penny, we are in fact

1 “ Wherever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted for inferred
entities [e.g., the cardinal number of two equally numerous collections].
. . . The method by which the construction proceeds is closely
analogous in these and all similar cases. Given a set of propositions
nominally dealing with the supposed inferred entities, we observe the
properties which are required of the supposed entities in order to
make these propositions true. By dint of a little logical ingenuity,
we then construct some logical function of less hypothetical entities
which has the requisite properties. This constructed function we
substitute for the supposed inferred entities, and thereby obtain a new
and less doubtful interpretation of the body of propositions in question Z
(‘ The Relation of Sense-data to Physics,’ Sec. vi. Scientia, 1914. The
article is now reprinted in Mysticism and Logic (London, 1918) ; the
reference is to pp. 155-6. ;

What I imply in the text is that number, thing, relation, are
directly experienced, and that metaphysics has to describe what is
thus directly experienced. ‘This is attempted in Bk. II.


172 SPACE-TIME a


substituting for the empirical point an intelligible con-
struction which, as it is maintained, can take its place in
science. When a thing is defined as the class of its
perspectives, a construction is supplied which serves all
the purposes of the loose idea of an empirical thing which
we carry about with us. AA relation is defined upon the
same method.! We are moving here in a highly general-
ised region of thoughts, used to indicate the empirical,
but removed by thought from the empirical. The
Humian question, What is the impression to which the
idea of a relation (or that of a thing) corresponds, has
lost its meaning. A thing or a relation such as we
commonly suppose ourselves to apprehend empirically
is replaced by a device of thought which enables us to
handle them more effectively. Such constructions describe
their object indirectly, and are quite unlike a hypothesis
such as that of the ether, which however much an
invention of thought professes to describe its object
directly. As in the case of the theory of number, we
seem to be in a logical or neutral world.

But we have cut our moorings to the empirical stuff
of Space and Time only in appearance, and by an assump-
tion the legitimacy of which is not in question, but which
remains an assumption. The starting-point is entities
or things which have being, and in the end this notion
is a generalisation from material things or events. Now
such things are supposed, on the relational doctrine, to
be distinct from the Space and Time in which they
are ordered. But there is an alternative hypothesis,
the one which we have more than once suggested as
involved with the empirical method here expounded.
The hypothesis is that the simplest being is Space-Time
itself, and that material things are but modes of
this one simple being, finite complexes of Space-Time
or motion, dowered with the qualities which are familiar
to us in sensible experience. That hypothesis must justify
itself in the sequel by its metaphysical success. But at
least it is an alternative that cannot be overlooked. The
neglect of it is traceable to the belief that we must choose


1 Principia Mathematica, i. p. 211.


cu.vt RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 173


between an absolute Space and Time, which are alike the
places of themselves and the places of material things,
and, on the other hand, a spatial and temporal world which
is a system of relations between things. As we have seen,
we cannot combine these notions. But if things are bits
of Space-Time, they are not entities with mere thought
relations which correspond to empirical Space and Time ;
rather, we only proceed to speak of relations between
them because they are from the beginning spatio-temporal
and in spatio-temporal relations to one another.

I am not contending that this hypothesis, which is no
new one but as old as the Timaeus of Plato with its
construction of things out of elementary triangles, and
has been revived in physics in our own day in a different
form,' is established ; but only that it is inevitable to an
empirical metaphysics of Space and Time. Order is, as
we have seen, a relation amongst these finite complexes
within Space-Time. When we begin with developed
material things, later in metaphysical (and actual) sequence
than Space-Time itself, we are by an act of thought
separating things from the matrix in which they are
generated. When we do so we forget their origin,
generalise them into entities, construct relations in
thought between them, transport ourselves into a
kind of neutral world by our thought, and elaborate
complexes of neutral elements by which we can descend
again to the spatio-temporal entities of sense. We can
legitimately cut ourselves adrift from Space and Time
because our data are themselves in their origin and
ultimate being spatio-temporal, and the relations between
them in their origin equally spatio-temporal. Thus we
construct substitutes for Space and Time because our
materials are thoughts of things and events in space and
time. We appear to leave Space and Time behind us

1 The reference is to the physical theory of the late Osborne
Reynolds, according to which the universe is Space, and matter is
comparable to a strain or a geological fault in this homogeneous
medium. See his Rede Lecture, On an Inversion of Ideas as to the
Structure of the Universe, Cambridge, 1903. Reynolds’s theory that
Space is granular in structure does not concern us here, but concerns


the physicist.


Contrast
with
empirical
theory.


174 SPACE-TIME BK. 1


and we do so; but our attachments are still to Space
and Time, just as they were in extending the idea of
dimensionality. Only here our contact is less direct.
For dimensionality or order is implied in Space and
Time, but in this later method we are basing ourselves
on entities which are not implied im Space and Time but
which do presuppose it. Indirect as the attachment is,
yet it persists. Consequently, though we construct a
thought of order or of an operation and interpret Space
and Time in terms of order, we are but connecting
thought entities by a relation which those entities in
their real attachments already contain or imply. If our
hypothesis is sound, order is as much a datum of Space-
Time apprehension as continuity is, and in the same
sense.

Thus the answer to the question, are Space and Time
relations between things, must be that they may be so
treated for certain purposes ; but that they are so, really
and metaphysically, only in a secondary sense, for that
notion refers us back to the nature of the things between
which they are said to be relations, and that nature
already involves Space and Time. Until we discover
what reality it is for which the word relation stands and
in that sense define it, the notion of relation is a mere
word or symbol. It is an invention of our thought,
not something which we discover. The only account we
can give of it is that relation is what obtains between a
king and his subjects or a town and a village a mile away
or a father and his son. But such an account suffers
from a double weakness. By using the word ‘ between’
it introduces a relation into the account of relation ; and
it substitutes for definition illustration. We may legiti-
mately use the unanalysed conception of relation and
of entity as the starting-point of a special science. But
there still remains for another science the question what
relation and entity are, and that science is metaphysics.
So examined, we find that relations of space and time are
intrinsically for metaphysics relations within Space and
Time, that is within extension and duration. Accordingly
the relational view as opposed to the absolute view of


cu.vt RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 17 5


Space and Time, whatever value it possesses for scientific
purposes, is not intrinsically metaphysical.


We are now, however, in a position to contrast
the metaphysical method with the mathematical. The
method of metaphysics is analytical. It takes experience,
that is, what is experienced (whether by way of con-
templation or enjoyment), and dissects it into its con-
stituents and discovers the relations of parts of experience
to one another in the manner I have attempted to describe
in the Introduction. But mathematics is essentially a
method of generalisation. Partly that generalising spirit
is evidenced by the extension of its concepts beyond their
first illustrations. This has been noted already. But
more than this, it is busy in discussing what may be
learned about the simplest features of things. Mathe-
matics as a science, says Mr. Whitehead, “commenced
when first some one, probably a Greek, proved proposi-
tions about amy things or about some things without
specification of particular things. These propositions
were first enunciated by the Greeks for geometry ; and
accordingly geometry was the great Greek mathematical
science.” ? This is an admirable statement of the spirit of
the science and of why it outgrew the limits of geometry.
It also indicates why when mathematics is pushed to its
farthest limits it becomes indistinguishable from logic.
On this conception our starting-point is things, and we
discuss their simplest and most general characters. They
have being, are entities; they have number, order, and
relation, and form classes. These are wide generalities
about things. Accordingly geometry turns out in the
end to be a specification of properties of number. In
treating its subject mathematics proceeds analytically in
the sense of any other science: it finds the simplest
principles from which to proceed to the propositions it is
concerned with. But it is not analytical to the death as
metaphysics is. Existence, number and the like are for
it simply general characters of things, categories of things,
if the technical word be preferred. Now an analysis of

1 Introduction to Mathematics, p. 14.


Mathe-
matics and
metaphysics
of Space.


Mathe-
matics
deals with
extension 3
meta-
physics
with
intension,


Ly 6 SPACE-TIME BK. I


things in the metaphysical sense would seek to show if
it can what the nature of relation or quantity or number
is, and in what sense it enters into the constitution of
things. But here in mathematics things are taken as
the ultimates under their generalised name of beings
or entities. They are then designated by descriptions.
What can be said about things in their character of
being the elements of number? Hence we have a
definition of number by things and their correspondences.
But metaphysics does not generalise about things but
merely analyses them to discover their constituents. The
categories become constituents of things for it, not names
of systems into which things enter. Its method is a
method not so much of description as of acquaintance.
The same point may be expressed usefully in a
different way by reference to the familiar distinction in
logic between the extension and the intension of names.
Mathematics is concerned with the extension of its terms,
while metaphysics is concerned with their intension, and
of course with the connection between the two. The
most general description of thing is entity, the most
general description of their behaviour to each other is
relation. Things are grouped extensionally into classes ;
intensionally they are connected by their common nature.
Number is therefore for the mathematician described in
its extensional aspect ; so is relation.. Now for meta-
physics intension is prior to extension. When the science
of extensional characters is completed, there still remains
a science of intensional characters. It is not necessarily
a greater or more important science. It is only ultimate.
The spirit by which mathematics has passed the limits
of being merely the science of space and number, till it
assumes the highly generalised form we have described,
carries it still further, till in the end it becomes identical
with formal logic. For logic also is concerned not with
the analysis of things but with the forms of propositions


1 Whitehead and Russell, Princ. Marh., Introduction, vol. i. p. 27.
“ Relations, like classes, are to be taken in extension, ie. if R and S
are relations which hold between the same pairs of terms, R and S
are to be identical.” Compare did. p. 211.


=


_cu.v1 RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 177


i


in which the connections of things are expressed. Hence
at the end pure mathematics is defined by one of its
most eminent exponents as the class of all propositions of
the form ‘p implies g,’ where p and g are themselves
propositions.?

Mathematics is a term which clearly has different
meanings, and the speculative conception of it endeavours
to include the other meanings. But it is remarkable
that as the science becomes more and more advanced, its
affinity to empirical metaphysics becomes not closer but
less intimate. The simple geometry and arithmetic which
purported to deal with Space and quantity were very near
to empirical metaphysics, for Space and Time of which they
described the properties are for metaphysics the simplest
characters of things. But in the more generalised con-
ception, the two sciences drift apart. It is true that still
mathematics deals with some of the most general
properties of things, their categories. And so far it
is in the same position towards metaphysics as before.
But Space and Time have now been victoriously reduced
to relations, while experiential metaphysics regards them
as constituents and the simplest constituents of things.
Hence it was that we were obliged to show that in cutting
itself loose from Space and Time mathematics was like a
captive balloon. It gained the advantage of its ‘altitude
and comprehensive view and discovered much that was
hidden from the dweller upon the earth. But it needed
to be reminded of the rope which held it to the earth
from which it rose. Without that reminder either
mathematics parts company from experiential metaphysics
or metaphysics must give up the claim to be purely
analytical of the given world.

Now it is this last calamity with which metaphysics Is meta-
: : physics of
is threatened, and I add some remarks upon the point tne possible
in order to illustrate further the conception of experi- or the.
ential metaphysics. For the mathematical philosopher,
mathematics and logic and metaphysics become in the
end, except for minor qualifications, identical. Hence
philosophy has been described by Mr. Russell as the

1 Russell, Principles of Mathematics, p. 3.


VOL. I N


: 7
178 SPACE-TIME BE.


science of the possible. This is the inevitable outcome
of beginning with things or entities and generalising —
on that basis. Our empirical world is one of many
possible worlds, as Leibniz thought in his time. But
all possible worlds conform to metaphysics. For us,
on the contrary, metaphysics is the science of the actual
world, though only of the a priori features of it. The con-
ception of possible worlds is an extension from the
actual world in which something vital has been left out
by an abstraction. That vital element is Space-Time.
For Space-Time is one, and when you cut things from
their anchors in the one sea, and regard the sea as
relations between the vessels which ride in it and without
which they would not serve the office of ships, you
may learn much and of the last value about the relations
of things, but it will not be metaphysics. Thus the
possible world, in the sense in which there can be many
such, is not something to which we must add something
in order to get the actual world. I am not sure whether
Kant was not guilty of a mere pun when he said that
any addition to the possible would be outside the possible
and thus impossible. But at any rate the added element
must be a foreign one, not already subsumed within
the possible. And once more we encounter the difficulty,
which if my interest here were critical or polemical it
might be profitable to expound, of descending from the
possible to the actual, when you have cut the rope of
the balloon.
The need Nothing that I have written is intended to suggest
ee any suspicion of the legitimacy or usefulness of the
"speculative method in mathematics. On the contrary
I have been careful to say the opposite. Once more, ’
as in the case of many-dimensional ‘ Space,’ it would seem
to me not only presumptuous on my part but idle on
the part of any philosopher to question these achieve-
ments. Where I have been able to follow these specula-
tions I have found them, as for instance in the famous
definition of cardinal number and _ its consequences,


1 “On Scientific Method in Philosophy” (Herbert Spencer Lec-
ture), Oxford, 1914, p. 17. Reprinted in Mysticism and Logic, p. 111.


Z


cx.vi RELATIONS IN SPACE AND TIME 179


illuminating. My business has consisted merely in
indicating where the mathematical method in the
treatment of such topics differs from that of empirical
metaphysics ; and in particular that the neutral world
of number and logic is only provisionally neutral and
is in truth still tied to the empirical stuff of Space-
Time. Suppose it to be true that number is in its
essence, as I believe, dependent on Space-Time, is the
conception, we may ask, of Messrs. Frege and Russell
to be regarded as a fiction? We may revert once more
to the previous question, when a fiction is fictitious.
If this doctrine is substituted for the analysis of number
as performed by metaphysics as a complete and final
analysis of that conception it would doubtless contain
a fictitious element. Or, as this topic has not yet been
explained, if the conception of Space as relations between
things is intended not merely as supplying a working
scientific substitute for the ordinary notion of extension
but to displace empirical Space with its internal relations,
the conception is fictitious. But if not, and if it serves
within its own domain and for its own purpose to
acquire knowledge not otherwise attainable, how can
it be fictitious? 1 venture to add as regards the con-
struction of points in space and time and physical things
out of relations between sensibles proposed recently by
Messrs. Whitehead and Russell, that if it bears out
the hopes of its inventors and provides a fruitful instru-
ment of discovery it will have irrespectively of its meta-
physical soundness or sufficiency established its claim
to acceptance. “Any method,” we may be reminded,
“which leads to true knowledge must be called a
scientific method.” Only, till its metaphysical sufficiency
is proved it would needs have to be content with the
name of science. For Space and Time may be con-
sidered as relations between things without distortion
of fact. Now the sciences exist by selecting certain
departments or features of reality for investigation, and
this applies to metaphysics among the rest. — They are
only subject to correction so far as their subject matter
1 A. Schuster, Presidential Address to British Association, 1916.


Summary.


180 SPACE-TIME BK. I


is distorted by the selection. But to omit is not
necessarily to distort.

On the other hand, if a method proper to a particular
science is converted into a metaphysical method it may
be defective or false. This is why I ventured to say
of Minkowski’s Space-Time," as a four-dimensional whole
which admitted of infinite Spaces, that it was a mathe-
matical representation of facts, but that it did not justly
imply that the Universe was a four-dimensional one,
because it overlooked the mutual implication of Space and
Time with each other. If it were so understood it would
contain a fictitious element. As it is, it contains an element
which is not fictitious but only scientifically artificial.


We may then sum up this long inquiry in the brief
statement that whether in physics, in psychology, or in
mathematics, we are dealing in different degrees of
directness with one and the same Space and Time ; and
that these two, Space and Time, are in reality one: that
they are the same reality considered under different
attributes. What is contemplated as physical Space-
Time is enjoyed as mental space-time. And however
much the more generalised mathematics may seem to
take us away from this empirical Space-Time, its
neutral world is filled with the characters of Space-
Time, which for its own purposes it does not discuss.
To parody a famous saying, a little mathematics leaves
us still in direct contact with Space-Time which it
conceptualises. A great deal more takes us away from
it. But reviewed by metaphysics it brings us back to
Space-Time again, even apart from its success in
application. Thus if we are asked the question what
do you mean by Space and Time? Do you mean by
it physical Space and Time, extension and duration, or
mental space and time which you experience in your
mind (if Space be allowed so to be experienced), or do
you mean by it the orders of relations which mathematics
investigates ? [The_answer is, that we mean all these
things indifferently, [for in the end they are one. .

1 Above, Bk. I choi paso: ve
No


fey BOOK 11
THE CATEGORIES


Be, 181


CHAPTER I


NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES


Space-Time then is in Kantian language an_ infinite Categories
given whole, that is to say, it is experienced as such, uatitie
where the term experience includes thought as well
as sensible experience. Its elements are represented
conceptually as point-instants or bare events; and we
have added the hypothesis that other empirical things
or existents are groupings of such events, whirlpools
within that ocean, or they are crystals in that matrix.
Only whereas a crystal may be separated from its matrix,
existents never can; they remain swimming in the
medium of Space-Time. . Their very being is continuity ;
they are themselves continuously connected groupings
of motions, and they are connected through the circum-
ambient Space-Time with other such groupings or com-
plexes. In less metaphorical language, they are complexes
of motion differentiated within the one all-containing
and all-encompassing system of motion. Primarily,
therefore, empirical existents are spatio-temporal and
remain so to the end. But with certain groupings of
motion, certain spatio-temporal complexes, there are
correlated what we call qualities, such as materiality,
life, colour, consciousness. What the exact relation is
between the quality and its spatio-temporal basis is to
be the subject matter of a part of the next Book. We
shall have to ask there whether it is fitly to be described
as mere correlation or is still more intimate. The brief
description contained in the name correlation is sufficient
for our present purposes. Finite existents so under-
stood, with their correlated qualities, are the things and
183


184. THE CATEGORIES BK. II


events of our ordinary experience, moving about or
happening in Space-Time, and endowed with qualities
the laws of which it is the office of the special sciences
to discover and co-ordinate. So much by way of
explanation of our hypothesis as to empirical existence.
Unlike the hypothesis of the Introduction, (that the
world of things might be treated as existing in its own
right and not dependent on the mind,) which is a hypo-
thesis of method ; it is a hypothesis as to the nature
of things, or, in ordinary language, one of substance, not
merely of method. In order to avoid the constant use
of the long phrase empirical existents, I shall speak
simply of existents. These include not only ordinary
finites but also point-instants which are the limiting cases
at which we arrive in infinite division, and infinites like
infinite lines or numbers, which are the limiting cases in
the other direction; and for this reason, in order to
include these two classes of existents which involve the
notion of infinitude, I speak of existents rather than of
finites. But while there will be much to say of point-
instants, I shall for the most part disregard infinites till
a later stage, and then touch upon them only briefly.’
Now amongst the characters of empirical existents
there is a clear distinction between those which are
variable and those which are pervasive. Some things
possess life, others not. Some things are red, others
green or yellow ; some are sweet, others sour. Some
have colour but no taste. Matter has mass but is not
conscious. ‘These characters are what have been called
above qualities, and because they vary from thing to
thing they may be called empirical characters. But
there are other characters which are pervasive and
belong in some form to all existents whatever. Such
are identity (numerical identity for example), substance,
diversity, magnitude, even number. Moreover, not
only are these characters of what we commonly call
things, but they are characters of all existents whatever,
that is to say of everything, where the word thing is


_ 1 Bk. IV. ch. i. Some remarks upon point-instants and infinites
will be found in ch. ix. of Bk. II. pp. 324 ff.


CH. 1 NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES 185


equivalent to any finite object of experience. Thus not
only is a living thing an extended substance of a certain
magnitude and number of parts; but a life itself, if
you consider it, or so far as you can consider it, without
direct reference to its body whose life it is, is extended,
a substance, and possessed of magnitude, and moreover
it is spread out into a multiplicity of parts and therefore
contains number. Even mind, now that we have
satisfied ourselves of its extended character in its enjoy-
ment of itself, possesses these characters.

It is true the pervasive characters also undergo
variation according to the empirical circumstances. The
wax is always extended, but its particular magnitude and
shape change when it is melted. Still, it retains some
extension and magnitude and shape in all its empirical
transformations. An earthquake may last a long or
short time, an illumination may be constant or inter-
mittent. But they are never without temporal character.
Such empirical variations of the pervasive characters of
things may be called primary qualities in distinction from
the secondary qualities, where the phrase covers not only
the traditional secondary qualities of matter but qualities
like life or consciousness. These qualities may be present
in one thing and absent from another, and differ in this
respect from the empirical variations of the pervasive
characters.

The pervasive characters of existents are what are
known from Kant’s usage as the categories of experience,
and | shall call them, in distinction from the empirical
ones or qualities, categorial characters. They may also
be called the @ priori or non-empirical characters. But
the contrast must be taken at its face value as a distinction
within the characters of experienced things. It does not
imply that a priori or categorial characters, because not
empirical, are not experienced. On the contrary, they are
the essential and universal constituents of whatever 1s
experienced, and in the wider sense of that term are
therefore empirical. It was in this wider sense that
philosophy was described as the empirical (or experiential)
study of the non-empirical. The word categorial is not


Why the
categories
are per-
vasive : not
because
they are
due to
mind ;


186 THE CATEGORIES BK. 11


so much exposed to misunderstanding as non-empirical or
in consequence of its history a priori ; and I shall most
frequently employ it. At any rate the two classes of
characters are distinguished within experience itself.
These categories then are the prerogative characters of
things which run through all the rest as the warp on
which the others are woven. Or, to vary the metaphor,
they are the grey or neutral-coloured canvas on which the
bright colours of the universe are embroidered. The
primary ‘qualities’ are variations of them in empirical
circumstance. The secondary qualities are correlated
with complexities in the primary qualities themselves.
Life is correlated with physical and chemical movements,
themselves reducible to complexities of more elementary
movements. Mind is correlated in turn with vital move-
ments of a certain sort. Colour (whether it is partly
dependent upon mind or not) corresponds, it is thought,
to vibrations in a hypothetical medium, the ether,
which hypothetically (and there is reason to think,
superfluously) fills all Space. The categories are thus
the groundwork of all empirical reality; what Plato
called the highest kinds of beings (péyora yévn
tev dvtwv). According to his latest interpreter, the
interest of these highest kinds displaced in his latest
writings that of the Forms of sensible things ; and justly.
For the Forms for all their eternal nature are, as compared
with the categories, empirical—the form of dog in which
individual dogs participate or which they imitate, but
which trees do not; the form of tree, or the form of
justice, and the like. These are empirical universals.
But the categories are not only universals, but, though
I do not know if Plato would have said so, are trul
universal in the sense that all existents partake of them.


The most remarkable feature of the categories which
is disclosed to inspection is that they are common to mind
and to physical and generally non-mental things. Consider
mind as it is known by direct acquaintance, that is by
enjoyment, without the addition of indirect knowledge
from any source, whether from reflective experience about


CH. I NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES 187


mind, or from speculative theory. It has identity, is a
substance, exhibits causality, etc. Something has been said
of this in the introductory chapter and need not be
repeated. What is the meaning of this presence of
the categories not only in the contemplated but the
enjoyed ?

One way of solving this problem is to say that the
mind is aware of the categories in its experience of itself,
and then imputes them to its objects. Whether this
answer has ever been attempted on a thorough-going scale,
I do not know. But it has often been attempted in
respect of the categories of causality and substance in
particular. We find these characters in ourselves, and we
interpret things, it is said, in our own likeness and find
that the interpretation is successful. Now it is certain
that experience of our own minds and experience of
external things play upon each other reciprocally, rein-
force and elucidate each other. When we have learned
in ourselves the continuity, of a decision with its motives,
of the issue of a train of thought with its premisses, of the
mere unfolding of an idea in its details with the vague
and implicit apprehension of the same idea, and particu-
larly the continuity of our performances with our inten-
tions ; we can then look to external things and events to
see whether there is not such continuity also there, the
same definite order of succession. Or, again, whether in
things there is not the like permanence in change that
we can so easily detect in our enjoyment of ourselves.
We speak then of causality or substance in external things,
of physical causality and physical substances ; and having
these conceptions we come back to our own minds and
ask whether we ourselves are not subject to physical
causation, or are not substances in the same sense as
external things, and we may thus raise problems which
seem to us of great difficulty. Out of this interplay of
mind and things it follows that while, on the one hand, we
speak of force or power in physical things in language
borrowed from our own wills; on the other hand,
psychological terminology, as in such terms as apprehension
or comprehension or conception, is largely ‘derived from


188 THE CATEGORIES BK, I


experience of physical things or of the action of our
bodies on physical things.

But the mutual interplay of our experience of mind
and things, which is an indisputable fact, is very far from
the imputation by the mind of its own characters to
external things. One simple consideration is enough to
show that we do not merely construe things on the
analogy of ourselves. For there must be something in
the things which makes the analogy valid, or which gives
a handle to the alleged imputation. If all we observe in
external events is uniform succession, to impute to one
of them a power to produce the other is a fiction, the
fiction which Hume set himself to discredit. It may be
serviceable anthropomorphism, but it is not science nor
philosophy. If there is no power traceable in things,
then there is none ; if the number of things is due to our
counting, then there is no number in the things. The
world then becomes indebted for its pervasive and
prerogative characters to mind. Such a result is only
satisfactory if the process is carried further, and if every
character in things is attributed to mind, otherwise we
could not understand how things should offer a reason to
us to construe them so. I do not say this result is not
true merely because it disagrees with our hypothesis of
method, that we may treat mind as merely one of the
many things in the universe. Yet at any rate we are
bound before accepting it to see whether an explanation is
not possible consistent with that hypothesis.

But now if there is something in the things which
gives colour to the imputation, if for instance there is
something in external things which is identical with the
causal or substantial continuity which we find in mind,
when we do not take that experience to be more than it really
is, the imputation is unnecessary. Things may be
numbered because they already contain number, not
because they can be counted. On the contrary, they can
be counted because they are countable and numerical.
All the profit then that we can derive from the interplay
of mind and things in becoming aware of the categories is
that we may more easily derive from the enjoyed than


cH. I NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES 189


from the contemplated the nature of the categories ; which


categories they share in common. Of this liberty we
shall avail ourselves.


Are we then to be content with the bare fact that the
categories are unlike empirical characters in belonging to
all things, and in particular in belonging to minds as well
as to external things? Such a coincidence would be
sufficiently remarkable, but it clamours for the discovery
of a reason. The reason is that the categories prove
upon examination to be fundamental properties or deter-
minations of Space-Time itself, not taken as a whole, but
in every portion of it. They belong to all existents
because, if our hypothesis is sound, existents are in the
end, and in their simplest terms, differentiations of Space-
Time, the complexes of events generated within that
matrix. If that hypothesis be sound we should expect to
find the pervasive features of things in the characters of
their ultimate foundation. Or to put the same thing in
another way, when and if it is seen that the categorial
characters of things are features of any bit of Space-Time
as such, merely so far as it is spatio-temporal, we are
forced to the further conclusion that the empirical
characters of things, their qualities, are correlated with the
empirical groupings in Space-Time, and that things with
their qualities are, as our hypothesis supposes, complexes
within Space-Time. The categories are, as it were,
begotten by Time on Space. It will be our business to
exhibit this proposition in some detail with respect to the
various categories.

The gist of the formula will perhaps be understood
best by meeting in advance a possible misunderstanding, to
the danger of which IJ shall recur more than once as the
inquiry proceeds. Spaces or times it will be said have,
it is true, magnitude, have identity, have a universal
character, have existence. The categories, or at least
some of them, are indeed applicable to spaces and times
or, if you will, bits of Space-Time. These are instances
which fall under these various categories, just as trees
and dogs and tables do. But since they are but instances


but because
they are
funda-
mental pro-
perties of
Space-
Time.


Kant’s
treatment
of the!
Categories,


190 THE CATEGORIES see


of the categories, the source of these categories must
be found elsewhere. Now the clue to the understanding
of our thesis is that the categories are not applicable as
it were ab extra to spaces and times, but that they are
applicable to things (including minds) because they flow
from the nature of the space-times which they occupy
or which they are. ‘Applicability to space-times has no
meaning for the categories, which are the features or
determinations of the space-times themselves. I do not
wish to anticipate too much, but a single instance may
suffice. My mind exists at this moment because it
occupies a certain portion of Space-Time, and that bare
occupation is existence. Moreover, it is so far universal,
that I remain in broad outlines the same mind whether I
am here in Glasgow or there in Florence. That trans-
plantation does not affect my identity. Caelum non
animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.


In making this inquiry into the categories I have
the good fortune to be able to make use for my own
purposes, first, of the great later dialogues of Plato and,
next, of Kant’s work in the ‘Schematism of the Categories’
and above all in the ‘Principles of the Understanding,’
the most significant and fruitful chapter of the Critique
of Pure Reason. But it would be at once tedious to
the reader and an interruption to the argument to
indicate in detail where I have been helped by Kant.
Indeed it would seem at first sight as if little help were
to be derived from him in this matter. For the draw-
backs and deficiencies of Kant’s doctrine of knowledge in
general and of the categories in particular are obvious
enough. The categories are referred, like the forms of
Space and Time, to the mind, because it is thought that
what Hutchison Stirling called the “empirical instruc-
tion ’’ does not contain them already. They are universal
and a priori and belong therefore to the understanding,
and are sharply separated from sense and its forms.
Nevertheless, Kant is far removed from the notion that
we manufacture or work up objects of knowledge by
means of the categories, still less that we impute these


CH, I NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES 191


forms to objects. They are for him veritable elements
in objective knowledge, though they are the contribu-
tion of objective mind and not of the empirical instruc-
tion. And of still more importance and value is his
effort to supply what he calls a “ proof” of the principles
of the understanding. In essentials the “ proof” is this,!
that objective external experience contains the categories
in correspondence with the features which the experience
of Time possesses as given in the inner sense,—such as
that it has duration, determinate order, permanence, is
fuller or less full? and the like. Since the form of
external experience is Space, it is not so far a cry from
this reasoning to the present doctrine, founded not on
any pretence of proof or reasoning but on empirical
inspection, that the categories are begotten by Time on
Space, or are fundamental features of any space-time.
For Space and Time are for Kant also forms of the mind,
though the categories belong to understanding and they
to sense.

Unfortunately the separation of the forms of sense or
intuition from those of the understanding, and of both
from the empirical instruction, gives to Kant’s analysis an
air of artificiality and unresolved miracle, and perhaps it
is not to be wondered at that those who have regarded
his formal procedure rather than the spirit of it have
represented the forms as if they were instruments used
in working up knowledge, as planes or chisels are used
in carpentering wood. The artificial separation does not
arise for us. For the categories are for us expressions of
the nature of Space-Time itself, and on the other hand
the empirical instruction consists of nothing but com-
plexes of this same space-time stuff. All the elements of
things we know are ultimately of the same stuff. But
in spite of these difficuluies I cannot think that this part
of Kant’s doctrine is so innocently inadequate as is often
believed. And I am making these remarks not in order
to fortify myself by his authority, which I certainly could


1 At least this is one of the lines of thought Kant pursues in
his proof.
2 To which corresponds the category of intensive quantity.


192 THE CATEGORIES 7s


not invoke, but to record a grateful conviction that with
or after Plato there is nothing comparable in importance
upon this subject with what may be learned from him,
even by one who believes that mind which is Kant’s
source of categories has nothing whatever to do with the
matter, and that mind is only a name for minds which
are empirical things like other empirical things, and like
them possess categorial characters and for the same reason
as other things possess them, that they are all alike
empirical complexes of space-time stuff. Leave out from
Kant the objective mind with all the dependencies of
that conception; and what he teaches us is mainly
sound. It is true that the omission produces a con-
siderable transformation, so considerable that the result
would hardly be recognised as related to his doctrine by
any affiliation of descent. But it is to be remembered
that for a man of Kant’s age the only method open to a
philosopher, whether it was Kant or Reid, of indicating
that the world of experience contains pervasive features
as well as variable ones, was to refer this part of experi-
ence to mind in its objective character. Be this as it
may, it is not always those who teach us most truth from
whom we learn most, but those who best point the way
to truth.

There are one or two questions of a general character
about the categories which, to avoid repetition, will best
be deferred till we have reviewed the categories in detail.
For instance, whether at all, and if so in what sense,
Space and Time themselves are to be called categories.
Categorial they plainly are, and equally plainly Space-
Time itself, which is the infinite matrix of all finites, is
notacategory. Again, it is plain from our description of
the relation of empirical quality to Space-Time (that it is
correlated with a certain complexity within Space-Time)
that if our account be correct quality is not a category,
and is no more than a comprehensive name for all the
empirical qualities, and does not follow from the
characters of Space-Time as such. Even for Kant, who
regarded quality as a category, it only anticipates experi-
ence in respect of the intensity of the quality. It is in


a


CH. I NATURE OF THE CATEGORIES 193


fact only another name for the empirical element in
things. But to avoid repetition at a later stage or
imperfect discussion now, | omit these matters for the
present.

We proceed then to describe the categories in order.
The reader will bear in mind that they enter as con-
stituent factors or as constitutive characters into every
existent, whatever its quality. He needs only, in order
to help himself in the abstract (that is elementary)
inquiry, to think of empirical things, divest them of
their qualitative colouring, and single out the categorial
foundations of what the colouring is correlated with.
While he may, if he chooses, regard also the embroidery
he will be pleased to think only of the canvas.


VOL. I o


Numerical
identity and
diversity.


CHAPTER II
IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, AND EXISTENCE


THERE are more senses than one of identity. There is,
in the first place, bare or numerical identity, which is the
identity of a thing with itself. Next, there is identity of
kind, which is universality or generic identity. A dog is
as dog generically identical with another dog. Thirdly,
there is individual identity, which implies the blending
of numerical and generic identity; an individual is a
particular of a certain sort. Lastly, there is substantial
identity, which, besides individuality as just described,
contains the element of substance. Such substantial
identity is what is commonly understood by a numerically
identical individual. But it is really more complex as
we shall see than merely being an individual. One of its
instances is personal identity.

We are concerned at present with bare numerical
identity, or self-identity. Any point-instant or group of
them is as such self-identical, and the self-identity of
anything is its occupation of a space-time. Diversity is
the occupation of another space-time, that is another
place with its time. One thing is diverse from another
in so far as it occupies a different point-instant from
another thing or more generally a different portion of
space-time. The occupation of any space-time, that is
self-identity, in distinction from any other space-time is
existence or determinate being. Owing to the empirical
continuity of Space-Time, any piece of Space-Time and
consequently any self-identity is distinct from some other
self-identity, that is, it possesses an other, and is thus
an existent or has existence. Existence or determinate


194


cx. IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 19 5


being is therefore identity in its relation to the other.
It is, as Plato taught in the Timaeus through the
mouth of his Pythagorean speaker, the union of the
same and the other. Identity, diversity, and existence
arise out of the intrinsic nature of Space-Time as a
continuum of its parts which are space-times, or rather
it arises out of the nature of any space-time, as being a
part of Space-Time and therefore connected with other
space-times. ;

Such union calls for no explanation ; it is given with
Space-Time itself. For Time makes Space distinct and
Space makes Time distinct. We have in fact noted
already that either of the two, Space and Time, may be
regarded as supplying the element of diversity to the
element of identity supplied by the other.’ Any point-
instant, or group of them, is therefore intrinsically itself,
and other than some other, and indeed than every other,
point-instant or group of them. It follows that existence
is distinct from identity only in this reference or relation
to the other. It therefore, to use another Platonic con-
ception, “ communicates’’ with the category of relation.


There is much in this if not brief yet abstract state-
ment which calls for comment. Being is the occupation
of space-time which also excludes other occupancy of space-
time. This seems at first sight to be a flagrant piece
of circular reasoning. When it 1s said that a point-instant
is identical with itself and different from another, same or
identical and other or different appear to be prior denom-
inations of which point-instants are particular instances.
Is not the point-instant declared to be the same as itself
and other than a different point-instant ? Though I have
entered a warning against such a misapprehension in the
preceding chapter, I must, at the risk of repetition, renew
the warning here and perhaps later again. It is not because
there is sameness and there is difference, and still less
because we have the notion of sameness and difference,
that a point-instant is the same (as itself) and different
(from another), but because there are point-instants or

1 See above, Bk I. ch. i. p. 60.


Defence
against
objections.


196 THE CATEGORIES BK, II


groups of them which are the parts of Space-Time that
there is sameness and difference in existents. I am not
starting from the world in which man exists with his
clear-cut and reflective thoughts which he thinks to apply to
particular things, but from the bare elements of the world,
its primary stuff out of which things are made; and am
accounting for the notions we possess, or rather verifying
them, by reference to this stuff. In the skeleton universe
of Space-Time we are attempting to detect what are the
primitive features of pieces of that skeleton which appear
in our experience clothed in the flesh and blood of what
we call empirical things, with all their richness and
complexity of qualities. It is not our human conceptions
of things which metaphysics seeks to exhibit but the
constitution of the world itself.

Even if we avoid the mistake of supposing that such
categories as same and different are supplied by the mind,
and urge the old objection in the form that same and
different though not conceptions made by us are yet
objective universals, are the highest forms of things, and
point-instants or groups of them do but participate in
these ; the answer is that same and different (that is
numerical sameness and difference) are indeed not only
categorial characters intrinsic to any space-time but also
universal, but that this consideration is at present irrele-
vant. The reason why same and different are categories
is not that they are universals, but that they are
characters which belong to any space-time and therefore
to the existent which occupies it. Weare concerned here
with the specific nature of same and different, not with
their universality. Itis true that they are like all categories
universal. Just as same and different communicate with
relation, so also they communicate with the category of
universality. There is a good sense in which a particular
point-instant may be called a case of identity, that is of
generic identity. An existent or being is a particular
case of existence as a generic universal. The “this” in
Mr. Bradley’s language is a case of “thisness.” We
have yet to see what constitutes universality or generic
identity, and we shall find that it too is founded in the


cx.t1 IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 197


nature of Space-Time. But though existence is universal,
a pOint-instant is not a mere case of the universal
‘existence’; but it exists because it is a point-instant,
and its existence is identical generically with the existence
of other point-instants for a different reason. In other
words, existents exist. or are subject to the category of
existence because they occupy space-times, and on our
hypothesis are in their simplest determination spatio-
temporal complexes ; the occupation of their own space-
time is a non-empirical or a priori determination of the


very Space-Time of which things are made; their existence.


is another name for this occupancy, that is to say for being
a piece of Space-Time. That existence may be resolved
into its two elements of identity and difference, because a
point-instant or group of them is in the first place what
it is, and in the next place is not a mere isolated point of
space or instant of time, but is saturated with Time or
Space respectively, and driven thereby out of its isolation
into relation with point-instants other than itself. The
point-instants are so far from being merely instances of
identity, difference, or existence, that these categories are
but the conceptual shapes of real concrete determinations
of things in their spatio-temporal character. We shall
find this to be true of all the categories. They are not
as it were adjectives or predicates of things ; they stand
for the simplest and most fundamental features (in the
sense in which red is a feature of this rose) of things,
and have the concreteness of Space-Time. Existence and
numerical sameness and difference are the most elementary
of these determinations. Consider the spatio-temporal
structure which underlies any thing whatever, even if
that thing be no more than a point-instant itself; and
going to the direct experience of it, as clarified by re-
flection, you realise that the self-identity of the thing is
nothing more nor less than the experienced fact that it is
the bit of space-time which it is.


Existence, or determinate being, or being itself (for
we shall see there is no being but determinate being),
is the union of identity and difference. But this desig-


Being as
union of
identity and
difference,


Being and
not-being,


198 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


nation of union must be received with caution. It is not
properly a blending or mixture of identity and difference ;
nor on the other hand are identity and difference to be
regarded as in reality one. The splendid image of the
Timaeus in which the Demiurge is represented as pouring
the Same and the Other into a bowl and creating Being
(Ousia) from their mixture is not by us to be understood
literally, if it was so understood by Timaeus. Being
is an occupation of a space-time. It does not contain
within itself the exclusion of other space-times. It
contains of course within itself, when it is more than a
point-instant, internal difference. But the exclusion of
the other which makes identity into being is its relation
not within itself but within Space-Time to other space-
times. As in this relation identity is being. Being is
not something new made up of the two, but is the same
taken along with its relation of otherness. Neither is its
otherness to be conceived as one with its identity. Its
otherness is its relation to the other, and that relation is
what we shall call later an intrinsic relation, without which
the same would not be the same. But its sameness is
one character and its otherness another. It would not be
different without the other, and the other is external to
it, and something new ; not extrinsic to it (because of the
nature of Space-Time) but yet not identical with it. Its
identity is so far from being identical or one with its
otherness that it would have no otherness except there
were an other, and it is other than the other, not the
same as the other. But the completer understanding of
this, if it needs further elucidation, belongs to the inquiry
into the category of relation.


Being it was said is the same as determinate being or
existence. This means there is no such category as bare
or neutral being to which some further determination
must be added to make existence. When such neutral
being is examined it will be found to stand for something
different from real or categorial being, either for the
relation of things to thought, or as a compendious name
for the relations between terms in a proposition.


cu. IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 199


We might indeed distinguish bare being from deter-
minate being by substituting in our exposition being for
identity, and not-being for difference, and describing
determinate being or existence as the union of being and
not-being, that is as being in relation to other being.
Bare being is then simple occupancy of a space-time.
But over and above the loss of the phrase numerical
identity, we gain nothing for clearness. For occupancy
of a space-time is ipso facto exclusion of other space-times.
There are no beings (occupants of space-times) which are
not existents.

But the idea of bare being leads on conveniently to
the subject of not-being, which is not the bare absence
of being, not in the language of the logicians a privative
conception, but is equivalent to other-being, that is
occupation of a different space-time. It may be the
occupation of any different portion in the whole remainder
of Space-Time, as when we distinguish red from what is
not-red and include under not-red anything whatever
whether coloured or not which is not red. Or it may be
and generally is the occupation of a different portion of
Space-Time within the same ‘universe of discourse,’ as
when not-red means any colour which excludes red.
The subject more properly comes under the head of
identity and difference of sort or kind (generic). But
not-being whether numerical or generic is always different
being, and remains being. If we try to think of not-
being as if it were something wholly disparate from
being, we are surreptitiously imagining or thinking some
world which has being, that is, is within Space-Time,
but of a different kind. A mere blank negation 1s
nothing at all. The nothing we can think of and
experience is not nothirg-at-all but is an object of some
kind and is a department of being. These are ancient
considerations, derived from Plato’s Sophistes. They
have been revived in our day to much purpose by Mr.
Bergson in an admirable passage of the Creative Evolution,’
where he interprets disorder as a different order from
what we call order, and repudiates the notion of nothing


1 Evolution créatrice, ch. iv. pp. 297 ff. Eng. tr. pp. 232 ff.


Neutral
being.


200 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


except as something different from the something which
constitutes the circle of our experience.

I may add that negation as a category is equivalent to
not-being. Negation is not merely a subjective attitude
of mind. That is only an instance of negation, in the
region of mental acts. Negation or negativity is a real
character of things, which means exclusion or rejection.
Not-white is the character which excludes or is different
from white. In this sense it is true that all determination
is negation. For all definite occupation of space-time is
other than other such occupation and excludes it.


There is no category then of being other than that of
determinate being or the existent. Since existence 1s
occupancy of a space-time in exclusion of other occupancy,
and since such occupation is always temporal, existence
must not be limited to present existence but includes past
and future. But various attempts might be or have been
made to find a being which is wider or more comprehen-
sive than existence. Such being may be called neutral being,
but in no case is such neutral being a category, of which
determinate being is a species, or closer determination.

Thus it may be said that there is neutral being which
corresponds to the copula in judgment, and is what is
meant whenever we say ‘is.’ But, in fact, the linguistic
copula ‘is’ is appropriate only to certain propositions,
those, namely, in which the terms are in the relation
of subject and attribute. In some propositions, as Mr.
Bradley has pointed out, it does not occur at all (inter-
jectional ones) ; in others the relation of the terms as Mr.
Russell insists is not expressed by the copula at all, but
may be, for example, a relation of quantity, as in ‘A
exceeds B in intellect,’ or of causality, as in ‘ Brutus killed
Caesar.’ A special importance has come to be attached to
‘is’ because with more or less ingenuity any proposition
may be tortured artificially into the subject-attribute
form. There is indeed in every proposition something
implied which happens to be expressed by the copula in
ordinary categorical propositions ; but that something is not
‘being’ but the reality of whatever relation the proposition


cur IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 201


expresses between its terms. For a proposition is the
explicit analysis of a complex, and asserts the reality of
the relation thus exhibited, whether it is the relation of
substance and attribute, or causality, or the like! What
corresponds to the copula is thus not being but reality,
and reality is at least existence or determinate being ; it
may be and is much more, but at any rate it is not less
and wider than existence. It is not something simpler of
which existence is a specialisation. The attempt to look
for a category more pervasive than other categories is in
truth vain, for categories as such are all alike pervasive,
and belong to all things. There is much however to be
said before the statement can be accepted that all proposi-
tions deal with existents ; in particular, we have yet to
consider how propositions which involve universals can
be so described.

Being, 7.e. neutral being, may be understood in a
different sense as the object of thought. Whatever the
mind thinks of has being or is ‘formally objective.’
A recent writer? proposes to say, accordingly, that there
is a world or summum genus of ‘subsistence,’ of which
what exists in space and time is a part. Determinate
being would, according to this, be a special determination
of ‘subsistence’ or being in the widest sense. The
reason for introducing this notion is that besides true
propositions there are errors and mere imaginations and

1 Even the existential proposition, ¢.g. King George exists, means
that the subject is a part of the whole reality of existence. For further
remarks on the assertion of reality in the proposition, see later, Bk. III.
chy x. B-

2 W. P. Montague, in The New Realism (New York, 1912) ; essay
on ‘A Theory of Truth and Error,’ p. 253. I have borrowed the
name ‘neutral being’ from Mr. Holt (see his essay in the same book,
and his Concept of Comsciou.ness), who uses it in a different sense. His
neutral being is a being which is neither mental nor physical, the
simplest form of which appears to be categories such as identity and
difference. Also Mr. Montague, to whom I refer here, does not use the
phrase neutral being at all, and he does not call his subsistence being,
and perhaps would not do so (see his account of ‘isness’ on p. 263).
Both his doctrine and Mr. Holt’s seem to me, however, in the end to
imply what I call neutral or bare being, the idea of something simpler


than the world of Space-Time. I stand in many respects so close to
them that I am the more anxious to make the real differences clear.


piey) THE CATEGORIES BK. II


there are also what are now known, since Prof. Meinong’s
work on the subject,’ as supposals, where there is neither
truth nor error, since no belief is entertained ; for example,
‘that the Earth is flat is still maintained by certain
persons’ ; ‘it is reported that a victory has been gained,’
in neither of which cases is the included proposition a
belief, but a supposal. The consideration of this notion
must be delayed till we have reached that special kind of
empirical existent, the mind, and inquire into the relation
of the subject of knowledge to the object. My contention
against any being other than spatio-temporal is in fact that
we begin at the wrong end if we start with the fact of
errors or supposals which appear undoubtedly to be and
yet not to be existent, so that we are led to conceive a
being which is less, and wider, than existence. Whereas
if we begin not with ourselves and what we think, but
with what the world is in its simplest terms, of which
world we are a part, we arrive at a different and less
perplexing result. We shall find reason if we pursue
this method to reject the notion that existence in Space
and Time is something added to some more formal reality,
call it being, call it subsistence, call it what corresponds to
the ‘is’ of propositions ; and to conclude on the contrary
that such being is real or determinate being with some-
thing left out, that it implies the interference of the
subject or the empirical mind with the real world in Space
and Time ; that it is not prior in analysis to reality but,
rather, subsequent to it; and that error does not give
us anew and more shadowy being than the spatio-
temporal reality, but is the world of determinate being
misread. Here for the present it is enough to note that
being as the mere formal object of thought is a conception
derived from the relation of the world to an empirical
part of itself, the mind.

The use of the term subsistence in the above state-
ment to describe bare being inclusive of being in space
and time, is not in itself a matter of much consequence,
but it is unfortunate because ‘subsistence’ is used by


Be Uber Annahmen (Leipzig, Igto, ed. 2). The notion of neutral
being discussed in this paragraph is not imputed to Mr. Meinong.


cx.tr IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 203


Mr. Meinong (and the usage has become established
through him) to describe not being as such or bare being,
but that kind of being which contrasts with particular
existence. Subsistence is, it is thought, timeless or
eternal being, and it belongs to universals and to sup-
posals. For instance, I may say that A exists ; but it is
urged that the proposition ‘that A exists’ does not
itself exist. The battle of Waterloo was fought in 1815 ;
but it is said, the fact that it was fought then is something
independent of the time of the actual battle. The issue
which is here raised is a different one ; are universals or
supposals or ‘ facts that’ out of Time and Space? There
is no doubt of the reality of these things ; but have they
or not being within Space-Time, or determinate being ?
We are about to show in the following chapter that
universals are not timeless. But at any rate the word
subsistence marks a distinction between two classes of
objects of thought, two groups of reality, for which it is
important to have a distinctive designation.


It may throw light on the denial here made of any
being which is less than determinate being, as well as
upon other matters, if I stop to consider briefly the
famous doctrine with which Hegel’s logic opens, that
being is the same as not-being, and the two are merged
into the category of becoming. If being were concrete
being, something which has a place in the world of reality
and not in the inventions of abstract thinking, the one
thing which is more obviously true about it than another
is that it is not identical with not-being, but different from
it, that is, that it is not identical with the other but other
than it. But being is not on this doctrine concrete. It
stands for the least that can be said about anything,
namely, that it is, and it is quite true that such being
is indistinguishable from nothing. Instead of concluding
that neither of them is anything at all, Hegel proceeds to
declare their synthesis to be ‘becoming,’ which as he
himself maintains is the first concrete notion. But how
can bare abstract thoughts, abstractions as he allows them
to be, combine or be combined to produce a concrete


The
Hegelian
identity of
being and
not-being.


204 THE CATEGORIES bx.


one? or how could they be combined if they were
identical and not different? Or if we suppose that we
treat them as a mere analysis of becoming, how could
a concrete real thought be analysed into two abstractions ?
Such an analysis is not comparable to our own analysis of
Space-Time into the two elements of Space and Time.
For each of these elements is concrete, and is only an
abstraction when it is supposed to exclude the other.
They are as concrete as body and life are in the organism.
Had becoming, which is in fact motion or Space-Time in
its simplest conceptual form, been analysed into being and
non-being as different but mutually involved elements
with becoming, becoming would have been equivalent to
what we have called existence, for the existent is nothing
but motion (that is Space-Time). But it would not be
the thoughts themselves which produced their own
unification, but the character of the concrete of which the
concept becoming is the concept. It would indeed be a
gross misreading of Hegel to suppose that he “ manu-
factured the world out of categories.” He is a perfectly
concrete thinker, and to each thought corresponds a
reality. But the inadequacy of his conception of the
relation of thought to nature betrays itself at the outset
of his triumphant procession of thoughts. Instead of
conceiving the thoughts as the concepts of what is given
in nature, he treats nature as a falling off from thought.
But all true or concrete thought is tied down to nature ;
all its balloons are captive ones. The transitions from
thought to thought ‘are not made by thought itself, for
transition is only possible to thoughts which are alive.
The thoughts owe their connection not to thought but to
the motions of which they are the thoughts. And when
once the glamour is gone from the first transition from
thesis (being) through antithesis (nothing) to synthesis
(becoming) the principle of the whole series of logical
forms which is founded on this principle, and really uses
the contrast and identity of being and not-being, becomes
suspect. No wonder that to some like Mr. Bradley these
logical concepts appear to be shadows. Realities they are
not, for they live in a region of thought divorced from its


cam IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 205


material, which in the end is nothing but Space-Time.
There is no way from logic to nature in Hegel, as his
critics have often observed, except through a metaphor.!


The so-called Laws of Thought, regarded as meta-
physical laws, follow at once from these considerations.
The most important of them is the law of contradiction.
Ultimately that law means that occupation of one piece
of Space-Time is not occupation of a different one. A
thing cannot be both A and not-A at once, for if so it
would occupy two different space-times. Or more shortly
the meaning is that one space-time is not another. I
have not yet spoken of generic identity nor of sub-
stantial identity ; but even now it is plain why the
law is true where we speak of attributes and not of
numerical identity or difference. For if a thing has the
attribute A, that attribute is, as in the thing, a numerically
distinct individual. The red of this rose is generically
identical with other reds, but it is as in this rose
individual. This rose cannot be both red and not-red,
for otherwise it would in respect of its red be at once
in a piece of Space-Time, and in a piece of Space-Time
which the first piece excludes. Considered on the other
hand as a law of our thinking, the law of contradiction
means that the thinking of one object and the thinking of
its contradictory occupy mutually exclusive places in the
mental space-time.

The law of identity means that to occupy Space-Time
is to occupy it, that a thing is itself. The law of excluded
middle means in its metaphysical interpretation that given
a special occupation of Space-Time, every occupation of


1 Tt will be plain from the sequel why for me Hegel’s conception
of an evolution in thought of logical categories is mistaken. There
is only an evolution in time of empirical existences which occupy
space-times. Hegel’s categories are in fact not categories at all, as
they are understood here, the @ priori constituents of all existences.
They are rather the concepts of the various phases of natural existence :
e.g. they include ‘mechanism’ and ‘ chemism’ and ‘life.’ Or perhaps
it is truer to say that the two notions of categories as @ priori features,
and categories as concepts of phases, of existence, are not clearly separ-
ated. Hence the apparent movement in thought is only artificial.


The law
of contra-
diction,


206 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


Space-Time is either that or belongs to the rest of Space-
Time, and is another way of expressing the relation of any
being to not-being.

These conclusions are obvious from the premisses,
but they lead to another which will be unwelcome to a
method of thought which has predominating influence at
the present time. The criterion of reality (or truth) has
been found in self-contradiction ; what is self-contradictory
cannot be ultimately real but only apparent. The
principle is valid, if it means that what is self-contra-
dictory is neither ultimately nor derivately real but down-
right false ; it derives its validity however not from any
self-evidence, but from the experiential or empirical
nature of Space-Time. The reason why nothing can be
real which contradicts itself is not that this is an axiom of
our thought, but that reality since it occupies a space-
time does not occupy a different one. Deriving its
validity then from Space-Time itself, it cannot be employed
to undermine the reality of Space and Time and reduce
them to appearances of an ultimate reality which is
neither, but accounts for both. If Space-Time is the
ground on which the criterion of contradiction is based,
Space and Time are not themselves contradictory. To
suppose so would be like invoking the authority of law
to break law, or sinning against the conscience con-
scientiously.

To find out what is contradictory we must therefore
have reference to experience itself, of which the principle
of contradiction is the statement of the simplest feature.
As reflected in our thinking, the test is that of internal
self-contradiction or verbal inconsistency. Accordingly,
the only way in which the test of contradiction can be
successfully applied in the hands of Mr. Bradley to show
that the categories, or even such notions as the self,
which have been put forward as real in their own right
are not so, is to show that they are inherently inconsistent.
But this as has been pointed out! is not what has been


1 See in particular a paper of Mr. G. F. Stout’s, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, N.S. vol. ii., ‘Alleged self-contradictions in the
concept of relation,’ especially section z.


can IDENTITY, DIVERSITY, EXISTENCE 207


done. And if it could be done, the pretenders would not
have even possessed a secondary reality but would be false.
As a matter of fact what has been done is to show that
these conceptions present great difficulties and the appear-
ance of inconsistency to the understanding. But perhaps
it is their inconsistency which is apparent and not they
themselves. If we are right and all the categories are
derived from the nature of Space-Time in any part of
it, they are all real in their own right and ultimately,
because Space-Time is the stuff of which all things are
made and the categories are its simplest characters.

If such an answer were intended as a short way with
absolute idealism, it would seem to the defenders of that
method merely cavalier, because it starts from Space-Time
as a given experience. The only way which is either
possible or respectful is the long way. We have first to
verify in detail the assertion that categories are properties
of any space-time. Even then it will be urged that
Space and Time are riddled with intolerable difficulties,
although these difficulties may not amount to inherent
self-contradiction. These difficulties must be examined
and if possible removed. I am persuaded that the
alleged inconsistencies of Space and Time arise from the
separation of either of them from the other: from
neglecting the temporal character of Space and the spatial
character of Time ; and that consequently the Space and
Time which are thought to be inconsistent are not Space
and Time at all, as Space and Time enter into real
experience. But as the arguments against their reality
turn on the ultimate unreality of relation, any further
discussion is best deferred until we reach that category.


Intro-
ductory.


CHAPTER III
UNIVERSAL, PARTICULAR, AND INDIVIDUAL


Existence is identity of place and time, or numerical
identity, and distinct from other such identities. Univer-
sality is identity of kind. It is the existence or subsistence
of a universal or concept which unites its particulars,
which they imitate or in which they participate, or however
else we may provisionally and traditionally describe the
relation between the universal and its particulars—the
transaction in which they are engaged. An individual is
a particular as determined by its universal. Strictly
speaking, there is no such thing as a particular or a uni-
versal. All things are individuals. But every individual
possesses particularity which separates it from others of
the same kind, or under the same universal; and it
possesses universality which converts its bare particularity
into individuality. Universality is thus a categorial
character of all things. Such a thing need not be a thing
with continued existence in time. It may be a sensory
object, a flash of colour, or of sweetness, which is
momentary and yet as being of a certain kind, red or
sweet, is individual. A bare event or point-instant is
particular as distinct from other events, but as qualified
by the universal character of existence, its particularity is
determined in total Space-Time and it is individual
though from the nature of the case momentary and
punctual. Can we discover in Space-Time any funda-
mental feature in virtue of which the empirical complexes
within it possess universality and hence are individualised
so that throughout the world we have existents embody-
ing laws of construction ?
208


cx. UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 209


Let us begin with an individual of a low type or singular
___‘ Organisation, for example a marble ball whose particularity ive!*
__ may be supposed secured by its markings of colour. Let
us suppose for simplicity that these do not change in
colour, and let us disregard the intramolecular movements
of the ball, confining our attention to its spherical form.
The ball changes its place in space and time as the earth
moves, and may also be displaced on the relatively resting
earth. Its universality is that in all these changes it is
unaffected in form ; that wherever it is, it undergoes no
distortion, and this arises from the uniformity of Space-
Time or, as it may be expressed equivalently, from the
constant ‘curvature’' of Space. The same account
applies obviously to balls which are turned out from one
machine, so that they differ from one another, let us say,
only in their place and time. They are identical in kind
because owing to the constant curvature of Space their
form is unaffected, and so far as form goes one can take
the place of the other. A round ball does not become
in another place elliptic or crooked.

We may next take a more highly organised individual,
say a person whose life may be regarded as arranged on
a certain plan. This is the best instance of the singular
universal. Lotze compares it to the structure of a
melody. It is such a plan of a man’s personality which
an artistic portrait endeavours to express, whereas a
photograph gives only a picture of the man at a passing
moment, unless by artistry of technique the hardness of the
momentary outlines may be softened and the photograph


1 This phrase, as I have had occasion to remark before, is inaccurate
(see D. M. Y. Sommerville, The Elements of Non-Euchdean Geometry,
London, 1914, ch. vi.). It is of course not used here with the assump-
tion which the author imputes to many philosophers that three-
dimensional geometry implies Space of four dimensions. That has been
seen (Bk. I. ch. v.) in the first place not to be Space at all, in the next
place to owe what reality it possesses to the work of thought. But the
phrase is a convenient one. For the most part, however, I shall speak
of the uniformity of Space. This is to be distinguished carefully
from the supposed homogeneity or indifference of Space, which is
declared to be characteristic of ‘conceptual’ in contrast with ‘ per-


ceptual’ Space. See before, Bk. I. ch. v. p. 152, and below, p. 216 2.
VOL. I P


Generic
universals,


ute


210 THE CATEGORIES BK. 11


approximate to a portrait.!. This individual person con-
tains indeed besides universality the category of substan-
tiality, or substantial identity, a category not yet to be
investigated. He is highly complex, and the parts are
in those conditions of motion to which, as I here assume,
qualities are correlated. Yet in all his changes of space
and time a certain plan of construction is preserved. It
is preserved in his internal changes of body or mind, so
that for instance he does not alter the colour of his skin
from hour to hour like certain crustaceans ; and so that
a certain balance of actions is maintained. But it is also
preserved not only in these subtle changes of space and
time within his bodily outlines, but also in the grosser
external transferences from position to position in space
or time. I shall call a grouping or complex of point-
instants or pure events a configuration of space-time or of
motion. Now the universality of this highly complex
person (as distinct from his substantiality) means as in
the simpler case of the ball, that though at each particular
moment of his life his configuration varies and is particular,
the configuration follows a certain plan and remains within
the limits of that plan. In other words, his configuration
remains relatively unaltered while he changes in his place
or time or both. However much he be transferred or
otherwise more subtly changed internally in space-time
he preserves a certain proportion of his parts and is un-
distorted. When he is so distorted as to forsake the plan
he becomes (as happens for instance in double personality)
a different individual. Once more, in this more difficult
case, he being himself a highly intricate complex of space-
time owes his universality to the uniformity of his
medium, that is to the constant curvature of Space.


Now the identification of universality with this
uniformity was easy enough with our single ball, or our—
identical balls, for here the configuration was repeated
exactly. But with the person the actual configuration

1 Doubtless this comparison has often been made, but it seems to


me as suggestive and true now as when I first heard it from the late
Hermann Grimm at Berlin more than thirty years ago.


cxw.mtr UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 211


changes from moment to moment and only the plan of it
persists. This difficulty which was slurred over above is
still more pressing, when we come to the ordinary generic
universal, like tree or dog or justice. Dogs vary in
size and shape and disposition. How then can we speak
of the universality of. dog as a plan or form of configura-
tion of space-time, since the spatio-temporal patterns of
no two dogs can be superposed and fit into each other ?

Let us follow our usual prescription and turn to our
own minds which we know more intimately than external
things. There, in our minds, we find habits which are
dispositions of response to situations of a certain kind.
On each occasion the response, let it be an act of will like
telling the truth when we are asked a question, or the
simpler instinctive response to a perception like holding
our hands to catch a ball which is thrown to us—on each
occasion the response is particular or rather individual,
but it obeysa plan or uniform method. It varies on each
occasion by modifications particular to that instance. It
may be swift or slow, eager or reluctant, slight or intense ;
the hands move to one side or another with nicely adapted
changes of direction according to the motion of the ball ;
the words are adjusted not merely to the subject of the
question, but to the requirements, which vary in each
case, of exactitude and sincerity or of that tactfulness in
telling the truth which takes account of the mental con-
dition of the questioner, and regards his intelligence and
his feelings and susceptibilities, so that there is a fine art
of truth-telling as there is of catching a cricket ball. But
however great or fine the variations in conduct, they have
their limits within the plan of the response which is
uniform. The response proceeds with these allowances
for modification, or rather with these necessities of modifi-
cation, on established and constant mental lines which are
also constant plans of direction within the neural space.
We may tell the truth facing a person or with our back
to him, but within that neural space which we enjoy in
mind the configuration of the response follows a certain
plan. In all the variations of particular response there is
no distortion of the pattern of response.


Mental
disposi-
tions.


212 ‘THE CATEGORIES 2x,


What mental dispositions in general are, in distinction
from their effective realisation in actual conduct, I need
not inquire too minutely. Iam content to regard them
as psychophysical, indicating by that word that being -
themselves physical they are ready upon occasion to start
up into mental life. It may be that, as some think, there
is a perpetual process of fainter actual functioning along
the neural lines. It is at least certain that the disposition
is not a bare physical one, but at least physiological. It
is not represented merely by purely anatomical patterns
and is something more than a mere physical arrangement,
such as is supposed to exist in a permanently magnetised
steel bar through the tilting of the molecules in one
direction. It is more than this, because the elements
which are tilted in our neural lines are living cells. This
important question I must leave. But at any rate besides
those mental habits which are purely psychophysical, or
latent, we can detect conditions of mind which are actually
conscious, and though not definite and individual but
vaguely defined have a more special claim to be considered
mental dispositions or schemes of response. The under-
lying psychophysical disposition may not be actualised in
an individual mental response, but in a mental outline or .
scheme of one, which is a diagram of response, but yet is
mental. It may betray or reveal itself in shoots of
consciousness which are not so individual as if 1 were
actually performing the action, but are of a specific sort or
on a recognisable plan. I mean by the term specific, to
take an illustration, that the vague premonitory shoots of
consciousness which anticipate at times the actual winding
up of my watch at night are recognisably different (I
should say in ‘direction’) from the premonitory shoots
of consciousness connected with some other habit, like
turning off the electric light in my study before I go to
bed. These attitudes, rather than actions, of mind can be
verified most easily in the uneasiness which warns us to
perform the action or reminds us that we have failed
to do so. In each case the uneasiness is of a different
sort, and has a vaguely specific direction.

The clearest instances, perhaps the only ones, of these


cawomr UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 213


mental schemes in the proper sense, are afforded by the
action of conceiving, of which concepts or Gann are
the compresent objects. Observation conducted first under
ordinary conditions and then under the conditions of the
laboratory + has convinced us of the existence of ‘image-
less thinking,’ which seemed so inconceivable to some
earlier psychologists. ‘Though our thinking does not
proceed without attachment to some particular of sense,
it may be to a word, it may be to the button which we
twist while we think, or the lock of hair which we pull to
the distraction of our companions, it may be to some
mere external circumstance contained in the conditions of
the experiment; yet it may proceed without any indi-
vidual embodiment or illustration of the thought itself :
By the pricking of my thumbs
Something wicked this way comes.

The witch is a true psychologist. The pricking of her
thumbs is the particular sensory experience to which the
thought of something wicked (observe the conceptual
expression) is attached though it is no image of wicked-
ness.

Turn now from mental habits or universals to
the non-mental universals which are found in external
things. They are ‘habits’ of Space-Time, and empirical
universals like dog or tree or justice are possible because
Space-Time is uniform and behaves therefore on plans
which are undistorted by difference of place and time.
There is only one respect in which the transition from
mental habits to habits of Space-Time appears to limp.
Mental habits occur in assignable neural places, though
the limits of these areas are extensible. But the habits
of Space-Time are localised indifferently all over Space-
Time. Given the appropriate empirical conditions a
triangle or a dog may be drawn anywhere according to
their universal plan of configuration. We have indi-
cated in a previous chapter the reason for this difference


1 There is now a large literature on imageless thinking. I may
cite in particular the earlier work of Mr. Stout in Analytical Psychology,
vol. i. Bk. I. ch. iv., and the researches by Messrs. Ach, Buehler,
H. J. Watt of the Wurzburg School of the late O. Kiilpe.


Habits of
Space-
Time.


214 THE CATEGORIES ae


between mind and Space-Time.’ The mind is not like
Space-Time an infinite but a finite whole. Moreover its
consciousness of things is awaked through the senses
with their highly specialised machinery of nerve endings
and nerve centres and paths. For specific objects specific
means of apprehension are necessary, and vision, taste
and the other senses, and still more the complex patterns
for apprehending complex objects have their specific
lodgings in the brain. What is said here of mind or
consciousness applies of course with proper qualifications
to all kinds of finites, so far as these have specific methods
of response to their surroundings. Such habits are
localised in specific portions of the spatio-temporal
structure ; as will be clearer in the sequel. Further it
follows as a consequence of the want of localisation of
the habits of Space-Time to definite portions of it, that
different habits may have certain parts of Space-Time in
common, though not at the same time. Thus the same
point may be the beginning of a circle or a parabola ;
though the point-instant will have different values in the
different cases, because it will be the beginning of different
lines of advance.

I may add that the comparison of universals with
habits is not made for the first time by me, though I do
not know that the comparison has been made with the
same implications.?

Universality is therefore a category or determination
of Space-Time. Every finite possesses universality or
identity of kind in so far as it admits without distortion
of repetition in Space-Time, that is, can itself undergo
change of place or time or both without alteration, or
can be replaced by some other finite. Empirical uni-
versals are plans of configuration of particulars which are
identical in kind. They may be called patterns of con-


1 Bk. I. ch. iv. pp. 139 f.

2 Thus Mr. Bosanquet writes (Principle of Individuality, p. 40, note
3): “The universal is essentially a system or habit of self-adjusting
response or reaction.” My difference from him lies in the phrase
‘system or habit.” A habit is for me not a system of its acts but the
plan, or in extensional terms, the class of them. See below, pp. 233 ff.


CH. 111 UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 215


figuration or, to use the old Greek word, ‘forms’ of
Space-Time. They are essentially in their simplest terms
spatio-temporal forms or shapes.

If this is true of empirical universals like dog or
plant or triangle it is still more obviously true of the
most comprehensive of all universals, the categories
themselves, which are a priori plans of configuration. I
am anticipating the complete verification that they all of
them are fundamental determinations of any space-time.
In so far as relation or substance or existence, etc., is
an @ priori determination of Space-Time, these are forms
or plans or patterns of configuration of Space-Time or
motion. They are the key plans of all plans of empirical
determination. The rest of them excluding universality
communicate with universality, and universality itself
stands for the fact that everything has its form. We
cannot say that universality itself is a universal any more
than we can say that the empirical universal dog is a dog.
Universality is the category in virtue of which there are
universals, whether empirical or a@ priori ones.

Universality is thus the name of the constancy of
any existent in Space-Time, so far as it is constant, that
is, its freedom from distortion wherever it is in Space-
Time, and this is equivalent to the uniformity of Space
(or what is the same thing, Space-Time). | Just as existence
is the name for occupation of a space-time in relation to
other occupation.

If it be objected that the uniformity of Space and with
it Space-Time is after all only an empirical character and
that there need not be such constancy, I can only answer
that Space-Time though itself categorial or a priori is em-
pirical in the sense of being presented in experience with
certain characters. I should be content with this simple
fact. It is true that a geometry may be imagined whose
‘Space’ isnot uniform. But our Space is not such, whether
the Euclidean or some other geometry be the closest
approximation to the description of it. For I am not
assuming Space to be flat, with zero curvature, but merely
to have a constant curvature. Ina ‘Space’ which is not
uniform I do not see how there should be universals,


Why Space


is uniform,


>


216 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


for each plan would suffer distortion as it was transferred.!
The world would consist of nothing but particulars, not
even of individuals, for there would be no meaning in the
contrast of individual and particular without the idea of a
plan of configuration. But if we seek to understand the
deeper meaning of the constancy of Space and Space-Time
we may refer to the relations set out in a previous chapter
between Space and Time, though with the same feeling of
modesty in our assurance as beset us there. Time as we
saw was not an addition to Space, but the characters of
Space were conformable to those of Time. It is the con-
formity of Space to the one-dimensional Time, which is
uniform—flows uniformly as Newton said—that involves
with it the uniformity of Space. Universality is thus, in


1 More than one friendly critic has urged that if we can think
of a Space of varying curvature, there must be at least one uni-
versal, that is the concept of the class of such curvatures ; and con-
sequently my contention that there are universals because there is
uniformity or constant curvature breaks down in this instance. The
answer which will be clearer from the ‘objections and elucidations’
which follow is from my point of view fairly clear, The notion of a
variable curvature of Space is got from experience of Space with a
constant one by a construction of thought, like four-dimensional Space.
Because, being familiar with universals, we can universalise Space-
curvature in thought, we are not therefore free to deny that univer-
sality as we know it in experience depends on constancy of curvature.
Moreover, while there is a good meaning in the universal contained in
the varying curvatures of curves in our Space, it is difficult to see what
is the universal element in the varying curvatures of the supposed Space
which itself varies in curvature. The supposed universal is rather
comparable to colour in relation to the various colours, red, green, etc.
There is no element colour in these of which red and green are varia-
tions. Colour is a collective name rather than a class one or a
universal. Such a universal curvature is nothing then, as before, but
a bare thought ; and no conclusion can be drawn from the supposition
of my critics. But, whether this last comparison be valid or not, I
recall their attention to the real problem, which is how there can be
sameness or generic identity at all. You may take these different
entities, space-curvatures, however measured, and construct a new so-
called ‘Space’ from them. But their generic identity is of your
making. Unless they are the same in themselves there is no real
universal of them. You may consider them as forming a class with
the sameness called curvature. But you have still to ask the prior
question how there can be classes of things at all. Sameness has
to be accounted for before things can form a class. It is this funda-
mental question that the text endeavours to answer.


casmm UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR avy


our drastic metaphor, begotten like the other categories
by Time on Space. _In all this the constancy or uniformity
of Space-Time or Space is carefully to be separated from
the notion of the bare homogeneity of Space or Time, in
the sense that there is imagined to be no real difference
between one part of Space or Time and another. This
notion is justly the bugbear of philosophers ; though some
have thought to retain it by distinguishing between con-
ceptual and perceptual Space or Time. I need not now
revert to the errors which underlie this distinction, which
would make conceptual Space a falsification of perceptual
Space. But in fact we have seen that Space and Time
differentiate each other : that every point differs from any
other by its instant and every instant by its point. Point-
instants are concepts but singular ones, and each point-
instant is an individual. As Mr. Russell has observed,
points seem all alike to us only because we have no in-
terest in discriminating them. The uniformity of Space
or Time or Space-Time does not mean this supposed
conceptual indifference of point-instants but merely that a
given plan of configuration is repeated in any part of
Space-Time where it occurs without distortion.


We have first to enter a caveat against the old possi-
bility of misunderstanding which has been noted from the
beginning. Plans, it may be thought, of space-time are
nothing but the universals of different patches of Space-
Time, the circular plan, for example, the universal of all
circular patches. They are but particular applications of
a conceptual universal which is prior to Space and Time
and is supplied from understanding or thought, it matters
not how. Universality belongs to Space-Time but comes
down upon it, either it may be imagined from mind or
from some eternal region as the Forms are supposed to
enter into Space by Timaeus. Our answer is the old one.
It is not because there are universals that any space-time
has a plan, but because Space-Time is uniform, or constant
in curvature, and admits a plan that existents which
are patches of space-time possess universality. Or the
misunderstanding may take another form. A constant


Objections
and eluci-
dations,


218 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


curvature means that the curvature is the same, and there
is a prior notion of generic sameness. I answer that the
constancy of curvature is an experienced or empirical fact
or character of Space-Time, and that it is this which makes
particulars of a sort the same in different positions.
Sameness (generic identity) follows from the constant
curvature ; the logical denomination of things follows
from or expresses the real nature of Space-Time.

These are misunderstandings. There is however a
different objection to meet which has much better pre-
tensions to be heard. The very name of plan or pattern
or form or law implies, it will be said, the idea of univer-
sality ; and the problem is concealed by a word. For a
plan is something of which many copies are possible. If
only a definite configuration of space-time were concerned,
like a right angle or a definite loudness of the note C, we
might be content with a reference to the constancy of
Space-Time. But when you allege that an acute angle at
A and an obtuse angle at B are instances of one and the
same plan or habit, the angular habit, you are really under
the protection of a name introducing the universal ‘ angle.’
For there is no one configuration of space-time which
can be called an angle. Thus to account for the generic
identity of angles you are introducing between the con-
stancy of Space to which you appeal and the particular
angles a universal under the name of a plan, which is the
condition under which that constancy can be applied to
individual angles of such great variation. The universal
you say belongs to Space-Time as such, but a new uni-
versal is needed on your own showing to mediate between
the particulars and Space-Time. This objection is highly
relevant, and it is analogous to one of the kinds of objec-
tion taken in ancient Greece to the Forms under the name
of the argument of the ‘third man.’! Besides the in-
dividual men and the form Man there is a third man.

1 There is a very instructive critical account of the various forms
of the third -man argument in a paper by Mr. A. E. Taylor on
‘Parmenides, Zeno and Socrates,’ in Proceedings Arist. Soc., 1915-16,
N.S. vol. xvi. I do not enter into the question, which among these


arguments the above objection corresponds to. I think it is the
argument from infinite regress used in the Parmenides.


cx.m1 UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 219


But it is in truth SOU as directed against the pre-
sent conception of universals. It arises only from the
latitude of the universal in question. Angle means a
configuration formed by two straight lines of divergent
directions in a plane. The habit of Space-Time to which
it is equivalent is the possibility of the existence of such
a configuration at any point. The magnitude of the angle
does not enter into the plan. If the universal were the
limited one of an angle of 60°, there would be no variation
of magnitude in the copies. The plan triangle allows
for variation in the magnitude of angles and sides within
the limits fixed by triangularity. The four-sided figure
with equal sides is similarly a plan or pattern which is
satisfied by the rhombus or the square.

What is true of the empirical universals of geometry,
which have been chosen in these examples, is true in like
manner of ordinary ‘ qualitied’’ universals, like dog or tree
or justice. The relation between the universal and the
particulars is the same in these cases as the relation between
the universal triangle or circle and the particular triangles or
circles, which Plato called mathematical objects. Fora par-
ticular dog is in the end a spatio-temporal configuration,
where the groupings of motion are such as to have sensible
qualities correlative with them. Soregarded a particular dog
differs from a particular triangle only in its muchgreatercom-
plexity. It too is spatially considered a geometrical figure,
but of an order which is too complicated to be treated by
the geometry of simpler figures. Particular triangles are
perfectly rectilinear because the triangle is a figure ideally
constructed within Space, or selected from it. But
irregular as the contours of a dog may be, he is none the
less a geometrical figure. Mathematical particulars are
therefore not as Plato thought intermediate between
sensible figures and universals. Sensible figures are only
less simple mathematical ones. This is the whole of the
difference. In any case whether it is with a mathematical
or a qualitied universal that we are concerned, there is no
question of any plan mediating between the particular and
the uniformity of Space-Time ; the plan is an embodiment
of that uniformity. The universality of the plan is the


Subsistence
and exist-
ence.


220 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


capacity of Space-Time to respond on each occasion accord-
ing to that plan.

Thus the universal is related to its particulars as
the equation of a curve is related to the instances of
it which may be obtained by varying the so-called
constants in the equation. For example the equation to
the parabola (y?=4ax) is universal as the formula which
applies to all curves described by the formula, where the
element a varies.1 A more satisfactory statement still is
that the equation of the second degree Ax’ + By’? + Cxy +
Dx+Ey+F=O is the universal of all conic sections
which can be obtained by appropriate values in the capital
letters. This brings out most clearly how the universal
or plan is the key to the utmost range of variation not
merely in magnitude but in configuration within the
limits of the pattern configuration. For it includes under
its formula such different configurations as the ellipse
and the parabola and the hyperbola which yet are subject
to the one more comprehensive pattern or habit of Space-
Time. The formula of the circle whose centre is the
origin x*+y’=7" has a much smaller limit of variation in
the magnitude of its one constant, while the equation
x? + y?= 36 is limited to the one definite kind of con-
figuration.

It will be observed that I do not call the equation to
the circle or the parabola the universal of the points of
which the circle or parabola consists, the significance of
which reservation will appear in another context.”


It has not seemed to me necessary to insist that the
universals of physical things are non-mental ; for this is
the only statement which is consistent with the whole spirit
of our hypothesis, even if the mentality of Forms had not
been summarily disposed of by Plato himself. But what
kind of reality, it may be asked, do universals possess?
Half the difficulty, or perhaps all of it, disappears when
once it is admitted that particulars are complexes of


1 Cp. Lotze, Logic, § 117. 2 Below, p. 235.
° Parmenides, 132 b, The argument is discussed fully in Mr.
Taylor’s paper just cited.


cx#nr1 UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 221


space-time and belong therefore to the same order or
are of the same stuff as the universals which are plans of
space-time. The objections taken to the conception that
the particulars participate in the universals or imitate
them, a conception which plays so great a part in the
history of the theory of universals, vanish upon. this
doctrine. The argument of the ‘third man’ arose from
the apparent separation of the form from its particulars
because the particulars were sensible. But if sensibles
are made of space-time stuff they follow their spatio-
temporal pattern, and whether we call the relation one of
imitation or participation, either designation is valid and
true. Of the two, participation is to be preferred because
imitation suggests a separate independent reality of the
universal, and participation means that the plan is not
copied but modified to suit the special circumstances of
time and place.

To say with Aristotle in his mood of antagonism to
his master that the universal is predicable of the particulars
converts the universal into a simple predicate and risks
confusion with the notion of the inherence of a quality
in its substance, a very different relation, the discussion
of which belongs to the head of substance. For the
proposition ‘this is yellow or sweet’ has an entirely different
meaning from the proposition ‘this is a dog’ or ‘ this is a
yellow or a sweet.’ Taken in extension this last pro-
position means that this is one of a class, but that class
is itself defined and designated (denoted) by its constitutive
universal. Taken in intension the predicate here is not
a quality at all but a plan of construction. The universal
is never therefore something which we assert of its
particulars or which merely obtains of its particulars, and
the universal does not depend on the predication but the
predication on the universal.

On the other hand to call the universal an independent
reality appears to give it a unique position from which as
it were it should descend upon its particulars and inform
them with its spirit. It seems to transfer universals into
a neutral world, whereas their stuff is the same as the
stuff of their particulars. The same objection applies to


22% THE CATEGORIES BK. I


the notion that the universal is the limit towards which
the particulars are a progression. For the limit of a series
is never itself a member of that series but outside it.’
Thus the series, 1, 1+4, 1+4 +4, etc. approaches to 2
as its limit, but 2 is not a member of the series. It is
true that the limit of a series is of the same order as the
series, the limit of a series of numbers is itself a number,
and this is what makes the conception of universals as
limits enlightening. But the limit is constitutive of the
series only to the afterthought which recognises that the
series has the limit. What corresponds in the series to
the universal is the law of its formation and this is not
outside but ‘ within’ the series, though it is not of course
a particular member of the series.

The universal exists therefore only so far as it is
realised in its particulars and it has such reality as, to use
a phrase of Mr. Bosanquet, is possible to it. It may be
said to have that reality of existence which is called sub-
sistence. For it is free from limitation to one particular
space and time. But subsistence must not be under-
stood to imply a neutral being which is distinct from
the world of spatio-temporal existence. The universal
subsists in so far as its particulars exist and is spatio-
temporal though not particular. The universal is nowhere
and nowhen in particular but anywhere and anywhen, and
in Hume’s language is in readiness to start into being
(which is existence) when the occasion calls. It is not
timeless or eternal as being out of time, but as being free
from limitation to a particular time.

Moreover not only does the universal exist in this
qualified sense which is called subsistence, but we must
add, extreme as the statement may sound, the universals
are spatio-temporal, physical, biological, mental, according
to the level of existence to which their individuals belong.
Universals are not necessarily like triangle or square merely
spatio-temporal. When we reach rocks or plants or minds,
we have plans or habits of Space-Time which include plans
to which various qualities are correlated and which area plan
of the combination of such plans. In this sense we must


1 Cp. T. P. Nunn, Te Teaching of Algebra, London, 1914, p. 542.


car UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 223


say, though the full meaning cannot be developed at
present, that universals of physical things are physical,
and that the universal man though it is not a man is
man or human. A physical universal is a physical
subsistent and a mental one a mental subsistent. This
does not interfere with their being ultimately all alike
spatio-temporal, for all things no matter what their
qualities are bits of Space-Time.

In order to realise more clearly the meaning of the
subsistence of universals we may first revert to mental
dispositions. Such a disposition is either experienced
consciously in imageless thought (by what may be called
a diagrammatic process of mind) or else we can conceive
it as a neural (psychophysical) disposition, or physical
tilt of cells. Now our habits as we saw are localised.
But there is nothing lower than Space-Time in which to
locate a disposition of it. What then is this disposition ?
It is certainly not something which we who think can
say, apres coup, about Space and Time, merely because
upon occasion we have particulars of a certain kind which
we put into classes. On the contrary, only because of the
universal and at its guidance can we arrange in a class.
It is itself something spatio-temporal. Nor is it a
bare potentiality. When a part of Space-Time is not
occupied by a real dog, it is occupied by something else,
if not by something material, then by Space-Time. For
Space-Time is always full; there are no vacua in that
matrix of things. It differs only at one moment and
another (and the difference may be enormous) by the
different configuration of its motions. Thus there may
be no dog or chalk triangle at this moment here in the
space before me—those are not the lines of advance
within that space—yet when the occasion comes the dog
may be there, because tne actual grouping of movements
has been replaced by that grouping of movements, with
their correlative qualities, which is a dog. Provided of
course the empirical circumstances do not impede ; for
no dog can replace a stone wall which is not removed.
To take a more obvious instance, which is suggested to
me by an interruption to my writing, a volume of space-


224 THE CATEGORIES BK. Il


time filled by wind may be displaced by that highly
complex grouping of qualities, my body, as I walk. We
may make the matter easier for imagination by saying
that any space contains actually all geometrical patterns as
soon as the time comes to draw them.

Such instances do nothing more than illustrate the
feature of Space-Time that within any part of it the
distribution of point-instants may take any plan permitted
or required by the empirical conditions. It is only in
this sense that the plan of a universal is potential ; its
potentiality is a reality consisting in the readiness of Space-
Time to adopt it, because Space-Time is built up of point-
instants whose place and time are perpetually changing their
distribution. This is the general potentiality of Space-
Time. Its specific potentiality, as when an acorn is said
to be potentially an oak, is describable in more specific
real terms. But all potentiality is real though it is not
an existence in particular. And in fact can anything be
more real, a more concrete (though elementary and not
specific) determination than the constancy to which all
universality has been traced? From the point of view
of this question, perhaps our labour to give a more
definite meaning to subsistence is labour lost.

Universals then though they have not existence in
particular have subsistence in so far as Space-Time suffers
or allows existence according to the plan of the universal.
They are the formulae according to which Time brings
forth particulars in a Space which can receive this plan.
Time is not therefore the moving image of eternity as
Plato or Timaeus said, holding the forms to be eternal.
The forms are not imposed on Space. But the Time
which is the life of Space brings to birth particulars in
their image.

Universals are not more real than their particulars
but have greater significance, as the general equation to
a circle is of greater significance than the same equation
with a numerical magnitude assigned to its radius. They
are concrete in the sense that they are not abstract
general ideas such as Berkeley directed his invective
upon. They are the constitutive plans of things. They


eam UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 225


are spatio-temporal and have all the concrete reality of
Space-Time. For the matrix and its determinations are
as concrete as the crystals deposited from it.


It has been thought that extramental universals, owing
nothing to thought save that they are compresent with
thinking and owe to thinking that they are known or
thought of, must be lifeless— petrified’ is the word used.?
Nothing can be farther from the truth. Universals do
not move or act; it is their particulars which do this.
But they are the plans of motion and action, to which
all action conforms. Like the cockles and mussels of the
fishergirl’s song they are “alive, alive, O!” But they
do not owe their life to mind. On the contrary, the life
which universals possess in mind is but an example of
the spatio-temporal vitality of all universals. Mental
universals are mental habits, and it is in virtue of the
dispositional character which they realise that particular
mental acts work their effects. The best known instance
of this is found in ordinary association of ideas. One
particular idea having been united with a second in an
interesting experience, another idea which is like the first
calls up an idea like the second. For an idea is never
repeated identically. What is repeated is its disposition.
The new idea which sets this disposition going, set in
action the connected disposition which is actualised in a
particular. The original experience was 4,),. The new
experience is 4,b,. The two a’s are particulars of the
mental habit A, the two #’s of the habit B. The
variation of 4 produced by experiencing a, rather than a,,
leads to the reinstatement of B in the form J, rather than
b,, by the operation of what Mr. Stout calls relative
suggestion, which is in fact an instance of the organic
character of mind. All this has now become the common
possession of psychologists. Nothing in it except what
is biological is peculiar to mind, and what is biological is
shared by mind with life. The plants also exhibit the
working of relative suggestion in adapting themselves

1 Mr. Bosanquet’s Distinction of Mind from its Objects, p. 36,
Manchester, 1913.

VOL. I Q


Universals
not lifeless.


226 THE CATEGORIES BEIT


within settled lines to changing circumstances. In the
end the character of all action physical or mental depends
on universals, and in the end all universals, mental as well
as physical, are spatio-temporal habits, though they are
patterns of other qualities as well.

It is in fact the cardinal defect of universals as
conceived by Plato or the Pythagoreans that they were
changeless and immoveable and eternal. For not even
the mind of Plato could be free from the habits of his
age, one of whose tendencies was to seek the highest
ideals of perfection in gravity of action and statuesque
repose rather than in restless motion.’ Hence to account
for motion he had to look for another source which he
found in soul. It is claiming no great credit that for
us universals should have from the beginning the form
of motion,” should be not merely spatial but spatio-
temporal. They are not particular motions but the plans
of motion and they are actualised in particular motions.
As the empirical universals vary from bare geometrical
patterns to the universals of material and living and
thinking things they become plans of motions which are
correlated with qualities. They are plans of configuration
of qualities or configurations of matter or mental action.
But they are never dead or petrified, because in the end
they are spatio-temporal plans and instinct with Time.
And above all they are never bare potentialities, the
creatures of abstract thinking, but possess such actuality
as they can possess, which is not particular actuality or


1 In a very interesting conversation, reported by M. Paul Gzell
(Art, by Auguste Rodin, translated from the French by Mrs.
Romilly Fedden, London, 1912), Rodin points out how the Greek
statues, ¢.g. the Venus of Milo, or the Tanagra statuettes, secured the
impression of repose by the opposite inclinations of the lines of the
shoulders and the hips, so as to produce a balance of the body.
Whereas in later art, as in the David of Michael Angelo, the lines
are in the same direction, and the result is the impression of motion.

2 I can accept with equanimity the laughing charge of Aristophanes
against one of the sophists of his time that “Vortex has expelled
Zeus and reigns in his place.” Empirical things are vortices or
eddies in the stuff of Space-Time, and universals are the laws of their
construction. But I hope to show in the end how Vortex reintroduces
Zeus in a more considered and worthier guise and to a securer throne.


cx. UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 22


existence. The laws of the construction of things and
those of the relations of things to one another are not
therefore inventions of the mind imputed to nature, but


part and parcel of the constitution of nature, and far more .


important parts than the particular facts from which they
are supposed to be merely derived by our human thought,
as if thought could make anything real which it does
not find."


Whatever difficulty there may be in conceiving the
nature of a universal and its relation to its particulars,


1 | have made no attempt in the above to consider the bearing of
the result on the teaching of Plato and the Pythagoreans ; partly
because it would be a matter of great length but mostly because I have
not the required scholarship. I imagine that it is more in keeping
with Pythagoreanism than with Plato himself. On the other hand,
in describing universals as patterns of motion I do not go the length
of one of the later Pythagoreans, Eurytus, of whom Mr. Burnet tells
us that he represented the form of man (supposed identical with the
number 250) by sticking pebbles to that number into wet plaster
along the outlines of a human shape. This makes the form of man
not merely a pattern of matter but actually a material thing. But
exaggerated as the procedure is, the spirit of it is sound, and I delight
in Eurytus. The Platonic doctrine of forms as numbers, that they are
composed of limit and the unlimited or indeterminate dyad, represents
within the world of forms what I am trying to say without any division
of form from sensible things, allowance always being made for the
absence of Time from Plato’s conception of numbers or forms. But
the separation of forms from sense which is common to Plato and the
Pythagoreans disappears, as remarked above, when sensibles are regarded
as spatio-temporal complexes. I have thought it best to use Plato for
my purposes as a guide to my own inquiry without nice discussion of
him for his own sake. For the same reason I do not enter into the
question of how much in the above is in agreement with Aristotle’s
teaching when he is constructive and not merely critical of Plato.
For Plato (with qualifications) as for him the forms were constructive
laws. His doctrine that the species is the genus in energy or
actualised appears to mé of the greatest significance. On the other
hand, what he adds to Plato in the matter is not very satisfying and
certainly does not bridge the gap between sense and thought. For
the actualisation of the species demands a prior individual of the same
species: “man begets man.” But Aristotle though an evolutionist
was necessarily only a logical and not a biological evolutionist—like
Hegel after him. The whole controversy as to whether forms are
beside particulars or in them loses its importance, as I have observed
before, when both form and particulars are spatio-temporal.


Universals
and repeti-
tion.


228 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


one thing can at least be affirmed, that without repetition
or the possibility of it there would be no universality.
The idea of a plan contains two features which must
be distinguished. A plan is a complex of parts, and
accordingly all universals imply such complexity, except
in the limiting case of bare existence or point-instants
where there is simplicity ; though even here an instant is
intrinsically (not merely empirically or as a matter of fact)
repeated in space and a point in time; point-instants
being the bare conceptual elements of Space-Time. A
plan or universal involves, outside this case, relations of
parts, or when it is a ‘law of nature’ it involves relations
of things to one another. The relation within such plan
or law is preserved under all instances, though with
indefinite scope for variation so long as the relation is
preserved. What these limits are is a purely empirical
matter. There is no categoria] reason why there should
not be human beings two miles high. The reason is
found in the empirical conditions, the difficulty of
obtaining food enough, the extreme difference in the
temperature of the atmosphere at the head and the feet,
and the like. The experiment has been tried on a
modest scale with mammoths and dinosaurs and has
failed.

But the internal complexity or systematic character
of a plan is not its universality; and because of the
ambiguity of the word plan, law, which means universality,
is preferable. To a universal, whether the law of con-
struction of a thing or of relation to other things,
repetition or the possibility of it is vital. A generic
universal may as a matter of fact never be repeated
empirically. There may be only one instance of the
generic universal ‘a Napoleon.’ But as a universal and
not merely a plan it implies repetition. The singular
universal, e.g. Napoleon, is repeated in its moments of
actual existence. Apart from possible repetition a plan
would be only the plan of a particular, and would be in
fact not a plan or law but an actual particular, not even
an individual. This is in fact only to say again that a
universal is a habit.


cx#u1 UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 229


Why certain universals should occur only once and
others repeated in varying numbers, why there should be
actual repetition of complexes of events, is for the moment
greatly dark. It again concerns the empirical order of
things, of which we know so little and of which philo-
sophers can say even less. There are multitudes of
atoms of gold, and multitudes of electrons from which
a selection is made to constitute atoms, and many trees
and dogs. The inorganic world spawns, like fishes in
the organic world. The universe in its lower levels
behaves apparently (does it do so really ?) as if endowed
with life. Knowledge of this kind we have, but what
more have we? We accept repetition of things in their
kinds as an empirical fact. To do so presents, it must
be confessed, a problem of the gravest difficulty, which is
only mitigated and not removed by the consideration
that the multiplicity of individuals of one type, or that
of types which fall under higher types, 1s not bare


repetition, that the many specimens differ from one


The
problem
of multi-
plicity.


another however slightly, that even an atom is only a°


statistical conception, the conception of an average of
individuals all varying about a mean. The fact of
multiplicity remains. Supposing it to be true that no
reason can be found in the nature of Space-Time itself
why types should repeat themselves in many instances,
we should have succeeded in overcoming the difficulty of
how universals can be realised in particulars, only to be
left with the problem, apparently insoluble, of how there
come to be particulars at all. Later we shall see that
quality is the distinctive empirical element in things, as
contrasted with their a priori or categorial characters and
with the relations of empirical things which arise from
their being complexes of Space-Time. It may be that
we must regard the multiplicity of nature in instances as
something equally empirical. It may be that the problem
though not now soluble, and I cannot see at present the
solution of it, may ultimately admit solution, as I hope.
I shall return to the matter at a later stage. At present
we must insist that if there were no universals which as
1 Bk. III. ch. ix. F, ‘On values in general.’


The dis-
trust of
repetition.


230 THE CATEGORIES BK, tt


a matter of fact were repeated in their instances, we
should not have reached the conception of universals.
And more than that, if there were not the categorial possi-
bility (that is the a priori possibility) of empirical
repetition, not only would universality not be known
(which after all concerns only human beings) but there
would be no universality.


Several reasons exist which account for the tendency
on the part of certain writers to push too far their
reaction against the teaching of sheer empiricism which,
not being empirical enough, disallows the reality of the
non-empirical. They neglect the claims of repetition to
be regarded as vital to universality and to be distinguished
from the systematic nature of a universal. One reason
is the fear of bare repetition, of instances which are not
variations of a plan, but manufactured articles which
exactly reproduce each other. If such repetition existed
the use of instances would lie merely in their number.
But as Mr. Bosanquet has so impressively taught us, the
value of instances is that by their differences of character,
not by their number, we are able to control one case by
another and render precise the fundamental law which is
involved and which may be masked by irrelevant circum-
stances or counteracted by others, “ to purify ” the law “ by
exceptions and finally limit it by negations.”! When a
single instance is of the right character it may be sufficient
to establish a law ; and the business of the logician is to
define that rightness of character. On the other hand,
mere number of instances which we roughly call the same
is only useful when analysis is impotent, and it can serve
us because we can reason backwards from the relations
between the number of various groups of instances to
the probable character of the causes which are at work.

Now our conception of repetition renders this fear
groundless ; it means that repetition brings not exact
identity but modifications within limits of an identical
plan of construction. The more comprehensive is the
plan, the greater the room left for variations which may


1 Logic, vol. ii. ch. iv. p. 117, eds. i. and ii.


cx.m1 UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 231


themselves be specific variations of kind. Bare repetition
it may be affirmed does not even exist. Manufactured
articles are not identical though they may be identical
within certain limits of precision. It is, however, true
that the more closely instances reproduce each other the
less useful they are for scientific discovery. But the mere
difference of place and time which makes an instance
numerically distinct may supply empirical conditions
sufficient to lead to variation utilisable for scientific
method.

A second reason is the fear lest laws or universals
should be mistaken for the abstract generalities or
generalisations which Berkeley demolished, which are
derived or are supposed to be derived from their
particulars by a process of omission. The specific
features of individuals which give to things their ordered
variety and richness of colouring are omitted; their
common features are retained, and it is the business of
thought to discover and arrange these generalities. Such
abstractions are often spoken of, by those who justly
repudiate them, as ‘class-concepts.’ Correspondingly, laws
of nature have sometimes been conceived as abstractions
of the common elements in the relations of things to the
neglect of the variations of those relations. Now it is
evident enough that useful as such abstractions may be
and are for artificial or provisional purposes, they have
nothing in common with universals as plans or laws of
construction, for these so far from neglecting the wealth
and variety of their particular instances are the formulae
which hold the instances together, not merely in our
thinking but in fact. But I cannot see from such
acquaintance as I possess with science that these ab-
stractions represent its practice. A class in the actual
practice of the sciences is not a bare collection of par-
ticulars which happen to agree in certain important
respects, but a group determined by their constitutive
formula. Witness the displacement in biology of the
artificial by the natural system of classification. Even
the artificial system was inspired by a true scientific
instinct, for all its faults. For the sexual parts on which


232 THE CATEGORIES BK, II


the classification is founded are of the last importance in
organic life, and supply a clue to, or in Mill’s phrase are
an index of, a vast number of other important properties.
The constant effort of the physicist or chemist is to
discover characters which are index characters to the real
constitution of things. The atomic weights were a first
approximation to this end. At present we are witnessing
the attempt to resolve the atom into a planetary system
of electrons in motion round their central nucleus.
Where would it be possible to find a more flagrant
example of the real striving of physical science after
constitutive plans? It is true that so eminent a logician
as Jevons has represented scientific procedure as founded
on the ideal of perfect enumeration of instances. But it
is hardly just that the sciences should be saddled with
the errors of their interpreters. The most elementary
acquaintance with simple mathematics is enough to show
in them the same endeavour after systematising their
facts that is verifiable in the less ‘abstract’ sciences. The
idea that mathematical propositions are mere generalisa-
tions could only be entertained by the misunderstanding
of empirical method to which Mill fell a victim. He
attempted to set geometry on the level of the inductive
sciences by regarding geometry and arithmetic as con-
cerned not with Space and Time themselves but with
the physical things which occupy them. Geometry is
indeed an empirical and experimental science; but its
empirical subject-matter is not the things which fill Space,
but their spaces. It observes the behaviour of Space,
and the variety of its empirical material supplied by
complexes within Space are the figures whose _properties
it discovers and connects into a system. It is thus not
the sciences themselves which in their spirit and purpose
worship the idol of abstract generalities. A spectre has
been conjured up by the fears of philosophers which
is called the mechanical method of science. But so
far as I can see, it is the offspring of mistaken philo-
sophers, or of science playing the part, as it often rightly
does, of a spectator of its own procedure, but failing to
do it justice. -


~


cx UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 233


A profounder reason for the distrust of universals, The


described as laws which are repeated in particular instances,
is connected with the previous one. ‘They seem to some
to remove us from reality, whereas the aim of all thought
and science is to preserve the most intimate contact with
reality, and with reality in its sensible form. Such an aim is
more surely, say they, embodied in a work of art where
every part of the work is vivified by its meaning, which
as it were penetrates into every corner of the statue or
the picture or the poem. Laws are infected with the
repetitive disease ; and the infection is conveyed by Space
and Time, which are for these thinkers the beau-ideal of
endlessness without purpose, the splintering of things
into dissipated elements without the stability of real
existence. The duty of thought is to be organic, and
even if there is something which can never be reduced to
terms of thought, if a person for instance can never be
exhausted in his personality by any organisation of
predicates, yet thought aspires to be individual and in its
own sphere to mirror reality so far as thought can. All
thinking tends thus to the concrete, defining itself into
complex individuality. The ‘mechanical principle’
neglects this purpose and misses the true concreteness of
thought.

It is such reasons which have led to the doctrine of
the ‘concrete universal,’ a doctrine derived from Hegel
and nowhere expounded with more effect and enthusiasm
than by Mr. Bosanquet in the second chapter of his
Principle of Individuality and Value. ¥or our hypothesis
on which things are ultimately complexes of space-time,
it seemed that thoughts, whose object is the plans of such
configurations, never can be divorced from their par-
ticulars ; that Space and Time, so far from being the
least self-subsistent of things, are in truth in their indis-
soluble union the ultimate reality in its simplest and
barest terms ; that the plans which it admitted are there-
fore concrete. But they do not aspire to be ‘concrete
universals’ in distinction from the alleged abstract ones
which do not and cannot exist. The so-called ‘concrete
universal’ is in fact not a universal but a universe. It 1s


‘concrete ’
universal.


234 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


not a law but a system. The relation of the universal to
its particulars ceases to be that of a plan to its participants,
but becomes that of a society to its members or a world
to its parts. “The true embodiment of the logical
universal,” says Mr. Bosanquet, “takes the form of a
world whose members are worlds.” The universal in
the form of a world refers to diversity of content within
every member as the universal in the form of a class
neglects it.” (The universal we have described has
neither the form .of a world nor of a so-called class, but
of a plan or law.) In the end there can be but one true
universal, and that is the world itself as a single individual.
Hence the significance of the phrase “a world whose
members are worlds.” ‘The test of universality which it
(the concrete universal) imposes is not the number of
subjects’? (granted at once!) “which share a common
predicate, but rather than this, the number of predicates
that can be attached to a single subject” (for instance,
the name of a person).’

The recognition of this logical form as the true type
of universality, Mr. Bosanquet says, “is the key to all
sound philosophy.” With all respect to the writer who
defends it with such skill, I venture to think this
doctrine combines into one two distinct notions. One is
that of the union of different features into a plan or law
which is realised with modifications in individual instances,
the combination of many predicates which appears to be
intended in the passage I have quoted. This is the uni-
versal as I have described it. But such a plan can-
not be called a universe. The other notion is that of the
union into a system of different individuals in or by or
under sucha plan. Such a union is indeed a universe, but
its relation to its particulars is not that of an individual
to its predicates, nor that of a plan to its embodiments.
A universe of particulars is not the universal of them.
It introduces in fact a different and important conception
which it misnames universal, that of an individual
substance or the totality of changing phases of an indi-
vidual’s life, every one of which follows a certain plan


1 Loc. cit. pp. 37-40.


cnin UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 235


or universal. I find in the doctrine of the concrete
universal these two notions intermixed.!

The distinction may be illustrated first from the case
of an individual person, which is regarded as typical. Any
fact as we have seen is universal in so far as it follows a
plan of constitution and can be repeated according to that
plan in time and space. As a particular determined
according to a plan it is an individual. An individual
substance or thing (to anticipate what belongs to a later
chapter) is the continuum of these repeated instances
of its universal plan. In a personality the various acts of
the individual are highly organised, and in the phases of
his life distinct activities become prominent, but always in
subordination to the one plan. Thus when an individual
follows the well-known rule of Sir William Jones :

Six hours to law, to soothing slumbers seven,

Ten to the world allot, and all to Heaven ;
dedication to Heaven describes the universal plan, the
individual person is the continuum of different conditions
of life which follow this plan. The theory of the concrete
universal would make him the universal of his acts as
well as the universe of them.

This case is that of an organised individual, and is of
great complexity. A simpler case is that of a parabola
whose equation is y?= 44x, where a has some definite value.
This individual parabola is the thing or substance com-
posed of all the points which follow the plan so described,
and is the universe of them. But their universal is not
the parabola but what may be described by the phrase
‘any point which satisfies this equation.’ ‘The parabola
is not a universal. On the other hand, there is a universal
parabola which is the plan of all such totalities of points,
a plan symbolised by the same equation when the para-
meter a may vary from curve to curve. This universal
parabola is not, however, the universe of all parabolas,
and in fact there is no such individual or universe.

1 Thus Mr. Bosanquet himself, as before noted, compares a universal
in the mind to a habit, and so far I seem to be repeating his view of


the universal. But a habit is surely not related to its realisations as
a thing to its predicates.


236 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


This is still plainer when we pass to a species or
genus, which can only be called the universal of its
specimens as being their plan of construction. If it means
their universe, where is such an individual whole to be
found? There is only the collection of individuals, which
have not even that approach to organisation that can be
found ina parabola. It may indeed happen that instances
of a species (or, if we prefer to say so, species of a genus)
are connected together into an organic whole which is
more than a mere whole of parts. This is the case as |
believe with human societies ; and wherever beings tend
to communal life there is an approach to this state of
things. The members of a society are instances of a type
which is represented by the society as a whole, and the
society is in fact a species which is itself an individual
existence! But we are not entitled on the strength of
such special (and perhaps disputable cases) to identify a
universal with an organised individual because the plan
of the individual members happens in these cases to be
in some way embodied in the whole. We still need the
notion of a plan or law, and this is what commonly is
called a universal.

In avoiding abstract universals, which not true science
uses but a false logic of science imagines, the theory we
are commenting upon assigns the name of universal to
something which is not a universal in the traditional sense,
but something different which is yet blended with the
older meaning of universal. If the matter were one of
nomenclature alone, it would not signify so much. Its
importance lies in the metaphysical consequences. If
universals (on the discovery of which all science turns)
are really universes, and not merely laws, there is in the
end only one universe or individual which is self-existent ;
the minor universes are shadows. For if the universal is
related to its particulars as a thing to its predicates they
become “adjectival” to it, and in the end the minor
universes are adjectival to the one universe or absolute
individual. If on the other hand the reality is Space-


1 H. Spencer has, I believe, a remark somewhere to this effect,
where I cannot remember.


CH. III UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR bey


Time, individual things, and minor universes which are
groupings of them, are real with the reality of their parent,
which is then “the nurse and mother of all becoming,” not
the devouring maw which swallows all empirical things.
The ‘concrete universal’ then mistakes universality
for system. It remains to add that the idea of system or
organisation is of the highest value for understanding the
problem of knowledge, and it is by this clue that Mr.
Bosanquet himself has been able to render such service
to logical theory. Organisation is a great empirical fact.
It begins lower down than organic life and is perpetually
overcoming the repetitive tendency which is equally
empirical. As we ascend the scale of being in the order
of time, aggregates are replaced by organic systems ; and
the higher a thing is in the scale, the greater it seems is
its ordered complexity. But system in general exists in
every complex even in the least organised, all disorder
has its own complex plan. System is the coherence of
elements, and the notion of system represents the essential
continuity of Space-Time which it retains while it breaks
up into its parts. The parts remain within the whole
and are coherent with one another. Science investigates
the particular forms of such coherence, and organisms are
a highly-developed instance of it. The nature of an


_ organism and still more a work of art is rightly exemplary


in the methods which reason follows. Thought, in follow-
ing the clue of coherence amongst its data, as science
always does, is thus bringing back the scattered members
of the universe into the spatio-temporal continuity out of
which, in spite of their disguises of qualities higher than
mere motion, they ultimately sprang. These considera-
tions belong properly to the theory of truth, and the
methods by which it is attained in science. Those
methods are empirical rules by which we seek to bring
order into the empirical material ; and it may be surmised
even at this stage that logic is an empirical science which
deals with the interconnection of the isolated portions of
our knowledge (that is, of reality) as presented in pro-
positional form.’
1 For this topic see later, Bk. III. ch. ix. B, ‘Truth and Error.’


The
category.


CHAPTER is,


RELATION


ALL existents are in relation because events or groups of
them are connected within Space-Time. Relation amongst
existents follows from the continuity of Space-Time. The
continuity of Space-Time is something primordial and
given in experience. When it is described in conceptual
terms as the continuous relation of point-instants it is
described in terms derived from finite complexes or things,
just in the same way as we apply the conception of
causality in physical events to mental events though we
are familiar with the causal experience first in mental life.
Thus there is no circularity, to anticipate the old mis-
apprehension, in explaining relation by continuity of
Space-Time. It isa certain determination of Space-Time,
afterwards known as its continuity, in virtue of which
existents are related to one another. Not all relations of
existents are in their immediate character or quality
spatio-temporal ; but if our hypothesis is sound they are
always spatio-temporal in their simplest expression.
Relation is, as James has so constantly and rightly insisted,
as elementary a feature of the universe as ‘ substantive’
things. This is true not only of our mental states, where
it is apprehended in enjoyment, but of the external world,
where it is apprehended in contemplation. In the end it
depends upon and expresses the continuity of Space-Time.
Space and Time we have seen are not relations but they are
through and through relational. Neither are they mere
existence, but they contain all existence. They are the
stuff in which existences are related ; and the terms and
the relations between them are equally spatio-temporal.
238


CH. Iv RELATION 239


Hence it is that relation is as vague a word in philo-
sophy as being. It stands for any connection between
things. Specific or empirical relations can be described,
mostly by naming their terms. But relation itself, relation
as such, is rarely defined or identified. The reason is
apparent now. It is a tategory and can only be indicated
by the finger as a characteristic of Space-Time or described
by conceptual terms which are later in the order of reality


than itself, just as we may describe red as the colour
of blood.


What then are empirical relations? We have seen
that empirical relations of space and time are themselves
spaces and times or are homogeneous with their terms,
made of the same stuff. Following a distinction drawn
by Mr. C. A. Strong, James classes them as “ambulatory”
relations in distinction from “saltatory”’ ones.!. For
example, “difference is saltatory, jumping as it were
immediately from one term to another, but distance in
time or space is made out of intervening parts of experi-
ence through which we ambulate in succession.” James
goes on to describe the knowing relation as ambulatory,
because in it we ambulate from idea to percept or thing,
which is of the same stuff as idea, and we ambulate though
a medium of the same stuff. With that we are not here
concerned. However, the distinction of the two kinds of
relation, happy and useful as it is, is not of more than
secondary importance. Whether a relation is of the
same stuff as the terms or not, it makes the terms into a
connected whole, an integral situation. From this point
of view all relations are ambulatory. Moreover, on our
hypothesis it is clear that in the end all relation is reducible
to spatio-temporal terms. Even apart from this ultimate
reduction there can be no jump from term to term, for
the relation, if it is to be concrete and not a mere thought
about its terms, must be some specific bond between its


1 W. James, The Meaning of Truth, New York, 1909. ‘A word
more about Truth,’ p. 138. For the whole subject of relation see his
Appendix A on ‘ The thing and its relations’ in 4 Pluralistic Universe,
New York, 1909.


Empirical
relations.


240 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


terms which binds them into one continuous tissue. If
it falls short of this, the relation fails to relate. Whether
the relation is homogeneous with its terms or not 1s
therefore a secondary matter.

Conceived in this concrete fashion a relation may be
described as the whole situation into which its terms
enter, in virtue of that relation. The qualification, ‘in
virtue of that relation,’ is added because terms may have
other characters which do not concern the relation in
question. Thus a king may, like Saul, be taller than his
subjects. But the relation of height does not concern
the kingly situation but a different one ; or a mother may
be more beautiful than her daughters, but this does not
concern the maternal relation, but a relation of degree.
The situation may be one of successive events as in the
causal relation of the blow which fells an ox; or of
simultaneous things like the rivalry of two suitors. By
the ‘situation’ is meant the concrete system of circum-
stances which brings the terms into connection with one
another. It used to be said that a relation was based on
a fundamentum relationis, and the distinction of the relation
and its foundation is, as I suppose, merely that the
relation itself is the concrete connection between the terms
set up by the acts and events or circumstances which
constitute the fundamentum. Mill has admirably de-
scribed this fundamentum in his Logic,’ though the reader
must always discount Mill’s metaphysical prepossessions.
Take the relation of interval between two points or two
moments. The interval is the connecting situation of
the two terms, in the one case a line, in the other a
duration ; that interval is the transaction into which two
points or instants enter in virtue of their real nature as
point-instants. The points or moments themselves do
not belong to the connecting situation except as they are
the beginnings of that transaction. (It is a subtlety to be
mentioned hereafter that the interval, as the stretch of
points between two positions, is not the same relation as


1 Logic, Bk. III. ch. ii. sec. 7, and particularly ch. iii. sec. 10. I
mean by Mill’s prepossessions his leaning (1) to subjective idealism in
metaphysics, and along with that (2) to atomism in psychology.


cay? RELATION — 241


the interval which is the distance between them.') The
relation of maternity consists in like manner in the
history of bearing the child and the whole set of actions
and feelings in which the mother is engaged towards her
child and correspondingly (‘correlatively’) the child is
engaged towards its mother ; always with the proviso in
so far as these actions and feelings on one side or the
other establish a connection between the two partners, or
initiate a transaction between them. For the actions and


feelings are prima facie states of the mother or of the


child, some of them actions, some passions ; services on
one part, acceptance on the other of those services. The
relation is the situation or connection or transaction set
up between the two partners in virtue of these services
and acceptances. Similarly the relation of knowing, the
cognitive relation, is not the act of knowing or the exist-
ence of the object but the situation of connection between
the two. To take a further example, the relation of
king to subjects is the system of acts and capacities of
them or passions and capacities of them in which the king
as king is concerned with his subjects, in so far as these
set up a certain situation or transaction between the
two sides.

These examples illustrate the truth that, not merely in


1 The distance between two points as distinguished from the
stretch of points between them is their unlikeness in respect of
position. [Cf. the distinction drawn by A. Meinong between
‘difference or interval’ (Unterschied) and ‘unlikeness’ (Verschieden-
heit), used below in respect of intensity, in ch. vii. (Uber die
Bedeutung des Weberschen Gesetzes. Hamburg, Leipzig, 1896).] The
points are identical as points but different in position. Now such
unlikeness in position is the situation constituted by the interval, but
that interval taken not as divisible into points but as the occupation of
a space to a certain extent taken as a whole. It is a matter of sub-
sequent experience that degrees of spatial unlikeness are themselves
expressible by extensive measurement, so that one distance may be
two feet and another three feet. Consequently, though distance of
two points is as a matter of fact the spatial interval of the two points
and can be resolved into parts and measured, it does not follow that
any distance, as between the intensities of a quality, e.g. the sound C,
or between qualitative units themselves like pitches of sound, is
necessarily extensive, that is, is an extensive quantity. See later, ch.
vii. on intensive quantity, pp. 307 ff.

VOL. I R


Sense of
relations,


242 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


bare Space or Time but in the empirical relations that
subsist between things with qualities, the relation is just
as concrete and just as much a reality (being ultimately
spatio-temporal) as the terms and belongs to the same
tissue with them. ‘This is what James in the Psychology
affirmed of spatial and temporal relations. The relation
may in fact be on occasion the centre of importance and
the terms, as it were, adjectival of it, instead of its being
adjectival of them. The fringe may be central and the


‘centre a fringe. Illustrations were given in a previous


passage, and fresh ones may be added here. The two
ends of a line may be merely its ends, the line itself, the
relation between them, being central, or they may be
thought of as the limits which bound the line, and, as it
were, press it in—in which case the points are central.
This difference of emphasis has been used by Th. Lipps
to explain. various illusions to which we are subject in
the estimation of the interval between two points.’ Again,
in a Homeric battle, it is the personality of the champions
which is central, the engagement is a fringe. But ina
battle of the great war, what we thought of first was the
swaying backwards and forwards, the advance and retreat
of the combatants, while the combatants themselves were
dim and confused masses.


Every relation is a situation or more properly a trans-
action between its terms. If the terms are transposed
they enter into a new relation which is of the same kind
as before but differs from it in ‘sense’ or direction.
Thus if A is the mother of B, B is a child born of A.
Two such relations differing only in sense are said to be
the one the converse of the other. This result might
seem at first sight to be incompatible with the account we
have given of relation. Since the situation of mother
and child involves both parties, it would seem that the


1 Th. Lipps: Raumdsthetik und geometrisch-optische Tauschungen.
(Schriften d. Ges. f. psych, Forschung (II. Leipzig, 1893-7, Section ays
Thus the empty horizontal distance between two points looks shorter
than a horizontal line of the same length, because the points in the
first case are more independent and seem to shut in their space interval.


———— ee a ee


CH. IV RELATION 243


maternal and the filial relation are not different but the
same. And so they are if the terms are merely inter-
changed and the terms themselves remain the same.
There is no difference in the situation or relation if the
terms are singular. The propositions, A is the mother
of B, and (the same) B is a child born of A, describe
precisely the same fact, but they describe it in the light


_ of the general relations of maternity or filial relation.


Now these two general relations differ in sense, and the
situations though the same in kind are different situations.
There is a real difference between the propositions A is
the mother of B and A is the child born of B. Actions
in the first case are replaced by passions in the second
and vice versa. ‘The difference lies in the direction of
the connecting movements. Similarly as between A
precedes B and A succeeds B. The quality of the situa-
tion is the same but its direction is reversed. The
journey from Edinburgh to London is not the same
Journey as that from London to Edinburgh, though it
covers the same interval of space. If A is the mother of
B and the child of C there are two sets of transactions
which are of the same sort but in a different sense, and
the situations are also different. It is only if the situa-
tion is treated as a resting one and not a transaction that
the real empirical difference in the situation is overlooked.
When the same situation is expressed in two different
senses by interchanging the terms (Edinburgh is north
of London, London is south of Edinburgh), the differ-
ence is not indeed a merely verbal one, though perilously
near to it, but a difference of aspect or description, what
Aristotle expressed by saying that the two things are the
same but not in their Jeing.1 The same actual situation
is interpreted differently according to the plan of the
general converse relation by interchanging the terms.
The above is what is meant by saying that a difference
of sense depends on the order of the terms.’ It affords


1 "Kore pev 7d adrd, 7d Se eivae ov Td ard. Aristotle’s example is
the road from Peiraeus to Athens. :

2 In so-called logical conversion there is no difference of ‘sense
involved. There the relation or “ pseudo-relation” as Mr. Russell


Relation
and other
categories.


7


244 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


also another testimony to the truth that we do not have
terms and relations but terms in relation. When terms
are transposed the general relation alters with them in
direction. Two conclusions follow. First, the difference
of sense is not something of which no account can be
given. If it cannot be defined, it can be described by
indicating what it stands for, the real difference of spatio-
temporal direction, that is of direction of motion, to
which it corresponds ; just in the same way as relation
itself is indicated by pointing to its crude primordial
basis in Space-Time. ‘Transactions are temporal as well
as spatial and are motions with direction. Secondly,
we are confirmed in the belief, hinted in a previous chapter,
that order arises out of the spatio-temporal character of
things, is founded upon Space-Time itself, and is not prior
to Space and Time, except when legitimately so considered
for artificial purposes.


Primarily relations hold between individual things.
But universals have a quasi-individual existence and we
may with propriety speak of relations in which universals
are concerned. The relation is, however, only indirect
and through the particulars. Universality communicates
with relation in the strict sense, in that the universal
establishes a relation of identity between the particulars.
It is doubtful whether we should admit relation between a
universal and its particulars ; we can only do so, I think,
by a substantiation of the universal. The relation between
a universal and its particulars is more strictly one between
the particulars themselves in respect of the universal. In
the same way a thing or substance may be said to be
related to a universal which is an adjective of it, though
once again this is really a relation between the universal,


calls it is unaltered. Conversion alters or may alter the quantity of
the terms. Here, too, the converse is not a mere verbal change.

I have not referred to the accidental matter that in some relations,
symmetrical ones, the converse is the same as the original relation ; for
example, equality. On the whole subject of the sense of relations see


Mr. Russell’s Princ. of Math, ch. ix. pp. 95, 96. My differences from
him will be plain from the text.


»
*


CH. Iv RELATION 245


e.g. Sweet, as particularised in sugar, to the other par-
ticularised qualities and to the substantial permanence of
sugar—all which matters are to be investigated presently.
Thus we may continue on this understanding to speak of
the relation of subject to predicate. What is important
is that we shall not confuse the relation of subject to
predicate in the ordinary categorical proposition which
expresses the relation of substance to attribute with
relations of space or time or quantity or quality, or the
like, which are specifically relational, or express relation
assuch. No contortions of language, however ingeniously
successful, will overcome the difference between an
attribute which inheres in its substance and a relation
like that of quantity which does not inhere and cannot
therefore be regarded as an adjective in the proper sense.

Other categories, then, like universality or existence
or quantity or causality, communicate with relation.
Existence, e.g., is diverse from other existence ; and the
like. Relation in its turn communicates with other
categories. Thus it exists as being itself a spatio-temporal
occupation, what we have called the situation connecting
its terms. Again it is either particular or universal : there
may be plans of relation as well as individual relations.
The relation of paternity or that of difference is universal,
though embodied like other universals in particulars.
Thus relations as universals are real and the objects of
thought ; though, in view of the abuse by which this
truth is transformed into the proposition that relations
are the special object or even product of thought, it is
almost more important to insist with James that relations
are perceived as well as thought and belong to the same
sensible reality as terms. And, above all, universal
relations are concrete, and relate terms, and they are not
to be floated off from terms as if they could be abstracted
from them, a danger not avoided as it seems by certain
conceptions of relation.


Relations, it hardly needs to say, are external realities
when they are relations of external things, and mental
Lt Ch, vi. A; “Substance


Relations
not merely
mental.


246 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


ones when they belong to enjoyments or mental things.
They are in no sense subjective or the work of the mind.
Some relations like likeness and difference, identity,
equality, greater or less, or those expressed by the words
‘and’ or ‘but’ or ‘ however,’ might seem at first sight to
be eminently mental, due to comparison. They have
sometimes been referred to the experience of the attention
which compares (likeness) or hesitates or is obstructed
(‘but’) or rejects (‘not’). Red and green are red
and green; but it is we who feel them different. We
might even think that one magnitude is greater than
another because the act of attending has a felt excess in
the one case to the other. But it is clear that the theory
is circular and that the acts of attention are themselves
compared (in enjoyment) in order to feel their likeness
or difference or excess. These relations are, in fact,
empirical variations of the category relation just as
triangles and parabolas are empirical variations of Space,
or the various integers or fractions are of the category
number, and are felt in mind as well as contemplated
outside it. Even ‘but’ and ‘still,’ though apprehended
by mental acts of obstruction, are objective situations of
opposition in the objects they connect. Negation is not
mental only but exists in things as well, and is such
difference as is asserted in contrary or contradictory
propositions.

What then are the objective situations which constitute
such relations as these ?_ In the case of empirical relations,
relations of a certain quality like paternity which connect
things of empirical quality, the answer is plain. Since
qualities are, we assume, correlated with spatio-temporal
processes, the relations, however otherwise represented
summarily or compendiously by their qualities, are in the
end spatio-temporal, though it may be of great complexity.
They are at least reducible without residue to such
relations, which are themselves configurations of space-
time. As to relations which arise out of categories
themselves, we must leave the other categories for
subsequent description. We have only hitherto dealt
with existence and universality. All existence involves


CH. IV RELATION 24.7


the relation of difference from other existence, and this
we have seen is the exclusion of other existents from the
occupation of its own space-time. The relation of
particulars to one another under or by their universal is a
more difficult matter. A convenient method is to adopt,
like James,’ a pragmatist criterion. The relation is that
one particular may be substituted for the other. Likeness
is partially successful and partially unsuccessful capacity
of substitution. Such a criterion is not open to us, for it
carries the relation back to a device of human thought,
whereas the relation is in the things and not to be
exhausted by a secondary criterion, which gives rather a
symptom than the reality. Our previous inquiry supplies
the answer. Things of the same sort are in the first
place numerically different and exclude each other in
Space-Time. But the transaction of conceptual identity ?
between them is their co-inclusion in the one Space-Time
which, in virtue of its constancy, works at different places
according to a plan which does not suffer distortion
merely in virtue of the difference of place and time.


Likeness or unlikeness is a derivative relation, which is
combined of the relation of sameness of kind with that
of difference in kind. Two things are like each other
only if they are different, and unlike each other only if
they are identical. Hence both likeness and unlikeness
are partial identity in kind. We may take as examples
a white and a purple pansy, a red triangle and a red
square, a tall or short man, a loud or a soft C. In all
but the first case, the different kinds are empirical
differences of categorial characters, extension, quantity,
intensity, which are more than merely numerical
differences. Space-Time provides us with likeness
or difference in so far as two empirical universals
overlap, or, in Plato’s phrase, communicate with each
other. Owing to the constancy of Space-Time it is
possible for one configuration to be partially the same as


1 Some Problems of Philosophy (London, 1911), p. 103.
2 Cf. for the phrase Mr. G. E. Moore’s paper on Identity, Proc.
Arist. Soc. N.S. vol. i., 1900-1, pp. 103 ff.


Likeness.


248 THE CATEGORIES BK, II


one set of particulars and partially the same as another
SCL.

The attempt has been made to explain identity as an
extreme degree of likeness and thus to make ‘like’ the
prior conception. Given a subject of reference A, we
may arrange the similars to it in a scale of varying degrees
of increasing likeness or decreasing difference. When
the difference reaches its minimum or the likeness its
maximum we have identity. This view was expounded
by James as a psychological thesis and contested by Mr.
Bradley.!_ Thus, for instance, we may have sounds of the
same pitch but different intensity, where as the distance
in the intensity from the standard diminishes the compared
sensation becomes identical with the standard.

This would seem, however, metaphysically erroneous,
for distance can only mean a greater or less degree of
unlikeness in respect of something which remains constant
or the same. The scale of unlike or like sensations
postulates identity and diversity. Being metaphysically
erroneous, the view is also psychologically so ; for nothing
can be true for one science which is false for another.
But James’s doctrine admits of a different interpretation.
It is true that we apprehend distinctly the shock of
unlikeness or distance before we apprehend the under-
lying identity. And it is the series of diminishing distances
ending in zero which forces on our minds the explicit
identity of kind. Thus James is explaining how we
become aware of identity as such and disentangle it from
its concomitants. Still it remains the case psychologically
(and not merely metaphysically) that the identity must
be in our minds, our minds must be working in the same
way and have the same sort of object, in order that we
should apprehend likeness or unlikeness.? Thus identity
is primordial and likeness derivative.

A more difficult question is whether likeness (or un-
likeness) is an empirical relation, as I have implied above,


1 W. James, Psychology, vol. i. p. 528 ff. For the controversy by the
two writers see Mind, N.S. vol. ii. pp. 83, 208, 366, 509.


> Compare on this point F. H. Bradley, Logic (London, 1883), p.
422,


a.


CH. IV RELATION 249


or is itself a category though a derived one. Though a
relation of the most extreme generality, it must be
declared to be empirical. There is nothing in Space-Time
which requires (though Space-Time admits) the over-
lapping of empirical universals. It might seem that one
kind involved in itself relation to other kinds, in the
same way as numerical identity is of itself the exclusion of
other point-instants and is therefore different from other
numerical identity. But the cases are not parallel. For
universality is a relation of identity between its own
individuals, but is not as such a relation to other
universals. Hence there is no reason in Space-Time
itself (no non-empirical reason) why two individuals
identical in kind should be also different in kind. Plato
himself was careful to distinguish the overlapping of
empirical universals from the overlapping of categories
as such.


Relations, then, are the spatio-temporal connections of
things, these things themselves being also in the end
spatio-temporal complexes. Since Space-Time is con-
tinuous, the connecting situation which constitutes a
relation is but spatio-temporal continuity in another form.
The relations and the things they relate are equally
elements in the one reality and so far are separate realities.
But the business of a relation is to relate, and there is
consequently no relation without things it relates, which
are then called its terms. On the other hand, there are
no things which are unrelated to others, which would
imply spatio-temporal discontinuity. They must at
least be connected in Space and Time, and it is plain that
they must be connected by all the relations which arise
out of the categories, seeing that categories are pervasive
features of all things. Bearing these considerations in
mind we can answer directly certain controversial questions
about relations.

Are relations external or internal totheir terms? We
must answer that everything depends on what is meant
by external and internal. If to be external means to have
a recognisable existence as much as terms have, relations


Are re-
lations in-
ternal or
external ?


250 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


are external. If it means that relations can exist in
separation from their terms or things, they do not so
exist ; for if they did so they would not relate. The
habit of describing relations by abstract terms instead of
concrete ones, ¢.g. the relation of paternity, is partly
responsible for this misapprehension. Substitute the
phrase ‘the paternal relation, and remember that a
relation is a spatio-temporal fact which may, as in the
examples given, itself turn into a thing ; and it is seen at
once to be untrue that a relation exists somewhere from
whence it descends upon its terms like a bed-cover upon
the sleepers in a common lodging-house. For instance,
the cognitive relation is distinguishable both from the
act of knowing and the object known, but if it existed
without them it would have nothing to do.

On the other hand, if to be internal means that a
relation is a quality of its terms, or belongs to them as
a quality does, then a relation is not internal to its terms.
Inherence is itself a relation, as between the quality which
inheres and the rest of the qualities. But a relation does
not inhere in its terms taken singly. On the contrary,
inherence we shall see means to be included spatially
in a thing ; and relation from the nature of the case, as
being the situation which unites things, is outside each of
them spatially (or rather spatio-temporally). Thus the
act of cognition or the cognitive capacity is inherent in
the knower, but the cognitive relation to the object is out-
side that act, is its compresence with the object. Indeed,
it is clear that if relation were inherent like a quality
in a term, then since the relation implies the correlative
term, the correlative would in some sense be internal to
the other term. Thus the child would be internal to the
father and the object known internal to the knower, as
has in fact been sometimes held. No one would, of
course, pretend that a relation can be a quality of doth its
terms taken together. We must therefore say that no
relation is internal to its terms in this sense of inherence.
But if internality of relation means only that it cannot
exist without its terms, relations are in this sense internal ;
that is, if the things between which they exist are really


CH. iv RELATION 251


terms of the relation. For a thing may be outside the
relation in other respects. Thus paternity is external toa
man before he is a father ; but when he is a father he is a
term in the paternal relation, which as it relates him to
the child is internal in this sense to both. It is a further
question and, as we shall see, the only question of real
importance whether things can be considered outside
certain relations, and which are such relations, as e.g. this
one of paternity.

Thus neither of the alternatives, relations are external,
relations are internal, is true without qualification or in a
valuable sense. If we separate the world into terms and
their relations we are making an abstraction. The things
are conceived as if they did nothing to each other (which
is impossible in Space-Time) or were unrelated ; and the
relations as if they did not relate. The world consists of
things iz their relations. Since this is the notion which
is most obviously denied by the alleged externality of
relations (let us call it the crude externality of relations),
we may reject crude externality. It implies an original or
crude discontinuity in Space-Time ; and, as we have seen,
without a primordial or crude continuity of Space-Time
we could never understand its constitution out of its
parts. In truth we form this notion only because we first
dissect the things from the original continuum and then
build it up again. We hew our stones from the quarry
and then restore the quarry from the stones.


But though the question whether relations are external
or internal ceases thus to be of great importance, there are
distinctions to be drawn amongst relations themselves ;
according as they are categorial or empirical, and accord-
ing as they are intrinsic or extrinsic to their terms ; which
raise a different question but one connected with the other
question. For relations are clearly enough not external
to their terms as terms. The idea of their externality
only arises because things before they become terms in a
relation are not necessarily the same as when they have
entered it. Categorial characters and the relations
founded on them belong to everything. Anything stands


Intrinsic
and
extrinsic
relations,


oA THE CATEGORIES BK. IJ


in some relation of space and time to other things ; it
has quantity and is greater or less than something else
and the like. Its size may alter but some size it retains.
It has attributes and is causally related with other things,
though it may change its colour or affect a different
substance. Strictly, categorial relations are not altered by
entry into a relation, it is only the empirical determina-
tions of them that may be altered.

Empirical characters of things are those which they
have from the grouping of Space-Time elements into
complexes, and empirical relations are the non-categorial
relations of things which they have in virtue of their
being parts of Space-Time. But under the designation
empirical I include two sets of characters. One set are
variations of Space-Time itself or of the categories. For
example, triangularity is an empirical determination of
shape, for not every finite is triangular. It is what is
commonly known as a primary quality. Again ‘and’
and ‘but’ are empirical variations of the category of
relation, as ‘like’ is of the category universal. The
other set are in a stricter or more special sense empirical,
for they carry with them variation of what is called quality,
secondary quality like colour or higher quality like life or
consciousness.

Now, amongst these empirical relations some are
intrinsic to the things and some are extrinsic. Thus a
man as man stands in human relations to other human
beings ; for instance, he must be the son of somebody or
possess sociality. But he need not be a king or a
father or a servant. His intrinsic qualities are expressed
in his intrinsic relations, which therefore are in a manner
internal to him. But his extrinsic relations depend on
circumstances, such as juxta-position or the environment,
and when he enters into these relations they are in a
manner external to him. This distinction corresponds
to the logical distinction of what is essential to a thing
and what is accidental to it. What is most intrinsic to
a thing is its typical character, manhood for instance to
man ; but the intrinsic qualities and relations expressing
them include what is specific to the individual and all the


CH. IV RELATION 253


so-called ‘ properties’ which follow from them, as well as
those truly inseparable accidents which are only properties
awaiting the disclosure of their connection with the
essential characters. Thus a man’s relation to his kind is
intrinsic or essential; but to have a son or a wife is
an accident, and, thanks to death or the law-courts,
it is what the logicians call a separable accident. It is
plain that categorial relations are intrinsic also, but they
are absolutely intrinsic, for nothing can be which does
not carry into all its relations its categorial characters.
What varies with the relation is the empirical character of
the relation arising out of the category. A thing may
now be above and now under another ; it may be far off
or near another thing, five feet or two inches longer than
another. Extrinsic empirical relations may therefore be
pure variations of categorial relations, or these variations
may themselves be attended by qualities, as for example
in the paternal relation.

Thus there are in fact three kinds of relations, the
strictly categorial, the essential, and the extrinsic. The
first two classes are both called intrinsic. Empirically
intrinsic relations are relatively unalterable. So long as
the things retain their individuality their intrinsic rela-
tions are not changed by entering into extrinsic ones.
A man remains a man though he becomes a king or a
father or a slave. But just because its qualities are
empirical and not categorial, the extrinsic relation may
alter the qualities of the thing. Thus a man may be
brutalised by the possession of power, or become egotistic
or parochialised by the concentration of his affections on
his child to the neglect of society. Misfortune may
turn him from a genial to a sour man, he may become
a disappointed man. The qualities intrinsic to the
individual suffer first, but extrinsic relations may affect
even the typical characters. For example, in the stages of
intoxication, where a man may be said to enter into an
extrinsic situation, first his voice loses its individual
character, then he loses the more typical capacity of
rational speech, and finally the most typical of characters,
the capacity of co-ordinated movement and locomotion.


The
ultimate
question
raised.


254 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


A man may become subhuman by degradation or isola-
tion, or monstrous by insanity, or he may by natural death
or violence cease to be a man at all. No wonder that
such extrinsic relations which alter the parties to it, seem
to be external and indifferent to the real nature of the
thing.


It is the contrast of the categorial and empirical char-
acters and relations which is of the greater importance
for metaphysics. For it sheds light upon the question
whether the partial character of existents affects their
claim to be considered real or true, whether, that is, we
must allow reality to the parts or deny it to anything
but the whole. The categorial characters of things
remain, whatever extrinsic relations they may enter into,
and hence their reality in these regards is unaffected.
It is only the empirical modifications of these categorial
characters and relations which are affected. Now partiality
can only vitiate the reality of anything so far as entering
into a whole changes the thing. Therefore the categorial
determinations of things are perfectly and absolutely
real or true. For, assuming them all to be fundamental
determinations of Space-Time, we can recognise no higher
standard of their reality. But empirical characters
(whether modifications of the categories or qualitative)
may be affected by extrinsic relations.’ Hence it follows
that we cannot be sure that we have the intrinsic nature
of a thing or a relation unless we have satisfied ourselves
that no extrinsic relations will affect them, and universal
propositions are therefore only possible under this proviso.
This is the first limitation on empirical truth. There is
a further question which the time has not yet arrived
to discuss, for it belongs to the problem of the ‘ one and
the many’: whether the liability of all finites to suffer
in their non-categorial intrinsic characters destroys their
reality or only affects the difficulty of discovering it.
But it will already be apparent that subject though they
are to change, to conversion into things of different
nature, this does not destroy their claim to be real so
far as they are what they are. For they are of the same


wre


CH. IV RELATION 255


stuff as the Space-Time which connects them and in
which those relations arise which may alter or destroy
them. They only become in changing, as for example
by death, other variations of the same matrix, and they
remain relatively real.


The difficulties which Mr. Bradley has found in
the notion of qualities and relations’ are due in the
first place to the inversion of the natural order of
things. Begin with the primordial fact of the parts of
Space-Time in organic connection with one another ;
qualities and relations are then mutually implied without
contradiction, because, as we have seen, the very notion
of contradiction is a birth of Space-Time itself, which
is the ultimate standard of reference. I return to this
below. But put aside this consideration. The difficulties
then arise from treating relations in the abstract as if
they did not relate ; the opposite error to that committed
by those who, maintaining relations to be external, treat
them as if there were nothing for them to relate.

In the first place, relations are said to depend on
qualities, and qualities on their relations, and this is
thought to be contradictory. It could only be self-
contradictory if the dependence were identical in the
two cases. But Mr. Stout has pointed out that while
relations depend on the qualities for their very being,
qualities depend on their relations only for the fact
that they are related, not for the qualities themselves.
Thus the distance of Glasgow and Manchester arises
from, depends on, is the manifestation of, the positions
of those towns. But they do not owe their position
to their distance, they only owe to it their distance.
The towns must be there to be so many miles distant,
but their distance is rot something by itself which
steps down and connects the town, but is the fact of
their connection in space. Or, again, a man is a father
because he is a male, whose functions have been realised ;
he does not owe his being a father to the paternal rela-
tion, but that relation implies his being a father.

1 Appearance and Reality, ch. iii.


Alleged
contra-
dictions in
relations,


256 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


Mr. Stout has endeavoured’ to simplify the dis-
cussion by adding to the notion of quality and relation
that of “relatedness.” Relations then depend on
qualities for being what they are, but qualities depend
on relations only for their relatedness. It is difficult
to see, convincing as the argument is, that relatedness
adds anything to enlighten the matter. It in fact
suggests that relations can be relations without related-
ness, that is without relating ; otherwise the distinction
would not be drawn. This is the very proposition
which is contested. We have the conception of qualities
independent of relation and relation independent of
relatedness. The last is not a fact. Nor is it true that
qualities can exist outside some relation or other, though
there may be a quality, e.g. maleness, which may exist
outside the relation of paternity. But then the male
quality is in certain relations of its own, of likeness
and difference, to the female.

Qualities, terms, and relations are alleged to be
“infected”? with the, evil of the so-called infinite
regress. But this allegation appears once more to depend
on the abstraction of relation from its business of
relating, so that we have the ironical result that rela-
tions whose externality Mr. Bradley strenuously denies
are treated in effect as if they were external. The
relation it is urged is itself related to the qualities. The
paternal relation is related to the father. Thus for a
relation to be applied a new relation is required, not of
course the same as the original relation or necessarily
so; and this intercalation of relations can plainly go
on to infinity. But is it not clear that if a relation is
itself in relation to its term, it is not doing its work of
relating ? If it really relates, it relates; by itself and
without the interposition of a fresh relation. If A is
the father of B, his paternity is continuous with, being
the situation which connects, A and B. Similar con-
siderations apply to a subtler form of the same supposition,
that a relation can be one without relating. Consider


1 Proc. Arist. Soc. N.S. vol. ii., 1901-2, ‘ Alleged self-contradictions,’
etc, DPelae


cH. IV RELATION 2k


A as he is in the relation, say B, and as he is in himself,
say C. There is then a new relation between B and C
breaking out within A. But if B stands for a quality
outside the relation, like maleness outside paternity, it
is irrelevant, for this is not the quality which enters into
the relation. If it does not, and the quality in itself is
different from the quality in relation, the relation is being
regarded as external to the quality, in other words, as
not relating it to its correlative.


These reflections are, as it seems to me, sufficient to
show that relations between terms and qualities though
they present difficulties do not present inherent contra-
diction. But I am very ready to admit that in the form
in which I have presented them, in the insistence that a
relation must relate, there is an undercurrent which bears
us back continually to the real and given fact of continuity
contained in Space-Time, without which such a postulate
that a relation must relate loses concreteness. Now for
Mr. Bradley himself Space and Time are but special cases
of the difficulties of relation; and he would repel the
assumption of an original continuity, because continuity
in its conceptual description is so patently a relation
between terms. For us the criterion of contradiction is a
derivative of Space-Time. For Mr. Bradley, Space and
Time are to be judged in respect of reality or appearance
by the human or reflective criterion of contradiction,
which draws its authority from our thought. We are
bound therefore to examine the alleged contradiction of
Space and Time independently, and our answer must be
that they seem contradictory because neither the Space
nor the Time which is examined is real Space or real
Time, I mean that it is not even the real appearance
which it is alleged to be. For each of them is supposed
really, and not merely as in mathematics provisionally, to
be distinct from the other. When this error of fact is
corrected, the arguments against their ultimate reality
are seen to be fragile.

Suppose then (what is not the case) that relations and
terms are only apparent characters of things, not ulti-

VOL. I S


Space and
Time—
their alleged
inconsist-
ency.


258 THE CATEGORIES BK, I


mately real; and consider Space by itself. We may
plausibly maintain two propositions which seem to
contradict each other: first, Space consists of extended
substances (shall we say ?); and second, it is a mere
relation. It cannot be substances, or spaces, alone, for
these themselves contain parts and involve relation among
them; and every term we choose for the relations
breaks up into relations without end. “Space is
essentially a relation of what vanishes into relations,
which seek in vain for their terms. It is lengths of
lengths of—nothing that we can find. On the other
hand it cannot be a mere relation. For every such
relation is a relation between terms which are themselves
Spaces.””? Space is thus neither a relation nor anything
else, and the contradiction, even verbally, seems hopeless.
But the spaces are supposed to be resting and the
relations to be distinct from what they relate. Now
there is no such thing as resting Space. It is essentially
temporal. Spaces, if we could conceive them at all as
existing by themselves, might be stationary, and the
relation between two spaces might be a kind of mechanical
bond, a relation which does not relate. It might be
supposed even to be the connecting or intermediate space,
but there would be no cohesion, and hence the contra-
diction. But Space is spatio-temporal. Now Time is
of its essence fluid, is succession. The Time which
is in Space drives on any space into connection
with some other space, and secures to it continuity.
Thus spatial relation is of the very being of any two
spaces, for it is their connecting situation into which
they are compelled by their time. The terms and
the relations are distinguishable elements in one and
the same empirical fact which is spatio-temporal. For
the same reason any space breaks up into parts with-
out end because the time which is in it distinguishes
it into parts within the original piece of space; and
the infinity of this process being vital to space is not
the bad infinity which is the counterpart of our human
helplessness, but the good infinity which is implied
1 Appearance and Reality, ch. iv. pp. 36-7 (ed. 1).


CH. IV RELATION 259


in the real nature of the thing’ and is  self-repre-
sentativeness.

Let us now turn to Time. If Time be taken apart
from Space it is, as we have so often seen, a mere ‘now’
and can admit no before or after. The argument starts
by affirming, what is true, that the now of Time implies
before and after ; but it takes a somewhat different form
from the argument about Space. For there the parts of
Space are presented together. But when they are taken
apart from Space we cannot have present and past or
future presented together. ‘Presented time is time
present.” But if the now involves before and after,
there is a relation between before and after, and the
puzzles of relation and its terms reappear. Either the
now is a duration and breaks up into parts or nows with-
out end ; or if it is not a duration it becomes a relation
between terms which are in themselves timeless, for these
terms not containing a before or after are not time.
Duration is either substantive and breaks up into parts,
or a relation, or rather a number of relations, connecting
timeless elements and therefore not having the unity
necessary to time.

Now all this maze of difficulties (which I hope I have
rendered the spirit of ) comes from neglecting the intrinsic
spatiality of Time. You may indeed admit that Time is
represented by a line. The mere pictorial representation
of Time by Space does not however help, for you are
then faced with the difficulties alleged against Space.
But if Space is of the very being of Time, Space sustains
Time as it fades into the past or dawns into the future.
It is then not true as an empirical fact that “ presented
time is the present time.” The now and the then are
presented as now and then, and are presented together
but not in the present of the enjoying consciousness but,
as befits them, the one in the present, the other in the
past.” The then is never a part or aspect of the now.
The now is continuous with the then which was and the


1 For the distinction of the two sorts of infinite regress, see B.
Russell, Principles of Mathematics, ch. iv. pp. 50-1, § 55.
2 Above, Bk. I. ch. iii.


260 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


then which is to be. Space gives to Time its continuity
as Time gives to Space its continuity. Space enables
Time to be Time, that is a duration of succession.
Any relation between moments of time is then a
piece of Time itself, and duration is not a relation
of the timeless but of the timeful ; and while duration is
made of the instants it connects, these instants are
connected by duration. For the relation and the terms
are of the same stuff. This possibility is overlooked by
the antagonist view, just because Time is treated as
unspatial, and consequently before and after have no
attachment but are degraded into aspects of the so-called
present. Just as Time drives the pieces of Space into
connection, Space compels the moments of Time to
remain attached, and not vanish into nothingness.

What Mr. Bradley has done then is to take a
fictitious or abstract Space and Time and demonstrate
that they are abstractions. The effort to show up
abstractions can never be praised too much. But it is
misdirected when it seeks to prove that realities, mis-
described so as to be abstractions, are abstract. And now
mark the revenge which the universe takes upon those
who do not accept it upon its own conditions. Thought
which sets up its canon of satisfactoriness to itself loses
its contact with the world of Space and Time which it
declares to be appearance. The “what” of things is
severed from their “that”; and thought moves in a
world of its own. Thought which repudiates the
Space-Time of which it is an element cannot be truly
concrete.

Once more we return to the truth that the difficulties
of continuity and infinity, of which these embarrassments
as to Space and Time are examples, arise from neglecting
the initial or crude continuity and infinity, positive
characteristics, of Space-Time itself. The conceptual
notions of continuity and infinity build up again the
original which they have begun by dissecting. But it
remains true that Space-Time itself in its empirical
character is the basis of continuity and infinity, of order
and series, and of all the categorial characters of things


i
.


261
iS Poin pa


tandai eet sg] sie ="
a > realities eee in
e are only appearances.!


Roch. i, Mr. Bradley completes
on Sp - by suggesting that there may be more
ce or ‘Time, pe that in different Times the order may
his raises questions which belong to a later stage, when
g ideas in their relation to reality. I much regret
1 of Mr. ped should be thus divided, but I cannot

(See Bk. III. ch. viii. Suppl. Note.) |


4


Se aS


= ve
’


The
category.


CHAPTERay.
ORDER


Ir order is a category it might seem eminently to be
due to the interference of mind. The mind, it might be
thought, compares things in respect of certain characters,
e.g. magnitude or shades of colour, and arranges them
in a scale in which any one thing precedes another and
is in general between that other and some term which
precedes itself.’ But a moment’s consideration is enough
to show that such comparison depends on the characters
and relations of the terms themselves, and, what is more
pertinent, the acts which the mind performs in arranging
terms in an order are themselves in order, only that the
order is enjoyed instead of being contemplated. Thus
if lines are ordered according to their increasing magni-
tude, the successive apprehensions of the lines are also
ordered in magnitude.

We have order when there are at least three terms
of which one is between the other two, that is, when B
is between A and C. Order is a category of things
because of betweenness of position in Space-Time. This
betweenness is, as we have seen, a fundamental feature


1 Compare B. Russell, Principles of Mathematics, § 231, p. 242,
for the independence of order of any psychological element. “ People
speak of a series as consisting of certain terms ¢aken in a certain order,
and in this idea there is commonly a psychological element. All sets
of terms have, apart from psychological considerations, all orders of
which they are capable; that is there are serial relations, whose fields
are a given set of terms, which arrange those terms in any possible
order. . . . Omnipotence itself cannot give terms an order which they
do not possess already: all that is psychological is the consideration of
such and such an order.”


262


CH. V ORDER 263


in Time, and points in Space are between each other in
virtue of the Time in which they are generated. What
applies to positions in Space-Time applies equally to
complexes in Space-Time. We may indeed have things
or points which are contemporaneous. But they are
between each other in space in virtue of the time in
which their positions in space are generated. ‘Between’
is therefore a crude or elementary feature of Space-Time
and attaches to the elements of Space-Time themselves
and to complexes of those elements.

Betweenness which is the characteristic of order com-
municates with relation, and order may be resolved into
relations. Thus, as Mr. Russell shows, terms x, y, z
are in an order when there is a relation R such that «
is in the relation R to y and y in the relation R to z,
in other words, when there is a transitive relation between
the terms, and it is asymmetrical. Thus if the relation is
of magnitude, x is greater than y and y than z and «
than z, and the relations of y to x and z have a different
sense. If the terms are points of time y is before z and
after x. This simplest of all orders is at the basis of
all order. But though in this way order may be expressed
in terms of relation, order is not a mere combination of
relations. For the introduction of asymmetry into the
transitive relation already implies betweenness. The
transitive relation of equality of magnitude would not be
sufficient for betweenness of magnitude. Such between-
ness can only be generated by a relation which being
transitive has direction and is therefore asymmetrical.
Betweenness is a crude datum to which the conception
of a transitive asymmetrical relation is due. Between
is therefore as much a specific datum, though resoluble
into two relations of different sense, as a motion along
the diagonal is a specific motion though resoluble into
components along the sides of the parallelogram. There,
too, the mere components are not equivalent to the
resultant unless they are really componenss, that is unless,
in the language adopted by Mill, their collocation is also
given. Betweenness being thus primordial, order is a
category distinct from relation, just as existence is distinct


A universal
character
of things.


264 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


from relation though existence is always in relation to
other existence.

Order involves at least three terms, and any three
terms may constitute an order, under the conditions in
which order is expressed relationally. Each term in
the order is ordered according to the nature of that
order. But not each term is necessarily between other
terms. This is only the case when the series has
neither beginning nor end; as in the case of instants
or the real numbers. In the order of colours, in the
order of precedence of nobility, in the order of species in
a genus, and the like, there may be first or last terms
or both which are not between in respect of that order ;
though they will always be between in the fundamental
order of Time or Space. Further it is clear that when
two terms are said to be in a certain order, as e.g.
cause and effect in the order of priority, or two
colours in respect of the order of hue or brightness ;
they are so described in so far as they are selected
members from a real order: e.g. in causality the order
of time.


Order is a difficult conception which I am unequal
to the task of treating adequately... What has con-
cerned us here has been to indicate that like other
categories it is a character of things which is a crude,
primordial feature of Space-Time, and can only be
indicated as such, or, if described, order is being
described like continuity in terms of what is derived
from it. It is difficult to discuss the conception at
greater length at this stage, for the assurance that all
order is in the end spatio-temporal can only be got from
considering order in its more special determinations,
like the order of numbers or of quantity, which we
cannot yet assume to be spatio-temporal. Order has
not usually been reckoned among categories at all, and
does not form one of the Kantian categories. Yet that
all things have order of some sort can readily be seen,


1? Mr. Russell has treated it with great fulness, Principles of Mathe-
matics, Pt. iv.


CH, V ORDER 265


if it is only order of position in Time or Space, or
quantitative or numerical order.

But the varieties of order are not only these
categorial special orders but empirical ones ; and some
of these may be enumerated. Most important of all,
perhaps, is the order of the qualities of a given kind or
modality of sensation ; for example, that of pitches of
sound or hues of colour. Such order has of course no
reference to the position of notes on a musical instrument
like the piano, or of colours in the solar spectrum. It
belongs to sounds or colours as experienced, that is as
sounds or colours, which for us are sensa. It is an expres-
sion of their ultimate spatio-temporal character. Sounds
form an order of pitches, ultimately because their wave-
lengths are a series in which each is spatio-temporally
between two others, and could be known (not heard) as
such if the sounds were produced from the one place. Mr.
H. J. Watt has even maintained that pitches of sound
and hues of colour are not differences of quality, but
that there is only one quality, sound, or colour, and
pitches and hues are merely terms in an order, deter-
mined by the one quality." Whether the modalities or
classes of sensible qualities themselves, sound, colour,
taste, etc., constitute an order, cannot in the present
state of our knowledge be asserted.

Besides this important example of empirical order
we have such order as that of descent from father to
child—the genealogical order, and we have the larger
order of descent in animal types determined by distance
from a common ancestor; there is the order of great-


1 «The elements of experience and their integration: or modalism,’
Brit. Fourn. of Psych. vol. iv., 1911. Seealso further papers in vols. Vi.,
1913; vii., 1914; and his later work, Tze Psychology of Sound (Cam-
bridge, 1917). I do not feel inclined to accept his statement that sound
is a quality and pitches merely their order (see below, p. 267), butshould
regard them as intrinsically qualities forming an order of qualities. On
the other hand, when we are dealing not with the sensa but with the
sensing of them, we shall see that the corresponding sensings are merely
spatio-temporal patterns of response which have no pitch-quality (nor
sound quality either), and in respect of them Mr. Watt’s doctrine
is true.


Order and
the other
categories,


266 THE CATEGORIES BK, I


ness from the merest weakling up to the superman, or
in moral matters the order of merit which belongs to
actions not in virtue of their goodness (for “all good-
ness ranks the same with God”) but in respect of their
largeness or splendour. And the list might be extended
to some length. Order is therefore far from being
confined to purely categorial orders with which the
term is so closely associated in the mind. But it
depends ultimately in every case on spatio-temporal
betweenness.


Order communicates with existence, as being itself
an existent, and as internally constituted of existents.
It is relational in itself, and at the same time there may
be relation between different orders, as for example in
correlation of the order of general intelligence to order
of sensibility in some department of sense. Lastly, it
communicates with universality ; it is a plan. And not
only is order universal with regard to its categorial
special determinations, like the order of number, but
all these categorial orders are universal in respect of
their empirical examples ; thus we may arrange things
in weight or brightness, or even numerical order may
assume such particular forms as the order of even or
odd or square numbers.

While order thus communicates with universality, its
distinctness from universality is a more important matter,
and at the same time more difficult to make clear. "When
points are considered in their order of position, the
transitive relation is that of greater (or less) distance from
a fixed member of the series (whether distance is taken
as’ equivalent to interval or distance proper, that is
unlikeness of position). The relation, distance from a
given point, is universal to any of the distances of the
points from the fixed point. But then it is not this
distance which is the order itself; that order can be
resolved into those relations, but is not identical with
them. The order is rather that of position in the ordered
series, and this is not the universal of the different
positions in the series, but is the collective name of all


cH. v ORDER 267


the positions. There is no true universal or plan of
construction, to be called position in the series, of which
the members of the series are modifications as different
dogs are modifications of the plan or law of dog-
construction. For position in the series or order implies
the order as a whole. To hold that belief would be an
instance of the concrete universal over again, like regarding
the parabola as the universal of its points, or the State as
the universal of its citizens, or the self as the universal
of its activities. Fora less elementary illustration let us
turn to Mr. Watt’s conception of pitches as the order of
the one quality sound, or colours as the order of colour.
It does indeed seem unnatural to hold that there is only
One quality sound or colour ; rather it would seem that,
according to common usage, the pitches and hues are
qualities which are ordered in respect of sound or colour.
But what is of value in the doctrine is that it recognises
order as an intrinsic (I should say categorial) character
of the pitches and hues, and sound as such and colour
as such are then orders named from the qualities of
their members. Now neither sound nor colour is a true
universal. There is no quality colour of which the
various hues are instances, nor, though this is more
difficult to verify, is there probably for experience any
universal, sound, of which the various pitches are modi-
fications, certainly no true universal, pitch. In both cases
we are considering the colour or sound psychologically as
experienced, that is as sound or colour, and not as
physical complexes which follow a certain law, in which
case both sound and colour are universals. This difference
between the relation of colour to the colours, and that of
a universal like dog to individual dogs, has long been
observed. Mr. Watt’s conception enables us to say that
colour is the order of colours, and is, I should say,
not itself a quality; and the like is probably true of
sounds. Thus the order of individuals is not their
universal ; and individuals regarded as instances of a
universal are not considered as ordered in respect of
that universal.

Thus order is a characteristic of every existent, distinct


268 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


from other such pervasive characteristics, and com-
municating with them; and it appears undoubtedly to
be a category and on the same level of rank’ with


existence, relation, and universality.


1 For rank among the categories see later, chap. ix. pp. 322 ff.


CHAPTER VI


SUBSTANCE, CAUSALITY, RECIPROCITY


A. SupstTancer?


AL existents, being complexes of space - time, are
substances, because any portion of Space is temporal or is
the theatre of succession; or what is the same thing
because all succession is spread out in space. In other
words, spaces and durations are not themselves substances
as if substance were a notion anterior to them and applied
to them ; but because Space-Time is what it is, and every
space is a duration and every duration an extension in
space, substance is a determination of all things which
occupy Space and Time. We are introduced here to a
category which arises not so much out of the character
of spatio-temporality taken as a whole given entity as out
of the ‘relation’ (if we may misapply a word strictly
applicable only to pieces of Space-Time*) between the
spatial and the temporal elements in any space-time.
For simplicity and brevity it will be enough to speak of
substance as a piece of Space which is the scene of
succession without stating the same thing in terms of
Time, in the reverse order. Any existent is a substance
in this account of the matter. Even a simple motion in


1 For the subjects of this chapter, especially Substance, I have found
much profit in Mr. C. D. Broad’s Perception, Physics, and Reality
(Cambridge, 1914), ch. ii. ‘On Causation.’ For substance, see
especially pp. 94-6, which confirmed and helped me in views which
were already in formation in my own mind. I have borrowed some of
his language and illustrations.

2 On the use of the word relation as between the space and time
elements themselves, see some further remarks later, ch. ix. p. 324.

269


The
category.


.


270 THE CATEGORIES BK. It


a straight line is an extreme instance of the life of a
substance, though the motion be not repeated and the
substance endures or remains identical only for the
duration of the single motion.


But it will be easier to deal first with what are .


ordinarily called things which possess many qualities
connected together, and to consider simpler substances
in the light of the more complex ones. Qualities it is
assumed are correlated with certain motions; and it
is indifferent for our purpose whether the quality
belongs, as will be here maintained, to the motion itself ;
or belongs to mind and is the mental correlate of the
motion, as is the belief of those who distinguish primary
from secondary qualities, but recognise a primary correlate
of the secondary quality. A thing or complex substance
is then a contour of space (i.e. a volume with a contour)
within which take place the motions correlated to the
qualities of the thing; and the complex substance or
thing is the persistence in time of this spatial contour
with its defining motions. Thus movements correlated
with the quality yellow and others correlated with the
quality hard are contained within the contour of the atom
or molecule of gold. Within the contour the qualities
are grouped according to the law of the construction of
the substance. The various movements which constitute
what has been before called that ‘configuration’ of space-
time which the thing is, define a certain outline of space,
that is, a certain volume of space with its outline. As
Time moves on the substance may change in its characters
or in the relation of them one to the other but always
within the limits set by the law of its construction. Our
most easily understood example of substance is found in
our own mind. There the activities of mind change
from one moment to another according to the objects
which engage it. Sometimes indeed the consciousness
located in one portion of the extended mind lapses into
unconsciousness. But always we have under the various
changes in the distribution of our attention in Time the
same relative configuration of movements within the total
outline occupied by our minds. It is the persistence of


CH. VILA SUBSTANCE 271


this including space throughout a lapse of time, a
persistence which means, as we have seen in our original
account of Space-Time, a ceaseless redistribution (in the
form of motions) of instants of time amongst points
of space, which makes our minds a substance and a
substantial identity. Or we may take as another instance
an organism with different activities in different parts of
the structure, all these activities constituting a configura-
tion of space-time bounded within the space of the
“organism, Or we may, as on previous occasions, consider
the organism as a substance from the point of view of
the changing distribution in the maturity of its cells.

The persistence of a piece of Space in Time which
results from the retention of the configuration of its
movements according to its law of construction does not
of course imply that the piece of Space is stationary as a
whole. On the contrary, no substance occupies the same
place continuously, if only because of the movement of
the earth or other heavenly body, and it may change its
place also by locomotion or transference. But the contour
and internal configuration remain within limits the same,
though not the position of the whole thing.

The movements underlying qualities may be complex
and the configurations of a thing with qualities is un-
doubtedly very complex. Ina simpler substance such as
a vibratory movement which has the quality sound, the
excursion of the vibration fills and defines a certain con-
tour of space and a comparatively simple one. When we
come to the simplest substance of all, the life of which
is movement in a straight line, what we have is the
occupation of the most elementary contour in space, viz.
a point by an instant in time. To understand such
simplicity we had first to understand the nature of more
complex substances. It might be thought that the whole
excursion of the point was the contour of the substance.
But in fact the sweep of the movement is comparable to
the translation of our mind (or say our body) as we move ;
only that in the simpler case the translation is the very
essence of the life of the point whereas the essence of the
life of the mind as mind is in the movements which take


Identity of


substance.


272 THE CATEGORIES BK. ba


place within the mind’s spatial contour. For the point-
instant is of itself motion, it is the element of motion.
A point is not a stable or fixed thing but in virtue of its
time is connected with some other point-instant. The
meaning of motion is, as was noted before, not that the
point of space itself moves as if it were a material body
shifting its place, but that the time of a point ceases to be
present, and the present is transferred to another point
continuous with it. That is to say, the contour of the
substance remains the same as the original point. The
simplest substance is consequently a movement. When
we take this movement in its limiting form we have the
point-instant, which may thus be called a momentary
substance. For a point-instant is by its very nature a
movement, not something statical. It is an ideal, not
an actual movement ; and just for this reason it is the
actual elementary existent, and is real just in virtue of
its ideal character." The conception of ‘substance at this
limit, at which it becomes momentary, is hardest to grasp,
and I may add rewards most when it is grasped.


The identity of a substance is individual identity as
persisting through a duration of time. Numerical identity
was occupation of a point-instant or complex of them.
Generic identity or identity of sort was the preservation
of a plan of construction throughout repetition at different
times or places. When the repetition of a plan is found
in its varying phases in the duration of an individual we
had individual identity. We see now that substantial
identity is equivalent to individual identity. Before,
under individual identity we were thinking of the uni-
versality of the plan of a particular in respect of the
moments of its life. The notion of substantial identity
represents these moments as woven together through the
constant changes of its internal motions in accordance
with a plan of construction. Individuality regards the
repeated plan ; substantial identity the persistence of the
particularised universal or individual through a period of
time. In practice substantial identity and individuality

1 See on this subject later, ch. ix. p. 325.


CH. VIA SUBSTANCE yes


are the same conception ; and by the individuality of a
thing is meant in general its identity of substance. This
combines then the two elements of repetition of a plan


with persistence of the contour of space within which


the motions take place which obey the plan. Personal
identity is a special instance of substantial identity. It
means the coherence of our mental life within an extension
which is occupied variously through the changing moments
of our life. Only since the enjoyed spatial extension of.
our mind is overlooked we are apt to think of it as
merely coherence in time, as if there could be such
coherence except for the space which establishes it. In
all cases it is the spatial contour which provides the unity
of substance, that spatial extent being itself meaningless
without motions to occupy it, that is without persistence
in time.’
What changes are compatible with the retention of
substantial identity is an empirical question which can
only be decided by reference to each case or kind of cases.
In the first place, it does not follow that qualities are
always localised in the same part of the volume of the
space or substance, though this appears to be the case with
minds where the kinds of consciousness corresponding
to certain objects are more or less definitely restricted in
locality. Even organic bodies may change colour in
different places as when we blush, or as in the crustaceans
before mentioned which change their colour with the
time of day. Under this head would come the famous
question of Sir John Cutler’s stockings which had been so
darned with green silk that not a thread of the original
black silk was left. Were the stockings the same or not?
It would seem to be the case that though the stockings
were not in the end of the same material the configuration
of the motions within the substance had been preserved.
In the all-important matter the substance had not ceased
to be a stocking and retained its empirical identity.
In the second place, the contour itself may vary within
limits without destroying the constructive plan, and so far
1 For the problems raised by the lapse of intervals of mental life
from our consciousness see later, Bk. III. chs. i. A and vi.
VOL. I T


274 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


as this is the case the identity of substance remains. The
main distinction of aggregates and organised beings lies
in this, that an aggregate may be diminished without
essential alteration, except naturally of those characters
which depend on the aggregation as such, e.g. magnitude
of the substance or strength of the material. This is
because the components of such secondary substances are —
alike. Even here if a block of marble is chipped it is
difficult, if the process of chipping continues long enough,
to call the remainder the same marble; there is only a
piece of it, the substance remains the same only generically.
Organisms grow, and parts may be removed, it is found
in experience, without. destroying the identity of the
substance, though the contour may be much altered, as by
the loss of a limb. Everything depends on the import-
ance of what is lost for the plan of the whole. We can
only note these limits as they occur in experience. A
man may lose a leg and not be much altered, while an
atom may lose two alpha particles and become a different
chemical body.

The empirical questions as to the preservation of the
identity of mind and how, when it is ruptured, it may be
revived, questions which have already been hinted at,
will meet us again at a later stage of the inquiry.
Another question belongs entirely to a later stage, and
that is the relation of a thing or substance to its appear-
ances ; which of its appearances belong to the thing itself,
which are mere appearances and imply something else in
addition. This question, as indicated by the word appear-
ance, concerns the connection of a thing with the mind
or other ‘ percipient ’ and belongs to the empirical relations
of things." Here we have considered substance, as a
union of qualities, as it is in itself.

That unity then is supplied by the space (that is the
space-time) within which the qualities are disposed.
Each quality inheres in the substance because it is included
in the space which unifies the substance. Thus the
proposition, this sugar is sweet, means that the universal
sweet in an individualised shape, that is as a definite and

1 Book III. chs. vii., viii.


CH. VIA SUBSTANCE 275


particular motion, is found within the volume of the
sugar. There is a complete difference between such a
proposition and one in which the predicate is the class-
concept of the thing, e.g. this is sugar, where the predicate
is the total plan of configuration which determines the
contour of the space of the substance.


A conclusion of some importance seems to be implied Qualities do
in this conception of substance. Not only is the inherence pene
of the sweetness and the whiteness merely the fact that
the motions correspondent to these qualities occur within
the contour of the substance, but these motions occur in
different places. The qualities of a substance do not
interpenetrate. It can only be supposed that they do,
if qualities are treated as mental creations or ideas and,
because they are such, are somehow regarded as not being
in space or time. But the motions at any rate which
correspond to the qualities are separate from one another
and differently located. They seem to interpenetrate
only because not distinguished in our apprehension.

The motion of whiteness (which for us is white) may to
our coarse apprehension be in the same place as the
sweetness ; and we may say the sugar is white and sweet
all over. But two different motions, when not com-
pounded into a single-resultant motion, do not occupy
precisely the same place. One may take place in the
interstices of the other, as it were, and be indistinguish-
able for us in locality. When a body is sweet and white
all over, the motions of whiteness and. sweetness are
repeated in various places and intermixed, as blue and
red points of colour may be dotted over a page one set
among the other. The motions of white are spread over
the volume like stippled points in an engraving and the
sweetness motions among them. Just as blood is seen
uniformly red though only the red corpuscles in it are red,
so the sweet and white stippling gives the impression
(through different senses) of a uniformly sweet white thing.’


1 The above applies, at any rate directly, only to qualities (2) of
different modality, (4) on the same level ; e.g. the different secondary
qualities of matter, of which Iam mainly thinking. As to (a), the mole-


Connection
of qualities.


276 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


Thus a substance in respect of its qualities may be
described as a space of a certain contour stippled over
with qualities. There is no pretence of any mysterious
support of qualities, such as Berkeley shrunk from and
thought to be a “brute senseless somewhat.” The
support of qualities is nothing more nor less than the
space-time within whose spatial contour they are united,
they themselves being parts of the space, whose
contour their configuration defines. For though we have
spoken mainly for convenience of the space-contour, yet
remembering that substance is persistence of this spatial
contour through time, each moment of the substance
being a particular of which the law of configuration is the
universal (the singular universal), we must think of sub-
stance as a specially defined volume of space-time. The
substance may be material or mental or living. But
ultimately the substantiality of it is its defined volume of
space-time.


Within this volume the motions to which qualities
belong are, primarily speaking, juxtaposed. But their
relation is more than is expressed by the somewhat
depreciatory name of juxtaposition. One of the great
difficulties that have been felt as to the reality of substance
is that it appears to be a mere aggregate of qualities.
Sugar is sweet and white and hard and the like. But
Space and Time are continuous, and to be within a
volume of space-time is to be connected by a space-time.
And in saying this we need take no account of the


cules of a tuning-fork vibrate with a single vibration compounded of
those of the fundamental tone and the overtones. Is there here a single
quality, or several separate qualities heard confusedly? (4) A higher
quality, life, is a movement (see Book III. ch. ii. B) of living substance
which carries with it movements, say of colour, in the material parts. I
do not discuss these difficulties.

For the question under (a), see F. Brentano’s Untersuchungen zur
Sinnespsychologie (Leipzig, 1907), an extraordinarily stimulating book, to
which I shall have to refer hereafter (Bk. III. ch. v., on the intensity
of sensations). He speaks, however, of psychological sensory contents


and the space of sensation (Empfindungsraum), not as I do of extemal
qualities in an external Space.


CH. VIA SUBSTANCE Gy ly


purely empirical fact that within a substance which is
compound there may be empty space-times or pores not
included in the substance itself. How far the empty
space-time, empty that is of qualities, belongs té the
substance or not is an empirical affair. The space-time
within which the electrons of the atom are supposed to
circle about their nucleus, is perhaps not a pore in the
substance but part of it, just as are the interstellar spaces
of the solar system. On the other hand, the pores ina
sponge do not belong to the substance of the sponge.
Now the space-time within which the motions are
found which have their qualities (if they have any) makes
these qualities into a continuum. Such an answer is
sufficient. But more exact and explicit description of
their connection is desirable. To supply this is a difficult
matter, but it must be attempted. We have first to refer
back to the general account of Space-Time. Structure
we saw was provided for by the fact that any instant
is repeated in Space, and there is therefore intrinsic
simultaneity of certain points. Now given this funda-
mental connection as a basis, different lines of advance
from it will leave us with events in the substance which
are simultaneous with one another though of different
qualities. Thus at least a whiteness and a sweetness
condition of the substance may co-exist, not in virtue of
a direct connection between whiteness and sweetness but
as the joint outcome of processes beginning with the
primordial connection. Qualities would on this showing
be connected together by a remoter relation. This corre-
sponds to the familiar (Lockeian) notion that the various
qualities of a substance are traceable to the nature of the
primary qualities of their primitive constituents. The
correspondence is of course not exact but on the contrary
very inexact. But it consists in this, that the multiplicity
of properties of a substance is not haphazard but rooted
in some simple state of affairs which enables many
qualities to belong together within one contour and to be
in part simultaneous. For though any substance is, like
the universe as a whole, doing its work at different times
in its different parts when Pe ieccd with reference to


278 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


some point-instant of it, there must be structure and
simultaneity for it to be a substance at all. (This state-
ment includes at the limiting case a simple movement.)
A body, for instance, could not be dying all at once in
every cell if it is to be a continuous structure. It was
only the gradual darning of the black silk stockings with
green silk which prevented them from being another pair
of stockings. It is of course empirical what original
movements are provided for in the substance. But an
empirical connection is not the same thing as a purely
haphazard one of mere juxtaposition.

But besides the remoter connection of organised
movements, with their qualities, there is also the direct
interconnection of qualities or movements such as is
illustrated for us in the mutual support of the functions
of an organic body by one another, the sustainment of
nervous action, for instance, by nutrition, and the regula-
tion of nutrition by nervous action. Here we have
reciprocal action of different*substances within the whole
substance. This reciprocity means causal relation within
the substance and is only possible through the connecting
space-time. Reciprocity we propose to discuss presently.
Now reciprocal actions are at a certain instant of time
simultaneous ; and so far as there is mutual interaction
between movements within a substance there is a more
special simultaneity of events within it.

On both grounds we are able to understand, though
T confess the matter is difficult and the account given of
it inadequate, how a substance can have many qualities at
the same time. The connection in whatever form is a
spatio-temporal one.


“ae


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 279


B. Cavusairy


Space-Time or the system of motion is a continuous
system, and any motion within it is continuous with
some other motion. This relation of continuity between
two different motions is causality, the motion which
precedes that into which it is continued in the order of
time being the cause and the other the effect. Motion,
like murder, will out, and no motion is indifferent to
other motions within the universe. Thus the contraction
of certain muscles in a boy’s hand and arm is trans-
formed into or continued into or replaced by certain
intramolecular movements in a stone which constitute
a translation of the stone at a certain velocity ; this
motion is transformed into the shattering of the window
which the stone strikes. A blow from a bullet on a
target is transformed into motions in the target which
constitute a dent in it. An electric stimulation of a
nerve ending is transformed into a movement up the
nerve (I will not attempt to characterise the intimate
nature of the movement, which is of a highly complicated
sort) which ends ultimately in a sensation, which is itself
a movement (or is correlated with one). A dose of
digitalis so affects the pneumogastric nerve as to end
in a cessation of the heart’s action, which is equivalent
to a new set of intramolecular movements in the heart
and is not a bare negative, but only a negative of its
previous actions. The motion of light, that is a motion
of a complex sort in the supposed ether, at any rate the
motion belonging to that substance which is light, is
transformed into certain motions in a photographic plate,
of a chemical order.

It is immaterial, with our metaphysical conception of
a substance, whether we describe a cause in popular

1 J have been helped in this chapter by Mr. Broad’s discussion of
causality (Perception, etc., ch. ii.).


The
category.


Causality
and
Substance,


280 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


language as a thing or substance affecting some other
thing or substance and producing an effect in it, or in
the stricter language of the logicians call the cause an
event or process which precedes another event or process
and without which the second event or process, the
effect, does not exist. I say ‘does not exist’ in place of
the common phrase ‘would not exist,’ for our only
means of knowing what would or would not, or can or
cannot, exist is to discover what does or does not exist.
The popular notion of a cause as a thing is inadequate,
for a thing can only be a cause in respect of the events
in which it is concerned. On the other hand, the logical
notion of causality as a connection of events is inadequate
so long as an event is regarded as an isolated occurrence
and not as a process which if the event is a cause is
continued into the event which is its effect. With such
static or statuesque isolation of its events the causal
relation is a piece of philosophical mythology. But a
substance is a system of motions and whether the cause
is a substance or a motion is all one. A cause is the
motion of a substance, or a substance in respect of its
motion. ‘Thus the cause of the breaking of the window-
pane is the motion of the stone or the stone in motion.
There need not be for the causal relation any other
substance than the motion itself. A thing in motion is
only a very complex substance in motion. We have no
difficulty in eonceiving the substance of light as causing
a chemical effect, even without introducing the notion of
an etherial substance in which that motion is conveyed.
The real reason why it is preferable to describe a cause
wholly in terms of motion is that a thing is causal of its
effect only in respect of the motion which is concerned.
Thus a heavy stone breaks the window-pane in virtue of
its velocity. and mass. A grain of sand propelled with
the same velocity might not have the same effect. We
introduce the stone in order to note the mass which is
engaged. But a thing may contain many qualities which
are unessential to the effect. Thus, for example, a
blow with a bat on the head or a blow with equal force
of impact from an iron billet will produce the same


;
San
‘7


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 281


effect. It is the business of science to disengage in the
action of substances what is the part essential to the
effect. The rest admits of variation. The thing may
be in this sense only the vehicle of the cause, in Bacon’s
phrase. The real cause is the motions which are con-
tinued into the motion which is the effect.

Causality is thus the relation of continuity between
one substance and another, whether those substances be
things or merely motions which we are not in the habit
of calling things (e.g. light). The causal relation. is
the obverse side of the existence of a substance. For
the category of substance communicates with that of
existence. Every substance occupies a space-time. Now
existence is other than and continuous with other
existence, or it is in relation to other existence. Hence
a substance, having existence, is at once different from
another substance and continuous with some other
substance. But all continuity is continuity of space-
time; it is not merely stationary continuity but a
moving one. Causality is thus the spatio-temporal
continuity of one substance with another ; and the cause
is the motion which precedes that into which, let us
say, it passes or is transformed. For we can find no


words to describe something so elementary as this rn


primitive crude relation except we borrow from particular
instances of it, such as are implied by ‘transformation’
or ‘passing into’ or other such language. Substances
share in the relational element of existence and that char-
acter of them is their causality in respect of some other
substance.


One matter of importance should be noted before
we proceed. A substance or motion or group of
motions is causal only if it is continued into a different
motion. Thus there is no causality in the continuance
without change of the same motion. A body perseveres
according to the first law of motion in its state of
uniform motion in a straight line unless subjected to the
action of an impressed force. But we cannot say that
the earlier part of the motion is the cause of the later


Causality
and
uniform
motion.


282 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


into which it is continued. For the later part of the
unchanged motion is the original motion or substance.
The bare continuance of a motion signifies no causal
action from something else. Indeed the first law, if I
may venture on the statement, does little more than
say this. It declares that any motion is as such a uni-
form motion, and that its path should be a straight line
hardly adds to our knowledge, for it is probably true
that the very definition of a straight line is that it is
the path of a uniform motion ; the fact of uniform, that
is unaccelerated and unaltered, motion being anterior to
the notion of a straight line. It is only when motion
suffers some change of acceleration or direction that it
postulates a cause, and we then ask what motion it was
preceding this result which was continued into the
change. For the continuity of a cause with its effect
means not that the cause is as it were lost in the substance
which it affects, but that it is added to the motions
already existing there. Hence the very different effect
produced by one and the same cause in different
substances. The stone which breaks a window-pane
may only bury itself in a soft window-cushion or a
mound of earth.

Thus the continuance of a motion requires no cause
but that motion of which the uniform motion is the
effect and this is different from it. A motion does not
cause its own continuance, is not as it were the cause of
itself, but is itself. Self-causality, so far as that notion is
legitimate, requires a different interpretation.

The purpose of this observation is to guard against
a mistaken doctrine that the cause of an event is the
immediately preceding state of the thing in which the
event occurs. For this would allow the position of a
body in uniform motion to be due to its preceding
position. Causality would become an_ insignificant
notion if it could be applied with this looseness. There
is an additional objection to the doctrine. It implies
that a causal process can be treated as a succession of
states, the proviso being that they shall be in immediate
sequence. But there is no such thing as immediate


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 283


sequence in a continuous series, the very nature of which
that there is no next term to any term. A cause is not
an event followed by another event, as if the events were
states of a substance. For out of such events neither
continuity nor substance could be constructed. A state
which is the cause of another state of the same thing can
only be an ideal section of a process or motion. And
thus interpreted, the proposition that any state of a thing
is the effect of a preceding state can only mean, if it is
to be true to Space-Time, that motions at any instant
are continued into different motions by what Js called
immanent causality.


All causality being the continuous passage of one Transeunt

motion or set of motions into a different one is transeunt. 24 im-
Immanent causality is nothing but transeunt causality canton
between the substances which are contained within a
substance. Thus, for instance, the passage of the thought
of an action within our minds into the realisation of that
thought in actual fact is (in part) immanent causality.
A better example would be the internal repression of a
wish where the whole action seems to go on within the
mind, though undoubtedly it requires the presence of
the body. The intramolecular actions of a body, or the
interactions between the parts of an organic system, or
the interconnection of movements within the system of
an atom are other cases of immanent causality. The dis-
tinction is clearly a relative one, and merely a matter of
convenience in description. A case of transeunt causality
between two independent substances like the cricket-ball
and the bat is immanent causality, if the ball and the bat
and the intervening space are taken to be a single
substance, as they may with perfect legitimacy be taken
to be.

Moreover, the distinction is relative in another and
more important sense. No substance is self-contained
as being disconnected from the rest of Space-Time,
and therefore from other substances. The immanent
causality of an organism is sustained by the environment.
Nervous action is affected immanently by nutrition,


Summary.


284 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


but nutrition is an effect of external substances, and
nervous action contains essentially motor-response to the
surroundings. When a thought brings about its own
realisation in an act of will the immanent process is the
transition of the thought into a perception and that is
purely mental, but it implies the action of the body on
its surroundings so as to produce the physical conditions,
e.g. the lifted weight, which are perceived in the act of
perception. To suppose an absolutely self-contained
substance is in fact to omit the fact that it belongs to
Space-Time, or rather perhaps it is to suppose that the
Space in which it exists is stagnant instead of being
essentially temporal. Even an atom is but a substance
precipitated within the matrix in which all substance
grows. The only self-contained reality in which all
causality is immanent is the universe itself, and its
immanent causality is but the transeunt causality of the
existents it contains. But the infinite whole itself is not
a cause, for the categories are only determinations of
finites or other beings within Space-Time which these
parts of the whole owe to the properties of any space-
time. Thus when the universe is spoken of as | self-
causing, this is either an illegitimate phrase, used meta-
phorically of the whole ; or, when it is used with a clear
apprehension of its meaning, it signifies only that the
various movements within the world are the outcome of
other movements in a different distribution. In other
words, the immanent causality of the universe is, to repeat
ourselves, only another way of expressing that every
existent in the world is in causal relation with other
existents. Only in this sense is the world causa sui.
All other self-causality is relative, it merely omits the
dependence of the substance on the rest of Space-Time.
Causation is thus a perfectly definite character of
things ; it is the continuity of existents within continuous
Space-Time as subsisting between substances, which are
themselves motions or groups of motions. Like all the
categories it 1s pervasive and no substance escapes it.
Causality is nothing less than this fundamental relation
between substances. But it is also nothing more. No


CH. IV B CAUSALITY 285


conception has been so persistently riddled with criticism.
It has been declared from the point of view of logic to
be either useless or superficial ; from that of metaphysics
to be self-contradictory. All these complaints seem to
me to depend on taking it either to be more than it is
and to have a meaning other than that which it has in the
usage of science and especially of physics ; or else to
take it for less than it is, and to omit its characteristic
features. To consider these criticisms in detail would be
a task of much time, and all that I can hope to do is to
touch upon them and in the main to let the exposition
speak for itself. But before doing so it will be better
to complete the positive exposition of causality, though
there will necessarily be a latent reference to destructive
criticism.


In the first place, then, the cause is a different motion
or set of motions from the effect. The mere continuance
of the same uniform motion is as we have seen not a
causal connection. ‘The only identity between cause and
effect is to be found in their continuity. We are not
even to suppose that the moment at which the cause takes
effect or the effect begins to be caused is as it were a
meeting-point of the two motions ; as if there were some
single point in which the two processes overlapped. The
continuity of the causal relation would be destroyed by
the supposition. It would be a revival in a new form of
the ancient puzzles of motion and the paradox of Achilles :
the causal motion and the effect motion being broken
up into steps of a progression. If this were the case the
cause would not produce its effect, nor the effect begin,
the point in question being the limit which the cause
would tend to but never reach.

It might be urged that the cause is actually carried
over into the effect; as when, to take a very simple
case, a shove on a moving body accelerates its motion.
But this is no mere persistence of the original motion ;
that motion is replaced by the acceleration of another
motion. When the stone shatters the window there is
not even the semblance of its continuance. The cause is


Cause and
effect
different.


Cause prior
to effect.


286 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


only continued in the resultant of itself and the original
motion of the patient. Now a resultant is what it is and
different from the components. Other cases of a quali-
tative sort may mislead similarly, like Hegel’s example
of the rain, which is the same water in the air and in
the ground which it wets. Really, the effect is some-
thing quite dissimilar: the falling water is distributed
differently from the resting water. In the action of
digitalis on the heart, not even such accidental simplicity is
to be found. The effect need not be like the cause and
rarely is. And it never is identical with the cause. That
would be uniform motion and the universe would be a
blank.

Causality is essentially a temporally continuous
relation and the cause is prior to the effect. Movements,
and substances generally, may be simultaneous with each
other but the relation is not one of causality. It is either,
first, that of reciprocity where action and reaction are
simultaneous ; but a reaction is not the effect of the
action but is the answering causality of the patient on
the agent. This covers the simultaneous existence of
qualities in the one substance where the qualities affect each
other mutually. Or, second, the simultaneity may be the
persistence of the same effect owing to the persistence of
the cause ; so that the effect of one dose of the cause is
simultaneous with the next dose of the cause. In this
way things, as bearers or vehicles of cause, and effect are
simultaneous but not the cause simultaneous with its
effect, not the particular dose of the cause simultaneous
with its own effect. Or we may have simultaneity of
motions which arise from points inherently contempo-
raneous. Otherwise simultaneity of cause and effect does
not exist and would imply that the relation was merely
a spatial one.

As it has been urged that cause and effect are identical
with one another, so likewise it has been urged that
cause, as it takes effect, occurs at the same instant with
the effect as that effect begins. But this is either a
tautology, or is untrue. The cause is the process in so
far as it precedes the effect and the desire to find an


ee


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 287


identity of time between the two arises again, it is prob-
able, from supposing the moments of the process to be
contiguous instead of continuous.

It is essential therefore to causality that causation
proceeds from before to after.’ Consequently it is only
in a logical sense that the effect can be held to determine
the cause as much as the cause the effect. We can only
mean by this that when the cause and the effect are
precisely stated they are reciprocal : when the cause, that
is, is purged of what may indeed occur in a particular
case but is accidental to it, and when the effect is stated
in terms so precise as to presuppose one cause only and
not a choice of several; when, to take the familiar
example, the death from drowning is distinguished from
the death by hanging, and the two not lumped together
under the general designation of death. The reciprocity
of cause and effect means then that unless there were the
precise effect there would not be the precise cause. But
such determination is logical and not real determination,
and the effect cannot be interchanged with cause except
as a basis of inference. We cannot in any real sense
therefore say that the future determines the present, for
the future is not yet and a future event introduces the
order of Time. In that order the future does not
determine but is determined. The present would not be
what it is unless it causes the future which it actually
does cause, but to regard it as dependent, except in the
above logical sense, on the future is to take Time half as
an accidental feature of the universe and to contemplate
the world as spatial instead of spatio-temporal. Thus it
is in no sense true that the future drags the present
into its future condition as if it operated a fronte. All
causality is @ tergo.

This might seem to contradict what was said in an
earlier chapter! of the experience of the future in enjoy-
ment. We anticipate something in our minds and this
anticipation was described as the enjoyment of the future,
not as present but as future. Now such anticipation leads
on to performance, and hence it would seem that in this case


1 Book I. ch. iv.


Causality
a limited
relation,


288 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


at any rate the future is causal. Why not therefore extend
this consideration and explain teleological action as action
which is determined by the future end to be attained ; so
that animals and men are dragged to their issues from the
future? The answer to this is to distinguish between
the future event as it will be when it is actual, in which
case it becomes not future but present ; and the future
as it is enjoyed, before it is realised. Such enjoyment is
the future in idea, and this is the only way in which the
future as future can be enjoyed. This future enjoyment
is causal to its own realisation as a present. But this
enjoyment drives us not a fronte but a éergo like all other
causality. The transition is still from the before to the
after. For the future as future precedes the future as it
is when it has become a present and precedes it in the
order of my enjoyment. In the same way my enjoyment
of the past as past precedes in my enjoyment, as it should,
the real present, for it is only by dragging the past up
from the depths of memory, “the dark backward of
time,” that I enjoy it as past. When, on the other hand,
the future is said in any other than a purely logical sense
to determine the present (just as much as the past
obviously does), the future is taken to mean the actual
distant event, and then the statement is untrue and falsifies
the significance of Time. If Time be taken seriously all
causality proceeds from actual present to actual future,
and is never determined by the actual future. It may be
determined by the future as future but this forms no
exception to the proposition.

Finally, the causal relation is a relation of existents.
One substance is the agent and the other its patient which
suffers its effect. Agent and patient together form a
relatively closed system and, as we have seen, within that
system the causality is immanent. There is no causal
relation between the infinite whole and any one of its
parts. ‘There is only such relation between one part and
another. The whole system of things does not descend
into the arena and contend with one of its creatures.
The business of science in its search for causes (and it is
not asserted that this constitutes the whole business of


..


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 289


science) is to discover what precise events are connected
as causes with what other precise events as effects. The
task may be one of infinite difficulty and may at best lead
only to probable propositions. The rules of the logic of
discovery are rules of procedure in this quest. Where
the causal connection can be established, it is done by an
elaborate machinery of negative instances, by which the
cause is narrowed down so as to contain only so much
as is relevant to the effect.1 Where experiment is not
possible other devices of approximation have to be used
which supply the place of experiment. In the amusing
prelude of the SopAist, Plato attempting to get a definition
of the sophist employs his method of division in order
to “hunt the sophist down to his lair.” What science
does is to hunt down the cause of an effect to its lair. It
may not establish exact connection but only a remote
one. Yet it seeks, in the phrase of Mr. Venn, to screw
the causal circumstances up closer and closer to the effect.
This procedure is not open to the objection that the only
satisfactory statement of a cause is the whole universe.
If this were true the idea of cause would indeed retain a
certain usefulness in practice, but as a theoretical basis of
procedure in science it would be useless. But the
objection rests on a misconception. It assumes that the
operation of the stars is a motion which interferes with
the causal act by which a man knocks another down ; and
does so because there is direct or indirect connection
between all parts of the universe, throughout Space-Time.
The question rather is whether the intimate causal relation
mentioned is interfered with by the rest of the universe
which undoubtedly sustains it. The question is the same
as when we ask whether the properties of a triangle which
undoubtedly imply the Space from which the triangle is
delimited are affected by the sustaining and surrounding
space. What science has to do is just to discover these
limited, intimate, relations of existents which are called
causal ones. Everything which it finds by inquiry
relevant has to be included and becomes part of the
substances involved. Everything which, though its
1 Bosanquet’s Logic, vol. ii. ch. iv. pp. 115 ff. (eds. 1 and 2).
VOL. I U


q
290 THE CATEGORIES BK. It


presence is assumed, does not interfere so as to control
or vitiate, lapses for the special causal relation into the
position of an immaterial condition. So much at least
follows from the fact that the world itself is not a
category and cannot be a cause.


Causality, We can now ask how far the modest but pervasive
no power, category of causality is open to the objections raised
nor force.


against it, which have grown into a formidable revolt
against its authority. Hume’s great service to this topic
was that he purified the notion of causality of anthropo-
morphism; he denied or rather he failed to find in
experience any power in the cause to produce the effect
or any necessity in their conjunction. It is true he
read experience amiss. For though no cause exhibits
mysterious power, it possesses a relation of connection
which Hume with his inherited conception of an atomic
experience made up of single and isolated pieces was
unable to detect. Subsequent philosophy has been
engaged in restoring the connection which he overlooked.
But the spectre of power and necessity which Hume
laid has been busy with men’s minds and is accountable
for the discredit upon which causality has fallen.

No notion of power or necessity is contained in the
conception of causality as a category. Still less is the
connection an anthropomorphic one. The experience we
have in our own persons of causality is so far from giving
us a notion of mysterious and unexplained efficacy or
power, that it is but an example of the same relation as
we find outside ourselves in external events. Rather we
must say that power is the continuous connection which
we observe in ourselves and can more easily and directly
observe in ourselves in enjoyment than outside us in
contemplated events. Our power is an instance of
causality ; causality is not the work of power. But since
the idea of a power in the cause to produce its effect
suggests that the relation is presided over by something
akin to spirit," some entity behind the relation which


1 In the sequel (Bk. IIT - ch. il. B) it will be maintained that ultimately
there is in all things something which corresponds to spirit in ourselves.


7


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 291


brings it into existence, we are perhaps well rid of the
conception which is harmless if it were once “ defecated ”
in Coleridge’s famous phrase, “to a pure transparency.”
Defecated conceptions still retain their body and colour
in the general mind.

We need therefore shed no tear over power ; and we
may view with equal equanimity the discredit of force
which has followed power or is in course of following
it to the place where those notions are preserved, which
are not so much false in themselves as such that the
mind cannot safely be trusted to use. With power in
the cause to produce the effect may go necessity of
connection. The only necessity which philosophy can
recognise is that of inference. But there is no necessity
in things except fact. Nothing is added to causal relation
by the adjective necessary. Every fact carries with it
necessity, the necessity at least for the human mind of
accepting it. There is no other necessity even in
mathematics, which is often regarded as the special
domain of that goddess. It isa fact that a triangle’s angles
are equal to two right angles, a fact which is discovered by
inspection as all facts are discovered. It is only the
extreme simplicity of the triangle, that it has none but
empirical spatio-temporal character, which induces us to
think that the connection of its form with the property
named is necessary. For mathematics is no exception to
the rule that science is empirical, and that its discoveries
are won by attention to the nature of its subject-matter.
Not even metaphysics is exempt, though its experienced
material is non-empirical in nature. ‘Must,’ if I may
repeat myself, was made for human beings in the relation


But the point of that doctrine is not so much that things are spirits, as
that spirit is only an advanced form of something which is found lower
down in all things. Our awareness of power is but our consciousness of
the causal relation between our will and our acts. The mischief of the
conception that a cause has power to produce its effect is that it intro-
duces some mysterious element of connection other than that of simple
continuity. Hume went too far in the opposite direction. For us
causality is not so much an example of power as power 1s an example’ of
causality.


Objections
to causality:
(1) from
logical
atomism.


292 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


of superior to subject. It has no part in science ; though
the science of man takes account of ‘ must.’


Stripped of these dangerous anthropomorphisms the
principle or law of causality that any event has a cause
means nothing more nor less than the proposition that a
motion is continuous with some precedent motion. Such
a principle is not necessary but is non-empirical as
following from the nature of Space-Time and not from
the nature of the particular events that happen to be
connected in space and time. It is difficult to under-
stand how in this sense it can be dispensed with, unless
science is to avow itself a mere tabulation of isolated facts
reduced to generalisations. It is worth while glancing
at some of the reasons which seem to make the idea
of cause dispensable. One of them is that causes and
effects regarded as substances or things are in the first
instance qualitative, and it is only in the initial stages of
science that we are concerned with such relations of
qualities. Fire expands bodies, digitalis stops the heart ;
propositions like these are merely the first steps beyond
empirical descriptions. The further science goes the
more it concerns itself not with connections of qualities
but with measurement and with processes or motions ;
how much heat is related to how much elongation, what
processes there are set up by digitalis which are connected
with the heart’s cessation. Moreover, it is not only
relations between independent substances which demand
investigation but in an eminent degree the constitution
of things in terms of primary qualities ; not what heat
does but what heat is; what are the primary processes
which underlie the world of qualities, or, in the technical
phrase, which are the ground of qualities.

Thus the higher stages of science become to a large
extent attempts to formulate in quantitative terms the
processes which occur in nature. What we seek is not
causes but formulae, expressible in equations. What
place is here for cause? What is there in the law of
gravitation which involves cause? Did not Newton
himself in declining to make hypotheses as to the cause


f-


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 293


of attraction limit himself to the formulation of the facts
compendiously stated in that law? What else is science
but such a set of compendious formulae? “In the
motions of mutually gravitating bodies,” says Mr. Russell,!
“there is nothing that can be called a cause and nothing
that can be called an effect ; there is merely a formula.”
But apart from the fact that the deeper reasons for such
formulae remain a subject of inquiry (the cause of
gravitation is an actual problem of physics), a formula
such as that of gravitation involves two elements. One
is that of quantitative description of the motions that
take place. On its other side, the formula asserts the
reciprocal determination of two motions by one another,
and this implies causality on the reasonable conception
of what is meant by the causal relation. Qualitative
causal laws are replaced by quantitative formulae, but so
far as science aims at connecting together motions it is
observing the law of causality, only in a less undeveloped
form. 1am bound to pass by the more explicit doctrine
of Mach and his followers, that cause is but a useful
means for shortening the work of description, for this
doctrine implies a conception of thought which is incon-
sistent with our hypothesis of the relation of mind to
things. Concepts are for us either realities or they are
nothing. They may indeed be erroneous, but even then
they are objective. That science is made by inventing
concepts which are verified by experience is a perfectly
true account of how we come to know. That our
concepts are nothing more, are not (if we could but get
the right ones) actual constituents of the objective world
and not merely inventions of ours, this is at least not
the principle on which we are conducting our inquiry.
Another reason for the discredit of causation is the
sheer misconception of it for which philosophers are
themselves in part responsible, that it means not a relation
of connection but a frequency of conjoint occurrence.
Two events apparently presumed to be disconnected may
be taken to be cause and effect when if one is repeated


1 <QOn the notion of Cause,’ Proc. Arist. Soc. N.S. vol. xill., 1912—
1913, p- 14. Reprinted in Mysticism and Logic (p. 194).


294 | THE CATEGORIES BK. II


the other is repeated—‘ the same cause, the same effect.’
Attention has been diverted from the nature of causality
itself to the nature of the conditions under which we can
succeed in discovering causal laws; and the notion of
the causality of a cause has been confused with the
universality of the connection. An easy triumph is thus
prepared for those suspect causes. There is no event
which is repeated, and a conception of causality which is
nothing but the repetition of a brace of events would
indeed be useless. Now we have seen already that
repetition, not bare identical repetition but under varia-
tions, is essential to the existence of a law, but is
distinguishable from the contents of the law. The causal
relation of two events is the relation between the events
whereby they become immanent action in a single
substance composed of the two events and of what is
needed to unite them. The causal relation is not the
repetition of the pair of similar events. The truth is
that without the repetition we should not discover laws,
and that at best owing to the great complexity of things
and the great distance of actual repetition from mere
repetition we can only hope for approximations to
certainty. The practice of the logicians has been enough
to show that the causal relation is not equivalent to the
criterion ‘same cause same effect.’ For it is vital to
the discovery of causal relations that in the absence of a
cause the effect is absent. This criterion it is which
gives meaning to the negative instance. It is no doubt
a legacy from Hume that the world should be broken up
into disconnected events which are found together or in
succession in experience. But Hume, to do him justice,
did not attribute any causal relation to the events them-
selves, as his successors did, but to the expecting mind.
I can only account for causality’s still being held by those
who profess adherence to Hume to be a relation, by
supposing that relation is understood to be something
that can be said about things and not a concrete set of
transactions into which they enter.

The extreme of atomism is reached when causality,
supposed to be equivalent to necessity and based on


CH, VIB CAUSALITY . 295


identical repetition, is considered to be an ideal limit
constructed by the mind which is at the opposite extreme
to complete independence of two things on one another.
What science then has to discover is not causal con-
nections, which are mental, but real correlations. No one
would undervalue the formulae of correlation proposed
with this end in view. But it is surely plain that this
view is inspired by the fear of the bogey of necessity, and
that unless we are to regard the world as made up of
discontinuous units, against the spirit of our hypothesis,
there is no meaning in correlation except as a first
approximation towards the more intimate relation of
direct or indirect causality ; that we proceed statistically
by establishing correlations where direct experimentation
On causes is not open to us. The quest for correlation
implies that events are determined, and determined in
reality and not merely logically, by one another in a
certain order... To discover such determination, the
weighing of numbers may at one stage of a science be
our only means. We aim at the plan of things by
numbers where the plan is not immediately or directly
accessible.


It is from an entirely different point of view, in fact
on the very ground of the systematic interconnection of
things, that a different school of thought depreciates the
relation of cause and effect in comparison with that of
ground and consequent. We have followed them in
maintaining that what matters in science is the connections
of things. For us therefore the discovery of the cause
of an event or motion or thing with qualities is the
detection of what precise motion or group of motions or
things or events is continuously connected with the
effect. The cause and effect make a system involving
process. But it is urged by the writers in question that
a cause as a mere event in time contains something


1 Compare chapter v. on ‘Contingency and Correlation— the
insufficiency of Causation’ in Mr. Karl Pearson’s Grammar of Science,
Part I. (London, rgr1, ed. 3), with Mr. A. Wolf’s remarks in Proc.
Arist. Soc. vol. xiii. N.S., ‘The Philosophy of Probability,’ §§ 3-5.


(2) from
logical
idealism,


296 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


irrelevant to the characters of the system. Time has for
them the taint of relative unreality and it infects the cause.
And they point to systems like those in geometry where
no Time, as they allege, is involved. Cause as an event
in time is an incomplete ground, and the scientific
ideal would be rather that of a system or the pattern of
geometrical ones."

It was this ideal which Spinoza employed, and the
inadequacy of his effort to make causal connection satis-
factory might have served as a warning. In truth it
would rather seem that whereas, according to these writers,
the relation of ground and consequent is fundamental
and that cause and effect adds something irrelevant, the
relation of ground and consequent eviscerates the causal
relation of its essential element of Time: implication
is a notion posterior to causation. Time is indeed
supposed to be mere ‘time,’ mere succession, and it is
such ‘time’ which is suspect. But there is only one
sort of Time and a sensible event in time possesses that
time-reality. If we mean mere time, a cause is not an
event in mere time. If we mean real Time, Time is itself
part of the ground. The ground of any consequent is
fundamentally process and is’ spatio-temporal. Either
therefore process is essential to the ground or else the
cause or event in time which is irrelevant to the ground
or which is the ground in an imperfect form is not the
real event which is intended by cause. The preference
of ground and consequent to that of cause and effect is
in fact an attempt to translate what is essentially temporal,
where Time is taken as real, into something stationary.
To do so we must reintroduce process into the stationary
contents of the ground, as when our subject-matter
is itself historical, e.g. in psychology or physics. The
example of a geometrical system is misleading. For
stationary Space is but Space-Time with the Time
omitted, and the omission is legitimate if it is only
supposed to be provisional. The preference in ques-
tion depends on the confusion of what is timeless with


1 For the topic of this section see Bosanquet, Logic, vol. i. pp. 264 ff.
ed. 1 (252 ff. ed. 2). q gic, vol. 1. pp. 264


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 297


what is independent of any particular time, as all
universals are.

Real grounds are to be distinguished from logical
grounds, though they may coincide. The real ground of
any event or character, when it is not merely the so-called
formal cause, which is equivalent to the fact explained, as
when vibrations of the ether are called the cause of light,
being in fact identical with them, is a complex of motions
of which the event or fact to be explained is the causal
outcome. But logic, if we may anticipate a later chapter,}
is the science of truth, or of how our beliefs, as expressed
in propositions, are to be systematised into a coherent
whole at the guidance of reality. For it therefore the
reason why or ‘because’ is not always the cause;
whereas in reality the reason is the “moving why” of
which Burns speaks. When A is equal to B, and C also,
neither B nor the equality of A and C to B is the cause
of the equality of Ato C. All manner of good reasons
for a conclusion are different from the cause of the fact
stated in the conclusion. The cause is always a reason,
but a reason need not be the cause. But we are not
therefore free to regard the logical ground because it is
the more general in logic as superior to the relation of
cause and effect in the reality. Truth is like a work of
art and has its own prescriptions, always dictated by
reality. We go about to arrive at reality by methods
proper to truth, and we are able to dispense in certain
cases with direct reference to causal interrelation. But
the ideals of logic cannot be used to depreciate the causal
relation.


These are difficulties which affect the use of causation (3) fran
in science and logic. Metaphysically it has been main- physics.
tained that causation is not reality but appearance. For
us since the universe of Space-Time divides itself into
motions and yet retains its continuity, the continuous
connection of motion with motion is as much ultimately
real as the Space-Time of which it is the history. But
the charges brought against it on metaphysical grounds

1 Bk. III. ch. ix. B.


298 THE CATEGORIES au


may be lightly touched on here, for either they imply
that causality is a relation which does not relate or they
depend on misinterpretation of continuity. Thus when
causation appears to be obnoxious to the infinite regress,
for that A should cause B there must be some third thing
C which moves A to its work, it is assumed that a cause
is not itself causative. It is waiting for an inducement.
Something, as Mr. Broad so well puts the point, is wanted
to stir it into activity. But its real activity consists in
passing over into its effect.

In the next place it is urged, by Mr. Bradley, that
causation can neither be discontinuous nor continuous, or
that it must be both, and is therefore contradictory. It
cannot be discontinuous and must be continuous, for if it
were discontinuous the cause would persist unchanged
for a time and then suddenly change. Again, it is
apparently assumed that for a cause to work it must have
an inducement. But the cause does its work not by a
change in itself but in leading on into something else.
A cause might well remain unaltered for a time and then
finding its patient produce its effect. The proposition
that causation is not discontinuous is indeed true but not
for the reason stated. Equally it is said causation cannot
be continuous for the cause would then be without
duration. “The cause must be a real event, and yet
there is no fragment of time in which it is real.”! This
appears to mean that a cause must occupy a finite time
in order to act ; which is the assumption already rejected ;
and it appears also to assume that a continuum is put
together out of adjacent points (in the likeness of spatial
points), whereas the essence of a continuum is that being
neither space-positions only nor time-positions only, all
its points are instants and all its instants points. A
continuum is a process and causation is a process. If
the cause is something stationary, causation is indeed
inexplicable. But it is in fact not stationary, and its
continuity does not mean that at any one instant the cause
is succeeded by something else which begins at the next
instant but that any instant is the point of passage of a

1 Appearance and Reality, ch. vi. p. 61 (ed. 1).


CH. VIB CAUSALITY 299


motion. To repeat an often-stated proposition, continuity
is the conceptual formulation of motion itself, and, hard
as it may be to say where cause ends and effect begins,
yet if cause is itself a process and effect another and
different one, the relation between the two is the transition
of the one which is earlier into the later motion, or group
of motions.


The
category.


300 THE CATEGORIES Be


C. RecrprociTy


Causality is a relation between substances in virtue of
which a motion or group of motions in the one is
continued into a motion or group of motions in the
second and thus alters the pre-existing motion of the
second substance. Now the second substance, or the
patient, is already a motion or group of motions, and
the effect which the cause produces is determined by
the second substance as well. The transaction into which
the two substances enter, so far as they constitute a closed
system, is a two-sided and not a one-sided transaction.
It is one in which each partner is cause and effect in turn.
The situation which is the relation of the two substances
is from the point of view of the first an effect on the
second, but from the point of view of the second an effect
on the first. The action of A on B is ipso facto an action of
Bupon A. In the transaction each partner exercises its
own causality ; the effect on B isa continuation of motions
in A, and the effect in A is a continuation of motions in B.
There is thus only one total situation arising from the
relation of the two and it appears as an effect in B of A
and an effect in A of B. Thus the pull of the horse, in
Newton’s example, on the rope attached to a heavy stone
is a pull of the rope on the horse ; the push which I give
the earth by the intramolecular movement which follows
my will to jump is the push of the earth upon me which
actually is the jump that I am said to make. When a
ball strikes another moving in the opposite direction, the
motion imparted to the second in one direction is precisely
the same transaction as consists in the rebound of the
first ball. When a moving ball overtakes another
moving ball the acceleration imparted to the one is a
deceleration of the other, and the one ball loses its
motion to the other, which it accelerates, just because of
the internal movements of the second. One motion


ou. v1 RECIPROCITY 301


evokes an alteration in another motion into which it is
thus continued, but it does not act upon the void, and
the pre-existing motion which it accelerates is continued as
an element in the same transaction into the acceleration
in a contrary direction of the overtaking ball. In other
and more familiar words, an effect is produced only in
what resists. Every action is at the same time a reaction.
But this does not do away with causality. The action of
A on B is the causality of A. The effect on B is
posterior to the motions in A. The reaction of B is its
causality exercised upon A, and is posterior to the
previous motions of B. Reciprocity between A and B
is therefore reciprocal causality. Moreover, the reaction
begins at the same moment as the action and two bodies
in reciprocal action are simultaneous so far as concerns
this moment. Thus the reciprocal attraction of the earth
and the falling stone is a single transaction which is the
beginning of the two opposite movements of the earth to
the stone and the stone to the earth. It is this kind of
case where the transaction is so obviously a single event,
viz. the diminution of the distance of earth and stone,
which has induced some to omit the element of causality,
the earth on the one side and the stone on the other, and
attend only to the mutual accelerations, inversely propor-
tional to the masses of the parties engaged.


The simultaneity of two interrelated substances in
respect of their action on each other is irrespective of the
continued existence of the substances, such as we find in
what Mill calls permanent causes, like the earth or other
heavenly bodies. The substances might act on each
other in virtue of their life and the life expire in the
interaction. It would still remain true that the action
and reaction would begin simultaneously in the dead
substances left. Where we have permanent causes the
two sides of the transaction are being constantly renewed
and the two interacting processes persist beside each
other.

Two interacting substances form a system or single
substance. What is true of them is true also therefore of


Corollaries.


Mechani-
cal and
organic
reaction,


302 THE CATEGORIES 8


the substances within a substance, such as the qualities of
a single substance or the parts of an organic whole.
There is simultaneity between such actions and reactions
within the substance, and here we have such account as
I am able to give of the structural character of things
apart from its intrinsic simultaneousness. The various
parts of a substance sustain each other by reciprocity and
so far there is simultaneity. But it is the result of
causal process and therefore of succession.!

The same thing holds true of independent substances.
When they come into relation they are in reciprocal
action and simultaneous in respect of certain processes.
This simultaneity is thus an outcome of the successive
character of Space-Time. Once more both in respect of
single things and in respect of the world as a whole, we
come back to the truth that apart from the intrinsic
necessity of some simultaneity of points, the fact that at
any one moment Space is filled with some event or other
is derivative from the successiveness of Space. A purely
simultaneous Space would be a Space which perished with
its perishing moment. A Space which is occupied by
Time at various stages in the intrinsic succession of Time
allows both for the persistence of Space and for its
complete occupation at any moment.


Action and reaction are conceptions drawn from
mechanics and founded as now we see in the nature of
Space-Time itself. The question may be raised whether
organic reaction falls under the same head. In particular
it might be asked, if a luminous body is the cause of our
visual sensations, do we in vision react on the luminous
object? It causes vision in us, but do we alter it?
‘The answer will illustrate the real nature of action and
reaction. For the character of the reaction depends on
the nature of the body affected, and so does the effect
produced by the cause. Now owing to the complexity
of an organic body the characteristic effect of the cause
may be only a remote effect. Thus the immediate
mechanical effect of light is pressure on the eye, and

1 Above, ch. vi. A, p. 276.


cH, v1 RECIPROCITY 303


there is mechanical reaction to this. But the psycho-
logical effect is remote and arrived at through a long
chain of action, whether chemical or not I. need not
inquire. It takes time for the mental effect of light to
be produced, but when it is produced there is at the
same time an action on the part of the organism of motion
which is commonly spoken of as the motor reaction.
This motor reaction is an integral part of the whole
situation in which the action of the light ultimately takes
effect. For it is a short-sighted insight which supposes
that the sensation of light is something which occurs first
and then releases the motor action which ultimately leads
to turning the eyes to the source of light. We may
rather see reason to believe with Mr. C. S. Myers? that
the actual sensation depends on the type of the motor
response and that the sensation emerges with the motor
process. Thus when the light produces its effect on the
centres of vision the organism with its preformed
structure is reacting towards the external world.
We must thus note first that the reaction of the
organism may be remote as compared with the first
effect of the stimulus. And again it will be very complex
in the end if the whole substance directly or indirectly
affected is complex. Hence, to quote a famous argument
to which we shail recur later in another connection, a
telegram may leave me cold which owing to its contents
may throw another person into profound agitation of
mind and of response. In the next place the essential
character of the reaction may be masked by the difference
of the conditions here and in a simple mechanical response.
For the reaction may take effect not so much on the
source of stimulation as on other objects. In general
and as a matter of fact organic reactions are in their out-
come directed towards the stimulus. The organism
performs motions which are designed to secure more of a
pleasant and less of an unpleasant stimulus, by what Mr.
Baldwin has called a circular process, or a process of
imitation, which repeats itself. The sight of a tasty


1 British Fournal of Psychology, vol. vi., 1912: ‘Are the intensity
differences of sensation quantitative?’ I.§1. See later, Bk. III. ch. v.


304 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


thing reacts in the seizing of it to eat. Our reactions
are in the first instance practical and do tend to return
upon the object. But the object being only remotely the
cause of the visual reaction, the reaction to it may be
directed on some different object. Thus in purely
intellectual apprehension of the fruit the reaction may
take the form, in the end, of speech. Or an insult may
be avenged not on the person of the culprit but on
some one else, or a man may recoup himself in the circle of
his home for the vexations he has suffered from his
business. These are complexities arising from the
complexity of the situation and of the organism. What
concerns us to observe is that any action on the organism
issues upon the external world sooner or later in some
part of it, whether directly connected with the original
source of the stimulation or not. The organic reaction
considered in its complexity is the issue of the organism’s
affections in effects upon the external world. And they are
not without grounds who look upon an organism as an
apparatus whereby actions received from outside are
converted into effects upon the outside world again. The
simplicity of mechanical action and reaction is not to be
expected in these cases where we compare the ultimate
source of action and the ultimate shape and locality of
reaction. The equivalence of action and reaction may
however be traced at every stage of these highly complex
transactions,


CHAPTER VII


QUANTITY AND INTENSITY


Tue category of substance was as we saw a feature of The cate-
any space-time which arose from the relation between &"*
the elements of Space and Time in it to one another.
Existence was the occupation of a space-time. Sub-
stance was the persistence of a space in its time or the
occupation of a space by a duration. Causality and
reciprocity were relations of substances. The categories
to which we now come, quantity and intensity, or, to
follow Kant’s terms, extensive and intensive quantity,
also arise from various essential relations within Space-
Time of Space and Time to one another. As regards
nomenclature, I shall follow Mr. Russell in using quantity
as the concrete term and magnitude as its corresponding
abstract term. Magnitude is to quantity as universality
is to universal or causality to the concrete relation of
cause and effect. Thus quantities may be equal to
one another but their magnitudes are not equal but
identical, In ordinary practice the term intensity is
used indifferently, I think, for intensive quantity and its
magnitude. So too magnitude and extensive quantity are
commonly used convertibly. But while any magnitude
may be greater or less than another magnitude, it is
convenient to be able to describe equality of quantity by
a distinguishing phrase, identity of magnitude. More-
over when in what follows quantity is used by itself, it
stands for extensive quantity.

As before, quantity and intensity are not concepts
which can be applied to spaces and times, but they are
features of things which are complexes of space-time

VOL. I 305 x


306 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


because of certain characters belonging to any space-time.
Extensive quantity is the occupation of any space by its
time or rather the occurrence of any space in its time,
or what is the same thing, the occupation of any time by
its space. Space as so occupied is a length or area or
volume. Time as so occupied is a duration. Of two
spaces generated by the same motion the greater space
occurs in the greater time, and the greater time occupies
the greater space. More or less of a motion is more
or less extension in space or time, the space traced out
being in correspondence with the time in which it is
traced; and this is extensive quantity—that is the
crude or initial character which the thought of quantity
represents. Quantity is thus equivalent to-the bare fact
that Space is swept out in Time, or that Time is
occupation of Space.

Intensity or intensive quantity, on the other hand,
is the occurrence of various spaces in the same time, or
what is the same thing, the occupation of the same space
by different times. The simplest case is the velocity of
a simple motion. The same time occupies a greater or
less space according as the motion is fast or slow ; or the
same space occurs in a greater or less time, according
as the motion is slow or fast. A less simple but still
simple case is the intensive quantity of a sound. If the
pitch remains unaltered the louder sound has the greater
amplitude of vibration ; more space being contained in
the same time of vibration. Thus while extensive
quantity is the fact that a space is occupied by its time,
whatever that time is, intensive quantity is the fact that
Time may be filled by Space and Space by Time un-
equally.

The ground of this distinction is that a space (or a
time) is both a whole and also a continuum of parts.
Considered as a whole, a space is traced out by its time
and more time means more space, by what we are
accustomed to call, with the use of numerical notions,
the addition of space to space. That is to say, when two
spaces are compared, for instance two lengths, the one
space covers the extent of the other and something more.


CH. VII QUANTITY AND INTENSITY 307


But a space is also a continuum and infinitely divisible.
Now two spaces, say two lengths, may be traversed in
the same time, for owing to the continuity of Space and
of Time there is a one-to-one correspondence between
the points of the two unequal lengths of space and
between them and the time which is also a continuum.
Thus intensity is a relation of Space to Time in virtue
of the continuity or infinite divisibility of each, which
secures that the time being the same it may be filled
with any extension of space; and the space being the
same it may be filled with any extension of time.
Extensive quantity is an affair of addition; intensive
quantity is an affair of concentration, or in numerical
language of division."


Thus extensive quantity belongs to existents so far as
the space and time of their space-time vary together ;
they have intensive quantity so far as one or other
remaining constant the other varies. In Kant’s language,
in extensive quantity the idea of the parts makes that of
the whole possible ; in intensive quantity the idea of the


1 An excellent illustration of the difference between extensive and
intensive quantity is provided by a problem which arises in psychology
or psychophysics in connection with the estimate of just perceivable
differences of length of lines as measured by the eye. With lines of
moderate length, the just perceivable difference follows Weber’s law
and is approximately a constant fraction of the length. But when the
differences of length are larger we tend to equate not fractional but
absolute differences, ¢.g. the difference of 5 and 7 inches seems equal to
that of ro and 12 inches, not to that of 10 to 14 inches, as it should
if Weber’s law held. H. Ebbinghaus, from whom I borrow this
account (Psychologie, vol. i. § 45, Pp- 504-5, ed. 1, Leipzig, 1go2)
explains the reason very clearly. When the difference of length is very
small we compare the two lengths taken altogether, measuring by the
movement sensations of the eye; and we compare two impressions
which have different strength or intensity. But when the differences
are larger, we tend to superpose one line on the other and find out the
actual difference by subtraction. ‘Thus in the second case we compare
the lines as extensive quantities; in the first, we are as it were considering
the lengths intensively. There is an apparent contradiction here with
the statement of the text that extensive quantity arises out of the
relation of the time to the space in spaces taken as wholes; whereas
here we say that in taking the lines intensively we take them as wholes ;
but a little reflection shows that the contradiction is only apparent.


Measute-
ment of
intensity,


308 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


whole makes the parts possible. It follows from this
that one quantity may be added to or subtracted from
another ; it is but a matter of the shorter or longer
generation of the two quantities. But an intensity
cannot be subtracted from another nor added to it. All
that we can do is to have a series of intensities which
can (again in Kant’s language) decrease from any given
intensity downwards to zero; or increase from zero
upwards to a given intensity ; as when hot water cools
and its temperature decreases in intensity continually,
or as when the note of a.tuning-fork dies away in
loudness. An intensity is not increased by adding to it
a fresh intensity; but only the additional stimulus,
increased by a measurable extensive dose, brings about
a condition of intensity which is unitary and has more
of intensive quantity than the intensity with which it is
compared. Psychologists have often urged this point in
respect of the intensity of sensations, that the sensational
intensity (for we are not concerned with whether sensa-
tions are extensive) is something complete and single and
that it is unmeaning to add or subtract the intensities
of sensations. Hence extensive quantity is directly
measurable, for extensities may be correlated directly
with numbers and this constitutes measurement. But
intensities are not measurable directly but only indirectly.
That is, we can make a scale of intensities beginning with
some one arbitrary intensity as a standard, and arranging ~
the others at various distances from this standard, and
we can measure in this way the distances of intensities
from one another. Thus the intensity of temperature is
measured by the numbers on the scale of a thermometer.
In dealing with sensations we may arrange intensities in
a scale where each sensation appears to sense to be
equally removed from its predecessor on the scale. So
stars are arranged in order of their magnitude, when the
star of the first magnitude is as much brighter than one of
the second as that in turn is brighter than one of the third?


1 B. Russell, Principles of Mathematics, p. 176.
_ 7 ‘The measurement of intensities as an arrangement of unitary
intensities according to their intervals is admirably explained by H.


cH. VII QUANTITY AND INTENSITY 309


Intensities are thus indirectly measurable by correla-
tion with what is directly measurable. It is therefore
incorrect to maintain that because intensities are unitary,
they are not measurable at all. For measure depends
on correlation with the series of numbers and_ this
correlatron is possible even in the case of intensities.
What is true is that ‘more or less’ means different
things in the case of extensive and intensive quantity.
Intensities are more or less as being further or nearer
from a standard intensity. They constitute therefore a
class whose members are primarily ordinal and are a
series. The class of extensive quantities may be arranged
ordinally, but the ordinal arrangement is secondary, for
extensities differ not merely by unlikeness but by actual
distance in space or time. Intensities are intrinsically
ordinal and are secondarily correlated with numbers,
whether with the arbitrary divisions on a thermometer,
or, as in the case of sensations, in the experiments which
attest the law of Weber, with the extensive measures of
their stimull.


The intensity of sensations, that is of processes of
sensing, is a particular case of the categorial character,
intensity, at a highly developed stage of empirical
existence. We have been concerned with the category
itself as applicable to finite existence at every stage, and
have tried to trace it to its root in the relation of Space
and Time within Space-Time. This account of the
matter is so closely allied to Kant’s difficult but famous
doctrine of the ‘ Anticipations of Perception,’ that it may
be worth while to pause for a moment for a word of
comparison. Kant established once for all the difference
between intensive and extensive quantity, and the debt
which psychology in particular owes him in this matter
has been too little acknowledged. But his purpose was
not psychological. Since there is in sensation, which is
empirical, a filling of the moment of time with an intensity


Ebbinghaus, Psychologie, ed. 1, vol. i. Bk. I. § 6, pp. 60 ff. Cf. also
Introduction to E. B. Titchener’s Exp. Psych., Quantitative (Instructors’
Manual), New York, 1905.


Compari-
son with
Kant’s
doctrine.


310 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


which cannot be regarded as made up of parts by
successive addition, Kant urged that there must be in the
object intensive quantity or degree. For since Time
cannot be perceived by itself, that is without something
which occurs in it; and much less therefore the filling
of a Time with various intensities of sensation ; there
must be in experience itself something to account for this
awareness of the filling of time. This ‘degree’ in the
quality of an experience is not itself empirical, that is, in
our phrase, it is not one of those characters which vary
from bit to bit of experience but is pervasive. It must
therefore be referred to the mind itself ; it is one of those
elements of objective experience whose non-empirical
character Kant recognises by such reference. In this way
the mind ‘anticipates experience’ by the axiom that any
perception must have some degree (or intensive quantity)
or other. From our point of view, the non-empirical
element in experience is not referable to the mind but to
Space-Time itself and it has nothing to do with anticipa-
tion at all and nothing specially to do with perception.
But in essentials I have been following him. Only, Kant
seems unable to give a satisfactory account of the reason
of intensive quantity. He contrasts with extensive
quantity the intensive filling of Time by sensation, but
he can only explain this by reference to the empirical
fact that a given intensity of sensation can decrease
to zero in time. It is true that the sound falls away in
loudness in a lapse of time, but this is only the empirical
consequence of the filling of the moment of time from
which the fall of intensity began ; and there is no definite
connection established, if any can be, between the lapse
of time needed for the vanishing of the sound and the
intensity of the sensation. As we have seen, that intensity
is to be explained by the connection of Time with Space.

_ Just as intensive quantity depends upon Space-Time
itself and not upon mind, so and more obviously does
extensive ‘quantity. Quantity for Kant arises in the
process whereby the mind traverses in time an extension
In space, so that we apprehend quantity in the act of
adding homogeneous parts to one another. Quantity is


CH. VII QUANTITY AND INTENSITY RUE


in this sense the work of the mind. For us Space-Time
is sufficient of itself. For Space-Time containing a
moving principle, Time, generates quantity. No mind is
needed for the “composition” of Space, nor could Time,
as Kant himself so often urges, help mind to the composi-
tion of Time without Space. Space-Time therefore does
the work of itself without making an appeal to mind.


CHAPTER VIII


WHOLE AND PARTS} AND NUMBER


Whole and Every existent is a whole of parts, because Space and


parts as
categorial,


Time, in different senses, disintegrate each other. Time
breaks up Space into spaces, and Space enables Time
to consist of times. Each of them, as we have seen,
secures the continuity of the other ; Space by supplying
connection to the fleeting instants of Time, Time by
providing elements within the blank identity of Space.
It is but repeating the same thing in other words, when
we say that, besides sustaining each other’s continuity,
they break each other up. Time disintegrates Space
directly by distinguishing it into successive spaces ; Space
disintegrates Time indirectly by making it a whole of
times, without which whole there would be no separate
times either. Considered by themselves they have no
parts ; they owe their partition to one another in their
mutual involvement, and they divide each other in
correspondence. In this division Time plays the directer
role and takes the lead.

What applies to Space and Time as such applies to
any space or time as they exist in any empirical being.
Everything is in the end, in its simplest terms, a piece
of Space-Time and breaks up therefore into parts, of which
it is the whole. It is purely an empirical matter, that is
a matter arising not from the fundamental character of
Space-Time but from the empirical grouping of parts
within it, what the whole may be. It may be a line or a
volume in which parts are united continuously. It may
be an aggregate of things with definite qualities, a pile
of shot or a company of soldiers, or a library of books,

312


cx. vir WHOLE AND PARTS; NUMBER AIR


or a collection of quite heterogeneous things, like the
contents of an antiquarian shop or the different members
of our bodies. The sings thus aggregated are not them-
selves continuous but discontinuous ; but they are con-
tinuously related by the space and time which intervenes
between them. There would not be aggregate wholes
composed of individuals but for the connecting space-
time. But the individuals, owing to their specific qualities,
form an isolated object of interest apart from their connec-
tion within Space-Time, and it is the space-time which
they themselves occupy which is resolved by their separa-
tion from one another into parts. Moreover it is these
aggregates of ‘qualitied’ individuals which being nearer
to our senses are our first experience of wholes ; and it
is later and by some effort of reflection that we first
dissect individual aggregates like bodies into their con-
stituent parts and later still observe that a bare extension
is itself composed of parts. But it remains that the
intrinsic resolution of Space-Time through the internal
relation of Space and Time is the basis of all distinction
of parts, no matter how loosely the whole is united of
them.


Number is the constitution ofa whole in relation to its
parts; and it is generated in the concurrent or corre-
spondent distinction of parts in space and time within a
spatio-temporal whole. It may be described indifferently
as a plan of resolution of a whole into parts or of composi-
tion of parts into a whole. All existents are numerable
or possess number, because in occupying a space-time they
occupy parts of space in correspondence with parts of
time. It matters not whether the parts be equal or
unequal, homogeneous or heterogeneous in their qualities ;
or whether the wholes are of the same extent of space-
time or not. A group consisting of a man and a dog is
as much a two asa group of two men or two shillings :
though its parts are unequal in quantity and different in
quality ; and as much two as a group of two elephants or
mice which occupy as wholes very different quantities of
space-time. To arrive at the number of a whole of


Number.


Number a
universal.


314 THE CATEGORIES mata


individuals we have to abstract from the quality or
magnitude of the individuals. Their number concerns
only the constitution of the whole out of its parts or
resolution of the whole into them. In itself number is
the correspondence of the space and time parts which is
involved in this resolution ; but it is a consequence of
this that the number of a group establishes a corre-
spondence between the members of the group and those
of any other group which has the same number-constitu-
tion. All twos correspond to one another in virtue of
their twoness, that is of the plan of constitution of the
whole from its parts. Number is therefore the plan of
a whole of parts.

Number is a different category from extensive
quantity, though closely connected with it: quantity
communicates with number. They are different because
it is a different relation of Space to Time which lies at
the basis of them. Quantity expresses the fact that Space
is a duration, or that Time sweeps out Space in its flight.
Number is the concurrent resolution of either into parts.
But since this is so, quantity is directly numerable, for in
the generation of a quantity there is the making of a
whole of parts by successive addition of the parts. Kant
in making number the ‘schema’ of quantity noted the
connection of the two, but mistakenly overlooked the
more important difference. The category whose schema
is number, if any such distinction of schema and category
could possibly be recognised, as it cannot, would be not
quantity but that of part and whole. Intensive quantity
does not communicate directly with number, for it is not
a whole of parts. The connection is only possible


indirectly through correlation of intensities with extensive
quantities.


Being a plan of constitution of a whole of parts,
number is universal or communicates with universality.
It is a non-empirical or a priori universal, arising out of
Space-Time as such. The various cardinal numbers,
2, 4, 7, etc., are empirical universals which are special
plans of whole and parts and are species of the category


cx#vi1 WHOLE AND PARTS; NUMBER 315


number. These special numbers have for their particulars
the groups of things (or even of parts of areas or lines
or hours) which are apprehended empirical embodiments
of these universals. Thus the number two is embodied
in two pebbles, or two men, or two inches, but is never
to be identified with them. The King’s gift to mothers
with triplets is given for the triplets, not for the number
three. Nor is the number two a mere abstraction from
concrete groups of two things but is the plan (itself
something concrete) on which this group is constructed.
Hence however much the observation of collections of
things may provoke us to attend to numbers and their
combinations, we no more derive arithmetical truths from
the things in which they are embodied than we derive
geometrical truths, such as that the two sides of the
triangle are greater than the third side, from actual
measurement of brass triangles or three-cornered fields.
These are not the foundations of arithmetic or geometry
but only the devices by which kind nature or our teachers
cajole us into the exercise of our attention to or reflection
upon numbers and figures themselves. Figures in
geometry and numbers in arithmetic are the empirical
objects so described which we observe for themselves ;
and numbers are empirical universals in the same way as
triangle and sphere and dog are empirical universals.
Thus the special numbers are the variable and shifting
material in which number as such, the category number,
is embodied. This rarefied, but still concrete, material is
what Plato described under the name of the “ inde-
terminate dyad,” indicating by the name dyad its capacity
of multiform realisation of number as such, and pointing by
this superb conception to the way in which we are to under-
stand the real relation between a universal and its sensible
particulars.’ It is therefore by no accident but in virtue
of the intrinsic character of number and numbers that
universality was represented by him as number and the
particular universals or forms as particular numbers. It
is only elaborating still further the appositeness of this


1 See J. Bumet: Greek Philosophy from Thales to Plato, ch. xvi.
pp- 320 ff.


Unity.


316 THE CATEGORIES see


conception when we try, as I have tried before to do, to
explain all universals as spatio-temporal plans that are
realised in the sensible particulars, which are in them-
selves spatio-temporal existents constructed on those
plans.


Arithmetic then is the empirical science whose object
is the special or particular numbers (themselves universals)
and the relations of them. One conception remains
difficult, that of the number 1, itself.7 It has sometimes
been thought that 1 or unity depends on the act of
thought (e.g. in counting) which constitutes an object one.
But clearly this could only be true if the act of thought
were itself enjoyed as one, and thus the explanation
would be circular. Now it is safe to say that unity is a
notion posterior in development to multiplicity. That
2 is equal to 1+1 is not the definition of 2 but some-
thing we learn about it, and Kant was perfectly justified
in calling such a proposition synthetic. Probably the
greatest step ever made in arithmetic was the elementary
discovery that the numbers could be obtained from one
another by addition of units, or before that stage was
reached, that 6 could be got by adding 2 to 4. The
numbers are to begin with distinctive individuals, as
distinct from one another as a triangle from a square.”
Enumeration was a reduction of this distinctive difference
in the empirical material to a comprehensive law of
genesis. Bearing this in mind, that numbers have
different numerical quality, we may see that unity is the
whole which is the same as its parts; or to put the
matter otherwise, any object compared with a whole of
two parts or of three parts, could be arranged in a series
with it, in so far as in the single object the whole and
every part coincided. That is, unity is a limiting case of
the distinction of whole into parts in which the distinction
has vanished, or it is a piece of Space-Time before its
division into parts. Thus unity is rather that which is


* I do not attempt the difficult problem of the number zero.


* Compare on this matter F. H. Bradley, Logic, pp. 370, 371; and
below, p. 319.


cx. vir WHOLE AND PARTS ; NUMBER 317


left when 2 is removed from 3 than what is added to
2 in order to make 3. In any case it is a discovery that
given a series of numbers, 2, 3, 4, etc., there is a num-
ber, unity, belonging to the series and based on the same
concurrence of Space and Time as the numbers, from which
the other numbers may be derived by addition, when
addition is suitably defined. I say, suitably defined ; for it
is clear that though we may add together things, we do not
add together numbers in the same sense ; but the sum of
two numbers is the plan of a whole whose parts correspond
to the parts of each of the two numbers when they are
taken together. We discover in this way empirically that
I2 is 7+5 and1+1 is 2.

Unity it may be observed in passing is different from


aunit. It has sometimes been thought that a number ist


a multiplicity of equal units; but, as we have seen,
number has nothing whatever to do with equality of parts
ina whole. A unit is in fact a thing (or even a piece of
Space or Time) which is used for purposes of measure-
ment. Measurement is effected by securing correspond-
ence with the series of numbers. The simplest and most
convenient method of doing this in dealing with things
is the adoption of a unit of the same stuff as the thing
and taking wholes whose parts are each the unit thing.
Finally, the reference of number to the corresponding
parts of space and time within any space-time may
serve to explain why as a matter of history the extension
of the idea of number from integers to fractions, irra-
tionals and other numbers has been accomplished in con-
nection with geometrical facts and has arisen out of them.


In this account of number I have ventured to differ
from Messrs. Frege and Russell’s often-cited definition
of cardinal number as the class of classes similar to a
given class; though it is clear that so far as my version
of the matter may be taken to be correct it is arrived at
by reflection on their doctrine and is suggested by it, and
is merely a translation of it into metaphysical language.
In fact they define number in extensional terms, which
is proper to mathematics, while the account here given is


Number in
extension,


Number
and
counting.


318 THE CATEGORIES ae


the intensional side of the same subject-matter." More-
over, it has been indicated that if number is the con-
stitutive correspondence of Space and Time whereby a
whole is a whole of parts, it would follow from this that
there is correspondence between the members of all
classes which have the same constitutive number. From
the side of extension then a cardinal number may be
described as a class of such classes. But this description
starts with entities belonging to classes ; that is it begins
with finites, at the very lowest finite spaces or durations,
and number is defined by reference to them. Just for
that reason the definition tells us something which is true
about number, but does not tell us what number is, any
more than to describe man as the class of men tells us
what man is. It gives us a description of number and
not acquaintance with it. It is thus not a metaphysical
account of number but something which follows from
number ; and it would not therefore, so far as I can see,
explain why any existent is numerable. Before, it has
been suggested that this method of defining number makes
it amenable to mathematical treatment,.and that it offers
a notable instance of the difference between mathematical
and metaphysical treatment of the same thing. Conse-
quently it is not in the least pretended that the account
here given could be used for making arithmetical dis-
coveries ; while on the other hand the extensive definition
of number is. It is not the business of metaphysics to
make discoveries in arithmetic, which employs such
concepts as are most suitable to its own purposes. The
metaphysical definition may be useless for mathematical
purposes. It is enough that it should be useful for
metaphysical purposes. The two accounts refer to the
same reality; but while the one, the metaphysical one,
points to it with the finger, the other describes it.


Number is apprehended through counting, but the
act of counting does not explain number. Number is a
category which belongs to all existents as wholes of parts


* Hence it will be observed this account applies directly to all
numbers, while the definition by classes applies directly only to integers.


cu. vir WHOLE AND PARTS; NUMBER 319


in Space-Time, and it applies to mind and mental acts in
the same sense as to external things. The whole of
enjoyment experienced in counting five is a whole of
mental acts and has number like the external thing that
is counted. Hence we learn number in counting groups
of material things, as in exchanging sheep and oxen for
cowrie shells or dollars, or in measuring lengths by our
feet, or estimating the height of a horse by our hands.
But the counting itself is only compresent with number
and is itself numerable. |

Since number is constitutive of a whole of parts, we
do not count unless we experience a whole as made of
parts. Hence it is that as a matter of fact we may find
processes performed which simulate counting, but where
objects are taken in, we say, as a whole, but not as a
whole of parts. A thing may have parts without having
its parts recognised as parts and without therefore being
in the strict sense a whole. We take in a crowd by its
individual look of magnitude or extension. A boy may
identify a card used in a musical-box, pierced with a vast
number of holes in an intricately complex arrangement,
and name its tune ; but he clearly is not counting or dis-
criminating parts. Many of the performances of animals
which seem like counting may, as Mr. Bradley has pointed
out, be explained without reference to counting. Apart
from any indications that may be given by human beings
to the animal, a group of three things looks or feels
different from one of two; and this may be sufficient for
the purpose. It cannot be said that the arithmetical
powers of the lower animals have been established, and
scepticism is not unbecoming in respect of horses and dogs,
no less than of pigs. If such capacity of real counting
were established our estimate of animals or ourselves
would undergo some modification. But it would at most
be a chapter added to the story of when and how the
mind comes to apprehend number. Metaphysically the
interest of counting does not lie here but in the fact
which may be verified in all the categories that when the
mind is aware of number it also enjoys itself as number.’


1 See later Bk. III. ch. vi.


CHAPTER IX


MOTION ; AND THE CATEGORIES IN GENERAL


The catee Tue last in our list of categories is Motion itself,


gory of
motion.


along with Space and Time which are in fact always
equivalent to motion, though they may be taken pro-
visionally in separation. The question may reasonably
be raised whether motion is a category at all and not
rather the lowest form of empirical existence, for all such
existents are motions and complexes of motions. But in
fact, though every empirical existent is some sort of
motion or other, it is the sort of motion which it is that
makes it empirical: whether a straight line or a triangle
or a wave-motion such as that of sound or light or the
neural movement that corresponds to a sensation as
enjoyed. That it is a motion or a space or a time is 4
priori or non-empirical; and in fact the category of
motion is but another expression of the fact that every
existent is a piece of Space-Time. But the category is
not Motion, taken as equivalent to Space-Time as a
whole, nor are Space or Time as wholes either of them
a category, as it will be the office of the succeeding
chapter to explain at such length as may now seem
necessary. Space-Time is the one stuff of which all
things are made and is not itself a category but a
singular, to which terms applicable to things are applied
only through the necessities of speech. Accordingly
the category we are now dealing with is more properly
described as a motion or a space or a time, or by their
abstract terms—motion, spatiality, temporality. Every-
thing is a motion, a space-time.

It might be objected that a motion or a bit of Space-

320


cx. x MOTION ; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 321


Time is a really existent concrete thing and therefore


cannot be a category. Such an objection would imply a


Fem,


complete misunderstanding of the nature of categories.
They are not expressing mere adjectives of things, but
concrete determinations of every space-time. Existence
is the occupation of any space-time. Universality for all
its abstract name is a concrete plan of arrangement of
space-time, relations are connections which are them-
selves space-times. Abstract characters are separations
made by us from concrete things; but what we are
referring to are concrete determinations of things. There
is therefore no difficulty from this point of view in treat-
ing motion or a motion as categorial. A more serious
objection would be this: we must recognise that a
motion has a character allied to and of the same kind
as quality. There is a motion-quality as there is redness
or sweetness. Motion is not a succession of point-instants,
but rather a point-instant is the limiting case of a motion.
So far we have seen Mr. Bergson to be right in his protest.
But while all other, empirical, qualities are correlated with
motions, the ‘quality’ motion is purely spatio-temporal,
that of being a space-time. There is nothing but the.
spatio-temporal fact ; there is nothing superinduced upon
it. The quality of motion which a motion possesses in
its indivisible character is, if I may repeat a phrase, a
limiting case of empirical quality. It might be called a
categorial quality were it not that, as will presently be
stated, quality, that is empirical quality, is not categorial
at all. Once more the exigencies of language constrain
us into using such terms as best we can find for describing
the indescribable. For motion is elementary and there
is nothing simpler.

I follow therefore the guidance of Plato in reckoning
motion asacategory. For Plato it is one of his “ greatest
kinds of beings,” which are what we call categories.
Unfortunately he combines it in a pair with rest, which
is not an independent category but only means, as we have
seen, the absence of comparative motion in reference to
some given motion, and is in fact a relative term. For
Plato indeed the doubt we have raised as to whether

VOL. I Y


Grades
of the
categories.


ape THE CATEGORIES BK. II


motion is a category at all, but only the first form of
empirical existent, could not arise. Even if we: are
entitled to consider the Timaeus as much as the Sophist
as representing his own view and not merely that of
his Pythagorean friends, motion must still be for him
a category. For the matrix of becoming, the matter
of things, is not for him as for us Space-Time but only
Space, and movement requires to account for it a category
of motion.

Thus a motion in so far as it is a particular sort of
motion is an empirical ‘existent. In so far as it has the
character of motion, that character is categorial. According
to the sense in which the phrase ‘a motion’ is taken, it
means a category or an empirical existent. Motion is
thus the border-line between the categorial and the
empirical region. Our discussion serves to point the
truth that categories and empirical characters are not
separated by a hard-and-fast distinction as Kant supposed.
It is rather the distinction between what is pervasive in
experience and what is variable and not pervasive. For
empirical things are complexes of that very Space-Time
of which the categories are the fundamental characters.
Accordingly the categories can be and have been studied
by the same so-called empirical or experiential method
as empirical things are. To this point I shall return
again.


At the same time the discussion leads us further to a
matter of great importance as well as difficulty, namely
the relation of the categories to one another. There are
grades of rank within them. Motion is more complex
than all the rest and includes them. It communicates
with all the others. A motion is a substance and exists
and is in relation to other motions. We seem to have
three grades within the categories. The major categories
are the first four—existence, universality, relation, and
order. These communicate with each other as has been
seen. Existence is different from other existence. As
universal a thing is of the same sort as other particulars
and different from another sort of particulars. Relation


cx. 1x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 323


exists and has in turn universality, in the same sense
as a thing is universal. The next group of categories—
substance, quantity, number, etc.—communicate with each
other and with the major group, but the major group do
not communicate with them. Thus a substance is in
a relation of causality with other substance, and it exists.
But existence is not a substance, nor is relation necessarily
causal, it may be a relation of number. Perhaps it might
be urged that an existent is also a substance. Yes, but
its bare existence, its mere occupation of Space and Time,
is not equivalent to substantial occupation. A substance
is universal, but a universal as such is not a substance.
- In fact that it is a substance is the error which underlies
the notion of the ‘concrete universal’: when we treat
a universal as a singular existent we are going beyond
universality to substance.

Motion forms the last or third group of the categories.
It presupposes the other categories and communicates
with them. But they do not communicate with it.
Even substance is not itself motion, though every thing
besides being substance is motion. Substance represents
motion only in respect of its persistent occupation of
space through a lapse of time; but it does not include
quantity, nor intensity, nor number. Whereas in motion
the full tale of the fundamental determinations of Space-
Time is told and motion is consequently the totality of
what can be affirmed of every space-time.

Perhaps the above description may serve as a gloss
upon Plato’s conception of the communion of the greatest
forms with one another; how vastly more important
such intrinsic communication is than the mere overlapping
of different universals in a thing which is say both
man and black ; and. how distinct it is from the parti-
cipation of a particular in its universal; while at
the same time, when the universal is taken to be the
plan of the particular spatio-temporal configuration
which its particular is, we can see how the participation
of the particular in the universal is illuminated by the
intercommunion within the world of forms—as indeed is
implied in Plato’s own doctrine of the forms as the


Point-
instants
and
infinites,


324 THE CATEGORIES BK. HT


union of the form of number with the indeterminate
dyad."

Besides these categories proper, we shall find that
there is yet another group of characters belonging to
empirical existents. They are relations arising out of the
nature of Space-Time which subsist between existents,
but they differ from the categories proper, in presuming
that there are empirical things in existence. They con- —
cern the connection of empirical things with one another ;
and may perhaps be spoken of as derived or even
empirical categories. These form the subject-matter of
the following Book.

It should be added that in speaking of the minor
categories of substance, number, etc., that is of the
second order of categories as depending on ‘relation’ of
their two elements of Space and Time to one another, I
have used the term relation from the poverty of language.
There is strictly speaking no relation between a time and
a space, for relations subsist only between existents, and
Space and Time are only provisionally separated features in
Space-Time. But ‘ relation’ having been used of existents
is extended so as to cover any connection. The con-
nection is not a relation but a given feature of any space-
time and is only called a relation by analogy. Similarly
though the qualities of a substance are related to each
other in the strict sense, it is only by an extension of the
term that substance is said to be ‘related’ to its qualities,
or again, as we have seen before, a universal is said to be
related to its particulars, as if the universal could exist by
itself, whereas it is the particulars which are related to one


another by the relation of identity of sort arising out of
their plan.


The categories apply obviously to all finites in the
ordinary sense of that term; but they apply also to
everything empirical, everything which is not the whole
of Space-Time but a part of it. Thus they apply to what
I have called empirical infinites, like the infinite numbers,
or as we shall see later to the infinite deity, because these


' See before, ch. viii. p. 315.


cx.1x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 325


are not the whole of Space-Time. However much an
infinite number is conceptual, it is rooted in Space-Time
like all numbers, and to that radical connection with the
common matrix of becoming owes the reality which it
possesses. But the empirical infinites offer less difficulty
than the point-instants themselves. The categories have
been illustrated from point-instants as well as from
ordinary things or complexes of pure events. The

exist, have universality, and substance, and the like.
Even the categories of quantity and number belong to
them and that of whole and parts, when point-instants
are considered as limiting cases. They are empirical like
the infinites, for each point-instant has its own individual
character, is a‘this.’ Yet since they are the elements of
Space-Time which is the source of all categories, they
illustrate that intimate connection of the non-empirical
and the empirical which will be touched on less briefly
in the following chapter. But they cannot be treated as
finites, regarded as having a separate existence like
ordinary finites. That would be to introduce the
notion of the real self-subsistent infinitesimal ; which is
inadmissible. Point-instants are real but their separate-
ness from one another is conceptual. They are in fact
the elements of motion and in their reality are inseparable
from the universe of motion; they are elements in a
continuum. So far from being finites, they are the con-
stituents which are arrived at as the result of infinite
division and belong to the same order as the infinites.
Consequently they must be regarded not as physical
elements like the electrons, but as metaphysical elements,
as being the elementary constituents of Space-Time or
Motion. Real they are, but if the apparent contradiction
may be pardoned, they are ideal realities. In any case
they are not apprehended by us purely through sense,
but with the aid of conception and by some other mental
function yet to be discussed. I do not attempt to
minimise the difficulties of this statement, which may I
trust be removed or lessened as we proceed. My
object here is only to point out that they and the empirical
infinites alike are contained within the one original matrix


Quality not
a category.


326 THE CATEGORIES BK. Il


and share the characters which every portion of it possesses.
There are empirical elements and empirical infinites, and
both are empirical and both in their degree real and yet
ideal. Thought if it is correct does not deprive its
objects of reality. But reality makes room for ideal
objects supposing them to be always in touch with Space-
Time; and this both sets of exceptional cases are, the
point-instants as constituents of Space-Time, the infinites
as a special class of complexes within it.’


Our list of categories omits two notions which have
pretensions to be accounted categories, quality and change,
and the omission must be justified. I will begin with
quality, for convenience, though change is so closely
related to motion, that it would seem to have prior right.
Quality is not a category but an empirical generalisation
of the various specific qualities of things, or a collective
name for them all. It is not open to me to say that


there is no discoverable determination of Space-Time as


such which is called quality, as there is one which is
called quantity ; for this would be begging the question.
But it is open to me to ask, is there any pervasive
determination of things on the strength of which we can
say the thing has quality? for otherwise quality would
not be a category of things. Now to this question the
answer is that there is none. We know from experience
that there are qualities—red, hard, fragrant, sweet, life—
corresponding to certain sorts of spatio-temporal complex.
But experience does not acquaint us with quality as such;
as it does make us acquainted with quantity or substance
as such. It is not relevant to point to what we have
ourselves called the quality of motion, for this quality,
empirical as it is, is the limit between the non-empirical
and the empirical, where the two are indistinguishable.
Were there no empirical qualities we should not need to
speak of the motion-quality at all. Quality is to specific
qualities as colour is to red, green, and blue. It is a
collective name for them but not their universal. It


1 The subject is returned to in Bk. IV. ch. i. 2
infinite qualitied entity God. 1. 2 propos of the


ca. 1x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 327


may gravely be doubted whether there is any plan of
colours which may be called colour, which is modified
and specified in red, green, and blue as the plan of man
is modified in European and Mongolian man. But even
if this could be maintained in the case of colour, it
cannot be held that there is any plan underlying red
and hard and life which is modified into these specific
qualities.

Contrast quality with quantity. Quantity as such is
a real determination of things of which definite quantities
are modifications or copies, which participate in the
universal or plan. The same thing is true of the other
categories. But it is not true of quality. It may be
answered that everything possesses some quality or
other, and therefore quality is categorial ; everything is
a complex of Space-Time and to complexity corresponds
quality, it will be said, upon our own showing. But
the objection does not hit the mark. Complexity in
Space-Time makes everything a complex, but not a
quality. It is specific sorts of complexes which are hard
or sweet. Complexity as such is not a qualitative but
a quantitative or purely spatio-temporal determination.
Let us for the sake of definiteness revert to colours.
The quality of the colour varies with the wave-length of
the vibration. Now every colour has some wave-length or
other. This is its universal determination as a complex
of motion. But length of wave is a quantity and not a
quality. When the length is definite there is colour.
But length of wave as such has no colour as such. Or
to revert to the general question irrespective of the
illustration from colour : all portions of Space-Time are
empirical complexes. But we may not therefore say
that ‘empirical complex’ is a category. For being
empirical is only a coliective designation of empirical
things. In so far as everything is empirical it is not
categorial. There is no category of empiricity which
pervades all empirical things. There are only empirical
things. In the same way there are red and green and
hard and sweet and life and mind; and these are
qualities. But there is no universal, quality. Quality


Change not
a category.


328 THE CATEGORIES BK. I


is therefore not categorial but empirical. Kant himself
though he regarded quality as a category could only use
it in experience, could only schematise it, in the form of
intensive quantity, which is as good as saying that as
quality it was useless as a category. The truth is, it 1s
not a category at all.


There are two reasons why change cannot be
regarded as a category. The first is that it is not
pervasive for there may be persistence without change,
as in the persistence of a quality, or, if the possibility of
this be doubted, in the case of a uniform motion. But
the more important reason is that change always involves
empirical elements. It is a transition from one empirical
determination to another. Primarily change is change
of quality, and quality is always empirical. We may, it
is true, also have change in quantity as in the velocity
of a motion; or a change in direction. But even here
it is a transition from one empirical determination of
quantity to another. Now a category implies no
empirical determination in the finites to which it applies.
For instance, relation is a category and an empirical
relation is between empirical existents, e.g. father and son.


- But the category relation does not depend on the


empirical character of its terms but on their categorial
character of existents. Change on the other hand
implies in its nature that that from which the change
takes place and that to which it proceeds are empirical.
Change is not mere difference ; but the passage from
something to something different. A change of quality
is more than a difference of quality, it is a process from
the old quality to the new. A change of mind, a mere
change in my sensation, is experienced by me, or is felt,
not as the possession of a different decision or a different
sensation, but as the passage from the one mental state
to the other. Remembering that all existents, no matter
what qualities they possess, are in the end complexes of
motion, we may describe change as a species of motion
which replaces one set of motions by another; it is
grounded in motion and may be described as a motion


oe


ex. x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 329


from one motion to another. The nature of the
transitional motion may be different in different cases.
Thus one thought may lead on to another and the
motion is experienced as a direct transition between
the two thoughts. The first thought leads on to the
different thought. But the motion of change may not
be of this simple and direct kind. Causes at work in
my mind may end in displacing one thought from its
prominence or activity in my mind. When the pale
skin blushes and changes in quality from white to red,
there is no direct transition from the motions correlative
to whiteness to the new set, but some cause is at work,
some motion, which ends in the displacement of the
white motions by the red. Where a motion changes in
velocity or direction, it is at the instance of some cause
or motion. In every case we have not a mere difference
but a motion which ends in the substitution of one
empirical condition for another.

Change is then not categorial but empirical, and it
is an empirical variety of motion, which is still categorial.
Accordingly I am unable to accept the doctrine of Mr.
Bergson that change is the stuff of things. It can only
be so regarded if change is a loose expression for motion.
Thus Mr. Bergson writes : “there are changes but there
are not things which change ; change needs no support.
There are movements, but not necessarily invariable
objects which move ; movement does not imply some-
thing which moves.”’ The second proposition is I
think true, but not the first. But their juxtaposition as
if they were saying the same thing appears to imply that
change and movement are identified. This cannot,
however, be maintained. Change is change of something
else, though it is not necessarily change of anything that
can be called a thing, like a material body. Movement
is anterior to things which are complexes of movements,
and it is quite true that that movement is a stuff of
which things are made and is not a mere relation
between things which already exist and are said to
move. But while the same may be said of change with

1H. Bergson, La Perception du changement (Oxford, 1911), p- 24.


The cate-
gories have
no origin.


330 THE CATEGORIES BK. II


respect to certain things, change always implies move-

ment and is movement from one movement to another.
Change is an alteration in something else, viz. in
movement. For Heraclitus, of whom Mr. Bergson 1s
the modern representative, as for the other Ionians there
was a stuff in which change occurred or which embodied
change and it was fire. But bare change cannot take the
place of fire. On the other hand bare motion or Space-
Time can, and change is an empirical form of that stuff.’


The categories then being the fundamental determina-
tions of Space-Time are the pervasive features of the
experienced world. According to our hypothesis things
are complexes of Space-Time, and we have seen relations
are spatio-temporal connections between them. Nothing
therefore but exhibits categorial features ; nothing there-
fore but obeys the principles in which these features
reappear in the form of judgments. Everything has
being and is a substance, every event has a cause, every-
thing is related to something else, by way of quantity or
causality or difference or otherwise. To the question
whether there are privileged or a priori parts of experience,
the answer therefore is that there are. To the question
whether these privileged elements are due to mind or are
in any peculiar way the contribution of mind, or imposed
by mind on the objects of experience, the answer is that
they are not. On the contrary the categories enter into
mind as they enter into the constitution of everything
else. The mind being a highly developed spatio-temporal
complex, that is to say being in its simplest and ultimate
expression such, is an existent, a substance, a cause,
numerable, and its acts have intensity, and affect each other
causally and reciprocally. To the question whether the
a priori characters of the world are derived in some
manner from experience of things or are primordial and
ultimate, the answer is that they are primordial ; they do


1 Plato distinguishes motion into two sorts, translation or movement
from place to place (wepiupopa); and change or alteration, motion from
state to state (aAAoiwous). Theaet. p. 181b. See Burnet, Gk. PAil.
Pt. i. p. 245. Iam following Plato, though with differences.


cx. x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL ant


not come into being otherwise than as all things come
into being and because things come into being. All
things come into being endowed with the categories and
with all of them. They are the determinations of all
things which arise within Space-Time, which is the matrix
of things, “the nurse of becoming.”

On this conception, the time-honoured controversy
on the origin of a priori ideas and principles becomes
superfluous, or, if that phrase may sound too harsh to be
compatible with the reverence due to great names in
philosophy and psychology, these ideas have their origin
in Space-Time itself. The controversy owes its fascination
to the intrusion of mind. The very use of the words,
a priori ideas, suggests that these categories are not
features of the world, the greatest kinds of beings as
Plato called them, but mere mental objects, or perhaps
devices or instruments for understanding experience.
Accordingly, since the time of Kant, the debate has
turned upon how we acquire these ideas, since there
can hardly be a doubt that we have them. Kant is
himself in some degree responsible for this result. We
have seen that for him the categories are the binding
cement of knowledge, whereby the mere empirical material
of knowledge becomes in the proper sense experience.
Not finding this binding substance in the empirical
materials themselves he referred it to the mind, not to
mind in its personal or empirical capacity as an experienced
object, as something which is made up of psychical
states or processes in the same way as a physical object
is made up of physical material ; but in its impersonal
capacity as the subject of knowledge, which knowledge
is not merely like an idea of Locke and his followers
the possession of an individual but open to all minds.
This, as I have said, was his method of expressing,
and perhaps the only method open to him of expressing,
the impersonality of knowledge, of real experience as
distinct from the objects which may occur to you or me
and not to another. But though he rightly saw that the
empirical or variable element in experience was distinct
from the a priori element, he did not see that what was


332 THE CATEGORIES seat


empirical was in fact in the same kind as the non-empirical,
that it was in itself the modifications of the non-empirical.
As he did not merely distinguish the two but separated
them, the categories became an artificial tie between things
in a different kind from them. No wonder that he
seemed to think of the categories and of Space and Time
as tools for working up empirical experience, a “ machine-
shop” in the trenchant but entirely misguided phrase of
James. They were not so for him; but since their
connection with the empirical material was referred to
mind, it remained miraculous that causality or Space
should be a part of experience itself as he was all the
time insisting. :

Kant’s solution of the problem was not psychological,
though it simulated that form. The problem has since
become almost entirely psychological ; have we a priori
ideas, and how do we come by them? The attempts
that have been made to answer the question have been
psychologically unsuccessful, and metaphysically they have
attained the failure to which, if our hypothesis be correct,
they were foredoomed. For these ideas have no history,
but lie at the basis of all history, whether history of the
mind or of other things. They could not be derived
from the experience which the individual has of empirical
things. For how could we gather number, for instance,
from things, if things were not already numerable ? And
if they are, our idea of number requires no history except
possibly of how it comes to clearness in our minds.

Then biology came to the help of half-hearted empiri-
cism. The individual could not within a life-time acquire
from external things through co-ordinated experiences of
touch (or sight) and movement the notion of Space. But
the acquisitions of a life might be transmitted from father
to child, and the accumulated experience of generations
might suffice. Thus, while Space or number are a
posteriori for the race, derived from the observation of
empirical things, they would be a priori for the individual
who inherits the results of centuries of past experience.
The biology, legitimate at the time the theory was
formulated, has since become more than suspect. But


Limciste


ae


cu.1x MOTION ; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 333


even if it were correct, how could experiences which were
not themselves spatial or numerical, no matter through
how many generations they were inherited, come to feel
or look like space or number ? .

To Spencer’s experiment succeeded the brilliant
hypothesis of William James, contained in the con-
cluding chapter of his Psychology. Some of our experi-
ences come to us through the front-door, by way of
sense ; some through the back-door, by way of our
cerebral (and mental) disposition. We see yellow when
a field of buttercups is presented to our eyes; but
we also see yellow when we are dosed with the drug
santonin. The categories and all a priori ideas come to
us by this back-door method. By a fortunate variation
a brain is born whose mind envisages the world causally
or numerically, and being successful in its reactions to a
world which is causal and numerical, its kind prevails and
peoples the earth. The biology is above reproach, but
the theory is as defective as Kant’s and, ironically enough,
its defects are much of the same sort. Unnecessary as
psychology, it will not bear examination as metaphysics.
It is assumed that I do not see causality or number in the
empirical object. But if so the analogy of the yellow
which we get either from the buttercup or from the optic
centres dosed with the drug is unavailable. In the first
place there is, so far as I am aware, no evidence that a
person who had never seen yellow from the buttercup or
other yellow objects would see yellow at all from santonin.
If the brain had not already functioned so as to see what
we call a yellow thing, would the stimulation of the optic
centre from within suffice? This is a very seasonable
doubt, which, however, is too much connected theoretically
with a particular view of sensation to be dwelt on further
at this stage. Let us, however, suppose it to be possible ;
how would it help? Let there be a mind which, when
the optic centre is stimulated in a special way, whether
from within or from without, sees yellow, and let it, not
having seen a buttercup before, see a buttercup. It
would see the shape of the buttercup and feel and smell
the flower, and it would see yellow. But why should it


334 THE CATEGORIES NE


see the buttercup yellow? Why attach the yellowness it
sees to the buttercup? Now the same question arises
precisely with the a priori ideas. My brain when stimu-
lated in a certain way thinks number or causality. But
why does it attach number to this pile of shot, or causality
to this murderer, if there is no number or causality written
on the face of the empirical object ? You will have front-
door experience and back-door experience ; but the problem
to be solved is how the front-door perceptions come to
be interpreted by the back-door ideas. If there are clues
to guide the mind then the back-door ideas are not wanted.
If there are none they are useless. Kant is avenged ; the
mind is a veritable machine-shop of a priori ideas with
which it fashions outward experience ; the accuser commits
the very fault with which he unjustly charged the accused.
And, over and above, the question remains which must
not be answered here ; could any habit of mental action,
due to endowment of brain, give us apprehension of
number or causality, apart from the causality it enjoys in
itself, unless it has exercised that causal habit at the call
of some external causality? The reservation contained
in the words apart from its enjoyment of itself was not
needed in the case of the yellow. For there the mind
does not enjoy itself as yellow when the optic centre is
drugged, but sees yellow in the same way as it sees a
buttercup yellow.

The truth is, that no fortunate variation is needed
to account for our envisaging the external world as causal
and numerical. The brain and the mind themselves
enjoy causality both internally in the relations of their
processes and in their relation to things outside the
brain or mind, and things outside are already causal and
are so apprehended by the mind. The fortunate variations
of brain or mind are not those which apprehend cause or
number, for these belong to brain or mind as they belong
to all things in space-time. The fortunate variations are
those empirical ones, those special twists of talent or genius
or sensibility, by which an individual discovers the law of
gravitation or produces Hamlet or the Choral Symphony.
We no more need a special gift for number than we need


—————


:


‘


cu. 1x MOTION; CATEGORIES IN GENERAL 335


a special gift for yellow. In the one case we need eyes ;
in the other case what we need is consciousness. Indeed,
as we shall see more clearly hereafter, just because number
and cause are categorial we do not need a special organ
like eyes to apprehend them. We shall see that in
contemplating causality outside itself the mind is aware
in enjoyment of its own causality.


The
categories
indefinable,


CHAPTER A
THE ONE AND THE MANY


Space-Time is thus the source of the categories, the non-
empirical characters of existent things, which those things
possess because of certain fundamental features of any
piece of Space-Time. These fundamental features cannot
be defined. For to define is to explain the nature of


something in terms of other and in general simpler things,


themselves existents. But there is nothing simpler than
Space-Time, and nothing beside it to which it might
be compared by way of agreement or contrast. They
cannot even be described completely. For description,
like definition, is effected by reference to existent entities.
Not only all our language but all our conceptions are
derived from existents, including in existents those of
mathematics, particular figures or numbers. The utmost
that we can do is therefore to describe in terms of what
is itself the creation of Space-Time with its various
features, and however little our description borrows from
metaphor, it cannot but be a circuitous way of describing
what is prior to the terms we use in our description and
can therefore in the end only be indicated and known by
acquaintance. Space-Time itself and all its features are
revealed to us direct as red or sweet are. We attempt
to describe what is only to be accepted as something
given, which we may feel or apprehend ; to describe, as
has been said above, the indescribable. With each
category in turn we have indicated the basis of it in
Space-Time—the occupation of Space-Time, the con-
tinuity of it which lies at the base of relation, its
uniformity or the constancy of its ‘curvature’ and the


336


—


CH. x THE ONE AND THE MANY en


like. But it is plain that these descriptions are merely
the best means open to us of inducing the reader to look
and accept what he sees. The descriptions do nothing
more than take the place of pointing with the finger.

More than once this has been propounded with regard
to continuity, or to the statement that Space-Time is a
continuum. A series of existents, say real numbers, occurs
under certain conditions and then becomes a continuum.
But we are in stating these conditions approximating to
the original and indescribable feature of Space-Time
which makes continuity of things in series possible. This
original continuity is known only by acquaintance. The
same thing is true of the infinity of Space-Time, and the
remarks made upon this topic in a previous chapter’ need
not be repeated. Of the categories the same thing is
true. Our description of Space-Time itself and of the
features which belong to any bit of it is but a means of
reaching by thought to what is deeper and more funda-
mental than the products of thought. It is a method
which redounds to the honour of Space-Time in the
same sense as it redounded to the honour of Cornelia to
be named as the mother of the Gracchi.


Kant was thus mistaken in the sharp distinction Space-
which he drew between the forms of Space and Time and PcG
the categories. If our hypothesis is correct, empirical the cate-
things are in the end complexes within that pure manifold °"™
of intuition of which he sometimes speaks; and the
categories belong to them because they are the funda-
mental features of Space-Time stuff. But there is a
well-worn proposition familiar to idealists, and derived
from Kant, that the source of the categories is not itself
subject to the categories. This proposition is true. The
categories applied for Kant to objects of experience, not
to the mind which contributes them to experience. They
apply in our conception of the matter to the empirical
things which are special configurations in Space-Time and
because they are such ; but they do not apply to Space-
Time itself. Space-Time does not exist but is itself the

1. Bkedch.. i; p. 40.
VOL. I Z


338 THE CATEGORIES BK. It


totality of all that exists. Existence belongs to that
which occupies a space-time. There is a perennial —
question which is stilled by no assertion of its futility,
how the world came to exist or what made the world ?
We can see at once the answer to the question, and
how far it is futile. The world which is Space-Time
never and nowhere came into existence, for the infinite —
becoming cannot begin to become. It could only do so
in a larger Space and Time and at the order of some
cause exterior to it. Now all existence arises within Space-
Time, and there is no cause which is not itself a part of ©
it. Nor can we say that it has some neutral kind of
being, some being for thought. For thought or thinking,
on our hypothesis that mind and things may be treated
on the same footing with proper regard for their empirical
difference, is an existent within Space-Time, and to say
that anything has being for thought means only that it
can be the object of thinking. The being of the world
if it had such neutral being cannot be being for its own
creature. Space-Time therefore does not exist but it is
existence itself, taken in the whole. The question is thus
not so much futile as it needs enlightenment. Space-
Time exists only in the loose usage of words in virtue of
which we have to say it is in Space and Time rather than
out of them—a matter to which we shall recur.
Space-Time is not universal ; for there is no plan of
it distinct from the execution. Its only plan is to be
Space-Time. Were it universal it must be repeated or
at least capable of repetition. But how should the whole
of Space-Time be repeated? For if it could be, it would
not be the whole. It is not, as we have attempted to
show at length, a relation, nor even a system of relations,
but it is through and through relational in the sense that
in virtue of its continuity there are relations between its
parts and the relations are themselves spatio-temporal.
Perhaps it is not necessary to run through the whole list
of categories to be assured that the father of them is not
also their child. But two of them seem to lay special
claim to be applicable to Space-Time, the category of
substance and that of whole and part with its related


cH. x THE ONE AND THE MANY 339


category of number. Is not Space-Time a whole, and a


one which includes many, and a substance? In each
case we must answer, no.


It is not a whole of parts, for a whole of parts is Nota
constituted by its parts, and is relative to other wholes of “hele of
parts. Whereas Space-Time breaks up into parts and ae
wholes of them as it lives and moves. It is true a rock
may disintegrate into powder and still remain an aggregate
or whole; but the whole is given to begin with. If
Space-Time were such a whole it would be given all at
once. But being Time (or indeed Space, which is the
same thing) it is not, as Mr. Bergson rightly says, given
altogether. To suppose so is to ignore the reality of
Time, to fail to take Time seriously. At any one
moment the universe is the whole of its existent parts,
but at any one moment the universe is not the whole
universe of parts. For in the redistribution of dates
among places, new existents are generated within the one
Space-Time. It may indeed be called not a whole of |
parts, but the whole or system of all existents. But this
designation does but help us, by reference to the category
of whole and parts, to feel towards the infinitude of Space-
Time. In like manner Space-Time is in no case a unity
of many things; it is nota one. For that implies that
it can descend into the field of number, and be merely an
individual, and becompared as one with two or three.
The universe is neither one in this sense, nor many.
Accordingly it can only be described not as one and still
less as a one, but as “he one; and only then because the
quasi-numerical adjective serves once more to designate
not its number but its infinite singularity ; or, as is more
clearly still expressed by calling it substance, that it is not
so much an individual or a singular as the one and only
matrix of generation, to which no rival is possible because
rivalry itself is fashioned within the same matrix.


It is not a substance, and only by a metaphor or ae
analogy can it be called the infinite substance. For ™ ees
substance is an existent configuration of space in so far


340 THE CATEGORIES BK. II .


as it is the theatre of Time; it is a space with definite
contour occupied by time, that is, is a space enduring in
time. But infinite Space has no contours and is thus no
substance. We are tempted still to call it substance
because a complex substance like man is a grouping
within its contour of many different substances, and we
imagine Space-Time to be an extension of such a complex
substance. In doing so weare forgetting that a substance
however complex is related (by causality) to other
substances and no such relation is possible for Space-Time
as a whole. It may still be urged, substance is the
occurrence of a space in time or the extension of time
over a space, and infinite Space and Time are in the same
relation to one another. But it is really only when you
cut a finite’ space out of the whole, or a finite time out
of the whole, that it is possible in strictness to speak of a
relation between the space and time of a substance. You
can think of them apart from one another just because
the time of which you speak is that part of a larger Time
which is appropriated to the space in question, or because
that part of Space is appropriated to the time in question.
Infinite Space and infinite Time are one and the same
thing, and cannot in reality be considered apart from one
another. This statement is wholly independent of the
question whether a finite space may not be sustained in
its configuration through infinite time; whether there
may not be substances which having come into existence
endure for ever ; which is entirely an empirical question
to be settled by evidence.

When we attempt to extend the notion of substance
to infinite Space-Time, we are in fact once more merely
helping ourselves towards a statement of its infinite
character, and the whole value of the attempt lies therein,
and not in the use of the conception of substance. We
are describing the infinite Space-Time as the substance
which includes all substances and is the system of them.
But the idea of infinity is prior to that of an infinite
system of existents, which is really derived from it. We
approximate to infinity by the notion of an infinite

1 Or any space less than the whole.


cH. x THE ONE AND THE MANY 341


system of existents, like numbers or substances, which is
our conceptual reconstruction, by means of the blocks, of
_ the quarry from which the stones were hewn. The infinite
Space-Time is the totality of all substances, but it is prior
to the substances by whose composition it is described.
Thus to call it the one or the whole or the infinite
substance is no more than to aim at its infinitude, in terms
of the finite creatures of it. Only in this sense is it
legitimate therefore to speak of the infinite substance.


In truth, infinite Space-Time is not the substance of
substances, but it is the stuff of substances. No word is
more appropriate to it than the ancient one of /yle (An).
Just as a roll of cloth is the stuff of which coats are made
but is not itself a coat, so Space-Time is the stuff of
which all things, whether as substances or under any
category, are made. If I call it the stuff and not the
material, it is to avoid confusion with the very much
more specific idea of matter, as matter is commonly
understood. Matter is a finite complex of space-time
with the material quality, as we shall afterwards see. The
substance of the great writers of the seventeenth century is
different from this stuff. It is the highest expression of
the universe and not like Space-Time the universe in its
lowest expression. Substance so understood is not mere
persistence of Space in Time but means that which is
absolutely self-contained and is the cause of itself. The
stuff of the world is indeed self-contained in that there is
nothing not included in it. But it is not the supreme
individual or person or spirit, but rather that in which
supreme individuality or personality is engendered, as we
shall have to note in the sequel. Nor can it intelligibly be
called the cause of itself. For causation is the more
intimate relation between existent substances. To think
of the world as causing itself is to imagine the world at
one moment generating itself at the next moment, and
splits the life of the world into independent moments
which can no more account for causal relation than a
motion can be explained as the succession of separate
point-instants.


Space-
Time as
the stuff of
things,


342 THE CATEGORIES ae


Thus Space-Time, the universe in its primordial form,
is the stuff out of which all existents are made. It is
Space-Time with the characters which we have found it
to reveal to experience. But it has no ‘ quality’ save that
of being spatio-temporal or motion. All the wealth of ©
qualities which makes things precious to us belongs to
existents which grow within it, and which are in the first
instance characterised by the categories. It is greater
than all existent finites or infinites because it is their
parent. But it has not as Space-Time their wealth of
qualities, and being elementary is so far less than they
are. Hence it repels two possible kinds of misdescription.
It is first something positive. Not being subject to the
categories it might be supposed to be entirely negative,
not relation nor substance nor quantity nor number,
not in time nor in space. It is in fact something very
positive to which these determinations and all the quali-
ties which depend on them owe their being. The other
misconception is far more serious. Because it is not
describable by categories the universe might be supposed
to have characters or qualities superior to them. Thus
Space-Time is not in space or time as though there were
some enveloping Space or Time. It is itself the whole of
spaces and times, as it is all existence, and all substance.
But it must not therefore be supposed to be spaceless or
timeless, out of Space or Time and to possess spaceless-
ness or timelessness (eternity) as some superior qualities
which confer upon it a unique character. All its char-
acters are reflected in its children. Call it by what name
you will, universe or God or the One, it is not above
Space or Time. It is truer to use the careless expression,
the universe is in Space and Time, than to describe it as
timeless. Space and Time are, in the words of Spinoza,
though not with the significance which he attaches to the
phrase, attributes of the universe or Space-Time. In
what sense there is divinity in the universe, we shall not
attempt to understand till much later in our inquiry.
Nor are we free to call it timeless or spaceless in order to
separate it from the Time which is measured by the
clock or the Space which is measured by the footrule.


+3


ou. x THE ONE AND THE MANY 343


There is only one Space and one Time, and though the
mathematicians may deal with it by methods different
from those of philosophy and common sense, it is still
the same Space and Time which they all investigate each
in its different way. It is such a misconception which has
given rise to the notion of eternity as something different
from Time and superior to it. But the only eternity which
can be construed in terms of experience is infinite Time.
If it is different from this it is out of all relation to Time,
and if attributed to the world requires justification on its
merits, and not because it may be thought to derive its
nature from contrast with the alleged defects of ordinary
empirical and mathematical Time. Space-Time therefore is
neither in Time nor in Space ; but it s Time and it és Space.


Two topics now claim discussion which arise out of
the relation of the whole Space-Time to its existents, and
the questions so raised are answered from the same con-
sideration, that the existents are of the same stuff as the
whole. One is the ancient subject of the relation of the
One and the Many. The other, which I will take first,
is the distinction of the categorial and the empirical, the
use of which must have already been the source of some
difficulty in the course of the exposition. The nature of
the distinction has been explained, but it must have
seemed at times a shifting or evanescent one. I do not
so much propose to ask again what is the distinction as
to recapitulate the cases in which categorial and empirical
seem to grade into each other. The categorial is the
pervasive, and the empirical is the variable or contingent.
But since categories are the fundamental features of, and
space-time and empirical existents are variable complexes
within, Space-Time, the boundaries of the categorial and
the empirical are from the nature of the case hard to
draw, and may seem indistinct and fluid. The @ priori
and the empirical are distinguished within experience
itself. Both are experiential or in a general sense
empirical. The strictly empirical is only the non-per-
vasive parts of experience, all experience being ultimately
expressible in terms of Space-Time.


Categorial
and
empirical.


344 THE CATEGORIES ae


Strictly speaking, the empirical coincides with that
which has quality. But we are compelled to recognise
mere spatio-temporality as, in a sense, a quality, though it
is in itself categorial. It is the meeting-point of the
categorial and the empirical. Motion is categorial and is
allied with the other categories which it sums up. But
it is allied, on the other hand, in virtue of its unitary
character with the series of obviously empirical qualities,
red, sweet, life, consciousness. Hence it is that the
various special determinations of the categories, of
number, quantity, motion, are described in common
philosophical language as primary qualities. To call
spatio-temporality quality is little more than a name, but
it illustrates the essential identity of stuff between the
categorial and the empirical.

Once more the various geometrical figures are de-
scribed as empirical, and the various numbers of
arithmetic, including not only the ordinary integers but
infinite numbers and surds. Number itself is categorial
and so is Space. But the numbers and different figures
in space are not pervasive but empirical. And yet we
might be seeming to deal with categorial matter in treating
these subjects. The distinction here is not so difficult
to draw. It becomes much more difficult when we call
point-instants themselves empirical,’ though they are the
very constituents of Space-Time, which is @ priori, and
the source of all that is a priori.

Another symptom of the intimacy of categorial and
empirical was the difficulty experienced in respect of
certain notions in determining whether they were
categorial or not. Change being a relation of empirical
terms could be assigned to the empirical, without much
hesitation. But likeness and such thoughts as ‘and’ and
‘but’ and ‘if’ might easily be taken for categories of a
derived order. ‘Like’ we decided to be empirical
because it implied the overlapping of different universals
in the same thing, and such overlapping is empirical
and does not follow from the nature of Space-Time
itself, but only from the fact that it breaks up into

1 See above, ch. ix. pp. 324 ff.


.


cH. x THE ONE AND THE MANY © 345


complexes, and these complexes may exhibit the over-
lapping of empirical universals.1 ‘And’ means combina-
tion and ‘ but ‘disjunction or obstruction between empirical
data, but they are empirical relations and arise from
the empirical character of their terms, when they are
not purely extrinsic. Such notions as these, however
categorial they may appear, lack the note of pervasiveness,
and the reason of this is that they are not fundamental to
any space-time as such.

Such difficulties in the working out of the distinction
of categorial and empirical serve only to accentuate the
intrinsic solidarity of the two. The whole empirical
world may be described as, in its simplest terms, a multi-
form determination under various circumstances of
categorial characters. If the variable and the pervasive
are alike Space-Time, this conclusion is natural. Any
empirical thing is a configuration of space-time, when
the thing is expressed in its simplest terms. And all
categories are configurations of space-time. The only
difference is in pervasiveness of the categorial as distinct
from the empirical determinations. I am a fairly definite
configuration of space-time; but I possess universality
in so far as, being a man, my pattern is repeated else-
where. In that respect I possess a character which every-
thing shares with me. My empirical universal, the
pattern of man, is shared with me only by other men.
But all my empirical characters are specifications under
my empirical conditions of categorial ones.


We come finally to the relation of the One to the
Many? We are not asking yet what the One is, nor
asserting anything other than that it is Space-Time ; nor
whether the elementary point-instants are monads like
those of Leibniz or whether the complexes of them are
governed by a dominating monad. These topics are not
yet in place. Our question is whether the existents
within Space-Time, being only crystals within that matrix,
are lost in the reality of Space-Time or conserve their
own. ‘This question too has been already answered in

1 See above, ch. iv. pp. 247 ff.


The One
and the
Many.


346 THE CATEGORIES . BK, I


part by anticipation under the head of relation. For it
is clear that Space-Time takes for us the place of what is
called the Absolute in idealistic systems. It is an ex-
periential absolute. All finites being complexes of space-
time are incomplete. They are not the sum of reality.
But their absorption into the One does not destroy their
relative reality! That could happen only if the real in
which they are absorbed were of a different stuff from
themselves. But to be a complex of space-time is to be
of the stuff of which the universe consists. Now a con-
figuration of motion is not destroyed by its relation to
the circumambient medium but is, on the contrary, sus-
tained thereby. It is the surrounding space from which
the triangle is cut off which secures it its existence as a
triangle. The society or State which is composed of
individual men as citizens does not destroy the reality of
its members as citizens but sustains it. Thus things
being reducible in the end to these complex groupings of
motions have such reality as falls to their share. The

may be brief as the lightning in the collied night. They
may be annihilated in the shock of motions within the
domain of Space-Time, they may enter into new com-
plexes and take on fresh empirical qualities, there may be
ceaseless variation from the interplay of things; or a
thing may persist through appreciable durations, under-
going redistribution of motions and changing its qualities
in correlation therewith, waxing and waning in bulk, even
varying in shape and texture and yet preserving its
substantial individuality, as when a man is mutilated by:
war or disease ; or it may persist eternally except for
violence as the germ-plasm is said to do. My body (for
I say nothing at present of my mind) dies and is resolved,
like the rock, into its elements. There is here but a
replacement of one kind of empirical reality by another.
All these empirical variations take place within Space-
Time and are changing configurations of it, and each of


1 In the general conception of the relation of the parts to the whole of
experience (which here appears as part of a systematic doctrine) I have
been chiefly stimulated by Mr. Stout’s metaphysical writings (in the
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society).


.


cH. x THE ONE AND THE MANY 347


them being of Space-Time shares in the reality which
belongs to its matrix. The difficulty is therefore not to
be sure that a thing or a state of a thing or an event
which happens to it really is but to know what it truly is.
To discover this is the object of science. And owing
to the imperfection of our minds which makes exact
qualitative observation unattainable and the difficulties to
be studied hereafter which stand in the way of exact
apprehension of spatio-temporal figures of things, this
object may be one to which we can only approach, but
not attain.

Consider Space-Time, or indeed the universe however
conceived, as lifted above its parts (or appearances as they
then are called), as something from which they represent
a fall and degeneration ; and the parts are unreal ultimately
because of their finitude. Let it be the stuff or medium
in which things are cultivated, and things of all kinds
suffer from their finitude only in their incompleteness.
They are not the whole reality but they are real in them-
selves, and it is only our imperfection as finites which
conceals from us partially their true nature; how that
is they are delimited against each other in Space-Time.
Within this matrix there may then be progressive types
not so much of reality as of merit or perfection, as a rose
may be a more perfect thing than a stone. There is room
for an ascending scale of such perfection. But every-
thing that truly is is really. The One is the system of the
Many in which they are conserved not the vortex in
which they are engulfed.


END OF VOL. I


Printed by R. & R. Cuark, Limirep, Edinburgh.


Seana


~
bf ne <5


NEW WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY


THE IDEA OF PROGRESS: An Inquiry into its
Origin and Growth. By J. B. Bury, M.A,, Regius
Professor of Modern History in the University of
Cambridge. 8vo.


MIND-ENERGY. By Professor HEenr1 Bereson,
Translated by Professor H. WILDON CarkR, in colla-
boration with the Author. 8vo.


IMPLICATION AND LINEAR INFERENCE.
By BERNARD BOSANQUET, LL.D., F.B.A. Crown
8vo. 7s. 6d. net. —


ire hen SOF RELIGION’ -IN —CON-
TEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY. By S. RapuHax-
RISHNAN, M.A., Professor of Philosophy in the
University of Mysore, Author of “The Philosophy of
Rabindranath Tagore.” Extra Crown 8vo.


PORN HiolORY OF GREEK PHILO:
SOPHY. By W. T. STACE, B.A. Crown 8vo.


ESSAYS IN’ CRITICAL REALISM: A Co-
operative Study of the Problem of Knowledge. By
DURANT DRAKE, Professor of Philosophy in Vassar
College ; ARTHUR O. LOVEJOY, Professor of Philosophy
in Johns Hopkins University ; JAMES BISSETT PRATT,
Professor of Philosophy in Williams College ; ARTHUR
K. ROGERS, Professor of Philosophy in Yale University ;
GEORGE SANTAYANA, Late Professor of Philosophy in
Harvard University ; Roy WooD SELLARS, Associate
Professor of Philosophy in the University of Michigan;
Cc. A. Srronc, Late Professor of Psychology in
Columbia University. 8vo.


LONDON : MACMILLAN AND CO.,, Lro.


I


OTHER WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY


THE PHILOSOPHY OF RABINDRANATH TAGORE.


By Professor S. RADHAKRISHNAN. 8yvo, 8s. 6d. net.


PROBLEMS OF THE SELF. An Essay based on the
Shaw Lectures, 1914. By Professor JoHN Lairp.  8vo.
12s, net.


THE INTUITIVE BASIS OF KNOWLEDGE. An
Epistemological Enquiry. By Professor N. O. Lossky. With
Preface by Professor G. Dawes Hicks. $vo, 16s, net.


MENS CREATRIX: an Essay. By Rev. Canon W.
TEMPLE. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.


DEVELOPMENT AND PURPOSE. An Essay towards
a Philosophy of Evolution. By Professor L. T. HoBHOUSE.
8vo. 12s. 6d. net.


DICTIONARY OF PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHO-
LOGY. Edited by Dr. James Mark Batpwin. With
Illustrations and Extensive Bibliographies. Crown 4to.
Vol. I. New Edition. 60s. net. Vol. Il. New Edition.
6os. net. Vol. III, in two parts. 7os. net.


ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL
SCIENCES. Edited by WILHELM WINDELBAND and ARNOLD
Ruce. English Edition under the Editorship of Sir HENRY
JONES. 8vo.


Vout. I. LOGIC. By Arnotp RucGsr, WILHELM WINDEL-
BAND, JOSIAH ROYCE, LOUIS COUTURAT, BENEDETTO CROCE,
FEDERIGO ENRIQUES, and NICOLAJ LOSSKIJ. Ios. net.


THE SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY. A History of


the Evolution of Philosophical Thought. By Various Writers.
Edited by Sir Henry Jones. 8vo.


THE EVOLUTION OF EDUCATIONAL THEORY.
By Professor JOHN ADAMS, LL.D. 12s, 6d. net.


GREEK PHILOSOPHY. Part I. Thales to Plato. By
Professor JOHN BURNET, LL.D. 12s. 6d. net.


THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY FROM
HOBBES TO REID. By Professor G. F. Stout.


[Jn preparation.
LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp.


2


“=F 3;


Works by Prof. HENRI BERGSON


CREATIVE EVOLUTION... Translated by ARTHUR MITCHELL,


Ph.D. 8vo. 125s. 6d. net.


LAUGHTER: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic. Authorised
Translation from the Sixth Edition by CLOUDESLEY BRERETON,
L. és L. (Paris), M.A. (Cantab.); and FRED ROTHWELS; B.A.
(London). Extra Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS. Translated by
T. E. HULME. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.


MIND-ENERGY. Translated by Prof. H. Witpon Carr, in
collaboration with the Author. 8vo. [Jn the Press.


A CRITICAL EXPOSITION OF BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHY.
By J. M‘KEeLLAR STEWART, B.A., D.Phil. Extra Crown 8vo.
6s. 6d. net.


HENRI BERGSON. An Account of his Life and Philosophy.
By ALGoT RUHE and NANCY MARGARET PAUL. With Portrait.
Extra Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d. net.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF CHANGE. A Study of the Funda-
mental Principle of the Philosophy of Bergson. By H. WILDON
CARR. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.


Works by Prof. HARALD HOFFDING


A HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY: A Sketch of the
History of Philosophy from the Close of the Renaissance to our own
Day. Translated by B.E. MEYER. Twovols, 8vo. 18s. net each.


THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY. Translated by GaLENn
M. FISHER, and a Preface by WILLIAM JAMES. Globe 8vo. 5s.6d.net. ,


THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION. Translated by B. E.
MEYER. $8vo. I5s. net.


A BRIEF HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. § Trans-
lated by C. F. SANDERS. Crown 8yo. 9s. net.


MODERN PHILOSOPHERS: Lectures; and Lectures on Bergson.
Translated by ALFRED C. Mason, M.A. Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d. net.


OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY. ‘Translated by M. E. Lownpgs.


Crown 8vo. 7s. net.


LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO.,, Lrp.
3


Works by BENEDETTO CROCE u


PHILOSOPHY OF THE PRACTICAL. Economic and Ethic. .
Translated by DOUGLAS AINSLIE, B.A. 8vo. 14s. net. '


AESTHETIC AS SCIENCE OF EXPRESSION AND GENERAL
LINGUISTIC, Translated by DouGLas AINSLIE, B.A. 8yo. ‘


12s, 6d. net. 3


LOGIC AS THE SCIENCE OF THE PURE CONCEPT. ~
Translated by DOUGLAS AINSLIE, B.A. 8vo, 14s. net.


WHAT IS LIVING AND WHAT IS DEAD OF THE PHILO- —
SOPHY OF HEGEL. Translated by DouGLAS AINSLIE, B.A. —
8vo, Ios, net.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF BENEDETTO CROCE: The Problem of
Art and History. By H. WILDON CARR, Hon.D.Litt. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.


Works by Dr. BERNARD BOSANQUET


THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY AND VALUE.
Gifford Lectures for 1911. 8vo. 12s. 6d, net.


THE VALUE AND DESTINY OF THE INDIVIDUAL.
Gifford Lectures for 1912. 8vo. 12s. 6d. net.


THREE LECTURES ON ASSTHETIC. Ex. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net. —


THE PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY OF THE. STATES Ssra
12s. 6d. net.


THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGIC. Crown 8vo. 4s. net.
PSYCHOLOGY OF THE MORAL SELF. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.
SOCIAL AND INTERNATIONAL IDEALS. Studies in


Patriotism. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.
SOME SUGGESTIONS IN ETHICS. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.


IMPLICATION AND LINEAR INFERENCE. Cr. 8vo.
7s. 6d. net.


Works by Dr. F. C. S. SCHILLER
RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX. A Study in the Philosophy of


Humanism. 8vo.. Ios. net.
HUMANISM. Philosophical Essays. 8vo. ros. net.
STUDIES IN HUMANISM. 8vo. ros. net.
FORMAL LOGIC: A Scientific and Social Problem. 8vo. ros. net.


Works by Prof. WILLIAM JAMES


THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY. Two vols. §8vo.
31s. 6d. net.


TEXT-BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY. Crown 8vo. 9s. net.


LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO. irn.
4


:
ra)


lit


~~ Nov20'3p


~| 0


0. 1137


Uiprary Bureeu Cat. ni


: F p
+B? :


° on | 48372


ABE


Alexander, Se


Space, Time and Deity


ee
7
Ap


