Key-Notes and Characteristics with Comparisons of Some of the Leading Remedies of the Materia Medica
Henry C. Allen
Key-Notes and Characteristics with Comparisons of Some of the Leading Remedies of the Materia Medica. Second edition. Philadelphia: Boericke & Tafel, 1899.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/keynotesandchar00allegoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


■•■ 6 1980


I


dt


Lane Medical Library

Slanlord Universily Medical Center


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY
STANFORD UNIVERSITY
MEDICAL CENTER
STANFORD, CALIF. 94305


KEYNOTES AND CHARACTERISTICS
WITH COMPARISONS


OP SOME OP THK


LEADING REMEDIES


OP THE


MATERIA MEDICA


BY


H. C. ALLEN, M. D.


Professor of Materia Medxca and the Oroanon in Hbrino Medical

College and Hospital, Chicaoo.

Skcond E^DITION.

Rkviskd and E^nlarqkd.


PHILADELPHIA AND CHICAGO
BOKRICKK & TTAKKL


COPYRIGHTED BY

BOERICKE & TAFEL,

1899.


T. B. & H. B. COCHRAN, PRINTERS,
LANCASTER, PA.


^2.


PREFACE: SECOND EDITION.


In preparing the second edition for the press the work
has been enlarged and practically rewritten. Many more
remedies have been included and symptoms and compari-
sons extended, yet care has been taken that every symp-
tom has been verified. The original plan has been main-
tained, viz.: to give only those symptom-guides that
mark the individuality of the remedy, that the student of
materia medica may use them as land-marks to master
the genius of the remedial agent.

At the suggestion of the publisher and in response to
numerous enquiries a more extended symptomatology of
the nosodes has been included, for these invaluable addi-
tions to our armamentarium, like the so-called tissue rem-
edies of Schiissler, only need more extensive provings to
place them in the list of polychrests.

That the student may acquire the correct pronunciation
of our remedial agents an alphabetical list of remedies
with the accentuation is given, for a homeopathic physi-
cian may properly be held accountable for the correct use
of terms peculiar to his profession. An index of reme-
dies and comparisons is also included.


^TSA«^


PREFACE.


The life-work of the student of the homeopathic
Materia Medica is one of constant comparison and dif-
ferentiation. He must compare the pathogenesis of a
remedy with the recorded anamnesis of the patient;
he must differentiate the apparently similar symptoms
of two or more medicinal agents in order to select the
simillimum. To enable the student or practitioner to
do this correctly and rapidly he must have as a basis
for comparison some knowledge of the individuality of
the remedy ; something that is peculiar^ uncommon^ or
sufficiently characteristic in the confirmed pathogenesis
of a polychrest remedy that may be used as a pivotal
point of comparison. It may be a so-called "key-
note," a "characteristic," the "red strand of the
rope," any central modality or principle — as the ag-
gravation from motion of Bryonia, the amelioration
from motion of Rhus, the furious, vicious delirium of
Belladonna or the apathetic indijfference of Phosphoric
acid — ^some familiar landmark around which the symp-
toms may be arranged in the mind for comparison.

Something of this kind seems indispensable to ena-
ble us to intelligently and successfully use our volu-
minous sjonptomatology. Also, if we may judge from


VI PREFACE.

the small number of homeopathic physicians who
rely on the single remedy in practice, and the almost
constant demand for a "revision" of the Materia
Medica, its study in the past, as well as at present, has
not been altogether satisfactory to the majority.

An attempt to render the student's task less diffi-
cult, to simplify its study, to make it both interesting
and useful, to place its mastery within the reach of
every intelligent man or woman in the profession, is
the apology for the addition of another monograph to
our present works of reference.

It is all-important that the first step in the study of
homeopathic therapeutics be correctly taken, for the
pathway is then more direct and the view more com-
prehensive. The object of this work is to aid the
student to master that which is gliding and character-
istic in the individuality of each remedy and thus
utilize more readily the symptomatology of the Home-
opathic Materia Medica, the most comprehensive and
practical work for the cure of the sick ever given the
medical profession. It is the result of years of study
as student, practitioner and teacher, and is published
at the earnest solicitation of many alumni of Hering
College, with the hope that it may be of as much bene-
fit to the beginner as it has been to the compiler.


AI.PHABETICAL LIST OF REMEDIES.


Abrot^anum.
Ace'tic ac^id.
Aconi^tum napel-'lus.
Acte'a racemo^sa.
-^''culus hippocas^tanum.
u^thu^'sa cyna^pium.
Agar^icus musca^'rius.
Ag^nus cas^tus.
Al'lium cc'pa.
Al^'oe socotri^na.
Alu''mina.
Am-nbra gris-'ea.
Animo''nium carbon-'icum.
Ammo^nium muriat^icum.
Amyle^num nitro''sum.
Anacar-'dium orienta-'le.
Anthraci^num.
Antimc'nium crud^'um.
Antimo^nium tartar^icum.
A^'pis mellif^'ica.
Apoc'ynum cannab^inum.
Argen^tum metal'licum.
Argen^tiim ni^tricum.
Ar^nica Monta^na.
Arsen^'icum al-Tjum.
A^rum triphyKlum.
As^'arum Buropae^um.
AsteMas ru^bens.
Aur^um metaFlicum.

Baptis^'ia tinctc'ria.
Bary'ta carbon^ica.
Belladon^na.
Benzo^ic ac'id.
Beriberis vulga^ris.


Bis'muth.
Bo^rax vene^ta.
Bovis^ta.
Bro^mium.
Bryo^nia al^a.

Cac^tus grandiflo^rus.

Cala'dium.

Calca-'rea arsen-'ica.

Calca-'rea ostrea^rum.

Calca^'rea phosphor^'ica.

Calen^'dula.

Cam^'phora.

Can^nabis In^dica.

Can^nabis sati^'va.

Canthar^ides.

Cap''sicum an^uum.

Car^bo anima^lis.

Car^bo vegetab^ilis.

Carbol^ic ac'id.

Caulophyl^lum thalictroiMes.

Caus^ticum.

Cham''omilla.

Chelidc'nium ma'' jus.

Cicu^ta virc'sa.

Ci^na.

Cincho^'na officina^'lis.

Co^ca.

Coc'culus InMicus.

Cof^fea cru''da.

CoKchicum autumna^'le.

Col'linsonia Canaden^sis.

CoFocynthis.

Coni^'um macula^'tum.

Cro^cus sati'vus,


VUl


AI.PHABETICAI. UST


Cro'talus hor^ridus.
Crouton tig^ium.
Cu''prum metal^icum.
Cycla-'men Burop3e''um.

Digitalis purpu^rea.
Diphtheri'num.
Dioscore^a villo^sa.
Dros^era rotun^difolia.
Dulcama'^ra.

Equise^tum hyema-le.
Bupato^rium perfolia^tum.
Buphra^sia.

Fer-'rum metal^icum.
Fluor^ic ac^id.

Gelse^mium sempervi''rens.

Glon^oine.

Graph^ites.

Hamame^is Virgin^ica.
Helleb-'orus ni-'ger.
Helon'^ias dioi^ca.
He^par suFphur.
Hydras^tis Canaden^sis.
Hyoscy^amus nigger.
Hyper-'icum perfora^tum.

Igna'^tia ama'^ra.

Imodium.

Ipecacuanha.

Ka^i bichro^micum.
Ka^ broma^tum.
Ka^i carbon-'icum.
Kal^mia latifo'^lia.
Kre^osotum.

Lacb^esis.
Lac canVnvan,


Lac deflora-'tum.
Le-'dum palus^tre.
Lil^ium tigri''num.
Lobelia infla^ta.
Lycopo^dium clava-'tum.
Lys^sin.

Magne'^sia carbon-'ica.
Magne'^sia muriat^ica.
Magne^sia phosphor-'ica.
Medorrhi^num.
Melilo'tus officinalis.
Menyan'thes triforiata.
Mercu'rius.

Mercu'rixis corrosi'vus.
Mercu'rius dul'cis.
Mercu'rius cy'anide.
Mercu'rius pro'to i'odide.
Mercu'rius bin'iodide.
Mercu'rius solu'bilis.
Mercu'rius sulphure'tum.
Meze'reum.
Milleforium.
Mu'rex purpu'rea.
Muriat'ic ac'id.

Na'ja tripu'dians.
Na'trum carbon'icum.
Na'tnim muriat'icum.
Na'trum sulphu'ricum.
Ni'tric ac'id.
Nux moscha'ta.
Nux vom'ica.

O'pium.

Petroreum.
Petxoseli'num.
Phosphoric ac'id.
Phos'phorus.
Physostig'ma.
Podophyl'lum pelta'tum.


OF REMEDIES.


IX


Phytolac'ca decan'dra.
Pic'ric ac'id.
Plat'ina metariicum.
Plum'bum metal'licum.
Psori'num.
Pulsatilla.
Py'rogen.

Rata'nhia.

Ranun'culus bulbo'sa.
Rhe'um.
Rhododen'dron.
Rhus rad'icans.
Rhus toxicoden'dron.
Ru'mex cris'pus.
Ru'ta graveolens.

Sabadilla.

Sabi'na.

Sambu'cus ni'gra.

Sanguina'ria Canaden'sis.

Sanic'ula.

Sarsaparil'la.

Seca'le comu'tum.

Sele'nium.

Se'pia.

Silic'ea.


Spige'lia.

Spon'gia tos'ta.

Stan'num.

Staphisa'gria.

Stramo'nium.

Sul'phur.

Sulphur'ic ac'id.

Sym'phytum officinale.

Syphili'num.

Tab'acum.
Taraxa'cum.
Taren'tula.
Terebin'thina.
Therid'ion curassav'icum.
Thlas'pi bur'sa pasto'ris.
Thu'ja Occidentals.
Trillium pendulum.
Tuberculi'num.

Valeria'na.
Varioli'num.
Vera'trum al'bum.
Vera'trum virlde.

Zin'cum metallicum.


CHARACTERISTICS


OF SOME OF THE


Leading Remedies.


ABROTANUM.

Southernwood. Composite^.

Alternate constipation and diarrhoea ; lienteria.

Marasmns of children with marked emaciation, espe-
cially of legs (lod., Sanic, Tub.) ; the skin is flabby
and hangs loose in folds (of neck, Nat. m., Sanic).

In marasmus head weak, cannot hold it up (^th.)

Marasmus of lower extremities only.

Ravenous hunger ; losing flesh while eating well
(lod., Nat. m., Sanic, Tub.).

Painful contractions of the limbs from cramps or
following colic.

Rheumatism: for the excessive pain before the
swelling commences ; from suddenly-checked diarrhoea
or other secretions; alternates with hemorrhoids, with
dysentery.

Gout : joints stiflF, swollen, with pricking sensation ;
wrists and ankle-joints painful and inflamed.

Very lame and sore all over.

Itching chilblains (Agar.).

Great weakness and prostration and a kind of hectic
fever with children ; unable to stand.


ABROTANUM— ( Continued^.

Child is ill-natured, irritable, cross and despondent ;
violent, inhuman, would like to do something cruel.

Face old, pale, wrinkled (Op.).

Relationship. — After Hepar in furuncle; after
Aeon, and Bry. in pleurisy, when a pressing sensation
remains in aflfected side impeding respiration.

ACBTIC ACID.

Glacial Acetic Acid. Q H^ Oy

Adapted to pale, lean persons with lax, flabby
muscles ; /ace pale^ waxy (Fer.).

Hemorrhage: from every mucous outlet, nose,
throat, lungs, stomach, bowels, uterus (Fer., Mill.);
metrorrhagia; vicarious; traumatic epistaxis (Am.).

Marasmus and other wasting diseases of children
(Abrot, lod., Sanic, Tub.).

Great prostration: after injuries (Sulph. ac); after
surgical shock ; after ancBsthetics.

Thirst : intense, burning, insatiable even for large
quantities in dropsy, diabetes, chronic diarrhoea ; but
no thirst in fever.

Sour belching and vomiting of pregnancy, burning
water-brash and profuse salivation, day and night
(Lac. ac. — ^salivation < at night, Mer. s.).

Diarrhoea: copious, exhausting, great thirst; in
dropsy, typhus, phthisis ; with night sweats.

True croup, hissing respiration, cough with the in-
halation (Spong.); last stages.

Inhalation of vapor of cider vinegar has been suc-
cessfully used in croup and malignant diphtheria.

12


ACBTIC A<Cm—{ConHnued) ,

Cannot sleep lying on the back (sleeps better on
back, Ars.); sensation of sinking in abdomen causing
dyspnoea ; rests better lying on belly (Am. c).

Hectic fever, skin dry and hot ; red spot on left
cheek and drenching night sweats.

Relationship. — It antidotes anaesthetic vapors
(Amyl.); fumes of charcoal and gas; Opium and
Stramonium.

Cider vinegar antidotes Carbolic acid.

Follows well : after Cinchona, in hemorrhage ; after
Digitalis, in dropsy.

It aggravates : the symptoms of Am., Bell., Lach.,
Mer.; especially the headache from Belladonna.


ACONITUM NAPELrLUS.

Monkshood. Ranunculacece.

Is generally indicated in acute or recent cases oc-
curring in young persons, especially girls of a full,
plethoric habit who lead a sedentary life ; persons
easily affected by atmospheric changes ; dark hair and
eyes, rigid muscular fibre.

Complaints caused by exposure to dry cold air^ dry
north or west winds^ or exposure to draughts of cold
air while in a perspiration ; bad effects of checked
perspiration.

Great fear and anxiety of mind, with great nervous
excitability; afraid to go out, to go into a crowd
where there is any excitement or many people ; to
cross the street.

13


ACONITUM NAPELLUS— C Continued ) .

The countenance is expressive of fear ; the life is
rendered miserable by fear ; is sure his disease will
prove fatal ; predicts the day he will die ; fear of
death during pregnancy.

Restless, anxious, does everything in great haste ;
must change position often ; everything startles him.

Pains : are intolerable, they drive him crazy ; he
becomes very restless ; at night.

Hahnemann says : " Whenever Aconite is chosen
homeopathically, you must, above all, observe the
moral symptoms, and be careful that it closely resem-
bles them : the anguish of mind and body ; the rest-
lessness ; the disquiet not to be allayed."

This mental anxiety, worry, fear accompanies the
most trivial ailment.

Music is unbearable, makes her sad (Sab. — during
menses, Nat. c).

On rising from a recumbent position the red face
becomes deathly pale, or he becomes faint or giddy
and falls, and he fears to rise again ; often accompanied
by vanishing of sight and unconsciousness.

Amenorrhoea in plethoric young girls ; after fright,
to prevent suppression of menses.

For the congestive stage of inflammations before
localization takes place. ^ "^

Fever : skin dry and hot ; face red, or pale and red
alternately ; burning thirst for large quantities of cold
water ; intense nervous restlessness, tossing about
in agony ; becomes intolerable towards evening and
on going to sleep.

Convulsions : of teething children ; heat, jerks and

14


twitches of single muscles ; child gnaws its fist, frets
and screams ; skin hot and dry ; high fever.

Cough, croup: dry, hoarse, suffocating ; loud, rough,
croaking; hard, ringing, whistling; on expiration
(Canst — on inhalation, Spong.); from dry, cold winds
or drafts of air.

Aconite should never be given simply to control
the fever, never alternated with other drugs for that
purpose. If it be a case requiring Aconite no other
drug is needed ; Aconite will cure the case.

Unless indicated by the exciting cause, is nearly
always injurious in first stages of typhoid fever.

Aggravation. — Evening and night, pains are insup-
portable ; in a warm room ; when rising from bed ;
lying on affected side (Hep., Nux m.).

Amelioration. — In the open air (Alum., Mag. c,
Puis., Sab.), ft-es- V j >Jn co vOv^k i^«.

Relation. — Complementary : to Cotfea in fever,
sleeplessness, intolerance of pain ; to Arnica in trau-
matism ; to Sulphur in all cases. Rarely indicated
in fevers which bring out eruptions.

Aconite is the acute of Sulphur, and both precedes
and follows it in acute inflammatory conditions.

Abuse of Aconite requires Sulphur.


ACTBA RACBMOSA.

Black Cohosh, RanunaUacecB.

Puerperal mania ; thinks she is going crazy (com-
pare, Syph.) ; tries to injure herself.

Mania following disappearance of neuralgia.

15


ACnrEA WLAC^MOSA— (Continued).

Sensation as if « heavy ^ black cloud had settled all
over her and enveloped her head so that all is darkness
and confusion.

Illusion of a mouse running from under her chair
(Lac c, ^th.).

Ciliary neuralgia : aching or sharp, darting, shoot-
ing pains in globes, extending to temples, vertex, oc-
ciput, orbit, < going up stairs > lying down.

Heart troubles from reflex symptoms of uterus or
ovaries. Heart's action ceases suddenly ; impending
suflEocation ; palpitation from least motion (Dig.).

Menses : irregular ; exhausting (Alum., Coc.) ; de-
layed or suppressed by mental emotion, from cold,
from fever ; with chorea, hysteria or mania ; increase
of mental symptoms during.

Spasms : hysterical or epileptic ; reflex from uterine
disease ; worse during menses ; chorea < left side.

Severe left-sided infra-mammary pains (Ust.).

Sharp, lancinating, electric-like pains in various
parts, sympathetic with ovarian or uterine irritation ;
in uterine region, dart from side to side.

Pregnancy : nausea ; sleeplessness ; false labor-like
pains; sharp pains across abdomen ; abortion at third
month (Sab.).

During labor: ^^ shivers'*^ in first stage; convul-
sions, from nervous excitement; rigid os ; pains severe,
spasmodic, tedious, < by least noise.

After-pains, worse in the groins.

When given during last month of pregnancy short-
ens labor, if symptoms correspond (Caul., Puis.).

Excessive muscular soreness^ after dancing, skating,

16


ACXEA WLAC^^OSA—^Conitnued).

or other violent muscular exertion.

Rheumatic pains in muscles of neck and back ; feel
stiflF, lame, contracted; spine sensitive, from using
arms in sewing, type writing, piano playing (Agar.,
Ran. b.).

Rheumatism affecting the bellies of the muscles ;
pains stitching, cramping.

Rheumatic dysmenorrhoea.

Relation. — Similar: to. Caul, and Ptds. in uterine
and rheumatic affections ; to. Agar., Lil., Sep.

Aggravation. — During menstruation : the more pro-
fuse the flow the greater the suffering.


^SCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM.

Horse Chestnut, Sapindacece,

For persons with hemorrhoidal tendencies, and who
suffer with gastric, bilious or catarrhal troubles.

Fullness in various parts^ as from an undue amount
of blood ; heart, lungs, stomach, brain, pelvis, skin.

Venous congestion, especially portal and hemor-
rhoidal.

Despondent, gloomy ; very irritable ; loses temper
easily and gains control slowly ; miserably cross
(Cham.).

Mucous membranes of mouth, throat, rectum are
swollen, bum, feel dry and raw.

Coryza ; thin watery, burning ; rawness, and sensi-
tive to inhaled cold air.

Follicular pharyngitis ; violent burning, raw sensa-
tion in throat ; dryness and roughness of throat.
B 17


^;SCIJI.US HIPPOCASTANUM— (G?«//«2^^^).

Frequent inclination to swallow, with burning,
pricking, stinging and dry constricted fauces (Apis,

Bell.).

Rectum : dryness and heat of; feels as if full of

small sticks ; knife-like pains shoot up the rectum

(Ign., Sulph.); hemorrhoids blind, painful, burning,

purplish ; rarely bleeding.

Rectum sore, with fulness, burning and itching
(Sulph.).

Constipation : hard, dry stool, difficult to pass ; with
dryness and heat of rectum ; severe lumbosacral back-
ache.

Stool followed by fulness of rectum and intense
pain in anus for hours (Aloe, Ign., Mur. ac, Sulph.).

Prolapsus uteri and acrid, dark leucorrhoea, with
lumbo-sacral backache and great fatigue from walking.

Severe dull backache in lumbo-sacral articulation ;
more or less constant ; affecting sacrum and hips.

Back ^^ gives out ;'^^ during pregnancy, prolapsus,
leucorrhoea ; when walking or stooping ; must sit or
lie down.

Sensation of heaviness and lameness in back.

Paralytic feeling in arms, legs and spine.

Relation. — Similar: to. Aloe, Coll., Ign., Mur. ac,
Nux, Sulph. in hemorrhoids.

After Coll. has improved piles, ^sc. often cures.

Useful after Nux and Sulph. had improved but
failed to cure piles.

Aggravation. — Motion ; backache and soreness, by
walking and stooping ; inhaling cold air.


18


^TMUSA CYNAPIUM.

FooPs Parsley. UmbillifercB,

Especially for children during dentition in hot sum-
mer weather ; children who cannot bear milk.

Great weakness : children cannot stand ; unable to
hold up the head (Abrot.) ; prostration with sleepiness.

Idiocy in children : incapacity to think ; confused.

An expression of great anxiety and pain, with a
drawn condition and well-marked linea nasalia.

Features expressive of pain and anxiety.

Herpetic eruption on end of the nose.

Complete absence of thirst {K'pis^ Puis. — ^rev. of Ars.).

Intolerance of milk : cannot bear milk in any form ;
it is vomited in large curds as soon as taken ; then
weakness causes drowsiness (compare, Mag. c).

Indigestion of teething children ; violent^ sudden
vomiting of a frothy, milk-white substance ; or yellow
fluid, followed by curdled milk and cheesy matter.

Regurgitation of food an hour or so after eating ;
copious greenish vomiting.

Epileptic spasms, with clenched thumbs^ red face,
eyes turned downwards, pupils fixed and dilated ;
foam at the mouth, jaws locked ; pulse small, hard,
quick.

Weakness and prostration with sleepiness ; after
vomiting, after stool, after spasm.

Relation. — Similar : to. Ant. c, Ars., Cal., Sanic.

Aggravation. — After eating or drinking; after
vomiting ; after stool ; after spasm.


19


AGARICUS MUSCARIUS.

Toadstool, Fungi.

Persons with light hair ; skin and muscles lax.

Old people, with weak, indolent circulation.

Drunkards, especially for their headaches ; bad
effects after a debauch (Lob., Nux, Ran.).

Delirium : with constant raving ; tries to get out of
bed ; in typhoid or typhus.

Headaches : of those who readily become delirious
in fever or with pain (Bell.) ; of persons subject to
chorea, twitchings or grimaces ; from spinal affections.

Chilblains^ that itch and burn intolerably; frostbite
and all consequences of exposure to cold, especially in
face.

Involuntary movements while awake^ cease during
sleep ; chorea, from simple motions and jerks of single
mucles to dancing of whole body ; trembling of whole
body (twitching of muscles of face, Myg.).

Sensation as if ice touched or ice-cold needles were
piercing the skin ; as from hot needles.

Burning, itching redness of various parts ; ears,
nose, face, hands and. feet ; parts red, swollen, hot

Uncertainty in walking, stumbles over everything
in the way ; heels pain as if beaten, when standing.

Spine sensitive to touch (Ther.); worse mornings.

Pain : sore, aching, in lumbar and sacral regions ;
during exertion in the day time ; while sitting (Zinc).

Spinal irritation due to sexual excesses (Kali p.)

Nervous prostration after sexual debauches.

Epilepsy from suppressed eruptions (Psor., Sulph.).

Every motion, every turn of body, causes pain in
spine. Single vertebrae sensitive to touch.

20


AGARICIJS mVSCAJBLTVS— (Continued).

Prolapsus, post-climacteric; bearing-down pain al-
most intolerable (compare, Lilium, Murex, Sepia).

Extremely sensitive to cold air (Cal., Kali c, Psor.).

Complaints appear diagonally ; upper left and lower
right side (Ant. t., Stram. — upper right, lower left,
Ambr., Brom., Med., Phos., Sul. ac).

Relations. — Similar: to, Act, Cal., Can. Ind., Hyos.,
Kali p., lyach., Nux, Op., Stram., in delirium of alco-
holism ; to, Myg., Tar., Zinc, in chorea.

Aggravation. — ^After eating ; after coitus ; cold air ;
mental application ; before a thunder-storm (Phos.,
Psor.).

AGNUS CASTIJS.

Chaste tree, Verbenacece.

For the lymphatic constitution.

Absent-minded^ reduced power of insight ; cannot
recollect ; has to read a sentence twice before he can
comprehend (Lye, Phos. ac, Sep.).

" Old sinners," with impotence and gleet ; unmar-
ried persons suflFering from nervous debility.

Premature old age : melancholy, apathy, mental
distraction, self-contempt; arising in young persons
from abuse of the sexual powers ; from seminal losses.

Complete impotence: relaxation, flaccidity, cold-
ness of genitalia. No sexual power or desire (Calad.,
Sel.).

Impotence, after frequent attacks of gonorrhoea.

Bad effects from suppressed gonorrhoea (Med.).

Gleet, with absence of sexual desire or erections.

Leucorrhoea : transparent, but staining linen yellow ;
passes imperceptibly ^^;« the very relaxed parts.

21


AGXIJS CASTVS—iConitnued).

Deficient secretion or suppression of milk in nurs-
ing women (Asaf., Lac c, lyac d.); often with great
sadness ; says she will die.

Complaints of imaginary odor before the nose, as of
herring or musk.

Prevents excoriation, from walking.

Relations. — Calad. and Selen. follow well after
Agnus in weakness of sexual organs or impotence.


ALrLrlUM CEPA.

Onion, LdeA) LiliacecB.

Acute catarrhal inflammation of mucous mem-
branes, with increased secretion.

Catarrhal dull headache, with coryza; < in the
evening, > in open air ; < on returning to a warm
room (compare, Euph., Puis.).

Headache ceases during menses ; returns when flow
disappears (Lach., Zinc).

Eyes; burning, biting, smarting as from smoke,
must rub them ; watery and suffused ; capillaries in-
jected and excessive lachrymation.

Coryza ; profuse^ watery and acrid nasal discharge^
with profuse, bland lachrymation (profuse, full of
acrid tears, bland and fluent coryza, Euph.).

Acrid, watery discharge dropping from tip of nose
(Ars., Ars. iod.).

Spring coryza : after damp northeasterly winds ; dis-
charge bums and corrodes nose and upper lip.

Hay fever : in August every year ; violent sneezing
on rising from bed ; from handling peaches.

Nasal polypus (Mar. v.. Sang., Sang, nit., Psor.).

22


AlrlrllJlI C:EPA-- {Continued).

Catarrhal laryngitis ; cough compels patient io grasp
the larynx ; seems as if cough would tear it.

Colic : from cold by getting feet wet ; over eating ;
from cucumbers, salads ; hemorrhoidal ; of children ;
< sitting, > moving about

Neuralgic pains like a long thread ; in face, head,
neck, chest.

Traumatic chronic neuritis; neuralgia of stump
after amputation ; burning and stinging pains.

Panaritia : with red streaks up the arm ; pains drive
to despair ; in child-bed.

Sore and raw spots on feet, especially heel, from
friction. ^^Efficacious when feet are rubbed sore?'* —
Dioscorides.

Phlebitis, puerperal ; after forceps delivery.

Relation. — Complementary: Phos., Puis., Thuja.

Compatible : before, Cal. and Sil. in polypus.

Similar : to, Euph., but coryza and lachrymation are
opposite.

Bad eflFects from getting feet wet (Rhus).

Aggravation. — Predominantly in the evening and
in warm room (Puis. — in open air, Euph.).

Amelioration. — In cold room and open air (Puis.).

ALrOB SOCOTRIXA.

Socotrine Aloes. Liliacecg.

Adapted to indolent, " weary " persons ; averse to
either mental or physical labor ; mental labor fatigues.

Old people ; especially women of relaxed, phleg-
matic habit. Extreme prostration, with perspiration.

23


AlrOB SOCOTRIN A — ( Continuea ) .

Itch appears each year, as winter approaches (Psor.).

Dissatisfied and angry about himself or his com-
plaints, especially when constipated.

Diseases of mucous membranes; causes the pro-
duction of fnucus in jelly-like lumps from throat or
rectum ; affects mucous membrane of rectum.

Headache across the forehead < by every footstep
(Bell., Bry.) ; with heaviness of eyes and nausea.

Headaches : are worse from heat, better from cold
applications (Ars.) ; alternating with lumbago ; after
insufficient stool.

Diarrhoea : has to hurry to closet immediately after
eating and drinking (Crot. t.)/ with want of confidence
in sphincter ani ; driving out of bed early in the morn'
ing (Psor., Rum., Sulph.).

When passing flatus, sensation as if stool would
pass with it (Olean., Mur. ac, Nat. m.).

Colic : cutting, griping pain in right lower portion
of abdomen ; excruciating, before and during stool;
all pains cease after stool, leaving profuse sweating
and extreme weakness ; attacks preceded by obstinate
constipation.

Flatus oflFensive, burning, copious ; much flatus with
small stool (Agar.) ; burning in anus after passage of
flatus.

Solid stool and masses of mucus pass involuntarily ;
hungry during diarrhoea.

Before stool : rumbling, violent sudden urging,
heaviness in rectum ; during stool, tenesmus and much
flatus ; after stool, faintness.

Hemorrhoids : blue, like a bunch of grapes (Mur.

24


ALOB S€H:OTnTSA—(Con/mued).

ac.) ; constant bearing down in rectum ; bleeding,
sore, tender, hot, relieved by cold water ; intense itch-
ing.

Itching and burning in anus, preventing sleep
(Ind.).

Relation. — Like Sulphur in many chronic diseases
with abdominal plethora and congestion of portal
circulation ; develops suppressed eruptions.

Similar: to. Am. m., Gamb., Nux, Pod.

Aggravation. — Early morning ; sedentary life ; Aol^
dry weather; after eating or drinking; standing or
walking.

Amelioration. — Cold water; cold weather; dis-
charge of flatus and stool.


ALrVMINA.

Pure Clay, Al^, Oy

Adapted to persons who suffer from chronic dis-
eases ; "the Aconite of chronic diseases."

Constitutions deficient in animal heat (Cal., Sil.).

Spare, dry, thin subjects ; dark complexion ; mild,
cheerful disposition ; hypochondriacs ; dry, tettery,
itching eruption, worse in winter (Petr.); intolerable
itching of whole body when getting warm in bed
(Sulph.); scratches until bleeds, then becomes painful.

Time passes too slowly ; an hour seems half a day
(Cann. Ind.).

Inability to walk, except with the eyes open, and in
the daytime ; tottering and falling when closing eyes
(Arg. n.. Gels.).

25


AlrUMIN A — ( Continued ) .

Abnormal appetite ; craving for starch, chalk, char-
coal, cloves, coflFee- or tea-grounds, acids and indiges-
tible things (Cic, Psor.) ; potatoes disagree.

Chronic eructations for years ; worse in evening.

All irritating things — ^salt, wine, vinegar, pepper —
immediately produce cough.

Constipation : no desire for and no ability to pass
stool until there is a large accumulation (Melil.); great
straining, must grasp the seat of closet tightly ; stool
hard, knotty, like laurel berries, covered with mucus ;
or soft, clayey, adhering to parts (Plat).

Inactivity of rectum, even soft stool requires great
straining (Anac, Plat., Sil., Ver.).

Constipation : of nursing children, from artificial
food ; bottle-fed babies ; of old people (Lye, Op.); of
pregnancy, from inactive rectum (Sep.).

Diarrhoea when she urinates.

Has to strain at stool in order to urinate.

Leucorrhcea : acrid and profuse, running down to
the heels (Syph.) ; worse during the daytime ; > by
cold bathing.

After menses ; exhausted physically and mentally^
scarcely able to speak (Carbo an., Coc).

Talking fatigues ; faint and tired, must sit down.

Relations. — Complementary : to Bryonia.

Follows: JBr>\, lyach., Sulph.

Alumina is the chronic of Bryonia.

Similar : to. Bar. c. Con., in ailments of old people.

Aggravation. — In cold air; during winter; while
sitting ; from eating potatoes ; after eating soups ; on
alternate days ; at new and full moon,

26


AlrUMIN A — ( Continued ) .

Amelioration. — Mild summer weather ; from warm
drinks ; while eating (Psor.) ; in wet weather (Caust).

Alumina is one of the chief antidotes for lead poi-
soning ; painter's colic ; ailments from lead.


AMBRA GRISBA.

Ambergris. A Nosode.

For children, especially young girls who are ex-
citable, nervous and weak ; nervous affections of old
people, nerves " worn out."

Lean, thin, emaciated persons who take cold easily.

Great sadness, sits for days weeping.

After business embarrassments, unable to sleep,
must get up (Act, Sep.).

Ranula with fetid breath (Thuja).

Sensation of coldness in abdomen (Cal.).

The presence of others, even the nurse, is unbear-
able during stool ; frequent, ineffectual desire, which
makes her anxious.

Discharge of blood between periods, at very little
accident — ^a long walk, after every hard stool, etc.

Leucorrhoea ; thick^ bluish-white mucus^ especially
or only at night (Caust, Mer., Nit ac).

Violent cough in spasmodic paroxysms, with eruc-
tations and hoarseness ; worse talking or reading
aloud (Dros., Phos.) ; evening without, morning with
expectoration (Hyos.) ; whooping-cough, but without
crowing inspiration.

Relations. — Similar: to. Act., Asaf., Coca, Ign.,
Mosch., Phos., Val.

27


Aggravation. — Warm drinks, warm room ; music ;
lying down ; reading or talking aloud ; the presence
of many people ; after waking.

Amelioration. — After eating; cold air; cold food
and drinks ; rising from bed.


AMMONIUM CARBONICUM.

Smelling Salts. zNH^O^j^CO^;

Hemorrhagic diathesis, fluid blood and degeneration
of red blood-corpuscles ; ulcerations tend to gangrene.

Stout, fleshy women with various troublies in con-
sequence of leading a sedentary life ; delicate women
who must have the " smelling-bottle " continually at
hand ; readily catch cold in winter.

Children dislike washing (Ant. c, Sulph.).

lyoses breath when falling asleep, must awaken
to get breath (Grind., Lach.).

Ill-humor during wet, stormy weather.

Headache ; sensation of fullness, as if forehead
would burst (Bell., Glon.).

Nosebleed : when washing the face (Arn., Mag. c.)
and hands in the morning, from left iiostri\\afier eating.

Ozena, blowing bloody mucus from the nose fre-
quently ; blood rushes to tip of nose, when stooping.

Stoppage of nose, mostly at night ; must breathe
through the mouthy a keynote even in diphtheria ;
long-lasting coryza ; " snufiies " of infants (Hep., Nux,
Samb., Sticta).

Putrid sore throat ; tendency to gangrenous ulcera-
tion of tonsils ; glands engorged.

28


AMMOKIIJII C ARBONICUM— ( Continued ) .

In diphtheria or scariatina when the nose is stopped
up; child cannot sleep because cannot get its breath.

Cholera-like symptoms at the commencement of
menstruation (Bov., Ver.).

Menses: too early, profuse, preceded by griping
colic ; acrid, makes the thighs sore ; copious at night
and when sitting (Zinc.) ; with toothache, colic, sad-
ness ; fatigue^ especially of thighs ; yawning and
chilliness.

Leucorrhoea: watery, burning from the uterus;
acrid, profuse from the vagina ; excoriation of vulva.

Dyspnoea with palpitation, worse by exertion or on
ascending even a few steps ; worse in a warm room.

One of the best remedies in emphysema.

Cough ; dry, from tickling in throat as from dust,
every morning from 3 to 4 A. m. (Kali c).

Panaritium ; deep-seated periosteal pain (Dios., Sil.).

Body red, as if from scarlatina (compare, Allan.).

Malignant scarlatina with deep sleep ; stertorous
breathing. Miliary rash or faintly developed eruption
from defective vitality ; threatened paralysis of brain
(Tub., Zinc.)

Relations. — It antidotes, poisoning with Rhus and
stings of insects.

Affects the right side most.

Inimical : to, lyachesis.

Aggravation. — Cold, wet weather ; wet poultices ;
from washing ; during menses.

Amelioration. — Lying on abdomen (Acet. ac.) ; on
painful side (Puis.) ; in dry weather.


29


AMMONIIJII MIJRIATICIJII.

Sal Ammoniac, NH\ CL

Especially adapted to those who are fat and slug-
gish ; or body large and fat but legs too thin.

Watery, acrid coryza, corroding the lip (All. c).

During menses : diarrhoea and vomiting ; bloody dis-
charge from the bowels (Phos.); neuralgic pains in the
feet; flow more profuse at night (Bov. — on lying
down, Kreos.).

Obstinate constipation accompanied by much flatus.

Hard, crumbling stools require great effort in expul-
sion ; crumble from the verge of anus (Mag. m.) ;
vary in color, no two stools alike (Puis.).

Hemorrhoids: sore and smarting; with burning
and stinging in the rectum for hours after stool ( JSsc,
Sulph.); especially after suppressed leucorrhoea.

Leucorrhoea ; like white of ^%%^ preceded by grip-
ing pain about the navel ; brown, slimy, painless, after
every urinatio7i.

Sensation of coldness in the back, between scapulae
(Lachn.).

Hamstrings feel painfully short when walking ; ten-
sion in joints as from shortening of the muscles
(Caust, Cimex).

Offensive sweat of the feet (Alum., Graph., Psor.,
Sanic, Sil.).

Relation. — Followed: by. Ant. c, Phos., Puis., Sanic.

AMYI.ENUM XITROSUM.

Nitrite of Amyl C^^H^^O, NOy

For nervous, sensitive, plethoric women, during or
after the menopause.

30


Often palliative in incurable cases ; very important
as regards euthanasia.

Rapidly dilates the arteries and accelerates, but later
weakens and retards the pulse.

Intense surging of blood to face and head (Bell.,
Glon.).

Craves fresh air ; opens clothing, removes bed cov-
ering and opens windows in the coldest weather (Arg.
n., Lach., Sulph.).

Flushings: start from face, stomach, various parts
of body, followed by sweatings, often hot, profuse ;
abruptly limited, parts below are icy cold ; followed by
great prostration.

Face flushes at the slightest emotion (Coca, Fer.).

Blushing : chronic or acute ; sea sickness.

Hemicrania, especially when afiiicted side is palid.

Collar seems too tight, must loosen it (Lach.).

Angina pectoris ; tumultuous heart action ; intense
throbbing of heart and carotids (Glon.).

Constant stretching for A<9/^rj/ impossible to satisfy
the desire ; would seize the bed and call for help to
stretch.

Profound and repeated yawning (Kali c).

Puerperal convulsions immediately after delivery.

Relations. — Similar: to, Bell., Cac, Coca, Fer.,
Glon., Lach.

Aggravation. — Mental or physical exertion.

Acts promptly by inhalation ; resuscitates persons
sinking under anaesthetics.

Crude drug chiefly palliative ; must be repeated as


31


patient becomes accustomed to it ; is curative in the
stronger higher potencies.

The cure more frequently depends upon the strength
of the potency than many who have not put it to
the curative test imagine.


ANACARDIUM ORIBNTAI.B.

Marking Nut. Anacardiacece.

Sudden loss of memory; everything seems to be in
a dream ; patient is greatly troubled about his forget-
fulness ; confused, unfit for business.

Disposed to be malicious, seems bent on wickedness.

Irresistible desire to curse and swear (Lac c, Lil.,
Nit. ac. — ^wants to pray continually, Stram.).

Lack of confidence in himself and others.

Feels as though he had two wills, one commanding
him to do what the other forbids.

When walking, is anxious, as if some one were pur-
suing him ; suspects everything around him.

Weakness of all the senses.

Hypochondriac, with hemorrhoids and constipation.

Strange temper, laughs at serious matters and is
serious over laughable things. Thinks herself a demon ;
curses and swears.

Sensation : as of a hoop or band around apart (Cac,
Carb. ac, Sulph.) ; or as of a dull, blunt instrument
pressing ; as of a plug in inner parts.

Headache ; relieved entirely when eating (Psor.),
when lying down in bed at night, and when about fall-
ing asleep ; worse during motion and work.

32


ANACAROIVM ORIENTAl,E— ( Continued ) .

Gastric and nervous headaches of sedentary per-
sons (Arg. n., Bry., Nux).

Apt to choke when- eating and drinking (Can. s.,
Kava kava, Nit. ac).

Swallows food and drink hastily ; symptoms disap-
pear while eating (Kali p., Psor.).

Stomach : sensation of fasting *' all gone," comes
on only when stomach is empty and is > by eating ;
(Chel., lod.); > during process of digestion (rev. of
Bry., Nux).

Warts on palms of hands (Nat. m.).

Great desire for stool^ but with the effort the desire
passes away without evacuation ; rectum seems power-
less, paralyzed, with sensation as if plugged up (ir-
regular peristaltic or over action, Nux).

Relations. — Compare : Rhus r., Rhus t. and Rhus v.

Symptoms are prone to go from right to left (Lye).

Anacardium follows well : after. Lye, and Puis.

Anacardium follows, and is followed by Platina.


ANTHRACIXUM.

Anthrax Poison, A Nosode,

In carbuncle, malignant ulcer and complaints with
ulceration^ sloughing and intolerable burning.

When Arsenicum or the best selected remedy fails
to relieve the burning pain of carbuncle or malignant
ulceration.

Hemorrhages ; blood oozes from mouth, nose, anus
or sexual organs ; black, thick, tar-like, rapidly decom-
posing (Crot).

c 33


A':STVLWUL€:rSVrSIK— (Continued) .

Septic fever, rapid loss of strength, sinking pulse,
delirium and fainting (Pyr.).

Gangrenous ulcers ; felon, carbuncle, erysipelas of
a malignant type.

Felon ; the worst cases, with sloughing and terrible
burning pain (Ars., Carb. ac, Lach.).

Malignant pustule; black or blue blisters; often
fatal in twenty-four or forty-eight hours (Lach., Pyr.).

Carbuncle; with horrible burning pains ; discharge
of ichorous offensive pus.

Dissecting wounds, especially if tendency is to be-
come gangrenous ; septic fever, marked prostration
(Ars., Pyr.).

Suspicious insect stings. If the swelling changes
color and red streaks from the wound map out the
course of lymphatics (lyach., Pyr.).

Septic inflammation from absorption of pus or other
deleterious substances, with burning pain and great
prostration (Ars., Pyr.).

Epidemic spleen diseases of cattle, horses and sheep.

Bad effects from inhaling foul odors of putrid fever
or dissecting-room ; poisoning by foul breath (Pyr.).

Hering says : " To call a carbuncle a surgical dis-
ease is the greatest absurdity. An incision is always
injurious and often fatal. A case has never been lost
under the right kind of treatment, and it should al-
ways be treated by internal medicine only."

Relations. — Similar: to, Ars., Carb. ac, Lach., Sec,
Pyr., in malignant and septic conditions.

Compare : Euphor. in the terrible pains of cancer,
carbuncle or erysipelas when Ars. or Anth. fail to >.

34


AKTIMOKIIJII CRIJOIJII.

Sulphide of Antimony. SbS^,

For children and young people inclined to grow fat
(Cal.) ; for the extremes of life.

Old people with morning diarrhc3ea, suddenly be-
come constipated, or alternate diarrhoea and constipa-
tion ; pulse hard and rapid.

Sensitive to the cold, < after taking cold.

Child is fretful, peevish, cannot bear to be touched
or looked at ; sulky, does not wish to speak or be
spoken to (Ant. t, lod., Sil.); angry at every little at-
tention.

Great sadness, with weeping.

Loathing life.

Anxious lachrymose mood, the slightest thing affects
her (Puis.) ; abject despair, suicide by drowning.

Irresistible desire to talk in rhymes or repeat verses.

Sentimental mood in the moonlight, especially ec-
static love ; bad effects of disappointed affection
(Cal. p.).

Nostrils and labial commissures sore, cracked and
crusty.

Headache : after river bathing ; from taking cold ;
alcoholic drinks ; deranged digestion, acids, fat, fruit ;
suppressed eruption.

Gastric complaints from over-eating ; stomach weak,
digestion easily disturbed; a thick, milky- white
coating on the tongue, which is the red strand of the
remedy ; very subject to canker sores in the mouth*
(Arg. n., Sulph.).

Longing for acids and pickles.

Gastric and intestinal affections: from bread and

35


ANTIMONIUM CWLUOVm— (Continued ) ,

pastry ; acids, especially vinegar ; sour or bad wine ;
after cold bathing ; over-heating ; hot weather.

Constant discharge of flatus, up and down, for
years ; belching, tasting of ingesta.

Mucus : in large quantities from posterior nares by
hawking ; from anus, ichorous^ oozing^ staining yellow ;
mucous piles.

Disposition to abnormal growths of the skin ; finger
nails do not grow rapidly ; crushed nails grow in splits
like warts and with homy spots.

Large homy corns on soles of feet (Ran. b.) ; very
sensitive when walkings especially on stone pavements.

Loss of voice from becoming over-heated.

Cannot bear the heat of the sun ; worse from exer- •
tion in the sun (Lach., Nat. m.) ; < from over-heating
near the fire ; exhausted in warm weather ; ailments
from sunburn.

Whooping-cough : < by being over-heated in the
sun or in a warm room ; from cold washing.

When symptoms reappear they change locality or
go from one side of the body to the other.

Aversion to cold bathing ; child cries when washed
or bathed with cold water ; cold bathing causes vio-
lent headache ; causes suppressed menses ; colds from
swimming or falling into the water (Rhus).

Relations. — Complementary : Squilla.

Similar : to, Bry., Ipec, Lye, Puis., in gastric com-
plaints.

Follows well : after. Ant. c. Puis., Mer., Sulph,

Aggravation. — After eating ; cold bath ; acids or


36


ANTIMONHJM CWiUOVM—(ConHnued).

sour wine ; a/ler heat of sun or fire ; extremes of cold
or heat.

Amelioration. — In the open air ; during rest ; after
a warm bath.

ANTIMONIVM TARTARICVM.

Tartar Emetic,

Adapted to torpid, phlegmatic persons ; the hydro-
genoid constitutioh (of Grauvogl).

Diseases originating from exposure in damp base-
ments or cellars (Ars., Aran., Tereb.).

Through the pneumogastric nerve it depresses the
respiration and circulation, thus producing the key-
note of the remedy, viz., when the patient coughs
there appears to be a large collection of mucus in the
bronchi; it seems as if much would be expectorated,
but nothing comes up.

Child : clings to those around ; wants to be carried ;
cries and whines if any one touches it ; will not let
you feel the pulse (Ant. c, Sanic).

Face cold^ blue^ pale^ covered with cold sweat (Tab.).

Tongue coated, pasty, thick, white, with reddened
papillae and red edges ; red in streaks ; very red, dry in
the middle ; extraordinary craving for apples (Aloe —
for acids, pickles. Ant. c).

Vomiting: in any position except lying on right
side ; until he faints ; followed by drowsiness and
prostration; of cholera morbus with diarrhoea and
cold sweat, a dose after each attack (Ver.).

Asphyxia: mechanical, as apparent death from
drowning ; from mucus in bronchi ; from impending

37


ANTIMONIIJM TARTARICIJM— (G?»/m«^flO

paralysis of lungs ; from foreign bodies in larynx or
trachea ; with drowsiness and coma.

Great sleepiness or irresistible inclination to sleeps
with nearly all complaints (Nux m., Op.).

Child at birth pale, breathless, gasping ; asphyxia
neonatorum. Relieves the ** death-rattle " (Taran.).

Icterus with pneumonia, especially of right lung.

Relations. — Similar : to, Lycopodium ; but spas-
modic motion of alae is replaced by dilated nostrils ;
to Veratrum, both have diarrhoea, colic, vomiting,
coldness and craving for acids ; to Ipecac, but more
drowsiness from defective respiration ; nausea, but >
after vomiting.

When lungs seem to fail, patient becomes sleepy,
cough declines or ceases, it supplants Ipec.

For bad effects of vaccination when Thuja fails and
Silicea is not indicated.

Before Silicea in dyspnoea from foreign bodies in the
larynx or trachea; Puis, in suppressed gonorrhoea;
Tereb. from damp basements.

Children not easily impressed when Ant. tart, seems
indicated in coughs, require Hepar.

In spring and autumn, when damp weather com-
mences, coughs of children get worse.

Aggravation. — In damp, cold weather ; lying down
at night ; warmth of room ; change of weather in
spring (Kali s., Nat. s.).

Amelioration. — Cold open air ; sitting upright ;
expectorating ; lying on right side (Tab.).


38


APIS MEI^I^IFICA.

Poison of the Honey Bee, Apium virus.

Adapted to the strumous constitution ; glands en-
larged, indurated ; scirrhus or open cancer.

Women, especially widows ; children and girls who,
though generally careful, become awkward, and let
things fall while handling them (Bov.).

Bad effects of acute exanthema imperfectly de-
veloped or suppressed (Zinc); measles, scarlatina,
urticaria.

Ailments from jealousy, fright, rage, vexation, bad
news.

Irritable ; nervous ; fidgety ; hard to please.

Weeping disposition ; cannot help crying ; discour-
aged, despondent (Puis.).

Sudden, shrill, piercing screams from children while
waking or sleeping (Hellebore).

CEdema : bag-like, puffy swelling under the eyes
(over the eyes, Kali c); of the hands and feet ; dropsy,
without thirst (with thirst, Acet. ac, Apoc).

Extreme sensitiveness to touch (Bell., Lach.).

Pain : burning, stinging, sore ; suddenly migrating
from one part to another (Kali bi., Lac c. Puis.).

Thirstlessness : in anasarca; acites (Acetic acid,
but face more waxy and great thirst).

Incontinence of urine, with great irritation of the
parts; can scarcely retain the urine a moment, and
when passed scalds severely ; frequent, painful, scanty,
bloody.

Constipation: sensation in abdomen as if some-
thing tight would break if much effort were used.

Diarrhoea : of drunkards ; in eruptive diseases, espe-

. 39


APIS MEULIIFICA— (Continued).

cially if eruption be suppressed ; involuntary from
every motion, as though anus were wide open (Phos.).

Affects right side ; enlargement or dropsy of right
ovary ; right testicle.

Intermittent fever ; chill 3 p. M., with thirsty always
(Ign.); < warm room and from external heat. (Thuja,
3 A. M. and at 3 p. m.).

Relations. — Complementary : Nat. mur.

Disagrees, when used either before or after Rhus.

Ars. and Puis, follow Apis well.

Has cured scarlatina albuminuria after Canth., Dig.,
Hell, failed.

Aggravation. — After sleeping (Lach.) ; closed, es-
pecially warmed and heated rooms are intolerable ;
from getting wet (Rhus), but better from washing or
moistening the part in cold water.

Amelioration. — Open air ; cold water or cold bath-
ing; uncovering; pains by coughing, walking or
changing position ; when sitting erect.


APOCYNIJM CANNABINIJM.

Indian Hemp. ApocynacecB.

Excretions diminished, especially urine and sweat.
Dropsy of serous membranes ; acute, inflammatory.
Dropsy : with thirst (Acet. ac), water disagrees or is
vomited (Ars.) ; most cases uncomplicated with or-
ganic diseases ; after typhus, typhoid, scarlatina, cir-
rhosis ; after abuse of quinine.

Acute hydrocephalus, with open sutures; stupor,
bt of one eye lost ; constant and voluntary motion

40


APOCYNIJM CAJH^ABrSV^—CConftnued),

of one arm and one leg (left arm and leg, Bry.) ; fore-
head projected.

Amenorrhoea in young girls, with bloating or drop-
sical extension of abdomen and extremities.

Metrorrhagia : continued or paroxysmal flow ; fluid
or clotted ; nausea, vomiting, palpitation ; pulse quick,
feeble, when moved ; vital depression, fainting, when
raising head from the pillow.

Cough, short and dry, or deep and loose, during
pregnancy (Con.).

Relations. — Similar: to. Acetic acid. Apis (no
thirst), Ars., Cinch., Dig., in dropsical affections.

Blatta orientalis has cured bad cases of general
dropsy, after Apis, Apoc. and Dig. failed. — Haynes.

ARGENTVIH METALrLrldJIH.

The Metal. Pure Silver.

Tall, thin, irritable persons.

Ailments from abuse of Mercury.

Constitutional effects of onanism.

Affects the cartilages, tarsal, ears, nose, eustachian ;
the structures entering into joints.

Seminal emissions : after onanism ; almost every
night ; without erection ; with atrophy of penis.

Crushed pain in the testicles (Rhod.).

Prolapsus ; with pain in left ovary and back, ex-
tending forward and downward (right ovary. Pal.) ;
climacteric hemorrhage.

Exhausting, fluent coryza with sneezing.

Hoarseness ; of professional singers, public speakers
(Alum., Arum t).

41


Total loss of voice with professional singers.

Throat and larynx feel raw or sore on ^swallowing
or coughing.

Laughing excites cough (Dros., Phos., Stan.) and
produces profuse mucus in larynx.

When reading aloud has to hem and hawk ; cough
with easy expectoration of gelatinous, viscid mucus,
looking like boiled starch.

Great weakness of the chest (Stan.) ; worse left side.

Alteration in timbre of voice with singers and pub-
lic speakers (Arum t.).

Raw spot over bifurcation of the trachea; worse
when using voice, talking or singing.

Relation. — Follows well : after. Alum.

Similar : to, Stan, in cough excited by laughing.

Aggravation. — Riding in a carriage (Coc.) ; when
touched or pressed upon; talking, singing, reading aloud.

ARGENTIJM NITRICUM.

The Silver Nitrate. AgO^ ^O^.

Acute or chronic diseases from unusual or long-con-
tinued mental exertion, P^^(k f\0\^^^

Always think of Argentum nit. on seeing withered,
dried-up, old-looking patients (thin, scrawny, Sec).

Emaciation, progressing every year ; most marked
in lower extremities (Am. m.) ; marasmus.

Apprehension when ready for church or opera,
diarrhoea sets in (Gels.).

Time passes slowly (Can. I.) ; impulsive, wants to
do things in a hurry ; must walk fast ; is always
hurried ; anxious, irritable, nervous (Aur., L/il.).

42


ARGENTIJIII -SITWUCU-n— (Continued).

Headache : congestive, with fulness and heaviness ;
with sense of expansion ; habitual gastric of literary
V[MtVL\ from dancing; hemicrania, pressive, screwing
in frontal eminence or temple ; ending in bilious
vomiting ; < from any exhaustive mental labor ; > by
pressure or tight bandaging (Apis, Puis.).

Acute granular conjunctivitis ; scarlet-red^ like raw
beef; discharge profuse, muco-purulent.

Ophthalmia neonatorum : profuse, purulent dis-
charge ; cornea opaque, ulcerated ; lids sore, thick,
swollen; agglutinated in morning (Apis, Mer. s., Rhus).

Eye strain from sewing, < in warm room > in
open air (Nat. m., Ruta) ; diseases due to defective
accommodation.

Craves sugar ; child is fond of it, but diarrhoea re-
sults from eating (craves salt or smoked meat, Cal. p.).

Belching accompanies most gastric ailments.

Flatulent dyspepsia : belching after every meal ;
stomach, as if it would burst with wind ; belching
difficult, finally air rushes out with great violence.

Diarrhoea : green mucus, like chopped spinach in

flakes ; turning green after remaining on diaper ; after

drinking; after eating candy or sugar ; masses of

muco-lymph in shreddy strips or lumps (Asar.) ; with

much noisy flatus (Aloe).

Diarrhoea as soon as he drinks (Ars., Crot. t.,
Throm.).

Urine passes unconsciously day and night (Caust.).

Impotence : erection fails when coition is attempted
(Agnus, Calad., Selen.).


43


ARGENTIJM mTWLlCJTM—(Conitnued).

Coition : painful in both sexes ; followed by bleed-
ing from the vagina (Nit. ac).

Metrorrhagia : in young widows ; in sterility ; zmtk
nervous erethism at change of life (L<ach.).

Great longing for fresh air (Amyl., Puis., Sulph.).

Chronic laryngitis of singers ; the high notes cause
cough (Alum., Arg. m., Arum).

Great weakness of lower extremities, with tremb-
ling ; cannot walk with the eyes closed (Alum.).

Walks and stands unsteadily, especially when he
thinks himself unobserved.

Convulsions preceded by great restlessness.

Sensation of a splinter in throat when swallowing
(Dolich., Hep., Nit. ac, Sil.) ; in or about uterus
when walking or riding.

Chilly when uncovered^ yet feels smothered if
wrapped up ; craves fresh air.

Prevents excessive granulation in ulcers.

Relation. — Natrum mur. for the bad effect of
cauterizing with nitrate of silver.

Coffea increases nervous headache.

Boys' complaints after using tobacco (Ars., Ver.).

Similar : to, Nat. m.. Nit. ac, Lach., Aur., Cup.

After Ver.; Lye follows well in flatulent dyspepsia.

Aggravation. — Cold food ; cold air ; eating sugar ;
ice cream ; unusual mental exertion.

Amelioration. — Open air ; craves the wind blowing
in his face ; bathing with cold water.

The 200 or loooth potency in watery solution as
a topical application in ophthalmia neonatorum has
relieved when the crude Silver nitrate failed.

44


ARNICA MONTANA.

Leopard* s Bane, Compositce,

Nervous women, sanguine plethoric persons, lively
expression and very red face.

For the bad effects resulting from mechanical in-
juries ; even if received years ago.

Especially adapted to those who remain long im-
pressed by even slight mechanical injuries.

Sore, lame, bruised feeling all through the body,
as if beaten ; traumatic affections of muscles.

Mechanical injuries, especially with stupor from
concussion ; involuntary feces and urine.

After injuries with blunt instruments (Symph.).

Compound fractures and their profuse suppuration
(Calend.).

Concussions and contusions, results of shock or in-
jury ; without laceration of soft parts ; prevents sup-
puration and septic conditions and promotes absorp-
tion.

Nervous, cannot bear pain ; whole body over-sensi-
tive (Cham., Cof., Ign.).

Everything on which he lies seems too hard ; com-
plains constantly of it and keeps moving from place
to place in search of a soft spot (the parts rested upon
feel sore and bruised. Bap., Pyr.; must move continu-
ally to obtain relief from the pain, Rhus).

Heat of upper part of body ; coldness of lower.

The face or head and face alone is hot, the body
cool.

Unconsciousness; when spoken to answers cor-
rectly, but unconsciousness and deliritmi at once re-
turn (falls asleep in the midst of a sentence. Bap.).

45


ARNICA MONTAN A— ( Continued ) .

Says there is nothing the matter with him.

Meningitis after mechanical or traumatic injuries ;
from falls, concussion of brain, etc. When suspect-
ing exudation of blood, to facilitate absorption.

Hydrocephalus ; deathly coldness in forearm ofchiU
dren (in diarrhoea, Brom.).

Apoplexy ; loss of consciousness, involuntary evacua-
tion from bowels and bladder ; in acute attack, con-
trols hemorrhage and aids absorption ; should be re-
peated and allowed to act for days or weeks unless
symptoms call for another remedy.

Conjunctival or retinal hemorrhage, with extravasa-
tion, from injuries or cough (I^ed., Nux).

Gout and rheumatism, with great fear of being
touched or struck by persons coming near him.

Cannot walk erect on account of a bruised sort of
feeling in pelvic region.

Tendency to small, painful boils, one after another,
extremely sore (small boils in crops, Sulph.).

Paralysis (left-sided) ; pulse full, strong ; stertor,
sighing, muttering.

Belching; eructations; foul, putrid, like rotten

eggs.

Dysentery; with ischuria, fruitless urging; long
interval between the stools.

Constipation ; rectum loaded^ feces will not come
away ; ribbon-like stools from enlarged prostate or
retroverted uterus.

Soreness of parts after labor ; prevents post-partum
hemorrhage and puerperal complications.

Retention or incontinence of urine after labor (Op.),

46


ARNICA mOlHT AlH A— (Continued ).

Relation. — Complementary : to, Aeon., Hyper.
Rhus.

Similar : to, /or soreness as if bruised^ Bap., China,
Phyt, Pyr., Rhus, Ruta, Staph.

Arnica follows well : after. Aeon., Apis, Ham., Ipec.,
Ver.; is followed by, Sul. ac.

In ailments from spirituous liquors or from charcoal
vapors. Am. is often indicated (Am. c, Bov.).

In spinal concussion, compare Hyper.

Aggravation. — At rest; when lying down,; from
wine. SA'VrNin^i -

Amelioration. — From contact ; motion (Rhus,
Ruta.).

ARSENICUM AI^BVM.

White Oxide of Arsenic, As.fi ^.

Great prostration, with rapid sinking of the vital
forces ; fainting.
The disposition is :

a. Depressing, melancholic, despairing, indifferent.

b. Anxious, fearful, restless, full of anguish.

c. Irritable, sensitive, peevish, easily vexed.
The greater the suffering the greater the anguish,

restlessness and fear of death.

Mentally restXesSy but physically too weak to move;
cannot rest in any place ; changing places continually ;
wants to be moved from one bed to another, and lies
now here, now there.

Anxious fear of death ; thinks it useless to take
medicine, is incurable^ is surely going to die ; dread
of deaths when alone, or, going to bed.

47


ARSENICIJ]»I ALUVM—iConftnued).

Attacks of anxiety at night, driving out of bed, <
after midnight.

Burning pains ; the affected parts burn like fire,
as if hot coals were applied to parts (Anthr.), > by
heat, hot drinks, hot applications.

Burning thirst without special desire to drink ; the
stomach does not seem to tolerate, because it cannot
assimilate, cold water ; lies like a stone in the stomach.
It is wanted, but he cannot or dare not drink it.

Cannot bear the smell or sight of foodiColoh,^ Sep.).

Great thirst for cold water ; drinks ofte7i^ but little
at a time ; eats seldom, but much.

Gastric derangements : after cold fruits ; ice cream ;
ice water ; sour beer ; bad sausage ; alcoholic drinks ;
strong cheese.

Teething children are pale, weak, fretful, and want
to be carried rapidly.

Diarrhoea, after eating or drinking ; stool scanty,
dark-colored, offensive, and, whether small or large,
followed by great prostration.

Hemorrhoids : with stitching pain when walking or
sitting, not at stool ; preventing sitting or sleep ;
burning pain > by heat ; fissures make voiding urine
difficult.

Breathing : asthmatic ; must sit or bend forward ;
springs out of bed at night, especially after twelve
o'clock ; unable to lie down for fear of suffocation;
attacks like croup instead of the usual urticaria.

Rapid emaciation : with cold sweat and great de-
bility (Tub., Ver.) ; of affected parts ; marasmus.

Anasarca, skin pale, waxy, earth-colored (Acet. ac).

48


ARSENICUM AI^WUn—(Con^mued ) .

Excessive exhaustion from least exertion.

Exhaustion is not felt by the patient while lying
still ; when he moves he is surprised to find himself
so weak.

Symptoms generally worse from 1-2 p.m., 12-2 a.m.

Skin : dry and scaly ; cold, blue and wrinkled ; with
cold, clammy perspiration; like parchment; white
and pasty ; black vesicles and burning pain.

Bad effects from decayed food or animal matter,
whether by inoculation, olfaction or ingestion.

Complaints return annually (Carbo v., Lach., Sulph.,
Thuja).

Relation. — Complementary : Allium s., Carbo v.,
Phog., Pyr.

Ars. should be thought of in ailments from : ckew-
ing tobacco ; alcoholism; seabathing; sausage poison-
ing ; dissecting wounds and anthrax poison ; stings of
venomous insects.

Aggravation. — After midnight (i to 2 a. m. or p.
i/L,)\/rom cold; cold drinks or food; when lying on
affected side or with thie head low.

Amelioration. — From heat in general (reverse of
Sec.) except headache, which is temporarily > by
cold bathing (Spig.) ; burning pain > by heat.

ARinU TRIPHYlrlrUM.

Indian Turnip. ( | w^K *^'\ ^^^-hd^ \ Aracecs.

Coryza; acrid^ fluent ; nostrils raw.

Nose feels stopped up in spite of the watery dis-
charge (compare, Am. c, Samb., Sinap.) ; sneezing
< at night.

D 49


ARUM TRIPHYlrlrlJM— ( Continued ) .

Acrid, ichorous discharge, excoriating inside of
nose, alae, and upper lip (Ars., Cepa).

Constant picking at the nose until it bleeds ; bor-
ing with the finger into the side of the nose.

Picks lips until they bleed ; comers of mouth sore,
cracked, bleeding (with malignant tendency, Cund.) ;
bites nails until fingers bleed.

Patients pick and bore into the raw bleeding sur-
faces though very painful ; scream with pain but keep
up the boring (in diphtheria, scarlatina, typhoid;.

Children refuse food and drink on account of sore-
ness of mouth and throat (Mer.) ; are sleepless.

Saliva profuse, acrid, corrodes the mucous mem-
brane ; tongue and buccal cavity raw and bleeding.

Aphonia: complete,after exposure to northwest winds
(Aeon., Hep.); from singing (Arg. n., Caust., Phos., Sel.).

Clergyman's sore throat ; voice hoarse, uncertain,
uncontrollable, changing continually ; worse from
talking, speaking or singing ; orators, singers, actors.

Desquamation in large flakes, a second or third
time, in scarlatina.

Typhoid scarlatina, with apathy, scanty or sup-
pressed urine ; threatened uremia.

The sore mouth and nose are guiding in malignant
scarlatina and diphtheria.

Relations. — Useful : after. Hep. and Nit. ac. in dry,
hoarse, croupy cough ; after Caust. and Hep. in morn-
ing hoarseness and deafness, and in scarlatina.

Should not be given low or repeated often, as bad
effects often follow. — Dr. L.

The higher potencies most prompt and effective.

50


ASARVM BITROP^VM.

European Snake Root AristolochiacecB.

Nervous, anxious people ; excitable or melancholy.

Imagines he is hovering in the air like a spirit
(Lac c.) ; lightness of all the limbs.

Cold " shivers " from any emotion.

Oversensitiveness of nerves^ scratching of linen or
silk, crackling of paper is unbearable (Per., Tar.).

Sensation as if ears were plugged up with some for-
eign substance.

When reading, sensation in eyes as if they would
be pressed asunder or outward ; relieved by bathing
them in cold water.

Cold air or cold water very pleasant to the eyes ;
sunshine, light and wind are intolerable.

Nausea : in attacks or constant (Ipec.) ; < after eat-
ing, tongue clean (Sulph.) ; of pregnancy.

Unconquerable longing for alcohol ; a popular rem-
edy in Russia for drunkards.

"Horrible sensation'' of pressing, digging in the
stomach when waking in the morning (after a de-
bauch).

Great faintness and constant yawning.

Relation. — Similar: to, Caust. in modalities; to
Aloe, Arg. n., Mer., Pod., Puis., Sulph. ac. in stringy,
shreddy stools.

Aggravation. — In cold and dry, or clear, fine
weather (Canst).

Amelioration. — Washing face or bathing affected
parts with cold water ; in damp, wet weather (Caust.).

Followed : by, Bis., Canst., Puis., Sulph. ac.


51


ASTBRIUS RUBBNS.

Star-fish, Radiata.

For the sycotic diathesis ; flabby, lymphathic cx)n-
stitution ; irritable temperament.

Easily excited by any emotion, especially by con-
tradiction (Anac, Con.).

Heat of the head, as if surrounded by hot air.

Sanguineous congestion to the brain.

Apoplexy ; face red, pulse hard, full, frequent.

Cancer of mammae ; acute^ lancinating pain ; draw-
ing pain in breast ; swollen, distended, as before the
menses ; breast feels drawn in.

A livid red spot appeared, broke and discharged ;
gradually invaded entire breast, very fetid odor; edges
pale, elevated, mamillary, hard, everted ; bottom cov-
ered with reddish granulations.

Gait unsteady; muscles refuse to obey the will
(Alum., Gels.).

Epilepsy ; twitching over the whole body four or
five days before the attack.

Constipation : obstinate ; ineffectual desire ; stool
of hard, round balls, like olives.

Diarrhoea : watery, brown, gushing out in a violent
jet (Crot. t, Grat, Gum., Jatr., Thuja).

Sexual desire increased in women (lyil.).

Relations. — Similar : to, Murex, Sepia.

Compare : Carbo an.. Con., Sil. in mammary can-
cer ; Bell., Cal., Sulph. in epilepsy.


52


AITRVIII MBTALLrlCUlI.

Gold. The Element,

Sanguine, ruddy people, with black hair and eyes ;
lively, restless, anxious about the future.

Old people ; weak vision ; corpulent ; tired of life.

For constitutions broken down by bad effects of
mercury and syphilis.

Pining boys ; low-spirited, lifeless, weak memories,
lacking in " boyish go ;" testes undeveloped, mere
pendent shreds.

Constantly dwelling on suicide (Naja — ^but is afraid
to die, Nux).

Profound melancholy: feels hateful and quarrel-
some ; desire to commit suicide ; life is a constant
burden ; after abuse of mercury ; with nearly all com-
plaints.

Uneasy, hurried, great desire for mental and physi-
cal activity ; cannot do things fast enough (Arg. n.).

Ailments from grief, disappointed love, with long-
ing for death and suicide.

Ailments from fright, anger, contradiction, mortifi-
cation, vexation, dread, or reserved displeasure (Staph.).

Oversensitive ; least contradiction excites wrath
(Con.); to pain ; to smell, taste, hearing, touch (Anac).

Headache of people with dark olive-brown com-
plexion ; sad, gloomy, taciturn ; disposed to constipa-
tion ; from least mental exertion.

Falling of the hair, especially in syphilitic and mer-
curial affections.

Hemiopia ; sees only the lower half (sees only the
left half, lyith. c, Lye).

Syphilitic and mercurial affections of the bones.

53


AURUM M AT ALLICUM— ( Continued ) .

Caries : of the nasal, palatine and mastoid bones ;
ozena, otorrhoea, excessively fetid discharge ; pains
worse at night; drive to despair; of mercurial or
syphilitic origin (Asaf.).

Prolapsed and indurated uterus ; from over-reacaing
or straining (Pod., Rhus); from hypertrophy (Con.).

Menstrual and uterine affections, with great melan-
choly ; < at menstrual period.

Foul breath ; in girls at puberty.

Sensation as if the heart stood still ; as though it
ceased to beat and then suddenly gave one hard
thump (Sep.).

Violent palpitation: anxiety, with congestion of
blood to head and chest after exertion ; pulse small,
feeble, rapid, irregular ; visible beating of carotid and
temporal arteries (Bell., Glon.).

Fatty degeneration of heart (Phos.).

Relations. — Aurum follows, and is followed well by
Syphilinum.

Similar : to Asaf., Cal., Plat, Sep., Tar., Then, in
bone, uterine diseases.

Aggravation. — In cold air ; when getting cold ;
while lying down ; mental exertion ; many complaints
come on only in winter.

Amelioration. — In warm air, when growing warm,
in the morning, and during summer.


54


BAPTISIA TINCTORIA.

Wild Indigo, LeguminoscB.

For the lymphatic temperament.

Great prostration, with disposition to decomposition
of fluids (Pyr.); ulceration of mucous membranes.

All exhalations and discharges fetid^ especially in
typhoid or other acute diseases ; breath, stool, urine,
perspiration, ulcers (Psor., Pyr.).

Aversion to mental exertion ; indisposed, or want
of power, to think.

Perfect indifference, don't care to do anything ; in-
ability to fix the mind on work.

Stupor ; falls asleep while being spoken to or in
the midst of his answer (when spoken to, answers
correctly, but delirium returns at once. Am.).

Tongue: at first coated white with red papillae;
dry and yellow-brown in centre ; later dry, cracked,
ulcerated.

Face flushed, dusky, dark-red, with a stupid, be-
sotted, drunken expression (Gels.).

Can swallow liquids only (Bar. c); least solid food
gags (can swallow liquids only, but has aversion to
them, Sil.).

Painless sore throat; tonsils, soft palate and parotids
dark red, swollen ; putrid, offensive discharge (Diph.).

Dysentery of old people ; diarrhoea of children, es-
pecially when very offensive (Carbo v., Pod., Psor.).

Cannot go to sleep because she cannot get herself
together ; head or body feels scattered about the bed ;
tosses about to get the pieces together ; thought she
was three persons, could not keep them covered (Petr.).

In whatever position the patient lies, the parts

55


BAPTISIA TTKCntaWLlA—dConitnued), .

rested upon feel sore and bruised (Pyr. — compare,
Am., Pyr.).

Decubitus in typhoid (Am., Mur. ac, Pyr.).

Relation. — Similar: to. Am., Ars., Bry., Gels., in
the early stages of fever with malaise, nervousness,
flushed face, drowsiness, and muscular soreness.

When Ars. has been improperly given or too often
repeated in typhoid or typhus.

After Baptisia : Crot., Ham., Nit. ac. and Tereb.
act well in hemorrhage of typhoid and typhus.

BARYTA CARBONICA.

Barium Carbonate. BaCoj.

Especially adapted to complaints of first and second
childhood ; the psoric or tubercular.

Memory deficient : forgetful, inattentive ; child can-
not be taught for it cannot remember; threatened
idiocy.

Scrofulous, dwarfish children who do not grow (chil-
dren who grow too rapidly, Cal.); scrofulous ophthal-
mia, cornea opaque ; abdomen swollen ; frequent at-
tacks of colic ; face bloated ; general emaciation.

Children both physically and mentally weak.

Dwarfish, hysterical women and old maids with
scanty menses ; deficient heat, always cold and chilly.

Old, cachectic people ; scrofulous, especially when
fat; or those who suffer from gouty complaints
(Fluor, ac).

Diseases of old men ; hypertrophy or induration of
prostate and testes ; mental and physical weakness.

Apoplectic tendency in old people ; complaints of

ram ^o \o^ ^^


BARYTA CARBO^lCA—iConfmued).

old drunkards ; headache of aged people, who are
childish.

Persons subject to quinsy, take cold easily ; or with
every, even the least, cold have an attack of tonsillitis,
prone to suppuration (Hep., Psor.).

Inability to swallow anything but liquids (Bap., Sil.).

Hemorrhoids protude every time he urinates (Mur.
ac).

Chronic cough in psoric children ; enlarged tonsils
or elongated uvula ; < after slight cold (Alum.).

Swellings and indurations^ or incipient suppuration
of glands, especially cervical and inguinal.

Offensive foot sweat ; toes and soles get sore ; of the
heels ; throat affections after checked foot sweat (com-
pare. Graph., Psor., Sanic, Sil.).

Great sensitiveness to cold (Cal., Kali c, Psor.).

Relation. — Frequently useful before or after Psor.,
Sulph. and Tub.

After Bar. c, Psor. will often eradicate the consti-
tutional tendency to quinsy.

Similar: to. Alum., Cal. iod., Dul., Fluor, ac, lod., Sil.

Incompatible : after, Calc. in scrofulous affections.

Aggravation. — When thinking of his disease (Oxal.
ac.) ; lying on painful side ; after meals ; washing
affected part

BBLrLrADOXXA.

Deadly Nightshade, SolanacecB.

Adapted to bilious, lymphatic, plethoric constitu-
tions ; persons who are lively and entertaining when
well, but violent and often delirious when sick.

57


BBLL ADOXXA— ( Conthiued ) .

Women and children with light hair and bine eyes,
fine complexion, delicate skin ; sensitive, nervous,
threatened with convulsions ; tuberculous patients.

Great liability to take cold ; sensitive to drafts of
air, especially when uncovering the head; from hav-
ing the hair cut ; tonsils become inflamed after riding
in a cold wind (Aeon., Hep., Rhus — takes cold from
exposure of feet, Con., Cup., Sil.)«

Quick sensation .and motion ; eyes snap and move
quickly; pains come suddenly, last indefinitely and
cease suddenly (Mag. p.).

Pains usually in short attacks ; cause redness of
face and eyes ; fulness of head and throbbing of
carotids.

Imagines he sees ghosts, hideous faces, and various
insects (Stram.) ; black animals, dogs, wolves.

Fear of imaginary things, wants to run away from
them ; hallucinations.

Violent delirium ; disposition to bite, spit, strike
and tear things; breaks into fits of laughter and
gnashes the teeth ; wants to bite and strike the at-
tendants (Stram.) ; tries to escape (Hell.).

Head hot and painful ; face flushed ; eyes wild, star-
ing, pupils dilated ; pulse full and bounding, globular,
like buckshot striking the finger ; mucous membrane
of mouth dry ; stool tardy and urine suppressed ;
sleepy, but cannot sleep (Cham., Op.).

Convulsions during teething, with fever (without
fever, Mag. p.) ; come on suddenly, head hot, feet cold.

Rush of blood to head and face (Amyl., Glon.,
Mel.).

58


nEMA^AUO^^ A— (Continued),

Headache, congestive^ with red face, throbbing of
brain and carotids (Mel.) ; < from slight noise, jar,
motion, light, lying down, least exertion ; > pressure,
tight bandaging, wrapping up, during menses.

Boring the head into the pillow (Apis, Hell., Pod.).

Vertigo when stooping, or when rising after stoop-
ing (Bry.) ; on every change of position.

Abdomen tender, distended < by least jar, even of
the bed ; obliged to walk with great care for fear of a
jar.

Pain in r. ileo-coecal region, < by slightest touch,
even the bed-cover.

The transverse colon protrudes like a pad.

Skin : of a uniform^ smooth^ shining^ scarlet red-
ness ; dry, hot, burning ; imparts a burning sensation
to examining hand ; the true Sydenham scarlet fever,
where eruption is perfectly smooth and truly scarlet.

Pressing downwards as if the contents of abdomen
would issue from the vulva ; > standing and sitting
erect ; worse mornings (lyil., Mur., Sep.).

Relations. — Complementary : Calcarea.

Belladonna is the acute of Calcarea, which is often
required to complete a cure.

Similar : to. Aeon., Bry., Cic, Gels., Glon., Hyos.,
Mel., Op., Stram.

Aggravation. — From touch, motion, noise, draught
of air, looking at bright, shining objects (Lys., Stram.);
after 3 p. m.; night, after midnight; while drinking;
uncovering the head ; summer sun ; lying down.

Amelioration. — Rest ; standing or sitting erect ;
warm room.

59


BBN^OIC ACID.

C,H,,CO,OH.

A gouty, rheumatic diathesis engrafted on a gonor-
rhoea! or syphilitic patient.

Gouty concretions; arthritis vaga; affects all the
joints, especially the knee, cracking on motion ; no-
dosities (Berb., lyith. c, Lye.).

Urine dark brown, and the urinous odor highly in-
tensified.

Enuresis noctuma of delicate children; dribbling
urine of old men with enlarged prostate ; strong char-
acteristic odor ; excess of uric acid.

Catarrh of bladder after suppressed gonorrhoea.

Diarrhoea of children; white, very offensive^ ex-
hausting liquid stools, running " right through the
diaper " (Pod.) ; urine offensive and of a deep red color.

Cough ; with expectoration of green mucus (Natr. s.);
extreme weariness, lassitude.

Pains, tearing, stitching, in large joints of big toe ;
redness and swelling of joints ; gout < at night.

Relation. — Similar : to. Cop., Nitr., Per., Thuja, es-
pecially in enuresis after Nitr. has failed ; Berb.,
Lith. c. in arthritic complaints.

Useful after Colch. fails in gout; after abuse of
Cop. in suppression of gonorrhoea.

Incompatible : wine, which aggravates urinary,
gouty and rheumatic affections.

BERBERIS TULrGARIS.

Barberry. BerberidacecB^

The renal or vesical symptoms predominate.

Pain in small of back ; very sensitive to touch in

60


BBRBBRIS TIJLGARIS— ( Continued ) .

renal region; < when sitting and lying, from jar,
from fatigue.

Burning and soreness in region of kidneys.

Numbness, stiffness, lameness with painful pressure
in renal and lumbar regions.

Pale, earthy complexion, with sunken cheeks and
hollow, blue encircled eyes.

Rheumatic and gouty complaints, with diseases of
the urinary organs.

Colic from gall-stones.

Bilious colic, followed by jaundice ; clay-colored
stools ; fistula in ano, with bilious symptoms and itch-
ing of the parts ; short cough and chest complaints,
especially after operations for fistulse (Cal. p., Sil.)r

Stitching^ cutting pain from left kidney following
course of ureter into bladder and urethra (Tab. — r.
kidney, Lye.).

Renal colic, < left side (Tab. — either side, with
urging and strangury, Canth.).

Bubbling sensation in kidneys (Med.).

Urine : greenish, blood-red, with thick, slimy mucus ;
transparent, reddish or jelly-like sediment.

Movement brings on or increases urinary com-
plaints.

Relation. — Similar : to, Canth., Lye, Sars., Tab., in
renal colic.

Acts well : after, Am., Bry., Kali bi., Rhus, Sulph.,
in rheumatic affections.

Aggravation. — Motion, walking or carriage-riding ;
any sudden jarring movement.


61


BISMUTH.

Hydrated Oxide of Bismuth, BI^O^OHy

Solitude is unbearable: desires company^ child
holds on to its mother's hand for company (Kali c,

lyil., Lye).

Anguish; he sits^ then walks^ then lies^ never long

in one place.

Headache returning every winter ; alternating with,
or attended by gastralgia.

Face, deathly pale, blue rings around the eyes.
Toothache > by holding cold water in, mouth (Bry.,
Coff., Puis.).

Vomiting: of water as soon as it reaches the
stomach, food retained longer (vomits food and water
Ars.); of enormous quantities^ at intervals of several
days when food has filled the stomach ; of all fluids as
soon as taken ; and purging, offensive stools (watery
stools, Ver.); with convulsive gagging and inexpress-
ible pain^ after laparotomy (Nux, Staph.).

Stomach : pressure as from a load in one spot ;
alternating with burning ; pain crampy, spasmodic ;
with irritation, cardialgia and pyrosis.

Cholera morbus and summer complaint, when
vomiting predominates; stools foul, papescent, watery,
offensive, very prostrating (Ars., Ver.).

BORAX.

Biborate of Soda,

Dread of downward motion in nearly all complaints.

Great anxiety from downward motion ; when laying
the child down on a couch or in the crib, cries and
clings to the nurse ; when rocking, dancing, swinging ;

62


BORAX— ( Cojitinued ) .

going down stairs or rapidly down hill ; horseback-
riding (compare, Sanic).

Children awake suddenly, screaming and grasping
sides of cradle, without apparent cause (Apis, Cina,
Stram.).

Excessively nervous^ easily frightened by the slight-
est noise or an unusual sharp sound, a cough, sneeze,
a cry, lighting a match, etc. (Asar., Calad.).

Hair becomes frowsy and tangled ; splits, sticks to-
gether at the tips ; if these bunches are cut off, they
form again, cannot be combed smooth (Fluor, ac,
Lye, Psor., Tub.).

Eyelashes : loaded with dry, gummy exudation ;
agglutinated in morning; turn inward and inflame
the eye, especially at outer canthus ; tendency to
" wild hairs."

Nostrils crusty, inflamed ; tip of nose shining red ;
red noses of young women.

Stoppage of r. nostril, or first r. then left, with con-
stant blowing of nose (Am. c, Lac c, Mag. m.).

Aphthce: in the mouth, on the tongue, inside of the
cheek ; easily bleeding when eating or touched ; pre-
vents child from nursing; with hot mouth, dryness
and thirst (Ars.); cracked and bleeding tongue (Arum);
salivation, especially during dentition.

Aphthous sore mouth ; is worse from touch ; eating
salty or sour food ; of old people, often from plate of
teeth (Alumen).

Child has frequent urination and screams before
urine passes (Lye, Sanic, Sars.).

Leucorrhcea : profuse, albuminous, starchy, with

03


BORAX— ( Continued ) .

sensation as if warm water were flowing down ; for
two weeks between the catamenia (compare, Bov.,
Con.).

Skin ; unhealthy, slight injuries suppurate (Calend.,
Hep., Mer., Sil.)-

Relation. — Borax follows: Calc, Psor., Sanic,
Sulph.

Is followed : by Ars., Bry., Lye, Phos., Sil.

Incompatible : should not be used before or after,
Acetic acid, vinegar, wine.

Aggravation. — Downward motion; from sudden,
slight noises ; smoking, which may bring on diar-
rhoea ; damp, cold weather ; before urinating.

Amelioration. — Pressure ; holding painful side with
hand.

BOTISTA.

PuffbalL Fungi.

Persons who suffer from tettery eruptions, dry or
moist.

Adapted to old maids ; with palpitation.

Stammering children (Stram.).

Discharge from nose and all mucous membranes
very tough^ stringy^ tenacious (Kali bi.).

Unusually deep impression on finger, from using
blunt instruments, scissors, knife, etc.

Intolerance of tight clothing around the waist (Calc,
Lach., Sulph.).

Sweat in axilla, smells like onions.

Hemorrhage: after extraction of teeth (Ham.);
from wounds ; epistaxis.

64


BOVIST A— ( ConHnued ) .

Great weakness of joints and weariness of hands
and feet

Awkwardness, inclined to drop things from hands
(Apis); objects fall from poweriess hands.

Menses: flow only at nighty not in the daytime
(Mag. c. — only during day, cease lying, Cac, Canst.,
LiL); diarrhoea before and during menses (Amm. c);
occasional show every few days between periods (Bor.);
every two weeks, dark and clotted ; with painful bear-
ing down (Sep.).

Intolerable itching at tip of coccyx ; must scratch
till parts become raw and sore.

Relations. — Compare : Am. c, Bell., Calc, Mag. s.,
Sep. in menstrual irregularities.

Bovista antidotes, effects of local applications of
tar ; suffocation from gas.

When Rhus seems indicated, but fails to cure, in
chronic urticaria.

BRomuni.

Bromine. The Element.

It acts best, but not exclusively, on persons with
light-blue eyes^ flaxen hair^ light eyebrows^ fiiir^ deli-
cate skin; blonde^ red-cheeked^ scrofulous girls.

Sensation of cobweb on the face (Bar., Bor., Graph.).

Fan-like motion of alae nasi (Ant. t., Lye).

Sailors suffer with asthma " on shore."

Stony, hard, scrofulous or tuberculous swelling of
glands, especially on lower jaw and throat (thyroid,
submaxillary, parotid, testes).

Diphtheria : where the membrane forms in pharynx j

E 65


BROmiJlI— ( Co7ithm€d ).

beginning in bronchi, trachea or larynx, and extend-
ing upwards ; chest pains running upwards.

Membranous and diphtheritic croup ; much rattling
of mucus during cough^ but no choking (as in Hepar) ;
sounds loose, but no expectoration (Ant. t.).

Croupy symptoms with hoarseness during whoop-
ing-cough ; gasping for breath.

Dyspnoea : cannot inspire deep enough ; as if breath-
ing through a sponge or the air passages were full of
smoke or vapor of sulphur ; rattling, sawing ; voice
inaudible ; danger of suffocation from mucus in larynx
(in bronchi. Ant. t.).

Hypertrophy of heart from gymnastics in growing
boys (from calisthenics in young girls, Caust.).

Physometra ; loud emission of flatus from the vagina
(Lye.) ; membranous dysmenorrhoea (Lac c).

Cold sensation in larynx on inspiration (Rhus,
Sulph.) ; > after shaving (< after shaving, Carbo an.).

Relations. — Compare : in croup and croupy affec-
tions, Chlor., Hep., lod., Spong.

Hard goitre cured after lod. failed.

Brom. has cured in croup after failure of lod., Phos.,
Hep., Spong.; especially in relapses after lod.

" The chief distinction between Brom. and lod. is,
the former cures the blue-eyed and the latter the
black-eyed patients. '^ — Hering.

BRYONIA ALrBA.

White Bryony^ Wild Hop, Cucurbitacece,

Is best adapted to persons of a gouty or rheumatic,
diathesis ; prone to so-called bilious attacks,

66


BRYONIA AlrB A— ( Continued ) .

Bryonia patients are irritable, inclined to be vehe-
ment and angry ; dark or black hair, dark complex-
ions, firm muscular fibre ; dry, nervous, slender peo-
ple (Nux).

Pains: stitching, tearing, worse at night; < by
motion, inspiration, coughing ; > by absolute rest,
and lying on painful side (Ptel., Puis. — stitching pain,
but < and > are opposite, Kali c).

Excessive dryness of mucous membranes of entire
body ; lips and tongue dry, parched, cracked ; stool,
dry as if burnt ; cough, dry^ hard^ racking^ with
scanty expectoration ; urine, dark and scanty ; great
thirst.

Vicarious menstruation ; nosebleed when menses
should appear (Phos.) ; blood spitting, or hemoptysis.

Ailments from chagrin, mortification, anger (Col.,
Staph.) ; violence, with chilliness and coldness ; after
anger chilly^ but with head hot and face red (Aur.).

Complaints : when warm weather sets in, after cold
days ; from cold drinks or ices in hot weather ; after
taking cold or getting hot in sum^ner ; from chilling
when overheated, kicks the covers off ; from exposure
to draft, cold wind (Aeon., Hep.) ; suppressed dis-
charges, of menses, milk or eruption of acute exan-
thema.

One of the chief characteristics of Bryonia is, ag-
gravation from any motion, and corresponding relief
from absolute rest,either mental or physical.

Desires things immediately which are not to be had,
or which when oflFered are refused.

Children dislike to be carried, or to be raised.

67


BRYONIA AlrBA— ( Continued ) .

Delirium ; talks constantly about his business ; de-
sire to get out of bed and go home (Act, Hyos.).

Constant motion of left arm and leg (Apoc., Hell.).

Patient cannot sit up from nausea and faintness.

Great thirst for large quantities^ at long intervals.

Headache : when stooping, as if brain would burst
through forehead ; from ironing (Sep.) ; on coughing ;
in morning after rising or when first opening the eyes ;
commencing in the morning, gradually increasing
until evening ; from constipation (Aloe, Colin., Op.).

Pressure as from stone at pit of the stomach, re-
lieved by eructation (Nux, Pul.).

Constipation : inactive^ no inclination ; stool large^
hard^ dark^ dry^ as if burnt ; on going to sea (Plat).

Diarrhoea : during a spell of hot weather ; bilious,
acrid with soreness of anus ; like dirty water ; of un-
digested food ; from cold drinks when overheated,
from fruit or sour krout ; < in mornings on moving^
even a hand or foot.

Mammae heavy, of a stony hardness ; pale but hard ;
hot and painful ; must support the breasts (Phyt.).

Cough : dry, spasmodic, with gagging and vomiting
(Kali c.) ; with stitches in side of chest ; with head-
ache, as if head would fly to pieces ; < after eating,
drinking, entering a warm room^ a deep inspiration.

Relations. — Complementary : Alumina, Rhus.

Similar : to Bell., Hep. for hasty speech and hasty
drinking.

To Ran. in pleuritic or rheumatic pains of chest.

To Ptelia, aching, heaviness in hepatic region ; >


68


BRYONIA AURJL—iCofitinued),

lying on r. side, greatly < lying on left side ; turning
to the left causes a dragging sensation.

After Bryonia : Alum., Kali c, Nux, Phos., Rhus,
Sulph.

Aggravation. — Motion, exertion, touch ; cannot sit
up, gets faint or sick or both ; warmth, warm food ;
suppressed discharges of any kind.

Amelioration. — Lying, especially on painful side
(Ptel., Puis.) ; pressure ; rest ; cold, eating cold things.

CACTUS GRANDIFLrORIJS.

Night-blooming Cereus, Cactacece,

Sanguineous congestions in persons of plethoric
habit (Aeon.) ; often resulting in hemorrhage ; sanguin-
eous apoplexy.

Fear of death ; believes the disease incurable (Ars.).

Hemorrhage; from nose, lungs, stomach, rectum,
bladder (Crot., Mill., Phos.).

Headache, pressing like a heavy weight on vertex
(> by pressure, Meny.); climacteric (Glon., Lach.).

Headache and neuralgia ; congestive, periodic, right-
sided ; severe, throbbing, pulsating pain.

Whole body feels as if caged, each imre being
tivisted tighter and tighter.

Constriction : of throat, chest, heart, bladder, rec-
tum, uterus, vagina ; often caused or brought on by
the slightest contact

Oppression of chest, as from a great weight ; as if
an iron band prevented normal motion.

69


CACTUS GWLA^imW^J^OWLVS— (Continued).

Sensation of a cord tightly tied around lower part
of chest, marking attachment of diaphragm.

Heart feels as if clasped and unclasped rapidly by
an iron hand ; as if bound, " had no room to beat."

Pains everywhere; darting, springing like chain
lightning, and ending with a sharp, vise-like grip, only
to be again renewed.

Menstrual flow ceases when lying down (Bov.,
Caust).

Palpitation : day and night ; worse when walking
and lying on left side (Lach.) ; at approach of menses.

Fever paroxysm returns at ii A. M. and ii p. m.

Relations. — Compare: Aeon., Dig., Gels., Kal.,
Lach., Tab.

CALrADHJM.

American Arum, AracecB.

Very sensitive to noise; slightest noise startles
from sleep (Asar., Nux, Taren.).

Eructations, frequent, of very little wind, as if
stomach were full of dry food.

Impotence : with mental depression ; relaxed penis^
with sexual desire and excitement (Lye, Sel.).

No erection, even after caresses ; no emission, no
orgasm during an embrace (Cal., Sel.).

Pruritus vaginae ; induces onanism (Orig., Zinc.) ;
during pregnancy ; with mucous discharge.

Falls asleep during evening fever and wakes when it
stops.

Sweet sweat attracts the flies,

70


CAI,A»IU1I— ( Continued) .

Mosquito and insect bites bum and itch intensely.
Aversion to motion ; dreads to move (Bry.).
Destroys craving for tobacco.

CALrCARBA ARSENICA.

Arseniate of Lime.

Great mental depression.

The slightest emotion causes palpitation of heart

(Lith. c).

Rush of blood to head and left chest (Amyl., Glon.).

Epilepsies, from valvular diseases of the heart.

Complaints of drunkards, after abstaining ; craving
for alcohol (Asar., Sul. ac).

Complaints of fleshy women when approaching the
menopause.

Relations. — Compare : Con., Glon., Lith. c. Puis.,
Nux,

Follows well : after Conium, in lymphatic, psoric
or tuberculous persons.

CALCARBA OSTRBARXJM.

Middle layer of Oyster Shell, Calcium Carbonate,

Leucophlegmatic, blond hair, light complexion,
blue eyes, fair skin ; tendency to obesity in youth.

Psoric constitutions ; pale, weak, timid, easily tired
when walking.

Disposed to grow fat, corpulent, unwieldy.

Children with red face, flabby muscles, who sweat
easily and take cold readily in consequence.

71


[ — ( Continued ) .

Large heads and abdomens : f ontanelles and sutures
open ; bones sofu develop ver\- slowly.

Curvature of bones, especially spine and long^ bones ;
extremities crooked, deformed ; bones irregularly de-
veloped.

Head sweats profusely while sleeping, wetting
pillow far around (SiL, Sanic. •.

Profuse perspiration, mostly on back of head and
neck, or on chest and upper part of body (Sil.)-

Diffictdt and delaved dentition with characteristic
head sweats, and open fontanelles.

During either sickness or con\'alescence,^r^^3r/ long-
ing for eggs ; craves indigestible things (Altim.) ;
aversion to meat.

Acidit>' of digestive tract : sour eructation, sour
vomiting, sour stool ; sour odor of the whole body
(Hep., Rheum).

Girls who 31^ fleshy, plethoric, and grow too rapidly.

Menstruation too early, too pro/use^ too long lasting ;
with subsequent amenorrhoea and chlorosis, with
menses scant>' or suppressed.

Women : menses too early, too profuse ; feet habitu-
ally cold and damp, as if they had on cold damp stock-
ings ; continually cold in bed.

The least mental excitement causes profuse return of
menstrual flow (Sulph., Tub.).

Fears she will lose her reason or that people will
observe her mental confusion (Act).

Lung diseases of tall, slender, rapidly growing
youth ; upper third of right lung (Ars. — ^upper left,


72


Myr., Sulph.) ; oftener the guide to the constitutional
remedy than Phosphorus (compare, Tub.).

Diseases : arising from defective assimilation ; imper-
fect ossification; diifficulty in learning to walk or
stand ; children have no disposition to walk and will
not try ; suppressed sweat.

Rawness of soles of feet from perspiration (Graph.,
Sanic.) ; blisters and offensive foot sweat.

Longing for fresh air (when in a room) which in-
spires, benefits, strengthens (Puis., Sulph.).

Coldness: general; of single parts {^2X\h\,)\ head,
stomach, abdomen, feet and legs; aversion to cold
open air, " goes right through her '' ; sensitive to cold,
damp air; great liability to take cold (opposite of
Sulph.).

Sweat : of single parts ; head, scalp wet, cold ; nape
of neck ; chest ; axillae ; sexual organs ; hands ; knees ;
feet (Sep.).

Pit of stomach swollen like an inverted saucer^ and
painful to pressure.

Uraemic or other diseases brought on by standing
on cold, damp pavements, or working while standing
in cold water ; modelers or workers in cold clay.

Feels better in every way when constipated.

Stool has to be removed mechanically (Aloe, Sanic,
Sel., Sep., Sil.).

Painless hoarseness, < in the morning.

Desire to be magnetized (Phos.).

Relations. — Complementary: to Bell., which is the
acute of Calc.

Calcarea acts best : before, Lye, Nux, Phos., Sil.

73


C ALrCARB A OSTREARIJM— ( Continued ) .

It follows; Nit. ac, Puis., Sulph. (especially if
pupils are dilated) ; is followed by, Kali bi. in nasal
catarrh.

According to Hahnemann, Calc. must 7iot be used
before Nit. ac. and Sulph.; may produce unnecessary
complications.

In children it may be often repeated.

In aged people should not be repeated ; especially
if the first dose benefited, it will usually do harm.

Aggravation. — Cold air ; wet weather ; cold water ;
from washing (Ant. c.) ; morning ; during full moon.

Amelioration. — Dry weather ; lying on painful side
(Bry., Puis.).

CALrCARBA PHOSPHORICA.

Phosphate of Lime, Calcium Phosphate,

For persons anaemic and dark complexion, dark
hair and eyes ; thin spare subjects, instead of fat.

During first and second dentition of scrofulous
children ; diarrhoea and great flatulence.

Children : emaciated ^ unable to stand ; slow in learn-
ing to walk (Cal., Sil.) ; sunken, flabby abdomen.

Oozing of bloody fluid from navel of infants (of
urine, Hyos.).

Rachitis : cranial bones thin and brittle ; f onta-
nelles and sutures remain open so long, or close and re-
open ; delayed or complicated teething.

Spine weak, disposed to curvatures, especially to
the left ; unable to support body ; neck weak, unable
to support head (Abrot).

74


CALCARBA PHOSPHORICA— (C(7;z/mf^^).

Girls at puberty, tall, growing rapidly ; tendency of
bones to soften or spine to curve (Ther.).

At puberty; acne in anaemic girls with vertex
headache and flatulent dyspepsia, > by eating.

Ailments from grief, disappointed love (Aur., Ign.,
Phos. ac).

Feels complaints more when thinking about them
(Helon., Ox. ac).

Involuntary sighing (Ign.).

Non-union of bones ; promotes callous (Symp.).

Rheumatism of cold weather ; getting well in spring
and returning in autumn.

Headache of school-girls (Nat m., Psor.) ; diarrhoea.

At every attempt to eat^ colic pains in abdomen.

Fistula in ano, alternating with chest symptoms
(Berb.) ; lack of animal heat ; cold sweat and general
coldness of body.

Relations. — Complementary : Ruta.

Similar : to Carbo an., Cal. fluor., Calc, Fluor, ac,
Kali phos.; to Psor., in debility remaining after acute
diseases ; to Sil., but sweat of head is wanting.

Acts best: before lod., Psor., Sanic, Sulph.; after
Ars., lod.. Tub.

Aggravation. — Exposure to damp, cold, changeable
weather ; east winds ; melting snow ; mental exertion.

Amelioration. — In summer ; warm, dry atmosphere.


75


Marigold, ComposUcB,

Traumatic affections : to secure union by first in-
tention and prevent suppuration.

In all cases of loss of soft parts when union cannot
be affected by means of adhesive plaster.

External wounds with or without loss of substance ;
torn and jagged looking wounds ; post-surgical opera-
tions ; to promote healthy granulation and prevent ex-
cessive suppuration and disfiguring scars.

Traumatic and idiopathic neuroma (Cepa) ; neuritis
from lacerated wounds (Hyper.) ; exhausted from loss
of blood and excessive pain.

Rupture of musgles or tendons ; lacerations during
labor ; wounds penetrating articulations with loss of
synovial fluid.

Wounds : with sudden pain during febrile heat ;
constitutional tendency to erysipelas (Psor.) ; old,
neglected, offensive ; threatening gangrene (Sal. ac).

Ulcers: irritable, inflamed, sloughing, varicose;
painful as if beaten (Am.) ; excessive secretion of pus.

Calendula is almost specific for clean, surgical cuts
or lacerated wounds, to prevent excessive suppuration.

Relations. — Complementary : Hep., Sal. ac.

Similar : to. Am. in traumatism wilhout laceration
of soft tissue.

Similar : to. Hyper, in injuries to parts rich in sen-
tient nerves where pain is excessive and out of all pro-
portion to injury.

*Calendae the months; i. <?., flowers aU the year through, open-
ing from 9 A. M. — 3 P. M.

76


CALBNDULA ( Continued ) .

Symp., Calc. p., for non-union of bones.

Rhus, Ruta, strains or injuries of single muscles.

Sal. ac, prevents excessive suppuration ; gangrene.

Sulph. ac. in painful, gangrenous wounds ; said to
destroy septic germs.

Acts as well in potency as in tincture, applied locally,
and may be administered internally at the same time.


CAMPHORA.

Camphor, Lauracece,

Pain better while thinking of it (Hell. — worse,
Cal. p., Helon., Ox. ac.)

Persons physically and mentally weak and irritable.

Exceedingly sensitive to cold air (Hep., Kali m.,
Psor.).

Bad eflFects of shock from injury ; surface of body
cold^ face pale^ blue^ lips livid; profound prostration.

Surface cold to the touch yet cannot bear to be cov-
ered ; throws ofiF all coverings (Med., Sec).

Entire body painfully sensitive to slightest touch.

Tongue cold^ flabby, trembling.

Sudden attacks of vomiting and diarrhoea ; nose
cold and pointed; anxious and restless ; skin and breath
cold (Ver., Jatr.).

In first stages of cholera morbus and Asiatic cholera ;
severe, long-lasting chill (Ver.).

Great coldness of the surface with sudden and com-
plete prostration of the vital force ; often a remedy in
congestive chill ; pernicious intermittent (Ver.) ; pulse
weak, extremely small, scarcely perceptible.

77


CAMPHOR A— ( Continued ) .

Measles and scarlatina when eruption does not ap-
pear ; with pale or cold^ blue^ hippocratic face ; child
will not be covered (Sec).

All sequelae of measles.

Relations. — Camphor antidotes nearly every vege-
table medicine ; also tobacco, fruits containing prussic
acid, poisonous mushrooms ; should not be allowed in
the sick room in its crude form.

Compare : Carbo veg.. Opium, Verat, Sec.

Amelioration. — When thinking of existing com-
plaint ; warm air ; drinking cold water.

Note for Thought. — All our progress as a school depends on
the right view of the symptoms obtained by proving with Cam-
phor or Opium. — Hering.


CANNABIS IXmCA.

Indian Hemp. Cannabinece,

Very forgetful : forgets his last words and ideas ;
begins a sentence^ forgets what he intends to speak ; in-
ability to recall any thought or event on account of
other thoughts crowding his brain (Anac, Lac c).

Constantly theorizing.

Laughs immoderately at every trifling word spoken
to him.

Full of fun and mischief, then perhaps moaning and
crying.

Great apprehension of approaching death.

Delirium tremens ; excessive loquacity ; exaggera-
tion of time and distance.

78


CANNABIS INOICA {Continued).

Time seems too long (Arg. n.) ; a few seconds seem

ages.

Distance seems immense ; a few rods seem miles.

Sensation as if the calvarium was opening and shutt-
ing (Act).

Sensation of swelling in the perineum or near the
anus, as if sitting on a ball (with great quantities of
ropy mucus in urine, Cinch.).

Relation. — Compare : Bell., Hyos., Stram.

CANNABIS SATIVA.

Hemp. Canfiabineoe.

Sensation as of drops of water failing on or from
single parts ; on the head, from the anus, stomach,
heart.

Obstinate constipation, causing retention of the
urine ; constriction of anus.

Contraction of fingers after a sprain.

Dislocation of patella on going up stairs.

Dyspnoea or asthma, where the patient can only
breathe by standing up.

Choking in swallowing, things go down " the ^h-vmy
way " (Anac).

Acute, inflammator>' stage erf gonorrhota ^^"jaA
stage, burning after urination^ discharge thi^k yj-
low, pus-like. Cub.).

Urethra very sensitive to touch or pre??vjr" ';<?,%,'.'/
walk with legs close together, it hurt^ t}je ^r'^;;?i?

Pain extending from orifice <A ur^^./.r^b V^// ^,;?k,
burning-biting, posteriori] y more yxv^K'.r// wi; .< .,,.
nating.

79


CANNABIS SATIVA {Continued).

Tearing pain along urethra in a zigzag direction.
Relations. — Similar: to, Cantli., Caps., Gels., Petros.
in eariy stages of specific urethritis.


CANTHARIDES.

Spanish Flies. Cantharidece.

Oversensitiveness of all parts.

Pain ; raw, sore, burning in every part of body^ in-
ternally and externally ; with extreme weakne^.

Hemorrhages from nose, mouth, intestines, genital
and urinary organs.

Disgust for everything ; drink, food, tobacco.

Drinking even small quantities of water increases
pain in the bladder.

Constant urging to urinate, passing but a few drops
at a time, which is mixed with blood (sudden desire
to urinate and intense itching in urethra, Petros.).

Intolerable urging^ before, during, and after urina-
tion ; violent pains in bladder.

Burning^ cutting pains in itrethra during micturi-
tion ; violent tenesmus and strangury.

Stool : passage of white or pale, red, tough mucus,
like scrapings from the intestines^ with streaks of
blood (Carb. ac, Colch.).

Bloody, nocturnal emissions (Led., Mer., Petr.).

Sexual desire : increased, both sexes ; preventing
sleep ; violent priapism, with excessive pain (Pic. ac).

Tenacious mucus in the air passages (Bov., Kali bi.);
compare Cantharis if vesical symptoms correspond.

80


CANTHARIDBS {Continued).

Skin : vesicular erysipelas ; vesicles all over body
which are sore and suppurating.

Erythema from exposure to sun's rays (sunburn).

T/ie burning pain and intolerable urging to urinate^
is the red strand of Cantharis in all inflammatory
affections.

Relations. — Similar : to, Apis, Ars., Equis., Mer.

Bums before blisters form and when they have
formed. If the skin be unbroken, apply an alcoholic
solution of any potency and cover with cotton ; this
will promptly relieve pain and often prevent vesica-
tion. If skin be broken, use in boiled or distilled
water, and in each case give potency internally.


CAPSICUM.

Cayenne Pepper, Solanacece,

Persons with light hair, blue eyes, nervous but
stout and plethoric habit.

Phlegmatic diathesis; lack of reactive force, es-
pecially with fat people, easily exhausted ; indolent^
dreads any kind of exercise ; persons inclined to be
jovial, yet get angry at trifles.

Children; dread open air ; always chilly ; refractory,
clumsy y faty dirty ^ and disinclined to work or think.

Desires to be let alone ; wants to lie down and sleep.

Homesickness (of the indolent, melancholic), with
red cheeks and sleeplessness.

Constriction : in fauces ; throat ; nares ; chest ;
bladder ; urethra ; rectum.

F 81


CAPSICUM— ( ConHnued ) .

Burning and smarting sensation, as from cayenne
pepper, in throat and other parts, not > by heat.

Tonsillitis : with burning, smarting pain ; intense
soreness; constriction of throat with burning ; inflamed,
dark red, swollen.

The burning spasmodic constriction and other pains,
worse between acts of deglutition (Ign.).

Painful swelling behind the ear (mastoid), extremely
sore and sensitive to touch.

Every stool is followed by thirst and every drink
by shuddering.

Every chill is attended with thirst and every drink
with shuddering.

As the coldness of the body increases, so also does
the ill-humor.

Nervous, spasmodic cough ; in sudden paroxysms ;
as if head would fly to pieces.

With every explosive cough (and at no other time)
there escapes a volume of pungent, fetid air.

Pain in distant parts on coughing (bladder, knees,
. legs, ears).

Relations. — Compare : Apis, Bell., Bry., . Calad.,
Puis.

Cina follows well in intermittent fever.

The constricting, burning, smarting pains differen-
tiate from Apis and Belladonna.


82


CARBO ANIMALrlS.

Animal Char coal X^^- ^^M> OXkm-^.

Headache : as if a tornado in head ; as if head had
been blown to pieces ; has to sit up at night and hold
it together.

Diseases of elderly persons with marked venous
plethora, blue cheeks, blue lips, and great debility.

Circulation feeble, stagnated, and vital heat sinks
to a minimum ; cyanosis (Ant. t., Carbo v.).

Glands : indurated, swollen, painful ; in neck, ax-
illae, groin, mammae ; pains lancinating, cutting, burn-
ing (Con.).

Benign suppurations change into ichorous or malig-
nant conditions.

Easily strained from liftings even small weights ;
straining and overlifting easily produce great debility ;
ankles turn when walking.

Joints weak ; easily sprained by slight exertion
(Led.).

Aversion to open, dry, cold air.

After appearance of menses so weak she can hardly
speak (Alum., Coc); menses flow only in morning.

Hearing confused ; cannot tell from what direction
a sound comes.

A stitching pain remains in chest after recovery
from pleurisy (Ran. b.).

Menstruation, leucorrhoea, diarrhoea are all exhaust-
ing (Ars. — ^are all offensive, Psor.).

Relations. — Complementary : Calc. phos.

Similar : to, Bad., Brom., Carbo v., Phos., Sep.,
Sulph.

Carbo animalis is often useful after bad effects

83


CARBO AlHlMAJLlS—CConiinued),

from spoiled fish and decayed vegetables (Carbo v.,
Cepa).

Aggravation. — A//fer shaving (> after, Brom.);
slightest touch ; after midnight.


CARBO YBGBTABILrlS.

■

Vegetable Charcoal, C^/vt- K-

For the bad eflFects of exhausting diseases, whether
in young or old (Cinch., Phos., Psor.) ; cachectic per-
sons whose vitality has become weakened or exhausted.

Persons who have never fully recovered from the
exhausting eflFects of some previous illness ; asthma
dates from measles or pertussis of childhood ; indiges-
tion from a drunken debauch ; bad eflFects of a long
ago injury ; has never recovered from eflFects of
typhoid (Psor.).

Ailments: from quinine, especially suppressed in-
termittents ; abuse of mercury, salt, salt meats ; spoiled
fish, meats or fats ; from getting overheated (Ant. c).

Bad eflFects from loss of vital fluids (Caust.) ; hemor-
rhage from any broken down condition of mucous
membranes (Cinch., Phos.).

Weakness of memory and slowness of thought.

Epistaxis in daily attacks, for weeks, worse from
exertion ; face pale before as well as after a hemor-
rhage.

Hemorrhage from any mucous outlet ; in systems
broken down, debilitated ; blood oozes from weakened
tissues ; vital force exhausted.

84


CARBO VE€SETABmS— ( Continued ).

Hippocratic face ; very pale, gra^-ish-yellow, green-
ish, cold with cold sweat ; after hemorrhage.

Looseness of teeth, easily-bleeding gums.

Patients crave things that make them sick; old
topers crave whiskey or brandy ; want clothing loose
around abdomen.

Weak digestion : simplest food disagrees ; excessive
accumulation of gas in stomach and intestines < lying
down ; after eating or drinking, sensation as if stom-
ach would burst ; effects of a debauch, late suppers,
rich food.

Eructations give temporary relief.

Diseases of the venous system predominate (Sulph.);
symptoms of imperfect oxidation (Arg. nit).

Deficient capillary circulation causes blueness of
skin and coldness of extremities ; vital powers nearly
exhausted ; desire to be constantly fanned.

Hoarseness : < evenings ; damp evening air ; warm,
wet weather ; fails when exerted (< morning, Caust.).

Awakens often from cold limbs and suffers from
cold knees at night (Apis).

Frequent) involuntary, cadaverous-smelling stools,
followed by burning ; soft stool voided with difficulty
(Alum.).

In the last stages of disease, with copious cold
sweaty cold brecUh^ cold tongue^ voice lost^ this remedy
may save a life.

Relations. — Complementary : Kali carb.

Want of susceptibility to well-selected remedies
(Opium, Val.).

Compare : Cinch., Plumb, in neglected pneumonia,

85


C ARBO YBGBTABILrlS— ( Continued ) .

especially in " old topers " ; Ant t in threatened pa-
ralysis from inability to expectorate loosened mucus.

Opium : with lack of reaction after well-selected
remedies fail to permanently improve (Val.).

Phos. in easily bleeding ulcers.

Puis., bad effects from fat food and pastry.

Sulph., acrid-smelling menstrual flow and erysipelas
of mammae.

Aggravation. — From butter, pork, fat food ; abuse
of quinine, bark and mercury ; from singing or read-
ing aloud ; in warm, damp weather.

Amelioration. — From eructation ; being fanned.


CARBOLrIC ACID.

Glacial Carbolic Acid.

The potencies are made with alcohol (an exception
to the rule of preparing acids).

Pains are terrible ; come suddenly^ last a short time,
disappear suddenly (Bell., Mag. p.).

Profound prostration, collapse ; surface pale and
bathed in cold sweat (Camph., Carbo v., Ver.).

Physical exertion, even much walking, brings on
abscess in some part, but generally in the r. ear. — R.
T. Cooper.

Dull, heavy, frontal headache, as if ^ rubber band
were stretched tightly over the forehead^ from temple
to temple (G^ls., Plat., Sulph.).

When bums tend to ulceration and ichorous dis-
charge.

86


CARBOLIC ACIM^^( Continued ).

Putrid discharges from mouth, nose, throat, nostrils,
rectum and vagina (Anthr., Psor., Pyr.).

Malignant scarlatina and variola (Am. c.).

Lacerated wounds with blunt instruments; bones
bare, crushed ; much sloughing of soft parts (Calend.).

Longing for whiskey and tobacco (Asar., Carbo v.).

Vomiting : of drunkards, in pr^^nancy, sea-sickness,
cancer ; of dark, olive-green fluid (Pyr.).

Dysentery : fluid mucus, like scrapings of mucous
membranes and great tenesmus (Canth.) ; diarrhoea,
stools thin, involuntary, black, of an intolerable odor.

Constipation^ with horribly ofiensive breath (Op.,
Psor.).

Leucorrhoea : acrid, copious, fetid, green.

Relations. — Compare : Ars., Kreos. in bums ; ulcers
with unhealthy, oflFensive discharges, Gels., Mer.,
Sulph.

Carbolic acid is antidoted by dilute cider vin^;ar,
either externally, or internally when acid has been swal-
lowed accidentally or taken for suicidal purposes.


CAIJLOPHYLLrUM.

Blue Cohosh. Berberidacece,

Especially suited to women ; ailments during preg-
nancy, parturition, lactation.

Rheumatism of women, especially of small joints
(Act. s.); erratic pains changing place every few
minutes (Puis.) ; painful stiffness of affected joints.

Pains are intermittent, paroxysmal, spasmodic.

87


CAUlrOPHYLLrUM— ( ConHnued ) .

Chorea, hysteria or epilepsy at puberty, during
establishment of menstrual function (Actea).

Leucorrhoea: acrid, exhausting; upper eyelids
heavy, has to raise them with the fingers (Gels.) ; with
" moth spots " on forehead (Sep.) ; in little girls
(Calc.) ; preventing pregnancy.

Habitual abortion from uterine debility (Alet — from
anaemia with profound melancholy, Helon.).

Spasmodic rigid os^ delays labor ; needle-like prick-
ing pains in cervix.

Labor pains short, irregular, spasmodic ; tormenting,
useless pains in beginning of labor (Act) ; no progress
made. Will correct deranged vitality and produce
efiicient pains, if symptoms agree.

Hemorrhage, after hasty labor ; want of tonicity ;
passive, after abortion (Sec, Thlaspi).

After pains : after long exhausting labor ; spasmodic,
across lower abdomen ; extend into groins (in the
shins, Carbo v., Coc).

Lochia protracted ; great atony ; passive, oozing for
days from relaxed vessels (Sec).

Relations. — Similar: to. Act, Bell., Lil., Puis.,
Sec, Thlas., Vib.

Similar : to, labor pains of Puis., but mental condi-
tion opposite.

Similar : to, Sep., " moth patches " and reflex symp-
toms from uterine irregularities.


88


CAUSTICIJM.

Hahnemann's, Tinctura acris sine Kali.

Adapted to persons with dark hair and rigid fibre ;
weakly, psoric, with excessively yellow^ salUmf com-
plexion ; subject to affections of respiratory and uri-
nary tracts.

Children with dark hair and eyes, delicate, sensi-
tive ; skin prone to intertrigo during dentition (Lye),
or convulsions with eruption of teeth (Stan.).

Disturbed functional activity of brain and spinal
cord, from exhausting disease or severe mental shock,
resulting in paralysis.

Rawness or soreness: of scalp, throat, respiratory
tract, rectum, anus, urethra, vagina, uterus (as if
bruised. Am.; as if sprained, Rhus).

Melancholy mood : sad, hopeless ; from care, grief,
sorrow; with weeping, "the least thing makes the
child cry."

Intense sympathy for sufferings of others.

Ailments : from long-lasting grief and sorrow (Phos.
ac.) ; from loss of sleep, night watching (Coc, Ign.) ;
from sudden emotions, fear, fright, joy (Coff., Gels.) ;
from anger or vexation ; from suppressed eruptions.

Children slow in learning to walk (Cai. p.).

Unsteady walking and easy falling of little children.

Constipation : frequent, ineffectual desire (Nux) ;
stool passes better when person is standing ; impeded
by hemorrhoids ; tough and shining, like grease ; in
children with nocturnal enuresis.

Urine involuntary : when coughing, sneezing, blow-
ing the nose (Puis., Squil., Ver.).


89


CAVSTlCVM—iConitnued).

Cough : with rawness and soreness in chest ; with
inability to expectorate, sputa must be swallowed
(Am., Kali c.) ; relieved by swallow of cold water ;
on expiration (Aeon.) ; with pain in hips ; remaining
after pertussis ; with expectoration chiefly at night

Hoarseness, with rawness and aphonia < in the
morning (< in the evening, Carbo y., Phos.).

At night, unable to get an easy position or lie still
a moment (Eup., Rhus).

Must move constantly, but motion does not relieve.

Cannot cover too warmly, but warmth does not >.

Faint-like sinking of strength ; weakness and
trembling.

Cicatrices, especially bums, scalds, freshen up, be-
come sore again ; old injuries re-open ; patients say
'' they never have been well since that bum."

Menses : too early ; too feeble ; only during the day ;
cease on lying down.

Paralysis: of single parts; vocal organs, tongue,
eyelids, face, extremities, bladder ; generally of right
side; from exposure to cold wind or draft; after
typhoid, typhus or diphtheria ; gradually appearing.

Drooping of upper eyelids ; cannot keep them open
(Caul., Gels., Graph. — of both lids, Sep.).

Rheumatic affections, with contraction of the flex-
ors and stiffness of the joints ; tension and shortening
of muscles (Am. m., Cimex, Guaiac, Nat).

Warts : large, jagged, often pedunculated ; bleed-
ing easily, exuding moisture ; small, all over the body ;
on eyelids, face ; on the nose.


90


C AIJSTICIJM— ( Continued ) .

Patient improves for a time then comes to a " stand-
still" (Psor., Sulph.).

Relations. — Complementary : Carbo veg., Petros.

Incompatible : Phos. Must not be used before or
after Phos., always disagrees ; the Acids ; CoflFea.

Compare : Am., must swallow mucus ; Gels., Graph.,
Sep. in ptosis ; hoarseness, Rumex and Carbo v. when
< changes to evening ; Sulph. in chronic aphonia.

Causticum antidotes paralysis from lead poisoning
(bad effects of holding type in mouth of compositors),
and abuse of Merc, or Sulph. in scabies.

It affects the right side most prominently.

Aggravation. — In clear, fine weather; coming from
the air into a warm room (Bry.); cold air, especially
draft of cold air ; on becoming cold ; from getting
wet or bathing.

Amelioration. — In damp, wet, weather ; warm air.


CHAMOMILrLrA.

Matricaria Chamomilla, Compositce,

Persons, especially children, with light-brown hair,
nervous, excitable temperament ; oversensitive from
use or abuse of coffee or narcotics.

Children, new-born and during period of dentition.

Peevish^ irritable, oversensitive to pain, driven to de-
spair (Coff.); snappish, cannot return a civil answer.

Child exceedingly irritable^ fretful; quiet only
when carried; impatient, wants this or that and be-
comes angry when refused, or, when offered, petulently

91


CWKAJUKOMUJLA—iConimued).

rejects it (Bry., Cina, Kreos.); "too ugly to live;"
cross, spiteful.

Piteous moaning of child because he cannot have
what he wants ; whining restlessness.

Patient cannot endure any one near him ; is cross,
cannot bear to be spoken to (Sil.) ; averse to talking,
answers peevishly.

Complaints from anger, especially chill and fever.

Pain : seems une ndurable, drives to despair ; < by
heat ; < evening before midnight ; with heat, thirst
and fainting ; with numbness of affected part; eructa-
tions < ,

One cheek red and hot the other pale and cold.

Oversensitive to open air ; great aversion to wind,
especially about ears.

Toothache if anything warm is taken into the
mouth (Bis., Bry., Coff.); on entering a warm room ;
in bed ; from coffee ; during menses or pregnancy.

Labor pains : spasmodic, distressing, wants to get
away from them ; tearing down the legs ; press upward.

Diarrhoea: from cold, anger or chagrin; during
dentition; after tobacco ; in child-bed; from down-
ward motion (Bor., Sanic).

Stool green, watery, corroding, like chopped eggs
and spinach ; hot,, very offensive, like rotten eggs.

Nipples inflamed, tender to touch (Helon., Phyt);
infantas breasts tender to touch.

Milk runs out in nursing women (runs out after
weaning. Con.).

Convulsions of children from nursing, after a fit of
anger in mother (Nux — after fright in mother, Op.).

92


CHAMOMUJLJl— ( CanHnued).

Violent rheumatic pains drive him out of bed at
night, compel him to walk about (Rhus).

Sleepy, but cannot sleep (BelL, Canst, Op.).

Burning of soles at night, puts feet out of bed
(Puis., Med., Sulph.).

Relations. — Complementar\' : BdL in diseases of
children, cranial nerves ; Cham., abdominal nerves.

In cases spoiled by the use of opium or morphine
in complaints of children.

Compare : Bell., Bor., Bry., CoflF., Puis., Sulph.

Mental calmness contra-indicates Chamomilla.

Aggravation. — By heat; anger; evening, before
midnight ; open air ; in the wind ; eructations.

Amelioration. — From being carried ; fasting ; warm,
wet weather.


CHBLrlDONIVM MA JUS.

Celandine. Papaveracece,

Persons of light complexion, blondes ; thin, spare,
irritable; subject to hepatic, gastric and abdominal
complaints (Pod.) ; every age, sex and temperament.

Constant pain under the lower and inner angle of
right scapula (Kali c., Mer. — under the left, Chenop.
g., Sang.).

Ailments: brought on or renewed by change of
weather (Mer.) ; all lessen after dinner.

Tongue coated thickly yellow, with red edge, sb
ing imprint of teeth (Pod. — ^large, flabby, with im
of teeth, Mer.).

93


CHBLrlOONIlTM MA JUS— ( Continued ) .

Desire for very hot drinks^ unless almost boiling
stomach will not retain it (Ars., Case).

Periodic orbital neuralgia (right side), with excess-
ive lachrymation : tears fairly gush out {Rhus).

Constipation ; stool, hard^ round balls like sheep's
dung (Op., Plumb.) ; alternate constipation and diar-
rhoea.

Diarrhoea : at night ; slimy, light-gray ; bright-yel-
lowish ; brown or white, watery, pasty ; involuntary.

Face, forehead, nose, cheeks remarkably yellow.

Yelloxv-gray color of the skin ; wilted skin ; of the
palms of flands (Sep.).

Hepatic diseases ; jaundice, pain in right shoulder.

Pneumonia of r. lung, liver complications (Mer.).

Spasmodic cough ; small lumps of mucus fly from
mouth when coughing (Bad., Kali c).

Affects right side most ; r. eye, r. lung, r. hypo-
chondrium and abdomen, r. hip and leg ; right foot
cold as ice, left natural (Lye).

Old, putrid, spreading ulcers, with a history of liver
disease, or of a tubercular diathesis.

Gall-stones, with pain under the right shoulder-
blade (terrible attacks of gall-stone colic. Card. m.).

Relations. — Chel. antidotes the abuse of Bry., espe-
cially in hepatic complaints.

Compare : Aeon., Bry., Lye, Mer., Nux, Sang.,
Sep., Sulph.

Ars., Lye. and Sulph. follow well, and will often be
required to complete the cure.


94


CICVTA YIROSA.

Water Hemlock, Umbelliferce.

Women subject to epileptic and choreic convul-
sions ; spasms of teething children, or from worms.

Convulsions : violent, with frightful distortions of
limbs and whole body ; with loss of consciousness ;
opisthotonos ; renewed from slightest touch, noise or
jar.

Puerpeial convulsions : frequent suspension of
breathing for a few moments, as if dead ; upper part
of the body most affected ; continue after delivery.

Epilepsy : with swelling of the stomach, as from
violent spasms of the diaphragm ; screaming ; red or
bluish face ; lockjaw, loss of consciousness and dis-
tortion of the limbs ; frequent during the night ; re-
curring, first at short, then at long intervals.

When reading, the letters seem to turn, go up or
down or disappear (Coc).

During dentition, grinding of the teeth or gums ;
compression of the jaws as in lockjaw.

Abnormal appetite y^r chalk and indigestible things ;
for coal or charcoal ; child eats them with apparent
relish (Alum., Psor.).

SuflFer violent shocks through head, stomach, arms,
legs, which cause jerkings of the parts ; head hot.

Injurious chronic effects from concussions of the
brain and spine, especially spasms ; trismus and
tetanus from getting splinters into flesh (Hyper.).

Pustules which run together, forming thick, yellow
scabs, on head and face. Sycosis menti.

Eczema : no itching ; exudation forms into a hard
lemon-colored crust.

95


CICUTA YlWLOSA—iConfmued),

Brain disease from suppressed eruptions.
Relations. — Compare : Hydr. ac, Hyper., Nux,
Strych.
Aggravation. — From tobacco smoke (Ign.) ; touch.


CINA.

IVonn Seed. Cotnpositce,

Adapted to children with dark hair, very cross, irri-
table, ill-humored, want to be carried, but carrying
gives no relief ; does not want to be touched ; cannot
bear you to come near it ; averse to caresses ; desires
many things, but rejects everything offered (compare.
Ant. t., Bry., Cham., Staph.).

Constantly digging and boring at the nose ; picks
the nose all the time ; itching of nose ; rubs nose on
pillow, or on shoulder of nurse (Mar. v.).

Children, suffering from worms ; pitiful weeping
when awake, starts and screams during sleep ; grind-
ing of teeth (Cic, Spig.) ; ascarides (Mar. v.).

Face is pale ; sickly white and bluish appearance
around mouth ; sickly, with dark rings under the
eyes ; one cheek red the other pale (Cham.).

Canine hunger : hungry soon after a full meal ;
craving for sweets and different things; refuses
mother's milk.

Urine ; turbid when passed, turns milky and semi-
solid after standing ; white and turbid ; involuntary.

Cough : dry with sneezing ; spasmodic, gagging in
the morning ; periodic, returning spring and fall.

96


CINA — ( Continued ) .

Child is afraid to speak or move for fear of bringing
on a paroxysm of coughing (Bry.).

Relations. — Compare : Ant. c, Ant. t, Bry., Cham.,
Kreos., Sil., Staph., in irritability of children.

In pertussis, after Drosera has relieved the severe
symptoms.

Has cured aphonia from exposure when Aeon.,
Phos. and Spong. had failed.

Is frequently to be thought of, in children, as an
epidemic remedy, when adults require other drugs.

Santonine sometimes cures in worm affections when
Cina seems indicated, but fails (Mar. v., Spig.).

China, G\\/^cl^ov\^ CCUvA .)

CINCHONA. ^\J>^PV4JC V^^^V^V
Peruvian Bark, (V^ V (rt \ /I ^ Rubiacece.


For stout, swarthy persons ; for systems, once ro-
bust, which have become debilitated, " broken down "
from exhausting discharges (Carbo v.).

Apathetic^ indifferent^ taciturn (Phos. ac.) ; despond-
ent, gloomy, has no desire to live, but lacks courage
to commit suicide.

Ailments: from loss of vital fluids, especially
hemorrhages, excessive lactation^ diarrhvea^ suppura-
//k?w(Chin. s.) ; of malarial origin, with marked periodi-
city ; return every other day.

After climacteric, with prof use .hemorrhages ; acute
diseases often result in dropsy.

Pains : drawing or tearing ; in every joint, all the
bones. Periosteum, as if strained, sore all over ;

G 97


CINCHON A— ( Continued ) .

obliged to move limbs frequently, as motion gives
relief; renewed by contact, and then gradually in-
crease to a great height.

Headache : as if the skull would burst ; intense
throbbing of head and carotids, face flushed ; from
occiput over whole head ; < sitting or lying, must
stand or walk ; after hemorrlmge or sexual excesses.

Face pale, hippocratic ; eyes sunken and surrounded
by blue margins ; pale, sickly expression as after ex-
cesses ; toothache while nursing the child.

Excessive flatulence of stomach and bowels ; fermen-
tation, borborygmus, belching gives no relief (belch-
ing relieves, Carbo v.) ; < after eating fruit (Puis.).

Colic : at a certain hour each day ; periodical, from
gall-stones (Card, m.) ; worse at night and after eat-
ing ; better bending double (Col.).

Great debility, trembling, aversion to exercise ;
sensitive to touch, to pain^ to drafts of air ; entire
nervous system extremely sensitive.

Unrefreshing sleep or constant sopor ; < after 3
A. M.; wakens early.

Hemorrhages : of mouth, nose, bowels or uterus ;
long continued ; longing for sour things.

Disposition to hemorrhage from every orifice of the
body, with ringing in ears, fainting, loss of sight, gen-
eral coldness, sometimes convulsions (Fer., Phos.).

Pains are < by slightest touch, but > by hard
pressure (Caps., Plumb.).

One hand icy cold, the other warm (Dig., Ipec,
Puis.).

Intermittent fever : paroxysm anticipates from two

98


CINCHON A— ( Continued ) .

to three hours each attack (Chin, s.) ; returns every
seven or fourteen days; never at night; sweats pro-
fusely all over on being covered, or during sleep
(Con.).

Relations. — Complementary : Ferrum.

Follows well : Cal. p. in hydrocephaloid.

Compare : Chin. s. in intermittent fever, anticipat-
ing type.

Incompatible: after, Dig., Sel.

Is useful in bad effects from excessive tea drinking
or abuse of chamomile tea, when hemorrhage results.

Aggravation. — From slightest touch ; draft of air ;
every other day ; mental emotions ; loss of vital fluids.

Amelioration. — Hard pressure ; bending double.


COCA,

Erythroxylon Coca, * Linece,

For persons who are wearing out under the physi-
cal and mental strain of a busy life ; who suflter from
exhausted nerves and brains (compare, Fluor, ac).

Melancholy, from nervous exhaustion; bashful,
timid, ill at ease in society.

Sad, irritable ; delights in solitude and obscurity.

lyonging for alcoholic liquors and tobacco ; for the
accustomed stimulants.

Want of breath : in those engaged in athletic sports ;
shortness of breathy in old people ; in those who use
tobacco and whiskey to excess.

Hemoptysis, with oppression of chest and dyspnoea.

99


COCA— ( ConHnued ) .

Sleepy, but can find no rest anywhere.

Violent palpitation : from incarcerated flatus (Arg.
n., Niix) ; from overexertion ; from heart strain (Am.,
Bor., Caust).

Bad effects : from mountain climbing or ballooning
(Ars.) ; of stimulants, alcohol, tobacco.

Prevents caries of teeth.

Relations. — Compare : patient desires light and
company, Stram. ; desires darkness and solitude. Coca.

Was first used as a tobacco antidote.

COCCUlrUS.

Cocctiliis Indtcus, Menispertnacece,

For women and children with light hair and eyes,
who suffer severely during menstruation and preg-
nancy ; unmarried and childless women.

Adapted to book-worms; sensitive, romantic girls
with irregular menstruation ; rakes, onanists and per-
sons debilitated by sexual excesses.

Nausea or vomiting from riding in carriage, boat or
railroad car (Am., Nux m.), or even looking at a boat
in motion ; sea-sickness ; car-sickness.

Headache : in nape and occiput ; extending to the
spine ; as if tightly bound by a cord ; with nausea, as
if at sea ; at each menstrual peripd ; < lying on back
of head.

Sick-headache from carriage, boat or train riding.

Diseases peculiar to drunkards.

lyoss of appetite, with metallic taste (Mer.).

Time parses too quickly (too slowly, Arg. n., Can. I.).

100


COCCVI^VS—{Con/tnued ).

Great lassitude of the whole body ; it requires exer-
tion to stand firmly ; feels too weak to talk loudly.

Bad effects : from loss of sleep, mental excitement
and night watching ; feel weak if they lose but one
hour's sleep ; convulsions after loss of sleep ; of anger
and grief.

Trembling of arms and legs ; from excitement, ex-
ertion or pain.

Vertigo, as if intoxicated upon rising in bed ; or by
motion of the carriage (Bry.).

Sensation : in abdomen of cutting and rubbing on
every movemept, as of sharp stones ; of hoUowness in
head and other parts (Ign.).

During the effort to menstruate she is so weak she
is scarcely able to stand from weakness of lower limbs
(Alum., Carbo an.) ; after each period hemorrhoids.

Leucorrhoea in place of menses, or between periods
(lod., Xan.) ; like the washings of meat ; like serum,
ichorous, bloody ; dujing pregnancy.

Cannot bear contradiction ; easily offended ; every
trifle makes him angry ; speaks hastily (Anac).

When fever assumes a slow, " sneaking," nervous
form, with vertigo ; with disposition to anger.

Relations. — Compare: Ign. and Nux, in chorea
and paralytic symptoms ; Ant. t., in sweat of affected
parts.

Has cured umbilical hernia with obstinate consti-
pation, after Nux failed.

Aggravation. — Eating, drinking, sleeping, smok-
ing, talking ; carriage riding, motion or swing of
sh^p ; rising up during pregnancy.

101


COFFBA CRUDA.

Coffee. RubiacecB.

Tall, lean, stooping persons, dark complexion,
sanguine choleric temperament.

Oversensitiveness ; all the senses more acute, sight,
hearing, smell, taste, touch (Bell., Cham., Opium).

Unusual activity of mind and body.

Full of ideas ; quick to act, no sleep on this account

Ailments: the bad effects of sudden emotions or
pleasurable surprises (Caust— exciting or bad news.
Gels.) ; weeping from delight ; alternate laughing and
weeping.

Pains are felt intensely ; seem almosfinsupportable,
driving patient to despair (Aeon., Cham.); tossing
about in anguish.

Sleepless, wide-awake condition ; impossible to close
the eyes ; physical excitement through mental exalta-
tion» (Compare, Senecio, for sleeplessness from pro-
lapsus, uterine irritation, during climacteric).

Headache : from over-mental* exertion, thinking,
talking ; one-sided, as from a nail driven into the brain
(Ign., Nux) ; as if brain were torn or dashed to pieces ;
worse in open air.

Hasty eating and drinking (Bell., Hep.).

Toothache ; intermittent, jerking, relieved by hold-
ing ice-water in the mouth, but returns when water
becomes warm (Bis., Bry., Puis., Caust., Sep., Nat s.).

Relations. — Compare : Aeon., Cham., Ign., Sulph.

Incompatible : Canth., Caust, Coc, Ign.

Aggravation. — Sudden mental emotion ; excessive
joy ; cold, open air ; narcotic medicines.


102


COLrCmCUM AUTU]»INAL,E.

Meadow Saffron. LiliacecE,

Adapted to the rheumatic, gouty diathesis; per-
sons of robust vigorous constitution ; diseases of old
people.

External impressions, light, noise, strong odors, con-
tact, bad manners, make him almost beside himself
(Nux); his sufferings seem intolerable.

Ailments : from grief or misdeeds of others (Staph.).

Pains are drawing, tearing, pressing ; light or super-
ficial during warm weather; affect the bones and
deeper tissues, when air is cold ; pains go from left to
right (Lach.).

Smell painfully acute ; nausea and f aintness from
the odor of cooking food, especially fish^ eggs or fat
meat (Ars., Sep.) ; bad effects from night watching
(Coc.).

Aversion to food ; loathing even the sight or still
more the smell of it.

The abdomen is immensely distended with gas^ feel-
ing as if it would turst.

Burnings or icy coldness in stomach and abdomen.

Autumnal dysentery, discharges from bowels con-
tain white shreddy particles in large quantities ; white
mucus; "scrapings of intestines" (Canth., Carb. ac).

Urine : dark, scanty or suppressed ; in drops, with
white sediment ; bloody, brown, black, inky ; contains
clots of putrid decomposed blood, albumin, sugar.

Affected parts very sensitive to contact and motion.

Arthritic pains in joints ; patient screams with pain
on touching a joint or stubbing a toe.

103


COLrCHICVM AUTUMN ALE— ( Continued ) .

Relations. — Compare : Bry. in rheumatic gout with
serous effusions ; in rheumatism in warm weather.

Often cures in dropsy after Apis and Arsen. fail.

Aggravation. — Mental emotion or exhaustion; ef-
fects of hard study ; odor of cooking food.

Motion : if the patient lies perfectly still, the dispo-
sition to vomit is less urgent Every motion renews
it (Bry.).

COLrLrlNSONIA CANADENSIS.

Stone Root. Labiatce.

Pelvic and portal congestion resulting in dysmenor-
rhoea and hemorrhoids.

Congestion of pelvic viscera, with hemorrhoids,
especially in latter months of pregnancy.

Dropsy from cardiac disease.

Palpitation ; in patients subject to piles and indi-
gestion ; heart's action persistently rapid but weak.

After heart is relieved old piles reappear, or sup-
pressed menses return.

Chronic^ painful^ bleeding piles ; sensation as if
sticks, sand or gravel had lodged in rectum (-^sc).

Hemorrhoidal dysentery with tenesmus.

Alternate constipation and diarrhoea; congestive
inertia of lower bowel ; stools sluggish and hard with
pain and great flatulence. Constipation.

Pruritus in pregnancy with hemorrhoids ; unable to
lie down.

Relations. — In heart disease complicated with

104


COLrLrlNSONIA CANADENSIS— (G?////;^'^).

hemorrhoids consult Collinsonia when Cac, Dig. and
other remedies fail.

Has cured colic after Col. and Nux had failed.

Compare ; -^sc, Aloe, Cham., Nux, Sulph.

Aggravation. — The slightest mental emotion or ex-
citement aggravates the symptoms (Arg. n.).


COLOCYNTH,

Squirting Cucumber. CucurbitacecE,

Agonizing pain in abdomen causing patient to bend
double, with restlessness, twisting and turning to ob-
tain relief ; > by hard pressure (> by heat, Mag. p.).

Pains : are worse after eating or drinking ; compel
patient to bend double (Mag. p. — < by bending double,
Dios.); menses, suppressed by chagrin, colic pains.

Extremely irritable, impatient ; becomes angry or
offended on being questioned.

Irritable ; throws things out of his hands.

Affections from anger, with indignation — colic,
vomiting, diarrhoea and suppression of menses
(Cham., Staph.).

Vertigo : when quickly turning head, especially to
the left^ as if he would fall ; from stimulants.

Sciatica : crampy pain in hip as though screwed in
a vise ; lies upon affected side.

Shooting pain, like lightning-shocks, down the
whole limb, left hip, left thigh, left knee, into popli-
teal fossa.


105


COLrOCYNTH— ( Continued ) .

Relations. — Complementary: Merc, in dysentery,
with great tenesmus.

Compare : Gnaph. intense pain along right sciatic
nerve, darting, cutting, from right hip joint down to
foot ; < lying down, motion, stepping ; > by sitting.

Compare with Staph, in ovarian or other diseases
from bad effects of anger, reserved indignation or
silent grief.

Aggravation. — ^Anger and indignation; mortifica-
tion caused by offense (Staph., Lye.) ; cheese < colic.

Amelioration. — From doubling up ; hard pressure.


CONIUM MACULrATUM,

Poison Hemlock, UmbellifercB.

The " Balm of Gilead " for diseases of old maids
and women during and after climacteric.

Especially for diseases of old men ; old maids ; old
bachelors ; with rigid muscular fibre ; persons with
light hair who are easily excited ; strong persons of
sedentary habits.

Debility of old people ; complaints caused by a
blow or fall ; cancerous and scrofulous persons with
enlarged glands ; rigid fibre.

No inclination for business or study ; indolent, in-
different, takes no interest in anything.

Memory weak, unable to sustain any mental effort

Morose ; easily vexed ; domineering, quarrelsome,
scolds, will not bear contradiction (Aur.) ; excitement
of any kind causes mental depression.


CONIVM MACULrATUM— (Ct7«//;?«<?flf).

Dreads being alone, yet avoids society (Kali c., Lye.).

Glandular indurations of stony hardness ; of mammae
and testicles in persons of cancerous tendency ; after
bruises and injuries of glands (compare, Aster, rub.).

Breasts sore, hard and painful before and during
menstruation (Lac c. Kali c).

Vertigo : especially when lying down or turning in
bed ; moving the head slightly, or even the eyes ; must
keep head perfectly still ; on turning the head to the
left (Col.); of old people ; with ovarian and uterine
complaints.

Cough ; in spasmodic paroxysms caused by dry spot
in larynx (in throat. Act.); with itching in chest and
throat (lod.); worse at night, when lying down^ and
during pregnancy (Caust., Kali br.).

Great difficulty in voiding urine ; flow intermits,
then flows again ; prostatic or uterine affections.

Menses: feeble^ suppressed; too late, scanty, of
short duration ; with rash of small red pimples over
body which ceases with the flow (Dul.); stopped by
taking cold ; by putting hands in cold water (Lac d.).

Leucorrhoea : ten days after menses (Bor., Bov.);
acrid ; bloody ; milky ; profuse ; thick ; intermits.

Bad effects : of suppressed sexual desire, or sup-
pressed menses ; non-gratification of sexual instinct,
or from excessive indulgence.

Aversion to light without inflammation of eyes ;
worse from using eyes in artificial light ; often the stu-
dents' remedy for night work ; intense photophobia
(Psor.).


107


CONIVM MACVI^ATVM—iConHnued).

Sweat day and night, as soon as one sleeps^ or even
when closing the eyes (Cinch.).

Relations. — Patients requiring Conium often im-
prove from wine or stimulants, though persons sus-
ceptible to Conium cannot take alcoholic stimulants
when in health.

Compare : Am., Rhus in contusions ; Ars., Aster,
in cancer; Cal., Psor. in glandular swelli^^gs.

Is followed well : by Psor. in tumors of mammae
with threatening malignancy.

Aggravation. — At night ; lying down ; turning or
rising up, in bed ; celibacy.

CROCUS SATIVUS,

Saffron, Iridacece,

Frequent and extreme changes in sensations;
sudden^ from the greatest hilarity to the deepest de-
spondency (Ign., Nux m.).

Excessively happy ^ affectionate^ wants to kiss every-
body ; the next moment in a rage.

Hemorrhage from any part, blood black, viscid,
clotted, forming into long black strings hanging from
the bleeding surface (Elaps).

Headache ; during climacteric, throbbing, pulsating,
< during two or three days of accustomed menstrual
flow ; nervous or menstrual headache before, during,
or after flow (Lach., Lil., Sep.).

Eyes : sensation, as if room were filled with smoke ;
as if had been weeping; as of cold wind blowing
across the eyes ; closing lids tightly gives >.


CROCUS SATr¥V»—(Co?ifznued).

Nosebleed ; black, tenacious, stringy, every drop
can be turned into a thread ; with cold sweat in large
drops on forehead (cold sweat, but wants to be fanned ;
with bright red blood, Carbo veg.); in children who
develop too rapidly (Cal., Phos.).

Dysmenorrhoea : flow black, stringy, clotted (Ust.).

Sensation as if something alive were moving in the
stomach, abdomen, uterus, arms or other parts of the
body (Sab., Thuja, Sulph.); with nausea and faintness.

Chorea and hysteria with great hilarity, singing
and dancing (Tar.); alternating with melancholy and
rage.

Spasmodic contractions and twitchings of single
sets of muscles (Agar., Igii., Zinc).

Relation. — Nux, Puis, or Sulph. follows Crocus
well in nearly all complaints.

Compare : In menstrual derangements (Ust.).


CROTALrlJS HORRIDUS.

Poison of Rattlesnake. Crotaltdce.

Is indicated in strumous, debilitated, hemorrhagic,
broken-down constitutions ; during zymotic diseases ;
in inebriates ; tendency to carbuncles or blood boils
(Anthr.).

Diseases caused by a previous low state of the
system ; low septic, typhoid or malarial fever ; chronic
alcoholism ; exhausted vital force ; genuine collapse.

Apoplexy; apoplectic convulsions in inebriates,
hemorrhagic or broken down constitutions.

109


Hemorrhagic diathesis ; blood flows from eyes, ears,
nose, and every orifice of the body ; bloody sweat

Yellow color of conjunctiva ; clears up vision after
keratitis, or kerato-iritis.

Malignant jaundice ; hematic rather than hepatic.

Purpura hemorrhagica ; comes on suddenly from
all orifices, skin, nails, gums.

Tongue firey red, smooth and polished (Pyr.) ; in-
tensely swollen.

Malignant diphtheria or scarlatina ; oedema or gan-
grene of fauces or tonsils ; pain < from empty swal-
lowing ; if vomiting or diarrhoea come on.

Prostration of vital force ; pulse scarcely felt ; blood-
poisoning (Pyr.).

Vomiting : bilious, with anxiety and weak pulse ;
every month after menstruation ; cannot lie on r. side
or back without instantly producing dark, green
vomiting ; black or coffee ground, of yellow fever.

Diarrhoea ; stools black, thin, like coffee-grounds ;
offensive ; from noxious effluvia or septic matters in
food or drinks; from ^^high game" (Pyr.); during
yellow fever, cholera, typhoid, typhus.

Intestinal hemorrhage when occurring in typical,
septic, or zymotic disease ; blood dark, fluid, non-
coagulable.

Dissecting wounds ; insect stings ; bad effects of
vaccination.

Vicarious menstruation ; in debilitated constitu-
tions (Dig., Phos.).

Menopause ; intense flushings and drenching per-
spirations ; faintness and sinking at stomach ; pro-


CROTALrlJS HORRIOIJS— ( Continued ) .

longed metrorrhagia, dark, fluid, offensive ; profound
ansemia.

Malignant diseases of uterus, great tendency to
hemorrhage, blood dark, fluid, offensive.

Relations. — Compare : Elaps, Lach., Naja, Pyr.

In Lach. skin cold and clammy ; Crot. cold and
dry ; Elaps, affections of r. lung, expectoration of
black blood.


CROTON TIGlrllJM.

Croton Oil Seeds. Euphorbiacece.

Affects mucous membrane of intestinal tract, pro-
ducing transudation of watery portions of blood, a
copious, watery diarrhoea (Ver.), and develops an acute
eczema over whole body (Rhus).

The bowels are moved as if by spasmodic jerks,
" coming out like a shot " (Gamb.); as soon as patient
eats^ drinks^ or even while eating ; yellow watery
stool.

Constant urging to stool followed by sudden evacua-
tion, which is shot out of the rectum (Gamb., Grat.,
Pod., Thuja).

Swashing sensation in intestines, as from water, be-
fore stool (rumbling before stool. Aloe).

Drawing pain through the chest from breast to
scapula^ of same side every time the child nurses ;
nipple very sore.

Intense itching of skin, but so tender is unable to

111


CROTON TTG'Lnjm—iConiznued),

scratch ; > by gentle nibbing ; eczema over whole
body.

Intense itching of genitals of both sexes (Rhus);
vesicular eruption on male ; so sensitive and sore is
unable to scratch.

Cough ; as soon as the head touched the pillow a
spasmodic paroxysm of cough set in ; suffocated, must
walk about the room or sleep in a chair.

Relations. — Compare : Kali br., Phos. in chronic
infantile diarrhoea ; Sil. pain from nipple through to
back when nursing.

Aggravation. — Diarrhoea : every motion ; after
drinking; while eating or nursing (Arg. n., Ars.);
during summer ; from fruit and sweetmeats (Gamb.);
^Ae least food or drink.


CIJPRIJM METAHrlClJM.

Copper, CN.

Spasms and cramps ; symptoms disposed to appear
periodically and in groups.

Mental and physical exhaustion from over-exertion
of mind and loss of sleep (Coc, Nux) ; attacks of un-
conquerable anxiety.

A strong, sweetish, metallic, copper taste in the
mouth with flow of saliva (Rhus).

Constant protrusion and retraction of the tongue,
like a snake (Lach.).

When drinking, the fluid descends with a gurgling
sound (Ars., Thuja).

112


CUPRUM MIETAJ^IACVH^— (Continued ) .

Cholera morbus or Asiatic cholera, with cramps in
abdomen and calves of legs.

Bad effects of re-percussed eruptions (of non-devel-
oped, Zinc), resulting in brain affections, spasms, con-
vulsions, vomiting; of suppressed foot-sweat (Sil.,
Zinc).

Convulsions, with blue face and clenched thumbs.

Cramps in the extremities ; palms, soles, calves,
with great weariness of limbs.

Clonic spasms, beginning in fingers and toeSy and
spreading over entire body ; during pregnancy ; puer-
peral convulsions ; after fright or vexation ; from
metastasis from other organs to brain (Zinc).

Paralysis of tongue ; imperfect, stammering speech.

Epilepsy : aura begins in knees and ascends ; < at
night during sleep (Bufo) ; about new moon, at regu-
lar intervals (menses) ; from a fall or blow upon the
head ; from getting wet.

Cough has a gurgling sounds as if water was being
poured from a bottle.

Cough, > by drinking cold water (Caust. — <
by drinking cold water, Spong.).

Whooping-cough : long-lasting, suffocating^ spas-
modic cough ; unable to speak ; breathless^ blue face^
rigidy stiff; three attacks successively (Stan.) ; vomit-
ing of solid food after regaining consciousness (Can.) ;
cataleptic spasm with each paroxysm.

After pains ; severe, distressing, in calves and soles.

Relations. — Complementary : Calcarea.

Compare: Ars. and Ver. in cholera and cholera
morbus ; Ipecac the vegetable analogue.

H 113


CUPRUM MET ALlrlCUM— ( Continued ) .

Ver. follows well in whooping-cough and cholera.

Apis and Zinc, in convulsions from suppressed ex-
anthems.

Aggravation. — Cold air ; cold wind ; at night ; sup-
pressed foot sweat or exanthem.

Amelioration. — Nausea, vomiting and cough, by a
swallow of cold water.


CYCLAMEN EUROP-«;UM.

So7v Bread. PrimulacecB.

Best suited for leuco-phlegmatic persons with
anaemic or chlorotic conditions ; easily fatigued, and
in consequence not inclined to any kind of labor;
feeble or suspended functions of organs or special
senses.

Pale^ chlorotic ; deranged menses (Fer., Puis.), ac-
companied by vertigo, headache, dim vision.

Pains ; pressive, drawing or tearing of parts where
bones lie near the surface.

Ailments : from suppressed grief and terrors of con-
science ; from duty not done or bad act committed.

Great sadness and peevishness ; irritable, morose,
ill-humored ; inclined to weep ; desire for solitude ;
aversion to open air (rev. of Puis.).

Headache in anaemic patients, with flickering before
eyes or dim vision, on rising in morning.

Flickering before eyes, fiery sparks, as of various
colors, glittering needles, dim vision of fog or smoke.

Satiety after a few mouthfuls (Lye), food then be-

114


CVCLrAHBN EVWLOrJEVm—(an/inuedj.

comes repugnant, causes nausea in throat and palate.

Saliva and all food has a salty taste ; pork disagrees.

Menses : too early ; too profuse, black and clotted ;
membranous (too late, pale, scanty. Puis.) ; better dur-
ing flow (worse, Act, Puis.).

Burning sore pain in heels, when sitting, standing
or walking in open air (Agar., Caust., Val., Phyt.).

Relations. — Compare : Puis., Cinch., Fer., in chlo-
rosis, and anaemic affections ; Croc., Thuja as if some-
thing alive in abdomen.

Aggravation. — Open air; cold water; cold bath-
ing ; menses < sitting and lying at night.

Amelioration. — In a warm room ; in-doors ; menses
> walking (leucorrhoea, < sitting, ^^ walking, Cac.
Coc.).


DIGITALrlS PVRPVRBA.

Foxglove, ScrophulariacecE,

Sudden flushes of heat, followed by great nervous
weakness and irregular intermitting pulse, occurring
at the climacteric ; < by least motion.

Weak heart without valvular complications.

Sensation as if heart would stop beating if she
moved (Cocaine — ^fears that unless constantly on the
move heart will cease beating, Gels.).

Faintness or sinking at the stomach ; exhaustion ;
extreme prostration ; feels as if he were dying.

Nightly emissions, with great weakness of genitals
after coitus.

115


DIGITALIS PURPUREA— ( Continued ) .

Great weakness of chest, cannot bear to talk (Stan.).

Stools : very light, ash-<!olored ; delayed, chalky
(Chel., Pod.) ; almost white (Cal., Cinch.) ; pipe-stem
stool ; involuntary.

Pulse full^ irregular^ very slow and weak ; inter-
mitting every third, fifth or seventh beat.

Face pale, deathlike appearance and bluish-red.

Blueness of skin^ eyelids, lips, tongue ; cyanosis.

Distended veins on lids, ears, lips and tongue.

Respiration irregular, difficult, deep sighing.

The fingers " go to sleep " frequently and easily.

Dropsy : post-scarlatinal ; in Bright's disease ; with
suppression of urine ; of internal and external parts ;
with fainting when there are organic affections of the
heart (with soreness in uterine region, Con v.).

Fatal syncope may occur when being raised to up-
right position.

Relations. — Cinchona antidotes the direct action
of Digitalis and increases the anxiety.

Aggravation. — When sitting, especially when sit-
ting erect ; motion.


mOSCORBA TILLrOSA.

Wild Yam, ' Dioscoreacece,

Persons of feeble digestive powers, old or young.
Flatulence after meals or after eating, especially of
tea-drinkers ; are often subject to violent colic.
Griping pains in abdomen about umbilicus.
Violent twisting colic, occurring in regular parox-

116


OIOSCORBA YTL'LOSA—iConiinued).

ysms, as if intestines were grasped and twisted by a
powerful hand.

Colic pains : < /rom bending forward and while
lyi'^g ) > o^ standing erect or bending backwards
(rev. of Col.).

Emissions during sleep ; vivid dreams of women all
night (Staph.) ; knees weak ; genitals cold ; great
despondency (Staph.).

Felons ; early when pains are sharp and agonizing,
when pricking is first felt ; nails brittle.

Disposition to paronychia (Hep.).

Relations. — Compare : Col., Phos., Pod., Rhus, Sil.

Aggravation. — Lying ; sitting ; bending double.

Amelioration. — Motion ; walking difficult, com-
pelled to walk even though tired.


mPHTH£RINU]!II.

Homeopathic Antitoxin, A Nosode.

Especially adapted to the strumous diathesis ; scrofu-
lous, psoric or tuberculous persons, prone to catarrhal
affections of throat and respiratory mucous membranes.

Patients with weak or exhausted vitality hence are
extremely susceptible to the diphtheritic virus ; when
the attack from the onset tends to malignancy (Lac c,
Mer. cy.).

Painless diphtheria ; symptoms almost or entirely
objective ; patient too weak, apathetic or too pros-
trated to complain ; sopor or stupor, but easily aroused
when spoken to (Bap., Sulph.).

117


OIPHTHERINIJM— (C^«//««^^/ ).

Dark red swelling of tonsils and palatine arches '
parotid and cervical glands greatly swollen ; breath
and discharges from throat, nose and mouth very of-
fensive ; tongue swollen, very red, little coating.

Diphtheritic membrane, thick, dark gray or brown-
ish black ; temperature low or subnormal, pulse weak
and rapid, extremities cold and marked debility ;
patient lies in a semi-stupid condition ; eyes dull, be-
sotted (Apis, Bap.).

Epistaxis or profound prostration from very onset of
attack (Ail., Apis, Carb. ac.) ; collapse almost at very
beginning (Crot., Mer. cy.) ; pulse weak, rapid and
vital reaction very low.

Swallows without pain, but fluids are vomited or re-
turned by the nose ; breath horribly offensive.

Laryngeal diphtheria, after Chlor., Kali bi. or Lac c.
fail; post diphtheritic paralysis, after, CausL, Gels. fail.

When the patient from the first seems doomed, and
the most carefully selected remedies fail to relieve or
permanently improve.

The above are cured symptoms, verifications which
the author has found guiding and reliable for twenty-
five years.

The remedy is prepared, like all nosodes and animal
poisons, according to the Homeopathic Pharmaco-
poeia, and like all homeopathic remedies entirely safe
when given the sick.

Like all the nosodes it is practically worthless in
potencies below the 30th ; its curative value also in-
creases with increase of potency from the 200th to the
m and cm. It need not and should not be repeated

118


OIPHTHERINUM— (0«/m«^^ ).

too frequently. It will cure in every case that crude
antitoxin will and is not only easy to administer, but
safe and entirely free from dangerous sequellse. Be-
sides, it is homeopathic.

The author has used it for twenty-five years as a
prophylactic and has never known a second case of
diphtheria to occur in a family after it had been ad-
ministered. The profession is asked to put it to the
test and publish the failures to the world.


OROSBRA ROTUNDIFOLrlA.

Sundew, Droseracece,

Whooping-cough with violent paroxysms which fol-
low each other rapidly, is scarcely able to get breath
(wakes at 6-7 A. m. and does not cease coughing until
a large quantity of tenacious mucus is raised, Coc. c. —
profuse epistaxis during every paroxysm, Ind.;
"minute gun" during the day, whooping at night.
Cor. r).

Deep sounding, hoarse barking cough (Verb.), <
after midnight, during or after measles ; spasmodic,
with gagging, retching and vomiting (Bry., Kali c).

Constant, titillating cough in children, begins as
soon as head touches pillow at night (Bell., Hyos.,
Rum.).

Nocturnal cough of young persons in phthisis ;
bloody or purulent sputa.

Cough ; < by warmth, drinking, singing, laugh-
ing, weeping, Ijring down, after midnight.

119


OROSERA WLOTV^nTFO'LlA— (Continued).

During cough ; vomiting of water, mucus, and often
bleeding at the nose and mouth (Cup.).

Sensation of feather in larynx, exciting cough.

Diseases prevailing during epidemic pertussis.

Clergyman's sore throat ; with rough, scraping, dry
sensation deep in the fauces ; voice hoarse, deep, tone-
less, cracked, requires exertion to speak (Arum.).

Constriction and crawling in larynx ; hoarseness,
and yellow or green sputa.

Laryngeal phthisis following whooping-cough (bron-
chial catarrh following, Coc. c.)

Relations. — Complementary : to, Nux vomica.

Follows well : after, Samb., Sulph., Ver.

Is followed : by, Cal., Puis., Sulph.

Compare : Cina, Coral., Cup., Ipec, Samb. in spas-
modic coughs. Often relieves the constant, distress-
ing night-cough in tuberculosis.

- Hahnemann says (Mat. Med. Pura): ** One single dose of the
30th potency is sufficient to cure entirely epidemic whooping
cough. The cure takes place surely between seven and eight days.
Never give a second dose immediately after the first; it would not
only prevent the good effect of the former, but would be injuri-


ous. ' '


I>UL,CA]IIARA.

Bitter-sweet, Solanacees.

Adapted to persons of phlegmatic scrofulous con-
stitutions ; restless, irritable.

Catarrhal rheumatism or skin affections, brought on
or aggravated by exposure to cold, damp, rainy
weather, or sudden changes in hot weather (Bry.).

120


DULrCAMAR A— ( Continued ) .

Increased secretion of mucous membranes ; perspi-
ration being suppressed from cold.

Patients living or working in a damp, cold base-
ment, or a milk dairy (Aran., Ars., Nat. s.).

Mental confusion ; cannot find the right word for
anything.

Skin- is delicate, sensitive to cold, liable to erup-
tions, especially urticaria ; every time patient takes
cold or is long exposed to cold.

Anasarca ; after ague, rheumatism, scarlet fever.

Dropsy : after suppressed sweat ; suppressed erup-
tions ; exposure to cold.

Diarrhoea : from taking cold in damp places, or
during damp, foggy weather ; change from warm to
cold weather (Bry.).

Catarrhal ischuria in grown-up children, with milky
urine ; from wading with bare feet in cold water ; in-
voluntary.

Rash before the menses (Con. — during profuse
menses. Bell., Graph.).

Urticaria over whole body, no fever ; itching bums
after scratching ; < in warmth, > in cold.

Thick, brown-yellow crusts on scalp, face, forehead,
temples, chin ; with reddish borders, bleeding when
scratched.

Warts, fleshy, large, smooth-; on face or back of
hands and fingers (Thuja).

Relations. — Complementary : to. Baryta carb.,
Kali s.

Incompatible : with, Acet. ac. Bell., Lach.

Should not be used before or after.

121


DULrC A]II AR A— ( Contifiued ) .

Follows well : after, Cal., Bry., Lye, Rhus, Sep.

Similar: to, Mer. in ptyalism, glandular swell-
ings, bronchitis, diarrhoea ; susceptibility to weather
changes ; night pains ; to. Kali s. the chemical ana-
logue.

For the bad effects or abuse of Mercury.

Aggravation. — From cold in general ; cold air ;
cold, wet weather ; suppressed menstruation, eruptions,
sweat.

Amelioration. — From moving about (Fer., Rhus).


Scouring Rush. Equisetacece.

Severe dull pain in the bladder, as from distension,
not > after urinating.

Frequent and intolerable urging to urinate, with
severe pain at close of urination (Berb., Sars., Thuja).

Constant desire to urinate ; large quantity of clear,
watery urine, without > (scanty, a few drops, Apis^
Canth.).

Sharp, burning, cutting pain in urethra while
urinating.

Paralysis of bladder in old women.

Enuresis diuma et noctuma ; profuse watery urine,
where habit is the only ascertainable cause.

Relations. — Campare : Apis, Canth., Fer. p.. Puis.,
Squilla.


122


EUPATORIUM PERFOlrlATlJM.

BoneseL Composites.

Adapted to diseases of old people ; worn-out con-
stitutions^ especially from inebriety ; cachexia, from
prolonged or frequent attacks of bilious or intermittent
fevers

Bruised feeling, as if broken, all over the body
(Am., Bellis, Pyr.).

Bone pains aflFecting back, head, chest, limbs, espe-
cially the wrists, as if dislocated. The more general
and severe, the better adapted (compare, Bry., Mer.).

Painful soreness of eyeballs ; coryza, aching in every
bone ; great prostration in epidemic influenza (Lac c).

Pains come quickly and go away as quickly (Bell.,
Mag. p., Eup. pur.).

Vertigo ; sensation as if falling to the left (cannot
turn the head to the left for fear of falling. Col.).

Cough : chronic ; loose with hectic ; chest sore, must
support it with hands (Bry., Nat. c); < at night ;
following measles or suppressed intermittents.

Fever : chill, 7 to 9 A. m. one day, at noon the next
day ; bitter vomiting at close of chill ; drinking
hastens chill and causes vomiting ; bone pains, before
and during chill.

Insatiable thirst before and during chill and fever ;
knows chill is coming because he cannot drink enough.

Relations. — Is followed well : by, Nat. m. and Sep.

Compare: Chel., Pod., Lye, in jaundiced conditions.

Bryonia is the nearest analogue, having free sweat,
but pains keep patient quiet ; while Eup. has scanty
sweat and pains make patient restless.


123


EUPHRASIA.

EyebrighL ScrophularacecB.

Bad effects from falls, contusions or mechanical in-
juries of external parts (Am.).

Catarrhal affections of mucous membranes, espe-
cially of the eyes and nose.

Profuse, acrid lachrymation^ with profuse, bland
coryza (reverse of All. c).

The eyes water all the time and are agglutinated
in the morning ; margins of lids red, swollen, burning.

Profuse fluent coryza in morning with violent cough
and abundant expectoration, < from exposure to
warm south wind.

When attempting to clear the throat of an offensive
mucus in the morning, gagging until he vomits the
breakfast just eaten (Bry.).

Profuse expectoration of mucus by voluntary hawk-
ing, < on rising in morning.

Amenorrhoea, with catarrhal symptoms of eyes and
nose ; profuse acrid lachrymation.

Menses: painful, regular, flow lasting only one
hour ; or late, scanty, short, lasting only one day (Bar.).

Pertussis : excessive lachrymation during cough ;
cough only in day ti7ne (Fer., Nat. m.).

Relations. — Similar: to. Puis, in affections of the
eyes ; reverse of All. c. in lachrymation and coryza.

Aggravation. — In the evening, in bed, indoors,
warmth, moisture ; after exposure to south wind;
when touched (Hep.).


124


FERRUM METALrLrlCUM.

Iron, The Element

Persons of sanguine temperament ; pettish, quarrel-
some, disputative, easily excited, least contradiction
angers (Anac, Coc., Ign.) ; > from mental exertion.

Irritability: slight noises like crackling of paper,
drive him to despair (Asar., Tar.).

Women who are weak, delicate, chlorotic, yet have
a firey red face. ^

Extreme paleness of the face, lips and mucous
membranes, which become red and flushed on the least
pain^ emotion or exertion. Blushing (Amyl., Coca).

Erethitic chlorosis, worse in winter.

Red parts become white; face, lips, tongue and
mucous membrane of mouth.

Vertigo : with balancing sensation, as if on water ;
on seeing fl^owing water ; when wajking over water,
as when crossing a bridge (Lys.) ; on descending
(Bor., Sanic).

Headache : hammering, beating, pulsating pains,
must lie down ; with aversion to eating or drinking.
For two, three or four days every two or three weeks.

Menses: too early, too profuse, too long lasting,
with firey red face ; ringing in the ears ; intermit two
or three days and then return ; fl^w pale^ watery^
debilitating.

Hemorrhagic diathesis ; blood bright red, coagu-
lates easily (Fer. p., Ipec, Phos.).

Regurgitation and eructation of food in mouthfuls
(Alum.), without nausea.

Canine hunger, or loss of appetite, with extreme
dislike for all food.

125


FBRRUM METALJ^ICVM—iConftnued).

Vomiting : imfnediately after midnight ; of ingesta,
as soon as food is eaten ; leaves table suddenly and
with one effort vomits everything eaten, can sit down
and eat again ; sour, acid (Lye, Sul. ac).

Diarrhoea : undigested stools at night, or while eat-
ing or drinking (Crot. t.) ; painless with a good appe-
tite ; of consumptives.

Constipation : from intestinal atony ; ineffectual
urging; stools hard, difficult, followed by backache
or cramping pain in rectum ; prolapsus recti of chil-
dren ; itching of anus at night.

Always feels better by walking slowly abouty al-
though weakness obliges the patient to lie down.

Cough only in the day time (Euphr.) ; relieved by
lying down ; > by eating (Spong.).

Dropsy ; after loss of vital fluids ; abuse of quinine ;
suppressed intennittent (Carbo v.. Cinch.).

Relations. — Complementar}' : to. Alum., Cinch.

Cinch : the vegetable analogue follows well in nearly
all diseases, acute or chronic.

Should never be given in syphilis ; always aggra-
vates the condition.

Aggravation. — At night ; at rest, especially while
sitting still.

Amelioration. — Walking slowly about ; in summer.

FLUORIC ACID.

Hydrofluoric Acid, HF,

Complaints of old age, or of premature old age ; in
syphilitic mercurial dyscrasia; young people look old,

126


FLUORIC ACm— (Continued),

Increased ability to exercise without fatigue (Coca) ;
is less affected by excessive heat of summer or cold of
winter.

Old cicatrices become red around edges, and threaten
to become open ulcers (Caust., Graph.).

Varicose veins and ulcers, obstinate, long standing
cases, in women who have borne many children.

Caries and necrosis, especially of long bones, psoric
or syphilitic, abuse of mercury or silica (Angus.).

Naevus, flat, of children (r. temple) ; capillary aneu-
rism (compare, Cal. fl.. Tub.).

Ulcers : red edges and vesicles ; decubitus ; copious
discharge ; < from warmth, > from cold ; violent
pains, like streaks of lightning, confined to a small
spot.

Rapid caries of teeth ; fistula dentalis or lachrymalis ;

exostoses of bones of face (Hekla).

Relations. — Complementary : Coca, Sil.

Follows well : after, Ars. in ascites of drunkards ;

after. Kali c. in hip disease ; after, Coff., Staph, in

sensitive teeth ; after, Phos. ac. in diabetes; after, Sil.,

Symph. in bone diseases ; after, Spong. in goitre.


Yellow Jasmine. Loganiacec^.

For children, young people, especially women of
a nervous, hysterical temperament (Croc, Ign.).

Complete relaxation and prostration of whole mus-
cular system, with entire motor paralysis.

127


GBLrSBUflUM— ( Continued ) .

Excitable, irritable, sensitive ; for the nervous affec-
tions of onanists of both sexes (Kali p.).

Bad effects from fright, fear, exciting news and
sudden emotions (Ign.— from pleasant surprises, Coff.).

Fear of death (Ars.) ; utter lack of courage.

The anticipation of any unusual ordeal, preparing
for church, theatre, or to meet an engagement, brings
on diarrhoea ; stage fright, nervous dread of appearing
in public (Arg. n.).

General depression y^-^w heat of sun or summer.

Weakness and trembling; of tongue, hands, legs;
of the entire body.

Desire to be quiet, to be let alone ; does not wish
to speak or have any one near her, even if the person
be silent (Ign.).

Vertigo, spreading from the occiput (Sil.) ; with
diplopia, dim vision, loss of sight ; seems intoxicated
when trying to move.

Children ; fear of falling, grasp the crib or seize the
nurse (Bor., Sanic).

Headache ; preceded by blindness (Kali bi.), > by
profuse urination.

Lack of muscular co-ordination ; confused ; muscles
refuse to obey the will.

Headache : beginning in the cervical spine ; pains
extend over the head, causing a bursting sensation in
forehead and eyeballs (Sang., Sil., begin in same way,
but semi-lateral) ; < by mental exertion ; from smok-
ing ; heat of sun ; lying with head low.

Sensation of band around the head above eyes
(Carb. ac, Sulph.) ; scalp sore to touch.

12S


GBLrSBMUJM- ( Continued ) .

Fears that unless on the move heart will cease beat-
ing (fears it would cease beating if she moved, Dig.).

Slow pulse of old age.

Great heaviness of the eyelids ; cannot keep them
open (Canst, Graph., Sep.).

Chill without thirst, especially along the spine, run-
ning up and down the back in rapid, wave-like success-
ion from sacrum to occiput.

Relations. — Compare : Bap. in threatening typhoid
fever; Ipecac in dumb ague, after suppression by
quinine.

Aggravation. — Damp weather; before a thunder-
storm ; mental emotion or excitement ; bad news ; to-
bacco smoking ; when thinking of his ailments ; when
spoken to of his loss.


GLrONOINB.

Nitro-glycerine. C^HJ^NO^ Oy

Nervous temperament; plethoric, florid, sensitive
women ; persons readily affected.

Bad effects of mental excitement, fright, fear, me-
chanical injuries and their later consequences ; from
having the hair cut (Aeon., Bell.).

Head troubles : from working under gas-light, when
heat falls on head ; can not bear heat about the head,
heat of stove or walking in the sun (Lach., Nat. c).

Cerebral congestion, or alternate congestion of the
head and heart

Head : feels enormously large ; as if skull were too

I 129


GlrONOINE— ( Continued ) .

small for brain; sunstroke and dun headache; in-
creases and decreases every day with the sun (Ks^l.,
Nat. c).

Terrific shocks in the head, synchronous with the
pulse. Throbbing, pulsating headache; holds head
with both hands; could not lie down, "the pillow
would beat.''

Brain feels too large^ full^ bursting ; blood seems to
be pumped upwards ; throbs at every jar ^ step^ pulse.

Intense congestion of brain from delayed or sup-
pressed menses ; headache in place of the menses.

Headache : occurring after profuse uterine hemor-
rhage ; rush of blood to heady in pregnant women.

Violent palpitation, with throbbing in carotids ;
heart's action labored, oppressed ; blood seems to rush
to heart, and rapidly to head.

Convulsions of children from cerebral congestion ;
meningitis, during dentition, cases that seem to call
for Belladonna.

Children get sick in the evening when sitting be-
fore an open coal fire, or falling asleep there.

Flushes of heat ; at the climacteric (Amyl., Bell.,
Lach.) ; with the catamenia (Fer., Sang.).

Relations. — Compare: Amyl., BelL, Ferr., Gels.,
Melil., Stram.

Aggravation. — In the sun, exposure to sun's rays ;
gas-light ; overheating ; jar ; stooping ; ascending ;
touch of hat; having the hair cut.


130


GRAPHITBS.

Black Lead, Ow-^ ^% Amorphous Carbon,

Suited to women, inclined to obesity, who suffer
from habitual constipation ; with a history of delayed
menstruation.

" What Pulsatilla is at puberty. Graphites is at the
climacteric."

Excessive cautiousness ; timid, hesitates ; unable to
decide about anything (Puis.).

Fidgety while sitting at work (Zinc).

Sad, despondent ; music makes her weep ; thinks of
nothing but death (music is intolerable, Nat. c, Sab.).

Eczema of lids ; eruption moist and fissured, lids
red and margins covered with scales or crusts.

Sexual debility from sexual abuse.

Menses ; too scanty, pale ; late with violent colic ;
irregular ; delayed from getting feet wet (Puis.).

Morning sickness during menstruation ; very weak
and prostrated (Alum., Carbo an., Coc).

Leucorrhoea : acrid, excoriating ; occurs in gushes
day and night ; before and after menses (before, Sep.;
after, Kreos.\

Hard cicatrices remaining after mammary abscess,
retarding the flow of milk ; cancer of breast, from old
scars and repeated abscesses.

Unhealthy skin; every injury suppurates (Hep.);
old cicatrices break open again ; eruptions upon the
ears^ between fingers and toes and on various parts of
body, from which ooze a watery, transparent, sticky
fluid.

The nails brittle, crumbling, deformed (Ant c);
painful, sore, as if ulcerated ; thick and crippled.

131


GRAPHITES— ( Continued ) .

Cracks or fissures in ends of fingers, nipples, labial
commissures ; of anus ; between the toes.

Burning round spot on vertex (Cal., Sulph. — cold
spot, Sep., Ver.).

Cataleptic condition ; conscious, but without power
to move or speak.

Takes cold easily; sensitive to draught of air (Bor.,
Cal., Hep., Nux). Suffering parts emaciate.

Hears better when in a noise ; when riding in a
carriage or car, when there is a rumbling sound
(Nit. ac).

Diarrhoea: stools brown, fluid, mixed with un-
digested substances, and of an intolerable odor ; often
caused by suppressed eruptions (Psor.).

Chronic constipation; stool difficult, large, hard,
knotty, with lumps united by mucous threads; too
large (Sulph.); smarting sore pain in anus after stool.

Children ; impudent, teasing, laugh at reprimands.

Sensation of cobweb on forehead, tries hard to
brush it off (Bar., Bor., Brom., Ran. s.).

Phelgmonous erysipelas : of face, with burning,
stinging pain ; commencing on right side, going to
left ; after application of Iodine.

Decided aversion to coition (both sexes).

Relations. — Complementary : Caust, Hep., Lye.

Graphites follows well : after, Lye, Puis.; after
Cal. in obesity of young women with large amount
of unhealthy adipose tissue ; follows Sulph. well in
skin affections ; after. Sepia in gushing leucorrhoea.

Similar : to. Lye, Puis, in menstrual troubles.


132


{Continued).

Aggravation. — At night, during and after menstrua-
tion.


HAMAMBLIS YIRGINICA.

Witch Hazel. Hamamelacece.

This shrub flowers from September to November,
when the leaves are falling. The seeds mature the
following summer.

It is adapted to venous hemorrhage from every ori-
fice of the body ; nose, lungs, bowels, uterus, bladder.

Venous congestion : passive, of skin and mucous
membranes ; phlebitis, varicose veins ; ulcers, varicose,
with stinging, pricking pain ; hemorrhoids.

Patients, subject to varicose veins, take cold easily
from every exposure, especially in warm, moist air.

" Is the Aconite of the venous capillary system."

Bruised soreness of affected parts (Am.); rheu-
matism, articular and muscular.

Wounds : incised, lacerated,contused ; injuries from
falls ; checks hemorrhage, removes pain and soreness

Chronic effects of mechanical injuries (Con.).

Traumatic conjunctivitis ; sugillations, or extra vas a
tions into chambers of eye ; from severe coughing ;
intense soreness (Am., Calen., Led.).

Nosebleed : flow passive, long-lasting, blood non-
coagulable (Crot.); profuse > headache (Mel.); idio-
pathic, traumatic, vicarious, of childhood.

Hemorrhage : profuse, dark, grumous, from ulcera-

133


HAMAMBLIS YWLGITnCJL—(Coniznued),

tion of bowels (Crot); uterine, active or passive; after
a fall or rough riding; vicarious menstruation; no
mental anxiety.

Hemoptysis ; tickling cough, with taste of blood or
sulphur ; venous, without effort or coughing ; some-
times monthly, for years.

Profuse discharges, which simulate a hemorrhage,
and form a drain upon system as severe as loss of
blood.

Hemorrhoids: bleeding profusely; with burning,
soreness, fulness, heaviness ; as if back would break ;
urging to stool ; bluish color ; anus feels sore and raw.

Menses : flow, dark and profuse ; with soreness in
abdomen ; after a blow on ovary, or a fall ; all suffer-
ing < at menstrual period (Act., Puis.).

Uterine hemorrhage active or passive ; from jolting
while riding over rough roads ; bearing down pain in
back.

After hemorrhage from piles, prostration out of all
proportion to amount of blood lost (Hydr.).

Bad effects from loss of blood (Cinch.).

Relations. — Complementary: Ferrum, in hemor-
rhages and the hemorrhagic diathesis.

Compare : Am., Calen., for traumatic, and to hasten
absorption of intraocular hemorrhage.

HBLLBBORUS NIGBR.

Christmas Rose, Ranunculacece,

Weakly, delicate, psoric children ; prone to brain
troubles (Bell., Cal., Tub.) ; with serous effusion.

134


HBLrLrBBORVS ISIGEWL— (Continued),

Melancholy : woeful; despairing ; silent ; with
anguish ; after typhoid ; in giris at puberty, or when
menses fail to return after appearing.

Irritable, easily angered ; consolation < (Ign., Nat.,
Sep., Sil.) ; does not want to be disturbed (Gels., Nat).

Unconscious; stupid; answers slowly when ques-
tioned; a picture of acute idiocy (of chronic. Bar. c).

Brain symptoms during dentition (Bell., Pod.) ;
threatening effusion (Apis, Tub.).

Meningitis : acute, cerebro-spinal, tubercular, with
exudation ; paralysis more or less complete ; with the
cri encephalique.

Vacant, thoughtless staring; eyes wide open; in-
sensible to light ; pupils dilated, or alternately con-
tracted and dilated.

Soporous sleep, with screams, shrieks, starts.

Hydrocephalus, post-scarlatinal or tubercular which
develops rapidly (Apis, Sulph., Tub.); automatic
motion of one arm and leg.

Convulsions with extreme coldness of body, except
head or occiput, which may be hot (Arn.).

Greedily swallows cold water ; bites spoon, but re-
mains unconscious.

Chewing motion of the mouth ; comers of mouth
sore, cracked ; nostrils dirty and sooty, dry.

Constantly picking his lips, clothes, or boring into
his nose with his finger (while perfectly conscious,
Arum).

Boring head into pillow ; rolling from side to side ;
beating head with hands.

Diarrhoea : during acute hydrocephalus, dentition,

135


HBLrUBBORlJS :SIGEWL— (Continued).

pregnancy; watery; clear, tenacious colorless mucus;
white, jelly-like mucus ; like frog spawn ; involuntary.

Urine : red, black, scanty, coffee-ground sediment ;
suppressed in brain troubles and dropsy ; albuminous.

Dropsy : of brain, chest, abdomen ; after scarlatina,
intermittents ; with fever, debility, suppressed urine ;
from suppressed exanthemata (Apis, Zinc).

Relations. — Compare: Apis, Apoc., Ars., Bell.,
Bry., Dig., Lach., Sulph., Tub., Zinc in brain or men-
ingeal affections.


HBLrONIAS DIOICA.

Unicorn Plant. MelanthacecB.

For women : with prolapsus from atony ^ enervated
by indolence and luxury ; worn out with hard work^
mental or physical ; overtaxed muscles bum and ache ;
so tired cannot sleep.

Always better when occupied, when not thinking
of the ailment (Cal. p., Oxal. ac).

Restless, must be continually moving about.

Irritable, fault finding ; cannot endure least contra-
diction or receive least suggestion (Anac).

Profound melancholy ; deep, mental depression.

Diabetes : first stages ; urine profuse, clear, saccha-
rine ; lips dry, stick together ; great thirst ; restless-
ness ; emaciation ; irritable and melancholy.

Albuminuria : acute or chronic ; during pregnancy,
with great weakness, languor, drowsiness ; unusually
tired, yet knows no reason.

136


HBLrONIAS mOICJL—(Co7iimued).

Menses: too early, too profuse, from uterine
atony in women enfeebled by loss of blood ; when
patients lose more blood than is made in intermenstrual
period ; breasts swollen, nipples painful and tender
(Con., Lac c). Flow passive, dark, clotted, offensive.

Sensation of soreness and heaviness in pelvis
(Lappa) ; a consciousness of a womb^ feels it move
when she moves, it is so sore and tender (Lys.).

For the bad effects of abortions and miscarriages.

Relations. — Compare : Aletris, Fer., Lil., Phos. ac.

Similar: to, Alet. in debility from prolapsus, pro-
tracted illness, defective nutrition.


HBPAR SVLrPHVR.

Sulphuret of Lime. Ca. S.

For torpid lymphatic constitutions; persons with
light hair and complexion, slow to act, muscles soft
and flabby.

The slightest injury causes suppuration (Graph.,
Mer.).

Diseases where the system has been injured by the
abuse of Mercury.

In diseases where suppuration seems inevitable,
Hepar may open the abscess and hasten the cure.

Oversensitive^ physically and mentally ; the slight-
est cause irritates him ; quick, hasty speech and hasty
drinking.

Patient is peevish, angry at the least trifle ; hypo-
chondriacal ; unreasonably anxious.

137


HBPAR SV'UPiaVWL—iCanttmied).

Extremely sensitive to cold air, imagines he can
feel the air if a door is opened in the next room ; mnst
be wrapped up to the face even in hot weather (Psor.);
cannot bear to be uncovered (Nux — cannot bear to be
covered, Camp., Sec.) ; takes cold from slightest ex-
posure to fresh air (Tub.).

Urine : flow impeded ; voided slowly^ without force^
drops vertically ; is obliged to wait awhile before it
passes ; bladder weak, is unable to finish, seems as if
some urine always remains (Alum., Sil.).

Cough : when any part of the body is uncovered
(Rhus) ; croupy, choking, strangling ; from exposure
to dry west windy the land .wind (Aeon.).

Asthma : breathing, anxious, wheezing, rattling ;
short, deep breathing, threatens suffocation ; must bend
head back and sit up ; after suppressed eruption
(Psor.).

Croup : after exposure to dry cold wind (Aeon.) ;
deep, rough, barking cough, with hoarseness and rat-
tling of mucus ; < cold air, cold drinks, before mid-
night or toward morning.

Sensation of a splinter, fish bone or plug in the
throat (Arg. n.. Nit. ac.) ; quinsy, when suppuration
threatens ; chronic hypertrophy, with hardness of
hearing (Bar., Lye, Plumb., Psor.).

The skin is very sensitive to touch, cannot bear
even clothes to touch affected parts (Lach. — sensitive
to slightest touch, but can bear hard pressure. Cinch.).

Skin affections extremely sensitive to touch, the
pain often causing fainting.


138


HBPAR SVliPWVWL—iConfmued),

Ulcers, herpes, surrounded by little pimples or
pustules and spread by coalescing.

Middle of lower lip cracked (Am. c, Nat. m. — cracks
in commissures, Cund.).

Eyeballs : sore to touch ; pain as if they would be
pulled back into head (Olean., Paris).

Diarrhoea : of children with sour smell (Cal., Mag.
c. — child and stool have a sour smell. Rheum) ; clay-
colored stool (Cal., Pod.).

Sweats : profusely day and night without relief ;
perspiration sour, offensive ; easily, on every mental
or physical exertion (Psor., Sep.).

Relations. — Complementary : to, Calendula in in-
juries of soft parts.

Hepar antidotes : bad effects of mercury and other
metals, iodine, iodide of potash, cod-liver oil ; renders
patient less susceptible to atmospheric changes and
cold air.

Compare : The psoric skin affections of Sulphur are
dry, itching, > by scratching, and not sensitive to
touch ; while in Hepar the skin is unhealthy, sup-
purating, moist, and extremely sensitive to touch.

Aggravation. — Lying on painful side (Kali c, lod.) ;
cold air ; uncovering ; eating or drinking cold things ;
touching affected parts ; abuse of mercury.

Amelioration. — Warmth in general (Ars.) ; wrap-
ping up warmly, especially the head (Psor., Sil.) ; in
damp^ wet weather (Caust, Nux — rev. of, Nat. s.).


139


HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.

Golden Seal. Ranunculacece,

For debilitated persons, with viscid mucous dis-
charges.

Cachectic or malignant dyscrasia, with marked de-
rangement of gastric and hepatic functions ; broken
down by excessive use of alcohol.

Cancer : hard, adherent ; skin mottled, puckered ;
pains knife-like, sharp cutting ; nipple retracted.

Nursing sore mouth ; tongue large, shows imprint
of teeth.

Leucorrhoea : ropy, thick, viscid, yellow ; hanging
from OS in long strings (Kali bi.) ; pruritus.

Profuse discharge of thick, yellow, stringy mucus
from nasal passages (Cor. r.).

Hawks yellow, viscid mucus from posterior nares
and fauces ; ulceration, after mercury or chlorate of
potash ; syphilitic angina.


HYOSCYAMVS NIGBR.

Henbane, Solanacece,

Persons of sanguine temperament ; who are irri-
table, nervous, hysterical.

Convulsions : of children, from fright or the irrita-
tion of intestinal worms (Cina) ; during labor ; during
the puerperal state ; after meals, child vomits, sudden
shriek, then insensible.

Diseases with increased cerebral activity but non-
inflammatory in type ; hysteria or delirium tremens ;

140


H YOSCYAMUS NIGER— ( Continued ) .

delirium, with restlessness, jumps out of bed, tries to
escape ; makes irrelevant answers ; thinks he is in the
wrong place ; talks of imaginary wrongs, but has no
wants and makes no complaints.

In delirium, Hyoscyamus occupies a place midway
between Belladonna and Stramonium ; lacks the con-
stant cerebral congestion of the former and the fierce
rage and maniacal delirium of the latter.

Spasms : without consciousness, very restless ; every
muscle in the body twitches^ from the eyes to the toes
(with consciousness, Nux).

Fears : being alone ; poison ; being bitten ; being
sold ; to eat or drink ; to take what is offered ; suspi-
cious^ of some plot.

Bad effects of unfortunate love ; with jealousy, rage,
incoherent speech or inclination to laugh at every-
thing ; often followed by epilepsy.

Lascivious mania; immodesty^ will not be covered^
kicks off the clothes, exposes the person; sings obscene
songs ; lies naked in bed and chatters.

Cough : dry, nocturnal, spasmodic ; < when lying
down^ relieved by sitting up (Dros.); < at night, after
eating, drinking, talking, singing (Dros., Phos. — >
when lying down, Mang. m.).

Intense sleeplessness of irritable^ excitable persons
from business embarrassments^ often imaginary.

Paralysis of bladder ; after labor, with retention or
incontinence of urine ; no desire to urinate in lying-in
women (Am., Op.).

Fever: pneumonia, scarlatina, rapidly becomes
typhoid; sensorium clouded, staring eyes, grasping at

141


HYOSCYAMUS KTG^WL—iConitnued),

flocks or picking bed clothes, teeth covered with
sordes, tongue dry and unwieldy, involuntary stool
and urine ; subsultus tendinum.

Relations. — Compare : Bell., Stram. and Verat

Phos. often cures lasciviousness when Hyos. fails.

Nux or Opium in hemoptysis of drunkards.

Follows : Bell, well in deafness after apoplexy.

Aggravation. — At night ; during menses ; mental
afFections ; jealousy, unhappy love ; when lying down.


HYPERICVM PERFORATUM.

SLjohrCs Wort, Hypericacece,

Mechanical injuries of spinal cord ; bad effects of
spinal concussion ; pains, after a fall on coccyx.

Punctured, incised or lacerated wounds ; sore, pain-
ful (Led. — contused wounds, Arn., Ham.), especially
if of long duration.

Injuries : from treading on nails, needles, pins, splin-
ters (Led.) ; from rat-bites ; prevents lockjaw.

Preserves integrity of torn and lacerated members
when almost entirely separated from body (Calend.).

Injury to parts rich in sentient nerves — ^fingers,
toes, matrices of nails, palms or soles — where the in-
tolerable pain shows nerves are severely involved ; of
tissues of animal life, as hands and feet.

Nervous depression following wounds or surgical
operations ; removes bad effect of shock, of fright, of
mesmerism.

Always modifies and sometimes arrests ulceration

142


HYPBRICITM PERFORATUM— ( ContMd ) .

and sloughing (Calend.). Crushed, mashed finger-tips.
Tetanus after traifhiatic injuries (compare, Phys.).

Vertigo : sensation as if head became suddenly
elongated ; at night, with urging to urinate.

Headache ; after a fall upon occiput, with sensation
as if being lifted up high into the air ; great anxiety
lest she fall from this height.

Spine : after a fall ; slightest motion of arms or
neck extorts cries ; spine very sensitive to touch.

Bunions and corns when pain is excruciating, show-
ing nerve involvement.

Convulsions ; after blows on head or concussion.

Relations. — Compare: Am., Calen., Ruta, Staph.

In wounds where formerly Aeon, and Am. were
given alternately, Hypericum cures.


IGNATIA.

St, Ignatius Bean. LoganiacecB.

Especially suited to nervous temperament ; women
of a sensitive, easily excited nature ; dark hair and
skin but mild disposition, quick to perceive, rapid in
execution. In striking contrast with the fair com-
plexion, yielding, lachrymose, but slow and indecisive,
Pulsatilla.

The remedy of great contradictions : the roaring in
ears > by music ; the piles > when walking ; sore
throat feels > when swallowing; empty feeling in
stomach not > by eating; cough < the more he
coughs; cough on standing still during a walk

143


IGN ATIA— ( Continued ) .

(Ast fl.); spasmodic laughter from grief ; sexual desire
with impotency ; thirst during a chilly no thirst in the
fever ; the color changes in the face when at rest

Mental conditions rapidly, in an almost incredibly
short time, change from joy to sorrow, from laughing
to weeping (Cofl., Croc., Nux m.); moody.

Persons mentally and physically exhausted by
long-concentrated grief.

Involuntary sighing (Lach.); with a weak, empty
feeling at pit of stomach ; not > by eating (Hydr.,
Sep.).

Bad effects of anger, grief, or disappointed love
(Cal. p., Hyos.); broods in solitude over imaginary
trouble.

Desire to be alone.

Finely sensitive mood, delicate conscientiousness.

Inconstant, impatient, irresolute, quarrelsome.

Amiable in disposition if feeling well, but easily
disturbed by very slight emotion / easily offended.

The slightest fault finding or contradiction excites
anger, and this makes him angry with himself.

Children : when reprimanded, scolded, or sent to
bed, get sick or have convulsions in sleep.

Ill effects, from bad news ; from vexation with
reserved displeasure ; from suppressed mental suffer-
ings ; of shame and mortification (Staph.).

Headache, as if a nail was driven out through the
side, relieved by lying on it (Coff., Nux, Thuja).

Cannot bear tobacco ; smoking, or being in tobacco
smoke, produces or aggravates headache.

In talking or chewing, bites inside of cheek.

144.


IGN ATI A— ( Co7itinued ) .

Sweat on the face on a small spot only while eating.

Oversensitiveness to pain (Coff., Cham.).

Constipation : from carriage riding ; of a paralytic
origin ; with excessive urging^ felt more in upper ab-
domen (Ver.) ; with great pain, dreads to go to closet ;
in women who are habitual coffee drinkers.

Prolapsus ani from moderate straining at stool,
stooping or lifting (Nit. ac. Pod., Ruta) ; < when
the stool is loose.

Hemorrhoids : prolapse with every stool, have to
be replaced ; sharp stitches shoot up the rectum (Nit.
a.) ; < for hours after stool (Rat., Sulph.).

Twitchings, jerkings, even spasms of single limbs
or whole body, when falling asleep.


Fever : red face during chill (Fer.) ; chill, with
thirst during chill only ; > by external heat ; heat
zvithout thirsty < by covering (> by covering, Nux).

Complaints return at precisely the same hour.

Ignatia bears the same relation to the diseases of
women that Nux does to sanguine, bilious men.

There are many more Ignatia persons in North
America than Nux vomica persons. — Hering.

Relations. — Incompatible : Coff., Nux, Tab.

The bad effects of Ign. are antidoted by Puis.

Aggravation. — From tobacco, coffee, brandy, con-
tact, motion, strong odors, mental emotions, grief.

Amelioration. — Warmth, hard pressure (Cinch.) ;
swallowing; walking.


145


lODlTM.

Iodine. The ElemenL

Persons of a scrofulous diathesis, with dark or black
hair and eyes ; a low cachectic condition, with pro-
found debility and great emaciation (Abrot).

Great weakness and loss of breath on going upstairs
(Calc.) ; during the menses (Alum, Carbo an., Coc.).

Ravenous hunger; eats freely and well, yet loses
flesh all the time (Abrot, Nat m., Sanic, Tub.).

Empty eructations from morning to night, as if
every particle of food was turned into air (Kali c).

Suffers from hunger^ must eat every few hours,
anxious and worried if he does not eat (Cina, Sulph.) ;
feels > while eating or after eatings when stomach is
full.

Itching: low down in the lungs, behind the
sternum, causing cough ; extends through bronchi
to nasal cavity (Coc. c, Con., Phos.).

Hypertrophy and induration of glandular tissue —
thyroid, mammae, ovaries, testes, uterus, prostate or
other glands — ^breasts may dwindle and become flabby.

Hard goitre^ in dark-haired persons (light-haired,
Brom.) ; feels > after eating.

Palpitation, worse from least exertion (compare.
Dig. — from least mental exertion, Cal. ars.).

Sensation as if the heart was squeezed together ; as
if grasped with an iron hand (Cac, Sulph.).

Leucorrhoea : acrid, corrosive, staining and corrod-
ing the linen ; most abundant at time of menses.

Cancerous degeneration of the cervix ; cutting pains
in abdomen and hemorrhage at every stool.

146


lODVm — {Contimied ).

Constipation, with ineffectual urging > by drink-
ing cold milk.

Croup : membranous, hoarse, dry cough, worse in
warm, wet weather ; with wheezing and sawing respi-
ration (Spong.).

Child grasps the larynx (Cepa) ; face pale and cold,
especially in fleshy children.

Relations. — Complementary : to, Lycopodium.

Compare : Acet. ac, Brom., Con., Kali bi., Spong.
in membranous croup and croupy affections ; espe-
cially in overgrown boys with scrofulous diathesis.

Follows well : after. Hep., Mer.; is followed by Kali
bi. in croup. Acts best in goitre when given after
full moon, or when the moon is waning. — Lippe.

Should not be given during lying-in period, except
in high potencies. — Hering.

Aggravation. — Warmth; wrapping up the head
(reverse of. Hep., Psor.).


IPECACUANHA.

Ipecac. RubiacecB.

Adapted to cases where the gastric symptoms pre-
dominate (Ant c, Puis.) ; tongue clean or slightly
coated.

In all diseases with constant and continual
nausea.

Nausea: with profuse saliva; vomiting of white,
glairy mucus in large quantities, without relief; sleepy

147


IPEC ACU ANH A— ( Continued ) .

afterwards ; worse from stooping ; the primary effects
of tobacco ; of pregnancy.

Stomach : feels relaxed, as if hanging down (Ign.,
Staph.) ; clutching, squeezing, griping, as from a hand,
each finger sharply pressing into intestines ; worse
from motion.

Flatulent, cutting colic about imibilicus.

Stool : grassy-green ; of white mucus (Colch.) ;
bloody ; fermented, foamy, slimy ; like frothy molasses.

Autumnal dysentery ; cold nights, after hot days
(Colch., Merc).

Asiatic cholera, first symptoms, where nausea and
vomiting predominate (Colch.).

Hemorrhage : active or passive, bright-red from
all the orifices of the body (Erig., Mill.) ; uterine, pro-
fuse, clotted ; heavy, oppressed breathing during ;
stitches from navel to uterus.

Cutting pains across abdomen from left to right
(Lach. — from right to left, Lye).

Cough ; dry, spasmodic, constricted, asthmatic.

Difficult breathing from least exercise ; violent
dyspnoea, with wheezing and anxiety about the
stomach.

Whooping-cough ; child loses breathy turns pale,
stiff and blue ; strangling, with gagging and vomit-
ing of mucus ; bleeding from nose or mouth (Indigo).

Cough, with rattling of mucus in bronchi when
inspiring (Ant. t); threatened suffocation from mucus.

Pains as if bones were all torn to pieces (as if broken,
Eup.).

Intermittent fever : in beginning of irregular cases ;

148


IPEC ACU ANHA— ( Continued ) .

with nausea, or from gastric disturbance ; after abuse
of, or suppression from quinine.

Intermittent dyspepsia, every other day at same
hour ; fever, with persistent nausea.

Oversensitive to heat and cold.

Relation. — Complementary : Cuprum.

Is followed well : by, Ars. in influenza, chills, croup,
debility, cholera infantum ; by Ant t in foreign
bodies in larynx.

Similar : to. Puis., Ant. c, in gastric troubles.

Aggravation. — ^Winter and dry weather; warm,
moist, south winds (Euph.) ; slightest motion.


KAU BICHROMICVM.

Potassium Bichromate. K^.Cr^,Oy

Fat, light-haired persons who suffer from catarrhal,
syphilitic or psoric affections.

Fat, chubby, short-necked children disposed to
croup and croupy affections.

Affections of the mucous membranes — eyes, nose,
mouth, throat, bronchi, gastro-intestinal and genito-
urinary tracts — discharges of a tough, stringy mucus
which adheres to the parts and can be drawn into
long strings (compare, Hyd., Lys.).

Complaints occurring in hot weather.

Liability to take cold in open air.

Rheumatism alternating with gastric symptoms,
one appearing in the fall and the other in the spring ;
rheumatism and dysentery alternate (Abrot).

149


K ALrl BICHROMICIJII— ( CanHnued ) .

Pains : in small spots^ can be covered with point of
finger (Ign.) ; shift rapidly from one part to another
(Kali s., Lac c, Puis.) ; appear and disappear suddenly
(Bell., Ign., Mag. p.).

Neuralgia every day at same hour (Chin. s.).

Gastric complaints : bad effects of beer ; loss of ap-
petite ; weight in pit of stomach ; flatulence ; < soon
after eating; vomiting of ropy mucus and blood;
round ulcer of stomach (Gym.).

Nose : pressive pain in root of nose {in forehead and
root ofnose^ Stict.) ; discharge of plugs, " clinkers;"
tough, ropy, green fluid mucus ; in clear masses, and
has violent pain from occiput to forehead if discharge
ceases.

Ulceration of septum, with bloody discharge or
large flakes of hard mucus (Alum., Sep., Teuc).

Diphtheria : pseudo-membranous deposit, firm,
pearly, fibrinous, prone to extend downwards to
larynx and trachea (Lac c. — reverse of, Brom.).

CEdematous^ bladder-like appearance of uvula;
much swelling, but little redness (Rhus).

Cough : violent, rattling, with gagging from viscid
mucus in the throat ; < when undressing (Hep.).

Croup : hoarse^ metallic^ with expectoration of
tough mucus or fibro-elastic casts in morning on
awakening; with dyspnoea, > by lying down (worse
when lying down, Aral., Lach.).

Deep-eating ulcers in fauces ; often syphilitic.

Headache: blurred vision or blindness precedes the
attack (Gels., Lac d.) ; must lie down ; aversion to


150


KALI BICHROmiClJlI— ( ConHnued ) .

light and noise ; sight returns as headache increases
(Iris, Nat, Lac d.).

Prolapsus uteri, seemingly in hot weather.

Sexual desire absent in fleshy people.

Relations. — Compare : Brom., Hep., lod. in croupy
affections.

After : Canth. or Carb. ac. has removed the scrap-
ings, in dysentery.

After: lod. in croup, when hoarse cough, with
tough membrane, general weakness and coldness are
present ; Cal. in acute or chronic nasal catarrh.

Ant. t. follows well in catarrhal affections and skin
diseases.

Aggravations. — Heat of summer ; hot weather.

Amelioration. — Skin symptoms are better in cold
weather (reverse of. Alum, and Pet.).


KALrl BROMATIJM.

Potassium Bromide, K. Br.

Adapts to large persons inclined to obesity ; acts
better in children than in adults.

Loss of sensibility^ fauces, larynx, urethra, entire
body ; staggering, uncertain gait ; feels as if legs were
all over sidewalk.

Nervous, restless ; cannot sit still, must move about
or keep occupied ; hands and fingers in constant
motion; fidgety hands (fidgety feet, Zinc.) ; twitching
of fingers.

151


KALI BROMATIJM— (a«A'««^^).

Fits of uncontrollable weeping and profound melan
cholic delusions.

Loss of memory; forgets how to talk; absent-
minded ; had to be told the word before he could
speak it (Anac).

Depressed, low-spirited, anxious, "feel as if they
would lose their minds,"

Incoordination of muscles (Gels.) ; nervous weak-
ness or paralysis of motion and numbness.

Restlessness and sleeplessness due to worry and
grief, loss of property or reputation, from business
embarrassments (Hyos.).

Night terrors of children (Kali p.) ; grinding teeth
in sleep, screams, moans, cries ; horrible dreams, can-
not be comforted by friends. Somnambulism (Sil.).

Spasms : from fright, anger or emotional causes in
nervous plethoric persons ; during parturition, teeth-
ing, whooping-cough, Bright's disease.

Epilepsy : congenital, syphilitic, tubercular ; usually
a day or two before menses ; at new moon ; headache
follows attack.

Cholera infantum, with, reflex irritation of brain,
before effusion ; first stage of hydrocephaloid.

Daily colic in infants about 5 A. m. (at 4 p. m.. Col.,
Lye).

Nervous cough during pregnancy ; dry, hard, almost
incessant, threatening abortion (Con.).

Stammering ; slow, difficult speech (Bo v., Stram.).

Acne : simplex, indurata, rosacea ; bluish-red, pus-
tular, on face, chest, shoulders ; leaves unsightly scars
(Carbo an.) ; in young fleshy persons of gross habits.

152


KALrl nWLOMATVWL— (Continued),

Relations* — One of the antidotes for lead poison-
ing.

Often curative after Eugenia jambos in acne.


KALrl CARBONICITM.

Potassium Carbonate. K^O^Co^.

For diseases of old people, dropsy and paralysis ;
with dark hair, lax fibre, inclined to obesity (Am. c.
Graph,).

After loss of fluids or vitality, particularly in the
anaemic (Cinch., Phos. ac, Phos., Psor.).

Pains stitchingy darting ^ worse during rest and lying
on affected side (stitching, darting, better during rest
and lying on painful side, Bry.).

Cannot bear to be touched ; starts when touched
ever so lightly, especially on the feet.

Great aversion to being alone (Ars., Bis., Lye. —
desires to be alone, Ign., Nux).

Bag-like swellings between upper eyelids and eye-
brows.

Weak eyes ; after coition^ pollution, abortion, measles.

Stomach : distended, sensitive ; feels as if it would
burst ; excessive flatulency, everything she eats or
drinks appears to be converted into gas (lod.).

Nosebleed when washing the face in the morning
(Am. c, Am.).

Toothache only when eating ; throbbing; < when
touched by anything warm or cold.

Backache, sweating, weakness ; after abortion, labor,

153


KALrl CASLnOKTCVS/K—iConhnued),

metrorrhagia ; when eating ; while walking feels as if
she must give up and lie down.

Cough : dry, paroxysmal, loosens viscid mucus or
pus which must be swallowed ; spasmodic wtlA gag-
ging or vomiting of ingesta ; hard, white or smoky
masses fly from throat when coughing (Bad., Chel.).

Feels badly, week before menstruation ; backache,
before and during menses.

Labor pains insufficient ; violent backache ; wants
the back pressed (Caust).

Asthma, relieved when sitting up or bending for-
ward or by rocking ; worse from 2 to 4 A. M.

Persons suffering from ulceration of the lungs can
scarcely get well without this anti-psoric. — Hahne-
mann.

Difficult swallowing ; sticking pain in pharynx as
of a fish-bone (Hep., Nit. ac); food easily gets into
the windpipe ; pain in back when swallowing.

Constipation : stool large, difficult, with stitching,
colic pains an hour or two before.

Heart : tendency to fatty degeneration (Phos.); as
if suspended by a thread (Lach.).

Very much inclined to take cold.

Relations. — Complementary : Carbo veg.

Compare : Bry., Lye, Nat. m.. Nit. ac, Stan.

Follows well : after. Kali s., Phos., Stan, in loose,
rattling cough.

Will bring on the menses, when Nat. m., though
apparently indicated, fails. — Hahnemann.


154


KALrMIA UlTIPOLrlA.

Mountain Laurel, Erkacece.

Adapted to acute neuralgia, rheumatism, gouty
complaints, especially when heart is involved as a se-
quel of rheumatism or gout.

In heart diseases that have developed from rheuma-
tism, or alternate with it.

Pains sticking, darting, pressing, shooting in a
downward direction (Cac. — ^upward, Led.); attended
or succeeded by numbness of affected part (Aeon.,
Cham., Plat).

• Severe stitching pain in r. eye and orbit (1. eye,
Spig.); stiffness in muscles, pain < when turning the
eyes (Spig.); begins at sunrise, < at noon and leaves
at sunset (Nat m.).

Rheumatism : pains intense, change places suddenly,
going from joint to joint; joint hot, red, swollen;
worse from least movement

Vertigo when stooping or looking down (Spig.).

Pulse slow, scarcely perceptible (35 or 40 per
minute); pale face and cold extremities.

Relations. — Similar: to, Led., Rhod., Spig., in
rheumatic affections and gout

It follows Spig. well in heart disease.


KREOSOTVIII.

Kreosote, A Distillation of Wood Tar,

Dark complexion, slight, lean, ill-developed, poorly

nourished, overgrown ; very tall for her age (Phos.).

Children : old looking^ wrinkled (Abrot.); scrofulous

155


KR£OSOTlJ]II— ( Continued ) .

or psoric affections; rapid emaciation (lod.); post
climacteric diseases of women (Lach.).

Hemorrhagic diathesis ; small wounds bleed freely
(CroL, Lach., Phos.); flow passive, in epistaxis, hemop-
tysis, hematuria ; in typhoid, followed by great pros-
tration ; dark, oozing, after the extraction of a tooth
(Ham.).

Roaring and humming in ears, with deafness, before
and during menses.

Corrosive, fetid, ichorous discharges from mucous
membranes ; vitality greatly depressed.

Itching, so violent toward evening as to drive one
almost wild (itching, without eruption, Dolichos).

Painful dentition ; teeth begin to decay as soon as
they at>pear ; gums bluish-red, soft, spongy, bleeding,
inflamed, scorbutic, ulcerated.

Vomiting : of pregnancy, sweetish water, with
ptyalism ; of cholera, during painful dentition ; inces-
sant with cadaverous stool ; in malignant affections of
stomach.

Severe headache before and during menses (Sep.).

Menses : too early, profuse, protracted ; pain during,
but < after it ; flow on lying down, cease on sitting
or walking about ; cold drinks relieve menstrual
pains ; flow intermits^ at times almost ceasing, then
commencing again (Sulph.).

Incontinence of urine ; can only tcT^nate when lying;
copious, pale ; urging, cannot get out of bed quick
enough (Apis, Petros.) ; during first sleep (Sep.), from
which child is roused with difficulty.


156


VL.WLE090TVM— (Continued ).

Smarting and burning during and after micturition
(Sulph.).

I/eucorrhoea : acrid, corrosive, offensive ; worse be-
tween periods {Row, ^ Bor.); has the odor of green com ;
stiffens like starch, stains the linen yellow.

Lochia : dark, brown, lumpy, offensive, acrid ; al-
most ceases then freshens up again (Con., Sulph.).

Violent corrosive itching of pudenda and vagina.

Relations. — Kreosote is followed well by Ars.,
Phos., Sulph., in cancer and diseases of a malignant
tendency.

Carbo veg. and Kreosote are inimical.

Aggravation. — In the open air ; cold weather ;
when growing cold ; from washing or bathing with
cold water ; rest, especially when lying.

Amelioration. — Generally better from warmth.


LrACHBSIS.

Surukuku^ Snake Poison. Ophidia.

Persons of a melancholy temperament, dark eyes,
and a disposition to low spirits and indolence.

Women of choleric temperament, with freckles and
red hair (Phos.).

Better adapted to thin and emaciated than to fleshy
persons ; to those who have been changed, both men-
tally and physically, by their illness.

Climacteric ailments: hemorrhoids, hemorrhages;
hot flushes and hot perspirations; burning vertex

157


(^Continued),

headache, especially at or after the menopause (Sang.,

Sulph.).

Ailments from long lasting grief ; sorrow, fright,
vexation, jealonsy or disappointed love (Aur., Ign.,
Phos. ac).

Women who have not recovered from the change
of life, "have never felt well since that time."

Le/i side principally affected ; diseases begin on the
left and go to the right side — left ovary, testicle, chest

Great sensitiveness to touch ; throat, stomach, ab-
domen ; cannot bear bed-clothes or night-dress to touch
throat or abdomen, not because sore or tender, as in
Apis or Bell., but clothes cause an uneasiness^ make
her nervous.

Intolerance of tight bands about neck or waist.

Extremes of heat and cold cause great debility.

Drunkards with congestive headaches and hemor-
rhoids ; prone to erysipelas or apoplexy.

Headache : pressing or bursting pain in temples <
from motion, pressure, stooping, lying, after sleep ;
dreads to go to sleep because she wakens with such a
headache.

Rush of blood to head : after alcohol ; mental emo-
tions ; suppressed or irregular menses ; at climaxis ;
left-sided apoplexy.

Weight and pressure on vertex (Sep.) ; like lead,
in occiput.

All symptoms, especially the mental, worse after
sleeps or the aggravation wakes him from sleep ; sleeps
into the aggravation ; unhappy^ distressed, anxious,
sad < in morning on zvaking,

158


{Conti7iued)»

Mental excitability ; ecstacy, with almost prophetic
perceptions ; with a vivid imagination ; great lo-
quacity (Agar., Stram.) ; wants to talk all the time ;
jumps from one idea to another ; one word often leads
into another story.

Constipation : inactivity, stool lies in rectum, with-
out urging; sensation of constriction of sphincter
(CausL, Nit ac).

Menses at regular time ; too short, scanty, feeble ;
pains all relieved by the flow ; always better during
menses (Zinc).

Piles : with scanty menses ; at climaxis ; strangu-
lated ; with stitches shooting upward (Nit. ac.).

The least thing coming near mouth or nose inter-
feres with breathing ; wants to be fanned, but slowly
and at a distance (rapidly, Carbo v.).

As soon as he falls asleep the breathing stops
(Am. c, Grind., I^ac c. Op.).

Great physical and mental exhaustion ; trembling
in whole body, would constantly sink down from
weakness ; worse in the morning (Sulph., Tub.).

Epilepsy ; comes on during sleep (Buf o) ; from loss
of vital fluids, onanism, jealousy.

Hemorrhagic diathesis ; small wounds bleed easily
and profusely (Crot, Kreos., Phos.) ; blood dark, non-
coagulable (Crot, Sec).

Boils, carbuncles, ulcers with intense pain (Tar.) ;
malignant pustules ; decubitus ; dark^ bluish^ purple
appearance ; tend to malignancy.

Bad effects of poison wounds ; post-mortem (Pyr.).

Sensation as of a ball rolling in the bladder.

159


LACHESIS— (G?////>/«^^ ).

Fever annually returning ; paroxysm every spring
(Carbo v., Sulph.), after suppression by quinine the
pre\4ous autumn.

Fever : typhoid, typhus ; stupor or muttering delir-
ium, sunken countenance, falling of lower jaw ; tongue
dry, black, trembles^ is protruded with difficulty or
catches on the teeth when protruding ; conjunctiva
yellow or orange color; perspiration cold, stains
yellow, bloody (Lye).

Diphtheria and tonsillitis, beginning on the left and
extending to right side (Lac c, Sabad.) ; dark purple
appearance (Naja) ; < by hot drinks, after sleep ;
liquids more painful than solids when swallowing
(Bell., Bry., Ign.) ; prostration out of all proportion to
appearance of throat.

Relations. — Complementary : Hep., Lye, Nit. ac.

Incompatible : Acet. ac, Carb. ac.

In intermittent fever Nat. m. follows Lach. well
when type changes.

Aggravation. — After sleep ; contact ; extremes of
temperature ; acids ; alcohol ; cinchona ; mercury ;
pressure or constriction ; sun's rays ; spring ; summer.

LrAC CANINITM.

Dog'^s Milk,

For nervous, restless, highly sensitive organisms.

Symptoms erratic, pains constantly flying from one
part to another (Kali bi., Puis.) ; changing from side
to side every few hours or days.

Very forgetful, absent-minded ; makes purchases

160


LAC CAVrnVM— (Continued),

and walks away without them (Agnus, Anac, Canst.,
Nat).

In writing, uses too many words or not the right
ones ; omits final letter or letters in a word ; cannot
concentrate the mind to read or study ; very nervous
(Bov., Graph., Lach., Nat. c, Sep.).

Despondent, hopeless ; thinks her disease incurable ;
has not a friend living ; nothing worth living for ;
could weep at any moment (Act., Aur., Cal., Lach.).

Cross, irritable; child cries and screams all the
time, especially at night (Jal., Nux, Psor.).

Fears to be alone (Kali c.) ; of dying (Ars.) ; of be-
coming insane (Lil.) ; of falling down stairs (Bor.)

Chronic ^'^ blue^^ condition; everything seems so
dark that it can grow no darker (Lye, Puis.).

Attacks of rage, cursing and swearing at slightest
provocation (Lil., Nit. ac.) ; intense ugliness ; hateful.

Coryza, with discharge of thick, white mucus.

One nostril stuffed up, the other free and discharg-
ing ; these conditions alternate ; discharge acrid, nose
and lip raw (Arum, Cepa).

Diphtheria and tonsillitis ; symptoms change re-
peatedly from side to side.

Sore throats and cough are apt to begin and etui
with menstruation ; yellow or white patches ; pains
shoot to ear.

Throat : sensitive to touch externally (Lach.) ; <
by empty swallowing (Ign.) ; constant inclination to
swallow, painfuL almost impossible (Mer.) ; paitis ex^
tend to ears (Hep., Kali bi.) ; begins on left side
(Lach.).

K 161


UkC CA^TNtrSH—aConltnued).

Shining, glazed appearance of diphtheritic deposit,
chancres and ulcers.

Very hungry, cannot eat enough to satisfy ; as
hungry after eating as before (Case, Cal., Cina, Lye,
Stront).

Sinking at epigastrium ; faintness in stomach.

Menses : too early ; too profuse ; flow in gushes,
bright red, viscid and stringy (dark, black, stringy.
Croc.) ; breasts swollen, painful, sensitive before and
during (Con.).

Discharge of flatus from vagina (Brom., Lye, Nux
m.. Sang.).

Breasts : inflamed, painful ; < by least jar and
towards evening ; must hold them firmly when going
tip or down stairs (Bry.).

Serviceable in almost all cases when it is required
to dry up milk (Asaf. — ^to bring back or increase it,
(Lac d.).

Sensation as if breath would leave her when lying
down ; must get up and walk (Am. c, Grind., Lach.).

Loss of milk while nursing, without any known
cause (Asaf.).

Palpitation violent when lying on left side, > turn-
ing on right (Tab.).

Sexual organs easily excited, from touch, pressure
on sitting, or friction by walking (Cinn., Coff., Mur.,
Plat).

When walking, seems to be walking on air ; when
lying, does not seem to touch the bed (Asar.).

Backache : intense, unbearable, across super-sacral
region, extending to r. natis and r. sciatic nerve ; <

162


LAC CANTNVmH—iContznu^d).

by rest and on first moving (Rhus) ; spine aches from
base of brain to coccyx, very sensitive to touch or press-
ure (Chin, s., Phos., Zinc).

Relations. — Similar : to, Apis, Con., Murex, Lach.,
Kali bi.. Puis., Sep., Sulph.

It generally acts best in single dose.

Probably no remedy in the Materia Medica presents
a more valuable pathogenesis in symptoms of the
throat, or one that will better repay a careful study.

Like Lachesis, this remedy has met with the most violent oppo-
sition from prejudice and ignorance, which its wonderful thera-
peutic powers have slowly, yet surely, overcome. It was success-
fully used by Dioscorides, Pliny and Sextus in ancient times, and
revived in New York by Reisig, Bayard and Swan in the success-
ful treatment of diphtheria. Reisig was the first to potentize it.


LrAC DBPLrORATlTIH.

4

Skimmed Milk,

The successful treatment of Diabetes and Bright's Disease with
skim milk, by Donkin, was the hint which led Dr. Swan to
potentize and prove it. Every symptom here given has been veri-
fied in the cure of the sick.

Diseases with faulty and defective nutrition with
reflex affections of nervous centers.

Despondent ; does not care to live ; has no fear of
death but is sure he is going to die.

American sick headache: begins in forehead, extend-
ing to occiput, in morning on rising (Bry.); intense
throbbing^ with nausea, vomiting, blindness and
obstinate constipation (Epig., Iris, Sang.); < noise,
light, motion (Mag. m., Sil.); during menses (Kreos.,

163


UkC OEFLORATUM— (Gw//««^^).

Sep.); great prostration; > pressure, by bandaging
head tightly (Arg. n., Puis.); copious, pale urine.

Globus hystericus : sensation of a large ball rising
from stomach to throat, causing sense of suffocation
(Asaf., Kal.).

Vomiting : incessant, no relation to eating ; first of
undigested food, intensely acid, then of bitter water ;
of pregtiancy (lyac. ac, Psor.).

Constipation : with ineffectual urging (Anac, Nux);
feces dry and hard (Bry., Sulph.); stool large^ hard^
great strainings lacerating anus; painful, extorting

cries.

A woman had taken lo or 12 enemas daily, often
passed 4 or 5 weeks without an evacuation, constipa-
tion of 15 years' standing.

Menses : delayed ; suppressed, by putting hands in
cold water (Con.); drinking a glass of milk will
promptly suppress flow until next period (compare,
Phos.).

Great restlessness, extreme and protracted suffering
from loss of sleep (Coc, Nit. ac).

Feels completely exhausted, whether she does any-
thing or not ; great fatigue when walking.

Sensation : as if cold air was blowing on her, even
while covered up ; as if sheets were damp.

Dropsy : from organic heart disease ; from chronic
liver complaint ; far advanced albuminuria ; following
intermittent fever.

Obesity ; fatty degeneration.


164


LrBDlJIlI PALrVSTRB.

Marsh Tea, Erica^ece.

Adapted to the rheumatic, gouty diathesis ; consti-
tutions abused by alcohol (Colch.).

Hemorrhage into anterior chamber after iridectomy.

Contusions of eye and lids especially if much ex-
travasation of blood; ecchymosis of lids and con-
junctiva.

Rheumatism or gout ; begins in lower limbs and
ascends (descends, Kal.) ; especially if brought to a
low asthenic condition by abuse of Colchicum ; joints
become the seat of nodosities and "gout stones,"
which are painful ; acute and chronic arthritis.

Affects left shoulder- and right hip-joint (Agar.,
Ant t, Stram.).

Emaciation of affected parts (Graph.).

Pains are sticking, tearing, throbbing; rheumatic
pains are < by motion ; < at night, by warmth of
bed and bed-covering (Mer.) ; > only when holding
feet in ice-water (Sec).

Complaints of people who are cold all the time ;
always feel cold and chilly ; lack of animal or vital
heat (Sep., Sil.) ; the wounded parts especially are
cold to touch.

Parts cold to touch, but not cold subjectively to
patient.

In some affections, warmth of bed intolerable on
account of heat and burning of limbs.

Swelling : of feet, up to knees ; of ankle with un-
bearable pain when walking, as from a sprain or false
step ; ball of great toe swollen, painful ; in heels as
if bruised.

165


Intense itching of feet and ankles, < from scratchr
ing and warmth of bed (Puis., Rhus).

Easy spraining of ankles and feet (Carbo an.).

Punctured wounds by sharp-pointed instiuments,
as awls, nails (Hyper.) ; rat bites, stings of insects,
especially mosquitoes.

Red pimples or tubercles on forehead and cheeks^
as in brandy drinkers, stinging when touched.

Long-remaining discoloration after injuries ; "black
and blue" places become green.

Relations. — Compare : Am., Crot. t, Ham., Bellis,
Ruta, in traumatism ; Con., in long-lasting eflFects of
injuries.


LrlLrllTIH TIGRINIJIII.

Tiger Lily, Liliacece,

Affects principally the left side of the body (Lach.,
Thuja).

Tormented about her salvation (Lye, Sulph., Ver.),
with ovarian or uterine complaints ; consolation <.

Wild^ crazy feeling on vertex ; confused ideas.

Profound depression of spirits ; can hardly avoid
weeping ; is very timid, fearful and weeps much ; in-
different about what is being done for her.

Anxious : about the disease ; fears the symptoms
indicate an organic affection ; marked in both sexes.

Disposed to curse, strike, to think obscene things
(Anac, Lac c.) ; alternates with uterine irritation.

Listless, yet cannot sit still ; restless, yet . does not

166


UL IIJM TIGRINUM— ( Continued ) .

want to walk ; must keep busy to repress sexual desire.

Desire to do something, hurried manner, yet has no
ambition ; aimless^ hurried motion (Arg. n.).

Fears : being alone, insanity, heart disease ; fears
she is incurable ; some impending calamity or disease.

Headaches and mental ailments depending on
uterine irritation or displacements. Menstrual irregu-
larities and irritable heart.

Cannot walk on uneven ground.

Pains in small spots ; constantly shifting (Kali bi.).

Frequent urging to urinate ; if desire is not attended
to, sensation of congestion in chest.

Bearing-down sensation ; in abdomen and pelvis, as
though all organs would, escape (Lac c, Murex, Sep.) ;
> supporting vulva with hand ; with palpitation.

Menses : early, scanty, dark, offensive ; flows only
when moving about ; ceased to flow when she ceased
to walk (Caust.^-on lying down, Kreos., Mag. c).

Sensation as if heart was grasped in a vise (Cac.) ;
as if blood had all gone to the heart ; feels full to
bursting ; inability to walk erect

Pulsations over whole body, and full, distended feel-
ing, as if blood would burst through the vessels (-^sc).

Palpitation, fluttering : faint, hurried, anxious sen-
sation about apex ; sharp pain in 1. chest ; awakens at
night ; irregular pulse ; extremities cold and covered
with cold sweat ; < after eating, lying on either side
(on left side, Lach.).

Rapid heart-beat, 150 to 170 per minute.

Constant desire to defecate and urinate (with pro-
lapsus), from pressure in rectum.

167


LrlLIlJlI TTGWtTNVM— {Continued).

Weak and atonic condition of ovaries, uterus and
pelvic tissues, resulting in anteversion, retroversion,
sub-involution (Helon., Sep.) ; slow recovery after
labor ; nearly always with constipation, from inactivity.

Relations. — Compare: Act, Agar., Cac., Helon.,
Murex, Nat p.. Plat, Sep., Spig., Tar.

LrOBBLrIA INFLrATA.

Indian Tobacco. Lobeliacece.

Best adapted to persons of light hair, blue eyes, fair
complexion ; inclined to be fleshy.

Gastric derangements, extreme nausea and vomiting;
morning sickness ; spasmodic asthma ; pertussis^ with
dyspnoea threatening suffocation.

Headache : gastric, with nausea, vomiting and great
prostration ; following intoxication ; < afternoon
until midnight; sudden pallor with profuse sweat
(Tab.); < by tobacco or tobacco smoke.

Vomiting: face bathed with cold sweat; of preg-
nancy, profuse salivation (Lac. ac. — ^at night, Mer.j;
chronic with good appetite, with nausea, profuse
sweat and marked prostration.

Faintness, weakness and an indescribable feeling at
epigastrium, from excessive use of tea or tobacco.

Urine : of a deep orange red color ; copious red
sediment.

Dyspnoea : from constriction of middle of chest ; <
with every labor pain, seems to neutralize the pains ;
< by exposure to cold or slightest exertion, going up
or down stairs (Ipec).

168


LOBELIA I'KFI.ATA—( Con/inued).


Sensation of congestion, pressure or weight in chest
as if blood from extremities was filling it, > ^y rapid
walki>ig.

Sensation as if heart would stand still ; deep seated
pain at base (at apex, Lil.)-

Sacrum : extreme sensitiveness ; cannot bear the
slightest touch, even of a soft pillow; sits leaning
forward to avoid contact with clothes.

Relations. — Compare : Ant t, Ars., Ipec, Tab.,
Ver.

Aggravation. — Slightest motion ; touch, cold.

Amelioration. — Chest pain by walking rapidly.

For the bad effects of drunkenness in people with
light hair, blue or grey eyes, florid complexion, corpu-
lent, Ivobelia bears the same relation that Nux vomica
does to persons of the opposite temperament


LVCOPODIVM CLAVATDM.

Wolfs Foot ; Cluh Moss. LycopodiaceiE.

For persons intellectually keen, but physically weak ;
upper part of body emaciated, lower part semi-drop-
sical ; predisposed to htng and hepatic affections (Cal.,
Phos,, Sulph,); especially the extremes of life, chil-
dren and old people.

Deep-seated, progressing, chronic diseases.

Pains; aching-pressure, drawing; chiefly right-sided,
< four to eight P. M.

A^ecls right side, or pain goes from right to left;
throat, chest, abdomen, liver, ovaries.


hest
aAid I


LrVCOPOmiJM C1.A\ ATV^—(Canftnued).

Children, weak, emaciated; with well-developed
heads but puny, sickly bodies.

Baby cries all day, sleeps all night (rev. of, Jal.,
Psor.).

Ailments from fright, anger, mortification, or vexa-
tion with reserved displeasure (Staph.).

Avaricious, greedy, miserly, malicious, pusilani-
mous.

Irritable ; peevish and cross on walking ; ugly,
kick and scream ; easily angered ; cannot endure op-
position or contradiction ; seeks disputes ; is beside
himself.

Weeps all day, cannot calm herself ; very sensitive,
even cries when thanked.

Dread of men ; of solitude, irritable and melancholy ;
fear of being alone (Bis., Kali c, Lil.).

Complexion pale, dirty, unhealthy ; sallow, with
deep furrows, looks older than he is ; fan-like motion
of alee nasi (Ant. t.).

Catarrh : dry, nose stopped at nighty must breathe
through the mouth (Am. c, Nux, Samb.); snufBles,
child starts from sleep rubbing its nose ; of root of
nose and frontal sinuses ; crusts and elastic plugs
(Kali bi., Marum).

Diphtheria; fauces brownish-red, deposit spreads
from right tonsil to left^ or descends from nose to right
tonsil ; < after sleep and from cold drinks (from
warm drinks, Lach.).

Everything tastes sour ; eructations, heartburn,
waterbrash, sour vomiting (between chill and heat).


no


IrYCOPODIVIlI CJ^AyATVM--- (Continued),

Canine hunger; the more he eats, the more he
craves ; head aches as if he does not eat.

Gastric aflFections ; excessive accumulation of flatu-
lence ; constant sensation of satiety ; good appetite,
but a few mouthfuls fill up to the throat, and he
feels bloated ; fermentation in abdomen, with loud
grumblings croaking^ especially lower abdomen (upper
abdomen, Carbo v. — entire abdomen. Cinch.); fulness,
not relieved by belching (Cinch.).

Constipation: since puberty; since last confine-
ment ; when away from home ; of infants ; with in-
effectual urging, rectum contracts and protrudes dur-
ing stool, developing piles.

Red "sand in urine, on child's diaper (Phos.); child
cries before urinating (Bor.); pain in back, relieved
by urinating ; renal colic, right side (left side, Berb.).

Impotence : of young men, from onanism or sexual
excess ; penis small, cold, relaxed ; old men, with
strong desire but imperfect erections; falls asleep dur-
ing an embrace ; premature emissions.

Dryness of vagina ; burning in, during and after
coition (Lys.); 'physometra.^? ^ cajQ ( cKkhIs^^X^^ i^. ^Aa«^. )

Discharge of blood from genitals during every stool.

Foetus appears to be turning somersaults.

Hernia : right sided, has cured many cases especially
in children.

Pneumonia ; neglected or maltreated, base of r.
lung involved especially ; to hasten absorption or ex-
pectoration.

Cough deep, hollow, even raising mucus in large
quantities affords little relief.

171


LYCOPODIVmi CLA V ATUM— ( ConHnued ) .

One foot hot and the other cold (Cinch., Dig., Ipec).

Waking at night feeling hungry (Cina, Psor.).

Relations. — Complementary: Iodine.

Bad eflFects: of onions, bread; wine, spirituous
liquors ; tobacco smoking and chewing (Ars.).

Follows well : after, Calc, Carbo v., I/ach., Sulph.

It is rarely advisable to begin the treatment of a
chronic disease with Lye unless clearly indicated ; it
is better to give first another antipsoric.

Lye. is a deep-seated, long-acting remedy, and should
rarely be repeated after improvement begins.

Aggravation. — Nearly all diseases from 4 to 8 P.
M. (Hell. — from 4 to 9 p. m.. Col., Mag. p.).

Amelioration. — Warm food and drinks; from un-
covering the head ; loosening the garments.

M K.AX9 (y^ KjA/k^ M-,

The Saliva of a Rabid Dog, A Nosode.

The sight or sound of running water or pouring
water aggravates all complaints.

Lyssophobia ; fear of becoming mad.

Bluish discoloration of wounds (Lach.).

Complaints resulting from abnormal sexual desire
(from abstinence, Con.).

Mental emotion or mortifying news always makes
him worse.

Cannot bear heat of sun (Gels., Glon., Lach., Nat).


*Ziemsen suggested Ivyssin as a substitute for Hydrophobinum,
Encyclopedia, vol. iii, p. 472.

172


IrYSSIN— ( Continued ) .

Convulsions : JErom dazzling or reflected light from
water or mirror (Stram.); from even thinking of fluids
of any kind ; from slightest touch or current of air.

Headache : from bites of dogs, whether rabid or
not ; chronic, from mental emotion or exertion ;< by
noise of running water or bright light.

Saliva ; tough, ropy, viscid, frothy in mouth and
throat, with constant spitting (Hydr.).

Sore throat, constant desire to swallow (Lac c,
Mer.).

DiflSculty in swallowing, even spasm of oesophagus
from swallowing liquids ; gagging when swallowing
water.

Constant desire to urinate on seeing running water
(Canth., Sulph.); urine scanty, cloudy, contains sugar.

Prolapsus uteri ; many cases of years' standing cured.

Sensitiveness of vagina, rendering coition painful.

Relations. — Compare : Bell., Canth., Hyos., Stram.,
in hydrophobia.

Aggravation. — Sight or sound of water ; bright,
dazzling light (Stram.) ; carriage-riding (Coc. — ^better
from. Nit ac).


MAGNBSIA CARBOMICA.

Carbonate of Magnesia, MgCO^^ J^^tQ,

For persons, especially children, of irritable disposi-
tion, nervous temperament (Cham.) ; lax fibre ; sour
smell of whole body (Rheum).

173


The whole body feels tired and painful, especially
the legs and feet ; aching, restless.

Spasmodic aflFections of stomach and intestines (Col.,
Mag. p.), increased secretion from mucous membranes.

Unrefreshing sleep, more tired on rising than when
retiring (Bry., Con., Hep., Op., Sulph.).

Inordinate craving for meat in children of tuber-
culous parentage.

Heartburn : sour^ belching, eructations, taste and
vomiting ; of pregnancy.

Pains : neuralgic, lightning-like, < left side (Col.);
insupportable during repose, must get up and walk
(Rhus) ; toothache, during pregnancy < at night.

Pain on vertex as if the hair were pulled (Kali n.,
Phos.).

Menses : preceded by sore throat (Lac c), labor-like
pain, cutting colic, backache, weakness, chilliness ;
flows only at night or when lying, ceases when walk-
ing (Am. m., Kreos. — ^rev. of, Lil.); acrid, dark, pitch-
like ; difficult to wash off (Med.).

Diarrhoea : preceded by cutting, doubling-up colic ;
occurs regularly every three weeks ; stools green^
frothy^ like scum of a frog-pond ; white, tallow-like
masses are found floating in stool ; the milk passes
undigested in nursing children.

When crude magnesia has been taken to " sweeten
the stomach ;" if the symptoms correspond, the poten-
tized remedy will often relieve.

Relations. — Complementary: to, Chamomilla.

Aggravation. — Change of temperature ; every three
weeks ; rest ; milk, during menses.

174


MAGXESIA CASLBOHEC A— (Continued).

Amelioration. — Warm air, but worse in warmth of
bed (Led., Mer. — ^better in warmth of bed, Ais.).


MAGNESIA MURIATICA.

Chloride of Magnesia. Mg. CL

Especially adapted to diseases of women ; spas-
modic and hysterical complaints, complicated with
uterine diseases; who have suflFered for years from
attacks of indigestion or biliousness.

Children : during diflScult dentition are unable to
digest milk ; it causes pain in stomach and passes un-
digested ; puny, rachitic, who crave sweets.

Great sensitiveness to noise (Ign., Nux, Ther.).

Headache : every six weeks, in forehead and around
the eyes ; as if it would burst ; < from motion and
in open air; > from lying down, strong pressure
(Puis.), and wrapping up warmly (Sil., Stron.).

Great tendency of head to sweat (Cal., Sanic, Sil.).

Continual rising of white froth into the mouth.

Eructations, tasting like rotten t^ggs^ like onions
(breath smells of onions, Sinap.).

Toothache ; unbearable when food touches the teeth.

Pressing pain in liver, when walking and touching
it, liver hard, enlarged, < lying on right side (Mer.,
Kali c).

Constipation : stool hard, scanty, large, knotty, like
sheep's dung; diflScult to pass; crumbling at verge
of anus (Am.m., Nat. m.) ; of infants during dentition.

Urine ; pale, yellow, can only be passed by bearing

175


mAGNBSIA MVWtlATlC A— (Continued),

down with abdominal muscles ; weakness of bladder.

Menses: with great excitement at every period;
flow black, clotted ; spasms and pains < in back when
walking, extend into thighs ; metrorrhagia, < at night
in bed, causing hysteria (Act., Caul.).

Leucorrhoea : after exercise ; with every stool ; with
uterine spasm ; followed by metrorrhagia ; two weeks
after menses for three or four days (Bar., Bov., Con.).

Palpitation and cardiac pains while sitting, > by
moving about (compare, Gels.).

Relations. — Compare : Cham, in the diseases of
children.


MAGNBSIA PHOSPHORICA.

Phosphate of Magnesia,

Is best adapted to thin, emaciated persons of a
highly nervous organization ; dark complexion.

Affections of right side of body ; head, ear, face,
chest, ovary, sciatic nerve (Bell., Bry., Chel., Kali c.
Lye, Pod.).

Pains : sharp, cutting, stabbing ; shooting, stitching;
lightning-like in coming and going (Bell.) ; intermit-
tent, paroxysm becoming almost unbearable, driving
patient to frenzy ; rapidly changing place (Lac c.
Puis.), with a constricting sensation (Cac, lod.,
Sulph.) ; cramping, in neuralgic affections of stomach,
abdomen and pelvis (Caul., Col.).

Great dread : of cold air ; of uncovering ; of touch-

176


MAGNBSIA PHOSPHORICA— ( Cofitin ued ) .

ing affected part ; of cold bathing or washing ; of
moving.

Languid, tired, exhausted ; unable to sit up.

Complaints from standing in cold water or working
in cold clay (Cal.).

Ailments of teething children ; spasms during den-
tition^ no fever (with fever, hot head and skin, Bell.).

Headache : begins in occiput and extends over head
(Sang., Sil.) ; of school girls ; face red, flushed ; from
mental emotion, exertion or hard study; < lo to ii
A. M. or 4 to 5 P. M.; > by pressure and external heat.

Neuralgia : of face, supra or infra-orbital ; r. side ;
intermittent, darting, cutting < by touch, cold air,
pressure > by external heat.

Toothache : at night ; rapidly shifting ; < eating,
drinking, especially cold things; > by heat (> by
cold, Bry., Coff., Fer. p.).

Spasms or cramp of stomach, with clean tongue, as
if a band was drawn tightly around the body.

Colic : flatulent, forcing patient to bend double ; >
by heat, rubbing and hard pressure (Col., Plumb.) ; of
horses and cows when Colocynth fails to >.

Menses : early ; flow dark, stringy ; pains < before,
> when flow begins (Lach., Zinc.) ; pains darting,
like lightning, shooting, < r. side, > by heat and
bending double ; vaginismus.

Enuresis : nocturnal ; from nervous irritation ; urine,
pale, copious ; after catheterization.

Cramps : of extremities ; during pregnancy ; of
writers^ piano or violin players.


177


MAGNESIA PHOSPHORICA— (C^/^V;;^^).

Relations. — Compare: Bell., Caul., Col., Lye,
Lace, Puis.; Cham, its vegetable analogue.

Sometimes acts best when given in hot water.

Aggravation. — Cold air ; a draft of cold air or cold
wind ; cold bathing or washing ; motion ; touch.

Amelioration. — Bending double ; heat ; warmth ;
pressure (burning pain > by heat, Ars.).


MBDORRHINVIII.

The Gonorrlioeal Virus, A Nosode.

For the constitutional effects of mal-treated and
suppressed gonorrhoea, when the best selected remedy
fails to relieve or permanently improve.

For persons suffering from gout, rheumatism,
neuralgia and diseases of the spinal cord and its
membranes — even organic lesions ending in paralysis
— which can be traced to a sycotic origin.

For women, with chronic ovaritis, salpingitis, pelvic
cellulitis, fibroids, cysts, and other morbid growths
of the uterus and ovaries, especially if symptoms
point to malignancy, with or without sycotic origin.

For scirrhus, carcinoma or cancer, either acute or
chronic in development, when the symptoms cor-
respond and a history of sycosis can be traced.

Bears the same relation in deep-seated sycotic
chronic affections of spinal and sympathetic nervous
system, that Psorinum does to deep-seated affections
of skin and mucous membranes.

178


mBDORRHINVm— ( Continued ) .

Children, pale, rachitic ; dwarfed and stunted in
growth (Bar. c); mentally, dull and weak.

Great heat and soreness, with enlargement of lym-
phatic glands all over body.

Consumptive languor ; fatigue ; great general de-
pression of vitality.

Pains : arthritic, rheumatic, a sequel of suppressed
gonorrhoea (Daph. od., Clem.); constricting, seem to
tighten the whole body (Cac.) ; sore all over, as if
bruised (Am., Eup.).

Trembling all over (subjective), intense nervousness
and profound exhaustion.

State of collapse^ wants to be fanned all the time
(Carbo v.); craves fresh air ; skin cold, yet throws off
the covers (Camph., Sec); cold, and bathed with cold
perspiration (Ver.).

Mind. — Weakness of memory ; cannot remember
names, words or initial letters ; has to ask name of
most intimate friend ; even forgets his own name.

Cannot spell correctly ; wonders how a well-known
name is spelled.

Constantly loses the thread of conversation.

Great diflSculty in stating her symptoms, question
has to be repeated as she loses herself.

Cannot speak without weeping.

Anticipates death ; always anticipating, feels matters
most sensitively before they occur and generally cor-
rectly.

Irritated at trifles ; cross during the day, exhilerated
at night.

Very impatient ; peevish.

179


MJEnOWLRm^jm—iConftnued ).

Anxious, nervous, extremely sensitive ; starts at the
least sound.

Time passes too slowly (Alum., Arg. n., Can. I.).

Is in a great hurry ; when doing anything is in
such a hurry she gets fatigued.

Many symptoms are < when thinking of them
(pains return as soon as he thinks about them, Ox. ac).

Head. — Intense burning pain in brain, < in cere-
bellum ; extends down spine.

Head feels heavy and is drawn backwards.

Sensation of tightness and contraction; extends
down whole length of spine.

Headache and diarrhoea from jarring of cars.

Throat. — Sensation as if she had taken a severe
cold, with distressing aching in bones ; throat sore
and swollen, deglutition of either liquids or solids im-
possible (Mer.).

Throat constantly filled with thick, gray or bloody
mucus from posterior nares (Hyd.).

Appetite. — Ravenous hunger immediately after eat-
ing (Cina, Lye, Psor.).

Constant thirst, even dreams she is drinking.

Insatiate craving: for liquor, which before she
hated (Asar.) ; for salt (Cal., Nat); sweets (Sulph.);
for ale, ice, acids, oranges, green fruit.

Bowels. — Stools: tenacious, clay-like, sluggish,
cannot strain from a sensation of prolapse of rectum
(Alum.).

Constriction and inertia of bowels with ball-like
stools (Lach.).

Can only pass stool by leaning very far back ; very

1^0


niEDORRHINlJlI— ( Continued ) .

painful, as if there was a lump on posterior surface of
sphincter ; so painful as to cause tears.

Sharp, needle-like pains in rectum.

Oozing of moisture from anus, fetid odor of fish
brine (Canst, Hep.).

Urinary Organs. — Severe pain (backache) in renal
region, > by profuse urination (Lye).

Renal colic ; intense pain in ureters, with sensation
of passage of calculus (Berb., Lye, Ocim. c) ; craving
for ice.

Nocturnal enuresis : passes enormous quantity of
ammoniacal, high colored urine in bed ever>' night;
< by over- work or over-play, extremes of heat or
cold ; when the best selected remedy fails ; with a
history of sycosis.

Painful tenesmus of bladder and bowels when
urinating.

Sexual Organs. — Menses : profuse, very dark, clot-
ted ; stains diflScult to wash out (Mag. c).

Metrorrhagia : at climacteric ; profuse, for weeks,
flow dark, clotted, offensive ; in gushes, on moving ;
with malignant disease of uterus.

Intense menstrual colic, with drawing up of knees
and terrible bearing down labor-like pains ; must press
feet against support, as in labor.

Intense pruritus of labia and vagina < by thinking
of it.

Breasts and nipples sore and sensitive to touch.

Breasts cold as ice to touch, especially the nipples,
rest of body warm (during menses).

Respiratory Organs. — ^Asthma : choking caused by

181


IHEDORRHINIJIIII— ( ConHnued ) .

a weakness or spasm of epiglottis ; larynx stopped so
that no air could enter, only > by lying on face and
protruding tongue.

Soreness of larynx as if ulcerated.

Dyspnoea and sense of constriction ; can inhale with
ease, but no power to exhale (Samb.).

Cough : dr>', incessant, severe ; painful, as if mucous
membrane was torn from larynx ; deep, hollow like
coughing in a barrel ; < at night, from sweets, on
lying down ; > by lying on stomach.

Sputa : albuminous, frothy ; small, green, bitter
balls ; viscid, difficult to raise.

Incipient consumption; severe pains in middle
lobes.

Back and Extremities. — Pain in back between
scapulae ; whole length of spine sore to touch (Chin. s.).

Intense burning heat, beginning in nape of neck
and extending down spine, with a contractive stiff-
ness, < by stretching.

Rheumatism of top of shoulder and arm ; pains ex-
tend to fingers, < by motion (right. Sang. — left, Fer.).

Lumbar vertebrae painful and sensitive to touch.

Pain in sacrum, coccyx, and back of hips, running
around and down limbs.

Pains in legs, from hips to knees ; only when walk-
ing.

Heaviness of legs, feel like lead ; walking very
difficult, legs are so heavy ; legs give way.

Lower limbs ache all night, preventing sleep.

Intensely restless and fidgety legs and feet (Zinc).


1^2


— Ccnnnu€d .

Terrible suffering in legs and aims dnring an elec-
trical storm.

Aching in legs, with inability- to keep them stili in
bed, < when gi\4ng up control of himself, when relax-
ing, in trying to sleep.

Coldness of legs and feet ; of hands and fore arms.

Drawing, contracting sensation in hamstrings and
ankles ; cramps in calves and soles (Cup.;.

Ankles easily turn when walking < Carbo an., Led. ).

Burning of hands and feet, wants them uncovered
and fanned (Lach., Sulph.).

Almost entire loss of ner\-ous force in legs and
arms ; exhausted by slightest effort.

Painful stiffness of ever\' joint in body.

Deformity of finger joints ; large^ P^^ffv knuckles ;
swelling and painful stiffness of ankles ; great tender-
ness of heels and balls of feet ; swellings of all joints
were puffy, like windgalls.

Relations. — Compare : Ipec, dry cough ; Camph.,
Sec, Tab., Ver., in collapse ; Pic. ac. Gels., inability
to walk ; Aloe, Sulph., morning diarrhoea.

The burning feet of Sulphur and restless fidgety
legs and feet of Zinc, are both found at the same time
in Medorrhinum.

Aggravation. — When thinking of it (Helon., Ox.
ac.) ; heat, covering ; stretching ; thunder storm ; least
movement ; sweets ; from daylight to sunset (rev. of
Syph.).

Amelioration. — At the sea shore (rev. of Nat.);
lying on stomach ; damp weather (Caust., Nux).


183


MELILCrriJS AURA.

Sweet Clover. Leguminosa.

Congestions, relieved by hemorrhage.

Engorgement of blood-vessels in any part or organ.

Violent congestive or nervous headaches ; epistaxis
affords relief (Bufo, Ferr. p., Magn. s.).

Convulsions: of nervous children during dentition
(Bell.); infantile spasms, eclampsia, epilepsy.

Religious melancholy with an intensely red face ;
insanity, in early stages, to relieve brain from pressure
and irritation.

Nosebleed preceded by intense redness, flushing of
face and throbbing of carotids (Bell.) ; with general
relief.

Very red face precedes hemorrhage from every
organ.

Constipation : difficult, painful, constriction in anus ;
throbbing, fulness ; no desire until there is a large ac-
cumulation (Alum.).

Relations. — Compare : Amyl., Ant. c. in epistaxis
after headache, but does not relieve ; Bell., Glon.,
Sang, in congestive headache, red face, hot head, etc.

Aggravation. — Approach of a storm ; rainy, change-
able weather.


niBNYANTHBS TRIFOLIATA,

Buck Bean. Ge7ttianacece,

Complaints from abuse of Cinchona and Quinine.
Fevers, in which the cold stage predominates ; cold-
ness felt most acutely in abdomen and legs.

184


]II£XYANTHES TWLTPOIAAT A— (Confined),

Headache* pressing in vertex from above down-
wards, > during hard pressure wiih hand (Ver.) ; as
of a heavy weight pressing upon the head at every step
(Cac, Glon., Lach.); < ascending (Cal.); often with
icy coldness of hands and feet (Cal., Sep.).

Anxiety about the heart as if some evil was im-
pending.

Tension : in root of nose ; in arms, hands, fingers ;
in skin, as if several sizes too small and was crowded
into it by force.

Relations. — Compare: Cac, Cal., Gels., Sep., Mag.
m., Paris.

Follow well : Caps., Lach., Lye, Puis., Rhus, Ver.

Aggravation. — During rest ; lying down.

Amelioration. — Pressure on affected part


niERClJRIlJS.

Quicksilver. The Element.

Best adapted for light-haired persons; skin and
muscles lax.

In bone diseases, pains worse at night ; glandular
swellings with or without suppuration, but especially
if suppuration be too profuse (Hep., Sil.).

Cold swellings ; abscesses, slow to suppurate.

Profuse perspiration attends nearly every com-
plaint, but does not relieve ; may even increase the
suffering (profuse perspiration relieves, Nat. m., Psor.,
Ver.;.

Great weakness and trembling from least exertion.

Breath and body smell foul (Psor.).

V4a pooi \ SAC e/m \ c^


Hurried and rapid talking (Hep.).

Catarrh : with much sneezing ; fluent, acrid, cor-
rosive ; nostrils raw, ulcerated ; yellow-green, fetid,
pus-like ; nasal bones swollen ; < at night and from
damp weather.

Toothache: pulsating, tearing, lacerating, shoot-
ing into face or ears ; < in damp weather or evening
air, warmth of bed, from cold or warm things ; > from
rubbing the cheek.

Crowns of teeth decay, roots remain (crowns intact,
roots decay, Mez.).

Ptyalism; tenacious, soapy, stringy, profuse, y^/^i/,
coppery^ metallic-tasting saliva.

Tongue: large, flabby, shows imprint of teeth
(Chel., Pod., Rhus) ; painful, with ulcers ; red, or
white.

Intense thirst, although the tongue looks moist and
the saliva is profuse (dry mouth, but no thirst. Puis.).

Mumps, diphtheria, tonsillitis with profuse offensive
saliva ; tongue large, flabby with imprints of teeth ;
mapped tongue (Lach., Nat., Tarax.).

Diphtheria : tonsils inflamed, uvula swollen, elon-
gated, constant desire to swallow ; membrane thick,
gray, shred-like borders adherent or free.

Dysentery : stool slimy, bloody, with colic and
fainting ; great tenesmus during and after, not >
by stool, followed by chilliness and a " cannot finish "
sensation. The more bloody the better indicated.

Quantity of urine voided is larger than the amount
of water drank ; frequent urging to urinate.

Nocturnal emissions stained with blood (Led., Sars.).

1^^


MERCVRIVS— ( Continued ) .

Leucorrhoea : acrid, burning, itching with rawness ;
always worse at night ; pruritus, < from contact of
urine which must be washed off (Sulph.).

Morning sickness ; profuse salivation, wets the pil-
low in sleep (Lac. ac).

Mammae painful, as if they would ulcerate at every
tnefistrual period (Con., Lac c.) ; milk in breasts in-
stead of the menses.

Cough : dry, fatiguing, racking ; in two paroxysms,
worse at night and from warmth of bed ; with utter
inability to lie on right side.

Affects lower lobe of r. lung ; stitches through to
back (Chel., Kali c).

Suppuration of lungs, after hemorrhages of pneu-
monia (Kali c).

Ulcers on the gums, tongue, throat, inside of the
cheek, with profuse salivation; irregular in shape,
edges undefined ; have a dirty, unhealthy look ; lar-
daceous base surrounded with a dark halo ; apt to run
together (syphilitic ulcers are circular, attack the pos-
terior parts of mouth, throat, and have well-defined
edges, are surrounded with a coppery hue, and do not
•extend from their primary seat).

Trembling extremities, especially hands ; paralysis
agitans.

Relations. — Follows well : after. Bell., Hep., Lach.,
Sulph., but should not be given before or after Silicea.

If given in low (weak) potencies hastens rather than
aborts suppuration.

The bad effects of Mer. are antidoted by Aur., Hep.^


187


MERCVRIVS— (C^»/j»ftf^^ ).

Lach., Mez., Nit ac., Sulph., and by a strong (high)
potency of Mer., when the symptoms correspond.

Compare : Mezereum, its vegetable analogue for
bad eflEects of large doses or of too frequent repetition.

Ailments from sugar, insect stings, vapors of arsenic
or copper. Diseases occuring in winter.

Aggravation. — At night ; wet, damp weather
(Rhus); in autumn, warm days and cold, damp
nights ; lying on right side ; perspiring.

Mercury is < by heat of, but > by rest in, bed.

Arsenic is > by heat of, but < by rest in, bed.


MERCVRIIJS CORROSIYVS.

Corrosive sublimate. HgCl^.

Diseases of men, syphilitic ; ulcers, with corroding,
acrid pus ; Bright's disease.

Dysentery and summer complaints of intestinal
canal, occurring from May to November.

Tenesmus : of rectum, not > by stool (> by stool,
Nux) ; incessant, persistent ; stool hot, scanty^ bloody^
sli?ny^ offensive; shreds of mucous membrane and
terrible cutting, colicky pains.

Tenesmus : of bladder, with intense burning in
urethra ; urine hot, burning, scanty or suppressed ; in
drops with great pain ; bloody, brown, brick-dust sed-
iment ; albuminous.

Gonorrhoea ; second stage, greenish discharge^ < at
night ; great burning and tenesmus.


18ft


MERCURIUS DIJ1,CIS.

Calomel. Hg^Cl^

Catarrhal affections of mucous membranes, espe-
cially of the eye and ear.

Catarrhal inflammation of fniddle ear (Kali m.).

Eustachian tube closed ; catarrhal deafness and otor-
rhoea in psoric children ; deafness of old age (Kali m.).

Acute affections of prostate after maltreated stricture.

Deafness and catarrhal affections of nares, throat,
and pharynx, from mercurial amalgam fillings.

Diarrhoea : of children ; stools grass-green ; like
chopped eggs ; profuse, causing soreness of anus.

MERCVRIVS CVANIDE.

Cyanide of Mercury. Hg ( CN^,

Malignant diphtheria with intense redness of faicces
and great difficulty of swallowing; pseudo-membra-
nous formation extends all over fauces and down
throat; putrid, gangrenous diphtheria, with phage-
denic ulceration ; membranous croup.

Great weakness ; extrerne prostration ; cannot stand
up from weakness.

When it corresponds to the genus epidemicus, like
every other remedy, is effective as a prophylactic.

MERCVRIVS PROTO IODIDE.

Iodide of Mercury, ^S^h'^

Diphtheritic and throat affections where the cervi-
cal and parotid glands are enormously swollen ; mem-
brane begins on or is < on right side ; < by warm
drinks, and empty swallowing (Lach.).

189


MERCVRIVS PRCKTO 10mn^—(^ConHn*d).

Tongue : thick, yellow coating at base (Kali bi. —
golden yellow coating at base, Nat p. ; dirty or greenish-
gray coating at base, Nat. s.); tip and edges red ; right
side of throat and neck most affected.

For Hunterian (hard) chancre, secondary symptoms
rarely follow if given in proper dose ; great swelling
of inguinal glands, no disposition to suppurate.


MERCVRIVS BINIODIDE.

Biniodide of Mercury. Hg I^

Diphtheritic and glandular affections of left side ;
fauces dark red ; solids or liquids painful when swal-
lowing ; exudation slight, easily detached ; cases at-
tending epidemic scarlet fever, ulcers on fauces or
tonsils ; glands enlarged ; greenish tough lumps from
phar^^nx or posterior nares.

Tubercular pharyngitis.


MERCVRIVS SOLrVBILrlS.

HahnemanrCs Soluble Mercury, Black Oxide.

Nervous affections after suppressed discharges
especially in psoric patients (Asaf.).

Glandular and scrofulous affections of children.

Otorrhoea : bloody, offensive discharge, with stab-
bing tearing pain ; < r. side, at night and lying on
affected side.

Furuncles and boils in external meatus (Pic. ac).

190


Polypi and fungus excrescences in external meatus
(Mar. v., Thuja).

Acrid nasal secretion^ having odor of old cheese ;
nostrils, red, raw, ulcerated.

Epistaxis : when coughing ; at night during sleep ;
hangs in a dark clotted string from the nose, like an
icicle.

Gonorrhoea : with phymosis or chancroids ; green
discharge^ < at night ; urging to urinate ; intolerable
burning in forepart of urethra when passing last few
drops ; prepuce hot, swollen, oedematous and sensitive
to touch ; of a torpid character, with threatening or
suppurating bubo.

Chancre : primary ; regular indurated Hunterian,
with lardaceous base ; with cheesy bottom and in-
verted red edges ; with phymosis or paraphymosis ;
deep, round, penetrating, eating through frsenum and
prepuce ; bleeding, painful, yellowish fetid discharge.

Hahnemann's remedy for syphilis and diseases of
the genito-urinary tract. Is rarely indicated if the
tongue is dry.

Diseases of the skin ; intolerable biting, itching,
over body, as from insect bites, < in evening and
from warmth of bed ; becomes pleasant on scratching.

Weakness and weariness of limbs ; sore, bruised.

MERCVRIVS SVLrPHVRICIJS.

Sulphate of Mercury, HgSO^.

Hydrothorax, if occurring from heart or liver dis-
eases ; dyspnoea, has to sit, cannot lie down. Ex-

191


MERCURIIJS 9VIJPJaMJWtlCVS—lCo?iftnued).

tremities swollen ; stool loose, watery, causing severe
burning and soreness ; burning in chest.

" When it acts well it produces a profuse, watery
diarrhoea with great relief to the patient ; it is as im-
portant as Arsenicum in hydrothorax." — Lippk.

Relations. — Compare : Ars., Cinnab., Dig., Sulph.


MEZEREUM.

Daphne Mezereum. ThymelacecB,

For light-haired, irresolute persons of a phlegmatic
temperament.

Eczema and itching eruptions after vaccination.

Hypochondriacal and despondent ; indifferent to
everything and every one ; angry at trifles and per-
fectly harmless things, but is soon sorry for it.

Toothache : in carious teeth (Kreos.) ; feel elon-
gated, dull pain when biting on them and when
touched with tongue, < at night ; > with mouth
open and drawing in air; roots decay (rev. of, Mer.).

Headache, violent after slight vexation ; painful on
the slightest touch ; right sided.

The head is covered with thick, leather-like crust,
under which thick and white pus collects here and
there ; hair is glued and matted together ; pus after a
time is ichorous, becomes offensive and breeds vermin.

Ulcers with thick, yellowish-white scabs, under
which thick, yellow pus collects.

Vesicles appear around the ulcers, itch violently,
bum like fire (Hep.) ; shining, firey-red areola around.

192


MEZEREUM— (G?«/m7/<?flf ).

Linen or charpie sticks to the ulcers, they bleed
when it is torn away.

Eczema: intolerable itching, < in bed and from
touch ; copious, serous exudation.

Neuralgic burning pains after zona.

Bones, especially long bones, inflamed, swollen ;
nightly pains going from above downwards ; after
abuse of Merc, after venereal diseases ; caries ; exosto-
ses, tumors soften from within out.

Pain in periosteum of long bones < at night in bed,
least touch, in damp weather (Mer., Phyt.).

Child scratches face continually, which is covered
with blood ; eruptions moist ; itching worse at night ;
inflammatory redness of face.

Relations. — Compare : Canst., Guaiac, Phyt., Rhus.

Aggravation. — Cold air ; cold washing ; at night ;
touch or motion ; bad effects of mercury or alcohol.

Epidemics occurring in January and February often
call for Mezereum.


MILrLrEFOLrlUlI.

Yarrow, Composites,

Ailments : from over-lifting ; over-exertion, or a fall.

Vertigo ; when moving slowly, but not when taking
violent exercise.

Hemorrhages : painless, without fever ; bright red,
fluid blood (Aeon., Ipec, Sab.) ; from lungs, bronchi,
larynx, mouth, nose, stomach, bladder, rectum, uterus ;
of mechanical origin (Am.); of wounds (Ham.).

M 193


MIlrlrEFOlrlUM— (Gw//««ifar ).

Wounds which bleed profusely, especially after a
fall {Km. ^ Ham.).

Hemoptysis : after injury ; in incipient phthisis ; in
hemorrhoidal patients ; from a ruptured blood vessel.

Painless drainage^ from nose, lungs, uterus ; after
labor or abortion ; after great exertion ; after miscar-
riage. Preventive in post-partum hemorrhage.

Menses : early, profuse^ protracted; suppressed,
with colic pain in abdomen.

Leucorrhoea of children from atony (Cal.).

Cough : with raising of bright blood ; in suppressed
menses or hemorrhoids ; with oppression and palpita-
tion ; after a fall from a height (Am.); after violent
exertion ; with blood, daily at 4 P. M. (Lye).

Relations. — Compare : Erecht. in epistaxis and
hemoptysis, blood bright red.

Follows well : after, Aeon, and Am. in hemorrhages.


IIIJREX PURPUREA.

A Mollusk, Muricidce.

Persons of a melancholy temperament.

For the sufferings during climacteric (Lach., Sep.,
Sulph.). Great depression of spirits.

Sinking, all gone sensation, in stomach (Sep.).

Least contact of parts ^ causes violent sexual excite-
ment (excessive sexual irritation driving to self
abuse, Orig., Zinc).

Violent excitement in sexual organs, and excessive
desire for an embrace (rev. of, Sep.).

1^4


MIIREX PURPUREA— (G?«/z««^^).

Sore pain in uterus ; a distinct sensation of a womb
(Helon., Lys.).

Bearing down sensation, as if internal organs would
be pushed out, must sit down and cross limbs to >
pressure (but no sexual desire, Sep.).

Menses : irregular, early, profuse, protracted, large
clots.

Leucorrhoea : < mental depression, happier when
leucorrhoea is worse.

Relations. — Compare: Lil., Plat, in nymphomania ;
Sep. in bearing down sensation, but has no sexual
erethism.


MURIATIC ACID.

Hydrochloric Acid, H CL

Adapted to persons with black hair, dark eyes, dark
complexion.

Irritable, peevish, disposed to anger and chagrin
(Nux); restlessness and vertigo.

Diseases of an asthenic type, with moaning, uncon-
sciousness, fretfulness.

Ulceration with fungus-like growths and pseudo-
like membranous deposits of intestinal tract.

Great debility : as soon as he sits down his eyes
close ; lower jaw hangs down ; slides down in bed.

Mouth and anus are chiefly affected; the tongue
and sphincter ani are paralyzed.

Malignant affections of mouth : studded with ulcers,
deep, perforating ; having a black or dark base ; of-

195


MURIATIC ACm— (Continued),

fensive, foul breath ; intense prostration ; diphtheria,
scarlatina, cancer.

Cannot bear the thought or sight of meat (Nit ac.).

If the anus be very sensitive either with or without
hemorrhoids ; anus sore during menses.

Hemorrhoids: swollen^ blue; sensitiye and pain-
ful to touch ; appears suddenly in children; too sore
to bear least touch, even the sheet is uncomfortable.
Prolapse while urinating.

Diarrhoea : stool involuntary while urificUing ; on
passing wind (Aloe); cannot urinate without having
the bowels move at the same time.

Urine passes slowly ; bladder weak, must wait a
long time ; has to press so that anus protrudes.

Cannot bear least touchy not even of sheet on genitals
(Murex).

Typhoid or typhus : deep stupid sleep ; unconscious
while awake ; loud moaning or muttering ; tongue
coated at edges, shrunken^ dry^ leather-like^ paralyzed;
involuntary fetid stools while passing urine ; sliding
down in bed ; pulse intermits every third beat.

Palpitation of heart is felt in the face.

Freckles ; eczema Solaris.

Relations. — Follows well : after, Bry., Mer., Rhus.

Cures the muscular weakness following excessive
use of opium and tobacco.


1^^


XAJA TRIPUDIANS.

Cobra virus. Elapidce,

Suicidal insanity^ broods constantly over imaginary
troubles (Aur.).

Simple hypertrophy of heart.

For restoring a heart damaged by acute inflamma-
tion, or from relief of sufferings of chronic hypertrophy
and valvular lesions.

Irritating, dry, sympathetic cough in the acute stage
of rheumatic carditis, or chronic organic lesions
(Spon.).

Threatened paralysis of heart, post-diphtheritic.

Pulse irregular in force, but regular in rhythm.

Inability to speak with choking, nervous, chronic
palpitation, especially after public speaking ; pain <
by carriage riding or lying on side.

Severe stitching pain in region of heart.

Relations. — Compare: Ars., Cac, Crot, Lach.,
Myg., Spig.


NATRUM CARBONICIJIII.

Carbonate of Soda. NA^, CO,^, ioH,fi.

Constitutions with aversion to open air and dislike
to exercise, mental or physical ; imbecility.

Great debility: caused by heat of summer (Ant. c);
exhaustion yr^»^ least effort^ mental or physical ; ready
to drop after a walk ; chronic effects of sunstroke.

Chronic effects of sunstroke ; now, with return of
hot weather, suffers from headaches.

Emaciation with pale face and blue rings around

197


NATRUM CAWLBOlHlCUn—iConftnued).

the eyes, dilated pupils ; dark urine ; anaemic ; milky,
watery skin and great debility.

Inability to think or to perform any mental labor,
causes headache ; feels stupefied if he tries to exert
himself ; comprehension slow, diflGicult

Intolerable melancholy and apprehension ; is wholly
occupied with sad thoughts.

Attacks of anxiety and restlessness during a thun-
der storm (Phos.) ; < from music (Sab.).

Headache : from slightest mental exertion ; from
sun or working lender gaslight (Glon., Lach.) ; with
tension, in nape or occiput before menses ; head feels
too large, as if it would burst.

Face pale, with blue rings around the eyes ; eyelids
swollen ; catarrh ; mucus in throat and posterior nares ;
constantly hawking to clear the throat ; dropping into
the throat from posterior nares.

Catarrh : extends to posterior nares and throat ;
hawking much thick mucus from throat ; profuse dis-
charge during day, stopped at night (Nux).

Thick, yellow, green, offensive, musty, hard dis-
charge from nose ; often ceasing after a meal.

Aversion to milk ; diarrhoea from it.

Bearing down as if everything would come out
(Agar., Lil., Mur., Sep.) ; heaviness, < sitting, > by
moving.

Discharge of mucus from vagina after an embrace,
causing sterility.

Easy dislocation and spraining of ankle (Led.) ; so
weak that it gives way ; foot bends under (Carbo an.,
Nat. m).

198


NATRUM CAWLBOVICV^— {Continued ) .

Relations. — Compare : Nat. s., for yeast-like vom-
iting ; Cal., Sep.

Follows well : after, Sep. in bearing down.

Aggravations. — From music; in the sun; excessive
Slimmer heat ; mental exertion ; a thunder storm.


NATRUM MURIATICUM.

Commo7i Salt. Na CL

For the anaemic and cachectic ; whether from loss
of vital fluids — profuse menses, seminal losses — or
mental affections.

Great emaciation; losing flesh while living well
(Abrot, lod.) ; throat and neck of children emaciate
rapidly during summer complaint (Sanic).

Great liability to take cold (Cal., Kali c).

Irritability : child cross when spoken to ; crying
from slightest cause ; gets into a passion about trifles,
especially when consoled with.

Awkward, hasty, drops things from nervous weajc-
ness (Apis, Bov.).

Marked disposition to weep ; sad weeping mood,
without cause (Puis.), but consolation from others <
her troubles.

Headache : anaemic, of school girls (Cal. p.) ; from
sunrise to sunset ; left-sided clavus ; as if bursting ;
with red face, nausea and vomiting before, during and
after menses ; as though a thousand little hammers
were knocking in the brain during fever ; > by per-
spiration.

199


NATRVm MVWLIATICVS/I— {Continued).

Headache ; beginning with blindness (Iris, Kali bi) ;
with zig-zag dazzling, like lightning in eyes, ushering
in a throbbing headache ; from eye strain.

Lachrymation ; tears stream down the face when-
ever he coughs (Euphr.).

Hay fever : squirming sensation in the nostril, as of
a small worm ; brought on by exposure to hot sun or
intense summer heat.

Sensation as of a hair on the tongue (Sil.).

Tongue : mapped, with red insiclar patches; like
ringworm on sides (Ars., Lach., Mer., Nit ac, Tarax.);
heav'y, diflScult speech, children slow in learning to
walk.

Constipation: sensation of contraction of anus;
torn, bleeding, smarting afterwards ; stool, dry, hard,
difficult, crumbling (Am. c, Mag. m.) ; stitches in
rectum (Nit. ac.) ; invohmtary, knows not whether
flatus or faeces escape (Aloe, lod., Mur. ac, Olean.,
Pod.).

Urine : involuntary when walking, coughing, laugh-
ing (Caust., Puis., Scilla) ; has to wait a long while
for urine to pass, if others are present (Hep., Mur.
ac.) ; cutting in urethra after (Sars.).

Seminal emissions : soon after coition, with in-
creased desire ; weakness of organs with retarded
emission during an embrace ; impotence, spinal irri-
tation, paralysis, after sexual excesses.

Pressing, pushing towards genitals every morning ;
must sit down to prevent prolapsus (L/il., Mur., Sep.).

Fluttering of the heart : with a weak faint feeling
< lying down (I^ach.).

200


NATRUM MJJWLULTlCtm— (Continued).

The heart's pulsations shake the body (Spig.).

The hair falls out when touched, in nursing women
(Sep.) ; face oily, shiny, as if greased (Plb., Thuja).

For the bad effects : of anger (caused by offence) ;
acid food, bread, quinine, excessive use of salt ; of cau-
terizations of all kinds with the silver nitrate ; of grief,
fright, vexation, mortification or reserved displeasure
(Staph.).

Hangnails : skin around the nails dry and cracked
(Graph., Pet.) ; herpes about anus and on borders of
hair at nape of neck (in bend of knees. Hep., Graph.).

Warts on palms of hands (sore to touch, Nat. c).

Dreams of robbers in the house, and on waking
will not believe to the contrary until search is made
(Psor.) ; of burning thirst.

Fever blisters, like pearls about the lips ; lips dry,
sore and cracked, ulcerated (Nit. ac).

Painful contractions of the hamstrings (Am. m.,
Caust, Guaiac).

Craving for salt (Cal., Caust.) ; great aversion to
bread.

Eczema; raw, red, inflamed, especially in edges of
hair ; < from eating too much salt, at sea shore, or
from ocean voyage.

Urticaria, acute or chronic ; over whole body ; espe-
cially after violent exercise (Apis, Cal., Hep., Sanic,
Urt.).

Intermittents ; paroxysm at lo or ii k. u \ old,
chronic, badly treated cases, especially after suppres-
sion by quinine ; headache, with unconsciousness dur-
ing chill and heat ; sweat > pains.

201


NATRVM MURIATICUM— (0«/i««^flf).

Relations. — Complementary: to, Apis; acts well
before and after it

Natnini mur. is the chronic of Ignatia, which is its
vegetable analogue.

Is followed by Sepia and Thuja.

Cannot often be repeated in chronic cases without
an intercurrent, called for by the symptoms.

Should never be given during fever paroxysm.

If vertigo and headache be very persistent, or pros-
tration be prolonged after Natrum, Nux will relieve.

Aggravation. — Ai to or ii a. m. ; at the seashore or
from sea air ; heat of sun or stove ; mental exertion,
talking, writing, reading ; lying down.

Amelioration. — In the open air (Apis, Puis.) ; cold
bathing ; going without regular meals ; lying on right
side (on painful side, Bry., Ign., Puis.).


NATRIJ]!!! SIJI.PHURICUM.

Sodiujfi Sulphate. jVa OSO.^ loAq.

Ailments which are < by, or which depend upon,
dampness of weat/ier^ damp houses or cellars (Aran.).

Patient feels every change from dry to wet ; cannot
tolerate sea air, nor eat plants that thrive near water ;
a constitution in which the gonorrhoeal poison is most
pernicious ; recovers slowly from every sickness.

Every spring ; skin affections reappear (Psor.).

Inability to think (Nat. c).

Sad, gloomy, irritable ; worse in morning ; dislikes
to speak or be spoken to (lod., Sil.).

202


N ATRTJIH SULrPHURICUM— ( Contimied ) .

Depressed; lively music makes her sad; satiety of
life ; must use great self-control to prevent shooting
himself.

Mental traumatism ; mental effects from injuries to
head ; chronic brain effects of blows, falls.

Granular lids : like small blisters (Thuja) ; green
pus and terrible photophobia ; gonorrhoeal or sycotic.

Nosebleed during menses (instead of menses, Bry.,
Puis.).

Toothache > by cold water, cool air (Coff., Puis.).

Dirty, greenish-gray or brown coating on tongue.

Diarrhoea : sudden, urging, gushing, much flatus ;
on first rising and standing on the feet ; after a spell of
wet weather ; living or working in basements.

Gonorrhoea : greenish-yellow, painless^ thick dis-
charge (Puis.) ; chronic or suppressed (thick, green.
Kali iod.).

Dyspnoea; desire to take a deep breath during
damp, cloudy weather.

Humid asthma in children ; with every change to
wet zveather ; with every fresh cold ; always worse in
damp, rainy weather ; sputa green, greenish, copious
(greenish grey. Cop.).

Sycotic pneumonia ; lower lobe of left lung ; great
soreness of chest, during cough, has to sit up in bed
and hold the chest with both hands (Nic. — r. lung,
Bry.).

Spinal meningitis: violent crushing gnawing pains
at base of brain ; head drawn back ; spasms with men-
tal irritability and delirium ; violent congestion of
blood to head ; delirium ; opisthotonos.

203


NATRVM SULrPHURICUM— (CbwAVftt^flf).

Relations. — Compare : Nat. m. and Sulph., which
are very similar ; Thuja and Merc, in syphilis and
sycosis occurring in hydrogenoid constitutions.

Aggrayation. — Damp basements or dwellings ;
damp weather (Aran., Ars. i., Dul.) ; rest ; lying.

Amelioration. — Dry weather ; pressure ; sitting up
(cough) ; changing position (but > in wet weather,
Caust.) ; open air.

Must change position frequently, but it is painful
and gives little relief (Caust.).


NITRIC Acm.

Nitric acid, H N Oy

Especially suited to thin persons of rigid fibre, dark
complexions, black hair and eyes — the brunette rather
than the blonde — nervous temperament.

Persons suffering with chronic diseases who take
cold easily ; are easily disposed to diarrhoea ; rarely to
those who suffer with constipation.

Old people with great weakness and diarrhoea.

Excessive physical irritability.

Pains : sticking, pricking as from splinters ; sud-
denly appearing and disappearing ; on change of tem-
perature or weather ; during sleep ; gnawing here and
there as from ulcers forming.

Sensation : of a band around head, around the bones
(Carb. ac, Sulph.) ; of a splinter in affected parts,
ulcer, piles, throat, ingrowing toe nail, < on slightest
contact.

204


NITRIC ACm— (Continued).

Ailments : which depend on some virulent poison ;
from mercury, syphilis, scrofula; in broken-down
cachectic constitutions.

After continued loss of sleep, long-lasting anxiety ;
bver-exertion of mind and body from nursing the sick
(Coc.) ; anguish from the loss of his dearest friend ;
indifference ; tired of life ; sadness before menses.

Great anxiety about his disease ; constantly think-
ing about his past troubles ; morbid fear of cholera
(Ars.) ; depressed and anxious in the evening.

Irritable, headstrong ; hateful and vindictive ; in-
veterate, ill-willed, unmoved by apologies.

Hardness of hearing > by riding in carriage or
train (Graph.).

Very sensitive to rattle of wagons over paved streets ;
headache from pressure of hat (Cal. p., Carbo, Nat.).

Ozena : green casts from the nose every morning.

Diarrhoea: great straining but little passes, as if
faeces remained and cannot be expelled (Alum.); pain
as if recttmi or anus were torn or fissured (Nat. m.) ;
violent cutting pains a//er stool, lasting for hours
(Rat, Sulph. — during and after, Mer.).

Fissures in rectum ; tearing, spasmodic pains dur-
ing stool ; lancinating, even after soft stools (Alumen,
Nat, Rat).

Urine : scanty^ dark-brown^ strong-smelling, " like
horse's urine ;" cold when it passes ; turbid, looks like
remains of a cider barrel.

Ulcers : easily bleeding ; in comers of mouth (Nat) ;
spUnter4tke pains ^ especially on contact (Hep.) ; zig-
zag, irr^^ular edges ; base looks like raw flesh ; exu-

205


NITRIC ACTD— {Continued).

berant granulations ; after mercury or syphilis or both,
engrafted on a scrofulous base.

Discharges : thin, offensive, acrid ; of a brown or
dirty yellowish green color ; rarely laudable pus.

Hemorrhage : from bowels in typhoid or typhus
(Crot., Alur. ac.) ; after miscarriage or post-partum ;
from over-exertion of body ; bright, profuse, or dark.

Cracking : in ears, on masticating ; of the joints, on
motion (Coc., Graph.).

Warts, condylomata : sycotic or syphilitic ; large,
jagged, pedunculated ; bleeding readily on washing ;
moist, oozing ; sticking pain (Staph., Thuja).

Affects especially the mucous outlets of the body
where skin and mucous membrane join ; mouth, nose,
rectum, anus, urethra, vagina (Mur. ac).

Relations. — Complementary : Ars. and Calad.

Inimical : to, Lachesis.

Resembles : Ars. in morbid fear of cholera.

Often difficult to distinguish from Mer.; but is
adapted to black-haired people, while Mer. is more
useful in light-haired persons.

Relieves ailments resulting from abuse of mercury,
especially if there be erethism ; bad effects of repeated
doses of Digitalis.

Follows well : Calc, Hep., Mer., Nat. c. Puis, or
Thuja ; but is most effective after Kali c.

Aggravation. — Evening and at night; after mid-
night ; contact ; change of temperature or weather ;
during sweat ; on waking ; while walking.

Amelioration. — While riding in a carriage (reverse
of Coc).


NVX MOSCHATA.

Nutmeg. MyristicacecB.

Adapted especially to women and children of a ner-
vous hysterical temperament (Ign.); to people with a
dry skin^ who rarely perspire ; complaints of preg-
nancy.

Weakness of old age ; dyspepsia of old people.

Oversensitive : to light ; of hearing ; of smell ; to
touch.

All the ailments are accompanied by drowsiness
and sleepiness (Ant. t., Op.) or an inclinatioii to faint
even from slight pain (Hep.); complaints cause sleepi-
ness.

Stupor and insensibility ; unconquerable sleep.

Absence of mind ; cannot think ; great indifference
to everything.

Weakness or loss of memory (Anac, Lac c, Lye).

Vanishing of thoughts while reading, talking or
writing ; uses wrong words ; does not recognize well-
known streets (Can. I., Lach.).

Changeable humor ; one moment laughing, the next
crying (Croc, Ign.); "sudden change from grave to
gay, from lively to serene " (Plat).

Dryness of eyes ; too dry to close the lids.

Great dryness of the mouth (Apis, Lach.); tongue
so dry it adheres to roof of mouth; saliva seemed like
cotton ; throat dry, stiffened, no thirst (Puis.).

Sensation of great dryness without real thirst and
without actual dryness of the tongue.

Great soreness of all the parts upon which one lies
(Bap., Pyr.); tendency to bedsores.

Eating a little too much causes headache ; pain,

207


NUX MOSCVLATA—iConttfmed).

fulness and distress in stomach w/ii/e eating or im-
mediately after (Kali bi.).

Abdomen enormously distended, after every meal.

Diarrhoea: in summer, from cold drinks; epidemic
in autumn, white stools (Colch.); from boiled milk ;
during dentition ; during pregnancy ; with sleepiness
and fainting; in autumn, epidemic, white, fetid

(Colch.).

At every menstrual nisus, mouth, throat and tongue
become intolerably dry, especially when sleeping.

Leucorrhoea in place of menses (Coc); patient
awakened with dry tongue (Lach.); physometra
(Lac c, Lye).

Pain, nausea and vomiting ; during pregnancy ;
from wearing pessaries.

Sudden hoarseness, < from walking against the
wind (Euph., Hep.).

Cough caused by : getting wann in bed ; being
overheated; during pregnancy (Con.); bathing; stand-
ing in water ; living in cold, damp places (Nat. s.);
loose after eating, dry after drinking.

Sleep : irresistibly drowsy ; sleepy, muddled, as if
intoxicated ; coma, lies silent, immovable ; eyes con-
stantly closed (with stertorous breathing. Op.).

Rheumatic affections ; from getting feet wet ; from
exposure to drafts of air while heated (Aeon., Bry.);<
in cold, wet weather, or cold wet clothes (Rhus); of
left shoulder (Fer.).

Backache, while riding in a carriage.

Fatigue, must lie down after the least exertion.

Relations. — Nux moschata antidotes mercurial in-

20S


NUX ^OSCVLATA—(Confmued).

halation, lead colic, oil of turpentine, spirituous liquors,
and especially the eflFects of bad beers.

Aggravation. — Cold, wet, windy weather (Rhod.);
weather changes ; cold food, water and cold washing ;
carriage driving (Coc); lying on painful side (on
painless side. Puis.).

Amelioration. — In dry, warm weather ; warm room ;
wrapping up warmly.


NIJX VOMICA.

Poison Nut, ^ ^ . ^ Los^aniacece.

Adapted to thin, irritable, careful, zealous persons
with dark hair and bilious or sanguine temperament.
Disposed to be quarrelsome^ spiteful^ malicious ; nerv-
ous and melancholic.

Debauchers of a thin, irritable, nervous disposition ;
prone to indigestion and hemorrhoids (persons with
light hair, blue eyes, Ivob.).

" Nux is chiefly successful with persons of an ardent
character ; of an irritable, impatient temperament, dis-
posed to anger, spite or deception." — Hahnemann.

Anxiety with irritability and inclination to com-
mit suicide, but is afraid to die.

Hypochondriac : literary, studious persons, who are
too much at home, suflFer from want of exercise, with
gastric, abdominal complaints and costiveness ; espe-
cially in drunkards.

Oyersensitiye : to external impressions ; to noise y
odorSj light or music (Nux m.) ; trifling ailments are

N 209


NUX \OMICA— (Continued ).

unbearable (Cham.) ; every harmless word offends

(Ign.)-

Persons who are very particular, careful, but in-
clined to become easily excited or angered ; irascible
and tenacious.

Bad effects of : coflFee, tobacco, alcoholic stimulants ;
highly spiced or seasoned food ; over-eating (Ant. c.) ;
long-continued over-mental exertion ; sedentary habits;
loss of sleep (Coc, Colch., Nit ac.) ; aromatic or patent
medicines ; sitting on cold stones, especially in warm
weather.

One of the best remedies with which to commence
treatment of cases that have been drugged by mix-
tures, bitters, vegetable pills, nostrums or quack reme-
dies, especially aromatic or " hot medicines," but only
if symptoms correspond.

Convulsions, with consciousness (Strych.) ; < anger,
emotion, touch, moving.

Pains are tingling, sticking, hard, aching, worse
from motion and contact.

Tendency to faint (Nux m., Sulph.); from odors;
in morning ; after eating ; after every labor pain.

Cannot keep from falling asleep in the evening
while sitting or reading hours before bedtime, and
awakes at 3 or 4 A. M.; falls into a dreamy sleep at day-
break from which he is hard to arouse, and then feels
tired and weak (reverse of. Puis.).

Catarrh : snuffles of infants (Am. c, Samb.) ; coryza,
dry at night, fluent by day ; < in warm room, > in
cold air ; from sitting in cold places, on stone steps.


210


NUX VOMICA -(0;2//«w^^).

Eructations : sour, bitter ; nausea and vomiting
eve ry morning with depression of spirits ; after eating.

Nausea : constant ; after eating ; in morning ; from
smoking ; and feels *' If I could only vomit I would
be so much better."

Stomach : pressure an hour or two after eating as
from a stone (immediately after, Kali bi., Nux m.) ;
pyrosis, tightness, must loosen clothing ; cannot use
the mind for two or three hours after a meal ; sleepy
after dinner; from anxiety, worry, brandy, coffee,
drugs, night watching, high living, etc.

Constipation ; with frequent unsuccessful desire,
passing small quantities of faeces (in upper abdomen,
Ign., Ver.) ; sensation as if not finished.

Frequent desire for stool ; anxious, ineffectual, >
for a time after stool ; in morning after rising ; after
mental exertion (inactive, no desire, Bry., Op., Sulph.).

Alternate constipation and diarrhoea (Sulph., Ver.),
in persons who have taken purgatives all their lives.

Menses : too early, profuse, last too long ; or keep-
ing on several days longer, with complaints at onset
and remaining after ; every two weeks ; irregular,
never at right time ; stopping and starting again
(Sulph.) ; during and after, < of old symptoms.

Labor pains : violent^ spasmodic ; cause urging to
stool or to urinate ; < in back ; prefers a warm room.

Strangulated hernia, especially umbilical.

Backache : must sit up to turn over in bed ; lum-
bago ; from sexual weakness, from masturbation.

Repugnance to cold or to cold air ; chilly, on least


211


NUX YOMlCA—(Co7iltnued),

movement ; from being uncovered ; must be covered
in every stage of fever — chUl, heat or sweat

Fever : great heat, whole body burning hot (Aeon.),
face red and hot (Bell.), yet patient cannot move or
uncover without being chilly.

Relations. — Complementary : Sulphur in nearly all
diseases.

Inimical : to, Zinc; must not be used before or
after.

Follows well : after, Ars., Ipec, Phos., Sep., Sulph.

Is followed well : by, Bry., Kob., Puis., Sulph.

Nux should be given on retiring or, what is better,
several hours before going to bed ; it acts best during
repose of mind and body.

Aggravation. — Morning; waking at ^f a., m,\ mental
exertion; after eating or over-eating; touch, noise,
anger, spices, narcotics, dry weather ; in cold air.

Amelioration. — In evening, while at rest ; lying
down, and in damp, wet weather (Canst).


OPIUM.

Poppy, PapaveracecB,

Especially adapted to children and old people ; dis-
eases of first and second childhood (Bar. c. Mill.);
persons with light hair, lax muscles, and want of
bodily irritability.

Want of susceptibility to remedies ; lack of vital
reaction, the well chosen remedy makes no impression
(Carbo v., Laur., Val.).


OrrUSH— (Continued).

Ailments: with insensibility and partial or complete
paralysis ; that originate /ram fright^ bad effects of,
the fear still remaining (Aeon., Hyos.); from charcoal
vapors ; from inhaling gas ; of drunkards.

All complaints : with great sopor ; painless, com-
plains of nothing, wants nothing.

Spasms : of children, from approach of strangers ;
from nursing after fright of mother (Hyos. — after
anger of mother, Cham., Nux); from crying; eyes
half open and upturned.

Screaming before or during a spasm (Apis, Hell.).
Deep stertorous respiration both on inhalation and
exhalation.

Delirium, constantly talking ; eyes wide open, face
red, puffed ; or unconscious, eyes glassy, half-closed,
face pale, deep coma ; preceded by stupor.

Thinks she is not at home (Bry.); this is continually
in her mind.

Picking of bed clothes during sleep (while awake.
Bell., Hyos.).

Delirium tremens: in old, emaciated persons;
bloated face, stupor, eyes burning, hot, dry ; with
loud snoring.

Sleep: lieaivy, stupid; with stertorous breathing,
red face^ eyes half-closed^ blood-shot ; skin covered ivith
hot sweat ; after convulsions.

Sleepy, but cannot sleep (Bell., Cham.), sleepless-
ness with acuteness of hearing, clock striking and
cocks crowing at a great distance keep her awake.

Loss of breath on falling asleep (Grind., Lach.).

Bed feels so hot she camiot lie on it (bed feels hard,

213


OPIUM— ( Continued ) .

Am., Bry., P>t.); moves often in search of a cool place ;
must be uncovered.

Digestive organs inactive : peristaltic motion re-
versed or paralyzed ; bowels seem closed.

Constipation : of children ; of corpulent, good-
natured women (Graph.); from inaction or paresis, no
desire ; from lead poisoning ; stool hard, round, black
balls (Chel., Plumb., Thuja); feces protrude and re-
cede (Sil., Thuja).

Stool : involuntary, especially after fright (Gels.);
black and offensive; from paralysis of sphincter.

Urine : retained, with bladder full ; retention, post-
partum or from excessive use of tobacco ; in nursing
children, after passion of nurse ; in fever or acute ill-
ness ; paralysis of bladder or sphincter.

(In Stramonium we have suppression ; while in
Opium the secretion is not dimini^ed, the bladder is
full but fullness is unrecognized.)

Opium renders the intestines so sluggish that the
most active purgatives lose their power. — Hering.

Persistent diarrhoea in those treated with large
doses of the drug. — Lippe.

Sudden retrocession of acute exanthema results in
paralysis of brain or convulsions (Zinc).

Marasmus ; child with wrinkled skin, looks like a
little dried up old man (Abrot.).

Relations. — Antidotes, for poisonous doses ; strong
coffee, Nux, Kali per. and constant motion.

When symptoms correspond, the potencies may
antidote bad effects of Opium drugging.

Compare : Apis, Bell., Hyos., Stram., and Zinc.

2\4


OPIUM— ( Continued ) .

Aggrayation. — During and after sleep (Apis, Ivach.);
while perspiring ; from warmth ; stimulants.
Amelioration. — From cold ; constant walking.


PETROLEV]!!!.

Coal or Rock Oil. Anthracite,

Adapted to persons with light hair and skin ; irri-
table, quarrelsome disposition (Nux) ; easily offended
at trifles (Ign. Med.); vexed at everything.

Ailments : from riding in a carriage, railroad car,
or in a ship (Coc, Sanic).

Ailments which are worse before and during a
thunderstorm (Nat. c, Phos., Psor.).

Symptoms appear and disappear rapidly (Bell.,
Mag. p. — ^reverse of. Plat., Stan.).

During sleep or delirium : imagines that one leg is
double ; that another person lies alongside of him in
same bed; that there are two babies in the bed (Val.).

Vertigo on rising (Bry.) ; in occiput ; as if intoxi-
cated ; like seasickness (Coc).

Headache : in occiput^ which is as heavy as lead ;
pressing, pulsating pain ; as if everything in the head
were alive ; numb, bruised ; as if made of wood.

Gastralgia : of pregnancy ; with pressing, drawing
pains ; whenever stomach is empty ; relieved by con-
stant eating (Anac, Chel., Sep.).

Diarrhoea : yellow, watery, gushing ; after cabbage,
sour krout ; during pregnancy, stormy weather ;
alzvays in the daytime,

215


PETROLEUM— (GwfAwi^flf ).

Painful sensitiveness of skin of whole body ; all
clothing is painful ; slight injury suppurates (Hep.).

Skin of hands rough, cracked ; tips of fingers rough,
cracked, fissured, every winter ; tenderness of the feet,
which are bathed in foul-smelling sweat (Graph.,
Sanic, Sil.).

Herpes : of genital organs extending to perineum
and thighs ; itching, redness ; skin cracked, rough,
bleeding ; dry or moist

Heat and burning of soles of feet and palms of
hands (Sang., Sulph.).

Sweat and moisture of external genitals, both sexes.

Painiul, itching chilblains and chapped hands <
in cold weather ; decubitus.

Sensation of coldness about the heart (Carbo an.,
Kali m., Nat. m.).

Relations. — One of our best antidotes for lead
poisoning.

The skin symptoms are worse in winter, better in
summer (Alum.) ; if suppressed, causes diarrhoea.

Aggravation. — Carriage riding (Coc, Sanic.) ; dur-
ing a thunderstonn ; in wiiiter (Alum.).

PETROSELINUM.

Parsley, Umbelliferce.

Intermittent fever: complicating traumatic or
chronic urethritis or stricture ; with abdominal aflfec-
tions and perverted or defective assimilation.

Thirsty and hungry, yet as soon as they begin to
eat or drink they lose all desire (rev. of, Cal.).

216


PETROSELrlNUM— (G7;^/^7^«^^ ).

Sudden urging to urinate (Canth.)-

Child suddenly seized with desire to urinate ; if
cannot be gratified at once jumps up and down with
pain.

Burning, tingling from perineum throughout whole
urethra.

Frequent voluptuous tickling in fossa navicularis.

Gonorrhoea : sudden irresistible desire to urinate ;
intense biting^ itching^ deep in urethra, must rub it
with some rough article in urethra for >; pain at
root of penis or neck of bladder. Gleet.

Relations. — Compare: Can., Canth., Mer. in^udden
urging to urinate.


PHOSPHORIC ACID.

Glacial Phosphoric acid, HPOy

Best suited to persons of originally strong constitu-
tions, who have become debilitated by loss of vital
fluids, sexual excesses (Cinch.) ; violent, acute dis-
eases; chagrin, or a long succession of moral emo-
tions, as grief, care, disappointed affection.

Ailments: from care, chagrin, grief, sorrow, home-
sickness (Ign.) ; sleepy, disposed to weep ; night-sweats
towards morning.

Pale, sickly complexion, eyes sunken and sur-
rounded by blue margins.

Mild, yielding disposition (Puis.).

Is listless, apathetic ; indifferent to the affairs of
life ; prostraied and stupefied with grief; to those

217


PHOSPHORIC ACm— (Continued).

things that used to be of most interest, especially if
there be debility and emaciation.

Delirium : muttering, unintelligible ; lies in a
stupor or a stupid sleep, unconscious of all that is
going on around him ; when aroused is fully con-
scious, answers slowly and correctly and relapses into
stupor.

In children and young people who grow too rapidly
(Cal., Cal. p.) ; pains in back and limbs as if beaten.

Headache : crushing weight on vertex^ from long
lasting grief or exhausted nerves ; in occiput and
nape ; usually from behind forward, < by least
motion, noise, especially music, > lying (Bry., Gels.,

Sil.).

Headache of school girls from eye-strain or overuse

of eyes (Cal. p., Nat. m.) ; of students, who are grow-
ing too fast.

Patient trembles, legs weak, stumbles easily or
makes missteps ; weak and indifferent to the affairs of
life.

Interstitial inflammation of bones, scrofulous,
sycotic, syphilitic, mercurial ; periosteum inflamed,
pains burning, tearing, as if scraped with a knife
(Rhus) ; caries, rachitis, but not necrosis ; growing
pains.

Boring, drawing, digging pains in nerves of extremi-
ties ; neurosis in stump after amputations (Cepa).

Diarrhoea: painless; 710 1 debilitating ; white or yel-
low, watery ; from acids ; involuntary, with the flatus
(Aloe, Nat. m.) ; choleraic, from fear.

Urine : looks like milk mixed with jelly-like, bloody

218


PHOSPHORIC ACID -( ConHyiued ) .

pieces ; decomposes rapidly ; proficse urination at night
of clear ^ watery urine^ which forms a white cloud at
once (phosphates in excess, nerve waste).

Onanism ; when patient is greatly distressed by the
culpability of the act (compare, Dios., Staph.).

Emissions : frequent^ profuse^ debilitating ; after
coitus ; most desire, after ; several in one night ;
abashed, sad^ despairs of cure (with irresistible ten-
dency to masturbate, Ust).

Chest : weak from talking or coughing (Stan.) ; in
phthisis ; nervous, from loss of vital fluids, too rapid
growth, depressing mental emotions.

Cerebral typhoid or typhus ; complete apathy and
stupor ; takes no notice, " lies like a log," utterly re-
gardless of surroundings ; intestinal hemorrhage, blood
dark.

Relations. — Compare : Phos., Puis., Pic. ac, Sil.;
Mur. ac. in typhoid ; Nit. sp. d. in apathetic stupor
and delirium.

Phos. ac. acts well before or after Cinch, in colli-
quative sweats, diarrhoea, debility ; after Nux in faint-
ing after a meal.

Aggravation. — From mental affections ; loss of vital
fluids, especially seminal ; self abuse ; sexual excesses >
talking, causes weakness in chest (Stan.).

PHOSPHORUS.

Phosphorus, The Element,

Adapted to tall slender persons of sanguine tem-
perament, fair skin, delicate eyelashes^ fine^ blond^ or
red hair ^ quick perceptions, and very sensitive nature.

219


PHOSPHORUS— ( ConHnued ) .

Young people, who grow too rapidly, are inclined
to stoop (to walk stooped, Sulph.) ; who are chlorotic
or anaemic ; old people, with morning diarrhoea.

Nervous, weak ; desires to be magnetized (Sil.)-

Oversensitiveness of all the senses to external im-
pressions, light, noise, odors, touch.

Restless, fidgety ; moves continually, cannot sit or
stand still a moment (restless, fidgety feet. Zinc.).

Burning : in spots along the spine ; " between the
scapiilce (as of a piece of ice, Lachn.) ; or intense heat
running up the back ; of palms of hands (I^ach.) ; in
chest and lungs ; of every organ or tissue of the body
(Ars., Sulph.) ; generally in diseases of nervous system.

Hemorrhagic diathesis ; small wounds bleed pro-
fusely (Kreos., Lach.); from every mucous outlet

Great weakness and prostration : with nervous de-
bility and trembling ; of whole body ; weakness and
weariness from loss of vital fluids (Cinch., Phos. ac).

Pain : acute, especially in the chest, < from
pressure, even slight, in intercostal spjices^ and lying on
left side ; excited by slightest chill ; open air intoler-
able.

A weak, empty, all-gone sensation in head, chest,
stomach and entire abdomen.

Apathetic ; unwilling to talk ; answers slowly ;
moves sluggishly (Phos. ac).

Weary of life, full of gloomy forebodings.

Dandruff, falls out in clouds (Lye); hair falls out in
bunches, baldness of single spots.

Eyes : hollow, surrounded by blue rings ; lids, puffy,
swollen, cedematous (upper lids, Kali c; lower. Apis).

220


rWlOHrWlOWLjm—iConftnued ).

Longs for : cold food and drink ; jnicy, refreshing
tilings; ice cream > gastric pains.

As soon as water becomes warm in stomach it is
thrown up.

Regurgitation of ingesta, in mouthfuls (Alum.).

Nausea from placing hands in warm water ; sneez-
ing and coryza from putting hands in water (Lac d.).

Constipation ; faeces slender, long, dry, tough and
hard (Staph.) ; voided with great straining and diffi-
culty (Caust).

Diarrhoea : as soon as anything enters the rectum ;
profuse, pouring away as from a hydrant; watery,
with sago-like particles ; sensation^ as if the anus re-
mained open (Apis) ; involuntary ; during cholera
time (which precedes cholera, Phos. ac.) ; morning, of
old people.

Hemorrhage: frequent and profuse, pouring out
freely and then ceasing for a time ; metrorrhagia, in
cancer ; hemoptysis ; vicarious, from nose, stomach,
anus, urethra, in amenorrhoea.

Heaviness of chest, as if a weight were lying on it.

During pregnancy ; unable to drink water ; sight of
it causes vomiting ; must close her eyes while bathing
(Lys.).

Cannot talk, the larynx is so painful ; is dry, raw,
rough, sore.

Cough : going from warm to cold air (rev. of, Bry.);
< from laughing, talking, reading, drinking, eating,
lying on the left side (Dros., Stan.).

Perspiration has the odor of sulphur.

Necrosis of the (left) lower jaw.

221


PHOPHSORUS— (0«/m7/^£/ ).

Relations. — Complementary : Arsenic, with which
it is isomorphic ; Cepa, its vegetable analogy.

Incompatible : with Causticum, must not be used
before or after.

Phos. removes the bad eflfects of Iodine and excessive
use of table salt.

Follows well : after, Calc. or Cinch.

Hahnemann says : *' Acts most beneficial when
patient suffers from chronic loose stool or diarrhoea.'*

Aggravation. — Evening, before midnight (Puis.,
Rhus) ; lying on left or painful side ; during a thunder-
storm ; weather changes, either hot or cold.

Cold air relieves the head and face symptoms but
aggravates those of chest, throat and neck.

Amelioration. — In the dark : lying on r. side ; from
being rubbed or mesmerized ; from cold food, cold
water, until it gets warm.


PHYSOSTIGMA.

Calabar Bean, LeguminoscB,

Uncommon mental activity ; cannot stop thinking.

Vision dim ; from blur or film ; objects mixed.

Pain after using eyes ; floating black spots, flashes
of light, twitching of lids and muscles of eyes (Agar.);
nistagmus.

Great prostration of muscular system ; impaired
locomotion (Gels.).

Tremors or trembling of young persons from mental
or physical disturbances.

222


PH YSOSTIGMA— ( Continued ) .

Idiopathic or traumatic tetanus ; brought on or <
by slightest breath of air from a person passing (Hyper.,
Lys., Nux, Strych.).

Relations. — Compare: Bell., Con., Cur., Gels.,
Hyper., Strych.


POOOPHYLLUM.

May Apple, BerberidacecB.

Adapted to persons of bilious temperament who
sufiFer from gastro-intestinal derangement, especially
after abuse of mercury ; " bilious attacks."

Thirst for large quantities of cold water (Bry.).

Pains : sudden shocks of jerking pains.

Depression of spirits, imagines he is going to die or
be very ill (Ars.) ; disgust for life.

Headache alternates with diarrhoea (Aloe) ; head-
ache in winter, diarrhoea in summer.

Painless cholera morbus; cholera infantum (Phyt.).

Violent cramps in feet, calves, thighs ; watery, pain-
less stools.

Difficult dentition : moaning, grinding the teeth
at night ; intense desire to press the gums together
(Phyt) ; head hot and rolling from side to side (Bell.,
Hell.).

Diarrhoea : of long standing ; early in mornings con-
tinues through forenoon, followed by natural stool in
evening (Aloe), and accompanied by sensation of
weakness or sinking in abdomen or rectum.

223


POOOPH VlXrim— ( Continued ) .

Diarrhoea of children: during teething; after eat-
ing ; wAile beitig baOied or washed ; of dirty water
soaking tiapkin through (Benz. ac.) ; with gagging.

Stool : green, water y\ fetid^ profuse (Calc.) ; gush-
ing out (Gamb., Jat, Phos.); chalk-like, jelly-like
(Aloe) ; undigested (Cinch., Ferr.) ; yellow meal-like
sediment ; prolapse of rectum before or with stool.

Prolapsus uteri : from overlifting or straining : from
constipation ; after parturition ; with subinvolution.

In early months of pregnancy, can lie comfortably
only on stomach (Acet. ac).

Patient is constantly rubbing a7id sJiaking the region
of liver zuith his hands.

Fever paroxysm at 7 A. M., with great loquacity
during chill and heat; sleep during perspiration.

Affects right throat, right ovary, right hypochon-
drium (Lye).

Pain and numbness in right ovary, running down
thigh of that side (Lil.).

Suppressed menses in young girls (Puis., Tub.).

Relations. — Compare: Aloe, Chel., Collin., Lil.,
Merc, Nux, Sulph.

It antidotes the bad effects of mercury.

After : Ipec, Nux, in gastric affections ; after, Calc.
and Sulph. in liver diseases.

Aggravation. — In early ^norning (Aloe, Nux,
Sulph.) ; in hot weather ; during dentition.


*2.*2.4


PHYTOLACCA.

Poke Root, PhytolaccacecB.

Patients of a rheumatic diathesis ; rheumatism of
fibrous and periosteal tissue ; mercurial or syphilitic.

Emaciation, chlorosis ; loss of fat.

Great exhaustion and profound prostration.

Occupies a position between Bryonia and Rhus;
cures when these fail, though apparently well indi-
cated.

In rheumatism and neuralgia after diphtheria, gou-
orrhcea, mercury or syphilis.

Pains flying like electric shocks ; shooting, lanci-
nating ; rapidly shifting (Lac c. Puis.) ; worse from
motion and at night.

Entire indifference to life ; sure she will die.

Vertigo ; when rising from bed feels faint (Bry.).

Intense headache and backache ; lame, sore, bruised
feeling all over ; constant desire to move but motion
< pains (Lac c, Mer. — motion >, Rhus).

Irresistible desire to bite the teeth or gums together
(Pod.); during dentition.

Sore throat; of a dark red color; uvula large,
dropsical, almost translucent (Kali bi., Rhus).

Diphtheria: pains shoot from throat into ears on
swallowing ; great pain at root of tongue when swal-
lowing ; burnings as from a coal of fire or a red-hot
iron ; dryness ; difficult to swallow with trembling of
the hands; sensation of a lump in the throat with
continuous desire to swallow ; tonsils, uvula and back
part of throat covered with ash-colored membrane ;
cannot drink hot fluids (Lach.).

o 225


PHYTOLACCA— (G7«A«i^^ ) .

Carotid and submaxillary glands indurated, after
diphtheria, scarlet fever.

Mammae full of hard, painful nodosities.

Breast ; shows an early tendency to cake ; is full,
stony, hard and painful, especially when suppura-
tion is inevitable ; when child nurses pain goes from
nipple all aver body (goes to back, Crot t; to uterus,
Puis., Sil.).

Mammary abscess; fistuke^ gf^pi^^g^ angry ulcers;
pus sanious, ichorous, fetid; unhealthy.

Tumefied breast neither heals nor suppurates, is of
a purple hue and "hard as old cheese" (Bry., I^ac c,

Phel.).

Nipples, sensitive^ sore^ fissured (Graph.) ; < in-
tensely by nursing, pain radiates over whole body.

Hastens suppuration (Hep., Lach., Mer., Sil.).

Aggravation. — When it rains ; exposure to damp,
cold weather. Compare ; Kale i. its analogue.


PICRIC ACID.

Picric acid. HQ H^NO^^ O.

Is often restorative of a wasted and worn-out sys-
tem ; a fair picture of " nervous prostration " (Kali p.).

Progressive, pernicious, anaemia ; neurasthenia.

Brain fag : of literary or business people ; slightest
excitement, mental exertion or overwork brings on
headache, and causes burning along the spine (Kali p.).

Headache : of students, teachers and overworked
business men ; from grief or depressing emotions ; in


PICRIC ACIO— ( Continued ) .

ocdpitO'Cervical region (Nat m., Sil.) ; < or brought
on by slightest motion or mental exertion.

Priapism, with spinal disease ; erections violent,
long-lasting ; profuse seminal emissions ; satyriasis
(Canth., Phos.).

Small boils in any part of body, but especially in
external auditory canal.

Burning along spine and great weakness of spine
and back ; softening of cord (Phos., Zinc).

Weariness, progressing from a slight feeling of
fatigue on motion to complete paralysis.

lired heavy feeling all over body, especially of
limbs, < on exertion.

Relations. — Compare : Arg. n., Gels., Kali p., Phos.
ac, Phos., Petr., Sil.

Amelioration. — Prom cold air and cold water.

Aggravation. — Least mental exertion ; motion ;
study ; wet weather.


PLATINA.

Adapted to women, dark hair, rigid, fibre ; thin, of
a sanguine temperament ; who suffer from too early
and too profuse menses.

Sexual organs exceedingly sensitive ; cannot bear
the napkin to touch her ; will go into spasms from an
examination ; vulva painfully sensitive during coitus ;
will faint during, or cannot endure, coition (compare,
Mur., Orig.).

The pains increase gradually and as gradually de-

227


PLATEN A— ( Continued ) .

crease (Stan.) ; are attended with numbness of parts
(Cham.).

For hysterical patients; alternately gay and sad,
who cry easily (Croc., Ign., Puis.) ; pale, easily
fatigued.

Arrogant, proud, contemptuous, and haughty;
pitiful " looking down " upon people usually vener-
ated ; a kind of " casting them ofiF " unwillingly.

Mental delusions, as if everything about her were
small ; all persons physically and mentally inferior,
but she physically large and superior.

Sensation, of growing larger in every direction.

Trifling things produce profound vexation (Ign.,
Staph.) ; remains a long time in the sulks.

Satiety of life, with taciturnity and fear of death
(Aeon., Ars.).

Mental disturbances after fright, grief, vexation;
onanism, pride.

Mental symptoms appear as physical symptoms dis-
appear, and vice versa.

Headache : numb, heavy pain in brain or on vertex ;
from anger or chagrin ; hysterical, from uterine dis-
ease ; pains gradually increase and decrease.

Nymphomania : < in lying-in women ; excessive
sexual development^ especially in virgins (Kali p.) ;
vaginismus, spasms and constriction.

Menses too early, too profuse, too long-lasting;
dark^ clotted^ offensive, with bearing down spasms;
pains in uterus with twitching ; genitalia sensitive.

Excessive itching in uterus ; pruritus vulvae.

Constipation : while travelling (at sea, Bry.) ; after

228


PLATINA— ( Continued ) .

lead poisoning : from inertia of bowels ; frequent, un-
successful urging ; stoo/s adhere to rectum and anus
like soft clay (Alum.) ; of emigrants ; of pregnancy ;
obstinate cases after Nux has failed.

Metrorrhagia : flow in black clots and fluid ; thick,
black, tarry or in a grumous mass (Croc).

Relations. — Compare: Aur., Croc, Ign., Kali p..
Puis., Sep., Stan.; Val. the vegetable analogue.

PLUMBUM.

Lead, The Metal.

Adapted to diseases from spinal origin (Phbs.,
Pic. ac. Zinc).

Excessive and rapid emaciation ; general or partial
paralysis ; extreme, with anaemia and great weakness.

Muscular atrophy from sclerosis of spinal system.

Lassitude ; faints on going into a room full of com-
pany.

Slow of perception; intellectual torpor, gradually
increasing apathy (in fevers, Phos. ac).

Weakness or loss of memory ; unable to find the
proper word (Anac, Lac c).

Delirium alternating with colic.

Assumes strangest attitudes and positions in bed.

Complexion : pale^ ash-colored, yellow^ corpse-like^
cheeks sunken ; expressive of great anxiety and suffer-
ing.

Skin of face, greasy, shiny (Nat. m., Sanic).

Distinct blue line along margin of gums ; gums
swollen, pale, show a lead-colored line.

229


PLUMBim— ( Continued ) .

Excessive pain in abdomen, radiaiing to all parts of
body.

Sensation in abdomen at night, which causes patient
to stretch violently for hours ; must stretch in every .
direction (Amyl. n,).

Violent colic, sensation as if abdominal wall was
drawn as if by a string to the spine.

Intussusception, with colic and fecal vomiting;
strangulated hernia, femoral, inguinal or umbilical.

Constipation: stools hard^ lumpy ^ black like sheep-
dung (Chel., Op.); with urging and terrible pain from
spasm of anus ; obstructed evacuation, from indurated
feces, dryness of the excretions, paralysis or muscular
atony; during pregnancy; from impaction of feces;
when Platina fails.

Bright's disease : colic pains ; abdomen retracted ;
rapid emaciation ; excessive debility ; contracted
kidney.

Feels a lack of room for foetus in uterus ; inability
of uterus to expand ; threatening abortion.

Spasms : clonic ; tonic ; from cerebral sclerosis or
tumor ; epilepsy or epileptiform convulsions.

Yellow skin ; dark brown " liver spots " in climac-
teric years ; jaundice, the eyes, skin and urine yellow.

Relations. — Compare: Alum., Plat., Op. in colic;
Pod. in retraction of navel ; Nux in strangulated
hernia ; Pod. the vegetable analogue.

The bad effects of Plumbum are antidoted by Alum.,
Petr., Plat., Sulph. ac, Zinc.

Aggravation. — At night (pains in limbs).

Amelioration. — Rubbing ; hard pressure.

2S0


PSORINUM.

A Product of Psora. A Nosode.

Especially adapted to the psoric constitution.

In chronic cases when well selected remedies fail to
relieve or permanently improve (in acute diseases,
Sulph.); when Sulphur seems indicated but fails to
act

Lack of reaction after severe acute diseases. Ap-
petite will not return.

Children are pale, delicate, sickly. Sick babies will
not sleep day or night but worry, fret, cry (Jalap.);
child is good, plays all day; restless, troublesome,
screaming all night (rev. of, Lye).

Great weakness and debitity ; from loss of animal
fluids; remaining after acute diseases; independent
of or without any organic lesion, or apparent cause.

Body has a filthy smell, even after bathing.

The whole body painful, easily sprained and injured.

Great sensitiveness to cold air or change of weather ;
wears a fur cap, overcoat or shawl even in hottest
summer weather.

Stormy weather he feels acutely ; feels restless for
days before or during a thunderstorm (Phos.); dry,
scaly eruptions disappear in summer^ return in winter.

Ailments : from suppressed itch or other skin dis-
eases, when Sulphur fails to relieve ; severe, from even
slight emotions.

Feels unusually well day before attack.

Extremely psoric patients ; nervous, restless, easily
startled.

All excretions — diarrhoea, leucorrhoea, menses, per-
spiration — ^have a carrion-like odor.

231


RSOWLTNVWL—CCanitnued )

Anxious, full of fear ; evil forebodings.

Religious melancholy ; very depressed, sad suicidal
thoughts ; despairs of salvation (Mel.), of recovery.

Despondent : fears he will die ; that he will fail in
business ; during climaxis ; making his own life and
that of those about him intolerable.

Driven to despair with excessive itching.

Headache : preceded, by flickering before eyes ;
by dimness of vision or blindness (Lac d.. Kali bi.); by
black spots or rings.

Headache: always hungry during ; > while eating
(Anac, Kali p.); from suppressed eruptions, or sup-
pressed menses ; > by nosebleed (Mel.).

Hair, dry, lustreless, tangles easily, glues together
(Lye). Plica polonica (Bar., Sars., Tub.).

Scalp : dry, scaly or moist, fetid, suppurating erup-
tions ; oozing a sticky, offensive fluid (Graph., Mez.).

Intense photophobia, with inflamed lids; cannot
open the eyes ; lies with face buried in pillow.

Ears : humid scurfs and soreness on and behind
ears ; oozing and offensive viscid fluid (Graph.).

Otorrhcea ; thin, ichorous, horribly fetid discharge,
like decayed meat ; chronic, after measles or scarlatina.

Acne : all forms, simplex, rosacea ; < during
menses, from coffee, fats, sugar, meat ; when the best
selected remedy fails or only palliates.

Hungry in the middle of the night; must have
something to eat (Cina, Sulph.).

Eructations tasting of rotten eggs (Am., Ant. t.
Graph.).

Quinsy: tonsils greatly swollen; difl&cult, painful

232


rSOWLTNimi—iCofiitnued ).

swallowing; bums, feels scalded; cutting, tearing,
intense pain to ears on swallowing (painless, Bar. c);
profuse, offensive saliva ; tough mucus in throat, must
hawk continually. To not only > acute attack but
eradicate the tendency.

Hawks up cheesy balls, size of a pea, of disgusting
taste and carrion-like odor (Kali m.).

Diarrhoea : sudden, imperative (Aloe, Sulph.); stool
watery, dark brown, fetid ; smells like carrion; in-
voluntary, < at night from i to 4 A. m.; after severe
acute diseases ; teething ; in children ; when weather
changes.

Constipation : obstinate, with backache ; from inac-
tivity of rectum ; when Sulphur fails to relieve.

Enuresis : from vesical paresis ; during full moon .
obstinate cases, with a family history of eczema.

Chronic gonorrhoea of year's duration that can
neither be suppressed nor cured; the best selected
remedy fails.

Leucorrhoea : large, clotted lumps of an intolerable
odor; violent pains in sacrum; debility; during
climaxis.

During pregnancy : most obstinate vomiting, foetus
moves too violently ; when the best selected remedy
fails to relieve ; to correct the psoric diathesis of the
unborn.

Profuse perspiration after acute diseases, with relief
of all suffering (Calad., Nat. m.).

Asthma, dyspnoea : < in open air, sitting up (Laur.);
> lying down and keeping arms stretched far apart
(rev. of Ars.); despondent, thinks he will die.

233


PSORn^imi— ( ConHnued ).

Cough returns every winter.

Hay fever: appearing regularly every year the
same day of the month ; with an asthmatic, psoric or
eczematous history. Patient should be treated the
previous winter to eradicate the diathesis and prevent
summer attack.

Cough : after suppressed itch, or eczema ; chronic,
of years' duration ; < mornings on waking and even-
ings on lying down (Phos., Tub.); sputa green, yellow
or salty mucus ; pus-like ; coughs a long time before
expectorating.

Skin : abnormal tendency to receive skin diseases
(Sulph.); eruptions easily suppurate (Hep.); dry^
inactive^ rarely sweats; dirty look, as if never washed;
coarse, greasy, as if bathed in oil ; bad effects from
suppression by sulphur and zinc ointments.

Sleepless from intolerable itching, or frightful
dreams of robbers, danger, etc. (Nat m.).

Psorinum should not be given for psora or the psoric
diathesis, but like every other remedy, upon a strict
individualization — the totality of the symptoms — ^and
then we realize its wonderful work.

Relations. — Complementary: Sulphur and Tu-
berculinum.

Is followed well : by. Alum., Bor., Hep., Sulph., Tub.

After : Lactic ac, in vomiting of pregnancy.

After : Arn. in traumatic aflFections of ovaries.

Sulphur follows Psorinum well, in mammary cancer.

Whether derived from purest gold or purest filth,
our gratitude for its excellent services forbids us to
enquire or care. — ^J. B. Bei.1..

2^4


PUUSATILLA.

Anemone, Ranunculacece.

Adapted to persons of indecisive, slow, phlegmatic
temperament ; sandy hair, blue eyes, pale face, easily
moved to laughter or tears ; aflFectionate, mild, gentle,
timid, yielding disposition — the woman's remedy.

Weeps easily ; almost impossible to detail her ail-
ments without weeping (weeps when thanked. Lye).

Especially, in diseases of women and children.

Women inclined to be fleshy, with scanty and pro-
tracted menstruation (Graph.).

The first serious impairment of health is referred to
puberic age, have " never been well since " — ^anemia,
chlorosis, bronchitis, phthisis.

Secretions from all mucous membranes are thick^
bland and yellowish-green (Kali s., Nat. s.).

Symptoms ever changing ; no two chills, no two
stools, no two attacks alike ; very well one hour, very
miserable the next ; apparently contradictory (Ign.).

Pains: drawing, tearing, erratic, rapidly shifting
from one part to another (Kali bi., Lac c, Mang. a.) ;
are accompanied with constant chilliness ; the more
severe the pain, the more severe the chill ; appear
suddenly, leave gradually, or tension much increases
until very acute and then " lets up with a snap ;" on
first motion (Rhus).

Thirstlessness with nearly all complaints ; gastric
difficulties from eating rich food, cake, pastry, espe-
cially after pork or sausage; the sight or even the
thought of pork causes disgust ; " bad taste " in the
morning.

235


rjJUSATTULJL— (Continued ).

Great dryness of mouth in the morning, without
thirst (Nux m. — ^mouth moist, intense thirst, Mer.).

Mumps ; metastasis to mammae or testicle.

** All-gone " sensation in stomach, in tea drinkeis
especially.

Diarrhoea: only, or usually at night; watery,
greenish-yellow, very changeable; soon as they eat;
from fruit, cold food or drinks, ice-cream (Ars., Bry.;
eating pears, Ver., China; onions. Thuja; oysters,
Brom., Lye; milk, Cal., Nat c, Nic, Sul.; drinking
impure water, Camp., Zing.).

Derangements at puberty ; menses, suppressed from
getting the feet wet ; too late^ scanty, slimy, painful,^
irregular, intermitting flow^ with evening chilliness ;
with intense pain and great restlessness and tossing
about (Mag. p.) ; flows more during day (on lying
down, Kreos.). Delayed first menstruation.

Sleep : wide awake in the evening, does not want
to go to bed ; first sleep restless, sound asleep when it
is time to get up ; awakes languid, unrefreshed (rev.
of, Nux).

Styes : especially on upper lid ; from eating fat^
greasy^ rich food or pork (compare, Lye, Staph.).

Threatened abortion ; flow ceases and then returns
with increased force ; pains spasmodic, excite suffoca-
tion and fainting ; must have fresh air.

Toothache : relieved by holding cold water in the
mouth (Bry., Coff.) ; worse from warm things and heat
of room.

Unable to breathe well, or is chilly in warm room.

Nervousness, intensely felt about the ankles.

23^


rJJJJSATILJ^A—(Confmued),

Relations. — Complementary : Kali m., Lye, Sil.,
Sulph. ac; Kali m. its chemical analogue.

Silicea is the chronic of Pulsatilla in nearly all
ailments.

Follows : and is followed by, Kali m.

One of the best remedies with which to begin the
treatment of a chronic case (Cal., Sulph.).

Patients, anaemic or chlorotic, who have taken much
iron, quinine and tonics, even years before.

Ailments : from abuse of chamomile, quinine,
mercury, tea^rinkingrsulphur.

Follows well : after, Kali bi.. Lye, Sep., Sil., Sulph.

Aggravation. — In a warm close room ; evening, at
twilight; on beginning to move ; lying on the left, or
on the painless side ; very rich, fat, indigestible food ;
pressure on the well side if it be made toward the
diseased side ; warm applications ; heat (Kali m.).

Amelioration. — In the open air ; lying on painful
side (Bry.) ; cold air or cool room ; eating or drinking
cold things ; cold applications (Kali m.).


PVROGBN.

A Product of Sepsis. A Nosode.

For saprsemia or septicaemia : puerperal or surgical ;
from ptomaine or sewer gas infection ; during course
of diphtheria, typhoid or typhus; when the best
selected remedy fails to > or permafiently improve.

The bed feels hard (Arn.); parts lain on feel sore
and bruised (Bapt.); rapid decubitus (Carb. ac).

237


P YROiiGEN— ( Continued ) .

Great restlessness; must move constantly to > the
soreness of parts (Am., Eup.).

Tongue: large flabby ; clean, smooth as if var-
nished ; fiery red ; dry, cracked, articulation diflScult
(Crot, Ter.).

Taste : sweetish ; terribly fetid ; pus-like ; as from
an abscess.

Vomiting : persistent ; brownish, cofifee-ground ;
ofiFensive, stercoraceous ; with impacted or obstructed
bowels (Op., Plb.).

Diarrhoea: horribly ofiFensive (Psor.); brown or
black (Lep.); painless, involuntary ; uncertain, when
passing flatus (Aloe, Olean.).

Constipation: with complete inertia (Op., Sanic);
obstinate from impaction^ in fevers ; stool, large,
black, carrion-like; small^ black balls^ like olives
(Op., Plb.).

Foetus : or secundines retained, decomposed ; dead
for days, black ; horribly offensive discharge ; " never
well since " septic fever, following abortion or con-
finement. To arouse vital activity of uterus.

Lochia ; thin, acrid, brown, very fetid (Nit ac);
suppressed, followed by chills, fever and profuse fetid
perspiration.

Distinct consciousness of a heart ; it feels tired ; as
if enlarged ; purring, throbbing, pulsating, constant
in ears, preventing sleep ; cardiac asthenia from septic
conditions.

Pulse abnormally rapid^ out of all proportion to
tem^perature (Lil.).


238


PYROGEN— ( ConHnued ) .

Skin ; pale, cold of an ashy hue (Sec); obstinate,
varicose, offensive ulcers of old persons (Psor.).

Chill : begins in the back^ between scapulae ; severe,
general^ of bones and extremities ; marking onset of
septic fever ; temperature 103 to 106 ; heat sudden,
skin dry and burning; pulse rapid, small, wirey, 140
to 170; cold clammy sweat follows.

In septic fevers, especially puerperal. Pyrogen *has
demonstrated its great value as a homoeopathic
dynamic antiseptic.

Relations. — Compare : Ars., Carbo v., Carb. ac. Op.,
Psor., Rhus, Sec, Ver.

Latent pyogenic process, patient continually relaps-
ing after apparent simillimum.

RATANHIA.

Rhatany. Polygalacece.

Terrible toothache during early months of preg-
nancy ; tooth feels elongated ; < lyings compelling to
rise and walk about.

Constipation: stool hard with great straining;
protrusion of hemorrhoids followed by long-lasting
aching and burning in anus (Sulph.); bowels inactive ;
pain after stool as if splinters of glass were sticking
in anus and rectum (Thuja).

Excruciating pains after stool ; burning after soft
stool (Nit. ac).

Fissures of anus^ great sensitiveness of rectum.

Fissures of nipples in nursing women (Graph., Sep.).

Relations. — Compare : Canth., Carb. ac. Iris,
Sulph., Thuja.

239


RA]KIJNCIJLUS BULBOSUS.

Buttercup. Ranunculacea.

One of our most effective remedies for the bad
effects of alcoholic beverages ; spasmodic hiccough;
delirium tremens.

Day blindness ; mist before eyes ; pressure and
smarting in eyeballs (Phos.).

Muscular pains about margins of shoulder blades in
women of sedentary employment, often burning in
small spots (Agar., Phos.); from needle-work, type
writing, piano playing (Act).

Pains : stitches^ sharpy shootings neuralgic^ myalgic
or rheumatic in walls of chesty coming in paroxysms ;
excited or brought on by atmospheric changes ; inflam-
matory ; depending upon spinal irritation (Agar.).

Pleurisy or pneumonia from sudden exposure to
cold, while overheated, or vice versa (Aeon., Arn.).

Corns sensitive to touch, smart, bum (Salyc. ac).

Intercostal rheumatism ; chest sore, bruised, <
from touch, motion or turning the body (Bry); in wet,
stormy weather (Rhus).

Shingles : preceded or followed by intercostal neu-
ralgia (Mez.); vesicles may have a bluish appearance.

Relations. — Compare : Aeon., Am., Bry., Clem.,
Euphorb., Mez.

Incompatible : with, Sulph. and Staph.

Aggravation. — Contact ; motion ; atmospheric
changes, especially, wet stormy weather (Rhus).


240


Rhubarb, Polygonacecs,

Suitable for children, especially during dentition.

Sour smell of the whole body ; child smells sour,
even after washing or bathing (Hep., Mag. c).

Screaming of children with urging and sour stools.

Children cry and toss about all night (Psor.).

Child impatient, desires many things, and cries;
dislikes even favorite playthings (Cina, Staph.).

Sweat of scalp, constant, profuse ; whether asleep or
awake, quiet or in motion, the hair is always wet ;
may or may not be sour (Cal., Sanic).

Difficult dentition ; child restless, irritable, peevish,
with pale face and sour smell (Kreos., Cham.).

Desires various kinds of food but cannot eat them,
become repugnant.

Colic : < at once by uncovering an arm or leg ;
with very sour stool; < when standing; not > by
stool.

Relations. — Complementary : after, Magn. c, when
milk disagrees and child has sour odor.

Compare : Cham., Col., Hep., Ipec, Magn. c. Pod.,
Staph., Sulph.

May be given after abuse of Magnesia, with or with-
out rhubarb, if stools are sour.


RHODODBNDRON.

Snowrose. Ericacece,

Nervous persons who dread a storm and are par-
ticularly afraid of thunder ; < before the storm, espe-

p 241


RHODODBNDRON— ( Continued ) .

cially an electrical storm (Nat. c, Phos., Psor., Sil.).

Toothache, every spring and fall during sharp east
winds ; worse from change of weather^ thunderstorm^
windy weather.

Acute inflammatory swelling of joints, wandering
from one joint to another ; severe at night ; < in rest
and during rough stormy weather (Kalm.).

Rheumatic drawing, tearing pains in all the limbs,
worse at rest and in wet^ cold^ windy weather (Rhus).

Cannot get asleep or remain asleep unless legs are
crossed.

Gout with fibrous deposit in great toe-joint, rheu-
matic, often mistaken for bunion (Colch., Led.).

Induration and swelling of the testicles after gonor-
rhoea or rheumatic exposure (Clem.); orchitis, sensa-
tion in gland as if it were being crushed (Aur., Cham.).

Relations. — Compare : Bry., Con., Cal., Led., Lye,
Sep., Rhus.

Aggravation. — Stormy, windy weather; electrical
changes in the atmosphere ; on approach of thunder-
storm ; symptoms reappear with rough weather.

Amelioration. — Better from wrapping the head
warmly ; dry heat and exercise.


RHUS TOXICODBNDROX.

Poison Oak, Anacardiacece,

Adapted to persons of a rheumatic diathesis ; bad
eflFects of getting wet, especially after being over-
heated.

242


RHUS TOlLICOmS'NUVLO^—iConitnued).

A^ilments : from spraining or straining a single part^
muscle or tendon (Cal., Nux) ; overlifting, particularly ^
from stretching high up to reach things; lying on
damp ground ; too much summer bathing in lake or
river.

Affects the fibrous tissue, especially (Rhod. — ^serous,
Bry.) ; the right side more than the left.

Pains : as if sprained ; as if a muscle or tendon was
torn from its attachment; as if bones were scraped
with a knife ; worse after midnight and in wet, rainy
weather ; affected parts sore to touch.

Lameness, stiffness and pain on first moving after
rest, or on getting up in the morning, > by walking
or continued motion.

Great restlessness^ anxiety, apprehension (Aeon.,
Ars.) ; cannot remain in bed ; must change position
often to obtain relief from pain (from mental anxiety,
Ars.).

Restless, cannot stay long in one position.

Back : pain between the shoulders on swallowing ;
pain and stiffness in small of back < sitting or lying,
> by motion or lying on something hard.

Great sensitiveness to open air ; putting the hand
from under the bed-cover brings on cough (Bar.,
Hep.).

Muscular rheumatism, sciatica, left side (Col.) ; ach-
ing in left arm, with heart disease.

Great apprehension at night ; fears he will die of
being poisoned ; cannot remain in bed.

Vertigo, when standing or walking; worse when


243


RHUS TOlLICOniE^miLO^-iConh'nued),

lying down (better when lying down, Apis) ; < rising
from lying, or stooping (Bry.).

Headache : brain feels loose when stepping or
shaking the head ; sensation of swashing in brain ;
stupefying ; as if torn ; /rom beer ; returns from least
chagrin ; < from sitting, lying, in cold, > warmth
and motion.

Dreams of great exertion ; rowing, swimming, work-
ing hard at his daily occupation (Bry.).

Comers of mouth ulcerated, fever blisters around
mouth and on chin (Nat. m.).

Tongue : dry ; sore, red, cracked ; triangular red
tip ; takes imprint of teeth (Chel., Pod.).

Great thirst, with dry tongue, mouth, and throat.

External genitals inflamed, erysipelatous, oedema-
tous.

A dry, teasing cough, before and during chill, in
intermittent fever ; cough, with taste of blood.

When acute diseases assume a typhoid form.

Diarrhoea : with beginning typhoid ; involuntary,
with great exhaustion; tearing pain down the pos-
terior part of limbs during stool.

Paralysis : with numbness of affected parts ; from
getting wet or lying on damp ground ; after exertion,
parturition, sexual excesses, ague or typhoid ; paresis
of limbs ; ptosis.

Erysipelas, from 1. to r.; vesicular^ yellow vesicles;
much swelling, inflammation ; burning, itching, sting-
ing.

Relations. — Complementary : to, Bryonia.


2^4


RHUS TOlLICOmS^inStO^— (Continued).

Inimical : to, Apis, must not be used before or after.

Compare : Am., Bry., Rhod., Nat. s., Sulph.

Aggravation. — Before a storm ; cold^ wet^ rainy
weather; at night, especially after midnight; from
getting wet while perspiring ; during rest

Amelioration. — Warm, dry weather, wrapping up ;
warm or hot things ; motion ; change of positiofi ;
moving affected parts.

The great chamcteristic of Rhus is that with few
exceptions the pains occur and are < during repose
and are > by motion.

Sepia, often quickly > itching and burning of
Rhus, the vesicles drying up in a few days.

Rhus is best antidoted by the simillimum ; the
potentized remedy given internally. The dermatitis
should never be treated by topical medicated appli-
cations ; they only suppress, never cure.


RUMBX CRISPIJS.

Yellow Dock. PolygonacecB.

For the tubercular diathesis, extremely sensitive
skin and mucous membranes.

Extremely sensitive to open air ; hoarseness ; worse
evenings ; after exposure to cold ; voice uncertain.

Tickling in throat pit^ causing dry, teasing cough.

Dry, incessant, fatiguing cough ; worse from chang-
ing air or room (Phos., Spong.) ; evening after lying
down ; touching or pressing the throat pit ; lying on
left side {^\ios>j\from slightest inhalation of cool air ;

245


RIJIIIBX CWLESrV»—(iConiznued).

covers head with bedclothes lo make air warmer ;
little or no expector'ation.

The cough is < in cool air or by anything which
increases the volume or rapidity of inspired air.

Sensation of lump in throat ; descends on swallow-
ing, but returns immediately.

Raw sensation in larynx and trachea when cough-
ing (Caust).

Urine ; involuntary with cough (Caust, Puis., Scil.).

Early morning diarrhoea ; from 5 to 10 A. M. (Aloe,
Nat s.. Pod., Sulph.) ; stools painless, profuse, offen-
sive ; sudden urging, driving out of bed in morning.

Skin : itching of various parts ; < by cold, > by
warmth ; when undressings uncovering or exposing to
cold air (Hep., Nat. s., Olean.).

Relations. — Compare : Bell., Caust, Dros., Hyos.,
Phos., Sang., Sulph.

Aggravation. — Cool or cold air ; lying down (Hyos.).

Amelioration. — Warmth ; keeping m^outh covered to
exclude cold air.


RUTA GRAY£OLr£NS.

Rue, RutacecB,

Scrofulous exostosis ; bruises and other mechanical
injuries of bones and periosteum ; sprains ; periosti-
tis ; erysipelas ; fractures, and especially dislocations
(Symp.).

Bruised, lame sensation all over, as after a fall or
blow ; worse in limbs and joints (Am.).

24^


RUXA GWLAY^OIMNS— (Con finned).

All parts of the body upon which he lies are pain-
ful, as if bruised (Bap., Pyr.).

Restless, turns and changes position frequently
when lying (Rhus).

Lameness after sprains, especially of wrists and
ankles (chronic sprains, Bov., Stron.).

Phthisis after mechanical injuries to chest (Mill.).

Aching in and over eyes, with blurred vision, as if
they had been strained.

After using eyes at fine work, watchmaking, en-
graving (Nat m.) ; looking intently (Sen.).

Amblyopia or asthenopia from over-exertion of eyes
or anomalies of refraction ; from over-use in bad light ;
fine sewing, over-reading at night ; misty, dim vision,
with complete obscuration at a distance.

£yes burn^ ache^ feel strained ; hot^ like balls of fire ;
spasms of lower lids.

Constipation ; from inactivity, or impaction follow-
ing mechanical injuries (Arn.).

Prolapse of rectum, immediately on attempting a
passage ; from the slightest stooping ; after confine-
ment ; frequent unsuccessful urging.

Pressure on the bladder as if constantly full ; con-
tinues after urinating ; could hardly retain urine on
account of urging, yet if not attended to it was diifi-
cult afterwards to void it ; scanty green urine ; in-
voluntary.

Warts ; with sore pains ; flat, smooth on palms of
hands (Nat. c, Nat. m. — on backs of hands, Dul.).

Backache, relieved by lying on the back.


247


RUTA GWLATEOIMNS— (Continued).

Relations. — Compare : Am., Arg. n., Con., Euphr.,
Phyt, Rhus, Symph.

After Arnica, it hastens the curative process in the
joints ; after Symphytum, in injuries of bones.


SABINA.

Samne. ConifercB.

Chronic ailments of women ; arthritic pains ; tend-
ency to miscarriages, especially at third month.

Music is intolerable; produces nervousness, goes
through bone and marrow (causes weeping. Thuja).

Drawing pains in small of back^ from sacrum to
pubes, in nearly all diseases (from back, going round
the body to pubes, Vib. op.).

Ailments: following abortion or premature labor;
hemorrhage from the uterus ; flow partly pale red,
partly clotted ; worse from least motion (Sec.) ; often
relieved by walking ; pain extending from sacrum to
pubes.

Menses : too early, too profuse, too protracted ;
partly fluid, partly clotted (Fer.) ; in persons who
menstruated very early in life ; flow in paroxysms ;
with colic and labor-like pains ; pains from, sacrum to
pubes.

Discharge of blood between periods, with sexual
excitement (Amb.).

Retained placenta from atony of uterus ; intense
after-pains (Caul., Sec).


24^


SABIN A — ( Continued ) .

Menorrhagia: during climacteric, in women who
formerly aborted ; with early first menses.

Inflammation of ovaries or uterus after abortion or
premature labor.

Promotes expulsion of moles or foreign bodies from
uterus (Canth.).

Fig warts with intolerable itching and burning;
exuberant granulations (Thuja, Nit. ac).

Relations. — Complementary : to, Thuja.

Compare : Calc, Croc, Millef., Sec, Trill.

Follows : Thuja in condyloma and sycotic affections.

Aggravation. — From least motion (Sec.) ; warm air
or room (Apis., Puis.).

Amelioration. — In cool, open, fresh air.


SABA DILL A.

Cebadilla. Liliacecs.

Suited to persons of light hair, fair complexion,
with a weak, relaxed muscular system.

Worm affections of children (Cina, Sil., Spig.).

Nervous diseases : twitching, convulsive tremblings,
catalepsy ; from worms (Cina, Psor.).

Illusions : that he is sick ; parts shrunken ; that she
is pregnant when merely distended from flatus ; that
she has some horrible throat disease that will be fatal.

Delirium during intermittents (Pod.).

Sneezing: in spasmodic paroxysms; followed by
lachrymation ; copious watery coryza ; face hot and
eyelids red and burning.

249


S ABADILLA— ( Continued ) .

Diphtheria, tonsillitis; can swallow warm food more
easily ; stitches and most symptoms, especially of
throat, go from left to right (Lach., Lac c).

Sensation of a skin hanging loosely in throat, must
swallow over it.

Headache : from too much thinkings too close appli-
cation or attention (Arg. n.) ; from worms.

Dryness of fauces and throat

Parchment-like dryness of skin.

Relations. — Compare : Col., Colch., Lye. where <
is from 4 to 8 p. m.; Puis., Sab. > in open air.

Follows : Bry. and Ran. b. well in pleurisy, and has
cured after Aeon, and Bry. failed.


SAmBUCVS NIGRA.

Elder, Caprifoliacece.

Adapted to diseases of scrofulous children, which
affect the air passages especially.

Persons formerly robust and fleshy, suddenly be-
come emaciated (lod., Tub.).

Bad effects of violent mental emotions ; anxiety,
grief, or excessive sexual indulgence (Phos. ac.
Kali p.).

CEdematous swellings in various parts of the body,
especially in legs, instep and feet.

Dry coryza of infants (sniffles) ; nose dry and com-
pletely obstructed, preventing breathing and nursing
(Am. c, Nux).

Dyspnoea : child awakens suddenly nearly suffo-

2^0


SAMBUCIJS "NlGWLA—iConiinued).

cated, face livid, blue, sits up iu bed ; turns blue,
gasps for breath, which it finally gets ; attack passes
off but is again repeated ; child inspires, but cannot
expire (Chlorine, Meph.) ; sleeps into the attack
(Lach.). Compare : Arum drac. in Miller's asthma.

Attacks of suffocation as in last stage of croup.

Cough: suffocative, with crying children; worse
about midnight ; hollow, deep, whooping, with spasm
of chest ; with regular inhalations but sighing exhala-
tions.

Cough deep, dry, precedes the fever paroxysm.

Fever : dry heat while he sleeps ; on falling asleep ;
after lying down ; without thirst ; dreads uncovering
(must be covered in every stage, Nux).

Profuse sweat over entire body during waking
hours ; on going to sleep, dry heat returns (sweats as
soon as he closes his eyes to sleep. Cinch., Con.).

Relations. — Compare : Cinch., Chlor., Ipec., Meph.,
Sulph.

Relieves ailments from abuse of Arsenicum.

Aggravation. — During reast ; after eating fruit.

Amelioration. — Sitting up in bed. Motion ; most
of the pains occur during rest and disappear during
motion (Rhus).

Follows well : after. Opium, in bad effects of fright

SANGVINARIA.

BloodrooL PapaveraxecB.

The periodical sick headache; begins in morning,
increases during the day, lasts until evening ; head

251


SAKGVIN ARIA— ( Cofitinued ) .

feels as if it would burst, or as if eyes would be
pressed out ; relieved by sleep.

American sick headache, > by perfect quiet in a
dark room ("tired headache" from over mental or
physical exertion, Epigea; sick headache < during
rest > by rubbing, pressure, motion. Indigo).

Headache begins in occiput^ spreads upwards and
settles over right eye (Sil. — over or in left orbit, Spig.).

Headaches, return at the climacteric ; every seventh
day (Sabad., Sil., Sulph. — eighth day. Iris).

Neuralgia of face > by kneeling down and press-
ing the head firmly against the floor ; pain extends in
all directions from the upper jaw.

ears ; in bronchitis, pneumonia, phthisis.

Rheumatic pain in the right arm and shoulder (left,
Fer.) ; cannot raise the arm, < at night

Pains in places where the bones are least covered, as
tibia, backs of hands, etc. (Rhus ven.).

Burning in pharynx and oesophagus.

Laryngeal or nasal polypi (Sang, n., Psor., Teuc.)

Climacteric ailments : flushes of heat and leucor-
rhoea ; burning of palms and soles ; compelled to
throw off bedclothes ; painful enlargement of breasts ;
when Lachesis and Sulphur fail to relieve.

Asthma after the " rose cold," < from odors.

Cough : dry, waking him at night and not ceasing
red cheeks ; night sweats ; diarrhoea.

Severe cough after whooping-cough ; the cough
returns every time patient takes cold.

252


SANGUINARIA— ( ConHnued ) .

Eruption on face of young women, especially dur-
ing scanty menses (Bellis, Cal., Eug. j., Psor.).

Relations. — Compare : Bell., Iris, Mellil., in sick
headache ; Lach., Sulph., in climacteric affections ;
Chel., Phos., Sulph., Ver. v., in chronic bronchitis or
latent pneumonia.

After Bell, fails in scarlatina.

As a dynamic remedy for the narcosis of Opium. .


SANICULrA.

Mineral Spring Water. Ottawa^ III.

Dread of downward motion (Bor.).

Child headstrong, obstinate, cries and kicks ; cross,
irritable, quickly alternates with laughter ; does not
want to be touched.

Constantly changing his occupation.

Head and neck of children sweat profusely during
sleep ; wets the pillow far around (Cal., Sil.).

Profuse, scaly dandruff on scalp, eyebrows, in the
beard.

Soreness behind ears with discharge of white, gray,
viscid fluid (Graph., Psor.).

Tongue : large, flabby ; burning, must protrude it
to keep it cool ; ring- worm on tongue (Nat. m.).

Nausea and vomiting from car or carriage riding.

Thirst ; drinks little and often ; is vomited soon as
it reaches the stomach (Ars., Phos.).

Symptoms constantly changing (Lac c, Puis.).

Incontinence of urine and faeces ; sphincter unreli-

253


SANICUlrA— ( Gw/Zw^^flf ) .

able (Aloe); urging from flatus, must cross legs to
prevent feces escaping.

Constipation : no desire until a large accumulation ;
after great straining stool partially expelled, recedes
(Sil., Thuja); large evacuation of small, dry, gray
balls, must be removed mechanically (Sel.).

Stool : hard, impossible to evacuate ; of grayish-
white balls, like burnt lime ; crumbling from verge
of anus (Mag. m.) ; with the odor of limburger cheese.

Diarrhoea : changeable in character and color ; like
scrambled eggs ; frothy, grass-green, turns green on
standing ; like scum of a frog pond ; after eating,
must hurry from table.

The odor of stool follows despite bathing (Sulph.).

Excoriation of skin about anus (Sulph.); covering
perineum and extending to genitals.

Ivcucorrhoea with strong odor of fish brine (oozing
from rectum smelling like herring brine, Cal.; fish
brine discharge from ear, Tel. ).

Weakness, bearing down as if contents of pelvis
would escape ; < walking, misstep, or jar, > by rest,
lying down ; desire to support parts by placing hand
against vulva (Lil., Mur.); soreness of uterus.

Foot-sweat : between the toes, making them sore ;
offensive (Graph., Psor., Sil.); on soles as if he had
stepped in cold water.

Burning of soles of feet ; must uncover or put them
in a cool place (Lach., Med., Sang., Sulph.).

Child kicks off clothing even in coldest weather
(Hep., Sulph.).

Emaciation, progressive ; child looks old^ dirty ^

254


S ANIClJLrA • -( Contimied ) .

greasy and brownish; skin about neck wrinkled^
hangs in folds (Abrot., lod., Nat. m., Sars.).

Relations. — Related to : Abrot., Alum, Bor., Cal.,
Graph., Nat. m., Sil., and others of our great anti-
psorics.

SARSAPARILrLA.

Wild Liquorice. Smildcece.

For dark-haired persons, lithic or sycotic diathesis.

Great emaciation ; skin becomes shriveled or lies in
folds (Abrot, lod., Nat, Sanic).

Headache and periosteal pains generally from mer-
cury, syphilis or suppressed gonorrhoea.

In children ; face like old people ; enlarged abdo-
men ; dry, flabby skin (Bar. c. Op.).

Herpetic eruptions on all parts of body; ulcers,
after abuse of mercury, in syphilis.

Rash from exposure to open air ; dry, itchlike erup-
tions, prone to appear in spring ; become crusty.

Severe, almost unbearable pain at conclusion of
urination (Berb., Equis., Med., Thuja).

Passage of gravel or small calculi; renal colic ;
stone in bladder ; bloody urine.

Urine : bright and clear but irritating ; scanty^
slimy ^ flaky ^ sandy^ copious^ passed without sensation
(Caust.) ; deposits white sand.

Painful distension and tenderness in bladder ; urine
dribbles while sittings standing, passes freely ; air
passes from urethra.

255


8 AR8 APARHJUA— ( ConHnued ) .

Sand in urine or on diaper ; child screams before
and while passing it (Bor., Lye).

Gonorrhoea checked by cold, wet weather, or mer-
cury, followed by rheuniatism.

Neuralgia or renal colic ; excruciating pains from
right kidney downwards (Lye).

Intolerable stench on genital organs; fluid pollu-
tions; bloody seminal emissions (Led., Men).

Retraction of nipples ; nipples are small, withered,
tmexcitable (Sil.).

Rheumatism, bone pains after mercury or checked
gonorrhoea ; pains < at night, in damp weather or
after taking cold in water*

Itching eruption on forehead during menses (Eug.
]., Sang., Psor.).

Rhagades : skin cracked on hands and feet ; pain
and burning, particularly on sides of fingers and toes
skin hard, indurated.

Relations. — Complementary : Merc, Sep., either of
which follows well.

Compare : Berb., Lye, Nat. m., Phos.

Frequently called for after abuse of Mercury.


SBCALrB CORNUXUM.

Spurred Rye ; Ergot. A fungus ; a Nosode.

Adapted to women of thin^ scrawny^ feeble^ cachec-
tic appearance ; irritable, nervous temperament ; pale,
sunken countenance.

256


SBCAlrB COWLNVTVmil—iiConimued).

Very old, decrepit, feeble persons.

Women of very lax muscular fibre; everything
seems loose and open ; no action^ vessels flabby ; pass-
ive hemorrhages, copious flow of thin, black, watery
blood ; the corpuscles are destroyed.

Hemorrhagic diathesis ; the slightest wound causes
bleeding for weeks (Lach., Phos.) ; discharge of sani-
ous liquid blood with a strong tendency to putres-
cence ; tingling in the limbs and great debility,
especially when the weakness is not caused by pre-
vious loss of fluids.

Leucorrhoea ; green, brown, offensive.

Boils : small^ painful with green contents^ mature
very slowly and heal in the same manner ; very debili-
tating.

Face : pale, pinched, ashy, sunken, hippocratic ;
drawn, with sunken eyes ; blue rings around eyes.

Unnatural, ravenous appetite ; even with exhaust-
ing diarrhoea ; craves acids, lemonade.

Diarrhoea: profuse, watery, putrid, brown; dis-
charged with great force (Gamb., Crot) ; very ex-
hausting ; painless, involuntary ; anus wide open
(Apis, Phos.).

Enuresis : of old people ; urine pale, watery, or
bloody ; urine suppressed.

Burning ; in all parts of the body, as if sparks of
fire were falling on the patient (Ars.).

Gangrene ; dry, senile, < from external heat

Large ecchymoses ; blood blisters ; often commence-
ment of gangrene.


257


SBCALrB COWLNVntVnSIK— (Continued).

Collapse in cholera diseases ; skin cold, yet cannot
bear to be covered (Camph.).

The skin feels cold to the touch, yet the patient
cannot tolerate coyering ; icy coldness of extremities.

Menses: irregular; copious, dark, fluid ; with press-
ing, labor-like pains in abdomen; continuous dis-
charge of watery blood until next period.

Threatened abortion especially at third month
(Sab.) ; prolonged, bearing down, forcing pains.

During labor : pains irregular ; too weak ; feeble or
ceasing ; everything seems loose and open but no ex-
pulsive action ; fainting.

After pains : too long ; too painful ; hour-glass con-
traction.

Suppression of milk ; in thin, scrawny, exhausted
women ; the breasts do not properly fill.

Pulse small, rapid, contracted and often intermittent

Relations. — Compare: Cinnamon in post-partum
hemorrhage ; it increases labor-pains, controls profuse
or dangerous flooding, is always safe, while Ergot is
always dangerous.

Similar : to, Arsenicum, but cold and heat are op-
posite.

Resembles Colchicum in cholera morbus.

Aggravation. — Heat : warmth from coverings of all
affected parts ; in all diseases worse from heat.

Amelioration. — In the cold air ; getting cold ; un-
covering affected parts ; rubbing.


25S


SBLrBNIfJlI.

Selenium, The Element.

Adapted to light complexion ; blondes ; great ema-
ciation of face, hands, legs and feet, of single parts.

Very forgetful in business, but during sleep dreams
of what he had forgotten.

Headache : of drunkards ; after debauchery ; after
lemonade, tea, wine ; every afternoon.

Hair falls off, on head, eyebrows, whiskers, genitals.

Coryza ending in diarrhoea.

Hungry : at night (Cina, Psor.); longing for spiritu-
ous liquors^ an almost irresistible maniacal desire.

Constipation ; stool large^ hard, impacted so that it
requires mechanical aid (Aloe, Cal., Sanic., Sep., Sil.);
after serious illness, especially enteric fevers.

Urine : red, dark, scanty ; coarse, red, sandy sedi-
ment ; involuntary dribbling while walking.

Impotence, with desire ; lewd thoughts, but physi-
cally impotent (sudden impotence, Chlor.).

Erections slow, insufficient, too rapid emission with
long-continued thrill ; weak, ill-humored after coitus,
often involuntary dribbling of semen and prostatic
fluid which oozes while sitting, at stool, during sleep ;
gleet (Calad.).

Priapism, glans drawn up (Berb. — drawn down,
Canth.).

Aphonia : after long use of voice ; husky when be-
ginning to sing ; obliged to clear the throat frequently
of a transparent starchy mucus (Arg. m., Stan.) ;
tubercular larjoigitis.


259


SElrENIUM— ( Continued ) .

Weak, easily exhausted; from either mental or
physical labor ; after typhoid, typhus, debauchery.

Irresistible desire to lie down and sleep ; strength
suddenly leaves him ; especially in hot weather.

Very great aversion to a draft of air either warm,
cold, or damp.

After typhoid, great weakness of spine, fears
paralysis.

Emaciation of affected parts.

Relations. — Compare : Phos. in genito-urinary and
respiratory symptoms ; Arg. m. and Stan, in laryngitis
of singers or speakers ; Alum, hard stool, inactive
rectum.

Follows well : after, Calad., Nat., Staph., Phos. ac,
in sexual weakness.

Itch checked by Mercurials or Sulphur often re-
quires Selenium.

Aggravation. — Draught of air ; in the sun; from
lemonade, tea or wine.

Amelioration. — Taking cold water or cold air into
the mouth.


SEPIA.

Cuttle Fish. -^*^ ^ Mollusca.

Adapted to persons of dark hair, rigid fibre, but
mild and easy disposition (Puis.).

Diseases of women : especially those occurring dur-
ing pregnancy, childbed and lactation ; or diseases
attended with sudden prostration and sinking f aintness

2^0


SEPIA— ( Continued ) .

(Murex, Nux m.) ; " the washerwoman's remedy,"
complaints that are brought on by or aggravated after
laundry work.

Pains extend from other parts to the back (rev. erf
Sab.) ; are attended with shuddering (with chilliness,
Puis.).

Particularly sensitive to cold air, " chills so easily ;"
lack of vital heat, especially in chronic diseases (in
acute diseases, Led.).

Sensation of a ball in inner parts ; during menses,
pregnancy, lactation ; with constipation, diarrhoea,
hemorrhoids, leucorrhoea and all uterine affections.

Faints easily : after getting wet ; from extremes of
heat or cold ; riding in a carriage ; while kneeling at
church.

Coldness of the v^ex with headache (Ver. — ^heat
of vertex, Calc, Graph., Sulph.).

Anxiety : with fear, flushes of heat over face and
head ; about real or imaginary evils ; toward evening.

Great sadness and weeping. Dread of being alone ;
of men ; of meeting friends ; with uterine troubles.

Indifferent : even to one's family ; to one's occupa-
tion (Fl. ac, Phos. ac.) ; to those whom she loves best.

Greedy, miserly (Lye).

Indolent ; does not want to do anything, either work
or play ; even an exertion to think.

Headache : in terrific shocks ; at menstrual nisus^
with scanty flow ; in delicate, sensitive, hysterical
women ; pressing, bursting < motion, stooping, mental
labor, > by external pressure, continued hard motion.


261


SEPIA— ( ConHnued ) .

Great falling of the hair^ after chronic headaches
or at the climacteric.

Yellowness: of the face; conjunctiva; yellow spots
on the chest ; a yellow saddle across the upper part of
the cheeks and nose ; a " tell tale face " of uterine ail-
ments.

All the coverings of the neck felt too tight and
were constantly loosened (Lach.).

Herpes circinatus in isolated spots on upper part of
body (in intersecting rings over whole body, Tell.).

Pot-belliedness of mothers (of children, Sulph.;.

Painful sensation of emptiness^ " all-gone feeling,'*
in the epigastrium, relieved by eating (Chel., Mur.,
Phos.).

Tongue foul^ but becomes clear at each menstrual
nisus, returns when flow ceases ; swelling and crack-
ing of lower lip.

Constipation : during pregnancy (Alum.) ; stool
hard, knotty, in balls, insufficient, difficult ; pain in
rectum during and long after stool (Nit. ac, Sulph.) ;
sense of weight or ball in anus, not > by stool.

* Urine : deposits a reddish clay-colored sediment
which adheres to the vessel as if it had been burned
on ; fetid, so offensive must be removed from the room
(horribly offensive after standing. Indium).

Enuresis : bed is wet almost as soon as the child
goes to sleep (Kreos.) ; always during the first sleep.

Gleet : painless, yellowish, staining linen ; meatus
glued together in morning ; obstinate, of long stand-
ing (Kali iod.) ; sexual organs, weak and exhausted.


262


— ( Continued ) .

Violent stitches upward in the vagina ; lancinating
pains from the uterus to the umbilicus.

Prolapse of uterus and vagina ; pressure and bear-
ing down as if everything would protrude from
pelvis ; must cross limbs tightly or " sit close " to
prevent it; with oppression of breathing (compare,
Agar., Bell., Lil., Murex, Sanic).

Irregular menses of nearly every form — early, late,
scanty, profuse, amenorrhoea or menorrhagia— when
associated with above-named symptoms.

Morning sickness of pregnancy ; the sight or
thought of food sickens (Nux) ; the smell of cook-
ing food nauseates (Ars., Colch.).

Dyspnoea : < sitting, after sleep, in room, > danc-
ing or walking rapidly.

Erythism ; flushes of heat from least motion ; with
anxiety and faintness ; followed by perspiration over
whole body ; climacteric (Lach., Sang., Sulph., Tub.);
ascends^ from pelvic organs.

Itching of skin ; of various parts ; of external geni-
talia ; is not > by scratching, and is apt to change to
burning (Sulph.).

Relations. — Complementary : Natnun mur.

Inimical : to, Lach., should not be used before or
after ; to. Puis., with which it should never be alter-
nated.

Similar : to, Lach., Sang., Ustil., in climacteric ir-
regularities of the circulation.

Frequently indicated after : Sil., Sulph.

A single dose often acts curatively for many weeks.

Aggravation. — In afternoon or evening ; from cold

263


L — {Continued),

air or dry east wind ; sexual excesses ; at rest ; sultry,
moist weather ; before a thunderstorm (Psor.).

Amelioration. — Warmth of bed, hot applications;
violent exercise.

Many symptoms, especially those of head, heart
and pelvis, are both < and > by rest and exercise.

It antidotes mental effects of overuse of tobacco, in
patients of sedentary habits who suffer from over-
mental exertion.


SILICEA.

Pure Silica, \ » , Silicic Oxid£» /

Adapted to the nervous, irritable, Anguine tempera-
ment ; persons of a psoric diathesis.

Persons of light complexion ; fine, dry skin ; pale
face ; weakly, with lax muscles.

Constitutions which suffer from deficient nutrition,
not because food is lacking in quality or in quantity,
but from imperfect assimilation (Bar. c, Calc); over-
sensitive, physically and mentally.

Scrofulous, rachitic children with large heads;
open f ontanelles and sutures ; much sweating about
the head (lower than Cal.), which must be kept wann
by external covering (Sanic); distended abdomen;
weak ankles ; slow in learning to walk.

Great weariness and debility ; wants to lie down.

Nervous debility ; exhaustion with erythism ; from
hard work and close confinement ; may be overcome
by force of will.

Restless, fidgety, starts at least noise.


SmiC:BJL—{Contuiu€d ) .

Anxious, yielding, fainthearted.

Mental labor very diflScult; reading and writing
fatigue, cannot bear to think.

Ailments: caused by suppressed foot-sweat (Cup.,
Graph., Psor.); exposing the head or back to any
slight draught of air; bad effects of vaccination,
especially abscesses and convulsions (Thuja); chest
complaints of stonecutters with total loss of strength.

Want of vital heat, always chilly, even when taking
active exercise (Led., Sep.).

Inflammation, swelling and suppuration of glands,
cervical, axillary, parotid, mammary, inguinal, seba-
ceous ; malignant, gangrenous.

Has a wonderful control over the suppurative pro-
cess — soft tissue, periosteum or bone — ^maturing ab-
scesses when desired or reducing excessive suppura-
tion (affecting chiefly the soft tissues, Calend., Hep.).

Children are obstinate, headstrong, cry when spoken
kindly to (lod.).

Vertigo : spinal, ascending from back of neck to
head ; as if one would fall forward, from looking up
(Puis. — ^looking down, Kal., Spig.).

Chronic sick headaches, since some severe disease
of youth (Psor.); ascending from nape of neck to the
vertex^ as if coming from the spine and locating in
one eye, especially the right (left, Spig.) ; < draught
of air or uncovering the head ; > pressure and wrap-
ping up warmly (Mag. m., Stron.) ; > profuse
urination.

Constipation: always before and during menses
(diarrhoea before and during menses. Am. c, Bov.) ;

265


SKLICBA— (Continued ).

diflScult, as from inactiyity of rectum; with great
straining, as if rectum was paralyzed ; when partly
expelled, recedes again (Thuja).

Faeces remain a long time in the rectum.

Fistula in ano alternates with chest symptoms
(Berb., Cal. p.).

Discharge of blood from vagina every time the
child takes the breast (compare, Crot t).

Nipple is drawn in like a funnel (Sars.).

Night walking ; gets up while asleep, walks about
and lies down again (Kali br.).

Unhealthy skin; every little injury suppurates
(Graph., Hep., Merc, Petr.).

Crippled nails on fingers and toes (Ant. c).

Takes cold from exposure of feet (Con., Cup.).

Sweat of hands, toes, feet and axillae ; offensive.

Intolerable, sour, carrion-like odor of the feet, with-
out perspiration, every evening.

Fistula lachrymalis ; ingrowing toe-nails (Mag. p. a..
Mar. v.) ; panaritium ; blood boils ; carbuncles ; ulcers
of all kinds ; fistulse, painful, offensive, high spongy
edges, proud flesh in them ; fissura ani ; great pain
after stool.

Desire to be magnetized, which > (Phos.).

Promotes expulsion of foreign bodies from the tis-
sues ; fish bones, needles, bone splinters.

Relations. — Complementary : Thuja, Sanicula.

Compare : Hep., Pic. ac. Kali p.. Hyper., Ruta,
Sanic, Gettysburg.

Follows well : after, Calc, Graph., Hep., Nit ac,

Phos.

266


SILICEA— ( Continued ) .

Is followed well : by, Hep., Fluor, ac., Lye, Sep.

Aggravation. — Cold; during menses; during new
moon ; uncovering, especially the head ; lying down.

Amelioration. — ^Warmth, especially from wrapping
up the head ; all the symptoms except gastric, which
are > by cold food (Lye).

Silicea is the chronic of Pulsatilla.


SPIGELIA.

PinkrooL Logania^ece.

Adapted to anaemic debilitated subjects, of rheu-
matic diathesis ; to scrofulous children afficted with
ascarides and lumbrici (Cina, Stan.).

Persons with light hair ; pale, thin, bloated, weak ;
wrinkled, yellow, earthy skin.

Body painfully sensitive to touch ; part touched feels
chilly ; touch sends shudder through the whole frame
(Kali c).

Afraid of sharp, pointed things, pins, needles, etc.

Rheumatic affections of heart (Kal., Led., Naja) ;
systolic blowing at apex. Aneurism.

Nervous headache ; periodical, beginning in morn-
ing at base of brain, spreading over the head and
locating in eye, orbit and temple of left side (right
side. Sang., Sil.) ; pain, pulsating, violent, throbbing.

Headache ; at sunrise, at its height at noon, declines
till sunset (Nat m.. Tab.).

Intolerable^ pressive pain in eyeballs ; could not turn


267


SPIGBLrIA— ( Continued ) .

the eyes without turning the whole body ; worse,
especially on making a false step.

Sensation : as if eyes were too large for the orbits
(Act, Com.) ; sensitive to touch ; as if a band around
head (Cac, Carb. ac, Sulph.).

Copious offensive mucus from posterior nares, drops
into throat, causing choking at night (Hydr.).

Sharp, stabbing, sticking pains through eyeballs
back into the head ; from cold^ damp^ rainy weather.

Prosopalgia : periodical, left-sided, orbit, eye, malar
bone, teeth ; from morning until sunset ; pain tearing,
burning, cheek dark red ; during cold^ rainy weather^,
from tea.

Toothache from tobacco smoking ; > only on lying
down and while eating (Plan.) ; worse from cold air
and water ; returns from thinking about it

Scirrhus of sigmoid or rectum, atrocious unbearable
pain (Alumen).

Dyspnoea : must lie on right side or with head high
(Cac, Spong.j ; pains in chest are stitching, needle-
like.

Chest affections with stitching pains synchronous
with pulse, < from motion, < cold, wet weather.

Palpitation : violent^ visible and audible ; from least
motion ; when bending forward ; systolic blowing at
apex.

Stammering, repeats first syllable three or four
times ; with abdominal ailments ; with helminthiasis.

Relations. — Compare : Aeon., Ars., Cact, Dig.,
Kali c, Naja, Kal., Spong., in heart affections.

Aggravation. — From motion, noise, touch, turning

2^^


SPIGElrIA— ( ConHnued ) .

the eyes ; from every shakings commotion^ or concus-
sion.

Amelioration. — Lying on right side with the head
high (Ars., Cac, Spong.).

SPOXGIA TOSTA.

Roasted Sponge. Spongia,

For the tubercular diathesis.

Especially adapted to diseases of children and
women ; light hair, lax fibre, fair complexion (Brom.).

Swelling and induration of glands ; goitre (Brom.).

Awakens in a fright and feels as if suffocating ; as
if he had to breathe through a sponge.

Every mental excitement < or increases the cough.

Worse after sleep or sleeps into < (Lach.).

Sore throat, < after eating sweet things.

Thyroid gland swollen even with chin ; with suffo-
cative paroxysms at night. Goitre.

Great dryness of mucous membranes of air passages
— ^throat, larynx, trachea, bronchi — "dry as a horn.'*

Cough : dry, barking, croupy ; rasping, ringing,
wheezing, whistling ; everything is perfectly dry^ no
mucous rdle.

Cough : dry^ sibilant^ like a saw didven through a
pine board ; < sweets^ cold drinks^ smoking, lying
with head low^ dry, cold winds ; < reading, singing,
talking, swallowing; > eating or drinking warm
things.

Croup: anxious^ wheezing^ < during inspiraHon

269


SPONGIA tOISrrX'-{Continued).

(< during expiration, Aeon.) ; < before midnight
(< before morning, Hep.).

Palpitation : violent with pain and gasping respi-
ration ; awakened suddenly after midnight with suf-
focation and great anxiety; valvular insufficiency;
before or during menses.

Angina pectoris; contracting pain, heat, faintness,
suffocation, anxiety and sweat ; < after midnight

Spermatic cord swollen, painful ; testicles swollen,
bruised, squeezed ; after suppressed gonorrhoea or
maltreated orchitis.

Relations. — Spongia follows well : after, Aeon.,
Hep., in cough and croup, when dryness prevails;
after Spong., Hep., when mucus commences to rattie.

Compare : Am., Canst, lod., Lach., Nux m., sputa
loosened but must be swallowed again.

STANNUM.

Tin, The Element.

Extreme exhaustion of mind and body.

Sinking, empty, all^one sensation in stomach
(Chel., Phos., Sep.).

Sad^ despondent^ feels like crying all the time,, but
crying makes her worse (Nat m., Puis., Sep.) ; faint
and weak, especially when going down stairs ; can go
up well enough (Bor. — rev. of Calc).

Headache or neuralgia; pains begin lightly and
increase gradually to the highest point and then
gradually decline (Plat).

Colic : > by hard pressure, or by laying abdomen

270


STANNUM— ( Continued ) .

across knee or on shoulder (Col.) ; lumbrici ; passes
worms.

Menses ; too early, too profuse ; sadness before ;
pain in malar bones, during.

Leucorrhoea ; great debility ; weakness seems to pro-
ceed from chest (from abdomen, pelvis, Phos., Sep.).

Prolapsus, worse during stool (with diarrhoea.
Pod.) ; so weak she drops into a chair instead of sitting
down.

While dressing in the morning has to sit down
several times to rest.

Nausea and vomiting ; in the morning ; from the
odor of cooking food (Ars., Colch.).

When singing or using the voice, aching and weak-
ness in deltoid and arms.

Great weakness in chest ; < from talking, laugh-
ing, reading aloud, singing ; so weak, unable to talk.

Cough : deep, hollow, shattering, strangling ; con-
cussive, in paroxysms of three coughs (of two, Merc.) ;
dry, while in bed, in evening ; empty sensation in chest.

Expectoration ; profuse, like the white of an t%% ;
sweetish^ salty (Kali i., Sep.) ; sour, putrid, musty ;
yellow, green pus (heavy, green, salty. Kali i.) ; dur-
ing the day.

Hoarseness ; deep, husky, hollow voice ; relieved
for the time by coughing or expectorating mucus.

Sweat : mouldy, musty odor ; after 4 a. m. every
morning ; on neck and forehead ; very debilitating.

Relations. — Complementary : Pulsatilla.

Aggravation. — Laughing and singing, talking,


271


STANNUM— (Gw/?««^^ ).

using the voice ; lying on right side; drinking any-
thing warm (from cold drinks, Spong.).

Amelioration. — Coughing or expectorating relieves
hoarseness ; hard pressure (Col.).

Stannum follows well : after, Canst, and is followed
by Cal., Phos., Sil., Sulph., Tub.


STAPHISAGRIA.

Stavesacre, RanunculacecB,

For the mental effects of onanism and sexual ex-
cesses.

Very sensitive to slightest mental impressions ; least
action or harmless word offends (Ign.).

Great indignation about things done by others or by
himself ; grieves about consequences.

Apathetic, indifferent, low-spirited, weak memory
from sexual abuses (Anac, Aur., Nat., Phos. ac).

Ailments from pride, envy or chagrin.

Ill-humored children cry for things which, after re-
ceiving, they petulantly push or throw away (Kreos.).

Was insulted ; being too dignified to fight subdued
his wrath and went home sick, trembling and ex-
hausted (the rev. of, Nux).

Sensation of a round ball in forehead sitting firmly
there even when shaking the head.

Mechanical injuries from sharp-cutting instruments ;
post-surgical operations; stinging, smarting pains,
like the cutting of a knife.

For the bad effects of : onanism, sexual excesses,

in


SXAPHISAGRIA— ( Continued ) .

loss of vital fluids ; chagrin, mortification, unmerited
insults ; indignation, with vexation or reserved dis-
pleasure (Aur.).

Nervous weakness ; as if done up after much hard
work.

Styes^ chalazcB on eyelids or upper lids^ one after an-
other, leaving hard nodosities in their wake (Con.,
Thuja).

Toothache : during menses ; sound as well as de-
cayed teeth ; painful to touch of food or drink^ but not
from biting or chewing ; < drawing cold air into
mouth ; < from cold drinks and after eating.

Teeth turn black, show dark streaks through them ;
cannot be kept clean ; crumble ; decay on edges (at
the roots, Mez., Thuja) ; scorbutic cachexia.

Craving for tobacco.

Extreme hunger even when stomach is full of food.

Sensation as if stomach and abdomen were hanging
down, relaxed (Agar., Ipec, Tab.).

Colic: after lithotomy or ovariotomy ; attending ab-
dominal section (Bis., Hep.).

Urging to urinate, has to sit at urinal for hours ; in
young married women ; after coition ; after difficult
labor (Op.) ; burning in urethra when not urinating ;
urging and pain after urinating in prostatic troubles of
old men ; prolapse of bladder.

Painful sensitiveness of sexual organs, vulva so sen-
sitive can scarcely wear a napkin (Plat.).

Onanism ; persistently dwelling on sexual subjects ;
constantly thinking of sexual pleasures.

Spermatorrhoea : with sunken features ; guilty^

R 273


STAPHISAGRIA— ( Continued ) .

abashed look ; emissions followed by backache, weak-
ness ; prostration and relaxation or atrophy of sexual
organs.

Cough : only in the daytime, or only after dinner,
worse after eating meat ; after vexation or indigna-
tion ; excited by cleaning the teeth.

Croupy cough in winter alternating with sciatica in
summer ; cough excited by tobacco smoke (Spong.).

Backache, < at night in bed, and in the morning
before rising.

Arthritic nodosities of joints, especially of the
fingers (Caul., Colch., Lye.) ; inflammation of pha-
langes with sweating and suppuration.

Sleepy all day, awake all night ; body aches all over.

In fever ; ravenous hunger for days before attack.

Eczema : yellow, acrid moisture oozes from under
crusts ; new vesicles form from contact of exudation ;
by scratching one place itching ceases, but appears in
another.

Fig-warts ; dry, pediculated, cauliflower-like ; after
abuse of mercury (Nit. ac. Sab., Thuja).

Relations. — Compare : Caust, Col., Ign., Lye, Puis.

Col. and Staph, act well after each other ; Caust,
Col., Staph., follow well in order named.

Aggravation. — Mental affections ; from anger, in-
dignation, grief, mortification ; loss of fluids ; tobacco ;
onanism ; sexual excesses ; from the least touch on
affected parts.

Inimical ; Ran. bulb., either before or after.


274


STRAlIONnJM.

Thorn Apple. Solanacece.

Adapted to: ailments of young plethoric persons
(Aeon., Bell.); especially children in chorea; mania
and fever delirium.

Delirium : loquacious, talks all the time, sings,
makes verses, raves ; simulates Bell, and Hyos., yet
differs in degree.

The delirium is more furious, the mania more acute,
while the congestion, though greater than Hyos., is
much less than Bell., never approaching a true in-
flammation.

Disposed to talk continually (Cic, Lach.); incessant
and incoherent talking and laughing ; praying, be-
seeching, entreating ; with suppressed menses.

Desires light and company; cannot bear to be
alone (Bis.); worse in the dark and solitude ; cannot
walk in a dark room.

Awakens with a shrinking look, as if afraid of the
first object seen.

Hallucinations which terrify the patient

Desire to escape, in delirium (Bell., Bry., Op., Rhus).

Imagines all sorts of things ; that she is double,
lying crosswise, etc. (Petr.).

Head feels as if scattered about (Bap.).

Eyes wide open^ prominent^ brilliant ; pupils widely
dilated^ insensible ; contortion of eyes and eyelids.

Pupils dilate when child is reprimanded.

Face hot and red with cold hands and feet ; circum-
sardonicus.

275


STRAMONHJII— ( CanHnued ) .

Stammering ; has to exert himself a long time be-
fore he can utter a word ; makes great effort to speak;
distorts the face (Bov., Ign., Spig.).

Vomiting: as soon as he raises hecui /ram pillow ;
from a bright light.

Convulsions: with consciousness (Nux — ^without,
Bell., Cic, Hyos., Op.); renewed by sight of bright
light, of mirror or water (Bell., I^ys.).

Twitching of single muscles or groups of muscles,
especially upper part of body ; chorea.

Hydrophobia : fear of water, with excessive aversion
to liquids (Bell., lyys.); spasmodic constriction of
throat.

No pain with most complaints; painlessness is
characteristic (Op.).

Sleepy, but cannot sleep (Bell., Cham., Op.).

Relations. — Stramonium often follows ; Bell., Cup.,
Hyos., Lys.

In metrorrhagia from retained placenta with charac-
teristic delirium, Sec. often acts promptly when Stram.
has failed (with fever and septic tendency, Pyr.).

After overaction, from repeated doses of Bell, in
whooping-cough.

Aggravation. — In the dark; when alone; looking
at bright or shining objects ; after sleep (Apis, I^ach.,
Op., Spong.); when attempting to swallow.

Amelioration. — From bright light ; from company;
warmth.


27^


SULPHUR.

Brimstone ; Flowers of Sulphur. The Element,

Adapted to persons of a scrofulous diathesis, subject
to venous congestions ; especially of portal system.

Persons of nervous temperament, quick motioned,
quick tempered, plethoric, skin excessively sensitive
to atmospheric changes (Hep., Kali c, Psor.).

For lean, stoop-shouldered persons who walk and
sit stooped ; walk stooping like old men.

Standing is the worst position for Sulphur patients;
they cannot stand; every standing position is un-
comfortable.

Dirty^ filthy people^ prone to skin affections (Psor.).

Aversion to being washed ; always < after abath.
Too lazy to rouse himself ; too unhappy to live.

Children : cannot bear to be washed or bathed (in
cold water, Ant c.) ; emaciated, big-bellied ; restless,
hot, kick off the clothes at night (Hep., Sanic.) ; have
worms, but the best selected remedy fails.

When carefully selected remedies fail to produce a
favorable effect^ especially in acute diseases, it fre-
quently serves to rouse the reactive powers of the
system ; clears up the case (in chronic diseases, Psor.).

Scrofulous, psoric, chronic diseases that result from
suppressed eruptions (Caust., Psor.).

Complaints that are continually relapsing (menses,
leucorrhcea, etc.) ; patient seems to get almost well
when the disease returns again and again.

Congestions to single parts ; eyes, nose, chest, abdo-
men, ovaries, arms, legs, or any organ of the body
marking the onset of tumors or malignant growths,
especially at climacteric.

277


SUlrPHUH— ( Continued ) .

Sensation of burning : on vertex ; and smarting in
eyes ; in face, without redness ; of vesicles in mouth ;
and dryness of throat, first r. then 1.; in stomach ; in
rectum ; in anus, and itching piles, and scalding
urine ; like fire in ripples (Ars.) ; in chest, rising to
face ; of skin of whole body, with hot flushes ; in
spots, between scapulae (Phos.).

Sick headache every week or every two weeks;
prostrating, weakening (Sang.) ; with hot vertex and
cold feet.

Constant heat on vertex ; cold feet in daytime, with
burning soles at nighty wants to find a cool place for
them (Sang., Sanic.) ; puts them out of bed to cool
them off (Med.) ; cramps in calves and soles at night.

Hot flushes during the day, with weak, faint spells,
passing off with a little moisture.

Bright redness of lips as if the blood would burst
through (Tub.).

Weak, empty, gone or faint feeling in the stomach
about II A. M. (lo or II A. M. > by eating, Nat. c);
cannot wait for lunch ; frequent weak, faint spells
during the day (compare, Zinc).

Diarrhoea : after midnight ; painless ; driving out of
bed early in the morning (Aloe, Psor.) ; as if the
bowels were too weak to retain their contents.

Constipation : stools hard, knotty, dry as if burnt
(Bry.); large, painful, child is afraid to have the stool
on account of pain^ or pain compels child to desist on
first effort ; alternating with diarrhoea.

The discharge both of urine and feces is painful to
parts over which it passes ; passes large quantities of


SUlrPHUH— ( G?«/mw^^ ) .

colorless urine ; parts round anus red, excoriated ; all
the orifices of the body are very red ; all discharges
acrid, excoriating wherever they touch.

Menses : too early, profuse, protracted.

Menorrhagia, has not been well since her last mis-
carriage. ** A single dose at new moon.'' — lyiPPE.

Boils : coming in crops in various parts of the
body, or a single boil is succeeded by another as soon
as first is healed (Tub.).

Skin: itching, voluptuous; scratching >; "feels
good to scratch ;" scratching causes burning ; < from
heat of bed (Mer.) ; soreness in folds (Lye).

Skin affections that have been treated by medicated
soaps and washes ; hemorrhoids, that have been treated
with ointments.

To facilitate absorption of serous or inflammatory
exudates in brain, pleura, lungs, joints, when Bryonia,
Kali mur. or the best selected remedy fails.

Chronic alcoholism ; dropsy and other ailments of
drunkards; "they reform," but are continually re-
lapsing (Psor., Tub.).

Nightly suffocative attacks, wants the doors and
windows open ; becomes suddenly wide awake at
night ; drowsy in afternoon after sunset, wakefulness
the whole night.

Happy dreams, wakes up singing.

Everything looks pretty which the patient takes a
fancy to ; even rags seem beautiful.

Movement in abdomen as of a child (Croc, Thuja).

Relations. — Complementary: Aloe, Psor.

Ailments from the abuse of metals generally.

279


SULPHUR— ( ConHnued ) .

Compatible : Calc, Lye, Puis., Sars., Sep.

Sulph., Calc, Lye; or Sulph., Sars. and Sep. fre-
quentiy follow in given order.

Calcarea must not be used before Sulphur.

Sulphur is the chrotiic of Aconite and follows it
well in pneumonia and other acute diseases.

Aggravation. — At rest ; when standing ; warmth in
bed ; washing, bathing; changeable weather (Rhus).

Amelioration. — Dry, warm weather ; lying on the
right side (rev. of, Stan.).


SULPHURIC ACID.

Sulphuric Acid. SOj.

Adapted to the light-haired ; old people, especially
women ; flushes of heat in climacteric years.

Unwilling to answer questions not from obstinacy,
but inaptness.

Feels in a great hurry ; everything must be done
quickly (Arg. n.).

Pain of gradual and slowly-increasing intensity
which ceases suddenly when at its height, often re-
peated (Puis.).

The pain is pressure as of a blunt instrument.
Tendency to gangrene following mechanical injuries,
especially of old people.

Child has a sour odor despite careful washing
(Hep., Mag. c, Rheum).

Sensation as if the brain was loose in forehead and
falling from side to side (Bell., Bry., Rhus, Spig.).

2^0


SULPHURIC ACU^—(Confinu€d),

Aphthae ; of mouth, gums, or entire buccal cavity ;
gums bleed readily ; ulcers painful ; offensive breath
(Bor.).

Chronic heartburn, sour eructaiiotis^ sets teeth on
edge (Rob.).

Water drank causes coldness of the stomach unless
mixed with alcoholic liquor.

Sensation as if trembling all over, without real
trembling ; internal trembling of drunkards.

Bad effects from mechanical injuries, with bruises,
chafing and livid skin ; prostration (Acet. ac).

Ecchymosis ; cicatrices turn blood-red or blue, are
painful (turn green. Led.).

Petechia : purpura hemorrhagica ; blue spots ;
livid, red itching blotches.

Hemorrhage of black blood from all the outlets of
the body (Crot, Mur. ac. Nit. ac, Ter.).

Concussion of brain from fall or blow where skin is
cold and body bathed in cold sweat

Weak and exhausted from some deep-seated dys-
crasia ; no other symptoms (Psor., Sulph.).

Relations. — Complementary : Puis.

Compare : Am., Bor., Calend., Led., Ruta, Rheum,
Symp.

In contusion and laceration of soft parts it vies with
Calendula.

Follows well : after. Am. with bruised pain, livid
skin and profuse sweat ; after. Led. in ecchymosis.

Ailments, from brandy drinking.

Sulphuric acid, one part, with three parts of alcohol, lo to 15
drops, three times daily for three or four weeks, has been success-
fully used to subdue the craving for liquor. — Hbring.

281


SYMPHYTUM.

Comfrey, BorragincLcece,

Facilitates union of fractured bones (Cal. p.) ;
lessens peculiar pricking pain; favors production of
callous ; when trouble is of nervous origin.

Irritability at point of fracture ; periosteal pain
after wounds have healed.

Mechanical injuries ; blows, bruises, thrusts on
the globe of the eye.

Pain in eye after a blow of an obtuse body ; snow
ball strikes the eye ; infant thrusts its fist into its
mother's eye (to soft tissues around the eye. Am.).

Relations. — Compare : Arn., Calend., Cal. p.,
Fluor. ac.,Hep., Sil.

Follows well : after, Arnica, for pricking pain, and
soreness of periosteum remaining after an injury.


SYPHILINUM.

Syphilitic Vines. A Nosode,

Pains from darkness to daylight; begin with
twilight and end with daylight (Merc, Phyt.).

Pains increase and decrease gradually (Stan.) ; shift-
ing and require frequent change of position.

All symptoms are worse at night (Merc.) ; from
sundown to sunrise.

Eruptions : dull, red, copper-colored spots, becom-
ing blue when getting cold.

Extreme emaciation of entire body (Abrot., lod.).

Heart : lancinating pains from base to apex, at


SYPmirlNUM— ( Continued ) .

night (from apex to base, Med.; from base to clavicle,
or shoulder, Spig.).

Loss of memory ; cannot remember names of books,
persons or places ; arithmetical calculation difficult.

Sensation : as if going insane ; as if about to be par-
alyzed ; of apathy and indifference.

Terrible dread of night on account of mental and
physical exhaustion on awakening ; it is intolerable,
death is preferable.

Fears the terrible suffering from exhaustion on
awakening (Lach.).

Leucorrhoea ; profuse, soaking through the napkins
and running down to the heels (Alum.).

Headache, neuralgic in character, causing sleepless-
ness and delirium at night ; commencing at 4 p. m.;
worse from 10 to 11 and ceasing at daylight (ceases at
II or 12 P. M., Lye); falling of the hair.

Acute ophthalmia neonatorum ; lids swollen, adhere
during sleep ; pain intense at night < from 2 to 5
A. M.; pus profuse ; > by cold bathing.

Ptosis : paralysis of superior oblique ; sleepy look
from drooping lids (Canst, Graph.).

Diplopia, one image seen below the other.

Teeth : decay at edge of gum and break off ; are
cupped, edges serrated ; dwarfed in size, converge at
their tips (Staph.).

Craving alcohol, in any form. Hereditary tendency
to alcoholism (Asar., Psor., Tuber., Sulph., Sulph. ac).

Obstinate constipation for years ; rectum seems tied
up with strictures ; when enema were used the agony
of passage was like labor (Lac d., Tub.).

283


SYPHDUINIJII— ( CanHnued ).

Fissures in anus and rectum (Thuja) ; prolapse of
rectum ; obstinate cases with a syphilitic history.

Rheumatism of the shoulder joint, or at insertion
of deltoid, < from raising arm laterally (Rhus — r.
shoulder. Sang.; left, Fer.).

When the best selected remedy fails to relieve or
permanently improve, in syphilitic aflEections.

Syphilitics, or patients who have had chancre
treated by local means, and as a result have suffered
from throat and skin troubles for years, are nearly
always benefited by this remedy at commencement of
treatment unless some other remedy is clearly in-
dicated.

Relations. — Compare : Aur., Asaf., Kali i., Merc,
Phyt., in bone diseases and syphilitic affections.

Aggravation. — At nighty from twilight to daylight


TABACUM.

Tobacco, SolanacecB.

Diseases originating in cerebral irritation followed
by marked irritation of functions of vagi.

Emaciation of cheeks and back.

Complete prostration of entire muscular system.

Sensation of excessive wretchedness.

Icy coldness of surface ; covered with cold sweat

Symptoms occur in paroxysms — asthma, sick head-
ache, vertigo, sneezing.

Great despondency with indigestion, palpitation, in-
termittent pulse.

2^4


TAB ACUM— ( Continued ) .

Vertigo : death-like pallor^ increasing to loss of con-
sciousness ; relieved in open air and by vomiting ; on
rising or looking upward ; on opening the eyes.

Sick headache coming on in early morning, intoler-
able by noon, deathly nausea, violent vomiting ; < by
noise and light ; periodical, lasting one or two days.

Sudden pain on right side of head as if struck by a
hammer or a club.

Dim-sighted ; sees as through a veil ; strabismus,
depending upon brain troubles.

Amaurosis, from atrophy of retina or optic nerve.

Face pale, blue, pinched, sunken, collapsed, covered
with cold sweat (cold sweat on forehead, Ver.).

Nausea ; incessant, as if seasick ; vomiting, on least
motion ; with f aintness ; > in open air.

Vomiting : violent^ with cold sweat ; soon as he
begins to move ; during pregnancy, when I^actic acid
fails (Psor.).

Seasickness ; deathly nausea, pallor, coldness ; < by
least motion and > on deck in fresh, cold air.

Terrible faint^ sinking feeling at pit of stomach.

Sense of relaxation of stomach with nausea (Ipec,
Staph.).

Child wants abdomen uncovered ; relieves nausea and
vomiting ; coldness in abdomen (Colch., Elaps, lyach.).

Constipation : inactive bowel or paralysis of rectum ;
spasms of sphincter ; prolapsus ani ; of years' stand-
ing; herpes of anus.

Diarrhoea: sudden, yellowish, greenish, slimy;
urgent, watery ; with nausea^ vomitings prostration and


285


TABACUM— ( Continued ) .

coid sweat (Ver.) ; with extreme faintness ; from ex-
cessive smoking.

Renal colic : violent spasmodic pains along ureter,
left side (Berb.) ; deathly nausea and cold perspiration.

Palpitation: violent when lying on left side ; goes
off when turning to the right.

Pulse : quick, full, large ; small, intermittent, ex-
ceedingly slow ; feeble, irregular, almost imperceptible

Hands icy cold, body warm.

Legs icy cold, from knees down ; trembling of limbs.

Relations. — ^Antidotes, for abuse of tobacco, are :

Ipec, for excessive nausea and vomiting.

Ars., for bad effects of tobacco chewing.

Nux, for the gastric symptoms next morning after
smoking.

Phos., palpitation, tobacco heart, sexual weakness.

Ign., for annoying hiccough from tobacco chewing.

Clem, or Plant, for tobacco toothache.

Sep., neuralgic affections of right side of face ; dys-
pepsia ; chronic nervousness, especially in sedentary
occupations.

Lye, for impotence, spasms, cold sweat from excess-
ive smoking.

Gels., occipital headache and vertigo from excessive
use, especially smoking.

Tabacum, potentized (2CX) or icxx)) to relieve ter-
rible craving when discontinuing use.

Amelioration. — Open^ fresh^ cold air ; uncovering.


"m^


TARAXACUM.

Dandelion. Composite^.

For gastric and bilious attacks, especially gastric
headaches.

Mapped tongue (Lach., Men, Nat. m.); covered
with a white film with sensation of rawness. This
film comes oflF in patches^ leaving dark red, tender,
very sensitive spots (Ran. s.).

Jaundice with enlargement and induration of liver
(mapped tongue).

Debility, loss of appetite, profuse night sweats^ espe-
cially when convalescing from bilious or typhoid fever.

Restlessness of limbs in typhoid (Rhus, Zinc).

Relations. — Compare : Bry., Chel., Hydr., Nux, in
gastric and bilious affections.

Aggravation. — Almost all symptoms appear when
sitting ; lying down ; resting.


TARANTULA.

Tarantula ; Cuban and Spanish, Araneide(E.

Adapted to highly nervous organisms, especially
choreic affections where whole body, or right arm and
left leg are affected (left arm and right leg. Agar.).

Constant movement of the legs, arms, trunk, with
inability to do anything; twitching and jerking of
muscles.

Restlessness, could not keep quiet in any position ;
must keep in motion, though walking < all symptoms
(rev. of, Rhus, Ruta).

287


TARANTULA— ( ConHnued ) .

Hyperaesthesia : least excitement irritates, followed
by languid sadness ; extreme of tips of fingers.

Slight touch along the spine provokes spasmodic
pain in chest and cardiac region.

Headache ; intense, as if thousands of needles were
pricking in the brain.

Abscesses, boils, felons, affected parts of a bluish
color (Lach.), and atrocious burning pain (Anth., Ars.);
the agony of a felon^ compelling patient to walk the
floor for nights.

Malignant ulcers; carbuncle, anthrax; gangrene.

Symptoms appear periodically.

Headache, neuralgic < by noise^ touchy strong lights
> by rubbing head against the pillow.

At every menstrual nisus, throat, mouth and tongue
intolerably dry, especially when sleeping (Nux m.).

Sexual excitement extreme even to mania ; spasms
of uterus ; pruritus vulva becomes intolerable.

Relations. — Similar: to, Apis, Crot, Lach., Plat,
Mygale, Naja, Ther.

Aggravation. — Motion; contact; touch of affected
parts ; noise ; change of weather.

Amelioration. — In open air; music; rubbing af-
fected parts.

Termini of nerves became so irritated and sensitive
that some kind of friction is necessary to obtain re-
lief.


•i^^


TEREBINTH.

Oil of Turpentine, A Volatile Oil.

The urifie has the odor of violets.

Tongue ; smooth^ glossy^ red^ as if deprived of
papillae, or as if glazed (Pyr.); elevated papillae ; coat-
ing peels off in patches leaving bright red spots, or
entire coating cleans off suddenly (in exanthemata);
dry and red ; burning in tip (compare, Mur. ac).

Abdomen : extremely sensitive to touch ; distension,
flatulence, excessive tympanitis ; meteorism (Colch.).

Diarrhoea: stool, watery, greenish, mucous \ frequent^
profuse^ fetidy bloody ; burning in anus and rectum,
fainting and exhaustion^ after (Ars.).

Worms : with foul breath, choking (Cina, Spig.);
dry, hacking cough ; tickling at anus ; ascarides,
lumbrici, tapeworm segments passed.

Hematuria : blood, thoroughly mixed with the urine;
sediment, like coffee-grounds ; cloudy^ smoky ^ albumi-
nous ; profuse^ dark or blacky painless.

Congestion and inflammation of viscera ; kidneys,
bladder, lungs, intestines, uterus ; with hemorrhage,
and malignant tendency.

Purpura hemorrhagica ; fresh ecchymoses in great
numbers from day to day (Sulph. ac).

Ascites with anasarca, in organic lesions of kidneys ;
dropsy after scarlatina (Apis, Hell., Lach.).

Hemorrhages ; from bowels^ with ulceration ; pass-
ive, dark with ulceration or epithelial degeneration.

Violent burning and drawing pains in kidney^ blad-
der and urethra (Berb., Can., Canth.).

Violent burning and cutting in bladder ; tenesmus ;

s 289


TERBBINTH— ( Continued ) .

sensitive hypogastrium ; cystitis and retention from
atony of fundus.

Albuminuria ; acute, in early stages, when blood
and albumen abound more than casts and epithelium ;
after diphtheria, scarlatina, typhoid.

Urine rich in albumin and blood, but few if any
casts ; < from living in damp dwellings.

Strangury ; spasmodic retention of urine.

Relations. — Compare : Alumen, Am., Ars., Canth.,
lyach., Nit ac.

Is recommended as a prophylactic in malarial and
African fevers.


THERIDION CURASSAinCim.

Orange Spider, Aranetdece.

Time passes too quickly (too slowly, Arg. n., Can. L,
Nux m.).

Vertigo: on closing the eyes (Lach., Thuja — on
opening them, Tab.; on looking upward, Puis., Sil.);
from any, even least noise; aural or labyrinthine
(Meniere's disease).

Nausea : from least motion, and especially on closing
the eyes ; from fast riding in a carriage.

Headache : when beginning to move, as of a dull
heavy pressure behind the eyes ; violent, deep, in the
brain ; < lying down (Lach.); very much < from
others walking on the floor, or from least motion of
head.

Every sound seems to penetrate through the whole
body, causing nausea and vertigo.


THKRIDION CVBiASS AYICJJM— (Cont'd).

Chronic nasal catarrh ; discharge thick, yellow,
greenish, offensive (Puis., Thuja).

Toothache ; every shrill sound penetrates the teeth.

Seasickness of nervous women; they close their
eyes to get rid of the motion of the vessel and grow
deathly sick.

Violent stitches in upper left chest, below the
scapula, extending to neck (Anis., Myr., Pix, Sulph.).

Pains in the bones all over, as if broken.

Great sensitiveness between vetebrae, sits sideways
in a chair to avoid pressure against spine (Chin, s.);
< by least noise and jar of foot on floor.

For extreme nervous sensitiveness ; of puberty, dur-
ing pregnancy and climacteric years.

" In rachitis, caries, necrosis, it apparently goes to
the root of the evil and destroys the cause." — Dr.
Baruch.

Phthisis florida, often effects a cure if given in the
early stages of disease.

In scrofulosis where the best chosen remedies fail
to relieve.

Relations. — Follows well : after, Cal. and Lye.


THLASPI BURSA PASTORIS.

Shepherd^ s Purse. Cruciferce.

Profuse passive hemorrhage from every outlet of
the body ; blood dark and clotted.

Metrorrhagia: with violent cramps and uterine

291


THLASPI BURSA lPA3T01US—(Coniin'd).

colic ; in chlorosis ; after abortion, labor, miscarriage ;
at climacteric ; with cancer uteri (Phos., Ust).

Menses : too early ; too profuse ; protracted (eight,
ten, even fifteen days); tardy in starting, first day
merely a show ; second day colic, vomiting, a hemor-
rhage with large clots; each alternate period more
profuse.

Hemorrhage or delaying menses from uterine in-
ertia ; exhausting, scarcely recovers from one period
before another begins.

Leucorrhcea : bloody, dark, offensive; some days
before and after menses.

Relations. — Compare: Sinapis, Trillium, Vi-
burnum, Ustilago.


THUJA OCCmBNTALIS.

Tree of Life ; White Cedar, ConifercB,

Adapted to hydrogenoid constitution of Grauvogl,
which is related to sycosis as effect is to cause.

Thuja bears the same relation to the sycosis of
Hahnemann — fig warts, condylomata and wart-like
excrescences upon mucous and cutaneous surfaces —
that Sulphur does to psora, or Mercury to syphilis.

Acts well in lymphatic temperament, in very fleshy
persons, dark complexion, black hair, unhealthy skin.

Ailments : from bad effects of vaccination (Ant t,
Sil.); from suppressed or maltreated gonorrhoea (Med.).

Fixed ideas: as if a strange person were at his
side ; as if soul and body were separated ; as if a liv-

2,^2


THUJA OCCmn^TAJLl^—iConttnued).

ing animal were in abdomen ; of being under the in-
fluence of a superior power.

Insane women will not be touched or approached.

Vertigo, when closing the eyes (Lach., Ther.).

Headache : as if a nail had been driven into pari-
etal bone (Coff., Ign.) ; or as if a convex button were
pressed on the part ; < from sexual excesses ; over-
heating ; from tea (Sel.) ; chronic, of sycotic or syphi-
litic origin.

White scaly dandruff ; hair dry and falling out.

Eyes : ophthalmia neonatorum, sycotic or syphi-
litic ; large granulations^ like warts or blisters ; > by
warmth and covering ; if uncovered, feels as if a cold
stream of air were blowing out through them.

Eyelids : agglutinated at night ; dry, scaly on
edges ; styes and tarsal tumors ; chalazse, thick, hard
knots, like small condylomata; after Staphisagria
partially > but does not cure.

Ears: chronic otitis; discharge purulent, like
putrid meat ; granulations, condylomata ; polypi, pale
red, cellular, bleeding easily.

Chronic catarrh : after exanthemata ; thick, green
mucus, blood and pus (Puis.).

Teeth decay at the roots, crowns remain sound (Mez.
— on edges. Staph.) ; crumble, turn yellow (Syph.).

Ranula : bluish, or varicose veins on tongue or in
mouth (Amb.).

Toothache from tea drinking.

" On blowing the nose a pressing pain in the hollow
tooth or at the side of it (Culex)." — Boenninghausen.

Abdomen : as if an animal were crying ; motion as

293


THUJA 0€X:TDE^VAJLl»—iContinui^d).

if something alive ; protrudes here and there like the
arm of a foetus (Croc, Nux m., Sulph.).

Distressing, burning pain in left ovarian region
when walking or riding, must sit or lie down (Croc.,
Ust) ; worse at each menstrual nisus.

Constipation : violent pains in rectum compel ces-
sation of effort ; stool recedes^ after being partly ex-
pelled (Sanic, Sil.).

Piles swollen, pain most severe when sitting.

Diarrhoea: early morning; expelled forcibly with
much flatus (Aloe) ; gurglings as water from a bung-
hole ; < after breakfast, coffee, fat food, vaccination,
onions.

Anus fissured, painful to touch, surrounded with
flat warts, or moist mucous condylomata.

Coition prevented by extreme sensitiveness of the
vagina (Plat. — by dryness, Lye, Lys., Natr.).

Skin : looks dirty ; brown or brownish-white spots
here and there ; warts^ large^ seedy ^ pedunculated
(Staph.) ; eruptions only on covered parts, bum after
scratching.

Flesh feels as if beaten, from the bones (Phyt. — ^as
if scraped, Rhus).

Sensation after urinating, as of urine trickling in
urethra ; severe cutting at close of urination (Sars.).

Chill, beginning in the thighs.

Sweat : only on uncovered parts^ or all over except
the head (rev. of Sil.) ; when he sleeps^ stops when he
wakes (rev. of Samb.) ; profuse, sour smelling, fetid
at night.


2^4


THUJA OCCm^^TAUS—iContzmied),

Perspiration, smelling like honey, on the genitals.

When walking the limbs feel as if made of wood.

Sensation as if the body, especially the limbs, were
made of glass and would break easily.

Suppressed gonorrhoea : causing articular rheuma-
tism ; prostatitis ; sycosis ; impotence ; condylomata,
and many constitutional troubles.

Nails : deformed, brittle (Ant. c).

Relations. — Complementary : Med., Sab., Sil.

Compare : Cann. s., Canth., Cop., Staph.

Cinnab. is preferable for warts on the prepuce.

Follows well : after, Med., Mer., Nit. ac.

Aggravation. — At night ; from heat of bed ; at 3
A. M. and 3 p. M.; from cold, damp air ; narcotics.


TRILLIIJ]II PENOULUM.

Wake Robin, Smilacece.

Hemorrhage : copious, both active and passive,
usually bright red ; from nose, lungs, kidneys and
nterus (Ipec, Mill.).

Tendency to putrescence of fluids.

Epistaxis ; profuse, passive, bright red.

Bleeding from cavity after extraction of a tooth
(Ham., Kreos.).

Menses : profuse, every two weeks, lasting a week
or longer (Calc. p.) ; after over-exertion or too long a
ride.

Flooding, with fainting.

295


TRnjUnJM VESfnVIAJM— (Continued).

Menorrhagia : flow, profuse^ gushing^ bright red;
at least mavefnent (Sab.) ; from displaced uterus ; ai the
climacteric ; every two weeks^ dark, clotted (Thlas.,

Ust).

Hemoptysis : incipient phthisis, with bloody sputa ;
in advanced stages, with copious, purulent expectora-
tion and troublesome cough.

Sensation as if hips and small of back were falling
to pieces ; as if sacro-iliac synchondroses were falling
apart, wants to be bound tightly ; as if bones of pelvis
were broken (.^sc.) ; with hemorrhage.

Profuse uterine hemorrhage at climacteric; flow
every two weeks ; pale, faint^ dim sights palpitation^
obstruction and noises in ears (Fer.) ; painful sinking
at pit of stomach.

Relations. — Complementary: to, Cal. p. in men-
strual and hemorrhagic affections.

Compare : Cinch., Bell., Kali c. Mill., I<ach., Sep.,
Sulph., Thlas., Ust.


TUBERCIJLINIJIII-BACILLINIJM,*

Pus (with bacilli) from tubercular abscess. A Nosode.

Adapted to persons of light complexion ; blue eyes,
blonde in preference to brunette ; tall, slim, flat,


The potencies of Fincke and Swan were prepared from a drop of
pus obtained from a pulmonary tubercular abscess or sputa. Those
of Heath from a tuberculous lung in which the bacillus tuberculo-
sis had been found microscopically; hence the former was called
Tuberculinum and the latter Bacillinum. Both preparations are
reliable and effective.

296


TUBERCUlrlNlJM-BACBLLINIJM— ( CorCd ).

narrow chest ; active and precocious mentally, weak
physically ; the tubercular diathesis.

When with a family history of tubercular affections
the best selected remedy fails to relieve or permmiently
improve^ without reference to name of disease.

Symptoms ever changing ; ailments affecting one
organ, then another — ^the lungs, brain, kidneys, liver,
stomach, nervous system — ^beginning suddenly, ceas-
ing suddenly.

Takes cold easily without knowing how or where ;
seems to take cold " every time he takes a breath of
fresh air " (Hep.).

Emaciation rapid and pronounced; losing flesh
while eating well (Abrot, Calc, Con., lod., Nat.).

Melancholy, despondent ; morose, irritable, fretful,
peevish ; taciturn, sulky ; naturally of a sweet dispo-
sition, now on the borderland of insanity.

Everything in the room seemed strange, as though
in a strange place.

Headache : chronic, tubercular ; pain intense, sharp,
cutting, from above r. eye to occiput ; as of an iron
hoop around head (Anac, Sulph.) ; when the best
selected remedy only palliates.

School-girl's headache : < by study or even slight
mental exertion ; when using eyes in close work and
glasses fail to > ; with a tubercular history.

Acute cerebral or basilar meningitis, with threat-
ened effusion ; nocturnal hallucinations ; wakes from
sleep frightened, screaming; when Apis, Hell., or
Sulph., though well selected, fail to improve.


297


TlJBBRClJLINlJM-BACIIXrlNVM— ( Con'd).

Crops of small boils, intensely painful, successively
appear in the nose ; green^ fetid pus (Sec.).

Plica polonica; several bad cases permanently
cured after Bor. and Psor. failed.

Diarrhoea: early morning, sudden, imperative
(Sulph.) ; emaciating though eating well (lod., Nat) ;
stool dark, brown, watery, offensive ; discharged with
great force ; great weakness and profuse night sweats.

Menses : too early ; too profuse ; too long-lasting ;
tardy in starting; with frightful dysmenorrhoea ; in
patients with a tuberculous history.

Tubercular deposit begins in apex of lungs, usually
the left (Phos., Sulph., Ther.).

Eczema: tubercular over entire body; itching in-
tense, < at night when undressing, from bathing;
immense quantities of white bran-like scales ; oozing
behind the ears, in the hair, in folds of skin with raw-
ness and soreness ; firey red skin. Ringworm.

Relations. — Complementary : Psor., Sulph.

When Psor., Sulph., or the best selected remedy
fails to relieve or permanently improve ; follows Psor.
as a constitutional remedy in hay fever, asthma.

Belladonna, for acute attacks, congestive or inflam-
matory, occurring in tubercular diseases.

Hydrastis to fatten patients cured with Tuber.


TALBRIANA.

Valerian. Valerianacece,

Excessive nervous excitability ; hysterical nervous
temperament (Ign., Puis.) ; persons in whom the in-

298


VALERIANA— ( Continued ) .

tellectual faculties predominate ; changeable disposi-
tion.

Red parts become white (Fer.).

Feels light as if floating in the air (Asar., Lac c. —
as if legs were floating, Sticta).

Oversensitiveness of all the senses (Cham., Nux).

Sensation of great coldness in head (on vertex,
Sep., Ver.).

Sensation as if a thread were hanging down throat
(on tongue, Nat, Sil.)«

Child vomits : curdled milk^ in large lumps ; same
in stools (iSth.) ; as soon as it has nursed^ after fnother
has been angry.

Sciatica : pain < when, standing and letting foot
rest on floor (Bell.) ; when straightening out limb, dur-
ing rest from previous exertion ; > when walking.

Relations. — Compare : Asaf., Asar., Croc, Ign.,
Lac c, Spig., Sulph.

For the abuse of Chamomile tea.

For pains in heels : Agar., Caust, Cyc, Led.,
Mang., Phyt.


TARIOLINVIII.

Pus from smallpox pustule, A Nosode.

Only fragmentary provings.

Bears the same relation to small pox that Anti-
toxin does to diphtheria.

An extended clinical record by competent and re-
liable observers attests its curative value in variola, —

299


T ARIOUNVM— ( ConHnued ) .

simple, confluent and malignant, — as well as in
varioloid and varicella.

It has done splendid work in all potencies, from
the 6th cent to the cm.

As a preventive of, or protection against, small-
pox, it is far superior to crude vaccination and ab-
solutely safe from the sequellae, especially septic and
tubercular infection. The eflScacy of the potency is
the stumbling block to the materialist But is it
more difficult to comprehend than the infectious nar
ture of variola, measles or pertussis? Those who
have not used it, like those who have not experi-
mentally tested the law of similars, are not competent
witnesses. Put it to the test and publish the failures
to the world.


TKRATRVHI ALBUM.

White Hellebore. MelanthacecB.

For children and old people ; the extremes of life ;
persons who are habitually cold and deficient in vital
reaction ; young people of a nervous, sanguine tem-
perament.

Adapted to diseases with rapid sinking of the vital
forces ; complete prostration ; collapse.

Cold perspiration on the forehead (over entire body,
Tab.); with nearly all complaints.

Cannot bear to be left alone ; yet persistently re-
fuses to talk.

300


T£RATRIJ]II AJUBVM—^Conitnued).

Thinks she is pregnant or will soon be delivered.

Mania with desire to cut and tear everything, espe-
cially clothes (Taran.) ; with lewd, lascivious talk,
amorous or religious (Hyos., Stram.).

Attacks of fainting from least exertion (Carbo v.,
Sulph.) ; excessive weakness.

Sinking feeling during hemorrhage (fainting, Trill.).

Sensation of a lump of ice on vertex^ with chilli-
ness (Sep.) ; as of heat and cold at same time on scalp ;
as if brain were torn to pieces.

Pace: pale, blue, collapsed; features sunken,
hippocratic ; red while lying, becomes pale on rising
up (Aeon.).

Thirst : intense, unquenchable, for large quantities
of vtxy cold water and acid drinks ; wants everything
cold.

Craving for acids or refreshing things (Phos. ac).

Icy coldness; of face, tip of nose, feet, legs, hands,
arms, and many other parts.

Cold feeling in abdomen (Colch., Tab.).

Violent vomiting with profuse diarrhoea.

Vomiting: excessive with nausea and great pros-
tration ; < by drinking (Ars.) ; by least motion (Tab.) ;
great weakness after.

Cutting pain in abdomen as from knives.

Cholera: vomiting and purging; stool, profuse,
watery, gushing, prostrating ; after fright (Aeon.).

Diarrhoea: frequent, greenish, watery, gushing;
mixed with flakes; cutting colic, with cramps com-
mencing in hands and feet and spreading all over ;
prostrating, after fright; < least movement; with

301


TBRATRimi AlMV^—iCanHnued).

vomiting, cold sweat on forehead during and prostra-
tion after (Ars., Tab.).

Constipation: no desire; stool large, hard (Bry.,
Sulph.); in round, black balls (CheL, Op., Plb.);
from inactive rectum ; frequent desire felt in epigas-
trium (Ign. — in rectum, Nux); painful, of infants
and children, after Lye and Nux.

Dysmenorrhoea : with vomiting and purging, or ex-
hausting diarrhoea with cold sweat (Amm. c, Bov.) ;
is so weak can scarcely stand for two days at each
menstrual nisus (Aluin., Carbo an., Coc.).

Bad effects of opium eating, tobacco chewing.

Pains in the limbs during wet weather, getting
worse from warmth of bed, better by continued
walking.

In congestive or pernicious intermittent fever ^ with ex-
treme coldness^ thirst; face cold and collapsed ; skin
cold and clammy, great prostration; cold sweat on
forehead and deathly pallor on face.

Relations. — After : Ars., Am., Cinch., Cup., Ipec.

After Camph. in cholera and cholera morbus.

After Amm. c, Carbo v. and Bov., in dysmenorrhoea
with vomiting and purging.

Aggravation. — From least motion ; after drinking ;
before and during menses ; during stool ; when per-
spiring ; after fright.

Often removes bad effects of excessive use of alcohol
and tobacco.


^02.


VERATRnH TIRIDB.

Green Hellebore, Melanthacece.

For full-blooded, plethoric persons.

Congestions, especially to base of brain, cJwst^ spine
and stomach.

Violent pains attending inflammation.

Acute rheumatism, high fever, full, hard, rapid
pulse, severe pains in joints and muscles (Bry.,
Salyc. ac.) ; scanty, red urine.

Child trembles, jerks, threatened with convulsions \
continual jerking or nodding of the head.

Nervous or sick headache ; congestion from sup-
pressed menses ; intense, almost apoplectic, with vio-
lent nausea and vomiting.

Congestive apoplexy, hot head, bloodshot eyes,
thick speech, slow full pulse^ hard as iron.

Convulsions : dim vision ; basilar meningitis ; head
retracted ; child on verge of spasms.

Cerebro spinal diseases ; with spasms, dilated pupils,
tetanic convulsions, opisthotonos ; cold^ clammy per-
spiralion.

Sunstroke, head full, throbbing of arteries, sensitive
to sound ; double or partial vision (Gels., Glon.).

Tongue : white or yellow with red streak down
the middle ; dry, moist, white or yellow coating, or no
coating on either side ; feels scalded (Sang.).

Pulse : suddenly increases and gradually decreases
below normal ; slow^ soft^ weak ; irregular, inter-
mittent (Dig., Tab.).

Veratrum viride should not be given simply to
" bring down the pulse " or " control the heart's

303


action," but like any other remedy for the totality of
the symptoms.


ZINCUM METALLICUM,

Zinc. The Element.

Persons snfFering from cerebral and nervons ex-
haustion ; defective vitality, brain or nerve power
wanting ; too weak to develop exanthemata or men-
strual function, to expectorate, to urinate ; to compre-
hend, to memorize.

Incessant and violent fidgety feeling in feet or
lower extremities; must move them constantly.

Always feels better every way as soon as the menses
begin to flow ; it relieves all her sufferings^ but they
return again soon after the flow ceases.

In cerebral affections : in impending paralysis of
brain ; where the vis medicatrix naturae is too weak to
develop exanthemata (Cup., Sulph., Tub.) ; symptoms
of effusion into ventricles.

Child repeats everything said to it.

Child cries out during sleep ; whole body jerks
during sleep ; wakes frightened, stares, rolls the head
from side to side ; face alternately pale and red.

Convulsions : during dentition, with pale face, no
heat, except perhaps in occiput, no increase in temper-
ature (rev. of. Bell.) ; rolling the eyes ; gnashing the
teeth.

Automatic motion of hands and head, or one hand
and head (Apoc, Bry., Hell.).


ZINCUM METALLICUM— ( Continued ) .

Chorea : from suppressed eruptions ; from fright.

Hunger : ravenous, about ii or 12 a. m. (Sulph.) ;
great greediness when eating ; cannot eat fast enough
(incipient brain disease in children).

Excessive nervous moving of feet in bed for hours
after retiring, even when asleep.

Feet sweaty and sore about toes ; fetid, suppressed
foot-sweat ; very nervous.

Chilblains, painful, < from rubbing.

Spinal aflFections : burning whole length of spine ;
backache, 7nuch < from sitting > by walking about
(Cobalt, Puis., Rhus).

Spinal irritation ; great prostration of strength.

Cannot bear back touched (Chin, s., Taran., Ther.).

Can only void urine while sitting bent backwards.

Twitching and jerking of single muscles (Agar.,
Ign.).

Weakness and trembling of extremities ; of hands
while writing ; during menses.

During. sweat, cannot tolerate any covering.

Relations. — Compare : Hell., Tuber., in incipient
brain diseases from suppressed eruptions.

Aggravation. — Of many symptoms from drinking
wine, even a small quantity (Alum., Con.).

Amelioration. — Symptoms : of chest, by expectorat-
ing ; of bladder, by urinating ; of back, by emissions
(< by Cobalt.) ; general, by menstrual flow.

Is followed well : by, Ign. but not by Nux, which
disagrees.

Inimical. — Cham, and Nux ; should not be used
before or after.

T 305


'J


INDEX.


A.

Abrotanum, 11, 12, 19, 74, 146, 149, 155, 199, 214, 255, 282, 297.

Acetic acid, 12, 29, 39, 40, 41, 48, 121, 160, 224, 281.

Aconitum napellus, 13, 50. 58, 67, 69, 90, 102, 129, 138, 155, 193,

208, 212, 213, 228, 240. 243, 270. 275, 301.
Actea racemosa. 16, 27, 68, 72, 79, 88, 107, 115, 134, 161, 176,

240, 268.
Actea spicata, 87.

JEsculus hippocastanum, 17, 30, 104, 167, 296.
jfEthusa cynapium, 19, iif 16, 299.
Agaricus muscarius. 20, n, 17, 24, 109, 115, 159, 165, 198, 222,

240, 263, 273, 287, 299, 305.
Agnus castus. 21, 43, 127, 161.
Ailanthus glandulosa, 29, 118.
Aletris farinosa. 88, 137.

Allium cepa. 22, 30, 50, 76, 84, 124, 147, 161, 218.
Allium sativum. 49.
Aloe socotrina. 23, 18, 37, 43, 68, 73, iii, 196, 2cx), 218, 223, 224,

233. 238, 246, 254, 259, 278, 294.
A lumen. 63, 205, 268.
Alumina. 26, i5» 16, 30, 41, 44, 52, 57, 72, 83, 85, 95, loi, 125,

131, 138, 146, 150, 151, 180, 184, 205, 221, 229, 262, 283, 302, 305.
Ambra grisea. 27, 21, 248, 293.
Ammonium carbonicum. 28, 131 47i 49» 63, 65, 87, 139, 153, 159,

162, 170, 200, 210, 250, 265, 302.
Ammonium, muriaticum. 30, 25, 42, 90, 174, 175, 201.
Amylenum nitrosum. 30, 13, 44, 58, 71, 125, 130, 184, 230.
Anacardium orientate, 32, 26, 52, 53, 78, 79, loi, 125, 136, 152,

161, 164, 166, 207, 215, 229, 232, 272, 297.
Angustura. 127.
Anisum stellatum. 291.
Anthracinum, 33, 48, 87, 109, 288.


308 INDEX.

Antimonium crudum. 36, 28, 37, 74, 84, 131, 147, 184, 197, 210,

266, 277, 295.
Antimonium tartaricum. 37, 21, 35, 65, 66, 83, 96, loi, 148, 149,

165, 170, 207, 232, 292. 295.
Apis mellifica, 89, 18, 19, 43. 59. 63, 65, 85, 104, 114, 118, 122,

135, 136, 156, 199. 201, 202, 207, 213, 215, 220, 221, 244, 249, 257,

276, 289.
Apocynum cannabiniim. 40, 39, 68, 304.
Aralia racemosa. 150.
Aranea diadema, 37, 121, 202, 204.
Argenium metallicum. 41, 44, 259, 260.
Argentiim nitricum. 42, 25, 31, 33, 35, 50, 53, 79, 85, 100, 112,

128, 138, 164, 167, 180, 250, 269, 280, 290.
Arnica Montana. 45, 12, 28, 55, 56, 76, 89, 90, 100, 108, 123, 124,

133, 135. 141, 142, 153. 179. 193. 194, 214, 232, 237, 238, 240, 246,
247, 282.
Arsenicum album. 47, 13. 19. 22, 24, 33, 43, 44, 50, 62, 63, 69, 72,
83, 94, 100, 103, 104, 108, 112, 121, 127, 128, 149, 153, 161, 175^
178, 200, 205, 206, 220, 223, 228, 233, 236, 243, 253, 257, 263, 269,

271, 278, 288, 289, 301, 302.
Arsenicum iodatum. 22, 204.
Arum, draconiiufn. 251.

Arum triphyllum. 49, 41, 42, 44, 63, 120, 135, i6r.

Asafoetida. 22, 54, 162, 164, 190, 284, 299.

Asarum Europceum. 51, 43, 63, 70, 71,87, 125, 162, 180, 283, 299.

Astacus fluviatilis. 144.

Asterias rubens, 52, 107, 108

Aurum metallicum. 53, 42, 67, 75, 106, 157, 161, 187, 197, 242,

272, 273, 284.


Badiaga. 83, 94, 154.

Baptisia tinctoria. 55, 45, 57, 117, 118, 129, 207, 237, 247, 275.

Baryta carbofiica. 56, 55. 65, 124, 135, 138, 176, 179, 212, 232, 233,

243. 255, 264.
Belladonna. 57, 18, 20, 24, 28, 31, 39, 54, 68, 86, 93, 102, 119, 121,

123, 129, 130, 134, 135, 142, 150, 160, 176, 177, 184, 212, 213, 215,

223, 263, 275, 276, 280, 290, 304.
Bellis perennis. 123, 166, 253.
Benzoic acid. 60, 224.
Berberis vulgaris. 60, 75> 122, 171, i8r, 255, 259, 266, 286, 289.


INDEX. 309

Bismuth. 62, 92, 102, 153, 170, '273, 275.

Blatta orienialis. 41.

Borax, 62, 65, 92, 100, 107, 125, 128, 132, 157, 161, 171, 253. 256,

270, 281.
Bovisia, 64, 29, 30, 39, 47, 70, 80, 107, 152, 157, 161, 176, 199.247,

265, 276.
Brotnium. 66, 21, 46, 83, 84, 132, 146, 150, 162. 236, 269.
Bryonia alba, 66, 24, 33, 41, 59, 62, 92, 96, 97, loi, 102, 104, 119,

120, 121, 123, 124, 134, 153, 160, 162, 163, 164, r74, 176, 177, 202,

203, 208, 211, 213, 214, 215, 218, 221, 223, 225, 226, 228, 236, 240,

243, 244, 275, 278, 280, 302, 303, 304.
Bu/o. 113, 159. 184.

C.

Cactus grandiflorus. 69, 32, 65, 105, 115, 146, 155, 167, 176, 179,

185, 268, 269.
Caladium. 70, 21, 22, 43, 63, 82, 206, 233, 259, 260.
Calcarea arsenicum, 71, 146.
Calcarea iodide, 57.
Calcarea fluoricutn, 75, 127.
Calcarea ostrearum, 71, 21, 25, 27, 35, 56, 57, 59, 64, 70, 74, 88,

108, 109, 116, 132, 134, 139, 146, 151, 161, 162, 169, 175, 177. ^.

185, 194, 199, 201, 216, 218, 236, 237, 241, 243, 253, 254, 259, 264.
Calcarea phosphoricum, 74, 35. 43. 61, 77, 83, 89, 99, 136, 144, i99.

205, 218, 266, 282, 295, 296.
Calendula, 76, 45, 64, 87, 133, 139, 142, 143, 265, 281.
Camphora, 77, 86, 138, 172, 236, 258.
Cannabis Indica, 78, 25, 42, 100, 113, 180, 207, 290.
Cannabis saliva, 79, 33> 289.

Cantharides, 80, 61, 87, 103, 122, 151, 173, 217, 227, 249, 259, 2^9.
Capsicum, 81, 98.
Carbo animalis, 83, 26, 66, 75, loi, 131, 146, 152, 166, 183, 198,

216, 302.
Carbo vegelabilis, 84, 49, 55, 83, 86, 87, 88, 90, 97, 98, 109, 126,

159, 160, 171, 179, 205, 212, 301. 302.
Carbolic acid, 86, 13, 32, 34, 80, 103, 118, 128, 151, t6o, ^04, 237,

239, 268.
Carduus m^arianus. 94, 98.
Cascarilla, 94, 162.
Caulophyllum, 87, 16, 90, 176, 178, 248, 274.


310 INDEX.

CausUcum, 89, 15, 27, 30, 43, 50, 51, 65. 66, 70, 84, 85, 93. 100,

102, 107, 113, 115, 127, 129, 139, 154, 159, 161, 167, 181, 183, 200,

201, 204, 212, 221, 299.
Curare, 223.
Chamomilla. 91, 17. 45. 58, 96, 102, 105, 145, 155, 173, 210, 213,

228, 241, 242, 376, 299.
Chelidonium. 91, 33. "6, 123, 154, 176, 186, 187, 214, 215, 230,

244, 262, 270, 302.
Chenopodium glaucum, 93.
Cinchona, 97, 79. 84, 85, 108, 116, 126, 134, 138. 145, 153, 171, 172,

217, 220, 224, 236, 251.
Chininum sulphuricutn. 97, 98, 99, 150, 163, 182, 291, 305.
Chlorine, 66, 118, 251.
Cicuta vifosa. 96, 26, 96, 275.

Cina, 96, 63, 92, 140, 146, 162, 172, 180, 232, 241, 249, 259, 267, 289.
Cinnabaris, 192.
Cinnamotnum. 162, 258.
Citnex, 30, 90.
Clematis, 179, 242.
Cobaltum. 212, 305.
Coca. 99, 31. 125, 127.
Cocaine. 115.
Coccus cadi. 119, 120, 146.
Cocculus. 100, 16, 26, 42, 83, 88, 89, 95, 103, 112, 115, 120, 125,

131, 146, 164, 173, 205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 215, 216, 302.
Coffeacruda. 102, 44, 45, 62, 89, 91, 92, 128, 144, 145, 162, 177.
Colchicum autumnale. 100, 48, 60, 80, 148, 165, 208, 210, 242, 258,

263, 271, 274, 285, 289, 301.
Collinsonia Canadensis. 104, 68, 172, 224.
Colocynth. 105, 67, 98, 107, 117, 123, 162, 174, 176, 177, 178.
Commocladia dentata. 268.
Conium maculatum. 106, 41, 52, 53. 54. 5^, 64, 71, 83, 92, 99, 121,

133 137, 146, 152, 157. 162, 164, 166, 172, 174, 176, 177. 187. 208,

25 [, 266, 273, 297, 305.
Con vallaria. 116.
Copaiba. 295.

Corallium rubrutn, 119, 140.
Crocus sativus. 108, 115, 127, 144, 162, 207, 228, 229, 279, 294,

299.
Crotalus horridus. 109, 33. 69, iii, 118, 133, 134, 156, I59» 206,

338, 257, 28 [.


INDEX. 311

Croton tiglium. 111, 24» 43» 52, 53f 54» 126, 166, 226, 266.

Cubeha, 78.

Culex. 293.

Cundurango, 50, 139.

Cuprum metallicum, 113, 44, 58, 112, 120, 183, 265, 266, 306.

Cylamen Europosum, 114, 299.

D.

Daphne odora, 179.

Digitalis, 116, 16, 98, 99, 105, no, 129, 146, 172, 206, 303.

Dioscorea. 117, 29, 105, 219.

Diptherinum, 117, 55.

Dolichos. 44, 156.

Drosera. 119, 27 42, 97, 141, 221.

Dulcamara, 120, 57, 107, 204, 247.

E.

Elaps corralltnus. 108,111,285.

Epigea. 163, 252.

Equisetum hyemale, 122, 255.

Erechthites, 194.

Erygeron Canadense. 148.

Eugenia jambos, 153, 253, 256.

Eupatorium perfoliatum, 123, 21, 90, 148, 179, 238.

Eupatorium. purpureum. 123.

Euphrasia, 124, 22, 23, 126, 149, 200, 208, 248.

Euphorbia, 34, 240.

P.

Ferrum metallicum. 125, 12, 31, 51, 60, 98, 114, 122, 124, 130,

145, 182, 208, 224, 248, 252, 284, 296, 299.
Ferrum phosphoricum. 122, 125, 177, 184.
Fluoricum acidum. 126, 56, 57, 63, 75, 99, 261, 266, 282.

G.

Gambogia, 25, 52, in, 112, 224, 257.

Gelsemium. 127, 25, 42, 52, 55, 86, 88, 90, 102, 115, n8, 135, 150,

152, 172, 176, 214, 222, 303.
Gettisburg. 266.
Glonoine, 129, 28, 31, 54, 58, 69, 71, 172, 185, 198, 303.


312 INDEX.

Gnaphaliutn. io6.

Graphites, 131, 30. 57. 65, 73» 90. 121, 127, 129, 137, 153, 161, 165^

201, 205, 214, 216, 226, 232, 239, 253, 254, 261, 265, 266, 283.
Gratiola. 52, iii.
Grindelia, 28, 159, 162, 213.
Guaiacum. 90, loi, 193.
Gymnocladus. 150.


Hamamelis Virginica. 133, 64, 142, 156, 193, 194, 295.

Hekla lava. 127.

Helleborus. 134, 29, 58, 59, 68, 172, 213, 223, 289, 304.

Helonias dioica, 136, 75, 77. 88. 92, 168, 183, 195.

Hepar sulphur, 137, 15, 28, 38, 44. 50, 57, 58, 64, 66, 67, 68, 72, 77,
102, 117, 124, 132, 150, 154, 161, 174, i8r, 185, 192, 200, 201, 205,
207, 208. 216, 226, 234, 241, 243, 254, 265, 266, 270, 273, 277, 280,
297.

Hydrastis Canadensis. 140, 134. 144, 148, 173, 180, 268, 287, 298.

Hydrocyanicum acidutn. 95.

Hyoscyamus. 140, 27, 68, 74, 119, 144, 152, 213, 246, 301.

Hypericum. 142, 46, 76, 95. ^66, 223, 266.

I.

Ignatia. 143, 18, 40, 45, 75, 82, 89, 95, loi, 102, 108, 109, 125, 127,
128, 135, 144, 148, 150, 153, 158, 160, 161, 175, 202, 207, 210, 211,
215, 217, 228, 235, 272, 276, 293, 298, 302, 305.

Indigo. 119, 148, 252.

Iodine. 146, n, 12, 33, 35, 66, loi, 107, 139, 151, 153, 176, 199,
200, 202, 250, 255, 265, 282, 297, 298.

Ipecacuanha. 147, 38, 51. 98, 113. 125, 129, i63, 172, 193, 297, 285.

J.

Jalapa. 161, 170.

Jatropha curcas. 52, 77, 224.


Kali bichromaium. 149, 39, 64, 73, 74, 80, 118, 128, 140, 161, 167,

170, 190, 208, 211, 225, 232, 235.
Kali brofnatum. 151, 107, 112, 160, 200, 266.
Kali carbonicum. 153, 21, 29, 31, 39, 57, 67, 68, 90, 93, 94, 107,

119, 127, 139, 146, 161, 170, 175, 176, 187, 199, 220, 277.


INDEX. 313

Kali iodatutn, 203, 226, 262, 271, 281.

Kali tnuriaticum. 77, 189, 216, 233, 237.

Kali nitricum, 174.

Kali permanganate, 214.

Kali phosphoricum, 20, 33, 128, 152, 226, 227, 228, 229, 232, 250

266.
Kali sulphuricum. 38, 121, 122, 150, 154, 235.
Kalmia latifolia, 155, 130, 165, 242, 265, 267, 268.
Kava kava, 33.
Kreosotum, 155, 30. 87, 92, 97, 131, 159, 163, 167, 174, 192, 220,

236, 241, 262, 272, 295.

L.

Lachesis, 157, 22, 28, 31, 34, 36, 39, 40, 44, 49, 64, 69, 70, 103, 108,
III, 112, 129, 130, 138, 144, 148, 150, 154, 156, 161, 162, 166, 167,
170, 177, 180, 183, 185, 186, 189, 194, 198, 200, 207, 208, 213, 215,
220, 225, 226. 250, 251, 254, 257, 262, 263, 269, 275, 276, 283, 285.
287, 288, 289, 290, 293.

Lachnanthes, 30, 220.

Lactic acid. 234.

Lac caninum, 160, 16, 22, 32, 39, 51, 63, 66, 78, 107, 117, 118, 123,
137, 150, I59» 166, 167, 173, 174, 176, 178, 187, 207, 208, 225, 226,
229. 235, 250, 253, 299.

Lac defioratutn, 163, 22, 107, 150, 151, 162 221, 232, 283.

Lappa major, i2,T,

Laurocerasus, 233.

Leptandra. 238.

Ledum palustre. 165, 46, 80, 83, 133, 142, 155, 175, 183, 186, 198,
242, 256, 261, 265, 267, 281, 299.

Lilium tigrinum, 166, 21, 32, 42, 52, 59, 62, 65, 108, 161, 169, 170,
174, 195, 198, 200, 224, 238, 254, 263.

Lithia carbonicum. 53, 60. 71.

Lobelia, 168, 20, 209.

Lycopodium, 169, 21, 26, 33, 38, 44, 53, 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 70,
89, 94, 106, 107, 114, 126. 138, 148, 152, 153, 160, 161, 162, 166, 176,
180. 181, 194, 207, 208, 220, 224, 231, 232, 235, 236, 256, 261, 267,
274, 279, 283, 294, 302.

Lyssin. 172, 59» 125, 137, 149, 171, 195, 221, 223, 294.

M.
Magnesia carbonicum, 178, 15, 19, 28, 65, 139, 167, 181, 241, 280.


314 INDEX.

Magnesia tnuriaticum, 176, 30, 63, 163, 200, 254, 265.
Magnesia phospharicum, 176, 58, 86, 105, 123, 150, 172, 174, 215,

236.
Magneticus polaris arcticus, 266.
Magnesia sulphuricum. 65, 184.
Manganum aceticum. 235.
Manganum metallicufn, 141, 299.
Marum verum (Teucrium). 22, 96, 97, 170, 191, 266.
Medorrhinum, 178, 21, 61, 77, 93, 174, 215, 254, 255, 278, 283,

292, 295.
Melilotus alba. 184, 26, 58, 59, 133, 232.
Menyanthes trifoliatum. 184, 69.
Mephitis, 251.
Mercurius. 186, 27, 50, 64, 80, 93, 94, 100, 122, 123, 137, 161, 165,

168, 173, 175, 180, 192, 193, 200, 205, 206, 225, 226, 236, 256, 266,

271, 279, 282, 287.
Mercurius biniodide, 190, 12, 43.
Mercurius corrosivus, 188, 106.
Mercurius cyanide, 189.
Mercurius dulcis, 189.
Mercurius protoiodide. 189.
Mercurius solubtlis. 190.
Mercurius sulphuricus. 191.
Mezereum. 192, 186, 188, 232, 240, 273, 293.
Millefolium. 193, 12, 69, 148, 212, 247, 249, 295, 296.
Murex. 194, 21, 52, 59, 162, 167, 196, 198, 200, 227, 261, 262, 263.
Muriatic acid. 196, 18, 24, 56, 57, 200, 206, 219, 281, 289.
Mygale. 20, 197, 288.
Myrtus communis. y2,t 291.

N.

Naja tripudians. 197, 53, i^i» 160, 267, 268, 288.

Natrum carbonicum. 197, 123, 129, 130, 131, 202, 215, 236, 242,

247, 278.
Natrum muriaticum. 199, n, 24, 33, 36, 43, 75, 90, 124, 135, 139,

146, 151, 155, 161, 172, 175, 180, 183, 185, 186, 198, 205, 216, 218,

227, 229, 233, 234, 244, 247, 253, 255, 267, 270, 272, 287, 294, 297,

298, 299.
Natrum, phosphoricum,y 190.
Natrum sulphuricum. 202, 38, 60, 102, 121, 139, 190, 199, 208,

27,6, 240, 245.


INDEX. 315

Niccolum, 203, 236.

Nitric acid, 204, 27, 32, 33, 44, 50, 132, 138, 145, 154, 159, 161,

164, 173. 196, 200, 201, 210, 238, 239, 249, 262, 274, 281.
Nitri spiritus dulcis, 219.
Nilrum. 60.
Nux moschata. 207, i5i 38[ 100, 108, 144, 162, 209, 210, 211, 236,

261, 270, 288, 290, 294.
Nux vomica. 209, 20. 25, 28, 33, 46, 33, 62, 67, 68, 70, 89, 92, 100,

102, 103, 112, 132, 138, 139, 141, 144, 145, 153, 161, 170, 175, 183,

188, 195, 198, 213, 215, 223, 224, 236, 243, 250, 251, 263, 272, 276,

299, 302.

O.

Ocimum. 181.

Oleander, 24, 138, 200, 238, 246.

Opium. 212, 12, 26, 38, 46, 58, 68, 85, 86, 87, 92, 93, 94, 102, 141,

142, 159, 174, 207, 208, 211, 230. 238, 255, 273, 275, 276, 302.
Origanum. 70, 194, 227.
Oxalic acid. 57, 75, 77, 180, 183.

P.

Palladium. 41.

Paris quadrifolia. 139.

Petroleum. 215, 25, 55, 80, 201, 266, 275.

Petroselinum. 216, 80, 91, 151, 156.

Phellandrium. 226.

Phosphoric acid. 217, 75f 89, 97, 127, 153, 157, 158, 220, 221, 250,

261, 272. 301.
Phosphorus. 219, 21, 27, 30, 40, 42, 50, 54, 67, 69, 72, 84, 86, 90,

98, 109, no, 112, 125, 141, 146, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159. 163, 164,

169, 171, 174, 198, 215, 224, 227, 229, 231, 234, 240, 242, 245, 253,

257, 262, 266, 270, 271, 278, 292, 298.
Phytolacca. 225, 68, 92, 115, 193, 223, 248, 282, 284, 294, 299.
Physostigma. 222, i43-
Picric acid. 226, 80, 183, 190, 229, 266.
Pix liquida . 29 1 .
Plantago major. 268.

Matina. 227, 26, 68, 86, 155, 162, 195, 207, 215, 270, 273, 294.
Plumbum. 229, 85, 94, 98, 138, 177, 201, 214, 238, 302.
Podophyllum. 223, 25, 54, 55, 59, 60, 93, in. n6, 135, 139, 145,

176, 186, 200, 223, 225, 230, 244, 249, 271.


316 INDEX.

Psortnum, 231, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 30, 32, 33, 55, 57, 63, 75, 76,
77, 83, 84, 87, 91, 95, 107, 108. 132. 138, 139. 153, 161, 164, 170,
172, 180, 185, 201, 202, 215, 238, 239, 241, 242, 249, 252, 253, 254,
256, 259, 264, 265, 277, 278, 279, 281, 283, 285.

Ptelea trifoliata, 67, 68, 69.

Pulsatilla, 285, 15, 16, 19, 22, 23, 29, 30, 35, 38, 39. 43. 44, 62, 67,
68, 69, 73, 86, 87, 88, 89, 93, 98, 102, 114, 115, 131, 134, 145, 147,
150, 160, 161, 164, 166, 175, 176, 186, 199, 200, 202, 203, 207, 209,
210, 217, 222, 224, 225, 226, 228, 246, 249, 253, 260, 261, 265, 270,
280, 290, 291, 293, 298, 305.

Pyrogen. 237, 34, 49. 55, 56, 87, no, in, 123, 159, 207, 214, 247,
276, 289.

R.

Ranunculus bulbosus, 240, 17, 20, 36, 68, 83, 250.

Ranunculus sceleratus. 132, 287.

Ratanhia, 239, i45, 205.

Rheum. 241. 72, 139, i73, 280

Rhododendron. 241, 41, 151. 209, 243, 245.

Rhus radicans. 33.

Rhus toxicodendron. 242, 23, 36, 40, 43, 45, 46, 47, 54, 58. 65, 66,
77, 89, 90, 93, 94, 108, III, 112, 122, 138, 150, 163, 166, 174, 186,
188, 208, 218, 222. 225, 235, 240, 242, 251, 275, 280, 284, 287, 294,

305.
Rhus venenata. 33, 252.

Robinia. 281.

Rumex crispus. 245, 24, 91, 119.

Ruta graveolens. 246, 43, 47, 75, 77, i43, i45, 166, 287, 266, 281.

S.
Sabadilla 249, 160, 252.

Sabina. 248, 15, 16, 109, 131, 193, 198, 258, 261, 274, 296.
Salicylic add. 76, 77, 240, 303.
Sambucus nigra. 250, 28, 49, 170, 182, 210, 294.
Sanguinaria. 251, 22, 93, 128, 130, 158, 162, 177, 182, 216, 254,

256, 263, 267, 278, 284, 303.
Sanguinaria nitrate. 22, 252.
Sanicula. 253, n, 12, 30, 57, 63, 72, 73, 92, 125, 128, 146, 175,

199, 201, 215, 216, 229, 238, 241, 255, 259, 263, 264, 266, 277, 278,

294.
Santonine. 97.


INDEX. 317

Sarsaparilla, 255, 6i, 63, 122, 186, 200, 232, 255, 266, 294.

Scilla. 200, 246.

Secale comutum, 256, 42, 49. 77» 78, 88, 138, 159, 165, 179, 239,

248, 249, 298.
Selenium. 259, 21, 22, 43, 50, 70, 73, 99, 254. 293.
Senecio aureus, 102, 247.
Sepia, 260, 21, 26, 27, 48, 54, 59, 65, 68, 73, 88, 90, 94, 102, 103,

108, 129, 131, 132, 135. 139, 144, 150, 156, 158, 161, 164, 165, 167,

168, 185, 194, 195, 198, 200, 201, 215, 239, 259, 265, 270, 271, 299,

301.
Silicea, 264, 25, 26, 29, 30, 35, 38, 44, 55, 57, 58, 61, 64, 71, 74, 75,

92, 112, 113, 127, 128, 135, 138, 139, 152, 163, 165, 175, 177. 185,

200, 202, 214, 216, 218, 220, 226, 227, 242, 249, 252, 253, 254, 256,

259. 267, 290, 292, 294, 299.
Sinapis. 292.

Spigelia, 267, 49» 97» I55, 201, 249, 252, 265, 276, 280, 283, 289.
Spongia. 269, 12, i5» 97, ii3» 126, 127, 147, 197, 245, 268, 269,

272, 274, 276.
Squilla. 36, 89, 122.
Stannutn. 270, 42, 89, 113, 116, 215, 219, 221, 228, 259, 260, 267,

280, 282.
Staphisagria. 272, 53. 62, 67, 95, 97, 103, 105, 106, 117, 127, 143,

144, 148, 170, 201, 206, 219, 221, 228, 236, 241, 283, 285, 293.
Sticta, 28, 150, 299.
Stramonium. 275, 21, 32, 58, 59, 62, 64, 100, 142, 152, 159, 165,

173. 301-
Strontium. 162, 175, 247, 265.

Sulphur. 277, 13. 20, 24, 25, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 44, 46, 51, 6r, 66,
72. 73. 85, 86,91, 92, 109, 117, 128, 132, 135, 139. 145, 146, 157,
158, I59» 160, 164, 166, 169, 173, 174, 176, 180, 183, 194, 204, 205,
210, 211, 216. 220, 224. 231, 232, 233, 234, 236, 237, 239, 252, 254,
261, 262, 263, 268, 281, 283, 291, 294, 297. 298, 301, 302, 304, 305.

Sulphuric acid. 280, 12, 21, 47, 71, 77, 126, 187, 230, 241, 280, 283,
289.

Symphytum officinale. 282, 45. 75, 127, 246, 248, 281.

Syphilinum. 282, 15. 26, 183, 293.

T.

labacum, 284, 37, 38, 61, 145, 162, 168, 267, 273, 290, 300, 301,

302, 303-
Taraxacum. 287, 159, 186, 200.


318 INDBX.

Tarentula. 287, 38, 51, 70, 109, 125, 301, 305.

Tellurium, 254, 262.

Terebinlhina, 289, 37, 38, 238, 281.

Teucriutn, 150, 252.

Theridion curassatncum, 290, 20, 75, 175, 288, 293, 298, 305.

Thlaspi. 291, 88, 296.

nuja, 292, 27, 38, 40, 49, 52, 60, 109, III, 112, 115, 121, 122, 144,

166, 191, 201, 2Q3, 206, 214, 236, 239, 248, 249, 254, 255, 265, 266,

273. 274, 279, 284, 290, 291.
Trillium pendulum. 295, 249, 292, 301.
Tuberculinum, 296, n, 12, 29. 48, 63, 72, 73, 127, 134, 135, 138,

146, 159. 224, 232, 234, 250, 263, 272, 278, 279, 283, 304.

U.

Urtica urens, 201.

Ustilago, 16, 109, 219, 263, 292, 294, 296.

V.

Valeriana. 298, 85, 86, 115, 212, 215, 229.

Variolinum. 299.

Veratrum. 300, 26, 29, 37, 44, 48, 62, 77, 86, 89, iii, 132, 142,

145, 166, 179, 185, 211, 236, 261, 285, 286, 299.
Veratrum viride. 308.
Verbascum. 119.
Viburnum, opulus. 88, 248, 292.


Xanthoxylum. loi.

Z.

Zincum, 304, 20, 22, 29, 39, 70, 109, 113, 114, 131, 163, 177, 182,

183, 194, 214, 220, 227, 229, 278, 287.
Zingiber. 236.


LANE MEDICAL UBRARY

STANFORD UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER
STANFORD, CAUFORNIA 94305

FOR RENEWAL: PHONE 497-6691


DATE DUE
