The Encyclopaedia of Pure Materia Medica, Vol. I
Timothy Field Allen
The Encyclopaedia of Pure Materia Medica, vol. I. New York: Boericke & Tafel, 1874.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/cu31924073484523).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CORNELL UNIVERSITY


THE

Sllomer  HctcnnarH  Htbrary

FOUNDED  BY

ROSWELL  P. FLOWER

for  the  use  of  the

N.  Y.  STATE  Veterinary  College

1897


CORNELL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY


3 1924  073 484 523


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in
tine  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


THE


ENCYCLOPEDIA


Pure  Materia^Medica.


A  KECOKD  OP  THE


POSITIVE  EFFECTS  OF  DRUGS  UPON  THE  HEALTHY
HUMAN  ORGANISM.


BDITED BY


TIMOTHY F.'' ALLEN,  A.M.,  M.D.,

PaOPESSOK  OF  MATERIA  MEDICA  AND  THEKAPEUTICS  IN  THE  NEW  YORK  HOM<EOPATHIC
MEDICAL  COLLEGE.


■WITH CONTRIBUTIONS FROM

DE.  EICHAED  HUGHES,  of  England.

DB.  C.  HEEING,  OF  Philadelphia.  DE.  CAEEOLL  DUNHAM,  of  New  Yobk.

DB.  AD.  LIPPE,  op  Philadelphia,  and  others.


YOL.  I.  ' '  L  ,./


BOEEICKE & TAFEL:

NEIV  YORK:  PHILADELPHIA:

145 GRAND STREET.  635 ARCH STREET

SOLE  AGENTS  FOR  GREAT  BRITAIN;

HKNKY  TURNER  &  CO.,  of  London,  77  Fleet  St.,  E.  C.

T


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1874,

By  BOERICKE  &  TAFEL,

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington.  D.  C.


SHEEMAN  4  CO.,

PRINTERS  AND  STEREOTYPERS,

PiriLAUELPHIA.


LIST  OF  REMEDIES  IN  VOLUME  I.


PAGE

Abies  Canadensis, 1

Abies  Nigra, 2

Absinthium 2

Acalypha  Indica, 3

Acetic  Acid, 4

Aconitine,  . . .' 5

Aeonitum  Anlhora, 6

Aconitum  Cammarum, 7

Aeonitum  Ferox, 8

Aconitum  Lycoctonum, ....  10

Aeonitum  Napellus, 12

Aconitum  Septentrionale, ....  44

(Actffia  Racemosa), 45

Actsea  Spicata, 45

Adelheidsquelle, 47

^seulus  Glabra,  . . ■ 48

^seulus  Hippoeastanum,  ....  48

^thusa, 59

Agaricus  Campanulatus, ....  68

Agaricus  Campestris, 68

Agaricus  Citrinus, 68

Agaricus  Emeticus, 68

Agaricus  Muscarius, 69

Agaricus  Pantberinus, 125

Agaricus  Phalloides, 126

Agaricus  Procerus,  , 127

Agaricus  Semiglobatus, ....  127

Agnus  Castus, 127

Agrostemma  Gitbago, 132

Ailanthus, 133

Alcohol, 138

A.letris  Parinosa, 146

Allium  Cepa, 146

Allium  Sativum, 160

Aloe, 163

Alstonia  Scbolaris, 192


PAGE

Alumen, 192

Alumina, 206

Ambra, 238

Ammoniacum, 249

Ammonium  Aceticum, ....  256

Ammonium  Benzoicum, ....  256

Ammonium  Bromidum, ....  256

Ammonium  Carbonicum, ....  259

Ammonium Causticum  (Ammonia),  283

Ammonium  Muriaticum, ....  286

Ammonium  Nitricum, ....  305

Amphisboena, 305

Amygdalae  Amarae  Aqua,. . . .  306

Amyl.  Nitrit, 309

Amylamine  Chlorobydrate, . . .  311

Anacardium, 312

Anagallis, 329

Anantherum, 330

Angelica  Atropurpurea, ....  344

Angostura, 844

Anilinum, 357

Anisum  Stellatum, 358

Anthemis  Nobilis, 358

Anthrakokali, 361

Antimonium  Arsenitum,  ....  362

Antimonium  Ghloridum,  ....  362

Antimonium  Crudum, 363

Antimonium  Oxldum, 376

Antimonium  Sulf.  Auratum, . .  377

Antimon.  et  Potass.  Tart., . . .  379

Apis, 400

Apium  Graveolens, 422

Aphis  Chenopodii  Glauci, ....  422

Apocynum  Androsaemifolium, . .  424

Apocynum  Cannabinum,  ....  425

Apomorphine, 427

(ill)


LIST  OF  REMEDIES  IN  VOL.  I.


PAGE

Aqua  Marina  (Sea-water), . . .  431

"AquuPetra," 432

Aranea  Diaderaa, 433

Aranea  Scinencia, 435

Argentum  Cyanidum, 436

Argentum  Metallicum, ....  436

Argentum  Muriaticum, ....  452

Argentum  Nitricum, 452

Aristolochia  (Milhomens), . . .  475

Aristoloohia  Serpentaria,  ....  476

Arnica, 47G

Arsenicum  Album, 496

Arsenicum  Hydrogenisatura, . .  550

Arsenicum  lodatum 5o2

Arsenicum  Metallicum, ....  554

Arsenicum  Sulfuratum  Flavum, .  556

Arsenicum  Sulfuratum  Rubrum, .  557

Artemisia  Absinthium, ....  557


PAGE

Artemisia  Contra  and  Judaica,  . .  557

Artemisia  Abrotanum, 558

Artemisia  Vulgaris, ......  558

Arum  Dracunculus, 559

Arum  Italicum, 559

Arum  Maculatum, 560

Arum  Triphyllum, 561

Arundo  Mauritanica, 565

Asafoetida, 569

Asaruni, 582

Asclepias  Cornuti  (Syriaca),  . . .  590

Asclepias  Tuberosa, 591

Asimina  Triloba, 598

Asparagus, 599

Asterias  Rubens, 602

Athamanta, 607

Atropinum, 608


INTRODUCTION.


The  study  of  the  positive  effects  of  drugs  upon  the  healthy  human  organism
is  novf  universally  acknowledged  to  be  the  duty  of  every  student  of  medicine.
To  su  pply  a  complete  and  accurate  record  of  these  effects  (pathological  anat-
omy excepted),  is  the  aim  of  this  work.  These  symptoms  are  recorded  as
facts,  which,  while  the  interpretation  of  their  physiological  action  is  as  sure  to
change  as  physiology  is  to  advance,  will  ever  remain  the  same,  and  be  re-read
and  re-interpreted  with  increasing  clearness  and  satisfaction.

Pemparation. — The  sources  from  which  this  compilation  has  been  made
are  three.

First.  Experiments  made  upon  healthy  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  noting
the  effects  of  the  drug.

Second.  Effects  observed  after  poisonous  doses  (accidentally  or  maliciously
administered).

Third.  Symptoms  (cautiously  admitted)  observed  in  the  sick  after  the  ad-
ministration of  the  drug.

To  these  must  be  added  a  vekt  few  symptoms  which  have  never  been
observed  as  effects  of  drug-action,  but  which  have  been  so  repeatedly  verified
clinically,  that  they  clearly  indicate  the  remedy  ;  these  are  designated  by  a
small  cipher  after  the  symptom.

A  large  amount  of  literature  has  been  searched  that  the  work  might  be  com-
translated.  The  authorities  quoted  by  Hahnemann  (whose  original  publica-
tions he  was,  in  many  instances,  unable  to  obtain),  have  been  referred  to  by
Dr.  Hughes,  of  England,  the  circumstances  under  which  the  effects  were
noticed,  furnished  us,  and,  when  necessary,  corrections  made.  The  follow-
ing sample  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  value  and  accuracy  of  Dr.  Hughes's
work  :

(V  )


vi  INTRODUCTION.


ANTIMONItTM  CETJDUM.

BoNETUS.  Statement  of  occasionnl  effects  of  A.

Gamkrarius.  Effects  of  overdosing  in  adults.

Eph.  Nat.  Cur.  Effects  of  overdosing  in  an  adult.

DiosoORiDBS.  Only  mentions  beneficial  effects  of  its  external  application  to  ulcers

of  the  eyes.
Gardane.  Not  obtainable.

Gmblin.  General  statement  (from  authors)  of  effects  of  A.
GoTZE.  Effects  of  A.  in  a  patient  with  syphilitic  ulceration.
Hildanus.  Same  case  as  that  given  in  full  by  Camerarius  in  Symptom  16.
Hoffman. Statement  of  ill  effects  of  antimonial  emetics.
James.  Not  obtainable.
JouBERT.  Not  obtainable.

Kfnckel  t.  LowENSTBiif.  Effects  of  continued  use.
LiiMDESTOLPK.  General  statement  of the  noxious  effects  of A.  (one  only  of the

eight  symptoms  referred  to  him  appears).
LoTiCHius.  Case  of  overdosing  in  an  adult.

Matthiolus.  (No  reference  given),  not  in  his  Comm.  in  Dioscorid.
MoRGENSTERN.  General  statement  (from  authors).
NicoLAi Not  traceable.
Plinius.  As  A.  was  not  used  internally  in  his  time,  thi.s  must  be  as  with  Diosco-

rides.  >

Reindel.  Not  obtainable.

Saunders.  General  statement  from  observation.
SoHULZ.  Not  obtainable.
Stahl. Not  obtainable.
Wepfer.  Several  cases  of  poisoning  in  man  and  animals.

NOTES.

Symptom  15.  Note,  "  The  case  related  in  S 16."

"  16.  Render  last  clause,  "  So  obtuse  was  her  sensibility  that  when,  from
the  acrimony  of  the  evacuations  and  her  position  on  the  back,  a
large  and  foul  ulcer  formed  over  the  sacrum  and  coccyx,  she  com-
plained of  no  pain  from  it."

17.  Note,  "Not  found."

28.  Note,  "Not  found."

56.  Note,  "Not  found."

68.  Bracket,  note,  "Preceding  S.  73."

73.  Bracket,  note,  "  After  violent  vomiting,  loft  ear  soon  recovered,  but
of  mombrana  tympani."

112.  Note,  "Same  case  as  S.  421."

113.  Note,  "  Not  mentioned  by  James  in  his  treatise  on  the  Fever  Powder."
184.  Note,  "  Hernia  ventriculi  after  violent  vomiting,"  and  bracket.
206.  Note,  "Not  found."
221.  Add,  "  But  rarely."
224.  Note,  "In  a  dog."
270.  Render  "  Suffocative  catarrh." Note,  "  Coming  on  fifteen  days  after

amputation  of  foot  (S.  381,  388),  and  ending  in  death."  Bracket.


INTRODUCTION.  vii


NOTE  BY  DR. HUGHES.


"  Dr.  Alien  has  wished  me  to  state  the  nature  of  my  contribution  to  his  opus
magnum.

"  It  has  regard  solely  to  the  pathogenesies  of  Hahnemann.  These  are  derived
from  two  sources  :  tlin  first,  observations  made  by  himself  and  his  disciples  ;
the  second,  cases  of  poisoning  and  overdosing  recorded  in  medical  literature.
The  two  elements  are  present  in  the  several  pathogenesies  in  varying  propor-
tions, as  may  be  seen  from  the  lists  given  iu  the  Monthh/  Hoinceopathic  Review,
for  November,  1873,  and  the  British  Journal  of  Ilomosoputli;/  for  October,  1873.

"There  are  thus,  in  Hahnemann's  contributions  to  the  Materia  Medica,  a
large  number  of  quotations.  Now,  in  editing  any  work  so  characterized,  you
will  add  greatly  to  its  value  if  the  quotations  are  verified  by  reference  to  the
originals.  Errors  will  creep  in,  and  they  are  much  more  likely  to  occur  to  the
citer,  full  of  his  other  thoughts,  than  to  a  corrector,  whose  one  purpose  is  to
see  that  no  mistake  is  allowed  to  stand.  Hahnemann's  quotations,  like  those
of  any  other  author,  need  verification,  and  experience  has  amply  proved  the
usefulness  of  the  task.

"  But  there  is  something  more.  It  has  often  been  lamented  that  Hahne-
mann has  given  us  so  little  information  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which
his  symptoms  were  observed.  In  the  case  of  himself  and  hjs  fellow-provers,  we
must  wait  for  this,  till  lif  ever  they  are)  their  day-books  arc  published.  But
as  regards  the  observations  he  has  cited  from  authors,  the  information  we
desire  is  (in  the  main)  accessible  to  us.  It  only  needs  a  search  in  the  great
libraries  which  aim  at  including  all  literature  to  find  the  journals,  transac-
tions, and  treatises,  extant  in  Hahnemann's  day,  and  from  which  he  quoted.
The  result  is  illumination.  A  flood  of  light  is  cast  upon  the  separate  symp-
toms he  has  furnished  :  we  learn  their  subjects,  the  dose  and  preparation  of
the  drug,  the  order  pursued  by  the  phenomena,  and  their  termination.  Many
misconceptions  which  we  are  liable  to  form  of  them,  standing  alone,  are  re-
moved ;  and  the  whole  series  becomes  intelligible  and  available  for  practice.

' '  Yet  once  again.  The  investigations  of  this  kind  which  have  been  hitherto
carried  out,  have  disclosed  a  strange  laxity  on  Hahnemann's  part,  as  regards
the  materials  he  has  used.  Symptoms  of  the  most  questionable  kind,  con-
demned by  his  own  canons,  and  such  as  no  one  now  would  admit  into  a  patho-
genesis or  use  in  practice,  find  frequent  place  in  the  Materia  Medica  Pura
and  the  Chronic  Diseases.  This  is  the  unanimous  judgment  of  all,  of  Eoth,
Langheinz,  Frank,  Shipman,  Beil,  Sorge,  Wurmb,  AVatzke,  who  have  exam-
ined any  part  of  the  subject.  It  has  been  suggested  in  explanation,  that
Hahnemann  left  this  part  of  his  work  to  others,  and  must  not  be  blamed  for
their  errors  ;  and  further,  that  he  gave  these  symptoms  as  corroborative  only.
But,  however  this  may  be,  there  they  stand  ;  undistinguished  in  most  collec-
tions (as  in  Jahr  and  Hempel),  from  those  which  surround  them,  undistin-
guished always  among  themselves.  They  need  imperatively  the  fullest  inves-
tigation, that  their  real  character  may  be  exposed,  and  they  be  either  dropped
or  stigmatized  as  dubious.

"The  facts  thus  stated  had  for  some  time  been  before  my  mind,  when  I
undertook  to  arrange  Belladonna  for  the  Hahnemann  Materia  Medica. It  was


viii  INTRODUCTION.

ray  duty  to  cunsult  the  originals  of  tlie  1 440  symptoms,  cited  by  Hahnemann,  in
his  pathogenesis  of  this  drug  ;  and  the  results  I  arrived  at  (as  detailed  in  the
British  Journal  of  Homoso2)athij  for  1873)  both  quickened  my  sense  of  the  need
of  such  examinations,  and  showed  me  their  feasibility  for  the  English  student.
In  the  Monthly  Homceopathic  Bccieic  for  November,  187:3,  I  stated  the  matter
at  length,  illustrating  it  by  the  instance  of  Aconite  ;  and  urged  the  carrying
out  of  the  investigation  for  all  Hahnemann's  medicines  No  response  came,
and  no  public  body  took  up  the  undertaking.  My  attention  was  then  drawn
to  Dr.  Allen's  projected  Encyclopedia,  and  it  seemed  to  me  a  grievous  thing
tbiit  Hahnemann's  pa thogenesies  should  once  more  go  forth  to  the  world  with
their  citations  unverified,  unillumined,  unreviscd.  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Allen,  offer-
ing to  do  this  work  for  him.  He  closed  with  me  at  once,  and  liberally  pro-
vided tiie  necessary  means,  and  I  have  been  engaged  in  the  investigation  ever
since.

"  Its  results  may  hereafter  appear  in  some  separate  and  more  detailed  form.
At  present,  they  are  incorporated  into  the  Materia  Medica  as  presented  in
these  pages.  In  the  heading,  instead  of  a  bare  list  of  names  of  authors  from
whom  Hahnemann  has  quoted,  there  is  affixed  to  each  a  brief  statement  of.
the  nature  of  his  observations,  sufficient  to  show  generally  the  value  of  the
symptoms  derived  from  this  source.  Next,  to  each  symptom  that  requires  it
a  note  is  appended,  throwing  light  upon  its  causation  and  connections.  Last,
all  doubtful  symptoms  are  bracketed  squarely,  to  distinguish  them  from  those
which  Hahnemann  himself  has  bracketed,  with  like  intent.""'  The  reason  for
such  stigma  is  either  stated  in  a  note,  or  is  obvious  from  the  account  given  in
the  heading  of  the  nature  of  the  author's  observations.  I  could  myself  have
wished,  in  many  instances,  to  expunge  rather  than  to  bracket  ;  but,  in  rever-
ence for  the  master,  Dr.  Allen  desires  to  omit  nothing  which  he  has  given  us,
and  it  is  left  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader  to  estimate  all  according  to  the'  in-
formation supplied.  My  notes  occupy  a  separate  division  of  the  page,  to  keep
them  distinct  from  those  whicii  Hahnemann  has  appended  to  his  s3'mptoms

■'lu  tills  Encyclopedia  of  Materia  Medica,  accordingly,  the  student  may
feel  confidence  that  no  cited  symptom  of  Hahnemann's  (save  those  of  authors
whose  works  I  have  been  unable  to  consult)  stands  unverified,  and  that  none
is  without  the  fullest  light  which  can  be  cast  upon  its  nature  and  probable
value."

The  existence  of  typographical  and  other  errors  in  the  original  text  of  some
provings,  has  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  editor,  by  Dr.  C.  Hering,  of
Philadelphia.  The  value  of  these  notes  will  be  recognized  by  the  following
samples.

Hahnoiiuinn,  Clironische  Krankheiten  Vierte  Tlieil,  Zweite  Aiiflage.  Natrtim
miinnr.,  pagH  382,  symptom  785,  "  Bei  kalten  Secken  instead  of  Backen."  Patho-
genetic Cj'elopedia,  part  1,  by  Dudgeon,  1850,  page  261-4,  "  Cold  pelvis  instead  of

*  These  symptoms  will  be  readily  distinguished  by  references  to  the  authorities
and  to  footnotes.  In  succeeding  volumes,  two  kinds  of  brackets  will  be  used  as
here  suggested.


I  INTRODUCTION.  ix

4'
cheeks  'i Same  Cyclopedia  has,  page  25-26,  nine symptoms  of  anxiety  under  the
head  of  ffntr.  mur. ;  one  is  not  to  be  found  in  Halmcmann  ("  on  awaking,"  etc.) ;
and  nine  with  anxiety,  not  to  be  found  in  Cyclopedia.

Chroni.sche  Krankheiten  Vierto  Theile.  Nitrum,  page  475,  symptom  252,  instead
o{  "  Nerveuffegend"  read  Nierengegend !  copied  by  Trinks  in  his  Handbucli  ;  also  by
Jahr  and  some  translators.

SabadilUi,  Archiv  4,  3,  page  122-156  ;  full  of  errors.  Stapf  Beitrage,  1836,  every
one  repeated  ;  have  gone  in  all  the  Repertories.  The  worst  are,  page  126,  instead
of  "  Wein-lr  itiken  read Warin-irinken,"  etc.

Authorities  are  given  at  the  beginning  of  each  proving,  and  each  symp-
tom is  followed  by  a  small  number  referring  to  this  list  of  autliorities,  so  that
any  symptom  may  be  readily  traced,  and  reliance  placed  upon  it  according  to
its  authority,  the  dose  which  produced  it,  or  the  time  when  it  occurred,  the
time  (when  noted  by  the  provers)  being  given  in  brackets  after  the  symptom.

Tkanslatioits  have  been  made  witli  special  care  to  preserve  tlie  accurate
meaning  of  the  original.  When  existing  translations  have  been  found  accu-
rate, their  phraseology  has  been  retained,  in  order  to  make  as  little  change  as
possible  in  existing  Repertories  or  habitual  use  of  symptoms.

For  several  years  the  editor  has  kept,  added  to,  and  elaborated  a  small
manuscript  vocabulary,  which  includes  the  most  obscure  terms  used  in  de-
scribing symptoms,  the  translation  of  which  has  been  adopted  after  numerous
comparisons  and  conferences  with  German  scholars.  Much  aid  has  been  ob-
tained from  a  table  of  terms  published  in  the  Vierteljahrschrift,  especially  in
the  matter  of  provincialisms.  A  few  extracts  will  illustrate  this  part  of  the
work.

Abqesohlagenheit.  Mental  dejection;  physical  prostration  or  weariness.'  (Com-
pare Mattigkeit.)

Anqeoriffkniieit. Indisposed ;  sick. (Compare  Abspannung.)

Daemisch  (see  Eiiigenommeti).  Confused.  (Compare  BenebUmg,  Benommenheit,
Befangenhcit,  and  Wiistheit  )

Frost.  Chill.  (More  severe  than  Kalte,  coldness;  a  more  subjective  or  internal
sensation.)

Matt.  A  sensation  of  weakness;  weariness  (tired,  like  Miide),  but  not  such  real
loss  of  strength  as  Schwnch.

ScHLUXD. The  whole  internal  throat ;  ScUund-kopf, -phsLryn-z.

By  such  means  the  editor  has  endeavored  to  make  the  translations  as  accu-
rate and  uniform  as  possible,  and  hopes  that  very  few  errors  will  exist  in  this
part  of  the  work.  The  translations  from  the  French  have  mostly  been  made
by  Dk.  G.  L.  Fkeejiax.  a  good  French  scholar  and  conscientious  translator.

Aeeangemeiit. — The  drugs  have  been  arranged  alphahetically,  which  ar-
rangement has  been  strictly  followed,  separating  even  Atropine  and  Bella-


X  INTRODUCTION.

donua.  The  only  scientific  or  satisfactory  grouping  of  drugs  possible  must
be  in  accordance  with  tlieir  generic  effects  on  the  liuman  body.  Many  of  our
drugs  are  too  imperfectly  known,  and,  indeed,  our  bodies  themselves  are  too
imperfectly  known,  to  render  such  a  classification  possible  at  this  time.  Theo-
retical grouping  of  drugs  must  be  left  to  text-books,  or  treatises  on  the  Materia
Medica ;  it  is  out  of  place  in  a  work  of  this  character.

Symptoms  are  arranged  in  accordance  with  the  anatomical  plan.  Sub-
iTrouping  has  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  following  general  principles
in  any  part :

First.  General  symptoms  not  localized  definitely.

Second.  Localized  symptoms.

Attention  has  been  paid  to  objective  and  subjective  symptoms,  and  when  pos-
sible the  axqjearance  of  a  part  (objective)  is  first  given,  and  afterward  sensa-
tions (subjective).  Symptoms  denoting  increased  action  or  activity  are  given
rirst ;  those  denoting  depression  and  loss  of  action  or  function  follow.

The  following  scheme  has  been  prepared  and  followed  as  strictly  as  possible :

I.  MIND.

A.  Emotional.

,1.  Rage,  fury,  etc.

2.  Desires  and  aversions.

3.  Moods.

a.  Laughs  or  weeps.

6.  Sadness,  anxiety,  fear.

c.  Changing  mood.

d.  Indifference.

B.  Intellectual.

1.  Thought.

2.  Memory.

3.  Cognition.

II.  HEAD.

A.  Confusion  and  Vertigo.

B.  Sensations  (in  general).

1.  Burning.

2.  Bursting.

3.  Constrictive.

Cramping.
Squeezing.
Pinching,  etc.

Aching.
Beating.
Boring,  etc.


4.  Dull.


5.  Sharp.

6.  Sore.

7.  Throbbing.


INTEODUCTION.

C.  Sensations  (local).

Forehead  (burning,  bursting,  etc. ).

Temples.

Vertex.

Parietals.

Occiput.

External  Head.

A.  Eruptions,  ETC.  (objective).

B.  Sensations  (subjective).


in.  EYE.


Eye  in  general.

1.  Objective.

General  appearance.
Motions.
Twitchings,  etc.

2.  Subjective  (general  sensations).


B.  Eye  locally.
1.


Orbit.

2.  Lids.

3.  Lachrymal  Apparatus.

4.  Conjunctiva.

5.  Ball  (sensations).

6.  Pupil.

7.  Vision.


a.  Acute  or  impaired.
6.  Photophobia.

c.  Distorted.

d.  Illusive.


IV.  EAK.


A.  External  Ear.

1.  Objective.

2.  Subjective.


B.  Hearing.


1.  Acute  or  impiaired.

2.  Illusions  of  hearing.


V.  NOSE.


A.  Tissue.


B.  Function.


1.  Objective  (including  discharges).

2.  Subjective.

1.  Smell  acute  or  impaired.

2.  Illusions  of  smell.


xii  INTRODUCTION.

VI.  FACE.

A.  Face  in  general.

1. Objective  (appearance,  color,  eto.).

"2.  Subjective.

B.  Face  logallt.

1.  Gheeks  and  upper  jaw.

2.  iips.

3.  Chin  and  lower  jaw.

VII.  MOUTH.

A.  Teeth  (objective  and  subjective).

B.  Gums.

C.  Tongue.

D.  General  Mouth.  •

E.  Saliva.

F.  Taste.

G.  Speech.

VIII.  THBOAT.

1.  Objective  and  Subjective.

2.  Throat  locally.

A.  Uvula.

B.  Tonsils.

C.  Fauces  and  Pharynx.
T>.  Swallowing.

3.  Throat  externally.

IX.  STOMACH  (function^

A.  Appetite.

Acute  or  impaired.
Perverted.

B.  Thirst.

Acute  or  impaired.
Perverted.

C.  Eructations.

D.  Hiccough.

E.  Nausea.

F.  Vojiitinq.

Stomach  (locally),  objective  and  subjective.
X.  ABDOMEN.

A.  HyP0CH0NJ)EIA.

B.  Umbilical  and  Sides.

C.  General  Abdomen.

D.  IIypogastrium  and  Iliac  Eegions.


INTRODUCTION.


XI.  RECTUM  AND  ANUS.
XII.  STOOL.


A.  DlAERHCEA.

1.  Character.

2.  Conditions.

3.  Concomitants.

B.  Constipation.

XIII.  UUINAEY  ORGANS.

A.  Bladder  (and  kidneys)

B.  Urethra  (discharges  and  sensations).

C .  Micturition.

D.  Urine.

XIV.  SEXUAL  ORGANS.

A.  Male.

1.  Penis.

2.  Scrotum  and  Testicles.


3.

Sexual  desires.

B.  Female.

i.

2.
3.

Uterus  and  ovaries.

Vagina  (discharges  and  sensations

Menstruation.

a.  Early.

6.  Late.

4.

Sexual  desires.

XV.  RESPIRATORY  ORGANS.

A.  Larynx,  Trachea,  and  Bronchi.

B.  Voice.

C.  Cough  and  Expectobation.

D.  Respiration

XVI.  CHEST.

1.  In  General  (objective  and  subjective).

2.  Locally.

1.  Front.

2.  Sides.

XVII.  HEART  AND  PULSE.
A.  Pejecordium.


xiv  INTRODUCTION.

B.  Heart's  Action.

1.  Rapid.

2.  Slow.

3.  Irregular.

C.  Pulse.

XVIII.  NECK  AND  BACK.

A.  Nape  of  Neck.

B.  Back  (general).

C.  Back  (local).

1.  Dorsal.

2.  Lumbar.
3 Sacral.

XIX.  EXTREMITIES  IN  GENERAL  (objective  and  subjective  ;  no
skin  symptoms).

XX.  SUPERIOR  EXTREMITIES.

A.  In  General.

B.  Local.

1.  Shoulder.

2.  Arm.

3.  Forearm,  etc.

XXI.  INFERIOR  EXTREMITIES.

XXII.  GENERAL  SYMPTOMS.

A.  Objective  (motion).

1.  Sjjasms,  etc.

2.  Paralysis.

B.  Subjective  (sensation).

1.  Acute.

2.  Impaired.

3.  Pain.

a.  Burning.
li.  Bursting.

c.  Constrictive.

d.  Dull.

e.  Sharp.
/.  Throbbing.


XXIII.  SKIN.


A.  General  (appearance,  color,  etc.).

B.  Eruptions.

1. Drtj  (general  and  local).
2 Moist  (general  and  local).
3.  Pustular  (general  and  local).

C.  Sensations  (for  Seasibility,  see  Generalities  '


INTEODUCTION.


XXIV.  SLEEP  AND  DREAMS.*

A.  Sleepiness.

B.  Sleeplessstess.


XXV.  FEVER.


C.  Dreams.


A.  Chilliness.

1. General.


B.  Heat.


C.  Sweat.


2.  Partial.

1.  General.

2.  Partial.

1.  General.

2.  Partial.


XXVI.  COXDITIONS.


A.  AGGEAVATIOlSrS.

1.  Time.

2.  Circxmixtance.

B.  Ameliorations.


Verifications. — For  the  purpose  of  making  the  work  practically  useful
(the  great  aim  in  view),  those  symptoms  which  have  heen  repeatedly  cured  by
the  drug  are  distinguished  by  stars,  with  italics,  or  full-faced  type  ;  the  latter
class  is  most  important.  Symptoms  in  italics,  without  stars,  have  been  re-
peatedly observed  by  provers,  but  not  yet  verified  on  the  sick.  Most  generous
and  efficient  help  in  this  portion  of  the  work  has  been  rendered  by  two  of  our
most  distinguished  therapeutists,  De.  Carroll  Dunham  and  Dr.  Ad.  Lippb.
Dr.  Dunham  has  looked  over  nearly  all  the  manuscript  when  ready  for  the
press,  and  put  in  his  stars  and  italics  ;  in  Argentum  nitricum,  for  example,  he
starred  symptoms  0,  31,  58,  61,  67,  73,  76,  82,  89,  104,  139,  141,  148,  275,  278,
.333,  .335, 403,  432,  435,  438,  439,  440,  446, 447,  499,  500^  .504,_511,  536,  553.  Dr.
Lippe  has  taken  the  trouble  to  send  the  editor  the  numbers  of  the  symptoms
in  liis  Text-book  which  he  has  verified  ;  has  also  made  additional  observa-
tions. The  other  verifications  have  been  inserted  by  the  editor,  after  consult-
ing nearly  the  whole  of  the  homceopathic  literature. Doubtless  numerous

*  This  section  should  follow  "  Mind,"  though  custom  has  placed  it  here.  Snould
it  prove  desirable,  it  can  be  changed  in  succeeding  volumes.


xvi  INTRODUCTION.

symptoms  now  undistinguished  deserve  stars.  The  editor  will  be  duly  thank-
ful for  any  suggestions  in  the  matter.

It  is  obviously  beyond  the  power  of  any  one  man  to  do,  in  a  limited  time,
all  the  clerical  and  other  labor  which  this  work  has  required.  Db.  George  L.
Fkeeman  has  been  constantly  employed  upon  it,  for  nearly  two  years  preced-
ing the  issue  of  the  first  volume  ;  he  has  translated  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  French
provings.  has  visited  libraries  for  the  purpose  of  copying  provings  and  poison
cases,  has  arranged  the  symptoms  in  accordance  with  the  scheme,  and  has
mads  up  the  Conditions.  My  partner,  Dii.  St.  Clair  Smith,  has  furnished
numerous  verifications  for  the  work,  and  has  very  efficiently  assisted  its  pro-
gress through  the  press.  To  both  these  gentlemen  are  due  our  most  grateful
acknowledgments.  To  Dr.  H.  M.  Smith  we  are  especially  indebted,  for  the
use  of  his  most  valuable  English  library,  complete  in  its  files  of  early  and
recent  Homoeopathic  literature.

The  work  is  now  offered  to  the  profession  with  the  hope  that,  b}'  its  accuracy
and  completeness,  it  will  advance  the  healing  art,  and  be  the  means  of  more
effectually  relieving  suffering.


T.  F.  Allen.


No.  3  East  Thikty-thikd  St.,  New  Yoke,
November  1st,  1874.


EN  CYCLOPEDIA


PURE MATERIA MEDICA.


ABIES  CANADENSIS.

A .  Canadensis,  Michx.  Nat.  order,  Coniferse.  Common  name,  Hemlock
(Spruce). Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  bark  and  young  buds.

Authority. Gatchell,  Investigator,  10,  54 ;  two  provers.

Mind. — Mind  quiet,  careless,  but  easily  fretted,^. — Irritable,^

Sead. — A  tipsy  feeling,  a  swimming  of  the  head ;  he  feels  light-
headed. (Hale's  New  Remedies,  3d  edition.)

Eyes, — A  feeling  like  that  produced  by  a  stye  in  the  outer  canthus  of
left  eye,l

Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth, ^

Stomach. — Hungry ,^ — A  tendency  to  eat  far  beyond  the  capacity  for
digestion.  (Gatchell,  in  Hale's  New  Remedies.) — Great  appetite,  with  rum-
bling in  stomach  and  bowels  after  eating,''. — Great  craving  for  meat,  pickles,
and  other  coarse  food,  with  hungry  gnawing  at  the  epigastrium,^  [10.] —
Some  thirstjl — Stomach  swelled,  burning,^ — Belching,'. — Distension  of  the
epigastrium,  with  increased  action  of  the  heart.  (Gatchell,  in  Hale's  New
Remedies.) — Weak  at  the  epigastrium,^ — Gnawing,  hungry  faint  feeling  at
the  epigaatrmm.  (Gatchell,  in  Hale's  New  Remedies.)

Abdomen,— FeaXmg  as  if  the  right  lung  and  liver  were  small  and
hard  ;  as  if  bile  were  deficient,^ — Irritable  feeling  in  the  splenic  region,'. —
Sick  feeling  in  the  bowels,'.

Stool  and  Anus. — Rectum  burns,'.  [20.] — Constipation,l

ZTriiini'!/  Organs. — Urinates  frequently  day  and  night,^ — Urine
straw-colored, ^

SexuaZ  Orr/ans. — Thinks  womb  soft  and  feeble  (thinks  would
cause  abortion),'. — Sore  feeling  at  the  fundus  of  the  uterus ;  relieved  by
pressing,'.

Ites2>iratory  Apparatus. — Breathing  labored,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Action  of  heart  labored,'.

Neck  and  Hack. — Feeling  as  of  cold  water  between  the  shoulders,'.
— Weak  in  the  sacral  region,'.

Upper  Extremities. — Pain  behind  the  right  shoulder-blade,'.  [30.]
— Hand.s  cold,  shrunken,'.

Lotver  Extretnities. — Lies  with  the  knees  drawn  up,'.

Generalities. — Twitching  of  muscles,'. — Bloated,'. — Wants  to  lie

VOL. I.— 1  ( 1 )


2  ABIES  NIGRA— ABSINTHIUM.

down  all  the  time/. — -Excessively  weak,\ — Very  faint,  as  if  the  top  of  the
head  were  congested  ;  drunken  feeling/.

Skin. — Skin  clammy/.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Gaping,  drowsy/. — Great  restlessness  at
night,  with  tossing  from  side  to  side,^  [40.]

Fever. — Cold,  shivering  all  over,  as  if  the  blood  turned  to  ice-water/
— Chills  down  the  back/.

ABIES  NIGEA.

Abies  nigra,  Poir.  Nat.  order,  Coniferse.  Common  names,  Black  or
Double  Spruce. Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  gum.

Authority.  Dr.  Leaman  (Ohio  Med.  and  Surg.  Rep.,  1).  Pro  vers :  1,
Man  40  years  old,  one  drop  of  tincture  daily ;  2,  Girl  18  years  old,  two  to
seven  drops  of  tincture ;  3,  Girl  19  years  old,  three  to  six  drops  of  tinc-
ture twice  a  day.

M/ind. — *  Very  low-spirited,''. — *  Very  melancholy,". — Nervousness,^. — In-
ability to  think  or  study ,^.

Head. — Dizziness,'. — Bad  feeling  in  the  head,^ — Slight  headache,^ —
Dull  headache/. — Headache  began  an  hour  after  taking  five  drops,  and
increased  with  the  doses,^.  [10.] — Severe  headache,'. — Head  hot  with  flushed
cheeks,'.

Face. — Cheeks  flushed,  with  hot  head,l

2'/woa^.— Choking  sensation  in  throat,^.

Stomach. — Hungry  and  wakeful  at  night,^ — Exceedingly  hungry,^ —
*  Total  loss  of  appetite  in  the  morning,  but  great  craving  for  food  at  noon
and  at  night,'. — Chewing  the  gum  after  meals  cured  the  habitual  eructa-
tions of  gas,  and  increased  the  appetite,". — ■*Pain  after  a  hearty  meal,''. —
The  habitual  pain  in  the  stomach  after  eating  was  cured,",'.  [20.] — The
tincture  relieved  the  usual  severe  pain  in  the  stomach  after  eating,  the  acid
eructations,  and  the  frequent  vomiting  of  food,°. — Severe  pain  in  stomach
extending  to  the  left  side,^. — Distressing  pain  in  the  stomach  (lasted  long
after  the  proving),'. — Chewing  the  gum  frequently  produces  the  sensation
of  an  undigested  hard-boiled  egg  in  the  stomach.  (Dr.  St.  Clair  Smith.)

Stool. — *  Constipation  (during  and  after  the  proving),'.

Genitals. — Menstruation  did  not  appear  till  the  third  month  after
the  proving  (very  unusual),'.

Respiration. — Easily  gets  out  of  breath,^

Hack. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,l

Generalities. — Pain  in  the  bones,l— Rheumatic  pains  and  aching
in  the  bones,'.  [30.] — Fatigue,'.

Sleep. — Dulness  during  the  day,  but  wakeful  at  night,^. — Did  not  sleep
as  well  as  u8ual,l — Very  bad  dreams,^ — Sleepy  during  the  day,  and  rest-
less at  night,'.

Fever. — Alternate  heat  and  cold,''.


ABSINTHIUM.

Artemisia  absinthium,  Linn.  Common  name.  Wormwood.  Nat.  order,
Compositse. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  fresh  young  leaves  and  flowers.

The  Swiss  "  Extrait  d' Absinthe  "  (from  the  effects  of  which  a  few  toxi-
cological  symptoms  are  obtained)  is  prepared  from  various  species  of
Artemisia,  viz.,  rupestris,  mutillina,  glacialis,  valeriaca,  spicata,  etc.


ABSINTHIUM— ACALYPHA  INDICA.  3

A^ithorities. 1,  Gatchell's  provings ;  t,  Toxicological.

J!fm<?.— Intoxication,  t. — Frightful  visions,  t. — Soothed,  as  if  going
into  a  beautiful  dreani,^^ — Very  tranquil,  as  if  brain  were  rounded  and
symmetrical ,\ — Wants  nothing  to  do  with  anybody,'. — Idiotic  manner;
don't  care  whether  she  dies  or  uot,\ — After  recovering,  he  had  ru>  recolledioti
of  taking  the  poiion,  nor  of  the  cause  of  his  doing  so, ^. — Sudden  loss  of  con-
sciousness, t. — Stupor,  t. — Idiocy,  t. — Kleptomania,  t. — Insensibility  (with
convulsions),  t.

JTeail. —  Vertigo,  tt. — Headache,  t. — Dizzy  when  she  rises  up,^ — Wants
to  lie  with  the  head  low,\

Eyes. — Injected  conjunctiva,  t. — Pain  in  the  eyes,'. — Eyes  itch,'. — Eye-
lids heavy,'.

Face. — Looks  foolish,'.

3IOHth, — Jaws  firmly  fixed,  t. — Tongue  protrudes,  feels  thick  ;  can't
talk  distinctly,' — Complains  that  tongue  (and  larynx)  are  paralyzed,".—
Foaming  at  the  mouth,  t.

Throat. — Scalded  feeling  in  throat,'.

Stomach. — No  appetite;  loathed  food  (next  day),'. — Eructations;
stomach  and  bowels  distended,'. — Sick  in  stomach  and  liver,'. — Tendency
to  vomit,  t. — Nausea,  apparently  in  region  of  gall-bladder,'. — Food  lies
heavy,'. — Stomach  feels  cold  and  oppressed  ;  thinks  it  would  not  absorb
much,'. — Uncomfortable,  irritated  feeling  of  stomach,'.

Abdomen. — ^Thinks  liver  and  spleen  thickened,'. — Thinks  liver  and
spleen  have  become  thin  and  pale,'. — Bloated  around  the  waist  and  in  the
abdomen,  as  after  ague,'. — Bowels  distended,'. — Very  much  bloated,'. —
Immense  accumulation  of  flatulence  ;  wind-colic,'.

TJvinary  Ovf/ans. — Constant  desire  to  urinate,' — Urine  of  a  deep
yellow  orange  color,  and  strong,  horse-like  smell,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Darting  pain  in  right  ovary,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Tremor  of  the  heart,  felt  towards  the  back,'. —
Heart  thumps ;  can  be  heard  in  the  scapular  region,'.

Lower  Mxtremities. — Feet  very  cold,'.

Genei'alities. — Falling  down,  as  in  epilepsy,  with  distortion  of  the
features,  spasms  of  the  limbs,  bloody  foam  at  mouth  and  biting  of  the
tongue,  t. — Epileptiform  convulsions,'. — Next  day  very  weak,'. — No  muscle ;
great  lassitude,'. — Very  rapid  prostration,  t.

JPathological  Appearances. — The  autopsies  of  animals  poisoned
by  absinthe  showed,  besides  a  penetrating  odor  of  wormwood  in  various
organs  of  the  body,  great  congestion  of  the  cerebro-spinal  vessels,  of  the
meninges  of  the  brain,  and  extreme  hyperaemia  of  the  medulla  oblongata.
The  bi-ain  and  spinal  cord  presented,  upon  transverse  section,  a  uniform
rosy  coloring,  with  injection  of  the  vessels ;  occasionally  the  stomach,  more
frequently  the  endocardium  and  pericardium,  showed  small  ecchymoses.
(Journ.  of  Psycholog.  Med.,  9,  525.)

ACALYPHA  INDICA.

Acalypha  Indica,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Euphorbiaeese.  Preparation,  Tinc-
ture from  the  plant.

Authority.  Dr.  Tonnere,  of  Calcutta.  (See  Am.  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  2,  and
A.  H.  Z.,  61,  104,  and  77,  31.)

*  Severe  fit  of  dry  cough,  followed  by  spitting  of  blood  (from  10  drops  of  the
tincture).


ACETIC  ACID.


ACETIC  ACID.


Pure  Glacial  Acetic  acid,  CJI^O^.  (Density  1.064  above  60°  F. ;  below
that  degree  crystalliDe.) Prepare  the  lower  dilutions  with  distilled  water.

Authorities.  1,  Melion,  Roth's  Mat.  Med.,  3,  15;  2,  Orfila  (toxico-
logie),  ibid. ;  3,  Cattell,  B.  J.,  11,  338  ;  4,  Waring's  Therapeutics,  Peter's
Elements ;  5,  Berridge,  M.  H.  Rev.,  15,  297.

31iiid. — Hydrophobia,". — Slight  and  transient  delirium,l— -Irritability
of  temper, I — Nervous  and  excitable  mood,l— Very  great  anxiety ,\ — Con-
fusion of  ideas,l — Diminished  intellectual  power,l — Disinclinatiou  to  exert
the  mind,'.— She  is  hardly  able  to  express  herself,'.— She  is  unconscious
of  all  around  her,".

Head. — [10.]  Giddiness,".— Heaviness  in  head,  with  sense  of  intoxica-
tion,''.—Indications  of  vascular  excitement  in  brain,l — Dull  pains  in  fore-
head and  vertex,^ — Confused  dull  aching  over  frontal  regions  (nervous
cephalalgiaj,".^I)ull  aching  in  right  forehead,  at  a  spot  near  the  ossific
centre,  externally,  and  afterwards  slightly  on  the  left  side,". — Shooting
pains  through  the  temples,^ — Distension  of  temporal  bloodvessels,  with  in-
creased heat  of  head,'.

Eijes, — Eyes  sunken  and  surrounded  by  a  dark  circle,*. — Great  flow
of  tears,".  [20.]— Pupils  dilated,".

Face. — Wildness  of  countenance,". — Face  pale  and  waxen,*. — Bright
red  flush  on  both  cheeks  and  spots  of  perspiration  on  the  forehead  (from
drinking  vinegar),^ — Bright  flush  and  heat  on  both  cheeks,  especially  on
the  left  (from  drinking  vinegar),^

Month. — Tongue  pale  and  flabby,*. — Epithelium  of  the  mouth  quite
white  (chemical  action),".

Stomach. — Diminished  appetite,*. — Adipsia,*. — Intensethirst,'.  [30.] —
(Eructations  fetid,  and  hiccough),". — Nausea,". — Retching,". — Vomiting
soon  after  eating,*. — Frequent  vomitiiu/,^. —  Violent  pain  and  sensation  of
burning  in  the  region  of  the  chest  and  stomach,^. — Severe  burning  pain  in
stomach  and  in  abdomen,". — Heat  in  the  stomach,  with  slight  colicky  un-
easiness in  small  intestines,  as  of  approaching  diarrhoea,". — -Heat  in  the
stomach,  with  slight  hot  eructations,". — Gastrddynia,".  [40.] — She  complains
of  her  stomach,^. — Chronic  derangements  of  the  gastro-intestinal  canal,". —
Sensation  as  if  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were  in  a  state  of  ferment,  with
horrible  tormenting  agony,". — Pain,  as  of  ulcerative  gnawing  at  a  spot  in
the  stomach,  following  after  depression  and  agony,". — He  fancies  there  is
an  ulcer  in  his  stomach,  which  seems  sore  in  one  spot,  with  gnawing ;  he
does  not  suffer  pain,  but  his  agony  is  distressing,  preventing  his  falling
asleep,  or  remaining  long  in  the  same  position  ;  towards  midnight  he  feels
very  sick,  aud  vomit?  some  thick,  gruelly  substance,  which  relieves  him,
and  he  then  falls  asleep ;  in  the  morning  the  ejected  substance  is  seen  to
be  yellow,  thick  matter,  like  yeast,  without  froth  or  bubbles,  and  in  quan-
tity about  three  tablespoonfuls — unfortunately,  it  was  not  more  minutely
examined  ;  the  depressing,  agonizing  feeling  still  continues  throughout  the
second  day,  and  is  removed  by  tobacco,". — (Scirrhus  of  the  pylorus),". —
Great  pain  at  the  serobiculus  cordis,".

Abdomen. — Abdomen  distended,^. — Tympanitis,  with  difficulty  of
breathing  (from  large  doses) ;  rumbling  in  abdomen,*. — Severe  burning
pain  iu  abdomen  and  stomach,".  [50.] — Griping  pain  in  bowels,*. — Chronic
derangements  of  gastro-intestinal  canal,". — Slight  colicky  uneasiness  in
small  intestines,  as  of  approaching  liquid  diarrhoea ;  with  heat  in  stomach,".


ACETIC  ACID— ACONITINE.  5

Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,*. — Watery  diarrhoea/. — Liquid  diar-
rhoea/.— Diarrhoea,  with  swelling  of  the  feet  and  legs/. — Diarrhoea,  with
colic  pains  and  tenderness  of  the  abdomen  to  touch,*. — Diarrhoea  of  phthisical
subjects,"  '. — Diarrhoeic  stools,'.  [60.] — Bloody  discharges  from  bowels,^.^

TTfinary  Organs, — Urine  increased,^. — Urine  increased  in  quantity
and  of  a  lighter  color,*. — The  secretions  smell  of  the  drug,^ — (Urine
cloudy),'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Irritation  of  windpipe  and  chest,*.—
(Hoarseness- from  irritable  larynx),^ — Croup;  hissing  respiration,  with
rattling  in  the  throat ;  lining  membrane  of  windpipe  is  tbund  covered  with
fibrinous  membrane,  exactly  as  in  true  croup,'. — (Foul  breath),'. — He  can
scarcely  speak,'.  [70.] — Dry  cough,  attended  with  increased  respiration,
succeeded  by  a  moist  cough,  with  fever,  increased  difficulty  of  breathing,
emaciation,  night-sweats,  osdema  of  feet  and  legs,  diarrhoea  and  death,*. —
Respiration  feeble,  difficult/. — Respiration  hurried,  laborious,'. — (Bronchial
hemorrhage),'.

Heart  and  false. — Pulse  full,  96/. — Pulse  lower,'. — Pulse  very
■weak  and  small,  contracted  or  diminished,'.

Chest. — Violent  pain  and  burning  sensation  in  regions  of  chest  and
stomach^.— K\\  the  lobes  of  the  lungs  filled  with  tubercles  somewhat  like  a
bunch  of  grapes,*. — Chronic  inflammation  of  the  lungs,'.

Upper  Extremities. ^{80.']  Diminished  muscular  power  of  arms
and  hands,^ — Paralytic  sensation  in  wrists  and  hands/. — Coldness  and
prickling  in  hands,^. — Skin  of  hands  dry,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Lassitude  of  tKe  limbs,'. — Impaired  mus-
cular power  of  legs,*. — Swelling  of  the  feet  and  legs,  with  diarrhoea/. —
(Edematous  swelling  of  feet  and  legs,*. — Diminished  sensibility  of  the
feet,*. — Coldness  of  the  feet,*.

Generalities, — [90.]  He  jumps  out  of  bed  like  a  madman,  and  crawls
on  the  ground,  howling  with  pain  (immediately)/. — He  rolls  about  in  agony,'.
— He  lies  oo  the  ground,  writhing  in  excruciating  agony/. — Strong  convul-
sions,'.— Convulsions  and  insensibility,'. — Violent  fatal  convulsions,  with
pain  in  stomach,*. — -Spasms  with  great  debility,'. — Trembling  from  head  to
foot,'. — Paralysis,'.— Prostration  of  strength,'.  [100.] — Fainting-fits,l —
Sense  of  oppression  and  heaviness,'. — Leanness,'. — Her  body  wastes,^. —
Atrophy,'. — ^Hemorrhage/. — General  anasarca,^ — Diminished  sensibility  of
the  surface  of  the  body,^. — She  appears  as  if  intoxicated,^

/S/ciJt.— Skin  pale  and  waxen,^  [110.] — The  cuticle  peels  ofiT,'. — Red-
ness and  burning  sensation,'.

Fever. — Temperature  of  skin  below  natural  standard,^. — Flushes  of
heat  in  the  external  parts,  with  increased  perspiration,'. — Slow  fever,  with
night-sweats^. — Hectic  fever,  with  emaciation,  cough,  night-sweats,  diar-
rhoea, dyspnoea,  and  troublesome  swelling  of  the  feet  and  legs,^  *. — Typhus
fever,  with  violent  delirium,  diarrhoea,  pain  in  the  abdomen,  rumbling  in
the  gastric  region ;  also  typhus  with  stupor,  tympanitic  abdomen,  and  ob-
stinate constipation,^*. — Cold  perspiration,'. — Profuse  perspiration/. — He
was  bathed  in  perspiration,^.  [120.] — Profuse  night-sweats,'.

ACONITINE.

Aconitine  (CjjHjgNOio)  is  obtained  from  the  roots  and  stems  of  Aconitum
napellus,  L.

This  must  not  be  confounded  with  "Morson's  (English)  Aconitine"


6  ACONITINE— ACONITUM  ANTHOKA.

(same  as  Nepalin  of  Fliiokiger,  or  Napelliu  of  Wigger,  or  Pseudo-aconi-
tine  of  Huebsehmann),  which  is  obtained  from  Aconitum  ferox.

Authorities. 1,  Sehroff;  t,  Toxicological,  from  Bird  and  others.

Blind. — Intellect  most  perfect,  and  even  vivid,  t. — Thought  slow  ;  long
thinking  impossible;  all  attention  disturbed,'. — Loss  of  sense,\

Head. — Vertigo,'. — Confusion  of  head  very  great,'. — Headache,  t. —
Pain  in  head  and  face  more  intense  after  the  slightest  mental  exertion,'.

jEyes. — Pupil  dilated  (both  from  internal  and  local  use),  t. — Dimness
of  vision,  t.

JEars. — Sense  of  pressure  in  ears,'.  [10.] — Eoaring  in  ears,'.

Face. — A  peculiar  drawing,  pressive  sensation  in  the  cheeks  on  upper
jaw,  the  forehead  (region  of  nervus  trigeminus),  increases  in  intensity,  at
first  intermittent,  wandering,  becomes  a  continuous  pain  of  great  intensity,'.

3Iouth. — Burning  on  tip  of  tongue  and  lips,'. — -Unpleasant  taste,  nau-
seous, bitter,'.

Throat. — Dryness  in  throat,'. — Every  attempt  to  swallow  followed  by
the  spasmodic  contractions  characteristic  of  hydrophobia,  but  they  were
not  renewed  by  the  sight  of  water,  t.

Stomach. — Eructations,  immediately,  t. — Severe  vomiting,  which  re-
curred every  two  or  three  minutes,  and  was  performed  by  a  sudden,  jerking
action  of  the  abdominal  muscles,  accompanied  by  a  loud  shout,  t.
■ Abdomen. — Rumbling, in  bowels  (immediately),  t.

Ufiiiari/  Organs. — Diuresis  very  marked,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — [20.]  Cough,  with  easy  expectora-
tion,'.— Respiration  difficult,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Weakness  of  the  beating  and  sounds  of  the
heart,  t. — Heart's  action  almost  imperceptible,  i. — Pulse,  at  first,  on  enter-
ing a  warm  room,  more  frequent,  then  sinks  far  below  normal,  is  small,
weak,  and  intermittent,'. — Pulse  falls  to  60,  and  in  two  hours  after  taking
the  medicine  was  so  feeble  as  to  be  almost  imperceptible  and  difficult  to
count,  t.

Chest. — Oppression,  t.

Extremities  in  General. — -Trembling  of  limbs,'. — Relaxation  of
joints,'. — Formication  on  the  feet  and  hands,  t.

Generalities. — [30.]  All  the  convulsive  movements  were  easily  ex-
cited by  simply  touching  him,  t. — Great  depression  of  the  circulation,  t. —
Pains  in  jaws,  nape  of  neck,  and  limbs,  t. — General  fatigue,  t. — Muscular
weakness,  even  to  inability  to  stand  up,  t. — Great  muscular  weakness,'. —
Prostration,  t. — Patient  fearfully  collapsed,  t.

Skin.— Genera.]  formication,  t. — Sense  as  if  the  epidermis  would  scale
ofl^','-  [40.] — Skin  seems  dotted  with  red  points,'.

Fever. — Horripilation,  t. — Surface  cold,  sweating,  and  quite  pale,  t. —
Head  and  face  suddenly  very  warm  ;  this  warmth  extends  over  the  whole
body,  is  most  intense  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  accom-
panied by  sweat,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleep  restless,'.

ACONITUM  ANTHORA,  L.

Nat.  order,  Ranunculacese.  Common  name,  Eiseuhut.  Habitat,  Sub-
alpine  ranges  in  Lower  Austria,  etc.  Preparation,  Extract  from  the  plant
in  flower,  and  also  from  the  root.

This  species  possesses  less  acrid  principles  than  any  other.


ACONITUM  CAMMAEUM.  7

Prover,  Heinricli  (0.1  gramme).  (Reil  and  Hoppe,  Journal  f.  Pharm.,
Tox.,  u.  Therap.,  1,  388.)

Pulse  diminished  several  beats  within  the  first  two  hours ;  sensation  of
warmth  in  the  stomach  ;  frequent  eructations ;  a  cool  and  dry  skin  ;  a
marked  increase  of  saliva  (extract  from  tiie  plant).

The  extract  from  the  root  produced  similar  symptoms,  with  the  addition
of  a  slight  crawling  in  the  face  and  extremities  ;  confusion  of  the  head ;  a
sensation  from  time  to  time  of  a  pressive  headache  along  the  course  of  the
longitudinal  sinus  and  in  the  right  temporal  region  ;  slightly  dilated  pupil ;
decided  sleepiness,  which  caused  a  deep  sleep  the  whole  night  through.
The  next  day  entirely  well.

ACONITUM  CAMMARUM.

A.  cammarura,  Linn,  (includes  A.  neomontanum,  Willd. ;  A.  interme-
dium, D.  C,  and  A.  Stoerckianum,  Reich.  See  "Aconitum.")  Nat.
order,  Ranunculaceaa. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  root.

Authorities. 1,  Schroff;  (,  Toxicological.

JHIlnd. — Rage,  t. — -Fear,  tt. — Apathy,  indifference  toward  the  whole
world,^. — Thought  and  concentration  of  mind  completely  disturbed,^ —
Memory  very  weak,'.

Head. — Vertigo,  t. — Vertigo  on  rising  up,  with  flickering  of  vision  ;
roaring  in  ears;  pain  in  head  and  face ;  nausea  and  great  weakness,'. —
Head  confused,'. — Dull  pain  within  the  skull,'.  [10.] — Physical  exertion
causes  a  return  of  pain  in  head  and  face,'. — Headache  increased  by  bend-
ing forward,'. — Head  and  face  warm,'. — Tensive,  drawing  sensation  along
course  of  nervus  trigeminus,  which  at  first  is  shooting,  wandering,  very
often  intermittent ;  becomes  a  continuous  pain,'.

El/es. — Pupil  dilated,  with  dim  vision ;  cannot  look  at  bright  objects
without  blinking;  both  near  and  far  objects  are  confused,'.

Ears. — ^Ringing  in  ears,  with  vertigo,'.

Face. — Blackish-blue  color  of  face,  t. — Most  remarkable  sensation  of
contraction  of  the  face,'. — Crawling  in  face,  followed  by  desquamation  of
epidermis,'. — Peculiar  crawling  sensation  in  face,  as  well  as  on  tongue,  and
over  whole  body,'. — Blue,  swollen  lips,  t.

3Iouth. — [20.]  Tongue  and  lining  of  mouth  red,'.— -Peculiar  crawling
sensation  on  tongue,  as  from  peppermint;  extends  to  lips  and  back  part  of
palate,  spreads  to  the  tips  of  fingers  and  toes ;  is  in  the  face  and  over  the
whole  body,'. — Paralysis  of  tongue,  t. — Salivation,  i,'. — Sharp,  peculiar
taste,'. — A  fuzzy  sensation  in  places  where  the  crawling  was,'. — Taste  and
sensation  diminished,'.

Throat, — Violent  stinging  pain  along  the  whole  mucous  membrane
from  lips  to  stomach,'.

Stomach. — Appetite  diminished,' — Thirst,  t.  [30.]— Violent  eructa-
tions, with  rumblings  in  bowels,'. — Nausea;  efforts  to  vomit;  vomiting,'. —
Violent  vomiting,  t. — Vomiting  relieves  all  the  symptoms,'. — Pressure  in
stomach,  t. — -Cramp  in  stomach,  t.

Abdomen. — Distended  abdomen,  t. — Constriction  of  the  abdomen,'. —
Burning  in  abdomen,  and  sensation  of  ants  crawling  around  in  it,  t.

Stool  and  Anus. — Violent  diarrhoea,  t.

TIrinary  Organs. — [40.]  Diuresis,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Erections  and  pollutions,  without  amorous
dreams,'.


8  ACONITUM  FEROX.

Mespiratory  Apparatus.— Voice  hoarse  and  rough,^ — Respira-
tion slow,  difficult,  with  sensation  as  if  the  chest  and  throat  were  coa-
strieted,^

Heart  and  _Ptt?se.— Pulse  frequent ;  afterwards  depressed,'. — Pulse
slow,  51 ;  small  and  weak,  can  hardly  feel  it,'.— Pulse  sinks,  becomes  irregu-
lar, small,  weak,'. — Pulse  very  irregular ;  not  half  as  rapid  as  normal,'. —
Pulse  and  beat  of  heart  sometimes  intermit  for  several  seconds,'.

Extremities  in  General. — Contraction  of  extremities,'.  [50.] —
Involuntary  stretching  of  the  limbs,'. — Pain  in  elbow,  knee,  and  hipjoint,
after  long  walking  around;  relieved  by  pressure,  but  not  entirely  removed,'.

Generalities. — Subsultus  tendiuum,'. — Twitchings,  t. — Catalepsy,  t.
— Unusual  restlessness  obliges  him  to  keep  moving,  aggravated  by  changes
of  temperature,'. — Paralysis  of  half  of  body,  t. — Depressed  and  weals,'. —
Very  weak  and  prostrated,  must  lie  down,'. — Oppression  and  anxiety,'.
[60.] — Touch  diminished,  cannot  feel  small  objects,'. — Sudden  death,  t.

S/ein. — Peculiar  crawling  sensation  is  over  whole  body,  as  well  as  on
tongue  and  face,'. — Skin  cold,  dry,  rustling,'. — Vesicles,  small  white  and
yellowish,  surrounded  by  an  intensely  red  areola,'. — Vesicles  on  skin  of
lower  extremities  filled  with  serous  fluid  and  very  painful,'.

Fever. — Skin  dry  and  icy  cold,'. — Heat,  t.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Frequent  yawning,'. — Sleepy,'.  [70.] — Sleep-
less at  night,  till  near  4  A.M.,  when  he  slept  two  hours,'. — Nights  so  rest-
less, that  he  wanders  about  the  room  as  if  crazy,'.


ACONITUM  FEROX.

A.  ferox,  "Wall.  (A.  virosum,  Don.)  Nat.  order,  Ranunculacese.  (The
most  poisonous  species  known  ;  from  the  Himalaya  Mountains.)  Comjnon
names  (Indian),  Biseh,  or  Bikh,  Ativisha.  Preparation,  Tincture  from  the
root.

Authorily.  Dworzak,  in  SchrofF  (Reil  and  Hoppe  Journ.).  Took  .01
gramme  of  the  extract  at  one  dose.

3Iind. — Mind  very  active ;  sequence  of  ideas  rapid  (in  six  hours). —
He  talked  constantly,  remembered  easily  the  minutest  circumstances  of  his
former  experiment,  compared  them  with  the  present  one,  and  readily  drew
conclusions  therefrom  (in  six  hours). — In  the  intervals  of  relief  from  dis-
tressing symptoms,  he  laughed  and  joked  about  his  very  comical  condition  ;
but  when  the  dyspncea,  anxiety,  etc.,  returned,  he  could  not  seem  to  endure
them,  and  abused  heartily  Aconite  and  Toxicology  in  general  (in  four  to
six  hours). — Was  incapable  of  any  mental  work,  even  the  simplest  addition
(second  day). — Comprehension  and  understanding  were  confused  (second
day). — Anxiety  (in  four  hgurs).

Head. — Confusion  of  head  (in  eighty  minutes). — On  rising,  at  6.30
o'clock,  vertigo  (second  day).

Et/es. — Pupils  dilated,  sluggish  to  light  (in  six  hours).

Face. — [10.]  The  cheeks  felt  fuzzy  (in  forty  minutes). — Troublesome
formication,  mostly  over  face  (in  eighty  minutes).

3Iout/i . — Formication  on  upper  surface  of  tongue,  gradually  involved
whole  mouth  (in  forty  minutes). — The  tongue  almost  insensible ;  it  feels
like  a  piece  of  raw  leather  in  the  mouth  (in  six  hours). — Tongue  covered
with  a  thick,  yellowish-white  fur  (second  day). — Violent  burning  in  mouth
(in  two  minutes). — Burning  in  mouth  and  throat  increased  by  food  (second
day). —  Drank  often  cold  water  to  relieve  the  burning  in  mouth  and  fauces


ACONITUM  FEROX.  9

(in  five  minutes). — The  mouth  felt  fuzzy  (in  forty  minutes). — Salivation
(iu  five  minutes).  [20.] — Taste  flat,  pasty  (second  day).

Throat. — Violent  burning  in  pharynx  (in  two  minutes). — Burning  in
throat  and  mouth  (in  two  to  four  hours). — Drank  often  cold  water  to  relieve
the  burning  in  fauces  and  mouth  (in  five  minutes). — Feeling  of  constriction
of  throat  (in  four  hours).

Stomach. — Very  little  appetite  (second  day). — Frequent  eructations
(in  eighty  minutes). — Transient  nausea  (third  day). — Nausea,  eructations
(could  not  vomit)  (in  four  hours). — At  times,  nausea  and  inclination  to
vomit  (in  eighty  minutes).  [30.] — After  breakfast,  nausea,  pressure  in
stomach,  with  pain  (second  day).— Sensation  of  warmth  in  stomach  (in
two  minutes). — Violent  drawing  pain  in  region  of  stomach  and  sacral
regions,  which  soon  spread  over  whole  abdomen  ;  on  pressure  at  the  epi-
gastric region,  the  pain  is  increased  (third  and  fourth  days). — Pressure  in
stomach  after  eating  (four  to  eight  days)  (fourth  day). — On  pressing  in
stomach,  an  internal,  dull  pressing  pain  (four  to  eight  days).

Abd^omen. — Rumbling  in  bowels  (in  five  minutes). — Constant  gur-
gling in  bowels  (in  four  hours).

Stool  and  Anus. — Two  half-watery,  dark,  not  copious  stools  (second
day).

Urinary  Organs. — Copious  evacuation  of  urine  every  fifteen  to
thirty  minutes ;  in  twelve  hours,  more  than  five  quarts  of  urine,  and  only
two  quarts  drank  (in  forty  minutes). — Frequent  and  copious  urination  (in
seven  hours).  [40.] — Urine  straw-yellow  for  eight  hours,  afterwards  became
dark  (in  forty  minutes).

Respiratory  Apparatus, — Dyspnoea. — Oppression  of  breathing
(in  four  hours). — Dyspncea  increased  to  such  a  degree  that  he  was  obliged
to  breathe  half  sitting  up,  with  the  head  resting  on  the  palms  of  the  hands
(in  six  hours). — Anxiety  increased  to  a  high  degree ;  he  constantly  feared
he  would  suffocate  from  paralysis  of  the  respiratory  muscles  (in  six  hours). —
Accelerated  respiration  (in  six  hours).

Heart  and  Pulsc—Pwlse,  slowed  11  beats  (74),  (in  five  minutes).
— Pulse  small,  weak,  60  (in  two  to  four  hours).— Pulse  weak  and  small  (in
six  hours). — Pulse  70,  small  and  weak  (second  day).

Extremities  in  General. — [50.]  Weakness  and  trembling  of  ex-
tremities (in  eighty  minutes).

Lower  Extremities. — Walking  difficult  and  uncertain,  fatiguing
(in  eighty  minutes). — Gait  tottering ;  step  regular,  but  powerless  (secouii
day). — Remarkable  weakness  in  lower  extremities,  especially  the  right
(third  day).

Generalities. — General  sick  feeling  (in  eighty  minutes). — Formica-
tion spread  over  whole  body,  but  affected  very  slightly,  or  not  at  all,  those
parts  that  had  been  cold ;  worse,  or  caused  by  change  of  temperature  and
motion.  From  7  to  7.30  p.m.,  this  annoying  sensation,  having  changed
from  one  nerve  to  another,  reached  its  greatest  severity ;  it  caused  a  painful
unrest,  so  that  he  could  not  possibly  lie  more  than  a  few  minutes  quietly  ;
constantly  changed  his  position  ;  would  attempt  to  get  up,  but  a  few  steps
exhibited  marked  weakness  and  prostration,  with  vertigo,  blackness  before
eyes,  trembling  of  whole  body,  inclination  to  vomit ;  relieved  at  once  by
lying  down  (in  two  to  four  hours). — Sensation  as  though  benumbed ;  on
touching  objects,  it  seemed  as  though  he  had  on  gloves;  on  pinching  the
cheek,  no  pain  (in  six  hours). — Touch  all  day  blunted,  as  through  gloves ;
and  he  seemed  to  walk  on  woollen  carpets  (second,  third,  and  fourth  days).


10 ACONITUM  FEROX— ACONITUM  LYCOCTONUM.

— Weakness  very  great  (in  four  hours). — Very  weak,  even  in  bed  (in
four  hours).  [60.] — Weakness  (fifth  day). — Lassitude  and  weariness  sud-
denly attacked  him  (second  day). — Prostration  from  the  sleepless  night
(fifth  day). — Weakness,  anxiety,  dyspnoea,  restlessness,  and  excitement  in-
creased with  intervals  of  relief  (in  four  hours).

Fever. — Sense  of  coldness  (in  eighty  minutes). — ley  coldness  of  body,
especially  of  extremities,  continued  for  several  hours;  he  was  wrapped  iu
his  gown  and  doubled  covers,  and  three  feather  bolsters,  and  the  room
kept  very  hot,  without  effect  (in  four  hours). — ^Temperature  objectively  and
subjectively  lowered ;  he  lay  one  and  a  half  hours  by  the  hot  stove  (second
day). — So  tired  he  had  to  go  to  bed  and  be  covered  up  warm,  because  the
skin  was  cold  objectively  and  subjectively  (in  eighty  minutes). — Desire  to
get  warm ;  he  rose  from  the  bed  and  tottered  six  steps  to  the  stove  ;  he  re-
mained by  the  stove  a  few  minutes  (half  sitting,  half  lying,  with  the  head
supported) ;  warmth  caused  a  pleasant  sensation,  but  there  arose  vertigo,
flickering,  trembling  of  limbs,  oppression,  and  nausea,  so  that  he  had  to  go
back  to  bed,  which  relieved  these  latter  symptoms  (in  four  hours). — He
could  not  divest  himself  of  the  idea  that  warmth  would  do  him  good ;  he
went  to  the  stove  again,  with  the  same  result  as  before ;  on  attempting  it
the  third  time,  he  could  not  stand  up  (in  four  hours).  [70.] — Desire  for
warmth  ;  not  being  able  to  leave  the  bed,  he  had  heated  bolsters  laid  on  his
chest  and  abdomen,  and  kept  as  quiet  as  possible  (in  four  to  six  hours). —
Skin  cold  (second  day). — Skin  cold,  dry,  rustling  (temperature  of  room
very  high)  (iu  two  to  four  hours). —  Calor  mordax  on  forehead,  chest,  and
hands,  with  sensation  as  if  numerous  glowing  hot  wires  were  stuck  into
him ;  relieved  by  the  perspiration  (in  four  to  six  hours). — In  order  to  pro-
mote perspiration,  he  flexed  and  extended  the  arm  as  rapidly  as  possible ;
after  a  minute,  copious  sweat,  with  ca/or  mordax;  but  instead  of  relief,  he
was  attacked  with  such  weakness  that  he  sank  down  exhausted  ;  palpitation
(in  six  hours).

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Sleepy,  and  slept  three-quarters  of  an  hour
(in  six  and  a  half  hours). — Slept  again  one  and  a  half  hours  (in  eleven
hours). — Night  sleepless  (fourth  day). — On  waking,  violent  burning  in
mouth  and  throat,  warmth  in  stomach,  dull  sensation  in  head  ;  weak,  weary,
relaxed  (in  seven  hours).

Conditions. — Afternoons  better  (third,  fourth,  and  fifth  days).— [80.]
The  burning  in  mouth  and  throat  renewed  for  a  few  hours  by  warm  food
(fourth  day). — Coffee  relieved  the  symptoms  (in  six  hours).

ACONITUM  LYCOCTONUM.

Aconitum  lycoctonum,  Linn.  (A.  telyphonum,  Eeich.).  Nat.  order,  Ra-
nunculacese.  Common  names,  (English)  Wolfsbane;  (German)  Wolfs-
eisenhut. Preparation,  ?

AutJiority. Petroz  (Journ.  d.  1.  Soc.  Gallicane,  1st  ser.,  vol.  3,  p.  16).

Mind. — Mania. — Ferocity. — Laughter. — Distraction. — Instability  of
ideas. — Dread  of  work. — Repugnance  to  business.

Head. — Vertigo  with  nausea. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  head,  which
extends  to  across  the  eyes.  [10.] — Digging  sensation  iu  the  brain. — Com-
pressive pain  in  the  head. — The  head  feels  heavy,  as  if  a  great  weight  were
pressing  on  the  brain. — Sensation  as  if  a  nail  "were  driven  into  the  head
when  moving  it. — Pulsations  in  the  head. — Shocks  in  the  forehead. — Pres-
sure on  the  top  of  the  head. — Hammering  pain  in  the  temples. — Pressure


ACONITUM  LYCOCTONTJM.  11

in  the  occiput. — Pulling  pain  in  the  scalp  when  contracting  it.  [20.] —
Pain  like  that  of  rheumatism  in  the  skin  of  the  head,  increased  by
touching  it.

JEi/es. — Fixed  look. — Heat  in  the  eyes. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  eyes,
going  from  without  inwards. — Boring  pain  in  the  eyes. — ^Painfulness  of  the
lids. — Itching  in  the  eyelids. — Sensation  of  pressure  on  the  lids. — Difficulty
in  raising  the  lids. — Feeling  of  dryness  at  the  inner  canthus.  [30.] — Smart-
ing in  the  canthi.

Ear's. — Feeling  of  roughness  in  the  ears. — Beatings  in  the  ears  when  in
the  open  air. — Purulent  discharge  from  the  ear. — Redness  behind  the  ears.

Nose. — Itching  on  the  nose. — Sensitiveness  of  the  nose. — Pulling  sen-
sation in  the  nose. — Lancinations  in  the  nose. — Compression  at  the  root  of
the  nose.  [40.] — The  skin  of  the  nose  is  cracked. — Muco-purulent  dis-
charge from  the  nose. — Dry  coryza. — Coryza  from  one  nostril.

Face. — Pale  face.— shining  face. — Pain  of  excoriation  around  the
mouth. — Pain  which  seems  to  be  in  the  facial  bones. — Tension  in  the
facial  muscles. — Bluish  circle  around  the  eyes.  [50.] — Hard  tuberculous
pimples  on  the  face. — Pimples  on  the  lips. — Sweat  on  the  face. — The  skin
of  the  face  becomes  of  a  light-brown  color. — Numbness  of  the  jaw,  like  in-
cipient paralysis,  relieved  by  compressing  it,  and  ameliorated  by  drinking
wine.

UHouth, — Burning  pain  in  the  upper  teeth. — Pressive  pain  in  the
teeth. — Tearing  pain  in  the  lower  teeth  when  opening  the  mouth. — Bluish
gums. — Ulcerated  gums.  [60.] — Clayey  taste. — Astringent  taste.

Stomach. — Strong  relish  for  dainties,  ft-uits,  cabbage. — The  relish  for
tobacco  is  increased  in  a  smoker. — Dislike  for  food  in  general,  especially
for  fatty  things  and  milk ;  they  cause  uneasiness. — Keen  hunger,  but  it  is
very  .soon  satisfied. — Thirst. — Constant  thirst,  even  when  drinking. — Burn-
ing thirst. — Thirst  at  night.  [70.] — Acid  risings,  with  weight  on  the  stom-
ach.— Risings  with  rancid  taste. — Risings  like  rotten  eggs. — Painful  eruc-
tations.— Hiccough. — Inclination  to  vomit  after  eating. — Inclination  to
vomit,  with  shivering. — Inclination  to  vomit,  with  vertigo. — Vomiting  of
mucus  on  getting  out  of  bed. — ^Yellowish  vomiting  after  drinking.  [80.] —
Vomiting,  with  copious  urination.

Abdomen. — Bruised  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium. — Tearing
pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium. — Starting  in  the  hepatic  region. — When
respiring,  both  hypochondria  feel  bruised. — -Sensation  of  compression,  which
is  referred  to  the  diaphragm. — -Anxiety  in  the  abdomen. — Beatings  in  the
abdomen. — Simple  pain  in  the  abdomen  after  drinking  milk. — Lancinating
pain  after  drinking  milk.  [90.] — Abundant  flatulence. — Colic,  like  that
caused  by  hsemorrhoids.

Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — The  anus  feels  as  if  strongly  con-
tracted.— Diarrhoea  with  violent  cutting  after  eating  pork. — Whitish  stools.
— After  stool,  pain  in  the  anus  as  if  there  was  a  crack  there. — Cramp  at
the  anus. — Tearing  pain  at  the  anus. — Itching  at  the  anus.  [100.] — Shiv-
ering after  stool. — Tenesmus  during  the  night.

Urinary  Organs, — Desire  to  urinate,  with  copious  emission. — Urg-
ing, with  ineffectual  efforts  to  urinate. — Desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  dis-
charge.— Colorless  urine. — Increased  heat  of  urine. — Turbid  urine,  deposit-
ing a  white  sediment.

Sexual  Orr/ans. — Itching  at  the  vulva. — The  menstrual  blood  is
fetid.  [110.] — Excoriation  of  the  bend  of  the  thigh  after  the  menses. — Leu-
corrhoea. — Viscid  leucorrhcea.


12  ACONITUM.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Difficult  respiration. — Slight  cough,
with  watery  expectoration. — After  a  slight  chill,  cough,  leaving  a  taste  of
blood  in  the  mouth.

Chest. — Swelling  of  the  mammary  glands.

Wecfk'  and  Urtc/s.— Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.— The  neck  seems
to  grow  larger.— Swelling  of  the  neck  on  one  side  only.  [120. ]; — Pressive
pain  at  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Shivering  in  the  back. — Jerking  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys.

Upper  JExtretnities. — Swelling  of  the  axillary  glands. — Pressure
in  the  shoulder-joints. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  shoulder-joints. — Tearing
pain  in  the  elbow-joint. — StitFness  in  the  joints  of  the  elbow  and  wrist. —
A  few  blotches,  like  scarlatina,  appear  on  the  forearm  and  hands. — Sensa-
tion of  fulness  in  the  hands.  [130.] — Sweat  on  the  hands.

Lower  Eoctremities. — On  stretching  his  legs  the  muscles  of  the
ham  feel  as  if  very  much  shortened. — Jerking  in  the  legs. — Itching  at  the
ankles  in  the  evening. — Lancinating  pain  at  the  instep  when  standing. —
Eruption  of  hot,  red,  slightly  painful  spots,  on  the  legs  and  toes.

jFlever.— Horripilation. — Chilliness  of  one  side  only  as  soon  as  he  is
uncovered. — In  the  morning  external  coldness  with  feeling  of  heat. — Cold-
ness alternating  with  heat,  succeeded  by  sweat.  [140.] — During  the  heat,
pale  face,  strong  appetite,  thirst ;  pain  in  bowels,  restlessness. — The  sweat
continues  after  the  fever. — Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs,  such  as  are  felt  in
intermittent  fever,  with  feeling  of  lassitude  during  the  night,  and  on  get-
ting up  in  the  morning.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Drowsiness. — He  sleeps  too  long. — Aberra-
tion of  hearing  during  sleep. — During  sleep  numbness  of  the  parts  he  lies  on.

Conditions. — The  pains  are  generally  felt  in  the  afternoon. — Aggra-
vation from  mental  exertion. — Aggravation  during  digestion,  especially  of
pork,  onions,  and  after  drinking  wine.

ACONITUM.

A.  napelliis,  L.  (including  also  A.  Stoerckianum,  Reich.,  in  part).  Nat.
order,  Eanunculacese.  Gommon  name,  Monkshood.  Preparation,  Tincture
from  the  whole  plant  and  root  when  beginning  to  flower.

Authorities.  1,  Hahnemann,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  1 ;  2,  Fred.  Hahnemann,
ibid.;  3,  Ahner,  ibid. ;  4,  Hornburg,  ibid.;  5,  Riickert,  ibid. ;  6,  Stapf  and
Gross,  ibid.;  7,  Wahle,  ibid.;  8,  Abano,  ibid,  (a  general  statement  of
the  effects  of  Aconite  poisoning) ;  9,  Bacon,  ibid,  (poisoning  of  an  adult
by  Aconite);  10,  Durr,  ibid,  (effects  of  a  mixture  of  Aconite  and  antimo-
nial  wine);  11,  Gmelin,  ibid,  (effects  when  given  to  patients  a  long  time)  ;
12,  Greeding,  ibid,  (an  account  of  the  treatment  of  nine  patients,  variously
afflicted,  with  increasing  doses  of  the  extract,  as  follows  :  I.  A  woman,  set.
35,  with  indurated  cervical  glands ;  II.  A  woman,  set.  36,  with  the  same,
and  also  a  maniac  ;  III.  A  woman,  set.  32,  with  the  same  ;  IV.  A  woman,
set.  68,  with  left  hemiplegia ;  V.  A  woman,  set.  79,  with  the  same ;  VI.  A
woman,  set.  49,  with  dropsy  ;  VII.  A  woman,  set.  49,  in  general  ill-health  ;
VIII.  A  woman,  set.  24,  demented  and  epileptic,  subject  to  spasms  of  the
limbs;  IX.  A  woman,  set.  40,  with  glandular  tumors);  13,  Van  Helmont,
ibid,  (effects  of  putting  a  piece  of  the  root  on  the  tongue) ;  14,  Matthiolus,
ibid,  (a  narrative  of  two  cases  in  which  Aconite  was  administered  to  crimi-
nals (male  adults)  to  test  the  efficacy  of  the  bezoar-stone  as  an  antidote,  S.
441,  635,  1374,  1652,  occurred  in  the  first  one,  the  rest  in  the  second);  15,


ACONITUM.  13

Moraeus,  ibid,  (two  adults  poisoned,  S.  631  belongs  to  one,  S.  1479  to  the
other);  16,  Richard,  ibid,  (as  Matthiolus,  one  subject);  17,  Eoedder,  ibid,
(effects  of  the  application  of  Aconite-juice  to  a  wound);  18,  Stoerck,  ibid,
(this  writer  experimented  on  himself  by  placing  a  small  quantity  of  the
root  on  his  tongue ;  he  then  gave  the  medicine  to  the  following  patients :
I.  A  man,  set.  30,  with  pleurodynia ;  II.  A  man,  set.  27,  with  sciatica ;
V.  [Note.  The  omitted  numbers  belong  to  cases  from  which  Hahne-
mann has  taken  no  symptoms.]  A  woman,  set.  40,  with  a  cervical  tumor ;
VII.  A  woman,  set.  22,  with  a  considerable  swelling  in  the  left  iliac  re-
gion ;  X.  A  woman,  set.  43,  with  neuralgia  of  the  right  foot  and  arm) ;
19,  Heucke,  provings  Archiv.  ,20  ("c."  a  girl),  with  the  tincture;  20,
Arneth,  Oest.  Zeit.,  1,  2,  Austrian  provings,  mostly  with  the  tincture ;  21,
Boehm,  ibid.;  22,  Gerstel,  ibid.;  23,  Gerstel's  wife,  ibid.;  24,  Maschauer,
ibid.;  25,  N.  JST.,  ibid.;  26,  Eeisinger,  ibid.;  27,  Rothansel,  ibid.;  28,
Schwarz,  ibid.;  29,  Sterz,  ibid;  30,  Wachtl,  ibid.;  31,  Watzke,  ibid.;  32,
Weinke  (girl),  ibid.;  33,  Wurstl,  ibid.;  34,  Wurmb,  ibid.;  35, Zlatorovick,
ibid. ;  36,  Jousset ;  37,  West  (from  Roth's  M.  M.,  1) ;  38,  Robinson  (short
provings  in  British  Journal  with  30,  200, 1000,  2000) ;  39,  H.  N.  S.  (Hahne-
mannian  Monthly,  4,  366,  proving  with  a  potency);  40,  T.  C.  D.,  ibid,  (prov-
ing with  the  60th);  41,  Fleming  (on  Aconite);  42,  Schneller  (Roth's  Mat.
Med.,  1);  43,  J.  C.  Peters  (effects  of  a  large  dose).

Toxicological  symptoms  are  marked  with  t.;  verified  clinical  symptoms
are  marked  with  a  pellet  °.

J/iiirZ.— *NightIy  raging  delirium ;  he  will  not  be  kept  in  bed ;  in
the  morning  excessive  sweat,'". — He  did  all  things  hurriedly,  and  ran  about
the  hovse,^". — Transient  frenzy,'^  t. — Hope  is  aroused,  immediately  after
vomiting,"  <. — Crazy  folly,'"  <. — He  commenced  to  be  delirious,  and  played
upon  a  leaf,'*  i.^-Maniacal  delirium,  t. — Delirium,  t. — Loquacity,*.  [10.] —
Exalted  spirits,^^ — Gayety,  with  inclination  to  sing  and  dance  (i  h.),''^. —
More  gay  and  excited  than  usual  (1st  h.),'. — He  cannot  remain  long  at
one  occupation,*''. — Excessive  disagreeable  restlessness ;  without  occasion
for  hurrying,  he  is  in  the  greatest  haste,  every  obstacle  that  delays  his
rapid  pace  is  excessively  annoying ;  he  knocks  against  some  people  who
do  not  get  out  of  his  way  fast  enough,  and  runs  iri  breathless  haste  up  the
steps ;  this  hurried  disposition  lasted  two  hours,''^ — He  raves,  though
awake;  jumps  out  of  bed  and  imagines  he  is  driving  sheep  (4  h.),'. — Lucid
(clairvoyant)  vision,'.t — Lively  memory,'. — Lively  imagination,'. — Great
activity  of  mind,''^ — He  sits  buried  in  thought,'.  [20.] — Rapid  change  of
thought,  great  exertion  is  required  to  fix  the  train  of  thought,"^. —  Unsteadi-
ness of  ideas;  on  attempting  to  think  of  one  thing,  another  forces  it  out  of  the
mind,  and  this  is  supplanted  by  another,  and  so  on,  until  he  becomes  quite  ^
confused,^. — Restlessness,  uninterrupted,  unpleasant ;  he  must  now  sit,  now
stand,  now  walk,  he  does  not  know  what  is  the  matter,^*. — ^Excessive
restlessness,  all  movements  and  actions  are  performed  with  great  haste
and  hurry,'^ — Impatience,  he  throws  himself  anxiously  about,  and  con-
stantly changes  his  position,",  etc.— Hurried  speech,  t. — Speaks  much  and
rapidly,  t. — ^Alternate  attacks  of  opposite  moral  symptoms,^*  t. — *Variable
humor,  at  one  time  gay,  at  another  dejected,^,  ^^. — *At  times  he  seemed  to
weep,  and  at  times  he  sang^^  i.  [30.] — Now  he  doubts  his  recovery,  now
he  is  full  of  hope,'*,  t. — Happiness,^^,  ''^. — Now  he  was  perfectly  conscious,

f  Hahnemann's  note  explains  that  he  was  conscious  that  his  beloved,  fifty  miles
away,  was  singing  a  certain  piece.


14  ACONITUM.

and  then  again  he  raved,"  i.— 7  §t4arre&ome,  with  constantly  varying  de-
lirium, he  chatters  childish  nonsense,  and  is  extravagantly  gay,'. — Morose,
ipeevish,^.—*  Quarrelsome  (6  h.),\—IrasdbUity,\— Fretful,^"  f.— =*'Vexation
about  trifles,^', '^  t— Extremely  inclined  to  he  vexed  (J  h.),'.  [40.]— Great  in-
difference, irritable,^'. — *  The  sliffhtest  noise  is  unbearable  (^  h.),'. —  Over-sen-
sitive to  light  and  noise,^,''. — He  takes  every  joke  in  bad  part  (3  h.),'. —
*  Cannot  bear  pain,  nor  to  be  touched,  nor  uncovered." — *  Crreoi  Anxiety,  t. —
Anxiety  only  transiently  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water,". — Anxiety  as
though  a  great  misfortune  would  happen  to  him,". — Increased  anxiety,  fol-
lowed by  total  apathy,  t. — Anxiety  which  does  not  allow  him  to  remain  in
one  place,  he  must  constantly  walk  about,  t.  [50.] — He  is  made  restless  by
'internal  anxiety,^^. — Auxiety  and  peevishness,  with  fine  dartings  in  the  side
of  the  chest,  then  palpitation  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  pressive  head-
ache,'.— *Inoonsolable  anxiety  and  piteous  howlings,  with  complaints  and  re-
proaches about  trifles  (5  h.),'. — Dolorous  anxious  complaints,  with  pusillani-
mous fears,  despair,  loud  wailing,  and  weeping,  and  bitter  reproaches,'. —
His  anxiety  and  fright  rose  to  a  great  pitch,  t. — Flickering  before  vision
makes  him  anxious  on  the  street,  he  thinks  he  constantly  jostles  the  passers
by,^'. — *  Anxiety,  he  believes  he  will  soon  die,  t. — *rear  of  approaching
death  (2-12  h.),',", '". — Excessive  fear  of  death,  t. — Feeling  as  if  his  last
hour  had  come,  t.  [60.] — Thrice  he  became  blind,  and  affirmed  death  to
be  at  hand,'*  t. — *  Apprehensive,  t,^". — Extreme  fearfulness  (^  h.y.- — Bread
of  some  accident  happening,^. — He  cannot  banish  anxious  apprehensive
thoughts,  even  in  gay  company,". — Fear  lest  he  might  stagger  and  fall,'. —
Great  timidity  after  a  severe  fright,  afraid  to  go  out  unattended  ofter  dark,  is
unable  to  control  his  feelings  of  apprehensive  fear.° — Fear  of  ghosts,°. — De-
jection, t. — *Depression  of  spirits,  t,^.  [70.]-^*Sadness,  solicitude,'. — De-
jected, as  if  she  had  no  life  in  her  (2  h.),"'. — Dejected,  disinclination  for
everything,  depression  even  whilst  walking,*. — Melancholy ,^^ — Music  is
unbearable,  it  goes  through  every  limb,  and  makes  her  quite  sad  (24  h.),'.
— She  began  to  cry  violently,  with  convulsive  twitching  of  the  facial  mus-
cles, t. — Every, now  and  then  she  uttered  a  peculiar  plaintive  cry,  t. — Dis-
like to  company,™. — Desire  to  be  alone,''. — Disinclined  for  conversation,''^
[80.] — Anthropophobia  (3  h.),',  ™. — Misauthropy,'.— Obstinacy,'.— Staid
resolute,  not  lively  humor  (secondary,  curative  actiou,  8  h.),'. — Disinclina-
tion for  mental  labor,^",  ^'. — Disinclined  to  exert  body  or  mind,*'. — Disinclined
to  read  {several). —  Unable  to  think  or  perform  even  the  slightest  mental  labor
(several). — Distraction,  if. — Unusual  distraction  ofideas,^*',  ^^.  [90.] — Distrac-
tion of  the  attention  whilst  reading  or  writing,  owing  to  frequent  cessation
of  thoughts,^ — Thinking  slow,  all  attention  disturbed,  t. — He  cannot  think
nor  reflect,  knows  nothing,  aud  has  no  idea  of  anything  in  his  head  as
usual,  but  feels  that  all  the  mental  operations  transpire  in  the  region  of  the
stomach  ;  after  two  hours  he  has  two  attacks  of  vertigo,  and  then  the  usual
thinking  power  returns  again  to  the  head,".— Prepossession  of  the  mind,  the
thoughts  he  has  already  conceived  and  half  written  down,  he  is  unable
lo  legister  completely  without  an  efibrt  to  recall  them  (3  d.),'. —  Want  of
memory,  what  has  just  been  done  appears  like  a  dream,  which  he  can  scarcely
call  to  remembrance,''^. —  Weakness  of  memory  (5-9  h.),'. — Memory  verv  weak,
t. — Loss  of  memory ,"1 — Loss  of  memory  for  dates," — Diminished  intellec-
tual powers,^, '.  [100.] —  Great  confusedness  both  of  tlwught  and  action  (4  h.),'*.
— *Dulness  and  confusion  of  mind,  t. — Prostration  of  mind,  t. — Stupor,  t.
— Insensibility,  t. — Loss  of  consciousness  transient,  f.— Loss  of  consciousness
during  the  convulsions,  t. — He  lies  in  a  stupid  condition,  at  evening,  eyes


ACONITUM.  15

closed,  twitching  of  the  facial  muscles,  mouth  compressed,  without  power
of  speech,  t. — Coma,  t.

Head  — Confusion  in  the  head  as  after  intoxication,  with  pressure  in  the
temples,^.  [110.]—  Confusion  of  the  head  evenings  with  pressure  in  the  forehead
(several\. —  Confused  and  muddled  feeling  in  the  head  early  in  the  morning  after
waking  (several). — Confusion  with  heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  head,  aggra-
vated by  motion  (several). — Confused  head  and  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,
mornings  on  waking  (19  h.). — Confusion  of  the  head  soon  changed  to  a
sense  of  heaviness,  and  pressive  pain  in  the  vertex  and  forehead  (19  d.). —
Muddled  sensation  in  the  head,^\ — Easy  stupefaction  from  tobacco  smoke,™.
— Vertigo,'  (and  several),  t  (many). — V.  to  falling,^*. — Confused  V.  all
day,"'.  [120.] — Frequent  attacks  of  V.,  feeling  as  if  about  to  fall  over,''". —
V.  as  after  slight  intoxication,  with  distraction  of  mind,^°. — V.,  the  child
totters  and  cannot  stand,  t. — V.  and  stupefaction  on  entering  a  warm  room,
as  if  intoxicated,'^. —  V.,  especially  on  stooping;  *she  staggers,  especially
to  the  right  (36  h.),^'. — V.,  everything  seems  to  go  around  in  a  circle,
she  can  scarcely  get  into  bed  (37  h.),^'. — *  V.  as  if  intoxicated,  all  goes
around,  she  staggers  as  if  about  to  fall ;  with  nausea,  worse  on  rising  from
sitting,  less  while  walking,  ymt  at  all  while  sitting  (J  h.),^°. — Staggering  as
from  concussion  after  a  fall  on  the  occiput,'". — V.,  sense  of  swaying  hither
and  thither  in  the  brain,'. — *  V.  while  stooping,^^.  [130.] — V.  while  stand-
ing,".— *  V-  on  rising  up,  t. — V.  with  confusion  iu  the  head  forenoons  daily
for  16  days  after  leaving  off  the  drug,''.— V.  on  motion  and  on  rest,'^. — V.
great  after  dinner,'*. — V.  when  walking  or  driving,". — *  V.  much,  increased
by  shaking  the  head,  whereby  complete  blackness  comes  before  eyes,^". — V.,
and  headache  in  forehead  and  occiput,  both  worse  on  stooping  (10  min.),'.
— Dizzy  heaviness  of  the  head,  chiefly  in  the  forehead  on  stooping,  with
nausea  and  sinking  in  the  pit  of  stomach  (2  h.),'^ — Dizzy  confusion  of  head,
on  right  side  of  forehead,  on  walking  in  the  open  air,'^.  [I'lO.] — V.  with
commencing  staggering,  it  seems  to  him  as  if  he  could  not  stand  on  his
feet,"'. — V.  with  headache,  especially  in  the  occiput,  t. — V.  with  distending
pain  in  the  occiput,  t. — V.  and  headache,  not  affected  by  violent  motion
(i  h.),'. — V.  with  obscuration  of  vision,  t. — Whirling  in  the  head  so  that
she  dare  not  move  it,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  eyes  would  close,". — (V.
with  difficult  respiration,  dry  cough,  and  pain  in  the  hips,".) — *  V.  with
nose  hleed.° — *  V.  with  nausea.°  [150.] — V.  with  vomiting  and  exhaustion."
— *Heat  in  the  head  (several). — Heat  in  the  whole  head  followed  by  sore-
ness, particularly  of  the  forehead,  lasting  all  the  evening  (11  h.),'l — *Burn-
ing  headache  as  if  the  brain  were  agitated  by  boiling  water,'*  t. — Head
warm,  it  feels  smaller  to  the  hand,"^ — Headache  as  if  a  hot  iron  were  bound
around  the  head,  t. — Headache  as  if  the  skull  were  laced  externally  with  a
band  and  drawn  tightly  together,". — Head  seems  bound  around  with  a
band,'. — Fain  over  the  whole  skull  as  if  compressed  from  all  sides  equally ;
sometimes  the  pain  is  concentrated  with  the  greatest  severity  in  the  orbits
(typically  recurring),'^. — Weight  in  the  head,". — Pressive  pain  in  whole
head,'".  [160.] — Heaviness  in  the  head,''^,^,^^. — Head  heavy  and  dizzy  in
the  morning,  as  if  he  had  drunk  wine  the  evening  previous,"'. — Headache,
t,"^,  etc. — Violent  headache  with  trembling,  t. — Pressive  headache  with  pres-
sure in  the  eyes  (19  h.). — Pressive  troublesome  headache,  first  in  the  vertex,
then  drawing  to  the  forehead,  where  it  causes  a  sensation  of  heaviness  and
fulness,  lasts  several  hours  ;  aggravated  by  motion ;  forenoons  (17  d.). —
Dull  headache,  as  if  bruised  with  a  bruised  feeling  in  all  the  limbs  (14  h.),*.
— Pressive  constrictive  headache  extending  over  the  whole  arch  of  the


16  ACONITUM.

skull,  especially  over  the  left  eye;  ameliorated  by  laying  on  the  cool  band,"i
— Drawing  in  the  whole  head,  especially  in  the  temporal  muscles,'^ — *Fiil-
ness  in  the  head  {several).  [170.] — Fulness  of  the  head  with  erratic  pains
in  the  right  supra-orbital,  tenaporal,  and  frontal  regions,^'. — Headache  as
if  the  brain  were  pressing  outward  (J  h.),\ — During  all  the  proving  sudden
and  frequent  congestion  of  the  head  with  anxiety,  followed  by  rigor  over
the  back,™.— The  brain  seemed  much  cougested,  and  the  jugular  vein  was
opened  with  great  relief;  she  felt  as  if  whirled  suddenly  from  a  close,  hot,
dark  room  into  a  spacious,  light  one,'°. — *  Shooting,  pulsatinff  headache,
as  if  from  an  internal  ulcer,  sometimes  prevents  .speaking,'. — Headache
as  if  a  part  of  the  brain  were  raised  up  here  and  there,  increased  by  slight
motion,  drinking  and  speaking  (}  h.),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  waving,
and  shaking  in  the  brain,^\ — A  fine  pulsating  here  and  there  in  the  head,'.
Humming  in  the  head,'^.  Numbed  feeling  in  the  head,  as  if  there  were  a
board  before  the  forehead  (i  h.),^'.  [180.] — Sensation  as  if  something  were
drawn  out  of  the  head,  causing  the  upper  lids  to  be  drawn  upwards  (J  h.),'®.
— Head  felt  as  if  forcibly  turned  around,  t. — Sensation  of  crepitation  (as
produced  by  bending  gold  tinsel  backward  and  forward)  in  the  temples,
uose,  and  forehead,'. — *Fulness  and  heavy  feeling  in  the  forehead,  as  if  an
outpressing  weight  lay  there,  and  as  if  everything  would  come  out  at  the
forehead  {i  h.),^^ — Fulness  of  the  forehead  on  stooping,  as  if  everything
would  fall  out  (25  h.),^'. — Outpressing  pain  in  the  forehead,'. —  Wedge-like  ■
pressing  asunder  headache  in  the  region  of  the  right  brow,  worse  in  the
room  than  in  the  open  air,^". — Forepart  of  the  head  feels  as  if  nailed  up  in
a  warm  room,^. — -Tension  all  over  the  forehead,*. — Contractive  pain  in  fore-
head,'.— Feeling  of  contraction  of  the  brain  under  the  forehead  (20  h. ),''*.
[190.] — A  squeezing  in  the  forehead,  over  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  a  feeling
as  if  she  would  lose  her  reason  (was  sick  in  her  head),  aggravated  by  walk-
ing in  the  open  air  (4  h.),'. — A  pinching  and  squeezing  in  forehead,  as  if  in
the  bones  ;  she  feels  sick,  as  if  madness  would  ensue  (12-24  h.),'.— Squeez-
ing tensive  pain  close  behind  the  orbits,'. — Very  sensitive  acute  pressive
pain  over  the  forehead,'.- — Pressive  pain  in  forehead,  especially  over  the
right  superciliary  ridge,  with  dread  of  jarring  by  riding,™. — Pressive  stupe-
fying pain  in  forehead,  worse  evenings,'l — Slight  pressive  headache  in  right
frontal  protuberance,  extending  toward  the  orbital  border,  with  flushes  of
heat  chiefly  in  the  face  and  ears,". — Pressive  headache,  especially  over
right  brow. — Pressive  shooting,  nauseating  headache  over  orbits,  extends
down  toward  upper  maxilla,  like  that  produced  by  vomiting  from  an  emetic
(2  h.),'. — Peculiar  drawing  pressive  sensation  in  forehead  (nerv.  trigem.)
grows  more  intense,  and  becomes  continuous  and  violent,  t.  [200.] — Most
furious  headache;  vision  obscured  ;  the  pain  was  chiefly  in  the  upper  part  of
the  forehead,  pressing  and  contractive ;  head  not  hot ;  face  swollen  and  pale ;
light  or  noise  increased  the  pain,  lying  quiet  in  a  dark  room  removed  it
(from  2d  dil.),'°. —  Violent  headache  limited  to  a  small  spot  above  left  supra-
orbital ridge,^'. — Frontal  headache  all  day,  worse  at  evening,  afterwards
more  particularly  confined  to  the  left  frontal  eminence  (2d  d.),''^ — Frontal
headache,  sometimes  shooting,  sometimes  pulsating,  sometimes  pressive
while  walking,  relieved  by  sitting,'. —  Violent  headache,  especially  m  right
half  of  forehead,". — Heaviness  in  the  forehead  and  parietal  bones,^'. — *  Head-
ache, pulsation  in  the  left  side  of  forehead  along  with  attacks  of  strong  blows
in  right  side  of  forehead  (3  h.),'. — Stitches  in  forehead  extend  to  right  temple,
and  then  in  left  side  of  the  occiput,". — Jerking,  shooting  in  the  head,  espe-
cially in  the  forehead,^'. —  Violent  sticking  pain  in  upper  orbital  border,  ex-


ACONITUM.  17

tending  upward  across  the  forehead,  and  across  the  temples  and  cheeks
into  the  molar  teeth  ;  worse  on  pressure  and  toward  evening,  the  supraorbital
region  becomes  swollen  in  consequence,^.  [210.] — Headache  in  the  temples/'.
— Pressing  out  pain  in  temples,  fulness  in  forehead,  with  pricking  and  bit-
ing of  lids  evenings,^^ — Stupefying,  drawing,  pressing  inward  pain  in  left
temple,^'. — Pressive  pains  in  temporal  region,  followed  by  jcrkings  in  the
occiput,  and  afterwards  confusion  of  head  and  contractive  pain,*. — Head-
ache, as  if  the  head  were  compressed  with  screws  at  both  temples,^". — Shoot-
ing, throbbing  pain  in  temples,^'. — Neuralgic  pains  in  right  temporal  region.
— Tearing  pain  in  left  temple,^  [220.] — Jerking,  shooting  pain  in  left
temple;  stitches  through  temples  into  the  head,^'. — Tearing  pain  in  left
temple  with  roaring  in  the  ears,^. — After  sleeping,  awake  at  4  am.,  with
unpleasant  sensations,  which  urged  him  to  rise,  when  he  experienced  dizzi-
ness and  very  heavy  headache,  apparently  about  temporal  muscles  above
each  ear,  with  transient  nausea  and  gush  of  cold  sweat,". — Pressure  on  the
vertex,  as  if  a  cap  were  pressed  tightly  on  the  head,^'. — Heaaache  in  the
vertex,  as  if  the  head  were  compressed  equally  on  all  sides  by  a  pitch  cap,  re-
moved by  motion  in  the  open  air,^. — Dull  pain  in  vertex,  extending  toward
the  temporal  region,  increased  by  stooping,''. — Pressure  and  sensitive  stitches
in  the  vertex,'^ — Pain  in  vertex  like  a  great  weight,^*. — Feeling  as  though
the  head  were  compressed,  starting  from  the  vertex  (several).^ — Pressure  and
,  heaviness  in  the  ve.rtex,". — Troublesome  pressure  in  vertex  forenoon  (19  a.).
[230.] — Troublesome  pressive  headache,  first  in  vertex,  then  extending  to
the  forehead,  where  it  produces  a  sensation  of  fulness  and  heaviness,  ag-
gravated by  motion  (19  a.). — Pressive  pain  in  vertex  nightly. — Continual
pressure  on  vertex,'^. — Pressive  pain  in  vertex  evenings,^''. — Pain  in  top  of
head,  relieved  by  washing  in  cold  water," — Sensation  as  if  a  ball  rose  from
umbilical  region,  and  spread  a  cool  air  over  the  vertex  and  occiput,". — Vio-
lent, pressive,  gradually  increasing  headache  in  both  sides  in  the  parietal
region,  somewhat  relieved  by  cold  water, '^. — In  the  evening,  headache  in-
creasing to  a  violent  pressure  in  both  parietal  regions  that  kept  him  awake
all  night,". — Semilateral  drawing  in  the  headj^. — Pains  in  left  side  of  head,"'.
[240.] — Pain  as  if  head  were  compressed  in  left  side  of  head,^ — Creeping
in  left  side  of  head,  as  from  a  brush,*. — Pain  in  right  side  of  head,"'. — Jerk-
ing, shooting,  drawing,  tearing  pain  in  right  side  of  head  superiorly,". — Pain
in  occiput^^, "°,  t.,  etc. — Pain  in  occiput  and  throat,'^ — Pressure  in  occiput,"".
— Posterior  part  of  brain  feels  very  much  injected,*". — Jerking,  tearing  pain
in  occiput,". — Painful  jerks  in  occiput,"".— Pressive  shooting  pain,  at  one
time  in  occiput,  at  another  in  forehead,"". — A  shooting  in  occipital  bone,*.
[250.] — As  if  one  had  taken  cold  after  a  profuse  sweat,  headache,  roaring
in  ears,  coryza,  bellyache,  especially  in  the  morning,'^ — Headache  increased
by  speaking,'. — Headache  on  bending  forward,  t. — Head  drawn  backward,  tt.
Scalp. — Itching  and  formication  of  scalp,"^ — Formication  relieved  by
Aecrf,"".— Formication,  especially  in  temporal  region,  t. — Stitches  in  right
temporal  muscle,^'. — Stitches  under  the  scalp,  t. — Several  spots  sensitive  to
toucli  and  cold  air,"'.  [260.] — Painful  tickling,  especially  on  top  of  head,
on  touching  the  hair,^'. — Scalp  feels  swollen  and  numb,"^. — Sensation  in
places,  as  if  the  hairs  stood  on  end,  with  increased  sensitiveness  of  them,  t. —
^Sensation  as  if  the  hairs  stood  on  end,^^. — The  hair  seemed  to  bristle,  and
the  scalp  was  painful  to  touch  in  several  places,  and  sensitive  to  cold  air,^'.
— The  roots  of  the  hairs  are  felt,"°. — Sensation  as  if  some  one  drew  him
upward  by  the  hair,'^. — An  increase  of  temperature  on  the  vertex  externally ;
it  felt  hot  to  the  touch,  and  the  hair  bristled  up  therej'^. — Throbbing  of  tem-

VOL. I. — 2


18  ACONITUM.

poral  arteries,'*.— Cold  perspiration  over  the  head,  tt.  [270.] — The  forehead
covered  with  cold  sweat,  t.

JEyes.—Sta,riBg  eyes,'  tt.— Glassy  eyes,  1— Bloodshot,"  <.— Protruded,"
t. — Protruding  and  swollen,  t. — Protruding  and  fixed,  tt. — Distorted,^*  t. —
(Distorted,  with  gnashing  the  teeth  about  midnight,".) — Convulsed,  t.  [280.]
— The  look  becomes  wandering,  t. — The  eyes  turn  upward,  so  that  only  the
whites  are  seen,  t. — Eyes  very  movable,  t. — Sparkling  (19  d.). — Dimness  of
eyes,^. — *Eyes  become  yellowish,  <.■ — *Eyes  dull,  encircled  by  blue  rings,  t. —
Eyes  seem  tightly  constricted,  t. — *  Inflammation  with  lachrymation,  which
causes  so  much  pain  and  fright  that  he  wishes  for  death,'". — (Cold  feel-
ing in  eyes  in  open  air,'.) — Burrving  in  eyes,  twitching,  and  vision  of  sparks,'^.
[290.] — Burning  and  itching  of  the  eyes  and  lids,  makes  him  rub  them ;
the  eyes  are  very  sensitive  to  the  air,  but  not  to  the  light,'^ — *Inflamma-
tion  extremely  painful  (chemosis),^. — Burning,  and  pressure  in  left  eye  and
over  the  brow,*. — Burning,  first  in  one  then  in  other ,^'  t. — Sensation  as  if
eyes  were  much  swollen  (5  h.),'". — Pressure  in  eyes,  most  felt  on  looking
down  or  around,  with  heat  in  them,^. — Sensitiveness  of  ejes,^^.—* Sticking
and  tearing  pains  around  the  eyes,  especially  worse  nights,°. — Lachryma-
tion, more  particularly  in  the  evening  and  at  night ;  *iAe  edges  of  lids
are  sore,  red,  and  inflamed  (1  d.).— Lachrymation  with  congh,^l — Prick-
ing and  biting  in  lids  like  beginning  coryza,  evenings,''^.  [300.] — Dryness
of  upper  lid,  almost  causing  a  pressure  in  eyes  (4  h.),'. — Hard,  red  swell-
ing of  right  upper  lid,  with  feeling  of  tension,  especially  in  the  morning,^
— Slight  irritation  of  the  edges  of  the  lids,  which  were  almost  raw  from  the
violence  of  the  lachrymation,''. — Marked  pain  at  right  internal  canthus,
dull  and  deepseated,^". — Several  times  repeated  sensations  as  if  left  upper
lid  was  long,  heavy,  and  hung  down  as  if  paralyzed  (though  it  looked  natu-
ral),".— Heaviness  of  lids,  they  seem  too  heavy  on  raising  them,". — Bough
feeling,  as  of  sand  in  left  internal  canthus  (13  b.,  lasted  two  minutes),^. — *Lids
swollen  hard,  with  tensive  sensation;  they  are  red  and  hot,°. — Lids  convul-
sively closed  as  from  irresistible  sleepiness,'^. — Conjunctiva,  especially  to-
ward internal  canthus,  highly  injected,  t.  [310.] — *The  balls  feel  enlarged,
as  if  coming  out  of  the  orbit,  and  stretching  the  lids,^'. — Pain  in  the  interior
of  the  eye,  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  out  when  the  lids  are  opened ;  the  pain
extends  to  the  supraorbital  region  and  interior  of  the  brain  (21  h.),^'. — Sen-
sitiveness of  upper  part  of  ball  on  moving  it,  as  if  it  were  pressed  out  of  the
orbit ;  relieved  by  stooping ;  changed  to  a  dull  pain  on  bending  the  head
back,". — Pressure  on  upper  lid,  and  sensation  as  if  the  ivhole  ball  would  be
pressed  into  the  orbit,  which  makes  the  eye  pain  as  if  crushed  ,'l — Severe  pres-
sure, sometimes  stinging  or  burning  in  the  front  part  of  the  ball,™. — Sense  of
pressure  in  the  balls,'^^ — Fine  sticking  pains  in  the  balls  during  the  course  of
a  half  hour,  momentary  (4h.),''. — Pupils  dilated  (immediately),',  "<. — Pu-
pils dilated ;  right  nearly  oval,  left  irregularly  polygonal,  t. — Pupils  con-
trMted,'\'\t.  [320.]— *P/io<o;?/w6ia  (6-12  h.),'.— Cannot  look  at  strongly
lighted  objects  without  blinking,  t. — Sight  weak  (long  lasting),  t. — Eyes
dazzled  on  coming  to  consciousness,  t. — Sharp  vision,'. — Pbotomania,  desire
for  bright  light  (3  h.),'. — Warmth  and  undulation  in  eyes  with  involuntary
half  closing  the  lids,  and  a  feeling  as  if  it  were  too  dark  to  read  in  a  well-
lighted  room  (12  d.),'^ — As  though  she  were  removed  from  a  narrow  dark
room  to  a  light  one ;  after  bleeding,  t. — Dimness  of  vision  (several). —  Vision
as  through  a  veil,'^, "'.  [330.] — Dim  vision  with  wide-open  eyes,  t. — Cloudiness
came  before  vision,  t. — Loss  of  vision,  tt. — Cloudiness  of  vision  with  sense
of  giddiness,'®. — On  going  out  in  the  evening  from  a  half  dark  room  into


ACONITUM.  19

the  street ;  flickering  before  eyes,  the  lamp-light  quivered  ;  he  could  with
difficulty  see  the  passers ;  he  seemed  to  see  worse  at  a  short  than  at  a
long  distance  ;  he  became  anxious  and  dizzy  on  giCcount  of  it,^\ — Flicker-
ing before  eyes,"  t. — Black  spots  floating  before  the  sight,'. — An  intensely
white  and  bright  spot,  about  the  size  of  a  small  plate,  appeared  before  the
eyes  both  when  shut  and  opened ;  it  was  impossible  to  detennine  before
which  eye  it  was,  though  it  seemed  more  nearly  in  axis  of  right  eye :  it
had  the  refulgence  of  highly  burnished  silver,  this  gradually  changed  to  a
straw  or  light  golden  color,  then  the  whole  field  of  vision  became  of  a  deli-
cate lilac  hue,  which  disappeared  to  give  place  to  the  same  spot,  which  was
now  of  a  beautiful  and  bright  azure ;  the  whole  lasted  one  half  hour,".

Ears. — Burning,  itching,  and  darting  in  both  ears  while  yawning,  worse
in  the  evening  and  in  open  air,  better  after  eating,''^ — Tickling  sensation
in  right  ear  as  if  a  worm  were  crawling  in  it,\  [340.] — Acute  stitch  in  right
meatus  externus,'*. — Tearing  in  left  ear,*. — Pressure  in  ears,  t. — Pains  in
left  ear,°^ — *Pains  in  right  ear^^. — An  occasional  burning  pain  in  left  ear
and  upper  jaw  while  perspiring,^ — Pain  behind  left  ear,  as  from  pressure
with  the  thumb,*. — Pain  just  below  right  ear,^'. — Sensation  of  swelling  on
the  bone  around  the  external  ear,^^. — Feeling  as  if  a  drop  of  water  were  in
left  ear,'".  [350.] — Sensation  as  if  something  stopped  up  the  left  ear,^. —
Sensation  as  if  something  lay  before  the  ear,^l — ^Roaring  in  ears ;  great
sensitiveness  to  noise,  t.- — Roaring  iu  ears,  (. — Ringing  in.  ears  (10  min.,
29),™  t. — Humming  in  ears,^'. — Humming,  hissing  noise  in  ears,  t. — Con-
tinual dull  buzzing  before  ears,  and  then  faintness,'. — Intense  singing  in
the  ears,*'. — *External  ear  red,  hot,  swollen,  painfully  sensitive,".

Nose. — Feels  tightly  constricted,  t.  [360.] — Stupefying  compression  at
the  root,^. — ^Marked  pain  between  orbits  at  the  base  of  nose,^'. — Furuncles
at  the  ti.p,^°. — Nose  feels  quite  dry,'°. — *Epistaxis,'. — Blows  much  bright  red
blood  from  nose  for  several  successive  mornings,'"'. — Frequent  violent  sneez-
ing,^*.— Frequent  sneezings  with  shootings  in  chest,'*.— Sneezings  frequent,
violent,  with  pain  in  abdomen,^^ — Sneezing  frequent,  profuse  nasal  flux,
and  sense  of  extreme  stuffing  in  thehead,'^  [370.] — Forcible  sneezing,'^ —
Sneezing  interrupted  by  pain  in  left  side  of  chest,^. —  Clear  fluid  flows  from
nosej^, '', '°. — Threatening  coryza  ;  one  or  two  hot  clear  drops  fall  from  nose,
attended  by  slight  lachrymation,'^ — Attack  of  catarrh  and  coryza  (8-12  h.),'.
Fluent  coryza  in  the  morning,". — (Attack  of  coryza,'^) — Severe  coryza,^,  ^',  ^.
— Sensation  as  if  coryza  were  about  to  commence,'",  . — Discharge  of  thick
yellow  mucus  from  nose  as  in  old  coryza,'*.  [380.] — *Great  sensibility  of
the  olfactory  nerve ;  bad  smells  have  a  powerful  effect,^.

Face. — *  Countenance  pale  and  anxious,"^. — General  sickly  appearance,  t.
— Idvid  and  ghastly,  t. — Pale  and  altered,  t. — Extreme  paleness,  t. — Hip-
pocratic,  1 — Uneasy 'expression,  t. — *Pale,  ivith  expression  of  anxiety  and
restlessness  (6  h.),  t. — Appearance  of  fright  and  imbecility,  t.  [390.] — Ex-
pression of  fright,  t. — *Livid  countenance,  t. — Face  blue,  like  that  of  a
strangled  person," — Livid  purple  with  white  blotches,  t. — On  looking  at
herself  in  the  glass  the  face  seemed  blue  and  indistinct,  t. — Bluish  face,
black  lips,". — Blue  lips,  t. — Face  red,  i. — *Red  and  hot  (several). — Flushed
face,'^.  [400.] — *  Redness  and  heat  of  both  cheeks,  with  a  sensation  of  the
laee  growing  large,'^. — Glowing  cheeks,'^. —  Glowing  heat  in  face  (several).
— Face  hot,  especially  in  the  evening  (several). — Face  hot,  hands  and  feet
cold  (19  d.). — Increased  warmth  of  cheeks,": — While  the  left  cheek  seemed
swollen  and  hot  it  is  really  cool  to  the  touch,^^ — Puffy  swelling  of  the  face
and  forehead,^ — Cold  sensation  in  face,  though  it  is  hot  to  the  touch  (sev-


20  ACONITUM.

eral). — Face  seemed  to  he  swelling,  tt.  [410.] — Sensation  of  swelling  in  fore-
head and  face,  especially  left  side,". — *  The  face,  red  when  lying,  becomes
deathly  pale  on  rising  up,°. — *  Cheeks  red  and  pale  alternately,  or  one  red  the
otlier  pale,°. — Warm  perspiration  on  face,*'. — *Sweat  on  the  eheelcs,  whichever
side  is  lain  on^. — Sweat  on  the  upper  lip  under  the  nose,'. — Face  covered
with  cold  clammy  sweat,  t. — Cold  sweat  stood  on  his  brow,  t. — Pain  in
zygomatic  process,  as  from  an  internal  ulcer,'. — Shooting  pain  from  right
supraorbital  ridge,  branching  out  upwards  across  the  forehead  to  the  hairy
scalp,  sideways  to  temples,  and  downwards  to  the  cheeks  and  into  two  or
tluee  teeth  ;  increased  by  pres.sure,  and  becoming  so  excessively  violent  to-
ward evening,  when  it  was  accompanied  by  constant  cough,  that  all  other
symptoms  were  thrown  into  the  shade;  the  next  day  the  supraorbital  ridge
was  swollen  (15  d.),'".  [420.] — Pain  in  face,  t. — *  Creeping  pain  in  cheehs^. —
*Sensation  as  if  cheeks  were  swollen  to  double  their  size,^. — Crawlings  in  right
cheek,^^ — Crawling  in  face,  and  sensation  of  burning  in  skin,  t. — Violent
faceache,^'. — Peculiar  drawing  sensation  in  the  cheeks,  upper  jaw,  fore-
head ;  grows  more  intense,  and  becomes  continuous  and  violent,  t. — Very
violent  pain  in  the  jaws,  as  if  they  would  fall  off,  causing  him  to  put  his
hands  to  them,".— Pain  in  the  maxillary  joint,  behind  the  zygoma  while
chewing,\ — Stinging  and  drawing  in  left  upper  and  lower  jaw,^l  [430.] —
Shooting  jerks  in  the  under  jaw,'. — Pressive  aching  in  the  under  jaw,'. —
Involuntary  pressure  of  the  under  jaw  against  the  upper,  with  flow  of  sa-
liva into  the  mouth."'. — Pressive  and  digging  pain  in  chin,^^ — Itching  and
formication  of  the  face,'"'. — Tickling  on  face,  t. — Peculiar  tickling  on  the
face,"". — Face  almost  insensible, i. — No  feeling  in  face,  t. — Most  remarkable
sensation  of  distortion,  t.  [440.] — Tivitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  t,
etc. — Distortion  of  the  facial  muscles,". — Continued  distortion  of  face,  t. —
Convulsive  contraction  of  face,  t. — Jaws  and  face  rigid,  t. — Heat-rash  on
the  forehead,^^ — Itching  pimples  on  the  upper  lip  (24  h.),'.  [450.] — *Lips
black}*. — Lips  swollen,  inflamed,  t. — Burning  of  lips  with  sensation  of  swell-
ing,''°. — Burning  of  lips  and  tongue,  as  after  eating  pepper  or  smoking  (sev-
eral).— Lips  aud  interior  of  mouth  burning,  painful,  and  inflamed,™. — Burn-
ing and  numbness  of  lips  and  mouth,  tt. — Lips  blue,  t. — Heat  and  tingling,
followed  by  numbness  of  lips  and  tongue," — Feeling  of  the  most  strange
distortion  of  countenance  at  times,  as  if  a  single  muscle  had  bulged  out  to
the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  then  as  if  the  whole  jaw  was  thrust  to  one  side,
as  in  partial  dislocation ;  at  other  times  as  if  the  lower  jaw  were  pushed
up  or  raised  into  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  conveying  the  idea  that  the  face
must  look  like  that  of  an  old  man  who  has  lost  all  his  teeth,  and  in  conse-
quence has  his  lower  jaw  thrown  forwards  and  upwards  (no  visible  change),".
— Several  times  sensation  as  if  all  the  muscles  of  the  face  were  firmly  but
not  spasmodically  contracted,  attended  with  a  numb,  heavy,  paralytic  feeling
of  whole  face ;  similar  sensations  simultaneously  in  both  arms,  from  shoul-
ders to  the  tips  of  fingers,  conveying  the  idea  that  the  arms  were  paralyzed,
though  they  obeyed  the  will  perfectly,*". — Frequently  repeated  sensation  as
if  the  lower  and  anterior  part  of  the  face  were  firmly  compressed  from  both
sides  by  a  heavy  but  not  painful  weight,  until  the  idea  became  irresistible
that  that  portion  of  the  face  was  very  thin  (no  change  of  features  noticed),*".
31outh. — *8ensibility  of  the  teeth  to  open  air,^'. — Cold  feeling  in  the  in-
cisors,"'. [460.]— Pain  in  teeth,'^— Shooting  pain  in  various  teeth  (36  h.),'. —
Shooting  pain  in  right  molars,^^ — Sticking  and  drawing  in  right  back  teeth.'l
— Teeth  of  right  side  ache,"'. — Pressive  toothache  in  left  upper  jaw,'. —
Teeth  feel  as  if  they  would  fall  out,  tt. — Blunted  sensation  in  teeth,'". *Th'rob-


ACONITUM.  21

Wng,  one-sided  toothache,  with  redness  of  the  cheek,  etc.,°. — Teeth  spas-
modically clenched,  U.  [470.] — ^Trismus,  tt. — ""Tongue  and  lips  swollen,'^.
— Sensation  as  if  the  tongue  %uere  swo^/e?i  (several). — T.  feels  too  large  for  the
mouth,  t. — T.  seems  to  have  grown  thicker,  t. — T.  feels  as  if  getting  longer,  t.
— T.  white,  thick,  cold,  t. — T.  furred  yellow,  t. — T.  furred  moist  with  diy
mouth  (19  d.). — "^Burning  in  T.,'*, '',  etc. — Burning  in  tip  of  T.,  and  in  li[),5,
t. — Burning  long-lasting,'*.  [480.] — *  Burning  vesicles  on  T.,^. — Burning  on
sides  of  T.,  t. — Burning  increases  in  intensity  for  four  hours,^. — Burning  in
T.  after  eating,'". — Burning  violent,  t. — Slight  burning  under  the  T.,^^ — Fine
penetrating  stitches  in  the  point  of  the  T.,\ — Momentai-y  flying  stitches  in  the
T.,  with  salivation,'^ — Occasional  single  stitches  in  right,  under  surface  of
T.,''. — Pricking  sensation  at  the  back  of  T.,  as  from  pepper,  with  saliva-
tion,\  [490.] — Peculiar  tingling  on  T.  extends  to  lips,  t. — Biting  sensation
in  T.  toward  tip,''. — Tingling  in  T,  and  jaws,  and  burning,  so  that  the
teeth  seem  to  wabble,'. — -Momentary  tingling,  numbness  at  tip  of  T.,''^ —
Peculiar  crawling  sensation  on  T.  as  from  peppermint,  extends  to  lips  and
lower  part  of  palate,  t. — Tickling  on  T.,  then  on  lips,  t. — Numbness,  ting-
ling, and  sense  of  distension  of  T.  and  lips,". — Numbness  of  T.  and  mouth
and  lips,  tt. — Transient  paralysis  of  T.,'. — *Sense  of  dryness  and  rawness  in
middle  of  T.  without  thirst  (1  h.),^  [500.]— Numbness  in  T.  with  difficult
swallowing,  t. — Cramp-like  sensation  at  root  -of  T.,  t. — Sensation  as  of  cold
air  passing  over  the  T.  (several). — Cold  T.,  as  in  a  cholera  patient,  t. — T.
felt  like  leather,  I. — T.  moved  continually  around  the  interior  of  the  mouth  ;
at  times  it  was  thrust  out  beyond  the  lips,  and  moved  from  side  to  side,  t.
— In  the  mouth  biting,  burning  feeling,  t. — Burning  in  mouth,  t. — Burning
from  lips  to  pharynx,*^ — *Dryness  of  Mouth,','"'!  [510,] — Dryness  and
coolness  of  mouth  without  thirst,*, — Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  front  of  the
mouth,'. — Dry  sensation,  first  in  lips,  then  in  interior  of  mouth,  with  heat
mountmg  from  chest  to  head  (without  redness  of  the  cheeks),'. — Con-
vulsions in  the  mouth,  t. — Mouth  drawn  to  one  side,  t. — Copious  fknv  of
saliva,'^,  %  etc. — Flow  of  frothy  saliva,^'-. — The  secretion  of  saliva  compels
him  to  swallow  often,". — Increased  secretion  of  clear  watery  saliva  (sev-
eral). [520.] — Saliva  mixed  with  red  streaks,  with  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth
(16  days  after  leaving  off  the  drug),'''. — Soreness  of  the  orifices  of  the  sali-
vary ducts,  as  if  they  were  corroded,'. — *Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,^. — In-
tensely bitter  taste,  t. — Bitter  taste  by  day,'^. — (Bitter  taste  with  loss  of
appetite,  and  pain  in  chest  and  under  false  ribs,'^) — (Peppery  taste,'*.) —
Strong  taste  of  pepper,  t. — -Peppery  taste  in  pharynx,''^ — Astringent  taste,'*.
[530.] — Sourish  taste,  with  loss  of  appetite,''. — Flat, nauseous, sweet  taste;
compels  hawking  up  tough  mucus,  and  then  swallowing  it,'". — Nauseous
taste  relieved  by  eating;  returns  after  eating,". — Insipid  fishy  taste,  as
from  stagnant  water,'. — It  seems  as  though  her  mouth  were  filled  with  air
having  the  taste  of  rotten  eggs,". — Taste  and  sensations  changed ;  in  spot.?
there  is  a  feeling  of  fuzziness,  t. — Things  that  formerly  tasted  strong  and
good  are  now  tasteless,". — *Speech  stammering,". — No  power  of  articula-
tion; he  uttered  only  unintelligible  sounds,  t. — She  lost  all  power  of
speech,  t.

Throat. — [540.] — Uvula  swollen  and  elongated ;  *the  fauces  and  phar-
ynx injected  dark  red ;  feeling  as  if  an  angular  many-pointed  body  were
sticking  in  the  throat;  prickling  burning  in  the  palate,  throat,  and  along
the  Eustachian  tube,  increased  by  swallowing,  with  oppression  of  the  chest,
headache,  and  increased  flow  of  saliva ;  the  throat  symptoms  were  increased
by  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  relieved  after  eating,". — Soft  palate,  ton-


22  ACONITUM.

sils,  and  fauces  reddened,  with  feeling  of  warmth  and  dryness  of  lips,^. —
*Redness  of  the  soft  palate  and  uvula,^''. — Pain  in  throat,'".— Disagreeable
scratching  in  throat,  provoking  dry  cough,'*. — Scraping  in  throat  with
difficult  swallowing,^^ — Scraping  sensation  ceases  on  clearing  throat,^*. —
Drawing  from  the  side  of  the  throat  to  behind  the  ears,'". — Fine_  stinging
sensation  in  the  back  of  the  throat,  as  from  the  small  pricking  hairs  of  the
seed  of  the  dog  rose  (Rosa  caniua)  (1  h.),\ — A  sticking  choking  sensation
in  a  small  spot  on  left  side  of  throat,  worse  when  swallowing  and  speaking,
but  felt  also  when  at  rest ;  after  one-fourth  hour  it  passed  into  the  right
side,  while  the  painful  sensation  in  the  left  side  ceased ;  it  remained  there
one-fourth  hour,  then  disappeared,''.  [550.] — Creeping  in  pharynx,'. — Tran-
sient pressure  and  tension  in  the  soft  palate  and  fauces;  as  if  these  parts
were  swollen,'", ''. — Slight  congestion  of  fauces,  '■"'. — The  throat  seemed  to  be
growing  narrow,  t. — Constrictive  sensation  in  the  back  of  throat,  as  from
astringents,'. — Warmth  and  constriction  of  fauces  (several). — ^Burning'  in
throat,  tt. — Burning  in  glottis  and  gullet,^. — Burning  and  numbness  of
throat,'^  t. — Sensation  of  burning  of  throat  and  stomach  with  inclination  to
vomit,  t. — *Burning  and  fine  stingingpaininbackof  throat^.  [560.] — Burn-
ing sensation  in  pharynx,^'^.— Heat  in  pharynx,'''. — Burning  sensation  in  back
of  throat,  causing  him  to  hawk  up  (14  h.),'*. — Fine  burning  in  fauces,'". —
Burning  and  dry  sensation  in  the  soft  palate  and  pharynx,  not  disappear-
ing even  after  eating,  and  frequent  empty  swallowing,". — Complains  of
throat  and  burning,  along  oesophagus,  t. — Sensation  of  heat  and  constriction
in  throat,  t. — Constriction  ofthroatj^  t. — Throat  seems  to  swell,  with  feeling
of  a  quantity  of  mucus  there  that  he  could  not  get  rid  of  by  hawking,". —
Scraping  and  constriction  of  throat,".  [570.]— Constriction  in  the  oesopha-
gus, not  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water,  with  dryness  of  the  palate,". —
Scratching  and  constriction  in  the  uvula  and  so  ft  palate,  causing  constant  hawk-
ing and  spitting,  even  amounting  to  an  irritation  to  vomit,'^. — Sensation  as  if
the  palate  had  fallen  down  and  rested  on  the  tongue,  forcing  one  to  hawk
and  spit  constantly  (for  several  hours),",'". — Dry  feeling  in  palate  and  pos-
terior nares,^*. — Dryness  in  oesophagus  with  great  thirst ;  the  water  seemed
not  to  moisten  the  parts  it  passed  over,". — '^Feeling  of  dryness,  as  if  some-
thing had  stuck  in  the  throat,'^. — Dryness  of  throat  increased  by  tobacco
smoke,  t. — Raw  feeling  in  throat,  with  frequent  secretion  of  mucus  from
the  larynx,". — Raw  scraping  feeling  at  back  of  throat  with  constant  desire
to  hawk  up,  lasting  12  hours,'*. — Raw  sensation  in  the  pharynx,'^  [580.]
— Rawness  in  throat,  especially  in  posterior  nares,  which  compels  him  to
clear  the  throat  frequently,  as  if  very  tough  mucus  extended  through  the
choanse  over  the  soft  palate  and  uvula,'^ — Pressure  in  throat,  especially
during  empty  deglutition,". — Inability  to  swallow,  t. — ^Several  sticking
pains  in  posterior  fauees,^\ — Pricking  in  right  Eustachian  tube,  compelling
him  to  swallow,'^ — Strong  peppery  feeling  in  throat,  t. — Tickling  in  phar-
ynx, t. — Throat  almost  insensilDle,  t. — He  frequently  pulled  at  the  throat,
t. — Coldness  down  the  oesophagus,  as  after  peppermint,".

Stomach. — [590.] — Anorexia,'. — Appetite  completely  gone,  unalle
to  take  solid  food  (1  d.),'l — Long-continued  anorexia  and  aversion,'. —
*Loathing  of  food  and  qualmishness  (i  h.),'.— She  will  eat  nothing,'. — *iV(^
appetite^^t.,*'^,  etc. — No  appetite,  food  creates  nausea,'^ — Uncommonly  good
appetite,''. — During  the  day  appetite  very  much  increased,  at  noon  and
evening  enormous  ;  he  ate  to  distension  and  then  felt  hungry,*". — Hunger,".
[600.] — Lively  sensation  of  hunger,  which  is  renewed  even  after  eating,^". —
*Great  thirst,",  'I — Thirst  for  beer,  which  lies  heavy  on  the  stomach,'.


ACONITUM.  23

(Hiccup  after  eating  and  drinking,'.)— (Hiccup,  mornings,  long  lasting,".)
— *Hiccup  painful,". — Eructations,  t. — Eructations  empty,'^,  ";  after  eat-
ing, t. ;  with  taste  of  the  drug,"',  '^ ;  of  air  (several). — Ineffectual  attempts
to  eructate,  he  wishes  to  but  caDnot,\^Eruetations  of  air  with  nausea
going  off  after  breakfast,^". — Risings  of  sweetish  water,  like  water-brash,
with  noises  in  the  ears,'".  [610.] — Risings  of  sweetish  water  with  nausea,''.
— Wate^-brash,'^ — -Risings  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  amounting  te
nausea,  fasting,'". — Scraping  from  the  pit  of  stomach  to  throat  with  nausea,
and  sinking  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  water  were  about  to  flow  into  the
mouth,'^.^— Nausea,'', '",  t,  etc. — Nausea  and  vomiting,  t. — (*Nausea,  vomit-
ing, thirst,  general  heat,  and  profuse  sweat  with  flow  of  urine,'^^.) — Nausea,
loathing,  and  geperal  sick  feeling,  with  painful  heaviness  of  the  limbs  (19
d.). — Nausea,  and  sinking  in  pit  of  stomach;  worse  while  sitting;  almost
entirely  removed  by  walking  (immediately),'^. — Flesh  broth  nauseates
him,".  [620.] — Nausea  while  walking  in  open  air,\ — Nausea,  first  in  pit
of  stomach,  then  under  the  sternum,  lastly  in  the  throat  without  flow  of
saliva,'. — Nausea  and  sinking,  qualmishness  {i  h.),'. — Nausea,  as  after
eating  some  disagreeably  sweet  or  fat  substance  (1  h.),'. — Nausea  relieved
by  eating,  with  sweet  taste,  and  hawking  up  phlegm,"". — Felt  sick,  but  could
not  vomit,  t. — Faint,  sick  feeling,  without  definite  nausea,". — InclinatioB
to  vomit  with  much  diarrhoea,". — Violent  vomiting,  t. — (*  Vomiting  of  lum-
6nci,".)  [630.] — Vomiting  twice  of  greenish-gray  watery  fluid  (?>A  d.),™. —
v.,  followed  by  violent  thirst,'^ — V.  very  violent,  first  of  food,  then  of
mucus,  frothy,  lasting  an  hour,  with  burning  of  lips,  mouth,  and  throat,
soon  extending  to  stomach,  t. — Bilious  V.,  t. — ■*  Green  V.,  t. — *V.  of  green
bile  (1  h.),'*. —  V.  mucMs,  tt. — V.  of  all  the  food,  t. — *V.  after  each  drinh,  t.
—  V.  of  green  masses  with  diarrhoea  of  same  appearance,  t.  [640.] — V.  of
fetid,  black,  bilious  mucus  (with  relief),". — V.  artificially  excited,  only
temporarily  restored  the  patient  from  his  state  of  syncope,'. — *  V-  with  anx-
iety,^^. — V.  with  great  disposition  to  stupor,  t. — V.  with  stools,  accompanied
by  cardialgia  and  violent  colic,  t. — After  repeated  V.  and  many  stools  he
still  complained  of  a  feeling  as  if  a  cold  stone  lay  in  the  stomach,^^. — V.  of
mucus  mixed  with  blood,  three  or  four  successive  days,".  [650.] — V.  of
bloody  mucus,  followed  by  profuse  perspiration,". — *V.  blood,". — Food  dis-
tressed after  eating,*". — After  dinner  heartburn  and  pain  in  stomach,"". —
Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  after  eating,^'. — While  eating  pressure  in  stom-
ach, as  if  she  had  eaten  something  indigestible,  with  feeling  of  warmth
and  tenderness  in  pit  of  stomach,"".— Pains  in  stomaeh,^^,  t.,",  etc. — Spas-
modic pains,  t. — Pressive  stomachache,*,",''- — Pressive  pain  in  pit  of  stom-
ach changes  into  constriction  of  the  chest  (2i  h.),'.  [660.] — *Pressure,  as
from  a  stone  in  pit  of  S.  going  through  to  the  back,  with  a  squeezing  sen-
sation as  from  a  strain,  like  stifl^hess,"'. — Sense  of  extreme  oppression  at  pit
of  S.  all  day,  as  of  excessive  repletion,  feeling  as  if  nothing  could  pass
further  than  the  stomach,"*. — Pressive  pain  at  pit  of  S.  while  sitting,  walk-
ing, and  standing,". — Pressive  pain  in  stomach,  as  from  a  weight  (1  i  h.),'.
— Pressive  tensive  pain,  as  from  fulness  or  an  oppressive  weight  in  stomach
and  hypochondria  (IJ  h.),'. — Pressive  and  swollen  feeling  in  pit  of  S.,^'. —
Pressure  in  stomach  with  splashing  in  bowels  (5-10  d.),"". — Pressive  sensa-
tion in  pit  of  S.  and  upper  abdomen,"'. — Sense  of  weight  in  stomach,^^. —
Sense  of  weight  in  stomach  with  constriction  in  throat,  and  nausea,"'.  [670.]
— Pressive  and  burning  pain  along  the  oesophagus  down  into  pit  of  S.,"'. —
Sense  of  distension  and  pressure  in  pit  of  S.,"'. — Feeling  as  if  the  stomach
were  alternately  distended  and  collapsed ;  the  hand  laid  on  it  feels  dis-


24  ACONITUM.

tinctly  the  rising  and  falling,". — Sticking  and  tension  in  epigastrium,  as
from  flatulent  colic,^". — Tensive  sensation  in  pit  of  S.,  relieved  by  frequent
offensive  eructations,^. — Felt  like  a  ball  in  pit  of  S.,  that  rising  up  spread
a  cool  air  over  vertex  and  occiput,". — Contractive  feeling  in  stomach,  as  from
an  a5tringent,\— Feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomaeh,'l — Heartburn,  t. — Heart-
burn all  day,^.  [680.] — Burning  in  S.,  t. — Burning  and  numbness  in  8.,t. —
*Burn:ing  Jeellng  from  stomach  up  through  the  cesopliagus  to  the  mouth,^,  ^^ —
Warmth  in  stomach  with  sweat,  t. —  Warm  feeling  in  stomach, ^^,*\ — Feeling
of  anxiety  in  pit  of  S.,  especially  in  a  warm  room,^". — Swelling  of  stomach
region,  *w;A.ic/i  is  sensitive  to  toueh,-\ — Pain  in  pit  of  S.,as  if  it  were  swollen
internally,  with  loss  of  appetite  and  dyspucea,\ — Anxious  pulsation  and
shooting  in  pit  of  S.  with  burning  in  umbilical  region,  etc.,^. — '^Stomach
sensitive  to  touch,  t.

Abdomen,. — 1690.] — *Pressivepain,  as  from  aweight  in  the  hypochon-
dria (12  h.),'. — ''Feeling  of  violent  constriction  in  the  hypochondria,^. — Sensa-
tion of  anxiety  in  the  hypochondria."  ''^. — Pains  in  the  upper  abdomen  with
ineffectual  straining  at  stool  {several). — Stitches  in  the  liver  and  bowels  as
with  needles,^. —  Continued  constriction,  especially  in  the  right  hypochondrium,
not  permitting  a  deep  hreathj'^. — *Stitches  in  hepatic  region,  hindering  a  deep
breath,^^. — ''Pressure  in  the  hepatic  region,  obstructing  respiration,  followed
by  pinching  bellyache  above  the  navel,\ — Violent  jerks  in  the  hepatic  re-
gion, taking  away  the  breath,^'. — Constrictive  pain  in  the  region  of  the
gall-bladder,  preventing  respiration,  on  sitting,^\  [700.] — Shooting  in  the
spleen  while  walking,^^ — A  sharp  stitch  under  the  ribs  on  the  right  side  on
laughing  aloud,^'. — The  upper  abdomen  below  the  ribs  is  the  seat  of  a  tense
painful  swelling,". — Dull  stitches  under  the  ribs  on  the  left  side  on  inspir-
ing,^".— '''Burning  in  the  umbilical  region, V^ ''° — Burning  sensation  in
umbilical  region,  which  rapidly  traversed  it  and  spread  toward  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  with  anxious  pulsation  and  shooting  there ;  after  a  short  time
came  a  rigor  over  the  whole  body,  whereupon  the  hot  feeling  and  the  pain-
ful sensation  in  the  umbilical  region  disappeared  (IJ  h.),^. — Pinching  sen-
sation in  vimbilical  region,''. — Clawing  and  scraping  in  umbilical  region,"'.
— Pinching  in  umbilical  region,  as  if  from  nausea,  followed  by  slight  diar-
rhoea,'^ — Drawing  bellyache  on  both  sides  of  navel,  also  excited  by  bend-
ing forward,'.- — Compression  of  the  navel,  followed  immediately  by  inter-
mitting pressure,  like  jerks,  in  the  navel,''.  [710.] — A  painless  feeling
above  and  to  the  left  of  navel,  as  if  something  cold  (a  cold  finger)  were
pressing  from  within  outward,''. — Retraction  of  navel,  especially  in  the
morning  before  eating,'. — Flatident  colic  in  hypogastrium,  as  from  a  flatulent
purgative,''-. — *  Semdtiveness  of  lower  abdomen  to  touchy. — *  Abdomen  sensi-
tive, t. — ^Sensitiveness  of  abdomen  to  touch,  as  from  slight  peritoneal
inflammation  (6  d.).™. — Exceedingly  fine  prickings,  as  from  needles,  in  left
hypogastric  region,™. — Faint  sinking  feeling  in  lower  abdomen  (19  d.). —
Dartiugs  in  the  bowels,  as  from  needles,". — Cuttings  in  intestines,  which
extend  through  the  chest  toward  the  right  shoulder,  like  sharp  knife-thrnsts,
and  almost  make  him  cry  out,  during  stool,'^  [720.] — In  morning  in  bed  in-
tolerable (cutting)  pains  in  abdomen,  so  that  he  knows  not  what  to  do  with
himself,  he  tosses  about  the  bed  (16  h.),'. — ^Burning  in  abdomen,  t. — The
child  complains  of  pain  in  abdomen,  i. — Painful  tension  of  the  abdomen  with
borborygmus,  t. — *Great  swelling  of  abdomen,  which  is  painful  to  touch/^
—Drawing  pains  in  bowels  here  and  there,"".— The  flanks  more  tense,  painful,
and  felt  hard,".— Pressing  pain  in  parietes  of  abdomen,  first  right  then  left,
almost  typically  recurring  for  several  days,"*.— The  abdomen  swelled  as  if


ACONITUM.  25

he  had  dropsy ,^°. — ^The  abdomen  seemed  as  if  full  of  water".  [730.] — Ah-
domen  swelled,  distended  as  from  ascites,*, '", — The  recti  abdominis  stretched
as  hard  as  a  boal•d,■'^ — Colicky,  distensive  stretching,  and  pressive  pains  in
abdomen  as  from  flatulence,^ — Violent  colic,  i. — Slight  gripings,^^.— Gripes
with  swelling  of  the  abdomen,  relieved  by  expulsion  of  flatus  (several). —
Fine  sharp  pains  in  different  parts  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  flatus,'^ — Pains
in  abdomen,  as  from  flatulence,''^'- — Very  hot  flatus  (9  h.),'. — Painful
rumbling  in  bowels,  and  discharge  of  flatus  with  relief  (19  d.).  [740.] —
Rumbling  in  bowels,  t.,^. — Rumbling  after  eating,  t. — Rumbling  and  grum-
bling all  night,^ — Rumbling  and  grumbling  with  sensation  of  rawness,''. —
Grumbling  fermentation  in  abdomen,'. — Rumbling  and  gurgling,  relieved
by  expulsion  of  flatus,'". — With  shooting  and  contractive  pains  here  and
there,''". — Gurgling,  with  itching  in  rectum,  provoking  scratching,  and  call
to  stool,"". — Loud  gurgling  in  lower  abdomen,  as  after  a  purgative,  with
sensitiveness  in  sacral  region,™.— Weakness  of  bowels,  as  from  abuse  of
purgatives,'.  [750.] — The  intestines  feel  paralyzed  and  unable  to  expel
their  contents ;  this  sensation  is  observed  more  in  the  region  of  the  trans-
verse colon  than  in  the  rectum,  notwithstanding  the  stool  when  discharged
is  not  unusually  hard,''^ — -Abdomen  symptoms  are  relieved  after  warm
soup,"?,"'.

ilectum  and  Amis, — Pain  in  rectum  (1  h.),'. — Burning  and  heat
in  haemorrhoids  (4  d.),"°. — Frequent  itching  in  rectum,  with  discharge  of
white,  hot  mucus,  for  sixteen  days  after  leaving  oiF  the  drug,"". — Itching
and  pressure  in  the  hsemorrhoidal  vessels,"". — Bleeding  haemorrhoids,'.—
(An  itching  in  anus  associated  with  hsemorrhoidal  pressure,  disappeared ;
curative,"".) — Violent,  very  painful  contractions  in  the  anus;  stitches
through  anus  and  urethra,". — Shootings  and  pressure  in  anus^.  [760.] —
Sensation  as  of  warm,  fluid  escaping  from  aww,?,,  "".^Transient  paralysis  of
the  anus,  involuntary  evacuation,'. — Involuntary  stools,"^ — Thinking  to
pass  merely  flatus,  there  occurs  an  unexpected  evacuation  of  thin  faeces
(4  h.),'. — Urine  and  faeces  involuntary  (in  convulsive  fit),  t. — In  his  faint
he  had  some  evacuation  of  the  bowels,'*.

Stool. — *  Watery  diarrhcea,^. — Three  thin  watery  stools  of  dissolved
offensive  faeces  (19  a.)  ;  with  slight  bellyache  (19  a.)  ;  with  grumbling  in
abdomen,  and  faint  sinking  feeling  (19  a.). — Three  thin  fluid  stools  with
some  cuttings  in  abdomen  (2d  d.),  (19  b.). — Diarrhoea  of  thin  fluid,  t. —
Between  6  and  7  a.m.  an  urgent  desire  for  stool  and  copious  discharge  of
soft  feeces  with  straining  (19  d.).  [770.] — Diarrhoea,  tt. — Painless  diarrhoea
preceded  by  pinching  about  the  navel,^". — Looseness  of  bowels,"". — Ten-
dency to  looseness  of  bowels,"'.— During  diarrhoea  copious  flow  of  urine  and
moderate  perspiration,'^ — Pasty  evacuation,^', '". — Soft  scanty  stool  three
or  four  times  daily,  accompanied  by  straining,'. — Nausea,  with  sweat,  at
times  before,  at  times  after,  the  diarrhoea,". — Several  very  white  stools  dur-
ing the  day,"". —  White  color  of  stool^. —  White  fceees  and  red  urine,^.  [780.]
Oi-een  stools,  t. — *Stools  like  chopped  spinach,". — *Slimy,  bloody  stools,
with  violent  pains  and  tenesmus  (constant  tearing  pinching  pains), °. — Black
and  very  fetid  stools  (after  an  injection),  t. — Constipation,  clay-colored
stools,"*. — Hard  evacuation  a  few  hours  earlier  than  usual,  requiring  a  great
effort,'. — Hard  stool  with  effort,*. — Very  hard  faeces,'',  '^ — Hard  stool  this
morning  (2d  d.),"'. — Constipated  bowels,"" ;  for  several  days,",  ^.

Urinary  Organs. — [790.] — A  slight  sensation  of  splashing  in  the
bladder  while  urinating,^ — Pain  in  the  bladder  while  walking  (4  h.),'. —
Burning  in  neck  of  bladder  when  not  urinating,'. — *  Tenesmus  of  the  neck  of


26  ACONITUM.

the  bladder  (4  h.)/. — Temporary  paralysis  of  r.eck  of  bladder,  involuntary
emission  of  urine,^ — (Pressure  on  the  bladder  with  retention  of  urine,".)—
Single  momentary  stitches  in  the  urethra  while  walking,^". — ^Burning  in
urethra  when  urinating,^. — Violent  shoots  in  glans  penis  while  uriuating,^.
—Shooting  and  pinching  pains  in  the  glans  penis  while  urinating,'.  [800.]
— Stingiug  crawling  in  the  glans,  with  subsequent  violent  stitches  in  the
meatus  urinarius,  t. — Frequent  urinatwn,''^,^^,  etc.— Frequent  urination,
the  urine  contaias  many  flocks  and  strings  of  mucus  (from  a  rheumatic  pa-
tient),'*.— Painful  urging  to  urinate,  she  must  urinate  very  often  because
the  bladder  speedily  fills  with  a  large  amount  of  clear  watery  urine,''. — Fre-
quent desire  to  urinate,'^ — Desire  to  urinate  on  touching  the  abdomen,'. —
*Anxious  desire  to  urinate  (4  h.),\ — =Desire  to  urinate,  the  urine  is  uncom-
monly scanty,  and  discharged  not  without  difficulty,  as  if  it  could  not  escape
well,  but  without  pain,  with  slight  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region  (from
the  smell  of  the),<'". — *Urine  passed  with  anxi-ety,'°. — *  Urine  passed  with  dif-
_/JoM%(dysuria),  (12-18  h.),'.  [810.] — Fainting  kind  of  feel  on  urinating,''^ —
Diuresis,  <.,'^. — (^Diuresis,  with  profuse  perspiration,  and  frequent  watery  di-
arrhoea with  colic,'^.) — Diuresis,  with  distortion  of  the  eyes,  and  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  feet,". — Diuresis,  and  constant  sweat,'l — Frequent  and
copious  flow  of  urine,'^ — Increased  discharge  of  urine,  which  deposits  blood
on  standing,'. — Frequent  passage  of  clear  watery  urine,^". — Scanty  discharge
of  urine,®. — Suppression  of  urine  (several).  [820.] — Suppression  of  urine,
with  pinching  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,". — Urine  scanty  and  dark,  t. —
Though  he  drank  much  during  the  night  he  made  no  water  (contrary  to
his  usual  habit) ;  next  morning  he  passed  red  urine  with  burning  along  the
urethra,^'. — *Urine  hot,  dark-colored, '^l — *  Urine  red,  with  white  foeces,': —
*  Uri7ie  dark-colored,^",  ®,  etc. — *  Urine  reddish  and  clear  (19  c). — Urine
brown,  passed  with  burning  sensations,  with  brickdust  deposit,'. — Brownish
colored  urine,  depositing  a  dirty  brown  sediment,'*. — The  urine  passed  in
the  morning  hours  is  brown,  after  awhile  it  becomes  turbid  and  deposits  a
sediment  of  smutty  brownish  color  (19  b.).  [830.]— Urine  thick,  sedimen-
titions,  and  reddish,'*. — Urine  much  clouded,™. — *HBematuria,°.

Sexual  Organs,  JUale.—ltch'mg  in  the  prepuce,  relieved  by  rub-
bing, but  soon  returning  (3  d.),'. — Several  sharp  momentary  prickings  in
both  glans  and  prepuce,^*. — Voluptuous  itching  in  the  glans  penis,^'. — Sev-
eral flying  painful  stitches  in  the  glans,  as  though  the  poles  of  a  galvanic
battery  had  been  applied  to  the  part ;  the  pains  came  on  most  unexpect-
edly,'*.— Dull  burning  in  the  fossa  navicularis,^'. — Slight  but  disagreeable
creeping  in  the  genitals,''. — Retraction  of  the  scrotumj^^  [840.]— Violent
itching  of  scrotum  compels  scratching  till  blood  is  drawn,^^ — Skin  of  left
side  of  scrotum  studded  with  minute  vesicles  pouring  out  a  humid  dis-
charge,**.— *Simplepain  in  the  testicles,  like  that  caused  by  a  bruise  (2  h.),'. —
*Brwised  pain  in  the  right  testicle,'^, '". — Bruised  pain  in  right  testicle,  and
momentary  sticking  pain  in  left  side  of  prepuce,**. — Slight  drawing  pain
in  right  testis,*". — *  Testes  feel  swollen  and  hard,  as  if  they  contained  a  large
amount  of  seminal  fluid,*". — Testicles  swollen,  hard,  hot,  and  sensitive  to
touch,°. — Sexual  desire  increased,*'. — Fits  of  lasciviousness,*.  [850.] — In
the  evening  excessive  sexual  desire  (with  the  warmth  and  perspiration),^*.
Greatly  increased  sexual  desire,  quickly  alternating  with  relaxation,". — In-
crease of  sexual  desire,*',*". — Frequent  erections,  with  increased  sexual  de-
sire,**.— Diminished  sexual  desire,'.— Frequent  emissions  (several). — Emis-
sions only  in  the  morning  (by  no  means  subject  to  it),**. — Two  emis.'iions  in
a  single  night,^. — Erections  and  emissions  without  dreams,  t. — Emission


ACONITUM.  27

during  the  night,  and  that  after  coition,'". — Female. — [860.] — Metrorrha-
gia,^.— The  menses,  which  had  ceased  the  day  before  commencing  the  drug,
reappear  (i  h.),*. — Reappearance  of  menses,  which  had  been  arrested  by  a
cold  bath,^\ — Reappearance  of  menses,  which  had  been  suppressed  by  a  cold
but  followed  by  a  very  offensive  white  discharge,  lasting  four  days,^''. — Sharp
pains  in  the  loins  when  the  menses  appear,". — Rage  when  the  menses  ap-
pear,".— Profuse,  tenacious,  yellow  leucorrhoea,^^ — Increased  milk  in  the
breasts,^. — *  Suppressed  menstruation  from  fright,° . — *  Vagina  dry,  hot,  sen-
sitive,".

Respirntory  Apparafuft.^ — [870.] — *Iarynx  sensitive  to  in-
spired air,  as  if  its  mucous  ^membrane  were  divested  of  its  coating^". — Sensa-
tion as  if  the  larynx  were  compressed  on  both  sides,''. — -*  Tickling  in  the  larynx
provoking  cough,'^. — Tickling  in  the  larynx,  from  smoking  tobacco,^". — *Pain
in  larynx  on  coughing,^^. — On  going  from  warm  room  into  open  air  irritation
of  larynx  and  dry  cough,^'. — Sensitiveness  of  larynx  to  touch,°. — Dry
sensation  in  the  trachea,".. — Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  trachea,  under
the  sternum  (8  h.),\ — Rattling  vibration  of  trachea,  i. — Pressive  and  burn-
ing pains  in  trachea,  extending  down  to  pit  of  stomach  (21st  d.),".  [880.]
— Raw  feeling  in  throat  along  course  of  trachea,  provoking  frequent  short
coMg'^,®.— Morbid  condition  (paralytic  attack)  of  the  epiglottis;  food  and
drink  easily  pass  into  the  windpipe  on  swallowing,  threatening  suffocation,
and  causing  cough ;  he  chokes  himself  easily,'. — Easy  choking  while  swal-
lowing saliva,^. — On  breathing,  a  sensation  as  if  the  air-passages  were  too
wide,  so  that  the  air  streamed  out  with  extraordinary  facility,'^. — *Hoarse-
ness,''. — Hoarseness  in  morning  (8  h.),'. — Hoarseness  all  day^^. — *  Voice
hoarse  and  rough,  t.— Hoarseness  and  partial  loss  of  voice^'. — Very  weak
voice,  t.  [890.] — Loss  of  voice  with  prostration,  t. — *Short  cough,\  '"■,  etc. —
Constant  irritation  to  cough,". — *Short  dry  cough^^. — *Dry  cough  (se'weraZ).
Dry  forcible  cough,^^,  '\ — *Dry  short  cough  excited  by  scratching  in  throat,^''. —
*  Cough  from  irritation  in  larynx,'". — Short  cough  from  tickling  in  larynx,  after
midnight  every  half  hour,  the  more  it  is  attempted  to  be  repressed  the  more
frequent  and  severe  it  becomes,^ — Hacking  cough  from  a  tickling  at  the
epiglottis  (immediately),^  [900.] — *Hoarse,  dry,  loud  cough,'''. — Short,
frequent,  distressing,  and  uncontrollable  cough,  but  without  expectoration
(1  d.),^^ — Frequent  dry  cough,  with  raw  pain  in  chest,  and  smarting  in
larynx,^'. — Violent  cough,  with  painful  shootings  in  different  parts  of  chest,
compelling  him  to  lie  always  on  the  back,  and  preventing  his  lying  on  the
side,". — *Gough,  with  shooting  in  chest,''*. — Dry  cough,  with  raw  pain  in
chest,  caused  by  change  of  temperature,''. — Cough  very  severe,  with  a  pe-
culiar dull  tone,  causing  a  great  strain  at  the  chest ;  almost  dry,". — Cough
and  pain  in  chest,  increased  toward  evening,  with  oppression  of  the  chest,''.
— Violent  dry  cough,  whereby  a  little  fluid  is  brought  into  the  mouth,  of
a  sweetish  salt  taste,  like  blood,  tasted  only  at  the  root  of  the  tongue,'^. —
*Frequent  dry  cough,  with  occasional  expectoration  of  bright  red  blood
I  3d  d.),  (19  b.).  [910.] — Morning  cough,  unth  blood-streaked  expectoration,".
— *  Frequent  cough,  with  severe  pains  from  the  shock  through  the  chest;
expectoration  sometimes  brownish-red,  rust-colored,'^. — Violent  dry  cough,
with  cramp  like  constriction  of  the  anus,'^ — Cough,  bringing  tears  into
eyes,'''. — Cough  after  drinking,'. — Cough  during  the  heat  of  the  body,'. —
Dry  cough  very  violent  in  the  warm  room,". — *  Cough  during  sleep,°. — Se-
vere cough  from  tobacco  smoke  (in  one  a'ccustomed  to  smoke),'. — He  (though

f  See  also  "  Nose."


28  ACONITUM.

accustomed  to  smoke)  cannot  smoke  without  constantly  hemming  and
coughing,  either  because  the  epiglottis  permits  the  entrance  of  smoke  into
the  larynx,  or  because  the  epiglottis  is  more  sensitive  than  usual  (6  h.), .
[920.]— *Cough  with  viscid  mucous  expectoration,'*'.— *Expectoration  of
blood  {several).~*'Rssmo-ptysis},  '^  etc.— *  Expectoration  of  thin,  frothy, white
mucus,  mixed  with  dreaks  of  bright  red  blood,'". — *  Expectoration  of  blood
and  mucus,  with  raw  sensation  behind  the  sternum,^'-. — Slow,  difficult  respira-
tion {venj  many).— Difficult  respiration,  i. — Impeded  respiration,  ^.—-♦Diffi-
cult respiration,  with  necessity  to  breathe  deeply,'. — Difficult  respiration,
relieved  by  coughing,"*.  [930.]- *Z)ee/J  sighing  (sej;eraZ).— Sighing  on  ac-
count of  slow  circulation,  and  distinct  feeling  of  congestion  of  blood  in  the
lungs,'\ — Breathing  much  affected,  niitsi  often  sigh  deeply, ^^. — Frequent  deep
breathing  {several). — On  breathing  deeply,  oppression,  anxiety,  and  painful
stitches  between  the  shoulders,'". — Frequently  inclined  to  breathe  deeply
without  sighing,  as  if  he  would  give  to  the  blood  an  impulse  through  the
lungs  (follows  the  hurried  mood),'°. — *  Oppressed  respiration,  dry  hacking,
much  thirst,  and  chilliness,''^. — Oppressed  respiration,  with  slight  pressure
under  the  sternum,  and  transient  heat,™. —  Oppressed  respiration  (several).
— *Fear  of  siiffocation," .  [940.] — Inspiration  often  affected  by  a  feeling  of
compression  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum  and  anterior  part  of  the  chest,
or  by  pinching,  especially  in  the  right  flank,  or  violent  shoots  deep  in  re-
gion of  \'iver,'"^.—*Inspiration  through  the  nose  impeded,  especially  in  sleep,^.
— *Respiration  short,  imperfect,  laborious,  t. — *Short  breath  in  sleep,  after
midnight,'. — Breath  short  and  scarcely  perceptible,". — Respiration  quick-
ened,"".— Respiration  hurried,'^'. — Respiration  rapid  (25  to  min.),  1 — "Res-
fiiration  superficial  (19  c). — Dyspnosa,  and  hot  feeling  in  the  lungs,".
950.] — Fear  of  sufTocation  with  anxiety,". — Anxiety  impeding  respira-
tion, with  warm  sweat  on  the  forehead,\ — Difficult  respiration,  anxiety ,  gasp-
ing for  air  (several). — *Breath  hot,*''. — Breath  fetid,^. — *Respiraiion  loud,
noisy,  with  open  mouth,\ — Respiration  stertorous,  t. — Mucous  rales,  audible
at  a  distance,  t. — Mucous  rales  posteriorly,  t.

Chest. — *Tightness  of  chest,'".  [960.] — Tightness  of  chest  with  strong
loud  respiration,'. — Sensation  as  if  chest  were  contracted,". — Constric-
tion of  the  chest,  to  the  right  of  the  sternum,  a  kind  of  tightness,".— Con-
striciion  of  chest^^  t. —  Constriction  of  the  chest  in  central  anterior  part,  hin-
dering deep  breathing,^^. — Contractive  pain  in  chest,  as  if  the  ribs  of  both
sides  were  drawn  toward  each  other,'. — The  cavity  of  the  thorax  seems  nar-
rowed,"".— Squeezing  pain  in  chesty. — Pressive  squeezing  pain  in  chest  under
the  sternum^. — *Pressive  tight  pain  in  side  of  chest,^.  [970.] — *Constrictive
sticking  pain  in  sides  of  chest,". — *Anxiety  in  the  chest,  and  oppression  on
the  right  side,  atteiviSird  in  the  whole  chest,". — Oppression  of  chest,  with  raw
pain  under  the  sternum  on  inspiration,'^. — *  Oppres.non  of  chest,^^,  etc. — *  Op-
pression and  anxiety  in  chest,  t. — *  Great  oppression  of  chest,  and  feeling  as
if  a  hundred-weight  upon  it,"*. — Great  oppression  of  chest,  making  him  breathe
deeply,  with  flying  shoots  in  it,"*. — Heaviness  and  oppression  of  chest  re-
lieved by  wine,". — Pressive  pain  in  chest  relieved  by  bending  the  body
backward,  but  renewed  on  resuming  a  straight  position  (12  h.),'. — *Pressure,
especially  on  right  side  of  chest,*".  [980.] — Pressure  on  chest,  first  on  right
side  then  on  left,'*. — Pressive  pain  in  left  side  of  chest  superiorly,  the  part
is  sensitive  to  touch,'*. — Pressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  second  left  rib
near  the  sternum,  limited  to  a  spot  the  size  of  the  palm,  increased  on  deep
inspiration,'^ — Pressure  and  burning  under  the  sternum,^. — Feeling  of  weight
on  chest,  as  if  the  whole  chest  were  compressed  from  all  sides,'. — *  Weight


ACONITUM.  29

under  the  sternum  preventing  deep  inspiration;  painful  pressure  from  the
sternum  to  the  spine,™. — Weight  on  the  chest,  with  a  quick  succession  of
fine  but  violent  stitches  in  left  side  from  without  inward,"". — *IIeaviness  on
the  chest". — Heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  chest,  as  if  he  could  not  expand
the  thorax,  which  frequently  makes  him  breathe  deeply,  with  internal  un-
easiness, anxiety,  and  palpitation,  forenoons  on  walking  (19  a.). — Heavi-
ness on  chest,  difficult  respiration,  sometimes  sighing,  violent  palpitation,
with  dry  cough,  and  clear,  bloody  expectoration  (19  h.). — Oppression  of
chest,  superficial,  frequent  respiration,  and  frequent  deap  breathing  and
sighing  (19  c).  [990.]- — Heaviness  and  fulness  in  chest,  anxiety  and  pal-
pitation (19  c). — Shooting  pressive  pain  on  right  side  of  the  sternum,'. —
*Stiiches  in  the  chest  on  breathing^. — Violent  stitches  through  the  chest,'\ —
*Painful  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  about  the  last  rib,  going
through  to  the  back  (10  h.),'. — Superficial  stitches  in  the  chest  and  cardiac
region,'^. — Stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  toward  the  false  ribs,'*. —
Violent  stitches  in  the  chest  with  suspension  of  the  respiration,^". — *Stitches
in  chest,  with  cough  {several). — Single  large  stitches  in  the  side  toward  the
back  (24  h.),'.  [1000.] — *Stitches  from  the  lowest  rib  in  the  right  side  to  the
apex  of  the  shoulder-blade,  through  the  centre  of  the  chest,  accompanying
every  inspiration,  with  complaining  humor,'. — On  rising  in  morning,  acute
lancinating  stitches  in  cardiac  region,  as  if  in  the  pleura  eostalis,  that  pre-
vent him  assuming  an  upright  posture  or  breathing  deeply,  with  an  incli-
nation to  cough ;  after  rubbing  the  skin,  and  making  gradual  efforts  to
breathe  deeply,  these  symptoms  went  off",  but  that  part  of  the  thorax  re-
mained sensitive  even  to  external  pressure  (20  doses  2d  dil.),''^ — -*Stitches
in  left  chest,"*. — Periodical  stitches  through  chest  with  dry  cough,"*. — On
the  11th  day  violent  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth
ribs,  but  not  affecting  deep  inspiration ;  the  12lh  and  13th  days,  these
stitches  still  continued,  and  often  extended  to  the  loins,". — Transient  stitches
in  chest,  now  here  now  there  {several). — Slight  stitches  in  the  left  upper  half
of  the  chest,  as  of  paralysis,"'. — *Sensitive  stitches  in  various  parts  of  the
thorax,  aggravated  by  bending  sideways,"\ — *0n  deep  breathing  stitches
between  the  shoulder-blades  and  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,"'. — Violent  burn-
ing stitch  in  left  half  of  chest,".  [1010.] — Transient  stitches  in  pectoralis
major  and  intercostals,  left  side,"'. — Dull,  oppressive  stitches  in  the  left  side,
near  the  axilla,^ — In  the  eveuing  flying  stitches  here  and  there,  in  the
ribs,  the  abdominal  parietes,  the  joints ;  great  swelling  of  the  belly,  which
is  painful  to  the  touch,''*. — Toward  evening,  shoots  in  the  centre  of  the  ster-
num, with  particularly  good  humor,^'. — Flying  shoots  along  the  sternum
and  betwixt  the  ribs,''. — Pain  in  the  chest,  like  a  shooting,  interrupting  res-
piration,'.— Shooting  in  the  side,  followed  by  palpitation  and  pressive  head-
ache, with  anxiety  and  ill  humor,'. — *Fine,  burning,  shooting  pain  in  the
chest,^. — Shooting  in  the  lower  half  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  going  off
on  lying  down,'". — Shooting,  boring,  burrowing  pain  in  the  left  side,  be-
tween the  fourth  and  sixth  ribs,  lasting  ten  minutes,'.  [1020.] — Shooting
in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  with  complaining,  lachrymose  humor,'. — Pinch-
ing, scraping  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  between  the  third  and
fourth  ribs,  not  affected  by  anything ;  it  goes  away  of  itself,'. — *Painful
shocks  in  left  chest  superiorly,  especially  on  taking  a- deep  6rea</i,"*.— Pain
in  right  side  of  chest  (19  c). — Pain  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  lowest  rib,  very
much  increased  by  the  touch,  whereby  the  patient  is  very  uneasy,  and'com-
plains,'. — Pain  in  the  middle  of  sternum,  as  from  a  bruise,  increased  by
touch,'. — Soreness  on  posterior  surface  of  sternum,  as  if  he  had  bruised


30  ACONITUM.

himself,  evenings,". — Chest  painful  externally  on  several  places,  particu-
larly the  right  side,''.— Heat  on  and  in  the  chest,'^.—* Heat  in  thelimgs,''y.
[1030.] — Burning  in  the  lungs,  not  affecting  respiration  ;  it  seemed  as  if  a
hot  fluid  would  come  into  the  mouth,*'. — Feeling  as  if  hot  water  were  being
poured  into  the  chest,^*. — Chest  warm,  t. — Fatigued,  exhausted  feeling  in
the  chest ;  slight  speaking  is  an  exertion,^'. — Creeping  pain  in  the  chest,'.—
Crawling  in  the  chest,  as  from  beetles,'. — Gnawing  pain  in  the  right  clavi-
cle,'^ — A  digging,  boring  pain  from  the  right  scapula  to  the  front  of  the
chest,  increased  hj  deep  inspiration,  but  not  by  expiration,  and  so  in  no
way  relieved  ;  lasting  twelve  minutes,^.

Heart  and  I*u,lse. — *  Dreadful  oppression  of  the  prcecordial  region,
t. — Oppression  espeeicdly  in  region  of  hearty.  [1040.] — Feeling  around  the
heart  as  though  a  heavy  body  lay  at  this  place ;  it  becomes  a  pressive  burn-
ing, with  flushes  of  heat  along  the  back,''^ — Weight  about  the  heart,". —
Compression  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the  heart,''. — *Anxiety  about
the  heart,",  "I — *  Anxiety  in  the  cardiac  region  ivith  quicker  and  stronger
beat  of  heart^". — ^Inward  pressing  pain  in  region  of  heart  (19  a.). — Slow
jerks  in  the  cardiac  region  toward  the  surface  of  the  chest,'. — Heat  and
disagreeable  sensation  in  heart,^^. — *Slight  stitches'  in  cardiac  region,''^. —
Transient  stitches  in  heart  region  (sometimes  noticed  in  rest),  especially  on
walking,  forenoons  (19  a.).  [1050.] — *  Anxiety  in  cardiac  region,  and  oppres-
sion of  chest,  with  contracted  pulse  and  constriction  of  the  chest,  when
sitting  after  much  motion,'''. — Palpitation,  with  great  anxiety,  difficulty  of
breathing,  and  great  weariness  in  all  the  limbs;  sensation  as  of  something  rush-
ing into  the  head,  with  confusion  and  flying  heat  in  the  face,'. — *  Palpitation
and  anxiety,  with  increased  heat,  especially  of  the  face,^. — ^Palpitation  of
heart  (several). — Palpitation  on  svalking,  with  great  anxiety,  etc.  (19  c). —
*Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  great  anxiety  and  restlessness,  and  pressive  pain
in  the  cardiac  region,''*. — Sudden  violent  palpitation  while  sitting  quietly,
with  a  tight  feeling  in  the  chest,'". — Palpitation  lasting  all  day,  relieved  by
quiet,  increased  by  walking,^*. — Tendency  to  palpitation,  with  trembling,'.
— *The  heart  beats  quickly  while  the  pulse  was  slow,  apparently  intermit-
ting with  attacks  of  powerlessness,"*.  [1060.] — Heart's  impulse  weak,  t. —
Heart  feebly  fluttering,  t. — The  heart  beats  but  once  to  every  three'  pulsa-
tions against  the  chest,  t.—The  left  ventricle  was  consonant  with  the  pulse,
but  the  right  auricle  seemed  to  be  in  a  convulsive  state,  its  movements  were
rapid,  irregular,  and  not  related  to  the  beats  of  the  ventricle,  t. — *Pulse
contracted,  full,  powerful,  febrile,  exceeding  100  beats  to  minute  (in
adults),  {several). — *Pulse  strong,  full,  and  quick,''^,  etc. — Auscultation  re-
vealed mucous  rales  posteriorly,  but  one  beat  of  heart  to  three  beats  of
pulse,  still  the  pulsations  of  left  vena  cava  were  equal  to  the  arterial  pulse  ;
rapid,  irregular  motion  of  right  auricle,  synchronous  with  the  beats  of  the
vena  cava. — Pulse  rose  from  95  to  112  on  going  in  from  open  air,'*. — *To-
ward  evening  the  pulse  became  full  and  quick ;  he  felt  the  beating  of  the
temporal  and  carotid  arteries,  while  sitting,^^.—* Pulse  full,  rapid,''*.  [1070.]
Pulse  full,  80  to  90,'*.— Pulse  96  during  afternoon,  fever,', ","».— Pulse  130,
feeble,  t. — -^Beat  of  heart  powerful;  pulse  full,  hard,  and  strong,  moderately
frequent  (19  c.).— Pulse  quick, 'irregular,  «.- Pulse  67,  small,  and  soft,  after
this  it  rose  in  an  hour,  to  102,  was  full,  and  hard,  then  an  agreeable  warmth
came  over  the  body,  followed  by  perspiration,  the  legs  all  the  time  continu-
ing cool.^l — *Pulse  full,  powerful,  intermitting  every  six  beats  of  the  heart
and  radial  artery,  with  heaviness  of  chest,  especially  in  the  cardiac  region,™.
— Pulse  intermitting  and  irregular ;  two  or  three  beats  followed  rapidly  in


ACONITUM.  31

succession,  and  then  came  a  pause  of  as  long  a  duration/. — Pulse  febrile
and  intermitting,  t. — Pulse  intermitting,  with  general  dulness,  t.  [1080.] —
Pulse  soft,  irregular,  t. — Pulse,  at  first  with  beginning  warmth,  frequent,
sinks  below  normal ;  becomes  weak,  and  at  times  intermittent,  f.-^Pulse  at
first  frequent,  then  retarded,  t. — Pulse  slower,  full,  and  soft  (19  c). — Pulse
54,  unequal,  soft,  and  full,  t. — Pulse  sinks,  irregular,  small,  weak,  i. — Pulse
slow,  irregular,  t. — ^Puhe  slow,  intermittent,  t. — Pulse  seems  as  if  the
blood  did  not  fill  the  artery  full,  t. — *Pulse  slow,  feeble,  t. ;  weak,  t. ;  small,
t;  small  and  weak,";  almost  imperceptible,  i.  [1090.] — Pulse  feeble,  soft,
and  occasionally  intermits  (every  fifteenth  beat),**. — No  pulse  perceptible,"*.
— *Pulse  thready,  with  anxiety,".

Neck  and  Back. — Nape  of  neck  stiff," — Pain  as  if  the  flesh  were
separated  in  the  nape,  with  feeling  as  if  the  neck  would  not  support  the
head,  and  the  head  would  on  that  account  fall  forward ;  on  moving  the
head,  shootings  in  the  nape,". — Rheumatio  pain  in  the  nape,  felt  only  on
moving  the  neck  (after  5-9  h.),'. — Stiff  feeling  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  in  the
evening,^, ^*. — Stiff  feeling  in  the  nape,  with  chilly  hands  and  feet,**. — ■
Drawing  pain  to  the  left  of  the  nape  and  in  the  scapula  on  moving  the
neck,^^— rSingle  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  nape,*.  [1100.] — Weariness  in
the  neck  on  motion,  as  if  involving  single  muscles,  especially  evenings  and
nights,^^ — '^'Drawings  in  muscles  of  throat  and  nec/c,™.— Fine  shootings  in
the  neck,  externally,'. — Drawing  pain  into  the  neck,  into  the  ear  and
shoulder,**. — Stiff  and  bruised  feeling  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  to  the
left  shoulder-joint  and  a  portion  of  the  dorsal  muscles  ;  worse  on  lying,
better  on  moving  (5th  d.),™. — Pressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  cervical
vertebrae,'. — Pressive  pain  m  the  neck,  as  of  a  pressure  with  the  point  of  a
finger  inwards  toward  the  trachea,^. — Stretching  in  the  cervical  muscles  on
turning  the  head,'^ — Pain  extends  from  neck  towards  right  shoulder,''. —
^Bruised  pain  between  the  shoulders,"",  '^.  [1110.] — Stitches  between  the  scap-
ulae (several). — Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  scapulas,^. — Slight  drawings  in
right  scapula,*. — Crawling  pain  in  back,  as  if  from  beetles. — Dull  rheu-
matic pains  in  muscles  of  back  and  shouldere,  in  the  places  where  the
chilly  or  numb  sensations  had  been  most  marked," — Creeping  as  of  insects
over  back,  arms,  and  thighs,'*. — Stiffness  of  the  hack,  t. — Shootings  in  the
back/\ — Coldness  along  the  vertebral  column,'^ — Feeling  of  heartburn
all  down  the  back,'".  [1120.] — Violent  shooting,  digging  pain  in  the  whole
of  the  left  side  of  the  spine  to  the  small  of  the  back,  so  much  increased  by
inspiration  as  to  bring  tears  into  the  eyes ;  this  lasted  four  hours,'. — Vio-
lent drawing  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  spine,  along  the  mm.,  sacro-lumbalis
and  longissimus  dorsi,  increased  by  pressure,  and  rendering  every  move-
ment diflncult;  this  went  off  after  four  hours,  but  passed  into  the  antagon-
ist muscles,  the  recti  abdominis,  which  were  stretched  as  hard  as  a  board.*^.
— Burning,  gnawing  pains  near  the  right  side  of  the  spine,'.^Pain  in  the
loins,  like  labor-pains,  whilst  walking,^ — Pain  in  the  loins,^,  'I — Pressive
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,^, '",  '^ — Momentary  sticking  and  drawing  in
small  of  back,^". — Violent  tearing  pain  in  small  of  back,  aggravated  by
pressure,  t. — Painful  boring  on  the  left  side  of  the  small  of  the  back,\ — Pres-
sive pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  small  of  the  back,*.  [1130.] — Painful  stiffs
ness  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  hip-joint,  as  if  paralytic,  on  movement
(after  2  h.),'. — Numb  sensation  in  the  small  of  the  back  into  the  legs  (several).
— Paralytic  pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back,  relieved  by  movement  and
bending  forward  (3d  and  5th  d.),™. — Shooting  and  creeping  in  the  small  of
the  back,"". — Sensitiveness  of  the  renal  region,^". — Shootings  in  the  kidneys,'^


32  ACONITUM.

— Transient,  but  painful  aching  in  region  of  left  kidney,'*. — Slight  uneasi-
ness in  region  of  right  kidney,*". — Tension  and  drawing  in  the  Jumbar  ver-
tebrse,  or  as  if  bruised,  with  gripes,  as  if  from  flatulence,'. —  Tensive,  pres-
sive  pain  in  the  lumbar  and  saoral  regions,  noticed  on  stepping,'^.  [1140.] —
Pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  last  lumbar  vertebrae,  at  its  junction  with  the
sacrum  ;  the  back  feels  as  if  beaten,', — *Paw  as  if  from  a  bruise,  from  the
loins  through  the  back  into  the  nape  of  the  neck  (after  4  h.),'. — Cutting
pain,  extending  from  the  spine  over  the  left  hip,  round  to  the  abdomen,  in
a  circle,'.

ISxtremities  in  f/eiteral. — *Trembling  and  tingling  in  the  limbs,
accompanied  by  shooting  pains  (-^  h.),  t. — *Convulsive  trembling  of  the
limbs,  t. — *Twitching  of  fingers  and  toes,  t. — ^Convulsive  contractions  of
limbs,  t. — Involuntary  stretching  of  limbs,  t. — Distortion  of  extremities,  t.
- — He  was  unable  to  keep  himself  upright,  and  was  attacked  by  convulsions,
the  upper  and  lower  extremities  were  drawn  inward,  the  lists  clenched  and
the  thumbs  doubled  into  the  palms  so  that  he  could  not  open  the  hand,  t.
[1150.]— Weariness  of  arms  and  legs,". — Weariness  and  exhaustion  of  all
the  limbs,  with  stretching  and  straining,'\ — Weariness  of  the  limbs,  espe-
cially the  legs,  with  constant  sleepines.s  and  ill-humor,'. — Heaviness  and
stiffness  of  limbs  in  open  air,". — Painful  heaviness  of  limbs  (19  c). — Stiff-
ness and  difficulty  of  moving  limbs,  t. — Difficulty  of  moving  limbs,'". —
An  arm  and  a  leg  feel  paralyzed,'". — A  paralyzed  feeling  in  left  arm  and
thigh  ;  the  power  of  moving  was  gone  in  both,  only  slightly  remaining  in  the
hand.  When  the  left  side  lost  this  it  came  into  the  right  side  in  the  same
way;  when  he  could  raise  the  right  arm  he  could  not  the  left,  and  vice
versa;  at  length  could  raise  them  both,''. — Feefing  as  if  the  limb  had  gone
to  sleep,  t. — It  seemed  as  though  the  circulation  stopped  in  all  liis  limbs;
no  circulation  at  all  was  felt  by  him  from  the  wrists  to  the  finger  ends,  and
from  the  ankles  to  the  tips  of  the  toes,'.  [1160.] — Weakness  and  unsteadi-
ness in  the  ligaments  of  all  the  joints  (46  h.),'. — Feeling  as  though  the
ligaments  of  the  joints  were  relaxed,". — Great  weakness  of  the  joiiits,  especi-
ally the  knee  and  joints  of  the  foot,  with  jerking  in  the  tendons  so  that  he
can  scarcely  walk,'. — Numbness  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes,''. — ■
*  Coldness  of  extremities,  U. — Bruised  feeling  in  the  limbs,'". — Pain  as  from
a  contusion  in  shoulder  and  hip-joints,  after  sleeping,  as  if  the  bed  had
been  too  hard,'. — Drawing  now  in  the  knee  and  calf,  now  in  elbow,". — Draw-
ings here  and  there  in  the  joints,'*,  'I — ^Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  Umbs,^.
[1170.] — Transient  pains,  like  bone  pains,  in  the  metacarpal  and  long  bones
of  upper  and  lower  extremities,'*. — Stretching  pains  in  the  limbs,  i'. — Paiu
in  the  elbows,  knees,  and  hips ;  pressure  after  walking  about,  t. — Almost
directly  after  getting  into  bed,  momentary  drawing  pains  in  left  middle
finger  and  right  heel,'". — Shuddering  of  the  extremities,"*. —  Crawling  in
upper  and  lower  limbs,  tt. — Pain  in  the  joints,'". — *A11  the  joints  are  painful
(7  h.),'". — Painless  cracking  of  all  the  joints  especially  the  knees,'.

Upper  Extremities. — Pain  in  left  shoulder-joint,*.  [1180.] — Slight
pain  in  shoulder-joints,'". — Pains  in  left  shoulder,'". — Tearing  pain  from  the
shoulder  down  the  arm  to  the  wrist  and  fingers,  on  every  motion  ;  during
the  pain  the  hand  is  blue  (after  1,  14  h.),' — Tumor  in  the  muscles  of  the
shoulder,  extremely  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  bruised  (after  4  h.),'. — The
shoulder  is  painful,  and  feels  as  if  it  would  sink  down,". — Some  transient
stitches  in  the  left  shoulder,",™. — Numbness  in  the  shoulders,  t. — Drawing,
tearing painin  shoulder-joint,^. — Pressure  in  right  shoulder  and  upper  arm,".
— Pressive  pain  in  left  shoulder,  and  posterior-exterior  side  of  left  upper


ACONITUM.  33

ftrm,''.  [1190.] — ^Violent  drawing  and  tearing,  with  paralytic  sensation  in
head  of  left  humerus,™. — Tingling  down  the  arms,  ". — The  arms  feel  bruised
and  sink  down  powerlessly,". — Weariness  of  arms,". — ^Coldness  and  insen-
sibility of  the  arms,\ — No  feeling  in  arms,  t. — Pinching,  as  if  with  blunt
forceps,  on  some  spots  of  the  left  arm,  often  returning,^'. — Throws  the  arms
about,  t. — Single  shootings  in  middle  of  right  upper  arm,  auteriorily,  while
at  rest;,  not  changed  by  motion  or  pressure,'.— Sudden  drawing  and  shoot-
ing pain  in  right  upper  arm  posteriorly,".  [1200.] — Drawing  and  paralytic
stiffness  in  right  upper  arm,". — Weariness  of  left  upper  arm,^'. — Tickling
itching  on  inside  of  I'eft  upper  arm,'". — Drawing  pain  in  the  elbow-joints,".
Drawing-tearing  pain  in  the  elbow-joints,^. — Several  rheumatic-like  pains  in
left  elbow-joint,"'. — Dull,  rheumatic  pains  about  right  elbow-joint,*^ — Vio-
lent shootings  in  the  elbow-joints  down  to  the  wrists,  on  the  outside  of  the
arm,  on  flexing  the  fingers  to  the  wrist-joint,". — Sensation  of  weight  in  the
arms,  from  the  elbow  to  the  fingers ;  they  feel  as  if  they  would  fall,  with
sensation  in  fingers  as  if  they  were  asleep,  on  grasping  anything,".^Z)rOT<;-
ing-tearing  painin  the  forearm,^.  [1210.] — Pain  in  the  forearm,  as  if  from  a
violent  blow,". — Drawing,  shooting  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  forearm,  excit-
able by  movement,\-^Crawling  in  right  forearm,^l — Paralytic  feeling  in
right  forearm  and  hand  (on  writing),  relieved  by  violent  motion,  but
returning  while  writing,  or  at  rest,  but  less  severely,'. — Drawing-tearing
pain  on  the  outside  of  right  forearm,'. — Cramplike  pain  in  the  whole  of
the  left  forearm,  not  relieved  by  anything,'. — Undulating,  tearing  pain  in
the  upper  end  of  tke  left  forearm,'. — Acute  pain  in  right  forearm,  along
the  flexor  tendons  of  the  little  finger,  increased  by  movement,'^ — *Numb,
tingling  sensations  in  arms  and  hands,  as  though  the  poles  of  a  galvanic
battery  were  being  held,". — *Numhness  in  arms  and  hands,  t.  [1320.] —
Much  formication  in  arms  and  hands,". — Immediately  (from  a  portion  of
the  juice  getting  into  a  wound  in  the  thumb),  horrible  pain  throughout  the
arm,  and  especially  at  the  wounded  spot.  The  arm  became  bright-red,
much  swollen ;  the  pain  so  intolerable  that  he  nearly  fainted,". — A  nunib-
ing-like  paralysis  of  the  left  arm  (and  thigh),  so  that  he  can  scarcely  move
the  hand," — Prickling  and  tingling  down  the  arms  and  fingers,  and  a
painful  numbness  across  the  wrists  (in  five  minutes),  t. — Pain  in  the  arm
and  the  fingers,". — Jerking,  drawing  pain  in  the  lower  and  internal  surface
of  the  left  forearm,  over  the  wrist  to  the  palm  of  the  hand,'.— /SAooiinjr  in
the  ivrist-joint,  as  if  from  needles  (several). — Drawing,  paralytic  pain  in  the
right  wrist-joint,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  wrist,\ — Trembling  motion  in  the
wrist  on  moving  the  hand,^. — Draiving  and  tearing  pains  in  wrist  and
fingers,'''^  [1230.] — Icy  coldness  of  the  hands  (several). — *Trembling  of
hands,  t. — One  hand  becomes  ice-cold,  and  insensible  as  if  benumbed  (after
2  h.),' — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  hand,'. — Cramp-like  pain,  with  fine
shootings,  in  the  right  hand,  relieved  by  moving  it,'. — Swelling  of  the
hands,  with  frequent  cough,  and  ordinary  appetite.'^ — Hands  cold  and
pulseless,  t. — Clenched  hands,  t. — Same  sprained  feel  in  joints  of  right
hand,". — Stinging,  itching  little  red  pimples  on  the  back  of  both  hands,
like  fleabites,'".  [1240.] — Transient  stitches  in  dorsum  of  left  hand,". —
Increased  warmth  of  palms,  evenings,^V^- — Cb/d  sweat  in  the  palms ^. —
Palins  of  hands  quite  insensible,  t. — A  few  pulsating  stitches  in  the  hollow
of  the  right  hand,  as  if  from  a  sharp  needle,'. — Morbid,  contractive  pain
in  the  hollow  of  left  hand,  so  that  the  fingers  can  scarcely  be  extended,'. —
Transient,  lame  pains  in  both  metacarpi,". — *  Creeping  pain  in  the  fingers,'^.
— *  Creeping  in  the  fingers,  felt  also  while  writing,^. — Hot  prickling  in  the

VOL. I. — 3


34  ACONITUM.

tips  of  the  fingers,  nights,''^  [1250.] — Nails  blue,  t. — Crawling  and  sensation
of  warmth  in  middle  and  index  fingers  of  left  hand,^. — Cutting,  pressive  pain
on  the  side  of  the  right  forefinger,  next  the  middle  finger,  during  motion  and
when  at  rest,'. — Strange,  intermittent,  lame,  growing-like  pains  in  distal
joint  of  left  forefinger,^^ — Rheumatic-like  stiffness  of  right  forefinger,  last-
ing for  about  ten  minutes,  and  causing  great  awkwardness  in  bending  it,^'. —
Drawing  lame  pains  in  right  forefinger,''*. — Paralytic  pain  in  the  thumbs,".
— Pain  as  of  dislocation  in  the  right  thumb-joint  on  moving  it/. — Jerking
pains  in  the  right  thumb,^ — Painful  drawing  in  the  left  thumb,'.  [1260.]
Drawing  pains,  several  times,  in  right  thumb,^.

LoiA^r  Extremities, — Drawing  pain  in  the  border  of  the  left  hip-
bone,''".— *  Drawing  pain  in  left  hip-joint  on  moving  ti,'*.— Painful  pressure
in  hip-joint  while  walking,''*. — Powerlessness  in  the  head  of  the  femur,  or
inability  to  walk,  owing  to  an  indescribable,  intolerable  pain,  almost  like
a  crushing  of  the  head  of  the  femur,  which  sometimes  declines  and  some-
times increases,  and  occurs  after  lying  down  and  after  sleep  (after  5  h.),\ —
Powerlessness  and  pain  in  the  head  of  the  femur,  producing  unsteady  gait,'.
— Drawing  pain  in  the  head  of  the  left  femur,  while  standing  and  sitting,
but  still  more  while  walking,". — Tired  feeling  in  the  lower  limbs  during
repose,^^, ''. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were  asleep
(several). — Bruised  pain  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  knees,^.  |"1270.] —
Stiffness  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  when  walking,  preventing  him  from
walking  quickly,". — His  limbs  trembled  as  he  walked,  t. — Ti-embling  of
limbs,  t- — The  lower  extremities  were  in  perpetual  movement,  even  when  he
sat  down,  t, — He  loses  the  sensation  of  standing  firm,'^ — Legs  fail  her  on
attempting  to  go  up  stairs,  i. — The  legs  bend  under  her,™,™. — The  child
staggers  to  his  feet;  his  face  brightens  up  ;  but  soon  standing  becomes  im-
possible, t. — Step  nnaeiVtixm,^'.— Drawing  pain  especially  in  the  joints  of  the
limbs^^.  [1280.] — Drawing  in  the  tendinoxis  expansions  of  the  lower  limbs^^.
— Small  vesicles  on  left  lower  extremities,  very  painful,  t. — "  No  use  in
legs,"  t. — No  feeling  in  legs,  t. — Drawing  pain  in  left  lower  extremity,  here
and  there,''". — Weariness  of  lirab,'\ — An  almost  paralytic  powerlessness  of
legs  and  thighs,  after  sitting,'. — Tight  pressure  in  the  thighs,  as  if  from
a  tightly-drawn  bandage,  with  great  fatigue  while  walking,'*. — Drawing
pain,  first  in  one  thigh,  then  in  the  other,  then  in  both  together,  only  while
moving,"*. — Numbness  in  the  thighs  and  feet  (several).  [1290.] — Strange
sensation  down  forepart  of  both  thighs,  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  trickled
over  them  ;  it  lasted  for  fully  five  minutes,"*. — Drawing-tearing  pain  in
thigh,^^. — Fine  shootings,  as  if  from  needles,  in  the  muscular  substauce  of
the  thigh,". — Cold  feeling  running  down  from  the  middle  of  the  thigh,
especially  on  the  knee  and  leg,^''. — Bruised  pain  of  thigh  and  coldness  of
soles,^^ — Drawing  along  the  thigh,  and  discomfort  in  the  knees,**. — *  Un-
steadiness of  the  knees;  they  bend  while  standing  or  walking,'. — '''Unsteadi-
ness of  the  knees,  especially  of  one;  it  bends  under  the  body,  while  walking
(immediately,  and  after  1  h.),'.^Slight  pain  in  right  knee,"'. — Deep,  slow,
shooting  over  the  right  knee,".  [1300.] — Jerking-tearing  in  the  inside  of
the  knee,". — *Shootings  in  the  left  knee,"', "°. — *Icy  coldness  of  the  knee
alternating  with  flying  shootings,"'. — Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  knee-joint^.
— *Knife-like  pains  in  the  knee-joint,° . — Tension  in  knee-cap,  hindering
walking,". — Pain  in  patella,  as  from  a  blow,"'. — Pain  in  patella  on  walk-
ing,"'.— On  walking  in  open  air,  an  acute  pressing  pain  by  fits  in  the  left
patella,  right  tendo  Achillis,  and  dorsum  of  left  foot,"'. — Pressing-gnawing
pain  in  patella,"'.  [1310.] — Pressive  pain  in  patella  and  in  tendo  Achillis," .


ACONITUM.  35

— Painful  drawing  in  leg,  from  the  knee  to  the  heel,  and  back  again,'. —
Cramps  and  pains  in  the  legs,  t. — Marked  feeling,  as  if  a  heavy  weight,
about  the  size  of  the  palm,  were  laid  on  the  outside  of  both  legs,  about
eight  inches  above  ankle,*^ — The  legs  got  very  cold  in  an  hour;  worse  in  a
warm  room  and  when  walking,". — Stitching  and  drawing  in  tibise,^l — Vio-
lent shooting  from  the  heel  to  the  popliteal  space  {from  olfaction),^". — Para-
lytic drawing  in  right  leg  and  tendo  Achillis  to  heel,^— Drawing  in  tendo
Achillis,'*. — Tendo  Achillis  feels  shortened  and  bent.  [1320.] — Cold  creep-
ing on  inside  of  leg,". — Itching  on  inside  of  leg,". — Weakness  in  lower
legs,  mornings,''''. — The  lower  part  of  the  legs  and  feet  are  as  if  numb  and
asleep,". — Legs  and  feet  feel  numb,  t. — Heaviness  and  tension  in  the
calves,^^. — Pain  in  calves  as  from  cramp,'''. — *  Cramp  in  the  calves,  t. — Pain
in  the  ankles,  with  despairing  thoughts,  and  contemplation  of  death,'. —
Sensation  in  the  ankles,  as  if  they  were  tightly  tied  with  a  ligature,  in  the
morning,'.  [1330.] — Horrible  pain  in  the  ankle,  relieved  by  compression
(after  7  h.),'. — Tearing  pain  in  left  outer  ankle,  going  upward  (after  14
h.),°. — Sharp,  transient,  rheumatic-like  pain  in  anterior  part  of  left  ankle-
joint  (3d  d.),"'. — *Coldness  of  the  feet  to  the  ankles,  with  sweat  of  the  toes  and
soles,'. — *  Coldness  of  the  feet,  particularly  of  the  toes^. — Feet  covered  with
cold  sweat,". — Heaviness  of  the  feet  (immediately),'. — The  feet  feel  as
heavy  as  lead  {several). — Weariness  of  feet  on  ascending  steps,". — Para-
lytic drawing  in  the  feet  {several).  [1340.]— Pressure  on  right  instep,". —
Transient  stitches  on  dorsum  of  left  foot,"*. — Pain  in  right  heel,  principally
when  treading  {several). — Hot  pricking  in  toes,  nights,"". — *Sleeping  of  the
toes  of  the  right  foot  while  walking  (several) .—Repeated  sharp,  painful
shootings  in  right  fourth  toe,'*.— While  sitting  at  tea,  most  unexpectedly,
three  very  sharp  and  painful  stitches  in  third  and  fourth  toes  of  right
foot,'*. — Shortly  after  getting  to  bed,  several  momentary  lancinating  pains
in  right  big  toe,  on  the  inside  of  ball  in  particular ;  also  in  third  and
fourth  right  toes,'l — Sensation  of  numbness  and  tingling  commenced  in
feet  and  spread  rapidly  upward,  t.

Generalities. — Convulsions,  tt.  [1350.] — Clonic  spasms,  t. — *Spasma
of  the  eyes;  clenched  jaws ;  the  body  became  rigid  and  bends  backward;
the  limbs  are  distorted  with  spasms,  and  he  dies,  t. — Convulsive  attacks  ;
the  upper  and  lower  limbs  drawn  inward  ;  the  legs  in  constant  motion ;
face  covered  with  cold  sweat ;  the  eyes  turned  up  ;  the  joints  crack  during
the  spasms,  t. — Violent  convulsive  fit ;  the  eyes  drawn  up  under  the  lids ;
the  fists  clenched  across  the  throat ;  the  teeth  grate  violently  against  one
another,  and  a  thick  ropy  saliva  was  forced  through  the  lips,  t. — (In  the
evening  sudden  crying  out,  gnashing  of  teeth  ;  then,  from  long-continued
hiccup,  stiff  immobility  like  a  statue  (catalepsy),".) — Twitching  of  ten-
dons, t. — The  symptoms  at  last  become  chiefly  confined  to  the  tendinous  or
muscular  structures,  such  as  shortened  feeling  of  the  tendons  of  the  ham
and  of  the  tendo  Achillis,"". — Twitching  of  various  groups  of  muscles,  espe-
cially of  the  forearm,  as  if  he  held  the  conductors  of  an  electro-magnetic  appa-
ratus in  his  hand,  only  the  pains  come  and  go  slower,". — *Excessive  restless-
ness and  tossing  about  for  severallioiirs.^^i. — She  gave  an  occasional  sigh,
tossed  her  arms  backward  above  her  head,  and  sought  to  shift  her  position
by  jerks,  t.  [1360.] — Extreme  sense  of  nervousness,'^ — Extreme  nervous-
ness and  agitation,'". — Fearful  and  uncertain  in  his  actions.'^ — *Sensitive-
ness  to  fresh  air,". — ^Remarkable  degree  of  sensitiveness  to  the  least  draught
of  cold  air,^. — Feeling  as  if  he  would  take  cold,"*. — *A11  the  symptoms  of
having  caught  cold,™. — Sensation  as  if  all  the  bloodvessels  were  congealed,'*.


36  ACONITUM.

Very  shaky  and  uervous,'^ — *Trembllug  and  tendency  to  palpitation,'.
[1370.] — Great  trembling,  t. — Increased  tremulousness  and  vertigo,'^—
General  muscular  tremors,". — Paralytic  and  bruised  pains  in  arms  and
legs,'  with  violent  trembling  all  over  the  body,  especially  in  the  extremities,
which  prevents  walking  ;  with  very  pale  face,  dilated  pupils,  faintness,  pal-
pitation, cold  sweat  on  the  back,  and  dizzy  headache  in  the  temples,  soon
followed  by  burning  heat  of  the  face,  with  a  sensation  of  tension  and  red-
ness of  the  face,  and  sleepiness  after  dinner  (46  h.),". — He  complained  J
lassitude  of  the  whole  body,  great  weakness,  and  pressure  at  the  heart,". —
General  sore,  tired  feeling  in  the  body,". — On  awaking  in  the  morning  such
great  exhaustion  he  was  unwilling  to  get  up;  it  went  off,  however,  on  ris-
ing,\ — Frequent  attacks,  almost  every  other  hour,  of  extreme  weakness
and  insensibility,  so  that  he  can  stir  neither  hand  nor  foot,  and  cannot  sit
up  in  bed ;  he  does  not  feel  his  former  pains,  cannot  see  nor  hear,  nor  even
speak  aloud  ;  the  legs  are  stretched  out  (after  a  few  h.),\ — Grew  very  weak
and  almost  blind  in  half  an  hour,  though  still  conscious,  t. — Prostrated,
weak,  and  sleepy,  t.  [1380.] — *  Great  musaular  weakness,  weariness,  prostra-
tion, almost  total  inability  to  stand,  tt. —  Gi'eat  loss  of  strength,'^'',''. — Progres-
sive failure  of  stren(/th,^\ — Great  weariness,  as  if  after  walking  far,^\ —
*Feeling  very  weary,  languid,  and  unable  to  rise  from  the  couch  ;  obliged
to  discontinue  all  work ;  the  system  feels  prostrated,  with  sense  of  inward
fever,^'. — Great  laziness  (19  d.). — Unusual  fatigue,". —  Walking  and  talking
tire  him ;  he  feels  very  much  affected,"^. — Easily  tired  ivhen  walking,  and  espe-
cially going  up  stairs,^". — *iJe  loses  his  abiliiy  to  stand,  must  sit  down,^^.  [1390.]
— She  hates  movement,  prefers  sitting,''. — She  must  lie  down  in  bed  she
feels  so  sick ;  head  so  confused,  dizzy,  and  painful,  and  the  limbs  so  heavy
(19  a.). — Complains  of  his  head  being  heavy,  his  strength  and  spirit  ex-
hausted, so  that  he  had  to  lie  down,*. — Urgent  desire  to  lie  down,". — She
must  lie  down  (2-5  h.),\ — Faintness,'  tt. — *Faintness  on  attempting  to  sit
up,  i.— Attacks  of  fainting  follow  constrictive  sensation  of  the  chest,  and
icy  coldness,'*. — Went  quite  suddenly  and  unconsciously  into  a  swoon  in  the
evening  while  standing  up  urinating ;  all  the  blood  seemed  to  rush  to  his
head,  and  he  fell  heavily  to  the  ground  (first  time  in  his  life),''. — Fainting
fit  directly  after  urinating ;  everything  whirled  around  him  ;  for  the  time
he  completely  lost  all  consciousness ;  hands  bedewed  with  cold  sweat,  and
for  some  time  after  he  remained  quite  prostrated,'^.  [1400.] — Impaired
sensibility  of  the  surface," — Touch  diminished,  so  that  he  cannot  distin-
guish small  objects  by  the  feeling,  t. — Formication  and  crawling,  now  in
one  place,  now  in  another,  with  an  uncomfortable  shuddering  sensation,
especially  on  the  upper  arm  and  lower  leg,'^. — The  paralytic  condition  soon
quitted  the  left  side  and  passed  over  to  the  right,". — *Numbness  and  ting-
ling over  the  body,^^. — Muscles  sore  and  stiff,''. — -Sensation  as  if  the  whole
body,  from  the  shoulders  downward,  was  heavy  as  lead,  while  a  heavy  pres-
sure, from  all  sides  and  from  above  downwards,  seemed  to  render  the  whole
body  smaller  in  size  and  stature,  the  head  and  neck  seeming  to  retain  their
natural  proportions,*'. — Sensation  of  sivelling  of  many  parts  of  the  body,  gen-
erally accompanied  by  shuddering  cold  or  rigor  (several). — Sense  of  swelling
of  almost  the  whole  body,  especially  of  the  left  side,  which  after  awhile
becomes  a  numb  sensation,  with  bruised  feeling  of  the  muscles,  and  weari-
ness in  the  bones,'^ — Feeling  of  swelling  all  over,  especially  in  left  side,
with  bruised  pain  in  ribs  and  arms,  and  crampy  feeling  about  the  heart ;
the  swollen  feeling  changes  to  a  numb  feeling,'^  [1410.] — General  anxious
sensation,  as  though  the  blood  would  overflow  the  vessels,  with  constant


ACONITUM.  37

ctilliness,  especially  with  cold  face,  even  in  a  -warm  room ;  worse  in  the
open  air  and  on  motion,™. — Anxious  tremblings,  like  a  boiling  and  seething
through  the  whole  body,  as  if  the  hands  and  feet  would  go  to  sleep ;  some-
thing as  if  one  is  just  on  the  point  of  becoming  intoxicated,  always  accom-
panied by  a  predominating  unpleasant  sensation  of  coldness,'^— Swelling
of  the  part  (on  which  the  juice  had  been  laid),  and  acute  inflammation,
going  on  to  profuse  suppuration,". — General  feeling  of  illness,'^ — Sensation
as  if  she  had  just  recovered  from  a  severe  illness  or  risen  from  a  sick-bed
(6  h.)^. — Feeling  all  day  as  of  impending  fever,  with  nausea,  want  of  ap-
petite, and  aching  gnawing  pains  throughout  the  whole  body,  extremities
particularly,'*. — General  sick  feeling,  nausea,  and  qualmishness,  with  pain-
ful heaviness  in  the  lirabs,'^. — Drawing  pains  wander  over  the  whole  body
in  rapid  succession,  nowhere  lasting  longer  than  one  minute,'^— Painful
drawings,  now  here,  now  there,  most  frequently  in  various  parts  of  the
thorax,  and  in  the  upper  and  forearms,". — Drawing,  tearing  pains,  wan-
dering without  order  from  one  place  to  another,  but  mostly  alternating  with
heart  symptoms,^^  [1420.] — After  the  delirium  pains  in  stomach,  head,
jaws,  and  here  and  there  in  his  joints,  which  in  seven  hours  become  more
general,'*. — Rheumatic  pains,  chiefly  in  the  knee,'''. — Frequent  flying  pains
all  over  the  body,'*. — Transient  pains  in  different  parts  of  the  body,". —
'^Bruised  pains  in  different  parts  (several).^— NenrsdgiG  pains,**. — ^Very  fine
■  stinging,  or  stinging  burning  pains  in  many  parts,  as  if  seated  in  the
skin,  sometimes  combined  with  a  sense  of  heaviness,  numbness,  or  swell-
ing,''^ — In  the  evening  flying  stitches  here  and  there,  in  the  ribs,  walls  of
abdomen,  and  joints,'". — *  Stitches  in  the  forehead,  back,  sides  of  chest,  back
of  hands,  and  other  parts,  as  if  he  stood  on  the  isolated  plate  of  an  elec-
trical machine,  and  one  took  sparks  from  him,". — Constriction  of  body,  t.
[1430.] — Gradually  all  parts  of  the  body  become  black,  the  whole  body
swells  up,  the  eyes  protrude,  the  tongue  hangs  out  of  the  mouth,". — A  pe-
culiar feeling  over  the  whole  body,  to  be  compared  with  that  experienced
in  a  vapor  bath,  when  the  steam  falls  rapidly  on  the  skin,  and  drops  are
felt  on  it,'^ — Unusually  comfortable  feeling  in  whole  body,^l — (Painful-
ness  of  whole  body  with  increasing  weakness,'^.) — *  The  whole  body  is  sensi-
tive to  touch ;  the  child  will  not  allow  itself  to  be  moved;  it  whines,^. — *  Burn-
ing through  all  the  mucous  membranes,  t. — *Most  of  the  symptoms  are  accom-
panied by  shivering  and  anxiety  (several).

Skin, — Jaundice,'. — Skin  becomes  yellowish,  t. — The  skin  appears
peculiarly  elastic  and  smooth,'".  [1440.] — Goose-flesh,'",  ™. — *SJcin  dry  and
imperspiring,^^. — Vesicular  eruption  on  both  temples,^". — *Spots  like  flea-
bites  on  hands,  face,  &c.,'. — Red  pimples  on  flexor  side  of  the  thumb,  in-
dex and  middle  fingers,  painful  to  pressure  (cont.  5  d.),^ — Skin  seems  dotted
with  red  spots,  t. — (Isolated  vesicles,  here  and  there,  fill  with  yellow  lymph
and  dry  up,".). — Red  pimples,  filled  with  acrid  fluid,  all  over  body  (from
patient  with  sciatica),'*. — Broad,  red,  itching  pimples  all  over  body  (from
patient  with  rheumatism),'*. — Chiefly  on  face,  forehead,  nape,  and  various
parts  of  the  body,  isolated  vesicles,  the  size  of  a  pin's  head,  containing  a
serous  fluid,  and  attended  with  itching  ;  successive  eruptions  appeared  for
a  fortnight,  which  dried  up  and  fell  ofi"  gradually,^'.  [1450.] — Itching  all
over  the  body,  especially  on  the  pudenda  (from  a  patient  with  sciatica),'*. —
Itching  in  several  muscular  parts,  especially  the  forearms,". — Constant
itching  and  smarting  on  various  parts  of  the  skin,". — Great  heat  all  over
the  body,  and  burning-itching,  especially  on  the  inside  of  the  thighs  and
about  the  knees,".— -Creeping,  itching,  and desquamation of  the skin,


38  ACONITUM.

especially  on  the  affected  parts,'. — Sensation  in  the  skin  as  if  the  epidermis
were  separated  from  the  cutis  by  an  intervening  layer — a  kind  of  wander-
ing, creeping,  and  running  all  over  the  body,  with  uncomfortable  shuddering
feeling,^^ — ^Formication  and  biting,  especially  on  the  hairy  parts  of  the
body,  with  the  exception  of  the  head,  as  if  from  fleas,  making  him
scratch,'". — *  Fine  pricking,  as  if  from  needles,  here  and  there  on  the  body,^ —
*The  tingling  sensation  spread  gradually  over  the  whole  body,  until  it  took
in  all  the  limbs,". — Pricking,  pressure,  pressing-gnawing,  now  here,  now
there,  in  the  skin,  as  from  a  strong  electro-magnet,'\  [1460.] — Skin  warm
(19  c). — Cold  clammy  skin.  Skin  becomes  cold  and  dry,  t. — Single  long-
coutinued  dartings,  here  and  there,  mixed  with  a  raw  sensation,  and  at
last  ending  with  pain  as  of  a  wound,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Interrupted  yawning;  she  cannot  yawn
enough,' — Yawns  often,  without  being  sleepy,^. — Yawning  and  stretching,".
(19  c.). — Frequent  yawning;  (shivering  and)  frequent  yawning  on  rising
in  the  morning,". — Yawning,  with  ringing  in  ears,  . — Yawning,  with  sleep-
iness,^".— Intense  yawning,  without  sleepiness,'".  [1470.] — Great  sleepiness :
spasmodic  yawning  (19  d.),^*. — Sleepiness  and  laziness ;  uncommon  sleepi-
ness, even  while  walking,*,^*. — Irresistible  sleepiness  by  day,''*. — Sleepiness;
sleep  (after  2  h.),'. — Quiet  sleep,  for  four  or  five  hours,". — Sleepiness
toward  noon,'^ — Great  sleepiness  in  the  afternoon  ;  the  eyes  close  involun-
tarily ;  he  wakes,  however,  readily,  at  the  least  noise,  but  always  falls
asleep  again,". — Uncommon  sleepiness  after  a  meal,". — Falling  asleep  while
standing,"". — Inability  to  keep  awake,'^  t.  [1480.] — Tendency  to  stupor,  t
— He  cannot  be  awake,  his  hands  are  cold  and  he  is  senseless,'",  t. — Light
sleep  (1  to  5  h.),'. — Sleep  very  light,  superficial,  so  that  in  the  morning  he
imagines  he  has  not  slept  at  all ;  .without  being  weak,'". — Frequent  waking,
with  excessive  wakefulness^*. — Disinclination  to  go  to  bed ;  he  could  not
sleep  when  he  went  to  bed,  owing  to  excessive  wakefulness,^^. — Sleeplessness
on  account  of  severe  pressive  pain  in  vertex,'*. — Could  not  sleep  for  some
time  after  the  decline  of  the  symptoms,  owing  to  inability  to  keep  the  eyes
closed,  t. — Sleepless  night,'*  t. — He  sleeps  sitting,  with  head  bent  forward,'.
[1490.] — In  the  moining,  he  lies  asleep  on  his  back,  the  left  hand  laid
under  the  back  of  the  head,'. — He  felt  as  if  he  were  sleeping  in  the  air,
and  had  nothing  under  him,^'. — On  lying  down  at  night,  shuddering,'. —
Frightful  convulsive  jerkings  on  falliug  asleep,^. — Frequent  starting  out  of
sleep,"". — *-ffe  starts  up  in  a  fright,  moves  much  and  talks  in  his  sleep,''. — She
starts  up  in  her  sleep,  and  says  some  one  is  holding  her,'. — Violent  twitching
of  the  extremities  on  falling  asleep,  so  that  he  was  waked  up  by  it,™,  t. — -
*Very  restless  nights  {several). — Restless  flights,".  [1500.] — Restless  nights,
must  walk  about,  t. — Went  to  bed  very  restless  and  excited,  and  slept  with
difficulty  ;  not  refreshed  on  rising  next  morning,^'. — Very  wakeful  and  rest-
less,''.— Nights  always  restless ;  and,  in  the  morning,  feels  as  if  he  had  been
drunk  over  night,". — *Eestless  tossing  in  bed,-', "'. — Nights  vei-y  restless ;
she  leaves  the  bed  frequently,  without  being  in  a  condition  to  lie  down
again  without  help,  t. — *  Nights  restless ;  alternating  cold  and  heat,  partial
aweat,^. — Nights, much  thirst,  restlessness,  chill  and  heat". — He  cannot  lie  en
the  right  side  nor  on  the  back  ;  he  turns  in  bed  from  one  side  to  another
with  pain,'. — *Sleep  at  night  often  disturbed  by  cough,'".  [1510.] — Se
wakes  often  at  night  on  account  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  wherefore
he  must  drink  oflen^'^,". — On  falling  asleep,  great  itching  of  the  limbs,  so
that  he  is  waked  up  by  it,^°. — Slow  breathing  when  asleep,'. — (Inspiration
with  a  double  jerk,  like  the  bleating  of  a  goat,  while  asleep,'.) — After


ACONITUM.  39

lying  down  at  night,  and  while  sitting  during  the  day,  he  is  in  a  state  of
waking  dreaminess,  and  imagines  erroneously  that  he  is  far  from  home,'.
— ^In  a  kind  of  half-sleep,  tormented  by  the  most  extravagant  dreams,
till  morning,^'. — Nightly  phantasies  iu  a  half-waking  state,". — Restless
nights,  with  vivid  dreams  about  the  events  of  the  day,™. — *Passed  a  rest-
less night,  body  very  hot,  tossed  about  much,  and  had  excessively  vivid
dreams^^. — Restless  and  disturbed  sleep  ;  strange  dreams,'*.  [1520.] — Rest-
less night,  disturbed  by  fearful  dreams,^'. — Stupid  sleep,  from  which  she
arouses  herself  with  difficulty,  after  awaking  several  times,  with  con-
fused dreams  ;  mornings  oq  waking,  the  head  is  eonfused,^^ — Sleep  full  of
dreams  of  a  confused  and  vivid  character,'*.— Long,  confused  dreams,'^ —
Dreams  iu  which  he  spoke  much,'. — He  has  a  very  vivid  dream  towards
morning,  and  obtains  an  accurate  explanation  of  a  circumstance  that  was
a  riddle  to  him  while  awake  (after  20  h.),'. —  Very  vivid  dreams  all  night
(several). —  Vivid,  rer/iembered  dreams  of  the  day's  occurrences  (several). — He
dreams  half  the  night  of  a  single  subject,  which  also  occupies  his  attention
for  many  hours  after  he  awoke,  so  that  this  subject  alone  is  in  his  mind
(like  the  fixed  idea  of  a  monomaniac),  which  is  very  troublesome  and  dis-
agreeable to  him,'. — Dreams  of  subjects  that,  for  eight  years,  had  been
foreign  to  his  thoughts,".  [1530.]— *  At  night,  anxious  dreams,  and  several
times  waking  with  a  start,". — *Anxious  dreams  at  mgh.t,''*.—*Long
dreanis,  with  anxiety  in  the  chest,  taking  away  the  breath  and  causing  him  to
awake  (nightmare),'. — '^Anxious,  heavy  dreams,  with  oppression  of  the
chest,''^, '". — Frightful  dreams,'''',  '*.

Fever. — *  Chilliness,  t. — Cold  over  the  whole  body,'. — She  is  cold,  and
shivers,". — Cold  and  rigors,'^'  t. — *  Anxious  chilliness  (aii&T  3  h.),'.  [1540.]—
*  Chilliness  on  the  slightest  inovement  (after  10  h.),'. — "^  Chilliness  from  being
uncovered,". — Body  and  extremities  cold,  t. — General  coldness  rapidly  in-
creasing, especially  on  the  extremities,  with  blueness  of  the  nails  of  the
fingers  arid  toes,  t. — Coldness  iu  a  warm  room," — Chilliness  evenings,  espe-
cially in  hands  and  feet,'*. — Extreme  chilliness  nearly  all  day,'^ — Had
rigors,  and  felt  icy  cold,  t. — Felt  icy  cold,  and  nearly  fainted  ;  during  the
day  frequent  recurrence  of  the  rigor,  with  violent  pain  in  right  temple,^*.
— ^Violent  shaking  chill,^'.  [1550.] — He  lay  quiet,  but  freezing  and  shiv-
ering, and  wished  to  be  covered  up  with  many  clothes,^. — Slight  degree  of
chilliness,''. — Continual  diminution  of  temperature,". — Constant  shivering.
— Constant  shuddering,^*. — Shivering  for  several  hours,  as  if  between  the
skin  and  flesh,  especially  over  the  back  and  abdomen  ;  felt  even  when  per-
spiring from  rapid  walking,'^ — Shivering  and  frequent  yawning  on  rising
in  the  morning,". — Shuddering  from  the  middle  of  the  spine  to  the  lumbar
muscles  of  both  sides,  as  if  from  taking  cold,™. — Chilliness  over  the  bach,  as
before  the  outbreak  of  catarrhxd  fever '^. — Constant  coldness  through  the  arms
and  legs,  and  shivering  even  in  the  face,".  [1560.] — Chilliness  and  formi-
cation between  the  shoulders  and  down  the  back,  with  cold  tips  of  fingers  and
toes,  blue  nails,  even  in  a  warm  room  (several). — *  Shivers  run  through  her,
from  below  upward  to  the  chest,". — Shivering  in  the  evening,  especially  in  the
hands  and  feet,'*. — Attack  of  faintness,  with  shivering,'. — '^Shuddering  on
lying  down  at  night,^. — Shuddering,  with  paleness  and  sunken  features,'^'-
— Coldness  in  the  hands  and  feet,  shuddering  over  the  back,  while  the  head
and  body  are  warm,''.- — Rigor  over  back  and  arms,". — Arms  and  hands  cold
and  pulseless,  legs  and  trunk  much  the  same,  t. — First  coldness,  rigor,  and
paleness  of  the  finger-ends,  then  of  the  fingers ;  thereafter  cramped  sensa-
tion in  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  calves,  and  finally  coldness  in  the  forehead


40  ACONITUM.

(after  i  h.),\  [1570.] — Coldness  under  the  skin ;  slight,  frequently  re-
peated rigor,  not  followed  by  heat,^*. — Rigor  comviencing  in  limbs,  then  going
to  whole  body,  with  goose-flesh ;  it  seems  to  be  between  skin  and  muscle ;
disappears  on  motion  ;  worst  when  at  rest,'*. — The  rigor  continued  to  in-
crease in  the  afternoon,  and  he  became  icy  cold,  no  coverings  suffice  to
warm  him,™. — In  the  afternoon  rigor  all  over  the  body,  in  a  hot  room,'l —
Rigor  down  the  back,  especially  in  the  evening,'. — Rigor  along  the  spine,
with  goose-skin  creeping  along  the  galea  apoueurotica ;  hands  and  face
blue;  he  seeks  the  heat  of  the  stove,'". — Felt  better  after  breakfast,  but
soon  afterward,  when  in  open  air,  had  severe  attack  of  rigor  over  the  back
and  chest,  followed  by  great  heat  (with  frontal  headache),  which  the  least
movement  brought  back,". — On  the  9th  day  an  attack  of  rigor  after  mid-
night, which  seemed  to  arise  from  the  priBcordia  and  extend  to  the  limbs ;
attacks  of  this  awoke  him  frequently  during  the  night,  and  were  followed
by  burning  dry  heat  with  febrile  pulse ;  in  morning  moderate  perspiration,".
— Violent  continued  rigor ;  short-lasting  heat,  and  copious  sweat,  with
heaviness  of  head,  with  waving  and  swaying  of  the  head,'^*. — Violent  rigors ;
icy  coldness,  with  very  gratifying  yawning  and  stretching  the  limbs;  after
some  hours  moderate  warmth  and  sweat ;  during  chill  and  heat  many  con-
comitant symptomf;,'^*.  [1580.1 — Chilly  sensation  after  eating  ;  weakness ;
sleepiness  ;  at  night  increased  heat,  tossing  about,  and  sleep  interrupted  by
lively  memorable  dreams,". — Fever;  chilly  feeling,  even  coldness  over
whole  body,  especially  on  legs  and  knees,  with  confused  head,  glowing  heat
in  face,  especially  in  the  red,  hot  cheeks;  pulse  gradually  rises  from  71  to
102,  is  full  and  hard,  with  pleasant  warmth  and  anxiety,  and  sensation  of
heat  around  the  head  ;  lastly,  general  sweat,^l — Dry  heat  and  exhaustion  ;
violent  rigor  in  the  evening  with  headache,  lasting  till  midnight,^*. — Flush-
ing of  the  face,  and  coid  hands  and  feet,  especially  in  the  evening  (19  a.). —
At  night  thirst,  restlessness,  rigors,  and  heat  till  morning,". — *Fever  ;  cold-
ness of  whole  body,  with  hot  forehead,  hot'  ears,  and  inward  dry  heat,'. — ■
*Fever;  coldness  and  stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  redness  and  heat  of  one,
coldness  and  paleness  of  the  other  cheek,  with  open,  fixed  eyes,  and  con-
tracted pupils,  which  only  dilate  slightly  and  slowly  in  the  dark,'. — Toward
evening  rigor  and  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet ;  then  nausea  felt  about
the  middle  of  the  sternum,  which  continues  even  when  partaking  of  food ;
after  eating  the  nausea  goes  oflT,  and  is  followed  by  heat  of  the  face,  accom-
panied by  sad  and  despairing  thoughts,'. — Cold  shuddering,  from  the  crown
of  the  head  down  the  back  to  the  sacrum,  followed  by  an  agreeable  sensa-
tion of  warmth  in  the  skin,™. — Heat  of  skin,  then  coldness,  t.  [1590.] —
Alternation  of  coldness  and  heat,". — Alternation  of  heat  and  chill  all
night,''. — *  Alternating  attacks  (after  3,  4,  6  h.). — Either  along  with  redness
of  the  cheeks,  childish  me,mme,i\t,%uith sensation  of  lieat  all  over  the  body,  and
headache  on  moving  the  eyes  upwards  and  sideways,^.-— *0r  along  with  red-
ness of  the  cheeks  and  heat  of  the  head ;  shuddering  all  over  the  body,  with
proper  taste  in  the  mouth,'. — *0r  along  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  rigor,
with  weeping  and  pressive  headache,'^. — *0r  along  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,
an  obstinate  disposition,  burning  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  and  pressive  head-
ache,^.— -After  the  siesta,  which  usually  makes  him  warm,  feeling  of  rigor
throughout  the  body,  and  cold  of  the  upper  arm;  the  cold  feeling  persisted
even  while  walking,  and  in  the  evening  gave  way  to  a  short,  disagreeable
feeling  of  warmth,  like  a  catarrhal  fever,^". — *toward  evening  burning
heat  in  the  head  and  face,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks  and  outpressing
headache ;  at  the  same  time  rigor  over  the  wlwle  body  and  thirst  (after  14  h.),'.


ACONITUM.  41

— *Heat  in  the  head ;  forehead  hot  to  the  touch,  with  rigor  over  the  body  on
the  slightest  movement,^. — The  14th  day,  at  night,  a  rigor,  followed  by  exces-
sively copious  perspiration,  sleeplessness,".  [1600.] — Internal  rigor  from
back  over  the  legs,  with  cold  sweat ;  the  face  feels  icy  cold  in  a  sunuy  day
and  warm  room  ;  this  lasted  four  hours,  till  evening,  when  heat  and  rapid
pulse  and  symptoms  of  coryza  came  on,  with  general  laziness  and  heaviness
of  the  limbs,^^ — 15th  day ;  another  rigor  at  night,  followed  by  dry,  hot
skin,  and  perspiration,". — *Face  hot;  hands  and  feet  cold{19  c). — Flushed
face,'^. — ^Extreme  redness  of  the  cheeks,  with  a  discontented,  complaining,
lachrymose  disposition  (after  3  h'.),\ — Head  and  face  suddenly  very  warm,
t, — *Toward  evening  dry  heat  in  the  face  with  anxiety,'. — In  the  even-
ing heat  of  the  palms  and  cheeks,". — Sensation  of  heat,  first  in  the  hands,
then  all  over  the  body,  even  in  the  chest,  without  perceptible  external  heat
(after  4  h.),'. — Sometimes  heat  creeps  over  the  back,\  [1610.] — *{IIeat,
and  throwing  off  the  clothes,K)  —Flying  heat,". — Flushes  of  heat  eveniugs,^^,  ^.
— *.Dry  heat  all  over  the  body,", ". — *Skin  burning  hot,  t. — *  General  heat
and  thirst,^. — Great  internal  heat  with  thirst,". — *During  the  heat  moderate
desire  for  beer}. — *(She  drinks  little  during  the  heat,  yet  has  dry  lips,'.) —
(During  the  heat  the  cough  is  troublesome,'.)  [1620.] — (Great  heat,  from
ten  in  the  evening  till  after  midnight,  with  dyspnoea;  she  would  like  to
cough  but  cannot,  and  speaking  is  difficult ;  at  the  same  time  there  is  the
greatest  restlessness,  and  complaints  about  pain  in  the  bowels,  feet,  abdo-
men, and  back ;  she  stamped  with  her  feet,  and  would  not  allow  herself  to
be  touched,'.) — Increased  warmth  all  day,  with  exhausted  feeling  and  loss
of  appetite  ;  the  heat  increased  toward  evening,  with  internal  heat  and  swollen
veins,^". — Evenings  prostration  ;  increased  warmth  of  skin  ;  flying  stitches
along  the  sternum  and  between  the  ribs,". — On  going  to  bed  the  heat  of
the  body  increased,  especially  of  the  extremities  ;  perspiration  appeared  on
the  inside  of  the  thighs  and  of  the  scrotum,  accompanied  by  great  itching;
he  scratches  till  the  blood  comes,^". — *After  getting  to  bed  all. the  feverish
symptoms  become  much  'aggravated,  and  almost  intolerable,^^ — ^Increase
of  febrile  symptoms  toward  evening j'". — Fever,  t. — Attack  of  fever  at  3  p.m.,".
— Throughout  the  whole  afternoon  a  sense  of  feverishness  hung  about  him,
attended  by  great  powerlessness  and  prostration  of  entire  body,  the  ex-
tremities particularly,''^ — The  feverishness  continues  without  interruption
all  through  the  night,  but  abated  a  good  deal  this  morning,'^  [1630.] —
Sense  of  inward  fever  attended  by  chilliness ;  desire  to  sit  over  the  fire,  and
a  disposition  to  nausea  ;  feverishness  abated  on  going  out  into  the  open  air,
and  walking  about,''^— Sense  of  inward  fever,  with  the  feeling  of  prostra-
tion,"*.— Dry  heat  and  tightness  of  the  skin  over  the  whole  body,  t. —
Warmth  extends  over  the  whole  body,  especially  stomach  and  abdomen,
accompanied  by  sweat,  t. — Whole  body  warm  and  sweating,  t. — Slight
warmth  and  moderate  sweat,". — Pleasant  warmth  of  the  whole  body ,  especially
in  back,  with  moderate  si«ea<,''^-^-Perspiration,  with  febrile  rigors  (after  3  h.),'.
— Febrile  perspiration,'. — *  Sour-smelling  sweat  all  over  the  body,^.  [1640.] —
Profuse  sweat,  i,". — *  Cold  sweats  {several).— Q\iria.c%  cold,  and  covered  with
clammy  sweat,  t. — Moderate  perspiration  all  over  the  hody^. — Skin  inclined
to  transpiration  (several). — General  warm,  steaming  sweat  (several). — Exha-
lation and  sweat  all  over  the  body,'^. — General  sweat,  especially  on  the
forehead  and  praecordia."'^. — Sweat  toward  noon,'l — Sweat  after  midnight,° .
[1650.] — Nocturnal  transpiration  (several). — Violent  sweat  without  ex-
haustion.'l — Though  his  speech  was  bold  and  his  look  animated  cold  sweat
3tood  on  his  brow,  and  his  pulse  could  scarcely  be  felt,'*. — In  the  morning


42  ACONITUM.

excessive  sweat  (after  nightly  delirium)/". — Profuse  sweat,  with  copious
flow  of  urine,'^ — Profuse  sweat,  with  the  diarrhosa  and  increased  flow  of
urine,'l — Copious  sweat  followed  the  convulsions,  t.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Confubion,  etc.;  muddled
and  empty  sensation  in  head  ;  head  heavy  and  dizzy,  etc. ;  blowing  of  much
bright-red  blood  from  nose;  fluent  coryza ;  hiccup;  hurried  call  to  stool;
acute  stitches  in  cardiac  region,  etc. ;  weakness  in  lower  legs;  sensation  in
ankles  as  if  tightly  tied,  etc. ;  great  exhaustion,  etc. ;  shivering  and  frequent
yawning;  excessive  sweat;  frequent  yawning;  lias  asleep  on  back,  etc.;
hard,  red  swelling  of  right  upper  lid,  etc. — (Forenoon),  Sweat;  sleepiness;
vertigo,  etc. — (Afternoon),  Great  vertigo  ;  violent,  sticking  pain  in  upper
orbital  border,  etc. ;  cough  ;  pain  in  chest,  etc. ;  shoots  in  centre  of  sternum,
etc. ;  pulse  full  and  quick,  etc. ;  rigor,  etc. ;  heat,  etc. ;  fever ;  attack  of
fever,  3  P.  M. ;  great  sleepiness  ;  shooting  pain  in  right  supra-orbital  ridge,
etc. — (Evening),  Confusion  of  head,  etc. ;  headache  ;  pain  in  forehead ;
pressive  headache  in  vertex  ;  pressing-out  pain  in  temples,  etc. ;  burning-
itching  in  both  ears  ;  face  hot ;  *flying  stitches,  here  and  there,  etc. ;  stiff
feeling  in  nape;  warmth  of  palms;  transient  stitches,  etc.;  chilliness;
shivering,  etc. ;  rigor  down  back  ;  prostration,  etc. ;  heat,  etc. ;  lachryma-
tion. — (Night),  *  Delirium;  pressive  pain  on  vertex;  hot  prickings  in  tips
of  fingers ;  hot  prickings  in  toes  ;  transpiration  ;  *much  thirst,  etc. ;  state
of  waking  dreaminess,  etc.  ;  lachrymation  ;  *pains  become  intolerable. —
(Before  Midnight),  Shuddering ;  all  the  feverish  symptoms. — (After  Mid-
night), *  Short  cough,  etc. ;  short  breath;  attack  of  rigor,  etc. ;  very  vivid
dream,  etc. — (Open  Air),  Dizzy  confusion  of  head ;  squeezing  in  forehead
over  root  of  nose,  etc. ;  cold  feeling  of  the  eyes ;  burning,  itching  and
darting  in  both  ears;  the  throat-symptoms;  nausea;  irritation  of  larynx
and  dry  cough ;  general  anxious  sensation,  etc. ;  severe  attack  of  rigor,
etc.— (Bending  body  forward).  Vertigo ;  vertigo,  etc. ;  vertigo  and  head-
ache; giddy  heaviness  of  head,  etc. ;  *headache;  *  fulness  of  the  forehead,
etc. ;  dull  pain  in  vertex,  etc. ;  drawing  bellyache,  etc. — -(Bending  body
sidewards).  Sensitive  stitches  in  thorax.— (On  going  to  bed).  Heat  of  body.
— (After  getting  to  bed),  '^All  the  feverish  sympioins. — (Drinking),  Cough.
— (On  falling  asleep),  *Jerkings;  itching  of  limbs. — (Flexing  fingers  to
wrist-joint),  Violent  shootings  in  elbow-joint,  etc. — (Driving),  Vertigo. —
(Eating),  Uncommon  sleepiness. — (Going  in  evening  from  half-dark  room
into  street),  Flickering  before  eyes,  etc. — (Going  indoors  from  open  air).
Pulse  quickened,  etc. — (Grasping  anything),  Sensation  of  weight  in  arms,
etc.— (During  heat  of  body),  Cough. — (Inspiration),  Dull  stitches  under
ribs  of  left  side  ;  oppression  of  chest,  etc. ;  stitches  from  lowest  rib  on  right
side  to  apex  of  shoulder  blade,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  side  of  spine,  etc. — (Deep
inspiration),  Oppression  of  chest ;  oppression  and  anxiety  of  chest ;  pains
in  chest ;  pressive  pain  in  region  of  second  left  rib,  etc.  ;  stitches  between
scapulas,  etc. ;  painful  shocks  in  left  chest,  superiorly ;  pain  from  right
scapula  to  front  of  chest. — (Laughing  aloud).  Sharp  stitch  under  ribs  on
right  side. — (light).  Headache. — (Lying),  Stifi'and  bruised  feeling  in  left
side  of  neck,  etc. — (Lying  on  sidie),  *  Violent  cough. — (After  lying  down),
Powerlessuess  in  head  of  femur,  etc.— (Lying  on  back),  *heart  symptoms,".
— (Mental  exertion).  Pain  in  head  and  face. — ^(Motion),  Confusion  in
head,  etc. ;  headache,  etc. ;  headache,  first  in  vertex,  etc. ;  weariness  in  neck,
etc. ;  painful  stiffness  in  small  of  back,  etc. ;  tearing  pain  down  arm,  etc.;
pains  in  bones  of  forearm  ;  acute  pain  in  right  forearm,  etc. ;  drawing  pain
in  thighs,  etc. ;  general  anxious  sensation,  etc. ;  chilliness ;  severe  attack


ACONITUM.  43

of  rigor,  etc. — (Appearance  of  Menses),  Kage ;  sharp  pain  in  loins. —
(Moving  affected  part),  Rheumatio  pain  in  nape;  drawing  pain  to  left  of
nape,  etc. ;  trembling  in  wrist ;  pain,  etc.,  in  right  thumb-joint;  drawing
pain  in  hip-joint.  —  (Moving  the  head),  Vertigo;  shooting  in  nape;
stretching  in  cervical  muscles. — (Rising  up),  *Vertigo. — (Noise),  Head-
ache.— (Laying  on  cool  hand).  Headache,  etc. — (Pressure),  Pain  on  right
supraorbital  ridge,  etc. ;  violent  drawing  pain  in  both  sides  of  spine,
etc. ;  violent  tearing  pain  in  small  of  back ;  violent  sticking  pain  in
upper  orbital  border,  etc. — (Rest),  Single  shootings  in  middle  of  right
upper  arm,  etc. ;  paralytic  feeling  in  right  forearm ;  tired  feeling  in
lower  limbs;  rigor,  etc. — (Standing),  Vertigo;  pressive  pain  in  pit  of
stomach  ;  drawing  pain  in  head  of  left  femur. — (Sitting),  Nausea,  etc. ;
pressive  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  anxiety  in  cardiac  region,  etc. ;  drawing
pain  in  head  of  left  femur ;  powerlessness  of  legs  and  thighs. — (Speaking),
Headache. — (Stepping),  Tendve  pressure  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions. — (In
sleep).  Inspiration  through  nose  impeded. — (After  sleeping),  Pain  in
shoulder  and  hip-joint ;  powerlessness  in  head  of  femur,  etc. — (On  attempting
to  sit  up),  Faintness. — (While  sitting  during  day).  State  of  waking
dreaminess,  etc. — (Treading),  Pain  in  right  heel. — (Change  of  tempera-
ture). Dry  cough,  etc. — (Tobacco-smoke),  Easy  stupefaction ;  dryness  of
throat ;  tickling  in  larynx ;  severe  cough. — (Touch),  Pain  in  lowest  rib,
etc. — (Urinating),  Sensation  of  splashing  in  bladder;  stinging  in  fossa
navicularis ;  fainting  kind  of  feel ;  burning  in  urethra ;  pains  in  glans
penis ;  shootings  in  glans  penis. — (Walking),  Vertigo  ;  dizzy  confusion  of
head,  etc. ;  the  throat  symptoms  ;  nausea  ;  pressive  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  ;
shooting  in  spleen ;  pain  in  bladder  ;  single  momentary  shock  in  urethra ;
palpitation,  etc. ;  pain  in  loins,  etc. ;  pressure  in  elbows,  knees,  hips ;  pain-
ful pressure  in  hip-joint ;  drawing  pain  in  head  of  left  femur,  etc. ;  stiff-
ness and  heaviness  of  limbs ;  great  fatigue,  etc. ;  pain  in  patella ;  acute,
pressing  pain  in  left  patella,  etc. ;  sleeping  of  toes  of  right  foot. — (When*
not  urinating),  Burning  in  neck  of  bladder.— (Warmth  of  room),  *Ver-
tigo  and  stupefaction  ;  *forepart  of  head  feels  as  if  nailed  up;  *headache,
etc. ;  *dry  cough;  *anxiety  in  pit  of  stomach;  legs  very  cold. — (Writing),
Paralytic  feeling  in  right  forearm.

Ameliorations. —  (Morning),  Feverishness. — (Open  air),  *Much
relieved  ;  *headache,  feverishuess,  etc. — (Bending  body  backwards),  Pres-
sive pain  in  chest. — (Cold  Water),  Headache,  etc. — (Compression),  Pain
in  ankle. — (Drinking  cold  water),  anxiety. — (Eating),  Bu^'ning,  itching,
and  darting  in  both  ears  ;  nauseous  taste;  the  throat  symptoms;  nausea. —
(Heat),  Creeping  in  scalp. — (Deep  Inspiration),  Lancinating  stitches  in
region  of  heart,  etc. ;  oppression  of  chest. — (Lying  quiet  in  dark  room),
Headache. — (Lying  on  back).  Violent  cough. — (Lying  down).  Shooting  im
lower  half  of  left  side  of  chest. — (Motion),  Stiff  and  bruised  feeling  in  left
side  of  neck,  etc. ;  paralytic  pressure  in  small  of  back  ;  paralytic  feeling
in  right  forearm. — (Moving  affected  part).  Pain  in  right  hand. — (ftuiet).
Palpitation,  etc. — (Rubbing),  Itching  in  prepuce ;  lancinating  stitches  in
region  of  heart,  etc. — (Sitting),  Frontal  headache. — (Stooping),  Sensitive-
ness of  eyeball ;  pressure  in  small  of  back. — ^Warm  soup).  Abdominal
symptoms. — (After  vomiting),  Hope  aroused. — (Walking), Vertigo ;  nausea
and  sinking  in  pit  of  stomach ;  feverishness,  etc. — (Washing  in  cold
water).  Pain  in  top  of  head. — (Wine),  Heaviness  and  oppression  of  chest.
— (Wine  and  coffee),  removed  symptoms  for  a  short  time  only,".


44  ACONITUM— ACONITUM  SEPTENTRIONALE.

JVbtes  and  Additions. — Symptom  1,  bracket ;  S.  3,  note,  not  found
in  the  original  (Hughes);  S.  4,  note,  mental  effect  of  vomiting  after  an
antidote  had  been  given ;  S.  92,  read  "  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  could  not
think,  understand,  or  know  anything  in  his  head  as  formerly,  but  that  all
these  mental  processes  took  place  in  the  prsecordial  region,  and  about  the
pit  of  the  stomach;  after  two  hours  he  was  twice  attacked  with  vertigo,
and  then  the  ordinary  thinking  power  returned  in  the  head,"" ;  S.  147,  note,
ailments  from  which  the  patient  suffered  before  taking  Aconite ;  S.  242,
for  "right"  read  "left;"  S.  316,  for  "balls"  read  "right  ball;"  S.  349,
before  "water"  insert  "hot;"  S.  479,  note,  local  effect;  S.  487,  see  note  to
S.  479  ;  S.  526,  see  note  to  S.479  ;  S.  616,  note,  "  not  found  ;"  S.  795,  note,
the  bladder  was  previously  unhealthy  ;  S.  813,  bracket ;  S.  865,  bracket ;
S.  866,  bracket,  note,  this  discharge  coincided  with  the  dispersions  of  the
iliac  swelling  ;  S.  1077,  read  instead  of  "as  long  a  duration,"  "no  long  dura-
tion ;"  S.  1174,  bracket ;  S.  1177,  see  S.  1420  ;  S.  1223,  note,  "  with  stupor;"
S.  1225,  note,  local  action,  see  note  to  S.  147  ;  S.  1235,  bracket,  "  with
frequent  cough,"  see  note  to  S.  147  ;  S.  1 238,  for  "  same  "  read  "  lame  ;"  S.
1347,  add  "  and  in  left  metacarpal  bones ;"  after  S.  1365,  add  (as  if  one
had  taken  cold  after  a  profuse  sweat ;  headache,  roaring  in  the  ears,  coryza,
bellyache,  especially  mornings,'^),  note,  the  actual  effect  of  a  chill  not  as  a
chill;  S.  1403,  note,  see  S.  1223  and  note;  S.  1415,  for  "gnawing"  read
"growing;"  S.  1433,  note,  ending  in  death;  S.  1447,  bracket,  note,  as  this
eruption  appeared  the  pain  ceased  ;  S.  1448,  bracket,  see  note  to  1447  ;  S.
1450,  bracket,  see  note  to  1447  ;  S.  1474,  bracket,  note,  symptom  of  conva-
lescence ;  S.  1481,  for  "  awake"  read  "  wakened  ;"  S.  1591,  add  "  with  rest-
less sleep;"  S.  1635,  note,  reaction  from  1550.

Additions. — Note  omissions,  owing  to  imperfect  index;  very  kindly
pointed  out  by  Dr.  Berridge,  of  London.

(Fragmentary  proving  by  Robinson.)

On  getting  into  a  warm  bath  the  feeling  of  formication  and  tingling
came  on  again  in  the  fingers,''*'. — Lame,  sprained  feeling  in  the  right  meta-
carpus,'*.— Several  strange  dreams;  woke,  and  found  himself  laughing
heartily ,''^ — Momentary  drawing  pain  in  the  right  forefinger,  and  at  the
same  time  pain  in  the  left  ankle  as  before,'*. — Itching,  nettle-rash  like
eruption  on  the  back  of  both  hands,  the  spots  being  very  well  marked,'". —
Flying,  growing-like  pains  all  forenoon  in  metacarpi  and  finger-joints  of
both  hands,'l — Considerable  rumbling  of  flatulence  in  bowels,'^ — On  going
into  open  air  felt  much  relieved,  but  on  getting  within  doors  again  all  the
symptoms  of  feverishness  became  greatly  aggravated,''. — Violent  coryza
and  lachrymation,'^ — Harsh,  dry  cough,". — Trifling  cough,  but  without
expectoration.'^ — Several  sharp,  flying  stitches  in  the  third  and  fourth
right  toes  shortly  after  getting  to  bed,'". — Paralyzed,  inactive  feeling  in  the
intestines,'".

The  pain  over  the  right  eye  and  behind  the  mastoid  process  quite  per-
sistent,".— Food  distresses  me  after  eating,*". — Lascivious  dreams,*".

Aphonia  lasted  more  than  two  weeks,  t.

ACONITUM  SEPTENTRIONALE,  Koelle.

This  plant  is  a  blue-flowered  variety  of  Aeon,  lycoctonum,  L.,  or  a  nearly
allied  species ;  it  is  found  on  the  rocky  hills  of  Sweden  (and  in  the  north
of  Europe).  _  Preparation,  The  extract  (obtained  by  digesting  the  root  with
rectified  spirits)  has  been  proved.


ACT^A  EACEMOSA— ACT^A  SPICATA.  45

Authority.  Carl  v.  SchrofF,  Jr.,  gave  one,  two,  and  three  decigrammes
to  Herr  Krueg.

Symptoms. — Slight  confusion  of  the  head. — Dull  pressure  in  the
scalp. — Unpleasant  sensation  in  the  stomach. — Sense  of  fulness  in  the  stom-
ach.— Taste  at  first  nauseous,  became  sweetish  at  the  forepart  and  on  the
edges  of  the  tongue. — Passage  of  clear  urine. — General  sick  feeling.

Pulse  (from  one  decigramme)  reduced  from  76  to  64. — Pulse  (from  two
decigrammes)  reduced  from  66  to  60. — Pulse  (from  three  decigrammes)
not  altered  in  frequency,  but  became  small  and  irregular.


ACTiEA  RACEMOSA.

(See  CiMiciFUGA.)

ACT^A  SPICATA.

Actsea  spicata,  L.  Ned.  order,  Ranunculacese.  Common  names,  Bane-
berry,  Herb  Christopher.  Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  root  obtained  in
the  fall.

Authorities.  1,  Petroz,  Journ.  d.  1.  Soc.  Gal.,  3,  12;  2,  Linnaeus,  from
Roth's  M.  M.,  3,  228;  3,  Colden,  ibid.;  4.  Lemercier,  ibid.

M.ind. — Furious  delirium,"^. — Delirium  during  fever ,^. — Loss  of  con-
sciousness,^.

Head. — Boring  pain  in  the  head,^. — Headache,  which  persists  after  the
fever,' — Pressure  in  the  forehead,  from  having  been  in  broad  daylight,^ —
Twitching  pain  in  the  teniples,\ — Pressure  in  the  vertex,'. — Hammering
pain  in  occiput,'. — Pain  which  seems  seated  in  the  periosteum  and  even  in
the  bones  of  the  skull,'. — The  symptoms  are,  in  general,  more  intense  at
night;  they  are  aggravated  by  walking;  for  the  most  part,  they  return
periodically,'. — Sensation  of  horripilation  on  the  scalp,l— Eruption  of  small
pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp,^ — Warm  sweat  of  the  head,'.

Eyes. — Suggillations  of  the  conjunctiva,'. — Ophthalmia,  like  catarrhal
inflammation,'. — Flow  of  burning  tears,'. — Objects  $eem  colored  blue,'. —
Spots  before  eyes  when  looking  steadily,'.

Ears. — ^The  ear  is  sore  to  the  touch,'. — Twitching  pain  in  ears  when
sneezing,  or  blowing  nose,'. — Murmuring  in  the  ears  after  sleeping;  it  be-
comes worse  from  mental  anxiety,'.

Nose. — Bruised  pain  in  nose,'. — Redness  of  the  nostril,'. — The  nasal
mucus  is  tinged  with  blood,'. — Nasal  hemorrhage,  during  the  oppression  of
the  chest,'.

Face. — The  skin  around  the  mouth  becomes  slightly  yellowish,'. — The
cheek  on  which  he  lies  perspires  easily,'. — *Pain  as  oj  rheumatism  in  the
faee^.

Mouth. — The  lips  are  somewhat  chapped,'. — The  salivary  secretion  is
increased,'. — Slightly  fetid  odor  from  the  mouth,'.

Throat, — The  submaxillary  glands  are  painful  when  chewing,'. — The
throat  becomes  sore  when  speaking,'. — Tearing  pains  in  the  throat,  especi-
ally when  breathing  cold  morning  or  evening  air,'.

Stomach. — Hunger,  with  aversion  to  food,'. — Sharp  appetite  in  the
morning,'. — Nausea,'. — Vomiting,*.— Desire  to  vomit,  with  dizziness,'. —
Vomiting  of  sour  matters,'. — Uneasiness  after  a  meal,'. — Cramp  of  the


46  ACTiEA  SPICATA.

storaaeh,\ — Painful  sensation  of  pressure  at  pit  of  stomach/. — Drawing  in
the  epigastric  region/.

Abdomen. — Beatings  in  right  hypochondrium/. — Throbbing  in  right
hypuchondrium/. — The  right  hypochondrium  is  painful  to  pressure/. — The
left  hypochondrium  becomes  almost  insensible/. — Spasmodic  contractions
of  the  bowels/. — Uneasiness  in  bowels/. — Feeling  of  compression  in  abdo-
men/.— Pain  in  the  abdomen  like  that  which  precedes  or  accompanies
menstruation/. — Pain  in  the  bowels  like  that  which  precedes  diarrhoea/. —
Copious  emission  of  flatulence/.

Stool  and  Anus. — Pappy  stool/. — The  alvine  evacuations  are  sus-
pended/.

Ui'inary  Orr/ans. — Frequent  urging  to  urinate/. — Frequent  urging
and  painful  micturition/. — The  urine  deposits  a  white  sediment/.

Mespir'atort/  Aitparatus. — Difficult  inspiration,  with  stitching
pain  in  the  epigastrium  when  drawing  a  deep  breath/. — Difficult  breath-
ing, with  painful  shock  in  the  abdomen  at  each  inspiration/. — Difficult
breathing,  with  pain  in  stomach,^ — Difficult  breathing,  with  pain  in  hip,'.
— Breathing  seems  difficult,  on  account  of  weakness,  especially  when  expir-
ing air,\

Sack. — Throbbing  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,'. — Bruised
pain  in  sacral  region,  when  lying  on  the  side,\

Extremities  in  General. — ^Swelling  of  the  joints  after  slight
fatigue,'.

Upper  Extremities. — *Pain  as  from,  paralytic  weakness  in  the
hands,^. — The  fingers  are  numb  and  cold;  they  are  discolored,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Swelling  of  the  lower  limbs/. — Boring  pain
in  the  lower  limbs,  ameliorated  by  stretching  them,'. — Weakness  of  the
lower  extremities,  after  changes  of  temperature,'. — Trembling  in  the  thighs
when  lifting  them,'. — Sensation  of  great  weariness  in  the  knees,'.

Generalities. — Lassitude  after  eating/. — Sudden  lassitude,  without
apparent  cause/. — Debility  from  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — Easily  tired
by  much  talking,'. — Throbbing  in  the  body,'. — Fermentation  of  the
blood,'. — The  pains  ot  Aotma  spicata  are,  in  general,  tearing,  drawing,'.

Fever. —  Horripilation  after  drinking,'. —  Horripilation  followed  by
heat,  during  which  vomiting  supervenes,'. — Viscid  sweat/. — Cold  perspi-
ration and  malaise,^.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Sharp  appetite  ;  numbness
of  right  finger-tips. — (Towards  evening),  Viscid  sweat. — (  When  ivalking  in
openair').  Debility. — (  When  draiow()'dee/>6refli/i).  Difficult  inspiration,  etc. —
{At  each  inspiration).  Painful  shock  in  abdomen. — (  When  expiring  air),
Breathing  seems  difficult,  etc. — (Breathing  cold  morning  or  evening  air).
Tearing  pains  in  throat. — {When  chewing).  Submaxillary  glands  painful. —
{After  drinking).  Horripilation. — {From  having  been  in  broad  daylight).
Pressure  in  forehead. — {After  eating').  Lassitude. — {After  n  meal),  Uneasi-
ness.— {After  slight  fatigue).  Swelling  of  the  joints. — (  When  looking  steadily),
Spots  before  eyes. — (  When  lying  in  bed),  Bruised  pains  in  sacral  region. —
{Mental  anxiety),  Murmuring  in  the  ears. — {During  oppression  of  chest).  Na-
sal hemorrhage. — {Periodically),  Symptoms  return.— (0?i  pressure),  Eight
hypochondrium  painful. — {Sneezing,  or  blowing  nose).  Twitching  pain  in
ears. — {After  sleeping),  Murmuring  in  ears. — {When  speaking).  Throat  be-
comes sore — {Much  talking),  Eaailj  tired  by. — {After  changes  of  tempera-
ture), "Weakness  of  lower  extremities. — (  Walking),  Head  symptoms.

Amelioration. — {Stretching  lower  limbs),  Boring  pain  in  them.


ADELHEIDSQUELLE.  47


ADELHEIDSQUELLE.


"Mineral"  Spring  at  Heilbrunn;  contains  among  other  substances,  Io-
dine, Bromine,  Alumina,  Soda,  etc.


Analysis  (Pettenkofer).

Sod.  lod., .22

Carbonate  of  Soda, .216

Free  Garb,  gas.

13.18  c.  c.

" Brom., .307

t(

Lime, .584

Carburetted  H.

8.02

" Ctilur.,  38.(168

u

Magnes., .144

Oxygen,

1.38

" Sulph., .048

((

Iron, .072

Nitrogen, ,

6.54

Potass  Chlor.,  .020

Alumina,

Silieea,

Organic,

0.142
.147
.165

Authorities.  Bethniann  (Archiv.  15).  1,  Man,  61  years  old,  with  chronic
catarrh,  took  20  ounces  daily,  fasting;  2,  Girl,  12  years  old,  well  except  an
enlarged  thyroid,  dranli  three  or  four  wineglasses  daily  after  breakfast.

Mind. — Much  trilling  and  tra-la-ing,  which  formerly  she  never  did,^

Jlead. — Confusion  of  head,  better  in  open  air,\

Eyes. — Eyes  feel  swollen,  as  after  taking  cold  ;  without  redness,\

Nose. — Toward  the  end  of  the  cure,  she  had  nose-bleed,  and  much  toss-
ing about  the  bed  at  night  (conip.  lod.),^ — Nose-bleed  (the  second  day
after  beginning  to  take  the  waters  the  second  time),^.

Face. — Cheeks  became  full,  and  the  face  red ;  was  formerly  thin  and
pale,l

3Iouth. — Salivation,  especially  nights,^

Stomach. — Soon  after  commencing  the  water,  appetite  increased,
became  conversational  and  lively,^ — Appetite  for  potatoes  and  sour  fruit,'.
—[10.]  Thirst  unusual,^.— Aversion  to  meat  and  roasted  articles,^ — Painful
flatulent  distension  in  pit  of  storaach,^

Ahdotnen, — Stomachache  in  upper  abdomen  wakes  hira,\ — Lower
abdomen  became  thick  and  protruding,^ — Copious  flatus  after  gunpowder,^.

Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  watery,  clear  brown,  then  yellow  and
watery,  four  or  flve  times  a  day,  with  much  offensive  flatus ;  no  pains,  but
loud  rumblings,  grumblings,  and  noises  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,
after  every  eating  or  drinking,  especially  after  use  of  pears ;  good  appetite
{coffee,  or  coffee-drinking,  relieved  the  attacks,  especially  the  rumblings  :
Nat.  carb.  relieved  the  diarrhoea),'.

Sexual  Orf/nns. — Testicles  sensitive,^

Chest. — [20.]  Chest  is  tired ;  reading  fatigues  (comp.  Nat.  mur.),^. — The
Whole  chest  is  painfully  sensitive,  as  if  inflamed  (Spt.  nit.  dulc,  antidote),'.

Neck  and  Suck. — The  thyroid  gland  became  much  swollen,  but
not  the  cervical  and  inferior  maxillary  glands,'.

TJljper  Extremities.— Small,  hard  indurations  (large  as  a  flax-
seed) in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  very  near  the  last  joint  of  the  fourth  finger,
adherent  to  the  bone,'.

Lotver  Extremities. — After  rising  in  the  morning,  cramp  in  left
calf  twice  disappeared  after  going  around,'.

Skin. — Hard  pimples,  with  a  red,  inflamed  areola,  itching  somewhat,
with  a  yellow,  pustular  apex,  somewhat  moist  on  scratching  it  off'  (like
small  boils),  on  neck,  chest,  fingers,  and  toes  (comp.  Sil.),^.

(Note.  This  water  has  been  used  for  hundreds  of  years  for  goitre,  scrofu-
lous troubles  of  various  kinds,  enlarged  glands,  etc.)


48  ^SCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.


^SCULUS  GLABRA.

iEsculus  glabra,  Willd.  Nat.  order,  Sapindaceffi.  Common  names,  Fetid
Buckeye,  Ohio  Buckeye. Preparation,  Triturations  from  the  whole  fruit.

Authority. Hale  ("New  Remedies").

Mind. — Confusion  of  mind,  always  attended  by  vertigo,  and  may  be
followed  by  stupefaction  and  coma.

Head, — Vertigo,  with  staggering,  reeling  and  unconsciousness. — Ver-
tigo with  fulness  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  dimness  of  sight,  thickness  of
speech,  nausea,  and  vomiting.

JEi/es. — Dimness  of  sight,  and  even  loss  of  sight. — Eyes  fixed  and  ex-
pressionless.

Mouth. — Thickness  of  speech  from  paralysis  of  the  tongue.

Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Great  distension  of  the  stomach  and
abdomen. — Nausea,  with  loathing  of  food  and  vomiting,  with  cramp-like
pain  in  stomach.

Stool  and  Anus. — Hard,  knotty  stools. — *Obstinate  constipation. —

-ZVec'/i"  and  Back. — Wryneck  (spasmodic). — *Great  lameness  and
weakness  of  the  back.

JEjctfemiti.es. — Trembling  of  the  lower  limbs,  with  spasmodic  con-
tractions.

Generalities. — Spasms  and  convulsions,  followed  by  paralysis. —
Great  weakness.

^scuLus  hippocasta'num.

^sculus  Hippocastanum,  L.  Nat.  order,  Sapindacese.  Common  names.
Horse  Chestnut ;  (Germ.)  Rosskastanie ;  (Fr.)  Le  marronuier  d'lnde.
Preparation,  Trituration  or  tincture  from  the  fresh  fruit  without  the  shell.

Authorities.  1,  Cooley,  N.  Y.  St.  Trans.,  8,  330  (took  the  tinct.) ;  2,
Buchmann,  Viertl  Jahrschrift,  10,  1  (took  the  powdered  nut  and  tinct.) ;
3,  Augusta  B.,  ibid,  (nut  and  0);  4,  Miss  W.  Br.,  ibid,  (nut) ;  5,  Miss  W.
N.,  ibid,  (nut) ;  6,  Pastor  R.  H.,  ibid,  (nut) ;  7,  Ed.  B.,  ibid,  (tinct.) ;  8.  Mrs.
J.,  ibid,  (tinct.);  9,  C.  W.  Boyce,  Hale's  New  Remedies,  2d  ed.  (1st.  dec.
trit.);  10,  T.  C.  Duncan,  ibid,  (,1st  and  2d  dee.  dil.);  11,  W.  Warren,  ibid.,
and  N.  Am.  J.  of  Horn.,  10,  80  (1st  and  2d  dec.  trit.);  12,  H.  M.  Paine
ibid,  (tincture);  13,  W.  H.  Burt,  ibid,  (crude  nut  and  1st  dec.  trit.);  14,
C.  H.  Lee,  ibid.  (3d  dil.  and  tinct.) ;  15,  Dr.  J.  C.  Raymond,  N.  Am.  J.  of
Horn.,  10,  90  (6th  cent,  potency).

Mind, — Great  repugnance  to  the  drug,'. — Inward  cheerfulness  and
placidity  of  temper,^ — *  Feeling  very  depressed  and  low-spirited,^^.— *  Feeling
very  sad^^. — *Feel  dull,  gloomy,  and  despondent^''. — Gloomy  forebodings,". —
^Extremely  irritable;  loses  temper  easy  and  gains  control  over  it  again  but
slowly,'". — Feels  miserably  cross, 'I — JDay  before,  when  he  had  the  darting
pains  in  the  trachea,  he  had  a  feeling  as  if  death  was  impending;  but  this
was  followed  by  an  exalted  condition  of  brain  and  nervous  sj'stem ;  thoughts
flowed  free,  easy,  and  clear,'". — [10.]  Thoughts  rapid,'". — Mind  clear,'". —
Mind  very  clear,  with  a  light  feeling  of  anterior  lobes;  posterior  portion  of
head  and  cerebellum  feel  heavy  and  dull,'". — Mind  cloudy,'". — Confusion
of  ideas;  mind  gets  confused;'".— Very  dull  and  stupid,'*.— Disincliuation
to  perform  any  labor,'^ — Have  not  studied  to-day,'". — Feel  disinclined  to
study,  and  wanting  rest,'". —  Unable  to  fix  his  attention,^". — [20.]  Loss  of


iESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  49

memory,"*. — On  waking  (from  sleep  while  sitting)  cannot  recognize  what
she  sees;  knows  not  where  she  is,  nor  whence  came  the  objects  about  ber,^

Head,, — Confusion  of  head,". — Sensation  in  head  as  if  intoxicated,^ —
Confused  feeling  in  head,  with  giddiness,^^. — Vertigo,  quite  troublesome,".
— Vertigo,  very  annoying  all  the  afternoon,'^ — Slight  vertigo,". — Vertigo,
with  sense  of  balancing  in  the  head,". — -Headache  general,  throughout
whole  head,". — [30.]  Headache  worse  on  stooping  or  getting  up  from  a
chair,'*. — Heat  in  head,*. — Headache  all  over,  as  if  it  would  burst  (during
fever),'*. — Pain  and  fulness  in  head,  with  stiffness  in  the  neck  and  spine,'.
— Fulness  in  head,'*. — Severe  headache,  as  if  head  would  split,'*. — Dull
headache,". — Brain  feels  dull  and  heavy,'. — Head  feels  heavy,  dull,  especi-
ally in  region  of  right  ear,'". — Dull  pains  in  head,  here  and  there,  but  prin-
cipally in  right  temple  and  occiput,  followed  by  dull  stitches  in  the  fore-
head and  temple,". — [40.]  Heaviness  of  head,^ — Lancinating  headache,'. —
Slight  frontal  headache  (in  one  hour),". — Very  severe  frontal  headache,  all
day,". — Dull  frontal  headaehe,^^.—Da\\,  heavy  frontal  headache,'". — *Dull
frontal  headache,  with  constrictive  feeling  of  skin  of  forehead, ^^. — Dull  frontal
headache,  with  fluent  coryza,'^. — Dull  weight  in  forehead,^". — *Dull  pressure
in  forehead,  with  slight  feeling  of  nausea  in  stomach,  followed  immediately  by
stitches  in  right  hypoehondrium,^^. — [50.]  Aching  in  forehead ;  feeling  in  it  as
during  cold  in  head,*. — Throbbing  in  right  frontal  eminence,". — Neuralgic
pain  in  region  of  causality  (right),  darts  towards  the  left,  with  a  constricted
feeling  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  followed  by  flying  pains  in  the  epigas-
tric region  (right  lower  lobe  of  liver)  (in  one  hour),". — Slight  uneasiness
in  region  of  left  causality,'". — Occasional  neuralgic  pains  in  forehead  and
apex  of  heart,". — Dull  pain  in  forehead  over  right  eye,'°. — Headache  over
right  eye  (after  one  hour),". — Pressure  of  hat  on  forehead  leaves  a  large,
red  spot,'". — Frequent  flying  pains  in  forehead  and  temples  all  day,".^
Frequent  flying  pains  through  temples,^^. — [60.]  Pain  and  soreness  at  tem-
poral region,'".— Sharp  pressing  pain  in  right  temple,". — Dull  pain  in  left
temple,". — Quite  severe  pains  in  left  temple,'. — Severe  shooting  pains  in
left  temple,'*. — Fine  stitches  in  left  temple,  with  slight  feeling  of  nausea  in
stomach,". — Head  feels  dull  over  temple,'". — Formication  in  the  front  of
the  temple,". — Feeling  as  if  she  had  a  board  upon  the  head,''. — Ssnsation  of
fulness  in  all  the  upper  part  of  the  head,'^ — [70.]  Headache  in  upper  part
of  head;  the  pain  is  uniform  and  constant;  the  sensation  that  of  fulness
and  pressure  rather  than  acute  pain,". — Quite  severe  pain  in  right  side  of
head,  above  the  temples,^. — -A  sore  spot  in  right  parietal  bone,  which,  upon
pressure,  felt  as  if  a  knife  were  piercing  through,'*. — Back  of  head  feels
heavy,'". — Dull,  heavy  pressure  on  cerebellum,'", — Bruised  feeling  in  the
occiput,  with  feeling  of  lameness  in  back  of  neck,". — Dull  pain  in  occiput,
extending  to  ears,". — Dull  pain  in  occiput,  with  flushes  of  heat  in  the  integu-
ments of  the  occiput,  back  of  neck  and  shoulders,". — Very  severe  lancinating
headache  at  base  of  brain,  as  if  too  full,'*. — Hypersesthesia  of  scalp,'". —
Soreness  of  right  side  of  scalp  (the  side  which  rested  on  the  pillow),'".

JEf/es. — [80.]  Eyes  dull,'. — Eyes  clear,'". — Eyes  of  a  pinkish  hue,'*. —
Quivering  of  lids,'. — Twitching  of  lids,'". — Tries  to  keep  from  winking,'". —
Frequent  twitching  of  muscles  under  left  eye,". — Heat  in  the  eyes,*. — Se-
vere smarting  of  the  eyes,". — [90,]  *  Weight  in  the  eyes,^. — Eyes  heavy ^''. —
Jerking  in  right  eye  (after  three  and  a  half  hours),". — Shooting  pain  in  left
eye,'". — Light  and  giddy  pain  in  right  eye,  white  near  light,'". — Burning
and  stinging  deep  in  left  orbit,  as  if  the  pain  surrounded  the  ball  of  the
left  eye,  with  feeling  of  coldness  in  eye,". — Painful  aching  over  left  eye,''. —
VOL.  I. — 4


50  JESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Lachryination,\ — Eyes  filled  with  tears/". — Burning  in  inner  canthi,l — ■
[100.]  Soreness  of  balls  of  eyes,". — Pupils  dilated;  contract  slowly,'". —
She  can  read  well  at  a  distance ;  can  read  without  spectacles,  which  she
could  never  do  before,'. — Flickering  before  eyes,''. — Optical  illusions,'".

Ears. — Burning  in  the  ears,". — Fulness  in  both  ears,'". — Pressure  in
region  of  right  ear,'".

Nose. — Dryness  of  posterior  mares,'". — Posterior  nares  empty;  used  to  be
full  of  mucus  in  morning,'". — [110.]  Disposition  to  sneeze,l — Sneezing^  '.
—Thin  mucus  from  nose,  causing  a  frequent  use  of  the  pocket-handker-
chief,'.— Increased  flow  of  mucus  from  nasal  passages,'". — Profuse  secretion
of  mucus  in  nostrils,  with  coryza,". — Fluent  coryza,". — Much  fluent  coryza,'.
— Frequent  coryza,'. — Severe  fluent  coryza,"  (three  hours  after),". — Fluent
coryza,  with  the  dull  frontal  headache,'^ — [120.]  Fluent  coryza,  with
twisting  sensation  in  the  front  part  of  the  nose,°. — Coryza,  with  cool  feeling
in  the  nose  on  breathing  in,'. — Coryza,  profuse,  with  feeling  of  fulness  in
nose  and  forehead,  as  if  he  had  taken  cold,'". — Catarrh ;  fulness  of  nose,
pressure  in  forehead,  especially  at  root  of  nose,'". — Left  nostril  filled  with
thick  mucus ;  right  one  empty,'". — Violent  formication  on  the  nose,^ — Ful-
ness at  root  of  nose  (frontal  sinus),'". — Pressure  at  root  of  nose,'". — Shooting
pain  in  nose,'. — Nose  feels  sore  and  full,'". — [130.]  Raw  feeling  throughout
the  whole  nasal  cavity,'. — Pain  in  right  nasal  bone,'". — Pressure  in  bone  on
left  side  of  nose,'". — Burning  in  the  nostril,'. — '*Stinging  and  burning  in
posterior  nares  and  soft  palate, ^^. — Sensation  of  swelling  of  the  nasal  mucous
membrane,  as  if  from  taking  cold,". — Posterior  nares  and  palate  feel  dry,'".
— Feeling  in  nose  as  after  a  pinch  of  snuflT,*. — Sensitiveness  of  the  nasal
mucous  membrane,  which  causes  a  feeling  as  of  coldness  in  the  nose,". — ■
The  nasal  mucus  becomes  even  more  watery,  the  inspired  air  more  felt,". —
[140.]  Drawing  in  right  nostril,  as  in  violent  coryza,^ — Dry  feeling  and
sensation  of  heat  in  the  nose,  especially  its  tip,  as  when  a  severe  coryza  is
about  to  come  on,'.

Face. — *Pale,  miserable  appearance^. — Looks  ill,".— Flush  of  blood  to
face  soon  after  rubbing  it,'". — Eubbing  after  washing  the  face  produces  red
spots  under  the  skin,'". — Flying  heat  and  redness  of  left  side  of  face,'. —
Flying  heat  in  left  side  of  face,'. — Burning  in  left  cheek,'.

JHouth. — Pain  in  sound  teeth,'". — [150.]  Teeth  feel  as  if  covered  with
oil,'". — Tongue  coated  w/iite,". — Tongue  slightly  coated  dirty-white,'". —
Tongue  coated  yellowish-white,°. —  Yellow  coating  on  the  tongue,^  '*. — Tongue
very  much  coated  yellow,". — Tongue  covered  with  a  light-brown  coat,'. —
Tongue  feeling  as  if  it  had  been  scalded,  with  great  constriction  of  fauces,".
— Tongue  feels  as  if  swolkn,'". — Soreness  of  tip  of  tongue,  like  that  pro-
duced by  ulcers,". — [160.]  Sharp  biting  and  stinging  pain  in  tip  of  tongue
and  fauces,". — Mucous  surface  of  mouth  and  pharynx  dry,'".— Dryness  of
soft  palate,'*. — Palate  and  posterior  nares  feel  dry,'". — *A  quantity  of  thick,
yellow  phlegm  in  mouth^''. — Burning  in  mouth  and  oesophagus,'. — Flow  of
ivater  into  the  mouth,". — Bush  of  water  into  the  mouth,". — Collection  of
water  in  mouth  compelling  him  to  swallow,'. — Increase  of  saliva,^  ". — [170,]
Salivation,". — "  1  induced  several  other  persons  to  make  a  few  trials,  but
with  no  result,  except  increased  salivation,"^. — Ptyalism,  with-  an  oily  taste,'".
— Coppery  taste  in  mouth,  with  increased  flow  of  saliva  (in  ten  minutes),".
—Foul  taste  in  mouth,'. — Sweetish  taste,'. — Sweet  taste,  as  after  taking
dulcamara,'. — Sweet  taste,  like  liquorice,^ — Sweetish  taste,  with  dryness
of  larynx,l — Sweet,  flat,  slimy  taste  in  moutli,". — [180.]  The  taste,  which
was  at  first  bitter,  becomes  sweet,". — The  taste  of  the  drug  is,  at  first,  in-


^SCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  51

tensely  bitter,  and  is  peculiarly  unpleasant  and  nauseous;  the  bitter  taste
is  soon  displaced  by  a  pleasant,  sweetish  flavor,  very  similar  to  that  of
ordinary  liquorice-root ;  this  sweet  taste  remains  about  an  hour," — Bitter
taste^'^^. — Bitter,  burning  taste  (of  the  drug),  acting  as  an  astringent  on  the
mouth  and  oesophagus,'. — Flat,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,".— Flat,  slimy
taste  in  mouth,". — Metallic  taste  in  mouthy. — The  taste  of  the  drug  remained
in  the  mouth  several  hours,'.— Unable  to  articulate  long  words  distinctly  ;
cannot  control  the  tongue  so  as  to  form  the  words  aright,".

Thvodt. — The  mucus  secreted  in  the  throat  becomes  thinner,'. —  [190.]
The  mucus  becomes  watery,^ — Hawks  up  ropy  mucus,'". — Frequent  call
to  expectorate  raucus,^ — Hawks  up  thick  mucus,'. — Hawking  of  thick,
afterwards  of  watery  mucus,'. — Mucus  ropy,  witli  a  sweetish  taste,'". — The
mucus  in  throat  excites  cough,*. — Increase  of  secretion  from  the  submaxil-
lary glands," '°. — ^-Dryness  of  the  throat,^  ". — Dryness  of  the  throat  after
eating,'. — [200.]  Painful  dryness  of  throat,  lasting  six  hours,". — *Dryness
and  contraction  of  throat,''. — Dryness  and  burning  in  throat,  with  sweetish
taste,^ — Throat  dry,  as  if  it  was  scraped  and  swollen,'*. — ^Dryness  of  back
part  of  throat,^*. — *  Feeling  of  dryness  and  roughness  of  throat  as  from  taking
cold,^^. — Dryness  in  the  throat,  with  scraping  sensation  during  expectoration,'.
— ^Sensation  of  dryness  in  throat  and  pharynx,^. — *Burning  in  throat^ "  *. —

*  Violent  burning  in  throat,  with  raw  feeling  there,^. — Burning  in  throat;  at
one  time  slight,  at  another  severe  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — [210.]-
Throat  felt  hot ;  worse  on  left  side,'*. — Pain  in  throat,  as  if  burnt,^ — *All
the  throat  was  excoriated,  and  it  was  constricted,^. — *Raw  feelirig  in  throat,^.
— Immediately  on  taking  the  drug,  there  is  a  sensation  of  scraping,  irrita-
tion, or  burning,  extending  from  the  mouth  to  the  stomach  ;  it  usually
passes  off  in  an  hour  or  two ;  it  remains  longer  in  the  stomach  than  in  the
throat,'^ — Irritation  of  the  throat  and  oesophagus,  a  sort  of  constricted,
scraped  sensation,  causing  a  disposition  to  hawk,  occurred  about  an  hour
after  taking  the  drug,  and  continued  for  several  hours,'^— Scraping  sensation
in  throat,  exciting  cough,'. — Constant  shooting  and  raw  pain  in  throat,^ —
Sore  throat,  quite  troublesome  in  the  forenoon ;  none  in  the  afternoon ,'^
— Sore  throat,  which  was  inflamed,'*. — [220.]  Tickling  in  throat,  causing
cough,^ — Sensation  as  if  the  air  breathed  in  were  colder,'. — Contractive
pain  in  tliroat  (five  minutes),'. — Contractive  pain,  with  burning  in  throat,".
— Fulness  of  upper  part  of  throat,'". — Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  as
if  something  had  stuck  there  which  required  to  be  expelled,'. — Increased
pain  in  throat  after  eating  a  grape,'. — Dryness  in  soft  palate,'. — ^Great  con-
gestion of  tonsils  and  soft  palate," Tonsils  and  soft  palate  very  much

congested,  but  no  enlargement,". — [230.]  Severe  congestion  of  tonsils  and
soft  palate,  with  a  constant  aching  distress  in  them,". — Constant  aching
distress  in  tonsils,". — Inflamed  tonsils,'. — Tonsils  of  a  fiery  red  color,  and
much  swollen,'. — Both  tonsils  swollen,  and  of  a  fiery  red  color,'*. — *Dry,
burning  sensation  of  fauces  and  palate^*'. — Fauces  and  oesophagus  very  dry,'".
— Mucous  surface  of  pharynx  and  mouth  dry,'". — Pharynx  and  mouth  feel
irritated,'". — Dull  pressing  and  *pricking  in  fauces,  with  sensation  of  fulness
in  epigastrium,  with  empty  eructations,  followed  immediately  by  burning
in  stomach  and  bowels  (in  a  half  hour),". — [240.]  Fauces  congested,". —

*  Constrictive  feeling  of  the  fauces,''. — Acrid,  constrictive  feeling  in  fauces,".
— *Fauces  feeling  very  dry  and  constricted,^'. — *  Great  constriction  of  fauces,
with  tongue  feeling  as  if  it  had  been  scalded,^'. — Fauces  feel  constricted,
with  frequent  dull  pains  on  each  side  of  the  tonsils  ;  they  look  very  darJe
and  congested,^. — Sharp,  biting  pain  in  the  fauces  and  tip  of  tongue,". —


52  iESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Violent  formication  in  the  fauces,^ — Heat  down  the  oesophagus,". — Burn-
ing in  oesophagus  and  mouth,' [250.]  Inclination  to  swallow,". — Fre-
quent inclination  to  swallow,". — Frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  with  dull
pain  in  tonsils,^l — Frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  with  frequent  neuralgic
pains  in  fauces,". — *Frequent  inclination  to  sivallow,  with  great  dryness  of
fauces,^^. — Frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  with  constant  aching  distress
in  tonsils  and  fauces,". — Frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  with  severe  con-
strictive feeling  in  the  fauces," Constant  desire  to  swallow,  with  feeling

of  dryness  and  stiffness  of  throat  when  swallowing,^ — Feeling  as  if  some-
thing had  lodged  in  the  fauces  that  produced  a  constant  inclination  to
swallow,". — Id  the  evening,  throat  sore,  swollen,  and  painful  on  degluti-
tion,".— [260.]  When  swallowing,  burning  like  fire,^ — Left  tonsil  very
much  swollen  and  painful  on  deglutition,". — Deglutition  difficult,^" ".

Stomach. — Good  appetite,".- — Increase  of  appetite,  with  sick  feeling
in  stomach  all  day,'. — Appetite  less  than  normal,^". — Appetite  but  little,"
— No  appetite," — Very  thirsty  (in  fever),\ — No  thirst  during  chill  or
fever,  but  rather  an  increase  of  saliva,". — Eructation,"  ". — [270.]  Empty
e7-uctation,^' ^'"^. —  Occasional  eructation,''. — Eructation  of  wind,*^''". — Fre-
quent eructation  of  wind,'  ^'".—  Frequent  eructation  of  air,". — Frequent
eructations  of  wind,  with  water-brash,^—- Occasional  eructation  of  wind,".
— Belching  of  wind," — Eructation,  with  relief,". —  Great  eructation  of
mucus,*. — [280.]  Periodical  eructation  of  viscid  mucus,*. — Eructation  of
thick  mucus,". — Nausea,' "  * ". — Nausea,  retching  (after  a  few  minutes),". —
Nausea  (inclination  to  vomit),'. — Nausea  (immediately  after)," ". — Constant
nausea,'. — Nausea  immediately,  and  continuing  all  the  afternoon,'. — Nau-
sea ;  the  thought  of  the  medicine  is  unbearable,'. — Slight  nausea,'  ". — [290.]
Slight  nausea,  with  empty  eructations,". —  Nausea  immediately,  with  in-
effectual attempts  to  evacuate  the  bowels,'. — Nausea  three  hours  after  tea,"
— Nausea  in  stomach,  with  slight  burning  and  increased  flow  of  saliva,". —
Nausea;  it  is  transient,  recurring  at  short  intervals,  and  usually  disappears
in  about  half  an  hour,''. — Inclination  to  vomit  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'.
— *Retahiiigj^. — *  Violent  vomiting,^. — A  great  deal  of  distress  in  stomach,'^.
— Considerable  pain  in  the  stomach  for  four  or  five  hours  after  eating,
which  continues  till  after  taking  food  again,'. —  [300.]  Stomach  and
bowels  distress  him  very  much,". — *  Constant  distress  in  stomach,  with  fre-
quent pains  through  the  bowels. — *  Co)istant  pain  in  stomach  and  right  lower
lobe  of  liver,'^. — Frequent  sharp  pains  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and
apex  of  heart,". — For  the  last  two  or  three  hours  there  has  been  a  con-
stant, very  severe  pain  about  and  just  below  the  pyloric  extremity  of  the
stomach,". — Burning  in  stomach,". — Burning  in  stomach  ;  feels  as  if  it  con-
tained warm  water,". — Constant  burning  distress  in  stomach,". —  Dull
burning  distress  in  stomach,". — Slept  well ;  but  woke  three  times  and
found  I  had  a  dull  burning  pain  in  stomach,". — [310,]  Constant  dull
burning  pain  in  the  pyloric  portion  of  the  stomach,". — Severe  burning  dis-
tress in  stomach  (superior  cardiac  portion),". — *  Constant  and  severe  burn-
ing distress  in  the  stomach,  with  inclination  to  vomit,'^. — Constant  and  very
severe  burning  in  stomach  and  bowels;  very  hard  to  endure  the  burning
distress,". — Constant  burning  distress  in  stomach  and  bowels,  with  severe
fluttering  sensation  in  pit  of  stomach,  lasting  five  minutes  at  a  time;  came
on  five  different  times,". — Constant  and  severe  burning  in  the  stomach,
with  a  very  severe  backache  in  the  lumbar  region,". — Heat  in  stomach  and
thorax," — Heartburn  (for  half  an  hour),". — Tenderness  and  soreness  of
stomach," — Aching  and  rumbling  in  stomach,'. —  [320.]  The  aching  in


^SCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  53

stomach  extends  downwards/. —  Constant  dull  pain  in  the  cardiac  portion
of  stomach,^^. — Early  in  morning,  a  feeling  of  gnawing  and  emptiness  in
stomach,^ — My  stomach  felt  as  if  it  would  fall  down  into  the  intestines/*.
— Fulness  of  stomach  (in  half  an  hour),*. — Distension  was  the  only  sign
which  told  me  to  stop  eating,'". — After  eating,  the  stomach  feels  full,  as  if
tiie  walls  were  greatl)'  thickened,'. — Cutting  stomachache,'. — Dyspepsia,^.
— Comfortable  feeling  in  stomach,^ — [330.]  Slight  pain  in  epigastrium,". —
Constant  burning  distress  in  the  epigastric  and  umbilical  regions,  with  a
very  severe  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  region,  very  painful  when  trying  to
walk,'^. — *  Constant  burning,  aching  distress  in  the  epigastric  region,  with
constant  dull,  aching  pains  in  the  right  hypochondriac  region,^'. — Great
heat  in  internal  organs,  or  near  the  epigastrium,'". — Soreness  of  epigas-
trium,'".— Fulness  at  epigastrium,^". — Peripdical  tightness  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  with  labored  breathing,*. — A  quick,  severe  griping  pain  in  the  epi-
gastric region ;  continues  about  half  an  hour  (in  a  few  minutes),'^ — Ex-
perienced a  severe  griping  pain  in  the  epigastrium  a  few  minutes  after
taking  the  drug ;  it  continued  till  he  fell  asleep — about  half  an  hour ;  it
extended  from  stomach  to  umbilical  region,  and  appeared  to  be  produced
by  flatus,  as  there  was,  at  the  same  time,  quite  a  perceptible  sensation
of  motion  in  the  bowels,'^ — Twisting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,^ — [340.]
^Pressure  as  from  a  stone  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,^. — Constant  dull  and
very  severe  aching  pain  just  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  produces
a  very  weak,  faint  feeling ;  it  is  very  hard  to  endure  the  distress,'^.

A-Momen. — Pain  in  the  hypochondria  through  to  the  back,  especially
on  inspiring,^ — Dull,  pressing  pains  in  left  hy]yotihondrmm,^.—* Tender-
ness in  right  hypochondriac  region,^". — Fulness  of  right  hypochondriac  re-
gion,'".— Frequent  dull,  aching  pains  in  right  hypochondriac  region,". —
Fine  stitching  in  left  hypochoudrium,". — Constant  dull,  aching  pain  in
right  hypochondrium,  and  region  of  gall-bladder,". — Dull  shifting  pain  in
left  hypochondriac  region,'". — [350.]  Constant  dull  pains  in  right  hypo-
chondriac region,  aggravated  by  walking,". — Pinching  pain  in  right  hypo-
chondrium, with  colic,". —  Constant  dull  aching  distress  in  right  lower  lobe
of  liver,". — *  Great  deal  of  distress  in  liver  and  epigastrium,^^. — *  Constant,
quite  severe  aching  piin  from  the  pit  of  the  stomioh  to  the  right  lowjr  lobe  of
the  liver,^^. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,'. — Shooting  in  right  side
above  the  hip,  deeply  seated,'. — Stitches  in  abdomen  on  left  side,  below
the  ribs,'. — Pain  at  umbilicus,^". — Burning,  aching  distress  at  umbilicus,".
— [360.]  Soreness  at  umbilicus,'". — Fine  pricking  pains  around  the  um-
bilicus,".— -Dull  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,'. — Constant  dull  pain  in
region  of  navel,'^ — Constant  dull,  aching  distress  in  the  umbilical  region,
with  a  very  severe  headache,". — Dull  pains  in  umbilicus ;  sometimes  they
are  very  sharp,". — Colicky  pain  at  the  umbilicus  (following  hard,  dry
stool),".— There  have  been  frequent  pains  in  the  umbilical  and  hypogastric
regions  all  day,  but  not  very  severe,".— Great  distress  in  the  umbilical  and
hypogastric  regions,  and  very  urgent  desire  for  stool,  with  rumbling  in
bowels,'^ — Pinching  below  navel,'. —  [370.]  Distension  of  abdomen,'. —
Rumbling  of  bowels,'". — -Frequent  rumbling  in  bowels,". — Rumbling  in
bowels  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  without  pain,'. — Borborygmus  and  flatus,
which  was  fetid,".— Much  wind  in  bowels,'"- i^efe'd  _/?afet.s,"''.— -Frequent
expulsion  of  flatus,'^ '". — Discharge  of  flatus,  with  griping  in  bowels,^ — Con-
stant, very  severe  burning  in  (stomach  and)  bowels,  with  severe  fluttering
sensation  in  pit  of  stomach,  lasting  five  minutes  at  a  time  (came  fifteen
different  days),'l — [380.]  Constant  and  very  severe  burning  in  (stomach


54  iESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

and)  bowels ;  very  hard  to  endure  the  burning  distress". — Bowels  and
stomach  distress  him  very  much, 'I — Abdomen  tender  to  touch,^". — Bowels
feel  as  if  he  had  a  severe  diarrhoea/". — Constrictive  feeling  in  the  bowels,^ —
Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  bowels,  followed  by  a  stool  (fourth  time)/. —
Cramp  in  the  bowels.l — At  each  inspiration,  griping  of  the  bowels,^—
Motions  preceded  by  pinching  in  the  bowels,^^Flying  pain  in  bowels,'^.
— [390.]  Rumbling  in  hypogastrium,  with  cutting  pains  around  the  um-
bilicus,".— Cutting  in  left  inguinal  region,".— Severe  neuralgic  pain  in
right  inguinal  region,".

Stool  and  Anus. — Fulness  of  colon  ;  must  have  stool,'". — *  Fulness
of  rectum,^". — Great  pressure  in  rectum,'". — Pressure  in  rectum,  with  incli-
nation to  stool,  with  empty  eructations,". — *Feelinff  of  constriction  in  reo-
tunij^K — *Sen>iation  of  dryness  of  the  rectum,^. — Dryness  and  itching  in  the
rectum,  with  feeling  of  stiffness  of  the  skin  and  adjacent  cellular  tissue,
continuing  for  several  days,^. — [400.]  Dryness  of  the  passage  for  several
days,  followed  by  secretion  of  moi.-<ture,''.^*Dry,  uncomfortable  feeling  in
the  rectum,  whieli  feels  as  if  it  were  filled  with  small  sticks,'. — *Exces-
sive  dryness  of  the  rectum,  with  feeling  of  heat,'.— *i^or  several  days  fol-
lowing, there  was  a  sensation  as  if  the  mucous  ?nembrane  of  the  rectum  was
thickened  and  obstructed  the  passage  of  faeces,^. — *Feeliiuj  in  rectum  as  though
folds  of  the  mucous  membrane  obstructed  the  passage,  and  as  if,  were  the  effort
continued,  the  rectum,  would  protrude,^. — The  dryness  of  the  rectum  is  fol-
lowed by  increased  secretion  of  mucus,'. — ^Dryness  and  soreness  of  the  rec-
tum,^.— Soreness  of  rectum,  with  increased  secretion  of  mucus,^. — *Soreness,
burning,  and  itching  at  anus,'". — *  Great  burning  and  itching  at  anus,^".
— [410.]  *Burning,  pressure,  itching,  and  fulness  at  anus,'". — ^Burning,
itching,  and  protrusion  of  anus,"'. — Some  heat  in  anus,  with  itching,'". —
*  Great  soreness  of  anus,^". — *Anus  sore,'". — *Raiv  feeling  in  anus^. — Severe
aching  pain  in  the  anus,'. — Dull  aching  pain  at  anus,'". — *Fulness  and
itching  at  the  an'us,  after  walking  a  mile,'". — Severe  cutting  pain  in  anus,
with  colicky,  pain  in  umbilicus,  following  after  very  hard  and  dry  stool,'^
— [420.]  Itching  in  the  anus,'. — Rubbing  will  produce  extreme  flow  of
blood  to  anus,'". — *  Prolapsed  feeling  of  the  anus  after  a  hard  stool,'^. — *  Feel-
ing as  if  a  portion  of  the  anus  WIS  prolapsed,  with  dull  backache,'^. — *  Pro-
lapsed feeling  of  the  anus,  after  a  stool  of  about  natural  consistence,'^. — About
halfaninchof  protrusion,  which  he  is  unable  to  push  up,'". — Sphincter
ani  unable  to  contract,'". — *  Tumors  of  a  hcemorrhoidal  character,  very  sore,
and  of  a  dark  purple  color,'. — *  Appearance  of  haemorrhoids,  like  ground-
nuts,' of  a  purple  color,  very  painful,  and  with  sensation  of  burning
(never  had  hsemorrhoids  before),". — Constant  urging  to  stool  (after  two
hours),'. — [430.]  Very  urgent  desire  for  stool,  and  great  distress  in  um-
bilical and  hypogastric  regions,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,". — Constant  in-
clination to  go  to  stool,  and  the  rectum  seems- swollen,'. — Great  desire  for  a
stool, 'I — ^Desire  to  go  to  stool  each  time  wind  was  eructated,'. — Desire  to
remain  at  stool  a  long  time,  with  straining,'. — Desire  for  a  passage  from  the
bowels,  without  result,^. — Frequent  inclination  for,  and  ineffectual  effbrts  at
stool,". — Great  straining,  with  shivering,'". — ^Ineffectual  attempts  at  stool,'"  ".
— Constant  tendency  to  diarrhoea  for  two  days ;  almost  constant  inclina-
tion to  go  to  stool,  but  without  any,  or  very  slight  evacuations,^. — [440.]
Constant  desire  for  stool,  with  pains  in  right  hypochondrium  and  stom-
ach,".— Stool  at  2  P.M.,'". — Had  two  soft  stools,  without  giving  relief  to  the
desire  for  stool,". — Stool  at  noon,  very  black  and  soft,  without  relieving
the  desire  for  stool,". — Two  moderate  fjecal  evacuations  (two  hours  after),'. —


iESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  55

Three  moderate  fsecal  evacuations  half  an  hour  after  taking  the  drug,'. —
Two  liquid  motions,  preceded  by  griping,^ — Four  loose  evacuations  within
a  quarter  of  an  hour,'. — In  two  hours,  several  thin  evacuations,'. — Bowels
loose  ;  stools  brown," — [450.]  Soft,  mushy  stool,  with  a  good  deal  of  pain
in  lumbar  region,''. — Stool  of  a  light-brown  color  and  very  soft ;  frequent,
but  not  to  the  extent  of  a  diarrhoea,". — Stool  of  a  mixed  character,'. — Diar-
rhoea for  twenty-four  hours  following,". — Diarrhoea  of  ingesta,'. — Copious,
soft  stool,  followed  by  burning  and  teeling  of  constriction  in  rectum,". —
Small  stool,  at  9.30  a.m.,  thin,  watery,  lighter-colored,  and  some  tenes-
mus,".— Rather  a  difficult  stool,'^ — Rather  a  difficult  stool,  about  noon,
followed  in  an  hour  by  a  slight  soreness,  aching  and  fulness  in  rectum,  in-
dicating piles,". — Difficult,  scanty  stool,". — [460.]  *  Very  large  and  hard
stool,  voided  with  great  difficulty,  folloived  by  severe  pains  in  anus,  with  feeling
as  if  a  portion  of  the  anus  was  protruded,  accompanied  with  dull  pains  in
the  umbilical  and  hypogastric  regions ;  this  feeling  lasted  all  night,  and
until  late  in  morning,  with  very  severe  backache  in  lower  part  of  lumbar  and
sacral  regions,^''. — A  very  dry  stool,  at  9  p.m.,  voided  with  difficulty,". — At
5  P.M.,  a  very  hard  and  dry,  knotty  stool,  voided  with  great  difficulty,". —
*Stook  hard  and  dark-brown,^^. — *Stool  of  hard,  impacted  fceces,  with  great
soreness  of  anus  (12  m.),'  °. — Stool;  first  part  black  and  hard  ;  the  last  part
about  the  natural  consistence,  but  almost  white  as  milk,  showing  that  the
secretion  of  bile  is  almost  completely  suspended ;  the  stool  was  followed
by  severe  tearing  pains  in  anus,''. — Expulsion  of  about  eight  inches  of
fseces,  like  a  rope,  solid,  knotty,  first  half  dark,  rest  quite  light  in  color,"*. —
Stool,  8  A.M.,  very  costive ;  great  straining ;  fseces  in  balls,'". — Bowels
torpid," — The  usual  stool  did  not  take  place,' '"  ".

Urinary  Organs. — [470.]  Shoots  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,'. —
Call  to  make  water,'. — On  two  occasions,  at  short  intervals,  urging  to  make
water,". — *JFrequent  urination,^". — *Desire  to  pass  water  often,  but  little  at  a
time^^. — Urine  scanty. —  Urine  scanty,  and  of  a  dark-yellow  color,  with  scald-
ing in  passing  through  the  urethra. —  Urine  scanty,  and  of  a  mahogany  color,
and  as  it  passed  through  the  urethra  it  burned  like  hot  wafer,'*. — Urine  scanty,
and  dark-brown  ;  no  sediment,'*. — *  Urine  dark  and  muddy,  and  passed  with
miich  pain,^. — [480.]  Retention  of  urine ;  passed  after  several  trials,'". —
*  Urine  hot,^". —  Urine  hot  and  clear,^". — Urine  very  high-colored,". — Urine
dark-brown,'. — Urine  very  clear,  and  increased  in  quantity,'". — Urine  dark  ;
some  little  sediment. — *  Urine  with  dark-brown  sediment,^*'. — *  Urine  yellow,
with  thick,  white,  mucous  sediment,'*.

Sexual  Organs. — Transient  pains  in  genitals,". — [490.]  Dull  and
heavy  shooting  pain  through  or  near  belt  of  penis,'". — Soreness  of  testicles,".
— Itching  of  testicles,'". — Drawing  of  left  testicle,'". — *Leucorrhoea,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Increase  of  the  dry  feeling  in  throat,
followed  by  secretion  of  mucus,  quite  like  the  second  stage  of  catarrh,". —
Sensation  of  dryness  and  stifl!ness  of  the  glottis,  and  all  the  pharyngo-
larynge'al  mucous  membrane,". — Dryness  of  the  larynx  with  tickling;
scraping  feeling  of  the  laryngo-pharyngeal  mucous  membrane,". — Tickling
in  larynx,'. — -Tickling  in  larynx  causes  cough  with  mucous  expectoration,'.
— [500.]  Throbbing,  darting  pain  in  trachea  produces  titillation,'". — *Hoarse
voice,'.  —  Coughing,'".  —  Repeated  cough,'. — -Cough  from  irritation,'. —
*Cough  dry,'. — Slight  cough  with  stitches  in  left  side  of  chest,'. — *Short
cough,  increased  by  swallowing  and  breathing  deeply,^. — Dry,  hacking  cough
(at  1  P.M.),  produced  by  great  constriction  of  the  fauces,  with  great  irrita-
tion of  the  epiglottis  (for  two  hours),". — Spitting  of  blood  on  getting  up


56  iESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

in  the  morning," — [510.]  Breatliing  rapid  and  laborious/. — Labored
breathing,*. — Dyspnoea  with  rapid  breathing,'*.

Chest. — Hot  feeling  in  chest,  with  cold  rising  up,  as  after  taking  pep-
permint drops,^ — Constant  burning  distress,  with  a  constrictive  feeling  of
the  lower  part  of  the  chest,". — Heat  in  thorax  and  stomach,"'. — Warm
feeling  in  chest,'. — Enw  feeling  in  chesty '. — Pains  in  chest,  as  if  a  stone
lay  on  the  scrobiculus  cordis,'. — Pains  in  the  chest  alternating  with  pains
in  the  abdomen,^.^[520.]  Thorax  feels  constricted,'". — Tightness  of  the
chest,^^^. — Sudden  stitches  throughout  chest,'. — Burning  in  the  nlarara^e,^
— Lungs  feel  very  much  engorged,'. — Lungs  feel  heavy,  and  as  if  en-
gorged,'*.— Taking  a  full  breath  causes  soreness  over  and  in  lungs,  with
great  rush  of  blood,'". —  On  the  right  side  of  chest,  when  respiring,  she  feels
the  lung  painfully  moving  up  and  down^. — Stitch  in  region  of  lower  lobe  of
left  lung;  relieved  when  passing  wind,'". — Twitching  from  the  chest  to  the
left  shoulder,l — [530.]  Stitches  in  left  side,^ — Stitches  leave  left  side  and
go  to  right  side  of  chest,'. — Shooting  pain  in  sternum,'. — Pains  in  sternum,
as  if  a  piece  were  toi'n  out  of  chest,^

Heart  mid  JPulse. —  Twitching  over  region  of  heart,^". — Frequent
stitches  in  region  of  heart,". — Darting  pains  in  region  of  heart,  with  ful-
ness and  palpitation,'". — Constant  dull,  aching,  burning  pain  in  the  region
of  the  heart,'^ — Severe  neuralgic  pain  in  region  of  heart,  so  painful  as  to
arrest  the  breath  (lasted  ten  minutes),". — Neuralgic  pain  in  region  of  heart
lasted  over  one  minute,  with  frequent  pains  in  epigastric  region,". — [540.]
Very  frequent  neuralgic  pains  in  the  region  of  the  apex  of  the  heart
and  stomach,'''. — Frequent  sharp  neuralgic  pains  in  region  of  heart,  with
a  great  burning  in  the  same  region,'^ — Occasional  neuralgic  pains  in  the
apex  of  heart  and  forehead,'^ — Sharp  pain  in  region  of  apex  of  heart,'^ —
Frequent  pains  in  region  of  apex  of  heart  and  between  shoulders,". — Fre-
quent pains  in  apex  of  heart,'l — Action  of  heart  full  and  very  rapid,'. —
Pleart's  action  very  rapid  and  heavy  ;  would  jar  me  while  lying  down,  and
could  feel  the  pulsation  all  over  body,'*. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,^ — Fre-
quent attacks  of  palpitation,''. — [550.]  Periodical  palpitation  of  the  heart,'.
— Severe  periodical  palpitation,  with  great  anxiety,'. — Pulse  accelerated,'".
— Pulse  frequent  and  full,', — Pulse  hard  and  frequent,'*. — Pulse  about  130
(during  fever),'*.— Pulse  157,'.— Pulse  about  90,'*.— Pulse  70  (12  M.),".—
Pulse  68,  soft  and  weak  (12  m.),".— [560.]  Pulse  66,  soft  and  weak  (12
j[.),". — Pulse  66,  soft  and  regular  (11  a.m.),".

Week  and  Back. — Pain  in  back  of  neck,'^". — Pain,  dull  and  heavy,
in  back  of  neck,'". — Feeling  of  lameness  and  weariness  in  back  of  neck
and  small  of  back,". — Pain  in  neck,'". — Soreness  of  neck,  with  pricking
sensations,'". — Neck  very  stiff  and  swollen,'*. — Slight  enlargement  of  cer-
vical glands,  sore  to  touch,'". — Good  deal  of  dull  aching  pain  between  shoul-
ders,".— [570.]  Continual  pain  in  back,  shoulders,  and  neck,  at  times  with
pricking  sensations,'". — Dull  pain  in  back,'". — Constant  dull  hackache,^^. —
Slight  backache  all  day,". — Very  severe  and  constant  backache,". — Back
ached  very  hard  all  night,  and  is  still  aching,". — Back  aches  severely,". —
*Back  aching  violently ;  walking  is  almost  impossible,". — "^Violent  backache
all  day,  almost  impossible  to  get  tip  after  sitting  down,^^. — *  The  backache  is
very  severe  when  moving,'^\ — [580.]  Back  and  legs  have  ached  so  severely
that  I  was  compelled  to  lie  down  all  the  forenoon,". — Back  is  feeling  very-
stiff  when  moving,". — Dull,  aching  distress  in  the  dorsal  region,". — *  Pains
in  the  small  of  the  back,'. — The  pain  extends  from  the  boioels  to  the  small  of
the  back,^. — *Dull  aching  pain  in  small  of  back,  aggravated  by  motion,". —


^SCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  57

*  Tearing  pain  in  small  of  back  and  hips  when  walking,^''. — *The  small  of
my  back  aches  so  severely  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  stoop  down,  or  to
get  up  when  sitting/'. — Very  severe  pain  in  small  of  back  and  hips  when
getting  up ;  not  much  after  moving  a  minute  or  so,''. — Weariness  in  small
of  back,"., — [590.]  *  Great  pain  around  loins,  especially  in  sacro-lumbur  re-
gion^".— ^Very  severe  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  region  ;  very  painful  when
trying  to  walk,  with  constant  burning  distress  in  the  epigastric  and  umbili-
cal regions,". — Dull  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  region,^'. — *Lamene3s,  and
sensation  as  if  strained  in  right  lumbar  region,  extending  to  the  gluteal
muscles,". — *Severe  aching  pain  in  lumbar  region,^'. — *  Very  severe  pain  in
lumbosacral regionwhen  stooping ^^. — Great  pain  in  sacro-lumbar  region,'". —
*Constant  backache,  affecting  the  sacrum  and  hips,  very  much  aggra-
vated by  walking  and  stooping  forwards,''. — *  Constant  dull  pain  across
hips  and  sacriun,^^. — [600.]  *Dall  aching  pain  in  sacrum,^^.

Upper  Extremities. — *Rheumatic-like  pain  in  right  scapula,'. —
*Pains  in  right  scapula  and  right  side  of  chest,  increased  by  inspiring,'. —
Dull  pain  in  shoulders  and  hands,". — The  arm  and  hand  of  left  side  be-
come strikingly  warmer,  and  feel  as  if  heavier  and  swollen,'. — Neuralgic
pains  in  arms,'". — Tearing  and  jerking  in  right  arm,'.^Constant  jerking
in  right  arm. — Paralyzed  state  of  right  arm  ;  she  cannot  raise  it,'. — Dull
aching  pain  in  elbow-joint  of  left  arm,". — [610.]  Sharp,  darting  pain  in  left
forearm;  a  numbness  with  prickling  sensations,'". — Stinging  in  hands,'". —
Pricking  in  hands  after  washing  them,'". — Not  able  to  control  muscles  to
write  well,'".— Nails  blue,'".

Lower  Extremities. — *  Constant  dull  pain  across  hips  and  sacruvi,".
— Legs  aching  severely,  feeling  so  weak  that  I  must  lie  down  all  the  tiuie,".
— Limbs  ache  wheu  weight  of  body  rests  on  them,'". — Knees  ache  severely,".
— Calves  of  legs  sore,'". — [620.]  Tendo-Achillis  sore,^". — Swelling  of  feet
after  walking  usual  distance,'". — Feet  swell ;  corns  very  sore,'".

General  it  ies. — Spasms  of  muscles  of  limbs,'". — At  times  feels  as  if
going  to  have  spasms  or  convulsions,'". — Limbs  feel  heavy,'". — Fulness  of
skin  as  if  too  much  blood  in  body,'". — Heart,  lungs,  stomach,  and  brain
feel  as  if  an  undue  amount  of  blood  was  there,'". — Fulness  of  dependent
parts,'". — Fulness,'". — [630.]  Weak,  stupid,  and  dull;  with  disposition  to
sleep  most  of  the  time,'. — Great  weakness;  she  totters  when  she  walks,'. — -
Weak  in  joints,'".— i^eefinjr  faint  and  weaA,". —  Weariness,^. — Weariness,
with  faintness  of  stomach,". — Fatigued  feeling,  as  from  a  long  walk,^.^
It  fatigues  him  to  walk  much,'". — Very  tired  and  languid,". — Feeling  of
languor,". — [640.]  Walking  is  very  painful,". — Feels  faint,'*. — She  feels
like  to  faint,'. — Feeling  of  extreme  illness,'. — Feeling  of  prostration  of  the
whole  system,". — Malaise,'".— General  malaise,'^ — General  feeling  of  ma-
laise, with  dull,  stupefying  feeling  in  head,". — Pain  in  the  joints,'. — Tear-
ing pain  in  the  back,  right  side,  and  shoulders,'. — [650.]  On  awaking  in
the  morning  felt  very  sore  all  over,  especially  calves  of  legs,  muscles  of
thighs,  back,  shoulders,  and  neck,  also  of  upper  extremities  and  chest,'". —
Sore  on  motion,'". — Too  sore  and  languid  to  attend  to  business,'". — Soreness
of  muscles  of  arm,  back,  and  lower  extremities,  especially  of  small  of  back,'".
— Pain  on  walking  erect,'". — Stiffness  of  joints,'". — Great  stretching,'".

Skin. — Goose-skin,'. — Itching  of  whole  body,  especially  around  waist,'".

Ferer. — Chilliness  and  goose-skin,'. — [660.]  Constant  chills  creeping
up  and  down  the  back,  with  painful  burning  in  the  anus,'. — Chills  running
along  the  spine,  followed  by  fever,  light  at  first,  but  increasing  until  he
felt  he  should  burn  up,'. — Riding  in  the  cool  air  produces  great  chilli-


58  iESCULUS  HIPP0CA8TANUM.

ness/". — When  cold  air  strikes,  skin  feels  chilly  and  teeth  chatter,". — She
cannot  get  warra,^ — Rigors,^ — Attack  of  rigor,  lasting  ten  minutes,'. —
Rigor  for  half  an  hour,  like  ague.'.^Feeling  as  if  I  had  the  ague,". —
About  4  P.M.,  severe  chill, -which  lasted  three  hours;  heat  of  fire  relieved
ine;  from  seven  to  twelve  at  night  very  high  fever;  profuse,  hot  perspira-
tion with  the  fever,". — [670.]  Great  heat  all  over  the  body,'". — Felt  a  glow
of  heat  all  over  the  surface,'". — Skin  dry  and  hot," — Fever  lasted  six
hours,'. — Feeling  very  feverish;  hands  hot  and  dry,''. — Burning  in  the
palms  and  soles,l — Flashes  of  heat  over  body,'". — Flying  heat  before  eruc-
tation,*.— General  perspiration,  with  decline  of  the  abdominal  distension,'.
— Perspiration  would  break  out  on  the  head  and  face,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — [680.]  Disposition  to  stretch  and  yawn  all  the
time,''. —  Constant  yawning,^. —  Yawning  and  stretching,^". — Yawning  with
stretching,  followed  by  chilly  sensations,'". — Yawning  and  stupefying  sleepi-
ness,^ — Inclination  to  sleep,'. — Disposition  to  sleep  all  the  time,'*. — Dull
and  sleepy,'. — Felt  drowsy,'*. — Great  drowsiness;  want  to  go  to  sleep
again,'". — [690.]  Very  drowsy  all  day,  and  soon  went  to  sleep,'". — She
falls  asleep  when  sitting  for  half  an  hour;  on  awaking  she  cannot  recognize
what  she  sees;  she  knows  not  where  she  is,  nor  whence  came  the  objects
about  her,'. — Immediately  after  (the  burning  in  the  cheeks),  sleep  for
another  quarter  of  an  hour;  after  awaking,  the  same  loss  of  consciousness,'.
— Slept  well,  but  very  sore  on  waking,'". — Slept  well,  but  woke  three  times,
and  found  I  had  a  dull  burning  pain  in  stomach,". — Awoke  disinclined  to
rise;  feel  as  if  I  had  not  slept;  had  troubled  dreams;  must  have  slept  on
my  back,'". — 'Slept  hard;  distressing  dreams;  thought  he  was  in  a  battle
and  fighting  hard,  under  great  excitement ;  awoke  troubled,  and  found  he
was  lying  on  his  back;  turned  on  right  side;  thought  he  saw  a  man  in  his
room  ; woke  at  5.30,'".

Conditions.  —  Aggravation. — [^Early  in  morning),  Gnawing  and
emptiness  in  stomach. — {Morning,  on  waking),  Sore  all  over,  etc. — {Fore-
noon), Sore  throat. — {Afternoon),  Vertigo. — {Evening),  Throat  sore,  etc. —
{Periodical),  Eructation  of  mucus;  tightness  in  scrobiculus  cordis;  palpita-
tion of  heart. — {When  breathing).  Feels  luug  moving  painfully. — {Breath-
ing in),  Cool  feeling  in  nose. — {Breathing  deeply).  Short  cough ;  increase
of  pains. — {Drawing  full  breath).  Soreness  over  lungs,  etc. — {Drawing
breath).  Pain  in  scapula,  etc. — (CoM  aiV),  Skin  feels  chilly,  etc. — -{Riding
in  cool  air).  Great  chilliness. — {After -eating),  Dvyneas  of  throat;  pain  in
stomach;  stomach  feels  full. — {Eating  a  grape),  Pain  in  throat. — {Near
light),  Pain  in  eye. — {Motion),  ^Backache;  stiff  back;  pain  in  small  of  back;
sore. — {Rising  from  seat).  Headache;  pain  in  small  of  back  and  hips. —
{After  rubbing),  Flush  of  blood  to  fuce.-— {Rubbing  after  washing),  Red
spots  under  skin. — {iStooping),  Headache;  backache;  pain  in  lunibo-sacral
region. — {SwaUowing\  Dry  and  stiff  throat;  burning  in  throat;  tonsil  pain-
ful; short  cough.— {After  tea),  'Nausea.— {Walking),  Pain  in  hypochon-
dria; *fvlness  and  itching  at  anus;  Hearing  in  synall  of  back;  ^backache. —
{Walking  erect),  Vam.— {Trying  to  walk).  Burning  in  epigastrium,  etc.;
aching  in  lumbar  region. — {After  washing).  Pricking  in  hands.

Amelioration.— {Afternoon),  Sore  throat. — {After  moving).  Pain  in
small  of  back  and  hips. — (  When  passing  wind).  Stitch  in  lung.


^THUSA.  59


tETHUSA.


^thusa  cynapium,  L.  Nat.  order,  JJmhelliferse.  Common  names,  Fool's
Parsley ;  (Fr.)  Petite  Cigue ;  (Germ.)  Gleisse,  Hundspetersilie ;  (Ital.)
Cicuta  minore. Preparation,  Tincture,  from  the  whole  flowering  plant.

Authorities. 1,  N g,  Prac.  Mitth.,  1828 ;  and  H.  and  T.  Annalen,

4,  113  ;  2,  Hartlaub,  ibid.;  3,  Petroz,  Bulletin  d.  1.  Soc.  Med.  Horn.,  4,  337  ;
4,  Didier,  Archiv.  d.  1.  Med.  Horn.,  1,  318;  5,  Eoth  (Mat.  Mad.,  includes
several  poison  cases ;  6,  Bigler,  Am.  J.  of  H.  M.  M.,  5,  459  (observed  in  a
patient  after  the  3d  dec.)  ;  t,  Toxicological.

Hinfl. — Rage,  t. — Liable  to  transports  of  rage,^  *. — Fury,  t — Frenzy,
t,^. — Delirium,  t,\ — Delirium,  mania,''. — ^Imagined  she  saw  rats  run  across
the  room,^.—*  Delirium;  he  imagines  he  sees  dogs  and  cats,^. — *  Delirium;
he  jump^  Old  of  window,". — [10.]  Hilarity,  talkativeness,  facetiousuess,' '. —
Very  lively  (second  day);  (seems  to  be  secondary aetion),l — In  the  forenoon,
gay,  good-tempered  ;  in  the  afternoon,  sad  and  anxious,^ — Toward  noon,
better  mood,'  I — Sadness,  when  alone,^. — The  disposition  becomes  retiring
and  tearful,  as  in  nostalgia,''. — Anxiety  and  dejection,  t. — ■* Anxiety,  tt. —
*Restless  anxiety,  t,^. — *  Great  anxiety  and  restlessness ;  soon  afterward,  violent
pains  in  head  and  abdomen,  t,^. — [20.]  Fright,  t. — Apprehension,  i,'. — Very
cross  and  fretful  (afteruoons),\ — Fretful  and  cross  in  open  air;  after  re-
entering the  room,  better  (a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — -She  looks  very  fret-
ful and  serious  and  does  not  speak  willingly,  during  heat  of  head,^ —
Awkwardness  ;  discontent,  even  to  vexation,'. — Excessive  sensitiveness,'. —
Very  great  and  long-lasting  nervous  susceptibility ,^ — A  fixed  idea,  which
she  cannot  throw  off,  of  a  garment  made  the  day  previous ;  she  also  dreamed
of  it,'. — Slowness  or  unsettled  state  of  his  ideas,  even  to  absence  of  thought,'.
— [30.]  Loss  of  comprehension  ;  a  kind  of  stupefaction,  as  if  there  was  a
barrier  between  his  organs  of  sense  and  external  objects,'. — Stupidity,". —
Stupefaction,  tt. — Stupor,  t. — Perfectly  unconscious  (boy  aged  8),  t. — Sense-
less, t,^. — *The  child  lay  unconscious,  t,^. — *He  lies  stretched  out,  without
consciousness,^.

Seacl. — *Head  confused;  brain  feels  bound  up  (two  and  a  half
hours),' '. — The  head  is  confused  during  the  coryza,'. — [40.]  The  head  is
heavy  and  confused,*. — Somewhat  stupid  in  the  head,  like  intoxication,
soon  after  taking,'. — Feeling  in  the  head  as  if  shattered  (afternoons),'. —
Vertigo,  tt,''  ^. — Vertigo  in  the  open  air,'. — Vertigo  when  sitting  down,
aggravated  on  trying  to  rise  from  his  seat,'. — Vertigo  after  the  colic,  t^
Vertigo  after  every  new  dose ;  disappears  in  open  air,'. — Vertigo  even  in
open  air ;  must  lean  against  something  so  as  not  to  fall,'. — *  Vertigo  with
'  sleepiness ;  eyes  will  close  (soon  after),'. — [50.]  Vertigo  with  sleepiness,  on
sitting  and  after  rising  up  (a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Sudden  attack  of
vertigo  on  sitting ;  disappears  after  rising  (second  day),'. — The  vertigo  is
more  especially  felt  toward  midday,'. — Giddiness  in  the  head,  t: — Giddi-
ness and  oppressive  headache,  t. — Dizziness;  he  cannot  keep  upright,^. —
Dizziness,  with  headache,^. — ''^Dizziness  and  sleepiness,*'. — Violent  headache,  t.
— Headache,^ — [60.]  Frequent  headache,  t,". —  Pains  in  head,  t. — Great
pain,  t. — Headache,  with  green  vomiting,  t. — Most  horrible  pains  in  head,
stomach,  and  abdomen,  t,'. — The  pains  in  the  head  stop  for  awhile,  when
eating,  but  soon  return,*. — -The  pains  of  the  head  return  periodically,  and
are  often  accompanied  with  pale  face,  trembling  in  the  jaws  and  pains  in
the  prsecordial  region,'. — The  pains  of  the  head  are  felt  especially  when


60  ^THUSA.

he  wakes  up ;  they  are  easily  brought  on  by  getting  chilled ;  sleep  causes
them  to  cease,  and  they  are  ameliorated  by  emission  of  flatulence/. — Heat
in  head  and  burning  in  face,  for  half  an  hour  (one  and  a  half  hours),^ —
Heat  rushes  to  the  head,  with  increased  warmth  in  whole  body,  redness  of
face,  and  relief  of  vertigo  (second  day),'. — [70.]  Flushes  of  heat  in  the
head,  with  increased  bodily  warmth,*. — Feeling  of  tension  in  the  head,'.—
Beating  and  sticking  in  whole  head  (afternoons),*. — Tearings  and  shootings
in  different  directions  in  the  head,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  head,^ — On  enter-
ing a  room,  a  hustling,  now  here,  now  there,  in  the  head,  though  only  for  a
short  time,'. — Throbbing  in  the  head,l — He'adache ;  throbbing  in  head,  on
entering  a  room  from  open  air  (seventh  day),'. — *Pains  in  the  forepart  oj
the  head,^. — Headache  in  the  lohole  forepart  of  the  head,  as  if  strongly  com-
pressed behind  and  above,*. — [80.]  Violent  pains  in  forehead,  as  if  the  head
were  compressed  with  all  force,  behind  and  above,^ — Paiu  in  forehead,  t.
— Violent  pains  in  forehead, I — Sudden  painless  sense  of  heaviness  in  fore-
head, that  seems  to  press  down  the  lids,  with  ill-humor  during  dinner  (sec-
ond day),'.- — ^Great  sense  of  heaviness  in  whole  forehead,  that  would  press
down  the  head,  with  great  ill-humor  while  sitting  (second  day),'. — Pressive
but  dull  pains  in  forehead,  and  then  on  right  side  of  occiput  (a  quarter  of
an  hour),'-'. — Feeling  in  forehead  as  if  something  turned  itself  round
therein  (third  day),'. — Throbbing  in  the  forehead,  with  sense  of  heaviness
in  occiput,'. — Sticking  in  the  forehead,  on  turning  head  to  the  right  (after-
noons),'.— Throbbing  in  left  frontal  region,  very  painful  (fourth  day),l —
[90.]  Pain  at  the  eyebrows,'. — Tension  above  the  root  of  the  nose,'. — Tear-
ing pain  across  the  eyes,'. — Jei'king-tearing  over  left  eye,  in  orbit,  on  sitting
(second  day),'. — Convulsive  tearing  above  left  eye,  in  frontal  sinus,  when
sitting,*. — Pain  in  left  temple,  on  a  small  spot,  as  if  a  vessel  were  torn  out
(for  two  minutes)  (second  day),'. — A  sudden  crack  in  right  temple  (after-
noons),'.— Sticking  in  left  temporal  region;  then  throbbing  of  this  part  (one
and  a  quarter  hours),'. — A  stitch  in  left  temple;  then  drawing  into  the
head  (one  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — ^Violent  stitching  and  throbbing  in  left
temple,  disappearing  on  pressure,  but  returning  (two  and  a  half  hours),'.
— [100.]  Pain  in  the  vertex,'. — Dull  pain  at  the  vertex  (one  and  a  half
hours),'. — Painful  sticking  and  throbbing  on  vertex ;  disappears  on  rub-
bing (afternoons),'. — Very  painful  sticking-tearing  in  left  side  of  head,'. — ■
Stitches  and  throbbing  at  the  right  parietal  bone,l — Sticking  and  throbbing
on  upper  part  of  right  parietal  bone  (two  hours),'. — Tearing  and  throb-
bing in  right  side  of  head,  then  again  sticking  in  left  half  (five  hours),^. —
Painful  screwing-together  from  both  sides  of  the  head ;  jerkings  in  right
side  of  head  ;  then  sticking  under  left  female  breast ;  very  sensitive,  espe-
cially on  inspiration  (afternoons),'. — -Sticking  and  beating  in  upper  part  of
right  side  of  occiput  (five  hours),'. — *Distressing  pains  in  occiput  and  nape'
of  neck,  etc.  (see  Neck). — [110.]  A  crack  in  right  occiput  pierces  the  whole
head,  extends  to  right  side  (afternoons),'. — Tearing-sticking  from  occiput
forwards  (afternoon),'. — Sense  of  contraction  at  the  hairy  scalp,'. — The
head  is  inclined  to  fall  backwards,'. — After  soup,  all  troubles  disappear,
but  return  in  half  an  hour,'.

JSijes. — Staring,  strange  look,  i,^ — Staring,  lifeless  eyes,  <,\ — Fixed,
lifeless  look,*. — Fixed  look,  <,". — The  eyes  are  very  wide  open,'. — [120.]
Eyes  brilliant  and  prominent,*. — Glittering,  somewhat  protruding  eyes,  tj^.
— Sparkling,  bloodshot  eyes,  t. — Eyes  infiamed  and  bloodshot,  t. — Spasm  of
the  eyes,'. — Great  pain  in  the  eyes,  t. — The  eyes  burn  violently  in  the
room,  as  if  smoke  were  in  them  (half  an  hour),'. — Pain  of  excoriation


^THUSA.  61

around  the  eyes,'. — Stitches  around  the  eyes  and  in  the  orbits/. — Pressure
in  the  eyes,^ — [130.]  Troublesome  sensation  around  the  eyelids,^. — Pain
of  excoriation  in  the  lids,^. — Chronic  inflammation  of  the  edges  of  the  eye-
lids,'.— Morning,  agglutination  of  the  lids  by  a  dry  substance,  which  he  is
obliged  to  soften  in  order  not  to  pull  out  the  lashes,^ — Swelling  of  the
Meibomian  glands,^ — Swelling  of  the  Meibomian  glands;  gum  in  the
canthi,". — Itching  of  the  canthi,'. — Many  red  vessels  show  in  conjunc-
tiva, tj\ — Eyes  staring;  pupils  dilated,  t. — *Pupih  moderately  dilated,  and
rather  senntive  to  the  light  (in  four  children),  t. — [140.]  *The  pupik  are
dilated,  but  sensitive  to  light,  t. — Wide  open,  insensible  pupils,  t. — Vision
confused;  sometimes  objects  appear  double,'. — Objects  seem  enlarged,  and
sometimes  double,'. — The  eye-symptoms  are  generally  felt  on  awaking,  or
in  the  open  air,'.

Ears, — Violent  twitches  in  both  ears,  not  dissipated  by  scratching,'. —
Sensation  of  heat  escaping  from  the  ear,'. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  ears,
from  within  outward,'. — Shootings  and  tearings  in  the  ears,*. — Transient
though  painful  stitches  in  right  ear,^^[150.J  Stitches  in  right  ear  from
without  inward,^ — Now  sticking,  now  tearing,  in  right  ear;  somewhat  re-
lieved by  rubbing,^ — Sticking  in  right  ear,  going  away  on  boring  with
the  finger,'. — Sticking,  extending  into  the  right  ear  (three  quarters  of  an
hour),'. — Sticking  in  left  ear,  with  sensatiou  as  if  heat  issued  from  it,
alternating  with  sticking  in  left  ribs  (five  hours),'. — Sticking  in  left  ear,
followed  by  fine  tearing  around  the  ear,  extending  into  top  of  head,'.—
Stitching  pain  behind  the  ears,'. — Ears  feel  stopped  up,*. — Sense  of  stop-
page of  the  ears,  with  hard  hearing,  which  lasts  longer  in  the  left  ear  (one
hour),'. — Dryness  of  the  ears;  want  of  cerumen,'. — [160.]  Purulent  dis-
charge from  the  ears,'.— Troublesome  whistling  in  the  ears,'. — Several  of
the  ear-symptoms  are  ameliorated  by  contact  and  pressure,'.

JVose.—Gorjza  in  the  morning,'. — Coryza  in  the  open  air,'. — Coryza
with  viscid  secretion,'. — The  coryza  has  a  nauseous  smell,'. — Sudden  stop-
page of  ihe  nose,  mornings  after  waking  (one  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Sud-
den stoppage  of  both  nostrils  (five  minutes),'. — The  coryza  loosens  on  the
second  morning ;  it  discharges  copious,  thick  mucus,'. — [170.]  Ulcerative
pain  deep  in  left  side  of  nose,  as  if  there  were  an  open  place  there,'. — In-
effectual desire  to  sneeze,'. — Irritation  to  sneeze  in  left  nostril  (half  an
hour),'. — Sneezing  once,'. — Sensitive  sticking  in  left  side  of  nose  externally,
then  a  very  fine,  painful  burning  in  the  right  side;  then  fine  burning,  as
with  a  glowing  needle,  externally  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'. — Sense  of
pressure  in  the  nose,'.

Face. — Countenance  wears  a  cold  expression,  i.— -Remarkably  sunken,
very  much  altered  face,  t. — The  face  has  a  tired  look,'. — [180.]  *Face  ex-
pressive of  anguish,'. — *  The  features  have  an  expression  of  great  anguish  and
severe  pain,  t.—*A  drawn  condition,  beginning  at  the  ala  nasi,  and  ex-
tending to  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  gave  the  face  an  expression  of  great
anxiety  and  pain,  t — Pale  face,  t. — Face  periodically  puffy  and  spotted
red,  t. — Eed,  sunken  countenance,  t. — Moderately  red  face,  t. — Pufiiness  of
the  face  during  the  menses,'. — Cold  sweat  on  the  face,'. — Sweat  on  the
face,'. — [190.]  Small  vesicles  on  the  skin  of  the  face,'. — Different  circum-
to  place,  t. — Pulling,  tearing  pains  in  the  face,  t. — Q3dematous  swelling  of
the  cheeks,  t — A  dull  stitch,  like  tapping  with  the  finger,  with  tearing,  in
middle  of  left  cheek,  in  a  small  spot  (second  day),'. — Tearings  in  both
malar  bones,  very  painful,  though  transient,' — Sticking  and  tearing in


62  ^THUSA.

right  malar  bone;  then  tickling  in  left  upper  teeth,  then  again  violent
stitches  in  left  ear  (three  hours)/. — Jactitation  of  the  muscles  around  the
mouth,'.— Yellowish  spot  on  the  upper  lip,".— Chap  on  the  upper  lip,'. —
[200.]  Tearing  in  lower  lip,  extending  into  the  neighboring  teeth  (after-
noons),\ — Tearing  in  right  lower  jaw  (one  hour  and  a  quarterj,^ — Sensa-
tion of  coldness  at  the  chin  and  the  labial  commissures,^

Mouth.— Bhockn  in  the  teeth,*.— A  sort  of  shocks  in  the  lower  teeth,'.—
Grumbling  in  a  right  back  lower  tooth;  it  seems  as  though  the  headache
arose  from  the  teeth  (seventh  day),\ — Painful  sensibility  of  a  decayed,
right  lower  back  tooth ;  still  more  sensitive  to  touch  (first  day),\ — Stick-
ing here  and  there  in  the  gums  (ninth  day),\ — Fine  sticking  and  tearing
in  the  gums,  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the  left  side,  frequently  (eleventh
day),\— Shootings  in  the  gums,*.— [210.]  Moist  tongue,  t. — Moist  and
white-coated  tongue  (from  milk),  with  sense  of  dryness  in  mouth,  t. — Sen-
sation as  if  the  tongue  were  too  dry,'. — Aphthse  in  the  mouth,'. — Sensation
of  pungent  heat  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  great  difficulty  in  swallowing,  i.
— Stitching  in  the  arch  of  the  palate,^ — Jaws  spasmodically  fixed,  t. — The
lower  jaw  is  fixed  to  the  upper,  so  that  nothing  can  be  introduced  into  the
mouth,  t. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,*. — Salivation,  as  copious  as  from  mer-
curial treatment,  lasting  almost  fourteen  days,  t. — [220.]  Sweetish,  insipid
taste,*. — Sweetish  taste  and  dryness  in  mouth  (eleventh  day),\ — Flat  taste
in  mouth,  sweetish;  mornings  after  waking,\ — Unpleasant,  bitter  taste,  t. —
Taste  of  cheese  in  mouth,'. — Food  tastes  salt,'. — Taste  of  onions,'.^ — Inde-
scribable taste,  both  before  and  after  a  meal,'. — Speech  almost  prevented,'. —
Slowness  of  speech,'.

Throat. — [230.]  Eedness  of  the  throat,'. — Inflamed  aphthce  and  pus-
tules in  throat,  waking  the  patient's  condition  almost  desperate,^. — Dryness  of
the  throat  and  frequent  hawking  (two  hours),'. — Pains  in  the  throat,  t. —
Burning  in  the  throat,^. — Heat  in  the  throat,  t. — Pointed  sticking  in  the
throat,  when  not  swallowing  (second  day),'. — Redness  and  swelling  of  the
velum  pendulum  and  adjacent  parts;  distress  so  great  that  he  fears  sufioca-
tion,'. — Itching  and  scraping  in  the  oesophagus,'. — Feeling  in  throat  as  if
she  could  not  swallow,  with  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  right  side  of  the
throat  and  ear,  for  one  hour  (afternoons)  on  sitting  (ninth  day),'. — [240.]
Great  difiiculty  in  swallowing,  with  sensation  of  pungent  heat  in  throat
and  mouth,  t. — Inability  to  swallow,  t.

Stomach. — Total  loss  of  appetite  for  every  kind  of  aliment,'. —  Want
oj  appetite,  t. — Want  of  appetite,  although  with  clean  tongue,'. — Want  of
appetite  in  the  evening,'. — Burning,  unquenchable  thirst,  t. — Thirst,  t. —
Continual  thirst,  t. — Urgent  thirst,*. — [250.]  Eructations,  tasting  of  the
ingesta,'. — Eructations,  tasting. of  the  soup  eaten  (one  and  a  half  hours),'.
— Difficult  eructations,'. — Empty  eructations  (afternoons),'. — Eructations
after  drinking,'. — The  eructations  are  allayed  by  lying  down,'. — Hiccough  ;
evenings,'. — Nausea,  without  vomiting  (in  the  evening),  t. — Nausea,  with
prostration,'. — Troublesome  nausea,  with  vomiting,^. — [260.]  Regurgitation
of  food  an  hour  after  a  meal,^ — *  Intolerance  of  milk ;  the  children  throw
up  their  milk  almost  as  soon  as  swallowed,  curdled  or  not  curdled,  in  from
ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  by  a  sudden  and  violent  vomiting ;  then  weakness
makes  them  drowsy  for  some  minutes,'. — *  Vomiting  of  milk,  t. — Vomit-
ing, t. — ^Horrible  vomiting,  t. — Vomiting,  painful,  t. — '■'Greenish  vomiting,^.
— *  Copious  greenish  vomiting,  t. — *  Vomiting  curdled  milk  (in  five  children,
in  two  others  of  greenish  mucus  mixed  with  the  half-digested  green  leaves),*.
— *  Violent  vomiting  of  a  frothy,  milk-white  mass,  t. — [270,]  Vomiting  after


^THUSA.  63

the  colic,  t. — Discharge  of  greenish  mucus  from  mouth  and  anus,  with  vio-
lent pains ;  colored  bloody  (in  two  children),  t. — Vomits  bloody  mucus,  t
— *  Vomiting,  with  diarrhoea,^. — Frequent  vomiting,  with  frequent  painful
diarrhoea,  t. — ^Vomiting  and  fever,'. — Vomiting,  with  chills,  sweat,  and
debility,''. —  Very  violent  pains  at  the  stomach,^. — Sense  of  pungent  heat  in
stomach,  t. — Feeling  in  stomach  as  if  something  had  turned,  followed  by
burning  feeling,  which  rises  into  the  chest,*. — -[280.]  *Painfid  contraction
of  the  stomach,^. — Pains  in  stomach,  caused  by  inflamed  aphthae  and  pus-
tules in  throat,  t. — ■* Painjulness  of  the  epigastric  region,^. — *Pains  in  epigas-
trium, with  nausea,  t, — Deepseated  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  t. — Tear-
ing pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  thence  into  the  oesophagus,  t. — ■*Pain  in
piit  of  stomach  and  abdomen,  followed  by  nausea,  with  or  without  vomiting,  t.

Abdomen. — Dull  stitches  in  the  side  near  the  stomach,  deep  in,  on
sitting;  heat  disappears  on  becoming  erect  (first  day),'. — A  stitch  in  the
right  rib-region  (afternoons),'. — Stitching  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right
rib-region,  and  soon  again  in  the  right  ear  (afternoons),'. — [290.]  Sticking
in  lower  rib-region  (four  hours) ;  frequent  and  long-continued,'. — Constant
sticking  in  left  lower  rib-region,  with  burning,  disappearing  only  for  a  short
time  on  rubbing,'. — A  stitch  in  the  left  lower  rib-region,  extending  back-
wai-ds ;  then  sticking  deep  internally  under  the  left  female  breast  (after-
noons),'.— Painfulness  of  the  hypochondria,'. — A  painful  pressing-in  and
burning,  with  sticking,  in  left  hypochondria,  twice  in  succession  (one  hour),'.
— Now  in  left  loins,  then  in  the  right  lower  rib-region,  a  sudden  burning,
as  from  glowing  hot  needles  (four  hours),'. — *  Great  cold  sensations  in  whole
upper  abdomen  immediately,^. — *  Coldness  of  the  abdomen,  both  objective  and
subjective,  with  aching  pain  in  the  bowels  (relieved  by  warm  wet  applica-
tions), accompanied  by  coldness  of  the  lower  extremities,  particularly  the  left
one,^ — A  painful  thrust,  as  with  a  knife,  round  about  the  bowels,  above
the  navel,  internally,  as  it  seemed  (second  day),'. — Rush,  like  boiling
water,  in  navel  region  ;  then  pinching  in  stomach,'. — [300,]  Griping  in  the
umbilical  region  and  hypogastrium,*. — Hard  and  tense  abdomen,  t. — Con-
tracted and  tense  abdomen,^. — Swelling  of  the  abdomen,^. — Large,  inflated
abdomen,^ — Bloating  of  whole  abdomen;  sometimes  with  bluish-black
color,  t. — Abdomen  swollen,  sensitive,  especially  in  hepatic  region,  t. —
Severe  pain  in  abdomen  (in  two  children),  t. — Pains  in  intestines,  t. —
*Pains  in  abdomen,  t. — [310.]  Digging  sensation  in  the  abdomen,''. — Throb-
bing in  the  abdomen,'. — *  Cold  feeling  in  bowels  after  every  dose^. — Moving
in  bowels,  followed  by  stool ;  first  part  hard,  the  rest  soft,'.— *  Excessive
griping  pain  in  abdomen,  t. — ^Gripes,  with  flatulence,  t. — *Gripes,  accom-
panied by  fearful  vomiting,  weakness,  and  indescribable  anguish,  t. — *Colic,
with  diarrhoea,  t. — *  Colie,  succeeded  by  vomiting,  vertigo,  and  weakness,  t. —
Cuttings  in  the  lower  abdomen,  with  urging  to  stool,  which  follows  very
soft,  succeeded  by  tenesmus  and  repeated  urging  (tenth  day),'. — [320,]
Drawing  in  right  lumbar  region  on  walking,  disappearing  on  sitting  (one
and  a  quarter  hours),'. — A  stitch  in  right  lumbar  region  ;  then  sensation
of  a  slight  pressure,  as  though  a  light  body  lay  there  (one  and  a  quarter
hours),'.

Stool  and,  Anus. — Contraction  of  the  rectum,'. — Sensation  of  dry-
ness at  the  anus,'. — Feeling  as  if  the  hsemorrhoidal  tumors  were  excori-
ated,'.— *Diarrhoea,  t. — Obstinate  diarrhoea,  t. — *Stools  of  partly  digested
food,  shortly  after  a  meal  or  at  night,'. — -Evacuation  of  a  thin,  bright  yel-
low, or  greenish  fluid,  mixed  with  much  bile,  with  severe  tenesmus,  t. —
Morning,  after  rising,  first  some  pinching  about  the  navel ;  then  two  soft


64  iETHUSA.

stools,'. — [330.]  Stool,  first  part  hard,  the  rest  soft,  preceded  by  movings
in  the  bowels,\ — Painful  "  goings  on  "  below  the  navel,  with  desire  for
stool  after  breakfast,  followed,  after  some  minutes,  by  hard  stool  (one
hour),\ — Very  hard  stool,  with  clawing  in  the  anus  and  severe  urging  (.sec-
ond day),\ — ConstipatioD,l — *Most  obstinate  comiipation,  with  feeling  as
if  all  action  of  the  bowels  had  been  lost,'.

Urinary  Orfffins. —  Cutting  pains  at  the  bladder,^. — Frequent  urg-
ing to  urinate,^ — Frequent  urging  to  urinate  at  night,'. — Copious  emission
of  urine,l — She  passes,  three  times,  much  pale  urine,  like  water  (second
(lay),\ — [340.]  Red  urine,  voided  with  difiiculty,l — Urine  depositing  a
white  .«ediment,'.

Sexual  Organs.— Stitching  pains  in  sexual  parts  (female),'. — Itch-
ing at  the  sexual  parts  (female),'. — Pimply  eruption  on  the  genitals  (fe-
male),'.— The  menstrual  blood  is  watery,'.

Mespiratori/  Apparatus. — Slight  cough,'. — Cough,  with  stun-
ning pain  in  the  head,'. — Cough,  with  titillating  sensation  in  the  throat,'.
—Cough,  with  paleness  of  the  face,'. — [350,]  Cough,  with  sweetish  taste  in
the  throat,'. — Cough,  with  tearing  pain  in  the  chest,'. — Cough,  followed  by
mucous  expectoration,'. — Cough,  aggravated  by  lying  down,'. — Dry  cough
after  dinner,*. — Dry  cough,  in  several  paroxysms,  after  dinner  (four  hours),\
— Frequent  short,  hacking  (one-half  hour),'. — Hoarse  breathing,'. — Sibi-
lant respiration,'. — Hoarse  and  sibilant  respiration,  especially  when  lying
on  the  back,'. — [360.]  Respiration  short  and  difiicult,  t. — The  respiration
is  very  difficult  and  shorty. — Short,  anxious  respiration  (first  hour),'. — Very
difficult  breathing,  with  extreme  oppression  of  the  chest,  t. — Short  breath-
ing, interrupted  by  hiccough,  <,"*. — G-reat  oppression;  she  can  hardly
breathe,*. —  Undisturbed  respiration,  t.

Chest. — Swelling  of  the  mammary  gland,'. — Severe  piercing  pain,
with  heat  and  redness  of  the  breast  (from  external  application) ;  next  day,
a  large  number  of  phlyctense ;  vesicles  filled  with  lymph  appear  over  the
breasts,  and  discharge  a  great  deal  of  serum  when  the  plaster  is  removed,'.
— Sensation  of  pressure,  as  from  a  band  around  the  chest,'.^-An  exces-
sively painful  dull  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  on  inspiration,  on
rising  from  sitting  bent ;  on  deep  inspiration,  the  pain  is  still  more  severe
(evenings,  at  6.30  o'clock)  (first  day),'. — [370.]  On  knitting,  evenings,
painless  tension  in  region  in  front  of  the  right  axilla  (fifth  day),'. — Dig-
ging and  tension  in  the  right  thorax  in  front  of  the  axilla,'. — Burning,  as
with  glowing  hot  iron,  on  a  small  spot  under  the  left  breast  (second  day),'.
— Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  t. — Severe  stitches  and  burning  in  the
middle  of  the  sternum,  which  cease  when  stooping,  but  return,*. — A  sharp
stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum ;  then,  burning  on  this  spot,  so  that  she
believes  it  all  up  with  her;  disappears  on  pressure,  but  returns  (fifth
hour),'. — Precordial  anxiety,^.

Heart  and  Plllse.^Violent  •palpitation  of  the  heart,^. — Palpitations
which  resound  in  the  head,'. — Palpitation,  with  vertigo,  headache,  and  icst-
lessness,'. — [380.]  Palse  full,  rapid,  tt\ — Rapid,  hard,  small  pulse,'. — Small
and  frequent  pulse,^. — Small,  frequent,  irregular  pulse,'. — Small  pulse,  t. —
Irrec/ular  pulse,  t. — Imperceptible  pulse,'.

Nech  and  Back. — Stitching-jerking  in  nape  (two  hours),'. — *Dis-
tressing  pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck,  extending  down  the  spine;  relieved
by  friction  with  hot  whisky.  A  feeling  as  if  the  pain  in  the  back  would  be
ameliorated  by  straightening  out  and  bending  stiffly  backwards  as  in  opistho-
tonus,^.— Shootings,  tearing  and  beating  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,*. — [390.]


^THUSA.  65

Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck/. — Painful  tearing  in  the  cords  on
the  right  side  of  the  neck  (seventh  day)/. — Drawing  pain  in  right  side  of
neck,  as  if  a  cord  or  vessel  were  torn  out ;  disappears  on  rubbing  (eleventh
day),'. — Violent  tearing  in  a  spot  as  broad  as  two  fingers  in  right  side
of  neck  (second  day)/. — In  left  cervical  muscles,  a  sharp  stitch  extending
inward  ;  then,  a  similar  stitch  on  upper  part  of  left  parietal  bone ;  then,
beating  in  the  whole  head,  more  on  right  side  and  backwards,  with  sensa-
tion of  heaviness,'. — Throbbing  tearing  in  a  small  spot  on  a  tendon  on  left
side  of  neck  (second  day),'. — Fine  stitch  between  shoulder-blades,'. —
Stitches  between  the  shoulder-blades,*. — Sense  of  heat  down  the  back,
(afternoons),'. — Pulling  in  the  back,^ — [400.]  Weak  feeling  in  the  back,'.
— Sense  as  if  screwed  up  in  small  of  back  (frequent),'. — Burning  externally
in  small  of  back ;  disappears  after  rubbing,'. — Weak  feeling,  like  paraly.sis,
when  raising  himself  in  bed,  when  turning  in  bed,  and  during  movement,^

Extremities  in  General. — Extremities  cold,  t. — Cold  limbs,\—
Extremities  chiOy,  benumbed,  and  affected  with  tremors,  t.

Upper  Mxtrerniti^es. — Numbness  of  the  arms,^. — Shootings,  draw-
ings and  tension  in  different  places,*. — Sensations  as  if  the  arms  had  become
much  shorter  ;  so  vivid  that  she  had  to  examine  them  in  the  morning  to
be  convinced  that  it  was  not  actually  so,^— Painful  tension  in  the  shoul-
ders,*.— [410.]  Painful  aching  about  the  left  scapula,  sometimes  extending
into  the  left  arm ;  attempt  to  relieve  it  by  rigid  expansion  and  closing  the
fist,  as  in  a  tonic  spasm,". — Pain  in  the  axillary  glands,'. — Tension,  first
on  the  left,  then  on  the  right  shoulder,  very  painful  (first  day),'. — Paralytic
sensation  in  left  shoulder;  then,  in  right  forearm  (second  day),'. — Arthritic
stiffness  of  the  elbow-joint,'. — Heaviness  of  the  forearm,'. — Tension  of  cords
of  left  forearm  when  flexed ;  she  does  not  venture  to  stretch  it  out,  and
still  this  tension  disappears  only  by  extending  and  bending  the  fingers  (on
knitting),  (five  minutes),'. — Fine  tearing  on  a  small  spot  on  inner  surface  of
left  forearm,'. — Stitching  tearing  from  the  middle  of  left  forearm,  on  the
upper  surface,  as  far  as  the  wrist,'.— Sticking  in  cords  of  right  forearm,  on
exerting  the  hand  (first  day),'. — [420.]  Paralytic  pain  in  left  forearm  on
sitting  (second  day),'. — Sudden  fatigue  of  the  forearm  on  knitting ;  she
must  lay  it  aside,  when  she  becomes  better  (quarter  of  an  hour),'. —
Sense  of  great  weakness  in  right  forearm,  a  hand's  breadth  above  the  wrist,
down  to  the  little  finger  (fifth  day),'. — Crarap  of  the  hand,'. — Frequent
tearing  in  the  back  of  right  hand,  in  the  tendons  of  the  thumb,  frequent
for  several  days  (seventh  day),'. — Formication  in  the  fingers,'. — Contrac-
tion of  the  fingers,'. — Swelling  of  the  fingers,'. — A  stitch  in  the  left  external
metacarpal  bones  (one  and  a  half  hours),'.— Jerkings  in  left  thumb  (two
hours),'. — [430.]  Jerking  tearing  between  the  first  and  second  joints  of
left  thumb,  as  if  in  the  marrow  (second  day),'.— Extremely  painful  sticking
in  ball  of  left  thumb,  on  flexion  ;  less  on  extension  (first  day),'. — On  sew-
ing, feeling  in  left  thumb  as  if  it  were  stiff  and  immovable,  and  she  could
not  straighten  it,  which,  however,  she  can  (first  day),'. — Tearing  in  meta-
carpal bone  of  right  index  finger  (second  day),'. — Tearing  in  metacarpal
bone  of  left  index  finger,'. — In  the  left  side  of  right  index  finger,  at  the
tip,  a  fine  stitching  as  of  a  thistle,  which  disappeai-s  by  long  pressure  on
it  (quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Tearing  in  lower  surface  of  third  joint  of
right  little  finger,'. — Tearing  between  the  little  and  ring  fingers,  increased
by  extension  (second  day),'.

Lower  Extremities. — Boring  pain  in  the  lower  extremities,'. —
Lancinating,  tearing  pain  in  the  lower  extremities,'. — [440.]  Formication,

VOL.  I. — 5


66  ^THUSA.

referred  to  the  bones  of  the  lower  limbs/. — Great  weakness  of  the  lower
extremities  (third  day)/. — Coldness  of  lower  extremities,  particularly  the
left,  with  coldness  in  abdomen,  etc.,^ — Tension  in  right  hip,  then  again
stitching-tearing  in  right  ear  (afternoons),'. — A.  pinching,  externally,  at
right  hip  (two  and  a  half  hours),'. — Sticking  and  drawing  pain  from  left
hip  into  the  thigh,'. — Sticking  in  upper  part  of  left  thigh,'. — Paralytic
pain  in  middle  of  right  thigh,  on  sitting ;  disappears  on  rubbing,'. — ^Stick-
ing in  right  knee,  on  standing  (evenings),'. — Tearing  deep  in  right  instep
(afternoons),'. — [450,]  Tearing-stitching  in  right  heel,  and  thence  into  the
sole,  and  as  far  as  ball  of  toes  (three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Sticking  in
right  sole  under  the  heel  (five  hours),'.

Generalities. — Bloating,  t. — The  whole  body  becomes  swollen  and
livid,  t. — ^Violent  epileptic  spasms,  with  clenched  thumbs,  red  face,  eye-
balls turned  down,  pupils  dilated,  insensible,  milky  foam  from  mouth,
clenched  teeth,  small,  hard,  frequent  pulse,  with  the  usual  temperature  of
body  (in  a  four-years-old  child),  t. — Spasms,  delirium,  and  stupor,  t. — Death
with  convulsions  (in  two  children,  fifteen  months  old),  t. — Whole  body  con-
vulsed, t. — Stiffness  of  the_  whole  body,*. — Stiffness  of  the  limbs,  t. — [460.]
Restlessness,  t. — Anguish,  and  very  troublesome  restlessness,  t — Restlessness,
vrith  excessive  anguish,^. — Great  agitation,^. — *Inability  to  hold  the  head
erect,  or  to  sit  up,  t. — *Unable  to  hold  herself  erect,  t. — *While  walking
he  is  seized  with  such  languor  and  listlessness  that  with  difficulty  he  sup-
ports himself  till  he  gets  home,  t. — *He  is  powerless  to  raise  his  head  and
stand  up,  t. — *Great  general  debility,  t. — *Great  weakness  and  prostration,
with  sleepiness  (second  afternoon),'. — [470.]  *  Weakness  after  the  colic,  t. —
Great  weariness,  t. — Complete  insensibility,  f. — Great  and  long-lasting  ner-
vous sensitiveness,*. — Indescribable  anguish,  with  vomiting  and  gripes,  i. —
Cries  of  anguish  (in  a  child),^. — General  malaise,  t. — State  of  malaise,  last-
ing all  day,  t. — Anxiety,  characterized  by  a  feeling  of  weight  on  the  chest,'.

Skin, — The  whole  body  is  of  a  bluish-black  color,^ — [480.]  During
one  day  appearance  and  disappearance  of  reddish-blue  spots  on  the  trunk
and  left  leg,  causing  the  patient  to  fear  an  attack  of  spotted  fever,*. — A
painful  boil  on  small  of  back,'. — Burning  heat  of  the  skin,'. — Itching  from
the  heat,'. — An  herpetic  eruption  itched  very  much  from  the  heat,  espe-
cially in  the  evening,'. — Tingling,  itching,'. — Itching  of  the  least-affected
portions  of  the  skin  ;  they  swell  up,'.

Fever. — General  coldness,'. — Internal  coldness,'. — Chill  through  the
whole  body  and  external  coldness,  without  thirst,  for  two  days,". — [490,]
Violent  chill  and  external  coldness,  so  that  she  cannot  get  warm  at  all
(forenoons,  soon  after  taking  it),  with  sleepiness ;  lasts  the  whole  day,^. —
General  coldness  during  sleep,'. — Coldness,  with  red  face,'. — Cold  extremi-
ties, <. — Coldness  of  abdomen  and  lower  extremities,^ — Shivering  on  enter-
ing a  room  from  the  open  air  (second  day),'.— Shivering,  which  is  more
frequent  in  the  afternoons,'. — Horripilation  in  the  open  air,'. — Horripila-
tion, with  heat,  which  pervades  the  whole  body,'. — During  the  horripilation
the  limbs  feel  as  if  broken,  with  hot  breath  and  restlessness,'. — [500.]  Gen-
eral heat,  t. — Remarkable  increase  of  bodily  heat,  t. — Temperature  some-
what increased,  t. — Fever-heat  (in  two  children),  t. — In  spite  of  the  great
general  heat  complete  adipsia,  t. — General  perspiration,'. — Sweat  when
going  to  sleep,'. — He  perspires  very  soon  from  the  least  bodily  exertion,'. —
He  cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered  during  the  sweat,'. — The  febrile  symptoms
occur  more  particularly  in  the  morning,  and  are  accompanied  with  very
great  malaise  and  tendency  to  delirium,  which  cease  during  the  sweat,'.


^THUSA.  67

Sleep  and  Dreams. — [510.]  Somnolence,  t. — Sleepy,  without  yawn-
ing (afternoons),'. — The  eyes  will  close  with  sleep,  disappears  in  open  air,'. —
Fell  suddenly  into  a  deep,  stertorous  sleep,  t. — Restless  sleep  during  the
first  hours  of'  the  night,  /. — Restless  night ;  great  disposition  to  slumber ;
but  calm  repose  is  wholly  prevented  by  frequent  startings  and  excessive
agitation,  t. — Sleep  broken  by  frequent  waking,''. — Sleep  prevented  by  pains
in  the  l^mb3,^ — Frequent  waking,  caused  by  a  feeling  of  cold,'. — Waking
up,  followed  by  several  hours  of  sleeplessness,'. — [520.]  Distortion  of  the
eyes  during  sleep,'. — Slight  spasmodic  movements  during  sleep,'. — Troubled
dreams,'. — Fatiguing  dreams  in  the  morning,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation, — (Morning),  Agglutination  of  lids ;  co-
ryza ;  febrile  symptoms  ;  fatiguing  dreams. — {Morning,  after  rising).  Pain  in
navel,  etc. — {Mornings,  after  waking),  Stoppage  of  nose  ;  flat  taste. — {Fore-
noon), Vertigo. — {Afternoon),  Sad  and  anxious;  cross  and  fretful ;  shattered
feeling  in  head  ;  beating  and  sticking  in  head  ;  sticking  in  forehead  ;  crack
in  temple;  pain  on  vertex;  pain  from  both  sides  of  head,  etc.;  crack  in  occi-
put ;  pain  in  occiput ;  feeling  as  if  could  not  swallow,  etc. ;  empty  eructations ;
stitch  in  rib-region,  etc.;  heat  down  back;  tension  in  hip,  etc.;  shivering;
sleepy,  etc. — {Evening),  Want  of  appetite  ;  hiccough  ;  nausea ;  sticking  in
knee ;  itching  of  eruption ;  *all  symptoms  aggravated  towards  evening  and
during  night  till  about  3  to  4  A.M.,^ — {Night),  Stools,  etc. ;  urging  to  urinate.
— {Before  midnight).  Restless  sleep. — (  Open  air).  Fretful  and  cross ;  vertigo ;
eye-symptoras  ;  coryza;  horripilation.  —  {When  a^owe).  Sadness. — {After
breakfast),  Fain  below  navel. — {After  the  colic).  Vertigo ;  weakness. —
{Getting  chilled).  Pains  in  head. — {During  the  coryza).  Head  confused. —
{During  dinner).  Ill-humor. — {After  dinner).  Dry  cough. — {After  drink-
ing). Eructations. — {Bodily  exertion).  Perspiration. — {Extending  finger's),
Tearing  in  fingers. — {Flexing  thumb),  Sticking  in  ball  of  thumb. — {Heat),
Itching  of  eruption. — {During  horripilation).  Limbs  feel  as  if  broken. —
{On  inspiring  air),  Sitickmg  under  left  breast ;  stitch  in  chest. — {On  knit-
ting), Fatigue  of  forearm. — {Lying  down),  Cough. — {Lying  on  back),  Hoarse
respiration. — {After  a  meal).  Stools,  etc. — {During  menses),  Puffiness  of
face. — {Return  periodically).  Pains  in  head. — {Rising  from  sitting  bent),
Stitch  in  chest. — {After  rising  up).  Vertigo. — {Trying  to  rise  from  seat).
Vertigo. — (iii  room),  Symptoms  return ;  eyes  burn  ;  shivering. — {Enter-
ing room  from  open  air),  Throbbing  in  head. — -{Sewing),  Stiff  feeling  in
thumb. — {Sitting),  Vertigo;  ill-humor;  pain  in  orbit;  tearing  in  frontal
sinus ;  feeling  as  if  could  not  swallow,  etc. ;  stitches  in  side  ;  pain  in  thigh. —
(During  sleep).  Distortion  of  eyes ;  spasmodic  movements. — (  When  going
to  sleep),  Sweat. — (Standing),  Sticking  in  knee. — (Turning  head  to  right).
Sticking  in  forehead. — (  Waking),  Pains  in  head  ;  ear-symptoms.

Ameliorations. — (Forenoow),  Gay,  good-tempered. — (Toward  noon).
Better  mood. — (Open  air),  Most  symptoms  disappear;  vertigo;  drowsi-
ness.—(Coring'  with  finger).  Sticking  in  ear. — (  Contact  and  pressure),  Ear-
symptoms* — (Eating),  Pains  in  head. — (On  becoming  erect),  Stitches  in
side.  — (Exerting  hand).  Sticking  in  cords  of  forearm. —  (Extension  of
thumb).  Sticking  in  ball  of  thumb. — (Extending  and  bending  fingers),
Tension  of  cords  of  forearm. — (Emission  of  flatulence),  Pains  in  head. —
(Lying  down).  Eructations, — (Pressure),  Stitching  and  throbbing  in  temple ;
stitch  in  sternum ;  sticking  in  forefinger. — (After  rising).  Disappears. —
(Entering  room  from  open  air),  Feels  fresher  and  better. — (Rubbing),
Pains  in  ear ;  sticking  in  rib-region ;  pain  in  side  of  neck ;  burning  in
small  of  back ;  pain  in  thigh. — (Sitting),!)  raw  ing  in  lumbar  region ;  para-


68 AGARICUS  CAMPANULATUS— AGARICUS  EMETICUS.

lytic  pain  in  left  forearm. — {Sleep),  Pains  in  head. — {After  soup),  All
troubles  disappear  for  half  an  hour. — {Stooping),  Stitches,  etc.,  in  sternum.


AGAEICUS  CAMPANULATUS.

A.  campanulatus,  Fr.  A.  ovalis,  Fr.  (section  Galera).  A  rare  species,
found  in  England  on  dung.

Authority. Poisoning  cases.

Recollection  restored,  and  lost  again. — He  loses  his  way. — He  reels
about. — Sudden  dimness  of  vision. — Countenance  expressive  of  anxiety. —
He  can  hardly  articulate. — Pulse  slow  and  feeble. — Languor  and  weak-
ness.— Giddiness,  debility,  trembling  and  loss  of  memory. — Great  drow-
siness.

AGARICUS  CAMPESTRIS.

Agaricus  campestris,  L.  Common  mushroom.  This  mushroom,  common
in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  is  esculent;  stem  only  two  to  three
inches  high.

Authority. Poisoning  symptoms.

Slight  delirium. — Eyes  sunken,  with  livid  circle. — Face  humid,  hippo-
cratic. — Tongue  red  and  parched. — Nausea. — Vomiting  and  purging  of
liquid  matter. — ^Abdomen  retracted. — Great  abdominal  pain  at  intervals. —
Severe  colic. — Purging  and  vomiting  of  liquid  matter. — Pulse  hard,  weak,
rapid,  irregular. — Pulse  feeble. — Respiration  irregular. — Depraved  habit,
leading  to  external  suppuration  and  gangrene. — Severe  cramps. — Green-
ness of  the  skin. — Formation  of  abscesses,  which  discharge  a  thin,  ill-
conditioned  pus,  and  pass  rapidly  into  suppuration  and  gangrene. — Skin
cold,  covered  with  cold  sweat. — Kind  of  tertian  fever. — Somnolency.


AGARICUS  CITRINUS.

A.  citrinellus,  Pers.  (?). Found  in  England,  in  fir  woods,  etc.

Authority. Poisoning  cases.

Coma  and  lethargy. — Vomiting. —  Violent  true  cholera. — Deep  sopor.


AGARICUS  EMETICUS.

(A.  emeticus,  Schsef  ?),  probably  Russula  emetica,  Fr.  A  small  acrid
species,  found  in  woods  in  Europe.

Authority. Poisoning  cases.

Head. — Vertigo  so  severe  that  one  must  be  carried  to  bed ;  is  not  able
to  sit  or  stand.

Eyes. — Lachrymation  (from  the  smell). — Lasting  weakness  of  eyes.

Nose. — Sneezing  (from  the  smell).

Jtfouth. — Nauseous  taste  of  the  fungus,  several  days. — Sharp  burning
in  mouth.

Stomach, — Sudden,  violent  longing  for  ice-cold  water  (during  the
worst  attacks  of  anxiety),  which  causes  gradual  relief. — Dislike  for  wine
and  meat,  several  days. — Violent  vomiting,  with  anxious  sensation,  as  if


AGARICUS  EMETICU8— AGARICUS.  69

the  stomach  hung  on  threads,  which  would  be  momentarily  torn  into,  with
ice-oold  sweat  of  face,  and  constantly  renewed  faintness,  even  from  moving
the  head  on  listening  to  reading  ;  increased  by  smelling  cordials,  especially
by  vinegar,  which  is  unbearable. — Violent  burning  pain  in  stomach  becomes
a  sensation,  as  if  a  moving  dull  body  in  the  stomach  pressed  it  out ;  now  in
one  place,  now  in  another,  with  nausea  and  great  qualmishness,  violent
eructations,  and  weak  eyes. — Painful  pressure  in  stomach,  followed  by  fre-
quent eructations,  repeated  attempts  to  vomit. — Constantly  increasing
anxiety  in  stomach. — Stomach  so  sensitive  for  eight  days  that  one  could
not  touch  it,  nor  cough.

Abdomen. — Abdomen  distended. — Constantly  increasing  pain  in
abdomen  (for  half  hour).

Stool  and  Amis. — Diarrhcea.

Heart  and  JPt*?se.— Pulse  rapid,  exceedingly  weak.

Generttlities. — Sudden  great  weakness  (quarter  of  an  hour).

Conditions. — Cold  water  relieved  speedily  and  permanently.


AGARICUS.

Agaricus  muscarius,  L. ;  Nat.  order,  Fungi,  Common  names,  Bug  or
fly  Agaric;  Germ.,  Fliegenschwamm  ;  Fr.,  Fausse  orange.  Preparottion,
Tincture  of  the  fresh  fungus.

Authorities.'f  1,  Stapf ;  2,  Schreter ;  3,  Hahnemann ;  4,  Fr.  Hahne-
mann ; 5,  Gross  ;  6,  Langhammer ; 7,  Apelt ;  8,  N g ;  9,  Seidel ;  10,

Sch. ;  11,  Woost;  12,  Adler;  13,  Adler's  wife ;  14,  Rosalie  D. ;  15,  Baum-
gartner;  16,  Copainigg;  17,  Hoor;  18,  Huber;  19,  Klitzinsky;  20,  Kraus;
21,Landsmann;  22,  Lazar;  23,  Link;  24,  Max;  25,  Rosenberg;  26,  Schmitt;
27,  Wagner;  28,  Zeiner;  29,  Zoth;  30,  Zlatarovich ;  31,  Kretschmar ;  32,
Lembke;  33,  Schelling ;  34,  Ohlhaut;  35,  Vadrot ;  36,  Voigtel ;  37,
Murray  ;  38,  Krachemariskov ;  39,  J.  C.  George  ;  40,  Pharmacod.  Lex. ;

41,  Lerger;  42,  Fricker  ;  43,  Paulet;  44,  Roth  ;  45,  Beck  ;  46,  Farring-
ton(E..A.);  47,  Windenhorn  ;  48,  Scholz.

t,  Toxicological  (numerous  scattering  cases).  No  poison  cases  accepted
unless  the  species  of  Agaricus  was  certainly  known.

M.ind. — Fury,'*'. — He  becomes  so  furious  that  he  can  hardly  be  re-
strained from  ripping  up  his  bowels,  as  he  fancies  the  mushroom  had
ordered  him  to  do,'^ — Fearless,  menacing,  mischievous  frenzy;  also,  frenzy
which  causes  the  patient  to  assail  and  injure  himself,  with  great  exertion
of  power,". — He  is  intoxicated  with  fearless  frenzy;  forming  bold  and
revengeful  projects,'". — Screaming  and  raving  like  mad  about  the  room,  t.
— Delirium,  t. — Delirium,  with  increase  of  strength,'^. — Raging  delirium ;
called  for  his  hatchet ;  had  to  be  confined ;  alternated  with  religious  excite-
ment, t. — Increase  of  strength,  with  cheerful  delirium;  the  patient  sings
and  talks,  but  returns  no  answer  when  questioned,''*. — Delirium ;  he  im-
agines himself  a  military  officer,  commanding  at  a  drill  and  directing  the
various  manoeuvres,'". — [10.]  Half  an  hour  later,  he  falls  into  a  delirium,
like  a  patient  with  a  high  fever,  and  becomss  now  immoderately  gay,  now

t  Nos.  1  to  11  from  Hahnemann  ;  12  to  30  and  48,  Austrian  provings  ;  31,  A  H.
Z.,  2,  62; 32,  A.  H.  Z.,  46; 33,  A.  H.  Z.,  82,  180; 34,  Hygea,  18,  19; 35,  38,  39,

42,  43,  44,  45,  and  47,  are  taken  from  Eoth's  compilation  ;  36,  37,  40,  and  41,  are
quoted  by  Hahnemann;  46,  Am.  J.  of  H.  Mat.  Med.,  4,  103.


70  AGARICUS.

profoundly  melancholy,^*. — Great  mental  excitement,  t — He  talks  inco-
herently; passes  very  rapidly  from  one  subject  to  another,  and  soon  enters
a  state  of  cheerful  delirium,  with  great  loquacity ,^^ — She  ran  about  the
yard,  romped  with  the  children,  threw  them  down,  even  hit  them,  t. — He
imagines  himself  at  the  gate  of  hell  and  that  the  mushroom  commands
him  to  fall  on  his  knees  and  confess  his  sins,  which  he  does.^^. — The  father
had  phantasies;  seemed  to  see  his  dead  sister  in  heaven,  t. — The  natives  of
Siberia  intoxicate  themselves  with  this  decoction.  Soon  after  drinking  it
they  become  jolly,  and  are  gradually  seized  with  such  a  fit  of  gayety  that
they  take  to  singing,  leaping,  and  reciting  before  the  beauties  of  the  tribe
their  exploits  in  war  or  the  chase.  Their  physical  strength  is  increased.
They  fall  asleep,  and  after  twelve  or  sixteen  hours  of  slumber,  they  awake
in  a  state  of  utter  prostration  ;  the  head,  however,  does  not  feel  so  empty  as
after  intoxication  by  brandy,". — Talking  volubly  and  respectfully,  as  if  to
his  parents;  returning  no  direct  answers  when  questioned ;  he  alternately
sings  and  is  vexed,  embraces  his  companions  and  kisses  their  hands.  He
performs  all  these  actions  while  affected  with  a  general  spasm,  more  like  a
trembling  thau  convulsion,'". — Great  loquacity,  and  at  the  same  time
strong  convulsions  of  the  facial  and  cervical  muscles,  especially  on  the
right  side,  drawing  the  head  down  toward  the  right  shoulder.  At  the
same  time,  movements  of  flexion  and  extension  alternately  in  the  lower
limbs,  not  preventing  locomotion  ;  these  cause  movements  of  putting  them
down  and  lifting  them.  He  walks  for  some  time  in  this  way,  with  a  great
deal  of  merry,  incoherent  talk.  After  this  condition  has  lasted  more  than
half  an  hour  it  is  followed  by  quietude,  disturbed,  in  a  little  while,  by
nausea  and  general  malaise,''. — During  intoxication  they  lift  and  carry  the
heaviest  loads,  take  long  steps  and  jump  over  small  objects,  as  if  trunks  of
trees  lay  in  their  way,  t. — [20.]  Tumbled  about  the  room  in  the  most
grotesque  manner,  t. — Laughed  about  their  not  standing  and  walking
straight,  t. — Some  run  and  walk  involuntarily  in  the  most  dangerous
places,  i. — Some  of  them  leap,  dance,  and  sing  ;  others  weep  with  anguish;
a  small  hole  appears  to  them  a  friglitful  chasm ;  a  spoonful  of  water  an
immense  lake  (only  from  abuse  of  the  drug),'^ — Dancing,  t. — Singing,  t. —
Telling  secrets,  i. — Extravagantly  exalted  fancy,  ecstasy,  prophecies,
making  verses,". — Great  prostration,  with  delirium  very  much  resembling
that  which  occurs  in  adynamic  fevers,'". — Taken  in  moderation  it  excites
the  intellect  and  inspires  cheerfulness  and  courage,'^ — f^O-]  Bright  mood,
with  absence  of  care,". — Bright  mood,  but  no  inclination  to  talk,'. — Calm,
composed,  sociable,  active,  and  glad  of  having  done  his  duty  (healthful  re-
action of  the  organism). — Cheerfulness  took  the  place  of  ill-humor,'". —
Cheering  up," — He  forces  himself  to  speak;  but  he  answers  only  in  a  few
words,  though  his  general  disposition  is  cheerful  at  the  time,'. — He  does
not  feel  disposed  to  speak,  though  he  is  not  ill-humored,'. — Au  impulse  to
laugh  overcame  him  in  bed,  owing  to  an  indescribably  mixed  sensation
of  happiness  and  misery,". — Depression  of  spirits,'. — His  mood  was  de-
pressed,^".— [40.]  Discouragement,'. — ^Melancholy  that  cannot  be  over-
come,".— Sad  mood  from  trifling  causes. — The  gayety  changes  into  suffer-
ing,'^ — Anxiety,  t. — Anxiety,  as  though  something  unpleasant  were  going
to  happen  to  her,'. — His  mind  is  uneasy  and  anxious;  he  was  constantly
concerned  only  about  himself,  his  present  and  future  condition,". — Restless-
ness and  uneasiness  of  body  and  mind  (after  the  lapse  of  half  an  hour),^ —
Timid  craziness,-". — Fretfulness  of  mind,". — [50.]  Vexed,  irritable,  moody,**.
— Ill-humor  and  irritability,'". — Peevish  and  irritable  mood,'". — Extremely


AGARICUS.  71

peevish  and  irritable,'. — Quarrelsome  mood,^'. — Easily  irritated  and  out  of
humor,'"\ — ^Reading  did  not  fix  his  attention  as  usual;  he  soon  became  ex-
cited, grew  angry  at  the  servant  and  felt  inclined  to  fight,^°. — She  is  vexed
with  herself  and  pities  herself,". — Ill-humored  and  indifFerent,". — Waking
in  morning  in  ill-humor,". — [60.]  *She  was  very  much  out  of  humor  all  day
and  disindined  to  answer  when  asked  questions,^^. — Disinclination  to  speak,
with  ill-humor,  peevishness,  and  disinclination  to  work,^ — *She  luho  ordi-
narily felt  so  extremely  solicitous  about  everything,  is  now  quite  indifferent,''. —
It  seemed  as  though  he  were  at  a  loss  to  discover  the  words  he  wished  to
use,'. — ^Thoughtless  staring;  disinclined  to  think;  he  is  sluggish  and  dull,".
Indifference  and  moody  taciturnity;  repugnance  to  work,". — Disinclination
to  work,' '. — He  trifles  with  everything,  to  save  himself  the  trouble  of  work-
ing,^.— Aversion  to  all  labor  that  occupies  the  mind ;  if  he,  nevertheless,
undertakes  any,  there  is  a  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  throbbing  in  the
arteries,  heat  in  the  face,  and  the  thinking  faculty  is  disturbed,". — Indispo-
sition to  think,'. — [70.]  Confusion  of  mind,  with  silent  delirium,  which  lasts
all  day,^^ — Heaviness  of  mind;  imbecility  (reaction  of  the  organism  in
old  age),^'. — Stupefaction,  t — Forgetful;  he  finds  It  difficult  to  recollect
the  things  which  he  had  heard  and  imagined  before,^. — The  train  of
thought  is  easily  disturbed,  and  the  last  thoughts  cannot  be  recalled
easily,^'. — ^The  patient  retains  no  recollection  of  his  serious  sickness,'^. —
Next  day  the  patient  did  not  remember  having  been  indisposed;  he  thought
he  had  made  a  journey,^". — Loss  of  consciousness,  <,". — Senseless,  with  closed
eyes,  t. — Unconscious,  with  red,  puflTy  face,  t.

Head. — [80.]  Confusion  of  the  Aead,""l — Confusion  of  the  head,
with  dull  pain  (after  two  hours),^. —  Confusion  and  heaviness  of  the  head,
(after  two  hours),". — ^The  head  is  heavy,  confused  (especially  in  forehead),
as  if  pressed  in,'^. — Head  confused  throughout  the  forenoon,". — Burrowing
in  the  brain,  as  though  everything  were  moving  there  in  confusion,''*. — -
Confusion  of  the  head  towards  noon,  and  slightly  cool,  creeping  feeling  in
the  scalp  of  the  vertex,  with  sensation  as  if  the  scalp  were  drawn  more
tightly  over  the  skull,'^ — Early  in  the  morning,  heaviness  and  confusion
of  the  head,  as  if  he  had  been  revelling  the  day  before,  lasting  six  hours,^^
— *  Vertigo,  t,^. — Violent  vertigo ;  she  is  often  compelled  to  sit  down,'^ —
[90.]  Vertigo,  at  5  a.m.,  that  rarely  ceases  during  the  day,'l — Vertigo,
while  walking,  making  his  gait  unsteady ,'^ — Vertigo,  from  afternoon  till
late  in  the  evening,  with  an  indescribable  impulse  to  fall  over  backwards.".
— Reeling,  t. — Staggering,  as  if  drunk,  t. — Reeling  and  sinking  down  (on
the  second  day),". — *Reelingwhen  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  an  hourj,'.
— *  Reeling,  as  from  spirituous  liquors ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air  he  stag-
gers to  and  fro,". — Giddiness,  as  from  intoxication.'^ — Vertigo  in  the  room;
better  in  the  open  air,  but  soon  returns,'l^[100.]  Sudden  vertigo,  that
throws  him  down,'" ". — It  seems  to  her  as  if  she  were  constantly  turning
round  ;  she  was  quickly  obliged  to  sit  on  the  ground  to  prevent  herself  from
falling ;  this  vertigo  lasted  very  violently  for  two  hours,  "  ®. — The  heat
of  the  sun  causes  violent  vertigo,"". — *Strong  light  of  the  sun  produces,
early  in  the  morning,  a  momentary  attack  of  giddiness,  even  to  falling,". —
Transient  vertigo,'^. — Occasional  slight  vertigo  during  the  day,'^. — Vertigo,
with  stupefaction," — Vertigo,  with  stupefying  headache,'". — In  the  morn-
ing, vertigo,  with  stupefying  headache,  which  lasts  all  the  forenoon,'". —
Vertigo,  with  stupefaction  and  burning  in  the  vertex,'*'^'. — [110,]  Stupe-
fying vertigo  immediately  sets  in  with  the  pain,'". — lu  the  morning,  re-
peated, but  only  momentary,  attacks  of  vertigo ;  more  in  the  open  air,  less


72  AGAEICUS.

in  the  room,'". — Vertigo  and  stupidity  early  in  the  morning  (after  three
hours),*. — ^Vertigo,  early  in  the  morning,  as  after  intoxication  (after  a
quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Vertigo,  coming  on  principally  early  in  the  morning;
it  commonly  lasts  from  one  to  eight  minutes,  and  returns  several  times  during
the  day  at  short  intervals,'. — Momentary  vertigo,  with  pressive  and  draw-
ing headache  in  the  forehead," — Attacks  of  vertigo,  combined  with  a  tot-
tering gait  and  indistinct  sight,  even  of  near  objects ;  these  attacks  come  and
go  every  five  minutes,  and  can  only  be  entirely  removed  by  thinking  of  some-
thing else,'. — Vertigo  coming  on  while  meditating,  walking  in  the  open  air
(after  eight  days),'. — Attack  of  vertigo  in  the  open  air  ;  it  disappears  in  the
room ;  lasting  for  several  days,^^ — Vertigo  in  the  room,  on  turning  round,'.
— [120.]  Vertigo,  passing  off  for  some  time  by  quickly  turning  the  head,'.
— Dizzy  dulness  of  the  head,^'. — Dizzy  dulness  of  the  head,  as  in  slight  in-
toxication, perceptible  nearly  all  day,'^ — In  the  afternoon,  dizzy  dulness
of  the  head,  especially  while  reading  or  looking  into  the  light,'^ — Dizzi-
ness, stupefactiou,l — Dizzy  stupefaction  in  the  head,  as  if  he  were  losing
his  consciousness,  with  roaring  in  left  ear,". — Head  as  if  intoxicated,^^ —
Pleasant  intoxication," — Intoxication,*".— Forenoon,  stupefaction  of  the
head,'*.^[130.]  Head  as  if  stupefied,  but  only  for  a  short  tirae,'^ — Dis-
agreeable cloudiness  in  the  head,\ — Slight  headache,  t. — In  the  head,  an
indistinct  sensation  of  a  disagreeable  kind,  all  day,  as  if  a  most  violent
headache  would  appear  every  moment ;  when  observing  the  pain  it  van-
ished entirely,  but  returned  most  disagreeably  when  least  taken  notice
qJ-i3  2i_ — Headache,  early  in  the  morning,  in  bed,'. — Heat  in  the  head  and
face,'. — Feeling  as  though  the  head  were  enlarged,''^. — Congestion  to  the
head ,\-— Dulness  of  the  head,'"'"". — Dulness  of  the  head;  head  con-
stantly dull,'". — [140,]  Dulness  of  the  head,  mornings,^'. — Dulness  of  the
head  in  the  forenoon,". — Dulness  of  the  head  at  noon,™. — Dulness  of  the
head,  which  diminished  on  walking  in  the  open  air;  which,  however,  re-
turned repeatedly,'". — Sensation  of  dulness  and  fulness  of  the  head,'°. —
Head  dull  and  full ;  he  could  not  go  on  reading,'". — Head  dull,  full,  sway-
ing back  and  forth,". — Head  dull  and  heavy,'". — Heaviness  of  the  head^^  '^.
—Continual  heaviness  of  the  head,  as  after  intoxication  (after  one  and  a
half  hours),''. — [150.]  Continual  heaviness  of  the  head  (after  five  hours),^
— In  the  morning,  dull  headache,  with  stupefying  vertigo  and  palpitation
of  the  heart ;  after  rising,  these  appearances  seemed  to  lessen  somewhat,
but  soon  became  more  violent,  with  excessive  chilliness,". — *Dull  headache,
esjjecial/y  in  the  forehead ;  this  headache  obliged  him  to  move  the  head  con-
stantly to  and  fro,  and  to  close  the  eyes  as  for  sleep,''. — Dull,  stunning  head-
ache, with  thirst  and  heat,  especially  in  the  face  (immediately),^. — Dull
headache,  mornings,  on  awakening,". — Dull,  pressive  headache,  which  dis-
appears after  a  copious  evacuation  of  the  intestines,  combined  with  flushes
of  heat,". — Waking  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  pressive  head-
ache,".— Moderate  pressure,  deep  in  the  head,"'  ^. — Pressive  headache,  at
intervals  before  going  to  sleep,". — Leaden  pressure  of  the  brain  on  the
cranial  bones,  which  even  extends  to  the  nose,'^. — [160.]  Violently  press-
ive headache,  especially  in  the  occiput,  after  dinner  (ninth  day),". — Weak
drawing  headache,'* '". — Drawing  in  the  head,  in  all  directions,  with  sensa-
tion as  though  the  person  were  to  lose  the  senses,^. — Drawing  lieadache,
early  on  awaking,  with  pressure  in  the  eyeballs,". — Jerking  tearing  in  the
head,  most  painful  behind  the  right  ear,  where  it  stops,". — Tearing  in  dif-
ferent places  in  the  skull,''^ — Grinding  pain  in  the  head ;  it  lasts  only  for
a  few  minutes,  but  it  frequently  returns,'. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  head.


AGARICUS.  73

especially  ia  the  occiput,"  ^^. — Jumping  of  the  muscles  in  the  left  forehead,'^
— *  Twitches  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead  above  the  right  eye,''. — [170.]  Head-
ache in  the  forehead  appeared  directly  after  taking,'^*. — Mornings,  violent
headache  in  the  frontal  region,  with  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  fore-
head and  eyelids,". — On  waking,  considerable  headache  in  the  forehead,'^
— Violent  headache,  that  diminished  towards  evening,  and  was  confined  to
the  forehead,'". — Half  an  hour  after  taking,  burning  in  the  superciliary
ridge  near  the  temples,'"  ^. — Sensation  in  the  head  as  though  the  frontal
regions  were  enlarged  and  the*brain  were  being  whirled  about  in  it,  with
pressive  pain  in  both  temples,''. — Heaviness  and  fulness  in  forehead,^''. —
The  forehead  is  heavy  and  confused,^^ — Burrowing  feeling,  as  if  the  brain
in  the  frontal  region  were  an  ant-hill,  with  fulness  of  the  head,'^. — Tran-
sient burrowing  pain  in  left  forehead  and  left  occiput,'^ — [180.]  Violent
boring  headache  in  the  frontal  region,  that  is  diminished  by  pressure,". —
Violent  grinding  pain  in  the  left  frontal  eminence  (after  three  hours),^—
Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead,'. — Sensation  of  drawing,  pressive  headache
in  the  left  frontal  eminence,  oppressimg  the  eye,'° "'. — Painful  drawing  pres-
sure from  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  towards  the  right,  while  sitting  (after
one  and  a  half  hours),^ — During  the  day,  pressive,  drawing  pain  in  the
forehead,  extending  to  the  eyes  ;  comes  and  goes,'l — Drawing  pain  in  the
middle  of  the  forehead. — -Soon  after  taking,  dull,  drawing,  transient  pain
in  left  forehead,'^ — Between  the  eyebrows,  a  drawing,  but  not  violent  pain,'".
— On  awaking  in  the  morning,  a  somewhat  drawing  headache  in  the  right
side  of  the  forehead,". — [190.]  *Dull,  drawing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the
forehead,  between  the  superciliary  ridges. — Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  fore-
head ;  intermitting  (after  thirty-three  hours),'. — ^Drawing  from  both  sides
of  the  frontal  bone  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  nose,'. — Drawing,  cutting  pain
in  the  forehead,  when  standing ;  when  sitting,  this  pain  assumes  a  pressive
and  stunning  character  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Dull  headache  in
the  forehead,"'. — Dull  headache  in  the  frontal  region,". — Dull,  rather  vio-
lent pain  along  the  forehead  and  sagittal  suture,'". — ^Dull  pains,  first  in  the
one,  then  in  the  other  frontal  eminence,'^. — Dull,  indistinctly  expressed
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead ;  pressing  both  temples  makes  the  pain
disappear,  but  it  returns  more  violently  after  a  short  time,'". — Pressure  in
the  cavities  of  the  forehead,'. — [200.]  Pressure  and  twitching  in  the  fore-
head, extending  to  the  eyes,' "°. — Violently  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,
with  vertigo,  while  sitting,'. — Pressure  deep  in  forepart  of  head,  at  margin
of  hair,"". — All  day  long,  a  dull,  pressive  pain  in  the  frontal  region ;  the
same  pressive  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  forehead,"". — On  waking  iri  the
morning,  pressive  pain  deep  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,'".— Transient,
pressive  headache  in  the  left  side  of  forehead,'". — Pressive  pain  in  the  left
frontal  eminence,'\ — During  the  day,  pressive,  drawing  pain  in  the  fore-
head, extending  to  the  eyes  ;  comes  and  goes,'". — Shortly  after  the  medicine,
pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  both  sides  of  the  head  were  pressed  together. —
When  she  laid  down  on  account  of  vertigo,  she  was  suddenly  seized  by  a
violent,  pressive  headache,  that  extended  into  the  left  ear,  as  if  something
would  stop  it  up,'". — [210.]  Pressive  pain  in  the  frontal  region,"'. — Pressive
pain  in  the  forehead,  extending  inward,'"  "^. — Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,
all  day  long,'" "°. — A  dull,  pressive  pain  in  the  frontal  region,". — Pressive
headache  in  the  forehead,  increases  in  the  open  air,'". — Some  pressive  pain
in  the  left  half  of  the  forehead,"". — On  waking  in  the  morning,  pressive
pain  deep  in  right  frontal  eminence,'". — Pressive  pains  in  the  right  frontal
region,  with  morning  dulness  of  the  head,"'. — Pressure,  with  stitches  in  the


74  AGAEICUS.

forehead  above  the  eyes,'. — During  a  walk  in  the  open  air,  pressive  pain
in  the  right  supraorbital  region,  which,  however,  disappears  in  a  short
time,". — [220.]  Pressure  coming  down  from  the  forehead  upon  the  upper
half  of  the  eyeballs  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — A  sensation  during  the
day  as  if  headache  were  coming  on,  which  really  appeared  towards  even-
ing, consisting  in  a  disagreeable  pressive,  and  sometimes  very  painful,  sen-
sation, in  little  spots  upon  forehead  and  temples,  which  lasted  for  hours,'^  ^'.
— Tearing  in  bones  of  forehead,^^.— Tearing  in  the  forehead  immediately
above  the  root  of  the  nose,'. — Sore  feeling  dn  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,
directly  over  the  eyebrows. — The  eminences  of  the  eyebrows  are  painful  to
the  touch,^^. — Shooting  pain  in  the  right  frontal  region,'^ — Transient  shoot-
ing pain  in  the  right  and  left  frontal  eminence,  alternately,^". — Violent
shooting  and  twisting  in  the  left  superciliary  ridge,"  ^'. — Slight  shooting  in
the  forehead,  which  gradually  increased,  especially  ou  the  left  side,'^^ —
[230.]  At  breakfast,  a  slight  noise  caused  violent  stitches  in  the  right
frontal  eminence,^.— Single  stitches  in  the  forehead,  especially  in  the  left
side,^*. — Every  time  after  rising,  a  stitch  in  the  forehead,".— Pricking,  as
of  many  needles,  in  a  spot  about  an  inch  in  size  on  the  left  frontal  emi-
nence," ^\ — Pricking,  as  of  needles,  in  the  left  frontal  region,'"  '^. — ■*Sensa-
tion  of  coldness,  as  of  ice,  on  the  scalp,  right  side  of  the  frontal  bone,  although,
on  touching  the  parts,  they  seem  to  feel  warm,^. — Itching  in  the  forehead,  in-
ducing scratching ;  there  are  pimples  on  the  forehead,'. — One  large  and
several  smaller  blisters  scattered  over  the  forehead,". — Frequent  twitching
of  the  muscles  of  the  left  temporal  region,". — Twitching  and  shooting  in
the  right  temple  and  along  the  zygoraa,'l — Frequent  jumping  in  the  left
temporal  region  and  zygoma,'". — [240.]  Rhythmical  twitching  of  the  mus-
cles in  the  left  frontal  and  temporal  region,'^ — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left
temple  (after  thirty-seven  hours),". — Pain  in  the  left  temple,  then  in  the
right  one,  then  in  the  left  lower  jaw,  like  a  decayed  tooth  beginning  to
ache,'^  ''^. — Aching  pain  in  the  zygoma  of  the  left  temporal  bone,^. — Wak-
ing, about  midnight,  with  a  violent,  burrowing  pain  in  the  left  temple,
which  is  diminished  by  pressing  with  the  hand,  and  reappears  after  re-
laxed pressure,'^— After  dinner,  transient  premonition  of  dull,  burrowing
headache  in  the  left  temple,'^ — A  boring,  throbbing  pain  in  the  squamous
portion  of  the  temporal  bones,  lasting  more  than  two  hours,"'. — Very  pain-
ful drawing  through  the  temples,  forehead,  and  eyeballs,". — Dull  headache
in  the  right  temple,'. — Dull  headache  in  the  left  temple,'*  ^'. — [250.]  Head-
ache in  right  temporal  region,  more  stupefying  than  throbbing,'*  ^'. — Pres-
sure in  both  temples,  at  noon,*". — Pressive  pain  in  the  temporal  region,"  —
Pressure  upon  the  upper  portion  of  the  left  temporal  bone,  immediately
above  the  concha  of  the  ear,  reaching  deep  into  the  brain  ;  it  increases
when  the  hairs  are  pressed  upon,  or  when  they  are  merely  touched,  and  is
attended  with  complete  depression  of  spirits,'. — After  breakfast,  a  painful
pressure  in  a  little  spot  on  the  left  temporal  bone,'*  ^'. — Violent  pressure  in
the  right  temple  on  the  temporal  bone,*. — Fine  stitches  in  the  left  temple
(after  half  an  hour),l — Stitches  in  the  left  temple,'''^*. —  Directly  after
talking,  a  stitch  in  the  right  temple ;  soon  after,  a  stitch  in  the  left  temple  ;
upon  which,  a  slight  pressure  took  place  in  the  latter,  lasting  several  min-
utes,'^ — Now  and  then,  shooting  in  the  left,  less  frequently  in  the  right,
temporal  region,*. — [260.]  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  temple,  over  the
eye,'*. — Tearing  in  the  right  temporal  region,*. — Burning  in  the  vertex,'". —
Beating  pain  in  vertex,  with  despair  bordering  on  rage. — Boring  pain  deep
in  the  brain,  at  the  vertex,'.— Pressure  and  tearing  in  left  side  of  skull  and


AGARICUS.  75

on  vertex,'''. — Mornings,  pressive  pain  in  the  vertex,™. — Feeling  of  pressure
in  the  vertex,'*. — Pressive  pain  in  the  vertex,  at  night,". — Transient  shoot-
ing in  the  vertex,'". — [270.]  Stitches  in  the  hairy  scalp  on  the  top  of  the
head,  which  afterwards  change  to  a  pressive  pain  in  the  vertex,'". — Left-
sided,  very  violent  headache,'". — Several  times,  pains  in  left  side  of  head
(three  to  five  hours),'''. — Pain  in  left  side  of  head,  with  much  desire  to  uri-
nate,'^ — In  the  forenoon,  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  a  continued,  bur-
rowing, one-sided  headache,  which  extended  from  the  left  frontal  eminence
along  the  parietal  bone,  through  the  entire  cerebral  hemisphere,  to  the  oc-
ciput,'*.— Boring  in  left  side  of  skull,  and  in  ascending  ramus  of  lower
jaw,'^ — A  continued  dull  pain  in  the  entire  left  half  of  head,  which  is  in-
creased, after  an  hour,  to  a  violent  burrowing  one,'*. — Pressure  in  the  left
half  of  head,'". — Tearing  and  pressing  in  the  entire  left  circumference  of
the  brain,  most  severe  in  left  orbit  and  zygoma,  with  confusion  in  the  head
(after  eight  hours),^ — Violent  lancinating  tearing  from  the  vertex  to  the
left  ear  (after  six  hours),". — [280,]  Penetrating,  fine,  tearing  pain ;  first  in
the  right  parietal  bone,  over  the  ear,  with  which  the  sensation  of  a  sore,
festering  spot  on  the  bone  was  continued  a  long  time;  it  pained  violently
on  being  touched,'^ '". — Slightly  tearing  pain  in  the  right  upper  side  of  the
head,'*  ^'. — Nearly  all  day,  constantly  recurring,  very  fine,  sensitive  tear-
ing, of  short  duration,  on  the  left  side  of  the  head,  behind  and  over  the
ear,  as  if  emanating  from  a  small  painful  spot,  which,  however,  was  not  to
be  found  by  feeling  for  it,'* "'. — One-sided  shooting  headache,'". — -A  shoot-
ing pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,". — A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  taking,
violent  shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  head ;  somewhat  later,  in  the  whole
head ;  but  in  both  sides,  right  and  left,  more  violent  than  in  the  rest  of  the
hea,d,".— Shooting  pain  in  left  half  of  head,  beginning  at  10  A.M.  and  last-
ing till  2  P.M. ;  after  which  it  was  superseded  by  transient  stitches,  that
returned  every  ten  minutes,". — Shooting  headache,  extending  from  the
left  parietal  bone  into  the  right  temple,  but  lasting  only  a  few  minutes,'^. —
*Pain,  ag  from  a  nail  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,^. — Frequent  itching
stitches  deep  in  the  left  cerebrum,'*. — -Externally,  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,
a  flash-like  stroke,'*  ^'. — [290.]  Momentaiy  twitching  in  the  right  side  of
the  head,'^ — Twitching  jumps  in  the  hairy  scalp  over  the  left  ear,  close  to
the  ear-cartilage,'*. — Different  kinds  of  headache  in  the  left  half  of  the  oc-
cipital bone,  luhen  seated. — Violent  boring  pain  in  occiput  and  left  super-
ciliary ridge,'^^*. — In  the  forenoon,  burrowing,  pressive  pains  in  the  left  oc-
cipital region  and  nape  of  neck,  with  weariness  in  the  lower  limbs  and
great  inclination  to  sleep,"  ^'. — Mornings,  in  bed,  a  pressive,  burrowing
pain  in  the  right  half  of  occiput,  with  accompanying  splintery  stitches  in
middle  of  right  cheek,'*. — Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,  early  when  in  bed,
as  if  from  a  wrong  position  ;  it  increases  by  stretching  and  holding  in  the
breath,*. — Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,  in  the  afternoon,'. — Drawing  and
tension  in  the  occiput. — [300.]  Drawing  and  pressive  pain  in  occiput  and
forehead,". — In  forenoon,  external  pain  in  head,  but  more  in  posterior  half;
tension  across  occiput,  towards  ears,  towards  neck-joint,  sometimes  more
perceptible  in  one  place  than  another,'". — After  waking,  dull  fulness  in
occiput,'*. — Dull  pain  in  occiput,  which,  on  lying  down,  became  more  vio-
lent and  burning,  and  gradually  extended  between  the  superciliary  ridges,
when  lying  on  the  back,'*. — The  dull  pain  in  the  head  has  gone  into  the
occiput,".— Pressure  in  the  occiput  (first  day),". — Excessively  pressive  pain
in  the  occiput,'*. — Tension  extending  towards  the  occiput,  and  there  devel-
oping into  a  dull,  pressive  pain,  with  a  sensation  of  heaviness,  continuing


76  AGAEICUS.

all  day,".— Tearing  stitches  in  the  occiput,  from  one  side  to  the  other,  early
in  the  morning  (second  day),".— Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,
which  returns  at  short  intervals,'. — Tearing  in  right  side  of  occiput,'^ —
[310.]  Tearing  in  right  half  of  occipital  bone,^^ — Sometimes,  a  tearing,
tensive  sensation  in  the  external  scalp  of  the  occiput,™. — During  forenoon,
flying  stitches  in  the  occiput,". — Repeated  stitches  across  the  occiput,^'. —
Stitches  across  the  occiput,  repeated  every  ten  minutes,  sometimes  more
violent,  sometimes  less,''. — Bruised  pain  in  back  of  neck  and  occiput,'^ —
A  lively,  throbbing  pain  in  the  occiput,". — Creaking  of  the  occiput  towards
the  left,  lasting  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  increased  by  pressure  on  the  painful
part,"  ^^ — Headache,  especially  heaviness  and  tension  of  the  occiput  towards
the  neck-ioint,^". — [320.]  *The  head  constantly  falling  backivards,  as  if  a
weight  were  attached  to  the  occiput,^^. — The  head  unsteady,  swaying  back  and
forth,  as  if  intoxicated,'". — Head  swaying  back  and  forth,'". — Convulsions
of  the  muscles  of  the  head  and  neck,  t — Such  violent  jarring  of  the  whole
head,  coming  from  the  atlas-joint,  that  the  prover  involuntarily  bit  his
tongue,". — Stitches  in  the  atlas-joint,  as  of  splinters,". — Head  hot  to  the
touch,'". — Pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp,'. — The  pimples  which  appeared  at
the  roots  of  the  hair  bled  easily,  after  scratching,  and  left  little  red  scabs
behind,^'. — The  head  full ;  pain  spread  over  the  cranium,  and  somewhat
relieved  by  the  touch,'". — [330.]  Sometimes,  external  tension  of  the  scalp,™.
— *Icy  coldness  in  the  region  of  the  coronal  suture,  after  the  parts  had
been  scratched  on  account  of  their  itching  ;  the  coldness  frequently  returns ;
approaches  more  and  more  the  forepart  of  the  head,  until  it  reaches  that
part  of  the  forehead  which  is  not  covered  with  hair,'. — Tearing  and  draw-
ing pain  externally  in  the  integuments  of  the  head  (skin  and  bones) ;  it  in-
creases on  pressure,  especially  in  a  small  spot  in  vertex,  which  pains  as  if
there  were  internal  festering,  at  night  (after  eighteen  days),'. — Sensitive-
ness of  the  integuments  of  the  head,  as  if  they  were  ulcerated,". — The
entire  length  of  the  scalp  on  the  left  side  somewhat  sensitive  to  the  touch,".
— There  are  a  few  spots  in  the  head  sensitive  to  the  touch,™. — Frequent
sensitive  tearing  in  the  tendinous  expansion  of  the  skull,'^. — Itching  of  the
hairy  scalp,'. — Itching  of  the  whole  of  the  hairy  scalp  ;  it  is  like  the  itchiug
of  healing  wounds,  and  provokes  scratching,". — Troublesome  itching  of  the
hairy  scalp,  especially  after  getting  up  ;  it  disappears  upon  the  parts  being
scratched  with  a  sharp  comb,".

Dfjes. — [340.]  Yellow  color  of  the  eyes  (third  day),'. — Burning  in  the
eyes,'". — The  eyes  burn  easily,™. — Burning  in  the  eyes,  especially  when
they  are  opened  and  shut ;  every  time  after  yawning,'".— Burning  of  the
eye,  with  sensation  of  contraction  in  the  evening  (first  day),^ — Burning
and  pressure  in  the  orbits,*. — Burning  and  itching  in  both  eyes,"*. — Burn-
ing and  aching  pain  above  the  right  eye,  with  lachrymation  (after  one  and
a  half  hours),'". — Heat  in  the  eyes,'". — Constant  heat  in  the  eyes,'". — [350.]
Heat  and  weariness  of  the  eyes,'". — The  eyes  are  hot,'". — The  eyes  are  hot
to  the  touch,'". — Painful  stretching  of  the  eye  on  waking  in  the  morning,'l —
Sensation  of  contraction  of  the  right  eye,  with  increased  dimness  of  sight  ;
this  is  succeeded  by  biting  pain  in  the  eyeball  and  lachrymation,  and  lastly,
by  twitchings  of  the  left  eye,  such  as  had  previously  existed  iu  the  right ;
wine  relieved  the  symptoms  at  once,'. — Cramp-like  pain  under  the  right
eyebrow ;  it  makes  the  opening  of  the  eyes  difficult  (after  five  hours),". —
Pressure  in  the  eyes*. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  towards  the  inside,'". — Painful
pressure  in  the  eyes  when  moving  them,  or  exerting  them  by  lamplight,'^ —
Pressure  in  the  eyes,  and  inclination  to  close  them,  without  sleep,  after  din-


AGARICUS.  77

ner,'. — [360.]  Pressure  in  the  eyes  and  upon  the  forehead,  as  though  some-
thing were  pressing  from  without  inwards  (after  ten  minutes)/. — A  pres-
sure in  the  right  eye  at  noon,  as  if  a  grain  of  sand  were  under  the  upper
eyelid ;  close  examination  of  the  eye  showed  nothing  abnormal/'. — Pressive
and  drawing  pain  in  the  eyes/^ — Pressive  pain  over  the  left  eye/. — Pres-
sure in  the  corners  of  the  left  eye,  as  if  there  were  a  foreign  body,'. — Vio-
lent stitches,  as  with  coarse  needles,  on  the  lower  edge  of  the  left  orbit,  at
the  exit  of  the  infraorbital  nerve,'^ — Fine,  pricking,  jjressive  feeling  di-
rectly over  the  eyes,^ — Eyes  easily  sensitive,™. — The  eyes  itch  in  the  morn-
ing/'.— Itching  and  pricking  in  the  right  eye  (after  one  hour),''. — [370.]
Itching  and  pressure  in  right  eye,  relieved  by  rubbing  for  a  short  time,l
—  Itching  and  tickling  in  left  eye,  which  induce  rubbing  (after  three
hours)/. — Dryness  of  the  eyes/. — *Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  eye  with-
out having  exerted  the  eye  in  any  way,"*. — Falling  off  of  the  hairs  of  the
eyebrows,'. — In  and  between  the  eyebrows,  small,  itching  pimples  appear
that  are  painfully  sensitive  to  the  touch,  and  vanish  after  a  few  days,**. —
Pressive  pain  in  the  superciliary  ridges/''. — Pressive  pain  in  the  right  super-
ciliary ridge ;  relieved  after  washing  the  body  with  cold  water,  then  grow-
ing worse  again,". — In  the  morning  pressive  pain  in  the  right  superciliary
ridge/''. — On  waking  in  the  morning,  a  pressive,  shooting  pain  in  the  left
superciliary  ridge,  towards  the  outside,"'. — [380.]  Pressive  pain  in  the  left
superciliary  ridge  for  five  minutes,  and  directly  after  in  the  right  supercil-
iary ridge,'^. — Burrowing,  pressive  pain  over  the  left  eye  and  the  frontal
eminence,'^ — Piercirig  pain  in  right  superciliary  ridge,". — Repeated  itching,
piercing  pain  over  the  left  eyebrow  induces  scratching,  which  stops  it,"''\ —
Toward  noon,  violent,  continued,  uninterrupted  stitch  directly  over  the  left
eyebrow,  that  lasts  in  the  same  degree  as  when  the  point  of  a  needle  is  con-
tinuously pressed  into  the  flesh ;  by  violent  scratching,  which  the  sensation
of  pain  finally  induced,  the  pain  was  stopped  almost  entirely,** "'. — Itching
in  the  eyebrows,'. — The  margin  of  the  lids  and  conjunctiva  palpebrarum
are  red,  with  sticking  and  tension  in  the  eyes,^". — *Trembling  in  the  upper
eyelid,"*. — *Trembling  in  the  right  upper  eyelid,"". — Trembling  of  the  left
upper  eyelid  in  the  morning,  which  is  repeated  towards  noon,"*. — [390.]
within  a  small  spot,  and  rather  extending  towards  one  another,'. — Twitch-
ing in  the  left  upper  eyelid,'^  "^ — Winking  of  the  right  lower  eyelid,  ac-
companied by  throbbing  of  an  artery  on  the  left  side,  at  the  back  of  the
nose,  and  twitches  of  the  skin  of  the  left  side  of  the  nose,'. — Winking  and
itching  of  the  left  lower  lid,  which  induce  rubbing,'. — *Contraction  of  the
eyelids  (after  two  hours),". — *Narrowing  of  the  interval  between  the  eyelids
for  several  days,  without  swelling,  and  often  with  twitching  and  winking  of
the  lids,'. — *The  interval  between  the  lids  is  smaller  than  usual ;  it  requires
an  effort  to  widen  it,". — Swelling  of  the  left  lid  toward  the  inner  canthus ;
this  swelling  causes  the  eye  to  appear  diminished/. — Half-open  eyes",  t. —
Violent  twitching  and  itching  in  the  left  canthus,*". — [400.]  Contraction
and  narrowing  of  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye,'. — The  caruucula  of
the  left  eye  increases  in  size  for  several  days,'. — The  eyelids  adhere  to  one
another  as  by  slimy  threads  ;  wiping  relieves  this  symptom  only  for  a  short
time,*'. —  Viscid  (previously  white),  yellow  humor,  which  glues  the  eyelids  to
one  another ;  the  secretion  of  this  humor  takes  place  in  the  inner  canthi,
and  continues  even  during  the  day,  but  especially  early,  and  in  the  even-
ing,".— Gum  in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes  (after  six  hours),"  ^. — Both  inner  an-
gles of  the  eye  were  found  stuck  together  with  a  little  mucus,*". — Burning


78  AGARICUS.

eyelids/^ — The  eyelids,  every  time  after  being  closed,  have  a  burning  sen-
sation similar  to  that  caused  by  watching  all  night  by  Iamplight,'^ — Pain-
ful pressure  in  the  lids,  especially  the  right  one,  with  great  sleepiness,'* ''. —
Painful  pressure  under  the  upper  eyelids,  especially  when  the  eyes  are
closed,  resembling  great  fatigue  of  the  eyes  after  great  exertion  in  too
strong  a  light ;  continues  quite  a  long  time,'* ". — [410.]  Slight  stitches  in  the
left  upper  eyelid,'".— Sticking  in  margins  of  lids ;  the  eyes  are  half  closed,
as  with  great  sleepiness,  and  very  sensitive  to  candlelight,'". — Biting,  and
sensation  of  contraction  in  lids,'l — Biting  sticking  in  the  edge  of  the  right
upper  lid,'*. — On  waking  in  morning  biting  in  the  edges  of  the  eyelidsj'l —
Burning  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eyes,  as  though  inflammation  were
going  to  set  in ;  the  pain  increases  upon  the  parts  being  touched,*. — Burning
sensation  of  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eyes  upon  the  lids  being  firmly  closed,*.
— -Scraping,  shooting  pain  in  the  inner  angles  of  the  eyes,  with  some  col-
lection of  mucus  in  them,'^ — A  scraping,  shooting  pain  in  the  inner  angles,
and  under  the  upper  lid  of  the  right  eye,". — [420.]  Soon  after  the  medicine
a  scraping,  shooting  pain  in  the  left  angle  of  the  eye,'*. — Itching  shooting
at  the  roots  of  the  cilifB,  in  the  left  upper  lid,'*. — Lachrymation  of  the
right  eye  (first  and  second  days),*. — Lachrymation  of  the  right  eye  (after
three  hours),l — Increased  lachrymation,^.— -Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  though
they  had  to  be  wiped  constantly,*. — -Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye,*. —
Eyeballs  jerked  here  and  there,  t.  (S.  J.) — *  Twitches  in  the  eyeballs  in  fre-
quent succession ;  in  the  left  eye  thfey  are  often  accompanied  by  lachry-
mation,'.— *While  reading  there  is  frequent  twitching  and  pressing  in
the  left  eyeball,'. — [430.]  *Spasms,  with  aching  pain  in  the  left  eyeball,  at
any  time  of  the  day,  and  under  all  circumstances ;  the  eye  has  to  be  wiped,
but  the  symptoms  remain,'.— Distorted  eyeballs,  t. — The  eyes  roll  in  their
sockets,  and  at  times  the  pupil  remains  fixed  against  the  upper  wall  of  the
orbit,'*.-^The  eyes  turn  upwards,*^ — Painful  sensation  of  the  left  bulbus,'* "'.
— Burning  and  pressing  of  the  eyeballs,  especially  when  moving  them,*. —
It  is  diflicult  to  move  the  eyes  ;  the  eyeballs  seem  to  expand  in  the  orbits,'".
— After  vomiting,  a  feeling  in  the  left  eyeball  as  though  it  were  enlarged,'*. —
Motion  of  the  eyes  in  the  orbits  is  not  quite  free,™. — *  Painful  twitching
in  the  right  eyeball,'*^. — [440.]  Dull  pain  in  the  bulbus,  similar  to  the
pain  caused  by  pressing  the  bulbus  with  the  hand,^°. — Very  painful  draw-
ing in  the  eyeballs  (third  and  fourth  days),^ — Drawing  and  pressing  in
the  eyeballs,  especially  the  left,  extending  into  forehead  (fourth  day),^ —
Prassive  pain  in  the  right  bulbus,  toward  the  top  and  outward,  very  sensi-
tive, but  only  momentary,  and  recurring  several  times,'* "'. — Very  sensitive,
pressive,  tearing  pain  in  the  right  bulbus,  without  influence  upon  the  vision,
but  so  sudden  that  he  involuntarily  put  his  hand  to  his  eye,'*  '^'. — Pressive
pain  in  the  left  bulbus,'^ — Pressure  in  the  left  eyeball  (after  ten  hours),". —
Painful  pressure  in  the  left  bulbus  from  -above,  extending  outwards ;  very
sensitive,  and  continuing  for  some  time,'*^'. — In  the  morning,  pressive  pain
in  the  left  bulbus  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.'l — Momentary  piercing  pain
in  the  right  eyeball,'".— [450.]  Sensitiveness  of  the  eyeballs  when  moving
them,'*.— Slight  painfulness  of  the  eyeballs  when  moving  them,**. — The
eyeballs  are  painful  to  the  touch,'". — ^In  the  evening  exceedingly  painful
itching  on  the  bulbus  under  the  left  eyeball,'*"'. — Pupils  dilated,  tt. — The
pupils  first  dilate  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),  then  contract  (after
twenty-five  hours),".— Pupils  at  first  contracted,  then  dilated,'". — Eyes  in-
sensible to  light,*". — Gradual  decrease  of  sight  on  walking  in  the  open  air
(after  seven  hours),'. — Great  weariness  (weakness)  of  the  eyes ;  if  she  looks


AGARICUS.  79

long  at  an  object  it  appears  pale,'. — [460.]  Shortsightedness  mid  dimsight-
edness  of  both  eyes,''. —  Very  indistinct  sight;  he  is  obliged  to  hold  objects
close  to  his  eyes  in  order  to  perceive  them  clearly,'. — In  reading  he  is
obliged  to  approach  the  letters  more  and  more  closely  to  his  eyes  in  order
to  recognize  them  distinctly;  afterwards  he  has  to  remove  them  again  to  a
greater  distance,  otherwise  the  sight  becomes  dim  again,'. — Loss  of  vision
while  reading,'*. — Dimness  before  the  eyes,  with  s[eepmess,^^.—Dimsighted-
ness;  everything  appears  obscured,  as  if  by  turbid  water;  he  has  to  make
au  effort  to  recognize  the  thing,'. — The  sight  grew  dim  ;  the  external  angle
of  the  left  eye  began  to  burn,  and  he  felt  a  pressure  under  the  left  upper
lid,  as  from  a  grain  of  sand,'*. — Every  object  appears  surrounded  with  a
mist,  and  therefore  obscured,'. — That  which  comes  before  the  eyes  is  ob-
scured, as  if  covered  with  cobwebs,'. — ^While  reading  the  eyes  grow  weak,
watery,  and  dim,'*. — [470.]  Dulness  of  vision,'^ — Vision  was  dimmed,  t,
8.  J. — ^The  light  seems  to  burn  dimmer  than  usual,"^ — Weakness  of  sight,'". —
Misty  weakness  of  sight,''. — Blinding  before  eyes,  t. — The  father  was  blind,
t. — Photophobia,'. — He  imagines  he  sees  things  double,". — Dizzy  vision  in
the  evening,  and  weakuess,  even  double-sightedness,". — [480.]  *IIe  reads
with  difficulty,  because  the  type  seem  to  move,^^. — Veiled  eyesight,'''. — His  eyes
were  dim  when  he  wished  to  read  ;  weak,  and  he  seemed  to  read  as  through
a  veil,  with  flickering  before  the  eyes,'*. — Flickering  before  eyes,  t,  S.  J. —
Flickering  before  the  eyes  while  writing,'*. — Sometimes  yellow  spots  before
the  eyes  when  looking  at  light  objects;". — A  black  spot  hovers  before  the
left  eye,  at  the  distance  of  half  an  ell ;  upon  winking  it  flits  to  and  fro,'. —
In  gloomy  weather  a  brown  spot  hovers  before  the  left  eye,  towards  the
inner  eanthus,'. — On  closing  the  right  eye  there  is  seen  before  the  left  a
small,  oblong,  dark-brown  spot,  hovering  in  an  oblique  direction  toward  the
inner  eanthus,  pretty  near  the  eye,'.

JEJars. — Frequent  jumping  of  the  muscles  about  the  ears  and  temples,'*.
— [490.]  Twitching  of  the  muscles  close  to  the  left  ear,'*. — ^Burning  and
itching  in  ears,^^. — *Redness,  burning  itching  of  the  ears,  as  if  they  had
been  frozen,*. — Cramp-like  pains  inside  of  the  left  ear,'*. — ^  Twitching
jumping  in  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear,'*. — Frequent  twitching  near  and
in  the  cartilage  of  the  right  ear,'*. — Frequent  twitching  and  rattling,  or
fluttering,  in  the  tympanic  cavity  of  the  right  ear;  jumping  of  the  tensor
tympani,'*. — Jumping  of  the  tensor  tympani,  with  a  sound  as  given  by  a
leather-covered  metal  valve,  when  set  in  motion,"  ". — Frequent  rolling
twitching  inside  the  cavity  of  the  right  tympanum,'*. — Pain  in  the  ear ;
tearing  pain  in  the  meatus  of  the  right  ear,  which  is  caused  and  increased
by  cold  air  passing  into  the  ear;  the  pain  extends  to  the  upper  jaw,  and
continues  for  several  days,'. — [500.]  Tearing  pains  in  right  ear,'*  ". —
Tearing  pain  and  violent  itching  in  the  left  ear,  with  desire  to  bore  deep
into  the  ear ;  when  lying  on  the  same  si,de,  the  pain  was  considerably  in-
creased,".— Stitches  in  the  left  mastoid  process,". — Frequent  violent  stitches,
as  of  splinters  penetrating  the  left  auditory  canal,'*  ". — A  few  sensitive,
but  transient,  stitches  from  the  fauces  along  the  course  of  the  Eustachian
tube  towards  the  right  ear,". — Sensitive  stitches  in  the  left  auditory
canal,'*  ". — Twitching  stitches  inside  of  the  right  ear,'*. — Itching  of  the
lobule  of  the  ear,'. — Itching  of  the  concha,  which  induces  rubbing;  rub-
bing makes  the  part  red  and  sore,  but  the  itching  continues,'. — Itching  in
and  behind  the  ears,''. — [510.]  Itching  in  the  external  meatus  of  the  right
ear,'. — Itching,  attended  vpith  tickling,  in  the  right  ear;  this  induces
scratching  (after  twenty -nine  hours),".— Itching,  generally  in  the  left  ear ;


80  AGARICUS.

this  induces  the  person  to  insert  the  finger  into  the  ear,  and  rub  it,'. —
Itching  in  the  left  external  auditory  tube,  with  a  stitch  in  the  inner  ear,  as
of  an  ice-cold  needle,".— Tickling  itching  on  the  lobe  of  the  left  ear,  and
in  the  external  auditory  tube ;  disappears  on  boring  with  the  finger,^*. —
Tickling  ifching  from  the  opening  into  the  fauces  of  the  right  Eustachian
tube,  extending  to  the  inner  ear,  alternating  with  excessive  ringing  in  the
left  ear,". — Itching  of,  and  pimples  on,  the  posterior  surface  of  the  concha,'.
— Several  times  during  the  day,  stoppage  of  the  left  ear,'°. — Sensation  in
the  ears  as  if  wax  were  flowing  out,'. — For  some  time  past,  excessive  secre-
tion of  wax  in  both  ears,^°.— [520.]  Hearing  very  acute,  t. — Dulness  of
hearing,". — Deafness  of  the  left  ear,  as  though  something  were  before
it,'*  ^. — Deafness,  with  headache,  t. — Roaring  in  the  ears," — Ringing  in
the  right  ear,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (alter  four  hours),'. — Ringing  in
the  left  ear,™. — In  ears,  a  fine  rushing  and  ringing,  or  a  noise  like  a  distant
teakettle  beginning  to  boil,  with  heat  in  head,'". — Roaring  in  the  left  ear,".
— Roaring  of  the  ears,  first  right,  then  left,™. — [530.]  Bubbling  roar  in  the
left  ear," — Constant  roaring  in  left  ear,  with  creaking  in  both  ears  on
empty  swallowing," — Inexplicable  humming  in  both  ears,  resembling  the
noise  of  a  spinning-wheel,  which  continues  for  several  hours,"  '°. — Peculiar
clucking  noise  in  right  ear,  frequently  returning,'^ — At  every  attempt  to
swallow,  a  creaking  sound  in  both  ears,  as  of  a  wooden  screw," — Rushing
in  the  right  ear,  like  the  jerking  sound  of  a  locomotive;  ceases  when  rising,
returns  when  lying  down,'". — Illusion  of  hearing,  as  though  a  nail  were
being  driven  into  a  board  at  a  distance,''.

JVose.— The  tip  of  the  nose  and  the  lips  are  pale  and  bluish,  t. — A
peculiar  cracking  and  creaking  in  the  bony  parts  of  the  nose,  as  if  the
spongy  bones  of  the  nose  were  pressed  against  each  other,  or  rubbed,"  ". —
Sneezing,  several  limes,™. — [540.]  Sneezing,  without  coryza,'. — Frequent
sneezing,'^  ". — Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza  (after  twelve  to  twenty-
two  hours),^ — Frequent  sneezing  and  yawning,"  —  Frequent  sneezing,
which  sometimes  comes  on  twice  in  succession  (first  day),". — Frequent
sneezing,  immediately  after  taking  the  medicine,'. — Also,  frequent  sneezing
during  sleep,  without  waking,"  ". — Several  violent  sneezings,  early,  in
bed,'. — Sneezing  several  times  in  the  morning,™. — Sneezing,  occasioned  by
a  feeling  of  nausea,*". —  [550.]  Dryness  of  the  nose,'  ™. — Dryness  of  the
nose,  with  sensation  of  cold  in  the  head,'. — Continual  dryness  of  the  nose ;
only  once  or  twice  during  the  day  two  or  three  drops  of  water  flow  out,'.
— The  nose  was  dry,  and  when  blowing  it  a  small  discharge  of  blood,'"'.
— Clear  water  frequently  drops  out  of  the  nose,  without  there  being  any  cold
in  the  head,''. — On  stooping,  clear  water  drops  out  of  the  nose,'. — Taking
a  little  snufi"  is  at  once  followed  by  abundant  collection  of  viscid  mucus  in
the  nose,'. — Upon  blowing  the  nose,  there  is  a  copious  discharge  of  clear
mucus  (after  five  days),'.— Small  quantity  of  dry  white  mucus  in  the  nose,
frequently  attended  with  a  sense  as  of  much  mucus  being  in  it,'. — Cold  in
the  head;  the  nose  feeling  obstructed,  especially  when  stooping  (seventh
day),". — [560.]  Fluent  coryza,'. — Fluent  coryza,  which  began  on  ihe  15th
and  lasted  to  the  26th;  after  being  moderate  the  first  two  days,  it  increased
to  unusual  violence  on  the  third.  It  first  attacked  the  left  half  of  the  nose
and  left  eye,  for  two  days ;  then  the  right  half  and  right  eye,  for  two  days,
which  constantly  discharged  an  acrid,  burning  moisture.  On  the  24th,
when  the  discharge  lessened,  the  nose  swelled  considerably,  became  bhiish-
red,  and  was  very  painful  to  the  touch.  The  inflammation  terminated  by
desquamation,''". — Great  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  and  burning  of


AGARICUS.  81

the  upper  lip,'". — Towards  evening,  a  fluent  coryza  set  in,''^ — Violent
coryza,  with  confusion  of  the  head,'^ — Excessive  blowing  of  mucus  from
the  nose  all  day,  without  further  symptoms  of  coryza,™ — A  violent  coryza
sets  in  ;  the  acridity  of  the  secretion  causing  an  eruption  of  the  nose  and
upper  lip,'^ — Every  morning,  on  rising,  a  nasal  catarrh,  which  disappears  after
awhile,  with  sneezing,". — Sensation  of  stoppage  and  catarrh,  with  discharge
of  watery  moisture  from  both  nostrils,'^ ". — Frequent  slight  hawkingof  small
masses  of  mucus  from  the  fauces  and  posterior  nares,^. — [570,]  *In  blow-
ing the  nose.  Mood  comes  out  of  it,  early  in  the  morning,  immediately  after
rising ;  this  is  followed  by  violent  bleeding  from  the  nose  (after  thirty-three
hours),". — Bleeding  from  the  nose,™. — (Passive  epistaxis  of  old  people),
(Roth.) — Burning  pain  in  the  nose  and  the  eyes  (from  olfaction),". — ^In-
flammation and  soreness  of  the  inner  wall  of  the  nose,'. — Feeling  of  ful-
ness in  the  upper  nasal  passage,  with  a  feeling  as  if  a  ball  were  forcing
itself  down  the  nasal  canal,'". — Sudden  pressure  at  the  superior  part  of  the
dorsum  of  the  nose,'. — Pressure  in  the  nasal  bones,™. — Throbbing  pressure
in  the  nasal  bone,  with' a  sensation  as  if  a  swollen  body  in  the  upper  nasal
passage  would  force  itself  down,'". — Pressure  in  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  a
sensation  as  if  the  nose  were  stopped  up,  without  any*  stoppage  of  the  nasal
passages,'". — [580.]  Sharp  stinging  in  the  left  side  of  the  root  of  the  noee,^.
— Cutting,  boring  pains,  from  the  left  nostril  upward,  extending  through
the  nasal  canal  into  the  frontal  bone,  exactly  as  if  an  electric  shock  darted
through  them,'". — Biting  sensation  in  mucous  membrane  of  left  nostril,*^ —
Great  sensitiveness  of  the  inner  walls  of  the  nose,^ — Disagreeable  sensitive-
ness of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nose,™. — Itching  sensitiveness  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  nose,  with  frequent  violent  sneezing,  acconipauied
by  jumping  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  loin,'"  ". — Cutting  sensation  of  sore-
ness in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  nostril,  that  takes  place  on  inhalation,
but  is  not  felt  on  expiration,^. — In  the  afternoon,  when  breathing  through
the  left  nostril,  a  painful  sensitiveness,  high  up,  as  though  the  mucous
membrane  were  sore,'"  ". — Prickling  sensation  in  the  right  nostril  and  eye,
as  one  experiences  before  sneezing,'. — Itching  on  the  outer  surface  of  the
nose,'. — [590.]  Violent  itching  of  the  wings  of  the  nose,  which  induces  rub-
bing,'.—Tickling  itching  in  the  left  nostril,  which  induces  rubbing  (after
fourteen  hours),". — Transient  itching  in  the  nose,  and  a  pungent  smell,  as  if
about  to  sneeze,"'  ^. — *  The  smell  is  sensitive,''. — The  odor  of  a  strong  cigar  was
not  perceived  at  all  in  the  left  nostril,  and  very  strongly  in  the  right  one,".
Face. — Puffy  face,^^ — Puffy,  pale  face,  with  blue  circles  around  the
eyes,  and  blue  nose  and  lips,*^.— Very  great  change  in  the  expression  of
the  face,'". — She  looks  pale  and  sunken  in  the  face,". — Paleness  of  the
face,". — [600.]  Pale  face,  with  bluish  appearance  around  eyes,  nose,  and
mouth,  t. — Disturbed  countenance,  and  imperceptible  pulse,'^. — Slight  yel-
lowish tinge  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  especially  about  the  nostrils  and  corners
of  the  mouth,". — Redness  of  the  face,  without  any  perceptible  heat,". —
Redness  of  the  face,  with  itching  and  burning,  as  is  consequent  upon  freezing
of  the  parts,^. — *  Frequent  jumping  of  the  muscles  in  the  face;  on  the  upper
iip}''. — *TwitcMng  of  facial  muscles,  t. — *  Twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the
face;  lasU  all  day  long,^'. — *  Twitching  in  different  parts  of  the  face,  but  only
of  the  upper  half,'* '". — Towards  4  P.M.  the  face  was  excessively  and  uni-
formly red,  burning  hot,  almost  swollen,  with  uncomfortable  tension  of  both
cheeks,'". — [610.]  Great  redness  and  heat  of  the  whole  face,'* ". — Redness
and  burning  heat  of  the  face,'* '". — Heat  of  the  head  and  face,  on  waking
ia  the  morning,  with  a  certain  sensation  of  bloated  ness  iu  the  face,  espeei-
vot.  I. — 6


82  AGARICUS.

ally  in  the  cheeks,'^  ^^ — Unpleasant  heat  in  the  face,  especially  in  the
cheeks,'^  ^'.—Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,  with  perspiration  breaking  out  on
the  forehead,'". — Itching  in  the  face,'.^In  the  morning,  pressure  in  the
facial  bones,  especially  in  the  socket  of  the  eye,'". — ^Involuntary  twitching
of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  on  the  right  malar  bone,'". — Twitching  on  the
right  malar  bone,". — Twitching  near  the  right  malar  bone,". — [620.]
Slight  twitching  in  the  right  cheek,  like  pulsating  (after  eight  days),'. —
Painless  twitching  of  the  right  muscle  of  mastication,  almost  jumping,  for
a  few  seconds,". — Unusual  redness  of  both  cheeks,  especially  the  left,  wi  th
heat  in  the  face," ". — Burning  of  the  cheeks  (after  one  to  two  hours),". —
Burning  of  the  cheeks,". — Burning  and  itching  on  cheeks,'^ — Flushes
of  heat  in  the  cheeks,'^. — Increased  warmth  of  the  face,  in  the  evening,
especially  near  the  malar  bone,'\ — Stitches  in  the  face,  in  the  left  cheek ;
they  begin  in  the  lower  jaw  and  extend  upward  (after  one  hour),". —
Sudden  violent  stitches,  as  of  splinters,  in  left  cheek  near  eye;  continue
several  days,'^. — [630.]  Dull  stitches  in  the  right  malar  bone,^ — Often
during  the  day  electric  stitches,  as  it  were,  in  left 'malar  bone,  with  fre-
quent twitches  of  the  muscles,  especially  in  the  left  cheek,'l — Indications
of  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  face,  in  the  region  of  the  upper  jaw,*^  '*.
— ^Tearing,  drawing  pain  in  the  right  upper  jaw,  and  in  the  right  cheek,
that  lasted  several  moments,". — *Lancinating  and  drawing  pain  in  the
right  cheek  (after  two  hours),". — A  fine,  penetrating,  very  painful  pricking
in  the  middle  of  the  right  cheek,  as  though  splinters  were  pierced  through
the  skin  into  the  muscles,". — Violent  pricking  in  right  cheek,  where  the
infraorbital  nerve  forms  the  plexus,  as  though  splinters  were  being  thrust
into  it," — Frequent  violent  pricking,  as  of  splinters  forced  into  the  left
cheek,  the  right  upper  lip,  and  the  point  of  the  chin,". — A  sudden  flash-like
pricking  in  the  right  cheek,  near  the  exit  of  the  infraorbital  nerve,  close
to  the  edge  of  the  orbit,  as  from  very  fine  and  narrow  splinters,". — Con-
tinued pricking  as  of  splinters,  in  the  right  cheek,  close  to  the  lower  edge
of  the  orbit,  that  changed  into  a  coarse  pain,  as  if  in  the  bone,".— [640.]
Quick  throbbing,  as  of  an  artery  in  left  cheek,  attended  with  shooting
stitches  extending  from  left  eye  into  the  upper  jaw,'. — Itching  in  the
whiskers,'. — Bluish  lips  (first  and  second  day),". — -Bluish  color  of  the  lips
and  nose,  t. — Lips  much  swelled,  owing  to  the  change  of  the  little  vesicles
into  ulcers,". — The  upper  lip  is  chapped,  with  a  burning  smarting  (fourth
day),^ — When  smoking  cigars,  the  epithelium  of  the  upper  lip  peels  off
easily,'". — The  epithelium  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  upper  lip  comes  off
in  flakes,'". — Eruption  of  little  blisters  on  the  upper  lip,™. — A  small  blister
on  the  red  part  of  the  lip  that  burns  considerably,'". — [650.]  An  herpetic
eruption  on  the  upper  lip,". — Several  painless  and  not  red  pimples  on  the
upper  lip,'".— Several  small,  burning  blisters  on  the  lower  lip,". — Dryness
and  little  burning  pimples  on  the  upper  and  lower  lips,  that  change  to
little  blisters  in  the  course  of  the  day,  filled  with  yellowish  serum,". —
Tetter-like  vesicular  eruption  on  the  upper  lip,". — An  itching  pimple  by
the  side  of  the  mouth. — The  middle  of  the  under  lip  cracked  and  burned
violently,  with  pain,"  ". — Great  sensation  of  dryness  of  the  lips,". — For
several  days  continued  dryness  of  the  upper  lip,  with  inclination  to  chap,".
— Dryness  and  burning  of  the  lips  (first  day),^ — [66.0.]  On  the  lips,
and  in  the  throat,  a  tearing  pain  (from  olfaction),".— A  little  froth  at
the  corners  of  the  lips,'^ — Restlessness  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw
and  lips,  with  fine,  trembling  vibration,". — Restlessness,  trembling  vibra-
tion, and  finally  an  actually  convulsive  condition  of  the  lower  jaw,". —


AGARICUS.  83

Convulsive  shaking  of  the  lower  jaw," — Convulsive  shocks  of  the  lower
jaw  by  starts/^ — The  jaws  were  clenched;  he  could  take  nothing;  he  tried
continually  to  speak,  and  uttered  only  inarticulate  sounds,^'. — Painful  sen-
sation in  the  articulation  of  the  lower  jaw,  which  is  sensitive  to  every
touch.^l — On  waking  there  is  so  violent  a  pain  in  the  left  articulation  of
the  jaw  that  the  prover  can  scarcely  open  his  mouth;  later  the  pain  dimin-
ishes, but  does  not  quite  cease,"". — In  the  right  lower  jaw  a  transient  pain,
as  though  fine  splinters  were  being  forced  between  the  skin  and  the  flesh,'^
— [670.]  Tensive  drawing  in  right  jaw,  extending  toward  the  ear,". — Spas-
modic drawing  in  the  chin  and  the  lower  jaw  (after  two  hours),'. —  Violent
tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw,^ — Pricking  pain  in  the  articu-
lation of  the  lower  jaw,  as  by  a  needle,^ — Suppurating  pimple  in  the
beard,"". — Fine  smart  stitches  at  a  small  place  of  the  chin,  close  under  the
lower  lip,*. — Pricking  in  the  chin,  as  with  needles  (immediately),^ — The
chin  is  covered  with  small,  white,  crowded  blisters,  of  the  size  of  millet-
seeds,  that  disappear  the  following  day  while  shaving,'^ — The  chin  is
covered  with  little  blisters,  that  do  not  disappear  until  after  several  days,'".
Mouth, — Slight  pain  in  the  left  back  teeth,'*. — [680.]  Drawing  pain  in
the  lower  incisors,". — Drawing  and  aching  in  upper  front  teeth,  just  after
he  had  looked  out  of  the  open  window,  in  cool  air,"^ — Peculiar  drawing
and  aching  in  backside  of  roots  of  upper  left  teeth,  involving  the  upper
incisors,"^ — Drawing,  cutting  pain  in  a  hollow  back  tooth,**. — Towards
one  o'clock  at  night,  she  was  roused  by  a  violent  tearing  pain  in  all
her  upper  teeth,  that  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,'". — Toothache ;  tearing'
in  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw;  increased  by  cold,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the
left  upper  and  lower  teeth,'". — Throbbing  and  tearing  in  the  upper  molar
teeth  of  the  left  side,  in  the  afternoon,'. — Dulness  of  the  incisors  of  the
lower  jaw,". — Half  an  hour  after  breakfast,  painful  jerks  in  a  loose  tooth
oT  the  upper  jaw,  after  drinking  cold  water ;  this  symptom  was  repeated
several  times  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  as  often  as  the  prover  drank  cold
water,'^. — [690.]  After  drinking  cold  water,  there  appeared  jerks  in  a  loose
tooth,  which  ceased  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,'l — Gnawing  pain  in  th^
molar  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw ;  then  itching  in  the  left  ear,  after  which  the
toothache  comes  on  again,  at  once,  in  the  afternoon,'. — Grumbling  tooth-
ache on  the  left  side  of  the  upper  jaw,'. — Lancinations,  attended  with  a
sensation  of  drawing  in  the  incisors  of  the  lower  jaw ;  the  lancinations  are
continued  towards  the  left  angle  of  the  lower  jaw  (after  one  hour),^ — ^The
front  teeth  feel  too  long  ;  they  are  very  sensitive  in  the  evening  (third
day),*. — Swelling  of  the  guins,  with  pain,'. — The  gums  are  painful,  and  the
saliva  tastes  acrid  (during  the  first  ten  days),*. — Painfulness  and  bleeding
of  the  gums,'. — Sensitive  gums,'*.— Thickly  coated  tongue  in  the  morning,".
— [700.]  White  coated  tongue,"  '*. — Tongue  is  coated  white,"  ^ — The  tongue
is  coated  white ;  at  the  tip  it  is  bordered  with  dirty  yellow  aphthae,  pro-
ducing a  sensation  as  though  the  skin  would  peel  off,  immediately  after  a
meal  (after  four  hours)  ? — Very  pale  tongue ;  it  is  covered  with  a  thin
white  mucus,'. — Back  part  of  the  tongue  is  coated  yellow  (seventh  to  tenth
day),'. — Slimy  tongue,'. — Tongue  quite  dry,'*. — Tongue  in  the  morning
covered  with  a  tough,  thickish  coating,**. — Tongue  covered  with  thick,
tough  mucus  in  the  morning,^'. — During  a  whole  month,  daily,  especially
mornings,  tongue  furred  and  covered  with  much  tough  mucus;  the  papillse
of  the  tongue  very  prominent,  more  so  toward  the  back,'". — [710.]  Small,
painful  ulcer  by  the  side  of  the  frjenum  of  the  tongue  (ninth  day),*. — The
tongue  is  sore,'. — Stinging  of  the  tongue,  as  of  sharp  tobacco,'^ — A  peculiar


84  AGAKICUS.

sensation  of  dryness  and  contraction  in  the  tongue,  as  after  an  astringent
liquid,". — Burning  sensation  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  had  been
dipped  in  pepper,". — The  feeling  of  soreness  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue  in-
creased by  the  touch,  and  lasting  all  the  evening,^  '^ — Sore  pain  at  the  tip
of  the  tongue,  where  there  seemed  to  be  a  little  blister,'*. — Fine  stitches  in
the  tip  of  the  tongue  (after  four  hours),^ — Stinging  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the
tongue,  as  after  pepper,'^— Tongue  on  the  right  side  is  burning  and  sore  in
many  spots ;  the  sore  spots  seem  furred,'^ — [720.]  Itching  prickling  in  left
half  of  tongue,'^ — Stinging  in  the  back  part  of  the  left  edge  of  tongue,  as
after  a  strong  radish,'^ — Sharp  stinging  in  the  left  half  of  the  tongue,'*. —
Bad  smell  from  the  mouth,'. — The  breath  has  a  nauseous  and  rather  sour
smell,''. — Bad  smell  from  the  mouth  early  in  the  morning,  with  foul  taste,*.
— Sickly,  foul  smell  from  the  mouth  (eighth  to  sixteenth  day),'. — Acrid
smell  from  the  mouth,  as  of  horseradish  ;  he  himself  is  not  aware  of  it,'. —
A  black  blood-blister  in  his  mouth,  without  having  hurt  himself,  which
discharged  the  following  day,^. — A  few  little  blisters  show  themselves  on
the  hard  palate,  with  a  feeling  of  soreness  in  it,'^ ''. — [730.]  Soreness  in  the
whole  inner  mouth,  especially  of  the  roof  of  the  mouth  (fifth  day),*. — The
roof  feels  sore,  as  though  the  skin  were  off;  it  is  very  sensitive  (first  day),*.
— Dry  mouth  and  fauces,**. — Dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  a  scratchy  feeling
in  the  fauces,'*. — Dry  palate,'". — Peculiar  disagreeable  dryness  of  the  palate,
especially  uncomfortable  when  swallowing,  with  occasional  stitches  towards
the  right  ear  and  the  salivary  gland  of  the  same  side,". — Foam  at  the
mouth,*'. — Frothing  at  the  mouth,  t. — Water  accumulates  in  the  mouth
(with  pains  in  the  belly)  (second  day),*. — [740.]  Flow  of  saliva  from  the
mouth,". — Flow  of  saliva,*^  ". — Increased  flow  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,'^  ". —
Salivation,^l — Much  confluence  of  water  in  the  mouth,™  '*  '\ — Sometimes,
especially  upon  raising  the  head,  fluid  saliva  flows  into  the  mouth  ;  this
induces  violent  hawking,". — Unexpectedly,  several  times  during  the  day,
when  moving  the  mouth,  such  a  sudden  flow  of  saliva,  that  objects  were
bespattered  with  it,'^  '*. — Considerable  flow  of  saliva,  with  dryness  of  the
throat,'". — Frequent  flow  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  slight  nausea  in  the
forenoon,  H. — Continued  flow  of  saliva,  compelling  its  constant  ejection,'\
^-[750.]  Flow  of  water  in  the  mouth,™. — Constant  flow  of  water  in  the
mouth,  compelling  frequent  spitting,'*. — Secretion  of  much  saliva  in  the
mouth,  following  after  splinter-stitches  in  the  left  sublingual  salivary
gland,'*. — Saliva  tastes  very  acrid  (during  the  first  ten  days),*. — Insipid
taste  in  the  mouth,'. — Taste  flat,". — Flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  tongue
coated  yellow  (seventh  to  tenth  day),". — Every  day,  when  the  stomach
is  empty,  flat  taste  in  the  mouth,**.— Taste  flat,  pappy,  somewhat  metal-
lic,".— Flat,  pappy  taste," — [760.]  Flat,  somewhat  sweetish,  metallic
taste,". — Bitterish  taste,™. — Bitter  taste,  Br.,'*  ". — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth
(twelfth  day),". — Sharp,  bitter  taste  at  the  root  of  the  tongue. — During  one
hour  before  dinner,  bitter  taste;  nevertheless  good  appetite,'*. — Offensive,
bitter,  resinous  taste,™. — After  taking,  disagreeable  sweetish  taste,  that
continues  some  hours  after  breakfast,™. — Disagreeable  sweetish  metallic
taste,™. — An  hour  after  breakfast,  sweet  gummy,  extremely  oflfensive  taste
in  the  mouth,  and  distension  of  the  abdomen,™. — [770.]  Already,  in  the
forenoon,  but  more  in  the  afternoon,  in  spite  of  good  appetite  for  dinner,
very  offensive,  somewhat  sweetish  taste,**. — Extremely  disagreeable  sweet-
ish bitter  taste  when  smoking  cigars,  especially  at  the  root  of  the  tongue,™.
—Bad  taste  at  the  root  of  the  tongue,  with  slight  nausea,™. — After  taking,
and particularly  after  breakfast,  very  offensive  taste  in  the  mouth,'*. —


AGARICUS.  85

Clayey  taste  in  the  mouth,'^ — Taste  salty,  as  after  herring,"  ^. — Astringent
taste  in  the  mouth,". — Directly  after  the  medicine,  rancid  taste  in  the
mouth,^. — Rancid  taste  for  three  hours,™.

Throat. — Burning  and  scratching  in  the  throat  that  extends  deep  into
the  left  side  of  the  chest,^. — [780.]  Feeling  of  constriction,  or  contraction
of  the  throat,**. — Contractive  dryness  of  the  throat,". — Roughness  in  the
throat,™. — Roughness  in  the  throat  (mornings),™. — Scratching  sensation  in
the  throat,  often  renewed,'' '". — -Roughness  and  scratchy  feeling  of  the
throat,^ — Scratching  in  the  throat,^'. — Directly  after  taking,  scraping  sen-
sation in  the  throat,  as  if  behind  the  root  of  the  tongue,'*  ". — Dryness  inside
of  the  throat,  not  to  be  soothed  by  water  or  beer,"^ — [790.]  Dryness  in  the
throat,''  '^  ™. — Dryness  of  the  throat  and  palate,". — Dryness  in  the  throat,
and  transient  stitches  in  it,  when  touched  externally,'^ — Upon  slightly
clearing  the  throat,  small  balls  of  phlegm  became  detached,'. — Throws  up
small  flocculi  or  solid,  balls  of  phlegm  almost  without  any  cough,''. — Scratching
burning  in  the  fauces,'*  '^ — Pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  fauces,'*. —
Uncomfortable  pressure  in  the  fauces,  as  though  a  foreign  body  stuck  there
that  could  not  be  removed  by  swallowing,'". — Sensation  in  the  fauces  as
though  a  particle  of  swallowed  food  had  lodged  there,''. — The  sensation  of
a  foreign  body  in  the  fauces  compels  frequent  swallowing,  which  is  uncom-
fortable and  affords  no  relief,''. — While  vomiting,  the  sensation  of  a  foreign
body  in  the  fauces  is  very  mucii  increased,'*. — [800.]  Painful  sensation,  as
if  something  were  torn  in  the  fauces,  when  swallowing  saliva,'*. — Occasional
uncomfortable  sensation  of  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  whereby  these
parts  at  the  same  time  become  sensitive  to  the  air,™. — Mornings,  when
awaking,  disagreeable  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  fauces  and  palate,  ex-
tending downward  to  the  pharynx,  causing  *contractio7i  there,  as  when  drink-
ing astringent  liquid,". — Great  dryness  in  the  fauces  and  pharynx,'*. — Sense
of  constriction  in  pharynx,  t,  S.  J. — Scratching  sensation  in  the  pharynx,". —
Dryness  of  the  pharynx,^^ '". — Soon  after  taking  the  medicine,  peculiar  dry-
ness of  the  pharynx,  with  stitches  toward  the  parotid  and  submaxillary
glands,". — Burning  in  the  oesophagus,™. — Sensation  of  coldness  from  the
pharynx  through  the  oesophagus  to  the  stomach,  as  when  eating  pungent
cress  or  radishes,'*. — [810.]  A  burning,  cooling  feeling  along  the  oesophagus
to  the  stomach,  as  after  eating  cress,'*. — Uncomfortable  feeling  of  tension
externally  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid  gland,  which  increases  towards
evening,'". — Distension  of  the  neck;  sensation  as  if  his  cravat  were  too
tight,™.

Stomach. — Great  desire  to  eat,  which  often  borders  on  a  ravenous  appe-
tite (fourth  to  eighth*  day),'. — Hunger  violent,  soon  after  eating  (2  p.m.),  and
also  later,'^. — Increased  appetite  in  the  morning ;  could  hardly  wait  for
breakfast,'*. — For  several  days  in  succession  he  had  sudden  fits  of  hunger,
during  which  he  swallows  his  food  in  a  great  hurry,  and  with  greediness,'.
— Towards  evening  his  appetite  increases ;  he  imagines  he  is  not  able  to
satisfy  it,  and  he  swallows  his  food  in  a  hurry  and  with  greediness,  as  if
with  rabid  hunger  (after  eight  hours),^ — Towards  evening  he  is  suddenly
attacked  with  rabid  hunger;  his  whole  body  is  covered  with  sweat;  these
symptoms  are  attended  with  great  weariness  and  tremor  of  the  extremities,'.
—Appetite  good;  but  inclination  to  vomit  after  eating,". — [820.]  Much
hunger,  but  no  appetite;  also,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Excessive  hunger,
without  relishing  any  kind  of  food,^*. — Loss  of  appetite,'". — Entire  want  of
appetite,'". — Want  of  appetite,' ". — No  appetite,  though  fasting,^''. — Appetite
diminishes  unusually,". — Appetite  small,'"'. — Appetite  very  bad,  almost  to


86  AGAEICUS.

distaste  of  food,'". — Appetite  diminished,^. — [830.]  Appetite  little  changed ;
somewhat  diminished,*". — Less  desire  to  eat  than  usual,"'. — Want  of  ap-
petite, with  disgust  for  roast  meat,''. — No  appetite  for  breakfast  for  two
days/^ — Total  want  of  appetite  at  the  usual  dinner-hour,". —  Little  appe-
tite for  dinner,"  '". — Aversion  to  the  taste  of  food  and  drinks,'\ — Aver-
sion when  eating,'l— Appetite  slight,  mostly  for  bread  and  butter,'^ —
Quick  repletion  at  dinner;  even  before  hunger  is  satisfied,'^  ^^ — [840.]  No
desire  for  eating;  desire  to  drink,'. — He  does  not  eat  bread  with  pleasure,'.
— Much  thirst  (second  day),'^ — Considerable  thirst,". — Unquenchable
thirst,**. — A  good  deal  of  thirst  in  the  forenoon,'". — Unusually  violent  thirst
in  the  afternoon," — Excessive  thirst  in  the  forenoon,  with  desire  for  beer,™.
— Want  of  thirst;  absence  (>f  thirst,^ '^— Little  thirst,™. — [850.]  Frequent
rising  of  mere  air,  such  as  takes  place  when  the  stomach  is  deranged  (after
half  an  hour),^ — Empty  risings,'. — Frequently  empty  risings,  alternating
with  hiccough  ;  these  symptoms  appear  while  he  smokes  tobacco,  which  he
is  in  the  habit  of  doing  (after  one  hour),*. — Eructations,  with  qualmishness
(after  three  hours),'^. — Eructations,  tasting  of  the  ingesta,'. — Early  in  the
morning  eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta,*. — Eructation  of  wind,""  ™. —
Eructation  of  wind,  tasteless  when  swallowing,'* "'. — Continual  eructation
of  wind  during  the  day,  once  as  after  rotten  eggs,"'. — Eructations,'*.-:— [860.]
Soon  after  taking  the  medicine  eructations  and  passage  of  flatus,'". — Trifling
eructation,  that  does  not  fully  rise,  but  dies  away  in  the  lower  part  of  the
oesophagus,'*"?. — Frequent  empty  eructations,^''''^. — Gulping,  sometimes  ris-
ing to  the  region  of  the  larynx,'* "'. — Empty  eructations,  alternating  three
times  with  violent  hiccough,". — Occasional  imperfect  eructations,'* "'. —
Frequent  eructations  in  the  afternoon,". — Eructations  of  wind  directly
after  the  medicine,  lasting  for  some  time,"". — Rather  violent  eructations,". —
Frequent  eructations  that  taste  of  the  food  eaten,". — [870.]  Frequent  eruc-
tations, tasting  like  apples,  without  having  eaten  any,". — *Eruotations  with
the  taste  of  apples,  frequently  during  the  forenoon,". — ^Frequent  eructations
tasting  of  rotten  eggs,  as  when  the  stomach  is  out  of  order j'^. — Frequent  sour
eructations,". — Frequent  sour  eructations  all  the  forenoon,". — Gulping  up
of  salty  fluid,'"  "*. — Eructations,  with  a  slight  attack  of  nausea,  and  inclina-
tion to  vomit,". — ^Empty  eructations  and  nausea,"'. — Hiccough  immediately
after  taking  the  medicine,'. — [880.]  Hiccough  in  the  afternoon,'. — Fre-
quent hiccough  (after  twenty-six  hours),*. — Nausea,^' ". — Nausea  without
vomiting,'*. — Nausea  shortly  after  taking  the  medicine,'. — Nausea  in  the
stomach,'* "'. — Nausea,  with  a  feeling  of  anxiety ;  it  is  evident  that  this  feel-
ing arises  from  the  abdomen,"". — A  sense  of  nausea  rises  as  far  as  his
mouth,". — A  great  deal  of  nausea,**. — -Frequent  nausea,  with  extremely
sharp  pains  in  the  stomach,'*. — [890.]  Nausea,  with  cutting  pain  in  the
abdomen,'. — Nausea  shortly  after  a  meal;  eructations  relieve  it,". — Nausea
and  pressure  in  the  stomach  soon  after  taking  the  medicine,'".— Sensation
of  nausea,'*"'. — ^Attack  of  nausea,'". — ^Nausea,  with  crawling  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach. — ^Toward  noon  a  feeling  as  of  nausea,'*'". — Nausea  after
drinking  cold  water,'". — Nausea  and  sensation  of  emptiness* in  the  stomach,
worse  in  the  morning,*". — Nausea  and  frequent  eructations  after  dinner,". —
[900.]  Momentary  nausea,  with  vertigo,  as  if  about  to  lose  his  conscious-
ness,".— Forenoons,  nausea  increased  to  the  point  of  vomiting,  which  does
not  take  place. — Nausea,  with  desire  to  vomit,'"  "*. — Directly  after  the  medi-
cine nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,'". — Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit
(after  two  hours),". — Slight  attack  of  nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,
right after breakfast,'". — Inclination to ■^)om^i,'* "  "  "^  "*  **. — Inclination to


AGAKICUS.  87

vomit,*". — ^Very  great  inclination  to  vomit". — Half  an  hour  after  the  medi-
cine violent  desire  to  vomit;  excessive,  exhausting  aversion,  without  vomit-
ing,^^ — [910,]  Inclination  to  vomit,  which  increased  to  such  a  degree  that
vomiting  would  have  followed  the  least  motion,'". — Constant  inclination  to
vomit,*". — Inclination  to  vomit  also  continues  after  vomiting, '°. — Inclina-
tion to  vomit  directly  after  the  medicine,  without  being  able  to,'*. — Inclina-
tion to  vomit,  with  watery  eructations,^*. — Inclination  to  vomit,  with  faint-
ness  and  anxiety ,*^ — Inclination  to  vomit  while  in  the  room,  that  disappears
in  the  open  air,'^ — Inclination  to  vomit  after  dinner,  without  disgust  at
the  food  eaten,'^ — Inclination  to  vomit  after  dinner,®. — Violent  gagging,
without  being  able  to  vomit,". — [920.]  Nausea  and  vomiting,  t. — Nausea
and  violent  vomiting,  t. — Nausea,  then  vomiting  of  mucus,'*. — Nausea  and
vomiting ;  he  throws  up  his  breakfast,®. — Inclination  to  vomit,  and  vomit-
ing once,'". — Vomiting  of  bitter  fluid,'^®. — ^Painless  vomiting,  with  a  slight
odor  of  alcohol,'". — Violent,  bitter  vomiting,'^®. — Bitter  vomiting,  with
shudders  creeping  over  the  whole  body,'^  ®. — Watery  vomiting,  with  a  shock
to  the  whole  body,". — [930.]  Spontaneous  vomiting  of  a  great  quantity  of
spongy  matter,  with  alvine  dejections  which  give  great  relief,'*. — Eight  or
nine  vomitings  and  five  diarrhoeic  stools,*". — Gurgling  in  the  stomach  im-
mediately after  the  medicine,". — The  pains  in  the  stomach  cause  the  pa-
tients to  roll  on  the  ground,  uttering  sharp  cries,**. — Disagreeable,  not  dis-
tinctly expressed,  sensation  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea  setting  in,™.^
Discomfort  in  the  stomach  after  taking  the  medicine,*". — Slightly  uncom-
fortable feeling  in  the  stomach,*". — Soon  after  taking  the  medicine  sensa-
tion of  discomfort  in  the  stomach,  eructations  of  wind,  heaviness  and  oppres-
sion in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,*". — ^Sensation  of  discomfort  in  the  stomach
after  breakfast,*". — Directly  after  taking,  disagreeable  sensation  in  the
stomach,  rattling  in  the  intestines,  passage  of  flatus,*". — [940.]  Pain  in  the
stomach,*". — Digestion  bad,'^. — Digestion  very  much  disturbed,". — Diges-
tion bad ;  for  the  taste  of  the  food  ejected  by  vomiting  could  still  be  dis-
tinguished at  ten  o'clock  at  night. — Burning  in  the  stomach,'^  ®. — Burning
in  the  stomach  after  the  medicine,*". — Slight  burning  in  the  stomach  after
the  medicine,*". — ^Slight  burning  in  the  stomach,*". — An  hour  after  break-
fast a  sensation  of  burning  and  being  twisted  in  the  stomach,'"  *°. — ^Soon
after  the  medicine'  slight  burning  in  the  stomach,  with  aversion,'*. — [950.]
After  the  medicine,  burning  in  the  stomach ;  then  heaviness  in  the  abdo-
men,*".— Burning  and  pressure  in  the  stomach  soon  after  the  medicine,*". —
Burning  and  pressing  pain  in  the  stomach,". — Slightly  cooling,  burning
sensation  in  the  stomach  and  pharynx,'*. — Heartburn,". — Heartburn  al-
most always  after  eating  any  kind  of  meat,^. — Sensation  of  warmth  in  the
stomach  after  the  medicine. — Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,*".— Repletion,  with  a  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach,*". —
Sensation  of  flabbiness  in  the  stomach  during  the  forenoon,'"  *°. — -[960,]
Sensation  of  flabbiness,  almost  causing  vomiting,*". — A  feeling  as  if  eruc-
tation would  take  place,  resembling  a  distending  pressure  in  the  orifice
of  the  stomach,'*  ^'. — -Sensation  of  fulness  after  dinner  and  pressure  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,  with  excessive  accumulation  of  flatus,". — -Feeling
of  fulness  and  of  flatus  after  dinner,'''. — Fulness  of  the  stomach,  with  a
flat  feeling;  the  stomach  feels  as  if  immediately  fastened  to  the  pharynx,'*.
— Pains  in  the  stomach  during  the  night,  as  though  flatus  were  pressing
it  out;  after  the  frequent  passage  of  oflfensive  flatus  this  trouble  entirely
ceased,'^ — ^The  stomach  seemed  full,  and  placed  directly  in  the  pharynx,
so  that  it  required  only  a  slight  impulse  to  vomit  with  ease ;  to  prevent


88  AGARICUS.

this,  smoking  was  discontinued/^. — Cramps  in  the  stomach  at  noon. — After
a  meal,  oppression  at  the  stomach  and  choking  at  the  oesophagus,'. —
Oppressive  weight  in  the  stomach,'. — [970.]  Oppression  at  the  stomach,
with  incliuatiou  to  go  to  stool,'. — Pressure  in  the  stomach  after  breakfast,^".
— Pressive  pain  in  the  stomach,^" "-. — Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stom-
ach,**.— Some  pressure  in  the  stomach,  after  breakfast,'*. — Pressure  and
heaviness  in  the  stomach  after  taking  the  medicine,'^  ^  ^. — Pressure  in  the
stomach,  as  of  accumulated  flatus,'^ — Sensation  of  pressure  and  coolness
in  the  stomach,  directly  after  taking,™. — Pressui'e  in  the  stomach  after  eat-
ing a  little,  which  was  not  increased  by  continued  eating,''' ".—Pressive
pain  and  drawing  downward  in  the  stomach  ;  soon  relieved  by  the  passage
of  much  flatus,". — [980.]  Pressure  and  boring  in  the  stomach  that  came  on
soon  after  the  medicine,  but  soon  ceased,'^ — -Mornings,  on  awaking,  pres-
sure in  the  region  of  the  stomach,". — -Pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  inclina-
tion to  frequent  sighing,'^. — Pressive  pain  in  the  stomach,  with  aversion  to
food,  and  some  nausea,". — Pressing  and  drawing  in  the  stomach,  increased
by  pressure  of  the  hand,''. — -Pinching  iu  the  stomach,'^ — Some  heaviness
in  the  stomach  and  abdomen  after  taking  the  medicine,™. — Heaviness  and
coolness  in  the  stomach  after  taking  the  medicine,™. — ^Sensation  as  if  a
stone  lay  iu  the  stomach,**. — Heaviness  and  discomfort  in  the  stomach  after
taking,™. — [990.]  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach  after  taking  the
medicine,™. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach  and  lower  abdomen
after  breakfast,™. — A  constant  sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  sink-
ing, like  a  heavy  weight  towards  the  abdomen,**. — -Sharp  pain,  with  great
oppression  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,"". — Faintness  of  the  stomach,  witb
an  empty  feeling  that  sometimes  alternates  with  a  sensation  of  jerking,  as
of  a  heavy  object,". — Trembling  of  stomach;  then  of  whole  body,  t. — Pains
in  pit  of  stomach  and  along  sternum,  t. — Burning  feeling  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,**. — Tensive  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  extends  to  the
left  clavicle;  it  is  felt  towards  evening,  during  deep  breathing  (ninth  day),'.
— Very  painful  tension  at  the  epigastrium,'^ — [1000.]  Pinching  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  as  if  with  tongs,"  ^. — Sensation  of  cramp-like  compression
and  shooting  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach, 'I — Cramp-like,  constrictive
pains,  coming  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  extending  far  into  the  ab-
domen,".— Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  ex-
tending as  far  as  the  chest,  towards  evening  (ninth  day),". — Heaviness  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,'". — Oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (first  and
ninth  day),". — Oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  as  far  as
the  sternum,". — After  breakfast,  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach;  in
the  afternoon  the  pain  passes  to  the  epigastrium,  where  it  becomes  a  bur-
rowing pain ;  in  the  evening  the  person  passes  wind,  after  which  the  pain
disappears  (sixteenth  day),^ — After  dinner,  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  attended  with  sensitive  drawing  and  pressure  in  the  balls  of  the
eyes,  reluctance  to  work,  and  indolent  disposition  (tenth  day),°. — Oppression
in  the  region  of  the  upper  and  left  border  of  the  stomach ;  the  pain  is  felt
when  standing  or  walking  (after  two  hours),'. — [1010,]  Oppression  at  the
pyloric  orifice  of  the  stomach,". — Tearing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,'^ — Crawl-
ing in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  nausea,**. — Soon  after  taking  the  medi-
cine sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,**.

Abdomen. — A  sort  of  rumbling  in  the  epigastrium,''. — Undulatory
jumping  of  the  upper  abdominal  muscles,'*. — When  sitting,  cutting,  colic-
like spasms,  resembling  spasms  of  the  stomach,  immediately  below  the  dia-
phragm, and  extending  towards  the  vertebral  column  (after  one  and* a  half


AGARICUS.  89

hours),". — Pinching  and  cutting  in  the  epigastrium  in  the  evening  (ninth
day),'. — Painful  tearing  in  a  small  spot  right  above  the  navel,  as  if  on  a
fine  line  about  two  inches  long,"  ". — Uncomfortable  feeling  in  the  upper
abdomen,  with  a  sensation  of  nausea  there,'"  '\ — [1020.]  In  the  hypochon-
dria, upon  the  left  side  of  the  last  true  rib,  there  is  a  pressive  pain,  return-
ing every  second ;  at  the  corresponding  place  of  the  right  side  the  person
experiences  a  pain,  as  from  an  old  gunshot  wound  (after  two  hours),". —
Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  hypochondria  and  region  of  pit  of  stomach,  as  if
the  contents  of  the  thorax  were  compressed  ;  the  pain  is  more  violent  after
a  meal,°. — Occasional  shooting  pressive  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium,
increased  by  pressure,". — In  the  right  hypochondrium,  more  backwards,
pressive  feeling,  with  occasional  stitches,  especially  when  bending  the  body
to  the  left;  continuing  all  day,". — Dull,  pressive  pain  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium, more  towards  the  back," — Uncomfortable  feeling  of  pressure
in  the  right  hypochondrium,  extending  upwards,". — Occasional  pressive
pain  in  the  liver,". — Mornings,  pressure  in  the  liver,'''. — In  the  region  of  the
liver,  sharp  stitches,  as  from  needles,". — Dull  stitches  in  the  liver  during
breathing,*. — [1030.]  Several  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver,^". — Morn-
ings, transient,  rather  violent  stitches,  deep  in  the  right  hypochondrium,'®.
— Stitches  in  the  liver  frequently  during  the  day,""^ — Occasional  little
sharp  stitches,  as  if  radiating  from  the  surface  of  the  right  lobe  of  the  liver
towards  the  centre,'". — A  sudden  violent  stitch  in  the  liver  towards  noon,'".
— Stitches  in  the  liver  and  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  nausea,'^  '*. — Sev-
eral stitches  in  the  region  of  the.  liver,''*. — Dull  stitches  extend  from  the
right  hypochondrium  and  from  the  navel  to  behind  the  sternum,'^. — Sensa-
tion of  pain  and  drawing  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  as  if  the  liver  had
increased  in  weight,  and  dragged  at  its  ligaments,". — Painful  sensation  in
the  region  of  the  spleen,'^*. — 1 1040.]  Pinching  pain  for  several  seconds  in
the  region  of  the  spleen,'*. — Deep,  contractive  pain  in  the  region  of  the
spleen,''*. — Dull  pressure  in  the  spleen  in  the  evening,  when  he  is  lying  in
bed  upon  the  left  side  ;  the  pain  is  diminished  by  turning  to  the  right  side.
— Stitches  under  the  short  ribs  of  the  left  side  in  inspiration,  and  especially
when  sitting  with  a  stooping  chest,*. — Rather  violent  stitch  in  the  region  of
the  spleen  several  times  during  the  afternoon,". — After  the  medicine  a
slight  sensation  of  pain  in  the  abdomen,  scarcely  worth  noticing  during
the  day ;  it  increased  to  a  sensitive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  and
continued,  though  diminished,  during  a  short  walk,'* "'. — Acute  pulsative
pain  below  the  left  hypochondrium  ;  it  rises  as  high  up  as  the  third  and
fourth  ribs  (afternoon  of  eighth  day),'. — Continued  pain  deep  in  the  navel,*^
— Uncomfortable  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  especially  around  the  navel,^°. —
Sensation  of  fulness  at  the  region  of  the  navel,'^ — [iO50.]  Slight  pinching
about  the  navel,'". — Pinching  below  the  umbilicus,  attended  with  a  bloated
condition  of  the  abdomen,'. — Sensation  of  heaviness  under  the  navel  after
breakfast,"". — Soon  after  taking,  a  sensation  as  of  a  burden  under  the  navel
appears,  and  some  pressure  of  flatus ;  afterwards  rattling  in  the  intestines,
upon  which  the  sensation  of  heaviness  returns,'". — Urging  under  the  navel,'''.
— Soon  after  taking,  heaviness  in  abdomen,  especially  in  the  region  of  the
navel,™. — Soon  after  the  medicine  a  sensation  of  heaviness  appears  in  the
navel,"". — More  or  less  severe  pressive  pain  in  umbilical  region,  sometimes
rising  into  the  right  side  of  the  chest,"'^. — Griping  in  the  region  of  the
navel,'". — Violent  griping  in  the  region  of  the  navel  for  several  seconds
after  breakfast,'^ — [1060.]  Slight  griping  between  the  navel  and  the  right
hypochondrium,'*. — Griping  about  the  navel,  lasting  till  dinner-time,'^. —


90  AGARICUS.

Slight  griping  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  which  ceases  after  awhile,". —
Colic-like  pains,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  of  some  duration,".
— Thumping  of  flatus  against  the  navel,  lasting  several  minutes,'^ — Cut-
ting pain  in  the  umbilical  region  (after  two  hours),". — Itching  stitches  in
the  navel,'*. — Evenings,  in  bed,  a  twitching,  writhing  jumping  in  the  recti
muscles,'^ — Jumping  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  flank,'*. — Pinching,  painful
sensation  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  above  the  hip  ;  relieved  by  pas-
sage of  flatus,'*. — [1070.]  Transient  stitches  in  the  right  flank,  rapidly  suc-
ceeding each  other  from  two  to  four  times,  and  returning  after  the  lapse  of
ten  or  fifteen  minutes,". — Frequent  twitching  of  the  abdominal  muscles,
even  in  the  pyramidal  muscles  by  the  pubis,'*. — Twitching  in  the  left  ab-
dominal muscles,'*. — Frequent  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  upper  ab-
domen,'*.— Frequent  jumping  of  the  muscles  of  the  walls  of  the  abdomen,'*.
— Bloated  abdomen,*'. — Slight  meteorism  of  the  abdomen,'^. — Distension  of
the  abdomen  for  some  time  after  breakfast,'*  ™. — Distension  of  the  abdomen ;
gurgling  in  the  intestines,'*. — Distension  of  the  abdomen,^  ™  t. — [1080.]  Dis-
tension of  the  abdomen  after  the  medicine,'*  *°. — Directly  after  the  taking,
inflation  and  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,'*. — Flatus  moves  to  and  fro  in  the
abdomen  in  an  audible  manner,'. — Grunting  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,^
— ^Audible  grunting  in  the  abdomen  early  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. —
Gurgling  in  the  intestines,™. — Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (after  half
an  hour),*. — Loud,  painless  din  in  the  abdomen,  like  distant  thunder,  at-
tended with  a  feeling  as  if  the  person  had  to  go  to  stool  (in  the  evening),'. —
Rumbling  and  wandering  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,''. — Rumbling  in  abdo-
men, with  constant  pain  deep  in  umbilical  region ;  aggravated  by  pres-
sure,*^ — [1090,]  Excessive  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,'^. — Rumbling  in  the
intestines,"  ^. — After  stool,  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,'. — Some  rattling  in
the  intestines,'". — After  breakfast,  gurgling  and  rattling  in  the  intestines,'*.
— Directly  after  taking,  rattling  in  the  abdomen  for  several  seconds,". — -
Frequent  recurrence  of  rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  abdomen  during  the
day,". — Pressure,  rumbling,  and  rattling  in  the  intestines  directly  after  the
medicine,**. — Gurgling  and  rattling  in  the  intestines  after  breakfast,^". —
Rattling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  peas  were  being  rolled  about,'^ — [1100.]
Noise  in  the  intestines ;  no  gurgling,  but  short,  abrupt  tones,*". — Loud  gur-
gling in  the  bowels,  deep  down,'. — Gurgling  and  rattling  in  the  intestines,'".
— After  stool,  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,'. — Sensation  of  fermenting  in  the
abdomen,**. — Passes  a  large  quantity  of  wind,''  °. — Passage  of  much  flatus,*^
— Passage  of  flatus,^^''^^". — Much  passage  of  flatus,'*. — Frequent  passage  of
flatus,**. — [lllO.]  Passes  wind,  attended  with  a  sensation  similar  to  that  ex-
perienced in  diarrho3a,'. — Passage  of  flatus  soon  after  the  medicine,  fol-
lowed by  a  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  lower  abdomen,™. — Soon  after  tak-
ing, passage  of  flatus,  with  warmth  in  the  abdomen,*". — *The  prover  has
passage  of  flatus  for  thirty-seven  days,™. — Much  passage  of  flatus,  fre-
quently painful,  or  preceded  by  colic-like  pains,'^  ''^. — feome  relief  after  pas-
sage of  flatus,*". — *Passage  of  much  inodorous  flatus,'".^During  the  entire
time  of  proving,  frequent  passage  of  inodorous  flatus  after  a  distending
pain  in  the  rectum,''  ". — Frequently  passes  fetid  wind,'. — Passes  wind  which
smells  of  garlic. — [1120.]  Moving  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,'*. — Flatus
troubled  him  during  the  night,^\ — Continued  rolling  of  wind  in  bowels,
eructations  of  tasteless  air,  and  passing  flatus,*^ — Slight  uncomfortable  sen-
sation in  the  intestines,'". — Violent  pain  in  abdomen  (after  four  hours),*'. —
Uncomfortable  sensation  in  abdomen,  with  grumbling,  growling,  and  occa-
sional cutting  gripes  in  a  slight  degree,  but  lasting  nearly  all  day,". — Sen-


AGAEICUS.  91

sation  of  discomfort  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent  rumbling,  and  occa-
sional griping,  occurring  often  in  the  forenoon,  as  well  as  in  the  afternoon,".
— A  constant  uncomfortable  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  with  some  flatus,^".
— Slight  burning  in  the  intestines  after  the  medicine,'". — Burning  in  the
intestines,  gradually  following  after  burning  in  the  stomach,"*. — [1130.]
After  breakfast,  burning  in  the  abdomen  for  a  short  time,'". — Immediately
after  taking,  slight  burning  sensation  in  the  abdomen  that  soon  ceases,™. —
Sensation  of  distension  in  the  abdomen,  following  after  a  very  insufficient
stool,™. — Sensation  of  distension  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,™. — Directly
after  the  medicine,  a  peculiar  sensation  of  distension  and  heaviness  appears
in  the  abdomen,™. — Soon  after  the  medicine,  the  same  sensation,  already
often  felt,  of  distension  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen,™. — After  eating  mod-
erately, feeling  of  distension  in  the  abdomen,™. — Uncomfortable  sensation
in  the  abdomen  ;  it  is  not  distended,  and  yet  there  is  a  feeling  of  distension
there,™. — Pressure  and  sense  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen  after  moderately
partaking  of  light  food,'. — ^Troublesome  fulness  of  the  whole  abdomen  ;  it
makes  sitting  and  breathing  difficult,". — [1140.]  Tension  in  the  abdomen,^'.
— Tension  in  the  whole  abdomen,^". — First  remarked  when  accidentally
stooping,  and  always  repeated  when  intentionally  doing  so;  a  sensation  of
tension  across  the  region  of  the  lungs  into  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  where
it  resembled  a  sprained  pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles,'^  ^\ — Directly  after
the  medicine,  tension  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen. — Pinching  in  the  ab-
domen,'.— -Slight  pinching  after  the  medicine ;  passage  of  flatus,™. — Vio-
lent pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen  before  and  during  the  stools,'. — •
Griping  in  the  abdomen  ,^'^ ''  ''.—Griping  in  the  abdomen,  lasting  for  several
minutes,'^ — Slight  griping  after  breakfast,"™. — [1150.]  Slight  griping  in
the  abdomen  for  several  hoiirs,^. — Directly  after  the  medicine,  slight  grip-
ing here  and  there  in  the  abdomen,  more  against  the  abdominal  walls  than
in  the  intestines,™. — ^Transient  griping  at  short  intervals,  which  always
began  with  a  stitch,  and  gradually  disappeared,". — Slight  griping  in  the
abdomen  at  noon,  with  passage  of  flatus,™. — Griping  in  the  abdomen  that
urged  to  stool;  relieved  by  a  tolerably  dry  evacuation,  accompanied  by
cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,™. — -Several  times,  while  walking  in  the  open
air,  griping  for  a  little  while,  and  a  burning  pressive  pain  in  the  lower  ab-
dominal region,".— At  9  a.m.,  a  burrowing,  pressive  pain  sets  in,  and  slight
griping  in  the  abdomen,  with  ineffectual  urging  of  flatus  towards  the  anus,'*.
— ^After  dinner,  slight  heaviness  and  slight  griping  in  the  abdomen,  with  in-
effectual urging  of  flatus  towards  the  anus,  . — Slight  griping  and  rumbling
in  the  intestines,™. — Griping,  with  passage  of  flatus,  an  hour  after  the  medi-
cine,^.— [1160.]  Griping  appears,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  over
which  he  fell  asleep,". — The  griping  becomes  more  violent  and  frequent,'^
— Griping  in  the  abdomen,  stitches,  and  then  a  cutting  pain,'^  ^°. — ^Accu-
mulation of  much  flatus,  causing  oppression,**. — Pressure  and  qualmishness
in  the  abdomen,  with  qualmish  feeling  in  the  stomach  during  the  fore-
noon," ™. — A  pressive,  very  disagreeable,  painful  sensation  in  the  left  side
of  the  abdomen,  causing  a  nauseated  ill-feeling  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
affected  spot,'^  ^\ — Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,". — Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,
soon  after  taking," — Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  directly  after  taking,"  ™.
— Urging  of  flatus  towards  the  anus," — [1170.]  Soon  after  the  medicine,
heaviness  and  urging  in  the  abdomen,  with  rattling  in  the  intestines,™. —
Directly  after  the  medicine,  heaviness  and  tension  in  the  abdomen,'. — Sense
of  writhing  in  the  abdomen,^". — Writhing  pain  in  the  abdomen,'. — Violent
colic,  t. — Colic,  after  stool,  as  if  the  person  had  swallowed  poison,  early  in


92  AGAEICUS.

the  morning  (seventh  and  ninth  days). — In  the  forenoon,  while  walking,
puncture-like  stitches  in  the  abdominal  walls  from  within  outward,''^ —
While  sneezing,  which  was  caused  by  the  sun,  violent  stitches  in  the  region
of  the  csecum,'^ '''. — Light  stitches,  from  within  outwards,  through  the  ab-
dominal walls ;  so  also  in  the  diaphragm,*'". — Slight  searchiug  in  the  abdo-
men, with  sensation  of  flatus  after  breakfast,'"'. — [1180.]  Repeated  light
searchings  in  the  intestines,^". — Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  late  in  the  even-
ing," ^'. — Rather  painful  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it  were  the  begin-
ning of  colic,'"'. — Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  a  soft,  crumbling
stool ;  occasional  cutting,  pressive  pains  in  the  hypogastric  region,^'. — Cut-
ting pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  rumbling  and  gurgling  in  the  intestines,".
— Cutting,  searching  sensation  in  the  abdomen,'*. — Occasional  cutting  pains
in  the  abdomen,  with  passage  of  inodorous  flatus,'°. — Sensation  of  cold  in
the  abdomen,'*. — Flabby  sensation  in  the  abdomen,^". — Sensation  as  if  the
abdominal  cavity  was  entirely  empty,*". — [1190.]  Bloated  condition  of  the
hypogastrium,  with  cutting  pain,  attended  with  wind  moving  to  and  fro
in  the  bowels ;  eructations  and  emissions  of  flatulence  give  but  short  re-
lief (after  one  hour),". — Much  noise  of  air  and  fluid  in  lower  abdomen,™. —
Rumbliug  in  the  lower  abdomen,™. — Frequent  rumbling  in  the  region  of
the  lower  abdomen," — Growling  in  the  lower  abdominal  cavity  ;  disten-
sion of  the  abdomen,'^ — Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  almost  as  if  the  per-
son had  to  go  to  stool;  at  the  same  time  the  person  passes  a  quantity  of
wind,  which  has  almost  no  smell,". — Sensation  in  the  abdomen  as  if  diar-
rhoea were  just  coming  on,". — During  the  whole  day  there  is  a  sensation
in  the  bowels  as  if  the  person  had  to  go  to  stool ;  however,  the  stools  are
not  passed  till  late  in  the  evening,  after  there  had  been  copious  stools  in
the  morning,'. — Very  painful  tension  of  the  lower  abdomen,'". — Tension
in  the  pelvis,  and  in  the  hypogastric  region,'". — [1200.]  Violent  pinching
in  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoeic  stool,'. — After  pappy  stool,  griping  in
the  lower  abdomen,  which  returned  several  times,  in  a  lesser  degree,
during  the  forenoon,  while  walking  in  the  open  air,'". — Griping,  like  colic,
in  the  lower  abdomen,  extending  from  the  left  ileum,  between  the  navel
and  symphysis  pubis,  through  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  to  the  right
ileum ;  it  was  lessened  by  pressure,  and  only  lasted  several  minutes,'*. —
In  the  forenoon  and  afternoon,  repeated  attacks  of  griping,  cutting  pains
in  the  lower  abdominal  region,  with  accumulation  of  flatus,'". — Repeated
griping  in  left  lower  abdomen,  with  rattling  in  the  intestines,''  ". — Aroused
at  midnight  by  a  spasmodic  pain  in  the  left  abdominal  region  that  urged
him  to  stool ,'^°. — Drawing  pain  towards  the  navel  and  the  right  flank;
this  pain  began  in  the  pelvis,  and  took  its  course  from  below  upwards,'".
— Dull,  drawing  pain  in  lower  abdomen,  extending  towards  the  lumbar
muscles,''^ — Soon  after  the  medicine,  a  feeling  of  heaviness  appears  in  the
lower  abdomen,*. — Slight  urging  in  the  lower  abdominal  region,™. — [1210.]
The  stitches  began  in  the  pelvis,  and  extended  to  the  right  side  of  the  ab-
domen, along  the  groin,  to  the  right  flank,  growing  weaker  and  weaker
during  their  course,  and  finally  disappearing  entirely,'". — Sudden,  violent
stitches,  as  of  splinters,  in  the  left  side  of  the  lower  abdomen,". — Cut-
ting in  the  hypogastrium,  without  stool,'. — Cutting  pain  in  the  hypogas-
trium, as  if  diarrhoea  were  to  ensue  (in  the  evening),". — Cutting  pain  in
the  abdomen,  such  as  is  consequent  upon  a  purgative ;  this  pain  is  fol-
lowed by  liquid  stools,  by  which  the  pains  are  relieved  (second  day),*. — A
feeling  of  restlessness  sinks  into  the  abdomen,'*  ". — Troublesome  itching  of
the  hypogastrium,  with  goose-skin ;  it  lasts  almost  the  whole  night,  and


AGARICU8.  93

only  disappears  in  the  morning,  after  perspiration  has  set  in,". — Mild  pain
in  the  groin,". — Painful  pressure  in  the  groin  (after  two  hours),". — Spas-
modic drawing  in  the  left  groin  when  urinating  (after  three  days),". —
[1220.]  Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  groin ;  felt  only  when  walking
(after  four  and  one-quarter  hours),'. — Dull  stitches,  which  hurt  very  much,
at  the  superior  anterior  process  of  the  iliac  bones,^. — Peculiar  tensive  pain
in  the  right  loin,'". — Tensive  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  right  loin,  some-
what increased  by  stretching  and  turning  the  thigh  outward  ;  sensation  of
paiu,  more  felt  when  standing,  prevents  walking,  and  is  increased  by  the
touch,''^ — Urging  in  the  left  loin,^^

Stool  and  Anus. — In  passing  wind,  there  is  an  acrid  pain  in  the
rectum  (sixth  day),'. — During  and  after  stool,  acrid  pain  in  the  rectum
(third  and  fourth  day),^. — Prickling  in  the  rectum  (after  three  hours),^. —
Prickling  in  the  rectum,  as  from  worms,'. — Stitches  in  the  rectum,^^  ^. —
[1230.]  Violeut  cutting  itching  began  in  the  rectum  in  the  evening,  close
above  the  opening,  that  indueed'a  drawing-in  of  the  anus,  without  afford-
ing relief,  which  was  rather  effected  by  involuntarily  pressing  it  out ;  it
entirely  resembled  the  sensation  caused  by  diarrhoeas  of  acrid  matter,  and
disappeared  again  in  about  half  an  hour,'*  ". — Slight  burning  in  the  anus,^".
— Sensation  of  warmth  in  the  anus,'"'. — Mornings,  burning  and  itching  in
the  anus,  as  with  tenesmus  during  stool,". — At  noon,  heat  and  itching  in
the  anus,''". — Towards  noon,  a  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  anus,  resem-
bling heaviness  and  fulness,  that  disappeared  again  after  a  time,  while  sit-
ting down,'". — Much  passage  of  flatus  ;  a  sensation  in  the  anus  of  painful
rumbling  round  in  the  abdomen,  with  inclination  to  stool,  accompanied  by
a  sensation  of  complete  closure  of  the  anus,'* "'. — Pressure  in  the  anus  for  a
short  time  at  noon,^". — While  taking,  a  feeling  was  already  noted  as  if
diarrhoea  would  set  in,  which,  however,  soon  vanished,  without  any  re-
sult,'* "'. — Stitches  in  the  anus,^*. — [1240.]  Occasional  violent  stitches  in
the  anus,'^. — Itching  and  tickling  of  the  anus,  which  obliges  the  person  to
scratch  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),*. — Some  itching  in  the  anus,™. —
Itching  and  prickling  in  the  anus,". — ^A  sensation  of  painful  dryness  of  the
anus,  with  an  inclination  to  draw  the  anus  in,'*  ^'. — Sensation  of  moisture
in  the  anus,'* '". — Paralytic  weakness  of  the  sphincter  ani,  so  that  the  faeces
can  only  be  retained  for  moments,  with  great  effort,'*. — Violent  burning  in
the  hsemorrhoids. — Hsemorrhoids  painful  and  burning,  very  much  in-
flamed,'^ — Inflamed  hsemorrhoids,  with  burning  in  the  rectum,'^ — [1250.]
Swelling  of  the  hsemorrhoids,  with  stitches  in  the  anus,'*. — After  a  copious
stool,  discharge  of  several  ounces  of  light-red  blood  from  the  rectum,  with
great  straining,  as  if  to  stool, 'I — Urgent  desire  to  stool,  which  was  scarcely
to  be  retained,  as  immediately  preceding  it,  painless  straining  in  the  rec-
tum, toward  the  front,  was  felt,'l — ^Urging  towards  the  anus,  three  hours
after  taking,^". — Violent  urging  towards  the  anus,  mornings,'^. — Urging  to
stool,  with  a  kind  of  tenesmus,  lasted  till  toward  morning. — Ineffectual
desire  for  stool,  with  much  passage  of  wind,''. — The  evacuations  become
pappy  (sixth  day),". — Passes  a  quantity  of  pappy  stools  (after  twelve  to
thirty-eight  houra),". — Soft,  pappy  stools  every  day,'. — [1260.]  A  pappy
stool  without  symptoms,  after  which  a  sensation  of  heaviness,  lasting  for
an  hour,". — Copious  pappy  stool,  with  subsequent  sensation  of  heaviness
in  the  hypogastric  region,*". — Copious  pappy  stool  after  breakfast ;  after-
wards, slight  sensitiveness,  with  feeling  of  distension  in  the  lower  abdomen,'".
— Copious  pappy  stool ;  after  it  slight  burning  of  the  anus,™. — Pappy  stool,
followed  by  burning  in  the  anus,™. — Copious  pappy  stool,  afterwards  itch-


94  ■  AGARICUS.

ing,  and  finally  burning  in  the  anus,'°. — A  scanty,  pappy,  painless  stool,
after  breakfast,  followed  by  a  feeling  of  distension  in  the  abdomen,'". —
Copious  pappy  stool,  followed  by  a  sensation  of  distension  in  the  abdomen,?".
— Scanty  pappy  stool,  followed  by  a  sensation  of  heaviness  around  the
navel,'". — A  pappy  evacuation,  afterwards  gurgling  and  rattling  in  the
intestines,'". — [1270.]  Three  evacuations  of  a  pappy  nature,^'*. — Soft  stools,
after  the  stools  had  been  passed  as  usual  early  in  the  morning,''. — Stool
soft,  but  not  like  diarrhoea,'^. — Frequent  very  soft  stools,  the  desire  to
which,  owing  to  paralytic  weakness  of  the  sphincter,  must  be  instantly
gratified  to  insure  cleanliness,'^ — A  soft,  very  copious  stool,'^  ^'. — Several
soft  stools,  that  cause  burning  in  the  anus,'^ — Several  soft  evacuations,'^ —
A  semi-liquid  painless  stool,'". — An  insufficient  semi-liquid  stool,'". — Two
scanty  semi-liquid  evacuations,'". — [1280.1  -^  dark-green,  soft,  liquid  stool,
afternoons,". — Colic  is  succeeded  by  knotty,  then  liquid  stools,  early  in  the
morning  (second  day),'. — Four  liquid  evacuations,  with  burning  in  the
anus,'°. — Two  liquid  stools,^'. — Three  stools  daily,  at  short  intervals,  con-
taining liquid  faeces,'*. — Frequent  liquid  stools,  with  burning  in  the  anus,'°.
^Awoke  with  griping  in  the  morning,  followed  by  two  liquid  stools,'". — ■
Dined  without  desire  or  satisfaction,  followed  four  hours  after  by  three
liquid  stools,'". — Five  times  in  succession  the  person  passes  liquid  yellowish
stools,  attended  with  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  emission  of  flatulence
which  has  no  smell,'. — Watery  stools,  attended  with  violent  colic  and  tenes-
mus, early  in  the  morning  on  the  third  day,'. — [1290.]  During  the  night,
three  watery  stools,  with  pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,''^ — Stools  are  at
first  knotty,  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards  watery ;  attended  with
violent  colic,  fermentation  in  the  abdomen,  and  great  nausea,'. — Passes
mucus  by  the  rectum,  attended  with  wind,*. — -Slimy  stools,  at  the  same  time
passing  much  wind,*. — Yellowish  slimy  evacuations,  with  tenesmus  and
pains,' . — Very  oflfensive  fecal  passage,  t. — Very  offensive  leek-green  evacu-
ations,'^.— Easy  and  copious  stool,  shortly  afterwards  a  feeling  of  heaviness
in  the  anus,  with  an  inclination  to  draw  the  anus  upwards,"  '". — A  tolera-
bly consistent  easy  stool,  followed  by  a  sensation  of  distension  in  the  abdo-
men,'".— After  taking,  sudden  desire  for  stool,  so  that  the  chair  could
scarcely  be  reached  ;  copious  evacuation  of  a  tough,  sticky  mass,  passed
without  difficulty,'". — [1300,]  Crumbling  stool,  preceded  by  a  feeling  of
moisture  in  the  anus,  which  led  to  the  certain  expectation  of  a  diarrhoea,"  ".
— Knotty  stools  at  night  after  violent  colic ;  this  is  succeeded  by  violent
tenesmus,  without  any  more  stools  being  passed  (third  day),'. — First  hard,
then  pappy  stools  ;  shortly  after  there  is  diarrhoea,'. — Evacuations  at  noon
and  evening,  which  is  not  usual," — Three  diarrhceic  stools  during  the  day,
with  swelling  of  the  htemorrhoids,  and  excessive  bearing  down  of  the  intes-
tines into  the  inguinal  canal  and  pelvic  cavity,". — Diarrhoeic  stools,  more
than  ten  times,  with  griping  and  passage  of  much  flatus,'^. — Very  frequent
diarrhoeic  stools,^. — Diarrhoea,". — Diarrhoea,  with  violent  pinching  in  the
body,  early  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — -Diarrhxa,  at  the  same  time  the
person  passes  a  large  quantity  of  wind  (after  six  hours). — [1310.]  Diarrhoea,
attended  with  painful  retraction  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen,^ — Dysen-
teric flux  (secondary  effect),*^. — Stool  delayed,  hard  and  scanty,'^ — Hard,
dark-colored  evacuations  (third  day),". —  Very  hard  stools,''. — Hard  stool ;
subsequently  burning  in  the  anus  for  some  time,'". — After  an  almost  painful
and  natural  straining,  a  difficult  hard  stool,"  ^'. — After  dinner,  a  hard
scraping  stool," — Two  easier  stools,  with  less  burning  in  the  anus,  and
passage  of  oflTensive  flatus,". — After  passage  of  flatus,  a  hard  stool,"  ''\—


AGARICUS.  95

[1320.]  Solid  stools  after  several  Jays'  constipation,'. — Absence  of  stool  for
two  days,'.— Contrary  to  habit,  stool  was  omitted  for  two  days,  until  finally
an  effort,  with  some  difficulty,  effected  a  hard  evacuation,'*  ^'. — Stool  every
other  day  ;  it  is  always  solid. — ^There  is  no  stool  for  three  days,  although
stools  generally  were  passed  every  day ;  at  the  end  of  three  days,  the  per-
son passed  stools  which  were  hard. — Stoppage  of  excretions,  t.

Urinary  Organs. — While  driving  in  the  forenoon,  tensive  pain  in
the  region  of  the  bladder,  without  desire  to  urinate,™. — Twitching  pain  in
bladder,'^ — Effusion  of  viscid  glutinous  mucus  from  the  urethra,^. — In  the
evening,  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  urethra,  quite  at  the  end,  along  the
glans,  involuntarily  inducing  pressure  of  this  part,™. — [1330.]  At  night,
momentary  burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,'''. — Burning  in  the  urethra
while  urinating,"  "". — Burning  while  urinating,'^. — Burning  sensation  while
urinating  continued  several  days,". — A  stitch  in  the  urethra,  as  if  an  in-
candescent steel  were  pushed  through  it  (after  three  hours),". — Fine  stitches
through  the  urethra,"". — Prickling  and  itching  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra
(after  two  hours),''. — A  sensitive,  momentary  crawling-itching  in  the  glans,
which  seems  to  be  in  the  urethra,™. — Tickling  in  thefossanavicularisof  the
urethra,  as  if  a  small  foreign  body  were  in  it,'^. — Sensation  in  the  urethra
as  jf  he  had  not  entirely  done  urinating,". — [1340.]  Sensation  in  the  ure-
thra, as  if  a  drop  of  cold  water  passed  through  it,". — Frequent  and  violent
urging  to  urinate,  and  copious  urine,  with  stitches  in  meatus  urinarius,'^^ —
Desire  to  urinate,  though  but  very  little  urine  is  passed  (after  three-quarters
of  an  hour),". — Waking  up  in  the  night  with  a  violent  desire  to  urinate,
much  urine  being  then  emitted  (after  nineteen  hours),*. — Frequent  desire
to  urinate ;  he  passes  much  urine,  the  penis  being  quite  relaxed  (after  four
hours),*. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  quantity  of  urine  considerably
greater  than  usual,™. — Profuse  urine  with  the  stool,  and  soon  afterwards
renewed  desire  to  urinate,'*^ — Frequent  micturition,'. — She  frequently
passes  her  urine,  though  she  had  drank  but  little  (fourth  day),''.^After
long-continued  desire  to  urinate,  profuse  urine  and  soft  stool,"^. — [1350.]
Copious  passage  of  urine,^°.— Passage  of  urine  frequent  and  considerably
increased,'*. — Passed  an  unusual  quantity  of  urine  during  the  night,™. —
Paralytic  weakness  of  the  sphincter  vesicse.  so  that  the  urine  could  only  be
retained  for  a  moment  with  difficulty,'*. — After  urinating,  the  urine  con-
tinued to  flow  involuntarily  for  some  time,  so  that  the  thighs  and  knees
were  frequently  quite  wet ;  it  seemed  as  if  the  sphincter  v-esicse  had  sus-
pended its  function,'*. — With  desire  to  urinate,  the  sphincter  vesicse  had
not  the  power  to  retain  the  urine,  even  momentarily.  It  passed  at  intervals,
dripping  long  afterwards,  frequently  wetting  the  thighs ;  the  penis  at  the
same  time  cold  and  shrunken,'*. — Retention  of  urine,'. — Rare  emission  of
urine,  without  any  increase  of  quantity,'. — Rare  emission  of  urine,  with
decrease  of  quantity,'. — Urine  comes  out  slowly,  feebly,  sometimes  only  in
drops ;  he  is  obliged  to  bear  down  in  order  to  facilitate  the  emission  of
urine,'. — [1360.]  The  urine  sometimes  stops  flowing  for  a  few  moments,
and  then  flows  again,'. — Noticeably  small  secretion  of  urine,'*  *". — Since
beginning  the  proving,  the  secretion  of  urine  seems  to  have  considerably
diminished,'*  ". — Scanty,  reddish  urine  (first  and  second  day),'. — Urine
scanty  and  dark  (second  afternoon),'''. —  Clear  lemon-colored  urine,''. — Urine
clear  canary-yellow,'^ — After  several  attempts,  the  urine  is  passed  clear
citron-yellow  (two  hours),'''.  —  In  the  morning,  urine  light-colored,  like
water;  flame-colored  in  the  afternoon,  without  sediment,". — Flame-colored
urine  in  the  afternoon,". — [1370.]  Urine  passed  was  burning  hot  and  dark


96  AGARICUS.

yellow," — Urine  red  and  dim,  without  sediment,". — During  the  time  of
proving,  urine  mostly  unusually  lemon-colored,'\ — Uriue  appeared  very
red  and  clear,". — Urine  of  normal  color,^". — Urine  notably  watery,"  —
Uriue  very  dim  and  whey-like,". — Urine  watery  in  the  forenoon,  after-
wards milky,". — Urine  milky  and  dim,".^Urine  grows  dim  and  whey-like
after  standing  a  short  time,'". — [1380.]  Urine  that  passes  very  dim,  like
clay-water,". — Urine  milky  in  the  afternoon,". — Urine  with  a  dense  shim-
mering film,  without  sediment,". — A  little  shimmering  pellicle  on  the  sur-
face of  the  urine,  seeming  to  consist  of  little  longish  crystals,". — After  an
hour,  the  urine  showed  a  little  shimmering  pellicle,  and  a  copious  white  sedi-
ment,".— Urine  with  copious  wHite,  flaky  sediment,  and  shimmering  film,".
— Red,  dim  urine,  depositing  a  copious  white,  flaky  sediment,  that  seemed
to  be  mixed  with  a  red  powder," — After  an  hour,  the  urine  turned  quite
dim,  and  deposited  a  red,  flaky  sediment,". — After  an  hour,  a  red  powdery
sediment,". — After  an  hour,  the  urine  deposited  a  copious  white  sediment,
which  proved,  on  chemical  analysis,  to  be  phosphate  of  magnesia,".

Sexual  Organs. — [1390.]  Irritation  of  the  genitals, 'I — Itching,
with  titillation  of  the  margin  of  the  prepuce;  thess  symptoms  oblige  him
to  rub  the  parts  (after  five  hours),". — Quickly  passing,  voluptuous  itching
in  the  penis,". — Tickling  itching  in  the  scrotum,  necessitating  rubbing,
while  sitting  (after  twelve  hours),". — The  skin  swells  and  turns  red  in  the
left  side  of  the  scrotum,  itches  and  twinges  ;  the  swelling  disappears  again
after  two  days,'*. — Excessive  retraction  of  the  testicles  toward  the  inguinal
ring,  so  that  it  became  painful,  and  it  was  necessary  to  push  them  out  from
the  inguinal  opening,  within  which  they  were  partly  imbedded ;  this,  how-
ever, only  afforded  partial  relief,  still  the  difficulty  was  not  of  long  dura-
tion,'* ^'. — Drawing  in  the  testicles,  attended  with  a  sense  of  uneasiness,
awkwardness,  and  sleepiness,  in  the  evening,'^ — Spasmodic  drawing  in  the
left  testicle  and  spermatic  cord,". — Continual  erections  (first  night),". —
Erections  early  in  the  morning,'''. — [1400.]  Frequent  erections,  also  at
night,'. — Mornings,  excessive  sexual  desire,™. — Very  lively  sexual  desire,™.
— The  sexual  desire  becomes  excited,'. — A  nap  after  dinner  is  succeeded
by  an  unbounded  desire,  in  the  sexual  organ,  for  an  emission  of  semen  ;
after  the  emission  there  is  a  pressive  tension  below  the  ribs,  without  any
symptoms  of  flatulence,'*. — Great  desire  for  an  embrace,  the  penis  being  re-
laxed^.— In  the  evening,  when  desirous  of  enjoying  an  embrace,  he  tried  in
vain  to  have  an  erection ;  he  was,  therefore,  obliged  to  desist ;  in  the  ensu-
ing night,  he  had  several  copious,  involuntary  effusions  of  semen,^ — In
spite  of  strong  excitement,  there  is  no  pleasurable  sensation  in  an  embrace,'.
— During  an  embrace,  a  copious  efiusiou  of  semen,  followed  by  a  very  long
sleep,'. — ^Tardy  effusion  of  semen  during  an  embrace,'. — [1410.]  Insufficient
effusion  of  semen  during  an  embrace,  which  is  succeeded  by  weariness  of
the  body,'. — After  every  embrace  there  is  great  weariness,  lasting  several
days,'. — Every  embrace  is  followed  by  copious  night-sweats,  attended  with
a  general  lassitude  of  the  body,  which  lasts  for  several  days,'. — After  an  em-
brace he  feels  very  much  exhausted ;  there  is  a  burning  itching  upon  the
skin,  and  copious  night-sweats  for  two  nights;  the  sweat  appearing  fi.'-st
upon  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  and  shoulders,  and  then  upon  the  abdo-
men and  the  anus,'. — Sexual  desire  very  much  diminished,'^ — Noticeable
sexual  apathy,'*  ^'.— Great  aversion  to  sexual  intercourse,^ — Pollutions
(first  night),'. — Nightly  pollutions,  without  any  lascivious  dreams,". —
Emissions,  several  successive  nights,"'. — [1420.]  Several  slight  emissions,'".
— Itching  of  the  hairy  parts  of  the  pudendum,'. — Itching  and  titillation  of


AGARICUS.  , 97

the  female  organs  of  generation,'. — Menses  appear  two  days  earlier  than
usual,  and  increased  ;  fiow  of  the  menses  greater  than  usual,  with  violent
pains  in  the  back  and  abdomen,  of  a  tearing,  pressive  kind.  Intolerable
itching  in  the  external  genitals,  which  did  not  cease  till  the  following  day ,^^
— Menses  flow  more  abundantly,*.

Respiratory  ApjJaratiis. — Sense  of  constriction  of  the  larynx,  t.
— The  oppression  and  constriction  of  the  larynx  make  him  dread  suffocation,^'.
— Pressive  pain  in  the  right  of  the  larynx,  with  irritation  to  cough,'^ —
Huskiness  of  the  voice,  with  piercing  pains  in  the  chest,^^ — Irritation  which
excites  coughing,'. — [1430.]  Frequently  returning  sensation  of  tickling  in
the  larynx,  which  induces  short  and  frequently  repeated  coughing,'. — A
scratching  irritation  in  the  windpipe,  causing  a  dry  cough,^^ — *  Constant
irritation  to  cough,  which  can  mostly  be  suppressed,  but,  if  not,  several  violent
shocJcs  of  cough  succeed  one  another,  which  are  very  painful  and  mostly  dry,^".
— Great  inclination  to  violent  cough  during  the  day,  especially  when
smoking  tobacco,'". — During  the  day,  several  *sudden  violent  attacks  of  cough-
ing,^".— During  the  day,  several  attacks  of  violent  seemingly  convulsive
cough,'". — Violent  coughing  several  times  during  the  day,  with  pain  under
the  sternum,'". — After  dinner,  coughing  and  sneezing  together,  so  violent
that  it  causes  him  to  cry  out,'". — Violent  cough,  with  sneezing,'". — The
cough  is  mostly  accompanied  by  sneezing,'". — [1440.]  Violent  sneezing
follows  every  attack  of  cough,'". — *  The  cough  has  the  peculiarity  of  appear-
ing in  isolated  attacks,  is  very  violent,  and  ends  with  repeated  sneezing,™. — A
few  attacks  of  cough  with  gagging,'". — A  violent  attack  of  cough,  with  in-
clination to  vomit,  and  lachrymation,'". — Forenoon,  frequent  coughing ;
afternoon,  an  attack  of  coughing,  with  vomiting,'". — Convulsive,  hacking
cough,  with  oppressive  perspiration,^. — Suddenly  occurring  violent  attacks
of  cough,'". — Recurring  several  times,  violent  cough,  by  shocks,'". — Cough
comes  suddenly,  and  is  so  violent  that  it  is  not  easily  suppressed ;  several
shocks  of  cough  succeed  each  other,  and  cause  him  to  double  up  and  force
tears  from  his  eyes ;  the  cough  then  ceases  for  a  longer  time ;  for  half  days,'".
— The  cough  came  on  suddenly,  and  was  so  violent  that  it  obliged  him  to
double  up,  contract  his  legs,  and  even  move  his  arms,'". — [1450.]  Two
attacks  of  convulsive  cough,  followed  by  pain  in  the  chest,'". — Awoke,
coughing  violently,'". — Violent  cough,  several  times  on  waking  up  in  the
morning,'". — When  he  awoke,  violent  convulsive  cough  set  in,^^ — Violent
coughing,  several  times  in  the  morning,'". — Cough  several  times,  mornings,'".
— Cough  in  the  morning  followed  by  sneezing,'". — Several  attacks  of  cough
in  the  forenoon,  accompanied  by  sneezing,'". — Violent  coughing  several
times  in  the  forenoon,'".— Several  convulsive  attacks  of  cough  during  the
forenoon,'". — [1460.]  During  the  forenoon,  at  intervals  of  two  or  three
hours,  convulsive  attacks  of  coughing,'". — Very  violent  coughing  at  noon,
with  repeated  sneezing,'". — Several  violent  attacks  of  cough  during  the
day,  but  not  of  long  duration,'". — In  the  afternoon,  frequent  violent  cough-
ing,'".— Often  roused  at  night  by  violent  attacks  of  cough,'". — So  violent  an
attack  of  cough  at  night  that  it  obliged  him  to  sit  up  in  bed,  as  he  could
not  recover  breath  for  some  time,'". — Coughed  racked  him  so  much  at  night
that  he  was  obliged  to  sit  up  in  bed,  because  the  spasmodic  contractions  of
the  air-passages  threatened  to  suffocate  him,'". — Violent  coughing  several
times  during  the  night,'". — Much  cough  during  the  night,'*. — Coughed  vio-
lently, and  sweated  somewhat  at  night,'". — [1470.]  Shortly  after  falling
asleep,  she  is  roused  by  a  spasmodic  cough,  lasting  about  ten  minutes,
attended  with  a  painful  tickling  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx  and  extend-

VOL.  I. — 7


98 ,  AGARICUS.

ing  down  the  throat". — Dry  cough  several  times,'". — When  sitting,  there
is  a  dry  cough  after  dinner,  which  disturbs  the  nap. — Dry  cough,  with
wheezing  under  the  sternum,  causing  burning,^^ — Frequent  cough  after  a
meal,  without  expectoration,'. — Violent,  mostly  dry  cough,  on  waking,™. —
Violent  attacks  of  cough  in  the  morning,  mostly  dry,'". — Short  dry  cough
several  times  during  the  forenoon,^'. — After  dinner,  short,  dry,  interrupted
hacking  cough,™. — During  the  day,  frequent  and  labored,  mostly  dry
cough,^". — [1480.]  At  night,  two  attacks  of  violent  labored  cough,  that
convulsively  shake  the  whole  body ;  the  cough,  which  is  mostly  dry,  is
caused  by  a  tickling  in  the  air-passages ;  slimy  expectoration  seldom  oc-
curred,™.— Several  times,  loose  labored  cough,  the  irritation  to  cough  being
in  the  windpipe,™. — Several  attacks  of  violent  coughing,  with  only  occa-
sional expectoration  of  mucus,™. — Several  times,  night  and  morning,  vio-
lent cough,  with  expectoration  of  mucus,™. — Cough  frequently  mornings ;
on  waking,  labored  and  mostly  dry,  with  expectoration  of  thick  white
mucus,™. — Coughed  several  times,  and  expectorated  mucus  on  awaking,™. —
Mornings,  on  waking,  cough,  with  loose  expectoration ,^^ — Violent  cough-
ing several  times  in  the  morning,  with  expectoration  of  mucus,™. — Morn-
ings, rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest,  followed  by  several  violent  attacks  of
coughing ;  but  rarely  expectoration  of  mucus,™. — Slight  coughing  of  mucus
in  the  morning,™. — [1490.]  Frequent  violent  cough  in  the  morning,  with
only  occasional  expectoration,^^ — Cough  which,  especially  in  the  morning,
brings  up  large  brown  flakes  of  mucus,'". — Coughing  up  of  thick  mucus  in
the  morning,™. — Mornings,  violent  cough,  several  times,  with  expectoration
of  mucus ;  the  cough  bears  the  widest  characteristics  of  a  spasmodic  cough,
that  is,  upon  a  deep,  almost  wheezing  inspiration,  follow  several  short,  clear-
sounding  shocks  of  cough,  often  with  doubling  up  of  the  body,  inclina-
tion to  vomit,  and  lachrymation. — Frequent  cough  in  the  forenoon,  some-
times dry,  but  mostly  "with  expectoration  of  mucus,™. — During  the  foi'e-
noon  appeared  several  attacks  of  violent  cough,  with  expectoration  of
mucus,™. — Frequent  coughing  up  of  lumpy  mucus  during  the  day,™. —
Cough  increased  towards  evening,'". — Much  expectoration  of  small,  gelat-
inous, transparent,  moulded  lumps  of  mucus,  with  great  relief  to  the  lungs,
without  coughing,  and  by  forcible  expiration,'^  ^'. — Expectoration  very
marked,  gelatinous,  or  rather  resembling  starch-paste,  transparent  and
white ;  it  does  not  dissolve,  but  retains  its  accidental  form  of  little  lumps,
like  coagulated  starch-paste,  and  is  observed  for  many  days,'*  ^'. — [1500.]
Expectoration  of  thin  thready  mucus,  and  small  lumps  of  a  saltish  taste,'l
— Breath  is  very  short,'. — Anxiety  ;  attacks  of  suffocation,  t. — Very  short
breath  and  asthma,  even  when  walking  slowly,'. — When  walking,  she  is
obliged  to  stand  still  several  times,  in  order  to  be  able  to  take  breath,'. —
Difficult  breathing  (after  eight  days),'. — Difficult  and  noisy  respiration,^'.
— Respiration  difficult,''^ — Towards  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  diffi-
culty in  breathing,'^ — Respiration  labored  and  superficial.'l — [1510.]  Op-
pressed breathing  at  times,'''. — Aggravated  breathing,  as  if  the  cavity  of
the  thorax  were  filled  vvith  blood  (after  four  hours),'. — Accelerated  breath-
ing,'^ 2i_ — Deep  breathing,'^ — Frequent  deep  inspiration,^''. — Hot,  acceler-
ated breath,  and  oppressed  chest ;  deep  breathing  and  involuntary  bursts
of  coughing  are  often  instinctively  but  vainly  employed  to  remove  these
difficulties,'*  ^'. — Respiration  liglit,^^.

Chest. — Frequent  twitching  in  both  pectoral  muscles,". — Frequent
jumping  of  the  pectoral  muscles.'^ — Rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest,™. —
[1520.]  Rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest,  when  lying  on  the  back,™. — Snor-


AGARICUS.  99

ing  and  wheezing  in  the  chest,  during  the  night,™. — Constant  sensation  of
not  feeling  well  in  the  chest,*'. — Pain  in  the  chest,  after  rising,'". — Burning
inside  the  chest,  and  a  kind  of  oppression,**. — Burning  in  the  chest,  after
dinner,'". — Pine  burning  and  prickling  at  different  places  of  the  chest,  espe-
cially upon  the  sternum  (after  one  hour),^ — Occasionally,  some  tensive  pain
across  the  chest,™. — Tension  across  the  chest ;  slight  shortness  of  breath,'".
— Soon  after  taking,  tension  across  the  anterior  walls  of  the  chest,  with
some  shortness  of  breath,'". — [1530.]  Soon  after  taking,  tension  across  the
anterior  wall  of  the  chest,'". — After  breakfast,  tension  across  the  chest,  as
if  the  thorax  could  not  sufficiently  expand,'". — Towards  noon,  slight  shoot-
ing pains  and  tension  in  the  chest,'". — Tension  and  pressure  over  the  whole
breast,  for  a  short  time  after  breakfast,'". —  Tension  in  the  lower  part  of  the
chest,  during-  motion  and  when  sitting ;  this  tension  takes  away  his  breathy. —
Difficulty  in  breathing,  as  if  his  chest  were  too  full;  he  is  constrained  to  breathe
deeper,^*  '^. —  Total  constriction  of  the  chest  consequent  upon  oppression;  she  is
obliged  to  take  frequent  and  deep  inspirations ;  this  makes  walking  difficult  for
her,''. — More  or  less  severe  constriction  of  the  chest,  with  deep  inspiration  at
times,  and  visible  beating  of  the  heart,  and  a  kind  of  oppression,  especially
behind  the  two  borders  of  the  sternum,  along  its  whole  length,^''. — Feeling  of
pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  as  if  the  contents  of  the  thorax  were  compressed ;  the
pain  is  most  violent  after  dinner,^.— Continued  pressure  on  upper  part  of
chest,  like  an  oppression,  with  repeated  deep  inspirations  on  walking  and
sitting,  with  painful  pressure  behind  the  sternum  and  at  both  sides  of
it;  comes  and  goes,  with  sensation  of  a  load  on  the  chest,'^ — [1540.]  Pres-
sure on  the  chest,'". — Pressure  on  the  chest,  after  breakfast,'*. — Slight  pres-
sure on  the  chest,'". — Pressure  and  pain  in  the  chest,'^ — Pressure  in  the
chest,  and  difficulty  in  breathing,'^. — Pressure  and  drawing  pain  in  the
chest,'". — Pressure  and  burning  in  the  centre  of  the  chest,". — Pressure  and
stitching,  with  sense  of  fulness  on  centre  of  chest,". — Afternoons,  frequent
pressure  in  the  chest;  sometimes  in  one  place,  sometimes  in  another,'". —
Oppression  at  the  chest,'. — ^[1550.]  Violent  oppression  at  the  chest,''. — Sense
of  oppression  in  chest  compels  deep  breathing,'^. — She  feels  so  oppressed  at
the  chest,  that  she  is  unable  to  take  a  slow  and  deep  inspiration,  and  has
to  give  it  up  again  as  soon  as  she  tries,'. —  Oppression  of  the  chest  in  the  re-
gion of  the  diaphragm,  attended  with  drawing  pain  (after  one-half  hour),". —
Oppression  at  the  chest,  attended  with  great  throbbing  of  the  arteries  (one
or  two  days),". — *Sense  of  oppression  at  the  cardiac  region,  as  if  the  cavity  of
the  thorax  were  narrowed,^. — Oppression  of  the  chest  and  frequent  sighing,".
— Oppression  of  the  chest  for  a  short  time,'". — Shortly  after  taking,  op-
pression pf  the  chest,  and  light  coughing  up  of  mucus,". — An  hour  after
taking,  oppression,  heaviness,  and  pressure  of  the  chest,"'". — [1560.]  Fore-
noons, when  sitting,  slight  oppression  and  stitches  in  the  chest,'". — Oppres-
sion of  the  chest,  at  5  a.m.,  that  was  seldom  relieved  during  the  day,". —
Chest  oppressed  and  eatarrhally  affected,  which  induces  cough  and  expec-
toration, hawking, and  deep  breathing;  deep  respiration  is  painful  in  some
parts  of  the  chest  and  body,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  as  if  something
dislocated  itself,'^  ^'. — He  is  attacked  by  oppression  frequently  during  the
day ;  then  shortness  of  breath,  which  repeatedly  compels  him  to  take  a
deep  breath,". — Oppressive  anxiety  in  the  chest,'. — Anxious  sensation  in
the  chest,  with  accelerated  and  audible  breathing,'^ ". — Anxious,  restless
feeling  in  the  chest,  from  time  to  time,  as  when  expecting  something  un-
usual,'" ^^. — When  rising  from  a  sitting  posture,  anxiety  in  the  chest  increases


100  AGARICUS.

and  breathing  is  accelerated,'^  ^^ — Anxious  baste  and  anxiety  in  the  chest,
as  if  expecting  something  unusual ;  breathing  accelerated,  and  inclination
to  sighing  respirations,'*  ^'. — Heaviness  on  the  chest,'". — [1570.]  Sometimes
momentary  stitches  through  the  chest,  from  behind,  without  disturbing  res-
piration,'". — Fine  stitching  and  pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  like
a  burning  pain,  without  cough,''^ — On  sitting,  evenings,  sudden  stitches
deep  in  chest,  in  region  of  the  borders  of  the  dorsal  veftebrse,'^ — Stitches
in  one  or  other  lung,  especially  on  bending  forward  or  backward  (for  two
or  three  days),'l — Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  lungs,  passing  off  soon,'. —
Painful  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,". — Stitches  in  the  chest,  below
the  nipples  (after  fourteen  and  thirty  hours),\ — When  walking,  in  the  fore-
noon, punctiform  stitches  from  within  outwards,  in  the  lower  half  of  the
chest,™. — Sometimes  very  sensitive,  piercing,  tearing  pains,  in  small,  limited
spots  in  the  thorax,  in  front  and  behind ;  for  instance,  in  the  left  side,  in
the  region  of  the  upper  false  ribs,  below  the  right  shoulder-blade,  etc. ;  res-
piratory motions  have  no  influence  upon  them,'*"'. — Pain,  repeatedly,  in
the  chest  and  back,  especially  under  both  shoulder-blades,  and  the  corres-
ponding parts  of  the  chest  in  front;  it  is  of  a  shooting,  pressive  kind,  very
painful,  inducing  deep  breathing,  as  if  for  relief,'* "'. — [1580.]  Sensation  of
soreness  in  the  chest,™. — Bruised  pain  in  the  entire  front  wall  of  the  chest,
with  difficulty  of  breathing,™. — Pulsative  soreness,  at  various  inconsider-
able places  of  the  chest,  especially  at  the  right  half  of  the  chest;  at  night,
and  also  during  the  day  (after  a  fortnight),'. — Sensation  of  rawness  in  the
chest,  with  indications  of  cough|  in  the  morning,'". — On  deep  breathing,
sense  of  motion,  almost  sticking,  in  muscles  of  chest  and  neck,'l — Pain,
as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  chest ;  it  increases,  especially  upon  taking  a  deep
inspiration ;  in  the  evening  (ninth  day),'. — Itching  upon  the  chest,  which
terminates  in  burning,'. — Burning  itching  upon  the  chest  and  in  the
back,'. — Violent  itching  of  the  nipples,'. — Copious  sweat  upon  the  chest,
at  night,'. — [1590.]  Mattery  pustules  in  the  breast,  with  a  red  areola  of
the  size  of  a  millet-seed  ;  they  cause  itching  and  burning,". — -Twitching  in
the  right  pectoral  muscle,". — Pain  in  the  chest,  right  side," "'. — Burning,
drawing  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  from  without  inward,  and
peculiar  kind  of  oppression,  lasting  for  iive  minutes,**. —  In  consequence
of  a  leap,  during  a  journey  on  foot,  burning,  piercing,  sprained  sensation
under  the  right  nipple,  which  makes  respiration  impossible  for  a  few  sec-
onds,'*.— After  rising,  severe  pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,™.
— When  walking,  painful,  excessive  pressure  on  the  right  breast  near  the
nipple,  with  a  sensation  as  if  deep  breath  could  remove  the  cause;  later,
the  anxious  feeling  of  oppression  of  the  chest  again,  which,  in  reaility,  did
not  exist,'* "'. — Late  in  the  evening,  there  appeared  a  pressive  pain-in  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  near  the  nipple,  that  could  not  be  removed  by  deep
breathing,  which  it  occasioned,'* '". — Frequent  pricking,  as  of  striking  splin-
ters, first  in  the  right  pectoral  muscles,  then  in  the  right  true  and  false  ribs,'l
— Splinters  (stitches)  in  the  right  rib-muscles,  below  the  nipple,". — [1600.]
Tearing,  intermittent  pain  in  the  right  front  wall  of  the  chest,'*  ^\ — Stitches
in  right  lung,'l — Stitches  in  the  right  lung,  on  walking,'^ — Momentary
stitches  in  various  places  in  right  lung,'^ — Jerking  stitches  through  right
luiig,'l — Violent  stitches  in  right  lung,  whereby  the  breath  must, be  held;
I'elieved  by  pressing  the  hand  on  the  chest,  while  sitting  (three  to  five
hours,  also  eleven  hours),'^ — Stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  right  lung,  worse
on  every  respiration,'^— -Stitches  in  the  right  pectoral  muscles,''^. — Frequent
pricking  of  splinters  near  the  lower  right  rib,'^ — Sore  pain  on  the  anterior


AGAEICUS.  101

surface  of  the  chest,  especially  in  the  right,  near  the  sternum,  seemingly
under  the  ribs,'". — [1610.]  Twitching  in  the  left  intercostals,'^ — Burning
pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest  (third  day),'. — Pinching  pain  in  the  left
mamma,  descending  obliquely  as  far  as  the  navel,*. — Sticking  in  the  left
axilla,  and  in  the  left  ribs,"  ^°. — Sticking  extends  from  left  nipple  outwards,
seems  to  be  more  in  the  muscles,^^ — Stitches  in  left  side  of  chest,  between
nipple  and  sternum,  increased  by  every  respiration,^^ — Stitches  in  left  lung,^^
— Fine  stitches  in  left  lung,'^ — Stitches  in  left  lung,  between  fifth  and  sixth
ribs;  worse  on  breathing.''^ — Fine  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  where
the  ribs  terminate ;  the  stitch  is  felt  when  sitting  and  stooping  with  the
chest,^ — [1620.]  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  where  the  ribs  ter-
minate; during  an  inspiration,^ — Pain  in  upper  part  of  left  breast,  in  in-
tercostal muscles,'^. — Frequent  violent  stitches,  as  of  penetrating  splinters,
in  the  dorsal  vertebrse  and  in  the  left  pectoral  muscle,  near  the  nipple,'*. —
Stitches  in  left  pectoral  muscles,  with  drawing  in  right  foot ;  boring  in
forehead.'l — Pressure  and  drawing  in  left  intercostal  muscles  and  muscles
of  left  thigh,  with  bruised  sensation  of  left  elbow,^^ — A  pain,  resembling
tearing,  in  the  region  of  the  left  lower  wall  of  the  chest,'" "'. — In  a  small,
the  shoulder-blade,  a  transient  sensation  of  icy  coldness,'*. — Isolated  attacks
of  pain  under  the  sternum,"". — Pains  along  the  sternum  and  in  pit  of
stQraach,  t. — Burning  under  the  sternum,^". — [1630.]  Excessive  burning
under  the  sternum,™. — Peculiar  sensation  of  contraction  of  the  sternum,'".
— Sensitive  pressure  in  a  little  spot  to  the  left  lower  third  of  the  sternum, '°  ^'.
— Sticking  behind  sternum,  not  increased  by  inspiration,  but  worse  at  end
of  expiration,'^ — Fine  stitches  behind  steruum,^\ — Stitches  behind  sternum
impede  respiration,'". — Pressure  under  the  upper  half  of  the  sternum,'".^
Pressive  pain  behind  sternum,'". — Oppression  behind  sternum,  in  rest,  with
some  violent  palpitation,'". — Pressive,  burning  pain  below  the  sternum,
after  breakfast,'". — [1640.]  Painful  pressure  at  the  middle  portion  of  the
sternum,  aggravated  by  inspiring  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),^ — Draw-
ing pressure  behind  the  right  margin  of  the  sternum,'". — Sore  pain  under
the  sternum,  after  breakfast,'". — Sensitiveness  below  the  sternum,'".

Heart  and  Pulse. — Beat  of  the  heart  visible  and  strongly  felt,'".
— On  sitting  down,  some  irregular,  strong  beat§  of  the  heart,  with  sense
of  oppression,'". — When  he  awoke,  he  had  trembling  of  the  heart,"'. — Vio-
lent pulsation  of  the  heart,  internally  perceptible,'". — Violent  pulsation
of  the  heart,  perceptible  even  in  the  coccyx,'^. — Increased  pulsation  of
the  heart,  with  redness  of  the  face,'^. — [1650.]  Weak  palpitation  of  the
heart,"'. — Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,"^. — Palpitation  of  the  heart
for  several  minutes,"'. — Very  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,"'. — Palpi-
tation of  the  heart  on  waking  in  the  morning,". — From  3  to  5  p.m.  unin-
terrupted palpitation  of  the  heart,"'. — Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  in
the  evening,"'. — Palpitation  of  the  heart  in  the  evening,  without  conscious-
ness,'".— Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  before  going  to  bed,"'. — Violent
palpitation  of  the  heart  for  five  minutes,"'. — [1660.]  Palpitation  of  the
heart  came  on  so  violently  that  he  was  obliged  to  lie  down  on  the  lounge,"".
— In  the  evening,  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  anxiousness,  that
terminated  in  a  restless  drowsiness,'". — When  standing,  painful  palpitation
of  the  heart,". — When  vexed,  he  had  palpitation  of  the  heart,"*. — Burning
pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  palpitation,". — At  noon,  burning  and
pressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  that  appeared  several  times  and
soon  passed  away,"'.: — Burning,  shooting  pains  from  the  region  of  the  heart.


102  AGARICUS.

extending  to  the  left  shoulder-blade,  caused  by  deep  inspiration,  and  much
aggravated  by  coughing,  sneezing,  and  hicoough,'l — Disagreeable  feeling
in  the  heart,  as  if  it  were  corapressed,'l — When  he  laid  down  at  night,  he
felt  several  blows  in  the  heart,  with  trembling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
and  anxiety,  caused  by  every  slight  noise.  The  same  on  waking  in  the
morning,  when  stitches  in  the  regiou  of  the  navel,  and  frequent  sneezing  and
yawning  set  iu,  besides,'^ — Pressure  near  the  heart,'l — [1670.]  From  4  p.m.
till  evening,  constant  pressure  near  the  heart,^. — Anxious  sense  of  oppres-
sion in  heart,  with  irregular,  violent  action  of  heart,^*. — Anxious  sense  in
heart,  and  some  violent,  irregular  beating,  which  makes  it  worse  in  sitting
(repeated),''^ — Anxiety  in  the  heart,'"  ^\ — Oppression  at  the  heart,  on  bend-
ing the  body  down,  with  violent  beating  of  the  heart,'^ — Violent  stitches
in  the  region  of  the  heart,  without  intermittejjt  pulse,'^ — Painful  stitches
in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  accelerated  pulse,'°. — Breathing  obstructed
by  momentary  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  irregular,  often  in-
termitting, pulse,'". — Several  twitching  shocks  of  the  heart,''. — At  night,
transient,  painful  shocks  in  the  heart,  with  anxiety ,'^ — [1680.]  Accelerated
pulse,'\ — Pulse  full,  very  rapid,  t. — Rapid  pulse,  intermitting  every  thir-
tieth or  fortieth  stroke,'". — Small,  quick  pulse,  eighty  beats,  early  in  the
morning,". — Pulse  weak,". — Pulse  weak  and  slow,". — Pulse  so  feeble  as  to
be  hardly  perceptible,*^. —  The  pulse  becomes  slower  (after  two  hours),'. — Small,
irregular  pulse  *\ — The  pulse,  which  is  generally  strong  and  full,  becomes
small,  weak,  and  scarcely  perceptible,'. — [1690.]  Small,  depressed  pulse,^^.
— Pulse  contracted,  84  to  88,  t. — Undulatory,  slow,  weak  pulse,'. — Inter-
mittent pulse,'^. —  Weak,  unequal,  intermittent  puke,''. — Early  in  the  morning
the  pulse  is  less  intermittent,'. — After  drinking  coffee,  the  pulse  became
less  intermittent,  and  rose  from  50  to  60  beats,'. — Pulse  sometimes  double,
with  a  short  interval,*^ — Pulse  57,  soft,  small  (a  quarter  of  an  hour)  ;  57  to
60  (one  hour)  ;  58  (two  hours) ;  70  (two  and  a  half  hours)  ;  90,  full  and
hard  (six  hours),"''. — Pulse  fell  to  60 ;  then  to  54  (in  fifteen  minutes)  ;  pulse
60  (in  three-quarters  of  an  hour) ;  70  (in  one  hour) ;  65  (in  one  and  a
quarter  hours) ;  60  (in  two  hours) ;  57  (in  one  and  three-quarter  hours) ;
60  (in  one  and  a  quarter  hours) ;  58  (in  two  and  a  quarter  hours)  ;  65  (iu
one  and  three-quarter  hours)  ;  60  (in  three  hours),^''. — [1700.]  Pulse  60  (a
quaijter  of  an  hour)  ;  65,  irregular  (twenty  minutes) ;  60  (forty-five  minutes) ;
60  (one  hour);  60  (one  and  a  half  hours);  65  (two  and  a  quarter  hours),''''.
Neck  and  Hack. — *Stiffuess  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  (after  two
hours),'. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck ;  or  pain,  as
from  having  bent  the  body  backward  in  lying  down  (after  thirty-two
hours),'. — Tension  in  the  neck,". — Marked  sprained  sensation  of  the  neck
on  turning  backward  toward  the  left ;  it  was  so  violent  that  the  head  re-
mained fixed  for  a  few  moments,  unable  to  return  to  its  proper  position.
This  pain  was  already  noticed  on  previous  days,  but  to-day  it  reached  such
a  degree  that  it  became  very  troublesome,  although  not  always  produced
by  the  above-mentioned  motion,'*  '■". — Back  of  the  neck  somewhat  hot,  stiff,'
aud  painful,  especially  when  moving  the  head  to  one  side  or  the  other,  par-
ticularly the  right  side,'". — Mornings,  in  bed,  constant  chirping  in  the  oc-
cipital region  of  the  neck,  as  if  a  cricket  were  in  the  cervical  canal ;  at  the
same  time,  for  several  days,'^ — ^A  pressive,  tensive  pain  in  the  occipital
region  of  the  neck,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  atlas,". — The  muscles  of  the
posterior  cervical  region  feel  bruised,  and,  upon  bending  the  body  forwards,
they  feel,  as  it  were,  too  short ;  this  symptom  occurs  early,  when  in  bed,
and  also  afterwards,  when  the  person  is  sitting,". — Pricking  in  the  cervical


AGARICUS.  103

vertebrae,  when  stooping,'*. — [1710.]  Suddenly,  a  violent  pressure  between
the  neck  and  the  shoulders. — Tensive  feeling  of  the  sterno-cleido-mastoid
muscle,  on  both  sides,  causing  a  feeling  of  stiffness  in  the  back  of  the  neck,".
— Stitches  in  the  skin  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,"*. — Twitching  of  the
muscles  from  the  left  side  of  the  neck  to  the  left  side  of  the  throat,'*. —
Burning  sensation  in  the  left  neck  and  shoulder  region,'*. — *Peculiar  sen-
sation of  weakness  and  stiffness  between  the  shoulders ;  extends  into  the  neck,^'^.
— Drawing  sensation  between  the  shoulders,'". — Frequent  tearing  between
the  shoulders  (fourth  day),*. — Painful  stitches  between  the  shoulders  (sec-
ond day),'. — The  pain  in  the  back,  under  the  shoulder-blades,  resembling
a  single  stitch,  began  to  be  very  disagreeable  again,'" '". — [1720,]  A  tran-
sient but  violent  pain  on  the  right  surface  of  the  back,  below  the  shoulder-
blade,  as  of  coarse  splinters  penetrating,'*. — Sudden,  violent  pricking,  as  of
splinters,  in  the  left  side  of  the  back,  below  the  shoulder-blade,'*. — Constant
disagreeable  sensation  over  the  whole  back,  especially  in  the  spinal  column,™.
— *Paininthe  back,  as  after  continual  stooping, ^'^. — Pain,  as  from  bruises  and
sprains,  in  the  whole  of  the  back,  attended  with  a  disposition  to  stretch  the
back  (third  and  fourth  days),".— After  dinner,  slight  backache  and  tension
across  both  sides  of  the  chest,  from  behind  forwards,™. — Backache  in  the
evening,"". — Very  violent  pains,  at  night,  along  the  back,  as  well  as  across  the
chest,  the  loins,  and  the  right  thigh,™. — Backache,  very  violent  at  the  least
motion  of  the  body,^'. — Pain  in  the  back  and  small  of  the  back,  after  gar-
den-work,''. — [1730.]  The  muscles  of  the  back  feel  bruised,^^. — *  The  muscles
of  the  back  feel  bruised,  and  upon  bending  fonvard  seem  too  short;  this  symp-
tom occurs  early  in  the  morning,  after  a  good  night's  rest,  in  the  bed,  as
well  as  afterwards,  when  the  person  is  sitting ;  two  days  in  succession,". —
The  muscles  of  the  back  feel  weak  ;  he  finds  it  difficult  to  sit  straight  with-
out leaning  against  something,". — Upon  rising  from  his  seat  and  righting
his  body,  his  back  feels  stiff;  there  is  a  violent  pain  in  the  left  loin,  which
prevents  the  body  being  righted  ;  when  sitting  he  feels  nothing,  and  is  able
to  turn  his  body  to  all  sides,'. — ^Spasmodic  pressive  and  drawing  pain,  ivhich
starts  from  the  back,  and  extends  to  the  middle  of  the  chest  and  into  the  oesoph-
agus, in  the  afternoon  ;  lasts  several  hours  (from  fifth  to  seventh  day),". —
Slight  shivering  down  the  back,™. — On  the  right  surface  of  the  back,  a  tran-
sient pain,  as  if  coarse  splinters  were  being  forced  between  the  skin  and  the
flesh,'*. — Painful  spasmodic  jerks  in  the  left  side  of  the  back,". — Burning
itching  of  the  back,'. — Itching,  with  titillation  of  the  back,'. — [1740.]  Ex-
cessive itching  on  the  back,  where  several  small,  scarcely  raised  reddish
points  appear,™. — Two  inflamed  pimples  on  the  back,  which,  by  light  pres-
sure, discharge  considerable  bloody  matter,™. — Pain  along  the  spinal  col-
umn was  so  violent  that  he  often  did  not  know  what  position  to  take-in  bed
to  lie  comfortably,™. — *Peculiar  painfnlness  along  the  spinal  cord  when
stooping,™. — *Violent  shooting,  burning  pains  deep  in  the  spine,'".—
*Aching  along  the  spine  and  limbs  (from  second  day),*". — *Pain  in  the  sa-
crum, a  sort  of  crick  in  the  back  (flexenschus),  extends  along  the  whole  spinal  col-
umn to  the  nape  of  the  neck,^^. — Dragging,  crackling,  and  creaking  along  the
spinal  cohiraD,  during  increased  motion  of  the  body,  especially  at  or  near
the  atlas-joint,  on  more  rapid  motion  of  the  head,'*. — *  When  stooping,  the
spinal  column  experiences  pain,  as  though  it  were  too  weak  to  support  the
weight  of  the  body,^. — Constant  prickling  along  the  spinal  column  and  occi-
put,'".— [1750.]  *  Sensation  as  if  ants  were  creeping  along  the  spine,^". — Slight
shiverings  along  the  spinal  column  and  the  upper  extremities,'".— On  feel-
ing, pain  was  felt  in  several  places  along  the  spine,^*. — *Spinal  column  sen-


104  AGARICUS.

sitive  to  the  toucli,"'. — *Every  increased  motion  causes  violent  pain  in  several
places  of  the  spinal  column,''^. — *  Increased  painfidii  ess  of  the  spinal  column  at
every  turning  motion  of  the  body^'. — *  Violent  pain  in  the  spinal  column  at
turning  motions  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  last  dorsal  and  first
and  second  lumbar  vertebra,  which  become  throbbing  after  increased  motion,^'.
— Painful  throbbing  in  the  spinal  canal,''. — *  Mornings,  the  spinal  column  is
so  sensitive  that  even  leaning  back  against  the  chair  causes  pain;'". — ^Peculiar
sensitivenes»of  the  spinal  column  ivhen  washing  with  a  sponge  (which  suggests
the  idea  of  spinal  irritation),'". — [1760.]  Signs  of  spinal  irritation  become
more  distinctly  conspicuous  ;  *a  drawing,  tensive  pain  along  the  whole  spinal
column,  and  occasional  flying  pains  along  the  course  of  the  spinal  cordj'°. —
Biting,  burning  sensation  in  a  spot  as  large  as  a  five-cent  piece  in  the  spinal
column,'". — ''After  dinner,  pain  in  the  spine,  especially  a  spot  the  size  of  the
palm,  in  the  middle  of  the  spinal  column;  is  very  sensitive  to  the  touch,  as  well
as  at  every  motion  of  the  body,^". — Sensation  in  the  back  as  if  cold  air  were
spreading  over  the  whole  body  from  the  spine  (aura  epileptica  ?),'". — Shoot-
ing pains  in  the  vertebrae,'". — Warmth  and  sensation  of  roughness  ia  the
dorsal  region,*^ — Pains  in  dorsal  muscles  on  sitting,'^ — Pressive,  boring
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  back  (second  day),'. — Waked  at  night  by  a  vio-
lent stitch  in  a  dorsal  vertebra,'". — Pain  between  the  eighth  and  ninth  dor-
sal vertebrae ;  it  was  drawing,  and  extended  periodically  up  to  the  hyoid
bone. — [1770.]  The  region  between  the  eighth  and  ninth  dorsal  vertebrae
is  painful  during  a  turning  movement  of  the  trunk,'^ — Since  yesterday  a
pain  appeared  between  the  eighth  and  ninth  dorsal  vertebrae  on  touching;
to-day,  in  the  same  place,  a  painless,  pushing  downward  pulsation,  synchro-
nous with  the  pulse,  as  if  the  aorta  coursed  in  the  spinal  canal ;  this  sensa-
tion, lasting  over  an  hour,  was  lessened  by  external  pressure,'*. — A  pain,
very  sensitive  to  touch,  in  the  twelfth  dorsal  and  first  and  second  lumbar
vertebrae,  with  a  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  gluteal  muscles  and  formication
in  the  feet,'^ — Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  upon  rising  from  his
seat ;  the  pain  prevents  the  body  from  being  righted  and  the  thighs  from
being  moved,'. — Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  when  sitting  or  lying
down  ;  the  pain  is  relieved  by  motion  (first  to  third  day),'. — Violently
shooting  pains  in  the  small  of  the  back,  upon  raising  the  thigh  when  sit-
ting,'.— Between  the  dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae  a  sticking  pain,  as  of
splinters,  followed  in  the  same  place  by  the  well-known  feeling  of  cold,  as
if  the  spinal  marrow  here  were  being  touched  by  an  icy-cold  object ;  a  few
minutes  later,  the  same  sticking  feeling  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,'". — Bruised
pain  in  small  of  back,^l — As  if  the  small  of  the  back  were  bruised,  especi-
ally when  standing,". — Pain,  as  if  from  a  sprain,  in  the  small  of  the  back
on  the-  left  side  (from  sixth  to  eighth  day),". — A  stitch  in  the  right  side
and  near  the  vertebral  column,  in  the  region  of  the  right  kidney  (after
half  an  hour),". — [1780.]  Violently  pressive  pain  in  the  left  kidney  region
at  night;  the  pain  disturbs  the  sleep  (twelfth  day),'. — Frequeut  jumping
of  the  muscles  in  the  lumbar  region,'". — Small  jerks  in  lumbar  muscles,'''.
— Frequent  twitchings  of  the  muscles  and  tendons  extending  from  an
upper  lumbar  vertebra,  with  a  violent  convulsive  shuddering  in  the  lower
part  of  the  body,'". — Crackling  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae  on  stooping,'- '''. —
Tension  along  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  making  stooping  forward  difficult,'". —
Painful  pressive  tension  in  the  tendons  and  ligaments  of  the  right  lumbar
region,  extending  to  the  great  trochanter ;  this  pain  has  the  peculiarity
that  it  only  appears  on  the  right  side,  and  always  disappears  when  lying
on  the  left,'". — Mornings,  after  awaking,  while  still  in  bed,  and  lying  ou


AGARICUS.  105

the  left  side,  a  pressive,  tensive  pain  appears  in  the  lumbar  vertebras ;  from
there,  it  moved  into  the  region  of  the  left  hip,  and  instantly  vanished  when
lying  on  the  right  side,'^ — Frequent  stitching,  as  of  splinters,  in  the  dorsal
and  lumbar  vertebrae. — Tearing  pain,  now  extending  to  the  right,  now  to
the  left  side  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  when  walking,'. — [1790.]  Pain,  as  from
bruises,  in  the  lumbar  region,  especially  when  lying  down  and  sitting,". —
Violent  electric-like  shock  of  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  emanating  from
a  lumbar  vertebra,'". — Shivering,  terrible  shock  of  the  whole  body,  ema-
nating from  one  of  the  lower  vertebrse,'*. — A  sensation  in  the  spinal  canal
of  the  lumbar  region  as  if  the  spinal  marrow  or  its  membranes  were  being
touched  by  a  piece  of  ice,'". — Tearing  in  lumbar  muscles  on  walking  or  sit-
ting,'l — Short  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  lumbar  region,  in  the
evening  (ninth  day),^ — Stitches  in  the  right  loin,'". — Frequently  during
the  day,  stitches  in  the  right  lumbar  region,'^  '^^. — Paralytic  pain,  as  from
weakness,  in  the  back  part  of  the  loins ;  the  pain  is  aggravated  by  walking
aud  standing  (after  twelve  hours),". — Feeling  of  paralysis  near  the  lumbar
vertebrse,  close  above  the  border  of  the  os  ilium ;  this  makes  it  difficult  for
him,  after  he  has  risen  from  his  seat,  to  step  forward,'. — [1800.]  Continued
twitching  motions  in  the  sacrum  and  lower  extremities,'". — -Pain  in  the  sa-
crum,'".— Pain  in  the  sacrum  every  time  after  taking,'". — Continued  pain
in  the  sacrum,''". — Pains  in  the  sacrum  and  spine  are  so  violent  that  the
prpver  cannot  leave  his  bed. — He  had  hardly  exerted  himself  somewhat
during  stool,  when  a  violent  pain  appeared  in  the  sacrum,  that  soon  ex-
tended to  the  lower  limbs,'^^ — Evenings,  the  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  sa-
crum increases  considerably,  and  becomes  so  irksome  that  walking  is  very
unpleasant,'"  ^'. — Pains  in  the  back  and  sacrum  continue  so  violent  all  day
that  he  is  obliged  to  remain  in  bed,  aud  take  the  easiest  position,'". — A
fortnight  after  the  close  of  the  proving,  he  constantly  suffered  from  pain  in
the  back  and  sacrum,™. — Indications  of  pain  in  the  hips  and  sacrum,  on  the
left  side  ;  the  latter  resembling  what  is  known  as  crick  in  the  back,^^  ^'. —
[1810.]  Pains  in  the  sacrum,  as  of  hEemorrhoids,™.— Fulness  and  pressive
heaviness  in  the  sacrum,'". — Pressure  in  the  sacrum,'^  ^". — Directly  after  the
medicine,  pressure  in  the  sacrum  for  a  few  seconds,'^. — Pressure  iu  the  sa-
crum, as  if  a  weight  lay  upon  it,'^ — Pressure  in  the  sacrum,  \vith  particular
exhaustion  when  walking,^*. — Pressive  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  though  it
would  burst,'". — Pressive  pain  in  the  sacrum,  when  leaning  back  in  his
chair,'\ — Pressive  pain  in  the  sacrum,  with  weakness  in  the  feet  when
Avalking  out  of  doors,^". — Pain  in  the  sacrum  when-  sitting,  pressure  as  if
bruised,'^-'. — -[1830.]  Weakness  in  the  sacrum,  with  pressive,  tensive  pain
there,'". — Excessive  drawing  in  the  sacrum  and  loins,^". — Towards  evening,
drawing  in  the  back  and  sacrum,^". — Stitches  in  the  sacrum,'^ '^". — *  While
v)alkmg  in,  the  open  air,  at  noon,  so  sudden  and  violent  a  stitch  in  the  sacrum
that  he  wis  incapable  of  taking  another  step,^^. — A  violent  stitch,  darting
from  the  spinal  marrow  of  the  sacral  region  towards  the  right  gluteal  mus-
cles,'".— Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum,'^ — Pains  in  the  sacrum  and  hips,  in-
creasing and  decreasing,  are  felt,  as  with  a  tearing  sensation  resembling
growing-pain,'" '". — A  sensation  of  icy  coldness,  close  to  the  coccyx,  appears
repeatedly,".— Corrosive  itching  of  the  left  side  of  the  os  coccygis,^.

Extremities  in  General. — [1830.]  Trembling  of  all  the  limbs
(primary  effect),^". — Trembling  of  the  limbs^''  ". — ^Frequent  jumping  of  the
muscles  of  the  extremities,  with  jerking  up  of  first  one  thumb  and  then  the
other,  and  of  separate  fingers,".— Restlessness  and  a  quivering  trembling
of  the  left  upper  arm  and  thigh-muscles,  with  light,  jerking  shocks  of  those


106  AGARICUS.

limbs,  and  frequent  jumping  of  the  muscles  in  different  positions  of  the
body,'". — When  lying  on  the  lounge,  frequent  twitching  of  the  muscles,
sometimes  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  knee,  sometimes  in  the  left  upper
arm,  sometimes  on  the  back,  on  the  right  shoulder-blade,'*. — Shocks  in
various  limbs,  and  frequent  jumping  of  the  muscles,"'. — Sensation  of  weai?-
ness  in  the  left  arm  and  left  foot ;  restlessness  in  them  that  compels  motion,''®.
— Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  with  slight  spasms  of  the  arms,*l — Weak-
ness in  limbs,  t. — Very  weak  in  all  the  limbs,^^ — [1840.]  Prostration  of
all  the  limbs,  especially  of  the  lower  extremities,''^ — Weakness  and  sensi-
tiveness to  pain  in  all  the  limbs,  attended  with  pain  in  the  heels  when
standing,*. — Prostration  in  every  limb,  especially  of  the  left  arm,". — Lassi-
tude and  heaviness  of  all  the  limbs. — Painful  lassitude  in  the  arms  and
legs,'. — Easy  going  to  sleep  of  the  extremities ;  when  writing  only  a  few
words  his  hand  went  to  sleep,  during  a  somewhat  forced  position  of  the
arm,  as  he  wrote  stooping  or  while  standing,'*^'. — *She  felt  as  if  her  limbs
did  not  belong  to  her,  t. — Painful  pressure  here  and  there  in  limbs,'''. — In
the  forenoon,  when  sitting,  a  not  exactly  painful  but  very  disagreeable
drawing  and  teai'ing  in  the  long  bones  of  the  upper  arm  and  lower  extremi-
ties,"".— Drawing  and  pressing  in  various  muscles  in  extremities  (mostly  in
extensors),"''. — [1850.]  Drawing  pain,  now  in  the  right  upper  arm,  now  in  the
left  knee-joint;  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  thigh,'. — Pains  resembling
tearing  in  the  limbs,"" "'. — Tearing  several  times  in  the  left  upper  arm;  the
same  in  the  right  thigh,  above  the  knee,  towards  the  outside,'"  ^'.—Momen-
tary tearing  pains  occasionally  appear  in  the  tendinous  expansions  of  the
extremities,'^ — Single  transient,  tearing  pains  in  the  right  ulna;  also,  in
the  right  tibia,'*. — Tearing  of  different  long  bones,  especially  at  their  ex-
tremities,^ — Fine,  piercing  tearing  pain,  always  appearing  suddenly,  in  the
region  of  the  right  leg,  in  front,  close  above  the  ankle,  and,  at  the  same
time,  at  a  point  in  the  middle  of  the  back  of  the  left  hand,"^  ^'. — Now  and
then  a  shooting,  tearing  pain  when  beginning  to  move,  which  disappears
when  motion  is  continued,'". — An  entirely  unusual  piercing  pain,  never  be-
fore experienced,  in  almost  every  limb  of  the  body,  particularly  severe  in
both  koee-joints  and  in  the  condyles ;  so  that  particularly  the  right  knee-
joint  was  very  painful  when  ascending  the  stairs,™. — Sensation  as  of  electric
shocks  in  different  limbs  and  different  fingers,". — [I860.]  Shock-wise,
jerk-like  appearing  shocks,  sometimes  in  the  left  hip,  sometimes  in  the
right  hand,  originatiug  in  the  legs,'*. — The  long  bones  of  the  upper  and
lower  extremities  and  all  the  joints  feel  bruised  after  motion,  and  the  mus-
cles feel  painful  on  being  touched,'. — Bruised  pain  in  left  elbow  and  ankle,"".
— Pricking  and  crawling  in  the  anterior  border  of  the  right  forefinger,  the
toes  and  the  heel,'*. — Formication  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,'^. —
Pains  in  the  bones  begin  in  the  morning,  continue  all  the  forenoon,  with
slight  interruptions,  are  worse  at  noon,  and  abate  again  in  the  afternoons  and
evenings ;  these  pains  are  particularly  located  in  the  left  tibia,  sometimes
appearing  in  the  condyle  of  the  left  elbow,  resembling  the  descriptions  of
syphilitic  pains  in  the  bones;  they  resemble  them  with  this  distinction,  that
they  are  not  aggravated  by  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  but  rather  lessened,
sometimes  disappearing  entirely,"". — Cold  and  blue  limbs,  t. — Hands  and
feet  cold,  t. — Mornings,  in  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  the  familiar  sensation  of
coldness  in  the  right  axilla,  and  in  the  inner  condyle  of  the  foot,'*. — Twitch-
ings,  especially  of  arms,  so  violent  that  it  seemed  to  her  as  from  electric
shocks ;  she  could  hold  nothing  in  her  hands,  t.

Upper  Extremities.  —  [1870.] Irregular  and  hurried  movements


AGAEICUS.  107

of  the  upper  extremities^''. — Slight  contraction  of  the  upper  extremities,  t. —
Began  to  move  the  arms  here  and  there,  and  shrug  the  shoulders,  t. — Pim-
ples upon  the  arms,  with  a  burning-itching,  of  the  size  of  grains  of  flaxseed,''.
— The  arms  feel  bruised,'. — Painful  weariness  of  the  arms,'.— On  account
of  the  pain  he  is  obliged  to  change  frequently  the  position  of  his  arms,'. —
Want  of  strength  in  the  arms,'. — Itching  of  the  arms,'.— Small  jerks  in
muscles  of  left  shoulder-joint  and  between  scapulse,^^ — [1880.]  Drawing,
rheumatic  pains  in  the  shoulder-joint,  attended  with  weakness  of  the  whole
arm  (fifteenth  day),". — Slight  drawing  and  pressive  pain  in  the  right
shoulder,'"*. — Violent  paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,^^. — Sticking
in  muscles  of  anterior  wall  of  right  axilla,'l — Rhythmical  jumping  of  the
muscles  in  the  left  shoulder-blade  and  left  deltoid  muscle,". — Violent  con-
vulsive shock  in  the  left  shoulder,". — Tearing  pain  in  left  shoulder,™. — Pain
in  left  shoulder-joint,'^ — Sprained  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,*l — A  sore
pain  in  the  lower  angle  of  the  left  shoulder-blade,  as  if  chafed,^^  ^\ — [1890.]
Fine  stinging  in  the  forepart  of  the  head  of  the  humerus  in  the  right  arm,^
— Convulsive  shock  of  the  left  arm,  as  from  an  electric  shock,  that  seemed
to  have  its  origin  in  the  neighboring  joints," — Violent  shock  in  the  left
arm," — From  2  to  6  p.m.  pain  as  of  lameness  in  the  left  arm,'''. — Drawing
pains  in  left  arm,  extending  to  the  middle  finger,^'. — Tension  in  the  biceps,".
— On  rising  in  the  morning,  stiff  pain  in  right  biceps  on  bending  the  fore-
arm back  to  the  body ;  lasts  a  long  time ;  makes  this  movement  difBcult,''^
— The  upper  arms  are  painful  to  the  touch,'. — Bruised  feeling  in  upper
arm,''. — Sensation  as  if  from  the  jumping  of  the  tendons  in  the  upper  arm,'^
— [1900.]  The  upper  arm  feels  paralyzed,  in  consequence  of  much  writing,^
— A  suppurating,  painful  abscess,  of  the  size  of  a  bean,  has  formed  in  the
middle  of  the  right  deltoid  muscle,". — Some  tension  in  the  right  upper  arm,
felt  when  moving,™. — Only  during  certain  motions  a  somewhat  painful
tension  in  the  right  upper  arm,™. — Fine  tearing  in  the  posterior  surface  of
the  right  upper  arm;  often  together  with  it  the  same  sensation  in  the  left
lower  arm;  but  the  tearing  is  most  sensitive  in  the  region  of  the  left
clavicle,"  '\ — Painful  lameness  of  the  right  upper  and  forearm,  and  easy
fatigue  of  the  latter  from  only  a  little  writing,'^ — Twitching  of  the  muscles
in  the  left  upper  arm,  near  the  point  of  the  elbow,". — Cramp-like  pain  in
the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm  below  the  deltoid  muscle,". — Mornings,
after  waking,  a  continuous,  pressive,  tensive  pain  in  the  tendons  of  the  left
upper  arm,  close  to  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  lasting  several  minutes," — Lame
pain  in  left  upper  arm. — [1910.]  Tearing  pain  in  left  upper  arm,'. — In  the
evening  a  tearing  pain  appeared  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  last-
ing for  some  time,  then  ceased  and  was  followed  by  a  sensitive,  sore  pain
at  the  point  of  insertion  of  the  left  deltoid  muscle,  and  which,  after  a  short
time,  alternated  with  fine  tearings  in  the  shoulder-joint,  repeating  itself  and
becoming  more  sensitive,"  '\ — When  accidentally  raising  the  left  arm,  a
violent  sprained  pain  appeared  in  the  substance  of  the  left  deltoid  muscle ;
it  seemed  as  if  there  were  thousands  of  splinters  in  the  arm,  at  every  at-
tempt to  raise  it,". — Pressure  and  bruised  sensation  in  elbows,  especially
in  left,'^ — Painful  jerks,  resembling  electric  shocks,  in  the  right  elbow  and
wrist,"  ''^. — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  tip  of  the  right  elbow,  as  if  it  were
covered  by  a  pieee  of  ice,". — Painless,  violent  pulsation  in  an  artery  the
size  of  a  quill,  close  above  the  olecranon  of  the  right  arm,  in  the  flesh  of
the  muscle,  very  distinct  and  repeated,"  '^. — Constrictive,  pressive  pain  in
left  elbow  and  right  shoulder,'^ — Drawing  pain  in  left  elbow  (ten  hours),'\
— Painful  tearing  in  the  left  elbow-joint,"  ''^. — [1920.]  Transient  stitches,


108  AGAKICUS.

as  of  fine  splinters,  in  the  tip  of  the  left  elbow,^^ — Itching,  with  titillation,
of  the  point  of  the  left  elbow;  this  induces  scratching  (after  three  hours),".
— Pain  in  the  forearms,  which  is  dull,  but  hurts  a  good  deal,'.^ — Sometimes
drawing  in  the  forearms,™. — Twitches  upon  the  upper  surface  of  the  right
forearm,  extending  to  the  bend  of  the  thumb,^ — On  the  edge  of  the  muscles
in  the  middle  of  the  right  forearm  a  sudden,  terrible  pain,  as  of  thousands
of  splinters,^^ — Tearing  in  the  right  forearm,'. — Inner  trembling  in  right
forearm,  extending  to  the  bend  of  the  thumb.l — Burning-itching  upon  the
right  forearm,  which  makes  it  necessary  to  scratch  the  parts;  the  scratch-
ing is  succeeded  by  white  eruptions  of  the  size  of  a  grain  of  flaxseed ;  at  the
same  time  the  skin  scales  off,  the  scales  having  the  shape  of  bran,'. — Burn-
ing pain  upon  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  lower  arm,  just  above  the
wrist-joint,  as  if  he  had  burnt  himself,^ — [1930.]  Sudden  pressing-like
pain  courses  through  the  left  forearm  to  the  root  of  the  fingers  (immedi-
ately);".— *  Drawing  pain  from  left  upper  to  forearm,^. — *Painful  drawing
in  muscles  of  left  forearm  and  down  over  the  elbow,^''. — Sensitive  drawing,
tearing  pain  in  the  radial  side  of  the  left  lower  arm,  and,  at  the  same  time,
above  the  elbow-joint  in  the  olecranon,'" ". — Forenoons,  frequent  tearing  in
the  left  forearm  bones,'". — Afternoons,  an  hour  after  dinner,  very  painful,
fine  tearing  in  the  left  lower  arm,  ceasing  and  returning,  as  if  between  the
two  forearm  bones,  extending  toward  the  hand,  with  a  fixed  pain  at  the
back  of  the  wrist,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  numbness  in  the  skin  of
the  lower  arm,  especially  of  the  back  of  the  hand,  but  which  only  seemed
so,  for  the  sensation  was  normal  to  the  touch.  The  fine  tearing  pain  re-
turns all  the  afternoon,  at  intervals  that  are  entirely  free  from  pain,  especi-
ally in  the  radial  surface  of  the  left  lower  arm,'"'. — ^Sensitive  tearing  pain
in  the  left  lower  arm,  of  the  radial  side,  and  outwardly,  and  in  the  region
of  the  left  hip,'° ". — Tearing  in  the  left  forearm,  and  in  the  olecranon
during  rest,'. — Acute,  rheumatic  pains  in  the  whole  of  the  left  forearm,  ex-
tending as  far  as  the  thumb  ;  this  symptom  occurs  in  the  afternoon,  during
rest,'. — Fine  tearing  in  the  radial  side  of  the  left  forearm,  extending  over
its  upper  half,'^  ''\ — [1940.]  Fine  tearing  in  the  ulnar  side  of  the  left  fore-
arm,'°^'. — Itching,  with  titillation,  of  the  right  carpus;  the-person  is  obliged
to  scratch  the  parts  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),''.— Tearing  in  the  carpus
of  the  left  hand,'. — Lame,  transient,  violent,  sprained  pain  in  the  tendons
of  the  dorsum  of  the  left  wrist,  as  after  a  mechanical  injury,'^  ^'. — The
hands  are  rubbed  together,  as  if  rolling  something  soft  into  a  ball  between
them,'\ — *Tremor  of  the  hands,'. — Tremor  of  the  hands,  as  in  old  people;
this  symptom  occurs  when  he  moves  the  hands  or  holds  something  with
them  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),". — *Burning  and  itching  on  both  hands,
as  though  they  had  been  frozen,  and  were  affected  by  winter's  cold  (on  a
cool  summer's  day);  '*the  parts  were  hot  and  swollen,  and  looked  very  red;
this  condition  lasted  uninterruptedly  for  four  months,  during  which  the
hands  would  become  so  swollen,  after  rubbing,  on  account  of  incessant
itching  and  burning  on  a  cool  spring  day,  that  the  knuckles  could  not
be  seen  for  many  hours,^'. — *Itching,  redness,  and  burning  of  the  hands,
as  occurs  when  the  parts  are  frozen,^. — -Extremely  violent  itching  in  both
hands,''^ — [1950.]  Cold  hands,"'. —  Unsteadiness  of  the  right  hand  when
writing,'"'^'. — On  waking  in  the  morning  sensation  of  pain  in  the  right
hand  and  bones  of  forearm,™. — Sore  pain  in  the  external  half  of  the
back  of  the  right  hand;  sensation  of  a  slight  burn  there,  increased  by
touching  it,'^'. — Stitches,  as  of  splinters,  in  the  back  of  the  right  hand,  near
the  wrist,  with  frequent  twitching  of  various  muscles,'^. — On  the  back  of


AGARICUS.  109

the  right  hand,  towards  the  wrist,  burning,  sore  sensation  for  several  houra,
though  nothing  is  to  be  seen  on  the  spot.  Afterwards  the  same  sensation
in  the  left  hand,^°. — Sensation  of  burning  and  soreness  in  the  skin  of  the
right  hand,  from  the  wrist  to  the  thumb  and  forefinger.  There  is  nothing
to  be  seen  on  the  skin,  but  the  spot  is  so  sensitive  that  passing  the  fingers
over  it  causes  pain,'". — Inflamed  pimples,  of  the  size  of  a  grain  of  flaxseed,
upon  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand,'. — Drawing  pains  in  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  left  hand,'. — Dull  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left  middle
finger,'. — fl960.]  Violent  painful  sensation  of  lameness  in  the  left  hand,^^
— Sensation  of  lameness  in  the  left  hand,  with  tension  in  the  right  fore-
arm,^^ — Always,  five  minutes  after  commencement  of  palpitation  of  the
heart,  violent  lame  pain  in  left  hand  and  arm,'''^. — Going  to  sleep  of  the  left
hand  when  leading  a  little  boy  during  a  walk,'^'''. — The  left  hand  goes  to
sleep ;  this  symptom  extending  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  forearm ;  at
nigiit  (fifth  day),*. — Warm  sweat  at  times  in  the  palms,'^ — A  peculiar
burning-itching  sensation  in  the  right  palm,  as  of  a  stiff  hair,^°. — Itching
and  titillation  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand,  which  has  to  be  scratched
(after  seven  hours),". — Swelling  of  single  fingers,'^ — *  Redness,  burning  itch-
ing of  the  flngers,  as  wlien  parts  are  frozen,^. — [1970,]  Sometimes  drawing
pain  in  the  fingers;  seemingly  in  the  periosteum,™. — Pain  in  base  of  right
fingers,''^ — Tearing  pain  between  the  thumb  and  index-fiqger  of  the  right
hand,". — Drawing  pains  that  spread  fork-like  from  the  space  between  the
thumb  and  index-finger  of  the  left  hand  towards  those  fingers,'*  ''^. — Painful
tearing  in  the  space  between  the  left  index-finger  and  thumb,  and  in  the
upper  arm,'*  '■''. — The  metacarpal  joints  of  the  right  index  and  middle
fingers  somewhat  red  and  sensitive  to  the  touch,'".— Tearing  in  the  fingers
of  the  left  hand,  where  the  phalanges  join  the  metarcarpal  bones;  motion
has  no  modifying  influence  over  this  symptom  (after  one  hour),*. — Sensa-
tion of  icy  coldness  over  the  joint  as  formed  by  the  right  middle  finger  and
its  metacarpal  bone. — Twitching  of  the  tendons  in  the  right  index-finger,
and  jumping  of  the  muscles  in  the  posterior  margin  of  the  right  hand,'*. —
Burning  and  prickling  in  the  index-finger  of  the  right  hand,  as  if  a  par-
onychia would  form;  in  a  few  days  thissymptom  is  followed  by  frequent
fits  of  numbness  of  the  finger  and  great,  long-continued  sensitiveness  of
the  finger  to  cold,".— fl980.]  Drawing  in  the  index-finger  of  the  right
hand,'. — Itching,  with  titillation,  of  the  inner  border  of  the  right  index-
finger,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  frozen  (after  five  hours),". — Frequent  prick-
ing, as  of  penetrating  splinters,  in  the  left  forefinger,". — Single  stitches,
in  rapid  succession  in  the  first  joint  of  the  left  forefinger,**. — Late  in  the
evening,  a  pain  resembling  tearing,  in  the  second  joint  of  the  left  fore-
finger,'* ". — Violent  tearing  in  the  right  middle  finger  (after  twenty-three
hours),*. — Sensation  of  going  to  sleep  and  violent  crawling  in  the  right
fourth  and  fifth  fingers,  in  the  back  of  the  hand,  and  in  the  ulnar  side  of
the  hand  after  writing  very  little,'*  ^'. — Tearing  twitches  in  the  last  two
fingers  of  the  right  hand,*. — Tearing  in  the  little  finger  of  the  left  hand,
from  its  metacarpal  joint,'*'". — 'For  an  hour  in  the  afternoon  tearing-burn-
ing in  the  right  thumb,™. — [1990.]  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  thumb,
that  occurs  frequently  during  the  day,  and  lasts  several  seconds,^^ — Cramp
in  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb  when  standing  and  walking ;  it  passes  off
when  the  person  is  sitting  (after  six  hours),". — Itching  and  titillation  of
the  ball  of  the  right  thumb,  which  obliges  the  person  to  scratch  the  parts
(after  eight  hours),". — Transient  sticking  pain,  as  of  fine  splinters,  in  the
point  of  the  right  thumb,'*. — Repeated  violent  tearing  in  the  left  thumb,'". —


110  AGAEICUS.

Pricking,  as  of  needles,  in  the  left  thumb,  increased  and  also  caused  by  a
slight  touch,^l

Lower  Extremities. — Trembling  of  the  lower  extremities,  t. —
*Pain  in  the  legs,  especially  disagreeable  in  the  region  of  the  right  hip-joint,
in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  leg,  resembling  violent  pains  from  fatigue,  accom-
panied by  tearing  pain.  These  pains  continued  all  the  afternoon  and  even-
ing, and  became  excessive  at  diflerent  times ;  added  to  which,  was  a  sensa-
tion of  unsteadiness  and  fatigue,'"  ^'. — *Markedly  violent  pains  in  the  limbs,
especially  in  the  hip ;  pain  in  the  hip,  especially  in  the  left  one,  under  the
gluteal  muscles ;  touch  and  pressure  have  no  influence  ;  walking  and  rest  do
not  affect  it ;  deep  stooping  increases  it,  as  well  as  a  change  of  position  of
the  respective  parts. — Pain  in  the  legs,  as  from  exhaustion  consequent  upon
typhus  fever,'. — [2000.]  Mornings,  Ijurning  in  both  legs,  which  ceases
after  rising,^". — The  legs  ache  dreadfully,  as  if  they  had  been  crushed  by  a
heavy  load,^. — Teusive  and  drawing  pain  in  both  legs  and  feet  in  the
night, ^'. — ^Drawing  pressive  pains  in  the  legs,  and  especially  in  the  ankles,^".
— Sometimes  a  drawing  pain  in  the  periosteum  in  the  bones  of  the  legs,'". —
Tearing  in  the  legs ;  it  continues  when  the  person  is  sitting,  and  is  relieved
by  motion,'. — Bruised  pain  in  extremities,  especially  left ;  increases  after  a
walk  through  the  room,^''. — The  legs  were  as  if  bruised,  and  half  lame,^. —
Pain  in  the  legs,  as  if  they  were  bruised,'. — Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs,'".
— [2010.]  Heaviness  and  coldness  of  the  lower  extremities,^*. — Great  weight
in  the  legs,''. — *  Weight  in  the  legs ;  they  feel  weary  and  as  if  they  had  been
knocked  from  under  the  person,''. — At  noon,  crawling  and  burning  in  the
skin  of  both  legs,  from  the  hip  to  the  heel,™. — Burning  itching  of  the  legs
on  getting  undressed  in  the  evening  ;  this  itching  is  attended  with  a  desire
to  scratch ;  the  scratching  produces  a  burning  sensation  and  makes  the
skin  dry,  which  easily  breaks  ;  after  five  weeks  the  skin  peels  off,". — In  the
legs,  the  pains  {of  almost  any  kind)  occur  when  the  person  is  standing  or  sit-
ting;  more  rarely  when  walking;  the  pains  diminish  and  disappear  by  mo-
tion,^.— His  legs  pained  most  when  he  attempted  to  rise,  after  sitting  for
awhile,'". — *  When  standing,  the  pain  increases  in  the  legs;  he  is  soon  obliged
to  walk  or  to  sit  down;  the  pain  comes  on  already  after  he  has  been  standing
a  minute,'. —  Weakness  of  the  legs  (feet);  being  too  powerless  to  stand  upon
them,  the  body  is  constantly  balancing  to  and  fro,^ — No  muscular  power
in  lower  extremities,  t. — [2030.]  Great  prostration  of  the  lower  limbs,  as
if  lead  were  attached  to  them,'". — Extreme  prostration  of  the  lower  limbs
while  walking,  which  often  compelled  him  to  sit  down,'^. — An  hour  after
dinner,  great  prostration  and  weakness  of  the  lower  extremities,''. — Great
heaviness  and  prostration  of  the  lower  limbs,". — *IIis  legs  feel  so  tired  and
heavy  that  he  can  .scarcely  lift  them,''. — *  Weak  and  heavy  in  the  legs  all  day ;
more  thau  usual  clear,  yellow  urine,*'. — Weariness  of  the  legs,'*. — Great
lassitude  of  the  legs ;  he  knows  not  where  to  lay  them,'. — Painful  fatigue
of  the  legs  at  the  least  ascending  of  stairs,  that  disappeared  when  walking
on  a  level  floor,'"  ". — Unsteadiness  of  the  legs,  so  great  that  the  knees  gave
way  at  every  step,  to  which  no  particular  attention  was  paid ;  without  per-
ceiving fatigue,'"  ". — [2030.]  Coldness  of  the  lower  extremities,". — The
legs  go  to  sleep  as  soon  as  he  crosses  them,'. — At  night,  perspiration  on  the
legs,™. — Perspired  very  much  on  both  legs  ^t  night,'" '°. — Evenings,  in  bed,
perspiration  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  legs,'*  ". — Pain  in  the  left  hip
already  appears  in  the  morning,'"  ". — Transient  stitches  in  the  left  hip-
joint,  and  pain  as  if  wrenched,  or  as  if  the  bones  of  the  left  articulation
were  being  separated  from  the  sacrum ;  the  latter  pain  extended  to  the


AGAEICUS.  Ill

cavity  of  the  lower  abdomen,  and  only  gradually  disappeared ,'^ — The  hip-
joints  are  painful,  as  if  dislocated  ;  most  after  them,  the  legs  ;  the  pain  is  a
sprained,  tired,  bruised  pain,  mixed  with  a  tearing  sensation,"  -'. — Dislo-
cated pain  in  the  left  hip  was  very  marked,  but  disappeared  after  an  hour
and  a  half,'^  ^. — ^Mornings  after  rising,  a  bruised  pain  in  the  right  hip,  that
soon  disappeared  after  continued  walking,'^ — [2040.]  Pain  in  the  hip  for
twenty-four  hours ;  it  is  not  felt  when  sitting,  but  is  very  acute  when  walk-
ing,".— Pressure  in  the  hip-joints,  especially  mornings,  in  bed  ;  sometimes
a  sensation  as  if  the  painful  head  of  the  femurs  would  be  separated,  or
dragged  from  their  articulations,  or  the  pelvic  bones  from  the  sacrum,^*. —
In  the  right  ilium,  externally,  under  the  gluteals,  rheumatic  drawing  pain,
like  pain  in  the  hips,^°  ^'. — The  dull  sensation  resembling  pain  in  the  hips,
in  the  region  of  the  left  ilium,  became  very  violent,  continued  nearly  the
whole  afternoon,  was  especially  troublesome  when  sitting,  and  immediately
disappeared  entirely  when  walking,^*  ^^ — Frequent  twitching  of  the  muscles
of  the  seat,**. — Twitching  of  the  muscles  of  both  buttocks,''. — Frequent
twitching  and  jumping  of  the  gluteals,'^ — Frequent  twitching  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  left  buttock,'*. — Momentary  tearings  and  spasmodic  contractions
of  the  left  gluteus  maximus,'\ — Burning  in  the  gluteals,'^ — On  sitting
down,  those  parts  upon  which  he  sits  feel  bruised,  or  as  if  he  had  sat  upon
them  for  a  long  while,^ — [2050.]  A  sensation  of  coldness  often  appeared
in  the  gluteal  muscles,'". — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  gluteal  muscles,  which
are  spasmodically  contracted,  making  walking  difficult,'\ — Loss  of  sensa-
tion and  coldness  in  the  gluteal  museles,'^ — The  familiar  sensation  of  cold-
ness in  spots  on  both  buttocks,  and  an  icy  coldness  extending  to  the  ankles,
especially  to  the  big  toe,'*. — Quicksilver  sensation  in  both  buttocks  at  the
same  time,'*. — Formication  in  the  gluteal  muscles,  and  a  cool  creeping  sen-
sation from  the  legs  to  the  toes,'°. — Boil  on  the  right  half  of  the  nates,^—
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  right  buttock,  appearing  at  regular  intervals,
at  every  stroke  of  the  pulse,'*. — The  familiar  sensation  of  coldness  in  the
right  buttock,'*. — On  a  small,  lengthwise  spot  of  the  right  gluteal,  a  chill-
ing sensation,  as  when  liquid  quicksilver  is  poured  into  the  palm,'*. — [2060.]
Quicksilver  sensation  in  the  right  gluteal. — Sensation  of  coldness  on  a  point
on  the  right  buttock,  and  on  the  surface  of  the  back,  beiow  the  shoulder-
blade,'*. — Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  nates  ;  the  pain  wakes
him  from  sleep  at  night,'. — Violent  tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  nates,
attended  with  a  feeling  of  coldness ;  the  tearing  is  very  violent  when  sitting ;
less  violent  when  rising  and  walking  (lasting  for  eight  days),'.— The
familiar  sensation  of  coldness  in  the  left  buttgck  and  the  region  of  the  tro-
chanter,'*.— After  dinner,  in  a  spot  the  size  of  a  cent,  on  the  left  gluteal
muscles,  the  familiar  cold  sensation,  as  of  contact  with  quicksilver,'*. —  On
crossing  the  thiglis  he  feels  a  violent  pain  in  them. — Painful  weariness  of  the
thighs,'. — The  thighs  are  painful,  as  after  long  journeys  on  foot. — Internal
drawing,  from  pelvic  muscles  into  the  legs ;  it  becomes  an  external  trem-
bling ;  warm  skin  ;  slow  pulse,'^ — [2070,]  Cramp-like  pains  from  the  ilium
down  toward  the  muscles  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,'*. —
During  the  day,  when  walking,  biting  on  the  thighs,  that  induces  scratch-
ing,^*.— Drawing  rheumatic  pain  in  the  external  surface  of  both  thighs,
when  walking,  and  after  sitting,". — Pressive  pain  as  from  a  plug,  on  the
external  surface  of  the  thigh,  above  the  knee,^ — Drawing  and  stretching
sensation  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,'*. — -Transient,  cramp-like
pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,'*. — Sensation  of
coldness,  in  a  strip  several  inches  long  and  some  lines  broad,  on  the  poste-


112  AGARICUS.

rior  surface  of  the  thigh/l — Pain  above  the  knee,  in  the  anterior  surface
of  the  femur,  as  if  bruised,'". — Tearing  close  below  the  lesser  condj'le  of  the
femur,'. — Tearing  which  causes  a  feeling  of  numbness  in  the  whole  thigh,
from  the  left  hip-joint  down  to  the  knee,'. — [2080.]  The  right  thigh  is.
very  painful,'". — Tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  when  walking  or  sitting,'. —
Drawing,  and  tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  on  laying  it  across  the  left ;  the
pain  disappears  again  on  extending  the  limb  (after  one  hour),^ — Paralytic
pain  in  the  right  thigh,  especially  when  walking ;  the  thigh  feels  as  if  it
were  too  heavy,  and  supported  a  load  (after  eight  hours),\ — The  tendinous
expansion  of  the  right  thigh  is  painfully  tensive,™. — Electric  stitches  in  the
skin  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,'^ — Pain  in  the  left  lower
thigh,'*. — Tearing  at  the  head  of  the  left  femur,  which  disturbs  his  rest,'. — ■
While  walking  in  the  forenoon,  he  observed  rather  a  violent  contraction
of  the  flexors  of  the  left  thigh,  lasting  over  an  hour,^'. — Painful  pressure  in
the  left  thigh,". — [2090.]  Painful  pressure  in  lower  outer  part  of  left  thigh ;
extends  down  into  the  knee,  then  into  the  left  sole,'^ — Continual  paralytic
drawing  in  the  left  thigh  down  to  the  knee,  both  in  rest  and  motion  (in  the
afternoon),". — Tearing,  attended  with  a  sense  of  coldness  on  the  posterior
side  of  the  left  thigh,'. — Drawing,  tearing  pain  from  the  region  of  the  left
loin,  in  the  foreside  of  the  thigh,  extending  to  the  middle,'*  ^^. — Drawing,
tearing  pain  at  intervals,  in  the  outer  side  of  the  left  thigh,  above  the  knee,-
extending  into  the  popliteal  space,^°  ^. — Fine  stitches  over  the  left  knee
and  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,'". — Painful  sense  of  paralysis  in
the  left  thigh,". — Corrosive  itching  on  the  anterior  side  of  the  left  thigh,*. —
Biting  pimple  on  the  thigh  above  the  left  knee;  scratching  excites  a  violent
sensation  of  burning  in  it,". — Knocking  together  of  the  knees,'*  ". — [2100.]
Twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  right  knee,'". — The  knee-joints  are  painful
early  in  the  morning,  on  getting  out  of  bed;  when  sitting,'.— Simultaneous
drawing  in  both  knee-joints,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  knees,^°. — Awaking  with
drawing  pain  in  the  knees,". — Stitches,  first  in  the  right  then  in  the  left
knee.' — Frequent  violent  stitches  in  the  knees,  with  weakness  in  the  feet,''^".
— When  walking,  violent  stitches  in  both  knees,  for  several  miuutes,"*. —
In  attacks,  especially  when  walking,  a  rather  violent,  piercing,  burning
pain  about  both  ankles,  and  sometimes  fine  stitches  were  felt  in  the  knee-
joints,'". — Feeling  of  internal  trembling,  especially  in  the  knees,  with  power-
lessness  of  the  legs,'^ — [2110.]  The  pain  in  the  knees  increases  when  sitting,
it  decreases  and  disappears  by  walking,'. — Weak  in  knees,'l — For  a  short
time,  while  walking,  such  weakness  in  the  knees  that  they  gave  way,'* '". —
The  limbs  knocked  together,  t — Drawing  pain  in  the  knee,  that  disappeared
when  moving,  and  grew  more  violent  while  lying,". — Stitches  in  the  knee,
with  electric  shocks,". — Fine  tearing  in  the  right  knee,^'. — Tearing  in  the
right  knee-joint,  when  standing  or  sitting,'. — Painful  tearihgs  in  the  right
knee-joint,'''. — Tearing  iu  right  knee  and  right  ankle,  with  dull  drawing  in
upper  front  teeth  (after  looking  out  of  an  open  window  into  cool  air),'''. —
[2120.]  Continual  boring  and  tearing  in  the  right  knee,  when  sitting,'. —
Slight  and  transient  tearing,  drawing  sensations  in  the  right  knee-joint,"*  ^'.
— Sensation  of  weakness,  and  drawing,  sprained  pain  in  the  right  knee,  tran-
sient,".— When  rising  from  his  .seat,  he  felt  violent  stitches  in  the  right
knee,". — Twitches  in  the  internal  side  of  the  right  knee,'. — An  undulating
sensation  in  the  right  popliteal  space,'*. — On  a  spot  as  large  as  a  cent,  iu
the  right  popliteal  space,  the  familiar  quicksilver  sensation,". — Drawing  in
the  left  knee,'. — Paiu,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  knee,  when  walking, . —
Stitches  in  the  left  knee  for  several  seconds,  with  a  subsequent  sensation  of


AGAEICUS.  113

weakness  in  the  limb,^^ — [2130.]  Pricking,  as  with  pins,  above  the  bend
of  the  left  knee  (after  thirty-six  hours),^ — Painful  sense  of  paralysis  in  the
bend  of  the  left  knee,". — Sudden  bending  of  the  left  knee,  when  walking
in  the  afternoon,". — Drawing  pain  in  the  leg,  extending  from  the  right
knee  as  far  as  the  toes,  when  sitting,'. — Tearing  in  the  leg  down  to  the
lower  extremity  of  the  tibia,'. — ^Tearing  in  leg  on  sitting,"''. — -Jumping,
drawing  pressure,  here  and  there,  in  muscles  of  leg,^^. — Jumping  of  the
muscles  of  the  right  leg  and  foot,  with  jerk-like  shocks  in  them  ;  rumbling
electric  shocks,  afterwards  pricking  itching  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,  near
the  toes,  and  in  the  left  forefinger,'*. — Frequent  jumping  of  the  tendons
in  the  right  leg,'*. — Pain  ill  the  right  leg,*".  —  [2140.]  Burning  in  the
right  leg,*". — Mornings,  some  burning  in  the  right  leg,^", — Much  burning
in  the  right  leg  after  dinner,"". — Evenings,  excessive  burning  in  the  right
leg,"". — Burning  pain  in  the  right  leg,  as  if  an  ulcer  were  forming,"". —
Heaviness  and  burning  sensation  in  the  right  leg,"". — Some  burning  in
the  skin  of  the  right  leg,"".- — Tension  in  the  right  leg,"". — After  rising,
some  tension  in  the  right  leg,"". — Sensation  as  if  he  were  being  pulled  by
the  right  leg,'^  ''\ — [2l50.]  Very  violent  drawing  and  tensive  pains  in
the  whole  right  leg,"". — Fine  tearing  pain  in  the  outside  of  the  right  leg
above  the  ankle,'^  ^'. — Tearing  in  muscles  of  anterior  lower  part  of  right
leg  (fifteen  hours),"^ — Jerk-wise  appearing,  convulsive  shocks  in  the  right
leg,'*. — Crawling  in  the  right  leg,'™. — Fine  pricking  on  the  internal  side
of  the  right  leg  and  towards  the  tibia,°.-^Cramp-like  pains,  sometimes
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg,  sometimes  in  the  upper  surface  of  the
thigh,'*. — Painful  drawing  in  the  posterior  side  of  the  left  leg,  extending
down  along  the  calf;  it  disappears  in  walking  (in  the  afternoon),". — Inter-
nal drawing  and  trembling  in  left  lower  leg,  more  about  the  knee,"". — Some
drawings  in  lower  part  of  left  lower  leg,"^ — [2160.]  The  left  limb  aches
in  the  morning,"". — Pressing  pain  in  lower  part  of  left  lower  leg,  on  walking
through  the  room,"'^. — Tearing  pain  in  the  left  leg  and  in  the  calf,'^  ^'. — A
tearing  pain,  with  a  sensation  of  paralytic  numbness  in  the  left  leg,'*  ^'. — ■
Heaviness  in  left  leg  like  lead,"'. — Burning  itching  of  the  left  leg,  which
excites  a  desire  to  scratch ;  the  scratching  is  followed  by  white  eruptions
of  the  size  of  a  grain  of  flaxseed,  which  peel  off  in  the  shape  of  bran,'. —
In  the  night,  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a  sense  of  coldness  in  the  whole
of  the  left  leg,". — Mornings  after  rising,  light  pains  in  the  tibiae,"". — Even»
ings,  light  pains  in  both  tibise,"". — Towards  noon,  drawing  pains  in  both
tibioB,^^ "". — [2170.]  Some  sensitiveness  in  both  tibiae,  but  no  pain,"". — The
pain  in  the  tibiae  increases  and  continues  when  sitting,  it  disappears  in
walking,'. — Burning,  attended  with  pressure,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  tibia,
below  the  knee,\ — Sensation  at  the  top  of  the  tibia  and  the  head  of  the
fibula,  as  if  a  warm  hand  were  lying  upon  the  parts,*. — Pressive  pains  in
the  tibia,"". — Soon  after  rising,  pains  become  less  in  the  tibia,  but  did  not
last  long,"". — Mornings,  some  pain  in  the  right  tibia,"". — Some  burning  in
the  right  tibia,'. — Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  right  tibia,'. — Single,  tran-
sient tearing  pains  in  the  right  tibia,"". — [2180.]  Occasionally  during  th^
night,  a  sensitive  tearing  pain  in  the  right  tibia,"". — Mornings,  very  violent
pains  in  the  left  tibia,"". — Cramp  in  left  tibia,  and  in  the  calf,"". — Drawing
in  the  left  tibia  on  walking,"^ — Mornings,  very  violent  pressive,  drawing
pains  in  the  left  tibia ;  when  walking  in  the  forenoon  these  pains  ceased
entirely,  but  appeared  again  in  the  afternoon  when  sitting,"". — Tearing  in
the  left  tibia,'. — For  a  short  time  after  dinner,  tearing  pains  in  the  left
tibia,"". — The  pain  in  the  left  tibia  ceases  entirely  while  walking  in  the

YOL.  I. — 8


114  AGARICUS.

forenoon,  but  returns  at  noon  for  a  short  time,'". — Pressure,  as  from  a  con-
tusion, on  the  internal  side  of  the  gastrocnemii,  while  sitting ;  the  pain  is
somewhat  lessened  by  standing  and  by  touching  the  parts,  but  it  becomes
violent  again  when  the  person  sits  down  (after  two  hours),". — Weight  in
the  calves,'^ — [2190.]  Burning  in  the  right  calf,^". — Cramp-like  pains  in
the  inner  side  of  the  right  calf,'*. — Transient,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  right
calf,  somewhat  later,  also  in  the  left  deltoid  muscle,".— Suddenly,  while
walking,  a  painful,  contractive,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  calf,  as  if
something  were  knotted  together  there ;  most  violent  when  lifting  up  or
putting  down  the  foot,  causing  the  knees  to  give  way,  and  making  them
lame,'°  ": — Tearing  in  the  exterior  surface  of"  the  right  calf  when  sitting
(first  day),". — Stitches  in  the  right  calf,^^ — Stitches  in  the  skin  of  the  right
calf,'*. — Frequent  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  calf,'^ — Painful
drawing  in  the  posterior  side  of  the  left  leg,  extending  down  along  the  calf;
it  disappears  in  walking  in  the  afternoon,". — Fine  sticking  in  left  calf,'l —
[2200.]  Crawling  and  pressing  in  left  calf,^^ — Sensation  of  stiffness  in
tendo  Achillis,  on  rising  from  sitting,'". — In  attacks,  especially  when  walk-
ing, a  rather  violent,  piercing,  burning  pain  about  both  ankles,  and  some-
times fine  stitches  were  felt  in  the  knee-joints,^". — Slight  drawing  about  both
ankles,™. — Slight  drawing  sensation  about  the  ankle-joints  of  both  feet,'". —
Drawing  on  internal  ankle-bones,'^ — Piercing  pain  in  the  second  and  third
rows  of  the  ankle-bones,  and  in  the  heel  when  walking,'^. — Night,  at  two,
was  waked  by  jerks  and  pressiVe  pain  in  the  right  ankle. — Pinching  and
drawing  cramp  in  right  ankle,  extending  over  the  whole  front,  then  in-
creasingly over  the  heel,  and  up  the  calf,  so  violent  that  rubbing  and  press-
ing the  parts  against  the  bedstead  gave  no  relief,  and  on  arising,  he  could
scarcely  stand  on  his  feet,". — Violent  teariiig  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the
left  ankle,'^ — [2210.]  Sprained  pain  in  the  left  ankle,*". — Tearing  pressure
upon  the  internal  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  when  sitting  (after  thirty-five
hours),". — Painful  stitches  in  the  external  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  when
sitting  (after  five  hours),". — Crawling  under  the  skin  under  the  inner  left
ankle-bone,". — Corrosive  itching  of  the  internal  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,*.
— In  the  warm  bed,  excessive  burning  in  both  feet  to  the  ankles,  as  if  the
blood  were  glowing  in  the  veins,'". — Heaviness  and  want  of  tonicity  in  the
feet,". — Heaviness  in  the  feet,^*. — Formication  in  the  feet,'*. — Weak  feeling
in  the  feet,  especially  drawing  and  crawling  under  the  skin  on  anterior
surface  of  lower  leg,  extending  toward  inner  side  of  the  sole,'l — [2220.]
Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  feet  on  going  down  stairs ;  this  weakness  con-
tinued when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  he  distinctly  felt  that  it  proceeded
from  the  sacral  region,'*. — Cold  feet,  as  if  plunged  in  snow,". — Feet  cold
and  unsteady,'". — Coldness  of  the  feet,  extending  to  the  condyles,'". — During
his  walk,  at  7  p.m.,  he  felt  a  painful  drawing  sensation  in  the  right  foot,
and  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  extending  over  the  knee,  with  an
accompanying  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  same  foot,'^. — On  the  right  foot,
about  the  inner  ankle,  a  painful  burning  of  the  skin,  as  in  incipient  ery-
sipelas, without  any  appearance  of  it  on  the  skin,'". — Fine  stitches  in  the
dorsuiQ  of  the  right  foot,*. — Corrosive  itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right
foot,*. — Undefined  pain,  throbbing  or  sprained,  in  the  right  instep,  and
towards  the  top  of  the  foot,'* "'. — While  walking  in  the  evening,  excessive
pains  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,'". — [2230.]  Violent  burning  pain  on
the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  late  in  the  evening,'". — Crawling  on  the  back
of  left  foot,'^ — Violent  stitches  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  left  foot,  be-
ginning at  the  malleoli,  when  at  rest,'. — Stitches  in  the  lower  surface  of  the


AGARICUS.  115

first  and  second  bones  of  the  metatarsus,'. — *  Cramp  in  the  sole  of  the  foot  at
nighty. — Tearing  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  when  walking,'. — At  noon,  a
piercing  pain  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  as  of  splinters,'^ — Tearing  in  the
hollow  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting,'. — Stitches  in  left  sole,'l — Itching
and  creeping  in  skin  of  left  sole,'l — [2240.]  Pain  in  the  heels,  as  from  a
bruise,  when  standing,^ — Stitches  in  the  heel  when  stepping,  which  extend
up  into  the  leg,'^ — Stitches  in  the  lower  surface  of  the  heel,  when  sitting,'. —
Piercing  pain,  as  of  splinters,  in  the  right  heel,'l — Piercing  pain,  as  of
penetrating  splinters,  in  the  right  heel  and  the  toes,'^ — Digging,  piercing
pains  in  the  right  heel  and  the  big  toe,  as  of  splinters,'^ — A  burning  stitch
in  the  left  heel,". — Stitches  in  the  toes  when  at  rest,'. — Crawling  in  toes,
especially  left,'^ — Itching  and  titillatiou  of  the  toes,  as  if  the  parts  bad
been  frozen;  this  excites  a  desire  to  scratch  (after  eleven  hours),'. — [2250.]
Itching,  burning,  and  redness  of  the  toes,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  frozen,^. —
Grinding  pain  in  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,'. — Sudden,  violent  piercing,  as
of  splinters,  in  the  right  toes,". — Painful  dull  stitches  in  the  last  three  toes
of  the  right  foot  (after  twenty  hours),^ — Drawing  and  tearing  upon  the
lower  surface  of  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting,'. — Soreness  of
the  little  toe  of  the  right  foot,  as  from  the  pinching  of  tight  shoes  (after  six
hours),'. — Drawing  in  left  toes^  '?. — Sharp  stitches  in  the  toes  of  the  left
foot,  when  standing  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Crawling,  like  formication,
in  tips  of  left  toes,'^ — The  left  great  toe  is  swollen  at  the  imbedding  of  the
nail,  and  very  paiufuV"- — [2260.]  Twitches  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of
the  left  foot  (first  day),^ — Painful  twitches  in  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot,'. —
Frequent  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot  (second  day),*. —
Stitches  in  the  spot  where  formerly  a  corn  had  been,". — Soreness  in  the  corn
of  the  second  toe  of  the  left  foot,  as  from  tight  shoes  (after  three  hours),'.
Generalities. — Conv^dsions,""'''. — Several  convulsions  following  each
other  in  quick  succession,  first  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  chest,  then  in
the  epigastrium,  afterwards  in  the  hypogastrium,  especially  on  the  right
side,  attended  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  whole  body  were  shaken  through ;
in  the  evening,  when  standing,'. — Epilepsy,"'. — In  a  patient  affected  with
epilepsy,  the  fits  came  on  at  shorter  intervals,'. — In  two  patients  affected
with  epilepsy  the  fits  became  more  violent,  reappear  at  shorter  intervals,
but  afterwards  occur  more  rarely,  and  are  very  slight,'. — [2270.]  Very
violent  spasms,''^. — Most  violent  tonic  and  clonic  spasms  lasted  all  day,  t. —
Spasms,  with  very  great  anxiety  and  pain  at  the  epigastric  region ;  re-
lieved by  spontaneous  vomiting,''". — Convulsions  alternating  with  stupor,'".
— Soporous  and  spasmodic  condition,  lasting  nearly  two  days,'". — *Frequent
jumping  of  the  muscles  in  different  parts  of  the  body,^^. — When  the  prover
was  reclining  on  a  lounge,  with  his  right  arm  under  his  head,  his  body  was
suddenly  shudderingly  shaken,  the  arm  involuntarily  pulled  down  'to  the
trunk,  upon  which  followed  several  fine  stitches,  in  both  condyles  of  the
elbows,"  ". — At  three  o'clock  in  the  night,  restlessness  in  every  muscle  of
voluntary  motion,  upon  which,  quivering  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of
the  lower  jaw;  finally,  action  of  the  muscles  as  in  St.  Vitus's  dance,  which
remained  uncontrolled  by  the  greatest  effort  of  the  will,". — Constant
inclination  to  bend  the  body  backward  and  forward  and  to  stretch,  t. —
^Spasmodic  movements  of  the  m,uscles  of  the  face  and  limbsj'^. — [2280,]  Com-
motion of  the  nervous  system,*". — Sensation  as  if  the  whole  body  were
shaken  through ;  in  the  evening,  when  standing,'. — Here  and  there  slight
twitchings  over  the  whole  body,  t. — Sense  of  tremor  in  the  whole  body
(after  one  hour),". — *  Tremor,^'  **. — *  General  trembling,  t. — Excessive  bodily


116  AGAEICUS.

agitation  ;  the  lower  limbs  were  forcibly  retracted,  and  the  arm  shook,  so
that  the  pulse  could  not  be  felt,'^ — *  Jactitation  of  the  muscles  all  over  the
body,". — Spasmodic  movements,  which  were  of  short  duration,  but  violent,
and  succeeded  by  a  yellowish  tinge  over  the  whole  surface,  a  kind  of  icterus,
especially  conspicuous  on  the  neck,  face,  and  chest ;  it  disappeared,  by  slow
degrees,  in  a  few  hours,^°. — Violent  convulsive  shock  of  the  entire  right
side  of  the  body,  proceeding  from  the  spine,". — [2290.]  Unsteady  gait ;
stumbling  over  every  object,'". — Undefined  impulse  to  fall  over  backwards,".
— Inner  restlessness,  that  impelled  the  prover  from  one  place  to  another,'".
— Whole  body  seemed  paralyzed,  t. — She  felt  so  light,  that  it  seemed  as
though  she  could  run  as  never  before,  <. — Supernatural  strength;  it  re-
quired four  men  to  bind  him,  t. — Loss  of  strength  in  all  parts  of  the
body,*. — Excessive  loss  of  strength,'. — Prostration,  and  very  much  affected
from  being  in  the  air,™. — Considerable  prostration  of  strength,*^ — [2300.]
General  prostration,  with  cold  and  viscid  sweat  all  over,^. — Feeling  of  pros-
tration, that  soon  diminished  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  but  which  re-
curred repeatedly,^'. — In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  prostrate  and  confused,
as  after  great  fatigue,". — Prostration  and  weakness,  on  the  least  motion,
together  with  frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,'". — Great  weakness  of  the
whole  body,'^. — Great  weakness;  the  pulse  was  hardly  perceptible,"". — Great
weakness,  especially  in  the  lower  limbs,  with  trembling  in  them,'". — Weak-
ness, with  vertigo  (uncommon),". — On  walking,  even  through  the  room,
great  weakness,  and  inclination  to  close  the  eyes;  deep  breathing  (one-half
hour),"^ — Lassitude  (after  twelve  to  sixteen  hours),". — [2310,]  Great  las-
situde, and  staggering  gait  (shortly),". — On  awaking  in  the  morning,  heavi-
ness in  the  whole  body,'". — Unusual  weariness  of  the  whole  body  ;  inability
to  think,'". — Weariness,"". — Weariness,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Great
fatigue  after  moderate  exercise,"". — Great  fatigue  after  short  but  quick
walking,'. — Easily  fatigued  on  slight  exertion,"^. — A  small  walk  through
the  room  is  fatiguing,"''. — When  in  bed,  he  feels  so  tired  that  he  does  not
know  what  position  to  take,'. — [2320.]  On  walking,  very  much  disinclined
to  walk,"l — On  ascending  a  little  hill  copious  sweat  breaks  out ;  he  feels
like  fainting,'. — Fainting,  t — Frequent  fainting  (in  an  hour),*".— She  re-
mained some  time  unconscious,  and  in  a  state  of  stupor  and  prostration,
which  caused  fear  for  her  life,*". — Half  an  hour  after  the  delirium,  he  falls
into  a  swoon,  which  is  short-lasting,  but  leaves  him  in  a  state  of  profound
dulness,"". — Stupor,"". — State  of  stupor,  with  spasmodic  agitation,"^. — The
patient  did  not  arouse  from  this  state  of  stupor,  except  when  teased  into
drinking  a  mixture  of  vinegar  and  water ;  this  condition  lasted  about  seven
or  eight  hours,  then  they  came  gradually  to  their  senses,  and  next  day  were
completely  restored,"'. — Stupefaction  and  sleepiness,  improved  in  the  open
air,'^— =^[2330.]  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  whole  body  to  cold,  especially
of  the  hands  and  feet,  with  pale,  wan  face,'*. — Great  sensitiveness  to  cool
air,"l — ^Sensibility  diminished,  t. — All  the  senses  are  blunted,'". — Anxiety,
attended  with  tremors  and  lassitude,'. — Anxiety,  with  breaking  out  of  per-
spiration,'".— Discomfort  in  the  whole  body,'* '" "". — A  peculiar  sensation  of
hiise,*". — An  indescribable  derangement  of  the  nervous  activity,'*"". —
[2340.]  Uncomfortable  feeling  of  sickness  in  the  whole  body,'. — Feeling
unwell  in  a  high  degree," "". — Much  aifected  from  walking,  with  the  atmos-
phere at  a  moderate  temperature,"". — Most  severe  pains,  t. — The  pains  are
felt  simultaneously  in  several  parts  of  the  body,  especially  on  both  sides
above  the  small  of  the  back,'. — Pains  of  various  kinds,  when  sitting,  simul-


AGARICUS.  117

taneously,  in  all  the  parts  of  the  body,'. — Cracking  in  all  the  joints,  on
moving  them,^^ — Muscle  symptoms  worse  on  sitting,  seldom  on  walking,'^
— It  seems  as  if  the  whole  body  were  gradually  diminishing,". — Cramp-like
pain  in  all  the  muscles,  erratic,  now  in  the  upper,  now  in  the  lower  ex-
tremities, when  sitting,". — [2350^]  When  sitting,  there  is  a  boring  pain  in
the  whole  head,  in  the  thighs,  tibiae,  and  the  bones  of  the  tarsus,  attended
with  somnolence,  and  relaxation  of  the  whole  body,'. — Frequent  sensitive
tearing,  now  and  ihen,  in  the  tendinous  expansions  of  the  body,". — Prick-
ing, as  from  pins,  in  different  parts  of  the  body  (after  one  hour),". — Fine
pricking  and  burning  in  different  parts  of  the  body  (after  one  hour),^ — All
the  parts  of  the  body  are  sensitive  to  pain ;  on  applying  even  feeble  pres-
sure to  a  spot,  it  pains  still  a  long  while  after,''. — Bruised  pain  in  single
joints,'*. — On  sitting,  the  bruised  pain  and  fatigue  are  most  felt,''l — Crawl-
ing on  hairy  portions  of  the  body,'l — A  feeling  of  crawling  and  coursing
through  all  the  nerves,  coming  from  the  abdomen,'". — Heat  of  the  face,
with  insupportable  anxiety,  which  yielded  four  or  five  times  to  perspiration,
caused  by  covering  the  head,  and  intentionally  accelerated  breathing,  upon
which  a  transient  sensation  of  highly  agreeable  coolness  streamed  through
him,".

Shin. — [2360.]  Spreading  herpes,'. — The  itching  eruption  spreads  fur-
ther, to  the  region  of  the  abdomen  and  thighs,".^Eruptions  of  little  pim-
ples show  themselves  here  and  there,™. — On  the  lower  abdomen,  in  the
region  of  the  navel,  the  privates,  and  inner  thighs,  an  eruption  appears,
consisting  of  small,  whitish  pimples,  that  itch  violently,  and  create  an  irre-
sistible desire  to  scratch,  which  only  increases  the  burning  and  itching,*'. —
A  few  mattery  pimples,  of  the  size  of  a  poppy-seed,  appear  between  the
forefinger  and  thumb  of  the  left  hand,  and  on  the  right  of  the  neck,". — On
the  front  side  of  the  left  thigh,  and  on  the  seat,  carbuncles  appeared  that
are  very  painful ;  the  carbuncle  on  the  seat  reached  the  size  of  a  hen's
egg,  was  exceedingly  painful,  and  discharged  blood,  without  matter,  in
considerable  quantities,®. — Itching,  that  causes  scratching,  in  the  region  of
the  navel ;  eruption  of  small  pimples  with  a  red  areola,'''. — Violent  itch-
ing in  the  region  of  the  abdomen  and  legs,  with  irresistible  disposition  to
scratch,  which  caused  a  scattered  eruption  of  easily-bleeding  pimples,".
— Excessive  itching  in  the  region  of  the  navel  and  perineum,  especially
violent  on  the  lower  extremities,  with  an  eruption  of  little  pimples,". — The
itching  began  with  a  crawling  sensation  under  the  skin,  moving  in  little
circles,  accompanied  by  occasional  pricking,  as  of  needles,  and  by  burning.
— [2370.]  Itching  all  over  the  skin,'. — Transient  itching  in  different  parts
of  the  -body,*'. — Itching,  like  electrical  stitches,  in  the  skin,  now  and  then,".
— During  the  day,  transient  itching  under  the  skin,  in  both  groins  and  on
the  left  arm," — Frequent  itching-  during  the  day,  alternately  about  the
neck,  the  extremities,  and  the  region  of  the  abdomen,  without  visible  erup-
tion,".— Violent  itching'  at  night,  of  some  duration,  in  the  region  of  the
navel,  privates,  and  inner  thighs,  which  induces  scratching,". — Excessive
itching  during  the  day,  while  walking,  in  the  left  popliteal  space,  on  the
right  front  side  of  the  knee,  and  also  in  the  region  of  the  sacrum ;  it  lasted
all  day,  appearing  alternately  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  and  often
quickly  changing  its  location,  . — Restless  sleep,  on  account  of  very  violent
itching,  that  irresistibly  induces  scratching,  not  only  on  the  abdomen  and
thighs,  but  also  alternating  on  the  arms  and  hairy  scalp,  which  only  abated
somewhat  toward  morning,  but  did  not  cease,  except  at  short  intervals,".—
Nightly  itching  and  burning,  especially  about  the  navel  and  the  region  of


118  AGARICUS

the  inner  thighs,  mostly  beginning  in  the  evening,  and  increasing  in  inten-
sity towards  midnight,^'. — *Violent  itching  between  the  thumb  and  fore-
finger of  the  left  hand,  likewise  on  the  back ;  a  very  restless  night,  with
frequent  waking,  owing  to  the  burning,  itching  pain,  which  continued,  almost
without  interruption,  in  different  parts  of 'the  body,". — [2380,]  During  the
day,  the  prover  felt  a  disagreeable  burning  pain  on  the  inner  surface  of
the  thigh,  on  the  spots  which  bad  itched  during  the  night ;  it  was  increased
by  walking,^. — Frequently  during  the  day,  a  corrosive  biting  and  burning,
now  and  then,  on  various  parts  of  the  skiu,'^ — •*Corrosive  biting,  now  and
then,  on  the  skin,". — *Pricking,  as  of  needles,  here  and  there,'^ — Frequent
violent  pricking  near  the  navel,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  skin,  as  if
splinters  had  penetrated  it,'". — Shooting  pains,  now  and  then,  in  the  skin,'°.
— *Several  times  during  the  day,  fine  stitches,  as  of  needles,  in  various  parts
of  the  skin,  without  any  outward  sign,^°. — *Itching  stitches  in  the  left  eye-
brow, the  left  ear,  on  the  head,  and  in  various  parts  of  the  body,^.

Fever. — Chills  all  over  the  body  (after  ten  minutes),". — A  chill  per-
vading the  body,  from  top  to  toe,^ — [2390.]  Continual  chilliness  ;  he  can-
not get  warm  in  the  room,  especially  early  in  the  morning,".— Much  chilli-
ness, and  constantly  cold  hands  and  feet,  yawning,  frequent  desire  to
urinate,  weakness  and  disinclination  to  motion,^^. — Great  inclination  to
chilliness,'. — Very  sensitive  to  cool  air,'. — The  slightest  contact  with  cool
air  causes  goose-skin,'. — Chills,  with  yawning,'. — Much  chilliness  and
yawning  (two  hours) ;  pulse  60,'^ — Easy  chilliness  on  slight  movement,  and
in  a  cooler  air,  or  if  the  cold  finger  touches  a  warm  part  of  the  body,'^ —
He  is  chilled  as  soon  as  he  goes  out  into  the  open  air  or  raises  the  cover  of
the  bed  in  the  night,'. — Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  hot  head,  con-
fusion, and  loss  of  ideas,^".— [2400.]  Great  internal  chilliness,'. — Internal
chilliness  and  cool  skin,'^ — A  slight  thrill  of  cold  down  the  left  leg  as  far
as  the  foot,". — Chill  in  the  back,  as  if  cold  water  were  running  down  ;  this
chill  occurs  when  he  leans  with  his  back  against  a  chair,'. — Now  and  then
chilliness  through  back  and  limbs,''^ — Chills,  with  shaking,  upon  lifting  the
cover  of  the  bed,'. — Chills;  face  and  hands,  however,  being  warm,'. — ^Vio-
lent chills,  with  shaking  of  the  whole  body,  and  tremor  of  the  hands  in
writing;  the  hands  are  cold,  the  face  naturally  warm,  without  any  thirst
or  subsequent  heat,^ — Chilliness  in  the  open  air,'^ — Very  chilly  in  the
evening,'. — [2410.]  Long-continued  chill  in  the  evening,  which  increases
to  shaking,'. — Shaking  chill  for  ten  minutes  on  lying  down  in  the  even-
ing,".— Feverish  chills  every  evening,  without  thirst  and  without  subse-
quent heat,'. — Radiating  warmth  from  the  whole  body,'^  ^°. — Veins  swollen,
with  cool  skin,'^ — Much  creeping  heat  through  the  back,  on  slow  walk-
ing in  open  air,  with  twitching  in  left  side  of  face,'^ — Violent  attack  of
heat  in  the  evening;  his  cheeks  glow,  although  his  hands  are  cold;  these
symptoms  are  attended  with  long-continued  thirst,  without  any  subsequent
sweat  (after  twelve  hours),". — ^Heat  in  the  night ;  she  feels  chilly  on  turn-
ing herself  or  raising  the  cover  of  the  bed,'. — Increase  of  animal  beat  at
night,'. — Skin  very  warm  ;  veins  much  distended.'l — [2420.]  Continual
heat  during  the  night;  afterwards  sweat,'. — Repeated  attacks  of  heat,  com-
bined with  sweat,  during  a  whole  afternoon,  attended  with  dull  headache,
without  thirst;  in  the  evening,  on  putting  on  his  hat,  heat  and  sweat  in-
crease; respiration  is  hurried,  with  great  depression  of  strength,^. — Violent
breaking  out  of  perspiration  over  the  whole  body,  even  the  hairy  scalp,'*. —
After  a  quiet  night  excessive  perspiration  over  the  whole  body,'''. — Break-
ing out  of  perspiration  with  anxiety,'^. — Sweat  consequent  upon  moderate


AGAEICUS.  119

bodily  efforts,'. — Sweat  in  walking,'. — Profuse  sweating  on  every  walk,'^ —
A  great  deal  of  perspiration  during  the  forenoon,™. — Evenings,  in  bed-
perspiration,  especially  of  the  legs,  without  heat ;  on  the  contrary,  with  a
sensation  as  if  they  were  fanned  by  a  cool  breeze,'* ". — [2430.]  Copious
sweat  during  the  night,". — Night-sweats  during  an  uneasy  sleep,'. — Copious
sweat  during  the  night  about  the  legs,"". — Copious  sweat  during  the  night,
especially  about  the  legs,^.— The  face,  neck,  and  chest  are  wet  with  cold
perspiration,'".

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Inclination  to  yawn," — Much  yawning,'^ —
Frequent  yawning,'' "  "'. — Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough
(after  seven  and  a  half  hours),". — Frequently  repeated  yawning ;  it  is  so
violent  that  it  makes  him  giddy;  early  in  the  morning  when  walking  in
the  open  air  (immediately),'. — [2440.]  He  yawned  frequently,  and  each
yawn  was  followed  by  involuntary  laughter, '^^  —  Very  frequent  convul-
sive yawning,  with  excessive  opening  of  the  mouth  ;  repeated  two  or  three
times  in  a  minute,'". — Yawning,  extension,  and  stretching  of  the  limbs
(after  one  hour),^ — Frequent  yawning,  with  somnolence;  he  can  hardly
help  falling  asleep  in  the  forenoon,'. — Sleepy,  yawning,  and  stretching;
pulse  65  (one  hour),^^ — Sleepy  and  tired  the  whole  day,'.  —  Unusual
sleepiness,^''  "  '"  **. — Irresistible  sleepiness,  which  makes  it  necessary  that
the  person  should  lie  down,". — Sleepiness,  with  heaviness  of  the  head
(immediately ),^  —  Early  and  unusual  sleepiness,'*". —  [2450.]  Somno-
lence; he  answered  slowly,  t. — Sleepiness,  early  in  the  morning,  one  hour
after  rising,^ — In  the  forenoon,  when  reading,  he  was  overwhelmed  with
sleep,'. — Unusually  great  sleepiness  after  dinner,'^  —  Irresistible  somno-
lence after  dinner,'.  —  Great  sleepiness  the  whole  afternoon,'*. — Unusu-
ally long  and  profound  sleep  after  dinner,". — Slept  well,  but  roused
himself  with  difficulty  in  the  morning,™. — Sleep  during  tbe  night  was
good,  quiet,  and  strengthening,*'. — -Sleep  unusually  long  and  profound,'^ —
[2460.]  Sleep  always  good,  but  profound;  as  if  stupefied  on  waking,'**'.
— Slept  well  during  the  night,  but  she  awakes  un  refreshed,  with  a  sen-
sation of  heat  and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body. — In  spite  of  great  som-
nolence, he  cannot  fall  asleep  (in  the  forenoon),'.— Although  he  felt  ex-
tremely drowsy  in  daytime,  yet  he  was  prevented  from  falling  asleep  by
an  abundance  of  ideas  that  thronged  his  mind,'. — After  dinner  sleep  op-
pressed his  eyes;  nevertheless,  he  was  unable  to  fall  asleep  on  account  of  pain
and  uneasiness  in  his  legs,''. — Already,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  he
felt  so  sleepy  that  he  was  obliged  to  go  to  bed ;  from  fear  lest  some  one
should  disturb  him  he  only  fell  asleep  an  hour  afterwards,  after  which  he
slept  until  near  morning,*. — Being  very  sleepy  in  the  evening  he  went  to
bed,  but  he  felt  so  uncomfortable  all  over  the  body,  and  his  legs  felt  so
tired,  that  he  was  unable  to  fall  asleep ;  this  symptom  continued  after  he
had  waked  up  from  a  dream,'. — Uneasy  sleep  (one  to  three  nights),'. —
Slept  well,  but  often  gnashed  his  teeth  while  asleep,™. — Sleep  restless,* " '"  **.
— [2470.]  Sleep  very  restless,  t. — Uneasy  sleep,  several  times  interrupted
by  waking  up,". — Frequent  waking  up  in  the  night,  as  though  he  had
slept  enough,". — Frequent  waking  up  at  night  (fifth  day),^ — Frequent
waking  up  in  the  night,  attended  with  anxiety,'. — He  frequently  wakes  up
in  the  night,  is  wide  awake,  but  falls  asleep  again  a  little  while  after,'. —
On  falling  asleep  electric  shocks,  with  twitchings  through  legs,  more  in
left,  and  sudden,  complete  waking,'*. — Slept  well,  but  awoke  at  1.30,  and
could  not  go  to  sleep  again  before  2.30,'°. — Wakes  very  early  in  the  morn-
ing (4.30);  lies  half  awake,  with  continued,  violent,  pressive  pain  in  um-


J.20  AGARICUS.

bilical  region ;  does  not  become  fully  awake/l — During  and  after  the
proving  somewhat  heavy  sleep,  often  interrupted  by  waking  up,'^". —
[2480.]  Sleep  stupefying,  although  several  times  interrupted  by  tossing
about  and  waking  up,'^  ^\— Later  at  night,  short,  restless  sleep,". — Night-
sleep  interrupted,". — Slept  very  little  during  the  night,  and  awoke  almost
every  half-hour,  but  without  any  other  syrap;;om,'-. — Restless  sleep  at  night,
with  much  tossing  about;  early  awaking,  without  being  able  to  sleep
again,'"  ". — Awaking  three  successive  nights,  exactly  at  midnight,'^ — Rest-
less, interrupted  night-sleep,  with  anxiety,". — Restless  night-sleep,  with
constant  tossing  about,  owing  to  an  irksome  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,
in  the  head,  as  well  as  the  chest,  abdomen,  and  feet,". — Slept  badly,  with
headache  mid  depression,  bordering  on  melancholy,". — At  night,  fear  of
suffocation;  sensation  as  if  the  nose  were  entirely  stopped, '■'^ — [2490.]  Light
sleep,  with  many  dreams  and  constantly  changing  images,". — Sleep  inter-
rupted by  anxious  dreams,'. — Internal  uneasiness  during  a  bad  dream,  the
nature  of  which  ho  is  not  able  to  recollect,  and  during  which  the  body  re-
mained quiet ;  upon  v;aking  up  all  uneasiness  had  gone," — Frequent  wak-
ing up  on  account  of  bad  dreams,'. — Disagreeable  dreams  often  wake  him
up  in  the  night,'. — Vivid  dreams,  partly  agreeable,  partly  disagreeable,^

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Vertigo,  etc. ;  dulness  of
head  ;  dull  headache,  etc. ;  frontal  headache,  etc. ;  pressive  pain  on  vertex ;
itching  of  eyes;  pain  in  superciliary  ridge;  trembling  of  eyelid;  sneezing;
pres^■ure  in  facial  bones;  coated  tongue;  roughness  in  throat;  increased  ap-
petite ;  nausea,  etc. ;  pressure  in  liver ;  stitches  in  right  hypochondrium  ;
burning  and  itching  in  anus ;  urging  towards  anus ;  urine  light-colored,
like  water  ;  excessive  sexual  desire  ;  cough;  violent  attacks  of  cough;  vio-
lent cough,  with  expectoration  of  mucus ;  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest ;  slight
coughing  of  mucus  ;  frequent  violent  cough,  etc. ;  cough,  bringing  up  flakes
of  mucus ;  cough  of  thick  mucus ;  violent  cough,  with  expectoration  of
mucus,  etc. ;  indications  of  cough  ;  burning  in  both  legs  ;  paiu  in  left  hip  ;
burning  in  right  leg;  the  left  limb  aches ;  pain  in  right  tibia;  pains  in  left
tibia. — (Morning,  in  bed),  Headache  ;  violent  sneezing ;  chirping  in  occip-
ital region  of  neck,  etc. ;  muscles  of  posterior  cervical  region  feel  too  short ;
coldness  in  right  axilla. — (Morning,  on  awaking'),  Dull  headache ;  head-
ache, etc. ;  headache  in  forehead  ;  drawing  headache  in  forehead  ;  pain  in
frontal  eminence ;  painful  stretching  of  the  eye ;  pain  in  superciliary
ridge,  etc. ;  biting  in  edges  of  lids ;  heat  of  head  and  face,  etc. ;  pain  in  ar-
ticulation of  jaw,  etc. ;  dry  feeling  in  fauces,  etc. ;  pressure  in  region  of
stomach ;  violent  cough ;  violent  convulsive  cough  ;  labored,  mostly  dry
cough,  etc. ;  mucous  expectoration  ;  cough,  with  loose  expectoration  ;  palpi-
tation of  heart ;  blows  in  the  heart,  etc. ;  tensive  pain  in  tendons  of  left
upper  arm  ;  sensation  of  pain  in  right  hand  ;  prostrate  and  confused  ;  heav-
iness in  whole  body. — {Morning,  on  rising),  Nasal  catarrh  ;  blowing  blood
from  nose ;  stiff  pain  in  right  biceps. — (Mornings,  after  rising).  Bruised  pain
in  right  hip;  pains  in  the  tibise. — (Early  morning),  Heavm&ss  and  confu-
sion of  head,  etc. ;  giddiness  ;  vertigo,  etc. ;  headache ;  pain  in  right  half  of
occiput,  etc. ;  drawing  pain  in  occiput,  etc. ;  stitches  in  occiput ;  agglutina-
tion of  lids;  bad  smell  from  mouth,  etc. ;  much  hunger,  but  no  appetite;
eructations,  etc. ;  grunting  in  abdomen ;  colic,  etc. ;  liquid  stools,  etc. ;  erec-
tions ;  small,  quick  pulse,  etc. ;  muscles  of  back  feel  too  short ;  knee-joints
painful ;  weariness  ;  frequent  yawning ;  sleepiness. — (Forenoon),  Head  con-
fused ;  stupefaction  of  head ;  dulness  of  head ;  one-sided  headache,  etc. ;
pains  in  occiput  and  nape,  etc. ;  external  pain  in  head,  etc. ;  tension  across


AGARICUS.  121

occiput,  etc. ;  stitclies  in  occiput ;  slight  nausea ;  good  deal  of  thirst ;  exces-
sive thirst,  etc. ;  eructations,  etc. ;  sour  eructations ;  nausea,  etc. ;  sensation
of  flabbiness  in  stomach  ;  discomfort  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  pressure,  etc.,  in  ab-
domen, etc. ;  stitches  in  abdominal  walls,  etc. ;  griping  in  lower  abdomen  ;
pains  in  lower  abdomen  ;  urine  watery  ;  frequent  cough  ;  violent  cough  ;
convulsive  cough;  short,  dry  cough  ;  frequent  cough,  etc. ;  attacks  of  cough,
etc. ;  oppression,  etc.,  in  chest ;  punctiform  stitches  in  chest ;  drawing,  etc.,
in  long  bones ;  tearing  in  left  forearm  bones ;  contraction  in  flexors  of  left
thigh  ;  great  deal  of  perspiration ;  frequent  yawning,  etc. ;  sleepiness. —
(  Towards  noon),  Stitch  over  left  eyebrow,  etc. ;  trembling  of  upper  eyelid  ;
feeling  as  of  nausea;  stitch  in  liver;  disagreeable  sensation  in  anus;  slight
shooting  pains  and  tension  in  the  chest ;  drawing  pains  in  both  tibise. —
(Noon),  Dulness  of  head;  pressure  in  both  temples;  pressure  in  right  eye,
etc.;  cramps  in  stomach;  griping  in  abdomen ;  heat  and  itching  in  anus ;
pressure  in  anus;  evacuations;  coughing;  pain  in  region  of  heart,  etc.;
stitch  in  the  sacrum  ;  pains  in  loins,  etc. ;  crawling,  etc.,  in  skin  of  legs,
etc. ;  pain  in  hip-joint,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  tibia  ;  pain  in  sole  of  right  foot. — ■
(Afternoon),  Drawing  pains  in  occiput;  pain  in  left  upper  molar  teeth;
toothache  ;  offensive  taste  ;  violent  thirst ;  eructations ;  hiccough  ;  pain  in
stomach  passes  to  epigastrium;  stitches  in  region  of  spleen;  pain  in  lower
abdomen  ;  dark-green,  etc.,  stool ;  urine  flame-colored  ;  urine  milky  ;  attack
of  coughing,  etc. ;  violent  coughing ;  pain  stretching  from  back,  etc. ;  tear-
ing in  left  forearm ;  rheumatic  pains  in  left  forearm ;  tearing  burning  in
right  thumb  ;  pain  in  legs  ;  dull  sensation,  like  pain,  in  the  hips  ;  drawing
in  left  thigh  ;  bending  of  left  knee  ;  heat,  with  sweat,  etc. ;  great  sleepiness.
— -(Towards  evening),  Increased  appetite;  rabid  hunger;  tensive  pain  at  pit
of  stomach,  etc. ;  drawing  in  region  of  pit  of  stomach,  etc. ;  drawing  in  back
and  .sacrum,  etc. ;  cough. — (-Euenm^'),  Vertigo,  etc. ;  headache;  sensation
of  contraction  in  eyes  ;  agglutination  of  lids ;  itching  on  bulbus ;  dizzy  vis-
ion ;  fluent  coryza  ;  warmth  of  face;  sensitiveness  of  front  teeth  ;  feeling  of
tension  in  region  of  thyroid  gland;  pinching,  etc.,  in  epigastrium  ;  pressure
in  spleen,  etc. ;  din  in  the  abdomen,  etc. ;  cutting  in  hypogastrium  ;  cutting
itching  in  rectum  ;  evacuations  ;  disagreeable  sensation  in  urethra  ;  stitches
in  chest,  etc. ;  pain  in  right  chest,  etc. ;  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  pal-
pitation of  heart;  backache;  twitches  in  right  lumbar  muscles;  pain  in
both  sides  of  sacrum  ;  tearing  pain  in  muscles  of  left  upper  arm,  etc.  ;  burn-
ing in  right  leg;  light  pains  in  tibiae;  pains  in  dorsum  of  left  foot;  convul-
sions, etc. ;  sensation  as  if  the  whole  body  were  shaken  through  ;  long-con-
tinued chill,  etc. ;  feverish  chills;  violent  attack  of  heat,  etc. ;  heat  and
sweat. — (Late  in  evening).  Cutting  in  abdomen  ;  tearing  pain  in  second
joint  of  left  forefinger;  burning  pain  in  dorsum  of  left  foot. — (Evening,  in
bed),  Jumping  in  recti  muscles;  perspiration  on  inner  surface  of  legs;  per-
spiration, etc. — (Night),  Pressive  pain  in  vertex;  pains  in  stomach,  etc. ;
trouble  from  flatus ;  itching  of  hypogastrium ;  three  watery  stools,  etc. ;
knotty  stools ;  burning  in  orifice  of  urethra  ;  violent  desire  to  urinate  ;  pas-
sage of  much  urine  ;  erections  ;  violent  spasmodic  cough;  violent  cough,  etc.  ;
attacks  of  cough  ;  snoring  and  wheezing  in  chest ;  sweat  upon  chest ;  pain-
ful shocks  in  the  heart ;  pains  along  the  back,  etc. ;  stitch  in  dorsal  ver-
tebra ;  pain  in  left  kidney  region ;  left  hand  goes  to  sleep ;  pain  in  legs  and
feet;  perspiration  on  the  legs;  sense  of  coldness  in  left  leg;  pain  in  right
tibia ;  cramp  in  sole  of  foot ;  heat ;  increase  of  animal  heat ;  continual  heat ;
copious  sweat ;  copious  sweats  about  the  legs ;  fear  of  suflTocation,  etc. — (Be-
fore midnight),  Itching  and  burning,  etc. — (Midnight),  Pain  in  left  temple;


122  AGARICUS.

pain  in  left  abdominal  region. — {Towards  11  a.m.),  Difficulty  in  breathing.
— (10  A.M.  till  2  P.M.),  Pain  in  left  half  of  head,  etc. — (2  to  6  p.m.),  Laiiie
pain  in  left  arm. — (3  to  5  p.m.),  Uninterrupted  palpitation  of  heart. — (4
P.M.  till  evening),  Constant  pressure  near  the  heart. — {Towards  1  o'clock  at
night),  Pain  in  upper  teeth. — (Night,  at  2  o'clock).  Jerks  and  pressive  pain
in  right  ankle. — {S  at  night),  Eestlessness  in  every  muscle,  etc. — {Open
air),  Vertigo ;  headache  in  forehead ;  chilliness. — (  Walking  in  open  air),
Reeling ;  staggering ;  vertigo ;  pain  in  supra-orbital  region  ;  decrease  of
sight ;  ringing  in  right  ear  ;  griping  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  griping  in  lower  ab-
domen ;  fJressive  pain  in  sacrum,  etc. ;  stitch  in  the  sacrum  ;  creeping  heat
through  the  back,  etc. ;  frequent  yawning. — {Bending  body  backwards  or
forwards).  Stitches  in  lung. — {Bending  body  down).  Clear  water  drops  out
of  nose ;  nose  feels  obstructed ;  sensation  of  tension  across  region  of  lungs,
etc. ;  posterior  cervical  muscles  feel  too  short ;  pricking  in  cervical  verte-
brae ;  .muscles  of  back  feel  too  short ;  painfulness  along  spinal  cord  ;  oppres-
sion of  heart,  etc. ;  crackling  of  lumbar  vertebrae. — {Deep  stooping),  Pains
in  limbs,  etc. — {Bending  body  to  left),  Pressive  feeling  in  hypochondrium,
etc. — {Before  going  to  bed),  Violent  palpitation  of  heart.— (j/ie?-  breakfast),
Pressure  in  temporal  bone ;  jerks  in  loose  tooth  ;  offensive  taste  in  mouth,
etc. ;  attack  of  nausea ;  sensation  of  discomfort  in  stomach  ;  burning,  etc.,
in  stomach  ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;  sensation  of  lieaviness,  etc.,  in  stomach  ;
oppression  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  sensattion  of  heaviness  under  navel ;  griping  in
region  of  navel;  distension  of  abdomen;  gurgling  and  rattling  in  intestines;
burning  in  abdomen ;  slight  griping ;  sensation  of  flatus ;  copious  pappy  stool ;
scanty,  pappy,  painless  stool ;  tension  across  the  chest,  etc. ;  tension  and  pres-
sure over  whole  chest;  pain  below  sternum  ;  sore  pain  under  sternum. —
{Breathing),  Dull  stitches  in  the  liver;  stitches  in  middle  of  right  lung;
stitches  in  left  side  of  chest ;  stitches  in  left  lung. — {Drawing  breath).  Stitches
in  left  short  ribs ;  stitches  in  left  side  of  chest ;  pressure  at  middle  of  sternum.
— {Bihalation),  Soreness  in  nostril. — {Deep  breathing),  Sense  of  motion,  etc.,
in  muscles  of  chest,  etc. ;  sprained  pain  in  chest ;  pains  from  region  of  heart,
etc. — {At  end  of  expiration).  Sticking  behind  sternum,  etc. — {Closing  eyes).
Pressure  under  the  lids;  burning  of  canthus  of  eyes. — {Cold),  Toothache.
— (Jft  cooler  air),  Easy  chilliness. — {Touch  of  cold  finger  to  warm  part  of
body),  Easy  chilliness. — {Raising  cover  of  bed).  Chilliness;  chills  with  shak-
ing.— {Cold  air  passing  into  ear).  Pain  in  ear,  etc. — {Looking  out  of  open
windoiu  in  cool  air).  Pain  in  teeth  ;  pain  in  right  knee,  etc. — {Crossing  the
thighs),  Violent  pain  in  thigh  ;  drawing  and  tearing  in  right  thigh. — {After
(iijiner).  Headache;  premonitions  of  headache;  pressure  in  eyes,  etc. ;  nausea,
etc. ;  inclination  to  vomit ;  sense  of  fulness,  etc.,  in  stomach  ;  feeling  of  ful-
ness and  flatus;  oppression  at  pit  of  stomach,  etc.;  heaviness,  etc.,  in  abdo-
men, etc. ;  hard,  scraping  stool ;  coughing  and  sneezing,  etc. ;  short,  dry
cough  ;  burning  in  chest ;  slight  backache,  etc. ;  pain  in  spine  ;  prostration
of  lower  limbs;  cold  feeling  on  gluteal  muscles;  tearing  pains  in  left  tibia;
unusual  sleepiness;  irresistible  somnolence;  long  and  deep  sleep. — {After
drinking  cold  water).  Jerks  in  loose  tooth  ;  nausea. — {After  an  embrace),
Great  weariness ;  much  exhausted,  etc. — {After  eating  moderately).  Feeling
of  distension  in  abdomen  ;  pressure,  etc.,  in  abdomen. — {After  eating  a  little),
Pressure  in  stomach. — {After  eating  meat),  Heartburn. — (After  moderate  ex-
ercise), Groat  fatigue ;  sweat. — (After  passage  of  fiat/us).  Hard  stool. -—(/ft
gloomy  weather).  Brown  spot  before  eye. — (In  passing  wind).  Great  pain  in
rectum. — (Putting  on  hat).  Heat  and  sweat. — (Heat  of  sun),  Vertigo. — (Efic-
coughing).  Pains  from  region  of  heart. — (Leaning  back  against  chair).  Pain


AGARICUS.  123

in  spinal  column  ;  pressive  pain  in  sacrum  ;  chill  in  back. — {Lifting  up  or
putting  down  the  foot),  Pain  in  right  calf. — {Light  of  sun).  Giddiness. —
{Lying  on  left  side),  Pain,  etc.,  in  left  ear. — {Looking  at  light  objects),  Yel-
low spots  before  eyes. — -{Looking  into  the  light),  Dizzy  dulness  of  head. —
(  Using  eyes  by  lamplight),  Pressure  in  eyes. — {Lying  on  hack),  Eattling  of
mucus  in  chest. — {Lying  down).  Headache,  etc. ;  pain  iu  occiput,  etc. ;  rush-
ing in  ear ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  bruised  pain  in  lumbar  region  ;  twitching
of  the  muscles ;  pain  in  knee. — {Lying  down  at  night),  Blows  in  heart,  etc.
■ — {After  a  meal),  ^ong\ie  coated  white,  etc. ;  nausea;  oppression  at  stom-
ach ;  soreness  in  hypochondria ;  frequent  cp\],gh..— {Moving  head  to  either
side).  Back  of  neck  hurt,  etc. — {More  rapid  motion  of  head),

— {Motion  of  body),  Backache.— (i^MriJigt  increased  motion  of  body),
Dragging,  etc.,  along  spinal  cord ;  pain  in  several  places  of  spinal  cord. —
{Slight  movement).  Easy  chilliness. — {After  motion).  Bruised  feeling  of  bones
of  extremities. — {Moving  Hie  part).  Tension  in  right  upper  arm. — {Moving
the  joints).  Cracking  in  them. — {Moving  eyes),  Pressure  in  eyes ;  burning
and  pressure  in  eyeballs ;  sensitiveness  of  eyeballs. — {Moving  mouth).  Flow
of  saliva. — {Moviiig  hands,  or  holding  something  with  them).  Tremor  of
hands. — {Slight  noise).  Stitches  in  frontal  eminences ;  blows  in  heart,  etc. —
{When  lea'it  taken  notice  of).  Disagreeable  sensation  in  head,  etc. — {Open-
ing and  shutting  eyes).  Burning  in  eyes. — {Five  minutes  after  commencement
of  palpitation  of  heart),  Lame  pain  in  left  hand  and  arm. — {Pressure),
Creaking  of  occiput ;  pressure,  etc.,  in  stomach  ;  pain  in  umbilical  region.
— {Reading),  Dizzy  dulness  of  head  ;  twitching  and  pressing  in  left  eyeball ;
loss  of  virion;  eyes  grow  weak  ;  overwhelming  sleepiness. — {Best),  Oppres-
sion behind  sternum,  etc. ;  tearing  in  left  forearm,  etc. ;  rheumatic  pains  in
left  forearm  ;  stitches  in  left  foot,  etc. ;  stitches  in  the  toes ;  symptoms  gen-
erally.— {Getting  out  of  bed).  Knee-joints  painful. — {After  getting  up).  Itch-
ing of  scalp.— {After  rising).  Stitch  in  the  forehead,  etc. ;  pain  inside  of
chest ;  tension  in  right  leg. — {Rising  from  seat),  Anxiety  in  chest,  etc. ;  pain
in  small  of  back ;  stitches  in  right  knee ;  sense  of  stiffness  in  tendo  Achillis.
— {Rising,  after  sitting  awhile),  Pain  in  legs. — {Rising  from  seat  and  righting
body).  Back  feels  stiff. — {Raising  head).  Flow  of  saliva  into  mouth. — {Rais-
ing left  arm).  Pain  in  deltoid  muscles. — {Raising  thigh  when  sitting).  Pain
in  small  of  back. — {Li  room),  Vertigo  ;  inclination  to  vomit. — {Sitting),
Pressure  in  forehead ;  pain  in  forehead  becomes  pressing  and  stunning ;
pain  in  forehead,  etc. ;  occipital  headache ;  spasms  below  diaphragm  ;  dry
cough,  etc. ;  oppression,  etc.,  in  chest ;  sudden  stitches  in  chest,  etc. ;  irregu-
lar, strong  beats  of  heart,  etc. ;  anxious  sense  in  heart ;  muscles  of  back  of
neck  feel  short ;  muscles  of  back  feel  short ;  pains  in  dorsal  muscles  ;  pain
in  small  of  back  ;  bruised  pain  in  lumbar  region  ;  tearing  in  lumbar  mus-
cles ;  pain  in  sacrum  ;  tearing  in  legs  ;  the  pains  in  legs  ;  dull  sensation  re-
sembling pain  in  hips ;  sitting  parts  feel  bruised ;  tearing  in  left  half  of
nates ;  tearing  in  right  thigh  ;  knee-joints  painful ;  pain  in  knees ;  tearing  in
knee-joint ;  boring,  etc.,  in  right  knee ;  pain  in  leg,  etc. ;  tearing  in  leg  ;  the
pains  in  the  tibia ;  bruised  pain  of  inner  side  of  gastrocnemii ;  tearing  in
outer  surface  of  calf;  pressure  upon  left  malleolus;  tearing  in  hollow  of
right  foot ;  stitches  in  lower  surface  of  heel ;  drawing,  etc.,  upon  lower  sur-
face of  right  big  toe ;  various  painS ;  symptoms  of  muscles ;  cramp-like  pain
in  all  the  muscles,  etc. ;  boring  pain  in  head,  thighs,  etc. ;  bruised  pain  and
fatigue. — {After  sitting).  Pain  in  external  surface  .of  both  thighs. — {Sitting
ivith  a  stooping  chest),  Stitches  under  left  short  ribs ;  fine  stitch  in  left  chest.
— {Standing),  Pain  in  forehead ;  oppression  iu  stomach  ;  painful  palpita-


124  AGARICU8.

tion  of  heart ;  bruised  feeling  in  small  of  back  ;  paralytic  pain  in  loins  ;
pain  in  right  loin  ;  cramp  in  ball  of  thumb  ;  the  pains  in  legs ;  tearing  in
knee-joint ;  bruised  pain  in  heels  ;  sharp  stitches  in  left  toes ;  convulsions,
etc. ;  sensation  as  if  the  whole  body  were  shaken  through. — (Stepping),
Stitches  in  heel. — (Scratching),  Burning  and  itching. — (Before  and  during
stools),  Pinching  and  cutting  in  abdomen. — (After  stool),  Rumbling  in  ab-
domen ;  creeping  in  lower  abdomen,  etc. — (Stretching  and  holding  in  the
breast).  Drawing  pain  in  occiput. — (Stretching  and  turning  thigh  outward),
Tensive  sensation  in  region  of  right  loin. — (Swallowing),  Dryness  of  palate,
etc. — (Empty  swallouiing).  Creaking  in  ears. — (Swallowing  saliva),  Painful
sensation  in  fauces. — (Sneezing),  Stitches  in  region  of  sacrum ;  pains  from
region  of  heart. — (Smoking  tobacco).  Empty  risings,  etc. ;  inclination  to
cough. — (Touch),  ~Ps\n  in  parietal  bone ;  burning  in  canthus;  stitches  in
throat ;  pain  in  right  loin  ;  pain  between  eighth  and  ninth  dorsal  vertebrae ;
pain  in  muscles  of  extremities ;  pain  in  back  of  right  hand,  etc. ;  pricking
in  left  thumb. — (Touching  the  hairs).  Pressure  upon  temporal  bones,  etc. —
(Every  turning  motion  of  body).  Increased  painfulness  of  spinal  column;
violent  pain  in  spinal  column,  etc. ;  pain  in  region  of  eighth  and  ninth  dor-
sal vertebras. — (Turning  head  backwards  and  towards  left),  Sprained  sensa-
tion of  neck,  etc. — (  When  undressing  in  evening).  Burning  itching  of  legs,
etc. — (  When  urinating),  Drawing  in  left  groin  ;  burning  sensation. — (  When
vexed).  Palpitation  of  heart. — (While  vomiting),  Sensation  of  foreign -body
in  fauces. — (After  vomiting),  Feeling  in  left  eyeball  as  though  enlarged. —
(  Walking),  Vertigo ;  oppression  in  stomach  ;  stitches  in  abdominal  walls,
etc. ;  pain  in  left  groin ;  difficulty  of  breathiug ;  punctiform  stitches  in
chest ;  pressure  on  breast,  etc. ;  stitches  in  right  lung ;  pain  from  sides  of
lumbar  vertebras ;  tearing  in  lumbar  muscles  ;  paralytic  pains  in  loins ;  pain
in  sacrum,  with  exhaustion ;  prostration  of  lower  limbs  ;  pain  in  the  hip ;
biting  on  the  thighs ;  pain  on  outside  of  thighs ;  tearing  in  right  thigh  ;
paralytic  pain  in  right  thigh  ;  contraction  in  flexors  of  left  thigh  ;  weakness
in  knees;  pain  in  left  knee;  sudden  bending  of  left  knee;  drawing  in  left
tibia;  pain  in  right  calf ;  pain  about  both  ankles  ;  pain  in  heel ;  drawing
sensation  in  right  foot,  etc. ;  pains  in  dorsum  of  left  foot ;  tearing  in  soles
of  feet. — (After  walking  through  room),  Bruised  pain  in  extremities,  etc. ;
pressing  pain  in  lower  part  of  left  leg. — (  Walking  upstairs),  Pain  in  right
knee-joint ;  painful  fatigue  of  legs. — (  Walking  up  little  hill),  Copious  sweat,
etc. — (In  warm  bed).  Burning  in  both  feet. — (  Washing  with  a  sponge).  Sen-
sitiveness of  spinal  column. — (After  garden  work).  Pain  in  back,  etc. —
(  While  writing).  Flickering  before  eyes ;  unsteadiness  of  right  hand  ;  tremor
of  the  hands. — (After  writing).  Sensation  of  going  to  sleep,  etc.,  in  right
fourth  or  fifth  fingers,  etc.^-(  Writing  stooping,  or  while  standing).  Going
to  sleep  of  hand.

Atnelioriition. — (Early  in  morning).  Pulse  less  intermittent. — (Morn-
ings, after  waking),  Pain  in  lumbar  region,  etc. — (Forenoon'),  Pains  in  left
tibia. — (Towards  morning).  Violent  itching. — (Towards  4  p.m.),  Redness
of  face,  etc. — (Open  air),  Vertigo;  inclination  to  vomit. — (Wcdking  in
open  air),  Dulness  of  head ;  feeling  of  prostration. — (Boring  with  finger),
Tickling  itching  in  lobe  of  ear. — (Expiration),  Sore  feeling  in  left  nostril.
— (After  drinking  coffee),  Pulse  less  intermittent,  etc. — (Eructations),  Occur-
rence of  nausea. — (Extending  the  limb).  Drawing  and  tearing  in  right  thigh.
—(Passage  of  flatus),  F^essive  pain,  etc.,  in  stomach;  pinching  sensation
inside  of  abdomen  ;  abdominal  pains. — (After  passage  of  offensive  flatus).
Pains  in  stomach,  etc. — (Lying  on  left  side),  Tension  in  tendons,  etc.,  of


AGARICUS  PANTHERINUS.  125

right  lumbar  region. — {Meditating),  Vertigo.' — {Motion),  Pain  in  small  of
back  ;  tearing  in  legs ;  the  pains  in  the  legs ;  pain  in  knee ;  prostration  and
weakness,  etc. — {Continued  motion),  Puia  in  limbs. — {When  observing  the
pain),  Indistinct  disagreeable  sensation,  etc. — {After  perspiration  in  morn-
ing), Itching  of  hypogastriiim. — {Pressure),  Frontal  headache;  pain  in
forehead  ;  pain  in  left  temple  ;  griping  in  lower  abdomen,  etc. ;  stitches  in
right  lung;  pain  between  eighth  and  ninth  dorsal  vertebrae. — {When  ris-
ing). Rushing  in  ears. — {After  rising),  Burning  in  both  legs,  etc. ;  pains  in
tibia. — {Li  room).  Vertigo. — {R\Ming),  Itching  and  pressure  in  eye. —
{Scratching),  Pain  over  left  eyebrow;  stitch  over  left  eyebrow. — {Scratching
with  sharp  comb),  Itching  of  scalp. — {Sitting),  Disagreeable  feeling  in  anus,
etc. ;  stiffness  and  pain  in  back  ;  cramp  in  ball  of  thumb  ;  pain  in  hip. —
{Standing),  Pain  in  internal  side  of  gastrocnemii. — {After  copious  stool),
Headache. — {Thinking  of  something  else),  Vertigo,  etc. — {Touch),  Pain
over  cranium  ;  pressure  on  internal  side  of  gastrocnemii. — {Turning  head
quickly).  Vertigo. — {Spontaneous  vomiting).  Spasms,  etc. — (  Walking),  Dull
sensation  like  pain  in  hips ;  tearing  in  left  half  of  nates ;  stitches  in  both
knees ;  pain  about  both  ankles,  etc. ;  pain  in  knees ;  drawing  in  posterior
side  of  left  leg,  etc. ;  pain  in  the  tibia  ;  pains  in  left  tibia ;  great  weakness,
etc. ;  itching  in  popliteal  space ;  burning  in  inner  surface  of  thigh  ;  sweat ;
profuse  sweat. — {After  short  but  quick  walking),  Fatigue. — {After  continued
walking),  Bruised  pain  in  right  hip. — {Walking  on  level  floor),  Fsimful
fatigue  of  legs. — (  Warmth  of  bed).  Pains  in  bones,  etc. — (  Washing  body  in
cold  water),  Pain  in  superciliary  ridge,  etc. — (  Wine),  Contraction  of  eye,
etc. — (  Wiping),  Adhesion  of  eyelids.

NOTES BY  DE. HUGHES.

Authorities.  36,  Voigtel,  general  statement  of  the  effects  of  Agaricus ;
37,  Murray,  ditto  ;  40,  Pharm.  Lex. ;  and  41,  Lerger,  not  accessible  ;  S.  48,
not  found  ;  S.  70,  old  people  remain  stupid  after  the  intoxication  has  passed
off;  S.  2267,  after  drinking  their  own  urine  passed  during  the  intoxication  ;
S.  2309,  reaction  after  the  intoxication.

A  few  symptoms  without  references  are  from  the  Austrian  rhume. — T.  F.  A.

AGARICUS  PANTHERINUS.

A.  pantherinus,  D.  C.  (Spotted  Amanita.)  A  brownish  species  (not
reddish,  as  A.  muscarius),  found  in  woods  or  pastures  in  England  and  in
the  United  States,  not  considered  poisonous.

Mlhlfl. — Delirium. — Maniacal  disposition  to  rave. — Loss  of  memory. —
State  of  consciousness  resembling  coma.

Head. — Great  heaviness  of  the  head.

Mouth. — ^Lips  tremble.

Throat. — Difficult  deglutition.

Stomach. — Some  loss  of  appetite.

Stool  and  Anus. — Slight  diarrhoea.

Upper  Extremities. — Trembling  of  the  hands.

Generalities. — General  overpowering  sense  of  fatigue. — Extreme
lassitude  and  torpor. — Loss  of  power  of  co-ordinating  muscular  movements.
— Convulsive  movements.

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Invincible  drowsiness. — Stupor. — During
sleep,  respiration  embarrassed ;  face  congested  and  of  a  livid  hue  ;  pulse
rather  slow.


126  AGARICUS  PHALLOIDES.


AGAEICUS  PHALLOIDES.

A.  phalloides,  Fr.  (A.  bulbosus,  Bull.,  in  part.)  Amanita  bnlbosa,
Lara.  A  small  stinking  species,  common  in  Europe,  and  in  United  States
(Pennsylvania). Poisonous. Common  name,  L'Oronge-cigue.

Authority. Poison  cases. (Tox.  Lafargue  J.  de  Chim.  Med.,  1863.)

JKind. — Mental  excitement  for  three  days  after  taking  them,  t. — Delir-
ium, with  faint,  indistinct  dreams,  t. — He  seems  very  averse  to  lying  down,
and  his  restlessness  and  impatience  lead  him  to  make  frequent  attempts  to
walk  about,  but  without  any  fixed  object  or  design,  t. — Consciousness  good
(speech  good,  etc.),  t. — Complete  consciousness  till  death,  t. — Stupor.

Head. — Frightful  pains  in  head,  t

Eyes. — Pupil  much  dilated,  with  impaired  vision,  t.

Face. — Deathlike  pallor,  t. — -Face  red,  t. — Face  cyanotic,  t. — The  coun-
tenance became  hippocratic,  t. — Very  anxious  expression  efface,  t.

jyEoiltll. — Teeth  and  gums  black,  t. — Cold  tongue,  t. — Tongue  red,  dry,  t.
— Breath  cold,  t. — Ulcerated  mouth,  t. — Trismus,  t. — Unable  to  answer
questions,  or  express  his  feelings  by  words,  t. — Speech  indistinct,  t. — Speech
slow  and  ditficult,  t.

Throat.— Throat  dry,  t.

Stomach. — Thirst  violent,  t. — ^Nausea,  t. — Nausea ;  then  vomiting  and
diarrhoea  (fetid),  t. —  Vomitings,  i. — Every  food  was  vomited,  t. — Vomiting
of  all  liquids,  t. — Vomiting,  mucous  and  bilious,  t. —  Very  frequent  bilious
and  mucous  vomitings,  t. — Vomiting  of  an  offensive  greenish-colored  fluid,  t
— Bloody  vomiting,  half  an  hour  before  death,  t. — Pains  in  the  stomach
and  hypogastrium,  followed  by  anxiety  and  vomitings,  t. — Incessant  cramps
of  the  stomach,  t. — Violent  cramp  in  stomach,  t. — Painful  sensations  in  })it
of  stomach  and  upper  abdomen,  t. — Violent  pains  in  epigastrium,  which
rapidly  spread  over  the  whole  abdomen,  t. — Pains  in  epigastrium,  greatly
increased  by  pressure,  t.

Abdomen. — Tense  abdomen,  t. — Abdomen  feels  hard  and  tumid,  t. —
Abdomen  painful,  *.— Unendurable  pains  in  hypogastrium  and  lumbar
region,  t.

Stool  and  Anus. — Inflamed  anus,  t — Frequent  bilious  stools,  t. —
Wliitish  stools,  as  in  Asiatic  cholera,  t. — Frequent  watery  stools,  t. — Bloody
stools  on  third  and  fourth  days,  t

TTrinary  Ovgaiis. — Suppression  of  urine,  t. — Anuria,  t.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Voice  hoarse,  t. — Respiration  short,  t.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  full,  rapid  (later  action),! — Pulse  hard
and  frequent,  t. — Pulse  slow  and  somewhat  irregular,  t. — Puhe  small  and
intermittent,  t. — Pulse  hardly  perceptible,  t.

Extremities  in  General. — Cold  extremities,  t. — Skin  of  extremi-
ties lost  their  elasticity,  t.

TTpjjer  Extrem,ities. — Upper  extremities  swell  and  assume  a  livid
color,  t. — Finger-tips  livid,  t.

Lower  Extremities. — Drawing  back  of  limbs,  t. —  Cramps  of  the
legs,  t. — Cramps  in  calves,  t. — Cramps,  especially  painful  in  feet,  t. — Cramps
in  feet,  with  drawing  back  of  the  limbs,  t.

Generalities, — Convulsions  and  death  (in  two  children),  t. — Convul-
sions violent,  t. — Slight  convulsive  motions  in  the  legs  and  arms,  which
gradually  extend  to  the  muscles  of  the  trunk,  and  cause  irregular  distor-
tions of  the  whole  body,  t. — Constant  restlessness,  t. — Very  painful  cramps,  t.


AGARICUS  PROCERUS— AGNUS  CASTUS.  127

— Debility,  t. — Extreme  prostration,  t. — Great  exhaustion,  t. — General  ma-
laise, (. — He  staggers  as  if  intoxicated,  and,  with  odd  gesticulations,  labors
to  express  his  sufferings,  but  cannot  articulate  a  syllable,  t. — Development
of  a  "  true  cholera,"  t. — Sometimes  a  kind  of  cholera  sets  in,  which  saves  the
patient;  but,  in  general,  when  cured,  their  convalescence  is  protracted,  t.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  characteristics  about  this  drug  is,  that  its
poisonous  effects  do  not  develop  until  ten  to  twelve  hours  after  eating  it.
{Colchicum  resembles  it  in  this  respect.)  The  fungus  is  exceedingly  fatal ;
twenty-three  out  of  thirty-eight  cases  died  (Boudier).  Other  collected
cases  show  thirteen  out  of  twenty-nine  (Husemann).  The  effects  of  this
drug  resemble  most  clearly  a  most  violent  attack  of  cholera.

Sliin, — Livid  skin,  t. — Body  covered  with  livid  spots,  t.

Fever. — Marked  chilliness,  t. — Skin  cool,  afterwards  hot,  t. — Skin  hot,  t.
— Skin  covered  with  sweat,  t. — Sweat  cold,  t.

Sleep  and  Z)reain«.— Somnolence.

Conditions. — Aggravation, — {Pressure),  Pain  in  epigastrium.


AGARICUS  PROCERUS. .

A.  procerus.  Scop.  (Parasol  mushroom.)  Found  in  England,  common
in  pasture  (also  in  Pennsylvania). Stem,  8-12  inches  high. Esculent.

Authority. Poisoning  cases.

Furious  delirium,  with  frantic  cries  and  vehement  resistance  to  remedies,
followed  by  a  state  like  delirium  tremens. — Insensibility. — Giddiness  and
staggering,  as  if  intoxicated. — Pupils  contracted ;  dilating  as  sensibility
returns. — Occasional  convulsive  spasms. — Debility. — Drowsiness.


AGARICUS  SEMIGLOBATUS.

A.  semiglobatus,  Batsch.  Common  on  dung,  England  and  United
States. Stem,  2-3  inches  high.

Authority. Poisoning  cases.

Spirits  exhilarated. — Stupor. — Tongue  parched  ;  slightly  streaked  with
white.— Severe  pains  in  bowels,  increased  by  pressure,  with  violent  purging
and  vomiting. — Urine  scanty. — Miscarriage  in  second  month. — Pulse  100-
120. — Fatal  convulsions.


AGNUS  CASTUS.

Vitex  agnus  castus,  L.  Nat.  order,  Verbenacese.  Common  name  (Engl.),
Chaste  tree;  (Germ.)  Keuschlamm ;  (Fr.)" Gattilier,  Pommes  d'apis.
Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  ripe  berries.

Authorities.  1,  Hahnemann,  Archive,  10,  1,  178 ;  2,  Franz,  ibid. ;  3,
Gross,  ibid.;  4,  Herrmann,  ibid.;  5,  Seidel,  Archive,  13,  2,  186;  6,  Stapf,
Archive,  10,  1,  178 ;  7,  Helbig,  Heraclides,  1,  43 ;  8,  Sn.,  in  Stapf's  Bei-
trage.

Mind. — Melancholy,  hypochondriac  mood  the  whole  day ;  he  feels  as
if  nothing  existed  around  him ;  he  is  dissatisfied  with  himself  all  the  time ;
he  is  incapable  of  attending  to  any  business ;  the  things  around  him  arc


128  AGNUS  CASTUS.

entirely  indifferent  to  him  ;  while  attending  to  his  business,  he  is  apt  to  fall
into  a  thoughtless  mood,". — He  sometimes  feels  as  if  he  were  nobody,  and
would  rather  be  dead  than  have  that  feeling;  when  possessed  by  that  feel-
ing, he  has  no  courage  to  undertake  anything ;  and  when  free  from  it  he
feels  exalted,  would  like  to  read  like  an  orator,  etc.,^ — *She  is  very  sad,  and
keeps  repeating  that  she  tvill  soon  die  ("  A.,"  in  Stapf 's  Beitrage). — Gloomy
sensation  in  the  head  over  the  eyes  (this  symptom  was  observed  in  a
man  of  twenty-five  years,  whose  genital  organs  were  habitually  weak),^ —
*  Extreme  absence  of  mind ;  he  is  unable  to  recollect  things ;  for  instance,  in
playing  cards,  which  he  was  fond  of  and  ^new  well,  he  did  not  know  what
card  he  was  to  play,  or  what  he  was  to  do  at  all,^ — *  He  finds  reading  diffi-
cult ;  he  has  to  read  several  things  twice ;  he  is  unable  to  fix  his  attention*.

Head. — Vertigo;  sensation  as  if  everything  were  turning  in  a  circle.;
in  a  few  days,*. — Confusion  of  head,  like  a  drawing  in  the  whole  head,'. —
The  head  feels  confused,*. — [10.]  Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  pressure  in
the  nape  of  the  neck  ;  sensation  as  if  the  head  would  fall  forward,'. — Con-
tractive headache,  when  reading,''. — Tensive  tearing  in  the  forehead  (about
one-half  hour),'. — Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,'. —
Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  temples  a»d  forehead,  in  the  brain;  more  vio-
lent during  motion  (about  two  hours),''. — Contractive  headache  above  the
temples  (about  twelve  hours),^ — Tearing  and  sticking  in  the  temples,  espe-
cially above  the  right  eye,  and  in  the  other  parts  of  the  brain  ;  more  vio-
lent during  motion  (about  one  hour),\ — Tearing,  with  pressure  in  the  right
temple,  on  the  outside  of  and  in  the  interior  of  the  brain ;  more  violent
during  motion,*. — Tearing  in  the  left  temple,^— Pain  in  the  upper  part  of
the  right  side  of  the  head,  which  is  more  of  a  smarting  and  sticking  na-
ture ;  more  externally,  in  the  bone,  as  it  were,  and  extending  from  behind
forward,  terminating  in  a  earner  of  the  forehead;  the  pain  occurs  especially
in  the  evening  hours,  and  befalls  him  even  in  sleep ;  for  several  days,'. —
[20.]  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  left  parietal  bones,^. — Corrosive  itch-
ing in  several  portions  of  the  hairy  scalp ;  going  off  momentarily  by  scratch-
ing,''.— Chilliness  in  the  scalp,  with  tension  ;  it  feels  warm,  however,^ —
Corrosive  itching  in  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead,  and  in  the  region  of
the  eyebrows,^

Eyes. — Burning  of  the  eyes  in  the  evening,  when  reading,'. — Pain  in
the  eye  towards  the  temple,  as  if  she  had  received  a  blow  upon  the  eye ;
increased  by  contact,*. — Running  of  the  eyes,  in  the  room,''. — Corrosive
itching  in  the  upper  eyelids,'. — Smarting  stitches  in  the  right  eyeball,  going
ofi"  by  rubbing  the  eye,". — Corrosive  itching  under  the  eyes,''. — [30.]  Dilated
pupils,  the  whole  day,l

Ears, — Considerable  heat  in  left  external  ear,  soon  after  taking  the
drug,^. — Hardness  of  \i&a,nng,^.— Ringing  in  the  ears,  or  rather  roaring'. —

Wose. — Hard  aching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose,  the  right  nasal  bone,
and  between  the  right  eyebrow  and  the  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  a  stone  were
pressing  there;  going  off  whenpressing  upon  the  parts  (about  thirty  houis),^
— Corrosive  itching  of  the  tip  of  the  nose,°. — Much  sneezing,  with  dryness
of  the  nose,^ — Illusion  of  smell ;  he  sometimes  smells  herring,  and  some-
times musk,  without  either  being  present  (one  day),".

Face, — Stinging  itching  in  various  parts  of  the  face,  commencing  with
a  loug  stitch  on  either  side,''. — Paralytic  tearing  in  the  right  malar  bone,*.
— [40.]  Formication  in  the  right  cheek,  obliging  him  to  scratch,*. —  Corro-
sive itching  in  either  cheek,  obliging  him,  to  scratch,^. — Corrosive  itching  on
the  right  side,  near  the  chin,*. — Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  ramus


AGNUS  CASTUS.  129

of  the  lower  jaw,*. — -Deep  tearing  in  the  right  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,  below
the  sockets.^.

Mouth, — The  teeth  are  painful  when  touched  by  warm  food  or  drink,'.
■ — Coppery  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  if  the  mouth  had  been  galvanized  (after
six  hours),^ — The  mouth  is  very  dry  ;  saliva  so  tough  that  it  can  be  drawn
out  in  threads  ;  the  velum  pendulum  palati  and  the  uvula  are  red  ;  he  ex-
periences a  scratching  in  the  throat,  which  obliges  him  to  cough  ;  while
coughing,  the  phlegm  which  he  wants  to  cough  up  feels  to  him  very  viscid,
as  if  a  piece  of  cloth  were  hanging  in  his  throat,'.

Throat. — Corrosive  itching  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,^

Stomach. — Hunger  and  appetite  are  very  strong,'. — [50.]  His  appe-
tite is  good,  and  his  hunger  is  rather  increased,'. — His  stomach  is  disor-
dered ;  he  relishes  his  food,  but  it  does  not  agree  with  him,'. — Aversion  to
drink,^ — *Want  of  thirst  (six  hours),*. — Increased  thirst  (aiter  thirty
hours),*. — The  food  does  not  agree  with  him  ;  it  makes  him  feel  uneasy  and
replete,'. — Frequent  hiccough,  with  disposition  to  be  out  of  humor,'. — Eruc-
tations,^ — The  wind  which  he  brings  up,  and  that  which  he  passes  by  the
rectum,  smells  like  old  urine  in  clothes,'. — Feeling  of  nausea  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,^ — Nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomacli  when  standing,  after
which  he  feels  a  qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all  the  bowels  sank
down  (at  one  hour),'. — [60.]  Pinching  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  sit-
ting bent  (after  five  days),'.

Ahdomen. — *Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  during  sleep,'. — Shift-
ing pressure  and  cutting  in  the  upper  abdomen,". — Transient  cutting  in  the
lower  abdomen,  directly  above  the  left  os  ilium,". — Itching  stinging  in  the
inguinal  region,  obliging  him  to  scratch,".— Sharp  prickings  in  the  superior
and  anterior  spinous  process  of  the  left  os  ilium  (after  half  hour),^.

Stool  and  Anus. — Loose  stool,  some  days  in  succession,'. — The  stools
are  more  loose  than  usual,  with  dull  pain  in  the  abdomen,'. — Several  diar-
rhoeic  stools,'. — Difficulty  in  passing  the  stools,  which  were  not  hard  ;  they
had  to  be  pressed  out,  and  seemed  inclined  to  re-enter  the  rectum,'. — *Dis-
eharge  of  prostatic  juice  when  straining  at  stool,^. — *Constipation  (after
seventy-two  hours),'. — [70.]  Twitching  in  the  sphincters,^. — Corrosive  itch-
ing of  the  perineum,^ — ^A  spot  near  the  anus,  in  the  flesh,  which  is  painful
when  walking,  as  of  subcutaneous  suppuration;  not  when  sitting,^

TJrinnrii  Organs. — Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  back  part  of  the
urethra,  after  micturition,'. — He  has  to  urinate  frequently,  and  a  good  deal,
the  whole  time  of  proving ;  the  urine  has  a  somewhat  darker  color,'. — The
urine,  increased  in  amount,  seems  to  pass  with  a  stronger  stream,'. — A  kind
of  yellow  discharge  from  urethra,'. — When  fondling  females  he  discharges
a  little  mucus  from  the  urethra,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Itching  of  the  genital  organs,  obliging  him  to
scratch,'. — Drawing  along  the  spermatic  cords,^ — *The  testes  feel  cold  in
the  night  to  others,  not  subjectively  (in  a  healthy  man),". — [80.]  Crawling
sensation  in  the  testes,^ — Corrosive  itching  in  the  membranes  of  the  penis,'.
—;-*Feehle  erections  without  the  sexual  desire  being  irritated  (after  five  to  six
hours),".^*The  penis  is  so  relaxed  that  not  even  voluptuous  fancies  excite
it,". — *Dimimdion  and  slowness  of  the  sexual  powers,  which  are  usually  very
easHy  and  powerfully  excited;  the  penis  is  small  and  flauoid  (in  a  very  healthy
man),". — *He  has  not  the  usual  morning  erection,  with  desire  for  an  em-
brace; the  parts  were  without  irritation,  flaccid,  and  not  disposed  for  an
embrace  (after  sixteen  hours),  (in  a  healthy  man),". — To  prevent  .getting
children,  a  man  took  for  three  mouths,  morning  and  evening,  twelve  grains


130  ,  AGNUS  CASTUS.

of  the  Agnus  castus,  by  which  the  parts  were  weakened  to  such  an  extent
that  not  only  did  the  erections  become  deficient,  but  he  lost  his  semen  as
he  intended,  and  never  begat  children.  (Lindron,  Venus-Spiegel,  p.  119.)
— Diminished  sexual  instinct;  after  an  embrace  the  body  feels  easy  and
light  (second  night),^ — Want  of  sexual  desire  for  two  days;  the  erections
and  the  sexual  desire  returned  on  the  third  day  (in  a  healthy  man),". —
Painful  erections,  early  in  the  morning  (after  fourteen  hours),". — [^0.]
Frequent  erections,^. — Frequent  erections,  during  which  the  penis  becomes
more  enlarged  than  usual  (fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  evenings),  (secondary
effect),^. — After  an  embrace  he  has  an  involuntary  emission  the  same  night,
and  a  long-continued  erection  (seventh  night),  (secondary  effect),". — In-
creased sexual  desire,  constant  erections,  and  voluptuous  feeling  in  the
genital  organs  (after  third  day),  (curative  effect),". — Unusually  violent  erec-
tions without  cause  and  without  any  amorous  thoughts ;  the  erection  was
accompanied  with  a  kind  of  amorous  rage,  without  any  desire  for  emission;
he  gnashed  his  teeth  from  an  excess  of  voluptuous  sensation  for  half  an
hour  iu  the  morning,  when  rising  (after  twenty  hours),  (curative  effect  ?),".
— Excites  the  sexual  desire  in  some.  (S.  PauUi,  Quad.  Bot.,  p.  189.) — The
semen  runs  out  in  a  stream,  without  ejaculation ;  it  has  but  little  smell,
and  is  scanty  (fourth  day),'.

Respimtory  Ax)p(iratus. — Sensation  as  if  tenacious  mucus  were
lodged  in  his  throat ;  he  is  unable  to  bring  it  up,^ — His  voice  sounds  as  if
it  passed  through  wool ;  it  has  no  characteristic  tone,'. — Cough  before  fall-
ing asleep,  in  the  evening,  in  bed,'.

Chest. — [100.]  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  externally,
especially  during  a  deep  inspiration,'. — Dull  pain  in  the  chest,'. — Hard
pressure  above  the  right  nipple,  more  violent  during  an  expiration  and
when  touching  the  parts,*. — Hard  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  last  true
and  the  first  rib  of  the  right  side ;  more  violent  when  touching  it,*. — Pres-
sure in  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  directly  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach,^

Heart  and  Pulse. — The  pulse  is  slower  and  less  perceptible ;  60
beats,^

Nech  and,  Hack. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  of
various  other  parts,l — Excessive,  deep,  sharp  stitches  in  the  coccyx,'. —
Deep  stitches,  going  and  coming,  on  the  left  side,  near  the  os  sacrum  and
the  coccyx  (after  three  hours),'.

Upper  Extremities. — Dull  tearing  stitches  on  the  top  of  the  left
shoulder,'. — [110,]  Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  a
sort  of  dislocation  pain,  more  violent  during  motion  and  inspiration  (after
three  hours),*. — Hard  pressure  in  the  right  axilla,  more  violent  by  touch  (after
half  an  hour),*. — Corrosive  itching  behind  the  axillje,'. — Hard  prem.we  in
the  upper  arm,  superiorly,  externally,  more  violent  by  touch  (after  three-
quarters  of  an  hour),*. — Sharp  prickings  directly  above  the  elbow-joint,  in
the  external  surface  of  the  left  upper  arm,'. — Pressure  in  the  right  elbow-
joint,  more  violent  during  motion  (after  thirteen  hours),*. — Jerking  iu  the
region  of  the  right  elbow,  disappearing  by  moving  the  arm,*. — Dull  stitch
in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  olecranon  process,  a  few  inches  above  the
wrist-joint  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),'. — Paralytic  pain  in  the  left  wrist-
joint,  perceptible  only  when  turning  the  hand,*. — Paralytic  jerking-draw-
ing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  left  index-finger,  more  violent  during
contact,*. — [120.]  Long,  sharp  stitch  in  the  eminence  of  the  lower  joint  of
the  index-finger,'. — Swelling  of  a  ijnger-joint,  with  arthritic  tearing  pain,'.
— Buzzing  and humming  in  the right  index-finger,l — Sticking iu  the


AGNUS  CA8TUS.  131

fingers  of  the  right  hand ;  iu  the  evening  of  the  fifth  day,'. — Pressure  in
the  muscles  of  the  left  thumb,*. — Dull  sticking  in  the  upper  joint  of  the
right  thumb,*.

Lower  Extremities. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  right  hip-joint,
sometimes  extending  above  and  below  the  hip-joint,  more  violent  during
motion,  abating  in  rest,  when  it  resembles  more  a  tearing  with  pressure,
accompanied  with  debility  and  weariness,  which  oblige  him  to  sit  down;
a  sort  of  luxation  pain  (after  thirty-six  hours),*. — Sharp  pricking  in  the
right  side  of  the  right  thigh,  high  up,^ — Cramp  pain  in  the  left  thigh,
externally  and  superiorly,  near  the  hip,  only  when  w'alking,^ — Shooting
iu  the  bend  of  the  right  knee  when  standing,'. — [130.]  Sticking,  draw-
ing pains  in  the  bends  of  both  knees,  extending  into  the  thigh  and  leg,
with  debility,  more  violent  during  motion ;  in  rest  it  is  changed  to  a
sort  of  drawing  with  pressure,  as  if  the  parts  were  dislocated,*. — Tearing
in  the  inner  side  of  the  left  leg,  from  the  knee  down  to  the  foot  (imme-
diately),^ — Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  calf  as  if  the  skin  were
pulled  at  with  a  string,^. — Sharp  stitch  in  the  external  side  of  the  left
fibula,  a  little  above  the  foot,  disappearing  on  pressure,'. — ^Paralytic  jerk-
ing-drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg,  extending  from  the  knee  to  the
foot,  the  same  when  walking  or  when  touching  the  parts  (after  six  hours),*. —
Corrosive  itching  causes  scratching  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  calf;
one  handbreadth  below  the  knee, . — Corrosive  itching  in  the  anterior  sur-
face of  the  tibia,'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  right  tibia,  when  standing,''. — In-
termittent sharp  stitches  in  the  region  where  the  fibula  and  tibia  join  the
tarsus  anteriorly  (after  seven  hours),*. — Sticking  in  one  part  of  the  outer
side  of  the  foot,  when  standing  still,^. — [140.]  Heaviness  in  the  right  foot ;
sensation  as  if  a  heavy  load  were  attached  to  the  tarsal  bones,  drawing  the  foot
down,  in  every  position  of  the  foot,'''. — Pricking  in  the  left  big  toe,'. — Violent
stitches  in  the  left  big  toe,  causing  the  whole  limb  to  jerk,^. — Tearing  iw
the  anterior  joints  of  the  left  toes;  more  violent  when  walking,^. — Dull,  inter-
mittent sticking  in  the  bottom  of  the  foot  near  the  heel,  independent  of
contact  or  walking  (after  half  an  hour),*. — Tearing  in  the  lower  limbs  for
half  an  hour,*. — When  walking  on  the  pavement  the  feet  easily  become
turned  (fifth  day) ;  early  in  the  morning,'.— Fine  lancinations  at  the  bottom
of  either  foot,*.

Geiieralities.^Great  weakness,  as  results  from  violent  anguish,  with
sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in,  when  standing,'. — Feels  bruised  all
over,'.

Slti'n, — [150,]  Itching-stinging  in  dififerent  parts  of  the  body,  obliging
him  to  scratch  (after  twenty-eight  hours),*. — Itching  around  the  ulcer  in
the  evening,'. — The  corrosive  itching  yields  to  scratching,  hut  returns  as
speedily,'. — Creeping  under  the  skin  of  the  hands  and  itching  of  the  body,
especially  up  the  back,  as  from  fleas,'.

Fever, — Chilliness,  without  thirst  or  subsequent  heat,*. —  Constant
trembling  of  the  whole  body  from  internal  chilliness,  the  body  feeling  warm  to
the  hands^. — Chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  without  thirst;  the  hands,  however,
are  the  only  portions  of  the  body  which  feel  cold  to  the  touch,'. — Chilliness  and
shuddering,  and  then  heat  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour);  these  alternate  fre-
quently, without  thirst  (after  fifty  hours),*. — Frequent  alteruations  of  chilli-
ness and  heat  without  thirst ;  the  hands,  however,  being  the  only  parts  of
the  body  which  feel  cold  to  the  touch,'. — Heat  in  the  face  and  dryness  of
the  mouth,  for  an  hour  ;  the  thirst  appears  only  when  the  heat  is  over,^. —
Heat  of  the  whole  body,  with  cold  knees,  in  the  evening,  in  bed ;  he  feels


132  AGNUS  CASTUS— AGROSTEMMA  GITHAGO.

as  if  fire  was  creepiug  over  him,^. — [160.]  Sweat  of  the  left  hand,  especially
the  interior  sides  of  the  fingers,  in  the  open  air,  previous  to  the  heat,^

Sleep  find  Dreams. — Makes  drowsy  and  intoxicates  fZwinger,
Herbar.,  227). — Makes  the  head  confused,  and  causes  drowsiness  (Diosc). —
Restless  sleep  ;  he  pushes  off'  the  cover  of  the  bed,  and  dreams  constantly,
without  recollecting  what,l — She  sometimes  starts  in  her  sleep,  as  if  in
affright,  and  wakes,^ — Anxious  dreams,  which  he  does  not  recollect,'. —
Voluptuous  dreams,*.

fort<?i^/oi*S.— Aggravation. — {Morning),  Early,  painful  erections  ;
early,  feet  turn  easily  when  walking. — {Evening),  Pain  in  right  side  of  head,
when  reading  ;  burning  in  eyes  ;  in  bed,  before  falling  asleep,  cough  ;  stick-
ing in  right  fingers  ;  itching  around  the  ulcer ;  in  bed,  heat  of  whole  body. —
{fitting  bent),  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach. — (Co?itoci),  Pain  in  eye ;  jerking
drawing  in  bone  of  left  index-finger. — (During  expiration),  Pressure
above  right  nipple. — {During  inspiration).  Tearing,  etc.,  in  right  shoulder-
joint. — {Deep  inspiration).  Pressure  in  region  of  sternum. — {After  micturi-
tion), Disagreeable  sensation  in  urethra. — {Motion),  Tearing  in  temples,
etc. ;  tearing,  etc.,  in  temples,  etc. ;  tearing,  etc.,  in  right  temple,  etc. ;  tear-
ing, etc.,  in  right  shoulder-joint ;  pressure  in  right  elbow-joint ;  pain  in
right  hip-joint ;  pains  in  bends  of  knees. — (  When  reading).  Contractive
headache ;  in  the  evening,  burning  of  the  eyes. — {In  room).  Running  of
the  eyes. — (  When  standing),  Nausea  ;  shooting  in  bend  of  knee ;  pain  in
right  tibia;  great  weakness. — {Touching  hand), 'F&in  in  left  wrist-joint. —
(7o((r/t),  Pressure  above  nipple;  pressure  in  right  rib  region;  pressure  in
right  axilla ;  pressure  in  upper  arm. — (  When  touched  by  warm  food  or
drink).  Teeth  painful. — (  Walking),  Cramp  pain  in  left  thigh  ;  tearing  in
left  toe-joint.

Amelioration. — {Motion),  Jerking  in  region  of  right  elbow. — {Pres-
sure).  Aching  on  dorsum  of  nose,  etc. — {Rubbing),  Itching  in  right  eyeball.
— {Scratching),  Itching  on  hairy  scalp.


AGROSTEMMA  GITHAGO.

Lychnis  githago,  Lam.  (Agrostemma  githago,  L.)  Nat.  order,  Caryo-
phyllaceee.  Common  names,  (Engl.),  Corn  cockle;  (Germ.),  Korurade ;
(Fr.),  LTvraie.  Preparation,  The  seeds  are  the  poisonous  part  (they  con-
tain the  powerful  alkaloid  Saponine).

Authority.  Toxicological;  observed  from  eating  bread  made  from  grain
containing  the  seeds  of  Agrostemma.

Jliiid. — Coma,  in  some  cases.

Head. —  Ferh'^'o.— Headache. — Sensation  of  heat  and  burning  rises
into  the  vertex  from  the  left  lower  jaw;  almost  makes  her  crazy.

3Ioath. — Mouth  dry  and  hot. — The  palate  has  a  red  margin.

Stomach.  — Nausea. — Vomiting. — Thirst  moderate. — Vomiting  sour
and  bitter. — Burning  from  the  stomach  along  the  oesophagus  to  the  throat
and  in  the  chest. — Knife-like  pains  in  the  stomach  at  times.

Abdomen. — Stool. — Constipation  with  tenesmus. — Diarrhoea  with
tenesmus. — Burning  in  the  bowels  and  rectum.

Hach. — Tearing  along  the  spine.

Fever. — Pulse  small  and  rapid  at  first,  becoming  tense  and  hard,  and
slower. — Skin  hot.

Generalities. — Difficult  to  remain  erect. — Locomotion  impaired.


AILANTHUS.  133


AILANTHUS.

Ailanthus  glandulosus,  Desf,  Nat.  order,  Simarubese.  Common  names,
Tree  of  Heaven ;  (Germ.),  Gotterbaum  ;  (Fr.),  Ailante.  Preparation,  Tinc-
ture from  the  flowers  beginning  to  open.

Authorities.]-  1,  Hering  ;  2,  Lippe ;  3,  J.  T.  Alley ;  4,  Mrs.  F. ;  5,  Mr.  M. ;
6,  H.  Mintou  ;  7,  Male  prover,  aged  28  ;  8,  Male  prover,  aged  21  ;  9,  P.  P.
Wells ;  10,  Wells's  girl,  aged  15 ;  11,  Wells's  boy  (young) ;  12,  W.  William-
son ;  13,  Hale,  New  Remedies,  3d  €d. ;  14,  Poisoning  from  drinking  water
impregnated  from  Ailanthus  roots;  Meshter.  (See  N.  Y.  J.  of  Horn.,  2,  99.)

Mind. — Low-spirited,'. — Continual  sighing,'.-^Depression  of  spirits,".
■ — Recklessness  iu  regard  to  present  or  future  events,^. — Stoical  indifference
to  whatever  happens,^. — ^Restlessness,'. — Great  anxiety,". — Inability  to  con-
centrate mental  effort ;  compelled  to  read  a  subject  several  times  to  get
even  a  misty  understanding  of  it,'. — Confusion  of  intellect;  found  it  almost
impossible  to  add  a  column  of  figures  correctly ;  had  to  go  over  it  several
times  to  get  it  right,^ — [10.]  Loss  of  memory,'. — Mental  alienation,'. —
(*Stupor,  delirium,  and  insensibility,  after  suppressed  scarlatina  eruption,".)

Mead. — Vertigo,  especially  when  stooping,'. — Dizziness,'". — Dizziness
and  confusion  of  the  head,'. — Staggering  dizziness  when  rising  or  moving,'.
— A  sensation  of  giddiness  with  nausea  and  sickness  at  the  stomach,*. —
Tottering  gait,  with  an  inclination  to  stagger ;  requires  extra  effort  to  walk
straight,'. — Giddiness  ;  nausea,  with  retching  and  some  vomiting,'l — [20.]
Slight  headache,  accompanied  with  nausea  and  giddiness,^ — The  figures  on
the  ledger  began  to  dance  up  and  down  the  columns;  my  head  grew  dizzy,^ —
Pain  in  the  occiput,  with  dizziness  and  ringing  pain  in  the  forehead,'. — A
fulness  and  somewhat  of  an  intoxicated  sensation  in  the  brain,'. — A  ful-
ness and  burning  on  the  brain,'. — Apoplectic  fulness  of  the  head,'. — Thick
heavy  feeling  in  the  head,  figures  and  letters  look  blurred,^ — Electrical
thrill  starting  from  the  brain  and  extending  to  the  extremities,'. — Feeling
as  if  an  electrical  current  were  passing  through  the  left  side  of  the  head,'. —
Dull  headache,'.— [30.]  Severe  headache,". — Headache  with  confusion  of
intellect,'. — Dull  headache,  with  burning  in  eyes  (immediately),\ — Dull
headache,  with  great  oppression  of  bronchia,'. — Dull  heavy  headache,  with
heavy  feeling  in  the  sternal  region,'. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  pain
over  the  eyes,  ameliorated  by  pressure,'. — Dull  compressed  feeling,  with
confusion  and  pain  in  the  forehead,".— Severe  pains  in  the  head  with  chills,
followed  by  flushings  of  heat,*. — Tingling  sensation  of  left  arm  and  hand,
with  dull  headache ;  no  appetite ;  tongue  coated  ;  pasty  taste  (on  waking
in  A.M.),^ — Pain  in  back,  head,  neck,  and  numbness  extending  from  under
the  left  scapula,  in  a  band  down  to  the  left  hip,'. — [40.]  Pain  in  centre  of
forehead,  more  to  left  (iu  five  minutes),'. — A  peculiar,  heavy  dull  pressing
pain  in  the  forehead,  of  no  great  severity,  but  which  indisposes  to  or  even
incapacitates  for  intellectual  labor.  This  is  always  relieved  by  Aloes
200th,'. — Between  one  and  two  p.m.,  a  heavy  frontal  headache,  with  drowsi-
ness ;  slept  two  hours,'. — Severe  darting  pain  through  the  temples  and
back  part  of  head,  with  confusion  of  ideas,'. — Severe  pain  through  the
temples  on  waking,'. — Tender,  bruised  feeling  over  parieto-frontal  sutures,'.

f  The  following  symptomatology  is  mainly  copied  from  Dr.  Jones's  arrangement
in  Am.  Horn.  Observer,  vol.  11.


134  AILANTHUS.

— Darting  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  head,'. — Pain  in  the  occiput,  with
dizziness  and  ringing  pain  in  the  forehead,  and  swelling  in  the  left  side  of
the  face,  below  the  eye,  and  upon  the  cheek,^ — Beating  in  the  occipital
arteries,'.

Efjes. — Eyes  feel  rough  and  irritated,  as  from  wind  and  dust,^ — [50.]
Smarting  and  aching,  as  from  powerful  astringents,'. — Burning  in  the
eyes,'. — -Sneezed,  and  experienced  a  sensation  of  cold  about  the  eyes,  and  a
gnawing  in  the  chest,'. — Light'  affects  the  eyes/. — Lachrymation  in  the
open  air,  or  by  brilliant  light,'. — Purulent  discharge,  with  agglutinated
lids  in  the  morning,'. — Conjunctivitis,  with  redness  and  inflammation,  ex-
tending around  the  external  canthus,'. — Falling  out  of  the  eyebrows,'. —
(Eyes  suffused  and  congested  ;  startled  look  when  roused ;  pupils  dilated
and 'sluggish ;  in  scarlet  fever,°.  Dr.  Chalmers.) — {*Fupils  widely  dilated  °.)
— [60.]  *  Photophobia,". — Intolerance  of  light,'". — Figures  and  letters  look
blurred,*.

Wose. — Itching  and  uneasy  feeling  around  the  nose,'. — Soreness  and
pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  nose,^. — Dryness  and  suppressed  secretion,'. —
Catarrhal  obstruction,  as  from  cold  in  the  head,'. — DiiBcult  breathing
through  the  nose,'. — Loss  of  smell,'. — Chronic  catarrh,'. — [70.]  (Copious
thin  ichorous  discharge  without  fetor ;  discharge  of  blood  and  pus.  In
scarlet  fever,°.  Dr.  Chalmers.)

Face. — Face  pale,". — Dusky  InWona  complexion,'. — Complexion  sallow
and  inactive,'. — Jaundiced,". — Dark-blue  circle  around  the  eyes,'. — Ir-
regular spots  of  capillary  congestion,  as  in  the  face  of  a  drunkard  after  a
debauch,'. — Hot,  red  face,'". — Miliary  rash,  more  profuse  on  the  face  and
forehead,  especially  the  forehead,  than  upon  the  rest  of  the  body,". — Pain
in  the  occiput,  with  dizziness  and  ringing  pain  in  the  forehead,  and  swell-
ing in  the  left  side  of  the  face ;  soreness  and  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the
nose ;  puffed  erysipelatous  face  ;  feels  heavy  and  sleepy  ;  nausea  coming  on
at  intervals,\— [80.]  On  tlie  second  evening,  tearing  in  the  upper  and
lower  teeth  of  the  left  side,  also  in  the  face  and  head,  aggravated  by  lying
down  and  forcing  him  to  walk  about ;  external  pressure  relieves.  Im-
provement only  toward  morning,l — ^(*Face  and  forehead  dark  mahogany;
suppressed  scarlatina, °.)

Totif/ue, — Tongue  coated,". — -Tongue  coated;  pasty  taste  in  morning,*.
— Tongue  thickly  covered  with  a  whitish  coa,t,brown  in  centre,^. — {* Tongue
dry,  parched,  and  cracked;  moist,  and  covered  with  white  fur;  tip  and  edges
livid.  Under  the  favorable  action  of  Ailanthus,  the  clearing-off  of  the
coating  revealed  prominent  papillse,°. In  scarlet  fever. Dr.  Chalmers.)

Throat. — Sensation  as  after  applying  an  astringent  to  the  pharynx,'. —

*  Thick,  (edematous,  and  dry  choky  feeling  in  the  throat,  continuing  in  the
acute  form  only  a  short  time,  and  then  becoming  chronic,'. — A  fulness  in
the  throat  just  above  the  sternum,  and  a  desire  to  hawk  up  something,'. —

*  Throat  dry,  rough,  and  scrapy,  more  so  in  the  morning,*. — [90.]  *Irrita-
hility  of  the  throat  and  hawking  up  of  mucus,'''. — Hawking  of  mucus  from  the
throat,'. — Constant  hawking,  and  efforts  to  raise  lumps  of  whitish  matter,'.
— -Raising  of  mucus  and  yellow  matter  from  throat,'. — Great  accumulation
of  matter,  part  of  which  is  easily  expectorated,  while  a  portion  is  with  much
exertion  detached  in  small  flakes,'. — Croupy  choking,". — *  Throat  tender
and  sore  on  swallowing,  or  on  admission  of  air,*. — When  deglutition  is
painful,  the  pain  always  extends  to  the  ears,'. — -Redness  of  the  throat  with
or  without  pain  during  deglutition,'. — "^^  The  fauces  and  tonsils  are  inflamed,
with  spots  of  incipient  idceration,^ . — Spreading  ulcers,  feeling  as  after  the


AILANTHUS.  135

application  of  nitrate  of  silver,'. — [100.]  Tenderness  and  enlargement  of
the  parotid  and  thyroid  glands,". — Thickened  and  swollen  feeling  of  the
muscles  of  the  neck,'. — (*The  throat  is  livid  and  swollen,  the  tonsils  stud-
ded with  numerous  deep,  angry-looking  ulcerations,  from  which  a  scanty
fetid  discharge  exudes ;  the  neck  is  very  tender  and  swollen ;  the  tonsils
are  prominent  and  studded  with  ulcerated  points.  In  scarlet  fever,°.  Dr.
Chalmers.)

Appetite, — ^No  feeling  of  hunger,  but  eats  his  usual  quantity,'. — No
appetite  for  breakfast;  tongue  coated;  pasty  taste,*. — No  appetite  for  din-
ner, everything  tasting  flat  and  insipid,*. — She  could  take  no  food,  the
sight  of  it  made  her  feel  worse,'". — Appetite  capricious,'. — Loss  of  appe-
tite; slight  nausea ;  disgust  at  food,". — Loathing  of  food,*. — [110.]  During
the  chill  there  was  great  hunger,  with  a  distressing  sense  of  general  empti-
ness,".

Stomach. — Every  morning  nausea,  and  during  the  day  a  febrile  heat
with  this  nausea  (but  frequently  without  it) ;  a  diarrhoea  set  in  ;  four  or
five  stools  daily,  with  pains  in  the  abdomen  ;  sometimes  vomiting  with  the
diarrhoea,'. — With  the  nausea  are  oppression  and  pain  below  the  hypochon-
dria, in  some  like  a  stricture  below  the  short  ribs.  Some  find  this  symp-
tom very  debilitating,'. — Excessive  nausea,  but  no  vomiting,  during  the
headache,'. — In  women,  nausea  similar  to  that  of  pregnancy,'. — Nausea
and  sickness  at  the  stomach,  with  sour  eructations,*. — Nausea  and  vomit-
ing,'^ — Any  food  taken  was  speedily  vomited,". — Vomited  repeatedly,'*.
— Peculiar  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach,'. — Inactive  condition  of
the  stomach,  as  though  its  contractive  power  was  impaired,'. — [120.]  Con-
stant, violent  increasing  pain  in  the  stomach,'*. — Water  tastes  brackish
and  flat ;  no  desire  for  drinks  except  when  eating,'. — Took  a  teaspoon-
ful  of  the  tincture.  In  half  an  hour  began  to  feel  queer  and  some-
what frightened ;  a  sensation  of  giddiness  with  nausea  and  sickness  at  the
stomach  came  over  me ;  cold  perspiration  stood  out  upon  the  skin ;  my
fingers,  in  fact  my  whole  body,  began  to  tingle  and  prick ;  my  limbs  felt  as
if  they  were  asleep  ;  the  figures  on  the  ledger  began  to  dance  up  and  down  ;
my  head  grew  dizzy ;  I  staggered  back  and  fell  into  my  chair  almost  un-
conscious. Drank  half  a  tumbler  of  Bourbon ;  soon  began  to  vomit  and
purge,  and  was  very  ill  for  two  hours.  Two  days  after  was  as  well  as  com-
mon, excepting  some  headache,  and  a  sort  of  numbness  of  the  left  arm,*.

Abdomen  and  Stool, — Tenderness  over  the  hepatic  region,'*. —
Tympanitis,'. — Burning  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,'^ — Weak,  burning,
uneasy  feeling  in  the  bowels,  as  of  approaching  diarrhoea,'. — Slight  rum-
bling in  the  bowels,'. — A  feeling  of  "  insecurity,"  as  if  he  would  be  attacked
with  diarrhoea  any  minute,^ — Bowels  moved  easier  than  natural,  two  or
three  times  a  day,'. — [130.]  Looseness  of  the  bowels,  appearing  more  in
the  large  intestines,'. — Colicky  and  griping  pains  in  the  bowels,'^ — Frequent
watery  dejections,  which  are  expelled  with  great  force,*. — Pains  in  hypogas-
trium  and  hips,'*. — Morning,  nausea  with  diarrhoea,  which  is  sometimes
attended  with  vomiting,'. — Dysentery ;  frequent  painful  stool,  little  fecal
matter,  much  bloody  mucus,  with  very  little  fever,'. — Constipation,'*.

Urinary  Orf/ans. — Urine  suppressed,'*.

Genitals, — A  sore  appeared  on  the  prepuce  of  the  prover,  which  had
the  exact  appearance  of  an  incipient  chancre ;  it  dried  up  and  disappeared
in  a  few  days  after  ceasing  Ailanthus.  (This  sore  and  the  rash  are  similar
to  those  which  characterize  primary  syphilis,".)

Cough, — Cough  somewhat  oppressed  ; expectoration  muco-purulent,


136  AILANTHUS.

free  in  the  morning,  sticky  and  scanty  during  the  day,^ — [140.]  Deep  ex-
hausting cough,  with  asthmatic  expansion  of  the  lungs,'.- — *Cough  deep
and  painful,'. — *  Violent  fits  of  coughing  before  retiring,  and  on  rising ;
she  coughs  continually,  until  expectoration  becomes  free ;  afterwards  is
comfortable  during  the  day,*.

Chest. — Oppression  of  breathing,". — Equable  oppression,  as  though
chest  was  strapped,'. — Asthmatic  oppression  in  the  larger  bronchi,'. — On
the  second  day  after  suspending  the  drug,  wheezing  asthmatic  respiration,'.
— Feeling  as  though  the  air-cells  were  stuck  together;  inability  to  com-
pletely expand  the  lungs;  can  hear  the  air-cells  open  (?)  as  the  lungs  ex-
pand,'.— Tired  feeling  in  the  lungs,  rendering  it  almost  an  exertion  to
breathe,'. — Pain  with  constriction  or  tightness  of  the  chest,". — [150.]  Exces-
sive tenderness  all  over  the  lungs,'. — Excessive  soreness  and  tenderness  of
the  lungs,  compelling  a  suspension  of  the  drug,'. — Soreness  of  the  internal
chest  with  pain  and  aching  of  the  lungs,". — Soreness  and  pain  of  the  lungs
increased ;  severe  pains  in  the  head,  with  chills,  followed  by  flushes  of
heat,". — Pain  and  contracted  feeling,  especially  through  the  centre  of  the
left  lung,  sternal  edge,'. — Aching  in  the  anterior  portion  of  the  left  lung,
extending  to  the  posterior,'. — Pain  as  from  a  small  blade  two  inches  at  the
left  of  the  lower  portion  of  the  sternum,'. — Heated,  burning  feeling,  as  from
breathing  hot  steam  or  air,'. — Burning  in  the  right  lung,'. — Burning  pain
under  the  left  shoulder,'. — [160.]  Stitching  and  aching  in  the  chest,'. —
Aching  pain  directly  under  the  clavicle,  sometimes  extending  to  the
sternum,'. — Respiration  quickened,'. — Crepitant  ronchus,'.

Heart  tiiid  Pulse. — Pulse  accelerated,"

Hack. — Soreness  in  the  glands  of  the  neck  with  pain  under  the  left
shoulder-blade,". — Intolerable  pain  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  upper  part  of
the  back,  and  in  the  right  hip-joint,". — Pain  in  the  head,  neck,  back,  and
numbness  under  left  scapula,  extending  as  a  band  down  to  left  hip,". —
Constant  aching  between  the  shoulders,'. — Aching,  pressed  feeling  of  the
dorsal  vertebra,'. — [170.]  Shooting,  aching  pains  in  the  shoulders  and
hips,'. — Constant  sharp  pain  through  the  small  of  the  back  and  hips,".

Superior  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  right  scapula,  deep  inside
(in  six  minutes),^ — The  pain  in  right  scapula  prevents  motion  of  the  arm;
a  similar  pain  in  the  right  foot  prevents  walking  (in  one  hour),\ — Numb-
ness of  the  left  arm,  and  a  sensation  as  though  the  fingers  were  asleep,". —
Tingling  sensation  of  left  arm  and  hand  on  waking,  in  a.m.,". — The  numb-
ness of  left  arm  and  hand,  with  pain  in  the  shoulder,  back,  and  hips,  last-
ing four  or  five  days  after  ceasing  to  take  the  drug,". — A  sort  of  numbness
of  the  left  arm,l — Fingers  tingle  and  prick,'. — Electrical  thrill,  extending
■  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers,''.

Inferior  Extremities. — [180.]  Limbs  felt  as  though  they  were
asleep,". — Numbness  of  the  left  leg,  with  tingling,  pricking  pain  in  the  foot
and  toes,". — Peeling  of  uneasiness  and  aching  restlessness  in  the  limbs,'. —
Heaviness  of  the  extremities,'. — Pain  in  the  right  foot  prevents  walking,'. —
Severe  pain  in  left  foot,  a  kind  of  tension  in  walking,'. — Sleep  disturbed
and  unrefreshing,". — fleavy  sleep  during  the  night,'. — Great  sleepiness  in
the  morning  or  forenoon  ;  sleepiness  the  whole  day,  but  this  is  not  refresh-
ing,'.— After  drinking  a  glass  of  wine  great  sleepiness,  with  fulness  of  the
head,'.

Fever.— \)S0.'\  Dry,  hot  skin,  especially  in  the  morning,  lasting  until
the  middle  of  the  day. — Skin  dry,'*. — Cold  perspiration  stood  out  upon  the
skin,*. — Felt  slightly  ill  on  rising  in  the  a.m.  ;  could  take  no  food ;  sight


AILANTHUS.  137

of  it  made  her  feel  worse;  was  suddenly  seized  with  vomiting;  severe
headache,  dizziness;  hot,  red  face;  inability  to  sit  up;  rapid  small  pulse ;
drowsy,  at  the  same  time  very  restless ;  great  anxiety.  In  two  hours  drow
siness  had  become  insensibility,  with  constant  mattering  delirium  ;  did  not
recognize  the  members  of  the  family.  She  was  now  covered  in  patches
with  an  eruption  of  miliary  rash,  all  of  a  dark,  almost  of  a  livid  color.
The  patches  between  the  points  of  the  eruption  were  of  a  dingy,  dull  Opaque
appearance.  The  eruption  was  more  profuse  on  the  forehead  and  face  than
elsewhere,  and  especially  on  the  forehead.  The  pulse  was  now  small,  and
so  rapid  as  hardly  to  be  counted;  the  surface  had  become  cold  and  dry;
the  livid  color  of  the  skin  when  pressed  out  returned  very  slowly ;  the
whole  was  a  most  complete  picture  of  torpor,^". — The  chill  was  always  pre-
ceded by  a  miliary  eruption,  most  copiously  developed  on  the  forehead  and
face.  During  the  chill  there  was  great  hunger,  with  a  distressing  sense  of
general  emptiness.  Any  food  taken  was  speedily  vomited.  Intolerable
pain  was  felt  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  and  the
right  hip-joint.  During  the  hot  stage  there  was  urgent  thirst,  with  delir-
ium, and  a  strong  desire  for  brandy,'". — (This  group  represents  the  quasi
"  secondary  action."  It  supervened  upon  the  poisoning  depicted  in  S.  193,
and  the  girl  was  subject  to  this  r6le,  for  a  fortnight.) — The  eruption  is  slow
to  make  its  appearance,  and  never  takes  on  the  genuine  scarlet  color ;  it
remains  livid,''. — Ailanthus  produces  an  eruption  which  has  an  exact  re-
semblance to  ordinary  measles,  but  it  is  attended  by  no  catarrhal  symp-
toms, or  other  concomitants  of  that  exanthem,'.

GericrcilitieH, — Immediately  after  taking  one  drop,  a  dulness  over
the  whole  body. — Languor  and  lassitude  on  making  exertions,^ — Incapa-
bility of  standing  long  at  a  time,'.- — [200.]  Tottering  gait,  with  an  incli-
nation to  stagger  ;  requires  extra  effort  to  walk  straight,'. — All  asthmatics
who  are  exposed  to  the  odor  feel  worse  during  the  blossoming  period,'. —
The  odor  affects  women  and  children  more  than  men,  and  old  people  least
of  all,'. — If  odor  gives  any  indication,  Ailanthus  should  prove  a  good
remedy  in  malignant  puerperal  fever,'. — Affects  the  organism  in  the  follow-
ing order:  throat,  lungs,  eyes,  head,'. — -(In  prover  M.,  this  order  of  evolu-
tion is  exactly  reversed.  J.) — After  discontinuing  the  drug  the  head,  throat,
and  chest  symptoms  lasted  for  about  twenty-four  hours,  and  gradually
died  away,^ — The  numbness  of  (left)  arm  and  leg,  with  pain  in  shoulder,
back,  and  hips,  continued  four  or  five  days,^ — Two  days  after  taking  a
teaspoonful  of  the  mother  tincture;  as  well  as  ever,  with  the  exception  of
some  headache,  and  a  sort  of  numbness  of  the  left  arm,^ — The  neuralgic
pains  (facial)  force  him  to  walk  about,^

Conditions. — Aggravation. —  {Morning),  Purulent  discharge  from
eyes,  etc. ;  coated  tongue,  etc. ;  throat  dry,  etc. ;  nausea  ;  nausea  with  diar-
rhoea ;  dry,  hot  skin. — {Morning  on  waking),  Tingling  in  arm,  etc. — {Morn-
ing or  forenoon),  Great  sleepiness. — (  On.  admission  of  air).  Throat  tender. —
{In  open  air),  Lachrymation. — {During  chill).  Great  hunger. — (  On  exerting
body).  Languor  aud  lassitude. — {During  heat).  Urgent  thirst,  etc. — {Lying
down),  Tearing  in  teeth,  etc. — {Brilliant  light),  JjSichrjmation.— {Rising  or
moving),  Staggering  dizziness. — {Stooping),  Vertigo. — {Swallowing),  Throat
tender. — {After  taking  wine),  Great  sleepiness,  etc.

Amelioration.  —  (  Toward  morning).  Improvement.  —  {Pressure),
Heaviness  of  head,  etc. — {External pressxire).  Tearing  in  teeth.


138  ALCOHOL.


ALCOHOL.


Ethyl-alcohol,  CjHgO.  (Spirits  of  Wine.)  Preparation,  From  commer-
cial spirits  of  wine,  by  redistillation.

Authorities.  The  following  symptoms  have  been  collected  from  various
sources,  and  though  incorporated  with  some  hesitation,  are  believed  to  be
reliable.

3Iind. — He  weeps  and  sobs  with  distorted  face,  or  he  froths  with  rage,
and  fills  the  house  with  curses  and  execrations. — Frenzy,  accompanied  by
the  most  violent  convulsions  (convulsive  intoxication). — Drunkenness,  with
various  manias. — Mania,  with  excessive  irritability,  excited  by  slightest
causes. — Mania,  with  disposition  to  commit  murder  or  incendiarism. —
Mania  for  alcoholic  drinks,  pepper,  and  other  heating  things. — Mania. —
Various  hallucinations  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  and  sensation. — Delirium.
— Transition  from  delirium  tremens  into  permanent  mania,  with  hectic,  or
dropsy,  physconia,  especially  hard  stomach. — [10.]  Much  inconsiderate,
confused  talking. — Incoherent  speeches. — Talkativeness,  by  which  untimely
confessions  are  drawn  from  him. — All  weaknesses  are  exposed,  and  all  se-
crets divulged,  without  reserve  (misers  excepted,  according  to  Trotter)  ("  in
vino  Veritas  ")  ;  all  hypocrisy  ceases. — He  chats,  scolds,  brags,  and  curses. —
He  is  ashamed  of  his  intoxication,  and  the  more  he  tries  to  conceal  it,  the
more  he  betrays  it. — Talkativeness,  and  abeyance  of  usual  caution. — Rapid
and  incoherent  talk. — Rum,  and  some  other  spirits,  made  us  very  talkative
and  hilarious  in  about  ten  minutes ;  so  much  so  that  my  friend  was  alto-
gether a  king ;  but  as  minutes  flew  away,  so  did  our  joyousness,  and  little
by  little  we  lessened  our  garrulity  and  became  silent,  almost  morose,  and
extremely  miserable.  Never  were  the  extremes  of  happiness  and  misery
brought  so  vividly  before  us,  or  seemed  to  be  in  such  close  proximity,  as  on
these  occasions.  Every  mental  perception  was  darkened,  and  the  dreami-
ness, which  is  not  an  unpleasant  feature  of  it,  is  a  condition  in  which  nei-
ther thought  nor  imagination  acquires  power. — Transported  into  a  garden
of  pleasure,  he  only  sees  cheerful  and  agreeable  objects,  but  the  predomi-
nating feeling  is  love  and  desire. — Infatuated,  he  discovers  beauties  in  his
mistress  that  he  had  before  overlooked,  and  he  uses  all  the  images  of  poesy
to  warm  his  feelings  and  heighten  his  passion.  The  delirium  of  love  breaks
out  first. — He  (an  octogenarian)  became  so  amorous  that  he  addressed  the
most  passionate  and  flattering  speeches  -to  a  lamp-post,  which  he  took  for  a
lady. — [20.]  A  sanguine  and  choleric  temperament  grows  sentimental  and
passionate  ;  they  show  the  greatest  inclination  to  love  and  voluptuousness.
— All,  even  the  coarsest,  desires  and  inclinations  become  uncontrollable. —
General  excitement  of  all  the  senses. — Moral  and  physical  exaltation. —
Indescribable  serenity  of  mind,  with  cheerfulness,  which  the  face  expresses.
— Inner  gratification,  accompanied  by  kindly  intentions  towards  others. — •
Cheerfulness  and  happy  humor. — The  imagination  grows  lively,  the  mind
mostly  free,  and  overflows  with  wit  and  humor. — Old  age  descends  to  the
exuberance  of  youth. — A  sulky  man  becomes  social  and  sympathetic ;  even
the  serious  philosopher  grows  merry,  lays  aside  his  severity,  and  enjoys  jest
and  song. — [30.]  Boisterous  mirth. — Immoderate  bursts  of  laughter. —
Screaming,  singing,  and  immoderate  merriment. — Boisterous  singing. —
Bawdy  songs. — -The  dance  is  accompanied  by  convulsive  gestures. — Sweet
outpourings  of  friendship  and  tender  confessions. — All  care  is  set  aside ;  all
grief  is  relieved  or  set  aside  (Hoffmann). — The  weak  one  grows  strong,  and


ALCOHOL.  139

the  despondent  bold. — The  despairing  lover  leaves  his  solitude,  and  forgets
the  indifference  of  his  mistress.  Amid  the  pleasures  of  the  cup  the  soldier
no  longer  complains  of  the  campaign  ;  the  sailor  forgets  the  dangers  of  the
storm. — [40.]  The  French  are  merry  ;  the  English,  gloomy  and  thought-
ful ;  the  Germans,  brutal. — He  grows  loving,  kind,  and  obliging ;  or  hard,
violent,  and  repellent. — He  is  courteous  to  an  enemy,  and  forgets  insults;
or  he  sneers  at  his  friend,  and  broods  revenge. — He  sings,  chats,  and  is
cheerful ;  or  he  is  dull,  gloomy,  and  reserved. — Cheerfulness  and  wit  degen-
erate into  shamelessness  and  licentious  jests. — The  modest  blush  of  shame
vanishes,  and  improper,  undignified  acts  are  committed. — Animation  dis-
played in  the  features  and  gestures. — Exhilaration  of  spirits. — Increased
self-esteem  aud  importance. — Feeling  unusually  strong  and  rich. — [50.]
He  weeps  and  sobs,  with  distorted  face. — Efforts  to  escape  from  the  bed  or
room,  or  from  some  frightful  object. — Grievous  sadness  and  melancholy,
that  end  in  tears,  complaints,  and  sighs. — Sadness,  often  constant  through
the  whole  disease  (delirium  tremens). — Melancholy,  with  inclination  to
commit  suicide. — Depression  of  spirits. — Restlessness  and  anxiousness  that
he  vainly  seeks  to  disguise  by  words,  making  it  more  conspicuous  by  that
means. — Solitude  and  repose  in  bed  increase  the  anxiety ;  he  refuses  to  re-
main in  bed,  often  even  in  the  house,  on  this  account,  and  escapes. — He
grows  unmanageable ;  demands  to  go  peremptorily  to  attend  to  his  busi-
ness.— Sighing,  anxiety,  and  apprehension  of  evil. — [60.]  Mental  inqui-
etude, making  it  impossible  for  him  to  settle  to  any  ordinary  occupation,
or  to  complete  the  tasks  which  he  begins  (chronic). — Feeling  of  vague  and
unaccountable  dread  (chronic). — Dread  arising  from  actual  delusions,  such
as  the  belief  that  an  enemy  is  constantly  lying  in  wait  to  inflict  an  injury,
etc. — They  think  they  are  on  shipboard  at  sea,  and  fear  being  drowned  in
the  storm ;  they  therefore  throw  everything  in  the  room  overboard,  i.  e.,  out
of  the  window,  into  the  street,  or  into  the  sea,  as  they  think. — Thinks  himself
pursued  by  robbers,  murderers,  police,  etc. — Vivid  apprehension  that  he  is  in
danger  of  falling  down  a  precipice,  even  when  walking  on  firm  ground  in
broad  daylight  (c/iro)iic).— -Moral  degradation,  marked  by  cowardice  and  un-
truthfulness (chronic). — Flightiness  and  violence  in  his  conduct,  and  restless
manner. — Stubbornness  in  all  he  does  or  leaves  undone. — Quarrelsomeness.
— Unreasonable  inclination  to  quarrel. — [70.]  He  begins  a  quarrel,  or
imagines  an  insult  which  was  not  given,  and  challenges  to  combat  or  de-
mands reparation. — Grudges  long  since  adjusted  or  forgotten  are  renewed ;
he  demands  revenge  or  satisfaction,  which  frequentl}'  ends  in  bloodshed  or
even  murder. — Impatience  of  contradiction. — Feeling  insulted  and  abused
by  one's  friends. — Rapid  changes  of  humor,  exhibiting  gayety,  mirthful-
ness,  petulance,  anger,  moroseness,  and  melancholy  by  turns. — Great  ease
in  the  use  of  the  intellectual  faculties. — Mind  free,  more  animated,  ideas
flow  more  easily. — Rapid  flow  of  thought,  but  he  cannot  keep  his  attention
fixed  continuously  ou  one  subject.  To  relate  a  not  very  complicated  oc-
currence causes  an  effort. — Rapidity  and  variety  of  thought. — The  imagi-
nation of  fanatics  is  occupied  with  religious  ravings ;  they  address  confi-
dential and  irreverent  discourses  to  the  Deity. — [80.]  Absurd  fancies. —
Greater  confusion  of  ideas. — Mind  disturbed  ;  consciousness,  the  power  of
fixing  the  attention,  were  lessened. — The  last  power  to  be  completely  re-
gained was  consciousness.- — Inattention  to  outward  objects. — General  intel-
lectual enfeeblement. — Weak  understanding. — Loss  of  judgment. — Absence
of  the  senses  and  of  reason. — Reasoning  powers  altogether  disabled. — [90.]
Stupidity.— Imbecility. — Dementia. — Insanity. — Insanity  breaks  out  more


140  ALCOHOL.

easily  in  those  who  have  received  injuries  to  the  skull. — Memory  impaired.
— Forgetfulness. — He  perfectly  recognizes  familiar  persons  in  the  height
of  the  disease  (delirium  tremens) ;  he  mistakes  one  person  for  another. —
He  strikes  a  post,  which  he  mistakes  for  a  man  who  will  not  get  out  of  his
way. — [100.]  If  only  for  moments,  he  confounds  one  person  with  another,
and  thinks  he  recognizes  an  absent  friend  in  a  stranger  who  is  present. —
Blunted  sensibilities.- — A  weak-nerved  person  shows  blunted  senses  and
childish  freaks.  The  phlegmatic  temperament  remains  passive  and  silent,
and  rather  falls  from  his  chair  before  giving  loud  evidences  of  his  intoxi-
cation.— Coma. — Very  vivid  mental  shocks  shorten  intoxication  very  much.
— Increased  perspiration  moderates  intoxication  very  much.

Send. — Feeling  of  lightness  and  clearness  in  the  head,  and  afterwards
confusion  and  weight. — Head  dull,  clouded,  and  hazy. — Attacks  of  vertigo,
with  sudden  faintness  and  reeling;  or  falling  down,  with  momentary  loss
of  consciousness,  but  no  twitchings. —  [HO.]  Vertigo. — Violent  vertigo,
nearly  changing  to  apoplexy. — Vertigo  enough  to  cause  falling ;  or  actual
falling  down. — Staggering,  uncertain  gait. — He  staggers  while  walking
and  standing. — He  strives,  with  a  certain  effort,  to  keep  himself  upright
while  staggering. — Momentary  attacks  of  vertigo. — Sometimes  head  trem-
bles.— The  head  nods. — Effusion  of  water  into  the  membranes  and  ven-
tricles of  the  brain. — [120.]  Softening  of  the  brain. — Induration  of  the
brain. — Congestion  to  head. — Congestion  of  the  brain  and  its  membranes.
— Violent  congestion  to  the  head  and  organs  of  the  chest. — Apoplexy. —
He  became  quite  insensible  and  unable  to  sustain  himself  on  his  feet.
Four  hours  after,  his  consciousness  and  sensibility  had  entirely  ceased ;
breathing,  snoring  irregular ;  pulse  80.  Enlarged  pupil,  without  contrac-
tility when  exposed  to  the  light.  Power  of  swallowing  entirely  gone.
Death  after  fifteen  hours.— Real  apoplexy  sets  in  during  his  highest  stages
of  intoxication,  with  a  complete  insensibility  of  the  iris,  the  skin,  etc. — -The
highest  degree  of  intoxication  is  apoplexy,  during  which  sensation  and  motion
cease,  while  the  activity  of  the  heart  and  arteries  continues. — A  high  de-
gree of  intoxication  is  a  truly  apoplectic  condition. — [130.]  The  sad  end
of  a  deeply  intoxicated  person  is  most  frequently  apoplexy. — Coma,  that
changes  to  paralysis  of  the  brain,  in  persons  of  an  apoplectic  habit. — By
frequently  repeated  intoxication,  a  predisposition  to  apoplexy  is  developed.
— Headache,  sometimes  with  nausea  and  vomiting. — Pressing  headache,
causing  stupidity. — Drawing  in  the  head. — Dull,  diffused  headache,  with  a
buzzing  or  rushing  sound  in  the  ears. — The  temporal  veins  look  full,  and
the  temporal  arteries  beat  rapidly  and  forcibl}';  afterwards,  they  seem  ex-
hausted and  collapsed. — Sensation  of  fulness  tit  the  crown  and  back  of  the
head,  or  at  the  temples,  according  to  the  kind  of  spirit  taken  (in  two  to
eight  minutes).

JEyes. — Eyes  injected. — [140.]  Eyes  red. — Red,  watery  eyes  (chronic).
— Eyes  fiery,  brilliant. — Eyes  fixed  and  wild. — Shy,  more  oblique  than
fixed  look. — Rigid,  gleaming  look. — Eyes  bright  and  animated,  or  suffused
and  soft. — Eyes  red  and  excited. — Chronic  inflammation  of  the  eye,  in
consequence  of  which,  spots  in  the  eye  and  dimness  of  vision. — Catarrhal
inflammation  of  the  eyes  (in  hard  drinkers). — [150.]  Linings  and  margins
of  the  lids  congested. — Roughness  of  the  margins  of  the  lids  (granulations)
in  hard  drinkers. — Contraction  of  the  pupils,  drooping  lids,  and  coma. —
Effusion  and  swelling  below  the  eyes. — Conjunctivae  more  or  less  jaundiced
(chronic). — Injected  eyeballs. — Yellow  tinge  of  the  sclerotica. — Veins  of
the  sclerotic  membrane  turgid  and  prominent. — Pupils  dilated,  sluggish,


ALCOHOL.  141

rarely  contracted. — Dilated  and  almost  insensible  pupils. — [160.]  Enlarged
pupil. — Pupil  enlarged,  not  entirely  insensible  to  the  light. — Entire  insen-
sibility of  the  iris. — Pupils  dilated,  and  afterward  contracted. — Contraction
of  the  pupils,  with  drooping  lids,  and  coraa. — Perception  of  light  lessened.
— Vision  weak ;  cannot  use  eyes ;  objects  flicker  and  become  dim,  indis-
tinct; cannot  read  or  write. — Aversion  to  light. — Flickering,  and  becoming
black  before  the  eyes. — Flickering  before  vision,  as  if  a  veil  suddenly
drawn  before  the  eyes,  which  at  last  becomes  thick  and  black,  especially
on  exerting  vision. — [170.]  Black  before  eyes,  especially  on  suddenly
moving  head  after  changing  position  on  rising  up,  with  vertigo  ;  patient
fears  falling,  and  grasps  at  surrounding  objects. — Sparks  before  the  eyes. —
Flashes  of  light  before  eyes. — MuscEe  volitantes,  in  clouds,  before  the  eyes
(^chronic). — Double  vision. — Visual  hallucinations  (chronic).

Ears. — Dryness  in  external  meatus. — Acute  sense  of  hearing. — Hear-
ing blunted. — Perception  of  sound  lessened. — [180.]  Confusion  of  sounds. —
Roaring  in  ears. — Roaring  in  ears,  especially  after  spasms,  or  with  vertigo.
— Ringing  in  ears. — Buzzing  or  rushing  sound  in  the  ears,  frequently
though  not  always  accompanied  with  dull,  diffused  headache  (chronic). —
Illusions  of  hearing. — Imaginary  voices  and  sounds. — Symptoms  worse
when  lying  down,  and  in  the  quietude  of  the  night.

Wose. — Redness  of  the  nose  and  cheeks  (chronic). — Redness  of  the
nose,  especially  at  the  tip. — [190.]  Vessels  of  the  skin  congested. — Swell-
ing and  inflammation. — Red  pimples,  or  tubercles. — Lining  membrane  of
the  nare.-i  inflamed  and  ulcerated. — Bleeding  of  the  nose. — Illusions  of  the
sense  of  smell.

Face. — There  was  a  relaxation  of  the  muscles  and  stifiiiess  of  the  skin
of  the  face,  forehead,  and  upper  lip,  so  that  the  features  fell. — Great  flabbi-
ness  of  the  muscles  of  expression  (chronic). — The  physiognomy  expresses
amiable  cheerfulness. — Face  bloated,  without  expression ;  stupid,  silly. —
[200.]  Violent  cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  which
sometimes  dislocates  the  lower  jaw. — Redness  of  the  cheeks  and  nose
(chronic). — Redness  overspreads  the  face,  and  all  the  features  melt  into  a
smile. — Face  bloated  and  heated. — Face  red  and  swollen. — Face  blue-
black,  or  pale. — Color  of  the  face  sometimes  unchanged,  sometimes  red,
sometimes  icteric,  like  the  rest  of  the  body. — Face  muddy,  red  in  spots,
mottled. — Face  earthy. — On  the  nose  and  other  parts  of  the  face,  warts  and
eruptions  appear,  of  different  colors  and  sizes.— [210.]  Tetter  in  the  face. —
Eruption  in  the  face ;  a  dark -red,  ugly,  shining  redness  of  the  skin  on  the
nose,  forehead,  cheeks,  sometimes  on  the  chin,  finally  in  other  places,  often
covered  with  tetter,  bluish-red  or  white  vesicles  and  pimples.  Skin  mostly
dry  and  rough,  with  broad,  red,  raised  clusters  in  the  skin  ;  itching  pain  ;
desquamation  slight,  or  wanting. — Forehead  serene.

Mouth. — Grinding  the  teeth. — Tongue  fissured  from  middle  to  the
edges,  furred,  or  sometimes  denuded  of  epithelium. — Papillae  at  tip  of
tongue  enlarged  and  red. — Sore  and  dry  condition  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue
(after  rum). — Perfect  cleanness  and  moistness  of  tongue  (chronic). — Dry,
red,  glazed  tongue  (chronic). — Thick  yellow  fur  on  tongue,  especially  at
the  back  part  (chronic). — ^[220.]  Tongue  coated. — Tongue  covered  with
yellow  slime  in  the  middle,  the  margins  clean. — White,  and  sometimes
brownish  coating  on  the  tongue. — Tongue  smooth  and  red,  with  tendency  to
stick  to  the  teeth  or  roof  of  the  mouth. — Tongue  feels  thick,  is  tremulous,
partially  paralyzed,  causing  one  to  stammer. — Tongue  moved  with  diffi-
culty.—-Sudden  trembling  in  tongue  and  lips. — Convulsive  motions  of  the


142  •  ALCOHOL.

tongue,  causing  stammering  and  inarticulate  speech. — Trembling  and
twitching  in  the  coated  tongue. — Dry  state  of  the  mouth. — Breath  offen-
sive, especially  during  digestion. — [230,]  Peculiar,  foul  breath ;  smell  quite
unlike  the  odor  of  the  alcoholic  liquor  itself,  and  may  be  separately  dis-
tinguished even  when  the  latter  is  also  present  (chronic). — Offensive  smell
from  the  mouth. — ^Offensive  breath  in  the  morning. — Mouth  filled  with
black  saliva. — Rising  of  tasteless  or  foul  liquid  in  the  mouth. — Sometimes
frothing  at  the  mouth. — Froth  in  mouth. — Foul  taste  (chronic). — Sour,
saltish,  or  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning. — Bitter  taste  in  the
mouth. — [240.]  Illusions  of  the  sense  of  taste. — Stammering  speech. —
Muttering ;  he  utters  inarticulate  sounds.

Throat. — Throat  red,  and  feels  stiff. — Granulations  on  the  posterior
wall  of  the  throat,  also  on  the  base  of  the  tongue. — Engorged  appearance
of  the  veins  of  the  fauces. — Redness,  dryness,  and  heat. — Aphthous  ulcers
in  the  throat. — Gangrenous  ulcers. — Throat  full  of  tough  mucus,  difficult
to  hawk  up. — [250.]  Collection  of  mucus,  sometimes  bloody. — Spasms  in
pharynx  and  oesophagus. — Paralysis  of  pharyngeal  muscles. — Paralysis  of
the  muscles  of  deglutition. — Burning  sensation  back  of  the  sternum. — Sore-
ness felt  from  tha  throat  down  to  the  stomach  after  swallowing  solid  food,
or  very  hot  or  cold  drinks. — Sensation  as  if  something  lodged  in  the  oesoph-
agus.— Feeling  of  contraction  or  stricture,  preventing  the  discharge  of
flatulence  by  belching. — Strong  efforts  to  clear  the  throat,  or  belch  or  vomit,
bring  up  blood  or  bloody  mucus. — Hawking  causes  vomiting. — [260.]
Swallowing  with  burning  and  painful  sensation. — Swallowing  painful. —
Spasmodic  dysphagia.

Stomach. — Desire  for  pepper,  mustard,  and  other  heating  articles. —
Longing  for  spirituous  liquors,  and,  if  not  speedily  gratified,  becomes  raving,
or  has  convulsions. — At  first  no  desire  to  eat;  afterwards,  ravenous  hunger.
— Loss  of  appetite. — Desire  to  eat  entirely  lost. — Aversion  to  food  and  alco-
holic drinks. — Thirst  before  breakfast  and  through  the  day. — [270.]  Thirst
often  excessive;  often  none. — Eructations,  sour  or  foul. — Eructations  of
water. — Sour  eructations. — Frequent  eructations. — Eructation  like  rotten
eggs. — Singultus. — Nausea,  and  vomiting  mucus  and  water. — Morning,
nausea,  or  vomiting. — Vomiting,  mornings. — [280.]  Vomiting  after  eating
or  drinking. — Vomiting  of  sour  and  offensive-smelling  matters. — Excessive
vomiting  (vomitus  crapulosus). — Vomiting  in  the  morning  hours  of  a  tough
mucus,  resembling  white  of  egg;  stringy,  with  flow  of  saliva. — Vomiting
of  sour  matter. — Htematemesis  (rare)  (chronic). — Fulness  and  distension
after  eating. — Inflammations  of  the  stomach  and  intestines. — Burning  heat
in  stomach. — Peculiar  burning  sensation  in  stomach,  best  allayed  by  water.
— [290.]  Pressure  in  the  stomach. — On  waking,  a  more  tickling,  contrac-
tive sensation  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  which  spreads  from  there  tothe
chest,  causing  shortness  of  breath,  and  irritation  to  cough. — Sense  of  oppres-
sion and  weight. — Weakness  of  the  stomach. — Heat  and  burning  in  the
epigastric  region. — Constriction,  uncomfortable  tension  and  pressure  in
epigastrium. — Tension  in  epigastrium. — -Oppression  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, that  is  often  aggravated  to  intense  anxiety.

Abdomen. — Sense  of  pressure  in  both  hypochondria. — Heat,  weight,
and  soreness  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — [300.]  Inflammation  of  the  liver.
— Swelling  of  spleen. — Recti  muscles  of  abdomen  become  l-igid  and  promi-
nent.— Ascites. — Rumbling  and  growling  in  intestines. — Inflammation  of


ALCOHOL.  143

the  intestines  and  stomach. — Flatuleilce. — Colic  (colica  crapulosa). — Colic
pains. — Intestinal  hemorrhage  (rare)  (chronic).

Stool  and  Anus. — [310.]  Hsemorrhoids  and  varices. — Bleeding
haemorrhoids  (chronic). — Paralysis  of  anus. — Faeces  compact,  knotty,  blacii-
ish,  or  light-gray. — Stools  blackish,  bilious,  slimy,  and  bloody,  or  thin  and
clay-colored. — Diarrhoea  bilious  or  mucous,  or  mealy. — Diarrhoea  (diar-
rhoea crapulosa ;  cholera  crapulosa),  but  also  constipation. — Diarrhoea
often  alternating  with  constipation.— Involuntary  excretion  of  stool  and
urine.

TTrinnvtf  Ol'f/ans. — ^Frequent  need  to  urinate ;  finally  incontinence.
— [320.]  Involuntary  excretion  of  urine  and  stool. — Increased  quantity  of
urine. — Lessened  secretion  of  urine. — Retention  of  urine. — Urine  scanty  at
first,  yellowish  or  deep  red,  then  more  copious,  with  sediment. — High-
colored  urine. — Albuminous  urine. — Urine  acid,  contains  serum  and  bile. —
Bloody  urine. — Discharge  of  blood.

Sexual  Oi'f/ati.s. — [330.]  Want  of  sexual  desire. — Sexual  powers
at  first  increased,  then  diminished. — Impotence ;  want  of  sexual  power. —
Intoxicated  persons  beget  drunkards. — The  children  of  drunkards  grow  up
dull,  indolent,  and  stupid,  and  become  intemperate. — Irregular  menstrua-
tion.— -Abortion  in  the  first  months.

Respirator  If  Apparatus. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the  larynx. —
Catarrhal  bronchitis. — Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  air-passages. — [340.]
Frequent  disposition  to  clear  the  throat. — Hoarseness. — Sobbing. — Cough.
— Hacking,  dry  cough. — Coughing  blood. — The  respiratory  muscles  acted
in  a  gasping  manner,  so  that  there  was  a  jumping,  quick,  inspiratory  effort,
and  a  lazy,  feeble  expiratory  effort  in  the  later  stage. — Accelerated  breath-
ing.— Respiration  quickened,  and  then  retarded. — At  all  peribds,  there  was
a  sense  of  impediment  to  respiration.— [350.]  Heavy,  labored  breathing. —
Snoring  respiration. — Asthma. — Asphyxia.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Organic  difficulties  of  the  heart  and  the  large
vessels. — Hypertrophy  of  the  left  side  of  the  heart. — ^Valvular  insufficiency.
— Increased  action  of  heart  set  in  so  soon  as  three  minutes,  and  continued
from  thirty  to  fifty  minutes. — Increased  activity  of  the  heart  and  arteries. —
Pulsation  of  the  heart  and  arteries  violently  increased,  hard  and  full. —
[360.]  Increased  heat  and  rapidity  of  action  in  the  heart. — Very  excited
action,  violent  throbbing  of  the  heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart. — He
grinds  his  teeth  with  anxiety,  and  presses  his  hand  on  the  region  of  the
heart. — Pulse  nearly  always  accelerated,  sometimes  small  and  empty,  some-
times full  and  even  rather  hard. — Small,  usually  frequent  pulse.

Chest, — Hydrothorax. — Emphysema. — Congestion  of  lungs. — Sensa-
tion of  warmth  in  chest. — [370,]  Tension  of  chest.

JVeck  and  Baek. — Veins  of  neck  swollen. — ^Temporal  and  throat
arteries  throb ;  jugular  veins  turgescent  or  protruding. — Weakness,  finally,
in  muscles  of  back  ;  cannot  even  sit  erect. — Sensitiveness,  aching,  and  pain
in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.

Extremities  in  General. — Sudden  startings  of  the  limbs,  as  from
electrical  shocks. — Trembling  of  extremities. — The  muscles  of  the  limbs
were  inactive. — -Increased  warmth  ;  then  coldness. — Creeping  sensation
(formication)  under  the  skin  of  the  hands  and  feet. — [380.]  Uneasy,  rest-
less feeling  in  the  extremities. — At  first,  a  feeling  of  increased  strength,  and
then  of  debility  and  weight. — ^Weakness  and  relaxation  of  the  muscles  of
locomotion,  first  in  fingers  and  hands,  especially  in  thumb  and  index-finger,
extending  all  over-  both  extremities,  which  become  heavy  and  difficult  to


144  ALCOHOL.

move. — Limbs  numb,  as  if  paralyzed,  and  again  extremely  sensitive  to
touch  and  motion ;  more  sensitive  to  a  light  touch  than  to  a  firm  grasp.

Upper  Extremities. — Trembling  in  arms  mid  hands. — Sometimes,
when  lying,  a  peculiar  persistent  trembling  in  muscles  under  the  skin  in
loins  or  upper  arms,  most  marked  if  one  suddenly  presses  on  any  place. —
Trembling  of  the  hands,  with  constant  working  of  the  tendons  of  the  wrist,
with  the  hands  turned  in. — Trembling  of  hands.-^Mornings,  on  waking,
trembling  in  fingers  and  hands,  aggravated  by  stimulants  ;  or  sometimes,
after  rising ;  later,  continues  all  day,  painless,  worse  after  keeping  still. —
Tearings  in  fingers,  often  with  a  benumbed  sensation  and  convulsive  at-
tacks.

Lowei'  Extremities. — [390.]  Eelaxation  and  exhaustion  in  gen-
eral locomotion. — Weakness  in  lower  extremities,  beginning  in  knees ;  gait
becomes  stumbling,  unsteady. — Spasmodic  drawings,  especially  on  bending
joints,  feet,  and  knees;  very  painful. — Pains  in  the  legs,  going  to  the  nates.
— Indescribable  aching  and  pains  in  the  legs,  below  the  knees,  and  in  the
feet. — The  flesh  feels  as  if  torn  from  the  legs,  or  cut  with  knives. — Twitch-
ings  in  muscles  of  calves  and  flexors  of  the  feet ;  become  painful  and  prevent
falling  asleep. — Numb  pain  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones  of  the  legs. — Vari-
cose condition  of  the  veins  of  the  legs. — Tearings  in  soles  of  feet. — [400.]
Formication  in  the  soles. — Inflammation  and  acute  pain  in  the  toes. — Scaly
patches,  very  itchy. — Ulcers. — Bunions.

Generalit les. —  Convulsions,  sometimes  like  chorea. —  Convulsions,
with  a  peculiar  sensation  in  head,  as  of  wind,  or  a  painful  drawing,  as  if
something  twisted  and  turned  in  the  head. — Convulsions  often  begin  in  one
extremity ;  are  often  confined  to  one  side ;  sometimes  the  head  is  drawn
backward,  the  back  bent,  the  teeth  clenched,  and  eyes  distorted. — Convul-
sions and  hysterical  paroxysms  break  out  in  intemperate  women. — Epileptic
attacks,  generally  coming  on  while  standing ;  sometimes  while  sitting  or
lying. — [410.]  Epilepsy  returns  after  every  excess  in  drinking. — Convul-
sive-like epileptic  attacks. — The  whole  body  trembles,  commonly  after  ex-
ertion.— Tottering  and  shaking. — Trembling  of  the  whole  body,  e.--;pecially
of  the  upper  extremities,  so  that  he  cannot  take  hold  of  any  object,  cannot
walk  without  stumbling,  and  only  with  difficulty  control  the  lower  jaw  when
speaking,  etc. — Subsultus  tendinum,  especially  evenings,  before  going  to
sleep. — Twitchings  or  jerkings  in  muscles  on  sitting  or  lying,  not  in  stand-
ing, especially  on  changing  position  ;  almost  always  in  lower  extremities. — ■
Persistent  muscular  ti'emor;  first  developed  in  the  extremities. — Muscular
inquietude  ;  inability  to  keep  the  limbs  or  the  body  still  without  a  special
eflTort  of  attention. — The  twitches  and  spasms  often  appear  periodicallj',  and
associated  with  hallucinations. — [420.]  Drawings  in  muscles,  like  electric
shocks. — When  at  rest,  carpologia. — Trembling  and  paralysis  as  usual  con-
sequences of  apoplexy. — General  paralysis  after  delirium  tremens. — Marked
sensory  paralysis  (chronic). — (Muscular  power  increased.") — Muscles  flabby,
pale. — Power  of  directing  and  co-ordiuating  the  muscles  lessened. — The
muscular  system  was  influenced  in  a  marked  and  definite  manner.  The
thin  layers  of  voluntary  muscles  found  about  the  body  showed  great  relax-
ation.— Muscular  tone  and  power  greatly  lessened ;  this  cfl'eet  not  being
identical  upon  voluntary  and  involuntary  muscles,  and  not  often  identical
upon  the  inspiratory  and  expiratory  sets  of  muscles. — [439.]  The  body
loses  its  mobility,  and  becomes  more  and  more  destitute  of  muscular  power.
— Emaciation,  want  of  strength,  with  continued  want  of  appetite. — Pros-
tration of  the  whole  body. — Premature  old  age ;  face  becomes  pale  and


ALCOHOL.  145

■wrinkled,  features  relaxed,  eyes  dim,  lips  pale ;  the  hands  and  the  rest  of  the
limbs  tremble ;  gait  unsteady. — Indolence  of  body  and  mind. — Frequent
swoons. — Hypercedhesia. — Sensation  benumbed  :  anaesthesia  ;  first  in  tips  of
fingers  or  toes ;  often  spreads  to  the  back  of  feet  or  shin,  or  back  of  hands.
This  numbness  is  usually  superficial ;  sensitive  to  deep  pressure ;  sometimes
sensitiveness  of  whole  body  blunted. — Pain  and  neuralgia  tearinga. — Pain-
ful tearing  cuttings. — [440,]  Tearing,  cutting  sensations  extend  from  the
sensitive  parts,  up  and  down ;  cause  one  to  cry  out ;  are  very  exhausting. —
Very  marked,  peculiar,  continuous  buzzing  or  thrilling  and  not  unpleasant
sensation,  passing  from  above  downwards,  and  through  the  whole  system
(most  prominent  in  from  fifteen  to  forty  minutes,  and  continued  without
much  variation  during  twenty  to  thirty  minutes). — Atheromatous  deposits
in  arteries. — Dropsy. — (Edema  of  the  legs ;  later;  general  anasarca. — Incli-
nation to  obesity. — Spontaneous  combustion.  All  drunkards  (exclusively,
according  to  Trotter),  especially  old  women,  exhale  so  much  spirituous
vapor  from  their  bodies  that  it  takes  fire  when  brought  in  contact  with  a
lighted  caudle,  and  causes  the  burning  of  the  body.

Skin. — Skin  smutty  or  yellowish-gray. — Jaundice. — Icteric  conditions.
— [450.]  Skin  soft  and  flabby. — Skin  becomes  dry  and  hard. — Skin  soft
and  pliant,  inclined  to  sweat. — Sense  of  dryness,  heat,  and  evident  fulness
of  swelling  of  the  exposed  parts  of  the  skin,  as  the  hands  and  face,  with
general  sensation  of  heat.  This  increased  for  a  time,  and  so  much  so  that,
with  rum  especially,  the  skin  was  as  harsh  and  dry  as  if  exposed  to  an
easterly  wind. — Tormenting  eruption,  exceedingly  itching  (psora  ebriosum),
spreading  over  the  body  the  more  it  is  scratched,  and  presenting  rough,
scaly  patches. — Skin  became  raw  and  dry,  and  lastly  covered  with  an  in-
definite chronic  exanthema. — Eczema  and  prurigo. — Acne  rosacea. — Large,
indolent,  blue-looking  boils  or  carbuncles. — Skin  does  not  heal  readily. —
[460.]  The  least  injury  to  the  skin,  the  prick  of  a  lancet,  an  inflamed  spot,
especially  eruptions  and  burnt  places,  suppurate  with  inconceivable  rapid-
ity, and  degenerate  into  ulcers,  which  not  only  afiect  the  soft  parts,  but  the
bones  as  well,  and  smell  offensively. — Varicose  ulcers. — Some  sensitiveness
of  the  skin,  especially  in  shin-bones,  extending  up  to  the  loins. — A  disagree-
able burning,  biting  prickling  of  the  skin,  after  sleeping  off"  intoxication. —
Formication,  beginning  especially  in  feet  and  legs,  extending  to  loins  or
hands  and  arms,  seldom  to  the  nates,  worse  mornings  and  evenings,  espe-
cially when  one  gets  into  bed,  so  that  sometimes  one  cannot  go  to  sleep  and
must  get  up.  Must  constantly  move  the  aflfected  parts,  and,  when  most
severe,  causes  mental  disturbance. — The  exhalations  of  the  skin,  as  well  as
the  breath,  smell  strong  of  alcoholic  liquors.

Fever, — Sensation  of  cold,  with  paleness  of  the  body. — Sensitiveness
to  the  fresh  air;  shudder  and  frost. — An  agreeable  warmth  spreads  over
the  body. — General  sensation  of  heat,  with  increased  action  of  the  heart
and  dryness  of  the  skin.  After  about  twenty  to  forty  minutes  this  sensa-
tion of  heat  gave  place  to  one  of  cold,  which  was  felt  first  on  the  most  sen-
sitive part  of  the  body  in  reference  to  temperature,  viz.,  between  the  shoul-
ders ;  and  at  length,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of  a  suitable  degree  of
atmospheric  temperature,  it  became  distressing,  and  led  often  to  shivering.
This  was  sometimes  so  marked,  and  occurred  so  suddenly,  that  it  gave  rise
to  a  shock.  It  did  not  correspond  to  the  temperature  of  the  skin,  but  was
usually  coexistent  with  the  cessation  of  the  iucrease  of  the  heart's  action. —
[470.]  Fever  (often  through  the  entire  course  of  the  disease — delirium  tre-
mens— none). — Evening exacerbations. — Great  inclination to sweat. —

VOL.  I. — 10


146  ALETRIS  FARINOSA— ALLIUM  CEPA.

Sweat  easy  at  first. — Sweat  profuse,  cool,  sticky,  sour-smelling,  sometimes
warm.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Deep  sleep. — Irresistible  sleep. — Deep  sleep,
frequently  accompanied  by  rattling  breath. — A  really  death-like  sleep
overcame  him. — Comatose  sleep,  which  becomes  fatal,  in  consequence  of
excessive  doses. — [480.]  Sleep  seemed  at  first  with  snoring,  as  if  apoplectic  ;
later,  not  to  be  roused. — Lethargic  phenomena ;  snoring  respiration,  inter-
mittent pulsation  of  the  heart,  followed  by  death  (from  very  large  doses).
— Restless  sleep. — Starts  from  his  sleep  with  every  indication  of  the  great-
est anxiety  and  restlessness. — An  invincible  disposition  to  turn  restlessly
from  side  to  side  in  bed  entirely  prevents  sleep  (chronic). — What  sleep  he
has  had  has  been  of  an  unrefreshing  kind,  and  a  complete  condition  of
nervous  prostration  naturally  results,  from  which  he  can  only  be  rallied  by
food  or  drink  (chronic). — Fully  developed  insomnia ;  the  patient  tosses  from
side  to  side  during  nearly  the  whole  night,  getting  only  broken  snatches  of
sleep,  and  these  almost  always  attended  with  disturbing,  and  often  with
frightful  dreams  (chronic). — Sleep  restless,  interrupted  by  dreams,  which
the  patient  in  the  beginning  still  recognizes  as  such,  but  later  takes  them
for  real  when  he  awakes ;  finally,  entire  sleeplessness,  during  which  he  often
insists  on  having  slept. — Terrible  dreams. — His  dreams  are  so  vivid  that
he  cannot  be  persuaded  on  awaking  that  they  are  not  realities. — [490.]
He  awakes  from  his  sleep  prostrate,  depressed,  and  weakened,  without  con-
sciousness of  what  has  happened. — After  sleeping  ofi"his  intoxication,  he  is
sad,  disinclined,  indisposed  to  any  occupation,  wastes  his  time  in  joyless  in-
activity, yawns  continually,  and  impatiently  awaits  the  hour  for  the  next
orgy.

ALETRIS  FARINOSA.

Aletris  farinosa,  L.  Nat.  order,  Hsemadoracese.  Common  names,  Colic
root.  Star  grass. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  root.

Authority. Hale  (New  Remedies,  from  the  Eclectics).

Excessive  nausea,  with  giddiness,  followed  by  vomiting  and  purging. —
Colic  in  the  hypogastrium. — Pressure  in  the  uterine  region. — *Premature
and  profuse  menses,  with  labor-like  pains.


ALLIUM  CEPA.

Allium  cepa,  Willd.  Nat.  order,  Liliacese.  Common  names,  Onion ;
(Germ.)  Zwiebel ;  (Fr.)  Oignon. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  red  onion.

Authorities.  1,  C.  Hering,  0;  2,  C.  Hering,  from  others,  "ab,"  "gg,"  etc.;
3,  J.  Jeanes ;  4,  W.  Wesselhoeft,  0 ;  5,  Geist,  3d ;  6,  J.  N.  Eckel,  e;  7,  Zum-
brock,  0;  8,  Alleborn,  0;  (9,  Toxicological ;)  (10,  Old  Authors;)  11,  Lingen  ;
12,  Williamson;  13,  Pereira;  14,  Neidhard ;  15,  Raue;  16,  Z.  B.;  17,
Dubbs. (Authorities  from  Hering's  Arznei  Priifungen.)

JKind. — To  maudragora  we  may  join  the  excessive  use  of  garlic,  onions,
and  leeks,  because  all  physicians  consider  them  very  injurious,  as  occasion-
ing deeply  corrupted,  malignant  humidity,  which  inflame  the  blood,  injure
the  eyes,  the  head,  the  brain,  and  stomach,  predisposing  to  lethargy,  sopor,
somnolency,  vertigo,  epilepsy,  and  indeed  insanity,"*. — Onions  go  to  the
head  with  their  acridity,  and  injure  the  brain,  and  if  one  eats  too  much  of
them  they  can  indeed  cause  insanity  and  madness," — If  many  are  eaten


ALLIUM  CEPA.  147

raw,  they  make  a  person  foolish  by  reason  of  their  aromas,  which  mount
into  the  head,". — If  too  many  are  eaten,  the  onion-juice  takes  away  the
senses,  by  reason  of  its  great  heat  and  acridity,  and  greatly  injures  the
stomach,"'. — I  find  something  injurious  in  the  onion,  and  consider  the  opin-
ion of  Spigelius  well  founded,  that  a  too  free  and  continued  use  of  it  as
food  causes  disturbances  of  the  brain,". — Inexpressible  anxiety,  turning
himself  hither  and  thither  full  of  despair,  with  severe  colic,'. — Pains,  with
sore  fingers,  make  him  fra,nt\c,° .^-*  Very  melancholy ,  with  catarrh  °. — In  the
afternoon,  after  wine  and  coffee,  he  was  completely  confused  and  absent-
minded  by  much  business,  forgot  and  twisted  everything  in  the  utmost
confusion  (the  fourth  day),'. — [10.]  He  makes  mistakes  in  spelling  a  for-
eign language,'. — -Apathetic,  mornings,*. — Working  people  take  in  the
morning  onions  with  bread  and  salt  for  the  bad  air,  as  they  do  treacle,  but
idlers  are  made  foolish,  melancholy,  and  sleepy  by  its  use,". — Cardanus
affirms  that  even  the  offspring  of  those  who  eat  onions  freely  are  disposed
to  insanity,".

Head, — *  Confusion  of  the  head,*;  with  coryza°. — Vertigo,  etc.," ;  (on
rising  up,°). — Head  confused,  especially  in  the  forehead,  after  renewed
eructations,^ — Confusion  of  the  head,  after  it  had  risen  up  from  the  stom-
ach into  the  throat,*. — Pain  in  both  sides  of  the  occiput,  and  a  dull  confu-
sion from  the  crown  backward  and  downward  in  the  regions  "  conscien-
tiousness" and  "love  of  approbation  ;"  continued  the  whole  forenoon  ;  went
away  in  the  evening  after  drinking  beer,'. — Confusion  in  the  occiput,  first
on  both  sides  and  towards  the  upper  part,  pressing  down  sideways,  then
behind  the  ears  around  the  whole  occiput  (after  one  hour),'. — [20.]  Pres-
sure and  confusion  in  the  upper  part  of  the  occiput  in  the  regions  "  con-
scientiousness," "  love  of  approbation,"  and  "  caution,"  the  whole  evening  ;
better  in  the  open  air,  worse  on  returning  to  the  warm  room  (first  day),'. —
Headache,". — But  those  in  whom  they  produce  headache  should  avoid  them,".
— Make  a  decoction  of  leeks  in  water  and  bathe  the  head  in  it,  for  head-
ache,'".— Raw,  they  are  very  injurious  to  the  head  and  to  the  eye-s,". — They
frequently  excite  headache  in  inflammatory  constitutions,'". — They  afilict
the  head  and  eyes,  hence  they  should  be  avoided  by  those  who  study,  and
have  a  humid,  weak  head,  sight,  and  hearing,'". — If  eaten  too  much,  they
cause  headache,'". — ''^ Headache,  better  in  the  open  air,^. — ^Headache,  worse
on  return  to  the  warm  room ^,  etc. — [30.]  *Headache  in  the  room,  evenings,
with  coryza,^ — *  Headache,  with  coryza,^: — *Headache  and  coryza,  worse
evenings  (fourth  day),". — *Severe  headache,  with  alight  coryza,°. — Headache
and  gastric  troubles,'". — Headache  and  yawning,'. — The  whole  head  be-
came hot  (after  cutting  onions),'. — Heat  of  the  head,'. — Heat  and  heaviness
of  the  head,  lasting  from  the  forenoon  till  near  evening ;  after  cutting
onions,'. — The  head  is  full  and  heavy,'. — [40.]  Fulness  and  heaviness  in
the  head,  as  if  it  were  bound  up,  with  flickering  of  the  eyes,'. — Like  elec-
tric shocks  through  the  head,". — Aching  of  the  head,^. — Dulness  in  the
head,  with  some  coryza  and  lachrymations,  in  the  evening  on  cutting  onions,'.
— Dulness  in  the  forehead  and  whole  head,  as  after  inhaling  chloroform,'.
— Dull,  oppressive  pain  in  the  head,'. — Heaviness  in  the  head,^— Oppres-
sive headache  over  the  eyes,  frequently  going  through  the  head  like  an
electric  shock  (the  first  day),". — *Pain  in  the  forehead,  with  catarrh,°. —
Stitches,  as  of  needles,  in  the  forehead,'. — [50.]  Stitches  over  the  whole
left  forehead,  externally ;  they  draw  into  the  ear,  the  upper  jaw,  and  the
teeth  of  the  same  side  (immediately  after  taking  it)  ;  evenings,". — Pains
deep  in  the  head  over  the  left  brow  (after  one  hour),'. — Headache  the  next


148  ALLIUM  CEPA.

morning,  especially  in  both  temples/. — *Pains  in  both  temples,  most  severe
in  the  right,  aggravated  by  winking,  afterward  the  pain  extends  over  the  fore-
head, worse  on  the  left  side,". — As  if  swollen  and  heavy  on  the  crown,'. —
Pain  left  of  the  crown  (after  seventy  minutes),'. — Headache,  from  both
sides  of  the  head,  downward  and  inward  toward  the  middle  (after  ten  min-
utes),'.— Tingling  pain  behind  the  left  mastoid  process,'l — Headache  in  the
region  of  the  organ  of  "concentration,"'. — Pains  deep  in  the  head,  stick-
ing to  the  ear,'. — [60.]  Headache,  first  in  the  occiput,  then  in  the  forepart
on  the  right  side  over  the  eye,'. — Headache  on  both  sides  of  the  occiput,
afterwards  in  only  two  large  round  places  in  the  upper  posterior  part  of  the
head,  in  the  region  "  love  of  approbation  ;"  still  later,  a  general  and  humming
sensation  of  the  part  being  asleep,'. — The  pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the
occiput  in  the  evening,  became  about  eleven  o'clock  a  sensation  of  being
asleep ;  on  touching  it,  he  first  noticed  it  was  not  in  the  scalp,  but  as  if  in
the  bone,'. — With  pressive  headache  is  the  sensation,  as  if  the  whole  bead
externally  were  wrapped  up  in  warm  water,". — For  alopecia,  Hippocrates
directed  the  spots  to  be  rubbed  with  onions,'". — (The  hair  is  made  to  grow
by  anointing  the  bald  spots  with  onions,"  '.) — (It  promotes  the  growth  of
hair  in  Isalduess  better  than  Alcyonium,°  '".) — It  may  be  used  externally
for  making  the  hair  grow,  anointing  the  shaven  head  with  it ;  the  juice
also  makes  the  hair  grow,°  '".) — (For  promoting  the  growth  of  the  hair,
the  head  is  washed  at  evening  with  French  brandy  which  has  stood  over
freshly  cut  onions,°  '".) — (Bald  spots  are  to  be  rubbed  with  a  cut  onion  till
they  are  red,  to  make  the  hair  grow,°  '".)

JEyes. — [70.]  (Blue-eyed, °  '".) — (The  eyes  are  no  longer  watery  and
dim  ;  the  sixth  day ; — they  have  their  natural  lustre ;  the  seventh  day,°  ".) —
*It  causes  biting  in  the  eyes,  irritates  to  tears  (an  undoubted  action  of  onion),'.
— At  evening,  on  cutting  up  onions,  there  was  a  continual  dropping  from
the  eyes,  then  they  become  painful,'. — Pungent  smell,  biting,  and  weep-
ing of  the  eyes,  and  sneezing,  after  taking  it,'. — *  Causes  lachrymation,^.
— (The  juice  represses  the  excessive  lachrymation,° '".) — The  eyes  water
after  a  few  hours  (first  day),". — The  left  eye  pains  the  next  morning;  fine
stitches  in  it ;  after  cutting  the  onions  in  the  evening,'. — *  The  lachrymation
of  the  left  eye,  with  coryza,  was  much  greater,  the  eye  was  much  redder,  and
more  sensitive  to  the  light  than  the  right  (iirst  day),". — [80.]  *Exeessive
lachrymation  of  tlie  left  eye,  with  redness  of  the  eyeball,  after  frequent
sneezing  (third  day),". — *  The  lachrymation  is  for  the  most  part  in  the  even-
ing, in  the  warm  room;  the  left  eye  weeps  more,  and  also  is  more  sensitive  to
the  light,^. — *  Watering  of  the  eyes  and  nose,^. — *Lachrymation,  with  co-
ryza,".— ^Lachrymation  (not  excoriating),  with  coryza,°. — Burning  in
the  outside  of  the  right  upper  lid  (after  three  minutes),'. — Burning  in  the
lids,'. — As  if  there  were  smoke  in  the  eyes  under  the  upper  lids,  mostly  in
the  night  (the  first  day),'. — Redness  of  the  lids,  with  catarrh,". — After
drinking  coffee,  an  irritation  on  the  left  upper  lid,  which  necessitates  fre-
quent rubbing ;  worse  in  the  warm  room,  disappearing  in  the  open  air  (the
first  day,  and  morning  of  the  second),". — [90.]  Irritation  of  the  left  upper
lid  reappears  very  strikingly  after  the  thirtieth,". — Itching  in  the  supra-
orbital region,  more  on  the  left  side  (after  one  hour),'. — Burning  itching  in
the  brows,  the  supraorbital  region,  and  the  upper  lids;  evening  of  the  first
day,'. — Heat  in  the  left  eyebrow,'^ — Needle-stitches  in  the  brows,'. — ^Pres-
sive pain  over  the  right  eye  (after  twenty  minutes),'. — Feeling  of  heaviness
over  both  eyes  and  in  the  forehead  ;  after  a  few  minutes,  lasting  two  hours,'*.
— Pains  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  would  be  torn  out,  as  if  the  eye  hung  loose


ALLIUM  CEPA.  149

posteriorly,  on  a  string,  and  could  be  bored  into  with  the  fingers  and  torn
out,'. — Drawing  pains  in  the- left  cheek,  going  into  the  interior  of  the  left
eye;  better  in  the  cold  air  (the  second  day),". — Pain  over  the  right  eye  to
the  root  of  the  nose,'. — [100.]  (Pain  from  the  cheeks  into  the  left  eye,'.) — ■
(Commencing  ecchymoses  in  the  eyes,°  ".) — (Ulcers,  spots  in  the  eyes,°  '". )
— (Irritant  afiections  of  the  eyes,  used  with  ashes,°  '".) — (A  stye  is  to  be
rubbed  with  a  piece  of  raw  onion, °  '".) — {^Swelling  of  the  lids  and  around
the  eye,  with  coryza°.) — On  becoming  sleepy  while  reading,  the  letters  ap-
pear to  him  very  small  (soon  after  the  second  dose),\ — Flickering  and  blind-
ing before  the  eyes;  everything  dances  hither  and  thither;  therewith  fulness
and  heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if  bound  up ;  the  whole  head  becomes  hot,
and  feels  swollen  and  heavy  on  the  vertex,  together  with  so  much  general
weakness  that  she  must  lie  down  ;  after  cutting  onions,'. — A  bright  dazzling
in  the  distance,  and  dimness  near  by,'. — The  eyes  are  sensitive  to  the  light,
particularly  the  left,^ — [HO.]  Cloudy  sight  by  candlelight,^

Ears. — Pecking  behind  the  right  ear  (after  one  minute),'. — Pains  mov-
ing from  deep  within  the  head  to  the  ears,  like  thick  threads,  about  a  finger
in  length,  remaining  in  particular  spots,  from  a  pea  to  a  hazel-nut  in  size
(after  fifty  minutes),'. — Pain  behind  the  ears  deep  within  the  head,  from
backward  and  inward  to  the  ears ;  a  sensation  entirely  new  and  peculiar  to
him  (after  one  hour),'. — Stitches  drawing  from  the  left  forehead  into  the
ear,". — Under  the  left  ear  a  hard  swelling  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut,  extending
from  over  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw  to  the  ear,  from  which  pains  go  into
the  ear,  especially  on  pressure,'. — A  painful  sensation  from  the  throat  to  the
ears  (after  five  minutes),'. — Chilling,  or  burning  twitchiug  on  the  right  side
of  the  throat  in  the  region  of  the  Eustachian  tube,  then  above  it  a  kind  of
gnawing;  neither  painful  (after  one  ho^r),'. — Pains  in  the  throat  drawiug
into  the  right  ear,'. — The  ears,  the  throat,  especially  about  the  root  of  the
tongue,  were  decidedly  affected  (fifteen  minutes  after  the  second  dose),'. —
[120.]  Stitches  through  the  right  ear  the  next  morning,' '. — (Dropped  into
the  ears,  it  removes  the  pains,  as  well  as  the  roaring  and  ringing,"  '".) —
(The  heart  of  the  onion  is  to  be  put  into  the  ears  for  tearing  in  the  ears,°  '".)
— Ringing  iu  the  ears  now  and  then  ;  also  soft,  in  both  ears,  as  from  sounds
far  distant  (mostly  in  the  right  ear,  from  which  he  hears  (fourth  to  seventh
day),'. — Humming  in  the  ears  on  lying  down,'  ^ — Roaring  in  the  left  ear,
as  heretofore  only  after  a  severe  cold  ;  afternoon  of  the  first  day,^

Nose, — -Pain  from  over  the  right  eye  into  the  root  of  the  nose,'. — (Mixed
with  vinegar  and  put  into  the  nose,  it  stops  the  bleeding,  which  the  simple
smell  of  the  onion  also  does,°  '".)— (For  nose-bleed,  put  onions  on  the
neck,°  '".) — *At  evening,  walking  in  the  street,  increased  dropping  from  the
nose,  quite  unusual,  from  both  nostrils,  without  the  sensation  of  coryza  (first
day),'. — [130.]  *Copious  watery  discnarge  from  the  nose,  and  watering  of
eyes,°  ^. — {^Discharge  of  ichorous  fluid  from  the  nose  in  oonvalesmig  scarlet
fever,°  *.) — Crawling  in  the  right  nostril,  as  before  sneezing ;  must  frequently
blow  thin  mucus  out  of  the  nose ;  one  hour  after  one  drop  of  the  third  (fore-
noon),*.— *Frequent  sneezing  in  the  evening  when  he  comes  into  a  warm  room
(second  day),^ — *Sneezing,^. — Since  collecting  onions  in  the  harvest,  four
years  before,  a  brother  and  sister,  each  in  the  thirtieth  year,  experienced
for  the  first  time  a  coryza,  recurring  at  the  same  time  each  year,  and  con-
tinuing two  to  three  weeks ;  they  would  sneeze  severely  twenty  to  thirty
times  every  morning,  and  were  obliged  to  avoid  peaches  on  account  of  their
rough  skin,  as  well  as  all  flowering  trees  and  plants  (Nux  vom.  relieved
very  greatly,  but  still  other  medicines  had  to  be  administered),'^. — The  most


150  ALLIUM  CEPA.

violent  sneeziDg,  as  if  she  would  be  torn  to  pieces,  as  soon  as  she  steps  out
of  bed,". — In  the  evening,  after  drinking  beer  and  eating  herring,  excessive
thirst ;  heat  and  severe  eoryza,  with  much  lachrymation,  headache;  acrid  burn-
ing discharge  from  the  nose,  so  that  the  upper  Up  became  red  and  sensitive
(first  day),". — *Nasal  discharge  and  headache,  better  in  the  open  air,  the  first
day ;  not  so  severe  the  next  morning ;  at  evening,  worse  in  the  room,  distinctly
relieved  as  soon  as  he  goes  into  the  open  air,  the  second  day  ;  on  awaking,  very
slight  the  third  day ;  after  repeating  the  dose,  more  severe,^. — Much  irritation
in  the  right  nostril,  soreness  of  the  nose,  sneezing,  lachrymation,  morning
of  the  fourth  and  fifth  days,  with  headache,". — ^[140,]  Some  soreness  of
the  nose  yet  (the  eighth  day),". — Coryza,  at  times  with  stoppage,  that  she
speaks  "  through  the  nose ;"  at  times  with  profuse  mucous  discharge,'". —
*With  coryza,  trembling  of  the  hands  at  evening,". — *  Acrid  discharge
from  the  left  nostril,". — (After  rapid  alternations  of  cold  and  warm  days,
in  November,  1852,  a  young  lady  complained  that  she  had  sufiered  for  a
few  days  from  coryza ;  worse  every  evening.  Water  ran  profusely  from
the  nose,  she  sneezed  frequently,  her  head  was  confused,  the  lids  and  about
the  eyes  were  swollen,  much  lachrymation  (not  acrid,  as  in  euphrasia),  fre-
quent cough,  tension  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  loss  of  appetite.  She
took  Cepa™  in  the  evening,  slept  the  whole  night,  was  quite  well  the  follow-
ing day,  and  remained  so  (Lippe),°.) — (The  nose  is  humid,  with  slight  co-
ryza, but  with  severe  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  this  time  was  not  relieved
by  lying  down,  as  is  usually  the  case  with  her  coryzas.  In  a  woman,  50
years  old;  better  in  the  evening,".) — (Fluent  coryza,  dropping  clear  water
( on  the  right  side,  as  usual  with  him) ;  had  not  only  lasted  twelve  hours,  as
customary,  but  many  days,  in  spite  of  cold  bathing  ;  it  disappeared  within
a  few  hours  after  Cepa,".  ,

Face. — Expression  of  anxiety  and  despair  with  pain  in  the  abdomen,'".
—Pain  in  the  right  upper  jaw  like  a  thread  in  a  nerve,  which  goes  from
above  downwards,  from  the  median  line  to  the  side,  deep  with  the  bone,  at
evening,  the  first  day,'.- — ^The  pain  in  the  right  upper  jaw  on  lying  down
in  the  evening,  extends  on  the  morning  of  the  second  day,  from  the  nose
outward  and  downward,'. — [150.]  Drawing  stitches  from  the  left  forehead
into  the  upper  jaw,". — Severe  pains  (like  neuralgia),  from  the  upper  half
of  the  right  eye  to  the  root  of  the  nose,^. — Drawing  pains  in  the  left  cheek,
extending  into  the  left  eye  (third  day),". — (Paralysis  of  the  left  half  of  the
face,  which  is  also  somewhat  noticed  in  the  limbs  of  the  same  side,  together
with  altogether  too  copious  secretion  of  urine,°'.) — Spots  warmer  than
usual  on  the  right  cheek  (after  fifty  minutes),'. — Heat,  especially  in  the  face,
every  time  after  eating  onions ;  several  sisters,'. — Heat  of  the  face  in  the
evening,". — (Facial  erysipelas,"  '.) — ;(Parree  produced  a  nettle-rash  erup-
tion on  the  face  and  on  the  body,  also  on  many  in  the  family,'.) — Swelling
of  the  cheeks  with  toothache,'*. — [ISO.}  The  upper  lip  is  red  and  sensitive
from  the  acrid  nasal  discharge,".

JUouth, — Pecking  in  the  two  hindermost  back  teeth  (after  three  min-
utes),'.— In  the  first  upper  teeth,  right  side,  sensitive  drawing  from  the  root
to  the  crown  (after  thirty  minutes) ;  later,  the  same  feeling  in  the  corre-
sponding teeth  on  the  left  side  (the  first  day),'. — Pressive  toothache  in  the
right  upper  and  lower  back  teeth,  with  the  inclination  to  bore  the  tongue
into  and  suck  them,  which  relieves,  lasting  an  hour ;  after  travelling  against
the  northwest  wind,  the  fifth  day ;  again  the  sixth  day,  after  going  against
the  northwest  wind,''. — Slight  pressure  in  the  right  back  teeth  on  going  into
a  warm  room. At  breakfast  (with  warm  cocoa),  painful ;  relieved  by  cold


ALLIUM  CEP  A.  151

■water  (the  seventh  day),^. — At  breakfast,  the  back  teeth  pain  from  eating
bread,  so  that  only  soft  food  can  be  eaten.  A  pressive  pain  remains  for
some  time  afterward.  Toward  noon,  the  pain  disappears  on  the  right  side,
and  settles  in  the  root  of  the  left  eye-tooth  ;  the  gum  around  the  root  is
inflamed ;  the  pain  frequently  ceases  suddenly  and  commences  in  an  instant
in  a  right  back  tooth ;  in  the  eye-tooth  it  is  pressive,  growling ;  cold  water,
cold  in  general  relieves  (the  eighth  day),^. — The  pressive  toothache  comes
on  after  walking  against  the  north  wind,  is  relieved  by  poking  and  sucking
with  the  tongue;  is  much  aggravated  on  eating  warm  soup,  and  disappears
after  a  swallow  of  cold  water ;  always  the  same  after  repeated  experiraents,^
— Pressive  pain  in  the  root  of  the  left  eye-tooth  disturbs  the  sleep,  with  ex-
cessive heat  in  the  cheeks;  towards  morning,  remission  and  sweat;  the
cheeks  feel  swollen  (ninth  day),^ — During  sleep,  feeling  as  if  the  back  teeth
were  too  long,  with  some  pain;  disappears  on  rising;  two  uights,^ —
Drawing  stitches  from  the  left -forehead  into  the  teeth/'. — [170.]  Immedi-
ately after  eating  onions,  raging  pain  attacks  a  broken  tooth.  Arnica,  high
in  water,  relieved  just  as  speedily,'". — The  teeth  are  a  smutty  yellow  in  the
morning,  they  remain  so  the  whole  day,  in  one  who  has  very  white  and
sound  teeth  ;  continues  three  to  five  days,'. — The  tongue  has  a  foul  coat,
especially  in  the  morning,  on  the  back  part,  the  third  day ;  slimy,  the  fifth
day,'. — The  tongue  is  furred  the  next  morning,". — Dryness  at  the  root  of
the  tongue,  on  the  right  side,'l — Mouth  and  tongue  as  if  scalded,". — Pains
under  the  tongue ;  at  the  lower  insertion  of  the  frsenum  it  is  surrounded
with  a  half  circle  of  small  sore  elevations,  the  next  morning  and  the  whole
day,'. — ^The  mouth  is  not  as  coated  in  the  morning  (the  second  day),'. —
Dryness  in  the  mouth,  without  thirst,". — It  causes  an  offensive  breath
(general  experience). — [180.]  (Onions  remove  the  bad  taste  in  the  mouth, °  '".)
— (Onions  remove  the  offensive  breath," '".) — (The  juice  is  of  service  in
putrid  sore  mouths,"  "'.)^( Antiscorbutic,"  '".) — It  has  a  sweet  and  aromatic
acrid  taste,'. — Sweet  and  nauseous  taste  after  taking  it,  and  so  also  on  the
third  day,'.— On  awaking,  nauseous  taste,  the  third  day  and  moi'ning  of
the  fifth,'. — A  sickly-sweet  taste,  also  again,  after  the  thirtieth,  though  in  a
less  degree,'. — Burning  taste,  more  on  the  gums  and  upper  part,'. — (Loss
of  taste,"'".)

Throat. — The  throat  was  decidedly  afl^ected,  after  fifteen  minutes,'. —
[190,]  A  constrictive  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the  throat,  lotv  down  in  the  region
of  the  OS  hyoides,  after  five  or  six  minutes ;  low  down  posteriorly  on  the  right
side,  after  seven  minutes,^. — Drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  throat,  re-
lieved by  cold  air  (second  day),'. — Some  redness  on  the  back  part  of  the
palate  on  the  right  side,'  ^. — Pain  in  the  throat  extending  to  the  ear,^. — In
the  throat  and  orifice  of  the  Eustachian  tube,  chilling  or  burning  twitching
and  gnawing,  not  painful,'. — Heat  low  in  the  pharynx,  extending  into  the
stomach,". — *Pain  in  the  throat  below  the  larynx,  as  after  swallowing  too
large  a  mouthful,  or  as  if  swollen  ;  the  pains  extend  every  little  while  into
the  right  ear;  the  whole  afternoon,  coming  on  after  midday,  ten  drops,' '.
— In  the  pharynx,  the  feeling  as  if  the  food  remained  stuck  behind  the
breast-bone,'l — Throat-ache,  as  if  there  was  a  lump  in  the  throat,  which  is
sore,  but  only  on  swallowing  and  elevating  the  tongue,  the  next  morning
(twenty-four  hours),'  ^ — (In  chronic  difiiculty  of  deglutition,  like  a  "  ball
in  the  throat,"  she  brought  up  a  lump  of  mucus  and  was  then  relieved,"  '.)
— [200.]  Throat-ache  as  after  taking  cold,'*. — (Soreness"  of  the  throat  with
catarrh,"  '.) — A  sense  of  nausea  extending  into  the  throat,*. — -A  benumbed
feeling  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  persistent  (first  day),'. — Great  dry-


152  ALLIUM  CEPA.

ness  of  the  soft  palate  after  breakfast,  eontinuiDg  two  hours  and  a  half
(first  day),". — With  great  dryness  of  both  nostrils,  considerable  thirst;
white,  frothy,  tasteless  mucus  collects  in  the  fauces,  which  is  easily  expec-
torated without  cough,". — Dryness  in  the  throat,''. — He  hawks  up  mucus
which  has  a  sweetish,  nauseous  taste,  the  third  day,^ — Toward  evening,
collection  of  mucus  behind  the  choanae,'. — In  the  posterior  fauces,  in  the
choanM,  and  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  soft  palate,  a  soft  bland  mucus
constantly  collects,  which  compels  one  either  to  swallow  or  hawk  it  up ;
evening  of  the  first  day,'. — [210.]  In  the  morning,  a  raw  feeling  in  the
fauces,  with  tickling  in  the  region  of  the  epiglottis,  first  on  the  right,  then
on  the  left  side ;  together  with  a  sensation  of  weakness  in  the  stomach,  very
annoying  hiccough,  and  uprising  of  frothy  salivary  mucus  fluid  ;  eructa-
tions of  wind,  and  passage  of  offensive  flatus.  Therewith,  constant  incli-
nation to  hacking  to  relieve  the  tickling  in  the  larynx.  After  breakfast,
severe  pain  in  the  right  ankle,  and  rumblings  in  the  abdomen  (second
day),^. — (Diminished  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  chronic  catarrh
of  th«  fauces,°  *.  j^Mucus  in  the  fauces,'.

Stomach. — (Loss  of  appetite  with  coryza,°  Lippe.) — Onions  promote
an  appetite,  but  if  one  eats  too  many  they  cause  a  revulsion  of  the  stom-
ach,".— The  appetite  is  increased,'". — '^The  appetite  is  excited  even  to  canine
hunger,"^. — They  produce  an  appetite  which,  however,  disappears  immedi-
ately as  soon  as  he  begins  to  eat;  food  is  disgusting  to  him,^ — The  priests
were  forbidden  its  use  because  it  produced  thirst,'". — Onions  excite  thirst,'".
— [220.]  Thirst  excessive,  with  stomach-ache,'";  with  tympanitis,'". —
Thirst,  with  heat,  evenings,  with  coryza,'" ;  after  chilliness,'';  after  flushes
of  heat  at  evening,". — (Nausea,"^ '".) — A  horrible  deathly  nausea  in  the
stomach,  with  very  slight  eructations  which,  however,  relieve  somewhat ;
every  day  after  eating ;  in  one  who  did  not  know  what  she  took,'. — Feel-
ing of  nausea  after  fifteen  minutes,'. — N'ausea  in  the  posterior  part  of  the
throat,  is  forced  up  as  with  a  thrust,  after  thirty  minutes,'. — Nausea  seems
more  properly  to  be  seated  in  the  stomach  ;  very  soon,'. — Nausea,^. — Slight
warmth  in  the  abdomen  and  squeamishness,  soon  after  taking  it,*. — Squeam-
ishness  and  slight  attacks  of  nausea  from  the  bowels  up  into  the  throat,
then  slight  confusion  of  the  head ;  soon,*. — [230.]  There  are  some  who,
smelling  onions  in  a  distant  kitchen,  taste  them  in  their  mouth,  so  that
afterwards  everything  tastes  of  them  and  produces  nausea,'. — (Nausea  on
becoming  erect, '^.) — Frequent  eructations ;  he  tastes  onions  in  the  after-
noon, after  taking  four  drops  of  the  tincture  in  the  morning,". — Immedi-
ately after  eating  onions,  long-continued  eructations,  but  not  after  the
tincture,'. — At  evening,  eructations  of  wind  ;  flashes  of  heat  over  the  whole
body,  and  thirst  (the  fourth  day),". — Eructations  still  incessant  on  the
morning  of  the  fifth  day,  without  repetition  of  the  dose,".^Eructations  of
wind,''  *;  with  distension  of  the  abdomen,";  with  rumblings,". — Slight  eruc-
tations relieve  the  horrible  nausea  in  the  stomach,'. — (It  stops  sour  eructa-
tions," '".) — Even  the  smell  of  onions  makes  her  vomit;  she  cannot  swallow
the  tincture  in  water ;  it  came  up  again,  she  is  so  averse  to  it,'. — [240.]
Vomiting  frothy,  slimy  fluid,". — Vomiting,  and  disease  which  resulted  in
death,  after  eating  onions,'. — Annoying  hiccough,'. — Stimulates  digestion,'".
— Irritates  the  stomach  and  promotes  digestion ;  excessives  use,  however,
gives  rise  to  dyspeptic  troubles,'". — Raw  onions  give  rise  to  injurious  secre-
tions in  the  stomach,  thirst,  inflammation,  flatulence,  and  headache,'". —
Feeling  of  emptiness,  and  drawings  back  and  forth  in  the  stomach,  with
some  pain,*. — Sense  of  weakness  in  the  stomach,'. — Pain  on  the  left  side  of


ALLIUM  CEPA.  153

the  stomach,*. — Oft-repeated  pressure  deep  within  the  epigastrium,  as  if  it
were  at  the  orifice  of  the  stomach,  and  on  the  posterior  side ;  evening  at
ten  (the  first  day),'. — [250.]  Dull  pain  belo^Y  the  breast-bone,  more  to  the
right  side,  on  moving  in  bed  ;  evening  at  ten  (after  five  minutes),^ — Pain
below  the  sternum  on  stooping,  morning,^ — Pain  in  the  region  of  the
pylorus,^. — Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  fulness  in  the  head,'. — Pressure  in
the  stomach,^ — Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  yawning,'. — Heat  extending
into  the  stomach,'^ — After  dinner  all  the  symptoms  vanish  (after  one  and
a  half  hours),'. — After  supper  the  symptoms  again  disappear  as  after  dinner,
the  first  day,'. — Distension  of  the  abdomen  before  dinner,'.— [260.]  Pain
in  the  bowels,  worse  after  eating,".

Abdomen. — Pressive  pain  in  the  hepatic  region,  which  extends
through  the  whole  abdomen,*. — The  pains  seat  themselves  for  some  time  in
the  right  liypochondrium,  with  which  are  cold  shudders  down  the  back,  so
that  he  can  scarcely  get  warm  ;  evening  at  nine  (third  day),". — Stitches  in
the  left  side,  toward  evening  the  first  day,  morning  of  the  second  day,  worse
on  lying  the  fourth  day,". — Contractive  pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium,
with  the  sensation  of  wind  moving  about,'^ — Pain  about  the  navel,  an
hour  after  dinner  (3  p.m.),'^ — Pain  in  the  umbilical  region,*. — The  pains
in  the  bowels  are  most  severe  while  sitting ;  on  moving  about  there  is  pas-
sage of  flatus  and  relief  to  the  pains  (the  first  day),". — Half  an  hour  after
drinking  coffee,  in  the  afternoon,  the  pains  in  the  bowels  returned  more  se-
vere, mostly  in  the  left  inguinal  region,  more  pressing  than  burning,  but
with  heat  in  the  abdomen  (second  day),". — With  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,
the  pains  return  more  severe  than  before,  with  passage  of  much  flatus ;
morning  of  the  third  day  after  the  second  dose,". — Flatulent  colic,'". — Pain
in  the  abdomen  and  shoulder  (right  half  ?),'". — [270.]  Pains  in  the  abdo-
men, woi'se  every  time  after  eating,". — Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,
as  though  he  had  punched  himself  in  this  place,'. — On  walking,  a  sudden
burning  or  chilling  cutting — a  pain  thin  as  a  thread — in  the  hypogastrium,
from  both  sides  inward  toward  the  middle  and  upward  (after  one  hour),'. —
Burning  glow  or  chilling  sensation,  as  if  scattered,  with  confused  feeling  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  ;  thereupon  slight  passage  of  half-loud  very
oflTensive  onion  flatus  (after  an  hour  and  a  half),'. — A  warm  or  chilling  sen-
sation, as  if  a  glow  within  beat  against  the  abdomen,  on  the  right  side,  and
over  the  external  and  upper  part  of  both  thighs ;  evening  of  the  first  day
from  nine  to  ten.  Repeated  later.  The  sensation  was  as  if  a  glowing  heat
beat  against  one,  but  without  the  same  heat,  only  warmth,'. — Heat  in  the
abdomen,  with  pain,". — In  pelvic  region,  internally  on  right  side,  above
and  inside  of  the  groin,  very  severe  pressure  on  a  small  spot ;  it  seems  to
be  on  the  inside  of  the  pelvic  cavity.  After  twenty  minutes,  like  a  violent
pain  on  a  small  spot,  deep  in  the  right  side  of  the  pelvis;  evenings  (first
day),'. — Violent  pains,  like  cuttings  with  very  small  knives,  with  a  twist-
ing motion  deep  in  above  the  left  groin,  midway  on  a  line  between  the  sym-
physis pubis  and  anterior  superior  spinous  process  of  the  ilium.  This  pain
moves,  turning  here  and  there  in  a  small  space ;  never  had  the  like  before
(fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Pains  in  the  left  flank  (second  day),'. — Burning
pressure  in  region  of  bladder;  soon  afterward  in  the  small  of  the  back
(10  P.M.,  first  day),'. — [280.]  Pressive  pains  deep  in  pelvis  (in  prostate?),'.
— Periodic  pains  in  the  pubic  region,  worse  on  sitting  (the  first  day),". —
Sticking  and  pressive  pain  in  posterior  inguinal  ring  and  spermatic  cord  (im-
mediately),^.— (Hernia  in  left  groin  protruded  and  strangulated,".  Lippe.)
— Ate  some  small  onions  ;  in  four  hours,  indefinable  anxiety;  walks  about,


154  ALLIUM  CEPA.

and  finally,  full  of  apprehension,  throws  himself  on  the  bed,  and  soon  gets
up  again;  constant  violent  pains  in  left  side  of  abdomen,  more  in  middle
and  lower  part  of  abdomen  and  in  region  of  bladder,  with  troubles  in  uri-
nating, and  no  stool ;  violent  thirst;  in  face,  expression  of  anxiety  and  doubt;
skin  hot,  especially  in  the  painful  and  sensitive  places  ;  pulse  somewhat  ac-
celerated, full,  hardish,". — Woman,  40  years  old,  after  eating  cooked  onions ;
the  hernia  in  the  left  groin  much  protruded  and  strangulated ;  very  severe  pains
from  high  up  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypochondrium  drew  towards  the  incarcer-
ated hernia;  very  restless ;  much  fever,  etc. ;  the  hernia  returned  after  a
single  dose  of  Aconite^",  and  no  farther  remedies  were  necessary  {Lippe). —
Pain,  drawing  from  the  region  of  the  liver  through  the  whole  abdomen,'. —
(Colic,  gastric,  wind  and  hfemorrhoidal  colic  ;  in  more  than  twenty  cases,
by  a  physician  who  was  severely  attacked  on  a  journey,  and  without  other
remedies,  seeing  a  string  of  onions  hanging  up,  took  (with  a  Eademache-
rian  intuitive  remedial  instinct)  one  of  the  largest  of  the  string,  and  de-
voured it  with  true  canine  hunger,  and  suddenly  is  enchanted  by  being  free
from  colic,°.  Loeffler.) — (Colic  after  immoderate  eating,".  Loeffler.) —
(Frequent  pains  in  bowels  in  the  summer,  especially  if  he  has  eaten  cucum-
bers, salad,  or  the  like;  this  relieves  nearly  every  time,  and  a  second  dose  is
rarely  needed,"  ^) — [290.]  (In  colic  of  children  often  useful, °  ^)— (Ascites
(1 1  years  old) ;  roasted  and  rubbed  in  as  a  salve,  with  goosegrease ;  even
after  twenty-four  hours'  use,  the  water  flowed  from  her  by  the  quart ;  she
became  weak,  that  she  was  despaired  of,  but  she  rallied,  and  there  was  no
relapse  after  six  years,°.  Frank's  Mag.) — Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdo-
men,".— If  too  many  are  eaten,  they  distend  the  abdomen  and  cause  flatu-
lency,'".— (Removes  flatulency," '".) — Make  bad  blood,  afibrd  little  nour-
ishnifsnt,  puff  up  the  abdomen,  cause  thirst,  injure  the  bile,'". — ^Cooked,  they
become  milder  and  sweeter,  but  still  cause  flatulency  (Hahnemann). — Flatu-
lence from  raw  onions.  In  one  woman,  raw  onions  always  caused  much
wind  in  the  stomach,  and  eructations ;  cooked  onions,  neve^,'^ — Immedi-
ately eructations  of  wind,  then  confusion  of  the  head,  especially  in  the
forehead,  and  distension  of  the  abdomen ;  afterwards  urgency  to  stool,  but
only  passage  of  wind,  with  weak  feeling  in  the  limbs,  and  at  evening  free
expectoration  of  mucus ;  the  distension  of  the  abdomen  continued  till  the
next  day,  and  ended  with  a  diarrhoea,  when  all  the  other  symptoms  also
disappeared  (from  fifty  drops  of  tincture  several  times  repeated),*. — Con-
tinued eructations,  nausea,  and  pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  rumbling  and
gurgling  in  the  abdomen,  especially  on  the  left  side,  where  there  is  stitch-
ing and  rumbling,  and  urgency  to  stool,  which  is  ineffectual.^ — [300.]  Rum-
bling in  the  abdomen,  with  passage  of  much  wind  through  the  anus,  pre-
ceded by  a  sensation  of  heat  and  frequent  eructations  (soon  after  taking,
the  first  day),^-^Frequent  eructations,  abdomen  distended  and  painful ;
relieved  every  time  after  passing  wind  downwards,  with  internal  heat  (first
day),". — Sensation  as  if  the  abdomen  were  much  swollen,  with  sharp  pain
and  oppression  of  breathing  before  and  after  diarrhoea,'. — Rumbling  in  the
transverse  colon,  evenings,  and  spdden  urgency  to  stool,''. — Rumbling  in
the  bowels,  with  stomach-ache," ;  epigastrium  after  breakfast,' ;  in  left  side
of  lower  bowels,'. — The  abdomen  is  distended  before  dinner,  so  that  the
clothes  seem  too  tight  (after  one  hour),\ — Lower  abdomen  very  heavy,  as
if  it  were  pressed  upon,  before  and  after  standing  ;  disappeared  after  bath-
ing (the  ninth  day),^ — He  onionated!  (Zwiebelt)  (Popular  expression);
the  young  people  in  Upper  Lusatia  say,  if  they  wish  to  express  themselves
politely,  "  he  has  made  a  mistake"  (Zweifelt),  without  knowing  how  aualo-


ALLIUM  CEPA.  155

gous  the  abdominal  mistake  is  to  the  scientific.  Both  are  criticizable
(Grirara). —  Very  offensive  flatus,^  \  and  «ioist,^ ;  mornings,*. — Offensive  flatus,
with  loud  passage  (after  fifty  minutes),'. — [310.]  Frequent  flatus,  difiicult
to  pass ;  evenings  (the  first  day),'. — Flatus  difiicult  to  press  out,  odorless
(the  first  day),'. — Frequent  passage  of  flatus  at  night,^ — Oflensive,  moist
flatus  (first  day),". — Frequent  passage  of  flatus  without  pain,**. — Less  pas-
sage of  wind  in  the  morning  and  all  day  ;  the  few  passages  are  (contrary
to  all  habit)  very  offensive,*. — Exceptionally  little  flatus,  almost  none,  in
one  who  is  accustomed  to  pass  a  great  deal  every  morning,  though  he  had
eaten  apples  the  previous  evening  according  to  his  custom  (the  second  and
subsequent  days);  this  diminished  emission  of  flatus,  mornings,  and  its
oflensive  odor,  lasted  for  over  a  year,  after  which  the  flatus  was  as  odorless
and  abundant  as  before,*. — Pain  in  bowels  relieved  after  passing  wind,".

Stool  and  Anus. — Promotes  defecation,'".- — Soft  evacuations  without
pain,'l — [320,]  If  he  eats  onions  in  the  evening,  he  becomes  sleepy,  and
his  eyes  heavy  ;  the  next  morning,  he  has  a  regular  and  satisfactory  stool,'.
— After  eating  food  seasoned  with  onions  always  diarrhoea,  either  the  next
night  or  towards  morning,'. — Feeling  of  diarrhoea  in  the  bowels,  and  soft
stool  without  diarrhoea,''. — Purging  (the  third  day  and  later),'. — Purging
(third  to  seventh  day),  also  nights,''. — Diarrhoea  following  distension  of  the
abdomen,  whereupon  all  troubles  disappear,'. — -(Diarrhoea  after  midnight
and  toward  morning,°  '.) — Absence  of  evacuations,  with  most  severe  belly-
ache, t. — Difficult  evacuation  of  faeces  (at  the  usual  time  after  breakfast) ;
though  without  hard  fseces,  still  he  had  to  strain  very  hard  (the  third  day),^
— The  stool  fails  (the  third  day),^ — [330.]  Stool  on  the  morning  of  the
fourth  day,  long  and  thick,^ — (No  stool  for  many  days,  with  catarrh,"  ".)
— Satisfactory  stools  in  the  morning,  in  constipated  habits,'. — Since  an  in-
termittent fever  and  large  doses  of  China,  two  years  previous,  the  prover
had  infrequent  evacuations  (four  to  eight  days,  without  feeling  the  slight-
est desire) ;  they  occurred  mostly  at  evening ;  since  the  proving,  for  a  year
and  a  half,  he  has  had  a  stool  nearly  every  morning,  only  very  seldom
omitting  for  two  or  three  days,''. — Strong  urging  and  pressure  for  a  soft  stool
at  the  usual  time  (five  or  six  days),^. — Sudden  urging  to  stool,  with  rum-
bling,".— Urging  to  stool,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,  but  nothing  passes,^
— Urging  to  stool,  but  only  passage  of  wind,". — A  very  painful  stit-ch  ex-
tends along  the  rectum  down  into  its  lower  part  (afternoons),'. — With  an
evacuation,  it  seems  as  if  there  were  cracks  on  the  inside  of  the  anus  (morn-
ing of  seventh  day),^. — [340.]  In  the  anus,  and  some  protruding  haemor-
rhoids, a  cold  creeping,  like  a  cool  worm,  more  on  left  side  (after  one  hour
and  later),'. — Biting  in  anus,*. — Blood  passes  with  the  stool  (tenth  to  twelfth
day);  (had  not  happened  since  he  proved  Lithium)^.

Urinary  Organs. — Dull  pains  in  right  kidney  region,  and  a  very
uncomfortable  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  bladder,  with  frequent  urging  to
urinate  (second-  day),'. — Most  violent  pains  in  region  of  bladder  and
uterus,'. — Pressure  in  the  bladder,'. — -Irritability  of  the  bladder,  and  pain
over  the  kidney  region,'. — Very  uncomfortable  feeling  of  fulness  in  the
bladder  aud  urgency  to  urinate,'. — Pain  in  region  of  the  bladder  and  in
left  side  of  abdomen,  t. — (Weak  feeling  in  bladder  and  urethra,"  I) —
[350.]  Very  pleasant  sensation  of  warmth  in  the  urethra,  without  erections
or  sexual  desire,". — *  Copious  urinating  (afternooiu),^^. — Urgency  to  uri-
nate and  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  bladder,'. — (*Frequent  urinating,  with  ca-
tarrh°'^.) — *  Frequent  urinating,  with  buiming  in  the  urethra;  the  urine  very
red  (second  day)  ;  all  day,  still  oftener  evenings  (third  day) ;  especially  with


156  ALLIUM  CEPA.

shuddering  and  chilliness,*. — Frequent  excessive  urging  to  urinate,  with
dribbling  burning  discharge,  t — Is^obliged  to  pass  even  small  amounts  of
urine;  this  ceased  after  a  few  days,  but  again  returned  and  remained  a
long  time,*. — Urinating  is  more  difficult,*. — Iridescent  film  on  the  urine  in
two  ca'ses,l — Urine  very  frothy,  but  clear ;  the  froth  remains  longer  than
usual,". — [360.]  Very  red  urine,'*;  with  reddish-yellow,  sandy  sediment;'.
■ — (lu  albuminuria  it  relieved  the  frequent  urinating,  and  even  diminished
the  amount  of  albumen,"  '.) — (Pressure  with  the  hand  on  the  bladder  in-
creases the  child's  cries,°  \) — (Sensitiveness  of  the  bladder  and  pain  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys,  weak  feeling  of  the  bladder  and  urethra  of  long
duration  (cured  by  six;  doses), °  ".) — (*Polyuria,°  ".) — (Difficult  micturition
from  spasmodic  closure  of  the  bladder,".) — (Spasmodic  strangury  after
getting  the  feet  and  bowels  cold,°.) — (Roasted  and  bound  on  to  the  navel ;
popular  remedy.) — (*Dribbling  or  spurting  urine  in  old  people,"  '.)

Sexual  Oi'f/ans. — Increases  coition  and  arouses  sexual  desire,'". —
Increases  virility,*. — [370,]  Increases  desire,'". — -Mornings  on  waking,  erec-
tions with  painful  tension,  without  sexual  desire  (eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth
days),'. — Drawings  in  right  spermatic  cord  (first  day),'. — Pain  from  in-
guinal ring  along  spermatic  cord,'. — Burning  in  urethra,^ — Burning  pain
in  forepart  of  the  glans,*. — On  account  of  weakness  in  the  hips,  he  cannot
finish  coition,  even  after  two  or  three  repeated  attempts  (first  day),'. —
Pressive  pains  in  bladder  and  prostate,  deep  in  the  pelvis,  the  next  morn-
ing and  forenoon,  after  coitus  (fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  days),'. — Violent
pains  in  uterine  region,'. — Brings  on  menses,'". — [380.]  Brings  on  menses,
but  not  very  strong,'". — Juice  mixed  with  wine  brings  on  menses,'". — Shoved
into  the  womb  brings  on  menstruation,'". — Eaten  raw,  it  expedites  men-
struation,'".— Expels  urine  and  menses,'". — Macerated  in  vinegar  it  brings
on  menses,'".

Respirafory  Apparatus, — Tickling  in  the  epiglottis,'. — Tickling
in  the  larynx,  with  copious  and  troublesome  collection  of  mucus  in  the
fauces,'. —  Tickling  in  the  throat,  with  aching  in  the  larynx  °  '. — *  Hoarseness^.
—[390.]  (Hoarseness  in  spring,"  '.) — Throbbing  in  larynx,  and  sensation  as
if  it  contracted,^''. — Cannot  breathe  freely  evenings ;  an  obstruction  in  the
middle  of  the  chest,  in  the  upper  part,'. — Asthmatic  breathing,  as  often
before,  at  11  p.m.,  after  smoking  tobacco,'. — Oppression  of  breathing,  with
ascites,'. — Relieved  asthma  and  caused  copious  ,sweat,° .'. — {Pressure  in  the
upper  part  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  makes  respiration  difficult,"  '.) — On  deep
inspiration,  sticking  in  the  left  side,". — *0n  inspiring  cold  air  hacking
cough,". — Dryness  and  tickling  in  the  throat,  and  hacking  cough  morn-
ings (fourth  day),". — ^[400.]  *  Constant  inclination  to  hack  in  order  to  relieve
tickling  in  the  larynx,^. — (Tickling  in  the  throat  and  cough,"  '.) — (Short
cough,  which  plagued  him  very  much  for  a  week,"  '.) — (* Violent  catarrh
in  a  boy,  after  northeast  wind  and  rainy  weather,  eyes  suffused,  lids  very
red,  as  from  crying  and  rubbing  thera ;  nose  dropping,  throat  sore,  and
some  cough,"  '.) — {*A  severe  cold,  frequent  sneezing,  lachrymation,  pain  in
forehead,  acrid  discharge  from  left  nostril,  hacking  cough  on  inspiring  cold  air,
cold  alternates  with  heat ;  no  stool  for  several  days,"  ".) — (*Violent  catar-
rhal laryngitis ;  the  hoarse  cough  seemed  to  split  and  tear  the  larynx" ;
cause  watering  of  the  eye,  etc.,".)

Chest,— Pain  in  chest,'". — Pain  in  the  chest,  as  though  the  food  had
remained  lodged  behind  the  sternum,'^ — Stitches  in  the  left  chest  with
burning  pain,*. — (  The  sticking  pains  in  the  left  side  are  aggravated  by  every
deep  inspiration,"  ".) — [410.]  Sticking  pain  in  various  parts  of  the  chest ;


ALLIUM  CEPA.  157

most  in  region  of  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,'. — (Flitting  pains  in
chest,°  '.) — (Tension  in  upper  part  of  chest,  with  coryza  and  cough, °  '.)

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  accelerated,  full,  hardish,  with  stomach-
ache ;  excited  nights,". — Pulse  harder  evenings,  only  82-84  beats  (first
day),\

Ifech  anil  Sach. — Shiverings  in  the  baek,^ — Pains  a  hand's  breadth
below  the  right  shoulder,  more  towards  the  spine,  after  long  sitting,^ —
(Pain  of  the  right  shoulder-blade,  on  lying  in  bed,°.) — Stitches  in  lumbar
region,'. — Pains  in.^the  loins,  as  he  used  to  have  if  he  had  no  stool  for
several  days  (third  day),*. — [420.]  Burning  pressure  in  small  of  back,'. —
Pain  in  region  of  left  kidney,  afterwards  less  severe  in  the  right  (first  day),
the  following  days  in  the  left,'. — Aching  in  region  of  left  kidney ,'^ — Dull
pains  in  right  kidney  region,  and  a  very  uncomfortable  feeling  of  fulness
in  the  bladder,  with  frequent  urging  to  urinate  (second  day),'. — (Pain  in
region  of  kidneys,"  '.) — (Pains  over  the  region  of  kidneys,"  ^)

Extremities  in  General, — *In  all  the  limbs,  especially  on  both
arms,  sore  as  if  it  were  all  scratched  off,  vnth  tired  feeling  therein,^. — Rheu-
matic pains  in  the  joints,^ — ^Troubles  as  after  taking  cold ;  the  next  day,
pains  in  all  the  bones,  aching  in  the  throat,  prostration,  etc.,". — Restless-
ness in  all  the  limbs  ;  cannot  hold  them  still,". — [430.]  Weak  sensation  in
the  limbs,  with  flatulent  troubles,*.— (^Neuralgia  of  the  stump  (after  am-
putation), violent  burning  stinging  pains,°.)  (Tincture.)

JJpi>er  Extremities. — Pain  in  shoulder  and  abdomen,'". — Sweat  in
axilla,'. — Weak  sensation,  especially  in  the  arms,*. — A  stitch  run  through
the  right  arm,  from  the  shoulder-blade  to  the  elbow,  with  burning  paiu,^ — ■
Needle  stitches  in  the  arms,". — Numb  sensation  in  the  left  elbow-joint,
worse  on  slight  motion  (forenoons),^. — Numb  sensation  in  left  elbow-joint,
with  headache,^ — In  right  elbow-joint,  pain  as  from  a  blow,  seventh  day
at  noon,^ — [440.]  Painful  afiection  of  the  left  forearm,  especially  in  the
radius  on  resting  on  the  arm  in  writing ;  evenings  (first  day),'. — Pain  in
the  middle  of  the  left  radius,  disappears  on  taking  hold  of  it  and  rubbing,
but  returns  (second  day),'. — Pains  in  the  right  wrist,  on  the  back,  and
extensor  side,  evenings  (first  day),'. — -Lameness  in  the  joints  of  left  hand,^
— Trembling  of  right  hand,  so  that  he  can  hardly  write,  evenings,  with
coryza  (first  day),'. — Trembling  of  right  hand  (also  after  X  again),^ —
Dry,  red  hands,  as  if  he  had  been  in  the  cold  (third  day),". — Pain  in  left
middle  finger,'. — Pain  in  right  fourth  and  fifth  finger  (soon),'. — Voluptu-
ous, corrosive  itching,  especially  on  the  palmar  side  of  the  left  thumb,  from
the  first  to  second  phalanx,  not  on  the  ball,  lasts  all  evening,  till  after
10  P.M.  (first  day),'.— [450.]  Sweat  of  palm  of  hand,'.

Lower  Extremities.— Excessive  tired  feeling  in  the  region  of  the
hips,  late  in  the  evening,  on  rising  from  sitting,  on  walking,  especially  on
going  up  steps  (first  day),'. — Weakness  in  the  hips,  nights,'. — Bruised
pain  in  left  thigh,  in  lower  part  on  the  side,  very  near  the  knee  (first
hour),'. — Pain,  almost  burning  pressure  in  upper  part  of  left  thigh,  toward
the  outer  side  (after  seventy  minutes),'. — Pain  in  left  thigh,  on  the  outer
side,  very  near  the  knee,  like  the  pain  in  the  ankle  (one  and  a  half  hours),'.
— Pain  on  outer  side  of  right  thigh,  above  the  knee  (one  and  a  half  hours),'.
— On  the  outer  side  and  upper  part  of  both  thighs,  a  glowing  sensation,'. —
Nettlerash  on  both  thighs  down  to  the  knees,  with  heat ;  on  rubbing,  they
itch,  and  at  upper  part,  there  are  hard  round  pimples ;  in  lower  part,
marbled  spots  ;  after  a  cold  and  other  troubles,  °  '*. — Shooting  pains  in  left
leg  and  right  foot,'. — [460.]  Paralytic  pains  in  the  knee-joint,*. — Stitches


158  ALLIUM  CEPA.

in  the  right  knee,  as  if  corning  from  the  bones,  from  within,  extending  out-
ward, in  front,'. — Burning  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  left  lower  leg,  on
a  small  spot  externally,  then  on  the  right,  just  the  same,  but  low  down,
evenings  (first  day),'. — Severe  pains  in  right  ankle,  mornings,^ — Pains  in
left  ankle  (after  one  hdur),'. — Burning  pains  around  the  left  outer  ankle,
afterward  lower  down,  and  a  burning  pressure  externally,  then  also  inter-
nally (after  one  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — Pains  in  the  right  foot,  evenings  (first
day),'. — Painful  twitching  on  inner  side  of  left  heel,'. — Pain  in  the  most
external  soft  parts  of  the  right  great  toe,  and  also  in  the  left  middle  finger  j'. —
Violent  ticking  pain  in  the  metatarsal  bones  of  the  left  great  toe,  re-
peated and  becomes  continued ;  evenings  (first  day),'. — [470.]  (Places  on
the  outside  of  the  left  ankle,  rubbed  sore  and  inflamed,  and  very  painful,
speedily  cured,  after  other  things  tried  in  vain,°  '.)

G-eneralities. — Attacks  at  once  the  whole  body,  and  causes  a  shock,
with  eructations  of  wind,^ — The  whole  body  is  set  into  a  revolution  which
over,  that  she  must  lie  down,'. — Deathly  faintuess  after  profuse  micturi-
tion,'.

Skin, — External  redness  and  itching  of  the  skin.  A  slight  corrosive
itching  here  and  there,  with  which  are  little  points,  which  cannot  be  very
a  severe,  distinct  sensation,  evenings,  worse  sitting  still  after  going  out  (first
day),'. — Stitches,  as  with  needles,  in  the  skin,  especially  on  the  head,  on
the  forehead,  in  the  brows,  in  the  throat,  and  on  right  arm,'. — (Nettlerash
on  the  thigh, °  '''.)^A  wart  between  the  left  shoulder  and  side  of  neck  begins
to  pain  the  next  morning,  is  red  and  scratched  off,'.

Fever, — Unusual  chilliness,'*. — [480.]  Frequent  cold  shivers  creep
along  the  back  (first  day),*. — Cold  creepiugs  along  the  back  (fifth  day),".
— Shivers  down  the  back,  especially  nights  in  bed;  he  wants  always  more
covering;  therewith,  he  feels  feverish  in  all  his  veins,  and  has  sweat,  espe-
cially in  the  axilla  and  in  palms.  (Young  man  who  did  not  know  what
he  took),'. — Cold  shivers  down  the  back,  with  liver-pains  (evenings),".
— Shivering  and  chilliness,  with  increased  urinating,*. — Internal  coldness,
with  subsequent  heat  and  great  thirst,  which  continues  into  the  night  (third
day),". — (Coldness  alternates  with  heat,  in  catarrh,"  ^) — It  is  injurious,  by
overheating,'". — Increased  warmth  of  the  skin,'. — Feverish  through  all  the
veins,  with  shiverings  in  the  back,'. — [490.]  The  juice  arouses  the  cir-
culation (Hahnemann). — ^Flitting  heat  now  and  then,^. — Internal  heat,  with
rumbling  in  abdomen,^ — Heat  in  the  head,  on  the  head,  in  brows,  in  face,
in  cheeks,  in  throat,  down  to  stomach,  in  bowels. — Heat,  with  coryza,  even-
ings, alternating  with  cold,  and  '^flitting  heat  over  the  whole  body,  and  thirst,
evenings,". — Heat  and  thirst  after  coldness,". — After  eating  onions,  he  feels
as  after  taking  cold  ;  feverish,  especially  evenings,  with  heat  in  the  face ;
tongue  and  mouth  feelburnt  and  dry,  without  thirst;  drinks  only  a  small
quantity,  with  restlessness  in  all  the  limbs,  so  that  he  cannot  hold  them
still ;  the  next  day  the  tongue  is  coated,". — Heat,  without  thirst,  at  2  A.M.,
disappears  mornings,  worse  again  after  brea!cfast,^K — Unusual  sweating  while
working,'. — Sweat  breaks  out  after  larger  doses,  in  three  cases,'. — [500.]
Sweat  in  axilla  and  palms,'. — Copious  sweat,'. — (Internal  fever  always
produced  and  renewed  from  too  much  walking.  Wakes  nights  at  2  a.m.,
with  excited  pulse ;  cannot  sleep  again  till  morning  ;  without  any  chill,  only
heat  without  thirst ;  disappears  mornings,  but  is  worse  again  for  a  few  hours


ALLIUM  CEPA.  159

after  breakfast ;  afterwards  very  much  prostrated  ;  Phosph.,  without  result ;
Cepa  cured,"  ".)

Sleep  and  Dreams, — With  the  sleepiness,  near  objects  seem  dis-
tant,'.— Much  yawning,  with  headache  and  pressure  in  stomach,^ — Fre-
quent internal,  but  not  very  deep,  yawning  (evenings)  (first  day),^ — Mid-
night, very  sleepy,  soon  falling  asleep ;  not  easily  disturbed  sleep  (first
day),'. — If  one  eats  much,  it  causes  lethargy,  a  deep  overpowering  sleep,'".
— Sopor,'". — Excessive  use  causes  sopor,'". — [510.]  Heavy  sleep,  sopor,  leth-
argy, follow  its  use,'". — Causes  heavy  dreams,  especially  in  those  who  have
been  lately  ill,'". — -who  will  have  pleasant  dreams  must  eat  a  raw  onion
before  going  to  sleep,  without  supper,'". — Constant  dreams  of  battles,  fights,
precipices,  storms  at  sea,  and  difficulty  in  reaching  the  coast,  of  deep  wells,
and  efforts  to  get  out  of  them,'. — Dreams  of  being  near  water  two  nights  in
succession,^ — Restless  sleep,  with  swarming  dreams,'". — Sleep  disturbed  by
toothache,**. — During  sleep,  teeth  feel  too  long,^ — Wakes  at  2  a.m.,  with
excited  pulse ;  can  no  more  sleep,". — Mornings,  after  rising,  sleepy  and
disinclined  to  work  ;  every  day,". — [520.]  Sleepy,  mornings,'. — On  waking,
nauseous  taste,".

Conditions. — Aggravation'. — (Morning),  Apathetic ;  sleepy  ;  flatu-
lence; erections,  etc. ;  dry  throat  and  cough;  pain  in  ankle. — {Afternoon,
after  wine  and  coffee).  Confused  and  absent-minded,  etc. — (Evening),  *All
catarrhal  symptoms  and  pains;  heat  of  face;  eructation  of  wind;  flashes  of
heat  and  thirst;  pulse  harder;  pains  in  foot;  heat  and  thirst;  mucus  behind
choanse. — (Night),  Passage  of  flatus. — (Nights,  in  bed),  Shivers,  etc. — (After
midnight),  Diarrhoea. — (In  open  air).  Dropping  from  nose. — (In  bed).  Pain
under  breast-bone. — (Bending  forward),  Pain  under  breast-bone  renewed. —
(After  breakfast),  Dryness  of  soft  palate. — (Breathing  deeply),  Sticking  in
side. — (Breathing  cold  air),  Cough. — (In  cold  air),  Coryza;  pains  in  cheek
and  eye. — (After  coffee).  Eye  symptoms;  stomach-ache. — (After  renewed
eructations).  Confusion  of  head. — -(After  eating).  Pain  in  bowels. — (Lying),
Pain  in  left  side. — (Lying  down).  Roaring  in  ears. — (Motion),  Passage  of
flatus,  relieving  stomach-ache. — (Motion  of  eyelids).  Pain  in  temples. —
(Slight  motion),  ^[how-]o'mt  feels  numb. — (On  resting  the  arm  in  uniting).
Pain  in  left  forearm,  etc. — (In  room),  *Lachrymation  mid  running  from
nose.— (Sitting),  Pains  in  bowels ;  pain  iu  pubic  region. — (Sitting  still),  ca-
tarrhal troubles ;  itching  of  the  skin,  etc. — (After  long  sitting).  Pain  in  back
below  right  shoulder. — (Eatirig  warm  soup).  Toothache. — (After  too  much
walking),  Renewed  paroxysm  of  intermittent  fever. — (On  ascending  steps).
Hips  tired. — (Warmth),  Toothache. — (Warm  room,  on  returning  to),  Pres-
sure in  head,  sneezing,  etc.;  toothache;  twitchings  in  upper  lid;  lachryma-
tion;  headache;  catarrhal  troubles. — (Northeast  wind  and  rainy  weather),Yio-
lent  catarrh. — (Northwest  wind,  riding  in).  Toothache.

Amelioration, — (Afternoons  and  evenings).  Often  quite  well. — (In
open  air).  Pains  in  limbs ;  pressure  in  head ;  pain  in  head ;  twitching  in
upper  lids;  catarrhal  troubles. — -(Bathing),  Heaviness  in  bowels. — (Cold),
Toothache;  pain  in  throat. — (In  cold  air).  Pains  iu  cheek. — (In  cool  room).
Catarrhal  troubles. — (  Cold  water).  Toothache. — (Passage  afflatus,  on  motion),
Stomach-ache ;  pain  in  bowels.


160  ALLIUM  SATIVUM.


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

Allium  sativum,  L.  Nat.  order,  Liliaceaj.  Common  names,  Garlic;
(German),  Knoblauch;  (French),  L'Ail.  Preparation,  Tincture  from  the
fresh  bulb.

Authorities.  1,  Petroz,  Journ.  d.  1.  Soc.  Gal.,  3,  279;  2,  Teste,  Systemati-
zation;  3,  All.  Horn.  Zeit.,  83,  184;  4,  Cattell,  B.  J.  of  Horn.,  11,"  340.

JUind. — Weeping  during  sleep,\ — Sadness;  restlessness  when  alone,\
— Mental  anxiety,'. — Dread  of  being  poisoned,'. — Fears  he  will  never  get
welljl — Fears  of  being  unable  to  bear  any  medicine,^ — Impulse  to  run
away,'. — Impatience,'. — Moral  sensitiveness,'. — [10.]  Wandering  thoughts,'.

Head. — Vertigo  on  looking  long  and  steadily  at  anything,'. — Vertigo
of  short  duration,  and  on  rising  from  one's  seat,'. — Heaviness  in  the  head,'.
— Heaviness  of  the  head,  ceasing  during  menstruation,  and  returning  after-
wards,'.— Heaviness  in  the  forehead,  almost  preventing  him  from  opening
his  eyes,'. — Pulsation  in  the  temples,'. — Dull  pain  in  the  occiput,  in  the
morning,  while  lying  on  the  back,'.

EyCH. — *Ca.tarrhal  ophthalmia  at  night;  smarting  burning  lachryma-
tion;  agglutination;  continued  difficult  opening  of  the  agglutinated  lids;
(this  set  in  regularly  evoy  night,  when  he  desired  to  read  an  hour  in  bed
(usual  habit),  so  that  he  had  to  give  it  up),^

.Ea/'S.-'— (*The  customary  aural  catarrh  disappeared;  he  heard  better
from  the  diseased  ear,° '.) — [20.]  Humming  in  the  ears,'.

Nose. — Coryza,  rather  dry,  then  fluent,  with  pressive  pain  from  above
the  root  of  the  nose,'. — Increased  secretion  of  nasal  mucus,  together  with
slight  stoppage  of  both  nostrils,'. — Blowing  blood  from  the  nose  in  the
night,'.

Face. — Lancinations  in  one  side  of  the  face,'. — Dryness  of  the  lips,'.

Jifouth, — Tickling  sensation  in  the  lower  teeth,'. — Transient  pressive
pullings  (in  the  forenoon)  in  both  jaws,  and  in  the  right  upper  molars,'. —
Swelling  of  the  lower  gums,'. — Troublesome  feeling  during  the  night  and
in  the  morning,  as  of  a  hair  on  her  tongue;  renewed  on  waking,'. — [30.]
Dryness  of  the  palate,'. —  Very  copious  flow  of  sweetish  saliva  into  the  mouth
in  the  forenoon,  after  meals;  more  especially  after  supper  and  during  the
nighty  '. — Hot  taste  in  the  mouth,  proceeding  from  the  throat,  and  strongly
reminding  him  of  the  taste  of  garlic,  immediately  after  taking  the  medicine,
and  returning  after  breakfast  to  such  a  degree  as  to  excite  a  flow  of  saliva,'.
— The  symptoms  of  the  mouth  are  aggravated  by  reading,'.

Throat. — Inflammation  of  the  throat,'. — Sensation  as  of  something
cold  rising  in  the  throat,'.— ^Sensation  as  of  a  hot  and  smarting  vapor  ris-
ing in  the  throat,'. — Mucous  accumulations  in  the  throat,  in  the  morning,
with  heaviness  of  the  head,'.

Stomach. —  Voracious  appetite,". — Feeling  of  great  hunger,  from  weak-
ness of  the  stomach,  without  increase  of  appetite,'. — [40.]  Thirst,''*. —
Thirst,  which  prevents  sleep,'. — Burning  eructations,'. — Burning  eructa-
tions after  a  meal,'. — Eructations  (immediately),'. — Eructations,  which  ex-
cite copious  salivation,'.— Nausea  and  loathing  of  food  (immediate  and
very  short-lasting  symptom),'. — Vomiting  during  the  fever,'. — Burning  in
the  stomach,  which  is  not  painful  when  not  touched,  but  is  very  sensitive
to  the  least  pressure,'. — Lancinations  in  the  stomach,'. — [50,]  Sensation  of
a  weight  in  the  stomach,  which  prevents  sleep,'. — Dull  pains  in  the  epigas-


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.  161

trie  region,  felt  only  on  deep  inspiration,  but  which  finally  embarrass  res-
piration,^ — ^A  pressure  inward,  as  if  a  stone  were  in  the  epigastric  region,'.
— Pressure  in  upper  abdomen  (stomach  and  along  the  transverse  colon) ;
relief  only  by  sitting  bent  and  pressing  with  both  hands ;  the  pain  became
unendurable  on  walking  out,'.

Abdomen. — Pressure  in  upper  abdomen  (stomach  and  along  trans-
verse colon)  ;  relief  only  by  sitting  bent  and  pressing  with  both  hands  ;  the
pain  became  intolerable  on  walking  out,'. — Twistings  and  pinchings  around
the  umbilicus,^ — Borborygmi  in  the  forenoon,^ — Flatulence,'. — ^Incom-
plete, and  aa  if  interrupted,  emission  of  fetid  flatulence,^  (The  usual  colic
disappeared  for  some  days,°  '•)— [60,]  Every  step  on  the  pavement  caused
excruciating  pain,  as  if  the  intestines  would  be  torn  apart  (ameliorated
by  lying  down),'. — Everything  (in  abdomen)  seemed  to  drag  downward,'.
— Weight  in  the  hypogastrium,  immediately  after  a  meal,  without  urgency
to  stool  or  urinate,^

Stool  and  Anus. — Piles,*. —  Diarrhoea,'. —  Involuntary  stools,'. —
Diarrhceic  stool  (at  the  end  of  thirty  hours),  towards  3  o'clock  a.m.,  pre-
ceded, accompanied,  and  .followed  by  cuttings  in  the  abdomen  and  loins,^
— Several  soft,  but  not  diarrhceic,  stools  every  twenty-four  hours,  during
three  days,''. — Stool,  first  fseces,  then  watery  ;  hot  passage,'. — Normal  stool
immediately  after  a  meal  (contrary  to  habit),^ — Stool  delayed  from  morn-
ing (usual  time)  till  after  dinner,  with  great  urging ;  with  the  stool,  heat  in
the  rectum,'. — [70.]  Constipation,  which  becomes  obstinate,'. — Constipa-
tion, with  almost  constant  dull  pain  in  the  bowels,  during  eight  days  (chiefly
in  the  forenoon),^

Urinary  Organs. — Sensation  in  the  bladder  and  urethra  as  of
urging  to  urinate,  which,  however,  does  not  exist,^ — Urine  increased,*. —
Whitish,  very  abundant  urine,  becoming  cloudy  from  nitric  acid,^. — A  kind
of  diabetes,'. — Scanty,  high-colored  urine,". — Urine  scarcely  half  the  nor-
mal (first  day)  ;  one-third  normal  (second  day),'. — Did  not  urinate  in  the
night  (contrary  to  habit),'.

Sexual  Oi'.^ffl/i.S.— Suppurating  pimples  on  the  vulva  during  the
menses,'. — ^[80.]  Bright  red  spots,  with  itching  and  smarting,  on  the  inside
of  the  labia  majora,  and  at  the  entrance  of  the  vagina,''. — Menses  five  days  too
early,^ — During  the  menses,  the  skin  of  the  internal  portion  of  the  thighs
presents  large  excoriations,".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Painful  irritation  of  the  windpipe
^  when  coughing,'. — Scraping  in  the  larynx,  exciting  dry  cough,  with  no
other  symptom,". — Almost  continual  mucous  rdles  in  the  bronchi^'. — Deep-
seated  cough,'. — Cough,  which  seems  to  come  from  the  stomach,". — Cough,
which  gives  rise  to  a  perceptible  fetid  smell,'. — Dry  cough  after  eating,". —
[90.]  Morning  cough  after  leaving  his  bedroom,  with  extremely  copious  mu-
cous expectoration,'. — Sudden  paroxysms  of  hard,  dry  cough  while  smoking,
obliging  him  to  quit,". —  Great  difficulty  in  expectorating  a  glutinous  mucus,^.
— Expectoration  increased,*. — Expectoration  of  a  thin,  yellowish,  purulent-
looking,  blood-streaked  mucus,  of  a  putrid  odor,". — Difficult  respiration,  as
if  the  sternum  was  compressed,".— Uneasiness  in  respiration,'. — The  cough
symptoms  are  aggravated  by  bending  the  head,  and  after  eating,  and  by
going  into  the  open  air,'.

Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest  during  sleep,'. — Darting  pain  in  the
chest,  which  prevents  sleep,'. — [100.]  Lancinations  in  one  side  of  the  chest,".
— Twitching  pain  in  the  side  of  the  chest;  it  seems  to  him  as  if  there  was
an  empty  spot  in  his  chest,'. — Lancinations  under  the  shoulder-blades  and

VOL.  I.— 11


162  ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

pectoral  muscles,  increasing  during  the  cough  and  deep  inspirations,  and
becoming  spasmodic  if  the  latter  are  renewed  several  times  in  succession  ;
with  irresistible  impulse  to  cough,^ — Swelling  of  both  mammae,  which  be-
come sensitive  to  touch  (at  the  end  of  twenty-four  hours),l — Dull  stitches
in  the  right  mamma,". — Eruption  of  red  blotches  between  the  breasts  and
around  the  nipples,^

Heart  and  JPulse. — Leaping  beats  of  the  heart,'. — Tension  of  the
pulse,'.

JVecJe  and  Sack. — Drawing  pains  in  the  neck,'. — Insensibility  to
touch  of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  neck,^ — [HO.]  Itching  between  the
shoulders,^ — Darting  pain  in  the  back,'. — Itching  in  the  back,'. — Red-spots,
like  ringworm,  come  out  on  the  back,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  sacrum,'. —
Cutting  pain  in  the  sacrum,  in  the  morning,'. — Simple  pain  in  the  coccyx,'.

TIppev  Extremities. — Painful  feeling  of  contraction  in  the  arm,'.
— Tension  and  heat  in  the  right  elbow,  which  is  painful  during  movement
of  the  arm,l — Pain  in  the  forearm,  it  seems  as  if  paralyzed,'. — [120.]  Burn-
ing, then  moisture,  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,". — Some  red  spots  appear  on
the  hands,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  fingers  extending  below  the  nails,'.

Lower  Extretnities. — Weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,'. — Tearing
pain  in  the  hip,'. — Almost  intolerable  pain,  confined  to  the  common  tendon
of  the  iliac  and  psoas  muscles ;  this  pain,  only  slightly  felt  in  the  daytime,
during  rest,  is  renewed  by  the  least  movement ;  it  is  so  acute  as  almost  to
extort  cries  when  he  tries  to  cross  his  legs,  while  sitting,  i.  e.,  to  place  the
right  thigh  over  the  left ;  but  this  movement  is  performed  with  scarcely
any  pain,  if,  instead  of  using  the  muscles  of  the  pelvis  and  thigh,  he  lifts
the  latter  gently  with  his  hand.  Finally,  this  pain,  which  is  endurable
while  walking,  although  compelling  him  to  limp,  is  aggravated  towards
8  P.M.,  in  bed,  where  it  becomes  impossible  to  change  his  position,  or  to
sleep,". — Painful  weariness  in  the  thighs,'. — Boil  on  the  thigh,'. — Pain  as  of
a  sprain  in  the  ankle-joint,". — All  these  symptoms  are  much  aggravated  by
walking,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  feet,'. — [130.]  Burning  in  the  soles  of  the
feet,'.— -Sensation  of  stifiuess  in  the  feet,'. — Tingling  in  the  feet,'. — Pain  as
of  a  sprain  in  the  toe-joints,'. — These  symptoms  are  much  more  troublesome
during  rest,  especially  if  the  foot  is  not  supported,'. — The  pains  in  the
limbs  were  always  aggravated  by  changes  in  temperature,  and  under  the
influence  of  moist  heat,'.

Generalities. — General  lassitude,  especially  in  the  lower  limbs,  to
such  a  degree  that  he  dreads  having  to  go  two  or  three  steps  upstairs,". —
Morning  lassitude,  which  appears  to  depend  on  nervous  insensibility,'. —
Relaxation  of  the  muscles,'. — -Sense  of  oppression ;  weakness,'. — [140.]
Drawing  in  the  muscles  during  the  night,'. — Sensation  of  contraction  in  the
muscles,'. — Tingling  in  the  aflJected  parts,'. — Pain  in  the  glands,'. — Lau-
cinations  in  the  limbs,". — Often  the  pains  are  gradually  increased  to  a  high
degree,  and  subside  in  like  manner,'.

Skin. — Looseness  of  the  skin,'. — Hard  swelling  of  the  integuments,'. —
Swelling  with  tingling,'. — Dryness  of  the  skin,'. — [150.]  It  blisters  the  skin
(locally),*.— Spots  at  first  white,  and  which  become  yellow,  and  are  accom-
panied with  a  tingling-itching,". —  Darting-itching,'. —  Formication  in  the
skin,". —  Tension  in  the  shin  of  the  joints,^. — Extreme  sensitiveness  of  the  skin,'.

Fever. — Chilliness  from  one  day  to  another,'.^Cliilliness  on  one  side
only,'. — During  the  coldness,  redness  of  the  face,'. — Horripilations  before
midday  and  in  the  evening,^. — [160.]  Catarrhal  fever  with  predominant
coldness,'. — General  heat  during  which  there  is  distress,^ — Heat  during


ALOE.  163

■ffhicb  she  feels  twitching  in  the  limbs,'. — During  the  fever,  vomiting,\ —
Sweat  in  the  afternoon,'. — Sweat  causing  itching,'. — Sweat  of  a  sour  smell,'.
— Fetid  sweat,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Drowsiness  after  meals,^ — Restless  sleep  at
night,^ — [170,]  Frequent  waking  up,  through  coldness,'. — Startings  in  the
rauseles  and  shocks  in  the  feet,  at  night,  when  going  to  sleep,^ — Sleep  pre-
vent-ed  by  darting  pain  in  the  chest,'. — Sleep  prevented  by  sensation  of
weight  in  the  stomach,'. — Sleep  prevented  by  thirst,'. — Slight  cold  fit
when  going  to  sleep,'. — Coldness  of  the  body  during  sleep,'. — Dreams  in
which  he  thinks,'. — Dreams  which  are  continued  when  he  is  awake,'. — At
midnight,  frightful,  anxious  dreams,  with  headache,  pressure  in  the  vertex,^

Conditions. — Ag'gravations. — {Morning),  Pain  in  occiput;  mucus
in  throat,  etc. ;  cutting  in  sacrum  ;  feeling  of  hair  on  tongue  ;  cough  after
leaving  bedroom. — {Forenoon),  General  symptoms ;  puUings  in  jaws  and
teeth;  flow  of  saliva;  borborygmi;  horrijiilations. — {Afternoon),  Sivie^t. —
{Evening),  Horripilations;  general  symptoms. — {Evening,  in  bed),  Pain  in
muscles  of  thigh. — {Night),  Starts  and  shocks  when  going  to  sleep ;  catarrhal
ophthalmia;  blowing  blood  from  nose;  flow  of  saliva ;  feeling  of  hair  on
tongue;  drawing  in  muscles;  restless  sleep. — {At  midnight).  Frightful
dreams. — (  Open  air).  Cough-symptoms.— (  When  alone),  Restlessness. —
{Bending  head),  Cough-symptoms. — {After  breakfast).  Return  of  hot  taste.
— {Deep  breathing).  Epigastric  pains. — {Coughing),  Irritation  of  windpipe.
— {After  eating).  Cough-symptoms. — {During  Fever),  Vomiting. — {Moist
Heat),  Pain  in  limbs. — {Looking  steadily).  Vertigo. — {During  Menses),
Pimples  on  vulva. — {Movement),  Pain  in  muscles  of  thigh. — {Moving  arm),
Pain  in  right  elbow. — {Reading),  Symptoms  of  mouth. — {Rest),  Feet-
symptoms. — {On  rising  from  seat),  Vertigo. — {Speaking  and  stooping).  Gen-
eral symptoms. — {Stepping  onpavement),  Paiu  in  intestines. — {During  sleep),
Oppression  of  chest. — (  When  smoking).  Paroxysms  of  cough. — {Straining
to  wmii).  Bowel-symptoms. — {Walking  owi),  Pressure  in  ujoper  abdomen,
etc. ;  pains  in  lower  limbs.

A-fneliovation, — {Lying  down),  Pain  in  intestines. — {During  men-
struation), Heaviness  of  head  ceases.— {Motion  of  a  carriage).  General
symptoms. — {Sitting  bent),  Pressure  in  upper  abdomen,  etc.


ALOE.

Aloe  socotrina.  Lam.  Nat.  order,  Liliacesea.  Preparation.  The  fiery
red  gum  is  to  be  triturated.

Authorities.^  l,Helbig,  0  (proved  the  tincture)  ;  2,  Hencke,  0;  3,L.S.,  0  ;
4,  Pren,  0;  6,  A.  B.,  I,  30th  by  olfaction  and  bv  the  mouth ;  6,  A.  B.,  II,
0;  7,  A.B.,III,  tf;  8,C.  Bering,  i-'nth  and  higher;  9,J.  Jeanes;  10,  Koch;
,11,  Neidhard,  xflth  >"  12,  Eaue,  j'jth  ;  13,  Williamson;  14,  Buchner,  0;
15,  S.  T.,  0;  16,  J.  M.,  a  girl,  0 ;  17,  Giaccomini,  0 ;  (18,  N.  T.) ;  19,
Voigtel;  20,  E.  R.  L. ;  21,  Wedekind  ;  22,  Gosewich  ;  23,  Zumbrook;  24,
Whitey,  xi^th  ;  25,  Watzke,  0 ;  26,  J.  O.  Muller,  3d  dec. ;  27,  Fischer,  0.

31ind. — Amorous  thoughts  present  themselves,  which  are  very  annoy-
ing (first  day),". — Before  taking  it,  the  disposition  is  apprehensive,  specula-

f  Nos.  1  to  24,  taken  from  Bering's  Arzneiprufungen  ;  25,  A.  H.  Z.,  74,  29;  26,
Z,  f.  V.  H.  Qilst.,  1,  38;  27,  Symptoms  from  five  provers.  Jour,  du  dispens.  Hahn  ,
3,  235.


164  ALOE.

tive,  amorous ;  after  taking  it,  quiet,  immovable,  conteuted,  joyful,  reflec-
tive ;  mind  is  more  self-sufficient,  more  inclined  to  labor ;  no  sleepiness
after  a  meal  (first  to  third  day),". — Contented,  happy  humor  in  the  even-
ing, as  well  as  all  the  following  day  (fifth  day),^ — ^Towards  evening,  un-
commonly aroused  by  inspiriting,  joyful  news  (fifth  day),^ — Merry,  self-
conteiited  ;  fraternized  with  the  whole  world  (fifth  day),". — At  evening,  in
a  happy  mood,  he  feels  completely  happy  and  contented,'*. — Great  serenity
and  good  humor  (in  a  patient),^ — The  child  is  very  much  enlivened  and
vivacious,  it  plays  and  prattles  uncommonly,  with  much  mischievousness
and  laughter  (from  sucking  Aloes),*. — Contented  with  his  station  in  life;  it
involuntarily  occurs  to  him,  that  he  is  really  much  better  off  than  many
other  people  (seventh  day),^— [10.]  Quiet  and  serene  humor  (curative
effect),^l — -In  the  forenoon,  he  is  disposed  to  become  reconciled,  where  he
would  not  otherwise  have  been  so  (second  day),^ — Despondent,  with  flatu-
lent .distension,*. — Anxiety,  anguish,  and  ebullition  of  the  blood,". — A  cer-
tain anxiety  (after  one  scruple),".-r- Anxiety  produced  by  vertigo,^ — Anx-
ious startings  up,'*.^ — Great  anxiety,  timorousness,  restlessness,  dread  of
death,  and  great  anguish,  so  that  she  cannot  stay  anywhere,'^". — Oppression
and  apprehensiveness,'". — After  a  nocturnal  emission  of  semen,  fright  at
the  rattling  of  the  windows  by  the  wind  (fourth  day),^ — [20.]  Little  in-
clination to  labor ;  discouraged,  apprehensive  about  his  success  (fourth
day),'. — Irritable,  he  cannot  endure  the  visit  of  many  people,  they  are  re-
pugnant to  him  (twenty-fourth  day),'. — Authropophobia,*. — (Iramediately,
strong  exhibition  of  will ;  he  quarrels  with  every  one  who  contradicts  him  ;
it  seems  as  if  he  would  permit  himself  to  be  torn  in  pieces,  sooner  than  give
up  his  will),". — The  weather  is  cloudy,  cold,  rainy  (in  December),  and  his
humor  morose,  thoughtful,  discontented  (fifth  day),". — Ill-humor;  peevish
about  himself,  so  that  he  insults  and  blasphemes;  worse  afternoons  (third
day),°. — Very  discontented  and  unhappy  mood,  since  the  forenoon,  with
confused  head  and  lack  of  inclination  to  labor;  better  in  the  evening
(twenty-fourth  day),'. — Moroseness  (first  day),*. — Peevish  towards  himself,
without  reason  (second  day),*. — Peevish  and  morose  (second  day),l — [30.]
Ill-humor,  with  pain  in  the  sacral  region,  aggravated  at  evening,  lasting
one  week,^ — Very  ill-humored,  seldom  moderated  by  sadness  (second  day),*.
— Ill-humor  and  incapacity  for  labor,  with  peevish  restlessness  (third  day),*.
— The  child  is  hard  to  please,  and  cries  on  the  least  provocation,  t. — A
condition  of  mind  that  is  intolerable,  and  without  stool  (ninth  day),'. —
Ill-humor,  peevishness,  and  authropophobia,  with  cuttings  in  abdomen,*. —
During  pain,  everything  disgusts' him,*. — Indifference  and  sleepiness  even-
ings,^ — After  meal,  no  sleepiness,  but  a  forbidding  and  unconcerned
humor;  about  half-past  three,  he  is  better  and  much  inclined  to  joke,
continually  mocking  the  remarks  of  others;  in  the  evening  is  inclined
to  work  (twelfth  day),°. — Lassitude,  alternating  with  great  mental  activity;
eighth  day,*. — [40.]  Immediately  after  a  meal,  he  sat  down  by  himself,'
without  speaking,  without  any  desire  for  mental  or  physical  exertion ;
meditating,  wrapt  up  in  himself,  as  after  a  sickness  or  a  fit  of  anger,  which
still  gnaws  internally,  which  one  cannot  express.  Nothing  can  engage  his
attention,  he  is  averse  to  and  disgusted  with"  everything.  From  one  till
after  four  in  the  evening,  already  an  opposite  condition  sets  in  ;  he  is  not
at  all  angered  about  an  accident  which  otherwise  probably  would  have
angered  him,\ — Great  restlessness  and  excitement  (second  day),*. — Inner
restlessness  and  excitement  (third  day),'. — Excitement  of  mind  and  body,
afternoons  (third  day),'. — At  an  early  hour,  quick,  complete  awakening.


ALOE.  165

with  inclination  for  mental  labor,  good  appetite  (second  day),'. — He  believes
on  awaking  that  it  must  be  later,*. — In  the  afternoon,  he  works  with  a  will,
without  a  midday  nap  (fourth  day),'. — In  the  morning,  good  appetite  and
inclination  to  work  (fifth  day),^ — Much  inclination  for  continued  labor
(first  day),^ — Especially  inclined  to  mechanical  labor  (first  day),". — [50.]
In  the  forenoon,  he  is  much  excited,  works  hastily  and  yet  well  (fifth  diiy),".
— Inclined  to  work,  with  pain  in  the  forehead,^ — Excited,  nights,  with
warmth  and  redness  of  the  face,". — -Head  confused,  and  indisposition  for
every  employment,'. — Labor  already  begins  to  be  tedious  to  him  (third
day),'. — Great  laziness  in  the  middle  of  the  day  (second  day),*. — Much
exhaustion  and  laziness  (seventh  day),*. — ^Disinclined  to  move  (second
day),*. — An  anxious  restlessness  deters  him  from  mental  labor  (first  day),'.
— *Great  disinclination  to  mental  labor  (second  day),*. — [60.]  Speedy
fatigue  from  mental  labor  (second  day),*. — *  Disinclination  for  much  mechani-
cal or  intellectual  labor;  instead  of  this,  great  disposition  for  desultory  think-
ing (fourth  day),'.  —  *  Exhaustion,  alternating  with  activity,*.  —  Smelling
camphor  relieves  the  troubles  quickly  and  considerably.  There  even  fol-
lows for  awhile  inclination  and  ability  for  mental  labor,  which  requires
clear  thinking.  After  an  hour,  however,  all  the  troubles  return  (eighth
day),*.  .

Head, — Painful  confusion  of  the  head  every  morning,^ — Confusion  of
the  head ;  the  first  day,* ;  the  second  day,'. — Confusion  of  the  head  and
discontent,'. — Confusion  and  heaviness. — *  Murky  pain  in  the  head  and  fore-
head,^.— Vertigo,". — [70.]  Paroxysms  of  vertigo," — Vertigo,  as  if  every-
thing whirled  about  with  her,  worse  on  going  up  stairs  and  turning  quickly,''.
— Very  peculiar  vertigo  each  day,  after  taking  the  third  trituration;  during
motion,  he  feels  as  if  he  ought  to  lie  down  ;  whilst  standing  and  walking,
an  inner  sensation  which  makes  everything  seem  insecure,  and  which  makes
him  very  anxious;  then  nasal  catarrh,  first  on  the  left  side,  then  on  the
right,  with  copious  secretion  of  mucus,  which  soon  becomes  thick ;  after-
wards, no  more  vertigo,*. — Whilst  sitting,  after  meal,  he  feels  as  if  he
sat  upon  a  high  chair ;  a  kind  of  vertigo  (the  fifteenth  and  subsequent
days),'. — Headache,". — Headache,  after  griping  of  the  bowels,  and  after  stool,".
— Headache  in  the  morning,  following  an  incomplete  evacuation  of  the
bowels,  lasting  until  a  second  stool  follows,  a  few  hours  after,'^ — The  whole
head  feels  affected,". — Periodic  headache,  alternating  with  pains  in  the
loins,^';  with  sacral  pain,". — Headache  relieved  by  cold  applications,". — -
Headache,  worse  in  warm,  better  in  cool. (air),". — [80.]  (Headache  from
the  heat  of  the  sun),". — After  eating,  the  headache  is  better  for  awhile,".
— Headache  worse  in  the  dark,  ameliorated  in  the  light,'*. — Headache
aggravated  by  motion,  especially  by  stooping  (the  first  day),'. — Pains  on
contact,". — Attack  in  the  head,  with  nausea,  as  from  indigestion,". — On
rising  before  five  in  the  morning,  the  head  feels  completely  aroused ;  an
excited  condition  of  the  whole  brain  (sixth  day),*. — The  brain  is  again
somewhat  excited  on  the  eleventh  day,*. —  On  rising,  the  brain  is  aroused
and  excited  (twenty-first  day),'. — Tension  in  the  head,". — [90.]  Continued
and  severe  congestion  of  the  occiput  and  sinciput,  whereby  the  eyes  are
pressed  out,"". — Congestion  of  the  head,^  " '^. — Disposition  to  congestion  of
the  head,  in  lunatics,"  (Trousseau). — It  often  produces  congestion  of  the
head,  if  administered  with  existing  hEemorrhoids  (aa.). — Tearing  in  the
head,  here  and  there,'". — After  11  o'clock  a.m.,  sense  of  dull  pressure
throughout  the  whole  head  when  walking,  a  shaking  as  if  the  brain  lay
loose  therein,  considerably  aggravated  in  fresh,  cold  air,  also  on  laying  the


166  ALOE.

head  down,  then  and  awhile  after  rising  up,  a  beating,  thumping  pain,  like
pulsating,  especially  in  the  occiput ;  better  awhile  after  eating  (the  first
day,  after  having  taken  the  medicine  five  times,  less  the  second  day ;  dis-
appearing the  third  day),'-. — Sensation  as  if  the  head  were  widened,  being
pressed  out  on  all  sides  (after  four  hours),". — Sluggish,  drawing,  sensitive
pain  in  the  head,  more  externally  (the  first  day),'. — -Throbbing  headache,
yj-ji,'^*. — Throbbing  in  the  middle  of  the  brain,^". — [100.]  She  received  a
shock  from  the  arm  up  into  the  head ;  thereupon  the  sensa-tion  of  a  wind
from  the  head  into  abdomen  (Kerner). — *Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,
from  the  third  to  the  fifth  day,  thereafter  relief,*. — Confusion  of.  the  sinci-
put, especially  with  chilliness,'. — *Doivnward  and  inward  pressing  pain
{doivn  towards  the  nose),  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead  (in  a  mesmerized  per-
son),\ — *Dull  headache  across  above  the  forehead,  with  heaviness  in  the
eyes,  and  nausea,". — *A  didl,  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  the  after-
noon*.— Headache  in  the  forehead  and  on  the  vertex,  as  from  a  weight  (fourth
day),'^. — Headache  in  the  forehead,  with  abdominal  symptoms,'. — Pressure
in  the  forehead,  immediately  after  licking  Aloes  (in  a  girl  nine  years  of
age),'. — Painfulness  of  half  the  face,  arising  from  the  forehead,*. — [110.]
Pressive  jaain  in  the  forehead,  involving  the  orbits  (the  third  day),^ — Dull
drawing  and  sticking  over  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  ;  the  head  feels
murky  ;  it  compels  one  to  make  the  eyes  small ;  at  the  same  time,  the  desire
for  labor  continues  longer  (fourth  day),". — Pain  on  right  side  of  forehead,"
— Pain  in  the  forehead,  pressing  outward  towards  the  temples ;  appears
soon  after  taking  Aloes,  and  continues,^ — *Dull,  pressive  pain  in  the  supra-'
orbital  region  (first  day),*. — PuUings  every  evening,  from  above  the  right
eyebrow  to  the  bottom  of  the  right  side  of  the  forehead," — Dull  stitches  in
the  supraorbital  region  (the  first  and  fifth  day),*. — Stitches  over  the  brows
and  in  the  frontal  prominences,'. — A  single  darting  drawing  over  the  left
eye  and  outward  through  the  same  (after  four  hours),". — Pressive  tension,
sometimes  pulsating,  in  the  sinciput,™. — [120.]  *Dull  pressive  pain  in  the
sinciput  (second  day),*. — Pressing  outward  to  the  temples,  with  periodic
heat  of  the  face,  and  flickering  before  the  eyes  (the  first  day),l — (Slight
pressive  pain  in  the  right  temple ;  sour  food  produces  an  inclination  to
vomit  and  lassitude),'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  left  temple  especially,  appear-
ing now  and  then,'. — Pressive  boring  in  the  left  temple,  soon  thereafter  a
sticking,  drawing  outwards  to  the  left  eye,  from  above,  out  of  the  brow
downwards,  afternoon  and. evening  (second  day),". — Drawing  stitches  over
the  right  temple,  not  deep  (the  third  day),". — First  transient,  then  severe
stitches  in  the  left  temporal  region,  aggravated  by  every  footstep,'*. — Dull
stitches  through  the  left  temple  into  the  brain,l — Pressive  sensation  at  the
crown,'. — *Seri-se  of  weight  on  the  vertex^''. — [130.]  At  midday,  a  pain,  as  of
subcutaneous  suppuration,  on  a  spot  as  large  as  a  half-dollar,  on  the  right
side  of  the  top  of  the  head  (between  organs  16  and  12,  according  to  Combe),
so  that  even  touching  the  hair  is  very  painful  (afternoons) ;  also  in  the
evening,  in  another  spot  of  the  same  size  (the  second  day),". — On  the  left
side  in  the  scalp,  near  the  vertex,  a  feeling  as  if  it  had  been  beaten,  so  that
pressure  thereon  is  painful,  but  yet  feels  good  (the  fifth  day),". — Painfulness
behind  the  top  of  the  head,  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration  ;  the  hair  stands
up  more  on  this  spot,  continuing  from  midday,  the  seventh  day  ;  tenth  and
eleventh  days,  again  a  sensitive  spot  behind  on  the  vertex,^ — Headache  on
the  left  side,". — Pressure  on  the  left  side  at  the  top  of  the  parietal  bone
(after  one  hour),". — Beating  in  the  left  wall  of  the  head,  at  first  painless,". —
Stitches  in  the  right  side  between  the  forehead  and  vertex,  from  the  top


ALOE.  167

inward  (the  first  day),'. — Leaping  pain  in  the  right  parietal  bone  toward
the  vertex,". — On  the  right  side  of  the  head,  sudden  blunt  shootings  from
below  upwards,  in  the  evening  and  on  the  following  morning,  after  tritura-
tion,^'.— Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  right  half  of  the  brain,  after  tritura-
tion,'"'*.— [140.]  Severe  pressure  in  the  occiput,  after  a  pressing  asunder,^".
— Pressive  ache  in  the  angle  of  the  right  occiput  (^evening),". — Dull  drawing
in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,^ — In  the  occiput  (and  abdomen),  beating
at  night,  when  lying  down ;  stitches  after  stooping;  external  soreness,'. —
An  ache,  like  a  pressure  in  the  scalp  of  the  occiput,'. — On  combing  the
hair  in  the  morning,  a  sensitive  spot  on  the  left  side  on  upper  part  of
the  occipiit;  towards  evening,  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  on  the  top
(twelfth  day),\ — Frequent  feeling  of  heat  in  the  scalp,™. — A  sensation  of
numbness  moving  over  the  scalp,  with  warmth,^  —  Dry  hair  (ninth  and
tenth  days),'.

Eyes. — The  eyes  are  glittering,  somewhat  reddened,  prominent,''". —
[150.]  An  unsteady,  anxious  look,™. — *One  is  compelled  to  make  the  eyes
small,  with  pain  in  the  forehead,^. — Determination  of  blood  to  the  eyes,
pressing  them  outward,™. — Pain  in  the  forehead,  involving  the  orbits,''. —
*Pain  deep  in  the  orbits,  as  if  in  the  muscles,  worse'  on  the  right  side,". — A
sensitive  pressure  in  the  orbits  (first  and  second  days),''. — Burning  pain  in
the  right  eye,  as  if  a  fine  current  of  hot  air  passed  through,  along  the  axis
of  vision  (first  and  second  days),*. — Over  the  left  eye  and  through  it  out-
ward drawing  paiu,^ — An  outward  drawing  pain  in  the  brow,  extending
to  the  left  eye,*. — Heaviness  of  the  eyes,  with  headache,'^ — [160.]  Tearing  '
pain  for  some  minutes,  at  the  bottom  of  the  right  eye,". — An  increased
congestive  condition  of  the  ordinarily  somewhat  reddened  conjunctiva  of
the  lids  (the  first  day),*. — Pustules  in  the  right  external  angle  of  the  eye,
surrounded  externally  and  internally  by  many  red  vessels,'. — ^Pressure  in
the  right  eyeball,  severe,  but  passing  away,  evenings,  from  light  (fifth  day),'.
— Dim,  cloudy  vision,  as  if  from  want  of  sleep,  for  several  nights,™. — It
becomes  dim  before  the  eyes  on  writing  (second  day),l — Flickering  before
the  eyes,  with  heat  of  the  face  (after  a  few  hours),". — Scotoma;  it  flickered
and  turned  before  the  eyes,"". — *  Yellow  rings,  moving  before  the  eyes,"^. —
Shining  bodies  shoot  across  the  eyes,''^

JSavs. — [170.]  Heat  in  the  inner  and  outer  ear,*. — Throbbing  and  sense
of  heat  in  the  back  part  of  the  ear,™. — Drawing,  sticking  pain  in  the  left
inner  ear,  which  is  after  awhile  also  felt  in  the  right,'*. — -A  slight  twinging
kind  of  pain  in  the  right  ear  (evening  of  third  day),'. — A  twinging  earache
and  cramping  pain  in  the  right  ear  (fourth  day),*. — Transient  stitches  from
the  left  temporal  region  toward  the  ear,'°. — On  pressing  the  teeth  together,
a  sensation  of  numbness  behind  the  ear ;  it  draws  in  the  lower  jaw,  down
through  a  back  tooth  (fourth  day),^ — Towards  midday,  a  drawing  pain,
from  before  backward,  below  the  right  external  meatus  auditorius,  behind
the  lobules,  in  the  mastoid  process,  and  in  the  ear-passage  itself  (fourth
day),". — -At  times,  a  transient  pain  in  the  left  external  oar-passage,  especially
on  pressing  the  teeth  together  (fifth  day),'. — Frequent  ringing  and  buzzing
in  the  ears,™. — -[180.]  At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  reading  aloud,
frequent  fine  crackings  in  the  right  maxillary  joint  (first  day),". — -Rustlings
in  the  right  ear,  which  almost  amount  to  cracklings,  on  moving  the  maxil-
lary joint  (after  two  hours),'. — Just  after  getting  into  bed,  sudden  explosion
and  clashing  in  the  left  ear,  as  from  the  breaking  of  glass;  the  clink  of  the
bits  of  glass  was  heard  at  the  bottom  of  the  head,  and  extended  thence  to-
ward the  right  ear,"'.


168  ALOE.

WoMe. — The  nose  is  very  red  without  redness  of  the  face,  in  the  cold  open
air  (the  first  day)/. — In  the  evening,  coldness  of  the  tip  of  the  nose,  sensi-
ble only  to  the  finger  touching  it,\ — Early  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  great
dryness  in  the  nose  (third  day),\ — Nose-bleed  early  in  the  morning,  a  few
drop.s  (second  day  ),^ — Some  blood  is  blown  out  in  the  afternoon.(fifth  day),".
— After  waking,  while  yet  in  bed,  the  right  nostril  bleeds  a  dessertspoonful
(eighteenth  day),'. — Nose-bleed,  now  and  then,™. — [190.]  It  stops  bleeding
of  the  nose  (Schroeder),°. — Inefiectual  inclination  to  sneeze  (after  ten  min-
utes),*.— Fruitless  attempts  to  sneeze  (morning  of  second  day),". — On  sneez-
ing, stitches  in  the  umbilical  region,". — Sneezing,  and  watery  mucus,  like
fluent  coryza,  lasting  till  toward  evening  (third  day),'. — Coryza,  the  whole
of  the  fourth  day ;  worse  in  the  afternoon,'. — Sensation  of  coryza  and  husky
voice,'. — Coryza,  with  pains  in  the  nose,"'. — Coryza,  with  burning  in  the
nose,"'. — Coryza  and  soreness  in  the  right  nostril  (fifth  and  sixth  days),'.
— [200.]  Inclination  to  coryza  at  times  (thirteenth  day) ;  thin  nasal  mucus
(fourteenth  day),'. — Fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing  (fifteenth  day),'. — Coryza;
whereupon  the  distressing  vertigo  disappears,'*. — Dry  coryza  (secoud  day),'.
— Pain  in  the  forehead  pressing  down  into  the  nose,'. — Pain  in  the  nose,
especially  early  in  the  morning,  and  never  except  on  motion  (thirteenth
and  fourteenth  days),'. — Sensation  of  burning,  like  fire,  in  the  left  nostril,".
— A  sensation  in  the  nose,  as  if  it  would  commence  bleeding  (the  fii-st
day),^ — The  right  wing  of  the  nose  is  scurfy  and  sensitive  on  its  inner  sur-
face, fourth  and  eighth  days  ;  and  again  somewhat  on  the  twenty-first  and
twenty-second  days,'.

r\(iCe. — Pale  over  night  (as  if  up  all  night),  sickly  look  (sixth  day),".—
[210.]  He  is  very  sensitive  to  the  coldness  of  the  weather,  has  a  very  pale
look,  sunken,  and  sickly  (thirteenth  day),^. — Pale,  wretched  color  of  the
face  (first  to  third  day),". — The  countenance  is  sickly,  suffering,  and  pale
(tenth  day),'. — Increased  warmth  and  redness  of  the  face;  wide-awake,  ex-
cited (after  half  an  hour),'. — Turgescence  of  the  skin,  especially  of  the  face ;
it  is  very  red,  and  its  temperature  is  increased,'"'. — Periodic  heat  of  the  face,
with  ]:)re33ure  in  the  temples,'^. — Burning  heat,  especially  in  the  face,™. —
Confusedness  and  painfulness  of  the  whole  left  half  of  the  face,  proceeding
from  ail  inflamed  spot  in  the  mouth,  and  from  the  forehead  (fourth  day),*.
— Redder  lips  than  usual,^ — Dry  and  cracked  lips,  t. — [220.]  Dry  lips ;
the  dried  epidermis  has  a  white  appearance  if  it  is  not  frequently  moistened
by  the  tongue  (second  and  third  days),'. — Dry  lips  ;  the  epidermis  is  white,
scaly ;  he  continually  licks  them  with  the  tongue  (from  the  sixth  to  the
eighth  day,  and  on  the  sixteenth  day),'. — Dry  lips,  an  hour  after  dinner,  to-
gether with  dryness  in  the  mouth  ;  the  lips  are  parched  and  white,  without
thirst ;  better  in  the  evening  (fifteenth  day),'. — Dry  lips,  scurfy,  swollen,
and  painful  (ninth  day),'. — Dryness  of  the  lips;  they  are  very  red  and  hot,
sometimes  trembling,^". — The  under  lip  is  swollen,  with  a  thick-skinned
long  vesicle,  in  the  red  part  of  the  lip  where  it  turns  inward,  of  the  size  of
a  flaxseed,  smooth,  yellowish,  covered  with  hard  skin;  it  makes  the  whole
part  of  the  lip  thick  (sixth  and  seventh  days),'. — Spongy  scurf  upon  the
lips,  which  exudes  moisture,  looks  ugly  (tenth  day) ;  on  the  eleventh  day
the  lips  are  very  dry,  the  spongy  scurfiness  is  moist,'. — Superficial  cracking
on  the  inner  side  of  the  upper  lip,  when  laughing,". — A  painful  little  crack
on  the  under  lip,  near  the  angle  of  the  mouth  (second  day),'. — A  blackish
point  (maggot),  on  the  edge  of  the  upper  lip,  on  the  left  side,  becomes  in-
flamed ;  it  is  the  next  day  a  yellow  pustule ;  goes  away  the  eighth  to  the
eleventh  day,*. — [230.]  Breaking  out  around  the  iuouth,\ — Bed,  round


ALOE.  169

spot  on  the  left  border  of  the  lower  jaw,  between  the  lower  border,  the
angle  of  the  jaw,  and  the  chin,".— Pimples  under  the  lower  jaw,^

Mouth, — The  teeth  have  looked  bad  for  many  days,  have  a  yellowish
cast  (seventeenth  day),*. — The  concave  edges  of  the  teeth  seem  sharp,  they
hurt  the  tong.ue  (seventeenth  day),^ — The  teeth  are  affected  as  after  eating
sugar  (first  and  second  days)  (N.  N.). — A  drawing  from  the  ear  into  the
lower  jaw  through  a  back  tooth,°. — Drawing  in  the  lower  front  teeth,^ —
Stitches  in  the  third,  hollow  back  tooth," — Gnawing  pain  in  a  hollow
tooth  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  in  the  evening,  recurring  periodi-
cally throughout  the  whole  night,  worse  by  eating,". — [240.]  A  lower,
hollow  back  tooth  becomes  sensitive,  especially  when  eating  (second  day)  ;
on  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  it  is  still  sensitive ;  on  the  fifth  day  he
cannot  bite  them ;  on  the  sixth  day,  it  is  still  more  sensitive,  it  even  pains
without  touching  it ;  it  is  no  more  sensitive  on  the  ninth  day  ;  on  the  tenth
day,  a  pustule  appears  on  the  front  part  of  the  gum,  under  this  same  tooth,^
— Pale  gbms  (sixth  day),*. — Tongue  coated  yellowish-white  (second  day),".
— Red  and  dry  tongue,'""'. — Dry,  stiff  tongue,". — Evenings,  dryness  on
the  tongue  and  in  the  mouth,  with  increased  thirst,  and  redder  lips  than
usual  (after  the  yj-jth),". — Large  yellow  ulcers  arise  on  the  tongue  after
the  use  of  Aloes  in  weaned  children,*. — Cold  feeling  of  the  left  side  of  the
tongue,  after  a  few  minutes,'. — After  dinner,  a  sensitive  painfulness  on  the
right  side  of  the  tongue  at  the  back  part,  especially  if  it  bite  against  the
teeth,  as  if  they  were  sharp  and  impinged  upon  a  sore  spot  (the  twenty-
fourth  and  twenty-fifth  days),'. — In  the  morning  after  waking,  suddenly,  an
extremely  fine  but  severe  stitch  on  the  under  part  of  the  tongue,  from  be-
hind forwards,  which  is  twice  repeated  on  moving  the  tongue  (neuralgia
sublingualis),'".— Inflamed  spots  in  the  mouth,*. — [250.]  Sickening  smell
from  the  mouth,  noticeable  to  himself,  as  if  he  had  been  without  food  a
long  time,  on  a  warm  day  (the  third  day),'. — Sore  feeling  of  the  inner  side
of  the  left  cheek  (afternoons),". — Inflammation  and  sore  pain  of  the  left
cavity  of  the  mouth  (fourth  day),*. — Dryness  in  the  mouth  ;  the  mucus  in
the  mouth  seems  dry  (third  day),'. — Dryness  in  the  mouth,'  (evenings),^*;
with  thirst. — Dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  much  thirst,  dry  heat  in  the
mouth  ;  the  tongue  is  very  red  and  somewhat  dry,'°.^Water  accumulates
in  the  mouth,  with  a  sensation  of  hunger  after  breakfast,".— Saliva  accu-
mulates in  the  mouth  when  taking  it  (Aloes),". — Increased  secretion  of  sa-
liva,^".— The  taste  of  the  aloes  exceedingly  nauseous,  which  rather  increased
after  fifteen  minutes ;  after  one  hour  it  still  continued,  and  remains  for  a
longtime  as  a  nauseous  bitterness  in  the  mouth,'.— [260.]  Nauseous, bitter
taste  in  the  mouth  (early  on  the  second  day),l — Bitter  taste,  with  loss  of
appetite,^ — A  few  complained  of  bitter  taste ;  many  had  sour  eructations,^'.
— Bitter,  sour  taste,'*. — Taste,  between  the  root  of  the  tongue  and  the  soft
palate,  like  that  soon  after  a  decoction  of  Senna  leaves,  from  early  in  the
morning  till  one  o'clock  (second  day),'l — Taste  in  the  mouth  like  ink  or
iron,  with  irritation  to  cough,'.— -*Jieto/&  taste,  with  dry,  irritative  hacking,^.
— Clayey  taste,". — Pappy  taste,".

T/iroflt. — -Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  provoking  cough,''. —
[270.]  Sense  of  swelling  or  pressure  in  the  throat,  at  eight  or  nine  o'clock
in  the  morning  of  the  fifth  day,'. — Throat  affections  after  skating ;  again  in
the  evening,  in  the  middle  of  the  soft  palate  posteriorly  (the  eleventh  and
thirteenth  days),'. — Dryness  in  the  throat,'* ". — Dryness  and  inflammation
in  the  throat  with  cough  and  expectoration,". — On  rising  in  the  morning,
some  rawness  of  the  fauces,  chiefly  in  the  upper  part,  in  the  soft  palate  and


170  ALOE.

uvula,  with  a  somewhat  raw  voice,  which  disappears  at  breakfast,  return-
ing on  going  into  the  open  and  cold  air  (afternoons),  (second  day),'. — Sen-
sation as  if  the  palate  were  swollen  (three  o'clock  in  the  morning)  ;  when
rising  and  during  the  forenoon  in  the  fauces,  increasing  in  the  afternoon,
continuing  in  the  evening.  On  empty  swallowing  and  yawning  the  arches
of  the  palate  are  painful  (the  fourth  and  following  days).  The  sensa-
tion in  the  lauces  only  on  forced  empty  swallowing ;  but  it  increases  a  few
hours  after  rising,  and  is  noticeable  even  without  swallowing,  but  not  on
swallowing  food.  On  chewing,  the  sides  of  the  soft  palate  pain,  as  if  sore,
or  as  if  burnt  with  hot  food,  aggravated  in  the  evening  (fifth  and  sixth
days),'. — ^The  arches  of  the  velum  palati  pain  on  chewing  hard  food ;  the
hard  palate  and  the  region  around  the  hindermost  back  teeth  feel  as  if  bnrnt
and  inflamed;  not  on  swallowing  food.  Especially  painful  is  the  stretch-
ing of  the  soft  palate  on  yawning  (sixth  to  eighth  day),'. — Soreness  of  the
left  arch  of  the  palate,  on  opening  wide  the  mouth  (ninth  and  tenth  days),'.
— Pain  in  the  throat  as  if  the  soft  palate  and  uvula  were  swelled ;  even-
ings, worse  on  awaking  in  the  morning;  first  disappears  at  midday
(twenty-first  and  twenty-second  days),'. — Hoarseness  in  the  back  part  of
the  fauces,^ — [280.]  Thick  mucus  in  the  mouth  and  fauces  on  waking  at
three  o'clock,^ — Hawking  thick  mucus  out  of  the  fauces  for  a  few  days
(the  fourth  day),  (morning  of  fifteenth  day),'. — The  pain  in  the  fauces  is
accompanied  by  expectoration  of  thick,  lumpy  mucus  from  the  fauces  and
choanse  (twenty-second  and  twenty-third  days),'. — Pressure  from  the  stom-
ach up  into  the  pharynx,^ — Sense  of  fulness  in  the  pharynx,  with  empty
eructations ;  at  times,  also,  without  eructations  (second  day),*. — Pressive
pain  in  the  pharynx,  sensation  of  rawness  and  swelling,  especially  on  swal-
lowing ;  hawking  up  of  thick  mucus  on  awaking  (morning  at  three  o'clock),
going  away  on  rising  (fourth  day),^ — Hawking  up  thick,  tough,  lumpy
mucus,  like  jelly,  easily  loosened,  early  after  rising  (fifth  day),\ — No  ex-
pectoration of  mucus,^". — Pain  in  the  back  of  the  throat  on  swallowing,*. —
The  throat  feels  as  if  it  were  constricted,".

Stomach, — [290,]  Increased  appetite,". — Great  appetite  the  second
day,*. — Appetite  not  diminished,  in  many  cases,  rather  increased,". — Feel-
ing of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  after  a  few  minutes,  from  olfaction  (second
day),^. — Frequent  appetite ;  ate  apples  out  of  regular  meal  times  (third
day),'. — Great  appetite  for  bread  (ninth  day),'. — Appetite  more  for  fruit
and  bread  (fourth  day),'. — Longing  for  juicy  food,  fruit,  but  not  for  water
(tenth  day),'*. — Meat  diet  was  (to  jaundiced  persons)  welcome  after  the  use
of  Aloes  (W.). — At  noon  he  ate  well  and  much  (first,  second,  eleventh,  and
twelfth  days),^ — [300.]  At  noon,  good  appetite,  then  it  seemed  to  him  as
if  he  was  not  yet  satisfied,  as  the  first  day ;  still  he  did  not  eat  again,  and
on  working  it  went  away ;  /it  seemed  again  as  if  something  ailed  him,  he
knew  not  what ;  this  took  place  many  times  before  long-enduring  hunger
(fourth  day),'*. — Appetite  good  ;  in  the  afternoon  again  hunger,  continued
eating,  as  after  long  abstinence  (tenth  day),^ — Appetite  good  in  the  morn-
ing,*.— Frequent  appetite,  but  not  great  (thirteenth  day), . — Great  appetite
for  stimulating  food,  with  fulness  in  the  stomach,*. — The  child  preserves  a
good  appetite  during  the  diarrhoea,'. — After  that  he  had  had  for  many
days  only  a  very  small  appetite ;  on  one  afternoon  he  had  a  very  great
longing;  he  ate  a  double  supper;  that  night  he  had  pain  in  the  back,\ —
Warmth  and  sensation  of  hunger  in  the  stomach  (after  one  hour),' — Canine
hunger,  forenoon  (second  day),".— He  awoke  at  7  a.m.  with  feeling  of
hunger,  and  urgent inclinations to  urinate  (third day),". — [310.]  Soon


ALOE.  171

after  breakfast  feeling  of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  so  that  water  accumulates  in
his  mouth  (fifth  day),". — Canine  hunger,  soon  after  morning  stool  (eleventh
day),^ — Hunger  with  yawning  (eveaings),^ — Some  hunger  in  the  evening
and  long  wakefulness  (ninth  day),^ — Feeling  of  hunger,  with  weak  and
changeable  pulse,'. — A  very  urgent  need  to  eat,". — Generally  a  few  eructa-
tions tasting  of  Aloes,  and  immediately  increased  feeling  of  hunger;  after
taking  one  to  three  grains,  lasting,". — Increased  desire  to  feed,  otherwise  no
change  (after  three  ounces  of  the  resinous  extract,  in  oxen),  (Viborg). —
Diminished  appetite,'  etc. — No  appetite,  and  febrile  sensation,'^ — [320.]
At  noon,  very  little  appetite,  and  a  feeling  as  if  one  does  not  oneself  know
what  is  the  matter,  whether  one  has  appetite  or  not,  so  that  two  hours  later
he  again  ate  more  apples ;  a  kind  of  torpidity  of  the  stomach  ;,  he  did  not
know  when  he  was  satisfied  ;  the  stomach  showed  no  decided  will ;  after  one
to  three  hours,^ — ^Little  appetite  in  the  morning  (twelfth  day),^ — Loss  of
appetite  and  dyspepsia,  with  coexisting  constipation  (N.  N.). — No  appetite
for  meat  (sixth  day,^;  fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Thirst,  with  dryness  of  the
mouth,'  '^  (evenings),^*.— He  drinks  while  eating,  as  he  is  not  accustomed  to
do  (nineteenth  day),'. — In  the  afternoon  uncommon  thirst  for  water  (twelfth
day  ;  not  the  thirteenth  day),^ — Thirst  awakens  at  night ;  sweat  after  drink-
ing,".— Much  thirst  immediately  after  dinner  and  supper  (fourteenth  day),^
-—Severe  thirst,  with  fever,^".— [330.]  Thirst,  especially  for  beer,  which
seems  to  alleviate  the  pains  in  the  anus,'. — Aversion  to  drinks,  especially
to  cold  drinks  (second  day),*. — -Eructations,  tasting  of  aloes,  lasting  two
hours,  frequently  recurring  (after  four  grains),*. — Bitter  eructations  (first
day),*. — Bitter  eructations,  many  days,'. — Bitter  eructations  after  drinking
water,'*. — Empty,  tasteless  eructation,  with  sense  of  fulness  in  the  pharynx
(second  day)  ;  again  (seventh  day),*. — Eructations  from  time  to  time,  part
of  the  time  without  any  taste  (morning  of  eleventh  day),^ — Easy  eructa-
tion of  wind  without  taste  (after  teu  minutes),  (after  thirty  minutes),". —
Much  eructation  of  wind,  with  oppression  of  the  stomach  (second  day),'^ —
[340.]  Eructation  of  flatulent  gases,^". — Empty  eructation,  empty  or  tast-
ing of  food,'*. — Eructation  relieves  the  oppression  of  the  stomach,''. — Acrid
eructation,  after  dinner,", — Sour  eructation  (W.). — Rising  of  flatulence  to-
■Vsrards  the  throat,  with  sensations  as  if  vomiting  were  coming  on," — Nau-
sea,'*.— Inclination  to  vomit,  after  sour  things,'. — Nausea,  with  empty  feel-
ing in  the  stomach,"'. — Nausea  rising  into  the  stomach,  with  inability  to
vomit,"'. — [350.]  Neither  nausea  nor  a  change  in  condition  is  observed
therefrom,". — Nausea,  immediately  after  taking  it ;  must  sit  completely
still  in  order  not  to  vomit ;  also,  other  days,'".^With  the  nausea,  pains  ex-
tend from  the  stomach  towards  both  sides  of  the  chest,'". — Nausea  with
headache,'".— Some  nausea,  with  paiu  in  the  umbilical  region  increased  by
pressure,  and  diarrhoea,'. — Once,  after  half  a  drachm  for  headache  from
heat  of  the  sun,  vomiting  a  quantity  of  thick  mucus  on  going  to  stool,  which
returns  a  half  hour  after  a  glass  of  water.  The  pulse  and  strength  were
thereby  sunken  till  the  next  day,". — In  a  city  where  one  had  begun  to
adulterate  beer  with  Aloes,  hiematemesis  was  almost  endemic.  The  use  of
alum-whey  gave  almost  sure  relief  (Neumann). — Soon  after  taking  it,
troublesome  sense  of  fulness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  followed  by  dis-
tension of  the  epigastrium  and  both  hypochondria ;  with  a  pain  in  the  first
hypochondrium,  which  goes  away  after  a  passage  of  flatus,  but  returns  with
renewed  distension,'*. — Fuluess  in  the  epigastrium,  with  great  appetite  for
stimulants  (second  day),*. — Fulness  of  the  stomach  after  drinking  water,
and  bilious  eructations,'*. — [360,]  Crawlings  in  the  stomach  and  abdo-


172  ALOE.

men,". — Immediately,  pain  in  the  stomach  on  the  right  side,". — Slight
pressure  in  the  stomach,^^ — Pressure  in  the  stomach  with  a  feeling  of
warmth  therein  (first  day),*. — The  pit  of  the  stomach  pains  very  much  on
making  a  false  step,^. — Pressure  in  the  epigastrium  and  up  into  the  pharynx
(fourth  day),'. — Painful  pressure  under  the  sternum  (fourth  day),*. — Some
pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  after  breakfast,  relieved  by  eructations,^
— Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  through  to  the  back,  like  a  weight,  with
sore  pain  ;  sometimes  this  pain  rises  higher  up  into  the  chest  and  then  sinks
down  again ;  accompanied  by  copious  eruetations,". — Feeling  of  weakness
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  like  a  weight  and  burning  there,'^ — [370.]  With
the  nausea,  pains  which  draw  from  the  stomach  up  into  both  sides  of  the
chest,  worse  on  motion  (third  day)  ;  still  the  same  paius  drawing  from  the
pit  of  the  stomach  to  both  sides  of  the  chest," — Snatching  under  the  pit  of
the  stomach  (in  a  mesmerized  person),'. — Jerks  in  the  epigastrium,',

Abdomen, — Painfulness  across  below  the  ribs,  with  painful  weakness
in  the  legs ;  therewith,  an  evacuation  somewhat  diarrhoeic,  with  chilliness,
so  that  he  feels  very  cold  as  often  as  he  goes  away  from  the  stove,'. — Stitches
under  the  left  ribs,  in  the  hepatic  region,". — Dull  pain  under  the  ribs  with
distension,'. — Aching  in  the  hypoehondrm,  cutting,'. — Distension  of  both
hypochondria,^. — Distension  as  if  it  were  too  narrow  around  under  the
ribs,'. — Occasional  stitches  in  both  hypochondria,  extending  around  the
navel,  and  then  passing  into  the  rectum. — [380.]  An  iuner  pressure  at  the
short  ribs,  after  three  hours,". — Pinching  at  both  sides  of  the  hypochondria,
first  day,".— Pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  better  after  passage  of  flatus,'.
— Stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  as  if  in  the  left  ligaments  of  the
womb,  and  in  the  ovaries,". — Dull  pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium  (third
day) ;  pressive  pain  (fourth  day),*. — A  jerking  pain  in  the  region  of  the
left  lower  rib,  internally,  going  from  above  downwards,  and  from  the  out-
side inwards,  on  walking,  morning  (sixth  day),'. — -Crampy  pain  in  the
region  of  the  spleen,''. — Dull  .stitches  in  the  splenic  region  through  the  left
breast  (in  the  supraorbital  region,  in  the  frontal  prominences,  in  the  fiuger-
joiuts),  (sixth  day),*. — Awaked  by  dull  stitches  in  the  splenic  region,  draw-
ing into  the  loins  (first  night),^ — Transient  stitches  in  the  spleen  (seventh
day),*. — [390.]  Stitches  now  left,  now  right,^ — *  Uneasiness,  heat,  pressure,
and  tension  in  the  region  of  the  liver,^'. — Uneasiness  in  the  hepatic  region
(W.). — Only  seldom  is  a  heating  and  uneasiness  in  the  hepatic  region  no-
ticed when  the  purgative  action  is  near  at  hand,". — Pressure  and  tension
in  the  right  hypochondrium," ;  in  the  right  epigastrium,'*. — Side  ache,
right  (Hong). — Pressure  under  the  right  ribs,*. — Dull,  pressive  pain  in  the
region  of  the  liver  (fourth  and  fifth  days),*. — Hard,  pressive  pains  in  the
region  of  the  right  lower  ribs,  alternating  with  just  such  pains  in  the  upper
part  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  seated  under  the  sternum  ;  i.  e.,  they  are
found  now  here,  now  there.  The  former  are  more  transitory,  but  more
frequent ;  the  latter  more  enduring,  but  less  frequent,'. — *Dull  pain  on  the
right  side  under  the  ribs,  the  same  in  all  positions,  ivorse  on  standing,  so  that
he  bends  hiinself  forwards,'.^[4:00.^  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver;  at  times
it  pains  by  the  last  ribs  internally,  as  if  strained,  as  after  great  exertion
(first  day),*. — Transient  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region  (second  day),*. —
Blunt  stitches,  now  in  the  left,  now  in  the  right  hypochondrium  (second
day),^ — ^Periodic  blunt  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region,  sometimes  moving
into  the  chest  and  obstructing  respiration  (first  day,  less  the  second  day),^.
— Single  blunt  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region  (first  day),^ — On  deep  in-
spiration, it  sticks  in  the  prtecordium,". — Stitches  moving  from  the  hepatic


ALOE.  173

region  into  the  chest,'.— Pain  in  the  liver  (Atoe  perfoliata,  herb.),  (Hong.) —
Aloes  increases  the  secretion  of  bile,  and  irritates  the  liver,". — The  purga-
tive action  of  Aloes  is  secondary  ;  the  primary  action  is  increased  irritation
of  the  liver,  and  consequent  augmented  secretion  of  bile,  whose  quantity
and  irritation  induce  purgation,". — [410.]  After  passage  of  flatus,  the  dis-
tension in  the  hypochondria,  and  the  pains  in  the  left  hypochondrium  dis-
appear,*.— *Abdomen  painful,  especially  in  the  umbilieal  region,^. — Severe
pressing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  across  over  to  the  umbilicus,^". — Throb-
bing, boring,  sticking,  in  the  umbilical  region,'^^ — *A  twisting  and  griping
paip  in  the  upper  abdomen,  and  around  the  umbilicus,  compelling  to  sit
bent  up,  which  relieves ;  therewith,  repeated  urging  to  stool,  but  only  flatus
passes  off,  which  is  very  offensive,  and  produces  burning  in  the  anus,  with
short  relief  from  the  pain  (second  day),l — -Pinching  and  twisting  pains
around  the  umbilicus,". — Digging  around  the  navel,'".— Pinching  in  the
umbilical  region,^*. — It  gripes  sometimes  in  the  umbilical  region,  with
shivering  through  the  whole  body  (first  day),l — Frequent  cutting  and
twisting  about  the  umbilicus,  so  that  she  lies  upon  the  abdomen,  but  she
cannot  remain  lying  quietly,  because  the  pains  do  not  decrease  in  severity,™.
— [420.]  Cutting  about  the  umbilicus  after  going  to  stool  (second  day),^ —
In  the  morning,  on  rising,  severe  raking  in  a  small  circle  about  the  navel,
just  as  if  he  had  received  a  blow  from  a  fist  upon  the  abdomen.  But  he
felt  the  pain  plainly  in  the  intestinal  canal,  and  a  pressure  upon  the  um-
bilical region  increased  it  very  much.  Therewith,  yellowish  pappy  diar-
rhoea, and  occasionally  some  nausea  (third  day),'. — Buring  pain  in  the
umbilical  region,'^ — Dull  stitches  in  the  umbilical  region  ;  sneezing,"  —
At  6  A.M.,  moving  about  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  urgency  to  stool  and
hunger;  second  stool,  with  flatulence,  and  a  kind  of  tenesmus  (fourth  day),^
— Itching  at  the  umbilicus,^ — Drawing  in  of  the  navel,^". — *Distension  of
the  abdomen,  especially  oftheivhole  epigastric  region,  with  flatus  moving  about
in  the  abdomen  (third  day),*. — Distension  of  the  abdomen,  moving  about
along  the  intestinal  canal  (fourth  day),*. — Distension  of  the  bowels,";  of
the  upper  part  of  the  bowels  (second  day),*. — ^[430.]  After  a  meal,  flatu-
lence distends  the  abdomen  (fifth  day),*. — Mornings,  flatulent  distension
of  the  bowels,  especially  in  the  hypochondrium  (third  day),*. — Flatulence
moving  about  in  the  abdomen,  which  is  distended  (first  day),*. — Flatulent
distension  during  menstruation,". — Some  flatulent  distension,  with  predomi-
nating ill-humor  (second  and  third  days),*. — Flatulent  distension  along
the  colon,  with  a  pain  which  presses  outward,  is  increased  by  motion,  and
suddenly  disappears  on  passage  of  hot  flatus  (morning  of  second  day),*. —
Periodic  movements  and  distension  in  the  abdomen,  chiefly  after  eating
(third  day),^ — There  is  moving  about  in  the  bowels  frequently  audible  to
him  ;  swashing  and  gurgling  (twelfth  day),\ — Severe  pains  in  the  abdo-
men,"— Increased  heat  in  the  abdomen," — [440,]  Unpleasant  warmth  in
the  abdomen,  as  well  as  also  a  throbbing,". — *Sense  of  fulness,  distension,  and
heat  in  the  whole  abdomen,". — Burning  throughout  the  whole  abdomen,*. —
Enteritis  from  its  long-continued  use  (Greenhow). — Inflammation  and
ulceration  of  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane," — Chilliness  of  abdomen,^".
— Cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  after  a  powerful  dose  (Schreger). — Excessively
painful  cuttings  in  the  intestines  during  a  meal,  preventing  further  eating,''^
— Copious  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  watery,  long-continued  diarrhoea ;
not  seldom,  also,  with  passage  of  flatus;  tenesmus  and  inflammation  chiefly
of  the  lower  part  of  the  intestinal  canal  (Vogt). — Cuttings  in  the  abdomen,
as  from  taking  cold  (by  a  mesmeric  woman),'. — [450.]  Drawing,  cutting


174  ALOE.

pains,  across  through  the  abdomen,  the  whole  day ;  with  ill-humor,  fretful-
ness,  anthropophobia,  not  disposed  to  go  into  the  open  air,  although  it  is  even
made  better  thereby*. — -Cutting  in  the  abdomen  is  very  severe,  after  eating
food  containing  some  vinegar,''  \ — In  the  afternoon,  slight  cutting  in  the
upper  abdomen  which,  by  means  of  motion,  especially  by  stretching  the
body  outwardly,  is  increased  ;  it  is  relieved  by  sitting  bent  (first  day),l —
Fine  cutting  in  the  upper  abdomen,^ — Cutting  pains  in  the  small  intestines
(second  day,  a)  ;  (first  day,  c)  ;  (second  day,  c) ;  (first  and  second  days,  d),*.
— Cutting  and  gurgling  in  the  small  intestines  (second  day),  cutting  pains
(third  day),*. — Sense  of  fulness  in  the  bowels,";  in  the  abdomen  (second
and  fourth  days),". — Congestion  of  the  abdomen,'\ — It  causes  ebullition  of
the  blood  in  the  organs  of  the  abdomen  (Gesenius). — Anxious  feeling  in
the  abdomen  (Richter). — [460.]  Griping,  and  three  soft  stools  through  the
day,  before  the  menses,". — Griping  of  the  bowels,  with  diarrhosa,  after
midnight,'l — ^Griping  of  the  bowels,  as  after  taking  cold.^l— Griping  in  the
abdomen,  as  after  taking  cold,  from  10  to  12  o'clock  a.m.,  after  a  thin  stool
(first  and  second  days),". — Griping  pains  (Gren.). — "^Griping  before  going
to  stool,^*'. — *Oripiiig  in  the  abdomen  before,  with,  and  after  the  stool;  with
the  stool  loud  flatus  (sixteenth  day),'. — In  large  doses.  Aloes  produces  small
stools,  but  very  troublesome  abdominal  gripings  (Hahnemann). — ^A  twist-
ing and  griping  pain  in  the  upper  abdomen,  soon  after  dinner  and  supper
(first  day),^ — In  the  morning,  after  waking,  aching  in  a  large  spot  in  the
middle  of  the  abdomen  ;  thereby  is  compelled  to  lie  bent,  and  to  press  upon
the  abdomen,  which  relieves  it.  After  rising,  the  pain  passed  into  mild
cuttings,  and  he  had  two  naturally  colored  pappy  evacuations.  (On  the
morning  succeeding,  an  afternoon  dose  of  five  grains),'. — [470.]  Aching  in
the  bowels,  partly  across  the  upper  part,  partly  in  the  middle,  going  down-
ward. If  she  lies  upon  the  abdomen  there  seems  to  be  a  stone  therein,  and
it  hurts.  On  lying  on  the  side,  the  stone  seems  to  be  in  the  side.  She
sweated  very  much  through  the  night,  and  on  the  next  day  was  taken  with
dry  coryza  and  diarrhoea.  (From  rubbing  the  tincture  ou  the  abdomen),'. —
*  Painful  sensation  in  the  abdomen;  yellowish  diarrhoea  towards  morning;
dull  pain  across  under  the  ribs,  with  distension,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow ;  there-
with, some  headache  in  the  forehead  (from  two  grains,  immediately),'. —
* Painfidness  hi  the  whole  abdomen,  especially  in  the  sides  and  in  front,  down
along  both  sides  of  the  navel,  which  parts  also  cannot  endure  being  touched ;
on  making  a  false  step  on  stone  pavement,  it  hurts  very  much  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  (many  days),'. — -The  abdomen  is  painful  to  pressure  (first  day),*. —
Abdomen  very  sensitive  to  touch,™. — On  lying  on  the  abdomen,  feeling  of
a  stone  in  the  abdomen  ;  on  lying  on  the  side,  in  the  side,'. — (Slight  throb-
bing, like  palpitation,  in  the  abdomen,  during  rest,  especially  nights,  lying
down ;  sometimes,  also,  in  the  occiput)  (after  four  weeks),'. — Crawlings  in
the  abdomen,". — Pleasant  crawlings  in  the  bowels,  and  diarrhoeic  stools,'. —
Pricking  in  the  intestines  before  stool,". — [480.]  Sensation  as  if  he  had
taken  cold  in  the  bowels,  after  the  morning  stool  (third  day),^ — *Dull
abdominal  pain,  as  after  taking  cold,  morning  and  evening  repeatedly,  still
without  inclinatio7i  to  stool  (twenty-third  day),'. — *A  feeling  of  weakness  in
the  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  would  result ;  not  till  after  eight  hours,  a
copious  evacuation,  amid  the  passage  of  much  flatus,*. — The  pain  in  the
abdomen  compels  one  to  bend  the  body,  which  nevertheless  aggravates  the
sticking  pain  through  the  left  breast  (third  day),*. — *  The  abdominal  mus-
cles pain,  when  rising  from  a  recumbent  posture,  with  pressing  to  stool,''. —
Blotches  on  the  abdomen,'. — Transient  moving  about  and  writhing  in  the


ALOE.  175

intestines  (second  and  third  days),^ — Moving  about  in  the  bowels,  with
continued  urging  to  stool,".^ — Moving  about  in  the  bowels  towards  the  lower
part,  especially  the  lowermost  parts,". — *Soon  after  supper,  growling  moving
about  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  griping  of  the  bowels  would  take  place  (sixth
day),". — [490.]  *  There  is  moving  about  in  the  bowels,  frequently  audible  to
him;  swashing  and  gurgling  (twelfth  day),^. — Sometimes  growling,  moving
about  in  the  bowels  (tenth  day),°. — ''Moving  about  of  flatulence  in  the  abdo-
men (second  day),*. — Rattling  in  tiie  abdomen,  mostly  in  the  hypogastrium,
as  from  movements  of  the  uterus,". — Flatulence  moving  about  in  the  abdo-
men, which  is  distended  (first  day),*. — In  the  evening,  copious  passage  of
flatus,  every  time  after  distension,  moving  along  the  colon  (seventh  day),*.
— Gurgling  in  the  bowels,  and  rumbling  or  blustering,". — Growling  in  the
bowels,  with  constipation,'. — Growling  in  the  abdomen  before  a  thin  stool,'.
— Gurgling  in  the  abdomen,*;  in  the  small  intestines,  with  cuttings,*. — [500.]
Growling  of  flatulence  (first  and  second  days),*. — Growling  here  and  there
in  the  abdomen  (fourth  day),*. — ^It  drives  away  flatulence,". — ^Passage  of
much  flatus,'*. — Frequent  loud  flatus  without  smell  (during  the  tenth  day),
(morning  of  eleventli  day),°. — Discharge  of  a  good  deal  of  flatulence ^'^. — Pas-
sage of  flatus  after  every  meal  (third  day),'. — In  the  midday  repose,  flatus
with  little  smell  (first  day),'. — In  the  evening,  copious  passage  of  flatus
, (third  day),*. — Frequent  and  loud  flatus  (evening  and  morning  of  third
day),'. — [510.]  Offensive  flatus  with  the  stool,^. — ^*Very  offensive  burning
flatus,^ — Throughout  the  whole  day  passage  of  much  offensive  fiatus,^^. — In
the  evening,  much  offendve  flatus,  loud  and  still,*. — In  the  evening  much  of-
fensive flatus,  with  relief  (first  day),''. — After  the  midday  nap,  much  offen-
sive flatus,  just  the  same  toward  evening  (ninth  day),\ — In  the  evening,
loathsome-smelling  flatus  (third  day),'. — After  dinner,  much  oifensive
flatus  (sixth  day),'. — Copious  offensive,  or  inodorous  flatus  (third  day),'. —
Offensive-smelling  flatus  after  eating  (fifteenth  and  eighteenth  days),'. —
[520.]  After  the  stool,  much  loud,  long,  lazy  flatus,  with  an  uncommonly
strong,  loathsome,  ofiensive  smell,  which  diffuses  itself  very  rapidly  (nine-
teentii  day),'. — The  whole  day,very  much  offensive  flatus,  mostly  in  the  morn-
ing. The  harder  and  more  delayed  the  stool,  the  more  copious ;  the  more  co-
pious and  easy  the  stool,  the  more  seldom  (twenty-third  day),'. — *  Passage  of  hot
flatus  (first  day),*;  burning  in  the  anus,l — Relieved  by  tiie  passage  of  hot
flatus  upward  and  downwards  (third  day),*. — '^Copious  passage  of  hot  flatus
(eighth  day),*. —  Only  wind  from  an  attempt  to  go  to  stool,*. — Much  flatus  and
little  fceees,". — Much  wind  with  evening  stool^^ ;  between  the  stools,*. — *Easy
passage  of  flatus,  with  inclination  as  for  a  soft  stool  (5  p.m.),". — Vigorous
passage  of  flatus,  evenings,*. — [530.]  Very  copious  passage  of  flatus,  during
the  whole  nigiit,". — Inflammation  of  thie  lower  portion  of  the  intestinal
canal  (Vogt.) — *Pains  in  the  hypogastrium  as  if  the  menses  were  coming  on
(in  a  nursing  woman,  delivered  two  months  before),". — Cramps  in  the
hypogastrium  and  right  groin,  passing  beyond  the  right  thigh,  and  beyond
the  knee,". — Rumbling  and  pinching  in  lower  abdomen,^*. — Great  tension
and  peculiar  sensitiveness  of  the  lower  abdomen,^". — Unendurable  tearing
and  tension  deep  in  the  bowels,  sometimes  single,  transient  stitches  through
the  abdomen,™. — *Heaviness  in  the  hypogastrium,  t;  in  the  rectum,'". —
^Dragging  down  in  the  abdomen^^. — It  produces  local  plethora  in  the  hypo-
gastric region  (Hahnemann). — [540.]  Sharp  pain  drawing  down  through
the  flank  into  the  middle  of  the  thigh  (after  three  to  four  hours),'''. —
*  Determination  of  blood  to  the  large  intestines  and  uterus  (Arnemann). —
Stitches  from  the  rectum  up  into  the  abdomen,"". — Affection  of  the  lower


176  ALOE.

end  of  the  intestinal  canal  and  of  the  pelvic  organs  (in  very  many  cases,
after  its  continued  use  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time),". — Periodic  drawing
in  the  right  inguinal  region/. — Shocks  from  the  hips  towards  the  inguinal
region,  preceded  by  chilliness,^. — Pain  in  the  loins,  involving  the  pelvis,' ^
— Pain,  as  if  tired,  in  the  inguinal  region,".— Pains  in  the  groins  and  abdo-
men (Hong). — Pain  in  the  groin,  and  heaviness  in  the  uterine  region,"  —
[550.]  Sticking  pain  over  the  arch  of  the  pubis  (fourth  day),'^ *■

Stool  (itid,  Anus. — *Severe  burning  in  the  rectum,^'. — *Sensation  of
heat  and  burning  in  the  rectum,™. — *Heaf,  soreness,  sense  of  heaviness  in
the  rectum^". — Heat  in  the  rectum  and  anus  when  the  foeces  pass  °  ". — During
slight  distension  of  the  abdomen  and  pleasant  crawling  of  the  bowels,  three
diarrhoeic  stools;  the  last  with  burning  in  the  rectum,  hsemorrhoidal  pains,
and  much  flatus  (after  seventeen  hours),^. — In  most  cases,  troublesome
heaviness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  and  active  irritation  at  the
end  of  the  intestine ;  sometimes  copious  evacuations  of  blood,  as  if  they
were  really  haemorrhoids,  when  they  had  not  previously  existed  (Trous-
seau and  Pidoux). — Cutting  pains  in  the  rectum,  with  the  passage  of  a
solid  stool  (ten  o'clock,  evening  of  twentieth  day),'. — Slinging  in  the  rec-
tum,'".— Dragging  in  the  rectum,  near  the  anus,^l — [580.]  In  the  rectum.,
sensation  as  if  loose,". — Pains  in  the  loins,  producing  an  annoying  sensation
in  the  rectum,l — It  furthers  the  circulation  of  blood  towards  the  pelvic
region,  it  excites  the  vessels  of  the  rectum  and  sexual  organs  (Richter). — ■
Burning  in  the  unus,^"  ^''. — '^ Burning  at  the  arms  after  stool,''''. — '''Itching  and
burning  in  the  anus,  painful  in  the  highest  degree,  prevents  his  sleeping  for  a
long  time,*. — '''Burning  in  the  anus;  a  kind  of  sore  feeling,  with  increased
itching  around  the  anus,  and  an  increased  evacuation  the  third  day  (in  two
brothers,  from  fifty  to  sixty  years  old,  after  repeated  doses),"  ^ — The  evacu-
ations which  Aloes  produced  are  of  a  bilious  character;  the  diarrhoea  which
it  causes  is  (with  the  exception  of  the  debility)  similar  to  a  bilious  diar-
rhoea, combined  with  burning  in  the  anus,". — Burning  pain  in  the  anus  after
a  hard  evacuation,^^. — ^Burning  in  the  anus  continuing  a  long  time,  after  the
passage  of  hot  flatus  (first  and  third  days),^ — [570.]  '"'^  Tenesmus  and  burning
heat  in  the  anus,'". — Sticking,  cutting  pains  in  anus,  following  stool^. — Stitches
from  the  anus  up  into  the  loins,^'. — Drawing,  sticking,  or  tensive  tearing
from  the  anus  into  the  loins,  and  into  the  abdomen,'". — On  walking,  after
the  morning  stool,  many  drawing  stitches  in  the  anus,  more  on  the  left  side
and  forward  to  the  region  of  the  prostate  gland  and  vesiculse  seminales
(eleventh  day),^. — *Fulness  and  pressing  out  in  the  anus,". — '^'The  not  too
hard  fseces  prick  quite  severely  in  the  anus,  as  if  it  would  tear  it  forwards ;
afterwards,  a  continued  pain  in  the  a^iu^s,  which  compelled  him  to  draw  it
together  frequently,  whereby  it  becomes  tense  and  aches  (third  day),'. —
*The  tenesmus  is  peculiar ;  an  unpleasant  sensation  in  the  anus,  as  if  more
stool  would  follow,  which  must  be  held  back  on  account  of  the  soreness ;  yet,  on
account  of  this  pain,  he  does  not  dare  to  draw  the  anus  together  as  usual,''. —
Pain  in  the  anus ;  relieved  by  beer,'. — Strong  pulsating  in  the  anus,  while
sitting,  after  dinner,^^ — [580.]  Ulcers  on  the  edge  of  the  anus  (a.  a.). —
*  'Weakness,  or  loss  of  poxoer  of  sphincter  ani,  which  is  incompletely  closed  after
a  stool,  so  that  keeping  the  anus  clean  was  difficult,'^. — Evacuation  of  blood
from  the  anus,  t. — Copious  discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus,  though  with-
out hseraorrhoidal  tumors  (Trousseau). — Blood  passes  after  the  stool,'". —
Some  loss  of  blood  at  stool,  as  if  hsemorrhoids  were  coming  on,". — Passage
of  very  much  blood  with  the  stool,  with  severe  pain  in  the  loins,'^". — Pas-
sage of  blood  from  the  anus  (Fallopius). — *Sense  of  fulness,  like  conges-


ALOE.  177

tion,  of  the  protruded  strangulated  hsemorrhoids ;  later,  an  indefinite  ur-
gency to  stool,  and  a  second  small  stool,  which  was  entirely  unusual,  whereby
the  hsemorrhoids  protrude  very  much,  and  pain,  as  if  sore  and  chapped  in
the  anus  (after  three  hours,  forenoon),^ — Swelling  of  the  hasmorrhoids ;
they  pain  as  if  raw,™. — [590.]  Soft  piles  at  the  anus  itch  evening  and
morning  (eighteenth  day),'. — After  rising,  a  hard,  small,  tough  stool,  with
sore  pains  in  the  haemorrhoids,  some  of  which  are  still  protruded  (nineteenth
day),'. — Continual  smarting  of  the  hsemorrhoids,  even  during  rest,  on  sit-
ting and  lying,  as  if  rubbed  raw  (twenty-second  day),'. — *  Hemorrhoids
very  sensitive,  on  wiping  after  the  stool  (twenty-third  day),'. — In  the  morn-
ing, the  piles  in  the  anus  are  small  and  little  sensitive ;  through  the  day
more  swollen  and  sensitive ;  sometimes  stitches  therein  and  itching  (twenty-
fourth  day),'. — In  the  afternoon,  much  itching  in  the  piles  and  anus  gen-
erally (twenty-second  day),'. — Towards  evening,  on  rising  from  sitting,
many  fine,  sensitive  stitches  in  the  hsemorrhoids,  so  also  later  in  the  evening,
when  sitting  (twentieth  day),'. — Twenty-four  hours'  relief  with  the  hsemor-
rhoids ;  on  that  day,  for  the  first  time,  much  blood  with  the  stoo],^ — [600.]
If  cold  water  applications  afford  relief  from  the  hsemorrhoids,  an  indica-
tion for  Aloes?*'. — Soft,  painless,  varicose  tumors  on  the  perineum  (four-
teenth day),'. — On  a  walk  of  two  miles,  the  perineum  became  very  sore,
which  otherwise  seldom  happened  in  five  or  six  miles  (fourteenth  day),°, —
*  Urgeiimj  to  stool  on  passing  ivater  at  night  (tenth  and  eleventh  days),*.—
Urgency  to  stool  at  times  in  the  evening,  which  he  can  overcome  (sixth
-day),^ — *  Unusual  urgency  and  haste  to  an  evacuation,^". — *IIe  feels  continu-
ally as  if  he  ought  to  go  to  stool,^. — A  feeling  like  urgency  to  stool  in  the
rectum,  near  the  anus,  more  toward  the  perineum  (after  triturating  it),'''. —
Frequent  urgings  (the  first  hours),^ — Urgiugs,  without  evacuation  (Sunde-
lin). — Frequent  urgings,l — Frequent  urgings,  without  stool  (third  day),^
— [610.]  Frequent  inclination  for  a  stool,'". — -Copious  urgings  (soon  after
taking  two  grains,  with  sugar  of  milk),^ — Urging ;  ivakes  at  night  many
times,^;  driving  out  of  bed  at  six  o'clock,''  ^. — A  frequent  transient  urging
(second  day),^ — Sometimes  there  is  sudden  urging,"  which  passes  off  just,  as
suddenly ,^ — ^At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  sudden  urging,  passing  away
just  as  rapidly ;  at  nine  o'clock,  diarrhoea,*. — ■*Sudden  urgency  in  the  morn-
ing, on  rising,". — *  Urging  and  straining,  yet  only  flatus  passes  o^,". — *  Com-
pelled to  stool,  and  only  passage  of  flatus,^*. — ^Urging  to  stool,  and  hunger,
in  the  morning,^ — [620.]  Urgency,  with  a  feeling  of  softness,  without  stool
(first  day),*. — Urgency,  with  movings  about  in  the  abdomen,\ — At  night,
frequent,  sudden  urging,  with  gurgling  in  the  lower  abdomen,  passing  off
again  just  as  suddenly  (first  day),*.— *  Urgency  to  stool,  with  passage  of
urine,*". — ■* Urgency  to  stool  immediately  after  ea^w? (7  (fifteenth  day),°. —
*Many  times  a  day,  urgency,  as  with  diarrhcei,  only  hot  fiatm  passes  with  great
relief;  but  it  soon  returns,  with  a  sensation  as  of  a  plug  wedged  in  be-
tween the  symphysis  pubis  and  the  os  coccygis  (second  dnj),'^.—* Frequent
urgency  to  stool,  with  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  pelvis  (first  day),^. — Inef-
fectual efforts  for  stool,  with  feeling  of  debility,". — Fruitless  straining,  and
severe  tenesmus  in  the  rectum,  and  passage  of  vigorous,  easily  escaping
flatus,". — Tenesmus  (Honigsberger). —  [630.]  Ineffectual  tenesmus,".^
Very  frequent  tenesmus,^". — Straining,  with  cessation  of  stool,*. — *Straining
and  burning  in  the  rectum,^''. — *  Urgency  and  straining ;  then,  after  a  few
minutes,  a  liquid  evacuation,  with  some  blood  and  bloody  mucus,'"'.— TJrgmg
the  whole  day ;  stool  at  evening,^ — *Every  time,  on  passing  urine,  the
feeling  as  if  some  thin  stool  would  escape  with  it  (third  day),*. — *With
VOL.  I. — 12


178  ALOE.

the  stool  there  is  always  a  feeling  as  if  still  more  were  at  hand  (sixth
day),*. — *A  troublesome  feeling  as  if  still  more  would  come,  after  a  thin,  pappy
stool  (sixteenth  day),". — *  Usually  wahes  in  the  morning  with  severe  urging  to
stool,  which  still  persists  after  a  copious  evacuation,^^. — [640.]  *  On  rising,
hasty  urging  to  stool,  with  continued  rumbling  in  the  abdomen ;  sputtering
with  the  stool  (second  day),^ — Urging,  as  for  a  solid  stool,  which  was  soft,".
— *Sudden  urgency,  with  a  liquid  stool,^. — Urgency  to  stool  in  the  afternoou
and  evening;  at  nine  in  the  evening,  a  second  indolent  passage  (fifth  day),".
— Pressing,  with  a  soft  stool,". — After  much  straining,  with  flatus,  a  small
stool,  with  much  pressing,  small  and  soft  (evening  of  third  day),". — Grip-
ing before  the  diarrhoea ;  tenesmus  therewith,'". — Frequent  griping  before
the  stool ;  therewith,  for  the  most  part,  flatulence,  sometimes  also  straining
at  stool. — *Fear  lest  a  stool  should  escape  with  flatus,". — *While  pass-
ing urine,  a  feeling  as  if  some  thin  stool  would  escape  with  it,". — [650.]  ,
*Every  time,  on  passing  wind,  the  feeling  as  if  some  thin  stool  would
escape  with  it  (third  day),". — *Must  take  care  that  he  does  not  have  an  in-
voluntary stool  when  passing  flatus  (twelfth  day),". — *The  stool  passes  with-
out his  needing  to  make  any  exertion,  it  falls,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  in-
testines (third  day),". — *An  inert  stool,  "the  stool  falls  oiit,"^. — *Somef(Bces
pass  contrary  to  will,  with  passage  of  flatus,^. — Thin,  almost  involuntary
stool,'. — *  The  foBces  escape  almost  without  being  natieed,^^. — ■*Involuntary
stool,  with  passage  of  flatus,". — *F8eces  and  urine  will  pass  together," ;
they  escape  together,". — [660,]  It  always  colors  the  stool  yellow  (Boer-
haave). — The  stool  on  the  following  morning  is  golden-yellow  (after  the
fourth),^l — Green  stools  (in  an  infant),". — Undigested  stools,  with  traces
of  blood,". — Bilious  evacuations," — Evacuation  of  very  large,  conglom-
erate pieces  of  intestinal  mucus,". — After  loud  grumblings  and  moving
about  in  the  abdomen,  a  thin  evacuation,  passing  almost  involuntarily,
consisting  in  part  of  thin,  yellow  fseces,  partly  of  bilious-streaked  pieces  of
mucus  mixed  with  the  faeces;  thereafter  crawling  in  the  anus,  which  com-
pels one  to  rub  it,'. — ^ Passage  of  a  membranous-looking  mucus  through  the
anus,'". — Inclinations  to  soft  stool,". — After  three  hours,  a  second  soft  stool ;
after  eight  hours,  a  third  (one-half  grain  taken  in  the  forenoon),^ ". — [670.]
Two  pappy  passages  (second  and  third  days),^ — The  stool,  after  twelve
hours,  was  thin  and  pappy ;  repeated  in  three  hours  (first  day) ;  three  pappy
stools  (third  day),l — Thin,  pappy  stool,  in  the  morniug,^ — Five  stools,
tenth  and  twelfth  days ;  he  could  have  gone  still  oftener,". — *Soft,  pasty
stool,''\ — *iSoft,  very  abundant  stool,'". — -Thin,  pappy,  dark-colored,  scanty
stools,^". — Looseness  of  the  bowels,  with  soft  stools,  for  several  days,^". —
Small  stool  of  yellow  mucus,'"'. — *Small,  brownish,  slimy,  half-fluid  stool,^.
— [680.]  Two  liquid  stools  (after  fifteen  grains);  (second  day),". — Copious
evacuations  of  the  rectum,  with  severe  purging  (Schoeppe). — Watery  stool
(after  large  doses),'". — Watery,  long-continued  diarrhoea  (Vogt). — (Evacu-
ations are  not  watery ),"  '"  '^. — Copious  watery  evacuations  from  the  bowels
mixed  with  blood,'". — *  Yellow,  pappy  diarrhoea,  and  pain  in  the  umbilical
region,  increased  by  pressure,'. — Fluid  stool,  with  griping  (Cullen). — She
is  wakened  after  midnight,  with  gripings  in  the  bowels ;  diarrhoea  yellow-
ish-green, with  pains  before  and  after,'^ — Pappy  stools,  after  abdominal
cuttings,'. — [690.]  Diarrhoea  the  next  day,  and  dry  coryza,'. — Diarrhoeio
evacuations,  with  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  and  chilliness,'. — *Diarrhoeic
stools,  with  burning  in  the  rectum,'^. — ^Passage  of  blood,  with  diarrhoea  (Vogt).
— Blood,  with  watery  stools,'". — Thin  or  soft  stools  mixed  with  blood  en-
tirely ceased  the  first  two  days ;  they  then  return  less  often,  and  after  four


ALOE.  179

to  six  days  are  of  a  natural  consistency/. — Stool  at  an  unusual  time,  tea
hours  later,  and  pappy  (first  day),". — Stool  twice  (entirely  unusual),  more
pappy  (second  day),'. — *  Urging  to  stool  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  after
half  an  hour,  a  small,  thin  stool,  then  griping  in  the  bowels  for  a  few  hours,
as  after  talsiug  cold,  and  subsequent  headache  ;  the  next  day,  without  repe-
tition of  the  dose,  stool  repeated  at  the  same  hour,  pappy,  and  less  than
the  urging  seemed  to  indicate,  with  subsequent  pain  in  the  bowels ;  the
third  day,  slight  urging  to  stool  the  whole  day,  until  the  ordinary  urging
to  stool  follows  at  evening  (after  the  -j-'^th  taken  five  times),'^ — *  Yellow
diarrhoea,  towards  morning,'^. — [700,]  Copious,  pappy  evacuations,  morn-
ings (second  day),*. — Diarrhoeic  stools  (on  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day,
after  daily  doses  of  a  small  quantity),". — Easy  and  copious  stools  in  the
morning,". — At  nine  and  ten  in  the  evening,  a  diarrhceic  stool,  then  again
the  next  day,  more  frequent  in  the  forenoon,  very  thin,  very  yellow ;  every-
thing that  the  child  had  eaten  could  be  seen  therein  (from  sucking  Aloes),^
— Two  pappy,  yellowish  stools,  with  much  passage  of  flatus  (the  same  even-
ing after  taking  the  jot^!  a-t  ten  o'clock  in  the  forenoon),". — In  the  evenr
ing,  a  diarrhoeic  stool  (second  day),*. — -Eight  hours  after  taking  it  (at  five
in  the  evening),  again,  indeed,  a  small,  thin  stool,  something  entirely  un-
usual, followed  by  more  fulness  and  pressure  in  the  auus,'. — After  the  morn-
ing stool,  the  feeling  many  times  as  if  he  ought  to  go  again  ;  at  four  in  the
afternoon,  a  thick,  pappy,  natural  stool,  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  solid
(second  day),*. — In  the  morning,  before  eight,  after  breakfast,  a  discon-
nected, soft  stool,  with  pressing,  passing  flatus  and  eructations ;  at  ten
o'clock  in  the  evening,  another  stool,  soft,  disconnected,  and  copious  (sixth
day),®. — A  stool  at  3  p.m.,  and  nine  in  the  evening  (eighth  day),^ — [710.]
A  stool  at  six  and  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening  (ninth  day),^ — A  stool  at
six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  after  getting  up,  small,  thin,  pappy,  easy ;  the
same  again  at  noon,  and  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  with  sputtering,  that  is,
with  gushing  flatus  and  thin  faeces  ;  just  the  same  in  the  evening  at  six  and
before  ten  o'clock  ;  could  have  gone  still  oftener  (tenth  day),". — *At  nine
o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  a  second  stool,  small,  yellowish,  shining,  with  much
sputtering  flatus,  with  some  tenesmus;  he  dreaded  lest  he  should  let  fceoes  and
urine  both  go  together ;  whilst  he  would  force  out,  yet  at  the  same  time  he  held
back;  at  eleven  in  the  forenoon  again  (eleventh  day),". — ^A  stool  at  three  and
six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  nine  and  eleven  in  the  evening ;  with  the
last  much  loud  flatus,  with  very  little  faeces  (eleventh  day),". — At  seven  in
the  morning,  immediately  after  rising,  another  stool  as  yesterday ;  five
times  through  the  day  ;  sometimes  only  flatus  with  little  faeces,  also  many
passages  of  flatus  besides ;  could  have  gone  ofteuer  (twelfth  day),". — Stool
five  times  up  to  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  then  again  five  times ;  con-
tinual passage  of  much  flatus,  wherewith  he  must  fear  that  a  stool  will
escape  with  it;  in  the  evening,  he  could  pass  flatus,  loud  and  strong,  with-
out being  obliged  to  fear  this  (thirteenth  day),". — A  stool  at  eight  in  the
morning,  the  same  at  noon  ;  then,  indeed,  twice  just  as  liquid,  though  less
flatulence  (fourteenth  day),". — On  passing  water  in  the  morning,  a  second
at  eleven  in  the  forenoon,  a  third  stool,  with  flatulence  (third  day),". — *0/i
rising,  he  must  immediately  go  to  stool,  thin,  and  so,  indeed,  three  times ;  much
flatus  besides,  wherewith  some  stool  easily  escapes  involuntarily  (fifteenth  day),".
— ^Four  copious  stools,  sometimes  appear  undigested  (sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth days) ;  in  the  forenoon,  copious,  fluid  stools  within  three  hours,  after
hasty  urging,  grayish-yellow,  undigested,  with  much  growling  about  in  the
abdomen  (eighteenth  day),". — [720.]  At  seven  o'clock,  a  third  stool,  with


180  ALOE.

straining,  when  he  thought  he  had  finished  still  more  came ;  at  eleven,  in
the  forenoon,  a  fourth  stool  (fourth  day),". — Two  movements  of  the  bowels
(eighth  day),*. — After  dinner,  small  stool,  followed  by  an  aching  in  the
lower  abdomen  for  several  hours,  as  if  another  stool  would  follow,''^ — Cold
feeling,  with  a  soft  stool  (eleventh  day),". — Straining  as  for  a  solid  stool,
which  was  then  soft  or  liquid  (fourteenth  day),". — Thin  stools,  mornings,
till  the  twentieth  day,".— At  three  in  the  morning,  he  awakes  with  hasty
urgency  to  stool,  dull  gripings ;  movings  about  in  the  abdomen  ;  thin,
pappy  evacuations;  afterwards  a  feeling  as  if  more  ought  to  come  (second
day),". — *  After  waking,  at  three  o'clock,  a  copious,  thin,  pappy  stool,  without
straining,^. — *A  t  five  in  the  morning,  a  regular  stool,  with  passage  of  urine
(fifth  day),". — Only  one  stool  in  the  morning ;  urine  normal  (fourth  day),".
—[730.]  After  a  remission,  from  two  o'clock  at  night  until  the  next  day,
after  dinner  (thirty-six  hours),  a  stool,  and  better  humor  (evening  of  elev-
enth day),". — At  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  a  thin,  pappy  stool,  with
dull  pains  in  the  abdomen  (twenty-third  day),". — *Stool  after  breakfast,^. —
*He  must  go  to  stool  soon  after  a  meal,\ — Two  hours  after  a  meal,  an
unusual  stool,". — On  standing,  sensation  as  if  a  stool  would  pass,'^ — Im-
mediately on  rising,  a  thin  stool,". — The  afternoon  stool  small,  little,  soft
pieces,  with  flatulence  (third  day),". — *Stool  in,  the  morning  after  rising  (six-
teenth day),". — A  stool  at  two  o'clock  in  the  night,  solid,  toward  the  end
pappy,  diarrhceic  (tenth  day),". — [740.]  *At  first  hard,  then  fluid  stool,
which  seems  to  be  very  hot^'". — The  first  part  of  the  stool  is  hard,  the  latter
part  thin,  pappy  ;  very  often  for  many  weeks,"'. — At  first  hard,  then,  to-
wards the  end,  diarrhceic,'. — Late  in  the  evening,  a  copious  evacuation  of
the  bowels,  though  more  solid,  occurring  in  addition  to  the  usual  forenoon
one  (first,  and  the  same  on  the  third  day),*. — Copious  evacuations  difficult,
and  after  long  and  repeated  exertion,^". — Scanty,  crumbling  evacuation,
with  a  feeling  as  if  more  ought  to  come  (after  one  hour),'. — Feeling  with
the  stool  as  if  the  bowels  were  indolent,". —  With  a  pappy  stool,  feeling  as  if
it  were  solid,^. — At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (an  unusual  time),  a  stool
too  small,  in  disconnected  small  pieces,  with  much  oflensive  flatus,  two
hours  after  dinner,  during  a  disturbed  state  of  mind,  which  was  still  in-
creased after  the  stool  (after  three  hours),". — [750.]  A  stool  at  ten  o'clock
in  the  evening,  thirty  hours  after  the  previous  one,  less  than  usual,  with
the  feeling  again  as  if  it  came  indolently ;  it  does  not  present  itself  in  a
right  way  (fourth  day),". — -There  is  a  daily  stool,  indeed,  but  yet  it  is  diffi-
cult to  pass  ;  it  distends  the  rectum  at  first,'. — The  stool  ceases  after  a  small
quantity  (j'gth),". — Hard  stool  (fifth  and  subsequent  days),^ — No  stool
(fourth  day),'''. — No  stool  (thirteenth  day);  solid  and  indolent  stool  (four-
teeuth  day),". — Two  days'  constipation  follows  a  pappy,  diarrhceic  stool,'.
— Hard,  lumpy  stool,  then  obstinate  constipation,". — Constipation,  with  in-
dolence, and  loss  of  irritability  of  the  abdominal  organs  (Fechner). — The
stool  is  wanting ;  and  an  unendurable  condition  of  mind,*. — [760.]  Cessa-
tion of  stool  (eleventh  day),". — Constipation,  and  straining  at  stool  (Konigs-
berger). — Constipation,".

Urinary  Organs. — Passage  of  blood  from  the  urethra,'". — Dis-
charge of  blood  from  the  urethra  (Borichius). — At  times,  painful  burning
in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  on  urinating,™. — Burning  on  urinating  (Eich-
ter),  (Wickard),  ",  (Schreger,  Fechner). — Burning  and  urging  on  urinat-
ing, and  general  agitation  (Wickard).— Rising  to  urinate  (seventh  day),^
— Wakened  to  urinate  at  2  o'clock  (fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  following
days),'^ '. — [770.]  Wakened  many  times  by  urgency  to  urinate,^ — ^Urgency


ALOE.  181

to  urinate  on  waking,'. — Frequent  urging  to  urinate,".— More  urgency,  less
urine  (first  day),'. — Increased  urgency  through  the  day,  with  no  increase
of  quantity  (fiftli  day),^ — One  is  driven  to  urinate  so  quickly  that  he  can
scarcely  retain  it  (forenoon  at  11  o'clock,  third  day),'*. — More  frequent,
quicker  urgency  in  the  afternoon,  with  smaller  quantity  than  in  the  morn-
ing (third  day),". — Increased  quicker  urgency,  and  more  copious  discharge
(seventh  day),^ — Must  run  quickly  to  urinate,  on  rising  at  5  o'clock,  then
at  8  and  9.30,  with  no  increase  of  quantity  (third  day),'. — On  rising,
quicker  urgency  to  urinate  (fourth,  sixth,  and  eighth  days,  evening  "f
twenty-third  day),'. —  [780,]  Bloody  urine  (Bartolinus). —  Deep-colored
yellow  urine," — It  passes  only  sparingly;  is  deeply  reddened,™. — Trans-
parent, dark,  not  increased  (first  day),". — Highly  colored  urine,  of  strong
odor,  remaining  clear  (third  day),'. — Urine  scanty,  dark,  with  a  slimy  sed-
iment (sixteenth  day),'. — In  the  afternoon,  frequent  copious  discharge  of
light-yellow  urine  (third  day),". — Urine,  for  the  first  time  again,  clear  as
water  (eighteenth  day),". — Secretion  of  a  greater  quantity  of  urine  (Green-
how). — Copious  urination  (after  15  grains),". — [790.]  Urine  increased  and
more  deeply  colored  (fourth  day),'*;  much  at  one  time  (sixth  day),^ —
Urine  copious  and  cloudy  (from  8  to  10  grains),". — Copious  urination  and
burning  therewith,^". — Increased  pale  urine  after  the  stool,".^ — Passage  of
urine  increased  after  the  stool,". — Urinating  in  children  increased  in  quan-
tity and  frequency ,°. — The  urine  passes  more  easily ;  formerly  he  had  al-
ways to  wait  awhile,  before  it  came,". — Urine  passed  with  some  difiiculty
(Richter). — Urine  passes  with  difficulty  (Richter). — With  the  last  stool,  at
10  in  the  evening,  the  passage  of  urine  is  somewhat  impeded  ;  it  passes  out
from  the  bladder  a  few  seconds  before  it  appeared  ;  then  with  interruptions,
and  every  time  with  some  urgency,  which  the  urine  does  not  immediately
follow  (tenth  day),\ — [800.]  Urine  in  small  quantity  and  hot,"  ". — Scanty
urinatiou,".^Urination  at  3  o'clock  (fourth  day),'. — Urination  with  the
stool  (second  day),'. — Urgency  to  stool  on  urinating,^ — The.  afternoon
urine  becomes  cloudy  on  standing,  with  a  whitish  coat  at  the  bottom  of  the
vessel,  a  fine  granular  cloudiness  in  the  urine;  smell  putrid,  ammoniacal
(first  day),'. — The  urine  deposits  a  yellow  sediment,  like  bran,".

Sexual  Organs. — Male. — Ill-looking  blisters  on  the  genitals  (Galen).
— The  member  is  fallen  away  small ;  scrotum  drawn  up  (seventh  day),°.
— Itching  of  the  prepuce  after  a  stool  (second  day),'. — [810.]  Tickling,
crawling,  and  spotty  redness  of  the  prepuce,". — Erections  without  occasion
(first  day),". — Erections  waken  at  2  a.m.,'. — Drawing  forward  in  the  urethra
on  sitting,  midday  (fourth  day),". — The  right  testicle  feels  cold  in  the  night
(third  day),'. — The  left  epididymis  is  very  painful  on  walking  and  handling,
the  whole  forenoon  (t^'ojj),"'. — With  a  lax  scrotum,  he  wakes  with  urgency
to  urinate ;  an  erection  at  2  o'clock  iu  the  morning  (third  day),'. — Increased
desire,". — Sexual  excitement,  with  erection  after  urinating  (2  o'clock  at
night),^ — He  awakes  at  4  o'clock  with  great  sexual  desire  (thirteenth  day),'.
— [820.]  Desire  more  active  after  eating,'. — Rather  an  inner  sensuality
than  irritation  of  the  parts  compels  him  to  satisfy  himself  (at  evening,  on
going  to  bed,  fifth  day),'. — Active  desire  at  evening,  and  uncommon  thirst
for  water  (eleventh  day),'. — He  awoke  at  1  o'clock  at  uight  with  active  de-
sire ;  without  being  wide  awake,  he  seized  hold  of  the  parts  until  the  emis-
sion of  semen ;  he  had  to  make  water,  and  on  fully  awaking  it  seemed  as
if  the  time  must  be  much  later  (fourth  day),'. — The  increased  desire  re-
lieved ;  the  amorous  mood  removed  (fifth  day),". — Probably  one  of  the  best
remedies  to  repress  a  too  lively  desire,  especially  in  children,  which  only  a


182  ALOE.

few  remedies  do/. — Small  quantities  cause  frequent  erections,  and  increase
the  sexual  desire  (Rust's  Mag.). — Pollution  during  the  midday  nap  (second
day),*. — Pollution  at  3  o'clock  at  night ;  then  strong  sexual  desire,'. —
Towards  morning,  pollutions  with  amorous  dreams,  which  had  not  been  the
case  for  a  long  time  (twelfth  and  seventeenth  days),'.^[830.]  After  the
seminal  emission,  he  had  to  go  to  stool  immediately,  the  first  time  at  night
(thirteenth  day),^ — ^After  the  seminal  emission,  urinatiug,^ — After  the
seminal  emission,  restless  sleep,". — Heaviness  in  the  uterine  region,  with
pains  in  the  loins  and  groin,'". — Heaviness  in  the  uterus  and  pains  in  the
back  (Trousseau). — Determination  of  blood  to  the  uterus  (Arnemann). —
Cramps  in  the  uterus,  with  loss  of  a  little  white  mucus," — Irritative  action
on  the  uterus  and  pelvic  organs,  from  the  determination  of  blood  to  these
organs  ;  repletion  of  the  bloodvessels,  especially  the  veins  ;  hence  it  is  in  a
condition  to  augment  existing  irritated  conditions  or  bleedings,  and  to  act
as  an  emmenagogue  in  amenorrhcea  and  chlorosis  (Pereira). — Pressing  and
drawing  in  the  uterus,™. — Painful  sensation  in  the  female  genitals,  as  if
they  were  toru,^'. — [840.]  Increase  of  the  fluor-albus,"". — Menstruation
comes  on  too  early,  too  copious,". — Menstruation  appears,  very  copious,
though  it  had  occurred  not  long  before,™. — The  menses  appear  six  days  too
early,  with  sensation  of  coldness,'''. — The  blood  shows  as  in  menstruation,
in  the  case  of  a  woman  nursing  a  child  two  months  old,^'.— A  young  girl,
suffering  from  amenorrhcea,  took  daily  three  grains  of  the  watery  extract ;
thereupon,  pappy  taste,  loss  of  the  previous  good  appetite,  congestion  to
the  head,  headache,  relieved  by  cold  applications,  alternating  with  pains  in
the  loins,  gripings ;  three  soft  stools  a  day;  the  periods,  which  had  stayed
away  three  months,  came  on  at  night,  with  severe  pain  in  the  loins," — It
often  produces  a  large  evacuation  of  the  monthly  purification  (Hahnemann).
— Given  for  too  copious  menstruation,  it  increased  it,". — Increase,  with  colic,'".
— Profuse  menses,". — [850.]  Flow  deep-red  aud  clotted,". — Long-lasting
menses,". — With  the  menses,  earache,^ — With  the  courses,  flatulent  dis-
tension of  the  intestines,'^. — *  During  the  monthlies,  dragging  down  in  the
rectum,  with  sense  of  fulness  in  the  pelvis,". — With  the  monthlies,  pain  in  the
loins,". — Abortion  ;  thereupon,  copious  discharge  of  bloody  slime,  often  with
pressing  and  drawing  in  the  uterus,™.

Mcspiratoi'i/  Apparatus. — Scraping  in  the  larynx," — Trembling
and  shocks  in  the  larynx  and  tongue  for  some  minutes,". — [860.]  Scraping
in  the  larynx,  with  tickling  in  the  fold  of  the  neck,". — Raw  pain  in  the  larynx
when  spitting,". — Stitching  in  the  right  side  of  the  larynx  with  each  par-
oxysm of  cough,". — In  a  dream  at  night  he  was  in  danger;  he  would  have
screamed  out,  but  could  not,  from  hoarseness ;  in  the  morning  he  awoke
with  hoarseness  low  down  in  the  fauces,  which  disappeared  after  breakfast
(third  day),^ — Voice  husky ;  hawking;  coryza-feelinginthe  nose,  with  chilli-
ness (twenty-fourth  day),'. — Raw  voice,  morning,'. — Scraping  in  the  throat,
.producing  cough,'. — A  scraping  feeling  in  the  throat  shows  itself  sometimes
in  the  morning  hours,  and  forces  a  not  entirely  dry  hacking  many  times,'.
— ^A  tickling  irritation  to  cough  in  the  fauces,  without  expectoration,  but
with  the  taste  in  the  mouth  of  ink  or  iron  (evening  of  fourteenth  and
morning  of  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  days),'. — Dry  cough,  especially  trouble-
some towards  evening,". — [870.]  Hoarse,  crepitant,  deep-sounding  cough,
as  if  the  whole  trachea  was  raw,  dry,  and  full  of  mucus,". — Dry  cough,
sometimes  provoked  by  determination  of  blood  to  the  chest  (second  day),''.
— Cough,  followed  by  expectoration  of  a  substance  the  size  of  a  bean  ;  it  is
composed  of  mucus,  yellow,  tenacious,  and  difficult  to  break  up," — Con-


ALOE.  183

stant  expectoration,  caused  by  tickling  and  scraping  in  larynx,". — Hsera-
optysis," ''". — Whistling  in  the  throat,  as  if  something  had  fallen  into  the
trachea  and  embarrassed  respiration,". — Whistling  and  labored  respira
tiou,". — Five  drops  of  the  tincture  were  given  for  pressure  in  the  abdomen,
with  pain  in  the  loins  and  weakness  in  the  legs ;  then  followed  apprehen-
sion, the  breath  will  stay  away  on  going  up  stairs ;  could  not  work,  became
anxious,  with  paralysis  in  all  the  limbs ;  the  cutaneous  veins  disappeared  ;
must  sit  and  sleep;  at  first,  he  felt  better  walking  than  sitting;  atler  a  few
hours  these  symptoms  and  those  of  the  disease  were  much  relieved/. — Dif-
ficult respiration,^'. — Restricted  respiration  and  hserhoptysis,"  ^''. — [830.]
Wheezing,  panting  inspiration ;  evenings,  after  smoking  tobacco,^  ^ — Asth-
ma and  wheezing  (Dios«orides). — Free  respiration,".

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pain  in  the  prsecordial  region,  which  extends
through  to  the  left  scapula,^''. — In  bed,  the  heart  beats  quicker,  and  frequently
it  gives  a  very  strong  beat,  whichtshakes  the  whole  body  ;  for  the  most  part,
after  midnight,  after  2  o'clock,'^ — Palpitation,  with  stitches  in  the  chest,*.
— Strong  beat  of  the  heart  (a.a.). — Sufficient  doses  frequently  accelerate
the  pulse,'^ — Pulse  fuller,  much  accelerated,". — Pulse  more  accelerated
than  usual,". — [890.]  Pulse  104,  with  sensation  of  internal  fever  and  want
of  appetite,'^ — Pulse  diminished  from  4  to  8  beats  a  minute  (after  three
hours,  from  8  to  10  grains),". — Pulse  sunken,". — Pulse  very  slow,  55  beats,
weak  and  suppressed,  with  coldness,  especially  through  the  legs;  half  an
hour  later,  the  pulse  is  still  irregular  in  force  and  frequency ;  the  sensation
of  hunger  increases;  an  hour  later,  more  frequent,  60,  weak,  sometimes  in-
termitting a  beat  (soon  after  taking),'. — Pulse  before  eating,  60  ;  after  the
midday  rest,  70,  sluggish  and  weak;  at  half-past  three  in  the  afternoon,
scarcely  60;  at  nine  in  the  evening,  regular  (first  day),'. — In  the  morning,
after  rising,  pulse  only  60,  weak,  and  suppressed ;  in  the  afternoon,  over  60
beats  (second  day),'. — In  the  morning,  the  pulse  scarcely  70;  at  3  p.m.,  62
(third  day)  ;  at  2i  p.m.,  62  ;  at  10  p.m.,  70  (fourth  day) ;  at  9  A.m.,  75  (fifth
day),'.

Chest. — Constriction,  with  periodic  pressure  and  squeezing  in  the  chest,
especially  in  the  right  half  (second  day),^. — Jerking  stitches  through  the
chest,  also  in  rest,  in  lying,  impeding  respiration,  with  some  palpitation
(eighteenth  day),'. — Cutting,  tearing,  sticking  jerks  in  the  chest,  which  sud-
denly stop  the  breath,  especially  if  he  would  recover  himself  from  a  stoop-
ing or  twisted  posture;  many  days  (fifteenth  day);  in  the  epigastric  region,
also,'. — [900.]  Dyspnoea  and  dull  stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  che3t,^
— Every  stitch  is  scarcely  an  inch  long  and  very  severe.  After  a  few
minutes,  its  place  is  changed,  it  seems  more  in  front  and  higher  up ;  twenty
to  thirty  minutes  later,  similar  stitches  in  the  right  chest  in  the  same  place,
though  less  severe  (after  three  to  four  hours),^ — Pressure  on  the  chest  as
if  she  would  choke,". — The  anterior  portions  of  the  chest  and  the  sides  up
into  the  axillse  are  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  beaten,  as  if  the  pains  were
seated  between  the  bones  and  the  flesh.  The  forepart  of  the  chest  is  also
painful  on  deep  inspiration.  The  abdomen  is  also  painful  in  the  same,
manner,  especiallj'  the  umbilical  region,  painful  of  itself,  and  worse  on
touch,  still  more  in  the  deeper  tissues,  or  in  the  intestines  themselves,  and,
for  the  most  part,  in  the  morning.  The  abdominal  muscles  are  painful  for
many  days  on  rising  up  from  lying.  On  moving  the  arms,  the  muscles
which  go  from  the  chest  to  the  arras  are  painful  at  their  costal  attachments
(continuing  eight  days),'. — Weakness  of  the  whole  chest,  now  and  theu
(second,  third,  and  following  days),'. — Weakness  of  the  chest  on  bodily  ex-


184  ALOE.

ertions  (fifth  and  eighth  days),'. — Weakness  of  the  chest,". — Severely
pressing  pains  behind  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  alternating  with  the
same  pains  under  the  right  ribs,*. — Immediately  on  rising,  sensitive,  pres-
sive  pains,  as  if  sprained,  behind  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  only  on  moving
the  arms,  on  stooping  and  crouching  together,  relieved  by  stretching  the
chest  out  straight  and  throwing  it  forward  (whole  of  thirteenth  day),^ —
Pressure  behind  the  sternum," — [910.]  On  bending  to  the  left  side,  short,
pinching  stitches,  deep  within  at  the  back  part  of  the  left  chest  and  under
the  left  nipple;  at  one  time  impeding  respiration,  at  another  permitting
deep  respiration,^ — Severe  stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  middle  of  the  left
chest,  in  the  region  of  the  sixth  rib,  so  that,  on  attempting  a  deep  respira-
tion, he  must  give  it  up  (evenings  at  nine;  fourth  day),'. — Stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  mamma,". — Stitches  through  the  left
chest,*. — Stitches  from  the  liver  into  the  chest,  interrupting  the  respira-
tion,^.— Pains  from  the  epigastric  region  into  both  sides  of  the  chest,". —
Sticking  pains  through  the  left  chest  when  crouching  on  account  of  pains
in  the  abdomen,*. — On  stretching  in  the  morning  a  sticking-drawing  in  the
lel't  chest,  Irom  the  region  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  only  superficial
but  preventing  respiration  (fifth  day),'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  right  ribs,
under  the  axilla,  extending  into  the  region  of  the  right  shoulder,  towards
the  back,".

Neck  and  Hack. — Goitre  (a.a.). — [920.]  On  the  right  side  of  the
neck,  it  feels  sore  on  motion,  as  if  one  of  the  muscles  were  drawn  and  pain-
fully stretched  (sixteenth  day),'. — Cracking  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  on
moving  them,  morning  at  eight  o'clock  (second  day),^ — On  sitting,  in  the
forenoon,  drawing,  tensive,  burning  on  the  right  side  of  the  nape,  as  if  in
the  muscles;  it  disappears  on  motion  (second  day).  On  sitting  in  the  after-
noon the  same  tensive  drawing;  on  stooping,  burning  (morning  of  third,
and  afternoon  of  fourth  days),". — Tension  and  compression  in  nape  of  neck,
behind  both  ears,". — Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  nape,  only  on
moving  the  neck,  after  rising  from  the  midday  rest  (first  day) ;  the  same  pain
on  motion  tensive,  almost  burning  (eleventh  to  nineteenth  day),'. — Pain
under  left  shoulder-blade,  coming  from  prsecordial  region,". — Dull,  stick-
ing pains  under  the  shoulder-blade  (second  day),  and  outward  pressing
pains  (third  day),*.— Dull,  sticking  pain  and  squeezing  between  the
shoulders,  more  on  the  right  side,  continuing  through  the  night  and  follow-
ing day,l — Bruised  pain  in  the  whole  back,  between  and  on  the  shoulder-
blades,  as  after  long  stooping  (second  day),*. — Very  little  appetite  for  many
days ;  on  one  afternoon  a  very  great  one,  ate  two  large  portions  at  evening.
In  the  following  night,  pain  in  the  region  of  the  last  dorsal  vertebra,  as  if
seated  in  the  spinal  cord ;  could  not  lie  on  the  back,  only  on  the  sides ;  now
stretched  out  straight,  now  with  the  thighs  flexed  on  the  body.  On  rising,
it  disappeared  (twenty-first  day),'. — [930.]  Pressure  and  drawing  in  the
right  kidney  region  (second  day),l — Severe  pains  in  the  kidneys,'*. — Pains
in  the  back  and  heaviness  in  the  uterus  (Trousseau). — Shooting  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  toward  the  anus,  hips,  and  lower  abdomen,"". — Lum-
bago, alternating  with  headache,^*. — Stitches  in  the  spleen  drawing  into  the
loins,  at  night,l — Stitches  into  the  loins,'™. — Pains  in  the  loins  on  awaking,
with  lassitude,'". — Pains  in  the  loins  with  the  appearance  of  the  menses,'*;
with  ill-humor,*;  alternating  with  headache,";  and  discharge  of  blood  from
the  anus,™. — Drawing  and  burning  in  the  sacral  region  (Richter). — [940.]
Sacral  pains  (Sandeliu). — The  sacral  troubles  are  increased,". — Morose
and  ill-humored  for  several  days;  on  the  fourth  day,  severe  drawing  sacral


ALOE.  185

pains,  which  spread  over  the  whole  pelvis;  they  filled  him  with  ill-humor;
they  were  aggravated,  evenings,  and  continued  for  eight  days,'  (two
grains  triturated  with  sugar  of  milk),\ — Sacral  pains,  on  rest  and  motion
(second  day),". — Sacral  pains  on  rising  in  the  morning;  during  the  day  it
is  drawing  about  in  the  sacrum,  with  the  feeling  of  heaviness  therein,
especially  on  sitting  (second  day),^ — A  heaviness  in  the  sacral  region
which  involves  the  pelvis  and  acts  on  the  rectum,  loading  it  (third  and
fourth  days),''. — A  dull,  heavy  sensation  in  the  sacral  region  (first  and  fol-
lowing days),'. — ''Presdac)  and  heaviness  in  the  sacral  region,  especially  on
sitting,  relieved  by  motion  (continues  over  eight  days),'. — Completely  stiff
in  the  sacrum  after  sitting,  the  rising  up  is  difiicult  for  him  ;  then  it  feels
like  a  load  in  the  sacrum  and  pelvis  (third  to  fifth  day),^ — Burning,  bit-
ing, and  sticking  on  the  sacrum,  between  the  skin  and  flesh,  as  of  a  mus-
tard plaster  (afternoon  of  third  day,  after  the  nausea  had  disappeared),".
^[950.]  Stitches  in  the  right  sacral  region,''. — Clucking  in  the  region  of
the  coccyx,  periodic,  lasting  several  minutes  (first  and  second  days),''. —
Pain  in  the  coccyx,  as  if  he  had  fallen  on  it,\

Upper  Extremities. — Outward  pressing  pain  in  the  shoulder  (first
day);  in  the  left  shoulder  (second  day),*. — Dull,  sticking  pains  from  the
shoulder  into  the  ulna  (second  day),*. — -Cracking  in  the  left  shoulder-joint
on  moving  it  (morning  of  fourth  day),". — Sweat  in  the  axilla,'. — Heaviness
of  the  right  arm  (second  day),*. — Pressive  or  paralytic  drawing  in  the
right  upper  arm,  near  the  shoulder-joint,  in  rest  and  motion  (third  day),^
— Furuncle  on  the  upper  arm,*. — [960.]'  Pains  in  the  elbow,*. — ^At  night,
in  bed,  pressive  pain  in  the  right  forearm ;  it  began  in  the  middle  of  the
forearm,  and  ended  in  the  wrist-joint,  where  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  press
the  bones  of  the  wrist  asunder  (ninth  day),'. — Paralytic  drawing  in  the
anterior  part  of  the  forearm  (third  day),".— Sensitive,  jerking-drawing,  as
in  the  flesh,  from  the  left  forearm  into  the  palm  of  the  hand,  six  to  eight
times,  in  quick  succession,  on  sitting  still  and  writing  (3  to  4  o'clock  p.m.,
third  day),'. — Pains  in  the  forearm  ending  in  the  wrist-joint,\ — Pain  press-
ing asunder  the  wrist-bones,'. — Weakness  of  the  wrist-joint,". — Drawing
into  the  palm  of  the  hand,'. — On  stretching  out  the  left  hand  it  feels  as  if
the  nerves  were  too  short,  and  were  dragged  like  an  electric  shock,'. — In
the  left  hand  and  forearm,  the  sensation  as  if  internally  asleep;  now  and
then  an  internal  jerking  and  twitching  without  pains  (third  day),^ — [970.]
The  loft  hand  falls  asleep,  forenoons,  on  sitting  in  a  wagon  (third  day),^ —
Cold  hands,^"'. — Cold  hands,  warm  feet ;  evenings,^ — Swollen  hands  in  the
evening,  eight  to  ten  o'clock,  with  heat  and  tickling-itching,  especially  in
the  balls  of  the  thumb,  compelling  vigorous  rubbing;  feels  as  if  frozen
(thirteenth  day),°. — Sensation  as  if  a  hair  lay  on  the  back  of  the  hand,
also  on  the  back  of  the  fingers  ;  many  times,^ — A  peculiar  sensation  on  the
last  phalanges  of  the  left  hand,  particularly,  as  if  the  hairs  there  slowly
rose  up;  it  seems  to  him  as  if  a  hair  lay  on  the  fingers  (seventh  day),'. —
Transient  stitches  in  the  metacarpal  joint  (second  day),*. — Habitual,  sen-
sitive drawing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  and  joints  of  the  right  middle
finger  (3  p.m.,  first  day),'. — In  the  metacarpal  joint  of  the  fourth  finger,  a
frequently  recurring  sticking  and  drawing  pain  (first  day),*. — Painful
drawing  and  stiffness  of  the  left  middle  finger,  seated  especially  at  the
metacarpal  joint  (first  day)  ;  jerking-drawing  pain  in  the  metarcarpal  joint
of  the  left  fourth  finger  (second  day);  pains  and  stiffness  in  the  right  (third
day),*. — [980.]  Extremely  painful  tearing  stitches  in  the  second  joint  of
the  left  fourth  finger  (ninth  day),^ — Pain  as  if  sprained  or  taken  cold  in


186  ALOE.

the  last  joint  of  the  left  fourth  finger  (ninth  day),  ^ — Aching  in  the  lower
condyles  of  the  first  phalanges  of  the  right  hand,  evenings,'. — Fine  stitches
in  the  finger-joints  (seventh  day),*. — Stitches  in  the  finger-joints,l — Draw-
ing in  the  joint  of  the  left  thumb  (soon  after  taliing  it);  then  in  the  fore-
noon and  the  midday  rest  (first  day),^ — Habitual  drawing  pain,  as  if
sprained,  in  the  left  last  joint  of  tlie  thumb  (had  been  sprained  three
months  before),  (fourth  day),'. — Red,  inflamed  ulcerous  spot,  with  sensa-
tion of  tearing,  on  third  finger  of  right  hand,^'. — Pain  under  the  nail  of  the
left  forefinger,".

Lower  JExtvemities. — Weariness  and  heaviness  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities (second,  third,  and  eighth  days),*. — [990.]  On  lying  down  after
eating,  the  limbs  fall  asleep  (fifteenth  day),'. — The  -whole  left  leg  is  asleep,
without  provocation  (after  one  hour),'. — Heaviness  of  the  legs,  the  second
day,l — Painful  weakness  in  the  legs,  with  pain  in  the  hypochondrium,'.
— Painful  weakness  on  walking,  especially  in  the  calf,  ankle-joint,  and  iti-
guinal  region,'". — Cracking  in  the  right  hip-joint,  on  rising  in  the  morning
and  on  walking  (second  day),". — Drawing  in  the  left  buttock,  soon  passing
away,  but  frequently  recurring,^ — Stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  buttock,
when  stooping,". — Heaviness  and  pain  from  prostration  in  the  right  upper
thigh  (fourth  day),*. — Heaviness  of  both  thighs  (sixth  day),*. — [1000.]
Outward  pressing  pain  in  the  thigh  (first  day),*. — Pain  drawing  downward
from  the  flank  into  the  middle  of  the  thigh,'". — Pain  in  the  inside  of  the
left  thigh  (after  one  hour),^ — Coldness  of  the  lower  thigh  to  over  the
knee,'. — Tearing  in  right  thigh,  above  the  knee-joint,'". — Tearing  in  the
right  thigh,'*. — Itching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh,^ — Crawling,  itch-
ing, biting,  on  knee-caps,  calves,  and  inner  surface  of  thigh,". — Pains  in  the
knee,*. — Stitches,  while  walking,  in  right  knee-joint,"'. — [1010.]  Stitch  in
right  knee,  nearly  causing  her  to  fall  down,". — Itching  in  the  popliteal
space,^ — *(Painful  weariness  in  the  calj°  '".) — Weakness  of  the  ankle-joint,^■
— Pain,  as  if  from  a  sprain,  in  the  outer  left  ankle-bone  when  walking,". —
Evening,  on  lying  in  bed,  and  in  the  morning,  the  sensation  as  if  the  ankle-
joint  were  sprained,  or  the  left  great  toe,  or  in  a  finger  or  thumb  which
had  been  sprained  a  few  months  before  (third  day),". — Pains  in  the  foot
(Hong). — Painful  pullings  in  the  whole  right  foot," — At  evening,  severe
pain,  as  if  sprained  and  bruised,  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  especially  of  the  left
foot  (after  nine  hours),'. — In  the  middle  of  the  right  sole,  internally,  as  in
— [1020.]  The  sole  of  the  foot  pains  in  rest,'. — The  soles  pain  on  walking
on  pavement,  as  though  he  had  performed  a  long  journey,'. — Cold  feet,' " ';
after  eating,  without  sleepiness,';  at  evening,™;  evening  in  bed,*;  preventing
sleep  at  night,*;  mostly  in  the  forepart  of  the  toes  only,'. — Pain  on  the
inner  margin  of  the  metatarsal  bone  of  the  left  great  toe,  on  walking  and
in  rest ;  first  there  is  a  pressure,  then  follows  a  slight  drawing,  as  if  the  pres-
sure extended  itself  (after  fifteen  hours),'. — He  wakes  many  times  in  the
night,  with  some  chilliness  and  sensitive  pain  in  the  great  toe  on  every
motion,  as  if  it  were  sprained,  sometimes  in  the  right,  sometimes  in  the  left,
whether  in  the  first  or  last  joint  could  not  be  distinguished  (first  day,  again
sixth  day),*. — In  the  afternoon,  on  walking  in  boots,  pain  in  the  right  third
toe,  as  if  frozen  (fourteenth  day),*. — For  several  days,  pain  in  the  right
little  toe,  as  from  chilblains  (twenty-fifth  day),'.

Generalities. — Anxious  startiug-up,'*. — Paralytic  drawings  in  vari-
ous muscles  (eighteenth  day),'. — Paralysis  in  all  the  limbs,  with  anxiety,'.
— [1030.]  General  prostration  (after  15  grains),". — Great  weakness,  phleg-


ALOE.  187

matic  temperament  (second  day);  weariness  (first  and  third  days),*. —
Weakness  and  inclination  to  vomit,  after  sour  food,'. — Weariness,  weak-
ness, and  creeping  coldness,  when  he  comes  from  bed  into  a  hot  room,". —
The  strength  and  pulse  sunken,  after  vomiting,". — Lassitude  and  prostra-
tion, as  from  extreme  nervous  weakness,™. — Lassitude  and  pain  in  the  loins
on  waking,'". — Indolent;  if  he  sits,  he  deliberates  about  standing  up,*. —
Makes  a  pedestrian  tour  of  five  miles  very  quickly,  without  fatigue  or  diffi-
culty (third  day),^. — Stronger  than  usual  for  bodily  exercise,  and  not  so  weak
and  used  up  the  next  day  as  usual  (afternoon  of  first  day),'. — [1040.]  The
whole  body  very  sensitive,". — Transient  pains,  as  if  bruised  or  sprained,  in
various  places;  on  the  left  forearm,  right  shoulder-blade,  left  side  of  the
ribs,  etc.  (fifteenth  day),'. — Frequently,  a  sensitive  drawing  in  different
places  in  the  body,  as  if  it  involved  the  bones ;  for  example,  in  the  right
knee,  as  if  in  the  joint,  on  sitting  still;  sooner  fatigued  on  motion  (fourth
day),'. — Jerking,  drawing,  dull,  sticking  pains  in  the  finger,  knee  and  elbow
joints  (fifth  day),*.— Dull  sticking  pains  in  the  joints  (eighth  day),*.— Pains
from  weakness  in  the  ankle-bones  and  the  joints  of  the  hands,*.

Skill. —  Weakness  inconsiderable,  even  ivhen  the  skin  was  very  tjolden-col-
ored". — The  cutaneous  veins  disappeared,  with  anxiety  of  the  chest,'. — Great
distension  of  the  veins,*. — Numerous  pimples  on  various  places  (fifth  day),*.
— [1050.]  On  the  abdomen,  small  pimples  as  large  as  the  point  of  a  pin,
scratch  (from  rubbing  in  the  tincture),'. — A  furuncle  on  the  upper  arm
(fifth  day),*. — Painful  pimples,  like  nodules,  in  the  skin;  under  the  chin,
behind  the  jaw  on  the  right  side  (third  day),'. — The  epidermis  cracks,  and
thick  matter  discharges  (a. a.). — After  he  had  torn  some  hard  skin  from
the  foot  too  deeply,  a  sore  resulted,  suppurated  slowly,  and  did  not  heal
(third  to  seventeenth  day),^. — Places  scratched  sore,  pain  very  sensitively,*.
— Pains  in  various  places,  with  swelling,'^. — Biting  itching  at  the  navel  in
the  evening,  compelling  rubbing,'. — Severe  itching  in  a  small  spot  on  the
inside  of  the  left  thigh,  above  the  knee  (first  day),*. — Crawling,  itching,
biting,  on  various  places,'^. — [1060.]  Itching  in  the  left  popliteal  space;
later,  in  the  right,  and  worse;*. — Itching,  heat,  and  swelling  of  the  hands  as
if  frozen,'. — Symptoms  of  the  hands,  as  from  chilblains,^

FeveT. — Seldom  chilliness  or  sensation  of  coldness,™. — Chilliness,'  ^. —
He  feels  cold  as  often  as  he  goes  away  from  the  stove,'. — Shivering  through
the  whole  body,  with  griping  in  the  abdoraen,^ — Cold  feeling  with  the
stool,*. — Cold  feeling  of  the  occiput,  with  throbbing  of  the  arteries,*. — Chill,
then  distension  and  shocks  over  the  hips,'. — [1070.]  Chill  on  waking  at
night,  with  pain  of  the  great  toe,^ — Chilliness,  with  sensation  of  coryza,^.
— Chilly  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  room,'. — Cold  creepings,*;  through  the
skin,';  down  the  back,'. — Creeping  chills,  with  weariness  and  weakness,
when  he  comes  from  bed  into  a  hot  room,^ — Coldness  through  the  body,
with  weak  pulse,'. — Coldness  of  hands  and  feet,*  *. — Cold  hands  and  feet
after  eating,  without  sleepiness,'. — Wakes  many  times  at  night  with  chill
(second  day),^ — Coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet  (fourth  and  fifth  days),^ —
[1080.]  Cold  feet  on  going  to  bed  at  9  o'clock  (fifth  day),^ — Coldness  of
the  feet  up  into  the  calves,  at  evening,  in  bed,  occurring  after  a  seminal
emission,  preventing  sleep  for  two  or  three  hours  (fifth  day),^. — Cold  hands
and  feet  in  the  morning;  the  feet  are  cold  the  whole  afternoon;  toward
evening  they  become  suddenly  warm,  so  also  the  hands  (sixth  day),'. — Cold
feet  the  whole  night;  little  sleep  (eighth  day),^ — He  feels  very  cold  in  the
night  (ninth  to  tenth  day),^ — Warm  feet  and  icy-cold  hands  the  whole


188  ALOE.

evening ;  they  alternated  often  through  the  day ;  now  the  feet  and  hands,  now
only  the  hands,  cold  (tenth  day),^ — The  night  from  the  tenth  to  the  elev-
enth day,  chilliness,  mostly  from  1  to  2  o'clock,  decreasing  toward  morning,^
— As  he,  in  the  forenoon,  came  from  a  cold  room  into  one  much  heated,
weariness,  weakness,  and  creeping  chills  through  the  whole  body  (eleventh
day),". — Shivering  through  the  whole  body;  it  creeps  through  all  his  bones
like  cold,  on  slowly  swallowing  the  Aloes,  becoming,  after  fifteen  minutes,
like  a  cold  shivering  creeping;  it  goes  especially  down  the  back,  also  in  the
limbs;  on  sitting,  it  makes  his  body  erect;  not  changed  by  moving  about;
lasts  forty  minutes,". — After  eating,  coldness  and  chilliness  of  the  hands  and
feet;  after  walking,  the  feet  become  warm,  the  hands  less  so;  in  the  even-
ing, both  warm  (first  day),". — [1090.]  At  midday,  the  thighs  down  to  the
knees  are  cold,  the  forepart  of  the  feet,  around  the  toes  especially,  particu-
larly in  the  midday  nap;  at  3  o'clock  the  feet  become  warm,  the  hands  at
4  o'clock  (first  day),'. — At  evening  the  feet  become  cold,  on  account  of
which  he  cannot  get  to  sleep  (third  day),'. — Chill  at  3  o'clock,  on  rising;
throughout  the  day,  very  sensitive  to  the  cold;  chilly  in  the  open  air  and
in  the  roem;  more  severe  in  the  afternoon;  the  cold  runs  through  the  skin
of  the  whole  body,  with  some  confusion,  especially  of  the  forehead  ;  at  even-
ing, the  chills  disappeared,  except  the  cold  feet  (fourth  day),'. — Afternoon
and  evening,  cold  legs  as  far  as  the  knees,  in  spite  of  lying  on  the  sofa  in  a
warm  room  (ninth  day),'. — Chilly;  it  often  creeps  down  his  back  (tenth
day),'. — Could  not  get  to  sleep  before  1  o'clock  on  account  of  coldness  of
the  legs,  which  at  first  became  cold  in  bed  (twentieth  day),'. — Chilly  and
sensitive  to  the  air  (twenty-third  day),'. — At  evening,  cold  feet,  as  far  as
the  calves,  on  account  of  which  he  could  not  get  to  sleep  (twenty-third
day),'. — It  frequently  creeps  down  the  back,  with  very  cold  legs  as  far  as
the  knee  (twenty-fourth  day),'. — The  night  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  fif-
teenth day,  without  chill,  and  with  a  good  sleep;  the  weather  had  become
warmer,". — [1100.]  Cold  is  better  endured,  though  he  had  slept  in  a  warm
room,*. — Fever,  with  most  violent  thirst,'^". — Burning  heat  in  various  parts
of  the  body,  especially  in  the  face  and  on  the  scalp,™. — Sensation  of  warmth
on  the  scalp,". — Heat,^". — Very  red,  especially  in  the  face,". — General  tur-
gescence  of  the  skin;  it  is  very  red,  especially  in  the  face,  and  the  tempera-
ture is  raised,^". — Heat,  followed  by  sweat,™. — Sweat  under  the  axilla  (after
2  P.M.,  first  day),'. — All  his  perspiration  'smells  very  strong;  it  taints  the
air,  especially  at  night,  in  the  bedroom  (nineteenth  day),'. — [1110.]  Nau-
seous-smelling sweat  on  the  genitals,". — Sweat  in  the  night,  after  drinking,*.
Sleep  and  Dreams. — At  evening,  in  the  open  air,  violent,  frequent
yawning,  without  sleepiness,*. — Frequent,  deep,  loud  yawning,  after  the
midday  sleep,'. — Much  yawning  (evening  at  8  o'clock),'. — Yawning  with
hunger  (at  evening),". — Frequent  violent  yawning  with  stretching,  in  the
forenoon  ;  it  pulls  the  mouth  wide  open  (eleventh  and  twelfth  days),". —
Tired  early  at  evening ;  much  yawning,  even  at  8  o'clock  (first  day),'. — It
also  produces  sleep,  not  only  because  it  eliminates  disturbing  causes,  but
because  it  possesses  volatile  properties  (Schrosder). — Completely  quiet
sleep  at  night  (after  fifteen  grains,  morning  and  evening),". — [1120.]  After
a  meal  very  sleepy,  he  lay  two  hours  in  a  dozy,  half  senseless  condition,
from  which  he  must  make  an  effort  to  arouse.  During  this  sleep  he  was
conscious  of  hearing  many  things,  without  being  able  rightly  to  recollect
or  arouse  himself  (second  day),".^After  a  meal  no  sleep ;  could  immedi-
ately labor  well  without  sleepiness  (fifth  day),". — After  a  meal  sleepy
(eleventh  day),  midday  sleep  (fifteenth  and  sixteenth  days),". — In  the


ALOE.  189

morning,  he  lay  longer  in  a  dozy  sleep  (fourth  day),'. — Long,  dozy,  morn-
ing sleep ;  sexual  desire  before  rising  (twentieth  day),'. — In  the  morning,
he  lay  till  toward  8  o'clock  (fifteenth  day),^ — Long,  dozy,  midday  sleep,
cannot  aroui-e  himself;  after  getting  up,  frequent  deep,  loud  yawning
(third  day),'. — Dozy  sleep,  only  at  midday,  not  morning  nor  evening  (third
day),'. — Dozy  lying,  after  waking  (second  day),'. — After  dinner,  dozy
napping;  it  closes  his  eyes  (fourth  day),'. — [1130.]  No  sleep  (fifth  day),'.—
Midday  sleep,  with  chasing  visions ;  a  crowd  of  dreamy  thoughts  (four-
teenth day),'.— Tired  early  in  the  evening  (first  day)  ;  he  even  sleeps  on
the  sofa  (fifth  day},^. — Very  sleepy,  indiSerent  in  the  evening  (thirteenth
and  thirty-first  days),'. — No  sleepiness  while  reading,  after  a  meal,  with
cold  hands  and  feet  (first  day),'. — Wakeful  a  long  time  at  evening  (first
day),". — Itching  in  the  arms  preventing  sleep. — *  Cannot  get  to  sleep  for  a
long  time,  because  the  evening  fatigue  vanished ;  a  crowd  of  thoughts  busy  him;
in  the  morning  he  lies  in  a  doze  till  it  is  day ;  tired  and  prostrated ;  sexual
desire  frequently  aroused  (nineteenth  day),'. — Cannot  get  to  sleep  till  one
o'clock  on  account  of  cold  legs,'. — Falling  asleep  hindred  by  cold  feet,'. —
[1140.]  Restless  sleep,  with  waking  up  and  feeling  cold  (fifth  day),°. — After
an  emission  of  semen,  restless  sleep,  with  repeated  wakings,  at  8  o'clock  in
the  morning,  when  he  must  go  immediately  to  stool ;  a  copious  passage,
with  vigor,  some  hours  after  the  previous  one  (fifth  day),''. — He  felt  very
cold  at  night,  passing  urine  at  2  o'clock ;  he  thought  it  must  be  later  than
two  (ninth  day),^. — Restless  sleep  (tenth  and  eleventh  days),  with  repeated
wakings ;  at  half-past  one  he  had  to  urinate,  shortly  thereafter,  sexual  excite-
ment, with  erection,". — The  nights  from  the  eleventh  to  the  twelfth,  and
from  the  twelfth  to  the  thirteenth  days,  little  chilliness,  better  sleep ;  at
ha,lf-past  two  he  waked  up  and  began  to  urinate ;  had  thick  mucus  in  the
moutli  and  fauces,'*. — After  evening  sleepiness,  poor  night  sleep,  constantly
half  awake,  coldness  of  the  feet  in  bed,  much  chilliness,  excited  brain
(thirteenth  and  fourteenth  days),^ — Wide  awake  for  a  long  time,  many
evenings,  on  account  of  coldness,  and  activity  in  the  head,  dozy  sleep,  first
towards  four  or  five  in  the  morning  (eleventh  to  fourteenth  days),^ —
Awaked  at  night  with  thirst,  drinks  a  glass  of  cold  water  and  breaks  out
into  a  sweat,  several  nights,'.- Woke  up  frequently,  with  urgency  to  stool
and  urinating,  but  went  to  sleep  again  until  4  o'clock,  when  the  urgency
compelled  him  to  get  up,  then  a  slight  passage  (fourteenth  day),^^^lept
badly ;  excited  (mentally)  ;  dozy ;  great  urgency  to  urinate  ;  sleeplessness
before  midnight,". — [1150.]  Sleeplessness. — Sleeplessness  from  midnight
until  5  A.M.,'". — Very  restless  sleep;  she  throws  off  the  bed-clothes,'"'. —
Restless  the  night  from  the  first  till  the  second  day ;  awake  many  times  ;
pollution  towards  3  o'clock,  which  he  had  not  had  for  a  long  time,
and,  immediately  thereafter,  irresistible  sexual  excitement ;  on  rubbing,
it  immediately  went  away,'. — Twitching  of  the  left  arm  and  head,  at  night
(in  a  weaned  baby),". — Chilliness,  with  restless  sleep  and  excited  brain,^  —
Feels  cold  at  night,* ;  at  3  o'clock,  on  getting  up,'. — Chilliness  waking  one
up  at  night,*. — -The  infant  moans  in  its  sleep,  and  perspires  profusely  all
over,". — At  times,  complete  awakening,*. — [1160.]  After  getting  up  at  3
o'clock,  he  remained  wide  awake  (fourth  day),". — He  awoke  at  3  o'clock,
with  urgency  to  urinate  (fourth  day) ;  without  stool  and  urgency  to  urin-
ate (fifth  day),". — Urgency  to  stool  and  urinate  drives  him  out  of  bed  at
6  o'clock  (fifteenth  day),  early  on  waking  (twenty-first  and  twenty-second
days),'. — Late  rising,  with  great  urgency  to  stool  and  urinate  (eleventh
day),*. — Wakes  in  good  health,  at  5  o'clock  (fifth  day),'. — Dozy  sleep,


190  ALOE.

toward  morning,  with  less  coldness  than  in  the  night  (fourteenth  day)/. —
In  the  morning,  he  lay  till  toward  8  o'clock  (fifteenth  day),^ — He  wakes
at  5  o'clock,  cannot  rouse  himself  on  account  of  dreamy  thoughts;  feels
agreeably  tired;  lying  seems  very  comfortable  (fifteenth  day),'. — Dry
cough  at  night,\ — Pains  in  the  forearm  in  bed,'. — [1170.]  Pain  in  the  back
at  uight,\ — Pains  in  the  loins  on  waking,'". — Pains  in  the  loins  on  rising  in
the  morning,^;  cracking  of  the  hip-joiut,". — Heavy  dreams  at  night,^ — At
night  in  a  dream  he  was  in  danger,  and  would  cry  out,  but  could  not  from
hoarseness,". — Visions  chase  one  another  in  the  midday  sleep,'. — Dream
about  huge  monsters  and  all  sorts  of  animals,". — Dreams  that  he  is  crazy,
and  that  everybody  is  watching  him,^'. — Awaking,  completely  active,
before  seven,  with  many  indistinct  dreams ;  otherwise  he  wakes  at  nine
(second  day)/. — No  sound  sleep ;  coldness ;  awakes  at  3  o'clock  from  a
mass  of  confused  dreams,  the  last  was  remembered,  but  on  rising  was  also
forgotten  (fourth  day),'. — [1180.]  Dreams  towards  morning  that  he  has
defecated  in  his  breeches  (twenty-fourth  day),'.

Conditions, — Aggravation. —  (Morning.) — *  Usually  awakes  in  the
morning  with  severe  urging  to  stool,  etc. ;  before  6  d clock,  aroused  and  excited  in,
the  head;  stool;  5  a.m.,  swelling  in  the  throat;  6  o'clock,  thin  stool;  tor-
mina in  the  umbilical  region ;  7  o'clock,  hunger  on  waking ;  after  waking,
pains  in  the  bowels,  and  pappy  stool,  etc. ;  after  rising,  a  stool ;  on  rising,
urgency  to  urinate ;  8  to  ,9  o'clock,  swelling  in  the  throat ;  a  crowd  of
thoughts  busy  him  and  prevent  his  falling  asleep  again  ;  stool  and  head-
ache; nasal  pains;  dryness  in  the  nose;  fruitless  inclination  to  sneeze;
nose-bleed ;  stitch  in  the  tongue ;  rawness  in  the  fauces ;  mucous  expecto-
ration ;  bitter  taste ;  little  appetite ;  abdomen  pains  ;  pain  in  bowels  (also
evenings) ;  flatulent  troubles ;  passage  of  flatus ;  offensive  flatus ;  thin
stool ;  diarrhoea  ;  yellow  diarrhoea,  etc. ;  itching  near  the  amis  ;  hoarseness  ;
dry  hackings ;  drawings  in  the  chest ;  cracking  of  the  cervical  vertebrae ;
cold  hands  and  feet ;  weak  pulse.— (i^orereoon),  Unhappy  mood  since  the
forenoon;  much  excited;  pressure  in  head,  after  11  o'clock;  earache;  bad
taste  at  the  root  of  the  tongue  ;  canine  hunger  ;  griping  in  bowels,  from  10
to  12  o'clock  ;  burning  in  the  nape  ;  epididymis  sensitive  ;  the  hand  asleep  ;
chilliness,  etc. — {Afternoon'),  Afternoon  generally  the  time  of  aggravation,
especially  of  the  symptoms  of  the  mucous  membranes;  ill-humor  worse  ;  excited ;
pain  in  forehead ;  suppurative  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head  ;  sudden
fluent  coryza  ;  coryza  ;  blood  blown  from  the  nose  ;  hunger ;  thirst ;  cutting
abdominal  pains ;  oflTjnsive  flatus ;  diarrhoea;  four  stools;  stool;  at  3  p.m.,
itching  of  the  haemorrhoids;  drawing  in  the  urethra  at  midnight;  increased
urgency  to  urinate;  pain  in  the  neck;  burning  in  the  sacrum ;  drawings  in
the  finger-joints;  pain  in  the  toes;  the  legs  and  hands  cold  at  midday;  at
3  o'clock,  the  feet  warm;  at  4,  the  hands;  cold  feet;  cold  legs;  at  noon,
sluggish;  also  in  the  afternoon,  without  sleep;  chilliness;  pulse  slower. —
{Evening),  The  symptoms  appear  in  the  evenin.g,  particularly ;  towards  even-
ing, dry  cough;  increased  ill-humor  and  pain  in  the  loins;  indifierent  and
sleepy ;  shootings  in  the  head  (and  the  following  morning) ;  pressure  in  the
eyes;  coldness  of  the  tip  of  the  nose;  earache;  twingeing  in  the  ear;  crack-
ing in  the  maxillary  joint;  dryness  in  the  mouth  with  thirst;  swelling  of
the  throat;  little  appetite  ;  itching  of  the  navel ;  copious  passage  of  flatus ;
offensive ;  urgency  to  stool ;  stool ;  stool  at  10  p.m.  ;  stool  late  ;  diarrhoea ;
crawlings  in  the  anus;  itching  of  haemorrhoids  (and  in  the  morning);
stitches  iu  the  haemorrhoids ;  urgency  to  urinate ;  sexual  desire ;  tickling
in  the  throat,  forcing  cough  (and  mornings)  ;  stitches  in  the  chest ;  pain  in


ALOE.  191

the  phalanges  ;  hands  swollen  and  hot ;  attacks  of  distress,  and  heating
over  the  hips,  into  the  loins ;  pain  in  tendo  Achillis ;  cold  feet ;  into  the
calves;  wrenching  pains  (and  in  the  morning);  yawning  and  hunger. —
{Night),  Toothache ;  stitches  in  spleen,  awaking  one ;  throbbing  in  the
abdomen  on  lying ;  pains  over  the  loins  waking  one ;  passage  of  flatus
through  the  whole  night ;  urgency  to  stool ;  urgency  with  urinating ;  shocks
that  force  him  to  rise  upright  out  of  bed  ;  waking  with  chill ;  waking  with
chill  and  pain  of  the  great  toe  ;  offensive  perspiration  ;  excessive  perspira-
tion.— {Before  midnight),  Sleeplessness. — (After  midnight),  Bellyache  and
diarrhoea;  sexual  desire  at  1  a.m.;  chill  at  1  to  2  A.M.,  disappearing  to-
ward morning;  at  2  A.M.,  stool,  awake,  with  urgency  to  urinate;  after  2  a.m.,
palpitation,  in  bed  ;  at  3  o'clock,  swelling  in  the  throat ;  awake  at  3  a.m.  ;
with  dreams;  for  a  thin  stool;  stool,  with  chilliness;  at  4  a.m.,  stool;
sexual  desire;  sleepiness,  from  midnight  until  5  a.m. — {Open  air),  Pain  in
the  soft  palate,  after  skating ;  red  nose  in  the  open  air  ;  averse  to  walking
in  the  wind. — {Just  after  getting  into  bed),  sudden  explosion  and  cracking
in  left  ear,  etc. — {Bending  body  fonoard),  Stooping  aggravates  the  head-
ache; stooping  forward  increases  pain  in  liver;  pain  in  breast-bone;  burn-
ing in  the  neck  ;  *stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  "  croupe,"  when  stooping. —
{Cold),  Cloudy  weather  causes  ill-humor ;  very  sensitive  to  cold  weather;
less  endurance  of  cold  ;  fresh  cold  air  increases  the  headache ;  raw  voice
returning  in  the  open  and  cold  air ;  pain  in  abdomen  as  from  taking  cold.
— {On  chewing).  The  palate  painful,  etc. — {Contact),  Pains  in  head  ;  pull-
ings,  etc. — {Darkness),  Headache. — (After  dinner).  Small  stool,  etc. —
(Lying),  Lying  on  the  abdomen,  with  cuttings  around  the  navel,  but  not
relieved  ;  on  account  of  pain  in  back,  cannot  lie  on  back,  only  on  side ;  on
lying  in  a  warm  room,  cold  legs ;  on  lying  down  (and  awhile  afterward),
throbbing  in  the  head. — (Motion),  Exercise  increases  the  headache ;  pain
in  the  nose,  only  on  motion  ;  nausea  ;  the  cutting  abdominal  pains  ;  pain
from  flatulence ;  the  pains  from  the  stomach  to  the  chest ;  on  motion,  par-
ticularly of  the  arms,  pain  in  the  breast-bone;  cracking  of  the  cervical  ver-
tebrae; pain  in  the  neck;  the  great  toe  feels  as  if  sprained. — (Moving  the
arm),  The  arches  from  the  arm  to  the  chest  pain. — (Pressure),  The  abdomi-
nal pains;  abdomen  sensitive  to  touch;  seems  to  aggravate  the  symptoms.
— (Pressing  the  teeth  together).  Sensation  of  numbness  behind  the  ears ;
pain. — (Raising  the  body).  On  rising  up  from  lying,  the  abdominal  muscles
pain  ;  on  rising  up  from  stooping,  jerks  in  the  chest ;  on  rising  in  the  morn-
ing, pain  in  chest  as  if  sprained. — (Rest),  Beating  in  the  abdomen  and  pal-
pitation ;  pain  across  the  loins ;  in  the  midday  rest,  cold  feet. — (Sitting),
While  sitting,  pulsating  in  the  anus ;  while  sitting,  more  pressing  in  the
loins ;  heaviness  in  the  loins ;  after  sitting,  stiffness  in  the  loins. — (Spitting),
Kaw  pain  in  larynx. — (Standing),  Pain  in  liver. — (After  stool),  Pain  in
anus. — (Stretching  the  body),  Pains  in  the  abdomen  ;  sticking,  drawing  in
chest. — (Stretching  out  the  hand).  Pain  therein,  as  if  too  short. — (  Walking),
On  walking,  it  shakes  in  the  head  ;  jerks  in  the  left  hypochondrium  ;  stitches
in  the  anus ;  cracking  of  the  hip-joint ;  stitches  in  right  knee-joint ;  pain  in
left  ankle-bone;  shiverings;  vertigo  on  going  upstairs  and  turning  quickly ;
at  every  step,  the  stitches  in  the  temple  are  much  worse  ;  on  making  amis-
step,  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  on  bodily  exertion,  pain  in  chest. —
(  Warmth),  Headache. — (  Writing),  Drawings  in  the  left  forearm.

Aineliorafions. — (Afternoon),  Easy  passage  of  flatus. — (Evening),
Unhappy  mood  better;  conciliatory  mood ;  inclination  to  work;  not  vexed  ;
aroused ;  happy  mood ;  dryness  of  lips ;  chilliness ;  hands  and  feet  again


192  ALSTONIA  SCHOLARIS— ALUMEN.

warm. — {In  cool  air),  Headache. — {Open  air),  Feels  better;  especially  the
headache  and  ill-humor  abate ;  exercise  in  open  air  relieves ;  all  the  symp-
toms disappear  or  are  ameliorated  on  exercise  in  the  open  air ;  walking  in
open  air  relieves  pain  in  bowels. — {Bending  body  forward),  Pains  in  abdomen
compel  him  to  sit  crouched  together ;  crouching  relieves  cuttings  in  abdo-
men.— {Light),  Headache.— (ifoiiow),  Drawings;  burnings  in  the  neck;
sacral  \)ains.^{Pre3,nire),  Beaten  feeling  in  head  ;  he  is  compelled  to  press
on  the  abdomen,  which  relieves  him ;  relieves. — {Rest),  Must  sit  still,  else
he  would  have  to  vomit. — {Sitting),  Must  sit  down  and  sleep,  with  anxiety
of  the  chest. — {Stretching  out  straight).  Pain  in  breast-bone. — (  Walking),
Better  than  when  sitting ;  pain  in  loins ;  cold  feet  become  warm ;  hands
less  so ;  relieved  by  going  about.— (  Warm  weather).  Chilliness.


ALSTONIA  SCHOLARIS  (?).

Nat.  order,  Apocynese  (?),  (A  large  tree  growing  in  India  and  Malabar).
Preparation,  From  the  bark.

Authority. Month.  Hom.  Rev.,  10,  508.  .

Violent  purging  and  cramp  in  the  bowels,  vertigo,  and  general  weakness.
Lt.  Col.  D.  I'Haste  (from  the  tincture,  in  water).

Editor  of  M.  H.  R.  took  a  part  of  a  grain  ;  it  had  a  bitter  taste ;  in-
duced sharp  purging,  with  considerable  pain,  uneasiness  in  the  bowels,  and
great  sense  of  heat  and  irritation  in  the  lower  bowel. — *  Dysentery,".  (Col.
D.  I'Haste.)

ALUMEN.

Alum :  the  crystallized  double  sulphate  of  Aluminum  and  Potassium.
(KA12S04,12HjO.) Preparation,  Triturations  of  the  pure  crystals.

Authorities.'f  1,  Fr.  Husemann,  took  the  30th  and' 12th;  2,  Tr.  took
the  6th  and  12th  ;  3,  Dr.  M.  J.  Rheese,  30th  ;  4,  "  n.  u."  3d  and  lower;  5,
Mrs.  Hz.,  30th ;  6,  R.  sen.,  8d ;  7,  Mrs.  R.  M.  R.,  12th ;  8,  Miss  R.  A.  R.,
6th ;  9,  Mr.  H.  H.  R.,  9th ;  10,  Miss  A.  R.,  6th  ;  11,  C,  Jr.,  6th  ;  12,  Dr.
Jeanes,  3d;  13,  C.  Hg.,  200th  Jen.;  14,Fechner;  15,  Wibmer,  crude ;  16,
from  Marcy,  etc..  Elements  of  a  New  M.  M. ;  17,  Alice  R. ;  18,  Poisoning
by  calcined  Aluni.

JMLitld.. — Conscious  of  all  that  happens ;  conscious  of  the  services  in
church,  while  the  blood  rushes  to  the  head  that  she  hardly  can  hold  it  up
or  keep  her  eyes  open,^ — From  9  a.m.  until  noon  very  depressed  and  sad;
could  have  wept  all  the  time ;  felt  very  much  oppressed,  anxious,  and
heavy,  like  a  stone  on  the  chest,  with  inclination  to  take  a  long  breath
(third  day),^ — Great  anxiety,  and  disbelief  in  the  power  of  medicine  to  re-
lieve him,^ — Feared  to  leave  her  seat  in  church,  after  feeling  faint,^ — They
frighten  him,  ebullitions  going  upwards,*. — Great  fear  in  her  dreams,^ — ■
*  Scarcely  endurable  pains  in  rectum,^  °. — Much  excited,  with  the  twitching,'.
— Excitability  of  feeling,  as  when  one  is  agitated  by  unpleasant  news,l
— [10.]  Great  agitation,  anxiety,  and  restlessness,  t. — Nervous  restlessness

f  The  symptomatology  is,  with  ix  few  exceptions,  taken  from  Bering's  monograph
of  Alumen  :  the  clinical  observations  of  the  old  school  are  not  here  included.


ALUMEN.  193

and  excitement,  more  like  that  caused  by  mental  emotion  than  bodily  ill-
ness,'.— Perceptive  faculties  were  gone  during  the  deathlike  fainting  spell,'.
— When  thinking  about  his  disease,  he  feels  the  heart  beating,'. — After
mental  excitement,  heart  begins  to  beat  violently,'. — More  anxious  at  night
than  at  other  times,'. — Intellect  and  senses  perfect,''.

Head. — In  the  evening,  when  lying  on  the  back,  a  sensation  as  if  ver-
tigo was  coming  on,  with  a  weakness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  dis-
appears when  opening  the  eyes  and  turning  on  the  right  side  (one  hour),'.—
Vertigo  when  looking  downwards,  as  if  he  should  fall  forwards,  and  at
other  times  often  giddy,". — Great  vertigo,  nausea,  and  weakness,'". — [20.]
She  staggers  to  a  chair ;  overcome  by  sudden  nausea,'. — Vertigo,  with
headache,  in  the  evening,  ceases  after  lying  down,^ — Blood  rushes  to  the
head  with  such  rapidity  and  force  that  she  cannot  raise  or  open  her  eyes,'.
— Blood  at  first  driven  to  the  head  by  the  suddenness  and  severity  of  pain,
leaving  it  afterwards,'. — Dull,  heavy  pain  in  the  head,  particularly  in  the
back  of  it,'. — At  8  a.ji.,  severe  jerking  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  fore-
head (third  day),'. — Pain  in  right  of  neck  and  forehead,'. — Temples  shoot-
ing,".— In  the  afternoon  until  evening,  stinging  pain  on  the  vertex,  when
stooping,^ — Pressing  on  top  of  the  head,";  vertex  (third  day),'  h. — Back  of
the  head  pains,'. — [30.]  Pain  in  the  head,  going  from  place  to  place,  com-
ing and  going  (forenoon),'. — The  pain  in  my  head  was  worse  than  any  other
symptom  (worse  in  the  morning  when  getting  awake);  at  one  time  it  was
acute,  shooting  from  one  temple  to  the  other;  at  another,  heavy,  and  pressing
on  the  top  of  my  head,  as  if  a  great  weight  were  placed  thereon,  with  nau-
sea ;  this  continued  all  day  without  cessation,  but  the  sickness  of  the  stom-
ach left  me,  and  returned  at  intervals  only;  it  was  accompanied  by  chilli-
ness and  feeling  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  down  my  back ;  at  another
time  great  heat  throughout  my  body :  in  fact  I  felt  exactly  like  I  did  tlie
time  I  was  attacked  with  small-pox,". — About  twenty-five  minutes  after
taking  the  third  dose,  the  same  sensation  of  warmth  ;  slept  during  the
night;  in  the  morning  some  headache  over  the  eyes  and  pains  on  the  left
side  of  the  chest,*. — Wakes  in  the  morning  with  pressing  headache  over
the  eyes,  which  lasts  until  10  a.m.;  headache  is  relieved  by  drinking  cold
water ;  the  following  morning  the  same  symptom  (first  and  second  days) ;
in  the  evening,  at  half-past  nine,  the  same  headache  as  in  the  morning,
with  vertigo,  lasts  until  bedtime ;  lessens  after  lying  down  to  sleep,^ — Great
pain  in  head,  and  nausea,  when  awaking  at  night,". — Headache,  with  sick-
ness,".— Headache,  lasting  all  afternoon,  after  attack  at  noon,". — Pain  in
head  after  cold  feeling,". — Head  and  hands  cold  ;  blood  seemed  to  be  for-
saking them,'. — Headache  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water.

Eyes, — [40.]  Sight  grew  dim,  with  attack  of  pain  in  the  stomach,'.—
When  opening  eyes  vertigo  disappears,'. — Looking  down,  vertigo,". — Pain
over  the  left  eye,^. — Bruised  feeling  on  the  inferior  edge  of  orljit  of  left
eye  on  pressure,  or  by  moving  the  eyelids  (after  eight  days  for  two  days),'-.
— Itching,  burning  on  the  border  of  the  right  lower  eyelid,  followed  by
milder  itching,  also  on  the  left  lower  lid  and  on  the  left  hip ;  in  the  morn-
ing (second  day),'. — Burning,  itching  on  the  right  lower  eyelid,'  b. — Spongy
excrescences  of  the  lachrymal  caruncle  and  of  the  eyelids  (Lefevre).

E(irs. — Hears  evepy thing  in  sleep;  his  bird's  moving  in  the  cage  ;  what
happens  around  her,^ — At  midnight,  heat  in  both  ears  and  left  side  of  the
face,  disappearing  when  going  to  bed,'  b.

Nose. — [50.]  Great  dryness  in  nose. — In  choansa  dryness  from  throat,'.

Face. — Animated  expression  of  the  face,  with  fever,". — Face,  left  side,

VOL. I. — 13


194  ALUMEN.

heat  at  night,'. — Embonpoint  from  general  bloating,  with  a  sickly  and  sal-
low complexion,"  °. — Sickly,  sallow  complexion. — Deathly  pale,  she  sup-
posed she  was,'. — Deathly  pallor  of  the  face,  like  a  corpse,  with  cramp  in
stomach,'". — Pain  in  the  left  articulation  of  the  jaw  close  to  the  ear,*. —
When  shaving,  the  chin  bleeds  from  slight  scratch,  in  the  morning  (second
day),\ — [60.]  Lower  lip  twitching,  with  pain  in  stomach,'. — Lips  blue,'".

JMLouth. — Mouth  very  dry  after  five  hours,  but  the  thirst  not  increased,"^
— Dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat,'". — Very  severe  pain  in  mouth  ;  burn-
ing sensation  and  dryness  of  the  mouth,'". — In  mouth  burning  pains,  burn-
ing,'".— Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  feeling  of  dryness  on
the  tongue  ;  qualmishness  in  the  stomach,  and  accumulation  of  wind  in  the
abdomen  (third  day),'  h.

Taste  (iiid  Tongue, — -Immediately  after  taking  it,  at  midnight,  a
metallic  taste  and  slight  nausea  ;  she  was  very  sick,  and  went  to  sleep  soon,
and  slept  until  5  a.m.,'. — Immediately  after  taking  it,  metallic  taste  in  the
mouth,  and  slight  nausea,  more  like  qualmishness,'. — Taste  sourish,  astrin-
gent, with  a  disgusting  sweetish  after-taste,  t. — [70.]  Metallic,'.^Burning,
sourish  feeling  on  the  right  side  of  tongue ;  after  taking  30th,'. — In  the
evening,  after  taking  it,  burning, sourish  feeling  on  the  tongue,'  b. — Stitches
in  the  tongue,  especially  on  the  tip,'  b. — Tongue  rough,  and  as  if  scraped,
in  the  morning,'. — Feeling  of  dryness  on  the  tongue,  especially  on  the  fore-
part, as  if  it  had  been  scraped  (notwithstanding  there  being  sufficient  saliva
in  the  mouth),  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — In  the  evening,  immediately
after  taking  it,  burning  on  the  tongue  (second  day),'.

Palate  and  Throat. — Roof  of  the  mouth  thickly  coated  with
phlegm,^. — After  the  powder  of  Alum  was  blown  in  the  throat,  to  cure  a  red-
ness there,  the  lower  half  of  the  uvula  was  like  a  berry  hanging  on  a  string
from  the  upper  part,'l — Pains  in  gullet,  extending  up  into  the  swallow,
pain  from  stomach,'. — [80.]  Very  severe  pains  in  the  pharynx ;  burning
in  the  mouth,  pharynx,  and  stomach,'". — Thick  phlegm  in  the  throat,  and
the  roof  of  the  mouth  is  thickly  coated  with  it,^ — He  spit  up  a  lump  of
coagulated  blood  in  the  morning  after  rising  (third  day),^ — Tickling  in
throat  after  rising,'. — In  throat,  scratching,  with  the  cough,'  °. — Prickling
sensation  in  both  sides  of  the  throat,  and  great  dryness,  with  constant
desire  to  drink ;  the  dryness  extended  to  the  posterior  nares,  and  rose  into
the  throat  (after  two  weeks),'. — Soreness  and  dryness  in  the  throat,  on  both
sides,  when  talking,  and  when  swallowing  (two  weeks  after  taking  the  last
dose),". — Dryness  in  the  throat,  with  desire  to  drink,'.— Heat  and  burning
in  the  throat  and  larynx,'". — In  pharynx,  burning  pains,  burning  down  the
oesophagus,'".

A]}petite. — [90.]  Appetite  was  rather  increased  (Barthez). — Undis-
turbed appetite  after  two  hours;  increased  in  two  days,'^ — One  drachm,
dissolved  in  water,  taken  in  small  doses  during  the  twenty-two  hours,  in-
creased the  appetite  and  digestion  moderately,  increased  the  secretion  of
urine,  confined  the  bowels  somewhat,  but  without  injuring  digestion,'*. —
Increased  appetite,'  b. — LTnusually  good  appetite,  and  thirst  (third  week),".
— Good  appetite,  with  fulness  of  stomach,^ — Increased  appetite  and  thirst,
after  a  sensation  of  contraction  in  the  stomach,'^ — Appetite  lessened,  t —
No  appetite;  she  eats  little  (twenty -first  day),".

Thirst. — Desire  to  drink,  with  dryness  in  the  throat,'. — [100.]  Thirst
intense,'". — Thirst,  and  good  appetite,";  thirst  and  appetite  increased,''. —
Thirst,  with  heat  in  the  stomach,  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water,". — Thirst
and  appetite  increased  after  contraction  of  stomach,'\ — Intense  thirst,  with


ALUMEN.  ■  195

fever,'*. — Before  breakfast,  attack  of  nausea ;  worse  during  breakfast,  better
after  it,';  during  breakfast,  cough  worse,' °;  after  it,  full  in  stonlach,^ —
Eating  something,  with  sinking  in  stomach,  she  feels  better,* — While  at
dinner,  erections,'. — ^After  the  meal,  heaviness  in  the  stomach,  and  a  throb-
bing like  in  an  abscess;  distension  of  the  stomach  and  epigastrium,*. — After
eating,  violent  throbbing  in  the  stomach,  lasting  twenty-five  minutes,'.

Gastric  Symptoms. — [110,]  Immediately  after  taking  a  dose,
each  time  some  eructations,'^ — Slight  nausea  immediately  after  taking
the  12th,'. — Nausea,'*. — Qualmish  in  stomach,';  sickness  at  intervals,";
when  awakening  at  night,  prevents  falling  asleep  again,';  continues  in  the
morning,  preventing  him  from  going  to  his  work,". — Two  hours  after  taking
it  in  the  morning,  she  was  taken  with  nausea,  faintness,  and  weakness,
lasting  until  the  afternoon,*. — Nausea  and  faintness  in  the  morning,  together
with  nervous  restlessness  and  excitement,  which  seemed  more  like  that  pro-
duced by  agitation  of  the  mind  than  by  illness  of  the  body.  The  pain  re-
turned about  the  same  time  in  the  afternoon,  and  I  have  not  been  entirely
free  from  it  since,*. — Nausea  in  the  morning,  with  such  a  weakness  that
she  is  unable  to  sit  up  (twenty-second  day),*  *. — Nausea  and  vertigo,'" ;  and
headache,";  and  metallic  taste,' ;  and  faintness,* ;  and  chilliness,". — Loath-
ing of  food,*;  with  pain  in  stomach,*;  nausea  with  it,'*;  sickness,'"*. —
Nausea,  with  retching,  as  if  everything  would  come  up  the  throat,'. — [120.]
Inclination  to  vomit,  fifteen  minutes,  but  no  vomiting  (after  two  and  a  half
drachms);  vomiting  easy,  and  not  preceded  by  much  nausea;  same  time
with  constipation  after  (three  drachms)  (Barthez). — Nausea  and  vomit-
ing,'*; with  fever,  t. — She  spits  up  a  lump  of  coagulated  blood  in  the  morn-
ing after  rising- (second  day),'. — Vomiting  and  disturbed  digestion  after
large  doses  (Sundelin).

Stomach. — Immediately  acute  pain  in  the  stomach  and  gullet,  burn-
ing in  the  mouth,  and  nausea;  symptoms  of  a  severe  attack  of  inflamma-
tion in  stomach  and  bowels  ensued  ;  for  several  days  not  out  of  danger.
After  a  single  dose  of  a  solution  of  ten  to  twenty  grains,'*. — Pain  in  stomach,
nausea,  vomiting,  colic,  more  frequent  discharges  from  the  bowels,'*. — Pain
and  nausea  in  the  stomach,  and  pain  and  rushing  of  blood  to  the  head,
with  drowsiness,  which  lasted  several  hours,". — Next  morning  I  rose  at  5
o'clock,  and  soon  after,  I  think  in  less  than  an  hour,  was  suddenly  attacked
with  severe  pain  and  nausea,  together  with  a  convulsive  bearing  in  the
stomach,  resembling  the  deathly  sickness  of  pregnancy,  but  without  vomit-
ing ;  this  was  also  attended  by  faintness  and  flashing  to  the  head,  which
made  assistance  necessary  to  remove  me  to  a  chamber.  I  think  the  symp-
toms lasted  a  full  hour,  and  were  succeeded  by  partial  loss  of  voice,  sore-
ness of  throat,  and  occasional  throbbing  of  the  heart,'. — Nausea  and  faint-
ness, accompanied  with  a  sick,  griping  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  loathing
of  food,*. — The  next  day  at  noon,  just  as  she  returned  from  school,  she  was
seized  instantaneously  with  the  most  acute  pain  in  the  stomach ;  her  mother
saw  her  looking  perfectly  well,  and  in  less  than  five  minutes,  found  her
sitting  drawn  together  with  her  knees  against  her  breast,  and  a  face  like  a
corpse ;  deathly  pallor ;  lips  blue.  She  said,  "  Oh,  mother,  I  feel  so
strangely,  I  think  I  have  the  cramp."  Cham,  relieved,  but  there  remained
great  vertigo  and  nausea ;  she  complained  of  being  very  cold,  but  did  not
shudder;  great  weakness,  as  after  long  illness,  with  headache  lasting  all
afternoon,". — [130.]  About  .3^  and  4  o'clock,  p.m.,  sitting  in  church,  she
was  seized  with  a  sharp,  steady  pain  in  the  stomach,  accompanied  by  the
most  deathlike  faintness  she  ever  recollected  to  have  felt,  with  extreme


196  ALUMEN.

sickness  and  immediate  loss  of  strength.  A  cold  sweat  covered  her;  she
thinks  she  must  have  been  deathly  pale,  for  she  felt  as  though  the  blood
(which  had  at  first  been  driven  to  the  head  by  the  suddenness  and  severity
of  the  pain),  were  leaving  it  and  the  extremities  altogether;  they  were
quite  cuid  ;  her  sight  grew  dim,  and  she  became  so  faint  that  she  expected
every  moment  to  fall  from  her  seat. — The  pain  in  the  stomach  felt  as
though  it  would  draw  her  double.  Having  no  friend  near  her  she  feared
to  make  the  attempt  to  leave  the  pew,  lest  she  should  not  have  strength  to
reach  the  door  unaided,  much  less  her  home.  The  attack  lasted,  she
thinks,  about  half  an  hour,  after  which  the  violence  of  the  pain  gradually
abated,  the  faintness  passed  off,  the  chilliness  gave  place  to  heat,  and  the
blood  rushed  to  her  head,  with  such  a  force,  that  she  could  hardly  hold  it
up,  or  keep  her  eyes  open,  though  quite  conscious  of  the  services  going  on
about  her.  After  services  she  was  able  to  walk  slowly  home,  though  very
weak,  feeling  very  much  as  if  she  had  been  ill  for  a  month.  She  felt  the
weakness  especially  in  her  back,  although  she  had  no  pain  there,  but  during
the  rest  of  the  evening,  whenever  drawing  a  long  breath,  it  appeared  to
come  from  a  spot  on  each  side  of  the  spine,  about  the  middle  of  the  back,
on  a  line  with  the  inferior  angles  of  the  scapulae  (fifth  day).  The  effects
passed  off  with  a  night's  rest,  and  she  had  no  further  return  of  the  symp-
toms (nor  has  she  had  such  an  attack  since,  two  years  after),'. — At  3  p.m.,
while  sitting,  a  sudden  jerking  pain  from  the  stomach  up  into  the  swallow,
at  the  same  time  a  twitching  of  the  lower  lip,  and  weak  feeling  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach  ;  he  has  to  rise  and  walk  about  when  all  the  symptoms
vanish,'  b. — At  8  p.m.,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  a  severe  pain  to  the
left  of  the  scrobiculuui,  somewhat  relieved  by  standing  still  and  pressing
ou  it,  and  disappearing  when  bending  double ;  when  continuing  his  walk
the  pain  returns,  but  a  little  lower  than  in  the  first  place,  and  becomes
more  perceptible  with  every  step,'  b. — Pressing  pain  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  followed  by  throbbing  sensation,  when  lying  on  the  back  in  the
evening  (first  day)  (second  day),\ — In  the  forenoon,  at  11  o'clock,  a  sink-
ing sensation  at  the  stomach ;  after  eating  something  she  felt  stronger,  but
had  for  fifteen  minutes  a  violent  throbbing,  fifteen  minutes  after  which  it
got  better  (twenty-second  day),*. — Every  morning,  as  often  before,  some
cough,*. — Fainty  weakness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  she  had  it  during
pregnancy,'. — Weakness  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  vertigo  in  the  evening,
while  lying  on  his  back,' ;  when  sitting,  has  to  rise,^ — Feeling  of  uneasi-
ness in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  rapid,  short  breathing,' 6. — [^40.]  Un-
pleasant feeling  in  the  stomach,  t. — Sense  of  contraction  in  the  stomach,
lasting  for  fifteen  minutes,  followed  by  acute  aching  in  the  stomach  ;  half
drachms  in  an  ounce  of  water  (Barthez). — Pressing  or  contractive  pains
in  the  stomach  (T.  W.). — Feeling  of  a  strong  contraction  of  the  stomach ;
soon  after,  increased  appetite  and  thirst,  more  active  digestion,'^. — After
breakfast,  fourth  day, feels  very  full  in  the  stomach,  and  yet  good  appetite;
she  thinks  if  she  could  vomit  she  would  feel  better,  but  has  no  nausea,^ —
A  sensation  of  a  fulness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  urges  him  to  take  a  deep
breath,  but  he  cannot,^"  Jen.,". — Heaviness  in  the  stomach,*. — Distension
of  stomach," ;  epigastrium,*. — From  pit  of  stomach  warm  creeps  run  down,'.
— Nausea  in  the  morning,  and  so  weak  that  she  could  not  sit  up  ;  she  felt  a
heat  in  the  stomach,  with  great  thirst,  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water
(twenty-second  day),*.— [150.]  Stomach,  burning  pains,  burning,'*. — Heat
and  burning  in  the  pit  of  stomach,  and  a  feeling  of  fulness  there,"  Jen.,".
— Tenderness  to  the  touch,  and  with  burning  in  the  pit  of  stomach,'". —


ALUMEN.  197

Burning  heat  and  tearing  pains  in  the  stomach,". — A  distension  of  the
stomach  and  of  the  scrobiculutn,  after  eating  (several  weeks)/  *. — Throbbing
as  in  an  abscess,  and  heaviness  in  stomach ;  throbbing  sensation  In  pit  of
stomach  while  lying  on  his  back  (evening  in  bed),^ — Habitual  hemorrhages
from  the  stomach,  such  as  are  sometimes  observed  in  hard  drinkers ;  re-
peated doses  of  the  first  decimal  trituration  are  highly  serviceable,'"  °. —
Much  gas  in  the  stomach,  at  once,'°. — A  throbbing  in  the  epigastrium,  ex-
tending to  the  heart,  with  violent  palpitation,^ — Distension  of  epigastric
region,*;  and  pain,'*.

AJxlomen, — [160.]  A  stitching  pain  runs  straight  down  the  median
line  of  the  abdomen  into  the  penis,  as  though  it  followed  a  thread,'. — Warm
creeps  running  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  down  over  the  abdomen,  fol-
lowed by  jerking  contractions  of  the  abdominal  muscles,  from  sides  towards
the  linea  alba  (fifteen  minutes  after),™  '. — Relaxed  feeling  in  the  abdomen
(third  day),'" '5. — Weakness,'. — Accumulation  of  wind  in  the  abdomen,'. —
Distension  of  the  bowels,". — Taken  internally  in  large  doses,  Alum  excites
nausea,  vomiting,  griping,  purging,  and  even  an  inflammatory  condition  of
the  intestinal  canal ;  effects  which  may  perhaps  be  induced  by  small  quan-
tities, in  persons  endowed  with  unusual  or  morbid  sensibility  of  the  stomach
and  bowels  (Pereira). — Burning  pain  in  the  small  intestines,". — Fearful
burning  in  the  lower  part  of  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;  can  scarcely  get
up';  she  feels  as  though  her  back  would  break  (third  day),'.— Colic,  with
pain  in  stomach,'*.-^[170.]  Without  producing  either  nausea,  pain  or  con-
stipation, it  relieved  colic  pains,'"  °. — Pain  in  the  belly  when  walking,  with
fulness  and  heaviness,'  °. — In  the  evening,  jerking  contraction  of  the  large
abdominal  muscles,  from  both  sides  below  towards  the  linea  alba  (fifteen
minutes  after  taking),^"  ^

Stool. — Usual  fluid  discharges  cease ;  and,  notwithstanding  his  various
meals,  no  second  stool,  as  usual",  but  a  sparing,  scanty,  consistent  opening
(the  second  day),'°. — Stools  become  more  diflicult  for  two  or  three  days  (after
some  drachms,  which  partly  had  been  vomited  up),". — Costiveness,'*. — -In
small  doses  it  always  causes  a  rarer,  dryer,  and  harder  stool ;  in  somewhat
stronger  doses  irritation,  more  exudation  and  copious  stools  (Vogt). — The
bowels  confined,"'.^In  the  afternoon,  difficult  passage  of  a  hard  stool,  with
some  blood  (the  first  day),'.^In  the  afternoon,  hard  stool,  expelled  with
difficulty,  and  some  blood ;  followed  by  beating  in  the  anus  (second  day),'.
— First  hard,  then  soft  stools  and  pain  following,"  °. — [180.]  Relieved
constipation  entirely ;  the  stools  since,  of  natural  consistence  and  fre-
quency," °. — Costiveness  of  long  standing ;  30  cent.,'  °. — Stools  dry,  sel-
dom,'".— Copious,  solid  stools,". — In  large  doses  it  acts  as  a  purgative,  t. —
More  frequent  discharges,". — Had  had  several  days  three  or  four  diarrhoea
discharges,  and  while  damp  weather  favored  this  state,  after  taking  Alum
in  solution,  no  stools  appeared ;  the  next  day  only  one  scanty,  consistent
evacuation  ;  the  following  day,  in  the  morning,  a  copious,  mushy  stool.
After  omitting  the  Alum,  soon  a  light  looseness  returned  four  or  five  times
a  day,'°. — Diarrhoea,  with  frequent  strong  tenesmus,  slimy  discharges;  and
while  they  pass  very  violent  pains  in  the  rectum,  going  down  into  the
thighs.  A  tuberculous  patient,'. — Diarrhoea,  stools  yellow  like  those  of  an
infant  (three  on  eleventh  day),'^ — Diarrhoea  appearing  during  the  typhus
abdominalis,  consuming  the  strength  of  the  patient,  is  quickest  relieved  by
it  (Maly.  in  Hygeia,  16,  335),  °. — Diarrhoea  in  tuberculous  patients,'"  °.
— [190.]  Blood  with  stool,'. — Great  masses  of  coagulated  black  blood
pass  from  the  anus  in  the  third  week  of  typhus,  with  signs  of  the  greatest


198  ALUMEN.

exhaustion.  A  girl  of  18  years,  3d  cent,  in  water,"  °. — Diarrhoea,  with
frequent  violent  urging,  slimy  stools  with  severe  pains  in  the  rectum  during
stool,  going  down  into  the  thighs,\ — Fetid,  bloody  ichor  from  the  rectura,°. —
Putrid  dysentery  (Jahr.),°.— During  stool,  pains  in  rectum,'. — During  stool
strong  dyspnoea,". — After  stool,  smarting  and  burning  at  rectum,"*;  pains
in  anus  and  rectum,'  '^ ;  in  rectum, °  ;  violent,"  (for  three  or  four  hours). —
After  a  stool,  beating  in  anus,'. — After  a  hard  stool,  hsemorrhoidal  tumors,'^

Rectiitn  and  Anus. — [200.]  Violent  urging  to  stool,'. — In  rectum,
severe  pains  during  stool,'. — With  the  stool,  tearing  in  rectum,". — Smart-
ing and  burning  at  the  rectum,  after  a  solid  stool,"*. — Beating  in  the  anus,
after  a  stool  (second  day),'. — Violent  pains  in  the  anus  and  rectum,  a  few
minutes  after  stoul  ;  stinging  and  tearing  up  the  rectum,  relieved  by  bend-
ing forward  and  sittine  bent  over ;  worse  particularly  when  lying  on  one
side ;  somewhat  better  from  lying  on  back  ;  at  the  same  time  burning  and
throbbing  in  the  anus,'  °. — In  frequent  attacks,  first  hard,  then  soft  stools,
and  after  it,  for  three  hours,  the  most  violent  pains,  burning,  shooting,  and
particularly  cutting  in  the  rectum  upwards,  lasting  from  morning  till
noon  ;  with  the  stool  passes  a  great  deal  of  blood,  without  any  relief;  some-
times a  sensation  as  if  the  anus  would  protrude.  After  the  patient  had
carried  a  piece  of  Alum  in  his  breeches  pocket,  he  never  had  it  again.
(Reported  to  Dr.  Neidhard.) — ^The  same  symptoms  have  in  many  cases  been
cured  by  giving  high  potencies,'^ — Severe  pains  in  the  anus  and  rectum,
appearing  several  minutes  after  stool ;  stinging  and  tearing  up  the  rectum,
relieved  by  bending  forward  and  sitting  bent  forward ;  particularly  worse
when  lying  on  the  side  ;  not  so  much  when  lying  on  the  back ;  burning
and  throbbing  in  the  anus ;  after  five  days  better,  but  then  a  stitching  pain
from  the  upper  part  of  the  left  chest  through  to  the  back,  between  the
shoulder  blades ;  worse  at  night  in  bed ;  it  wakes  him ;  increases  when
lying  on  the  left  side;  not  increased  by  taking  a  long  breath  ;  at  the  same
time,  sudden  attacks  of  flutterings  at  the  heart,  disappearing  as  quickly  as
they  came.  A  man  with  chronic  asthma  (Dr.  J.  Husmann),°. — A  woman
with  what  was  called  cancer  of  the  rectum  (?),  caused  by  a  metallic  pes-
sary introduced  in  the  vagina  for  prolapsus  uteri,  and  remaining  there  for
years,  which  had  been  somewhat  benefited  by  Nux.  and  Sulp.,  but  not
permanently. — Intense  pains  in  the  anus,  and  in  the  rectum  the  worst,  par-
ticularly after  stool ;  she  can  scarcely  endure  it ;  sometimes  lasting  three
or  four  hours.  During  stool,  strong  dyspnoea. — Four  days  after  taking  30
cent.,  more  relief  than  from  any  other  remedy  since  three  months ;  for  the
first  time,  stool  without  pains ;  was  perfectly  cured,  had  no  return,  even
after  a  scirrhus  was  cut  out  of  the  mamma  six  years  later,  and  is  nearly  well
now,  twenty-five  years  after,' °. — [210.]  Ulceration  of  the  rectum  ;  if  there
is  an  ulcerated  surface,  and  mostly  exceedingly  painful  excrescences  and
fetid,  bloody  ichor,  2°  (Wolf),°. — -Hsemorrhoidal  tumor  after  a  hard
stool,". — -Piles,  with  aching  within  the  anus  (after  eight  days),'l — A
small  lump  at  the  anus  itches  violently,  particularly  in  the  night,  not  so
much  during  the  day,'  6. — Itching  at  the  anus  all  evening  (first  and  second
day),'._

TJpine. — -Increased  secretion  of  urine,'". — Frequent  urination,'  h. — The
urine  becomes  remarkably  acid  from  the  use  of  it  (Kraus). — In  the
morning  a  bluish,  iridizing  film  on  the  urine  passed  the  evening  before,'  b.
— Brown,  muddy  urine,  over  which  is  formed  a  thin,  variegated  cuticle,
like  that  which  is  formed  over  stagnant  water  that  contains  iron  (after  six
days),'. — [220.]  The  urine  looks  as  though  cheesy  milk  had  been  stirred


ALUMEN.  199

into  it/ 6. — White,  cloudy  uriae  (after  tea  hours),'. — Orifice  of  urethra
itching,'.

Male  Genitals. — While  at  dinner  (2  o'clock),  erections;  something
quite  unusual  (third  day),' 6. — In  the  night  an  emission  of  very  thick
semen  ;  felt  unusually  well  and  strong  next  morning,' i. — A  cuttiug  pain
in  the  left  side  of  the  penis,'. — Shooting  pain  from  the  middle  line  of  the
belly,  as  along  a  thread  down  into  the  penis  (third  day),'^ '^ — Itching  on
the  scrotum  and  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  in  the  evening  (second  day),'.

Female  Genitals. — In  the  highest  degrees  of  weakness  of  uterus,
its  good  influence  is  only  transient  (Hufeland). — Higher  potencies  relieved
permanently  if  indicated  by  the  symptoms,"  °. — Causes  induration  and  scir-
rhus  uteri,  if  continually  used  for  copious  menstruation  and  hemorrhages
(Hufeland). — [230.]  Catamenia  very  scanty  and  more  watery  than  usual
(33  years  old),  has  usually  very  profuse  menstruation,". — During  catamenia
hands  weak,  drops  things  easily,^ — Menses  did  not  appear  since  several
months,  no  good  digestion,  loss  of  strength,  pain  in  the  lower  limbs,  par-
ticularly at  night ;  the  collura  uteri  swollen  and  puffed  up,  the  vagina  very
sensitive,  and  narrowed,  particularly  at  the  orifice,  by  swellings  of  various
size  (Jacquot). — As  she  had  it  during  pregnancy,  faint  weakness  in  pit  of
stomach,'.

Respii'atOt'lf. — Hoarseness,  voice  shrill,  cannot  talk  loud ;  at  times
she  feels  as  though  she  had  lost  her  voice ;  altogether  the  sound  of  the
voice  varied  when  talking,  it  is  sometimes  high,  sometimes  low  ;  cannot
talk  loud  enough,'. — After  a  week,  repeated  the  proving  with  precisely
similar  though  less  violent  effects,  except  that  her  voice  was  entirely  lost
for  a  full  week,  and  the  soreness  of  the  throat  became  so  troublesome,  as
apparently  to  give  her  doctor  some  uneasiness ;  he  called  repeatedly  and
administered  medicine  several  times  during  the  ensuing  fortnight.  This
aphony  lasted  for  months,'. — Hoarseness ;  worse  from  talking,  which  like-
wise causes  a  tickling  cough,'. — Hoarseness  with  tickling  cough,' °;  with
cough  in  the  evening,'". — Talking  increases  hoarseness,';  voice  changing,';
throat  dry,^;  causes  a  tickling  cough,'.

Larynx. — Tickling  in  the  larynx  causing  cough  (Trbg.). — [240.]
Tickling  in  throat  causes  cough,'  °  ;  scratching  like  dust  in  larynx,^. — Pain-
ful scraping  sensation  of  roughness  in  the  larynx,  with  expectoration  of
much  clear  mucus,  for  two  or  three  days  after  taking  the  medicine,'. — With
the  cough,  scraping  in  the  throat  to  the  middle  of  the  sternum  ;  rawness  in
the  breast ;  but  slight  expectoration,'. — In  larynx,  heat  and  burning,'*. —
Sense  of  constriction  in  the  windpipe,'^

Bfeatlilng. — Oppression  of  chest ;  tightness  across  the  upper  part ;
sense  of  heat  and  burning,  t. — Sensation  as  if  ligated  in  chest,'. — With
every  deep  inhalation,  pain  on  both  sides  of  the  spine,  in  the  middle,*. —
When  inhaling,  pain  in  clavicle,'. — Rapid  short  breathing  with  uneasiness
in  stomach,'. — [250.]  Respiration  rapid,'*. — Ineffectual  urging  to  take  a
deep  breath,  by  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,". — Not  increased  by  deep  breath-
ing, stitches  from  chest  to  back,°.

Cough. — *  Cough  from  tickling  in  larynx,  caused  by  talking,^'. — Some
irritation  to  cough,  in  the  morning  after  rising  (first  day) ;  tickling  in  the
throat  causing  cough  (second  day),'. — Tickling  cough  one  hour  after  getting
up  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — Cough  immediately  after  rising,  excited
by  a  tickling  in  the  throat;  worse  during  breakfast,  after  breakfast  better,
and  only  occasional  cough  during  the  day,'  °. — Tickling  cough  in  the  even-
ing, from  twilight  (7  o'clock),  until  bedtime"  with  hoarseness,'  °. — Severe


200  ALUMEN.

spell  of  hard  shaking  cough,  caused  by  a  scratching  sensation  in  the  larynx,
as  if  dust  were  in  it,  which  is  relieved  by  the  discharge  of  a  quantity  of
clear  raucus  (after  a  few  hours),'. — *Dry  cough  in  the  evening  after  lying
down;  after  she  felt  nearly  well ;  but  she  had  a  cough  in  the  evening,'. —
[260.]  Every  morning  (as  often  before),  some  cough  (twenty-second  day),'.
Cough  in  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  excited  by  a  tickling  in
the  throat,  particularly  worse  during  breakfast,  afterwards  better;  only
now  and  then  during  the  day.  The  same  tickling  cough  iu  the  evening,
from  7  o'clock  until  he  goes  to  bed,  with  hoarseness. — When  coughing,  a
scratching  in  the  throat,  to  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  and  rawness  in  the
chest;  very  scanty  expectoration.  After  the  30  cent.,  immediate  improve-
ment; after  three  days  a  relapse;  tlien  with  a  repetition  of  the  dose  for
two  days,  gradual  improvement. — Diarrhoea  with  frequent,  violent  urging;
slimy  stools,  with  severe  pains  in  the  rectum  during  stool,  going  down  into
the  thighs.  A  young  man  who  had  been  given  up  several  years  before  as  an
incurable  consumptive,  but  had  been  afterwards  cured  by  homoeopathy,'  °.
— *  With  the  cough,  scraping  in  throaty. —  When  coughing,  a  scratching  in  the
throat,  to  the  middle  of  sternum,'  °. — Cough,  with  pain  in  region  of  ovary ,'^

JSxpectorntion. — Slight  expectoration,';  very  scanty,'". — Thirst,
phlegm  in  throat  and  on  palate,\ — Expectoration  of  a  mass  of  clear,  trans-
parent phlegmA — Expectoration  relieves  scraping,^ — [270.]  It  evidently
so  changed  the  expectoration  as  immediately  to  cause  a  copious  discharge
of  mucus  from  the  bronchi,  and  finally  checked  the  superabundant  secre-
tion ;  did  not  produce  thirst  or  any  unpleasant  symptoms,  and  so  far  from
aggravating  the  febrile  state,  it  often  served  materially  to  alleviate  it,'^

C/iest. — When  inhaling,  pain  under  the  right  clavicle  and  right
shoulder  (second  day),'. — Since  yesterday,  stinging  from  the  upper  part  of
the  left  chest,  through  to  the  back,  between  the  shoulder-blades.  Worse
at  night  in  bed,  when  it  awakens  him  ;  not  aggravated  by  deep  inhalation,'.
— Stitching  pain  down  the  middle  of  the  chest ;  later  in  the  right  side,^ —
From  upper  left  of  chest  stitches  through  to  the  back,°. — Pain  from  heart
to  lower  part  of  right  lung,'. — Sore  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  under
the  nipple,  especially  when  bending  up  double  (contracting  the  body)  in
the  morning  (second  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  chest  when  sitting,  especi-
ally when  bending  forwards,' 6. — Pains  in  the  chest  to  the  left,  near  the
middle  of  the  sternum,  after  rising,  when  washing  and  dressing,  lasting
until  9  A.M.  The  following  morning  the  same  and  worse  (Trbg.).  Pains
in  the  chest;  on  side  of  chest,*. — [280,]  Rawness  on  the  chest,' *™"°. — To
the  middle  of  sternum,  scraping,  scratching,'  "^  '  °. — Sensation  of  fulness
in  the  chest;  in  the  afternoon,  particularly  after  supper,  painful,  as  if  dis-
tended in  the  chest  and  arms,*. — Soon  after  taking  it  in  the  evening,  felt  a
slight  pain  or  binding  sensation  in  her  breast,  especially  on  the  right  side,
retiring  to  rest  almost  immediately,  it  disappeared  after  lying  down,'". —
Tightnet^s  across  upper  part  of  chest,'*. — Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  lower
part  of  the  chest  and  in  the  abdomen,  6'.

Heavt. — Half  an  hour  after  the  second  dose  he  feels  very  warm  in  the
left  side,  opposite  the  shoulder,  inside,  and  feels  also  very  tired,  still  he  slept
afterwards  very  good,*. — To  the  heart  a  throbbing  from  epigastrium,*. —
From  the  heart  a  pain  shooting  to  the  lower  part  of  right  lung,'. — At  times
quite  well  as  if  nothing  ailed  her,  then,  when  beginning  to  think  about  her
disease,  she  feels  the  heart  beating,  so  that  it  seems  to  move  the  whole
chest;  and  yet,  when  she  places  her  hand  over  it,  it  seems  to  beat  very
little  stronger  than  natural,  and  at  other  times  its  motion  is  scarcely  per-


ALUMEN.  201

ceptible;  sometimes  the  contractions  are  frequent,  sometimes  seldom.  The
contraction  seems  to  end  with  a  snap,  as  if  the  valves  of  the  heart  were
jerked  suddenly  shut,'. — [290.]  Fluttering  of  heart,  sudden  attacks,  dis-
appearing as  quickly  as  they  came,°. — Rapid  and  violent  palpitation,  worse
when  lying  on  the  right  side ;  also  when  lying  in  one  position  for  any  length
of  time ;  has  to  throw  himself  about  in  bed  (twenty-first  day),\ — Percepti-
ble strong  palpitation  and  strong  pulsation  through  the  whole  body,  when
standing  for  some  time  on  one  spot,^6. — Was  in  about  an  hour  seized  with
a  throbbing  of  the  heart,  similar  to  heavy  blows  of  a  hammer,  with  long
intervals;  in  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  the  violence  abated,  and  gradually  sub-
sided,'.— Violent  palpitation  ;  intermitting  beating  of  the  heart,'. — The  pal-
pitation of  the  heart  and  other  symptoms,  except  the  constipation,  were
better  during  the  first  week  until  Saturday,  when  owing  to  a  sudden  ex-
citement, the  heart  began  to  beat  violently,  and  continued  to  do  so  for  a
few  moments,  and  the  palpitation  then  passed  off! — Since  that  time  all
symptoms  have  been  increased,^ — Had  but  little  trouble  with  the  disease
in  heart  since,  and  the  few  slight  attacks  have  been  immediately  relieved
by  it,'  °. — Pulse,  intermittent,'. — Throbbing,  as  in  an  abscess,  in  the  stom-
ach,*; after  a  pressing  pain  there,";  then  throbbing  in  arms,'  "^ '  °. — [300.]
Strong  pulsation  through  the -whole  body,'.

External  Chest. — Tenderness  over  the  second  rib  of  the. left  side
when  touched ;  tenderness  upon  pressure,  later  above  the  left  clavicle,'. —
An  intermitting  sore  pain  along  the  course  of  the  third  rib  of  the  left  side,
which  continues  sometimes  a  minute  (but  more  frequently  less  than  a
minute),  and  is  sometimes  accompanied  with  a  more  stinging  pain  in  the
region  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  rib  of  the  same  side,  which  is  sometimes  felt
in  the  elbow,  at  long,  irregular  intervals,'. — In  the  morning,  sore  pain  in
the  right  chest  under  the  nipple  when  bending  forward,  in  sitting  (second
day),'.

Week. — Pain  on  the  side  of  it,'. — Burning  on  the  right  side  of  the
neck,'  h.

Jiack. — Between  the  shoulder-blades,  stinging,'*. — Stitching  pain  from
upper  left  chest  through  to  the  back  between  the  shoulder-blades,  worse  at
night  in  bed;  awakens  him,  increases  when  lying  on  leftside,  not  by  taking
a  long  breath,°. — Pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  spine,  near  the  spine,  ex-
actly there  where  the  shoulder-blade  ends,'  b. — From  2  o'clock  p.m.  until
evening,  tearing  pain  in  the  back,  at  the  lower  angles  of  the  scapulse,  when
sitting  still,  not  when  moving,^. — [310.]  Under  the  shoulder-blade,*. — Pain
on- both  sides  of  the  spine  on  a  line  with  the  inferior  angles  of  the  scapulse,
with  every  deep  inhalation,  all  evening.  On  each  side  of  the  spine  above
the  middle  of  it,  a  spot  where  the  breath  appears  to  come  from,  drawing  a
long  breath,'. — Feels  as  if  her  back  would  break ;  can  scarcely  get  up,'. —
In  back  the  weakness  is  most  felt,*. — Sensation  as  of  cold  water  running
down  the  back,'. — In  back,  warmth  spreading,*. — In  small  of  back,  burn-
ing,'.— In  the  morning,  fifteen  minutes  after  the  fifth  dose,  a  kind  of  cramp
in  the  back  just  below  the  liipson  both  sides;  very  warm  ebullitions;  the
sensation  goes  from  the  hips  up  the  left  side;  it  frightens  him  and  he
quickly  takes  a  cup  of  coffee,*.

Upper  Limbs. — Great  weakness  in  the  region  of  the  shoulder-blades,
with  inclination  to  bend  forward,  which  relieves,'  b. — Severe  pain  in  the
left  shoulder,*. — [320.]  Pains  in  the  left  shoulder,  which  disappear  from
motion  and  exercise,'  b. — Itching  on  the  right  shoulder,'  b. — Drawing-tear-
ing pains  particularly  in  left  shoulder,'. — Feeling  of  weakness,  a  kind  of


202  ALUMEN.

numbness  in  the  left  arm,  and  particularly  in  the  left  shoulder,^  b. — In  arm,
lack  of  power  and  dull  pain,'. — In  anas,  fulness,* ;  of  bloodvessels,^ — Be-
tween three  and  four  o'clock  I  felt  a  pain  in  my  right  arm  as  though  a
cord  were  drawn  tightly  around  it,  just  below  the  shoulder,  occasioning
great  fulness  of  the  bloodvessels  and  deprivation  of  strength.  The  pain
was  dull  and  heavy,  not  general  throughout  the  arm,  but  rather  in  lines,
extending  in  different  directions  from  the  ligature  which  apparently  bound
it ;  the  weakness  was  such  that  I  could  scarcely  hold  the  needle  which  I
was  using  when  the  pains  commenced ;  it  began  suddenly,  continued  for  a
few  moments,  and  then  abated,  although  it  did  not  leave  me  entirely,  and
returned  at  irregular  intervals  during  the  remainder  of  the  day  and  even-
ing. Renewed  doses  increased  the  pain  in  the  arm,  which  is  this  evening
quite  severe,*. — Pain  in  the  right  arm  as  if  a  string  were  tied  tightly
around  it,^■ — Half  an  hour  after  the  second  dose  pains  in  the  arms  and
pains  over  the  left  eye. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  bones  of  the  arras,  par-
ticularly in  the  right :  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  under  the  left  shoulder-
blade,^ — [330.]  In  the  morning,  for  an  hour,  unpleasant  sensation  in
both  arms,  afterwards  heat,  more  in  the  left  hand,'  b. — ^In  arm,  pain  from
elbow,' ;  in  elbows,'. — In  the  morning,  when  awaking,  rheumatic  pain  in
the  bend  of  the  left  elbow-joint,  when  extending  the  arm ;  disappears  after
rising  and  going  about,' 6. — Bruised  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  arm,  hand,
and  feet,*. — Pain  as  if  sprained  in  the  right  wrist,  at  12  m.,  from  thence
the  pain  goes  into  the  first  phalangeal  joint  of  the  right  forefinger,  where
it  is  a  tearing,  which  disappears  soon,  but  returns  quickly  (third  day) ;  felt
weak  in  the  hands,  during  catamenia;  she  drops  things  easily  that  she
holds  in  her  hands,^. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  hand  and  all  the  finger
joints,*. — Hands  pain," ;  cold,';  heat,*";  trembled  very  much,'". — Finger-
joints  pain,  first  phalangeal  joints,*.

Lower  Limbs. — Great  lassitude  in  the  lower  limbs  when  going  up-
stairs; the  whole  of  the  third  day,*. — In  lower  extremities,  lassitude,^ —
[340.]  Down  into  thighs,  pain  from  rectum,'  °. — When  standing,  bruised
pain  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  after  a  severe  cold,'  b. — Uneasiness  in  the
knees,  with  pain  right  above  them,*.^Pain  in  both  knees,  particularly
in  the  right,  when  walking,*. — Sensation  as  if  a  cord  were  tied  around  the
leg,  under  the  right  knee ;  the  pain  extends  downward  and  upward,  but  is
confined  to  the  lower  leg.  To-night-a  similar  feeling,  though  much  slighter,
in  the  lower  limb  on  the  same  side,  as  though  a  cord  were  bound  round  it
below  the  knee,  the  pain  extending  both  below  and  above,  on  the  under
part  of  the  limb  only,*. — In  the  evening  a  kind  of  numb  sensation  in  the
right  leg,  from  the  knee  down  into  the  foot,  when  lying  on  it  (one  hour),
(first  day),'. — Legs,  from  knees  down,  cold,'. — Pain  in  the  left  ankle-joint
when  walking,  and  particularly  when  going  upstairs ;  in  the  morning  (third
day),'  b. — Pain  in  feet,* '. — Coldness  of  the  feet,  with  numbness,  in  bed,
even  if  the  feet  are  covered  up  warm,'. — [350.]  In  the  feet,  coldness  from
the  knee,'. — Feet  are  very  sensitive  to  pressure,  and  when  walking,  par-
ticularly the  soles,'  b. — Pain  in  the  sole  of  the'foot  between  the  ball  of  the
little  toe  and  the  heel ;  also,  drawing,  tearing  pain,  particularly  in  the  left
shoulder,'  b. — In  the  evening,  when  walking  in  the  street,  stitch  pain  in  the
under  part  of  the  right  big  toe ;  felt  each  time  when  pressing  on  it,  all
evening  (second  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  right  big  toe,'  b.

All  the  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  whole  body,*. — Pain  in  the
right  side  of  the  neck  and  forehead,  then  in  the  left  foot  and  ball  of  the
foot,  then  on  the  vertex,'  6. — Bruised  pain  in  the  whole  body,*. — Slept  well ;


ALUMEN.  203

in  the  morning,  an  hour  after  rising,  tiredness,  and  for  three  hours  a  twitch-
ing in  the  limbs,  particularly  in  the  arm,  and  with  it  much  excited,*. —
Coldness  of  the  legs  from  the  knees  down  to  the  feet,  and  coldness  of  the
hands,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening,^  6. — [360.]  Coldness  of  the  hands,
and  rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  shoulder ;  worse  after  motion,^  b. — Cold
hands  and  feet,  as  if  all  the  blood  had  left  them,  with  pain  in  storaach,^

Generalities, — ^Has  to  throw  himself  about  in  bed,' ;  restlessness,
agitation,  with  fever,'^ — Nervous  tremor  and  excitability  of  feeling,  as
when  one  is  agitated  by  unpleasant  news,^. — Trembling  of  muscles,*. —
Twitching  in  limbs  three  hours  in  the  forenoon,*;  of  lower  lip,\ — Jerking
contraction  of  abdominal  muscles,'^;  follow  the  warm  creeps,^ — Slight  con-
vulsive movements,'*. — Sensation  as  if  a  string  were  tied  around  the  arm
and  lower  limbs,'. — Weak  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach,';  sinking  sensation,';
uneasiness,';  faintness  and  weakness,  as  if  dying,'. — [370.]  Lassitude  in
the  whole  body,  particularly  in  the  left  lower  extremity  (Trbg.).-^ — Feels
very  tired  (soon  after  taking  it),*. — Keeps  the  bed ;  so  faint  that  she  ex-
pected every  moment  to  fall  from  her  seat,';  (reached  her  chamber  with
difficulty;  staggers  to  a  chair),';  deathlike  fainting,'. — Weak  with  the
nausea ;  could  not  sit  up ;  loss  of  strength,  with  sickness ;  faintness  and
nausea  (in  the  morning),'. — ^Very  weak,  as  if  she  had  been  ill  for  some
time,';  great  weakness,  as  after  long  illness,'";  debility  in  typhus,^ — ^I  was
immediately  sensible  of  a  metallic  taste,  and  slight  nausea,  but  soon  fell
asleep,  being  greatly  fatigued,  and  slept  heavily  until  near  five ;  I  arose
without  more  effort  than  usual,  and  about  six,  while  standing  at  a  table
making  some  arrangements  for  breakfast,  was  suddenly  seized  with  the  most
overpowering  nausea,  as  though  my  whole  stomach  were  rising  to  my  throat;
I  tottered  to  a  chair,  when  a  cold  sweat  broke  over  me ;  the  effort  to  vomit
ceased,  though  the  nausea  continued,  attended  by  a  flushing  to  my  head,
extreme  faintness,  and  a  disposition  to  shiver;  I  reached  my  chamber  with
much  difficulty,  and  on  lying  down  felt  some  relief,  chiefly  in  the  faintness,
and  after  taking  some  Ipecacuanha  was  able  to  rise  and  attend  to  my  family,
though  feeling  very  weak ;  strong  palpitation  of  the  heart,  intermitting
pulse ;  the  pain  shoots  from  the  heart  to  the  region  of  the  lower  right  lung,'.
— Great  weakness  after  attack,  particularly  in  spine,'.— He  feels  exactly
as  he  felt  when  he  had  the  small-pox  (second  day),°.

Sleep. — When  going  to  bed  heat  in  ears  and  face  disappears,'. —
Cannot  get  to  sleep  on  account  of  ebullition  of  blood  (first  day),'. —
[380.]  Is  more  anxious  at  night  than  at  other  times,'. — Sleeplessness,  with
fever,  i. — Very  light  sleep  in  the  night ;  hears  nearly  everything  that  hap-
pens (Trbg.). — Very  restless  sleep,  tossing  to  and  fro ;  when  he  does'  sleep
it  is  so  light  that  he  hears  it  if  his  birds  move  in  their  cage  (Trbg.). —
Wakes  at  night,  with  nausea  and  violent  headache ;  lay  awake  about  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  when  he  went  to  sleep  again ;  next  morning,  when  he
was  called,  he  was  unable  to  attend  to  his  business  on  account  of  nausea,
with  violent  headache ;  now  sharp  stinging,  from  temple  to  temple ;  now
heavy  pressure  on  the  vertex,  as  of  a  heavy  weight  lying  on  it ;  continued
all  day  long,". — In  the  night,  half  waking,  half  dreaming,  she  hears  what
happens  around  her,  but  dreams  on,  of  dead  bodies,  that  her  father  had
died ;  with  it  great  fear ;  would  like  to  turn  on  her  side,  but  cannot  do  it,
feels  so  heavy  in  her  bones ;  in  her  dream  it  seems  to  her  as  if  the  dream
would  soon  pass  over  if  she  could  turn  on  her  side,  but  she  is  not  able
to  do  it  (at  4  a.m.,  fourth  day),^ — When  awaking  in  the  night,  thick


204  ALUMEN.

phlegm  in  the  throat,  and  the  roof  of  the  mouth  thickly  coated,  which  she
never  had  before  (third  day),^

Fever. — Very  sensitive  to  cold,  which  was  not  the  case  before  (third
day),**. — Like  after  a  severe  cold,  pain  in  limbs,'. — While  washing  and
dressing,  pain  in  chest,^. — [390.]  Inclination  to  chilliness  after  attack  of
retching,'. — Chilliness  with  the  sickness  at  the  stomach,". — She  complained
of  being  very  cold,  but  did  not  shiver;  it  passed  off,  perhaps  in  an  hour,
but  was  succeeded  by  pain  in  the  head,  which  lasted  all  the  afternoon,". —
In  the  last  attack  the  coldness  was  general ;  she  could  not  distinguish  a
particular  coldness  of  the  feet ;  but  all  perceptive  faculties  were  gone  dur-
ing the  deathlike  fainting  spell,'. — Chilliness,  and  feeling  as  if  cold  water
were  poured  down  the  back,' ". — Coldness  in  hands,' ;  of  legs  and  hands,'.
— Cold  feet,  even  when  covered  up,'. — Creeping  and  coldness  of  the  skin,
soon  after  doses,  followed  by  heat  and  tingling  of  the  same  parts,'^. — Fever,
accompanied  by  intense  thirst;  continued  nausea  and  vomiting;  sleepless-
ness ;  agitation  ;  animated  expression  of  the  face ;  pain  and  distension  of
the  epigastric  region  ;  frequent  pulse,  and  burning  pains  in  the  mouth,
pharynx,  and  stomach,'^ — Sensation  of  warmth,  soon  after  taking  it,'. —
[400.]  Great  heat  throughout  the  body,". — Sensation  all  forenoon,  as  of
inward  heat,". — Heat  and  tingling  following  creeping  and  coldness,". —
Warm  ebullitions  iu  both  sides,*. — He  cannot  get  to  sleep  for  a  long  time,
on  account  of  extraordinary  ebullition  of  blood  in  the  whole  body  (second
day),'. — In  the  morning,  after  the  fourth  dose,  very  soon  tired  ;  warm  ebul-
litions like  spasms  spread  over  the  whole  trunk,  particularly  in  the  back ;
no  pains,  but  a  trembling  of  the  muscles ;  towards  two  o'clock  the  pains
in  the  chest  return ;  feels  better  when  walking,*. — Flushes  of  heat  to  the
head  after  attack,'. — Warm  creeps  run  over  the  abdomen,'. — Cold  sweat ;
breaks  out  over  the  whole  body,';  covers  her,  with  cramps  in  stomach,'.—
Chilliness ;  at  another  time,  great  heat  throughout  the  body,". — [410,]
Coldness,  with  pain  in  the  stomach,  gave  place  to  heat,  and  the  blood  rushed
to  her  head  with  such  force  that  she  scarcely  could  hold  it  n^,".— Chill;
metallic  taste,  slight  nausea,  palpitation  ;  pain  striking  from  the  heart
across  to  the  lower  extremity  of  the  right  lung;  a  sensation. as  of  cold
water  poured  down  the  back,  and  numbing  coldness  of  the  feet,  though
covered  warmly  in  bed  (returned  repeatedly  after  taking  the  12th)  ;  in  the
last  attack  the  chill  was  general ;  I  was  not  sensible  of  any  particular
coldness  of  the  extremities,  though,  indeed,  nearly  all  sensation  was  lost
for  a  time  in  the  deathlike  faintness,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation {Morning),  Headache  over  eyes,  etc. ;

itching-burning  on  border  of  eyelid,  etc. ;  tongue  rough,  etc. ;  dry  feeling
on  tongue ;  sickness  at  stomach  ;  nausea,  etc. ;  nausea,  with  weakness,  etc. ;
cough;  bluish  film  on  urine;  sore  pain  in  right  chest;  cramp  in  back;  pain
in  left  ankle-joint;  very  soon  tired. — (Morning,  when  getting  awake),  Pains
in  head. — {Morning,  on  waking).  Headache  over  eyes;  rheumatic  pain  in
bend  of  left  elbow. — (Morning,  after  rising),  Spits  up  coagulated  blood,
etc.;  tickling  in  throat;  severe  pain,  etc.;  irritation  to  cough;  cough;
cough  from  tickling;  twitching  in  limbs. — (Forenoon),  Sinking  sensation  at
stomach  ;  most  violent  pains  in  rectum;  twitching  in  limbs,  etc.;  twitching
of  lower  lip;  sensation  as  of  inward  heat. — (iVbon),  Most  acute  pain  in
stomach,  etc. ;  sprained  pain  in  right  wrist. — (Afternoon),  Headache ;  diffi-
cult passage  of  hard  stool,  etc. ;  hard  stool,  etc.;  sense  of  painful  fulness  of
chest,  etc. — (Afternoon  and  Evening),  Coldness  of  the  limbs,  etc. — (Even-
ing), Contraction  of  abdominal  muscles,  etc. ;  itching  of  anus ;  itching  on


ALUMEN.  205

the  .scrotum,  etc.;  hoarseness  with  cough;  tickling  cough;  pain  ou  both
sides  of  the  spine;  pain  under  big  toe. — (Evening,  after  lying  down),  Dry
cough. — (Night),  More  anxious;  heat  in  side  of  face;  itching  of  lump  at
anus  ;  emission  of  very  thick  semen ;  pain  in  lower  limbs  ;  nausea  and  vio-
lent headache. — (Night,  when  awaking).  Great  pain  in  head,  etc. ;  thick
phlegm  in  throat,  etc. — (Night,  in  bed),  Stitching  pain  through  upper  chest;
stinging  pain  through  upper  chest. — (Midnight),  Heat  in  ears,  etc. — (9  a.m.
till  wooJi),  Very  depressed,  etc. — (Towards  two  o'clock),  Tains  in  chest  re-
turn.— (2  P.M.  till  evening),  Tearing  pain  in  back. — (3  p.m.),  Sudden  pain
from  stomach  into  the  swallow,  etc. — -(Betiveen  3  and  4  p.m.),  Pain  in  right
arm. — (About  3.30  and  4  p.m.).  Pain  in  stomach. — (8  p.m.).  Pain  in  left  of
the  scrobiculus. — (Evening  at  9.30),  Headache  over  eyes,  etc. — (  Walking  in
open  air),  Pain  to  left  of  the  scrobiculus. — (In  bed).  Coldness  of  feet,  etc. —
(Bending  up  double),  Sore  pain  in  right  side  of  chest. — (Sitting  bent  forward),
Pain  in  left  chest. — (Before  breakfast),  Attack  of  nausea. — (During  break-
fast), Nausea ;  cough. — (After  breakfast).  Feels  very  full  in  stomach,  etc. —
(Coughing),  Scratching  in  throat. — (Drawing  breath),  Pain  under  right
clavicle,  etc. — (Drawing  deep  breath),  Pain  on  both  sides  of  spine. — (At
dinner),  Erections. — (After  dinner).  Heaviness  in  stomach. — (After  eating),
Violent  throbbing  in  stomach;  distension  of  stomach,  etc. — (Mental  excite-
ment), Heart  begins  to  beat  violently. — (  When  extending  arm),  Rheumatic
pain  in  bend  of  elbow. — (Looking  down),  Vertigo. — (Lying  on  one  side).
Pains  in  anus  and  rectum. — (Lying  on  right  side).  Palpitation  of  heart. —
(Lying  on  right  leg),  Numb  sensation  in  it. — (Lying  in  one  position  for  any
length  of  fi«ie).  Palpitation  of  heart. — (Lying  on  left  side),  Stitching  pain
through  upper  chest.^(Lying  on  back  in  the  evening).  Pain  in  pit  of  stom-
ach, etc. ;  weakness  in  pit  of  stomach,  etc. ;  throbbing  sensation  in  pit  of
stomach. — (During  menses).  Hands  weak,  etc. — (After  motion).  Coldness  in
hands,  etc. — (Moving  eyelids).  Bruised  feeling  on  edge  of  lower  orbit. —
(Pressure),  Tenderness  before  left  clavicle.— Bruised  feeling  on  edge  of  left-
orbit. — (After  retching).  Inclination  to  chilliness. — (  Wheyi  sitting).  Pain  in
left  chest. — (Sitting  still).  Tearing  pain  in  back. — (Standing),  Bruised  pain
in  lower  extremities,  as  after  a  severe  cold. — (Standing  for  some  time  on  one
spot).  Strong  palpitation. — (  With  every  step,  while  walkkig),  Pain  to  left  of
scrobiculus. — (During  stool).  Pains  in  rectum;  strong  dyspnoea;  tearing  in
rectum. — (After  stool).  Smarting  and  burning  at  rectum  ;  pain  in  anus  and
rectum;  beating  in  anus ;  stinging  and  tearing  up  the  rectum  ;  burning  and
throbbing  in  anus. — (After  hard  stool),  Hsemorrhoidal  tumors. — (After  solid
stool).  Smarting  and  burning  at  rectum. — (After  supper).  Sense  of  painful
fulness  in  chest,  etc. — (Swallowing), Soreneaa  and  dryness  in  throat. — (Talk-
ing), Soreness  and  dryness  in  throat,  etc.;  hoarseness;  cough. — (Touch),
Tenderness  over  left  second  rib. — (Beginning  to  think  about  her  disease),
Feels  heart  beating,  etc. — (  Walking),  Pain  in  belly ;  pain  in  both  knees,
etc.;  pain  in  left  ankle-joint;  pain  under  big  toe. — (Going  upsf airs),  Jjaasi-
tude  in  lower  limbs;  pain  in  left  ankle-joint. — (Washing  and  dressing  after
rising).  Pains  in  chest.

Amelioration,. — (  When  going  to  bed).  Heat  in  both  ears,  etc. ;  heat
in  ears  and  face  disappears. — (Bending  double).  Pain  to  left  of  scrobiculus
cordis. — (Bending  forwards  and  sitting  bent  over).  Pains  in  anus  and  rec-
tum ;  stinging  and  tearing  up  the  rectum. — (Bending  forwards),  Weakness
in  region  of  shoulder-blades. — (After  breakfast^.  Attack  of  nausea  ;  cough.
— (Drinking  cold  water).  Headache ;  thirst,  etc. — (Eating  something).  Feels
better;  feels  stronger  in  stomach. — (Exercise),  Pains  in  left  shoulder. —


206  ALUMINA.

{Expectoration),  Cough ;  scraping  in  throat. — (After  lying  down),  Pain  in
breast. — (Lying  on  back),  Tearing  up  the  rectum. — (After  lying  down  to
sleep),  Headache  over  eyes,  etc. — (Motion),  Tearing  pain  in  back  ;  pains  in
left  shoulder. — (Opening  eyes),  Vertigo. — (Rising  and  walking  about).  Pain
from  stomach  to  swallow,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  •elbow-joint. — (Standing  still
and  pressing  on  it).  Pain  to  left  of  scrobiculus. — (  Walking),  Feels  better.


ALUMINA.

Chemically  prepared  pure  Aluminium  oxide  [Al^OJ.  Preparation,
Triturate  with  sacch.  lactis.

Authorities.  1,  Hahnemann,  Chr.  Krank.,  1,  33  ;  2,  Hartlaub,  ibid. ;  3,
N-g,t  ibid. ;  4,  Schreter,  ibid. ;  5,  Trinks,  ibid. ;  6,  Bute,  ibid.

Mind. — He  feels  light-spirited ;  the  intellectual  and  physical  powers
appear  to  be  excited  (first  day),'. — (He  feels  excessively  contented),'. — He
takes  everything  in  the  worse  sense,  and  weeps  and  howls  for  hours  (second
day),'. — The  hoy  weeps  constantly  against  his  will,  for  half  an  hour,'. — De-
pressed as  with  grief,  early  in  the  morning  on  waking;  consciousness  is  not
clear,'. — Depressed  and  friendless ;  he  wishes  only  to  be  left  alone,  in  the
forenoon  (the  eighth  day),'. — The  person  imagines  only  disagreeable,  sad
images  (first  day),^ — Involuntary  sighings  and  groanings, as  in  great  pain;
he  is  not  conscious  of  it,". — He  believes  he  will  not  be  able  to  recover  his
health,*. — [10.]  He  feels  low-spirited  on  account  of  his  disease,'. — *She  is
constantly  possessed  by  bad  thoughts,  which  oblige  her  to  weep ;  at  the
same  time  she  feels  apprehensive  and  uneasy,  as  if  something  evil  were  to
happen  to  her  ;  everything  that  she  only  looks  at,  fills  her  with  sadness
(eleventh  day),'. — Upon  seeing  blood,  or  knives,  horrible  thoughts  throng
her  mind ;  she  feels,  for  instance,  as  though  she  would  commit  suicide,
although  she  has  the  greatest  aversion  to  it,'. — *Intolerable  ennui,  an  hour
seems  to  him  half  a  day, ^. ^Serious,  anxious  mood,^. — Anxious,  reflective,
peevish  mood,^ — Oppressive  anxiety,  attended  with  emptiness  and  confu-
sion of  the  head,  and  pressure  in  the  forehead  (after  twelve  hours),^ —
Anxiety,  with  external  heat  and  uneasiness  as  if  she  had  done  something
bad,^. — *  Anxiety,  early  in  the  morning,  as  though  he  were  threatened  with
an  epileptic  fit,'. — Anxiety  and  fearfulness,  as  if  he  had  committed  a  crime
(fifth  day),^— [20.]  Anguish,  with  much  uneasiness,  the  whole  day  (second
day),'. — Anxiety,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  pulsations  in  some  parts
of  the  breast  and  abdomen  (fourth  day),'. —  Uneasiness,  in  the  evening,  as
though  some  evil  were  impending,^. — Extremely  frightened,  and  starts  upon
hearing  the  least  thing  fall,'. — *He  is  apprehensive  of  losing  his  thoughts,
and  his  understanding,'. — Dissatisfied  with  everything,  feels  despairing,'. —
Ill-humored  and  peevish ;  she  is  grumbling  continually,*. — Not  disposed

f  Note  by  Hahitbmann. — "  With  merely  these  two  letters,  Doctors  Hartlaub
and  Trinks  designate  a  man  (a  true  '  anonymity  '),  who  has  furnished  the  greatest
number  of  symptoms  for  their  '  Annals,'  whose  symptoms  are  often  expressed  in  a
careless,  difi'use,  and  indefinite  manner.  I  could  only  extract  what  was  useful,
believing  that,  in  these  observations,  he  has  been  ii  truthful  and  careful  person  ;
still  it  is  scarcely  to  be  expected  that,  in  this  work — the  most  indispensable  pillar
of  our  therapeutic  art — requiring  such  great  and  careful  discretion,  acuteness  of
sense,  fine  powers  of  observation,  and  strict  criticism  of  one's  own  sensations  and
observations,  as  well  as  a  correct  choice  of  expression,  the  homoeopathic  public
should  place  implicit  belief  in  an  unknown  person,  designated  with  only  two
letters,  'N-g.'  "


ALUMINA.  207

for  anything  ;  nothing  gives  hirn  pleasure,'. — Peevish,  ill-humored  ;  she  is
conscious  of  it,  at  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (first  day),^ — *Peevish  and
whining;  the  lobules  of  the  ears  are  hot  (after  two  days),'. — [30,]  Ex-
tremely peevish  and  obstinate,^. — Is  opposed  to  the  wishes  of  other  people,'. —
She  is  excessively  peevish,  and  everything  is  offensive  to  her  ;  she  desires
nothing  but  to  quarrel  and  make  a  fuss,  in  the  afternoon  (fifth  day),'. — The
person  is  greatly  excited,  overfatigued,  and  nevertheless  discontented  as  if
not  enough  had  been  done,'. — He  sneers  at  everybody  contemptuously,'. —
Indifference,  absence  of  mind,  and  peevishness,^. — *His  mood  changes
greatly,^. — ^Frequently  changing  mood  during  the  day,  sometimes  assurance,
sometimes  timidity,'': — Increased  animation  alternating  with  absence  of
mind,  during  which  one's  thoughts,  sight,  and  hearing,  are  indistinct,  and
have  almost  disappeared,'. — *He  constantly  speaks  wrong,  choosing  differ-
ent expressions  from  those  which  he  intended,'. — [40.]  Want  of  attention
in  reading;  the  mind  does  not  remain  fixed  on  one  object  (first  day),\ —
Incapacity  for  connected  thought,'. — Dulness  of  mind,'. — Inability  and
want  of  disposition  for  mental  labor,''. — Great  absence  of  mind  and  irreso-
lution (second  day),^ — Reluctance  to  any  kind  of  employment  (first  day),^
—  Want  of  disposition  for  any  kind  of  labor,  with  ennui,  in  the  forenoon,''. —
The  mind  is  occupied  with  a  variety  of  objects,  but  not  one  of  them  leaves
a  distinct  recollection  in  the  mind  (fourth  day),^ — *  Absence  of  all  power
of  recollection,  and  great  weakness  of  memory,'. — Continual  great  weak-
ness of  memory,'. — [50.]  Want  of  memory  for  many  weeks,*. — Great  for-
getfulness,".— Striking  forgetfulness,*. — Great  stupor,  *with  dread  of  falling
forward^.

Head. — Confusion  of  the  head,  with  heat  in  the  face,^ — Confusion  of
the  head,  with  dread  of  losing  his  consclousness,'.^Early  in  the  morning,
the  head  feels  confused  and  dull ;  this  passed  off  after  rising  (third  day),'.
— The  head  feels  extremely  confused,  as  if  his  consciousness  were  outside
of  his  body  ;  when  he  says  anything,  it  seems  to  him  as  though  somebody
else  had  said  it ;  or  when  he  sees  anything,  it  seems  as  though  somebody
else  had  seen  it,  or  as  if  he  saw  it  through  somebody  else's  eyes,'. — Early  in
the  morning  his  head  feels  cloudy  and  hot,'. — Her  head  feels  befogged  and
intoxicated ;  it  seems  to  her  as  though  she  would  turn  about,  for  nine  days,
this  alternated  with  pain  in  the  kidneys,  and  the  cloudiness  of  the  head
decreased  in  proportion  as  the  pain  increased,  and  vice  versa  (after  thirty
days),*. — [60.]  Great  heaviness  of  the  head,  with  paleness  of  face,  and  las-
situde,'.— Heaviness  of  the  head,  attended  with  confusion  of  the  forehead,
and  sensitiveness  of  the  vertex  to  the  touch,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
(second  day),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head  when  sitting  erect,  he  feels  as  if  he
would  fall  forward,  this  increases  on  stooping,  at  1  p.m.  (fifth  day),'. —
Early  in  the  morning  the  head  feels  heavy  and  hot,'. — Occasional  weakness
of  the  head,'. — Vertigo  in  the  morning,'. —  Quickly  passing  vertigo  171  the
morning,*. — Vertigo  increased  on  stooping,*. — *  Vertigo,  everything  turns  with
him  in  a  circle,  attended  with  nausea,'. — Everything  before  his  eyes  turns
with  him,'.: — [70.]  Vertigo  even  to  falling ;  the  whole  room  seems  to  turn
with  her;  she  is  obliged  to  sit  down  at  once,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
(third  day),*. — Severe  vertigo  in  walking  or  sitting,  as  though  he  would
fkll  over;  often  for  several  days,  and  with  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
extending  towards  the  head,'. — -Vertigo,  even  to  falling,  during  a  walk ;
she  had  to  lean  against  a  wall  (twenty -fourth  day),*. — *  Vertigo,  early  in
the  warning,  as  though  she  would  turn  around,  with  a  fainting  nausea;  after
having  breakfasted  on  wheat  bread,  her  nausea  ceased,  but  a  sour  taste


208  ALUMINA.

remained  in  the  mouth  (eleventh  day),*. — Giddiness  for  some  days  almost
without  interruption;  it  is  like  alight  intoxication  produced  by  beer  (thirty-
first  day),*. — Giddiness  the  whole  day,  even  to  falling;  in  order  to  moderate
this  vertigo,  she  is  obliged  to  wipe  her  eyes  (eleventh  day),*. — *The  head
always  feels  giddy  as  soon  as  she  opetis  her  eyes  (sixteenth  day),*. — On  stoop-
ing, surging  in  the  head,  synchronous  with  the  pulse;  on  becoming  erect,
it  is  somewhat  diminished  (after  dinner),^. — Over  the  head,  externally,  a
sensation  as  though  the  skin  would  go  to  sleep  (three  days),^ — Violent
headache,  peculiar,  as  though  the  brain  were  dashed  to  pieces,*. — [80.]
Headache,  increasing  by  walking  in  the  open  air,\ — Headache,  when  in
bed  at  night,'. — *Pain  in  the  head  and  nape  of  the  neck ;  it  increases  on
going  to  bed,  and  only  leaves  off  in  the  morning,  on  rising,'. — Headache,
which  obliges  one  to  lie  down ;  with  dry  heat  and  cough  during  sleep,  the
whole  afternoon,'. — Heat  rises  into  his  head,  from  the  stomach,  in  the  fore-
noon,'.— External  pinching  and  griping  on  the  head,  with  a  sensation  as
of  freezing  towards  the  occiput,  worse  on  stooping,  in  the  evening,*. — After
dinner,  heat  in  the  head ;  on  stooping,  a  sensation  in  the  brain  as  if  it
would  fall  forwards  ;  this  passes  off  on  raising  the  head  (first  day),^ — Pain
as  if  the  head  were  being  screwed  together,  with  stitches  in  the  forehead,
and  such  a  violent  heaviness  in  the  vertex,  that  the  head  threatens  to  fall
down  on  stooping ;  when  standing,  at  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (two
days),'.^Dull,  pressive  headache,  increased  on  walking  (first  day),^ —
Screwing  pressure  in  the  head,'. — [90.]  Tearing  in  the  whole  head,  in  the
forenoon  (first  day),'. — Headache,  tearing,  with  a  sense  as  of  pressing  from
both  sides,  in  the  evening  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),  with  chills,  many
evenings  in  succession,'. — Thrusts,  as  with  a  knife,  now  and  then  shooting
through  the  head,'. — Stitches  in  some  parts  of  the  head,'  *. — Headache,
violent  stitches  in  the  brain,  with  inclination  to  vomit,-'. — Stitches  in  the
head  from  within  outwards,  in  the  afternoon  (eighth  day),'. — Stitches
shooting  through  the  head  at  every  step,'. — A  stitch  in  the  head,  going
round  the  brain,'. — Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  when  stoop-
ing during  labor  (twenty-eighth  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  fore  and  back  part
of  the  head  after  eating,  worse  towards  evening  (after  thirty-seven  days),'*.
— [100.]  Pulsative  headache  on  ascending  the  stairs,  after  dinner  (second
day),^ — Rhythmical  beating  in  the  whole  head,  in  the  afternoon,  when
walking,  and  next  morning  in  bed  (after  three  days),'. — Headache,  as  if
bruised,  with  redness  of  cheeks,'. — Headache,  as  if  a  worm  were  crawling
under  the  skull ;  the  pain  is  also  cutting,  and  corrosive,'. — Intolerable  itch-
ing of  the  head ;  he  is  obliged  to  scratch  until  the  parts  bleed ;  after
scratching,  the  skin  pains,^ — Itching,  formication  here  and  there  over  the
head,'. — Sense  of  warmth  in  the  forehead,  which  is  not  perceptible  exter-
nally ;  with  dulness  of  the  mind,  for  half  an  hour,'. — Burning  and  pressive
pain,  with  warmth  in  the  forehead,  after  dinner,  when  standing  or  sitting;
the  pain  is  relieved  in  the  open  air,  and  does  not  return  in  the  room,'. —
Sense  of  constriction  around  the  forehead,  attended  with  aching  (after
a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Compressive  (pinching)  headache  In  the  forehead,
above  the  eyes;  it  seems  to  come  from  the  temples  (after  three  to  twelve  '
hours),'. — [110.]  Compressive  headache  above  the  eyes,  coming  from  both
temples,  in  the  evening ;  and  at  night,  heat  when  in  bed,  followed  by
sweat  (after  two  hours),'. — Pressing-in  pain  in  the  forehead,'. — Intensely
pressive  headache  above  the  eyes,'. — Pressing  out  at  the  forehead,  after
dinner,'. — Tearing  in  the  forehead,  in  the  forenoon  ;  in  the  afternoon,  it  is
changed  to  stitching  (second  day),'. — Tearing  headache  in  the  forehead,


ALUMINA.  209

which  is  relieved  in  the  open  air,  in  the  evening  (third  day),'. — 10.30  p.m.
with  the  frontal  headache ;  tearing,  pressing  from  the  forehead  back  over
the  vertex  (first  day). — Stitches  in  the  forehead,  with  dulness  and  heavi-
ness of  the  head,  in  the  afternoon  (third  day),l — Stitches  in  the  forehead
on  going  to  sleep  (tenth  day),*. — Beating  and  stitches  in  the  forehead  and
right  side  of  the  head,  iu  the  afternoon  (second  day),'. — [120.]  Sensation
as  if  something  were  crawling  (between  the  skin  and  flesh),  coining  from
both  temples,  and  going  to  the  forehead  ;  here  it  presses  outward  as  though
it  would  penetrate  through,". — At  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead,  a  little
spot  is  painful  to  the  touch,  early  in  the  morning  (tenth  and  eleventh
days),". — Confusing  tension  in  a  small  spot  in  the  right  temple ;  it  passes
off  by  pressure;  when  the  pressure  ceases,  it  returns  immediately,  in  the
forenoon  (two  days),'. — Continual  boring  and  tearing  in  both  temples,  in
the  forenoon  (fourth  day),'. — Painful  boring  into  the  right  temple,  in  the
evening  (fifth  day),'. — Boring  and  drawing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  left
temple,  in  the  evening  (third  day),\ — Pressing-in  pain  in  the  right  temple,
after  dinner,'. — External  tearing  in  the  right  temple,  followed  by  continual
internal  boring  and  beating  (second  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  right  temple  ;
rubbing  excites  a  burning  in  the  place  (after  half  an  hour  to  two  hours),'.
— Tearing  upwards  in  the  left  temple,  and  subsequent  stitches  in  the  right
(after  two  hours),'. — [130.]  A  stitch  in  the  right  temple,  as  with  a  large,
blunt  instrument,  leaving  transient  soreness  behind  (after  thirteen  days),*.
— Stitches  in  the  temples  on  singing ;  they  abated  as  soon  as  she  stopped
singing  (after  thirty-three  days),*. — Pain  in  the  left  region  of  the  vertex,
as  if  somebody  were  raising  her  up  by  a  lock  of  hair  (first  day),*. — Beating
and  raging  in  the  vertex,  in  the  forenoon  (two  days),'.-— Stitches  in  the  head
towards  the  vertex  (second  and  third  days),''. — Puhative  headache  in  the
vertex,  over  the  right  temple,  early  on  waking,'. — Beating  and  pressing  in
the  right  temple,  like  strong  pulsation,  with  pressure  upon  the  vertex,  as
from  a  heavy  weight,  in  the  afternoon  (second  day),'. — Stitches  on  the  out-
side, as  with  an  awl,  iu  a  small  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,  close  to
the  vertex,*. — Beating  and  tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side  of  the
head,  1  p.m.,'. — Headache,  painful  drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,'.
— [140.]  Sensation  as  if  the  right  side  of  the  head  were  pressed  or  screwed
towards  the  other,  and  as  if  the  vertex  were  oppressed  with  a  heavy  load,
in  the  forenoon,  at  8J  o'clock  (second  day),'. — Tearing  and  stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  head,  in  the  forenoon ;  and  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,
in  the  evening  (first  day),'. — Headache  on  the  left  side  (after  eighteen
hours),^ — Short,  lasting,  dull  pain  in  the  occiput  (after  half  an  hour),^ —
Headache  in  the  occiput,  it  feels  bruised ;  passes  off  on  lying  down,'. —
Pressure  on  the  occiput  and  forehead  externally,  as  from  a  tight  hat^. —
Drawing  and  pulsative  tension  iu  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  in  the  fore-
noon (one  day),'. — Dryness  of  the  hairs,'. — Falling  of  the  hair  (after  eight
days),*. — The  hairy  scalp  itches,  and  is  covered  with  white  scales,". — [150.]
*0n  touching  the  hair  on  the  head,  pain  as  if  the  place  were  sore,'.

JEyes. — Redness  of  the  eyes,  with  a  sense  of  excoriation  in  the  corners,
and  weakness  of  sight;  in  the  evenings,  when  reading,  he  sees  a  halo  around
the  light;  he  is  obliged  to  wipe  his  eyes  often;  in  the  night,  they  become
agglutinated;  this  lasts  a  long  time,". — Redness  of  the  right  eye,  with  sore-
ness and  lachrymation  (third  and  fourth  days)," — Squinting  of  both  eyes,\
— Trembling  of  the  left  eye,  as  though  it  would  leap  out;  worse  towards
evening,  and  on  looking  down ;  better  on  closing  the  eye,  or  on  looking  up,
or  on  holding  the  eye  with  the  hand ;  at  the  same  time  the  eye  is  so  sensi-

VOL.  I. — 14


210  ALUMINA.

tive  to  the  light  that  she  was  often  obliged  to  close  it  for  three  days  after
(forty-seven  days),*. — Burning  sensation  of  the  eyes,  morning,  on  waking,'.
— Burning  in  the  eyes,  especially  on  looking  vp,^.—* Burning  and  pressure
in  the  eyes,^. — Burning  and  pressure  of  the  eyes  and  nose,  as  if  she  would
be  attacked  with  a  cold,*. — Tearing  in  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,'. —
[160.]  Tension  around  the  left  eye  (two  days),'. — Pressure  in  the  eyes;  she
was  unable  to  open  them,'. — *Pressure  in  the  eyes,  and  sensitiveness  to  the
light,l — Pressure  in  the  right  eye,  in  the  evening,  when  writing  or  read-
ing,^ — Pressure  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  something  had  fallen  into  it,  just  below
the  upper  eyelid ;  the  whole  day  (fifth  day),*. — Biting  in  the  left  eye,  as
from  soap,  in  the  evening,'. — Tearing  biting  pain  in  the  eye,'. — Biting  and
burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  early  in  the  morning  (second  day),*. — Sensation
of  excoriation  in  the  interior  of  the  eyes,  in  the  evening ;  after  this  the  eyes
were  irresistibly  closed,'. — Frequent  and  violent  itching  of  the  eyes,'. —
[170.]  Sensation  of  trembling  of  the  eyebrows,". — The  eyelashes  fall  out
easily,'. — On  the  left  lower  eyelid,  a  pimple,  with  a  stinging  pain,'. — In-
cipient stye,  frequently  forming  on  the  upper  eyelid,^. — On  closing  the  eyes
but  lightly,  they  are  often  spasmodically  closed  with  pain ;  if  he  tries  to
open  his  eyes  in  the  night,  they  pain  him  as  if  they  were  oppressed  with  a
sudden  flood  of  bright  sunlight,  even  in  darkness ;  they  become  again  drawn
together;  these  symptoms  are  accompanied  by  little  sleep,  and  by  frequent
twitching  during  the  day  in  the  right  upper  eyelid,^ — Weakness  of  the
eyelids ;  they  are  all  the  time  on  the  point  of  closing,  although  he  is  not
sleepy  (in  the  afternoon),'. — He  cannot  well  open  the  left  eye,  because  it
seems  to  him  as  if  the  upper  eyelid  were  hanging  deep  down ;  on  this  ac-
count he  often  wipes  the  eye,  in  order  to  see  better  (fifth  day),'. — *The
upper  eyelid  feels  paralyzed,  hangs  down,  and  covers  only  half  of  the  eye
(twenty-ninth  day),'. — Biting  pain,  with  burning  and  stinging,  as  from  an
acrid  humor  in  one  of  the  corners  of  the  eye,'. — Every  evening,  burning
and  dryness  of  the  eyelids,  with  pain  in  the  left  internal  canthus,  and  a
secretion  of  dry  gum,  every  morning,  lasting  upwards  of  a  week,'. — [180.]
Stitches  in  the  lower  eyelids,^ — Tearing  in  the  right  upper  eyelid  on  look-
ing down;  on  looking  up,  feeling  as  if  the  upper  lid  were  longer  and  were
hanging  down;  afterwards,  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  early  in  the
morning  (two  days),'. — Sensation  of  excoriation  and  dryness  in  the  inter-
nal canthus,'. — Alternating  pressure  in  the  eyelids  (one  da,j),^.— Itching  in
the  corners  of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  lids,'. — Stitches  in  the  corners  of  the  eye,'.
— Burning  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes  (two  to  three  days),'. — The  right  eye
constantly  secretes  a  mucous  humor  (eye-gum),'. — The  eyes  secrete  much
mucus  in  the  night,  for  several  days  in  succession,*. — Much  dry  gum  early
in  the  morning  on  waking,'. — [190.]  *The  eyes  are  agglutinated  on  waking
in  the  morning;  they  burn  on  being  opened,  with  dread  of  light,^^. — *Nightly
agglutination  for  several  weeks,  with  inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva  and
secretion  of  mucus  during  the  day ;  in  the  evening,  when  the  room  is  lighted,
it  seems  as  if  gauze  were  before  the  eyes,  which  is  not  removed  by  wiping;
he  sees  a  halo  around  the  light  (after  ten  days),'. — The  eyes  are  aggluti-
nated in  the  morning;  dim,  with  biting  (second  day),'.— rLachrymation  in
the  open  air,'. — Frequent  lachrymation,  without  pain,'  *. — Laehrymation
early  in  the  morning,  after  waking,' '. — Lachrymation  and  burning  of  the
eyes,  with  a  sensation  of  swelling  of  the  face  (first  day),'. — Burning  aod
increased  secretion  of  mucus  of  the  eyes,  at  night,  and  sometimes  early  in
the  morning,  with  itching,\ — Inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva  of  the  right
eye,  without  much  pain,  in  the  evening  (first  day),^ — Pressure  upon  the


ALUMINA.  211

left  eyeball  (after  half  an  hour),^. — [200.]  The  eyes  become  weak  after
long  looking  (fourth  day),'.— Twitching  and  mist  before  the  eyes/. — Dim-
sightedness,  as  through  afog,^. — Dim-sightedness,  sometimes  in  the  open  air,
and  passing  off  in  the  room,'' ^— Dim-sightedness,  as  through  mist,  in  the
evening  (one  to  thirty  days),'  ^. — "^Dim-sightedness,  which  obliges  her  to  wipe
her  eyes  constantly,  which  relieves,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  lids  would  adhere
in  the  corners  (eleventh  day),'  *. — The  right  eye  is  dim,  as  if  a  feather  or  a
hair  were  before  it,  which  she  thinks  she  must  take  away  (sixth  and  sev-
enth days),*. — *In  the  evening,  her  eyes  are  so  dull  and  dry  that  she  can
neither  read  nor  sew ;  also  during  the  day  her  sight  is  dull  (usually  her
sight  is  very  good),'. — Short  flickering  and  a  kind  of  spots  before  the  eyes,
with  a  sort  of  vertigo,'. — On  closing  his  eyes,  it  is  bright  before  them,'. —
[210.]  The  objects  she  looks  at  appear  yellow  (thirty-fourth  to  thirty-fifth
day),'. — After  blowing  the  nose,  white  little  stars  sparkle  before  the  eyes
(fourth  day),'.

Ears. — On  the  right  ear,  a  transparent  vesicle,  without  pain,". — It
seems  to  her  as  if  something  were  lying  before  her  ear  externally,'. — Itching
burning  in  the  anterior  border  of  the  right  ear  (first  day),'. — Heat  and  red-
ness of  the  ear  for  many  evenings^. — Tension  in  the  ears  (second  and  third
days),^. — Boring  pain  in  the  ear  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  hollow  of  the
ear  in  the  afternoon ;  also  felt  on  pressure  (fourth  day),'. — (Headache),
tearing  and  stitches  in  the  ears,  somewhat  lessened  by  pressure  with  the
hand,  lasting  four  days,  towards  evening  (after  sixth  day),*. — Tearing  in,
behind,  and  below  the  ears,'. — [220.]  Frequent  stabs,  as  with  a  knife,  into
the  hollow  of  the  ear,'. — Stickings  into  the  ears,'. — Stitches  in  the  ears,  es-
pecially in  the  evening  (after  thirty  days),''. — In  the  night,  stitches  deep  in
the  right  ear  (after  four  hours),'. — Stitches  through  the  ears  from  within
outwards  (after  four  hours),*.— -Stitches  in  the  left  ear  (seventh  day),*. — •
Pulsations  in  the  ear,'. — Severe  itching  in  both  ears;  rubbing  with  the  fin-
gers increases  it  (after  fifty  hours),'. — Itching  before  and  behind  the  ears
and  of  the  lobules,'. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the  right  ear  often  (eleven
days),^ — [230.]  On  blowing  her  nose  something  obstructed . her  ear;  on
.swallowing,  the  ear  opens  again,'. — Itching  and  tingling  in  the  external
meatus,' '. — Crackling  of  the  tympanum,  especially  when  chewing,'. — On
swallowing,  there  is  a  crackling  in  the  ear,'.— For  an  hour  it  seems,  in  the
right  ear,  as  though  he  had  an  entirely  different  voice  (fourth  day),'. — Loud
whistling  in  the  ear,'. — Whizzing  in  the  ears,'. — Roaring  of  the  ears  early
in  the  morning;  at  the  same  time  the  stools  are  more  solid  than  usual,*. —
Roaring  before  the  ears,  as  of  large  bells,  early  in  the  morning,  after  ris-
ing,'.— Roaring  in  the  ears,  in  the  evening,'.

Nose. — [240.]  *The  septum  of  the  nose  is  swollen,  red,  and  painful  to  the
touch;  in  the  evening  the  pains  are  increased,  with  stitches  in  the  forehead
(one  day),*. — *  Swelling  and  hardness  of  the  left  ala  of  the  nose,  with  pain  to
the  touch  (eight  days),*. — *  Ulcerated  nostrils,'-. — A  boil  on  the  nose,'. — Rat-
tling and  piping  in  the  nose,  with  rough  voice,  in  the  afternoon  (three  days),'.
— The  nose  is  stopped  (one  day),'. — Obstruction  of  the  left  nostril  (ten  days),^
— Unwell,  as  from  a  cold  which  cannot  develop,'. — Sensation  in  the  nose  as
if  a  cold  would  come  on,  in  the  evening,  for  several  days  (four  days),^ — •
Catarrh,  with  sneezing  and  obstruction  of  the  nose,  the  whole  day  (three
days),'. — [250.]  Dry  catarrh  (nine  days),'. — Violent  dry  catarrh,  especi-
ally at  night,  with  great  dryness  of  the  mouth,'. — Violent  fluent  coryza  in
the  left  nostril,  appearing  suddenly;  the  right  nostril  is  obstructed  en-
tirely,'.— First  fluent  coryza,  then  dry,  so  that  both  nostrils  are  entirely
obstructed,'. — On  the  right  side  of  the  nose  there  are  two  pimples,  with  a


212  ALUMINA.

burning  and  stinging  pain,^. — Frequent  sneezing  (and  hiccough),  without
eoryza  (one,  two,  seven  days),'. — Water  runs  from  the  right  nostril,  with-
out catarrh,'. — Secretion  of  much  thick  and  viscid  mucus  from  the  nose,''.
— Fluent  eoryza  (with  rough  voice)  in  the  afternoon  and  morning  (four,  six
days^.l — Fluent  eoryza,  with  frequent  sneezing  and  lachrymation,*. — [260.]
Bleeding  from  the  nose,^ — Blood  only  is  blown  out,'. — Intermittent  burn-
ing pain  in  the  right  wing  of  the  nose  in  the  evening  (one  day),'. — Tearing
in  and  near  the  right  nasal  fossa ;  upon  pressing  the  part,  it  passes  off  only
for  a  short  while  (second  day),'. — *Soreness  with  scabs  in  the  right  nostril,
with  a  discharge  of  much  thick  yellowish  mucus  (the  first  four  weeks),'. — Vio-
lent itching  of  one  ala  of  the  nose  (one  hour),'. — Itching  of  the  dorsum,  the
side,  and  around  the  orifice  of  the  nose,'. — Excessively  acute  smell,'. —
Weakness  of  smell,'. — Sour  smell  in  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning  (three
days),'.

Face, — [270.]  Sullen,  low-spirited  look,'. — Paleness  of  the  face,'. —
Paleness  and  redness  of  the  face  alternating  in  quick  succession,'.— Skin
of  the  face  rough,  especially  on  the  forehead,'. — Itching  pimples  on  the
forehead,  the  right  side  of  the  nose,  and  the  left  angle  of  the  mouth  ;  upon
being  pressed  they  run  together  (six  to  nine  days),'.— Every  day  flushes  of
heat  in  the  face,'. — Heat  and  tension  in  the  left  side  of  the  face,  in  the
evening  (first  day),*. — His  face  seems  to  him  larger  or  swollen,  and  the
eyes  smaller,  so  that  his  sight  is  impeded  ;  after  dinner  (first  day),'. — *  The
skin  of  the  face  is  tense,  even  around  the  eyes,  as  if  the  white  of  an  egg  had
dried  upon  it ;  after  dinner,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (fifth  day),'. —
Formication  in  the  right  side  of  the  face,  with  stinging  pain  in  the  hollow
of  the  ear,  and  tearing  in  the  right  knee,'. — [280.]  Violent  itching  in  the
face,'. — Itching,  with  a  violent  desire  to  scratch,  in  the  face  and  under  the
chin  ;  succeeded  by  small  pimples  like  rash  (fourth  day),'. — Itching  of  the
forehead,  cheeks,  around  the  eyes,  and  of  the  chin,'. — The  cheeks  look  as
red  as  copper,  as  in  brandy  drinkers,^ — A  painful  red  spot  upon  the  right
cheek,'. — Small,  red,  painless  pimples  upon  the  right  cheek,  which  feel
rough  (twelfth  day),*. — Upon  the  right  cheek  a  pimple,  which  is  painful
to  tiie  touch  like  a  sore,'. — Pimples  on  the  left  cheek  and  forehead  (tenth
day),'. — One  boil  after  the  other  on  the  left  cheek,'. — Drawing  and  tearing
in  the  left  cheek  and  gums ;  in  the  afternoon  (after  thirtieth  day),*. — [290.]
Crawling  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  cheeks  (after  three  hours),^ — Itch-
ing of  the  cheeks,  with  burning  after  scratching,'. — Itching  of  the  left
angle  of  the  mouth,  and  the  zygoma  ;  it  disappears  on  being  scratched,'. —
Tearing  in  the  sides  of  the  face,  especially  in  the  right  side,  in  the  zygoma;
upon  rubbing  the  part  it  passes  off:  it  is  sometimes  attended  with  tearing
pain  in  the  teeth  of  this  side,'. — The  vermilion  border  of  the  lips  is  bluish
(during  and  after  the  fever),". — Swelling  of  the  lower  lip,'. — On  the  inter-
nal surface  of  the  lip  a  bright  vesicle  as  large  as  a  pea  (second  day),^. —
Swelling  of  the  lips  with  vesicles  upon  them,'. — Chapped  (dry)  lips,^*^. —
Both  his  lips  appear  to  him  larger  and  swollen,'. — [300.]  The  lips  peel  off
(fourth  day),'. — Crusty  eruptions  on  the  lower  lip,'. — Small  pimples  on
the  chin,  which  pass  ofiP  again  next  morning  (after  eighth  and  thirteenth
day),'. — Sensation  around  the  chin,  as  if  it  were  covered  with  cobweb,'. —
The  jaws  are  firmly  set  against  each  other  (one  hour),^ — Remarkable
shortening  of  the  lower  jaw ;  the  upper  teeth  project  over  the  lower  for
three  days,^ — The  jaw  is  so  swollen  that  he  cannot  open  the  mouth  without
pain  ;  there  are  stitches  going  up  to  the  malar  bone  and  the  temple,'. — Ten-
sion and  drawing  in  the  jaws  and  cheeks,  with  increased  secretion  of  saliva
(second  day),^ — Painful  tension  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaws,  when  chew-


ALUMINA.  213

ing  or  opening  the  mouth/. — Itching  formicatiou  on  the  right  side  of  the
lower  jaw,'.

3Iouth. — [310,]  Thick,  badly  smelling  mucus  on  the  teeth  (fifth  day),'.
— Two  rotten  molar  teeth  (one  above,  the  other  below)  catch  into  each
other  on  opening  the  mouth,*. — Ulceration  of  the  roots  of  all  the  teeth,". —
In  chewing  the  least  she  suffers  the  most  violent  toothache ;  the  roots  of
the  teeth  are  then  painful,  as  if  they  were  ulcerated,\ — The  toothache  ex-
tends down  to  the  larynx,  with  irritation  of  the  nerves,  as  after  having
caught  cold,  or  having  used  too  much  chamomile,". — The  teeth  are  very
painful  when  she  chews  ;  she  is  afraid  of  pressing  them  against  one  another
(after  second  day),'. — Upon  setting  the  teeth  together,  a  toothache,  as  if
the  teeth  were  loose,'. — The  hollow  teeth  are  very  painful  when  food  gets
into  them,'. — Sense  of  coldness  of  the  teeth,  with  great  sensitiveness,'. —
Sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  too  long  (first  day),^ — [320.]  In  the  evening,
boring  (tearing,  grinding)  in  the  teeth  (after  one  hour),'. — ^Boring  in  vari-
ous hollow  teeth,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth  of  the  right  side,  in  the
evening;  it  disappeared  after  having  laid  down,'. — Gnawing  pain  in  one
of  the  front  molar  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw,  with  tearing  behind  the  ear,  as
if  the  ear  would  be  torn  out ;  worse  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and
then  slowly  decreasing ;  sitting  up  in  the  bed  gives  a  little  relief;  after
midnight  there  is  only  gnawing  in  the  tooth  ;  the  pain  remains  the  same
under  all  circumstances ;  in  daytime  it  is  dull,^ — Drawing  and  tearing  pain
in  the  front  lower  teeth,  extending  to  the  zygoma  and  the  temples,'. — Draw-
ing pain,  extending  from  one  tooth  as  far  as  the  ear,  in  the  side  of  the  head,'.
— Pressive  pain  in  one  of  the  incisors,  both  when  chewing  and  not,^ — Tear-
ing in  the  molar  teeth  at  different  times  of  the  day,  sometimes  as  high  up
as  the  temples,'. — On  biting  on  a  stump  it  pains,  as  if  violently  pushed  into
the  socket,'. — Cutting  toothache,  in  the  open  air  and  on  lying  down  in  the
evening  in  bed  (after  two  and  three  hours),'. — [330.]  Bruised  pain  in  one
of  the  right  upper  molar  teeth ;  pressing  upon  the  tooth,  which  makes  it
feel  loose,  relieves  the  pain  (eleventh  day),'. — One  of  the  upper  molar  teeth
is  painful  to  the  touch,'. — At  night,  when  in  bed,  throbbing  of  the  roots
of  the  teeth,  like  pulsations,'. — Jerking  and  tearing  toothache  wakes  her
up  after  midnight ;  it  disappears  after  rising  (fifth  day),'. — Jerking  pain
in  one  of  the  first  molar  teeth  of  the  left  upper  row  (first  day),'. — Tickling
in  the  teeth  and  of  their  roots,  immediately  after  dinner  (the  fourth  and
fifth  days),'. — -Swelling  of  the  gums^. — On  the  gums  of  the  left  side  of  the
lower  row  of  teeth  an  ulcer  forms,  which  opens  immediately,  and  discharges
blood  which  tastes  saltish,'. — Bleeding  of  the  gums  (fourth  day),^ — Draw-
ing pain  in  the  gums,  as  if  they  were  sore,'. — [340.]  Tongue  coated  white,
with  a  good  taste,*. — Tongue  coated  yellowish-white,  with  bitter  taste,*. —
Sense  of  roughness  on  the  tongue  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. —
Crawling  in  the  tongue  (stinging,  and  transient)  (one  hour),*. — Itching  in
the  tip  of  the  tongue ;  he  would  like  to  scratch  it  to  pieces  (after  fifth  and
seventh  days),'. — *Number  of  little  ulcers  in  the  mouth,'. — Thick  mucus
runs  from  the  posterior  nares  into  the  mouth,'.^'*Musty,  bad  smell  from
the  mouth,'. — The  mouth  continually  feels  as  if  it  were  burnt  (after  dinner)
(after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Painfulness  of  the  inner  mouth,  palate,  tongue,
gums ;  they  feel  so  sore  that  he  can  scarcely  eat,'. — [350.]  On  waking,  the
mouth  is  dry  and  the  tongue  sticks  to  the  palate,'. — Dryness  in  the  mouth,
although  saliva  is  not  wanting ;  this  causes  frequent  painful  swallowing,*. —
♦Increased  secretion  of  saliva  and  mucus  (first  and  second  days),'  *. — The
secretion  of  saliva  becomes  real  ptyalism,*.^In  the  morning,  spitting  of


214  ALUMINA.

much  saliva  and  mucus,". — Increased  secretion  of  saliva,  with  a  sense  of
contraction  in  the  mouth,  or  with  continual  crawling  upon  the  surface
of  the  cheeks  (after  half  au  hour),'*. — A  large  quantity  of  saliva  accumu-
lates in  the  mouth,  when  iu  bed  in  the  evening  (third  day),^ — Constant
collection  of  sweetish  or  sourish  water  in  the  mouth  (fifth  and  eighth  days),''.
— Collection  of  much  mucus  iu  the  mouth  ;  on  spitting  it  out  it  is  continu-
ally formed,  whilst  the  throat  remains  dry  (first  day),\ — Water  in  the
mouth,". — [360.]  Sour  liquid  rises  into  his  mouth,'. — Frequent  collection
of  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth  ;  he  is  obliged  to  spit  it  out  the  whole  day,
n)ost  in  the  afternoon ;  never  at  night  (after  ten  minutes,  and  second  day),'.
— Early  in  the  morning,  fiat,  metallic  taste  in  the  mouth  (fourth  and  fifth
days),^ — Sourish,  saltish  taste  (first  day),^ — Bitter,  insipid  taste  in  the
mouth,^ — Bitter  taste  in  the  raouth  (shortly  after  taking  it),'. — Bitter  and
slimy  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the  morning  on  rising  (five  days),'. — Bitter
taste  in  the  evening,  after  having  eaten  apples,'. — Astringent  acrid  taste
upon  the  tongue,  as  from  eatiug  sloes  (one  to  eight  days),'". — Taste  in  the
mouth  of  blood,  for  half  an  hour  (seven  days),'. — [370.]  Everything  tastes
flat,". — Everything  she  eats  seems  tasteless,  and  not  salted,  especially  in  the
evenings;  bread  tastes  like  sponge  (first  and  second  days),'. — Meat,  espe-
cially, does  not  seem  to  have  any  taste,'. — Beer  tastes  bitter  and  nauseous ;
this  causes  retchings  (twelve  days),'.

Thvont, — ^Redness,  inflammatory,  in  the  hack  part  of  the  throat  (nine
days),^ — Inflammation  of  the  throat,  terminated  by  a  marked  livid  border
round  the  buccal  cavity,  several  days  (after  two  days),°. — *Thick  viscid
mucus  flows  into  the  throat  from  the  posterior  nares,'. — He  cannot  hawk
up  the  phlegm  in  his  throat,  because  it  is  too  far  down,'. — ^^A  piece  of  phlegm
gets  into  his  throat,  which  chokes  him  until  he  swallows  it  (after  ten  min-
utes),'.— *  Collection  of  thick  viscid  mucus  in  the  throat,  especially  in  the  even-
ing, and  morning  on  waking,  which  increases  the  soreness  of  the  throat ;  it
induces  frequent  clearing  of  the  throat,  and  can  only  be  expectorated  in
little  lumps,  with  great  effort  (first  day),''. — [380.]  Clearing  the  throat  of
saltish  phlegm,  after  dinner  (two  days),'. — *In  the  evening,  dryness  of
the  throat,  which  induces  frequent  clearing  of  the  throat  (three  days),^
- — Dryness  of  the  throat  and  mouth  (shortly  after  taking  it),°. — ^Dryness
and  scraping  of  the  throat  (one  day),'.- — Great  dryness  of  the  throat,  mouth,
and  lips,  as  if  the  parts  were  parched,  attended  with  torturing  thirst,'.— Sour-
ish taste  in  the  throat,  then  bitter  eructations,  shortly  after  having  eaten
his  milk  soup  in  the  evening  (four  days),'. — Sourish  taste  appearing  sud-
denly in  his  throat,  without  eructations,  in  the  forenoon  (four  days),'. —
Sweet  taste  in  the  throat,  with  vertigo,  followed  by  expectoration  of  mucus
mixed  with  blood,  early  in  the  morning  (twenty-eighth  day),'. — On  waking
in  the  morning,  his  throat  is  rough  and  his  chest  oppressed ;  he  cannot
raise  anything  from  his  throat,  and  is  obliged  to  sneeze  a  good  deal  (after
twelve  hours),'. — *In  the  evening  (and  at  night),  roughness  of  the  throat,
which  causes  hawking,  with  secretion  of  mucus,  several  days  in  succession,'  *. —
[390.]  Rancid  and  rough  in  the  throat ;  this  obliges  him  to  clear  the  throat
(four  days),'. — Hoarseness  and  rancidity  of  the  throat,  the  whole  afternoon
(after  five  days),'. — Sense  of  burning  in  the  throat,  in  the  evening  (three
days),". — Burning  in  the  throat,  like  heartburn,  with  a  sense  of  roughness
(five  days),'. — In  both  sides  of  the  neck,  sensation  as  of  an  external  swell-
ing, with  stinging  pains,'. — Sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  it  were  narrowed,
and  the  air  cut  off,  as  in  a  violent  sore  throat  after  a  cold,  or  in  an  inflam-
mation of  the  throat;  this  always  lasts  only  a  few  minutes  (first  seven  days),".


ALUMINA.  215

— Constrictive  (pressive)  pain  in  the  throat  and  pharynx,  with  much  mucus
in  the  mouth,  in  the  evening  (one,  two  days),*. — *Scraping  high  up  in  the
throat^. — Drawing  and  tensive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  throat,  especially
on  moving  the  tongue  (nine  days),". — At  nights,  spasmodically  drawing  pain
in  o-ne  side  of  the  throat  and  in  the  ear,  disturbing  the  sleep,  and  increased
by  deglutition  (nine  days),^. — {^QQ.y  Pressure  in  the  throat  as  from  a  lamp,
withsoreness,  rough  voice,  and  dryness  of  the  throat,^.- — Pressi  ve  and  ten.-i  vc  pain
in  the  inner  right  side  of  the  throat,  as  far  as  the  ear  (one  day),*. — Sense
of  scraping  in  the  throat,  as  if  he  had  swallowed  pepper  (after  three  hours),*.
— Constant  griping  scraping  in  the  throat  (five  days),^. — After  eructation,
scraping  in  the  throat,  which  obliges  clearing  the  throat  (two  days), I —
*Rawness  and  roughness  of  the  throat,  which  induce  coughing,  in  the  even-
ing (four  days), ^*. — Sore  throat  in  swallowing,*. — Burning  soreness  in  the
throat  during  and  after  deglutition,  in  the  morning,  for  several  days  in
succession  (four  days),*. — *  After  clearing  the  throat,  ivhich  she  finds  very  dif-
fieidt,  it  feels  very  sorej'. — Aching  sore  throat  during  empty  deglutition,  in
the  evening,  for  several  days  in  succession  (caused  by  a  swelling  in  the
throat)  (four  days),*. — [410.]  Sore  throat,  pressure  in  the  throat,  even  when
not  swallowing,  with  internal  heat  in  both  hands  (after  two  hours),'. —
*  Transient  stitches  in  the  throat,  shooting  here  and  there,  on  swallowing,  and
something  pointed  sometimes  seems  to  stick  in  the  throat  in  the  evening  (two,
four  days),*. — Stinging  in  the  throat,  on  empty  deglutition,' ^ — *Violent
tickling  in  the  throat,  exciting  frequent  cough  (four  days),*. — Pressive  pain
in  the  left  tonsil,  during  and  after  swallowing  (one  day),*. — In  the  morning,
dull  stitches  in  the  right  tonsil  (four  days),*. — Swollen  tonsils  (six  days),*.
• — *  Sense  as  of  constriction  from  the  oesophagus  down  to  the  stomach,  every  time
he  swallows  a  morsel  of  food,^. — Contraction  of  the  oesophagus,  and  want  of
action,  in  the  morning,  on  waking,'. — "^  Violent  pressive  pain,  as  if  a  portion
of  the  CB-sophagus  were  contracted  or  compressed,  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,
especially  during  deglutition,  but  also  when  not  swallowing,  with  oppres-
sion of  the  chest  alternating  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  especially  after
a  meal  (eight,  nine  days),*. — [420.]  Impeded  deglutition  at  night,  as  from
a  spasmodic  constriction  of  the  throat  (one  day),*. — Spasmodically  pressive
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  on  swallowing  food  and  drink,*.

Stomach. — He  is  always  hungry ;  could  always  be  eating,'. — Very
hungry,-. — Rabid  hunger ;  he  is  panting  for  his  dinner,  and  cau  scarcely
await  it,*. — She  is  hungry,  but  she  eats  nothing  with  relish,^ — She  has  no
aversion  to  food,  but  no  desire  to  eat ;  on  looking  at  the  food  she  is  already
satisfied ;  she  could  go  a  whole  day  without  eating  (for  many  days),'. —
Strong  appetite  for  vegetables,  fruit,  and  soft  food,'. — *No  desire  to  eat,  no
appetite,  no  hunger;  food  does  not  taste  badly,  but  it  does  not  taste  at  all ;
everything  tastes  like  straw  or  shavings,'. — He  has  no  appetite,  and  eats
with  reluctance,*. — [430.]  Little  hunger  and  no  appetite  for  many  days,
even  when  he  eats  nothing  at  dinner  (one  to  fifteen  days),^. — Diminished
appetite,  with  fulness  of  the  abdomen,*. — *Aversion  to  meat,^. — Aversion  to
meat,  even  unto  vomiting,  for  three  days  (after  six  days),^ — Very  thirsty
the  whole  day,  also  at  dinner,''.- — Aversion  to  the  usual  smoking,'. — Smok-
ing does  not  relish,  and  intoxicates  him,  for  four  days,^ — Smoking  does  not
agree  with  him,'. — Frequent  empty  eructations  (alter  two  hours),'. — Empty
eructations  after  supper  (two  days),". — [440.]  Frequent  eructations  tasting
of  milk-soup  which  he  had  taken,  from  supper  until  he  lay  down,l — Eruc-
tations, with  pressive  pain  in  the  chest,  while  eating  (after  three-quarters
of  an  hour),'. — Bitter  eructations  alter  eating  potatoes;  he  feels  a  loathing


216  ALUMINA.

which  makes  him  shiver ;  in  the  evening  (five  days),l — Eancid  eructations,
leaving  a  burning  in  the  throat  for  a  long  while  (one  day),^ — Rancid  eruc-
tations, especially  after  dinner  (ten  to  thirteen  days),^ — Rancid  eructations
after  breakfast  soup,^. — Acrid  eructations,\ — Sour  eructations,  in  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed,'. — *Sour  eructations,  with  burning  in  the  throat,  like
heartburn  (one  day),^. — In  the  forenoon,  acidity  rises  into  his  mouth ;  it
continues  for  a  long  time,  and  is  attended  with  a  sensation  of  heat  in  the
mouth,\ — [450.]  Waterbrash,*. — Gulping  up  of  sour  mucus;  afterwards,
burning  in  the  throat,  like  heartburn,  coming  on  frequently,  especially
after  the  soup  for  breakfast,'. — Sweetish  risings  from  the  stomach ;  the
phlegm  which  he  throws  up  tastes  sweetish,  continues  a  long  time,  early  in
the  morning  (three  days),^ — Hiccough  after  eating,  at  noou  and  in  the
evening,'. — Hiccough  after  dinner,  also  after  eructations  from  the  break-
fast soup  (one  to  two  days),^ — When  standing,  she  becomes  nauseated,'. —
Nausea,  even  to  fainting;  her  breathing  is  arrested  on  account  of  it  at
night,'. — Nausea  as  soon  as  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,'. — Frequent  nausea,
as  if  he  would  vomit;  his  appetite  is,  nevertheless,  tolerably  good,'. — Incli-
nation to  vomit  in  the  morning,*. — [460.]  In  the  morning,  retching  in  the
throat,  as  if  one  would  vomit,'. — Inclination  to  vomit  after  eructation  of
air,  with  chilliness  of  the  body,  which  rises  from  the  feet  into  the  abdomen,*.
— Nausea,  with  an  inclination  to  vomit,  and  retching ;  this  caused  her  to
put  her  finger  into  the  throat,  after  which  she  vomited  phlegm  and  water,
but  the  breakfast,  which  she  had  eaten  two  hours  before,  remained  (four-
teen days  ),*. — After  supper,  nausea,  loathing,  and  weariness,  for  several  even-
ings,'.— Loathing  and  qualmishness  in  the  oesophagus  (one  hour),'. — Qualm-
ishness at  the  stomach,  with  faint-like  nausea  and  vertigo ;  the  room  turns
round  with  her ;  after  this,  her  head  remains  confused  (ten  days),*. — Fre-
quent nausea,  especially  during  the  chills,^ — Nausea,  with  rising  of  air,*. — ■
Nausea  and  chilliness  the  whole  day,*. — Attack  of  nausea,  with  headache,
paleness  of  the  face,  want  of  appetite,  several  evacuations  of  the  bowels,
loathing,  subsequent  inclination  to  vomit,  creeping  chilliness;  after  a  walk
he  is  obliged  to  lie  down  (eleven  days),''. — [470.]  Early  in  the  morning,
faint-like  nausea;  after  breakfast,  relieved  (nine  days),*. — On  waking  in
the  morning,  nausea,  qualmishness,  and  lassitude,  with  stickings  over  the
eyes,  and  pain  in  the  kidneys  during  motion  (nine  days),*. — She  wakes  in
the  morning  with  nausea  and  qualmishness  at  the  stomach,  and  physical
depression,  as  if  sleep  had  not  recruited  her,  accompanied  by  a  quick  fever-
ish pulse,  with  internal  heat  (three  days),*. — Violent  nausea  and  tremor
after  supper,'. — Disagreeable  sensation  of  hunger  and  emptiness  in  the  stom-
ach, without,  however,  much  appetite,'. — Violent  pain  in  the  stomach,  with
sensitiveness  to  external  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  in  the  evening
(six  days),^ — Pain  at  the  stomach ;  it  feels  full  or  bloated ;  painful  to  external
touch  ;  empty  eructations  and  fermentations,  or  loud  rumbling  and  rollings
in  the  abdomen,  as  of  something  working  therein,  after  dinner  (one  to  five
days),'\ — After  having  eaten  potatoes,  the  stomach  aches ;  sick  feeling,  nau-
sea, and  then  colic,'. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  she  had
been  drinking  cold  water,  in  the  evening ;  also  in  the  forenoon,  after  an
eructation,  and  while  some  eructations  are  continually  taking  place ;  in  the
afternoon,  it  passes  ofl^  (two  to  five  days),l — Heartburn  after  drinking  wa-
ter,'.— [480.]  Heartburn  after  supper,'. — Heartburn,  with  profuse  discharge
of  water  from  the  mouth,l — Sensation  of  pinching  at  the  stomach,  in  the
afternoon  (one  day),l — Drawing  pain  at  the  stomach,'. — After  dinner,
drawing  in  the  stomach ;  this  caused  a  sensation  of  tension  in  the  whole


ALUMINA.  217

body,  which  made  her  so  tired  that  she  was  obliged  to  lie  down/. — ^Gnawing
in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  awhile  after  dinner  (two  to  three  days),^. —
Pressure  and  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (thirty-one  days),^
— Pressure  and  soreness  transversely  across  the  stomach  and  upper  abdo-
men, in  the  afternoon,'. — Disagreeable  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach
before  the  evacuation  had  taken  place  (nine  days),^ — Oppression  at  the
stomach  upon  eating,  although  she  eats  with  relish,*.^[490.]  Oppression  at
the  stomach,  extending  up  to  the  throat,  after  having  eaten  potatoes ;  eruc-
tation relieves,  in  the  morning  (eight  days),^ — Oppression  in  the  stomach,
towards  noon  or  evening,"  ^ — Griping  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed,'. — Drawing  pain  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  up  into  the
pharynx,  with  difficult  breathing,'. — Violent  pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, and  from  thence  great  oppression  of  the  chest ;  she  was  obliged  to  stand
still  every  moment,  and  was  unable  to  walk  further,*. — Sensation  of  pressure
and  constriction  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest  and  be-
tween the  scapute  (thirteen  days),". — Pressure  and  crawling  at  the  pit,  as
from  a  worm  (after  two  hours),^ — Twisting  and  constriction  in  the  region
of  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest  and  throat,  attended  with  difficult
breathing,"  ^ — Sensation  of  cutting  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  ;  it  is  pain-
ful to  the  touch,  in  the  afternoon  (two  days),'. — Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  and  of  the  chest,'.- — [500.]  After  dinner,  stitches  in  the  stomach  and
chest,  coming  out  at  the  shoulder,  with  short  breathing  and  great  anguish;
for  several  hours  in  the  evening  (after  twelve  days),'. — After  an  evacua-
tion, and  during  the  period  of  digestion,  he  experiences  a  sense  of  scraping  in
the  stomach  and  the  mouth,'. — Ulcerative  soreness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
early  in  the  morning,  on  turning  in  the  bed,'. — Tearing  sore  pain  from  the
pit  of  stomach  down  into  the  abdomen,  as  if  everything  would  be  torn  out,'.
Abdomen. — When  stooping,  the  liver  is  always  sensitive  and  pain-
ful,'.— Tearings  in  the  liver,'. — Tearing,  extending  from  the  right  hypo-
chondriac region  into  the  hip,  in  the  forenoon  (first  day),'. — Upon  rising
from  a  stooping  position,  violent  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,
as  if  in  the  liver,  with  arrest  of  breathing  (eleventh  day),'. — Stitches  in
the  right  hypochondriac  region  when  standing ;  they  disappear  when  sit-
ting,'.— In  the  evening,  continually  painful  stitches  under  the  left  lower
ribs,  extending  as  far  as  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (fifth  day),'. — [510.]  Dull
stitches  occurring  alternately  under  the  left  lower  ribs,  and  in  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen  (fourth  day),^ — -Stitches  in  both  hypochondriac  re-
gions,'.— Sensation  as  if  both  hypochondriac  regions  were  forcibly  pressed
or  screwed  towards  each  other,  in  the  forenoon  (first  day),'. — Lpug-con-
,  tinued  burning,  and  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondriac  region,  as  if  it
were  deeply  cut  into  by  a  band,  in  the  afternoon  (first  day),'. — Frequently
an  instantaneous  drawing  pain  under  the  right  ribs,  when  sitting  or  walk-
ing,'.— In  the  evening,  pinching  around  the  navel  (first  day),*. — During
the  usual  breakfast,  there  is  pinching  below  the  navel,  with  fulness  and
distension  of  the  abdomen  (first  day),^ — Worrying  around  the  navel,
as  after  a  cold,  in  the  afternoon  (second  day),'. — Pressure  in  the  umbilical
region  with  stitches,  in  the  afternoon,  when  standing,'. — Both  sides  of  the
upper  abdomen  seems  to  press  towards  each  other ;  the  place  is  externally
painful  to  the  touch  (after  two  hours),'. — [520.]  Painful  distension  of  the
abdomen  at  night,  which  prevents  her  sleeping  ;  with  retention  of  stool
(eleventh  day),'. — Great  distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  empty  eructation
and  two  soft  evacuations,  without  relief  (eighteenth  day),'. — After  dinner,
much  distension,  with  tenesmus ; this  was  afterwards  succeeded  by  the


218  ALUMINA.

passage  of  two  hard  balls  of  fseces ;  afterwards  she  went  to  walk,  during
which  the  distension  of  the  abdomen  continued  in  spite  of  the  copious  emis-
sions of  flatulence ;  no  relief  was  obtained  till  a  copious  evacuation  occurred
after  her  walk  (ninth  day),*. — The  abdomen  is  distended  and  very  hard,
without  any  sensation  of  pain,^ — Fulness  of  the  abdomen,  with  orgasm
extending  towards  the  chest,  after  dinner,  for  several  days  (after  third
day),l^Distension  and  rumbling  without  passage  of  flatus,'. — During  the
menses,  bloated  abdomen,  and  too  large  flow  of  blood,\ — ^Grumbling  in  the
abdomeu,  with  anxious  restlessness,  without  any  flatulency  passing  off;  the
small  stool  does  not  relieve  (first  day),^ — Much  rumbling  flatus  in  the
abdomen ;  however,  it  passes  off  freely,  with  a  feeling  of  weakness  of  the
sphincter  ani,^ — Much  audible  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,^
— [530.]  Loud  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  also  after  eating,\ — Runibling
in  the  abdomen,  succeeded  by  eructations,*. — Frequent  desire  to  emit  flatu-
lency,'.—Emission  of  flatulence,  which  relieves  the  sense  of  fulness  of  the
stomach,  in  the  evening  (fifth  day),'. — Loud  emission  of  flatulence,'. — Much
badly  smelling  flatus,  which  passes  off  quietly  in  the  night,  and  after  din-
ner (one  to  seven  days),'. — Moving  to  and  fro,  and  painless  clutching  in
the  abdomen  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Early,  before  breakfast,  spasmodic
pain  from  the  bladder  to  the  chest,  disappears  after  breakfast,*. — Sensation
of  distension,  as  if  the  abdomen  became  more  and  more  full,  after  supper
(fifth  day),'. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon,'. —
[540.]  Sudden  sensation  of  burning  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon,'. —
Sudden  pinching  in  the  abdomen  here  and  there ;  it  then  passes  to  the
small  of  the  back,  where  it  produces  a  gnawing  pain  for  a  long  time,  in  the
afternoon  (sixteenth  day),'. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  with  heat  in  the
stomach  (after  one  hour),'. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed  ;  it  terminates  in  a  flow  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (second  and
third  day),^. — On  waking,  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  tenesmus ;  she
was  scarcely  able  to  reach  the  privy,  where  she  had  to  lean  against  the
wall  in  a  fainting  fit ;  she  had  no  stool,  but  the  pain  in  the  abdomen  ceased
after  much  tenesmus  (twelfth  day),*. — -In  the  afternoon  and  night,  pinch-
ing pain  and  tearing  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  extending
to  the  hypochondriac  region  and  the  sternum  (seventh  day),\ — Towards
evening,  colic-like  pinching  and  tearing  in  the  abdomen,  with  chilliness  in
the  body ;  relieved  by  application  of  warm  cloths,*. — During  the  menses,
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  greater  lassitude  than  usual,'. — Flatulent
colic,^. — ^After  dinner,  violent  attacks  of  colic,  the  whole  afternoon ;  short
sleep  relieves ;  as  soon  as  he  moves,  it  seems  as  if  they  would  return,  with
violent  tenesmus  and  occasional  expulsion  of  faeces;  this  lasts  until  evening;
the  anus  feels  sore,  with  stinging,  so  that  he  cannot  sit  down  without  pain ;
on  the  following  day,  liquid  mucus  frequently  passes  off  by  the  rectum,  in-
voluntarily (after  fourteen  days),l — [550.]  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  after
every  meal,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening  (after  twenty-nine  days),'. — Violent
pinching  in  the  abdomen  after  every  cold  she  takes,  or  as  soon  as  she  goes
into  the  cold  air,'. — Pinching  and  writhing  in  the  abdomen  (after  one
hour),'. — At  midnight,  is  roused  from  sleep  by  violent  pinching  and  rum-
bling in  the  abdomen;  this  ceases  towards  morning  (after  twelve  days),'. —
Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,'. — Pressure  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,'. —
His  abdomen  seems  to  hang  down  heavily,  for  two  hours,  in  the  afternoou,
in  walking,'. — Continual  pressure  and  burning  in  the  abdomen,'. — Pressive
and  sticking  pain  in  the  abdomen,  after  eating  (fifth  day),". — Stitches
moving  about  in  the  abdomen  and  the  hypochondria,  as  if  something  would


ALUMINA.  219

press  out  (seventh  day)/. — [560.]  Tearing  in  the  os  innominatum/. — Sense
as  of  tearing  in  the  abdomen,  mornings  after  rising,'. — A  few  days  before
the  appearance  of  the  menses,  she  has  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen  during
an  evacuation,  as  if  she  were  to  have  diarrhoea ;  with  pinching,  writhing,
and  pressing,  like  labor-pains,\ — Pain  in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  as  if
something  would  tear  on  physical  exertion  ;  it  extends  to  the  thighs,\ —
Tension  of  the  abdominal  muscles,  from  reaching  high,'. — Sharp  cutting
and  burning  in  the  hypogastric  region,  the  whole  forenoon,  till  evening,*. —
Pulsative  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
abdominal  ring,  when  sitting  (fourth  day),'. — Violent  pain  in  the  left  side
of  the  abdomen,  as  if  an  ulcer  were  forming,  with  nausea  (thirty-fourth
day),*. — Shootings,  causing  fright,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  (second
day),'. — Shortly  after  eating,  acute  pressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen,'. — [570.]  Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  after  a  copious  evacuation,
which  leaves  a  desire  for  stool  behind  (after  ten  days),*. — Pain  in  the  upper
abdoiQen,  as  if  threatened  with  diarrhoea,  succeeded  by  soft  stools,  without
any  diminution  of  the  pain  (eleventh  day),*. — Colic,  followed  by  diarrhoea,
this  was  succeeded  by  a  violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at  the  place  where,
when  a  girl,  she  had  an  internal  ulcer,  which  opened ;  the  pain  was  like
that  felt  after  a  violent  blow  ;  she  had  to  rub  the  place  and  lay  the  hand
upon  it,  whilst  the  body  was  bent;  this  relieved  the  pain  somewhat,  but  it
lasted  uniformly  the  whole  day,  either  sitting  or  standing  (seventeenth
day),*. — Frequently  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  without  distension  or  stool
(second  day),^. — Upon  sitting  bent,  acute  cutting  pains  transversely  across
the  abdomen  (after  five  hours),^. — Violent  cutting  and  rumbling  in  the
whole  abdomen ;  the  pain  rises  up  to  the  stomach,  like  a  violent  twisting  ;
succeeded  by  an  intensely  pressive  pain  in  the  chest,  which  arrests  the
breathing,  from  four  in  the  afternoon  till  eleven  at  night,^ — Inguinal  hernia
protrudes  with  violence  (after  half  an  hour),'. — -Hernia  did  not  protrude  in
the  first  days ;  then  it  protruded  every  day  until  the  twelfth  day ;  on  the
thirtieth  day,  hernia  threatened  to  become  strangulated  ;  then  it  protruded
every  day  until  the  fiftieth  day,  although  the  protrusion  diminished  from
day  to  day,  and  finally  ceased  for  several  months,*. — Hernia  protruded  a
good  deal  towards  evening ;  became  constricted  in  the  lumbar  region  with
the  most  violent  pain,  which  obliged  her  to  bend  her  body,  and  did  not
allow  her  to  walk ;  the  hernia  could  not  be  reduced  ;  half  an  hour  after-
wards, when  sitting  quietly,  reduction  took  place  of  its  own  accord  (thirty
days),*. — [580.]  Pinching  and  stitches  in  the  groins  and  the  lumbar  regions
(on  ascending  the  stairs),'. — In  the  abdominal  muscles,  over  the  left  groin,
a  drawing  pain  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when  she  is  dancing  or  walking
fast,'. — *Pressing  in  both  groins  towards  the  sexual  organs,  in  the  evening
(third  day),'. — -Sensation  in  the  right  ilium  as  of  both  sides  being  pressed
together  with  a  vise  (first  day),' — ^Sticking  pressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the
abdominal  ring,  as  if  a  hernia  would  press  out  there,  with  tension  as  far  as  the
side  of  the  abdomen,  at  the  same  time  a  tumor  may  be  felt  at  the  painful  spot,
which  feels  like  a  strangulated  hernia,'.— Stitches  in  the  right  iliac  region,'.
Stool  and  jLnus. — Protrusion  of  a  varix  of  the  rectum  ;  it  enlarges
by  walking,  and  decreases  during  a  night's  rest,'. — Varices  of  the  rectum
always  enlarge  in  the  evening;  they  become  moist,  and  burn,'. — The  rectum
is  inactive,  as  if  it  were  deficient  in  peristaltic  motion,  and  had  not  strength
enough  to  press  the  contents  out;  the  stools  are  soft  and  thin,  and  can  only
be  pressed  out  by  straining  the  abdominal  muscles  (after  sixteen  hours),'. —
*Tne  rectum  seems  paralyzed  (second  day),'. — [590.]  The  varices  become


220  ALUMINA.

moist,  and  sting,'. — When  walking,  dark-colored  blood  passes  out  of  her
rectum,'. — Tenesmus  of  the  rectum  and  the  bladder,  passing  off  after  an
evacuation,*. — Tenesmus  (third  day  ),\^Tenesmus  (first  day),'. — Tenesmus,
lasting  a  long  while,  succeeding  a  troublesome  pressure  in  the  lower  abdomen ;
the  evacuation  comes  on  slowly,  and  can  only  be  passed  by  straining  the  ab-
dominal muscles ;  the  whole  of  the  intestines  appear  to  be  inactive  for  want
of  peristaltic  motion  ;  stools  are  not  hard  (after  second  day),\ — Tenesmus
preceding  an  evacuation,'. — Bearing  down  during  an  evacuation  ;  the  stools
are  very  firm,  knotty,  and  scanty,  preceded  by  tenesmus  (second  day),^ —
^Itching,  burning  of  the  anus,^. — -During  an  evacuation  it  seemed  as  if  the
rectum  were  dried  tip  and  constricted;  however,  the  stool  was  regular,*. —
[600.]  Pricking,  as  with  pins,  in  the  anus,  after  a  difficult  evacuation,'. —
Crawling  in  rectum,  as  from  worms,*. — Itching,  burning,  and  stinging  of
the  rectum,*. — ^Sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  anus,  after  an  evacuation  at-
tended with  contraction  of  the  rectum  and  constriction  of  the  anus,^. — Pressure
in  the  anus  (third  day),^ — ^Itching  in  the  anus  for  a  long  while  (after  thir-
tieth day),l — Itching  of  the  anus,  as  if  it  would  pulsate,*. — Severe  itching
in  the  fold  between  the  nates  and  the  anus ;  scratching  aggravates  it  (first
and  second  days),'. — Sweat  of  the  perineum,  with  an  intolerable  itching,
which  increases,  and  becomes  painful  after  rubbing,'.— Sensation  as  if  the
perineum,  between  the  scrotum  and  anus,  were  inflamed,*. — [610.]  Momen-
tary pressure  in  the  perineum  on  blowing  the  no3e,*.^Painful  pressure  in
the  perineum,  which  passes  off  quickly,*. — Violent  pressure  in  the  perineum,
at  the  commencement  of  coition  and  during  erections,*. — Pressure  in  the
perineum  during  coition,*. — Soreness  of  the  perineum  during  clap  (after
four  weeks),^ — ^Colic  preceding  an  evacuation,  which  is  sometimes  solid,
sometimes  soft,  but  always  scanty,*. — After  an  evacuation,  much  ineffectual
desire  for  stool  in  the  upper  abdomen,  and  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,
without  tenesmus,'. — Attacks  of  slight  diarrhceic  stools,  with  colic,  lasting
for  two  and  three  days,'. — Diarrhoea  succeeding  colic,*. — Diarrhoea  succeed-
ing a  retention  of  stool,  which  had  lasted  six  days ;  six  evacuations  a  day,
preceded  by  colic,  which  sometimes  continued  even  after  the  evacuation,*.
—[620.]  Twice  a  diarrhoea  in  the  evening  ;  the  stools  at  last  become  lumpy
(second  day),'. — Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus  in  rectum,*. — ^For  some  time  she
had  three  or  four  ordinary  evacuations  a  day  without  any  trouble,^ — The
evacuation  which  generally  took  place  in  the  evening,  took. place  in  the
morning,*. — Liquid  stools,  preceded  by  pain  in  the  abdomen,  or  attended
with  colic  (third  and  fifth  day),'. — Stools  soft,  almost  liquid,  with  burning
in  the  anus,  also  an  evacuation  in  the  evening,  preceded  by  tenesmus ;  an-
qther  in  the  night  (second  and  fifth  days),'.— The  first  portion  of  her  stools
is  liquid,  and  is  expelled  with  a  jerk  ;  the  last  portion  appears  burned  (fifth
day),'. — Stools  covered  all  over  with  a  whitish  mucus,  firm,  preceded  by
oppression  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  which  ceased  immediately  after
the  evacuation  (after  thirtieth  day),'. — Bright-colored  stools,'. — Bloody
mucus  passes  during  and  between  the  evacuations  and  without  it,'. — [630.]
*  Dropping  of  blood  during  an  evacuation,^. — *Thls  is  succeeded  by  a  stream
of  blood,  folloteed  by  soreness  in  the  anus,  and  along  the  rectum  (after  seven-
teenth day),'. — *Blood  passes  during  a  firm  evacuation  (ninth  and  thirtieth
days),'. — Retention  of  stool  (eighth  and  eleventh  days),'. — Stool  only  once
every  two  days,  solid,  sometimes  mixed  with  blood,*. — No  stool  during  the
first  days,*. — *Stools  too  scanty,''. — *Evacuation  of  a  small  quantity  of  nard
faeces,  with  pressure  and  a  sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  rectum,'. —
Hard  and  difficult  stools,  with  pain  in  the  anus,'. — *Difficult  evacuations,


ALUMINA.  221

the  stools  being  hard  and  of  the  shape  of  laurel  berries,  with  cutting  pain
in  the  anus,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow,'. — [640.]  *Firm,  hard,  soanty  stools,
with  presmre  and  pain  in  the  anus,  and  difficult  evacuation  (the  first  day),^

JJritiary  OfffCiHS. — *Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  bladder  and  genital
organs ;  he  fears  that  he  will  wet  the  bed  (in  the  evening),". — Violent  tenes-
mus of  the  bladder,' °. — -Pressure  and  drawing  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,
especially  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder  (fourth  and  fifth  days),^ — (Clap  for
more  than  six  weeks  (after  fourteenth  day),  with  a  violent  and  painful
swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands  of  the  right  side,  cutting  pain  during  mic-
turition, and  pain  in  the  perineum,  especially  violent  at  the  end  of  the
second  week ;  the  pain  in  the  perineum  is  especially  violent  when  standing,
rising,  or  sitting  dnwn),^. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the  urethra,  which  passes
ofi"  by  lying  still,*. — (Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  anterior  portion  of  the
urethra,  as  if  the  skin  there  were  without  sensibility,  especially  in  the
morning),^ — -Tearings  and  shootings  in  the  urethra  when  walking  in  the
open  air,  ascending  towards  the  hypogastrium,\ — Agreeable  and  voluptu-
ous itching  in  the  urethra  and  between  the  testicles,*. — Itching,  burning  in
the  urethra,'. — [650.]  Early  in  the  morning,  on  waking,  while  in  bed,  a
drawing  and  biting  sensation  in  the  urethra,'. — Cutting  in  the  anterior  part
of  the  urethra  during  micturition,  and  even  awhile  afterwards,  as  if  the
urine  passed  over  an  inflamed  place  (after  eighteenth  day),^. — After  urinat-
ing the  urethra  became  hot,  then  burning,  and  he  had  tenesmus  of  both
rectum  and  bladder,*. — Urging  and  pressure  to  urinate,  without  increased
quantity  of  urine,". — Urging  to  urinate  early  in  the  morning,  on  waking,
with  difficult  and  tardy  emission  of  the  urine  in  a  thin  stream,  from  the
female  urethra  (seventh  day),'. — (When  he  wishes  to  urinate  he  has  a  sort
of  fright),*. — When  urinating,  burning  like  fire;  much  worse  in  the  even-
ing (first  day),'*. — He  is  frequently  obliged  to  rise  during  the  night  to
urinate  (first  and  fourth  days),'. — (After  sitting  a  long  time  he  feels  no  in-
convenience in  urinating,  but  as  soon  as  he  moves  about  he  feels  a  burn-
ing),*.— (Urinating  is  followed  by  burning,  which  makes  him  low-spirited
and  desponding),*. — [660.]  During  her  menses  she  was  obliged  to  urinate
frequently  day  and  night,  which  corroded  the  genital  organs  (sixth  day),*.
— Frequent  emission  of  urine  in  small  quantity  in  the  evening  (first  day),'.
— Increased  secretion  of  urine  for  several  days,'  *. — Involuntary  emissions
of  urine,  occasioned  by  bearing  down  in  order  to  evacuate  the  bowels,  which
can  only  be  efiected  with  great  difiiculty  (second  day),'. — (Involuntary
emission  of  urine,  at  least  twenty  times  a  day;  very  little  urine  passes
off"  at  a  time);  (with  a  clap)  (afterfourweeks),^— -Seldom,  but  copious  emis-
sion of  urine  (sixth  day),'. — Increased  secretion  of  pale,  hot  urine,  with
burning,'  ^ — Emission  of  much  straw-yellow,  clear  urine  (fourth  and  fifth
days),' '". — Ijiirge  quantity  of  water-colored  urine,'. — Frequent  and  copious
emission  of  pale  urine  (preceded  by  burning  in  the  urethra),'. — [670,]
(Twisted  stream  of  urine),*. — Decrease  of  urine  (in  the  morning),  with  cut-
ting in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra  (fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  days),'. —
For  a  whole  day  there  is  no  evacuation,  either  of  urine  or  fseces,'. — No
emission  of  urine  in  the  forenoon,  but,  in  the  afternoon,  frequent  emissions
of  an  increased  quantity  of  a  reddish  urine,  which  becomes  turbid  during
the  night,  and  deposits  a  sediment  (first  day),'. — She  passes  but  little  urine,
which  deposits  a  sediment  of  red  sand,'. — The  deep  yellow  urine  soon  de-
posits a  large  and  loose  cloud  (first  and  fifth  days),'. — When  standing,  the
urine  deposits  a  thick  white  sediment,^ — Pale  urine,  with  a  turbid  sedi-
ment,'.— White,  turbid  urine,  as  if  chalk  had  been  stirred  with  it,*.


222  ALUMINA.

Sexual  Organs. — Numerous  erections  in  the  evening,  and  during
the  night  when  lying  in  bed,  and  in  the  afternoon  when  sitting  (first  to
third  day),^ — [680,]  (When  waking,  during  the  night,  almost  constantly
painful  erections ;  they  are  not  perfect,  but  cause  a  sensation  as  if  the
organ  were  ulcerated  internally,  with  short,  fine,  piercing  stitches  in  the
whole  organ,  resembling  shootings)  (after  four  weeks),^ — (Priapisms  during
the  night),*. — ^On  moving  his  hand  along  the  penis,  has  a  drawing  pain,
which  extends  as  far  as  the  glans ;  with  weak  appetite,*. — Soreness  on  the
inner  surface  of  the  prepuce,' — Secretion  of  much  smegma  behind  the
glans,^ — Sensation  as  if  the  glans  were  compressed  (for  two  minutes),*. —
Drawing  from  the  glans  through  the  urethra  (after  five  days),^. — Formation
upon  the  glans,*.— Itching  of  the  glans  (fourth  day),". — Itching  of  the
scrotum  ;  removed  by  scratching  (second  day),^ — [690,]  Contractive  pain
in  the  right  spermatic  cord ;  the  testicle  of  the  right  side  is  drawn  up  at
the  same  time,  and  is  also  very  sore  and  painful  (second  day),*. — The  left
testicle  is  hard,  and  indescribably  painful  to  the  touch,*. — At  first,  the
sexual  instinct  appears  to  be  lessened,  and  the  erections  appear  to  be  in-
creased ;  whereas,  in  the  reaction  of  the  organism,  the  desire  for  an  embrace
increases,  although  erection  is  wanting,^. — Indifference  to  sexual  inter-
course,*.— Want  of  sexual  instinct  (immediately,  for  several  days),'. —
During  the  first  weeks,  the  sexual  instinct  is  more  intense,  in  the  following
weeks  decreasing,  and  more  moderate,'. — Frequent  and  violent  erections
and  emissions  (after  three  and  thirty-three  days),^  *. — Emissions,  two  nights
in  succession  (after  fifteen  days),'. — Emission  during  the  afternoon  nap,'. —
Almost  every  other  night  an  emission,  with  voluptuous  dreams,'. — [700,]
Emissions,  the  first  four  nights,  with  voluptuous  dreams,'. — During  coition
the  semen  passes  thick  and  lumpy  like  jelly,*. — Pressure  in  the  sexual
organs,'. — Tickling  of  the  sexual  organs  a.Qdi  the  thighs,'. — Jerking  stitches
on  the  left  side  of  the  pudendum,  extending  into  the  chest,'. — Itching  in
the  pudenda,  during  the  leucorrhoea,^. — Pain,  like  the  tick  of  a  watch,  on  the
left  side  of  the  vagina,  with  throbbing  as  in  formation  of  pus  in  an  ulcer,
which  continues  for  two  days,  unchanged  under  all  conditions ;  however,
nothing  could  be  either  seen  or  felt  (thirty-sixth  day),*. — Leucorrhoea,'. —
(The  leucorrhoea  with  which  she  was  affected,  ceased),^. — Leucorrhosa  suc-
ceeding the  menses,  painless,  lasting  three  days  (after  twenty-seventh  day),*.
[710,]  Frequently  acrid  leucorrluea,^. — *  Acrid  leucorrhoea,  with  burning  in
the  genital  organs,  and  still  more  in  the  rectum ;  these  parts  seemed  inflamed
and  corroded,  so  that  she  found  walking  difficult;  washing  with  cold  water  re-
lieved; the  leucorrhoea  was  abundant,  and  flowed  almost  over  her  feet;  at  the
same  time  blood,  resembling  meat  washings,  passed  for  two  days ;  three
days  after  the  menses  (twenty-second  day),*. — Leucorrhoea,  looking  like
meat  washings,  in  the  afternoon,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (and  when
sitting),  also  at  night,''. — *Profuse  leucorrhoea  of  transparent  mucus,  only
in  daytime,  without  Sensation  or  pain  in  the  abdomen,'. — *Leucorrhcea,
quite  clear,  like  water  or  transparent  mucus ;  it  made  the  linen  stiff  (after
eight  days),*. — *Leucorrhoea  of  yellow  mucus  (after  some  days),'. — Six
days  before  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  she  has  a  copious  flow  of  mucus
from  the  vagina,  accompanied  by  tremor,  lassitude,  and  a  sensation  as  if
everything  would  fall  out  of  her  abdomen,', — The  menses  appear  four  days
too  soon,  preceded  by  violent  headache,  which  ceased  on  the  appearance
of  the  menses ;  after  they  had  flowed  for  one  day,  the  headache  came  on
again,  and  continued  during  the  whole  period,  for  five  days ;  the  menses
were  less  copious  than  usual  (after  twenty-two  days),*. — The  period  catae


ALUMINA.  223

on  five  days  too  early ;  a  copious  flow  ou  the  second  day  ;  lasted  eight
days,  as  usual ;  preceded  by  paius  ia  the  abdomen  ;  diarrhoea  on  the  sixth
day,*. — Menses  appear  too  soon  (by  three  to  eleven  days),  short  and
scanty,'. — [720.]  The  menses,  which  had  gradually  stopped,  appear  again
(after  seventeen  days),\ — The  period  had  already  delayed  ten  days  (after
fifty-two  days) ;  during  a  walk  and  a  desire  for  urinating,  a  little  dark-
colored  lymph  passed  ;  the  menses  did  not  appear  till  the  third  month  (in
a  woman  of  forty-eight  years),'. — Appearance  of  scanty  menses  (after  ninth
(lay) ;  four  weeks  later  (after  thirty-seven  days),  they  flow  copiously,'. —
The  menses  are  scanty,  and  last  only  three  days,'. — Menses  scanty  and  pale
(after  three  days),'. — The  menses  appear  on  the  sixth  day,  without  any
disagreeable  symptoms ;  two  days  later,  a  cold  comes  ori  with  pain  in  the
nose,  the  head,  and  the  forehead,  increased  on  blowing  the  nose ;  in  the
later  days,  diarrhoea  and  colic  intervene  besides,*.  '

Respirator}/  Appnratiis. — Phlegm  in  the  air-passages,  always
adherent ;  it  necessitates  clearing  the  throat,  whereby  only  a  small  portion
becomes  detached,^ — Whistling  in  the  air-passages,  and  smothering  in  the
chest,  on  breathing,'. — *Irritation  in  the  larynx  induces  cough,*. — Irrita-
tion to  cough,  with  frequent  spitting  of  saliva,^ — [730.]  She  takes  cold
easily,  in  the  room  ;  she  gets  hoarse,  this  decreases  by  walking  in  the  open
air,'. — Hoarseness  in  the  morning  (sixteenth  day),'. — She  is  frequently
attacked  with  sudden  hoarseness,  which  caused  a  loss  of  voice,  and  could
not  be  relieved  by  clearing  the  throat ;  mostly  in  the  afternoon  and  even-
ing,'.— Cough,  with  painful  pressure  in  the  occiput,'. — Cough,  with  scraping
in  the  throat,'. — Short  fits  of  cough,  with  tearing,  shooting  pain  in  the  right
temple  and  the  vertex,'. — Cough,  which  makes  the  chest  feel  sore,  in  the
forenoon,  (third  day),^ — Frequent  short,  dry  cough,  in  the  forenoon  and
evening,'  ^. — *Dry  cough  at  night,  with  dryness  of  the  throat  (after  twenty-
four  hours),'. — ^Violent,  short,  dry  persistent  cough,  with  sneezing ;  and
tearing,  shooting,  and  pinching  pain,  extending  from  the  nape  of  the  neck
as  far  as  the  right  shoulder,'. — [740.]  Dry  cough,  coming  suddenly  in  the
morning,  and  passing  ofl^  quickly,  or  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and
then  also  continuing  in  the  room  (first  and  sixth  da)'),'. — *Continual  dry,
hacking  cough,  with  vomiting  and  arrest  of  breathing,  and  sticking  pain
extending  from  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  to  the  hypochondrium  and  the
pit  of  the  stomach,'. — Violent  dry  cough,  during  the  day,  every  attack  lasts
a  long  time ;  only  after  two  days,  the  cough  becomes  less  frequent  and
looser,'.— Violent  and  dry  cough  in  the  morning  after  rising;  later,  some
expectoration  follows  (fourth  and  sixth  days),'. — -*Cough,  with  much  ex-
pectoration, especially  in  the  morning,'. — (Cough,  with  expectoration;  the
throat  becomes  rough  and  hoarse,  with  fluent  coryza),*. — Cough,  with  secre-
tion of  loose  mucus  (curative  effect),*. — Sudden  violent,  but  short  cough  ;  by
making  an  eff'ort,  he  expectorates  a  piece  of  phlegm,  mixed  with  blood,  in
the  afternoon  (fifth  day),'. — The  morning  cough  and  expectoration  ceased
(curative  effects),  (fifth  day),*. — Difficult  breathing,  in  the  forenoon,*.

Chest. — [750.]  Blister  on  the  right  half  of  the  chest  and  on  the  throat,
with  burning  pain  ;  with  glowing  heat  in  the  face,  and  chills  in  the  rest
of  the  body ;  sleeps  soundly  and  without  dreams,*. — Rattling  in  the  chest,
caused  by  mucus  (fifth  day),'. — Feeling  of  dryness  in  both  sides  of  the
chest  (fifteenth  day),'. — Continual  warmth  in  the  middle  of  the  chest  (after
five  minutes),'. — Heat  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest ;  she  feels  the  heat  when
breathing,'. — Pinching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening
when  sitting  (first  day),*. — At  night  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a  cramp,


224  ALUMINA.

and  oppression  of  the  chest  (having  walked  a  good  deal  the  day  before),'.
— Pressure  on  the  chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  at  night,  when  lying  upon
the  back  ;  passing  off  when  lying  upon  the  side  (second  day),". — His  chest
feels  oppressed,^ — Oppression  at  the  chest  (first  day),°. — [760.]  Oppression
of  the  chest,*. — Oppression,  orgasm,  and  pulsation  in  the  chest  (after  two
hours),''. —  Oppressive  pnin  in  the  chest,  the  chest  feels  tight,'. — Oppression
on  the  chest,*. — Oppression  at  the  chest,  when  stooping  while  writing,'. —
At  night,  violent  oppressive  pain  in  the  chest,  which  disturbs  the  otherwise
quiet  sleep,  and  is  not  increased  by  breathing,  but  by  bending  the  head
forward,  several  days  (after  five  days),^ — Oppressive  pain  in  the  middle
of  the  chest,  alternating  with  a  constriction  and  violent  palpitation  of  the
heart,  especially  after  a  meal  (eighth  and  ninth  days),^ — Weight  on  the
chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  without  cough,  only  in  the  afternoon
(eighteenth  day),^ — When  walking  fast,  sensation  as  of  cutting  and  pres-
sure in  the  chest,  relieved  by  sitting  (a  fortnight)  (after  twenty  days),l —
Painful  sensation,  as  if  the  chest  became  wide  (first  and  ninth  days),^ —
[770.]  The  chest  feels  contracted,  with  apprehension  (eleventh  day),^ — Sen-
sation of  constriction  around  the  chest  when  stooping,  while  the  person  is
sitting ;  it  passes  ofi"  on  becoming  erect,  in  the  afternoon  (first  day),l—
When  stooping  during  some  work,  her  chest  felt  constricted,  so  that  she
was  scarcely  able  to  breathe,  as  if  she  had  been  laced  too  tightly ;  this
passed  off  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (ninth  day),*. — Boring  pain,  some-
times in  the  middle,  sometimes  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,  aggravated  by
breathing,  sometimes  in  the  evening  ;  relieved  by  becoming  erect  and  walk-
ing,l — External  pressure  at  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  (diminished  some-
what by  friction),'. — Pressure  here  and  there  in  the  chest,'. — Pressure  in
the  chest,  followed  by  empty  eructations,  without  relief;  the  pressure  some-
times reaches  as  far  as  the  back,  and  is  increased  by  walking,  in  the  fore-
noon (first  and  twentieth  days),'. — Pressure  on  the  chest,  with  shortness  of
breath  and  irritation  to  cough,  which  often  goes  and  comes,'. — Pressure  on
the  chest  during  an  already  existing  cough,  and  after  it ;  during  which  a
paralytic  pain  extends  through  the  arm,  so  that  the  arm  becomes  weary
and  powerless  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  cut  or
sore,  after  dinner,  until  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening ;  relieved  after  lying
down ;  next  morning  the  pain  returns,  during  the  morning  cough,  with  a
feeling  of  weakness  in  the  chest,  and  accompanied  by  empty  eructations
and  short  breath  (seventh  day),'. — [780.]  Sharp  stitches  in  the  upper  part
of  the  chest  (third  day),^ — Stitches  in  the  chest,  here  and  there,  sometimes
worse  by  breathing,  sometimes  burning,'. — *When  stooping,  a  stitch  from
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  to  the  middle  of  the  chest;  it  comes  with  every  in-
spiration ;  afterwards,  also  when  standing  erect,'. — Tearing  stitches,  like
lightning,  from  the  right  loin  to  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  through  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  when  inspiring,'. — Soreness  in  the  chest  and  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  accompanied  by  fatiguing  cough,  lachryraation,  and  tenacious
expectoration,*. — Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  interior  of  the  chest,  when
moving  or  turning  the  body,*. — Formication  on  the  left  clavicle  (and  over
the  right  half  of  the  chest,  with  biting  itching)  ;  the  spot  burns  on  being
scratched,  and  burning  vesicles  appear  (sixteenth  day),'.— Burning  in  the
whole  right  .side  of  the  chest,  with  twinges  and  sticking  in  a  false  rib  of  the
right  side,  in  the  afternoon  (first  day),'. — Disagreeable  feeling  of  constric-
tion below  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  on  a  small  spot  (after  two  hours),'. —
Sensation  of  hard  pressure  during  active  exercise,  high  up  on  both  sides  of
the  chest;  less  when  sitting,  completely  disappearing  on  lying  down ;  touch-


ALUMINA.  225

ing  the  parts  does  not  affect  it,\ — [790.]  Stitches  high  up  in  both  sides  of
the  chest,  during  active  exercise  ;  when  sitting  or  walking  there  are  none,
but  only  pressure  with  arrest  of  breathing,'. — Pine  stitches  in  the  left
mamma,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  (second  day),^ — During  a.  violent
effort,  lifting,  carrying,  etc.,  pain  in  the  chest  on  the  left  side  of  the  sternum,
with  soreness  of  the  place  on  being  touched  (after  ten  days),^. — Sensation
of  oppressive  dryness  under  the  sternum,*. — Chilliness  in  the  interior  of  the
sternum,'. — Pressure  on  the  sternum,  worse  in  the  evening,  when  walking,*.
— Stitches  under  the  sternum,  increased  by  talking ;  at  the  same  time  feel-
ing of  compression  of  the  chest,  as  if  she  were  tightly  laced  (thirty-fifth
day),*. — At  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  pain  as  from  excoriation,  which
extends  to  the  stomach,  afterwards  hoarseness,'. — Itching  upon  the  sternum,
which  goes  oflPby  scratching  (fifteenth  day),^

Heart  and  Pulse. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  daily  on  waking,'. —
[800.]  *Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  a  few  irregular  beats,  large  and
small  ones  being  intermixed,'. — Towards  4  or  5  o'clock  in  the  morning,
waked  by  anxiety  about  the  heart,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out,  which,  how-
ever, is  not  the  case;  after  rising,  the  anxiety  immediately  disappears,'.

Neck  and  Sack.—Uhe  nape  of  the  neck  is  painful  on  moving  the
head,'. — Stitches  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,'. — Stitches  in  the  nape  of  the
neck  and  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  where  they  disappear  only  after
long  friction,'. — Itching  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  of  the  throat  (after  eigh-
teen days),'*. — Vesicles  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  (eight  days),'. —
Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck,'.— Early  in  the  morn-
ing, stiffness  of  the  neck  and  upper  part  of  the  back,  with  drawing
pains,  passing  off"  by  motion  (four  days),^ — Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the
neck,  so  that  she  cannot  turn  her  head  to  the  left  side,'.— [810.]  Violent
tension  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  one  hour  in  the  afternoon  (one  day),'. —
Painful  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  not  altered  by  friction  or  mo-
tion of  the  head,  in  the  forenoon  (one  day),'. — Drawing  and  pressure  in  the
glands  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck,'. — Stitches  in  the  neck,  on  the  left  side,
externally,  relieved  by  pressure,  with  tearing  in  the  head  and  stitches  in
the  ears  (after  twelve  days  ),*. — Stitches  in  the  glands  of  the  right  side  of
the  neck,  and  drawing  pressure  in  those  of  the  left  side  (after  half  an  hour
to  an  hour),". — Violent  itching  of  the  neck  and  on  the  chest,  as  if  she  were
bitten  by  fieas  (after  ten  days),*. — ^Violent  itching  of  the  neck,  nape  of  the
neck,  and  of  the  chest,  without  any  visible  eruption  ;  on  touching  the  skin,
a  hard  pimple  is  felt  here  and  there  under  the  skin  (fourteen  days),*. — Painful
stifiiiess  between  the  scapulae,  afterwards  extending  towards  the  ribs  and  kid-
neys,^ — Burning  in  the  superior  angle  of  the  left  scapula,  relieved  somewhat
by  friction,'. — Painful  tension  between  the  scapulse,  in  the  forenoon  (two
days),'. — [820.]  Gnawing  stitches  in  the  scapulae  (second  day),'. — Stitches
between  the  scapulae,'. — Stitches  between  (and  on)  the  scapulse,  with  arrest
of  breathing  (first,  second,  third  days),'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  left  scapula
(after  thirty-four  days),'.— Stitches  and  cutting  in  the  scapulse,  with  chilli-
ness, two  days  in  succession,'. — Itching  on  and  between  the  scapulae,'. —
*Pain  ill  the  back,  as  if  a  hot  iron  were  thrust  through  the  lower  vertebrce^. —
Violent  pressure  in  the  back,  preceding  the  protrusion  of  a  varix  from  the
rectum,'. — Violent  pain  all  along  the  back ;  stitches  and  twitches  so  that
she  cannot  stoop,  and  cannot  take  up  anything  with  her  hand  ;  increased
by  breathing  (third  day),^ — Fine  stitches,  extending  from  the  back  to  the
ribs  (after  two  hours),'. — [830.]  *From  time  to  time,  a  violent  stitch  in  the
middle  of  the  back,'. — ^Itching,  crawling  (and  stinging)  in  the  whole  of  the
vol,.  I.— 15


226  ALUMINA.

back  and  in  the  sacrum,  succeeded  by  grumbling  pain,'. — Pain  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys,^— Pain  in  the  region  of  both  kidneys,  across  the
small  of  the  back,  as  from  a  bruise,  or  after  driving  upon  a  rough  road ;  it
is  worse  on  stooping  or  turning;  as  if  a  hook  were  plunged  into  her,  which
make?  her  scream,  and  lasts  for  a  few  days  (fourth  day),*. — In  the  morn-
ing, pain  in  the  kidneys;  better  in  the  afternoon,*. — Pain  in  the  loins,  espe-
cially on  walking  or  stooping  (tenth  day),*. — Burning  itching,  like  a  flea-
bite,  in  the  left  lumbar  region  ;  it  makes  him  start ;  lasts  a  long  time,  and
did  not  go  off  till  after  long  scratching,^ — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back
when  walking,'. — Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  like  gnawing;  it
rises  up  to  between  the  shoulders,  where  it  becomes  so  violent  that  she
would  like  to  weep  (relieved  by  Chamomile)  (thirty-second  day),'. — Tear-
ing sticking  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  the  evening  before  falliug
asleep,  in  bed,\ — [840.]  Tearing  jerkings  in  the  small  of  the  back,  especi-
ally during  motion,'. — Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  in  the
back,^. — ^Violent  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  (early  in
the  morning)  in  the  coccyx  on  touching  the  part  (fourth  and  seventh  day),'.
— After  the  evacuation,  throbbing  in  the  small  of  the  back,'. — Painful
twitches  at  the  point  of  the  coccyx,  in  the  forenoon  (second  day),'. — Gnaw-
ing pain  in  the  coccyx,  not  altered  by  walking ;  relieved  by  stretching
(first  day,  in  the  evening),'. — Itching  in  the  os  coccygis,'.

Extremities  in  General. — Twitchings  in  all  the  limbs,'. — Invol-
untary twitchings  here  and  there ;  movements  of  one  foot,  of  the  fingers,
etc.,'. — In  the  evening,  twitchings  in  both  of  the  lower  extremities  together,
especially  in  the  legs  and  feet,  followed  by  a  disposition  to  turn  the  arms
and  stretch  them  upwards,'. — [850.]  In  the  morning,  paralytic  weakness
of  all  the  limbs,  with  stupefaction  of  the  head,  in  paroxysms  of  some  min-
utes (tenth  day),'. — The  fourth  and  fifth  fingers,  the  right  knee,  and  at  last
the  heel,  go  to  sleep  after  sitting,'. — Rigidity  of  the  hands  and  feet,  as  if
they  had  gone  to  sleep,  early,  on  waking ;  the  symptom  disappeared  after
rising  and  walking  a  little,'. — ^When  engaged  in  some  bodily  labor,  a
"cramplike  sensation,  like  numbness,  ascending  the  whole  of  the  left  leg,
also  in  the  left  arm,  with  dizzy  stupefaction  of  the  head,  in  paroxysms
(fourteenth  day),'. — Sensation  as  of  burning  tension  in  the  dorsa  of  the  feet
and  hands,  as  from  a  swelling,'. — -Sense  of  contraction  in  the  right  index
and  foot,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short ;  when  he  touches  something  with
his  finger,  he  feels  as  if  he  were  being  electrified,*. — *Pain  in  the  limbs  as
if  the  bones  were  squeezed  narrower,  with  pressure  in  the  joints,'. — Sensa-
tion in  the  limbs  as  if  he  had  caught  cold,  accompanied  by  frequent  chilli-
ness during  the  day  and  heat  in  the  face  in  the  evening,'. — Tearing  in  the
left  scapula,  in  the  arms,  hands,  and  legs,  especially  in  the  evening  (third
day),'.

Upper  ^Extremities. — Tearing,  at  different  periods,  in  the  arms
and  all  the  parts  thereof,  in  the  shoulders,  axillse,  upper  arms,  elbows,  fore-
arms, etc.,'. — -[860.]  Stitches  in  the  shoulders,  axillse,  and  arms,  also  at
night,'. — Frequent  tearing,  occurring  at  intervals,  in  both  axillse,  iu  the
afternoon  (fourth  day),'. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  shoulder-joint,  es-
pecially on  raising  the  arm,'. — Sudden  jerk  or  concussion  in  the  right
shoulder  (after  two  hours),'. — (Soft  red)  swelling  of  the  arm,  and  violent
stitches  in  it,'. — Lassitude  of  the  arms,'. — Great  lassitude  in  the  arms,  which
the  person  is  scarcely  able  to  lift  (third  day),^ — Great  weariness  of  one
arm,'. — Burning  (and  tension)  of  the  arms  (upper  arms)  and  fingere,  and
of  the  left  elbow,  as  from  glowing  iron,'. — Continual  burning  and  stinging


ALUMINA.  227

iu  the  arms,  with  stiffness  in  the  back,  so  that  she  cannot  well  move,\—
[870.]  Heat  in  the  right  arm,  from  time  to  time,  which  may  be  even  felt
externally,'. — Sense  of  tightness  in  the  arm,  as  from  cold,'. — Tearing  in  the
arms,  from  the  upper  arm  to  the  fingers,  and  from  the  fingers  and  wrist-
joints  to  the  shoulders,''. — Paralytic  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  arms,
sometimes  across  the  small  of  the  back,  coming  to  the  right  upper  arm,  and
going  to  the  left  lower  arm,  and  vice  versd,^. — Itching  of  every  part  of  the
arms,  which  disappears  by  scratching,'. — Pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  as  if
it  were  dislocated,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  left  humerus  (second  day),^ — •
Tearing  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  upper  arm,  extending  as  far  as  the
scapula,  when  sneezing  and  coughing,'. — (Sticking)  tearing  in  the  upper
arm  and  elbow;  it  seems  to  be  in  the  bone,  in  the  forenoon,^ — Stitches  in
the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm  (after  some  hour.s),'. — [880.]  Almost  con-
stant boring  pain  in  the  point  of  the  elbow,'. — Pain  above  the  point  of  the
elbow,  especially  on  leaning  upon  it,  as  from  a  sharp  pressure  on  the  upper
arm,'. — Sticking  pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  elbow  and  wrist-joint,'. —
Continual  (visible)  twitching  in  the  right  forearm  and  the  lower  joint  of
the  left  thumb,'. — Excessive  heaviness  in  the  forearms  and  hands;  her  arms
seem  shorter,'. — Her  left  lower  arm  goes  to  sleep  every  day;  there  is  a
pricking  sensation  in  it  from  the  hand  to  the  elbow,'. — Painful  drawing  in
the  lower  arm,  when  at  rest,'. — Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  the  lower
arm,  extending  as  far  as  the  hand,  in  the  morning  on  waking,'. — Painful
tearing  in  the  lower  arm,  apparently  upon  the  bone,  lasting  one  minute  and
occurring  three  times,'. — Tearing  in  the  forearms,  as  far  as  the  wrist  and  the
fingers,'. — [890.]  The  left  wrist  is  so  sensitive  that  he  cannot  lift  anything
with  this  hand  without  the  greatest  pain,^. — Distended  veins  of  the  hands
in  the  afternoon  and  evening,'. — Rough,  chapped,  readily  bleeding  hands,^.
— After  violent  itching  of  the  hands,  the  skin  peels  off,  on  the  third  day,
like  bran;  at  the  same  time  a  small  round  spot  forms  behind  the  left
thumb  and  index,  which  burns  violently,  but  lasts  only  one  day,'.— Con-
tinual troublesome  coldness  of  the  hands,'. — ^On  waking,  his  right  hand  has
gone  to  sleep,'. — Itching  upon  the  hands,  the  back  of  the  hands,  and  be-
tween the  fingers;  relieved  by  scratching,'. — Swelling  of  the  fingers,'. — In
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  a  disposition  to  ulcerate;  there  is  formed  in  them  a
white  ulcerated  spot,  with  stinging  pain ;  it  goes  off  without  opening,^. —
The  middle  fingers  are  painful  on  motion,'. — [900.]  Sensation  in  the  right
index  as  if  it  were  dislocated,*. — His  left  thumb  went  to  sleep  in  the  after-
noon twice  in  succession ;  then  crawling,  which  lasted  for  some  time,'. —
Drawing  pain  iu  the  thumb  and  index,'. — Tearing  in  and  between  the  fin-
gers,'.— Formication  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  in  the  evening,  with
burning  stinging  (sixth  day),'. — An  eschar  upon  the  finger,  which  was
formed  nine  years  ago  in  dissecting,  begins  to  itch  (ninth,  twelfth  day),^. —
Itching  on  and  between  the  fingers,  which  goes  off  by  scratching,'. — Itcli-
ing  on  the  right  fingers,  which  increases  by  scratching  and  rubbing,'. — Itch-
ing around  the  lowest  joints  of  the  fingers,  which  increases  by  friction;  this
is  succeeded  by  an  insufierable  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  fingers,'. — Burning
itching,  with  crawling,  between  the  index  and  middle  fingers  of  the  left
hand,'. — [910.]  Extreme  brittleness  of  the  finger-nails;  they  break  on
being  cut,*. — Gnawing  beneath  the  finger-nails,  with  crawling  along  the  arm,
as  far  as  the  clavicle,'.

Lower  JExtremities. — *Great  heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs ;  he
can  scarcely  drag  them ;  when  walking  he  staggers  and  has  to  sit  down ;
in  the  evening  (fifth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  legs  and  loins  during  motion.'. —


228  ALUMINA.

After  a  walk,  pain  in  the  legs  and  loins ;  it  prevents  her  from  sleeping,'. — '■
Great  weariness  of  the  legs  when  sitting,^ — Staggering  walk  as  in  in-
toxication,*.— *Drawing  in  the  extremities,^. — The  right  hip-joint  gives  him
pain,\ — Tearing  pain  over  both  hips  and  on  the  upper  brim  of  the  pelvis,'.
— [920.]  Tearing  and  sticking  in  the  hip-joint,  and  just  above  the  knee,  in
paroxysms,*. — Stitches  in  the  left  hip,  extending  to  the  small  of  the  hack
and  to  the  loins ;  when  breathing  repeated,'.— Pain  in  the  left  hip  as  from
a  bruise ;  it  becomes  worse  on  pressure,  early  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),l
*  Wlien  sitting  the  nates  go  to  sleep^. — Cutting,  as  with  a  knife,  transversely
across  the  right  half  of  the  nates,  in  the  forenoon  (second  day),'. — Burning
and  biting  itching  of  the  thighs,  passing  off  by  scratching,'. — *In  the  thighs
and  legs,  long-continued  tension,  almost  like  a  cramp,  extending  downwards ;
only  a  few  minutes,  but  frequently  returning,'. — Tearing  in  the  legs,  the
thighs  and  legs,  when  sitting  and  lying,  especially  at  night,'. — *  Trembling
0/  the  Icnees,^. — Cracking  of  the  right  knee  in  walking,'. — [930.]  At  night,
violent  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  extending  down  to  the  heel,'. — Pain
in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee ;  the  boy  cannot  tread  upon  the  foot,'. — Her
knees  appear  to  her  to  be  longer  during  the  pain,'.^Painful  boring  in  the
right  knee  (after  two  hours),'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  knees,  on
ascending,  not  descending  the  stairs,'. — Drawing  pain  in  both  knees  on
ascending  the  stairs ;  the  pain  is  not  felt  on  simply  bending  the  knees,  nor
is  it  felt  on  touching  them,'. — Sensation  of  pressure  into  the  bend  of  the
left  knee,  when  walking,  after  having  risen  from  the  seat,'. — Sharp,  twitch-
ing pressure  from  without  inwards  at  the  patella,'. — Tearing  in  the  knees
and  patella,^. —  Violent  tearing,  beginning  at  the  knees  and  coming  out  at  the
toes,  with  a  sensation  of  swelling  of  the  knees;  in  the  afternoon,  until  even-
ing (relieved  by  walking),  (twenty-first  day),'. — [940.]  Dull  tearing  on
the  inside  of  the  left  knee,  in  the  evening  (nineteenth  day),'. — Sticking
tearing  pain  in  the  knee,  in  the  evening,  before  falling  asleep,'. — Stitches
in  the  left  knee,  only  when  sitting;  they  disappear  when  walking  in  the
open  air,'. — Sticking  and  tearing  in  the  right  knee,  in  the  evening  (first
day),'. — Pain  in  the  patella  on  pressing  the  hand  upon  it  or  upon  bending
the  knee,'. — Feeling  of  uneasiness  in  the  legs  ibr  several  evenings,  at  seven
o'clock,  lasting  half  an  hour,  before  she  went  to  sleep,'. — Drawing  in  the
legs,'. — *  Heaviness  of  the  legs;  she  can  scarcely  lift  them,^. —  Weariness  of  the
legs,  especially  in  the  middle  of  the  tibiae;  they  feel  bruised  when  standing
or  walking ;  she  feels  as  if  she  would  sink  down,  for  then  the  pain  is  worse,
especially  in  the  evening  ;  less  when  sitting  and  lying,'. — Tearing  drawings
in  the  leg,  extending  up  from  the  malleolus  externus,'. — [950,]  Tearing
in  the  legs  at  difl^rent  periods,'. — Gnawing  pain  in  the  legs,". — Cramplike
sticking  pain,  in  the  right  leg,  with  a  sensation  of  numbness ;  during  the
afternoon  nap,  when  sitting,  and  also  after  waking,'. — Stitches  in  the  right
tibia,  when  in  bed  in  the  evening,'. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  left
tibia,  especially  during  motion,'. — Upon  laying  one  foot  across  the  other,
or  stepping  upon  the  toes,  she  is  attacked  with  painful  cramps  of  the  calves,'.
— When  walking  the  gastrocnemii  muscles  appear  too  short ;  they  seem
tense  (after  twenty  hours),'. — Before  taking  the  drug  he  had  tension  of  the
calves  (soles  of  the  feet  and  toes,  with  spasm  and  paralysis  of  the  legs)  ;  this
symptom  is  increased  by  the  drug,  and  extends  over  the  knee,  so  that  he
cannot  keep  himself  straight ;  afterwards  a  burning,  shooting,  sometimes
cutting  pain  in  the  calves  and  soles  (the  first  day),'^. — Tension  and  burn-
ing, on  the  external  surface  of  the  right  calf,  in  the  evening  (second  day), .
— Tensive  pain  at  the  inside  of  the  calves  when  walking,'. — [960.]  *Fre-


ALUMINA.  229

quent  cramps  in  the  calves,^. — Cramp  in  the  calves,  as  if  the  tendons  were
too  short,  after  rising  from  his  seat,  passing  off  on  walking  about ;  pre-
viously his  feet  became  suddenly  so  languid  that  he  was  afraid  of  rising,
in  the  afternoon  (second  day),'. — Painless  drawing  down  along  both  calves
(after  two  hours),'. — Tearing  in  the  calves,'. — Painless  beating  or  throbbing
in  the  left  calf  like  pulsations,  early  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'. — Vio-
lent formication  in  both  calves,  after  supper  (fifth  day),'. — Itching  of  the
calves,'. — On  trying  to  step  upon  the  foot  severe  stitches  in  the  malleolus
of  the  right  foot,  and  violent  cutting  from  the  left  big  toe  to  the  heel,  so
that  he  is  not  able  to  step  upon  the  foot  (second  day),^ — Sensitive  drawing
pain  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  when  at  rest,  not  when  walking,'. — Tearing  in
each  tendo  Achillis,  in  the  evening  (fifth  day),'. — [970.]  *Numbness  of  the
heel  on  stepping  upon  thefoot,^. — Sensation  in  the  left  heel  as  if  it  were  com-
pressed from  both  sides  (second  day),'. — Heaviness  in  the  feet,  with  tear-
ing,*.— *Heaviness  in  the  feet,  with  great  lassitude  of  the  legs  (third  day),'. —
The  right  foot  goes  to  sleep,  with  crawling  in  it,'. — Painful  di'awing  below
the  malleoli  (tenth  day),^— Tearing  in  the  feet  and  malleoli  at  different
periods,'. — Pain  in  the  bones  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  on  touching  them,
accompanied  by  itching  (first  day),^— An  ulcer  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,
which  is  almost  entirely  cured,  causes  a  stinging  pain  on  stepping  upon  it ;
in  the  room,  after  having  walked  in  the  open  air,'. — *Pain  in  the  sole  of
the  foot,  on  stepping  upon  it,  as  though  it  were  too  soft  and  swollen^. — [980.]
Tension  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  in  the  forenoon  (second  day),'. — Burning
stitches  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning,  dis-
appearing by  rubbing,'. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,'.
— The  old  hard  skin  of  the  feet  becomes  very  sensitive,^ — The  hard  skin  of
the  sole  of  the  foot  is  very  sensitive  to  the  touch;  but  even  without  being
touched  it  is  affected  with  a  violent  aching  pain,'. — Stinging,  titillation,
and  pricking  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,' '. — Tickling  itching  in  the  sole  of  the
foot,'. — Itching  and  titillation  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,^ — Herpes  between
the  toes,'. — Cutting  in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  as  if  he  walked  upon
knives,  early  in  the  morning,  when  walking  (fourth  day),'. — [990.]  Burn-
ing stitches  in  the  left  big  toe,  close  to  the  nail,  at  night,\ — Stinging  pain
in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe.'.^Drawling  in  the  big  toe,  as  if  it  had  been
frozen  (second  day),'. — -Itching  of  the  toes,  after  staying  in  the  open  air,l
— Itching  and  shining  redness  of  the  great  toes ;  they  are  painful  upon
external  pressure  (after  fourth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  toes  and  feet,  when
the  feet  have  become  warm  by  walking ;  after  walking  the  symptoms  dis-
appear immediately  (after  thirty  days),''. — Itching  of  the  toes,  with  redness,
as  if  they  had  been  frozen,  worse  after  scratching,  in  the  evening  (third,
fourth,  sixteenth  days),'. — Corns  are  very  painful,*. — Smarting  stitches  in
the  corns,'-.

Generalities. — Shaking  pulsations  through  the  whole  body,^ —
[1000.]  Involuntary  motions  of  the  head  and  other  parts,'. — His  arm  and
head  are  jerked  backwards  several  times,  with  apprehension,'. — Tremulous
excitement  of  the  whole  nervous  system,'. — Even  the  weakest  spirituous
drink  intoxicates  him,'. — Inclines  to  convulsive  laughter,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed  (fifth  day),'. — First  he  sat  still  without  answering ;  this  was
followed  by  anxious  groaning  for  five  minutes ;  after  this  a  convulsive  laugh
for  ten  minutes,  then  again  weeping ;  then  weeping  and  laughing  in  alter-
nation,'.— ^When  he  attempts  to  take  his  after-dinner  nap  in  a  sitting  pos-
ture, a  jerk  through  the  head  and  limbs,  like  an  electric  shock,  with  stupe-
laction,'. — Uneasiness ;  she  constantly  had  to  move  her  feet  and  to  go  about,'.


230  ALUMINA.

— Uneasiness  when  sitting  or  lying ;  she  had  to  shift  the  position  of  her
hands  and  feet,'. — All  the  muscles  feel  paralyzed,". — [1010.]  *  Tremulous  las-
situde,^.— Lassitude  in  the  forenoon,  and  great  chilliness ;  in  the  afternoon
shaking  chilliness  in  the  back,*. —  Great  lassitude  of  the  whole  hody,\i\ih
chilliness  and  headache  (thirty-third  day),". — Lassitude;  dizziness;  fre-
quently a  feverish  pulse  and  want  of  disposition  to  work  for  several  days ;
little  appetite  ;  drowsiness  after  dinner ;  heaviness  in  the  body ;  frequent
disposition  to  eructations,  which,  however,  either  do  not  take  place  at  all,
or  but  imperfectly  (after  four  weeks),''. — Lassitude  in  the  whole  body,  ac-
companied by  obtuseness  of  the  thinking  faculty,  flushes  of  heat,  and
anxiety  (fourth  day),'. — ^Physical  depression,  lassitude,  so  that  she  can
scarcely  lift  her  feet,  accompanied  by  drowsiness  and  laziness  (twenty-sec-
ond day),*. — His  strength  fails,  even  after  a  short  conversation  or  walk,'. —
After  the  menses  had  ceased  body  and  mind  felt  exhausted ;  a  little  work
and  moderate  walking  prostrated  her  and  made  her  spiritless,'. — Great  ex-
haustion of  strength,  especially  after  walking  in  the  open  air,  accompanied
by  yawning,  stretching,  drowsiness,  and  inclination  to  lie  down  ;  lying  down,
however,  increases  the  lassitude  (thirteenth  day),'. — Great  fatigue,  especially
upon,  talking^. — [1020.]  *Slow,  tottering  gait,  as  after  a  severe  sickness,^. —
*  Excessively  faint  and  tired ;  he  is  obliged  to  sit  down,'. — *  Unconquerable
disposition  to  lie  down  (after  three  hours),'. — Walking  in  the  open  air  is
succeeded  by  excessive  cheerfulness  and  staring  look ;  afterwards,  at  every
motion,  cold  shiverings  and  sweat,  with  chilliness  of  the  head ;  when  going
to  sleep,  head,  hands,  and  feet  are  hot,'. — At  night,  when  waking,  there  is
anxiety,  dyspncea,  and  profuse  sweat,'. — Upon  entering  the  room,  after  a
walk  in  the  open  air,  dread  and  nausea  when  talking,'. — Kush  of  blood
to  the  head ;  black  before  the  eyes ;  giddiness ;  ringing  in  the  ears,  and
drowsiness,'. — Towards  evening  she  feels  sick  at  the  stomach,  and  her  head
turns,  with  constant  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  great  anxiety  ;  this  lasted
the  whole  night  until  the  next  forenoon,'. — ^Orgasm  of  blood,  with  increased
pulse,  and  trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing ;  also  after  a  meal,  with
heat  of  the  whole  body,  and  sweat  of  the  face  (first  day),^ — In  the  even-
ing violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  vertigo,  followed  by  a  desire
for  stool,  during  which  pure  blood  was  passed  ;  feeling  of  paralysis  in  the
small  of  the  back ;  when  sitting  straight  she  had  no  support,'. — [1030.]
Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  loins,  over  the  hip  and  in  the  muscles  of  the
calf,  when  walking,'. — Lightning-like  shooting  to  and  fro  in  the  right
shoulder,  the  small  of  the  back,  and  the  abdomen  ;  afterwards  feels  bruised
(second  day),". — (Dull,  pressive  pains  in  the  bones,  especially  of  the  legs,
the  chest,  and  the  back),'. — Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  back  and  all  the
extremities,  as  in  fever  and  ague,".

Skin,~^ma[\  injuries  of  the  skin  become  sore  and  inflamed,'. — The
tetters  (small  white  itching  pimples  in  clusters)  inc^ease,^ — Pimples  on  the
forehead  and  neck,'. — Itching  of  an  already  dry  crust  of  a  small  uncured
boil  on  the  forehead ;  the  itching  disappears  on  being  scratched,". — The
hairy  scalp  itches,  and  is  covered  with  white  scales,^— A  cluster  of  pimples
on  the  scalp  behind  the  right  ear,  with  painful  tension,". — [1040.]  On  the
left  lower  eyelid  a  pimple,  with  a  stinging  pain,'. — On  the  right  ear  a  trans-
parent vesicle,  without  pain,". — Boil  on  the  nose,'. — Itching  pimples  on  the
forehead,  the  right  side  of  the  nose,  and  the  left  angle  of  the  mouth  ;  upon
being  pressed  they  run  together  (sixth  to  ninth  days),". — Painful  red  spot
upon  the  right  cheek,'.^Small,  red,  painless  pimples  upon  the  right  cheek,
which  feel  rough  (twelfth  day),*. — Upon  the  right  cheek  a  pimple,  which


ALUMINA.  231

is  painful  to  the  touch,  like  a  sore,'. — Pimples  on  the  left  cheek  and  fore-
head (tenth  day),'. — One  boil  after  another  on  the  left  cheek,'. — On  the
internal  surface  of  the  lip  a  bright  vesicle  as  large  as  a  pea  (second  day),^
— [1050.]  Crusty  eruptions  on  the  lower  lip,'. — Small  pimples  on  the  chin,
which  pass  off  again  next  morning  (after  eight  aud  thirteen  days),^ —
Number  of  little  ulcers  in  the  mouth,'. — Blister  on  the  right  half  of  the
chest  and  on  the  throat,  with  burning  pain ;  with  glowing  heat  in  the  face,
and  chills  in  the  rest  of  the  body  ;  sleeps  soundly,  and  without  dreams,*. —
Vesicles  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  (eighth  day),'. — Violent  itching  of
the  neck,  nape  of  the  neck,  and  chest,  without  visible  eruption ;  on  touch-
ing the  skin,  a  hard  pimple  is  felt  here  and  there  under  the  skin  (four-
teenth day),*. — Pimples  upon  the  back,'. — Itching  eruption  of  rash  on  the
arms  and  legs,  without  any  redness ;  upon  scratching,  watery  blood,^ —
Eruption,  across  the  .shoulders,  of  small,  red  elevations,  with  a  pointed
vesicle  in  the  middle ;  they  cause  some  burning,  only  in  the  evening  (after
six  and  fourteen  days),^ — Rough,  chapped,  readily  bleeding  hands,^. —
[1060.]  After  violent  itching  of  the  hands  the  skin  peels  off,  on  the  third
day,  like  bran  ;  at  the  same  time  a  small  round  spot  forms  behind  the  left
thumb  and  index,  which  burns  violently,  but  lasts  only  one  day,'. — On  the
tips  of  the  fingers,  a  disposition  to  ulcerate ;  there  is  formed  on  them  a  white
ulcerated  spot,  with  stinging  pain;  it  goes  ofi"  without  opening,^. — Boil  on
the  right  hip,  which  suppurates,'. — An  ulcer  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  which
is  almost  entirely  cured,  causes  a  stinging  pain  on  stepping  upon  it ;  in  the
room,  after  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — The  old,  hard  skin  of  the  feet  be-
comes very  sensitive,'. — Herpes  between  the  toes,'. — Biting  in  the  tetters,^.
— Stinging  here  and  there  of  the  whole  body,  especially  .in  the  evenings,'.
— *  Intolerable  itching  of  the  whole  body,  especially  when  he  becomeg  heated,
and  in  bed ;  he  has  to  scratuh  himself  until  the  skin  bleeds,  which  is  painful
after  scratching,^. — Itching  of  the  whole  body,  especially  the  face  (seventh
day),'. — [1070.]  Itching  of  single  small  places  of  the  body  here  and  there,
mostly  in  the  evening,  and  not  going  off  by  scratching,'. — Violent  itching
of  the  whole  body,  as  if  an  eruption  would  break  out  (after  five  days),". —
Violent  itching  and  gnawing  upon  the  skin  of  the  whole  body  ;  but  little
relieved  by  scratching,'. — Itching  of  the  tetters,  especially  towards  evening,^.
— Stinging-itching  of  the  back  and  the  side  of  the  abdomen  (second  day),'.
— Itching  of  (and  fine  eruption  on)  the  inside  of  the  right  thigh,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Much  yawning,  accompanied  by  drowsiness
(which  goes  off  only  in  the  open  air),'. — Constant  yawning,  also  before  dinner,
without  drowsiness,' ^ — Snoring  during  the  afternoon  nap  (sixth  day),'. —
Drowsiness  by  day^. — [1080.]  Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  even  when
standing,'. — Great  drowsiness  in  the  evening,  already  at  six  o'clock,'. — She
falls  asleep  very  early  in  the  evening,*. — *  Tired  and  drowsy,^. — Great  lassi-
tude, accompanied,  in  the  forenoon,  by  an  irresistible  inclination  to  sleep ;  she
lies  down  and  sleeps  soundly  for  an  hour;  this  sleep  caused  the  lassitude  to
disappear,  and  made  her  feel  very  comfortable,'. — She  sleeps  too  soundly,
and  has  to  be  waked,'. — Deep  sleep  towards  morning,  with  dreams  which
fatigue  the  head  (after  ten  hours),'. — Early  on  rising  she  feels  as  if  she  had
not  slept  enough  ;  she  still  feels  tired,  and  yawns,'. — Early  in  the  morning,
after  an  uneasy  sleep,  he  still  feels  tired,  and  does  not  wish  to  rise,^ — In  the
morning  he  would  like  to  sleep  longer,*. — [1090.]  In  the  morning  he  is  ob-
liged to  sleep  longer  than  usual,  and  he  cannot  wake  up  entirely ;  at  the
same  time,  however,  he  falls  asleep  later  on  going  to  bed,*. — In  the  evening
he  falls  asleep  late,  on  account  of  images  crowding  upon  his  fancy  (second


232  ALUMINA.

day)/. — In  the  evening  he  cannot  fall  asleep  under  an  hour,  but  afterwards
he  sleeps  well/. — He  cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight,  hindered  appar-
ently by  a  heaviness  in  the  arras,'. — He  cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight,
and  i,oi'.ses  about  from  one  side  to  another  (second  day),'. — When  asleep,
she  spoke  loud,  laughed  and  \vept,\ — Great  uneasiness  during  sleep,  with
violent  weeping  and  disconsolate  grief,  without  being  fully  conscious,  for  a
few  minutes,  before  midnight,^ — She  sobs  and  groans  at  night,  as  if  she  were
weeping,  although  she  is  not  aware  of  it,  shortly  after  falling  asleep  (seventh
day),\ — Violent  startings  when  asleep,  before  midnight,  which  rouse  him
completely  (seventh  day),'. — At  night  uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs;  this  pre-
vents him  from  falling  asleep,'. — [1100.]  She  cannot  find  rest  anywhere
at  night ;  she  tosses  about  and  feels  pain  all  over,  for  several  nights  (after
fifteenth  day),'. — Uneasy  sleep;  he  tosses  about  in  bed;  feels  hot  and  anx-
ious ;  accompanied  by  twitchings  in  the  limbs  and  startings,  before  falling
asleep,*. — Uneasy  sleep  during  the  first  nights,*. — Uneasy  sleep;  she  often
turned  from  one  side  to  another ;  she  felt  hot,  lay  most  of  the  time  uncovered ;
her  sleep  was  a  mere  slumber,  which  did  not  afford  her  any  rest,  accompanied
by  many  dreams,  and  frequently  interrupted  by  walcing  (seventh  day),*. —
Uneasy  sleep,  with  toothache,". — Waking  frequently  at  night,  for  eight
days  (twelve  days),'. — Wakes  up  before  midnight,  on  account  of  a  dry
cough,  first  accompanied  by  chilliness,  then  by  dry  heat,'. — After  midnight
his  sleep  is  uneasy ;  he  often  wakes,  and  tosses  about  in  the  bed,^ — At
night  he  rises  from  his  bed  without  being  aware  of  it,  and  with  firmly
closed  eyes  ;  he  goes  anxiously  from  one  room  to  another  while  he  is  rubbing
his  eyes;  when  brought  to  bed  again,  the  boy  fell  asleep  immediately,'. —
Uneasy  sleep  before  the  appearance  of  the  menses;  many  dreams;  on
waking  she  has  orgasm,  heat  in  the  face,  headache,  and  palpitation  of  the
heart,'. — [1110.]  Towards  morning  waked  with  a  deathly  anguish  caused
by  pains  which  one  imagined  when  sleeping,'. — Sound  sleep  (full  of  dreams),
with  erections,". — Sound  sleep,  with  many  pleasant  dreams,*. — Pleasant
dreams,  about  money  which  he  had  received,  etc.,'. — Confuted  dreams,*'. —
A  number  of  dreams,  all  of  them  of  a  disagreeable  nature,*. — Dreams  caus-
ing unxietij,  with  uneasy  sleep,'. — Anxious  dreams  towards  morning,  the
sleep  being  otherwise  sound  (after  twelve  days),*. — Fearfully  anxious
dreams  and  nightmare,'.^Anxious  dreams,  such  as  that  the  tiler  forcibly
thrusts  a  piece  of  meat  into  one's  mouth,*. — [1120.]  He  talks  much  when
asleep,  as  if  he  had  an  anxious  dream,'. — After  midnight  he  starts  up  from
an  ansiou-  dream  (that  a  horse  is  pursuing  him,  and  intends  to  bite  him),
(tenth  day;,'. — Dreams  about  quarrelling  and  vexations,'. — Dream,  full  of
shame,'. — Tormenting  dreams,  begetting  a  fear  of  death,  which  lasts  even
after  waking,'. — In  a  dream  he  imagines  he  is  obliged  to  descend  from  a
height ;  he  thinks  that  he  will  fall,'. — She  dreams  that  she  is  upon  a  ferry-
boat which  is  foundering  in  the  river ;  she  wakes  up  with  anxiety,'. — He
dreams  that  he  is  walking  about  in  a  river,  in  which  he  sees  serpents  and
other  animals,  of  which  he  is  afraid,'. — He  dreams  about  ghosts,  and  makes
so  much  noise  that  it  wakes  him,*. — Dreams  about  falling  stars,  fires,  mar-
riages,'.—  [1130.]  Dreams  about  thieves;  she  wakes  with  anxiety,'. — She
dreams  that  she  has  committed  a  theft,  or  that  she  has  got  among  robbers,'.
— Dreams  about  death  and  burial,'.

Fever. — Internal  cold  and  chills,  with  a  desire  for  the  warm  stove,  and
stretching  of  the  limbs  ;  worse  after  warm  drinks,^. — -Chilly  iu  the  open  air,'.
— -Chilliness  of  the  whole  body  ;  the  feet  are  as  cold  as  ice  the  whole  day,
with  heat  in the  head,  also  in  the  room  (first  day),'. — Internal  chilliness


ALUMINA.  233

and  external  heat,  especially  on  the  "cheeks,  with  dark  redness  of  them,  as
in  brandy  drinkers,". — Internal  chilliness,  with  hot  cheeks  and  cold  hands,".
— Cold  creeps,  without  any  thirst  or  subsequent  heat  or  sweat,  from  four
to  six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  with  throbbing  pains  in  the  forehead  and
occiput,  which  decrease  by  pressing  with  the  hands  (ninth  day),*. — Chilli-
ness, constant  eructations,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  frequent  collection  of
saliva,  great  failing  of  strength  and  headache,  as  if  the  bead  would  burst,
especially  on  the  top  of  the  head,  with  vertigo  (relieved  by  a  dose  of
ipecacuanha),  (thirty-fourth  day),^ — [1140.]  Frequent  repetition  of  chilh  in
the  evening  (second  day),^ — Chills  over  the  whole  body,  every  other  day,
towards  evening,  without  any  thirst,  with  want  of  appetite ;  sleeplessness
and  restless  tossing  about  in  the  bed,*. — Chills  over  the  whole  body,  during
an  evacuation,  iu  the  evening  (fifth  day),^— At  four  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing roused  from  sleep  by  chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  accompanied  by  vio-
lent contraction  of  the  stomach  ;  continual  empty  eructations,  which  afford
relief;  then  four  liquid  stools,  with  constant  chilliness,  followed  by  burning
iu  the  anus  ;  the  chilliness  lasted  until  evening  (thirty-second  day),'. — Chil-
liness and  uneasy  sleep  the  whole  night  (thirty-third  day),^ — Chills  near
the  warm  stove  (fifteenth  day),'. — In  the  evening,  chilliness  from  seven  to
eight  o'clock ;  she  feels  so  chilly  that  she  is  obliged  to  go  to  bed,  but  even
there  it  takes  her  a  long  while  to  get  warm  (fifth  day),'. — Very  sensitive
to  cold  air,  especially  in  her  feet,". — In  the  evening,  feverish  symptoms,
chills,  which  increase  by  the  slightest  motion;  sometimes  also  flushes  of
heat  in  the  face  (first  day),''. — In  the  evening,  at  five  o'clock,  such  violent
chilliness,  especially  of  the  back  and  feet,  that  she  could  not  even  warm
herself  near  the  warm  stove;  in  half  an  hour  sweat  broke  out,  without  any
thirst  (sixth  and  seventh  days),'. — [1150.]  In  the  evening,  chilliness  and
warmth  often  alternate ;  the  face  is  hot,  with  chills  in  the  rest  of  the  body,'.
— Internal  chilliness,  with  hot  hands  and  hot  lobules  of  the  ears  (after  two
hours),\ — -Chilliness  half  an  hour,  followed  by  heat  of  the  body,  and  sweat
in  the  face,°. — Pleasant  warmth,  of  short  duration,  in  the  right  side  of  the
face,  in  the  afternoon  (fifth  day),'. — Sudden  heat  in  the  face,  with  redness,
lasting  only  for  a  short  while  (fifth  day).'. — -Sensation  in  the  body,  as  after
being  violently  heated,  when  sitting  (first  day),*. — In  the  evening,  heat  in
the  whole  body  for  two  hours;  it  appears  to  begin  at  the  head  (fifth  day),'.
— Feverish  faintishness,  with  internal  heat,'. — Towards  evening,  heat  in
the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  feet;  followed  by  shivering,  which  obliged
her  to  go  to  bed,  where  she  soon  fell  asleep ;  thirst  neither  during  the  hot
nor  the  cold  stage,  without  other  symptoms  (eleventh  day),*. — Heat  before
midnight ;  it  does  not  allow  him  to  fall  asleep,'. — [1160.]  Heat,  with  anxiety,
at  night,  and  sweat,'. — Sudden  heat,  with  sweat  and  anxious  palpitation
of  the  heart,'. — In  the  morning,  upon  remaining  in  bed  after  six  o'clock,
she  begins  to  sweat,  for  some  mornings  (after  ninth  day),*. — During  bodily
effort,  heat  runs  over  the  whole  body ;  succeeded  by  chills,  with  burning  in
the  abdomen,'. — Sweat  upon  every  motion,  followed  by  cold  shivers,  as  if
one  had  caught  cold,'.

ConditiO'ns, — Aggravation. — {Morning),  ^arly  on  waking,  depressed;
most  symptoms  appear ;  early,  anxiety  ;  early,  head  confused  ;  early,  head
feels  cloudy,  etc. ;  early,  head  feels  heavy;  vertigo;  quickly  passing  ver-
tigo ;  in  bed,  rhythmical  beating  in  whole  head ;  early,  painful  spot  in
forehead ;  early,  on  waking,  headache  in  vertex,  etc. ;  on  waking,  burning
of  eyes;  early,  biting,  etc.;  pain  in  eyes;  sensation  of  dry  gum  in  eyes  ;
early,  stitches  in  right  side  of  head ;  on  waking,  dry  gum  in  eyes ;  on


234  ALUMINA.

waking,  eyes  agglutinated ;  early,  after  waking,  lachrymation ;  early,  some-
times, burning,  etc.,  of  eyes;  boring  pain  in  ear;  early,  roaring  in  ears;
early,  after  rising,  roaring  before  the  ears  ;  early,  sour  smell  in  the  nose ;
heat,  etc.,  in  left  side  of  face  ;  spitting  of  saliva,  etc. ;  early,  flat,  etc.,  taste
in  mouth ;  on  rising,  bitter,  etc.,  taste  in  mouth  ;  on  waking,  thick  mucus
in  throat;  early,  sweet  taste  in  throat,  etc.;  on  waking,  throat  rough,  etc.;
dull  stitches  in  right  tonsil;  contraction  of  the  oesophagus,  etc.;  early,
sweetish  risings  from  the  stomach  ;  inclination  to  vomit ;  retching  in  the
throat;  faintlike  nausea;  nausea,  etc.;  oppression  at  stomach;  early,  on
turning  in  bed,  soreness  at  pit  of  stomach ;  early,  before  breakfast,  pain
from  the  bladder  to  the  chest;  on  waking,  pinching  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  dry
feeling  in  urethra;  on  waking,  and  while  in  bed,  drawing,  etc.,  in  urethra;
early,  urging  to  urinate,  etc. ;  decrease  of  urine  ;  dry  cough ;  violent,  dry
cough;  cough  with  expectoration;  early,  stiffness  of  neck,  etc.;  pain  in
kidneys  ;  early,  pain  in  coccyx ;  weakness  of  all  the  limbs,  etc.;  early,  on
waking,  rigidity  of  the  hands,  etc.;  on  waking,  pain  in  the  lower  arm;
early,  pain  in  left  hip ;  early,  beating  in  left  calf;  burning  stitches  in  right
sole ;  early,  cutting  in  right  big  toe ;  would  like  to  sleep  long ;  upon  re-
maining in  bed,  after  6  o'clock,  begins  to  sweat. — {Forenoon),  Depressed,
etc.;  indisposed  to  labor,  etc.;  heat  rises  into  head;  tearing  in  whole  head;
tearing  in  forehead ;  tension  in  spot  in  right  temple ;  boring,  etc.,  in  tem-
ples ;  beating,  etc.,  in  vertex ;  tearing,  etc.,  in  right  side  of  head  ;  drawing
in  right  side  of  the  occiput ;  sourish  taste  in  throat;  acid  risings  into  mouth  ;
cold  sensation  in  stomach ;  tearing  from  hypochondriac  region  into  hip ;
sensation  as  if  the  hypochondriac  regions  were  pressed  together ;  cutting, ,
etc.,  in  the  hypogastric  region;  cough;  dry  cough;  difficult  breathing;
pressure  in  chest;  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck;  tension  between
scapulae;  twitches  at  the  point  of  the  coccyx;  tearing. in  upper  arm,  etc.;
cutting  across  the  nates. — {Towards  noon).  Oppression  in  the  stomach. —
(iVoon),  Hiccough.^CJi/terraoo?!.),  Peevish,  etc.;  headache,  etc.;  stitches  in
the  head,  etc. ;  beating  in  whole  head ;  stitch  in  the  forehead ;  stitches  in
the  forehead,  etc.;  beating,  etc.,  in  forehead,  etc. ;  beating,  etc.,  in  right
temple;  weakness  of  the  eyelids;  boring  in  hollow  of  ear;  rattling,  etc.,  in
nose;  drawing,  etc.,  in  left  cheek,  etc.;  watery  saliva  in  mouth;  hoarseness,
etc.,  of  throat;  pinching  at  the  stomach;  pressure,  etc.,  across  stomach,
etc. ;  cutting  in  region  of  stomach,  etc. ;  burning,  etc.,  in  right  hypochon-
driac region;  worrying  around  the  navel;  pressure  in  umbilical  region,
etc. ;  cold  feeling  in  abdomen ;  burning  in  abdomen  ;  pinching  in  abdomen ;
pinching,  etc.,  in  left  side  of  abdomen;  abdomen  seems  to  hang  down
heavily;  frequent  and  increased  urine;  when  sitting,  numerous  erections ;
leucorrhoea;  sudden  hoarseness;  sudden  cough,  etc. ;  weight  in  chest,  etc. ;
sense  of  contraction  around  chest ;  burning  in  right  side  of  chest ;  tension
in  back  of  neck ;  tearing  in  the  axillse ;  distended  veins  of  hands ;  right
thumb  went  to  sleep ;  tearing  from  knees  to  toes,  etc.;  cramp  in  calves  ;  shak-
ing chilliness  in  the  back;  warmth  in  right  side  of  face. — {Towards  even-
ing), Stitches  in  front,  etc.,  of  head;  trembling  of  left  eye;  tearing,  etc.,  in
ears;  oppression  in  stomach;  colic-like  pinching,  etc.,  in  abdomen;  pro-
trusion of  hernia ;  sick  at  stomach,  etc. ;  itching  of  the  tetters  ;  chills  over
whole  body ;  heat  in  the  whole  body,  etc. — {Evening),  Most  of  the  symp-
toms appear ;  throat  symptoms ;  uneasiness ;  external  pinching,  etc.,  in
head ;  headache,  tearing,  etc. ;  pressive  headache ;  tearing  in  forehead ;
boring  into  the  right  temple ;  boring,  etc.,  in  left  temple ;  tearing,  etc.,  iu
left  frontal  eminence;  redness  of  the  eyes,  etc.;  pressure  in  right  eye;


ALUMINA.  235

biting  in  left  eye ;  sense  of  excoriation  in  the  interior  of  eyes ;  burning  and
dryness  of  the  eyelids,  etc. ;  inflammation  of  conjunctiva  of  the  right  eye  ;
dioi-sightedness ;  eyes  dull  and  dry;  heat  and  redness  of  ear;  stitches  in
ears;  roaring  of  ears;  pains  in  the  nose,  etc. ;  sensation  in  nose  as  if  a  cold
were  coming  on ;  boring  in  the  teeth ;  boring  in  the  teeth  of  right  side ;
drawing  in  the  teeth  of  right  side ;  on  lying  down  in  bed,  cutting  tooth-
ache ;  in  bed,  saliva  accumulates  in  mouth ;  bitter  taste,  after  eating
apples;  everything  tasteless,  etc.;  thick  mucus  in  throat;  dryness  of  the
throat ;  sourish  taste  iu  the  throat,  etc. ;  sense  of  burning  in  the  throat ;
constrictive  pain  iu  throat,  etc. ;  rawness,  etc.,  of  throat ;  soreness  in  throat;
aching  sore  throat ;  stitches,  etc.,  in  throat ;  bitter  eructations,  etc. ;  in  bed,
sour  eructations ;  hiccough  ;  pain  in  the  stomach,  etc. ;  cold  sensation  in
stomach  ;  in  bed,  griping  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  stitches  in  the  stomach,  etc. ;
stitches  in  left  lower  ribS ;  pinching  around  the  navel ;  emission  of  flatu-
lence; pinching  in  the  abdomen;  pressing  in  both  groins;  varix  of  rectum
enlarges;  weak  feeling  in  the  bladder,  etc.;  burning  in  urethra,  while
urinating;  numerous  erections;  sudden  hoarseness;  dry  cough ;  pinching
in  the  upper  chest ;  boring  pain  in  chest ;  pressure  on  sternum  ;  before  fall-
ing asleep  in  bed,  tearing,  sticking  in  small  of  back ;  twitchings  in  lower
extremities,  etc. ;  heat  in  the  face ;  tearing  in  the  left  scapulae,  etc. ;  dis-
tended veins  of  hands  ;  formication  in  right  fingers  ;  tearing  on  inside  of
left  knee;  tearing  in  the  knee;  sticking,  etc.,  in  right  knee;  legs  feel
bruised ;  in  bed,  stitches  in  right  tibia ;  tension,  etc.,  on  surface  of  right
calf;  tearing  in  each  tendo  Achillis ;  tension  in  sole  of  foot;  burning
stitches  in  right  sole ;  itching  of  the  toes,  etc. ;  in  bed,  inclines  to  convul-
sive laughter ;  lassitude,  etc. ;  pain  in  small  of  back,  etc. ;  burning  of  erup-
tion across  shoulders  ;  stinging,  here  and  there,  of  the  whole  body  ;  itching,
here  and  there;  cannot  fall,  asleep  nnd^en  &n  howc  ;  frequent  repetition  of
chills;  chills  over  whole  body;  feverish  symptoms,  etc. ;  alternate  chilli-
ness and  warmth;  heat  in  whole  body. — {Night) ,  Throat  symptoms;  in
bed,  headache ;  pressive  headache ;  agglutination  of  eyes ;  burning,  etc.,  of
eyes ;  stitches  deep  in  right  ear ;  violent  dry  catarrh  ;  in  bed,  throbbing  of
roots  of  teeth  ;  drawing  in  one  side  of  throat,  etc. ;  impeded  deglutition ;
distension  of  the  abdomen ;  emission  of  badly  smelling  flatus  ;  when  lying
in  bed,  numerous  erections ;  when  waking,  painful  erections ;  priapism ;
leucorrhoea;  dry  cough,  etc. ;  cramp,  etc.,  of  chest;  pressure  on  chest,  etc.;
violent  pain  in  chest ;  stitches  in  shoulders,  etc. ;  pain  in  bend  of  knee ;
burning  stitches  in  left  big  toe ;  when  waking,  anxiety,  etc. ;  sobs  and
groans  iu  sleep ;  uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs  ;  tosses  about,  etc. ;  chilliness,
etc. ;  heat,  with  anxiety,  etc. — ( Before  midnight).  Cannot  fall  asleep  ;  uneasi-
ness during  sleep. — {Midnight),  Pinching,  etc.,  in  abdomen. — {After  mid-
night). Uneasy  sleep;  jerking,  etc. ;  toothache. — {Towards  morning),  Deep
sleep ;  waked  with  a  deadly  anguish  ;  anxious  dreams. — {Every  other  day),
Chills  over  whole  body. — (4  a.m.).  Nausea ;  chilliness  of  whole  body,  etc.
— (4  or  5  A.M.),  Anxiety  about  heart. — (8.30  a.m.).  Sensation  as  if  right
side  of  head  were  pressed  toward  the  other. — (9  A.M.),  Fine  stitches  in  left
mamma. — (1  p.m.).  Peevish,  etc. ;  beating,  etc.,  inside  of  head. — (2  p.m.).
Pain  as  if  head  were  screwed  together. — (4  p.m.),  Heaviness  of  head,  etc. ;
vertigo,  etc. — (4  to  6  p.m.),  Cold  creep.s,  etc. — (4  to  11  p.m.).  Cutting,  etc.,
in  whole  abdomen,  etc. — (5  p.m.).  Violent  chilliness. — (7  p.m.).  Feeling  of
uneasiness  in  legs. — (7  to  8  p.m.),  Chilliness. — (9  p.m.),  Gnawing  in  molar
tooth,  etc. — (10.30  p.m.).  Tearing,  pressing  from  forehead,  etc. — ( Open  air).
Burning,  etc.,  pain  in  forehead ;  lachrymation ;  dim-sightedness ;  cutting


236  ALUMINA.

toothache ;  chilly. — (After  staying  in  open  air),  Itching  of  the  toes. — (  Walk-
ing in  open  air),  Headache ;  tearings,  etc.,  in  urethra ;  leucorrhoea ;  dry
cough  ;  great  exhaustion  of  strength,  etc. — {Eating  apples),  Bitter  taste. — {In
bed),  iieat,  etc. — (Goiiig  to  bed).  Fain  iu  head,  etc. — {Bending  head  for-
ward). Violent  paiu  in  chest. — [Bending  knee),  Pain  in  patella. — {Sitting
bejit),  Cutting  pains  across  abdomen  ;  oppression  at  the  chest ;  sense  of
constriction  around  chest. — {Blowing  nose),  Stars  sparkle  before  eyes ;  some-
thing obstructs  the  ear ;  momentary  pressure  on  the  perineum. — {During
breakfast),  Pinching  below  navel,  etc. — {Breathing),  Whistling  in  the  air-
passages,  etc. ;  heat  in  the  forepart  of  chest ;  boring  pain  in  chest ;  stitches
in  chest ;  pain  all  along  the  back,  etc. ;  stitches  in  left  hip. — {During  chills),
Frequent  nausea. — {After  clearing  throat),  Head  feels  very  sore. — {At  com-
mencement of  coition).  Violent  pressure  in  perineum. — {During coition).  Pres-
sure in  the  perineum. — -{After  every  cold).  Pinching  in  the  abdomen. — (  Goirig
into  cold  air),  Pinching  in  the  abdomen. — {Chewing),  Crackling  of  the
tympanum;  painful  tension  in  articulation  of  jaws;  violent  toothache;
teeth  painful. — {Closing  eyes).  Bright  before  eyes. — {Coughing),  Tearing  in
upper  arm. — {During  and  after  cough),  Fressnre  on  chest;  paralytic  pain
through  arm. — {Dancing),  Drawing  in  muscles  over  left  groin. — {After
dinner),  Immediately,  all  the  symptoms  become  aggravated  ;  shortly  after
most  of  the  symptoms  come  on ;  surging  in  the  hand;  heat  in  the  head;
pulsative  headache;  burning,  etc.,  pain  in  forehead;  pressive  pain  in  fore-
head ;  pressing-in  pain  in  right  temple ;  face  seems  larger,  etc. ;  when  walk-
ing iu  open  air,  skin  efface  tense;  immediately,  tickling  in  the  teeth,  etc.;
mouth  feels  burnt;  clearing  throat  of  phlegm;  rancid  eructations;  hic-
cough ;  pain  at  stomach,  etc. ;  drawing  in  stomach  ;  gnawing  in  region  of
stomach  ;  stitches  in  stomach,  etc.;  much  distension,  with  tenesmus  ;  fulness
of  abdomen,  etc. ;  passage  of  badly  smelling  flatus ;  violent  attacks  of  colic ;
pain  iu  chest ;  drowsiness. — {After  drinking  water),  Heartburn. — {Eating),
Stitches  in  front  and  back  of  head  ;  hiccough ;  eructations,  etc. ;  oppression
at  stomach ;  loud  grumbling  in  abdomen ;  pressure,  etc.,  in  abdomen ;
pressive  pain  in  left  side  of  abdomen. — (After  an  emission).  Reappearance
and  aggravation  of  all  the  previous  symptoms. — (Sitting  erect).  Heaviness
of  head. — (During  violent  effort).  Pain  on  left  side  of  sternum,  etc. — (After
eructations).  Scraping  in  throat ;  inclination  to  vomit. — (Before  evacuation).
Tenesmus;  colic. — (During  evacuation),  Heanog  dov/u,  etc.;  rectum  seems
dried  up,  etc. ;  dropping  of  blood  ;  chills  over  whole  body. — (After  evacua-
tion), Ineffectual  desire  for  stool ;  throbbing  in  small  of  back. — (After  diffi-
cult evacuation),  Pricking  in  anus ;  sense  of  excoriation  in  anus. — [Active
exercise).  Hard  pressure  on  both  sides  of  chest ;  stitches  in  both  sides  of
chest. — (Physical  exertion),  Tearing  pain  in  sides  of  abdomen ;  heat  runs
over  whole  body,  etc. — (Laying  one  foot  across  the  other).  Cramps  of  the
calves. — (Friction),  Itching  in  both  ears;  itching  around  finger-joiuts;
itching  on  right  fingers;  sweat  of  the  perineum. — (Becoming  heated).  Itch-
ing of  whole  body. — (Inspiration),  Stitch  from  abdomen  to  chest;  stitches
from  loin  to  chest. — (During  bodily  labor),  Ci'amplike  sensation  in  leg  and
arm,  etc.— (Leaning  on  part).  Pain  above  point  of  elbow. — (In  lighted
room),  In  evening,  gauze  seems  before  eyes. — (After  long  looking).  Eyes
become  weak. — (Looking  down).  Trembling  of  left  eye ;  tearing  in  right
upper  eyelid  ;  upper  lid  feels  longer,  etc. — (Looking  up).  Burning  in  eyes. —
(Lying),  Tearing  in  legs,  etc. ;  uneasiness ;  lassitude. — (Lying  on  back),
Pressure  on  chest,  etc. — {[Before  menses).  Flow  of  mucus  from  vagina,  etc. ;
violent  headache ;  pain  in  abdomen  ;  uneasy  sleep,  etc. — (During  menses),


ALUMINA.  237

Bloated  abdomen,  etc. ;  pinching  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  frequent  urination. —
{After  menses).  Painless  leucorrhoea;  acrid  leucorrhoea. — {After  a  meal),
Oppression  of  chest,  etc. ;  pinching  in  abdomen  ;  pain  in  middle  of  chest,
etc.;  orgasm  of  blood,  etc. — {After  eating  milk  soup),  Sourish  taste  in
throat. — {Motion),  Tearing,  jerking  in  small  of  back  ;  middle  fingers  pain-
ful ;  cold  shiverings,  etc. ;  sweat. — {Moving  head).  Nape  of  neck  painful. —
{Moving  or  turning  body).  Soreness  in  the  interior  of  chest. — {Moving  about).
Burning  while  urinating. — {Moving  hand  along  penis').  Drawing  pain,  etc.
— {Moving  tongue).  Drawing,  etc.,  pain  in  right  side  of  throat. — {During
afternoon  nap).  Sticking  pain  in  right  leg,  etc. ;  jerk  through  head  and
limbs,  etc. — {Opening  eyes).  Head  feels  giddy;  eyes  burn. — {Opening
mouth).  Painful  tension  in  articulation  of  jaws. — {Potatoes),  Appear  to  ag-
gravate or  renew  the  symptoms  ;  bitter  eructations,  etc. — (Pressure),  Pain
in  the  patella  ;  itching,  etc.,  of  great  toes. — {Reaching  high).  Tension  of  the
abdominal  muscles. — {Raising  arm).  Pain  in  shoulder-joint. — {Reading),
Pressure  in  right  eye. — {Resl^,  Drawing  in  lower  arm ;  drawing  in  tendo
Achillis ;  {Rising),  Pain  in  perineum  ;  stitches  in  right  side  of  abdomen ;
cramp  in  the  calves. — {In  room).  After  walking  in  open  air,  stinging  pain
in  ulcer  of  sole  of  foot. — {Scratching),  The  skin  pains  ;  itching  in  fold  be-
tween nates  and  thighs;  itching  on  the  right  fingers;  burning,  etc.,  o/^Ae
thighs;  itching  of  the  toes. — {Setting  teeth  together).  Toothache. — {Sitting),
Most  symptoms  appear  to  come  on ;  vertigo ;  pain  under  ribs ;  pain  in  side
of  abdomen ;  pain  in  perineum ;  leucorrhoea ;  pinching  in  upper  part  of
chest;  fingers,  etc.,  go  to  sleep;  nates  go  to  sleep;  tearing  in  legs,  etc.;
stitches  in  left  knee ;  uneasiness ;  sensation  as  after  being  violently  heated.
— (  Going  to  sleep).  Stitches  in  the  forehead. — {Sneezing),  Tearing  in  upper
arm. — {Standing),  Pain  as  if  the  head  were  being  screwed  together ;  burn-
ing, etc.,  pain  in  forehead  ;  nausea  ;  stitches  in  right  hypochondriac  region  ;
pressure  in  umbilical  region,  etc. ;  pain  in  perineum ;  legs  feel  bruised. —
{At  every  step),  Stitches  through  the  head. — {Trying  to  step  upon  foot).
Stitches  in  right  malleolus,  etc. — {Stepping  upon  foot).  Numbness  of  foot;
stinging  pain  of  ulcer  in  sole;  pain  in  the  sole. — {Stepping  upon  toes).
Cramps  of  the  calves. — {Stooping),  Heaviness  of  the  head  ;  vertigo  ;  surg-
ing in  head ;  external  pinching,  etc.,  on  the  head ;  sensation  as  if  head
would  fall  forward ;  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  head  ;  liver  sensitive,  etc. ;
chest  felt  constricted ;  stitch  from  abdomen  to  chest ;  pain  in  region  of  both
kidneys ;  pain  in  the  loins. — {After  breakfast  soup),  Kancid  eructations. —
{After  supper).  Empty  eructations ;  frequent  eructations,  etc. ;  nausea,  etc. ;
violent  nausea,  etc.;  heartburn;  sense  of  distension  in  abdomen;  formica-
tion in  both  calves. — {Swallowing),  Cracking  in  ears ;  drawing  pain  in  one
side  of  throat,  etc.;  sore  throat;  stitches  in  throat,  etc.;  pressive  pain  in  left
tousil ;  squeezing  from  the  oesophagus,  etc. ;  pressive  pain  in  oesophagus ;
pressive  pain  in  middle  of  chest. — {Empty  swallowing).  Aching  sore  throat;
stinging  in  the  throat. — {Talking),  Stitches  in  sternum,  etc. ;  great  fatigue.
— {Turning),  Pain  in  kidney  region. — {Touch),  Pain  as  if  scalp  were  sore ;
pain  in  small  of  back,  etc. ;  pain  in  bones  of  dorsum  of  foot. — (  Urination),
Cutting  in  forepart  of  urethra ;  burning-like  pain  in  urethra. — {After  uri-
nating), Urethra  becomes  hot. — {After  waking).  Mouth  dry,  etc. ;  palpita-
tion of  heart;  pain  in  right  leg. — ( ITaZHngr),  Severe  vertigo ;  pressive  head-
ache ;  beating  in  head  ;  pain  under  ribs ;  abdomen  seems  to  hang  down ;
varix  of  rectum  enlarges ;  dark-colored  blood  from  rectum ;  pressure  in
chest ;  pressure  on  sternum  ;  pain  in  loins ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  cracking
of  right  knee ;  pressure  in  bend  of  left  knee ;  legs  feel  bruised ;  gastrocnemii


238  AMBRA.

appear  too  short;  pain  at  inside  of  calves;  cutting  in  right  big  toe;  pain
in  legs  and  loins ;  bruised  pain  in  loins,  etc. — (  Walking  fast),  Drawing  in
muscles  over  left  groin  ;  cutting,  etc.,  in  chest. — (  Walking  upstair-i),  Pul-
sative  headache ;  pinching,  etc.,  in  the  groins,  etc. ;  pain  in  bend  of  knee. —
(After  warm  drinks),  Internal  cold,  etc. — (Feet  becoming  warm  by  walking),
Itching  of  the  toes  and  feet. — (  Writing),  Pressure  in  right  eye  ;  orgasm  of
blood,  etc.

Amelioration. — (Morning),  On  rising,  pain  in  head,  etc. — (Fore-
noon), Great  number  of  symptoms  disappear ;  throat  symptoms. — (After-
noon), Pain  in  kidneys. — (Evening),  In  open  air,  the  symptoms  appear  tn
be  relieved  ;  tearing  in  forehead. — (Night),  Great  number  of  symptoms  dis-
appear ;  collection  of  saliva  in  mouth.— (Every  other  day),  Feels  some  bet-
ter.— (  Walking  in  open  air).  Hoarseness ;  contraction  of  chest ;  stitches  in
left  knee. — (After  breakfast),  Faintlike  nausea ;  pain  from  bladder  to  chest.
— (After  breakfasting  on  wheat  bread).  Nausea  ceased. — (Closing  eyes).
Trembling  of  left  eye. — (Chamomile),  Pain  in  small  of  back. — (After  din-
ner). Feels  most  easy. — (Becoming  erect),  Surging  in  the  head ;  sense  of
contraction  around  chest ;  boring  pain  in  chest. — (Emctation),  Oppression
of  stomach. — (After  an  evacuation),  Tenesmus  of  the  rectum,  etc. ;  oppres-
sion in  region  of  stomach. — (Emission  of  flatulence).  Sense  of  fulness  of
stomach. — (Friction),  Tearing  in  the  sides  of  the  face;  external  pressure  at
lower  part  of  chest ;  stitches  in  nape  of  neck,  etc. ;  burning  in  superior  angle
of  left  scapula  ;  burning  stitches  in  right  sole. — (Holding  eye  with  hand),
Trembling  of  left  eye. — (Looking  up).  Trembling  of  the  left  eye. — (Lying
down).  Headache  in  occiput ;  boring  in  teeth  of  right  side ;  pain  in  chest ;
sense  of  pressure  on  sides  of  chest  disappears ;  pain  in  legs. — (Lying  still),
Sense  of  heat  in  urethra. — (Lying  on  side),  Pressure  on  chest. — (Laying
down  the  head  quietly  in  the  bed),  Headache. — (Appearaiice  of  mejues),  Head-
ache ceased. — (Motion),  Stiffness  of  neck,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  tibia. — (Pres-
sure), Tension  in  spot  on  right  temple ;  tearing,  etc.,  in  the  ears  ;  pain  in
molar  teeth  ;  stitches  in  left  side  of  neck,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  hip  ;  throbbing
in  forehead,  etc. — (During  night's  rest),  Varix  of  rectum  decreases. — (After
rising).  Jerking,  etc.,  toothache ;  anxiety  about  the  heart  disappears. —
(After  rising  and  tvalking  a  little),  Rigidity  of  the  hands,  etc. — (In  room),
Dim-sightedness  passes  oS.—(Sc7-atching),  Itching  of  angle  of  mouth,  etc. ;
itching  of  scrotum  ;  itching  upon  the  sternum  ;  itching  upon  hands,  etc. ;
itching  on  and  between  fingers ;  itching  disappears ;  skin  painful. — (Sitting),
Stitches  in  right  hypochondriac  region  disappear ;  cutting,  etc.,  in  chest ;
sense  of  pressure  on  sides  of  chest ;  stitches  on  both  sides  of  chest ;  weari-
ness of  legs;  pain  in  leg;  pain  in  right  leg. — (Sitting  up  in  bed),  Gnawing
in  front  molar  tooth. — (Stretching),  Gnawing  in  coccyx. — (  Walking),  Most
symptoms  decrease ;  boring  pain  in  chest ;  stitches  on  sides  of  chest ;  stag-
gers, etc. ;  tearing  from  knees  to  toes ;  cramp  in  calves  ;  itching  of  toes,  etc.
— ( Warmth),  Pain  in  abdomen. — ( Warm  eating  and  drinking).  Throat
symptoms. — (Applying  warm  cloths),  Pinching,  etc.,  in  abdomen. — (Wiping
eyes).  Giddiness ;  dim-sightedness.


AMBRA.

Ambra  grisea. Found  in  some  marine  animals,  and  frequently  obtained
floating  on  the  Southern  seas. Preparation,  Triturations.


AMBEA.  239

AutJiorities. (Hahnemann's  M.  M.  Piira)  ;  1,  Hahnemann ;  2,  Gersdorff.

Mind. — Distorted  images,  grimaces,  diabolical  faces  crowd  upon  his
fancy ;  he  cannot  get  rid  of  them,'. — Lewd  fancies,  even  when  dreaming ;
the  mind  and  the  sexual  organs,  however,  do  not  feel  excited  by  them  (first
twenty-four  hours),'. — She  is  excited,  loquacious  ;  talking  fatigues  her  ;  she
was  uuable  to  sleep  at  night;  got  a  headache,  as  if  she  carried  a  large  load
upon  her  head ;  she  felt  oppressed  at  the  chest ;  had  to  sit  up  in  bed,  and
was  attacked  with  anguish  and  sweat  all  over,'. — Uncommonly  long  ex-
citement,'.— Great  equanimity  (reaction  of  the  organism),''. — Great  sadness
(after  seventy-two  hours),'. — Despair  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Great  de-
pression of  spirits  (after  six  days),'. — He  is  overwhelmed  with  sad  thoughts,
and  feels  a  sort  of  qualmishness  about  the  heart;  he  feels  sad  for  a  long
time,'. — [10.]  Indifferent  to  joy  or  grief;  more  depressed,  however,  than
composed,'. — Anxiety  after  dinner,'. — Anxious  thoughts  arise  in  his  mind,'.
— The  mind  feels  uneasy  and  agitated,'. — ^Uneasiness  the  whole  day,  the
chest  feeling  oppressed,'. — Anguish  and  tremor  (after  eight  days),'. — In  the
evening  one  feels  a  sort  of  anguish,^. — Irritated  mood,  as  if  one  had  weak
nerves  and  were  impatient,". — Talking  irritates  her ;  she  is  attacked  with
trembling  through  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  lower  extremities,  and
has  to  be  alone  for  some  time  in  order  to  rest  herself,'. — Immediately,
whining  mood,  followed  by  peevishness  and  quarrelsomeness,  for  two  hours;
he  feels  easily  roused  to  indignation,'. — [20.]  Constant  alternation  of  de-
pression of  spirits  and  vehemence  of  temper;  this  prevents  him  from  hav-
ing a  calm  mood,'. — He  is  always  as  if  he  were  in  a  dream,'. — He  was  not
able  to  reflect  upon  anything  properly ;  he  feels  stupid  (first  twenty-four
hours),'. — Bad  memory  ;  his  thoughts  are  weak ;  he  has  to  read  everything
three  or  four  times,  and,  after  all,  he  does  not  seize  the  meaning  of  what
he  reads,'.

Head. — Oppressive  confusion  of  the  head,  immediately  after  eating,
especially  during  motion,'. — Compressing  confusion  of  the  head,l — Head-
ache every  morning ;  the  head  feels  muddled,  as  if  she  had  been  revelling
the  whole  night,'. — Violent  vertigo,'. — Uncommon,  even  dangerous,  ver-
tigo,'.— ; Vertigo,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  in  the  fore  and  afternoon,'.
— *She  had  to  lie  down  on  account  of  vertigo  and  feeling  of  weakness  in  stom-
ach (in  afternoon,  after  seventy-two  hours),'. — [30.]  *  Great  weakness  in  his
head,  with  vertigo  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Weakness  in  the  head,  with
a  sort  of  chilliness  of  the  head,'. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  for  two
days,'. — Music  causes  the  blood  to  rush  to  the  head,'. — Tension  in  the  head,
which  makes  one  feel  stupid,'. — Compressing  headache,  starting  from  both
temples,^— Pressive  drawing  ascending  from  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  ex-
tending through  the  head  towards  the  forehead,  considerable  pressure  re-
maining behind  iu  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput,^ — Drawings  and  tearings
in  the  head,  to  and  fro,'. — Pressure  and  stitches  in  the  head,'. — Oppressive
and  tearing  headache,  especially  over  and  on  the  top  of  the  head,". — [40.]
Shootings  through  the  head,". — When  making  an  exertion,  he  experiences
a  lancinating  and  cutting  headache ;  he  feels  it  at  every  step ;  easier  when
lying  down,'. — (Twitchings  in  the  head),'. — Headache  as  if  a  cold  would
come  on,  at  times  increasing,  at  times  decreasing,  and  continual,". — Head-
ache when  blowing  the  nose,'. — External  headache ;  also  in  the  nape  of
the  neck  and  in  the  neck ;  pain  as  from  straining  the  parts  in  lifting,  pain-
ful to  the  touch,  the  whole  day  (after  twelve  days),'. — Painful  pimple  on
the  forehead,^ — Ked  pimple  on  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  close  to  the
hair ;  it  feels  sore  when  touched,  but  does  not  suppurate,". — Sensation  in  the


240  AMBRA.

forehead  and  eyes  as  when  a  cold  is  about  breaking  out,^ — Oppressive
headache  in  the  forehead,^ — [50.]  Pressur.e  in  the  forehead,  with  appre-
hension of  becoming  crazy  (after  forty-eight  hours),\ — Downward  pressing
pain  in  the  forehead  and  the  top  of  the  head,  every  other  day,  accompanied
by  heat  in  the  head  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  paleness  of  the  face,  beginning
early  in  the  morning,  increasing  only  iij  the-  afternoon,'.— Short  violent
pressure,  just  over  the  nose,  in  the  forehead,  in  frequent  paroxysms ;  it  be-
comes tearing,  and  leaves  behind  a  confusion  of  the  occiput,^. — Tearing
headache  in  the  forehead,  as  far  as  the  upper  part  of  the  face,'. — Pressive
pain  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,'. — Tearing  in  left  temple,  as  high  up  as
the  vertex ;  also  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  and  behind  the  left  ear,''. —
Humming  around  the  temples,'. — -Stitch  in  the  head,  over  the  left  temple
(after  three  hours),'. — Painless  feeling  of  pressure  on  top  of  head,  and  heav-
iness of  the  head,  iu  the  evening  (after  thirty-six  hours),'. — Extremely  pain-
ful tearing  on  the  top  of  the  head,  and  apparently  in  the  whole  upper  half  of
the  brain,  with  paleness  of  the  face  and  coldness  of  the  left  band,\ — [60.]
On  the  right  side  of  the  head  there  is  a  place  where  the  hairs  pain  when
touched,  as  if  sore,'. —  Confusion  of  the  occiput,^. — Pressing  pain  in  the  occi-
put and  nape  of  neck,'.^ — Pressive  paiu  in  a  small  place  of  the  occiput,'.—-
Tearing  pressure  in  the  whole  occiput,  extending  as  far  as  the  top  and  the
forehead,'. — Tearing  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  towards  the  nape  of  the
neck  and  behind  the  ear,'. — In  the  evening,  several  very  severe  stitches  as-
cending towards  the  occiput,'. — ^Falling  off  of  the  hair  (after  twenty-four
hours),'.

Eyes. — Distended  veins  of  the  white  of  the  eye,'. — Pressure  and  biting
of  the  eye,  as  from  dust  which  had  got  in,'. — [70.]  Pressure  upon  the  eyes,
which  can  only  be  opened  with  difficulty ;  pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  had  been
closed  too  firmly,  especially  early  in  the  morning,'. — Pressure  upon  the  eyes,
as  if  they  were  deep  in  the  orbits,  with  tearing  headache,  extending  down-
ward from  the  forehead,  or  from  the  ear  through  the  occiput  (after  three
hours),'. — Burning  pain  in  the  right  eye  (after  ten  hours),'. — Tearing,  in
short  jerks,  in  and  around  the  right  eye,'. — Burning  in  the  eyelids,'. — Itch-
ing of  the  eyelid,  as  if  a  stye  would  form  there,'. — Pressure  on  left  eyebrow,'.
— Biting  and  lachr3'mation  of  the  eyes,'. — Intolerably  itching  titillation
around  the  eyes,'. — Turbid  sight,  as  through  a  mist  (after  some  hours),'. —
[80,]  Very  dim  vision  (after  three  days),'. — After  a  meal,  shootings,  first
around  the  left,  then  around  the  right  eye,'.

Ears. — Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  lobule  and  behind  it,'. — Tearing  in
right  ear  early  in  morning,  and  frequently  at  other  times,'. — Crawling  iu
ears  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Itching  and  tickling  in  the  ears,'. — Hear-
ing decreases  every  day,  five  days  in  succession  (after  six  days\'. — *Deaf-
ness  of  one  ear,'. — ■*Roaring  and  whistling  in  the  ear,  in  the  afternoon  (ai'ter
four  days),'.— (Snapping,  as  of  a  spark  from  the  electric  machine,  and
noise,  as  when  winding  up  a  watch),'.

Nose.—\^0.'\  *Dried  blood  gathers  in  the  nose  (after  sixteen  hours,)'. —
*BIeeding  at  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,^. — (Great  dryness  of  the  iuside
of  the  nose,  although  air  passes  through  easily),'. — Cramp  of  the  right  wing
of  the  nose,  toward  the  malar  bone,'. — Obstruction  of  the  nose,  which  feels
sore  internally,'. — Great  dryness  of  the  nose,  which  continues  a  long  time,
accompanied  by  a  good  deal  of  irritation,  in  the  nose,  as  if  one  would
sneeze,'. — Occasional  sneezing,  the  nose  being  dry,'. — Tingling  iu  the  nose,
as  if  one  would  sneeze,'. — Frequent  attempts  to  sneeze,'. — She  sneezes  al-
most every  day ;  this  never  happened  before,'. — [100.]  Dry  coryza,'.


AMBRA.  241

Face. — Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,^. — Jaundice-colored  /ace,'. — Spas-
modic tremblings  of  the  muscles  of  the  face/. — Spasmodic  twitchings  of
the  face  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed','. — Gnawing  and  tingling-itching
in  the  face,'. — Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  face,  especially  near  the
right  wing  of  the  nose,'. — Red  spot  on  the  cheek,  without  any  sensation,'.
— Pimples  and  itching  in  the  whiskers,'. — Tension  of  the  cheek,  as  from
swelling,'. — [HO.]  Painless  swelling  of  the  cheek  on  the  upper  jaw,  with
throbbing  in  the  gums  (after  a  few  hours),'. — Stitching,  pressive  pain  in
the  jaws,'. — Pain  in  the  jaws,  as  if  they  were  being  screwed  together  or
asunder,'. — Hot  lips,'. — Spasm  of  the  lower  lip,  and  sensation  as  if  it  were
being  pressed  against  the  gums  and  torn  away,'.

3Iouth. — Bleeding  of  the  teeth,'. — Unusually  copious  bleeding  from
the  lower  teeth  of  the  right  side,l — Drawing  pain,  at  times  in  one,  at  times  •
in  another  tooth  ;  the  pain,  increased  by  warmth,  was  suppressed  by  cold,
for  a  few  moments ;  did  not  become  worse  by  chewing,  and  went  off  after
a  meal ;  the  gums  on  the  inner  side  were  swollen,'. — Pain  in  the  hollow
tooth,  in  the  evening,'. — Pain  in  the  hollow  tooth,  especially  in  the  open
air,  as  if  the  nerve  were  being  touched,'. — [120.]  After  dinner,  pain  in  a
hollow  tooth,  more  lancinating  than  tearing ;  for  half  an  hour  (after  five
hours),'. — Prickling,  drawing  in  the  upper  right  molar  teeth,^. — Pressive,
burrowing  pain,  apparently  under  the  left  lower  molar  teeth  ;  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed,^ — Drawing  pain,  sometimes  in  the  teeth  of  the  right,  some-
times in  those  of  the  left  side,  by  day,  and  for  several  nights,^. — Drawing  in
the  incisor  tooth,  as  if  a  current  of  air  rushed  into  the  tooth,  causing  a
stitch  there,'. — Considerably  swollen  and  painful  gums,'. — The  tongue  is
coated  gray-yellow,'. — Tuberculous  growths  under  the  tongue,  which  feel
sore,'. — Tongue,  mouth,  and  lips  feel  quite  numb  and  dry ;  early,  on  wak-
ing,'.— Fetid  odor  from  the  mouthy. — [130.]  Badly  smelling  breath,  early
after  waking,'. — Blisters  in  the  mouth,  which  pain  as  if  the  place  were
burnt,'. — Great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  early  on  waking,  accompanied  by  a
total  want  of  thirst,  for  several  days,'. — Smarting,  and  sensation  of  exco-
riation in  the  interior  of  the  mouth  ;  pain  prevented  her  from  eating  any-
thing acrid,'. — Feeling  of  contraction  in  the  salivary  glands  during  a  meal,
especially  when  swallowing  the  first  mouthfuls,'. — (Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
early  when  waking),'. — Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth,  after  drinking  milk,'.

Thvoat, — Secretion  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  roughness  and  rawness,^.
— *  Accumulation  of  grayish  phlegm  in  the  throat,  ivhioh  is  difficult  to  hawk
up,  accompanied  by  rawness  of  the  throat,''. — Hawking  up  of  mucus  early  in
the  morning,'. — [140.]  Choking  and  vomiting  can  hardly  be  avoided  when
hawking  up  phlegm  from  the  fauces,'. — Rawness  of  the  throat,'. — Rawness
of  the  throat,  as  in  a  cold,'. — -Rawness  of  the  throat,  as  in  a  cold,  for  some
days,'. — Sensation  in  the  throat  as  if  she  had  something  lodged  in  it,'. — After
dinner,  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  as  if  food  were  lodged  there  which
will  not  go  down,'. — Tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  throat,  and  in  the  upper
back  part  of  the  fauces,'.— ^Tearing  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  and  on
the  left  side  of  the  palate,  during  dinner,'. — Sore  throat,  as  if  something
impeded  deglutition  (after  eight  days),'. — (Sore  throat,  not  when  swallow-
ing food,  but  during  an  empty  deglutition,  and  on  pressure  from  without,  ac-
companied by  tension  of  the  cervical  glands,  as  if  they  were  swollen)  (after
four  days),'. — [150.]  (*Sore  throat,  after  a  draught  of  air;  there  are  stitches
shooting  from  the  neck  into  the  right  ear ;  the  parts  are  especially  painful
when  moving  the  tongue),'. — Tickling  in  the  throat,  which  induces  cough-
ing,'.— Tickling  in  the  throat  and  the  thyroid  body,  during  the  act  of  cough-

VOL.  I. — 16


242  AMBRA.

ing,\ — Sensation  during  the  act  of  coughing,  as  of  a  sore  place  in  the
throat,'. — Pain  of  a  submaxillary  gland,  which  looked  swollen  (after  three
days),'. — Tearing  pain  of  the  palate  as  far  as  into  the  left  ear,'. — *Sen8a-
tion  of  rawness  in  the  region  of  the  velum  pendulum  palati^. — Sense  as  of
biting  in  the  back  part  of  the  fauces,  between  the  acts  of  swallowing,^ —
Pressive,  biting  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  fauces,  from  time  to  time,l

HtOtnacJl. — Somewhat  insipid  eructations,  frequently  in  the  after-
noon,'.—  [160.]  *Frequent  empty  eructations  (after  three  and  one-half
hours),''. — Violent  eructations  after  dinner,'. — ^Frequently  sour  eructations
(after  forty-eight  and  seventy-two  hours),'. — Audible  eructations,  tasting
bitter,'. — Heartburn,  with  suppressed  eructations,  when  walking  in  the  open
air,'. — -Every  evening,  sense  as  of  a  spoiled  stomach,  and  regurgitation  of  acrid
substances  as  high  up  as  the  larynx,  like  heartburn,^. — (Nausea,  after  break-
fast) (after  seventy-two  hours),'. — (Nausea,  turning  the  stomach)  (after
twenty-four  hours),'. — Qualmishness  about  the  stomach,'. — Burning  in  the
stomach  (after  three  hours),'. — [170.]  Burning  in  the  region  of  the  stomach
and  higher  up,l — Cramp  of  the  stomach,'. — She  had  to  lie  down  in  the
afternoon,  on  account  of  a  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  stomach,  and  vertigo
(after  seventy-two  hours),'. — Tension  and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,'. — Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,'. — Pressure
and  burning  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  this  symptom  goes  off  by  an
eructation,'. — (After  every  evacuation  a  weakness  about  the  pit  of  the
stomach),'.

Abdomen. — Aching  in  the  region  of  the  liver,'. — Aching  in  a  small
place  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  region  of  the  liver ;  the  pain  is
not  felt  when  touching  the  parts,'. — Pressure  in  the  umbilical  region,  with
heartburn ;  this  goes  off  by  an  eructation,'. — [189.]  Stitching  pain  around
the  navel,  when  moving  the  abdomen,  especially  when  drawing  the  abdo-
men in,'. — Pressure  on  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  over  the  right  hip,'. — Pres-
sure in  the  epigastrium,  hands  and  feet  being  cold,'. — Continual  pressure
in  the  epigastrium,  diminishing  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  returning  when
sitting  down,'. — Stitches  over  the  hips  for  two  days  (after  five  days),'. —
Sharp  pressure,  or  dull  stitch,  over  the  right  hip,'. — Tension  and  infla-
tion of  the  abdomen,  after  every  meal,  even  every  time  he  drinks,'. — Dis-
tended abdomen  (after  a  few  hours),'. — Distended  abdomen  (after  five
hours),'. — ^oon  after  midnight  he  wakes  with  a  considerably  distended  ab-
domen, especially  a  distended  hypogastrium,  owing  to  incarcerated  flatulence
exciting  a  colic,  or,  at  any  rate,  a  violent  pressure  downwards ;  this  accu-
mulation of  flatulence  disappears  during  the  subsequent  sleep,  without  any
emission  of  flatus,  the  abdomen  becoming  easy,'. — [190.]  Twitchings  in  the
abdominal  muscles,  in  the  evening,'. — Fermentation  and  audible  rumbling
in  the  abdomen,  which,  however,  is  not  felt,'. — -(Burning  in  the  abdomen),'.
— *Sense  of  coldness  in  the  abdomen,'. — *  Coldness  of  one  side  of  the  abdo-
men for  two  days  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Violent  cramps  in  the  belly,'.
— First  pinching  pain  in  the  belly,  then  a  little  cutting  in  the  epigastrium,
which  goes  off  by  an  eructation,'. — The  abdomen  feels  compressed,'. — Com-
pressive weight  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Weight  in  the
abdomen,  and  sensation  as  if  the  parts  had  been  sprained,  and  were  suffer-
ing a  pressure,  coming  from  the  spinal  marrow,'. — [200.]  Pressure  in  the
abdomen  is  followed  by  the  emission  of  inodorous  flatulence,'. — Trouble
caused  by  incarcerated  flatulence,  occasioning  a  pain,  especially  in  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen,'. — Violent  cutting  colic,  in  the  evening,'. — Cutting
colic,  when  in  bed,  after  midnight,  even  during  a  general  sweat,'. — Cutting


AMBRA.  243

colic,  with  a  soft  stool,  early  in  the  morning,  on  two  mornings  in  succession
(after  five  days),'. — Violent  cutting  colic,  with  diarrhoea  occurring  three
times,  three  days  in  succession  (after  five  days),'.— Sense  as  of  pinching  in
the  hypogastrium,  with  violent  fermentation  and  gurgling,  especially  in
the  epigastrium,  when  lying  in  bed  early  in  the  morning;  diminished  by
rising,  renewed  by  lying  down  again,  especially  when  lying  upon  the  back,^
— When  drawing  the  abdomen  in,  violent  prickings  in  the  hypogastrium,
which  may  also  be  excited  by  pressing  the  parts  from  without,'. — Pressure
below  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  in  the  hypogastrium,  from  time  to  time,
also  at  night,^ — After  ineflfectual  urging,  a  pinching  pain  in  the  hypogas-
trium, especially  of  the  right  side  (after  some  days),'^. — [210.]  Pressure
deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  after  the  evacuation,^.

Stool  and  Anus, — Tenesmus  in  the  abdomen,  remaining  after  the
stool  (he  feels  as  if  he  had  not  yet  done),  upwards  of  a  minute,'. — Tenes-
mus of  the  rectum,'. — (Drawing  in  the  rectum),'. — Stitches  of  the  rectum,'.
— Tickling  of  the  rectum,'. — Itching  and  biting  of  the  rectum,  which  go
off  by  rubbing,'. — Itching  of  the  anus,'. — Itching jjf  the  anus  (after  some
hours),". — *Frequent  urging,  no  stool;  this  gives  her  a  good  deal  of  anxiety ;
during  this  time  the  neighborhood  of  other  people  was  intolerable  to  her,'.
— [220.]  Four  ordinary  evacuations  within  the  space  of  a  few  hours  (after
a  few  hours),'. — Copious,  soft,  light-brown  stools  (after  eight  days),'. —
(Ambra  grisea  appears  to  improve  stools,  which  had  been  delaying  hereto-
fore) (after  ten  and  fifteen  days),l — Scanty  stools  (after  twenty-four  hours),'.
— *  Constipation  (after  four  days),'. — A  quantity  of  blood  is  passed  with  the
soft  stool  (after  seven  days),'.

Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  the  bladder,  and  simultaneously  in  the
rectuni  (after  five  days),'. — Sensation  as  if  a  few  drops  passed  out  of  the
urethra,'. — Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  (after  six  days),'. — Burn-
ing in  the  orifice  of  the  ui-ethra  and  the  rectum,'. — [230.]  (Twitchings  in
the  urethra)  (after  twelve  days),'. — Urgent  desire  to  urinate,  early  after
rising,  for  two  hours  ;  he  often  cannot  retain  his  urine,'. — Frequent  micturi-
tion at  nighty. — The  urine  he  emits  is  three  times  the  quantity  of  what  he
drinks,  especially  early  in  the  morning ;  afterwards,  a  dull  pain  in  the  re-
gion of  the  kidneys,'. — Copious,  bright-colored,  cloudless  urine  (after  four
days),'. — Diminished  secretion  of  urine  (the  first  three  days),'. — Little
urine,  which,  in  a  few  hours,  deposits  a  reddish  sediment,'. — A  little  urine,
with  a  reddish  cloud,  without  any  thirst,'. — Brown  urine,'. — Whitish,  floc-
culent  urine,'. — [240.]  The  urine  is  of  a  lemon-yellow  color,  almost  inodor-
ous, a  little  flocculent,'.—  Tlie  urine  is  dark-brown  and  a  little  turbid,  even
while  being  emitted  (after  twenty  hours),'. — *The  urine  is  turbid,  even  while
being  emitted;  yellow-brown;  it  formed  a  brown  sediment,  while  the  clear
urine  above  it  was  yellow,'. — Urine  with  a  reddish  cloud,'. — The  urine  has
a  penetrating  odor  after  standing  awhile,'. — Bloody  urine  (after  seven
days),'.

Sexual  Organs. — An  itching  pimple  on  the  male  parts  of  genera-
tion,'.— Burning  in  the  geuital  organs,  with  a  few  drops  of  blood  being
emitted,  especially  after  a  walk  and  hard  stool,'. — Vehement,  voluptuously
delightful  feeling  in  the  interior  of  the  genital  organs,  without  any  consid-
erable erection  or  irritation  of  the  external  organs;  that  feeling  continues
for  hours  (after  four  days),'. — Violent  erections,  early  on  waking,  without
any  voluptuous  desire,  the  parts  being  externally  numb ;  when  the  erection
subsides  there  is  a  tingling-tearing  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra,'. — [250,]
The  erections  subside  (reaction),'. — Pain  in  the  glans,  as  from  ulceration,'.


244  AMBRA.

— Tearing  in  the  glans,'. — Itching  of  the  glans,  which  continues  when  sit-
ting, lying,  standing  or  walking,^ — ^Violent  itching  of  the  pudendum  (less
frequently  of  the  anus)  ;  she  has  to  rub  the  parts,\ — *8oreness  and  itching  of
the  pudendum,  even  when  she  does  not  urinate^. — *iSioeUing,  soreness;  and  itch-
ing of  the  labia  piidendi,^. — Hemorrhage  from  the  uterus  (after  two  hours),'.
— (Discharge  of  bluish-white  clots  of  mucus  from  the  vagina),'. — (Profuse
leucorrhoea  at  night),'. — [260.]  Leucorrhma,  consisting  of  thick  mucus,  in-
creasing from  day  to  day,  each  discharge  being  preceded  by  a  stitch  in  the
vagina,'. — *The  menses  occur  three  days  before  the  time  (after  fourth  day),'.
— *  The  menses  appear  four  days  before  the  time  (after  twenty  days),'. — Sen-
sation in  the  abdomen  as  if  the  menses  would  come  on,  although  they  had
appeared  twenty-one  days  ago  (after  two  hours),'. — During  the  menses  the
left  leg  becomes  blue  from  distended  veins,  with  a  pressive  pain,'.

Respiratonj  Apparatus. — Burning  and  itching  titillation  ex-
tending from  the  larynx  down  to  the  abdomen,'. — -* Cough  only  at  night,
produced  by  an  excessive  irritation  in  the  throat;  there  is  no  cough  by
day,'. — Cough  excited  by  rawness  of  the  throat,''. — *  Cough,  every  evening,
with  pain  under  the  left  ribs,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  there^. — ^Nightly
cough,  owing  to  an  excessive  irritation  in  the  throat,'. — [270.]  Oeeadonally
considerable  paroxysms  of  cough,^. — *  Violent,  convulsive  cough,  accompanied
by  frequent  eructations  aiid  hoarseness,^. — *A  kind  of  hooping-cough  (after
forty-eight  hours),'. — *Deep,  dry  cough,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the
mouth,  and  subsequent  rawness  in  the  throat,^. — When  coughing  there  is  a
pressure  in  the  umbilical  regi»n,'. — *  Very  saltish  expectoration  when  cough-
ing,^.— Roughness  and  hoarseness  of  the  voice ;  tenacious  mucus  collects  in
the  throat,'. — Hoarseness ;  rough,  deep  voice,  alternating  with  thick  phlegm
in  the  larynx  ;  he  easily  throws  it  up  when  clearing  the  throat,  or  by  a
slight  cough  (after  ten  and  twenty-four  hours),'.

Chest. — Burning  in  the  chest,'. — Burning  in  the  external  parts  of  the
chest,l — [280.]  Burning  ache  near  one  of  the  ribs  of  the  right  side ;  it  is
aggravated  by  external  pressure ;  afterwards  a  similar  pain  in  the  left
mamma,^ — *Sense  of  rawness  in  the  ehest,^. — Stitch  in  the  chest,  extending
to  the  back  (after  a  few  hours),'. — Violent,  dull  stitch  in  the  right  mamma,
interrupting  respiration,^. — *  Wheezing  in  the  chesty. — Oppression  at  the
chest,l — Oppression  in  the  back,  through  the  chest,'. — Oppression  of  the
chest  and  back,  between  the  seapulce ;  it  subsides  for  a  short  time  after  eat-
ing,'.— Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  much  uneasiness  the  whole  day  (after
third  day),'. — Tightness  of  the  chest ;  she  cannot  breathe  deeply,  nor  yawn
fully,'. — [290.]  Peeling  of  pressure  deep  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,
during  a  strong  expiration  ;  the  pressure  is  most  painful  at  a  small  place,^ —
Pressure  in  the  superior  part  of  the  chest,  in  paroxysms,  for  five  minutes,'.
— Pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,^. — Pressure  below  (in  ?)  the  left
half  of  the  chest,'. — Pressure  in  the  prsecordial  region,''. — ^Aching  in  the
chest,  over  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  beaten  ;  relieved
by  eructations,^ — Pain  of  the  right  lowermost  true  ribs,  as  if  the  parts
had  been  bruised  ;  more  towards  the  back,'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  below  the  arm,'. — *  Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the,
chest^\

Heart  and  Pulse. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  when  walking  in  the
open  air,  with  paleness  of  the  face,'. — [300.]  Violent  palpitation  of  the
heart,  with  pressure  in  the  chest,  as  if  a  lump  were  lodged  there,  or  as  if
the  chest  were  obstructed,'. — He  perceives  the  pulse  in  the  body ;  it  feels
like  the  tick  of  a  watch,'.


AMBRA.  246

Neclt.  and  Back. — Drawing  ache  in  the  nape  of  the  neck/. — Eheu-
matic  pain  in  the  right  scapula,'. — Burning  in  the  left  scapula,'. — Stitches
in  left  scapula  (first  day),'. — Pain  in  the  back,  as  if  the  intestines  were
being  compressed,  with  a  heaviness  in  the  back,  as  if  he  were  not  able  to
right  himself,'.— Rheumatic  pains  in  the  back,  on  the  right  side,l — Stitches
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting  (after  eight  or  nine  days),'. — Single,
violent,  sharp  stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,  increased  by  the  slightest
motion,''. — Violent  pressure  in  the  lower  part  of  the  small  of  the  back,''. —
[310.]  Painful  tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  loins,'.

Extremities  in  General. — Twitchings  in  the  limbs,'. — Uncom-
mon twitching  in  all  the  limbs,  and  coldness  of  the  body  at  night  (after
fifth  day),'. — Uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs,  like  a  tingling,  accompanied  by
a  sort  of  anguish,  only  by  day,'.

Upper  Extremities. — The  arms  easily  go  to  sleep,  when  lying  on
them,'. — At  night  the  right  arm  frequently  feels  numb,  and  goes  to  sleep,'.
— The  left  arm  often  goes  to  sleep  during  the  day,  when  at  rest,'. — Tearing
in  both  shoulders,'. — Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder-joint j\ — In  the  evening
there  is  drawing  in  the  shoulder;  it  feels  sprained  and  paralyzed^.— \ZZO.']
Violent,  dull  stitch  in  the  right  shoulder  (after  two  hours),l — Sense  as  of
clucking  in  the  arm,'. — Twitchings  in  the  arm,'. — Tearing  in  the  right  arm,
early,  for  five  minutes,'. — (Paralysis  of  the  right  upper  arm),'. — Tearing  in
the  right  elbow  and  forearm,''. — Drawing  ache  in  the  right  forearm  as  far
as  the  elbow,''. — Cramp  in  the  hands  (after  some  hours),'. — Paralysis  of  the
hand,  for  a  few  minutes  (after  sixth  day),'. — Icy  cold  hands  for  a  long
time  (after  one  hour),^ — £330.]  Painful  coldness  of  the  hands  for  a  long
time,". — Icy  coldness  of  the  hands,  in  the  evening;  the  hands  feel  chilly,".
— Tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  middle  portion  of  the  right  hand,". — Sting-
ings  in  the  hands  and  fingers,  as  of  flies,'. — Itching  in  the  palms  of  the
hands,'. — Stitches,  at  times,  in  the  right  index;  at  times  in  the  right
thumb,'. — Rheumatic  pain  extending  from  the  lowest  joint  of  the  thumb,
through  the  metacarpal  bone,  as  far  as  the  wrist-joint,". — Tearing  in  the
muscles  of  the  thumb,". — Trembling  in  the  thumb,  in  the  evening,  in  re-
peated short  paroxysms,'. — Tearing  in  the  lowest  j'oint  of  the  left  index-
finger,'. — [340.]  (The  lowest  joints  of  the  fingers  become  stiff  in  the  even-
ing, and  the  lowest  joint  of  the  thumb  becomes  swollen,  and  is  then  pain-
ful on  being  bent;  this  symptom  is  worse  when  she  did  not  exercise  her
fingers  during  the  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  right  index-finger,". — -Tearing  in
the  last  two  fingers,  in  the  evening,  before  falling  asjeep,". — Drawing  in  the
fingers  and  the  thumb,'. — Tearing  in  tip  of  the  little  finger,". — Tearing
under  the  nail  of  the  right  middle  finger,". — The  skin  of  the  tips  of  the
fingers  becomes  wrinkled  early  in  the  morning,'. — The  wart  on  the  finger
feels  sore,'. — Itching  of  the  tips  of  the  fingers,'.— There  arises  an  itching
little  tetter  between  the  thumb  and  the  index-finger,'. — [350.]  Lancinating
pain  in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb;  when  touched  ouly  slightly,  the  part  feels
as  if  a  splinter  had  been  thrust  under  the  nail ;  this  feeling  decreases  when
the  part  is  pressed  upon,". — Tingling  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  as  if  it  had
gone  to  sleep;  this  symptom  passes  off,  for  some  time,  by  pressing  upon  the
parts,".

Lower  Extremities. — Stretching  and  relaxation  in  the  lower  ex-
tremities,'.— Feeling  in  the  lower  extremities  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep ;
he  has  no  firm  step  (after  eighth  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  left,  and  after-
wards in  the  right,  hip,". — Tearing  ache  in  front,  just  below  the  left  hip,".
— Sense  as  of  a  clucking  tearing  behind,  under  the  left  half  of  the  nates,'.


246  AMBRA.

— Tearing  iu  the  right  half  of  the  nates,l — Heaviness  of  the  legs,^. — Great
lassitude  in  the  legs,  early  in  the  morning,'. — [360.J  Eheumatic  tearing  in
the  right  leg,^. —  Tearing  in  the  left  leg,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Tension  in
the  thigh,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  especially  when  walking,'. —
Tearing  in  the  right  knee,^. — Drawing  in  the  knees  and  the  malleoli,'.7—
Paralysis  of  the  knee  for  a  few  minutes  (after  six  days),'. — Pain  as  from  a
sprain,  above  the  knee,  especially  after  having  been  seated  (after  five
days),'. — Itching  of  the  knees,'. — Stiffness  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  early  in
the  morning  (the  first  dayj,'. — Soreness  of  the  bends  of  the  knees,  which  is
most  painful  in  the  evening,'. — [370.]  Tearing  under  the  left  knee,  in  the
upper  part  of  the  tibia,^ — The  legs,  from  the  knee  down,  especially  the
feet,  are  very  much  swollen  (after  third  day),'. — There  is  more  sensation
of  coldness  in  the  legs  than  perceptible  coldness,'. — Itching  of  the  legs,
over  the  malleoli,  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down;  after  rubbing  the  parts
they  feel  sore  and  as  if  bruised,'. — During  the  menses  the  left  leg  becomes
blue  from  distended  veins,  with  a  pressive  pain,'. — The  right  leg,  especially
the  knee,  is  very  cold,'. — Tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  leg,^ —
Cramp  in  the  legs,  and,  almost  every  night,  cramp  in  the  calves^. — Intermit-
tent tearing  in  the  left  calf',^ — Sense  as  of  grumbling  iu  the  calves  and
feet,'. — [380.]  Painful  spots  on  both  shins  (after  twenty-eighth  day),'. —
Itching  of  the  legs  over  the  malleoli,  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down;
after  rubbing  the  parts  they  feel  sore,  and  as  if  bruised,'. — Tearing  of  the
malleoli,'. — Itching  of  the  malleoli,'. — Cold  feet,'. — Very  cold  feet,^ —
Weakness  of  the  feet ;  they  feel  insensible  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. —
Stiffness  of  the  feet ;  they  feel  weary  and  exhausted  (after  sixth  day),'. —
Tingling  in  the  feet;  they  feel  numb;  after  rising  be  felt  like  fainting;  it
became  dark  before  his  eyes;  he  could  not  remain  up;  had  to  vomit  and
lie  down  again,'. — Arthritic  pain  in  the  articulations  of  the  foot,'. — [390.]
When  walking,  pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  left  foot,'. — Tension  iu  left
foot  (at  noon),'. — Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  left  foot  (after  twenty-six
days),'. — Occasional  stitches  iu  the  left  foot,'. — Tearing  in  the  external
border  of  the  left  foot,^ — Violent  burning  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,'. — Itch-
ing of  the  inside  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  which  cannot  be  removed  by  scratch-
ing,'.— Pain  in  the  heel  when  walking,' Stitches  in  the  heel,'. — Itching

of  the  toes,'. — [400.]  Tearing  in  the  middle  toes  of  the  left  foot.l — Stitch
in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,'. — Arthritic  pain  iri  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,'. —
Intolerable  tickling  of  the  tip  of  the  big  toe,'. — Pain  of  the  corns;  they  feel
sore,'.

Generalities. — When  walking  in  the  open  air  an  uneasiness  in  the
blood  and  more  rapid  circulation,  accompanied  by  greater  weakness  of  the
body,'. — Early  in  the  morning  (in  a  room  which  was  extremely  heated)
he  suddenly  felt  so  weak  that  he  was  not  able  to  walk  alone,  hands  and
forehead  being  covered  with  a  cold  sweat,'. — Weakness,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, when  in  bed,^ — Weariness,  with  painful  soreness  of  all  the  limbs,'. —
Lassitude,  which  disappears  by  walking  (after  fifth  dayl,'. — [410,]  Heavi-
ness in  the  body;  he  feels  weary  and  exhausted  (after  fifth  day),'.— Fail-
ing of  strength  ;  the  kuees  give  way  (after  three  hours),'. — Very  uneasy  by
day,'. — The  symptoms  decrease  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  but  they  return
when  sitting,^.

Skifl.—Tha  eruption  is  reproduced  upon  the  skin,  with  a  good  deal  of
itching,'. — His  tetters  are  reproduced,'. — Burning  in  several  places  of  the
skin,'. — Early,  on  waking,  the  skin  feels  numb,  and  is  insensible  as  far  as
the  knees,  without  being  cold ;  the  hands  have  but  an  indistinct  sensation ;


AMBRA.  247

the  skin  seems  to  have  gone  to  sleep,  but  there  is  no  tingling/. — Itching
almost  all  over,  even  on  the  abdomen,\ — Painful  pimple  on  the  forehead/.
— [420.]  Red  pimple  on  middle  of  forehead,  close  to  the  hair ;  it  feels  sore
when  touched,  but  does  not  suppurate.'^ — Pimples  and  itching  in  the
whiskers,\ — Pimples  on  the  face,  without  sensation,'. — An  itching  pimple
on  the  male  parts  of  generation,'. —  Violent  itching  of  the  pudendum  (less
frequently  of  the  anus)  ;  she  has  to  rub  the  parts,'. — The  skin  of  the  tips
of  the  fingers  becomes  wrinkled,  early  in  the  morning,'. — The  wart  on  the
finger  feels  sore,'. — There  arises  an  itching  little  tetter  between  the  thumb
and  the  index  finger,'. — Itching  of  the  inside  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  which
cannot  be  removed  by  scratching,'. — Pain  of  the  corns;  they  feel  sore,'.

Fevev. — [430.]  Internal  chilliness  at  night,  which  prevents  him  from
falling  asleep,  or  which  rouses  him  from  sleep  at  night ;  he  did  not  get
warm,'. — Chilliness  and  weariness,  which  gives  him  an  inclination  to  go  to
sleep,  four  forenoons  in  succession  ;  this  symptom  went  off"  by  taking  some
dinner  (after  seventy-two  hours),'. — Chilliness,  sleepiness,  weariness,  and
dull  headache,  ever  since  the  morning ;  the  headache  disappeared  when
walking  in  the  open  air,'.^Chilliness,  weariness,  and  headache,  after  two
diarrhoea-like  evacuations,'. — Slight  chills  before  dinner  (first  day),'. —
(Cold  skin  over  the  whole  body,  except  face,  neck,  and  genital  organs)/. —
Heat,  two  evenings  in  succession,  from  7  to  8  o'clock  (after  twelve  days),' — -
Heat  in  the  face,  and  over  the  whole  body,  every  quarter  of  an  hour  (after
five  or  six  days)/. — Night  sweat,  two  nights  in  succession  (after  six  or  seven
days),'. — Profuse  night-sweat,  two  nights  in  succession  (after  five  days),'. —
[440.J  General  perspiration,  after  midnight,  for  many  nights,'. — Profuse
moisture,  every  night,  almost  like  sweat,'. — Moderate  night-sweat,  over  and
over,  the  whole  body  being  very  warm,'.— Sweat  every  morning,  worse  on
the  affected  side,'.

Sleep  and  jOreaws.— Disposition  to  stretch,'. — (Sleepiness  by
day),'. — Sleeplessness  before  midnight,'. — He  cannot  sleep  at  night,  he
knows  not  why/. — Sleeplessness  for  several  nights ;  slumber  early  in  the
morning,  which  is  full  of  fantasies,'. — Frequent  waking  during  the  night,^
— [450.]  Frequent  waking ;  about  2  o'clock  in  the  night,  a  long-lasting
uneasiness  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  occiput,'. — Falling  asleep
late;  afterwards  uneasy  sleep,  owing  to  a  pressure  in  the  epigastrium,
especially  on  the  right  side,l — Pain  over  the  eyes,  with  nausea,  for  several
nights  in  succession,  always  after  midnight,  and  lasting  until  7  or  8  o'clock/.
— Pressive  tearing  from  the  occiput  to  the  forehead,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed,  late  after  having  fallen  asleep,*. — Heat  in  the  head,  the  first  half
hour,'. — Uneasiness  in  the  occiput,  after  midnight,'. — He  wakes  up  at  night
with  a  headache;  this  goes  off" by  rising  from  the  bed/. — When  waking  up,
he  feels  weak,  his  mouth  is  dry,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  pressure  in  the
epigastrium,  which  increases  when  lying  upon  the  abdomen ;  when  the
pressure  has  disappeared,  he  feels  a  tearing  in  the  small  of  the  back,  which
disappears  in  its  turn  by  lying  upon  the  back,'. — On  waking,  about  mid-
night, there  are  the  following  symptoms:  weakness,  nausea,  violent  pres-
sure in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  in  the  abdomen,  violent  erections  with-
out any  voluptuous  sensation,  dryness  in  the  mouth,  and  insensibility  of
the  surface  of  the  body,l — Waking  early ;  this  is  followed  by  a  frecjuently
interrupted,  but  very  deep  sleep,  the  eyes  being  tightly  closed,^ — [460,]
Early  in  the  morning,  after  waking,  when  in  bed,  he  feels  very  weary,
especially  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body ;  there  is  confusion  in  the  head,
and  a  sensation  as  if  the  eyes  had  been  tightly  closed,  accompanied  by  a


248  AMBEA.

little  nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach;  he  can  scarcely  prevail  upon
himself  to  rise/. — Weariness,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  with
a  sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  had  been  closed  too  tightly/. — At  night,
when  asleep,  he  lies  upon  his  back,  with  bent  knees,  the  occiput  being  sup-
ported by  both  his  hands ;  with  very  vivid  dreams,^ — Startings,  as  with
fri'ght,  in  the  evening  when  falling  asleep;  he  imagines  that  there  is  too
much  light  in  the  room ;  he  jumps  out  of  his  bed  with  a  sort  of  anguish
(after  some  hours),'. — Uneasy  sleep  at  night,  owing  to  coldness  of  tlie  body,
and  twitchings  in  all  the  limbs  (after  five  days),'. — Uneasiness  for  three
nights  in  succession,  with  many  dreams  (after  five  days),'.— Vivid,  uneasy
dreams  come  on  the  moment  he  falls  asleep ;  they  almost  prevent  him  from
sleeping  (after  eight  days),'. — The  child's  sleep  is  uneasy;  it  talks  wliile
asleep,  and  desires  to  drink,'. —  Uneasy  sleep  with  anxious  dreams  (after  five
days),'.— Uneasy  dreams  at  night ;  they  fill  him  with  anguish,^.- — [470.]  He
falls  asleep  late ;  afterwards,  he  has  anxious  dreams,  as  if  he  were  abused
and  too  weak  to  defend  himself;  on  waking,  he  feels  a  great  weakness  in
the  upper  part  of  the  body,  accompanied  by  a  pinching  pressure  under  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  nausea  ;  these  symptoms  appear  when  lying  down  and
falling  asleep  again,  and  are  then  accompanied  by  pressure  in  the  left  side
of  the  abdomen ;  the  symptoms,  however,  disappear  when  one  is  wide  awake,
sits  up,  and  moves  about;  they  terminate  with  the  emission  of  flatulence,
fermentation  in  the  abdomen,  and  eructation,^ — FesMijr  anxious  dreams,
and  talking  while  asleep,  for  eight  days  (immediately),'. — Dreams  full  of
work,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Headache  ;  sweat. — (Early
in  morning),  Pain  in  eyes,  etc.;  tearing  in  right  ear,  etc.;  bleeding  at  the
nose;  hawking  of  mucus  ;  weight  in  abdomen  ;  increased  urine ;  tearing  in
right  arm  ;  skin  of  finger-tips  wrinkled  ;  great  lassitude  in  legs ;  tearing  in
left  leg ;  stiffness  of  bend  of  knee  ;  great  weakness,  etc. — (Early  on  waking),
Tongue,  etc.,  numb  and  dry ;  dryness  of  mouth ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;
violent  erections. — (Early  after  waking),  Badly  smelling  breath ;  skin  feels
numb,  etc. ;  very  weary,  etc. — (Early,  in  bed),  Sense  of  pinching  in  hypo-
gastrium,  etc. ;  weakness ;  weariness. — (Early  after  rising).  Urgent  desire
to  urinate. — (Forenoon),  Vertigo ;  chilliness,  etc. — (Noon),  Tension  in  left
foot. — (Afternoon),  Vertigo;  vertigo,  etc.;  roaring  in  the  ear;  insipid
eructations  ;  had  to  lie -down,  etc. — (Evening),  Sort  of  anguish;  pressure  on
top  of  head,  etc. ;  stitches  towards  occiput ;  twitchings  of  face,  etc. ;  pain  in
hollow  tooth ;  sense  as  of  spoiled  stomach,  etc.;  twitchings  in  abdominal
muscles;  cutting  colic  ;  cough,  etc. ;  drawing  in  shoulder,  etc. ;  coldness  of
hands;  trembling  in  the  thumb  ;  stiffness  of  finger-joints ;  soreness  of  bends
of  knees;  heat. — (Evening  before  falling  asleep).  Tearing  in  fingers. —
(Eueninri,  in  bed).  Pain  in  molar  teeth ;  itching  of  legs ;  pressive  tearing
from  occiput  to  forehead.^(i\^i5'/ii),  P^ressure  below  pit  of  stomach ;  frequent
micturition;  profuse  leucorrhoea ;  cough ;  twitching  in  all  the  limbs,  etc. ;
right  arm  numb,  etc. ;  cramp  in  the  calves;  internal  chilliness  ;  sweat;  pro-
fuse moisture;  cannot  sleep;  headache;  uneasiness;  anxious  dreams. —
(Before  midnight).  Sleepiness. — (After  midnight),  General  perspiration  ;
pain  over  eyes;  uneasiness  in  the  occiput. — (On  waking  about  midnight).
Weakness;  nausea,  etc. — (Soon  after  midnight),  Wakes  with  distended
abdomen,  etc. — (After  midnight,  in  bed).  Cutting  colic. — (2  a.m.).  Long-
lasting  uneasiness,  etc. — -(Every  other  day),  Downward  pressing  pain  in  fore-
head.— (In  open  air).  Pain  in  hollow  tooth. — (  Walking  in  open  air),  Vertigo ;
heartburn,  etc. ;  palpitation  of  heart,  etc. ;  uneasiness  in  the  blood,  etc. —


AMMONIACUM.  249

(After  draught  of  air).  Sore  throat. — (After  breakfast),  Nausea. — (Blowing
reose),  Headache. — (Coughing),  Tlcklmg  in  throat,  etc. — (Before  dinner),
Slight  chills. — (During  dinner).  Tearing  in  back  part  of  throat,  etc. —
(After  dinner).  Anxiety;  pain  in  hollow  tooth  ;  pressure  in  pit  of  throat;
violent  eructations. — (Empty  deglutition),  Sore  throat. — (Drawing  abdo-
men in).  Stitching  pain  around  navel;  prickings  in  hypogastriura. —
(Drinking),  Tension  and  inflation  of  abdomen. — (After  eating).  Confusion
of  head. — (After  eructation).  Weakness  about  pit  of  stomach. — (After  evacua-
tion). Pressure  deep  in  hypogastriam. — (After  two  diarrhcea-like  evacuations'^,
Chilliness. — (Exertion),  Lancinating  and  cutting  headache. — (When  not
exercising  the  parts).  Stiffness  of  fiuger-joints,  etc. — (During  strong  expira-
tion). Pressure  in  right  chest. — (Lying  on  abdomen),  Pressure  in  epigas-
trium.— (Lying  on  back),  Sense  as  of  pinching  in  hypogastrium,  etc. —
(Daring  a  meal).  Feeling  of  contraction  in  salivary  glands,  etc. — (After  a
meal),  Shootings,  etc. ;  tension  and  inflation  of  abdomen. — (During  menses),
Left  leg  becomes  blue,  etc. — (Motion),  Confusion  of  the  head ;  stitches  in
small  ofback. — -(Moving  tongue).  Pain  in  throat. — (Music),  Rush  of  blood
to  head. — (Pressure from  without),  Sore  throat ;  prickings  in  hypogastrium.
— (After  rising).  Feels  like  fainting. — (After  rubbing  the  parts).  Soreness  of
legs,  etc. — (Sitting),  Stitches  in  small  of  back  ;  the  symptoms. — (Sitting
down).  Pressure  in  epigastrium. — (After  having  been  seated).  Pain  above
knees. — (After  hard  stool).  Burning  in  genital  organs. — (Slight  touch).  Pain
in  tip  of  left  thumb. — (After  ineffectual  urging),  Yiachmg  pain  in  hypo-
gastrium.— (When walking).  Tension  in  thigh;  pain  in  articulation  of  left
foot ;  pain  in  heel. — (After  a  walk).  Burning  in  genital  organs.

Amelioration. — (  Walking  in  open  air),  Pressure  on  epigastrium  ;  the
symptoms;  headache. — (Taking  dinner).  Chilliness,  etc. — (After  eating).
Oppression  of  chest,  etc. — (Eructation),  Pressure  and  burning  below  pit  of
stomach  ;  cutting  in  epigastrium ;  aching  in  chest. — (After  lying  doimi),
Headache. — (Lying  upon  bach),  Tearing  in  small  of  back.^(^/i!er  a  meal).
Drawing  pain  in  teeth. — (Pressure),  Pain  in  tip  of  left  thumb ;  tingling  in
tip  of  thumb. — (Rising  from  bed),  Sense  of  pinching  in  hypogastrium,  etc. —
(Rubbing),  Itching  and  biting  of  the  rectum. — (During  sleep).  Accumula-
tion of  flatus,  etc. — (Touch),  Pain  in  region  of  liver. — (  Walking),  Lassitude.

AMMONIACUM.

Dorenia  ammoniacum,  Don.  Nat.  order,  Umbelliferse.  Common  names,
Gum  ammoniac;  (Persian),  Oschak  or  Kandal.  Preparation,  Trituration
of  the  gum,  or  solution  in  water.

Authorities.^  la,  32  grains  in  3  ounces  of  water;  lb,  same  repeated;  Ic,
effects  of  fumes  of  the  fluid  distilled  from  the  gum;  2,  woman,  42  years
old,  30-40  drops  aqueous  .solution;  3,  man,  26  years  old,  12-18  grains ;  4,
"A,"  1-30  grains,  triturated;  5,  "B,"  2-15  grains  in  substance;  6,  Jiihnel,
1-40  grains;  7,  Wichmann ;  8,  Stieglitz.

Mind. — A  melancholy  mood,  continued  for  several  days,^  o. — The
whole  day  through,  he  was  uncomfortable  and  in  a  melancholy  mood,'  b. —
During  the  day,  he  was  in  a  gloomy  state  of  mind,°. — He  is  uneasy  and

t  Nos.  1  to  5,  Buchner's  provings,  Hygea,  13,  212  and  22,  264  (translated  in
Shipman's  Journal);  No.  6,  Inaugural  Dissprtiition,  Leipzig,  1837  (A.  H,  Z.,.12,
230) ;  No.  7,  in  Hufeland's  Journal,  1800  (A.  H.  Z.,  9,  287) ;  8,  in  Burgrave  de  Aere,
etc.


250  AMMONIACUM.

uncomfortable,  and,  whether  walking  or  sitting,  is  out  of  humor,^6. — Ill-
humored,''. — Morose  temper,^ — Incapacity  for  mental  exertion,".- — Disincli-
nation for  anything,".

Head.— In  afternoon,  a  slight  sensation  of  confusion  of  the  head,^. —
[10.]  In  the  evening,  there  was  confusion  of  the  head,  which  incapacitated
him  for  labor,'  a. — Somewhat  increased  confusion  of  the  head,  after  some
hours,  and  sleepiness,  with  a  sensation  as  if  bruised  in  the  limbs,  and  pains,
continuing  half  an  hour,  in  the  course  of  the  crural  nerve,^ — While  read-
ing, he  was  attacked  with  vertigo,  which  passed  into  a  headache,  and
continued  into  the  night,". — Heaviness  of  the  head,' 6. — Violent  headache
(day  and  night),". — The  stitching  pains  pressing  through  the  head  were
very  distressing;  these  pains  continued,  with  but  little  intermission,  through
the  whole  day,^. — Later,  the  forehead  was  confused,  with  weakness  of  sight
and  heaviness  in  the  loins,'  a. — Pressive  pains  in  the  whole  forehead  and
over  the  eyes  (shortly  after  taking;  lasts  all  day),". — Pressive  pain  in  the
whole  bead,  especially  in  the  supraorbital  region  and  occiput  (at  midday),".
— Pains  were  observed  in  a  few  hours  through  the  whole  forehead ;  in-
creased all  day  till  evening,  and  prevented  any  intellectual  labor  (after  26
grains),". — Aching  in  the  forehead,'  a. — [20,]  Aching  in  the  forehead,  with
confusion  of  the  whole  head,  and  such  drowsiness  that  any  effort  or  labor
was  utterly  impossible,". — Aching  in  right  half  of  forehead  (10  o'clock),' o.
— Transient,  stitching  pains-  in  left  temporal  region  (in  one  hour),* — Tear-
ings  in  left  side  of  head,'  b. — Late  in  evening,  drawing  in  left  zygoma,
extending  to  temples,' o. — A  furry  sensation  (Pilzigkeitsgefriihl)  at  the
occiput,'  a. — Stitching  upon  the  occiput,  where  the  hairs  ceased ;  under
the  hair,  pustules  were  formed,'  6. — Where  the  hair  ceases,  isolated  pus-
tules,' b. — Frequently  returning  stitches,  as  from  a  knife,  in  the  middle  of
the  hairy  scalp,^ — Prickling  in  hairy  scalp,  returning  next  day;  also  in
upper  half  of  eyeball,^ — [30.]  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp  (more  in  the  ver-
tex and  below),  requiring  him  to  scratch,' 6. — Itching  of  hairy  scalp  more
severe  than  before,^ — Itching  in  hairy  scalp  of  occiput  on  left  side,'  b.

Eyes. — The  eyes  seem  dry  to  him,  with  sensation  as  if  there  were  a
foreign  body  between  the  left  upper  eyelid  and  the  eyeball,' 6. — Pressure
on  the  eyes,  and  a  dull  stitching,  especially  when  stooping,*. — Aching  over
eyes  and  in  forehead,  rather  stronger  in  temporal  region,  continuing  nearly
the  whole  day,  but  moderately,  being  somewhat  relieved  after  dinner,". —
The  pain  in  eye  was  less ;  drawing,  stitching,*. — Aching  in  upper  part  of
eye,'  b. — Morning,  on  waking,  purulent  matter  in  the  inner  canthi  of  both
eyes,  but  especially  the  right,*. — Sensation  of  a  swelling  under  the  tarsus,
as  if  a  little  gland  were  swollen,  though  the  finger  could  not  detect  any,*.
— [40,]  Pricking  throbbing  in  left  upper  eyelid,  which  returned  the  next
day,  followed  by  aching,'  a. — Continual  dull  stitching  pain  in  right  lower
eyelid,  much  increased  by  moving  the  eyelids,  touching  them,  or  stooping;
externally,  no  change  apparent,*.: — The  pains  in  the  lower  eyelids  had  en-
tirely disappeared ;  only,  in  the  right  one,  a  small  hardened  pellicle  might
be  felt,*. — He  cannot  read  without  straining  the  eyes,'  6.— Such  a  cloudi-
ness before  eyes  that  things  which  previously  could  be  recognized  from  the
room  without  difficulty,  seemed  now  as  if  enveloped  in  a  cloud,". — Blind-
ness in  evening,*. — Dimness  and  obscuration  of  sight  in  evening,  amount-
ing almost  to  blindness ;  stars  and  fiery  points  moved  with  the  eyes,'. — Dim-
ness of  sight  in  the  evening,  and  especially  in  the  morning  after  rising,  with
increased  warmth  in  the  eyes,'  a. — The  daylight  hurt  his  eyes,  although  the
sky  was  overcast/  a. — Before  the  eyes,  a  cloud  of  dust  was  constantly  wav-


AMMONIACUM.  251

ing,°. — [50.]  It  seemed  as  if  dust  floated  before  the  eyes  (which  were  heavy
from  sleeping),  and  moved  hither  and  thither;  at  the  same  time  there  was
pressure  upon  the  orbital  region,^ — Beams  of  light  and  sparks  proceeding
from  the  eyes,  and  a  burning  bright  light,  surrounded  by  brilliant  colored
rings,  while  others  saw  things  as  through  a  thick  mist  or  cloud  of  dust,  at
evening,'.

EuTS. — Deepseated  tearings  in  right  external  auditory  passage,'  h. —
Single  transient  stitches  in  right  ear,\^Separate  stitches  in  right  ear,^. —
Fleeting  stitches  in  right  ear,  at  noon,*. — There  was  a  humming  perceived
in  ears,  which  continued  but  a  short  time,^ — Humming  in  ear,  so  violent
as  to  injure  the  hearing,". — Clinking  in  left  ear,  while  scratching  the  occi-
put (at  10  P.M.),' 6.

Nose. — Increased  secretion  of  mucus  from  nose  (immediately  after),' 5.
— [60.]  Frequent  sneezing,'  b,  ". — Profuse  mucous  discharge  from  the
nose,".

Face. — Her  countenance  changed,  and  she  became  quite  pale,l — The
lips  were  dry,  and  he  experienced  a  burning  sensation,^.

JHoiith. — Dull,  stitching,  jerking  pains  in  the  two  left  lower  incisors
(which  were  sound),  at  7  o'clock,*. — Profuse  saliva,'. — Short  rheumatic
stitches  in  left  eyetooth,*. — Dry  roughness  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  gums,
with  slight  aching  in  pit  of  stomach,*. — Thin  yellowish  coating  on  tongue,'.
— Yellow-coated  tongue  and  bitter  taste,^ — [70.]  Dry  roughness  of  the
point  of  the  tongue  and  the  gums,*. — Nose,  mouth,  and  throat  distressingly
dry  (on  awaking),'. — Clayey  taste,'  6. — Bitter  taste  in  mouth  (immediate-
ly),^ — Bitter,  rank  taste,*. — Flat  taste  in  mouth,  somewhat  sweetish,'. — No
taste  in  forepart  of  tongue,  but  nauseating,  bitter  in  pharynx;  disappears
after  eating  (soon  after  taking),".

Throat,— Sensation  of  fulness  extending  up  into  the  throat  (10  a.m.),' a.
— A  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  throat  and  gullet,  almost  inducing  nausea,'  a.
— Sensation  in  throat  and  oesophagus  of  scraping  and  burning  (16  to  24
grains),". — [80.]  Soon  after  taking,  scraping  sensation  in  the  oesophagus,^
— Sensation  as  if  something  were  sticking  deep  in  the  throat,  making
it  necessary  to  swallow,'  b. — Stitching  from  the  region  of  the  right  submax-
illary glands,  extending  into  the  mouth,'  6. — Slight  roughness  of  the
throat,'  b. — In  the  throat,  a  roughness  and  dryness  was  present,*. — After
swallowing,  sensation  in  throat,  as  from  dry  cough,".

Stomach. — Eructations,*. — Violent  eructations  (soon  after),*. — Occa-
sional eructations  of  a  resinous  odor,*.— Eructations  of  a  strong,  resinous,
bitter  taste  (immediately  after  12  grains),*. — [90.]  Increasing  nausea,^ —
Nausea,  almost  vomiting  (soon  after  taking),". — Aching  in  stomach  (imme-
diately),*.— After  supper,  aching  in  stomach,*. — Sensation  of  heat  and  slight
burning  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  occupying  a  space  as  large  as  a  child's
head,*. — Sensation  of  warmth  and  aching  in  pit  of  stomach,*. — Aching  in
pit  of  stomach*.

Abdomen. — Transient  stitches  under  the  ribs  and  above  the  navel,
chiefly  at  the  left  side,*. — Transient  stitching  pains  under  right  short  ribs,
at  9  o'clock,*. — At  8  a.m.,  sevei-al  transient  fine  stitches  under  the  right
short  ribs,  returning  at  noon  and  in  the  evening,*. — [100.]  Fine  transient
stitches  under  the  right  short  ribs,  in  the  osecal  region,  and,  after  rising,  in
the  right  ear  also,*. — For  nearly  an  hour  after  taking,  transient  short
stitches  under  short  ribs,  on  left  side,  and  similar  pains  between  the  su-
perior and  anterior  spinous  processes  of  the  ilium  and  left  side  of  navel,*.
— On  waking  in  the  morning,  dull,  stitching,  fleeting  pains  under  the  short


252  AMMONIACUM.

ribs;  similar  pains  in  csecal  region,*. — Half  an  hour  after  dinner,  slight
transient  cutting  pain  about  the  navel,*. — Aching  and  tension,  as  if  pressed
together,  about  the  navel,  continuing  only  a  few  rninutes  (in  half  an  hour),*.
— Aching  and  tension  below  the  navel,  on  the  left  side,  from  which  was
developed  a  peculiar,  dull,  stitching  (apparently  superficial)  pain,*. — Dull,
stitching,  transient  pains  between  the  crest  of  the  left  ilium  and  the  navel,
immediately  ;  and  subsequently  similar  pains  in  the  csecal  region,*.— Dull,
stitching,  jerking  pain  in  the  region  of  the  osecum,  disappearing  again  after
some  minutes ;  returning  on  change  of  posture,  and  especially  when  inclin-
ing towards  the  left  side,  when  lying,*. — Transient  return  of  the  pain  in
the  caecum,*. — Fleeting,  dull,  stitching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  caecum,  but
less  than  the  day  before,*. — Single,  fleeting  stitches  in  the  caecal  region  at
7.30  o'clock,*. — [110.]  Pains  similar  to  the  previous  caecal  pains,  and  at  a
corresponding  point  on  the  left  side,  some  minutes  later,*. — After  1  p.m.,
there  was  great  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  for  half  hour,^ — Rumblings
in  abdomen,  with  confusion  in  forehead,'  b. — -Soon  after  taking,  passage  of
strong-smelling  flatus,*. — In  morning,  copious  discharge  of  sour-smelling
flatus,^ — At  night,  unusually  free  discharge  of  wind,*. — After  some  hours,
slight  pains  in  abdomen,^ — Slight  pains  in  belly,  with  borborygn:lus,^ —
Chilliness,  and  wandering  pains  in  abdomen,  followed  by  an  abundant
mucous  stool ;  at  the  same  time  there  was  also  a  mucous  discharge  from  nose,
with  frequent  sneezing,  and  mucous  expectoration  (prover  was  at  that  time
suffering  from  a  coryza),". — Slight  griping  in  belly,'  6. — [120.]  Violent  cut-
ting colic  (two  ho^lrs),^ — Colic-like  pains  ensued  in  afternoon,  but  were
transient,\ — The  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  and  the  sensation  of  aching
and  heaviness  in  pubic  region,  seemed  to  alternate,*.— The  peculiar,  dull,
stitching,  caecal  pains,  alternating  with  a  similar  pain  in  the  corresponding
part  of  the  left  side,*. — Rheumatic  pain  in  left  side  of  .pelvis,'  b. — Distress-
ing pain  in  region  of  pubiir,'  b. — Heaviness  and  aching  in  the puhio  region*.
— Repeated  stitching  in  right  groin,  almost  in  the  spermatic  cords,  return-
ing in  the  evening  (after  12  o'clock),' a. — The  pain  in  the  course  of  the
crural  nerve,  extending  itself  towards  the  inguinal  ring  and  the  spermatic
cord,^ — Itching  in  right  groin,'  b. — [130.]  Jerking,  drawing  in  left  groin,*.
— Drawing  pains  about  the  lower  abdomen,".

Stool  and  Anus. — Pressure  on  rectum  while  sitting,'  a. — Soft  stool,^
— Soft  stool,  accompanied  by  much  flatus,  after  rumbling  in  the  bowels,' 6.
— After  9  a.m.,  very  unsatisfactory  soft  stool,'  b. — A  soft  evacuation  after
partaking  of  fruit,  yet  without  any  sufficient  inclination,*. — Stool  soft,  but
without  straining,*. — Soft  stool  of  dark-brown  faeces,*. — In  morning,  a  pappy
stool,'  b. — [140.]  After  dinner,  at  1.30,  he  had  a  pappy,  fecal  stool,  having
had  an  insufficient  one  in  the  morning,'  b. — After  1  p.m.,  several  pappy
stools,^ — In  afternoon,  a  pappy  stool  ensued,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,^ —
Next  day  (after  26  grains),  the  stools  were  sometimes  fluid,". — Profuse  di-
arrhoea mucosa  (two  hours),". — Two  copious  stool s,*.^Profuse  mucous  stool
(follows  the  chilliness  and  pains  in  lower  abdomen),". — Hard,  sluggish
stool,*. — Difficult  stool ;  even  when  there  was  a  slight  sensation  of  urging  to
stool,  the  rectum  was  so  inactive  that  the  stool  was  only  effected  by  much
effort,  and  with  interruptions,*. — The  alvine  evacuations  were  diminished,
while  the  urinary  discharge  was  increased  ;  at  the  same  time  the  pain  in
the  pubic  region,  at  first  but  slight,  became  quite  severe,^ — [150.]  Stool
delayed  till  evening,'  b. — Not  till  evening  did  his  bowels  move  (contrary
to  his  usual  custom),'  b. — The  stools  were  delayed  two  or  three  days,  and
were  of  firm  consistence  (after  twelve  days),'. — Constipation,*.


AMMONIACUM.  253

Urinary  Organs. — Burning  at  orifice  of  urethra,  diminishing  in-
teriorly/ &.— Several  fleeting  stitches  through  the  fossa  navicularis,*. — In-
crease of  urine  and  sweat,  but  diminished  alvine  evacuations,'. — For  a
couple  of  days,  after  urinating,  some  drops  of  urine  were  still  discharged,'  h.
— The  urine  passed  contained  much  lactate  of  urea,'  b. — Absence  of  lactic
acid  and  lactate  of  urea  from  the  urine,*. — [160.]  The  marked  acid  reaction
of  the  urine,  which  continued  for  several  days,  arose  from  the  surplus  of
uric  acid,  which  was  deposited  for  some  time,*. — The  urine  also  contained
much  mucus,*. — After  a  few  days,  many  torulce  were  formed,*. — Albumen
was  not  present,*. — Even  when  cold,  the  urine  had  a  peculiar  smell,  and
was  more  pungent  than  natural ;  while  evaporating,  also,  it  gave  forth  a
peculiar  odor,*.

Sexual  Organs. — Stitches  at  the  root  of  the  petois,'6. — Painful
drawing  in  spermatic  cord,\— Severe  stitches  in  the  spermatic  cord,  and  in
the  left  pubic  region,^ — In  evening,  drawing  pain  along  the  spermatic
cord,^ — Constant  drawing  in  right  spermatic  cord,' 6. — [170.]  Disagreeable
drawing  in  right  spermatic  cord,*.— -Stitching  in  right  spermatic  cord  while
waiking,l — Late  in  evening,  stitching  in  right  spermatic  cord,'  a. — Slight
pains  in  left  spermatic  cord,  at  eleven  o'clock,*. — ^Drawing  in  region  of  left
spermatic  cord  frequently  returning,'  b. — Dull,  aching  drawing  in  testicles,
for  some  minutes,*.

Respiratory  Apparatus.— Occasional  tickling  in  air-passages,
which,  however,  does  not  induce  cough,". — ^Hoarse  voice,".-'— Peculiar  sensa-
tion in  the  throat  that  induces  a  cough,  soon  after  taking ;  relieved  after
eating,^ — For  three  days  past,  in  morning,  coughing  up  of  a  slight,  soluble,
thickish  mucus  from  the  larynx,*. — [180,]  Expectoration  mucous,  and
more  copious  than  usual  (day  after  twenty-six  grains),^ — Respiration  ac-
celerated,^ ". — For  many  days  the  respiration  is  shorter  and  more  in  the
upper  part  of  the  lung.^,  but  accompanied  with  no  other  unpleasant  sensa-
tion than  anxiety  and  discomfort,'  b.

Chest. — Pain  in  chest,^. — -Some  constriction  of  chest,  with  pain  (in  one
hour),''. — Constriction  of  lower  half  of  left  breast,  and  soon  after  a  deep-
seated  pain  there,^— -Some  oppression  of  chest,  with  stitches  in  left  half  of
chest,  when  inspiring,". — Slight  jerking  stitches  about  the  short  ribs  on  left
side,  more  towards  the  anterior  surface  of  the  breast,*. — Anxiety  and  op-
pression of  chest  (in  a  phthisical  person  who  had  formerly  spit  blood),".

Heart  and  Pulse. — In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  violent  pal-
pitation in  the  chest  and  carotids  (the  stroke  of  the  heart  was  stronger  and
more  vigorous,  but  not  more  rapidthan  usual),  which  made  it  difficult  to
get  to  sleep,*. — [190.]  In  the  evening)  palpitations  and  restless  sleep,*. —
Strong,  distressing  throbbing  of  the  heart,  which  extended  itself  belo^  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  at  night  when  going  to  bed  ;  it-  was  more  violent  when
lying  on  the  back,  or  on  the  left  side ;  less  when  lying  on  right  side ;  pre-
venting sleep  for  a  long  time,*. — At  night,  when  lying  down,  throbbing  of
the  heart  and  arteries ;  unusual  weariness  of  the  eyes  after  reading,*. —
Pulse  more  frequent,^. — The  pulse  was  evidently  accelerated,^. — ^The  pulse
somewhat  quick,  frequent,  and  hard,". — The  pulse  was  small  and  tense,
without  being  accelerated,'  a. — Pulse  tense,^.

Week  and  Sack. — Heaviness  and  aching  at  the  end  of  the  lumbar
vertebrse,'  b. — Fleeting  stitches  in  left  lumbar  region,  increased  when  ex-
piring,'.

Extremities  in  General. — [200.]  Weariness  of  extremities,'  a. —
Heaviness  of  the  limbs  (in  evening),'  a. — Repeated  tearing  pains  in  wrists


254  AMMONIACUM.

and  ankles/. — Before  he  went  to  bed  he  experienced  tearing,  but,  for  the
most  part,  very  fleeting  pains  in  the  right  shoulder,  knee,  and  ankle ;  also
in  the  left  tarsal  bones,  but  less  severe,*. — Pains,  like  rheumatic  pains,  were
felt  in  the  left  shoulder,  the  knee,  and  right  ankle,^

Upper  Extremities, — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  whole  right  arm,
about  twelve  o'clock,^  b. — Single,  rheumatic,  fleeting  pains  in  the  right
arm,  now  at  one  point,  now  at  another,*. — Sensation  in  right  arm,  as  if
bruised  (principally  above  the  elbow),'  a. — Tensive,  aching,  transient,  dull,
itching  pain  on  fleshy  part  of  extensors  of  right  arm  and  elbow-joint,'. —
Sensation  of  paralysis  in  left  arm,'. — [210.]  Stitching  in  shoulder  and  ax-
illa, extending  down  to  the  elbow,  during  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,\ — Rheu-
matic pain  in  right  shoulder,*. — Acute  stitches  in  the  right  shoulder,'  h. —
Stitching  and  tearing  in  left  shoulder,'  6. — Stitching  in  left  shoulder-joint,'.
— Pricking  in  left  shoulder-joint,  extending  over  the  deltoid  muscle,  almost
disappearing  when  pressing  upon  it,' 6. — In  the  evening,  stitches  in  the
glands  of  the  right  axilla,'  c. — Dull,  drawing  pains  in  right  deltoid  muscle,
at  9  A.M.,*. — Drawing  and  tearing  in  right  wrist,'  b. — Sensation  as  if  bruised
in  left  wrist;  afterwards,  in  the  right  also,' n. — [220.]  Short,  rheumatic
pains  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  right  hand,  in  elbow,  and  shoulder,*.
— Rheumatic  pain  in  the  index-finger  of  the  left  hand,'  b. — Drawing  in
right  middle  fingers,'  a.

Lower  Extremities. — At  evening,  weariness  in  both  hip-joints  for
several  hours,*. — Stitching  in  right  hip-joint,  while  sitting  (10  a.m.),'  a. —
Next  day,  before  nine  o'clock,  he  experienced,  while  walking,  acute  stitch-
ing pain,  somewhat  above  the  right  hip-joint,  almost  compelling  him  to
limp ;  the  pain,  which  chiefly  occurred  when  sitting  bent  up,  diminished
during  the  day,  and  by  morning  disappeared  almost  entirely,'  c. — Sensation
of  uneasiness  in  right  trochanter  major,*. — Dull,  drawing  pain  in  right  tro-
chanter, at  4  P.M.,  continuing  an  hour,*. — From  3.50  to  5.30  p.m.,  dull
stitching  pain  in  right  trochanter  major,  with  weariness  of  leg,*. — In  even-
ing, drawing  pain  in  right  trochanter  and  left  knee,". — [230.]  Sensation  of  '
weariness  in  right  thigh,". — Jerking  pain  in  left  thigh,  in  the  course  of  the
crural  nerve  (in  evening),'. — Undefinable  pains  in  the  left  knee,'  h. — At  9
P.M.,  while  sitting,  a  sensation  as  if  the  left  knee  were  swollen,  with  in-
creased heat  of  the  knee,  and  pricking  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,'  h. — Ten-
sion in  the  right  knee-joint,  when  walking,' 6. — Towards  morning,  there
was  stitching  in  the  left  side  of  right  knee,'  a. — Constant  stitching  and  ach-
ing on  the  left  leg,  at  the  left  knee,  at  the  protuberance  of  the  tibia,'  b. —
Pain  in  right  leg,  above  the  knee,  which  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  walk,'  b.
— The  pain  below  the  knee  returned  again  when  walking,'  b. — Tearing  pain
in  right  shin,'  b. — [240.]  Tearing  pain  in  both  ankles,'. — Pressure  above
the  right  ankle,'  b. — Late  in  the  evening,  cracking  in  the  left  ankle,  when
moving,'  a. — Painful  drawing  in  left  foot,*. — Pain  in  middle  of  sole  of  left
foot,'  b. — Heaviness  in  right  sole,  so  that  be  trips  up  when  going  upstairs,'  h. —
Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,'  a. — Burning  in  left  meta-
tarsus,' 6. — Pricking  and  burning  in  left  metatarsus,'  6. — Repeated  pricking
in  right  metatarsus,' 6. — [250.]  JPricking  below  the  right  metatarsus,' 6. —
Burning,  then,  flve  minutes  after,  stitching  in  right  great  toe,' 6. — Gouty
pains  in  left  great  toe,  so  that  he  cannot  walk ;  this  is  repeated  several
times,' 6.— About  10  A.M.,  drawing  in  the  middle  toe  of  left  foot,' a. —
Stitches  in  the  little  toe  of  the  left  foot,  at  the  left  of  the  joint,  where  the
skin  was  somewhat  thickened,'  b.

Gfen^ralities. — Pulsation  and  restlessness  in  whole  body,  not  per-


AMMONIACUM.  255

mitting  him  to  go  to  sleep  at  night,  though  he  had  drank  less  than  usual,*.
— Weariness,  even  upon  the  least  motion,' 6. — Weary,  and  as  if  beaten,^
— Immediately  upon  rising  he  felt  a  sluggishness  and  drowsiness,  with  de-
pression of  spirits,  which  manifested  itself  in  the  body  as  heaviness  and
weariness,'  a. — Great  lassitude,  without  having  really  become  previously
fatigued  ;  the  limbs  feeling  as  if  bruised,^ — [260.]  Discomfort,'  b. — Stitch-
ing in  various  parts  of  the  body,  on  the  left  great  toe,  on  the  left  knee,  in
the  chest,  but  not  continuing  long  in  the  same  place  (in  evening),'  a. — Here
and  there  fermentation,'  a. — Dryness  of  mouth  and  oppression  of  chest,
worse  early  in  moruing,^

Skin. — On  left  side  of  occiput,  where  hair  ceased,  vesicles  presented
themselves,  compelling  him  to  scratch,  and  disappearing  again  till  evening;
the  same  thing  occurred  in  the  beard,  on  the  right  side  of  the  face,  where
he  noticed  only  one  vesicle,'  e. — Itching  returning  in  the  evening,'  b.

Fever. — Chills,  running  from  feet  up  over  the  back,  at  half  past  ten
o'clock,*. — Chilliness,  half  an  hour  after  dinner,  at  one  o'clock,  extending
from  feet  up  over  back,*. — Disposition  to  sweat,'-  a  °.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Frequent  yawning,  which  brought  tears  into
his  eyes,'  a. — [270.]  Soon  after  soft  stool,  yawning,  because  the  stomach
felt  empty,'  a. — Great  drowsineSi,". — -Drowsiness,^  a  °. — After  a  dose  of  nine
grains,  the  confusion,  heaviness,  and  pain  in  head  were  so  combined  with
drowsiness  that  all  inclination  to  labor  disappeared,^ — He  got  to  sleep
late,'  b. — Although  great  drowsiness  had  continued  through  the  whole  day
he  did  not  get  to  sleep  till  late  at  night ;  the  sleep  was  disturbed,  as  every
time  he  dropped  to  sleep  he  was  awakened  by  frightful  dreams,  and  it  was
a  long  time  before  he  could  get  to  sleep  again, ^ — The  severest  headache
continued  through  the  night,  and  prevented  sleep  (after  thirty  grains),". —
Great  weariness,  and  sensation  as  if  bruised,  which  prevented  sleep  for  a
long  time,^ — Restlessness  and  pulsations  after  going  to  bed,  not  allowing
him  to  sleep  for  a  long  time,*. — Restless  sleep,^. — ^280.]  Sleep,  during  whole
night,  restless,  interrupted,  and  unrefreshing,' o. — He  was  restless  at  night,
woke  often,  and  dreamed  much,'  a. — The  sleep  was  often  interrupted,^.^
Sleep  as  quiet  as  usual,  but  woke  up  occasionally,^.— Although  he  did  not
go  to  bed  till  about  twelve,  his  sleep  was  much  interrupted  till  three  o'clock,
but  after  that  he  did  not  sleep  at  all,'  b. — Sleep  full  of  dreams  (inter-
rupted),' b. — Many  dreams  at  night,  though  the  sleep  was  not  much  dis-
turbed by  them,*. — Fell  asleep  again  (after  taking,  at  4  a.m.),  and  had
many  dreams,*. — Many  confused  dreams,*. — Continued  dreams,". — [290.]
At  night,  many  confused  dreams  and  restless  sleep,*. — His  restless  sleep  was
full  of  dreams,  which  he  remembered,  but  which  were  not  disagreeable,'  6.
— Sleep  uneasy  ;  dreams  distressing,'  b.

Conditions, — Aggravations. — {Morning),  Discharge  of  flatus ;  pappy
stool ;  coughing  up  mucus. — (Morning  on  waking),  Purulent  matter  in  inner
canthi,  etc.;  dull  pains  under  short  ribs,  etc. — -(Immediately  on  rising).
Sluggishness,  etc. — (Morning  after  rising).  Dimness  of  sight. — (Noon),
Stitches  in  right  ear.— (Afternoon),  Slight  confusion  of  head;  pappy  stool,
etc. ;  colic-like  pain ;  weariness  in  both  hip-joints,  etc. — (Evening),  Con-
fusion of  head,  etc.;  blindness;  dimness  of  sight;  stitch  in  right  groin;
drawing  pain  along  spermatic  cord;  palpitation,  etc.;  heaviness  of  limbs;
stitches  in  glands  of  right  axilla;  drawing  pain  in  right  trochanter,  etc.;
jerking  pain  in  left  thigh ;  stitching  in  various  parts,  etc ;  itching  returning.
— (Late  in  Evening),  Drawing  in  left  zygoma,  etc. ;  stitching  in  right  sper-
matic cord  ;  cracking  in  left  ankle. — (Evening,  after  lying  down),  Palpita-


256 AMMONIUM  ACETICUM— AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

tion  in  chest,  etc. ;  {Night),  Discharge  of  wind  ;  restlessness;  many  dreams.
— {Night,  when  going  to  bed),  Throbbing  of  the  heart,  etc. — {Towards  morn-
ing). Stitching  in  right  knee. — (8  a.m.),  Fine  stitches  in  right  short  ribs. — '
(9  A.M.),  Pains  in  right  deltoid  muscle. — {About  10  a.m.),  Drawing  in  left
toe. — {After  1  p.m.),  Rumbling  in  abdomen,  etc. — (3.50  to  5.30  p.m.),  Dull
pain  in  right  trochanter. — (4  p.m.).  Pain  in  right  trochanter." — (9  p.m.,
while  sitting),  Sensation  as  if  left  knee  swollen,  etc. — {Sitting  bent  up),  Acute
pain  above  hip-joint.^ — -{Bending  to  left  side,  when  lying),  Dull  pain  in  region
oi  csetiUin.^-{Afier  dinner).  Pain  about  navel;  pappy  fecal  stool. — {Expira-
tion), Stitches  in  left  lumbar  region. — {After  eating  fndt),  Soft  evacuation,
etc. — {When  inspiring).  Oppression  of  chest,  etc. — {Lying  on  left  side),
Throbbing  of  heart,  etc. — {Lying  on  back).  Throbbing  of  heart,  etc. —
{Moving),  Crack  in  left  ankle. — {Moving  eyelid),  Pain  in  right  lower  eye-
lid.— {Change  of  Posture),  Dull  pain  in  region  of  esecum. — {While  read-
ing). Vertigo,  etc. — {After  reading).  Weariness  of  eyes. — {After .rising).
Stitches  in  right  ear. — (  While  sitting).  Pressure  upon  rectum ;  stitching  in
right  hip-joint. — {Stooping),  Pressure  on  eyes,  etc.;  stitching  pain  in  right
lower  eyelid. — {After  supper).  Aching  in  stomach. — {Totiching  eyelids).
Stitching  pain  in  right  lower  lid. — {  While  waLktng),  Stitch  in  right  sper-
matic cord ;  tension  in  right  knee-joint ;  pa'in  below  knee.

A.melloration. — {Early  in  morning),  Dryness  of  mouth,  etc. — {After
dinner).  Aching  over  eyes,  etc. — {Half  an  hour  after  dinner,  at  one  o'clock).
Chilliness. — {Lying  on  right  side).  Throbbing  of  the  heart,  etc. — {Pressure),
Pricking  in  left  shoulder,  etc. — {Soon  after  soft  stool).  Yawning.


AMMONIUM  ACETICUM.

Chemical  formula,  C^HjO^NH^.  Preparation,  The  aqueous  solution  known
as  "  Spiritus  Mindereri "  has  been  employed.

Authorities.  Wibmer's  experiments  with  repeated  doses  of  the  "  spiritus  "
diluted  with  water.

Scraping  in  the  throat. — Increased  warmth  in  the  abdomen. — Increased
warmth  of  the  skin,  especially  in  the  face. — Heaviness  in  the  head.— Causes
profuse  urine  which  contains  sugar  ;  Larrey  (in  Med.  Chir.  Treatise),  (old).


AMMONIUM  BENZOICUM.

Chemical  formula,  C,H50(NH^)0. Preparation  for  use.  Solution  in  water.

Authority. Wibmer's  provings,  two  to  twenty  grains  in  solution.

Increased  frequency  of  the  pulse. — Increased  mucous  secretion  in  the
larynx,  causes  frequent  hawking  and  spitting. — Increased  warmth  in  the
stomach,  slight. — Slight  discomfort  in  the  stomach. — Pain  across  the  sac-
rum, with  urgency  to  stool.  ,


AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

Chemical  formula,  NH,Br. Preparation,  Triturations.

Authorities.  A.  M.  Cushing,  provings  in  Trans.  Am.  Inst,  of  Horn.,
1870.  1,  first  dec.  trit.,  repeated  doses  up  to  20  grains,  then  stopped  2,
second  dec.  trit.,  first  day,  25  grains ;  second  day,  25  grains,  three  times ;


AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.  257.

fourth  day,  75  grains;  seventh  day,  100  grains;  eleventh  day,  50  grains.
3,  third  dec.  trit.,  first  day,  50  grains ;  second  day,  50  grains  and  100  grains ;
third  day,  25  grains.

times  during  da.y  felt  as  if  a  band  was  tied  around  head  above  ears,  pressing
hai-dest  just  above  the  ears'  (third  and  fourth  days),^ — Pain  in  right  side
of  head,  near  the  eye,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it  (second  day),'. —
Sharp  pain  in  left  side  of  head,  near  the  eye  (daily),'.

Ej)es. — Much  redness  between  orbit  and  inner  canthi ;  looks  as  if  a
membrane  were  growing  over  it  (fifth  day),'. — Pain  around  both  eyes,  into
head  (fourth  day),'. — Pain  around  orbits  (fifth  day),'. — Eyes  feel  badly
to-day,  though  awake  but  an  hour  an4  a  half  last  night  (sixth  day),''.— In
evening  eyes  feel  very  large,  with  constant  blue  before  them  (sixth  day),^
— [10.]  Right  eye  feels  large  and  smarts;  he  has  to  wear  a  shade  in  the
evening,  to  read  or  write  (sixth  day),'. — Eyes  smart  (fifth  day),^ — Eyes
smart  in  evening,  but  have  not  during  the  day  (fifth  day),'. — Eyes  sore
(ninth  day),l — Eyes  feel  sore,  and  as  if  sand  in  them  (third  day),l — Both
eyes  sore  and  very  red  (ninth  day),'. — la  morning,  eyes  red  and  sore,  with
white  mucus  in  corners ;  left  eve  worse  (second  day),^ — Right  eye  sore
(sixth  day),'. — Right  eye  feels  as  if  bathed  in  hot  water  (3  p.m.),  (fifth
day), I — Right  eye  full  of  white  stringy  muaas  (fifth  and  sixth  days),'. — [20.]
Lids  swollen  (sixth  day),'. — Every  evening  eyelids  droop,  and  it  is  difficult
and  painful  to  raise  them  (third  day),'. — Lids  stuck  together  in  moving
(seventh  day),'. — Eyes  stuck  together  (sixth  day),''. — Mucus  on  eyelashes
(third  day),l — In  evening  eyeballs  feel  large  and  sore  (fourth  day),^

EaTH, — Sharp  pain  in  lower  portion  of  left  ear,  extending  to  cheek  and
neck  (8  p.m.),  (third  day),'.

Nose. — Nose  stopi)ed  up ;  then  discharge  of  clear  fluid  (second  day),'.
— Occasional  discharge  of  watery  fluid  from  left  nostril  (fourth  day),l

Mouth.— TongaB  very  sore,  as  if  burnt ;  cannot  talk  or  read  without
pain,'. — [30.]  Tongue  sore  on  top,  both  sides  and  tip  (eighth  day),'. — Tongue
stiff  and  sore,'. — In  morning,  tongue  dry,  sore,  and  stiff,'. — Biting  sensation
on  left  side  of  tip  of  tongue,'. — In  morning,  tongue  smarts  severely,  as  if  just
burned  ("second  day),',  etc. — Tongue  feels  as  if  burnt  worse  near  the  tip
(fifth  day),^ — Mouth  feels  as  if  burnt  (ninth  day),l — In  morning,  mouth
feels  as  if  badly  burnt  (eighth  day),^ — In  morning,  raouth  very  dry  (fourth
day),'. — Mouth  filled  with  saliva,'. — [40.]  Stringy,  tasteless  mucus  in
mouth,'. — Mouth  filled  with  white,  frothy,  stringy  mucus  (fourth  day),'. —
In  morning,  mouth  full  of  white,  sticky  mucus  (third  day),'. — Tasting
of  food  eaten  several  hours  before  (third  day),'.

Throat. — White,  thick  mucus  in  throat  (second  day),'. — Throat  filled
with  white,  sticky  mucus;  he  has  to  hawk  it  up,  causing  smarting  of  fauces
(first  day),'. — During  day,  throat  filled  with  white,  stioky  mucus,  streaked
with  blood  (fourth  day),'. — Throat  sore  (seventh  day),',  etc. — Throat  sore  ;
looks  mottled,  as  if  diphtheritic  deposit  were  commencing  (eighth  day),'. —
Throat  sore ;  worse  on  left  side  (eighth  day),'.— [50.]  Throat  sore ;  pre-
paring to  swallow  is  painful,  but  the  act  of  swallowing  is  not  (8  p.m.),
(third  day),'. — Throat  sore,  with  expectoration  of  white,  sticky  mucus,  with
similar  discharge  from  nose  (second  day),^ — Throat  much  irritated  (third
day),'. — Irritation  of  throat,  with  inclination  to  cough,^. — Throat  smarts
(third  day),^ — Sensation  of  hot  air  passing  up  throat,  on  right  side,  though
stomach  feels  cold  (fourth  day),'. — Tickling  in  throat,'. — During  the  even-
ing, tickling  in  throat  (second  day),^ — Tickling in throat,  with  cough

VOL. I.— 17


258  AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

(seventh  day)/. — Tickling  on  both  sides  of  throat,  causing  deep  cough
(third  day)/. — [60.]  Tickling  in  throat  in  morning,  with  inclination  to
cough,\ — Pain  in  both  tonsils  (fourth  day),^. — Fauces  look  red  (third
day),^ — Fauces  dark-red  and  congested  (seventh  day),\ — Accumulation
of  mucus  in  fauces,\ — Accumulation  of  mucus  in  posterior  fauces,\ — In
morning,  fauces  and  mouth  full  of  white,  sticky  mucus  (third  day\l —
Fauces  and  top  of  tongue,  for  half  its  length,  feel  as  if  scalded,^. — Fauces
sore  (ninth  day),l — Fauces  slightly  sore  (sixth  day),\ — [70.]  Stinging  in
fauces,  with  inclination  to  cough,  but  relieved  by  sneezing,'.

Stomach. — Food  does  not  digest,'. — Occasional  belcliing  of  small
quantities  of  wind,  slightly  sour  (fourth  day),'. — Something  seems  to  rise
from  pit  of  stomach,  almost  stopping  the  breath  and  causing  a  faint  and
very  disagreeable  sensation,  partially  relieved  by  raising  wind  (third  day),'.
— Frequent  sensations  (which  are  daily),  as  if  something  were  rising  from
the  stomach,  but  not  like  wind,  causing  a  faint  sensation,  but  disappearing
in  a  moment  (eighth  day),'.-^-Stomach  feels  bad,'. — Distress  in  stomach
(third  day),'.— Stomach  feels  badly  in  afternoon,  but  much  easier  than
evening  previous  (fifth  day),'. — Swallowing  anything  cold  causes  a  dis-
tress the  entire  length  of  oesophagus  and  into  the  stomach  (second  day),'.
— [80.]  During  afternoon  and  evening,  sensation  of  fainting  or  suffocation,
beginning  at  the  epigastrium,  and  rising  on  both  sides  of  sternum  to  throat,
causing  him  to  sigh  and  walk  around  the  room ;  feared  he  might  die  (fourth
day),'. — Sharp,  cutting  pain  in  stomach  (eighth  day),'. — Sore,  lame  feeling
in  stomach  (second  day),'. — Terrible  distress  in  upper  part  of  epigastrium  ;
could  not  sit  still,  had  to  walk  the  room ;  during  this  time,  much  belching
of  wind;  the  pain  went  through  to  the  back,  and  extended  to  both  hypo-
chondria ;  could  scarcely  get  his  breath  ;  pain  so  severe  that  it  produced  a
perspiration  over  whole  body  (second  day),'.

Abdomen, — Sharp,  twisting  pain  just  above  crest  of  ilium,  right  side,'.

Stool  and  Anus. — An  old  hssmorrhoidal  tumor,  which  had  not  ap-
peared for  some  time,  returned,  and  was  quite  hard,  sore,  and  very  small,
but  soon  disappeared,'. — Sudden,  urgent  desire  for  stool,  with  loose  stool
(in  twenty  minutes),'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — When  walking,  had  to  hold  mouth
open  on  account  of  heat  in  throat  and  lungs,'. — Tickling  in  throat,  with
inclination  to  cough  (11  a.m.)  (third  day),^. — During  the  evening,  tickling
in  the  throat,  mostly  on  the  sides,  eavshig  him  to  cough  suddenly  (third  day),''',
etc. — [90.]  Sudden  inclination  to  cough,  from  tickling  in  both  sides  of
throat,  just  below  tonsils  (fourth  day),'. — A  very  sudden  desire  to  cough,
coming  so  suddenly,  by  a  tickling  in  the  throat,  it  strangles  one,  and  almost
arrests  breathing  (tenth  day),^ — Almost  constant  desire  to  cough  (ninth
day),l — Inclination  to  cough  from  low  down  in  throat  (second  day),'.
— Frequent  cough  (tenth  day), I — Sudden  cough,'. — Sudden  deep  cough
(second  day),'. — ^Sudden  short  cough  when  rising  from  bed  in  morning,
from  sensation  of  mucus  in  throat,'. — During  the  evening,  sudden,  hacking
cough,  with  watery  discharge  from  nose,'. — Sudden  cough,  from  tickling  in
throat  just  below  tonsils  (fifth  day),'. — [100.]  Occasional,  sudden  cough,
with  expectoration  of  white  mucus  (seventh  day),'. — Sudden  cough,  then
a  deep  cough  (fourth  day),l — During  afternoon  and  evening  the  cough  is
deeper  (from  tickling  just  below  the  tonsils),  causing  pain  in  the  tonsils
(sixth  day),'. — Expectoration  of  white,  sticky  mucus  (ninth  day),". — Expec-
toration of  white,  sticky  mucus,  and  occasionally  blood  (fifth  day),'. — Ex-
pectoration of  gelatinous  mucus  (tenth  day),^ — Inclination  to  draw  a  long


AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM— AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM. 269

breath,'. — A  sense  of  suffocation  from  the  luugs,  which  causes  himto  move
round  from  fear  of  suffocating  (ninth  day)/.

Chest, — Frequent  constrictive  pains  across  chest  (tenth  day),". — Tight-
ness across  chest  (tenth  day),l— [110.]  Tightness  across  chest,  with  pain  in
lungs,'. — Sharp  pain  in  both  lungs,  and,  during  the  forenoon,  pain  seems
to  be  mostly  in  the  pleura  (eighth  day),''. — Sharp  pain  in  lungs,  worse  in
upper  portion  of  right  lung  (seventh  day),^ — Lung  feels  cold  inside  (fourth
day),'. — Pain  in  right  lung  (fourth  day),l^Pain  under  middle  of  left
clavicle  (fourth  day),'.

BacJi. — Feeling  over  right  kidney  as  if  something  were  pressed  hard
against  it;  relieved  by  pressure,  but  leaving  a  pulling  sensation  (fifth  and
sixth  days),'.

TJppev  Extremities, — Sensation  in  right  shoulder  as  if  pressed  by
a  weiglit  (9  p.m.)  (eleventh  day),l

Lower  Extremities. — Legs  ache,'. — All  forenoon,  feels  as  if  a
cord  were  tied  around  the  right  leg,  midway  between  the  hip  and  knee,
making  him  limp,  causing  pain  (eighth  day),^ — [120.]  In  the  afternoon,
the  pain  in  right  leg  disappeared,  and  was  felt  below  knee  in  left  leg;  in
the  evening,  it  was  in  the  ankle,  th^n  in  left  foot,  soon  passing  away,  with
the  inclination  to  cough  returning  (eighth  day),^ — Repeated  sharp  pains
in  back  side  of  left  leg,  midway  from  hip  to  knee,'. — Pain  in  left  leg  gone,
but  is  in  same  locality  in  right  leg,'. — Left  ankle  and  foot  lame  (ninth
day),^ — -Feet  cold  (fifth  day),',  etc. — In  evening,  feet  cold  (second  day),'. — -
Feet  cold  in  warm  room  (sixtii  and  seventh  days),'. — Feet  very  cold  in  a
warm  room,  causing  legs  to  ache  (second  day),^

Fever, — Troubled  more  with  cold  than  at  anytime  during  the  winter;
have  to  warm  feet,  even  in  a  warm  room,'. — Back  and  feet  cold  in  a  warm
.room  (fourth  day),'. — [130.]  Inclined  to  be  chilly,  with  flashes  of  heat
(fourth  day),'. — Flashes  of  heat  over  tlie  body,  as  if  perspiration  would
come  on  (second  day),'.

Sleej)  and  Dreams. — Slept  but  two  hours  last  night  (eighth  day),'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Eyes  red,  etc.;  tongue  dry,
etc.;  tongue  smarts;  mouth  feels  as  if  burnt;  mouth  dry;  mouth  full  of
mucus  ;  tickling  in  throat,  etc. ;  fauces  full  of  mucus. — {Morning,  on  rising).
Sudden,  short  congh.— {Forenoon),  Pain  in  pleura  ;  feeling  as  of  a  cord  tied
around  leg. — {Afternoon  and  evening).  Sensation  of  fainting,  etc.;  cough
deeper,  etc. — {Evening),  Eyes  feel  large,  etc. ;  eye  smarts ;  eyelids  droop  ;
eyeballs  feel  large ;  tickling  in  throat ;  tickling  in  throat,  etc. ;  sudden
hacking  cough ;  feet  cold. — {Swallowing  anything  cold).  Distress  along
oesophagus,  etc.

Amelioration. —  {Afternoon),  Stomach  feels  easier.  —  {Sneezing),
Stinging  in  fauces. — {Raising  wind).  Faint  sensation  from  stomach,  etc.

AMMONIUM  CAEBONICUM.

The  sesquicarbonate  of  Ammonium  (smelling  salts),  formula  2[(NH4)2
C0,]C02. Preparation,  Solution  in  distilled  water,  one  to  ten.

Authorities.^  1,  Hahnemann;  2,  Hartlaub ;  3,  Nenning;  4,  Gross;  5,
Stapf;  6,  Trinks;  7,  Schreter;  8,  Blaufuss ;  9,  Fries;  10,'  Gunther;  11,

f  One  to  seven  from  Hahnemann's  collection,  Ch.  K.,  vol.  2;  Nos.  8  to  19  are
Martin's  provings. Horn.  V.  J.  Sch.,  10,  67.


260  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Hiffert;  12,  Hern;  13,  Krunibholz ;  14,  Kreutzmann  ;  15,  Martio  ;  16,
Mayer;  17,  Relehmann  ;  18,  Runge;  19,  Vulpius;  20,  Wibmer.

jJIind. — All  day  long,  lively,  excited,^ ^. — Extremely  exalted,'. — Occa-
sioDally  excessive  mirth,'. — -He  often  laughs,  without  moderation,  at  a  trifle
(after  thirty-eight  days),'. — The  mood  changes  for  the  better, after  supper;
headache  and  pain  at  the  stomach  ceasing  at  the  same  time,^ — Earnest
mood,'. — Very  weeping  mood,  with  thoughts  of  death/. — Sad,  almost  weep-
ing mood,  towards  evening  (second  day),^. — Great  depression  of  spirits
(with  the  abdominal  complaints),'^. — [10.]  Cloudy  weather  makes  her  very
sad,'. — Sad,  low-spirited,  apprehensive  of  evil,  accompanied  by  chilliness,
in  the  forenoon,'. — The  whole  morning,  striking  gloomy  humor,'^ — Kind
of  sadness  not  usual  with  me;  no  inclination  to  go  out,'. — Very  hypochon-
driacal,"'.—-Morose,  and  full  of  grief,'. — The  recollection  of  past  disagree-
able occurrences  torments  him,'. — Sighing,'. — Gloomy  and  uneasy  mood
(second  day)j'. — She  is  anxious  on  account  of  her  illness,'. — [20.]  For
many  afternoons  she  is  seized  with  a  weakness  and  anxiety ;  she  knows  not
how  to  comfort  herself,  what  to  do  with  herself;  this  state  leaves  her  towards
evening,'. — About  7  p.m.,  a  sort  of  anxiety  possessed  me,  which  lasted
about  an  hour,  and  then  went  off  again,'^-. — At  night,  attack  of  great  anx-
iety, as  if  she  had  to  die,  accompanied  by  cold  sweat,  audible  palpitation
of  the  heart,  and  involuntary  lachrymation  ;  she  was  unable  to  move  her
eyes  or  to  speak,  accompanied  by  audible  heavy  breathing,  and  trembling
of  the  hands  (after  nineteenth  day),'. — Every  afternoon,  between  five  and.
six  o'clock,  she  is  seized  with  anguish,  as  if  she  had  committed  the  greatest
crime  ;  towards  evening  the  anguish  passes  off,'. — Great  oppression  of  the
heart ;  he  knows  not  how  to  quiet  himself,'. — Very  easily  frightened,'. —
After  the  fever,  very  ill-humored  and  irritable ;  felt  better  after  a  glass  of
"bishop,"'^ — Very  unamiable,  irritated,  peevish;  she  answers  reluctantly,
(second  day  of  her  courses),'. — Peevishness  early  in  the  morning,'. — Ill-
humor,  peevishness,  sometimes  accompanied  by  headache,  in  the  forenoon,'.
— [30.]  Peevish  and  angry,'. — Peevish,  angry,  scolding,  in  the  evening
(sixth  day),'. — Considerable  ill-humor  and  dissatisfied  feeling,'^ — She  found
fault  witli  everything,'. — She  could  not  bear  any  noise,'. — The  child  is  ex-
tremely obstinate,*. — Bears  no  contradiction,'. — She  has  rest  nowhere,  and
succeeds  in  nothing  (fourth  day),'. — At  night,  low  spirits,  and  sometimes
considerable  excitement,". — He  does  not  seem  to  be  in  his  senses,'. — [40.]
Head  very  thoughtless,'. — She  finds  it  hard  to  arrange  her  ideas,'. — He
speaks  incorrectly ;  speaks  wrong  without  wishing  it ;  uses  one  word  for
another  in  speaking,'. — He  easily  uses  wrong  letters  and  figures  in  writing
or  ciphering  (ninth  day),'. — Very  forgetful,  and  headache  when  reflecting,'.
— Very  forgetful ;  absent;  cannot  recollect  (ninth  day),'. — Very  absent;
when  telling  a  story  he  easily  loses  his  train  of  thoughts,  and  hits  upon
thoughts  and  expressions  which  he  did  not  wish  to  employ  (eighth  day),'. —
Absence  of  mind,  accompanied  by  anxiety  ;  when  speaking,  he  is  at  a  loss
to  finish  his  speech,'.

Head. — Confusion  of  head  (in  one-quarter  hour),'\ — [50,]  Soon  after
taking,  confusion  and  weight  of  the  head,". — Emptiness  and  confusion  of
the  head  (after  one-quarter  hour),'. — Stupefaction  of  the  head,'. — Head-
ache as  before,  especially  a  sensation  as  after  having  been  drunk  ("Kat-
zenjammer"),*. — Vertigo,  as  from  intoxication,  after  sitting  still  for  some
time  (towards  evening),'. — Vertigo,'  ^''. — Vertigo  at  night  and  early  in  the
morning  (after  two  days),'. — Vertigo  at  night,;  everything  turned  with  her;
she  had  to  sit  up  in  bed,'. — Frequent  vertigo,  early  in  the  morning  after


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  261

rising ;  it  continues  the  whole  day,  and  is  worse  toward  evening ;  he  feels
as  if  things  turned  with  him  in  a  circle,  also  at  night  on  moving  his  head,^.
— Vertigo,  with  nausea,  early  in  the  morning ;  in  walking  it  soon  passes
off  (fourth  day),'. — [60.]  Early  in  the  morning,  vertigo,  with  flickering
before  the  eyes;  she  has  to  sit  down, \ — Vertigo  and  cold  sweat,  such  as
usually  accompany  a  fainting  fit,'^ — Vertigo,  and  trembling  of  the  feet,
so  that  he  has  to  hold  himself  in  order  not  to  fall,  for  several  days  (^after
three  days),^ — Vertigo,  with  headache  (one  hour  after  taking),". — Upon
turning  with  the  body  the  head  inxmediately  feels  dizzy,'. — Giddiness,  nau-
sea, and  want  of  appetite  ever  since  the  dawn  of  day,'. — Headaciie  (in
half  hour),'*. — Severe  headache,'". — Slight  headache,  which  did  not  last
long,'*. — In  afternoon,  violent  headache,". — [70.]  In  evening-,  slight  head-
ache,".— Headache  after  dinner  (fifth  day),'. — Headache,  early  in  bed,  with
nausea,  which  rises  as  high  up  as  the  throat ;  she  feels  an  inclination  to
vomit;  the  symptom  passes  off  after  two  or  three  hours,'. — Headache  and
pain  at  the  stomach,  accompanied  by  ill-huraor,  the  whole  day  (after  three
days),^ — In  the  morning,  noticed  a  slight  headache,  combined  with  nausea,
which,  however,  as  usual,  went  off  as  soon  as  I  took  my  pipe  in  my  mouth,'^
— Headache,  with  heaviness  of  the  forehead,  early  in  the  morning  ;  worse
in  the  afternoon  (eighth  day),'. — Tensive  feeling  in  brain,  especially  on
right  side,^°. — Head  heavy  and  full,™.— Afternoon,  after  drinking  coffee,
congestion  to  head, 'I — Towards  evening,  the  rush  of  blood  was  greater,".
— [80.]  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  at  night,  and  heat  in  the  face  on  wak-
ing,'.— Feeling  of  lightness  in  head/*. — -His  head  seems  very  heavy,'. — Pres-
sure over  the  whole  head  after  having  got  heated  (after  ten  days),'. — Head-
ache, now  here,  now  there,  in  the  brain ;  a  pressure,  with  sticking  over  one
eyebrow,'. — Boring  and  lancinating  pain  in  the  head  at  night,'. — ^Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  whole  head,  early  after  rising,  and  during  the  whole  day
(twenty-third  day),'. — Clawing  pain  in  the  head,'. — Sticking  headache  the
whole  day,'. — Headache,  resembling  a  knocking  or  hacking  with  a  sharp
instrument ;  pain  prevented  her  from  moving,  she  had  to  lie  still,'. — -[90.]
Pain,  as  from  ulceration,  in  moving  the  head  and  in  pressing  upon  it,  espe-
cially in  the  occiput,  at  one  of  the  glands  of  that  region,  for  some  time,'. —
Headache,  as  if  water  or  something  else  were  in  his  head,'. — Sense  of  loose-
ness of  the  brain,'. — -The  head  easily  gets  cold,'. — Eruptions  upon  the  fore-
head resembling  little  boils,'. — Pimples  and  vesicles  on  the  forehead,'. —
Pimples  on  the  forehead,  and  the  tip  of  the  nose,'. — Headache  in  fore-
head,''.— Confusion  and  heaviness  in  forehead,'^". — Burning  pains  in  sinci-
put,'l — [100.]  Heat  and  pressure  in  sinciput,''. — Pressive  sense  of  fulness
in  the  forehead,  as,  from  the  vapor  of  coal,'. — *  Pressive  fulness  in  the  forehead
and  vertex,  as  if  the  head  would  burst  there/. — On  stooping,  there  is  tension
in  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  in  front,  the  head  threatens  to  burst  with  pain,'.
— *IIeadache,  beating  in  the  forehead  as  if  it  would  burst,^. — '^Heaviness  and
beating  in  the  forehead,  after  dinner,^. — For  several  mornings  she  is  roused
from  her  slumber  by  a  drawing  pain  of  the  periosteum  of  the  forehead  ;
the  pain  passes  off  after  rising,'. — Uproar  behind  the  right  frontal  emi-
nence, as  if  everything  would  come  out  there  (second  day),'. — Boring
stitches  behind  the  right  frontal  eminence,  deep  in  the  brain,  during  dinner
(second  day),'. — Throbbing  headache  in  left  frontal  region,™. — [110.]  Prick-
ings over  the  right  eye,'. — Stitches  over  the  left  eye,  so  violent  that  they
often  cause  the  eyes  to  contract,  after  dinner  (fourth  day),''.^ — Tearing  in
the  temples,  early,  and  in  the  evenings,'. — Painful  throbbing  and  beating
in  the  temple,  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  and  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,


262  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

sometimes  with  yawniug,^ — -Tearing  in  the  right  temple,  during  dinner,'.—^
Stitches  in  the  left  temple,  as  with  a  blunt  instrument,'. — Stitches  in  the
left  temple,  increased  by  chewing,^ — Headache  in  vertex,*. — Pressure  at
the  top  of  the  head,  half  an  hour  (after  six  days),'. — Feeling  of  coldness
in  the  course  of  the  longitudinal  sinus  (in  half  hour),^*. — [120.]  The  right
side  of  her  head  seems  to  be  heavier  than  the  left ;  the  head  feels  as  if
it  would  fall  over  on  that  side  (first  day),''. — On  moving  his  head,  there
is  a  sensation  as  of  the  brain  falling  to  and  fro,  towards  the  side  where  he
stoo{)S,  sometimes  with  stinging  pains,  a.  symptom  which  gives  him  no  rest,
even  at  night,  for  several  weeks  in  succession,'.— Stitches  here  and  there  in
the  head,  deep  in  the  brain,  especially  in  the  right  side ;  they  pass  off  in
the'  open  air  (fourth  to  forty-second  day),l — Heaviness  in  the  left  side
of  the  head,  growing  worse  in  bed  (forty-sixth  day),'.— -Tearing  behind  the
left  ear,  as  far  as  the  vertex,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  head  were  cleft,'. —
Itching  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  great  sensitiveness  of  the  integuments
of  the  head  when  scratching  (tenth  day),'. — Violent  itching  of  the  hairy
scalp,  especially  of  the  occiput,'. — Sense  as  if  the  hairs  would  stand  upon  end,
with  crawling  over  the  whole  head,  and  a  feeling  of  coldness  there,  after
coming  out  of  the  open  air  and  entering  the  room,'. — The  hair  is  painful
when  touched,'. — -The  scalp  and  the  hairs  are  intensely  painful  when  the
hand  is  moved  along  them ;  this  movement  made  him  shudder  (first  even-
ing),'.

Eyes. — [130.]  The  eyes  are  weak ;  the  child  winks  continually,*. —
Burning  of  the  eyes  the  whole  day,  especially  early  on  waking,  with  intoler-
ance of  light,  and  in  the  evening  on  lying  down,'. — The  eyes  are  inflamed
and  dim,'. — The  right  eye  is  a  little  inflamed  and  dim,'. — Pressure  in  the
eyes,'. — Pressure  and  cutting  in  the  eyes  (fourth  day),'. — Pressure  and  fine
stitches  in  the  eyes  (second  day),'. — Prickings  and  pressure  in  the  eyes,'. —
Biting  in  the  eyes,  and  itching  of  the  borders  of  the  lids,'.^Itching  and
biting  in  the  eyes,  which  pass  off  by  rubbing  (early  in  the  morning),  (first,
fourth,  and  twelfth  days),'. — [140.]  A  stye  on  the  right  upper  lid  becomes
inflamed,  with  a  sensation  of  tension  (second  day),'. — Very  great  twitching
in  external  canthus  of  right  eye,  like  live  blood,  and  visible  in  mirror;  the
eye  was  for  two  hours  as  if  covered  by  a  veil,'". — Inflammation  of  the  inner
canthus  of  the  right  eye,  without  pain  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — Pressure  upon
the  eyelids  on  waking  up,  and  when  he  is  about  falling  asleep ;  he  cannot
open  them,  although  he  is  internally  awake,'. — The  eyes  are  agglutinated,
early  in  the  morning,'. — The  eyes  are  agglutinated,  early  in  the  morning,
after  sound  sleep ;  it  takes  her  a  long  time  to  open  them,'. — The  eyes  are
agglutinated  in  the  morning;  they  run  in  daytime,'. — When  reading,  his
eyes  run,'. — Watery  eye  ;  the  white  of  the  eye  is  full  of  red  veins,  as  in  an
incipient  inflammation  of  the  eye,'. — The  right  eye  waters,  and  the  vessels
of  the  cornea  are  distinctly  visible,'. — [150.]  Copious  lachrymation,  espe-
cially of-  the  right  eye,  as  well  in  the  open  air  as  in  the  room,'. — Pupils
alternately  dilated  and  contracted,™. — Indistinct  vision,^ — Flickering  before
eyes,'". — When  sneezing,  white  stars  sparkle  before  his  eyes.'.-^Sparks  before
her  eyes  upon  waking  at  night,'. — A  large  black  spot  hovers  before  the
eye  after  she  has  been  sewing,'. — -On  looking  at  a  distance,  and  also  on
accommodating  for  near  vision,  objects  seem  doubled,'.

Ears. — Hard  swelling  of  the  parotid  glands,'. — Twitches  and  tension
around  the  left  ear,  in  the  cheek-bone  and  in  the  temples,  with  swelling  of
the  cervical  glands,'. — [160.]  Tearing  below  and  behind  the  ears  (made
worse  by  moving  the  head),  sometimes  extending  as  far  as  the  vertex,  the


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  263

occiput,  and  the  nape  of  the  neck,  also  the  shoulder  (after  dinner),'. — Ten-
sion behiud  the  right  ear,'. — Twitches  and  pinching  in  the  internal  ear,'. —
Frequent  and  painful  stitches  in  the  right  ear,'. — In  evening,  transient
pinching  in  right  ear,  as  has  happened  several  times  before  these  last  days,'*.
— Stitches  in  the  left  ear  (second  day),'. — Throbbing  in  the  left  ear,  at  night,
when  lying  upon  it;  on  turning  to  the  other  side,  the  symptom  disappears
(sixth  day),'. — Early  in  the  morning,  itching  over  the  ears,  which  spreads
over  the  whole  body  (third  day),'. — Crawling  and  burrowing  in  the  left
ear,  which  afterwards  extends  to  the  lower  jaw  (tenth  day),'. — Painful  sen-
sitiveness of  the  deaf  ear  in  consequence  of  a  loud  sound  ;  this  caused  her  to
tremble  over  the  whole  body,'. — [170.]  Diminished  hearing,'. — A  report  in
the  ears  as  of  a  distant  shot,  five  or  six  times  in  the  course  of  an  hour,'. —
Roaring  before  the  left  ear,'. — At  night,  roaring  in  the  left  ear  (second
day),'. — Illusion  of  hearing ;  he  imagines  he  hears  the  ringing  of  bells,'. —
Every  day,  after  midnight,  rushing  in  the  (right)  ear,  when  resting  upon
it  in  bed,'. — Buzzing  before  the  ears,  as  if  the  hearing  were  dull,  and  as  if
something  were  lying  before  the  ears  (after  seventeen  days),'.

Nose. — Pimple  upon  the  tip  of  the  nose,'. — Furunculus  on  the  tip  of
the  nose,'. — Pustule  on  the  side  of  the  nose,'. — [180.]  On  the  septum  of  the
nose  a  vesicle,  in  forepart,'. — *An  aorid  fluid  runs  from  the  nose,'. — Water
drops  out  of  the  nose,  without  a  cold,'. — *  When  stooping,  water  runs  from
the  nose,'. — During  the  catamenia,  acrid  water,  which  excites  a  burning  sen-
sation upon  upper  lip,  is  constantly  running  out  of  her  nose  (forty-third
day),'. — On  blowing  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,  pus  drops  out  at  one
of  the  nostrils  (fifth  day),'. — Blowing  bloody  jnueus  out  of  the  nose,  fre-
quently,'.— On  blowing  the  nose,  blood  comes  out  at  the  left  nostril  (second
day),'. — *Bleeding  at  the  nose  (eighth  day),'. — Bleeding  at  the  nose,  after
dinner  (second  day),'.^[190.]  Frequent  sneezing,  early  in  the  morning,
when  in  bed,'. — Frequent  violent  sneezing  (fifth  day),'. — *  Obstruction  of  the
nbse,^. — The  7iose  is  very  much  obstructed,  without  any  cold,'. — *At  night  the
nose  was  so  obstructed,  that  she  was  not  able  to  breathe,  except  through  her
mouth  (after  four  days),'. — After  having  had  a  sound  nap  in  the  forenoon,
she  walies  up  at  1  o'clock  with  a  sense  of  anxiety,  as  if  she  were  choking;
this  was  on  account  of  the  nose  being  quite  obstructed,  and  her  not  being
able  to  take  breath,  except  with  an  open  mouth,  so  that  the  chest  was  pain-
ful in  consequence  of  the  difficult  breathing  (after  twelve  days),'. — Cold,
with  rattling  in  the  nose,  accompanied  by  obstruction  of  the  nose,  and
roughness  of  voice,'. — Stuifed  cold  in  the  head  for  a  week,  causing  confu-
sion of  the  head,'". — Cold,  with  obstruction  of  the  left  nostril,'. — *Dry  coryza,
especially  at  night,  without  the  slightest  air  passing  through  the  nose,'. — [200.]
Dry  coryza  and  obstruction  of  the  nose,  when  lying  in  bed,  in  the  evening
and  at  night,'. — *Fluent  coryza  (fourth  day),'. — Violent  fluent  coryza,  with
tearing  in  the  left  cheek,', — Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  cough,'. — Coryza,'".
Great  coryza,'°. — Unusually  severe  coryza,'*. — Uncommonly  violent  coryza,
which  lasts  with  an  unusual  obstinacy,'". — Tearing  in  the  left  nostril,  and
simultaneou.'jly  in  the  bone  of  the  left  elbow,  extending  towards  the  hand,'. —
Slight  twitching  in  the  left  side  of  the  nose,  which  seems  to  draw  up  the
wing  of  the  nose,'. — [210.]  *  When  stooping,  sensation  in  the  tip  of  the
nose  as  if  the  blood  were  accumulating  there,". — Upon  strongly  breathing
through  the  nose,  this  organ  feels  painful,'. — Swelling,  sensation  of  soreness
and  itching  in  the  right  nostril,  with  a  crawling  in  the  nose,  as  if  from  con-
stant catarrh ;  the  nose  runs  (after  three  days),'. — Left  ala  nasi  internally


264  . AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

swollen  and  tender,'". — Dryness  of  nose  and  lips/°. — Smell  like  a  profuse
sour  perspi^ation,'^

Face. — Wretched  look,*. — Pale,  wretched  appearance,'^ — Paleness  of
the  face,  with  nausea,  and  moral  and  physical  weariness,'. — Pale,  bloated
face,  for  a  long  time  (after  thirty  days),'. — [220.]  Pale  face,  accompanied
by  headache,  pain  at  the  stomach  and  ill-humor  (fourth  day},'. — Increased
number  of  pimples  on  face,'*. — Heat  in  the  face,  during  mental  exertions,^.
— Heat  in  the  face,  during  and  after  dinner^. — Heat  in  the  head  and  face,
with  red  cheeks,'. — Sense  as  of  stretching  in  the  face  ;  she  has  to  rub  her
eyes  and  her  face,  as  if  she  were  sleepy,'. — -Tension  of  the  skin  of  the  face
(the  nose  and  both  lips),  as  if  the  face  were  swollen,  early  in  the  morning
on  waijing,'. — Contraction  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead  and  face,'. — Violent
pain  in  the  face  on  the  right  side,'.— Painful  tension  and  tearing  in  the
right  side  of  the  face  (second  day),'. — [230.]  Hard  swelling  of  the  cheek,
as  well  as  the  glands  of  the  ear  and  neck,'. — White,  herpes-like  spots  of  the
size  of  a  small  pea,  which  continually  exfoliate  (upon  the  cheek),'. — Boils
upon  the  cheek  and  around  the  ear,'. — Small  boils  and  indurations,  dis-
charging water  and  blood,  upon  the  cheek,  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth,
and  on  the  chin,'. — Pustules  upon  the  forehead,  temple,  cheek,  and  chin,'.
— Pustules  upon  the  cheeks,  during  the  menses,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the
cheek  bones,'. — Pimple  on  left  cheek,  near  ear,  not  painful  unless  pressed,'".
— Redness  of  left  check,'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  zygoma,'. — [240,]  Burn-
ing vesicles  on  the  vermilion  border  of  both  lips,'. — The  lips  are  constantly
dry,  and  stick  together  (fifteenth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  mouth  ;  both  lips
were  itching,'. — Vesicles  at  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth  and  on  the  upper
lip,'. — Pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  with  burning  pain,'. — Eruption  at  the
mouth,'. — Herpes-like  scaly  eruption  around  the  mouth,'. — Miliary  erup-
tion around  the  chin,  without  sensation,'.

3Ioiith. — ^The  decay  of  the  teeth  progresses  rapidly,'. — His  teeth  fall
out,  even  sound  ones,'. — [250.]  On  sucking,  blood  comes  out  of  a  molar
tooth,'. — Violeut  toothache,  with  heat  of  the  same  side  of  the  head  (after
twelve  da}^?),'. — Pain  in  two  molar  teeth,  as  when  sweets  set  into  a  hollow
tooth,'. — Toothache  at  night,  and  swollen  cheek  on  the  day  following;
afterwards  enlarged  nose  and  red  spots  in  the  face  and  upon  the  neck,'. —
Toothache  during  the  catamenia,  day  and  night,  especially  during  and  after
eating,  relieved  by  warm  cloths  and  pressing  upon  the  teeth,'. — Violent
toothache,  as  soon  as  she  gets  into  bed  in  the  evening,  during  the  whole  night ;
it  cannot  be  relieved  in  any  position,'. — In  chewing,  almost  all  the  teeth
are  painful  ;  the  person  was  unable  to  speak  on  account  of  pain  ;  upon  air
rushing  into  the  mouth  the  pain  became  intolerable,'. — The  teeth  are  painful
on  biting  together,^. — An  anterior  inferior  incisor  tooth  becomes  very  pain-
ful when  biting  upon  it,  on  third  day  of  the  catamenia,'. — Drawing  in
teeth,". — [260.]  Drawing  toothache  during  the  catamenia,'. — -Drawing
toothache  during  the  catamenia ;  it  passes  oiF  by  eating  (after  six  hours),'. —
Drawing  toothache,  which  seems  to  be  in  the  jaws,  and  extends  as  far  as
the  ear  and  the  cheek ;  only  during  eating  and  when  biting  upon  the
tooth,'. — Drawing  in  the  teeth,  at  night,  and  on  waking,'. — Darting  in  a
decayed  molar  tooth,  after  dinner;  the  pain  ceases  upon  picking  the  tooth,'.
— Tearing  pain  in  the  upper  row  of  teeth,'. — Drawing  and  tearing  iu  a
molar  tooth,  after  a  journey  in  damp  weather  (after  twenty-three  days),'. —
Teariug-jerking  in  the  teeth,  extending  into  the  ears ;  also  at  night,  in  a
hollow  back  tooth  ;  relieved  by  smelling  of  Hepar  sulphur,'. — Tearing  in
the  teeth  and  jaws,  as  far  as  the  ears,  before  midnight ;  she  is  obliged  to


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  265

shift  constantly  from  one  side  to  another;  the  teeth  are  very  painful  when
biting  upon  them  (third  day  of  catamenia)/. — Tearing  in  the  upper  molar
teeth  of  the  left  side,  with  frequent  collections  of  water  in  the  mouth,  and
gnawing,  in  the  left  shoulder  (tenth  day),'. — [270,]  Tearing  toothache  in
the  left  upper  row,  which  seems  to  affect  the  roots  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form
there  (thirty-sixth  day),'. — Sensation  as  if  an  abscess  was  at  the  roots  of
the  teeth,  which  threatens  to  burst  on  the  access  of  air,  or  when  the  tooth
is  pressed  upon  during  mastication,'.— Shootings  in  a  healthy  molar  tooth,
ill  the  open  air,'. — Shooting  toothache,  uninterruptedly  for  eight  days,\ —
Shooting  pain  in  Ike  molar  teeth,  upon  pressihg  their  edges  against  one  another;
he  was  only  able  to  chew  with  the  incisor  teeth  (immediately,  and  on  the
second  day),'. — When  a  warm  liquid  gets  into  the  mouth,  the  person  ex-
periences painful  shootings  in  the  teeth  and  the  lower  jaw  of  one  side  (for
five  or  ten  minutes),'. — On  touching  the  tooth  with  the  tongue,  a  violent
stitch  occurred  in  a  hollow  tooth  of  the  upper  row,'. — Sensation  of  soreness
in  a  hollow  molar  tooth  (after  half  an  hour),^ — Throbbing  and  pressive
toothache  (after  third  day),'. — Toothache  in  the  evening,  as  if  the  teeth
were  squeezed,'. — [280.]  Sensation  in  the  teeth,  as  if  there  were  no  power
to  bite,'. — The  teeth  became  very  dull,'. — Dulness  of  the  molar  teeth,  and
on  biting  on  them,  they  appear  to  be  loose,'. — The  teeth  feel  as  if  they  were
dull  and  too  long,'. — The  teeth  frequently  feel  as  if  they  were  too  long,  as  after
acids,'.-^A  tooth  which  formerly  had  often  been  painful,  appears  to  be
longer,  and  becomes  again  sensitive  to  pain,'. — The  gums  are  so  sensitive
that  she  does  not  dare  to  touch  them  with  the  tongue  (forty-first  day),'. —
Stitches  of  the  inner  and  upper  gums  of  the  right  side,'.-^Itching  of  the
gums  ;  they  bleed  upon  being  scratched,'. — Gums  incline  to  bleed,'. — [290.]
Sensation  as  of  swelling,  or  also  swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  gums,'. —
Swelling  of  the  gums  accompanied  by  swelling  of  the  cheek,', — Abscess  of
the  gums,  attended  with  discharge  of  pus,'. — Gums  somewhat  swollen  and
more  seusitive,'^ — Very  sensitive,  reddened  gums,'*. — The  gums,  especially
of  lower  teeth,  swollen  and  very  sensitive  ;  a  yellow  painful  vesicle  on  the
mucous  membrane,  betwixt  left  and  lower  canine  tooth,'^—  Vesieles  on  the
tongue,  especially  on  its  border,'. — Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which
hinder  speaking  and  eating,  with  a  burning  pain,'. — Pustules  upon  the
tongue,  with  a  burning  and  stinging  pain,  especially  on  the  border  and
under  the  tongue,'. — Small  ulcer  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  feeling  sore  when-
ever the  tongue  is  moved,'. — [300.]  Painful  erosion  on  middle  of  tongue,
observed  after  two  hour^,'°. — Tongue  and  whole  inside  of  the  mouth  red-
dened, especially  the  excoriated  spot  on  the  palate,'^ — Burning  at  the  tip
of  the  tongue,  made  worse  by  touching  it,'. — On  taking,  coldness,  followed
by  warm  feeling  on  tongue,'*. — The  medicine  caused  a  feeling  of  coolness
on  the  tongue,  on  taking,". — The  anterior  half  of  the  tongue  feels  as  if  it
were  pithy,  early  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'. — Bad  smell  from  mouth,
which  he  himself  perceives  for  a  long  time,'. — Redness  of  the  mouth  and
tenderness,  especially  towards  evening,". — Redness  and  inflammation  in  the
mouth  and  throat;  these  parts  are  painful,  as  if  they  were  sore  and  excor-
iated,'.— Sensation  as  of  swelling  in  the  mouth,'. — [310.]  The  buccal  cavity
feels  so  narrow  that  she  scarcely  dares  to  o^en  her  mouth  or  to  move  her
tongue,  lest  she  should  hurt  some  part  by  touching  it  with  the  tongue
(fortieth  day),'. — Scraping  sore  sensation  in  mouth,  especially  severe  in  the
inside  of  upper  gums ;  one  spot  was  softened,". — The  part  of  the  mouth
beneath  the  tongue  was  particularly  red,". — A  small  spot  on  the  palate  was
excoriated  by  a  hard  crust  of  bread,". — Pain  at  the  palate,  as  from  an  ulcer,


266  AMMONIUM  CAEBONICUM.

on  touching  it  with  the  tongue ;  the  part  exfoliatea  on  the  day  following,'.
■ — Burning  vesicles  on  the  inner  side  of  the  lower  lip,'. — On  the  inner  side
of  the  lower  lip,  a  painful,  white  vesicle,'. — The  inside  of  the  cheeks  is  full
of  vesicles  without  sensation,'. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  in  the  evening,
which  cannot  be  relieved  by  drinking ;  the  mouth  feels  parched  early  in
the  raorning,\ — Great  dryness  and  heat  of  the  mouth,  at  night  (after
twelve  days),\ — [320.]  Collection  of  saliva  in  mouth,'". — Loose  mucus  in
mouth,'^ — Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  mouth  and  scraping  feeling,'^. —
Frequent  and  copious  collection  of  watery  saliva  in  her  mouth  ;  she  is  con-
stantly obliged  to  spit,'. — Great*secretion  of  mucus  in  mouth  and  nose,  in
afternoon  and  evening,'". — Collection  of  saltish  water  in  the  mouth,'. — She
has  to  spit  a  good  deal  for  several  days,^. — Medicine,  taken  dry,  left  a  dis-
agreeable taste  on  tongue,". — Pungent,  cooling,  then  burning  taste,'^^ — Taste
of  medicine,  at  first  cooling,  then  becoming  alkaline,'^— [330.]  Salt  taste,'*.
— Bitter  taste  at  root  of  tongue,'^. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the
morning ;  attacks  of  nausea  the  whole  day  (tenth  day),'. — Bitter  taste  in
the  mouth,  early  on  waking  (second  day),'. — Nasty  and  sourish  taste  in  the
mouth,'. — Acid  taste  after  drinking  milk,'. — Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth,  with
bloody  saliva  (fifth  day),'. — Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth,  during  the  whole
time  of  proving,'. — Bad  smell  and  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morn-
ing,'.— Sourish  and  metallic  taste  offood,^. — [340,]  Talking  is  often  difficult
for  her,  as  from  weakness  of  the  organs  of  speech,  or  on  account  of  pains
resembling  pains  at  the  stomach  (third  day),'.

Thvoat. — ^Burning  in  the  throat,  down  the  oesophagus,  as  from  alcohol,'.
• — Soreness  in 'the  throat,'. — Sore  throat  towards  evening,'. — Bad  sore
throat,  like  stinging  and  drawing,  or  tearing,  more  painful  when  speaking
(third  day),'. — Sore  throat,  like  a  scraping,'. — *Roughness  and  scraping  in
the  throat,^. — Pressure  in  the  throat,  with  external  swelling  on  both  sides,'.
— Dryness  in  the  throat,". — Dryness  of  the  throat  and  mouth,'. — [350.]
On  waking  early  in  the  morning,  dryness  of  the  throat  and  mouth,  with
thirst,'. — Afternoons  and  evenings,  dryness  in  the  throat  and  mouth,  with
thirst,'. — Burning  in  the  fauces  and  ossophagus,'*. — Pain  in  the  throat  dur-
ing deglutition,  as  if  the  right  tonsil  were  swollen^. — Swelling  of  the  tonsils,
with  difficult  deglutition,  especially  early  in  the  morning  and  in  the  even-
ing,'.— Sensation  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  her  throat,  by  which
swallowing  is  made  difficult,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  choking  pres-
sure (early,  and  in  the  evening),' '. — She  feels  as  if  something  were  stick-
ing in  her  throat,  on  the  right  side,  making  deglutition  difficult  (after  six
minutes),'. — In  afternoon  and  towards  evening,  aching  and  shooting  in  the
thyroid  gland,  which  had  been  swollen  and  painless  for  years,'*.

Stomach. — Increase  of  hunger  and  appetite  (first  and  second  days),'.
—  Very  violent  hunger  and  appetite  (after  eighteen  days),'. — [360.]  Eabid
hunger  (after  two  hours),'.' — Increased  appetite  at  dinner  ;  nevertheless,  she
is  immediately  satiated  after  eating  little  (fourth  and  sixth  days),'. — Was  very
hungry,  but  had  little  appetite.'l — No  desire  for  meat  or  boiled  things ;
she  only  desires  bread  and  cold  food,  for  several  days,  duriug  the  cata-
menia,'. — Little  hunger  and  appetite,  although  he  relishes  his  meal  (second
and  eighth  days),'. — No  appetite,'". — Want  of  appetite  early  in  the  morn-
ing,'.— Milk  becomes  distasteful  to  her,'. — She  cannot  eat  her  dinner  with-
out drinking  (after  ten  days),'. — No  appetite,  but  continual  thirst,'. —
[370.]  Considerable  thirst,'".— Much  thirst  for  beer  (lasting  a  week),'*.—
Continual  thirst,'. — Thirst  continued  the  whole  afternoon,'. — Constant  ab-
sence of  thirst  during  the  time  of  proving,'. — Disposition  to  eructate,". —


AMMONIUM  CAEBONICUM.  267

Eructation,". — Great  eructation,'^ — Eructation  in  an  hour,'^ — Constant
eructations,'. — [380.]  Frequent  but  suppressed  eructations,^. — A  good  deal  of
empty  eructations,  especially  the  first  day,^. — Frequent  risings  of  air,  in
the  evening  and  after  dinner  (fifth  day),'. — Sour  eructations,^ — After  tak-
ing milk,  sour  eructations  (in  four  hours),'\ — Eructations  tasting  of  the
food,^ — Eructations  tasting  of  the  food,  during  and  after  supper  (tenth
day),'. — Feverish  chilliness  early  in  the  morning,  succeeded  by  hiccough
(second  day),'. — Nausea  (in  half  hou^),'^ — On  taking,  nausea,". — [390.]
Nausea,  with  flatulent  disturbance,". — Nausea  and  coated  tongue,  early  in
the  morning  (after  eight  days),'. — Attacks  of  nausea  the  whole  night  so  that
she  was  unable  to  sleep  (after  eight  hours),'. — Inclination  to  vomit,  hut  ivith-
out  actually  vomiting j'. — Sense  of  nausea  and  lassitude  during  and  after  din-
ner (during  the  catamenia),  (ninth  day),'. — Qualmishness,  early  after  rising,
until  the  afternoon,  accompanied  by  chilliness  in  the  whole  body  ;  when  this
symptom  appears,  she  vomits  sour  water  during  the  catamenia  (after  fifty-
five  days),'. — Qualmishness  of  the  stomach  unto  vomiting,  when  walking
(fourth  day),'. —  Qualmishness  after  ea^Mij'j'.^Qualraishness  and  inclination
to  vomit,  every  day,  immediately  after  dinner,  for  a  whole  hour,'. — After  eat-
ing, she  finds  talking  difficult,'. — [400.]  Rumbling  in  stomach,'.^Pain  at
the  stomach,  with  loathing  of  the  supper  while  the  person  is  taking  it
(eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  stomach,  with  disposition  to  watery  risings
(sixth  day),'. — Burning  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,'. — Burning  heat,
first  at  the  stomach,  then  also  in  the  bowels  (shortly  after  taking),". —
Heat  at  the  stomach,  which  extends  into  the  intestines,  as  from  drinking
strong  wine  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach,'. — *Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  overloaded,  until
three  hours  after  a  meal^. — The  stomach  seems  full,  trembling  (during  the
catamenia),'. — *  T/ie  clothes  press  upon  the  stomach^. — [410.]  Sense  of  emp-
tiness at  the  stomach,'. — Pinching,  rumbling,  and  gurgling  in  the  stomach,'.
— Aching  in  stomach  (in  half  hour),". — Aching  in  gastric  region,  ex-
tending, in  a  sort  of  vibratory  motion,  towards  the  loft  nipple,*. — Boring
and  tearing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  extending  up  to  the  first
lumbar  vertebrae,'. — -Pressure  at  the  stomach,'. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,
with  nausea  and  sensitiveness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'. — Pressure  at
the  stomach,  after  dinner,'. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  at  night,^. — Oppres-
sion at  the  stomach,  with  a  sensation  of  contraction  (also  in  the  chest),  ac-
companied by  loathing  and  nausea  (fourth  day),'. — [420,]  Oppression  at
the  stomach,  already  early  in  the  morning,  passing  into  nausea  and  incli-
nation to  vomit,'. —  Oppression  of  the  stomach  after  eating,^. — Oppression  at
the  stomach  after  supper  (after  twelve  hours),'. — ^Gnawing  at  the  right  side
of  the  stomach,'. — * Painfulness  of  the  stomach  when  pressed  upon  (fourth
day),'. — Feeling  of  warmth  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,". — After  eating,  great
pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  succeeded  by  nausea  und  vomiting  of  the
ingesta;  afterwards,  sour  taste  in  the  mouth;  for  five  days  (after  sixteen
days),'. — Heaviness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'.

Abdomen. — Pressive  pain  under  the  right  ribs,  in  the  region  of  the
liver,'. — Sore  pain  in  the  liver,'. — [430.]  Stitches  below  the  left  ribs  in  the
evening,'. — Pressure  over  the  umbilicus,  as  from  a  button,'. — Painful  com-
pression on  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  only  when  sitting,  relieved  by  mo-
tion and  by  stretching  out  (fifth  day),'. — Abdomen  painfully  distended,'^
— Excessively  distended  abdomen,'. — Distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  re-
tention of  stool,'. — Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  spasms,  or  when
fasting,  every  time  after  she  swallows  something,  for  several  days  (after  six-


268  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

teenth  day),'. — Rumbling  and  pain  in  the  bowels,'. — Rumbling  and  moving,
as  from  flatulence,  in  the  abdomen,'. — In  afternoon,  much  rumbling  of  bowels
and  discharge  of  flatus,^'*. — [440.]  Much  flatus,". — Much  emission  of  flatu-
lence,^ — In  evening,  much  flatus, ^^. — Accumulation  of  flatulence,  with  grip-
ing,'.— Emission  of  a  quantity  of  flatulence  in  the  afternoon,  evening,  and
at  night,  the  evacuations  being  normal  (fourth  day),'. — The  flatus  very
fetid,'*. — Contractive  and  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  first  in  the  upper,
then  in  the  lower  part,  early  in  the  morning,  so  violent  that  it  produceil
qualmishness  and  gathering  of  water  in  the  mouth,  even  unto  faintness,  ac-
companied by  chilliness,  twelve  hours  before  the  appearance  of  the  menses
(after  nine  days),'. — Violent  pinchipg,  contraction,  and  rumbling  in  the
belly,  in  the  forenoon;  it  comes  on  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  can
only  be  relieved  by  lying  upon  the  belly  and  applying  warm  cloths  to  it;
in  the  evening  it  appears  again,  also  in  the  cold  on  the  following  morning;
afterwards,  it  becomes  less  when  in  the  room  (seventeenth  day),'. — Pinch-
ing and  obstruction  in  the  abdomen,'. — Sudden  painful  contraction  of  the
bowels,  as  far  as  the  region  of  the  stomach,  relieved  by  compressing  the
belly  with  the  hands,  passing  off  after  lying  down  (thirty-third  day),'. —
[450.]  Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,'. — Bellyache  after  breakfast  (in  one
hour),'". — Disposition  to  painful  flatulent  colic,'. — At  3  o'clock  in  the
morning,  she  is  roused  from  her  sleep  by  a  violent  colic,  two  days  before
the  appearance  of  the  menses  (forty-first  day),'. — Violent  colic  at  7  o'clock
in  the  morning  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Colic  in  the  left  side  of  the  ab-
domen during  dinner;  the  pain  terminates  with  the  emission  of  flatulence,'.
— Violent  colic,  two  nights  in  succession,  which  did  not  diminish  till  after
the  passage  of  some  strong  flatulence,'. — Cutting  and  biting  in  the  bowels,
as  from  worms,  with  contractive  pain  at  the  stomach,  and  chilliness  and
sweat;  the  person  cannot  fall  asleep  till  morning;  on  waking  up,  the  pain
reappears,'. — Stitches  in  the  abdomen,  which  make  walking  difficult,'. —
Burning  deep  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  (second  day),'. — [460.]  Pres-
sive  pain  in  the  Ifeft  side  of  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning  (after  twelve
hours),'. — Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,  when
stooping,'. — Wet  and  cold,  for  several  afternoons  past,  have  caused  pain  in
the  bowels,'". — The  abdominal  complaints  recur  regularly  every  evening,".
— Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  v/as  coming  on  (in  a  quarter  of  an
hour),'^ — Contractive  cramp  deep  in  the  hypogastrium  on  stooping,  also  in
the  small  of  the  back  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium
for  three  hours,  also  during  dinner  (after  two  hours),'. — Transverse  stitches
deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  when  standing,'. — Cutting  pain  in  the  lower  ab-
domen, during  which  the  belly  is  very  small  (sixteenth  day),'. — Painful
pressure  in  the  groin  and  the  bend  of  the  thigh,'. — [470.]  (Pinching  and)
sharp  stitches  in  the  right  groin,  when  stretching  out  (twentieth  day),'. —
Elastic  swelling  in  the  left  groin,  as  large  as  a  fist,  in  the  evening,  after
lying  down,  with  a  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  at  that  place;  on  account  of  this
pain  she  cannot  rest  upon  that  side;  the  pain  is  also  experienced  upon  the
parts  being  touched;  on  waking,  swelling  and  pain  had  disappeared  (ninth
day),'. — 'A  hernia  protrudes  in  the  left  groin  (second  day),'.^Aching  swell-
ing of  left  inguinal  glands,  which  went  off  towards  noon,  and  was  replaced
by  headache  and  ill-feeling,  which  lasted  till  evening,  and  recurred  slightly
next  day,'. — Sense  of  fulness  and  distension  in  the  region  of  the  left  groin, .
Stool  and,  Anus. — The  varices  of  the  rectum  protrude  a  good  deal
during  the  evacuation,  and  are  painful  a  long  time  afterwards,  so  that  she
finds  it  impossible  to  walk  (seventh  day),'. — The  varices  of  the  rectum  pro-


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  269

trude  even  when  there  is  no  evacuation,  but  they  recede  when  lying  down,'.
— Formation  of  varices  of  the  rectum,  moist,  and  with  a  pain  as  from  ex-
coriation,'.— At  night  he  cannof.  sleep,  on  account  of  a  burning  pain  at  the
rectum ;  this,  together  with  a  strong  desire  for  stool,  compelled  him  to  rise,'.
— After  the  evacuation,  sense  of  scratching,  then  burning,  at  the  anus,'. —
[480.1  Itching  of  the  anus,^. — The  child  becomes  sore  between  the  legs,'. —
Diarrhoea,  of  faeces  and  mucus,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  before  and
during  the  stools  (eighth  day),'. — ^Diarrhoea,  with  colic,  early  in  the  morn-
ing,'.— Loose  stools,  twice  a  day  (third  and  fourth  days),'  ^ — Loose  motion,'^
— Loone  stool,  preceded  and  followed  by  cutting  in  abdomen,^. — Uncommonly
early  call  to  stool,  and  loose  evacuation,  then  headache  and  much  rigor
(in  one-quarter  hour) ,'\ — Liquid  stool  (8  a.m.),^ — Stools  mixed  with  mucus,'.
— [490.]  At  7  A.M.,  evacuation  surrounded  by  watery  mucus. — In  morn-
ing early,  a  fecal  evacuation,  which,  contrary  to  custom,  occurred  during
the  day,'*. — Evacuations,  with  constant  tenesmus,'. — Violent  cutting  in  the
rectum,  with  good  evacuations,'. — The  evacuations  are  accompanied  by  a
pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  moves  transversely  across  the  abdo-
men towards  the  sacrum  and  rectum;  it  is  diminished  by  bending  the  body,
and  ceases  entirely  after  an  evacuation  (twenty-eighth  day),". — *Discharge
of  blood  during  and  after  the  evacuation,^. — Hard  evacuation,  followed  by
discharge  of  a  milk-like  prostatic  fluid,'. — Hard,  painful  stools,  with  prick-
ings in  the  anus,'. — Hard  stools,  surrounded  with  streaks  of  blood  (after
twenty-two  hours),'. — Retarded  and  hard  stools,  forming  masses,  which  she
finds  it  difficult  to  press  out,'. — [500.]  Retention  of  stools  during  the  first
days;  this  is  succeeded  by  loose  stools  (in  all  the  pro  vers),'. — Constipation
the  first  four  days,*.

Urinary  Organs, —  Violent  tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  with  cutting,'.
— Constant  tenesmus,  even  at  night,  with  diminished  passage  of  urine,  ac-
companied by  burning,'. — Blood  comes  out  of  the  urethra,'. — After  urinat-
ing, there  is  a  strong  traction  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra ;  in  the  even-
ing, when  going  to  bed,'. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  of  a  boy,  while
asleep,  towards  morning  (first  and  second  night,  and  after  sixteen  days),'. —
Great  desire  to  make  water,'. — Copious  urination,'. — Great  flow  of  urine,'".
— [510.]  Frequent  micturition,  especially  the  first  day,'. — Somewhat  in-
creased urinary  secretion,". — Frequent  call  to  pass  water,  as  was  also  the  ,
case  for  several  days  previously,''. — Repeated  call  to  pass  water ;  urine
very  muddy,  of  a  peculiar  smell,  and  with  copious  sediment,'". — Increased
and  turbid  urine,'. — Increased  flow  of  urine,  and  loose  evacuation  in  after-
noon,'^.— Great  increase  of  urine  and  frequent  calls  to  pass  it,  especially  in
the  afternoon,'*. — Frequent  and  copious  emissions  of  urine,  especially  in
the  evening,'. — At  night,  she  is  obliged  to  rise  for  the  purpose  of  urinating,'.
— At  night,  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a  desire  to  urinate,'. — [520.]  At
night,  several  successive  emissions  of  urine,  some  of  them  pretty  copious,'. —
At  noon,  the  urine  looks  pale-yellow ;  this  is  the  first  emission  since  last  even-
ing,'.— Urine  pretty  clear,'". — White,  sandy  urine,  for  several  days  (after
nine  days),'. — The  urine  looks  reddish  after  dinner,  like  water  mixed  with
blood,'."

Sexual  Organs. — {Male.)  Stifihess  of  the  penis,  without  any  desire
for  coition  (sixth  day),'. — Involuntary  continual  erections,  early  in  the
morning  (thirteenth  day),'. — Itching  on  glans  penis,  which  lasted  several
days,". — Frequent  relaxation  of  the  scrotum,'. — Increased  weight  of  the
scrotum  ;  he  was  obliged  to  carry  it  in  a  supporter,'. — [530.]  Drawing  pain
in  the  scrotum,'. — Occasional  drawings  in  the  scrotum,  which  are  relieved


270  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

by  raising  it,\ — Choking  pain  in  the  serotnm  and  spermatic  cords;  the
scrotum  is  painful  to  the  touch  ;  it  is  excited  by  involuntary  erections,'. —
Vehement  desire  for  coition,  without  any  remarkably  voluptuous  thoughts,
and  almost  without  any  erection  (after  five  days),'. — Vehemently  voluptu-
ous desires,  with  trembling  of  the  body,  almost  without  any  erection,'. —
Lascivious  fancies,  and  great  liveliness  and  excitement  (evening  and  night) ;
(I  cannot  say  if  I  should  attribute  them  to  the  medicine),^ — Diminished
sexual  desire,'^. — The  sexual  instinct  is  dormant  for  some  time  (after  seven
days),'. — (Total  want  of  the  sexual  instinct),'. — Aversion  to  the  other  sex,'.
— [540.]  Pollutions,  almost  every  night,'. — Pollution,  two  days  after  an
embrace,'. — Nocturnal  emissions  (cannot  say  if  I  should  attribute  them  to
the  medicine),^ — (After  coition,  excited  circulation  and  palpitation  of  the
heart),'. — {Females.)  *Swelling,  itching,  and  burning  of  the  pudendum  (after
twelve  days),'. — Soreness  of  the  pudendum  and  the  anus,  especially  painful
on  urinating,'. — *  Violeiit  itching  of  the  pudendum^. — Continual  itching  of
the  mons  veneris ;  it  constantly  reappears  after  scratching  the  parts,^  —  Vio-
lent leucorrhcea  (after  two,  seven,  eight,  and  nine  days),'. — Watery,  burning
leucorrhoea  (thirteenth  and  fourteenth  days),'. — [550.]  The  courses,  which
had  always  been  regular,  appear  one  day  too  soon,^ — After  a  long  drive
in  the  cold  air,  the  courses  come  on  four  days  too  soon  ;  they  are  very  copi-
ous, especially  at  night,  and  when  sitting  and  driving ;  previously  she  experi-
ences griping  colic,  with  want  of  appetite,'. — *  The  courses  come  on  six  days
too  soon,^. — The  courses  come  on  on  the  eighteenth  day  (after  seven  days),'. —
The  menses  appear  too  late  by  three  to  five  days  ;  there  occurs  one  com-
plete interruption,'. — The  menses  are  more  copious  (immediately),'. — *The
menstrual  blood  is  blackish,  often  in  clots,  passing  off  with  spasmodic  pain  in
the  belly,  and  hard  stools,  with  tenesmus ;  the  flow  is  abundant,^. — The  men-
strual blood  is  not  much  colored,'. — *The  menstrual  blood  is  acrid,  it  makes
the  thighs  sore ;  this  soreness  causes  a  burning  pain,^. — Pain  in  the  belly  and
the  small  of  the  back,  before  the  catamenia,l — [560.]  Paleness  of  the  face,
before  and  during  the  catamenia,'. — Invincible  sadness  during  the  cata-
menia,'. — Toothache  during  the  catamenia,'. —  Colic  during  the  catamenia,
with  griping,  pressure,  and  tension  between  the  scapulae,'. —  Violent  tearing
in  the  body  diiring  the  catamenia,  which  appear  one  day  too  soon,'. —  Violent
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  during  the  catamenia,^. —  Violent  cold  during
the  catamenia  (ninth  day),'. — *  Great  fatigue  of  the  whole  body  during  the
catamenia,  especially  of  the  thighs,  tvith  yawning,  toothache,  pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  and  chilliness,^.

Ites2)ii'atori/  Appoi'atus. — Rattling  in  the  larynx,  as  from  mucus
(for  several  days),". — Constriction  of  the  larynx  from  both  sides  of  the  neck,'.
— [570.]  Drawing,  and  stinging-itching  in  the  larynx,'. — Soon  after,  a  ca-
tarrhal irritation  in  the  nose,  and  scraping  and  scratching  in  the  throat,
with  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  and  diiBcult  hawking  up  of  a  little  phlegm
(after  half  an  hour),''. — Hoarseness  and  roughness  in  the  throat,'. — Rough
throat ;  he  can  only  speak  with  diificulty,  as  speaking  increases  the  rough-
ness (second  day),'. — Violent  and  frequent  hoarseness,^. — She  is  so  hoarse
that  she  cannot  speak  a  loud  word  (after  sixteen  days),'. — His  chest  feels
so  oppressed  that  he  can  scarcely  speak,  with  coryza,  and  expectoration  of
much  mucus,  especially  early  in  the  morning,'. — The  chest  feels  rough ;
when  calling  aloud  he  is  hoarse,'. — Immediately  after  taking,  an  irritation,
causing  cough,  which  did  not,  however,  last  long,". — *  Cough  from  a  scratch-
ing in  throat,^. — [580.]  *The  child  coughs  violently  every  morning,  at  three
to  four  o'clock,^. — He  is  obliged  to  cough  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when  in  bed


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  271

in  the  evening,'. — Nightly  cough^. — At  night,  cough,  with  stuffed  cold  in
the  head,  which  kept  him  awake  in  bed  from  twelve  to  one  o'clock,  and
yet,  in  the  morning,  felt  quite  well,  except  a  little  stomachache,  which  soon
went  off,  but  returned  betwixt  nine  and  ten  o'clock,'^ — Cough,  with  asthma
(sixth  da)'),'. —  Cough,  ivith  asthma,  for  half  an  hour,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed,\ — Cough,  from  deep  in  the  chest,  extremely  violent,^ — Cough,  which
contracts  the  chest,^ — Cough,  which  makes  the  chest  under  the  sternum
feel  sore,  as  from  excoriation,'. — Cough,  exciting  a  pain  in  the  jaws,  which  is
not  felt  upon  touching  them,'. — [590.]  Cough,  with  pain  at  the  lower  part
of  the  sternum,'. — Cough,  with  stitches  in  the  sternum  (first  day),'. — Cough,
every  attack  causes  a  stitch  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'.— Cough,  with  heat
in  the  head,'. — Short  and  suppressed  hacking,  from  an  irritation  in  the
larynx,  with  painful  sensation  of  spasmodic  asthma,'. — *Dry  cough,  espe-
cially at  night,  as  from  particles  of  dust  in  the  throat,^. — *  Violent  dry  cough
in  the  middle  of  the  nighty. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  phlegm,  and
soreness  in  the  air-passages,'. — Cough,  during  the  whole  day,  and  early  in
the  morning,  with  expectoration  of  a  quantity  of  phlegm,'. — Continual
cough,  early  in  bed,  with  expectoration  of  phlegm,  affecting  chest  and
head,'. — [600.]  Cough,  with  expectoration  of  phlegm,  intermixed  with
little  points  of  blood  (after  eight  da3-s),'. — *  Cough,  with  expectoration  of
bloody  phlegm,  heaviness  upon  the  chest,  and  short  breath,  especially  in  as-
cending a  hill  (sixth  and  eighteenth  days),'. — Increased  expectoration,™. —
Bloody  expectoration  when  clearing  the  throat,'. — Roughness,  and  bloody
taste  in  the  mouth,  succeeded  by  cough  and  expectoration  of  light-red
blood,  with  burning  and  heaviness  in  the  chest,  heat  and  redness  in  the
face,  and  trembling  of  the  whole  body  (fourth  day),'. — Much  hawking  of
saltish  mucus  at  night,'. — *  Oppression  of  breathing,". — Difficult  breathing ;
it  made  him  hack  (short  cough),'. — Difficult  breathing  at  night ;  he  cannot
bear  the  cover  of  the  bed  to  touch  his  mouth,  for  then  he  is  afraid  of  chok-
ing (seventh  day),'. — Asthma  and  palpitation  of  the  heart  after  every
effort,'. — [610.]  Attack  of  asthma  for  eight  days  ;  he  had  immense  trouble
in  ascending  a  few  steps,  and  in  breathing ;  this  was  only  possible  for  him
in  the  open  air ;  he  dared  not  venture  into  a  warm  room  ;  he  there  turned
as  pale  as  a  corpse,  and  was  unable  to  do  anything  except  sit  still  (after
twenty-one  days),'. — Short  breathing,  with  stitches  in  the  chest,'. — Short
breathing,  especially  on  going  upstairs,'. — When  breathing,  frequent  stitches
in  the  hands  and  fingers,'.

Chest. — Red  rash  on  the  chest,'. — Pain  in  the  chest,*. — Pains  in  the
chest,". — During  an  expiration  it  seems  as  if  something  drew  downwards
in  the  chest,  and  did  not  permit  expiration  (seventh  day),'. — The  chest  feels
weak,'. — Chronic  weakness  of  the  chest  and  coryza  (after  fourth  week),'. —
[620.]  Heaviness  on  the  chest,  as  from  an  accumulation  of  blood  (fourth,
fifth,  .seventh  days),'. — Heaviness  and  tightness  of  the  chest,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,'. — Painful  oppression  at  the  chest,  as  from  a  hundred-
weight ;  she  only  desires  to  cough,  in  order  to  be  relieved  (seventh  day),'.
— Painful  oppression  on  the  chest,  especially  when  lying  on  the  bed,'. —
Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest  (after  writing),'. — Heat  in  the  chest,'. — Com-
pressive oppression  on  the  chest,'. — Contraction  of  the  middle  of  the  chest,
either  when  breathing  or  not ;  the  place  aches  on  pressing  upon  it,  as  after
a  blow,'. — Bruised  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  early  in  the  morning
(fourth  day),'. — When  standing,  sensation  in  the  chest  as  if  the  lungs  were
drawn  down  (sixth  day),'. — [630.]  Great  distress  in  the  chest,'. — Stitches
in  the  chest,  at  the  last  true  rib,  when  breathing  and  singing,'. — Stitches


272  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

in  the  chest,  when  stooping,  relieved  by  straightening  up  (sixteenth  day),^
— Stitches  upon  the  sternum,  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  under" the
left  breast ;  upon  touching  the  parts  they  feel  bruised,'. — Stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  when  walking,'. — Stitches  in  the  right  breast,  when
stooping^. — Twenty,  thirty  successive  stitches,  even  when  she  does  not
breathe,  under  the  right  breast,  close  by  the  lowest  ribs,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, when  rising  up  in  bed;  likewise,  at  other  periods  of  the  day ,\ — The
right  breast  is  painful  to  the  touch  (third  day),^. — A  small,  red  furunculus
above  the  right  breast,  which  is  only  painful  when  touched,^ — Pain,  especi-
ally in  left  side  of  chest,  as  after  sitting  long  in  a  bent  position,*. — [640.]
Felt  an  uninterrupted  aching  in  chest,  more  on  left  than  right  side,". —
Shooting  at  the  side  of  the  left  nipple  in  breathing;  especially  troublesome
when  seated,^ — Violent  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  commencing
in  the  precordial  region  and  then  moving  downwards  towards  the  side,  and
afterwards  towards  the  back  (after  eleven  days),\ — Stitches  in  the  left
breast,  during  a  great  portion  of  the  night,  which  do  not  permit  her  lying
on  the  left  side,'. — The  parts  of  the  sternum  crack  upon  the  chest  being
bent  backward,  with  a  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,'. — Heaviness
and  oppression  at  the  sternum,  at  night,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Great  palpitation,'. — Frequent  palpitation  of
the  heart,  with  retraction  of  the  epigastrium  and  sense  of  weakness  in  the
prsecordial  region,'. — Audible  palpitation  of  the  heart'  and  accelerated
beating ;  upon  the  hand  being  pressed  upon  the  heart  the  blood  seems  to
rise  to  the  neck,  with  breathing  rendered  diiScult  (at  rest),'. — Pulse  some-
what quickened,'^ — [650.]  Pulse  seems  to  get  quicker  whenever  the  oppres-
sion came  on,'. — Pulse  about  half  as  strong  again  as  usual,^ — Pulse  112,'^ —
Pulse  76,'l

Week  and  Sack. — Violent  burning  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  early  in
the  morning  (tenth  day),^ — Drawing  pain  at  the  nape  of  the  neck  (with
stitches  at  the  head,  over  the  temples,  and  bloated  face),'. — Drawing  from
the  neck  down  (sixth  day),'. — Stiff  neck,  when  turning  the  head,'. — Pain
in  the  back,  during  motion,'. — Burning  at  the  back,  especially  in  the  small
of  the  back,  several  times  during  the  day,'. — [660.]  Pressure  in  the  back,'.
— A  jerk  in  the  back,  at  night,  when  asleep  (seventh  day),l — A  blister
forms  upon  the  left  scapula,  with  a  sensation  of  stinging,  as  from  fleas,'. —
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  increased  by  motion  and  walking,'. — Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back  when  stooping ;  she  feels  as  if  the  muscles  were
not  strong  enough  to  support  the  body,  which  constantly  threatens  to  fall
forwards ;  relieved  by  straightening  up  (second  day),'. — Pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  as  from  a  bruise  (second  day  of  the  menses),'. — Upon  walking
out  into  the  open  air  he  had  a  sudden  dart  into  the  small  of  the  back ;  this
■was  most  painful  when  rising,  after  being  seated  for  a  long  time,'. — Shoot-
ing pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,'. — Drawing  pain  from  the  small  of  the
back  to  the  legs,'. — Drawing  and  pressive  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back
and  in  the  loin,  only  when  at  rest  (sitting,  standing,  or  lying),  in  daytime ;
it  disappears  when  walking,'. — [670.]  Violently  throbbing  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  and  in  the  loin,  when  at  rest;  upon  touching  the  parts
the  pain  remains  the  same,'. — Gnawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and
in  the  hips;  from  these, parts  it  extends  to  the  abdomen,  and  moves  again
backwards,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion  (sixteenth  day),'. — Stinging
at  the  coccyx  preceded  by  itching,'.

Extremities  in  General. — All  her  limbs  ache  in  the  forenoon
and  at  night,  with  gnawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  more  when  at


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  273

rest  than  when  moving  about  (forty-first  day),'. — Sensation  as  if  the  limbs
were  bruised  ;  also  in  the  evening,^ — Bruised  feeling  in  .Iimbs,^ — All  her
limbs  pain  her  at  night,  with  a  gnawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  (forty-
first  day),'. — Great  lassitude  in  limbs  as  after  a  fever,". — Great  lassitude  in
her  limbs  and  complete  disinclination  to  work,\ — Morning  after  taking,
great  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,'". — [680.]
Great  fatigue  and  weakness  of  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  evening  hours,  in
the  knees  and  legs,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down  (first  and  second  days),^
— Itching  in  all  the  limbs,'". — Cracking  in  the  joints,  when  walking,'. —
Sticking-drawing,  sometimes  in  the  right  arm,  sometimes  in  the  legs,'. — The
hands  and  feet  go  to  sleep  when  sitting ;  passes  off  on  moving  about,'. —
Cold  hands  and  feet,  even  in  a  warm  room,  and  when  they  are  well  covered,'.
Upper  EdCtremities. — Drawing  pain  in  the  arms  and  hands,'.—
Tearing  in  tlie  joints  of  the  upper  extremities,'. — Tearing  in  the  shoulders,'.
— Drawing  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-joint  (after  fourteenth  day),'. — [690.]
Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  both  when  at  rest  and  in
motion  (thirty-seventh  day),'. — Small  furunculus  upon  the  left  shoulder,'. —
Pressure  upon  the  left  shoulder,'. — A  few  tearings  in  the  left  shoulder  to-
wards the  chest,'. — Bruised  pain  in  the  left  shoulder,  when  at  rest  and  in
motion,'. — Bruised  pain  in  the  left  shoulder  and  elbow-joint  (in  the  even-
ing),'.— The  glands  in  the  axilla  become  painful  and  enlarged,'. — Draw-
ing pain  in  the'arms  and  hands,'. — Noticed  on  upper  arm,  where  he  had
received  a  prick,  a  kind  of  insensibility,  which  only  went  off  gradually,'". —
Burning  at  a  small  spot  of  the  upper  and  lower  arm  (eleventh  day),'. —
[700.]  In  the  night,  about  three  or  four  o'clock,  she  puts  her  arm  out  of
bed  without  knowing  it;  the  pain  which  she  experiences  in  her  arm  rouses
her  from  sleep ;  the  arm  is  cold,  stiff,  and  in  the  elbow-joint  it  is  as  heavy
as  lead;  the  arm  being  very  stiff,  she  has  to  use  the  other  hand,  in  order  to
put  the  arm  back  again  into  the  bed  ;  upon  moving  it,  or  when  the  arm  is  in
the  bed,  a  tearing  pain  in  the  shoulder,  elbow,  and  wrist-joint,'. — Spasm  in
the  right  arm,  which  drew  the  arm  backwards,  three  times  in  succession ;  this
was  succeeded  by  heat  of  the  body  and  turbid,  white  urine,'. — Twitches
and  jerkings  in  the  right  upper  arm  (fourth  day),'. — Sensation  of  paralysis
of  the  right  arm  (fourteenth  day),*. — Heaviness  and  sensation  of  paralysis
of  the  right  arm  ;  she  has  no  strength  in  it,  and  is  obliged  to  let  it  hang
down ;  at  the  same  time  the  hand  is  swollen  and  cold  for  half  an  hour  (after
two  hours),'. — The  right  arm  appeared  to  weigh  a  hundredweight,  and  to  he
without  strength^. — For  some  days  the  right  arm  is  quite  weak  and  cold,  so
that  it  appears  to  be  benumbed  and  lifeless;  this  was  again  succeeded  by  a
tingling  sensation  in  it,'. — Paralytic  drawing  in  the  left  arm,  extending
from  the  axilla  as  far  as  the  wrist,'. — Cracking  in  the  elbow-joint,  during
motion,'. — Creaking  pain  in  elbow-joint,  on  stretching  the  arm  out  straight
before  him,'. — [710.]  Stiflhess  of  the  elbow-joint,'. — Boring  pain  in  the
elbow-joint,  in  the  fossa  which  receives  the  olecranon  process,'. — Sharp
stitches  in  the  elbow,'. — Tearing  in  the  elbow  (in  the  bone)  as  far  as  the
little  finger  (fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Violent  pain  in  the  middle  of  the
left  forearm,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  bone
there  would  curve  inward  and  break  (second  day),'. — Itching  of  the  inside
of  the  right  forearm,  with  a  sensation  as  of  burning  consequent  upon  scratch-
ing ;  at  the  same  time  there  are  formed  small  red  pimples,  spots,  and  nodes,
which  do  not  cease  to  itch  after  being  scratched ;  on  the  day  following  they
become  crimson  (fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Tension  in  the  wrist-joint,  when
at  rest,  worse  during  motion ;  he  feels  as  if  he  could  not  move  his  hand

VOL.  I. — 18


274  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

(second  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  wrist-joints  as  far  as  the  fingers ;  it  ceases
when  she  is  warm  in  bed,^ — Painful  tearing  in  the  left  wrist,  as  if  in  the
marrow  towards  the  little  finger  (sixth  day),^ — The  right  hand  frequently
goes  to  sleep  when  lying  upon  it  during  the  night  (fourth  day),^ — [720,]
Trembling  of  the  hands  (after  seventh  day"),'. — Distended  veins  and  blue-
ness  of  the  hands,  after  washing  them  with  cold  water,'. — The  skin  of  a
child's  hand  becomes  quite  hard  and  chapped,  the  fissures  being  very  deep,'.
— Great  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the  hand,  which  roused  her  from  sleep  at
night,'. — The  skin  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  peels  off  (after  fourth  day),'.—
Upon  stretching  the  fingers  apart  a  pinching  pain,'. — Cramp  in  the  pos-
terior phalanx  of  a  finger,  so  that  he  cannot  stretch  it,  with  painful  stitches ;
from  morning  to  night,  when  staying  in  the  cold  (second  day),'. — Drawing
pain  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  as  far  as  the  hand,  as  from  continual  mes-
merizing (first  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  fingers,  and  in  the  articulation  of
the  thumb,'. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  left  thumb,  which  seems  to  be
in  the  bone,  accompanied  by  a  yawning  (eleventh  day),'. — [730.]  Visible
twitching  and  jerking  in  the  left  thumb,'. — Swelling  of  the  middle  joint  of
the  right  middle  finger,  with  painfulness  when  touched  or  bent,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Sudden  and  great  weakness  in  the  lower
extremities ;  she  finds  it  difficult  to  move  them  along,  after  dinner  (second
day),'. — Acute  pain  in  the  hip-joint  when  walking,'. — Acute  pain  in  the
hip-joint  every  morning,  in  bed;  the -joint  feels  as  if  beaten  asunder,  so
that  he  cannot  turn  himself  when  lying  down  ;  the  pain  decreases  after
rising  ;  and  still  more  when  walking ;  in  the  afternoon,  the  pain  disappears
entirely  (for  four  weeks),'. — In  evening,  sudden,  violent  pulsation  about
right  hip,  which,  however,  soon  goes  off",''. — Drawing  pain  descending  from
the  left  hip,'. — His  legs  seem  contracted,'. — The  tendons  of  the  muscles  of
the  legs  feel  too  short,'. — Twitches  in  the  legs,  towards  evening,'. — [740.]
Uneasiness  in  the  legs,^. — Heaviness  in  the  legs,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  lift
them,  in  the  evening  (eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  leg,  as  from  a  sprain,
when  walking,'. — Sweat  of  the  legs  at  night,'. — Great  lassitude  in  the  thighs
and  legs,'. — Jerk-like  scraping  upon  the  bones  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  so
that  she  is  obliged  to  twitch  up  her  leg  every  moment,  and  cannot  remain
lying  down,  but  has  to  walk  about  (evening),'. — Burning  itching  upon  the
nates,'. — In  evening,  on  left  nates,  a  painful  boil,'". — Great  lassitude,  with
pain  in  the  thighs,  as  if  they  would  fall  off,  or  as  if  the  tendons  would  tear
ofi",  alternating  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  she  has  so  much  pain
that  she  knows  not  what  to  do  with  herself  (on  the  third  day  of  menses),'.
— Bruised  pain  in  the  thighs,'. — [750.]  Stiffness  in  the  thighs  when  walk-
ing,'.^! tching  on  outer  surface  of  thighs,  on  the  same  spot,  and  equally
severe,  in  both  thighs,". — Bruised  pain  in  the  middle  of  both  thighs,  both
when  at  rest  and  in  motion  (during  the  catamenia),'. — Pain  in  the  thigh,
as  if  she  had  been  beaten  blue,  which  prevents  her  from  walking  (only
when  walking  and  taking  much  exercise),', — Boil  on  right  thigh,  the  size
of  a  child's  fist,  very  painful,  and  not  relieved  by  poultices ;  the  boil,  cut
open,  discharged  much  pus  and  blood,'". — Acute  pain  in  the  right  femur,
as  if  the  inmost  marrow  were  shaken,  increased  by  lying  and  sitting,  a
quarter  of  an  hour  (after  some  hours),'. — Pain,  as  of  contusion,  in  the  right
thigh,  immediately  over  the  knee,  which  passes  off  by  rubbing  (eleventh
day),'. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  thigh,  with  a  feeling  of  weakness
and  sudden  bending  of  the  legs  in  walking,'. — Pain,  as  if  the  tendons  were
too  short,  at  a  place  of  the  left  thigh  over  the  bend  of  the  knee ;  only  when
the  parts  are  pressed  upon,  or  when  the  person  sits  upon  them,  otherwise


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  275

there,  is  no  pain  (third  day)/. — Blue  spot,  as  large  as  a  child's  hand,  over
the  knee,  with  a  sensation  of  excessive  burning  there,'. — [760.]  A  deep
seated,  burning  furunculus  consequent  upon  itching,'. — An  induration  over
the  right  knee,  deep  under  the  skin,  painful  only  when  pressed  upon,'. —
Twitches  in  both  knees  and  legs,^ — Twitches  in  both  patellae,  in  the  even
ing,  several  times  in  succession  (fifth  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  knees  and
knee-joints,'. — Boring  and  drawing  in  the  knee,  which  causes  such  an  un-
easiness in  the  legs  that  she  is  obliged  to  move  them  constantly  ;  this  mo-
tion, however,  does  not  relieve  the  uneasiness,'. — Cracking  when  moving
the  knee,'. — Pain  in  the  knee,  as  from  a  sprain ;  upon  sitting  down  and
turning  the  leg,'. — Burning,  redness,  like  scarlatina,  in  the  bend  of  the
right  knee  and  along  the  leg ;  the  pain  increases  upon  laying  the  cold  hand
upon  tjie  part  (twentieth  and  twenty-first  days),'. — Boring  pain  in  and  upon
the  patella,'. — [770.]  Pain  as  froin  paralysis  in  the  legs,  as  if  they  were
going  to  sleep,  relieved  by  walking  (seventh  day),'. — The  legs  frequently
go  to  sleep,  when  sitting  and  standing,  and  at  night,  when  he  lies  upon  the
limb,'. — Frequent  cramps  in  the  legs,  especially  in  the  muscles  of  the  tibiae
and  the  feet,'. — Cramp  in  the  leg,  when  lying  down,  which  became  intol-
erable on  rising,  and  obliged  the  person  to  lie  down  again,'. — Tearing  below
the  knee  and  at  the  left  tibia  (eleventh  day),'. — Violent  cramp  in  the  calf,
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  so  that  he  had  to  stand  suddenly  still,'. —
Straining  in  the  calf  (from  a  cold  ?),'. — Violent  stitches  deep  in  the  calves
(fourteenth  day),^ — (Stitches  over  the  right  heel),'. — Tearing  in  the  malleoli
and  in  the  joints  of  the  feet;  it  extends  as  far  as  the  toes,  and  ceases  when
she  gets  warm  in  bed,'. — [780.]  Drawing  pain  at  the  external  malleolus
(fourth  day),'. — Acute  pain  in  the  heel,  early  on  waking,  as  if  the  bone
were  perforated  by  ulceration,'. — Tingling  in  the  left  heel ;  when  touching
it  with  the  hand,  it  feels  as  if  it  were  ulcerated  (after  five  days),'. — Tear-
ing twitches  in  the  right  heel  (thirty-seventh  day),'. — Cold  feet,'. — Chilli-
ness of  the  feet,  in  the  evening,  especially  when  going  to  bed,^. — -Rapid  swell-
ing of  the  feet,  extending  as  far  as  the  calves,'. — Great  lassitude  in  the  feet,
as  if  tired  (second  day),'. — Trembling  of  both  feet  (after  nine  hours),'. —
Uncommon  sensitiveness  of  both  feet  to  wet  and  coId,'^ — [790.]  Crawling
on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  as  from  having  gone  to  sleep  (eleventh
day),'. — Tingling  and  itching  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  which  is  almost  un-
bearable, and  so  vehement  that  she  would  like  to  scratch  ofi"  the  skin  ;  after
scratching,  there  is  a  burning  sensation,  in  the  evening  (after  lying  down),'.
— Tearing  in  both  soles  (eleventh  day),'. — On  rising  in  morning,  though
there  had  been  no  frost  in  the  night,  ball  of  right  foot  swollen  and  tender
as  from  frost,'^ — Sharp  stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot,'. — Ball  of  left
foot  very  painful,  in  evening,'^. — In  evening,  the  swelled  ball  of  left  foot
burned,  and  was  painful,'". — In  evening,  tender,  red  swelling  of  right  toes,
like  chilblains,'^ — Tearing  stitches  and  twitches  of  the  big  toe,'. — Frequent
and  painful  twitches  of  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  (when  a  child,  it  had  been
frozen),'. — [800.]  Occasionally,  acute  stitches,  and  drawing  of  the  balls  of
both  the  big  toes,  as  if  they  were  frozen,  for  several  days,  especially  in  the
evening,  on  going  to  sleep,'. — Itching  and  crawling  in  the  ball  of  the  big
toe  of  the  right  foot,  as  from  a  chilblain,'. —  Piercing  pain  in  the  ball  of  the
big  toe,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,'. — *The  left  big  toe  feels  hot,  and  is
painful,  as  if  he  had  burnt  if,  especially  in  damp  weather,  and  when  the
boots  press  upon  it ;  the  pain  decreases  on  pulling  off  the  boot,  or  on  rest-
ing the  foot  firmly  against  the  floor,  or  when  walking  (fourteenth  to  thirty-
sixth  day),'.  — *The  big  toe  becomes  red,  enlarged,  and  painful,  especially  in


276  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

the  evening,  when  in  bed,  and  the  whole  foot  swells,^. — During  walking,  the
ball  of  the  big  toe  is  painful,  as  if  there  were  subcutaneous  ulceration,'.

Generalities. — Towards  noon,  it  became  black  before  the  eyes  ;  the
letters  appeared  to  move  ;  his  breath  was  arrested;  with  previous  lassitude;
upon  quickly  rising  from  sitting,  his  whole  body  felt  rigid,  the  arms  and
legs  being  stretched  out,  whilst  the  fingers  were  clenched ;  he  had  to  use
force  to  stretch  them ;  this  made  them  again  movable  (fourth  day),'. —
Spasms,™. — Most  severe  muscular  contractions,™. — Tetanus,™. — [810,]  Great
restlessness,  which  becomes  a  convulsive  trembling,™. — When  walking,  she
trembles  over  the  whole  body,l. — She  staggers  upon  rising,'.^Excessively
tired,'. — Very  tired  in  the  morningj^.^Great  fatigue  in  the  forenoon,  which
invites  to  sleep  (one  hour),'. — In  morning,  exhaustion,'^ — *  Tired  and  weary
all  day,  without  being  either  sad  or  cheerful  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. —
On  leaving  her  bed,  she  is  often  unable  to  stand,  on  account  of  weariness
(after  forty-eight  hours),'. — She  is  powerless ;  lies  down  for  several  hours,
as  if  senseless  and  weary,'. — [820.]  Weary  and  discouraged  when  walking
in  the  open  air ;  he  trembled  with  weakness,'. — Inability  to  stand  upright
well,'^. — The  whole  day,  a  slight  perspiration,  as  from  exhaustion,'. — -*Las-
situde^*'^^. — Uncommon  lassitude,'^. — Great  lassitude  (in  evening),'". — In-
describably great  lassitude  ;  often  she  cannot  sit,  and  has  to  lie  down  for
hours  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Evening  and  morning  of  19th,  great
lassitude ;  also,  on  following  days,  heaviness  of  limbs,". — ^Great  las'situde
and  fatigue  of  the  body,  early  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  forenoon,  ^s  if  he
had  worked  too  much ;  relieved  by  walking  in  the  open  air,". — Sensation
of  being  bruised  in  the  whole  body ;  lassitude  and  weeping  mood,  early  after
rising,'. — [830.]  At  three  o'clock  in  the  night,  he  felt  a  jerk  in  the  upper
part  of  his  body  and  in  the  arms,  with  a  tearing  pain ;  in  the  full  posses-
sion of  his  senses  for  at  least  ten  minutes  ;  afterwards  he  felt  very  faint,'. —
Toward  evening,  she  became  suddenly  indisposed  ;  she  thought  she  would
faint;  walking  up  and  down  in  the  open  air  gave  her  relief,  alth6ugh  she
still  experienced  a  few  stitches  in  the  right  side  (after  ten  days),'. — She  is
much  affected  by  talking  much,  and  hearing  people  talk ;  her  hands  and
feet  become  cold  in  consequence  of  it,'. — *  Excessive  sensitiveness  to  open  air,^.
— Sensitiveness  to  open  air  (in  evening),'". — She  cannot  bear  the  evening
air;  her  feet  become  heavy;  the  external  air  is  unpleasant  to  her,  and
every  part  of  her  body  feels  sore,'. — ^Unusual  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  to
cold,'. — Feeling  of  numbness  on  the  right  side,  upon  which  she  is  lying
when  in  bed;  upon  turning  to  the  other  side,  this  feeling  passes  off  (second
day),l — Visible  emaciation  of  the  whole  body,". — Pain  in  the  occiput,  in
the  chest,  and  from  both  scapulse,  down  along  the  ribs,'. — [840.]  Violent
rheumatic  drawing  pain  through  all  the  limbs,  hands,  feet,  nape  of  the
neck,  head,  etc.,^ — Tearing  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  thighs,'. —
Fine  prickings  in  the  head,  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes,'. — A  cold
affects  her  head,  and  makes  her  hoarse,'. — Very  sick  the  whole  day,"'. — In
morning,  felt  ill,". — Several  symptoms  appear  to  'develop,  or  to  become
worse  in  the  open  air,'. — He  has  to  turn  himself  slowly  in  bed,  because
motion  gives  him  pain,". — Much  affected  from  walking  in  the  open  air,". —
Walking  in  the  open  air  tires  him  out,'. — [850,]  Walking  in  the  open  air
makes  him  feel  hot,*. — He  finds  it  more  easy  to  lie  upon  the  left  side  than
upon  the  right,". — *  The  right  side  of  the  body  appears  more  affected  than  the
left,\ _

Skin. — *rAe  whole  upper  part  of  the  body  is  red,  as  if  it  were  covered
with  scarlatina,^. — Violent  itching  here  and  there  over  the  whole  body;  the


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  277

scratching  is  followed  by  burning  vesicles,  or  pimples,  or  hard  nodes,''. —
Burning  pimples,  of  the  size  of  a  millet  grain,  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and
on  the  forearms,^. — Strange  uneasiness,  every  evening  at  seven  o'clock,
which  rouses  the  child  from  its  slumber ;  it  tosses  about  in  bed  and  screams,
until  it  falls  into  a  sound  sleep,  towards  ten  o'clock ;  this  sleep  lasts  the
whole  night;  during  the  uneasiness,  the  head  feels  bloated  and  burniiiy;;
next  morning,  the  face  is  covered  with  spots,  as  if  scarlatina  would  break
out,*. — Rash  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  and  the  left  lower  arm,'. — Arouinl
the  elbow,  small  red  tubercles,  painfully  cutting,  only  a  few  of  them  ulcer-
ating ;  the  same  upon  the  neck,  but  large,'. — A  herpetic  eruption,  dormant,
becomes  red,  itching  and  burning,  and  disappears  in  a  few  days,'. — A  pus-
tule appears  on  the  right  commissure  of  the  mouth,  with  much  boring  pain  ;
before  this,  several  had  appeared  on  the  left  cheek  and  on  the  thighs,'l—
[860.]  The  warts  become  inflamed,'.— The  fluid  in  the  ulcer  becomes  offen-
sive,'.— Eruptions  upon  the  forehead  resembling  little  boils,'. — Pimples  and
vesicles  on  the  forehead,'. — Pimples  on  the  forehead  and  the  tip  of  the
nose,'. — Pustules  upon  the.forehead,  temple,  cheek,  and  chin,'. — Purunculus
on  the  tip  of  the  nose,'. — Pustule  upon  the  tip  of  the  nose,'. — -Pustule  on
the  side  of  the  nose,'.— On  the  septum  of  the  nose,  a  vesicle,  in  forepart,'^ —
Increased  number  of  pimples  on  the  face,'". — White,  herpes-like  spots,  of
the  size  of  a  small  pea,  which  continually  exfoliate  (upon  the  cheek),'. —
Boils  upon  the  cheek  and  around- the  ear,'. — [870.]  Small  boils  and  indu-
rations, discharging  water  and  blood,  upon  the  cheek,  at  the  corners  of  the
mouth,  and  on  the  chin,^—- Pimple  on  left  cheek,  near  ear,  not  painful
unless  pressed,'^ — Pustules  upon  the  cheeks,  during  the  menses,". — ^Erup-
tion  at  the  mouth,'.— Herpes-like,  scaly  eruption  about  the  mouth,', — Burn-
ing vesicles  on  the  vermilion  border  of  both  lips,'. — Vesicles  at  the  right
corner  of  the  mouth  and  on  the  upper  lip,'. — Pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  with
burning  pain,'. — On  lower  lip,  two  small,  hard  swellings,'*. — Miliary  erup-
tion around  the  chin,  without  sensation,'. — [880.]  Burning  vesicles  on  the
inner  side  of  the  lower, lip,'. — On  the  inner  side  of  the  lower  lip  a  painful
white  vesicle,'. — The  inside  of  the  cheeks  is  full  of  vesicles  without  sensa-
tion,'.—  Vesicles  on  the  fewg'Me,  especially  on  its  border,'. — Vesicles  at  the
tip  of  the  tongue,  which  hinder  speaking  and  eating,  with  a  burning  pain,'.
— Pustules  upon  the  tongue,  with  a  burning  and  stinging  pain,  especially
on  the  border  and  under  the  tongue,'. — Small  ulcer  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,
feeling  sore  whenever  the  tongue  is  moved,'. — More  itching  pimples  on
podex,'^ — Pimples  on  podex,  painful  on  lying  down  at  night,'\ — Red  rash
on  the  chest,'. — [890.]  A  small,  red  furunculus  above  the  right  breast,
which  is  only  painful  when  touched,'. — A  blister  forms  upon  the  left  scapula,
with  sensation  of  stinging,  as  from  fleas,'. — Small  furunculus  upon  the  left
shoulder,'. — Itching  of  the  inside  of  the  right  forearm,  with  a  sensation  as
of  burning  consequent  upon  scratching ;  at  the  same  time,  there  are  formed'
small  red  pimples,  spots  and  nodes,  which  do  not  cease  to  itch  after  being
scratched;  on  the  following  day,  they  become  crimson  (fourth  to  fifth
day),'. — Itching  in  back,  arms,  and  shins,'".— The  skin  of  a  child's  hands
becomes  quite  hard  and  chapped,  the  fissures  being  very  deep,'. — The  skin
of  the  palm  of  the  hand  peels  off  (after  four  days),'. — Many  itching  pimples
on  thighs  and  hands,'". — Blue  spot,  as  large  as  a  child's  hand,  over  the
knee,  with  sensation  bf  excessive  burning  there,'. — A  deepseated  burning
furunculus  consequent  upon  itching,'. — Small  furunculus  in  the  left  instep,
painful  only  when  touched,'. — [900.]  Burning  redness,  like  scarlatina,  in
the  bend  of  the  right  knee  and  along  the  leg ;  the  pain  increases  upon  laying


278  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

the  cold  hand  upon  the  parts  (twenty  and  twenty-first  days),', — Eruption  of
pimples  on  the  legs,  and  inflammation,". — Much  itching  upon  the  skin  of  the
whole  body,'. — Itching  over  the  whole  body,  early  in  the  morning  (for  three
hours),'. — Itching,  here  and  there,  of  many  places  of  the  body,  usually  pass-
ing off  after  scratching,  or  painfully  burning,^. — Much  itching  on  the  hands
and  the  rest  of  the  body,"*. — Itching  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  great  sen-
sitiveness of  the  integuments  of  the  head  when  scratching  (tenth  day),'. —
Violent  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  especially  of  the  occiput,'.— Sense  as  if  the
hairs  would  stand  on  end,  with  crawling  over  the  whole  head,  and  a  feeling
of  coldness  thei-e,  after  coming  out  of  the  open  air  and  entering  the  room,l
—The  hair  is  painful  when  touched,'. — [910.]  The  scalp  and  the  hairs  are
intensely  painful  when  the  hand  is  moved  along  them ;  this  movement
made  him  shudder  (first  evening),'. — Early  in  the  morning,  itching  over
the  ears,  which  spreads  over  the  whole  body  (third  day),'. — Itching  of  tlie
anus,^. — The  child  becomes  sore  between  the  legs,'. — Violent  itching  of  the
genital  organs,'. — Itching  of  the  scrotum,'. — Violent  itching  of  the  puden-
dum,'.— Continual  itching  of  the  raons  veneris ;  it  constantly  reappears
after  scratching  the  parts,'. — Burning  itching  upon  the  nates,'. — He  can-
not fall  asleep  on  account  of  itching  and  stinging  of  the  skin,'. — [920.]
Towards  evening,  itching  on  the  arms  and  still  more  on  the  feet,'l — Itch-
ing, or  rather  a  burning,  in  left  sole  and  calf,  particularly  in  the  former,
where  it  was  most  persistent,'*.  •

Fever. — Chilliness,'\ — During  day  a  good  deal  of  chilliness,". — Gen-
eral shivering,'^ — At  night  he  often  feels  chilliness  in  his  sleep;  on  waking,
he  is  immediately  warm  again,'. — At  night  chilliness,  so  that  he  cannot
get  warm,  least  of  all  his  feet,  nor  can  he  fall  asleep,'. — -Frequent  chilliness,
towards  evening,  and  continuing  until  going  to  bed,'. — Frequently  feverish
chilliness,  in  the  evening,'. — Shivering  before  falling  asleep,'. — [930.]  Chil-
liness in  the  open  air,  or  upon  coming  out  of  the  open  air,  and  entering
the  room,'. — Attacks  of  chilliness,  in  the  evening,  frequently  accompanied  by
the  hairs  standing  upon  end,  blue  hands,  blue  nails,  chattering  of  teeth,
and  shaking ;  sometimes  these  symptoms  are  followed  by  nightly  heat,  and
by  sweat  early  in  the  morning,'.-^Chills  when  in  bed,  from  nine  to  twelve
o'clock  in  the  evening,  alternating  with  heat,  and  much  uneasiness  (after
tenth  day),'. — -Chills  and  heat  for  several  days,  mostly  shaking  chills,  fol-
lowed by  general  dry  heat;  a  little  sweat  only  early  in  the  morning,'. —
Alternate  chilliness  and  heat,  with  sensitiveness  to  cold ;  nausea,  thirst,
pressure  at  the  chest,  with  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  tearing  in
the  forehead,  and  confusion  of  the  head,  alternate  redness  and  paleness  of
the  cheeks,  pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  disposition  to  eructations,  ac-
companied by  a  violent  coryza  and  sleeplessness;  for  several  days  (during
the  catamenia),'. — Rigor,'". — Rigor  in  walking  across  the  street,". — Rigor
alternating  with  heat,  especially  flving  heat  in  face,^ — Rigor  with  weak
feeling,  then  heat  in  the  face,'". — Feeling  of  coldness  in  chest  and  gastric
region,". — [940.]  Excessive  orgasm  of  blood  at  night ;  he  imagines  that
the  blood  will  burst  his  veins  and  his  heart,'.— At  9  a.m.,  feeling  of  warmth
all  over  the  body,". — Warmth,  especially  in  head  and  face;  burning  in
lobe  of  left  ear  and  around  nostrils,'^. — Feverish  heat  for  several  evenings
in  succession,  one  hour  and  a  half,  accompanied  by  headache,'. — Heat  at
night  (nineteenth  day),'. — Heat  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  abdo-
men, in  the  forenoon  (eleventh  day),'. — Always  warm,  and  oppressed  with
anxiety,  in  the  forenoon,  previous  to  the  menses  (forty-second  day),'. —
Feverish  heat  in  the  head,  with  cold  feet,'. — About  noon  uncommon  bum-


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  279

iug  in  hands  and  feet,'^ — Profuse  perspiration," — [950.]  Very  profuse
perspiration,  of  a  fetid  smell/". — Slight  perspiration,  not  so  fetid,". — Great
perspiration,  especially  the  following  night,^". — Continual  night-sweats,'. —
He  sweats  every  night,  early  in  the  morning,  and  is  then  quite  hot,'. —
Sweat  early  in  the  mor»i)i(7,'.— -Sweat  towards  morning  (first  day),". — Sweat
in  the  joints,  early  in  the  morning  (after  sixteenth  day),'.

Sleep  and  IDreatns. — Frequent  stretching  of  the  body,  early,  as  if
he  had  not  slept  enough  (second  day),'. — Disposition  to  stretch  the  arms
and  feet,'. — [960.]  Much  yawning,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the
mouth,  weariness,  discomfort,  or  chilliness,". — Violent,  spasmodic  yawning
in  the  evening,'. — In  afternoon  great  drowsiness,^. — Sleepiness  during  the
day;  in  the  afternoon  he  has  to  sit  down  to  sleep,  otherwise  his  eyes  feel
sore,'. — Sleepiness  through  the  day;  he  has  to  lie  down  in  the  forenoon  and
afternoon,'. — She  becomes  very  sleepy  when  she  is  nut  busy,  for  instance,
at  table;  the  sleepiness  passes  oif  when  she  is  busy  at  something,'. — Sleepi-
ness in  the  day,  with  yawning  (first  to  fourth  day),". — ^Unconquerable
sleepiness  after  supper;  nevertheless,  he  does  not  sleep  well  in  the  night,'.
— He  is  soon  sleepy  in  the  evening,  but  his  sleep  at  night  is  uneasy,  for
several  weeks,". — Falling  asleep  late  at  night  (first  night),'. — [970.]  Can-
not fall  asleep  in  the  evening,  he  knows  not  why  ;  afterwards  the  person
sleeps  well  (second  day),". — -(Nightmare  on  falling  asleep),'. — The  sooner
she  goes  to  bed  the  better  she  sleeps ;  the  later  she  goes  to  bed,  the  less  able
is  she  to  sleep,'. — At  night,  when  in  bed,  he  cannot  fall  asleep  before  two,
three,  four  hours,  on  account  of  uneasiness,  dry  heat,  and  sometimes  burn-
ing at  the  stomach,'. — He  cannot  fall  asleep  on  account  of  itching  and
stinging  of  the  skin,'. — Great  wakefulness  until  12.30,  with  constant  strain-
ing and  pressure  on  the  belly,  and  discharge  of  flatus,'". — He  remains
awake  until  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  he  falls  into  an  oppressive
sleep,  during  which  he  sweats  until  seven  o'clock,'. — Lay  in  bed  from
eleven  to  one  o'clock,  without  being  able  to  sleep,  a  thing  which  had  never
happened  to  him  bef'ore,"'.^Light  sleep  at  night;  every  little  noise  wakes
her,". — Sleep  very  unquiet,'". — [980.]  Uneasy,  unrefreshing  sleep,  every
night;  he  tosses  about,^. — Sleep  somewhat  disturbed,'". — His  sleep  is  uneasy
and  interrupted;  he  sleeps  little  and  frequently  wakes,'. — -Uneasy  sleep,
with  frequent  waking,  for  several  nights,  especially  during  her  menses,". —
Frequent  waking  at  night,  with  chilliness  (first  day),". — At  night  she  wakes
every  half  hour,  and  is  very  weary  in  the  morning,'. — He  wakes  between
one  and  two  o'clock  at  night,  and  cannot  fall  asleep  again  under  two  hours
(second  day),'. — After  midnight  she  wakes  with  pain  at  the  stomach,  and
cannot  fall  asleep  again  till  four  o'clock,'. — Frequent  waking,  with  groan-
ing and  sobbing,  for  several  weeks,". — *IIe  stavts  up  from  his  sleep  as  if  by
fright,  several  times  in  sueeession  after  midnight ;  afterwards  he  cannot  fall
asleep  again  for  a  long  time;  for  many  nights,". — [990.]  ^-Frequent  start-
ing up  from  sleep  as  if  by  fright,  at  night,  with  subsequent  great  tearfulness,".
—Sleep  full  of  dreams  (second  day),'. — He  dreams  while  awake,  at  night,'.
Dreams  at  night,''. — ^Vivid  dreams,  by  a  person  who  never  dreamed,'. —
Sleep  full  of  vivid  dreams,'. — She  dreams  whole  stories,'. — Romantic
dreams,'. — Lewd  dreams,  three  nights  in  succession,  about  having  had  an
embrace,  and,  on  waking  up,  sensation  as  if  there  had  been  an  emission  of
semen,  which,  however,  was  not  true,'. — Confused  dreams,'. — [1000.]  Many
confused  dreams,  all  about  things  that  had  happened  many  years  ago,''^. —
Anxious  dreams,^. — Dreams  every  night,  which,  when  ending,  were  accom-
panied by  a  sensation  of  anxiety;  this  woke  him  at  three  o'clock  in  the


280  AMMONIUM  CAKBONICUM.

morning/. — Anxious  dreams  about  clanger  and  want/. — At  night,  terrify-
ing dreams,". — Anxious  dreams  about  ghosts;  he  screamed  when  asleep/.
— Dreams  about  death  and  dying,'. — Dreams  about  dying  and  corpses/. —
Disgusting  dreams  about  lice  (after  eighteenth  day),l — Dreams  about
quarrels  (third  and  seventh  days),^ — [1010.]  She  expresses  in  her  sleep
what  she  thought  of  when  awake,\

Condi' ions. — Aggravation. ^(lfo?-/img'),  Gloomy  humor;  slight
headache,  etc.;  pain  in  periosteum  of  forehead  ;  violent  pinching,  etc.,  in
belly  ;  great  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs  ;  very  tired  ;  exhaustion  ;  great  las-
situde; felt  ill. — {Early  in  the  morning),  Peevishness;  vertigo;  vertigo,
with  nausea;  vertigo,  with  flickering  before  the  eyes;  tearing  in  the  tem-
ples ;  itching  and  biting  in  eyes  ;  agglutination  of  eyes  ;  itching  over  ears,
etc. ;  anterior  half  of  tongue  feels  pithy  ;  mouth  feels  parched  ;  bitter  taste
in  mouth  ;  bad  smell,  etc.,  in  mouth  ;  swelling  of  tonsils,  etc.;  sensation  as
of  something  sticking  in  throat,  etc.;  want  of  appetite;  feverish  chilliness,
etc. ;  nausea,  etc. ;  oppression  at  stomach,  etc. ;  contraction,  etc.,  in  abdo-
men, etc. ;  pressive  pain  in  left  side  of  abdomen ;  diarrhoea,  with  colic;
fecal  evacuation,  etc.;  erections;  chest  oppressed,  etc.;  bruised  pain  in
middle  of  chest ;  burning  in  nape  of  neck  ;  lassitude  and  fatigue  ;  itching
over  whole  body;  sweat;  sweat  in  the  joints. — {Early,  in  bed),  Headache,
etc.;  frequent  sneezing;  continual  cough,  etc. ;  frequent  stretching  of  the
hody.^{Early,  on  walcing).  Dryness  of  throat,  etc. ;  pain  in  the  heel. —
{Morning,  on  waking),  Burning  of  eyes;  bitter  taste  in  mouth. — {Morn-
ing, in  bed),  Pain  in  hip-joint. — {Early,  after  rising).  Frequent  vertigo ;
drawing,  etc.,  in  head;  qualmishness,  etc. ;  lassitude,  etc. — {Forenoon),  %&d,
etc.;  ill-humor,  etc. ;  violent  pinching,  etc.,  in  belly ;  all  limbs  ache  ;  great
fatigue;  lassitude;  heat;  always  warm,  etc. — {Towards  ?ioo>i),  Black  before
eyes,  etc. — {About  noon),  Burning  in  hands  and  feet,  etc. — {Afternoon),
Weakness  and  anxiety,  etc. ;  anguish ;  violent  headache ;  congestion  to
head;  great  secretion  of  mucus  in  mouth,  etc. ;  dryness  in  throat,  etc.;
aching  and  shooting  in  thyroid  gland,  etc.;  rumbling  of  bowels,  etc. ;  emis-
sion of  flatulence,  etc.;  increased  flow  of  urine,  etc.;  great  drowsiness. —
{Towards  evenijig) ,  Sad  mood;  vertigo,  etc.;  frequent  vertigo;  rush  of
blood;  redness  of  mouth,  etc. ;  sore  throat;  aching  and  shooting  in  thyroid
gland  ;  indisposed  ;  itching  on  the  arms,  etc. ;  frequent  chilliness. — {Even-
ing), Peevishness,  etc.;  slight  headache;  tearing  in  the  temples;  transient
pinching  in  right  ear;  toothache,  etc.;  dryness  of  mouth;  great  secretion
of  mucus  in  mouth,  etc.;  dryness  in  throat,  etc.;  swelling  of  tonsils,  etc.;
sensation  of  something  .sticking  in  throat ;  risings  of  air,  etc. ;  stitches  below
left  ribs;  muoh  flatus;  emission  of  flatulence,  etc.;  violent  pinching,  etc.,
in  belly  ;  stitches  in  left  side  of  abdomen;  abdominal  complaints;  swelling
in  left  groin,  etc. ;  traction  in  urethra ;  frequent  and  copious  emission  of
urine;  lascivious  fancies,  etc.;  sensation  as  if  limbs  were  bruised;  fatigue
and  weakness  of  limbs  ;  bruised  pain  in  left  shoulder,  etc. ;  pulsation  about
right  hip  ;  heaviness  in  legs  ;  boil  on  nates  ;  twitches  in  both  patellae;  chil-
liness of  the  feet;  ball  of  foot  painful ;  ball  of  left  foot  burns  ;  swelling  of
toes  ;  great  lassitude  ;  sensitiveness  to  open  air  ;  feverish  chilliness  ;  attacks
of  chilliness;  feverish  heat;  violent  yawning ;  soon  sleepy. — {Ehening,in
bed).  Coughs  ;  cough,  with  asthma;  pain  in  middle  of  left  forearm  ;  pain  in
ball  of  big  toe;  big  toe  becomes  red. — {Evening,  on  lying  down).  Burning
of  eyes ;  tiugling,  etc.,  in  sole  of  foot ;  pain  in  pimples  on  podex. — {Even-
ing, ongoing  to  sleep).  Stitches,  etc.,  in  big  toes. — {Getting into  bed, in  even-
ing). Violent  toothache. — {Night),  Low  spirits,  etc. ;  fatigue ;  roaring  in  left


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  281

ear ;  nose  obstructed ;  dry  coryza ;  toothache ;  tearing-jerking  in  hollow
tooth ;  great  dryness  and  heat  of  mouth  ;  attacks  of  nausea ;  pressure  at
stoniach;  emission  of  flatulence,  etc. ;  violent  colic ;  burning  pain  at  rectum,
etc.;  rises  to  urinate;  desire  to  urinate ;  several  successive  emissions  of
urine  ;  lascivious  fancies,  etc. ;  pollutions ;  menses  very  copious  ;  cough  ;
cough,  etc.;  dry  cough;  hawking  of  mucus;  difficult  breathing;  stitches
in  left  breast ;  heaviness,  etc.,  at  sternum  ;  jerk  in  the  back ;  all  the  limbs
ache ;  all  the  limbs  pain  her ;  sweat  of  legs  ;  chilliness  in  sleep  ;  chilliness  ;
heat;  continual  sweats. — {Before  midnight),  Tearing  in  teeth,  etc. — (Mid-
n\ght),  Violent  dry  cough. — (After  midnight),  Rushing  in  ear ;  starts  fnim
sleep,  etc. — {Towards  morning).  Involuntary  emission  of  urine;  sweat. —
(3  A.M.),  Violent  colic;  jerking  in  upper  part  of  body,  etc.— (3  to  4  a.m.),
Violent  cough;  pain  in  arm,  etc. — (7  a.m.),  Violent  colic;  evacuation  sur-
rounded by  watery  mucus. — (9  a.m.).  Feeling  of  warmth  all  over  body.—
(7  P.M.),  Sort  of  anxiety;  strange  uneasiness. — {Open  air).  Shootings  in
molar  tooth  ;  several  symptoms;  much  affected  ;  tires  him  out;  makes  him
feel  hot ;  chilliness. — {  Walking  in  open  air).  Violent  pinching,  etc.,  in  belly ;
heaviness  and  tightness  at  chest ;  sudden  dart  in  small  of  back ;  cramp  in
calf;  weary  and  discouraged. — {Air  rushing  into  mouth).  Pain  in  teeth. —
(In  bed),  Heaviness  in  left  side  of  head. — {In  bed,  9  to  12  p.m.).  Chilliness,
etc. — {Biting  teeth  together).  Teeth  painful;  teeth  very  painful ;  shooting
pain  in  molar  teeth. — {Biting  on  tooth),  Becomes  very  painful ;  drawing
toothache. — {After  breakfast).  Bellyache. — (Breathing),  Stitches  in  hands,
etc.;  stitches  in  chest. — (Strong  breathing  through  nose).  Organ  feels  painful.
— (When  not  fiwsy),  Becomes  very  sleepy. — (Drinking  eq^ce).  Congestion
to  he&A.— {Cloudy  weather),  Makes  her  very  ssid.— (After  coition).  Excited
circulation,  etc. — (Chewing),  Stitches  in  left  temple;  almost  all  teeth  pain-
ful.— (Cold),  Violeut  pinching,  etc.,  in  belly;  cramp  in  phalanx  of  finger,
etc. — (Washing  with  cold  water).  Distended  veins,  etc. — (After  drive  in  cold
air),  Courses  five  days  too  soon. — (Laying  on  cold  hand).  Burning,  etc.,  in
bend  of  knee,  etc. — (Damp  weather).  Big  toe  feels  hot,  etc. — (During  din-
ner). Stitches  behind  frontal  eminence,  etc.;  tearing  in  right  temple;  heat
in  face;  sense  of  nausea,  etc.;  colic,  etc.;  pressure  in  hypogastrium. —
(After  dinner).  Headache ;  tearing  below  and  behind  the  ears ;  heaviness,
etc.,  in  forehead ;  stitches  over  left  eye ;  bleeding  at  nose ;  heat  in  face  ;
darting  in  tooth  ;  frequent  risings  of  air,  etc. ;  sense  of  nausea,  etc. ;  qualm-
ishness, etc. ;  pressure  at  stomach ;  urine  reddish ;  weakness  in  lower  ex-
tremities.— (During  eating),  Toothache ;  drawing  toothache. — (After  eat-
ing), Toothnehe;  qualmishness;  finds  talking  difficult;  oppression  of  stom-
ach; great  pressure  at  pit  of  stomach,  etc. — (During  mental  exertion), 'H.eat
in  face. — (During  expiration).  Drawing  downwards  in  chest,  etc. ;  shooting
outside  of  left  nipple. — -{After  every  effort).  Asthma,  etc. — (After  getting
heated),  Pressure  over  whole  head. — (Looking  at  a  distance,  etc.).  Objects
seem  double. — (Lying  down).  Pain  in  right  femur. — (Lying  on  back),  Pain-
ful oppression  of  chest. — (Lying  on  the  part,  at  night).  Throbbing  iu  left
ear ;  legs  go  to  sleep. — (Before  menses).  Pain  in  belly,  etc. ;  pale  face ;
always  warm,  etc. — {During  menses),  Acrid  water  runs  from  nose  ;  pustules
upon  cheeks ;  toothache ;  drawing  toothache ;  no  desire  for  meat,  etc. ;
sense  of  nausea,  etc.;  qualmishness,  etc.;  stomach  seems  full,  etc.;  pale
face;  sadness;  colic,  etc.;  violent  tearing  in  body;  pain  in  small  of  back;
violent  cold ;  great  fatigue  of  whole  body,  etc. ;  bruised  pain  in  thighs ;
pustules  upon  cheeks ;  alternate  chilliness  and  heat,  etc. ;  uneasy  sleep,  etc.
— {Drinking  milk),  Acid  taste ;  sour  eructations. — (Motion),  Pain  in  back ;


282  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

pain  in  small  of  back  ;  cracking  in  elbow-joint ;  tension  in  wrist-joint. —
(Moving  head),  Pain  as  from  ulceration  ;  sensation,  as  of  brain  falling,  etc. ;
tearing  below  and  behind  e3.rs.^{Movi7ig  head  at  night),  Frequent  vertigo,
etc. — {Moving  hand  along  hairs),  They  are  intensely  painful,  etc. — {Pres-
sure), Painfulness  of  stomach ;  pain  over  bend  of  knee ;  pain  in  bead,  as
from  ulceration;  pain  in  induration  over  right  knee;  big  toe  feels  hot,  etc. ;
pain  in  pimple  on  cheek. — {Reading),  Eyes  run. — {Reflecting),  Headache.
— {Rest),  Pain  in  small  of  back,  etc.;  throbbing  pain  in  small  of  back. —
{Rising),  Cramp  in  leg. — {Rising,  after  long  sitting),  Sudden  dart  into  small
of  back. — {Rising  quickly  from  sitting).  Whole  body  felt  rigid. — (  Warm
room).  Attacks  of  asthma. — {Entering  room  from  open  air).  Hairs  feel  as
if  standing  on  end,  etc. ;  chilliness. — {After  sewing),  Linrge  black  spot  before
eye. — {Scratching),  Itching  of  mons  veneris. — {Singing),  Stitches  in  chest.
—  {Sitting),  Compression  on  sides  of  abdomen;  shooting  outside  of  left
nipple;  hands  and  feet  go  to  sleep;  pain  in  right  femur;  legs  go  to  sleep.
— {On  sitting  down),  Pain  in  knee. — {Sitting  on  painful  parts).  Pain  in  left
thigh. — {Sitting  and  driving).  Griping  colic. — (  When  about  falling  asleep),
Pressure  on  eyelids. — {Sneezing),.  White  stars  before  eyes. — {Standing),
Stitches  in  hypogastrium  ;  lungs  feel  drawn  down ;  legs  go  to  sleep. —
{Speaking),  Houghness  of  voice. — (Stooping),  Tension  in  nape  of  neck;
water  runs  from  nose;  sensation  of  blood  accumulating  in  end  of  nose;
stitches  in  left  side  of  abdomen;  cramp  in  hypogastrium,  etc.;  stitches  in
chest;  stitches  in  right  breast;  pain  in  small  of  back. — -(Before  stool),  Cut-
ting in  abdomen. — {During  stool).  Cutting  in  abdomen. — (Stretching  out).
Pinching,  etc.,  in  right  groin. — {Stretchin,g  out  arm).  Creaking  pain  in  elbow-
joint. — {Stretching  fingers  apart).  Pinching  pain. — (During  supper).  Eruc-
tations tasting  of  the  food. — (After  supper).  Eructations  tasting  of  the  food ;
oppression  at  stomach  ;  unconquerable  sleepiness. — (After  swallowing  any-
thing), B,nmhling  in  abdomen. — (ToMc/iwijr),  Bruised  pain  in  left  groiu;
painfulness  of  finger-joints ;  pain  in  boil  above  right  breast ;  pain  in  boil
on  left  instep  ;  hair  painful. — (Touching  teeth  with  tongue).  Violent  stitches
in  hollow  teeth,  etc. — (Touching  tip  of  tongue),  Burning  at  tip  of  tongue. —
(Turning  head).  Stiff  neck. — (Turning  with  body).  Immediate  dizziness. —
(Turning  leg).  Pain  in  knee. — (Urinating),  Soreness  of  pudendum,  etc. —
(After  urinating).  Traction  in  urethra. — (  Waking),  Pressure  upon  eyelids;
tension  of  skin  of  face. — (  Walking),  Qualmishness  of  stomach,  etc. ;  stitches
in  right  chest;  pain  in  small  of  back;  cracking  in  joints;  pain  in  hip-
joints  ;  pain  in  left  leg ;  stiffness  in  thighs ;  pain  in  thigh  ;  ball  of  big  toe
painful;  trembles  over  whole  body. — (Ascending  hill), Gongh,  etc. — (Ooing
upstairs).  Short  breath. — (  Warm  liquid  getting  into  mouth).  Painful  shoot-
ings in  teeth,  etc. — (After  writing),  Rush  of  blood  to  chest.

Amelioration. — (Towards  noon),  Swelling  of  left  inguinal  glands. —
(Afternoon),'P&in  in  hip-joint. — (Towards  evening),  Weakness,  and  anxiety,
etc.;  anguish. — (In  open  air).  Stitches  in  head,  etc.;  attacks  of  asthma. —
(  Walking  in  oj^en  air).  Lassitude  and  fatigue ;  faint  feeling. — (Bending
body),  Pinching  pain  in  abdomen. — (After  glass  0/ "  6J«/iop"),  Ill-humor,
etc. — (Pulling  off  hoot),  Big  toe  feels  hot. — (  When  busy  at  something),  Sleepi-
ness.— ( Compressing  belly  with  hands),  Sudden,  painful  contraction  of  bowels.
— (After  journey  in  damp  weather).  Pain  in  molar  teeth. — (Emission  of
flatulence),  Colic  in  left  side  of  abdomen;  colic  at  night. — (Smelling  Hepar
sulphur).  Pain  in  back  tooth. — {After  lying  down).  Sudden,  painful  con-
traction of  bowels. — (Lying  on  belly).  Pinching,  etc.,  in  heWy. ^(Motion),
Compression  on  sides  of  abdomen  ;  hands  and  feet  go  to  sleep. —  (Picking


AMMONIUM  0AU8TICUM.  283

teeth), Darting  in  decayed  tooth. — (Pressure), Hot  feeling  in  big  toe. — (On
taking  pipe  in  mouth),  Headache,  etc. — {Pressing  upon  teeth).  Toothache
during  menses. — {After  rising).  Pain  in  periosteum  of  forehead  ;  pain  in
hip-joint. — {In room),  Pinching, etc.,  in  belly. — {Raising  scrotum),  Drawing
in  the  part. — {Rubbing),  Itching  and  biting  in  eyes ;  pain  in  right  thigh. —
(After  scratching).  Itching  here  and  there. — (After  sitting  still  for  some  time),
Vertigo,  etc. — (Strai,giitening  ?</)),  Stitches  in  chest ;  pain  in  small  of  back.
— (Stretching  out).  Compression  on  sides  of  abdomen. — (After  a  stool),  Pinch-
ing pain  in  abdomen. — (After  stipper),  Better  mood  ;  headache,  etc. — ( Turn-
ing to  other  side).  Throbbing  in  left  ear. — (Turning  to  other  side  in  bed),
Numb  feeling  in  right  side. — (  On  waking),  Chilliness. — (  Walking),  Vertigo,
etc.;  sudden  dart  in  small  of  back;  pain  in  hip-joint ;  pain  in  legs;  big
toe  feels  hot,  etc. — (  Warm,  cloths),  Toothache  during  menses ;  pinching,
etc.,  in  belly. — (  When  warm  in  bed).  Tearing  in  wrist-joint ;  tearing  in  mal-
leoli, etc.


AMMONIUM  CAUSTICUM  (AMMONIA).

Chemical  formula,  NH3.  Common  name.  Hartshorn  spirits.  Prepara-
tion, Solution  of  the  ga.s  in  water.

Authorities.  Toxicol ngical  (l,Wibmer,  proving,  Buchner'sRepertorium;
2,  Vetter,  Hufeland's  Journal,  78;  3,  Chrestien,  Gaz.  d.  Sant6;  4,  Schlegel,
Material,  etc.,  1801;  5,  Mankiewicz,  Virch.  Archiv.,  45;  6,  Winter,  Med.-
Chir.  Cent.  BL,  took  3  drachms;  7,  Hiff,  Lancet,  49;  8,  Br.  J.  of  Horn.,
21 ;  9,  Souchard,  in  N.  A.  J.  of  H.,  17 ;  10,  Imbert-Gourbeyre,  J.  d.  Chim.
Med.,  1854;  11,  Gaz.  d.  Hop.,  in  N.  Z.  f  H.  K.,  17;  12,  Watson,  Times,
1845,  "Guano  Fumes;"  13,  Wibmer,  Effects  of  Inhalation ;  14,  Cattell,  in
B.  J.  of  Horn.,  11).

IMLind. — The  patient,  perfectly  comprehending  his  condition,  resigns
himself  to  despair,'.— Remarkable  timidity ,^ — His  intellect  was  clear,'. —
Unconscious,'".

Bead. — Slight  confusion  in  the  head,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen
(in  six  minutes),'. — Slight  confusion  in  the  head,  with  pressure  in  the  tem-
ples, ceasing  almost  entirely  in  ten  minutes  (in  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. —
Sensation  as  if  the  brain  protruded  at  the  centre,  forward,  and  on  both
sides,  and  the  skull  was  quartered,  but  without  pain  and  without  confusion
of  the  head,'. — The  forehead,  where  the  bloodvessels  are  full  of  blood,  feels
hot  to  the  touch,". — Pressure  in  the  frontal  region,  with  feeling  as  if  the
head  would  split,  but  without  pain,  which  lasts  a  few  minutes  (in  seven
minutes),'. — [10.]  Slight  pressure  at  the  occiput,  lasting  ten  minutes  (in
half  an  hour),'.

Eyes. — Eyes  red,  shining,". — The  eyes  sunken;  the  pupil  widely  di-
lated,".— Lachrymation,'^

_E«r.«. — Deafness,'^

Nose, — Peculiar  redness  of  skin  over  nose  and  frontal  sinuses,'^  — Co-
ryza,'\ — A  watery  fluid  runs  at  intervals  from  the  nasal  cavities,  and  the
air  is  completely  excluded  from  them,'.

Face. — ^The  face  is  altered,'. — The  expression  was  anxious,^ — [20.]  The
whole  expression  of  his  face  showed  the  greatest  anguish,". — Extremely  pale
face,  expressive  of  the  greatest  suffering,'. — Face  always  very  red  during
the  febrile  exacerbations,l — His  distorted  features  had  red  spots,". — His
lips  were  rather  swfflleu,'. — Lower  lip  swollen  to  three  times  its  normal


284  AMMONIUM  CAUSTICUM.

size,^. — Small  black  coating  on  the  middle  of  the  lower  lip,'. — The  mucous
membrane  of  the  lips  and  nose  was  destroyed,'.

Mouth. — Teeth  clenched,^'". — The  surface  of  the  tongue  is  white,'. —
[30.]  The  tongue  appeared  deprived  of  its  epithelium;  only  on  solitary
places  could  some  white  membrane  still  be  seen,  and  nearly  the  whole
fauces  showed  the  same  state,". — Curled  pieces  of  white  skin  are  detached
from  the  tongue  and  throat,  and  those  parts  appear  red,'. — The  tongue,  the
palate,  and  the  entire  cesophagus,  as  far  as  visible,  are  whitish  and  partly
covered  with  blisters,'''. — Burning  and  scraping  at  the  root  of  the  tongue
and  posterior  portion  of  the  cesophagus  (while  swallowing  the  medicine),'.
— Small  black  coating  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,'. — The  entire  buccal  cav-
ity, the  mouth,  the  tongue,  and  probably  a  great  part  of  the  oesophagus  and
stomach,  are  raw,  denuded  of  epithelium,*. — The  mucous  membrane  of  the
mouth,  and  all  the  visible  parts  of  the  throat,  were  dark-red,  swollen,  and
tender;  the  epithelium  was  detached  in  different  places,^ — The  penetrating
smell  of  Ammonia  was  still  clearly  perceptible  in  his  breath,  although  he
had  taken  so  much  vinegar,^ — From  mouth  and  nose  flowed  a  large  quan-
tity of  bloody  fluid,". — Profuse  bloody  salivation,". — [40.]  Foaming  from
mouth,'".

Throat. — Throat  externally  red,  and  the  soft  parts  swollen,^ — Burn-
ing pain  in  throat,". — Burning  pain  from  the  mouth  to  the  region  of  the
stomach,'". — Burning  heat  at  the  throat,'. — Burning  pain  at  throat  and
stomach,^ — Lancinating  and  scraping  sensation  at  the  throat  (immediately
after  taking  the  medicine),'. — -Scraping  at  the  throat  (when  swallowing  the
medicine),'. — Deep  redness  of  the  velum,  its  pillars,  the  tonsils,  and  the
posterior  wall  of  the  pharynx,'. — The  uvula  is  contracted  and  covered  with
white  mucus,'. — [50.]  The  tonsils  appear  scarcely  at  all  enlarged,'. — The
posterior  wall  of  the  pharynx,  and  the  epiglottis,  were  deeply  reddened,
and  like  the  mouth,  with  most  intense  pain  in  the  throat,^ — Dryness  in
oesopliagus,". — Great  difficulty  in  swallowing,'. — Could  scarcely  swallow,".
— He  swallowed  with  difficulty  some  vinegar  and  water,  but  it  seemed  to
relieve  him,". — After  two  hours  of  great  anxiety,  the  patient  complained
mostly  of  his  throat,  as  swallowing  was  still  nearly  impossible,".

StOuincJl. — Very  urgent  thirst,l — Thirst,". — Very  urgent  thirst,  with
difficult  deglutition,'. — [60.]  He  is  consumed  with  thirst,  and  yet  is  unable
to  get  down  a  drop  of  liquid,'. — Thirst  very  strong,  without  the  power  to
swallow,". — Eructations  which  do  not  smell  of  Ammonia  (soon  after  taking
the  medicine),'. — Constant  mucous  voniiting,^ — He  passes  an  immense
quantity  of  mucus  from  the  mouth,'. — He  throws  up  by  the  mouth  and
nostrils  quantities  of  a  whitish  fluid  which  burns  wherever  it  touches,  and
smells  like  sal  volatile  liuiraent,^ — He  immediately  screamed  and  was  very
sick,  bringing  up  at  first  stringy  mucus  of  a  light  color,  and  then  some  more
dark,'. — Vomiting  blood,". — The  right  hand  automatically  pointed  in  the
stomach  region,' — He  was  allowed  to  get  up  on  the  fifteenth,  but  the  next
day  a  hearty  meal  gave  him  very  great  pain,", — [70,]  Heartburn,'*. —
There  was  burning  pain  in  the  track  of  the  cesophagus,  none  in  the  stom-
ach itself,  but  its  region  was  tender  on  pressure,'. — Epigastrium  swollen  and
tender,^ — Great  sensitiveness  of  the  epigastric  region;  very  small  pulse,
with  shiverings  (at  4  p.m.),'.

Abdomen. — Great  pain  and  tenderness  in  left  hypochondrium  and  at
epigastrium,'*. — There  was  no  abdominal  distension,". — The  abdomen  was
soft,". — Rumbling  in  abdomen,'. — Inexpressible  pains  in  the  upper  part  of
the  intestinal  tube,*. — Pains  in  lower  abdomen,  back,  and  sacral  region,'.


AMMONIUM  CAUSTICUM.  285

Stool  and  Anus. — [80.]  Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  rectum  ;  an
injection  spouted  forcibly  from  the  rectum  as  soon  as  thrown  up,l — The
vomiting  is  followed  by  several  stools,  which  cause  a  violent  burning  at  the
anuSjl— -Solid  stool  (he  has  already  had  the  usual  morning  evacuation),
with  cessation  of  the  confusion  of  the  head  (in  six  minutes),^. — Copious
hemorrhagic  stools,'. — Bloody  stools,  very  frequent,". — Evacuation  of  some
pints  of  clear  blood,  with  excessive  tenesmus,". — The  poison  was  taken
March  7th,  bat  his  bowels  did  not  act  till  the  12th,  and  then  only  after  a
purgative,'*. — Suppression  of  a  chronic  looseness  of  the  bowels,"  ^.

TJrinary  Organs. — Scanty,  red  urine,'. — The  urine  was  alkaline
and  dark-yellow,". — [90.]  Urine  smelling  of  ammonia,'. — Next  day,  the
urine  contained  a  good  deal  of  sediment,  consisting  of  urates,^

Sexual  Of  (fans. — The  menses,  hitherto  always  regular,  are  fifteen
days  too  early,  and  very  profuse,^.

Resjnratory  A]»pa,ratus. — Slight, rather  coarse  mucous  rales  were
heard  in  the  larynx  and  trachea,". — He  had  a  constant  tickling  in  larynx,
with  pain  in  epigastrium,". — For  several  days,  he  sufiered  from  a  bronchitis,
with  profuse  expectoration,  but  it  took  nearly  a  week  till  his  voice  returned,
aud  he  regained  his  strength  only  by  slow  degrees,'. — Speech  fatiguing,  in-
terrupted,".— The  voice  was  low  and  weak,  speech  fatiguing  and  interrupted,
on  account  of  the  condition  of  the  respiratory  function,'. — She  could  hardly
speak,  because  the  effort  to  do  so  fatigued  her  exceedingly,  and  caused  pain
in  the  chest,^ — The  voice  was  rough,  weak,  and  hoarse,". — [100.]  Dull,
hoarse  voice,*. — Weak  and  indistinct  voice,". — Voice  deep,  weak,'^. — ^Speech
wanting,*. — Obstinate  cough,''. — Cough,  with  copious  mucous  expectora-
tion,'.— Cough  and  much  expectoration,  especially  after  drinking,''. —
Cough,  with  profuse  mucous  expectoration,  and  excited  by  drinking,'. —
When  he  tries  to  drink,  severe  cough,  with  expectoration  of  slimy  masses,".
— The  cough  and  expectoration  are  especially  excited  by  the  contact  of
liquids  with  the  back  of  the  mouth ;  only  a  very  little  passes  into  the  oesoph-
agus,'.— [110.]  Spasmodic  cough,  lasting  an  hour,  during  which  he  expec-
torates a  great  quantity  of  membrane,*. — He  hawked  and  expectorated
continually,  although  doing  so  gave  him  great  pain,". — Bloody  expectora-
tion,'l — Respiration  heavy  and  rattling,". — Every  respiration  produces  a
kind  of  rattling  noise,'. — The  breathing  harsh,  hurried,  and  somewhat  ob-
structed,'.— Respiration  difficult,'. — *  Very  great  difficulty  in  breathing,^. —
Great  difficulty  in  breathing,". — Difficult,  quick,  stertorous  breathing,'. —
[120.]  Was  aroused  from  sleep  by  a  suffocative  feeling,". — Spasm  of  the
glottis;  death  from  asphyxia,'.

Chest. — Continuous  mucous  rattling  in  chest,". — The  chest-sounds  were
normal,". — Pain  in  the  whole  chest,  with  sufibcative  anguish,". — Inclination
to  draw  a  long  breath,  which  is  prevented  by  a  violent  pain  in  the  chest
towards  the  back,  evidently  in  the  oesophageal  region,''. — Great  oppression
and  want  of  air,l — Extreme  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  increased  rattling
and  threatened  suffocation,'. — Lung-catarrh,'^ — The  praecordial  region  is
distended  and  painful,'. — [130.]  Extremely  violent  anguish  at  the  prse-
cordia,  with  great  oppression  of  the  chest,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  small,  weak,  rapid,". — Small,  frequent,
and  weak  pulse,'. — Very  small  and  moderately  frequent  pulse,  but  it  iu-
creases  in  frequency  from  hour  to  hour,'. — The  pulse  was  quickened  five
beats  per  minute  (usual  rate  70);  it  was  also  somewhat  hard,'. — Pulse  so
slow  and  intermittent  that  it  was  difficult  to  count  it,  as  were  also  the


286  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

beats  of  the  heart,".— Pulse  60,  small  and  hard,". — Pulse  weak,  irregular,'.
— Small,  depressed,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse,^

Upper  Extremities. — Convulsive  twitches  of  right  arm,"

Generalities. — [140.]  State  of  irritation  aud  of  extraordinary  suf-
fering,^.— In  the  evening,  the  patient  was  greatly  excited;  pulse  quite  small
and  very  quick,  with  increased  oppression,^ — After  a  venesection,  the  pa-
tient got  more  quiet,  and  the  bloody  expectoration  ceased,". — Motorial
power  intact,". — He  had  perfect  sensibility,  and  not  much  distress  of  coun-
tenance,'.— Great  weakness,'^. — Great  debility,". — Great  prostration,".—
Remarkable  exhaustion ;  his  muscular  strength  is  diminished  to  a  degree
not  proportioned  to  the  duration  of  the  disease,''. — On  trying  for  the  iirst
time  to  get  out  of  bed,  he  was  unable  to  stand  on  his  legs,  and  at  the  least
effort,  he  trembled  violently,^ — [150.]  Bleedings  from  the  mouth,  nose,
eyes,  ears,  which  cause  faintness,".

Skin. — The  skin  was  pale,  cold,  and  had  lost  its  elasticity,". — The  ap-
plication of  a  blister  plaster  takes  off  the  skin,  but  does  not  excite  the  se--
cretion  of  serum,". — Erysipelas,". — Skiu  hot,  not  dry,". — Hot,  dry  skin," ".
— Dry  skin,l — Cutaneous  sensibility  intact,".

Fever. — Heat  in  chest  and  at  stomach,".

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleepless  night,".— Very  restless  night,^

Conditions. — Aggravation. —  {Evening),  Great  excitement,  etc. —
{After  drinking),  Cough,  etc. — {After  hearty  meal).  Great  pain  in  stomach.

Amelioration. — {Solid  stool),  Confusion  of  the  head. — {After  venesec-
tion). More  quiet,  etc. — (  Vinegar  and  -water).  Seemed  to  relieve  him.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Ammonium  chloride,  NH^Cl.  Common  names,  Sal  Ammoniac ;  Sal'm'iao.
Preparation,  Trituration  on  aqueous  solution  (100  parts  of  water  at  60°
dissolves  36  parts  of  the  salt).

Authorities.  1,  N-g  and  Hartlaub,  H.  and  T.  Annalen,  4 ;  2,  Hahne-
mann, Chr.  Krank.,  1 ;  3,  Rl.  (ibid.);  4,  Gumpert,  Roth's  rfeum^;  5,  Wib-
mer;  6,  Fischer,  Roth's  r6sum6;  7,  Rechnitz,  ibid.;  8,  Knorre,  A.  H.  Z.,
6,  83;  9.  Frank's  Mag.,  poison  cases;  10,  Boecker ;  11,  J.  d.  Chim.  Med.,
1840,  poison  by  fumes,  A.  H.  Z.,  20,  9.

Jtfind. — Wheu  talkrhg  about  some  important  subject  he  becomes  ex-
tremely excited,''. — She  is  overwhelmed  with  anxiety,  would  like  to  weep,
and  does  weep,  sometimes  (first  day),^ — Full  of  melancholy  and  anxiety,
as  if  some  internal  grief  and  sorrow  were  gnawing  at  her  heart,\ — She  is
sitting  there,  full  of  ill-humor,  absorbed  in  her  thoughts,  and  can  scarcely
be  induced  to  speak,  in  the  evening  (fifteenth  day),'. — Peevish,  as  if  she
had  some  internal  vexation,  and  looking  as  if  not  yet  entirely  conscious  of
herself;  as  if  she  had  not  slept  enough  (third  day),\ — Irritable  and  peevish,
in  the  forenoon ;  the  mood  improves  after  dinner  (eighth  day),^ — Very
irritable,  peevish,  and  easily  frightened,". — Involuntary  antipathy  to  cer-
tain persons,^

Mead. — The  head  feels  confused,  as  after  intoxication  (fourteenth
day),l — [10.]  The  head  feels  dizzy  and  confused  in  the  room ;  this  symp-
tom passes  off  in  the  open  air ;  early  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'. — Ver-
tigo, as  if  she  would  fall  to  one  side;  worse  during  motion,  passing  off  in
the  open  air,  frequently  (third  day),'. — Giddiness  and  fulness  of  the  head;
it  feels  as  if  it  were  very  Iieavy  (one  hour),'. — Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  287

head,  almost  daily,  after  rising,\ — The  head  feels  so  full  that  it  seems  too
heavy  (after  twenty-fifth  day),'. — Violent  headache,  for  several  days,". —
Feeling  of  heat  and  fulness  in  the  head,  early  after  rising,'. — Heat  in  the
head,  without  preceding  chill,  before  midnight,  in  bed,  so  that  she  cannot
go  to  sleep  for  a  long  time,'. — Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  head,  especially
in  the  left  side,  in  the  room  (second  day),'.-^Frequent  creeping  over  the
head,  of  short  duration  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — [20.]  Pimples  on  the  fore-
head, followhig  after  itching  and  scratching  (sixth  day),'. — Frontal  head-
ache, without  mental  disturbance,\ — -Violent  throbbing  headache  in  the
forehead,  towards  evening,  lasting  one  hour ;  upon  touching  the  forehead
worse ;  with  weakness,  so  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  and  chills  on
going  to  bed,^. — Heaviness  in  the  forehead,  frequently  during  the  day,  ac-
companied by  a  feeling  of  internal  heat  and  a  little  sweat,'. — Pressure  in
the  forehead,  with  sensation  of  heat  there,  early  in  the  morning,  after  an
uneasy  night,'. — Downward  pressure  in  the  forehead,  towards  the  root  of
the  nose,  with  sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  torn,  early  after  rising  (twenty-
fifthday),'. — Painful  boring  in  the  forehead,  early  after  rising,  and  almost
during  the  whole  day  (fifth  day),'. — Sudden  fine  stitching  in  the  left  side
of  the  forehead,  of  long  duration,  afternoons  (fourth  day),'. — Painful
twitches,  from  below  upwards,  in  the  left  temple  (third  day),'. — Burning
pain,  and  sometimes  stitches,  in  the  left  temple,  both  when  at  rest  and  when
masticating  and  sneezing  ;  no  increase  of  pain  when  the  parts  are  touched,^
— [30.]  A  sudden  tearing  pain  from  below  upward  in  the  right  temple,
forenoons  (sixth  day),'. — Painful  tearing  in  the  right  temple  and  down
into  the  side  of  the  face  (seventh  day),'. — Fine  tearing,  extending  upward,
in  the  right  temporal  bone,  during  the  menstruation  (seventeenth  day),'. —
A  violent  stitch  in  the  left  temple  ;  forenoons  (twentieth  day),'. — Headache
on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  if  the  head  were  broken  in  two  (fourth  day),'. —
Stitches  in  the  vertex,  with  a  sensation  as  though  the  head  were  bursting ;
mornings  (third  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  vertex  on  stooping ;  afternoon  at
three,  lasting  till  six  (second  day),'. — Glowing  heat  on  the  right  side  of  the
head,  every  evening,''. — Fine  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  forenoons
(fifth  day),'. — A  painful  tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side  of  the
head,  while  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'. — [40.]  The  occiput  feels  as  if  it  were
compressed  with  a  vice ;  this  symptom  afterwards  manifests  itself  in  both
sides  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  excessive  ill-humor  (seventeenth  day),'.
— Pinching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  at  a  small  spot ;  forenoons
(eleventh  day),'. — Itching  pimples  on  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  in  the
evening ;  at  night  they  pass  off  (after  nineteenth  day),'. — Itching  of  the
hairy  scalp,  forcing  him  to  scratch  constantly  (third  day),'.

JEyes. — Eyes  become  weak,  glassy,  watery,'. — Redness  of  the  white  of
the  eyes  and  itching  of  the  eyes,''. — Pain  in  the  eyes,^ — The  eyes  burn  in
the  morning,  after  rising,  if  she  looks  at  the  light  (fourth  day),'. — Burning
of  the  eyes  in  the  evening,  and  closing  thereof  as  from  sleep ;  this  symptom
passed  off  as  soon  as  light  entered  the  room  (fifteenth  day),'. — ^The  eyes  are
burning  for  several  evenings,  only  at  twilight ;  the  pain  ceases  as  soon  as
light  enters  the  room  (fifteenth  day),'. — [50.]  The  eyes  burn  at  night,  with
profuse  lachrymation,^ — Violent  burning  in  the  right  eye,  which  continues
long  in  the  open  air,'. — Tearing  in  the  upper  border  of  the  right  eye,  first
made  worse,  then  improved,  by  pressing  upon  it;  afternoons  while  sitting
(fifteenth  day),'. — Very  painful  sensation,  as  of  hammering,  over  the  mar-
gin of  the  right  orbit,  or  as  if  a  large  body  were  pushing  there  (fifteenth
*i*y)>'' — Twitching  of  the  left  eye;  she  must  rub  a  long  time  before  it  dis-


288  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

appears  (fourth  day),\ — Slight  twitching  in  the  lower  eyelids,  especially
the  left,  during  the  whole  time  of  proving,^ — Eyes  burn  like  fire,  in  the
canthi,  the  whole  day  (third  day),\ — Burning  in  the  canthi,  so  that  she
cannot  look  at  the  light ;  disappears  after  washing ;  mornings  (third  day),'.
— Tearing  in  the  external  cauthus  of  the  eye,^ — Lachrymatiou,  early  after
rising  (third  day),'. — [60.]-  Agglutination  of  the  eyes,  early  on  waking,
with  burning-  in  the  corners,  after  washing  (second  day),'. — A  vesicle  in
the  white  of  the  eye,l — Tearing  in  the  eyeballs,^ — Twitching  in  the  left
ball,  without  any  in  the  lid;  disappears  after  rubbing  (fourth  day),'. —
Mist  before  the  eyes ;  in  the  open  air  she  distinguishes  nothing,  either  far
or  near,  even  in  the  light  of  the  sun ;  in  the  room,  on  the  contrary,  she
sees  better  (for  five  minutes),'. — For  several  mornings  dimness  of  the  eyes;
there  is  a  mist  before  them,  which  passes  off  after  washing,'. — Sensation  in
the  left  eye  as  if  a  body  were  rising  in  it  which  prevents  her  from  seeing;
in  the  forenoon  (fourteenth  and  fifteenth  days),'. — Yellow  spots,  as  large
as  a  penny,  everywhere  before  the  eyes,  when  sewing,  and  when  looking
into  her  garden  out  of  the  window  (two  minutes),'.

Mars. — Painful  pimple  on  the  anti-helix  of  the  right  ear,^ — Itching
pimple  on  the  external  concha  of  the  right  ear,  which  induces  him  to
scratch  continually,'. — [70.]  Several  fine  stitches  in  the  left  ear,  which  fre-
quently recur ;  afternoons  in  the  open  air  (fourth  day),'. — Several  pointed
stitches  in  the  right  ear,  shooting  inwards ;  then  a  burning  extending  from
the  left  ear  outwards;  on  walking  in  the  open  air  (first  day),'. — Frequent
sensitive  stitches  outward  from  the  right  ear ;  it  frequently  lasts  a  long
time,'. — Stitches  outward  from  the  right  ear,  as  with  an  awl,  several
times,'. — Boring  and  sticking  outward  from  the  right  ear  (third  day),'. —
Clawing  and  tearing  in  the  right  ear  (nineteenth  day),'. — Boring-twitching
in  the  right  ear  (sixteenth  day),'. — Burrowing  and  turmoil  in  the  right
ear,  on  which  he  lay  at  night,  as  if  something  would  come  out  there  (third
day),'. — Tickling  in  the  right  ear,'. — Frequently  fine  stitches  outward  from
the  left  ear,'. — [80.]  Twisting  in  the  left  ear,  also  behind  it,  where  there  is  a
moist  herpes,'.— Itching  in  both  ears,  which  does  not  pass  off  by  scratching,
with  discharge  of  liquid  wax  for  several  days  (after  fifth  day),'. — Grum-
bling and  thundering  noise  in  the  right  ear  when  sitting,  also  at  night,
with  pulsative  beats  (sixth  day),'.

Nose, — External  swelling  of  the  left  side  of  the  nose,  and,  the  next
day,  bloody  crusts  discharge  (third  day),'. — Bleeding  at  the  nose  from  the
left  fossa,  whereupon  the  itching  ceases  (third  day),'. — On  blowing  nose,
some  brown  blood  with  the  mucus,'". — In  morning  left  nostril  stopped  by
mucus ;  removed  by  blowing,'". — Bloody  froth  from  nose  and  mouth,". —
Frequent  sneezing  during  the  day  (thirteenth  and  fourteenth  days),'. —
Frequent  sneezing,  without  a  cold,  roused  her, from  her  sleep,  with  crawling
in  the  throat,  which  caused  her  to  cough,  and  produced  a  secretion  of  saliva
(after  sixth  day),'. — [90,]  Clear,  acrid  water  runs  out  of  the  nose,  corrod-
ing the  lips,'. — Coryza,  with  eruptions  in  the  nostrils  (sore  nose),^ — Coryza
at  one  nostril,  out  of  which  runs  a  quantity  of  thick,  yellow  matter;  this  is
accompanied  by  tearing  in  the  cheek-bone  and  the  teeth  of  the  left  side,^
— *Coryza,  with  obstruction  of  the  nose  and  loss  of  smell  (thirteenth  and
fourteenth  days),'. — Coryza,  with  a  feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  nose,
during  which  a  large  quantity  of  mucus  passes  off,  with  great  difficulty,
however  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Dry  coryza ;  clear  water,  however,
runs  out  of  the  nose,^ — Obstruction  of  the  nose,  with  pain  at  the  right
nasal  fossa,  at  night,  the  symptom  passing  off  again  the  next  morning,'. —


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  289

Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose,  as  when  a  cold  is  approaching,^ —
*Sore  nose,  on  the  inside  and  around  the  margin  of  the  nostrils,^ — Pain,
as  from  ulceration,  in  the  left  nasal  fossa;  cannot  endure  the  touch;  this
symptom  occurs  frequently  (after  third  day),'. — [100.]  Constant  itching
in  the  nose,  with  desire  to  blow  it,  and  sensation  as  if  a  large  and  rough
body  were  sticking  high  up  in  the  nose,  with  obstruction  (second  day),'.

Face. — Distorted  features  expressive  of  the  greatest  anxiety,". — Color
of  the  face  very  pale,'. — Eruptions  in  the  face,^. — Vesicles  without  any  sen-
sation upon  the  left  side  of  the  face  (eleventh  day),'. — Herpes  in  the  face,
dry  and  tettery,^ — Heat  in  the  face,  with  burning  for  half  an  hour  in
the  room,  which  goes  off  in  the  open  air  (third  day),'. — Twitching  pain  in
right  upper  part  of  the  face,  at  a  small  spot ;  in  feeling  of  it  it  disappears,
and  on  drawing  the  fingers  away  the  pain  is  renewed,  and  so  repeated  for
three  times ;  forenoons  l^fil'teeuth  day),'. — Tearing  in  right  malar  bone  and
up  into  the  temples ;  forenoons  (twenty-firet  day),'. — Violent  painful  tear-
ing in  left  malar  bone  (eleventh  day),'. — [HO.]  Repeated  tearings  in  right
side  of  bones  of  face ;  evenings,  while  sitting  (sixteenth  day),'. — Swelling
of  the  cheek,  with  enlargement  of  a  gland  below  the  right  angle  of  the
lower  jaw,  attended  with  a  throbbing  and  lancinating  pain,^ — Drawing  in
the  lower  jaw,'. — Tearing  in  the  left  lower  jaw,  afterwards  in  the  upper
incisors  (twenty-fourth  day),'.— The  lips  became  contracted  and  felt  as  if
they  were  greasy,'. — Both  lips  burn  like  fire  (twenty-second  day),'. — At
times  burning-stinging  in  the  upper  lip  (second  day),'. — Excoriated  spots
on  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip,  with  burning  soreness  (second  day),'. —
Chapped  lips,''. — Dry  and  wrinkled  lips ;  they  became  chapped  and  she
had  to  moisten  them  constantly  with  the  tongue,^. — [120.]  Itching  pimples
around  the  upper  lip  (second  day),'. — Blisters  on  the  upper  lip,  which  be-
came inflamed  and  ulcerated  (after  twenty-two  days),'.

Mouth. — Tearing  toothache,'. — Painful  tearing  in  all  the  teeth,  at
8  P.M.,  disappearing  in  bed  (sixth  day),'. — Tearing  toothache,  now  in  the
right,  now  in  the  left  upper  row,  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  evenings  in
bed,'. — Tearing  in  the  decayed  root  of  a  tooth  of  the  upper  row;  it  imme-
diately passes  off  by  pressing  upon  it  with  the  finger,  afternoons,  when  sit-
ting (fifteenth  day),'. — Stinging  pain  in  the  upper  front  teeth  (fifth  day),'.
— Swelling  of  the  gums  of  the  left  lower  row,  by  the  last  back  teeth,  accom-
panied by  stitches  extending  as  high  as  the  left  temple  (after  eleven  days),'.
— Tongue  white,". — White-coated  tongue,'. — [130.]  Coated  tongue  in  fore-
noon,'".— Tongue  and  mouth  coated  in  spots  with  a  white  mucous  coat,  like
false  membrane,". — *  Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  burn  like  fire,  and
disappear  in  an  hour  (third  day),'. — *  Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  with
a  burning  pain,''. — Disagreeable  taste  and  collection  of  water  in  the  mouth
(first  day),'. — Pappy  taste  in  mouth,  early,  after  rising  (third  day),'. —
Bitterness  of  the  mouth,  the  whole  day  (after  seven  and  eight  days),'. —
Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  with  bitter  eructations,  which
pass  off  after  having  eaten  (first  day),'. — Bitter  taste  during  the  anxiety,
and  nauseating,  bitter  eructations,'.— Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth,^.— [140.]
Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  on  waking  (fourteenth  day),'. — Could
scarcely  speak,  and  complained  of  burning  pains  in  throat  and  chest,".

Throat, — External  and  internal  swelling  of  the  neck,  with  pressive
pain  when  swallowing,  and  drawing  and  stinging  pains  in  the  highly
swollen  submaxillary  glands,^^Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  (after
twelve  days),'. — Phlegm  sticks  in  the  throat,  which  he  can  neither  hawk
up  nor  swallow  (eleventh  day),'. — For  the  first  eight  days,  phlegm  con-

VOL. I.— 19


290  AMMONIUM  MUKIATICUM.

staritly  remains  in  the  throat,  which  he  can  hawk  up  only  with  great  diffi-
culty ,\ — Hawking  up  a  quantity  of  phlegm,  early  in  the  morning,l — Feel-
ing of  dryness  in  the  throat  (fifteenth  day),'. — Roughness  in  the  throat,
which  passes  off  after  dinner,'. — Sore  throat,  stinging  in  the  throat,  hoth
during  and  between  the  acts  of  deglutition  (twentieth  day),'. — [150.]  Sore
throat,  with  rawness,^ — Stinging  in  the  throat  when  yawning ;  this  symp-
tom occurs  frequently  (first  day),'.— Severe  throbbing  in  the  glands  of  the
neck,  without  the  glands  being  either  inflamed  or  swollen  ;  accompanied  by
flushes  of  heat,  and  want  of  air  in  the  throat  (after  twenty-four  days),*.—
Sensation  as  of  throbbing  in  the  tonsils,  which  are  not  swollen ;  the  throb-
bing is  like  that  of  an  artery ;  with  uneasiness  and  oppressive  anxiety
(after  twelve  days),'. — Swallowing  almost  impossible,".

StOjnach. — Neither  hunger  nor  appetite ;  nevertheless,  he  take  his
usual  meal  at  noon,  and  the  food  tastes  naturally  (eleventh  day),'. — No
hunger,  for  several  days,  though  he  takes  his  usual  meals  (four  days),'. —
Want  of  appetite  in  the  evening  ;  she  does  not  wish  to  eat  anything  and
frequently  yawns  (sixteenth  day),'. — Almost  total  loss  of  appetite  (after
twenty-four  days),'. — Thirst  (first,  second,  and  third  days),'. — [160.]  Vio-
lent thirst,". — Thirst  during  several  days  and  nights,  which  caused  her  to
drink  a  good  deal  of  water  (after  twenty-four  days),'. — Very  urgent  thirst,
which  is  only  satisfied  with  lemonade,'. — Unquenchable  thirst,  afternoons
(third  and  sixth  day),'. — Thirst  at  evening  (first,  second,  fifteenth,  and
nineteenth  days),'. — Thirst  before  the  chill  (evenings  before  5  and  6),
(nineteenth  day),'. — Absence  of  thirst  (contrary  to  habit),  (first  day),'. —
Rising  of  air  (shortly  after  taking  the  medicine),'. — Oppressive  eructations,
tasting  of  the  ingesta  (after  twenty-second  day),'. — Bitter  eructations,  with
taste  of  the  food,  forenoons  (fifth  day),'. — [170.]  Frequent  eructations  of  a
bitter  taste,  the  whole  day  (eleventh  day),'. — Gulping  up  of  the  ingesta,'. —
In  the  afternoon,  gulping  up  of  bitter,  sour  water,  the  taste  of  which  re-
mained in  the  mouth  until  she  ate  again  (seventeenth  day),'. — Frequent
hiccough,  or  bitter  eructations  ;  with  the  hiccough,  violent  stitches  in  the  left
breast,'. — Hiccough  an  hour  after  dinner  (fourth  day),'. — Continual  hic-
cough, only  seldom  ceasing  (ninth  day),'. — Attacks  of  nausea  (first  day),'. —
Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  forenoons
(eleventh  day),'. — Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  immediately  after  din-
ner, which  is  relieved  by  eructations,  and  in  the  open  air  (fourteenth  day),'.
— After  every  dinner  and  supper,  he  is  attacked  with  nausea,  waterbrash,
and  horripilation  (after  twenty-six  days),^ — [180.]  Nausea,  with  oppression
at  the  stomach ;  nevertheless,  there  is  an  inclination  to  eat,''. — Burning
from  the  stomach  up  towards  the  pharynx,  like  heartburn,'. — Burning  and
pressure  at  the  stomach,  becomes  a  stinging,  afternoons  (twelfth  day),'. —
Heat  at  the  stomach  (morning  of  the  first  day),^ — Sensation  of  fulness  in
the  stomach,  with  oppression,  without  shortness  of  breath ;  this  symptom
lasts  the  whole  afternoon,  and  is  relieved  neither  by  rest,  motion,  nor  eruc-
tations,'.— Sensation  in  stomach  as  of  emptiness,  or  hunger  (shortly),'. —
Emptiness  in  stomach,  not  relieved  by  eating,". — Empty  feeling  in  the
stomach,  and  yet  he  can  hardly  persuade  himself  to  take  food,*. — Sensation
as  of  fasting  in  the  stomach,  which,  nevertheless,  feels  full ;  worse  after
breakfast  (sixteenth  day),'. — Frequent  drawing  in  the  stomach,'. — [190.]
Sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  if  everything  would  turn  round,  with  disposi-
tion to  waterbrash  and  great  qualmishness,  even  unto  vomiting,  on  walk-
ing in  the  open  air ;  relieved  by  eructations,  forenoons ;  also,  afterwards,
while  sitting ;  he  must  go  into  the  open  air,  where  it  soon  disappears,'. —


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  291

Grinding  and  writhing  in  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  passing  off
after  breakfast  (second  day),'. — Gnawing,  or  grinding,  at  the  stomach,  as
if  it  contained  worms,'. — Gnawing  sensation  at  the  stomach,  soon  after
taking  a  new  dose,'. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea,^. — At  8  a.m.,
sensitive  stinging  and  burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  extends  to
the  right  axilla,  and  into  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  alrm,  for  one  min-
ute (seventeenth  day),'.

Abdomen. — Long-continued,  occasional  pinching,  as  with  two  fingers,
in  both  hypochondria,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion  (second  day),'. —
Stitches  and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  right  ribs,  in  the  afternoon,  when
walking  (ninth  day),'. — Occasional  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondriac  re-
gion, when  spinning,'. — Splenetic  stitches,  even  when  sitting,^ — [200.]
Rumbling  around  the  navel,  continuing  a  long  time  (one  hour  after  taking),'.
■ — Violent  pinching  around  the  navel,  for  half  an  hour ;  then  two  e-'acua-
tions  (nineteenth  day),'. — Pinching  in  a  small  spot  to  the  left  of  the  navel,
while  standing ;  worse  on  stooping  (third  day),'. — Momentary  cutting  and
shooting  around  the  navel  (fifteenth  day),'. — Griping  in  abdomen,  below
navel  (6  p.m.),'". — Discomfort  in  abdomen,  below  and  to  left  of  navel,'". —
Sensation  as  of  grinding,  at  a  small  spot  near  the  navel  (one  hour  after
dinner),  (fourth  day),'. — Burning  in  right  flank,  on  sitting,  for  five  min-
utes, afternoons  (twenty-second  day),'. — A  large  furunculus  on  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen,^ — Drawing  in  the  side  of  the  be]ly,^ — [210.]  Pain  in
upper  abdomen,  at  a  small  spot,  like  a  burning,'. — Rumbling  in  bowels,^
without  perceptible  flatulence,  afternoons  (third  day),'. — Growling  and
noises  in  bowels,  with  much  passage  of  flatulence  (sixteenth  day),'. — Rum-
bling from  fermentation  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  extending  as  far  as
the  chest,  early  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up,  in  bed,^ — Frequent  emission
of  flatus  (eighteenth  day),'. — Emission  of  loud  flatus  (nineteenth  day),'.^
Frequent  emission  of  offensive  flatus,  without  the  sensation  of  flatus,'. —
Colic,^. — Oppression  in  the  abdomen,^. — Weight  in  the  abdomen,  as  of  a
load,  with  anxiety,  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst ;  the  symptom  passes  off
during  sleep,^ — [220.]  Fulness  in  the  abdomen,'". — Severe  pinching  in  the
abdomen,  which  is  soon  followed  by  a  loose  evacuation  (immediately),^ —
Pinching  in  the  abdomen  at  every  inspiration,  which  passes  off  again  by
expiration  (thirteenth  day),'. — Pinching  all  around  in  the  abdomen  and  in
the  groins,  as  before  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  early  after  rising
(eighteenth  day),'. — Gripings,  here  and  there,  in  the  bowels,  without  sen-
sation of  flatulence,  afternoons  (eighteenth  day),'. — Gripings  and  movings
in  all  the  bowels,  the  whole  day  (fourth  day),'. — Violent  cutting  in  the
whole  abdomen,  at  two  o'clock  at  night ;  this  rouses  her  from  sleep  (after
twenty-four  hours),'. — Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  with  the
hand  (nineteenth  day),'.— Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  over  the
hip,  when  sitting,  and  when  stooping  while  stauding,l — Frequent  disap-
pearing and  recurring  gripings  in  the  lower  abdomen,  forenoons  (thirteenth
day),'. — [230.]  Pinching  and  griping  pain  in  the  lower  abdomen,  with
dyspnoea,''. — Pressive  tension  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  near  the  ring,
as  if  something  were  pressing  out,^ — Pain  in  both  .groins,  like  severe  grip-
ings, which  afterward  extended  to  the  navel,  and  disappeared  after  a  few
evacuations,  evenings  (first  day),'. — Cutting  and  stitches  in  both  groins,  as
far  as  the  small  of  the  back,  with  urging  to  urinate  every  half  hour  in  the
evening,'. — Tearing  and  tensive  pain  in  the  groin,  when  walking,^ — Dis-
tension, with  a  tensive  sensation  and  grinding,  in  the  right  groin,'. — In-
describably vehement  pain  in  the  right  groin  ;  it  often  extends  to  the  hip


292  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

and  the  small  of  the  back  (fifteenth  day)/. — Stitches  in  the  right  groin,
and  coming  out  behind  the  hip,  when  sitting  (fourth  day),'. — Sense  of  dis-
tension in  left  groin,  which  becomes  somewhat  painful  on  sitting  (fifteenth
day),\ — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  groin ;  it  obliges  him  to  walk
crooked  (third  day),'. — [240.]  Pain,  as  from  ulceration,  in  the  left  groin,
perceptible  only  when  walking,'.

Stool  and  JLnus, — *Mueh  burning  in  rectum  during  and  after  the
expulsion  of  soft  stook,'-. — *Itching  soreness  of  the  rectum,  several  pustules
being  formed  by  the  side  of  it,'. — Increases  or  produces  hsemorrhoidal  flux,'.
— *Much  burning  in  anus  during  soft  stool  (eleventh  day),'. — Tearing  in  the
perineum  when  walking,'^. — Stinging  tearing  pain  in  the  perineum,  in  the
evening,^ — *Stool  hard,  crumbling,  scanty ;  but,  after  dinner,  the  usual
stool,  followed  by  burning  in  anus  (fourteenth  day),'. — Evacuation  consists
of  only  two  small  pieces,  passed  with  pressure,  followed  by  a  soft  stool,'. —
Stool,  whose  first  part  was  solid,  the  last  soft,  with  straining,  followed  by
burning  in  the  anus;  afternoon,  the  usual  stool;  during  menstruation
(fourteenth  day),'. — [250.]  Hard  stool,  soon  after  taking  a  new  dose  (ninth
day) ;  on  the  next  day  stool,  whose  first  part  was  hard,  the  last  part  soft,'.
— Solid  stool,  the  third  or  tburth  days  (only  once  a  day) ;  the  fifth
day,  the  usual  soft  stool,'. — Stool  as  usual  (in  two  hours);  a  similar
one  follows  iu  the  afternoon,'.— Soft  stool,  with  pain  in  lower  abdomen
(eighteenth  day),'. — Soft  stool,  with  excessive  urgency,  follows  some  rum-
blings in  the  umbilical  region  (iu  one  hour  after  a  new  dose),'. — Soft  stool,
soon  after  taking ;  none  on  second  day  ;  usual  stool  on  third  day,'. — Two
soft  stools  (first  and  nineteenth  day),'. — Stool  rather  soft  than  hard  (second
and  third  days),'. — Soft  stool,  the  first  day,  at  an  unusual  time,'. — Soft
stool,  the  first  day,  two  and  three  times,  and  large  amounts  of  urine,'. —
[260.]  Several  soft  stools,  after  each  fresh  dose,'. — Five  half  liquid  stools,
with  pains  around  the  navel  (second  afternoon),  (prover  always  inclined
to  soft  stools),'. — Diarrhoea,  twice,  followed  by  pains  in  the  abdomen  (fifth
day),'. — In  the  morning  slight  diarrhoea,  whereupon  the  abdomen  becomes
internally  sore,  and  pains  as  if  beaten  (eighth  day),'. — Three  soft,  almost
fluid,  stools,  with  mucus  (first  day),'. — Pain  below  the  navel,  followed  by  the
usual  stool,  with  stinging  in  the  anus ;  afternoon  at  four  (even  now,  after
twelfth  day),'. — Soft,  yellow  stools,  with  great  haste  to  go  to  stool ;  fol-
lowed by  tenesmus  and  burning  iu  the  rectum  (fifth  day),'. — *  Green  slimy
stools,  in  the  morning  (third,  fourth  days),'. — *  Glassy,  tough  mucus  in  stool,^.
— Hard  stool,  covered  with  wimcms,'". — [270.]  Stool  covered  with  mMctts,'". —
Occasional  intermission  of  stool  for  several  days  (second,  third,  fourth,
thirteenth,  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  twenty-second,  twenty-third  days),  in  the
different  provers,'.— No  stool  for  two  days,  with  constant  colic,  and  sensa-
tion as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on  (twenty-second,  twenty-third  days),'.

Urinary  Organs. — Pinching  and  stitching  pain  in  the  bladder,  as
far  as  the  urethra,  when  lying  down,^ — Constant  tenesmus  of  the  bladder,
after  4.o'clock  A.M.,^ — Desire  to  urinate,  only  a  few  drops  of  urine  being
passed ;  afterwards  the  urine  was  emitted  regularly  with  the  stool,'. — He
can  only  pass  urine  very  slowly,^ — Diminished  urinating  (first  day),'. —
Scanty  urinating  (fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Urine  less  in  amount  and  fre-
quency (second  day),'. — [280.]  Urine  increased  (second  day),'. — Urine  in-
creased (ninth  day),'. — Urine  increased,  the  first  day,  though  she  drinks
less,'. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  and  frequent  micturition,  early  in  morn-
ing,^ — Must  rise  at  night  to  urinate,  and  passes  an  unusual  amount  (first
day  before  menses),  (sixteenth  day),'. — Bises  three  times  at  night  to  urinate,


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  293

and  passes  much  urine  (first  day),'. — He  constantly  passes  more  urine  than
usual  (seventeenth  day)/. — Constantly  increased  urine,  which  compels  him
to  rise  at  night,'. — Increased  urging  to  urinate,  at  10  a.m.  (first  day),l —
Copious  urine,'. — [290.]  Copious  emission  of  urine,  which  has  a  stale  smell,
yet  remains  clear,*. — The  urine,  when  passing,  feels  hot ;  its  quantity  is  in-
creased (the  first  day),'. — Reddish,  bright  urine,  with  a  loose,  cloudy  sedi-
ment (sixth  day),'. — Clayey  sediment  in  the  urine,  after  one  hour  (fifth
day),'.

Sexual  Organs. — (Male.) — Frequent  erections  (after  seventh  day),'.
— Stitches  and  beating  in  the  left  spermatic  cord  (fifth  day),'. — {Female. )
Sensation  in  the  female  genital  organs  as  after  a  nightly  embrace,  early
after  waking,^. — The  menses  appear  two  days  too  soon,  with  pain  in  the  abdo-
men and  small  of  the  back;  *they  continue  at  night,  when  the  blood  flows  more
abundantly  (after  seventeenth  day),'. — Discharge  of  a  quantity  of  blood
with  the  stool  during  the  catamenia,^ — Leucorrhcea,  with  distension  of  the
abdomen,  without  accumulation  of  flatus,l — [300.]  Leucorrhcea,  like  the
white  of  an  egg,  after  previous  pinching  around  the  navel,'. — Brown,  slimy,
painless  leucorrhcea,  after  every  discharge  of  urine  (sixth  and  seventh
days),'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Irritation  causing  hawking,  whereby
only  a  piece  of  phlegm  is  expectorated ;  with  it  a  raw  sensation ;  then  a
long-lasting  sore  feeling  up  behind  the  uvula ;  mornings  (fourth  day),'. —
*Hoarseness,  with  burning  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  the  whole  afternoon
(after  third  day),'. — Could  scarcely  speak,  and  complained  of  burning  pains
in  throat  and  chest,". — Aphonia,". — Violent  cough,  in  the  evening,  when
in  bed,  during  which  water  comes  up  into  her  mouth  (third  and  fourth
days),'. — Cough  when  breathing  deeply,  especially  when  lying  on  the  right
side,^. — Dry  cough  (thirteenth  or  fourteenth  day),'. — Dry  cough,  mornings
(seventeenth  day),'. — Frequent,  dry,  hacking  cough  (second  day),'. — [310.]
Bry,  hacking  cough,  caused  by  tickling  in  the  throat,  which  also  continues
when  not  coughing;  forenoons  (fifth  day),'. — Dry  cough,  evenings,  from
six  to  nine,  from  tickling  in  the  throat ;  it  passes  off  after  lying  down  in
bed  (third  day),'. — Dry  cough  troubles  her  nearly  the  whole  night,  so  that  she
cannot  sleep  on  account  of  it  (sixth  day),'. — (A  previous  dry  cough  and  dry
catarrh  become  more  severe,  and  lasts  through  the  whole  proving,'.) — (A
constant,  troublesome  cough,  which  was  seated  before  taking  the  drug,  and
during  fifteen  days  of  the  proving,  disappeared  suddenly  without  expectora-
tion, which  follows  first  after  several  days  (fifteenth  day),'.) — The  cough  is
usually  dry,  mornings,  and  loosens  in  the  afternoon;  most  frequently,  with
sticking  in  the  left  hypochondriac  region,'. — Dry  cough  in  the  morning,  with
sticking  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest,'. — Cough  nights  when  lying  on  the
back,  with  sticking  in  the  left  middle  false  ribs,  extending  down  to  the  last
false  ribs ;  he  could  not  "cough  out,"  on  account  of  pain,  though  the  cough
was  loose ;  more  severe  on  turning  on  to  side  (on  fourth  day).  On  the  fol-
lowing evening  the  cough  returned,  but  without  the  sticking;  each- attack
lasted  only  a  few  minutes,'. — Constant  hawking,  without  expectoration,". —
Desire  to  breathe  deep,  and  often  to  cough,  with  slight  expectoration,'". —
[320,]  Cough  from  hawking  some  mucous  expectoration,'". — Cough,  with  ex-
pectoration,'".— Cough,  with  some  expectoration,  early  in  the  morning  (first
day),'. — Expectoration  of  tough  mucus  in  afternoon,'". — Expectoration  of
blood  for  six  days,  after  previous  itching  in  the  throat,''. — Short  breath
(after  eighteenth  day),'. — ^Threatening  suflfbcation,". — Sense  of  severe  con-
striction of  throat  and  difiicult  respiration,".


294  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Chest. — Rattling  iu  chest,''. — Burning  at  small  spots  of  the  chest  (when
walking  iu  the  open  air),  (shortly,  and  after  thirteenth  day),'. — [330.]
Rawness  in  chest  (evening  at  8),'°. — Tension,  or  compression  as  with  a
vice,  in  front,  at  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  when  standing;  not  aifected  by
breathing  (first  day),'. — Beating  in  the  chest  after  dinner;  the  beating  ex-
tends to  the  pharynx,  with  heat  of  the  face  and  uneasy  mood,^. — Pressure
in  middle  of  the  chest,  with  stitches,  as  if  a  morsel  which  had  been  swallowed
had  stuck  there;  afternoons  (sixth  Aa.y),^ .—Oppression  at  the  chest,  with  in-
clination to  eructations,  which  came  on  in  the  open  air,  and  relieved  the
pressure:  early,  after  rising  (after  nineteen  days),'. — Oppression  of  chest,
when  moving  the  arms  with  force  and  when  stooping,'. — It  becomes  so
heavy  in  the  chest  when  walking  in  the  open  air  that  she  cannot  take
breath  in  suiBcient  quantity,  and  is  therefore  obliged  frequently  to  stand
still  (second  day),'. — Heaviness  on  the  chest,  nights,  in  bed,  which  wakes
him,  with  restlessness,  which  does  not  allow  him  to  go  to  sleep  again.  At
3  A.M.  this  heaviness  wakes  him  again;  he  was  kept  in  a  kind  of  half  sleep,
iu  which  he  was  partly  conscious,  and  thought,  or  rather  dreamed,  that  he
had  been  hanged,  and  the  chest  had  been  hard  pressed  (fifth  day),'. —
Pressure  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest,  without  dyspnoea,  for  half  an  hour,
evenings  (first  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest,  and  pressure
for  two  minutes;  afternoons,  and  the  following  morning  (third  day),'. —
[340.]  Stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest,  in  every  position,  though,  ap-
parently, relieved  by  sitting;  afternoons  (first  day),'. — Red  spots,  as  large
as  a  penny,  on  the  left  side  of  the^chest,  with  a  sensation  as  of  burning  itch-
ing, and  turning  pale  when  pressed  upon  with  the  finger  (tenth  day),'. —
Painful  tension  under  the  right  mamma,  in  any  position,  frequently  inter-
mittent (after  dinner),  (fifteenth  and  sixteenth  days),'. — Pain,  as  from  a
bruise,  in  a  spot  of  a  hand's  breadth  under  the  right  mamma,  both  when
touched  and  left  alone,  frequently  intermittent,  and  often  with  shortness
of  breath  (twelfth  to  sixteenth  day),'. — Fine  stitches  below  the  right  female
breast,  without  affecting  respiration ;  on  sitting  bent,  afternoons  (fifteenth
day),'. — Frequently,  a  transient  but  sharp  stitch  behind  the  right  ribs,  on
motion  (seventh  day),'. — Small  pointed  stitches  below  the  right  breast  dur-
ing menstruation  (seventeenth  day),'. — Sharp  stitches  below  the  left  female
breast,  while  standing  (first  day),'. — Stitches  iu  the  middle  of  the  left  side
(rib  region),'. — Sudden  fine  stitches  come  out  of  the  left  chest;  they  fre-
quently recur,  and  are  unchanged  by  breathing;  forenoons  (thirteenth
day),'. — [350.]  With  every  inspiration,  a  stitch,  as  with  an  awl,  shoots  up-
ward in  the  left  chest;  afternoons  (first  and  thirteenth  days),'. — Rhyth-
mical stitches  in  the  left  chest;  evenings,  while  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'.—
Tearing  at  a  small  spot  in  the  left  clavicle,  with  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,
when  pressing  upon  it  (second  day),'.^ — -Tearing  sticking  in  the  left  clavicle,
at  a  small  spot,  with  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  when  touching  that  spot  with
the  finger  (second  day),^ — Pressure  upon  the  left  mamma  when  taking  ex-
ercise in  the  open  air;  also  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  upon  leaving  the
warm  room  and  going  into  the  open  air  (third  and  nineteenth  days),". —
Sensation  of  sticking  crawling  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting,'.
— Beating,  like  a  pulse,  at  a  small  place  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  chest,  only
when  standing,  not  when  sitting;  early  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'. —
Sensation  of  fleabites  at  several  places  of  the  left  mamma,  which  passes
off  by  scratching ;  in  the  evening  (eleventh  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  pre-
cordial region,  which  suddenly  extended  thence  into  the  left  forearm  (fif-
teenth day),'.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  295

Seart  and  Pulse. — ^Pulse  weak,  irregular,  rapid,". — [360.]  Small,
Boft,  quick  pulse,'. — Intermittent  pulse,*.

Ifecli  and  Rack. — Tension  and  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  so
that  she  was  unable  to  move;  in  the  evening;  it  passes  off  after  lying  down
(eighteenth  day),\ — Drawing  in  the  cape  of  the  neck;  this  drawing  seems
to  be  in  the  tendons  (third  day),'. — Itching  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the
evening,  when  undressing;  after  lying  down,  the  itching  passes  off  (eigh-
teenth day),'. — Stiff  neck,  with  pain  when  turning  it,  reaching  from  the
nape  of  the  neck  as  far  as  between  the  shoulders;  for  six  days  (after  six
days),'. — Frequent  intermitting  tearing  in  the  cords  of  the  right  side  of  the
neck,  during  menses  (seventeenth  day),'. — Tearing  in  cords  of  left  side  of
neck  (one  hour  after  taking),'. — Tearing,  now  in  both  sides  of  the  neck,
now  in  the  cheeks;  lasts  five  minutes;  frequently  at  evening  (fourth  day),'. —
Tearing  stitches  in  the  neck  and  left  clavicle,  on  moving  the  head,^ — [370.]
Icy  coldness  in  the  back  and  between  the  shoulders,  at  the  spot  of  a  pi-evi-
ously  existing  pain,  only  internal ;  neither  feathers  nor  wool  can  warm  that
spot;  after  half  a  day,  the  coldness  terminates  in  itching  (after  twelve
days),'. — When  sitting,  tension  in  the  back,  and  as  if  the  back  were  com-
pressed with  a  vice;  disappears  by  motion  (fifteenth  day),'. — Tension  in
back,  preceded  by  painless  itching  of  the  left  scapula  (fifteenth  day),'. —
Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  back,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  rest  upon  it ;  at
night  (after  three  days),'. — When  she  had  fallen  asleep,  an.  hour  after  lying
down  in  the  evening,  she  was  awakened  by  a  fearful  backache;  she  fre-
quently fell  asleep  again,  but  the  pain  always  woke  her  again  (sixteenth
day),'. — Terrific  backache  wakes  her  at  night  at  1,  and  lasts  till  4,  with
paralytic  pain  in  both  hips,  and  in  external  surface  of  thigh,  above  the
knee;  these  parts  are  still  painful  to  touch  the  next  forenoon  (eighteenth
day),'. — Backache,  forenoons  at  10;  afterwards,  weakness  of  the  thighs
during  menstruation  (seventeenth  day),'. — Bruised  backache,  nights  (sec-
ond day),'. — Backache,  as  if  bruised,  afternoons,  while  spinning ;  disap-
pears after  motion  (second  day),'. — Bruised  pain  in  the  back,  at  night,  so
that  she  can  hardly  lie  (thirteenth  day),'. — [380.]  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in
the  back,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  lie  upon  it  at  night  (after  three  days),'.
— At  night,  between  11  and  12,  extremely  violent  backache,  as  if  it  were
wholly  beaten  and  shattered ;  it  wakes  her  from  sleep,  and  she  can  neither
lie  on  the  back  nor  on  the  side,  but  must  constantly  turn  about;  the  pain
lasts  till  1  o'clock  the  next  afternoon,'. — Frightful  backache,  as  if  shattered,
on  rest  and  motion,  for  an  hour  and  a  half  (eighteenth  day),'. — Pain  be-
tween the  scapulie,  as  from  a  wrench  and  a  bruise,  or  as  if  the  muscles  of
the  back  were  stretched  asunder,^. — Pinching  iu  the  flesh  of  the  right
scapula  (fifteenth  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  left  scapula,  especially  on  lower-
ing the  shoulder  and  turning  the  trunk  to  the  left  side,^ — Stitches  in  the
left  scapula  when  at  rest  (fourth  and  ninth  days),'. — Drawing  and  press-
ing, from  without  inwards,  in  the  middle  lumbar  vertebrae,  which  forces
him  to  stretch  the  abdomen  forward,^ — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with
incarceration  of  flatulence,^. — Pain  in  small  of  back,  when  walking,  so  that
she  was  unable  to  walk  straight,^ — [390.]  Pain  in  small  of  back,  when
raising  the  body  after  stooping,'. — After  yawning,  a  sensation  in  small  of
back  as  if  something  elastic,  like  air,  were  pressing  out  there  (sixth  day),'.
— Painful  stiffness  in  small  of  back,  even  when  sitting;  mostly,  however,  when
raiung  the  body  erect,^, — Pain  of  the  coccyx,  as  from  a  bruise,  when  sitting
quietly,  especially  when  slumbering,^.

Extrctnities  in  General. — Fatigue  and  weakness  of  the  limbs,'.


296  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

— Painful  tearing  here  and  there,  (as,  for  example,)  oa  the  inner  surface
of  the  left  wrist,  right  and  left  upper  arm,  both  hands,  of  the  knee,  only
not  on  trunk  and  head;  evenings,  on  sitting;  disappears  after  lying  (third
day),'. — Stinging,  jerking,  and  crawling  in  tips  of  fingers  and  toes;  after-
noons, 1  to  2  (seventeenth  day),\^A  burning  crawling,  now  in  tips  of  fin-
gers, now  in  tips  of  toes,  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep;  on  standing  (third
and  fourth  days  and  fifth  night),\ — Stinging  in  tips  of  fingers  and  toes,
when  walking  in  open  air;  aiternoons  (twenty-second  day),'. — In  the  even-
ing, a  shooting  and  tearing  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes;  then  in  the
right  upper  arm,  where  the  tearing  is  of  an  erratic  nature;  it  is  attended
with  anxiety,  and  passes  ofi"  after  lying  down ;  evenings,  6  to  10  (sixteenth
day),'. — [400.]  Tearing,  apparently  in  the  bone  of  the  left  upper  arm,  and
afterwards  of  the  right  thigh,  from  the  hip  downwards,  when  sitting  (tenth
day),'. — Tearing  in  left  arm  and  foot  (first  day),^. — Wakened,  at  11  at
night,  by  tearing  pains  in  the  middle  of  the  right  upper  arm,  and  on  the
back  of  both  lower  legs,  from  the  heels  upwards,  in  the  bones  (twenty-
fourth  day),'. — The  limbs  of  the  right  side  appear  to  be  more  affected  than
those  of  the  left,'. — Tearing  in  fingers  and  toes,  evenings,  at  8,  on  spinning,
so  that  she  must  lie  down ;  after  awhile,  in  bed,  it  disappears  (fourth
day),'. — Frequent  crawling  in  tips  of  fingers  and  toes ;  afternoons  (nineteenth
day),'.

Upper  JEictremitles. — Blisters,  of  the  size  of  peas,  upon  the  right
shoulder,  tensive  and  burning,  and  forming  a  kind  of  scurf,  after  three
days  (after  two  days),'. — Tearing  in  both  shoulders,  on  awaking,  before
midnight  (twenty-first  day),'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  shoulder-joints,  when
moving  them,  first  to  the  right,  then  to  the  ieft,^ — Burning  and  pressure  in
the  right  shoulder  (second  day),'. — [410.]  Throbbing  in  the  right  shoulder,
as  with  a  finger,  mornings,  in  bed,  and  also  frequently  by  day  (nineteenth
day),'. — Drawing  in  the  right  shoulder-joints,  as  after  a  cold  ;  when  at
rest,'. — A  swollen  gland  in  the  axilla,  resembling  a  hard,  red  ulcer,  which
separated,  however,  constantly  into  parts,  like  a  large  pimple  (after  eighteen
days),'. — Sudden  throbbing  in  left  axilla,  which  frequently  disappears  and
returns,  while  sitting  (twelfth  day),'. — Violent  itching  at  night,  between
the  shoulders  and  on  the  left  lower  arm,  so  that  he  would  like  to  scratch
the  skin  off"  (after  two  days),'. — Her  right  arm  is  very  heavy  and  feels  rigid;
the  upper  arm  seems  paralyzed,  in  the  evening,  when  spinning,  and  early
in  morning  (sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and  eighteenth  days),'. — Tearing  in  the
left  arm,  as  if  in  the  tendons,  reaches  into  the  fingers,  passing  oflT  during
active  motion  (ninth  day),'. — Compressive  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,
when  leaning  it  against  the  table,  passing  off"  during  motion  of  the  arm
(twenty-second  day),'. — ^Tearing  in  the  upper  arm,  a  hand's  breadth  below
the  shoulder,  as  "if  in  the  marrow,  as  far  as  the  wrist-joint  (thirteenth  day),'.
Tearing  in  the  upper  arm,  the  arm  being  very  sensitive  to  pressure  (nine-
teenth day),'. — [420.]  Drawing  in  the  lower  arm,  from  the  right  elbow  to
the  left  finger;  it  becomes  a  tearing  pain,  and  passes  off"  by  motion  (second
day),'. — Pressure  in  the  left  lower  arm,  when  lying  in  bed,  which  passes
off"  by  motion,  but  is  renewed  by  leaning  the  arm  upon  the  table  when
writing  (eleventh  and  twelfth  days),'. — Itching  and  burning  in  left  lovyer
arm,  under  the  bend  of  the  elbow  (thirteenth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  inside
of  the  lower  arm,  early  in  the  morning,  and  pimples  in  the  bend  of  the
elbow  (thirteenth  day),'. — After  scratching  the  internal  itching  side  of  the
left  lower  arm,  small  pimples  are  formed  there,  which  soon  disappear  again
(fourteenth  and  fifteenth  days),'. — Pimples  on  the  right  lower  arm,  which


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  297

force  him  to  scratch  continually,  ou  account  of  violent  itching,'. — Heavi-
ness and  sense  of  having  gone  to  sleep  in  the  right  forearm  (third  day),'. —
Tearing  and  twitching  in  the  tendons  of  the  internal  surface  of  the  left
wrist  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — Tearing  in  the  tendons  of  the  internal  surface
of  the  left  wrist,  so  violent  as  if  they  would  be  torn  out,  afternoons  (first
day),'. — Twitching,  tearing  on  back  of  left  hand,  behind  the  thunab,  with
swelling  of  it,  which,  however,  disappears  in  a  few  hours  (twenty-fifth
day),'. — [430.]  Small  vesicles  on  the  wrist-joint,  which  first  vehemently
itch,  and  then  burn,  when  scratched  (after  twenty  days),'. — Large  vesicles,
with  a  hard  base,  first  itch,  then  burn ;  new  vesicles  appear  daily,  while
the  first  ones,  after  a  few  days,  partly  disappear  and  partly  become  scurfy
from  scratching ;  they  remain  long  inflamed ;  on  and  about  the  right  wrist,
though  mostly  on  its  upper  surface  (nineteenth  day),'. — Tolerably  large
nodes,  deeply  seated  in  the  skin  ;  appear  around,  and  also  below  the  right
wrist ;  they  itch  violently  at  first ;  after  scratching,  burn  and  become  in-
flamed, and  seem  about  to  suppurate,  but  disappear  without  doing  it ;  only
those  that  are  much  scratched  form  a  reddish-brown  scurf  after  a  couple
of  days,  which  remains  several  days;  while' inflamed,  the  place  is  also
swollen  (twelfth  day),'. — Violent  lancination  through  the  hands,  while
walking  in  the  open  air  (twenty-second  day),'. — Stitches  and  beating  in  left
hand,  worse  when  moving  it,'. — Beating  in  palm  of  right  hand,  as  with  a
little  hammer,  passing  off'  by  moving  the  hand  (twelfth  day),'. — Feeling  of
paralysis  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  first  phalanx  of  the  right  middle  finger;
when  sitting  and  knitting  (fifteenth  day),'.— Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the
dorsa  of  both  hands,  at  the  lower  ends  of  the  metacarpal  bones,  especially
on  the  last  thumb-joint,  when  seizing  something  ;  the  pain  is  not  felt  when
making  any  other  motion  ;  upon  extending  the  hand,  the  pain  decreases  ;
and,  upon  pressing  upon  the  joint  of  the  thumb,  the  pain  passes  off  with  a
cracking  sound  (afternoons,  at  rest),'. — Itching  pimples  on  the  dorsa  of
both  hands,  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  attended  with  desquamation  of
the  skin  at  those  itching  places  on  the  following  morning  (after  twenty
days),'. — Peeling  off  of  the  skin  between  the  thumb  and  index  of  both
hands  (after  fourteen  days),'. — [440.]  Twitching  in  last  joint  of  right  little
finger,  evening  (second  day),'. — Twitching,  tearing  on  external  surface  of
right  thumb,  evenings  (fifteenth  day),'. — Tearing  pain  in  last  phalanx  of
left  thumb  (fifteenth  day),'. — Violent  tearing  pain  in  ball  of  right  thumb,
and  on  pressing  on  it,  a  painful  stitch,  which,  however,  disappears  on  long
pressure  (fourteenth  day),'. — Painful  tearing  in  last  joint  of  right  index
finger,  worse  on  pressure  or  rubbing,  and  extending  over  the  whole  back
of  the  hand ;  for  ten  minutes,  evenings  (fifteenth  day),'. — Tearing  in  left
index-finger,  below  the  nail,  afternoons  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — Tearing  in
last  joint  of  right  middle  finger  (sixteenth  day),'. — Painful  tearing  in  left
little  finger,  from  behind  forward  (first  day),'. — Tearing  in  middle  joint  of
thumb,^ — Craraplike  pain  in  right  middle  finger,  as  if  in  the  tendons,  upon
bending  the  fingers  inwards  (eleventh  day),'. — [450.]  Sticking  in  last  joint
of  left  thumb,  for  five  minutes,  evenings,  while  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'. —
Some  sharp,  transient  stitches  in  last  left  thumb-joint ;  afternoons,  while  at
rest,'. — Stitches  in  tip  of  right  thumb  ;  when  it  left  that  place,  it  stuck  in
the  left  index-finger,  in  the  last  joint ;  then  spread  over  the  whole  left  hand,
where  the  pain  became  throbbing  and  violent;  soon  it  intermitted,  but
returned  and  soon  disappeared  entirely;  on  moving  the  hand,  it  disappeared
entirely ;  while  sitting,  evenings,  at  six  (eleventh  day),'. — Sensitive  stitches
in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  frequently  renewed  (thirteenth  day),'. — Coarse


298  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

stitches  at  the  tip  of  left  little  jSnger,  for  one  minute  (fourth  day)/. — Pain-
ful throbbing  in  left  thumb,  under  the  nail,  from  1  to  5  p.m.,  when  it  sud-
denly leaves  (eighth  day),'. — Painful  aching  in  first  joint  of  left  index-
finger  on  stretching  it  out,  while  knitting,  which  goes  off  on  bending  it
(fifteenth  day),'.— Crawling  in  tip  of  right  thumb  and  index-finger,  as  from
going  asleep,  evenings,  on  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'. — Vehement,  long-lasting
itching  in  the  tip  of  the  index-finger,  which  cannot  be  stopped  by  scratch-
ing, early  in  the  morning  (twelfth  day),'.

Loiver  Eoctremities. — Very  severe  boring  pain  in  the  lower  limbs,'.
— [460.f]  *Pain  in  the  left  hip,  as  {f  the  tendons  were  too  short,  so  that  she  is
obliged  to  limp  when  walking ;  when  sitting  there  is  a  gnawing  pain  in  the
bone,^. — Sticking  on  external  surface  of  left  hip,  in  all  positions,  at  night,
from  12.30  till  2,  relieved  by  pressure,  with  copious  passage  of  flatus,  and
it  seems  as  though  the  violent  pain  was  caused  by  the  flatulence,'. — Violent
itching  around  the  hip,  at  night,  and  early  in  the  morning ;  also  of  the
thighs,  legs,  and  around  the  bend  of  the  knee,  with  rash  pimples,''. —
Weariness  and  weakness  of  the  legs,  the  whole  day,  only  ceases  at  night
(firat  day),'. —  The  hamstrings  of  both  legs  are  painful  when  walking;  they
feel  too  short ;  not  so  when  at  rest^. — Trembling  of  the  left  leg,  with  sensi-
tiveness to  the  touch  (tenth  day),'. — *  When  sitting,  tearing  down  the  thighs
from  the  left  hip;  first,  it  is  relieved  by  rising,  and  oomes  on  again  lohen  sitting
down;  afterwards,  motion  no  longer  relieves  the  pain  (sixteenth  day),'. —
*  Tearing  pain  in  front  of  the  thigh,  when  sitting,''. — Painful  tearings  in  the
*exterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,  in  the  evening,  *when  sitting  down
(fifteenth  day),'. — Excessively  painful  stitches  in  the  knee-joints,  in  the
evenings  at  nine,  *when  sitting;  cau  hardly  be  endured  (third  day),'.—
[470.]  Stinging  and  tearing  in  the  left  knee,  when  walking  (eleventh
day),'. — (In  a  child  that  had  been  aflected  with  swelling  of  the  knee,  and
whose  knee,  after  the  swelling  had  been  cured,  remained  stiff,  and  curved
from  before  backwards,  the  mobility  was  very  soon  restored),'. — Twitching
in  left  popliteal  region  ;  on  walking,  the  cords  seem  too  short ;  disappears
after  long  walking  (second  day),'. — Early,  when  rising,  the  thighs  were
contracted  about  the  popliteal  region,  as  if  dried  up,  or  too  short,  so  that
she  was  unable  to  go  downstairs  ;  this  symptom  passed  ofi'  after  long  and
violent  exei'cise  (fifteenth  day),'. — *Drawing  tension  in  the  legs  when  sitting
or  lying;  this  obliges  him  to  walk  crooked,  after  which  the  symptoms  pass  off,'.
— Tension  and  traction  in  the  tendons  of  the  legs,  so  that  he  finds  walking
difficult,  with  lassitude  in  the  legs,'. — Spasmodic  contraction  around  the
lower  part  of  the  left  leg  (fifth  day),'. — Insensibility  of  the  left  leg,  when
sitting  (it  feels  dead),  (twelfth  day),'. — Slow,  fine  stitches  in  the  lower  leg,
just  below  the  knee,  on  the  inner  surface,  while  sitting  (thirteenth  day),'. —
Sore  stitches  in  left  calf,  while  sitting  (fourteenth  day),'. — [480,]  Stmging
pain  in  left  calf,  after  four  hours'  walk,  when  at  rest  (third  day),'. — The
ankle-bones  are  very  painful  when  walking  and  stepping  on  them ;  they
feel  bruised  and  contracted,^. — Spasmodic  contraction  or  tearing  below  and

■f  Extract  from  a  letter  from  Dr.  Dunham,. — "  In  passing,  let  me  call  your  atten-
tion to  my  verificiitions  under  Ammojiium,  muriaticum,,  of  aggravations  of  sciati'"
pains  while  sitting,  pain  on  the  left  side.  These  symptoms  have  led  me  to  use
Amm.  mur.  in  several  cases  of  severe  and  long-continued  sciatica  with  completl^
success.  (Comparative  ease  when  walking ;  complete  freedom  from  pain  while  lying
down,  until  in  the  course  of  time  the  '  painful  spots  '  were  developed.)"  Dr.  Dun-
ham has  underlined  in  Amm.  mur.,  S.,  285,  297,  392,  393,  400,  460,  466,  467,  468,
469,  474,  552.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  299

around  the  right  inner  malleolus,  on  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'. — Throbbing
and  beating,  as  from  an  ulcer,  in  left  external  malleolus  (ninth  day)  ;  on
walking  (and  on  eleventh  day),  also  in  right  foot,\ — Frightful  ulcerative  pain
in  right  heel,  relieved  by  vigorous  rubbing  (niueteenth  day),\ — Frequent
tearing  and  ulcerative  pain  in  right  heel,  so  that  she  must  cry  out;  nights,  at
3  o'clock  in  bed ;  relieved  in  no  position  (sixteenth  and  seventeenth  days),'.
— Spasmodic,  painful  contraction  in  right  heel,  evenings  in  bed  (fourteenth
day),\ — Tearing  in  the  external  border  of  the  foot,  when  standing ;  it
passes  off  by  motion  (seventh  day),'. — Sensation  in  the  right  foot  as  if  it
had  gone  to  sleep,  at  night ;  and  also  in  the  left,  the  next  forenoon  (nine-
teenth and  twentieth  days),'. — Cold  feet,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed  ;  it
takes  her  a  long  time  to  get  them  warm  (fourteenth  day),'. — [490.]  Pain
is  excited  in  a  paralytic  foot,  which  had  already  been  much  improved,^ —
Itching  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening  (second  day),'. — Tear-
ing in  left  great  toe,  while  standing  (fifth  day);'. — Tearing  in  external  sur-
face of  right  great  toe,  while  sitting  (fifteenth  day),'. — Tearing  in  right
great  toe  (afternoons  on  sitting)  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — Fine  sticking  in
right  little  toe,  on  standing  and  walking  (fourteenth  day),'. — A  slowly  in-
creasing and  decreasing  sticking  in  left  great  toe,  afternoons,'. — Pinching
itching  of  the  forepart  of  the  right  big  toe  (seventh  day),'.

Generalities. — Much  attected,^ — Weakness,  inactivity,  general  de-
pression (in  fever),*. — [500.]  Very  weak,  mornings,".— General  weakness,
sluggishness,  and  dejection  of  whole  body,^. — Sudden  faintness  and  weakness
after  dinner,  when  taking  exercise  in  the  open  air  (nineteenth  day),'. — Weak-
ness, with  sense  of  severe  constriction  of  throat  a^d  difficult  respiration,".
— He  appears  to  be  constantly  affected  with  orgasm  of  blood,^. — Orgasm  in
the  whole  body,  with  anxiety ;  in  the  beginning  of  the  proving  period  she
feels  more  warm  than  cold,'. — Early  in  the  rnorning,  after  waking,  she
feels  contracted  in  the  whole  body,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  walk ;
the  pain  went  off  by  long  walking  (nineteenth  day),'. — Painful  twitching,
or  jerking-tearing,  here  and  there,  in  the  calves,  on  a  spot  size  of  the
hand ;  also,  on  right  temple,  on  arms,  between  right  index  and  middle
fingers,  where  the  pain  most  severely  throbs  and  beats,  as  if  it  would  sup-
purate; evenings,  six  to  ten,  on  sitting;  pain  first  disappears  on  lying  in
bed  (fifteenth  day),'. — Pressive  burning  and  stinging  at  several  places,  here
and  there,  forenoons  (third  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdo-
men, then  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  then  in  the  right  scapula,  and,
lastly,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  accompanied  by  chilliness  and  sleepiness
during  the  day,l — [510.]  She  appears  to  be  better  in  the  open  air,'. — All
the  bones  of  the  body  are  painful  and  feel  bruised,  when  slumbering  or
sitting  still,^ — Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the
back,  with  tearing  in  both  shoulders  and  in  the  back,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, after  rising,  and  worse  during  motion  (after  twenty-fifth  day),'. — Coffee
seems  to  restrict  the  action  of  the  drug,'.

Skin. — Fine  rash  over  the  whole  body  for  two  weeks  (after  sixteenth
day),l — Constant  subcutaneous  formication  all  over  the  body,*. — Very  fine
miliary  eruption  (sudamina),  following  profuse  perspiration,". — Psoric  erup-
tion over  the  greater  part  of  the  back  and  lower  extremities,'. — Itching,
here  and  there,  over  the  whole  body,  evenings  before  lying  down,'. — Itch-
ing and  biting  over  the  whole  body;  cannot  scratch  enough,  evenings,'. —
[520.]  Itching,  evenings,  on  front  of  chest,  on  left  forearm,  whereon  little
pimples  appear,  which  disappear  over  night  (second  day),'. — Itching  over
whole  body,  evenings,  before  lying  down ;  it  lasts  some  time  after  lying


300  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

down,  with  small  pimples,  here  and  there  (tenth  day),\ — After  itching
and  scratching  on  forepart  of  the  forehead  some  pimples,  which  soon  dis-
appear (sixth  day),'. — Itching  pimples  on  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  in
the  evening;  at  night  they  pass  off  (after  nineteenth  day),'. — Painful  pim-
ple on  the  antihelix  of  the  right  ear,^ — Eruptions  on  the  face,''. — A  vesicle,
without  sensation,  on  left  side  of  face  (eleventh  day),'. — Herpes  in  the  face,
dry  and  tettering,''. — Excoriated  spots  in  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip,
with  burning  soreness  (second  day),'. — Chapped  lips,^ — [530.]  Dry  and
wrinkled  lips ;  they  become  chapped,  and  she  had  to  moisten  thera  con-
stantly with  the  tongue,^ — Itching  pimples  around  the  upper  lip  (second
day),'. — Blisters  on  the  upper  lip,  which  become  inflamed  and  ulcerated
(after  second  day),'. — Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  with  a  burning
pain,''.— Vesicles  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  burn  like  fire,  and  disap-
pear in  an  hour  (third  day),'. — Blisters  of  the  size  of  peas,  upon  the  right
shoulder,  tensive  and  burning,  and  forming  a  kind  of  scurf,  after  two  days
(after  second  day),'. — Itching  and  burning  in  left  lower  arm  under  the
bend  of  the  elbow  (thirteenth  day),'.— Itching  of  the  inside  of  the  lower
arm,  early  in  the  morning,  and  pimples  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow  (thirteenth
day),'. — After  scratching  the  intei'ually  itching  side  of  the  left  lower  arm
small  pimples  are  formed  there,  which  soon  disappear  again  (fourteenth
and  fifteenth  days),'. — Pimples  on  the  right  lower  arm,  which  force  him  to
scratch  continually,  on  account  of  violent  itching,'. — [540.]  Small  vesicles
on  the  wrist-joint,  which  first  vehemently  itch,  and  then  burn,  when  scratched
(after  twentieth  day),'. — Large  vesicles,  with  a  hard  base,  first  itch,  then
iDurn ;  new  vesicles  appqar  daily,  while  the  first  ones,  after  a  few  days,
partly  disappear,  partly  become  scurfy  from  scratching;  they  remain  long
inflamed  ;  on  and  about  the  right  wrist,  though  mostly  on  its  upper  surface
(nineteenth  day),'. — Tolerably  large  nodes,  deeply  seated  in  the  skin,  appear
around,  and  also  below,  the  right  wrist ;  they  itch  violently  at  first ;  after
scratching  they  burn  and  become  inflamed,  and  seem  about  to  suppurate,
but  disappear  without  doing  it;  only  those  that  are  much  scratched  form
a  reddish-brown  scurf  after  a  couple  of  days;  while  inflamed  the  place  is
also  swollen  (twelfth  day),'. — Itching  pimples  on  the  dorsa  of  both  hands,
in  the  evening,  and  at  night,  attended  with  desquamation  of  the  skin  on
those  itching  places,  on  the  following  morning  (after  twentieth  day),'. —
Peeling  off  of  the  skin  between  the  thumb  and  index  of  both  hands  (after
fourteenth  day),'. — Vehement,  long-lasting  itching  in  the  tip  of  the  index-
finger,  which  cauuot  be  stopped  by  scratching;  early  in  the  morning
(twelfth  day),'. — Violent  itching  around  the  hips,  at  night,  early  in  the
morning ;  also  of  the  thighs,  legs,  and  around  the  bend  of  the  knee,  with
rash-pimples,".

Feiwr. — Coldness,  evenings, at  seven,  with  some  thirst;  lasts  two  hours
(sixth  day),'. — Evenings,  at  five,  a  violent  shivering  creeps  over  her,  for
three  and  a  half  hours,  without  subsequent  heat  (first  days),'. — Chilly  and
shivering  the  whole  day,  especially  evenings,  also  nights ;  she  dares  not
uncover  herself,  on  account  of  chilliuess  (seventh  day),'. — [550.]  Chilh-
ness,  evenings ;  coldness  runs  down  the  back,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  (nine-
teenth day),'. — Chilliness,  evenings,  at  six  ;  goes  off  after  lying  down,  with
thirst  during  it  (twenty-fourth  day),'. — *  Chilliness,  evenings,  after  lying
down,  and  as  often  as  she  wakes,  without  thirst  (twenty-first  day),'. — Chil-
liness, evenings,  after  lying  down  and  the  whole  night  (twenty-seventh
day),'. — Chilliness  and  shivering,  evenings  at  six,  and  the  next  morning  at
seven ;  sweat,  morning,  in  bed ;  all  without  thirst  (twentieth  day),'.— Chil-


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  301

liness  somewhat,  evenings  at  5.30,  in  a  warm  room  ;  then  sweat  before  mid-
night (third  day),^ — Chilliness,  then  alternating  heat ;  then  sweat,  evenings,
without  thirst  (first  day),'.— Frequent  attacks  of  fever,  followed  by  chills
and  heat,  with  bloated  red  face,  and  thirst  during  the  chills  and  the  heat ;
the  intervals  when  there  is  no  fever  last  about  half  an  hour/. — More  heat
(warmth)  than  coldness  during  the  last  period  of  the  proving  (after  seven-
teenth day),'. — Heat  over  the  whole  body  in  a  warm  room,  and  after  quick
motion;  this  heat  is  accompanied  by  redness  of  the  face  and  a  sensation
of  stinging  heat,  which  is  especially  external  over  the  whole  chest,^. — [560.]
Heat  in  forenoon ;  thirst  early  in  the  evening,  after  rising,'. — Frequently
dry  heat  in  the  head,  upon  entering  the  room,  followed  by  a  little  thirst
in  the  evening  (nineteenth  day),'. — Heat  in  the  whole  body,  as  if  sweat
would  break  out  (after  fourteenth  day),'. — Frequent  flashes  of  heat,  with
subsequent  sweat  (thirteenth  day),'. — Great  heat  when  in  bed  at  night,
then  sweat,  early  in  the  morning  (eighteenth  day),'. — Heat  in  the  palms  of
the  hands,  soles  of  the  feet,  and  iu  the  face,  in  the  evening,  immediately
after  lying  down  (with  thirst).;  afterwards  sweat  (twenty-third  day) ;  fourth
evening,  heat  without  thirst,'. — ^Early  after  rising,  sensation  of  heat,  and  a
little  sweat  iu  the  haiids  and  odorous  sweat  of  the  feet,^. — ^Heat  over  the
whole  body,  with  redness  of  the  face  and  sweat,  when  exercising  in  the  open
air  (after  twenty-fourth  day),'. — Heat  and  sweat  in  the  afternoon,  then  a
little  thirst,'. — Very  profuse  perspiration,^ — [570.]  Sweat  after  midnight
(after  fourth  day),'.— -Sweat  over  whole  body  for  several  nights,'. — Sweat
early  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  so  that  the  shirt  is  drenched,  without  previous
heat  or  chill,'. — Increased  perspiration ;  every  movement  (so  to  speak)
makes  him  sweat,*. — Increased  transpiration  ;  sweats  on  every  exertion,'. —
Fever-paroxysms  begin  with  chill  and  heat,  and  end  with  sweat,".

Sleep  and,  Drearns, — In  the  morning  constant  yawning,  without
being  sleepy  (seventh  day),'. — Early  in  evening,  great  sleepiness,  with  closing
of  the  eyes ;  passes  off  when  light  is  brought  into  the  room,'. — She  cannot  fall
asleep  before  3  o'clock  in  the  morning;  she  then  sleeps  until  morning,  and
wakes  with  sweats,'. — She  cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of
heat  in  the  head,'. — [580.]  Starting  up,  while  one  is  falling  asleep,  evenings
(fifth  day),'. — ^Uneasy  sleep,  after  midnight,  with  frequent  waking  up  and
turning  from  one  side  to  another,  amidst  dreams,^ — Restless  sleep,'". — She
cannot  get  to  sleep  before  3  o'clock,  without  cause  (first  day),'. — She  wakes
up  about  12  and  cannot  sleep  more  (seventeenth  day),'. — At  evening  soon
asleep  (contrary  to  habit) ;  sleeps  well  the  first  night,'. — Sleepless  night,  and,
at  3  A.M.  till  4,  chilliness,  then  heat,  and  then  sweat;  all  without  thirst
(thirteenth  day),'.^Uneasy  nights,'. — Sleep  full  of  dreams  (after  third
day),'. — Dreams  the  whole  night,  almost  frightful  and  fearful  (first  day),'.
— [590.]  Anxious  dreams,  that  her  father  and  brother  had  come,  and  she
could  not  get  the  cooking  ready  (fifteenth  day),'. — Dreams  that  some  one
held  her  tightly  by  the  hand  and,  in  spite  of  her  efforts,  she  could  not  get
away ;  she  would  cry  out,  but  could  not ;  then  she  awoke  anxious  (seven-
teenth day),'. — He  dreams  that  a  horse  bit  his  arm,  which  frightened  him
very  much  (fourteenth  day),'. — Dreams  that  she  saw  a  soldier  shot,  at  which
she  cried  and  woke  in  anxiety  (thirteenth  day),'. — Dreams  that  she  fell  into
the  water;  that  she  found  a  living  child,  and  other  anxious  dreams  (third
day),'. — Dreams  that  he  was  in  danger  of  falling  into  a  flood ;  then  he
climbed  into  a  tree,  from  which  he  soon  fell  (twelfth  day),'. — Dreams  of
vexation  and  fright ;  that  she  was  lost  in  a  forest  (third  day),'. — Dreams
that  she  would  take  a  long  journey,  but  did  not  know  the  way  nor  kind


302  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

of  journey,  and,  on  inquiring  the  way,  no  one  could  give  information,  which
made  her  feel  very  sick  (third  day),\ — Dream  that  the  whole  body  is
covered  with  rash ;  with  good  sleep  (second  day),'. — Lewd  dreams  about
having  had  an  emljrace,^ — [600.]  Voluptuous  dreams  (after  fourth,  fifth,
twelfth  days),\

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (^Morning),  Stitches  in  vertex ;  burn-
ing in  canthi ;  dimness  of  eyes;  left  nostril  stopped;  slight  diarrhoea;
green,  slimy  stools;  irritation,  causing  hawking,  etc.;  dry  cough;  cough
dry  ;  stitches  in  chest ;  very  weak  ;  constant  yawning. — {Early,  in  morn-
ing), Head  feels  dizzy,  etc. ;  pressure  in  forehead,  etc. ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth ;
hawldng  of  phlegm  ;  grinding,  etc.,  in  stomach  ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate  ;
cough,  with  expectoration  ;  beating  in  left  cavity  of  chest;  right  arm  very
heavy,  etc.;  itching  in  inside  of  lower  arm;  itching  in  tip  of  index-finger;
itching  around  hip  ;  sweat. — (Early,  on  waking).  Agglutination  of  the  eyes ;
sourish  taste  in  mouth;  sensation  in  female  genitals,  as  after  an  embrace;
tearing  in  bone  of  upper  arm,  etc. ;  rumbling  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen.
— {Early,  after  waking).  Whole  body  feels  contracted. — (Early,  in  bed).
Sweat. — (Early,  when  rising),  Thighs  contracted,  etc.— (Mornings,  in  bed).
Throbbing  in  right  shoulder ;  sweat. — (Morning,  after  rising).  Eyes  burn.
— (Early,  after  rising).  Heat  and  fulness  in  head ;  downward  pressure  in
forehead,  etc. ;  boring  in  forehead  ;  lachrymation  ;  pappy  taste  in  mouth  ;
pinching  in  abdomen  ;  pain  in  whole  body  ;  sensation  of  heat,  etc.— (jPore-
woo)i).  Irritable  and  peevish;  tearing  in  right  temple;  stitch  in  left  temple;
stitches  in  left  side  of  head ;  sensation  of  body  rising  in  left  eye,  which
prevents  sight;  pain  in  upper  part  of  face;  tearing  in  right  malar  bone;
coated  tongue ;  bitter  eructations,  etc. ;  nausea,  etc. ;  turning  sensation  in
stomach  ;  gripings  in  lower  abdomen  ;  dry,  hacking  cough,  etc. ;  stitches
come  out  of  left  chest;  tearings  in  right  index-finger ;  left  foot  goes  to
sleep;  burning,  etc.,  at  several  places;  heat. — (J/tenwora),  Stitching  in  left
side  of  forehead  ;  stitches  in  vertex ;  tearing  in  upper  border  of  right  eye;
fine  stitches  in  left  ear ;  tearing  in  root  of  tooth ;  unquenchable  thirst ;
gulping  up  bitter,  sour  water  ;  burning,  etc.,  at  stomach  ;  stitches,  etc.,  in
region  of  right  ribs ;  burning  in  right  flank  ;  rumbling  in  bowels  ;  griping
in  bowels;  hoarseness,  etc. ;  cough  loosens;  expectoration  of  tough  mucus;
pressure  in  middle  of  chest,  etc.;  stitches  in  forepart  of  chest,  etc.;  stitches
below  right  female  breast ;  stitch  in  left  chest ;  stinging,  etc.,  in  finger-tips,
etc. ;  crawling  in  tips  of  fingers,  etc. ;  tearing  in  tendons  of  left  wrist ;  tear-
ing in  left  index-finger ;  stitches  in  thumb-joint ;  tearing  in  right  great  toe  ;
sticking  in  left  great  toe;  sweat. — (Toward  evening),  Throhhmg  in  fore-
head.— (Early,  in  evening,  after  rising).  Thirst. — (Earh,  in  evening),  Great
sleepiness. — (Evening,  when  undressing).  Itching  in  nape  of  neck. — (Even-
ing, after  lying  down).  Chilliness;  heat  in  palms  of  hands. — (Evening),l\\-
humor,  etc.;  heat  on  right  side  of  head;  pinching  in  occiput;  pimples  on
occiput;  burning  of  eyes,  etc.;  tearing  in  right  side  of  face;  want  of  ap-
petite; thirst;  pain  in  both  groins,  etc.;  pain  in  perineum;  dry  cough;
pressure  in  chest;  stitches  in  left  chest;  sensation  of  fleabites  in  left
mamma ;  tension  and  stifliiess  in  nape  of  neck ;  tearing  in  both  sides  of
neck,  etc.;  shooting,  etc.,  in  tips  of  fingers,  etc.;  right  arm  very  heavy,  etc.;
pimples  on  backs  of  hands ;  twitching  in  right  little  finger ;  twitching-
tearing  on  external  surface  of  right  thumb  ;  sticking  in  joint  of  thumb  ;
stitches  in  hand ;  crawling  in  tip  of  thumb ;  tearing  in  surface  of  right
thigh ;  itching  of  right  sole ;  itching,  etc.,  over  the  whole  body  ;  itching
on  front  of  chest;  chilliness;  sweat,  etc.;  a  little  thirst;  heat,  without


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  303

thirst. — (Evening,  in  bed),  Violent  cough;  co.ntraction  in  heel;  eold_feet.
— (Evenings,  before  lying  doxvn),  Itching  here  and  there  over  whole  body,  etc.
— (Night),  Noise  in  right  ear,  etc.;  obstruction  of  nose,  etc.;  dry  cough;
cough,  etc.;  sprained  pain  in  back;  bruised  backache;  itching  between
shoulders,  etc. ;  pimples  on  backs  of  hands  ;  itching  around  the  hip ;  right
foot  feels  gone  to  sleep. — (Nights,  in  bed).  Heaviness  on  the  chest ;  great
heat. — (Before  midnight).  Heat  in  head  ;  tearing  in  both  shoulders  ;  sweat.
— (After  midnight),  Sweat ;  uneasy  sleep. — (After  4  a.m.),  Constant  tenes-
mus of  bladder. — (8  a.m.).  Stinging,  etc.,  in  pit  of  stomach. — (10  a.m.),  In-
creased urging  to  urinate ;  backache. — (1  to  5  p.m.).  Throbbing  in  left
thumb. — (4  P.M.),  Pain  below  navel,  etc. — (8  p.m.).  Tearing  in  all  tlie  teeth  ;
rawness  in  chest ;  tearings  in  fingers. — -(5,  evenings),  Violent  shivering,  etc.
— (5.30,  evenings).  Some  chilliness. — (6,  evenings), 'ChiWmesa  and  shiverings.
— (6  to  10,  evenings).  Twitching,  etc.,  here  and  there,  in  calves. — (7,  even-
ings), GoUne^s. — (9,  evenings),  Stitchea  in  knee-joint. — (11,  wtjf/if).  Pains
in  right  upper  arm. — (12.30  till  2,  night).  Stitch  on  surface  of  left  hip. — -
(1,  ??ig'/ii),  Terrific  backache. — (2,  night),  Catting  in  abdomen. — (3,  at  night
in  6ed),  Tearings,  etc.,  in  right  heel. — (Open  air).  Burning  in  riglit  eye;
distinguishes  nothing ;  eructations. — (Exercise  in  open  air).  Pressure  upon
left  mamma;  sudden  faintness,  etc.;  heat  over  whole  body,  etc. — (Going
from  warm  room  into  open  air),  Pressure  in  left  side  of  chest. — (  Walking  in
open  atV),  Stitches  in  right  ear,  etc. ;  nausea,  etc.;  turning  sensation  in
stomach,  etc.;  burning  in  chest;  heaviness  on  chest,  etc.;  lancinations
through  the  hands. — (  On  going  to  bed),  Chilliness. — -(Sending  pari  inward),
Pain  in  right  middle  finger. — (Sitting  bent),  Stitches  below  right  female
breast. — (After  breakfast),  Sensation  of  fasting  in  stomach. — (Before  chill).
Thirst. — (After  dinner),  Hesitmg  in  chest;  tension  under  right  mamma;
sudden  faintness,  etc. — {Immediately  after  dinner),  Nausea,  etc. — (An  hour
after  dimmer).  Hiccough. — (After  every  dinner  and  supper),  Nausea,  etc. —
(Inspiration),  Pinching  in  abdomen  ;  stitch  in  left  chest. — (Leaning  part
against  table).  Pain  in  left  upper  arm  ;  pressure  in  left  lower  arm. — (Look-
ing into  garden  out  of  ivindow).  Yellow  spots  before  eyes. — (Lowering
shoulder).  Stitches  in  left  scapula. — (Lying  down).  Pain  in  bladder ;  draw-
ing tension  in  legs. — (Lying  in  bed),  Pressure  in  left  lower  arm. — (Lying
on  right  side).  Cough,  when  breathing. — (Lying  on  back),  Cough,  etc. —
(Luring  menses).  Tearing  in  right  temporal  bone ;  discharge  of  blood  with  '
stool ;  stitches  below  right  breast ;  tearing  in  cords  of  right  side  of  neck ;
weakness  of  the  thighs. — (Motion),  Vertigo  ;  stitches,  etc.,  in  head  ;  stitch
behind  right  ribs;  pain  in  whole  body;  sweat. — (Slaving  the  part),  Stitches
and  beating  in  left  hand,  etc. — (Moving  parts  to  right  and  left).  Rheumatic
pain  in  shoulder-joint. — (Moving  head).  Stitches  in  neck,  etc. — (Moving
arms  forcibly),  Oppression  of  chest. — (Pressure),  Tearing  in  left  clavicle ;
painful  stitch  in  ball  of  right  thumb;  tearing  in  right  index-finger. — (Rais-
ing body  after  stooping).  Pain  in  small  of  back  ;  stiffness  in  small  of  back.
— (Best),  Stitches  in  left  scapula ;  drawing  in  right  shoulder-joint ;  stitches
in  thumb-joint ;  pain  in  left  calf — (After  rising).  Feeling  of  heaviness  in
head. — (In  room),  Head  feels  dizzy,  etc.;  heat  in  face,  etc. — (Entering
room).  Dry  heat  in  head. — (Rubbing),  Tearing  in  last  joint  of  right  index-
finger. — (Scratchijig) ,  Itchmg  and  burning  on  wrist-joint ;  nodes  on  wrist
burn,  etc. — (Seizing  anything).  Pain  in  backs  of  hands. — ((Sitting'),  Tearing
in  upper  right  head  ;  tearing  in  upper  border  of  right  eye  ;  noise  in  right
ear,  etc. ;  tearing  in  right  side  of  face ;  tearing  in  decayed  root  of  tooth  ;
sensation  in  stomach  as  if  everything  were  turniag  around ;  burning  in  right


304  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

flank  ;  stitches  in  left  side  pf  abdomen  ;  stitches  in  right  groin  ;  sense  of
distension  in  left  groin  ;  stitches  in  left  chest;  sticking-crawling  in  left  side
of  chest ;  tension  in  back ;  tearing  here  and  there,  etc. ;  throbbing  in  left
axilla ;  sticking  in  joint  of  thumb  ;  stitches  in  hand  ;  crawling  in  tip  of
thumb,  etc. ;  *pain  in  left  hip-bone ;  Hearing  down  the  thighs;  Hearing  in
front  of  thighs ;  stitches  in  knee-joints;  drawing  tension  in  legs;  insensi-
bility of  left  leg;  stitches  in  lower  leg,  etc.;  stitches  in  left  calf;  contrac-
tion, etc.,  below  the  right  inner  malleolus  ;  tearing  in  outer  surface  of  right
great  toe  ;  tearing  in  right  great  toe  ;  painful  twitching,  etc.,  in  calves. —
{Sitting  down),  Tearing  in  external  surface  of  right  thigh. — {Sitting  quiet),
Pain  of  the  coccyx ;  all  the  bones  painful. — {Sitting  and  knitting).  Para-
lyzed feeling  in  right  hand,  etc. — {Sewing),  Yellow  spot  before  eyes. —
{Slumbering),  Pain  of  the  coccyx ;  all  the  bones  painful. — {Spinning),
Stitches  in  right  hypochondriac  region;  backache,  etc. ;  tearing  in  fingers,
etc. ;  right  arm  very  heavy. — {Standing),  Pinching  to  the  left  of  the  navel ;
tension  at  lower  front  chest ;  stitches  below  left  female  breast ;  beating  in
left  cavity  of  chest ;  tearing  in  outer  border  of  foot ;  tearing  in  left  great
toe ;  sticking  in  right  little  toe. — {Stooping),  Pinching  to  left  of  navel ;
oppression  of  chest. — {Stooping,  while  standing).  Stitches  in  left  side  of  ab-
domen.— {During soft  stool).  Burning  in  anus. — {During  and  after  expulsion
of  soft  stool).  Burning  in  rectum. — {Stretching  out  the  part).  Aching  in  finger-
joint. — {Swallowing),  Pressive  pain  in  throat,  etc. — {Touch),  Throbbing  in
forehead;  tearing-sticking  in  left  clavicle,  etc. — {Turning  the  part).  Stiff
neck. — {Timing  on  to  the  side),  Cough,  etc. — {Turning  trunk  to  left  side).
Stitches  in  left  scapula. — {Twilight),  Eyes  burn. — {After  every  discharge  of
urine),  Leucorrhoea. — (  Walking),  Stitches  and  burning  in  region  of  right
ribs  ;  tearing,  etc.,  in  groin  ;  ulcerative  pain  in  left  groin  ;  tearing  in  the
perineum ;  pain  in  small  of  back ;  hamstrings  painful ;  stinging,  etc.,  in
left  knee;  twitching  in  left  popliteal  region ;  throbbing,  etc.,  in  external
malleolus  ;  sticking  in  right  little  toe. — (  Walking  and  stepping  on  the  parts).
Ankle-bones  painful. — {After  tvashing).  Burning  in  canthi. — {Yawning),
Stinging  in  throat ;  elastic  sensation  in  small  of  back.

Amelioration. — {Morning),  Obstruction  of  nose,  etc.— {Night),
Itching  pimples  pass  off';  burning  of  eyes,  etc. — (3  to  4  a.m.).  Chilliness,
etc. — (7  A.M.),  Chilliness,  etc. — {Open  air).  Dizziness,  etc.;  vertigo;  burn-
ing in  right  eye;'  stitches  in  left  eye;  heat  in  face,  etc.;  nausea,  etc.;  turn-
ing sensation  in  stomach,  etc.;  appears  to  be  better. — {In  bed).  Tearing  in
all  the  teeth;  tearings  in  fingers,  etc. — {After  breakfast).  Grinding  and
writhing  in  stomach. — {Bending  the  part).  Aching  in  finger-joint. — (  Walk-
ing crooked).  Drawing  tension  in  legs. — {After  dinner).  Mood  improves;
roughness  in  throat. — {After  eating).  Bitter  eructations. —  {Eructation),
Nausea,  etc. ;  tearing  sensation  in  stomach,  etc. ;  pressure  on  chest. — {Ex-
piration), Pinching  in  ahdomeQ.— {Extending  hands).  Pain  in  the  dorsa. —
{Long  and  violent  exercise).  Thighs  contracted,  etc. — {Feeling  the  part),  Paiu
in  upper  part  of  face.— (iejwowade),  Very  urgent  thirst. — [Light),  Burning
of  eyes,  etc. ;  sleepiness. — {Lying  down),  Tension  and  stiffness  in  nape  of
neck ;  itching  of  nape  of  neck  ;  tearing  here  and  there,  etc. ;  shooting,  etc.,  in
tips  of  fingers,  etc.;  evening  chilliness. — {Lying  in  bed).  Dry  cough  ;  twitch-
ing, etc.,  in  calves. — {Motion),  Tension  in  back,  etc. ;  backache,  etc. ;  tear-
ing in  outer  border  of  foot. — {Motion  of  the  part).  Pain  in  left  upper  arm  ;
drawing  in  lower  arm,  etc. ;  pressure  in  left  lower  arm  ;  beating  in  right
palm ;  stitches  in  hand. — {Active  motion),  Tearing  in  left  arm,  etc. — {Pres-
sure), Tearing  in  decayed  root  of  tooth ;  sticking  on  surface  of  left  hip. —


AMMONIUM  NITRICUM— AMPHISBCENA.  305

(Long  pressure).  Stitches  in  ball  of  right  thumb. — (Pressing  upon  thumb-
joint),  Pain  in  backs  of  hands. — {Rest),  Pain  in  hamstrings. — (Rinng),
Tearing  down  thighs. — {In  room),  Sees  better. — (Rubbing),  Twitches  in
left  eyeball ;  ulcerative  pain  in  right  heel. — (Scratching),  Sensation  of  flea-
bites  on  left  mamma. — (Sitting),  Stitches  in  forepart  of  chest;  beating  in
left  cavity  of  chest. — (Sleep),  Weight  in  abdomen. — (Long  walking),  Twitch-
ing in  left  popliteal  space ;  contracted  feeling  in  whole  body. — (After  wash-
ing), Burning  in  cauthi ;  mist  before  eyes.

AMMONIUM  NITRICUM.

Chemical  formula,  NH^NO,.

According  to  Wil)mer,  it  causes  diminished  temperature,  slower  pulse,
and  increased  urine.

AMPHISBCENA.

A.  vermicularis,  Wagl. ;  Animal  kingdom.  Nat.  order,  Ophidians.  Prep-
aration, The  jaw  containing  the  poison  is  removed  and  triturated.

Authorify. Mure  (Brazilian  provings).

Wind. — Ennui. — Depression. — Tender  sadness,  which  disposes  one  to
be  gentle  and  meek. — Sadness  and  lassitude  in  the  morning. — Impatience.

JleO'd. — Vertigo,  as  if  one  would  fall  towards  one  side,  and  is  then  im-
pelled towards  the  opposite  side  by  a  contrary  oscillation. — Dizziness  when
turning  round. — -Horrible  headache,  with  sensation  as  if  the  feet  were  in
the  brain. — Weight  at  the  forehead. — [10.]  Weight  in  the  forehead  and
parietal  regions. — Repeated  beating  at  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  as  if
hailstones  fell  upon  it. — Lancination  and  pain  all  through  the  right  side
of  the  head. — Sweat  about  the  head.

Eyes. — Weariness  of  the  eyes,  in  the  evening,  with  pain  and  pricking
when  looking  at  the  light. — Constriction  of  the  right  eye,  as  if  strung  to-
gether with  a  cord. — Sensation  as  of  a  grain  of  sand  in  the  right  eye. —
Constant  twitching  at  the  upper  eyelids,  especially  the  left. — Pain  at  the
inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  as  if  a  stye  would  form. — Shooting  pain  in
the  outer  angle  of  the  left  eye. — Lachrymation  and  constriction  of  the  left
eye.

Ears. — [20.]  Pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius,  as  if  air  were  rushing  in.

Face. — Pricklings  and  heat  at  the  right  malar  eminence. — Painful  and
large  pimple  on  left  side  of  upper  lip,  suppurating. — Swelling  of  the  right
lower  jaw,  worse  in  the  open  air. — Pains  in  the  right  lower  jaw,  and  con-
siderable swelling,  aggravated  by  air  and  dampness. — Dull  pain  in  the  right
lower  jawbone.

3Iouth, — The  teeth  feel  elongated  and  set  on  edge,  especially  the  right
lower  molars. — The  toothache  is  worse  in  the  afternoon  and  evening. —
Chewing  is  painful,  but  the  contact  of  liquids  is  not  painful.

Throat, — Swelling  of  the  tonsils. — [30.]  Deglutition  is  difiicult;  one
is  not  able  to  swallow  saliva.

Stmnach, — Chilliness  and  pains  at  the  epigastrium.

Abdomen. — Protrusion  of  umbilical  hernia. — Tearing  pain  at  the
navel,  all  day. — Lancination  in  the  navel,  as  from  a  stiletto. — Suppuration
of  inguinal  hernia. — The  hernia  is  painful,  and  air  is  felt  in  it.

Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation.
VOL.  I.— 20


306  AMYGDALiE  AMAR^  AQUA.

Neck  an  d  Sack. — Violent  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  vertebral  col-
umn, worse  when  walking,  moving  the  arras,  or  stooping.

Upper  JSorfremities. — Breaking  out  of  little  pimples,  especially  on
the  forearm. — [40.]  Painful  swelling  of  the  arm,  on  the  fifteenth  day.

Lower  Extremities. — Painless  drawing  up  of  the  legs. — Cramp  in
the  left  leg. — Cramp  in  the  left  leg;  it  remains  behind  in  walking,  as  if
paralyzed.

Generalities. — Debility.

Skin. — Painful  and  large  pimples  on  the  left  side  of  the  upper  lip,  sup-
purating.— The  miliary  acne  rosacea  spreads  over  the  chest,  neck,  and  back,
with  itching,  which  is  worse  in  the  morning,  and  decreases  in  the  evening.
— Breaking  out  of  little  pimples,  especially  on  the  forearm. — Acute  acne
rosacea  (a  dry  itch  cured),  covering  extensive  elliptical  spots;  after  the
eruption  healed,  a  furfuraceous  desquamation  took  place  wherever  a  pim-
ple had  been  situated. — Gradually,  a  white  vesicle  forms  on  every  pimple,
discharging  a  clear  serum,  after  which  the  eruption  dries  up  on  the  fifth
day.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — [50.]  Wakes  at  midnight  for  ten  consecu-
tive nights. — Disturbed  sleep.

Conditions. — Aggravation {Morning),  Sadness and  lassitude;

itching  of  the  eruption. — {Afternoon),  Toothache. — {Evening),  Weariness
of  the  eyes,  etc. ;  toothache. — {Air),  Pains  in  lower  jaw,  etc. — {Open  air),
Swelling  in  right  lower  jaw. — {Dampness),  Pains  in  right  lower  jaw,  etc. — ■
{Moving  arms),  Pain  in  vertebral  column. — {Stooping),  Pain  in  vertebral
column. — {Turning  round).  Dizziness. — {Walking),  Fain  in  vertebral  col-
umn.

Amelioration. — {Evening),  Itching  of  the  eruption.

AMYGDALA  AMARJE  AQUA

Amygdalus  communis,  L.  (includes  A.  amara  and  A.  dulcis).  Nat.
order,  Rosacese.  Common  names.  Bitter  almond,  Mandelbaum,  Amandier.
Preparation,  An  ounce  of  alcohol  is  added  to  a  pound  of  bitter  almonds,
then  add  six  pounds  of  water,  and  distil  down  to  three  pounds  (Joerg).

Authorities.'^  1,  Engler ;  2,  Meurer ;  3,  Siebenhaar ;  4,  Joerg;  5,
Schwartze  ;  6,  Pierer;  7,  Wolf ;  8,  Chivoud;  9,  Pouzaire;  10,  Brodie  (took
the  oil);  11,  Bullet,  de  Therap. ;  12,  Haller;  13,  Giacomini;  14,  Mestz-
dorf;  15,  Chavasse  (oil);  16,  "B.;"  17,  "X."  (Annal.  d.  Montpellier) ;  18,
Rassi  (Fr.  Mag.,  1,  13)  ;  19,  Cattell  (B.  J.,  11)  ;  20,  Smith  (Lancet,  1844),
{t.  from  oil) ;  21,  Letheby  (Lancet,  1845)  ;  22,  Purcell  (Lancet,  1855),
(t.  from  oil) ;  23,  Ellis  (Lancet,  1863),  {t  from  oil.)

lUind. — Mild  delirium  ;  the  patient  stammers  incoherently,'". — Ap-
pearance of  intoxication,". — Complete  intoxication,'^ — She  is  so  much
affected  that  she  can  hardly  utter  a  word  (after  four  hours),*. — The  feelings
were  deeply  affected  ;  she  began  to  weep,°. — Extreme  anxiety,". — She  falls
down  unconscious  (in  tea  minutes),". — Loss  of  consciousness,'. — (In  a  hypo-
chondriac, forty-eight  years  old ;  from  an  emulsion  of  bitter  almonds.) —
Loss  of  consciousness,  of  voice,  and  of  motive  power  (in  a  child  of  three
years,  after  five  or  six  bitter  almonds),*. — Senseless,'*  ™. — [10.]  Coma,  with

f  Nos.  1  to  4,  from  Joerg's  Materielen;  5  to  10,  from  Hartlaub  and  Trinks ;  11
to  17,  from  "  Pathogenesie,"  Journ.  d.  1.  Med.  Horn.,  1845-50.


AMYGDALA  AMAR^  AQUA.  307

stertorous  respiration  and  involuntary  stools  ;  but  she  revives  suddenly  and
looks  wildly  about  her,"

Head, — Heaviness  and  confusion  of  head  and  of  thought,*. — Heavi-
ness and  confusion  of  head  as  in  beginning  coryza,  with  a  diminished
(five  beats)  pulse  (fifty  drops),\ — Confusion  of  head,* 'I— General  confu-
sion of  the  head  (forty  drops), ^ — Complete  confusion  of  whole  head,  which
in  the  afternoon  was  confined  to  the  left  side.  Also  mclined  to  sleep  during
the  afternoon,  and  was  weary  (forty  drops),'. — The  whole  forenoon,  the
left  half  of  the  head  was  confused  ;  it  gradually  passed  oft'  by  noon,\ — Ver-
tigo, in  strong  air,'' — Vertigo,  as  if  intoxicated,  followed  by  sudden  death
(from  taking  many  bitter  almonds),^ — Head  dj'awn  between  shoulders,'*. —
[20.]  Violent  headache,".— The  whole  night  (after  twenty  drops),  violent
headache  spread  over  the  whole  head,  which  disturbed  the  sleep ;  pulse
depressed,'. — During  the  forenoon  a  sense  of  heaviness  in  the  forehead,'. —
Slight  pressure  in  forehead,*. — Sense  of  weight  and  oppression  on  top  of
head,'^

Eyes. — Sunken  eyes,'*. — The  eyes  are  turned  upwards ;  they  become
fixed  and  seem  about  to  start  from  their  sockets,'  '*. — Eyes  glassy ,^^. — The
eye  had  a  brilliant  and  glassy  appearance  throughout ;  mere  physical  bril-
liancy, without  mental  expression,^". — Excessive  brilliancy  of  the  eyes,^^. — [30.]
Eyes  wide  open  and  motionless,"*. — Eyes  closed,  cold,'^ — Eyelids  closed,'"'.
— Spasmodic  movements,  especially  of  the  eyelids,'^. — Upper  eyelids  con-
vulsed, for  some  hours,'".— Eyeballs  remarkably  prominent,  accompanied
with  rolling  motion,  and  nearly  protruding  from  their  sockets, 'I — Eyes
open  and  rolling  from  side  to  side,^'. — Eyes  both  drawn  to  left  side,''". —
Contracted  pupils,'* '".—Pupils  dilated,". — [40.]  Fully  dilated  pupils,'".—
Pupils  widely  dilated,  and  insensible  to  light,'l — Motionless  pupils,'  '*.—
Dimness  of  sight,'^ '".

Ears. — Ears 'white  and  cold,". — Humming  in  the  ears,'^

Nose. — Nose  white  and  cold,'*.

Face. — Pale  face,'*  '^ — Face  becomes  deadly  pale,'* ". — Face  yellowish-
gray  and  moist,'^ — [50.]  Countenance  very  much  flushed,^''. — Spasmodic
distortion  of  the  features  (after  some  minutes),". — Frequent  convulsive
action  of  muscles  of  face  and  neck,^^. — Sardonic  laughter ;  joyful  counte-
nance ;  sparkling  eyes,'*. — Lips  pale  and  bluish,''^ — Lips  white  and  cold,".

Mouth. — Tongue  dry  and  coated,'^ — Mouth  tightly  closed,"  ™. — Froth
at  the  mouth,*. — [60,]  The  breath  has  a  strong  smell  of  bitter  almonds,'*.
— Considerable  s,welling  of,  and  undulatory  motion  in  the  jugular  veins;
the  carotids  beat  quickly  and  fully,™.

Throat. — Deglutition  is  impossible,'. — Burning  sensation  in  throat,".
— Excessive  burning  heat  in  laryngo-pharyngeal  region,".

Stomach. — Nausea  and  vomiting  of  food,''. — Vomiting,'^ — Vomiting
of  a  bitter,  viscid  substance,'*. — Vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  food  and
bile  smelling  strongly  of  prussic  acid,'*. — A  disagreeable  feeling  which
seems  to  ascend  from  the  epigastric  region  (immediately),'".

Abdomen. — [70.]  Abdomen  relaxed,  soft,  hardly  of  natural  warmth,'*.
-^Pains  in  abdomen,". — Colicky  pains,  which  increase,  until,  in  less  than
two  hours,  the  abdomen  is  distended  like  a  balloon  ;  convulsive  movements
of  the  jaws  ;  loss  of  consciousness  and  frotlii:ig  at  the  mouth  ;  then  sudden
death  (in  a  child,  from  taking  milk  of  bitter  almonds),". — Copious,  fecu-
lent, but  especially  watery  evacuations,'. — Stool  seldom,'*.

XJrlnary  Organs. — Scanty  and  painful  urination,'*.

Sexual  Organs. — Penis  shrivelled,'*.


308  AMYGDALA  AMAR^  AQUA.

Mespiratory  Apparatus, — Increased  discharge  of  mucus  from
the  larynx,*. — Scraping  in  larynx  (eight  drops),*. — Scraping  in  the  larynx
(after  twenty-four  drops),'. — -[80.]  Hoarseness  caused  by  the  scraping  in
the  larynx,*. — Panting  for  breath,". — Short,  panting  respiration  ;  suffoca-
tive attaclis,'°. — Breathing  stertorous,''^ — Slow,  stertorous  breathing;  which
keeps  getting  slower,'. — Breathing  stertorous,  and  at  long  intervals,^^ —
Breathing  slow  and  gentle,^". — Respiration  scarcely  perceptible,'*. — Respi-
ration heavy,'*. — Difficult  respiration,'*.

Chest. — [90.]  The  chest  heaved  spasmodically,  and  its  movements
were  hurried,". — Oppression  of  chest,". — Several  transient  stitches  and
pains  coming  and  going  just  under  the  left  nipple,  deep  in  the  chest;  it
made  respiration  difficult  (twelve  drops),*.

Henrt  and  Pulse. — Heart  beats  very  feebly,'*. — Beat  of  heart  feeble,
sometimes  intermittent,^^ — Pulse  strong,  frequent,  and  wiry,'". — Pulse  at
first  small,  frequent,  and  intermittent,  then  slow  and  regular,'". — Pulse  full
and  strong,  but  slow,'^'. — Pulse  slow,  full,  and  moderately  hard,^ — Piilse
slow  and  vibrating,'". — [100.]  Pulse  from  70  down  to  64  (quarter  of  an
hour),  (ten  drops),'. — Pulse  100,  130,  140;  very  small,  thready,". — Pulse,
from  70  down  to  61  (one  hour),  (five  and  thirty-five  drops),'. — Pulse  sank
to  50,  in  quarter  of  an  hour,  for  an  hour  (after  thirty  and  forty  drops),'. —
Pulse,  30 ;  very  feeble  in  carotid  and  radial  arteries,'". — Pulse  small,". —
Pulse  slow  and  flickering,'''. — Diminished  pulse,*. — Pulse  scarcely  percep-
tible,'*.— The  pulse  becomes  imperceptible,'" '"'.

Extremities  in  General. — [HO.]  Limbs  were  completely  lax,
and  fell  lifeless  when  lifted,^". — Unsteadiness  of  the  limbs,'". — Upper  and
lower  extremities  cold,'*. — Heaviness  of  extremities  and  whole  right  thigh,'*.

Lower  JSxfremltles. — Could  not  stand  on  legs,'*. — Formication  in
the  legs,  with  staggering  gait,'^ — Knees  flexed  on  the  abdomen,'*.

Generalities. — Convulsions,'". — Most  violent  convulsions,  which  last
almost  three-quarters  of  an  hour,^ — The  convulsions  returned  after  a
quarter  of  an  hour ;  but  less  violently  (tinct.  op.  simp,  palliated  them),^ —
[120.]  General  tetanus,^. — Complete  opisthotonos,'"'. — Excessive  languor,".
— General  debility  (from  seven  bitter  almonds),". — Feeling  of  weakness,  as
if  the  muscular  vigor  was  deficient,  and  he  would  fall  down,'". — Fainting,".
Syncope,'". — Death  in  thirty  minutes,'. — General  malaise,'". — Weight  on
the  eyes,  and  in  the  limbs,".  ,

Skin. — [130.]  Skin  blue  and  bluish-red,  especially  on  scrotum,  where
it  was  blue  and  almost  greenish-yellow,'*. — Wheals  over  the  whole  skin,'".
—Urticaria  febrilis,'".

Sleep  aitd  Dreams. — Yawning,  with  irresistible  tendency  to  sleep,'".
— Drowsiness,'". — Inclined  to  sleep  the  afternoon,'. — In  the  afternoon  and
evening  depression,  inclination  to  sleep  through  the  night  a  sound  and  deep
sleep,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  rouse ;  he  felt  as  though  he  had  not
slept  enough  (fourteen  drops),'. — She  is  plunged  in  a  deep  stertorous  sleep,'.

/''ever.— General  coldness,'^ — Surface  cold  and  clammy,"'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {f'orenoon),  Left  half  of  head  confused ;
heaviness  in  forehead. — (Afternoon),  Confusion  of  left  side  of  head;  in-
clined to  sleep;  depression,  etc. — {Evening),  Depression,  etc. — (Night),
Headache,  etc. ;  deep  sleep. — (Strong  air).  Vertigo.


AMYL  NITKIT.  309


AMYL  NITRIT.

Formula,  C^HuNO,. Preparation  for  use,  Dilution  with  alcohol.

Authoritie8.-\  (Provings  all  made  by  olfaction.)  1,  Batteman ;  2,  Mad-
den ;  3,  Jones ;  4,  Goodhart ;  5,  Blake ;  6,  Fick ;  7,  W.  P.  Wesselhoeft ;  8,
T.  F.  Allen  ;  9,  St.  Clair  Smith  ;  10,  Hugh  M.  Smith  ;  11,  G.  L.  Freeman.

Jflind, — Anxiety,  as  if  something  might  happen;  must  have  fresh  air,''. —
The  throbbing  in  the  head,  and  bursting-out  feeling  in  the  ears,  and  con-
striction of  throat  and  heart,  made  me  think  I  had  taken  too  much,  and
from  actual  fright  I  ran  to  the  window  to  breathe  the  fresh  air,^. — Complete
obliviousness  of  recent  conversation  (in  a  few  minutes),^

Send, — Confusion  of  head,". — After  the  throbbing  and  fulness  of  the
head  had  passed  away,  it  was  followed  by  a  confused,  weak  feeling  and  a
weight  in  top  of  head,  as  though  it  would  be  crushed  iu,'. — Vertigo  (rarely),'.
— Vertigo  (in  three  minutes),". — Slight  vertigo  (in  a  few  seconds),^ — Giddi-
ness (now  and  then),^ — [10.]  Slight  dizziness  in  the  head  (in  two  minutes),''.
— Head  seemed  to  swim  around  (in  a  second  or  two),^ — Feeling  of  intoxica-
tion,^ — Girls  who  have  inhaled  it  have  often  complained  that  it  gave  them
a  headache,^. — *Heat  and  throbbing  in  head,^. — *Feeling  of  intense  fulness
in  the  head  (immediately),*. — Full,  confused  feeling  in  head,  mostly  frontal ;
then  a  beating,  throbbing,  and  bursting  sensation,". — Heavy  aching  all
through  the  head  (in  two  minutes),*. — After  all  experiments,  a  dull  aching
remained  in  the  head  for  more  than  thirty  or  forty  minutes,*. — Frontal
huraming,^ — [20.]  Slight  perspiration  over  the  forehead  (immediately),*.
— Perspiration  broke  out  on  forehead,". — Bursting  in  the  forehead  (in  three
minutes),^ — Throbbing  in  temples ;  visible  pulsating,". — Could  feel  the  tem-
poral arteries  throb  distinctly,'. — Sense  of  tension  in  temples,". — Vertical
humming  (in  twenty-five  seconds),^. — Sensation  of  something  rushing  upwards
and  throbbing  in  vertex^. — Constriction,  as  if  each  parietal  region  was
pressed  in," — Dull  throbbing  in  sides  and  back  of  head,". — [30.]  Throb-
bing in  the  occiput,^ — After  the  weak  feeling  passed  off,  the  arteries
seemed  to  be  numb  along  their  course,".

Ej/es. — Under  ophthalmoscope,  the  arteries  of  the  optic  disk  were
found  small,  while  the  veins  were  dilated  and  varicose,*. — Under  ophthal-
moscope, the  veins  of  the  dish  were  seen  to  become  enlarged,  varicose,  and  tor-
tuous; the  arteries  small,  but  not  abnormally  so  (from  5  minims),*. — Dull
heaviness  over  eyebrows,*. —  Conjunctivae  bloodshot  (in  two  minutes),*. — Di-
lated pupils,'. — Sight  very  hazy  (in  fifty  seconds),*. — In  full  doses  of  8  or
10  drops,  the  sight  becomes  impaired  slightly,  and  the  outline  of  objects
hazy  and  indistinct,*. — Primrose  halo,  even  with  the  eyes  closed  and  shaded,l
— [40.]  Objects  begin  to  look  yellow,". — ^Protruding,  staring  eyes,°.

JSars. — Burning  of  the  ears,^. — Much  throbbing  in  -ears  (in  two  min-
utes),*.— Ears  begin  to  throb  (in  a  second  or  two),**. — Beating  behind  ears,\
— Sensation  of  a  piston  working  up  and  down  in  the  ears  (in  thirty  sec-
onds),^ — Bursting  sensation  in  ears,  as  though  the  membrana  tympani
of  each  ear  would  be  forced  out  with  each  beat  of  the  heart,".

Nose. — Pressure  over  root  of  nose,".

t  l.Jahresberichtd  Dresden  Gesellschaft,  etc.,  1871  ;  2,  "Practitioner,"  9,  331 ;  3,
"Practitioner,"  7,213;  4,  "Practitioner,"  vol.  6,  12,  seven  experiments;  5,  Month.
Horn.  Key.,  1871,  five  experiments;  6,  Monograph,  Berlin,  1874;  7  to  11,  provings
in  MS  ,  made  by  olfaction,  as  were  all  the  other  experiments.


310  AMYL  NITRIT.

Face.— Face  scarlet  (immediately),*. — Deep  facial  flush  (in  twenty-five
seconds),". — [50.]  *riushing  of  the  face  (in  thirty  to  forty  seconds),l —
Face  much  flushed*. — A  bright  florid  flush  spread  over  his  face  (in  a  few
seconds),". — Flushing  of  the  face,  followed  by  turgidity  of  the  facial  veins,^. —
The  flushing  of  the  face  did  not  commonly  appear  till  from  fifteen  to  thirty
seconds  after  the  commencement  of  the  inhalation,*. — ^Intense  surging  of
blood  to  face  and  head,''. — Face,  at  first  intensely  red,  after  the  effects  began
to  pass  off  became  very  pale,'. — Face  at  first  very  red ;  a  few  minutes  after,
pale,". — Face  became  intensely  red  and  hot ;  this  came  up  and  subsided
like  a  wave ;  on  passing  off,  the  face  became  paler  than  usual,*. — Heat  and
redness  of  face}^. — [60,]  Great  heat  and  redness  of  face,  with  sensation  as
though  the  blood  would  start  through  the  skin,  with  lachrymation,'.— Warmth
of  face,".

Throat. — *  Choking  feeling  in  throat,  on  each  side  of  the  trachea,  along
the  carotids;  feeling  of  constriction^. — *The  collar  seemed  too  tight,with  desire
to  loosen  it,^. — Tickling  in  throat,\

Stomach. — Nausea,^ — Slight  nausea,". — Slight  uncomfortable  feeling
in  stomach,'. — Constriction  and  pressure  over  prsecordial  region,  as  though
he  wants  to  rub  it,".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — *  The  feeling  of  constriction  in  throat
extended  to  chest,  and  produced  dyspnoea  and  asthmatic  feeling  in  larynx  and
trachea,  with  desire  to  eructate,". — [70,]  Peculiar  seusation  of  chokiug,". —
The  respirations  were  not  altered  in  frequency,  but  in  all  cases  great  incli-
nation to  cough  was  experienced,  with  an  indescribable  feeling  of  fulness
about  the  chest,*. — Cough  and  bronchial  irritation,^ — Much  cough  (in  fifty
seconds),*. — Involuntary  coughing  (in  two  minutes),*. — Breathing  24,  from
20  (in  two  minutes),". — Normal  respiration,  18;  after  ninety  seconds,  20;
after  one  hundred  and  fifty  seconds,  20,". — Normal  respiration,  16 ;  after
ninety  seconds,  20 ;  after  one  hundred  and  fifty  seconds,  20,".^Respiration
much  easier  and  deeper,  apparently  dependent  on  dilatation  of  the  bron-
chi (inhalation  of  1  drop),^ — Accelerated  respiration,'''.— [80.]  Desire  to
sigh  convulsively  (in  thirty  seconds),". — Slight  dyspnoea,  with  inclination
to  cough  (immediately),*. — It  sometimes  causes  a  little  breathlessness  and
coughing,^.

Chest. — Vital  capacity  (spirometric)  of  the  lungs  not  increased  nor
diminished  (average  of  large  number  of  experiments),". — Sensation  as  if  the
anterior  wall  of  the  thorax  were  swelled  out  to  a  convex  shape,  and  the
lower  end  of  the  sternum  made  a  deep  depression,  bent  in  towards  the
spine  (without  objective  signs  of  contraction  of  diaphragm  or  abdominal
muscles),l — *Pr8BC0rdial  anxiety  (in  thirty  seconds),".

Heart  and  Pulse. — *The  beating  of  the  heart  and  of  the  carotids
is,  in  some  persons,  very  marked.l — Accelerated  heart-action  (in  thirty
seconds),". — Increased,  frequency  of  cardiac  pulsation^. — *  Cardiac  oppression
and  tumultuous  heart-action  (in  a  few  minutes),". — [90.]  ^-Tumultuous  heart-
action,''. — *Pain  and  constriction  around  heart;  an  aching  pain,". — The  ach-
ing pain  and  constriction  of  the  heart  continued  more  or  less  for  at  least
three  weeks,  when  it  was  relieved  after  taking  Cactus  grand.,". — Dull  pain
in  heart,'. — (Pulse  not  markedly  affected,'.) — In  all  cases,  the  pulse  was
invariably  the  first  function  to  show  any  indication  of  the  action  of  the  .
drug.  Generally,  in  from  three  to  ten  seconds,  the  beats  were  much  in-
creased in  frequency.  The  pulse-beats  often  rose  from  70  to  the  rate  of
160  per  minute  in  a  few  seconds,  quickly  subsiding  again  as  the  drug  was
left  oflP,  but  nearly  always  remaining  somewhat  irregular,*. — When  sphyg'


AMYL  NITRIT— AMYLAMINE  CHLOROHYDRATE. 311

mographic  tracings  were  made,  it  was  found  that  in  the  very  first  stage  of
its  action,  the  up  stroke  produced  by  the  contracting  ventricle  was  almost
imperceptible,  giving  unpleasant  visions  of  approaching  syncope.  This
feature  was  apparently  due  to  the  excessive  rapidity  of  the  heart's  action,
and  was  succeeded,  in  a  very  few  beats,  by  a  sudden  and  jerking  impulse,
which  gave  no  positive  indication  of  anything  more  than  an  exaggeration
of  normal  conditions,*. — The  sphygmographie  puke-curve  ends  abruptly  in
a  very  sudden  down-fall*. — Frequency  of  pulse  rapidly  increases  (in  eight  to
twelve  seconds),^ — Accelerated  pulse;  96  to  136  ;  in  one  minute,  small ;  in
two  minutes,  full ;  three  minutes,  very  full,\ — A  pulse  of  20,  in  a  quarter  of
a  minute,  will  often  rise,  in  ten  or  fifteen  seconds,  to  40,^ — [100.]  Pulse  rose
from  66  (normal)  to  114  (inhalation  of  3  drops),". — Pulse  rose  from  72  (nor-
mal) to  128 ;  returned,  in  two  minutes,  to  normal.  (The  face  became  very
red),".- — Pulse  136,  regular  (normal,  54),  (in  two  minutes),*. — Pulse  80,  very
irregular  (in  four  minutes),*. — Pulse  72,  more  regular  (in  seven  minutes),*.
^Pulse  80,  regular  (in  thirty-one  minutes),*. — Pulse  65  (in  half  a  minute),*.
— Pulse  72,  irregular  (in  four  minutes),*. — Pulse  64  (in  twenty-three  min-
utes),*.— Pulse  decreased  64  beats  (from  168  to  104),  (in  two  minutes),*. —
[110.]  Pulse  80  (in  seven  minutes),*. — Pulse  160,  from  120  (in  thirty  sec-
onds),*.— Pulse  104,  from  84  (in  ten  seconds),*. — Pulse  96,  from  84  (in  two
minutes),*. — Pulse  84,  very  irregular  (in  eight  minutes),*. — Pulse  at  rate
of  108  per  minute,  from  84  (in  five  seconds),*. — Pulse  at  rate  of  120,  from
84  (in  ten  seconds),*. — Pulse  144  (in  fifteen  seconds),  from  84,*. — Pulse  84,
very  irregular  (in  two  minutes),*. — Pulse  84,  regular  (in  three  minutes  and
fifty  seconds),*. — [120.]  Norftial  pulse,  60;  after  ninety  seconds,  130 ;  after
one  hundred  and  fifty  seconds,  80,^ — Normal  pulse,  64 ;  after  ninety  sec-
onds, 106 ;  after  one  hundred  and  fifty  seconds,  68,^. — Pulse  at  first  slow
and  very  strong;  afterwards,  quicker  and  jerking,'.

Keck  and  Back. — Warmth  of  neck,'.

Extremities  in  General. — *  Tired  feeling  of  limbs,''. — Muscular
tremor  of  arms  (in  two  minutes),*. — *  Tremulousness  of  hands  and  stifibess
and  slight  numbness  of  fingers,'. — While  writing,  hand  so  tired  that  he
can  hardly  hold  the  pen,  with  crampy  feeling  in  wrist  and  thumb,  which  is
sometimes  difficult  to  overcome ;  the  thumb  seems  to  grasp  the  pen  so  tight
that  it  is  difiicult  to  guide  it  (it  is  now  over  fifteen  minutes,  and  the  effect  is
still  very  strong),'.

Generalities. — The  muscles  generally  seemed  relaxed  and  heavy ;
this  caused  a  sensation  of  unsteadiness  while  walking  (inhalation  of  1
drop),". — The  blood-pressure  is  diminished,*. — [130.]  Slight  feeling  of  las-
situde (in  seven  minutes),*. — After  all  experiments,  a  feeling  of  lassitude
remained  behind  for  thirty  or  forty  minutes,*. — *  General  relaxed,  weak
feeling  over  the  whole  body,". —  Weak  feeling  all  over  the  body,^". — Uncertain,,
trembling  sensation  over  whole  body,'.

Fever. — Warmth,  often  general,'. — Temperature  97.9°,  from  97.7°
(immediately),'. — Temperature  98.1°  (in  four  minutes),*. — ■* Perspiration,
often  general,^.

AMYLAMINE  CHLOROHYDRATE.

C,H,3NHC1.

Authority. Dujardin-Beaumetz.

Lowers  the  temperature  in  a  remarkable  degree,  and  retards  the  pulse.


312  ANACARDIUM.


ANACARDIUM

Seraecarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Anacardiacese.  Common
name,  Marking  nut.  Preparation,  Trituration  of  the  layer  of  the  nut
between  the  shell  and  the  kernel.

A'uthorities.'f  1,  Hahnemann  ;  2,  Herrmann  ;  3,  Hartmann  ;  4,  Gross  ;  5,
Franz  ;  6,  Langhamraer ;  7,  Becher  ;  8,  Stapf ;  9,  Rail  (Z.  f.  H.  K.,  2,  44) ;
10,  Trinks  (Z.  f.  H.  K,  2,  131) ;  11,  Fox  (Z.  f.  H.  K,  1,  117).

31iH(l. — Illusions  of  the  fancy;  he  imagines  he  hears  his  name  called
by  the  voice  of  his  far-distant  mother  and  sister,  accompanied  by  an  appre-
hension of  misfortune  and  anxiety,'. — -Excessive  cheerfuluess,\ — In  the
afternoon  he  is  more  cheerful  than  in  the  forenoon  ;  as  soon  as  the  sleepi-
ness after  dinner  is  past  he  is  more  cheerful  and  more  disposed  to  work
(after  thirty-eight  hours),^ — He  laughs  when  he  should  be  serious,'. —
When  occupied  with  serious  things  he  is  obliged  to  laugh  on  account  of  a
tickling  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  when  occupied  with  ludicrous  things
he  is  able  to  refrain  from  laughter,^ — Sadness,\ — -In  the  forenoon  he  is  ex-
tremely hypochondriac,  low-spirited,  and  desponding,  with  awkward  and
childish  manners ;  all  his  motions  are  extremely  awkward  and  indolent
(after  third  day),^ — Melancholy  illusion  ;  he  imagines  a  bier  is  in  the  side-
room,  upon  which  either  his  friend  or  himself  is  lying,'. — *He  is  separated
from  the  whole  world,  and  has  so  little  confidence  in  himself  that  he  despairs  of
being  able  to  do  that  which  is  required  of  him,'-. — [10.]  lie  is  very  indifferent  and
unfeeling;  neither  agreeable  nor  disagreeable  objects  excite  his  interest;  for
eight  days,'. — *When  walking  he  felt  anxious,  as  if  some  one  were  pursuing
him;  he  suspected  everything  around  him,^. — Anxious  apprehension  and
though tfulness,  when  meditating  over  his  present  and  future  destiny,^
— Anxious  apprehension  and  peevishness,*. — Anxiety,  apprehension  of
threatening  misfortune,'. — The  future  appears  dangerous  to  him,  as  if
nothing  but  misfortune  and  danger  were  reserved  for  him;  want  of  confi-
dence in  his  strength  and  despondency,'. — Anxiety  in  all  his  actions ;  every-
thing appeal's  to  him  more  terrible  ;  he  imagines  himself  surrounded  with
enemies ;  then  he  feels  warm  and  the  blood  seems  to  boil  within  him
(seventh,  eighth  days),'. — *  Internal  anxiety,  which  did  not  leave  him  any
peace;  he  felt  solicitous  on  account  of  every  trifle,  as  if  it  would  lead  to  some
great  trouble;  with  apprehension  of  the  future,^. — In  the  evening,  anxiety
and  apprehension,  after  cheerfulness  through  the  day,*. — Irritable  and  con-
tradicting,''.— [20.]  *J.  slight  offence  makes  him  excessively  angry,  breaking
out  in  personal  violence^. — Peevish  mood  all  day  ;  everything  about  him
made  a  disagreeable  impression  upon  him,". — Gloomy,  peevish  mood,  with
desire  to  go  into  the  open  air,'. — Excessively  peevish  and  ill-humored,*. —
Very  peevish  and  ill-tempered ;  extremely  susceptible  to  all  annoyances,'.
— *He  takes  everything  in  bad  part  and  becomes  violent^. — Increased  fancy ;
he  constantly  thinks  of  some  new  object  to  which  the  mind  forcibly  clings,'.
— His  mind  is  much  more  animated  than  before;  he  likes  to  enter  upon
acute  analysis,  but  every  eifort  of  this  kind  causes  a  tearing,  pressive  head-
ache in  the  forehead,  the  temples,  and  the  occiput,^ — Extreme  excitement
of  the  fancy,  with  a  number  of  projects,  in  the  evening,  from  9  to  10
o'clock  ;  he  is  not  able  to  control  his  attention  ;  little  by  little  the  mind  be-

f  Nos.  1  to  8  from  (Archiv.  and)  Hahnemann  Chr.  Kr.  (provings  made  with
powdered  nut  and  tincture).


ANACARDIUM.  313

comes  dull,  so  that  he  is  without  any  ideas  (after  sixteen  hours),^ — Indis-
posed to  do  anything,'. — [30.]  Every  kind  of  intellectual  labor  is  difficult
for  him,  like  a  kind  of  absent-mindedness,^ — Dread  of  labor ;  he  is  afraid
of  undertaking  the  least  labor;  he  likes  nothing,*. — The  mind  is  much  con-
fused, as  if  a  cold  were  coming  on,\; — He  confounds  the  present  with  the
future,'. — Early  in  the  morning,  after  a  sound  sleep,  he  is  unable  to  com-
prehend the  slightest  thing ;  his  head  feels  confused  and  empty ,^. — Dulness
of  the  senses,  with  confusion  of  the  head,  and  prostration,^ — Increase  and
greater  vividness  of  the  memory ;  he  spontaneously  recollects  the  smallest
circumstances  of  times  long  past ;  he  would  be  able  to  learn  easily  by  heart
if  his  attention  were  not  diverted  by  other  thoughts,  which,  however,  he
finds  it  easy  to  control  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),^ — Dulness  of  the  senses,
with  anxiety;  he  scarcely  perceives  what  is  taking  place  around  him,'.—
Anacardium  weakens  the  understanding  (Matthiolus). — *Great  weakness
of  memory  ;  cannot  remember  anything;  forgets  everything  immediately^. —
[40.]  Ha  remembers  with  difficulty ;  he  retains  nothing  in  his  memory;  he  is
deficient  in  ideas  and  he  soon  loses  his  subject  without  being  aware  of  it,^
— Diminution  of  the  imagination  and  the  memory  in  the  afternoon ;  he
cannot  recollect  anything  (after  five,  six  hours),^ — He  can  only  reflect  upon
a  subject  which  has  been  furnished  to  him  ;  he  does  not  remember  anything
himself,'.^The  memory  is  quite  deficient,  early  in  the  morning,  especially
as  regards  single  names,". — In  the  afternoon  his  memory  is  better  than  in  the
forenoon,  although  his  recollections  only  come  to  him  after  the  time  when
he  was  in  need  of  them ;  however,  he  easily  understands  what  he  reads,
although  he  does  not  entirely  remember  it  (after  third,  fourth  days),". —
Thoughts  vanish,^

Head. — His  head  feels  very  heavy  all  day,'.— Early  in  the  morning,
after  rising,  his  head  feels  so  confused  and  heavy  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to
support  it;  he  was  obliged  to  lie  down  again,'. — -Painful,  dull  confusion  of
the  head  when  he  lies  in  bed  iu  an  uncomfortable  position,'. — Vertigo,  as
if  all  objects  or  himself  were  wavering ;  he  is  obliged  to  steady  himself
(first  day),'. — [50-]  Vertigo,  he  almost  fell  down,'. — Vertigo  when  walk-
ing, as  if  all  objects  were  too  far  distant,'. — *Vertigo  on  stooping,  with  a
sensation  of  turning  round  in  a  circle  (after  thirteen  hours),". — Vertigo,
black  before  the  eyes,*. — The  head  reels,*. — Dizziness  of  the  head,  as  after
spirituous  drinks,'. — Great  giddiness  after  a  walk,  in  the  afternoon,'. — The
whole  head  swelled,'". — Heat  in  the  head,'. — Occasional  pressure  in  the
head,'. — [60.]  Pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  interrupted  by  vio-
lent stitches  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Dull  pressure  from  with-
out inward,  here  and  there,  in  small  places  of  the  head,*. — Repeated  tear-
ings  in  the  whole  head,  with  chills  all  over  the  body,  low  spirits,  and
restlessness;  this  does  not  permit  her  to  remain  in  any  one  j)lace ;  aflways
returns  every  third  day,*. — Tearing  headache  during  hard  labor  (after
fourth  day),^. — Repeated  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  face,  and
neck,  and  immediately  after,  humming  before  the  left  ear,*. — Violent,
grinding  headache,  in  the  evening,'. — Sharp  stitches  through  the  left  side
of  the  head,  reaching  deep  into  the  brain,*. — Dull,  tremulous  stitches  on
the  left  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  head;  they  are  merely  incipient,  and
do  not  become  distinct,*. — Any  effort  of  the  mind  causes  a  bruised  sensa-
tion in  the  brain,'. — Throbbing  headache,'. — [70,]  Several  violent  jerks,  so
that  he  would  like  to  scream  out  loud ;  they  come  from  behind,  and  reach
across  the  left  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  head  and  the  forehead  (after
half  an  hour),*. — The  headache  is  worse  during  motion,^ — Hard,  red,  pus-


314  ANACARDIUM.

tules  on  the  forehead  and  in  the  angle  of  the  left  wing  of  the  nose,  with  a
feeling  of  soreness,  for  several  weeks,l — Dull,  painful  confusion  of  the  fore-
head, extending  down  to  the  root  of  the  nose,*. —  Constrictive  headache  in
the  forehead,  with  extremely  peevish  mood,  increasing  from  hour  to  hour,
accompanied  by  a  violent  grinding  pain,  which  is  diminished  for  a  few
moments  by  strongly  pressing  upon  the  forehead ;  at  last  the  pain  takes
hold  of  the  whole  head,  with  a  painful  sensation  as  if  a  tense  band  were
reaching  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  ears ;  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down ;
the  pain  lasts  from  5  p.m.  to  next  morning,*. — Violent  constrictive  pain  iu
the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  especially  at  the  external  border  of  the
orbit,*. — Pressive,  pinching  headache  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  ^vith
single  teariugs  towards  the  forehead  (after  twenty-four  hours),'.— Pain  in
the  head,  especially  in  the  forehead,  stupefying,  pressive,  exciting  vertigo ;
he  threatened  to  fall  to  the  left  side  when  sitting  (after  two,  two  and  a  half
hours),". — Pressure  at  the  forehead  from  without,  over  the  left  eyebrow
(after  two  hours),". — Hard  pressure  in  the  angle  between  the  frontal  and
nasal  bones  (after  three  days),l — [80.]  Pressure  in  the  forehead,  every
morning  on  waking ;  worse  in  walking,  as  if  the  brain  were  shaken,'. — Dull
pressure  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  increasing  at  slow  intervals,  becom-
ing more  and  more  deep,  and  gradually  extending  over  the  whole  front  of
the  head  in  the  evening,*. — Violent  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  fore-
head, from  within  outward,'. — Dull  pressure  coming  out  at  the  right  frontal
eminence,*. — Compression  and  dull  pressure  below  the  left  frontal  eminence,*.
— Tearing-sticking  in  the  forehead  over  the  right  eye,'. — Grinding  in  the
right  half  of  the  forepart  of  the  head,  especially  along  the  border  of  the
orbit ;  relieved  by  strong  external  pressure  (and  during  a  meal),  accom-
panied by  intolerable  pain,  as  if  a  heavy  body  were  forced  in  there ;  the
pain  diminishes  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  on  lying  with  the  painful  spot
upon  the  arm  ;  on  falling  asleep  it  subsides  entirely,*. — Itching  of  the  fore-
head,'.— Painless  pimples,  with  red  areolae  at  the  top  of  the  left  temple
(after  nine  hours),". — Compression  simultaneously  in  both  temples,*. — [90.]
Pressure  inward,  and  squeezing  in  both  temples,  with  continual  constriction
of  the  upper  joart  of  the  head  ;  passes  off  towards  evening,*. — Several  times,
when  breathing,  a  long  stitch  drawing  from  the  temple  into  the  forehead
(after  five  and  a  half  hours),'. —  Violent  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  right
temple,- '°^^. — Tearing  pain  in  the  brain,  just  above  the  right  temple,^ —
Pressure  from  without  inward  in  the  left  temple,*. — Sudden,  acute,  piercing
and  biting  tearings  in  the  temple,  extending  into  the  brain  (after  three
hours),^. — Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  temple,'. — Sharp,  pressive  tearings  in
the  left  temple,^.— Shootings  and  tearings  in  the  left  temple,^. — Headache,
with  stitches  in  the  left  temple,'. — [100.]  *Pressive  pain  on  the  top  of  the
head,  when  coughing,  or  taking  a  deep  inspiration^. — *Dull  pressure,  as
from  a  plug,  on  the  left  side  of  the  vertex,^. — Confusion,  first  of  the  left,  then
of  the  right  side  of  the  head,*.— Jerkings  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  fre-
quently repeated,  close  down'  in  front  of  the  ear,*. — Drawing  pain  in  the
left  side  of  the  head,'. — Pressure  in  the  occiput,  on  the  right  side  (after
three  hours),l — Tearing,  which  commences  in  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput
on  the  right  side  and  reaches  as  far  as  the  forehead  (after  thirty-five
hours),l — Tearing  headache  iu  the  occiput,  in  distinct,  successive  attacks,
which  reach  as  far  as  the  temple  (after  half  an  hour),". — Drawing  pain  in
the  forehead,  in  the  left  vertex,  and  iu  the  occiput,^ — Jerking  shoots  and
tearing  in  the  occiput  and  temples,  mostly  when  bending  the  head  back-
ward (after  two  hours),"*. — [110,]  Many  little  boils  upon  the  hairy  scalp,


ANACARDIUM.  315

of  the  size  of  a  flaxseed  ;  they  feel  sore  when  touched  or  scratched,^ — Vio-
lent itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,\

Eyes. — Left  eye  swollen  shut,". — Painful  eyes,  without  redness,'. —
Violent  pressure  upon  the  eyes,  especially  upon  the  left,  and  in  the  exter-
nal canthus  of  this  eye  when  looking  long  at  one  object  (half  an  hourX''. —
*Dull  pressure,  as  with  a  plug,  on  the  upper  border  of  the  right  orbit,  ex-
tending into  the  brain,  with  stupefaction  of  the  whole  side  of  the  head,^ —
Rheumatic  tearing  pain  in  the  left  eye  (more  in  the  lids),  which  extends  as
far  as  the  temples,'*. — Lids  so  swollen  that'he  could  scarcely  see,".' — The
eyelids  felt  swollen,  but  without  pain,"*. — Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  there
was  something  between  the  ball  and  the  upper  lid,  which  causes  rubbing,^
— [120.]  Something  seems  to  rub  between  the  ball  and  the  lower  lid,*. —
Twitches  in  the  eyelids  ;  he  imagines  that  one  must  see  thera,*. — Pressure,
as  from  a  stye,  in  the  right  inner  canthus,  and  the  neighboring  tarsal  car-
tilages,^.— Pressure  below  the  left  external  canthus  (after  two  hours),''. —
*Painj  as  if  a  plug  were  pressed  in  under  the  upper  border  of  the  orbits,
and  touched  the  balls,*. — Pressure  upon  the  eyeball,  from  before  backward,
or  from  above  downward,^ — Tearing  in  the  balls  and  orbits,  mornings  when
walking  (after  twenty-four  hours),'*. — Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils  (after
thirteen,  fourteen,  and  nineteen  hours  ;  reaction),^ —  Contraction  of  the  pupils
(after  fourteen  hours),". — The  pupil  of  the  right  eye  becomes  smaller  for  a
short  time  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. —  [130,]  Dimness  of  the  eyes,  as  if
they  were  full  of  water,  which  forces  one  to  wink  often ;  in  the  evening
(after  sixteen  hours),'*. — Shortsightedness;  he  cannot  distinguish  anything
at»a  distance,  while  he  distinctly  sees  everything  which  is  held  near  his
eyes,*. — Great  sensitiveness  of  the  eyes  to  the  light,'. — Frequent  flickering
before  the  eyes,'. — The  flame  of  a  light  appears  to  flicker,  and  to  alter-
nately darken  and  brighten  ;  on  looking  steadily  at  the  light  he  saw  that
it  burnt  calmly,'. — *The  light  appears  to  be  surrounded  with  a  halo  in  the
evening,^.

Ears. — Twitches  in  the  external  ear,'. — Pain,  as  from  ulceration  in
the  ear,  mostly  when  swallowing,'. — Pain  in  the  ear,  as  from  ulceration,
when  biting  the  teeth  together,^. — Painful  pi'essure  upon  the  external  ear,'. —
[140.]  Sensation  behind  the  ears,  as  if  the  part  would  become  sore ;  he  is
obliged  to  rub  it,*. — Violent  tearing  along  the  upper  border  of  the  carti-
lage of  the  right  ear,*. — Violent  sticking-tearing  in  the  left  external  ear
(after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Tearing  in  the  left  ear,  down  the  cheek,'. —
Sensation  of  a  cramplike  contraction  in  the  left  concha  (after  half  an
hour),'.— Peeling  of  obstruction  in  the  left  ear,  as  from  cotton ;  he  did  not
hear  as  well  with  this  ear  as  with  the  other  (after  half  an  hour),l — Violent
stitches  in  the  left  ear,'. — Tearing,  sticking,  dull  pains  in  the  tip  of  the  an-
titragus  of  the  left  ear,*. — Drawing  pain  behind  the  left  ear,'. — Cramplike
contraction  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius,  with  a  pressure  against  the  tym-
panum,*.— [150.]  Spasmodic,  cramplike  pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius  exter-
nus,\ — Painful  twingeing  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius,*. — ^Painful  drawing
in' the  left  meatus  auditorius  internus  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),^ —
Twitchings  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius  at  short  intervals,  and  very  pain-
ful, as  if  a  nerve  were  put  upon  the  stretch,  or  like  electric  shocks,*. — Itch-
ing in  the  ear,  and  discharge  of  a  brownish  matter,'. — He  sometimes  heard
so  feebly  that  he  did  not  notice  when  some  one  opened  the  door  with  a
noise ;  often  his  hearing  was  so  acute  that  he  heard  people  through  double
doors  walk  in  the  antechambers  (after  fifty-four  hours),'. — Humming  in
the  ears}. — Roaring  before  the  ear,'. — Tingling  in  the  right  ear,*.


316  ANACARDIUM.

JVbse. — Pimples,  with  red  areolae,  at  the  angle  of  the  right  wing  of  the
nose,''. — [160.]  *Red  pustules  on  (he  septum,  in  the  right  nostril,  with  sore-
ness when  touched,^ — Obstruction  of  the  posterior  nares,  as  by  much
phlegm,^. — Sneeziug,*.— Violent  coryza,  lasting  four  weeks,^ — Violent  fluent
coryza  after  frequent  sneezing,  with  lachrymation,'. — Severe  coryza,  in  the
evening  (after  forty-eight  hours),^. — -Bleeding  at  the  nose  after  violent
blowing,'. — Dry  coryza,^ — Short  pain  in  the  nose,  such  as  arises  from  too
great  cold,  which  causes  his  eyes  to  run,'. — Contractive  pain  in  the  forepart
of  the  nose,  as  from  great  cold,  with  lachrymation,'. — [170.]  Bruised  sen-
sation in  the  left  side  of  the  nose ;  the  pain  seems  to  be  in  the  bone,*. —
Smell  seems  to  have  disappeared  almost  completely,  although  the  nose  is  not
obstructed  (after  five  hours),^. — ^Illusory  smell,  as  of  burning  tinder,  early,
when  rising^. — "^Constant  smell  before  the  nose,  like  pigeon  or  chicken  dung,
especially  when  smelling  his  clothes,  or  his  body  (after  two  hours),^

Face. — Face  began  to  swell,  beginning  from  the  eyes,". — Great  pale-
ness of  the  face  shortly  after  taking  the  medicine,*.— Pale,  sick,  wan  color
of  the  face,  without,  however,  any  other  symptoms,'. — Paleness  of  the  face,
without  coldness  (immediately),'. — The  person  looks  sick,  hollow-eyed,  with
blue  rings  around  the  eyes  for  several  days  (shortly  after  taking  the  medi-
cine),'.— Violent  burning  on  the  face,'". — [180.]  Dry  heat  in  the  face,  and
over  the  whole  head,  with  confusion  of  the  head  and  pale  look ;  at  the
same  time  he  feels  hot  upon  the  skin,  which  he  himself,  however,  does  not
perceive,*. — After  a  meal,  heat  in  the  face,  and  exhaustion,*. — After  dinner,
heat  in  the  face,  with  accumulation  of  sweetish  saliva  in  the  mouth,  and
violent  thirst,\ — Left  side  of  face  exceedingly  swollen,  and  covered  with  a
number  of  small,  pock-like  blisters,'". — White,  scaly  herpes  on  ths  right
cheek,  close  by  the  upper  lip  (after  four  hours),*. — Drawing  pain  in  the
right  cheek -bone,^ — Dull  pressure  upon  the  left  cheek-bone,*. — Dull  pres-
sure in  the  face,  in  the  middle  of  the  cheek,  as  if  the  place  were  squeezed
with  pincers,*. — Dryness  of  the  lips  and  their  corners,'. — Burning  dryness
of  the  external  borders  of  the  lips,  almost  as  from  pepper,*. — [190.]  Fre-
quently a  drawing  pain  in  the  lower  jaw,  especially  in  the  evening,'. — Fre-
quently repeated  tearings  in  the  right  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,*. — Occa-
sional tearings  in  the  articulations  of  the  jaw  (after  forty-two  hours),^ —
Suppuration  and  paiufulness  of  a  place  under  the  chin,  where  there  was  a
boil  two  years  before,*. — Small  blisters  on  chin,  discharging  liquid  when
broken,'". — Violent  burning  on  the  chin,'". — Externally,  burning  upon  the
chin,  and  dull  pressure,  extending  upward  upon  the  left  side  of  the  chin,
as  after  being  scraped  witli  a  dull  razor,*.

3IOHth, — ^Tearing  in  all  the  teeth,  returning  at  intervals,*. — Toothache
upon  taking  something  warm  in  his  mouth,  a  few  jerkings,  more  pressive
than  drawing,'.— The  teeth  feel  longer,  at  night,  when  in  bed,  accompanied
by  a  pressive  pain,'. — [200.]  Drawing  pain  in  the  gums  and  the  roots  of
the  lower  molar  teeth  of  the  left  side,^ — Cramplike  drawing  in  the  lower
row  of  teeth  of  the  right  side,  reaching  as  high  as  the  ear  (shortly  after
taking  the  medicine),*. — Tensive  and  drawing  pain  in  a  hollow  molar  toefth,
extending  to  the  ear,  for  several  days,  at  10  o'clock  in  the  evening,*. —
Violent  tearing  in  the  teeth  of  the  left  side,'". — Pain  in  one  of  the  lower
incisors,  as  if  a  toothpick  had  been  stirred  about  in  it,  made  worse  by  con-
tact with  the  tongue  and  the  open  air  (second  day),'. — Swelling  of  the
gums,'. — *Bleeding  of  the  gums  upon  slight  rubbing,^. — The  tongue  is  white
and  rough,  like  a  scraping-iron  (after  three  hours),*. — Heaviness  of  the
tongue,  and  sensation  as  of  swelling,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  continue  speak-


ANACARDIUM.  317

ing,\ — *Painful  veddes  in  the  mouth,^. — [210.]  A  quantity  of  liquid  comes
into  his  moutli  and  throat,  which  causes  a  sensation  of  nausea  in  the  chest,^
— Insipid,  foul  taste  of  the  food,  also  without  eating,'. — Insipid  taste  of  the
beer,\ — Bitter  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat,\ — Bitter  taste  in  the
mouth  after  smoking  tobacco,\ — Everything  tastes  to  him  like  herring-
brine,'. — Tobacco  does  not  taste,  only  causes  biting,'. — In  the  afternoon  his
speech  is  firmer  and  surer  than  in  the  forenoon,'. — When  speaking,  he  finds
it  dif&cult  to  utter  certain  words,  as  if  his  tongue  were  too  heavy,'.

Thvocit. — *Phlegm,  firm  and  tough,  comes  into  the  throat,  obstructing
at  the  same  time,  the  posterior  nares  (after  one  hour),^ — [220.]  Prickings
as  with  needles,  now  here,  now  there,  in  the  throat,  externally,*. — Dryness
•  of  the  throat,  passing  off  by  eating,  in  the  forenoon,^.^Roughness  of  the
throat,'. — Roughness  of  the  throat,  with  deep  tone  of  voice,  after  a  meal,^.
— Hard  pressure  in  the  throat,  on  both  sides  of  the  larynx,  which  some-
times interferes  with  deglutition,^. — Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,*. —
Sudden,  dul^  pressure,  as  from  a  weight,  on  the  left  side  of  the  throat,*. — •
Slow,  dull  thrusts  coming  from  both  sides  of  the  ears,  and  in  their  cavities,
as  if  two  blunt  plugs  were  penetrating,  to  meet  in  the  centre,*. — His  throat
feels  as  if  it  were  raw  and  sore,'. — Sensation  as  if  scraping  in  the  throat*^. —
[230.]  Frequent  itching  of  the  throat,^. — Great  appetite,  pressure  at  the
stomach  and  nausea  unto  vomiting,  after  a  meal,  even  when  without  exer-
cise,'.— He  has  no  appetite  for  dinner ;  nevertheless,  he  takes  it  and  rel-
ishes it,  because  it  is  dinner-hour  ;  bread,  however,  tastes  a  little  bitter,^. —
At  times,  violent  hunger;  at  times,  none  at  all,'. — Constant  thirst;  how-
ever, when  drinking,  his  breath  is  interrupted,  and  he  is  obliged  to  swallow
his  drink  little  by  little,'. — Eructations  of  fluid,  frequently  repeated,  which
choke  him,*. — Eructations  with  spasmodic  pain  at  the  stomach,'. — Eructa-
tions, after  drinks  and  liquid  food,'. — Eructations,  after  a  meal,  which  burn
in  the  throat,'. — Empty  eructations,  early  in  the  morning,*. — [240.]  Hic-
cough,*.— Qualmishness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  between  meals,  with
anxiety  as  from  a  sprain ;  without,  however,  real  nausea,  and  with  good
taste  in  the  mouth  and  good  appetite,'. — Several  kinds  of  food,  of  which
he  is  generally  very  fond,  disgust  him  so  much,  that  he  would  like  to
vomit,'. — Much  nausea,  early  in  the  morning,'. — iVatt-sea,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, with  a  sensation  of  fasting  in  the  stomach,'. — Violent  nausea  toward
evening,  constant  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  and,  at  last,  vomit-
ing, followed  by  great  acidity  in  the  mouth,'. — Nausea,  with  retching  re-
turning shortly  after  drinking  cold  water,  and  then  vomiting  of  this  water,
with  a  sensation  as  if  the  oesophagus  were  pressed  asunder  by  a  large  ball,'.
— Shaking  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  at  every  step,  after  every  meal,'. —
Rumbling  and  fermenting  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,*. — Sensitive,  dull  pres-
sure at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  slowly  coming  and  going,*. — [250.]  Dull
pressure,  at  intervals,  over  and  near  the  pit,  during  a  meal,*. — Pressure
and  tension  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  after  every  meal,'. — Soft  pressure,
with  drawing,  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  disappears  after  a  meal ;
when  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  twelve  hours),*. — Pressive  and  drawing
pain  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  walking  (after  ten  and  a  half
hours),^ — Compressive,  painful  prickings  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when
inspiring  and  expiring,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by  any  position,  or  by
contact  (after  four  hours),". — First,  sensation  as  of  fasting  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  then  pressure  in  the  stomach  the  whole  day,  and  as  if  ob-
structed emission  of  flatus  both  above  and  below,  and  want  of  appetite,'. —
Burning,  rising  out  of  the  stomach  into  the  throat,'. — Heartburn,  after


318  ANACARDIUM.

soup,  like  sour  air  in  the  oesophagus,  with  a  constricted  sensation,'. — Violent
contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,  relieved  by  stooping,  made  worse  by  lift-
ing the  arm,  aud  when  turning  the  body,'. — [260.]  Pressure  at  the  stom-
ach, from  reflection  and  intellectual  exertion?,'. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,
after  a  meal,'. — After  a  slight  breakfast,  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,  towards  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much,'. — Pressure  at
the  stomach  after  a  meal,  with  a  feeling  of  extreme  exhaustion  and  lassi-
tude, with  great  thirst  (after  three  and  a  half  days),'. — *During  dinner,
almost  all  the  symptoms  disappear ;  they  come  on  again  two  hours  afterwards,^.

Abdomen. — Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  an  hour  after  a  meal,'.
— Stitches  in  the  hypochondria,  when  inspiring,  sometimes  on  the  right  side,
sometimes  on  the  left,*. — Stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium,'. — Dull  stitches  ■
in  the  region  of  the  spleen  ;  they  seem  partly  in  the  chest,  partly  in  the
abdominal  cavity,^. — Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  as  if  something
hard  had  formed  there,  with  a  sensation  when  breathing,  speaking,  and
especially  when  coughing,  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst ;  when  touching
the  part  it  pains  like  a  pressure  and  tension,'.— [270,]  *Paiu  around  the
navel,  as  if  a  blunt  plug  were  squeezed  into  the  intestines,*. — Dull,  inter-
mittent stitches  at  the  uav'cl,*. — Sensitive,  sharp  stitches  over  the  navel  on
the  right  side,  which  cause  him  to  start,*. — Hard  pressure  at  a  small  spot
above  and  below  the  navel,  and  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,^. — Dull
pressure  just  below  the  navel,  worse  by  pressing  upon  it, and  by  breathing;
shortly  after  a  meal,*. — Pinching  contraction  at  a  small  spot  on  the
left  side  near  the  navel,  when  breathing  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Dull
stitches  in  the  abdominal  cavity,  not  far  from  the  navel,". — One  quick
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  on  the  right  side,'. — Burning  prickings,  as  regular
as  beats,  externally,  on  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  below  the  short  riks,*.
— Transient,  short  stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,
just  below  the  short  ribs,*. — [280,]  '''^  Thrusts  as  from  a  blunt  tool,  on  the  right
side  near  the  navel  (after  six  hours),*. — Stitches  which  are  very  sensitive
and  dull,  on  the  left  side  near  the  navel,*. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen,
shortly  after  dinner,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much,'. — After  a  meal,  flatus
moves  about  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a  purgative,'. — Continual  rumbling
and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,*  ^ — Continual  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  espe-
cially in  the  region  of  the  navel,'. — Cutting  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,
as  from  flatulence,  or  cold,  with  tenesmus  (after  four  and  twenty-two
hours),". — Pinching  in  the  abdomen  during  stool,^ — Pinching  and  griping
in  the  abdomen  (after  twelve  hours),^. — Griping  pain  in  the  abdomen,
apparently  in  the  intestines  (after  seven  hours),^ — [290.]  Attacks  of  colic
more  cutting  than  pinching,  coming  on  when  flatus  becomes  incarcerated
in  the  abdomen,'. — Hypochondriac  dejection  after  a  meal  ;  there  is  a  pres-
sure in  the  abdomen,  from  below  upward,  and  he  feels  extremely  weak  both
in  body  and  mind  (after  six  hours),^^ — A  sudden,  wavelike  shooting  iuto
his  abdomen,  like  lightning,*. — Pain,  as  if  something  in  the  abdomen  would
become  twisted  together,  with  subsequent  pressure  (after  thirty-two  hours),".
— Upon  bending  the  body  backwards,  the  intestines  are  painful,  as  if
spasmodically  shortened,  in  the  forenoon,'. — Single,  sharp  stitches  in  the
lower  abdomen,'. — Intermittent  dull  pressure,  from  within  outwards,  over
the  abdominal  ring,*. — Dull,  deeply  penetrating  stitches,  at  the  spinous
processes  of  the  left  iliac  bones,*.

Stool  and  Anus.— The  varices  of  the  rectum  become  smaller,  and
cease  to  be  painful,  except  soreness  when  the  person  begins  to  walk  (cura-
tive effect),'. — *  Tenesmus;  he  cannot  expel  anything ;  the  rectum  seems  to  be


ANACARD1[UM.  319

plugged  up,^. — [300.]  *Frequent  tenesmus  during  the  day,  for  many  days,
without  ever  being  able  to  expel  anything,^. — Constant  tenesmus  ;  the  expul-
sion not  taking  place  immediately;  there  is  a  painful  twisting  and  turning
in  the  intestines,  transversely  across  the  abdomen,^ — Frequent  itching  in
the  anus,'. — Itching  of  the  anus,  after  an  embrace,'. — Desire  for  stool  three
times  a  day  ;  he  had  a  desire,  but  upon  going  to  stool  and  sitting  down,  the
desire  had  gone ;  the  rectum  would  not  perform  its  functions ;  he  had  to
strain  considerably,  even  when  the  stools  were  very  soft/. — He  was  fre-
quently obliged  to  go  to  stool ;  however,  he  expelled  but  little  every  time ;
the  stools  were  iirst  soft,  then  hard,'. — Every  day,  two  or  three  ordinary
stools,  passing  with  great  difficulty,'. — *  Urging  to  stool,  after  a  meal,  more
in  the  upper  part  oj  the  intestines^.- — Diarrhcea  at  night,  with  subsequent
constipation,'. — Frequent  watery  diarrhrea  ;  the  expulsion  being,  neverthe-
less, with  much  exertion,'. — [310.]  During  the  act  of  expulsion  of  fseces,
and  especially  after,  dull  pressure  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  iucreased  by
inspiration,  just  below  the  navel,*. — Yawning  and  eructations  after  stool,'.
— Stools  of  a  very  pale  color  (after  forty-eight  hours),'.

Uiinary  Orf/aiis. — Itching  of  the  urethra,'. — Constant  desire  to
urinate.'.-^Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  but  little  urine  passing  (first  four
hours),^ — Frequent  emission  of  clear  watery  urine  in  small  quantities,". —
Early  in  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  frequent  clear  watery  urine,*. — He
is  obliged  to  rise  at  night  to  urinate ;  uevertheless,  he  urinates  again  at  the
usual  period,*. — The  urine,  while  being  emitted,  is  turbid,  deposits  a  dirty
sediment,  and,  when  shaken,  looks  like  clay,*.

Sexual  Organs, — [320.]  Cutting  pain  along  the  penis,'. — Discharge
of  the  prostatic  juice,  with  natural  stool,'. — Discharge  of  the  prostatic  juice,
with  difficult  stool,'. — Discharge  of  the  prostatic  juice,  after  emission  of
urine,'. — Continual  voluptuous  itching  of  the  scrotum,  which  excites  the
sexual  desire  (after  two  hours),'. — Extreme  sexual  desire,'. — Sexual  desire
early  in  the  morning,  after  waking,  with  erection  of  the  penis,^ — Want  of
excitability  of  the  sexual  desire  (first  ten  days),'.— Emission  of  semen  at
night,  without  amorous  dreams  (after  twenty-seven  hours),". — Tearing  in
the  mons  veneris,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — [330.]  Cough,  commencing  with  titil-
lation  in  the  larynx,  and  suffocation,'. — Shaking  attacks  of  couglj,  resem-
bling fits  of  hooping-cough,  excited  whenever  he  talks,'. — -Shaking  cough,
which  does  not  permit  him  to  sleep  at  night,'. — Short  cough,  mostly  in  the
afternoon,  with  expectoration  of  a  tenacious  gray-yellow  sub.stance,'. — Short
cough,  with  purulent  expectoration,'. — Short  hacking  cough,  after  a  meal,
aflfecting  the  throat  as  if  it  were  raw  (after  three  days),^. — Hacking  cough,
after  a  meal,  affecting  the  throat  as  if  it  were  raw  (after  three  and  a  half
days),". — Periodical  attacks  of  cough,  only  in  the  daytime ;  he  gets  out  of
breath ;  every  three  or  four  hours,'. — Cough  early  in  the  morning,'. — Se-
vere attacks  of  cough,  with  shivering,  lasting  for  hours,  beginning  at  4  a.m.,
and  occurring  several  times  during  the  day  (after  fourteen  days),'. — [340.]
Violent  cough  after  dinner,  with  vomiting  of  the  food,'.— Severe  cough  in
the  evening,  when  in  bed,  causing  the  blood  to  rush  to  the  head,'. — Nightly
cough,  with  rawness  of  the  throat,'.^Cough,  almost  only  during  the  night,
and  more  severe  than  during  the  day,'. — Cough,  more  severe  at  night  than
by  day;  several  days,'. — Cough,  with  stitches  in  the  forehead  or  in  the  side
of  the  head,'. — Cough,  with  pain  in  the  occiput,'. — Cough,  with  usually
vain  desire  to  sneeze,'. — Cough,  with  yawning  after  the  attack,'. — He  spits


820  ANACAEDIUM.

blood  when  coughing  (fourth  day),\ — [350.]  Short  breath,  especially  after
a  meal  and  when  sitting,'.

Cheat. — Uneasiness  in  the  chest,  apparently  about  the  heart,  especially
in  the  forenoon  (fourth  day),'. — Pressure  on  chest,  especially  when  sitting,
with  fulness;  he  would  like  to  get  rid  of  this  symptom  by  vomiting  (after  ten
hours), ^— Pressure  of  the  chest,  like  oppression,  extending  toward  the  ax-
illae, with  difficulty  of  breathing  (after  twenty-four  hours),l — Oppression
of  chest,  with  weeping,  which  relieves  it,'. — Asthma ;  oppression  of  chest
(after  ten  liours),'. — Oppression  of  chest,  during  an  expiration,  with  pres-
sure upon  the  sternum  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),^ — Oppression  of  chest,
with  internal  anxiety  and  heat,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
chest,'. — Twitching  sensation  in  the  pectoral  muscle  when  raising  the  arm,'.
— [360.]  Feeling  of  soreness  and  rawness  in  the  chest,  increased  by  inspi-
ration (immediately),*. — Single  sharp  stitches  in  the  chest,'.— Sharp  pul-
sating stitches  in  the  chest,  above  the  heart  (after  eighty  hours),*. — Itching
upon  the  chest,'. — Corrosively  itching  prickings,  as  from  pins,  at  the  last
false  rib.l — Sudden,  quick  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  close  by
the  axilla;  he  feels  it  at  the  same  time  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  back,
without  any  influence  upon  breathing,'. — *Dull  pressure,  as  from  a  plug,
in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,*. — Pressure  from  without  over  the  right  nip-
ple,^ — Waveiike  drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,*. — Dull  stitches  in
the  left  side  of  the  chest,  a  hand's  breadth  below  the  axilla,*. — [370.]
Sharp  stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  mamma,  which  prevented  her
for  a  long  time  from  rising  from  her  seat;  afterwards,  a  sensation  of  apres-
sive  weight  at  that  place,'. — Tearing,  with  some  pressure,  on  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  reaching  as  high  as  the  heart,  as  though  the  whole  side  were
being  crushed,  especially  when  stooping  (after  ten  hours),^ — Intermittent
throbbing  pricking,  as  with  needles,  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  close  to
the  throat  (after  three  and  a  half  hours),". — Constrictive  prick,  as  from  a
pin,  at  the  left  false  ribs,  externally  (after  four  hours),". — Oppressive  anx-
iety in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  without  pain,  as  if  he  could  not  remain
in  the  room,  but  must  go  into  the  open  air,  and  be  very  busy,'. — Quick
pressure  upon  the  sternum,  as  from  a  blow,  when  falling  asleep  duriug  the
day,'. — Sensation  behind  the  sternum,  as  if  there  were  a  sore  place  in  the
chest,'.— Dull  pressure  upon  part  of  the  right  border  of  the  sternum,'. —
Short  breath;  he  feels  oppressed  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,'. — Cutting  in
the  preecordial  region,*. — [380.]  *  Sharp  stitches  in  the  prwcordial  region,  ex-
tending thence  to  the  small  of  the  hack*. — Stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  prse-
cordial  region,  increased  when  breathing  and  walking,  and  coming  on
anew  when  the  walking  was  recommenced,*. — Severe  stitches  in  the  precor-
dial region  when  breathing,^. — Stitch  in  the  precordial  region  at  night,  when
breathing,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Short  stitches  piercing  through  and  through
the  heart,  succeeding  each  other  two  by  two,*.

Neck  imd  Back. — After  the  head,  the  neck  began  to  swell,'".—
Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  with  tensive  pain,  especially  when
moving  the  head  quickly  after  keeping  it  still ;  less  duriug  constant  mo-
tion (after  fifty-two  hours),'. — Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  ncck,\ — Stiffness
and  pressive  tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  occiput,  and  between
the  scapulae,  on  waking,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,'. — Painful  stiff-
ness of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  two  days  in  succession,  early  in  the  morn-
ing on  waking  ;  he  had  been  lying  on  that  side ;  the  pain  was  brought  on
by  the  slightest  motion,  and  especially  upon  turning  the  head  towards  the


ANACAKDIUM.  321

psiinful  side  (after  four  to  five  days),'. — [390.]  Painful  contractive  stiffness
on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  close  to  the  occiput ;  the  pain  is  felt  when  at
rest;  it  neither  interferes  with  nor  is  increased  by  the  motion  of  the  head
(after  two  hours),'. — Dull  intermittent  pressure,  as  from  a  heavy  burden,  on
the  right  side  of  the  neck  and  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,  apparently
in  the  bone,*. — Slowly  intermittent  pressure  in  the  angle  formed  by  the
jieck  and  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,*. — Cramplike  pressure  under  and
near  the  shoulder-blades,  from  without  inward  (after  half  an  hour),". —
Formication  in  the  shoulder-blades,  or  sensation  as  if  they  had  gone  to
sleep,*. — Cracking  in  the  scapula  upon  lifting  the  arm,\ — Pain  in  the  right
side,  near  the  vertebral  column,  in  the  shoulder-blade,  as  from  continually
sitting  bent,*. — Tearing  stitches  near  the  right  shoulder-blade,  extending  out-
ward,\ — Violent  lancinating  pressure  close  under  the  left  shoulder-blade,
without  influencing  breathing  (one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Sharp  stitches  in
the  external  side  of  the  left  shoulder-blade,*.— [400.]  Dull  stitches  in  the
left  shoulder-blade,  returning  slowly,  and  causing  a  tearing  pain,  to  extend  to
all  side^s*. — Fine  and  dull  thrusts  in  the  right  half  of  the  external  surface  of
the  left  scapula  externally,  at  short  intervals,*. — Painful  tearing  between
the  scapulae,'. — Cracking  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,  when  stooping,'. — Pain-
ful stiffness  in  the  back  when  raising  one's  self  while  sitting ;  the  pain  dis-
appears when  sitting  bent,'. — Rheumatic  drawing  along  the  back,^ — Blunt
stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,*.

Extremities  in  Getteral. — Repeated  tearings,  in  paroxysms,
simultaneously  through  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,*. — Heaviness  in
the  left  arm  and  leg,  when  walking,'.

JJjiper  Extremities. — Itching-pricking,  as  with  needles  below  the
shoulders,  passing  off  by  rubbing,*. — [410.]  Itching  and  tickling  in  both
axillae,  forcing  him  to  rub  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Painful  lancinating
tension  in  the  arms,  upon  stretching  and  extending  them ;  from  the  joints
down  the  flexor  muscles ;  on  bending  the  arras  back  there  is  a  cracking  in
the  joints,  especially  in  the  shoulders,  with  pain,  as  if  the  arm  were  dislo-
cated,*.— At  night  he  cannot  lie  long  on  one  side  because  his  arms  then
feel  a  pain  as  if  bruised,*. — Pressure  in  the  right  arm,  apparently  in  the
muscles  and  bones  simultaneously,  with  lassitude  in  them,^.— The  left  arm
goes  to  sleep,*. — -Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  left  arm,'. — Pimples  with  red
areolae  and  pus  at  the  tip,  on  the  lower  portion  of  the  upper  arm,  with  pain-
ful itching  during  motion  of  the  arm,  irritating  to  scratching  (after  twelve
hours),". — (Spasmodically)  pressive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arms,
when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  when  sitting,  in  the  evening,". — Pain  as
from,  a  bruise,  frequently,  in  the  right  scapula  and  upper  arm,  so  that  she
can  scarcely  lift  up  herarm,\ — Rheumatic  drawing  pain  in  the  right  upper
arm,  from  the  shoulder  to  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  with  a  feeling  of  stiffness
in  the  arm,°. — [420.]  Painful  jerking  in  the  left  upper  arm,  above  the
bend  of  the  elbow,*. — Dull  pressure,  like  a  grumbling,  in  the  left  upper
arm,  apparently  in  the  marrow  of  the  bone,  very  painful  and  intermittent,*.
— Beatings,  as  with  a  heavy  body,  very  painful,  in  the  middle  of  the  left  upper
arm  (immediately),*. — Pressure  from  without  inwards,  in  the  forearms  here
and  there,  short,  painful  (immediately),*. — Cramplike  twitches  all  over  the
forearm,  a  hand's  breadth  above  the  left  wrist  (immediately),*. — Pressive
scratchings  upon  the  bone  of  the  forearm,  when  at  rest,^ — Cramplike  draw-
ing in  the  right  forearm,  from  the  wrist  to  the  elbow,*. — Pressive  pain  in
the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  when  writing  (after  thirteen  hours),". — ■
Cramplike  pressure  at  the  left  forearm,  more  violent  on  pressure,  and  be-

VOL. I.— 21


322  ANACARDIUM.

coming  a  tearing  pressure  on  motion,^ — Cramplike  violent  pain  in  the  left
forearm  and  the  back  of  the  hand,  unaffected  by  motion,  at  night  in  bed,^ —
[430.]  Pressure  in  the  bend  of  the  left  elbow,  which  draws  the  arm  down
as  if  heavy,  and  makes  its  motion  difficult ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air
(after  thirteen  hours),^. — Twitches  in  the  flexor  tendons  at  the  wrist,'. —
The  hands,  even  the  palms  of  the  hands,  are  covered  with  warts,'. — Great
feeling  of  dryness  of  the  hands,^. — Dry,  hot  hands,'. — Long,  violent,  pains
fully  tearing  stitch  in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,". — Stinging,  with  itching,
of  the  external  knuckle  of  the  right  hand,  which  does  not  pass  off  till  the
parts  have  been  scratched  a  long  time,  until  they  become  red,*. — Crampliko
contraction  of  the  left  hand,  so  that  she  cannot  make  her  finger  straight,*. —
Intermittent,  dull,  lancinating,  cramplike  pain  on  the  external  border  of
the  left  hand,  where  the  little  finger  unites  with  its  metacarpal  bone,*. — •
The  palms  feel  hot,  while  the  backs  of  the  hands  are  cold,'. — [440.]  Sim-
ple pain  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  on  moving  it,*. — Small  blisters  on  the
backs  of  the  hands,'". — Pressive  tearing  on  the  back  of  the  hand  (after  nine
hours),^. — Pressive,  spasmodic  pain  in  the  muscles  transversely  across  the
back  of  the  left  hand  (after  half  an  hour),". — Prickings,  as  from  pins,
upon  the  back  of  the  left  hand,*. — Cramplike,- twitching,  dull  pain  in  the
anterior  extremities  of  the  metacarpal  bones,  unaffected  by  motion,'. —
Cramplike  pain  in  the  right  hand,  where  the  metacarpal  bones  join  the
phalanges  (after  half  an  hour),^ — Repeated  tearings  in  the  right  thumb,
as  far  as  the  elbow,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down ;  relieved  only  by
strong  pressure  and  friction,  since  it  does  not  appear  to  be  in  the  muscle,
but  deeper,*. — Conti'active,  lancinating  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left
thumb,  passing  off  by  motion  and  touch  (after  two  hours),". — Cramplike
twitches  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,  iu  the
lowest  phalanges,*. — [450.]  Intermittent,  cramplike  pain  in  the  lowest
joints  of  the  right  thumb  and  index,''. — Grumbling  pain  between  the  meta-
carpal bones  of  the  left  index  and  middle  fingers,  just  behind  the  knuckles,*.
— Pustules  upon  the  index-finger,  with  red  areolae,  and  a  stinging  sort  of
voluptuous  itching,  which  spreads  into  the  whole  of  the  palm  ;  the  itching
forces  one  to  press  and  squeeze;  red  and  white  lymph,  and  afterwards  a
scurf  appear,  beneath  which  is  formed  a  plug  of  pus ;  in  the  evening  a
drawing  sore  pain  in  the  ulcer;  it  lasts  eight  days,*. — On  the  side  of  the
left  index-finger  a  pimple,  which  opens  on  the  day  following,  and  then
passes  off;  is  formed  after  nightly  itching  in  the  hollow  of  the  hand  and
between  the  fingers;  violent  friction  relieves,  without  removing  it,*. — Vio-
lent cutting  at  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  index-finger,'. — Cramplike
pain  in  the  joints  of  the  left  hand,  where  the  index-finger  joins  the  meta-
carpal bone,*. — Sharp,  burning  stitches  at  the  external  border  of  the  left
hand,  where  the  little  finger  joins  the  metacarpal  bone  (after  thirty-six
hours),*. — Frequently  repeated  tearings  in  the  little  finger,*. — Cramplike
pain  in  the  hand,  in  the  region  of  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  little  finger,^
— Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  little  finger,'.
Lower  JExt^'emities. — [460.]  Weariness  of  the  limbs,  as  from
walking  too  much,  and  sleepiness,  as  from  great  weakness  (after  nine
hours),". — Loud  cracking  in  the  right  hip-joint,  on  moving  it  while  sitting,*.
— Pain  as  from  a  sprain  and  a  bruise  over  the  right  hip,  when  rising  from
the  seat ;  the  pain  is  lasting ;  it  also  comes  on  when  moving  the  trunk  while
sitting,  rising  is  then  intolerable,  and  he  has  to  walk  stooping,'. — Slight
twitchings  and  drawings  in  the  thighs,  especially  about  and  in  the  knees,
as  after  a  long  journey  on  foot,  with  painful  uneasiness  when  sitting,  re-


ANACARDIUM.  323

sembling  a  tremulous  agitation  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),*. — Burn-
ing prickings,  as  with  pins,  which  oblige  one  to  scratch;  here  and  there,  in
the  muscles  of  the  thighs,*. — Painful,  dull  pressure  in  the  thighs,  sometimes
intermittent,  rhythmical,*. — Burning  itching  upon  the  thighs,  in  the  evening,'.
— Drawing  pain  down  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,*. — Pressure,  with
sensation  as  of  twitching,  at  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh,*. — Boring
stitch  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  part  of  the  right  thigh,  in  front  (after  ten
hours),^ — [470.]  Dull  pressure,  as  from  a  plug,  in  the  left  glutei  muscles,*. —
Cnimplike  pressure  in  the  left  thigh,  anteriorly  and  posteriorly,^. — Tear-
ing contraction  on  the  external  side  of  the  left  thigh,  at  a  small  spot;  sub-
sequently a  pain  as  from  subcutaneous  suppuration  (after  eleven  hours),*.
— Itching  prickings  of  the  left  thigh,  which  pass  off  by  rubbing,*. — Painlerss
feeling  of  weakness  above  the  knees,  when  walking,  with  painful  aching
when  sitting,  as  after  great  fatigue  of  the  legs  (after  half  an  hour),*. —
Drawing  pain  above  the  knees,  when  sitting;  in  walking  felt  as  mere  weak-
ness (after  half  an  hour),*. — Violent  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  external
side  of  the  right  thigh,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,  and  always  accompanied
with  a  lancination  (after  ten  and  a  half  hours),^ — Dull  pain  in  the  left
thigh,  just  above  the  knee,*. — -Dull  pain,  with  soreness,  above  the  knee,  on
lifting  the  feet  high,  with  a  painful  feeling  of  weakness  about  the  knees,
and  cramplike  pinching  between  the  bend  of  the  knee  and  calf,*. — Itching
eruption  around  the  knees,  as  far  as  the  calves,'. — [480.]  *Painful  uneasi-
ness around  the  knees,  with  sensation  of  stiffness,  as  if  bandaged  or  made  tense,
when  sitting,''. — Long  stooping  is  followed  by  severe  pains  in  the  knees,  and
in  the  muscles  above  and  below  them,*. — *The  knees  feel  paralyzed,  with
stiffness  and  great  lassitude,  so  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk,^. — After  a  meal,
when  standing,  very  weak  in  the  knees,  at  the  same  time  sleepy  and  not
disposed  to  any  kind  of  work,*.— Pressure  at  the  internal  side  of  the  knee,
wlieu  walking,*. — Pressure  and  drawing  at  the  inside  of  the  knee,  when
walking,*. — Dull,  pressive  drawing  at  the  internal  surface  of  the  right
knee  when  sitting,*. — Drawing  pain  in  the  right  knee,  apparently  behind
the  patella,  unaffected  by  position  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),^ — Blunt
stitches  in  the  right  knee,*. — Dull  stitches,  or  thrusts,  just  below  the  right
knee,  when  treading  with  the  feet,*. — [490.]  Burning  sore  pain,  as  if
scraped,  at  the  external  side  of  the  left  knee,*. — Painful  drawing  in  left
knee,  when  bending  it  (while  sitting) ;  passing  off  when  stretching  the  leg,*. —
Wavelike  twitches,  here  and  there,  in  the  legs  (when  sitting),*. — Frequent
pulsations  and  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  legs,*. — His  legs  totter  when
standing ;  painful  weakness  in  the  feet,  when  sitting,*. — Uneasiness  in  the
legs,  when  sitting,  as  if  everything  were  alive  in  them,  and  descended  in  a
turning  motion  downward  into  the  feet,  which  felt  heavy  and  almost  as
though  they 'would  go  to  sleep,*. — Restlessness  in  the  legs  on  sitting,  ex-
tending up  and  down,  causing  a  painful  pressing  inward  at  several  places ;
disappears  on  walking,  aaid  returns  on  sitting  (immediately),*. — Burning
pain  at  a  small  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  legs,  as  of  red-hot  sparks,'. —
Heaviness  in  the  legs,'. — Dull,  indistinct  drawing  in  the  legs,*.— [500.]
Here  and  there,  drawing,  pressure,  and  sense  of  heaviness  in  the  legs,  after
a  walk ;  the  sense  of  heaviness  is  diminished  by  extending  the  foot,l — Fre-
quent drawing  downward  in  the  legs,  when  sitting,*. — Twitches  in  the  left
tibia,  just  over  the  malleolus,  intensely  painful,  and  occurring  at  short
intervals,  resembling  electric  shocks,*. — Painful  drawing  in  the  tibia  (after
three-quarters  of  an  hour),^. — Pressive  pain  upon  the  left  tibia  when  sitting,
with  uneasiness  of  the  whole  limb,  which  decreases  upon  the  leg  being


324  ANACARDIUM.

drawn  in,^ — Eheumatic,  tensive  pressure  at  the  leg,  transversely  across
the  tibia,  only  when  extending  the  leg  in  walking,^. — Pressive,  lancinating
pain,  sometimes  with  boring  in  the  tibia  and  muscles  of  the  legs,". — Tearing
pressure  at  the  anterior  surface  of  the  tibia,  just  above  the  ankle,*. — Oramp-
like  pressure  in  both  calves,  more  towards  the  external  side,  towards  the
tibia  (after  third  day),l — Dull  stitches,  very  sensitive,  on  the  surface  of
the  tibia,  over  the  right  ankle,'. — [510.]  Cramp  of  the  calf,  when  walking,'.
— Cramp  in  the  calves,  at  night,'. — *  Cramplike,  intermittent  drawing  in  the
legs,  from  the  heels  into  the  calves,^. — *  Painful  tightness  in  the  calf,  when  walk-
ing, as  if  the  muscles  were  too  short,  also  when  in  bed  at  night,  with  sleep-
lessness,'.— Painful  tightness  in  the  left  calf,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  tarsal
articulation  when  he  seats  himself  (after  thirty-two  hours),^. — In  the  tarsal
articulation  of  the  left  leg,  pain  as  from  a  sprain,  on  setting  the  foot  upon  the
ground^. — Drawing  downwards  over  the  external  malleoli,  when  standing,
with  pain  in  the  soles,  so  that  standing  becomes  very  difficult  for  him,'. —
Burning  sore  pain  above  the  heel,*. — Cramplike  pressure  at  the  left  heel
(after  thirty  hours\l — [520.]  Tearing  and  grinding  pain  in  the  heel,  early
when  in  bed,'. — Cold  feet,  early  in  the  morning,'. — The  feet,  which  had
been  warm,  became  intensely  cold  when  walking ;  the  cold  feet  become  still
colder,'. — Painful  jerkings  internally  upon  the  back  of  the  foot,*. — Prick-
ings, as  with  pins,  on  the  back  of  the  left  foot,*. — Itching,  with  scratching,
as  if  rubbed  with  a  woollen  cloth,  upon  the  back  of  the  foot  (after  six
hours),*. — Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  when  sitting,*. — Cramplike  draw-
ing of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  into  a  curve,*. — Dull,  intermittent  pressure
at  the  internal  border  of  the  sole  of  the  foot,*. — Tearing,  while  standing,
transversely  across  the  roots  of  the  toes,  passing  off  by  moving  them  (after
five  hours),^ — [530.]  Repeated  tearings  in  the  big  toe,*. — Sensitive,  inter-
mittent twitching  in  the  right  groat  toe,*.— Spasmodically  drawing  and
tearing  pains  from  the  toes  into  the  back  of  the  feet,*.

Generalities. — He  makes  all  motions  with  greater  energy  and  per-
severance; his  muscles  contract  more  vigorously ;  but,  on  motion,  the  fibres
seem  put  upon  the  stretch  too  much,  or  as  if  there  were  not  sufficient  fluid
in  the  joints  (after  one  hour),*. — Continual  indolence  after  the  siesta;  he  can
scarcely  move  his  limbs,  and  he  loathes  speaking,'. — Paralysis  of  someparts
(Matthiolus-Dacosta);  panting,  languishing  condition,  like  paralysis,  as  if
obliged  to  sink  down,  after  a  short  walk  in  the  afternoon ;  in  the  evening
he  can  walk  fast  and  a  good  deal,  without  feeling  tired ;  he  then  sweats
considerably  (sixth  day),*.— After  a  short  journey  on  foot,  which  he  found
very  difficult,  he  felt  so  worn  out,  tired,  and  exhausted  that  he  was  obliged
to  sit  down  at  once,  and  would  prefer  lying  down  ;  resting  the  head  upon
something,  and  closing  the  eyes,  afford  him  a  feeling  of  comfort,*. — Exces-
sive weakness ;  he  can  scarcely  move  his  hands  ;  he  trembles  at  every  mo-
tion,'.— *  Weakness  in  the  body ;  he  wants  to  lie  down  or  sit  all  the  time,\
— [540.]  During  a  short  journey  on  foot  he  becomes  so  worn  out  that  he
can  scarcely  go  on,  and  even  long  afterwards,  when  sitting,  he  is  not  able
to  recruit,*. — *  Very  faint  on  going  upstairs,^. — Faint  and  exhausted ;  at  first
walking  is  inconvenient,  and  his  feet  feel  heavy ;  by  continuing  to  walk
this  feeling  of  faintness  becomes  less,  and  he  feels  better,*. — She  grows  thin,
without,  however,  feeling  indisposed,'. — Such  a  swelling  of  the  afiected
parts  that  the  patient  looked  like  a  hogshead  (from  wearing  the  nut),". —
The  swelling  passes  gradually  down  from  the  eyes  to  the  thighs,'". — When
sitting  quietly,  he  perceives  the  beating  of  the  pulse  in  the  arms,  which
had  been  loosely  crossed,  and  even  in  the  whole  body  (after  some  bodily


ANACARDIUM.  325

eflTort)/. — (Any  part  which  he  does  not  move  immediately  goes  to  sleep),'.
. — The  skin  of  the  body  is  insensible  to  itching  irritants,'. — Most  violent
burning  pain  of  the  affected  parts ;  violent  fever  (from  wearing  the  nut),".
— [550.]  He  feels  a  heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  body  from  playing  on  the
piauo,'.— General  aching  in  the  interior  of  the  whole  body,'. — AH  the  ten-
dons of  the  body  ache  so  much  that  he  cannot  walk,  and  is  forced  to  sink
down,'. — Violent  drawing  in  the  abdomen  and  extremities,  with  subsequent
burning,  then  pain  in  the  bones  on  being  touched,  so  that  she  cannot  I'all
asleep,'. — Drawing  and  pressive  pains  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  body,'.—
Sensation  as  if  all  the  bones  were  bruised,  early  in  the  morning,  when  lying
quietly  in  bed,  with  stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  small  of  the  back,
and  headache  in  the  forehead  and  temples;  all  relieved  on  rising,'. — Pain,  like
a  boil,  in  the  affected  parts  ;  he  dares  not  touch  them ;  stitches  externally,
at  several  places  of  the  body,  for  example,  at  the  pectoral  muscles,  forehead,
wrist,  etc.,'. — Severe  coryza,  with  fever;  she  was  unable  to  get  warm,  with
heat  in  the  head,  and  icy  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet,  in  the  warm  room  ;
afterwards  dry  heat;  the  tendons  of  the  legs  seem  too  short;  cramp  of  the
calves,  and  uneasiness  about  the  heart  (eighth  day),'. — The  attacks  cease
for  one  or  two  days,  and  then  continue  again  for  a  couple  of  days,  so  that
a  certain  periodicity  may  be  observed  in  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms,*.
— The  open  air  is  unpleasant  to  him,  and  feels  too  rough,'. — [560.]  When
sitting,  he  feels  well ;  but  standing  causes  an  uneasiness  in  the  lower  ex-
tremities, as  if  they  ought  to  be  drawn  up,  with  anxiety ,^

Skin. — In  an  h6ur  the  skin  was  destroyed  (by  applying  the  juice),'". —
Destruction  of  the  epidermis,  leaving  an  inflamed  surface  covered  with  small,
miliary  pustules,  with  unbearable  itching,  and  discharging  a  yellow  liquid,
forming  crusts  (from  applying  the  juice),^ — During  the  healing  of  the
skin,  excessive  desquamation,". — Appearance  of  hypertrophy  of  the  skin,
with  swollen  and  indurated  papillae  and  wheals,  and  formation  of  thick
folds,  which  impede  the  motion  of  the  joints  (from  applying  the  juice),". —
Bright  scarlet  eruptions  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of  the  thigh  in  con-
tact with  the  nut,  and  of  the  abdomen,". — Several  blisters  opened,  and
discharged  a  yellowish,  transparent  liquid,  which  hardened  to  a  crust  in
the  open  air,'". — Chest,  neck,  axillae,  upper  arms,  abdomen,  scrotum,  thighs,
were  not  only  covered  with  raised  crusts,  discharging  a  thick,  yellowifsh
liquid,  but  these  had  partly  changed  into  wartlike  excrescences,  with  thick-
ened epidermis,  the  whole  intermediate  skin  being  of  an  erythematous  red-
ness, and  the  itching  fearful  (from  wearing  the  nut),'. — The  hands  looked
like  those  of  a  mulatto,  white,  with  black  spots  (from  applying  the  juice),'".
— Many  little  boils  upon  the  hairy  scalp  of  the  size  of  a  flaxseed  ;  they
feel  sore  when  touched  or  scratched,^ — [570,]  Painless  pimples,  with  red
areolae,  at  the  top  of  the  left  temple  (after  nine  hours),*. — Rough,  exfoliat-
ing, herpes-like  skin  around  the  mouth,  with  crawling-itching,*. — In  the
evening,  in  bed,  heat  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  with  burning-itching
and  irritation,  such  as  arises  from  much  scratching ;  after  scratching,  the
burning  increases,'. — Sensation  as  of  burning  on  the  skin  here  and  there,
which  induces  one  to  scratch,  and  which  passes  off  by  scratching,*. — Burn-
ing and  stinging  of  the  tetters,  which  had  itched  before,'. — The  burning
changes  to  an  extremely  painful  itching,  combined  with  stitching,  like  the
stings  of  insects  (fourth  day),'". — Such  a  fearful  itching  in  the  swollen  parts,
that  he  could  not  refrain  from  scratching  the  skin  sore  in  several  places,'".
— Extremely  disagreeable  itching,  forcing  him  to  scratch,  even  when  in
company  (from  wearing  the  nut),". — Burning-itching  at  the  one  place,  in-


326  ANACARDIUM.

creased  by  scratching/. — Corrosively  stinging  itching  upon  the  body  here
and  there,  especially  upon  the  back  and  thighs,  with  desire  to  scratch;
scratching  relieves  ibr  a  short  time,^ — [580.]  General  voluptuous  itching
over  the  whole  body,  which  spreads  still  more  by  scratching,^ — Desire  to
scratch,  without  itching,  in  many  places;  after  scratching  it  immediately
disappears,'.^ — The  itching  showed  itseli'  especially  in  the  evening,  and
when  he  went  to  bed,'". — The  cutaneous  irritation  was  accompanied  with
feverishness,  loss  of  appetite,  and  constipation,'. — Itching  of  the  forehead,'.
— Violent  itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,'. — Pimples,  with  red  areolae,  at  the
angle  of  the  right  wing  of  the  nose,*. — Red  pustules  on  the  septum,  in  the
right  nostril,  with  soreness  when  touched, I — White,  scaly  herpes  on  the
right  cheek,  close  by  the  upper  lip  (after  four  hours),". — Small  blisters  on
chin,  discharging  liquid  when  broken,'". — [590.]  Suppuration  and  painful-
ness  of  a  place  under  the  chin,  where  thei'e  was  a  boil  two  years  before,*. —
Painful  vesicles  in  the  mouth,'. — Itching  and  tickling  in  both  axillse,  forc-
ing him  to  rub  (after  one-quarter  of  an  hour),*. — The  hands,  even  the  palms
of  the  hands,  are  covered  with  warts,'. — Small  blisters  on  the  backs  of  the
hands,'". — Pustules  upon  the  index-finger,  with  red  ar.eolse,  and  a  stinging
sort  of  voluptuous  itching,  which  spreads  into  the  whole  of  the  palm ;  the
itching  forces  one  to  press  and  squeeze ;  red  and  white  lymph,  and  afterwards
a  scurf  appear,  beneath  which  is  formed  a  plug  of  pus ;  in  the  evening,  a
drawing,  sore  pain  in  the  ulcer ;  it  lasts  eight  days,*. — On  the  side  of  the
left  index-finger  a  pimple,  which  opens  on  the  day  following,  and  then
passes  off,  is  formed,  after  nightly  itching  in  the  hollow  of  the  hand  and
between  the  fingers  ;  violent  friction  relieves  without  removing  it,*. — Itch-
ing eruption  around  the  knees,  as  far  as  the  calves,'. — Itching,  with  scratch-
ing, as  if  rubbed  with  a  woollen  cloth,  upon  the  back  of  the  foot  (after  six
hours),^.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — After  a  meal,  sleepy,  and  indisposed  to  work,'.
— [600.]  After  dinner,  irresistible  desire  to  sleep,^. — Sleepiness  and  weari-
ness in  the  afternoon,  when  sitting  or  reading,  as  if  he  had  exerted  himself
too  much  by  mental  or  bodily  efforts  (after  three  hours),". — Tired  and
sleepy  in  the  evening  sooner  than  usual ;  early  in  the  morning  he  would
like  to  stay  in  bed  and  sleep  on  ;  also,  after  dinner,  he  would  like  to  take
a  nap,*. — Deep  and  sound  sleep  at  night ;  he  can  scarcely  arouse  himself
early  in  the  morning,'. — Sound  sleep  until  9  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  (first
night),'. — Slumber,  day  and  night,  with  great  heat  and  thirst,  with  a  skin
which  feels  hot,  and  with  grumbling  and  anxious  sighing  when  asleep,'. —
Constant  stupor,  without  dreams  ;  after  waking  he  is  quite  stupid  ;  the  skin
feels  frequently  hot,  with  red  cheeks  and  cold  forehead,  although  he  com-
plains of  heat  in  the  head ;  at  the  same  time  violent  thirst,  and  sore,  pain-
ful dryness  in  the  throat,'. — Light  sleep,  with  frequent  waking,'. — Could
not  sleep  well  at  night  on  account  of  the  itching,'". — He  feels  so  uneasy,
that  he  can  scarcely  sleep  a  little,  every  other  night,'. — [610.]  Uneasy
sleep  at  night,  with  frequent  tossing  about;  his  head  lay  either  too  high  or
too  low,  which  caused  a  sensation  of  confusion,'.—- At  night,  he  is  often
awake  for  half  hours  ;  in  the  intermediate  periods  he  enjoys  a  sound  and
refreshing  sleep,'. — He  is  without  sleep  at  night  until  2  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing; he  was  constantly  obliged  to  shift  his  position  (second  night),'.—
Nights  totally  sleepless  (from  wearing  the  nut),'. — He  screams  anxiously
when  asleep,'. — Twitches  of  the  mouth  and  fingers  when  asleep,'. — After
waking,  early  in  the  morning,  anxiety  drives  him  out  of  bed,'. — Starlings,
as  if  from  fright,  when  lying  in  bed  awake,  in  the  evening  (after  fifteen


ANACARDIUM.  327

and  sixteen  hours),^ — He  lies  in  a  dreamy  state  night  and  day,  without
sleeping,  full  of  anxious  thoughts  about  his  daily  business,^ — Vivid  dreams,
accompanied  by  great  mental  exertion ;  this  causes  a  bruised  headache  on
waking,'. — [620.]  Vivid  dreams  at  night,  which  seemed  to  him,  during  the
day,  as  if  the  things  dreamed  of  had  really  happened  ;  first  day,  it  seemed
a  long  time  ago ;  the  following  days,  as  if  they  had  just  happened,\ —  Vivid
dreams  about  old  events,'. — His  nightly  dreams  are  mixed  with  the  plans
he  had  made,^ — He  dreams  that  he  has  to  preach  without  having  com-
mitted his  sermon ;  this  induces  a  state  of  anxious  meditation,  without
being  able  to  accomplish  it,*. — Anxious  dreams,  full  of  danger,'. — Dreams
about  fire,  the  sleep  being  otherwise  sound,*. — Anxious  dreams  about  fire,'.
— He  dreams  that  he  smells  tinder  and  sulphur ;  on  waking  up  the  illusion
continues,'. — He  dreams  that  his  face  is  covered  with  white,  ugly  pustules
(after  twenty-one  hours),^ — She  is  dreaming  about  the  loathsome  diseases
of  others,'. — [630.]  Dreams  about  dead  bodies,  about  a  near  tomb,  or  a
steep  precipice,'.

Fever. — Sensation  as  if  he  would  feel  cold,  momentary,  frequent,*. —
Continual  chilliness,  even  in  a  warm  room,*. — Chilliness  for  several  minutes,
after  dinner  (first  day),'. — Chilliness  and  want  of  appetite,*. — Chills  over
the  whole  body ;  he  feels  warm  only  in  the  sun,*. — Shivering  over  the
whole  body,  as  if  he  had  caught  cold  in  the  wet,".— Shivering  over  the
whole  body,  with  heat  in  the  face,  without  any  thirst,  in  any  position  of
the  body  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),".— Repeated  icy  cold  creepings,*. —
Shivering  in  the  whole  back,  as  from  cold  water  being  thrown  upon  the
person,". — [640.]  Chilliness  of  the  limbs,  early  in  the  morning,  for  a
couple  of  hours,  which  causes  him  to  tremble,*. — Feeling  of  chilliness  of
the  hands  and  feet,^. — External  heat,  with  great  thirst,  and  dry,  burnt
lips,'. — Internal  heat  in  the  evening  for  two  hours,  with  cold  sweat  over
and  over,  especially  in  the  head,  accompanied  by  short  breath,  thirst,  and
weakness  in  the  abdomen  and  knees,  even  unto  falling,'. — He  complains
of  feeling  great  heat,  without  the  skin,  however,  feeling  hot  (after  ten
days),'. — Great  heat,  especially  in  the  night,  with  violent  thirst,  without
sweat,  so  that  he  cannot  endure  this  condition,'. — Feeling  of  heat,  and  heat
in  the  face  and  palms,  without  thirst,^ — Heat  over  the  whole  body ;  he,
nevertheless,  complains  of  chilliness,'. — Great,  feverish  uneasiness  in  the
afternoon,  such  as  is  felt  during  a  cold,  accompanied  by  faintness,  and
tremor  of  the  lirabs,^ — Great  heat  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with
thirst,  sweat,  and  hot  breath;  however,  he  complains  of  chilliness,  which
causes  him  to  shake ;  the  feet,  which  were  formerly  sweaty,  feel  cold,'. —
[650.]  Quickly  passing  heat  in  the  face  and  brain,  in  the  afternoon,  with
redness  of  the  cheeks  (after  eight  hours),^ — After  supper,  heat,  which
spreads  quickly  over  the  face,  without  thirst  or  chilliness  (after  twelve
hours) ;  thirst  comes  on  in  half  an  hour,". — Heat  in  the  face,  with  nausea
and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,  every  afternoon  at  4  o'clock ;  she  is
obliged  to  lie  down ;  eating  relieves,'. — The  skin  over  the  whole  body  is
moist,  the  windows  being  open,  and  the  temperature  of  the  rest  of  the  body
being  moderate,'. — Night-sweats,'. — Frequent  waking  up  from  sleep,  with
general  sweat  (after  nineteen  hours),". — At  night,  he  sweats  on  the  chest
and  abdomen,'. — Clammy  sweat  in  the  palms,  most  in  the  left  hand,'.

Conditions. — Aggravations. — {Morning),  Early,  after  sleep,  ina-
bility to  comprehend,  etc.;  early,  after  rising,  head  confused,  etc.;  on
waking,  pressure  in  forehead ;  when  walking,  tearing  in  eyeballs,  etc. ;
early,  when  rising,  smell  before  nose,  etc. ;  early,  empty  eructations  ;  early,


328  ANACARDIUM.

much  nausea;  early,  before  breakfast,  frequent,  clear,  watery  urine  ;  early,
after  waking,  sexual  desire,  etc. ;  early,  cough ;  early,  on  waking,  stiffness
of  right  side  of  neck ;  early,  in  bed,  pain  in  heel ;  early,  cold  feet ;  early,
when  lying  quietly  in  bed,  briiised  feeling  in  all  the  bones,  etc. ;  early,  after
waking,  anxiety ;  early,  chilliness  of  limbs. — (Forenoon),  Hypochondriac,
etc.;  dryness  of  throat;  intestines  painful;  uneasiness  iu  chest. — {After-
noon), Short  cough  ;  pain  in  muscles  of  upper  arm  ;  while  sitting  or  read-
ing, sleepiness,  etc. ;  feverish  uneasiness,  etc. ;  heat  in  face,  etc. ;  4  o'clock,
heat  in  face,  etc. — (  Toward  evening),  Violent  nausea,  etc. — (Evening),
Anxiety,  etc. ;  9  to  10  o'clock,  excitement  of  the  fancy,  etc. ;  grinding  head-
ache ;  dimness  of  the  eyes ;  severe  coryza  ;  pain  in  lower  jaw  ;  10  o'clock,
pain  in  hollow  tooth  ;  in  bed,  severe  cough  ;  pain  in  muscles  of  upper  arm  ;
after  lying  down,  tearing  in  right  thumb  ;  drawing  pain  in  ulcer  ;  burning-
itching  in  thighs;  sweats  considerably;  iu  bed,  heat  of  skin,  etc.;  itching;
pain  in  the  ulcer;  internal  heat. — (Night),  In  bed,  teeth  feel  longer,  etc.;
diarrhoea;  cough,  etc.;  in  bed,  pain  in  forearm,  etc.;  cramp  in  the  legs;
in  bed,  tightness  in  calf;  great  heat;  sweats;  sweats  on  chest  and  abdo-
men.— (Walking  in  open  air),  Pressure,  etc.,  in  pit  of  stomach;  pain  in
muscles  of  upper  arm  ;  pressure  in  bend  of  left  elbow  ;  cramp  of  the  calf. —
(  When  asleep),  Twitches  of  the  mouth  and  fingers. — ( Going  to  bed).  Itch-
ing.— {Bending  body  backward),  Intestines  painful. — (Bending  knee),  While
sitting,  drawing  in  knee. — (Bending  head  backwards).  Shoots,  etc.,  in  occi-
put, etc. — (Bending  arms  back).  Cracking  in  the  joints,  etc. — (Biting  teeth
together),  Pain  in  the  ears. — {Breathing),  Stitch  from  temples  into  forehead;
pressure  below  navel ;  pinching  contraction  near  navel ;  stitches  on  the  left
side  of  the  prsecordial  region  ;  stitches  in  the  prcBCordial  region. — (Breathing
deeply).  Pain  on  top  of  head. — (After  slight  breakfast),  Pressure  in  region
of  stomach,  etc. — (Contact  of  part  with  open  air),  Pain  iu  a  lower  incisor. —
(Contact  of  part  with  tongue).  Pain  in  a  lower  incisor. — (Coughing),  Pain  in
top  of  head. — (After  dinner).  Heat  in  face,  etc.;  eructations;  inflation  of
abdomen  ;  violent  cough  ;  desire  to  sleep ;  chilliness. — (After  some  bodily
effort).  Perceives  pulse  beating  in  arms,  etc. — (After  an  embrace).  Itching
of  the  anus. — (During  expiration),  Oppression  of  chest. — (During  and  after
expulsion  of  faeces).  Pressure  in  abdominal  muscles. — (Extending  arms).
Lancinating  tension  in  arms. — (Extending  leg  in  walking).  Pressure  at  the
leg. — (Setting  foot  on  ground).  Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  tarsal  joint. — (In-
spiring), Btitches  in  hypochondria;  pressure  in  abdominal  muscles;  sore-
ness, etc.,  in  chest. — (Jnspiring  and  expiring),  Pricking  at  pit  of  stomach. —
(Lifting  the  arm),  Pain  in  stomach.^ — (Lifting  foot  high).  Dull  pain  above
knee. — (After  liquids).  Eructations. — (Looking  long  at  one  object).  Pressure
upon  the  eyes,  etc. — (Lying  on  one  side).  At  night,  arms  feel  bruised. —
(Lying  in  bed,  in  an  uncomfortable  position).  Confusion  of  the  head. —
(During  hard  labor),  Tearing  headache. — (During  a  meal),  Pressure  near
the  pit  of  the  stomach. — (After  a  meal),  Heat  in  the  face,  etc.;  roughness
of  the  throat,  etc. ;  great  appetite,  etc. ;  shaking  in  pit  of  stomach  at  every
step ;  ])ressure,  etc.,  in  pit  of  stomach ;  pressure  at  stomach;  pressure  in
region  of  liver;  pressure  below  navel ;  flatus  moves  about  in  abdomen;
hypochondriac  dejection,  etc. ;  urging  to  stool ;  short,  hacking  cough,  etc.;
short  breath  ;  when  standing,  weak  in  the  knees ;  sleepy,  etc. — Qlotion),
Stiffness  of  right  side  of  neck  ;  fibres  seem  put  upon  the  stretch  too  much,
etc. ;  headache. — (Moving  the  hand).  Simple  pain  in  palm. — (Moving  head
quickly,  after  keeping  still).  Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck. — (Moving
part  while  sitting),  Cracking  in  hip-joint. — (Moving  trunk,  while  dtiing),


A^ACARDIUM— ANAGALLIS.  329

Pain  over  right  hip. — {Playing  piano),  Heaviness,  etc.,  of  body. — (Pressure),
Pressure  on  left  forearm. — {Raising  one's  self  while  sitting),  Stiffness  in  the
back. — {Raising  arm),  Twitching  sensation  in  the  pectoral  muscle. — {Re-
flection  and  intellectual  labor).  Pressure  at  stomach. — {Rest),  Pressive
scratching  upon  bone  of  forearm. — {Rising  from  seat).  Pain  over  hight  hip.
— {Slight  rubbing),  Bleeding  of  the  gums. — {Scratching),  Burning  of  skin ;
burning,  itching  of  sore  places. — {After  the  siesta).  Continual  indolence. —
((S'iWijtg'),  Short  breathing  ;  pressure  on  chest ;  uneasiness  in  thighs  ;  draw-
ing pain  above  knees ;  painful  uneasiness  around  knees ;  drawing  at  inner
surface  of  knees ;  legs  totter  ;  uneasiness  in  legs;  restlessness  in  legs  ;  draw-
ing downward  in  legs;  pain  upon  left  tibia;  burning  in  soles. — {Sitting
dowii),Va.in  in  tarsal  articulation. — (Standing),  DrsLViing  over  malleolus;
tearing  across  the  roots  of  the  toes ;  uneasiness  in  lower  extremities. —
{During  stool),  Pinching  in.  the  abdomen. — {After  stool),  Yawning  and
eructations. — {Stooping),  Vertigo,  etc.;  tearing  on  left  side  of  chest;  crack-
ing in  cervical  vertebras. — {Long  stooping).  Severe  pain  in  knees,  etc. —
{After  supper).  Heat  over  face,  etc. — {Swallowing),  Pain  in  ear. — {Talking),
Attacks  of  cough. — {After  smoking  tobacco).  Bitter  taste  in  mouth. — ( Tread-
ing), Stitches  below  right  knee. — {Turning  the  body),  V&in  in  stomach. —
( Turning  head  to  painfid  side),  Stiffness  of  right  side  of  neck. — (  On  being
touched).  Pain  in  bones. — {Walking),  Anxiety;  vertigo;  in  afternoon,  gid-
diness; pressure  in  forehead;  pressure,  etc. ;  pain  below  pit  of  stomach;
stitches  on  left  side  of  prsecordial  region ;  heaviness  in  left  arm  and  leg ;
weakness  above  knees,  etc. ;  pressure,  etc.,  at  inside  of  knee ;  drawing,  etc.,
in  legs  ;  painful  tightness  in  the  calf;  feet  become  cold  ;  panting,  languish-
ing condition,  etc.;  worn  out,  etc. — {Going  upstairs),  Vertigo. — {Taking
something  warm  in  mouth).  Toothache. — (  Writing),  Pain  in  muscles  of  right
forearm.

Amelioration. — {Afternoon),  More  cheerfiA;  memory  better;  speech
firmer,  etc. — {Toward  evening).  Pressure  inward,  etc.,  in  both  temples,  etc.
— (Evening),  In  bed,  pain  in  head ;  can  walk  fast,  and  a  good  deal. —
{FaUing  asleep).  Pain  in  head. — {Sitting  bent).  Stiffness  in  back. — {During
dinner),  Temporar}^  disappearance  of  almost  all  symptoms. — {Eating),
Dryness  of  throat;  heat  in  face,  etc. — {Drawing  leg  in),  Heaviness  of  the
\\mh. —{Extending  foot),  ^QBse  of  heaviness  in  leg. — {Violent  friction).  Itch-
ing in  hollow  of  hand. — {During  a  meal),  Grinding  in  forepart  of  head,  etc.
— {After  a  meal).  Pressure,  etc.,  in  pit  of  stomach. — {Motion),  Pain  in  mus-
cles of  left  thumb. — (  Constant  motion  of  head).  Stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck.
— {Strong  pressure  and  friction),  Tearing  in  right  thumb. — {Pressure  on
forehead),  Paiu  in  forehead. — {Resting  head  upon  something  and  closing  eyes) ,
Affords  feeling  of  comfort. — -{Rising),  Bruised  feeling  in  all  the  bones. —
{Rubbing),  Itching,  pricking  below  shoulders. — {Scratching),  Burning  of
the  skin  ;  itching  of  the  body ;  desire  to  scratch  disappears. — {Sitting),
Feels  well. — {Stooping),  Paiu  in  stomach. — {Stretching  leg).  Drawing  in  left
knee. — {Touch),  Pain  in  muscles  of  left  thumb. — {Walking),  Restlessness
in  legs. — {Continuing  to  walk).  Faint  feeling. — {Weeping),  Oppression  of
chest.

ANAGALLIS.

A.  arvensis,  L.  Nat.  order,  Primulacese.  Common  names.  Scarlet  pim-
pernel; weather-glass.  Preparation  (from  the  red-flowered  variety),  Tinc-
ture.


330  ANAGALLIS— ANANTHERUM.

Authority. Schr^ter,  N.  A.,  3,  3,  174.

Mind. — Lively ;  more  gay  than  usual,  with  great  joy ;  he  attends  to
his  business,  and  is  contented  with  himself  (first  hours). — Great  flow  of
spirits  for  several  days ;  he  takes  pleasure  in  everything ;  on  account  of
very  joyful  feelings,  without  thinking  of  anything  in  particular,  he  cannot
collect  his  thoughts  during  a  sermon. — He  thinks  of  everything ;  his  mind
is  vigorous  (first  hour).

Sead. — Heat  rising  to  the  head,  and  sensation  of  slight  sweat  on  the
forehead,  followed  by  a  pressive  sticking  in  the  eyeballs,  and  a  tickling
prickling  in  the  urethra,  inclining  him  to  coition  (a  quarter  of  an  hour). —
Spasmodic  stitches  in  both  temples,  extending  thence  to  the  eyes,  in  the
middle  of  which  it  presses  (four  hours). — Pressive  headache  in  the  fore-
head, after  the  blowing  of  cold  air  on  him  (five  hours).

Euvs. — Twinges  in  the  right  ear  follow,  pressure  in  the  eyes  (four
hours).

Throat. — Sensation  of  dryness,  with  some  scraping  in  the  throat  (first
evening).

Stool. — Desire  for  stool  (a  quarter  of  an  hour). — [10.]  Stool  well  di-
gested.— Itching  in  the  rectum,  and  some  pressure  in  the  loins,  as  with  hsem-
orrhoidal  troubles  (first  day).

JTrinavy  Orf/ans. — On  urinating,  especially  in  the  morning,  a
burning  pain  in  the  urethra ;  the  orifice  seems  agglutinated,  and  a  violent
pressure  is  required  before  the  urine  passes,  which  it  does  in  two,  three,  or
several  streams  (first  day). — A  tickling  prickling  along  the  urethra,  espe-
cially at  the  orifice,  neither  pleasant  (since  it  is  half  painful)  nor  unpleas-
ant, since  it  inclines  to  coition  (a  quarter  of  an  hour). — Desire  for  coition
(first  and  second  days). — With  the  erection  before  coition,  a  burning  tensive
pain  in  the  urethra ;  disappears  on  coition  (third  day).

Chest, — A  kind  of  anxiety  in  the  chest  (first  evening). — Suddenly,  a
feeling  as  if,  internally  in  the  chest,  he  were  struck  with  a  cushion  full  of
pins  (second  day).

TTpjjer  Extremities. — A  tensive  drawing  from  the  left  shoulder  to
the  neck,  which,  after  it  had  entirely  disappeared,  returned  if  he  completely
raised  the  left  arm  and  forcibly  extended  it  downward  (first  day). — On
cutting  with  the  shears,  a  feeling  of  a  cramp  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb,
which  becomes  a  dull  drawing ;  when  it  leaves  this  place,  it  appears  in  the
left  thumb  (first  evening). — [20.]  In  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  thumb,  a
dull  drawing  pain,  sometimes  like  a  tearing,  mostly  in  the  right  hand,  at
times  also  in  the  left  hand,  returning  at  uncertain  times  (first  day).

Sleep. — Sleep  bad,  restless ;  falls  asleep  late,  wakes  early,  and  has  not
slept  enough  in  the  morning  (firet  night).

Generalities.— rTremhVmg,  like  shivering  (first  evening). — Violent
trembling  of  the  heart,  with  trembling  and  shivering  of  the  whole  body,
both  before  and  with  a  dull  pain  in  a  hollow  tooth,  with  anxiety  in  the
chest  (first  evening,  in  bed).


ANANTHERUM.

Andropogon muricatus, Retz. (Anantherum muricatum.) Common
names,  Vetiver  or  Viti-vayr. Nat.  order,  Graminese.
Authority. — Houat  (Nouvelles  Doun^e,  2d  series,  p.  119).
Mind. — Gay  humor,  with  disposition  to  laugh  and  sing.— Sadness  and


ANANTHERUM.  331

restlessness,  with  fear  of  death  and  of  the  future. — Sheds  tears  easily. — ■
Hypochondria,  with  dread  of  society  ;  he  seeks  solitude  and  obscurity  ;  does
not  want  to  see  or  hear  anything. — Restless,  suspicious,  and  very  irritable
character,  or  apathetic  and  as  if  besotted. — Disposition  to  anger,  with  de-
sire to  strike  and  destroy. — Quarrelsome  and  contrary  humor,  but  after
being  angry  he  often  regrets  what  he  has  done. — Ungovernable  jealousy  ;
everything  causes  jealousy. — Foolish  joy  and  absurd  complacency. — [10.]
Frequent  changes  in  his  mood  and  turn  of  thought,  even  to  idiotism. — A  be-
sotted condition,  like  drunkenness,  in  which  he  forgets  even  to  eat  and
drink. — A  great  deal  of  self-esteem ;  great  satisfaction  with  himself  and
his  labor ;  internal  complacency,  with  smiles. — Is  constantly  inclined  to
weep,  even  about  lively  things,  with  reveries  and  hallucinations. — Ardent
desire  to  travel. — Blunted  intellect  and  loss  of  memory. — Feverish  haste  in
all  his  actions. — Persistent  /ear  of  death  during  all  his  sufferings. — Mono^
mania,  as  for  rowing  about  in  a  boat,  dressing  or  walking  out  in  a  gro-
tesque manner,  always  frequenting  the  same  places  and  doing  the  same
things. — Frequent  delirium,  idiocy,  mental  alienation.

Head. — [20.]  Heat  of  the  head,  with  vertigo. — Vertigo,  with  debility
and  stupidity  of  the  head.— Head  excessively  heavy,  with  burning  and
pulsative  pains. — ^Vertigo  and  dulness,  with  cerebral  congestion,  red  face,
and  tendency  to  fall  backwards. — Vertigo  and  dulness,  with  burning  stitch-
ing pains  in  the  head,  and  sensation  as  if  it  was  crushed. — Vertigo,  with
feeling  of  drunkenness  and  staggering  gait. — Vertigo^  with  confusion  of
sight  and  great  heaviness  of  the  head. — Vertigo,  with  debility  in  the  back
and  lower  extremities,  and  inability  to  remain  upright. — Vertigo,  with  heat
and  heaviness  of  the  head,  perturbation  of  ideas  and  senses. — Vertigo,  in  all
positions,  aggravated  especially  by  motion  and  strong  air.^[30.]  Heaviness
and  weakness  of  the  h  ead,  with  pressure  in  the  sinciput. — Sensation  as  if  some-
thing turned  round  in  the  head,  with  pains  in  the  stomach,  great  appetite,
colic,  venereal  desire;  chills  and  shaking,  notwithstanding  the  great  heat;
depression  or  very  great  cheerfulness  (very  persistent  symptom). — Great  heat
of  the  head,  with  desire  to  bathe  it  with  cold  water. — Sensation  as  if  he  had
water  in  the  head,  especially  in  walking,  with  confusion  of  the  cerebral
faculties  and  great  headache. — Burning,  lancinating,  pulsating  headache,
principally  on  the  right  side,  in  the  forehead  and  temple,  with  nausea,  vom-
iting, and  great  heaviness  of  the  eyes. — Head  excessively  weak  and  heavy,
so  that  he  cannot  keep  it  up,  and  lets  it  drop  on  one  side  or  the  other. —
Sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  laid  bare,  and  currents  of  cold  air  passed
over  it. — Sensation  as  if  heavy  objects  and  balls  moved  about  in  the  head,
especially  at  night  and  when  he  lies  on  the  right  side. — Cramps  and  cold
chill  in  the  head,  with  confusion  of  ideas.- — Pressive  and  lancinating  head-
ache, accompanied  by  pains,  as  from  hammering  in.  the  head. — [40.]  Ver-
tigo, with  contraction  and  digging  in  the  inner  cauthi  of  the  eyes,  extend-
ing into  the  brain. — Sensation  as  if  the  head  had  struck  against  a  stone  and
been  crushed. — Neuralgic  pains  in  the  temples,  with  sensation  as  if  there
were  iron  points  there. — Lancinating,  cramplike,  and  dilating  pains  in  the
temples,  with  desire  to  compress  them  forcibly. — Pulsative  and  lancinating
.  pains  in  the  brain,  as  if  it  were  pricked  every  moment. — Pains  which  pierce
the  brain  like  steel  arrows,  from  the  forehead  to  the  nape  of  the  neck. — De-
sire to  lean  the  head  against  something  hard  and  cold. — Pressure  on  the  top
of  the  head,  with  sensation  as  if  the  skull  were  crushed. — Pains  as  if  the
brain  were  bruised  and  wounded. — Pains  in  the  head,  as  if  there  were  ab-
scesses and  tubercles  in  the  brain,  with  lancinating,  burning,  and  cramp-


332  ANANTHERUM.

like  pains  in  raany  places  in  the  head,  and  a  stupefied  condition. — [50,]
Dull  pains  in  the  head,  torpor  of  the  brain,  desire  for  rest,  and  nausea. —
Inflammation  of  the  brain,  with  heat,  as  if  he  had  live  coals  in  the  head. —
Neuralgic  and  spasmodic  pains  in  the  head,  producing  fits  of  craziness. —
Pressive  and  constrictive  pains  in  the  head,  as  if  it  were  compressed  by  an
iron  band. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  great  heat,  dizziness,  loss
of  consciousness,  and  epistaxis. — Headache  worse  in  the  afternoon  and  even-
ing ;  also  from  noise,  motion,  and  light. — All  pains  in  other  parts  seem  to
produce  in  the  head  congestion,  cramps,  and  stitches. — The  headaches  are
almost  always  accompanied  by  burning  and  pulsative  pains. — Spasmodic
twitchings  in  the  head,  pulling  it  from  one  side  to  the  other. — Nervous
trembling  of  the  head. — [60.]  Itching  and  excessive  heat  in  the  head,  ex-
tending to  the  face. — Herpes  and  ulcers  on  the  hairy  scalp,  with  large  thick
humid  scabs  and  much  prurigo. — Large  tumors,  like  lupia,  suppurate,  and
form  ulcers  on  the  head. — Growths  like  warts  and  lupia  on  the  eyebrows.
— Protuberances,  like  exostoses,  on  the  sinciput  and  temples. — Eedness,
itching,  excoriations,  obstinate,  scabby  herpes  on  the  forehead.

ISi/es, — Heat  and  burning  in  the  eyes. — Pressure  and  painful  stitches
in  the  eyes. — The  eyes  enlarged,  red,  inflamed,  with  frequent  dimness  of
vision  and  appearance  of  sparks,  as  if  they  were  smartly  struck  or  com-
pressed.— Very  great  photophobia;  light  produces  a  kind  of  itching  in  the
eyes. — [70.]  Swelling  and  pains  as  if  an  abscess  would  form  in  the  right  eye.
■ — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  eyes,  which  remain  turned  upwards. — Sen-
sation of  roughness  and  excoriation  of  the  eyes,  especially  when  moving
the  eyelids. — Yellowness  of  the  sclerotica. — Pupils  strongly  dilated  ;  he  has
to  wink  with  his  eyes  in  order  to  distinguish  objects. — Congestion  of  blood
to  the  eyes,  with  tickling,  pricking,  and  pains  as  from  rheumatism  in  the
eyeballs. — The  slightest  local  application  aggravates  the  pains  in  the  eyes.
— Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  eyelids. — Ulceration  of  the  margin  of
the  eyelids,  with  inability  to  separate  them. — The  eyelids  are  inverted,  and
as  if  scarified. ^ — [80.]  Abundant  secretion  of  mucus,  and  considerable
lachrymation,  especially  in  the  open  air. — Trembling  of  the  lids. — Swelling
and  ulceration  of  the  lachrymal  glands. — Amaurotic  weakness  of  the  eyes.
— Neuralgic  and  rheumatic  pains  in  the  orbits,  with  sensation  as  if  the
frontal  bone  were  fractured. — Intense  and  burning  pains  in  the  eyes,  with
spasms  and  alteration  of  their  axis. — Dull,  dim,  wild,  wandering  eyes,  with-
out expression.  —  Very  prominent  or  deeply  sunken  eyes. — Contracted
pupils. — Objects  appear  dark  and  vacillating,  red  or  covered  by  a  grayish
cloud. — [90.]  The  images  of  objects  are  retained  before  the  vision  in  an  in-
convenient and  unpleasant  manuer. — Black  points,  muscse  volitantes,  and
fiery  circles  before  the  eyes. — Everything  seems  excessively  bright  and  shin-
ing.— Candlelight  appears  diffused,  and  the  letters  run  together  in  reading. —
Dimness  of  vision,  as  if  from  watery  vapors  before  the  eyes. — Inclination
to  wink,  and  to  pass  the  hand  frequently  over  the  eyes,  as  if  to  remove  a
veil  from  before  them. — Sensation  of  a  great  weight  on  the  eyelids,  which
keeps  them  closed. — Pressure  on  the  eyes  as  if  one  were  going  to  sleep,  or
even  into  a  swoon. — Spasmodic  motions  of  the  pupil,  which  obscure  the
sight  at  intervals.

Nose. — Heaviness  and  stoppage  of  the  nose. — [100,]  Stitches  in  the
nose,  with  a  crushing  sensation  at  its  root. — The  air  which  passes  through
the  nostrils  seems  icy  cold. — Great  dryness  and  heat  in  the  nose,  with  fre-
quent and  very  painful  sneezing. — Ulcers  in  the  nostrils,  with  epistaxis. —
Very  frequent  epistaxis. — Fluent  coryza,  with  pressive  pains  in  the  head


ANANTHERUM.  333

and  root  of  the  nose;  burning  in  the  nostrils;  lachrymation  and  sneezing,
as  if  he  had  snuffed  up  pepper  or  tobacco. — Abundant  discharge  from  the
nose  of  purulent,  greenish,  and  very  badly  smelling  matter. — Stitches  and
pulsations  in  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  nasal  hemorrhage. — Dry  or  fluent
coryza,  with  cerebral  torpor,  intoxication,  headache,  and  sensation  as  if  the
head  were  full  of  water. — Nasal  catarrh,  with  bronchitis. — [110.]  The  nose
is  enlarged  and  red. — Insupportable  tickling  in  the  nose,  with  violent  sneez-
ing as  soon  as  he  inhales  a  little  cold  air. — Inflammation  and  swelling  of
the  nasal  bones,  with  hammering  pains. — Boils  and  small  tumors,  like
lupia,  on  the  tip  of  the  nose. — Nose  cold,  pale,  and  pointed,  or  large  and
inflamed,  with  many  small  bloodvessels  visible  on  its  surface.

Ears. — Heat  in  the  interior  of  the  ears,  with  pulsation  and  sensation
as  if  there  were  abscesses  in  them. — Severe  digging  stitches  in  the  ears,
with  discharge  of  yellowish,  purulent  matter. — Very  copious  secretion  of
cerumen. — ^Heat,  and  smarting  in  the  lobes  of  the  ears. — Fissures  in  the
lobes  of  the  ears. — [120.]  Burning,  crusty  eruption,  with  inability  to  lie  on
them. — Attacks  of  deafness,  especially  in  the  evening  and  in  damp  weather.
— Paralytic  hardness  of  hearing. — After  listening  for  a  few  moments,  the
hearing  becomes  fatigued,  and  the  words  are  confused  and  indistinct. —
Noises,  murmurs,  and  hissing  in  the  ears. — He  hears  frequently  a  noise  as  of
waves  beating  against  the  shore,  with  a  deafening  sound,  which  prevents
him  from  hearing  a  word. — Sensation  as  if  he  had  dirt  in  his  ears,  or  a
spongy  substance  which  swells  up.

Face, — Face  yellowish,  or  red,  enlarged,  inflamed,  and  congested. —
Face  pale,  transparent,  and  white  as  wax. — Face  gray,  cold,  and  frozen-
looking,  and  paralyzed. — [130.]  Face  emaciated,  bluish,  cyanotic,  con-
tracted, shrunken,  with  hollow  eyes. — Face  discolored  like  that  of  a  drowned
person. — Deep,  red  face,  with  cerebral  congestion,  vertigo,  and  stupefac-
tion.— Itching  and  burning  in  the  cheeks,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were
excoriated. — Ulcers  and  scabs  on  the  face. — Red  spots  on  the  face,  as  if  it
had  been  painted  with  vermilion. — Small  pimples  on  the  face,  which  fre-
quently sting  as  from  needle-pricks. — Intense  scaly  herpes,  with  falling  off
of  the  eyebrows  and  beard. — Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  face,  with  closed-
up  eyes ;  fever,  delirium,  desire  to  expose  himself  to  the  air,  and  even  to
throw  himself  out  of  window,  as  from  the  effects  of  a  sunstroke. — Yellowish
pimples  and  pustulous  herpes  on  the  face. — Puffy  face,  with  tense  and
easily  ulcerated  skin. — [140.}  Subcutaneous  red  spots,  as  in  small-pox. —
Red  lumps  in  the  face,  as  from  congestion  of  blood. — Boils  and  abscesses  on
the  face. — Sensation  as  if  the  face  had  been  stung  by  insects. — Strongly
marked  red  or  yellow  spots  on  the  face. — The  skin  of  the  face  is  painful
and  as  if  excoriated,  after  shaving. — Swelling  of  the  cheek,  with  abscesses
on  the  gums. — Burning,  pulsative,  lancinating  pains  in  the  face. — Facial
neuralgia  from  the  eyebrows  to  the  chin,  with  distorted  features  and  grim-
aces.— Convulsive  movements  as  from  iic  douloureux,  or  trismus,  with  pains
in  the  lips  and  chin. — [150.]  Spasmodic  movements  of  the  facial  muscles,
with  involuntary  grimaces,  especially  on  the  left  side. — Itching  and  burn-
ing miliary  and  urticarious  eruptions  on  the  face. — Painful  swelling,  like
an  abscess,  on  the  right  maxillary  sinus. — Painful  shocks  in  difierent  parts
of  the  face. — Pain  in  the  facial  bones,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were  crushed
and  dislocated. — Ulcers  and  scabs  under  the  nose  and  on  the  chin. — The
jaws  are  spasmodically  clenched. — Convulsive  agitation  of  the  facial  mus-
cles, with  difficult  biting  and  mastication. — Great  weakness  of  the  facial
bones  and  teeth,  as  if  the  least  effort  would  fracture  them. — Sensation  as  if


334  ANANTHERUM.

the  lips  were  constantly  full  of  oil. — [160.]  Lips  enlarged  and  inflamed. —
Lips  covered  with  phlyctenae,  which  are  constantly  renewed. — Lips  enor-
mously swollen,  ulcerated,  everted,  of  a  bluish-yellow. — Ulcers,  especially
at  the  labial  commissures,  and  resembling  a  syphilitic  affection. — Lips  dry,
pinched,  and  contracted.

JHouth, — Lancinating,  digging,  and  drawing  pains  in  the  teeth,  with
sensation  as  if  they  were  forcibly  separated  from  each  other,  or  pulled  at
with  pincers  and  torn  out. — Constant  inclination  to  clench  the  teeth. — Sen-
sation of  cold  in  the  teeth,  with  heat  in  the  gums  and  the  whole  mouth. —
Burning  in  the  teeth,  gums,  and  lips,  as  if  they  were  calcined. — Sensation
of  uneasiness  and  pain  in  the  region  of  the  last  molars,  as  if  new  ones  were
coming  through. — [170.]  Pain  in  the  hollow  teeth,  especially  at  night,  in
cool  air,  and  when  eating,  with  very  bad  smell  from  the  mouth. — The  gums
swollen,  inflamed,  burning,  and  as  if  scorbutic. — Severe  pains  in  the  teeth,
with  cramps  in  the  whole  jaw,  especially  after  exposure  to  a  current  of  air.
— Gnashing  and  grinding  of  the  teeth,  they  crumble  and  break. — The
teeth  feel  as  if  longer  and  sharper. — Decay  of  the  teeth,  with  acute,  lan-
cinating strokes  in  their  roots. — Toothache,  with  sensation  as  if  the  jaws
were  broken. — Toothache,  aggravated  especially  in  the  afternoon,  evening,
and  night,  also  by  taking  anything  cold,  by  the  least  contact,  and  by
changes  of  weather. — Wine,  and  especially  cofiee,  aggravate  the  toothache
for  awhile. — The  teeth  are  loose  and  readily  fall  out. — [180.]  Pulsative,
lancinating,  and  distensive  pains  in  the  gums.; — Gum-boils,  with  swelling
of  the  cheeks  and  submaxillary  glands. — Mouth  burning  and  inflamed,  as
if  erysipelatous  and  excoriated. — Ulcers  like  aphthoe  or  thrush,  in  difierent
parts  of  the  mouth. — Exfoliation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  buccal
cavity.^Inflamed  palate,  with  very  painful  nodosities. — Itching  of  the
palate,  and  small  burning  pimples  there. — Fetid  breath. — Flow  of  thick
and  viscid  saliva,  with  bitter  mouth. — Frothy  slavering  at  the  mouth,  with
constant  desire  to  spit. — -[190.]  Very  painful  pimples  on  the  tongue,  with
itching  and  burning. — Tongue  inflamed,  and  enormously  swollen^  with  great
difiiculty  in  speaking. — Severe  pains  at  the  root  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were
cut  ofi". — Swelling  of  the  salivary  and  submaxillary  glands. — The  tongue
fissured,  lacerated,  and  as  if  cut  on  its  edges,  with  copious  salivation  and
debility,  as  if  from  the  efiects  of  mercury. — Grayish,  yellowish,  bloody  or
brickdust  coating  on  the  tongue. — Difficult  speech,  stammering.

Throat. — Inflammation  of  the  throat,  with  sensation  of  fulness  and
obstruction,  as  if  it  were  plugged. — Burning  in  the  throat,  as  if  it  were  full
of  mustard,  with  violent  and  convulsive  cough. — Inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  the  tonsils. — [200.]  Frequent  and  stubborn  abscesses  on  the  tonsils.
— Angina  with  almost  impossible  deglutition. — Raw  pains,  tumors,  and  a
great  deal  of  tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  great  difficulty  in  swal-
lowing even  the  saliva. — Debility  and  attacks  of  constriction  of  the  throat,
with  danger  of  suffocation. — Burning  and  stitches  in  the  throat,  with  con-
stant feeling  of  strangulation. — Sensation  as  if  he  had  a  burning  stick  in
the  throat,  reaching  down  into  the  stomaeh.^Liquids  pass  frequently  into
the  larynx  and  through  the  nasal  fosste,  with  violent,  jerking  cough. — Con-
siderable accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  granulations,  and
grayish  ulcers  like  false  membranes. — Inability  to  drink,  in  spite  of  great
thirst,  on  account  of  spasms  in  the  throat,  which  contracts  and  feels  tight
as  soon  as  he  hears  anything  said  about  water,  or  sees  shining  objects.—
Sensation,  sometimes  of  burning  heat,  sometimes  of  icy  coldness  in  the
cesophagus. — [210.]  Tickling  sensation,  as  if  some  live  thing  were  moving


ANANTHERUM.  335

about  in  his  oesophagus,  with  fits  of  suffocating  cough. — ^Ulcerated  spots  on
the  throat,  aggravated  by  cold.

Ttiste  and  Apjtetite. — Bitter  or  bloody  taste  in  the  mouth. — Taste
bitter,  acid,  and  sometimes  sweetish,  extending  into  the  stomach,  with
epigastric  burning  and  hunger  at  the  same  time. — Bitter,  bilious  taste. —
Flat  taste  of  the  food  ;  it  also  seems  frequently  too  salt,  or  overseasoned.
— Morbid  hunger  in  the  afternoon,  evening,  and  even  at  night,  when  he
wakes  up  to  eat. — Hunger  even  after  eating  ;  he  thinks  of  nothing  else. —
He  likes  everything,  except  what  is  insipid,  wateiy  or  sweet ;  prefers  salted
or  highly  seasoned  food. — Hunger,  as  if  he  had  fasted  a  long  time,  with
empty  feeling,  burning,  and  sensation,  as  if  he  had  a  tape-worm. — [220.]
Hunger,  with  excessive  weakness  which  seems  to  come  from  the  stomach. — •
Burning,  stitches,  and  roughness  in  the  CBsophagus. — Intense  hunger,  still
he  cannut  eat. — Hunger,  with  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  stomach  ;  even
the  little  he  eats  causes  clenching  of  the  teeth  and  contraction  of  the  throat.
— Contraction  of  the  stomach  and  chest,  so  that  he  can  take  nothing  and
almost  suffocates. — Burning,  unquenchable  thirst. — Desire  for  cold  water,
strong  liquors,  cider,  and  sour  drinks. — Love  of  strong  odors ;  desire  for
garlic,  laurel,  sweet  basil,  and  all  sorts  of  spices ;  he  even  longs  for  aro-
matic driuks. — Anorexia  ;  excessive  repugnance  to  all  food.

Stomach. — The  stomach  feels  full  and  as  if  ulcerated. — [230.]  Very
frequent  empty  eructations,  especially  after  eating  or  drinking. — Obstinate
and  i)ainful  eructation,  especially  after  eating  vegetables. — Regurgitations,
with  taste  of  the  food  or  of  saffron,  and  sometimes  acid  or  ammoniacal. —
Obstinate,  convulsive  hiccough. — Burning  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  on
fire. — Excessive  and  almost  continual  secretion  of  phlegm. — Much  secretion
of  phlegm,  especially  when  waking  in  the  morning,  before  eating,  when
walking,  and  sometimes  at  night. — Much  phlegm  is  formed,  with  nausea,
insipidity,  or  acidity,  and  heat  in  the  stomach. — Incessant  nausea- and  in-
clination to  vomit. — Vomiting  of  the  food  and  of  bile,  with  hunger  even
after  eating. — [240.]  Vomiting  of  food,  and  often  of  blood,  after  meals. — •
Vomiting  of  acrid,  burning  matter,  followed  by  bile  and  blood. — Vomiting,
with  horrible  pains  in  the  stomach. — Watery,  acid,  or  insipid,  and  sweet-
ish vomiting,  with  burning  and  stitches  in  the  stomach.— Vomiting  of  pure
blood,  as  if  from  the  rupture  of  a  bloodvessel  in  the  stomach. — Vomiting,
bilious  and  black. — Vomiting  mixed  with  bile,  blood,  or  water. — Watery
vomiting,  with  whitish  particles  in  it,  and  most  foul  eructations ;  stitches
and  cramps  in  the  stomach  and  extremities  ;  urging  to  stool,  and  very  liquid
diarrhoea ;  painful  icy  coldness  over  the  whole  body ;  excessive  thirst ;
pressure  and  constriction  in  the  epigastrium  ;  spasms  ;  agitation  ;  cold  per-
spiration, especially  on  the  head ;  a  state  like  intoxication,  prostration  and
emaciation. — Vomiting,  with  constant  dread  of  death. — It  seems  as  if  the
whole  force  of  the  organiism  was  concentrated  in  the  stomach  to  produce
an  infinity  of  suffering. — [250.]  Sensation  of  fulness  and  constriction  of
the  stomach,  with  total  want  of  appetite,  bitter  and  salty  taste. — Con-
tracted and  burning  stomach,  with  desire  to  vomit. — kSeusation  as  of  worms
moving  about  in  the  oesophagus  and  stomach. — Continual  contractions  and
cramps  in  the  stomach. — Food  passes  through  his  bowels  undigested,  almost
as  soon  as  eaten. — Bad  digestion,  with  painful  movements  of  the  ingesta
in  the  stomach,  without  power  to  expel  them  ;  great  headache ;  desire  to
vomit;  twisting  in  the  stomach,  and  feeling  of  intoxication. — Sensation  as
of  tumors,  holes,  or  sharp  pebbles  in  his  stomach. — Extreme  debility  com-
ing from  the  stomach,  and  which  can  in  no  way  be  relieved. — Stomach


336  ANANTHERUM.

painful  as  if  full  of  ulcers. — Painful,  impossible  digestion ;  he  vomits  food
just  as  it  was  when  taken  several  days  before. — [260,]  Contractive,  gnaw-
ing, and  tearing  pains  in  the  stomach,  as  if  caused  by  some  living  thing. —
Spasms  and  cramps  in  the  stomach,  hindering  respiration,  and  forcing  him
to  twist  and  cry  out. — Pains  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  torn,  cut,  and
perforated  in  several  places;  pains  which  leave  him  no  rest  day  or  night,
and  engross  him  entirely. — Pains  in  the  stomach,  with  continual  mental
irritability. — -Sensation  as  if  he  had  in  the  stomach  a  hard  tumor,  starting
from  the  pylorus,  extending  on  the  right  side  to  the  liver. — Burning,
tearing,  and  crampy  pains  in  the  stomach,  spreading  into  the  chest  and
right  hypochondrium. — Stitches  in  the  stomach  extending  into  the  chest
and  back. — Very  painful  pressure,  like  a  bar,  on  the  epigastrium,  with
short,  anxious  respiration. — Crampy  pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  extend-
ing to  the  back. — Spasms  of  the  stomach,  with  sensation  as  if  all  the  tho-
racic and  abdominal  viscera  were  contracted  and  reduced  in  volume ;  op-
pression, and  fear  of  choking. — [270.]  Very  painful  contractions  in  the
epigastric  region. — Nearly  all  the  stomach  symptoms  are  accompanied  by
headache. — Heaviness  and  distension  of  the  stomach,  as  if  full  of  water. —
Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  closed  by  a  bar. — Cramps  and  pains  in
the  stomach,  as  if  cut  with  a  knife,  or  struck  by  lightning. — Spasmodic
contractions  of  the  oesophagus  and  pylorus,  with  inability  to  swallow. —
Spasms  and  burning  in  the  stomach,  with  violent  colic,  so  that  he  has  to
bend  himself. — Digging,  tearing,  clawing,  and  gnawing  pains  in  the  stomach.
— Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  bitten  in  different  places,  and  the  intes-
tines pricked  and  cut. — Pains  in  the  stomach,  extending  to  the  liver  and
into  the  entire  chest. — [280.]  The  pains  in  the  stomach  are  worse  in  the
evening,  at  night,  after  eating,  by  movement,  excitement  of  feeling,  and
every  occupation. — Inclination  to  change  his  position  every  moment  to  ease
the  paths  in  the  stomach. — Inflammation  of  the  stomach,  with  fever,  con-
stipation, and  intense  hunger  and  thirst. — Pains  in  the  stomach,  with  cold
sweats  on  the  face  and  back.

Abdomen. — Sensation  of  heat  and  of  congestion  of  the  liver. —
Cramps  in  the  hepatic  region,  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  full  of  painful
tuberosities. — Pulsative,  burning,  and  digging  pains  in  the  region  of  the
liver. — Sensation  as  if  the  liver  were  pinched  and  scraped  in  different
places,  with  copious  secretion  of  bile. — Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the
liver,  as  if  caused  by  abscesses,  with  oedematous  swelling  of  the  belly,  and
even  of  the  whole  body;  prostration  ;  inability  to  move  without  groaning;
stool  hard,  difficult,  blackish,  brownish,  or  grayish  ;  skin  deep-yellow. —
Vomiting  of  bile  as  if  it  came  directly  from  the  liver. — [290.]  Sensation
of  hard  lumps,  as  if  there  were  concretions  in  the  liver. — Burning,  pulsat-
ing, and  lancinating  pains  in  the  region  of  the  spleen. — Sensation  as  if
there  were  foreign  bodies  in  the  spleen,  and  as  if  the  passage  of  the  blood
would  tear  it. — Cramps,  laucination,  and  digging  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,
with  loss  of  respiration. — Spleen  as  if  ulcerated  and  hypertrophied. — Burn-
ing in  the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  he  had  erysipelas. — Inflammation  and
swelling  of  the  abdomen,  which  is  very  painful. — Abdomen  inflated,  tense,
and  hard,  with  tympanitic  sound  on  percussion. — Colics,  cramps,  and  tear-
ing pains  iu  the  abdomen,  with  sensation  as  if  there  were  a  red-hot  iron  in
it. — Colic,  with  much  flatulence  as  soon  as  he  walks. — [300.]  Colic,  with
cramps  in  the  limbs,  icy  coldness,  and  choleraic  diarrhoea. — Sensation  as  if
the  bowels  were  excoriated  or  pulled  out. — Lancinating  and  crampy  pams
in  the  abdomen,  spreading  into  the  hypochondria  and  kidneys. — Colic  and


ANANTHERUM.  337

pains  iu  the  bowels,  as  if  they  were  gnawed  by  animals  ;  he  twists  about,  and
knows  not  what  position  to  take  for  relief — Sensation  as  if  he  had  a  tumor
in  the  transverse  colon,  and  thousands  of  pimples  all  over  the  intestinal
tube,  with  inflammation  of  all  the  glands  and  serous  membranes  of  the  abdo-
men.— Burning  and  cramps  in  the  abdomen,  with  alternating  coldness  and
heat. — Twisting  and  tearing  pains  in  the  bowels,  as  in  iliae  passion,  with
nausea  and  vomiting. — Tumors,  like  hernia,  or  like  buboes  in  the  groin.

Stool  and  Ajius, — Very  long-lasting  constipation,  followed  by  dry,
brown,  bulky  stools,  then  diarrhoea. — Obstinate  constipation,  with  fever,
heat,  thirst,  sweat,  and  debility. — [310.]  Stools  difficult,  large,  and  hard. — ■
Hard,  knotty  stools,  like  sheep-dung,  passed  with  difficulty,  even  after  the
use  of  injections. — Violent  colic,  with  sinking  in  of  the  abdomen,  and
pains,  whicli  oblige  him  to  twist  and  bend  double. — Abdomen  tense  and
hard,  without  being  swollen. — ^Repeated  mucous  and  bloody  stools,  with
colic,  burning  in  the  bowels  and  anus,  tenesmus,  and  great  weakness. — Di-
arrhoeie  stools,  with  cramps  and  pains  in  the  back,  chest,  stomach,  and  ab-
domen, dulness  of  the  head,  with  sensation  of  drunkenness  and  prostration.
— Brov.:ii^h-yellow  diarrhoeic  stools,  of  a  very  bad  smell. — Whitish,  chol-
eraic stools,  with  cramps,  general  coldness,  painful  pressure,  and  constric-
tion at  the  epigastrium,  colic  and  burning  in  the  abdomen,  unquenchable
thirst,  with  frequent  inability  to  drink  on  account  of  spasms  of  the  throat
and  stomach ;  vertigo,  burning  in  the  head,  weakness  in  thinking,  great
prostration,  emaciation,  and  suppression  of  urine. — Tseniaj,  lumbrici,  and
especially  ascarides  are  discharged  with  the  stool. — Stools  containing  only
blood,  with  frightful  colic,  and  extreme  weakness. — [320,]  Pains  as  if  he
had  any  quantity  of  iron  points  in  the  bowels. — Involuntary  stools. — Burn-
ing in  rectum  and  anus  during  stool. — Flowing  hsemorrhoids,  with  dark
blood,  and  steady,  burning  pains  in  the  rectum. — Large,  inflamed  heemor-
rhoidal  tumors. — Hfemorrhoidal  tumors,  as  if  from  abscesses  ;  they  ulcerate
and  suppurate. — Tumors,  like  mushrooms,  at  the  anus. — Anus  prolapsed
and  very  painful,  even  when  not  at  stool. — Intolerable  itching  at  the  anus.
— Constipation  as  from  inertia  of  the  bowels,  retraction,  and  paralysis  of
the  rectum. — [330.]  Ears  and  nose  cold  during  the  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
TTriiuir'U  Orf/Cins. — Constant  urging  to,  urinate,  with  stitches  and
crushing  pains  in  the  kidneys. — Frequent  emission  of  urine,  which  is  turbid,
or  soon  becomes  so. — Sensation  of  numbness  and  obstruction  in  the  kid-
neys.— Sensation  as  if  the  kidnej's  and  bladder  were  always  full  and  swollen.
— Pressive  and  burning  pains  in  the  bladder,  with  urging  to  urinate  every
minute  ;  the  bladder  cannot  hold  the  smallest  quantity  of  urine. — Difficult,
painful,  intermittent  urination;  it  stops,  and  begins  again  the  next  moment.
— Urine,  for  the  most  part,  frequent,  copious,  and  turbid. — Fulness  and  dis-
tension of  the  bladder,  with  inability  to  urinate. — Urine  turbid,  thick,  and
full  of  mucus,  as  in  catarrh  of  the  bladder. — [340.]  Retention  of  urine,  with
retraction  of  the  urethral  canal. — Urine  brownish,  or  yellowish  and  bloody.
— Very  frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  burning  urine,  which  is  discharged
guttatim. — Urine  with  yellowish,  grayish,  or  dark  sediment. — Frequent,  in-
effectual urging  to  urinate,  with  lancinating  and  spasmodic  pains  in  the
kidneys  and  bladder,  and  great  fulness  of  the  latter. — Discharge  of  coarse
gravel  with  the  urine. — Clear  urine,  with  chalky  sediment,  and  looking
like  milk  when  shaken  up. — Cramps  in  the  kidneys,  with  frequent  urina-
tion, or  complete  suppression. — Clear,  abundant  urine,  day  and  night,  with
debility,  great  thirst,  dryness  of  the  mouth ;  stools  hard,  gray,  or  dark-
Colored,  with  many  other  symptoms,  chiefly  of  the  liver  and  stomach. —

VOL.  I. — 22


338  ANANTHERUM.

Hemorrhage  from  the  urethra. — [350.]  Ardor  urina. — Urine  with  irides-
cent pellicles. — Urine  thick,  red,  and  very  sedimentous.— Incontinence  of
urine,  with  involuntary  urination  when  walking,  and  even  at  night  in  bed,
during  sleep,  as  if  caused  by  paralysis  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Tenes-
mus vei^icse,  with  ischuria,  spasms  of  the  kidneys  and  extremities,  and  burn-
ing in  the  urethra,  which  seems  retracted. — Ulceration,  or  sores  like  chan-
cres, in  the  urethra. — Sensation  as  if  the  urethral  canal  was  obstructed  by
tumors  and  excrescences. — An  ulcer,  like  a  syphilitic  ulcer,  in  the  meatus
urinarius. —  Thick  yellow  or  green  mucus  flows  from  the  urethra,  with
priapism,  burning  and  tearing  pains  in  the  urethra,  inflammation  and
swelling  of  the  penis  and  inguinal  glands.

Genital  Organs. — (Male.)  Excoriations  on  the  prepuce  and  meatus
urinarius. — [360.J  Secretion  of  a  thick  substance,  of  very  strong  odor,
between  the  glaos  and  prepuce,  which  are  swollen. — Burning,  stitching,  and
pinching  in  the  penis. — ^Syphilitic-looking  pimples  on  the  penis,  with  in-
tense pains,  traversing  it  from  one  part  to  another. — Ulcers  and  pustulous
herpes-like  acne  rosacea  on  the  penis. — The  penis  excoriates  easily  during
coitus,  and  even  an  erection. — An  indurated  ulcer,  like  a  chancre,  on  the
penis. — Scabby  herpes  on  the  pubis. — Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the
testicles. — Swelling  of  the  scrotum,  as  if  caused  by  an  accumulation  of
serum. — Sensation  of  hard  tumors  in  the  testicles  and  spermatic  cords,  with
severe  pains  in  these  parts.^[370.]  Tumors  like  buboes  or  hernia  in  the
groins. — Burning  lancination  and  deepseated  pains  in  the  scrotum  and
anus. — Furfuraceous  herpes,  with  great  itching  in  the  scrotum. — Redness
and  painful  excoriation  between  the  thighs. — Great  increase  of  the  venereal
appetite. — The  venereal  appetite  is  increased  by  every  attempt  to  satisfy
it,  until  it  drives  him  to  onanism  and  madness. — During  coitus,  all  his
sufferings  cease,  only  to  reappear  afterwards  with  increased  severity. —
Venereal  desire,  with  attacks  of  impotence. — Total  absence  of  venereal
desire. — Difficult  ejaculation,  very  long-lasting,  or  incomplete. — [380.]  Fre-
quent seminal  and  prostatic  losses. — Nocturnal  pollutions,  without  dreams
or  consciousness. — {Female.)  Burning  pains  as  if  there  were  a  chafing-dish
in  the  region  of  the  ovaries. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  ovaries  as  if  they
were  stretched,  and  every  instant  pinched. — Burning,  crampy,  pinching,
and  gnawing  pains  in  the  womb,  with  great  debility  and  general  prostra-
tion.— Lancinating  and  distensive  pains  in  the  womb. — Engorgement  of
the  uterus. — Hard  tumors,  like  scirrhus,  on  the  neck  of  the  womb. — Burn-
ing pains  in  the  uterus  extending  into  the  kidneys,  with  general  weakness.
— Pains  in  the  uterus,  as  if  it  were  twisted  and  compressed. — -[390.]  Stitches
passing  like  strokes  of  lightning  into  the  womb. — Pressure  on  the  uterus,
with  feeling  as  if  it  escapes  from  the  pelvic  cavity. — Prolapsus  aud  dis-
placement of  the  uterus. — Sterility,  as  from  atrophy  of  the  ovaries. — Swell-
ing of  the  uterus,  as  if  from  a  collection  of  water. — The  os  uteri  swollen,
hard,  ulcerated,  closed. — -Menstruation  anticipating;  very  painful  and
copious ;  the  blood  generally  bright  or  light-colored. — Menstruation  re-
tarded ;  the  blood  dark,  thick,  followed  by  fetid,  light-colored  leucorrhoea.
— Total  suppression  of  menses. — Menstruation  frequent  and  painful,  as  at
the  critical  age. — ^[400.]  Menstruation  very  marked,  with  bruised  pains  in
the  kidneys  and  thighs,  and  great  prostration. — Vulva  inflamed  and  ulcer-
ated.— Great  itching  and  burning  in  the  vulva,  especially  in  the  aftemoou
and  at  night  in  bed. — Whitish  and  reddish  eruptions,  like  sycosic  excres-
cences, on  the  vulva. — Leucorrhoea  watery,  clear,  or  milky,  aud  of  very  bad
odor. — Thick,  purulent,  yellow  or  green  leucorrhoea. — Contractions  and


ANANTHERUM.  339

spasms  of  the  womb. — Stitches  and  distensive  pains  in  the  breasts,  with
sensation  of  enlargement. — Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  mammae,  with
pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  with  weight  and  duluess  in  the  back  and
hypochondria,  and  inability  to  support  the  upper  part  of  the  body. — Heat
and  pain  in  the  mammse,  as  if  they  had  been  gashed  with  a  penknife. —
[410.]  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  mammary  glands. — Congestions
of  the  mamraje  as  from  accumulation  of  milk. — Lancinating,  pulsating,  and
pressive  pains  in  the  mammae. — Distensive  and  crampy  pains,  with  sensa-
tion of  biting  on  the  breasts. — Indurated  and  ulcerated  tumor  in  the  breast,
with  swelling  of  the  ganglia  of  the  chest  and  axillae;  burning,  lancinating,
and  gnawing  pains,  as  if.  there  were  a  live  animal  there. — The  chest  feels
as  if  bound  in  a  corslet,  which  prevents  its  action. — Phlegmoiious  erysipelas
in  the  breasts,  with  tendency  to  attack  the  head. — Excoriation  of  the
nipples. — Excessive  secretion  of  milk. — The  breasts  are  atrophied,  and  be-
come soft.

Respiratory  Apptiratus. — [420.]  Scratching  in  the  larynx,  with
great  accumulation  of  mucus,  rough  voice  and  rattling  breathing. — Heat  in
the  larynx,  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  ulcerated  and  cut. — Sensation  as  if
there  were  corrosive  acid  in  the  larynx-. — Desire  to  cough  every  minute,  in
order  to  breathe. — Voice  altered,  bass,  nasal. — Voice  stopped,  as  if  from
want  of  respiration. — Hoarseness  and  frequent  aphony,  with  symptoms  of
tuberculous  or  granular  laryngitis. — Very  prominent  swelling  of  the  laryn-
geal cartilages. — Raw  pain  in  the  larynx,  with  severe,  tearing,  scraping
cough,  with  purulent  and  bloody  expectoration. — Short,  dry,  and  frequent
cough. — [430.]  Violent  cough,  sensibly  felt  in  the  back,  chest,  and  abdo-
men, with  deepseated  pains  in  the  head. — Obstinate,  paroxysmal,  shaking
cough,  with  scratching,  burning,  a  great  deal  of  phlegm  in  the  larynx,  and
aphony. — Cough,  especially  in  the  evening  and  during  the  night. — Hard,
noisy  eongh,  as  if  the  lungs  would  be  torn. — Paroxysms  of  cough,  often  last-
ing half  an  hour,  not  allowing  him  time  to  breathe,  and  ending  with  copious
mucous  expectoration. — Hoarse  cough,  as  if  the  chest  would  be  shattered,
with  expectoration  of  blood,  palpitations,  and  fainting  fits. — Short  cough
and  tussiculation,  with  heaviness  and  stitches  in  various  parts  of  the  chest,
and  oppression. — Burning  and  raw  feeling  in  the  whole  chest  and  larynx,
with  severe  dry  cough  and  bloody  expectoration. — Paroxysmal  cough,  with
vomiting  of  food  and  bile ;  humming  and  ringing  in  the  ears. — -Cough,
especially  at  night  when  lying  down,  and  even  during  sleep,  with  scratch-
ing, and  accumulation  of  much  mucus  in  the  larynx. — [440.]  Rough,
sibilant  cough,  with  obstruction  in  the  larynx,  as  from  false  membranes. —
Spasmodic  cough,  like  hooping-cough,  with  vomiting  and  involuntary
urination.' — Sensation  during  the  cough,  as  if  a  very  rough  cord  were  drawn
through  the  bronchi. — Cough  generally  dry  and  painful,  and  aggravated
by  heat. — Cough,  with  congestion  of  blood,  stitches  and  tearing  pains  in
the  chest,  and  spasmodic  movements  of  the  limbs. — Cough,  with  fever,
shiverings,  and  coldness  ;  copious  sweat  of  a  putrid  smell,  especially  in  the
evening  and  at  night. — Great  debility  before  and  especially  after  the
cough. — Expectoration  of  blood,  with  stitching  pains  in  the  chest,  especially
in  the  left  side  and  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  accompanied  by  severe,
suffocating  cough. — Expectoration  of  mucu?,  mixed  with  blackish  and
rusty-looking  blood. — Haemoptysis  of  coagulated  blood. — [450.]  Expecto-
ration of  whitish,  glairy  matter,  or  of  thick  yellow  or  green  mucus. — Ex-
pectoration of  pus  mixed  with  blood,  or  of  matters  like  that  from  tubercles.
— ^Lancinating,  tearing,  or  compressive  and  distensive  pains  in  the  chest,


340  ANANTHERUM.

with  crepitation  and  crackling. — Stitches  and  heaviness  in  the  pleura,  with
cough  and  oppression. — R^les  of  different  kinds. — Respiration  quick,  anx-
ious, and  often  interrupted  by  spasmodic  contractions  of  the  chest. — Asth-
matic sufferings,  with  cough,  and  difficult,  whitish,  flaky  expectoration. —
Contraction  and  obstruction  of  the  chest,  so  that  he  can  neither  eat  nor
breathe. — Cough,  with  vomiting  of  black  or  light-colored  decomposed  blood.
— Sensation  as  if  the  whole  chest  were  tightly  laced. — [460.]  Great  oppres-
sion of  the  chest,  with  continual  fear  of  suffocation.— Sensation  as  if  he  had
a  heavy  weight  on  the  chest,  and  it  were  all  engorged  and  on  iire. — The
symptoms  of  the  chest  are  increased  by  the  fever,  with  coldness  and  shiver-
ings,  very  disturbed  pulse,  great  irritability,  desire  for  dainties,  hfead  heavy,
weak,  and  dull. — The  pains  are  more  severe  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest,
but  more  persistent  on  the  left  side. — Scraping  and  ulcerative  pains  in  the
chest,  as  if  there  were  boils  or  herpes  in  the  lungs. — Sensation  as  if  there
were  tubercles  in  the  whole  upper  portion  of  the  chest. — Excoriative  pains
in  the  bronchi,  as  if  they  had  been  rasped.

Heart. — Burning  and  sensation  of  weight  in  the  heart,  with  sadness,
anguish,  and  fear  of  death. — Stitches  and  formication  in  the  heart,  with
great  anxiety. — Lancinations,  cramps,  and  weakness  of  the  heart,  which
seems  too  full  of  blood  and  unable  to  beat,  with  oppression  ;  pulse  slow  and
full,  then  accelerated,  hard,  and  dicrotic. — [470.]  Sensation  as  if  the  blood-
vessels of  the  heart  and  larynx  were  contracted. — Violent  palpitations,  with
suffocative  attacks  from  the  least  emotion. — Stitches  and  cramps  in  the
heart,  with  sensation  as  if  its  apex  were  pinched  very  hard. — Trembling  of
the  heart,  with  sensation  as  if  it  shook. — Sensation  as  if  the  great  vessels
of  the  heart  were  distended  in  various  parts. — Heavy  and  painful  heart. —
Heart  seems  paralyzed,  as  if  it  could  not  beat  any  more,  with  deathlike
weakness.

Skill. — Heat  and  moisture  of  the  skin,  with  redness  and  itching. — Ex-
cessive itching  all  over,  especially  in  the  evening,  and  at  night  in  bed. —
Pruritus,  with  stinging  and  heat  of  the  skin. — [480.]  The  skin  is  very  ten-
der, it  breaks,  ulcerates,  and  suppurates  readily. — Burning  heat  of  the
skin,  with  stitches,  pricking,  and  miliary  eruption. — Sensation  as  if  he  wore
a  hair  shirt,  which  pricked  him  everywhere. — Blotches  and  swellings  on
various  parts  of  the  body,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten. — A  great  many  pim-
ples form  on  the  pores  of  the  skin,  with  little  stitches  like  piu-pricks,  and
leave  scabs,  chiefly  on  the  face  and  thighs,  with  burning,  chills  and  fever.
— Many  boils  and  abscesses  on  different  parts  of  the  body. — The  skin  is
scarlet,  and  always  burning. — Sensation  on  the  skin  as  if  he  had  been
scratched. — Red  pimples,  like  miliaria  or  urticaria,  with  itching  and  ob-
stinate burning. — Miliary  eruption,  appearing  one  day  and  vanishing  the
next. — [490.]  Itching  and  eruption  like  compact  and  small  scabies,  or  like
lichen  agrius. — Pustular  eruption,  resembling  confluent  small-pox. — Erup-
tions simulating  scarlatina  aud  measles. — Skin  icy  cold,  pale  or  blue. — Skin
flaccid  and  without  elasticity. — Calor  mordax,  with  disagreeable  dryness
of  the  skin. — Herpes,  with  excoriation  and  scales,  which  are  constantly
renewed. — Frequent  shuddering  of  the  skin,  with  great  general  debility. —
The  skin  is  often  ?old,  red,  blue,  livid,  or  very  pale,  with  general  coldness
aud  cold  sweat. — Erysipelatous  swelling  on  different  parts  of  the  body. —
[500.]  Large  boils  on  face  and  neck,  and  all  fleshy  parts. — Elevations  and
painful  swellings  on  several  parts  of  the  body,  as  if  from  the  bites  of  ven-
omous insects.- — Formication  on  the  skin,  with  sensation  of  torpor  and  loss
of  sensibility. — Pains  as  if  the  skin  were  torn  by  the  nails. — Deep-yellow


ANANTHERUM.  341

complexion,  and  black  circles  around  the  eyes. — Large,  painful  boils,  which
spread  and  become  erysipelatous. — The  least  prick  becomes  a  sore,  and
forms  a  suppurating  swelling. — Bluish,  scorbutic-looking  blotches  over  the
body.

G-eneralities. — Nervous  irritation,  with  great  restlessness,  although
every  movement  is  difficult  and  painful. — General  tremor. — [510.]  Pains
generally  acute,  lancinating,  crampy,  with  extreme  weariness  in  different
parts  of  the  body. — Burning,  lancinating,  tearing,  rheumatic,  and  gouty
pains,  principally  aggravated  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  by  change  of
position,  wind,  cold  air  and  moisture,  and  strong  heat. — Coffee  aggravates
the  pains,  but  afterwards  relieves  thera. — Strong  liquors  aggravate,  aromatic
liquors  ameliorate,  the  pains. — Congestion  and  ebullition  of  blood  in  the
head. — Malaise  and  debility,  with  constant  restlessness. — Attacks  of  de-
bility, as  if  he  would  lose  consciousness, — Frequent  fainting?,  especially
after  eating  or  drinking. — Cramps  and  spasms  of  various  kinds. — Tetanus,
drawing  the  head  backwards,  often  with  nausea  and  vomiting. — [520.]
Eclamptic  convulsions,  and  involuntary  movements  of  the  limbs  as  in
chorea. — Epileptic  convulsions,  commencing  with  sadness,  re^lessness,  hic-
cough, contraction  of  the  diaphragm,  burning  in  the  stomach,  congestion
of  blood  to  the  head;  then  loss  of  consciousness,  falling  down,  violent  move-
ments of  the  limbs,  bloody  frothing  at  the  mouth,  seminal  losses,  involun-
tary stools  and  urination. — Great  bodily  and  mental  debility,  with  melan-
choly, accompanied  with  suicidal  ideas,  and  copious  sweat  at  the  least
movement.— i)isposition  to  chilliness,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  cold. —
Cold  sensation  in  one  part,  though  it  shows  the  same  temperature  as  the
rest  of  the  body. — Extreme  prostration,  with  desire  to  sit  and  to  lie  down ;
he  cannot  find  relief  in  any  posture. — Frequent  sensation  of  contraction
and  tightness  throughout  the  organism. — Nervous  perturbation,  with  dis-
turbance of  the  circulation  ;  the  bile  seems  in  constant  revolution,  and  the
blood  hot  and  congested. — Spasmodic  attacks,  with  contractions  of  the
limbs,  of  the  eyes  and  features. — Fits  of  extreme  weariness  and  debility,  as
if  every  visceral  organ  were  atrophied  aud  paralyzed. — [530,]  Difiioulty  in
defining  and  expressing  his  sufferings,  so  great  and  numerous  are  they,  and
so  much  is  he  enervated. — Attacks  of  stupor  and  faintness,  followed  by  a
paralytic  sensation  of  the  right  side  of  the  body,  tongue,  and  upper  and
lower  extremities. — Semi-lateral  pains  in  the  head,  eyes,  and  ears. — In-
flammation and  suppuration  of  the  glands. — Induration  of  the  submaxillary
and  cervical  glands,  with  difficult  speech. — While  walking,  general  heat,
with  cold  ears,  which  become  hot  when  the  body  becomes  cold. — All  symp-
toms are  aggravated  by  motion  and  heat. — Swelling  of  the  periosteum  and
bones, — Easy  dislocation  of  the  joints.

Back. — Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck. — [540.]  Contraction  of  the
trunk,  with  sensation  as  if  the  back  became  crooked. — Bruised  pains  in  the
vertebrEe  and  kidneys. — Painful  stiffness,  with  weakness  of  the  whole  spinal
column. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  back  and  between  the  shoulders. — Stiff"-
ness  in  the  back  and  kidneys,  with  crampy  and  tearing  pains,  excited  by
the  least  movement. ^Sensation  as  if  stabbed  between  the  ribs. — Paralytic
weakness  of  the  vertebral  column  and  extremities. — Pain  as  if  the  scapulae
were  broken, — Drawing,  lancinating,  and  crampy  pains  in  the  articulations
of  the  shoulders,  and  between  the  scapulae,  especially  when  moving  the
arms. — Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  kidneys,  with  inclination  to  remain
constantly  lying  down. — [550.]  Weakness  of  the  kidneys,  extending  into
the  back, — Pains  of  extreme  weariness  in  the  kidneys  and  entire  sacrum,


342  ANANTHERUM.

with  great  weakness  and  iuability  to  keep  up. — Twisting,  stabbing  pains
in  the  kidneys. — Sensation  of  formication  and  numbness  in  the  kidneys. —
Lumbago,  with  very  great  debility. — Sensation  as  if  a  nail  had  been  driven
into  the  kidneys.

JJjrper  Extremities. — Sensation  as  if  his  arms  were  kept  stretched
out  stiff  by  bars  of  iron  inside  them. — Burning  and  lancinating  pains  in
the  arms. — Red  swelling  of  the  articulations  of  the  arms,  with  burning  and
tearing  pains  as  in  rheumatism. — Contusive  pains  in  the  arms. — [660.]
Convulsive  motions  of  the  upper  extremities,  especially  in  the  forearms. —
Red  and  violet  spots  on  the  arms,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten. — -Erysipelatous
swelling  of  the  arms. — Excoriated  places  on  the  arms,  as  if  caused  by  burns.
— Abscesses  and  ulcers  on  the  arms  and  hands,  penetrating  to  the  bones. —
Infiltration  of  the  arms,  especially  morning  aud  afternoon-. — ^Paralytic
.  weakness  of  the  arms. — Eruptions  like  itch  or  lichen  on  the  arms  and
hands. — The  hands  are  icy  cold  and  go  to  sleep. — Ulcers  aud  fissures  on
the  hands. — [570,]  Cutting  sensation  along  the  fingers,  and  as  if  they  were
dislocated  or  broken. — Swelling  of  the  finger-joints,  with  rheumatic  and
gouty  pains.-=— Tophi  in  the  finger-joints,  which  move  with  great  difficulty.
— The  fingers  deformed  and  contracted. — Burning,  pulsative  pains,  aud
pains  as  frOm  whitlow,  on  the  fingers. — Diseased  and  distorted  nails.

Lower  Extremities, — Painful  feeling  of  extreme  weariness  in  the
hips,  with  inability  to  move  after  sitting  still  some  time. — Stiffness,  with
lancinating  and  crampy  pains  in  the  sacrum  and  iliac  bone.— Obstinate
stifiness,  extending  from  the  hip  to  the  knee. — Paralytic  weakness  aud
palsy  of  the  legs,  with  complete  insensibility. — [580.]  Sciatic  and  rheu-
matic pains  in  the  legs,  making  him  cry  out,  and  aggravated  chiefly  by
cold. — -Burning  pains  iu  the  thighs  and  knees. — Erysipelatous  swelling  of
the  legs. — -Crampy  pains  and  acute  drawiugs  in  the  legs  and  at  the  instep.
— Boils  and  inflamed  red  pimples  on  different  parts  of  the  legs. — Rheu-
matic and  gouty  pains  in  the  legs  and  feet,  especially  in  the  heels. — Feet
swollen,  red,  burning,  he  cannot  bear  anything  on  them. — Ulcer  on  the
outside  of  the  right  thigh,  as  coming  from  an  abscess,  penetrating  deeply
and  suppurating  copiously. — Very  painful  boils  on  the  legs. — Varicose
swelling  of  the  legs. — [590.]  When  walking,  acute  contractions  in  the  ex-
tremities of  the  toes  and  under  the  nails,  with  bleeding  fissures  in  the  feet.
— Lancinating  pains  in  the  coruii,  which  in^ame. — Blisters  and  ulcers  ou
the  soles  of  the  feet. — The  nails  grow  awry,  and  hurt  the  toes. — Cold  feet.
— Very  bad-smelling  perspiration  of  the  feet.

Sleep. — Constant  drowsiness,  with  inclination  to  go  to  bed. — The  eyes
close  involuntarily,  when  night  comes,  and  he  goes  to  sleep  wherever  he
may  be. — Goes  to  sleep  early  and  awakes  towards  midnight,  with  inability
to  go  to  sleep  again. — -Restless  sleep,  with  cries,  starting  up,  movements  of
the  limbs,  and  anxious  dreams. — [600.]  Comatose  sleep,  with  continual
disturbing  dreams  and  snoring. — ^Prolonged  sleep  in  the  morning,  with  in-
clination to  lie  abed  late. — Sleep  with  frequent  dreams,  alternate  coldness
and  heat,  and  burning  of  the  whole  body,  intense  thirst  and  fright. — Uu-
refreshing  sleep;  on  awaking  he  feels  tired,, as  if  he  had  not  slept  at  all. —
Sleeplessness  from  excessive  nervous  excitement. — Sleeplessness  for  many
nights,  with  fatigue,  painful  weariness,  and  debility. — Sad  dreams,  or
dreams  of  the  day's  business. — Disagreeable  and  frightful  dreams. — Dreams
of  epidemic,  contagious  diseases,  and  especially  of  hydrophobia. — Dreams
of  journeys,  of  sumptuous  living,  of  pleasures  and  enjoyments. — [610.]
Dreams  of  falling  from  a  frightful  height,  with  agitated  waking,  rush  of


ANANTHERUM.  343

blood  to  the  head,  aud  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Dreams  of  being  in  com-
pany and  taking  part  in  a  joyous  festival. — Dreams  of  disputes  and  quarrels.
— Anxious  dreams  which  he  cannot  define. — Chilliness  and  shiverings,  on
the  head  and  in  the  back. — Coldness  and  shiverings  followed  by  burning
heat  with  headache. — Excessive  general  coldness,  with  trembling,  s])asms,
and  cramps,  hunger,  and  great  thirst.^Calor  mordax,  and  excessive  dry-
ness of  the  skin,  with  hunger,  and  thirst,  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,
the  pulse  quick  and  hard,  headache  aud  delirium. — Almost  constant  alter-
nations of  coldness  and  heat. — -Coldness  and  shiverings,  with  cold  sweats,
chattering  of  the  teeth,  colic  and  cramps  in  the  stomach  and  extremities. —
[620.]  During  the  fever,  repugnance  to  all  sweetened  bitter  drinks ;  desire
for  strong  drinks  ;  water  always  tastes  bad;  vertigo,  delirium,  fear  of  fall-
ing, of  slipping,  and  he  keeps  slipping  down  to  the  foot  of  the  bed  ;  anger,
even  with  nervous  seizures;  perverted  intellect,  and  loss  of  consciousness. —
Fever,  with  coldness  and  shiverings  and  aggravation  of  all  the  pains. —
External  coldness  and  shivering  with  internal  heat,  especially  in  the  chest.
— -Fever  with  typhoid  character  and  great  constipation. — Aggravation  of
the  fever  in  the  evening  and  at  night. — Intense  chilliness! — Pulse  generally
accelerated  and  rebounding;  or  slow, small,  and  imperceptible;  or  irregular
and  intermitting. — Abundant  and  weakening  perspiration.

Conditions. — Aggravation. —  {Morning),  On  waking,  secretion  of
phlegm. — {Afternoon'),  Headache;  toothache;  morbid  hunger;  itching,  etc.,
in  vulva. — {Evenhig),  Headache;  attacks  of  deafness;  toothache;  morbid
hunger;  pains  in  stomach;  cough;  cough,  with  fever,  etc.;  itching;  burning,
etc.,  pains;  fever. — {Night),  Sensation  as  of  objects  moving  in  head,  etc.;
pains  in  hollow  teeth;  toothache;  morbid  hunger;  secretion  of  phlegm;
pains  in  stomach;  in  bed,  itching  in  vulva;  cough;  cough  when  lying
down;  cough,  with  fever,  etc.;  itching  all  over;  burning,  etc.,  pain;  fever.
— (  Open  air).  Secretion  of  mucus,  etc. — {Strong  air).  Vertigo. — {Draught
of  air),  Fains  in  teeth,  etc. — {Local  application),  Pains  in  eyes. — {Coffee),
Toothache  for  awhile;  aggravates  at  first. — {After  coitus).  All  sufferings. —
{Cold),  Ulcerated  spots  on  throat;  pains  in  legs. — {Cold  air).  Pains  in  hol-
low teeth ;  burning,  etc.,  pains. — {Taking  anything  cold).  Toothache. — {Least
contact),  Toothache. — {Before  cough).  Great  debility. — {During  cough),  Sen-
sation as  of  cord  drawn  through  larynx. — {After  cough),  Great  debility. —
{Damp  weather).  Attacks  of  deafness. — {Drinking),  Empty  eructations;
fainting. — {Before  eating).  Secretion  of  phlegm. — {Eating),  Pains  in  hollow
teeth;  empty  eructations;  pains  in  stomach;  fainting. — {Emotion),  Suffoca-
tive attacks. — {During  fever),  Repugnance  to  sweet  drinks,  etc. — {Heat),
Cough;  burning,  etc.,  pains;  all  symptoms. — (Lying  on  right  side),  Bensa.-
tion  as  of  objects  moving  in  head. — {Light),  Headache;  itching  in  eyes. —
{Strong  liquors),  The  pains. — {Moisture),  Burning,  etc.,  pains. — {Moving
eyelids),  Feeling  of  roughness,  etc.,  of  eyes. — {Moving  arms).  Pains  in  shoul-
der-joints.— [B'lotion),  Vertigo;  headache;  pains  in  stomach;  all  symptoms;
stiffness  in  back,  etc. — 'Noise),  Headache. — (Every  occupation).  Pains  in
stomach. — {Change  of  position),  Burning,  etc.,  pains. — {After  shaving),  Skin
of  face  painful. — {After  sitting  still).  Inability  to  move. — {During  stool),
Burning  in  rectum,  etc. — {Eating  vegetables),  Eructations. — •(  Walking),  Sen-
sation like  water  in  head,  etc.;  secretion  of  phlegm;  general  heat,  etc.;  con-
tractions in  tips  of  toes,  etc. — {Changes  of  weather),  Toothache. — {Wind),
Burning,  etc.,  pains. — (  TFrne),  Toothache.

Amelioratvons. — {Coffee),  Relieves  after  aggravation. — (During
coitus).  All  sufferings  cease. — {Aromatic  liquors).  Ameliorate  the  pains.


344  ANGELICA  ATROPURPUREA— ANGUSTURA.


ANGELICA  ATROPURPUEEA.

Archangelica  atropurpurea,  Hoff'm.  Nat.  order,  Umbelliferas.  Common
name,  Great  angelica. Preparation,  ?

Authority.  Dr.  Shell,  M.D.,  Family  Guide  to  Health,  1856  (A.  J.  of
H.  M.  M.,  1,  272).

Large  doses  (15  to  20  grains)  cause  disgust  for  all  spirituous  liquors.


ANGUSTURA.

Galipea  cusparia,  St.  Hil.  (Bonflandia  trifoliata,  Willd.;  Angostura
vera).  Nat.  order,  Rutaceas.  Preparation,  Trituration  and  tincture  of  the
bark.

Authorities.'!'  1,  Hahnemann;  2,  Franz;  3,  Michler;  4,  Mossdorf;  5,
Gross;  6,  Harnisch;  7,  Wislicenus;  8,  Langhammer;  9,  Meyer;  10,  Schre-
ter;  11,  Lembke.  •

Mind. — Greatly  excited  and  extravagant  spirits,  with  drawing  in  the
limbs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  tense,  in  the  afternoon  (after  two  days),^ —
Anxiety,'". — Lachrymose  and  irritable,'". — Marked  ill-humor;  everything
vexes  her,'". — He  is  easily  frightened,  and  starts,'^. — Pusillanimity,'.-;— He
has  not  confidence  enough  in  himself  to  undertake  and  perform  voluntary
motions,'. — Prone  to  anger;  every  trifle  irritates,'". — Ill-humor  and  peevish-
ness (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — [10.]  Discouragement;  dissatisfaction
with  his  .situation  ;  he  does  not  bear  a  joke ;  slight  offences  fill  him  with
bitterness  (after  twelve  hours),'. — Liveliness  and  activity  of  mind,^ — He
feels  cheerful  and  lively  when  performing  no  intellectual  labor,  but  be-
comes dizzy  when  reading ;  he  then  falls  asleep  immediately,^ — Lively
mood  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (immediately),'. — In  the  afternoon,
great  animation  and  facility  of  intellect ;  he  comprehends  everything  much
nioie  easily  than  on  the  first  day,  and  more  easily  than  formerly,  but  he
feel.-  unable  to  dwell  upon  bis  subject,  owing  to  some  internal  uneasiness,
such  as  is  experienced  by  those  who  anticipate  some  great  pleasure,  or  also
owing  to  all  sorts  of  plans  crowding  upon  his  mind  (after  thirty-five  hours),".
— For  the  first  three  afternoons  the  body  feels  warm  ;  on  the  third  after-
noon, extreme  liveliness  and  quick  memory ;  however,  he  is  not  able  to
think  of  anything  attentively,  being  prevented  by  the  intrusion  upon  his
mind  of  a  rather  agreeable  project  which  he  almost  believes  to  be  real  and
feasible,  and  which  exclusively  absorbs  all  his  attention;  it  is  a  sort  of
vivid,  waking  dream  (after  four  days),^ — Lively  mood  ;  he  is  confident  he
can  achieve  everything  with  vigor  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Great  ab-
sence of  mind  ;  when  occupied  with  something  serious,  his  attention  is  con-
stantly arrested  by  other  things  (after  forty-five  hours),^ — Sometimes  he  is
lost  in  reverie,  and  even  complete  absence  of  thought ;  he  easily  falls  asleep
when  reading,^ — Uncomfortable  early  in  the  morning ;  frequent  yawning
and  want  of  disposition  for  any  kind  of  work  (after  four  days),l

lieud. — [20.]  Suddenly,  great  confusion  of  the  head,  as  from  a  skin
drawn  over  the  brain,  half  an  hour  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Confu-
sion and  dulness  of  the  head,  as  after  intoxication,". — Confusion  and  sense

t  No?.  1  to  9  from  H.  Mat.  Med.  Pura ;  No.  10,  New  Archives,  3;  No.  11,  N.  Z.
f.  H.  Kl.,  1872.


ANGUSTURA.  345

of  contraction  of  the  head,  when  walking  rapidly/. — Confusion  of  the  head ;
pullings  in  the  forehead,^ — Vertigo,'". — Periodical  vertigo,". — Vertigo  in
the  open  air  (after  twenty  hours),'. — Vertigo  from  the  occiput  when  sit-
ting; throbbing  in  right  temple,'". — He  is  attacked  with  a  feeling  of  ver-
tigo when  crossing  a  running  water  or  walking  by  the  side  of  a  ditchful  of
water;  he  fears  he  will  sink  down,l — Dizziness,'". — [30.]  Swaying  of  the
head,'". — Head  drawn  first  to  the  right  side,  then  to  the  left,'". — In  the
open  air,  she  was  attacked  with  a  little  headache  and  heat  (towards  even-
ing),'.— Headache  occurred  only  when  there  was  heat  in  the  face,l — Ful-
ness in  the  forehead,'". — Headache  always  occurred  towards  evening,  when
it  became  dark,  and  continued  until  the  moment  he  fell  asleep,^ — Heavi-
ness in  the  head  when  sitting,'". — Heat  around  the  head,  with  sweat  upon
the  forehead,  early,  when  in  bed,'. — Heat  rising  to  the  head,'". — Cramp-
like headache,'. — [40.]  Frequent  pressure  in  the  head  (immediately),". —
Pressure  in  the  head  (and  toes),  (immediately),". — Headache,  as  if  every-
thing in  the  brain  were  moving  about,  with  oppressive  and  boring  pain,
especially  in  the  temples;  when  laying  the  forehead  upon  the  table  he
feels,  in  the  first  moments,  nothing  except  some  tension;  soon,  however,  the
pains  return  less  violent,  and  assume  their  original  violence  as  soon  as  the
head  i.s  raised  (after  twelve  hours),^ — -Early,  after  rising,  great  heaviness
in  the  forehead,  without  any  confusion  (after  three  days),^ — Sometimes,
very  severe  boring  in  the  forehead  and  sides  of  the  head  (third  day),". —
Drawing  in  the  forehead  (after  nine  and  a  half  hours),". — Pressure  in  the
forehead,". — Pressure  in  forehead  (immediately),". — Pressure  in  the  fore-
head (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Headache ;  pressure  in  the  forehead,
over  both  eyes,  as  if  the  contents  would  come  out,  both  at  rest  and  in  mo-
tion,'.— [50.]  Very'  severe,  frequent  pressing  pains  in  forehead,  with  the
sensation  of  heaviness  (after  four  hours),". — Pressive  headache  in  the  fore-
head, towards  evening,  with  great  heat  in  the  face,^ — The  brain  in  the
forehead  feels  bruised ;  increased  by  stooping,  and  diminished  in  the  open
air  (immediately),'. — Severe  repeated  pains  in  forehead  and  temples  (after
four  hours),". — Drawing  in  the  forehead  and  pressure  in  the  temples  (im-
mediately),".— Continual  itching  stitches  in  the  forehead  and  temple,  ex-
ternally, which  do  not  go  off  by  rubbing,'. — -The  temporal  muscles  feel
dead,  numb,  as  if  something  were  pressing  out  there,'. — Tensive  pain,  in  the
temporal  muscles,  when  opening  thejaws,^. — Boring  headache  in  the  temples,'.
— Drawing  and  oppressive  pain  in  the  temporal  region,". — [60.]  Pressure  in
the  temples  (immediately),". — Pressure  in  the  temples  (after  one  hour),^ —
Pressure  on  the  temples,  as  from  a  plug,  several  times  (after  one  hour),". —
Tearing  headache,  rather  externally,  extending  from  the  vertex  over  the
temples  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — A  stitch,  as  from  electricity,  starting
from  the  temples  upwards  and  downwards,'. — Intermittent  prickings  iu  the
right  temporal  region,  more  externally  (after  four  hours),*. — Roaring  in
the  temples  and  sides  of  the  head  (immediately),". — Boring  and  pressure
in  vertex  (soon  after  taking),". — In  the  evening,  drawing  and  oppressive
headache  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  with  pressure  on  the  lower  jaw
(after  sixteen  hours),'''. — Drawing  on  the  sides  of  the  head,  then  several
times  drawing  in  the  legs  and  I'eet  (early  iu  morning),".— [70.]  Pressure
on  both  sides  of  the  head  (soon  after  taking),". — Pressure  on  the  sides  of
the  head  (immediately),". — Twitchings  at  a  small  place  under  the  skin  of
the  right  parietal  bone;  when  pressing  upon  the  part,  it  pains  as  if  it  were
bruised  (after 'one  hour),*. — Headache;  pressure  iu  the  occiput  in  the  after-
noon,'.— Pressure  in  the  left  hemisphere  when  stooping;  relieved  on  raising


346  ANGUSTURA.

the  head  again  (immediately),*. — Drawing  at  the  sides  of  the  occiput  (im-
mediately),".

Eyes. — The  eyes  are  red,  and  burn;  in  the  morning  they  are  aggluti-
nated,\ — Violent  burning  in  the  inner  half  of  the  eyes  themselves,  and  in
the  internal  corners;  afternoons  and  evenings,'. — Tension  first  in  one,  then
in  the  other  eye;  it  seems  from  behind  forwards,  early  in  the  morning  (after
forty-eight  hours),\ — Pressure  in  both  eyes,  as  if  a  bright  light  were  irritating
them,  and  as  if  they  became  weary,'. — [80.]  A  few  stitches  over  the  eyes,\ —
Eyes  feel  as  if  there  was  sand  in  them,'". — Pressure  on  the  right  eye  and  the
orbitjin  the  evening  (after fourteen  hours),^ — Severe  pressure  above  the  right
eye  and  deep  in  the  right  orbit  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Slight  twitch-
ings  between  the  eyebrows  while  reading,'. — Feeling  of  dryness  under  the
upper  eyelids,'. — Sore  pain  in  the  eyelids,'.^Stitches  in  the  right  eyelids
(after  eight  hours),".— Itching  stitches  in  the  upper  eyelid,  which  cannot
be  removed  by  rubbing  (after  one  hour),'. — Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (after
thirteen  hours),^ — [90.]  Contraction  of  the  pupils  (after  three  and  a  half
hours),^ — He  sees  much  farther  and  more  sharply  than  usual,*. — Far-sight-
edness; he  saw  distinctly  objects  at  a  distance;  whereas  he  generally  was
short-sighted  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),". — Early,  on  rising,  dimness  be-
fore the  eyes,  as  if  the  cornea  were  obscured  (after  twenty-four  hours),'.—
There  seems  to  be  a  light  vapor  before  the  eyes,  which  soon  passes  off,'.

Ears. — Tearing  in  a  boil  over  the  right  mastoid  process  (after  a  quarter
of  an  hour),*. — Heat  of  the  ears  and  both  Cheeks,'. — Pinching  in  the  ex-
ternal ear,'. — Heat  in  the  lobules,'. — Sensation  as  if  something  were  before
the  ear,  and  as  if  something  were  inserted  in  it,'. — [100.]  Throbbing  pain
behind  the  ears,  on  the  side  of  the  neck,  as  if  the  carotid  were  beating,'. —
Burning  in  the  internal  ear,  in  the  region  of  the  tympanum,'. — Several
transient  drawings,  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  ear,'. — Stitches  in  the
ears  (after  one  hour),". — Stitches  deep  in  the  right  ear  (after  one  and  a
half  hours),". — ^Very  painful  tearing  twicchings  in  the  right  internal  ear;
they  gradually  become  drawings  (after  one  hour),*. — Tearing  twitchiugs
before  the  left  ear  (after  one  hour),'. — Stitches  in  the  meatus  auditorius
externus,'. — Hearing  is  much  more  acute  than  usual  (after  five  and  a  half
hours),  (curative  reaction),^ — Ringing  in  the  right  ear  (after  thirty-three
hours),*.

Nose, — [110.]  Sensation  of  a  corrosive  soreness  deep  in  the  nose  (im-
mediately),'.

Face. — Internal  and  external  heat  of  the  face,  immediately  after  sup-
per,*.— Drawing  in  the  facial  muscles  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Draw-
ing in  the  muscles  of  the  face  (after  one  hour),". — Drawing  in  the  muscles  of
the  face,  right  side  (immediately),". — Stitches  in  the  right  facial  muscles
(after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Prickling  in  the  fiicial  muscles  (after  one
and  a  half  hours),". — Feeling  of  heat  in  both  cheeks,  without  any  ex-
ternal perceptible  warmth,'. — In  the  evening,  hot  feeling  in  the  cheeks,
which,  however,  do  not  feel  warm  when  touched  (after  twelve  hours),l —
Pressure,  sometimes  very  severe,  in  the  facial  bones,  especially  in  the  zy-
goma (after  ten  hours),". — [120.]  Cramplike  pain  at  the  zygoma  (after  a
quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Stitches  in  the  left  zygoma  (after  one  and  a  half
hours),". — Pain  in  the  niassetcr  muscles,  as  if  one  had  fatigued  them  by  chew-
ing too  much^. — Cramplike  pain  near  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  in  the  mas-
ticator muscles,  especially  when  at  rest;  the  pain  is  diminished  by  opening
or  closing  the  jaws,'. — Pressure  several  times  in  the  right  niaxilla  (after
one  hour),". — Drawing  in  the  maxilla  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),".


ANGUSTURA.  347

3Iowth. — Drawing  pain  iu  the  two  right  upper  incisors/. — Throbbing
toothache  in  a  hollow  tooth,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  (after  fourteen
hours),'. — Slight  drawing  in  some  of  the  upper  molar  teeth,  which,  however,
cannot  be  defined,*. — Drawing  pain  which,  to  judge  by  the  feeling,  is  be-
tween the  crowns  of  the  middle  upper  right  molar  teeth,  and  may  be  pal-
liated by  touching  the  teeth  with  the  cold  finger  (after  one  hour),*. — [130.]
Sticking-drawing  in  the  right  upper  gums  (after  three  hours),'. — White
tongue,  with  a  feeling  of  roughness  (after  twelve  hours),^ — Burning,  as  of
pepper,  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,  almost  on  its  border  (after  three
hours),*. — Stitches  several  times  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (after  eight  hours),".
— Pinching  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  are  extremely  painful,
even  when  the  tongue  is  not  movesj  (after  six  hours),'. — In  the  evening,
during  slumber,  his  mouth  had  become  filled  with  a  viscid,  insipid,  and
foul  phlegm ;  he  could  not  drink  enough,^ — Great  dryness  of  mouth  and
lips,  without  any  thirst  (after  three  hour3),^ — Much  saliva  flows  from  the
mouth,'". — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  after  the  usual  smoking,^. — Bitter
taste  in  the  mouth,  and  several  slight  eructations  after  dinner,  which  he
ate  with  a  good  appetite  (after  thirty  hours),''. — [140.]  Foul,  flat  taste  in
the  mouth  for  a  short  time  (after  two  hours),*. — (Bread  tastes  sour  to  her),'.
— Taste  in  the  mouth  as  of  peach-pits,'.

Throat, — Frequent  roughness  in  the  throat ;  he  must  hack,  without
being  able  to  expectoi-ate  anything  (after  six  hours),'. — Roughness  and
dryness  in  the  back  part  of  the  palate  and  fauces,  without  any  thirst,  worse
when  swallowing  (after  twenty-five  hours),^

Stomach. — Although  his  appetite  is  very  great,  yet  he  does  not  relish
his  food  ;  it  seems  offensive  to  him  ;  at  the  same  time  a  fulness  in  the  chest,
owing  to  suppressed  eructations ;  he  feels  unable  to  satisfy  his  appetite  by
eating  a  plentiful  dinner  (after  six  hours),^ — Loss  of  appetite  while  at
dinner,'". — Desires  this  thing  and  that,  but  is  disgusted  with  everything
brought  to  her,'". — Particular  aversion  to  meat,'". — Thirst,'". — [150,]  Great
desire  for  cold  drink  (after  fifteen  liours),'. — Raging  desire  to  drink,  but  it
forsook  her  when  she  put  the  glass  to  her  lips,'". — He  has  no  desire  for
drink,  nevertheless  he  craves  warm  drinks  more  than  cold ;  he  did  not
feel  any  chilliness  after  the  cold  drinks,'. — Eructation  of  water,'". — Many
empty  eructations  after  a  meal,'. — Bilious  eructations,'. — Frequent  hic-
cough (after  three  hours),*. — Sense  of  nausea  in  the  stomach  (after  one
hour),'. — Nausea,  with  waterbrash,'". — Nausea,  especially  during  a  meal,".
— [160.]  Empty  feeling  in  stomach,'". — In  the  beginning  of  the  meal  cut-
ting pain  in  the  stomach,  like  soreness;  it  went  off  during  the  meal  (after
three  days),^ — Nausea  during  a  walk,  as  if  he  would  faint,  accompanied
by  great  lassitude  all  over,  which  did  not  abate  by  sitting  down ;  after-  ■
wards  it  seemed  as  if  the  nausea  rose  into  his  head,  and  he  felt  hungry,'. —
Cutting-tearing  in  the  pit,  increased  by  moving  the  trunk,  after  dinner,'. —
Cramplike,  pinching  pain  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,
when  sitting  (after  thirteen  hours),*.

Abdomen. — Cutting  under  the  short  ribs,  in  the  right  side  of  the  ab-
domen, when  moving  the  trunk  (after  forty-eight  hours),**. — Loud  rumbling
in  the  abdomen,'. — Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  eructations,^ —
Fermenting  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,
accompanied  by  incarceration  of  flatulence  (after  three  hours),". — Painless
motions,  grumbling,  and  gurgling  in  the  intestines,  continuing  almost  un-
ceasingly for  three  hours,*. — [170.]  Emission  of  stinking  flatulence,*. —
Slight  warmth  over  the  abdomen,'". — Cramplike  colic  when  walking,^. —


348  ANGUSTURA.

Stitches  in  the  ahdomen,  followed  by  drawings/. — Drawing  pain,  as  from
a  bruise,  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  walking  in  the  open  air
(after  one  hour),^ — Dull  stitches  in  the  abdomen,  on  the  left  side  near  the.
navel  (after  twenty-four  hours),^ — Dull,  shaking,  transient  shootings  here
and  there,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomeu,^ — Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium
transversely  over  the  pubis,  with  pressure  towards  the  rectum  (after  a  quar-
ter of  an  hour),*. — Cutting  and  gurgling  in  the  hypogastrium,  transversely  ,
over  the  pubis,  when  taking  warm  milk  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),*.
— Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  from  within  outward,  accompanied  by  an-
guish (after  sixteen  hours),l — [180.]  Sense  as  of  drawing  and  cramping
in  the  pelvis,  when  walking,'. — Dull  stitches  in  the  left  os  innominatum,
just  behind  the  hip-joint;  they  occur  in  short  paroxysms,  and  are  increased
by  every  motion ,^— Pains  in  the  sacrum  and  abdomen,  as  if  things  wound
together  lay  in  the  abdomen,  and  were  sore  and  paralytically  pressed  upon
the  sacrum,  preventing  her  from  walking  about,  as  if  she  were  too  old  and
too  tired  ;  stooping  was  also  difficult,'". — Cramplike  pressure  over  the  pubis
when  sitting,  as  if  something  were  boring  out  there  (after  twelve  hours),^
— Periodic  throbbing  and  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  in  a  spot  above  the
mons  veneris,'". — Several  times  a  sensation  in  the  intestines  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on,*. — Pinching  in  the  right  lumbar  region  when  at  rest,'. —
Cutting  pain  in  the  left  lumbar  region,  from  within  outwards  (after  three
hours),'. — Cramplike  pain  at  the  upper  border  of  the  ilium,  extending  to
the  spine  (after  twelve  hours),'.

Stool  mtd.  Amis. — During  a  soft  stool  there  was  a  painful  tenesmus
of  the  rectum,  as  if  it  had  been  contracted,  with  distension  of  the  hsemor-
rhoidal  veins,  and  a  burning  pain,  as  if  the  rectum  were  being  corroded
(after  two  days),^ — [190.]  Sensation  in  the  rectum,  as  if  it  would  protrude ;
this  symptom  is  followed  by  a  yellow,  soft,  very  profuse  evacuation  (after
one  and  a  half  hours),^. — Frequent  urging  in  the  rectum,  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on  immediately,  with  shiverings  over  the  face,*. — Stitching  in
the  rectum,'". — (Tingling-itching  of  the  I'ectum,  as  from  ascarides),'. — Pro-
trusion of  hsemorrhoids  during  a  hard,  knotty  stool,  with  contractive  pain
and  sticking  after  feeling  a  contraction  of  the  rectum  the  day  before,'". —
Haemorrhoids  remain  protruded,  even  during  the  night,'". — Indications  of
diarrhoja,  with  drawings  through  all  the  intestines  (after  three  ho^rs),^ —
Frequently  slight  desire  for  stool ;  he  felt  as  if  the  passage  would  not  take
place  ;  upon  much  straining  a  few  hard  pieces  came  out  (after  twelve  hours),*.
— Thin,  copious  stool,  without  any  pain  (after  two  hours),\ — -The  stool  was
not  as  thin  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  indications  of  diarrhoea,*.
— [200,]  Three  profuse,  very  thin  stools  within  four  hours,*. — ^Early  in
the  morning,  diarrhoea  comes  on  after  previous  colic  and  nausea ;  the  last
evacuation  was  only  mucus,'. — Colic  and  diarrhoea  ;  the  last  evacuation  is
only  mucus  (after  twelve  and  eighty-four  hours),'. — Every  evacuation  is
followed  by  shiverings  over  the  face  and  goose-skin^*. — Sensation  as  if  stool
had  not  been  passed  sufficiently,  as  if  more  would  come,*. — Daily  stool,  as
usual,  only  more  hard ;  usually  has  soft  stools,". — Moderate  costiveness,^

Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  followed  by  the  pro-
fuse emission  of  white  urine;  tenesmus  after  micturition  (after  thirty-six
hours),l— Inclination  to  pass  urine  during  the  day;  the  urine  is  of  a  light
color,  and  is  passed  in  large  quantities  (after  one  and  a  half  houre),". —
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  but  little  urine  (after  two  hours),*. — [210.]
Frequent  micturition  (after  one  hour),". — Burning  after  micturition ;  one
is  obliged  frequently  to  urinate,  although  but  a  few  dark-yellow  drops  are


ANGUSTURA.  349

emitted  each  time;  they  cause  a  burning  each  time,'. — Urine  copious,  and
nearly  as  light-colored  as  water  (after  one  hour),". — Orange-colored  urine,
soon  becoming  turbid  (after  twenty-four  hours),'.

Sexual  Ovgans. — Stitches,  sometimes  itching,  of  the  prepuce,'. —
Voluptuous  itching  of  the  tip  of  the  glans,  which  forces  one  to  rub;  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air  (after  six  and  a  half  hours),^ — Itching  of  the  scrotum,'.
— Drawing  in  the  left  spermatic  cord,  alternating  with  twitches,  accompa-
nied by  a  sensation  of  shivering  in  the  neighboring  parts  of  the  scrotum  and
thigh,''. — Prolapsus  uteri,"*. — Rapid  successive  stitches  in  the  uterus,  relieved
by  bathing  with  cold  water,'".— [220.]  Short-lasting  pressure  in  the  right
ovary,'". — Itching  pimples  on  the  left  labium  major  (these  usually  appear
wheu  the  menses  have  been  retarded  some  time);  they  burn  when  urinating;
larger  pimples  on  the  labia  minora,  that  itch  when  touched,'". — Discharge  of
milky  mucus  from  the  vagina,'". — A  slight  yellowish  discharge  from  the
vagina  the  day  before  the  menses  appear,'". — Irritation  and  raging  in  the
genitals,'". — Transient  irritation  in  the  genitals,  and  a  contraction  of  the
ligaments  of  the  uterus,'". — Itching  and  swelling  of  the  genitals,  without
voluptuous  sensation,'". — Itching  in  the  genitals,  obliging  her  to  scratch  so
as  to  draw  blood;  after  which  it  abated,'". — Disagreeable  tickling  in  the
geuitals,'". — During  her  morning  sleep  she  had  a  pollution,  and  was  out  of
humor  after  it,'". — [230.]  Menses  appear  two  weeks  later  than  usual,'".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Trembling  sensation,  internally,  re-
sembling hiccough,  during  an  inspiration;  the  inspiration  is  made  in  two
jerks,  from  within  outwards  (after  eight  hours),l — Frequent  irritation  to
cough,  caused  by  a  tickling  arising  from  under  the  sternum  and  extending
into  the  back,'". — -Irritation  to  dry,  hacking  cough,'". — Scratching  (Kratzen)
in  larynx,  with  short  cough  (after  nine  and  a  half  hours),". — Tickling  in  the
larynx,  inducing  a  dry,  short,  and  hacking  cough,  continuing  a  long  time
(after  two  and  three-quarters  hours),*. — Stitch  in  the  epiglottis  (immedi-
ately),'.— Tenacious  phlegm  in  the  trachea,  difficult  to  hawk  up  (after  tea
and  eleven  hours) ,1 — The  voice  is  louder  and  firmer  (curative),  (after  five
and  a  half  hours),''. — Hoarseness,  occasioned  by  much  phlegm  in  the  throat
(after  ten  hours),^ — [240.]  Cough,  as  if  something  weighed  on  his  lungs,'".
— Frequent  dry  cough  (after  rising  in  morning),". — Frequent  short  cough,
followed  by  one  hiccough,'. — Some  hacking  cough,'". — Violent  cough,  deep
from  the  trachea,  early  in  the  morning,  accompanied  by  expectoration  of
yellow  mucus  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — A  short  and  hacking  cough  the
whole  day,  owing  to  a  tickling  in  the  larynx,  only  when  walking  in  the
open  air,  with  a  rattling  in  the  chest  and  expectoration  of  much  yellow
mucus,*. — Expectoration  of  sourish,  salty  water,'".

Chest. — During  a  walk,  peculiar  sensation  of  lightness  and  well-feeling
in  the  chest  (after  two  hours),". — Pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest  when
moving  in  bed,  early  in  the  morning,  and,  during  the  day,  when  the  arms
are  brought  together,  they  pain  as  if  bruised ;  on  touching  the  parts,  they
feel  no  pain,  not  even  when  breathing,'. — Quickly  passing  tightness  of  the
chest  (immediately),'. — [250.]  Tightness  of  the  chest  and  pressure  in  the
left  side,  wheu  walking  fast  (after  twelve  hours),^ — Oramp  in  the  chest,  as
if  one  had  suddenly  taken  a  violent  cold,". — Pressure  on  the  chest,  toward
the  axilla  and  on  the  tendon  of  the  pectoralis  major  (after  three  days),^ —
Cutting  pressure  through  the  thorax,  from  within  outwards,  with  a  sense
of  anguish  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Sharply  pressing,  almost  pinching,  pain
at  a  small  place  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  chest  (after  fifteen  hours),'. —
Oppression  of  the  chest,'". — Great  oppression  of,  and  pressure  upon,  the


350  ANGUSTURA.

chest,  with  pressure  on  the  sides  of  the  frontal  bone,  and  violent  palpita-
tion of  the  heart,  towards  evening,  when  going  upstairs  (after  two  hours),''.
— Drawing  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  thorax  (soon  after  taking),". —
Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  chest,  even  when  pressed  only  feebly  (after
twenty-four  hours),'.' — Cutting  pressure  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  first  only
during  expectoration;  afterwards  changed  to  cutting  thrusts,  which  continue
even  on  holding  the  breath  (after  one  hour),'. — [260.]  Lying  on  the  side
is  painful," — Cutting  stitches  in  the  last  rib  during  an  inspiration,  and,
moreover,  before  going  to  sleep  and  after  lying  down,'. — Feeling  as  if  the
lung  were  turned  over,'". — Contractive  pressure  in  the  ribs,  above  the  hypo-
chondria, but  more  in  the  right  side,'". — Painful  contractive  sensation  on
right  side  of  chest,  when  touching  it,  as  if  it  were  bruised ;  worse  when  raising
her  arm,'". — Pressure  across  the  whole  right  side  of  the  chest  and  abdomen,
as  if  these  parts  were  being  compressed  in  front  and  behind,  accompanied  by
sharp  cutting,  downward,  in  the  sternum  and  in  the  spine,  increased  by  inspi-
ration and  every  movement  of  the  trunk  (after  five  hours),'. — Dull  stitches
between  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder  and  the  neck,^ — Stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  thorax,  with  feeling  of  lassitude  in  the  knees  (after  one  hour),".
— Very  sharp  itching  stitches  in  front,  in  the  last  true  rib  of  the  right
side,  which,  in  the  beginning,  do  not  pass  off  by  scratching,  but  afterwards
disappear  of  themselves  (after  twenty-four  hours),''. — Stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  thorax;  in  the  shin-bones  when  walking  (after  two  hours),". —
[270.]  Sticking  in  right  lung,  extending  under  right  shoulder," — Oppres-
sion in  the  sternum," — Several  times,  severe  pressure  on  the  right  side  of
the  sternum,  as  from  a  blunt  body  (immediately),". — When  taking  as  deep
an  inspiration  as  possible,  it  seems  to  be  arrested  under  the  upper  portion
of  the  sternum;  he  there  feels  a  pain  like  a  dull,  still  stitch  or  pressure
(after  seventy-two  hours),''. — Pressure  several  times  on  the  left  side  of  the
sternum  (after  one  hour),". — Cutting  thrusts  in  the  sternum  and  spine,  from
without  inwards  (after  thirty-six  hours),'. — Single  stitches  in  the  sternum,
when  sitting  (after  twenty-eight  hours),". — Sensation  under  the  sternum  as
if  a  sore  place  were  being  scratched,  the  size  of  a  finger;  worse  every  sec-
ond day,'".

Heart  and  J^ulse. —  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  in  the  evening,
when  lying  on  the  left  side,  in  bed;  better  when  sitting  up,^ — Violent  pal-
pitation of  the  heart  when  sitting  or  stooping,  with  a  painful  sensation  as  if
the  heart  were  constricted,^. — [280.]  Painful  thrust  in  the  region  of  the
heart,^

Ifeck  and,  JBack, — Violent  trembling  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  on
the  left  side  (after  two  hours),*. — Burning  in  the  nape  of  the  neck," — Ex-
cessive wrenching  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  that  bent  the  head  to  the  right,"
— Tension  in  forepart  of  right  side  of  neck,  with  sharp  stitches,  even  when
at  rest  (after  two  hours),'. — Drawing  stitch  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,'. —
Neck  as  if  swollen,  after  the  headache,'". — Drawing  in  the  7ieck  (immedi-
ately),".— Slight  pain  in  the  cervical  vertebrae;  worse  on  raising  the  arms,".
— Stiff  pain,  like  drawing,  between  tJie  scapulcc  and  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed;  when  rising,  she  was  unable  to  move  her
arras  on  account  of  the  pain,  nor  was  she  able  to  turn  her  neck  the  whole
forenoon;  several  mornings  in  succession,  lasting  until  noon,  with  weakness
of  the  whole  body,'. — [290.]  Pressing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and
back  (in  three-quarters  of  an  hour),". — Bruised  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
neck,  on  the  left  side,  towards  the  shoulder ;  the  parts  feel  as  if  strained  too
much ;  only  during  motion,  and  abating  in  the  open  air,'. — Swelling  of  the


ANGUSTURA.  351

right  side  of  the  neck,  so  that  she  could  not  turn  her  head," — Tension  in
the  muscles  of  the  back,  near  the  axilla;  he  finds  it  difficult  to  lift  his  arm
(immediately),'. — Pain  in  the  spinal  vertebrae,  as  after  a  blow,". — Contrac-
tion under  the  shoulder-blades,'". — Cutting  stitches  in  the  scapula,'. — At
night,  in  bed,  he  frequently  feels  a  stitch  on  the  right  side  near  the  spine,
between  the  scapulae;  the  stitch  is  felt  during  motion,  and  appears  to  pene-
trate deep  into  the  chest,^ — Chilliness  in  the  back;  cold  hands  for  half  an
hour  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Chilliness  in  the  back  (after  one  and
a  half  hours),". — [300.]  Chilliness  in  the  back  (after  one  hour),". — Wan-
dering pains  in  the  back  (soon  after  taking),". — Early  in  the.  morning,
when  in  bed,  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  everything  were  broken ;
after  rising,  she  was  unable  to  pick  up  anything  from  the  floor  for  several
hours;  tliis  was  followed  by  hunger;  afterwards,  cutting  pains  in  the  abdo-
men and  loose  stools,  which,  finally,  became  slimy,'.— ^Stitches  below  and
by  the  side  of  the  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting,^ — Pain  in  the  small  of
the  back,  rather  on  one  side,  as  if  bruised;  drawing  and  pressive,  when  sit-
ting (after  thirty-five  hours),^ — Pressure  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if
bruised;  ttie  pain  often  roused  her  from  sleep;  it  was  worse  at  4  o'clock  in
the  morning,  but  had  disappeared  when  she  rose,'. — Dull  gurgling  in  the
sacrum  (after  one  hour),'.

Extremities  iti  General. — Drawings  in  the  legs,  shoulders,  mus-
cles of  the  arms  (immediately),". — Drawing  in  the  joints  of  the  feet,  in  the
head,  in  the  fingers  (immediately),". — Drawing  in  the  toes,  pressure  in  the
feet,  joints  of  the  feet  and  legs,  in  shoulders  (soon  after  taking),". — [310.]
Pressure  in  shoulders  and  knees  (immediately),". — Pressure  in  the  shoul-
ders ;  in  the  toes  and  feet  (after  one  hour  j,".— Pressure  on  the  back  of  the
feet,  in  the  toes,  in  the  joints  of  the  hands  (third  day),". — Severe  pressure
in  the  muscles  of  the  arms,  in  the  knees,  legs  and  joints  of  the  feet  (after
eight  hours),". — Severe  pressing  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms,  in  the
elbows,  knees,  fingers  (after  ten  hours),". — When  sitting,  a  bruised  sensa-
tion in  the  knees;  after  awhile,  the  same  in  the  arms  (immediately),". —
Bruised  sensation  irn  arms  and  legs  (after  two  hours),".

Upper  Extremities. — Painful  twitchings  in  the  top  of  the  shoul-
der,'.— Pain  in  the  right  shoulder,  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less,'". — Con-
tractive pressure  in  the  right  shoulder,"*. — [320.]  Drawing  behind  the
right  shoulder,  extending  to  the  head,". — Pressive  pain  in  the  humerus,  as
from  a  bruise  (after  one  and  three-quarters  hours),"*. — Stitches  in  the  right
shoulder,'". — Pricking  on  the  right  shoulder,'". — Stitching  and  drawing  in
left  shoulder  (soon  after  taking),". — Pressive  cutting  in  the  axilla  (after
half  an  hour),'. — Transient  warmth  spreading  through  right  arm,'". — Upon
extending  the  arm  for  a  long  time,  it  feels  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were  held
in  the  hand  a  long  time ;  a  sort  of  paralysis,'. — Heaviness  in  the  arm  re-
lieved in  the  evening,'". — -Fine  tearing  in  the  arms,  apparently  more  in  the
bones,  and  worse  when  at  rest  than  in  motion  (after  two  hours),'. — [330.]
Pressing  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms,  with  drawing  (soon  after  taking),". —
Raging  and  stitches  in  the  arm,  with  contraction  between  the  shoulders,'". —
Fine  itching  of  the  arms,  which  passes  off  by  rubbing  (after  one  hour),'. —
Severe  pains  in  the  elbows ;  they  feel  bruised  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),".
— Stiffness  in  the  elbow-joints,  with  weakness  of  the  forearms,'. — Pain  in
the  elbow-joint,  apparently  in  the  tendons,  as  if  he  had  knocked  them
against  something,  increased  by  moving  the  arm,  or  leaning  upon  it  (after
walking  in  the  open  air),  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Pressure  in  the  elbows
(immediately),". — The  left  arm  feels  heavy,  when  one  is  walking,  with


352  ANGUSTURA.

pressure  on  the  outside,  iu  the  region  of  the  elbow-joint,  as  if  the  arm  were
being  pulled  down  when  left  hanging  free  (after  four  hours),l — Drawing
in  the  forearm  and  hand,  like  a  cramp,\ — Frequent  stitches  from  the  hand
to  the  elbow," — [340.]  Pressure  in  the  wrists  (immediately),". — Eight
wrist  feels  as  if  dislocated,  with  sticking,'". — Single,  deeply  penetrating
stitches  over  the  right  wrist-joint  (after  seven  hours),'. — Paralytic  weakness
in  the  hands  and  elbow-joints  ;  he  could  scarcely  move  them  ;  but  without
stiffness,  and  without  otherwise,  any  difficulty ;  with  chilliness  and  want  of
animal  heat  (after  one  hour),^ — Cold  hands  (after  one  hour),". — Cold  hands
and  fingers  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Heaviness  of  the  hands,'". —
The  hands  feel  swollen,'". — Drawing  and  pressing  pains  in  the  hand  and
fingers  (after  four  hours),". — Feeling  of  heat  on  dorsum  of  left  hand  (after
six  hours),^ — [350.]  Rheumatic,  drawing  pressure  upon  the  dorsum  of  the
right  hand,  in  the  evening,^ — Dull  stitches  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand,
in  front  of  the  wrist-joint  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Drawing  around  the  joint
of  the  thumb,  as  if  sprained,  especially  when  bending  the  thumb,l — Pres-
sive  pain,  internally  in  the  flesh  of  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb  (after  quarter
of  an  hour),*.- — Severe  pressure  in  the  fingers,  hands,  muscles  of  the  arms
(immediately),". — The  fingers  of  the  right  hand  only  are  cold  to  the  touch,
and  they  feel  cold  (inwardly),  (after  three  hours),^. — Drawing  in  the  fingers
(immediately),". — Drawing  in  the  fingers  (after  one  hour),". — Drawing  in
one  of  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,'. — Pain  in  the  lowest  joints  of  the  fingers,
as  when  moving  an  ulcerated  part,'. — [360.]  Pain  in  the  right  middle
finger,  as  if  torn  out,'. — The  ring  finger  feels  insensible,  numb,  pithy,  and
as  if  dead,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Weakness  of  the  lower  extremities,  especially
felt  above  the  knee-joint,  as  after  a  long  walk,'. — Sudden  heaviness  and
lassitude  in  the  lower  extremities  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — He  cannot
walk  fast,  his  legs  feel  too  stiffj^ — The  upper  part  of  the  hip-joint  feels
painful,  as  if  luxated;  it  is  almost  unfit  for  walking,^ — During  motion,
frequent  pain  in  the  hip,  as  if  stiff  or  dislocated,  almost  like  cramp.'. —
Pressive,  drawing  pain  deep  in  the  tendons  of  the  hip'joints,  upon  rising
from  a  seat  (after  seven  hours),^ — Fine  shootings  in  the  skin  of  the  glutei
muscles,  accompanied  by  tingling,  externally,'. — Boring,  paralytic  pain  in
the  region  of  the  ischiatic  nerve,  on  the  back  part  of  the  thigh,^ — [370.]
Tensive,  pressive  pain  in  the  upper  and  anterior  portion  of  the  rectus  mus-
cle of  the  thigh,  when  stretching  the  part  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),^-^
Cramplike  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  only
when  walking  (after  twenty-one  hours),'. — The  anterior  muscles  of  the
right  thigh  feel  paralyzed ;  jsainful  tension  when  moving  the  muscles,^ —
When  bending  the  knee,  one  feels  a  tensive  pain  in  the  anterior  muscles
of  the  right  thigh,^ — Drawing  aching  on  the  external  side  of  the  thighs
when  walking,''. — Pressing  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs  (immedi-
ately),".— Fine  tearing  in  the  thighs,  apparently  more  in  the  bones ;  worse
at  rest  than  in  motion  (after  two  hours),'. — Sharp  stitches  in  the  anterior
muscles  of  the  right  thigh,^. — Jerking  stitches  in  the  left  thigh,  and  in  the
upper  border  of  the  ilium,  extremely  painful,  and  felt  only  when  sitting  (after
quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Throbbing  above  the  flexor  of  the  left  thigh,'". —
[380.]  Fine  itching  of  the  thigh,  going  off  by  rubbing  (after  one  hour),'. —
Sense  of  drawing  and  cramping  in  the  right  knee-joint  when  walking,
or  when  standing  upon  the  foot  stretched  forward,'. — Pressure  in  the
knees  and  thighs  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Pressure  in  the  knees
(immediately),". — Stitches  running  up  in  the  external  tendons  of  the  knee,


ANGUSTURA.  353

when  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  thirteen  hours),'. — Bruised  sensation
in  the  knees  (third  day),". — Bruised  pain  in  the  knees  (immediately),". —
Intermittent  prickings  in  the  left  patella,  when  walking  in  the  open  air
(after  six  hours),^ — Paralytic  sensation,  like  a  contraction  of  the  ligaments,
from  the  middle  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  as  far  as  the  calf,  both  when  at
rest  and  in  motion  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — The  feet  and  legs  feel
numb  and  pithy,  as  far  as  the  knees,  but  without  tingling,'. — [390.]  Draw-
ing in  the  legs  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Cramplike  straining  drawing
from  below  upward,  in  the  calf,  and  also  in  the  thighs,  extending  upwards
from  the  bend  of  the  knee,l — Stitches  in  the  calves  (immediately),". —
Stitches  in  the  calves,  and  pressing  pains  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". —
Drawing  at  the  sides  of  the  tendo  Achillis,  in  the  calves  (immediately),". —
Drawing  at  the  sides  of  the  tendo  Achillis  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),".
— Burning  in  the  tibiae,  when  walking,^. — When  walking,  a  drawing,
superficial  (softly  pressive)  pain  in  the  tibia,  and  around  the  ankle,  with
a  sensation  as  if  the  tibia  would  break,  which  prevents  him  from  walking,^
— Drawing  in  the  tibia  and  the  neighboring  muscles,'. — Pressure  and  draw-
ing in  the  tibia,  iu  the  evening,  when  sitting  (after  twelve  hours), ^ — [400.]
Dull  stitches  in  the  left  tibia  (after  one  hour),'. — Stitching  in  the  skin  of
the  shin-bones  (immediately),".- — Paralysis  of  the  ankles,^. — Feeling  as  of
burning,  around  the  right  external  malleolus,  when  walking  or  sitting
(after  twenty-six  hours),^ — Dull,  drawing  stitches  in  the  right  ankle,  when
'  sitting  (after  eleven  hours),''. — Early  in  the  morning,  when  walking  about,
a  drawing  and  aching  in  the  ankles,  with  heat  in  the  joints,  and  sensation
as  if  they  were  dislocated,  near  the  malleolus  exteruus  (after  three  days),^
— Left  ankle  as  if  sprained ;  sometimes,  also,  the  knee-pan,'°. — Severe  boring
in  the  ankles,  and  in  the  feet  (immediately),". — When  crossing  the  legs,  a
cramplike,  tearing,  drawing  in  the  left  heel,  which  is  standing  still,  and  a
pressive  drawing  iu  the  other  knee,  which  is  laid  across  (after  ten  hours),',
— Pressure  in  the  right  heel,'". — [410.]  Stitches  in  the  heel,  when  sitting,
iu  the  evening,''. — Sweat  of  the  feet,*. — The  external  border  of  the  foot,  and
the  part  below  the  external  malleolus,  go  to  sleep  when  walking,^. — Pain
of  the  foot,  when  stepping  upon  it,'. — Her  right  foot  felt  warm,'". — Momen-
tary cramps  in  the  feet,'. — Cramplike  pain  in  the  foot,  followed  next  day,
by  a  pressive  pain,  and  a  feeling,  when  standing  upon  the  foot,  as  if  it  had
been  bruised,'. — Severe,  compressive  sensation  in  the  right  foot  (after  one
and  a  half  hours),". — Pressure  under  the  right  metatarsal  bones,  as  from
great  fatigue  after  walking  (in  the  morning,  in  bed),'". — Sense  of  stiffness
in  the  feet  (lower  extremities),  almost  as  if  the  contact  with  an  invalid  had
deprived  him  of  all  strength,'. — [420.]  Cramplike  pain  in  the  forepart  of
the  foot,  without  any  real  contraction  of  muscles,  more  when  sitting,  or  at
rest  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Cramplike,  pressive  drawing  on  the  border
of  the  left  foot,  on  the  prominence  of  the  fifth  metatarsal  bone,  as  if  he  had
sprained  the  joint  by  a  misstep  (after  five  hours),^ — Frequent  drawing  in
the  feet,  especially  at  the  external  edge  (immediately),". — Pressing,  draw-
ing pains  in  the  feet  (after  two  hours),". — Pressing  pain,  as  from  a  sprain,
in  the  right  foot,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  two  and  a  quarter  hours) ,^
— Pressure  in  the  joints  of  the  feet,  shoulders  (immediately),". — Shudders
from  below  upward  in  the  right  foot,'". — Formication  iu  the  foot,  and  strong
throbbing,'". — Severe  stitches  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  (soon  after  taking),". —
Sudden  tearing  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  when  sitting,^ — [430.]  Almost  lan-
cinating tearing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  mostly  when  moving  the
parts.l — Drawing  in  the  toes  (immediately),". — Stitches  in  the  toes  (after
VOL.  I.— 23


354  ANGUSTURA.

one  and  a  half  hours),". — Pricking  in  the  right  toes,  and  the  same  severe
stitching  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  right  foot,  moving  upward  to  the  lower
leg  (after  one  hour),".

Generalities. — In  the  evening,  after  sitting  an  hour,  he  feels  quite
stiff' and  contracted;  after  rising  from  his  seat  he  is  urtable  to  straighten
himself  (after  thirteenth  hour),^ — Inclination  to  constant  stretching,'. —
Prostration  as  after  a  fever,'". — Excessively  tired,  especially  in  the  thighs,
after  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — Lassitude  and  weariness  of  all  the  limbs,
wi'thout  any  sleepiness,'. — Sensation  in  the  whole  body  as  if  he  had  lost  his
strength,  and  especially  as  if  the  marrow  of  the  bones  had  become  stiifer
and  coagulated  (immediately),'. — [440.]  OracJcing  in  all  the  joints  (after
twenty-sixth  hour),^. — Cracking  in  almost  all  the  joints,  but  not  audible,'. —
When  walking,  a  painful  tension  in  the  muscles,  here  and  there,*. — Periodic
hammering  and  tearing,  as  if  a  weight  oppressed  her  inwardly,'". — Frequent
drawing  in  the  occiput,  on  the  sides  of  the  head,  in  the  fingers,  shoulders,
and  joints  of  the  hands  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),".^ — Drawing  in  head,
hands,  and  fingers  (soon  after  taking),". — Pressure  in  the  knees  (soon  after
taking),". — Drawing,  pressing  pains  in  the  joints  during  a  walk  (after  one
hour  and  a  half),". — Drawing  and  pressure  in  head,  chest,  shoulders,
feet  (immediately),". — Drawing,  pressing  pains  in  the  feet,  in  the  muscles
of  the  thighs,  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arms,  in  the  knees,  on  the  edges
of  the  feet,  in  the  bones  of  the  head  (after  rising  in  the  morning),".^Pres-
sure  in  the  temples,  in  the  feet,  in  the  maxillse,  arms,  several  times,  as  from
a  blunt  body,  especially  severe  on  the  sides  of  the  forehead  and  on  the  back
of  the  feet  (immediately),". — [450.]  Pressing  and  boring  in  different  parts
of  the  head,  in  the  forehead,  muscles  of  chest,  and  of  the  back  (after  eight
hours),". — ^The  whole  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  and  of  the  thigh  and  leg,
seems  bruised,  and  when  walking,  threatens  to  fall  together,  on  account  of
a  rheumatic  drawing  pain  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),^— Stitches  in  the
right  thorax  and  feet  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),".

S/cln. — Itching,  in  the  evening,  in  bed  ;  after  rubbing  the  parts,  flat,
very  painful  ulcers  appear,'. — Irritability  of  the  skin,  with  burning;  she  is
often' obliged  to  bare  her  arms,'". — For  four  days,  frequent  itching  on  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  skin ;  scratching  only  slightly  relieves  (after  one  and  a
halt  honrs),".— Voluptuous  itching  of  the  tip  of  the  glans,  which  forces  one  to
rub,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (^after  six  and  a  half  hours),'. — Itching
of  the  scrotum,'. — Itching  pimples  on  the  left  labium  major  (these  usually
appear  when  the  menses  have  been  retarded  some  time) ;  they  burn  when
urinating;  larger  pimples  ou  the  labia  minora,  that  itch  when  touched,'". —
Itching  and  swelling  of  the  genitals,  without  voluptuous  sensation,'". — [460.]
Itching  in  the  genitals,  obliging  her  to  scratch,  so  as  to  draw  blood ;  after
which  it  abated,'". — Fine  itching  of  the  arms,  which  passes  off  by  rubbing
(after  one  hour),'. — Fine  itching  of  the  thigh,  going  off  by  rubbing  (after
one  hour),'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Excessive  yawning,  as  if  she  would  cramp
her  jaws,'". — Frequent  attacks  of  yawning,  without  any  sleepiness,  with  a
cramplike  pain  in  the  jaws,'. — Frequent  yawning,  with  extension  and
stretching  of  the  limbs  (after  twenty-four  hours),^.— Sleep,  towards  morn-
ing, with  dreams,^ — Sleepiness  during  dinner,'". — Great  sleepiness  in  the
evening,  until  9  o'clock ;  afterwards  is  wide  awake  until  after  midnight,''. —
In  the  evening,  great  physical  depression,  and  irresistible  inclination  to
sleep,  while  sitting;  he  sleeps  one  hour,  with  snoring,  but  afterwards  on
lying  down  cannot  fall  asleep  under  one  hour,'. — [470.]  When  sitting  and


ANGUSTUEA.  355

reading,  he  falls  asleep,  but  is  aroused  by  the  slightest  noise,  and  starts  up,
with  a  great  chill  which  thrills  through  and  through  hina,l — Very  light

slumber  about  noon,".— Restlessness  at  night,"". — Uneasy  sleep,'.^Uneasy
sleep;  she  often  wakes,  without  cause,\ — Uneasy  sleep  at  night,  which  came
only  towards  morning;  full  of  dreanis,^ — Uneasy  sleep,  full  of  dreams;  he
did  not  wake,  however;  with  emissions  two  nights  in  succession,''. — Wakes
up  in  the  night  and  cannot  get  to  sleep  again,'". — His  sleep  is  interrupted
by  dreams  until  6  o'clock  in  the  raoraing;  then  he  became  wide  awake,
afterwards  fell  asleep  again,  and  then  remained  sleepy  until  noon,l — During
her  morning  sleep  she  dreamt  that  she  was  in  a  magnetic  slumber,'". — [480.]
Vivid  dreams,  partly  disagreeable,  partly  anxious ;  he  frequently  woke ;  on
falling  asleep  again,  he  always  dreamed  of  something  else,^ — Confused
dreams,  partly  of  a  terrifying  nature,''. — Anxious,  distressing  dreams,  causing
her  to  weep  much,'".

Fever. — Chills  all  over,  with  nausea,'". — At  3  p.m.,  shivering,  with
goose-flesh,  abating  in  the  open  air,  without  thirst,  for  several  days  in  suc-
cession,'.— Internal  shivering,  at  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  with  violent
thirst,  without  subsequent  heat,  several  days  in  succession,'. — Early  in  the
morning,  chilliness  in  the  bed,  without  subsequent  heat,'. — Shivering  in  the
evening,  on  going  to  bed,'". — Inward  chill,  while  externally  warm  to  the
touch,'". — When  she  removed  her  shawl  from  her  neck  she  felt  cool ;  if  she

,  keep  it  on,  it  was  too  warm,'". — [490.]  Violent  chills  over  the  back,  when
walking  in  the  room,  in  the  forenoon  (after  twenty-five  hours),^— Much
thirst,  in  the  forenoon ;  an  hour  after,  chills  over  the  back,^ — Chilliness  in
back  and  extremities  (in  three-quarters  of  an  hour),". — Chilliness  in  the
back,  cold  hands  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Chilliness  over  the  back  ;
cold  hands  and  fingers  (after  one  hour),". — -Chilliness  in  the  back  and  cold
hands  several  times  during  the  day  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Chilli-
ness in  back,  cold  fingers  and  hands,  pressure  in  the  arms ;  the  coldness  lasts
over  half  an  hour  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Chilliness  over  the  back,
cold  hands  and  feet,  pressure  in  the  shoulders,  shin-bones,  for  half  an  hour
(after  one  and  a  half  hours),". — Chilliness  over  back,' cold  hands  and  feet,
drawing  in  the  forehead  (after  nine  and  a  half  hours),". — Severe  cold  sen-
sation over  the  back,  icy-cold  hands  and  fingers,  pressure  and  drawing  in
the  sides,  pressure  in  the  forehead,  lassitude  in  the  knees,  drawing  in  the
back,  the  whole  state  lasts  over  half  an  hour  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),". —
[600.]  Severe  cold  sensation  in  the  back,  with  icy-cold  hands  and  feet,  with
frequent  pressure  in  the  temples,  drawing  in  the  elbows  and  toes,  severe
stitches  on  the  inside  of  the  left  foot,  spreading  upward  over  the  malleolus
internus  (after  one  hour),". — The  chilliness  with  the  paroxysmal  pain  lasts
over  half  an  hour  (after  one  hour),".— Pains  continue  after  the  chill,". —
Increasing  warmth  over  the  whole  body,  towards  evening,'. — Heat  in  the
night,  especially  around  the  forehead,  so  that  she  is  unable  to  sleep  again
after  3  a.m.  ;  at  9  a.m.  she  has  a  chill,'. — Warmth  of  the  whole  body,  to-
wards evening,  with  pressive  drawing  in  the  side  of  the  forehead  with
thirst  (after  fourth  day),^ — Upon  entering  the  room  in  the  evening  he
feels  a  great  heat ;  he  knows  not  what  to  do  with  himself,  but  without
thirst  (after  second  day),'^.^-Slight  heat  after  the  chill,'. — In  the  afternoon
feeling  of  warmth  in  the  whole  body,  especially  the  cheeks,  not  without
thirst  (after  second  day),^ — Warmth  of  the  body,  except  the  head ;  the
cheeks  were  cold  (the  latter  part  of  this  symptom  was.owing  to  the  reaction
of  the  vital  principle ;  since  the  prover,  before  taking  Angustura,  had  been
affected  with  heat  of  the  cheeks  for  several  days),'. — [510.]  Increased  warmth


356  ANGUSTUEA.

of  the  cheeks  and  body,  with  pressive,  confused  headache,  in  the  temples
and  sides  of  the  forehead,  towards  evening,  for  three  days  in  succession,''. —
Wol^e  up  in  the  night,  feeling  increased  warmth,  which  obliged  her  to
throw  off  a  portion  of  the  bedclothes,'". — Mounting  heat,'". — Alternations
of  warmth  and  chilliness  during  the  night,'". — Flying  warmth,  alternating
with  shuddering,'". — Perspiration,'". — Violent  perspiration  atnightin  bed,'".
Conditions. — Aggravation.  —  {Morning),  Early,  uncomfortable  ;
early,  in  bed,  heat  around  head,  etc.;  early,  after  rising,  heaviness  in  fore-
head;  early,  drawing  in  sides  of  head,  etc.;  agglutination  of  eyes;  early,
on  rising,  dimness  before  eyes ;  early,  diarrhoea ;  after  rising,  frequent  dry
cough  ;  early,  violent  cough,  etc. ;  early,  in  bed,  stiff  pain  between  scapulse;
early,  in  bed,  pain  in  small  of  back;  after  rising,  pains  in  the  feet,  etc.;
early,  in  bed,  chilliness. — (Forenoon),  Violent  chills  over  the  back ;  much
thirst. — {About  noon).  Very  light  slumber. — (Afternoon),  Greatlj'  excited,
etc.;  great  animation,  etc.;  pressure  in  occiput;  burning  in  inner  half  of
eyes,  etc. — (  Towards  evening),  Headache  ;  headache  in  forehead  ;  warmth
over  whole  body ;  warmth  of  cheeks,  etc. — (Evening),  Headache  on  right
side,  etc.;  burning  in  inner  half  of  eyes,  etc.;  pressure  in  right  eye,  etc.;
hot  feeling  in  cheeks  ;  after  lying  down,  toothache  ;  during  slumber,  mouth
full  of  viscid  phlegm  ;  when  sitting,  pain  below  pit  of  stomach  ;  pressure
upon  dorsum  of  right  hand;  when  sitting,  pressure,  etc.,  in  tibia;  till  9
o'clock,  great  sleepiness;  great  physical  depression,  etc.;  on  going  to  bed,
shivering. — (Night),  In  bed,  stitch  in  right  side  ;  heat. — (4  a.m.).  Pressure
in  small  of  back. — (3  p.m.),  Shiverings,  etc.;  internal  chilliness,  etc. —
(9  P.M.),  Chilly. — (Every,  second  day),  Sensation  under  the  sternum,  as  if  a
sore  place  were  being  scratched. — -(Open  air),  Vertigo  ;  evening,  headache.
— (  Walking  in  open  air).  Lively  mood  ;  pain  in  abdomen  ;  itching  of  tip
of  glans ;  short  cough  ;  pain  in  elbow-joint ;  stitches  around  tendons  of
the  knee ;  prickings  in  left  patella ;  burning  in  the  tibia ;  drawing,  etc.,
pain  in  tibia,  etc.;  sprained  pain  in  right  foot;  excessively  tired. — (Bend-
ing the  thumb),  Drawing  around  thumb-joint. — (Bending  the  knee).  Pain  in
muscles  of  thigh. — (Grossing  running  water).  Vertigo. — (Crossing  legs).
Drawing  in  left  heel. — (At  dinner),  Loss  of  appetite ;  sleepiness. — (After
dinner),  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  etc. — (During  expiration),  Pressure  in  both
sides  of  chest,  etc. — (Extending  arms).  Feeling  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were
held  in  the  hands. — (During  inspiration),  Trembling  sensation  internally;
stitches  in  the  last  rib  ;  pressure  across  right  side  of  chest,  etc. — (Deep  in-
spiration), Dull  stitch  in  chest. — (During  intellectual  labor),  Feels  cheerful
and  lively. — (After  lying  down,  before  going  to  sleep).  Stitches  in  last  rib. —
(Lijing  on  left  side').  Evening,  in  bed,  palpitation  of  the  heart. — (During  a
meal).  Nausea. — (After  a  meal).  Empty  eructations. — (Motion),  Stitches  in
left  OS  innominatum  ;  bruised  pain  in  muscles  of  neck  ;  stitch  in  right  side;
pain  in  the  hip. — (Moving  the  parts).  Tension  in  muscles  of  thigh ;  tearing
on  dorsum  of  left  foot. — (Moving  in  bed).  Early  in  morning,  pain  in  mus-
cles of  chest. — (Moving  the  trunk),  Cutting-tearing  in  pit  of  stomach ;  cut-
ting under  short  ribs;  pressure  across  right  side  of  chest,  etc. — (Opening
jaws).  Pain  in  temporal  region. — (Raimig  arms).  Pain  in  cervical  vertebrse.
— (Raising  the  arm).  Contractive  sensation  on  right  side  of  chest. — (  When
reading).  Becomes  dizzy ;  easily  falls  asleep ;  twitches  between  eyebrows.
— (At  rest).  Pain  near  the  articulation  of  the  jaw  ;  pinching  in  right  lum-
bar region;  tearing  in  the  arms;  tearing  in  thighs;  cramplike  pain  in
forepart  of  foot. — (Rising  from  a  seat),  Pressive  pain  in  tendons  of  hip-
joint. — (  When  walking  in  the  room).  Violent  chills  over  the  back. — (Sitting),


ANILINUM.  357

All  symptoms ;  vertigo  over  occiput ;  heaviness  in  head ;  pressure  over
pubis ;  stitches  in  sternum ;  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  pains  in  small  of
back  ;  bruised  sensation  in  knees,  etc. ;  stitches  in  left  thigh;  burning  around
right  external  malleolus ;  in  evening,  stitches  in  the  heel ;  cramplike  pain
in  forepart  of  foot;  teai-ing  in  the  sole;  feels  stiff  and  contracted. — {After
the  usval  smoke"),  Bitter  taste  in  mouth. — {Standing  upon  the  foot  stretched
out),  Drawing,  etc.,  in  right  knee-joint — (Stepping  upon  the  part).  Pain  of
the  foot. — {During  hard  stool).  Protrusion  of  haemorrhoids. — (Stooping),
Bruised  feeling  in  forehead  ;  palpitation  of  heart. — {Stretching  the  part).
Pain  in  rectus  muscle  of  thigh. — {After  supper),  Immediately,  heat  of  the
face. — {Swallou'ing),  Roughness,  etc.,  in  back  part  of  palate,  etc. — (Bring-
ing the  arms  together).  They  pain  as  if  bruised. — (  When  urinating).  Pimples
on  genitals  burn. — {After  urination),  lenesrnns  of  the  bladder;  burning. —
(  Walking),  Stitches  in  shin-bones  ;  left  arm  feels  heavy  ;  pain  in  posterior
surface  of  thigh  ;  drawing-aching  on  exterior  surface  of  thighs  ;  drawing,
etc.,  in  right  knee-joint ;  burning  around  right  exterior  malleolus ;  outer
border  of  foot,  etc.,  goes  to  sleep  ;  tension  of  the  muscles ;  right  side  of  ab-
domen, etc.,  threatens  to  fall  together. — {During  a  walk).  Peculiar  sensation
of  lightness,  etc.,  in  chest;  pains  in  the  chest. — {When  walJdng fast),  Con-
fusion, etc.;  tightness  of  chest,  etc. — {Going  upstairs),  Towa.rds  evening,
oppression  upon  chest,  etc. — {After  walking).  In  morning,  in  bed,  pressure
under  right  metatarsal  bones. — (  Walking  by  the  side  of  a  ditch  full  of  water).
Vertigo. — {Taking  warm  milk),  Cutting,  etc.,  in  hypogastrium.

Amelioration. — {Evening),  Heaviness  in  the  arm. — {Night),  All
symptoms. — {Open  air),  Bruised  feeling  in  forehead;  bruised  pain  in  mus-
cles of  neck  ;  shiverings. — {Bathing  with  cold  water).  Stitches  in  uterus. —
{Touching  tooth  with  cold  tongue),  Pains  between  the  crowns  of  molar  teeth.
— {Laying  forehead  upon  table).  Pains  in  head. — {Opening or  closing  jaws),
Pain  near  the  articulation  of  the  jaws. — {After  scratching),  Itching  in  geni-
tals.— {Sitting  up).  Palpitation  of  the  heart. — {Rubbing),  Itching  of  arms  ;
itching  of  thighs. — {Walking),  All  pains;  nausea,  etc.;  drawing,  etc.,  in
pelvis.

ANILINUM.

.  (Amidobenzene.) CgHjNHj.

Lailler  (Gaz.  Heb.,  1873)  (M.  H.  Rev.,  Jl.,  1873).

Local  application  of  10  per  cent,  solution  of  the  hydrochlorate  to  pso-
riasis caused,  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  vomiting ;  repeated  fifteen  or  twenty
times  during  the  night ;  incontinence  of  urine,  with  a  little  tenesmus ;  night
rastless ;  the  next  morning  the  face  and  nearly  the  whole  of  body  cyan-
otic; pulse  116,  small,  regular;  slight  rales  in  chest;  severe  pains  in  heels
and  calves.  A  second  application  (afterward)  of  a  5  per  cent,  solution
caused,  in  two  hours,  headache,  irresistible  drowsiness,  coldness,  and  dysp-
noea ;  cyanosis  very  marked ;  voice  very  feeble.

In  another  case,  a  solution  of  2  per  cent,  caused,  in  four  hours,  loss  of
consciousness  (lasted  fifteen  minutes),  deep  cyanosis  (lasted  five  hours) ;
respiration  regular ;  cyanosis,  followed  by  great  paleness  and  cold  sweats  ;
following  night  sleepless ;  urine  high-colored.

A  boy,  cleaning  an  aniline  vat,  inhaled  the  fumes,  and  was  suddenly
seized  with  giddiness,  and  became  insensible ;  the  face  and  body  became
cold,  puke  slow  and  almost  imperceptible,  action  of  the  heart  feeble,  respi-


358  ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS.

ration  heavy  and  labored  ;  after  rallying  a  little  he  complained  of  pain  in
the  head  and  giddiness  ;'  his  face  had  a  purple  hue,  as  also  his  lips,  mouth,
and  nails;  this  blue  color  (like  a  patient  in  last  stage  of  cholera)  continued
the  next  day.

Cane  related  by  Mr.  Kiiagg,  of  Huddersfield,  Horn.  Obs.  (Eng.),  1,  64. —
James  K.,  aged  39,  of  average  health,  was  directed,  about  noon,  to  empty
four  carboys  of  the  nitrate  of  benzole  into  a  still.  By  mistake,  the  last
one  contained  aniline.  On  lifting  it,  he  struck  it  against  the  edge  of  the
still,  and  it  was  broken,  the  whole  contents  pouring  over  him;  none  en-
tered his  mouth,  but  the  fumes  were  freely  inhaled.  About  an  hour  after-
ward "he  broke  out  into  a  sweat,  and  felt  quite  giddy,  and  weak  in  the
head  and  stomach."  At  11  p.m.,  he  presented  the  following  appearance:
Face  and  whole  body  of  livid,  leaden  hue;  lips,  gums,  tongue, and  eyes  of
a  corpse-like  yellow ;  gasping  for  breath,  as  though  it  was  his  last.  There
was  no  convulsions,  and  he  was  perfectly  sensible  and  able  to  give  a  correct
account  of  his  feelings;  puLse  extremely  small  and  irregular.  The  only
pain  of  which  he  complained  was  in  the  head  and  chest.  He  recovered
under  the  free  use  of  brandy,  ammonia,  chloric  ether,  and  cold  affusions
to  the  head,  and  mustard  sinapisms  on  legs  and  thighs.


ANISUM  STELLATUM.
{See  IiiLiciUM  Anisatum.)

ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS.

Nat.  orrfer.  Com positse.  Comvion  jiames,  Roman  Chamomile;  Hunds-
Kamile. PreparaUon,  Tincture  from  the  whole  plant  beginning  to  flower.

Authority.  Dr.  Berridge  (M.  H.  Rev.,  13,  475).  Provings  with  the
tincture.

31  hid,.  — Very  low  spirits  ;  feeling  as  if  something  were  about  to  happen;
as  if  he  would  like  to  get  alone,  and  unburden  himself  by  crying  for  an
hour  or  two  ;  worse  from  3  to  5  p.m.  (eighteenth  day). — Exceedingly  cheer-
ful spirits  for  fifty-four  hours  (after  twelve  hours). — Rather  low  spirits
(thirty-eighth  day).^Feeliug  as  if  something  was  about  to  happen  to  hini
(fifteenth  day). — Dislike  to  go  out  of  doors  (thirty-eighth  day). — On  going
out  of  doors,  in  evening,  felt  nervous,  and  exceedingly  afraid  of  being  run
over  (eighteenth  day). — Much  desire  for  reading  and  deep  thinking,  which
he  could  do  without  tiring  his  brain  ;  lasting  forty-eight  hours  (after  twelve
hours). — Thoughts  wandered  ;  had  little  command  over  mind ;  distaste  for
hard  study ;  lasting,  more  or  less,  for  about  thirty  hours  (fifth  day).

Haad.—Bu]],  frontal  headache  (after  four  hours). — [10.]  Very  slight
headache,  8.30  a.m.,  as  if  from  congestion  in  forehead,  increased  by  bend-
ing head  down  ;  worse,  also,  for  three  or  four  hours,  about  two  hours  after
food ;  very  severe  about  two  hours  after  dinner  (third  day). — 6  p.m.,  a
boring,  oppressive  headache,  affecting  the  entire  forehead,  with  feeling  of
general  languor,  lasting  till  he  went  to  bed,  but  disappearing  before  morn-
ing (fourth  day).

Eyes. — After  rising  from  bed,  eyes  water,  chiefly  indoors;  at  same
time,  running  of  dear  water  (not  acrid)  from  left  nostril ;  worse  indoors,


ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS.  359

and  increased  immediately  on  going  into  a  colder  room  (forty-fifth  day). —
Eyes  watered  much,  especially  on  exposure  to  cold  (first  day). — Eyes
slightly  painful,  as  though  something  pressed  against  posterior  part  of  ball ;
worse  on  bending  head  downward  (third  day). — Tenderness  of  eyeballs  on
pressure  (after  four  hours).

Nose. — Sneezing  when  indoors  (had  not  been  exposed  to  cold)  (forty-
fifth  day).

Face. — Looks  pale  (nineteenth  day). — Lips  very  dry  (fourth  day).

Mouth. — Tongue  with  a  slight,  moist,  white  coating,  especially  in
centre  (after  four  hours).- — [20.]  Sense  of  taste  greatly  intensified,  so  that
he  enjoyed  food  very  much  (immediately). — Bitterness  in  mouth,  as  from
indigestion  (first  day).

Throat, — Slight  rawness  of  throat,  with  disposition  to  swallow  saliva
every  two  or  three  minutes,  with  a  view  to  relieve  it,  which  it  does  not  do
(forty-eighth  day). — Back  of  pharynx  feels  raw,  increasing  from  morning
to  evening;  worse  on  swallowing  saliva,  and  in  the  open,  cold  air  (forty-
fourth  day). — When  drinking,  a  feeling  of  constriction  of  pharynx,  appar-
ently about  the  junction  of  pharynx  and  oesophagus,  causing  a  slight  cut-
ting in  swallowing  liquids,  but  not  solids.

StO'inach. — Appetite  greatly  increased  ;  food  relished,  especially  meat
(third  day). — Loss  of  appetite  (fifth  day). — No  appetite  (after  four  hours).
—Loss  of  appetite  for  food  and  drink  at  all  his  meals  (seventeenth  day). —
Considerable  thirst,  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water  (fourth  day). — [30.]
On  drinking  tea,  had  no  relish  for  it ;  it  seemed  as  though  it  would  be
vomited,  because  the  pharynx  felt  as  if  contracted,  especially  at  posterior
part,  as  if  the  liquid  would  not  go  down.  Solid  food,  on  the  other  hand,  he
enjoyed,  and  swallowed  without  difficulty  (first  day). — A  qualmish  feeling
in  stomach,  nearly  amounting  to  sickness ;  worse  indoors,  passing  ofi"  out
of  doors  in  about  an  hour  (after  fifteen  minutes). — Considerable  nausea  in
stomach,  ceasing  on  going  into  the  open  air. — Much  pleasant  warmth  in
stomach,  followed  in  fifteen  minutes,  by  desire  for  food,  which  dinner  removed
(immediately).

Abdomen, — Pain  in  right  hypochondriura,  as  from  distension  with
fseces,  followed  by  a  great  desire  to  evacuate,  which  resulted  only  in  a  slight
passage  of  hard  mucus.  The  pain  continued  constantly  afterwards  all  day
(fifth  day). — Dull  aching  pain  over  the  whole  region  of  the  liver,  abiding
in  all  situations  or  postures,  lasting  twelve  hours ;  no  aggravation  on  pres-
sure, but  a  little  on  walking  (third  day). — 9.30  a.m.,  Wearying,  pain  in
loins,  especially  left,  as  from  muscular  exertion,  worse  in  walking ;  it  in-
creased gradually,  then  gradually  decreased  ;  by  3  p.m.  it  was  gone  (eighth

Stool  and  Anus, — Continued  itching  of  anus,  as  from  ascarides ;
worse  when  sitting  in  evening  (fifth  day). — Bowels  freer ;  fseces  softer,
easier,  and  continuous  (second  day). — Bowels  easily  moved,  early  in  morn-
ing; fseces  softer  than  usual;  pale  yellow;  not  very  offensive.  (Bowels
would  act  in  evening),  (second  day). — [40.]  Bowels  slightly  open ;  fasces
hard,  dark  (more  so  than  usual),  (sixth  day). — Yellowness  of  the  fseces
(one  ounce  of  tincture  in  water). — For  a  fortnight,  bowels  have  acted  only
twice  a  week ;  stools  otherwise  natural  (fortieth  day). — Constipation  for
three  days. — Constipation  for  five  days.

Urinary  Organs. — Intense  pain  in  and  over  bladder,  as  from  dis-
tension, extending  along  both  spermatic  cords  (as  far  as  contained  in  in-
guinal canal),  which  felt  as  if  varicose. — The  pain  continued,  with  varying


360  ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS.

severity,  for  three  or  four  hours,  then  intermitted,  varying  in  severity,  for
thirty  minutes  (after  eight  hours). — Desire  to  urinate,  with  intense  pain,
varying  in  severity,  at  neck  of  bladder,  as  from  distension;  pain  not  re-
lieved by  urinating,  though  the  desire  was  (after  six  hours). — Awoke  at
2  A.M.,  with  great  desire  to  urinate  ;  passed  a  normal  quantity  of  urine,  but
the  desire  was  felt  whenever  he  awoke,  for  four  or  five  hours  afterwards
(after  eight  hours). — Urinated  much  more  frequently  than  usual,  an  ordi-
nary amount  each  time,  all  apparently  normal ;  this  lasted  about  twelve
hours  during  the  day,  not  during  the  night  (first  day). — Had  to  urinate
four  or  five  times  during  the  night;  a  small  quantity  each  time,  so  that
the  total  amount  was  not  more  than  usual  (third  day).

Sexual  Oi'gctns. — [50,]  Seminal  emission,  about  4  a.m.  (after  ten
hour-'.)

Respiratory  Apparatus. — In  afternoon,  dry  cough  in  paroxysms,
caused  by  tickling  at  back  of  larynx,  which  was  momentarily  relieved  by
the  cough  ;  cough  worse  directly  he  went  into  a  warm  room,  but  not  when
in  bed  at  night  (sixteenth  day).

Heart  and  Pufse.—Fuhe  96  (usually  75-78),  full  and  soft  (third
day). — Pulse  (at  2.30  p.m.),  108;.  (usually  80),  small  and  weak;  it  grad-
ually decreased  towards  night,  resuming  its  normal  rate  next  morning
(after  five  and  a  half  hours).

Week'  aiid  BacU. — Carotid  vessels  in  neck  feel  a  little  turgid;  this
feeling  was  especially  marked  below,  decreasing  upward  (third  day).

Extremities  in  General. — Veins  in  extremities  reduced  in  size
(after  four  hours). — Extremities,  from  wrists  and  ankles  downwards,  ex-
tremely cold  (third  day). — Dull,  aching  pains  in  limbs,  especially  large
joints  and  loins  (after  four  hours).

Lower  J£octreniitles.— Soles  of  feet  itched,  as  from  chilblains  (third
day).

Generalities. — In  forenoon,  and  lasting  till  evening,  dislike  to  touch
or  drink  anything  cold  ;  e.  (/.,  cold  water,  the  fire-irons,  etc.  (This  is  not  so
when  he  naturally  takes  cold),  (forty-fifth  day). — [60.]  Extremely  lazy ;
no  de.^ire  to  leave  bed,  or  read ;  with  a  little  fever  (second  day). — Great
lassitude,  especially  in  gluteal  region  (after  four  hours). — General  malaise
and  weakness  (fifteenth  day). — General  malaise  (thirty-eighth  day).

Skin. — Cutis  anserina  (after  four  hours). — Skin  dry  (after  four  hours).

Sleep  and  Dreams. — At  night,  slept  badly;  kept  waking;  could
not  sleep  for  long  together ;  kept  getting  up  and  walking  about  room
(eighteenth  day).

JPever. — Cold  creeping  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  scalp,  where  it
began  ;  increased  on  leaving  the  fire  (after  four  hours). — Extreme  feeling  of
cold  when  dressing,  beginning  in  legs,  where  it  was  most  felt ;  then  in  neck ;
then  in  whole  body  ;  when  it  became  general,  it  was  most  felt  in  back ;  in-
creased by  going  into  open  air  (after  one  and  three-quarter  hours). — Did
not  feel  cold  in  open  air,  though  the  thermometer  stood  at  20"  (first  day).
— [70.]  After  very  little  exertion  in  walking,  got  hot  with  much  warm
per.-^l)i  ration  all  over  the  body,  chiefly  on  head  and  face,  though  the  weather
was  very  cold  (fourth  day).

Conditions. — Aggravation. — -{Morning  till  evening),  Back  of
pharynx  feels  raw, — {Forenoon),  Dislike  to  anything  cold. — {Afternoon),
Dry  cough.— (8.30  a.m.),  Slight  headache.— (3  to  5  p.m.).  Low  spirits,  etc.
—(6  P.M.),  Boring,  etc.,  headache. — {Open  air),  Feeling  of  cold. — {Bend-
ing head  down).  Headache ;  eyes  painful. — {Exposure  to  cold).  Eyes  water.


ANTHRAKOKALI.  361

— (  Open,  cold  air),  Back  of  pharynx  feels  raw. — (  Ooing  into  colder  room),
Immediately,  eyes  water;  running  of  water  from  nose. — {When  drinking),
Feeling  of  constriction  of  pharynx,  etc. — (After  eating).  Headache. —
(Zrea'BM7(7_^re),  Cold  creeping  over  body. — (JratZoors),  Eyes  water ;  running
of  water  from  left  nostril ;  sneezing;  qualmish  feeling  in  stomach. — {After
rising  from  bed),  Eyes  water. — (Sitting),  In  evening,  itching  in  anus. —
{Swallowing  saliva),  Back  of  pharynx  feels  raw. — {Walking),  Pain  over
region  of  liver ;  pain  in  loins. — {Going  into  warm  room).  Cough  worse.

Amelioration. — ( Open  air),  Qualmish  feeling  in  stomach  passes  off;
nausea  in  stomach. — {Drinking  cold  water).  Thirst.


ANTHRAKOKALI.

Prepared  by  the  action  of  Caustic  Potassa  upon  Eiinfkirchen  coal.  (See
Horn.  Dispensatory.)

Authorities.  A.  H.  Z.,  18,  235;  (extracted  from  Polya,  Klinger,
Isent^ee,  etc.). Several  persons  proved  it  (Nos.  12  and  13  females).

M-OUtU. — Tongue  soon  furred,  with  nauseous  taste,".: — Furred  tongue,
appetite  lost,  nausea,^^. — Tongue  furred,  with  vomiting  and  colic,'^. — Dry-
ness of  mouth  and  throat,^  ^. — Taste  unpleasant,*. — Taste  nauseous,^.

Throat. — Pain  in  throat,  with  coated  tongue,". — Burning  in  throat,
with  slight  dysphagia,^ — Burning  in  throat,  soon  followed  by  anorexia,
nauseous  taste,  and  violent  colic,  without  diarrhcea  (after  ten  days  repeated
doses),'. — [10. J  Dysphagia  and  dryness  of  the  throat,'".

StOitiacll. — Anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  colic,  and  flatulence,^— Burn-
ing thirst,*. — ^Almost  unquenchable  thirst,'". — Nausea  after  eatiug,^ — Nau-
sea, with  intercurrent  vomiting,^ — Vomiting  bilious,  mixed  with  blackish
mucus,''. — Sensation  of  warmth  in  stomach,l — Cramps  in  the  stomach,  and
colic  pains,^

Abdomen. — Violent  burning,  deep  in  the  abdomen,'^ — [20.]  Violent
colic,  increased  at  night,  so  that  he  had  to  apply  a  cataplasm,  which  re-
lieved (seventh  day),". — Colic,  borborygmi,  tympanitic  distension  of  the
abdomen,^ — Colic,  borborygmi,'".

Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  three  times  a  day,'. — Diarrhcea  instead
of  usual  constipation,^ — Copious  diarrhoea,  with  colic  and  borborygmi,". —
Diarrhoea  for  several  days,  with  increased  urine,*. — Two  fluid  stools,'^^ —
Stool  pasty,  preceded  by  colic  and  borborygmi,'.

Urinary  Organs. — Burning  in  urethra  on  urinating,^ — [30.]  Ischu-
ria ;  urine  pale,'l — Urine  increased,^  * '. — Urine  profuse,'. — Profuse  watery
urine,'". —  Copious  evacuation  of  pale,  clear  urine,^  ^ — Urine  less  profuse,". — ■
Urine  pale,  acid,  profuse,^ — Peculiar  odor  to  the  urine,".

Sexual  Organs. — Frequent  erections,'^ ''  °.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  and  temperature  feverish,'^

Generalities, — [40.]  Feels  generally  sick,". — Weakness  of  whole
body  and  restlessness,  with  heaviness  of  the  head,".

Fever. — Creeping  chills  alternating  with  heat  followed  by  slight  sweat,
with  accelerated  pulse,'. — Increased  warmth  of  body  at  evening,  with  accel-
erated full  pulse,". — Warmth  and  heat  sensation,  beginning  in  the  throat,
and  extending  down  to  the  stomach ;  from  hence  it  migrated  to  the  skin
where  it  did  not  remain  long ;  was  not  followed  by  sweat,'. — Moist  skin,^
— Copious  sweat  in  the  evening,  lasting  till  morning,  with  restlessness,
headache,  prostration,  and  accelerated  pulse,*. — Copious  sweat,  with  slight


362  ANTIMONIUM  CHLORIDUM.

vascular  excitement  (sixteenth  day)/. — Moderate  night-sweat,  beginning  at
evening,  with  sleeplessness  and  excited  pulse,". — The  burning  of  the  skin
was  (on  eighth  day)  followed  by  nightly  sweat  (continued  several  days),'. —
[50.]  Nightly  sweat  returning  every  twenty-four  hours,  as  long  as  the
proving  lasts,  without  itching  of  the  skin,'°. — Profuse  night-sweat,  with
headache,  and  accelerated  pulse  (thirteenth  day  after  increasing  doses),^ —
Profuse  night-sweats,  and  renewed  diarrhoea,  which  again  ceased  without
stopping  the  dosing  (seventh  day),^. — Copious  night-sweat,  with  loss  of
sleep,  and  excessive  restlessness,  but  relief  of  the  pain  in  the  abdomen,'^ —
Profuse  warm  night-sweat,  with  confusion  of  the  head,'^. — No  sweat,^.

Conditions. — Aggravations. — {Evening),  Warmth  of  body,  etc.;
copious  sweat. — (Night),  Colic ;  profuse  sweats,  etc. — (After  eating),  Nausea.
— (  Urinating),  Burning  in  urethra.

Amelioration. — (  Cataplasm),  Colic.


ANTIMONIUM  AESENITUM.

Arsenite  of  antimony.  Formula,  (Sbj03)As05-|-3  p.  c.  (For  chemical
preparation,  see  All.  Horn.  Zeit.,  79,  76.) Preparation,  Triturations.

Authority.  Isnard  (A.  H.  Z.,  79,  76,  Review  of  Therap.  Andw.  des  Ar-
sen.)  took  daily  increasing  doses  of  .01  to  0.10  of  centigramme;  symptoms
began  on  the  sixth  day.

Congestion  of  the  head. — Pain  in  the  forehead. — Pressure  in  the  temples.
— Pain  in  the  orbits. — Conjunctivitis. — (Edema  of  the  face. — General  sick
feeling. — Sense  of  weakness. — Wandering  pains  along  the  sciatic  nerves. —
Loss  of  appetite.- — Nausea. — Diarrhoea  slight,  without  pain  in  abdomen. —
Pulse  90. — (^Excessive  dyspnoea  in  cases  of  emphysema),  Dr.  Payr,  A.  H.  Z.,
79.

ANTIMONIUM  CHLORIDUM.

Antimonious  chloride,  SbClj.  (Butter  of  antimony.)  (The  white  pow-
der exposed  to  the  air  becomes  yellowish  ("  powder  of  Algaroth "),  owing
to  formation  of  the  trioxide.) Preparation,  Trituration.

Authorities.  Poisoning  cases,  see  Cattell's  symptoms,  B.  J.,  11,  525 ;
Lancet,  1841.

Jilind. — Stupor. — Insensibility.

Eyes. — Eyes  somewhat  reddened. — Eyes  sunken. — Pupils  dilated  and
inactive. — Pupils  dilated,  insensible.

Fnce. — Countenance  pale ;  features  collapsed. — Features  set.

3£oHth. — Mouth  filled  with  tenacious  transparent  mucus. — [10.]  Nu-
merous abrasions  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  fauces,  with  slight
fever. — Tongue  clean. — Tongue  dry  in  centre. — Unable  to  speak  for  some
minutes.

Throat. — Great  pain  in  throat. — Severe  pain  in  throat  and  fauces.—
Sense  of  burning  in  throat. — Severe  burning  pain  in  throat,  with  difBculty
in  swallowing. — Heat  and  uneasiness  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  pain  on
swallowing.— In  the  throat,  severe  burning  pain  (increased  by  deglutition),
extending  in  a  less  degree  along  the  oesophagus  to  the  stomach. — [20,]
Fauces  inflamed.

Stomach. — Incessant  efforts  to  vomit,  and  frequent  abortive  desire  to
.  defecate,  with  cold  skin. — Nausea,  vomiting. — Incessant  vomiting. — Vom-


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  363

itiDg  for  two  hours,  followed  by  prostration. — Severe  burning  pain  in
stomach.

Abdomen. — Burning  pain  in  epigastrium,  and  tumefaction  of  abdo-
men.— Excruciating  griping  pains  in  abdomen. — Tenderness  of  abdomen  to
touch,  with  sensation  of  burning.

Respiratory  ^^7>arcfiMS.— Respiration  very  slightly  apparent. —
[30.]  Seems  choked. — Respiration  heavy.

Heart,  and  Pulse. — Pulse  rises  to  120,  with  sleepiness. — Pulse
small,  accelerated,  very  feeble,  or  hard. — Pulse  80,  small. — Pulse  80,  small,
rather  firm.

Generalities, — Restlessness. —  General  weakness. — Great  or  com-
plete prostration  of  strength. — Faintness.

Skin. — [40.]  Skin  pale  and  cold.— Skin  cold. — Skin  cold  and  clammy.

Sleej)  and  Dreams. — Drowsy;  must  be  raised  before  he  answers,
which  he  does  rationally.

Fever. — Slight  feverishness.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

("Stibium.")  Sesquichloride  of  antimony,  SbjSj.  (Native  gray  anti-
mony ore.)

Aufhorities.f  1,  Hahnemann,  Chr.  Krankheiten,  2,  190 ;  2,  Caspari,
ibid. ;  3,  Hartlaub,  ibid. ;  4,  Langhammer,  ibid. ;  5,  Gmelin,  Allgem.  Gesch.
d.  Mineral  Gifte  (general  statement  from  authors  of  effects  of  Ant.),  ibid.  ;
6,  HiWanus,  Obs.  Cent.,V.  O.,  12  (same  case  as  that  given  in  full  by  Cam-
erarius,  S.  17),  ibid. ;  7,  Lindestolpe,  de  Venenis  (general  statement  of  the
noxious  effects  of  Ant. ;  one  only  of  the  eight  symptoms  referred  to  him  ap-
pears), ibid. ;  8,  Gardane,  Gazette  de  Sant^,  1773,  ibid. ;  9,  Camerarius,  Syl-
loge  Memorabil.  (effects  of  overdosing  in  adults),  ibid. ;  10,  Wepfer,  de  Cicuta
et  Ant.  (several  cases  of  poisoning  in  men  and  animals),  ibid. ;  11,  Ephemer.
Nat.  Cur.  (should  be  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.),  dec.  1  (effects  of  overdosing  in  an
adult),  ibid. ;  12,  James,  in  Simon's  Beob.,  1790,  ibid. ;  13,  Stahl,  Mat.  Med.,
1744,  ibid.;  14,  Morgenstern,  de  Usu  Ant.  Cr.,  1756  (general  statement
from  authors),  ibid. ;  15,  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.  et  System.,  pts.  1  and  2,  fol.
ed.,  Geneva,  1761  (statement  of  ill  effects  of  antimonial  emetics),  ibid. ;  16,
Bonetus,  Polyalthea  (statement  of  occasional  effects),  ibid. ;  17,  Matthiolus
(Goetze,  in  Act.  Vratislav.),  (no  reference  given  to  Matthiolus ;  not  in  his
Comm. ;  Goetze,  effects  of  Ant.  in  a  patient  with  syphilitic  ulceration),
ibid. ;  18,  Saunders,  Observ.  de  Ant.,  etc.,  London,  1773  (general  statement
from  observation),  ibid. ;  19,  Joubert,  Lib.  de  Peste,  ibid. ;  20,  Schulz,  in
Tract,  de  Nat.  Tinct.  Bezoard.,  ibid. ;  21,  Lotichius,  Observationes,  lib.  iv,
cap.  3  (case  of  overdosing  in  an  adult),  ibid. ;  22,  Kunckel  v.  Lowenstein,
Labarator.  Chem.  (effects  of  continued  use),  ibid. ;  23,  Nicolai,  Progr.  ad
Dissert.,  also  Reindel,  de  Oleo,  etc.,  ibid. ;  24,  Pitet,  Bib.  Horn.,  Paris,
1872,  p.  91  (effects  of  the  30th,  given  for  blepharitis).

Mind. — (Delirium  and  death,  in  consequence  of  an  emetic  of  Oroc.
metall.)^.\ — Decided  disposition  to  shoot  himself  in  the  night,  not  to  any

t  Dioscorides  (in  Hahnemann)  only  mentions  the  beneficial  effect  of  its  external
application  to  ulcers  of  the  eye;  Plinins,  ibid. ;  as  Anti  was  not  used  internally  in
his  time,  this  must  be  as  with  Dioscorides.

X  Not  found,  Hughes.


364  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

other  kind  of  suicide;  this  forced  him  to  leave  his  bed,  otherwise  he  was
unable  to  get  rid  of  it,'. — *Continual  condition  of  ideal  love  and  ecstatic
longing  for  some  ideal  female  being,  which  wholly  filled  his  fancy ;  more  when
walking  in  the  open  pure  air  than  in  the  room ;  this  symptom  disappeared
after  a  few  days,  the  sexual  desire  apparently  diminished  at  the  same  time,^
— Dejection  of  spirit  during  the  day,*. — He  felt  discouraged;  this  made  his
head  feel  warm  in  front,*. — Attacks  of  anxiety,^. — Anxious  reflections
about  himself,  his  present  and  future  fate,  during  the  day,*. — Anxiety  in
bed,  at  night,  from  3  to  5  o'clock,'. — Uneasy  (second  day),'''.— [10.]  Irritated
state  of  mind,  feeling  of  grief,  the  whole  forenoon;  the  sound  of  the  bells,
as  well  as  the  sight  of  that  which  surrounds  him,  moves  him  to  tears ;  his
breathing  is  short  and  heavy,'. — *Peevish ;  vexed  without  any  cause  (second
day),l — Out  of  humor;  sad  in  the  evening,'. — Ill-humor  the  whole  day,*. —
*He  is^nlky;  doBs  not  wish  to  speak  with. any  one,^. — He  does  not  speak
(second  day),^ — Dementia,*  (same  case  as  8.  17). — Dementia,  idiocy;  she
did  not  leave  her  bed,  spoke  nothing  without  being  asked,  desired  neither  to
eat  nor  to  drink,  nevertheless  ate  with  pleasure  if  anything  was  offered  to
her  and  she  felt  hungry;  she  declined  eating  when  she  did  not  feel  hungry;
at  the  same  time  she  was  all  the  time  pulling  her  neckcloth,  or  she  folded  a
handkerchief  and  then  unfolded  it  again,  or  she  pulled  little  feathers  out  of
the  bed  and  then  gathered  them  together;  so  obtuse  was  her  sensibility  that
when,  from  the  acrimony  of  the  evacuations  and  her  position  on  the  back,
a  large  and  foul  ulcer  formed  over  the  sacrum  and  coccyx,  she  complained
of  no  pain  from  it,".

Send. — Vertigo,^ — Weakness  of  the  head,l — [20.]  Violent  headache,'.
— Violent  headache  after  bathing  in  the  river,  with  weakness  in  the  limbs
and  repugnance  to  food,^ — Headache,  and  subsequently  a  little  bleeding
at  the  nose  (after  seven  and  a  half  hours),*. — Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the
head,  as  after  continual  working  in  a  cold  room  (fourth  day),l — -The  rush
of  the  blood  to  the  head  becomes  less  (curative  effect),^ — Violent  tearing
in  the  whole  head,  with  heat  in  it,  towards  noon  (sixth  day),''. — Tearing
pain  in  the  whole  head,  here  and  there,  from  morning  till  night,^ — The
tearing  in  the  head  becomes  less  when  walking  in  the  open  air,^ — Dull,
stupefying  pain  in  the  whole  head,  with  nausea  in  the  pharynx,  when
smoking,  to  which  he  is  accustomed,*. — ^Heaviness  in  the  forehead". — [30.]
Headache,  as  if  her  forehead  would  burst ;  at  the  same  time,  she  felt  intox-
icated, sat  alone,  and  would  not  speak,''.f — Continual  pain  in  the  forehead
and  the  temples,  boring  from  within -outwards,  unchanged  by  touching  the
parts  (after  five  hours),*. — *  Slight  dull  headache  in  the  forehead,  and  vertigo,
increased  by  ascending  stairs,^. — Stupefying,  dull  headache,  rather  exter-
nally, in  the  forehead,  so  violent  that  sweat  broke  out  from  anxiety,  when
walking  in  the  open  air  (after  six  hours),*. — Pressure  inwards,  at  times
drawing,  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,^ — Momentary  drawing  pain  over
the  left  temporal  boiie  ;  went  off  by  pressure,  and  then  returned  much  more
violent,  immediately  after,-. — Slow  pulsation  externally,  at  the  left  temple,
with  fine  prickings,  several  times  in  succession,  extending  towards  the  eye-
brows ;  this  symptom  is  most  severe  when  it  is  not  especially  noticed,'. —
Upon  the  left  parietal  bone  there  is  a  small  spot  which,  when  touched,
causes  pain  in  the  bone,  as  if  the  periosteum  were  swollen,". — Small,  flat
tubercles  here  and  there  upon  the  scalp,  of  the  size  of  small  peas,  painful

t  Not  found.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  365

to  pressure,  and  with  a  feeling  of  crawling  all  around,'. — Single  sharp
stitches  on  the  scalp  (for  one  minute),^

Eyes. — [40.]  Red,  inflamed  eyes,  with  itching,  and  nightly  agglutina-
tion,\ — Redness  of  the  left  eye,  with  dread  of  light  on  rising  early  in  the
morning,  and  a  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  inner  canthus,^ — Inflammation
of  the  eyes,*. — Pain  at  the  right  eyebrow,  within  the  skull,  as  if  the  parts
were  pressed  asunder,''. — Sharp  pressive  stitches  below  the  left  eyebrow,*. —
Reddened  eyelids,  with  fine  stitches  in  the  eyeball,^— Twitching  in  the
left  eyelids,''. — Gum  in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes,  in  the  forenoon  (after  three
hours  and  a  half),*. — Much  mucus  in  the  right  canthus,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, with  dry  gum  in  both  lids,''. — Small  moist  place  at  the  outer  canthus,
very  painful  upon  sweat  coming  in  contact  with  it,". — [50.]  Itching  in  the
external  canthus  of  the  eye,  which  obliges  one  to  rub  (after  two  hours),*. —
Fine  stitches  in  frequent  succession,  without  pain,  in  the  forepart  of  the  eye-
ball, in  the  forenoon  (ninth  day),l-^Incurable  blindness,'.f

J5«TS.— -Redness,  burning,  and  swelling  of  the  left  ear,  as  from  the  bite
of  a  mosquito,'. — Swelling  and  redness  of  the  whole  of  the  internal  concha
with  periodical  itching,'. — Itching  stitches  at  the  border  of  the  right  concha,
above  the  helix,  going  ofl'on  being  touched  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),'. —
In  the  evening  .something  seemed  to  block  up  the  right  ear,'. — Drawing
pain  through  the  right  ear  into  the  Eustachian  tube,  almost  reaching  the
mouth,  after  dinner  (sixteenth  day),'. — Stitches  in  the  ears,'. — Crawling  in
the  right  meatus  auditorius  (second  day),'. — [60.]  Sensation  of  burrowing
or  swarming  (of  animals)  in  the  ears,  especially  when  lying  still  (fifth
day),'. — Violent  din  in  the  ears,  as  if  some  one  were  beating  against  the
door  of  the  house,\ — Smashing  in  the  ear,  as  of  a  few  drops  of  water,  when
moving  the  jaws,'.— Ringing  before  the  ears  (second  day),'. — ^Continual
roaring  in  the  ears,  especially  during  stillness  (second  day),', — Roaring  in
the  ears,  most  in  the  afternoon,". — An  old  roaring  in  the  ears  disappeared
(curative  effect),'. — Painful  roaring  in  the  ears,'  (preceding  S.  68). — Loss
of  hearing,". — (After  violent  vomiting,  left  ear  soon  recovered,  but  right  re-
tympani). — A  kind  of  deafness  of  the  right  ear,  as  if  a  leaflet  were  placed
before  the  tympanum ;  this  symptom  cannot  be  removed  by  boring  with
the  finger  in  the  ear  (after  fourteen  hours),*.

Nose. — [70.]  *Both  nostrils  become  chapped  and  covered  with  crusts,^. —
The  left  nostril  becomes  chapped  and  painful,'. — Obstruction  of  the  nose  in
the  evening,  as  in  coryza,  for  several  days,'. — Coryza,'. — Coryza,  with  sore,
crusty  nostrils,'. — Fluent  coryza  early  in  the  morning,  for  some  hours,  with
sneezing,*. — Dry  coryza,^. — Fluent  coryza,'.^Blowing  out  blood,'. — Bleeding
at  the  nose,  several  days  in  succession,'. — [80.]  *Bleeding  at  the  nose  every
evening,'. — -Dryness  of  the  nose  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  so  that  he
can  hardly  speak,'. — *  The  nose  is  painful  when  breathing,  as  if  from  inspir-
ing cold  air,  or  from  inhaling  acrid  vapors,''.— Sore  nostrils,  with  drawing
pain,'. — Feeling  of  soreness  in  the  nt^strils  when  inspiring  air,  especially  in
the  right  nostril,  which  is  a  little  obstructed,'. — Soreness  of  the  right  nos-
tril ip  the  anterior  angle,  with  pain  as  in  a  cold,'.

Face. — Slight  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  face  (after
nine  hours),'. — *  Cracks  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  painful  like  sores,  return-
ing after  five,  eight,  and  twelve  weeks,'. — Twitches  of  the  muscles  at  the
corners  of  the  mouth,'. — The  lips  are  dry,^. — [90.]  Formication  upon  the

f  Not  found.


366  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

upper  lip  (nineteenth  and  twenty-fourth  days),'. — Burning,  stinging,  as
from  a  red-hot  little  spark  on  the  chin  and  the  upper  lip  (seventh  and
ninth  day),". — Sensation  at,  and  below  the  chin,  when  touching  it,  as  if  the
hand  were  moved  over  many  small  sore  places,  and  small,  honey-colored
granules  upon  the  skin  here  and  there,'.

Mouth. — Waking  from  the  siesta  with  and  by  dull  grinding  of  the
teeth  (second  day),'. — ^Severe  bleeding  of  the  teeth,^. — Twingeing  toothache,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  and  after  dinner,'. — *Stitches  in  the  tooth  when
inspiring  air,\ — *  Toothache  in  a  hollow  tooth,  worse  at  night  than  in  dqytime;
a  fine  stinging,  pulling,  and  grinding,  as  if  in  the  nerve,  which  moves
downwards  and  then  upwards  into  the  head  ;  if  he  touches  the  tooth  with  the
tongue,  he  feels  pain,  as  if  the  nerve  were  torn,^. — The  nightly  toothache  is
accompanied  by  great  warmth,  which  seems  to  come  from  the  chest,'. — The
toothache  is  renewed  immediately  after  eating  even  soft  things,  is  worse  by
applying  cold  water,  and  is  relieved  in  the  open  air,'. — [100.]  The  gums
stand  off  from  the  teeth,  and  bleed  easily,'. — *  Dryness  of  the  mouth,  &.tn\g\-\t
(sixth  day),'. — *Rawness  of  the  palate,  with  expedoraiion  of  much  mums,
when  clearing  the  throat  (after  fifth  week),'. — Blisters  upon  the  tongue,'. —
*Tongue  coated  white  in  the  forenoon  (after  two  hours),*. — Accumulation
of  water  upon  the  tongue,'. — After  dinner  some  fine,  sharp  stitches  in  the
tongue,  in  front  on  the  left  border,  following  in  succession  (after  thirty-
three  hours),'. — -Feeling  of  soreness,  and  redness  at  a  small  place  on  the
right  border  of  the  tongue  for  several  days,  frequently  going  off  and  sud-
denly returning  (sixth  day),'. — Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,'. —
*Much  saltish  saliva  in  the  mouth,^". — [110.]  Profuse  ptyalism  from  nose  and
mouth,"  (same  as  S.  383). — Ptyalism,  without  any  fetid  odor,  and  with-
out looseness  of  the  teeth,".^ — The  mouth  smells  as  in  ptyalism  from  mer-
cury,'.—Fine  pinching  on  the  palate  the  whole  night,  especially  painful
during  deglutition ;  early  in  the  morning  the  symptom  disappeared  only
after  hawking  up  the  phlegm,  which  had  collected  on  the  sides  of  the  palate
during  the  night,  except  a  feeling  of  roughness  which  remained,'.

Throat. — Much  viscid  phlegm  collects  in  the  throat  the  whole  day,'.
— He  is  obliged  thewhole'day  to  draw  a  quantity  of  thick  yellowish  mucus
from  the  posterior  nares  into  the  throat,  and  expectorate  it  (ninth  day),'. —
Clearing  the  throat  and  hawking  when  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — A
foreign  body  seems  to  hang  in  the  throat ;  he  tries  in  vain  to  swallow  or
expel  it,'°. — Early  in  the  morning,  roughness  and  dryness  in  the  throat
(sixth  day),'. — Sore  throat  on  the  left  side,  as  from  a  swelling  or  a  plug,'. —
[120,]  Sensation  as  of  scraping  on  the  velum  palati,  as  if  much  phlegm
were  upon  it,  which  could  only  be  expelled  after  clearing  the  throat  for  a
long  time;  often  it  was  not  expelled  at  all,  for  several  days  (seventh  day),'.
Impeded  deglutition,*.

Stomach. — Strong  sense  of  hunger  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  early
on  waking,  without  appetite ;  eating  does  not  remove  the  symptom ;  at  the
same  time  disagreeable  sense  of  emptiness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and
want  of  animal  heat,  for  two  days  (after  fourth  week),'. — Want  of  appe-
tite,".— Complete  loss  of  appetite,'*. — Appetite  extremely  little,'. — Imraense
thirst,'". —  Thirst  in  the  evening,  and  desire  to  drink,'.— JlfwcA  thirst  at  night
(after  sixth  day),'. — Drinks  much  only  at  night,'. — [130.]  *  Violent  thirst,
with  dryness  of  the  lips,^. — Goat's  milk  refreshes  him  agreeably,'". — Loud
eructations  (after  one-quarter  of  an  hour  and  one  hour  and  a  half),'. —

f  Not  mentioned  by  James  in  his  treatise  on  the  fever  powders.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  367

Eructations  having  a  raw  taste,*. — Bitter  eructations  like  bile  (after  three
hours),'. — *Gulping  up  of  fluid,  tasting- of  the  ingesta,  in  the  afternoon
(second  and  third  days),l — Hiccough  (after  one  hour),*. — Frequent  hic-
cough when  smoking  tobacco  (after  ten  hours  and  a  half),*. — Violent
nausea," — Nausea  after  drinking  a  glass  of  tuine,^. — [140.]  Nausea,  with
vertigo,^. — Nausea  and  vomiting,*. — Terrible  vomiting,  which  nothing  can
stop,'. — *  Vomiting  of  mucus  and  bile". — Violent  vomiting,  with  attacks  of
anxiety,'". — Fearful  vomiting,  with  convulsions,^". —  Violent  vomiting  and  di-
arrhcea,^'^. — Violent  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  with  excessive  anguish,'". —
Fulness  and  inflation  after  dinner ;  often  alternates  witii  lightness,  cheer-
fulness, and  activity  of  both  mind  and  body,''. — Pain  at  the  stomach,  as  from
excessive  fulness,  without,  however,  any  fulness,  and  accompanied  by  appe-
tite,^ — [160,]  *Pain  at  the  stomach,  as  after  too  mucli  eating,  with  distended
but  not  hard  abdomen  (after  three  days),'. — Cramp  of  the  stomach,'^. —
*  Cramplike  pains  at  the  stomach^'". — Cramp  of  the  stomach,  in  several  per-
sons, during  the  whole  of  their  lives,'".— Transient  pinching  in  the  region
of  the  stomach,^ — Feeling  of  tightness  below  the  stomach,  with  empty
eructations,^ — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  which  is  more  like  a  dull  cutting,
especially  when  drawing  in  the  abdomen,''.— Pressure  at  the  stomach  early
iu  the  morning,  with  thirst  (twentieth  day),''. — Several  attacks  of  cutting
pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,'. — Painful  feeling  in  the  stomach,  when
pressing  upon  it,'. — [160.]  *  Burning  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  like  heartburn,
with  good  appetite,''. — Burning,  spasmodic  pain,  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
in  attacks  of  half  an  hour,  which  drove  him  to  despair  and  to  the  resolu-
tion of  drowning  himself^. — Pinching  pains  on  the  right  side,  over  and  by
the  side  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'.

Abdomen. — Slight  tension  in  the  hypochondria,'". — Pinching  pain  on
the  left  side  of  the  navel,'. — Distended,  big  abdomen,''. — Abdomen  very  much
distended;  this  causes  a  pain  as  from  internal  pressure,'. — Great  inflation
of  the  abdomen,  especially  after  a  meal,'. — (Hernia),^'|" — Loud  rumblings
in  the  abdomen  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),*. — [170,]  Slight  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,  as  when  bubbles  of  air  arise  in  the  water,'.— Loud  rumbling
in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness,  in  the  forenoon  (after  three  hours),*. —
Much  rumbling  flatus,  bursting  forth  immediately  after  a  meal;  some  smells
badly ;  some  before  it  passes  moves  downwards  and  meets  other  flatus,  espe-
cially in  the  right  side  (ninth  day),'. — Inconsiderable  flatus  passed  off,  with
a  sensation  as  of  pressing  asunder,  as  if  a  copious  expulsion  of  fseces  would
take  place  (after  five  hours  and  a  half),'. — Much  flatus  immediately  after
dinner ;  it  moves  about  audibly,  especially  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, some  being  expelled  (after  six  hours),'. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in
the  intestines,  going  off  after  a  meal,'. — Sensation  in  the  intestines  as  after
a  violent  diarrhoea ;  the  symptom  is  transitory  but  exhausting,'. — The  most
intolerable  pain  in  every  part  of  the  abdomen,^ — Pinching  at  a  small  place
on  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  low  down,  like  the  beat  of  the  pulse,  iu
the  afternoon  (third  day),'. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  especially  on  the
right  side,  towards  the  back,  beginning  suddenly  in  the  evening,  and  in-
creased by  motion  (after  three  weeks),'. — [180,]  Violent  cutting  in  the  ab-
domen (twenty-second  day),'. — Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  a  feeling  of
nausea  there, and  accumulation  on  the  tongue,'. — Cutting  in  the  abdomen  the
whole  day,  with  a  feeling  of  oppression  coming  from  the  stomach,  indispo-
sition to  work,  dry  humor,  and  pain  at  the  stomach  on  eructations,'. — Sud-

f  "  Hernia  ventriculi,  after  violent  vomiting."


368  ANTIMONIUM  CEUDUM.

den,  compressive  colic,  with  gulping  up  of  water, ^. — The  symptoms  in  the
abdomen  recommence  again,  all  of  them  (after  two  weeks  and  a  half  ),^ —
Hard  gland  in  the  left  groin  painful  to  pressure;  the  gland  appears  to  lie
over  Poupart's  ligament,  and  to  run  parallel  to  it,l — Pain  as  from  swelling
in  the  cartilage,  or  the  periosteum,  of  the  upper  portion  of  the  crest  of  the
ilium,l — Pain  in  the  groins,  as  from  swelling,  felt  on  pressure;  the  place
felt  hard,  as  from  swollen  glands,''.

Anus  (1 11(1  Stool. — The  varices  of  the  rectum  protruded  more  than
usual  (eleventh  day),^ — Protrusion  of  the  rectum  during  stool,  for  some
time,^ — [190.]  Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  rectum,  with  emission  of  flatu-
lence,'.— Expulsion  of  black  blood  by  the  rectum,". — Continual  discharge
of  blood  and  solid  portions  of  the  intestines  by  the  rectum,'.")" — *Pain  in  tlie
rectum  during  stool :  feeling  of  soreness ;  as  if  an  ulcer  had  been  torn  open,^.
— Frequent  tenesmus,  although  little  urine  is  passed  (after  five  days},l —
Sharp  itching  in  the  rectum  (seventh  day),^ — Burning,  itching,  aud  smart-
ing in  the  anus  at  night  (after  three  days),l — Drawing  pain  in  the  anus,l
— Crawling  aud  burning  of  the  haemorrhoids,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed
till  falling  asleep  (after  eleven  days  and  after  five  weeks),^ — *  Itching  of  the
anus,^.—\%00.']  Severe,  urgent  desire  for  stool  after  dinner,  and  quick  ex-
pulsion of  ordinary  faeces,  with  straining  (four  days),^ — Disposition  to  di-
arrhoea, which,  however,  does  not  take  place,'. — Diarrhoea  at  night  and
early  in  the  morning;  every  time,  however,  only  one  evacuation,'.— Pappy,
frequent  stool  (after  one  hour  and  a  half),*. — *  Very  difficult,  hard  stool^. —
Difficult  expulsion  of  hard  stool,  without  previous  straining  (after  eleven
hours),*. — Difficult  evacuation  of  hard  stools,  with  previous  pressing  in  the
rectum,  two  minutes  (after  twelve  hours),*.— The  stools,  which  had  previ-
ously been  very  consistent,  now  become  very  thin,''. — Very  thin  stools  after
taking  vinegar,  with  pain  in  the  rectum  during  stool,^ — Very  liquid  stools,^.
— [210,]  Hard  stool  early  in  the  morning,*. — Hard  stool  in  the  evening,
with  violent  pressing  in  the  rectum,  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,^ — *Stool,
first  natural,  then  several  small,  loose  evacuations,  then  as  small  but  hard  evacu-
ations, with  violent  straining  in  the  rectum  and  anus  until  all  are  passed,^. —
Constipation  for  three  days,'.

Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  of  the  bladder  rouses  him  from  sleep
at  night,'. — Sensation  of  painful  contraction  at  the  bottom  of  the  canal
(neck  of  the  bladder),'*. — Burning  in  the  urethra,''*. — Constant  urging  to
urinate,  with  extreme  dysuria,''*. — Desire  to  urinate,  frequent  and  violent;
expelling  much  urine  every  time  (after  one,  two,  and  two  hours  aud  a  half),*.
— Expels  the  urine  but  rarely ,'l — [220.]  Frequent  micturition,*.— Long-
continuing,  frequent  micturition,  little  urine  being  expelled  in  great  haste
(eighteenth  day),". — Frequent  urination,  ivith  intense  burning  in  urethra  dur-
ing emission^'*. — Frequent  micturition,  with  discharge  of  a  small  quantity
of  watery  urine  (fourth  day),". — Copious  micturition  at  night,  three  times,".
— Copious  and  frequent  micturition  (in  a  dog),'°. — At  night  he  passes  a  small
quantity  of  urine,  in  an  intermitting  stream,  with  painful  erections,'.— Gold-
yellow,  thin  urine,  with  a  scarcely  perceptible  cloud,'". — Brown-red  urine,".
— Dark-colored,  frequent  urine  (after  seven  hours),*. — [230.]  Small,  red
corpuscles  in  the  urine  after  having  stood  twenty-four  hours,'".

Sexual  Orf/ans, — Erections  (after  six  hours),". — Burning  at  the
glans  penis,"*. — Fine  itchings  of  the  penis  (after  fourteen  hours),". — Violent
itching  of  the  extremity  of  the  glans,". — Biting-itching,  as  from  salt,  of  the


t  Not  found.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  369

left  side  of  the  scrotum,  frequent,  lasting  fourteen  days  (after  fourteen
days),^ — Continual  drawing  in  the  spermatic  cord,  while  there  was  a  boil
at  the  perineum ;  the  pain  was  most  violent  When  standing,  and  became
less  when  stooping,^ — Excited  sexual  desire,  with  uneasiness  in  the  whole
body,  which  prevents  him  from  sitting  long  (after  six  hours),l — Afterwards
the  sexual  desire  appears  to  be  less  for  several  days,'. — Even  upon  leaning
the  back  against  something,  there  is  an  irritation,  as  if  pollution  would
come  on,'. — [240.]  Nightly  pollutions,  without  any  voluptuous  dreams,*. —
Pollution  at  night,  with  many  dreams  (eleventh  day),^ — Pressure  in  the
womb,  as  if  something  would  come  out,'. — Discharge  of  an  acrid  water  from
the  vagina,  which  caused  a  sensation  as  of  biting  down  along  the  thighs,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — *  Violent  spasms  in  the  larynx  and  the
pharynx,  as  if  the  throat  were  filled  with  a  plug,  which  becomes  alternately
thicker  and  thinner,  accompanied  hy  a  feeling  of  soreness,^. — Rough  voice,'. —
Speech  and  singing  are  not  firm,  but  weak,'". — *  Extreme  feebleness  of  voice;
he  can  only  speak  in  a  low  tone,^''.—*IiOSS  of  voice  as  often  as  he  became
hot;  the  voice  came  back  by  resting  himself,'". — Cough,  early  in  the  morn-
ing after  rising,  in  paroxysms;  it  seems  to  come  out  of  the  abdomen  ;  the
first  attack  is  always  the  most  violent;  the  following  become  weaker  and  lueaher,
so  that  the  last  aUaek  resembles  a  mere  hacking  cough,^. — [250.]  Frequent,
dry  cough,'". — Severe,  dry  cough,  with  a  sense  as  of  scratching  in  the  larynx,
in  a  sudden  short  attack,^ — Cough,  with  discharge  of  viscid,  thin  phlegm,
deep  out  of  the  chest,  early  in  the  morning,'". — Deep  sighing,  breathing,  as
from  fulness  of  the  chest,  for  several  days,  in  the  afternoon  and  after  eat-
ing,^ — Dyspnoea,^. ^Dif&calty  of  breathing  during  supper,'. — Difficulty  of
breathing  after  supper,'. — Asthma,". — Very  troublesome  asthma,'". — Suffo-
cating asthma  in  four  young  men,'".— [260.]  (Suffocating  catarrh),'°.f —
Death  produced  by  suffocating  catarrh  in  fifteen  days,  occasioned  by  a  few
grains  of  antimony,'".

Chest, — Burning  in  the  chest  at  every  cough,  as  of  fire,  with  a  glow-
ing, hot  breath  from  the  mouth,'".— Burning  in  the  chest,  with  dry  cough,
and  dyspnoea  almost  to  suffocation, '".J — Oppression  on  the  chest,'. — Oppres-
sion at  the  chest,  early  on  waking,'. — Half  pressive,  half  sticking  pain
under  the  left  clavicle,  apparently  in  the  air-passages,  when  breathing,'. —
Pain  as  from  contusion,  or  as  from  too  great  an  effort,  in  the  pectoralis
major  muscle,  early  in  the  morning  when  rising,  and  a  few  hours  after,
when  extending  and  lifting  the  arm,  or  when  pressing  upon  it,'. — Dull
stitches  in  the  chest,  when  breathing  deeply,  first  on  the  right  side  under
the  two  first  ribs,  tlien  under  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,'. — Stitches,
with  constrictive  pinching  in  the  middle  of  the  chest  (third  day),'. — [270.]
Severe,  continual  itching  upon  the  chest  the  whole  day,''. — Itching  upon  the
chest,  as  if  a  blister  were  healing,'. — He  was  frequently  roused  from  sleep
by  an  intolerable  itching  upon  the  chest,  where  he  felt  pimples,'. — Stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  breathing,  with  a  little  cough  and  head-
ache,'.— Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  chest,  when  expiring  in  a  standing  posi-
tion (after  five  hours),'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  chest,
in  the  evening  when  lying  down,'.

Hen.rt  and  Pulse. — Violent  palpitation  of  the  hearty'".— Pulse,
sometimes  a  few  quick,  then  three  or  four  slow  beats  (immediately),'.

t  Coming  on  fifteen  days  after  amputation  of  foot  (S.  351,  352),  and  ending  in
death  ;  see  next  symptom.
X  Not  found.
VOL I. — 24


370  ANTIMONIUM  CEUDUM.

Neck  OMd  Sack. — Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,'*. — Spasmodic
drawing  from  above  downwards  in  one  of  the  posterior  cervical  muscles  on
the  right  side,  iu  the  evening  when  sitting  (eighth  day),^ — [280.]  Spas-
modic drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  reaching  as
far  as  the  scapulae,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  and  early  in  the  morn-
ing ;  worse  on  stooping,  exerting  the  arm,  and  turning  the  head  to  the  left
side  (twelfth  day),^^Inward  pressing  drawing  in  the  neck,  on  the  lower
part  of  the  left  side  (nineteenth  day),". — Straining  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
and  between  the  scapulae,  when  stooping,^. — Single  stitches  iu  the  skia  of  the
neck,  here  aud  there  (second  and  third  day),^ — Seasitiveness  of  the  skin  of
the  neck  ;  if  he  rub  hard,  on  account  of  the  itching,  the  place  feels  sore,^ —
Itching  of  the  neck,l — Spasmodic  stitches  in  the  right  scapula  when  sit-
ting,*.—Tearing  in  the  back  the  whole  day,  from  morning  to  night,^.— Vio-
lent itching  upon  the  baoJc,  a  fortnight,^. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  im-
mediately on  rising,  and  the  whole  day,  not  at  night,^. — [290,]  Violent
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  rising  from  sitting ;  it  disappeared  in
walking,^

Extremities  in  General. — Convulsions  aud  trembling  of  the
limbs,'". — Lassitude,  tremulous  fatigue,  and  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs  after
dinner,  as  if  coming  out  of  the  abdomen,  with  trembling  of  the  hands  when
writing,  and  subsequent  expulsion  of  much  stinking  flatulence,  the  abdomen
being  dititended,^ — Feeling  as  if  the  limbs  were  enlarged,''*.

Upper  Extremities. — A  stitch  under  both  arms  when  walking  iu
the  open  air,'. — Sharp  itching  of  the  inside  of  the  left  arm,\ — Light  twitches
in  the  right  deltoid  muscles  (fifth  day),l — Quivering,  drawing  in  the  mus-
cles of  the  upper  arms,  which  did  not  pass  off  by  motion,  but  by  warmth,
and  returned  in  a  draught  of  air,'. — Paralytic  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
upper  arms,  when  bending  the  arms,  as  if  they  were  contracted  too  much,
or  weakened  by  the  contraction,'. — Sudden  drawing  jerk,  transversely
through  the  right  upper  arm  (after  ten,  twenty,  aud  one  hundred  aud
twenty  minutes),'. — [300.]  Cracking  in  the  elbow-joint,  on  turning  it  to
and  fro,'. — Drawing  in  the  forearm,  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,'. — Draw-
ing down  the  right  forearm  (after  one  hour  aud  a  half),'. — Paralytic  draw-
ing in  the  right  forearm  (after  two  hours),'. — Drawing  on  the  inside  of
the  lower  part  of  the  forearm,  with  a  sensation  of  pressure  from  without
(nineteenth  day),'. — Gouty  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  right  fourth  finger,'. —
Drawing  pains  in  the  fingers  and  their  joints,'^. — Crackin'g  in  the  metacarpal
joint  of  the  thumb,  when  moving  it  (ninth  day),'. — Fine  itching  in  the  tip
of  the  left  thumb  (after  fourteen  days),'. — Discolored  nailsj'.f- — [310.]  *Th6
finger-nails  did  not  grow  as  fast  as  formerly,  and  the  skin  beneath  the  nails
was  painfully  sensitive,"^.

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  right  hip-joint,'. — Drawing  pain
in  the  left  hip,". — Drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint,  when  walking,  especially
when  bending  the  thigh  backwards ;  also  in  the  evening,'. — Painful  draw-
ing from  the  hip-joints  towards  the  os  sacrum,'. — Drawing  iu  one  of  the
nates,  around  the  hip-joint,  into  the  thigh  (seventh  day),'. — Slight  twitches
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  half  of  the  nates,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting
(fifth  day),'.— Bluish  spots  upon  the  thighs.'.f^ — Repeated  tension  of  the
right  thigh,  high  up,  like  a  small  spasm  (seventh  day),'. — Drawing  pain  in
the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,'. — [320.]  Drawing  pain  at  the  an-
terior and  internal  sides  of  the  thigh,'. — Slight  clucking  for  a  few  minutes,

f  Not  found.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  371

in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  half  of  the  nates,  when  standing  (after  four
weeks),'. — Sharply  stinging  itehiug  on  the  inside  and  anterior  surfaces  of
the  left  thigh  (after  four  and  a  half  hours),^ — Sharply  stinging  itching  of
the  right  thigh,  which  does  not  go  off  by  scratching;  after  the  itching,  a
small,  flat,  yellowish  pimple  is  formed  at  that  place,l — The  stinging  itch-
ing upon  the  thighs  comes  on  every  evening,^ — Sensation  as  of  a  spasm  at
the  external  border  of  the  left  thigh,  as  if  the  muscles  become  slowly  con-
tracted and  again  extended,  in  the  afternoon  (after  ten  hours),''. — Stiffness
of  the  knee,  for  eight  days,\ — Painful  stiftbess  of  the  knee ;  the  knee  pained
her  so  much,  that  she  could  not  stretch  it  out,  and  was  obliged  to  limp,'. —
Pain  in  the  knee,  which  prevented  him  from  stretching  the  foot,  aud  made
him  limp,\ — Pain  just  below  the  knee,  as  if  it  had  been  tied  too  tightly,
the  whole  evening  (after  thirteen  days),^ — [330.]  Drawing  pain  in  the
right  knee,^ — Sudden  violent  stitch  on  the  outside  of  the  knee,^ — A  stitch
in  the  left  knee,  which  started  him,  and  caused  a  jerk  with  the  leg  (tenth
day),'. — Itching  of  the  right  knee,  on  the  inside,  and,  after  rubbing  it,  a
large  blister,  which  is  painful  only  for  a  short  while,l — Drawing  pain  in
the  leg,  as  high  up  as  the  knee,^ — In  the  evening,  when  sitting,  painful
drawing  in  the  right  leg,  beginning  at  the  knee,  or  at  the  os  ischium,  going
down  the  thigh  and  tibia,  as  far  as  the  foot,  so  that  he  has  to  lift  it  and
shift  its  position  several  times  in  succession  (tenth  day),'. — Clucking
in  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  leg,  immediately  after  stitches  in  the
ankle  (third  day),'. — Bluish  spots  upon  the  tibi8e,'.t — Drawing  pain  at  the
lower  part  of  the  left  tibia,'. — Deep  stitches  descending  all  along  the  tibia,*.
— [340.]  Sharp  stitch  in  the  shaft  of  the  tibia,  from  within  outwards,  when
sitting  (after  five  hours),*. — Fine  itching  on  the  left  tibia  (after  four  and  a
half  hours),'.— Painless  pinching,  coming  and  going,  in  the  lower  joint  of
the  right  calf,'. — Drawing  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  left  calf,'. — Pain,  as
from  a  sprain,  in  the  external  malleolus  of  the  right  foot,  when  turning  the
foot  outwards,,with  frequent  cracking  of  the  joint,  when,  bending  or  stretch-
ing it  (fifth  day),'. — On  the  outside  of  the  left  calf,  a  place  which  feels
bruised  when  touched,  for  a  few  days  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Crawling
along  the  left  calf,  without  itching  (after  fourteen  hours),'. — Violent  itch-
ing under  the  external  malleolus  of  the  right  foot,  which  does  not  at  once
pass  off  by  scratching,  and  leaves  a  small  red  spot  behind,'. — Cramplike
drawing  at  the  external  side  of  the  left  heel  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'.
— Drawing  pain  in  the  left  heel  (after  three  hours),' — [350.]  Chilblains  on
the  feet,  with  pain  and  redness,  in  the  summer  season,'. — Mortification  of
the  foot ;  it  is  quite  black,'"  (same  case  as  next). — Intolerable  burning,
lancinating,  and  tearing  pains  in  a  mortifying  foot,  it  being  insensible  to
touch,  or  to  the  prick  of  a  pin,"  (Set  in  soon  after  violent  vomiting  had
subsided,  see  S.  260.) — Her  foot  feels  so  heavy  that  she  cannot  lift  it,'. —
When  walking,  the  right  foot  feels  benumbed,  and  goes  to  sleep,'. — Con-
stantly icy-cold  feet,'.^IIis  feet  do  not  get  warm  before  1  o'clock  at  night,'.
— *  Large  horny  places  on  the  skin  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  close  to  where  the  toes
commence,  which  pained  like  corns,  and  always  returned  after  having  been
cut  out,'. — *  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  when  walking,  especially
upon  stone  pavement,  for  a  long  time  (after  seven  days),'. — Sensitive  sting-
ing in  the  skin  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  going  ofi"  by  rubbing ;  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  after  a  walk  of  three  hours  (eighth  day),'.— [360.]
Sharp,  fine  prickings  in  the  soles  of  the  foot  (tenth  day),'. — Cracking  of

f  Not  found.


372  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

the  big  toe,  at  every  motion  requiring  an  effort,''. — Burning  pain  on  the
ball  of  the  right  big  toe  (sixth  (lay),l — Tearing  and  drawing  through  the
right  big  toe,^ — Cutting  under  the  left  big  toe,  rhythmical  (after  six  days),^
— Fine  itching  upon  the  left  big  toe  (after  four  and  a  half  hours),^ — A
corn  upon  the  left  little  toe  became  painful  without  any  cause,  as  if  it  were
pressed  upon  (seventh  daj'),^

Generalities. — Immense  swelling  of  the  whole  body.'.f — Dropsical
swelling  of  the  body,'\|— Incurable  dropsy,'".— [370.]  Getting  fat,'\—
Emaciation  and  exhaustion,".  — Excessive  hemorrhages,'°.§ — Disposition
to  start,  even  at  slight  noises,^ — Twitches  of  the  muscles  of  many  parts  of
the  body,'. — (Convulsive  movements,  especially  at  the  head),'".  (In  a
puppy). — Indolence  and  disposition  to  lie  down  after  dinner,^ — Extreme
lassitude,^*. — Great  lassitude,  early  in  the  morning,  and  disinclination  to
rise,l — Weariness,  especially  of  the  feet,  with  great  peevishness,  at  7  o'clock
in  the  evening,'. — [380.]  General  prostration,^*. — Death  after  a  few  hours,
consequent  upon  giving  Antimony,  for  cramps  of  the  stomach,'^ — Intoxica-
tion,^ — Apoplexy,  accompanied  by  such  a  profuse  flow  of  saliva,  that  he
expelled  a  large  quantity  of  watery  foam  from  the  nose  and  mouth,". —
Sensation  while  taking  a  moderate  dinner,  as  if  the  body  were  considerably
filled  with  a  quantity  of  flatus  moving  about,l — Heavy,  pressive  pains,
sometimes  in  the  chest,  sometimes  in  the  back,  sometimes  in  both  parts  at
the  same  time,'". — Sensation  of  general  vascular  ebullition,^*. — All  the
symptoms  come  on  again  after  the  third  week ;  however,  after  this  period,
they  appeared  more  on  the  left  side  of  the  body,''.

Skin. — Eruptions  like  rash,^. — Red  points  with  white  dots  in  the  centre,
at  several  places,''. — [390.]  Brown  spots  and  dots,  like  small  liver  spots,
here  and  there,  especially  upon  the  arms,^ — Red,  hardened,  slightly  ele-
vated place  on  each  side  of  the  forehead,  itching  like  a  nettle,  going  and
coming,^. — Nettlerash ;  white  pimples  with  red  areolae,  with  violent  burn-
ing and  fine  stinging,  in  the  face,  on  the  limbs,  as  far  as  the  fingers  that
were  swollen  ;  accompanied  by  violent  thirst  and  nausea,'. — Pimples  coming
on  at  night,^ — Red,  hard  pimple,  painful  to  the  touch,  on  the  left  temple,
close  to  where  the  cartilage  of  the  ear  begins,^. — Pimples  and  vesicles,  as
from  stings  of  insects,  at  many  places  of  the  body,  especially  on  the  face  and
on  the  joints  of  the  extremities ;  they  come  on  with  itching,  and  often  dis-
appear after  a  few  hours,^. — Pimples,  that  itch  when  getting  warm  in  bed,
and  prevent  sleep,'. — Pustules  with  yellow  or  brown  scurf,  here  and  there,".
— Just  above  the  eyebrows,  a  white  tubercle,  which  does  not  itch  ;  but  is
only  painful  to  the  touch,'. — Rash  behind  the  eare,  as  far  as  the  nape  of
the  neck,  and  over  the  scapulas,'. — [400.]  Red  pimple,  with  pus  at  the
tip,  on  both  sides  of  the  nose,  painful  to  pressure  (twelfth  day-),". — Vesicles
in  the  face  and  upon  the  nose,  like  varioloid,  with  stinging  pain  on  pres-
sure,".— Several  pimples  in  the  face,  that  pain  like  mosquito-bites,". — Red,
burning,  suppurating  eruption  upon  the  face,'". — Red  vesicular  pimples  like
varioloid,  with  stinging  pain  when  pressed,  at  several  places  on  the  skin,". —
Nettlerash  in  the  face,  especially  upon  the  cheeks,'. — Pimple  upon  the
right  cheek,  as  from  a  mosquito-bite,". — Flat  pimples  upon  both  cheeks,
which  are  not  red ;  itching  when  touched,  with  a  yellowish  scurf,". — The

t  Not  found.

J  Jaundice  had  preceded  the  emetic  of  Ant.,  which  was  followed  by  this  ascites.
It  terminated  in  death.
J  Not  found.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  373

chest  is  dotted  with  fine  red  points,  with  violent  itching,  which  does  not
pass  off  by  rubbing,". — Eruption  on  the  left  side,  upon  the  cheek,  towards
the  chin,  with  a  yellow  crust,  painful  to  the  touch,  and  which  may  be  easily
knocked  off,''. — [410.]  Red  pustules  upon  the  upper  lip,  and  at  the  right
corner,  with  a  dull  pain,  either  with  or  without  any  pressure  (twentieth
day),^ — Many  red  points,  with  white  little  tips  in  the  centre,  below  the
left  corner  of  the  niouth,^ — Many  red  points,  with  white  dots  in  the  cen-
tre; with  a  stinging  pain  upon  moving  the  hand  over  the  hairs  of  the
beard,  on  the  front  of  the  neck,". — Hard  long-continuing  pustules  below
the  neck,  like  small  blisters,  which  become  filled  with  pus,  not  only  at  the
tip,  but  all  around,". — Boil  on  the  perineum,  with  a  sense  as  of  burning,  and
pain  far  around,". — Small  pimple  on  the  neck  and  under  the  chin,  painful
to  the  touch  (thirteenth  day),". — Hard,  pea-shaped  body  on  the  nape  of  the
neck,  on  the  left  side,  under  the  skin  ;  only  felt  by  stretching  the  skin,
when  bending  the  head,". — Small  red  pimples  on  the  top  of  the  right
shoulder,  without  any  sensation,  passing  off  for  a  short  time  on  pressure
(seventh  day),". — Brown  liver-colored  spots  on  both  shoulders,". — Red  heat
vesicles  with  yellow  dots  over  the  whole  of  the  right  shoulder ;  afterwards
they  look  like  goose-skin,  and  scale  off,". — [420.]  Pimples,  resembling  rash,
on  the  middle  of  the  upper  arms,  without  itching  (fourteenth  day),".— Cor-
rosively itching  pimples  at  the  bend  of  the  elbow,\ — A  blister  on  the  sty-
loid process  of  the  ulna  of  the  right  arm,". — Several  light-brown, dots  upon
the  arms,  like  little  liver  spots,". — At  night,  a  large  pimple  is  formed  on
the  styloid  process  of  the  radius  of  the  left  arm,". — A  blister  on  the  external
border  of  the  left  hand,". — Itching  vesicle  on  the  left  hand,". — Red,  itch-
like pimple,  painfully  stinging  when  touched ;  with  a  brown  scurf,  on  the
carpal  joint  of  the  right  thumb  (twenty-fourth  day),". — Corrosively  itching
pimples,  in  the  ball  of  the  hand,  on  the  muscle  of  the  thumb,\ — Small
pimple  on  the  left  half  of  the  nates  of  a  child,". — [430.]  Large,  hard  pus-
tules on  the  left  half  of  the  nates,  with  itching  and  tensive  pains,". — Pimple
on  the  right  knee,  as,  from  mosquito-bite,". — Red  pimples  on  the  knee,  like
vesicles,  resembling  varioloid,  with  stinging  pain  when  touched,". — White,
hard  tubercles  on  the  leg,  of  the  size  of  a  pea  ;  they  come  on  in  consequence
of  itching,  and  are  surrounded  by  a  small  red  circle,". — If  he  rub  the  skin
upon  the  chest  on  account  of  the  itching,  the  place  feels  sore;  the  skin  is
as  sensitive  as  after  blisters,". — Single,  long-continued,  tickling  and  itching
stitches,  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  upper  arm  ;  not  causing  scratch-
ing, from  within  outwards,  also  under  the  right  half  of  the  nates,'. — Itch-
ing over  the  whole  body,  especially  on  the  chest  and  back,". — Itching,  here
and  there,  with  perceptible  blisters,  frequently  rouses  him  from  sleep,". — At
night  he  is  wakened  by  violent  itching,  and  he  discovers  pimples  at  several
places,". — Itching  of  many  parts  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  neck  and
limbs,".— [440.]  Itching  upon  the  chest  and  the  back,^. — Itching  of  the
arm,  with  reddish  blisters,  like  mosquito-bites,  after  rubbing,".

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Frequent  yawning,  three  or  four  times  in
succession,". — *  Great  sleepiness  during  the  day,  and  early  in  the  morning,
after  waking;  he  cannot  decide  to  leave  his  heA,^.—* Sleepiness  in  the  fore-
noon,*.— Transient  sleepiness  in  the  afternoon,  when  sitting,*. — At  7  o'clock
in  the  evening,  she  feels  overwhelmed  with  sleep;  she  continues  to  sleep  during
the  night;  early  in  the  morning  she  feels  well;  for  six  days  in  succession,".
— Sleepy  and  peevish  at  6  o'clock  in  the  evening;  at  8  o'clock  he  cannot
refrain  from  sleeping;  sleeps  soundly  at  night;  early  in  the  morning  he
feels  so  tired  that  he  can  scarcely  open  his  eyes,". — Slumber,  with  fanciful


374  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

del usions,\— Slumber,  with  delusions  of  fancy;  sbe  hears  some  one  knock-
ing outside,  or  is  called  by  somebody,'. — [450.]  He  falls  asleep  late;  he
was  unable  to  fall  asleep  before  midnight,'. — He  is  wide  awake  in  bed,  in
the  evening,  so  that  he  cannot  fall  asleep  under  an  hour;  this  symptom  is
accompanied  by  frequent  shiverings,  especially  over  the  whole  of  the  left
side,  upon  which  he  does  not  lie;  or  by  sexual  desire,  with  erections,  when
getting  warm;  these  make  him  yet  more  awake;  for  eight  days  in  succes-
sion, and  again  after  five  weeks,'. — Uneasy  sleep  at  night,  on  account  of
itching  stitches  here  and  there,  going  off  by  rubbing,'.— *  At  night,  frequent
waking,  as  from  fright,*. — Frequent  waking  at  night;  on  falling  asleep,  he
immediately  dreamed  about  solemnities,'. — Little  sleep  (the  first  night),l —
At  night,  he  lies  upon  his  back,*. — He  dreamed  of  seeing  an  old  school-
mate; this  gave  him  much  pleasure  (after  twenty-three  hours),*. — His  night
sleep  is  interrupted  by  dreams  about  members  of  his  family  at  his  native
place,  with  whom  he  quarrelled,*. — His  night  sleep  is  interrupted  by  dis-
agreeable dreams  about  quarrels  with  his  relatives,*. — [460.]  Voluptuous
dreams  at  night,  with  pollutions,*. — Lewd  dreams,  several  nights  in  succes-
sion, also  with  pollutions  (after  eleven  days),^ — Anxious  dreams,  as  if  he
were  to  be  hurt ;  he  starts  up  from  sleep,  and  trembles  with  his  hands  and
feet,'. — Horrible  dreams  about  mutilation  of  men,'.

Fever. — Much  chilliness ;  no  heat,'. — Chilliness,  even  in  a  warm  room,l
— Shiverings  over  the  whole  body,  without  thirst  (after  two  hours),'. —
Shiverings  over  the  whole  body  early  in  the  morning,  with  heat  in  the  fore-
head, without  thirst  (after  half  an  hour),*. — Disagreeable  feeling  of  internal
chilliness,  so  that  he  cannot  get  warm ;  returning  after  the  lapse  of  five
weeks,''. — Towards  noon,  violent  chills  for  an  hour,  with  great  thirst  for
beer ;  then  sleep,  succeeded  by  heat  and  constant  thirst,'. — [470.]  He  feels
quite  hot  in  consequence  of  the  slightest  exercise,  especially  in  the  heat  of
the  sun  ;  he  then  complains  of  excessive  heat  in  the  throat,'". — Waking  at
2  o'clock  at  night,  with  slight  warmth  all  over,  and  burning  itching  and
sensation  of  excoriation  of  the  anus  (third  day),'. — At  night,  when  in  bed,  he
feels  quite  hot,  and  is  drenched  with  sweat,'". — Sweat  returning  at  the  same
hour  for  three  days  in  succession,''. — General  warm  sweat  in  bed,  every  other
morning,'. — Sweat  during  sleep,*. — Early  in  the  morning,  when  waking,
mild  sweat  over  the  whole  body  (after  twenty-one  hours),*. — General  sweat,
without  smell,  which  made  the  tips  of  the  fingers  soft  and  wrinkled,'.

Coilditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Mucus  in  right  canthus';
early,  fluent  coryza;  early,  roughness,  etc.,  in  throat;  early,  on  waking,
sense  of  hunger;  early,  pressure  at  stomach;  early,  diarrhoea;  early,  hard
stool;  early,  after  rising,  cough ;  early,  cough,  etc.;  early,  on  waking,  op-
pression of  chest;  early,  when  rising,  pain  in  pectoralis  major;  early,  pain
in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck;  immediately  on  rising,  pain  in  small  of  back;
early,  great  lassitude;  early,  feels  tired;  shiverings  over  the  whole  body,
etc.;  early,  when  waking,  mild  sweat  over  whole  body. — {Every  other  morn-
ing), General  warm  sweat,  in  bed. — {From  morning  till  night),  Teariug  pain
in  head;  tearing  in  back. — [Forenoon),  Irritated  state  of  mind,  etc.;  gum  in
the  canthi;  stitches  in  eyeball;  tongue  coated  white;  rumbling  in  abdomen;
somnolence. — (Towards  noon),  Tearing  in  head  ;  violent  chills,  etc. — {After-
noon), Roaring  in  ears;  gulping  up  of  fluid;  pinching  in  left  side  of  abdo-
men; deep,  etc.,  breathing;  sensation  of  a  spasm  at  border  of  left  thigh;
when  sitting,  transient  sleepiness. — (Evening),  Out  of  humor,  etc.;  some-
thing seemed  to  block  up  ear;  obstruction  of  nose;  bleeding  at  nose;  in
bed,  toothache;  thirst;  pinching  in  abdomen  begins;  in  bed,  crawling,  etc.,


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  375

of  the  hsBtuorrhoids ;  hard  stool,  etc. ;  when  lying  down,  pain  in  right  chest;
when  sitting,  spasmodic  drawing  in  one  of  the  cervical  muscles;  after  lying
down,  drawing  pain  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck;  pain  in  left  hip-joint;  when
sitting,  twitching  of  muscles  of  left  half  of  nates;  itching  on  thighs;  pain
below  knee ;  when  sitting,  drawing  in  right  leg ;  in  bed,  after  a  walk  of  three
hours,  stinging  in  skin  of  right  sole. — (Night),  Disposition  to  shoot  him-
self; in  bed,  anxious  reflections  ;  in  bed,  3  to  6  o'clock,  anxiety  ;  tooth-
ache, etc. ;  dryness  of  the  mouth;  pinching  on  the  palate;  much  thirst;
drinks  much;  itching,  etc.,  in  knees;  diarrhoea;  tenesmus  of  blarlder;
passes  small  quantity  of  urine,  etc. ;  pimples  come  on ;  pimples  on  left
radius ;  violent  itching,  etc. ;  in  bed,  quite  hot,  etc. — (2  a.m.).  Wakes
with  slight  warmth  all  over,  etc. — (6  p.m.).  Sleep,  etc. — (7  p.m.).  Weari-
ness, etc. ;  overwhelmed  with  sleep. — (  Walking  in  open  air),  Condition  of
ideal  love,  etc.;  dull  headache;  dryness  of  nose;  clearing  the  throat,  etc.;
stitch  under  both  arms. — (In  draught  of  air).  Drawing  in  muscles  of  upper
arms  returns. — {After  bathing  in  the  river).  Violent  headache. — [Bending
arms),  Paralytic  pain  in  muscles  of  upper  arm. — (  When  breathing).  Nose
painful ;  stitches  in  left  chest. — (Breathing  deeply).  Stitches  in  chest. — (Ap-
phjing  cold  water),  Toothache. — (Coughing),  Burning  in  chest,  etc. — (  When
draioing  in  abdomen).  Pressure  at  stomach. — (During  deglutition),  Pinching
on  the  palate.  —  {After  dinner),  Pain  through  right  ear,  etc. ;  twingeing
toothache;  stitches  in  tongue;  fulness,  etc.,  of  the  body ;  immediately,  much
flatus ;  desire  for  stool ;  lassitude,  etc.,  in  limbs  ;  indolence,  etc. — (Eating),
Toothache  renewed  ;  deep,  sighing  breathing ;  pain  under  left  clavicle. —
{Exerting  arm),  Drawing  pain  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck. — (  When  expiring
in  a  standing  position).  Stitches  in  left  chest. — {Extending  arm),  Pain  in
pectoralis  major. — {After  slight  exercise),  Feels  quite  hot. — {In  heat  of  sun).
Even  when  he  walks  and  works  but  little,  feels  indisposed. — (  When  inspir-
ing air),  Sore  feeling  in  nostrils ;  stitches  in  the  tooth. — (Lifting  arm).  Pain
in  pectoritlis  major. — (  When  lying  still),  Sensation  of  animals  moving  in
ear. — (After  a  meal),  Inflation  of  abdomen  ;  bursting  forth  of  flatus. — (Mo-
tion), Pinching  in  abdomen. — (  When  not  especially  noticed).  Pulsations  at
left  temple. — (Pressure),  Painful  feeling  at  stomach  ;  pain  in  groin ;  pain
ill  pectoralis  major. — (Rising  from  sitting),  Pain  in  small  of  back. — (After
rubbing).  Itching  of  arm,  etc. — (  When  sitting),  Stitches  in  right  scapula ;
stitch  in  shaft  of  tibia. — (During  sleep).  Sweat. — {When  smoking).  Pain  in
whole  head. — {Standing),  Druv/'mg  in  spermatic  cord;  clucking  in  right
half  of  nates. — (During  stillness),  Roaring  in  ears. — (Stooping),  Pain  in
muscles  of  nape  of  neck  ;  straining  in  nape  of  neck,  etc. — (During  stool).
Pain  in  rectum. — (After  supper),  DiflSculty  of  breathing. — (During  supper).
Difficulty  of  breathing. — (Turning  head  to  left).  Drawing  pain  in  muscles
of  nape  of  neck. — (Touch),  Pimples- on  cheek  itch;  stinging  of  pimple  on
thumb;  pain  iu  pimple  on  knee. — (Turning foot  outwards),  Pain  in  right
external  malleolus. — (After  taking  vinegar).  Very  thin  stools,  etc. — (  Walk-
ing), Especially  when  bending  the  thigh  backwards,  drawing  pain  in  left
hip-joint;  right  foot  feels  numb,  etc. — (  Walking  upstairs),  Dnll  headache
in  forehead,  etc. — (In  warm  air).  Feels  indisposed. — ( Getting  loarm  in  bed).
Pimples  itch. — (Drinking  wine),  *  Makes  him  feel  worse ;  nausea. — {When
writing),  Trembling  of  the  hands.

Amelioration. —  (In  open  air),  Toothache. — (In  cool  air),  *Feels
better. — (After  a  meal),  Empty  sensation  in  abdomen  goes  ofi". — (Pressure),
Pain  over  left  temporal  bone,  went  off"  temporarily. — (Rest),  Feels  better ;
voice  returns.: — {Rubbing),  Stinging  in  right  sole. — (Stooping),  Drawing  in


376  ANTIMONIUM  OXIDUM.

spermatic  cord. — {Touch),  Stitches  at  border  of  right  concha  go  oflf. —
(  Walking),  Pain  in  small  of  back  disappeared. — ( Warmth),  Drawing  in
muscles  of  upper  arm  passed  off.


ANTIMONIUM  OXIDUM.

Sesquioxide  of  antimony,  SbjOj. (Fumes  from  antimony  works.)

Authorities. A.  H.  Z.,  20,  122;  Rev.  d.  1.  Med.  Horn.,  2,  194.

Head. — Pain  in  head. — Violent  headache. — Slight  headache  increases
to  an  intolerable  degree. — Violent  headache,  with  tearing  in  the  limbs. —
Stitches  through  the  head  from  time  to'  time. — Lightniug-like  stitches
through  the  head  backward,  which  suddenly  disappear,  while  the  headache
in  the  forehead  remains. — Violent  stitches  and  burning  at  the  occiput  and
nape  of  the  neck. — Pain  in  the  occiput,  especially  evenings,  violent,  stupe-
fying, and  so  exhausting  that  he  soon  falls  into  an  unrefreshing  sleep. —
Continuous  fatiguing  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  immediately  behind
the  glabella.

Mouth. — [10.]  Tongue  coated  white.

iStoinaeh. — Loss  of  appetite. — Diminished  appetite. — Anorexia.

Abdomen . — Abdomen  distended  by  incarcerated  gases. — Abdominal
pains. — Gripings. — Colic,  without  diarrhoea.

Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea. — Diarrhoea,  with  griping  pains  in  ab-
domen, troublesome,  frequent,  consisting  of  food  evacuated  soon  after  eating.

TTi'inart)  Oi'gans. — [20.]  Indescribable  lameness  in  the  urinary
apparatus. — Pains  and  urging  at  neck  of  bladder,  and  burning  in  the
urethra  during  urination. — Discharge  of  a  few  drops  of  mucus  from  the
urethra. — Gonorrhoea-like  discharge  from  the  urethra. — Painful  discharge
of  urine  gidtatim. — Dysuria,  with  a  mucous  discharge,  causing  sensation
of  burning  in  the  urethra.— Strangury. — Urine  of  a  deep  orange-yellow
color,  almost  red. — Deep-red  and  bloody  urine,  causing  burning  in  the
urethra,,  from  which  exuded  a  whitish  mucus,  after  cessation  of  the  bloody
urine.

Sexual  Organs. — Dwindling  of  the  penis  and  testicles. — [30.]  Penis
flaccid. — Burning  at  the  glaus  penis. — Want  of  vigor  in  the  genitals,  which
approached  impotence. — Absence  of  erections. — Complete  impotence. —
Complete  impotence ;  no  ejaculation  of  semen,  and  even  no  erections. —
Atrophy  of  the  testicles. — Testicles  grew  smaller. — Atrophy  of  testicles  and
penis. — Pain  in  testicle. — [40.]  Pains  in  the  testicles. — Decrease  of  sexual
feeling. — Absence  of  sexual  feeling. — Loss  of  sexual  appetite.

Resjtir  J  tory  Apparatus. — Cough  violent,  shattering,  dry,  with
stitches  in  chest. — Cough  dry,  painful,  finally  ends  in  a  difficult  expectora-
tion.— Difficult  expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus. — Respiration  audible,
from  rattling  and  whistling.— Sense  of  suffocation. — Respiration  difficult,
with  mucous  and  sibilant  r41es  over  the  chest.

Chest. — [50.]  Pain  in  the  chest. — Very  great  constriction  of  the  chest,
with  atitches. — Continued  oppression  of  chest,  constriction  and  irritation  to
cough. — Oppression  of  chest. — Lancinating  pain  along  edge  of  ribs,  and  in
back. — Sharp  stitches  through  the  chest,  towards  the  shoulders  and  back. —
Violent  stitches  in  chest,  with  dry  cough.

Neck  and  Back. — Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands. — Sensitive  pains
in  the  loins. — Sharp  pains  in  the  sacro-lumbar  region.


ANTIMONIUM  SULPH.  AURATUM.  377

Extretnities  in  General. — [60.]  Spasms  of  the  limbs. — Pain  in
all  the  limbs.

Generalities, —  Cheat  relaxation  of  the  whole  organism. — General
relaxation  and  depression. — Great  weakness. — Excessive  general  irrita-
bility.— Great  sensitiveness.

Skill. — Pustular  eruption,  thick  on  the  lower  abdomen.— Pustular
eruption  on  neck. — Pustular  eruption  on  neck  and  body. — [70.]  Pustular
eruption  thickest  on  the  genitals. — Pustular  eruption  on  arms,  nates,  geni-
tals ;  prevents  walking. — Pustular  eruption  in  the  bends  of  the  limbs. —
Pustular  eruption  on  nates. — Pustular  eruption,  especially  on  thighs  and
scrotum. — Pustular  elevations,  like  pocks,  on  the  scrotum.

Sleep  and  Dreams, — ^Troublesome  restlessness  at  night. — Distress-
ing restlessness  prevents  sleep. — Sleeplessness. — Fatiguing  dreams. — [80.]
Anxious  dreams,  and  frequent  startings.

Fever. — Fever. — Complaints  assume  the  form  of  intermittent  fever. —
Profuse  perspiration  and  general  weakness. — Very  profuse  and  debilitating
sweats  during  sleep. — Very  tormenting,  pouring  sweat,  every  time  after
.  sleeping,  followed  by  great  exhaustion. — Night-sweats. — Excessive  night-
sweats.

ANTIMONIUM  SULPH.  AUEATUM.

Antimonic  persulphide,  Sb^Sj.  Golden  sulphuret  of  antimony.  Prepa-
ration, Trituration.

Authorities.  1,  Mayerhofer,  Hirschels,  Z,  f.  Hom.  Kl.,  19,  27;  proving
with  repeated  doses,  varying  from  one-sixteenth  to  ten  grains.  2,  Boecker
(Beitrage).

Mind. — Apprehensiveness,\

Head, — Head  confused,^. — Confused  head  on  account  of  the  severe
urging in the  abdomen,'. — Pressive  headache,^. — Forepart of the head  ■
affected,'. — Forehead  feels  confused,'. — Headache  one  sided,  especially  in
the  left  temporal  region,'.

Ears, — A  reddish  swelling  behind  the  right  ear  (on  the  third  day),
which  leaves  behind  a  redness  and  scurfiness,'.

Nose, — Increased  mucous  secretion  from  uose,^ — [10.]  Increased  mucus
from  nose  and  throat,^. — Violent  coryza  with  loss  of  smell,'. — -Nasal  catarrh,
with  impeded  respiration,  in  the  morning,'. — Catarrh  and  fluent  coryza,
with  a  confused  head,  impeded  respiration,  and  impaired  appetite,'. — Bleed-
ing from  nose  on  wasliing,l

Mouth, — Pressive,  boring,  tearing  toothache,'. — -Tongue  very  thickly
coated  yellow,'. — Pasty  mouth  and  taste  in  the  morning,^. — Much  saliva  and
water  collected  in  the  mouth,'. — Taste  pasty,'. — [20,]  Taste  very  flat,
pasty,'. — Taste  pasty,  with  a  slimy  coated  tongue,'. — Taste  was  sweetish,
bitter,  and  flat,'.

Throat. — Mucus  from  the  throat  becomes  ofiensive  to  smell,'. — In-
creased mucous  .secretion  in  back  of  throat,^. — Pressure  and  tensive  feeling
in  the  throat,  especially  at  the  larynx,'. — Pressure  in  the  throat  as  if  a  plug
stuck  in  it,'. — In  the  morning,  .scratching,  rough  feeling  in  the  throat,'. —
Severe  scraping  pain  in  the  throat,  especially  in  the  larynx,'. — Burning  and
heat  in  the  fauces,'.

Stomach, — [30.]  Appetite  increased  to  decided  hunger  (four  grains),'.
— Appetite  lost,'. — Weak  stomach,  disordered  digestion,  with  nausea,'. —
Almost  loathing  of  food,  with  no  appetite,'. — Fulness  in  the  stomach,'. —


378  ANTIMONIUM  SULPH.  AURATUM.

Pressure  in  the  stomach,'. — Pressure  in  the  epigastric  region,'. — Pressure
in  pit  of  stomach,'.

Abdomen. — Pressure  and  fulness  in  the  umbilical  region,'. — Abdo-
men tense,  sensitive,  especially  about  the  navel,'. — [40.]  Burning,  stick-
ing sensation  on  the  whole  left  side,  especially  of  the  left  lumbar  muscles,'.
— Abdomen  tense,  full,'. — Twisting  in  the  intestines  very  sensitive,'. —
Great  sensitiveness  in  the  colon,  and  especially  at  the  anus,'.— Tensive
drawing  pain  in  the  groins,'.

Stool  and  ArtMS. — Constant  urging  to  stool,'. — Passage  of  much
flatus,  with  sudden  urging  to  stool,  followed  by  a  stool  at  first  solid,  then
bright  yellow,  pasty,  then  violent  colic  and  rumbling  around  the  navel,'. —
Stool  half  solid,  half  soft,'. — Stool  of  hard  fseces  passed  with  unusual  diflS-
culty,'. — Constipation,  with  tenesmus  and  burning  pains  in  the  anus,'.

tli'inary  Organs. — [50.]  In  the  urethra  a  tickling  and  twitching
sensation,  with  increased  urine,'. — Increased  evacuation  of  urine,  with  much
tensive  and  tickling  sensation  in  the  penis,'. — Urine  increased,  reddish-
brown,'. — Urine  increased,  reddish-brown  (one-half  grain),'. —  Urine  in-
creased, dark-red  (contained  traces  of  Antimony  after  six  grains),'.

Sexual  Organs. — The  scrotum  itches  more  severely  toward  morning,
followed  by  some  redness ;  the  next  day  a  dry  pustulous  eruption  develops,
with  constipation  (four  grains),'. — The  itching  and  eruption  on  the  scrotum
extended  more  toward  the  perineum  (second  day),'. — Sexual  desire  un-
usually excited,'. — Extraordinary  sensitiveness  of  the  genitals,'.

Mesitiratory  Apparatus. — Tickling  as  from  mucus  in  the  larynx
and  air-passages,'. — [60.]  Tickling  as  from  mucus  in  the  larynx,  without
ability  to  expectorate  mucus,'. — Increased  secretion  of  tough  mucus,  during
the  restless  night,'. — Increased  mucous  secretion,  with  fulness  in  the  bronchi,
and  full,  hard  breathing,'. — Accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  the  bronchi
and  larynx,'. — Fulness  in  the  bronchi,'. — Bronchi  feel  full,  with  difficult
■  respiration,'. — Pressure  and  constriction  in  the  bronchial  tubes,'. — Increased
mucous  expectoration,  mixed  with  blood,  of  a  sweetish  taste,'. — Eespiration
embarrassed,'. — *  Respiration  difficult,^. — [70.]  Respiration  difficult,  fall,'.

Chest. — Heaviness  in  the  prsecordium  and  apprehensiveness,'.

Meart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  in  the  morning  60,  evening  70  (two
grains  the  evening  previous),'. — Pulse  soft,'. — Pulse  small,  suppressed,'.

JVeck  and  Hack. — Tensive,  pressing  feeling  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,
neck,  and  ribs,'.

Extremities  in  General. — Tensive  feeling  in  the  muscles  of  the
shoulder  and  thigh,'. — Stiff,  tensive  pains  in  the  joints,  mornings,'. — Con-
stant drawing,  tearing  pains  in  the  joints,'. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  joints,'.

Upper  Extremities. — [80.]  Arms  heavy  in  the  morning,'. — Pain-
ful immobility  of  the  left  arm,'. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  joints  of  the
arms,'. — Boring  tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  arm  and  hand,'. — Pressive,
tensive  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,'. — Twitchings,  like  electric  shocks,
through  both  ulnar  nerves,  especially  in  the  elbow-joint,'. — Pressure  and
heaviness  in  the  bones  of  the  forearm,'. — Swelling  of  the  fingers,'. — Tensive
swollen  feeling  of  the  fingers,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Deep  sleep  with  sweat  (four  grains),'. — [90.]
Sleep  soporous,  not  refreshing,'. — Extremely  broken  soporous  sleep,'. — Sleep
quiet  till  midnight,  then  sudden  waking,  with  confused  head  and  pressure
above  the  forehead  toward  the  vertex,'. — Sudden  waking  after  midnight,
with  great  excitement  and  restlessness;  unusually  excited  sexual  desire;
after  this  the  sleep  was  light,'. — Slept  only  three  hours,  suddenly  awoke  with


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TAKT.  379

a  heavy,  confused  head,  pressure  in  the  stomach,  difficult  breathing,  fulness
of  the  bronchi,  restless  tossing  about,  skin  very  active  with  slight  warmth,
and  even  sweat  over  the  whole  body,'. — Sleep  dreamy,'. — Sleep  dreamy,  wakes
after  midnight  with  dull  headache  (six  grains),'. — Sleep  dreamy,  with  sud-
den wakings  after  midnight,  with  very  much  increased  gouty  and  rheumatic
troubles  of  upper  and  lower  extremities,'.— Sleep  very  dreamy,  frequent
waking  with  a  much-confused  head,  peculiar  sensitive  tension  and  dulness
in  the  cerebrum  (ten  grains),'. — Heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities,'.— [100.]  Tensive  rheumatic  troubles  in  the  hip-joint  and  ingui-
nal region,'. — Slight  swelling  of  the  ankles,  and  especially  of  the  knee,'.

Genevalities, — In  the  morning,  sense  of  great  weakness  and  prostra-
tion,'.

Skin. — Pustules,  elevated,  dry,  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  thighs,
which  itch,  feel  tense,  pain  on  walking,  and  involve  the  whole  leg  in  sym-
pathy; they  remain  three  weeks,  when  they  dry  and  desquamate,'. — Itch-
ing of  the  skin,  especially  of  the  scrotum  and  inner  surfaces  of  the  thighs,'.

Sleep, — Vivid  dreams  and  sudden  waking  after  midnight,  with  great
restlessness,  drawing,  tensive,  rheumatic  pains  over  the  whole  thorax  and
spine;  difficult  and  noisy  respiration,  with  profuse  secretion  of  mucus,'. —
Sleep  with  anxious  dreams,'.

Fever. — General  chilliness,  with  shivering  down  over  the  whole  spine,'.
— Heat  and  cold  alternate,'. — [110.]  Chills  alternate  with  heat,  toward
evening,'. — Moderate  sweat  at  night,^

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Nasal  catarrh,  etc. ;  pasty
mouth,  etc. ;  scratching,  rough  feeling  in  throat ;  pains  in  joints ;  arms
heavy;  great  weakness,  etc. — (^Toward  evening),  Chills,  alternating  with
heat. — (Night),  Moderate  sweat. — {Midnight),  Sudden  waking,  etc. — {After
midnight).  Sudden  waking,  etc. — {Toward  morning).  Scrotum  itches. —
(  Washing),  Bleeding  from  nose.

ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

Tartar  emetic,  2[K(SbO)C4H40glH20. Preparation,  Triturations.

Authorities.'f  1,  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  Reine  Arznei-Mittldehre,  2,  209  ;
2,  S.  Hahnemann,  Archive,  3,  2,  146;  3,  Riickert,  do.;  4,  Gross,  do.;  5,
Stapf,  do. ;  6,  Fr.  H-n,  do. ;  7,  Hering,  Archive,  13  z.,  183;  8,  "M.,"  in  Buch-
ner's  review,  Hygea,  18,  274,  took  first  dil.  repeated  doses ;  9,  do.  took  one
grain  at  once;  10,  Molin,  Comptes  rendus  du  Congres  Med.  Horn.  d.  Paris,
1851-56,  proving  with  sixth  and  eighteenth  dilutions,  repeated  doses;  11,
Noebling,  N.  Z.  f.  H.  K.,  14,  80,  proving  with  several  small  doses  and  sub-
cutaneous injection  ;  12,  Boecker  Beitrage,  crude  proving;  13,  Mayerhofer,
in  Boecker  Beit.,  effects  of  one  one-hundredth  of  grain  ;  14,  De  Moore,  Rev.
de  1.  Mat.  Med.,  5,  436,  proving  with  one-quarter  grain ;  15,  Macfkrlan,
Am.  J.  Horn.  M.  M.,  4,  60,  prov.  3"  Fincke ;  16,  Woodbury,  N.  E.  Med.
Gaz.,  4,  238,  four  grains  a  day  for  fifteen  days;  17,  Giaccomini,  N.  Archive,
1,  2,  107,  one  scruple;  18,  Hutchinson  (in  Stapf 's  collection.  Archive,  3,  2,

t  Symptoms  in  Stapf  (Archive,  3',  2,  146),  from  Shsefer,  Hufel.  J  ,  1810,  are
omitted,  being  observed  after  tartar  emetic  given  in  canelle  water ;  also  Sohoenfelder,
do  ;  observed  from  a  solution  of  antimony  glance  (crudum)  in  acetic  acid;  also
Goodwin,  do.,  from  tartar  emetic  mixed  with  camphor;  also  Barbier,  see  Heneke's
compilation,  A.  H.  Z.,  88,  5,  tartar  emetic  mixed  with  chicory;  also  Jankovich,
do.,  from  tartar  emetic  mixed  with  opium.


380  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

146,  effects  of  inunction),  (see  also  Wibmer) ;  19,  Blackburne,  do. ;  20,
Horst,  do.,  inunction  (Hufeland's  Journ.,  1813);  21,  Bonetus,  do.;  22,
Elias,  do.  (Hufel.  J.,  20),  eight  grains  in  a  clyster;  23,  White,  do.;  24,
Baeumlinus,  do. ;  25,  Stutz,  do.  (inunction)  ;  26,  Autenrieth,  do.  (inunction)  ;
27,  Hecker,  do.  (inunction)  ;  28,  Walther,  do.  (four  pounds  in  milk,  the
curds  eaten  by  two  students) ;  29,  Serres,  from  Hencke's  collection,  A.  H,
Z.,  88,  5  (and  also  from  Wibmer)  ;  30,  Troschel,  do. ;  31,  Driver,  do. ;  82.
Male,  do. ;  33,  Duffin,  do. ;  34,' La  Clinique,  do.;  35,  Med.  Gaz.,  do.;  36,
Wetzler,  do. ;  37,  Krebs,  Hygea,  20,  289  ;  38,  Hildebrandt,  do. ;  39,  Im-
bert-Gourbeye,  Brit.  Journ.,  19,  367,  et  seq.,  eruption  from  inunction ;  40,
Boeckh  Frank's  Mag.;  41,  Lembert,  do.;  42,  Crichton,  do.;  43,  Wesener,
do. ;  44,  Schneider,  do. ;  45,  Carron,  from  Wibmer ;  46,  Orfila,  Toxicologie
(from  Roth  Mat.  Med.);  47,  Recamier,  do.;  48,  Constant,  from  Roth;  49,
Savory,  do.;  50,  Sachi,  do.;  51,  Baumbach,  do.;  52,  Freer,  Lancet,  1847
(effect  of  two  drachms);  53,  Harley,  Lancet,  1846  (effect  of  ten  grains  on
a  child) ;  54,  D.  Kiger,  O.  M.  and  S.  Rep.,  5,  171  (child  swallowed  one-
half  ounce  crude).

Wind. — Furious  delirium  (third  day),*'. — (Suicidal  mood  ;  he  raves
and  does  not  know  what  he  is  doing),^ — Excitement  of  disposition,". —
He  ivas  talking  to  himself". — Despondent  and  apprehensive  about  his  re-
covery ,'*.^Hopeless,  despondent  mood,  toward  evening,  y^ith.  chilliness,  pain
in  the  chest,  and  great  sleepiness,^ — 4.30  p.m.,  very  morose,  dejected,  and
sad,'. — *  The  anxiety  increases  with  the  nausea,  together  with  a  slight  pres-
sure and  some  warmth  in  the  abdomen,  which  moves  about  with  the  free
flatulence,*. — She  is  frightened  at  every  trifle,^. — [10.]  Appi'ehensive,  with
fulness  about  the  heart  and  increased  warmth  (eighth  day),®. — Appre-
hensive and  restless,*. — Dreaded  to  be  left  alone  even  for  a  few  moments,
lest  he  "  should  be  dreadfully  nervous  and  not  know  what  to  do  with  him-
self,"'".— Bad  humor,  everything  goes  wrong,'". — Bad  humor,  noise  is  intoler-
able,'".— Everything  displeases  her  of  which  she  thinks  (after  two  hours,').
— Peevish  and  quarrelsome,**. — He  rubs  his  eyes  with  his  hands  as  if  in  a
stupid  sleep,  and  wakes  in  a  very  ill-humor,  e.  g,  if  one  looked  at  him  he
began  to  howl,*. — The  child  will  not  allow  itself  touched,  without  whining
and  crying,  whereby  the  toes  and  fingers  are  drawn  inwards,''. — The  whole
time  an  unusual,  noticeable  (more  to  others  than  to  herself)  wild  gayety,
toward  evening;  this  gave  place  to  fretfulness,  peevishness,  and  anxious
thoughts  about  the  future ;  she  thinks  she  will  remain  in  her  present  con-
dition,^ — [20.]  Excited  mentally  (ninth  day),l — Restless,  excited  mind,".
— Became  senseless,". — Loss  of  consciousness ;  he  falls  into  a  state  of  stupor,
interrupted  from  time  to  time  by  spasms,™.

Head. — Head  confused  (second  day),*. — Head  confused,". — Head  much
confused  (fifth  day),*. — Head  confused  in  the  morning,  which  disappeared
after  rising  (first  day),*. — Head  confused,  with  a  warm  forehead,  depression
of  vigor,  and  indifference  to  everything,'". — Confusion  of  the  head,  like  a
stupefaction,  with  a  feeling  as  if  he  ought  to  sleep,*. — Head  confused,  with
heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  forehead  (eighth  day),*. — [30.]  Confusion  of
the  head,  like  a  pressure  in  the  temples  (immediately ),^ — Marked  con-
fusion of  the  head,  with  increasing  nausea,*. — Head  heavy,  confused,". —
Head  heavy,  much  confused  (ninth  day),'*. — Head  heavy,  pressive,  and  con-
fused,".^Head  heavy,  confused,  with  great  discomfort  on  waking,  morn-
ings (ninth  day),*. — The  head  is  heavy,  confused,  and  painful,  with  inter-
nal heat  in  the  head  (3  p.m.)  ;  it  becomes  better  in  the  open  air,  and  does
not  return  again  in  the  room,'. — Vertigo,"  '"  "  ". — Vertigo  (eighth  day),". —


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  381

Attacks  of  vertigo  (third  and  fourth  day),'. — [40.]  Vertigo  often  on  closing
eyes". — Vertigo  on  walking;  he  totters/. — Vertigo,  with  flickering  before
the  eyes  (third  day),". — Whirling  in  the  head  (ninth  day),*. —  On  trying  to
lift  his  head  he  felt  a  dizziness  which  obliged  him  to  replace  it  on  the  pillow*^.
— Dulness,  dizziness,'^ — No  pustules,  but  an  inflammation  of  the  meninges
of  the  brain  ;  the  patient  ran  about  delirious  (inunction  of  four  grains),'*. —
Congestion  to  head," — Headache,^ — Headache  (second  day),''. — [50.]
ache (ninth  day),^ — Violent  headache,  with  pressure  and  throbbing  in  the
forehead  and  temples  (eleventh  day),*. — Severe  headache,  palpitations,
vertigo,'. — Stupefaction  of  the  head,  as  if  confined,*. — Headache,  like  a
tension,  with  drawings  and  burrowing,  even  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  nose
(afternoons),*. — Headache,  with  sensitiveness  of  epigastric  region,'*. — Heat
in  the  head  increased  by  motion  (third  day),'. — Sensation  of  heat  in  ihe
head,  4  p.m.,'. — Frequent  risings  of  heat  in  the  head,  with  thirst  (sixth
day),\ — Compression  of  the  head,*. — [60.]  External  weakness  of  the  head;
she  cannot  hold  the  head  erect,^ — Internal  weakness  of  the  head,^ —
Heaviness  of  the  /lead,*".— The  head  seems  very  heavy,'. — The  head  is  heavy,
and  feels  enlarged  (4  p.m.),'. — The  head  is  so  heavy  that  she  can  scarcely
hold  it  upright,  with  very  fretful  disposition,  in  the  forenoon,'. — The  head
is  heavy  and  requires  supporting  behind,^. — Pressure  in  the  brain,". — Pres-
sive  headache  all  day,  especially  in  forehead  (eleventh  day),*. — Stitches  in
the  head,  from  11  a.m.  till  evening  (second  day),^ — [70-]  Sharp  stitches  in
the  head  on  motion,''. — Raging  and  beating  in  the  whole  head,  as  if  the
brain  would  suppurate,  which  disappears  in  the  open  air,  but  returns  in
the  room,  2i  p.m.,'. — Forehead  covered  with  cold  sweat,"  ". — Forehead
covered  with  sweat,  head  is  cold,'". — Slight  attacks  of  frontal  headache,*. —
Violent  pain  in  forehead  and  vertigo  (five  minutes),". — Heat  on  the  fore-
head, without  sweat,  in  the  morni^g,^ — On  coughing,  heat  and  sweat  of
the  forehead,  so  that  she  became  very  dizzy,l — Fine  burning  on  the  frontal
bone  above  the  right  temple  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — *Headache,  as
from  a  hand  compressing  the  forehead,^". — [80.]  Inward  boring  into  the
frontal  bone,  between  the  left  root  of  the  nose  and  the  eyebrows,'. — Dull
boring,  as  from  a  blunt  instrument,  below  the  right  frontal  eminence,*. —
Headache  draws  about,  painfully,  in  the  forehead  and  vertex,  with  tension
and  pressure,*. — Dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  some  one  had  beaten  him
on  the  head  (fourth  day),'. — In  the  forehead  a  dull  pain,  sometimes  be-
coming a  sticking,  which  extends  to  the  temple,  increased  by  coughing
(fourth  day),'. — Pressure  in  the  forehead,  especially  on  motion  (four
hours),'. — Pressure  in  forehead  and  occiput  (fifth  day),*.— A  dull,  wave-
like pressure  on  the  right  frontal  eminence,*. — Headache  from  morning
till  5  P.M. ;  a  painful  pressing  forward  from  the  occiput  across  the  vertex  into
the  frontal  region,  where  it  seems  to  her  as  if  everything  would  come  out;
worse  at  1  p.m.  (seventh  day),'. — Pressive  headache  in  the  centre  of  the
forehead,  above  the  nose,^. — [90.]  For  several  months,  a  pressive,  tensive
pain,  especially  in  the  forehead,  immediately  after  wakiug,  relieved  by  cold
water  (especially  the  third  day),'. — *  Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  move  like
a  sticking,  extends  downwards  into  ihe  left  eye,  with  unusual  inclination  to
close  the  eyes  (four  hours),'. — A  fine  tearing  from  the  left  frontal  eminence
toward  the  temple,  on  speaking  (after  one  hour),'. — Slight  sticking  in  the
forehead  (second  day),'. — Sticking  (or  rather  tearing)  in  the  forehead
(twenty  hours)  from  2  P.M.  till  3  a.m.,'. — Jerking  and  drawing,  with  a  ten-
sion in  the  forehead,  especially  over  the  left  eye  (one  hour),'. — A  sensitive


382  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  the  whole  evening,  with  a  sensation
as  if  the  brain  pressed  too  hard  there,  balled  into  heavy  lumps,*. — *  Throb-
bing in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (fourth  day),l — On  waking  in  the
night  he  always  has  the  same  bad  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  balled
into  a  heavy  lump,  only  in  the  left  half  of  the  forehead,*. — Pressive  head-
ache on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  with  pressure  on  the  eyes,". — [100,]
Violent  pulsating  of  the  bloodvessels  in  the  temples  (fifth  day),l — Pressing
inward  in  the  left  temple,*. — Feeling  as  if  both  temples  were  pressed  to-
gether,*.— Feeling  as  if  the  head  were  compressed,  at  both  temples,  with
dull  instruments,*. — Fine  tearing  in  the  left  temple,  on  motion  in  the  open
air  (after  two  hours),'. — Sticking  in  the  temples  (third  day),l — A  long-
continuing,  sensitive,  drawing  pressure  iu  the  right  temple,*. — In  the  tem-
ples a  tension,  as  if  squeezed,  with  a  kind  of  supefaction  (one-quarter  of  an
hour),*. — *Painful  drawing  in  the  right  temple  extends  down  to  the.  zygoma  and
upper  jaiu,\ — Tension  on  the  vertex  (second  day),^. — [110.]  Very  sensitive
pressure  on  the  vertex  (fifteenth  day),^ — In  the  afternoon,  on  motion,  a  surg-
ing from  the  neck  upward  across  the  vertex,  toward  the  forehead,  with
stupefaction  and  confusion  of  the  senses,  on  standing  for  one  minute,\ — ■
Burning  and  itching,  in  a  place  as  large  as  a  half  dollar,  in  the  anterior
part  of  the  right  parietal  bone,  on  stooping.;  on  rising,  it  is  somewhat  re-
lieved, but  constantly  returns  on  stooping,  and  disappears  on  scratching
(after  one  hour),'. — Intermittent  tearings  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,l —
Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and  especially  deep  in  the  right  ear,
on  raising  the  head,  after  stooping  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),\ — A
kind  of  stupefaction  with  a  tensive  sensation  attacks  the  left  half  of  the
head  (one-quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Slight  tearing,  drawing  headache  in  the
left  half  of  the  head  from  behind  forward,*. — A  tensive  pressing-in  head-
ache in  the  left  half  of  the  skull,*. — On  stooping,  several  violent  stitches
in  the  left  parietal  bone,  extending  forward  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Such
a  violent  stitching-tearing  from  the  posterior-inferior  portion  of  the  left
parietal  bone  to  a  place  in  front  of  the  vertex,  that  it  seems  as  though  a
piece  were  being  torn  from  her  head;  deep  within,  on  standing,  8  a.m.;  the
same  pain  returns  on  the  following  day,  at  the  same  hour,'. — [120.]  The
occiput  becomes  heavy,  and  an  anxious  oppressive  sensation  sets  in,°. — Sen-
sation in  the  occiput,  on  stooping,  as  if  something  fell  forwards  (three
hours),'. — Raging  or  throbbing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  like
ulceration,  on  rest  and  motion,  Ij  p.m.,'. — Heaviness  in  the  head,  and  the
scalp  is  so  sensitive  that  she  can  scarcely  bear  the  comb  (morning  and
evening),'.

Eyes. — Squinting  eyes,"'. — Enlarged,  swollen  eyes,'". — Bloodshot  eyes*\
— Weak  and  dim  eyes,'''. — Weakness  of  eyes  (eleventh  day),'. — Eyes  feel  so
tired  that  they  would  close,^. — [130.]  Burning  in  the  eyes,  evenings,  as  if
he  had  studied  long  by  the  light,*. — Pressure  on  both  eyes,*. — Sense  of
weight  on  eyes,'". — Inclination  to  press  the  eyes  tightly  together*. — Dull  pres-
sure over  the  nose  and  one  eye,*. — Violent  tearing  between  the  root  of  the
nose  and  the  right  eyebrow,  as  if  some  one  took  hold  of  her  there  by  the
skin  ;  very  painful  and  long-lasting  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Difficulty  of
moving  the  lids  (second  day),''. — Sticking,  like  electric  stitches,  iu  both
inner  canthi,  and  pressure  in  the  eyes,'. — Burning  and  biting  in  the  right
internal  canthus  and  redness  of  the  conjunctiva,*. — Acute  conjunctivitis,
with  much  lachrymation,'*. — [140.]  Yellowness  of  the  sclerotica,'". — The
eyeball  pains  as  if  bruised,  especially  on  touch,'. — Sudden,  rather  severe,
tensive  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  eyeball,*. — Vanishing  of  sight


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TAKT,  383

(ninth  day),'. — ^Vanishing  of  sight  and  hearing,'. — The  sight  vanishes
when  she  looks  at  an  object  for  a  long  time,  ii  p.m.,\ — Sparks  before  the
eyes,". — *Flickering  before  the  eyes,^ "  ''. — Flickering  before  the  eyes,  especi-
ally on  rmnf!  from  sitting,  several  times  in  an  hour,  of  short  duration;  she
sees  only  as  through  a  thick  veil,  with  vertigo  (several  days),^ — Blackness
before  the  eyes," ".  ■  '  ,

Ears, — [150.]  Twitching-tearing  in  the  right  concha,  in  the  evening
on  lying  down,  which  disappears  in  bed,\ — Ulcerative  pain  in  the  right
concha,  in  the  evening  (after  two  days),'. — Twitching,  painful  tearing  in
the  right  ear,  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — Roaring  in  the  ear  (fourth
day),'. — Fluttering  before  the  left  ear,  as  from  a  large  bird  ;  at  the  same
time  a  warmth  passes  to  this  ear,  as  if  she  stood  near  a  hot  stove ;  gradu-
ally disappearing  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'.

Nose. — The  corners  of  the  nostril  are  ulcerated  and  painful  (fourth
hour),'i — Nose  pointed,". — Violent  sneezing,  five  times,". — (Twice  hearty
sneezing),*. — *  Sneezing,  fluent  coryza,  and  chilliness,  with  loss  of  taste  and
smell,''. — [160.]  Fluent  coryza,^ — Fluent  coryza  and  tickling  cough,  with
violent  eructations,  retching,  and  vomiting  of  a  tough,  watery  mucus  (elev-
enth day),'. — Catarrhal  symptoms  toward  evening  (eighth  day),'. — Ca-
tarrhal stoppage  of  the  nose,  with  thick,  mucous  discharge,'. — Catarrh  in
the  left  nostril,  with  stoppage  of  the  nose  and  loss  of  smell  (1.30  p.m.),'. —
Now  stoppage  of  the  nose,  now  a  fluent  catarrh,'. — Nose-bleed  at  3  p.m.,
followed  by  fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing,^ — ^Stupefying  tension  across  over
the  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  laced  with  a  band,^. — A  tearing  and  crawling  in
the  left  nostril,  as  of  sudden  irritation  to  sneeze,  vvhich,  however,  does  not
occur  (after  half  an  hour),'.

Face. — Red  face,*". — [170.]  Face  bright-red,". — Face  smutty  color.'l
— Livid  face,^. — Pale  face,". —  Great  paleness,^". — Remarkably  pale  face,  for
an  hour,^ — *Pale,  sunken  face,"  'I — Face  unusually  pale,  and  wore  an  ex-
pression of  extreme  anxiety,'". — Countenance  livid,  bathed  in  clammy  sweat,
and  expressive  of  great  suffering  (one  hour),°l — [180.]  Cold  sweat  onface,^".
— Spasmodic  agitation  of  the  facial  muscles,*'. — *  Convulsive  twitches  in  almost
every  muscle  of  the  face,^^, — Countenance  distorted,  with  peculiar  tetanic
spasms  of  the  jaws,  as  though  she  was  endeavoring  to  bite  everything
within  reach,°l — Burning  heat  of  face,". — Tensive  feeling  in  face  and  neck
(second  day),''. — Dull  pressure  on  the  left  malar  bone,*. — Sensitive  draw-
ing, at  last  dull  pressure,  on  left  malar  bone,*. — Lips  livid,". — Cracked
lips,  at  night  on  waking  (fourth  day),'. — *Dry,  scurfy  lips  (third  hour),l —
[190,]  The  right  and  left  sides  of  the  upper  lip  are  full  of  clear,  itching
vesicles,  which,  on  drying  up,  are  replaced  by  new  ones ;  the  itching  is  espe-
cially violent  in  the  evening,'. — On  the  right  side  of  the  lower  lip  several
clear  vesicles ;  at  the  same  time  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip  is  swollen
and  covered  with  small  pimples,  with  tensive  pain  on  pressure,'. — Burning
externally  on  the  right  side  of  the  chin,  which  lasts  but  a  short  time  (after
one  hour  and  a  half),'. — Burning  on  the  right  side  of  the  chin,  as  if  one
held  a  hot  coal  to  it  (after  one  hour  and  three-quarters),'. — Drawing  from
the  chin  along  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw,*. •

JHoiith. — Violent  toothache  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'. — Tearing
in  three  to  four  teeth  of  the  lower  left  row,  which  soon  disappears  (after
an  hour  and  a  half),'. — Pain  in  a  root  of  a  tooth  of  the  right  lower  row,
as  if  it  were  being  taken  out,  which  frequently  returns,'.— Gums  bleed,  as
if  scorbutic,". — Several  burning  blisters  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,
which  soon  disappear,  but  return  a  day  later  (sixth  day),'. — Tongue  dry  and


384  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

red  (one  hour)/". — [200,]  Tongue  very  red  and  dry  in  the  centre,™'*. —
Tongue  coated/l — Tongue  in  morning  thick  yellow,  thicker  in  p.m.,". —
Tongue  coated  gray,^ — Tongue  thickly  white  coa.ted,^^.—* Tojigue  covered
with  a  thick,  white,  pady  coat,^". — Tongue  coated  slimy  (fourth  day),*. —
Tongue  coated  pappy,  slimy,". — Moist,  clean  tongue,'". — Tongue  difficult
to  move,'^ — [210.]  It  m,  painful  to  move  the  tongue  about,". — Tearing  pain
on  the  left  side,  behind  the  root  of  the  tongue,  noticed  on  swallowing,'. —
In  the  morning  after  rising,  the  mouth  is  so  sore  that  she  can  scarcely
swallow,  with  white  tongue  and  sour  taste  (second  day),'. — An  unpleasant
sensation  on  the  palate  the  whole  time,'. — On  the  posterior  part_of  the  pal-
ate, sensation  of  soreness,  and  as  if' a  hard  body  lay  against  it;  without
swallowing ;  it  disappears  on  eating  bread  (8  a.m.),'. — Itching  below  the
right  corner  of  the  mouth,  where,  after  scratching,  three  vesicles  arise  ;  also
under  the  left  corner  (second  day),'. — Mouth  dry  (ninth  day),'. — Increase
of  saliva,". — Saliva  increased ;  must  frequently  expectorate,'^ — Salivation,'^.
— [220.]  Copious  saliva  runs  from  the  mouth  (fourth  day),'. — Great  accu-
mulation of  water  in  the  mouth,^— Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,
'vlthout  nausea,  though  with  a  qualmish,  filthy  taste,*. — Collection  of  water
lu  the  mouth,'. — Flow  of  tasteless,  clear  water  in  the  mouth,  which  runs
out  in  great  quantity,  with  retching  and  straining,  without  fetching  up  any-
thing beyond  a  little  clear  mucus,'''. — Profuse  spitting,". — Must  often  spit,
even  while  eating,"'. — Bad  taste  in  the  mouth  (eighth  day),'. — Very  im-
pleasant  taste  in  the  mouth,". — Clammy  mouth,'". — [230.]  Salty  taste,^ —
Bitter  mouth,'". — Bitter  mouth  in  morning,"'. — Taste  bitter  and  pasty  (fourth
day),'. — Taste  dry  and  pasty  (first  day),'. — Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the
morning  after  waking  (sixth  and  seventh  days),'. — In  the  morning  on
waking,  very  sour  taste  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  tongue,  as  of  salt,
which  disappears  after  eating  (second  day),'. — Taste  pappy  or  flat,'l — No
taste  to  the  food  (fourth  hour)*^ — Tobacco  has  no  taste,*. — [240.]  Difficult
speech,'". — Speechless,'''.

^^J'Oai.— Increased  raucous  secretion  in  the  throat,"  ".—Much  mucus
in  throat  and  short  breathing  (eighth  day),'. — Sharp  pain  at  the  throat,'^.
— Choking  sensation,'". — Roughness  in  the  throat,  with  sensation  as  if  a
small  leaf  obstructed  the  windpipe,  on  hawking ;  for  one  hour  (after  one
hour),'. — Great  roughness  in  the  throat,  which  soon  disappears  [7  p.m.),'.
— Throat  raw ;  swallowing  difficult  and  painful,'". — Itching  and  dryness  in
the  throat,  which  provokes  a  hacking  in  the  morning  (seventeenth  day),'. —
[250.]  The  soft  palate  and  pharynx  very  red,  covered  with  vesicles ;  many
are  opened,  swollen, -and  covered  with  mucus,". — Rapid  swelling  of  the
cervical  glands  and  tonsils,". — Sensitiveness  of  oesophagus,  so  that  unehewed
morsels  cause  much  pain,". — Swallowing  sensitive,'". — Difficulty  in  swal-
lowing,'"".—  Great  dysphagia,*". — Deglutition  is  impossible,*^.

Stomach. — Appetite  increased  (second  day),'. — Canine  hunger  on
walking  in  open  air,". — Though  food  tastes  good  and  he  has  some  appetite,
yet  he  can  only  gradually  get  some  food  into  his  stomach,  from  which  he
feels  better,  and  the  pressure  in  the  abdomen  is  somewhat  relieved  (first
day),'. — [260.]  On  eating,  soon  satiated,  almost  nauseated,  must  stop  eat-
ing,'".— *He  eats  at  noon  with  appetite,  but  after  he  is  satisfied  a  kind  of  nausea
attacks  him  at  times,*. — Some  appetite,  but  food  was  quickly  rejected,". —
Usually  good  appetite,  only  sometimes  poor,'. — *  Extraordinary  appetite  for
apples,  and  thirst  for  cool  water ;  evenings  he  is  soon  sleepy,  against  his  usual
habit,*. — No  more  desire  for  tobacco,'. — Cannot  eat,  on  account  of  nausea
and  aversion,'". — Appetite  diminished  (third  day,  et  seq.),"  '".—Loss  of  ap-


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  385

petite,"'". — Appetite  completely  lost  (fifth  day),l — [270.]  Loss  of  appetite
in  the  morning,"'. — The  child  eats  little  but  drinks  much,^ — Thirst  (second
day),*. — Great  thirst,*'. — Thirst  increased  (fourth  day ),l — Urgent  thirst,'".
— Thirst  constant  and  insatiable,"*. — Much  thirst  one  day,  the  next  none  at
all,^. — Thirst,  with  internal  heat,^. — Thirst  for  beer  or  sour  milk,  with  dry-
ness in  the  throat  (6  p.m.),'. — [280.]  Desire  for  strong  liquors  and  acids,'".
— *  Desire  for  acids,''. — *  Absence  of  thirst,^ — Absence  of  thirst  the  whole
day,". — Eructations,^.  —  Eructations  frequently  through  the  day,  slight
gagging  (fourth  day),*. — Eructations,  sometimes  tasteless,  sometimes  nau-
seous,'*.— Bitter  eructations  (eighth  day),*. — Eructations  acid,  bitter  (fifth
day),?. — Eructations  of  a  salty,  nauseous  fluid  (second  hour),'. — [290.]
Sour  eructations,'. — Eructations  of  watery  fluid,  often  of  sharp,  salty  taste,*.
— Eructations,  with  taste  of  the  breakfast,'. — *  Empty  eructations,^ '. — Empty
eructations  relieve  the  nausea  for  a  very  short  time,*. — In  the  morning  fre-
quent eructations,  with  yawning,  and  great  ill-humor  (fifth  day),'. — First
eructations,  then  frequent  risings  of  fluid  (as  of  food),  which  she  again
swallows,  after  which  a  sour  taste  and  scrapy  sensation  down  the  throat
remain,*. — General  hiccough,  like  eructations  of  air,*. — Hiccough,**. — Vio-
lent hiccough,  but  no  vomiting,"". — [300.]  Uprisings  of  milk  and  an  acid
fluid  (one  hour),'. — Waterbrash,'". — Qualmishness,  a  reminder  of  nausea,
rises  from  the  stomach,*. — Qualmish,  uncomfortable,  and  depressed,*. —
*  After  dinner,  qualmishness  in  the  stomach  of  some  duration,*. — Several  times
gagging  severely,  sweat  starts  out  on  the  forehead,  the  limbs  become  very
weak,  and  much  water  flows  from  the  mouth ;  followed  by  weakness,*. —
Violent  retching  (a  half  hour),". — Eetching,*'. — Retching  gradually  comes
on,  which  becomes  more  severe,  till  vomiting  (with  great  efiTort)  ensues  of
tenacious  mucus  and  bile  (ninth  day),*. — Indescribable  nauseous  internal
sensation,'*. — [310.]  An  especially  disgusting-sensation  in  the  stomach  ;  she
believes  it  would  do  her  good  to  eructate ;  with  frequent  attacks  of  nausea
in  the  stomach,  which  extends  into  the  chest  (after  three-quarters  of  an
hour),'. — *Nausea," '"  '*  *'. — Nausea  (one  hour),'". — Continued  nausea,'*. —
Nausea  from  swallowing  the  saliva,'". — Nausea  after  eating,""". — Nausea
after  eating  or  drinking,'". — Nausea  rises  suddenly  from  the  umbilicus  and
epigastric  regions,  in  repeated  attacks,*. — *lJ'ausea,  causing  anxiety  (fifth
day),*. — Nausea,  and  great  aversion  to  food  (eighth  day),*. — [320.]  Great
nausea,  with  aversion  to  the  accustomed  food,  and  with  pinchings  in  the
abdomen,'.— Nausea,  accompanied  by  increased  frequency  of  pulse,  rising
till  he  vomits,  and  followed  by  slow,  weak  pulse,". — Nausea,  which  causes
a  particularly  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  throat,*.— *iVaMsea,  with  slight  pres-
sure in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  followed  hy  headache  in  the  forehead,'. — Nausea
increased,  frequent  hiccough,  aversion,  eructations,  pressure  in  the  throat
(ninth  day),*. — Nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  after  each  dose,'. — Constant
nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,"". — Inefl^ectual  efl'orts  to  vomit,*'. — Nausea,
vomiting  (two  hours),'. — Nausea  and  vomiting  after  eating,'". — [330.]  Vio-
lent nausea  and  incessant  vomiting  throiigh  the  whole  night,  and  four  stools  in
twelve  Jiours,^^. — Nausea  and  vomiting  of  curdled  milk  (in  an  infant  whose
nurse  had  taken  Ant.  tart.).  (Hencke.) — *Nausea  (in  a  quarter  of  an  hour),
then  yawning  with  profuse  lachrymation,  followed  by  vomiting,^. — Nausea  and
vomiting  of  mucus,  with  acceleration  of  the  pulse  from  62  to  75,  where  it
continued  till  night,'^ — Unheard  of  vomiting,"'. — Enormous  vomiting  (a
strong  dose),**. —  Violent  vomiting  (three  grammes),**. — Intolerance  of  food
and  drink,'". — *  Vomits  till  he  becomes  faint,^^. — Vomiting  in  any  position,
except  lying  on  the  right  side,'". — [340.]  After  a  violent  pressure  on  the
VOL.  I. — 25


386  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

stomach  it  increases  to  vomiting,^. — Retching,  and  once  difficult  vomiting
of  bitter,  bad-smelling,  pasty,  and  fluid  matter  (it  had  an  acid  reaction,
and  showed  traces  of  antimony),  (fifth  day),^ — Green  vomiting,". — Painful
vomiting  of  much  mucus  and  bile  mixed  with  some  blood  (half  an  hour),'*.
— Vomiting  of  some  tough,  watery  mucus,  then  pasty  food,  and  at  last  fluid
mixed  with  bile,  with  most  violent  exertion  of  the  chest  and  abdomen,  and
anxious  sweat,'.— Vomiting  of  food,". — Vomiting  of  food,  from  the  cough,^
— Vomiting  speedy  and  easy,  followed  by  great  retching  (thirteenth  day),".
—'■' Vomiting,  with  headache,  and  trembling  in  the  hands  (half  an  hour),'.
— First  violent  vomiting  and  purging  (4  grains  to  an  old  woman),". — [350.J
Vomiting,  with  frequent  dook  (40  grains),". — *  Violent  vomiting  and  purging,
with  great  prostration  (ten  minutes),'^'. —  Vomiting,  followed  by  constant  iuool-
untary  watery  stools  (one  hour),"'. —  Vomiting,  with  anguish,*^. — *  Vomiting  dif-
ficult after  long  retching,  and  followed  by  great  prostration,^''. — No  vomiting  (5
centigrammes),*". — No  vomiting  (from  15  centigrammes),*". — ^Heaviness  in
stomach  (second  day),°. — Weakness  in  the  stomach  (eleventh  day),^ — Irri-
tation in  stomach  and  nausea  (fourth  day),^ — Indescribable  malaise  in  the
region  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen  ;  on  touching  the  parts  gently  with  the
hand  the  pain  increases  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  diminishes  in  the
abdomen,'*. — [360.]  Pains  in  the  stomach,**. — Acute  pains  in  the  stomach,*^
— Craving  sensation  at  stomach,'". — Creeping  sensation  in  the  stomach,'". —
Unpleasant  sensation  of  warmth  in  the  stomach  (in  five  minutes),  which
continually  increased  to  a  painful  burning,  and  caused  great  restlessness,''.
■ — Slight  burning  in  the  stomach,^ — Burning  heat  in  the  stomach,'"  *l —
Burning  and  pressure  in  (an  apparently  full)  stomach  (eighth  day),". —
After  the  nausea,  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach,*. — Fulness  in
stomach,". — [370.]  Sensation  after  dinner  as  if  one  had  overloaded,  with
nausea,  griping  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  and  sticking  headache  in  the
forehead  and  occiput,'. — *In  the  night,  sensation  as  if  sfie  had  loaded  her
stomach  with  something ;  eructations  frequent,  lilcefoid  eggs;  sleep  restless,'. —
Feeling  of  a  weight  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  involving  the  whole  ab-
domen, and  causing  great  malaise ;  this  condition  is  ameliorated  in  the
open  air,  and  aggravated  in  the  room  ;  it  is  also  diminished  by  eructations,'*.
— Cramps  in  the  sio)?iac/t,**.— Flatulent,  audible  motions  in  the  epigastric
region  (three  hours),*. — Pain  at  the  epigastrium^". — Slight  pain  at  the  epi-
gastrium (second  day),™. —  Violent  pains  at  the  epigastrium,  which  was  tense,".
— Violent  throbbing  in  epigastric  region  (a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — (Con-
tinual whirling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  evenings  on  going  to  sleep,  with
very  violent  rapid  beating  of  the  heart,  which  threatens  to  rupture  the
heart),'. — [380.]  Feeling  as  of  cold  water  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  with
it  he  feels  faint;  he  will  fall  down;  then  follows  heat  in  the  head,". — In  the
region  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  a  sensitive  aching  as  from  incarcerated
flatulence,  late  in  the  evening ;  sometimes  forcible  expulsion  of  flatus  with
relief,*. — Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  (second  day),". — Pressure  in  pit  of
stomach  (ten  minutes),". — Troublesome  feeling  of  pressure  in  pit  of  stom-
ach (fifth  day),". — Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  very  great
nausea,*. — A  cutting  sensation  extends  upward,  from  time  to  time,  from  the
pit  of  the  stomach,*. — Sticking  pain  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  especially
felt  on  drawing  in  the  abdomen,*.

Abdomen. — Around,  below  the  short  ribs,  sensitive  painful  tension,
so  that  he  can  hardly  sit,  but  would  rather  lie,  from  incarcerated  flatulence,
■which  passes  ofl"from  time  to  time,*. — Duluess  over  the  liver,  increased  one
finger's  breadth  at  the  base,". — [390.]  Epigastric  and  liver  region  some-


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TAET.  387

what  tense  (fifth  day),*. — Liver  sensitive  to  contact,". — Warmth  about  the
navel,  gradually  extending  over  the  whole  abdomen  (after  quarter  of  an
hour),'. — Colic  around  the  umbilicus,  early  in  morning," — Inflammation
of  the  abdomen,*^. — Inflated  abdomen,'". — Tlie  abdomen  is  somewhat  dis-
tended, and  there  is  gurgling  in  it,  perceptible  externally ,^ — Abdominal
meteorism". — Distension  and  tension  in  the  abdomen,  relieved  somewhat
by  discharge  of  flatulence,  but  often  returning,'. — Upper  abdomen  distended
aud  painful,^^ — [400.]  Bowels  relaxed  (second  day),^'. — Rumbling  in  ab-
domen, as  if  water  were  in  it,  relieved  by  passage  of  wind,  up  and  down,'^
— Much  rumbling  in  the  not-distended  abdomen,  before  the  diarrhoea,^ —
Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  the  abdomen.'l — Rumbling  in  abdomen,  after
eating,'l — Much  commotion  in  the  abdomen,  soon  after  taking,'  ^ — Slight
moving  about  in  the  whole  abdomen,  with  fine  pinching,  as  if  stool  would
occur  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — As  the  nausea  paroxysmally  in-
creases, and  slight  retching  motions  arise  in  the  throat,  a  spasmodic  motion
is  perceptible  in  the  upper  abdomen,^ — Astonishing  amount  of  flatulence,
with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  and  only  slight  griping;  the  easy  passage
of  it  relieved  (second  day),'. — Frequent  offensive  flatulence,  preceded  by
rumbling  and  uneasiness  in  abdomen,'^ — [410.]  Pains  in  abdomen,  after
eating,'". — Violent  pains  in  abdomen,  after  vomiting,". — The  pain  in  the
abdomen,  though  not  so  very  severe,  is  yet  so  distressing,  that  he  is  in  an
extremely  restless  mood,  and  disinclined  to  do  any  work,'. — Must  lie  and
stretch  out  long,  on  account  of  discomfort  in  the  upper  and  lower  abdomen  ;
at  last  he  goes  to  sleep  (11  a.m.),*. — Violent  pain  in  epigastrium,  and  over
the  whole  abdomen  (one  hour),^l — The  pain  in  the  abdomen  causes  great
restlessness  in  the  body ;  one  must  constantly  move  a  limb  or  change  posi-
tion ,^. — *  The  abdomen  seems  stuffed  full  of  stones,  though  he  has  eaten  nothing,
and  it  does  not  feel  hard;  a  sensation  that  he  feels  after  long-continued  sitting
at  work,". — Violent  pressive  tension  in  the  abdomen,  especially  over  the
bladder,  which  decidedly  increases  toward  6  p.m.,  and  lasts  toward  six  days
(second  day),'.— A  kind  of  cramp  in  the  upper  and  lower  abdomen,  between
nausea  and  tendency  to  diarrhcBa,  in  which  now  one  now  the  other  seems
to  predominate ;  at  times  relief  from  empty  eructations,  and  inclination  to
pass  wind,  or  actual  passage  of  wind,*. — (Spasmodic  pains  in  the  abdomen  ;
when  they  begin  his  eyes  close  forcibly,  and  he  is  obliged  to  sleep  whether
he  wishes  or  not),l — [420.]  Gripings  in  the  bowels,  with  development  of
flatulence,'. — Griping  and  cutting,  and  repeated  nausea,  with  empty  eruc-
tations, and  passage  of  flatus  with  relief,*. — -After  a  meal,  violent  griping
and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  which  is  not  relieved  by  a  stool  at  3  o'clock ;
it  lasts  till  4  o'clock  (third  day),'. — Pinching  pain  in  abdomen  below
navel,". — Waking  at  4.30  a.m.,  with  some  pinching  and  commotion  in  the
abdomen,  followed  by  soft  stool  (second  day),'. — In  sitting,  a  crawling  in
abdomen,  which  becomes  griping  and  flatulence,  (afternoons),'. — A  tran-
sient nausea  repeatedly  in  the  abdomen,  like  an  approaching  griping,  as  if
diarrhoea  would  set  in,*.— Painful  drawing,  now  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  now  in  the  left,  so  that  she  can  only  sit  stooping,  returning  fre-
quently,'.— *  Violent  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  stones,  as  if  full;  much,
worse  on  sitting,  especially  on  stooping;  at  times  it  changes  into  griping
about  the  umbilical  region  (one  hour),'. — Pressive  and  griping  pains  in
•  abdomen,'^ — [430.]  Hard  pressure  in  upper  abdomen,l — The  pressure  in
the  abdomen  becomes  sometimes  more  severe,  and  presses  toward  the  rectum,
when  soft,  boiling,  hot  flatus  passes,  which  relieves  the  pressure,*. — Pressive
pain  in  abdomen,  in  evening,  after  eating,  relieved  by  bending  backwards


388  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

aDr]  stooping,^''. — Pinching  pressure  and  tension  in  the  abdomen  (eighth
day)/. — Dull  pain  in  abdomen,". — Dull  bellyache  in  the  mesogastric  re-
gion, with  slight  horripilation,  and  goose-skin,". — Cutting  in  the  abdomen,
evening,  toward  9  o'clock  (fourth  day),^ — Stomach-ache,  as  if  the  intes-
tines were  cut,^l — *  Outting»  in  the  abdomen ;  and  across  the  lower  abdomen
it  lies  like  a  stone,  with  great  nausea;  after  six  times  ineffectual  retchings,  fol-
lowed by  ineffectual  tendency  to  diarrhoea,  vomiting  with  great  exertion,  trem-
bling in  the  abdomen,  and  bending  together ;  first  food  with  persistent  sour
taste,  followed  by  a  continued  scraping  feeling  in  the  throat ;  afterward
chilliness,  then  two  diarrhxic  stools  in  succession,  the  last  time  it  passes  like
water, ^. — Cutting  and  griping  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  wind,*. — [440.]  Vio-
lent cutting  and  twisting  in  the  abdomen,  and  tearing  .from  the  hypogas-
trium  down  through  the  thighs  to  the  knees,  like  labor  pains,  with  fine  but
severe  stitches  at  the  navel,  with  nausea  and  waterbrash ;  soon  afterward
diarrhoea,  preceded  by  rumblings,  and  moving  of  wind  in  the  abdonaen,*. —
Violent  colic,". —  Colic  in  the  abdomen,**. — Colic  precedes  the  purging  (forty-
eight  hours),^ — Short,  tearing  pain  in  the  leftside  of  the  upper  abdomen,  fre-
quently repeated,^ — Stitching  in  intestines,". — Stitches  in  the  upper  abdo-
men,'.— Abdomen  sensitive  (eleventh  day),^ — Abdomen  sensitive  to  con-
tact,'" ". — Increased  sensitiveness  of  the  abdominal  walls  (eighth  day),'. —
[450.]  Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch  (fifth  day),^ — On  drawing  in  the  abdo-
men, a  small  spot  in  the  left  side  of  upper  abdomen  hurts,". — Frequent
sensation  of  pulsating  in  the  abdomen,'. — Violent,  rheumatic,  long-lastiug
pain  in  "the  whole  left  side;  this  pain  is  repeated,^. — A  stitch  extends
downwards  from  the  stomach,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  and  again
upward ;  on  expiration  and  on  touch  it  aches,*. — Warmth  in  the  lower
abdomen,  as  if  she  had  drunk  something  very  warm ;  it  wanders  about,
and  finally  up  toward  the  stomach  (after  half  an  hour),\ — The  tension  in
the  abdomen  seems  to  draw  more  toward  the  bladder  on  the  third  day,^ —
At  1  A.M.,  she  wakes,  on  account  of  violent  cramping  and  griping  pain
above  the  pubis,  with  icy  coldness  on  the  whole  trunk,  head,  and  arms;
cold  sweat  breaks  out  in  such  profusion,  that  the  shirt  becomes  drenched,
with  great  internal  heat ;  sensation  of  dryness  of  the  tongue,  which  is  never-
theless moist ;  with  warm  lower  extremities ;  frightful  apprehension ;  rest-
lessness ;  she  constantly  throws  herself  from  side  to  side ;  but,  with  sensa-
tion of  great  heat,  cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered.  After  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  she  is  inclined  to  eructation,  without  being  able  to ;  then  empty  eruc-
tation and  small  discharge  of  flatulence,  without  relief;  thirst ;  rising  of
water  into  the  throat,  with  great  nausea  in  the  stomach ;  paleness  of  the
face  ;  on  the  lower  extremities  warm  sweat ;  and  such  great  lassitude  of  the
feet  that  she  is  unable  to  raise  them  ;  inclination  to  stool ;  hardness  and
sensitiveness  of  the  lower  abdomen  on  rubbing ;  even  long  before  this,  she
felt  the  pain  while  asleep.  (After  a  small  dose  of  Ipecac,  the  sweat  disap-
pears, after  quarter  of  an  hour ;  then  the  coldness,  and  lastly  the  pains,
which  occur  at  longer  and  longer  intervals,  till  they  disapper  altogether),
(after  half  an  hour.)  After  cessation  of  this  frightful  attack,  she  slept
souudly ;  6  a.m.,  on  waking,  heaviness  of  the  head,  and  appearance  of  the
menses  ;  blood  thick  and  black  ;  they  are  too  soon,  but  without  any  other
difficulty,  and  last  as  usual,  three  days  (fourth  day),\ — (Spasmodic  draw-
ing from  the  thigh  to  the  abdomen),'. — Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium  and
aching,  with  cold  shivers,  as  if  menses  would  appear,*. — [460.]  Stitches
over  the  pubis,'. — Very  violent  burning  soreness  in  the  right  groin,'. —


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TAET.  389

Slight  sticking,  tearing  pains  in  a  small  spot  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower
abdomen,^ — Slight  rheumatic  sensation  in  the  left  pelvic  bones,^

Stool  and  Anus. — Several  painful  tearings  in  the  rectum,  after  din-
ner,'.— Sticking  pain  in  the  rectum  (second  day),^ — Transient  stitch  in  the
rectum  (ninth  hour),'. — Sudden,  violent,  alarming  stitch  from  the  lower
abdomen,  down  through  the  rectum  (fourth  hour),'. — (Hsemorrhoids),^.—
Burning  in  the  anus  after  stool,^ — [470.]  Violent  tension  in  the  perineum,
especially  on  walking,  with  strong  desire  to  urinate  (uninterrupted  for
several  days),'.: — In  the  morning,  after  rising,  the  usual  stool,  with  cutting
in  the  rectum,  preceded  by  pinching  in  the  abdomen  (fourth  <lay),\ — Stool
after  eating,'^— -Stool  solid  at  first,  then  pasty,  with  tenesmus  (fifth  day),".
— After  repeated  desire,  stool,  which  seems  to  be  almost  thin  fluid,  but
really  is  only  pasty,*. — Pasty  stool  (three  in  twelve  hours),'°. — Copious
alvine  evacuation**. — Soft  copious  evacuation,". — Liquid,  greenish  stool,
with  heat  at  anus,'". — Stool,  thin  mucus,  with  rumbling  and  pressure  in  the
bowels  (ninth  day),'. — [480.]  Stool  soft,  half  fluid  (sixth  and  seventh
days),'.^-Soft  stool  every  day,  for  four  days," — In  the  evening,  two  soft
stools,'. — Two  thin  fluid  stools,  with  sensitive  drawing  pains  in  the  abdp-
men  (eleventh  day),'. — Though  he  had  his  usual  stool  a  few  hours  before^
yet  he  is  obliged  to  go  again  to- stool ,*.^Repeated  tendency  to  stool,*. —
DiarrhcBa,". — Abundant  diarrhoea*^. — Diarrhoea  yellowish-brown ,^ — Thin,
bilious,  mucous  diarrhoea,". — [490.]  Diarrhoea  slimy,  appears  like  yeast,
with  a  marked  cadaverous  smell,"*. — Diarrhoea  is  very  watery/. — Bloody
stools,". —  Very  offensive  diarrhxic  stools,^^. — *  Diarrhoea  and  vomiting".—
Involuntary  diarrhoea  (death  thirty  hours  after),'". — Involuntary  evacua-
tions of  much  mucus,  and  dead  roundworms,". — Involuntary,  watery,
blood-streaked  stools,". — Fasces  mixed  with  mucus  and  bile,'^ — Stools  vary,
sometimes  soft,  sometimes  hard,'-. — [500.]  Uncommonly  hard  stool,  difiicult
to  pass  (first  day),'. — Hard  stool,  it  omits  one  day,'. — Desire  for  stool
ineffectual,  though  the  bowels  seem  full  and  pressing  (eighth  day),'. — No
stool  for  several  days,^ — Constipation  (third  day),'.

Urinary  Orijans. — A  very  sensitive  sticking  pain  in  the  lower  part
of  the  bladder;  he  believes  that  the  pain  must  be  caused  by  troubles  from
a  stone  (third  day),'. — ^Burning  in  the  urethra  while  urinating  (eighth
day},'. — *  Violent  burning  in  the  urethra  after  urinating  (third  day),'. —
Slight  tearing  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra,^ — Continued  sticking  pain
in  the  posterior  portion  of  the  urethra,  the  whole  forenoon  (second  day),'.
— *  The  urging  to  urinate  and  the  burning  in  the  urethra  increase,  only  a  little
urine  passes;  the  last  drops  are  bloody  and  accompanied  by  violent  pain  in  the
bladder  (fourth  day),'. — [510.]  Increased  desire  to  urinate  (ninth  day),'.^
Frequent  desire  to  urinate  (eighth  day),'. — Violent  urging  to  urinate,
during  which  it  burns  in  the  urethra  (second  day),'. — (He  can  hold  his
water  no  longer),'^. — Diuresis,". — Frequent  urinating,  and  pressure  to  uri-
nary passages,'^ — Urinates  more  frequently  (fourth  day),'. — Frequent  pas-
sage of  dark  urine  (fifth  day),'. — Frequent  urinating,  forenoons  and  even-
ing (sixth  day),'. — Frequent  urinating,  followed  by  relief  of  symptoms
(eleventh  day),'. — [520.]  Increased  urination,". — Copious  urination,'". —
Profuse  urination,". — Urine  pi'ofuse  (second  day),". — Urine  increased  ;
clear,  watery,'^ — Urine  increased,  dark,  turbid  (ninth  day),'. — Urine  more
copious  and  frequent ;  diminishes  at  last,*. — Retention  of  urine  followed  by
fatal  eclampsia  (inunction),  Krebs,". — The  urinary  troubles  last  from  two
to  six  days  continually,  at  first  increasing,  then  gradually  decreasing,'. —
*  Urine  dark  brownish-red,  turbid,  and  with  a  strong  odor, ^. — [530.]  Urine


390  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

turbid  and  dark  at  first,  afterward  clear,*. — The  urine  at  first  clear  like
water,  deposits  a  milky  sediment,  which  mixes  readily  on  shaking  the
glass,  and  gives  a  milky  look  to  the  whole  (fourth  day),^ — The  urine  be-
comes cloudy,  and  deposits  an  earthy  sediment  (first  day),\ — The  urine
deposits  a  violet-colored,  earthy  sediment  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'.
-. — Albuminous  urine,". — On  the  fifth  day,  the  urine  has  a  red  inflammatory
look,  and  on  standing  deposits  bloody  red  fibres,'.

Sexudl  Or(/ans. — Sexual  organs  first  excited,  then  relaxed,'^ — A
burning  irritation,  very  singular,  more  like  a  tickling,  though  not  at  all
voluptuous ;  rather  very  troublesome  ;  not  relieved  by  anything ;  extends
from  the  region  of  the  rectum,  through  the  urethra,  to  the  glans,  where  the
tickling  is  most  severe  (lasts  six  to  seven  days  without  interruption,  and  is
his  most  distressing  symptom),''. — Sexual  desire  aroused  (eleventh  day),'. —
Leucorrhoea  for  two  days  only,'. — [540.]  The  menses  six  days  too  early,
weak,  and  only  for  two  days,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Tough  secretion  of  mucus  from  air-
passages  (fifth  day),'. — Large  increase  in  amount  of  carbonic  acid  expired".
— Violent  tickling  in  the  air-passages  provokes  a  short  cough,^— Pain  iu
larynx,  and  short  cough  on  talking,'^ — Fulness  and  oppression  in  bronchi
(third  day),'. — Irritation  to  cough,  with  tough  mucus  in  the  throat,  op-
pressed breathing,  and  sensitive  stitches  in  the  left  breast  (ninth  day),'. —
Voice  small,  changed;  evening  (ninth  day),\ — Morning  hoarseness,'^ —
Hoarseness,  worse  on  talking,'l — [550.]  Increased  hoarseness,  with  cough,
hawking,  and  expectoration,'^ — Cough  for  half  an  hour  before  midnight,^ —
Cough  after  eating;  the  child  vomits  his  food  and  mucus,^ — The  catarrh
provokes  a  cough,  though  she  had  wo  power  to  cough,^. — Much  cough  and
sneezing,^ — Dry,  frequent  cough,'". — Slight,  dry  cough,'". — Two  attacks  of
dry  cough  (after  one  hour),'. — Difficult  cough,  with  some  expectoration,"'.
— At  the  beginning  of  every  paroxysm  of  coughing  she  often  snuffed  for
air,  as  if  she  could  not  get  it,  before  she  got  the  strength  to  cough,". — [560.]
Cough  and  hawking  of  mucus  in  morning;  comes  up  easily,'^ — Cough
about  2  or  3  a.m.,  with  expectoration,l — Sputa  white,  frothy ;  expectoration
abundant,**. — Easy  expectoration  of  a  great  deal  of  sweetish,  transparent
mucus,'*. — *  Rapid  breathing  ^^^. — *  Respiration  short,''^.- — ^Respiration  heavy,
anxious,^. — Eespiration  hard  and  anxious  (third  day),'. — Repiration  hard,
full  (fifth  day),". — Respiration  deeper  (in  general), 'I — [570.]  ^Difficult  res-
piration,^'.— In  sleep,  expiration  was  snoring,  inspiration  in  two  jerks,  in-
termitting; breathing  often  irregular  and  interrupted,^.-^Z'i/sjt)WQ5a,'°". —
*  Dyspnoea;  she  must  he  supported  in  a  sitting  position  in  hed^^. — Loss  of
breath,". — Asthmatic  ever  since  the  proving,". — Respiration  hindered  on
account  of  swelling  of  the  pharynx  and  accumulation  of  tough  mucus  there,
with  fever  and  delirium,™. — *It  seems  as  if  he  would  suffocate,  evenings,  in
bed ;  he  cannot  get  air,  and  is  obliged  to  sit  up  the  whole  night,'. — *  About  3
A.M.  she  was  suffocated  and  oppressed,  and  had  to  sit  up  to  get  air;  only  after
cough  and  expectoration  she  became  better^'.

Chest. — *The  mucus  rattles  in  the  chest;  oppression  of  the  chesty.—
[580.]  Large  pustules  on  the  chest  and  neck,  like  cow-pox,  with  a  red
areola;  after  three  weeks  it  is  covered  with  a  crust,  and  leaves  a  deep  scar,'°.
— Anxious  feeling  in  chest  and  around  heart,". — '^Anxious,  with  oppression
of  the  chest  ami  rising  of  warmth  from  the  heart,*. — Pain  deep  in  chest  and
pharynx,  after  violent  sneezing,'. — Burning  in  the  chest  (before  each  of  his
usual  epileptic  attacks),  which  rises  into  the  throat,". — Fulness  in  the  chest
(sixth  and  seventh  days),"". — *  Chest  feels  all  the  time  very  full^".— Fulness


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  .^91

in  lungs". — *  Constriction  of  chest  (fifth  day)/. — Constriction  in  chest,  fre-
quently associated  with  cough,'". — [590.]  *  Oppression  of  chest,^". — Unconi-
mon  oppression  of  the  chest  (fourth  day),^. — Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the
upper  part  of  the  chest,  on  bending  the  head  forward;  on  rising,  it  is  re-
lieved, but  returns  on  stooping  again  (after  two  hours),'.: — An  ahuost  sore,
paroxysmal  feeling  in  the  chest,  especially  in  the  left  side,  toward  eveniug,
the  second  day,  with  a  hopeless,  despairing  mood,^ — Rawness  and  constric-
tion in  chest,  and  expectoration  of  mucus,'^ — On  stooping,  a  fine  stitch  on
the  right  lowest  rib  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),\ — Pain  in  right  side,  be-
hind and  at  base  of  chest,  aggravated  by  deep  breathing," — An  itching
stitch  on  the  right  nipple  (alter  three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Burning  in
the  left  breast,  near  the  shoulder,  more  externally;  on  pressure  or  rubbing,
it  is  worse;  then  it  diminishes  and  intermits  somewhat  of  itself  (after  half
an  hour),'. — Long-lasting  painful  stitching  in  the  upper  left  side  of  the  chest,
near  the  clavicle,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  left  axilla  (after  two  hours),'.
^-[600.]  A  fine  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  below  the  axilla,  on  mo-
tion of  the  trunk  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Crawling,  as  of  insects,  above  the
left  mamma,'. — Burning  under  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum ;  afterwards,
in  the  stomach  (after  half  an  hour),'. — ^Very  unpleasant  heavy  feeling  in
the  prsecordium  (ninth  day),^ — Pressure  or  heaviness  in  the  prsBcordial
region,*.

Heo.rt  and,  Pulse. — Pulsation  of  the  heart  small  and  irregular
(fifth  day),*. — Heart's  action  accelerated,  irregular  (eighth  day),'. — Palpi-
tation (almost),  (fourth  A&j"),^.—* Palpitation  of  the  heart,^". — Frequent  pal-
pitationj^''. — [610.]  Violent  palpitation,  with  the  purging,^ — Repeatedly  ap-
prehensive and  warm  about  the  heart,  with  violent  beating  of  the  heart,  so
that  it  seems  as  though  he  felt  it  in  his  head,'. — This  whirling  and  beating
of  the  heart  comes  on  every  night  regularly,  and  lasts  until  he  breaks  out
into  a  sweat,^. — *  Oppression  at  the  heart  (fifth  day),*. — Pulse  rapid  and  al-
most audible;  a  general  pulsatingwhich  she  believes  must  be  audible  to  the
bystanders  (fourth  day),'. — Pulse  somewhat  excited  (third  day),^ — Pulse
full  and  rapid,". — Full,  rapid  pulse,'*. — Pulse  full,  accelerated  (thirteenth
day),*. — Pulse  full,  irregular,  accelerated  (fifth  day),*. — [620.]  Frequent,
irregular,  full  pulse,'". — *Pulse  rapid,  weak,  trembling,'". — Pulse  88,^'. —
Pulse  full  and  hard;  the  skin  warmer  than  nsMal,^^.^— Slow,  full  pulse,^. — •
Decreased  action  of  the  heart;  retarded  puke  (after  repeated  small  doses),".
— In  general,  pulse  slower  and  weaker,'^ — Pulse  10  beats  slower,™. — Pulse
sank  from  78  to  60,'^ — Pulse  weak  (sixth  to  seventh  day),*. — [630.]  Pulse
depressed,'". — Pulse  small,  contracted,'^'. — Pulse  small,  contracted  (ninth
day),*. —  Small,  contracted  pulse". — -Pulse  small,  intermittent  (eleventh
day),*. — Small,  tight,  hardly  perceptible  pulse,^". — Pulse  suppressed,  imper-
ceptible,".— Pulse  imperceptible  (one  hour),*l

Nech  und  Hack. — Cramp  in  muscles  of  neck,*'^ — Pressive  sense  of
fatigue  in  the  cervical  muscles,  close  to  the  occiput,  especially  on  the  right
side,*. — [640.]  Does  not  like  anything  to  touch  him;  inclination  to  unbut-
ton the  collar  of  his  shirt,'". — On  turning  the  neck,  over  the  left  scapula,
and  also  on  taking  hold  of  anything,  painful  aching,  which  comes  suddenly,
and  then  becomes  continuous;  twenty-four  hours  later,  over  the  right  scap-
ula,*.— A  fine  stitch  between  the  shoulder-blades  (after  two  hours),'. — Pain
in  the  back,  as  from  fatigue,  several  days,  especially  after  eating  and  ivhile
sitting^  — Short  sticking  tearing  pain,  especially  in  the  lower  right  side  of
the  back,  near  the  right  hip,^ — A  paiu  in  the  small  of  the  back,  before  and
on  rising  from  the  bed,  as  if  one  had  carried  a  weight  there ;  after  rising,  it


392  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

disappears,^ — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  just  above
the  sacrum,  mornings,^ — Sharp  stitches  iu  the  region  of  the  kidneys  on
moving  the  arm,l — Pain  in  theloins,'".

Extremitteft  in  General.— IiisemibUity  and  coldness  of  limbs;
weak,  almost  imperceptible  pulse,  without  vomiting  (child),'^ — [650.]  Right
arm  and  hand  and  both  great  toes  were  cold  to  the  touch,'". — Heaviness  in
all  the  limbs  (eighth  day),'. — Great  heaviness  in  the  feet  and  arms,  so  that
she  must  let  them  sink  down,*. — Constant  inclination  to  stretch  the  limbs,'".
— Weakness  of  the  limbs,^". — *  Weakness  in  all  limbs  (sixth  and  seventh
days),**. —  Weakness  of  limbs,  especially  legs,'l— Extremities  tired  and  weak
(second  day),". — Fatigue  in  the  limbs,'*. — Burning  and  tearing  in  the  joints
(sixth  to  seventh  day),*. — [660.]  Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  joints  (elev-
enth day),^ — Slight  rheumatic  drawings  through  the  whole  right  hand,  im-
mediately afterward,  drawing  through  both  legs  from  above  downward,  es-
pecially in  the  region  of  the  knee,  and  noticed  on  walking  (two  hours),^ —
(Tearing  in  the  limbs),l — Tearing  and  drawing  in  joints,"  '^ — Tearing  and
drawing  in  the  extremities  (eighth  day),". — Rheumatic  and  bruised  sensa-
tion in  the  limbs,  on  rising  and  shortly  before  it,*.

Uiypei-  Extreniities. — Frequent  twitching  of  the  tendons  in  the
arms  and  hands,". — A  kind  of  dislocated  pain  in  the  right  shoulder,*. — A
cracking  iu  the  shoulder-joint,  with  tearing  pains  to  the  hands,^ — Soreness
iu  shoulder-blades,''. — [670.]  Short,  rheumatic  pain,  around  and  in  the
shouliler-joint,  and  the  left  breast,". — A  violent  tearing,  externally  in  the
right  shoulder,  followed  by  itching  (after  one  hour),'. — Violent  itching  in
the  left  shoulder;  after  scratching,  a  number  of  small  vesicles' arise,  and
she  must  scratch  till  thej'  bleed,  without  relief  to  the  itching,  whereupon  the
spot  burns;  the  vesicles  dry  after  three  days,'. — Fine  stitching  and  twinge-
ing  below  the  left  axilla ;  then  a  stitch,  with  twingeing,  on  the  condyles  of
the  left  elbow  (after  two  hours),'. — A  twingeing  sensation  in  front  of  the
left  axilla,  as  if  one  raised  the  skin  (after  two  hours),'. — Tearing  twitching
in  the  arm  and  left  side,^ — Severe  jerking  in  the  right  arm,  is  not  relieved
by  motion  (immediately),^ — Burning  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  right
upper  arm,  toward  the  shoulder,  with  yawaing  (after  two  hours),'.— A
drawing  down  along  the  outer  surface  of  the  left  upper  arm,  almost  as  if  in
the  bone,  in  several  short  paroxysms,*. — A  fine  boring  in  the  right  humerus,
as  if  in  the  marrow,  which  frequently  increases,  then  extending  into  the
shoulder,  frequently  somewhat  diminished;  it  disappears  on  pressure,  and
is  relieved  on  motion  of  the  arm,  but  frequently  returns  (after  one  hour),'.
— [680.]  Short,  rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  elbow,^ — Itching  on  the  ex-
ternal surface  of  the  right  elbow,  which  disappears  on  scratching  (after
three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — On  the  forearm  near  the  wrist,  an  eruption
of  pimples  like  the  itch,  also  on  the  upper  arm  ;  the  itching  is  relieved  by
scratching.^ — Transient,  rather  severe  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left
forearm,^ — A  twingeing  or  sensation  as  if  something  would  raise  the  skin,
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  forearm  ;  on  pressure  it  disappears,  but  re-
turns a"-ain  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Violent  itching  on  the  external  surface
of  the  left  forearm  ;  on  scratching,  small  pimples  appear,  which  burn,  and
the  skin  becomes  rose-red,  but  white  on  pressure;  the  redness  continues
two  hours  (6  p.m.),'. — Itching  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  forearm ;
after  scratching,  a  number  of  small  pimples  arise  (in  the  forenoons),'. —
*TreiiibUng  of  hands  (eleventh  day),'. — *Gold  hands  and  icy  cold  tips  of  the
fingers  (third  day),'. — The  left  hand  is  remarkably  cold,  the  right  not,^—
[690.]  *Hands  cold  and  moist,". — Ou  coughing,  heat  and  moisture  of  the


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  393

haods,  and  sweat  of  the  head,^ — On  the  back  of  left  hand,  on  touching  the
hairs,  fine  severe  stitches. — Tearing  and  stitching  in  the  border  of  the  left
thumb,  so  violent  that  it  seems  as  if  the  tendons  would  be  torn  out  (9  a.m.),^
— When  she  wants  to  clench  her  fist,  or  extend  the  fingers,  they  are  tense,
as  if  swollen  (4  p.m.),^ — Fingers  firmly  contracted  down  upon  the  shoul-
ders, with  every  muscle  in  an  extraordinary  state  of  rigidity ,^l — On  the
lowest  joiut  of  the  right  middle  and  ring  fingers,  frequent  violent  pinching
pain,  with  sensation  as  if  the  tendons  would  contract ;  still,  motion  remains
free  (fifth  day),\ — Stitching  in  the  lowest  joints  of  the  left  middle  and  ring
fingers,  as  from  a  thistle,  worse  on  pressure  (sixth  day),^. — Twitching,  tear-
ing below  the  right  third  finger,  as  if  in  the  marrow,  extends  towards  the
arm ;  disappears  only  gradually,  in  the  afternoon,^ — Tearing  on  the  back
of  the  left  middle  finger,  as  if  it  would  tear  out  the  tendon  (for  one  min-
ute),'.— [700.]  The  tips  of  the  finger.s  become  dead,  dry  and  hard,  without
sensation,  several  days,'.

Lower  Extremities, — Numbness  and  coldness  in  the  legs,'". —
Lower  extremities  heavy  and  stiff,  as  if  lamed.'l — Drawing,  tensive  pain  in
lower  extremities  (fourth  day),'. — Tension  and  tearings  in  lower  extremi-
ties,"— Rheumatic  pain  in  and  over  the  left  hip,^ — Just  below  the  left  hip,
transient  rheumatic  pains,^. — Spasmodic  twitchings  of  the  muscles  of  the
thigh  (eleventh  day),*. — *  Tension  in  the  hamstrings  on  walking,  evening,^. —
Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  thigh,*.— [710.]  Twinge-
ing  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh,  as  if  one  pinched  him,  or  raised
his  skin  with  a  needle ;  the  spot  continued  to  pain  still  longer  in  the  open
air  (after  two  hours),'. — Fatigue  in  the  knees,'. — Burning  pricking  in  the
knees,*. — In  the  morning  in  bed,  and  on  rising,  aching  in  the  bones  of  the
knee-joint,  as  if  the  limb  had  no  power,  and  as  if  the  tendons  were  over-
stretched and  strained,^ — Tearing,  a  hand's  breadth  above  and  below  the
knee,  on  the  external  surface  (after  two  hours),'. — Evenings  in  bed,  stick-
ing in  the  knee  and  hip  (first  day),*. — On  the  left  side  below  the  left  knee,
a  slow,  throbbing,  sensitive  picking,  in  rest  and  motion,''. — Painful  cramps
in  the  calves,*'. — Cramp  in  the  calves  frequently  wake  him,'". — ^Cramp  in
the  calves,  afternoons,  disappears  on  walking  about  (fifth  day),*. — [720.]
Spasmodic  drawing  sensation  in  the  calves  (ninth  day),".— -Soreness  in
calves,'^ — Tearing  internally  in  the  right  calf,  and  at  the  same  time  burn-
ing externally  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Slight  twitches  in  the  left  calf
(second  day),*. — Rheumatic  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  left  calf,^ — Tear-
ing and  itching  on  the  external  surfiice  of  the  left  calf  (after  two  hours),'. —
Violent  pinching  and  clutching  in  the  left  calf,  and  from  the  popliteal  space
to  the  external  malleolus;  extremely  painful,'. — Itching  below  the  left
calf,  which  causes  scratching,  after  which  a  considerable  lump  arises,  which
contiuues  to  itch,'. — An  outward  sticking  in  the  varices,^ — A  painful,
biting  itching  in  the  leg,  where  there  are  varices,  as  if  a  suppurating  in-
flammatory swelling  would  ensue,". — [730.]  Very  violent,  rheumatic  pains
between  the  calf  and  the  malleolus  of  the  left  leg ;  together  with  rheumatic
paiQs  in  the  right  lower  back  teeth,". — Slight  swelling  and  stiffness  of  the
malleoli  of  the  right  foot  (eleventh  da.y),''.^*The  feet  go  to  sleep  immedi-
ately after  sitting  down  each  timej^. — The  right  foot  goes  to  sleep  while  stand-
ing, with  crawling  (2  p.m.),'. — Weariness  in  the  feet  (third  day),". — Cold
feet,^ — She  can  scarcely  raise  the  feet  on  account  of  heaviness  (6  p.m.),'. —
Suddenly  across  the  left  instep,  a  transient,  pressive,  pricking  pain,  as  from
a  blow,*. — On  the  left  instep,  near  the  inner  malleolus,  suddenly  a  pricking
transient  pressure,  as  from  a  blow  ;  it  goes  as  quickly  as  it  came,*. — During


394  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

the  day,  on  walking,  a  tension  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,". — [740.]  Itching
soreness  between  the  little  and  next  toe  of  the  right  foot,  for  ten  days,'. —
A  sudden,  painful,  rhythmical  picking  in  the  left  great  toe,*.

Generalities. — Face  and  whole  body  very  pale  (twelfth  hour),'l —
Loss  of  seven  pounds,  in  weight,  in  three  weeks,". — Spasmodic  movements,*'.
— Convulsions  (death  in  a  few  hours),'^ — Convulsions  and  loss  of  couscious-
ness,"^. — Convulsions  and  tetanic  spasms, ^^.— She  lay  on  the  ground  distorted
by  cramps,  rigid,  as  if  dead ;  one  foot  was  gangrenous  and  afflicted  with
most  violent  pain,'^\ — Constant  contraction  of  all  the  muscles,  especially  of  the
abdomen  and  upper  extremities  (twohours),^^ — [750.]  Vomitingand  epileptic
spasms  (inunction  on  a  child),^^ — As  soon  as  he  got  warm  in  bed,  at  night,
he  sprang  into  the  air,''. — ^Trembling,''. —  Whole  body  trembled  and  felt  very
sick,^'. — A  very  peculiar  internal  trembling  (third  day),'. — * Long-cotHinued
trembling  of  the  head,  and  a  paralytic  trembling  in  the  hands  on  every  motion
(15  grains;,'^ — Throbbitig  and  pulsating  in  all  the  vessels  of  the  body,  per-
ceptible externally,  j'et  without  anxiety,  only  with  ill-humor,'^. — Relaxed
condition  of  the  whole  body,'. — His  condition  was  such,  that  he  might  have
been  taken  for  a  man  intoxicated  on  wine,". — Blood  loses  fibrin,  and  becomes
thinner,'^ — [760.]  *  Restlessness  excessive  (ninth  day),^. — ~*Either  general
restlessness  or  nausea,^'. — Restlessness,  vertigo,  syncope^. — Anxious  restless-
ness and  tossing  about  (fifth  day),*. — Great  general  discomfort,  which  starts
from  the  abdomen  ;  he  groans  and  moans  involuntarily ;  restlessness  drives
him  from  sitting  to  standing,  and  walking  about,*. — For  two  days,  indo-
lence and  great  sleepiness,^*. —  Weakness,  general  and  great  depression  of
spirits  (eleventh  day),*. — *  Great  weakness,^'-. — *  Great  weakness  and  lasd-
tude,^'\ —  Weakness  and  exhaustion, ^^. — [770,]  Weakness  so  great  that  he  must
lie  in  bed,^. — After  vomiting,  great  weakness,  fatigue,  and  sleepiness ;  disgust
for  all  the  customary  food;  pale,  earthy  face;  swimming  dim  eyes,  yet
appetite  for  cooling  things,  like  apples,*. — *Such  great  general  weakness,  and
so  warm  about  the  heart,  that  she  must  let  the  arms  sink  down,*. —  The  child
wishes  to  be  carried  constantly,^. — Great  fatigue,'". — General  fatigue  on  wak-
ing,°. — Very  weary,'l — Whole  body  very  weary  and  prostrated  (4  p.m.),'. —
Prostration  and  weariness  in  all  the  limbs  (ninth  day),". — *  Great  prostration
and  sluggishness  of  the  body ;  he  feels  best  when  he  sits  still  and  does  nothing,'.
— [780.J  So  prostrated,  that  she  can  only  raise  her  feet  with  difiiculty,  in
the  forenoons,'. — *Faintness^^. — Faintuess ;  he  lost  consciousness,^. — Attacks
of  faintness,'l — Syncope,^. — Alternations  of  unsteadiness  and  syncope,". — Loss
of  sensation,". — Loss  of  sensation  in  the  anointed  parts,'*. — General  ma-
laise,".— Malaise  after  supper,". — [790.]  Malaise,  nausea  (in  a  few  hours),".
— Head,  hands,  and  feet  feel  swollen  and  enlarged,  after  walking  in  the
open  air  (4  p.m.),'. — Drawings  here  and  there,*. — Tearing  in  all  the
limbs,  the  chest,  abdomen,  testicles,  and  eyes,\ — Tearing  and  drawing  in
the  bQwels,  and  in  all  the  limbs,'.

Skin, — Rash,  where  the  salve  had  been  rubbed  in,'^. — Reddish  rash,". —
Rash  on  the  arms,  breast,  and  occiput,l^Itching  eruption  on  the  skin,"'.—
Eruption  of  bright  red,  small,  conical,  distinct,  hard  pimples,  with  an  in-
flamed base  like  lichen  simplex,  thickly  covered  the  breast,  anterior  (sur-
faces of  the  upper  arms,  wrists,  hypogastrium,  and  inner  surfaces  of  the
thighs,'". — [800,]  Vesicular  eruption  over  the  body  (internal  use},".— A  very
itching  rash,  which  suppurates,''".— Rash  over  the  face  and  whole  hmly,  with
profuse  sweat;  respiration  very  difficult  with  continued  heat,  thirst,  and
headache,™. — Painful  pustular  eruption}^. — Pustules,  when  it  is  rubbed  in,
also  ou  other  parts  of  body,  as  nasal  fossse,  margin  of  anus,  glaus  penis.


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  395

genitals,  arms,  etc.,'°. — A  thick  eruption  like  pocks,  often  pustular,  as  large  as
a  pea,  filled  with  piis,". — Eruption  of  itching  pustules,  which  soon  dry  up,". —
From  applying  antimouial  ointment  to  the  dorsal  region  considerable
local  eruption  was  produced;  in  six  days  itching  on  scrotum ;  on  ninth  day
five  pustules  ou  scrotum  and  three  on  penis,'". — Eruption  of  pimples  and
vesicles,  which  in  two  days  are  filled  with  pus,  are  like  the  pustules  of  small-
pox and  are  very  painfiil ;  these  pustules  dry  up  and  form  crusts;  this  erup-
tion appears  first  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  forearm,  then  on  the  hack  (from
internal  use),*". — At  first  small,  red  pustules ;  the  third  day  increased  in
number  and  size ;  the  fourth  day  most  of  them  had  a  brown  everted  margin,
were  covered  by  crusts  similar  to  cow-pox,  and  contained  much  matter  in
the  centre;  the  sixth  and  seventh  days  some  were  as  large  as  the  thumb-
nail, shaped  like  a  flat  ulcer,  and  contained  much  thin  matter,^". — [810.]
Most  of  the  suppurating  places  became  confluent  the  eighth  day,  and  dis-
charged blood  and  matter,''". — The  corners  of  the  nostrils  are  ulcerated  and
painful  (four  hours),l — Cracked  lips,  at  night,  on  waking  (fourth  day),^ —
Dry,  scurfy  lips  (three  hours),^ — The  right  and  left  sides  of  the  upper  lip
are  full  of  clear,  itching  vesicles,  which,  on  drying  up,  are  replaced  by  new
ones;  the  itching  is  especially  violent  in  the  evening,'. — On  the  right  side
of  the  lower  lip  several  clear  vesicles;  at  the  same  time  the  right  side  of  the
upper  lip  is  swollen,  and  covered  with  small  pimples,  with  tensive  pain  on
pressure,'.— Eruption  of  pimples  like  pocks  on  the  side  of  the  chin;  tickling
sensation;  must  rub  it,^ — Two  boils  behind  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue,
painful  on  touch,  3  p.m.,'. — -A  boil  behind  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,
which  pains  as  if  sore  when  she  presses  it  with  the  tongue,  or  on  swaljowing
(from  the  morning  after  rising  till  evening),  (second  day),'. — Several  burn-
ing blisters  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue,  which  soon  disappear,  but  return  a
day  later  (sixth  day),'. — [820.]  Itching  below  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth,
where,  after  scratching,  three  vesicles  arise ;  also  under  the  left  corner  (sec-
ond day),'. — Skin  from  waist  to  knees  covered  with  an  infinite  number  of
small  pimples,  which  itch  intolerably;  she  is  compelled  to  scratch  till  the
blood  comes;  external  genitals  much  swollen,™. — Pimply  eruption  on  the
genitals,^^ — Small  red  pustules  on  the  genitals,™. — Frequently  observed  that
when  the  pustular  eruption  was  very  copious  where  the  ointment  was  ap-
plied, similar  eruptions  developed  on  the  genitals'^. — Pustules  developed  on  the
scrotum,  five  weeks  after  the  removal  of  an  antimonial  plaster,  from  between
the  shoulders,™. — ^Large  pustules  on  the  chest,  like  cow-pox,  with  a  red
areola;  after  three  weeks  it  is  covered  with  a  crust  and  leaves  a  deep  scar,^°.
— Several  small  pimples  on  the  upper  part  of  left  side  of  the  chest,  and  a
similar  one  on  the  right  side  (eighth  day),'. — A  red,  somewhat  swollen,  streak,
two  inches  long,  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  without  sensation,  which  does
not  disappear  on  pressure,  but  lasts  twenty  days,'. — -Violent  itching  in  the
left  shoulder;  after  scratching,  a  number  of  small  vesicles  arise,  and  she  must
scratch  till  they  bleed,  without  relief  to  the  itching,  whereupon  the  spot  burns ;
the  vesicles  dry  after  three  days,'. — [830.]  Itching  on  the  anterior  surface  of
theright  upper  arm ;  afterscratching,small,deepseated  pimplesappear,which
continue  to  itch  (third  day),'. — On  the  forearm,  near  the  wrist,  an  eruption
of  pimples,  like  the  itch ;  also  on  the  upper  arm  ;  the  itching  is  relieved  by
scratching,''. — A  tetter,  as  large  as  a  penny,  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left
forearm,  which  disappears  after  three  days,  but  returns  after  eight  days,
and  itches  violently,  especially  when  scratched ;  the  place  remains  rough
for  some  time  after,'. — Small,  red,  elevated  spots,  like  flea-bites,  appear  on
the  hands,  without  pain,  and  disappear  after  two  hours  (fourth  day),''. —


396  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

Dark-yellow  spots  of  large  size  appear  on  several  fingers,  remain  two  days
(fourth  day),^ — On  each  buttock  three  or  four  tensively  paining  pimples,
which  pain  like  a  boil  on  pressure,  and  last  four  days,\ — Voluptuous  itch-
ing below  the  right  calf;  after  scratching,  a  number  of  deepseated  pimples
arise,  which  do  not  cease  to  itch  till  scratched  bloody,  and  then  the  place
itches  and  burns  for  a  long  time  (second  day),'. — Itching  below  the  left
calf,  which  causes  scratching,  after  which  a  considerable  lump  arises,  which
continues  to  itch,\ — Itching," 'I — Itching  in  the  skin,'l — [840.]  Itching,
now  here,  now  there,  which  disappears  on  scratching,'. — Biting  itching  ■over
whole  body  (eleventh  day),*. — Itching  around  an  old  ulcer,^ — A  crawling
itching  in  the  sore  itself  (evenings  on  lying  in  bed),^. — Itching  below  the
left  lower  jaw,  which  disappears  on  scratching,'. — Voluptuous  itching  in
the  nape  of  the  neck,  which  causes  scratching,  till  the  blood  comes,  on
which  it  does  not  disappear  (7  p.m.),'. — Itching  on, the  middle  of  the  right
shoulder-blade,'. — Itching  on  the  external  surface  of  the  right  upper  arm,
just  above  the  elbow,  which  disappears  on  scratching  (10  a.m.),'. — Itching
on  the  external  surface  of  the  right  elbow,  which  disappear.^  on  scratching
(after  three  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — Itching  on  the  inner  surface  of  the
left  forearm  ;  after  scratching,  a  number  of  small  pimples  arise  (in  the  fore-
noon),'.— [850.]  Violent  itching  on  the  external  surface  of  the  left  fore-
arm ;  on  scratching,  small  pimples  appear,  which  burn,  and  the  skin  becomes
rose-red,  but  white  on  pressure:  the  redness  continues  two  hours  (6  p.m.),'. —
Violent  itching  in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  which  disappears"  on  scratch-
ing (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Burning  itching  on  the  inner  side  of
the  left  thigh  ;  after  scratching,  pain  as  if  sore,  and  on  touch  as  if  bruised
(6  P.M.),'. — Itching  on  the  front  part  of  the  left  knee,  which  disappears  on
scratching,'. — A  painful  biting-itching  in  the  leg  where  there  are  varices,
as  if  a  suppurating  inflammatory  swelling  would  ensue,'''. — An  itching  and
biting  in  the  right  sole,  so  that  he  must  scratch,  evenings  in  bed,*.

Sleep  and  Dreams.  —  Yamiing,^". — Frequent  yawning,'*. — Fre-
quent, great  yawning,*. — Frequent  yawning,  although  she  has  slept  suffi-
ciently,'.— [860.]  Yawning  and  stretching  the  limbs,*. — Constant-  stretch-
ing and  yawnings,  forenoons,'. — Inclination  to  -sleep,". — Inclined  to  rest
and  sleep,'^ — ^Inclined  to  sleep,  with  anxious  dreams,". — Great  desire  to
sleep,^'\ — *Great  sleepiness  (ninth  day),*. — Exceptional  sleepiness  and  over-
weening inclination  to  sleep,'*.^ — Forenoons,  great  desire  to  sleep;  if  he  sits
still  he  sleeps  immediately,  with  vivid  dreams  of  a  continuation  of  his  pre-
vious thoughts  .(second  day),*. — The  eyes  close  involuntarily,  forenoons ;  he
falls  asleep,  and  often  starts  up  violently,  but  at  once  goes  off  again  (first
day),'. — [870.]  In  the  morning,  at  10  o'clock,  could  not  get  out  of  bed
from  sleepiness,  and  was  so  heavy  and  inclined  to  sleep,  and  his  limbs
wei'e  so  tired  and  gone-to-sleep  that  he  could  hardly  stand,^. — At  10  a.m.,
he  still  feels  a  disposition  to  sleep,  which  he  is  unable  to  shake  off';  he  is  so
fatigued  and  prostrated  that  he  can  scarcely  keep  himself  up,*''. — Sleepiness
by  day,l — Such  an  irresistible  inclination  to  sleep  by  day  that  when  be
went  about  and  stood,  fell  asleep  as  soon  as  he  sat  down,^— Even  when
getting  on  horseback,  in  the  strong  air,  he  feels  sleepy,  and  can  hardly  over-
come his  drowsiuess,*^ — Could  hardly  keep  awake,  and  was  dizzy  when
riding  in  the  open  air,''*. — Evenings  (quite  contrary  to  custom),  he  is  sleepy
very  early  that  he  can  hardly  keep  awake,  and  half  an  hour  later  he  be-
comes wide  awake  and  remains  so  till  late  at  night,*. — Unusual  sleepiness
at  night,''*. —  Grreat  drowsiness  and  inactivity,  for  two  days*''. — Involuntary
slumber,  with  heavy  sleep ;  on  waking  knows  nothing  about  it  (thirteenth


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  397

day),'. — [880.]  Sleep  sound,  with  great  sweat,*. — Stupid  sleep  (eleventh
day),'. — He  lies  on  his  back  in  sleep,  the  left  hand  under  the  head  (nine
hours),^ — Somnolence ;  the  eyes  close  involuntarily;  he  sleeps  with  the  head
held  erect;  so  fast  asleep  that  he  did  not  wake  when  the  eyelids  were  sepa-
rated (pupils  were  found  contracted) ;  with  moderate  warmth  of  the  hands
and  face  and  quiet  breathing ;  only  for  a  few  minutes  roused  by  the  occa-
sional efforts  to  vomit  (one  quarter  of  an  hour),  (child),^ — He  talks  much  in
his  sleep,  plainly  and  coherently,^ — Sleep  after  dinner,^ — Deep  sleep  at
night,  with  very  heavy  dreams  (ninth  day),^ — Difficulty  in  going  to  sleep,'".
— He  has  to  lie  in  bed  till  1  o'clock  fit  night  before  he  can  get  asleep,  and
then  lies  merely  in  a  dreamy  state ;  he  seems  to  be  obliged  to  wade  in  deep
water  and  cannot  get  out,-. — He  gets  asleep  late  and  with  difficulty,  and  often
wakes  and  tosses  about,^ — [890.J  Restless  sleep,'" ''. — Restless  sleep,'. — At
night  the  child  screamed  out  of  sleep,  with  staring  eyes ;  Hrembled,  it  drew
up  its  arms  andfeet,^. — He  had  scarcely  fallen  asleep  when  he  was  seized  with
electric  shocks  and  jerks,  all  of  which  came  from  the  abdomen  ;  it  threw  now
one  arm  now  another  away  from  his  body;  now  a  foot;  now  it  threw  the
whole  body  into  the  air,''. — Sleep;  remained  restless  and  dreamy  a  long
time,*. — Sleep  restless,  with  many  confused  heavy  dreams  (eighth  day),". —
Extremely  restless  sleep  the  whole  night ;  she  wakes  often  from  anxious
dreams,  with  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  cracked  lips  (fourth  day),'. — Ex-
ceedingly restless  at  night,*^ — Little  sleep  (fifth  day),^ — Sleeplessness
before  raidnight,^ — [900.J  Only  slumber  before  midnight,^— He  awoke  at
midnight  with  violent  thirst  and  urging  to  urinate  (second  day),'. — He
awoke  at  night  with  violent  thirst  and  urging  to  urinate,  but  only  a  little
passed  (second  night),'. — Loss  of  sleep  at  night  till  morning,''. — No  sleep
for  several  nights,^ — Sleep  more  dreamy  than  usual  (first  day),'. — Light
sleep  at  night,  full  of  liveliest,  though  unimpassioned,  only  historic  dreams
(eiglit  hours),l — Dream  of  a  lively  nature,'. — Very  heavy  dreams  at  night
(third  day),*. — Troublesome  dreams,  with  nightmare  all  night,'". — [910.]
The  first  night  he  dreams  continually  of  bright  glowing  fire,  from  which
he  must  frequently  fly ;  the  fire  breaks  out  all  around  wherever  he  goes,
still  it  does  not  burn  up  the  house ;  the  second  night  he  preaches  without
having  memorized  and  "  gets  stuck ;"  this  occurrence  worries  and  makes
him  anxious,  as  on  the  previous  night,  the  larger  part  of  the  night,*.

Fever.— Cold  skin*\ — Cold  sensation  on  skin,". — Chills,"'*. — Chilli-
ness,'.— He  is  chilly  and  very  cold,^ — Violent  shivers  through  whole  body,".
— Slight  chilliness  (third  day),*. — Feeling  as  if  cold  run  through  all  the
vessels  (soon  after  taking  it),^ — [920.]  Feverish  chills,". — Constant  chilli-
ness with  very  warm  clothing  (sixth  and  seventh  days),*. — Chilliness  from
within  outward,  spreads  from  the  spine  over  the  abdomen  and  extremities
(fourth  day),*. — Chill  at  night  and  on  rising  in  the  moruing,^ — Severe  chill
several  forenoons,'. — From  morning  till  evening  constantly  chilly,  as  soon
as  she  goes  from  the  room  into  the  open  air,'. — During  normal  stool  cold
shivers  through  the  skin,'^ — Chill  over  whole  body,  with  trembling  and
shaking  at  3  p.m.  (for  several  hours),". — *He  looks  pale  and  suffering,  and
is  so  chilly  on  going  into  the  open  air  that  he  trembles,*. — Chilliness,  as  if
cold  water  had  been  dashed  over  him,  with  gooseflesh  on  the  arms,  and
repeated  yawning  (soon  after  taking  it),*. — [930.]  In  the  morning  after
rising,  for  half  an  hour,  chill,  with  gooseflesh,  and  likewise  at  7  p.m.,  for
two  hours,  after  which  thirst  follows,  at  9  o'clock  (third  day),'. — Chilliness,
with  gooseflesh  and  cold  skin  over  the  whole  body,  which  remained  a  long
time  on  the  hands  (ninth  day),*. — *  Trembling  and  chilliness  over  whole  body,


398  ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.

always  from  within  outward,  without  ability  to  get  warm,  with  a  general
sick  feeling  (eighth  day),^.— Slight  chill,  drowsiness,  and  weakness,"  —
Warmth  of  skin,". — Temperature  elevated,". —  Unusual  heat  of  the  body,'''.
— Violent  heat,^°. — General  warmth  over  whole  body  (fourth  day),^ — Gen-
eral increased  warmth  over  whole  body  (fifth  day),*. — [940.]  Heat,'". —
Flushes  of  heat  rising  to  the  head,^°. — Dry  heat,  driving  hira  out  of  bed,'".
— Fever,". — Fever  of  the  same  kind,  at  the  same  time,  for  the  two  follow-
ing days,'. — Constant  heat  in  the  afternoon,  increased  by  the  slightest  mo-
tion ;  it  affects  the  head  especially  ;  daily,^ — Evenings,  great  heat  all  over,
especially  in  the  face,  without  marked  thirst,^ — Restlessness,  violent  febrile
excitement,  great  heat,  thirst,  and  headache,  and  the  night  after  it  very
profuse  sweat,'*. — Heat,  with  weak  pulse,''''.— Heat  and  thirst,  for  several
days,'. — [950.]  Toward  6  o'clock,  fever  as  yesterday,  with  W3.nt  of  appe-
tite, followed  by  increased  pain  in  the  abdomen  (fourth  day),'. — Creeping
coldness  and  heat,  with  nausea  and  faiutness,'. — Chilliness,  with  heat  of
certain  parts,  especially  face,''. — Fever  first  appears  toward  8  p.m.,  chill,
with  flushes  of  heat  (third  day),'. — Chill,  on  motion,  alternating  with  heat,'.
— Violent  febrile  chillj  evenings  at  6 ;  after  eating,  violent  heat,  with  draw-
ing in  the  occiput  (first  day),^. — Feverishness,  with  coldness,  starting  from
spine  and  extending  to  extremities,  and  especially  to  abdomen,''. — Alternate
heat  and  coldness,". — Chill  alternates  with  heat  till  toward  8  p.m.  ;  at  night
he  wakes  with  thirst  and  urging  to  urinate  (second  day),'. — Sweat,"  —
[960.]  *Sweat  all  over^^. — Sweat  general  (ninth  day),^ — Sweat  on  forehead
and  neck,". — Perspiration  profuse  (second  day),'"*',  etc. — Profuse  perspira-
tion during  sleep,'". — Profuse  sweat  over  whole  head  and  on  the  chest  (fifth
day),'. — Profuse  sweat,  especially  of  the  affected  parts,'". — Profuse  general
sweat,  mornings  on  waking  (eleventh  day),'. — Profuse  sweat  at  night,'. —
Cold  sweat,^ ". — [970.]  Cold  sweat  all  over  the  body  (in  ten  minutes),*'.—
Cold  sweat  very  soon  (2  grains  to  a  child),". — *The  whole  body  breaks  out
into  a  cold,  clammy  sweat  (15  grains),".

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (^Morning),  Head  confused ;  on  waking,
head  heavy,  etc.;  heat  on  forehead;  heaviness  in  head,  etc. ;  twitching-tearing
in  right  ear;  violent  toothache;  tongue  thick  yellow;  after  rising,  mouth  sore,
etc. ;  after  waking,  sour  taste  in  mouth  ;  on  waking,  sour  taste  at  back  of
tongue;  dryness  in  throat,  etc. ;  loss  of  appetite  ;  frequent  eructations,  etc.;
early,  colic  around  umbilicus;  after  rising,  cutting  in  rectum,  with  stool;
cough,  etc. ;  pain  in  lower  part  of  back ;  in  bed  and  on  rising,  aching  in  knee-
joint  ;  on  rising,  chill ;  after  rising,  chill,  etc. ;  on  waking,  profuse,  general
sweat. — (jPorenoon.),  Head  heavy,  etc.;  sticking  in  urethra  ;  frequent  urina-
tion ;  stretching  and  yawning ;  eyes  close  involuntarily,  etc. ;  severe  chill. —
(^/teraooft).  Headache,  etc.;  coating  on  tongue  thicker;  on  motion,  surging
toward  neck  upwards,  etc. ;  on  sitting, crawling  in  abdomen ;  cramp  in  calves;
constant  heat. — {Toward  evening).  Hopeless,  etc.,  etc.;  fretfulness,  etc.;  ca-
tarrhal symptoms ;  sore  feeling  in  chest,  etc. — {Evening),  Pain  in  side  of  fore-
head, etc.;  heaviness  in  head,  etc. ;  burning  in  eyes ;  on  lying  down,  twitch-
ing-tearing in  right  concha;  ulcerative  pain  in  right  concha;  itching  heat  in
upper  lip;  on  going  to  sleep,  whirling  in  pit  of  stomach,  etc. ;  late,  aching  in
pit  of  stomach  ;  toward  9  o'clock,  cutting  in  abdomen ;  two  soft  stools ;  fre-
quent urinating ;  voice  changed ;  in  bed,  suffocative  feeling ;  on  waking,
tension  in  hamstrings;  in  bed,  sticking  in  knee,  etc.;  on  lying  in  bed, itch-
ing in  the  sore  ;  in  bed,  itching-liiting  in  left  sole ;  heat  all  over. — {Night),
On  waking,  bad  headache,  etc.;  on  waking,  cracked  lips;  violent  nausea
and  vomiting;  stomach feel*  loaded,  etc.;  whirling,  etc.,  of  the  heart;


ANTIMON.  ET  POTASS.  TART.  399

child  screams,  etc. ;  chill. — {Before  midnight),  Gough  ;  sleeplessness. — {Mid-
night), Wakes  with  thirst,  etc. — {Morning  till  evening),  Constantly  chilly.
— {Morning  till  5  p.m.),  Headache,  etc. — (11  a.m.  till  evening),  Stitches  in
head. — (2  p.m.  till  3  a.m.),  Sticking  in  forehead. — (2  to  3  a.m.).  Cough,  with
expectoration. — {About  3  a.m.).  Suffocated. — (1  p.m.).  Headache,  etc.;
cramp,  etc.,  in  bowels  ;  pain  above  pubis,  etc. — (3  p.m.), Head  heavy,  etc.;
nose-bleed  ;  chills  all  over,  etc. — (4  p.m.),  Feeling  of  heat  in  head. — (  Toward
6  p.m.).  Tension  in  abdomen. — (6  p.m.).  Febrile  chill. — -(7  P.M.),  Chill,  etc.
— {Towards  8  p.m.).  Fever. — {Open  air).  Twitching  on  left  thigh;  from
warm  room,  constantly  chilly ;  chilly. — {Motion  in  open  air),  Tearing  in
left  temple. — (  Walking  in  open  air).  Canine  hunger;  head,  etc.,  feel  swollen.
— {Anger),  Cough. — {Bending  head  forward).  Pain  in  upper  chest. — {Sitting
bent).  Pressure  in  abdomen  ;  pressure  in  abdomen,  etc. — {Deep  breathing),

Paiu  in right  side. — {Closing  eyes).  Vertigo {Coughing),  Heat,  etc.,  of

forehead  ;  dull  pain  in  forehead  ;  vomiting  of  food  ;  heat,  etc.,  of  hands,
etc. — {After  dinner).  Qualmishness  in  stomach  ;  sensation  as  if  overloaded
in  stomach,  etc. ;  tearings  in  rectum  ;  sleep. — {Drawing  in  the  abdomen).
Sticking  from  below  pit  of  stomach  ;  small  spot  in  abdomen  hurts. — {After
drinking),  nansea.. — {After  eating), 'N-dusea;  nausea  and  vomiting;  rum-
bling in  abdomen  ;  pains  in  abdomen ;  cough  ;  pain  in  the  back ;  violent
heat,  etc. — {Expiration),  Stitch  in  abdomen  aches. — (Before  each  epileptic
attack),  Burning  in  chest.^{Taking  hold  of  anything),  Aching  in  neck. —
{Tnjing  to  lift  head  from  pilloiv),. Dizziness. — {Looking  at  object  a  long  time).
Sight  vanishes. — {After  a  meal).  Creeping,  etc.,  in  abdomen. — {Motion),  Heat
in  head  ;  stitches  in  head  ;  pressure-in  forehead  ;  trembling  of  hands  ;  chill,
etc. — {Rapid  and  violent  motion).  Pain. — {Moving  arm).  Stitches  in  region
of  kidneys. — {Pressure),  Paiu  in  pimples  on  upper  arm ;  burning  in  left
breast ;  stitching  in  fingers  ;  pimples  on  buttock  pain. — {Before  rising  from
bed),  Pain  in  small  of  back;  rheumatic,  etc.,  sensation  in  limbs. — {On  ris-
ing from  bed).  Pain  in  small  of  back;  rheumatic,  etc.,  sensation  in  limbs.
— {Rising  from  sitting).  Flickering  before  eyes,  etc. — {In  room).  Raging,  etc.,
in  whole  head ;  feeling  of  weight  in  region  of  stomach,  etc. — {Rubbing),
Burning  in  left  breast. — {Scratching),  Vesicles  arise  at  the  mouth ;  vesicles
arise  on  shoulder ;  pimples  on  left  forearm  ;  itching  on  left  forearm ;  itch-
ing below  left  lower  jaw. — {Sitting),  Immediately,  pressure  in  abdomen  ;
the  attacks ;  pressure  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  pain  in  back. — {After  sitting  down),
Immediately,  feet  go  to  sleep. — -{Sitting  down  after  moving),  The  pain. —
{During  sleep).  Profuse  perspiration. — {After  violent  sneezing).  Pain  in  chest,
etc. — {Speaking),  Tearing  from  left  frontal  eminence,  etc. — {Standing),  8
a.m.,  stupefaction,  etc. ;  stitching-tearing  from  parietal  bone  to  vertex ;
right  foot  goes  to  sleep,  etc. — (Stooping),  Burning,  etc.,  in  right  parietal
bone ;  stitches  in  left  parietal  bone ;  sensation  in  occiput  as  if  something
fell  forward ;  stitch  in  right  lowest  rib. — {Daring  stool).  Cold  shivers
through  the  skin. — {After  stool), 'Burning  in  anus. — {After  supper),  Malaise.
— {Swallowing),  Pain  behind  root  of  tongue  ;  saliva;  nausea. — {Talking),
Pain  in  larynx,  etc.;  hoarseness. — {Touch),  Eyeball  pains;  stitch  in  abdo-
men aches. — {Touching parts  gently  with  hand),  Pain  in  region  of  stomach.
— ( Touching  the  hairs  of  4/ie  part).  Fine  stitches. — (  Turning  neck  over  left
scapula).  Aching  in  neck. — {After  urinating).  Burning  in  urethra. — {After
vomiting),  Pains  in  abdomen  ;  great  weakness,  etc. — -{On  waking),  General
fatigue. — {After  waking),  Pain  in  forehead. — (  Walking),  Totters ;  te.nsiou
in  perineum,  etc. ;  drawings  through  right  hand,  etc. ;  tension  on  dorsum
of  foot.


400  APIS.

Amelioration. — {Open  aiV), Head  heavy, etc. ;  raging, etc., in  head;
feeling  of  weight  in  region  of  stomach. — {In  bed),  Twitching-tearing  in
right  concha. — {Eating bread),  Soreness,  etc.,  in  palate. — {Cold  water).  Pain
in  forehead. — {After  cough  and  expectoration),  Feeling  of  suflbcation. —
{Eating),  Sour  taste  on  back  of  tongue ;  feels  better ;  pressure  in  abdomen.
— {Eructation),  Nausea ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;  cramp  in  abdomen. — {Lying
on  right  side),  Y omitmg.— {Moving  about),  Pressure  in  abdomen. — {Pres-
sure), Boring  in  right  humerus ;  twingeing  in  left  forearm. — {Passage  of
flatus).  Nausea ;  aching  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  distension,  etc.,  in  abdomen  ;
rumbling  in  abdomen;  rumbling,  etc.,  in  bowels;  pressure  in  abdomen;
griping  in  abdomen,  etc. — {Rising  after  stooping),  Burning,  etc.,  in  right
parietal  bone;  tearing  in  right  side  of  head  ;  pain  in  upper  chest. — {Scratch-
ing), Burning,  etc.,  in  right  parietal  bone ;  itching  in  right  elbow  ;  itching
on  upper  arm. — {Standing),  Freasure  in  abdomen. — {Touching  part  gently
with  hand).  Pain  in  abdomen. — {Frequent  urinating),  Relief  of  symptoms.
— {Vomiting),  Cough. — {Walking  about),  Cramp  in  calves.


APIS.

Apium  virus.  Poison  of  the  honey-bee.  Preparation,  Tincture  of  the
working  bees  (made  by  putting  them  alive  into  alcohol),  or  of  the  poison
sac,  carefully  extracted.

Authorities.^  1,  Effects  of  the  sting;  2,  F.  Humphreys ;  3,  L.  B.  Wells;
4,  Bishop;  5,  Hays;  6,  Bigelow ;  7,  Greene;  8,  Kellogg;  9,  Hering,
crude  virus  ;  10,  Plering,  fl;  11,  Hering,  from  a  woman,  "Th."  30th;  12,
Hering,  from  a  girl,  "  O."  30th;  13,  Helmuth,  crude;  14,  Kindermaun,
crude;  15,  Langstroth,  from  the  poison;  (16  to  23,  new  symptoms  ob-
tained from  patients),  16,  Marcy ;  17,  Bishop;  18,  Bloede ;  19,  Hering;
20,  Berens  ;  21,  Washburue  ;  22,  Marcy ;  23,  Humphreys ;  24,  Symptoms
from  sting  of  the  humble-bee.

3£ifld, — Excitement,  with  heat  at  night,'. — Laughs  at  every  misfor-
tune,'.— In  the  daytime,  he  danced  with  excessive  joyousness ;  performed
all  his  antics  singing  and  dancing  ;  was  affability  itself;  and  utterly  unable
to  walk  slowly.  He  laughed  at  the  greatest  misfortune,  as  he  would  at  a
comedy,'. — She  feels  like  crying  about  everything,". — Sad  thoughts,  with
longing  for  death  (third  day),  forenoon,". — Dejection,  with  great  prostra-
tion,".— Anxiousness,  with  tension  on  the  vertex,''. — Great  anxiety  and
excitement ;  must  lie  down ;  wants  to  get  up  and  go  again,  just  before
death,'. — General  anxiety  and  distress,'. — [10.]  Great  anxiety  in  the  head
and  swelling  of  the  face,'. — Anxiety,  excitement,  and  fear  increase  until
death,'. — Dread  of  death,  or  sensation  as  if  he  should  not  be  able  to  breathe
again,*. — *  Premonition  of  death  arose  after  a  few  minutes  ;  "  he  believes  he
is  going  ",'■ — Feels  that  he  must  succumb,  after  a  few  minutes,  and  dies
ten  minutes  after  being  stung,'. — She  thought  she  must  die,  she  felt  so
strangely,'. — He  says,  after  a  few  minutes,  "  I  am  a  dead  man," '. — Is  him-

f  No.  1,  obtained  from  Central  N.  Y.  proving;  Hering,  Amer.  Arzneipruf. ;
A.  K.  Morgan,  N  Y.  St.  Trans.,  3,  104;  Bell,  H.  M.,C,  3ti0;  Samuel  Dean,  N.  E.
M.  Gaz.,  i,  234;  Marcy.  N.  A.  J.,  l(i,  501  ;  K.  U.  Jones,  N.  A.  J.,  2,  409;  J.  P.
Dake,  N.  A.  J.,  6,  385;  Cropper,  N.  Y.  St.  Trans.,  N.  S.  1  (MSS.),  and  some  other
scattering  observations.  Nos.  i  to  8,  from  proving  of  Central  N.  Y.  Horn.  Soc.,
185:i;  9  to  24,  from  Herinij's  Amer.  Arzneipruf.  j  (Bee-bread  symptoms  by  Whit-
more,  Chicago  Med.  Examiner,  1805).


APIS.  401

self  conscious  of  an  extremely  disagreeable,  violent,  and  sensitive  mood  ;
would  have  liked  to  kill  a  dog  that  barked  at  him,  etc. ;  everything  went
wrong ;  nothing  could  be  done  to  please  him,'°. — Became  more  angry  than
ever  before ;  (in  a  female  scold),". — Irritable  mood  (fifth  and  sixth  days) ;
nothing  appeared  to  satisfy  him;  everything  out  of  place  (eighth  day),
(2d  dil.),l — [20.]  Mental  restlessness,  during  uterine  hemorrhage,^ — Con-
fusion of  mind,*  (A.  E.  M.). — Confusion  when  attempting  to  read  a  study,"
(A.  R.  M.). — It  seems  to  her  as  if  she  did  not  know  what  to  do,  as  if  she
had  no  volition  of  her  own,  her  head  feels  so  stupid,". — Stupid,  sleepv,  and
headache,^ — Unfit  for  mental  exertion,'^ '. — Inability  to  think  clearly,  or
express  himself,'  (A.  R.M.). — Inability  to  concentrate  the  mind,'  (A.  R.  M.).
— Mind  bewildered,' (A.  R.  M.). — Head  stupid,". — [30.]  Torturing  sensa-
tion in  the  head,  during  which  he  becomes  wholly  incapable  of  mental
labor, '^ — Inclination  to  change  his  occupation ;  will  not  keep  steadily  at
anything,  with  dulness  of  the  head  (second  day),'. — She  was  partially  con-
scious, and  continually  moaning,'  (J.  P.  D.). — Was  unconscious  of  what
passed  about  him,'. — Complete  loss  of  consciousness,'.  (A.  R.  M.). — Perfect
insensibility,  with  vomiting,  desire  for  rest  and  sleep,  slow  beat  of  the  heart,
and  scarcely  perceptible  radial  pulse  (Wasj)). — Sank  into  a  state  of  insen-
sibility in  fifteen  minutes  (five  minutes  before  death),'.

Hend, — Dulness  of  the  hpad,  with  restless  condition,". — Gloominess  of
the  head  and  some  confusion,'. — Head  confused  and  gloomy  (first  day),
(2d  dil.),l — [40,]  Confusion  of  the  head  with  the  pains,l — Head  dull  and
confused,'". — Head  is  dull  and  slightly  confused,'. — Head  feels  big,  con-
fused,' (A.  R.  M.). — Confusion  of  the  head,  with  pain  in  the  forehead,^
(2d  dil.). — Pain  in  sinciput,  and  confusion  of  the  head,'^. — *Head  confused
and  dizzy,  with  constant  preasi\>e  pain  above  and  around  the  eyes,  that  is  some-
what relieved  by  pressure  of  the  hands,^'. — Vertigo,  Confused  vertigo,  very
violent  at  times ;  worse  when  sitting  than  ivhen  walking  ;  extreme  when  lying
down  and  closing  the  eyes.  (During  several  days,  and  after  several  strong
doses),l — Attacks  of  vertigo  and  nausea  (fifth  day,  and  lasting  into  the
second  week),'l— Vertigo,  with  headache  (evenings,  after  sleeping),'^. —
[50.]  Vertigo,  with  blindness,'  (A.R.  M.). — Headache,  with  vertigo,'. —
Vertigo,  and  pressure  in  the  forehead,  after  sneezing,'. — Vertigo,  when
pressing  the  head,'. — Vertigo,'. — After  sleeping  on  the  sofa,  evenings  (second
day),". — Dizziness  in  the  head,  during  the  whole  second  day,". — Whirling
in  the  head,  with  weakness,". — -She  grows  dizzy  and  faint,  while  standing,".
— Headache  and  chilliness,  from  8  to  10  in  the  evening,  with  some  tooth-
ache ;  pain  in  the  forehead,  first  left  side,  then  right,  thus  alternating ;
afterwards,  in  the  vertex,  right  side,  where  it  is  also  sensitive  to  the  touch ;
then  in  the  temples,  and,  at  last,  again  in  the  forehead,  right  side  (.second
day)  ;  morning  of  the  third  day,  pain  again  in  forehead,  left  side,". — Her
whole  brain  feels  as  if  tired,  gone  to  sleep  and  crawling ;  she  feels  it  at  the
same  time  in  both  arms,  especially  the  left,  and  from  the  left  knee  down  to
the  foot,'". — [60.]  During  toothache,  she  feels  it  in  her  head,  when  biting
her  teeth  together,". — Headache,  worse  when  reading,  increased  in  a  warm
room,'*. — Pain  spreading  from  the  gums  into  the  head,'". — With  cough,  in
single  shocks,  all  the  evening  (first  day),". — With  suppressed  menstrua-
tion,".— Burning,  piercing  in  the  head,".— Burning  and  throbbing  in  the
head,  increased  by  motion  and  stooping,  relieved  for  awhile  by  pressing
the  head  firmly  with  the  hands ;  with  occasional  perspiration  (fnr  some
hours),*. — Very  violent  headache,  and  sensation  of  a  great  pressuie,  as  of
congestion  to  the  head,  with  thi'obbing  and  painful  burning  in  the  temples,
VOL.  I.— 26


402  APIS.

redness  and  smarting  of  the  eyes,". — Bursting,  expansive  pain  in  the  head,
attended  by  vertigo  and  confusion  of  the  mind,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Inflammatory
swelling,  and  twitching  so  violent  that  an  apoplectic  attack  was  feared,'. —
[70.]  The  head  seems  as  if  too  large,  swelled  to  the  size  of  a  bushel-basket,
causing  him  to  look  into  the  glass,  involuntarily,'. — Swelling  of  the  head,'.
— Head  feels  too  large,'. — She  feels  as  if  her  head  were  too  large ;  with
sore  throat,'". — Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  head  and  stomach,". — Head  as
if  too  full ;  it  seems  as  if  there  were  too  much  blood  in  it ;  heaviness,  pres-
sure, and  sometimes  a  sudden  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  during  which
warm,  close  rooms  are  perfectly  intolerable,'*. — Great  rush  of  blood  to  the
head,". — Duluess,  and  the  head  feels  compressed,^*. — Head  pains,  as  if
pressed  together,^'. — Throbbing  in  the  head,  worse  when  moving  and  stoop-
ing, relieved  for  awhile  by  pressing  the  head  between  the  Aa«ds,'°.— [80.]  *Dull
pain  over  the  whole  head,  relieved  by  pressure,^^. — Dull,  heavy  headache,  on
rising,  lasting  till  3  in  the  afternoon  (second  day),^. — Dull  pressure  in  the
head,  when  rising  from  a  reclining  position,  or  from  sitting,'^ — Heaviness
and  pressure  in  the  head,  one  hour  after  taking  one  drop,  lasted  three  and
four  days,'. — Oppressive  headache,  when  in  a  warm  room,  and  reading,*. —
Oppression  of  the  head,'. — Frontal  headache,^ — (Piercing),*. — Violent
headache,  mostly  confined  to  the  forehead,  with  fever  (second  day),^ —
Headache  in  the  forehead,  left  side,  with  single  stitches  under  the  left  ear,
lachrymation  of  the  left  eye,  chilliness,  yawning,  and  some  pain  in  the  um-
bilical region  (evening  of  eighth  day),". — ^Particularly  disagreeable  pain  in
the  forehead  with  dulness  and  confusion  (first  day),  (2d  dil.),'. — [90.]  Sen-
sation of  dulness  across  the  forehead,  just  over  the  eyes  (third  day),'. —
Pressing  pain  in  forehead,  with  vertigo,  after  sneezing  (at  once),^. — Pressive
pain  in  the  sinciput,  with  vertigo,  immediately,l — Heat  in  the  forehead,
during  headache,^ — Prickling  in  the  forehead  (6th  dil.),''. — In  glabella,
tensive  drawing  of  the  skin  up  toward  the  forehead,'^ — Dull  confusion  in
both  sides  of  the  forehead,  exactly  from  the  supraorbital  ridge  to  the  fron-
tal protuberances,  fifteen  minutes  after  taking,  lasting  about  two  hours,  and
ceasing  after  breakfast,'*. — Headache  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  with
lachrymation,". — Pain  in  the  organs  of  causality,  comparison,  and  ide-
ality,*.— Dull,  heavy  pain  in  the  forehead  and  sides  of  the  head  (temples  ?)
that  is  relieved  by  pressure  with  the  hands  (St.),'. — [100.]  Dull  pressive
headache  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead,  as  if  it  would  burst,  extends  to
the  temples,'  '*. — Violent,  pressive  pain  for  several  days,  in  forehead  and
temples.'^ — Headache,  in  single  jerks,  from  the  temples  to  the  middle  of  the
forehead  ;  therewith,  exterior  head  sensitive  to  the  touch  ;  increases  at  10
in  the  forenoon  ;  the  eyes  burn  ;  the  nose  itches ;  (second  day),  the  same ;
likewise,  the  sixth  to  the  tenth  day,'^. — Stitches  in  the  forehead  and  tem-
ples,".— Pain  iu  both  temples ;  the  whole  head  heavy,  sleepy,  and  stupid
(after  one  hour),'^ — Bursting  in  the  temples,". — Pressing,^ — Violent  ach-
ing pains  through  the  temples  and  organs  of  causality,  comparison,  mirth-
fulness,  and  ideality,*. — Throbbing  and  painful  burning  in  the  temples,''. —
[110.]  Throbbing,  painful  sensation  in  the  temples,*. — Boring  pains  iu  the
temples,  every  morning,  on  waking  (for  three  mornings),'. — Boring  pams
in  the  temples,  continued  for  several  days,  at  intervals,  lasting  only  a  few
minutes  at  a  time  ;  beginning  the  third  day  (after  taking  three  drops  of  the
3d  dil.,  every  morning),'. — Dull,  pressive  pain  in  the  right  temple,  on
waking  in  the  morning,  soon  changing  to  the  left,'. — Slight  aching  in  the
left  temple,^ — Violent,  sharp  pain  in  the  left  temple,^— Stitch  in  the  left
temple  (evening  of  sixteenth  day),". — Pain  in  the  vertex,  evenings,".—


APIS.  403

Violent  pressure  in  the  top  of  the  head,  left  side,  deep  inward,  when  draw-
ing on  boots  (after  an  hour)  ;  afternoon,  a  pain  in  a  little  spot,  inwardly,
in  the  left  front  corner  of  the  head,  above  the  extreme  end  of  the  left  eye-
brow ;  lasts  all  day  ;  worse  when  coughing  (after  several  days),'. — Weight
and  fulness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,". — Heaviness  and  fulness  in  the
vertex,'*. — Tension  in  the  scalp,  on  the  vertex,  as  if  everything  were  vio-
lently drawn  apart  there  ;  not  painful,  but  with  great  anxiety,'^ — Sensi-
tiveness to  touch,";  on  the  vertex  and  forehead,". — Tensive,  drawing  pain
over  the  left  side  of  the  head,'*. — Headache,  with  fulness  and  heaviness  in
tJie  occiput,^ — [120.]  Violent,  dull,  heavy  pain  in  the  right  parietal  pro-
tuberance, as  if  the  surface  of  the  bone  were  being  pressed  in  ;  not  relieved
by  pressure  (soon),". — Dull  ache  in  the  oeciput,^ — Aching  in  the  occiput,
increased  by  shaking  the  head,^*. — Pressure  in  the  occiput,  very  soon,^
— Tension  from  the  back  of  the  neck,^. — Violent  drawing  from  the  back
of  the  neck,  extending  behind  the  left  ear ;  spreading  over  the  left  half  of
the  head,'*. — Falling  out  of  the  hair,  all  through  the  proving,''. — Itching
on  the  head,**. — -[130.]  Itching  of  the  scalp  (afternoon  of  third  day),".

Eyes, — *  Swelled  about  the  eyes,^^. — *SwelUng  that  entirely  closes  the  eyes,^.
— *Redness  of  the  eyes,". — *Eye3  red  and  itching,'. — Redness  of  the  eyes,
with  headache,". — Tremulous  twitching  in  the  left  eye,  for  several  days,
more  at  night,^ — Pain  round  about  the  eyes,'*. — Pains  in  the  eyes,'l — Eyes
burn,'^ — [140.]  Burning  in  the  left  eye,". — *Burning  stinging  in  the  right
eye,  beginning  with  a  dull  heaviness,  and  causing  flow  of  water  (repeated
twice),^. — ^Burning  stinging  and  sensation  of  swelling  around  the  left  eye  and
in  the  superciliary  ridgej"-. — '''^Smarting  and  sensation  of  burning  in  the  eyes,
with  bright  redness  of  the  conjunctiva;  very  sensitive  to  light^''. — Boring  and
piercing  in  the  eyes,  forenoons;  lachrymatiou,  all  day  (third  day),'l —
Piercing  itching  around  the  eyes,  in  the  brows,  lids,  and  in  the  eyes  them-
selves, more  in  the  left,  especially  in  the  inner  eanthi,  with  a  desire  to  rub
the  eyes  while  pressing  them  hard;  with  this,  soreness  and  smarting  on  the
margin  of  the  lids,  in  the  eanthi,  and  in  the  eye  itself;  quivering  of  the  eye-
ball, and  a  feeling  in  the  eyes  all  day  as  if  there  were  mucus  in  them,  es-
pecially in  the  left,'*. — Piercing  itching  in  the  eyes,  lids,  and  around  the
eyes;  more  in  the  internal  eanthi,'*. — *  Stinging  itching  in  the  eye,  eyelids,
and  around  the  eyes,  on  the  left  side,  and  more  at  the  internal  canthus,". —
Piercing  itching  in  the  left  eye,  in  the  lids,  and  around  the  eye,  mostly  in
one  corner,  and  in  the  throat  at  the  same  time  (first  day),''. — *PLercing  in
the  eyes;  was  obliged  to  remove  her  spectacles  while  reading  and  vrriting  (near-
sighted woman),  (evenings,  seventh  day),". — [150.]  Prickling  under  the
eyes,l — Sore  pain  in  the  orbits  of  the  eyes,  as  well  as  in  the  bones,  after
every  sting  of  a  bee,'. — Eyes  painful,  when  sewing,  evenings,". — *  Sensation
of  swelling  around  the  eye^. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  eyes,'*. — Dull,
heavy  feeling;  inclination  to  close  the  eyes;  desire  to  rub  them  forcibly,  and
making  pressure  with  the  fingers,  when  closed  for  some  time,*. — ^Inclination
to  close  the  eyes,*. — *  Violent  shooting  pains  over  the  right  eye  that  extend
down  to  the  eyeball  (6th  dil.),l — Desire  to  rub  the  eyes  hard,'*. — Desire  to
rub  and  press  the  eyes,*. — [160.]  Itching  around  the  eye,l — Eyelids  much
swollen,  red,  and  (Edematous,'.— *r/is  upper  lids  so  swelled  that  they  hang
like  little  sacs  over  theface,^. — Twitching  of  the  right  eyelid,*. — *  Burning  in
the  margin  of  the  lids;  causes  lachrymatiou,^. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the
eyelids,'^ — *Siuarting  on  the  margin  of  the  lids  and  in  the  eanthi,'*. — Vio-
lent stinging  in  the  right  lower  lid,  in  the  morning,^ — Itching  and  prick-
ling of  the  lids  of  the  right  eye  (first  day),*. — Itching  of  the  right  eyelid.


404  APIS.

at  intervals,  all  day  (repeated  in  several  provings),'. — [170.]  Itching  of  the
right  ej^elid  in  paroxysms,  during  the  second  day,". — Itching  and  irritation
of  the  left  eyelids  for  several  days,''. — Itching  in  the  inner  angle  of  the  left,
eye,°. — Aching  pressure  in  the  orbit  of  the  left  eye,  mostly  the  lower  part,
continuing  for  several  hours.l — Worse  itching  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the
left  eye,". — Agglutination  of  the  eyes,"  *. — Itching  of  the  eyelids  and
some  agglutination  (first  day),". — Slight  agglutination  of  the  eyes  at  night;
had  to  pick  them  open  in  the  morning," '. — Agglutination  of  the  eyelids,
with  soreness  of  the  margins  and  canthi,". — Sore  elevations  of  the  skin,  like
the  stings  of  insects,  at  the  external  corner  of  the  eyebrow,  very  tender  to
the  touch,". — [180.]  If  stung  over  the  eyebrow,  he  had  worse  results,'. —
Pain  over  the  eyes,'*. — Pain  in  the  superciliary  ridges,'^. — Burning  piercing
in  the  region  of  the  left  eyebrow,"  ^ — Dull,  heavy,  tensive  pain  over  the
eyes,  with  pain  through  the  orbits,  lasting  but  a  short  time  (this  pain  oc-
curred in  three  provings),". — Transient  biting  itching  in  the  right,  and  some-
times in  the  left  eyebrow,". — *Lachrymation,^  ^''. — *  With  burning,^. — Lachry-
mation,  morning  of  third  day,'. — * Lachrymation  and  pain  in  the  eyes  (in  the
second  week),'". — Lachrymation,  with  piercing  in  the  eyes,". — [190.]  *Lach-
rymation  of  the  left  eye,  and  some  burning  in  it,  and  a  sensation  of  a  smaU  for-
eign body  there,  during  which  the  eyes  are  weaker ;  painful,  evenings,  when  sew-
ing, and  sensitive  to  light  (lasting  into  the  fourth  week),". — Lachrymation  of
the  left  eye,  with  pain  in  the  forehead,  left  side  (evening  of  eighth  day),". —
Lachrymation  of  the  left  eye,". — After  frequent  lachrymation  of  the  left
eye,  it  seems  to  her,  very  often,  as  if  tliere  were  a  small  foreign  body  in  the
external  canthus  of  the  left  eye  (tenth  and  following  days),".— Tears  staod
in  the  eyes  on  account  of  nervous  restlessness,'. — Tears  flow  involuntarily
from  his  eyes,  very  soon ;  aho,  stinging  in  the  tip  of  the  nose,'. — ^'Eyes  water
and  are  painful  when  she  looks  at  anything  light  (fifth  day),'".— The  right
eye  filled  with  tears  that  are  shed  from  time  to  time  (after  three  hours),'. —
Biting  piercing  sensation  in  the  right  eye,  causing  copious  lachrymation,^
— Flow  of  mucus  and  lachrymation  of  the  right  eye,  at  night,  in  bed,". —
Violent  pain  in  the  left  lachrymal  duct  and  around  the  opening,". — [200.]
Sensation  as  if  there  were  a  mass  of  mucus  in  the  left  eye,  continuing  all
day  (fourth  day),". — Sensation  all  day  as  if  there  were  mucus  in  the  eyes;
worse  in  left,'\ — Pain  through  the  eyeballs,  dull,  heavy,  and  dragging,". —
Piercing  in  the  eyeballs  (second  day),". — Pressing  pain  in  the  lower  part
of  the  eyeball,". — ^Quivering  twitching  of  the  left  eyeball,'^ — Pains  around
the  left  eyeball  (first  day);  later,  around  both,^ — Aching  pressure  in  the  kft
eyeball,  mostly  in  the  lower  part,  for  several  hours  ;  repeated  twice,". — ''  The
eyes  arc  'Weak,  with  disinclination  to  exert  them ;  they  are  painful  and  easily
fatigued  ivhen  used;  only  regain  their  strength  and  vigor  the  tenth  or
twelfth  day  (this  was  experienced  by  one  who  had  never  had  weakness  of
sight  before  or  since),". — Weakness  of  sight,  with  sensation  of  fulness  in  the
eyes,'^^[210.]  *  Weak  eyes ;  for  several  days  the  light  is  painful^. — Sensitive-
ness to  light,"  '". — Must  take  off  her  spectacles  (a  short-sighted  woman),". —
Blindness,  with  vertigo,' (A.  R.  M.). — Growing  dark  before  the  eyes,"'".—
It  grows  dark  before  his  eyes  when  stooping  (afternoons,  fourth  day),". —
Sensation  of  whirling  around  in  the  sight,  with  difficult  vision  at  the  same
time,  lasting  for  only  a  moraent,^

Enrs.^Ears  purple,'  (A.  R.  M.).— A  small,  rough,  reddish  tetter  in
the  centre  of  the  lobe  of  the  left  ear,  extending  somewhat  back ;  remained
in  the  antrum  after  an  eruption  caused  by  preparing  Rhus;  was  entirely
removed  after  Graphites ;  after  five  months,  appeared  again,  a  week  after


APIS.  405

taking  the  Apis,  and  remained  a  week ;  was  only  removed  after  Graphites".
— In  the  inner  cartilage  of  the  left  ear,  a  little  pimple,  painful  when
pressed  (tenth  day,  and  longer),". — [220.]  Tension  behind  and  under  the
ears,^;  behind  the  left  ear,  extending  up  from  the  back  of  the  neck,^;  be-
hind the  right  ear,^;  behind  the  left  ear,". — Pains  in  the  inner  right  ear
(second  day),^ — Similar  pain  behind  the  left  ear  as  over  the  eyes;  violent
drawing  from  the  back  of  the  neck,  extending  behind  the  left  ear," — Burn-
ing in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  ear,'^ '". — Stitches  under  the  left  ear,". —
Frightened  starting  from  sleep  at  noise,^^

Nose, — Nose  swollen,'. — *Nose  much  swollen,  red  and  cedematous,^  (Bell).
— Nose  swollen ;  red  stripes  under  the  eyes,  extending  across  the  cheeki^,"'. —
Entire  stoppage  of  the  nose,  from  swelling  of  its  mucous  lining,*  (Bell). —
[230.]  Nose  affected,  as  if  it  would  swell,^^ — -Violent  sneezing,  imraedi-
ately,l — Frequent  sneezing,  for  many  days  (eleventh  day),  (in  two  prov-
iugs),l — Sudden  coryza,  afternoons,  4  o'clock,  with  dryness  of  the  nose;
then  burning  of  the  lips,  and  sensation  as  if  they  would  chap  (fifth  day),".
— A  kind  of  coryza  (after  four  hours) ;  worse  evening,  second  day,  with
dull  sensation  in  the  nose;  now  and  then  some  dropping;  dry  on  the  morn-
ing of  third  day  ;  moisture  only  when  blowing  the  nose  ;  more  affected  out-
wardly, and  feels  as  if  it  would  swell,". — When  blowing  it  some  blood
comes  from  the  nose  (mornings,  second  and  third  days),  and  afterwards,
sometimes  even  in  the  fourth  week,". — (Blood  flowed  from  the  nose,  after
death),'. — Dryness  of  the  nose  in  catarrh,". — Tip  of  the  nose  cold,  with
chilliness  in  the  evening," — Itching  of  the  nose,'l — [240.]  Itching  on  the
left  nostril,  is  painful,  with  redness  (fourth  day),".

Face, — Paleness  of  the  face,'. — Paleness  of  the  face ;  trembling  of  the
hands  and  feet,"*. — Very  pale  and  seemed  ill,  but  without  any  swelling
(badly  stung  child),'. — Paleness  of  the  face,  with  faintness,'". — Pallor  of
the  child,'. — Countenance  assumed  a  pallid,  deathlike  look,  frightening
those  around  with  the  thought  that  he  was  about  to  die,'  (E.  U.  J.). — His
face  grew  pale,*  (E.  E.  M.). — Red  face ;  wants  it  bathed,'. — Her  face  be-
came red,  then  purple,^  (J.  P.  D.). — [250.]  *The  face  is  red  and  hot;  pain,
burning  and  piercing,  and  swollen  so  as  to  be  unrecognizable  (not  gone  after
eighteen  hours),'. — The  face  becomes  purple,'  (Bell). — Face  livid,'. — Livid,
blue-reddish  color  of  face  (two  weeks),". — (Color  of  face  very  dark,  almost
blue-black,  after  death),'. — The  face  is  swollen  to  blindness,  and,  for  a
week,  he  goes  about  blinking  like  an  owl,'. — The  face  swelled  so  that  he
could  hardly  see  (after  a  sting  in  the  face),'.— Inflammatory  swelling  of
the  face;  the  right  eye  completely  closed,  the  left  eye  almost;  the  cheeks
hang  down  to  the  breast  (after  being  stung  in  the  right  corner  of  the
mouth),'. — Nose  and  face  swell  immediately  after  being  stung  in  the  tip
of  the  nose;  continues  several  days,'. — Face  inflamed,'. — [260.]  *  Erysipelas
oj  the  face;  over,  the  whole  face  light  redness,  swelling,  heat,  with  burning  fever,
coated  tongue  and  thirst  (in  a  girl  of  nine ;  sixth  dilution  every  two  hours),". —
Nettle-rash  in  the  face,'. — Burning  in  the  face,  with  sensation  of  fulness,  as
if  the  bloodvessels  were  overfilled;  very  much  aggravated  when  stooping,".
twenty-four  hours,  and  for  more  than  two  weeks  left  behind  a  livid,  bluish-red
color  of  the  face,". — Heat  of  the  face,  with  chilliness,". — Sensation  as  if  face
would  swell,  left  side,  especially  about  the  eye  (after  one  hour),". — Tension
in  the  face  waked  him  at  1  o'clock  at  night ;  the  nose  was  swollen  and  the
right  eye  and  cheek ;  stinging  pain  when  touched  ;  under  the  right  eye,  be-
ginning at  the  top  of  the  nose,  red  stripes  crossed  the  cheeks,  lasted  till  4


406  APIS.

o'clock ;  the  following  day,  again,  after  midnight,  rapid  swelling  of  the
upper  lip,  with  heat  and  burning  redness,  lasting  till  toward  morning ;
third  night,  a  sudden  running  across  the  right  cheek,  like  a  little  insect,
and  stung  him  lieside  the  nose,  upon  which  the  cheek  and  upper  lip
swelled," — Prickling  in  the  face,l— Burning  cheeks,  with  cold  feet,". —
Red  stripes  down  from  the  nose  across  the  cheeks,'.— [270.]  Ulcer  on  the
cheek,  lasting  three  months,^ — Heat  of  the  cheeks  and  hands,'". — Stinging
pain  in  the  left  malar  bone  (fourth  week),". — Eunning  as  of  an  insect  over
the  cheek,'^ — Dark  streak  along  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lips;  they  are
rough,  cracked,  and  peel  off  (second  day),  (sixth  dilution),''  (etc.). — Swell-
ing of  the  lips,  and  sensation  as  of  swelling  for  several  days;  then  a  fine
eruption  about  the  lips,  and  dryness  and  desquamation  of  the  lower  lip
(sixth  dilution),^  (and  others). — -Lips  swollen  and  everted,'. — Swelling  of
the  lips  and  tongue,  after  being  stuug  in  the  temples,'. — The  upper  lip  as
much  swollen  as  if  it  were  turned  inside  out  (after  being  stung  on  the
neck),'. — The  lips  are  dry,  with  a  black  stripe  in  the  red  portion,'". — [280.]
Lips  cold  (after  eight  to  ten  minutes),'. — Raging,  violent  pains  in  the  lips,
then  extending  into  the  gums  and  head,  and  finally  over  the  whole  body
(directly  after  taking,  in  a  woman),™. — Burning  in  the  lips,  with  catarrh,".
— Roughness  and  sensation  of  tension  in  the  lips,  especially  the  upper  cue
(sixth  dilution),^  (and  others). — Roughness  aiid  tension  in  the  lips,  especi-
ally the  upper  one,^ — Prickling  in  the  lips,  and  sensation  as  if  they  had
received  a  severe  contusion,  with  swollen  feeling  (after  a  few  hours),'. —
Sensation  as  if  the  lips  would  chap,  in  catarrh,". — Upper  lip  swollen  ;  grew
red  and  hot,  almost  brown,'*. — Chapping  of  the  lower  lip,". — Burning  on
the  chin,^ — [290,]  Burning  stinging,  as  of  fire,  on  the  chin  and  malar
bones,^ — Drawing  in  the  lower  jaw,  extending  from  the  chest,".

3Iout1l. — When  biting  the  teeth  together,  in  swallowing,  after  yawn-
ing, and  otherwise,  a  kind  of  grinding  the  teeth,  only  a  single,  involuntary
jerk ;  is  repeated  very  often  (seventh  and  following  days),". — Toothache,'.
— Toothache  with  headache,". — Twitching  toothache  in  the  left  upper  back
teeth,". — Jumping  pain  in  the  left  upper  molar  teeth,". — Toothache  in  the
upper  jaw,  right  side,  during  which  she  feels  the  biting  together  of  her
teeth  in  her  head;  with  chilliness,  evenings  (second  day),". — Violent  pain
in  the  first  left  upper  molar;  seems  connected  with  the  headache  (after
five  hours),".— Heat,  with  toothache,"  ".—[300.]  Easy  bleeding '  of  the
gums  (sixth  day),". — Very  troublesome  pains  in  the  gums,'^ — Violent
pains  spreading  through  the  gums,"". — Swelling  of  the  tongue,  then  of  the
whole  body,  after  a  sting  in  the  vertex  ;  he  could  neither  speak,  nor  move
his  tongue,  nor  swallow  the  least  morsel,'. — Swelling  of  the  tongue  and  lips
(after  a  sting  in  the  temples),'. — Burning  from  the  tongue  down  the  whole
throat  into  the  stomach,  and  eructation  every  four  to  five  minutes,  with
gathering  of  tasteless  water  in  the  mouth ;  the  eructations  increased  very
much  after  drinking  water,  it  almost  suflTocated  her,'". — Burning  stinging
on  the  tongue,^ — Prickling  heat  on  the  tongue,^ — Tongue  very  painful,  after
seven  hours;  the  burning  rawness  increases;  vesicles  rise  along  the  edge ;
stings  with  the  pain,  (6), ''. — Rawness,  burning,  and  blisters,  along  the  edge
of  the  tongue,  which  are  very  painful,  with  stinging  (after  eight  hours),  («),*.
— [310.]  Extreme  sensation  of  rawness  and  scalding,  all  around  the  margm
of  the  tongue ;  little  pimples  on  the  edge  (6  after  four  hours),^ — *The  whole
margin  of  the  tongue  feels  as  if  scalded,  as  if  quite  raw;  little  papular  eleva-
tions appear  along  the  edge  of  the  tongue  (after  two  hours),^ — Tongue
as  if  burnt,'. — Mouth very  dry,'. — Dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat;  the


APIS.  407

tongue  feels  as  if  burnt  (second  day),'. — Dryness  under  the  tongue,  disap-
pears after  moving  the  tongue  a  great  deal  (6  o'clock,  evenings,  after  ten
hours),". — *  Dryness  oj  the  tongue;  red,  fiery  appearance  of  the  bur.oal  cavity,
with  painful  tenderness,^. — Tongue  and  palate  sore,''. — Sore  pain  of  the
palate  and  tongue,^ — *  On  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  somewhat  to  the  left,  a  roiii  of
small  vesicles,  painfully  sore  and  raw,^". — [320.]  A  number  of  vesicles  and
redder  spots  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and  on  the  left  edge  of  the  tongue,'".
— In  the  mouth,  on  the  inner  cheeks,  fiery  redness,^. — Dryness  in  the  mouth
and  fauces,'^. — Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat  (second  day),^
— Burning  in  the  mouth,  as  if  the  whole  mouth  were  hot  inside  on  the  lips
and  palate;  she  has  more  thirst  during  this  than  usual,  and  drinks  fre-
quently (forenoons  in  the  fourth  week),". —  'Sealding  in  the  mouth  and  throat
(for  two  days),^. — *Painful  sensitiveness  of  buccal  cavity,*. — Intlararaatiou
and  swelling  of  the  palate,  that  obstructed  breathing,  so  that  he  died
(wasp),^ — Dryness  of  the  palate,  which,  when  touched  by  the  tongue,  feels
rough  and  scratchy  (early  the  second  day),'^ — Flow  of  saliva  {Swammer-
dam). — [330.]  Copious  accumulation  of  soapy  saliva,  in  the  mouth  and
throat,  mornings  (second  day),^. — Tough,  frothy  saliva,'^ — Stringy  saliva
adhering  to  the  tongue,'^. — Thick,  tough,  adhesive  mucus  in  the  mouth  and
fauces,'''. — Bitter  taste  in  fauces,". — Took  the  poison  of  the  queen  bee  ;  first,
I  had  a  bitterish  taste,  vphich  afterwards  became  more  sharp  and  pungent,
spreading  over  the  whole  fauces  to  the  jaws,  forcing  the  saliva  from  its
channels.  The  tongue  was  affected  as  after  chewing  the  Spanish  Bertram
root,  but  in  a  less  degree.  There  was  at  the  same  time  great  activity  in
every  part  of  the  mouth,  as  if  I  had  taken  ten  to  twelve  drops  of  the
strongest  alcohol.  Emboldened  by  this,  I  tasted  the  poison  of  the  common
working  bees,  and  that  of  wasps.  It  was  the  same,  only  that  of  the  work-
ing bees  was  milder  and  less  than  that  of  the  wasps  {Swammerdam). — Bit-
terish taste  at  the  back  of  the  tongue  and  in  the  fauces  (after  two  minutes),".
— Lost  his  taste,'.

Throat. — The  glands  of  the  throat  swollen  on  the  injured  side,'. —
Great  accumulation  of  viscid  mucus  deep  in  the  throat,  compelling  frequent
hawking  (mornings,  eleventh  day),^. — [340,]  *  Dryness  in  the  throat  with-
out thirst,^". — Dryness  in  the  throat,'' ;  in  the  fauces,'' ;  of  the  palate,"'. —
Dryness  and  heat  in  the  throat  (first  day),'. — Burning  in  the  throat,  extend-
ing to  the  stomach,'". — Sensation  of  rawness  in  the  throat,  with  viscid  saliva,
that  adheres  to  the  hard  palate,  velum,  and  tongue,". — Sensation  of  rawness
in  the  throat,  with  inclination  to  frequent  hawking,'^ — Frequent  inclina-
tion to  clear  the  throat,'". — Sore  throat,  accompanied  by  a  hoarse,  hard,
spasmodic,  and  somewhat  hollow  cough,  caused  by  a  sensation  of  filling  up
in  the  throat,  as  though  he  needed  to  raise  something.  Does  not  recollect,
however,  raising  anything,'  (E.  U.  J.). — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  fauces
and  throat,  extending  downward  through  the  chest  to  the  pit  of  the  stom-
or  rawness,  and  supposed  it  to  be  such  as  a  consumptive  might  feel,  who
had  a  violent  and  hard  cough  for  a  long  time  (in  a  few  minutes),'  ( E.  U.  J.)-
— ''Sensation  of  fulness,  contraction,  and  suffocation  in  the  throat,'^. — [350.]
*  Throat  felt  constricted,  and  as  if  a  foreign  body  was  lodged  in  it ;  deglutition
was  painful,^. — *Sensation  of  constriction  and  erosion  in  the  throat,  in  the
mornings,  after  fifteen  minutes ;  increases  to  such  a  degree,  in  eight  hours,
that  swallowing  becomes  difiicult,^ — Disagreeable  oppression  in  the  throat
(in  one  hour),'  (Deane). — An  aching  pressure,  as  if  from  a  hard  body,  back
in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat  and  fauces ;  continuing  for  some  hours  (at


408  APIS.

half  an  hour),  (occurred  in  two  provings),^ — *Stinging  itching  deep  in  the
throat,  at  the  lower  part  of  the  neeJc,  accompanied  ivith  a  sensation  of  constric-
tion,''.— Pressure  in  the  fauces  as  of  a  foreign  body,^. — Roughness  and  sensi-
tiveness of  the  pharynx  (every  time  after  smelling  the  poison)/^. — *Difficult
swallowing,^. — ^'Inability  to  swallow  a  single  drop,  with  swelling  of  the  tongue^.
— Not  until  some  hours  after  the  sting,  the  throat  swelled  inwardly,  then  out-
wardly; voice  grew  hoarse;  breathing  and  swallowing  very  difficult ;  difficulty
of  swallowing  not  caused  by  the  swelling  in  the  throat,  but  by  the  irrita-
tion of  the  epiglottis,  for  every  drop  of  liquid  put  upon  the  tongue  nearly
suffocates  him.  Small  white  spot,  about  half  an  inch  to  the  left  of  the  glottis.
(Death  after  twenty-seven  hours,  after  a  sting  in  the  throat),^

Stomach. — [360.]  Entire  loss  of  appetite,".— No  appetite,  nor  desire
for  food,  though  it  was  not  repulsive  to  him,'  (E.  U.  J.). — Lessening  appe-
tite, for  several  days,  although  the  coated  tongue  grows  cleaner,'. — The  first
mouthful  of  food  he  took  "  seemed  to  drive  the  soreness  downward,  and
each  succeeding  mouthful  to  drive  it  further  down,"  and  he  continued  eat-
ing, until  the  soreness  and  cough  quite  left  him,  and  did  not  return,'
(E.  U.  J.). — Thirst,  with  burning  in  the  mouth,". — Burning  thirst,  seems
to  rise  from  the  stomach,  with  dryness  in  the  throat;  without  thirst;  burn-
ing cheeks  and  cold  feet,  without  increased  pulse,'".- — Great  thirst,  when
working  at  night,  after  diarrhoea,'^. — Asks  for  a  drink  of  water,'. — Asked
for  water,  and  drank  some,'. — *No  thirst,  ivith  dryness  of  the  throat,^". — [370.]
No  thirst  with  the  dryness  in  the  throat,  but  she  drinks  very  often,  although
it  relieves  her  but  little,'". — *Wo  thirst,  with  heat,". — Violent  eructation,^ —
Eructation  tasting  like  yolk  of  eggs,^ — Eructation  tasting  of  the  ingesta,".
— Eructation,  with  copious  accumulation  of  tasteless  water,". — Increased
eructation  after  drinking  water,". — Violent  eructation  of  wind  during  head-
ache,"*.— Eructation  relieves  the  pain  over  the  left  hip,^ — Aversion,  with
chilliness  andcold  limbs,'. — [380.]  Gagging,  after  a  sting  in  the  temples,'.
— Nausea,  apparently  from  the  throat,'*. — Nausea  seems  to  come  from  the
throat,''. — Sickness  at  the  stomach,  and  pain  over  the  whole  body  so  severe
as  to  cause  crying,'  (C.  C.  C). — Was  obliged  to  go  home  and  lie  down,  on
account  of  nausea,'. — Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  night,  with  a
disagreeable  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in,  morn-
ings ;  loose,  ui'gent  stool,^. — Nausea  to  vomiting,  with  fainting,'^ — Nausea,
followed  by  yellow  and  bitter  vomiting  (after  forty-five  minutes),'  (A.  K.  M.).
— Some  nausea  and  vertigo,'^ — Nausea  and  vomiting,'^ — [390.]  Nausea
and  vomiting,'. — Nausea  and  vomiting,  with  swelling  of  the  head,'.- — Nau-
sea and  vomiting  of  food,  with  diarrhoea,  after  repeated  vomiting ;  first,
bile,  afterwards  a  thin,  very  bitter-tasting  liquid,  with  violent  pains  across
the  lower  abdornen,"'. — Vomiting  (wasp),'.  —  Vomiting  of  ingesta,"'. —
Vomiting  of  bile,^'.— Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,^. — Severe  vomiting  and  profuse
diarrhoea,^  (E.  E.  M.). — For  several  days,  he  was  troubled  with  a  morbid
excitement  of  the  digestive  apparatus,'  (E.  E.  M.). — Most  terrible  pains
in  the  stomach  appeared  immediately  after  taking  the  second  atten.;  the
following  day,  coldness  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  which,  after  it  grad-
ually subsided,  was  followed  by  a  burning  heat  in  the  stomach,''".— [400,]
'■^Burning  heat  in  the  stomach,^". — Heartburn,'  (C.  C.  G). — Heat  and  burn-
ing in  the  stomach  (first  day),'. — Burning  in  the  stomach,  and  eruotations,'".
— *Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,^^. — Grawling,  drawing,
and  gnawing  in  the  stomach ;  later,  a  violent  compression  in  the  abdo-
men,".— Prickling  pain  in  the  stomach,  as  from  needles,'. — Pressure  in  the


APIS.  409

stomach,". — Pressure  ia  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'. — Pressure  in  the  region
of  the  orifice  of  the  stomach,"

Abdomen — [410.]  Violent  burning  pain  under  the  short  ribs,  on  both
sides,  worse  and  lasting  longest  on  the  left,  where  it  prevented  sleep  for
weeks,". — Under  the  right  ribs,  sensation  as  if  gone  to  sleep," — Pain,  left
side,  uuder  the  last  ribs,^ — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  umbilical  region,
and  chilliness,". — Fulness  and  evident  enlargement  of  the  abdomen.  (In
a  woman,  after  several  large  doses),''. — Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,'". —
Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  a  sensation  of  fulness,". — Rumbling  in  the
abdomen,  as  if  diarrhosa  would  ensue,^ — Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with
violent  urging  to  stool,". — Restlessness  in  the  intestines,  and  death,'. —
[420.]  Faiutuess  and  nausea,  from  the  short  ribs  across  the  whole  abdomen
(soon  after  a  sting  in  the  .scrotum),  lasting  three  hours,'. — Nausea  in  the
abdomen,  is  obliged  to  lie  down,'. — Sickly  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  which
inclines  him  to  continue  in  a  quiet,  sitting  posture,^ — Pain  in  the  abdomen
from  the  hips  towards  the  umbilical  region  (forenoons),  (second  day),'\ —
Violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  relieved  when  sitting  up,". — Slight  pain  in
the  abdomen,  with  urging  to  pass  flatus  (after  fifteen  minutes),'.— Pain  in
the  abdomen,  mornings,  and  urging  to  stool,'^ — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  with
urging  to  stool,  and  pain  when  straining  (mornings,  after  rising,  after
dreaming  it  at  night,  second  day),''. — Sometimes  pain  in  the  abdomen
again,  with  a  feverish,  trembling  feeling  (second  day),'l — Disagreeable
sensation  and  growling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  setting  in,^. —
[430.]  Frequently,  pain  in  the  abdomen,  mornings,  and  very  hard  scanty
stool ;  as  formerly  often  (in  third  week),''. — Sore  feeling  in  the  abdomen,
in  the  morning,". — As  if  sore  in  the  abdomen,".— */Soreww«  of  the  bowels  felt
■when  sneezing ,  or  pressing  upon  them,". — Deep  within,  below,  and  beside  the
right  hip,  sensation  of  soreness,  burning,  and  numbness,'". — *  Sensitiveness
of  the  walk  of  the  abdomen,  worse  from  pressure,  even  ivhen  touched,'". — *Ful-
ness  and  sensation  of  bloatedness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  she  were  inflated,^. —
*Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,". — Contractive,  painful  sensation  in
the  abdomen,' when  walking,". — No  redness  or  pain  in  the  part  stung,  but
severe  griping  pains  all  over  the  abdomen,'  (E.  E.  M.). — [440.]  Violent
griping  in  the  abdomen," — Dull  pains  in  the  bowels,^ — Heaviness  in  the
abdomen,'. — As  if  the  intestines  had  been  crushed,  with  stools  and  tenes-
mus,'^ — Violent  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,'. — Violent  pains  across  the
lower  abdomen,  with  bitter  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,'^ — Sensation  as  if  diar-
rhoea were  coming  on,'^. — Aching  and  pressive  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,
with  bearing  down  in  the  uterus,  as  if  the  menses  were  coming  on  (in  two
persons),^ — Aching  and  pressure  in  the  lower  abdomen,^— Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  lower  abdomen,'^ — [450.]  Bearing  down,". — Slow,  throbbing,
boring  pain  over  the  left  crest  of  ilium,  relieved  by  eructations  (second  day),^

Stool  find  Anus, — Sensation  in  the  rectum  like  an  electric  shock,
slightly  painful,  and  followed  by  urging  to  stool,". — *Sensation  of  rawness
in  the  anus,  with  diarrhoea,". — Throbbing  in  the  rectum,  with  a  sensation
in  the  anus  as  if  stuffed-full,  and  with  heat,*. — -Excessive  tenesmus,". —
Urging  to  stool,^ — Urging  to  stool,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,'^ — Fre-
quent urging  to  stool ;  pains  in  the  anus  after  much  straining,  the  following
morning,". — *  Passage  of  flatus  before  stool,^. — [460.]  Copious,  watery  diar-
rhoea,^ (A..  ^.M..'). — Copious  diarrhoea  and  vomiting,'. — *  Copious  evacua-
tions of  blackish-brown,  green  and  whitish  excrements,^. — Nausea,  vomiting,
and  diarrhoea,  first  lumpy,  and  not  fetid  ;  afterwards,  watery  and  very
fetid;  then  pappy,  mixed  with  mucus  and  blood. Then  followed  stools


410  APIS.

•  like  a  dysentery,  with  much  tenesmus,  and  a  sensation  as  if  the  intestines
had  been  crushed,'^ — Several  loose  stools  daily,^ — Two  loose  stools  daily,
for  five  days,'. — Loose  stools,  eight  days  in  succession,^ — *Loose  stools  in
the  morning  (fifth  day)  ;  loose  urgent  stool  in  the  morning  (sixth  day),'  ^ —
Loose,  lumpy  stool,*. — *  Yellow,  watery  diarrhoea,  with  griping  (twelve  dis-
charges within  twelve  hours),*. — [470.]  *Greeuish,  yellowish,  mucous  diar-
rhoea, without  any  pain  (about  twenty-four  hours  after  the  first  dose  (2d);
and  twelve  times,  the  same  day  ;  then  ceasing,  while  she  took  2d,  and  later,
after  1st),". — Yellowish,  slimy,  green-colored  diarrhoea,  with  swelling  of
the  labia,'. — *  Increasing  prostration  during  diarrhoea,^''. — *Stools  soft  and,
pappy,  mixed  with  serum,  as  if  soft  fceaes  had  been  beaten  in  water,  but  not
dissolved ;  orange-colored,''. — Stool  every  morning ;  scanty,  pappy,  light-
yellow  ;  did  not  begin  to  grow  darker  for  a  week,'. — ^Several  thin,  yellow
stools,  with  extreme  weakness  and  prostration ;  the  stools  occur  with  every
motion  of  the  body,  as  if  the  anus  were  constantly  open.  (In  a  woman
of  forty,  with  ascites,  after  6th  dil.),^. — Colorless  water  passes  from  the
anus,^ — Stool  natural,  preceded  by  emission  of  flatulence,  and  a  small
quantity  of  almost  colorless  water,  containing  lumps,  or  fragments  of  jelly-
like mucus,  streaked  with  blood,*. — Blood  and  mucus  with  the  stools,'^ —
Very  hard,  scanty  stool  (mornings),'^. — [480.]  Bowels  confined  for  several
days  (eleventh  day),  (2d  dil.),^ — Bowels  confined  (from  the  eighth  to  the
twelfth  day),''. — No  stool  for  a  week  (from  the  third  to  the  tenth  day),".

Urinary  (Organs. — For  several  days  he  was  troubled  with  a
morbid  excitement  of  the  urinary  organs,'  (E.  E.  M.). — A  very  disagree-
able sensation  in  the  bladder,  with  a  bearing-down  in  the  region  of  the
sphincter,  and  so  frequent  a  desire  to  urinate  that  he  not  only  did  so  by
day,  but  was  compelled  to  rise  ten  or  twelve  times  during  the  night ;  sore-
ness and  burning  when  passing  urine,'*. — Burning  in  the  urethra,*. — Burn-
ing in  the  urethra  before  and  after  urination  (third  day),^ — Burning  before
and  after  passing,'  *. — ^Burning  and  soreness  when  urinating,^  '*. — As  if
scalded  when  urinating,". — [490,]  *Soreness  when  urinating,  as  if  scalded,*.
— Stitchlike  pain  in  the  urethra,*. — When  beginning  to  urinate,  the  swell-
ing of  the  labia  minora  obstructs,". — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,^'. — Fre-
quent desire  to  urinate,  attended  with  burning  in  the  urethra,  with  uneasi-
ness in  the  spermatic  cord  (sixth  day,  from  large  doses),*. — *Frequent  desire
to  urinate,  with  some  burning  before  and  after  emission  (second  day),'. —
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  a  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  bladder ;  a
bearing  down  in  the  region  of  the  sphincter,'*. — Almost  incessant  desire  to
pass  urine ;  in  passing,  the  urine  seems  to  him  to  be  unusually  warm,
even  to  burning,  with  sensation  as  if  the  flow  were  obstructed  by  a  con-
traction in  the  bulbus ;  the  quantity  of  urine  is  quite  as  usual,". — After
taking  the  6th  dilution  in  the  evening,  he  was  obliged  to  pass  urine  every
five  minutes  the  following  day,'  (and  others). — ^Repeated  urination  every
few  minutes  all  day  (in  a  person  never  subject  to  such  attacks ;  day  after
taking  one  drop  of  the  2d  dilution,  at  night),'. — [500.]  Day  and  night,
very  frequent  passage  of  colorless  urine,". — *  Frequent  and  exces.-<ively  pro-
fuse discharge  of  natural  urine,^. — Frequent  and  extraordinarily  copious
discharge  of  urine,  otherwise  as  usual,  day  and  night,  in  a  dropsical,  preg-
nant woman  (after  three  doses  of  the  30th  dilution),''. — Enormous  secretion
of  urine  (four  to  six  pounds  daily),  greatest  when  at  some  outdoor  exercise,  with
flatulence  and  some  looseness  of  the  bowels  (bee-bread),  (Whitemore). —
Decidedly  increased  passage  of  urine  (first  and  second  days),'. — Copious
passage  of  pale,  straw-colored  urine,  with  brickdust  sediment,". — *  The  pre-


APIS.  411

viously  very  scanty  urine  diminished  to  one-half,  with  a  violent  burning  sensa-
tion wlien  urinating,  as  if  scalded,". — *  Urine  highly  colored,'". — *  Urine
high-colored,  and  more  frequent  emission  of  small  quantities  (third  day)/. —
Pale-yellow,  with  brickdust  sediment,'^^

Sexual  Organs. — [510.]  A  pustule,  sore  as  a  boil,  surrounded  by  a
red  areola,  and  maturated  in  the  centre,  arises  in  the  hair  of  the  pubes,  re-
maining sore  and  painful  some  days  (eleventh  day),^ — Sensation  of  weak-
ness in  the  genitals,''*. — Uneasy  sensation  in  the  spermatic  cord,*. — Frequent
and  long-lasting  erections,^— The  testicle  swelled  to  such  a  size  "  that  it
scarcely  had  room  in  the  scrotum,"  with  tension,  and  the  most  violent  itch-
ing (after  a  sting  in  the  scrotara),^ — Desire  to  cohabit  during  the  day,
while  sitting  at  home  and  when  driving  (after  five,  six,  and  eight  hours),'.
— Very  much  increased  sexual  desire,  in  a  hysterical  woman,". — Hemor-
rhage from  the  uterus,  occurring  in  a  lady  who  was  always  regular  and
healthy ;  coming  on  one  week  after  the  cessation  of  the  usual  menstrual
period,  and  three  days  after  taking  the  medicine,^ — She  feels  as  she  does
in  the  beginning  of  pregnancy,*. — *Bearing-down  pains  in  the  uterus,  as  if
menstruation  were  coming  on,  with  aching  and  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,".
— [520.]  Bearing-down  pains,  as  in  the  early  stages  of  parturition  (in  sev-
eral cases),*. — *Metrorrhagia  at  the  second  month,  with  profuse  flow  of
blood,  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,  great  uneasiness,  restlessness,  and  yawn-
ing,''.— -Miscarriage  at  the  second  month  (from  drop  doses  of  the  2d  dilutiou),^
— Miscarriage  at  the  third  mnnth,^. — Abortion  in  the  fourth  month,  with
very  copious  hemorrhage,  in  a  young,  perfectly  healthy,  recently  married
woman,  during  a  mild  attack  of  fever,  for  which  Apis'  was  given,^ — Should
be  given  to  pregnant  females  with  the  utmost  caution,^— -The  numbness
and  duluess,  beginning  in  the  right  abdominal  region  (from  the  ovaries)  to
the  hip,  now  extends  to  the  ribs,  and  down  over  the  whole  thigh  ;  better  when
lying  upon  it,'°. — When  stretching  in  bed,  a  fine  cutting  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  ovarian  region,  across  to  the  right;  first  very
faint,  then  stronger  and  stronger,  increased  at  every  repeated  stretching;
four  or  five  times  the  same,  then  ceasing  (evenings,  seventh  day),". — Great
increase  of  pain  and  tenderness  in  the  ovarian  region,  in  two  cases ;  one,
of  large  induration,  the  other,  in  a  supposed  incipient  stage  of  develop-
ment,".—In  the  region  of  the  diseased  right  ovary,  soreness,  hardness,  and
burning  heat,^". — [530.]  *Fain  in  right  ovarian  region  during  menstruation^.
— *The  right  ovarian  region  very  sensitive  during  the  period,^. — Drawings
in  right  ovarian  region  (twentieth  day)",. — Drawing  in  the  right  ovarian
region  (twentieth  day),". — In  the  region  of  the  left  ovary,  pain  as  if  strained,
more  when  walking,  evenings  at  6  o'clock ;  after  several  hours,  also,  a
bearing  down  on  right  side,  and  a  lame  feeling  in  the  shoulder-blades ;  to-
wards 11  o'clock,  when  walking,  she  is  compelled  to  bend  forward,  on  ac-
count of  a  contractive,  painful  sensation  in  the  abdomen  ;  still  felt  the  fol-
lowing morning,  somewhat  to  the  left  (first  day),". — A  deep,  penetrating
pain  begins  in  the  clitoris,  and  extends  down  into  the  vagina ;  the  labia
minora  are  swollen,  and  feel  dry,  hard,  and  covered  with  a  crust;  hindered
passing  urine  at  first  all  day  until  it  ceases,  late  in  the  evening,  after  the
application  of  cold-water  compresses,^". — Much  flow  of  mucus  from  the
uterus  and  the  vagina,  with  cessation  of  internal  burning  in  the  abdomen,'".
— Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  back,  and  sacrum,  as  if  the  periods  were
coming  on ;  she  distinctly  feels  it  running  downward,".— She  feels,  for  sev-
eral days,  as  if  her  periods  were  coming  near  the  right  time ;  but  they  re-
main away,  and  pregnancy  has  taken  place  (twentieth  and  following  days),".


412  APIS.

— Bearing-down  pains,  and  sensation  as  if  the  menses  would  come  on  (in
several  cases),^ — [540.]  As  if  the  periods  were  coming  on,". — The  period
flows  two  to  three  days,  then  stops  one  day,  and  returns,  and  so  on  for  ten
days  (in  two  cases),™.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Sensation  as  of  a  rapid  swelling  of
the  lining  membrane  of  the  air-passages,'  (B-)- — Feeling  of  rawness,  with
inclination  to  hawk,'°. — Speaking  is  painful;  she  feels  as  if  it  wearied  the
pharynx,  in  which  there  is  drawing  and  pain,". — He  grows  hoarse,'. — .
Hoarseness  and  difficulty  of  breathing,'. — Hoarseness  and  rough  voice
through  the  day  and  night  (second  day),''  ^  (and  others). — Hoarseness,
mornings,  with  dryness  in  the  throat  and  no  thirst,  and  drinking  is  of  no
use;  at  the  same  time,  soreness  in  the  suprasternal  fossa,  and  sensitiveness  to
pressure,  likewise,  in  the  region  above  both  clavicles;  later,  violent  stitches
through  the  lungs,  here  and  there,  through  the  hips  and  sides  of  the  chest,
with  aching  all  over,  but  especially  in  the  left  breast;  constantly,  a  peculiar
sensation  as  if  cords  were  being  pulled  from  the  suprasternal  fossa,  down-
wards and  sideways,  in  different  directions,".^* /rr-iiaiiore  to  cough  in  the
suprasternal  fossa,^. — [550.]  /Severe  cough,  especially  after  lying  and  sleeping;
the  tickling  that  causes  it,  in  a  little  spot,  very  distinctly  deep  down  on  the
posterior  wall  of  the  windpipe  (second  day,  before  midnight);  would  like
something  to  reach  it  with  and  brush  over  it;  his  head  aches  while  coughing;
he  must  bend  it  back,  and  hold  it  so  that  the  shock  cannot  act  with  such
violeuce;  as  soon  as  the  least  bit  of  mucus  loosens,  he  is  better,'. — Hoarse
cough,  with  evening  heat,'. — Cough  prevents  sleep,  after  lying  down,  and
wakens  him  towards  midnight,  with  the  same  distinct  clicking  down  back,
which  irresistibly  irritates  to  violent  shocks  that  are  felt  in  the  head  ;  ceases
directly  after  the  loosening  of  a  small  lump  of  mucus,  which  is  swallowed
(third  to  fourth  days);  cough  the  fourth  and  fifth  days,  only  evenings,  not
at  night,^ — Cough,  preventing  sleep,". — When  coughing,  pain  through  the
chest,  from  the  clavicle,'". — Cough,  more  in  warmth,  and  in  repose,  and
rousing  from  first  sleep,  for  several  evenings,'. — Cough,  when  starting  in
sleep,'''.— -Violent  shocks  of  cough,  from  a  crawling  irritation  down  in  the
windpipe,  near  the  suprasternal  fossa;  and,  at  every  shock  of  cough,  in-
creased headache  in  the  left  side  and  upper  part.  After  half  an  hour,
something  loosens  and  is  swallowed,  when  the  cough  ceases  directly  (first
day,  when  roused  from  sleep  before  midnight),'. — Expectoration  of  a  great
quantity  of  transparent,  somewhat  frothy,  bloody  mucus  (after  an  emetic),'  (B.).
— Dyspncea;  it  seemed  impossible  to  breathe ;  had  to  fan  him  to  keep  him  alive,'
(A.  R.  M.). — [560.]  Sensation  as  though  he  should  not  be  able  to  breathe
again,■^ — Sensation  as  if  he  would  not  be  able  to  breathe,^ — *  Great  feeling
of  suffocation ;  it  seems  as  if  she  could  not  long  survive,  for  want  of  air,^  (B.).
— *Intense  sensation  of  suffocation ;  threw  the  collar  wide  open;  could  bear
nothing  about  the  throat;  with  dusky  hue  to  the  face,  and  bluish  lips,'  (C
W.  B.). — Can  scarcely  breathe  from  swelling  of  the  tongue,  so  that  the
laborious  inspiration  can  be  heard  all  over  the  house,'. — Difficulty  of
breathing,  inclination  to  sleep,  and  increasing  shortness  of  breath  when
walking,'. — Breathing  very  difficult,  and  every  drop  of  liquid  nearly  chokes
him,'. — *Hurried  and  difficult  respiration,  with  fever  and  headache  (second
day),". — Difficult,  anxious  breathing,  with  constriction  in  the  throat;  worse
when  lying,^^ — Sensation  of  fulness,  constriction,  or  suffocation  in  the
throat,  with  difficult,  anxious  breathing;  worse  in  a  horizontal  position,^.
— [570.]  Labored  inspiration,  as  in  croup,'. — Breathing  oppressed  in  pres-
sure of  the  chestj'l — Breathing  oppressed  by  pressure  in  the  back,".—


APIS.  413

Short  breath,' ". — Short,  quick  breathing,  nights,'. — Breathing  very  slow,'.
— Closed  rooms,  especially  if  overheated,  are  insupportable  to  him,'^. — Pain
in  the  heart  that  interrupts  breathing,'.

Chest. — At  every  pressure,  when  holding  the  breath,  pain  through  the
chest,''. — Heat  in  the  chest,''. — [580.]  Sensation  of  burning  heat  in  the
chest  and  stomach,  early  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — Sensation  of
warmth  or  burning  in  the  chest  (first  day),'. — Fulness,  tension,  and  pres-
sure in  the  chest  (first  day),'. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  chest,'. — When
coughing,  and  at  every  pressure,  pain  above  the  clavicle,  and  from  there
down  through  the  chest,"'. — Sharp  pains  in  the  chest,  at  nights  (fifth  day),\
— Sometimes,  sharp  pains  and  stitches  through  the  chest,'". — Stitches
through  the  chest  and  back,  at  night  (sixth  day),''. — Stitches  through  the
chest  and  back,  at  night,'. — Pressure  in  the  chest,'. — [590.]  Pressure  in
the  chest  (s6on),'''.-^Pressure  in  the  chest,  after  pains  in  the  shoulders  and
upper  arms,^ — Slight  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  frequent  desire  to  draw
a  deep  inspiration,^. — Like  a  pressive  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,'".
— As  if  the  chest,  near  the  last  ribs,  were  crushed,  pressed,  or  beaten,". —
Sensation  of  heaviness,^ — Pain,  as  of  a  bruise,  and  sensation  of  weight  in
the  chest  (for  several  days),*. — Trembling  and  pressure  in  the  chest,  with
oppressed  breathing  (forenoon,  second  day),".— Sensation  of  soreness,  lame,
bruised  feeling,  as  if  from  recent  injury,  from  being  jammed,  bruised,  or  beaten
(confirmed  in  many  provers),*. — Pain  in  the  chest,  stinging,  first  left,  then
right,  where  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs  bend  toward  the  hypochondria ;  at  the
same  time,  everything  grew  dark  before  her  eyes,  in  which  she  felt  pain
(forenoon,  third  day),'^ — [600.]  Trembling  in  the  chest,". — Stitches  in  the
side,'. — Sticking  through  the  sides  of  the  chest  and  through  the  lungs,". —
Pain  in  the  chest,  only  on  the  left  side,  near  the  last  ribs,  in  or  below  the
region  of  the  heart  (second  week),'^ — Slight  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  under  the  short  ribs,*. — Sense  of  constriction  or  lacing  from  the  pit
of  the  throat  downwards  and  sideways,". — *Dull,  aching  pains  in  the  left  side
of  the  chest,  near  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  several  times  during  the  day,  with
sensation  of  fulness  in  the  chest  and  short  breath  (first  day),'. — Suprasternal
fossa  sensitive  to  touch,  as  if  sore,*. — Sticking  under  the  left  arm,  near  the
fourth  or  fifth  rib,  when  breathing  and  when  not  (fourth  week),". — Tear-
ing drawing  from  below  on  the  left  side,  arising  next  to  the  sternum ;
drawing  back  and  forth  in  the  chest  upward,  and  finally  in  the  lower  jaw ;
at  the  same  time,  pain  in  the  back,  and  sensation  as  if  the  menses  were
coming  on  (at  the  monthly  period,  twenty-first  day),". — [610.]  Sensation
as  if  cords  weije  drawn  along  through  the  chest,'". — Stitches  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest,^. — Coldness  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,^". — Suddenly,  a  pain  in
a  little  spot  to  the  left,  on  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum  (fourteenth  day),".

Heart  and  Pulse. — Slow  beating  of  the  heart;  scarcely  perceptible
radial  pulse  (wasp),'. — Violent  palpitation,  sensible  to  himself  and  audible
to  those  in  the  room,'  (A.  K.  M.). — Rapid,  feeble  beats  of  the  heart,'  (A.
R.  M.). — Action  of  che  heart  interrupted,'. — Pulse  accelerated  (first  day),'.
— Pulse  increased  20  strokes,  full  and  strong  (second  proving),". — [620,]
Pulse  95,  full  and  strong,". — Pulse  88,  with  sensation  of  heat,  evenings,'^
— Pulse  increased  from  65  to  77  (first  day),'. — Pulse  decreased  very  soon,'.
— Pulse  hardly  perceptible  (wasp),'. — Pulse  feeble,  scarcely  discernible  at
the  wrist,'  (E.  E.  M.).— No  pulse  at  the  wrist,'  (A.  R.  M.).— Pulseless  at
wrist  for  twenty  minutes,'  (A.  R.  M.).— Pain  in  the  heart,'. — Pain  near
the  heart  that  almost  arrested  the  breathing,  continuing,  at  intervals,  for
some  days,'. — [630.]  Sudden  attack  of  acute  pain  just  below  the  heart,  soon


414  APIS.

extending  diagonally  towards  the  right  chesf.,^  (B.). — Several  stitchlike  pains
just  below  the  heart,^.

Nccli  and  Bach, — Nettlerash  in  the  back  of  the  neck/. — Slight
sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  ueck  and  small  of  back,^ — Swelling  in
the  back  of  the  neck  in  gouty  patients/. — Swelling  on  the  back  of  the  neck,
so  that  his  head  is  pressed  upon  the  chest/. — Back  of  neck  stiff/^ — Ten-
sion in  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  beneath  and  back  of  the  ear  (soon;  6th
dil.),^  (and  others). — Rheumatic  stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side
of  the  neck;  worse  when  moving  the  head  in  that  direction;  came  on  when
rising  in  the  morning ;  is  very  painful ;  less  noticed  when  moving  the  head
in  any  other  direction  (second  day),^ — Rheumatic  stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  back  of  the  neck,'^. — [640.]  Violent  piercing  burning  pain  in  a
small  spot  down  on  the  left  of  the  back  of  the  neck,  also  on  the  occiput
and  left  arm  (after  two  hours),^ — Pains  extending  from  the  shoulder  up
to  the  back  of  the  neck,^ — Sharp,  tensive  pain  from  the  neck  up  back  of
the  left  ear,  extending  forward  over  the  left  side  of  the  head  (first  day),'  ^
— Tensive  pain  in  the  left  shoulder,  extending  up  into  the  back  of  the  neck
(second  day),'. — Pain  in  the  back,  over  the  shoulder-blades;  worse  on  the
right  side  (first  and  second  days),'. — Lame  feeling  in  the  scapulae,". — Dull
pressure  under  the  scapula,  with  sore  feeling  on  moving  the  parts,^ — Pressure
under  the  shoulder-blades,  painful  when  moving,'". — Peculiar  weakness  in  the
back,". — Peculiar  excessive  weakness  along  the  whole  back,  on  both  sides
of  the  spine,  as  if  she  could  not  lie  upon  it  for  weakness,'' "". — [650.]  Burn-
ing and  heat,  like  "  prickly  heat,"  on  the  back,'  (B.). — Sudden  Bush  of
heat  over  the  back,  as  though  sweat  would  break  out,  with  a  pain  at  the
left  illo-sacral  junction,*. — Chills  running  over  the  back,'". — Backache,". —
Stitches  in  the  back  and  chest,^. — Stitches  through  the  back,'. — Back  as  if
bruised,^ — Back  feels  bruised  near  the  last  ribs,  on  a  place  a  hand's  breadth
in  extent,  as  if  the  muscles  internally  were  sore,  especially  on  the  left  side
(the  whole  third  day),". — Pressure  behind  on  the  last  ribs,  on  both  sides
of  the  spine,  which  somewhat  hinders  breathing,  about  as  in  anxiety
(twenty-first  day),". — Prickling  on  the  back,'. — [660.]  Sensation  of  stiff-
ness in  the  sacrum,'***. — Pa4n  in  the  ilio-sacral  junction,*. — Urging  in  the
sacrum,  as  if  to  the  period ,'^

Extremities  in  General. — Trembling  of  the  hands  and  feet,^*. —
He  first  swelled  about  the  joints,  where  bunches  were  forming  that  looked
somewhat  inflamed  and  itched  very  much,'. — Blood  settled  under  the  toe
and  finger-nails,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Cold  limbs,  with  chilliness,'. — His  extrem-
ities grew  cold,'  (E.  E.  M.). — A  cutting  instrument  seemed  tij  penetrate  all
his  limbs  at  the  same  time,  like  an  electric  discharge  (wasp),'.

Upper  Extremitieft, — Red  and  white  spots  on  the  arms,'. — [670.]
— Burning  and  heat,  like  "prickly  heat,"  on  the  arms  and  hands,'  (B.). —
Swelling  of  the  whole  arm,  so  that  he  could  not  take  off  his  coat  without
an  effort,  in  the  evening,  and  was  only  able  to  put  it  on  next  morning  with
the  greatest  difficulty.  The  arm  remained  very  sensitive  for  some  days
(after  a  sting  in  the  hand),'. — Unpleasant  sensation  in  the  inner  side  of
both  arms,  reaching  from  near  the  elbow  to  the  axilla;  also,  a  similar  sen-
sation in  the  anterior  and  inner  part  of  each  thigh,  reaching  from  near  the
knee  to  the  inguinal  region,  which  ceased  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour,'  (S.
D.). — Drawing  pains  in  the  arm,  that  begin  in  the  shoulders  and  extend  to
the  end  of  the  fingers,'^ — Itching,  and  appearance  of  blotches,  in  arras  and
hands,  like  nettlerash,  on  scratching,'  (B.). — Drawing  pain  through  the  arm,
beginning  in  the  shoulders,'".— Hand  and  arm  swollen  and  painful  for


APIS.  415

several  days,\ — Crawling,  as  if  going  to  sleep,  in  both  arms,  especially  in
the  left,'". — Itching  stitching  in  the  back  of  the  arm,". — Left  arm  affected
(after  fifteen  minutes),'. — [680.]  Burning  stinging  on  the  left  arm,^ — The
upper  part  of  the  arm  is  painful,''. — Aching  in  the  right  shoulder  and  upper
portion  of  the  arm  (soon),^ — Dull  pains,  apparently  in  the  bones  of  the
arms  and  fingers,^ — Aching  in  right  shoulder  and  upper  arm,  and  pressure
on  the  chest  (first  day),^^Great  increase  and  intensity  of  the  odor  from
the  axillary  glands  (fourth  day),*. — Stinging  painsin  the  left  elbow,  sudden,
but  not  lasting  (third  day),*. — ■*  (Edema  of  the  hands,^. — The  hand  becomes
purple,'  (B.).— Ncttlerash  on  the  back  of  the  hand,'. — [690.]  Hands  trem-
ble,"— Hands  as  if  dead,  during  chill,'". — Hot  hands,'". — Burning,  as  of
ond day;  first  dilution),^ — Hot  hands,  during  chilliness,".— Burning  and
stinging  in  the  hands,  especially  the  palms,  that  became  very  red ;  half  an
hour  after  a  sting  in  the  neck.  Cold  water  relieves,'. — Prickling  in  the
hands,  palms,  and  back  of  the  hands,'. — The  back  of  the  hand  swollen  to
the  finger-tips  (after  a  sting  upon  it),'. — Sore  and  red  spots  in  the  palms,'.
— Itching  in  the  palms,  mostly  left,  in  little  burning  spots,'. — [700.]  Itch-
ing and  burning  on  the  back  of  the  hands,  and  on  the  knuckles,  also  on
the  first  joints  of  the  fingers,  especially  of  the  right  hand ;  the  skin  begins
to  chap  finally,  here  and  there,  as  if  from  cold,  to  which  she  had  not  been
exposed  (evenings,  9  o'clock,  fifth  day),". — The  right  hand  swells  as  if
puffed  up,  and  is  slightly  bluish-red ;  pressure  of  the  fingers  makes  white
spots,  that  disappear  slowly  and  leave  no  indentation,  without  heat  and
without  pain,  except  some  tension ;  with  nettlerash  (sixth  dilution),". —
Itching  and  chapping  of  the  right  hand  (still  felt  on  the  seventh  day),". —
Itching  and  chapping  of  the  right  hand;  the  lower  lip  also  begins  to  chap
(evenings,  eighth  day),". — The  fingers  swell  and  remain  very  sensitive  for
several  days  (after  a  sting),'. — The  stung  finger  was  swollen  little,  or  not
at  all,'. — The  bones  of  the  fingers  are  painful,^. — *  Very  distinct  sensation  of
numbness  in  the  fingers,  especially  in  their  tips,  about  the  roots  of  the  nails,
with  a  sensation  as  if  the  nails  were  very  loose,  and  he  could  shake  them  off,".
— Cold  fingers,". — Cold  hands,'. — Drawing  pains  extending  to  the  ends  of
the  fingers,"'.^[710.]  Itching  in  the  fingers,  . — Tingling  of  the  fingers  of  the
left  hand  (soon),'. — -Burning  twitching,  like  a  pricking  contraction,  in  the
right  thumb,  from  without  inwardly;  also  the  same  in  other  places  (second
day),'. — After  many  stings,  the  index-finger  felt  numb,  but  was  neither
sensitive  nor  swollen  ;  in  several  days  black  spots  appear  in  the  skin,'. —
Inward  burning  about  a  hang-nail,  on  the  outside  of  the  right  fourth
finger;  no  redness  where  it  pains,  inside,  and  not  aggravated  by  pressure;
continued  burning  in  the  tip  (fourth  and  fifth  days),'. — Burning,  like  fire,
in  the  finger-tips,'. — -Fine  burning  pricking  in  the  finger-tips,'. — Sensation
as  if  the  finger-nails  were  quite  loose,  and  as  if  he  could  shake  them  off,".
Lower  JExtremities. — Lower  limbs  feel  paralyzed,". — Dull  pains,
as  if  iu  the  bones  of  the  lower  extremities,^. — [720.]  Sore  feeling  of  the
flesh  of  the  lower  extremities,  disappearing  on  walking,  and  returning  again
while  sitting,^ — Itching  and  pricking  in  the  lower  limbs,'. — Sore  pain  in
left  hip-joint  (immediately  after  every  dose  of  the  second  dilution);  later
a  weakness,  unsteadiness,  trembling  in  this  joint,'". — Drawing  through  the
thighs  to  the  tips  of  the  toes,  with  numb  sensation  in  the  latter,'^. — An
itching  stitch  posteriorly  on  the  thigh,". — Burning  itching,  especially  pos-
teriorly, on  the  left  thigh  (after  four  hours),'. — Violent  pain  in  the  left
knee,  outside,  over,  and  under  the  knee,  mostly  half  in  front  (after  two  and


416  APIS.

a  half  hours)  ;  violent,  short  pains  in  front,  below  (after  six  hours)  ;  now
and  then  violent  on  outside  (second  day),". — Fine  burning  stinging  on
the  knee  (first  day),^ — Crawling,  as  if  from  an  insect,  on  the  inner  side  of
the  right  knee  (mornings,  fourth  day),". — Prom  the  left  knee  to  the  foot,
crawling  as  if  going  to  sleep,'". — [730.]  Darting,  transient  pains  in  the  ex-
ternal malleolus  of  the  left  ankle  (for  four  days),". — After  the  sting  of  bees,
the  former  gouty  concretions  appeared  again,  and  then  disappeared,'. —
Red  and  white  spots  on  the  feet,'. — *When  taking  off  the  foot-gear,  even-
ings, frequent  swelling  of  the  feet,'^. — *At  night,  on  removing  the  boots  and
socks,  he  J'ouad  thai  his  feet  were  swollen  full,  with  a  sensation  of  heaviness  and
stiffness;  the  upper  parts  of  the  feet  felt  bungling  and  itched,  and  were  of
a  bright  red  color ;  on  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  balls  of  the  toes  painful  ful-
ness, and  as  if  he  stepped  on  cushions  when  he  walked  (sixth  day,  from
many  large  doses),*. — Feet  trembled,". — Burning  of  the  feet  (first  day),l —
Burning  and  pricking  in  the  feet  (after  a  sting  on  the  neck),'. — Cold  feet,
with  burning  cheeks,'". — *Sensation  in  the  toes,  and  the  whole  foot,  as  if
too  large,  swollen,  and  stiff,'. — [740.]  Heaviness  and  stiffness  of  the  feet,'. —
Crawling  and  itching  of  the  feet,  as  if  she  had  frozen  them  (sixth  day),'^ —
Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  toes,". — Burning  of  the  toes,  with  erysipela-
of  the  foot  is  cold  (lasting  half  an  hour),l — Burning  of  the  toes,  with  red-
ness and  heat  in  them,  while  the  feet  are  cold  (for  half  an  hour),^ — Draw-
ing pains,  extending  into  the  toes,'l — Pricking  in  both  little  toes  (first  day,
second  dilution),*.

GenerulUies. — Actual  swelling,  or  "  puffing  up,"  of  the  whole  body,
without  any  noticeable  change  of  color,  except  in  the  face,'  (E.  U.  J.). —
(No  blood,  when  venesection  is  attempted),'. — The  blood  let  from  a  young,
healthy  woman,  five  minutes  after  she  was  stung,  was  colorless,  and  only
red  in  the  centre  of  the  vessel,'. — [750.]  Twitching  of  the  muscles,'  (A.  R.  M.).
— Jactitation  of  the  muscles,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Trembling,'. — Stretching,'^ —
She  was  found  to  be  in  a  spasm,  generally  tonic,  but  in  a  measure  clonic ;
her  knees  were  drawn  up  to  her  breast,  and  her  hands  and  arms  moved
convulsively,'  (J.  P.D.). — Convulsions,'. — The  whole  nervous  system  seemed
most  violently  affected,'. — Terrified  starting  during  evening  sleep,'l — Ex-
cessive irritability  of  the  nerves,'^. — The  sting  instantly  strikes  through  his
whole  frame,  like  an  electric  shock,  thrilling  both  ends  of  his  fingers  and
toes,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Restlessness ;  would  constantly  like  to  go  from  one
place  to  another,'*. — [760.]  An  extraordinary  restlessness  overcomes  him
in  the  afternoon,  with  as  much  exhaustion  as  if  he  had  done  very  hard
manual  labor.  (After  smelling  the  bee  poison,  when  gathering  a  swarm),".
— Nervous  restlessness,'. — Nervous  restlessness,  during  the  latter  half  of  the
night,l — Nervous  restlessness  ;  she  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  herself,
so  that  tears  came  to  her  eyes,'. — Bodily  unrest,  as  if  after  hard  work,'^ —
General  lameness,  especially  in  the  lower  limbs  (humble-bee),". — -'Tired,
as  if  bruised  in  every  limb,  especially  in  the  back,  as  one  feels  in  the  morning,
after  exertion ;  especially  perceptible  on  rising  after  sitting,  must  stretch  him-
self even  in  the  street  (after  six  hours),".— ^General  feeling  of  lassitude
(second  day),^ — *General  feeling  of  lassitude,  loith  trembling^. — For  sev-
eral days,  totally  unfitted  for  labor  of  any  kind,'  (E.  U.  J.).— [770.]  Fre-
quent loss  of  all  strength  with  a  trembling  sensation^^. — Great  weakness  at  in-
tervals'.— Attack  of  weakness,  during  which  she  grows  dizzy  (evenings,
third  day),'^ — So  weak  directly,  that  he  was  obliged  to  lie  down,  and  lost
his  consciousness  (after  a  sting  in  the  middle  finger),'. — During  continual


APIS.  417

diarrhoea,  weakness  increases,  and  headache  diminishes,". — Scarcely  able
to  walk ;  staggering,*  (A.  R.  M.). — Truly  distressing  prostration  and  lassi-
tude,\ — *With  all  the  rest  of  the  symptoms,  a  constant  feeling  of  lassitude
and  great  prostration,'*. — Mv/;h  prostration,^  (A.  R.  M.). — Sudden  prostra-
tion, with  coldness,^  (A.  R.  M.). — [780.]  Great  prostration  for  several  days,^.
— Sudden  prostration  of  the  vital  forces  (shortly  after),*  (E.  E.  M.). — Sud-
den prostration  of  the  vital  forces ;  severe  vomiting ;  profuse  diarrhoea ;
cold  extremities ;  pale  face ;  severe  griping  pains  in  the  abdomen ;  pulse
weak,  scarcely  perceptible  at  the  wrist.  (Prom  a  sting  on  the  eyebrow),'.
— Prostration  and  depression  (soon),". — Heavy  and  prostrate  in  fever,''". — Was
obliged  to  be  led  into  the  house ;  threw  himself  on  the  bed  ;  unable  to  hold
himself  up,*. — Without  feeling  either  weakness  or  faintness,  she  is  yet  sud-
denly compelled  to  lie  down  on  the  ground,*. — Sinks  quite  exhausted  at
language,*  (E.  U.  J.). — Must  lie  down,  he  feels  so  unwell,*. — Must  lie
down,'. — [790.]  Lies  down,  but  rises  again  to  go  to  the  neighboring  brook ;
after  a  few  steps,  dies,'. — Goes  home  and  lies  down ;  wants  his  red  face
bathed  ;  wants  to  be  raised  up  ;  asks  for  water ;  lips  are  cold  ;  he  dies,  ten
minutes  after  the  sting  of  an  humble-bee,  in  the  temple,'. — Faintness,*  ^. —
Fainting;  trembling,*. — Faintness  (wasp),*. — Faintness,  with  nausea,'. — •
He  felt  'very  strangely  in  an  instant ;  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  were
going  to  faint.  He  asked  for  water  just  before  death  (after  a  sting  in  sep-
tum of  nose),'. — A  faint  and  deathly  feeling  came  over  him,'  (E.  U.  J). —
Faintness,  deathlike  prostration,  which  continued  half  an  hour,  accom-
panied with  intense  anxiety  and  distress  at  the  stomach,  oppression  of  the
chest,  dyspnoea,  short,  rapid  breathing,  pulse  accelerated,*  (A.  R.  M). —
Fainting  and  twitching.s,  when  the  pains  are  violent,'. — [800.]  She  falls
down,*  (B.). — She  staggered  and  fell,*  (J.  P.  D.). — Fell  to  the  ground  and
died  in  a  few  minutes,*. — My  flesh  was  as  sensitive  as  if  cut  with  many
lancets  (next  day,  after  many  stings),*. — Sensitive  to  steel  points  that  are
directed  towards  her ;  it  seems  to  her  as  if  the  skin  in  the  glabella  were
being  drawn  up  towards  the  forehead,". — *  The  whole  surface  of  the  body
becomes  exceedingly  sensitive  to  the  touch;  every  hair  is  painful  when  touched
(6th  dil.),^ — *Skin  extremely  sensitive  to  contact;  painful  to  the  slightest
touch  ;  could  not  bear  the  sheet  upon  him,*  (A.  R.  M.). — Numbness  over
the  whole  body,  at  once,*. — A  very  strange  feeling,  which  she  could  not
define  (in  ten  minutes),*  (J.  P.  D.). — Violent  pain,* ;  for  days,*. — [810.]
Screamed  aloud  at  great  pain,  that  increased  with  intense  rapidity  (directly
after  the  sting  of  a  wasp),*. — Sensation  in  whole  body,  as  if  everything  were
too  large,*. — Sensation  as  if  crushed  over  the  whole  body,  on  the  sides,  hips,
back,  in  short,  everywhere ;  with  restlessness  all  night,  and  loose,  urgent
stool,  mornings.  (From  several  pellets  of  the  6th,  taken  evenings,  on
account  of  great  warmth ;  the  same  symptoms  are  repeated  in  the  same
order,  three  times,  after  similar  doses),^ — Felt  very  sore  from  head  to  foot
(after  first  day),'  (J.  P.  D.). — Bruised  sensation  all  over;  sides,  hips,  back,
in  fact,  he  ached  everywhere  (after  reaction),'  (E.  E.  M.). — Trembling  sen-
sation, with  heat,**.

Skin. — Desquamation  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin  (wasp),*. — In-
flammatory swelling  of  the  whole  body ;  the  right  eye  entirely,  the  left
almost  closed ;  cheek  and  nose  level ;  the  lower  cheek  hung  down  upon
the  breast ;  the  breast  was  like  a  great  loaf,'. — *Rapid,  considerable  swell-
ing,*-—*Swelling  of  the  whole  body,'. — [820.]  Spreading,  inflammatory
swelling  (humble-bee),^. — Inflammatory  swelling  till  death,'. — Painful,  red
VOL.  I.— 27


418  APIS.

swelling,^.' — *Diffuse  inflammation  of  the  cellular  tissues,  ending  in  their
destruction,'. — ^Swelling  and  an  erysipelatous  redness,^. — *Sharp  pain  and
erysipelatous  swelling,  very  hard  and  white  in  the  middle,^. — From 1  to  4,
mornings,  tension  and  swelling  in  the  face  and  lips,'*. — Hand,  arm,  face,
and  head,  swell  considerably  (after  a  sting  in  the  middle  finger),  (wasp),'.
— Face,  neck,  breast,  and  limbs  considerably  swollen,'. — Swelling  of  the
■whole  left  side  of  the  body  (side  of  the  sting,  in  the  testicle),  first  in  the
joints,'. — [830.]  Blotches  on  the  body,  and  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  with
stinging  as  of  nettles,'. — *Body  covered  with  large  wales,  size  of  a  silver
half  dollar,  slightly  elevated  and  white  (C.  C  C),'. — The  whole  body  covered
with  red  spots,  as  if  scalded,  with  burning  and  sticking  (after  a  sting  in  the
neck),'. — "Red  and  white  blotches  over  the  body  and  extremities  like  nettle-
rash,'^  (A.  R.  M.). — Red  place  near  the  sting,  with  swelling  on  the  stung
spot,  and  red  stripes  along  the  fingers  and  the  arms,'. — Erysipelatous  red-
ness of  the  toes,' ;  and  the  feet,'^. — Redness  of  the  stung  spot ;  not  till  later,
when  the  attacks  were  improving,'. — Red  lines  along  the  lymphatic  vessels,
from  a  sting  in  the  middle  finger  and  the  arm  (wasp),'. — Over  the  whole
body,  the  most  violent  inflammation  and  excessive  pressure  when  rubbing;
covered  with  small  white  spots,  resembling  mosquito-bites,'. — Large,  florid
blotches  appeared  upon  the  skin,  resembling  erysipelas. This  lasted  for
something  over  an  hour,  but  was  essentially  relieved  by  a  solution  of
borax,'  (S.  D.). — [840.]  Rash  ;  red  blotches,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  the
skin  to  contact. This  sensitiveness  extended  all  over  the  body,'  (A.  R.  M.).
— Spots  of  the  size  of  a  dollar  swell  up,  without  changing  the  color  of  the
skin,  and  become  uncommonly  sensitive  to  the  touch,  as  if  sore  {0  and
1st),". — Sudden,  indescribable  sensation  over  the  whole  body,  with  a  sting-
ing feeling;  red  and  white  spots  on  the  palms,  on  the  arms  and  feet,'. — Her
whole  body  was  covered  with  thickly  swelled  wales,  without  itching  or
burning ; whereupon other  symptoms disappeared,'. — Light-red, raised,
hard  swelling  of  the  sting,  and  a  chilly  sensation  around  it  (wasp),'. —
^Elevations  on  the  skin,  as  after  the  bite  of  insects,  painfully  sore,  sensitive  to
touch,'.— Small  elevations  on  the  skin,  as  after  the  bites  of  ants,  appear  at
the  extreme  end,  over  the  left  eyebrow,  pain  as  if  sore,  and  are  very  sensi-
tive to  pressure  (third  day),''. — In  a  few  minutes  after  the  cessation  of  the
spasms,  there  appeared  all  over  her  body  and  limbs,  and  even  on  her  ears,
a  red  eruption ;  some  of  the  elevations  in  circumference  the  size  of  a  pea,
but  generally  like  millet-seed. This  eruption  continued  visible  for  an  hour,
and  was  very  itchy  while  passing  away,'  (J.  P.  D.). — ^With  swelling  of  the
face,  and  the  whole  body,  he  is  covered  with  a  kind  of  urticaria,  that  is
somewhat  paler  than  the  usual  color  of  the  skin,'. — *Itching  and  appearance
of  blotches,  like  7iettlerash,  after  scratching,^  (B.). — [850.]  *Eruption,  like
nettlerash,  over  the  whole  body,  with  burning  and  itching  (second  day,  after
30th  dil.),'. — *  Nettlerash  over  the  whole  body,  and  lessening  of  the  previous
symptoms,^. — ^Nettlerash  after  fever,^. — Very  soon,  a  dense  nettlerash  over
the  whole  body,  that  itched  very  much,  and  disappeared  after  a  good  sleep,'.
— Nettlerash  (appeared  a  week  after  the  sting ;  the  symptoms  had  disap-
peared),' (C.  C.  C). — Sensitive  pimples  (B.). — Red  pimply  eruption,  cover-
ing the  entire  body,  but  more  evident  and  thicker  upon  his  chest  and  back
than  upon  his  face  and  limbs,'  (E.  U.  J.). — Tetter  on  the  lobe  of  the  ear,'^
— Eruption  around  the  lips.l — Inflammation,  violent  pains,  and  gangrene, .
— [860.]  Pain  of  the  sSing  seemed  to  penetrate  deeply,  aad  as  if  a  hook
were  being  drawn  out  there  (wasp),'. — Violent  sensation  of  burning  like
fire,  in  the  seat  of  the  sting  (wasp),'. — ^Sensation  of  burning  heat  and  sling-


APIS.  419

ing,  in  various  portions  of  the  surface  of  the  body,  at  the  same  time*. — Vivid,
stinging  paiu,  swelling  and  inflammation,'. — Over  the  whole  body,  from
head  to  foot,  as  if  he  were  being  stung  by  insects,  so  that  it  prevented  him
from  sleeping  all  night,™. — Stinging,  prickling,  burning,  smarting,  itching
sensation,  all  over  the  skin.^  (E.  E.  M.). — Stitch,  as  from  an  insect,  and
then  swelling,'*. — Throbbing  in  the  swelling,'. — Prickling  over  the  whole
body,  externally  and  internally,'. — Prickling  all  over  the  body,  most  on  the
back  and  palms  of  the  hands,  the  face,  forehead,  and  under  the  eyes  ;
[870.]  Prickling  over  the  whole  body,  as  after  the  sting  (lasting  one  to
two  weeks,  returning  after  every  exertion),'. — Intense  burning  itching  all
over  his  body,  so  severe  that  he  retired  to  his  room,  and  rubbed  himself
vigorously  with  his  flesh  brush  (almost  immediately),'  (E.  U.  J.). — *Burn-
ing  itching  in  several  places,^. — Burning  itching  places,  here  and  there,
especially  on  the  back  (second  day),'. — *Itohing  pricking  in  the  skin  in
different  parts  of  the  body,  more  on  the  lower  extremities,  and  continued
through  the  day  (first  day),^. — In  evening,  an  intolerable  itching,  attended
with  a  burning,  fiery  sensation,  commencing  in  the  arms,  and  finally  spreading
over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  reaching  to  the  feet,''-  (S.  D.). — Itching  over
the  whole  body  (humble-bee),^'. — The  most  violent  itching,  like  pricking
with  needles,  so  that  his  whole  body  had  to  be  rubbed  with  cloths,'. — Itch-
ing over  various  parts,  especially  on  head  and  fingers  (humble-bee),^*.—
Itching  on  the  head," ;  on  the  forehead  and  face,'' ;  about  the  eye,^ ;  and
about  the  eyebrows,'^;  the  ] ids,^ " '°.— [880.]  In  the  canthi,"^;  in  the
eye,^;  on  the  nose,"';  on  the  back,^;  on  the  hands,^  ^ " ;  the  palms,";  fingers,-* ;
on  the  thighs,";  the  knees,';  the  lower  limbs,". — Violent  itching  of  the
tensively  swelled  scrotum,'. — Itching  of  eruptions,^;  the  bunches  on  the
joints,'. — Stinging  itching  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,  like
flea-bites  ;  directly  after,  the  same  on  the  right  arm ;  better  after  scratch-
ing, afternoon,". — Itching  of  the  feet,'^ — The  itching  is  relieved  by  fric-
tion,' (E.  U.  J.).

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Inclination  to  yawn,";  mornings  (fourth  or
fifth  day),". — Must  yawn  much,  and  is  often  sleepy ;  she  feels  the  least  in-
terruption of  her  morning  sleep  all  day  (third  and  fourth  week),". — Yawn-
ing, chilliness,  headache,". — Yawning  in  uterine  hemorrhage,^. — [890.]
Much  yawning  after  rising  in  the  morning,  although  she  had  slept  long
enough  (second  day),". — Great  inclination  to  sleep;  still  he  walks  a  tenth
of  a  mile,'. — *Great  desire  to  sleep,  amounting  to  most  extreme  sleepi-
ness,'^ — Desire  for  rest  and  sleep,  but  they  compelled  him  to  move  about
(wasp),'. — When  the  other  symptoms  diminished  again,  the  prostration,
with  great  desire  to  sleep,  remained,". — *  Very  sleepy,  early  in  the  evening
(second  day),'. — /Sleepiness,  prostration,  and  vomiting  of  bile,'^. — Very
drowsy  mornings ;  will  not  rise ;  back  as  if  beaten ;  must  extend  and  stretch
himself;  is  confused  in  the  head  (second  day),'l — She  fell  asleep  while  sit-
ting, evenings,  and  started  several  times  at  a  noise  (after  one  hour),'^. —
*They  sleep  very  long,  mornings,  for  several  weeks  (with  many),  (C.  Hg.)—
[900.]  Too  much  sleep  (from  second  to  third  day),". — Frequent  waking
during  the  night,' ' ;  to  pass  urine,'  ^l — ^ Awaking  four  times  from  sleep  at
night,  with  great  thirst  forcold  water,'l — *  Anxious  startingin  sleep,  with  some
cough,'^ — Sleeplessness,'. — Was  kept  awake  and  restless  during  the  whole
night,  by  loose,  urgent  stools,'.  (E.  E.  M.) — Nervous  restlessness  all  night,
that  prevents  sleep,l — Nervous  restlessness,  especially  during  the  latter
half  of  the  night,'^ — Fidgety  restlessness  in  the  latter  part  of  the  night


420  APIS.

(third  day,  2d  dilution),^ — Very  restless  sleep ;  inclination  to  frequent
awaking  during  the  night,  and  incessant  dreaming,^. — [910.]  Has  not  the
least  enjoyment  from  sleep ;  it  seems  to  him  as  if  his  brain  had  no  rest  at
all,  either  day  or  night,'\— A  burning  pain  under  the  left  ribs  at  night,
preventing  sleep,". — Stitches  in  the  skin,  preventing  sleep,  as  if  from  in-
sects,™.— ^Awakes  from  tension  in  the  face  at  night,^^ — Boring  in  the  tem-
ples when  awaking,' ;  pressive  pain,^ — The  symptoms  of  the  sting  improve
after  sleep,\ — Night-sleep  full  of  dreams  (third  day) ;  still  the  same,  mostly
of  travelling  (eleventh  day),  2d  dilution,";  repeated  at  every  proving,^ —
Sensation  as  of  movement  from  place  to  place,  mostly  travelling  by  rail-
road,'.— Dreams  mostly  of  journeys,^ ;  long  distances,". — Often  dreams  of
flying  far  through  the  air,'^. — [920.]  Dream  that  he  made  journeys  in
great  leaps  through  the  air,  like  a  bird,^. — Feels  like  a  bird  in  the  air ;
takes  great  leaps  in  his  dreams,*. — Plagues  himself  in  dreams  all  night,  with
a  flying  apparatus ;  tries  to  arrange  the  wings?,  which,  however,  will  not
work,'^: — Dreams  of  a  great,  hot  stove ;  was  obliged  to  walk  over  a  hot
floor ;  also,  on  dirty,  wet  roads  for  a  very  long  distance ;  then  he  came  to
a  dinner-table  where  many  people  were  assembled  (first  day),". — Frequerrt
waking  first  night,  and  dreams,  with  vexatious  care  about  various  kinds
of  business,'. — Dreams  of  a  tormenting,  active  kind,  full  of  care  and  toil,'^
— Dreams  of  many  people  who  are  quarrelling ;  one  among  them,  who  be-
comes nearly  beside  himself,  he  leads  from  the  room  by  the  arm,  whereby
he  is  calmed  (humble-bee),^*. — Disagreeable  dreams  about  fiends,'. — Dreams
she  has  pain  in  the  abdomen  and  diarrhoea  (first  night),*^ — A  young  man
dreams  that  he  is  a  girl  (R.  Brauns).

Fever. — [930.]  Strange,  inward  trembling  feeling,  as  after  a  sickness,
with  a  kind  of  shudder,  without  coldness  or  shivering ;  down  the  back,
morning ;  more  in  the  upper  half,  afternoons,  3  to  5  o'clock  (after  seven
to  nine  hours),*. — When  she  was  put  to  bed  at  noon  she  was  seized  by  a
violent  chill,  although  it  was  a  warm  summer  day,  during  which  the  face
remained  red,  and  the  body  covered  with  large,  red  spots,*. — Chill,  with
shivering,  accompanied  by  a  terrible,  racking  pain  all  through  the  head,
with  increased  prostration,*  (A.  E.  M.). — Chilliness  all  over ;  unwell  feeling,
so  that  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down,*. — Chilliness  while  sitting  still,  caused  pre-
viously by  a  slight  movement,  with  heat  in  the  face,  and  headache,  even-
ings (second  day),". — Occasional  feeling  of  chilliness,^ — Slight  chilliness,
soon  passing  ofi",  followed  by  fever  at  night,*. — Frequent  chilliness,  and  hot
hands  in  the  fourth  week,". — Chilliness  evenings,  with  yawning  and  head-
ache, and  tip  of  nose  cold  (fourth  week),**. — Chilliness,  cold  limbs,  and
nausea,*. — [940.]  Chilliness,  with  toothache,". — General  creeping  chills,
repeated  at  short  intervals ;  something  moved  over  him,  rolling  like  waves
(wasp),'. — Sudden  chills,  then  heat  and  perspiration,*. — Shaking  chills
after  thirty-six  hours  of  heat,*'. — Chill,  with  cold  fingers,  especially  those
of  the  left  hand  (evenings,  third  day),**. — *  Chilly  every  afternoon  at  3  o'doch ;
she  shudders,  worse  in  warmth ;  the  chills  run  down  the  back ;  hands  feel  as  if
dead ;  feverishly  hot  after  about  an  hour,  with  a  hoarse  cough;  heat  of  the
cheeks  arid  hands,  without  thirst ;  ceases  gradually,  but  she  feels  heavy  and
prostrate,^". — Sensation  of  cold,  without  coldness  of  the  skin,  with  ague,*'.
— Shudders,  and  diarrhoea,*. — Coldness  of  the  limbs,*. — Shuddering,  and
then  nettlerash,*. — [950.]  Cold  feet  and  burning  cheeks,*". — Cold  feet,  with
burning  toes,^ — Fever,'. — Violent  fever,'. — Hot  and  burning  sensation,  and
oppressive  feeling  all  over ;  for  several  days,'  (E.  E.  M.). — Sensation  of
heat  and  stinging  over  whole  body  (C.  C.  C.),'. — Sensation  of  heat  through


APIS.  421

the  whole  body,  without  external  sensation  of  heat ;  the  trembling  feeling,  as
formerly ;  pulse  88  ;  after  several  minutes  she  grows  dizzy  while  standing,
and  as  if  about  to  faint ;  is  compelled  to  sit ;  turns  very  pale,  and  feels  nausea
to  vomitings  after  lying  down  on  the  sofa  she  fell  asleep ;  anxious  starting
in  sleep,  with  some  cough  ;  turns  on  the  other  side,  and  sleeps  quietly  (even-
ings, soon  after  repeated  doses,  second  day),'l — Feverish,  trembling,  with
pain  in  the  abdomen,'^ — Fever  and  nettlerash  after  a  sting  in  the  hand,'.
— General  sensation  of  heat,  worse  in  the  chest  and  stomach  (first  day),''.
— [960.]  Heat,  with  headache,". — Heat  when  breathing  rapidly,''. — Heat
at  night,  with  agitation  (first  night),'.— Hot  flushes,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Heat,".
— Heat  in  the  face  and  chilliness,  evenings,". — Heat  and  difficult  breath-
on  the  footjl— The  heat  of  the  room  is  intolerable,'*. — [970.]  Burning  of
the  feet,'. — Heat  after  chilliness,  evenings,'". — Heat  at  night,  after  chilli-
ness,".— Flushes  of  heat  mixed  with  chills,'  (A.  R.  M.). — Fever-heat  in-
creasing for  thirty-six  hours,  then  a  violent  shivering  chill,  at  5  o'clock  in
the  morning,  during  which  she  felt  very  cold  herself,  but  not  so  to  others,".
— As  if  perspiration  would  break  out,*. — Perspiration  breaks  out  occasion-
ally,".— Perspiration  broke  out,  so  that  it  penetrated  the  clothing,'. — Per-
spiration now  and  then,  with  headache  and  heat,". — ^Perspiration  after
tremhlmg  and  fainting,  then  a  nettlerash,^. — [980.]  Dry  skin  alternating  with
perspiration,".

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  5  o'clock,  ague;  boring  in
temples,  when  awaking ;  pressive  pain ;  headache,  when  rising ;  pain  in  fore-
head ;  lachrymation  ;  adhering  lids ;  sticking  in  the  right  lower  lid  ;  swell-
ing of  the  eyes;  blowing  blood  from  the  nose;  dry  palate ;  mucus  in  the
mouth;  hawking  mucus;  accumulation  of  mucus  and  hawking;  pain  in  the
throat;  burning  in  chest  and  stomach;  sensation  of  soreness  in  the  abdo-
men ;  pain  in  the  abdomen  ;  after  rising,  pain  in  the  abdomen  and  urging
to  stool;  urging  to  stool  and  pain;  stool;  soft  stool;  diarrhoea;  hoarse;  when
rising,  pain  in  nape  of  neck;  crawling  on  the  knee;  drowsy;  yawning;  heat.
— (Forenoon),  Sad ;  increased  headache ;  dark  before  eyes ;  pains  in  the  eyes ;
burning  in  mouth  and  thirst;  pain  from  the  hip  toward  the  navel ;  piercing
in  the  chest ;  pressure  on  the  chest. — (From  mornings  till  3  p.m.).  Headache.
— (Afternoon),  When  stooping,  dark  before  eyes;  increased  headache;  4.
o'clock,  sudden  coryza ;  kind  of  chill  in  the  back  ;  *3  to  4  o'clock,  chilly;
itching;  itching  of  the  head. — (Evening),  Vertigo,  when  standing;  dizzy
and  weak;  vertigo  and  headache ;  headache  ;  piercing  in  the  temples  ;  pierc-
ing in  the  eyes  and  weakness ;  pain  in  the  eyes,  when  sewing ;  lachrymation ;
cold  nose;  coryza  worse;  chapping  of  the  lower  lip ;  toothache;  dry  under
the  tongue ;  pain  in  the  abdomen  ;  pain  in  the  ovaries  ;  hoarseness,  begin-
ning; cough;  chapping  of  the  hands;  feet  swollen;  faint;  sleepy;  sleepy  and
startled  ;  increased  aversion  to  cold  ;  chilliness;  chilliness  and  cold  fingers  ;
sensation  of  heat. — (Night),  Quivering  and  twitching  of  the  eyes,  worse
left ;  adhesion  of  the  eyes ;  secretion  of  mucus  from  the  eyes  in  bed  ;  aversion
and  nausea ;  disgust,  inclination  to  vomit  and  feeling  of  diarrhoea ;  short
breath  ;  sharp  pains  in  chest ;  stitches  through  chest  and  back ;  stitches  in
the  chest  and  back ;  heat. — (Before  midnight).  Cough,  that  awakes. — (Latter
part  of  night),  Restless. — (During  day),  Frequent  urinating. — (Day  and
night).  Frequent  urinating. — (Bending  head  on  painful  side).  Increased  pain
in  nape  of  neck. — (Cold  weather),  Weakness  and  chest  troubles. — (Cough-
ing), Headache. — (  Closing  eyes).  Vertigo. — (After  every  exertion  and  much
exercise),  The  prickling  returns  all  over  the  body,  the  same  as  after  the


422 APIUM  GEAVEOLENS— APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI.

sting. — {Leaning  hack,  when  Bitting),  Feeling  of  suffocation.— (Zrt/iwg'),
Weakness  in  back  ;  increased  difficulty  in  breathing ;  wishes  to  be  raised
up  ;  cannot  lie  horizontally  ;  increased  vertigo. — {Motion),  Chilliness ;  in-
creased headache ;  pain  in  shoulder  and  upper  arm.- — {Moving  head  toward
right),  Stitches  in  right  side  of  nape  of  neck. — {Pressure),  Sensitive  to  out-
ward pressure;  pain  in  abdomen;  abdomen  painful  on  exterior  pressure;
little  bunches  sensitive. — {Reading),  Headache. — {Rising,  after  sitting),
Back  as  if  beaten. — {Shaking  head).  Pain  in  occiput. — {Sitting),  Increased
vertigo ;  pain  as  if  beaten  in  lower  limbs. — {Sneezing),  Sore  feeling  in  ab-
domen.— {Speaking),  Pain,  caused  by  fatigue  in  the  larynx. — {Going  up-
stairs). Difficulty  in  breathing. — {After  long  standing),  Faint  and  dizzy ;
renewed  swelling  of  sprained  knee. — {Stooping),  Headache ;  darkness  before
eyes;  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  face. — {Stretching  in  bed),  Pain  in  ovaries.
— {Touch),  Tain  in  swollen  cheeks ;  scalp  sensitive. — {Walking),  Soles  of
feet  feel  like  cushions ;  pain  in  ovaries. — (  Warmth),  Closed  rooms,  especi-
ally if  overheated,  are  perfectly  ^intolerable  to  him,  with  fulness  and
heaviness  in  the  head,  and  rush  of  blood  ;  *headache  in  warm  room ;  cough
worse  ;  chilliness  grows  worse  ;  *makes  him  worse,  especially  in  evening,  with
some  coryza  and  cough.

Amelioration. —  {Cold  loafer),  Burning  in  palms;  wanted  his  red
face  bathed  ;  pain  and  burning  in  clitoris  and  labia ;  best  means  of  relief
after  a  sting. — {Continued  diarrhoea),  Headache. — {Exercise),  Seemed  to
bring  him  to  himself.  —  {Eating),  Soreness  and  cough. — {Eructations),
Pain  over  left  hip. — {Lying  on  the  parts).  Going  to  sleep  of  the  thighs,  etc.
— {Pressure),  *Headache. — {Rubbing),  Itching  of  skin. — {Sitting  up).  Pain
in  abdomen. — {Sleep),  Symptoms  of  the  sting. — (  Walking),  Bruised  feeling
of  the  lower  limbs;  vertigo.


APIUM  GRAVEOLENS.

A.  graveolens,  L. (Celery.) Nat.  order,  Umbelliferse.

Authority.  Beckwith  (O.  M.  and  S.  Rep.,  3, 116),  took  twenty  and  sixty
drops  of  tincture  from  the  seeds.

Stomach. — Unpleasant  feelings  in  stomach,  with  belching ;  the  regurgi-
tation tasting  of  the  celery  (within  one  hour,  after  20  drops). ^Heartburn
(soon  after  60  drops). — Spitting  up  food  (soon  after  60  drops). — Gone  feel-
ing in  pit  of  stomach,  lasting  for  hours,  and  partially  relieved  by  eating
(after  60  drops).


APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI.

Insect  belonging  to  the  Aphidae.  The  plant  lice  from  Chenopodium
glaucum.

Authority. Dr.  Meyer,  Archive,  15,  2,  179,  proved  the  third  dilution.

jCfeat?.— Headache  violent,  pressing,  especially  in  the  forehead,  worse
on  each  movement ;  it  feels  as  if  the  brain  swashed  hither  and  thither ;  now
and  then  a  deepseated  pain  in  the  occiput  (ninth  day).

Ei/en. — Burning  of  the  lids,  for  several  successive  evenings.

Ears. — Painful  tearing  transient  alternately  in  each  ear  (first  day).

Nose. — Eruption  on  the  right  nostril  and  left  upper  lip,  with  burning
pain,  as  iu  coryza  (second  day). — Sneezing  (second  day). — Fluent  coryza


APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI.  423

(second  and  third  days). — Fluent  coryza  in  the  evening,  with  a  pulse  of
85  (third  day). — Fluent  coryza,  with  burning  at  the  nostrils  (fifth  day). —
Coryza,  with  burning  biting  on  the  nostrils,  especially  on  the  septum
(seventh  day).

Face. — [10.]  Face  pale,  inclining  to  yellow  (fourth  day). — Flushes  of
heat  in  the  face,  with  confusion  of  the  head,  as  in  threatening  coryza
(seventh  day). — Great  inclination  to  sweat  in  the  face  (first  day). — Dry-
ness of  the  lips  (eighth  day). — Dry  lips  in  the  morning  (fourth  day).

Mouth, — Tearing  drawing  pain  in  a  hollow  back  tooth,  toward  noon  ;
it  gradually  increased  and  spread  to  the  other  teeth  on  the  right  side,  to
the  ear,  temple,  and  the  cheek-bones;  worse  in  bed,  and  only  relieved  by
a  general  warm  sweat,  after  some  hours  (twelfth  day). — Painful  vesicle
on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (twelfth  day). — Breath  warm  (eighth  day). — Dry-
ness of  motdh  and  throat  with  frequent  accumulation  of  mucus,  several  days.
— Increased  warmth  in  the  mouth  ;  the  breath  is  warmer  (fourth  day). —
[20.]  Inflammation  of  the  palate  (second  day). — Scraping  sensation  in  the
palate  (first  day). — Constantly  increasing  collection  of  mucus  in  the  mouth
and  throat  (fourth  day). — Profuse  accumulation  of  insipid  mucus  in  the
mouth  and  fauces  (third  day). — Increased  secretion  of  frothy  mucus  in  the
mouth  and  throat,  and  frequent  inclination  to  raise  it  by  hawking  (first
day). — Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  mouth  (of  an  unpleasant  flat  taste)  ;
frequent  hawking  from  the  throat  and  repeated  spitting  (second  day).

Throat, — Dryness  in  the  throat  causes  much  thirst  (first  day).^Burn-
ing  in  the  throat  (second  day). — Cutting  burning  sensation  in  the  whole
throat,  particularly  in  the  palate,  especially  caused  by  inspiration  (first
day). — Burning  biting  pain  in  the  soft  palate  (eleventh  day).

Stomach, — [30.]  Appetite  for  meat  and  bread  lost  (ninth  day). —
Thirst  (ninth  day). — Much  thirst  at  evening  (twelfth  day).— Frequent
eructations  of  air  tasting  of  the  food  (daily).

Abdomen, — Rumbling  of  flatus  in  the  bowels,  with  passage  of  con-
siderable (third  day). — Gurgling  of  flatus  about  with  some  passage  of  it
(fourth  day). — Fla'tus  in  the  bowels  causes  griping  (fifth  day).— Dull
griping  in  the  intestines  from  time  to  time,  as  if  a  stool  would  soon  follow,
with  passage  of  more  flatus  than  usual  (first  day). — Painful  cutting  griping
in  the  small  intestines  (fourth  day).— Frequent  colic,  griping  in  the  bowels
at  night  (first  day).

Stool  and  Anus. — [40.]  Several  inefiectual  urgings  to  stool  (in  the
rectum  and  bladder),  (eleventh  day). — Urging  to  stool,  soon  after  rising  in
the  morning,  with  a  thin,  pasty  evacuation  ;  repeated  several  times  through
the  day,  with  constantly  increasing  gripings,  burning  in  the  anus  and  urg-
ing to  stool  (second  day). — Two  thin  stools  towards  morning  with  griping
and  pressure  in  the  rectum  (tenth  day). — Stool  several  times,  thin  fluid
mucus  mixed  with  flakes  of  dark  blood,  with  griping  and  dragging  in  the
rectum,  during  the  forenoon  (ninth  day). — Stools  almost  every  hour,  with
griping  in  the  bowels,  painful  pressing  in  the  rectum,  bladder,  and  urethra
(ninth  day). — Stool  thin,  pasty,  frothy,  with  burning  in  the  anus  (sixth  day).
— Stool  thin,  pasty,  acrid,  with  burning  pain  in  the  anus  (fifth  day). — Stool
thin,  pasty,  preceded  by  griping  in  the  bowels,  accompanied  by  burning  of
the  anus,  and  urging  to  repeated  evacuations  (third  day).

TIrinary  Organs, — Irritation  in  the  urethra,  as  from  something
acrid,  compels  frequent  urinating  (sixth  day). — Burning  in  the  orifice  of
the  urethra,  on  urinating  (second  and  third  days). — [50.]  Burning  in  ure-
thra (sixth  day). — ^Urine  burns  when  passing  through  the  urethra  (ninth


424  APOCYNUM  ANDROSJSMIFOLIUM.

day). — Frequent  and  profuse  urination  ;  urine  deep  yellow,  and  slightly
foaming  (fifth  day). — Urine  frothy,  brownish-red,  deposits  a  thick  yellow-
ish sediment  (twelfth  day).

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  right  side
of  the  larynx,  externally  (first  day). — Irritation  in  the  larynx,  as  from  a
burning  acid,  which  sometimes  causes  a  cough  and  frequently  hawking
(seventh  day). — Irritation  to  cough,  in  the  region  of  the  larynx  (second
day). — Constant  irritation  in  the  larynx  to  hawk  frequently,  provokes  a
cough,  which  expectorates  mucus ;  the  irritation  is  a  tickling  burning,
sometimes  a  stinging  sensation  (fourth  day). — Burning,  scrapy  feeling  in
the  larynx  (fifth  day). — Tickling,  burning  sensation  in  the  larynx  (fifth
day). — [60.]  Violent  sneezing,  which  pains  the  larynx  (fifth' day). — Voice
sometimes  hoarse  and  rough,  cleared  by  much  hawking  (fifth  day). — Dry
cough,  caused  by  irritation  in  the  throat  (fourth  day). — Cough  from  irrita-
tion in  the  larynx,  worse  from  4  to  6  p.m.  (seventh  day).

Heart  and,  Pulse. — Pulse  accelerated  fninth  day). — Pulse  more
accelerated  and  tense  (fourth  day). — Pulse  accelerated,  forenoon,  with  sen-
sation of  burning  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,  and  inclination  to  sweat  in
them  (third  d;iy).

Extremities  in  General. — Limbs  pain  as  if  bruised,  with  frequent
drawing  tearing  pains,  from  above  the  knee  down  to  the  foot,  especially  on
the  tibia  and  in  the  soles  (ninth  to  thirteenth  days).

Lower  Extremities. — Tired  feeling  in  the  legs,  especially  in  the
knees  (thirteenth  day). — Feet  cold  up  to  the  knees  (ninth  day). — [70.]
Stinging  burning  pain  in  the  corns,  alternating  between  the  little  toes
(first  day).

Generalities. — Feeling  of  fatigue  (fourth  day). — Very  weak  and
prostrated  at  evening  (tenth  day). — Drawing  tearing  pains,  here  and  there,
especially  above  the  knee  (eleventh  day). — Pains,  drawing  tearing,  in  vari-
ous parts  of  the  body,  shoulders,  arms,  ears,  temples,  hollow  teeth  (ninth
day). — Feeling  of  irritation  or  congestion  in  all  the  pelvic  viscera ;  desire
to  urinate,  to  a  stool,  voluptuous  irritation  in  the  prepuce,  pressure  and
urging  in  the  bladder  (eighth  day).

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleepless  night  (ninth  and  tenth  days). —
Voluptuous  dreams,  and  two  emissions  (seventh  day).

Fever. — Frequent  chilliness  over  the  whole  body,  especially  the  back
(daily). — Chills  run  up  and  down  the  back  (ninth  day).


APOCYNUM  ANDROS^MIFOLIUM.

Nat.  order,  Apocynacese.  Common  name,  Spreading  dogbane.  Prepa-
ration, Tincture  from  the  root.

Authoritie.?.  Dr.  J.  Henry,  Phil.  J.  of  Hom.,  3,  368.  Provings  with  50
to  1800  drops  of  the  tincture.  One  symptom  (No.  28)  from  Attomyr  N.
Archive,  1,  1.

Head. — !iMuch  pain  all  over  the  head  (400  drops). — Heat  of  head  and
neck  (500  drops). — Great  fulness  and  pain  in  the  head,  of  an  indescribable
character  (100  drops). — Pains  and  stiffness  in  the  back  of  the  head  and
neck  (200  drops). — Pulsating  pain  in  back  of  the  head,  and  between  the
right  hand  and  elbow  (350  drops).

Nose. — Great  sneezing  (450  drops). — Great  itching  and  irritation  in
left  nostril  (450  drops). — Everything  smelled  like  honey  (150  drops).


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.  425

Face. — Twitching  of  the  face  (450  drops). — [10.]  Itching  and  burning
of  the  face  (400  drops). — Violent  pain  in  left  zygomatic  process  (500
drops).

Month. — Pain  of  all  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw,  left  side  (150  drops).—
Most  delightful  taste  in  the  mouth  (150  drops).

Stomach. — Some  efi'ort  to  vomit  (650  drops). — Vomiting,  purging
(1800  drops).

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  left  groin,  of  a  shooting  character  (500
drops).

Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  with  much  pain  arid  rumbling;  only
two  evacuations,  but  copious  and  affording  much  relief  (350  drops). — Four
bilious  evacuations  in  one  day  (650  drops). — Ten  bilious  evacuations  in
one  day  (650  drops). — [20.]  Painful  bilious  diarrhcea  (250  drops). — Con-
stipation of  the  bowels  (100  drops).

TJvinury  Orf/ans.- — Frequent  passing  of  clear  urine  (400  drops). —
Profuse  flow  of  clear  urine  (350  drops).

Sexual  Organs. — Profuse  menstruation,  lasting  eight  days,  with
violent  pressing  pain  (550  drops).

Respiratory  Apjjaratus. — Dull,  heavy  pain  when  breathing,
seeming  to  go  from  above  downward  (200  drops).

Neck  and  Sack. — Stiffness  of  the  neck  (400  drops). — Pain  increased
in  back  of  neck  and  extending  to  front  (650  drops).

Extremities  in  C?e»?erai.— Swelling  of  hands  and  feet  (from
fumes  of  the  juice  of  the  plant),  (Attorayr,  N.  Archiv.,  1, 1, 181). — Much
pain  in  knee  and  right  shoulder  (150  drops;. — [30.]  Most  violent  pains  in
all  the  joints  (450  drops).

Upper  Extremities. — Pains  severe  above  each  wrist  (650  drops).

Lower  Extretnities. —  Cramps  in  the  bottoms  of  the  feet  (50  drops).
— Cramps  and  burning  in  the  bottoms  of  the  feet,  most  severely  in  the
right  loot,  with  severe  pain  in  the  joint  of  the  left  big  toe,  and  heat  in  the
right  leg  and  knee  (100  drops). —  Violent  heat  in  the  bottoms  of  the  feet
(50  drops). — Tingling  pain  in  his  toes;  sharp  pains  in  middle  toe  (150
drops).

Generalities. — Trembling  of  the  body  (150  drops). — Great  prostra-
tion and  trembling  of  the  body  (1800  drops). — Lassitude  (500  drops). —
Much  lassitude  (400  drops). — [40.]  Swollen  sensations  of  the  face  and
body  (300  drops). — Heaviness  of  the  body,  with  great  desire  to  sleep  (300
drops).— Pains  in  diflferent  parts  of  the  body  (150  drops). — Flying  pains
in  different  parts  of  the  system  (300  drops). — Pain  on  turning  to  the  left
side  (400  drops).

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Sleep  not  refreshing  (500  drops). — Inability
to  sleep  at  night  (500  drops). — Violent  dreams  (500  drops).

Skin. — Violent  itching  of  body  and  face  (300  drops).

Fever. — Chilliness  (500  drops). — [50.]  Profuse  sweating  of  the  whole
body  (50  drops).

Conditions, — Aggravation. — {When  breathing).  Pains  from  above
downward. — (Ore  turning  to  left  side).  Pain.


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

A.  cannabinum,  L. Nat.  order,  Apocynaceaj. Common  name,  Indian
hemp.


426  APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

Author ities.'f  1,  Black ;  2,  Peters ;  3,  Marcy ;  4,  Knapp  (took  infusion
of  the  powdered  root  in  warm  water  (15  grains  to  cupful),  two  tablespoon-
fuls  every  fifteen  minutes).

3Iind. — *  Bewildered,''.

Head,. — Unusual  heaviness  of  the  head,  with  aching  pains  in  the  small
of  the  back  and  limbs  (evening,  eighth  day),^ — Headache,*.

Eyes. — Woke  early  in  the  morning,  with  severe  irritation  of  the  left
eye,  as  if  several  sharp  grains  of  sand  were  in  it,  attended  with  much  heat,
irritation,  and  redness;  after  lasting  several  hours,  this  disappeared  as  sud-
denly as  it  came  oh,l

Nose. — Without  any  other  sign  of  having  taken  cold,  he  would  wake
up  in  the  morning  with  the  nostrils  and  throat  filled  with  thick,  well-
concocted  yellow  mucus,  as  if  he  had  had  a  severe  catarrh  for  at  least
seven  or  ten  days,  and  which  had  skipped  its  first  stage  and  commenced  in
the  second,^

Mouth. — Dryness  of  mouth  on  waking  (fifth  morning),'. — Increased
secretion  of  mucus  and  saliva  from  the  mouth  and  fauces,  which  kept  me
constantly  spitting,*.

Throat. — The  bitter  subacrid  taste  was  persistent  in  the  fauces,*.

Stomach. — *  Thirst  on  waking,'.— [10.]  Slight  nausea  (fifteen  min-
utes),*.— Nausea,'. — Eiforts  to  vomit  (thirty  minutes),*. — Nausea,  and  even
vomiting,^ — After  sleeping  an  hour,  woke  with  extreme  sickness,  followed
by  two  spells  of  full  vomiting  (two  and  a  half  hours),*. — Vomited  slightly
(one  and  a  quarter  hours),*. — On  waking,  felt  a  sinking  at  the  stomach,'.
— Occasionally,  a  sense  of  sinking  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,^

Abdomen,. — Decided  distension  of  the  abdomen,  especially  after  a  mod-
erate dinner;  all  the  sense  of  fulness  seemed  about  the  stomach,  liver,  and
spleen,  while  the  lower  bowels  did  not  appear  more  flatulent  than  com-
mon,^.— Occasionally,  some  flatulence  and  slightly  uneasy  sensations  in  the
bowels,^

Stool  and,  Anus. — :[20,]  Occasionally,  it  seemed  as  if  diarrhoea
would  occur,  but  it  did  not,^ — It  proved  a  gentle  cathartic;  "I  felt  the
stimulus  of  it  passing  onward  into  the  intestines ;"  a  gentle  movement  the
next  morning  without  any  griping,  and  the  bowels  were  kept  soluble  for  a
day  or  two,*. — Loose,  but  not  very  copious,  bilious  stools,^ — Increased  in-
clination towards  constipation,^. — *  Evacuations  exceedingly  scanty,''. — Bowels
sluggish,  but  fseces  not  hard  or  costive,".

Urinary  Organs. — There  seemed  to  be  but  little  expulsive  power
about  the  bladder,^ — The  little  water  that  was  passed  flowed  as  easily  as  if
it  were  oil,^ — Copious  secretion  of  urine,'. —  Urine  augmented,*. —  [30.]
Urinary  secretion  increased  in  quantity,  and  much  lighter  in  color  than  in
health  (eighth  day),'. — ^Diminished  urine  (sixth  day),'. — *Dedded  scanti-
ness of  the  urinej'. — *  Urine  diminished  to  one-third  the  usual  amount,  without
pain  or  uneasiness  about  the  kidneys  or  bladder ;  on  the  contrary,  these
organs  seemed  remarkably  comfortable ;  they  seemed  simply  torpid,'. —
Urine  generally  of  a  light,  golden,  sherry-yellow  color,  not  depositing  any
sediment  from  exposure  to  cold,''.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — *8hort  dry  cough,". — Once  during  the
evening,  and  twice  upon  diiferent  nights,  sudden  and  violent  attacks  of

t  No.  1,  from  Lond.  Med.  Gaz.,  1833  (A.  H.  Z.,  4,  370) ;  2,  N.  A.  J.,  4,  529;  3,
"  Petere's  Elements;"  4,  An  Imiugural  l)issertation  on  Indian  Hemp,  etc.,  to  the
JefiFerson  Med.  Coll.,  by  M.  L.  Knapp,  1825.


APOMORPHINE.  427

bard  and  frequent  coughing,  annoying  him  for  at  least  one  or  two  hours,
then  disappearing  without  leaving  a  trace  of  cold  behind,^. — Scanty  expec-
toration of  white  mucus,'. — Irresistible  disposition  to  sigh,'. — *Short  and
unsatisfactory  respiration,^.— [^0.1  *Sense  of  oppression  about  the  epigas-
trium and  chest,  several  times  so  great  that  there  was  the  greatest  difficulty  in
getting  breath  enough  to  smoke  a  cigar  or  to  speak  with  any  comfort,  and  this
happened  after  lighter  meals  than  ordinary,''.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse,  between  attacks  of  vomiting,  45  (two
and  a  half  hours),*. — Pulse  50  (one  and  a  half  hours),*.

Neck  and  Sack. — Slight  soreness  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  when
bringing  the  muscles  into  action,'.

Lower  UjXtreiwities.—lia.vA  aching  several  times  in  both  knees,
sufficiently  severe  to  make  him  fear  that  an  attack  of  inflammatory  rheu-
matism was  coming  on,^.

Generalities. — General  restlessness  on  going  to  bed,'. — Weak  and
sleepy,  and  went  to  bed  (one  and  a  quarter  hours),*. — Sense  of  general  but
transient  debility,^ — Though  it  diminished  the  pulse,  it  produced  no  death-
like prostration,*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — On  going  to  bed,  desire  to  sleep,  without  the
ability  to  do  so,'. — [50.]  Great  restlessness  and  little  sleep  (fifth  night),'. —
Drowsiness,*.

Fever. — On  going  to  bed,  unusual  heat  of  the  skin,'. — Sweat,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Early,  on  waking,  irrita-
tion of  left  eye,  etc. ;  on  waking,  nostrils  and  throat  filled  with  mucus  ;  on
waking,  dryness  of  mouth ;  thirst;  nausea;  sinking  at  stomach. — (Evening),
Heaviness  of  head,  etc. ;  attack  of  cough. — {Night),  Attack  of  cough. —
{Going  to  bed).  General  restlessness;  desire  to  sleep,  etc.;  heat  of  skin. —
{After  dinner),  Distension  of  abdomen. — {Exerting  muscles  of  the  part),
Soreness  in  region  of  kidneys.


APOMORPHINE.

A  substance  obtained  from  morphine  (differing  only  from  morphine  in
having  one  less  equivalent  of  water).  Formula,  CH^NO,.  (Morphine  is
C„H„N0,)

Authority.  J.  B.  Victor  Bourgeois,  de  L'Apomorphine,  un  nouvel  emet-
ique,  monograph,  Paris,  1874.

Case  I.  Injection  of  three  milligrammes  of  Apomoiphine;  no  result. — Octo-
ber 26,  9.20  A.M.  M.  Lachize  injected  into  the  outer  portion  of  my  left  arm
three  milligrammes  of  Apomorphine.  I  placed  a  thermometer  in  the  axilla.
— 9.20.  Pulse  60,  respiration  16,  thermometer  36.8°. — 9.23.  No  especial  sen-
sation ;  pulse  72,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  16. — 9.25.  *Violent  incli-
nation to  vomit;  feeling  of  heat  all  over,  but  especially  in  the  head ;  face
congested  ;  pulse  92,  thermometer  36.9°,  respiration  20. — 9.28.  No  change ;
pulse  96,  thermometer  36.9°,  respiration  22. — 9.30.  Pulse  slightly  irregu-
lar; less  nausea;  pulse  80,  thermometer  36.9°,  respiration  20. — 9.33.  Pulse
84,  thermometer  36.9°,  respiration  20.— 9.35.  Pulse  still  irregular ;  nausea
entirely  ceased  ;  no  particular  symptom  ;  drowsiness;  respiration  calm  and
regular;  pulseSO,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  16.— 9.40.  Sleep. — 10.15.
Awoke ;  no  more  nausea ;  no  headache ;  no  fatigue ;  pulse  64,  thermometer


428  APOMORPHINE.

36.8°,  respiration  14 ;  breakfasted  at  11  o'clock  without  feeling  anything
abnormal.

Case  II.  Injection  of  six  milligrammes  Apomorphine ;  vomiting. — Novem-
ber 6.  M.  Lachize  made  another  injection  of  six  milligrammes  Apomor-
phine into  the  lower  and  outer  portion  of  the  left  arm,  and  conducted
subsequent  observations  as  carefully  as  before.^9.40  A.M.  Pulse  76,  ther-
mometer 36.9°,  respiration  15. — 9.43.  Pulse  80,  thermometer  36.9°,  respi-
ration 15. — 9.45.  Violent  inelination  to  vomit ;  full,  regular  pulse  ;  pandicu-
lations; pulse  100,  thermometer  36.9°,  respiration  18. — 9.48.  Retching;
pulse  and  breathing  irregular ;  pulse  104,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration
24. — 9.50.  Easy  vomiting ;  same  irregular  pulse ;  pulse  94,  thermometer
36.8°,  respiration  20. — 9.53.  Pulse  96,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  21 ;
more  vomiting ;  condition  the  same. — 9.55.  Vomiting  ceased ;  still  some
nausea ;  continued  irregularity  of  pulse  and  respiration ;  pulse  94,  ther-
mometer 36.7°,  respiration  18. — 10  o'clock.  Quite  quiet;  drowsiness;  pulse
76,  thermometer  36.7°,  respiration  12;  quiet  sleep  for  one  hour;  on  awak-
ing, pulse  68,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  8 ;  ate  my  next  meal  without
any  uneasiness. — Next  day,  and  several  times  afterward,  I  took  a  subcuta-
neous injection  of  one  centigramme  Apomorphine ;  it  caused  no  pain,  and
no  local  symptoms;  the  resulting  phenomena  were  the  same  as  before,  only
after  injecting  ten  or  twelve  milligrammes  the  vomiting  came  on  in  four  or
five  minutes;  it  was  more  violent.

Case  III.  Encouraged  by  the  experiments  upon  animals,  I  took  an  in-
jection Dec.  10,  1873,  of  three  centigrammes  Apomorphine,  in  presence  of
Drs.  Zuber  and  Graudjax,  on  the  outer  portion  of  the  right  arm,  the  left  arm
being  bandaged. — 2.20  p.m.  Pulse  66,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  14. —
2.22.  Pulse  104,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  19 ;  vomiting,  without  pre-
vioiis  naiisea,  took  place  two  minutes  after  the  injection  ;  sudden  sensation
of  heat  running  all  over  the  body,  and  lasting  about  a  minute,  followed  by
vomiting  ;  this  vomiting  lasted  three  minutes ;  during  this  time,  pulse  100
to  102,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  20  to  24. — 2.26.  Extreme  fatigue;
tried  to  get  up,  but  could  not ;  pulse  84,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  16.
— 2.27.  No  change ;  pulse  78,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  15. — 2.28.
Nausea;  pulse  96,  thermometer  36.8°,  respiration  18. — 2.29.  Some  attacks
of  vomiting ;  violent  headache. — 2.32.  Quiet ;  drowsiness ;  pulse  98,  ther-
mometer 37°,  respiration  17. — 2.33.  Pulse  98,  thermometer  37°,  respiration
17;  so  much  fatigued  that  the  eyes  closed  involuntarily. — 2.36.  Nausea;
pulse  104,  thermometer  37°,  respiration  16. — 2.38.  Less  copious  vomiting
than  before ;  invincible  need  of  repose. — 2.40.  Slept  in  a  chair. — 4  o'clock.
Ached  with  fatigue ;  no  other  bad  feeling ;  no  headache ;  pulse  80,  ther-
mometer 37°,  respiration  15 ;  at  dinner,  less  appetite  than  usual.  The
symptoms  observed  in  these  cases  resemble  those  which  follow  the  use  of
all  emetics  in  nauseating  doses ;  there  was  an  unpleasant  feeling  at  the
prsecordia;  congestion  of  the  face  and  headache;  then  the  conjunctiva  be-
came injected  ;  there  was  copious  salivation,  and  after  a  certain  interval  a
sense  of  considerable  fatigue.  After  emetics  the  symptoms  were  the  same,
but  more  intense.  The  stage  of  nausea,  in  my  own  case,  was  always  very
brief,  yet  recognizable.  The  others,  to  whom  the  drug  was  administered,
had,  in  general,  the  same  symptoms.  Dr.  Zuber,  aide-major  at  Val-de-
Grace,  after  two  subcutaneous  injections,  felt  each  time  an  intense  head-
ache ;  he  was  dizzy,  and  his  limbs  much  fatigued.  The  feeling  of  weakness
was  very  well  marked  in  one  of  our  friends,  an  exceedingly  robust  indi-
vidual, aged  30 ;  a  copious  sweat  covered  his  face,  which  was  pale  instead


APOMORPHINE.  429

of  florid  as  usual ;  after  each  of  several  trials  he  had  a  violent  attack  of
dyspnoea,  perhaps  due  to  a  long-established  organic  afiection  of  the  heart.
Complete  recovery  generally  took  place  in  an  hour  or  two  after  the  injec-
tion ;  usually,  also,  the  vomiting  was  succeeded  by  invincible  drowsiness.

Case  IV.  Injection  of  one  centigramme  Apomorphine.  Vomiting  in  ten
minutes. — Man,  72  years  old,  entered  the  Eothschild  Hospital  December
24 ;  he  had  long  labored  under  chronic  bronchial  catarrh,  with  pulmonary
emphysema ;  at  present  there  is  considerable  dyspnoea  and  difficult  expec-
toration ;  the  patient  is  obliged  to  sleep  sitting  up.  The  Apomorphine  was
tractions of  the  diaphragm  and  thoracic  walls,  and  promoting  discharge
from  the  lungs;  at  11  o'clock  he  received  an  injection  of  one  centigramme
Chlorohydrate  of  Apomorphine  into  the  arm  at  its  dorsal  aspect.  Solution
fresh,  limpid,  colorless ;  pulse  80,  respiration  28  (the  temperature  was  not
taken,  our  previous  observations  having  convinced  us  of  the  uselessness  of
doing  so). — 11.5.  Pulse  92,  regular ;  respiration  28  ;  patient  made  no  com-
plaint; yawning. — 11.10.  Pulse  108,  rather  irregular ;  respiration  32 ;  the
patient,  without  previous  nausea,  was  attacked  by  vomiting,  which  lasted
about  two  minutes ;  it  consisted  of  mucus,  and  was  quite  scanty ;  no  facial
congestion;  no  sweat. — 11.13.  Pulse  70,  respiration  24. — 11.15.  Pulse  88,
respiration  24;  renewed  but  ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit.— 11.20.  Pulse  76,
respiration  20 ;  the  patient  complained  of  great  fatigue ;  he  breathed  more
easily,  and  said  he  felt  quite  sleepy  ;  in  a  few  minutes  he  sank  back  on  his
pillow  and  went  to  sleep;  while  asleep,  11.45,  pulse  76,  regular;  respira-
tion 18  to  20. — 1  o'clock.  The  patient  is  awake;  pulse  and  respiration  the
same.  Having  so  far  confirmed  the  beneficial  eifects  of  the  medicine,  we
intended  to  administer  it  again  next  day,  increasing  the  dose  to  fifteen  mil-
ligrammes, but  the  patient  seemed  so  much  depressed  that  we  thought  it
best  not  to  risk  the  experiment ;  the  injection  caused  no  pain,  and  no  sub-
sequent irritation.

Case  V.  Injection  of  one  centigramme  Apomorphine ;  vomiting  in  six  min-
utes.— Young  man,  aged  24,  under  treatment  for  a  febrile,  gastric  difficulty,
which  had  lasted  three  days;  robust  constitution  ;  general  health  excellent;
tongue  thickly  coated  ;  headache ;  no  diarrhoea ;  no  gurgling,  or  abdomi-
nal tenderness. — 10.20  a.m.  One  centigramme  Apomorphine  injected  into
left  arm  ;  same  solution  as  in  preceding  case ;  pulse  92,  respiration  14,  morn-
ing temperature  38.2°.— 10.22.  Pulse  108,  respiration  15.-10.25.  Pulse
120,  small,  regular ;  .respiration  15;  nausea;  face  congested  and  moist;
hiccough. — 10.26.  Pulse  120,  respiration  20 ;  copious,  slimy  vomiting  now
set  in  and  lasted  one  and  a  half  minutes. — 10.28.  Pulse  88,  respiration  15;
the  patient  was  quiet  for  three  or  four  minutes ;  he  complained  of  weak-
ness ;  then  nausea  returned  ;  the  hiccough  ceased. — 10.32.  Pulse  104,  respi-
ration 22 ;  renewed  vomiting,  almost  as  copious  as  at  first,  but  more  painful ;
it  lasted  two  or  three  minutes. — 10.38.  A  third  vomiting ;  scanty  ;  patient's
face  covered  with  sweat ;  much  prostrated,  and  complains  of  great  fatigue  ;
after  this  he  lies  quiet,  and  soon  falls  asleep. — 10.40.  Pulse  84,  strong  and
regular;  respiration  10. — 1  o'clock.  Patient  awake;  no  further  effects
from  the  medicine  ;  says  he  feels  much  relieved  ;  his  headache,  he  asserts,
has  quite  ceased ;  pulse  96,  thermometer  38.6°,  respiration  14.  No  local
symptom.  Next  morning,  patient  much  the  same ;  fever  less  ;  scarcely  any
headache ;  tongue  still  coated ;  some  diarrhceic  stools  in  the  evening  are
rather  attributable  to  his  complaint  than  to  the  Apomorphine.

Case  VI. Woman  with  gastric  trouble. 1st.  Dose  of  fifteen  milligrammes


430  APOMORPHINE.

given  by  the  mouth;  no  effect.  2d.  Administration  of  two  centigrammes;
vomiting  in  eight  minutes. — Woman,  aged  23  years ;  has  a  child  three  years
old;  sound  constitution  ;  usual  health  good  ;  a  patient  since  the  day  before.
We  saw  her  at  9  A.m.  ;  the  tongue  is  thickly  coated,  and  shows  the  marks
of  the  teeth ;  intense  headache ;  blue  circles  around  eyes ;  skin  hot  and
moist ;  constipation  for  three  days  ;  pulse  100,  thermometer  38.6°,  respira-
tion 16. — At  9.30  we  gave  her  fifteen  milligrammes  of  Chlorohydrate  of
Apomorphine  in  thirty  grammes  of  water  (an  extemporaneous  preparation).
— 9.35.  Pulse  108,  respiration  16. — 9.40.  Pulse  116,  respiration  16 ;  some
nausea. — 9.45.  No  change.— 9.50.  Pulse  108,  respiration  14  to  16;  nausea
ceased. — 10  o'clock.  Pulse  100,  respiration  14.  From  this  time  patient  felt
as  before ;  no  inclination  to  vomit.  The  medicine  seemed  without  effect.
— Next  day,  no  change;  fever  quite  considerable;  evening  temperature
39.2°,  morning  temperature  38.4°  ;  no  stool ;  tongue  coated ;  inclination
to  vomit. — 9  a.m.  Pulse  96,  respiration  14;  twenty  milligrammes  Apomor-
phine taken  by  the  mouth ;  same  preparation  as  yesterday. — 9.5.  Pulse
112,  respiration  16  ;  nausea. — 9.8.  Pulse  120,  respiration  22 ;  copious  bil-
ious vomiting. — 9.10.  Pulse  92,  quiet;  respiration  20. — 9.15.  Renewed
vomiting,  less  copious  than  at  first.- — 9.20.  Pulse  92,  quiet ;  respiration  16.
— 9.30.  Quite  quiet,  but  no  sleep  ;  patient  feels  relieved  ;  headache,  which
before  the  first  vomiting  was  most  intense,  has  now  almost  entirely  ceased.
— 11  o'clock.  Pulse  92,  thermometer  386°,  respiration  14 ;  no  movement
of  the  bowels  during  the  day ;  at  night  one  very  difiicult  stool. — Next
morning,  although  the  tongue  was  less  coated  and  the  headache  better,  a
results  from  a  dose  of  three  centigrammes  Apomorphine.

Case  VII.  (Communicated  by  Dr.  Zuber.)  Haemoptysis  from  tubercle.
Injection  of  three  centigrammes  Apomorphine ;  copious  vomiting  in  four  min-
utes.— Leon  S.,  second-class  trooper  in  the  second  regiment  of  artillery,  23
years  old,  of  mean  appearance,  was  attacked,  on  the  22d  December  last,
with  a  troublesome  hsemoptysis.  When  I  saw  him  it  had  lasted  four
hours ;  the  blood  raised  was  bright  red,  frothy,  almost  pure,  and  quite
abundant  (four  hundred  or  five  hundred  grammes)  ;  cold  fomentations  had
been  applied  to  his  chest,  and  he  had  taken  two  tablespoonfuls  of  salt;
pulse  frequent,  104.  It  was  necessary  to  ai-rest  the  bleeding  as  soon  as
possible.  I  thought  of  resorting  to  the  use  of  emetics,  so  highly  recom-
mended in  such  cases,  and  I  selected  Apomorphine,  whose  properties  as  a
speedy  emetic  made  it  particularly  applicable. — At  5  p.m.  I  injected  under
the  skin  quite  a  large  dose  of  Apomorphine,  three  centigrammes  of  slightly
altered  solution  (colored  light-green)  ;  the  patient  went  on  coughing,  and
at  each  paroxysm  he  brought  up  blood  having  the  same  appearance  as
before. — 5.4.  Abundant  vomiting  of  food,  without  previous  nausea ;  this
lasted  about  two  minutes ;  then  came  a  period  of  quiet,  when  the  cough  no
longer  racked  the  patient ;  in  half  an  hour  the  vomiting  ceased  ;  the  pa-
tient was  extremely  feeble,  but  the  means  employed  appeared  to  have  done
good  service ;  he  coughed  only  at  long  intervals,  and  the  expectorated
blood  became  less  and  less. — Next  day,  there  was  hardly  a  trace  of  blood
in  the  sputa ;  haemoptysis  was  probably  owing  to  a  tuberculous  induration
at  the  apex  of  the  right  lung ;  no  local  eflTect.

Case  VIII.  (Communicated  by  Dr.  Zuber.)  Angina  tonsillaris.  Injec-
tion of  two  centigrammes  Apomorphine ;  vomiting  in  three  or  four  minutes. —
M.  T.,  sculptor  ;  sick  for  three  or  four  days  with  acute  tonsillitis ;  he  was
very  subject  to  angina. At  Rome,  where  he  was  an  art  student,  he  had


AQUA  MARINA.  431

several  attacks,  one  of  which,  of  a  phlegmonous  nature,  caused  him  much
suffering.  Moreover,  during  a  residence  in  the  Campagna,  he  contracted
an  obstinate  intermittent,  which  still  lingered,  and  imparted  to  the  fever
accompanying  his  angina  a  decidedly  remittent  type;  the  tonsils  are  en-
tirely swollen,  they  greatly  impede  respiration,  and  deglutition  is  almost
impossible.  I  made  two  free  incisions  into  each  tonsil,  with  a  view  of  de-
pleting them  ;  and,  at  last,  to  aid  this  effect,  I  thought  of  administering
Apomorphine,  since  it  was  exceedingly  difficult  for  the  patient  to  get  down
a  dose  of  emetic.  I  injected,  accordingly,  two  centigrammes  of  a  recent
solution  ;  nausea  came  on  in  three  minutes,  followed  by  vomiting,  which
the  condition  of  the  pharynx  rendered  very  difficult  and  painful.  The
vomitings,  which  were  quite  frequent,  ceased  in  half  an  hour.  As  I  an-
ticipated, the  muscular  contractions  strongly  favored  the  escape  of  blood
from  the  engorged  tonsils,  through  the  previous  scarifications,  and  the  pa-
draught  containing  seventy-five  centigrammes  of  quinine. — Next  day,  there
was  considerable  improvement ;  fever  less  intense  ;  the  tonsils,  though  still
much  enlarged,  now  allowed  air  and  warm  drinks  to  pass  easily.  M.  T.
considered  himself  cured,  and  could  not  sufficiently  praise  the  new  emetic.
"  At  Rome,"  he  said,  "  they  vomited  me  a  great  deal,  for  they  used  to  pre-
cede quinine  by  an  emetic,  but  the  effect  was  never  so  speedy.  Here  the
business  is  over  before  ordinary  emetics  would  begin  to  operate."


AQUA  MARINA  (SEA-WATER).

Authority.  C.  Wesselhoeft,  Trans.  Am.  Inst,  of  Horn.,  1871,  sec.  2,  p.
178,  four  provers.

Head. — Acute,  paroxysmal,  neuralgic  pain  in  right  anterior  portion
of  head  all  the  afternoon  and  evening  (from  inhalation  by  atomizer),'. —
Acute,  tensive,  neuralgic  pain  above  right  frontal  portion  of  head  (from
inhalation  by  an  atomizer),\ — Severe  neuralgic  pains  down  right  temple,
and  above  right  frontal  protuberance,  very  acute,  and  vanishing  without  a
trace  ;  appearing  after  ten  or  thirty  minutes  in  left  side  of  neck  (near  edge
of  trapezius  muscle),  (immediately  from  inhalation  by  an  atomizer),'.

Ears. — Stinging  pain  (transient  Stitches),  in  right  ear  in  the  evening,'.

Face. — Faceache  on  left  side  of  upper  and  lower  jaw,  extending  under
lower  jaw  to  right  side.  The  pain  was  acute,  like  toothache. — Cold  water
was  intolerable  (4th  dil.),^

Throat. — Sore  throat,  with  sensation  of  foreign  substance  in  throat
(5th  dil.),*. — Sensation  as  if  a  small  substance  were  in  the  throat,  not  unlike
a  hair  or  fishbone,  tickling  and  urging  to  swallow,  and  causing  a  desire  to
cough,  but  not  benefited  by  coughing  (5th  dil.),*. — Pain  on  swallowing,
extending  into  ear  and  temples  (4th  diI.),^

Stomach. — Nausea,  and  nauseous  sensation  in  stomach  and  abdomen,
with  eructation  of  wind  for  two  hours. (From  a  glassful  of  sea-water),'.

Conditions, — Aggravations. — (Afternoon  and  evening),  Neuralgic
pain  in  anterior  portion  of  head. — {Evening),  Pain  in  right  ear. — (Cold
water),  Faceache.


432  "AQUA  PETRA."


"AQUA  PETRA."

"  The  mineral  springs  of  Chase  and  Brittingham."

Authority.  Dr.  D.  S.  Kimball,  Phil.  J.  of  Hom.,  2,  615 ;  provings  with
the  evaporated  residue  of  the  water.

J7e«<?.-^Headache,  with  fever  in  the  afternoon  (fourth  day). — Itching
and  scaliness  of  the  scalp. — Itching  and  scaliness  of  the  scalp,  afternoons
and  evenings.

Eyes. — Mucous  discharge  from  the  eyes. — Burning,  smarting  of  the
eyes,  especially  the  margins  of  the  lids. — Aching  pain  through  the  eyes  and
orbits,  increased  by  motion  and  the  open  air,  or  sunlight ;  relieved  by
quietude. — Photophobia.

JEars, — Itching  in  the  ears. — Snapping  in  the  right  ear,  when  chewing.

Nose. — [10.]  Blood  in  the  nose,  frequently. — Dryness  of  the  nostrils.

Face. — Itching  and  scaliness  of  the  face.

Thvoat. — Sensation  of  something  remaining  in  the  throat,  like  parti-
cles of  food. — Eoughness  and  adhesive  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  it  is
difficult  to  remove. — Scraping  and  roughness  in  the  throat. — Irritation  of
the  fauces,  larynx,  trachea,  and  upper  half  of  the  lungs  very  great ;  sensa-
tion of  roughness  and  scraping  in  them  (sixth  day).

Stomach, — Increased  secretion  of  the  alimentary  canal. — Much  fiatm
passed  toward  morning. — Aching  in  the  abdomen,  and  through  the  whole
length  of  the  alimentary  canal,  even  to  the  throat  (by  its  continuance  some
time). — [20.]  Aching  in  the  viscera  and  lower  abdomen. — Aching  and
faint  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  extending  even  through  the  cesophagus  to
the  throat,  and  in  the  throat,  with  diminished  appetite.

A-bdonieil. — Pressing  or  bearing-down  sensation  in  the  abdomen.

Stool  and  Anus. — Two  stools  a  day.

JJrinaTij  Organs. — Burning  in  the  urethra,  remaining  after  an
evacuation. — Urine  increased  and  scalding. — Considerable  scalding  on  mic-
turition, scalding  continuing  several  days. — Frequent  micturition. — In-
creased secretion  of  urine  and  cutaneous  transpiration. — Urine  pale,  watery,
and  with  but  little  smell.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — [30.]  Somewhat  tenacious  mucus  in
the  larynx  and-  trachea. — Continued  disposition  to  cough,  with  rough,
scraping  sensation  in  the  throat. — Cough,  frequent  paroxysms. — Paroxysms
of  continued  cough. — Coughing  nearly  all  night  (fourth  day). — Cough
rather  dry,  with  occasional  exjjectoration  of  mucus,  affording  but  little
relief. — Cough  fatiguing,  exhausting,  suffocative,  and  the  sputa  difficult  to
raise,  or  if  raised,  immediately  replaced  by  other. — Paroxysms  of  coughing,
about  10  A.M.,  and  1  or  2  o'clock  p.m.,  lasting  from  an  hour  to  an  hour  and
a  half,  each  time,  with  watery,  frothy,  transparent  mucus  at  first,  but  later
becoming  tinged  yellow,  as  from  saffron,  seeming  to  come  from  the  upper
portion  of  lungs  (sixth  day).- — Coughing  apparently  worse  on  lying  down
or  exercising  the  lungs  (sixth  day). — Sputa  consist  of  tenacious  and  watery
mucus,  without  color,  the  first  days ;  now,  watery  and  frothy,  quite  yellow
(sixth  day). — [40.]  Sputa  contains,  now  and  then,  some  few  particles,
thick,  opaque  and  muco-purulent,  of  a  dark  color  (seventh  day). — Sub-
stances brought  up  by  coughing  from  the  throat,  like  that  which  collects
round  the  teeth  where  the  brush  is  not  often  used,  smelling  much  the  same,
rather  soft,  like  cheese  (sixth  day).

Chest. — Pain,  congestion,  and  stricture  of  the  chest  (several  times). —


ARANEA  DIADEMA.  433

Congestion,  pain,  and  stricture  in  chest,  more  especially  the  upper  half. —
Afternoon,  faint,  oppressed,  asthmatic  sensation  in  the  chest,  lasting  over
an  hour  in  its  worst  form,  and  a  trace  of  it  remaining  all  the  afternoon. —
Afternoon  and  evening,  aching  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  lungs,  extending
to  the  throat  (seventh  day).

Heart  and  Pulse.— 'P\i\se.  full  and  more  accelerated  (seventh  day).
— Weakness  and  rheumatic  pain  in  lumbar  region,  more  apparent  in  the
afternoon  and  evening. — Aching  and  weakness  in  the  lumbar  region.

Generalities. — (jteneral  weakness. — [50.]  Lassitude  in  the  afternoon.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sound  and  uninterrupted  sleep,  with  dispo-
sition to  sleep  in  the  morning. — Tired  on  first  waking.

Fever. — luthe  afternoon  and  evening,  chills  and  violent  fever,  with
headache,  aching  of  the  bones  and  limbs,  and  restlessness  (fifth  day).

Conditions. — Aggravation.  —  {Morning),  Disposition  to  sleep. —
{Afternoon),  All  symptoms;  faint,  etc.,  sensation  in  chest;  aching  in  upper
portion  of  lungs,  etc.;  weakness,  etc.,  in  lumbar  region  ;  lassitude;  chills,
etc. — {Evening),  Aching  in  upper  portion  of  lungs,  etc.;  weakness,  etc.,  in
lumbar  region;  chills,  etc. — {Towards  morning),  Much  flatus  passed. —
(10  A.M.),  Paroxysm  of  cough. — (1  or  2  p.m.).  Paroxysm  of  cough. — {Open
air).  Aching  pain  through  eyes  and  orbits. — {When  chewing).  Snapping  in
right  ear. — {Exercising  lungs).  Cough. — {Lying  down).  Cough. — {Micturi-
tion), Scalding  in  urethra. — {Motion),  Aching  pain  through  eyes,  etc. —
{Sunlight),  Aching  pain  through  eyes  and  orbits.

Amelioration. — {Evening),  All  symptoms,  except  the  cough,  and
those  of  the  back. — (  Quietude),  Aching  pain  through  the  eyes  and  orbits.


AEANEA  DIADEMA.

Epeira  diadema.  Nat.  order,  Avachmda.  Commoji  7iames,  Gross  spider;
Araign^e  a  croix  papale.  Preparation,  Tincture  prepared  by  putting  the
living  animals  into  alcohol.

Authorities.  Nos.  1  "  F.,"  and  2  "  H.,"  from  A.  H.  Z.,  1,  122 ;  ("  F."  a
young  doctor ;  "  H."  a  Saxon  army  surgeon ;  symptoms  observed  after
taking  repeated  doses  of  the  tincture,  for  several  days ;  increasing  gradually
from  12  to  33  drops ;  taken  fasting  in  the  morning.)  No.  3,  from  Grau-
vogle,  "Text-book  of  Homoeopathy."

Sead, — Confusion  of  the  head  after  eating,  (first  day),'. — Confusion  of
the  head,  with  lassitude,'. — Evenings  on  studying,  confusion  of  the  head
and  pressive  pain,  as  if  on  the  bones  of  the  right  temple,  and,  the  upper
part  of  the  forehead,  which  is  relieved  by  resting  the  head  on  the  hand,
but  reappears  on  taking  the  hand  away,". — *  Headache  and  confusion  of  the
head,  both  relieved  by  smoking,  but  they  return  and  continue  nearly  all  day,'.
— Continued  headache  (immediately),'. — -Headache  continues  till  evening,
becomes,  however,  milder  after  a  few  hours,  and  ^ceases  entirely  in  the  open
air,^. — Headache,  with  burning  in  the  eyes  and  hea,t  in  the  face.  Headache
less  severe  on  walking  than  while  sitting.  Smoking  relieves,  but-  does  not
entirely  remove  it  (immediately),'. — Headache  relieved  by  smoking,  and
disappears  entirely  on  smoking  in  the  open  air  (in  fine  spring  weather),'.^
Drawing  in  the  head  down  the  lower  jaw  (soon  after  taking),'. — [10.]
Headache,  especially  in  forehead,  goes  off  after  smoking  (two  hours),'. —
Heat  in  the  forehead  and  eyes;  an  unpleasant  flickering  sensation  in  them

VOL.  I.— 28


434  ARANEA  DIADEMA.

on  reading  or  writing,  from  which  also  the  headache  is  more  severe  (two
hours),^

ISfirs. — Twingeing,  pinching  pains  in  the  right  ear  and  parotid  gland ;
as  it  disappeared  from  this  side,  it  passed  into  the  left  ear  (second  after-
noon),^

Wose. — Coryza  for  three  days,'. — Coryza  with  thirst,'.

Face, — Burning  in  the  face,". — Heat  in  the  face,  especially  in  the  eyes
(disappears  after  four  hours),'.

Mouth, — Sensitive,  cold  sensation,  in  the  right  lower  incisors,  especi-
ally on  drawing  in  air;  came  on  again  the  next  day,  at  the  same  hour,  in-
termittent fever  like  (sixteen  hours), I — *Siidden  violent  pains  in  the  teeth
of  the  whole  upper  and  lower  jaw,  at  night,  immediately  after  lying  down,^. —
Sticking  in  the  palate  and  larynx  (for  twenty-four  hours),'. — [20.]  After
drinking  milk,  an  unpleasant  taste  of  it  remains,'. — Nauseous,  bitter  taste
in  the  mouth,  with  coated  tongue  (one  hour),'. — Bitter  taste  relieved  by
smoking  (after  half  an  hour),'.

Stomach. — Thirst,'.

JLbdomeit. — Sensation  of  heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  lower  bowels;
it  seems  as  if  a  stone  lay  there,  while  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  an  un-
pleasant feeling  of  faintness,  together  with  griping  in  abdomen;  sensation
of  heaviness  in  the  thighs,  so  that  they  can  hardly  be  carried  forward,  with
confusion  of  the  head  ;  returns  the  next  day,  intermittent  fever  like,  at  the
same  time;  lasts  half  an  hour  (5  p.m.,  second  day),\

Stool  and  A.nus. — *  Thin  fluid  stool  accompanied  by  pain  in  abdomen,
which  is  relieved  by  rubbing  the  abdomen  with  the  hand.  The  stool  passed
only  part  at  a  time,  and  with  straining,  a  half  hour  later  fermenting  in  the
abdomen  (third  day),^

Sexual  Organs. — *Periods  eight  days  too  early,  too  strong,  and  too
copious,^.

Chest, — ^Hemorrhage  from  the  lungs,'.

Extremities  in  General. — At  times  dull,  burrowing  bone-pains
in  the  limbs,l — Morning,  in  bed,  dull,  burrowing  bone-pains  in  the  right
upper  and  forearm  bones,  and  in  the  right  tibia;  it  also  appears  at  intervals
through  the  day  (third  day),^

Upper  Extremities. — [30.]  Quivering,  twitching  in  the  muscles
of  the  left  upper  arm,  lasts  half  an  hour,  afternoon  (second  day),^ — *In
both  ring  and  little  fingers,  of  both  hands,  a  feeling  as  if  they  had  gone  to
sleep,  and  of  formication,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Violent,  dull,  burrowing  bone-pains  in  the
right  OS  calcis,  for  several  days,  constantly  if  the  foot  is  moved  from  a  quiet
position  ;  on  contiuued  motion,  however,  it  gradually  disappeared  (first  day
after  second  dose),^

Generalities. — Lassitude,  thirst,'. — Lassitude  without  heaviness  in
the  feet,  weariness,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Restless  sleep,  with  frequent  waking,  always
with  the  sensation  as  if  the  hands  and  forearms  were  greatly  swollen,  as  if
they  were  as  strong  and  large  again  as  natural.  They  seem  so  heavy  that
he  imagines  he  cannot  lift  them,^

Fever. — (Bone-pains  for  four  weeks  ;  feverish  attacks  mostly  consist-
ing of  coldness.  Troubles  in  the  abdomen,  which  are  usually  accompanied
by  a  chill,  and  mostly  come  on  toward  evening;  eruption  on  the  skm;
pimples  here  and  there),^

Conditions. —  Aggravation. —  {Toward  evening),  Troubles  in  ahdo-


AKANEA  SCINENCIA.  435

men,  etc. — (Evening),  On  studying,  confusion  of  the  head,  etc. — (Night),
*  Immediately  after  lying  down,  pain  in  all  the  teeth. — {Drawing  in  air),  Cold
sensation  in  right  lower  incisors. — {After  eating),  Confusion  of  head. —
{After  drinking  milk),  Unpleasant  taste  of  it  remains. — {Moving  foot  from
quiet  position).  Pains  in  right  os  calcis. — {Heading),  Flickering  sensation  in
forehead  ;  headache. — -(  Writing),  Flickering  sensation  in  forehead  ;  head-
ache.— {^Periodical  at  same'hour,°.)

Amelioration. — (In  open  air),  Headache  ceases  entirely. — {Con-
tinual motion  of  foot).  Pain  in  right  os  calcis. — (Resting  head  on  hands),
Conl'usion  of  head,  etc. — (Rubbing  with  the  hand),  Pain  in  abdomen. —
(Smohing),  Headache,  etc. ;  bitter  taste. — (  Walking),  Headache.


ARANEA  SCINENCIA.

A  gray  spider  found  in  Kentucky  on  old  walls. "  Does  not  spin  a  web."

Authority.  Dr.  Win.  Eowley,  N.  Am.  Journ.  of  Horn.,  7,  64;  two  prov-
ings  (1,  "N.  S.;"  2,  "E.  P.")  with  the  1st  and  2d  dilutions.

]l£ind,. — Could  not  collect  his  thoughts  (with  slight  pain  in  head),
(second  day),^

Head. — Vertigo  worse  when  stooping  (third  day),^ — Vertigo,  with
nausea  (after  two  hours),^ — Severe  pain  in  head,  affecting  the  eyes  (im-
mediately),\ — Slight  paius  in  head  (after  fifteen  minutes),'. — Dull,  heavy
pain  in  head  all  day  (second  day),'. — Dull,  sluggish  pain,  but  quite  in-
tense, all  over  the  head  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — After  dinner,  dull
pain  in  head,  rather  increased  till  after  supper,  when  it  was  relieved  (first
day),". — -Head  dull,  with  heavy,  painful  fulness  (fourth  day),'. —  [10,]
Dull,  stupid  feeling  in  head,  with  feeling  of  fulness  and  dull"  aching  pain
(after  two  hours),^ — Dull,  heavy  pain  in  postero-superior  part  of  head
(after  twenty  minutes),'. — Could  not  rest  on  account  of  pain  in  head,'.

Eyes. — Eyes  feel  weak  and  inflamed  (second  day),'. — Eyes  felt  h"eavy,
with  a  blur  over  them  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Constant  twitching  of
the  under  lids  (second  day),'. — Eyelids  swollen  (third  day),'. — Eyes  run  a
good  deal  (second  day),'. — There  seems  to  be  a  blur  constantly  collecting
over  the  eyes  (second  day),'. — Glimmering  before  the  eyes  (immediately),^

Mouth, — [20,]  Rather  profuse  flow  of  saliva  (immediately),^ — Sweet
taste  in  mouth  (immediately),". — Dryness  and  prickling  in  throat  (immedi-
ately),".

Stomach. — Foul  stomach  (second  day),'. — Slight  pain  in  stomach
(after  two  hours),". — Sour  eructations  (after  two  hours),". — Slight  nausea
(after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — ^Strange  feeling  in  stomach,  as  if  he  had  not
eaten  for  a  long  time,  continuing  for  about  an  hour  (after  half  an  hour),'.

Abdomen. — Very  unpleasant  dull  rumbling  pains  in  bowels  (second
day),'. — Colic  increased  by  bending  forward  (immediately),".

Stool  and,  Anus. — [30.]  Sensation  as  if  the  bowels  were  loosened
(after  two  hours),". — Bowels  costive  (second  day),'.

Urinary  Orf/an.<i. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,  so  that  he  had  to
get  up  twice  during  the  night,'. — Urine  cloudy,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Slight  palpitation  of  the  heart  on  waking,  which
soon  passed  off  (second  day),^.

Generalities. — Felt  fatigued,  physically  and  mentally,  as  though
he  had  labored  hard  (had  felt  uncomraouly  well  in  the  morning),  (after
two  hours),". — Felt  uncommonly  well  in  the  morning,  with  good  appetite


436  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

for  breakfast  (second  day),^ — The  whole  system  appears  deranged  (second
dfvy)/. — Felt  as  if  he  had  been  drinking  (immediately V-

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleepy  on  sitting  down  (fourth  day),'. —
[40.]  Slept  well  all  night  (usually  restless  and  sleeps  but  little),  (first
day),^ — Uncommonly  sound  sleep  at  night  (immediately),^ — Felt  as  if  he
had  been  broken  of  his  rest,  yet  did  not  seem  sleepy  (after  one  and  a  half
hours),'. — Very  restless  during  night;  could  sleep  but  a  few  moments  at  a
time,  and  then  not  soundly,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Bending  forward),  Vertigo;  colic. —
(After  dinner),  Dull  pain  in  head. — (  Chi  waking).  Slight  palpitation  of  the
heart. — (  Warm  room).  All  symptoms.

Amelioration, — (Morning),  Felt  uncommonly  well. — (Open  air),
Symptoms  rather  relieved.— (4^er  supper),  Pain  in  head.


ARGENTUM  CYANIDUM.

Silver  cyanide. AgCy.

Authority.  Poison  case,  Hirschel's  Zeit.,  19,  128.  Effect  of  inhaling
fumes  while  silvering  with  "Argentine."

Vertigo. — Violent  headache  in  the  vertex. — Itching  in  the  nose,  with
profuse  secretion  of  mucus. — Face  very  red. — Tongue  very  red. — Taste
pungent,  gaseous.— Scraping  in  the  throat. — Throatache. — Sense  of  con-
striction and  burning  in  the  throat. — Violent  pain  in  the  suprasternal
fossa,  and  under  the  manubrium  sterni,  every  time  she  turned  to  one  side.
— Nausea,  with  such  general  discomfort  that  she  had  to  lie  down. — Vomit-
ing, with  retching. — Suffocating  attack.— Respiration  diiBcult  and  short. —
Cough  constant,  dry,  spasmodic,  allowing  her  to  articulate  but  one  word  at
a  time. — Pulse  90.— Painful  cramps  in  the  feet. — Great  weakness. — Pro-
fuse sweating  thi-ough  the  night. — Slept  scarcely  any.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Metallic  silver..  Preparation,  The  pure  precipitated  metal  for  trituration
(Hahnemann  used  the  leaf  silver).

Authorities.  1,  Hahnemann  (R.  A.  M.  L.,  4,  337);  2,  Gross,  ibid.;  3,
Franz,  ibid.;  4,  Meyer,  ibid.;  5,  Haynel,  ibid.;  6,  Herrmann,  ibid.;  7,  Wis-
licenus,  ibid.;  8,  Langhammer,  ibid.;  9,  Hering,  Archive,  15,  and  N.  Ar-
chiv.,  3;  10,  Huber,  Oest.  Zeit.,  2,  six  provings  with  repeated  doses,  with
1st,  2d,  and  3d  trits.,  and  4th,  5th,  and  6th  dils.

Mind. — He  is  all  the  time  in  a  kind  of  intoxication ;  he  knows  not
how  to  define  it,'. — Increased  cheerfulness  and  disposition  to  talk  the  whole
day  (after  three  hours),  (reaction),^. — When  pleased,  excessively  merry,
but  cries  a  long  time  about  a  trifle,'. — Discouraged,'.

Head. — Confusion  of  the  head  at  10  a.m.  (3d  trit.),'". — Head  cloudy,
as  if  benumbed  (1st  trit.),'". — Sense  of  obscuration  in  the  head,  as  if  there
were  smoke  in  the  brain,*. — Dulness  in  the  head,''. — The  head  feels  dull
and  hollow;  his  whole  brain  aches,  accompanied  by  chilliness,'. — [10.]
Dizzy  stupefaction  of  the  head  (1st  trit.),'°. — He  began  to  feel  a  tingling
and  turning  in  his  head,  as  if  he  were  tipsy,'. — *Hefelt  suddenly  giddy,  and
as  if  a  mist  were  before  his  eyes,^. — *  Attacks  of  vertigo ;  he  cannot  well  control


AEGENTUM  METALLICUM.  437

his  senses;  also,  when  sitting  or  reflecting  (after  half  an  hour)/. — Very
dizzy  on  coming  in  from  a  walk,  with  slight  shivering  through  the  skin
(1st  trit.),'". — Stinging  burning  pain  in  the  head,'. — Slight  pressure  on  the
head  causes  a  feeling  of  soreness,^ — Violent  shooting  and  tearing  pain  in
the  head,^ — (Early  in  the  morning,  stitching  headache,  with  redness  of  one
eye),\ — Pressive  headache  in  the  forehead,  over  the  eyebrows  (after  two
hours),'. — [20.]  *  Pressing  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  stupor,  and  draiuing
pressure  in  the  occiput,^. — Intermittent  boring  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the
forehead  the  whole  day;  the  pain  increases  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down
(after  seven  hours),*. — A  transient  pain  deep  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,
extending  obliquely  to  the  right  temporal  region  (5th  dil.),'". — Drawing
pains  in  right  frontal  eminence  (1st  trit.),"'.^-A  transient  tearing  pain  deep
in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  extending  toward  the  right  temple  (5th
dil.),". — Drawing  pain  in  the  left  frontal  eminence  (3d  trit.),"". — A  short
painful  drawing  in  the  left  frontal  eminence  (6th  dil.),'°. — Pressive  tearing
in  the  left  frontal  eminence  (after  six  hours),''. — Pressive  tearing  under  the
left  frontal  eminence ;  the  globe  of  the  eye  feeling,  at  the  same  time,  com-
pressed,''.— Pressive  pain  in  the  temporal  bones,  externally,". — [30,]  Pres-
sive tearing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  right  and  left  temporal  bone,  increased
by  contact,^.— Spasmodic  twitching  and  subsultus  of  the  right  temporal  mus-
cle, the  occipito-frontalis  muscle  of  the  right  side,  the  muscles  on  the  side
of  the  neck  near  the  cricoid  cartilage,  and  towards  the  nape  of  the  neck ;
this  subsultus  repelled  the  hand,  and  was  accompanied  by  a  quivering
pain,'. — Pinching  pressure  in  the  right  temple,  with  sharp  rhythmical
stitches  from  without  inwards  (after  five  days),'. — Painful  drawing  in  the  left
temple  (4th  dil.),'°. — A  short  drawing  pain  in  the  left  temple  (3d  trit.),'". —
Painful  drawing  in  the  left  temple  when  sitting  (3d  trit.),'°. — Excessive
pain  in  the  left  temple,  both  pressive  and  drawing  (after  five  hours),^. — -
Tearing  in  the  left  temple,^. — Tearing,  apparently  in  the  left  temporal  bone
and  over  the  left  mastoid  process,''. — Pressive  pain  in  the  parietal  bones,
externally,". — [40.]  Drawing  throbbing  headache  deep  in  the  right  half
of  the  brain,  during  rest  (2d  trit.),'°. — Drawings  deep  in  the  right  half  of
the  brain,  which  gradually  increased  to  violent  tearings,  and  extended
toward  the  forehead  and  occiput;  evenings,  in  bed  (4th  dil.),'". — Sensation
in  the  head  both  of  pressure  and  trembling,  over  the  right  ear,  extends
backward  (after  four  hours),l — Drawing  pain  from  the  occipital  bone  as
far  as  the  middle  of  the  frontal  bone,  obliquely  across  the  right  temporal
bone,  externally,". — *A  left-sided  headache,  as  if  in  the  brain-substance,  at
first  only  slight  drawing,  but  gradually  becoming  more  violent  and  tear-
ing, and  at  its  culmination  was  raging  as  though  a  nerve  were  being  torn
into ;  this  lasted  twenty-five  to  thirty  seconds,  and  ended  suddenly  at  its
greatest  severity,  at  8  p.m.,  when  going  across  the  room  (5th  dil.),'". —
Pressive  pain  in  the  left  parietal  bone,  externally,". — Cutting  stitches,  ap-
parently in  the  skull  or  on  the  surface  of  the  brain,  close  in  front  of  the
left  ear,  forwards,'^. — Painful  drawing  in  the  left  occipital  region,  between
the  protviberance  and  the  mastoid  process  (2d  trit.),'". — Slight  thrill  of
shivering  over  the  right  side  of  the  scalp,^.

Eyes. — *{The  upper  and  lower  eyelids  are  very  red  and  thick;  the  eyes,
however,  do  not  suppurate),'. — [50.]  A  single  violent  vertical  stitch
through  the  skin  and  cartilage  of  the  left  upper  lid  (afternoon),  (5th  dil.),'".
— Frequent  fine  stitches,  with  itching,  which  provokes  scratching,  in  the
left  canthi,  and  the  itching  also  often  in  the  skin  of  the  left  ear  (6th  dil.),'°.
— Frequent  sticking  in  the  canthi  (3d  trit.),'". — A  short  but  severe  sticking


438  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

in  the  left  internal  canthus,  as  if  with  a  coarse  needle,  at  3  p.m.  (5th  dil.),'".
— Violent  itching  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes,'.

EdVS, — increased  warmth  in  the  concha  of  the  left  ear,  and  itching,
which  provokes  scratching  (6th  dil.),'°. — -In  the  folds  of  the  external  ear,  a
sensation  as  if  a  many-footed  insect  were  crawling,  without  itching  (4th
dil.),'". — Violent  itching  of  the  external  ear ;  he  scratches  until  the  parts
bleed,'. — A  pressive  tearing  over  the  left  ear,  in  a  small  place  (after  twelve
hours),l^Repeated  violent  stitches  in  the  fossa  behind  the  right  lobule,
penetrating  into  the  head  (3d  trit.),'". — [60.]  A  drawing  pain  from  the
fossa  behind  the  right  lobule  as  far  as  the  skin  of  the  cheek,  extending  down
to  the  lower  jaw,  as  if  the  pain  were  in  the  periosteuni,^ — Two  successive
unusually  severe  stitches  in  the  fossa  behind  the  lobule  of  the  left  ear,  from
without  inward  (4th  dil.),'°. — Frequent  itching  in  the  folds  of  the  concha;
it  causes  scratching,  which  was  always  followed  by  a  burning  sore  pain,
afternoons  till  evenings  (6th  dil.),'". — A  corroding  itching  in  the  fossa  of
the  right  auricle,  causes  scratching  (3d  trit.),'". — A  painful  drawing  in  the
fossa  behind  the  right  lobule,  close  to  the  cartilage,  extending  downward
in  a  crescent  form,  during  rest  (2d  trit.),'". — A  sensitive  drawing  in  the
fossa,  just  behind  the  lobule  of  the  left  ear,  recurring  at  short  intervals  (6th
dil.),'"  (repeated  the  next  day). — Corrosive  itching  of  the  lobules  of  both  ears,
early  in  the  morning,  after  rising  (after  twelve  hours),^ — Itching  on  the  inner
surface  of  the  lobule  of  the  left  ear,  causes  scratching  (1st  trit.),'°. — Sensa-
tion in  the  right  ear  as  if  it  were  stopped  up,'. — Painful  drawing  within
the  left  ear  (3d  trit.),'". — [70.]  Cutting  stitches  from  the  left  internal  ear
as  far  as  the  brain,'.

Wose. — The  nose  is  obstructed,  in  the  forepart  of  both  nostrils ;  sensa-
tion as  of  biting  in  the  left  nostril,^. — Fluent  coryza ;  the  nose  is  constantly
full  of  mucus,'. —  Violent  fluent  coryza,  without  sneezing  (after  ten  hours),". —
*  Excessive  fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing,  for  two  days,^. — When  blow-
ing the  nose,  violent  bleeding  (immediately  after  dinner,  and  again  in
three  hours),'. — Irritation  in  the  nose,  as  if  a  cold  would  come  on  (after
one  hour),*. — A  throbbing  in  the  left  nostril  (fore  part),  tension  in  the
external  skin  of  the  nose  as  though  the  nasal  bones  were  compressed,  with
tickling  pricking  in  the  left  nostril,  that  occasioned  several  violent  sneez-
ings (4th  dil.),'°. — *Tinglingand  itching  in  the  nose,  followed  by  bleeding,'.

Face. — Sensation  of  heat,  without  redness  in  the  face  (1st  trit.),'°. — [80.]
Fine  drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  face,  especially  in  the  region  of  the
cheek-bones,'. — Perceptible  throbbing  over  the  whole  of  the  left  cheek,  as
though  the  muscles  would  be  raised  from  the  mucous  membrane,  with  a
feeling  as  though  the  left  cheek  were  larger,  with  a  slight  chilly  burning  in
the  skin,  and  redness  of  both  cheeks;  lasts  six  to  eight  minutes  (4th  dil.),'°.
— Painful,  gnawing  pressure  on  the  bones  of  the  right  side  of  the  face;
most  severe  on  the  zygoma  (after  one  hour),'. — Fine,  painful  stitches  in
the  right  malar  bone,'. — ^Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  zygoma^". — Tearing
in  the  left  zygoma,^— *Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  close  under  the  nose,'. —
Cutting  stitches  under  the  right  half  of  the  lower  jaw,  apparently  in  the
gland,  from  without  inwards,^

Mouth. — The  lower  row  of  teeth  sticks  to  the  upper,  as  though  the
enamel  were  covered  with  a  sticky  cement  (3d  trit.),'". — A  sensitive  aching
in  the  last  hollow  lower  left  molars  (3d  trit.),'".— [90.]  A  feeling  as_ though
the  enamel  of  the  teeth  was  covered  with  a  sticky  cement  (2d  trit.),  . —
An  incisor  tooth  being  pressed  forward  was  painful  (after  five  hours), .
The  gums  are  painful,  especially  when  touched,'. — A  little  blister  on  the


AEGENTUM  METALLICUM.  439

tongue,  sore  and  burning/. — Feeling  of  dryness  of  the  tongue,  which,  how-
ever, is  moist,'. — Dr}'ness  of  the  tongue,  and  hard  palate  (6th  dil.),". —
Dryness  of  the  middle  of  the  tongue  and  hard  palate  (5th  dil.),'°. — A  burn-
ing on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  as  though  he  had  chewed  some  aromatic  sub-
stance, afternoons  (3d  trit.),'°. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  tongue  (quarter
of  an  hour),  (4th  dil.),'". — Great  dryness  of  the  mouth  (quarter  of  an  hour),
(4th  dil.),".— [100.]  Dryness  in  the  mouth  (1st  trit.  and  4th  dil.),'".— Dry
sensation  in  the  mouth  (quarter  of  an  hour),  (5th  dil.),'°. — Sticky,  tough
saliva  on  the  palate  (causes  scratching),". — The  saliva  accumulates  in  his
mouth,  with  a  shaking  chill,\ — Muoli  flow  of  saliva  during  the  afternoon
nap,  causing  spitting ;  with  so  much  dryness  of  the  mouth  that  the  tongue
stuck  to  the  palate  (for  ten  minutes),  (4th  dil.),'". — His  speech  is  impeded
on  account  of  much  viscid  saliva  accumulating  in  his  mouth,'.

UlTOat, — *The  region  of  the  submaxillary  gland  is  swollen;  this  makes
the  neck  stiff,  and  produces  a  tension  in  the  parts  when  moved;  deglutition  at
the  same  time  is  difficult,  as  if  there  were  internal  swelling  of  the  throat ;  he  is
obliged  to  force  every  mouthful  of  food  down  his  throat  (after  forty-eight
hours),'. — Violent  pulsation  of  the  carotids,  especially  on  the  left  side
(4th  dil.),'". — *Viscid,  gray,  jelly-like  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  can  be
easily  hawked  up ;  early  in  the  morning,^. — Slight  drawing,  hardly  sensi-
tive, pains  in  the  left  parotid  gland  (4th  dil.),". — [110.]  Drawing  pain  in
the  right  submaxillary  and  parotid  glands  (1st  trit.),'°. — When  masticating,
sense  of  cutting  towards  the  parotid  gland,  as  after  taking  something  very
acid  ;  it  seems  to  be  felt  in  the  Eustachian  tube,'. — Boring  and  grinding
pain  in  the  throat,\ — Roughness  and  rawness  of  the  throat,  continuing  the
whole  day,^. — *His  throat  feels  raw  and  sore,\ — Soreness  and  rawness  in
the  throat,  during  expiration  and  deglutition,'. — *When  coughing,  raw
and  sore  in  the  throat,  not  in  the  windpipe ;  nor  when  swallowing,". —
*Sense  as  of  scraping  in  the  velum  pendulum  palati,  as  if  a  rough  body
were  glued  to  it;  it  was  not  a  painful,  but  a  disagreeable  sensation,  and
was  more  felt  during  empty  deglutition  than  when  swallowing  a  morsel,
but  it  was  felt  constantly,  and  forced  him  to  swallow  the  saliva  ;  in  a  few
hours  this  feeling  descends  deeper  into  the  throat,'. — *  When  yawning,  pain-
ful tension  in  the  fauces,  as  from  swelling,'. — Itching  crawling  in  the  pha-
ryngeal orifice  of  the  right  Eustachian  tube,  which  extends  to  the  tym-
panum, followed  by  the  same  in  the  left  ear  (2d  trit.),'°. — [120.]  Feeling
of  nausea  in  the  throat,  followed  immediately  by  heat  all  over,  mostly  about
the  head,  with  redness  of  the  face,  without  thirst  (after  half  an  hour),*.

Stomach. —  Very  great  appetite  (after  forty  hours),". — '^Excessive  appe-
tite, continues  even  when  the  stomach  feels  full'^. — Sensation  of  hunger  (4th
dil.),'°. — Excessive,  almost  painful  sensation  of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  re-
curring in  paroxysms  (5th  dil.),". — *  Excessive,  gnawing  hunger  the  whole
day,  which  cannot  be  satisfied  by  eating;  afterwards,  for  several  days,  this
hunger  could  only  be  allayed  for  a  short  time  by  eating,^ — Sensation  of
hunger,  as  from  great  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  mornings  (4th  dil.),". — '
Hunger,  mornings  after  waking  (1st  trit.),'". — During  the  afternoon  nap,  a
sensation  of  hunger,  with  attacks  of  nausea  (8d  trit.),'". — Sensation  of
hunger  in  the  stomach  (an  hour  after  taking  it),  with  slight  nausea  (6th
dil.),'°. — [130.]  Sense  of  hunger,  with  drawiug-in  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
through  the  day  (3d  trit.),'°. — Sensation  of  hunger  with  nausea,  (painless)
contraction  of  the  pharynx,  and  inclination  to  swallow  the  saliva  (lasts
several  minutes),  (3d  trit.),'°. — Sensation  of  hunger,  forenoons,  with  nausea
as  from  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  and  scraping  irritation  in  the  bronchial


440  AEGENTUM  METALLICUM.

tubes,  causing  a  dry  cough  (2d  trit.)/". — Appetite  entirely  gone;  he  loathes
food  when  merely  thinking  of  it/. — Woke  at  7.30  A.M.,  with  hunger  and
great  weakness  in  the  shoulders  (6th  dil.),". — Indifference  to  food ;  he  is  satia-
ted immediately,'. — No  appetite,  early  in  the  morning,^ — (Great  desire  for
wine),\ — Sensation  likeheartburn  (afterone  and  a  half  hours),*. — Hiccough,
when  smoking  tobacco  as  usual  (after  one  and  a  quarter  hours),^ — [140.]
Almost  continual  qualmishness  and  nausea,^ — Eetching,  by  which  a  bitter,
acrid,  badly  smelling  liquid  ,is  brought  up  from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth,
leaving  behind  a  continual  sense  of  rawness,  roughness,  and  burning  in  the
throat  (heartburn),  (after  eight  hours),l — Two  vomitings  in  the  afternoon,
during  stool,\ — Pinching,  transversely,  across  the  stomach,  and  in  the  left
hypochondrium,". — When  standing  or  reading,  he  suddenly  felt  a  burning
sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  a  sense  as  of  a  dull  compression  of  the
brain  from  all  sides,  and  an  approaching  vertigo,  with  nausea,  and  inclina-
tion to  vomit,  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  as  alter  turning  quickly  round
in  a  circle ;  at  the  same  time,  a  sudden  heat  in  the  whole  body,  but  more
in  the  face,  and  momentary  sweat  on  the  chest  and  in  the  face,'. — Pressure
at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'.

Ahflomen. — A  transient  stitch  within  the  abdomen,  between  the  right
hypochondrium  and  the  epigastrium,  followed  by  hunger  and  loud  rum-
bling in  the  bowels  (3d  trit.),'°. — Sharp  stitches,  from  within  outwards,  in
the  abdominal  muscles,  near  the  last  true  rib ;  they  terminate  in  a  fine
pinching,  and  abate  a  little  by  rubbing  (after  sixty  hours),'. — *Bruised
pain  in  the  flank,  over  the  left  hip,  and  on  the  whole  left  side  of  the  pelvis
(2d  trit.),'". — (With  uterine  weakness),". — Distension  and  fulness  in  the
upper  abdomen,  with  a  hungry  feeling  (5th  dil.),'°. — [150.]  At  night,  a
pressive,  painful  distension  of  the  abdomen  ;  it  passed  oif  without  emission
of  flatulence,'. — Tympanic  distension  of  the  whole  right  side  of  the  bowels,
with  bruised  pain  on  hard  pressure  ;  slowly  disappears  after  passage  of
wind  (4th  dil.),". — Rumbling  and  fermenting  in  the  bowels,  as  though  fluid
were  poured  from  one  intestine  into  another  (4th  dil.),'". — Rumbling  in  the
abdomen  during  the  night,  and  emission  of  flatulence,'. — Loud  rumbling  in
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  like  the  croaking  of  frogs  (after  three-quarters  of
an  hour),^ — In  the  morning,  sense  of  burning,  like  heartburn,  in  the  abdo-
men, stomach,  and  as  far  as  the  chest,'.— Contractive  pain  in  the  belly,
after  the  morning  stool ;  it  seems  owing  to  a  cold,  when  sitting,'. — Contrac-
tion and  tension  of  the  abdominal  muscles,  when  walking,  so  that  he  has  to
walk  stooping,^ — Bellyache,  as  in  diarrhoea,'. — Cutting,  internally,  trans-
versely across  the  abdomen,'. — [160.]  A  painful  drawing,  frequently
through  the  day,  on  the  posterior  portion  of  the  pelvis,  left  side,  externally
during  rest  (4th  dil.),'". — Paiu,  as  if  sprained,  on  the  posterior  surface  of
the  outer  rim,  left  side  of  the  pelvis  (at  the  insertion  of  the  gluteus  maxi-
raus),  renewed  at  every  step,  afternoons,  after  a  long  walk  (second  day),
(4th  dil.),'". — Drawing  stinging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  pelvis,  toward
the  back  jDart,  during  rest  (2d  trit.),'". — Boring  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the
hypogastrium,  just  over  the  groin  (after  thirty-four  hours),'. — After  begin-
ning to  eat,  an  excessive  pressure  extending  from  the  hypogastrium  down-
wards, towards  the  pubic  region  ;  worse  during  an  inspiration,  and  allevi-
ated by  rising  from  one's  seat,l — Painful  urging  in  the  hypogastrium,
during  a  soft  evacuation,'. — A  momentary,  violent  stitch  from  before  back-
ward, in  the  hypogastrium  (4th  dil.),'°. — Cutting  stitches  on  both  sides,  in
the  region  of  the  abdominal  ring  (after  three  and  a  half  hours),'. — A  pain-
ful, though  transient  tension  in  the  left  iliac  region,  along  the  course  of  the


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  441

psoas  muscle,  noticed  when  walking,  and  at  rest  C6th  dil.),"". — A  drawing
tensive  pain,  in  the  right  inguinal  region,  along  the  psoas  muscle,  disap-
peared in  rest  (5th  dil.),". — [170.]  Sensation  in  the  bend  of  the  left  groin
as  if  the  tendon  of  the  psoas  muscle  were  strained ;  on  pressure,  it  feels
painful,  as  if  bruised,^ — Tension  and  drawing  in  the  groin,  below  the
abdomiual  ring,  extending  to  the  left  thigh,".

Stool  and  Anus. — A  sensation  in  the  rectum  as  though  a  living
worm  were  boring  through  the  anus,  and  by  its  windings  rubbed  around
the  rectum ;  lasted  ten  minutes ;  returned  while  sitting  and  standing  after
a  meal  (4th  dil.),'°. — *Frequent  and  always  successful  desire  for  stool  in
the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  with  expulsion  of  a  small  quantity  of  soft  stool,
continuing  for  several  days  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),'. — Sensation  as
though  a  small  worm  forced  its  way  through  the  sphincter  ani  (3d  trit.),'°.
— A  feeling  as  if  many  small,  living  threadworms  hung  out  of  the
anus,  which  on  stooping  caused  an  itching,  but  no  need  to  scratch  (4th
dil.),'°. — Feeling  in  the  anus  as  though  small,  longish  bubbles  of  air
were  escaping,'". — ^A  severe  itching  in  the  anus  and  along  the  fossa  between
the  nates,  causing  scratching,  at  8  p.m.,  while  walking ;  lasts  five  minutes
(4lh  dll.),'°. — '"'Stool  after  dinner  very  .dry,  and  like  -sand,  but  passed
without  trouble  (after  eight  hours),'.— A  brownish-yellow,  pasty,  almost  di-
arrhoeic  evacuation,  with  ineffectual  pressure  at  the  end  of  the  stool  (2d
trit.),".— [180.]  Pasty  stool  (one-quarter  of  an  hour),  (4th  dil.),'".— Three
pasty  stools  during  the  day,  the  last  one  almost  diarrhoeic,  preceded  by
pinching  and  urging  (4tli  (lil.),". — Straining  in  the  hypogastrium  during
a  rather  soft  evacuation,  and  even  afterwards  (after  seventy-two  hours),'. —
More  force  than  usual  required  to  evacuate  the  bowels  (6th  dil.),'". — It
occasioned  effort  to  finish  a  stool  or  passage  of  urine,  so  that  the  back
part  of  the  pelvis,  especially  the  left  side,  sometimes  pained  as  if  sprained
(5th  dil.),'". — Stool  hard,  insufficient,  with  straining  (3d  trit.),'".

Urinary  OPffans. — Slight  burning  when  urinating,  as  though  the
urine  were  acrid  (though  it  was  normal),  (8d  trit.),'°. — A  transient  stitch
in  the  urethra  fiom  behind  forwards  (4th  dil.),"'. — ^Frequent  desire  to
urinate,  and  copious  emission  of  urine,  for  several  hours  (after  two  hours),*.
— Frequent  micturition  (after  six  hours),^

Sexual  Organs. — [190.]  A  painful,  transient  drawing  through  the
right  inguinal  ring  down  to  the  testicles,  at  4  p.m.  during  rest,  with  a  pasty
stool  (4th  dil.),". — Repeated  tearing  pains  along  the  course  of  the  sper-
matic cord,  extending  into  tSe  testicles,  during  rest  at  4  p.m.  after  a  short
walk  (2d  trit.),'°. — "■'  Crushed  pain  in  the  testicles,  evenings  in  bed  (2d  trit.),'".
— *Cruslied  pain  in  the  right  testicle,  even  the  pressure  of  the  clothes  increases
the  pain,  on  walking  (2d  trit.),". — A  repeated,  grabbing  pain  deep  in  the
substance  of  the  right  testicle,  when  at  rest,  with  a  certain  fear  and  anx-
iety (3d  trit.),'°. — Pain  in  the  left  testicle,  as  after  a  contusion  (after  forty-
nine  hours),*. — Sexual  desire  somewhat  diminished  (6th  dil.),'". — Emission
of  semen  almost  every  night,'. — Emission  at  night  (3d  trit.),'°.-i-Pollutions
at  night,  without  lewd  dreams,*.^— [200.]  An  incomplete  emission  during
sleep  (4th  dil.),".  (See  S.  148.)

Respiratory  A-XypaTatus. — *  Laughing  produces  mucus  in  larynx,
and  excites  cough,^. — '■'  When  going  upstairs,  or  stooping,  mucus  gets  into
the  air-passages,  which  is  expelled  by  a  single  fit  of  coughing,^. — On  quietly
inspiring,  two  tones  (as  from  a  bassoon,  a  low  and  a  high)  sounded  at  the
same  time  from  low  down  in  the  throat  (just  before  going  to  sleep  evening),
(4th  dil.),'".— When  eating  fruit,  it  seemed  to  him  repeatedly  as  if  a  Utile


442  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

piece  stuck  in  the  larynx;  it  feels  as  if  in  the  upper  part  and  in  front  some-
thing lay  in  a  little  spot  almost  as  if  chilling,  and  somewhat  pressing,  which
sensation  constantly  irritates  him  to  cough,  without  being  removed  by  doing
so  (1st  trit.),".— In  the  throat  (larynx),  a  remarkable  shattering  kind  of  a
crack  or  crash,  with  almost  a  metallic  reverberation  (like  that  heard  from
the  ice  breaking  up  in  the  spring),  (3d  trit.),'". — *Rawness  and  soreness
in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  when  cougrhingr,  not  when  swallowing,\
— *A  dull  cutting,  which  heccmes  a  stitch,  in  the  air-passages,  from  below  up-
wards, occasioning  two  or  three  jits  of  cough;  it  continues  even  after  the
cough ;  the  cough  produces  a  kind  of  watery  expectoration,  which,  how-
ever, does  not  relieve  the  irritation  to  cough  (after  twenty-four  hours),^. —
It  seems  like  a  raw  spot  in  the  windpipe,  in  the  region  of  the  suprasternal
fossa ;  worse  when  speaking,  talking,  or  singing,'. — Pain  in  the  cricoid  car-
tilage, caused  by  a  draught  of  air,  with  a  feeling  of  a  stopper  in  the  throat,
and  on  pressing  on  it  a  bruised  pain,'". — [210.]  *  Cough  from  laughing,^. —
(Cough  in  the  morning),'. — Irritating,  hacking  cough,  without  expectora-
tion ;  early  in  the  morning  after  rising  (after  forty-eight  hours),^ — ^Several
attacks  of  a  short,  rattling  cough  by  day,  not  in  the  night,  nor  in  the  open  air,
with  white,  thickish,  easy  expectoration,  looking  like  boiled  starch,  but  not
transparent,  without  taste  or  smell,'.

Chest, — ^Mucus  in  the  chest,  and  cough,  with  expectoration  (after
twenty-six  hours),'. — Spasmodic  aching  and  tension  in  some  of  the  ribs,'. —
Drawing,  stinging  pain,  as  in  an  ulcer,  in  the  lowest  rib  near  the  spine  (2d
trit.),'". — Violent  cutting  in  both  sides,  in  the  region  of  the  lowest  ribs,
from  within  outwards ;  the  pain  is  severe  only  during  a  deep  inspiration ;
when  moving  the  trunk  without  taking  an  inspiration,  he  feels  no  aggrava-
tion of  the  pain,  but  feels  it  as  soon  as  he  inspires  (after  ten  hours),'. — A
pinching,  pressive  pain  in  a  place,  as  large  as  a  half  dollar,  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest  below  the  axilla ;  at  noon,  while  at  rest,  on  pressing  on  it
a  bruised  pain  remains  (4th  dil.),'". — On  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  a  place
aifected  with  a  pain,  as  if  something  hard  were  pressing  upon  the  ribs,'. —
[220.]  A  painful  drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  thorax,  about  one  and
one-half  inches  below  the  axilla,  paining,  on  strong  pressure,  as  if  bruised ;
while  at  rest  after  a  meal  (6th  dil.),'°. — During  a  deep  inspiration,  under
the  second  or  third  rib  of  the  right  side,  in  a  place  of  the  size  of  half  a
dollar,  a  pain  pressing  from  within  outwards,^. — Sharp  stitches  on  the  right
side,  near  the  handle  of  the  sternum  (after  eight  hours),^— Sharp  stitches
on  the  right  side,  near  the  nipple,^ — *In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  for  a
minute,  such  a  violent  stitch  from  within  outwards  that  he  can  neither  ex-
pire nor  inspire  (when  sitting),  (after  twenty-eight  hours),^ — Cramplike
pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest ;  after  the  pain  has  subsided  the  place  is
still  painful  to  the  touch  (after  nine  hours),'. — Gnawing  irritation  on  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  when  at  rest,'. — Sensation  of  oppression  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  over  tho  heart  (after  seventy-eight  hours),'. — Cutting,  as
with  a  fine  knife,  across  the  cartilages  of  the  false  ribs  on  the  left  side;  morn-
ings in  bedafte.  waking,  the  spot  pains  on  pressure  as  if  bruised  (4th  dil.),'°. —
A  horizontal  cutting,  as  with  a  knife,  on  the  left  side  near  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  in  the  cartilage  of  the  false  ribs,  after  breakfast  when  quiet  (5th
dil.),'°. — [230,]  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  cartilage  of  the  left  false  ribs,
horizontally  across  the  rib  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'". — Mornings,  in  bed
after  waking,  transient  cutting,  as  with  a  fine  knife,  on  the  left  side  near
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  cartilages  of  the  false  ribs ;  returns  several
times,  and  after  awhile  alternates  with  a  pain  in  the  same  place  on  the


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  443

Dull  stitches  on  the  left  side  under  the  last  false  ribs/. — Dull  stitches  under
the  third  true  rib  of  the  left  side,  remaining  the  same  during  both  expira-
tion and  inspiration,".— Slowly  intermittent,  dull  stitches  under  the  carti-
lages of  the  last  true  ribs  on  the  left  side,  over  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (in
the  evening  in  bed),  (after  thirty-one  hours),^— Sharp  stitches  between  the
sixth  and  seventh  true  ribs  of  the  right  side,  increased  during  an  inspira-
tion,".— Pressing  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  in  the  sternum,
increased  only  by  deep  inspirations  (after  a  few  minutes),'. — Cutting  stitch
transversely  across  below  the  last  rib  of  the  left  side,  when  stooping  side-
ways and  leaning  on  the  arm,'. — ^Pressive  pain  in  the  sternum  externally,".
— Prickings  under  the  xiphoid  cartilage  of  the  sternum,". — [240.]  Violent
pressure  on  the  sternum  internally,  increased  by  every  motion,  especially
by  stooping  and  then  rising  again,". — A  sticking  pinching  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  sternum ;  most  violent  when  sitting  bent,  and  is  uninfluenced
either  by  expiration  or  inspiration  (after  eight  hours),'. — Fine  stitches  in-
side of  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  from  within  outwards  (after  forty-
eight  hours),'. — A  momentary  but  frightful  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest  (prsecordial  region),  as  if  in  the  diaphragm  (2d  trit.),'".

Heart  and  Pulse. — *Frequent  spasmodic,  though  painless  twitchings
of  the  whole  eardiao  muscle,  especially  on  lying  on  the  back,  with  a  constantly
recurring,  though  not  anxious  thought,  that  he  would  have  apoplexy  and
never  complete  the  proving  (2d  trit.),'". — (Oppressive  burning  in  the  region
of  the  heart),^ — In  the  evening,  in  bed,  quick  pulse,  with  thirst  (after
eleven  hours),*.

]!feck  and  Sack. — ^The  nape  of  the  neck  feels  stiff;  there  seems  to
be  something  foreign  in  the  occiput,  a  kind  of  drawing  and  pressing  on  it,\
— Painful  tension  on  both  sides  of  the  foramen  magnum,  especially  on  mo-
tion, after  waking  in  the  morning  (third  day),  (6th  dil.),'". — Violent  draw-
ing pain  in  the  right  neck,  close  to  the  foramen  magnum  (3d  trit.),'". —
[250.]  A  drawing  pain  from  the  mastoid  process,  extending  for  an  inch
downward,  disappears  on  pressure  (3d  trit.),'° — Pressure  on  the  outer  left
side  of  the  neck,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,^ — A  tensive,  bruised  pain
on  each  side  of  the  neck,  along  the  course  of  the  sterno-cleido-mastoid  mus-
cles, only  noticed  when  the  head  is  turned  to  the  opposite  side,  and  the
muscle  put  upon  the  stretch,  on  sitting  in  the  open  air  (3d  trit.),".— Tick-
ling itching  stitches  between  the  scapulae,  resembling  violent  flea  or  mosquito
bites ;  he  could  not  scratch  enough,'. — Sharp  pressure  under  the  scapulae,'.
— Excessive  tearing  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  left  scapula;  the  pain  is
felt  when  sitting,  and  abates  when  rising  from  the  seat,". — Tearing  in  the
glenoid  cavity  of  the  scapula,  extends  as  far  as  the  clavicle,". — Tingling  of
the  left  scapula,  as  if  the  parts  had  gone  to  sleep,'. — A  transient  itching
between  the  scapulae,  causes  scratching  (5th  dil.),'". — Cutting  stitches  at  the
termination  of  the  ribs,  on  the  right  side,  near  the  vertebral  column,  espe-
cially when  curving  the  back,^ — [260.]  Pressure  in  the  side  of  the  back,
opposite  the  bowels  ;  afterwards,  fearfully  violent,  as  though  he  would  die,
oppressive  stitches  occurring  on  the  least  motion,  or  when  breathing,  so
that  he  had' to  walk  bent ;  when  Ij'ing  still,  a  griping  there,  as  in  a  malig-
nant ulcer ;  oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  a  heavy  load  had  been  lying  on
it,  which  prevented  "breathing,'. — Bruised  pain  in  the  back  and  loins,  after
waking,  in  the  morning  (third  day),  (6th  dil.),'". — Drawing  tensive  pain  in
the  left  lumbar  region,  and  in  the  groin,  below  the  inguinal  ring,  extending
to  the  thigh ;  at  7  p.m.,  while  at  rest,  after  a  moderate  walk  (4th  dil.),"'. —


444  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Dull  stitches  in  the  second  lilmbar  vertebra,'.— Sensation  as  if  the  small  of
the  back  had  been  knocked  away  (after  twenty-four  hours),l — The  small
of  the  back  pains  very  much,  as  if  beaten,''. — Bruised  pain  in  the  small  of
the  back,  in  the  loins  and  neck,  especially  painful  on  motion,  mornings
after  waking  (3d  trit.),'°. — Burning  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  small
of  the  back,  when  sitting ;  when  rising,  or  when  pressing  upon  the  part,  the
pain  is  simply  burning,  without  stitches ;  drawing  on  the  right  side  of  the
posterior  brim  of  the  pelvis,  and  in  the  small  of  the  back  (after  quarter  of
an  hour),^. — A  sensation  of  coldness,  as  though  the  skin  and  underlying
muscles  were  touched  with  a  point  of  ice  on  the  right  side  of  the  pelvis
near  the  sacrum,  when  sitting ;  lasts  thirty  seconds,  and  returns  after  eating
(3d  trit.),^". — A  very  violent  pain  as  if  sprained,  deep  in  the  left  lumbo-
sacral region,  unendur.able  on  adductions  of  the  left  thigh,  compelling  one
to  limp ;  lasts  several  minutes,  followed  by  bruised  pain  on  the  outer  side  of
the  left  knee  (3d  trit.),".

Extremities  in  General. — [270.]  Loss  of  power  in  the  limbs
(1st  trit.),". — Great  loss  of  power  of  the  limbs,  especially  of  the  upper  arm,
about  the  shoulder,  mornings,  after  waking  (4th  dil.),". — Mornings,  in  bed,
after  waking,  unusual  fatigue  of  the  limbs,  especially  of  the  upper  arms,  as
far  as  the  shoulder,  as  after  a  long  walk ;  with  slight  chilliness  under  the
whole  skin,  and  feeling  of  hunger,  which  disappeared  after  a  short  attack
of  nausea  (6th  dil.),'°. — Discomfort,  heaviness,  in  all  the  limbs,^ — A  sort
of  pressive  tearing  in  the  extremities  of  the  long  bones,  just  above  or  below
their  joints,  in  different  parts  of  the  body  (after  forty-eight  hours),^ —
Cramplike  drawing  in  the  back  of  the  right  hand  and  foot,". — Pressive,
drawing  and  tensive  pain  in  the  bends  of  both  elbows  and  knees  (in  every
position)  ;  when  pressing  upon  the  parts,  the  pain  disappears  for  a  moment,
but  returns  immediately,'. — Tearing  and  pressive  pain  in  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  thumb,  and  in  the  two  posterior  joints  of  the  big  toes ;  worse  by
contact,^ — Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  right  shoulder  and  left  inner  malleo-
lus of  the  ankle,  on  walking  (1st  trit.),".

Ujjper  Extremities. — Twitching  of  muscles  from  the  right  ante-
rior clavicular  region  toward  the  shoulder-joint  (in  a  fasciculus  of  the  pec-
toralis  major),  during  rest  (4th  dil.),'".^ — ^[280.]  Tearing  on  the  top  of  the
shoulder,  and  in  the  region  of  the  head  of  the  humerus,^ — A  momentary
tearing  on  the  articular  eminence  of  the  right  shoulder,  at  5  p.m.,  while  at
rest  (()th  dil.),'°. — Tearing  pain  from  the  articular  eminence  of  the  right
shoulder  to  the  neck,  during  rest  (4th  dil.),"'. — Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the
uppermost  muscles  of  the  right  shoulder-blade,  on  exerting  the  outstretched
arm  (4th  dil.),'". — Frequent  painless,  muscular  twitchings  around  the  right
shoulder-joint,  at  one  time  in  the  posterior  margin  of  the  axilla,  at  another
in  front  of  the  clavicle  extending  to  the  top  of  the  shoulder  (4th  dil.),'". —
Boring  scratching  pain  in  right  shoulder-joint,  mornings,  when  walking
(3d  trit.),". — A  short,  painful  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  and  then
in  the  right  frontal  region  (6th  dil.),'°. — Tearing  drawing  (afterward,  beat-
ing, throbbing)  pains  in  the  right  shoulder-joint  in  rest,  with  marked  para-
lytic weakness  of  the  joint  (5th  dil.),". — Pressive,  bruised  pain  on  the  top
of  the  left  shoulder-joint,  on  walking  (one  hour),  (2d  trit.),".^-Paiu,  as  if
sprained,  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  at  rest  (4th  dil.),'".— [290.]  Pressive
tearing  below  the  shoulder-joint,^ — A  sharp,  painful  drawing  in  the  right
deltoid  muscle  (4th  dil.),'°. — Drawing,  digging  pain  under  the  right  deltoid
muscle,"". — Drawing  pains  in  left  deltoid  muscle,  which  pains  on  pressure,
as  if  beaten,  at  rest ;  lasts  ten  to  fifteen  seconds  (4th  dil.),". — Boring  stitches


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  445

in  the  right  axilla,  which  did  not  cease  when  touched  (after  thirty  hours),l
— Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  posterior  wall  of  the  right  axilla,  on  muscular
exertion,  disappears  in  rest  (3d  trit.),"'.^The  arm  is  inclined  to  go  to  sleep,
when  lying  on  it,  mornings,  with  increased  flow  of  saliva  (2d  trit.),'". —
Paralytic  feeling  in  the  arms  during  motion,  especially  in  the  elbow-joint
(after  thirty-two  hours),'. — Tensive  drawing  in  difierent  places  on  the  arms,
like  stitches,'. — A  transient  drawing  tearing  in  the  lower  end  of  the  left
arm,  near  the  condyles  of  the  elbow,  at  3  p.m.,  while  at  rest  (6th  dil.),"*. —
[300.]  Violent  electric  shocks  in  the  left  arm,  starting  from  the  shoulder  ;
when  lying  with  the  hands  under  the  head,  during  a  nap  (3d  trit.),'". —
Fatigue  and  loss  of  power,  especially  of  the  upper  arm,  after  waking  (3d
trit.),". — Great  fatigue  and  loss  of  power,  especially  of  the  upper  arms,  with
inclination  to  lie  down  and  sleep,  11  a.m.  (3d  trit.),'". — Powerlessness  in
the  upper  arm,  as  after  very  severe  labor  (3d  trit.),'". — Great  weakness  of
the  upper  arm,  and  stiffness  of  the  neck,  mornings,  after  waking,  disappears
after  rising  (5th  dil.),'". — Fatigue  of  the  upper  arm,  and  a  drawing  pain  in
the  radius,  beginning  above  the  wrist,  followed  by  a  similar  pain  in  the
right  shoulder  (3d  trit.),". — Cramp  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm,  when
lifting  it ;  otherwise  the  cramp  is  scarcely  felt  (after  ten  hours),'. — Pressive
pain  in  the  flesh  of  the  upper  arm,  which  increases  by  contact,''.^Burning,
quickly  passing  stitch  in  front,  in  the  middle  of  the  left  upper  arm,^. — Con-
tinued pinching  in  the  right  upper  arm  (after  one  hour),'.— [310.]  Draw-
ing pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm  near  the  elbow,  with  para-
lytic weakness  of  them,  during  rest  (5th  dil.),'". — A  drawing  pain  with
paralytic  weakness  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  right  upper  arm,  in  red,
with  inclination  to  stretch  the  arm ;  lasts  several  minutes  (5th  dil.),'". — A
short  paralytic  drawing  on  the  outside  of  the  left  upper  arm;  on  pressure  it
pains  as  if  beaten  (3d  trit.),"". — Tearing  in  the  left  upper  arm,^ — Muscular
twitchings  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow,  and  bruised  pain  on  the  top  of
the  right  shoulder,  during  rest  (2d  trit.),'". — Painless  twitching  in  the  left
elbow-joint,  in  rest,  at  3  p.m.  (2d  trit.),'". — A  burning  pain  in  a  circum-
a  tension,  externally,  at  the  point  of  the  elbow  (after  six  hours),'. — A  pain-
ful drawing  through  the  radial  joint  of  the  right  elbow,  at  noon,  lasting
ten  or  fifteen  seconds,  followed  by  a  similar  pain  in  the  left  hip,  during
rest  (5th  dil.),".— A  biting  itching  on  the  right  elbow  (5th  dil.),'°.— [320.]
Violent  stitch  in  the  tip  of  each  elbow  (2d  trit.),'". — A  very  violent  stitch
in  the  tip  of  the  left  elbow,  when  at  rest  (3d  trit.),'".— Spasmodic,  pressive
drawing  pain  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow,  as  if  the  arm  had  been  sprained
by  violent  motion  ;  only  felt  during  motion  ;  more  when  extending  than
when  bending  the  arm,'. — Short,  lasting,  jerking  tearings,  apparently  in
the  shaft  of  the  radius,  first  of  the  right,  then  of  the  left  forearm,  finally  in
the  lowest  joint  of  the  right  middle  finger ;  returning  from  time  to  time,^ —
A  very  sensitive,  paralytic  drawing  in  the  right  radius,  beginning  above
the  anterior  condyle ;  lasts  eight  to  ten  seconds,  evenings  (4th  dil.),'". — A
sort  of  paralysis  of  the  right  arm  and  hand  ;  it  drops,  and  with  great  effort
he  can  scarcely  write  (after  three  hours),^ — ^Violent,  pressive  tearing  in  the
posterior  muscles  between  the  bones  of  the  elbow  and  the  radius,  as  far  as
the  wrist  (after  thirty-one  hours),l — Spasmodic  pressure  and  drawing  pain
in  the  internal  side  of  the  left  forearm,'. — A  frightful  stitch,  as  from  an
angry  wasp,  in  the  skin,  at  the  middle  of  the  extensor  side  of  the  left  fore-
arm, followed  in  a  short  time  by  a  similar,  but  less  severe  stitch  in  the  skin
of  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  at  11  a.m.  (3d  trit.),'°. — Intermittent  pointed


446  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

stitches  in  the  radius  of  the  right  side,  more  in  the  muscles/. — [330.]  Fre-
quent paralytic  painful  drawings  from  the  middle  of  the  flexor  side  of  the
radius  of  the  left  forearm  up  to  the  elbow,  at  rest  (4th  dil.),". — Drawing
tearing  pains  above  the  wrist,  at  2  p.m.  (4th  dil.),"*. — Painful  paralytic
drawings  above  the  wrist,  from  the  condyles  at  the  elbow  down  along  the
ulnar  side  of  the  right  forearm,  afterward  the  same  pain  in  the  left  fore-
arm, evenings,  in  bed  (4th  dil.),'°. — Drawing  pain  in  the  radial  part  of  the
left  wrist-joint,  while  at  rest,  disappears  on  moving  the  hand,  and  on  pres-
sure pains  as  if  beaten  (3d  trit.),'". — Sharp  continued  stitch  behind  the
wrist-joint,  at  the  beginning  of  the  radius  (after  six  hours),*. — Pressive
tearing  in  the  bones  of  either  wrist,^. — Titillation  in  the  palm  of  the  right
hand,  forcing  him  to  scratch  (after  thirty-three  hours),^ — Paralytic  pains
in  almost  every  joint  of  the  right  fingers,  lasting  ten  to  fifteen  seconds  (4th
dil.),'". — Painless  twitchings  of  the  whole  right  thumb,  afternoons,  on  writ-
ing (ten  to  twelve  times'),  so  that  it  is  abducted  from  the  fingers  (1st  trit.)'°.
— A  short  painful  drawing  in  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb,  alternating  with
a  similar  sensation  in  the  left  occiput,  at  rest  (5th  dil.),'". — [340.]  A  draw-
ing pain  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  index  finger,  with  sudden  paralytic
loss  of  power  of  it,  at  1  p.m.,  when  at  rest ;  lasts  thirty  seconds  (4th  dil.),'".
— Drawing  in  the  joints  of  the  three  left  midmost  fingers,  both  when  in
motion  and  at  rest,". — A  drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  middle  joint  of  the
left  index  finger,  attacks  him  while  in  bed  ;  it  becomes,  after  a  short  dura-
tion, throbbing  (3d  trit.),'°. — A  sensitive,  drawing,  penetrating  pain  in  the
bone  of  the  metacarpal  joint  of  the  ring  finger,  when  at  rest  at  noon  (second
day),  (4th  dil.),'°. — Tearing  in  the  lowest  joint  and  the  metacarpal  bone
of  the  left  fourth  finger,  with  spasmodic  clenching  of  the  fingers,  especially
when  seizing  something,*. — Violent  tearing  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right
little  finger  (3d  trit.),".

Lower  Extremities. — -Powerlessness  of  the  lower  extremities  after
waking ;  the  knees  knock  together  when  walking  (3d  trit.),'". — After  rising
from  bed,  great  weariness  of  the  lower  extremities,  most  marked  in  the
region  of  the  trochanters ;  it  seemed  as  though  the  ligaments  and  muscles  had
given  way,  with  painful  tension  in  the  muscles  about  the  trochanter  and  but-
tocks, as  if  sprained;  especially  sensitive  on  walking;  on  hard  pressure,  they
pain  as  if  bruised  (6th  dil.),^°. — StiflFness  of  the  lower  extremities,  evening
(6th  dil.),". — Shivering-like  creepings  through  the  whole  outer  side  of  the
left  lower  extremity  on  standing  in  a  room  (1st  trit.),'". — [350.]  Paralytic
weakness  in  the  hip  and  thigh,'. — Paralytic  weakness  in  the  right  hip-joint
when  walking,  especially  when  moving  the  leg  forward,  and  stitches  when
setting  down  the  foot;  this  caused  him  to  limp,  but  soon  went  off,'*. — Pain-
ful stiffness  in  the  muscles  about  the  hip-joint  on  dressing  (6th  dil.),'°. —
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  bones  of  the  right  hip  (3d  trit.),'". — On  running,
when  he  steps  on  the  left  foot,  which  is  stretched  forward,  a  painful  prick-
ing pressure  in  the  right  hip-joint,^ — Violent  pain  at  a  place  behind  the
left  hip,  as  if  he  had  had  a  violent  fall  upon  it;  only  felt  during  motion;
not  excited  by  standing  (after  thirty-two  hours),^ — Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in
the  right  hip-joint  (1st  trit.),'°. — A  pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  left  hip,
caused  by  sneezing  (4th  dil.),'". — A  pain,  ^s  if  sprained,  in  the  hip-joint  on
every  step,  so  severe  that  it  caused  him  to  limp  (2d  trit.),'°. — A  violent
electric  shock,  starting  first  from  the  left,  then  from  the  right  hip-joint,  and
disturbing  his  after-dinner  nap  (3d  trit.),".— [360.]  Burning  sore  feeling
between  the  nates  after  a  short  walk  (1st  trit.),". — The  glutei  muscles  pain
as  if  bruised  on  walking,  stooping,  adduction  of  the  thigh,  or  by  lying  on


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  447

the  parts  (6th  dil.)/". — Throbbing  stitches,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,
from  the  left  trochanter,  along  the  neck  of  the  femur,  to  the  socket ;  lasts
ten  minutes ;  the  end  of  each  throb  was  always  accompanied  with  a  iine
stitch  ;  mornings,  after  waking,  in  bed  (4th  dil.),'". — Loss  of  power  in  the
thighs  on  walking  in  the  street  (3d  trit.),'°. — Sense  of  a  tingling  humming
{vibration)  in  the  left  thigh,  and  drawing  in  the  anterior  muscles,". —
Bruised  pain  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh  and  knee  (1st  trit.),'°.
— The  knees  often  knock  together  when  walking,^.- — A  transient  drawing
from  the  right  popliteal  space  through  the  knee  to  the  outer  margin  of  the
patella,  at  10  p.m.,  in  bed  (6th  dil.),"'. — The  knees  knock  together  when
ascending  stairs  (1st  trit.),'°. — Pressive  pain  in  the  knee-joint,  and  from
within  outwards,  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  extremity,  when  sitting,^ —
[370.]  Muscle  twitchings  above  the  left  patella  (1st  trit.),'". — Tearing  dull
stitches  over  the  left  patella,  in  any  position,*. — Bruised  pain  on  the  left
side  of  the  right  patella;  this  increased  so  much  when  walking  that  he
limped,  and  could  step  with  difficulty;  disappeared  in  twenty-five  seconds,
while  sitting,  with  weakness  and  loss  of  power  in  the  extremities  (3d
trit.),'". — Bruised  pain  in  the  left  patella  and  around  the  back  of  the  left
side  of  the  pelvis;  on  motion,  it  pains  as  if  sprained  (3d  trit.),'". — The  knee
is  painful,  as  if  bruised;  worse  when  sitting  than  when  walking  (after  one
and  a  quarter  hours),'. — A  bruised  and  dislocated  pain  in  the  right  knee,
on  motion  (5th  dil.),^". — Bruised  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  right  knee,  fol-
lowed by  biting  itching  on  the  inside  of  the  left  knee  (5th  dil.),'°. — Pain,  as
if  sprained,  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee ;  disappears  during  rest  (3d
trit.),'°. — Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  right  knee,  and  cramp  in  the  calf  on
walking;  mornings,  after  rising  (2d  trit.),". — A  throbbing  bruised  pain  on
the  anterior  and  inner  surface  of  the  right  knee,  on  standing  (4th  dil.),'". —
[380.]  Electric  shocks  through  the  right  knee-joint,  followed  by  two  sim-
ilar shocks  through  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  which  seemed  to  explode
close  to  the  foramen  magnum;  prevented  falling  asleep  in  the  forenoon  (3d
trit.),". — Slight  twitchings  in  the  external  side  of  the  left  knee,  with  a  sen-
sation of  clucking,  when  sitting  (immediately),'. — A  craniplike  incisive
pain  over  the  left  knee,  on  both  sides,  when  he  does  not  move  (after  eight
hours),'. — A  short  drawing  pain  in  the  condyles  of  the  left  knee  (a  quarter
of  an  hour),  (3d  trit.),'°. — Tearing  in  the  left  knee-joint  when  sitting  (after
seventy-two  hours),^ — In  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  burning  corrosive
stitches  in  the  left  tibia,  not  far  from  the  knee,  which  caused  an  involun-
tary twitching  of  the  foot  (after  seventeen  hours),*. — A  short  but  repeated
drawing  paralytic  pain  through  the  marrow  of  the  right  tibia  on  walking
across  the  room,  at  6  p.m.  (3d  trit.),^°. — Repeated  drawing  throbbing  pain
in  the  middle  of  the  left  tibia,  when  at  rest  (a  quarter  of  an  hour),  (3d
trit.),'". — Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  inner  condyle  of  the  right  tibia,  on
walking  in  the  open  air  (3d  trit.),". — Throbbing  tearing  in  the  middle  of
the  right  tibia  (1st  trit.),". — [390.]  An  extremely  violent,  almost  unendur-
able, pain  through  the  whole  fibula,  with  loss  of  power,  at  3  p.m.,  when
walking  (3d  trit.),". — Paralytic  drawing  in  the  middle  of  the  left  tibia,  as
if  in  the  periosteum,  at  rest  (3d  trit.),". — Frequent  tearing  pains,  now  in
the  left,  now  in  the  right  head  of  the  fibula,  and  below  in  the  bone  (3d
trit.),". — A  paralytic  aching  in  the  periosteum  (or  bone)  of  the  left  fibula
while  at  rest  (3d  trit.),". — Cutting  pain  in  the  left  fibula,  as  with  a  fine
knife,  on  standing  (1st  trit.),". — When  going  downstairs,  the  calf  muscles
are  painful,  as  if  too  short,*.— Cramp  in  the  left  calf;  worse  when  at  rest
(afier  four  hours),'. — A  frequent  cramplike  drawing  in  the  lowest  portion


448  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

*
of  the  right  calf  at  Hi  a.m.,  both  in  rest  and  on  motion  ;  lasts  but  a  few
seconds  (6th  dil.),^°.— Sensation  in  the  left  ankle  as  if  the  foot  had  become
detached,  and  the  cartilage  of  the  joints  did  not  touch  when  walking,'. —
A  paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  left  ankle,  near  the  external  malleolus;
lasts  some  minutes,  when  at  rest  (3d  trit.),^". — [400.]  A  transient  tearing
pain  in  the  inner  malleolus  of  the  left  ankle,  extending  upward,  in  rest
(5th  dil.),"". — Cutting  stitches  -in  the  external  malleoli,  from  within  out-
wards, when  sitting,  almost  not  at  all  when  walking;  worse  when  the  foot
rests  upon  a  small  support  (after  some  hours),'. — A  pain,  as  if  sprained,  in
the  external  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  when  walking  (4th  dil.),". — Bruised
pain  on  the  left  inner  malleolus  (4th  dil.),'". — Pain,  as  if  bruised,  and  throb-
bing, in  the  joints  of  the  feet ;  worse  when  sitting  (after  three  hours),'. —
In  the  joints  of  the  feet,  and  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  legs,  a  great  turmoil
and  dull  beating,  as  from  great  fatigue,  with  tingling  and  stinging  of  the
skin  of  the  tibise ;  worse  when  at  rest,  but  less  during  motion  (after  four-
teen hours),'. — A  drawing  pressive,  then  throbbing,  pain  on  the  dorsum  of
the  right  foot,  in  the  metatarsal  bones,  while  sitting  (3d  trit.),". — Drawing
pain  in  the  left  metatarsal  bones  and  ankle,  with  burning  in  the  corn  of
the  left  toe  (2d  trit.),'". — *Tearing  in  the  feet,  at  times  in  the  soles,  at  times
in  the  dorsa,  or  in  the  heels,  toes  (especially  in  their  lowest  joints),  in  the
tarsal  or  metatarsal  bones;  the  pain  does  not  extend  beyond  the  malleoli;
very  seldom  a  shooting  pain  extended  beyond  the  malleoli,". — Pain  in  the
heel,  when  stepping  upon  the  foot,  feeling  as  if  it  were  pithy  (continued),'.
— A  somewhat  burning  sensation  in  the  right  heel  and  tendo  Achillis,  as
if  they  had  gone  to  sleep,^ — [410.]  Tearing  on  the  back  of  the  middle  toes
of  the  left  foot  at  6  p.m.  (3d  trit.),'". — Pain  in  a  corn  makes  it  difficult  to
go  to  sleep  (1st  trit.),'" — Violent  burning  in  the  corn,  in  paroxysms,  even
without  external  pressure,  for  twenty-four  hours,'.

Generalities, — Twitch ings  and  palpitation  of  several  muscles,  es-
pecially of  the  right  thigh,l — Woke  in  the  morning  weak  and  depressed
(4th  dil.),'". — Paralytic  weakness  on  motion  (1st  trit.),'". — Great  weakness
of  the  body,  especially  of  the  thighs,  when  sitting  or  walking,  with  sleepi-
ness (after  four  hours),*. — Lassitude  and  heat  all  over  when  walking  in
the  open  air;  he  has  no  sweat,  and  feels  a  sort  of  anguish,  as  if  his  clothes
were  too  tight,'. — Great  weakness  in  the  limbs,  and  tensive  bruised  pain  in
the  neck,  mornings,  after  waking;  better  after  rising  (5th  dil.),'". — Fre-
quent drawing  pains,  now  in  one,  now  in  another  joint,  now  in  the  upper
arm,  in  the  calf,  forehead,  always  short  and  alternating,  in  rest  (2d  trit.),'".
— [420.]  Drawing  pains,  now  in  the  left  forehead,  now  in  the  occiput,  now
in  the  left  elbow-joint,  in  rest  (1st  trit.),'°. — Painful  pressive  tension,  alter-
nating between  the  tendon  of  the  right  psoas  and  the  triceps  humeris ;  on
pressing  on  it,  pain  as  if  bruised  (1st  trit.),'°. — Paiu,  as  if  sprained,  on  the
external  posterior  rim  of  the  pelvis  and  on  the  right  inner  malleolus,  on
motion,  after  rising  (3d  trit.),'°. — Slight  soreness  between  the  nates,  around
the  anus,  and  in  the  groin,  on  moderate  walking  (2d  trit.),'°. — Seems  to  be
beset  with  pressive,  burrowing,  tensive,  stiff,  bruised,  and  broken  feelings
(of  the  bones),  (3d  trit.),'°.

Skin. — Burning  itching,  here  and  there,  on  the  skin ;  for  instance,
upon  the  skin  of  the  face,  the  hands,  etc.,  not,  however,  making  scratching
necessary,'. — Frequent  sticking  in  the  skin,  as  from  fleas  (6th  dil.),'°.— In-
tolerable itching,  as  from  a  flea  creeping  over  the  head  and  the  whole
body,'. — Stitches  here  and  there  in  the  skin,  as  from  electric  sparks,  through
the  day  (3d  trit.),'". — Itching  biting,  causing  scratching  ou  the  skin  of  the


AEGENTUM  METALLICUM.  449

«

forehead  (5th  dil.),"— [430.]  Pimple  on  the  left  temple,  painful  when
touched,'. — A  little  blister  on  the  tongue,  sore  and  burning,'. — A  furuncle
formed  on  the  lowest  left  rib,  not  painful,  but  sensitive  to  touch ;  it  dis-
charged after  six  days,  but  the  hardness  under  the  skin  remained  fourteen
days  (6th  dil.),'". —Stinging  and  itching  burning  under  the  skin,  in  the
inner  side  of  tiie  wrist-joint  (after  thirty-two  hours),'. — (Several  pimples
on  the  tibia,  with  a  burning  pain),'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Dizzy  drowsiness;  his  eyes  closed,'. — Inclined
to  sleep,  forepart  of  night,  but  could  not,  on  account  of  heat  and  stinging,
as  of  gnats,  in  the  skin ;  when  half  asleep,  was  attacked  with  vertigo,  so
that  he  thought  the  head  would  fall  out  of  the  bed,  followed  by  violent
convulsive  shaking  of  the  body,  as  in  epilepsy,  with  vertigo  and  sleepless-
ness,'".— On  beginning  the  customary  afternoon  nap,  a  repeated  sudden
electric  shock  of  the  whole  left  lower  limb,  starting  from  the  left  knee-joint,
interrupting  the  nap  (5th  dil.),'". — Wakes  at  3.30,  and  cannot  sleep  again
(3d  trit.),'".— Night  extremely  restless  (6th  dil.),'".— [440.]  Very  restless
night  on  account  of  many  anxious  dreams  (5th  dil.),"'.^Sleep  restless,  with
many  dreams  of  care  and  fright  (4th  dil.),'°. — Extremely  restless  at  night;
dreamy;  dreams  of  unpleasant  things;  not  remembered  (5th  dil.),'°. —
Sleep  full  of  dreams  (1st  trit.),'". — Sleep  full  of  very  active  anxious  dreams,
which  were  not  recalled  in  the  morning  (very  unusual),  (6th  dil.),'". —
Dreams  about  the  events  of  the  day,'. — Night  full  of  dreams  of  the  day's
business  (4th  dll.),'". — Many  anxious  dreams,  causing  nausea  (3d  trit.),'".
— Frightful  anxious  dreams  at  night  (2d  trit.),'". — Anxious  dreams;  on
waking  up,  he  still  felt  so  anxious  that  he  imagined  he  had  suffered  the
accident  he  had  dreamed  about,'. — [450.]  A  dream  that  he  was  followed
by  a  raging,  powerful  fiend;  in  the  morning,  he  woke  very  early,  and  was
very  weak;  the  weakness  seems  to  concentrate  itself  in  the  hip  (5th  dil.),'".

Fever. — Shivering  through  the  whole  body  (after  one  and  a  half
hours),'. — Slight  chilliness  under  the  whole  skin,  mornings,  in  bed,  after
waking,  etc.  (6th  dil.),'". — In  the  afternoon,  chilliness  until  he  went  to  sleep ;
even  in  bed,  he  could  not  get  warm ;  sweat  after  midnight,'. — Chilliness  on
the  back  and  on  the  feet,  extending  beyond  the  malleoli ;  it  continued  for
two  hours,  and  was  very  painful ;  walking  did  him  no  good  (after  six  and
a  half  hours),^ — Chills  over  the  upper  portion  of  the  body,  at  night,  when
lifting  the  cover  ever  so  little;  when  properly  covered,  he  felt  naturally
warm  (after  four  hours),'. — Slight  creeping  chills  in  the  skin,  on  uncover-
ing the  upper  part  of  the  body  (4th  dil.),'". — In  the  forenoon,  heat  and
feeling  of  lieat  over  the  whole  body,  less,  however,  about  the  head,  without
any  thirst,  with  a  little  sweat  on  the  abdomen  and  some  on  the  chest,'. —
Hectic  fever  every  day  from  11  to  12  or  1  o'clock,^ — Sweats  very  easily,
especially  during  and  after  eating  (1st  trit.),'°.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Early,  stitching  headache ;
early,  after  rising,  itching  of  lobules  of  ears ;  early,  *mucus  in  throat;  sen-
sation of  hunger ;  after  waking,  hunger ;  early,  no  appetite ;  burning  in
abdomen,  etc. ;  cough ;  early,  after  rising,  hacking  cough ;  in  bed,  after
waking,  cutting  across  cartilages  of  false  ribs ;  in  bed,  after  waking,  cutting
in  the  cartilages  of  the  false  ribs ;  after  waking,  pain  in  back  and  loins ;
after  waking,  loss  of  power  of  limbs ;  when  waking,  muscular  twitchings
around  right  shoulder-joint ;  when  walking,  boring  scratching  in  right
shoulder-joint;  after  waking,  in  bed,  stitches  from  left  trochanter  to  socket;
after  waking,  great  weakness  in  the  limbs,  etc. — (Forenoon),  Sensation  of
hunger,  etc. ;  heat,  etc.,  over  whole  body  — (Noon),  *The  symptoms  reap-

TOL. I.— '29


450  AEGENTUM  METALLICUM.

pear ;  at  rest,  pain  in  right  side  of  chest. — (^Afternoon),  Stitch  through
skin,  etc.,  of  left  upper  lid ;  itching  in  the  folds  of  the  concha,  etc. ;  burn-
ing on  tip  of  tongue  ;  two  vomitings  ;  after  long  walk,  pain,  as  if  sprained,
on  left  side  of  pelvis ;  on  -writing,  twitches  in  right  thumb ;  chilliness. —
(Evening),  After  lying  down,  boring  pain  in  left  side  of  forehead ;  in  bed,
drawing  in  right  half  of  brain,  etc. ;  *in  bed,  crushed  pain  in  testicles;  in
bed,' stitches  under  ribs;  in  bed,  quick  pulse,  etc. ;  paralytic  drawing  io
right  radius  ;  in  bed,  drawing  above  the  wrist,  etc. ;  in  bed,  burning  stitches
in  left  tibia. — (Night),  Distension  of  the  abdomen ;  rumbling  in  abdomen,
etc. ;  when  lifting  the  cover,  ever  so  little,  chills  over  upper  part  of  body.
— (After  midnight),  Sweat. — (10  a.m.).  Confusion  of  head. ^(11  a.m."),
Stitching  in  the  side  of  left  forearm,  etc. ;  great  fatigue,  etc.— (2  p.m.),
Drawing  pains  above  the  wrist. — (3  p.m.),  At  rest,  tearings  in  lower  end
of  left  arm. — (6  p.m.),  Burning  pain  on  elbow ;  tearing  in  back  of  left
middle  toes. — (7  p.m.).  At  rest,  after  moderate  walk,  pain  in  left  lumbar
region; — (Adduction  of  thigh),  Pa,m  in  lumbo-sacral  region. — (Draught  of
air),  Pain  in  cricoid  cartilage. — (  Walking  in  open  air).  Pressure  on  side  of
neck  ;  pain  in  condyle  of  tibia ;  lassitude,  etc.,  all  over. — (Bending  arm),
Tension  at  point  of  elbow. — (Sitting  bent).  Pain  in  left  side  of  sternum. —
(Breathing),  Pressive  stitches  in  side  of  back. — (  On  coming  in  from  a  walk).
Very  dizzy,  etc. — (Contact),  Pum  in  region  of  temporal  bones;  pain  in
metacarpal  bone  of  thumb,  etc. ;  pain  in  flesh  of  upper  arm.^(  Coughing),
*Eaw,  etc.,  in  throat;  rawness,  etc.,  in  upper  part  of  larynx. — (Curving
the  6ac/i;),  Stitches  at  the  .termination  of  the  ribs. — (During  deglutition),
Soreness,  etc.,  in  throat;  (*empty),  scraping  in  velum  pendulum. — (After
dinner),  Immediately,  when  blowing  nose,  violent  bleeding. — (After  begin-
ning to  eat).  Pressure  from  hypogastrium  downwards.— '(J._/i!er  eating).  Cold-
ness in  right  side  of  pelvis. — (During  and  after  eating),  Sweats  very  easily.
— (During  expiration).  Soreness,  etc.,  in  throat. — (Extending  arm),  Pain  in
bend  of  right  elbow. — (Muscular  exertion).  Pain  in  right  axilla. — (Inspira-
tion), Pressure  from  hypogastrium  downwards ;  cutting  in  region  of  lowest
ribs;  pain  under  second  and  third  ribs;  stitches  between  ribs;  stitches  in
chest,  etc. — (Laughing),  *Produces  mucus  in  larynx;  *excites  cough. —
(Itifting  tlie part).  Cramp  in  upper  arm. — -(Lying  on  hack),  *Twitchings  of
the  cardiac  muscle. — (Masticating),  Sense  of  cutting  toward  the  parotid
gland. — (Motion),  Pressure  on  the  sternum  ;  after  waking,  in  the  morning,
tension  on  both  sides  of  the  foramen  magnum ;  stitches  in  the  side  of  back ;
morning,  after  waking,  paralytic  feeling  in  arms ;  paiu  in  bend  of  right
elbow;  pain  behind  left  hip;  bruised,  etc.,, pain  in  right  knee;  paralytic
weakness. — (Motion  after  rising),  Pain,  as  if  sprained  in  rim  of  pelvis. —
(After  a  meal).  While  sitting  and  standing,  sensation  as  of  a  living  worm
boring  through  the  anus. — (During  afternoon  nap).  Sensation  of  hunger,
etc. — (Pressure),  Tendon  of  psoas  muscle  painful  as  if  bruised ;  drawing  on
outside  of  left  upper  arm ;  pains  in  left  wrist. — (Beading),  Burning  sensa-
tion at  pit  of  stomach. — (Reflecting),  Attacks  of  vertigo. — (Rest),  Headache
in  right  half  of  brain  ;  drawing  in  fossa  behind  right  lobule ;  drawing  in
pelvis;  pain  on  right  side  of  pelvis  ;  at  4  p.m.,  drawing  through  right  in-
guinal ring;  4  p.m.,  after  short  walk,  pain  along  course  of  spermatic  cord;
pain  deep  in  right  testicle ;  irritation  on  left  side  of  chest ;  twitching  of
muscles  from  clavicular  region  towards  shoulder-joint;  pain  from  shoulder
to  neck  ;  pains  in  right  shoulder-joint ;  pains  in  left  shoulder-joint;  pains
in  left  deltoid  muscle  ;  pains  in  mu.scles  of  right  upper  arm  ;  pains,  etc.,  in
surface  of  right  upper  arm ;  muscular  twitchings  in  bend  of  right  elbow,


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  451

etc.;  3  P.M.,  twitcliings  in  left  elbow-joint;  at  noon,  drawing  through  the
radial  joint  of  right  elbow  ;  stitch  in  tip  of  elbow  ;  drawing  from  radius  up
to  elbow;  pain  in  radial  part  of  left  wrist;  drawing  in  ball  of  left  thumb,
etc. ;  1  P.M.,  pain  in  right  index  finger,  etc. ;  at  noon,  pain  in  bone  of  ring
finger;  crarap-like  pain  over  left  knee;  repeated  pain  in  left  tibia  ;  draw-
ing in  left  tibia;  paralytic  aching  in  periosteum  of  left  fibula;  cramp  in
left  calf;  drawing  pain  in  left  ankle;  tearing  pain  in  inner  malleolus  of
left  ankle ;  great  turmoil,  etc.,  in  joints  of  the  feet,  etc. ;  drawing  pain  iu
the  joints,  etc. ;  drawing  pains  in  left  forehead,  etc. — {Rising  from  seat),
Burning  in  the  side  of  small  of  back. — (Rising  after  stooping),  Pressure  on
the  sternum. — (Resting  foot  on  small  support).  Stitches  in  the  external  mal-
leolus.— (Seizing  something),  Tearing  in  left  fourth  finger,  etc. — (Setting
down  the  foot).  Stitches  in  hip-joint. — (Singing),  Raw  spot  in  windpipe. — -
(Sitting),  Attacks  of  vertigo ;  drawing  in  right  temple ;  pain  in  belly ;
*stitch  in  the  side  of  chest ;  tearing  in  left  scapula  ;  stitch  in  side  of  small
of  back ;  coldness  on  right  side  of  pelvis ;  pain  in  knee-joint ;  knee  pain-
ful ;  twitchings  in  outer  side  of  left  knee ;  tearings  in  left  knee-joint ;
stitches  in  the  external  malleolus. — (Sneezing),  Pain,  as  if  sprained  in  left
hip. — (Speaking),  Raw  spot  in  windpipe. — (Standing),  Burning  at  pit  of
stomach,  etc.  ;  pain  on  surface  of  right  knee ;  cutting  pain  in  left  fibula. —
(Standing  in  a  room),  Shivering  through  outer  side  of  left  lower  limb. —
(Stepping),  Pain  in  heel ;  pain,  as  if  sprained  in  hip-joint. — (Stepping  on
left  foot,  when  running),  Pressure  in  right  hip-joint. — (During  stool).  Two
vomitings. — (After  morning  stool),  Pain  in  belly. — (Stooping),  *Mucus  gets
into  air-passages. — (Stooping  sideways  and  leaning  on  arm).  Stitch  below  rib.
_ — (Touch),  Gums  painful. — (Turning  head  to  opposite  side,  and piUting  ster-
no-cleido-mastoid  muscle  on  stretch).  On  sitting  in  open  air,  pain  on  each
side  of  neck. — C  Uncovering  upper  part  of  body).  Slight  creeping  chills  in  the
skin. — (Urinating),  Slight  burning. — (After  waking).  Fatigue,  etc. ;  weak-
ness of  upper  arm,  etc. ;  powerlessness  of  lower  extremities. — (  Walking),
Contraction,  etc.,  of  the  abdominal  muscles ;  *crushing  pain  in  right  tes-
ticle ;  pain  in  right  shoulder,  etc. ;  pain  in  top  of  left  shoulder-joint ;  loss
of  power  in  thighs ;  knees  knock  together ;  pain  in  patella ;  weakness  in
right  hip-joint ;  morning,  after  rising,  pain  in  right  knee,  etc. ;  3  p.m.,  pain
through  whole  fibula,  etc. ;  pain  in  left  malleolus ;  great  weakness  of  body. —
( Walking  across  room),  *Leftsided  headache ;  6  p.m.,  paralytic  pain  through .
marrow  of  right  tibia. — (Walking  upstairs),  *M.ucuh  gets  into  the  air-pas-
sages ;  knees  knock  together. — (After  short  walk).  Sore  feeling  between
nates. — ( Yawning),  *Tension  in  fauces.

Atnelioration. — (Night),  Attacks  of  short  cough. — (Open  air),  At-
tacks of  short  cough. — (Exerting  outstretched  arm).  Pain  in  muscles  of  right
shoulder-blade. — (Moving  hand).  Pain  in  radial  part  of  left  wrist. — (Pas-
sage of  wind),  Distension  of  right  side  of  abdomen. — (Pressure),  Drawing
pain  downward  from  mastoid  process  disappears ;  pain  in  bends  of  elbows
and  knees. — (Rest),  Pain  in  right  inguinal  region ;  pain  in  right  axilla ;
pain  in  inner  side  of  right  knee. — (After  rising),  Weakness  of  upper
arm,  etc. ;  weakness  in  the  limbs,  etc. — (Rising  from  seat).  Pressure  from
hypogastrium  downwards,  etc.;  pain  in  left  scapula. — (While  sitting).
Bruised  pain  in  left  side  of  right  patella. — (  Walking),  Stitches  in  external
malleoli.


452 AEGENTUM  MURIATICUM— ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.


ARGENTUM  MURIATICUM.

Silver  chloride,  AgCl. Preparation,  Trituration.

Autliority.  Lembke,  provings  with  the  3d  aud  1st  trits.,  N.  Z.  f.  Horn.
Kl.,  11, 129.

Ilendf. — After  4  p.m.,  frontal  headache  again,  especially  on  stooping
(second  day). — Awoke  with  pressing  in  the  forehead,  which  lasted  till  4
P.M. ;  increased  on  stooping,  relieved  by  coughing ;  once,  in  the  open  air
(12^  R.),  even  nausea  appeared,  with  a  more  violent  attack  of  the  head-
ache, which,  in  general,  was  not  always  equally  severe  in  a  given  time,  but
sometimes  decreased  remarkably,  then  again,  without  cause,  became  sud-
denly very  violent  (second  day). — Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  frontal
bone,  with  heat  in  the  forehead ;  increased  on  stooping ;  more  violent  at
times,  and  lasting  till  he  went  to  sleep.— 9.30  a.m.,  tearing  in  the  frontal
bone ;  again  at  4  p.m.  (first  day). — Drawing  in  the  skin  of  the  left  temple,
as  if  it  were  contracted  (after  one  hour). — Tearing  in  the  left  temple. —
Tearing  in  the  vertex  and  in  the  occiput  (after  one  and  a  half  hours). —
Tearing  on  both  sides  of  the  occiput  (after  one  hour).

JEl/es, — Pain  on  the  right  lower  orbital  border  (after  two  and  a  half
hours). — [10.]  Tearing  below  the  right  eye  (after  one  and  a  half  hours). —
Violent  stitching  in  the  right  lids  (after  nine  hours). — Violent  stitches  in
the  skin  of  the  right  lid  (after  one  hour).

Face. — Tearing  in  the  upper  jaw  (after  one  and  a  half  hours). — Tear-
ing in  the  right  upper  jaw  (after  six  houre).

Mouth. — Taste  slightly  metallic,  inclining  to  bitter  (first  day).

Throat. — Convulsive  contraction  in  the  pharynx  (after  eleven  and
three-quarter  hours).

ZTfinary  Organs. — Very  frequent  and  violent  urging  to  urinate;
much  unue  (first  day). — Violent  urging  to  urinate,  with  dark  yellow,  and
very  acrid  urine  (after  one  and  a  half  hours). — Remarkably  violent  urging
to  urinate,  which  had  to  be  obeyed  speedily;  much  clear  urine  passed;
again  in  an  hour,  and  several  times  afterwards,  until  4  p.m.  (in  two  hours).
— [20.]  In  the  night,  very  frequent  urination ;  urine  as  usual  in  quality
and  quantity. — Frequent  aud  copious  urination,  but  with  less  urging  (first
day).

Extremities  in  General. — On  walking,  drawing  in  the  skin  on
the  external  side  of  the  left  thigh ;  drawing  in  the  skin  above  the  inner
condyle  of  the  left  elbow-joint  (after  four  hours).

Upper  Extremities. — Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder  (after  one
hour). — Drawing  in  the  skin  above  the  inner  condyle  of  the  right  elbow
(after  six  hours).

Louder  Extremities. — In  the  evening,  boring  on  the  sides  of  the
right  foot. — Boring  outside  of  the  right  ankle  (first  day). — Pressing  deep
in  the  right  leg,  on  sitting,  lasting  several  minutes,  and  often  returning.

Generalities. — Tearing  on  the  left  side  of  the  head  and  in  the
left  thumb.

ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Silver  nitrate,  Ag.  NO3. Preparation,  Solution  of  the  crystals  in  distilled
water,  for  lower  dilutions.
Authorities. 1,  Hahnemann,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  4,  340 ;  2,  "  J.,"  22  years  old


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  453

mail,  (Est.  Zeitschrift,  2,  1 ;  3,  "H.,"  man,  23  years  old,  ibid.;  4,  "M.,"
man,  36  years  old,  ibid.;  5,  "P.,"  woman,  30  years  old,  ibid.;  6,  "N.,"
girl,  18  years  old,  ibid.;  7,  "E.,"  man,  20  years  old,  ibid.;  8,  "  K.  M.,"'
boy,  7  years  old,  ibid.;  9,  Graves,  ibid,  (quoted  from  Hygea,  9,  135) ;  10,
Th.  Hall,  ibid.  (Med.  and  Phys.  Journ.,  1800),  given  to  a  woman  for  con-
vulsions; 11,  Moll,  ibid.  (Haudbuch  d.  Pharmak.);  12,  Stuppe,  ibid.
(Inaug.  Dissert.)  ;  13,  Oesterleu,  ibid.  (Handbuch  d.  Hidmittellehre) ;  14,
(Bull,  de  Therap.),  ibid.;  15,  (Gazette  d.  Sante),  ibid.;  16,  Etieune  St.
Marie,  ibid.;  17,  (Med.  Chir.  Zeit.),  ibid.;  18,  Moodie,  ibid.  (Med.  and
Phys.  Journ.),  general  statement ;  19,  Gesnerius  (De  Secretis  reraed.),
ibid.;  20,  Westphal,  ibid.  (Miscell.  Nat.  Curios.);  21,  Blancard,  ibid.  (Die
neue  Scheidek.);  22,  Boyle,  ibid.;  23,  Nasse,  ibid.;  24,  Boerbaave,  ibid.;
25,  Hildegardis,  ibid. ;  26,  Kinglake,  ibid.  (Lond.  Med.  and  Phys.  Journ.),
given  to  a  man  for  epilepsy;  27,  Schneider,  ibid.  (Hufelands,  J.) ;  28,
Balardini,  ibid.;  29,  Hoffmann,  ibid, ;  30,  Barn,  ibid. ;  31,  Michaelis,  ibid. ;
32,  Ebers,  ibid.;  33,  Cappe,  ibid.;  34,  Burdach,  ibid.;  35,  Richter,  ibid. ;
36,  Wederaeyer,  ibid.;  37,  Badley,  ibid. ;  38,  De  Lens,  ibid.;  39,  Fodere,
ibid. ;  40,  Currie,  ibid. ;  41,  Tanchon,  ibid. ;  42,  Glauber,  ibid. ;  43,  Venat,
ibid.;  44,  Gutceit,  ibid.;  45,  Brown  (Lond.  Med.  Gaz.,  1834),  ibid.;  46,
Hudson,  ibid. ;  47,  Smith  (Lond.  Med.  Gaz.,  1837),  ibid. ;  48,  Meyer,  ibid. ;
49,  Roget,  ibid.;  50,  Kopp,  ibid.;  51,  Frank,  ibid.;  52,  Heriug,  Horn.  v.
Jahrschrift,  10,  343;  53,  Lembke,  N.  Z.  f.  H.  K.,  11,  130  (20  drops  to  a
teaspoonful  of  a  solution  of  1  grain  to  1  ounce  of  water)  ;  54,  J.  O.  Muller,
Z.  f.  Horn.  Aezte.  CEst.,  1,  45  UO  drops  of  6  dil.);  55,  Krahmer  (Mono-
graph), Review  in  A.  H.  Z.,  29,  62,  took  small  doses,  and  once  i  grain  ;
56,  Schachert,  Dissertation  d.  Arg.  nit.  (Review,  A.  H.  Z.,  29,  74),  took  i
grain;  57,  Gaz.  Med.,  1832  (Rust's  Mag.,  40,  and  A.  H.  Z.,  5,  133);  58,
Gamberini,  Med.  Neuigkeiten  (A.  H.  Z.,  Mon.  BL,  3,  29)  ;  59,  Pouniarede,
Journ.  d.  Chim.  Med.,  1839  ;  60,  Barbier,  Trait,  d.  Mat.  Med.;  61,  Lom-
bard, Gaz.  Med.  d.  Paris,  1832;  62,  Koehlin,  Wirkung.  d.  MetalL;  63,
Debeney,  Recueil  d.  Mem.  d.  Med.,  1843,  injection  of  12  grains  in  a  healthy
urethra;  64,  Dawosky,  Journ.  d.  Med.,  etc.,  1856;  65,  Balardini,  Oraodei
Annali  d.  Med.,  1826  ;  66,  Scattergood,  Brit.  Med.  J.,  1871,  fatal  poisoning
of  a  boy.

Mind.. — Imbecile  appearance;  he  looks  at  people  with  a  foolish  ex-
pression of  countenance,  even  while  conversing  with  them  on  some  serious
subject ;  he  behaves  shyly  and  sillily,  and  talks  in  a  childish  manner.  On
lying  down  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  his  head,  visions  and  distorted  faces
hover  before  his  imagination,  although  his  eyes  are  closed,  even  in  day-
light (30th  potency,  second  day),'. — Apathy,  with  great  debilit}^  and
tremulous  weakness  (1st  potency),^ — Hypochondriac  and  gloomy  raood;
drawing  pain  in  the  forehead  ;  yellowish  complexion ;  sweetish-bitter  taste
in  the  mouth  ;  dry,  viscid  lips  ;  feebleness  and  febrile  sensation  ;  debility
and  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs  (in  the  forenoon,  at  11  o'clock,  for  one
hour),  (30th  potency,  third  day),*.— Hypochondriac  taciturnity,  accom-
panied with  dulness  of  the  head,  and  beating  in  the  whole  body  (30th
potency),*. — Anxiety,  which  makes  him  walk  rapidly,^. — *-He  feels  very
mneh  affected  bodily  and  mentally ;  he  does  not  undertake  anything  lest  he
should  not  succeed  (6th  potencv),*-- — Irritated  and  anxious  mood,  in  the
morning  after  rising,  accompanied  with  great  nervousness,  feeling  of  weak-
ness and  tremulousness  (6th  potency),*, — Alternation  of  clear  consciousness,
lightness  of  sense,  and  inditffereuce  (6th  potency),*.-— Dulness  of  sense,  ab-
sence of  thought,  inability  to  think ;  he  is  unable  to  find  suitable  words


454  ARGENTUM  NITEICUM.

for  his  ideas ;  hence  he  falters  in  his  speech  (2d  potency,  second  day),*

[10.]  Difficulty  to  collect  his  senses ;  he  found  it  extremely  difficult  to  con-
ceive an  idea,  with  heat  and  fulness  in  the  head  (2d  potency,  third  day),*.
— He  feels  dull,  as  if  he  would  do  nothing,*'^. — Stupid  feeling  in  the  head
when  writing  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Weakness  of  memory ;  he  is
unable  to  think  connectedly,  and  falters  iu  his  speech  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — Stupefaction,  with  suflering  look  (30th  potency,  second  day),^ —

Mend. — Confusion  of  the  head  (2d  potency,  first  day),*. — The  whole
day  his  head  feels  confused,  especially  the  occiput,  the  left  region  of  the
vertex,  and  the  forehead  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — [20.]  On  waking  in
the  morning  from  a  sleep  full  of  dreams,  his  head  aches  and  feels  confused
(2d  potency,  first  day),*. — The  head  feels  confused,  accompanied  with
whizzing  in  the  ears,  and  hard  hearing  (30th  potency,  sixth  day),".— Con-
fusion of  the  head,  with  feeling  of  stupidity,  over  night ;  in  the  morning,
when  waking,  it  is  changed  to  fulness  in  the  forehead,  with  stinging,  dig-
ging in  the  same,  increasing  after  rising  (1st  potency,  fifth  day),*. — Dull
and  confused  state  of  the  head,  with  beating  in  the  whole  body,  and  hypo-
chondriac taciturnity,  after  dinner  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — The  head
feels  confused  after  drinking  coffee. — -Vertigo,*". — ^Vertigo  in  the  morning
(30th  potency,  fourth  dav),'. — Vertigo  with  headache,". — In  the  morning
she  was  attacked  with  vertigo,  as  if  she  were  turning  in  a  circle,  inducing  her
to  squat  doivii,  lest  she  should  fall;  accompanied  with  headache  (30th  potency,
second  day),". — Vertigo,  more  before  the  eyes  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. —
[30.]  Vertigo,  with  complete  though  transient  blindness,'". — *  Vertigo,  and
buzzing  in  the  ears,  and  general  debility  of  the  limbs  and  trembling,".—
Vertigo  and  staggering  gait,"'. — Attack  of  fleeting  vertigo,  as  if  intoxicated
(1st  potency,  first  day),*. — *  Giddiness,  as  if  intoxicated,  aevompanied  with
lassitude  and  debility  of  the  lower  limbs  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — ^Vertigo,
with  nausea  and  confusion  of  the  seuses(30th  potency,  second  day),'. —
Giddiness  in  the  head,  as  if  he  would  faint,  the  body  feeling  tired,  but  not
disagreeably  so  (30th  potency,  first  day).*. — Giddy,  dulness  of  sense,  and
as  if  he  had  lost  all  sensations;  accompanied  with  drowsiness  (30th  potency,
first  day),*. — Dizziness  before  falling  asleep  (1st  potency,  first  day),l — There
is  no  region  in  the  head  which  was  not  painfully  affected  by  the  drug. — [40.]
Headache  all  the  time  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Sen.satiou  in  the  head,
as  if  the  epileptic  fit  were  approaching,'. — When  waking  in  the  morning,
he  has  a  terrible  headache,  obliging  him  to  gnash  his  teeth  (1st  potency,
third  day),*. — Strong  and  agreeable  odors  appear  to  increase  the  headache
remarkably  (second  day),*". — *  The  headache  is  worse  in  the  open  air. — Head-
ache and  toothache  (30th  potency,  third  day),". — *The  headache  is  re-
lieved by  binding  something  tightly  around  the  head.  (Aust.  provings.) —
Headache,  with  eructations  and  chilliness. —  Generally  the  headache  is  ac-
companied by  chilliness,  and  sometimes  by  a  general  increase  of  the  temperature
of  the  body.  (Aust.  provings.) — The  whole  night  his  head  feels  heavy  and
dull,  with  heat  in  the  head,  inducing  him  to  lay  his  head  on  cool  places,  in
order  to  obtain  relief  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — [50.]  Painful  fulness
in  the  brain  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — *Painfid  fulness  and  heaviness  in
the  head,  with  inability  to  recollect,  and  glowing  heat  of  the  head  and  cheeks,
in  the  afternoon  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. — He  wakes  with  a  headache  in
the  morning;  the  head  feels  full,  heavy,  and  stupid;  the  headache  becomes
intolerable  when  making  the  least  movement,  and  continues  the  whole  day
(2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Fulness  and  heaviness  of  the  head  (2d  potency,


AEGENTUM  NITRICUM.  455

second  day),*. — Fulness  and  heat  in  the  head,  at  night,  with  great  excite-
ment (30th  potency,  fourth  day),". — Fulness,  pushing,  and  heat  in  the
head,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  head  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — *Ex-
cessive  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  throbbing  of  the  carotid  arteries,
obliging  him  to  loosen  his  cravat,  accompanied  with  heaviness,  stupefying  dul-
ness  of  the  head,  great  melancholy,  weakness  of  mind,  inability  to  express  him-
self suitably  and  coherently  (30th  potency,  second  day),'. — *Pain  in  the  head ;
tlie  head  seems  enlarged  (30th  potency,  third  day),^. — *Ifthe  pain  is  felt  all
over  the  head,  it  appears  to  him  enlarged;  if  the  pain  is  felt  only  on  one  side
of  the  head,  the  eye  of  the  affected  side  appears  enlarged  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — Pain  in  the  head,  as  if  it  would  burst,  occasioned  by  mental  labor
(2(1  potency,  second  day),*. — [60.]  Slight  digging-up  moving  about  in  the
parenchyma  of  the  brain  (6th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — *Drawing,  in  streaks
or  bands,  over  the  surface  of  the  brain,  apparently  in  the  membranes  or
the  sinuses  (6th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Headache  dull,  tormenting,  espe-
cially in  the  forehead,  with  dejection  and  restlessness  (1  grain),^". — Since
waking,  his  forehead  feels  painful  and  dull,  which  abates  after  dinner  (Ist
trit.,  second  day),^ — She  wakes  with  a  headache ,  pressure  deep  in  the  brain,
accompanied  with  chilliness,  the  whole  forenoon  (30th  potency,  first  day),^
— Pressing,  digging  headache,  with  chilliness,  and  great  bruised  feeling  in
the  limbs,**. — Nocturnal  pressing,  stupefying  pain  about  in  the  head,  espe-
cially extending  to  the  temples  and  forehead,  with  heaviness  iu  the  whole
body,  restless  dreams  and  nausea  (in  a  woman  of  thirty),**. — "^Pressing
pains  in  the  whole  head,  occasioned  by  mental  exertion  (30th  potency,
second  day),*. — Sensation  as  if  a  cool  current  were  blowing  from  the  right
frontal  eminence  into  the  right  eye  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Pain  iu  the
forehead  and  vertex,  as  if  grasped  together  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. —
[70.]  Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  the  daytime,  increasing  considerably
in  the  evening  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Aching  pain,  extending  to
the  eyes,  with  sneezing  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. —  Violent  boring  in  the
left  forehead,  when  walking  (after  six  and  a  half  hours),*'. — *Boring  in  the
left  frontal  eminence  (immediately),*^ — Drawing  in  the  forehead,*'. —
Drawing  over  the  whole  forehead,  lasting  only  a  short  time  (after  two  and
a  half  hours),*'. — *  Constant  drawing  and  digging  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,
afterwards  accompanied  with  a  drawing  tearing,  extending  along  the  whole
left  arm  (6th  potency),*.— Almost  all  day,  pressure  and  heaviness  in  the
forehead,*'. — Heaviness  and  pressure  in  forehead,  lasting  the  whole  day
(after  one  hour),*'. — Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  forehead,  the  whole
day,  worse  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  ceasing  toward  evening ;  not  in-
creased by  eating  (after  one  hour)  *'. — [80.]  All  day,  pressure  and  heavi-
ness in  forehead,  increased  by  stooping,*'. — Pressure  in  the  forehead  (30th
potency,  first  day),'. — *  Pressing  in  the  frontal  bone,  to  the  left,  especially
on  the  frontal  eminenc^  at  times  more  violent;  it  is  constant,  and  appears
at  times  like  a  band  ovir  the  forehead  ;  worse  on  walking,*'. — Pressure  in
the  upper  right  forehead ;  and  outward  from  the  right  nipple  (immedi-
ately),*'.— Pressing  and  drawing  over  the  forehead  and  below  the  left  eye,*'.
— Pressure  iu  the  right  half  of  the  forehead,  especially  in  the  eyebrows,  in
the  morning,  when  waking  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — Pushing  iu  the
right  side  of  the  forehead,  as  of  a  load  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Tear-
ing in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (immediately),*'. — Wandering  tearing  in
the  skin  of  the  left  upper  forehead  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),*'. — *Sticking
and  afterwards  digging  pain  in  the  left  frontal  and  vertex  region,  extending
as  far  as  the  malar  bone  (2d  potency),*. — [90.]  *Stitehes  and  digging  in  the


456  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

left  frontal  eminence,  every  day,  at  different  periods,  but  more  frequently  in
the  afternoon  (6th  potency),*. — Undulating  throbbing  in  the  whole  fore-
head (6th  potency,  third  day),*. — *  Pulsations  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead
(SOth  potency,  first  day),*. — At  12  o'clock,  ^violent  boring  in  the  left  temple
(first  day),*^ — Pressure  in  right  temple  (second  day),^^ — Tearing,  extend- '
ing  down  the  right  temple  as  far  as  the  face  (SOth  potency,  second  day),*.
— (-Cutting,  as  with  knives,  Iq  the  left  temple  (SOth  potency),*. — At  8  a.m.,
tearing  on  the  top  of  the  head,  more  violent  diagonally  over  the  vertex
(third  day),*^ — Tearing  on  the  right  of  the  vertex  (immediately  ),^l-^Pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  consisting  in  heaviness,  fulness,  and  pressure,
for  several  evenings  (2d  potency),*. — [100.]  8  a.m.,  boring  on  the  upper
right  side  of  the  head  (third  day),*^ — 1  p.m.,  violent  boring,  increasing  by
jerks  and  shocks,  on  the  upper  right  side  of  the  head,  when  walking;
10  P.M.,  the  same  in  the  left  temple,  on  sitting ;  10.30  p.m.,  in  the  right
temple  (second  day),'', — Digging  headache,  in  the  right  side  (2d  potency),*.
— *  Digging  and  tumultuous  raging  in  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain,  until
he  lost  his  senses;  if  the  pain  abates  in  the  forehead,  it  increases  in  the  side
of  the  head  and  toward  the  occiput,  where  it  extends  down  to  the  nape  of
the  neck ;  the  pain  increases  during  motion,  when  vertigo  accompanies  it,
to  such  an  extent  that  he  walks  to  the  left,  instead  of  walking  straight  (SOth
potency,  second  day),*. — *Digging,  cutting  motion  through  the  left  hemisphere
of  the  brain,  extending  from  the  occiput  to  the  frontal  protuberance,  recurring  fre-
quent!]/, and  increasing  and  decreasing  rapidly  (SOth  potency),*. — lO.SO  P.M.,
on  sitting,  suddenly,  on  the  right  parietal  bone,  a  violent  drawing,  as  if
upward  ;  immediately  after,  pressing  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead ;  then
deep  in  the  right  wrist,''. — Drawing,  with  pressure  and  heaviness  in  the
right  side  of  the  head,  abating  in  rest,  but  increasing  by  the  least  motion
(2d  potency),*. — On  waking  in  the  night,  tearing  on  one  side  of  the  head
(first  day),"'. — Dragging,  beating  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  accom-
panied with  a  general  uncomfortable  feeling  (SOth  potency,  second  day),*.
— Troublesome  stinging  and  digging  pain,  alternately  anteriorly  and  pos-
teriorly in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  (SOth  potency,  third  day),*. — [110.]
Violent  boring  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  (first  day),''. — Narrow  trac-
tion extending  from  the  occiput  into  the  middle  of  the  brain  (6th  potency,
fourth  day),*. — Tumorlike,  itching  elevations  on  the  scalp  and  in  the  nape
of  the  neck  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. — On  the  border  of  the  nape  of  the
neck  and  the  scalp,  irregularly  shaped  blotches  make  their  appearance,
itching  violently,  and  feeling  sore  when  scratched ;  after  scratching  them
for  some  time,  they  become  inflamed  and  moist  (1st  potency,  sixth  day),*.
— Creeping  in  the  scalp,  as  of  vermin,  towards  morning  (SOth  potency,
third  day),'.^Much  itching  of  the  scalp  (2d  potency,  second  day),* '. — Much
itching  and  biting  near  the  nape  of  the  neck  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — In-
tolerable nightly  itching  of  the  boundary  of  the  neck  and  scalp  (1st  potency,
fifth  day),*. — Extremely  troublesome  itching,  creeping  and  crawling  of  the
scalp,  as  of  vermin,  with  sensation  as  if  the  roots  of  the  hairs  were  pulled  up-
ward; she  had  to  scratch  all  the  time  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),'^.

^y«3,s.— Holloweyedness  (SOth  potency,  fifth  day),*. — [120.]  Bleareyed-
ness  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. — Wild  rolling  of  the  eyes,  the  pupils  being
dilated  and  insensible  to  light,". — After  violent  itching  the  evening  before,
red  vessels  spread  here  and  there,  ecchymoses  into  the  conjunctiva  bulbi,°*.
— *  Ophthalmia,  abating  in  the  cool  and  open  air,  intolerable  in  the  warm
room,°. — *  Ophthalmia,  with  intense  pains,^^. — Burning  and  dryness  of  the


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  457

eyes,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking ;  he  had  great  trouble  in  opening
them  (2d  potency),*. — Aching  pain  deep  in  the  eye,  early  in  the  morning
(30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  if  too  full ;  heat  and
pain  in  the  ball  of  the  eye  when  moving  or  touching  it ;  mucous  flocks
impeding  the  sight,  and  obliging  him  to  wipe  the  eyes,  in  the  daytime;  a
scarlet  redness,  which  had  appeared  in  the  morning  in  the  inner  cantbus
of  the  right  eye;  extended  considerably  in  the  evening,  looked  very  much
heightened,  and  spread  as  far  as  the  cornea;  the  conjunctiva,  bulbi,  and
palpebrarum  looked  inflamed  and  infiltrated  ;  the  eye  was  affected  with  a
stinging  itching  pain,  as  if  occasioned  by  a  grain  of  sand  which  had  be-
come lodged  in  the  eye ;  *gray  fipota  and  bodies  in  the  shape  of  serpents
moved  before  vision ;  he  saw  as  through  mist ;  even  the  light  of  the  candle,
which  was  not  tinned  white,  was  enveloped  in  mist;  the  aperture  between
the  edges  of  the  lids  became  narrower,  and  he  had  to  wink  frequently  (with
general  debility  and  increased  temperature  of  the  skin,  2d  potency),*. —
Heaviness  over  the  eyes,  which  open  with  difficulty ;  increased  by  stoop-
ing ;  decreased  toward  evening,^'. — Tearing,  extending  from  the  forehead
into  the  left  eye  and  side  of  the  face ;  lachrymation  of  the  eye,  which
looks  red  and  glistening  (30th  potency,  third  day),^. — [130.]  Violent  stitches
in  the  inner  angle  of  the  right  eye  (after  two  hours),*'. — Itching  and  biting
of  the  left  eye  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — *Neuralgic  pain  in  left  infra-
orbital region  (lasted,  with  more  or  less  severity,  all  winter),'^ — *Infraor-
bital  neuralgia  (\eit  side),  at  first  only  now  and  then,  but  it  became  constant
during  the  following  winter,*^ — Boring  deep  in  the  right  lower  orbital
ridge  (after  one  hour),*'. — Drawing  in  the  centre  of  the  lower  right  orbital
ridge,"'. — Tearing  and  pressing  in  the  centre  of  the  right  lower  orbital
ridge,  in  several  attacks,  while  sitting;  unaffected  by  touch  or  pressure;
with  much  thin  saliva  in  mouth,  and  bitter  taste  like  soapsuds  (second  day),°'.
— *Boring  above  the  left  eye  (after  two  hours  and  a  half),*'. — Pressure  in
left  eyebrow  (after  two  hours  and  a  half),*'. — *The  canthi  are  red  as  blood ;
the  caruncnla  lachrymalis  is  swollen ;  it  stands  out  of  the  corner  of  the
eye  like  a  lump  of  red  flesh ;  clusters  of  intensely  red  vessels  extend  from
the  inner  canthns  to  the  cornea  ;  the  conjunctiva  is  puckered  and  intersti-
tially  distended;  increased  secretion  of  tears  and  gum  (2d  potency,  second
day),*. — [140.]  Biting  of  the  right  outer  canthus  (2d  potency,  second  day),*.
— *  Itching  of  the  canthi  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Nightly  agglutina-
tion of  the  right  eye ;  in  the  morning  the  eye  was  closed  with  crusts  of  dry
gum,  which  had  to  be  soaked  before  they  could  be  removed,  and  the  eye
could  be  opened ;  when  opened  it  looked  redder  than  the  day  before ;  pres-
sure and  heat  in  the  eye  were  more  intense ;  the  aperture  between  the  lids
was  swollen,  accompanied  with  photophobia;  dimness  of  sight  (2d  po-
tency),*.— Moisture  of  the  eyes  and  slight  agglutination,  in  the  morning
(30th  potency,  fifth  day),*. — *Thc  eyes  are  filled  with  mucus;  reading  is
difficult  (2d  potency),*. — *  Mucus  in  the  eyes,  drying  up  in  the  lashes  and
forming  scurfs  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — In  the  morning  when  waking,
the  eyes  are  filled  with  mucus ;  at  the  same  time  the  head  feels  slightly
confused,  especially  in  the  forehead  and  root  of  the  nose  (30th  potency,
second  day),*. — *The  conjunctiva  of  the  eyes  and  lids  is  red  as  blood  (2d  po-
tency, second  day),*. — *  Around  the  cornea,  towards  the  inner  canthus,  the
conjunctiva  exhibits  a  red  congested  swelling  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — At
10  P.M.,  violent  sticking  in  the  right  eyeball  (third  day),*'. — [150.]  6  a.m.,
on  rising,  much  stitching  in  the  left  eyeball,  more  in  its  lower  part  (third
day),*'. — Frequent  stitches  in  the  inner  angles  of  both  eyeballs  (first  day),*'.


458  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

—Opacity  of  the  cornea ;  a  large  portion  of  the  cornea  is  covered  with  a
white,  opaque,  apparently  dense,  but  not  very  deeply  penetrating  spot,". —
Contraction  of  the  pupil,". — She  is  only  able  to  read  by  holding  the  page
which  she  is  reading  at  a  distance  from  her  eyes  (30th  potency,  third  day),^
— *.Vanishihg  of  sight;  he  is  constantly  obliged  to  wipe  off  the  mucus  which
obstructs  the  axis  of  vision  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. — Weakness  of  sight,
with  moist  eyes,  impeding  writing  (30th  potency,  fourth"  day),*. — In  the
evening  at  twilight,  she  felt  as  if  she  would  become  blind ;  her  sight  be-
came so  suddenly  weak  that  she  broke  forth  into  loud  complaints;  she  had
to  open  her  eyes  widely  to  recognize  the  things  around  her,  with  dilatation
of  the  pupils  ;  she  had  not  yet  recovered  her  full  power  of  vision  at  candle-
light, although  there  was  an  improvement  (30th  potency,  first  day),^ — The
letters  become  blurred  before  the  eyes  ;  her  sight  vanishes  when  reading  or
writing  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Obscuration  of  sight,  with  anxiety,
heat  in  the  face,  and  lachrymation,'. — [160.]  Transient  blindness,*". — Fiery
bodies  and  flashes  before  her  eyes,  in  the  morning  in  the  dark  (30th  potency,
third  day),*.

Ears. — She  thought  a  board  had  been  placed  before  the  left  ear  (30th
potency,  sixth  day),^ — Tearing  behind  right  ear  (after  one  hour  and  a
half  ),'*l — Frequent  stitches  deep  in  the  left  ear  (first  day),*^ — Twingeing
pain  in  the  ears  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*.^ — Tearing  and  twingeing  in
the  right  ear  (2d  potency),*. — Painful  stoppage  of  the  ears,  with  headache
(30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. —  Whizzing,  feeling  of  obstruction,  and  hard
hearing  in  the  left  ear  (30th  potency,  fifth  day),°. — Whizzing  before  the  ears,
with  dulness  of  the  head  (30th  potency,  sixth  day),^ — [170.]  Ringing  in
the  ears  and  deafness  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Clear  ringing  in  the  ears,
in  the  morning  in  bed  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — Clear  ringing  in  the
ears,  confusing  the  senses ;  she  imagines  it  is  at  a  distance  (30th  potency,
first  day),". — Clear  ringing  before  the  ears,  passing  into  momentary  deaf-
ness, with  dull  roaring  (1st  potency,  first  day),*.

Nose. — Readily  bleeding  pimple  near  the  septum  of  the  nose  (2d  po-
tency),*.— Scurfs  in  thenose  excessively  painful  when  becoming  detached,
and  occasioning  bleeding  (30th  potency,  sixth  day),*. — Ulcers  in  the  nose
becoming  covered  with  yellow  crusts,*. —  Coryza;  sneezing  after  tingling  in
the  Dose  and  the  posterior  nares  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Much  sneezing
(several  days),'. — *  Coryza,  with  constant  chilliness,  sickly  look,  lachrymation,
sneezing,  and  such  a  violent  stupefying  headache  that  she  had  to  lie  down  (30th
potency,  third  day),^. — [180.]  Disagreeable  stoppage  of  the  upper  part  of
the  nose,  for  three  days,^". — *Discharge  from  the  nose  resembling  white  pus,
with  clots  of  blood,^". — When  sneezing  he  discharges  a  purulent  mucus  from
the  nose,  mixed  with  little  spots  of  blood  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),l — Dis-
charge from  the  nose  like  white  pus  mixed  with  lumps,". f — 8  a.m.,  several
drops  of  blood  from  the  right  nostril,  without  previous  blowing  of  the  nose,
touch,  or  motion  (fourth  day),^'. — Blows  blood  from  the  right  nostril  (30th
potency,  fifth  day),*. — He  blows  blood  and  puriform  mucus  from  the  nose,*.
— The  nose  is  obstructed,^ — Unpleasant  stoppage  in  the  upper  part  of  the
nose  for  three  days,'". — At  night,  the  nose  is  stopped,  with  much  itching
(2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — [190.]  In  the  room  the  nose  is  obstructed ;  in
the  open  air  a  thin  mucus  flows  from  it  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Pain
and  swelling  of  the  right  nasal  wing  (3d  potency,  sixth  day;,*". — Sore
pain  in  the  nose  when  compressing  the  wings,*. — The  left  nasal  bones  are

■j-  After  the  three  days  of  S.  T.  the  piis  is  said  to  have  been  like  brain-substance.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  459

painful,  as  if  bruised  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Rigidity  and  clawing  in
the  nasal  cavity  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Twitching  and  creeping  under
the  skin,  close  to  the  left  side  of  the  nose  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Smart-
ing and  itching  in  the  nose  (1st  potency,  fifth  day),^ — *Itehing  in  the  nose
(2d  potency,  third  day),*. — *  Violent  itehing  in  the  nose,  obliging  him  to  rub
it  constantly  until  it  is  raw  (2d  potency,  for  several  days),^ — *Dulness  of  the
sense  of  smell  (30th  potency,  several  days),". — [200.]  At  night  she  has  a
smell  as  of  pus  before  the  nose  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),^

Face. — *Sickly  appearance  (1st  potency),^ — *Sunken,  pale,  bluish  coun-
tenance (2d  potency),*. — Leaden^colored  countenance,  with  nausea  (30th
potency,  second  day),". — Appearance  of  old  age ;  the  skin  in  the  face  is
more  tightly  drawn  over  the  bones,  hence  the  muscles  are  more  distinctly
delineated  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Convulsions  of  the  facial  muscles,
the  mouth  being  almost  locked,". — Pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,
and  drawing  in  the  left  cheek  (first  day),^'. — Dull,  drawing,  tearing  pains
from  the  right  temple  to  the  upper  jaw  and  to  part  of  the  teeth  (30th  po-
tency),*.— In  the  left  cheek,  a  wandering  pain  like  a  crawling  (after  six
hours),*^ — Drawing  in  the  skin  of  both  cheeks  (immediately),^'. — [210.]
4  P.M.,  burning  stitching  on  the  left  zygoma,  then  on  the  right  (first  day),°^
— The  lips  and  soft  parts  of  the  mouth  have  a  bluish  appearance  (1st  po-
tency),".— On  the  margins  of  the  lips  and  about  the  chin  are  purple-red
spots,  and  the  interior  of  the  mouth  is  covered  with  a  whitish-gray  crust
(Beont.),*^ — The  lips  are  dry  and  viscid,  without  thirst  (6th  potency),*. —
Boring  deep  in  both  sides  of  the  chin  (third  day),^'. — Drawing  above  the
chin,  under  the  skin  (first  day),*'. — Drawing  in  the  lower  jaw,^'. — Pain,  as  if
beaten  to  pieces,  in  the  body  of  the  left  lower  jaw  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*.

Mouth. — Exfoliation  of  a  molar  tooth,  in  the  right  lower  jaw,  imped-
ing mastication,  and  causing  an  ulcerative  pain  and  a  vacillating  sensation
(30th  potency,  third  day),'. — The  teeth  become  affected  and  spoiled;  whereas
he  formerly  never  suffered  with  toothache,  and  had  perfectly  sound  teeth,  he  now
suffered  constantly  with  some  pain  in  the  teeth  ever  since  he  commenced  the
proving,  which  was  felt  especially  when  chewing,  when  eating  sour  things,  and
when  introducing  cold  things  into  his  rnovth;  besides  this  there  is  a  grumbling
and  digging  perceived  in  the  teeth,  especially  those  of  the  lower  jaw,  on  the  left
side,  as  if  they  would  become  cari'oMS,*.— [220.]  Raging  in  the  carious  molar
tooth  of  the  left  side  (30th  potency),". — Drawing  through  all  the  teeth  of
the  lower  jaw  (second  day),^^ — 9  p.m..  Drawing  through  the  lower  incisors
(first  day),*'. — Drawing  in  the  inolars,*^ — In  the  morning,  when  washing
his  mouth,  the  cold  water  causes  a  sudden  tearing  pain  in  his  teeth  (30th
potency,  second  day),*. —  The  teeth  are  very  sensitive  to  cold  water  (30th
potency,  second  day),*. — *  After  a  time  tenderness  of  the  gums  with  a  dispo-
sition to  bleed;  they  were,  however,  neither  painful  nor  swollen,^". — The  gums
are  inflamed  and  stand  off  from  the  teeth  in  the  shape  of  white  indenta-
tions, especially  painful  when  touched,*. — *Loose,  readily  bleeding  gums,
which,  however,  were  neither  painful  nor  swollen,". — *  White  tongue  (1st
potency,  second  day),^ — [230.]  White,  slimy  tongue  (1st  potency),''. — Yel-
lowish-gray tongue  (30th  potency,  second  day),'. — *B,ed,  painful  tip  of  the
tongue ;  the  papillae  are  erect  and  prominent  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. —
Tongue  dark-bluish  in  spots  (^  grain),^". — Tongue  smutty-brown  (1  grain),*".
— The  tongue  is  swollen  and  painful,  as  if  ulcerated  (1st  potency,  fifth
^ay),*. — The  papillse  are  prominent  and  erect,  and  feel  sore  (1st  potency),^
— The  papillae  of  the  left  side  are  erect  and  prominent  (1st  potency,  fifth
day),*. — Towards  the  left  margin  of  the  tongue  the  papillse  become  erect


460  ARGENTUM  NITEICUM.

and  form  reddisli  painful  pimples ;  the  tongue  is  painful  as  if  burnt  (1st
potency,  first  day)/. — Rough  tongue  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — [240.]
Dry  tongue  in  the  morning  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — Dry  tongue  in  the
evening  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — In  the  morning,  when  waking,  the
tongue  feels  dry  as  a  crust ;  even  after  washing  the  mouth  with  water,  the
dryness  abates  only  a  little  and  for  a  little  while  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),*.
— The  tongue  and  mouth  are  dry  and  parched  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. —
The  tongue  is  remarkably  dry,  ivilh  violent  thirst^^. — Dry  tongue,  with  slimy
mouth  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — Burning  in  the  tongue ;  of  a  small  spot
on  one  or  the  other  hand  ;  on  the  inner  condyle  of  the  knee  (first  day),*'. —
10  P.M.,  burning  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  with  a  peculiar  bitter  taste  (not
the  bitterness  characteristic  of  Arg.  nit.'),  (second  day),*'.— Feeling  of
warmth  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  and  then  in  the  oesophagus  {\  grain),**. —
Troublesome  tension  and  prickling  of  the  palate;  a  few  days  after  this  a
swelling  with  a  wart-shaped  excrescence  showed  itself,  impeding  deglutition
(30th  potency,  seventh,  ninth  day),*. — [250,]  Ulcerated  crusts  on  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  mouth,  especially  that  of  the  left  cheek  (1st  potency,  fifth
day),*. — Fetor  from  the  mouth,  in  the  morning  (2d  potency,  third  day),*. —
Parched  condition  of  the  lips,  mouth,  tongue,  and  fauces,  night  and  morn-
ing (2d  potency),*. — Slight  astringent  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  lips,  in
the  buccal  cavity  and  in  the  tongue  (6th  potency),*. — -Watery  mucus  in  the
mouth  and  in  the  posterior  nares,  day  and  night  (1st  potency),'. — Accumu-
lation of  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth  (1st  potency),". — Watery  mucus  in
the  mouth  and  posterior  nares,  day  and  night  (1st  potency),^ — Ptyalism
(30th  potency,  fifth  day  ),*. — Astringent  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  accumula-
tion of  watery  saliva  (6th  potency),*. — Metallic  taste  (from  caustic),*^ — ■
[260.]  She  has  a  taste  as  of  ink  in  the  mouth,^ — Inklike  metallic  taste,
with  styptic  astringency  of  the  mouth  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Metallico-
styptic  taste  in  the  mouth,  like  ink,  immediately  (1st  potency),^ — In  the
morning,  after  rising,  he  has  a  clayish  taste  in  his  mouth,  the  tip  of  the
tongue  being  white,  the  root  yellow,  with  viscid  lips  and  no  thirst  (6th  po-
tency, second  day),*. — Pappy,  chalklike  taste  in  the  mouth,  viscid  lips,  thin
mucous  coating  on  the  reddish-white  tongue  (30th  potency),*. — Pappy,  bit-
ter taste,  with  viscid  mouth  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Bitter  taste  (i
grain),**. — Very  bitter  taste,  and  sensation  of  warmth  on  tip  of  tongue,  and
afterward  in  pharynx,**.^ — Bitter,  astringent,  stinging,  coppery  taste  in  the
mouth,  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  immediately  after  taking  the
drug  (1st  potency),*. — Bitter,  astringent,  metallic  taste,  as  of  verdigris,  ex-
citing nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  (1st  potency),^ — [270.]  Sweetish
taste  (i  grain),**. — Sweetish  bitter  taste,  with  hypochondriac  mood  (30th
potency,  third  day),*. — -The  palate  and  fauces  were  so  dry  that  he  was
merely  able  to  mutter  instead  of  talking  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),'.

Throat. — *  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  posterior  nares,  obliging  him
to  hawk,  in  the  forenoon  (2d  potency),*. — *Frequent  accumulation  of  a  tena-
cious, thick  mucus  in  the  throat,  obliging  one  to  hawk,  and  causing  slight
hoarseness  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — *Thiek,  tenacious  mucus  in  the
throat  obliges  him  to  hawk  all  the  time,  the  ivhole  day  (1st  potency,  first
day),*. — *  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  moidh  and  fauces;  he  has  to  hawk
and  spit  all  the  time,  in  the  morning  (1st  potency),'. — *  Burning  in  throat
very  severe  (1  grain),*". — *Rawness  and  soreness  ia  the  throat, *^ — *Serap-
ing  sensation  in  the  throat  caused  hawking  and  cough  (i  grain),**. — [280.]
*Seraping  in  the  throat  (2d  potency),*. — Roughness  in  the  throat,  occasion-
ing a  short  hawking  (6th  potency),*. — Roughness  and  scraping  of  the


ARGENTUM  •  NITRICUM.  461

throat,  as  if  raw  and  sore  (6th  potency,  first  day),*. — Eoughness  and  dry-
ness of  the  throat,  with  ulcerative  pain,  at  night  (2d  potency),*. — Dryness
and  strangulation  in  the  throat,  with  shortness  of  breath,  at  night  (30th
potency,  fifth  day),". — *Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  throat,  as  of  an  ulcer,
drawing  and  tension  upward  and  downward ;  sensation  as  if  a  splinter  were
lodged  in  the  throat  when  swallowing,  eructating,  breathing,  stremiing,  and
moving  the  neck ;  sometimes  an  undulating  jerking  and  pukativg  was  felt  in
the  throat,  continuing  for  several  days  (2d  potency),*.— Titillatiou  in  the
throat,  as  if  caused  by  a  little  feather,  obliging  one  to  hawk  (6th  potency),*.
— *  Redness  of  the  velum  palati,  posterior  nares,  and  isthmus  (6th  potency),*.
— *Dark  redness  of  the  uvula  and  fauces  (2d  potency ),*.^Burning  pain
in  the  region  of  the  velum  palati  and  the  posterior  nares,  as  if  sore  or  as  if
corroded  by  pepper  (fourth  day),*. — [290.]  Sensation  as  if  the  velum  pen-
dulum palati  were  swollen,  not  per  se,  but  when  moving  the  tongue  and
during  deglutition,^ — Ulcerative  pain  of  a  small  spot  in  the  velum  pendu-
lum palati  (6th  potency),*. — *  Burning  and  dryness  in  the  fauces  and  phar-
ynx (1st  potency),'. — Very  unpleasant  metallic  taste  and  slight  burning  in
pharynx  (^  grain),"". — Burning  in  pharynx  lasted  longer  (J  grain),*". —
Burning  in  pharynx  became  severe  (i  grain,  three  times  in  third  day),'^". —
Spasm  and  strangulation  in  the  pharynx  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. —
Troublesome  strangulation  in  the  pharynx,'\— Sore  feeling  in  the  pharynx
when  drinking  cold  water  or  during  empty  deglutition  (2d  potency),*. —
Seated  ulcerative  pain  in  the  pharynx,  apparently  in  the  posterior  wall ;
changed  to  an  aching  pain  when  yawning  and  taking  a  deep  inspiration
(2d  potency,  third  day),*. — [300.]  Intense  titillation  of  the  palate  and
pharynx,  causing  the  eyes  to  water,  and  occasioning  a  fatiguing,  short,
hacking  cough,  at  noon  (2d  potency),*. — *Paroxysm  of  cramp  in  the  (esoph-
agus (in  the  forenoon,  at  lOJ  o'clock). — Sore  throat  when  swallowing,  as  if
swollen,  or  as  if  a  splinter  were  sticking  in  the  throat  (1st  potency,  fifth  day),^
Stomach. — Strong  appetite,* ". — Unusual  appetite  (6th  potency),*.— In
morning,  violent,  insatiable  hunger  (second  day),*^ — In  the  evening,  un-
commonly violent,  insatiable  hunger  (first  day),*". — Urging  desire  for  acrid
cheese,*. — *  Irresistible  desire  for  sugar,  in  the  evening,*. — Appetite  rather
poor  (fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  days),*". — [310.]  Diminished  appetite  (2d  po-
tency),*.— No  appetite ;  many  eructations  (1st  potency),^. — No  appetite ;  food
tastes  to  him  like  straw  (1st  potency),''. — Speedy  repletion  (2d  potency),*. —
No  appetite  at  breakfast  (1st  potency),^ — Loss  of  appetite,  nausea,  and  vomit-
ing,*'.— Eructations  insipid  {i  grain),**. — *Violent  belcMngs  (1st  potency),^
— Belching  immediately  (30th  potency),". — Much  belching  in  the  morning
(30th  potency,  third  day),*. — [320.]  {Most  of  the  gastric  derangements  are
accompanied  by  belching.) — Continuous  repulsive  sensation  in  the  stomach
and  pharynx,". — Nausea,'"". — Nausea  transient  (1  grain),**. — Slight  nau-
sea, which  disappears  after  eating  (J  grain),*". — Nausea  and  gagging  with-
out real  vomiting  (1  grain),*". — Nausea  arising  from  the  stomach  and  the
prsecordia,  with  desire  to  vomit  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — Slight  nausea
in  the  stomach,  with  chilliness  and  shuddering,  and  accompanied  with  a
peculiar  sensation  of  rigor  in  the  lower  limbs  (1st  potency,  first  day),*.—
Nausea,  resembling  hunger  (6th  potency),*. — Nausea,  with  gurgling  in  the
abdomen  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — [330.]  Faintish  nausea,  with  violent
palpitation  of  the  heart,  of  which  she  had  three  paroxysms  on  the  same
day  (1st  potency,  third  day),*. — Nausea,  heaviness,  and  pressure  in  the
stomach," — Nausea,  heaviness,  and  pressure  in  the  stomach  (three  hours
after),'". — *  Nausea  after  each  meal,  for  a  long  time,  especially  after  and  during


462  ARGENTUM  NITEICUM.

dinner ;  in  the  evening,  very,  severe  for  an  hour  (thirty),*^. — Gagging,". —
*  Constant  nausea,  and  frequent  and  extremely  troublesome  efforts  to  vomit,'". —
Vomiting,". — Frequent  vomiting,"". — Violent  vomiting,'''^ — *  Vomiting,  the
substances  which  were  thrown  up  tinging  the  bedclothes  6fac/c,".— [340.]  Great
irritation  of  the  stomach,  anxiety  in  the  prsecordial  region,  and  vomiting,"^
— ^Vo'mmngand  diarrhma,  with  violent  colicky  pains,^^. — Retching  and  vom-
iting of  mucus  accompanying  the  diarrhoeic  stools  (30th  potency,  fourth
day),". — *She  wakes  about  midnight  from  the  oppressive  sensation  of  having  a
heavy  lump  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  inducing  vomiting ;  not  till  morn-
ing does  she  throw  up  glairy  mucus,  which  can  be  drawn  into  threads;  she
had  two  paroxysms  of  that  kind  of  vomiting,  after  which  she  felt  the  whole
afternoon  a  desire  to  vomit,  a  tremulous  weakness,  and  a  sensation  in  the
head  as  if  it  were  in  a  vice'  (30th  potency,  sixth  day),". — *  Vomiting
which  stains  the  bedclothes  black,^^. — Attacks  the  stomach,^. — Excites  the
nerves  of  the  stomach,'". — Oppresses,  cools,  and  injures  the  stomach,''\ —
Contraction  of  the  stomach ;  it  is  less  spacious,". — *  Inflammation  of  the
stomach,^^. — [350,]  Gastro-euteritis,". — Slight  spasm  of  the  stomach  before
breakfast  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Slight  spasm  of  the  stomach  at
5  o'clock  in  the  morning  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Shifting  of  wind,
and  twisting  in  the  stomach,  with  frequent  empty  eructations  (30th  potency,
first  day),".— Pains  in  the  stomach,'*. — Pain  in  the  stomach,  transient,*'. —
Some  pains  in  the  stomach,"\ — Stomach  ;  the  patient  experiences  very
severe  epigastric  pains,"'. — *  Violent  cardialgia,^^. — Cardialgia  and  nausea
before  breakfast,  early  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — [360.]  Cardialgia  and
internal  chilliness,  early  in  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  accompanied
with  a  very  bad  appearance  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Warmth  in
stomach  (1  grain),'^". — Increased  warmth  in  stomach  (J  grain),"". — Burning
in  stomach,"". — Burning  heat  in  the  stomach,''^. — Burning  ascending  from
the  stomach  (30th  potency,  third  day),". — Momentary  feeling  of  warmth  in
the  stomach,  accompanied  with  slight  nausea,'*. — Warmth  in  the  stomach,
with  rumbling  in  the  intestines  and  emission  of  flatulence,". — Burning
sensation,  nausea,  and  pain  in  the  stomach,". — Burning  heat  in  the  stom-
ach,''".— [370.]  Burning  in  the  stomach  and  chest,'". — Heartburn,^'". — Sen-
sation of  heaviness,  and  pains  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea,". — Sensation  as
if  the  stomach  and  oesophagus  were  filled  with  food  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — Tension  and  pressure  in  the  stomach,  causing  anxiety,  and  a  sen-
sation as  if  the  stomach  were  filled  unto  bursting  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — After  yawning,  a  sensation  is  experienced  in  the  stomach  as  if  it
would  burst;  wind  presses  upwards,  but  the  (esophagus  feels  spasmodically
closed;  hence  an  ineffectual  effort  to  eructate,  with  excessive  strangulation,
pr-essing  pain  in  the  stomach,  faintish  nausea,  confluence  of  water  in  the  mouth,
and  inability  to  stir ;  the  paroxysm  ceases  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  amidst
frequent  and  violent  belching  of  wind  (6th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — *Peri-
odic,  constrictive  sensation  in  stomach  (1  grain),"". —  Gnawing  pain  in  the
stomach,  on  the  left  side  (6th  potency),*. — Wild  gnawing  at  the  stomach,  a
sort  of  hunger  with  nausea  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — *  Violent  cardial-
gia; griping  and  burning,  momentarily  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — [380.]
Several  attacks  of  pressure  in  stomach  (fourth  day),"". — Oppression  of  the
stomach,". — Increased  pressure  at  the  stomach  (3()th  potency),'. — Violent
pressure  at  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),". —
Hard  pressure  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  on  the  right  side,  which  is  more
intense  during  a  deep  inspiration  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Pressure,
heaviness,  and dragged-down  sensation  in the stomach  (30th potency.


ARGEi^TUM  NITRICUM.  463

second  day),*. — Pressure  in  stomach,  better  towards  evening  (next  day),
(1  grain),'^ — Weak  stomach  ;  food  oppresses  the  stomach  like  a  weight,
and  drags  it  downward  ;  sensation  as  if  the  stomach  and  oesophagus  were  filled
with  food ;  eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta  even  eight  hours  after  a  meal
(3Qtii  potency,  second  day),*. — *  Violent  cardialgia,  waking  her  in  the  night;
twisting  of  the  stomach,  which  extends  down  into  the  abdomen  (1st  potency,
first  day),^ — *  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  stomach,  after  dinner  (30th  potency,
second  day),*. — [390.]  *  Stinging  ulcerative  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  stom-
ach, directly  below  the  short  ribs,  more  intense  during  a  deep  inspiration,  and
when  touching  the  parts  (6th  potency),*. — *  Trembling  and  throbbing  in  the
stomach  (1st  potency),^ — On  cessation  of  the  attack  (which  lasts  from  two
to  three  hours),  *painful  swelling  of  the  pit  of  the  stomaeh,  with  great
anxiety  (iu  a  sensible  girl  of  twenty  odd  years),**. — *  Constant  sense  of  ful-
ness in  pit  of  stomach ^^. — 8.30  a.m.,  violent  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, for  several  minutes  (fourth  day),*'.

Abdotnen. — *  Abdomen  swollen  and  distended  (thirtieth),*^ — He  wakes
iu  the  morning,  from  shifting  of  flatulence,  rumbling,  and  a  sensation  in
the  intestines  as  if  he  had  to  go  to  stool  (1st  potency,  first  day),^. — Emis-
sion of  flatulence  immediately  (2d  potency),*. — Emission  of  much  flatulence,
after  dinner  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — ^Flatulence  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — [400.]  Coldness  in  the  abdomen,  which  is  painfully  irritated  (30th
potency,  fourth  day),". — Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  several  times  a  day
(1st  potency),*. — Peculiar  uncomfortableness  and  emptiness  in  the  abdo-
men, with  nausea  (6th  potency),*. — *Fulness,  heaviness,  and  distension  of  the
abdomen,  with  anxiety,  impeding  respiration,  after  supper  (30th  potency),*.
— Painful  tension  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  sore  and  ulcerated
(30th  potency),*. — Troublesome  colic,  like  cramp,  al'ter  a  slight  catarrh
(30th  potency),*. — Colic  previous  to  the  diarrhoea,*. — Oppressive  drawing
pain  in  the  whole  abdomen,  down  to  the  groin,  with  tension,  as  iu  ascites
(6th  potency),*. — Sensation  as  of  a  ball  ascending  from  the  abdomen  into
the  throat  (30th  potency,  third  day),". — Extremely  disagreeable  drawing
down  the  whole  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  standing  (1st  potency,  first
day),*. — [410.]  Stitches  dart  through  the  abdomen  like  electric  sparJcs,  especi-
ally during  a  sudden  transition  from  rest  to  motion,  on  the  left  side  (6th  po-
tency),*.— Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  sore,  accompanied  with  great  hunger,
abating  after  eating,  but  a  trembling  setting  in  in  the  place  (1st  potency,
second  day),*. — Pain  iih  the  hypochondria  (1st  potency),*.— Hard  pressure
in  the  left  hypochondrium  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Stinging  in  the
liver  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Stitches  in  the  liver,  coming  on  with  a
jerk  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Cutting  and  stinging  in  the  liver  (1st  po-
tency),*.— Peculiar  fulness  in  the  liver,  painful,  with  occasional  drawing
and  stinging,  especially  when  walking,  often  reaching  into  the  chest  (1st
potency,  first  day),*. — Periodical  dull  stitches  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the
liver  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — (Afiection  of  the  liver,  ending  in  fatal
dropsy,''".) — [420,]  Stitches  in  the  spleen,  recurring  several  evenings  (1st
potency,  fifth  day),*. — Fine  stitches  in  the  spleen,  coming  on  at  intervals
(1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Colic  around  the  umbilicus,  for  several  days
(1st  potency),*. — Intermittent  dull  pressure  in  the  transversalis  muscle  of
the  abdomen,  near  the  crest  of  the  ilium,  as  if  made  with  a  foreign  body
(6th  potency),*. — Pressing  pain  in  the  groins,  more  violent  when  touching
them  (6th  potency),*.

Stool  and  Anus. — Stitches  in  the  rectum  (third  day),**. — Creeping
and  burning  in  the  anus  (1st  potency),*. — A  good  deal  of  frequently  repeated


464  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

itching  of  the  anus,  inducing  him  to  rub  until  he  became  gore  (30th  potency),*.
— Discbarge  of  a  quantity  of  ascarides,™. — Discharge  of  taenia/'. — [430.]
Discharge  of  several  yards  of  tsenia/". — A  good  deal  of  urging  during  the
diarrhoea,*. — *Stnol  eupious,  fluid,  followed  by  'vomiting,^. — Two  or  three  stools
daily,  softer  than  usual,°l — Liquid  stools,  dark-colored,  and  quite  frequent,*'.
—* Frequent  stools,  with  slight  pains  in  the  hypogastrium,*^ — Daily,  two
or  three  liquid  stools,  with  much  mucus,*'. — Three  diarrhoeie  stools  at  short
intervals,  the  first  being  papescent  and  copious,  the  next  scanty  and  of  a
watery  mucus  of  dark  color  (1st  potency,  first  night),l — *Six  liquid,  brown
evacuations  oj  a  fetid  smell  (first  and  second  nights),^. — *A  slight  colic
wakes  him  from  his  uneasy  slumber,  and  he  had  sixteen  evacuations  of
a  greenish,  very  fetid  mucus,  accompanied  with  emission  of  a  quantity
of  noisy  flatulence,  in  one  night  (1st  potency  ),^ — [440,]  6  a.m.,  awakened
by  sudden  urging  to  stool;  the  discharge  copious,  half-liquid,  and  bright  yellow,
without  pain  or  straining ;  soon  after,  the  same  urging  again ;  besides  this,  two
stools  daily  (fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  days),*l — Diarrhoea,*'. — Diarrhoea  (1
grain),*". — rDiarrhoea,  transient,". — -Shifting  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,
in  the  morning,  followed  by  two  diarrhceic  stools  (1st  potency),^ — Two  di-
arrhoeie stools  in  the  evening  (1st  potency),®. — *Four  evacuations  of  green
mucus,  with  retching,  vomiting  of  mucus,  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  draw-
ing pain  in  the  abdomen ;  during  all  this  time  she  could  not  bear  being  laced
around  the  hypochondria  (30  th  potency,  fourth  day),^ — *  After  having  eaten
sugar  greedily  in  the  evening,  he  was  attacked  with  scanty,  watery  diar-
rhoea about  midnight,  accompanied  with  flatulent  colic,  and  much  of
noisy  flatulence  during  the  evacuation  (6th  potency),*. — Diarrhoeie  stool
after  breakfast  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Acts  powerfully  upon  the  in-
testinal canal,  occasioning  from  four  to  five  stools  a  day,". — [450.]  Fre-
quent evacuations,  with  slight  pains  in  the  abdomen,™. — Diarrhoea,  with
colic,''. — Violent  diarrhoea,^" ;  (*like  spinach  in  flakes,°.  Lippe.) — *Bloody
evacuations,''*. — Bloody  stools,  with  great  debility,^'. — ^Several  evacuations
of  bloody  mucus,  without  any  particular  pain,  towards  morning  (1st  potency,
first  day),*. — Small  stool,  with  copious  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  rec-
tum,*'.—  Constipation,*'. — Sometimes  constipation,''^  — Violent  constipa-
tion,".— [460.]  Constipation :  the  substances  evacuated  were  dry  and  of  a  firm
consistence,  whereas  his  bowels  were  generally  loose  (after  taking  small  doses,
and  on  the  last  days  of  the  proving),*. — Slowness  and  diminution  of  the
fecal  and  urinary  discharges,*. — Dry,  firm,  al  vine  evacuation  (30th  potency,
on  the  last  days),'. — Diarrhoea  or  constipation,'*.

Urinary  Organs.—  Stricture  of  the  urethra  (from  cauterizing),**.
— Oozing  of  mucus  from  the  urethra  (1st  potency),^ — In  the  night,  quite
au  abundant  secretion  of  thick,  white  mucus ;  in  about  ten  hours  discharge
of  thinner  mucus;  micturition  is  free  and  no  longer  painful ;  at. noon  the
mucous  membrane  is  dry,"'. — The  urinary  apparatus  was  at  first  greatly
irritated,"'.f — Inflammation  and  violent  pains  of  the  urethra,  with  increased
gonorrhoea,  priapism,  dysuria,  bloody  urine,  fever,*^'. — Heat,  itching,  and  tit-
illation,  in  the  morning,  when  urinating  for  the  first  time  (2d  potency,  fifth
day),*. — [470.]  *Burning  during  micturition,  and  sensation  as  if  the  ante-
rior portion  of  the  urethra  were  constricted  (2d  potency),*. — '^Burning  mic-
turition and  feeling  in  the  urethra  as  if  swollen;  tlie  last  portion  of  the  urine
passes  off  with  difficulty  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — ^Burning  after  mic-
turition (2d  potency),*. — Slight  burning  in  the  whole  course  of  the  urethra,

f  Not  mentioned  by  this  author. Hughes.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  465

increased  gonorrhoea,  burning  during  micturition,  painful  tension  during
erections,  chordee,  bleeding  from  the  urethra,  shootings  in  the  same  from  be-
hind forward," — The  urethra  feels  swollen,  hard,  and  knotty  (2d  potency,
third  day),*. — The  urethra  is  painful,  as  if  closed  up  by  swelling,  and  ul-
cerated (,2d  potency),*. — Drawing  through  the  end  of  the  urethra  (after
one  hour),*l — Sore  feeling  in  the  urethra,  even  after  micturition  (2d  potency,
third  day),*. — After  urinating,  a  burning  drop  ran  along  the  urethra  (2d
potency,  second  day),*. — Sensation  as  if  something  fluid  were  running  along
the  urethra  from  behind  forward  (2d  potency),*. — [480.]  When  emitting
the  last  drop  of  urine,  a  cutting  from  the  posterior  portion  of  the  urethra
as  far  as  the  anus  (2d  potency),*. — ^Dragging  pains  during  micturition  (2d
potency,  third  day),*. — Painful  pushing  in  the  urethra  (3d  potency),*. — The
urethra  is  painful  between  the  acts  of  micturition,  as  if  ulcerated  (6th  po-
tency),*.— *  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  urethra,  as  if  a  splinter  had
been  pushed  in  (6th  potency),*. — As  a  diuretic  and  diaphoretic,*^ — The
urine  is  passed  with  an  ease  as  never  before,  and  which  was  almost  pleas-
ant ;  the  stream  seemed  to  be  more  voluminous  (1st  potency,  third  day),*.
— Pressure  to  urinate  early  (after  an  hour  and  a  quarter),*'. — 4  and  6  A.M.,
hurried  urging  to  urinate,  with  very  little  urine,  which  was  dark-yellow
(second  day),*'. — In  the  night,  woke,  with  urging  to  urinate  (second  day),".
— [490.]  *  Quick  urging  to  urinate ;  urine  copious  and  clear-yellow  (after  one
hour),*'. — Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  much  yellow  urine,  followed  by
cutting  in  the  end  of  the  urethra  (first  day),*'. — Frequent  micturition  (1st
potency),"*. — Frequent  urination  (second  day),*'. — All  day,  frequent  and  in-
creased urination  (first  day),*'. — In  forenoon,  more  frequent  and  copious  uri-
nation in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  (first  day),*'. — Frequent
and  copious  urination  in  the  daytime,  the  stream  being  sometimes  divided
(1st  potency),^ — A  good  deal  of  urination  at  night  (1st  potency),*. — Copious
urination  at  ni^ht  (2d  potency,  first  day),^ — *Urine  does  not  pass  so  easily  or
freely  ,*^ — [500.]  *In  emitting  the  urine  it  was  longer  before  it  made  its  appear-
ance (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — In  the  night,  urinated  three  times,  with
much  urgency  to  do  so,  but  little  urine  passed  (second  day),*'. — After  urinat-
ing, during  which  an  ulcerative  pain  was  felt  in  the  urethra,  a  second  but  in-
efiectual  urging  to  urinate  was  experienced  (2d  potency),*. — Emission  of  a
few  drops  of  urine  after  he  had  done,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  interior  of
the  urethra  were  swollen  (1st  potency),''. — *  Inability  to  pass  the  urine  in  a
•projecting  stream  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — At  7  A.M.,  difficult  urination,
with  severe  burning,  and  discharge  of  white  pellicles,  shreds  of  epithelium
from  the  mucous  membrane,*'. — In  evening,  decidedly  less  urine  than
usual  (first  day),*'. — The  urine  passed  at  5  P.M.  is  clear  and  yellow  (second
day),*'. — Frequent  and  copious  emission  of  pale  urine  (2d  potency),*. —
Frequent  emission  of  a  pale,  strong-smelling  urine  (1st  potency),''. — [610.]
Accelerated  and  increased  emission  of  pale  yellow  urine  (1st  potency,  first
day),*.-:-*5caw<y  and  rare  emission  of  a  dark-yellow  urine  (after  taking  the
higher  potencies,  and  on  the  last  days  of  the  proving),* '. — Urine  dark-
yellow  (first  day),*'. — Urine  dark-yellow  and  acid,*'.— *The  urine  passed  at
noon  becomes  clouded  from  mucus,  and  the  vessel,  as  far  as  the  urine
reaches,  is  lined  with  a  thin,  light-red  sediment  (second  day),*'. — *Urine
diminished,  but  concentrated,  and  no  diminution  of  the  salts,  except  urle
add,  which  after  a  time  entirely  disappeared  from  urine,*". — The  inorganic
salts  increase  in  urine,*".

Sexual  Organs. — Male. —  Chancre-like  ulcers  on  the  prepuce;  at
first  their  tips  were  covered  with  pus,  but  afterwards  the  ulcers  became  dif-
voL I.— 30


466  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

fused  through  a  pretty  spacious  depression,  exhibiting  the  tallow-like  coat-
ing of  chancres  (1st  potency,  on  the  ninth  day),^ — "^Sensitiveness  near  the
orifice  of  the  urethra,^''. — Painful  coition  ;  the  urethra  felt  as  if  put  upon  the
stretch ;  absence  of  pleasure  (6th  potency),*. — [520.]  In  from  twenty-five
to  thirty  seconds,  terrible  pains,  continuing  at  the  same  intensity  for  five
minutes,  then  gradually  diminishing  and  becoming  very  endurable  at  the
end  of  an  hour,  extending  even  into  and  along  the  course  of  the  spermatic
cords,*". — The  right  testicle  is  enlarged  and  hard  (2d  potency,  third  day),^.
— *  Want  of  sexual  desire,  the  genital  organs  having  shrivelled  (30th  potency,
fourth  day),*. — Frequent  nightly  emissions,  sometimes  accompanied  with
lascivious  dreams,*. — Three  copious  emissions  in  one  night  (1st  potency),'.
— Female. — Hemorrhages  from  the  uterus,*^ — Hemorrhages  from  the
uterus  (a  fortnight  before  the  menses),  only  a  few  hours  (1st  potency,-
fourth  day),^. — Excites  the  capillaries  of  the  uterus,*". — Congestions  to  the
uterus,".— Pain  during  coition  and  violent  bleeding  afterward  (from  injec-
tion of  a  weak  solution  for  a  profuse  leucorrhcBa),"^. — [530.]  She  had  two
seminal  emissions  at  night,  which  she  had  never  had  before  (30th  potency,
fourth  day),*. — Suppression  of  the  mucous  leucorrhoea ;  it  reappears  in  a
few  weeks,  but  less  and  milder,^.^Suppression  of  the  menses,  miscarriage,
and  metrorrhagia,*'. — The  menses  appear  at  the  usual  period,  but  they  are
much  more  copious  than  usual,  and  are  accompanied  with  cutting  pains  iu
the  small  of  the  back  and  groin,  and  contractive  sensation  in  the  latter
(30th  potency,  sixth  day),".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — When  lying  down,  after  dinner,  he
perceives  a  whizzing  and  whistling  in  the  larynx  (in  the  throat  and  the
bronchial  tubes),  occurring  regularly  as  the  pulse;  the  noise  did  not  seem
to  be  occasioned  by  accumulation  of  mucus,  but  by  the  movement  of  the
blood  ;  it  was  heard  only  when  lying  on  the  left  ear  (30th  potency,- second
day),*. — Balls  of  soaplike  mucus  accumulate  in  the  larylix,  occasioning
slight  turns  of  cough,  by  means  of  which  they  are  expelled  (6th  potency),'.
— ^Internal  soreness  of  the  larynx  and  pit  of  the  throat;  worse  in  the  morn-
ing,''''.— 2  P.M.,  much  tickling  in  the  larynx,  without  cough  (second  day),*".
— Scratchy  sensation  in  larynx  provokes  hawking  and  cough,'^ — Irritation
and  titillation  in  the  larynx,  followed  by  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the
larynx,  occasioning  a  slight  rattling  and  whizzing  breathing,  until  the
mucus  is  thrown  off  in  small  lumps  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),'. — [540.]
Dry  tickling  in  the  larynx,  occasioning  a  cough,  in  the  daytime  (1st  po-
tency),^ — 3  p.m.,  continued  tickling  in  larynx,  rather  lessened  on  inspira-
tion, followed  by  short,  dry,  shaking  cough,  almost  wholly  ceasing  on
sitting  (first  day),*'. — Hoarseness,  with  roughness  in  the  throat  (2d  poten-
cy),*.— Nightly  hoarseness,  with  turns  of  dry  cough,  after  which  she  throws
off  blood-tinged  mucus  mixed  with  saliva  (30th  potency,  seventh  day),". —
Suddenly,  while  lying  quietly  in  bed,  at  night,  sense  of  pressure  in  throat,
and  violent,  short,  dry  cough,  without  tickling  in  larynx  (second  day),*'. —
Night-cough,  occasioned  by  a  titillation  in  the  laryns^  (2d  potency),*. —
Cough,  occasioned  by  a  titillation  in  the  throat  (2d  potency),*. — Violent
titillation  in  the  throat,  obliging  him  to  cough,  before  dinner,  recurring  at
the  same  hour  for  several  days  (2d  potency),*. — Dry,  fatiguing  cough,  oc-
casioned by  a  violent,  almost  burning,  titillation  in  the  throat,  before  retir-
ing in  the  evening  (2d  potency),*. — Dry  and  hacking  cough,  several  times
a  day  (1st  potency),*. — [550,]  Occasional  cough  in  bed,  at  night  (30th  po-
tency, third  day),*. — Paroxysms  of  dry  cough  at  night,  sometimes  so  vio-
lent as  to  induce  vomiting  (1st  potency),*. — Nightly  cough  and  sweat  (1st


ARGENTUM  NITEICUM.  467

potency),*.— *-Eyenm(?,  cough,  which  makes  the  accustomed  tobacco-smoke  in-
tolerable to  him  (2d  potency,  fifth  day),*. — Cough  after  dinner,  impeding
speech,*. — Suffocative  cough,  for  several  days,  at  noon,*, — Catarrh,  which  is
at  firet  slight  and  dry,  and  afterwards  loose,  changing  in  a  few  days  to  a
rattling  cough,  with  yellow  expectoration,  profuse  sweat  breaking  out
readily,  bad  look,  hollow  eyes,  and  disturbed  nightly  sleep;  as  the  cough
improved,  the  boy  blew  from  his  nose  purulent  mucus  mixed  with  blood
(30th  potency,  seconcTto  fourth  day). — Dyspnoea,°l — Difficulty  of  breath-
iugi'l — Excessive  suffocative  oppression  of  breathing,'^

Chest. — [560.]  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  chest  (1st  poteney),^ —
Nightly  pain  in  the  chest  (2d  potency,  first  day),^ — Burning  in  the  chest,'^
— Sensation  of  warmth  between  the  scapulae  and  the  sternum,  which,  after
awhile,  changed  to  a  pressure  in  the  epigastric  region  (i  grain),''. —
Warmth  between  shoulder-blades  and  sternum,  afterward  changing  to  a
slight  pressure  in  epigastric  region,  with  frequent  tasteless  eructations,'*. —
A  violent  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  would
burst,  after  going  upstairs;  she  must  hold  the  chest  with  both  hands,'l —
Aching  tensive  pain  in  the  chest,  in  various  places  of  the  chest,  of  the  size  of
half  a  dollar  (2d  potency),*. — Sense  of  pressure  on  the  chest,  without  palpi-
tation of  the  heart,  with  need  of  deep  inspiration,  lasting  half  an  hour ;  dis-
appears on  walking ;  returns  in  an  hour,  also  when  walking,  but  lasts  only
a  short  time  (after  six  and  a  half  hours),''. — Sighing,  owing  to  oppression
of  the  chest  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Fulness  and  anxiousness  in  the
chest,  with  disposition  to  sigh  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — [570.]  Heaviness
in  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  with  desire  to  sigh,". — Oppression  of  the  chest,
accompanied  with  a  clawing  sensation  moving  through  the  chest  (6th  po-
tency),*.— Stitches  in  the  chest  (2d  potency),*. — Stitches  in  the  breasts  (1st
potency,  fifth  day),'. — The  outer  chest  is  painful  to  the  touch  (1st  poten-
cy),^ — Itching  of  the  chest  and  axillae  (30th  potency;  third  day),*. — A  vio-
lent pain  in  the  left  external  breast  (in  the  evening,  when  drawing  on  the
boots),  followed  by  a  persistent  severe  sore  pain  in  both  pectoral  muscles,
which  are  very  sensitive  if  the  arms  are  stretched  to  draw  ou  to  the  chest ;
worse  near  the  left  nipple,'^ — Sticking  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (1st
potency,  fifth  day),'. — The  mammary  glands  of  the  right  side  are  painful,
as  if  ulcerated,  towards  the  axilla,  especially  when  touching  the  part;
when  stretching  the  arm  and  turning  the  trunk  speedily  to  one  side,  an
oblong  rounded  protrusion  is  distinctly  felt  (30th  potency,  fifth  day),'. —
Pressure  and  weight,  as  of  a  stone,  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  in  a  spot
of  the  size  of  a  hand  (30th  potency,  fifth  day),". — [580.]  Anxiety  in  the
prsBcordia,  after  dinner  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Pain  in  the  prse-
cordia  (30th  potency,  second  day),'.— Constant  sensation  of  fulness  in  the
praecordial  region,".

Heart  and  Pulse. — When  walking,  sensation  of  pressure  in  the
region  of  the  heart,  without  palpitation  or  cough;  was  not  forced  to
stop  walking,  but  only  to  breathe  deeper;  the  feeling  lasted  some  time  after
keeping  quiet  in  the  room  (after  seven  hours),''. — *  Heart's  action  irregular,
sometimes  intermitting,  with  an  unpleasant  sensation  in  the  chest,^'". — *  Action
of  heart  irregular,  sometimes  intermits,  with  a  plainly  unpleasant  sensation  in
chest;  on  attention  to  it,  the  irregularity  is  more  severe;  almost  disappears  on
motion  in  open  air,^. — On  walking,  a  sensation,  several  times,  as  if  the
heart  were  beating  once  or  twice  stronger,  but  without  impediment  from
walking,  and  without  oppression  of  breath,". — *  Palpitation,^^. — Palpitation
of  the  heart,  and  sensation  of  restlessness  in  it,  several  times  (first  day),''.


468  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

— Sensitive  palpitation,  like  a  sudden  falling  from  above  toward  the  mid-
dle; goes  away  just  as  quickly,  with  pain  iu  the  middle  of  the  upper  part
of  chest,  as  if  it  would  burst  (30),'''. — [590.]  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  at
night  (1st  potency),^. —  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  accompanied  ivith  a
faintish  nausea,  of  which  she  had  three  paroxysms  in  one  afternoon  (1st  po-
tency, third  day),^ — Throbbing  of  the  heart,". — Frequent  palpitation  of
the  heart  on  slight  excitement,  and  also  from  rapid  movement  (first  day),^.
— '^Palpitation,  caused  by  any  sudden  muscular  exertion  or  emotional  ex-
citement,''^.— Toward  evening,  twice,  palpitation  of  the  heart  on  motion  of
the  body  (first  day),''. — Palpitation  caused  by  sudden  violent  exertion  or
mental  excitement;  and  in  horizontal  position,  especially  evenings,  iu  bed,
the  unpleasant  sensations  in  chest  are  worse,'^ — The  irregular  action  of  the
heart  was  worse  when  noticing  it;  better  when  moving  freely  about,''. —
Pulse  70  ;  fnll  and  natural,".

Week  and  MneJe. — Bounding  pulsations  of  the  left  carotid  at  regular
intervals,  distinctly  seen  by  the  naked  eye  (30th  potency,  third  day),'. —
[600.]  Clawing  in  the  right  anterior  cervical  muscle,  resembling  a  cramp
(6th  potency),*.^I>rawing,  with  pressure,  in  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,
as  of  a  load  (6th  potency),*. — Violent  pressure  between  the  shoulders,
penetrating  deeply,  especially  at  the  angle  of  the  right  shoulder,  early  iu
the  morning,  on  waking  (6th  potency),*. — Tensive  clawing  pains  in  the
hach,^. — Nightly  pains  in  the  bach,*'. — Weight  in  the  small  of  the  back,  which
prevents  him  from  sitting  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Violent  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  as  if  sprained,  early  in  the  morning,  when  sitting ;  the
pain  was  so  violent  that  he  had  to  rise  (1st  potency,  second  day),*. — Pain
in  the  small  of  the  hack,  relieved  when  standing  or  walking  (1st  potency,
fourth  day),'. — Paralytic  heaviness  in  the  lumbar  region,  on  the  left  side,
extending  into  the  hip-joint  of  the  same  side  (6th  potency),*. — The  lumbar
regiou  feels  rigid  and  as  if  put  upon  the  stretch  (6th  potency),*. — :[610,]
The  lumbar  region  feels  bruised  (1st  potency),'. — The  small  of  the  back
feels  weary  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Violent  pain  in  small  of  back
(girl  of  8),'*. — Digging-up  in  the  small  of  the  back,  not  permitting  her  to
bend  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Cutting  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  in
the  abdomen  (1st  potency),^. — Cutting  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  abdo-
men, even  when  touching  the  parts  (1st  potency),'. — Violent  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  morning,  scarcely  permitting  him
to  rise,  and  not  permitting  him  to  walk  about,  except  crooked  ;  recurring
in  the  same  manner  for  four  days  in  succession  (1st  potency,  third  day),*.
— Pains  in  the  kidneys,*'. — Frequent  complaints  about  pain  in  the  small
of  the  back  and  in  the  loins  (1st  potency,  fourth  day),'. — Heaviness  and
drawing  in  the  loins,  accompanied  with  great  debility  and  weariness,  trem-
bling in  the  lower  limbs,  as  after  a  fatiguing  journey  (1st  potency,  first
day),*. — [620,]  Stiffness,  heaviness,  aud  paralytic  pain,  commencing  at  the
sacrum,  and  going  down  along  the  pelvis  and  the  hips  (6th  potency),*. —
Heaviness  aud  paralytic  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  sacrum,  not  permit-
ting him  to  sit  for  a  long  while,  and  obliging  him,  when  walking,  to  stretch
the  dorsal  spine  as  much  as  possible  (6th  potency),*. — He  experiences  such
an  intense  pain  iu  the  sacral  region  that  blowing  and  sneezing  cause  him
to  start  (6th  potency),*. — Extremely  painful  drawing  and  heaviness  in  the
OS  sacrum,  along  the  pelvis,  as  if  the  menses  were  going  to  make  their  ap-
pearance (1st  potency,  third  day),'.

Extremities  in  General. — *  Chorea-like  convulsive  motion  of  the
upper  and  lower  extremities,^*. — *  Lassitude  aud  heaviness  of  all  the  limbs


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  469

(third  day),''. — *  Paralysis  of  the  extremities,". — Sensation  in  all  the  limbs
as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep  or  become  rigid/. — 5.30  a.m.,  in  bed,  violent
boring  in  the  left  outer  malleolus  and  in  the  left  shoulder  (fourth  day),*l
— After  rising,  internal  drawing  in  centre  of  right  upper  arm,  then  in  the
flesh  of  the  right  thigh,  below  and  internally  (fourth  •day),*l — -[630.]  10
P.M.,  while  sitting,  violent  pressure  in  the  soft  part  above  the  bend  of  the
right  knee,  in  the  left  little  finger,  and  on  the  back  of  the  left  foot  (first
day),''. — Stitching  in  the  bone  of  the  right  third  finger,  and  on  the  dorsum
of  the  foot  (first  day),'^

Upper  JExtremities. — Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  whole  of  the
upper  right  extremities  (2d  potency),*.— Drawing,  pressing  pain  through
the  whole  right  arm,  at  times  more  violent  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  or  in  the
upper  arm  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),''. — 6  p.m.,  while  walking,  violent
pain  in  tte  muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  arm,  toward  the  lower  part  of  the
thorax,  into  the  muscles  of  the  loins,  increased  by  each  imspiration,  also  by
walking ;  lasts  five  minutes  (first  day),''. — 4  p.m.,  violent  fcoring  in  the  right
shoulder  (first  day),". — Pressing  in  the  left  shoulder-joint  (after  seven
hours),". — Violent  pressure  on  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder,  while  resting
the  arm,". — Tension  in  the  right  axillary  glands  (1st  potency),^ — Pain  in
the  right  axilla,  as  if  strained  or  torn^  upon  raising  the  shoulder,  the  pain
extended  along  the  arm  as  far  as  the  hand,  where  a  prickling  sensation  was
experienced  (2d  potency),'. — [640.]  Tearing  internally  on  the  right  elbow
(second  day),"'.— Stitching  about  the  right  olecranon,  rather  violent  and
long-lasting;  unafiected  by  motion  of  the  elbow-joint,  hut  somewhat  aggra-
vated while  resting  the  joint,". — Paralytic  .drawing  in  the  fe(mes  of  the  fore-
arm (6th  potency),*. — Nightly  bone  pain  of  the  ulna  (30th  potency,  second
day),*. — He  wakes  in  the  night  owing  to  an  acute  pain  in  the  left  wrist-
joint,  as  if  sprained,  accompanied  with  heat  of  the  whole  hand,  and  un-
easiness in  the  hand,  obliging  him  to  change  the  position  of  the  hand  all  the
time ;  in  the  morning,  a  pimple  is  seen  not  far  from  the  joint,  the  tip  of
which  is  filled  with  pus,  and  in  which  a  stinging  pain  is  experienced,  as  of
a  splinter  which  had 'been  stuck  in ;  the  tip  is  raised  upon  a  red,  hard  base
of  considerable  extent  (1st  potency,  first  day),'. — Tension  a,nd  stiffness  in
the  left  wrist  on  bending  it,  with  a  deepseated  pain ;  disappeared  toward
evening  (first  day),". — ^Violent  pressure  in  the  left  wrist  (after  one  hour),".
— Pressing  in  the  left  wrist  (always  at  10.30  p.m.),". — Drawing  in  left
hand  (after  one  hour),". — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  adductors  of  the
fingers;  she  can  scarcely  separate  the  closely  compressed  finger,'*. — [650.]
Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  fingers,  so  that  she  cannot  open  the  hand,
which  is  kept  half  clenched  (in  a  matron  of  sixty),'*. — Drawing  in  the
fingers  of  the  right  hand  (first  day),". — Rheumatic  tearing  in  the  region
where  the  phalanx  of  the  thumb  joins  the  metacarpus  (6th  potency),*. —
Cramp  of  the  ring  finger,  when  seizing  anything  (30th  potency,  third  day),*.
— 9  P.M.,  pain  through  the  joints  of  the  left  index  finger,  increased  on  bend-
ing the  finger,  when  a  stiffness  as  from  swelling  is  experienced  in  the  joints,
and  lasts  till  the  following  morning  (first  day),". — Sticking  in  the  tip  of
the  left  little  finger  (after  two  hours),".

Lower  Extremities. — Legs  drawn  up  to  abdomen  by  muscular
contraction,'^ — *In  the  night  his  lower  limbg,  especially  his  knees,  start  up  ;
the  starting  awoke  him  (1st  potency),^ — ^He  vacillates  when  walking,  feel-
ing moreover  extremely  uncomfortable  in  the  whole  body,  and  unsteady  in
his  limbs  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Staggering  gait  in  the  open  air
(30th  potency,  second  day),*. — [660.]  Weariness  of  the  legs  (30th  potency,


470  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

second  day),'. — *Paralytie  heaviness  and  debility  of  the  lower  limbs,  so  that
she  did  not  know  where  to  put  them,  (1st  potency,  third  day),*. — *Lassitude
and  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs,  accompanied  with  dizziness,  as  from  in-
toxication (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — *  Great  debility  and  weariness  in  the
lower  limbs,  the  whole  afternoon,  as  after  a  long  journey  on  foot,  accompanied
ivith  sick  feeling,  dread  of  labor,  drowsiness,  chilliness,  and  sickly  appearance
(1st  potency,  second  day),^. — When  walking,  compressive  sensation  in  the
whole  left  leg  (after  six  hours),*'. — Drawing  through  the  whole  right  leg,
on  sitting  (second  day),*". — Sticking  drawing  pain  in  the  hip  down  to  the
tarsal  joint  (1st  potency),*. — Paralytic  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  and
emaciation  of  the  same  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — When  walking,  pres-
sive  pain  below  and  in  front  of  the  left  trochanter,  which,  on  stepping,
causes  him  to  bend  over  ;  very  frequent,  but  not  at  every  step  (firsj;  day),*'.
— Periodical  nervous  ("  cramplike  ")  drawing,  from  the  hip  down  to  the
kuees,  in  paroxysms,  sometimes  so  violent  that  it  caused  her  to  exclaim ;
the  drawing  descended  along  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh  (i.schias
antica),  (30th  potency',  third  day),*. — [670.]  Drawing  in  the  left  knee
(first  day),*'. — Pressure  in  the  right  knee  (after  one  hour),**. — Pressing  in
the  right  knee,  when  sitting  and  walking,  and  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left
foot  (immediately),**. — Violent  pressing  in  the  right  knee,  also  when  walk-
ing, lasting  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  then,  stitching  paiu  deep  in  the  tongue,
lasting  nearly  an  hour  (second  day),*'. — When  walking,  pressure  in  the
knee,  worse  on  stepping  (first  day),*'. — Internal  tearing  in  left  knee ;  after-
ward, in  the  right,*'. — Paralytic,  painful  drawing,  as  if  bruised,  one  hand-
breadth  above  the  left  patella,  in  the  rectus  cruris  muscle  (6th  potency),*. —
Tumult  in  the  knees,  with  weariness  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. — Violent
tearing,  raging,  digging-up  pain  under  the  patellae,  first  the  left,  then  the
right  (1st  potency,  second  day),*. — Drawing  tearing  from  the  knees  into
the  legs  (1st  potency,  second  day),*. — [680.]  Drawing  tearing  on  the  left
side  of  and  near  the  patella  (6th  potency),*. — Drawing,  anteriorly,  on  the
left  leg,*'. — Drawing  and  scraping  in  the  lower  half  of  the  tibia,  anteriorly
(30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — Tearing  on  right  tibia  (after  half  an  hour),*'.
— Rigidity  in  the  calves,  with  great  debility  and  exhaustion,  as  froan  fatigue,
scarcely  permitting  her  to  walk  across  the  room  (1st  potency,  third  day),*.^

*  Excessive  weariness  of  the  calves,  cus  from  fatigue  (1st  potency,  first  day),*. —

*  Great  debility  and  weariness  in  the  calves,  as  after  a  long  journey  (6th
potency),*. — When  walking,  on  a  small  spot,  to  the  outside,  on  the  left  calf,
a  violent  pain,  causing  him  to  bend  over,  also  on  standing,  the  same  pain
lasts  several  minutes,  and  then  disappears  completely  (first  day),*'. — For
several  nights,  cramps  in  the  calves,*'. — When  walking,  pain  in  the  left
calf,  such  as  is  usual  in  cramp  of  the  calves  (first  day),*". — [690.]  Violent
drawing  in  the  calves  when  going  upstairs,  so  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to
drag  himself  along  (2d  potency),*. — When  walking,  peculiar  sensation  in
left  calf,  like  a  stitching,  or  like  hot  fluid  running  over  the  skin  (second
day),*'. — The  tarsal  joint  bends  easily  of  itself  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*.
— Pressure  in  the  left  ankle  (second  day),*'. — JDuU  pressure  in  the  right
ankle,  and  above  the  right  patella,  when  sitting  (after  half  an  hour),*'.
— Stinging  in  the  outer  ankle  of  the  right  foot  (2d  potency,  second
day),^ — 1  P.M.,  when  sitting,  violent  stitching  and  tearing  below  the  left
internal  malleolus,  forcing  him  to  rise,  and  walk  about  rapidly,  when  the
pain  gradually  disappeared  (second  day),*'. — Arthritic  drawing  in  the  right
foot  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),*. — 7  a.m.,  when  sitting,  drawing  in  the  left
instep  (third  day),*'. — 11  p.m.,  drawing  on  the  right  toes,*'. — [700.]  11  p.m.,


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  471

drawing  in  the  left  toes,  shifting  about  to  other  parts/'. — Violent  stitching
and  drawing  in  the  right  toes  (fourth  day),^l — Prickling  in  the  right  sole,
when  sitting  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),^^

Generalities. — Cachexia,  emaciation,  affection  of  the  liver,  dropsy,^".
— Great  emaciation,^'. — Weight  of  body  decreased,''^ — CEdema  of  legs  and
ascites,"*. — *Convulsions  and  twitchings,"''. — Powerful  excitation  of  the
muscles  and  nerves,  and  consensual  excitation  of  the  nerves  of  the  stomach,"'.
— Her  nerves  are  so  much  affected,  that  she  apprehends  she  will  lose  her
senses,  accompanied  with  constant  chilliness  (30th  potency,  third  day),°. —
[710.]  Nightly  nervousness  (1st  potency),'. — *Nightly  nervousues.-.,  with
heat  and  fulness  in  the  head  (30th  potency,  fourth  day),". — Convulsions,"'.
— Convulsive  contraction  of  this  or  that  portion  of  muscles,". — Presentiment
of  the  approaching  epileptic  fit,\ — Weakness,*^ — Peculiar  debility,". —
*She  feels  so  debilitated  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  across  the  room,  com-
plaining a  good  deal  about  rigidity  in  the  calves  (1st  potency,  third  day),°. —
In  the  afternoon,  he  felt  so  weak,  that  he  had  to  lie  down,  accompanied
with  an  increase  of  warmth  iu  the  whole  body,  and  heat  in  the  palms  of
the  bauds  (2d  potency),*. — In  the  morning,  after  rising,  he  feels  very  much
debilitated,  tremulous,  irritated,  and  apprehensive  (6th  potency),*. — [720.]
♦Tremulous  weakness,  accompanied  with  general  debility,  as  after  great
physical  exertions,  and  apathy  (1st  potency),^ — Great  debility  and  de-
spondency,".— After  breakfast,  he  feels  extremely  debilitated,  nervous,
tremulous,  afraid  to  undertake  anything,  lest  he  should  not  succeed  (6th
potency),*. — *Nervous,  faintish,  tremulous  sensation,  as  if  a  severe  disease
were  going  to  attack  him  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Excessive  debility,
wretched  appearance,  and  emaciation,*'. — Debility  in  the  afternoon, \ —
*Trembling^  and  tremulous  sensation,*. — Feeble,  weary,  and  without  appe-
tite (1st  potency), I — Lazy  and  debilitated  (2d  potency),*. — He  is  almost
exhausted,  having  had  sixteen  diarrhcBic  stools  iu  the  night  previous  (1st
potency),^ — [730.]  *  Tremor  of  the  limbs,  general  debility,  as  from  a  physi-
cal exertion,". — Very  weary  and  sleepy  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),*'. —
He  is  unconscious,  insensible,  and  convulsed  ;  pulse  70  ;  (a  druggist,  after
8  grains  of  this  salt),'*. — Complete  insensibility  of  the  body,". — Disagree-
able sensation  moving  about  iu  the  body,  now  in  the  limbs,  now  in  the  head
(6th  potency),*. — Orgasms  in  the  whole  body,  with  increased  temperature
(30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Anxiety  in  the  precordial  region,  sighing,  in-
tense feeling  of  disease,  after  dinner  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Eruc-
tations and  a  sensation  as  in  catarrh  of  the  fauces  and  larynx  (after  drink-
'°g)>  (4  grain),"". — Burning  in  the  stomach,  and  on  the  chest,^'. — *Sensa-
tion  as  if  the  body,  and  especially  the  face  and  head,  expanded;  he  feels  as  if
the  bones  of  the  skull  separated,  with  increase  of  temperature  (30th  potency,
first  day),*. — [740.]  8  a.m.,  violent  boring  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and
.left  wrist  (fourth  day),'*'.-;-Drawiug  in  the  right  lower  jaw,  and  in  the  right
knee,"'. — Pressure  on  the  left  lower  orbital  border,  and  also  several  times
in  the  right  wrist  (immediately),*'. — 6  a.m.,  in  bed,  tearing  in  the  head,  in
the  temples,  and  in  the  first  phalanx  of  the  left  index  finger  (third  day),*".

Skin. — Peculiar  discoloration  of  the  skin  (argyria)  from  the  blue-gray,
violet,  or  bronze-colored  tinges  to  the  real  black  (after  large  and  rei)eated
doses),  (numerous  authors). — Skin  brown,  tense,  and  hard,^. — Slight  brown
spots  on  upper  part  of  chest,  and  on  hands,*^ — Brownish  color  of  skin  of
lower  extremities,*^ — Repeated  drawing  in  the  skin  of  the  left  forehead,
and  of  the  left  cheek,  as  if  a  spider's  web  lay  there  (immediately),*'. —
Tumor-like,  itching  elevations  on  the  scalp,  etc.  (2d  potency,  third  day),*.


472  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

— [750.]  Scurfs  in  the  nose  (30th  potency,  sixth  day"),*. — Pimple  near  sep-
tum of  nose  (2d  potency),*. — Ulcers  in  the  nose,  etc.,*. — In  the  left  corner
of  the  mouth,  a  painful,  inflamed  pimple,  forming,  on  the  day  following,  a
pock-shaped  pustule,  which,  after  a  few  days  of  efflorescence,  passed  into  a
hard  pimple  of  a  few  days'  duration  (2d  potency),*. — Pustule  on  the  derma
of  the  upper  lip,  arising  from  a  painful,  red,  shining  pimple  (2d  potency,
second  day),*. — Hard  pimples  in  the  vermilion  border  of  the  upper  lip,
paler  than  the  lip,  and  sore  to  the  touch  (30th  potency,  third  day),'. —
Pimples  on  the  chin  and  cheek,  which  rapidly  fill  with  pus  (6th  potency),*.
— On  border  of  nape  of  neck,  etc.,  irregularly  shaped  blotches,  etc.  (1st
potency,  sixth  day),*. — Itching  pimples  on  the  back,  the  itching  being
especially  felt  in  the  evening,  and  obliging  him  to  scratch  (1st  potency,
fifth  day),*. — Itch-like  eruption,  especially  on  the  back  (1st  potency,  sixth
day),*. — [760.]  The  dorsum  of  the  right  hand  and  that  of  the  index  finger
is  covered  with  red  blotches,  which  become  transformed  to  yellow  blisters
upon  a  red  base  (2d  potency,  second  day),*. — Itching  blotch-shaped  pimples
make  their  appearance  upon  the  lower  limbs  in  the  night  (30th  potency,
second  day),''.^Fatal  dropsy,°\ — Itching  of  various  parts  of  the  body,
making  him  uneasy  in  the  night  (1st  potency,  sixth  day),*. — A  good  deal
of  prickling  itching  in  various  parts  of  the  skin,  at  night  (2d  potency,  fifth
day),*. — When  getting  warm  in  the  night,  she  felt  an  itching  smarting  over
the  whole  skin,  especially  the  thighs  and  axillae  (30th  potency,  third  day),^
— Small  itching  pimples,  here  and  there,  resembling  itch  stigmata,  espe-
cially on  the  chest  and  back,  towards  the  shoulders  (1st  potency,  fifth  day),*.
— Itch-like  eruption  (especially  on  the  back),  (1st  potency,  fifth  day),*. —
Small  itch  pimples,  bleeding  when  scratched,  and  becoming  in  that  case
covered  with  bleeding  scurfs  (30th  potency,  third  day),^ — Pustulous
ecthyma,  coming  on  subsequently  to  itching,  and  pain  in  the  affected  por-
tion of  skin  (from  applying  the  nitrate  externally),". — [770.]  At  night,  in
bed,  he  experiences  a  torturing  itching  of  the  hard  blotches  on  the  lower
limbs,  and  in  the  bend  of  the  knee  ;  he  had  to  scratch  all  the  time,  and  was
then  as  if  in  flames  until  morning  (30th  potency,  third  day),*. — Stinging
itching  of  various  parts  of  the  body,  most  violent  around  the  left  nipple
(6th  potency,  second  day),*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. —  Yawning  and  chilliness  (6th  potency),*. —
Much  yawning  and  drowsiness  (at  5  o'clock  in  the  evening),  (30th  potency,
second  day),*. — Long  and  deep  yawning  (at  10  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  and
in  the  afternoon),  (6th  potency),*. — Frequent  inclination  to  fall  asleep
while  sitting  (third  day),'^^ — Sleepiness  when  sitting ;  he  had  to  exert  him-
self to  prevent  himself  from  falling  asleep  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — She
inclines  to  fall  asleep  in  the  evening,  while  sitting  down  (1st  potency,  third
day),^ — Soporous  condition,". — Attack  of  sopor  in  the  evening  (30th  po-
tency, third  day),*. — [780.]  Sopor  with  tossing  about,  in  the  night ;  no  sleep  .
(1st  potency), I — Sleeplessness,  with  tossing  about  in  the  bed  (1st  potency),'.
— Sleep  very  restless,  she  tossed  about  in  the  bed,  and  spoke  aloud  (2d
potency),^ — Nights  restless;  in  the  morning  all  the  limbs  feel  bruised,  and
the  sides  pain,''l — Had  a  restless  night ;  was  awake  most  of  the  time,  or
slumbered  merely,  and  had  dreams  (30th  potency,  third  day),'. — Restless
night ;  tossing  about,  heavy  dreams  (30th  potency,  first  day),'. — *  Restless
night ;  he  woke  almost  every  hour,  and  had  an  unrefreshing  slumber,  dis-
turbed with  dreams  (30th  potency,  second  day),*. — Restless  night,  with
fantastic  dreams  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Restless  night,  with  headache
and  stupefaction  (30th  potency,  third  day),'. — *Restless,  stupefied  sleep,  icitli'


AEGENTUM  NITRICUM.  473

horrid  dreams  (2d  potency),*.— [790.]  The  night's  rest  is  disturbed  with  a
dull  headache  (2d  potency),*. — In  the  morning  he  wakes  from  a  slumber
full  of  dreams,  with  dulness  of  the  head  (2d  potency),*. — He  wakes  in  the
night  with  sore  throat  (2d  potency),*. — He  woke  early  in  the  morning,
owing  to  shifting  of  flatulence,  rumbling  in  the  intestines,  and  sensation  as
if  he  would  go  to  stool  (1st  potency),''. — Fancies  and  images  crowd  upon
him  when  falling  asleep  (2d  potency),*. — *Is  prevented  from  falling  adeep
hy  fancies  and  images  hovering  before  his  imagination;  in  the  first  part  of
the  night,  he  is  in  a  sort  of  fantastic  half  slumber,  full  of  dreams  (1st
potency),*. — Restless  nights,  full  of  dreams  (1st  potency,  second  day),^ —
la  the  night,  many  dreams,  of  places  where  he  had  been,  and  persons  he
had  seen,  all  confusedly  mingled  as  regards  time  and  circumstances  (firet
day),*'. — In  the  early  part  of  the  night,  restless  dreams  of  long,  dimly
lighted  passages,  loith  a  succession  of  figures  strangely  dressed,  who  retreat
when  approached,  but  follow  when  he  goes  on  (first  day),*'. — *In  the  morn-
ing, he  dreams  that  he  is  hungry;  this  sensation  wakes  him;  upon  wak-
ing he  finds  himself  attacked  with  a  violent  spasm  of  the  stomach,  which  is
accompanied  with  hunger,  nausea,  and  considerable  flatulence  (30th  potency,
third  day),*. — [800.]  He  frequently  wakes  in  the  night  from  dreams  about
putrid  water,  fishes,  and  ^serpents,  filling  him  with  horror  (6th  potency),*. —
He  dreamed  towards  morning  that  an  insect  had  burrowed  so  deeply  in
his  heel  that  it  had  to  be  cut  out  (6th  potency),*. — Lascivious  dreams,  in
the  morning,  during  which  he  would  have  had  an  emission  of  semen,  if  he
had  not  waked  up  before  (30th  potency,  second  day),*.

Fever, — For  four  days,  every  evening,  at  6  o'clock,  attack  of  fever,**.
— Feverish  sick  feeling,  the  whole  afternoon ;  constant  weakness  and  ex-
haustion (2d  potency),*. — Febrile  condition ;  during  the  whole  of  the  fore-
noon she  suffered  with  headache  and  chilliness,  ate  little  at  noon,  and
without  any  appetite;  complained  a  good  deal  of  nausea;  in  the  afternoon,
about  4  o'clock,  she  was  seized  with  violent  tumult  and  beating  in  the
head,  with  heat  of  the  head,  creeping  chills,  the  skin  being  dry  and  hot,
accompanied  with  nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit,  and  with  great  desire
for  something  salt ;  she  felt  likewise  so  debilitated,  that  she  was  no  longer
able  to  remain  out  of  bed ;  the  desire  for  something  acrid  and  sour  having
increased,  she  took,  at  7  o'clock  in  the  evening,  some  pot-cheese,  which  she
devoured  greedily  ;  after  this  the  symptoms  improved,  but  the  febrile  sen-
sation continued  the  whole  night  (30th  potency,  sixth  day),*. — Shuddering
over  the  whole  body,  which  passed  into  a  febrile  chill,  with  goose-flesh  and
coldness,  the  head  being  hot  and  the  hands  cold,  with  nausea,  the  whole
forenoon,  recurring  at  the  same  period  on  other  days  (30th  potency,  second
day),'.^General  chill,  followed  after  a  short  interval,  by  general  heat ;  the
former  lasting  longer,  and  returning  quickly  on  uncovering,  even  during
the  heat,  the  latter  with  perceptible  pulsation  of  the  left  temporal  artery  ;
both  stages  without  thirst,^. — Fever,  after  a  meal ;  he  feels  chilly,  goes  to
bed,  feels  extremely  nervous  and  weak ;  the  head  feeling  obtuse  (2d  po-
tency),*.— Coldness  all  over,  in  the  warm  room,  in  the  evening  (1st  po-
tency ),^ — [810.]  Chilliness  and  headache,  in  the  forenoon  (30th  potency),*.
— Chilliness  and  nausea  after  rising  (30th  potency,  seventh  day),^ — Con-
stant chilliness,  extends  up  the  back  and  across  both  shoulders,  worse  after
eating,  and  when  he  comes  in  from  the  open  air,*^. — The  chilliness  was
accompanied  with  a  pale,  almost  yellowish  countenance,  nausea,  and  empty
risings  (30th  potency,  third  A&j),^. ^Night-sweats*. — ^Profuse  night-sweat,\
— A  good  deal  of  night-sweat  (30th  potency,  fifth  day),°. — Sweat  on  the


474  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

chest,  at  night  (30th  potency,  first  day),*. — Morning  sweat  (1st  potency),';
(30th  potency,  seventh  day),^ — Slight  sweat  in  the  morning  (1st  potency,
sixth  day),*. — [820.]  Morning  sweat  (from  4  until  6),  after  a  restless  sleep,
which  had  been  disturbed  by  many  fits  of  cough  (2d  potency),*. — Sweat
accompanied  with  chilliness,  as  soon  as  he  got  warm  in  bed  (1st  potency),^

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Vertigo  ;  aching  pain  deep
in  the  eye ;  mucus  fills  the  eyes ;  ringing  in  the  ears ;  tongue  dry ;  taste
clayey;  hunger  excessive ;  belching;  heat  and  itching  on  urinating;  urg-
ing to  urinate  ;  internal  soreness  in  the  larynx  ;  sweat. — (At  6  a.m.),  Stick-
ing in  left  ball ;  sudden  stool ;  tearing  in  head  and  fingers. — (At  8  a.m.),
Violent  boring  in  side  of  head  and  wrist. — (Morning,  after  rising),  Very
debilitated. — (Morning,  on  waking),  Dulness  of  head  ;  headache,  and  con-
fused pressure  between  shoulders. — {Morning,  when  walking),  Burning  and
dryness  of  the  eyes. — (Forenoon),  Urination  more  frequent. — (Noon),  Vio-
lent boring  in  left  temple;  suffocative  cough. — (Afternoon), Yioleut  boring  in
right  side  of  head  ;  stitches  and  digging  in  the  frontal  eminence  ;  palpita-
tion ;  great  debility  and  weariness  in  the  lower  limbs ;  weakness. — (At  6
P.M.),  Fever  daily. — (Evening),  Pain  in  right  side  of  head  ;  frontal  head-
ache; tongue  dry;  excessive  hunger;  desire  for  sugar;  stitches  in  the
spleen ;  diarrhoeic  stools ;  less  urine ;  cough  dry,  fatiguing ;  itching  pim-
ples.—(J.<  10  P.M.),  Sticking  in  the  right  ball. — (Night),  Smell  of  pus ;
sore  throat  wakes  him;  *colic  and  diarrhoea;  *much  urinating;  cough;
*cough  and  pressure  in  throat ;  hoarseness ;  pain  in  chest ;  palpitation ;
pain  in  back ;  acute  pain  in  left  wrist ;  cramps  in  calves ;  *nervousness ;
itching  of  skin,  of  border  of  neck,  and  scalp;  sweat. — (Midnight),  *8canty
watery  diarrhoea. — (Night,  on  waking).  Tearing  in  one  side  of  head. — (Open
air).  Headache. — (Bending  wrist),  Tension  and  stiffness. — (After  breakfast).
Very  debilitated. — (Chewing),  Toothache. — (After  coffee).  Head  confused.
— (Cold  things).  Toothache. — (Cold  water).  Sudden  pain  in  teeth. — (Before
dinner).  Tickling  in  throat,  causes  cough. — (After  dinner).  Emission  of
^aXxm.— (Drawing  on  boots).  Violent  pain  in  breast. — (After  eating),  Nausea.
— (Excitement),  *  Palpitation. — (Inspiration),  Pain  in  stomach  ;  pressure
near  pit  of  stomach. — (Lying),  Visions,  etc.,  generally  aggravated  ;  whiz-
zing in  air-passages  (after  dinner). — (Mental  exertion).  Pressing  pain  in
\i&a,A. —(Moving  eye).  Heat  and  pain  in  ball. — (Motion),  Drawing  and
heaviness  in  right  side  of  head ;  palpitation.— (iSWden.  motion),  Stitches
dart  through  the  abdomen. — (Odors),  Headache. — (Sitting),  *Pain  in  small
of  back;  ^weight  in  small  of  back;  *heavy  paralytic  sensation  in  sacrum;
drawing  through  right  leg  ;  dull  pressure  in  right  ankle ;  violent  sticking
in  left  malleolus ;  pricking  in  right  sole ;  sleepy. — (Sour  things).  Toothache.
— ( Going  upstairs).  Drawing  in  calves. — (Stooping),  Heaviness  in  forehead
and  over  eyes. — (Stretching  arm).  Mammary  glands  painful. — (Swallowing),
Soreness  in  pharynx. — (Thinking  of  it),*  Irregular  heart's  action. — (Tobacco
smoke),  *Intolerable  on  account  of  cough. — (Touching  the  part).  Pressing  pain
in  groins;  *pain  in  stomach. — (Twilight),  Sight  suddenly  weak. — (Warm
in  bed).  Sweat  and  chilliness  (in  the  night) ;  itching  (room) ;  *  Ophthalmia.
— (  Walking),  Violent  boring  in  left  side  of  forehead  ;  painful  fulness  in  the
liver ;  pressure  in  prsecordial  region  ;  pressive  pain  in  left  trochanter ;  pres-
sive  pain  in  knees;  violent  pain  on  outside  of  left  calf;  sticking  in  left
calf;  cramp  in  calves ;  compressive  sensation  in  left  leg. — (  Walking  in  open
air).  Heaviness  in  forehead. — (  Walking  erect).  Pain  in  small  of  back. —
(After  yawning).  Bursting  sensation  in  stomach.

Ameliorations. — (Evening),  Heaviness  over  eyes ;  pressure  in  stem-


ARISTOLOCHIA.  475

aeh. — {Cool  air),  *  Ophthalmia. — (Motion  in  open  air),  Irregular  beating  of
heart. — {Binding  head  tight).  Headache. — {Eating),  Pain  in  abdomen,  as
if  sore. — {Emitting  flatulence),  GeneraX  relief. — {Fresdng  on  Ztead),  Head-
ache.— {Red),  Drawing  and  heaviness  in  right  side  of  head. — {Standing),
Pain  iu  small  of  back. — {Walking),  Pain  in  small  of  back.


AEISTOLOCHIA  (MILHOMENS).

A.  cymbifera,  Mart.  Nat.  order,  Aristolochiaeese.  Common  name,  Bra-
zilian snake-root. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  flower.

Authority. Mure  (Brazilian  provings).

Head. — The  head  is  burning  hot. — Head  heavy. — Acute  lancination
in  the  head. — Throbbing  iu  the  right  frontal  eminence  for  a  minute. — His
temples  are  very  sensitive  to  touch  during  the  whole  day. — Sensation  of
torpor  at  the  vertex. — Acute  lancination  in  the  left  side  of  the  head. —
Severe  lancination  behind  the  head. — Shooting  in  the  cerebellum. — Sensa-
tion of  torpor  in  the  cerebellum.

3Ioutfl. — Excoriations  of  the  lips  and  gums. — Excoriations  of  the  lips
and  gums,  as  on  the  second  day. — Mouth  pasty  through  the  whole  morning.

Stomach. — Anorexia.  —  Complete  anorexia. — Want  of  appetite. —
Thirst. — Great  thirst,  with  bitterness  of  the  mouth. — Continual  thirst  and
bitter  mouth. — Borborygmus  in  the  stomach  and  intestines. — Fulness  of
the  stomach. — Pain  at  the  scrobiculus.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  right  groin.

Stool  and  Anus. — Burning  pains  at  the  anus. — Colic,  followed  by
a  stool,  at  first  soft,  then  diarrhoeie,  twice  in  succession. — Easy  stool.

Urinary  Off/ans. — He  makes  water  more  frequently  than  usual.

Sexual  Organs. — Itching  on  the  skin  of  the  prepuce. — Pricking  in
the  right  testicle.

Chest. — Bruised  pain  over  the  left  pectoral  muscle,  which  is  sensitive
to  the  touch  at  night. — Pain  in  the  right  side.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Lancinating  pain  at  the  apex  of  the  heart,
which  takes  away  his  breath  at  night.

Necle  and  Sack. — Painful  spot  under  the  scapula,  as  if  from  hav-
ing received  a  blow.— Sharp  pain  between  the  shoulders. — ^Uneasiness  in
the  lumbar  region.— Dull  pain  at  the  lower  part  of  the  lumbar  region,  and
in  the  hypogastrium. — Acute  pain  in  the  sacro-lumbar  region.

Upper  Extremities. — -The  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  left  arm
are  painful  to  the  touch. — Itching  above  the  bend  of  the  right  arm. — Pain
in  the  hypotbenar  eminence  of  the  right  hand. — Stinging  in  the  hypothenar
eminence  of  the  left  hand.— Pain  in  the  dorsal  portion  of  the  left  indfex. —
Pricking  in  the  joint  of  the  first  phalanx  of  the  little  finger.

Lower  JExtrem,ities.—The  leg  is  swollen  and  violet-colored  in  the
morning;  it  becomes  inflamed  by  fatigue,  and  turns  blaekish-red  towards
evening. — The  whole  leg  is  covered  by  large,  irregular  patches,  formed  by
extravasated  blood. — The  pains  in  the  legs  continue. — Stiffness  of  the  leg,
with  impossibility  of  standing  up  for  a  few  minutes. — Swelling  of  the  left
leg. — The  left  leg  is  red  and  inflamed. — Lancinations  through  the  whole  ex-
tent of  the  left  inferior  extremity. — Pricking  on  the  internal  surface  of  the
right  leg. — Itching  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  right  leg. — Uneasiness,  then
pricking,  in  the  thighs. — Malaise,  as  if  something  were  collected  in  the
internal  part  of  the  right  leg  above  the  knee. — Acute  pain  in  the  right


476  ARISTOLOCHIA  SERPENTARIA— ARNICA.

thigh. — Smarting  on  the  internal  superior  part  of  the  right  thigh. — Prick-
ing in  the  right  thigh. — Itching  on  the  right  thigh. — Itching  on  the  inter-
nal surface  of  the  left  thigh. — Bruised  pain  in  the  left  knee. — Bruised  pain
under  the  left  patella. — Painful  lancinations  in  the  internal  part  of  the  left
knee. — The  upper  part  of  the  left  leg  is  painful  to  the  touch.— Prick  as
from  a  pin  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  leg. — Swelling  of  the  lower  part  of
the  calf. — Cramplike  pains  in  the  left  tendo-Achillis. — Uneasiness  in  the
lower  part  of  the  tendo-Achillis. — Prick  under  the  heel. — The  malleoli
appear  swollen. — Partial  swellings  around  the  malleoli. — Malaise  after
waking  in  the  morning;  he  cannot  go  to  sleep  again ;  he  feels  as  if  something
incommoded  him  about  the  malleoli  for  several  hours;  this  pain  increases,
becoming  a  bruised  pain. — Feeling  as  if  the  lower  part  of  the  right  leg  had
a  tendency  to  fall  down  upon  the  malleoli,  as  a  stocking  might  do ;  he  often
carries  his  hand  there  as  if  to  raise  it  up. — Pain  above  the  right  internal
malleolus. — Cramplike  pain  in  the  right  internal  malleolus.— Lancinations
in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  leg  and  internal  malleolus. — Persistent  pain
above  the  left  internal  malleolus. — Disagreeable  sensation  behind  the  left
internal  malleolus. — Lancinations  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  lefi;  external
malleolus. — Tlie  left  leg  is  painful  as  if  excoriated  ;  the  pain  passes  to  the
right  internal  malleolus  and  becomes  more  acute. — Itching  on  the  left  ex-
ternal malleolus. — Itching  on  the  left  internal  malleolus.

Generalities. — Prickings  in  different  parts  of  the  body.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Disturbed  rest. — Unquiet  sleep. — Dreams. —
Disgusting  dreams. — He  dreams  that  he  can  neither  eat  nor  drink  nor
walk. — He  dreams  of  a  sheep  and  a  dog  covered  with  red  scarves ;  the
former,  elevated  above  the  ground,  shook  his  head,  and  was  seized  by  the
dog  in  the  middle  of  his  back ;  the  dog  himself  was  suspended  by  the  back
by  a  man  accompanied  by  many  other  individuals;  afterwards,  a  very
amorous  dream,  with  pollution.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Mouth  pasty  ;  leg  swollen,
etc.;  after  waking,  malaise. — {Towards  Evening),  Jjeg  becomes  inflamed,
etc. — (Night),  Left  pectoral  muscle  sensitive;  pain  at  apex  of  the  heart.


ARISTOLOCHIA  SERPENTARIA.

{See  Seepentaeia.)

ARNICA.

Arnica  montana,  L.  Nat.  order,  Compositae.  Common  name  (German),
Wohlverleih.  Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  whole  plant  when  in  flower
(Hahnemann).

Authorities.  1,  Hahnemann,  R.  A.  M.  L.  1,  473  ;  2,  Franz,  ibid. ;  3,  Gross,
ibid.;  4,  Stapf,  ibid,  (from  Archiv.  5,  3);  5,  Fr.  Hah-n ;  6,  Hornburg;  7,
K'ummer;  8,  Langhammer;  9,  Wislicenus ;  10,  Bsehr;  11,  Aaskow,  ibid.
("  not  found,"  Hughes);  12,  Collin,  ibid.  (Obs.  Circa  Morbos,  IV  and  V,
Effects  of  Arnica  when  given  for  Paralysis,  Amaurosis,  Spasms,  Fever,  and
Dysentery) ;  13,  Crichton,  ibid.  (Samml.  br.  Abh.  f.  pr.  Aezte,  XIII,  3,  A
Brief  Statement  of  the  Observed  Effects  and  Virtues  of  Arnica) ;  14,  De
la  Marche,  ibid.  (Effects  in  cases  treated  by  Arnica) ;  15,  De  Meza,  ibid,  (a
case  of  paraplegia,  induced  by  suppressed  menstruation  from  fatigue  and


ARNICA.  477

fright,  in  a  young  girl,  cured  [after  lasting  three  years]  by  Arnica,  which
brought  on  menses  immediately,  motion  returning  in  two  days) ;  16,  Murray,
ibid.  (A  Summary  of  the  Observed  Effects  of  Arnica);  17,  Pelargus,  ibid,
(a  child  to  which  Arnica  was  given  for  a  fall  from  a  height) ;  18,  Stoll,
ibid.  (General  statement  of  the  effects  of  Arnica) ;  19,  Fehr,  ibid.  (Effects
of  Arnica  in  cases  of  Injury);  20,  Thomas  A.  Thuessink,  ibid.;  21,  Vicat,
ibid,  (general  statement) ;  22,  Veckaskrift,  ibid. ;  23,  Avon  Szontagh,  N.
Z.  £  H.  Kl.,  7, 10,  proving  with  15th  and  3d  dils.;  24,  Ibid.,  proving  with
the  tincture,  1  to  100  drops ;  25,  Proving  of  extract  of  Arnica  by  Vienna
Soc.  of  (Allop.)  Physicians,  B.  J.  of  Hom.,  6,  267 ;  26,  Jorg,  provings  of
self  and  class  with  infusion  of  the  flowers  (Jorg,  Materialen,  1);  27,  Jorg
and  class,  provings  of  the  root  (ibid.);  28,  Eobinson's  proving  with  yooTjth
(B.  J.  of  Horn.,  25,  320) ;  29,  Shumann's  case  of  poisoning,  from  Schmidt's
Jahrbucher  (Am.  H.  Obs.,  8),  (two  cupfuls  of  the  tea  taken  for  delayed
menstruation);  30,  Lancet,  1864  (effects  of  one  ounce  of  the  tincture);  31,
(Omitted);  32, Horn.  Times,  1853  (external  application);  33, Hoppe  Prag
Monatsschrift,  12, 24  (external  application) ;  34,  Schleissteher  PragMonats-
schrift,  12,  65  (external  application) ;  35,  Chapman's  case,  B.  J.  of  Hom.,
7,  391  (external  application);  36,  Black,  B.  J.  of  H.,  2,  275  (external  ap-
plication) ;  37,  CEst.  Med.  Woch.  (B.  J.  of  H.,  3,  254),  (external  applica-
tion) ;  38,  Dr.  Hedenberg  (N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  3,  235),  (external  application)  ;
39,  Dr.  Clarke  (N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  3,  260),  (external  application).

Mind, — Excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  mind;  extreme  disposition  to
agreeable  as  well  as  disagreeable  emotions,  without  weakness  or  excessive
sensitiveness  of  the  body ;  (on  one  occasion  this  excessive  sensitiveness  of
the  mind  was  observed  before  that  of  the  body ;  I  have  also  seen  these  two
kinds  of  sensitiveness  occurring  in  alternation  or  simultaneously),'. — Un-
common liveliness,". — Bright,  talkative  (this  was  a  curative  reaction  in  a
person  of  an  opposite  mood),^ — Calm,  bright  mood  (curative  reaction),*. —
^'Indifference  to  everything,^. — Weeping,'. — After  supper  she  weeps,  is  peevish,
listens  to  nobody,  and  does  not  wish  to  be  told  anything,'. — Depression  of
spirits  and  absence  of  mind  (after  three  hours  and  a  half),'. — Hopelessness,^.
— [10,]  Anxiety,*  '■  '*  '*. — *  Hypochondriac  anxiety,^  ^^. — Violent  attacks  of
anxiety ,^ — Anxiety  about  the  present  and  the  future  (third  day),^ — Fright-
fulness,^. — Unexpected  trifles  frighten  and  cause  him  to  start  (after  an  hour
and  a  half),'. — Apprehension  of  future  evils,'. — Horror  of  instant  death,'".
— Uncommonly  peevish  ;  everything  is  disagreeable  to  her,*. — -Hypochon-
driac peevishness ;  he  is  not  disposed  to  do  anything,'. — [20.]  She  is  ex-
tremely peevish ;  all  her  former  cheerfulness  and  amiable  manners  have
gone  (after  one  hour),*. — Peevishness  ;  he  would  like  to  quarrel  with  every-
body,'.— Quarrelsomeness  and  peevishness,'. — He  is  contradictory ;  nothing
can  be  done  to  suit  him  (after  three  and  twelve  hours),'. — She  is  extremely
morose  and  irritable ;  *she  does  not  speak  a  word,'. — Moroseness ;  one  flrst
desires  all -sorts  of  things,  and  afterwards  repels  them,'. — Sullen  mood,  as
after  a  quarrel,*.-^Sullen  insolence  and  imperiousness  (after  some  hours),'.
— Obstinate  and  headstrong  resistance  to  other  people's  opinions  (after  four
hours),'. — Irritable,  sensitive  mood,'". — [30.]  Excessive  irritation  of  the
temples ;  she  easily  laughed  when  there  was  no  occasion  for  it ;  when  some-
thing disagreeable  was  told  her  she  got  angry,  and  broke  forth  in  loud
howling,'. — (Excessive  inclination  to  perform  many  and  long  literary  labors,
without  possessing  the  strength  which  is  required  to  terminate  them  without
injuring  health),'. — He  is  easily  absorbed  by  reveries  while  awak^,'. — He
sits  absorbed  in  a  revery,  although  he  thinks,  properly  speaking,  of  noth-


478  AKNICA.

ing,'. — Absence  of  mind  ;  he  cannot  direct  his  thoughts  long  to  one  object,'.
— Absence  of  mind  ;  his  thoughts  imperceptibly  wander  from  their  object,
and  dwell  upon  images  and  fanciful  visions,^ — After  walking  in  the  open
air,  he  is  ill-disposed  to  think  or  talk,  notwithstanding  he  was  very  cheer-
ful before  (aiter  nine  hours),^. — Aversion  to  every  earnest  labor,". — He
loathes  every  sort  of  work,'. — Uneasiness  of  body  and  mind  (without  there
being  any  anxiety) ;  one  feels  as  if  one  were  prevented  from  doing  something
which  is  extremely  necessary,  accompanied  by  a  total  want  of  disposition
for  any  kind  of  work,^. — [40.]  Inability  to  perform  continued  active  work,^.
— *  Want  of  memory ;  he  forgets  the  word  he  is  about  speaking,".

Send. — Confusion  of  the  head,'  ". — Confusion  in  the  head,'*. — Head
confused,^"  ^. — *' Confusion  of  the  head,  with  decided  pressure  in  the  right
half  of  the  head,  especially  over  the  right  brow,^. — Confusion  of  head,  chang-
ing to  pressive  right-sided  headache,'*. — Confusion  of  head,  with  frequent
inclination  to  sleep,". — Confusion  and  fulness  in  the  head,'^. — Confusion
of  the  head,  vertigo,  and  anguish  are  aggravated  by  artificial  vomiting,'.
— [50.]  Stupefying  headache  early  in  the  morning,'. — Dulness  and  pain
in  the  head,'^. — Obscuration  of  the  head  and  confusion  of  one-half  of  the
skull,  with  contraction  of  the  pupils,*. — Heaviness  of  the  head,'*. — Her
head  feels  so  heavy  that  she  lets  it  constantly  haug  on  one  side,'". — The
head  feels  heavy,  and  is  so  movable  on  account  of  weakness  of  the  muscles
of  the  neck,  that  it  easily  inclines  to  all  sides  (after  four  hours),'. — Heavi-
ness and  confusion  of  the  head,^. — Vertigo,' ". — Short-lasting  vertigo. —
Sudden  vertigo  at  dinner,  as  if  he  would  fall  forward,'. — [60.]  He  feels
vertigo  and  nausea  when  reading  too  long,^ — Vertigo  when  walking,*. —
*  Vertigo ;  it  is  almost  imperceptible  when  sitting  and  bending  the  head  over,
but  when  righting  or  moving  the  head  she  feeh  as  if  everything  turned  with
her,*'. — Vertigo  in  the  forehead,  especially  when  walking ;  everything  turns
with  her,  and  threatens  to  fall  over  with  her,*. — Headache,'^. — Intense
headache,  with  feeling  of  great  weight  and  heaviness  in  the  eyes,  and  op-
pression and  drooping  of  the  lids,  as  if  they  could  not  be  raised,'^ — Violent
headache,  on  linking  in  the  morning,  which  reached  such  a  point  at  8  a.m.  tlmt,
while  walking  in  the  open  air,  he  almost  fell  from,  dizziness ;  disappeared  at
10  A.M.,™.— Headache,  twitching,  tearing  ;  increased  by  stooping  and  cough-
ing,'.— (Headache,  which  is  tolerable  only  when  lying,  but  intolerable  when
raising  one's  self  and  sitting  in  the  bed),'. — Partial  headache,'^ — [70,]
Burning  in  the  head,  with  pressive  pain,  as  if  the  head  were  being  distended
from  within  outwards,'. — ^Burning  in  the  brain,  the  remainder  of  the  body
being  cool,  or  at  least  not  hot,^. — Great  internal  and  external  heat  of  the
head,'". — Internal  heat,  especially  in  the  head,  with  heaviness  of  the  head,
without  any  thirst,'. — Flushes  of  heat  over  the  head,  with  sweat  gathering
in  the  face,*. — Rush  of  blood  to  the  brain,  and  headache  in  the  forehead,'''.
— Emptiness  in  the  head,  without  any  particular  headache  (after  two  hours),'.
— Slight  pressure,'". — Pressure  and  confusion  of  the  head,^. — Pressive  head-
ache from  3  to  8  p.m.,  now  more  in  the  forehead,  now  more  in  the  occiput,'".
— [80.]  Headache,  pressive,  which  is  also  followed  by  a  throbbing,  pressive
headache  in  the  temples,'. — '''Pressive  headache,  as  if  the  head  were  being  dis-
tended from  within  outwards ;  the  pain  seems  to  arise  from  something  soft
in  the  vertex,  with  drawing  in  the  occiput,  and  tearing  towards  the  tem-
ples,'.— *Pain  as  if  a  knife  were  drawn  through  the  head  traiisnersely  from
the  left  side ;  this  is  immediately  followed  by  i)iternal  coldness  of  the  head,  vihich
causes  the  hair  to  stand  on  end,*. — Violent  stitches  in  the  head  when  cough-
ing (after  ten  hours),'. — Headache ;  stitches  extending  upwards ;  they  come


ARNICA.  479

OD  again  when  cougbine  or  moving  the  head,  and  can  only  be  relieved  by-
resting  the  head  upon  the  painful  side,\ — Frontal  headache,^^ — Heaviness
in  the  forehead  (after  one  hour),*. — Dull  pain  in  the  head  in  the  region  of  the
forehead,'"'. — Pressive  pain  iu  the  forehead,'. — Pressive  frontal  headache,".
— [90,]  Pressive  headache,  frontal,  with  confusion  of  the. head  so  severe
that  she  I'eared  she  would  fall  over  while  sitting,  and  had  to  lie  down,^^ —
Pressive  headache  in  right  forehead,  and  temple,  and  right  eye,''*. — Pressure
in  the  right  half  of  the  frontal  bone ;  afterwards  sneezing ;  the  pressure
then  moved  into  the  left,  afterwards  into  the  right  ear  (after  two  days),^ —
Pressive  pain  iu  left  half  of  forehead,  in  the  evening,''*. — First  pressive  pain
in  the  forehead,  afterwards  stitching  and  twitching  stitching  pain  iu  the
forehead,  accompanied  by  chilliness  (after  eight  hours),'. — Pressive  pain  in
the  forehead,  especially  when  walking,  or  ascending  the  stairs,  reflecting,  or
reading,''. — *Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  increases  near  the  warm
stove,  as  if  the  brain  were  rolled  up  in  a  lump,''. — Headache,  pressive,  over  the
eyes,  extending  towards  the  temples,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  integuments  of
the  forehead  were  spasmodically  contracted  (after  one  hour),". — Stupefying,
dull,  pressive  pain  iu  the  forehead,  more  externally  (after  five  hours  and  a
half),^ — Violent  sticking  pains  in  the  forehead  and  occiput,  on  waking  in
the  morning ;  lasts  all  day,'"'. — [100.]  Fine  pricking  pain  in  the  forehead,
which  becomes  worse  by  raising  the  eyes,  with  heat  in  the  face  and  thirst,'.
— Stitches  in  the  forehead,'. — Stitching  pain  in  the  forehead,^. — Violent
stitches  in  the  forehead  when  coughing  (after  seven  hours),*. — Rapid  stitches
in  the  left  frontal  eminence,  accompanied  by  the  sensation  as  if  an  extravasa-
tionof  blood  had  taken  place,^. — Jerking  stitches  in  the  forehead,*. — Twitch-
ing headache  in  the  forepart  of  the  head  (after  one  hour),'. — Jerking,  lan-
cinating headache  when  stooping,  as  if  everything  would  come  out  of  the
forehead,  accompanied  by  nausea,  qualmishness  about  the  heart,*. — Crawl-
ing in  the  forehead,'. — ^Feeling  of  cold  at  a  small  place  on  the  foreliead,  as
if  some  one  touched  him  with  a  cold  thumh^. — [110.]  Headache,  pressive,  iu
the  temples  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Repeated  tearings  in  the  left  temple,^
— Tearing  in  the  left  temple ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air  the  pressive
headache  distending  the  head  from  within  outwards  returns  (after  ten
hours),^. — ^Sticking  pains  in  temples  and  foreheadj^^. — *  Headache  as  if  a  nail
had  been  thrust  into  the  temple,  accompanied  by  general  sweat  about  mid-
night; this  is  followed  by  faintness  (after  some  hours),'. — Stitches  in  the
temporal  region  following  each  other  in  quick  succession,  extending  towards
the  forehead  (after  four  hours),'. — Dull  stitches  from  without  inward  in  the
temples  (after  one  hour),'. — Jerking  stitches  in  the  left  temple,*. — Headache
in  the  left  temple,  returning  from  time  to  time ;  fine  pricking  and  tearing  (after
four  hours),'. — Transitory  burning  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  neck  exter-
nally,*.— [120.]  Headache,  pressive,  externally  on  the  top  of  the  head,". —
Brain  felt  sore  and  tender  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,''^ — Crawling  on
the  top  of  the  head  externally,'. — Slight  headache  on  the  right  side,^*. —
Headache  on  the  left  side. — Rheumatic  headache,  with  vertigo  (commonly
one-sided),'"'. — Pressive  headache  in  the  parietal  region  and  in  the  orbits,"'.
— Pressive,  painful  drawing  in  the  left  half  of  the  skull,  beginning  at  the
ear  and  coming  out  at  the  top  of  the  head  (after  three  hours),". — Headache,
dull,  pressive,  under  the  parietal  bone  and  in  the  region  of  the  lachrymal
fossa,'"'.^ — Pain  in  the  occiput  at  some  places,  as  if  the  hair  were  pulled  out,  or
as  severe  electric  shocks,*. — [130.]  The  scalp,  as  far  as  the  eyebrows,  is  firmly'
attached  to  the  skull,  and  almost  immovable  (after  an  hour  and  a  half),'.
— Stinging  itching  of  the  scalp,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by  scratching,'.


480  ARNICA.

Eyes, — Staring  eyes,  denoting  anguish,'. — Slight  protrusion  of  the
right  eye;  it  looks  more  elevated  and  larger  than  the  left,'". — Eyes  sunken,
glassy,  with  dilated  insensible  pupils,"". — Considerable  swelling  under  the
left  eye,"®. — Left  eye  seems  more  elastic  and  is  sensitive  to  pressure,^*. —
(Burning  in  the  eyes),". — Burning  in  the  eyes,  without  any  dryness,'". —
Pressive  pain  in  left  eye,''*. — [140.]  (Stitches  in  the  eyes),'l — Itchingof
the  eyes,'^. — Crawling  over  the  orbits,'. — Cramplike  tearing  of  the  left  eye-
brow,'.—Painful,  dull,  intermittent  pressure  on  the  margin  of  the  left
orbit,". — Occasional  flow  of  tears,  which  burn  like  fire,'". — *The  margin  of
the  upper  eyelids,  along  its  line  of  contact  with  the  eyeball,  internally,  in  pain-
ful when  the  lids  are  moved,  as  if  they  were  too  dry  and  a  little  sore,^. — Sharp,
fine  stitches  in  the  internal  canthus,*. — Itching  of  the  canthi  (after  twenty-
seven  hours),^ — Spasmodic,  pressive  twitchings  under  the  left  eye,  on  the
nasal  bone ;  they  extend  even  over  the  ball  of  the  eye,'. — [150.]  Pressive
pinching  pain,  confined  to  inner  half  of  right  eyeball,'". — Pressive  pinching
pain  in  the  inner  half  of  the  right  eyeball,  gradually  ceasing  on  motion  in  the
open  air,''*. — Pressive  pain  in  inner  half  of  right  eyeball,  and  corre-sponding
part  of  forehead,''*. — Drawing  pain  in  the  right  eyeball  (after  twenty -seven
hours),'. — *Dilatatifin  of  the  pupils  (after  twenty-six  hours),'. — *Contrac-  ■
tion  of  the  pupils  (after  twenty-four  hours),". — Contraction  of  the  pupils,
with  obscuration  of  the  head,*. — Vision  of  sparks,"".

JEars, — Heat  and  burning  in  the  lobule,*. — Feeling  of  heat  externally,
of  the  left  ear,  and  in  the  cheek,". — [160.]  Feeling  as  of  one  ear  being  hot,
which,  however,  is  not  the  case  (after  one  hour),'. — Pressure  in  the  ear,'. —
Intermittent  pressure  in  both  ears,  in  the  region  of  the  tympanum  (after
ten  hours),'. — First,  stitches,  afterwards  a  tearing  pain  in  the  ears  (after
one  hour),'. — Dull  stitches,  extending  inwardly,  through  the  internal  ear
(after  one  hour),". — Dull,  long  stitches  behind  the  ear,'. — Stitch  darting
through  the  right  ear,  then  through  the  left,  lastly  through  the  eyes,  with
a  feeling  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  forcibly  turned  upwards,*. — Pain,  in-
ternally, in  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear,  as  if  the  parts' had  been  bruised  or  con-
tused,^.— The  hearing  is  much  more  acute  (after  ten  hours),'. — Sensibly
diminished  hearing  (after  thirty  hours),'. — [170.]  Very  frequent  roaring
in  ears,  even  in  repose,"*. — Ringing  in  the  left  ear  (after  three  hours),'. —
Slight  singing  in  right  ear,"*. — Humming  of  the  ears,'. — Humming  in  the
ears  (after  seven  hours),*.

Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nose,'. — Nose  swollen,"*. — Nose  swollen,  erysipel-
atous, and  vesicated,"^ — Frequent  sneezing  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. —
Sneezing  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),'. — [180.]  Sneezing,'. — Sneezing
twice  in  succession,  followed  by  a  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  as
after  a  violent  blow,". — Coryza  in  the  evening,  when  going  to  sleep ;  catarrh
on  the  chest,  on  waking  in  the  morning,'. — Some  coryza,"". — Violent
coryza,'. — *Frequent  blowing  of  nose,  with  traces  of  blood,"". — *Diseharge
of  several  drops  of  clear  blood  from  the  nose  on  first  blowing  it  in  the
morning,"". — Frequent  nose-bleed,^. — Frequent  bleeding  at  the  nose,'". —
Slight  epistaxis,"\ — [190.]  Severe  epistaxis  at  night  prevented  sleep,"". —
(Constant  burning  about  the  borders  of  the  nostrils,  with  desire  to  sneeze),'.
— Feeling  of  heat  in  the  nose ;  however,  it  is  cold  to  the  touch,". — Cramp-
like  pain  at  the  root  of  the  nose  (after  two  hours),". — Dull  pressure  on  the
nasal  bone,  with  stupefaction,". — Sticking  tearing  pain  in  the  nose,'. — The
nose  pains  him  from  above  downwards  as  if  he  had  had  a  violent  fall  upon  it,'.
— Sense  as  if  the  nostrils  were  ulcerated  ;  the  nose  is  sore  within,'. — Itching
crawling  on  the  side  of  the  nose,  going  off  by  rubbing  (after  one  hour),". —


AENICA.  481

Feeling  as  if  an  insect  were  crawling  near  the  nose ;  this  cannot  be  removed
by  nibbing,^

Face. — [200.]  The  countenance  is  much  simhen,^. — Dry  heat  in  the  face,
towards  evening,  extending  as  far  as  behind  the  ears,  uiithout  any  thirst,  the
nose  being  quite  cold  (after  twenty-four  hours),". — Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,
in  the  evening  (after  thirty-six  hours),*. — Heat  and  itching  in  the  face,'^ —
*Red  swelling  of  the  right  cheek,  luith  throbbing  and  pinching  pain,  swollen
lips  and  *great  heat  in  the  head,  with  a  cold  body ;  the  feet  felt  sometimes
hot,'. — Hot,  red,  shining,  stiff  swelling  of  the  left  oheek,^". — *Eedness  and
burning  in  one  cheek,  otherwise  cool,  or  at  any  rate,  not  hot,'. — (At  noon,
during  dinner,  in  one  cheek,  perceptible  warmth),'. — When  yawning,  cramp-
like pain  in  the  cheek  (after  one  hour),". — Creeping  over  the  left  cheek,
like  a  shivering  without  coldness,  extending  as  far  as  the  side  of  the  occi-
put (after  six  hours),'. — [210.]  Throbbing  and  pinching  in  the  swollen
cheek,  as  if  two  hammers  beat  against  each  other,  crushing  the  flesh,'". —
Twitching  throbbings  in  the  left  cheek  (after  half  an  hour),'.-^ Violent
trembling  of  the  lower  lip,'"'. — Swollen,  thick  lips,'°. — ^Ulcerated  corners  of
the  mouth,  with  a  burning  pain,  especially  when  moving  those  parts,'. —
Hydroa  on  the  lips  (in  one  individual),^'.— C/iopped  Zips,'. — The  external
margin  around  the  lips,  especially  the  upper  lip,  becomes  chapped,  as  by
cold  (after  eight  and  a  half  hours),*. — Parched  lips,'. — Burning  heatin  both
lips,  with  moderate  warmth  of  the  body^. — [220.]  Tingling  in  the  lips  as  if
they  had  gone  to  sleep  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),^ — Itching  of  the  upper
lip ;  when  rubbing  it,  it  burns,^ — Pressive  twitchings  (intermitting  tear-
ings),  in  the  muscles  of  the  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw,^. — Incipient  paralysis
of  the  lower  jaw,'. — (Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  articulation  of  the  right
jaw,  when  moving  the  jaw  to  and  fro,  early  in  the  morning),  (after  twenty
hours),'.

Mouth. — Teeth  covered  with  mucus  (after  one  hour),'. — Wabbling  and
elongation  of  the  teeth,  without  pain,'. — Pressive  pain  in  one  of  the  left
lower  incisors,  which  is  not  hollow,''*. — (Toothache,  as  if  the  teeth  had  been
bitten  out,  sprained,  were  wabbling,  throbbing;  the  teeth  feel  as  if  they
were  pressed  out  by  the  blood  rushing  towards  them  ;  they  ai-e,  then,  more
painful  when  touched),'. — Pain  in  the  teeth,  as  if  the  roots  of  the  teeth
were  being  scraped  with  a  knife,'". — [230.]  Pressure  on  the  inferior  and
internal  gums,  as  of  a  leaden  bullet,'. — Tearing  toothache  of  the  left  molar
teeth,  upper  row,  during  eating ;  the  pain  goes  off  after  eating,". — Tingling
in  the  gums,  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep,*. — During  mastication,  the  gums
pain  as  if  ulcerated,  especially  the  place  under  the  tongue,^ — *  Tongue
coated  white,  with  a  good  appetite,  and  good  taste  (after  two  days),". — Sen-
sation of  dryness  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  in  the  palate,  on  the  lips,  with
shivering  over  the  arms  and  thighs  (after  two  hours),'. — Burning  in'the
tongue  (anterior  third),  and  soft  palate,  as  from  pepper,  or  swallowing  hot
liquid,'^ — Burning  of  t6ngue  and  palate,'^ — Stinging  biting  at  the  root  of
the  tongue,'*. — Biting  sensation  on  the  tongue  (after  four  hours),'. — [240.]
Sensation  as  of  the  tongue  being  sore  (after  four  hours),'. — *Fetid  breath
from  the  mouth,'. — *  Vapor  fetid,  coming  out  of  the  mouth  during  an  expira-
tion, for  two  days,^. — ^Dryness  in  the  mouth,'". — Dryness  of  mouth  and
throat,"'. — *Dryness  in  the  mouth  with  great  thirst,^". — Dryness  in  the  mouth
mthout  thirst,^ — Dryness  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  without  any
thirst,  the  taste  in  the  mouth  is  foul  (after  fourteen  hours),'. — Burning
scraping  in  the  mouth  and  oesophagus,^. — Puckered  feeling  in  the  palate  as
of  something  astringent  (after  five  hours),'. — [250.]  Increased  saliva  (three

VOL.  I. — 31


482  ARNICA.

hours),''''. — Profuse  saliva,'*. — *  Bitter  taMe  in  the  mouth  ,^ — *  Bitter,  rather
disgusting  taste,^. — Bitter  taste  on  swallowing  the  medicine,'^. — Bitter  taste
in  the  mouth,  early  after  waking,'. — (Everything  which  he  takes,  tastes
sour),'. — *  Putrid,  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth,^. — *  Taste  of  rotten  eggs  in  the
mouth  between  the  meals,^.

Throat. — Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands;  they  are  chiefly  pain-
ful when  he  raises  or  turns  his  head,  but  especially  on  touch  (after  four
days),'. — [260.]  Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands,'. — Sound  of  subdut-d
whistle  in  the  throat,'". — Phlegm  in  the  throat,  tastes  bitter  when  hawked
up  (after  twelve  hours),^. — Burning  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  with  u
feeling  of  internal  heat,  or  rather  that  sort  of  anguish  which  originates  in
heat  (without  any  heat  being  perceptible  externally),'. — Violent  burning
in  the  throat  when  swallowing,^*. — Constriction  in  the  throat,'^ — Stinging
in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  between  the  acts  of  swallowing,'. — Pressive
pain  of  the  velum  pendulum  palati,'. — Pain  in  the  fauces,  as  if  something
hard  or  rough  (ex.  a  crust  of  bread)  were  lodged  in  it,  in  the  afternoon,
when  lying  down  ;  the  pain  passes  off  when  rising  (after  six  hours),'. — Feel-
ing as  if  the  pharynx  were  swollen,  and  would  hinder  swallowing  (half  an
hour),'^. — [270.]  Violent  burning  from  the  fauces  through  the  oesophagus  to
the  stomach,^. — A  peculiar  scraping  burning  from  the  throat  to  the  stomach,
which  became  a  troublesome  pressure  in  the  stomach,'^. — Noise  during  degluti-
tion,'.— Difficult  deglutition,'". — Deglutition  is  prevented  by  a  sort  of  nausea,
as  if  the  food  would  not  go  down,^.

Stomach. — Increased  appetite,^. — Enormous  appetite  in  the  evening;
after  the  meal,  immediately  affected  with  a  feeling  of  repletion,  and  a  colic-
like pressure  in  several  places  of  the  abdomen,  especially  the  sides,'. — Al-
though she  has  eaten  considerable,  she  nevertheless  felt  empty,  as  if  she
had  not  eaten  anything,  but  she  felt  as  if  she  had  drunk  a  good  deal ;  sense
as  of  swashing  in  the  body,*.^ — Gnawing  hunger,  without  appetite ;  lasted
till  he  fell  asleep,^". — Appetite  lost,'". — [280.]  ^Repugnance  to  food,^^. —
Total  want  of  appetite  for  ten  days,  during  which  time  he  loathed  the  sight
of  food,^*. — Want  of  appetite;  the  tongue  coated  white  and  yellow,'. — Com-
plete want  of  appetite,  with  nausea,'". — Want  of  appetite  in  the  evening,'.
— ^Repugnance  to  meat  and  broth,^. — His  (usual)  tobacco  is  repugnant  to
him,'. — Desire  for  vinegar,'. — She  wants  to  drink  constantly,  but  she  knows
not  what,  because  everything  is  offensive  to  her,'". — Desire  for  water,'. —
[290.]  A  good  deal  of  thirst  and  drinking  during  the  yawning  stage,  pre-
vious to  fever;  afterwards  thirst,  but  little  drinking,  during  the  hot  stage,'.
— Nightly  thirst  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — Thirst,  without  any  external
heat,  the  pupils  being  little  capable  of  dilatation  (after  one  hour),'. — (Repug-
nance to  milk),'. — Inclination  to  eructations,'*. — Eructations,^  ^" "  ^. — Fre-
queM  eructations,^. — Empty  eructations,^. — Empty  eructation  (after  a  quarter
of  an  hour),* '. — Frequent  empty  eructations," — [300.]  Frequent  eructa-
tions, smelling  of  Arnica,". — Half-suppressed  eructations,*.— Eructations
of  much  wind,". — *Eructations  bitter  and  like  bad  eggs  (two  hours),'. —
Early  in  the  morning,  *eructations,  tasting  like  rotten  eggs,'. — A  kind
of  suppressed,  imperfect  hiccough,  after  dinner,^. — Gulping  up  of  saltish
water,'. — During  the  eructations,  a  bitter  phlegm  is  gulped  up,'. — Dis-
gust,'*.— Nausea,'^ — [310.]  Extreme  nausea,"'. — Nausea,  without  vomiting,
or  without  any  stool,'*. — Nausea,  with  burning  scratching  in  the  throatj'^. —
Nausea  and  eructations,"*. — Nausea  and  general  relaxation  during  the  fore-
noon,"".— Nausea  and  disposition  to  vomit  early  in  the  morning  (fourteen
hours),'. — He  felt  well  during  the  siesta,  as  long  as  the  eyes  were  closed ;


ARNICA.  483

on  opening  them,  qualmishness  of  the  stomach/. — Qualmishness  and  nau-
sea, with  anxious  pressure  in  the  stomach,". — Qualmishness  of  the  stom-
ach, with  empty  eructations,". — Inclination  to  vomit,'^ — [320.]  Inclination
to  vomit,  without  nausea  (half  an  hour),'". — *Emphj  retching,  ineffectual
efforts  to  vomit  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Retching  at  night;  vomiting,
however,  does  not  come  on;  in  the  pit  of  his  stomach  there  is  a  weight,  as
of  a  lump,\ — Retching,  unto  vomiting,".— Vomiting,'" '^ — Vomiting  of
bitter  yellow  bile,'^ — Vomiting  small  quantities  of  yellow  odorless  fluid,
with  excruciating  pains,'^'. — ^Vomiting  of  coagtdated  blood,^*. — Grumbling,
unpleasant  motions  in  the  stomach,"". — Grumbling  in  the  stomach,  with
colic,". — [330.]  Great  pains  in  the  stomach,  increased  by  pressure,". — Car-
dialgia," '". — Heartburn,'". — Fulness  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,^'. — The
stomach  feels  overdistended  (though  he  had  eaten  nothing),  with  a  feeling
as  though  he  would  throw  off  every  moment,'^. — Feeling  of  repletion  of  the
stomach,  accompanied  by  loathing,^. — Emptiness  in  stomach,^'. — Contractive
pains  in  the  stomach,"". — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  stomach  causes  a  gen-
eral pain,  but  mostly  in  the  posterior  wall  of  the  stomach,  with  a  sensation  as
if  the  wall  of  the  stomach  would  be  forcibly  pressed  toward  the  spine,  and  as  if
the  spine  xvould  be  made  painful  from  that  place  downward  (one  hour),"".
— Pain  as  if  the  posterior  wall  of  the  stomach  were  forcibly  pressed  against  the
spinal  column,". — [340.]  Stomach  seems  contracted  spasmodically,  with
pain,". — Pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  its  walls  were  spasmodically  drawn  to-
gether; relieved  by  eatirig  (ten  minutes),"". — Pinching  in  the  stomach,". — -
*  Pinching,  spasmodic  griping  in  the  stomach,^. — Pinching  and  pressure  in
the  stomach  extended  through  the  bowels  as  a  constriction,  with  much  move-
ments,^.— Griping  and  pricking  pains  in  the  stomach,  with  frequent  gag-
ging,"".— Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  stomach,^. — Pressure  as  if  a  stone
were  lying  in  the  stomach  (immediately),". — Pressure  in  the  stomach  lasts
all  day,  and  wakes  from  sleep  at  night,"". — -Pressure  in  the  stomach,  with
heaviness  on  the  chest,"". — [350.]  Pressure  in  the  upper  and  anterior  por-
tion of  the  stomach,"'.^Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  if  the'  xiphoid  process
were  pressed  inward,"'. — Oppression  of  stomach,"^. — (Biting  pain  in  the
stomach),  (immediately),'. — Violent  jerks  under  the  stomach,*. —  Great
pain  in  epigastrium,  increased  by  pressure,"". — After  a  meal,  fulness  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach  and  painful  pressure  at  a  little  spot  deep  in  the  hypo-
gastrium,  immediately  behind  the  pubis  (in  the  bladder?)  ;  it  is  most  felt
when  standing,  and  constantly  excites  micturition  (after  four  hours),^. —
Sense  as  of  digging  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (after  half  au  hour)  ;  and  as
if  something  were  being  rolled  up  like  a  ball  (after  twenty-four  hours),". —
Severe  pressure  at  the  epigastrium,"". — Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
as  of  a  hand  ;  this  pressure  gradually  ascended  up  to  the  neck ;  she  then
felt  nauseated,  and  the  water  collected  in  her  mouth  ;  this  went  off  after
lying  down,  and  there  was  only  a  pressure  in  the  abdomen  (after  one
hour),'. — [360.]  Painful  pressure  transversely  across  over  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  with  dyspnoea,".

Abdomen, — Spasms  in  the  hypochondriac  region,'". — Flying  pains  in
epigastrium  and  right  hypochondrium,"*. — Pressive  pain  below  the  right
hypochondriac  region,  seeming  to  be  in  the  liver  or  duodenum,"'.— Painful
pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver  (after  two  days),".^Pain  in  the  region
of  the  liver,  which  presses  like  a  stone,  both  during  expiration  and  inspira-
tion ;  felt  when  he  lay  on  his  left  side,*. — Pressure  shooting  upwards  in  the
region  of  the  spleen,  resembling  a  continued  stitch,  when  walking  (after  six
hours),". — Pressure  below  the  last  ribs,*. — Fine  and  severe  sticking  pain


484  ARNICA.

below  the  last  rib/. — Dull  stitches  in  the  right  side,  below  the  ribs,'. —
[370.]  Stitches  under  the  false  ribs  of  the  left  side,  intercepting  the  breath,
when  standing,^ — Grunting  and  fermenting  flatus  below  the  umbilical
region  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — (Retraction  of  the  umbilicus),'^ — ^
Pinching  over  the  umbilicus,''.^Pressive  pain  and  sensitiveness  to  touch
ou  a  small  spot  on  the  right  side  of  the  navel,  as  if  flatulence  had  accumu-
lated therej^'l — Tearing  in  the  abdomen,  over  the  navel,'.— Cutting  over
the  umbilicus,  especially  when  breathing  deeply,  and  at  every  step,  but
neither  immediately  before  nor  during  stool,'. — Stitches  in  the  umbilical
region,  which  seem  to  be  in  the  small  intestines,". — ^Distension  of  the  abdo-
men (in  a  few  minutes,  lasted  one  hour),'"'. — *Abdomen  tympanitic j^'^. — [380.]
*  Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen  (a  quarter  of  an  hour),". — *  Distension
of  tlie  bowels,  with  frequent  urging  to  stool  (three  hours),'"'. — Distended  ab-
domen, with  frequent  urging  to  stool,  though  more  than  ever  C07utipated,^\ —
Distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  frequent  passage  of  wind  and  urging  to  evac-
uate the  rectum,'^. — Tension  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  especially  the
lower  part,  a  couple  of  hours  after  a  moderate  supper,  accompanied  by  a
dull,  general  pressure  in  those  parts,  especially  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,
without  any  flatus  being  distinctly  felt ;  this  continues  during  the  night,
with  heat  of  the  limbs  and  dreams  which  fatigue  the  mind ;  he  wakes
every  hour ;  the  inodorous  flatus  which  he  passes  affords  him  no  relief,'. —
Tense  distension  of  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  when  at  rest;  the  part  is
painful  as  from  an  internal  wound ;  when  coughing,  blowing  the  nose,  or
secting  down  the  foot,  it  feels  painful,  as  if  it  had  been  shaken,  torn,  or  cut
to  pieces ;  it  is  painful  when  touched,  and  feels  as  if  one  cut  into  a  wound';
relieved  by  the  emission  of  flatulence ;  every  day,  from  morning  until  2
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,'. — Grunting  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  from
flatulence,'. — Loud  grunting  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness  (after
ten  hours),*. — Increased  production  of  gas  in  bowels,''*. — Flatulence,^". —
[390.]  Flatus,  rumblings  in  the  abdomen,'^ — Fermenting  flatus  in  the  ab-
domen,'.— ^^Offensive  flatus,". — *Flatus,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs  (after  three
hours),'. — Flatus  accompanied  by  pressure  at  the  stomach,'. — Flying  pains
in  abdomen,". — (Burning  stinging  pains  in  the  epigastric  region),'". — In
the  morning,  in  bed,  tension  in  lower  part  of  epigastric  region,'*. — Pinching
throbbing  on  the  left  side,  between  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  the  umbili-
cus,*.— Colicky  pains,  owing  to  flatulence,'. — [400.]  Violent  colic  (one
hour),". — Colic,  apparently  from  incarcerated  flatus,'. — Colic ;  an  hour
afterwards,  tenesmus;  at  last,  an  evacuation  of  fteces,  composed  of  small
lumps,  mixed  with  flatulence,'. — Fine  tearings  in  the  abdominal  muscles
(after  one  hour),'. — Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  a  sudden
contusion,  when  walking  (after  twenty-six  hours),". — Slight  cuttings  in  the
intestines  (two  houra)''°. — Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  as  after  a  cold,'. — Vio-
lent cutting  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  which  darted  upwards  like  a
stitch  as  far  as  the  vertex,  so  that  he  jumped  up  as  from  an  electric  spark
(after  twenty-four  hours),". — Sharp  thrusts  through  the  abdomen  from  one
side  to  the  other  (after  three  hours),". — Fine  stitch  in  the  abdominal  mus-
cles, which  leaves  an  itching  behind ;  it  passes  ofi"  by  scratching  (after
three  hours),". — [410.]  Clawing  throbbing  on  the  left  side,  between  the  pit
of  the  stomach  and  the  umbilicus,". — Violent  jerks  below  the  stomach,". —
Colio  resembling  dysentery;  a  kind  of  grinding  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  within
the  hips  on  both  sides,  accompanied  by  nausea  and  slumber  (between  two  and
five  hours),'. — Intermittent  tearing  in  the  left  half  of  the  pubic  eminence,^.
Stool  and  Anus. — Tenesmus  of  the  rectum,'. — Straining  in  the


ARNICA.  485

rectum,'. — Straining  and  pressing  in  the  rectum  when  standing  (after  seven
hoiirs),^— Tenesmus  every  half  hour;  but  nothing  except  mucus  was
passed/. — Tenesmus,  with  emission  of  flatulence;  previously  grunting  in  the
intestines  (after  one  ho\ir)^\—* Tenesmus ;_this  is  followed  by  a  copious,  thin
or  paplik&  sourish-smelling  stool,  giving  great  relief  (every  day  four  or  five
times),". —  [420.]  Pressive  pain  in  the  rectum  (after  six  hours),'. — Sensation
of  rumbling  in  the  rectum  for  three  days,  not  altered  by  the  usual  stools,''.
— -Bliud  hsemorrhoids,'^ — Swelling  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  vessels,'^ — Burn-
ing and  shooting  in  the  anus,®. — Continual  inclination  for  stool,". —
*Iueffectual  urging  to  stool,^ — Sudden  violent  urging  to  stool  as  though
diarrhoea  would  follow,  but  only  a  few  fseces,™. — ^Frequent  stool ;  after  every
stool  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down,^. — Frequent,  small  stools,  consisting  only  of
mucus  (after  sixth  and  seveuth  hour),'. — [430.]  Increased  soft  motions,  with
considerable  loss  of  blood  (from  haemorrhoids),'®. — Diarrhceia  stool  ivith  some
cuttings  in  the  intestines,'^. — Frequent  diarrhoea,'*. — Watery  diarrhoea
(hardly  left  the  closet  during  the  night),®. — (*DiarrhoBa  resembling  brown
yeast),'. — Nightly  diarrhoea  with  pressive  colic,  us  if  from  flatulence,'. — Pap-
like diarrhoea,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen  previous  to  stool,'. — -In-
voluntary stool  at  night,  wken  asleep,'. — White  diarrhoealike  stool,'. —
Paplike,  brown  stool,  with  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  came
on  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),^ — [440.]  Stool  sometimes  diarrhoeic,  some-
times scanty  and  tough,  with  much  wind,''^ — Stool  thinner  and  darker  than
usual,". — *Undige8ted  stools,  although  not  liquid,'. — ■*Bloody  puslike
stool,^\ — Stools  firmer  and  less  frequent,''". — Stools  harder  and  more  seldom,'*.
— Stool  sluggish,'^ — Hard,  difficult,  with  pressure  in  the  abdomen  (after
thirty-six  hours),* — *  Constipation,^.

Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  the  urine  dropping
out  involuntarily  (after  one  hour),'. — [450.]  Tenesmus  of  the  neck  of  the
bladder,  with  ineffectual  efforts  to  urinate,'. — Cutting  pain  in  the  orifice  of
the  urethra,  at  the  termination  of  micturition,'. — Stitches  in  the  urethra,'.
—Stitches  in  the  urethra  after  micturition  (after  one  hour),'.— Itching  in
the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  in  the  region  of  the  glans,  when  he  is  not
urinating,'. — More  frequent  desire  to  urinate  than  usual,'. — Desire  to
uriuate,  accompanied  by  some  biting  burning,  increased  after  micturition,
but  not  while  urinating,'. — ^Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  emission  of  a
smaller  quantity  of  yellow-red  urine  (after  forty-six  hours),^ — Frequent
desire  to  urinate,  with  copious  emission  of  urine  (after  one  hour),*. — ^Urging
to  urinate,  with  copious  discharge  of  watery  urine,'*. — [460.]  He  passes  red
urine,  the  quantity  of  which  is  larger  than  the  liquid  he  had  drunk,". —
Early  in  the  morning  he  passes  a  quantity  of  urine,  which,  however,  flows
slowly,  as  if  the  urethra  were  constricted  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. —
— Frequent  emission  of  a  watery  urine  (after  twelve  hours),'. — Frequent
emission  of  white  watery  urine,  the  quantity  of  which  is  smaller,  than  the
liquid  which  he  had  drunk;  the  last  drops  of  the  urine  do  not  press  out
easily  (the  first  four  days),'. — Emission  of  a  quantity  of  urine  ;  he  is  able,
especially  at  night,  to  retain  it  a  long  time  (after  thirty  hours),'. — Retention
of  urine,  with  tenesmus  of  the  bladder,'. — One  has  to  stand  a  great  while
before  some  urine  is  emitted,*. — Urine  increased,  deep  colored,'". — Urine
remarkably  scanty,'*. — Scanty  red  urine,*. — ^[470.]  Watery  urine,". — Dark-
yellow  urine,  strongly  acid,  of  high  specific  gravity,  becomes  opalescent  on
boiling,  but  again  clear  on  adding  nitric  acid,'*. — Urine  sulphur-colored
turbid,  extremely  frothy,  with  neutral  reaction,  and  soon  depositing  an
abundant  sediment. Boiling  renders  it  more  turbid ;  the  addition  of  nitric


486  ARNICA.

acid  clears  it,  but  aTnmonia  again  makes  it  cloudy.  It  becomes  offensive
on  the  third  day,  and  precipitates  only  crystals  of  phosphoric  acid,  ammonia,
and  magnesia,". — *I)ark-brown  urine,^^. — *Brou'n,  clear  urine,  which  im-
mediately becomes  whitish  and  turbid  (after  forty-eight  hours),'. — *Brown
urine  with  brich-red  sediment,^. — Urine  has  a  saturated  appearance,  acid  re-
action, and  increased  specific  gravity,". — Urine  strongly  acid.  When  de-
composing, it  dissolves  totally,  on  the  addition  of  nitric  acid,  luith  formation
of  ffas". — The  urine,  on  standing,  deposits  a  slight  sediment,  which  con-
tinually increases;  and  when  the  urine  decomposes,  it  precipitates  an
unusual  number  of  crystals  of  phosphoric  acid,  ammonia,  magnesia,  and
urates.  The  later  crystals  adhere  farmly  to  the  sides  of  the  glass," — In-
crease of  earthy  phosphates  in  the  urine,".

Sexual  Organs. — [480.]  {Male.)  Itching  pimple  on  the  prepuce,'.
— Itching  red  spot  upon  the  glans,'. — Fine  stitch  through  the  glans,'. — In
the  afternoon,  several  violent  stitches  in  the  glans  penis," — Itching,  or
itching  stitches  in  the  glans,'. — Violent,  continued  erections  after  waking,
without  any  desire  for  an  embrace,  or  without  any  amorous  thoughts  (after
twelve  hours),'. — (Painless  tubercle  on  the  scrotum),'. — Single  stitches  in
the  scrotum,'. — Testes  felt  hard,  and  were  swollen  and  tender,®. — Early,
in  bed,  feeling  of  weakness,  with  relaxed  testicles,  as  if  he  had  had  an
emission  of  semen  the  night  before,  while  asleep,  which,  however,  was  not
the  case,'. — [490.]  Violent  sexual  desire,  and  continued  erections  (in  a
weak  old  man),'. — ^Siveral  pollutions  in  one  night,  with  voluptuous  dreams,'.
■^Emission  of  semen  (by  day)  during  an  affectionate  caress,'. — {Female.)
A  girl  of  twenty  years,  who  had  not  had  her  courses  for  one  year,  but  was
otherwise  healthy,  had  an  attack  of  nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomath,  imme-
diately after  taking  the  medicine;  this  was  followed  by  a  lump  of  blood
passing  through  the  vagina,*. — Brings  on  menstruation  (curative  effect),'^.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Sensation  as  if  the  larynx  were  im-
peded by  swelling,  causing  cough  and  hawking,  which  brings  up  only  a
little  thick  mucus,  without  giving  relief," — During  an  eructation,  he  felt
as  if  his  breath  caused  an  agreeable  cooling  in  the  trachea,  as  if  the  walls
were  too  thin,^ — (Sense  as  of  crackling  in  the  trachea,  when  walking,  and
in  the  evening,  when  lying  down),'. — Hoarseness,  early  in  the  morning,'. —
Voice  low,  muttering,™. — [500.]  Cough  at  night,  during  sleep,^. — Even
yawning  excites  cough,'. — *eough,  in  children,  produced  by  weeping  and
lamenting,'. — *  Cough  is  excited  by  cries,  in  children,  when  accompanied  by
anger  and  tossing  about  (between  the  seventh  and  eighth  hours),'. — When
asleep,  snoring  expiration  and  inspiratiou  (after  twenty-four  hours),'. —
*Cough  produced  by  itching  irritation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,
during  the  siesta  (after  four  hours),'. — Cough  exciting  vomiting,'. — Cough,
with  stitches,  which  increased  the  pain,"°. — Cough  with  stitches  in  the  side
of  the  chest  (after  ten  hours),'. — •*  Cough  producing  a  feeling  in  the  ribs,  as  if
all  of  them  were  bruised,^. — [510.]  *  Constant  dry  cough  which  shook  the  whole
/rame,®. — Dry,  sharp,  hacking  cough,"". — *  Quite  dry  cough  produced  by  a
titillation  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  trachea  (after  four  hours),'. — Dry,  short,
and  hacking  cough,  as  from  a  titillation,  low  down  in  the  trachea,  every  morn-
ing after  rising,^. — (Cough,  with  expectoration,  which  appears  to  come  out
of  the  posterior  nares),'. — The  mucus  in  the  air-passages  which  collected
over  night,  was  more  easily  expectorated  than  usual,^^ — Expectoration  of
clear  glairy  mucus,  mixed  with  blackish  points,'"'. — *Sputa  mixed  with  blood
(after  second  day),''. —  '''Bloody  expectoration  from  the  chest,^°. — *Hmmoptym^.
— [520.]  He  de.sires  open  air,'. — Longing  to  be  in  free  open  country  air,"*.


ARNICA.  487

— In  the  night,  contrary  to  custom,  breathing  with  open  mouth,  which  was
quite  dry  on  awaking,^'. — *Shnrt,  panting  breath,^. — (Quick,  difficult  in-
spirations, slow  expirations),'. — Frequent  and  slow  deep  breathing,  with
pressure  below  the  chest,^ — *Dyspnce%,  quick  expirations  and  inspirations,'^''.
— (Excessive  difficulty  of  breathing),".

Chest. — Red  sweat  on  the  chest,^'. — Pains  over  the  thorax,'^ — [530.]
(Anguish  and  pains  in  the  chest),". — Anguish  across  the  chest,  with  incli-
nation to  vomit  (after  two  hours),'. — Feeling  of  internal  coldness  in  the
chest," — (Feeling  of  tension  across  the  chest,  as  far  as  the  neck  ;  this  ten-
sion is  lessened  by  lying  on  the  back,  increased  by  walking,  and  becoming
painful  when  standing),  (after  two  hours),'. — Tightness  of  the  chest  and
difficult  respiration,^. — (Drawing  pain  in  the  chest,  accompanied  by  anx-
iety),'.— Aching  pains  in  the  chest,'^ — Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  an-
guish ;  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and  headache,'". — Oppressive  weight  on  the
upper  "part  of  the  chest,'". — Suffocative  oppression  of  the  chest,'''. — [5.40.]
Early,  when  waking,  a  load  of  blood  appears  to  have  accumulated  in  the
chest ;  after  a  little  exercise  he  feels  better,'. — *  Violent  stitches  in  the  middle
of  the  left  breast,^. — Pressive  stitches  in  the  chest,*. — Stinging  on  the  chest
and  inner  surface  of  the  arms,^*. — *Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  joints  of  the
chest  and  baak^. — (Pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  raw,  with  roughness  of
the  throat  during  cough),'. — Hk  chest  feels  affected,  raw;  his  sputa  is  some-
times tinged  with  blood,  especially  when  walking  (after  thirty-six  hours),*.
— *AU  the  joints  of  the  bones  and  cartilages  of  the  chest  feel  painful,  as  if
they  were  bruised,  during  motion  and  breathing^. — Cutting  pressure  through
both  sides  of  the  thorax,  increased  by  inspiration  (after  one  hour),". — Stitches
in  both  sides,  under  the  ribs,  as  from  flatulence  (after  one  hour),'. — [550.]
Stinging  itchiug  in  the  sides  of  the  chest  and  in  the  back,  which  cannot  be
removed  by  scratching  (after  some  minutes),'. — Pressive  pain  in  the  right
breast,  at  a  small  place,  which  remains  unaltered,  either  by  motion,  or  contact,
or  breathing,^. — Pine  sticking  pains  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,'. — *Sticking
pain  in  one  of  the  two  sides  of  the  chest,  accompanied  by  a  short  cough,  which
increases  the  pain,  and  by  continued  asthma,^. — Dull  stitches  in  the  right  side,
near  the  ribs,*. — Pain,  like  prickings,  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,'. — In
the  middle  of  the  left  breast,  a  painless  feeling  of  constriction,  which  tight-
ens breathing,  accompanied  by  a  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which
arrests  breathing,'. — Stitches  in  the  left  breast,  during  a  deep  inspiration,
near  the  sternum,*. — Twitching  pain  in  left  side  of  chest,^*. — Pain  in  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  like  pricks  of  pins  (after  twenty-nine  hour3),^ — [560,]
Crawling  itching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (after  one  hour),'. — Violent
pressure  on  the  sternum,  over  the  pit,*. — Dull  pressure  over  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,'. — Stitches  under  the  sternum,".
— Dull  stitches  entering  the  thorax  through  the  sternum  (after  two  hours),'.
— Pressive  pain  in  the  lower  extremity  of  the  sternum,  which  is  especially
felt  during  a  deep  inspiration  (after  twelve  hours),'. — Pressive  stitching
pain  in  front,  in  the  sternum,  especially  when  walking,'.

Heart  and  PalsP,. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,". — The  motion  of  the
heart  is  first  very  rapid,  then  suddenly  slow,'". — Stronger  beat  of  the  heart,".
— [570.]  The  beating  of  the  heart  is  more  like  jerking,"'.^Cardiac  dis-
tress,'".— Pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  as  if  the  heart  were  squeezed  to-
gether, or  as  if  it  got  a  violent  shock,*. — *Pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  as
if  it  were  squeezed  together,  or  as  if  it  got  a  shock  (after  thirty-six  hours),'. —
*Stitches  in  the  cardiac  region,''^. — *  Stitches  in  the  heart  from  the  left  side  to
the  right,^". — Twingeings  at  the  heart,'". — Pulse  slow  and  small,^'. — Pulse


488  ARNICA.

rapid,". — Pulse  accelerated,". — [580.]  Pulse  somewhat  accelerated,'*. —
Pulse  accelerated  (80),'*. — Pulse  accelerated  and  irregular  (one  hour),^^ —
Rhythm  of  heart  irregular,^^. — *Puke feeble,  hurried,  andirregular,^'". — Puhe
100;  feeble,  fluttering;"'.

Week  and  Back. — Prominent  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  ;  they
are  exceeding  painful,  especially  when  moving  the  neck  or  speaking,". —
Puin  in  right  side  of  neck,  where  the  external  carotid  emerges  from  the
sterno-cleido-mastoid  muscle,  as  if  a  lymphatic  gland  were  swollen ;  it  is
aggravated  by  suddenly  turning  the  head  to  the  left,  by  forcible  pressure,
and  by  severe  throbbing  in  the  arteries  of  the  neck,^^ — Cramplike  pain  in
the  cervical  vertebrse,  accompanied  by  dull  stitches  from  without  inwards
(after  two  hours),". — Cramplike  tensive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,
when  sneezing  or  yawning,\ — [590.]  Rough  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the
left  side  of  the  neck,  with  bruised  pain,". — Pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the
neck,  as  if  the  cravat  were  tied  too  tight,". — Pressure  and  tension  on  the
spinal  processes  of  the  last  cervical  and  first  dorsal  vertebrse,'". — When
bending  the  head  over,  he  feels  a  pressure  and  tension  in  the  lowest  cervical
vei'tebra,^ — Tearing  pain  in  the  neck,'^ — *  Violent  pain  in  the  spine,  as  after
sudden  rising  up  after  long  stooping,''^ — A  peculiar  painful  sensation  extend-
ing doiun  the  back,  as  comes  sometimes  from  continued  stooping  in  hard  work,
on  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,''^. — -The  spine  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  not
able  to  carry  the  body,". — (Sensation  as  if  the  spinal  marrow  were  being
injected,  with  a  feeling  of  concussion),". — Arthritic  pain  in  the  baek  and
limbs,\ — [600.]  Burning  pain  in  the  back,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,'.
— Paiu  as  from  bruises  in  the  back,'. — Stitch,  at  every  inspiration,  in  the
right  side  of  the  back,  extending  from  the  last  ribs  to  the  axilla  (after  forty-
eight  hours),". — Crawling  in  the  vertebral  column,^ — Pain  between  the  scap-
ulae, with  violent  stomachache,'". — Pressive  pain  between  the  scapulae  (after
two  days),". — Pressive  rather  superficial  pain  between  the  shoulders ;  after
a  subsequent  dose,  this  pain  returned  more  below  the  right  scapula,^". —
Pressive  pain  between  the  scapulae,  which  seemed  to  extend  from  the  posterior
wall  of  the  stomach,^^. — Cutting  thrusts  between  the  scapulse,  extending  into
the  thoracic  cavity,  when  walking  (after  six  hours),". — Pinching  pain  be-
tween the  lower  angle  of  the  right  shoulder-blade  and  the  spinal  column,  in
the  muscles  of  the  back,  increased  on  stretching  these  parts  ;  (had  been
previously  noticed  several  times  in  former  years).'^. — [610.]  Pain  in  the
right  scapula,  towards  the  back,  as  after  a  violent  blow  or  fall,^. — Slight  pinch-
ing oa  the  lower  angle  of  the  left  .scapula,^*. — Pricking  itching  on  the
scapula  (after  two  hours),". — Sensation  in  the  back,  almost  under  the  shoul-
ders, as  if  something  like  a  lump  were  lodged  there,  which  causes  dull
stitches  during  motion,  not  when  at  rest,*. — Painful  pressure  in  the  middle
of  the  spine  (when  sitting),". — (Crawling  in  the  dorsal  spine,  afterwards  in
the  false  ribs  as  far  as  the  stomach),'^^Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  lumbar
region,'''. — Pain  in  the  loins,  cutting  from  without  inwards,  especially  when
stooping  (after  sixty  hours),". — Great  weight  across  the  lower  part  of  the
loins,  and  a  feeling  of  being  drawn  in,  as  if  a  cord  was  drawn  tightly
across,^'.— Sharp  stitches  in  both  loins  (after  three  hours),". — [620.]  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  something  had  been  torn  inside,*. —  The  small
of  the  baek  is  painful  as  if  it  had  been  beaten,^. — Pain  in  the  small  of
the  back  ;  stitches  in  it  when  coughing,  breathing  deeply,  or  walking,'. —
Pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  after  a  violent  blow  or  fall,".

Extremities  in  General. — Twitchings  in  all  the  limbs,  especially
in  the  feet  and  shoulders,  with  heat  of  the  feet,'. — Tremor  of  the  limbs,'*. —


AKNICA.  489

Relaxation  in  the  limbs,  as  if  they  had  been  strained  too  much,l — Heavi-
ness of  the  limbs,\ — Excessive  heaviness  of  the  limbs,". — Heaviness  in  all
the  limbs,  as  after  great  fatigue,^. — [630.]  *  Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs;
paralytic  pain  in  all  the  joints,  during  motion,  as  if  the  joints  were
bruised  (after  eight  hours),'. — When  walking  in  the  open  air,  sensation  of
heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  muscles  under  the  articulations  of  the  upper
and  lower  extremities  (after  eight  hours),^ — (Tearing  pain  in  the  limbs),".
— Deeply  penetrating  dull  stitches  in  the  limbs,  here  and  there,'. — *Pain
in  the  limbs  as  from  a  bruise,^''. — *Pain  in  all  the  limbs,  as  if  they  had  been
bruised,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  notion  (after  ten  hours),*. — Painful  concus-
sion in  all  the  limbs ;  felt  when  the  carriage  shakes,  as  when  one  treads  too
firmly  upon  the  foot  in  walking^. — Weakness  in  the  feet  and  arms,  when
walking  in  the  open  air  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),'. — The  limbs  of  the  side
on  which  he  is  resting  have  gone  to  sleep,*. — Drawing  pains,  short  lasting,
crawling  in  the  hands  and  feet,  and  sticking  pains  in  divers  joints),"'.

TJltpev  Extremities. — *Pain  as  from  bruises  on  the  anterior  surface
of  tlie  arms,^. — *  The  arms  feel  weary,  as  if  he  had  been  bruised  by  blows,  so  that
he  Avas  unajjle  to  bend  his  fingers  inwards,*. —  Violent  twitching  pain,  extend-
ing from  the  left  shoulder-joint  to  the  middle  finger,^*. — (Crawling  in  the
arms),'l — Drawing  pressive  pain  in  the  left  shoulder  when  standing  erect,^
— Smarting,  sore  sensation  below  the  shoulder, I — Broad,  sharp  stitches  be-
low the  axilla,  from  without  inwards," — (Painful  concussion  or  shock  in  the
arm,  almost  electric-like),'^ — Twitchings  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm
(immediately),". — [650.]  Intermittent,  painfully  pressive  tearing,  extending
from  the  lower  part  of  the  left  upper  arm,  as  far  as  the  elbow,  apparently
in  the  bone,^ — Dull  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm,  which  cause
him  to  start,'. — Painful  stitches,  like  shocks,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  upper
arm,'. — Twitches  in  the  left  upper  arm,  as  if  a  nerve  were  twinged,'. —
When  bending  the  arm,  the  flexor  muscles  of  the  forearm  are  tense  ;  ex-
tending these  muscles  again  is  painful  (after  two  hours),^ — ^Tearing  pain  in
the  arms  and  hands,'. — Burning  stitches  in  the  forearm,'. — Slow,  dull
stitches  in  the  left  forearm,  with  acute  pains,  as  if  the  arm  were  broken
(early,  when  in  bed),'. — Sharp,  broad  stitches  below  the  elbow-joints  (after
two  hours),". — Crawling  in  the  forearms,'. — [660.]  Left  wrist  powerless  for
one  half  hour,  with  a  feeling,  generally,  that  he  could  not  use  the  arms,'".
— Tearing  pain  in  the  left  wrist-joint,  especially  when  writing ;  the  pain  is
felt  in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand  ;  it  decreases  when  letting  the  hands  hang
down,'. — Slight  cracking  and  sensation  of  dislocation  in  right  wrist,  when
moving  the  hand,". — Sticking  tearing  in  the  wrists,  especially  in  the  left
(after  three  hours),'. — *Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  wrist  (chest,  back,
hips),'. — *Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  wrist-joint,^. — Pain  as  from  a  sprain
in  the  left  wrist-joint  (after  two  days),'. — Sharp  stitches  in  the  wrist-joint,
increased  by  motion  (after  two  hours),". — Distended  veins  of  the  hands,
with  a  full,  strong  pulse,'. — Weakness  of  the  hands,  especially  when  seizing
something  (after  two  hours),'. — [670.]  Violent  drawing  pain  on  the  ulnar
side  of  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand,^. — Sharp  drawing  in  the  outer  half
of  the  back  of  the  right  hand,^. — Painful  pressure  on  the  dorsum  of
the  hand,'. — Tearing,  tioitohing  pain,  during  rest,  on  the  ulnar  side  of  the
dorsum  of  the  left  hand,".— (Creeping  and  crawling  in  the  hands),"'.' —
Cramp  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,^. — Drawing  cramplike  pain  in  the  long
bones  of  the  fingers  and  the  forearm  ;  it  extends  backwards  and  upwards,'.
— Drawing  in  the  right  thumb,'\ — Drawing  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  dorsum


490  ARNICA.

of  the  left  little  finger,''*. — In  the  evening,  drawing  and  tearing  in  the  right
third  finger,  especially  at  the  ungual  phalanx ;  also,  at  times,  in  the  little
finger,  and  along  the  ulnar  edge  of  the  forearm,^*. — [680.]  Pressive  pain  in
the  joints  of  the  right  ring  and  little  fingers,'*. — Pressive  pain  in  the  first
phalanges  of  the  last  three  left  fingers,". — Spontaneous  pressive  pain  in  the
ungual  phalanx  of  right  ring  finger,^. —  Violent  pressing  tearing  pain  in  the
ulnar  side  of  the  ungual  phalanx  of  right  ring  finger^'*. — Tearing  in  the  tips
of  the  last  two  left  fingers,^. — -Sticking  twitching  pain  in  the  fingers,'. —
Stitches  in  both  middle  fingers  (and  in  the  knee),'. — Fine  stitches  in  the
anterior  joint  of  the  middle  finger  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Sharp
stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  middle  joint  of  the  index  finger  (after  two
hours),'. — Burning  stitches  on  the  end  of  the  left  third  finger,". — [690.]
Itching  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger  (after  two  hours),'. — '*Pain
in  the  balls  of  both  thumbs,  as  if  they  had  been  knocked  against  something
hard,^. — Sharp  pain  on  pressure,  as  from  crushing,  in  the  ungual  phalanx
of  right  ring-finger,^*. — Fine  pricking  itching  of  the  lower  joints  of  the
fingers  ;  it  goes  off  by  scratching  (after  thirty-six  hours),'.

Lower  JExtremitles, — Trembling  in  the  lower  extremities,*.— At
night,  the  lower  extremities  are  painful  when  laid  across  one  ^nother,". —
Tearing  pain  in  the  lower  extremities,'. — (Tearing  pain  in  the  lower  extremi-
ties),'^ — *  Drawing  pressive  pain  in  the  left  hip-joint,  the  thighheing  extended,
when  sitting  (after  five  hours),''. — Single  thrusts  in  the  hips,'. — [700.]  *Pain
as  from  a  sprain  in  the  hips  (back,  chest,  wrists),'. — Continual  pinching  on
the  outer  side  of  the  thighs  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Thighs  of  a  livid  color,
with  blue  and  yellowish  marks,  as  if  black  and  blue,'\ — Trembling  of  the
recti  muscles  of  left  thigh  (common),'''. — Pinching  twitchings  in  the  upper
portion  of  the  left  thigh,  near  the  scrotum,'. — (Abscess  of  the  psoas  muscle),'.
— Pain  in  the  thigh  when  rising  and  stepping  upon  the  foot,'. — Transient
tension  in  left  buttock  and  knee,". — Drawing,  cramplike  pressure  in  the
muscles  of  the  thigh  when  sitting  (after  forty-eight  hours),". — Slight  tear-
ing in  the  left  upper  thigh  (very  common),'''. — ^[710.]  Fine  stitches  in  the
thigh  above  the  knee  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Itching  stitches  on
the  inner  side  of  the  thigh  above  the  knee ;  they  become  more  violent  by
rubbing  (after  two  hours),'. — *Pain  in  the  thighs  ivhen  walking,  as  from  a
blow  or  contusion^'. — Sense  of  twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh,'. —
Finely  stinging  itching  of  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh,  like  soreness,  dimin-
ished by  contact,''. — The  knees  suddenly  bend  when  standing  (after  one
hour),'. — The  knee-joints  have  no  firmness  ;  they  totter  when  standing  (after
three  hours),'. — Sometimes  sudden  absence  of  power  in  the  knees ;  they
bend,  whilst  the  feet  are  numb  and  insensible,'. — (Cramplike  pain  in  the
knee  and  leg),'. — Tearing  in  the  knees  (not  uncommon),". — [720.]  Violent
tearing  in  the  region  of  the  left  knee,  ameliorated  by  violent  friction,"  —
Pressive  tearing  below  the  left  knee,'. — Stitches  in  the  knee  (and  in  both
middle  fingers),'. — Pain  in  the  right  knee  when  ascending  the  stairs,  as  if
one  had  knocked  it  against  something  (after  three  hours),'. — Sense  as  of
gurgling  in  the  lower  part  of  the  leg,  from  below  upwards,  when  at  rest  (after
quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Prick  in  the  knee  when  touched  (after  one  hour),'. —
intense  burning  at  a  small  spot  on  the  outside  of  the  left  tibia,"'. — Twitch-
ing lancinating  pain  in  the  tibia,  extending  from  below  upwards  (after  six
hours),'. — Pressure  in  the  tibia,  as  after  knocking  it  against  something,  only
when  walking  (after  thirty  hours),". — Tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  calf
from  below  upwards,  accompanied  by  drawing  when  standing  (after  seven
hours),". — [730.]  Tearing  pain,  like  boring  and  digging,  from  above  down-


ARNICA.  491

■wards  in  the  left  calf;  the  pain  then  extends  into  the  thigh,  thence  cross-
ing behind  the  os  coccygis,  and  finally  terminating  at  the  right  iliac  bone
(after  six  hours),'. — '*Pain  as  after  a  violent  blow  over  the  calf  of  the  right  leg,
aeeompanied  by  lassitude  of  the  legs,\ — Want  of  power  in  both  ankles,  and
a  heavyweight  on  each  instep,'". — Tearing  in  the  malleoli,'. — Tearing  pain
on  right  external  malleolus,  and  on  dorsum  of  foot,''^.—'Pa,in  in  the  tarsal
joint,  undulating,  tearing  (almost  dull  stitching),^ — *Pain  as  from  a  sprain
in  the  tarsal  joint,' . — Tearing  in  the  heel,'. — Stitches  in  the  right  foot  over
the  heel,  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  only  when  extending  the  tarsal  joint,  but
not  when  walking  (after  two  hours),'. — Sudden  swelling  of  the  (sick)  foot,'.
— [740.]  The  feet  felt  tired  after  having  taken  a  walk  in  the  open  air ;  the
knees  bent ;  as  soon  as  the  feet  felt  weary  she  became  sleepy  at  once,  fell
asleep,  and  dreamed  immediately,'. — Inexpressible  pain  in  the  (sick)  foot,
as  from  internal  uneasiness,  and  as  if  it  were  lying  too  hard ;  this  obliges
one  to  move  the  part  hither  and  thither,  in  the  evening  (after  eight  hours),'.
— *  Arthritic  pain  in  the  foot,  y/'ith  a  little  fever  towards  evening,'. — Violent
burning  in  the  feet,'". — Violent  Mting  and  burning  on  the  external  ridge
of  left  foot,  through  a  centre,^*. — (Pressive  pain  in  the  paralyzed  foot),'. —
Stitches  in  the  foot,  extending  through  the  big  toe,'. — Tingling  in  the  feet,^
— Feeling  as  of  crawling  and  creeping  in  the  feet,'. — Drawing  in  the  outer
half  of  the  back  of  the  left  foot  j^*. — [750.]  Sweat  of  the  soles  of  the  feet  and
toes,'. — Standing  becomes  painful,'. — Cramp  in  the  toes  of  the  left  foot
(after  thirty-six  hours),*. — Painful  cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  soles  of  the
feet,'. — Stitches  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  in  one  and  the  same  spot,  when
walking,  as  if  there  were  a  corn  (after  thirty -six  hours),^. —  When  walking,  on
raising  left  foot,  and  bending  left  ankle,  crawling  in  the  outer  half  of  left  sole,
as  if  the  nerve  were  pulled,^\ — Crawling  prickings  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,
one  and  the  same  place,''. — Tearing  in  the  left  little  toe,^. — Sticking  tearing
in  the  under  surface  of  the  big  toe,  especially  when  setting  down  the  foot
(after  four  hours),'. — Sticking  tearing  pain  in  the  tip  of  the  big  toe ;  it
comes  on  gradually,  and  is  felt  when  lying  down  for  the  siesta,'. — [760.]
Violent  stitches  in  the  toes  when  walking,^ — Single,  severe  stitches  in  the
big  toe  (after  one  hour),'.— Dull,  long  stitch  in  the  right  big  toe,'. — *Ar-
thritic,  dull  pain  towards  evening,  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  joint  of  the  big  toe,
aeeompanied  by  smne  redness,^. — Dull  throbbing  pain  in  one  of  the  toes,^ —
Dull,  trembling  pain  in  one  of  the  toes,^. — Single  shocks  in  the  big  toe,'.

Generalities. — (Jerks  and  shocks  in  the  body,  as  by  electricity),'^ —
Sudden  twitches  of  single  muscles  in  almost  every  part  of  the  body,  espe-
cially in  the  limbs ;  those  twitches  produce  a  shock  either  in  single  parts
of  the  body,  or  in  the  whole  body,'". — Uneasiness  in  the  whole  body,  with-
out any  mental  anguish  ;  a  kind  of  excessive  mobility,  which  finally  be-
comes a  kind  of  trembling  of  the  whole  body,'. — [770.]  Orgasm  of  the
blood  in  the  evening,  accompanied  by  dizziness  of  the  head ;  he  feels  pul-
sations in  the  whole  body ;  (he  coughs  for  hours  until  he  vomits ;  this  wakes
him  at  night),'. — When  walking  in  the  open  air,  he  feels  as  if  the  whole
right  side,  especially  the  shoulder,  were  too  heavy  and  paralyzed ;  he  does
not  feel  this  in  the  least  when  in  the  room  (after  eight  hours),^ — ^'Lassitude
and  sluggishfiess  of  the  whole  body ;  the  legs  are  scarcely  able  to  stand,^. —
General  fatigue,  lassitude,  and  sleepiness,". — General  weakness,''^. — Loss  of
strength,^'. — *  General  sinking  of  strength;  he  can  scarcely  move  a  limb,*. — •
Feeble  in  walking,  as  if  suddenly  blighted  with  old  age,''^ — Tremulous  un-
easinessand  weakness,*. — *  Weakness,  weariness,  sensation  as  of  being  bruised ;
these  symptoms  oblige  him  to  lie  down,*. — [780.]  Felt  sick  and  feeble  on


492  ARNICA.

rising,'". — Comfortable  feeling  of  exhaustion,'^. — He  feels  faint  when  walk-
ing ;  he  recovers  himself  when  standing,^. — Faintness,'*. — '*Painful  and  ex-
cessive sensitiveness  of  the  whole  body,^. — *  Painful  sensitiveness  of  all  the  joints
and  of  the  skin,  on  making  the  slightest  motion  (after  four  hours),'. — Extreme
malaise,'^. — Indescribable  discomfort  and  disinclination  to  activity ,''. — Ex-
cessively violent  pain,  which  caused  many  to  scratch  the  wall  or  the  floor
with  their  nails,  like  madmen ;  the  pains  do  not  continue  more  than  an
hour  (immediately  after  taking  the  medicine),'*. — [790.]  (Burning  and  cut-
ting pains  here  and  there),'''. — Everything  on  his  body  feels  as  if  it  were
tied  too  tight,'. — Extremely  disagreeable  painfulness  of  the  periosteum  of
all  the  bones,  resembling  almost  a  drawing  in  all  the  limbs,  as  in  fever  and
ague,'. — From  time  to  time  tearing  in  almost  every  part  of  the  body,  espe-
cially, however,  in  the  lower  and  upper  extremities ;  in  the  lower  extremi-
ties they  are  mostly  felt  when  sitting ;  the  pain  for  the  most  part  appears
to  rise  from  below  upwards,'. — Stitching  pains,''". — Burning  stitches  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  body,^*. — *FeIt  as  if  bruised  over  the  whole  body, 'I —
Twitching  pain  in  the  affected  part  (after  two  hours),'. — Disagreeable  sense,
as  of  tingling  or  dull  pain  in  a  contused  part,^. — Fine  prickings  in  almost
every  part  of  the  body,  especially  the  nose,  eyebrows,  eyelids,  even  hands
and  fingers,'. — [800.]  Intense  pricking  and  itching  of  the  entire  body,'^.

Skin. — Skin  red,™. — *Skin  red,  hot,  and  (edematous, ^^. — Skin  cold,
dry,^". — Eruption,  with  great  burning  or  smarting,'*. — Vesicular  eruption,
with  great  heat  and  great  irritation,**. — Fine  vesicular  eruption,  with  itch-
ing,'".— Red  patches,  with  swelling  and  burning,". — Caused  erysipelatous
redness  and  turgescence  of  the  skin,  with  increased  temperature,  and  in
many  places  papular  elevations,  which  on  slight  touch  itch  rather  than  pain,
and  are  tipped  with  a  small  vesicle,'*. — Erythematous  inflammation  of  the
skin  with  oedema  over  the  face  and  whole  body  ;  it  becomes  vesicular  and
finally  scales  off,'l — [810.]  Nettle-rash  eruption  (child  from  smelling
Arnica),'^. — Itching  rash  (produced  by  moistening  the  skin  with  the  tinc-
ture),'.— Eruption  like  pin-heads  with  red  skin,'". — Vesicles,  closely  set,
acuminated,  on  an  inflamed  base,'*. — Red  points  and  vesicles  with  red
areola,  smarting  and  itching,". — Pustules  in  fourteen  days,". — Pimples  on
the  side  of  the  forehead,  partly  filled  with  pus  (after  three  days),'. — Rash
on  the  face,  especially  the  forehead,  which  goes  and  comes,'^ — Erythema
of  the  face :  less  about  the  margins  of  the  hair  ;  worse  on  the  lids.  The
cheeks,  upper  lip,  and  nose  dark-red  and  moderately  swollen.  The  concha,
especially  its  margin,  swollen  and  bright  red  ;  the  adjacent  parts  were  much
swollen  and  red.  The  lids  were  cedematous,  and  oedematous  sacs  hung  from
the  lower  lids ;  with  heat  in  the  face  and  violent  biting  (itching),  disturb-
ing sleep.  Pulse  normal,".  (A  repeated  result  of  using  tincture  of  Arnica
on  himself  and  others.) — Eruption  over  the  malar  bone,'". — [820.]  Erup-
tion on  the  cheeks,  like  small-pox;  mostly  under  the  eyes,^ — Pimple  on
both  sides  of  the  upper  lip  (after  two  days),'. — Pimple  in  the  groove  of  the
upper  lip,  in  the  middle,  with  redness  all  around,  and  tensive  pain,'. — Small,
rapidly  suppurating  acue-pustule  under  the  right  labial  commissure,". —
Several  vesicles  in  middle  of  lower  lip,  containing  a  clear  fluid  and
soon  drying  into  scabs,'". — Pimples  in  the  nose  and  under  the  nose,  which
are  filled  with  pus  at  the  tips,  with  a  biting  pain,'. — Pimple  on  the  side  of
the  neck,  which  when  touched  stings  and  pains  as  if  ulcerated  (after  forty-
eight  hours),'.f — Erysipelatous  inflammation,  the  left  hand  dark-blue,  and

t This  kind  of  pimple  is  painful  to  touch,  surrounded  with  an  inflamed  red  border :
ia  extremely  similar  to  a  boil. Boils  are,  therefore,  cured  by  Arnica. Homoeopiithically


ARNICA.  493

covered  with  large  and  small  vesicles  -which  gave  the  skin  the  appearance
of  a  rhinoceros  hide". — Eruption  on  the  palms,  causes  complete  exfoliation
of  the  skin  ;  the  hands  have  a  scaly  look,  and  the  skin  is  somewhat  cracked
in  the  folds,'". — Itching  pimple  between  the  thumb  and  the  index  finger;
when  touched  a  fine  stinging  pain,  as  if  a  splinter  were  in  it  (after  forty
hours),\ — [830.]  Burning  pain  at  times  in  this,  at  times  in  another  part  of
the  skin,'. — Sense  of  cold,  at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  another  place  in  the
skin,'. — Transient  but  violent  tearings  at  different  tiines  and  on  different
parts  of  the  skin,^*. — A  sharp  pricking  sensation  over  the  whole  surface  of
the  body,". — (Stinging,  burning,  and  itching  pain  in  the  skin,  here  and
there,  which  is  felt  when  lying  down  for  the  siesta ;  it  soon  goes  off  of
itself  and  by  scratching),'. — Itching  of  the  skin,^.

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Yawning  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Frequent
yawning,'. — Frequent  yawning,  in  the  evening,  without  sleepiness,^. — ^Yawning
and  stretching,  accompanied  by  dilatation  of  the  pupils,  without  sleepiness
(after  one  hour),'. — [840.]  Yawning  (with  the  nausea),''^ — Sleepiness,^. —
*Sleepi7iess  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Somnolence,"'. — Unusual  drowsiness  in  the
forenoon,'^. — In  the  evening,  one  feels  sleepy  too  soon,^. — He  become  sleepy
too  early  in  the  evening,^. — Sleepiness  during  the  day  (after  two  hours),'.
— He  becomes  very  sleepy  after  having  walked  long  in  the  open  air ;  he  is
not  disposed,  then,  either  to  speak  or  think,  although  he  was  very  cheerful
previously,''. — A  good  deal  of  sleep,'. — [850.]  He  cannot  fall  asleep  in  the
evening;  but  he  sleeps  so  much  longer  in  the  morning,'. — Sleeplessness
with  anguish,  as  if  owing  to  heat,  until  2  or  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,'. —
Sleeplessness  and  wakefulness  until  2  or  3  o'clock  after  midnight ;  this  is
accompanied  by  a  stinging,  biting  itching,  here  and  there,'.^In  the  even-
ing she  sleeps  a  couple  of  hours ;  afterwards  she  remains  wide  awake  until
5  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  then  she  falls  into  a  sound  sleep  until  9  o'clock
in  the  forenoon,'. — Unusually  early  waking  in  morning,  with  inability  to
fall  asleep  again," — Sudden  startiugs  as  with  fright,  when  falling  asleep,*. —
While  falling  asleep,  at  night,  he  is  roused  from  sleep  by  a  peculiar  sensa-
tion of  heat  in  the  head ;  this  is  followed  by  anguish  when  awake ;  he
dreads  similar  attacks,  and  is  afraid  that  he  may  have  an  apoplectic  fit,
(after  ten  hours),". — Restless  sleep,^^. — Sleep  restless  and  diminished,^". —
Lamenting,  while  asleep  (afteJ  two  hours),'. — [860.]  Loud  unintelligible
talking  when  asleep,  without  being  accompanied  by  dreams  which  one  can
recollect,'. — Starting  and  jerking  backwards  of  the  head,  while  asleep,'. —
Starting  up  while  asleep,'. — Went  to  bed  languid  and  exhausted,  sleep
much  disturbed,  awake  six  or  seven  times,  each  time  dreaming  he  was  dying
and  that  the  bed  was  surrounded  by  friends,'*. — '^Involuntary  expulsion  of
faces  while  asleep,^. — Frequent  waking,  with  emissions  of  semen  (second
night),*. — Sleep  restless  and  disturbed  by  dreams,'*. — Sleep  restless,  frequently
waked  by  dreams,''". — Sleep  full  of  dreams,'. — His  sleep  is  full  of  dreams  and
does  not  refresh  him ;  he  feels  as  if  he  had  not  slept  at  all,'. — [870.]  When
half  asleep  he  dreams  for  several  hours;  the  dreamer  shows  much  irresolu-
tion,'.— Vivid  dreams  which  cannot  be  recollected,". — Vivid  dreams  to-
wards morning;  while  dreaming  he  talks  loud  and  is  waked  by  it  (sixth
day),'. — The  visions  which  he  had  seen  in  the  dreams  of  the  previous  night
return,'". — Anxious  dreams  about  visions  which  he  had  seen  in  previous
dreams,'. — Very vivid dreams,'^". — Vivid, agreeable dreams,^^ — Vivid

Arnica  may  be  used  as  a  preventive  against  boils  in  persons  who  are  subject  to  them.
1  Itnow  this  from  experience. — H.


494  ARNICA.

dreams,  the  first  agreeable,  the  latter  causing  anxiety ,^ — Anxious,  heavy
dreams  the  whole  night ;  they  depress  his  strength  a  good  deal,'. — She
dreams  the  whole  night  that  she  is  overwhelmed  with  reproaches ;  on
waking  she  was  scarcely  able  to  realize  that  all  this  had  been  a  mere
dream,'. — [880.]  He  has  terrible  dreams,  screams  loud  while  asleep ;  this
wakes  him  up,'. — Fearful  dreams  of  large  black  dogs  and  cats,  immediately
after  falling  asleep  in  the  evening,'. — He  dreamed  of  men  being  flayed ;
this  appeared  frightful  to  him,l — Dreams  about  frightful  objects,  of  the
lightning  having  struck,, graves,  etc.^.

Fever. — Feeling  of  cold  all  over  the  body,  although  he  is  naturally
warm  (after  one  hour),'. — Shaking  chills  without  any  thirst,'. — Chilliness
mostly  in  the  evening,'. — External  and  internal  chilliness  an  hour  after  the
headache,  and  constant  anguish,'. — A  violent  shivering  creeps  through  him
when  gaping,*. — A  violent  shivering  thrills  through  him  when  walking,^ —
[890.]  When  waking  from  sleep,  by  day  or  at  night,  he  feels  an  internal,
continued  chilliness,  without,  however,  any  shivering,'. — ''^In  the  morning
she  feels  chilly  wJien  in  bed ;  the  chilliness  begins  before  she  rises,  and  con-
tinues the  whole  forenoon,"'. — *Shivering  over  the  whole  body  and  the
head,  at  the  same  time  heat  in  the  head  and  redness  and  heat  in  the
face,  accompanied  by  coolness  of  the  hands  and  a  feeling  as  of  the  hips,
the  back,  and  the  anterior  surface  of  the  arms  being  bruised,'. — Morning,
when  in  bed,  he  has  a  feeling  of  cold  in  the  right  side  upon  which  he  was  lying
(after  quarter  of  an  hour),". — Chilliness  in  the  back  and  the  anterior  part
of  the  thighs,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Heat  of  the  whole  body,'^ — *Di-y
heat  over  the  whole  body,  after  waking  early  in  the  morning,'. — *Dry  heat  in
the  bed,  with  violent  thirst ;  heat  becomes  intolerable  to  him ;  he  tries  to  un-
cover himself;  but  he  feels  chilly  upon  uncovering  himself,  or  even  when
making  the  slightest  motion  in  bed,'-. — Flush  of  heat  over  the  face  and  sensation
of  an  agreeable  warmth  of  the  body  (after  half  au  hour),^. — Short  repeated
attacks  of  anguish,  with  flying  heat  over  the  whole  body,'. — [900.]  When
lying  some  time  without  stirring,  he  feels  hot,  especially  about  the  head  ;
he  is  obliged  to  shift  his  position  constantly,'. — Flushes  of  heat  in  the  back,
by  paroxysms,'. — Fever  in  the  morning  ;  first,  chilliness,  afterwards,  attack
of  heat,'. — *  Oreat  internal  heat,  hands  and  feet  being  cold,  accompanied  by
chills  over  the  whole  body,"'.^Sweat,"'. — Frequent  sweats,"^ — Slight  sweat
■when  waking  from  sleep,'. — Skin  more  moist  than  usual,  on  the  chest  and
inner  surface  of  the  arms,^". — Increased  perspiration  during  the  night,^*. —
*  The  exhalations  smell  sour,'. — [910.]  Nightly,  sour  sweat,'. — Several  transi-
tory sweats  over  the  whole  body,  at  night,  accompanied  by  anguish,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  Early  stupefying  head-
ache ;  on  waking,  violent  headache ;  sticking  pain  in  forehead,  etc. ;  early,
bruised  pain  in  right  articulation  of  jaw  ;  early,  dryness  in  mouth  ;  early,
after  waking,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;  early,  eructations,  etc. ;  early,  nausea,
etc. ;  in  bed,  tension  in  lower  part  of  epigastric  region  ;  early,  passes  quantity
of  urine ;  early,  in  bed,  feeling  of  weakness,  etc. ;  after  rising,  dry,  etc.,
cough ;  early,  hoarseness ;  early,  when  waking,  feeling  as  of  a  load  of  blood
in  chest;  on  rising  from  bed,  painful  sensation  down  back;  early,  in  bed,
stitching  in  left  forearm  ;  in  bed,  chilly  ;  in  bed,  cold  feeling  in  right  side;
early,  chilliness  in  back,  etc.;  early,  after  waking,  dry  heat  all  over;  fever.
— (Forenoon),  nausea,  etc. — (Noon),  During  dinner,  warmth  of  one  cheek. —
(Afternoon),  When  lying  down,  pain  in  fauces,  etc. ;  stitches  in  glans
penis. — (Towards  evening),  Dry  heat  in  the  face;  arthritic  pain  in  foot,
etc. — (Evening),  When  going  to  sleep,  coryza ;  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face ;


ARNICA.  495

enormous  appetite ;  want  of  appetite ;  when  lying  down,  sense  as  of  crackling
in  the  trachea ;  drawing,  etc.,  in  right  third  finger,  etc. ;  pain  in  sick  foot;
chilliness. — (Night), Severe e]nsta.xis;  retching  ;  diarrhoea,  etc.;  when  asleep,
involuntary  stool;  during  sleep,  cough;  lower  extremities  painful ;  increased
perspiration ;  sour  sweat ;  transient  sweats  all  over. — {About  midnight),
General  sweat. — (3  to  8  p.m.),  Pressive  headache. — (  When  walking  in  open
air),  Pressive  headache  returns;  sense  of  heaviness,  etc.,  in  muscles  under
articulations  of  the  extremities;  weakness  in  feet  and  arms;  right  side  feels
too  hea,vy.^(After  walking  in  open  air),  Indisposed  to  think ;  burning
pain  in  back  ;  feet  feel  tired  ;  very  sleepy. — (/«  bed).  Dry  heat,  etc.,  on  the
slightest  motion,  feels  chilly. — (Bending  head  over).  Pressure,  etc.,  in
lowest  cervical  vertebrae. — (Blowing  nose).  Pains  increase;  right  side  of
abdomen  painful. — (Breathing  deeply).  Cutting  over  umbilicus  ;  stitches  in
left  breast ;  stitches  in  small  of  back. — (Drawing  breath).  Cutting  pressure
through  both  sides  of  thorax ;  stitch  in  right  side  of  back. — ( Coughing),
Headache ;  stitches  in  head  ;  stitches  in  forehead  ;  right  side  of  abdomen
painful;  stitches  in  small  of  back. — (Gries),  In  children,  cough. — (At
dinner).  Sudden  vertigo. — (After  dinner),  Kind  of  suppressed  hiccough. —
(During  eating},  Tearing  toothache,  etc. — ( When  standing  erect),  Pain
in  left  shoulder. — (Extending  torsa^ /om4),  Stitches  in  right  foot. — (When
gaping),  Violent  shivering  thrills. — (Lying  down).  Pain  in  tip  of  big  toe ;
stinging,  etc.,  in  skin. — (  When  lying  motionless).  Feels  hot,  etc. — (Lying
on  left  side).  Pain  in  region  of  liver. — (Between  meals).  Taste  of  rotten  eggs
in  mouth. — (After  a  meal),  Fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  etc. — (During
mastication).  Gums  pain,  etc. — (At  end  of  micturition).  Cutting  pain  in
orifice  of  urethra. — (After  micturition).  Stitches  in  urethra ;  biting  burning
in  urethra. — (Motion),  Pains  increased  ;  painful  sensitiveness  of  joints,  etc. ;
all  the  joints  of  the  bones,  etc.,  of  the  chest  feel  painful ;  sensation  as  of  a
lump  in  the  back  ;  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  etc. ;  stitches  in  wrist-joint. —
(Moving  the  parts).  Burning  pain  in  corners  of  mouth  ;  pain  in  articula-
tion of  right  jaw. — (Moving  head).  Feels  as  if  everything  turned  with  her;
stitches  in  head. — (Moving  neck).  Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  painful.
— (Moving  hand).  Cracking,  etc.,  in  right  wrist. — (  Opening  eyes).  Qualmish-
ness of  stomach. — (Pressure),  Pains  in  stomach  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  pain
in  right  side  of  neck  ;  sharp  pain  in  phalanx  of  right  ring  finger. — (Raising
oneself  and  sitting  in  bed).  Headache. — (Raising  head).  Swelling  of  sub-
maxillary glands  painful. — (Raising  eyes).  Pricking  pain  in  forehead. —
(Reading),  Pressive  pain  in  iove\xedid.—(Refleating),  Pressive  pain  in  fore-
head.—'(Oft  rising).  Felt  sick,  etc. — (Rising  and  stepping  upon  foot).
Pain  in  the  thigh. — (Rubbing),  Burning  of  upper  lip ;  stitches  on  inner
side  of  thigh. — (During  rest).  Distension  of  the  right  side  of  abdomen;
tearing  twitching  pain  on  dorsum  of  left  hand ;  sense  of  crackling  in  the
lower  part  of  leg. — (  When  seizing  something).  Weakness  of  the  hands. —
(Setting  down  foot).  Eight  side  of  abdomen  feels  painful ;  tearing  in  under
surface  of  big  toe. — (Sneezing),  Pain  in  muscles  of  neck. — (Sitting),  Tear-
ing in  lower  extremities  ;  pressure  in  middle  of  spine ;  thigh  extended  ;  pain
in  left  hip-joint;  pressure  in  muscles  of  thigh. — (Speaking),  Swelling  of
cervical  glands  painful. — (Every  sound).  Pains  increase.  —  (Stooping),
Headache ;  jerking,  etc.,  headache,  etc. ;  pain  in  loin!i.-~(Stretchi7ig  the
parts).  Pain  between  scapula  and  spine. — (After  supper),  Weeps,  etc. —
(When  standing).  Fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  etc.;  stitches  under  left  false
ribs;  straining,  etc.,  in  rectum ;  tension  across  chest;  tension  in  muscles  of
calf. — (At  every  step),  Cutting  over  the  umbilicus. — (Swallowing),  Burning


496  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

in  throat. — {Swallowing  hot  liquid),  Burning  in  the  tongue. — {Talking),
Pains  increase. — {Touch),  Teeth  painful  ;  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands
painful ;  right  side  of  abdomen  painful ;  pain  in  knee;  pimple  stings,  etc. —
(^Turning  head  to  left),  Pain  in  right  side  of  neck. — {Artificial  vomiting).
Confusion  of  head,  etc. — (  When  walking).  Slight  sweat ;  continued  chilli-
ness.— {Walking),  Feels  faint;  vertigo;  pressive  pain  in  forehead  ;  pressure
in  region  of  spleen ;  pain  in  right  side  of  abdomen  ;  sense  of  crackling  in
trachea ;  tension  across  chest ;  sputa  tinged  with  blood ;  stitching  pain  in
sternum;  cutting  thrusts  between  scapulae;  stitches  in  small  of  back  ;  pain
in  thighs  ;  pressure  in  tibia ;  on  raising  left  foot,  etc. ;  crawling  in  left  sole ;
stitches  in  toes. — {Walking  upstairs),  Pressive  pain  in  forehead:  pain  in
right  knee. — {Near  warm  stove),  Pressive  pain  in  forehead. — (  Weeping
and  lamenting).  Cough. — {Yawning),  Tensive  pain  in  muscles  of  neck.

Atnelloration. — {Evening),  Pain  in  left  half  of  forehead. — {Motion
in  open  air),  Pain  in  right  eyeball. — (Walking  in  cool,  open  air).  Better. —
(Contact),  Itching  of  thigh. — {After  eating).  Toothache  goes  oflf;  pain  in
stomach. — (Exercise),  Feeling  as  if  load  of  blood  in  chest. — (Emission  of
flatulence).  Pain  in  right  side  of  abdomen. — -{Letting  hands  hang  down),
Tearing  pain  in  left  wrist-joint. — (Lying),  Headache ;  pressure  in  pit  of
Stomach,  etc. — (Lying  on  back),  Tense  feeling  across  chest. — (Besting  head
on  painful  side),  Stitches  in  head. — (Bising),  Turn  in  fauces  passes  off. —
(Rubbing),  Crawling  on  nose  ;  tearing  in  left  knee. — (Scratching),  Stitch  in
abdominal  muscles  ;  itching  of  finger-joints. — (Standing),  Faint  feeling. —
(After  thin  stool).  Tenesmus.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

Arsenious  oxide,  AS2O3.  (Arsenious  acid  ;  white  oxide  of  arsenic ;  white
arsenic.) Preparation  for  use,  Triturations  with  sugar  of  milk.

Authorities.f  (1  to  89,  from  Hahnemann,  Chr.  Krank.,  5.)  1,  Hahne-
mann ;  2,  Baehr ;  3,  Fr.  Hahn'u ;  4,  Hartlb.  and  Trinks ;  5,  Hering ;  6,
Hornburg;  7,  Langhammer;  8,  Meyer;  9,  Stapf;  10,  Whl. ;  11,  Ebers
(effects  of  Ars.  of  Pot.  in  ague  patients) ;  12,  Friedrich  (poisoning  of  a
woman) ;  13,  Morgagni  (1,  poisoning  of  a  woman  of  60 ;  2,  of  a  male
adult ;  8,  of  female  adult ;  4,  same  case  as  Wolff's  ;  5,  poisoning  of  a  man) ;
14,  Guldenklee  (effects  of  vapor) ;  15,  Richard  (poisoning  an  adult)  ;  16,
Marcus  (after  Ars.  of  Pot.  in  a  fever  patient)  ;  17,  Myrrhen  (from  drawing
sol.  of  A.  into  nostrils  for  a  coryza)  ;  18,  Quelmalz  (poisoning  of  a  girl  by
black  oxide)  ;  19,  Kaiser  (poisoning  of  whole  family  by  A.)  ;  20,  Forestus
(from  orpiment  in  a  woman)  ;  21,  Henuing  (application  of  A.  to  a  diseased
breast)  ;  22,  Verzasch  ;  23,  Albert!  (cases  of  poisoning  in  healthy  adults) ;
24,  Biittner  (poisonings) ;  25  (woman  took  A.  for  suicide)  ;  26,  Guilbert
(poisoning  of  an  adult) ;  27.  Pyl  (do.)  ;  28,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.  (same  as  Myr-
rhen, No.  17) ;  29,  Lusitanus  (poisoning  of  a  youth)  ;  30,  Pearson  (eff^icts
of  Ars.  of  Pot.  in  an  epileptic)  ;  31,  Buchholz  (poisoning  of  several  adults
by  black  oxide)  ;  32,  Thomson  (poisoning  of  a  woman) ;  33,  Tennert ;  34,
Grimm  (from  the  black  oxide,  in  an  adult)  ;  35,  Wedel ;  36,  Jacobi  (from
suppression  of  ague  by  A.,  in  a  youug  man) ;  37,  Knape  (effects  of  powder-
ing hair  with  A.)  ;  38,  Baylis  (general  statement  from  authors)  ;  39,  He;m-

t  Symptoms  from  authorities  11,  16,  18,  20,  21,  30,  31,  34,  36,  40,  44,  49,  53,  56,
56,  57,  59,  65,  73,  74,  75,  83,  and  84,  are  braclseted.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  497

reich  (1,  effects  of  A.  sprinkled  on  the  hair ;  2,  effects  of  large  doses  of
Ars.  of  Pot.)  ;  40,  Siebold  (effect  of  dressing  pustular  scalp  with  mixture
of  A.  and  cinnabar)  ;  41,  Vicat  (from  powdering  hair  with  A.)  ;  42,  Schle-
gel ;  43,  Neue  Med.  Chir.  Wahrn. ;  44,  Heun  (from  applications  of  A.  to
cancerous  ulcer  of  cheek)  ;  45,  Miiller  (general  statement)  ;  46,  Eph.  Nat.
Cur.  (poisoning  of  a  man  by  twelve  grains  of  A.)  ;  47,  Majault  (1,  poison-
ing of  a  man  with  realgar ;  2,  of  a  woman  with  orpiment ;  3  and  4,  of  a
youth  with  A.) ;  48,  Tennert ;  49,  Fowler  (effects  of  Ars.  of  Pot.  in  ague
patients)  ;  50,  Isenflamm-Stemmig  (general  statement)  ;  51,  Van  Eggern  ;
52,  Kopp  (poisoning  of  a  man  of  56)  ;  53,  Feldmann  (from  a  plaster  of  A.
applied  for  a  quartan)  ;  54,  Preussius  (poisoning  of  a  boy)  ;  55,  Thilenius
(effects  in  a  patient  with  scirrhus  of  breast) ;  56,  Grimm  (from  black  oxide,
in  an  adult)  ;  57,  Salzb.  M.  Chir.  Zeit.  (effects  of  A.  applied  to  fungus  on
the  head) ;  58,  Kellner  (poisoning  of  a  girl  of  20)  ;  59,  Gerbitz  (from  or-
piment) ;  60,  Wolff  (poisoning  of  two  women)  ;  61,  Goritz  ;  62,  Low  ;  63,
Cruger  (poisoning  of  an  adult)  ;  64,  Tacheuius  (from  inhaling  sublimed
A.) ;  65,  Degner  (effects  of  applying  sol.  of  A.  for  itch,  in  two  men) ;  66,
Stahl  (poisoning  of  two  adults) ;  67,  Greiselius  S.  (from  vapor'in  self,  rest
in  miners)  ;  68,  Klinge  (observation  of  miners  in  A.)  ;  69,  Borellus  (from
carrying  A.  in  pocket)  ;  70,  Montanus  (poisoning  of  a  woman)  ;  71,  Car-
danus  (general  statement  from  authors) ;  72,  Gabezius ;  73,  Fernelius
(from  sprinkling  A.  on  cancerous  ulcer  of  breast)  ;  74,  Justamond  (from
A.  given  to  a  young  woman  with  cancer  of  the  tongue) ;  75,  Pet.  d.  Appons
(effects  of  realgar)  ;  76,  Hammer  (poisoning  of  a  girl  of  20) ;  77,  Bern-
hardi ;  78,  Huber  (states  that  he  knows  a  woman  so  affected  by  A.) ;  79,
Hartmann ;  80,  Degrange  (from  rubbing  A.  into  head)  ;  81,  Pfann  ;  82,
Heinze ;  83,  Hargens  (from  application  of  A.  to  a  cancerous  ulcer) ;  84,
Storck  (effects  of  Ars.  of  Pot.  in  ague  patients)  ;  85,  Borges  (poisoning  of
an  adult) ;  86,  Hall,  All.  lit.  Zeit.  (inhalation  by  a  man  of  Arsenetted
Hyd.) ;.  87,  Bonetus  (from  carrying  A.  in  pocket)  ;  88,  M.  N.  Zeit,  1798 ;
89,  Rau  (from  application  of  A.  to  scalp)  ;  numbers  90  to  94  inclusive  are
taken  from  Imbert-Oourbeyre's  provings  with  4th  trit.jl'Art  Medieale,ll ,  433
et  seq.;  90,  Damour;  91,  M'lle  E. ;  92,  Imbert-Gourbeyre ;  93,  Bonjean ;
94,  Souleyre ;  95,  Robinson's  provings  on  females  with  the  12th,  B.  J.  of
Horn.;  96  (ibid,),  with  the  30th;  97  (ibid.),  with  200th;  98  (ibid.),  with
1000th  ;  99,  Mad.  Buchmaun's  proving  (a  grain  of  A.  in  some  water,  taken
by  mistake),  Hom.  V.  J.  S.,  10,  119;  100,  Borri,  from  Hartl.  and  Trinks
(effects  of  fumes  of  wax  candles  containing  A.)  ;  101,  Trevasso,  from  H.  and
T.  (internal  administration  of  A.)  ;  Nos.  102  to  165  inclusive  are  taken  from
Roth's  collection  of  poison  eases,  Hom.  V.  J-  S.,12,25;  102,  James;  103, 104,
audl05,Rummel;  106,Jaquernin;  107,Orfila;  108,Heifelder;109,Puchelt;
110,  Hohnbaura  ;  111,  Schreyer  ;  112,  Kortum  ;  113,  Stachow;  114,  Roth-
hamel;  115,  Klose;  116,  Spengler ;  117,  Sonderland ;  118,  Canetta ;  119,
Schapper;  120,  Van  den  Dale ;  121,  Tonnellier  ;  122,  Kraft;  123,  Opler;
124,  Scheulen;  125,  Koch;  126,  Hausbutner;  127  (ibid.);  128,  Keller-
mann  ;  129,  Hornung  ;  130,  Brenner;  131,  Neumann  ;  132,  Bodenmuller  ;
133,'W"atson;  134,Franque;  135,  Renter;  136,Z611ner;  137,  Beauchesne ;
138,  Leroy;  139,  Dehenne;  140,  Odier;  141,  Barrier;  142,  Orfila ;  143,
J.  deChim.Med.,  1846;  144,Wepfer;  145,  De  Haen;  146,  Falconer;  147,
Pinel;  148,  Missa;  149,  Gerard;  150,Devergie;  151,Leuret;  152,Fielitz;
153,  Hafter;  154,  Alquie;  155,  Flechner;  156,  Huss  Bush;  157,  Nissen;
158,  Pfaff;  159,  Bruckner;  160,  Coqueret ;  161,  Edwards;  162,  Skillman;
163,  Angouard  ;  164,  Schafer;  165,  Husemann; 166,  Johann  Schellham-

TOL. 1.— 32


498  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

raer  (effects  of  large  doses,  N.  A.  J.  of  Horn.,  2,  317)  ;  167,  Dailand,  tox.,
N.  A.  J.,  7,  389 ;  168,  Tox.,  N.  A.  J.  of  Horn.,  2,  473  (from  Med.  Eepos.,
5,  43) ;  169,  Dr.  Rhees,  Am.  H.  Rev.,  2,  510  (effects  of  Arsenic  applied  to
kill  the  nerve  of  a  tooth)  ;  170,  Tox.,  Dr.  Hill  (K  Y.  St.  Trans.  (Horn.),
9,  232) ;  171,  Taylor,  on  Poisons;  172,  Wetmore,  N.  A.  J.  of  Horn.,  6,  369
(tox.,  127  grains  of  Arsenic) ;  173,  Isidore,  Rec.  de  Mem.  de  Med.,  etc.;
174,  Smoler,  Oest.  Zeit.  f.  Heilk.,  1863  (three  cases  of  Ars.  paralysis);  175,
Keber,  V.  J.  S.  f.  Ger.  Med. ;  176,  Dr.  P.  in  U.  (Henke's  Zeit.,  1862) ;  1 77,
Barnes  (Lancet,  1847)  ;  178,  Wagner  (Med.  Annals)  ;  179,  Platner  (Omo-
dei  Am.  Univ.,  Hah.  M.  M.)  ;  180,  Lachese  (Ann.  de  Hygiene,  H.  Mat.
Med.) ;  181,  M.  Diville  (Lancet,  1838)  ;  182,  Rayner  (Lancet,  1838j ;
183,  Murray  (Lancet,  1838);  184,  St.  Thos.  Hosp.  Rep.  (Lancet,  12,  509);
185,  Greening  (Lancet,  1834);  186,  Lancet,  1829;  187,  Lancet,  1839;
188,  Burns  (Lancet,  1839);  189,  Thompson  (Lancet,  1840);  190,  Foster
(Lancet,  1840);  191,  Hedley  (Lancet,  1842);  192,  Gaz.  de  Hop.  (Lancet,
1842)  ;  193,  Bird  (Lancet,  1843,  poisoning  by  the  vapor  of  Arsenic) ;  194,
Shipman  (Am.  J.  of  Med.  Sc,  1838) ;  195,  Argent  (Lancet,  1844) ;  196,
Kelso  (Lancet,  1844)  ;  197,  Farget  (Lancet,  1851)  ;  198,  Waite  (Lancet,
1858),  Arsenic  applied  to  pulp  of  tooth ;  199.  Dermott  (Lancet,  1851) ;
200,  Ryan  (Lancet,  1851) ;  201,  A.  McLeod  (Ed.  M.  and  S.  J.,  15,  553) ;
202,  Ward  (Ed.  M.  and  S.  J.,  33,  61) ;  203,  Dymock  (Ed.  M.  and  S.
J.,  59,  350) ;  204,  Gairdner  (Ed.  M.  and  S.  J.,  32,  305)  ;  205,  Jeesche
(Horn.  V.  J.  Schrift,  8,  467);  206,  N.  Z.  f.  H.  Kl.,  12,  56;  207,  Bramer
(A.  H.  Z.,  19,  223),  Horst  (A.  H.  Z.,  19,  241),  and  Buchner  (A.  H.  Z.,
46,  64);  208,  Hoppe  (A.  H.  Z.,  32,  379) ;  209,  Kurtz  (A.  H.  Z.,  32,  379) ;
210,  Bartlett  (Chicago  Pharmacist,  1872) ;  211,  Scales  (N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,

2,  226,  effects,  taken  for  the  complexion)  ;  212,  Benham  (Am.  Observer,
1864);  213,  Malmstein,  Hygeia,  1873  (Schmidt's  Jahrb.,  chron.  Ars.
poison)  ;  214,  Levin  (effects  of  Arsenic  applied  externally ;  Hirch's  Zeit.,
19,  112)  ;  215,  Bouvier  (L'Art  Med.,  6,  31) ;  216,  Coltun  (Med.  Investi-
gator, 9,  241)  ;  217,  Wibmer  (effects  of  the  fumes)  ;  218,  Zeit.  f  Hom.  Kl.,

3,  137  (effects  of  Arson,  paper) ;  219,  Goullon  (on  Arsen.  paper,  A.  H.  Z.,
64,  81)  ;  220,  Brit.  Med.  J.,  1873  (poisoning  by  paper  and  pigments)  ;  221,
Oppenheim  (Verhandlung,  1859,  Arsen.  paper) ;  222,  Lorinzer  (Wien
Med.  Wach.,  1857,  Arsen.  paper)  ;  223,  Dudgeon  (B.  J.  of  Horn.,  20,  200,
Arsen.  paper) ;  224,  Bayer  (M.  Horn.  Rev.,  1870,  p.  597,  Arsenical  paper-
hangings);  225,  M.  Hom.  Rev.,  1870,  p.  413  (Arsen.  paper,  symptoms  ob-
served in  four  children) ;  226,  Dr.H.  Reynolds,  Hahn.  Month.,  10, 53  (tox.).

Mind. — Cerebral  excitability,'". — Rage;  he  had  to  be  bound;  he  en-
deavored to  escape,'^'. — Attacks  of  madness  and  sorrow,'*". — *  Mania;  head-
ache;  excessive  anguish;  noise  before  the  ears,  as  of  many  large  bells,  and
when  opening  his  eyes  he  constantly  saw  a  man  who  had  hung  himself  in
the  garret,  and  who  requested  the  other  by  signs  to  cut  him  down ;  the
former  ran  up  to  the  latter  with  a  knife,  but  not  being  able  to  cut  him  down,
*he  became  desperate,  and  attempted  to  hang  himself ;  this  attempt  being  foiled,
he  hecdme  so  restless  that  he  could  scarcely  be  kept  quiet;  he  lost  his  speech,
though  he  had  his  full  understanding ;  and  when  attempting  to  express
himself  in  writing,  could  only  write  down  unintelligible  signs,  trembling
and  weeping  all  the  while,  the  forehead  covered  with  the  sweat  of  anguish,
kneeling  down  and  raising  his  hands  as  if  praying,^. — Disposition  to  suicide,".
— *  After  m,idnight,  a  frequent  desire  to  kill  himself,  by  stabbing  his  heart
through  and  through,"*. — When  alone,  he  thinks  about  disease  and  similar
things,  from  which  he  finds  it  difficult  to  force  his  mind/. — *Delirium,™ '",


AESENICUM  ALBUM.  499

etc.,  etc. — High  delirium  unmanageable,'"'. — [10.]  Delirium  ;  he  arose  to
visit  his  daughter  (absent,  as  he  knew),  and  could  with  difficulty  be  quieted,
but  spoke  rationally,'". — Loss  of  reason,  returning  from  time  to  time,™. —
*Very  violent  delirium,  especially  at  night,  with  great  restlessness,'™. —
Violent  delirium  during  the  last  three  or  four  days,'". — Delirium  a  few
hours  before  death, "^. — Violent  delirium,  with  tetanic  convulsions,'". — He
often  raved  during  the  course  of  the  disease,"^. — He  raves,  making  motions
with  his  hands,  as  if  measuring  with  a  rule,  so  that  his  ravings  mostly  re-
lated to  his  business,'". — Raving  and  carphology,'". — Delirious  thoughts
with  the  eyes  open,  without  being  in  delirium  either  before  or  after,'. — -[»0.]
Delusions  alternating  with  half-confused  sleep,"^ — Alternating  lively  phan-
tasies,'"'.— In  the  night  he  talked  sensibly  at  times,"". — He  likes  to  converse
with  others,'.— Foolish  answers,™'. — *Her  desire  exceeds  her  need ;  she  eats
and  drinks  more  than  is  good  for  her ;  she  walks  further  than  she  needs  to  do,^.
— Indisposition  to  reply  to  questions,"*. — Eather  cheerful  and  disposed  to
busy  himself,'. — Mind  energetic  and  fresh,  inclined  to  gayety  ^". — *Loud
wailing,"'. — Moaned  grievously,^'*. — She  lies  crouched  in  bed,  groaning  and
moaning,'^'. — [30.]  *She  spends  the  night  in  moaning  and  groaning™. —
*Frequent  screaming  from  pain,^'"  "^. — He  cried  and  howled,  and  spoke  little
and  abruptly,'. — (Piercing  lamentations,  interrupted  by  attacks  of  weak-
ness),".— Piteous  complainings,  that  an  extremely  unpleasant  sensation  in
the  abdomen  and  excessive  mental  anguish  took  away  his  breath,  and
forced  him  to  bend  double  in  this  or  that  direction,  or  to  rise  and  walk
about,". — Precordial  anxiety  for  a  long  time,'*. — *Anxiety  and  restlessness
in  the  whole  body  (after  nine  hours),'^ — Continued  sobbing,  with  childish
spells  of  crying,'^. — *  Very  low-spirited,  aiid  crying  at  the  slightest  provoca-
tion^'^.— *  Exceedingly  sensitive,  despondent,  sad,  and  weeping ;  the  least  trifle
fills  her  with  care  and  solicitude,^. — [40.]  Sad  mood,"'.— Great  seriousness,'.
— Spirits  depressed,^'*. — Much  depressed,"'. — She  is  despondent  about  her
condition,"'.— Grief,''. — Sad  and  depressed,'. — Melancholic,  sad,  after  eat-
ing, with  headache  (after  eighty  hours),'. — (Religious  melancholy  and  re-
serve),".t — Excessive  melancholy,^". — [50.]  He  despairs  of  his  life,'^.J —
*He  despairs  and  weeps,  and  imagines  no  one  can  help  him,  that  he  must
die;  he  is  cold  and  chilly,  and  afterwards  generally  weak,'. — *  An-
guish," '^ — *Excessive  anguish,  mth  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  difficult
breathing,^'. — ^Internal  anguidi^^. — (Deathly  anguish  with  vomiting),". —
*Anguish  and  despair  driving  from  one  place  to  another  for  relief,^'^. —
Anguish  from  the  heart,  iaterrupted  by  attacks  of  weakness,'^ — Anguish,
so  that  he  several  times  fainted,'^ — *With  great  anguish  he  turns  and
tosses  to  and  fro  in  his  bed,'*  '^': — [60.]  Talks  but  little,  only  complains  of
anguish,'^. — *  Gh-eat  anguish,  trembling,  and  tremor,  with  violent  tearing  in
the  abdomen,^. — *  With  inexpressible  mental  anguish  and  increasing  pain,
he  seemed  to  be  at  his  last  gasp,". — Mental  anxiety,'". — Indescribable  anx-
iety,"^ "*,  etc. — Extreme  anxiety,"  "". — (Most  intolerable  anxiety),™.§ —
*Real  deathly  anxiety,'"'''. — Excited  and  anxious,'^. — Impatient  and  anxious,^.
— [70.]  The  anxiety  and  restlessness  are  indescribable ;  "  Kill  me,"  he  cried,
"  or  relieve  my  pains !"  "^. — Great  anxiety  and  oppression,"". — Anxiety  and
breaking  out  of  cold  sweat,'". — Anxiety,  with  sweat,". — Continued  anxiety,
a  mental  anguish,  as  if  he  had  not  done  his  duty,  without,  however,  know-
ing wherein,'. — Anxiety  and  heat  do  not  permit  her  to  fall  asleep  before  mid-
night, for  many  days,'. — *  Anxiety  m  the  evening  after  lying  down ;  at  3

t  "  Not  found,"  in  reference.  J  "  Not  found."  §  "  Not  found."


500  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

o'clock  after  midnight,  after  waking,\ — *Violent  anxiety  at  3  o'clock  in
the  night ;  he  now  felt  hot,  now  as  if  he  would  vomit,^ — Anxiety  and
fear ;  he  sees  an  absent  acquaintance  lying  dead  upon  the  sofa,  and  has
great  dread  of  hiiu,'". — Fear,^^. — [80.]  Sense  of  deadly  jear^. — Appre-
hension,^.— Constant  dread  of  death,^. — *Dread  of  death  coming  on  sud-
denly when  left  alone,  or  on  going  to  bed,^^*. — *The  greatest  fear  and
anguish ;  sees  ghosts  day  and  night,^. — (He  is  anxious  and  trembling,
and  is  afraid  he  shall  not  be  able  to  prevent  himself  from  killing  a  person
with  a  knife),^^ — He  runs  through  the  whole  house  at  night  in  search
of  thieves,'". — He  imagines  that  the  whole  house,  and  the  space  under
the  bed,  are  full  of  thieves,  which  causes,  from  fright,  anxious  cold  sweat
to  break  out  over  his  body,'". — He  has  so  much  fear  that  he  jumps  out  of  his
bed,  and  hides  himself  in  the  wardrobe,  which  he  can  hardly  be  induced
to  leave,'".  —  He  sees  thieves  in  his  room,  and  therefore  hides  himself
under  the  bed,'". — [90.]  He  sees  vermin  and  bugs  crawl  about  his  bed,  from
which  he  wants  to  escape,  and  constantly  throws  away  whole  handfuls
of  them,'". — Her  disposition  has  changed  very  much  since  the  poisoning
(four  months  ago)  ;  *her  natural  cheerfulness  was  quite  banished,  she  was
afraid  of  solitude  and  death ;  the  slightest  cause  was  sufficient  to  put  her  into
anger  and  rage,  which  especially  occurred  when  one  spoke  of  her  complete  re-
covery, which  she  considered  wholly  impossible.  At  times  also  an  indescribable
melancholy  attacked  her.  Not  until  after  a  year  did  her  wonted  cheerful-
ness return  (Roth). — Fretfulness,  even  amounting  to  anger,™. — *  Very  fretful
and  sensitive ;  the  least  thing  made  him  angry, \ —  Very  fretful,  indignant,  capri-
cious ;  every  word  offends  her,  and  makes  her  very  angry,  when  she  should
answer,^. — *  Very  fretful  and  contented  with  nothing ;  she  finds  fault  with
everything ;  every  conversation,  noise,  even  the  light,  is  disagreeable  to
her,^. — Ill-humor,  when  waking  in  the  morning ;  she  knew  not  what  to  do
with  herself  from  ill-humor ;  pushed  the  pillows  and  bed-cover  away,  and
would  not  look  at  or  talk  to  anybody,'. — Inclines  to  jest  in  a  malicious
manner,'. — Indignation  in  the  morning  when  in  bed ;  pushes  the  pillows
about  indignantly,  uncovers  himself,  sees  no  one,  and  does  not  want  to  be
spoken  to,'. — She  becomes  furiously  mad  when  offered  something  to  eat,
without  having  the  least  appetite,'. — [100.]  Crying  at  the  slightest  provoca-
tion. Excessive  irritability,  and  quarrelsome  inclination.  (This  latter
feature  was  very  remarkable,  for  during  the  two  years  we  were  free  from
arsenical  paper,  the  boys  were  always  happy  together,  and  remarked  for
their  gentleness  to  each  other),^^°. — Great  sensitiveness,'"^.^ — Cannot  bear  the
slightest  noise,"'. — Very  easily  made  to  cry  or  laugh,'"', — The  mind  was
much  affected  by  trifling  things,'"'. — Vexed  about  trifles,'. — He  is  vexed
about  every  trifle,  arid  constantly  talks  about  other  people's  faults,^. — Dis-
contented ;  has  no  desire  for  anything,'. — Dissatisfied  the  whole  day,  and
very  fretful  at  himself  for  not  having  done  enough,'. — Indignation,  alter-
nating with  mildness ;  in  her  indignation  she  looks  at  nobody,  and  does  not
want  to  hear  anything ;  she  also  cries,'. — [110.]  Irresolution,  by  repeated
moods ;  desires  something,  and  when  everything  is  done  to  fulfil  his  wish,
the  least  trifle  is  sufiicient  to  change  his  mind,  and  he  will  not  have  it,'. —
Quiet,  with  haggard  expression,  without  complainings,"". — In  the  first
minutes,  great  tranquillity  of  soul  and  cheerfulness ;  half  an  hour  after,
excessive  anxiety  and  restlessness ;  he  imagined  that  the  effects  of  the
poison  would  be  terrible,  and  desired  that  he  might  continue  to  live  (in
the  case  of  a  man  who  had  poisoned  himself  with  Arsenic  and  despaired  on
that  account),". — *  Great  indifference,^. — *Indifference  to life,^  '". — *Cal'm,


AK8ENICUM  ALBUM.  501

indifference;  without  caring  about  their  approaching  death,  they  neither
expected  nor  desired  to  recover  (secondary  effect,  in  two  suicides  who  had
taken  Arsenic),'. — Calmness  of  mind  (in  the  case  of  a  despairing  melancholy
person),'*.t — Intellectual  :  Calm  and  equable  mood ;  no  event  disturbed
his  equanimity,'. — She  retained  her  mental  faculties,  clear  consciousness,
and  an  unshaken  quiet  disposition,'^*. — Involuntary  mental  excitement,
towards  morning,  hindering  sleep,  although  he  feels  very  drowsy,'. —
[120.]  *  Ideas  crowd  upon  him ;  he  is  too  weak  to  repel  them  in  order  to  dwell
upon  one  idea  alone,^. — Confusion,**. — Confusion  of  raind,"°. — Stupid  and
confused  in  his  head,  as  in  violent  coryza,  and  when  out  of  humor ;  the  head
feels  like  a  lantern,'. — Feels  as  if  she  would  lose  her  senses  when  thinking
long  about  anything,''.— Absence  of  mind,^'^. — Answers  slowly,'". — He  re-
turns very  short  answers  when  questioned,"*. — (Weakness  of  the  under-
standing),".!— At  last  perfectly  unable  to  perform  any  mental  work,
afraid  of  his  fellow-men,  irritable  and  passionate ;  he  got  so  downhearted
from  continued  sleeplessness  (from  October  6th,  1855,  to  November,  1856),
that  he  committed  suicide,'^. — [130.]  Absence  of  the  understanding  and  of
the  external  and  internal  senses ;  he  saw  nothing,  said  nothing  for  many
days,  heard  nothing,  and  understood  nothing ;  when  one  shouted  into  his
ears,  he  looked  at  those  present  like  one  waking  from  deep  sleep,".— Want
of  memory,''*^. — Diminished  memory, \ — Porgetfulness  ;  thoughts  leave  him,'.
— ^Very  imperfect  memory  for  a  long  time,". — From  having  had  a  remark-
ably good  memory,  she  lost  her  memory  completely,^^. — Does  not  recognize
■objects,'^ — Did  not  seem  fully  conscious  of  his  condition,'". — (Chronic
weakness  of  sense),".§ — Self-consciousness  disappears  or  becomes  very  in-
distinct,'^— [140.]  Unconsciousness,''. — Loss  of  consciousness,^'^  '^',  etc. —
They  lay  unconscious  and  insensible,'*'. — *Loss  of  sensation  and  of  con-
sciousness,".— Lies  unconscious,  and  is  aroused  with  difficulty,". — *Sense-
te,""^. — (She  lay  on  her  bed  senseless,  muttered  unintelligible  sounds,
with  staring  eyes,  and  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead ;  tremor  of  the  whole
body ;  small  pulse,  hard  and  very  quick),". — Loss  of  consciousness  and
speech,''^ — Loss  of  consciousness  and  convulsions,'^'. — Stupor  and  per-
vading sleepiness,'"". — [150.]  Comatose  stupefaction,'*'. — After  vomiting
and  diarrhoea,  condition  of  stupor  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  wake
her,'*'. — Stupor  with  staring  eyes,"".

Head. — Vertigo  :  *  Vertigo,^"  "°,  etc.,  etc. — Vertigo ;  felt  whole  room
go  around,". — Excessive  vertigo,  so  that  she  had  to  hold  herself,"^ — Ex-
cessive vertigo ;  "the  bed  is  tipping  over,  I  shall  fall  on  the  floor," '"^—
Vertigo  and  dulness  in  the  head,'". — Vertigo  on  arising,"^ — Vertigo  every
evening ;  she  has  to  hold  on  to  something  when  closing  her  eyes,'. — [160.]
Vertigo,  only  when  walking,  as  if  he  would  fall  to  the  right  side,'. — Vertigo,
when  sitting,'. — Vertigo,  with  vanishing  of  thought  when  rising  up,'. —
(Vertigo,  with  headache),". — Vertigo,  with  obscuration  of  sight,".^Ver-
tigo,  with  transient  loss  of  sight,'*'. — Vertigo,  with  quiet  features,'^*. — Vio-
lent vertigo,  with  inclination  to  vomit  when  lying  down  ;  he  has  to  sit  up
to  be  relieved,'. — Much  vertigo,  especially  with  rush  of  blood  to  the
heart,^"*. — Vertigo  and  trembling,"'. — [170.]  So  dizzy,  that  he  could  not
keep  his  head  erect,'". — Dizzy  in  the  head  when  going  into  the  open  uir;
the  dizziness  increased  on  re-entering  the  room  (after  half  an  hour),'. —

t  "The  calmness  was  rather  mental,  from  his  determination,  than  physical."

J  "  Result  of  suppression  of  Ague  by  A."

I  "  Doubtful  how  much  in  ague  and  how  much  A."


502  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

Dizziness,  attended  with  mental  confusion/'". — Giddiness,^''^"'"'^. — Reeling
sensation  in  the  head  during  vomiting,'^'. — Reeling  and  stupid  sensation  in
the  head,  especially  the  forehead,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  as  if  in-
toxicated, so  that  he  staggers  from  side  to  side,  and  threatens  to  fall  every
moment  (after  nine  and  a  half  hours),'.  —  Confusion,  etc.:  Confused
feeling  in  the  head,". — Confusion  of  the  head,™. — *  Great  confusio?i  of  the
head,^^^  ''I — Great  confusion  of  the  head,  evenings  (third  day ),'.f — [180.]
Confusion  and  somnolence,'". — Dull  head,  without  pain,'. — *Stupid  and
dizzy  in  the  head ;  he  was  unable  to  think,'. — Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  as
if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  from  eleven  in  the  forenoon  till  six  in  .the  after-
noon,'.— Stupid  and  weak  in  the  head  towards  noon,'. — *  Stupefied  feeling
in  the  head,  as  if  he  had  done  an  excessive  amount  of  work  with  precipitate
haste,  accompanied  with  internal  uneasiness  (after  second  day),'. — (Stupefac-
tion of  the  head,  with  loss  of  sense,  and  vertigo),".'! — Gloominess  in  the
head,^'. — Weakness  of  the  head,  with  weakness  and  qualmishness  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  so  violent  that  she  was  quite  sick,'. — (Heaviness  of  the
head,  with  aching  pain,  in  the  morning),  (after  seventy-two  hours),". — [190.]
^Heaviness  in  the  head,^*^  '*°,  etc. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  without  pain,'"*. —
Heaviness  of  the  head  all  day  (as  after  sexual  excess),'^. — Heavy  and  con-
fused feeling  in  the  head,  so  that  he  cannot  stand  still;  he  must  lie  down,'.
■ — (Great  heaviness  in  the  head,  especially  when  standing  or  sitting),".§ —
Heaviness  of  head,  with  confusion,''.  —  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the
head,"®. — *  Great  heaviness  in  the  head,  with  humming  in  the  ears;  it  goes
off  in  the  open  air,  but  returns  again  as  soon  as  lie  enters  the  room  (after
sixteen  hours),'. — Head  in  General:  (Swelling  of  the  head),''. — (Swell-
ing of  the  veins  of  the  whole  head,  after  violent  vomiting),". — [200.]
(Swelling  of  the  head  and  face),*'. — {Excessive  swelling  of  the  head  and
faee),^''. — *  (Edema  of  the  head,  face,  eyes,  neck,  and  chest,  having  a  natural
color,^'. — Palsied  shaking  of  the  head,'^. — Incessant  to-and-fro  movement
of  the  head,^^. — Grasping  the  head  and  throat  (in  a  child),'". — Ringing
noise  in  the  head,**. — Noise  and  confusion  in  head,''. — Strange  sensations
in  her  head,^'^*. — Sensation  in  the  head,  over  the  ear,  when  walking,  as  of
two  marbles  striking  each  other,'. — [210.]  Headache,™' ^''^,  etc. — *  Violent
headache,™ '",  etc. — Excessive  headache,^'  ^'.—Severe  headache,  getting  worse
all  day,  with  very  decided  feeling  of  constriction  at  the  temples,  as  if  from
intoxication  (immediately),'^ — Stupefying  headache,  especially  in  the  right
side  of  the  forehead,  directly  over  the  right  eyebrow,  with  sore  pain  when
knitting  the  brow,'. — Headache,  which  lasted  eight  days,"". — Headache  at
uncertain  times,  mostly  in  the  uight,'^'. — On  rising  in  the  morning,  violent
headache,  worse  on  the  left  side ;  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  bed  ;  it  lasted
s.'veral  days,  though  with  less  intensity ,'l — Increase  of  headache  at  11
P.M.,  with  cold  hands  and  face,". — Headache  nearly  constant,  aggravated
by  vomiting,"'. — [220.]  Headache  for  several  days,  relieved  by  applying
cold  water,  but  becoming  much  worse  if  taken  away,'. — (Periodical  head-
ache),'".— ^Intense  headache,  increased  by  light  and  noise^^. — Headache  and
vertigo  (a  long  time),"'. — Headache  and  vertigo™ '■"'. — Headache,  with  ver-
tigo, for  several  days,'^ — Headache  and  dulness,"'. — Headache  and  stom-
achache,'^^ — Violent  headache,  with  fever  and  sensitiveness  of  the  region
of  the  stomach,'™. — Burning  pain  in  the  head,". — *Heat  in  the  head,  when
coughing,^. — [230.]  Tensive  headache,'. — Contractive  pain  in  the  head,'. —
Stupefying,  aching  pain,  especially  in  the  forehead,  with  fine  stitches  in  the

t"  Not  found."  J  "Not  found."  J  After  an  antidote.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  503

left  temporal  region  near  the  outer  canthus,  when  walking  and  standing,
going  off  when  sitting  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),'. — Dull  headache,  in
the  morning,  when  waking,  going  off  when  rising,'. — Drawing  and  throb-
bing in  head,™'. — Violent  pressive  headache,"^ — Violent  pressing  in  the
head  from  six  to  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  entire  want  of  appetite,  tran-
sient sweat,  and  great  anguish,^ — Excessive  heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if  the
brain  were  oppressed  by  a  load,  with  humming  in  the  ears  in  the  morning
after  rising  (after  twenty-four  hours),^ — Stupefying  pressive  headache,
especially  in  the  forehead,  in  eveiy  position,'. — Pain  as  if  the  brain  were
being  torn  out,''.  —  [240.]  Tearing  throbbing  headache,  especially  at
night,'"'. — Frequent  attacks  of  tearing  throbbing  headache,  sometimes  on
one  side,  and  extending  over  whole  head,'"'. — Tearing  in  the  head,  and  at
the  same  time  in  the  right  eye,\ — Headache,  consisting  of  tearing  and
heavines3,  with  drowsy  faintuess  in  the  daytime  (after  four  days),'. — Pain
as  if  bruised,  in  the  external  head,  worse  when  touched,'. — Wavering  sen-
sation in  brain,  especially  when  moving  the  head,". — *  When  moving  the
head,  while  walking,  the  brain  seems  to  flap,  with  pressure  upon  it,^". — *  Sen-
sation, during  motion,  as  if  the  brain  moved  and  beat  against  the  skull^. —
Violent  throbbing  pain  in  the  whole  head,  especially  the  forehead,  with
desire  to  vomit,  when  raising  himself  in  bed,'. — Sharp,  hard  throbbing,
like  a  hacking,  in  the  whole  head,  as  if  the  skull  were  being  pressed  asun-
der ;  at  night,  sweat  breaking  out,'. — Forehead  :  [250.]  Inflammation
of  frontal  sinuses,  with  aggravation  at  the  same  time,  each  day,"". — Cold
sweat  of  the  forehead, ^^"^^^ . — Hard  swelling,  on  both  frontal  eminences,  like
a  nut;  the  swelling  increases  in  the  evening  (Sr.). — Frontal  heaviness  all
day,  becoming  quite  troublesome  in  the  evening,  with  pulsations  rather
more  painful  in  the  forehead  and  temples,". — *Frontal  headache,"". — The
most  agonizing  pains  were  about  the  forehead  and  temples,'".— *Intense
pains  in  the  frontal  region,  accompa^iied  by  vertigo^^^. — During  sleep,  he
complains  of  headache,  now  in  the  forehead,  now  in  the  occiput,"". —
*  Drawing  pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (after  two  and  three-
quarter  hours),'. — (Headache  over  the  left  eye,  very  violent  in  the  evening
and  night),^. — [260.]  Constrictive  (drawing  together)  pain  above  eyes  and
in  temples,". — *Pain  as  if  bruised  or  sore,  over  the  nose  and  in  the  forehead,
going  off  for  a  short  time  by  rubbing,^. — Sensation  as  if  he  had  been  knocked
on  the  forehead,'. — Throbbing  headache  directly  over  the  root  of  the  nose,^. —
Violent  throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead,  during  motion,'. — Temples  :  Swell-
ing of  the  superficial  veins  of  temples,". — Unpleasant  feeling  in  the  region
of  the  temples,'^'. — Pain  in  temples,". — All  day  pressive  headache  in  both
temples,'^. — Pressive  pain  in  thp.  right  temporal  region,  in  every  position  of
the  body  (after  three  hours),'. — [270.]  Stitchlike  pressive  pain  in  the  left
temple,  not  going  off  by  contact  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),'. — Stitching
pain  in  the  left  temple,  going  off  by  touch,'. — Tearing  stitches  in  the  left
temple,'. — Painful  hammering  in  the  temples,  at  noon  and  midnight,  for
half  an  hour,  after  which  her  body  feels  paralyzed  for  two  hours,'. — Ver-
tex :  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  vertex,'''*. — Burning  at  a  spot  on  the  scalp
I  he  size  of  a  dollar,  on  the  vertex,". — The  burning  pain  in  the  region  of
the  vertex  has  not  yet  quite  disappeared  (after  ten  days),  and  she  com-
plains of  a  sore  pain  in  the  scalp,  when  touched,'"'. — Drawing  headache,
under  the  coronal  suture,  a  few  hours  every  afternoon,'. — In  the  head,  now
a  pressing  confusing,  now  a  violent  throbbing,  or  a  burning  pain  in  the
region  of  the  vertex,  which  grew  less  on  gentle  rubbing,"'. — Headache,  as
from  a  heavy  weight  pressing  on  vertex,". — Paeietals  :  [280.]  (*Hemi-


504  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

crania)  f. — Bruised  pain  in  one  side  of  the  head,  in  the  morning  when
rising  (after  twelve  hours),\ — *  Dull  beating  pain  in  one  half  of  the  head,
as  far  as  above  the  eye,^. — *The  pains  in  the  head  and  face  are  especially  se-
vere on  the  left  side,  so  as  to  prevent  leaning  or  resting  on  that  side ;  she
was  obliged  to  sit  up  all  night,  keeping  the  head  erect,". — ■*  Violent  neural-
gia on  left  side  of  head,  followed  by  lame  feeling,". — Dull  pain  on  left  side
of  head,'^ — Tearing  pains  on  left  side  of  head,". — Occiput  ;  *Headache
in  the  occiput,'. — Head  painful,  especially  in  the  occiput,"". — Tearing
pains  in  the  occiput,^ — External  Head  :  [290.]  (Corroding  ulcers  on
the  scalp),". — (Ulcerated  crust  on  the  scalp,  of  the  thickness  of  a  finger,
falling  off  in  a  few  weeks),™. — (Ulcer-crusts  on  the  scalp  extend  as  far  as
the  middle  of  the  forehead),*'. — Scalp  covered  with  hard,  isolated  pus-
tules,^"'.— Moist  discharge  from  scalp,'^ — Behind  the  right  ear  a  circular
elevation  of  the  size  of  a  penny-piece,  with  reddened  base,  burning,  twitch-
ing, and  stitching,". — (Burning  pain  in  the  scalp),".— Scalp  painful  when
touched,". — Pain  of  the  scalp  when  touehed,  as  of  ulceration,^. — The  scalp
was  painful,  on  applying  the  hand  to  it,''^ — [300.]  (Gnawing  itching  on
the  head),". — Disagreeable  formication  in  the  head,  every  other  night,™. —
Creeping  iu  the  integuments  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  roots  of  the  hair  were
moving,'. — Itching  all  day  on  the  hairy  scalp,  compelling  him  to  scratch,'^
— Corrosive  itching  over  the  whole  head,  obliging  him  to  scratch,'. — Pain-
ful itching,  as  of  an  ulcer,  in  the  whole  scalp,  which  is  painful  all  oyer  as
if  ecchymosed,  hut  mostly  in  the  region  of  the  occiput  (after  seven  hours),'. —
(*Burning-itching  in  the  scalp),"' — The  hair  is  painful  when  touched,'. —
*  Falling  out  of  the  hair^"^  "*,  etc. — The  hair  falls  off  from  the  left  side  of
the  head,". — [^10.]  The  hair  which  had  come  out  grew  again,  but  was
stiff  and  brittle,  and  of  a  gray  color ;  but  it  soon  fell  off  again,  and  gave
place  to  healthy  brown  hair,  which  grew  as  thick  and  long  as  formerly,'"*.
Eyes.  —  Eyes  in  General  :  Lively,  penetrating  look,"'l  —  Eyes
brightandg]istening,audvessels  of  cornea  much  injected,'". — (Inflammation
of  the  eyes,,". — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  violent,  frequently  recurring,^*.
— Weak  look  of  the  eyes,'^. — Dim  eyes,".^Suffused,  languid  eyes,^"^ — Eyes
look  veiled,  and  minutely  injected,''^-^Blue  circles  around  the  eye,  and
pale  appearance  of  the  eyeball,''". — [320.]  Yellow  eyes,  as  in  jaundice,'. —
Eyes  injected™ "^,  etc. — Eyes  injected,  as  in  the  beginning  of  an  eruptive
fever,'"". — Weak  and  inflamed  eyes,  the  conjunctiva  was  fiery  red,"*. — The
eyes  red,"". — The  eyes  very  red,'*". — Bloodshot  eyes,".- — Red,  inflamed
eyes,*". — Eyes  red,  as  after  weeping,"^ — Wild  look,^"^. — *Staring  eyes,'"*. —
[330.]  Staring  look,  without  dilatation  of  the  pupils,'". — Protruding
e!/es,'"  ^^  —  Eyes  protruding  and  quite  red,"'^ — Protruding  and  watery
eyes,"".  —  *Sunkeu  eyes  and  pale  face,"'. — Swelling  of  the  eyes,  ('*)  "".f —
Eyes  greatly  swollen,'". — (Swelling  of  the  eye  and  lips),". — *Painless
swelling  under  the  left  eye,  partly  dosing  the  eye,  and  very  soft  (after  five
days),'.  —  Distortion  of  the  eyes,*^J — [340.]  Distortion  of  the  eyes  and
cervical  muscles,*". — Distortion  of  the  eyes  in  a  horrid  manner,". — Rigid
eye,  turned  upward,'". — From  time  to  time  the  eyes  turned  upward  and
squinting,  but  only  transiently,'"". — Eyes  reti-acted,'"'. — Eyes  often  feel
moist  and  as  if  full  of  tears,  but  without  lachryraation,"". — Stiffness  of  the
eyes,"^ — Eyes  stiff,  heavy,  rather  sensitive,"".— *Jra  evening,  feeling  of  sand
iu  eyes,'". — *Jn  the  evening,  feeling  as  of  sand  in  the  eyes,  obliging  him  to
rub  them,"''. — [350.]  Eeels  as  if  there  were  a  blood  boil  below  each  eye,"  —

f  Compare  S.  199,  authority  18.  %  "  Not  found."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  505

Deep  internal  pain  of  the  right  eye,  with  violent  stitches  when  turning  it,
so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  turn  it,'. — Violent  pain  in  the  left  eye,"". —
Violent  pain  in  left  eye  during  the  night,"'. — *BurDing  in  the  eyes,\ —
*Severe  and  constant  burning  in  the  eyes,^. — During  the  day,  slight  sensa-
tion of  heat  in  both  eyes,'^ — ^Burning  in  the  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth,'^". — *Eyes
hot  and  burning  sore  in  the  balls,^. — *Sensation  of  burning  and  smarting  (in
eyes),"'. — [360,]  Several  times  in  the  evening,  and  especially  when  lying
down,  a  distinct  feeling  of  burning  and  slight  pricking  in  the  eyes,'*.
— Drawing  pain  in  the  eyes  and  twitching  in  the  lids,'. — Heavy  pressure  in
the  eyes,'". — Pressure  in  the  left  eye  as  from  sand  (after  two  hours),'. —
Pressive  pain  under  the  right  eye,  lasting  for  hours,  at  night,  causing  so
much  anguish  that  she  was  unable  to  remain  in  bed,'. — Tearing  in  the  eye,
occasionally ,*l — Tearing  pains  in  left  e}''e,''. — Somewhat  painful  sensitive-
ness of  both  eyes,'^-^ — Stitches  and  burning  in  eyes,". — *Pulsative  throbbing
ill  the  eyes,  and  at  every  pulsation  a  stitch ;  after  midnight,^. ~~\ZtO,']  Jerking
in  the  left  eye,'. — Severe  nightly  itching  in  both  eyes,". — Biting,  gnawing
itching  in  both  eyes,  obliging  him  to  rub  (after  three  hours),'. — Eyes  feel
worse  when  moving  them,  or  looking  steadily,". — All  the  eye-symptoms
I  have  felt  the  more  acutely,  as  I  have  never  before  had  the  slightest
trouble  with  those  organs,'^ — Brow  and  Oebit  :  *A11  the  parts  around
the  orbits  ai'e  swollen,"". — ^Suborbital  pain  on  the  left  side,  with  prickings
as  with  needles,  sometimes  quite  severe,^''. — Pinching  aching  pain  over  the
eyes,  going  off  soon. — Itching  around  the  eyes  and  temples,  as  if  pricked
with  innumerable  red-hot  needles,'. — Lids  :  Blepharitis  excessively  aggra-
vated,'"^. — [380.]  *Blepharadenitis,  cil.,  and  ulcerosa,**'. — Lower  lid  exter-
nally excoriated  where  theburning  was  most  severe,^"*. — Lids  and  lips  blue,"^
— Eyelids  injected  and  lialf  shut,"*. — Redness  of  margin  of  lids,*"*. — Edges
of  lids  very  red^  ""'. — ^Extreme  redness  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  eyelids,  with
uneasy  sensation,  rather  than  pain,  often  obliging  him  to  rub  the  eyes,'*. —
In  the  morning,  much  gum  on  the  eyelids,  *. — *Swelling  of  the  lids,'". — -
*The  lids  miollen  and  red,™. — [390.]  *Eyelids  oedematous,  often  completely
closing  the  eyes,**^ — (Edematous,  painless  swelling  of  the  eyelids,". —
Swelling  of  the  upper,  and,  after  that,  of  the  lower  left  eyelid,  afterwards
of  the  forehead,  head,  and  neck,  without  pain  and  without  secretion  of
mucus ;  the  swelling  of  the  head  and  neck  reached  a  frightful  size,'". —
(Edema  of  the  left  eyelids,"^ — Great  oedema  of  upper  lid,  with  a  bright  red
flush,**®. — *  Continual  trembling  of  the  upper  eyelids,  with  lachrymation^.—
Spasms  of  the  eyelids,". — Spasmodic  closure  of  the  lids,". — *  The  (edematous
eyelids  are  firmly  and  spasmodically  closed,  and  look  as  if  distended  with  air,".
— The  left  eye  cannot  be  opened,". — [400.]  His  eyelids  closed ;  he  feels
tired,^ — Agglutination  of  the  eyelids,  in  the  morning,'". — The  eyelids  are
not  closed  during  sleep,*'".— -Kind  of  difficulty  in  moving  the  eyelids,'*. —
Slight  stiffness  in  the  eyelids,'*. — Prom  time  to  time,  stiffness  in  the  eye-
lids,'*.— Stiffness  of  the  eyelids,  as  if  he  had  been  smoking  all  night ;  lasted
fifteen  days,'*. — Marked  and  constant  stiffness  of  the  eyelids,  for  four  days,'*.
— *.Dryness  of  the  eyelids,  as  if  the  eye  were  rubbed  by  them,  when  reading  by
candlelight,^. — *Pain  of  the  margin  of  the  eyelids,  during  motion,  as  if  dry
and  rubbing  against  the  eyeballs,  both  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  room,'. —
[410.]  1  P.M.,  Sudden  severe  pain  in  the  eyelids,  with  very* painful  prick-
ing and  lachrymation,  which  lasted  ten  minutes,'*. — ^Burning  in  the  margin
of  the  upper  eyelids,^. — Pressive  pain  over  the  left  eyelid,  increasing  when
raising  the  eye,  and  also  in  the  upper  half  of  the  eyeball,'. — Smarting  in
the  eyelids,  like  that  felt  on  entering  a  room  filled  with  smoke ;  lasted  all


506  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

day/'. — Lachrymation  :  Swimming  of  the  eyes/^. — The  eyes  watery,  half
opened,  red,'". — Watering  from  the  eyes,  and  a  dazzled  sensation,^^*. —
*  Watering  and  itching  of  the  eyes,  with  a  little  pus  in  the  eyes  in  the  morn-
ing,'.— *  Lachrymation,''^ '"',  etc. — Slight  lachrymation  in  the  morning,  with
some  .fluent  coryza,''. — [420.]  *Corrosive  tears,  making  the  cheeks  and
eyelids  sore,^*. — Constant  watering  of  the  right  eye,  for  eight  days  (after
second  day),'.- — Conjunctiva:  Inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva,"  —
Chronic  conjunctivitis,  not  severe,  but  obstinate,  with  itching  and  depre-
ciation of  vision,'''. — Conjunctivitis  palpebralis,"'. — *  Inflammation  of  the
conjunctiva,  with  suffusion  of  the  eyes  and  intolerance  of  light,^''^. —  Yellowness
of  conjunctiva,^"^. — The  white  of  the  eye  yellow,'^. — Yellow  white  of  the  eye
as  in  jaundice," — Conjunctiva  somewhat  red,'". — [430.]  The  white  of  the
eye  becomes  red,'". — Redness  or  soreness  of  the  conjunctiva,^"'. — *  Conjunc-
tiva injected,^"  "^ . — The  conjunctivae  intensely  injected,"". — *  Conjunctiva
minutely  injected,  with  diffused,  pale  redness,^'. — Conjunctiva  minutely  in-
jected and  ciliary  vessels  greatly  enlarged,''"'^ — Ball  and  Pupil  :  Eye-
balls very  protruding,  as  if  out  of  their  sockets,^'*. — The  eyeballs  fixed  up-
ward,"".— Yellowness  of  sclerotica,"'. — In  the  albuginea  and  at  the  edge  of
the  reddened  cheeks  a  slight  icteric  flush, "I — [440.]  Pupils  dilated™  '"^,  etc.
— Pupils  strongly  dilated,'"'.— The  pupils  from  being  minutely  contracted
become  exceedingly  dilated,". — Pupils  contracted,™^  '*°. — ^Contracted  pupils
(after  one  and  a  half  hours),* '. — Alternate  dilatation  and  contraction  of
pupils,  more  in  the  night,  in  rather  rapid  and  extreme  degree,  increased  by
presenting  a  lighted  candle,  or  moving  the  tip  of  the  finger  to  and  fro,"'. —
Pupils  insensible  to  light,'"'. — Vision  :  Eyes  weak,'". — The  eye  weak,
without  lustre,  and  generally  closed,"*. — Weakness  of  the  eyes,"*. —
[450.]  Weak  sight,  for  a  long  time,".f — Disturbance  of  vision,'**. — The
sight  is  indistinct,'". — Obscuration  of  sight,'^ — Obscuration  of  sight;  it  be-
comes black  before  the  eyes  immediately,'*.^Slight  loss  of  vision,'". —
Vision  impaired ;  could  not  read  by  gaslight  more  than  a  few  minutes ;
could  not  see  except  by  good  daylight,  and  then  had  to  get  work  very
near  her  eyes ;  any  use  of  eyes  attended  with  pain,'". — (Almost  total  blind-
ness in  the  case  of  a  female  affected  with  weak  sight ;  she  loses  hearing  and
is  for  a  long  time  affected  with  dulness  of  sense),".J — He  opens  his  eyes,
and  complains  that  they  see  no  more,"*. — She  lost  the  sight  totally,"*. —
[460.]  (Sparks  before  the  eyes  luith  headache  and  vertigo),":  —  Flicker-
ing before  the  eyes,'".  —  White  spots  or  points  before  the  eyes,'. — *Sees
as  through  a  white  gauze,'. — It  seems  yellow  before  the  eyes,  during  the
nausea,". — Darkness  before  the  eyes,'". — Darkness  and  flickering  before
the  eyes,". — *Photophobia  ("),"".§ — *She  appeared  to  be  sensitive  to  light,
and  often  kept  her  eyes  closed,'^'. — Snow  dazzles  the  eyes,  and  makes  them
water,'.

Ears. — [470.]  Ears  extremely  swollen,  with  dark,  erysipelatous  red-
ness, and  large  blisters,  which  soon  discharge  and  become  gangrenous-look-
ing,'"'.— Burning  in  the  outer  ear  in  the  evening  (after  five  hours),'. — Draw-
ing tearing  in  the  left  lobule,'. — Drawing  tearing  behind  the  ear,  along  the
neck,  extending  down  to  the  shoulder,'. — Some  itching  under  the  right  ear,
and  a  papular  eruption  there,". — Sensation  as  if  the  left  meatus  auditorii!:-
were  stopped  from  without,'. — AVhen  swallowing,  the  ear  becomes  closed
from  within,  like  deafness,'. — ■♦Otalgia,'. — Cramp  pain  in  the  outer  ears,'.
— *Tearing  in  the  internal  ear,'. — [480.]  *Sticking  tearing  through  the  left

t  See  S.  128,  and  note.  J  See  S.  138.  g  To  authority  11,  see  S.  457.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  507

meatus  auditorius  from  within  outwards,  towards  evening  (first  day),\ —
Stitching  in  the  ear  in  the  mormngj^.—*iStitcJiing  pain  in  the  left  meatus  au-
ditorius at  night,  from  within  outwards,^. — Agreeable  creeping,  deep  in  both
ears,  for  ten  days,'. — Voluptuous  tickling  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius
causes  rubbing,'. — Heaeing:  Unusual  sensitiveness  to  sound, ^^*.-:- Very
sensitive  to  noise,'. — He  does  not  understand  what  people  say,'°. — Hard
hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  (after  sixteen  hours),'. — [Deafness.
H.],°. — [490.]  Sounds  in  the  ear  and  the  whole  head,'. — *JRoaring  in  the
ears,'',  etc. — Roaring  in  the  ears  at  every  new  paroxysm  of  pain^. — Roaring
in  the  left  ear,'^'. — Strong  rushing  noise  in  the  ear,  as  of  a  near  waterfall,'.
— *-Ringing  in  the  ears^. — Ringing  in  the  right  ear,  when  sitting  (after  an
hour  and  a  half),'.

Nose. — Objective  and  Discharges  :  Nose  pointed,"*. — '^'Nose  swollen
and  pouring  forth  a  profuse  watery  discharge,^'*. — *Sores  of  mucous  mem-
brane of  nose,^^". — [500.]  [*Ulceration  of  the  upper  part  of  the  inner  nose,
secreting  a  fetid  ichor,  tasting  bitter.  H.],*.^ — Sneezing,". — Frequent  sneez-
ing, without  coryza  (after  eleven  hours),'. — *  Violent  continued  sneezing,^. —
Violent  and  intractable  sneezing,^™. — Frequent  violent  attacks  of  sneezing,
which  awake  her  at  night,  and  attended  by  copious,  watery  discharge  from
nose,"''. — Running  from  the  nose,'". — Profuse  running  from  the  nose,''"*. —
Considerable  running  at  the  nose  for  two  days,  with  itching,''. — *Excoriat-
ing  discharge  from  the  nostrils,^'''. — [510.]  (^Discharge  of  a  corrosive  fluid
from  the  nose),". — -Pi-ofuse,  thick,  yellow  discharge  from  the  nose,''". —
*Every  morning  at  5  o'clock  sets  in  an  excessive  discharge  from  the  nose,  dur-
ing five  years  and  a  half,  with  very  occasional  intermissions  of  a  few  weeks  dur-
ing very  hot  weather ;  it  was  always  worse  in  the  morning,  and  went  off  in
the  open  air,'''". — Cold  in  the  head,"". — Slight  coryza,'".-— Sudden  coryza,'*.
— Violent  fluent  coryza,'. — ^Fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing  (after
eleven  hours),'. — Coryza,  with  sneezing,  every  morning  when  waking,  and
going  ofi"  speedily,'. — Very  annoying  coryza ;  stoppage  of  the  primse  vise,'".
— [520,]  *  Excessive  coryza,  with  hoarseness  and  sleeplessness,^.-— She  is  con-
stantly blowing  her  nose,  as  if  she  had  a  cold  in  the  head  (never  was  thus
troubled  before),". — Dryness  of  the  nasal  cavity,'^. — *Fluent  and  dry  coryza
together,^. — Stoppage  of  the  n(jse,  as  from  catarrh,". — Violent  hemorrhage
from  the  nose  during  ill-humor  (after  three  days),'. — After  the  use  of  wine
excessive  bleeding  from  the  nose,"'. — Bleeding  of  the  nose  when  vomit-
ing,'"'.— (Violent  hemorrhage  from  the  nose  after  violent  vomiting),". —
Sensations  and  Smell  :  *Pain  in  the  nasal  bone,  in  the  root  of  the  nosej^.
— Distressing  feeling  of  stoppage  under  the  bridge  of  the  nose,  which  oc-
casionally altered  his  speech,""*. — [530.]  ^Distressing  stoppage  in  the  bridge
of  the  nose^'^. — Nose  and  ears  cold,'". — Burning  pain  in  the  nose,  eyes,  and
mouth,"'. — In  the  evening,  unpleasant  heat  in  the  left  nasal  fossa,  with  a
peculiar  dryness  of  the  back  part  of  the  mouth,'". — *The  watery  nasal
mucus  causes  a  smarting  and  burning  at  the  nostrils,  as  if  they  were
made  sore  by  it,'. — Itching  in  the  nose,". — Stitches  in  the  nasal  bones,'. —
(The  smell  of  co6ked  meat  is  intolerable  to  him),'^t — Oflensive  smells  be-
fore the  nose,". — Smells  of  pitch  and  sulphur  before  the  nose  alternately,'.

Face. — Appearance  :  [540.]  Face  covered  with  sweat,'"' '"°. — *Face
covered  with  cold  sweat,'""  "*,  etc. — Skin  of  face  icy  cold,". — Face  cold,
nose  and  lips  blue,'"'. — *Face  and  hands  cold,  covered  with  cold  sweat,'"". — •
Features  greatly  changed,"*  "". — *His  appearance  is  best  compared  with  that

t  "After  antidote."


508  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

of  a  cholera  patient  in  the  algid  stage,'^"^. — *Face  stupid,"'. — *Suffering  ap-
pearance,'"^.— *Distressed  expression  of  countenance,''". — [550.]  Anxious
countenance,™^ — The  look  anxious,  but  not  wild  or  confused,"*. — Expres-
sion of  agony  on  the  countenance,'**.— *Face  expressive  of  genuine  mental
agony,''^^ — Frightful  expression  of  apprehension,™'. — On  the  face  signs  of
vague  anxiety  and  desperation,  as  well  as  an  expression  of  deep  trouble,"*.
— Face  expressive  of  the  deepest  anxiety,  now  red,  now  pale,"". —  Wild
look,"  '^,  etc. — *Hippoeratic  jace}^  '^',  etc. — Deathlike  expression  (during
vomiting),''^ — [560.]  *Deathly  color  to  the  face  (during  vomiting),'l —
*Pale  countenance,"'^'^,  etc. — ^Extremely  delicate  pale  appearance,™. —
(Deadly  paleness,  with  violent  vomiting),". — Deadly  white  look  ;  extreme
pallor,"*. — Face  pale,  except  a  flush  on  each  cheek,"^ — The  face  pale  ;  con-
fused expression,™. — Pallid  and  anxious  countenance,"'. — Face  pale  and
haggard,"". — *Pale  and  squalid  countenance,™'. — [570.]  *Pale,  corpselike,
convulsively  distorted  countenance,"". — *Face  pale,  with  an  expression  of
extreme  pain,'°". — She  looked  very  pale,  and  felt  very  powerless,'". — Pale-
gray,  swollen  face,'".  —  *Pale,  yellow,  cachectic  look,*. — Face  leaden
gray,'". — *The  face  bluish-gray,"*. — The  face  somewhat  livid,'". — Face
livid  and  lurid,*'  *". — (Clayey,  lead-colored  face,  with  green  and  blue  streaks
and  spots),''. — [580.]  *  Color  oj  the  face  yellowish,^""'. — Color  of  face  gray-
ish-yellow,'*".— Yellow  face,"'. — Yellow  or  jaundiced  state  of  the  counte-
nance,'''.— ^Yellow  face  and  sunken  eyes,'. — A  greenish-yellow  color  of  the
face,'"". — *  Face  flushed, ^^'  ™',  etc. — Face  and  eyes  injected,'*^ — Reddish,  dis-
torted face,"*.— Face  red,'" '^,  etc.— [590.]  Face  red,  inflamed,'*'.— Face
red,  with  a  yellowish  tinge  about  the  nostrils,"'. — Face  red  in  spots,  and
covered  with  sweat,'". — Face  and  tongue  red,"'. — Face  red  and  puffy,"'. —
*Face  red  and  swo&ft,"'. — The  face  at  times  puffed,'"'. — *Swelling  of  the
face,'* "°,  etc. — *(Edema  of  the  face,'™. — Swelling  of  the  whole  face  (from
the  external  application  of  Arsenic),^ — [600.]  {Elastic  swelling  of  the  Jace,
especially  of  the  eyelids,  and  more  particularly  in  the  morning,  in  three  per-
sons),*^ — Swelling  of  the  face  and  legs,'". — Face  swollen  and  livid,'™. —
Bloated,  red  face,". — Bloated,  red  face,  with  swollen  lips,'. — Swollen,  dark,
hot  face,"'. — Whole  face  extremely  swollen,  with  dark,  erysipelatous  red-
ness, and  large  blisters,  which  soon  discharge,  and  become  gangrenous-look-
ing,''.— Face  swollen,  flushed,  and  covered  with  cold  sweat,"^. — Swelling
of  the  face,  with  fainting-fits,  and  vertigo,". — *Snnken  face,* "",  etc. — [610.]
*Sunken,  anxious  features,". — *Face  sunken,  pale,  covered  with  cold  sweaty*".
— Disfigured,  pale  countenance,". — *  Distorted,  drawn  lines  of  the  face^^. —
Distortion  of  the  features,  as  if  dissatisfied,'. — Face  horribly  distorted  by  con-
vulsions and  pain,'"*. — The  mouth  drawn  in  all  directions,"". — Twitching  of
the  facial  muscles,^  "'. — Convulsions  of  facial  muscles,". — Frequent  smil-
ing,™'.— [620.]  Sensations:  Sensation  as  if  an  eruption  was  about  to  appear
all  over  face,". — Pains  in  the  face,  teeth,  and  gums,^^. — Increase  of  pain  in
face  on  touching  the  painless  side,". — The  left  side  of  the  face  feels  colder
than  the  right,". — Heat  and  redness  of  face,". — Violent  burning  and  itching
in  the  face  for  half  an  hour,  during  which  the  pain  in  face  diminishes,". —
Flushes  of  heat  in  face,  with  anxiety,". — Tearings  in  face  of  a  quotidian
type,"'. — Tearing  pain  in  left  half  of  the  face,". — Throbbing  in  face  and  head
asif  the  boiling  blood  would  burst  the  veins,". — [630.]  Itching  in  the  face;
he  scratches  it  until  it  is  red,'. — Red  spot  on  right  cheek,". — Extensive  tu-
mefaction of  the  right  cheek,  with  violent  pain  in  the  whole  of  that  side  of
the  face ;  smooth,  shining,  scarlet  redness  of  the  skin  over  the  swelling,'"'. —
*  Corrosive  ulcer  on  the  lip,  painful  in  the  evening  after  lying  down — a  sort  of


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  509

tearing  and  smarting  pain ;  the  pain  is  worst  when  touching  the  part  and  ex-
posing it  to  the  air ;  prevents  sleep,  and  wakes  him  at  night  (after  fourteen
days),'.— White-powdere'd  \\ps,'^\—*IAps  livid, ^^.—* Bluish  lips,^^  'I— *Lips
and  tongue  bluish,"*. — A  brown  strip  of  shrivelled,  almost  burnt,  epidermis
extends  through  the  middle  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip,'. — *Lips
spotted,  blacki'^. — [640.]  Lips  covered  with  small  black  spots,^". — Painful
blotches  in  the  upper  lip,'. — ^Swelling  of  the  lips,^.  —  ^Swollen,  cracked
lips,''. — Lips  swollen,  with  two  large  blisters,  as  if  from  a  cold,  one  on  the
right  edge  of  the  upper  lip,  the  other  at  the  left  edge  of  the  lower  lip  ;  the
former  afterwards  discharges  lymph,  the  latter  pus,". — Lips  convulsively
distorted,  as  with  risus  sardonicus,'". — Bleeding  of  the  under  lip,  after  a
meal  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Lips  somewhat  dry,  and  pale  red,™".
— *Lips  dry,  and  covered  with  herpes,"'.. — *Sore  lips,  and  ulcers  in  the
mouth ,''°. — [650.]  Priehing  twitching  or  jerking  in  one  side  of  the  upper
lip,  especially  when  going  tosfcep,'. — Itching  in  the  upper  lip,  as  if  pricked
with  innumerable  hot  needles,  extending  as  far  as  under  the  nose;  next
day,  swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  above  the  vermilion  border,'.  —  Jaws
clenched,". — Jaws  closed  tightly,'*'. — Jaws  firmly  locked,™'. — Spasms  in
jaws ;  can  scarcely  separate  the  teeth,". — When  drinking,  can  only  open
mouth  a  little,  and  with  difficulty,". — When  trying  to  drink,  she  bites  the
edge  of  the  tumbler," — She  swallows  the  offered  drink  with  a  convulsive
motion  of  the  jaws,  so  as  to  almost  break  the  glass,"". — Abscesses  of  the
jaw,'".— [660.]  Pressure  in  the  left  upper  jaw,'. — Twice  in  the  space  of  five
minutes  he  felt  severe  pains  along  the  course  of  the  right  inferior  maxillary
nerve,  each  time  five  or  six  very  painful  and  distinct  lanoinations  ;  while  lying
down,  some  time  after,  very  severe  headache,  and  the  same  painful  lanoina-
tions along  the  maxillary  nerve,'^

Mouth. — Teeth  and  Gums:  Gnashing  of  teeth,". — Convulsive  grind-
ing of  the  teeth,"'. — *  Grinding  of  the  teeth,  while  asleep,'.— Considerable  de-
posit of  tartar  at  the  base  of  the  teeth  (in  a  dentist,  who  took  the  greatest
care  of  his  teeth),". — Palling  out  of  all  the  teeth,*'. — The  upper  teeth  of
the  right  side  began  to  loosen  and  were  removed  with  the  fingers,'^'. —
Painful  looseness  of  the  teeth  ;  they  feel  sore  per  se,  and  still  more  when
chewing ;  the  gums  are  likewise  painful  to  the  touch,  and  the  cheek
swollen,'. — *A  tooth  becomes  loose  and  prominent,  in  the  morning ;  the  gum,
of  that  tooth  is  painful  to  the  touch;  that  part  of  the  cheek  behind  which  the
tooth  is  located  is  still  more  painful  on  the  outside  ;  the  tooth  is  not  painful
when  biting  the  teeth  together^. — [670.]  Progressive  caries  of  the  teeth,  with
unbearable  toothache,""*. — Dulness  of  teeth,  as  if  she  could  not  chew  with
them,". — *  The  tooth  seemed  longer  than  natural;  was  sensitive  to  pressure  and
cold  water;  was  somewhat  loosened,^^^. — Pain  in  .teeth,™'. — Toothache  in  all
the  teeth  of  left  side,". — Toothache  all  day  in  the  left  upper  jaw,'^ — *Pain
of  some  of  the  teeth  as  if  they  were  loose  and  would  fall  out;  the  pain  is  not
increased  by  chewing  (after  one  hour),'. — Slight  toothache  on  rising;  it  soon
becomes  extremely  severe,  with  profuse  salivation,'^ — Toothache,  at  night,
shortly  after  going  to  sleep ;  it  wakes  her,'. — In  the  evening,  for  four  or  five
minutes,  slight  but  well-marked  pains  in  the  upper,  and  especially  in  the
lower,  molars  of  the  right  side,'l — [680.]  Upper  teeth  painful  when  biting  on
them,". — Toothache,  more  aching  than  drawing,'.— Severe  dull  aching  pain
in  the  tooth,  extending  to  all  the  teeth  of  that  side,'®'. — ^Tearing  in  teeth,
regularly  recurring  at  night,'"'. — Tearing  in  the  teeth  and  head,  driving
her  almost  to  frenzy ;  she  strikes  her  head  with  her  fist ;  shortly  before  the
menses,'. — *  Jerking,  continuous  toothotche,  extending  as  far  as  the  temple,


510  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

relieved  or  arrested  by  sitting  up,'. — The  toothache  always  consists  of  very
distinct  painful  stitehes,'^ — Abscess  over  the  canine  (upper),  on  the  right
side ;  on  being  opened,  discharged  freely  a  sanious  pus,  for  several  weeks,"'.
— Characteristic  deposit  of  false  membrane  on  the  gums,"^. — Swollen
gums,  completely  covered  with  a  network  of  white  false  membrane,"". —
[690.]  Swollen,  bleeding  gums,  very  painful  to  touch,  and  spotted  white,'". —
The  gingivo-labial  groove  is  much  injected,'". — A  purple-red  line  on  the
gums,'*'. — A  large  portion  of  the  alveolar  process  of  the  superior  maxilla
becomes  detached  and  was  removed,"'. — Nightly  tearing  pain  in  the  gums
of  the  incisors,  intolerable  as  long  as  he  lies  on  the  affected  side,  but
arrested  by  the  warmth  of  the  stove ;  on  the  following  morning  the  nose  is
swollen  and  painful  to  the  touch  (after  three  days),'. — Stitching  in  the
gums  in  the  morning,'. — Tongue  :  Swollen  tongue,"^. — *  Inflammation  and
swelling,  externally  and  internally,  about  the  root  of  the  tongue,^"^. — *0n  the
edges  of  the  tongue,  five  superficial  ulcers  as  large  as  a  pea,"". — Tongue
clean,'^'.  —  [700.]  Tongue  thickly  coaied,'"* '"*,  etc. — Mucous  coatiug  on
tongue,'*". — Tongue  much  furred,™. — *  Tongue  furred,  with  a  red  streak  down
the  middle  aad  redness  of  the  tip,"". — *  Very  coated  tongue,  sometimes  with
red  edges,'''"'. — *  White  tongue,'^'. — Thin  white  coating  on  tongue,". — *  Tongue
coated  whitish,^""  "I — The  tongue,  roof  of  the  mouth,  gums,  fauces,  and  throat
became  covered  with  a  thick  white  velvety  coating,  growing  drier  and
darker  until  the  fourteenth  day,  when  it  began  to  loosen  and  detach
itself,  in  small  pieces  at  first,  but  soon  came  off  rapidly,  and  was  discharged
by  the  bowels  in  large  quantities,  having  the  fetor  of  putrid  animal  matter,
leaving  the  mouth,  throat,  stomach,  and  bowels  acutely  tender  for  some
time,"". — The  upper  surface  of  the  tongue  was  white,  not  coated,  but
thickened,'". — [7l0.]  *  Tongue  lohite  and  dry,'"'*. — The  tongue  grayish,
swollen,'*^. — *  Tongue  coated  yellowish-white,'"'^. — -Tongue  at  its  base  covered
with  a  yellow  coating,  and  red  at  the  tip  and  edges,'**. — *Bluish  tongue,"^.
— Tongue  and  lips  bright  red,^'^*. — *  Tongue  fiery  red,  smooth  and  dry,'". —
Thick,  brownish  coating  on  tongue,™. — Tongue  with  very  protruding  pa-
pillae, at  the  end  scarlet,"*.— Patchy  tongue,''*.— [720.]  Scalded  tongue,'"*.
— Moist  tongue,"*. — Tongue  moist,  whitish  in  the  centre,'*'.— Tongue  moist
and  icy,"'. — *Dryness  of  the  tongue,'" ",  etc. — *Dry  and  brown-eoated
tongue,"^— Dry  tongue,  coated  toward  the  back,'". — *  Tongue  dry,  and
morbidly  red,  with  papillas  considerably  raised  at  the  tip'^. — Insensible
tongue,  as  if  burnt  and  dead,  and  no  taste,'. — -(Feeling  of  dryness  on  the
tongue),^'. — -[730.]  Weakness  and  pains  in  the  tongue,'"'. — *  Violent  burn-
ing on  the  tongue,  in  the  palate  and  throat,'". — *  Violent  burning  on  the
tongue,  in  the  pharynx  and  stomach,'^''. — *Pain  in  the  tongue,  as  if  covered
with  burning  painful  vesicles,'. — The  tongue  feels  painful,  as  if  corroded,  on
the  side  of  the  tip  (after  fourteenth  day),'. — Tongue  seemed  thick,'. —
Boring  pain  in  the  right  border  of  the  tongue,  in  a  sort  of  half  sleep,'. —
Stitching  pain  in  the  root  of  the  tongue,  as  if  a  fishbone  were  lodged  there,
when  swallowing  or  turning  the  head,'. — Mouth,  etc.  : — Mucous  membrane
of  the  mouth  slightly  abraded,"'. — '^Painful  blisters  in  the  mouth  and  on  the
tongue,'"^. — ^Numerous  aphthoe  in  the  whole  mouth,'^". — [740.]  Aphthae  in
the  mouth,  at  first  white,  then  becoming  black,'**. — Disgusting  smell  from
the  mouth,". — Fetor  of  the  breath,  with  superficial  ulceration  of  the  gums
and  throat,'". — Hemorrhage  from  the  mouth  and  rectum,**. — Slimy  mouth
and  throat  (two  hours),'. — *  Dryness  of  the  mouth,"" "',  etc. — (Great  dryness
in  the  mouth),**. — Dry  mouth  and  thick  tongue,". — Dry  mouth,  with  violent
thirst,'". — *  Violent  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  great  thirst,'. — [750.]  *Feeling


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  511

of  great  dryness  in  the  mouth,  with  violent  thirst ;  he  drinks  little  at  a
time,'. — He  imagines  he  has  sand  in  his  mouth,"^ — Long-continued  feel-
ing of  roughness  in  the  hard  palate,l — Pain  in  the  mouth,  beginning  on  the
left  side,  and  afterwards  aflPecting  all  the  gums  (after  some  days),*. — Heat
in  the  mouth  and  throatj^'^ — *  Burning  in  the  mouth  and  pharynx,^^".—
*Burmng  in  the  mouth  along  the  pharynx,  and  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,'".  —  *Mouth,  pharynx,  and  oesophagus  commenced  to  burn
violently,'*'. — *Much  saliva;  he  must  spit  often,^ — Frequent  spitting,"'. —
[760.]  Frequent  spitting,"". — Considerable  salivation,"". — Copious  saliva-
tiou,'^. — Salivation  has  been  observed  to  follow,  especially  when  small
doses  have  been  given  for  a  length  of  time,"'. — Acrid  fluid  rises  into  the
mouth,'.  —  Diminished  secretion  of  saliva,"l — Saliva  hloody*'^^^. — Bitter
saliva,'. — Dry  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  of  wood,'. — The  food  tastes  as  if  not
salted  enough,'. — [770.]  Beer  has  a  flat  taste,'. — Unpleasant  taste,"". — Dis-
gusting sour  taste  in  the  mouth,"". — He  complained  of  a  detestable  taste  in  the
mouth  and  fauces,'"''. — *The  food  tastes  sale,'. — Disagreeable  metallic  taste
in  the  raouth,'"^ — *Sour  taste,"". — Disgusting  sour  taste  in  the  mouth,"". —
Sour  taste  in  the  mouth  ;  the  food  likewise  tastes  sour,'. — *Bitter  mouth,
without  having  eaten  anything,'. — (Bitter  taste,  mornings),^ — [780.]  *  Bitter
taste  in  the  mouth  after  a  meal,': — Bitter,  repulsive  taste  in  the  mouth,  after
eating  and  drinking,'. — Bitter  mouth,  with  yellow  diarrhoea,'^ — Malt  beer
tastes  bitter,'. — Putrid  aud  fetid  taste  in  the  mouth,'. — Putrid  taste,  morn-
ings, like  spoiled  meat,'. — Loss  of  power  of  speech,™. — -He  cannot  speak,
for  he  cannot  approximate  the  lips ;  the  lower  one  is  burned,  hanging  down,
everted,  and  very  painful,'"^

Throat. — Throat  in  General  :  *Ulcerated  throat,'''^ — [790.]  Ulcer-
ated sore  throat  (while  the  paper  was  being  removed  from  the  walls),'®. —
Erosions  of  the  throat  fester  deeply,"". — Excessive  swelling  of  the  left
carotid,  when  stooping,^ — Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands,  with  ach-
ing and  contusive  pain,'. — (Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands,  with  painful-
ness  to  external  pressure),*. — Hard  swelling  of  the  left  submaxillary  gland,
increasing  in  the  evening  (Sr.). — Parotid  and  submaxillary  glands  much
swollen,'"'. — (Inflammation  of  the  throat),'". — Contraction  of  the  throat,'"'.
— The  throat  is  constricted,'^". — [800.]  Bitter  throat  after  a  meal,  the  food
having  a  natural  taste  every  other  day  {like  a  tertian  /ever),'. — *Sweetish
taste  also  in  throat,*"". — Hawks  up  gray  mucus,'. — Constant  spitting  of  sa-
liva and  mucus  from  fauces,'"^ — Extreme  dryness  of  the  throat,'"^ — Feel-
ing of  dryness  in  the  throat;  she  had  to  drink  all  the  time,  as  if  parched,'.
— *Dryness  and  burning  in  throat,''^. — Dryness  and  contraction  of  the
throat,"".— *Dryness,  soreness,  scraping,  and  burning  in  throat,"". — Dry
throat,  with  violent  thirst,'". — [810.]  Roughness  and  hoarseness  in  the
throat,  mornings,'. — Sensation  as  if  a  hair  were  in  the  throat,'. — Pain  in
throat  in  the  evening,"'. — Pain  in  throat  and  mouth,'"'. — Pain  in  throat
and  stomach,"'"'.  —  Excruciating  pains  and  burning  sensation  in  throat
and  stomsich','^^.—* Burning  in  the  throat,^^ ",  etc. — Heat  and  burning  in
the  throat,'™. — Heat  and  uneasiness  in  throat,'"*. — Heat  and  excruciating
pain  in  throat,*"'. — [820.]  Heat  and  lancinating  pain  in  throat,*"'. — Excru-
ciating heat  aud  oppression  in  the  throat,  as  if  burning  and  sufibcating,'".
— Burning  and  dryness  in  the  throat,'". — Sensation  of  heat  in  throat  and
stomach,'"'. — *Burning  in  the  throat  and  region  of  the  stomach,''* '"'. — Vio-
lent burning,  as  if  fire  in  the  throat  and  chest,"^. — *A  burning  sensation
from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  up  the  pharynx  into  the  throat,  where  it  is
most  violent,  causes  a  marked  scraping,  and  hinders  swallowing,"". — Sen-


512  AKSENICUM  ALBUM.

sation  in  the  throat  as  of  a  lump  of  mucus,  which  tastes  of  blood,'. — Glo-
bus hystericus,'''^^ — The  throat  feels  closed  iutemally,  as  by  swelling,'^ —
[830.]  Sense  of  constriction  of  the  throat,^  "',  etc. — Suffocative  constriction
in  throat,". — Choking  sensation,"*. — Sense  of  constriction,  with  feeling  of
dryness  or  burning  heat  in  the  throat,"'. — 8ore  throat^  ^". — Quite  painful
sore  throat,"^ — Capricious  sore  throat,"". — Scraping  in  throat  as  of  ran-
cid grease,  when  swallowing  the  first  mouthful  in  the  morning,'. — Uvula,
ETC.:  Uvula  somewhat  swollen  and  red,"". — Scraping  sensation  behind  the
velum  pendulum  palati,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition,'. — [840.]  Tonsils
swollen,  with  false  membrane,™. — Superficial  excoriation  of  the  fauces,"*.
— The  fauces  red  and  swollen,'"^ — Fauces  exceedingly  red,"^ — Burning  in
the  fauces  J'''  ^^ — *Heat  and  dryness  of  the  fauces,^". — Much  constriction  of
the  fauces,"". — Pain  in  the  pharynx  when  talking,"'. — Pain  in  the  pharynx
and  abdomen,"*. — Cramp  in  the  pharynx,"*. — [850.]  Burning  sensation  in
pharynx,  CBsophagus,  and  stomach,"". — Tearing  pain  in  the  pharynx  and
along  the  whole  throat,  even  when  not  swallowing,'. — Twisting  sensation
in  the  fauces  and  stomach,  as  if  a  thread  were  rolled  up  into  a  ball,'^f —
At  the  base  of  each  pillar  of  the  pharynx  a  large  aphtha  surrounded  with
a  red  areola,  with  redness  of  the  pharynx,  for  four  or  five  days,"l — Para-
lytic condition  of  the  pharynx  and  cesophagus ;  the  bread  went  down  with  great
difficulty,  as  if  the  cesophagus  had  not  strength  enough  to  swallow  it ;  he  heard
it  fall  down  with  a  rumbling  noise,^. — *  Burning  in  the  pharynx^^^  "*,  etc. —
*Violent  burning  in  the  pharynx  and  oesophagus  as  far  as  the  stomach,'^.
— Violent  burning  in  the  pharynx  and  stomach,"*. — *Congtriction  of  the
pharynx  (oesophagus),**. — Soreness  in  pharynx,"". — [860.]  Sensation  of  a
slight  burning  in  the  oesophagus,'"*. — Sensation  of  burning  pain  down  the
oesophagus,™. — Burning  sensation  along  the  oesophagus,"*'*'. — Pain,  burn-
ing, etc.,  in  the  oesophagus  and  stomach,'™. — -There  was  evidently  a  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  oesophagus,'**. — In  the  oesophagus,  sensation  of  sore-
ness,'**.— Constant  sensation  of  desire  to  swallow  saliva,'*'. — Dysphagia,'**.
— Painful  deglutition,*^ — *Swallowing  very  difficult  and  painful,^^^. — [870.]
Difficult  swallowing  (**),  °",  etc. — *Swallowing  very  difficult,^'"^. — Difficult  swal-
lowing on  account  of  small  ulcers  in  the  throat,"*. — The  throat  feels  closed
up ;  nothing  can  pass  through  the  pharynx,^*. — Inability  to  swallow,""  "'.

Stomach. — Appetite  and  Thirst:  *Appetite  morbidly  increased,'*".
— Constant  craving  for  food,^'*. — Desire  for  sour  things,". — Great  desire  for
acids  and  acid  fruit,'. — Inclination  for  lard,"". — [880.]  Capricious  appe-
tite,"".— Inclination  to  eat,  but  everything  is  repugnant,"". — *No  appetite ;
still,  he  relishes  the  food  he  eats,'. — Diminished  appetite,"*. — No  appetite
for  dinner ,"^—*  Want  of  appetite,^^^  "',  etc. — Want  of  appetite  for  eight
days,"*. — Want  of  hunger  and  appetite  for  ten  days,*. — (*Want  of  appetite,
and  violent  thirsf),^. — Want  of  appetite,  and  a  pressing  sensation  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,"*. — [890,]  *Loss  of  appetite  (*'),  '",  etc. — *  Complete
loss  of  appetite  (**), ''''. — Complete  loss  of  appetite,  all  through  the  provi  ng,"\ —
Loss  of  appetite,  or  else  unusual  craving  for  food,'"*. — *A version  to  food,**. —
*  Aversion  to  all  food,"*. — *Great  aversion  to  food,"^. — Aversion  to  butter,^^.
— *  Oan  eat  nothing,  everything  is  repugnant,^. — (He  cannot  think  of  food
without  feeling  nauseated),".!— [900.]  *Loathing  of  food,'  (**).— Inability
to  get  nourishment  swallowed,'*.§ — Thirst  (**),  *',  etc. — *  Thirst  and  dryness
of  the  mouth,  with  a  peculiar  thick  white  saliva,''^. — Thirst  and  anxiety,"*. —
Increased  thirst,^'^ '",  etc. — A  good  deal  of  thirst,  at  night,  owing  to  dryness

t"  Observed  after  an  antidote."  J  As.  S.  138.  §  "  After  antidote."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  513

in  the  throat,  ceasing  iu  the  morning,'. —  Great  thirst,^^^ ''^,  etc. — Urgent
thirst,™. — *Excessive  i/iir«<,'l— [910.]  *Excessive  thirst ;  drinking  did  not
refresh  him,''. — *Exeessive  thirst; he  drinks  much, but  little  at  a

timB.^'CS  "not  fonnd").—* Intense  thirat,^'^ '^ ,  etc.-^* Thirst  violent  ™-'-'^.
— *  Thirst  so  violent  that  he  drank  eleven  jugs  of  water  in  half  a  day,^^\ —
Violent  tormenting  thirst,"*. — Violent  thirst,  not  without  appetite,". —
Thirst,  violent,  continued,'^. — *  Unquenchable  thirst  (''),  ^*,  etc. — *  Unquench-
able thirst,  with  dryness  of  the  tongue,  pharynx,  and  oesophagus,'*. — [920.]
The  thirst  became  unquenchable  in  the  evening,"*. — Unquenchable  thirst,
from  morning  till  evening ;  he  has  to  drink  water  every  ten  minutes,^. —
The  vomiting  ceases ;  he  only  constantly  cries,  "  I  am  thirsty,"  '°^ —  Constant
thirst,''  '".—(Suffocative  thirst),'"'.— Burning  thirst,'"''  (",  "  not  found  ").—
*Burning  thirst,  without  especial  desire  to  drink,"'. — Burning,  unquench-
able thirst,'*'. — *He  calls  for  refreshing  fruits,  and  sucks  slices  of  lemon
with  great  eagerness,""'. — *  Desire  for  vinegar  water,'. — [930,]  Great  desire
for  milk,  which  was  usually  repulsive  to  her,'. — Great  desire  for  coffee,'. —
[Desire  for  brandy,  H.],^ — Thirst  not  very  marked,"\ — She  does  not  wish
to  drink,'-'. — Absence  of  thirst,'. — *No  thirst  during  the  chilliness,". —
Eructation  and  Hiccough:  *Prequent  eructation, '"l — Many  eructations,
especially  after  drinking,'. — Continual  eructations,*'. — [940.]  Unsuccessful
eructations". — Violent  empty  eructations,  with  confusion  of  the  head  (after
thirty-six  hours),'. — Frequent  empty  eructations  (half  an  hour),'. — Eructa-
tion of  airj'^ — Eructations  tasting  of  the  iugesta,'. — Bitter  eructations  after
a  meal,  with  gulping  up  of  a  bitter,  greenish  mucus,'. — Eructations  occa-
sioned by  flatulence  moving  upward,'. — Sour  eructations  after  dinner,'. —
Eructations  of  foul-smelling  gases,'**. — Eructation  and  hiccough,'^*. — [950.]
Eructation  and  nausea,'". —  Waterbrash  (after  4  in  the  afternoon),'. — *Hic-
cough,""  '**,  etc.— During  the  night  hiccough,"*. — Hiccough,  at  night,  when
rising,  with  a  scraping  repulsive  taste  in  the  mouth,'. — *Long-lasting  hic-
cough, in  the  hour  when  the  fever  ought  to  have  come,".— ^Frequent  hic-
cough after  a  meal,  followed  by  eructations,'. — Frequent  hiccough  and
eructations,". — Violent  hiccough,^^". — Convulsive  hiccough,'^''. — Nausea  :
[960.]  Qualmishness,  at  llin  the  forenoon,  and  3  in  the  afternoon,". — In  the
morning,  when  waking,  she  feels  qualmish  and  nauseated,  as  high  up  as
the  chest ;  afterwards,  she  vomits  white  mucus  and  has  a  bitterish  taste  in
her  mouth,'. — ♦Nausea,"" "'"',  etc. ;  t,  etc. — Increased  nausea,'"'. — Intense
nausea,^'*. — Daily  nausea,"'. — Nausea  in  the  pharynx  and  stomach,'. — Fre-
quent nausea,  with  a  sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth,  not  always  after  a  meal,'.
— Nausea,  which  seems  to  be  seated  in .  the  throat,  with  accumulation  of
water  in  the  mouth,'. — Nausea  when  sitting ;  water  got  into  the  mouth,  as
in  waterbrash ;  the  nausea  disappeared  on  walking  into  the  open  air,  and
was  succeeded  by  profuse  dischargeofpapescent  stools  (after  seven  hours),'.
— [970.]  Nausea  before  a  meal ;  after  eating  or  drinking,  distension,  or
pressure  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,'. — *Nausea,  with  anguish,'^. — Nausea,
with  imperfect  waterbrash,  shortly  before  and  after  dinner,'. — Nausea,  with
frequent  inclination  to  vomit,"*. — Nausea  and  desire  to  vomit,  obliging  him
to  lie  down,  in  the  forenoon  ;  accompanied  with  tearing  around  the  knuckles,
and  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,'. — Disgust,  nausea  and  vomiting,  mostly  two
hours  after  eating,  no  matter  how  light  the  food  was,'**. — Nausea,  then
vomiting,'^*. — Constricting  nausea,  followed  by  vomiting,'". — Nausea  and
vomiting,"''^  "\ — Nausea,  and  occasional  vomiting,'". — [980.]  Na-usea  and
violent  vomiting,"^  '*'. — Constant  nausea  and  vomiting  for  several  hours,"". —
Nausea  at  times  increases,  so  that  one  vomits  food,  mucus,  and  a  fluid
VOL.  I.— 33


514  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

partly  acid  aud  partly  bitter,'^^. — *  Long-lasting  nausea,  with  faintness,
tremor,  heat  all  over,  and  shuddering,  after  a  few  hours,^. — Great  sickness  of
the  stomach,  accompanied  by  a  copious  flow  of  tenacious  saliva,"". — Sick-
ness and  vomiting,^^?. — Inclination  to  vomit,". — Inclination  to  vomit,  with-
out vomitiug,""  '*",  etc. — Desire  to  vomit,  and  violent  vomiting,''. — Inclina-
tion to  vomit,  after  the  heat,\ — [990.]  Desire  to  vomit,  also  in  the  open
air,\ — *  Constant  inclination  to  vomit,  with  rare  vomiting,  but  frequent  retak-
ing, which  as  it  seemed  increased  periodically  with  oppression,^^^. — Desire  to
vomit ;  qualmishness  when  sitting  up  in  bed,  and  frequently  sudden  vomit-
ing,'.— ^Drinking  brandy  lessens  the  inclination  to  vomit^'^. — Unusual  ten-
dency to  retching,  brought  on  by  crying  or  coughing,^^^. — Eetching,™. —

*  Frequent  ineffectual  retching,^^*. — *  Ineffectual  retching,  continues  almost  with-
out interruption,™. — (Empty  retching) ,'^ — *  Violent  retching,™  '^. — [1000.]
Constant  retching,  without  real  vomiting,™. — Retching,  and  sometimes
vomiting,""*. — Violent  retching  and  vomiting,™. — Very  violent  retching
and  vomiting,™'. — The  retching  and  vomiting  nearly  approached  Qonvul-
sions,"*". — Retching,  with  frequent  vomiting  of  white  mucus,'''\ — Retching
and  vomiting  as  soon  as  he  has  taken  a  few  spoonfuls  of  soup,"l — Retch-
ing and  repeated  violent  vomiting  of  mucus  and  bile,'". — Attempts  at
vomiting,'". — Very  great  effort  to  vomit,'". — Vomiting:  [1010.]  Vomit-
ing," (^),  (aud  numerous  others). — Vomited  a  little,'"^. — Vomiting  freely,"*.
— -He  vomits  very  easily,  even  after  slight  meals,'^. — Severe  vomiting^"^  ™'. —
Violent  vomiting,™^. — Violent  vomiting,  as  if  the  bowels  would  be  torn
usunder,^.-^-*  Continued  violent  vomiting,  with  the  sensation  as  if  it  would
tear  out  his  stomach  and  intestines,  as  with  a  pair  of  forceps,''". — *  Violent  ^
vomiting,  not  only  of  the  food  last  taken,  but  also  of  the  fluid  contents  of  the
stomach,'''". — Violent  vomiting,  lasting,  with  little  interruption,  half  a  day,
at  times  mixed  with  blood,  with  cutting  in  the  stomach,'*^ — [l020.]  *The
vomiting  is  generally  violent  and  incessant,  and  excited  by  any  substance
taken  into  the  stomach,'". —  Very  violent  vomiting,™  "*,  etc.— Violent  vomit-
ing, with  internal  burning,  thirst,  and  heat,'^'. — He  vomited  several  times
very  violently,  at  first  fragments  of  food,  then  water,  with  great  relief,'^. —
Most  violent  vomiting,  with  fearful  pains  in  the  abdomen  and  legs,"*.
— *  Vomiting  not  copious,  with  remarkable  effort,™. — ^Excessive  and  most  diffir
cult  vomiting  of  the  beverage,  and  of  yellow-green  mucus  and  water,  with  hitter
taste  in  the  mouth,  lohich  remained  a  long  time  after,^. — Frequent  vomiting,^".
— Repeated  vomiting,  for  forty-eight  hours,'"'. — Vomiting  at  short  intervals
till  the  next  day,'^°. — [1030.]  More  frequent  vomiting,  not  only  bilious,  but
bloody  and  slimy,  every  half  hour,  day  and  night,"^ — During  painful,
continued  retching,"  vomiting  repeated  at  least  every  ten  minutes,'^". — Fre-
quent labored  vomiting,'*". — Vomiting,  almost  incessant,  and  very  severe,
continuing  six  hours,  then  recurring  by  spells,  for  twenty-four  hours,'". —

*  Almost  incessant  vomiting  for  forty-eight  hours,  with  fearful  burning  in  the
abdomen,  and  thirst  that  cannot  be  satisfied,'"'". — Incessant  vomiting,"^ —
*Vomiting  cannot  be  stopped,  with  violent  retching,  griping  in  the  abdo-
men, and  pains,'"'. —  Vomiting  bitter,^"'". — *  Vomiting  of  a  bitter  green-
yellow  liquid,'^.-—*  Vomiting  of  ingesta,™-  ^"'.—[1040.]  (Vomiting  of  the
ingesta,  for  several  weeks),". — *Vomited  all  the  food  he  took,"'*. — '^Ina-
bility to  retain  nourishment,  which  is  thrown  up  as  soon  as  it  touches  the
stomach,'"-^. — Vomiting  of  food  and  white  mucus,"^ — Vomiting  of  food,
mixed  with  a  tenacious  mass,'". — *Even  water  is  immediately  thrown  off
the  stomach,"^ — *At  first  he  ejected  food  by  vomiting,  then  mucus  and
green  bile,'?^ — Vomiting  of  food  mixed  with  a  reddish-brown  liquid,"".—


AESENICUM  ALBUM.  515

Frequeut  vomiting  of  food  ;  soon  after,  repeated  diarrhosa,  with  relief,'^. —
Vomiting  of  large  quantity  of  fluid,^*". — [1050.]  Watery  vomiting,™. — Vom-
iting white  fluid,'". — Vomiting  of  a  scanty  yellowish  fluid,  streaked  with
green,"". — Copious  vomiting  of  pale  yellow  liquid,'^. — Vomiting,  without
efToi-t,  of  yellow  mucus,™'. — Greenish  bitter  vomiting,™'. — *Bilious  vomit-
ing,^^^. — *Severe  bilious  vomiting,™. — *Copious  vomiting  of  bilious  matter,'^'.
—Vomiting  of  bile  on  getting  up,". — [1060.]  *When  vomiting,  much  green
bile  was  ejected,"^ — Vomiting  of  much  green  bile  in  the  first  hoiirs,'"'. —
Vomiting  of  bile  and  mucus,''™. — Vomiting  of  green  matter  at  night,  of
whitish  stufi"  next  morning,^. — Violent  vomiting  of  mucus,  bilious  and
frothy  masses,"'. — With  tormenting  retching,  violent  vomiting  of  a  large
quantity  of  greenish  liquid,  and  two  stools,  consisting  of  the  food  eaten  the
day  previous,  almost  undigested,"^ — Vomiting  of  thick,  glairy  mucus,'^f —
Vomiting,  two  or  three  times,  of  a  tenacious  mucus  and  brownish  mass,"*.
— Vomiting  of  brown  and  green  substances,'"^. — Vomiting  of  an  alternately
thin  or  thick  brownish-dark  substance,  with  violent  exertion  and  increase
of  the  pain  in  the  stomach,  without  subsequent  relief,". — [1070.]  *  Violent
vomiting  of  a  brown  turbid  matter,  mixed  with  mucus,  and  sometimes  streaked
with  blood,"^. — *Vomiting  of  a  brownish  substance,  frequently  mixed  with
blood,  with  violent  exertion,''. — The  vomited  matter  was  colorless,  pale-
yellow,  mixed  with  a  little  frothy  saliva,  or  several  streaks  of  blood,'^'. —
Vomiting  of  blood-streaked  mucus,™. — Vomiting  mucus  mixed  with  blood,^^.
— *  Vomiting  of  blood,^' "'. — Profuse  melaena  ;  vomited  blood,  and  his  sputa
was  tinged  with  it,"'. — Violent  vomiting  of  blood,  and  evacuation  of  dark
blood  (with  which  a  violent  burning  pain  was  felt  in  the  anus) ;  there  was
such  a  mass  of  blood  that  not  a  drop  seemed  left  in  the  body,'°\ — Vomiting
of  bloody  mucus,**. — *  Vomiting  of  mucus  and  biood,^^^'^. — [1080.]  Tlie
matters  discharged  from  the  stomach  and  bowels  may  have  a  yellowish
color,  or  may  be  colored  by  blood,  or  by  a  mixture  of  blood  and  bile,  and
then  present  various  shades  of  brown  or  olive-green.  They  may  be  milky
white,  consisting  of  flakes  of  mucus  mixed  with  white  arsenic,"'. — The
ejecta  tasted  bitter,  like  acrid  bile,  and  looked  green,"^. — *  Vomiting  on
raising  the  head,^^^. — Vomiting,  an  hour  after  getting  up  (for  the  first  time
in  his  life),°l — Vomiting,  immediately  after  a  meal,  without  nausea,^ —
Vomiting  after  each  meal,"'. — *Voiiiiting  every  time  after  drinking,"*. —
*After  each  drink  the  vomiting  is  renewed,  with  violent  pains  in  the  abdo-
men and  pharynx^^^. — Vomiting  periodic,  more  a  retching,"l^[1090,]
Vomiting  every  half  hour,  without  pain  or  other  appearance  of  suiferiug,"*.
— Vomiting,  especially  in  the  night,  which  lessened  toward  morning,  when
diarrhoea  appeared,'". — The  vomiting  is  relieved  by  water,"*. — *The  vomit-
ing brings  no  relief,"'. — Violent  vomiting,  and  very  violent  bleeding  of
the  nose,"**. — Vomiting  of  a  substance  which  causes  constriction  of  the
throat,'™. — Amid  fearful  retchings  and  convulsive  contractions  of  the
stomach,  he  had  to  vomit  six  times,'™. — Vomiting,  and  afterwards  violent
diarrhoea,'". — Occasional  vomiting  and  purging,'™. — *  Vomiting  and  diar-
rtea,"'""',  etc. — [1100.]  ^Excessive  vomiting  and  diarrhosa,^*. — ^Violent
vomiting  and  purging,'*'. — *Violent  vomiting  and  purging,  frequently  re-
peated,"*.— *Violent  vomiting  and  di^irrhoea  for  four  days,"". — Violent,
continued  vomiting,  with  diarrhoea,". — Vomiting,  alternating  with  diar-
rhoea; after  which,  lasting  constipation,'". — Vomiting  and  painful  diar-
rhoea,''".— Vomiting,  and  diarrhoea  of  greeuish  bloody  water,"'^ — Vomiting

f  "  After  antidote. "


516  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

and  purging  of  dark-colored  matters,^*'. — He  vomited,  the  first  two  days
and  nights,  about  twenty  times  (which  ceased  only  after  eight  days),  and
purged  often,  especially  at  first,'". — [1110.]  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea
bloody,'^^ — Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  during  the  whole  night,'^^ — Vomiting
and  purging,  with  unbearable  odor,'™. — Horrid  cries  accompany  the  vomit-
ing, which  continues  day  and  night.^.f — The  vomiting  returned  accompanied
by  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  (second  day),"'. — Vomiting  was  followed
by  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,"". — Vomiting,  eighteen  to  twenty  times
in  succession,  after  which  she  became  very  weary,  so  that  she  could  not
speak,  could  only  complain  of  her  abdomen,'". — Vomiting  of  a  thin,  bluish,
dirty  yellow  substance,  followed  by  great  debility,". — Vomiting  with  diar-
I'hcea,  directly  after  the  swoon,™. — Vomited  several  times,  then  fell  asleep,
and  .slept  until  near  midnight,'™. — [1120.]  Violent  vomiting,  followed  by
copious  sweating,"". — Incessant  vomiting  of  the  milk  that  had  been  taken,
with  roaring  like  a  wild  animal,  on  account  of  pain,'°". — ^Frequent  vomiting,
with  apprehensions  of  death,^*. — Vomiting  with  returning  consciousness,"'.
— Violent  vomiting  and  frequent  unconsciousness,  lasting  but  a  few  mo-
ments; immediately  after,  trembling,  abdominal  pain,  and  repeated  stools
followed,"'''. — The  vomiting  occurs  mostly  by  paroxysms,  without  great
exertionj''^ — Stomach  :  Inflammation  of  the  stomach  is  a  constant  post-
mortem appearance,  whether  the  poison  have  entered  the  system  by  a
wound  or  ulcerated  surface,  or  by  swallowing,'". — Severe  inflammation  of
the  whole  alimentary  mucous  membrane,"'. — The  stomach,  duodenum,  and
rectum  were  much  inflamed  (post  mortem),"'. — Weak  digestion,  and  dis-
like to  meat,^^. — [1130.]  *Disturbed  digestion  from  the  slightest  food,'"". —
Digestion  difficult  (eight  months),'*". — Indigestion,"'. — Stomach  distended
and  hard,"'. — The  stomach  begins  to  distend,  and  is  warmer  than  the  rest
of  the  body,'". — (Distension  of  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  hypochondria,
previous  to  stool),'^.J — Distension  of  the  epigastric  region,". — Gastric
acidity,'™. — Violent  spasms  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,'*". — Spasm  of  the
stomach,  with  violent  colic,  diarrhoea,  and  fainting  fits,'^ — [1140.]  (Exces-
sively violent  spasm  of  the  stomach,  with  thirst),*'. — Feeling  of  great  weak-
ness in  the  epigastrium,  so  that  she  trembled,  after  micturition,'. — Uncom-
fortable sensation  in  the  stomach,"*. — Unpleasant  sensation  in  the  stom-
ach,'".— *Anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,'". — *Anxiety  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,^. — *  Great  anxiety  about  the  pit  of  the  stomach,^^  ™,  etc. — *  Anx-
iety in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  rising  high  up,  at  night,^. — Pains  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,"^'". — Pain  in  the  stomach^^  ("),  etc. — [1150.]  Car-
dialgia,'*'. — The  stomach  and  pharynx  painful,"". — Pains  in  the  stomach,
causing  nausea,'^§ — Pains  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  in  the  abdo-
men,'^".— Pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,'"'. — *Pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
arresting  the  breathing^. — Considerable  pain  and  great  heat  in  the  epigas-
tric region,'^'. — Great  painfulness  of  the  stomach,**. — Great  pain  in  the
epigastric  region,'*'. — Great  pain  in  epigastric  region,  in  paroxysms,"". —
[1160.]  Severe  pain  across  the  epigastric  region,  . —  Violent  pain  in  the
epigastriwm,^^^  "'I — He  appeared  to  have  violent  pains,  lamented,  groaned,
screamed,  pressed  with  his  hand  on  the  epigastric  region,  but  did  not  locate
the  pain  verbally,  as  in  general  nothing  was  to  be  found  out  from  him,"".
— The  child  showed  signs  of  great  pains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,"". —
He  experiences  pain  only  in  the  stomach,'"^ — The  stomach  was  the  seat  of
the  most  vivid  sufiering,'*'. — Cries  and  complainings  of  inexpressible  an-

f  "  Cited  from  Cardanus."  |  "  After  antidote."  J  "  After  antidote."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  517

guish  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  without  distension  or  colic,". — Excruciating
pain  in  region  of  stomach,*^ — Terrible  distress  in  the  stomach,'™. — In  the
evening,  pain  in  the  stomach,"^. — [1170.]  Constant  pains  in  stomach  (eight
months),'*". — Pains  and  cramps  in  stomach,  with  vomitings  and  waterbrash,
becoming  very  severe,^". — *Pain  in  the  stomach  seemed  to  be  associated
with  violent  retching,'^"'. — Pain  in  the  stomach  seemed  to  be  the  result  of
violent  efforts  to  vomit,^'". — Symptoms  of  inflammation  of  the  stomach,''*. —
Pains  in  the  stomach  and  intestines,'". — Violent  pains  in  the  epigastric  and
umbilical  regions,'^'. — Violent  pains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,"'^ — Con-
slant  internal  chilliness  in  the  epigastric  region;  he  is  never  clad  warm
enough ;  the  parts  feel  warm  when  touched,'. — Sensation  in  the  stomach,
as  if  it  would  burn,"'^ — [1180.]  Heat  rises  from  storaiach,''l — Burning
around  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'. — *Burning  in  the  stomach,'"  '^',  etc. —
*Burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,'" ",  etc. — *  Violent  burning  pains  in  the
stomach,'*'. — *  Violent  burning  pains  in  the  stomach  and  intestines^^. — Burn-
ing in  the  stomach  like  fire,^'. — Burning  in  the  stomach  like  red-hot  coals,^^. —
*In  the  stomach  fearful  burning  pains,'''. — *Intense  burning  in  the  region
of  the  stomach,''^''. — [1190.]  Intense  heat  and  burning  of  the  epigastrium,^'^. —
*Intense  burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  increa^sed  by  pressure,"'^. —
Heat  and  uneasiness  in  stomach,'"*. — Heat,  pain,  and  pressure  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,^^. — Con,stant  and  considerable  burning  in  the  stomach  and
chest,*'. — *  Red-hot  burning,  with  great  anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
with  tormenting  retching,^^^. — Burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  aching
pain,*'. — Burning  in  the  stomach,  with  pressure  as  of  a  load,'^ — Burning  in
the  stomach,  and  pain  increased  by  touch  in  the  stomach  and  liver,'". —
Momentary  relief  of  burning  and  nausea  followed  the  vomiting,"". — [1200.]
Feeling  of  repletion  in  the  stomach,  with  aversion  to  food,  and  pain  in  the
stomach  after  eating,  in  the  evening,'. — Severe  pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if
it  were  distended  in  its  whole  extent,  and  would  be  torn,"' — Pain  in  the
stomach,  as  if  full  of  flatulence  ;  eased  at  first,  after  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,
but  subsequently  returning  with  greater  violence,". — Sensation  of  tension  in
epigastric  region,™. — Repletion  in  the  epigastric  region,  with  pinching  in
the  abdomen,'. — Contractive  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  storaach,'^^. —
Violent  contractive  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,"'. — *Painful
contraction  in  the  epigastrium,'**.^Violent  contraction  of  the  stomach  and
pharynx,  and  painful  burning,"". — Pinching  in  the  pit  of  stomach  toward
the  right  side,  causing  her  to  stoop,"". — [1210.]  *  Cramps  in  the  stomach,  and
feeling  as  if  he  had  an  attack  of  cA,o^er(X,"'.^Especially  in  the  region  of  the
stomach  fearfully  violent  cramps  and  pains,'"". — Violent  cramp  in  the
stomach  and  abdomen,'""  '*". — Spasmodic  pain  in  the  stomach,  two  hours
after  midnight,'. — Periodic  spasmodic  pains  in  the  gtomach  and  bowels,'". —
Stomachache,""  '^^ — Unbearable  stomachache,  with  constantly  increasing
anxiety  and  cries  for  help,"*. — *Drawing  pain  in  the  evening  when  sitting,
commencing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  extending  around  the  lower  border
of  the  left  ribs,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose,'. — Painful  drawing  in  the
stomach,  with  slight  shivering,'**. — Oppressive  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the
stomach,". — [1220.]  Weight  in  the  stomach,  and  anorexia,  all  day,"'. —
*  Weight  in  the  stomach,  as  of  a  stone,  after  a  meal,'. — Pressure  on  the  stomach
'painful,^'"  '"",  etc. — Pressure  at  the  exterior  wall  of  the  stomach,  when  talk-
ing (after  half  an  hour),'. — Pressure  at  the  orifice  of  the  stomach  and  in
the  fauces,  after  a  meal,  as  if  the  food  remained  high  up,  followed  by  empty
eructations,'. — Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  pit  of  the  stomach,^'' ".
— Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,"*. — Hard  pressure  over  the  pit  of  the  stom-


518  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

ach  (immediately),'. — Pressure in epigastrium,  which is tense,  though
scarcely  sensitive  to  even  deep  pressure,™. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  for
three  hours,  shortly  after  breakfast  and  dinner,  accompanied  with  empty
eructations,  and  a  nauseating  relaxation  of  the  body,'. — [1230.]  Pressure
about  the  stomach,  so  that  he  cannot  stand  up,  as  soon as  he  has  eaten
something,  not  immediately,  but  after  a  little  while,'. — Strong  pressure  in
stomach  after  swallowing  a  little  soup,"'. — ^^Strangulatiug  feeling  in  the
stomach,  with  increased  sensitiveness  to  touch,'"^ — (Cutting  pain  in  the
stomach),^^ — Cutting,  spasmodic  paius  in  the  stomach,  hypochondria,  and
chest,"^. — Gnawing,  corrosive  pain  in  the  stomach,^^. — Stitching  pain  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  during  cough,'. — Intolerable  pricking  paiu  in  the  stom-
ach, as  though  a  thousand  red-hot  needles  were  sticking  through  the  stom-
ach,'^'l^Tearing  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,"^ — Dull  tearing,  trans-
versely across  the  region  of  the  stomach,  when  walking  in  the  afternoon,'.
— [1240.]  *  Violent  tearing  boring  pain  and  spasm  in  the  stomach  and  intes-
tines,^".— Tearing,  spasmodic,  aching  pain  in  the  stomach,". — *Pain  in  the
stomach,  tenderness  on  pressure,'". — Pains  on  touching  the  regions  of  the
stomach  and  bladder,"". — *Stomaeh  tender  to  pressure,'"'. — *  Tenderness  of  pit
oj stotnach  to  pressure™. — Soreness  in  pit  of  stomach,  when  talking,  draw-
ing breath,  or  moving  about,**. — He  complained  little  of  pain,  but  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach  was  sensitive  to  external  pressure,'"^ — ^Regions  of
stomach  and  navel  sensitive, ^^^. — Stomach  remarkably  sensitive,^^' '". — [1250,]
On  touching  the  region  of  the  stomach  slight  pain,^"  '*l — Acute  pain  on  pres-
sure over  the  epigastrium,"''. — At  first  the  region  of  the  stomach,  afterwards
more  especially  the  regions  of  the  liver  anii  the  abdomen,  are  painful  to
touch,'"*. — The  region  of  the  stomach  very  sensitive,  with  very  violent  pains
in  the  intestinal  canal,'^'. — Pains  in  and  around  stomach,  which  becomes
sensitive  to  pressure,"'. — Throbbing  pains  in  epigastrium ;  prevent  sleep,'''^
— Frequent  spasmodic  jerks  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  rectum,
causing  him  to  start,'. — Gnawing  and  pricking  (hard  and  fine  beating)  pain
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  a  feeling  of  tension,'. — Itching  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  obliging  him  to  scratch,"^ — He  constantly  scratched  the  skin
of  the  epigastrium  with  his  nails,'°^ — [1260.] Could  not  bear  any  wine,  even
the  smallest  portion,^"^. —  The  pains  in  the  stomach  are  relieved  by  sweet  mitt,"*.
Abdomen. — Hypochondriac  and  Umbilical  Regions  :  Irritation
of  liver,  with  yellowish,  or  sickly  pale  look,™. — *Paiu  in  the  region  of  the
liver,'"*. — Violent  pain  in  the  right  hypochondriac  region,'^. — Pain  in  the
right  hypochondriac  and  adjoining  lumbar  regions,  the  pain  extending  from
these  parts  sometimes  through  the  abdomen,  sometimes  into  the  right  groin
and  side  of  the  abdomen,  like  renal  colic  ;  urine  unchanged,'^. — *  Acute  pain
over  region  of  the  liver,  much  increased  on  pressure,™. — Hypochondria
tense  and  shaken  by  convulsions,'*'. — Increased  tension  in  the  hypochondria
during  the  paroxysm  of  fever;  he  is  almost  unable  to  lie  on  one  side,'. —
Pressing  sensation  in  the  liver  when  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — [1270.]
Drawing  stitching  pain  under  the  left  hypochondrium,  extending  into  the
chest,  when  clearing  the  throat,'. — ^Hypertrophy  of  spleen,™. — [Swelling
of  the  spleen,  which  had  been  indurated  formerly.  H.],^ — *Violent  pains
about  the  navel,  causing  him  to  bend  forward,  increased  by  touch  and  on
attempting  to  raise  himself,  or  to  lie  on  the  back,'*". — Pains  in  the  abdo-
men below  the  navel,"". — Drawing  colic  in  the  umbilical  region  (after  two
hours),'. — Dysenteric  colic  in  the  umbilical  region,*". f — Abdomen-  in  Gen-

f  "  Tormina  circa  umbilicum."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  519

EBAL :  *Swolleii  a.hiovaen,''^^.^* Abdomen  swollen  and  painful,". — Bowels
rather  tympanitic/**. — [1280.]  Abdomen  fuller  than  usual,'". — Excessive
swelling  of  the  abdomen,*". — Swelling  of  the  abdomen  and  of  the  orbital
region,'". — Violent,  painless  distension  of  the  abdomen  after  a  meal;  he
had  to  lean  his  back  against  something  to  be  relieved,'. — Abdomen  swollen
and  tense,'"". — ^Distended  abdomen,""  ^^,  etc. — Distension  of  the  abdomen
after  stool,'. — *Distensioii  and  pain  in  the  abdomen,*^  "'. — Bloatedness
every  morning,  with  emission  of  flatulence  a  few  hours  after,'. — The  abdo-
men was  soft  and  not  distended,'°l — [1290.]  Abdomen  soft  and  sunken,'".
— Spasms  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,
with  breaking  out  of  sweat;  afterwards  emission  of  flatulence  and  thin
stool,'. — Great  flatulence,^^". — Flatulence  having  a  putrid  smell  (after  eleven
hours),'. — The  flatulence  rises,  and  causes  eructations,'. — Emission  of  a
quantity  of  flatulence  preceded  by  loud  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,'. —
*Rumhling  in  the  bowels,^' "". — Ruipbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  of  much  flatu-
lence,'.— Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  without  stool,'. — Violent  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,'"'. — [1300.]  Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  morning  on  waking,'.
— Gurgling  in  the  abdomen ;  flatulence,'"". — Weakness  of  the  abdominal
muscles,'. — Tendency  to  inflammation  of  duodenum,  with  violent  pains,'*.
— Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  but  only  when  at  rest,'. — Uncomfortable
feeling  in  the  abdomen,  afterwards  colic,  and  very  frequent  vomiting,'^". — ■
Excessively  unpleasant  feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen,". — Anxiety  in  the
abdomen,  with  fever  and  thirst,'". — *Pain  in  bowels,"". — *Pains  in  abdo-
men,'"^ ^",  etc. — [1310,]  Pain  over  the  abdomen,™. — ^Much  pain  in  abdo-
men,"".—Unbearable  pains  in  the  abdomen,'". — The  pain  in  the  abdomen
becomes  seated  in  the  left  side,'. — *Pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  unbearable
anxiety,"". — *  Anxiety,  with  pains  in  abdomen  so  violent  that  he  grasped
those  about  him,  and  again  pushed  them  from  him ;  frequently  jumped
out  of  bed  and  sat  on  the  chamber,  or  ran  about,'". — Pains  in  abdomen
and  legs,^^. — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  heat  in  the  face,'. — Abdominal
pains,  with  excessive  urging  to  stool,  when  a  diarrhoeic  evacuation  fol-
lowed,"*.— Pains  in  abdomen,  with  constipation,'"'. — -[1320.]  Dull  pain,
with  sensation  of  tension  and  heaviness  in  the  right  epigastric  and  hypo-
gastric regions,'"*.^ — *  Violent  pains  in  abdomen,^'^  "",  etc. — Violent  pains  in
the  abdomen,  even  caused  screaming,"^ — ^Intolerable  anguish,  and  very
troublesome  sensation  in  the  abdomen  arrests  the  breathing,  with  lamentings
about  ^<,'^t — *  Violent  pains  in  the  abdomen,- with  such  great  anguish  that  he
had  no  rest  anywhere ;  rolled  about  on  the  floor,  and  despaired  of  his  life,^\ —
Such  violent  pains  in  the  abdomen  that  on  going  home  he  had  to  hold  on
to  the  houses  in  order  to  prevent  falling,'"*. — Violent  pains  pervading  the
whole  abdomen,  with  continued  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,"*. — -Violent  ab-
dominal pains,  with  incessant  diarrhcea,"*'. — Pains  in  the  abdomen,  moving
about,  accompanied  with  diarrhoea  and  pains  in  the  anus,". — Violent  rheu-
matic pains  in  the  left  side  of  abdomen,™. — [1330.]  Frequent  but  not  con-
tinued pains  in  the  abdomen,"*. — Constant  pain  in  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men,"^ — The  pains,  which  in  the  beginning  only  had  their  seat  in  the
stomach,  pass  down  into  the  intestines ;  he  presses  with  his  right  hand  the
navel,  and  cries  that  his  intestines  are  burning^"". — *  Violent  burning  in  the
abdomen  (lasting  half  an  hoxit),^^''.—* Burning  pain  in  intestines,™ .-^Burn-
ing pain  in  the  abdomen,  noon  and  afternoon,  going  off"  with  an  evacuation,'.
— *Burning  pains  in  the  abdomen,"^ — Burning  heat  in  the  intestines,^*^. —

t  Same  as  S.  34.


520  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

Violent  burning  in  the  abdomen,  throat,  and  chest,"l — *Violent  burning
pain  in  the  bowels,™. — [1340.]  Sensation  of  warmth  in  the  abdomen,'^. —
Violent  burning  in  the  whole  intestinal  tract,"^ — (Burning  in  the  abdomen,
with  pricking  and  eutting),'\f — *Burning  in  the  abdomen,  with  heat  and
thiratf'. — Tendon  in  the  abdomen™ "'. — ^Feeling  as  if  intestines  were  being
drawn  together,''. — The  abdominal  wall  appeared  to  be  drawn  in  toward
the  spinal  column,'**. — Abdomen  drawn  in,  more  tense;  feels  as  in  lead
colic;  little  sensitive  to  pressure,™. — The  abdominal  walls  are  contracted
and  almost  touch  the  spinal  column ;  the  recti  muscles  are  stretched  like
a  rope,'°l — [1350.]  Frequent  griping,"*. — Cramp  in  the  abdomen,™. —
Cramps,  which  appear  to  commence  in  the  abdomen,"". — Colicky  feeling
in  bowels,'"^. — Colic-like  attacks,"*. — Excessive  colic,*l — Twisting  colic,'^.J
— Colic  and  diarrhoea  during  the  afternoon  ;  chilliness,  the  colic  continuiug
after  the  diarrhoea,'. — From  time  to  time  violent  colic,"'. — Violent  colic
pains  during  the  night,"". — [1360.]  Excessive  colic  and  pain  in  the  stom-
ach,™.— Colic,  with  copious  stools,''". — Colic  recurring  periodically,"! —
*The  colic  ceases  after  stool,'^ — Drawing  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen^  as
from  incarcerated  flatulence,  nevertheless  no  flatulence  was  passed,'". —
Twisting  and  griping  pain  in  the  abdomen,'". — Twisting  of  the  intestines  and
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  preceded  by  rumbling,  and  followed  by  three  diar-
rhoeic  stools,'. — Twisting  of  the  intestines,  with  pinching  and  rumbling  in
the  abdomen,  before  and  during  the  liquid  stoo],^ — *  Gutting  pain  in  the
abdomen  C"),'^  etc. — Frequent  cutting  pains  in  abdomen,'"l — [1370.]  Vio-
lent cutting  in  the  region  of  the  abdomen,'^". — Abdominal  pains,  cutting,
burning,"^ — Abdominal  cutting,  with  vomiting,'". — Abdominal  pains,  as
if  the  intestines  were  being  cut  with  swords,  causing  him  to  cry  out,"^ —
Cutting  pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  below  the  last  ribs,  increased  by
feeling  of  it,'. — Clawing  cutting  pains  in  the  intestines,  in  the  evening  after
lying  down  and  in  the  morning  after  rising ;  the  pains  sometimes  dart
through  the  abdominal  ring  (as  if  hernia  would  protrude)  into  the  sper-
matic cord  and  the  perineum ;  when  this  colic  subsides,  a  loud  rumbling
and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen  set  in,'. — Cutting  and  tearing  in  the  abdo-
men, with  icy  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  cold  sweat  of  the  face,'".
— (Lancinating  tearing  and  gnawing  pains  in  the  intestines  and  stomach),".
— Duriug  the  menses,  pinching  stitching  cutting  from  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach down  to  the  hypogastrium,  also  in  the  back  and  the  sides  of  the  abdo-
men ;  the  pain  was  so  great  that  she  had  to  bend  double  when  standing  or
sitting,  with  loud  eructations,  moaning,  lamenting,  and  weeping,'. — Cutting,
and  sensation  in  the  intestines  as  of  being  twisted  together,  previous  to  the
diarrhoeic  stool,'. — [1380.]  Violent  abdominal  cutting,  with  vomiting,'". —
Lancinations  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  under  the  short  ribs,  in  the
evening  shortly  after  lying  down,'. — Digging  sensation,  with  pressure,  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,". — *Stitches  from  the  abdomen  down  into  the
vagina,'^. — Stitching  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  under  the  short  ribs ;  he
cannt)t  rest  on  that  side,'. — A  sensation  was  felt  in  the  abdomen,  and  thence
moved  to  the  head,  where  was  a  beating,  and,  still  more,  a  tearing ;  after-
wards it  extended  to  the  left  side,  where  one  or  two  sudden  jerking  stitches
were  Mt,'^.— Tearing  in  the  abdomen,^  ^^. — Violent  tearing  in  the  abdomen,
with  nausea  and  vomiting,"^ — The  abdomen  was  so  tender  that  the  slight-
est pressure  could  not  be  borne,'". — Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch,'"". — [1390.]
Abdomen  painful  to  touch,'"*. — On  touch,  increasing  pains  in  the  abdo-

t  "After  antidote."  t"Notfound."  J  "  Not  found."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  521

men,"^ — On  touching  the  abdomen,  and  especially  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
violent  pains,''*. — Painfulness  and  tension  of  the  abdomen,  so  that  he  could
not  bear  the  bed  covering,'^'. — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  especially  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  increased  by  pressure,'". — Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  abdo-
men, or  as  if  crushed,  during  cough,'. — Pulsation  in  abdomen,  extending
deep  into  the  bowels,'". — Pain  deep  in  the  abdomen,"'.— Sense  of  burning
and  constriction  in  lower  abdomen,  especially  on  stretching  the  feet,"'. —
*Pinohin(j,  increasing  unto  cutting,  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  only  in  the
morning  before  and  during  diarrhoeic  stool,  and  continuing  even  after}. —
[1400.]  Pain  as  if  the  epigastrium  were  cut  off  from  the  hypogastrium,
with  great  anguish  and  lamentations  about  his  pain,'^ — Lower  abdomen
painful  on  pressure,"'. — -Sore  pain  in  hypogastrium,"'. — Burning  in  the
groin,^ — Contractive  pain  in  the  left  groin  during  micturition,'. — Pain  as  if
sprained,  wheu  stooping,  in  the  groin  and  right  lumbar  region,'. — Digging,
burning  pain  in  the  boil  in  the  groin,  excited  by  the  slightest  contact,'. —
Single,  violent,  slow  stitches  in  both  groins,'.

Stool  and  Anus. — Rectum  and  Anus:  *  Spasmodic  protrusion  of
the  rectum,  very  painful,'^. — The  rectum  remains  protruded,  after  hemorrhage
from  the  rectum,'. — [1410.]  (Discharge  of  blood  from  the  rectum  almost
every  moment,  with  vomiting  and  excessive  colic),^°. — *Tenesmus,'"'. — Con-
stant tenesmus,"^. — -Tenesmus  with  burning,".^Tenesmus ;  discharges  fre-
quently tinged  with  blopd,"'. — Constant  tenesmus,  with  dejection  of  mucous
stools,'"'. — *  Tenesmus  as  in  dysentery,  constant  burning,  with  paiti  and  pres-
sure in  the  rectum  and  anus, ^. — Burning  in  rectum,"". — *  Burning  at  the  rec-
tum after  stool,  with  great  weakness  and  trembling  in  all  the  limbs,^. — During
the  menses,  sharp  stitching  from  the  rectum  as  far  as  the  anus  and  the
pudendum,'. — [1420.]  Rough  prickling  in  rectum,  as  if  passing  sand,"°. —
Twitchings  in  anus,"". — Painful  swelling  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  veins,  with
tenesmus,". — Piles,  bleeding,  and  protruding,"". — *Blind  hsemorrhoids,  pain-
ful, the  pain  resembling  prickings  with  a  hot  needle,'. —  Varices  of  the  anus,
with  pricking  pain  when  walking  and  sitting,  not  at  stool,'. — *Hcemor-
rhoidal  tenesmus  of  the  anus,  causing  a  burning  pain  like  fire,  especially  in
the  night,  and  not  permitting  him  to  sleep ;  in  the  day  the  pain  becomes
worse,  and  increases  to  violent  stitches ;  worse  when  walking  than  when  .
sitting  or  lying  down,'. — ^Burning  at  the  anus,'  ". — Burning  at  the  anus
for  one  hour,  disappearing  after  hard  and  knotty  stool,'. — Burning  and
itching  of  the  anus,™. — [1430.]  During  stool,  painful  contraction  directly
over  the  anus,  towards  the  small  of  the  back,'. — *The  evacuations  exco-
riated the  skin  about  the  anus,"". — Itching  scraping  or  smarting  pain  in
the  anus,'. — *Painful  soreness  of  the  anus,  when  touched,'. — Itching  of  the
anus,'. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  perineum  causes  scratching  (after  half  a
day),'. — Stool  :  Desire  to  evacuate  the  bowels,'*^ —  Urging  to  stool^^  ^°". —
Violent  urging  to  stool,  driving  her  out  of  bed,"". — Constant  urging  to
stool,"". — [1440.]  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,^^^^.  —  Ineffectual  desire  for
stool,'. — Desire  for  stool,  but  no  stool,^. — Stool  and  urinary  tenesmus,"". —
Inclination  to  diarrhoea,'^'. — Diarrhoea,  "  ^,  etc.,  etc. — *Frequent  diarrhoea,
with  violent  tearing  cutting  pains  in  the  intestines,"'. — Diarrhoea,  frequently
severe,'". — Purging,"^ — Purging,  more  or  less  violent,'". — [1450.]  As  soon
as  the  damp  weather  set  in,  and  fires  were  necessary,  he  invariably  com-
plained every  Sunday  (the  only  day  on  which  he  was  much  in  the  room  so
papered)  of  diarrhoea,^". — Diarrhoea,  every  morning  and  forenoon,  loose
and  slimy,  preceded  by  griping,  and  followed  by  straining,''''''. — After  he
had  been  to  stool  over  a  hundred  times,  and  was  helpless  from  exhaustion,


522  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

the  diarrhoea  still  continued,  with  great  anxiety  and  cutting  in  the  intes-
tines,'"^ — Constant  diarrhoea,"". — Involuntary  passage  of  faeces,". — Diar-
rhoea, copious,  involuntary,  and  painless,"". — Unnoticed  stools,^.t — Unno-
ticed discharge  of  stool,  supposing  it  to  be  flatulence,'. — ^Involuntary  stools
and  urine^^". — *  While  fully  conscious,  she  discharges  faeces  and  urine  una-
Mares,""'. — ■[1480,]  At  every  act  of  vomiting  there  was  a  copious  involun-
tary discharge  from  the  bowels,"". — While  standing,  half-liquid  matter
escaped  involuntarily  from  the  anus,  just  as  if  one  had  suddenly  opened
the  pipe  of  a  vessel  containing  liquid ;  the  evacuations  are  very  profuse,
at  first  white,  then  yellowish,  and  appear  to  come  from  a  liquid  that  had
been  taken,"". — ^  Shortly  before  death,  while  lying  down,  involuntary
stools,"^ — Profuse  stool,'". — Fluid  stool,™. — Frequent,  thin,  liquid  evacua-
tions,'^^ — Thin  stool  four  times  in  the  afternoon,"". — Three  thin  stools  in
half  an  hour,"". — *  Violent  watery  diarrhosa,'^". — Frequent  watery  diarrhoea
set  in  after  the  vomiting  had  ceased,*. — [1470.]  Stools  serous,  not  fre-
quent,'^\ — Pappy  stool,"". — Pappy  fseces,  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less
(six  to  thirteen  hours),'. — Pappy  stool  twice  in  the  afternoon,"". — Slimy,
thin  stools,  having  a  hacked  appearance,'. — Evacuations  consisting  of  a
white,  tenacious  mucus,  very  similar  to  the  rinsings  of  intestines,  which
masses  formed  lumps  the  size  of  a  fist,"". — Diarrhoea  or  scybalous  passages
of  clayey  color,'"". — Several  yellowish-brown  evacuations,^"". — Green  stool,'"*.
— *Slimy  and  green,  mucous  stools,^'. — [1480.]  At  first  thick,  at  last  diarrhoeic
green  stools,'"^ — [Greenish,  dark-brown,  diarrhoeic  stool,  smelling  like  a
putrid  ulcer,  H.],". — *Diarrhxa  of  a  dark,  bloody  color, ™.^-* Frequent  black
evacuations, ^^^. — *Black,  acrid,  putrid  stools,''. — *  Violent  diarrhoea,  three
or  four  thtles  in  an  hour,  with  offensive  black  discharges,^^^. — Odorless  stools,
similar  to  the  diarrhoea  after  indigestion,'"°.-^Odorless,  bilious  evacuations,
recurring  every  five  or  ten  minutes,'"'. — Diarrhoea  with  tenesmus,"". —
*8mall  stools  with  tenesmus,  first  dark-green  faces,  afterwards  dark-green
muous,  after  colie^. — [1490.]  Yellow,  watery,  scanty  diarrhoeic  stools,  with
subsequent  tenesmus,  as  if  more  stool  would  come,  and  intense  colic  around
the  umbilicus,". — Yellow  diarrhoeic  stools,  with  tenesmus  and  burning  pain
in  the  rectum  and  anus,'-. — *Acrid  water  in  stool,^". — Frequent  evacuations,
^mixed  with  slimy,  fatty  masses,'^. — Ash-colored  stool,  like  dirty  water,  with
some  yellow  mucus,  without  pain  or  tenesmus,™'. — Purging  of  a  watery
fluid,  intermixed  with  lumps  of  green  mucus,'"". — (Tenacious  bilious  matter
passes  frequently  with  the  stool),"".| — At  first,  black,  hard  stools,  after-
wards, stools  covered  with  bilious  mucus,'"*. — Normal-looking  stools  were
covered  with  a  mass  which  appeared  combined  of  jelly  and  bile,'"^ — With
his  stool  he  passed  a  ball-shaped  lump,  which  seemed  to  consist  of  undi-
gested fat  mixed  with  tendinous  parts,'". — [1500.]  Discharge  of  reddish-
black  matter  through  mouth  and  anus,™". — Brownish  stools,  mixed  with
mucus,^"^— Black  matter  and  worms  were  discharged  with  the  stool,"". —
^Discharge  of  a  black  fluid,  burning  at  the  anus  like  fire,  after  much  un-
easiness and  pain  in  the  abdomen,'^. — *  Watery  blood  passes  with  the  stool,  and
surrounds  it^. — The  stools  contain  bloody  mucus,"*. — *Stools  mucus  and
blood,^™. — Very  unhealthy,  pale  evacuations,  with  constant  passing  of  mu-
cus, and  sometimes  (very  rarely)  blood,^''". — *  Expulsion  of  pieces  of  mucus,  ac-
companied  by  tenesmus,  with  cutting  pain  in  the  anus,  as  of  blind  hcemorrhoids,'.
— (Diarrhoea,  with  violent  burning  at  the  anus),"". — [1510.]  Diarrhoea  and
vomiting,'"'. — During  the  day  he  had  several  stools,  and  frequent  vomiting

t  "No'fo""'^-"  t"  Not  found."


AKSENICUM  ALBUM.  523

of  yellowish  liquids/'". — *Black,  mucous  diarrhoea,  with  persistent  vomiting,
perhaps  seven  times  daily,^'^ — *Frequent,  dark-colored,  offensive  stools,  and
at  the  same  time  vomiting  of  a  clear,  mucous,  odorless  liquid,"*. — Diarrhoea
with  abdominal  pains,"'"*. — Continual  diarrhoea,  with  violent  abdominal
pains,^'^. — *Blackish-brown  bilious  stools,  with  griping,™. — After  slight
pinching  in  the  lower  abdomen,  three  to  four  times  yellowish  watery  diar-
rhoea and  thirst,"*. — Diarrhoea  and  abdominal  pain  ;  she  grasped  with  both
hands  toward  the  head,  complained  of  the  abdomen,  and  drew  the  legs  up
high,"l — Frequent  alvine  (fluid)  evacuations,  attended  by  colic,^". — [1520.]
*  Gomider  able  purging,  and  extreme  coldness  of  the  extremities,"'.^-*  Hem-
orrhage from  the  bowels,™. — Evacuation,  upward  and  downward,  of  a  large
quantity  of  blood,  mixed  with  bilious  matter,  with  apparent  relief,^"'. —
Violent  purging,  with  discharge  of  blood  per  anum,"'\ — *Diarrhoea,  only
of  blood  and  water,"*. — *  Dysentery-like  diarrhoea,^^. — Dysentery  ,*^—-*  Fruit
and  fresh  vegetables  cause  diarrhoea,"". — (Knotty,  unsatisfactory  stool),'. —
Stool  tardy,"^— [1530.]  Stool  retarded,"".— Constipation  C)  ",  («^  for  four
•days),  etc. — Obstinate  constipation,'"'^*.^ — Obstinate  constipation  for  two
years,'*'. — No  stool,"^ — *Constipation,  with  pains  in  the  bowels,*. — *Diar-
rhoea  alternating  with  constipation,'. — At  first  diarrhoea,  at  last  constipa-
tion, without  vomiting,'".

Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  and  strangury,'"* — Strangury,'". —
[1540,]  Burning  in  the  urethra,''. — ^Burning  on  urinating,™ ''". — *Burn-
ing  in  the  urethra  during  micturition,"  *l — Burning  in  the  anterior  part
of  the  urethra  at  the  commencement  of  micturition,  early  in  the  morning
(after  twenty-four  hours),'. — Biting  pain  in  the  urethra,'. — Frequent  pain,
like  tearings,  deep  in  the  urethra,'. — Strong  urging  to  urinate,". — Frequent
desire  to  urinate,  passing  much  urine  (after  two  to  seventeen  hours),'. —
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  which  at  times  is  accomplished  only  with  diffi-
culty,"".— *  Great  desire  to  urinate,  but  does  not  pass  any  urine,^. — [1550.]
Desire  to  urinate,  which  he  cannot  satisfy,  but  the  bladder  is  empty,  and
with  the  catheter  only  a  few  spoonfuls  of  clear  urine  are  discharged,"'^ —
Frequent  urination,"'. — Urine  more  frequent  than  usual,'*". — Must  rise  to
urinate  three  or  four  times  in  the  night,  passing  a.  large  quantity  every
time,  several  nights  in  succession,'. — Involuntary  urinating,". — *Involun-
tary  micturition ;  the  urine  flowed  from  her  before  she  was  able  to  reach  the
chamber,  though  but  little  iirme,'.— [Involuntary  emis.sion  of  urine  in  the
night,  when  sleeping,"  H.],*. — Painful  urinating,"". — Ischuria,"*. — Spas-
modic difficulties  in  urinating,"". —  [1560,]  (Diminished  flow  of  urine,
sometimes),*'. — *8oanty  urine,  passing  with  difficulty, ■^^. — *Scanty  emission,
and  burning  during  emission,'. — Urine  was  not  passed  at  all,"*. — Reten-
tion of  urine,^^  *'.• — *  Retention  of  urine,  as  if  the  bladder  were  paralyzed^. —
Urine  suppressed,'". — (Urine  increased,  often),*'. — Urine  in  considerable
quantity,"*. —  Profuse  urination,". —  [1570.]  Urine  profuse  and  dark-
brown,'". — (Urine  copious  and  burning  hot),^. — Urine  scanty,'"  ™. — Scanty
dark -yellow  urine,". — Urine  almost  colorless,'. — Dark,  wine-yellow  urine,
with  violent  pressure,". — [Greenish,  dark-brown  urine,  turbid  when  emit-
ting it,  looking  like  cow-dung  stirred  up  with  water,  and  forming  no  sedi-
ment, H.],*. — *IIcematuria,^. — ^Urine  very  turbid  (after  five  days),'. —
Much  sediment  in  the  urine,'"*. — [1580.]  Bed  sand  in  the  urine,  and  pain
in  passing  it,™.

Sexual  Organs,  — {Male.)  (* Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  genital
organs,  increasing  almost  to  gangrene;  excessively  painful),^. — *Excessively
painful  swelling  of  the  genital  organs,". — Sphacelus  of  the  male  parts  of


624  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

generation,*'. — *The  glans  is  blue-red,  swollen,  and  cracked,^. — Erections
seldom  and  incomplete/". — Sexual  powers  lost/". — Erections  in  the  morn-
ing, without  emission,'. — Erection,  with  burning  in  the  anterior  part  of  the
prepuce,'. — The  penis,  bladder,  and  kidneys  cause  him  fearful  pains,"'. —
[1590.]  dwelling  and  unbearable  burning  of  the  penis,'"'. — Corrosive  itch-
ing of  the  posterior  portion  of  the  penis,  obliging  him  to  scratch,'. — Violent
itching  of  the  glans,  without  erection,'. — Stitching  itching  on  the  tip  of  the
prepuce,'. — On  awaking,  all  the  reddened  portion  of  the  scrotum  was
found  covered  with  an  eruption  of  very  small  vesicles.  This  continued  for
some  days,  discharging  slightly,  and  ending  in  desiccation,  (This  case
shows  the  elective  action  of  Arsenic  on  the  genital  organs),'^ — Swelling  of
the  scrotum,"^. —  Emission,  with  sexual  dreams,'.^ Emission,  without
dreams,  followed  by  a  continued  erection,'. — Discharge  of  prostatic  juice,
with  diarrhoeic  stool,'. — {Female.}  Itching  of  the  genital  organs,'. — [1600.]
Sexual  furor  of  a  woman  ;  she  requires  an  embrace  twice  a  day,  and  if
not  satisfied,  the  orgasm  takes  place  spontaneously,'. — She  experienced
active  fcetal  movements  during  the  attack  (she  was  seven  months  advanced
in  pregnancy),™- — -^Leucorrhcea  {a  otipful  in  twenty-four  hours)  yellowish
and  thick,  corroding  the  parts  it  touches;  for  ten  days,'. — Leucorrhceal  dis-
charge while  standing  and  emitting  flatulence  (after  twenty-four  hours),'.
— After  the  menses,  there  always  appeared  for  several  days  a  discharge  of
a  yellow,  offensive,  watery  fluid ;  frequently,  also,  a  discharge  from  the
rectum  of  blood  and  purulent  mucus,  associated  with  burning  pains,"®. —
*Sudden  profuse  discharge  of  dark  blood  from  the  vagina,^. — Discharge  of
bloody  mucus  after  the  menses,'. — *Menses  too  early,^. — Menses  twice  re-
turn, too  early,  even  in  twenty  days,'. — *Profuse  menses,^. — [1610.]  Men-
struation several  days  longer,  and  somewhat  more  profuse,"". — ■*  Constant
exhausting  menorrhagia,™. — The  menses  did  not  make  their  usual  appear-
ance ;  in  their  stead  she  had  stitches  in  the  gluteal  region  and  the  shoul-
ders, (Sr.). — Appearance  of  menses,  which  have  been  five  days  retarded,".
— Menses  continue  only  two,  instead  of  six  days  as  usual,*'. — The  menstrua-
tion, which  should  appear,  ceased,"". — *Amenorrhoea,"^. — Suppressed  men-
struation,'^'*.— Scanty,  pale  menses,". — Pale-red  blood,".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Larynx,  etc.,  and  Voice  :  [1620,]
Obstinate  bronchitis,^". — ^(Gangrenous  croup),*'. — Suflfbcative  catarrh,^^t
—*{Sudden  catarrh,  threatening  suffocation,  at  night),". — Spasms  of  glot-
tis,^^'. — ^Dryness  of  the  larynx,^. — Irritation  in  larynx,  provoking  a  cough,".
— *Smoky  sensation  in  larynx  causes  cough  before  going  to  sleep,  evenings,  as
of  the  vapor  of  sulphur,^. — *  Constant  titillation  in  the  larynx,  inducing  cough,
even  when  not  inspiring^. — *The  voice  is  trembling ^"^ '". — [1630,]  Low
voice,'^. — *Weak  voice,'". — Voice  clear,  but  weak,'". — *  Voice  very  uneven,
now  strong,  now  weak,'^ '"'. — *  Hoarseness,^"  ''^'. — Chronic  hoarseness,''^*. —
Voice  rough  and  hoarse,". — Rough  voice,  with  hoarseness,'. — Voice,  from
time  to  time,  screaming,'^'. — The  voice  is  hollow,  the  speech  unintelli-
gible,'"^ — [1640.]  The  voice  almost  ceased,'". — Aphonia,". — Cough  and
ExPECTOBATiON  :  Troublesomc  cough,'". — Frequent  coughiug,"^ — Fre-
quent severe  cough,''^ — *Severe  spasmodic  cough,''*. — Severe  spasmodic
cough,  with  tendency  to  vomiting;  lasted  until  the  heat  of  summer,'". —
Severe  spasmodic  cough  (while  the  paper  was  being  removed  from  the
walls),"*. — Violent  morning  cough,'. — Cough  short,  iti  the  morning,  after
the  (usual)  tea-drinking,'. — [1650.]  *Cougli  in  the  evening,  directly  after
lying  down;  she  has  to  sit  up;  afterwards,  contractive  pain  in  the  epigastric

,  f  "  Same  symptom  as  next."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  525

region  and  pit  of  the  stomach;  this  pain  continued  the  cough,  which  made  her
weak,'. — *  Night-cough ;  he  has  to  sit  up  as  soon  as  the  cough  commences,^. —

*  Violent  fits  of  cough  wake  him  in  the  night,  as  if  he  would  be  suffocated  ;  the
throat  became  swollen^. — *  Cough  when  going  into  the  open,  cold  air,''. —

*  Cough,  evenings,  directly  after  lying  down^. — Cough  when  moving  the
body  ;  the  cough  frequently  puts  him  out  of  breath  suddenly/. — *  Cough
caused  by  a  constrictive  sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  as  from  the
vapor  of  sulphur  j'. — Cough  on  drawing  a  deep  breath  or  moving  about,". —

*  Cough,  especially  after  drinkitigj'. — Cough  excited  when  he  drinks  with-
out thirst/. — [1660,]  Tenacious,  short,  and  hacking  cough,  causing  a
smarting  pain  in  the  chest,^. — Cough,  tightness  of  the  chest,  and  painful
stitching  in  the  chest,"'. — Dry  cough,''. — (Dry,  hacking  cough),". — (Dry,
violent  cough  (after  two  hours)  ),". — (Dry,  fatiguing  cough),". — Frequent
short,  dry  cough,". — *Deep,  dry,  short,  unceasing  cough,  after  midnight,'. —
Cough,  without  expectoration,  from  irritation  in  the  air-passages,'. — Fre-
quent short,  dry,  hacking  cough  from  a  suffocative  sensation  in  the  larynx,
as  from  the  vapor  of  sulphur,'. — [1670.]  Dry,  choking  cough,  with  short,
labored  breathing  and  sore  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  ulcerated ;
the  pain  eictends  to  the  middle  of  the  chest,^. — *  Cough,  without  expectora-
tion, but  with  dyspnoea,  in  the  evening,'': — Cough,  without  expectoration,  pre-
ceded by  a  jerking  in  the  hip,  which  seems  to  excite  the  cough,'. — Violent
attacks  of  cough  and  copious  expectoration, ^^^ — (Short  and  hacking  cough,
with  pain  in  the  chest  and  salt  expectoration,  preceded  by  oppression  of
the  chest),". t — Thick  yellow  expectoration,''. — Green,  bitter  expectoration
in  the  morning,'. — Salty  expectoration  (by  hawking),'^.J — Bitter  expecto-
ration,'°.§ — When  coughing  violently,  much  water  comes  out  of  the  mouth,
resembling  waterbrash,'. — [1680.]  ^Expectorates  a  frothy  saliva,'''^. — The
mucus  coughed  up  is  streaked  with  blood,'. — Discharge  of  mucus  streaked
with  blood  ;  afterwards  desire  to  vomit,'. — ^Spitting  of  blood.^^^.^-Spitting
of  blood,  with  such  a  degree  of  nervous  irritability,  that  a  current  of  air
caused  an  attack  of  spasms  and  convulsions,'". — Painful  expectoration,"^
— Respiration  :  Inspiration  normal ;  at  times  sighing,"*. — Frequent  in-
voluntary sighing,^°\ — '^Shortness  of  breath,''^. — Short  respiration,"^ —
[1690.]  Very  short  breathing,*. — Respiration  short,  irregular,"*. — Short
and  frequent  respiration,^"^. — *  Respiration  short,  accelerated,  moaning^'^^^'.
— ^Respiration  short,  anxious,'-''^. — Short  respiration,  especially  when  walk-
ing,".— *  Directly  after  coughing,  the  breathing  becomes  short,  as  if  the  chest
were  contracted,'^.—  Frequeiit  oppressive  shortness  of  breath  in  every
position  of  the  body,  causing  anxiety,'. — Respiration  accelerated,'^*'  '"l —
Respiration  rapid  and  short,^'*.  —  [1700.]  Respiration  slow,"". — Respira-
tion free,  slow,'".  —  Respiration  very  slow  and  imperfect,'". — Respiration
heavy,"'.  —  He  breathes  heavily,™"'',  etc. — Respiration  heavy,  and  dis-
turbed by  frequent  sighing,'*''. — He  breathes  heavily,  while  suffering  the
pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  chest  were  oppressed,'. — Respiration  op-
pressed,''"'' '"". — Respiration  very  much  oppressed'^* '™. — *  Oppressed  respira-
tion, freguenily  returning,''^. — [1710.]  ^Breathing  greatly  oppressed ;  obliged
to  get  up  and  go  to  the  window  for  air^. — *Oppression ;  want  of  breath ;
a  nocturnal  asthma  makes  him  spring  up  at  midnight,"'. — Breathing  diffi-
cult, and  often  interrupted  by  sighs,'*. — *Unusual  anxiety ;  gasping  for
air,™'. — Breathing  difficult,^^  "°,  etc. — Breathing  very  difficult,"'. — Labored
breathing,™'. — *I)ifficult  breathing,  with  great  anguish,".  —  Sleep,  with

t  See  8.  138. J  "  Observed  after  antidote." g  "  Observed  after  antidote."


526  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

difficult  respiration,". — (Difficult  breathing) ,*^.f — [1720.]  Respiration  is
painful,  from  the  tender  state  of  the  abdomen,"'.— Suffi)cative  feeling  when
going  upstairs,'^ — '* Air-passages  seem  constricted;  he  could  not  fully  breathe,
and  thought  he  should  suffocate,"". — *  When  walldng  in  the  open  air  he  ex-
periences a  suffocative  sensation,  which  obliges  him  to  cough^. — He  is  threat-
ened with  suffocation  ;  puts  out  his  tongue,^". — She  imagines  she  will  suffo-
cate every  moment,  being  so  weak  that  she  is  not  able  to  take  a  deep
breath,'". — *He  immediately  loses  his  breath  in  the  evening  upon  getting  into
bed  and  laying  himself  down  ever  so  carefully;  the  trachea  becomes  constricted,
and  a  fine  wheezing  is  heard  in  it  resembling  the  sound  of  a  fine  string,'^. —
Dyspnoea  great,'". — Great  dyspnoea,  with  pain  in  the  right  chest  and  shoul-
der,'**.— Violent  dyspnoea,". — [1730.]  Extreme  dyspnoea,"'. — The  distress
of  breathing  continually  increases,"'^ — Continually  increased  distress  of
breathing,  ending  in  asphyxia,'°^ — Spasmodic  asthma,'"^ ''^. — *  Asthma;  the
breathing  becomes  more  and  more  weak  and  short,  until,  filially,  she  is  only
able  to  breathe,  and  talk  very  low,  by  inclining  the  chest  forward,^". — Asth-
matic attack  every  half  an  hour,  lasting  five  to  ten  minutes,"'. — Long-lasting
dyspnoea,'*. — Dyspnoea  when  vexed,'.- — Asthma  when  fatigued,  as  from  an-
guish,'.— Asthmatic  attacks  during  sleep."'.  «

Chest. — Chest  in  General  :  [1740.]  Yellow  spots  on  the  chest,^  ™. —
Upper  part  of  chest  yellow,™. — Anterior  part  of  chest  and  neck  livid,"'. — •
Wheezing  in  chest,". — Inflammation  of  the  lungs,'"^. — On  auscultation,  the
posterior  lobes  of  both  lungs  were  found  to  be  affected  with  pneumonia,  and
the  lower  lobes  on  both  sides  were  partially  consolidated,"^ — Violent
catarrh  and  oppression  of  the  chest  with  phlegm,"". — *  Very  tenacious
mucus  in  the  chest,  difficult  to  loosen,^. — Pains  in  the  chest,^. — Pains  inter-
nally, in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  (after  five  hours),'. — [1750.]  Much
pain  in  the  chest,*". — Pain  in  lower  chest  on  full  inspiration,'". — *  Chilliness
in  the  interior  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  also  after  supper,'. — (^Burning  in
the  chest),'^^. — *Great  heat  in  the  chest,  extending  below  the  diaphragm,".
— Heat  and  excruciating  pain  in  chest,'"'. — Tightness  in  the  chest,"". —
Tightness  of  chest,  as  if  bound  by  a  hoop,". — Great  tightness  on  the  chest;
he  felt  as  if  he  must  burst,"*. — (Tightness  of  the  chest,  threatening  suffoca-
tion, for  one  hour),"'.| — [1760.]  Tensive  pain  in  the  chest,  especially  when
sitting,'. — As  soon  as  he  walked  a  little,  he  immediately  experienced  tight-
ness of  the  chest,"". — Continued  contraction  of  the  chest,  and  short  and
hacking  cough,*. — Constriction  of  the  chest,*'. — *  Constriction  of  the  chest
with  great  anxiety  and  restlessness,  evenings,^. — Constriction  of  the  chest,  so
that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  speak  one  word,  and  came  near  fainting
(third  day),*. — Some  constriction  and  heaviness  in  chest,™. — Cramp  in  the
chest,"". — Compressive  sensation  in  the  chest  when  eating,'. — Oppression  of
the  chest,"".§ — Sense  of  oppression,'". — [1770.]  Oppression  of  the  cAesi,"".
— In  the  evening,  violent  oppression  of  the  chest,'"*. — Oppression  of  the
chest  and  sensation  of  anxiety,""  "". —  (Oppression  of  the  chest,  difficult
breathing),"". — *0ppression  of  the  chest  when  walking  fast;  coughing  on
going  upstairs^. — Wakes  out  of  sleep  at  night,  with  oppression  of  chest,  or
spasm  in  chest,  and  great  anxiety,"". — *Much  lassitude  and  oppression  of
breathing  when  walking,*''. — (Pressure  on  the  chest),"'. — Increased  stitches
under  the  ribs,  and  increased  headache,  as  if  heat  were  in  it,  during  cough,'.
—In  the  chest  a  stitching  tearing,  tensive  pressing  and  burning  pain,'^. —
[1780.]  Dull  stitches  in  the  chest  when  stooping,'. — Feeling  of  soreness  and

t  "  Local  effect."  {  "  Local  effect. "  J  "  Anxietates  pectoris."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  527

rawness  in  the  chest,'. — Creeping  in  the  chest,'. — Sides,  Sternum,  etc.  :
Stitching  in  the  side  under  the  short  ribs ;  he  cannot  lie  on  that  side,'. —
Stitching  when  coughing,  first  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  and  afterwards  (in
two  days)  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,'. — Burning  in  the  right  chest,  ex-
tending to  the  groin,  where  it  is  a  pressure,*. — Sticking-tearing  pain  in  the
region  of  the  upper  right  rib,'. — Stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right
chest,  especially  when  breathing ;  the  stitches  are  a  sort  of  pressure
terminating  in  a  stitch  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Stitching  in  the
left  chest,  only  during  an  inspiration,  which  was  impeded  by  the  stitching,'.
— Stitches  in  the  left  chest,  during  a  deep  inspiration,  obliging  him  to  cough,^.
— [1790,]  Severe  pain  at  the  junction  of  the  upper  and  lower  sternal
regions,^'". — (Long-continued  burning  in  the  region  of  the  sternum),**. —

*  Oppression  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  makes  respiration  difficult  (for  eight
days),'. — *Stitching  pain  in  the  sternum,  from  below  upwards,  when  cough-
ing,'.— Very  great  prseeordial  anxiety,'". — Great  oppression  in  the  prae-
cordial  region,"^

Heart  atld  Pulse. — Heart  :  Inflammation  of  heart,  and  its  results,
dilatation  and  oedema  of  feet,^". — The  sounds  of  the  heart,  but  especially
the  "  choc,"  rather  violent ;  not  agreeing  with  the  small  pulse,'". — Heart
slow,  pulse  weak.'™. — Great  irregularity  of  the  heart  and  breathing,''^'. —
[1800.]  Irritable  heart,"'.— *The  heart-beats  are  irritable,".— Feeble
and  hurried  action  of  heart,™. — Heart  and  pulse  accelerated,"^ — *Palpita-
tion  of  the  heart,"  "\  etc. — Violent  palpitation,''. — Complaint  of  violent
palpitation  of  the  heart,'"'. — Violent,  tumultuous  palpitation  of  the  heart,".
— Very  violent  and  even  painful  palpitation  of  the  heart,"". — ^Excessive,
troublesome  palpitation  of  the  heart,^. — [1810.]  *  Violent  palpitation  at  night,'.
— *Strong,  visible,  and  audible  palpitations,  chiefly  at  night,^^. — When  lying
on  the  back,  the  heart  beats  much  faster  and  stronger,'. — The  heart  acts
violently ;  one  hears  a  violent  blowing  sound,  with  very  full  pulse,  110  per
minute,'™. — *  Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  with  small  irregular  pulse,^^^. — '
Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxiety,'". — *Irregular  palpitation  of  the
heart,  but  so  violent  at  night,  that  he  imagines  he  hears  it ;  accompanied
with  anguish,*. — Violent  palpitation,  visible  in  the  carotids  ;  causes  beads
of  sweat  on  the  face,'"*. — *Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  tremulous  weak-
ness after  stool ;  he  has  to  lie  down,'. — The  beat  of  the  heart  entirely  dis-
appeared,'"".— [1820.]  Cramp  in  the  heart,^''  "'*. — Sensation  as  if  the  heart
were  pressed  down,". — Pulse:  Irritated  pulse,'"'. — Extremely  feverish
pulse,". — Increased  pulse,"^. — Accelerated  pulse,'^'^  ^'^,  etc. — Pulse  extremely
rapid,*'.  —  Quick,  rather  hard  pulse,". — Pulse  hard  and  frequent,'**. —

*  Quick,  small  pulse,*'". — [1830.]  Pulse  frequent  and  small,™  "*,  etc. —
*Pulse  rapid  and  weak,^'^. — Quick,  weak  pulse," .f — Weak,  quick  pulse,'"*. —
*Pulse  small  and  rapid,"". — Pulse  small  and  quick,'". — -Pulse  regular,  not
small  but  frequent,'^. — Pulse  hard,  irregularly  accelerated,"". — Moderately
frequent  pulse,  somewhat  tense  and  small,*'. — Pulse  frequent,  full,  and
quite  regular,"^  —  [1840.]  *ftuick,  weak,  and  irregular  pulse,"^.— Pulse
rapid,  weak,  spasmodic,'"'. — Small,  rapid,  weak  pulse,^". — Pulse  contracted,
frequent,  irregular,'*". — Convulsive,  small,  rapid  pulse,'**. — *Pulse  is  sinall,
very  frequent  and  irregidar ;  sometimes  wholly  imperceptible,"'^. — *P%dse
irritated  and  frequent,  not  fidl^^. — Weak,  small,  frequent  pulse,". — Small,
scarcely  perceptible,  frequent  pulse,'"  "°. — Pulse  full,  hard,  accelerated,". —
[1850.]  Pulse  restless  and  small ;  increased  after  repeated  vomiting,'"


.  13*.


t  "Not  found.


528  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

Depressed,  hard  and  rapid  pulse,'"'.  —  The  pulse  was  small,  unequal,
irregular,  very  frequent,'". — Pulse  feverish ;  at  the  most,  90  beats,"'*. —
Pulse  100,"^. — Pulse  104,  and  strong,™. — Pulse  118,  sharp,  but  easily  com-
pressed,''°'''. — Pulse  120,  feeble  and  i^regular,''^ — *Pulse  120,  weak  arid
rather  unequal,  with  occasional  indication  of  fluttering ^^^. — Pulse,  when
resting  in  bed,  90;  standing  up,  or  walking,  120. — [I860,]  Pulse  rapid,  90  to
100,  then  130  to  140,"°. — Pulse  in  the  morning  quiet ;  9  to  10  o'clock,  some-
what irritated ;  at  12  o'clock,  small,  hard,  frequent ;  from  5  o'clock  till
death,  after  midnight,  no  longer  perceptible,'".— Pulse  miserable,''*.— Pulse
full,  not  rapid,"^ — Pulse  hardish,  and  slow,'™. — Pulse  140,  irregular.'^l  —
(Slow  pulse,  sometimes  only  38  beats),™.! — Pulse  large,"* '". — Tense  pulse,".
—Pulse  throbbing  and  hard,"'.— [1870.]  Pulse  full  and  strong,'".— Pulse
strong,  full,  and  bounding,'". — Feeble  puhe^^^. — *Puhe  very  weak,™. —
Small  weak  puhe,^^. — Small,  oppressed  pulse,"'. — Pulse  small,  contracted,
intermitting,'*'. — Irregular  pulse,'*". — Small  and  irregular  pulse,'*'. — Pulse
intermitting,"". — [1880.]  Intermittent  small  pulse,". — Intermittent,  un-
equal, small  pulse,  finally,  complete  disappearance  of  puLse,". — Pulse
trembling,  scarcely  perceptible^^''  '**. — Pulse  small,  scarcely  perceptible,'". —
Pulse  almost  imperceptible,  small,  contracted,  irregularj''^ — Pulse  scarcely
perceptible,^^*  "*,  etc. — It  is  possible  to  feel  only  the  slightest  trembling  of  the
radial  pulse,'°l — Pulse  and  respiration  scarcely  noticeable,'". — Imper-
ceptible pulse,™^— No  pulse,™.— [1890.]  PufeeZess,"' "".—Absence  of  pulse,
with  frequent,  irritated  beating  of  the  heart,".

Neck  and  Sach. — Yellow  color  of  neck,™. — Swelling  of  the  external
neck,  no  pain,". — Swelling  of  the  thyroid  gland,  especially  on  the  right  side
of  neck,"'. — Distortion  of  the  cervical  muscles,'*. J — The  neck  is  drawn  by
spasms  to  the  left  side  and  backward,". — *  Stiff  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  bruised
or  sprained,  a  similar  pain  being  felt  over  the  hips  ;  night  and  morning,'. —
Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,'". — Stiff  neck  ;  she  cannot  move  her  head,"".
— [1900.]  In  the  evening,  stiffness  of  the  posterior  cervical  muscles,"^ —
Tensive  stiffness  in  the  neck,^. — Pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  as  far
down  as  the  pectoralis  muscle,"". — Violent  neuralgia  on  left  side  of  neck,
followed  by  lame  feeling,"". — Spasmodic  pain  on  left  side  of  neck,"". — Pain
on  pressui'e  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,"". — Pain  in  the  back,  with  uneasiness
and  anxiety,^*. — Weakness  in  back,"'. — Painsin  the  back,"". — Violent  or  dull
but  continual  pains  in  the  back,  with  accompanying  great  weakness ;  inclined
to  lie  down  without  relief,"". — [1910,]  *Stiffnessin  the  spinal  column,  beginning
in  the  region  of  the  os  coccygis^. — Severe  pain  in  the  back,"''*. — Dull  pain  in
the  back,  with  painful  transient  drawing  on  the  external  surface  of  the
extremities,'*'. — Drawing  in  the  back,  up  and  down,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the
back,  from  the  small  of  the  back  to  the  shoulders,  with  stitches  in  the  sides ;
flatulence  moving  about  in  the  abdomen  and  pressing  upward  ;  after  this
he  belches  and  is  relieved,'. — ^Drawing  from  the  sacrum  to  the  nape  of  the
neck,  causing  the  trunk  to  bend  backward,"". — Drawing  pain  in  the  back  in
the  forenoon  (after  six  days),'. — Drawing  pain  between  the  scapulae,  obliging
him  to  lie  down,^. — Pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  back  and  across  the  scapulse
(after  four  days),'. — Bruised  pain  between  the  shoulders,"'.— -[1920,]  Beat-
ing, drawing,  and  stitching  pain  in  the  back,  small  of  the  back,  and  thighs,
at  night,'. — Strongly  gurgling  movements  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of
the  back,  only  when  lying  on  the  right  side  (after  three  hours),'. — Itching
and  exhalation  of  the  back,  the  whole  night,'. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the

f  "  He  had  not  previously  counted  it."  J  "  Not  found."


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  529

two  last  dorsal  verteljrae,™. — Acute  pains  in  the  lower  part  of  the  spine
(eight  months),'*. — Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  when  taking  an
inspiration  and  sueezing,^ — *Loss  of  strength  in  the  small  of  the  back,\ —
Painful  stiffness  in  the  small  of  the  back,  the  whole  day,'. — *Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised,'-. — Violent  periodical  pains  in  small  of  back,
with  stiffness,"'. — [1930.]  Weakness  in  loins,'''°.^Complains  of  a  tensive  and
tearing  sensation  of  pressure  in  both  loins,  especially  violent  below  the
curve  of  the  left  rib,  where  it  is  also  very  sensitive  to  touch,"^

Extremities  in  General. — Objective:  Hands  and  feet  as  if
mummified,  so  that  the  skin  hung  in  many  folds  about  the  bones,  which
protruded  unnaturally,  but  were  not  at  all  enlarged,"'. — Contraction  of  the
Kmfts,'* '". — The  flexor  muscles  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities  con-
tract,'".— Drawing  together  of  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,"'^— Strong  con-
traction in  the  knees  and  elbows,'". — The  toes  and  fingers  were  continually
flexed ;  after  being  straightened  by  any  one  they  again  returned  to  the
flexed  condition,'"^. — The  contraction  of  the  fingers  and  toes  disappeared
after  a  profuse  loss  of  blood  by  vomiting,  and  from  the  anus ;  after  being
bent  straight  they  remained  in  this  position,  but  appeared  as  if  dead  ;  after
a  warm  bath  life  returned  to  the  hands  and  feet,  but  fingers  and  toes  again
remained  bent,'°\— Distortion  of  the  limbs,'^'. — [1940.]  Twitching  of  the
limbs,'"'''  ^'^ — Upper  and  lower  extremities  convulsed,^''. — Convulsions  of
the  limbs  and  knees,^l — *  Tremor  of  the  limbs,^''^\  and  others. — Tremor  of
the  extremities^'^. — Trembling  in  all  the  limbs,''*. — Trembling  in  the  extremi-
ties,'"^ "^  etc. — Trembling  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,'. — Violent
trembling  of  the  limbs,''^ — Trembling  of  the  limbs,  even  after  a  moderate
walk,*. — [1950.]  Trembling  and  very  violent  motion  of  the  limbs,'^°. — Trem-
bling and  jerking  of  the  limbs,'^*. — Trembling  of  the  limbs  after  the  vomit-
ing was  over,". — '^Violent  starlings  of  the  limbs  while  falling  asleep,'-. — Prom
time  to  time  he  stretched  the  extremities  and  remained  several  moments  in
this  condition  on  account  of  relaxation,  when  vomiting  appeared  with  re-
newed violence,'"'. — Loss  of  the  nails  of  the  hands  and  feet,'". — Subjec-
tive :  Sensation  in  all  the  extremities  diminished  (eight  weeks),"*. — Numb-
ness of  the  limbs  and  pains  across  the  shoulders,  extending  down  the  arms,^".
— Insensibility  and  falling  asleep  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  lasted
during  the  whole  illness,  and  prevents  her  holding  objects  tightly ,"^ — As
the  gastro-enteritis  got  better,  numbness  and  loss  of  power  in  his  limbs  came
on,  at  first  only  in  his  fingers  and  toes,  but  slowly  extended  to  his  knees
and  wrists,  almost  depriving  him  of  the  use  of  them,"". — [I960.]  The  mo-
bility and  strength  of  the  extremities  decreased,  so  that  the  patient  could
only  with  difiiculty  hold  anything,  and  his  gait  became  insecure  and  stum-
bling,'^^ — Almost  absolute  immobility  of  the  limbs,  especially  the  left;
sensation  was  only  diminished,  not  lost,'™. — Heaviness  in  limbs,'"'. — Lassi-
tude  of  the  Umbs,'^^ '"^ . —  Cheat  lassitude  in  the  limbs,'''*. — Lassitude  in  the
limbs  and  weakness,"^ —  Weariness  of  the  limbs'^'  '^^ — Limbs  felt  tired,'".
— *  Weariness  of  the  limbs' '",  etc. — Prostration  and  lassitude  of  the  lirabs,"^.
— [1970.]  ^Excessive  weakness  and  exhaustion  of  the  limbs,  obliging
him  to  lie  down,^'. — Weakness  and  diminished  sensibility  in  all  the  limbs,"*.
— Complete  ataxia  of  the  muscles  of  the  extremities ;  the  gait  was  as  in
an  excessive  chorea,  and  the  hands  could  hardly  be  held  up,"*. — Stiffness
of  extremities,'". — Motion  of  limbs  difficult,™. — He  can  no  longer  move
his  limbs  freely,'^*. — (Stiffness  and  immobility  of  all  the  joints),''". — Ex-
tremities as  if  paralyzed,"^ — Partial  paralysis  of  the  limbs,"*. — Paralytic
weakness  of  the  limbs,  returning  at  a  certain  hour  every  day,  like  fever
VOL.  I. — 34


530  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

and  ague,\ — [1980.]  As  if  paralyzed  in  all  his  limbs  ;  he  is  unable  to  tread
firmly,". — (Paralysis,  contraction  of  the  limbs),".— Paralysis  is  sometimes
general,  and  affects  both  the  upper  aud  lower  limbs,"'. — Paralysis  of  ex-
tremities, with  ansesthesia  aud  most  violent  pains,"^ — The  paralysis  of  the
extremities  related  as  well  to  the  motor  as  to  the  sensitive  nerves,  neverthe-
less the  parts  were  extremely  sensitive  to  cold,'^'. — Weariness  and  pain  of
the  joints  in  the  forenoon,  more  when  sitting  than  when  walking,\ — Weak-
ness and  crawling  sensation  in  limbs,  especially  from  knees  to  toes,".-  -Un-
easiness in  all  the  limbs  before  retiring,  going  off  when  lying  down,'. — In-
expressibly painful  and  disagreeable  feeling  of  sickness  in  all  the  Iirabs,\
— Pain  in  limbs ;  dreads  to  move  them,^'^ — [1990.]  Excessive  pains  in  the
limbs,*'. — Wandering  pains  in  the  limbs,"'. — Pain  and  stiffness  in  his
limbs,™. — Arthritic  pains  in  the  limbs,  without  inflammation,'. — *  Coldness
of  the  extremities, ^^^ '™,  etc. — Extremities  cold  and  pulseless,™. — [Stiffness
of  all  the  joints ;  he  was  not  able  to  stretch  himself  because  of  a  tension
in  the  whole  body  ;  the  knees  were  so  stiff  and  cold  that  he  tied  handker-
chiefs around  them,  otherwise  they  are  painful  and  disturb  his  sleep.  H.],^
— Cramp  in  the  limbs,". — Complained  of  cramps  in  the  upper  and  lower
extremities,"^ — Cramps  in  the  muscles  of  the  extremities,"". — [2000.]  All
the  limbs  ache,'. — All  the  limbs  ache,  whether  he  walks,  sits,  or  lies,'. —
Painful  drawings  in  limbs,™. — Tearing  in  limbs,*'. — Tearing  pains  in  the
long  bones,'. — Muscles  of  the  extremities  sensitive,'^. — Creeping  in  the
limbs,  as  if'  gone  to  sleep,'. — Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  feet  and  hands,
with  fearful  pains  by  day  and  night,  which  for  three  months  drove  all  sleep
from  her,'°l — Arms  and  legs  quite  strong  and  mobile ;  hands  and  feet,  on
the  contrary,  extremely  wasted,  so  that,  without  organic  changes,  all  the
articular  processes  protruded  unnaturally,  and,  in  regard  to  sensation  and
mobility,  so  paralyzed  that  nothing  could  be  held  securely ;  the  feet  would
not  permit  his  rising ;  on  stepping  lie  always  planted  down  the  flat  sole,
aud  on  walking  his  feet  were  dragged  along  like  weights,'". — Frequent  fall-
ing asleep  and  insensibility  of  the  right  arm  and  foot,'^. — Numbness  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  also  in  the  feet,  where  cutting  pains  were  some-
times felt,"^ — [2010.]  Diminished  sensation,  at  first  iu  the  tips  of  the  fin-
gers, whence  it  spread  over  the  hands  and  arms ;  then  in  the  toes,  whence
it  spread  over  the  feet  and  legs,'"". — Loss  of  sensation  in  hands  and  feet,'"*.
— -Complete  insensibility  of  the  hands  and  feet,'^".— Sensation  in  soles  en-
tirely lost,  and  greatly  diminished  in  the  hands,™. — Complete  ansesthesia
and  paralysis  of  the  hands  and  feet,  equally  in  the  extensors  and  flexors,"".
— Loss  of  sensation  in  hands  and  feet,  so  that  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and
toes  could  be  pricked  without  the  slightest  feeling  (chronic  poisoning),'". —
His  hands  and  feet  seem  to  have  lost  their  power,  and  they  feel  trembling
early  in  the  morning,'. — Weakness  of  the  wrists  aud  ankles,  they  are  stiff
and  sometimes  painful,'". — Immobility  of  the  fingers  and  toes,'"". — He  lost
the  use  of  his  hands  and  feet,  with  which  violent  neuralgic  pains  appeared
in  the  extremities,  which  lasted  for  over  two  and  a  half  years,  and  did  not
leave  even  after  the  strongest  doses  of  morphia ;  the  paralysis  lasted  nearly
three  years,'"". — [2020.]  Occasional  pains  in  the  joints,  as  the  shoulder  and
knee,"". — Severe  pain  in  legs  and  arms,  very  excruciating  and  like  the  gnaw-
ing of  rats,  or  the  boring  of  a  gimlet  into  the  bones,'"'. — Neuralgic  pains
in  arms  aud  legs,™. — Neuralgic  pains  in  the  forearm  and  legs  from  the  hips
downward  ;  they  did  not  seem  to  follow  the  main  nerve-trunks  ;  increased
gradually,  reached  their  height,  then  gradually  decreased,  and  were  never
lancinating ;  cold  air  or  cold  water  excited  them  immediately ;  they  were


AESENICUM  ALBUM.  531,

most  violent  between  9 J  p.m.  and  8  a.m.,"'.— Cramps  in  the  legs  and  arms
very  severe,'".— Drawing  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  knees,  feet,  and  hands,'.
— Drav/ing  pain,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  in  the  middle  finger  and  foot,'. —
*  Violent  tearing  in  the  arms  and  lower  limbs ;  he  cannot  rest  upon  the  affected
side;  the  pain  is  least  felt  when  moving  the  affected  part  to  andfro,^. — Stitch-
ing pains,  as  of  needles,  in  the  hands  and  feet,'™. — Sudden  tearing  jerking
or  stitching,  changing  to  a  burning,  in  the  thumb  or  big  toe,  in  the  morn-
ing, in  bed,'. — [2030.]  Trembling  and  prickling  sensation  in  the  hands  and
feet,"^ — Toward  evening,  |)ut  not  during  the  day,  crawling  in  the  fingers
and  toes,'°°. — Occasional  creeping  sensations  in  the  hands  and  feet,^'l

JJppei^  Extremities. — Upper  extremities  weak  f  the  flexors  of  the
fingers  retracted  (eight  weeks),"'. — ^Heaviness  and  formication,  which  soon
attacked  the  upper  extremities,^"*. — Unbearable  pain  in  the  left  shoulder,'^'.
— Convulsive  sensation  in  the  left  shoulder,™. — Drawing  pains  in  shoul-
ders,™.— [Glandular  swelling  of  the  axilla,  H.],^ — Tearing  sticking  in  the
right  axilla. — [2040.]  Soreness  in  the  axilla,  under  the  arms,'''. — Painful
swelling  of  the  right  arm  and  hand,'™. — The  right  arm  became  intensely
tumefied  from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist  and  was  very  painful,'^^. — Weakness
of  arms,"". — The  arms  were  somewhat  weak,"'^. — Entire  inability  to  move
the  left  arm,"". — The  right  arm  goes  to  sleep  when  he  lies'  upon  the  right
side,'. — Pain  in  the  arm  of  that  side  upon  which  one  rests,  at  night,^. — The
left  arm  feels  colder  than  the  right,"". — Violent  neuralgia  in  left  arm,  fol-
lowed by  lame  feeling,"". — [2050.]  Peculiar  neuralgic  pains  in  the  left  arm,
suddenly,  after  meals,^^. — *  Drawing,  jerking  and  tearing  from  the  tips  of  the
fingers  into  the  shoulder,^. — Tearing  in  the  arm,  especially  of  the  elbow  and
wrist,  at  night,  in  bed,'. — Pains  in  the  elbow  and  fingers,'". — Violent  rheu-
matic pains  in  right  elbow,"'^ — In  the  wrists  there  was  very  little  muscular
power ;  the  fingers  could  neither  grasp  nor  hold  anything  smaller  than  the
crutches,  which  they  could  hold  a  little,  though  there  was  no  sensation  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  even  when  injured,"". — Drawing  pain  in  both  styloid
processes  of  the  wrist,  every  evening,'. — *  Hands  and  lower  half  of  forearm
dark  and  livid,  a,a  in  malignant  cholera,'"^ — (Painful  swelling  of  the  hands),".
— The  hands  never  recovered  their  former  fulness  and  strength,  and  the
so-called  "  nsevus  "  (mother's  mark)  almost  totally  disappeared  (after  ten
years),'"^— [2060.]  Trembling  of  hands,™  "'%  etc.— The  hands  are  stiff  and
insensible  for  a  long  time,". — The  hand  can  be  extended,  but  not  the  fin-
gers,"".— Hands  could  hold  nothing  securely,"". — Hands  and  arms  arepower-
less,"^ — Lameness  of  the  hand  ;  it  commenced  with  heaviness,  but  was  not
combined  with  wasting,'". — Cold  hands,". — The  hands  icy  cold,'^*. — Cramp
in  the  hand,  when  moving  it,'. — Drawing  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bones,
in  the  morning,'. — [2070.]  Tearing  sticking  in  the  bones  of  the  hand,  and
the  little  finger,'. — Palms  very  sensitive,  yet  he  does  not  know  whether  he
has  taken  hold  of  an  object, ™^ — Violent  crawling  in  the  hands  at  night,'. —
Fine  tickling  in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  obliging  one  to  rub,'. — [Hard
swelling  of  the  fingers,  with  pain  of  the  bones  of  the  fingers,  H.],*. — Ungual
phalanges  wasted  and  the  nails  very  hard,  brittle,  clawlike,"". — Trembling
ofthe  fingers  and  occasional  creeping  sensations  in  the  hands  and  feet,^". —
He  moves  his  fingers  and  hands  during  sleep,'. — Tonic  spasm  of  fingers,"". —
Fingers  half  flexed,"". — [2080.]  Flexors  overpower  extensors,  and  constant
flexion  of  fingers,"*'. — The  extensors  of  the  fingers  much  more  powerless
than  the  flexors,  so  that  the  fingers  were  always  bent  somewhat,"". — The
flexors  of  the  four  fingers  of  each  hand  are  so  contracted  that  the  two  last  pha-
langes are  bent  on  the  first,  and  the  tips  of  the  fingers  touch  the  palms


532  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

(eight  months),'*'. — One  can  bend  the  fingers,  but  not  extend  them,'"". —
Rigidity  of  the  fingers,  as  if  they  were  stifi",'. — He  could  not  move  the
fingers,"'. — Sensation  extremely  slight  in  the  fingers,  blunted  as  far  as  the
wrists,  above  them  norraal,'°^ — Loss  of  sensation  in  the  fingers,  as  if  every-
thing stagnated,'". — After  the  lapse  of  years,  numbness  of  the  fingers,"^. —
The  fiuger-joints  are  painful  when  moved,'. — [2090.]  Painful  cramp  in  the
lowest  joints  of  all  the  fingers,^. — Painful  cramp  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,,
from  morning  till  noon  (after  five  days),'. — Cramp  in  the  fingers,  especially
at  night,  in  bed,'. — Cramp  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  when  attempt-
ing to  stretch  them,'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  fingers,'. — Tickling
itching  of  the  rigEt  middle  finger,'. — Badly-colored  nails,^*. — The  nails
changed  color  nearly  every  month ;  at  first  they  became  fiery  red,  then  black,
as  it  suffused  with  blood,  after  which  they  made  room  for  new  nails,  which
were  thin  and  transparent,'"^.

Lower  JEaetremities. — In  General:  The  lower  extremities  are
somewhat  ojdematous,*"^ — Excessively  painful  swelling  of  the  lower  limbs,t.
— [2100.]  The  lower  limbs  become  much  wasted,"'. — Lower  extremities
retracted  to  the  abdomen,'"". — Cramps  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities, especially  of  the  plantaris  of  the  right  foot,'^". — Painful  cramps
in  the  lower  extretnities,"'". — Violent  twitchings  of  the  lower  extremities,™. —
Trembling  in  lower  extremities,^'^ — Gait  unsteady,*'^. — Tottering  gait,'"". —
Gait  tottering,  stumbling,  as  if  stitf,  with  slipping  outward  of  the  feet,™. —
Gait  heavy,  "-slumpy;"  diflicult  to  raise  himself  after  eating  (chronic
poisoning),'". — [2110.]  Unsteadiness  and  vertigo  in  walking,  across  an  open
place™. — Weakness  in  lower  extremities,^". — *Sensation  as  if  the  lower
limbs  would  break  down  in  going  upstairs,. — Cannot  ascend  a  single  step,
must  be  carried,"". — Can  only  walk  a  few  minutes  very  slowly,"'. — The
lower  limbs  could  scarcely  be  rotated,"^. — Stiffness  of  the  lower  extremi-
ties,"".— Stifihess  and  immobility  of  the  limbs,  with  violent  tearing  pains,*.
— Lower  extremities  paralyzed,"'. — Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs  (",  "  not
found  "), ",  etc. — [2120.]  Almost  complete  paralysis  of  lower  extremities,'"'.
— Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  with  loss  of  sensation,'". — Going  to  sleep  in
lower  extremities,"". — Wooden  feeling  in  lower  extremities,"". — *Uneasi-
ness  in  the  lower  limbs,  he  cannot  lie  still  in  the  night,  and  had  to  change
the  position  of  his  feet  all  the  time  or  to  walk  about,  to  get  relief,'. —
*Iutolerable  pains  in  the  lower  limbs,*. — Violent  pains  in  the  lower  limbs,
espscially  the  joints,". — *  Coldness  of  the  lower  limbs,  especially  the  knees  and
feet,  covered  with  cold  sweat ;  they  could  not  get  warm,'. — Lower  extremi-
ties continued  cold  (twelve  hours),"'^ — Drawing  pains  in  lower  extremi-
ties,"".— [2130.]  ^Tearing  sticking,  apparently  in  the  periosteum,  along  the
whole  lower  limb,  down  to  the  tip  of  the  big  toe,^. — Tearing  in  the  lower
limbs,"'. — *  Tearing  in  the  lower  limb,  from  top  to  bottom;  he  was  unable  to
tread,  sit,  or  lie  down,  edher  in  bed,  or  on  the  sofa ;  had  to  shake  the  limb  to
and  fro  day  and  night,  or  else  to  limp  about,  and  had  no  rest ;  worse  at  night,i.
— Tearing  in  the  lower  limbs,  especially  in  the  knee  and  tarsal  joints,  only
(luring  motion,'. — Drawing  tearing  in  the  lower  limbs,  from  the  anterior
sarl'ace  of  the  thigh,  as  far  as  the  knee  and  tarsal  joint,  when  walking,'. —
Painful  shocks  in  the  lower  limbs,"'^. — Formication  in  lower  extremities,"".
— Hip,  Thigh;  and  Knee  :  *Sciatica,°^. — *  Violent  drawing  tearing  pain
in  the  hips  and  left  foot,  in  the  morning,  after  a  sleepless  night  (third  day),'. —
With  the  headache,  decided  stiffness  in  the  thighs,  as  after  a  long  walk,"l^
[2140,]  On  rising  in  the  morning,  attack  of  pain  in  the  anterior  and
inner  portion  of  the  thighs  (after  four  days),"". — Painful,  cramplike  con-


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  533

traction  of  bundles  of  muscles  of  the  thighs  and  calves,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed,  the  toes  being  drawn  backwards,  after  which  he  became  very
weak,'. — Paroxysmal  cramp-pain  of  single  parts  of  muscles  of  the  thighs
and  legs ;  when  feeling  the  parts,  there  was  a  jerking,  as  of  something
alive,'. — Soreness  between  the  thighs,  with  itching,**. — Itching  at  the  inner
surface  of  the  thighs,  which  next  day  increases  and  becomes  seated  on  the
left  side  of  the  scrotum,  with  unusual  redness  of  that  side  only,  and  of  the
posterior  portion  of  the  penis,  and  great  heat,'". — Corrosive  itching  of  the
thighs  causes  scratching  (after  thirteen  hours),', — Sudden  starting  of  the
knee,  directly  after  lyiug  down;  it  comes  on  after  dreaming  that  he  is  going
to  knock  his  foot  against  a  stone,'. — The  knees  crack  when  walking,"'. —
Stiffness,  especially  of  the  knees  and  feet,  alternating  with  tearing  pains,''. —
Weakness  of  the  knees;  he  had  great  trouble  in  sitting  down,'. — [2150.]
Excessive  weakness  in  the  knees,  even  when  taking  a  short  walk,'. — The
right  knee  is  unable  to  support  the  body,  it  breaks  down,', — Paralysis  of
both  kuees,™. — Tension  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too
jshort,  when  sitting  or  standing,  not  when  walking,'. — Sensation  around  the
knees  as  if  they  were  bandaged  very  tightly,^', — Stitching  pain  in  the
knee,'°.f — Pain  as  if  bruised  on  the  side  of  the  knee,  only  when  touched,
and  when  sitting,  not  when  walking;  sensation  as  if  the  flesh  were  de-
tached,'.— Pain  in  the  left  knee,  as  if  bruised  and  sprained,  especially  when
rising  from  a  seat,'. — Leg  and  Ankle  :  Sweat  on  the  legs,  morning  (first
night),'. — Dwindling  of  the  legs,", — [2160.]  Swelling  of  the  legs  to  above
the  calves,  preceded  by  tearing  in  the  calves,  which  went  off  by  the  appli-
cation of  warm  cloths,'. — Swelling  of  legs  and  feet,  but  no  preternatural
heat,"". — Twitchings  in  legs,"'. — Twitchings  in  the  legs  with  painful  draw-
ing from  the  back,"**. — Jerking  in  the  legs,  in  the  afternoon,  when  sitting,'. —
Convulsive  drawing  together  of  the  legs ;  they  bend  up  under  the  thigh,'*'. —
Cramp  of  legs,™'. — *Cramps  in  the  legs  (secondary  effect,  after  some
months),^'^ — Cramps  in  the  legs  and  feet,"". — The  legs  are  so  heavy  that
he  is  scarcely  able  to  lift  them,'. — [2170.]  Heaviness,  weariness,  and  draw-
ing in  the  legs,  with  spontaneous  bending,  unsteadiness,  and  weakness  of
the  knees,  especially  in  the  morning,  early,'. — Prom  the  knees  to  the  ankle
especial  heaviness  and  weariness,'™. — Lassitude  and  heaviness  in  the  legs,"^.
— Stiffness  in  legs,"". — When  he  turns  on  the  left  side,  he  can  easily  move
the  whole  right  leg,  inward  or  outward  ;  the  foot  then  remains  turned  in,
that  is,  the  toes  still  point  toward  the  left  leg ;  but  in  the  left  leg  these
motions  are  impossible ;  the  voluntary  extension  of  the  foot  is  impossible
on  both  sides,'*".— (Paralytic  condition  of  the  legs  ;  he  is  scarcely  able  to
walk),™. — Benumbed  sensation  from  the  toes  as  far  as  the  knee-joints,'*". —
Very  violent  pains  in  the  legs,  especially  in  the  joints,'^*. — At  times,  pains
extend  along  the  crural  nerve,  as  far  as  the  heel  or  toes,"". — The  legs  are
painful  when  stretched,"". — [2180.]  Chilliness  of  the  legs,  in  the  evening,
from  the  calves  down  to  the  feet,'. — Cramp-pain  in  the  leg,  early  in  the
morning,  terminating  in  a  humming  or  buzzing,'. — *Drawing  pain  in  the
legs  when  resting  upon  the  floor,  perpendicularly,  while  sitting,^. — Drawing,
tearing,  and  jerking  in  the  legs,  from  the  ankles  to  the  knees,'. — Feeling  as
if  a  heavy  weight  were  hanging  from  the  legs,"". — Tearing  sticking  in  the
lower  and  inner  part  of  the  leg,  at  a  small  place,'. — *  Tearing  in  the  legs
during  the  shuddering,^. — Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  leg,  from  the  bend
of  the  knee  to  the  heel,  as  if  sprained,'. — Boring  pain  in  the  right  tibia,'. —

■)■  ' '  After  antidote.


■534  ARSENICUM  ALBUM-

Sharp,  tearing  drawing  in  the  tibia,^ — [2190.]  Legs  painful  to  touch,".^-
[Jerking  pains  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  part  of  the  leg],*. — Single,  vio-
lent tearing  in  the  tibia,  causing  one  to  cry  out,'. — Spasmodic  contraction
in  the  calves,"*.^ — The  calf  is  hard  and  as  if  pressed  flat,  with,  intolerable
pain,  resembling  a  cramp-pain,  causing  her  to  cry  out  for  about  an  hour
and  a  half;  the  whole  leg  became  cold,  insensible,  and  stiff,  so  that  she  was
unable  to  move  it ;  there  remained  a  tension  in  the  calf,  and  a  sort  of
paralysis  in  the  leg  behind  (after  fifty  hours),^.—*  Cramps  in  the  calves,^^^'^,
etc. — Severe  cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,"'. — Cramp  in  the  calf,  when
walking  (after  two  hours  >,'. — Cramp  in  the  calves,  especially  in  the  night,
in  bed,'. — Aching  pain  in  the  calves,'. — Tearing  pain  in  the  right  calf,
when  sitting  (after  eleven  hours),'. — [2200.]  Swelling  of  the  ankle  without
redness,  with  tearing  pains,  which  can  be  relieved  by  the  application  of
warmth,'. — StifFuess  in  the  ankle  and  knee-joints,  with  difficulty  in  walk-
ing,^".— Painfulness  of  the  ankles  when  touched,*. — Tearing  in  the  ankles,'.
—Tearing  around  the  ankles  and  in  the  dorsum  of  the  feet,  when  lying
down,  with  nausea,'. — Feet  and  Toes:  *  Swelling  of  the  feet  ('")," — Feet
swelled  easily  (one  week),'". — Shining,  hot  swelling  of  the  feet,  extending
above  the  ankles,  with  round  red  spots,  causing  a  burning  pain  (after  third
day),'. — Itching  swelling  of  the  feet,'. — (Edematous  feet  (after  six  weeks),"*.
— [2210.]  *  CEdema  of  the  feet  and  exhaustion  Q^). — Swelling  of  the  feet,
which  long  afterwards  remain  weak  and  heavy ,"^. — Very  great  oedema  of
the  feet,  which  lasted  many  weeks,'". — Hard,  red-blue,  green-yellow  and
very  painful  swelling  of  both  feet  (after  twenty-eight  days),'. — Trembling
in  feet,". — Cramp  of  the  feet,'*°. —  Weakness  of  the  feet™. — Weakness  of  the
feet,  lasting  three  weeks,'^'. — Weakness  of  the  feet,  on  great  exertion,'^^  —
When  walking,  he  dragged  the  feet  loosely ;  when  lying,  they  lie  relaxed
and  fallen  down,"". — [2220.]  Feet  would  not  support  him,  but  gave  way
beneath  him,^". — In  eight  weeks  she  could  only  move  the  feet  when  lying,
but  could  not  walk,'", — Paralysis  of  the  feet,^°.f — Total  paralysis  of  the
feet,"°. — Paralysis  of  the  feet,  preceded  by  vomiting,". — Complete  paralysis
of  feet,  hands,  and  arms,'"'. — Numbness,  stiffness,  and  insensibility  of  the
feet,  with  occasional  swelling  and  great  pains,". — Numb  pains  in  the  right
foot ;  when  sitting,  she  is  unable  to  raise  it  except  with  the  hand,^ — Feet
feel  as  if  furred,™". — Fuzzy  feeling,  going  to  sleep  and  coldness  of  the  feet,
extending  a  hand's  breadth  above  the  ankle,'".— [2230.]  Sensation  dimin-
ished in  the  feet  and  legs,^". — Loss  of  sensation  in  the  feet ;  on  attempting
to  walk,  she  could  not  feel  the  ground,^'^ — Cold  feet,  with  contracted
pulse,'^ — Continual  cold  feet  when  sitting  still ;  he  is  scarcely  able  to  warm
them  in  bed,'. — Pains  in  the  feet,'*. — Pains  in  the  feet,  which  decreased
from  year  to  year,  but  (after  ten  years)  have  not  yet  quite  disappeared,
and  especially  show  themselves  on  the  appearance  of  the  menses,'"". — Pain
in  the  foot,  as  if  sprained,  when  she  makes  a  misstep,  or  does  not  place  the
foot  in  a  natural  position,^. — Cramps  in  feet,^". — Constant  cramps  in  the
feet,''''*. — Drawing  in  the  foot,  so  that  he  cannot  hold  it  still ;  he  cannot
step  rapidly,  but  only  cautiously,'. — [2240.]  Tearing  and  stitching  in  the
metatarsal  articulations  of  both  feet,  with  stitches  in  the  joints  when  tread-
ing or  walking,  as  if  the  feet  were  sprained  ;  the  ankles  feel  sore  and  pain-
ful when  touched,'. — Stitching  pains  in  the  outer  border  of  the  foot,'. — In-
tolerable itching  of  the  feet  and  thighs,^*^^^''. — ^The  pains  in  the  feet  become
worse  by  motion,". — Pains  in  the  joints  of  the  foot,  on  the  top  of  the  instep,

f  "Cited  from  Cardanus;"  same  as  S.  2224.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  535

as  if  sprained,  when  stepping/. — When  walking,  steps  flat  with  whole
sole,''''. — Numb  feeling  in  the  sole,"®. — Soles  feel  as  if  made  of  wood  and
do  not  feel  the  ground,'^"". — Soles  of  feet  painful  on  stepping,". — Feeling  of
coldness  in  the  soles,'. — [2250.]  Violent  burning  in  soles  of  feet.'l — Stitches
in  the  soles  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Tearing  in  the  heels,l — In  the  morn-
ing, when  waking,  the  heels  are  painful,  as  if  th^  had  been  lying  on  a
hard  place,'. — Stitches  in  the  bottom  of  the  left  heel,  when  treading,  ex-
tending to  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thigh,'. — Toes  drawn  downward,™. —
The  flexors  of  the  toes  so  contracted  that  the  tips  of  the  toes  touch  the  soles
of  the  feet ;  walking  very  difficult ;  standing  upright  causes  pain  (eight
raonths),"*". — The  toes  are  constantly  flexed  ;  they  can  be  extended  a  little
by  great  exertion  of  the  will,  but  with  the  aid  of  the  hand  very  easily  ;  her
gait,  on  account  of  this  loss  of  power,  is  heavy  and  stamping,'"'. — [All  her
toes  became  stiff,  so  that  she  could  not  tread,  H.],°. — Loss  of  power  of  the
toes;  walking  was  accomplished  with  the  whole  sole  of  the  foot,  by  which
her  gait  became  stamping,'"'. — [2260.]  The  extensors  as  well  as  the  flexors
of  the  toes  are  paralyzed,''". — Titillating  creeping  itching  of  the  right  big
toe,  as  is  felt  in  a  healing  wound,  causes  rubbing  (after  one  and  a  half
hours),'. — In  the  night,  when  lying  in  bed,  violent  prickling  tearing  in  the
corn,'.

Generalities.— Obj-ectiye  :  General  health  poor,^''. — At  first  glance,
one  would  have  thought  a  case  of  typhoid  fever  was  before  him.  Constant
sleepiness,  numbness,  stupid  appearance,  ringing  in  the  ears,  no  pains,  red-
ness of  the  cheeks,  slight  ophthalmia,  dorsal  decubitus,  paralysis  of  the
limbs  and  trunk,  great  emaciation,  moist  skin,  violent  beating  of  the  heart,
valves  of  the  heart  normal,  no  morbid  sound,  lungs  free.  .  Pute  95  to  100 ;
tongue  clean,  not  dry ;  abdomen  not  sensitive  to  pressure*,  but  drawn  in;
hollow  gurgling  in  the  abdomen  ;  no  diarrhoea,  and  involuntary  urination,'"".
— *Cholera,"''.f — The  incessant  vomiting,  the  diarrhoea,  the  cramps  in  the
calves,  the  livid  appearance,  and  especially  the  liquids  evacuated,  showing
no  signs  of  blood,  all  defined  the  attack  as  a  sort  of  sporadic  cholera,'**. —
Consumption,*'. — Gradual  consumption  (died  within  a  year),^. — The  effects
produced  by  small  doses  of  arsenic  might  have  been  mistaken  for  those  of
mercury,'". — [2270.]  He  gathers  himself  together  in  bed,  can  scarcely
move  his  limbs,  and  is  with  difficulty  awakened  from  his  delirious  sopor,'^".
— The  body  crouched,'"*. — He  lies  in  bed  crouched  together,'^". — She  lies
bent  over  a  trunk,  supported  on  both  arms,  pale  as  a  corpse,  with  the  most
violent  retching,'''". — Greatly  swollen  all  over,''". — (Great  swelling  of  the  face
and  the  whole  body),". — (Anasarca), ".J — (Complete  general  anasarca),".§
— (Elastic  swellings  in  various  parts  of  the  body),*". — (Swelling  of  the  whole
right  side  of  the  body,  down  to  the  hip,  with  swelling  of  the  left  leg),^\ —
(Swelling  of  the  face  and.  feet,  dry  mouth  and  lips,  distended  abdomen,
diarrhoea,  colic,  vomiting),".||— Wasting,'"*. — [2280,]  {Emaciation), ^^  *',  etc.
— *  Oreat  emaciation,^^^. — Progressive  emaciation,  without  loss  of  appetite,'"'.
— She  became  remarkably  thin,'". — He  becomes  emaciated  and  sinks  ex-
hausted,'".— (Emaciation,  till  death),''. — Dwindling  of  the  whole  body,
with  excessive  sweats,'. — *She  becomes  emaciated,  with  clay  colored  face,  blue
jnargins  around  the  eyes,  great  weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  want  of  disposition
to  do  anything,  and  constant  inclination  to  rest  (after  eight  days),'. — The

f  "That is,  constanfvomiting  and  diarrhoea,  with  sharp  nose,  cold  limbs,  cramps,
and  death."
I  As  S.  138.  ?  As  8.  128.  ||  As  S.  138.


536  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

female's  healthy,  well-fed  body  had  changed,  in  eight  weeks,  so  that  it  was
scarcely  more  than  a  feeble  skeleton  covered  with  skin  ;  and  the  healthy  red
and  white  of  the  complexion  had  become  a  pale  bluish-gray.  The  abdominal
walls  were  olive  green  ;  the  back  ecchymosed  ;  mouth  and  nose  covered  with
scabs,  and  the  hair  had  almost  all  fallen  out,'°^ — Fatal  marasmus  (in  eighteen
months),^'".  —  [2290.]  -General  collapse,'".  —  Motor  Symptoms:  Laxity
of  all  the  muscles,'*". — Muscles  faa:,'°"°*,  etc. — After  a  year,  the  muscle  was
low  compared  with  what  it  was  formerly,'"". — Tremblings,'". — She  trembled
violently,''^". — General  trembling,''^'. — Trembling  over  the  wliole  body,''^^,  etc.
— He  trembles  in  every  part  of  the  body,*. — General  tremor  of  the  entire
body,'"". — [2300.]  In  the  morning,  trembling  of  the  whole  body,"*. — Tremor,
with  sweat  on  the  face,^l — Trembling  and  formication  of  the  whole  body,"'*.
— Anguish,  trembling,  and  tremor,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  face,''. — Twitch-
ing,™''". — Violent  twitching  of  the  whole  body,"". — Subsultus  tendinum,'"^
— Inclines  to  start,'. — Convulsive  starlings  all  over  the  body,™'. — Several
sudden  and  involuntary  muscle-contractions,'*". — [2310.]  Spasmodic  start-
ing of  the  whole  body  in  bed  (after  twelve  hours),^^ — *Startings,  resembling
ooiicussive  shocks,  in  the  affected  part,  in  the  evening,  when  falling  asleep;  they
are  excited  by  a  slight  trouble  felt  in  a  remote  part,  such  as  a  tearing,  itching,
etc.,'. — While  rolling  about  in  bed,  he  screams,  "  I  am  suffocating !"  throws
-off  the  covering,  opens  his  mouth  wide,  as  if  to  draw  breath,  "and  remains
fixed  in  this  condition  for  several  seconds,'"^ — From  time  to  time  he  lies  on
his  back,  touching  the  region  of  the  coccyx  with  his  heel,  while  the  knees
are  raised  and  widely  parted.  Suddenly  he  turns  round  spontaneously,
and  takes  a  different  positiou,'"^ — Cramps,^"*. — SpasmSjC)^. — Hysterical
spasms,  followed  by  great  exhaustion,^'".- — Convulsions,  ^^  *',  and  others.
— Slight  convulsions,'". — Convulsions,  most  violent,".  —  [2320.]  Fearful
convulsions ;  stiff,  with  body  bent  backward,'". — Convulsion.^,  with  foam
at  the  mouth,''*. —  Violent  convulsive  motions  before  death,'".  —  *Epi-
leptic  convulsions,^*. — Slight  convulsions,  which  lasted  several  minutes;
alter  wards  renewed  violent  vomiting,'". — Tetanic  spasms,'". — -(Attacks
of  tetanic  spasms),". — Tetanic  convulsions,  the  body  bent  backward  and
the  chest  distended  high  up;  he  uttered  at  the  saine  time,  a  miserable
wail,'". — Convulsions,  and  horrible  distortions  of  the  limbs,". — Convulsions,
occasionally  brought  on  by  violent  pains  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,". — [2330.]
Convulsions,  and  complete  loss  of  consciousness,  with  vomiting  and  horrible
colic,'™. — Convulsive  fit ;  first  she  jerked  her  arms  outward,  after  this  she
lost  her  consciousness,  lay  like  one  dead,  pale  but  warm,  clenched  her
thumbs,  twisted  her  fists,  drew  her  arms  up  slowly,  lowered  tl^era  again
slowly  ;  after  ten  minutes  she  drew  her  moiith  to  and  fro,  as  if  working  her
jaws ;  breathing  imperceptible  ;  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  fit  ceased,
terminating  in  a  jerk  through  the  whole  body,  a  sort  of  starting  forward
of  the  arras  and  lower  limbs ;  consciousness  returned  at  once,  but  there  was
great  weakness,'. — Convulsive  attacks,  which  appeared  from  time-to  time,
but  seemingly  only  from  an  external  cause,  especially  from  vexation  or
other  violent  mental  agitation.  They  were  announced  about  an  hour  be-
fore their  appearance,  by  drawings  in  the  limbs,  and  longings  to  He  down,
without  finding  sleep.  When  they  came  on,  she  experienced  either  a
sudden  jerk  through  the  whole  body,  or  an  icy  coldness  running  from  the
head  down  the  back  with  lightning-like  velocity.  At  the  same  moment,
she  loses  consciousness,  stretches  and  writhes,  and  then  draws  the  limbs  to-
gether, especially  the  arms.  At  times,  also,  convulsive  distortion  of  the
facial  muscles  and  tetanus  appear  with  it,  when  it  has  happened  that  the


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  537

under  lip  or  tongue  has  been  injured  by  the  tightly  set  teeth  and  has  bled.
More  frequently,  however,  the  spasm  rages  in  the  abdomen,  which  rises  and
falls  very  rapidly,  with  rumbling  in  the  bowels.  The  attack  is  generally
repeated,  after  a  respite,  before  her  return  to  consciousness.  The  whole
lasts  ten  minutes,  at  most.  On  returning  to  consciousness,  she  calls  for
water,  which,  however,  renews  the  convulsions,"". — Violent  convulsions,
afterward  violent  sweats,  then  sleep,^^\ — Death,  with  or  without  spasms,".
—  Convuhioiu  previous  to  death,^^''. — Restless,'"'. — *  Great  restlessness,"'"^'^,
etc. — Marked  restlessness,"". — Great  inquietude,''.^Restless  and  tossed
about,™". — [2340.]  *Very  great  restlessness,  so  that  she  could  not  lie
quiet  a  minute,"*. — He  continually  threw  himself  about,'". — *He  threw
himself  restlessly  hither  and  thither  in  ied,"*.  —  *B,estlessness ;  throwing
himself  from  side  to  side,'". — Rolling  about  in  bed,'^^ — *Re  lies  now  on
tlie  right,  now  on  the  left  side,  and  changes  position  with  incredible  rapidity,^"'.
— -By  paroxysms  he  started  up,  became  very  restless,'". — *RSstless,  he  changes
from  one  bed  to  another,". — *He  has  no  rest  anywhere,  and  changes  from
place  to  place,  from  bed  to  bed,^. — Continual  restlessness  and  contraction  of
the  body,'"". — [2350.]  The  child  is  restless,  moans  and  cries,'. — Marked
restlessness  and  excitement,  with  wakefulness  at  night,''™. — Restlessness  and
tossing  about  in  the  bed,  with  sadness  and  unquenchable  thirst  (after
twenty-four  hours),".  —  *Restlessness  and  anxiety,''. — Restlessness  and
anxiety,  so  that  he  alternately  left  the  couch,  and  threw  himself  on  the
floor,"l — Restlessness  and  hypochondriac  anxiety,  as  from  continued  sitting'
in  a  room,  as  if  coming  from  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  without  palpita-
tion of  the  heart  (immediately),'. — Great  restlessness;  she  threw  herself
about  in  bed,  and  tightly  clasped  a  person  standing  near,  in  her  anxiety
and  oppressioD,"^ — (Restlessness,  with  pains  in  the  abdomen,  head,  and
knees),'^"!" — Paralysis  and  Weakness:  Electro-muscular  contractility
remarkably  diminished,'". — She  becomes  quite  stiff,  is  not  able  to  move  or
stir,  is  only  able  to  stand,'. — [2360.]  She  cannot  move,". — In  the  morn-
ing, the  muscular  stiffness  is  increased,  and  extends  to  the  arm  and  forearm,
which  are  painful  when  moved,'^ — He  could  no  longer  sit  upright,  stand
or  walk,  but,  when  lying,  could  make  every  motion,'". — Paralyzed,  was  no
longer  able  to  walk,"'. — Paralysis  of  both  motion  and  sensation,"". —
Paralysis  of  the  lower  half  of  the  body  lasts  nearly  six  mouths,'*'. — Local
paralysis,  preceded  by  numbness  or  tingling  in  the  fingers  or  toes,'". — In-
complete paralysis,™". — -Great  laziness  and  dread  of  the  least  exertion,^. —
Feels  as  heavy  as  lead,"". — [2370.]  Tired  all  over,". — Easily  fatigued,  so
that  she  dreads  exertion,'". — Becomes  pale  and  easily  tired  on  slight  exer-
tion,™.— In  general,  more  fatigued  mornings  than  evenings,''. — In  the
evening,  general  feeling  of  fatigue,  which  increased  to  a  very  distressing
degree,". — Lassitude,"'. — *  Great  lassitude, ^"^  "",  etc. —  General  lassitude,"" '".
— Great  lassitude ;  he  had  to  go  home  and  lie  down,'^". — *The  slightest
paroxysm  of  pain  is  accompanied  with  an  excessive  sinking  of  strength,
obliging  him  to  lie  down,'. — [2380.]  He  lies  down  all  day,''.— He  is
obliged  to  keep  to  his  bed,'. — Lassitude,  so  that  he  could  not  leave  the
bed,'". — *  Failing  of  strength,^"  '*. — Muscular  power  weakened,  so  that  he
could  not  hold  an  object  after  he  had  taken  it,"'". — Cannot  support,  or  lift
any  rather  heavy  object  without  letting  it  fall,'". — Entire  loss  of  strength;
cannot  speak  without  great  effort,". — Loss  of  strength,"". — Weakness,". —
Debility,"'. — [2390.]  Great  general  weakness,"". — Excessive  weakness,^^ '"".

f  Symptoms  noted  after  the  bezoar  stone  as  an  antidote.


538  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

— Very  great  weakness, '^^  ^"^j  etc. — Very  marked  weakness,™. — General
debility,™'. — Extreme  debility,"*. — Great  debility,  and  exhaustion,™. — Fits
of  weakness,'^ — Weakness  as  if  he  suffered  from  want  of  food,'. — [2400.]
General  weakness,  especially  in  the  lower  limbs ;  he  is  scarcely  able  to  move
them,". — Great  weakness,  especially  in  the  legs,"  "'*. — Great  weakness  ;  her
gait  was  like  one  much  intoxicated,'^. — Weakness  of  the  whole  body  for
several  days,  with  weak  pulse ;  he  had  to  lie  down,'\ — His  strength  fails
him  more  and  more,". — Weakness  in  the  muscular  system,  especially  of
the  lower  extremities,  so  that  the  gait  was  uncertain  and  stumbling,'"". —
Gait  shaky  and  stumbling.  On  attempting  to  stand,  he  falls,  if  not  aided.
Also,  when  sitting,  he  holds  himself  with  difficulty;  still,  the  extremities
can  be  moved  in  all  directions,  though  not  without  effort,'"". — She  was  so
weak  that  she  had  to  be  led  into  the  room,'". — He  can  scarcely  walk,'"". —
*He  is  so  weak  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk ;  he  feels  as  if  he  would
fall  over,". — [2410.]  *So  weak  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  across
the  room  without  sinking  down,' ". — *So  weak  that  he  was  not  able  to  walk
alone,  before  the  vomiting  set  in,'^ — He  falls  down,  when  attempting  to
walk  (having  full  consciousness),". — For  several  days  he  felt  so  weak  in
the  morning  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  rise  from  bed,^ — *-He  endeavors
to  rise,  but  is  unable  to  sustain  himself  on  his  feet,^. — After  rising,  he  fell
down  on  the  floor,"'. — He  gets  out  of  bed,  falls  down,  and  wounds  the
occiput,'"". — ^When  rising  from  bed,  she  fell  down  at  once ;  from  weakness
and  vertigo,  and  increased  headache,'. — (He  was  unable  to  leave  his  bed,
he  felt  so  trembling  and  weak),".f — General  weakness  and  paresis,  which
rapidly  become  paralysis  (after  one  week),'". — [2420.]  He  remained  very
weak  for  a  long  time,"". — *Continued  weakness  and  prostration,'^. — Con-
stant feeling  of  extreme  weariness,"'. — *  Very  weary  and  exhausted,"''. —
*Great  weariness  after  a  meal,'. — Great  weariness  after  dinner,  and  ex-
cessive yawning,'. — General  exhaustion,'"". — Great  exhaustion,''^ — Frequent
feelingof  exhaustion,''*.— Toto^  exhausted,'''^ "".—[2430.]  Prostration,"".-
Great  prostration,'". — Nervous  prostration,"". — Excessive  prostration,'"*. —
Remarkable  prostration ;  kneeling  on  the  floor  of  her  room,  the  head  sup-
ported on  the  arms  of  her  brother  ;  she  was  not  able  to  hold  herself  up,'". —
Excessive  and  most  unusual  prostration  of  strength,"". — Remarkable  pros-
tration and  discomfort,'™. — Great  prostration  and  bodily  weakness,  especially
after  vomiting,  which  still  occurs  at  intervals,'"". — A  sense  of  sinking,  so  that
he  thought  he  was  dying,"". — -Condition  resembling  a  mild  form  of  collapse
in  cholera,"". — [2440.]  Nearly  collapsed  condition,  with  sluggish  power  of
motion  and  afterward  almost  immobility,"*. — In  a  state  of  collapse ;  ex-
tremities were  cold,  lips  purple,  face  dusky,''". — Great  general  weakness
and  irritability,"". — Weak  in  body  and  soul ;  he  says  nothing  without  being
peevish,'. — ^Deathly  weariness,  with  face  as  pale  as  death,'"". — He  dies  with
weakness,  without  vomiting,  convulsions,  or  pain,". — Excessive  weakness,
violent  vertigo,  continued  vomiting  and  hsematuria,  followed  by  death
(without  agony,  fever,  or  pain),". — Faintness  and  Sensibility  :  i^oini-
jtess,'"' '"'.— J^amiini;,""  '''.—Fainted,"".— [2450.]  Attacks  of  fainting,"".—
Fainting  fits,  ('"),  ("'),  and  others. — Deep  swoon,"". — Excessive  sivoons'^. — ■
Faintness  and  depression,'".  —  *Faint,  anxious  and  weak,  early  in  the
morning,'. — '"Faintness  when  discouraged;  her  strength  returns  with  her
cheerfulness}. — *  Great  faintness  and  anxiety;  she  has  lost  the  control  of  her
senses,  is  scarcely  able  to  attend to  things,  accompanied with reeling

t  A-s  S.  138.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  539

vertigo/. — Frequent  fainting  fits,  with  vomiting  and  weak  pulse  (after
three  hours),". — Sensation  of  faintness,  burning  and  nausea,"". — [2460.]
Faint,  when  she  became  cold  over  the  whole  body,"*. — Before  death,  coma
sometimes  supervenes,  with  paralysis,  tetanic  convulsions,  or  spasms  in  the
muscles  of  the  extremities,'". — The  organs  of  sense  are  morbidly  active,''. —
*Senses  morbidly  acute,  but  mental  faoulties  unimpaired,^'"^. — Nervousness,'^'.
— Increased  sensibility,  so  that  the  gentle  opening  and  shutting  of  a
door,  or  accidentally  touching  the  bed-clothes,  caused  the  patient  to  start,
and  a  careless  closing  of  the  door  drew  tears  from  her,  and  gave  her  pain,'°°.
— Such  a  high  degree  of  sensitiveness  that  a  mere  draught  of  air  caused
cramps  and  convulsions,'"'". — Sensibility  diminished,^". — Apparent  insensi-
bility to  external  objects,™'. — Sensations  :  Unusual  lightness,''^ — [2470.]
He  felt  thick,"^ — General  uneasiness,"'^ — General  discomfort,""! — Great
anxiety  in  tiie  whole  body  with  cold  sweat,'™. — Obliged  to  go  to  bed  early
in  the  evening,  with  general  malaise ;  could  not  get  warm,  although  the
weather  was  quite  mild  ;  had  to  be  covered  with  bed-clothes  as  if  it  was
winter,'^ — General  malaise,'*^ — General  malaise,  followed  by  vomiting.''' —
On  rising  in  the  morning,  general  malaise,''. — General  depression  and  sick
feeling,'"'. — *The  pains  seem  intolerable,  and  drive  the  patient  mad,'. —
[2480.]  Pains  all  over,"*.— Pains  in  the  whole  body,  mostly  in  the  even-
ing (Sr.). — A  numb  pain  is  perceived  in  the  whole  side  of  the  body,'. —
*  The  paroxysin  of  pain  is  frequently  accompanied  with  other  symptoms^. —
*Frequent  return,  at  regular  hours,  of  the  pains  and  uneasiness,  as  in  fever
and  ague^. — Return  of  the  same  Arsenic  symptoms  at  the  same  hour,  after
a  period  of  four  days,'lf — There  are,  at  times,  remissions  or  even  inter-
missions in  the  symptoms,  which  may  lead  to  a  deceptive  hope  of  recovery,
or  (by  the  recurrence  of  symptoms)  to  the  erroneous  supposition  that  a
fresh  quantity  of  poison  had  been  administered,'". — Mustard  plasters  cause
pain,  but  neither  redness  nor  swelling  of  the  parts  where  they  are  applied,'"^
— ^Burning  pains,^^  (and  others). — ""Burning  pains,  especially  in  the
inner  organs,  skin  and  ulcers,'. — [2490.]  Burning,  corrosive  pains,^* ". —
Burning  pain  where  applied,'"*. — The  burning,  stitching,  tearing  pains,
especially  in  the  extremities,  affected  the  patient  more,  as  the  energy  of  the
body  decreased  and  sensibility  increased,'*. — Day  and  night,  fearful  pains,
which  were  generally  burning,  as  when  one  has  been  burned,  and  the  injured
part  is  exposed  anew  to  the  fire ;  at  times  also  stitching,  and  then  again
gouty  tearing,. with  which,  at  times,  an  endless  rapid  twitching  and  pulling
appeared  at  one  spot.  In  general,  the  affected  limb  was  constantly  twitch-
ing,'"*.— Violent  pains,""'. — Violent  pains  over  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  lay
on  fire  or  needles;  external  application  of 'Arsenic,'™. — Occasional  violent
pains  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  in  the  knee-joint,  in  the  soles  of  the
feet,  and  in  the  region  of  the  heart,™. — Burning  in  all  the  veins,  when
waking  in  the  night,  which  happens  frequently,'. — Pain  in  the  affected
part,  as  if  the  bone  in  th.it  part  were  swollen  and  excoriated ;  felt  when
sitting,'. — Sensation  as  if  the  whole  left  half  of  the  body  were  drawn  to-
gether,".— [2500.]  *  Violent  anguish,  as  if  everything  became  constricted,  with
anxiety  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach^. — Feeling  as  if  pressed  on  by  a  heavy
body,". — On  awaking,  every  morning,  sharp  pains  all  over  the  body,  and
aching  pains  across  the  shoulders  and  back  of  the  neck,'"'^^Sha^p  pains  all
over  the  body,  especially  in  the  genitals,'"*. — Fine  stitches  over  the  whole
body,'. — Tearing  pains  in  the  bones,'. — Ulcerative  pain  in  the  affected  part,

*  "  This  recurrence  only  took  place  once."


540  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

as  if  it  had  passed  into  the  stage  of  sup'puration  and  were  about  to  open  ;
felt  when  sitting,^ — Pain  in  the  whole  trunk,  mostly  in  the  small  of  the
back  and  back,  especially  after  riding  on  horseback  (in  a  practiced  rider),'.
— Beating  in  lall  the  limbs  and  also  in  the  head,'. — Pains  in  the  joints,'^'.

Shin. — Appeaeance,  ETC. :  [2510.]  *8kinbecamevery  white;  complexion
white  and  pasty-looking,'^*. — *  Exeessivewhiteness  of  the  skin,  as  in  infants,  which,
as  the  arsenical  influence  increased,  became  yellow  and  scaly,  producing  in  J.  E.
and  baby  the  most  irritating  eruption  all  over  the  body,  with  a  strong  and
peculiar  smell,^^^ — The  skin  became  gradually  yellow,  and  afterwards  of
a  dusky  brown  color,™. — Jaundice,". — *The  whole  skin  became  blue,"^ —
The  veins,  especially  the  jugular  veins,  very  much  dilated,  hence  the  skin
became  bluish,™. — Cyanosis,"'. — He  became  red  and  moist  over  the  whole
body,"*! — Smutty,  mottled  skin,  especially  in  extremities,'''. — Skin  became
a  smutty  brown,  especially  on  uncovered  portions,^". — [2520.]  Dry,  cracked
state  of  the  skin,''''*. — Skin  dry  and  scaly,  cracked  all  over,  and  very  sore,
with  a  strong  and  peculiar  smell  from  it,''''*. — *Deep  mortification  of  the
skin,"*. — On  the  toes,  especially  both  little  toes,  an  extremely  hard,  horny
skin  gradually  appeared,  which  pained  like  a  burning,  and  made  walking
very  painful,"'l — The  skin  from  the  head  to  the  feet  comes  ofi",'"". — [The
skin  of  the  whole  body  peels  off  in  large  scales],*. — The  thickened  epider-
mis comes  off',"". — The  skin  of  the  whole  body,  except  the  head,  came  off",'**.
— Desquamation  of  a  large  part  of  the  body,  especially  on  the  forearms,
and  return  of  a  just  cured  herpes  on  the  chin,  which  remains  five  to  six
days,'"'. — Exfoliation  of  the  cuticle  and  skin  of  the  tongue,'". — [2530.]
The  thick  skin  of  the  soles  of  the  feet  came  off",'**. — Spots  on  the  skin,  here
and  there,"'. — Little  blotches  on  the  forehead,*^ — Thick-set,  white  blotches,
about  the  size  of  a  lentil,  a  little  larger  or  smaller;  skin  colored,  smarting
and  painful,  the  pain  being  generally  worse  at  night,'. — *Blue  spots  on  the
abdomen,  genital  organs,  and  white  of  the  eye,'^ — Large  red  spots  over  the
whole  skin,'". — Inflamed,  measle-like  spots  over  the  body,  especially  about
the  head,  in  the  face,  and  on  the  neck,'".'!' — On  the  left  side  of  the  face,  an-
swering to  the  parotids,  an  inflamed  spot,  red,  firm,  solid,  painful  on  pres-
sure with  the  finger,  appearing  yellow,"*. — (The  parts  around  the  ulcer  be-
come inflamed ;  the  ulcer  bleeds  when  bandaging  it,  and  becomes  covered
with  a  dry,  superficial  crust),''. — Dry  Eruptions:  Eruption  on  the  skin,*'.t
— [2540.]  Eruption  over  whole  body,"". — *  Very  painful  black  eruption,^''. —
*8mall  ecchymoses,  or  rather  petechim,^"'. — Rash  over  the  whole  body  falling
off"  in  scales,"'. — Red,  scorbutic  rash,".— (Slight  eruptions  resembling  nettle-
rash),*'. — Rashlike  eruption  on  the  skin,  especially  on  the  abdomen,"". —
Rash,  profuse,  diagnosed  as  scarlatina,  with  such  severe  pains  all  over  that
he  could  not  turn  in  bed,""*.-^Elevations  similar  to  those  caused  by  nettles;
also  small  pimples,  as  in  rash  eruptions,'*'. — *Pi'mples  burning  violently,
causing  almost  unendurable  anguish,^.- — [2550.]  Small,  pointed  pimples  make
their  appearance,  with  itching,  going  off"  after  scratching,'-. — Miliary  erup-
tion, with  white  tips,  over  the  whole  body,  even  the  hands  and  feet,". —
[Fine,  sand-shaped,  itching  eruption  all  over  the  body.  H.],*. — (-Eruption
on  the  forehead),". — (Innumerable,  very  red  pimples  on  the  scalp),". —
Pimples,  difficult  to  cure,"°.§ — Small  pimples  on  several  parts  of  the  body,
even  on  the  forehead  and  under  the  jaw,  causing  a  burning  pain  and  not
much  itching,'. — -A  pimple,  covered  with  scurf,  in  the  left  side  of  the  scalp,

t  "After  Opium  hud  been  given  as  antidote."
i  "Not  found."  J  "Not  found.'


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  541

obliging  him  to  scratch,  and  pailiful  when  rubbed,  as  if  ulcerated  (after
two  hours),'.— Pimples  over  the  whole  scalp,  painful  when  rubbed  or  touched,
as  if  ecchymosed  or  ulcerated ;  the  same  pain  is  felt  in  the  whole  scalp
(after  eleven  hours),'. — There  appeared  upon  the  face  and  neck  a  number
of  large  red  blotches,  at  first  the  size  of  a  silver  dollar,  of  an  intensely  red
or  scarlet  color,  and  partially  raised  in  wheals ;  this  rash  gradually  ex-
tended, and  in  a  day  and  a  half  covered  the  entire  body  (fifth  day),^'". — ■
[2560.]  On  the  lips,  an  eruption  similar  to  herpes  labialis,™. — Eruptiou
on  the  lower  lip,  with  a  thick  crust  and  a  lardaceous  base  (Sr.). — Painless
eruption  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border  of  lip  (after  fourteen  days),'.
— *Red,  herpetic  skin  around  the  mouth,^. — *  Eruption  around  the  mouth,
burping  and  painful,\ — Colorless,  biting  eruption  around  the  whole  neck,
upon  the  shoulders,  and  on  the  sides,^— Pimples  on  the  hands,  the  thumb,
and  the  forehead,"'. — Purple  petechise  on  chest  and  neck,™". — Skin  of  neck,
bosom,  and  shoulders  covered  with  a  j-ough,  cracked,  dirty,  brownish-red
eruption,  with  burning  and  itching,™. — *  Herpes-like  spot  on  left  side  of  neck
extended  rapidly  over  whole  side  of  neck,  and  upon  face,  with  itching  and
burning,  then  a  similar  spot  on  the  right  side,'". — [2570.]  Blotches  and
pimples  on  the  hands,*'. — Dense  eruption  of  small,  red,  conical  pimples  all
over  the  hands  and  fingers,  with  itching,  which  is  increased  by  soratchingj'l
— Moist  Eruptions  :  Eczema,^™. — *Eruption  resembling  red  petechise,  from
evening,  painful,  dry,  moist,  and  burning  after  scratching  (Sr.,  from  Hahne-
mann).— *  Black  vesicles,  causing  a  burning  pairui'^. — Rash  over  the  whole
body,  except  the  limbs ;  numberless  small,  white  blisters  covered  the  skin,
which  appeared  to  be  inflamed  between  them,"°°.^ — Pimples  in  the  region  of
the  left  temple;  when  scratched  they  exude  bloody  water,  and  become  pain-
ful and  sore  when  rubbed,'. — Scabby  eruption  on  the  occiput,"*. — -On  the
red,  inflamed  portion  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  numerous  vesicles  filled  with
yellow  fluid ;  the  redness  and  inflammation  spread  about  the  nose  and
mouth,'". — Eruption  on  the  face,  covered  with  blisters,"^ — [2580.]  The
eruption  on  the  face  dried  into  scabs ;  nose  and  lids  scale,"". — The  erup-
tion on  the  face  dries,  here  and  there  scabs  fall  off",  and  on  the  left  concha
new  blisters  form,"^ — Whitish,  pointed  pimples,  the  tips  filled  with  a  wa-
tery fiuid,  with  burning  itching,  as  of  mosquito-bites,  on  the  hands,  between
the  fingers,  and  on  the  abdomen  ;  the  fluid  flows  out  when  scratching  the
pimples,  and  the  itching  goes  off",'. — [Fleshy  excrescences  spring  up  from
the  ulcers  on  the  fingers ;  they  speedily  become  decayed,  blue,  and  green,
with  viscid  ichor,  spreading  an  intolerably  bad  odor.  H.],^ — [Blisters  form
in  the  night  all  over  the  soles,  as  if  caused  by  fly-blisters ;  they  open  and
pour  out  a  light-yellow,  fetid  water.  H.],^ — Ulcers  and  Pustules  :  The
ulcer  has  very  high  edges,'. — *Mimh  blach,  coagulated  blood  comes  out  of  the
,  uleer,^. — Ulcer  which  is  especially  painful  in  the  morning,  with  dark-brown,
thin,  bloody  pus  under  a  thin  scurf,  and  with  single  stitches  while  sitting,
the  stitches  being  diminished  when  standing,  and  still  more  when  walking,'.
— Severe  suppuration  and  swelling  of  the  skin  around  the  spreading  ulcers,
especially  on  the  abdomen,  genitals,  and  inside  of  the  thighs,"*. — Cancer-
ous ulcer,  making  the  amputation  of  the  limb  necessary ,*^f — [2590.]  Sores
broke  out  over  the  head  and  neck,"*. — *Two  large  pimples  on  the  forehead
between  the  eyebrows,  obliging  him  to  scratch,  exuding  bloody  water,  and
becoming  filled  with  pus  on  the  day  following,'.— Pustule  on  forehead  and

t  "  In  a  refiner  of  A."


542  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

left  cheek,". — Pustules  on  forehead  and  "chest,". — On  the  forehead,  about
the  eyes,  on  the  cheek  bones,  the  shoulders,  the  upper  part  of  the  arm,  and
the  chest,  an  eruption  of  white  pustules,  in  large  number,  which,  in  form
and  progress,  were  similar  to  small-pox  ;  these  pustules  were  partly  isolated,
partly  confluent,  were  very  easily  torn,  changed  to  thick  crusts,  and  left
very  perceptible  scars  behind,^'". — (Pustulous  eruption  on  the  scalp  and
face,  with  burning  pain),"'. — Ulcers  in  the  whole  face,'^ — The  face  became
covered  with  pustules,'^'. — Ulcerated  eruption  around  the  lips,'*". — [Large,
broad,  pale-red,  and  excessively  painful  boil  on  the  hand,  between  the
thumb  and  index  finger,  especially  in  the  evening.  H.],^ — [2600.]  Abscess
on  the  posterior  side  of  the  arm  above  the  wrist;  on  opening  it  a  very  co-
pious discharge  of  thick  yellow  pus  followed,  with  denudation  of  the  sur-
face of  the  ulna,  as  shown  by  the  probe,^°l — Gatherings  (abscesses)  on  her
hands,  which  she  never  had  had  before,  followed  by  severe  pains  in  her
wrists  and  arms,  so  as  almost  to  disable  her,^''". — -[Ulcer  on  the  left  leg  below
the  knee.  H.],*. — *  Ulcer  on  the  leg,  covered  with  a  gray  crust,  and  surrounded
with  an  inflamed  border;  it  is  burning  and  painful,'.— [Itchlike  eruption,
especially  in  the  bends  of  the  knees.  H.],^ — Ulcers  on  both  heels,  which
discharge  ichorous  matter,'*". — The  trunk  and  upper  extremities  are  covered
with  a  discrete  papulo-vesicular  eruption,  very  troublesome,  causing  him
to  scratch  till  he  bled  ;  itching  much  aggravated  at  night,"^. — Great  sensi-
bility or  irritation  of  the  skin,  accompanied  by  a  vesicular  eruption  ;  some-
times this  has  assumed  the  form  of  nettlerash,  or  of  the  eruption  of  scarlet
fever,  for  which  disease  a»senical  poisoning  has  been  mistaken,'". — [The
skin  of  the  soles  becomes  insensible,  thick  as  cork,  and  breaks.  H.],^ —
Sensation,  when  moving  about,  as  if  the  whole  skin  were  rough  and  about
to  burst," — [2610.]  The  skin  of  the  whole  body  is  painful,'. — The  hard,
horny  skin  on  the  toes  is  very  troublesome,  and  burns  much,'"''. — Horrid
burning  in  the  skin  of  the  finger,  as  if  the  part  had  been  burnt  with  boil-
ing grease  (after  dipping  the  hands  into  a  cold  solution  of  Arsenic),'. — *In-
tolerable  burning  in  the  slcin,^^. — Much  disturbed  at  night  by  smarting  and
itching,  which  forced  him  to  keep  applying  cold  water  compresses ;  he  got
a  little  sleep  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,''^ — *Burning  pain  in  the
ulcers,'  (^). — *Burning  in  the  ulcers  as  from  glowing  coals,'. — ^Burning
like  fire  around  the  ulcer,  which  is  fetid  and  suppurates,  accompanied
viith  faintness  and  drowsiness  in  daytime^. — ^Burning  in  the  border  of  the
ulcer  and  itching  in  the  ulcer  itself^. — (Burning  in  the  ulcer  follows  the  itch-
ing),".— [2620.]  Tearing  pain  in  the  ulcers,'. — Stitching  over  the  whole
skin,'™. — *Slow  stitches,  as  with  a  red-hot  needle,  in  the  skin  here  and  there j'^.
— Prickings  in  the  skin,*". — *Painful  sensitiveness  of  old  ulcers  previously
painlcas,^. — Creeping  sensation,  as  of  fleas,  in  the  thighs,  as  far  as  the  abdo-
men, also  in  the  loins  and  nates,  obliging  him  to  scratch,'. — Burning  itching
of  the  body,'. — Burning  itching,  the  parts  being  painful  after  scratching^.
— Unpleasant  itching  and  eruption  of  small,  itchlike  pustules,  which  soon
desquamate,'*'. — At  night,  itching  on  the  head  and  several  parts  of  the
body,  lasting  all  night,  and  preventing  sleep,*^ — [2630.]  Itching  of  the
neck  below  the  maxilla,'. — Itching  and  soreness  of  the  anus  and  privates,
with  sometimes  sharp  pains  there,^^''. — Frequent  itching  on  the  backs  of  the
fingers,  sometimes  so  severe  that  she  scratches  the  skin  off",  with  an  eruption
of  pointed  papulse  between  the  fingers  (after  three  days),". — A  good  deal
of  itching  of  the  right  thigh  and  arms,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Yawning  and  Sleepiness:  Yawning,"  —
Frequent  yawning,'. — Yawning almost uninterrupted,'. — Yawning and


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  543

stretching  as  though  he  had  uot  slept  enough/. — Yawning  and  weakness
after  eating,  so  that  he  must  lie  down  and  sleep,'. — Inclined  to  sleep,"". —
[2640.]  No  sleep,  but  inclination  to  slumber, "^ — She  became  sleepy,  with-
out being  able  to  sleep  or  rest,"*. — Sleepiness,^"'  "',  etc.— Frequent  attacks
of  somnolence  in  the  daytime,  when  sitting,'. — *Drowsiness,^°^'^. — Exces-
sive drowsiness ;  he  falls  asleep  again  immediately  after  taking ;  for  four
days,'". — *Drowsiness  interrupted  by  uneasy  dreams  and  great  anxiety,'. —
Irresistible  desire  to  sleep,  alternating  with  great  restlessness,'".— -Soporous
condition,  from  which  she  often  awoke,  but  only  for  a  short  time,'"'. —
Sleep  :  Slept  a  little  at  times ;  when  awake,  was  inclined  to  converse  in  a
quiet  and  agreeable  way,  more  particularly  in  reference  to  her  own  history  ;
this  continued  for  the  next  forty-eight  hours,  she  being  all  the  while  in  a
state  of  extreme  prostration  (first  day),"". — [2650.]  The  little  patient  slept,
except  when  awakened  by  vomiting,'"^ — Slumber  and  slight  delirium,'*. —
At  night,  sleep,  alternating  with  raving  and  different  visions,'". — He  lies
on  his  back  during  sleep,  with  his  left  hand  under  the  occiput,'. —  Quiet
s^eep,'""'". — *Startings  of  various  kinds,  when  falling  asleep,  in  the
evening,'. — *Much  violent  starting  while  asleep^''. — *  Frequent  starting  from
sleep,"". — General  sick  feeling,  in  sleep,  two  successive  nights,'. — Uneasy
nights;  felt  as  if  a  chill  was  coming  on,°l — [2680.]  Disturbed  sleep,'"^ —
*Sleep  uneasy,  and  disturbed  by  dreams,''''*. — '^'Restless  sleep™ "". — *Sleep
restless;  disturbed  by  attacks  of  cough,  anxiety,  and  general  heat,  until  1.30
P.M. — *  After  midnight  (from  3  o'clock  on)  she  tosses  about,  and  sleeps
only  at  times,'. — Loud  moaning  in  the  evening,  while  asleep,'. — Moaning,
while  asleep,  with  tossing  about  in  bed,  especially  about  8  o'clock  in  the
morning,'. — He  talks  and  quarrels  "while  asleep,'. — During  sleep,  loud
talking  and  indistinct  murmuring,  with  half-closed  eyes,"". — During  sleep,
he  complains  of  headache,  now  in  the  forehead,  now  in  the  occiput,'°l —
[2670.]  *  The  pains  are  felt  in  the  night,  during  sleep,^. — Sleep  very  rest-
less, she  wakes  very  early,^. — *  The  pain  of  the  affected  part  wakes  him  in
the  night  from  time  to  time,  espc-ially  before  inidnight^. — She  is  awakened
from  sleep  by  vomiting,'". — He  wakes  while  dreaming,  and  while  an  emis-
sion is  taking  place,  without  being  able  to  remember  what  he  dreamed  of,'".
— *In  the  morning,  she  feels  as  if  she  had  not  slept  enough,^. — '* Feels  as  though
she  had  not  slept  enough,  mornings ;  eyes  are  weary ;  she  cannot  get  out  of
bed^. — Cannot  go  to  sleep,  although  fatigued,"". — Sleeplessness  till  3  a.m.,"".
— No  sleep,"". — [2680.]  Sleeplessness  C"),",  and  others. — Sleepless  for  forty-
eight  hours,  then  had  a  good  night's  sleep,  which  quite  refreshed  her;  felt
comfortable  for  twelve  hours,"". — '^Sleepless,  with  restlessness  and  moaning^.
—Sleepless,  tossing  about,  nights,  with  creeping  in  the  abdomen,'. — Sleepless-
ness, with  fainting  fits  from  time  to  time, ".^(Nightly  fancies),*". — During
his  morning  slumber  he  hears  every  sound  and  noise,  yet  continues  dream-
ing withal,'. — Heavy  dreams,*. — Heavy  dreams  and  nightmare;  the  dreams
hovered  before  his  mind  even  during  the  day,  and  disquieted  him,'°". —
Dreams  full  of  fatiguing  thoughts,'. — [2690.]  Sleep  disturbed  by  anxious
dreams,"". — Dreams  full  of  care ;  he  wakes,  and  when  asleep  again  con-
tinues his  dream,'. — Anxious  dreams  while  falling  asleep  ;  he  wants  to  cry
out,  but  cannot  utter  his  cry,  and  is  suddenly  waked  by  that  cry,  which  he
hears  yet,'. — Vivid,  vexatious  dreams,'. — Frightful,  anxious  dreams,'. —
Nightly  dreams  full  of  threats,  apprehensions,  or  repentance,'. — Dreams
full  of  care  and  danger;  he  wakes  with  a  cry,  and,  when  asleep  again,
dreams  of  something  else,'. — *  Dreams  full  of  care,  sorrow,  and  fear,  disturb


544  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

his  sleep, ^. — *  Uninterrupted  dreams  about  thunderstorms,  fire,  black  water,
and  darkness,^. — Dreams  about  death,''.

Fever. — Coldness:  [2700,]  Temperature  lowered,"'. — Skin  cold,"*. —
*  Cold  as  a  corpse,™. — Coldness  of  the  skin  for  several  months,'''^.^-Skin
cold  to  touch,  and  covered  with  profuse  cold  perspiration,"'^ — The  skin  icy
cold,  covered  with  cold  sweat,  especially  on  the  forehead  and  temple=,'°'. —
Skin  cool  and  spasmodically  closed,^''. — *The  skin  icy  cold  and  the  face  fear-
fidly  pale,^"''. — Sensation  of  external  coldness  (which  is  also  objective),  with
internal  heat,  like  fulness  or  fire  in  the  vessels,"*. — Shuddering  i^^),^'^. — •
[2710.]  Frequent  shuddering,''. — Feverish  shuddering,^. — *  Cold  shudder^
ing,^^''. — Violent  chilly  shuddering,''*. — The  shuddering  disappears  after
dinner  (rare  alternate  effect),'. — Shuddering  after  dinner,^. — The  shudder-
ing returns  every  afternoon  at  5  o'clock,'. — Shuddering,  after  drinking,  as
if  from  disgust,^'. — Shuddering  and  chilliness,  after  drinking  (immediately),'.
— Feverish  shuddering  every  evening,'. — Shuddering,  every  evening,  before
retiring,'. — [2720.]  *Shuddering  whenwalkingc  in  the  open  air,'. — *Shud-
dering,  without  thirst  (immediately),'. — Shuddering  over  the  whole  body,
with  hot  forehead,  warm  face  and  cold  hands,  or  with  warm  forehead,  hot
cheeks,  and  cold  hands,'. — *The  shuddering  is  apt  to  be  accompanied  with
other  pa'iis  or  ailments,^. — Many  symptoms  are  accompanied  with  shudder-
ing,'.— Shivering,'"^*. — Fever-shivering,  chills,'. — Shivering,  out  of  the  bed,'.
—Chattering  of  the  teeth,  fearful  distortion  of  the  facial  muscles,  and  crying
out  that  he  can  bear  it  no  longer  on  account  of  the  coldness ;  he  trembled,
with  it  as  if  he  had  an  ague ;  the  room  was  well  heated  and  the  weather  not
cold,"l — General  chilliness,™*. — [2730.]  Chilliness  in  the  external  skin,  over
the  face  and  feet,'. — Chilliness  increasing  to  the  highest  degree,". — Violent
chilliness  with  shakiug,'^^Chi^iness,  with  cold  feet ;  nevertheless,  he
began  to  perspire,'. — Chilliness,  with  alteirnating  burning  pains  in  stomach,
and  marked  anxiety,"'. — Chilliness  with  shaking,  during  the  pains  ;  they
are  followed  by  thirst,'.^ — Chilliness,  with  coldness  towards  evening,'. — Vio-
lent chilliness  in  the  evening,  after  going  to  bed,'. — Attack  of  chilliness  in
the  evening,  lasting  five  minutes,  and  again  in  the  morning,  on  waking,".
— Chilliness,  without  being  able  to  get  warm,  accompanied  with  ill-humor,
flushes  of  heat,  when  talking  or  moving  about;  she  then  became  red  in  the
face,  but  nevertheless  felt  chilly,'.— -[2740.]  Toward  evening,  attack  of
chilliness,  lasting  two  hours,  afterwards,  sweat  without  heat,". — Chilliness
at  3  o'clock,  every  afternoon,  with  hunger;  the  chilliness  increased  after  a
meal,'. — Quotidian  ague,  sometimes  tertian,'^. — The  slightest  chill  from
exposure  to  damp,  or  from  sitting  in  church  on  a  very  cold  day,  was  always
followed  by  shivering  fits,  abdominal  pain,  diarrhoea,  rapid  loss  of  strength,
and  distressed  countenance,'". — ^Internal  chilliness  in  the  afternoon,  with
external  heat  and  red  cheeks^. — Fever  when  coming  out  of  the  open  air  and
entering  the  room :  first,  chilliness,  afterwards  hiccough  for  a  long  while,
after  which,  general  sweat,  lastly,  again  hiccough,'. — Violent  shaking
chill,'". — Shuddering  chills,  with  shaking  of  the  head,".— Cold,'". — Great
coldness,'". — [2750.]  *Oreat  coldness  of  the  surface  of  the  body,™. —  Coldness
over  the  whole  body,™ '"',  etc. — General  coldness,'^'l — Constant  coldness  of
the  whole  body,". — *  Coldness  of  the  body  and  dryness  of  the  skin,  alternate
with  cold  sweai,". — Icy  coldness  before  vomiting,  then  burning  heat  of  the
whole  skin,  which  is  cold  to  touch,". — Coldness  of  the  limbs,". — A  sudden
coldness  crept  over  him,  he  could  not  stand,'". — She  cannot  get  warm  in
bed,  at  night,'. — He  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  ;  he  thinks  he  has  caught  cold
in  his  head,'. — [2760.]  The  coldness  of  the  body  could  not  be  relieved  by


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  545

the  application  of  external  warmth  ;  complete  want  of  reaction/^l — Sensa-
tion of  coldness  over  the  whole  body,  also  internally,  especially  in  the
stomach,'". — Coldness  and  numbness  of  the  whole  right  side,  especially  in
arm  and  hand,''^*. — Coldness  of  the  face,  hands,  and  foreai-ms,"'. — Extremi-
ties and  face  in  the  afternoon  cool,  toward  5  o'clock  cold,"*. — Hands  and
feet  icy  cold,"'. — In  the  evening,  coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  even
about  the  abdomen,'. — General  coldness,  with  profuse  sweat  of  the  skin,''.
— The  whole  body,  especially  the  hands  and  feet,  cold  and  dry,"'. — [Cold-
ness morning  and  evening,  without  thirst ;  emitting  a  quantity  of  urine,
little  stool,  and  stretching  in  all  the  limbs,  H.],^ — Heat  :  [2770.]  Per-
ceptible heat  of  whole  body,". — Burning  flush  over  whole  body,^. — Tempera-
ture of  skin  increased,"* '™,  etc. — Skin  very  hot,^"- "". — Violent  heat  of  the
skin,™. — Dry  heat  of  the  skin,". — Skin  hot  and  dry,*^^. — Fever,".f — Violent
fever,"'  {^),  etc. — Regular  tertian  intermittent  fever,'*. — [2780.]  At  first,  slight
fever,  afterwards  becoming  severe,"l — The  fever  begins  in  the  daytime,
and  lasts  till  evening,'^ — Fever,  attended  by  delirium,"'. — High  fever,  with
delirium,^^. — Fever  with  violent  thirst,*". —  Violent  fever  and  thirst,'**. — Violent
fever  with  rapid  hard  pulse,™. — Fever,  with  stiffness  and  very  violent  pain
in  the  swollen  legs  and  feet,  which  also  continued  after  the  fever  had  dis-
appeared on  the  eighth  day,'". — Fever  and  restlessness,"^ — *Fever  at  2
o'clock  in  the  night,  increased  warmth  over  the  whole  body,  sweat  in  the  face  and
on  the  feet,  and  tension  in  the  hypochondria  and  epigastrium,  producing  colicky
pain,  and  a  feeling  of  anxiety,*. — [2790.]  *Typhus-like  fever  with  extreme
restlessness,  alternating  with  stupor,'**. — Attacks  of  fever,'". — Repeated
attacks  of  fever,  with  pain  in  shoulders  and  nape,™. — Every  evening,  an
attack  of  fever,'^". — Fever,  towards  evening  ;  chilliness  with  drowsiness,  and
a  disagreeable  sick  feeling  through  the  whole  body,  as  after  a  paroxysm  of
fever,  either  completely  or  only  half  terminated ;  after  midnight,  profuse
sweat  on  the  thighs ;  returned  at  the  same  hour,  two  days  after,'. — [Burn-
ing fever,  not  to  be  relieved  by  cold  water  ;  the  heat  is  followed  by  sweat,
especially  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ;  this  fever  sometimes  appears  every  fort-
night, for  a  few  days],^ — Fever  at  10  o'clock  in  the  evening ;  heat,  with
redness  of  the  whole  body,  afterwards  sweat,'. — Paroxysm  of  fever  return-
ing at  the  same  hour  for  several  days,'. — Hectic  fever,"'.! — Fevers  termi-
nating in  death,^'.§— iTea^,'" '^.— [2800.]  Great  heat,'".— Burning  heat
over  body,™l — Violent  heat,". — ^Internal  heat,^. — *Burning  heat  inter-
nally,".— *Feels  as  if  burning  up  internally,"  '^^ — Feeling  of  heat  with
anxiety,  after  midnight,  with  inclination  to  uncover  herself*. — Feverish
heat,". — ^Burning  heat  and  thirst**^. — Feverish  heat,  with  thirst,". — [2810.]
*  Complains  of  violent  internal  heat  and  thirst  while  vomiting,^". — Internal
heat,  with  thirst,  after  diarrhoea,".— Heat,  internally  and  externally,  through
the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  drank  too  much  wine,  with  thirst  for  beer,". —
(Anxious  heat),".|| — General,  anxious  heat,". — General  heat  in  the  morn-
ing, in  bed,  at  sunrise,  with  sweat  in  the  face,  and  dryness  of  the  forepart
of  the  mouth,  without  thirst,'. — Transient  heat,  in  the  afternoon,  with
thirst,". — At  4  o'clock,  heat  and  sweat,  without  dininution  of  the  pains,
uutil  6  o'clock,". — *Night,  heat,  without  third  or  sw^at*. — *Heat  and  restless-
ness the  whole  night,  and  pulsations  in  the  head  hindering  sleep,*. — [2820.]
Heat  in  the  face  and  body,  at  the  commencement  of  the  pains,'. — Heat  in
the  face,  at  7  o'clock  in  the  evening  (for  one  hour),'. — (Excessive  orgasm  of

t"  Not  found."  J  As  S.  138.  ?"  Not  found."  |1  "  Exsestuatio."

VOL.  I. — 85


546  AESENICUM  ALBUM.

the  blood),^^f — Sensation  as  if  the  blood  either  coursed  through  the  veins
too  rapidly,  or  were  too  hot,  with  small,  rapid  pulse,'. — Sensation  as  if  the
blood  in  the  arteries  was  boiling-hot,'". — Coldness  and  Heat  :  The  skin
is  cold  and  clammy  in  the  stage  of  collapse,  at  other  times  very  hot,  or
there  are  rapid  alternations  of  heat  and  cold,"\ — Fever ;  chilliness  and
heat  in  alternation,^'. — Very  hot,  then  very  cold,^^. — She  either  feels  too  cold
in  her  whole  body,  and  nevertheless  is  not  cold  to  the  touch  anywhere,  or
else  she  is  too  warm,  and  nevertheless  is  not  warm  to  touch,  except  perhaps
in  the  palm  of  the  hand,'. — Chill,  so  that  the  teeth  chattered ;  with  red
and  hot  forehead,"*. — [2830.]  Feverish  chilliness  and  shuddering ;  heat
of  the  external  ear;  anguish,  and  gnawing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
mixed  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,\ — Unpleasant  sensation
through  his  body,  like  a  sort  of  fever ;  when  lying  down,  his  head  becomes
hot,  especially  the  ears,  but  the  knees  are  cold  (after  thirty-six  hours),'. —
Feverish  chilliness,  followed  by  dry  heat  of  the  skin,". — Fever  ;  external
coldness  of  the  limbs,  internal  heat,  anxious  restlessness,  and  weak,  change-
able pulse,'". — Fever;  chilliness  in  the  daytime,  after  the  chilliness,  thirst;
in  the  evening,  a  good  deal  of  heat  in  the  face,'. — Feverish  shuddering  in
the  morning,  alternating  with  heat,'. — Fever  in  the  forenoon ;  chilliness
with  shaking,  without  thirst,  with  spasms  in  the  chest,  pains  in  the  whole
body,  and  a  kind  of  inability  to  use  one's  senses ;  afterwards,  heat  with
thirst,  followed  by  sweat  and  roaring  in  the  ears,'. — *Fever  in  the  afternoon ;
shuddering  about  the  head,  ivith  stretching  and  drawing  in  the  limbs,  followed
by  chilliness  and  goose-skin;  in  the  evening,  from  8  till 9  o'clock,  heat  over  the
body,  especially  in  the  face,  without  sweat;  cold  hands  and  feet^. — Rigors  fol-
lowed by  heat,  every  evening,''". — Fever,  every  other  day  ;  chilliness  at  6
o'clock  in  the  evening,  with  weariness  of  the  thighs,  and  bruised  feeling ;
on  the  third  afternoon,  at  5  o'clock,  inclination  to  lie  down,  afterwards,
chilliness  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst ;  afterwards,  heat  without  thirst,
and  an  oppressive,  aching  pain  in  the  forehead,'. — [2840.]  [Fever ;  short-
lastiug  coldness  at  night,  followed  by  violent  heat  with  delirium,  but  no
thirst,  H.],^. — Sweat  :  Skin  very  dry,'". — Skin,  tongue,  and  fauces  dry,'".
— Skin  dry  and  hot,'". — They  then  rarely  perspired,  even  in  the  hottest
weather  (while  the  skin  was  yellow  and  brown),''*. — Sweat,"  "IJ — (Sweat
tingeing  the  skin,  and  especially  the  eyes,  yellow),".§ — *  Offensive  sweat  over
whole  body,''". — Profuse  perspiration,™'. —  Very  copious  si«ea<s,'°* "'. — Very
easy  and  profuse  sweat,". — Cold  sweat,'^^* '". — [2850.]  Profuse  cold  sweat,'"'.
— Cold  sweat  all  over.'*'"". — Cold  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  disappearing
after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and,  after  he  had  felt  well  all  day,  returning
toward  evening,  and  disappearing  as  rapidly,'*". — Sudden  and  cold  sweat,".
— Cold,  clammy  sweat,"'l — *Cold  clammy  sweat,'". — (Cold,  viscid  sweat),".||
— Sweats  easily  ;  cool,"®. — Frequent  sweat,'"^ — Very  profuse  sweats,  which
lasted  many  days,'™. — [2860.]  Morning,  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  from
the  time  he  wakes  to  the  time  he  rises,'. — Sweat  only  in  the  face  in  the
morning,  when  waking,'. — Sweat,  in  the  forenoon,  with  heaviness  of  the
head,  roaring  in  the  ears,  and  trembling,'. — (Night-sweat),*. — Night-sweat,
three  nights  in  succession,'. — *  Profuse  sweat  about  the  lower  limbs  in  the  night,
especially  about  the  knces,^. — *  Sweat  while  in  bed,  exhausting  him  unto  faint-
ing^.— *Sweat  when  commencing  to  sleep,  going  off  after  sleeping  a  little,^. —
Sweat  on  the  hands  and  thighs,  at  the  commencement  of  sleep,  going  off

f  "  Exsestuatio."  %  Note  to  authority  47,  "  Stated  as  effect  of  antidote."

g  As  S.  138.  II  As  SS.  56  and  563.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  547

after  sleeping  awhile  (after  six  hours),^ — *  Sweat,  with  excessive  thirst;  he
would  like  to  drink  all  the  time,^. — [2870.]  Sweat  with  increased  diuresis,"'.
— Moist  skin,  with  cold  extremities,'™. — The  sweat  appears  when  the  fever
is  over,^.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  "When  waking,  ill-humor ;
in  bed,  indignation  ;  heaviness  of  head,  etc. ;  on  waking,  headache,  etc. ;  on
rising,  headache ;  when  waking,  dull  headache ;  after  rising,  heaviness  in
head,  etc. ;  when  rising,  bruised  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  gum  on  the  eyelids  ;
agglutination  of  lids  ;  pus  in  eyes  ;  ^slight  laehrymation,  etc. ;  stitching  in
the  ear ;  "^discharge  from  nose  at  5  a.m.,  etc. ;  *  Teeth  loose,  etc. ;  on  waking,
coryza,  etc.;  swelling  of  face ;  on  rising,  slight  toothache;  stitching  in  gums;
bitter  taste;  putrid  taste  ;  roughness,  etc.,  in  throat;  when  swallowing  first
mouthful,  scraping  in  throat;  when  waking,  feels  qualmish,  etc. ;  on  get-
ting up,  vomiting  of  bile ;  an  hour  after  getting  up,  vomiting  ;  bloateduess,
etc. ;  on  waking,  rumbling  in  bowels  ;  after  rising,  pains  in  the  intestines ;
"^before  and  during  diarrhwie  stool,  pinching  in  hypogastrium ;  diarrhoea;
early,  at  commencement  of  micturition,  burning  in  forepart  of  urethra;
erections ;  violent  cough ;  green,  etc.,  expectoration  ;  in  bed,  jerking  or
stitching  in  thumb,  etc. ;  tearing  in  metacarpal  bone ;  ^drawing  tearing
pain  in  hips,  etc. ;  on  rising,  attack  of  pain  in  thighs  ;  sweat  on  legs  ;  early,
heaviness,  etc.,  in  legs ;  cramp-pain  in  legs ;  heels  painful ;  trembling  of
whole  body;  muscular  stiffness;  fatigue;  on  rising,  general  malaise;  on
waking,  pains  all  over,  etc. ;  on  waking,  attack  of  chilliness;  from  the  time
of  waking  to  time  of  rising,  sweat ;  when  waking,  sweat  only  in  face ;
*feels  as  though  had  not  slept  enough.— {Morning  till  noon),  Cramp  in
finger-tips. — {Morning  till  evening).  Thirst. — {Every  morning).  At  5  o'clock
discharge  from  nose. — {Forenoon),  Nausea,  etc. ;  diarrhoea  ;  drawing  pain
in  back  ;  weariness,  etc.,  of  joints  ;  fever,  etc. ;  sweat,  etc. — {Towards  noon).
Stupid,  etc.,  feeling  in  head  ;  hammering  in  temples. — {Afternoon),  Draw-
ing headache;  when  walking,  tearing  across  stomach  ;  burning  pain  in  ab-
domen; colic  and  diarrhoea,  etc. ;  when  sitting,  jerking  in  legs  ;  chilliness,
etc. ;  face,  etc.,  cool ;  transient  heat ;  *fever,  etc. — {Every  afternoon),  *At
5  o'clock,  shuddering ;  *at  3  o'clock,  chilliness,  etc. — ( Towards  evening),
*  Tearing  through  left  meatus  auditorius ;  crawling  in  fingers  and  toes ;  chil-
liness with  coldness;  attack  of  chilliness,  etc. ;  fever. — {Evening),  Anxiety,
etc. ;  confusion  of  head  ;  swelling  of  frontal  eminences ;  frontal  heaviness ;
headache  over  left  eye ;  *feeling  of  sand  in  eyes  ;  feeling  of  burning,  etc.,
in  eyes;  burning  in  outer  ear;  heat  in  left  nasal  fossa,  etc. ;  pain  in  molar
teeth ;  swelling  of  submaxillary  gland ;  pain  in  throat ;  thirst ;  pain  in
stomach  ;  after  eating,  feeling  of  repletion  in  stomach  ;  *when  sitting,  pain
from  pit  of  stomach  round  left  ribs;  after  lying  down,  spasms,  etc.,  in  abdo-
men, etc. ;  after  lying  down,  pains  in  the  intestines ;  shortly  after  lying
down,  lancinations  in  left  side  of  abdomen ;  *before  going  to  sleep,  smoky
feeling  in  larynx,  etc. ;  ''^directly  after  lying  down,  cough ;  *cough,  without
expectoration,  etc. ;  *when  getting  into  bed  and  lying  down,  loses  breath ;
chilliness  in  chest;  *constriction  of  chest,  etc. ;  violent  burning  of  chest ;  stiff-
ness of  cervical  muscles ;  in  bed,  pain  in  finger  and  foot ;  pain  in  wrist ;
in  bed,  contraction  of  muscles  of  thighs  ;  chilliness  of  legs  ;  *when  falling
asleep,  starting  in  affected  part;  general  feeling  of  fatigue  ;  pains  in  whole
body ;  boil  on  hand  painful ;  while  asleep,  loud  moaning ;  after  going  to
bed,  violent  chilliness;  attack  of  chilliness. — {Every  evening).  Feverish
shuddering  ;  before  retiring,  shuddering ;  attack  of  fever ;  rigora,  etc. —
{Every  other  day).  Fever,  etc. — {Night),  *  Delirium, ;  talked senselessly ;


548  ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

headache ;  tearing,  etc.,  headache ;  throbbing  in  whole  head,  etc. ;  head-
ache over  left  eye ;  pain  in  left  eye  ;  'pressive  pain  under  right  eye ;  alter-
nate dilatation  and  contraction  of  pupils;  ^stitching  pain  in  left  ear;  tooth-
ache ;  regularly  recurring  tearing  in  teeth ;  pain  in  gums  ;  thirst ;  hic-
cough ;  when  rising,  hiccough,  etc. ;  vomiting ;  vomiting  and  diarrhoea ;
*anxiety  in  pit  of  stomach ;  colic  pains ;  burning  of  the  hsemorrhoids ;
*iudden  catarrh ;  *cough ;  *violeni  palpitation ;  *strong,  etc.,  palpitation ;
pain  in  back,  etc. ;  itching,  etc.,  of  back  ;  in  bed,  tearing  in  arm  ;  crawling
in  hands ;  in  bed,  cramp  in  fingers ;  tearing  in  lower  limb,  etc. ;  in  bed,  cramp
in  calves;  when  lying  in  bed,  tearing  in  the  corn;  when  waking,  burning
in  all  the  veins  ;  smarting  and  itching  ;  itching  on  the  head  ;  during  sleep,
the  pains  are  felt ;  in  bed,  cannot  get  warm  ;  *heat,  without  thirst  or  sweat ;
*heat,  etc. ;  short-lasting  coldness,  etc. ;  *sweat ;  *profuse  sweat  about  the
lower  limbs. — {Every  other  night).  Formication  in  the  head. — {Before  mid-
night), Pain  wal-.es  him. — {Midnight),  Hammering  in  the  temples  ;  ^oppres-
sion, etc. — {After  midnight),  *  Desire  to  kill  himself :  *pubative  throbbing  in
the  eyes;  in  two  hours,  pains  in  stomach;  *deep,  etc.,  cough, from  3  o'clock
on ;  '''tosses  about,  etc. — ( Towards  morning),  Mental  excitement. — (2  a.m.),
*Fever,  etc. — {About  3  a.m.),  Moaning  while  asleep,  etc. — (3  a.m.),  *  After
waking,  anxiety ;  *violent  anxiety. — (11  a.m.),  Qualmishness. — (11  a.m.  to
6  P.M.),  Stupid  feeling  in  head. — (1  p.m.),  Pain  in  eyelids,  etc. — -(4  to  6
p.m.).  Heat,  etc.^ — {After  4  p.m.),  Waterbrash. — {Towards  5  p.m.),  Face,
etc.,  cold. — (6  to  8  p.m.).  Pressing  in  head. — (7  p.m.),  Heat  in  face. — (10
P.M.),  Fever,  etc. — (11  p.m.),  Headache,  etc. — (Open  air).  Desire  to  vomit.
— (  Going  into  open  air),  Dizziness. — (  Walking  in  open  air).  Pressing  sensa-
tion in  liver  ;  ^suffocative  sensation  ;  shuddering. — {Left  alone),  *Dread  of
death. — -{Ascending  stair.i).  Suffocative  feeling  ;  *oppression  of  chest. — {In
bed).  Exhausting  sweat. — {After  breakfast),  Pressure  at  the  stomach. —
(Breathing),  Stitches  in  right  upper  chest ;  stitch  in  left  chest. — (Drawing
deep  breath).  Cough. — (  When  clearing  throat).  Pain  under  left  hypochon-
drium. — {Oold  air).  Pains  in  limbs  ;  *cough. — {Cold  water),  Pains  in  limbs.
— {Coughing),  *  Heat  in  head ;  tendency  to  retching;  stitching  pain  in  pit
of  stomach  ;  bruised  pain  in  abdomen  ;  ^oppression  of  chest ;  stitches  under
ribs,  etc. ;  *  stitching  pain  in  sternum. — (After  coughing),  ^Breathing  becomes
short. — (Crying),  Tendency  to  retching;  weak  feeling  in  epigastrium. —
{Before  dinner).  Nausea,  etc. — (After  dinner).  Sour  eructations ;  nausea,
etc. ;  pressure  at  stomach,  etc. ;  shuddering. — (Drinking  water').  Renews
convulsions. — (After  drinking).  Eructations  ;  distension,  etc.,  in  abdomen  ;
*vomiting ;  renewed  vomiting,  etc.;  *cough;  shuddering  immediately;
*  shuddering,  etc.— (Eating),  Compressive  sensation  in  chest. — (After  eating).
Melancholic,  etc. ;  distension,  etc.,  in  abdomen  ;  in  two  hours,  dLsgust,  etc.;
in  a  little  while,  pressure  about  stomach  ;  yawning  and  weakness. — (Aftei-
eating  and  drinking),  Bitter,  etc.,  taste  in  mouth.— (.4/if«r  a  little  soup).
Retching  and  vomiting. — (  When  fatigued).  Asthma. — (Feeling  the  part).
Cutting  pain  in  side  of  abdomen. — (During  fever-paroxysm),  Tension  in
hypochondria. — (After  the  heat),  Inclination  to  vomit. — (During  ill-humor).
Hemorrhage  from  nose. — (Inspiring),  Stitches  in  region  of  kidneys. — (Fidl
inspiration),  Fain  in  lower  chest. — (Light),  *  Headache. — (Light  of  candle
before  eyes),  Alternate  dilatation  and  contraction  of  pupil. — (Looking  stead-
ily). Eyes  feel  worse. — (Looking  up),  Pressive  pain  over  left  eyelid. — (Lying
down),  Vertigo,  etc. ;  feeling  of  burning,  etc.,  in  eyes ;  nightly  pains ;  tear-
ings  around  ankles,  etc. — (Lying  on  right  side).  Movements  in  the  muscles
of  left  side  of  back. — (Lying  on  affected  side).  Pain  in  gums. — (Attempting


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  549

to  lie  on  back),  *Pain  about  the  navel. — (Lying  on  back),  Heart  beats  faster.
—(Before  a  meal).  Nausea. — {After  a  meal),  Bleeding  of  under  lip ;  bitter
taste  in  mouth ;  bitter  throat ;  bitter  ernctations ;  frequent  hiccough ;  imme-
diately, vomiting ;  *wcight  in  stomach  ;  pressure  at  orifice  of  stomach,  etc. ;
distension  of  abdomen  ;  *  great  weariness ;  chilliness;  pains  in  left  arm. —
{Before  menses).  Tearing  in  teeth,  etc. — {During  menses).  Cutting  from  pit
of  stomach  to  hypogastriura,  etc. ;  stitching  from  rectum  to  anus,  etc. —
{On  appearance  of  menses).  Pains  in  feet. — {After  menses).  Discharge  from
vagina,  etc. ;  discharge  of  bloody  mucus. —  {During  micturition),  Va.m  in
left  groin  ;  ^burning  in  urethra. — {Motion),  Pain  increased  ;  ^sensation  as
if  brain  moved,  etc. ;  throbbing  pain  in  forehead;  cough  ;  tearing  in  lower
limbs;  pains  in  feet;  flushes  of  heat. — {Moving  finger-tips  before  eyes),  Dila-
tation and  contraction  of  pupils.— (Jfcwinj'  the  part).  Wavering  sensation  in
brain  ;  *while  walhing,  brain  seems  to  flap ;  eyes  feel  worse  ;  *pain  of  margin
of  eyelids ;  cramp  in  hand;  pain  in  finger-joints. — -{During  the  nausea).  It
seems  yellow  before  eyes. — {Noise),  Headache. — {Pressure),  *  Burning  pain
in  region  of  stomach ;  *pain  over  region  of  liver ;  pain  in  abdomen. — {Peri-
odic), Colic ;  all  symptoms. — {At  every  new  paroxysm  of  pain),  Roaring  in
ears.  —  {Raising  head),*  Vomiting. — {Attempting  to  raise  himself),*  Pain
about  navel. — {Raising  himself  in  bed).  Desire  to  vomit. — {Reading  by  can-,
die-light),* Dryness  of  eyelids.  —  {Every  respiration),  Increase  of  pain. —
{Rest),  Uneasiness  in  abdomen. — {Before  retiring).  Uneasiness  in  all  the
limbs. — {After  riding  on  horseback),  Pain  in  the  whole  trunk. — (  On  rising),
Vertigo. — {Rising  from  seat).  Pain  in  left  l^nee.— {Entering  room  from  open
air),  *  Fever;  *heaviness  of  head,  etc. — {Re-entering  room),  lihzmess;  heavi-
ness in  head. — {During  the  shuddering),  *  Tearing  in  the  legs. — {Sitting),
Vertigo ;  heaviness  in  head ;  ringing  in  right  ear ;  nausea,  etc. ;  tensive
paiu  in  chest ;  nightly  pains  ;  weariness,  etc.,  of  joints ;  tension  of  bends
of  knees;  bruised  pain  on  side  of  knee  ;  pain  in  right  calf;  paiu  in  aflfected
part. — {Sitting  up),  In  bed,  qualmishness. — {Sitting  down  and  attending  to
business),  Much  uneasiness. — {Resting  legs  on  floor  while  sitting).  Drawing
pain  in  legs. — {After  scratching).  Itching  of  pimples  on  hands,  etc. ;  burn-
ing itching  parts  painful. — (  When  going  to  sleep),  *Tvvitchings  in  upper  lip  ;
*startings  of  the  limbs;  sweat;  sweat  on  hands  and  thighs. — (While  asleep),
*  Grinding  of  teeth ;  starlings  of  whole  body. — (Sneezing),  Stitches  in  region
of  kidneys. — -{Speaking  loud).  Increases  pain. — (Standing),  Heaviness  in
head ;  headache,  etc. ;  tension  of  bends  of  knees. — -(Jiefore  stool),  Disten-
sion of  stomach,  etc. — (After  stool),  Distension  of  abdomen  ;  ^burning  at
rectum,  etc. ;  *palpitation  of  heart,  etc. — (After  diarrhoea),  Internal  heat,
with  thirst. — (  When  stooping).  Swelling  of  left  carotid  ;  pain  in  groin,  etc. ;
stitches  in  chest. — (Stretching  feet).  Sense  of  burning,  etc.,  in  lower  abdo- '
men. — (After  supper).  Chilliness  in  chest.— (  When  swallowing).  Ear  closed
from  within ;  pain  in  root  of  tongue. — (Between  acts  of  swallowing).  Scrap-
ing sensation  behind  velum  pendulum  palati. — (Talking),  Pain  in  pharynx ;
pressure  at  external  wall  of  stomach  ;  flashes  of  heat  during  chilliness. —
(Being  talked  to).  Makes  pain  intolerable. — (Touch),  Bruised  pain  in  exter-
nal head ;  pain  in  stomach,  etc. ;  *pains  about  navel ;  pains  in  abdomen;
violent  pains  in  abdomen,  etc. ;  pain  in  boil  in  groin  ;  soreness  of  anus  ;
bruised  pain  on  side  of  knee. — (Touching  the  hair).  Headache. — (Touching
painless  side),  Pain  in  face. — -(Turning  head),  Stitching  pain  in  root  of
tongue. — (When  vexed),  Asthma.  —  (Vomiting),  Headache;  bleeding  at
nose;  violent  internal  heat,  etc. — (After  vomiting).  Trembling  of  limbs ;
pulse  increased. — (After  vomiting  and  diarrhoea).  Pain  in  stomach. — (  Walk-


550  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

ing),  Vertigo;  sensation  in  head  as  of  two  marbles  striking  each  other;
headache;  pains  in  hseraorrhoids ;  short  respiration;  *tightness  of  chest;
*dyspn(ea;  tearing  in  lower  limbs ;  cramp  in  calf. — (  Walking  fast),  *  Oppres-
sion of  chest.

Atnelloration. — (Morning),  Dryness  in  throat. — (Evening),  Pains
abate. — (Open  air),  Strong  inclination  to  run  into;  ^heaviness  in  head;
*discharge  from  nose. — (  Walking  in  open  air).  Nausea,  etc. — (Belching),
Drawing  pain  in  back,  etc. — (Applying  cold  water),  Headache. — (Compress-
ing the  part),  Pains  abate.  —  (After  dinner).  Shuddering  disappears. —
(Drinking  water),  Vomiting.  —  (Drinking  brandy),  *vom\tmg.  —  (Lying
down).  Uneasiness  in  all  the  limbs. — (Sweet  milk).  Pains  in  stomach.—
(Moving  about).  Many  symptoms ;  nightly  pains. — (Moving  affected  part  to
and  fro).  Tearing  in  arms  and  lower  limbs. — (Rubbing),  Pain  over  anus,
etc. ;  *Pain  in  forehead. — [After  scratching).  Itching  in  pimples. — (Sitting),
Stupefying,  etc.,  pain  in  head  ;  dull  headache  ;  ^jerking  toothache. — (After
sleeping  a  little).  Sweat  goes  off. — (Standing),  Many  symptoms. — {After  stool),
*  Colic. — (  Touch),  Stitching  pain  in  left  temple. — (  Uncovered),  Desire  to  be.
- — (After  vomiting).  Burning,  etc.,  in  stomach. — (Warmth  of  stove),  Pain  in
gums. — (Application  of  warmth).  Pain  of  limbs;  tearing  in  calves;  pains  in
ankles.

ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Arsenetted  hydrogen,  Arsenious  hydride  or  Arsine  (AsH,).  Preparation,
Dissolve  the  freshly  prepared  gas  in  ice-cold  distilled  water.  (Provings
were  made  by  inhaling  the  gas.)

Authorities.  1,  Gehlen,  Buchner  Tox.,  1827 ;  2,  Schindler,  Graefe  and
Walther  Journ.  (inhaled  an  amount  representing  i  grain  of  the  metal)  ;  3,
Eisenmenger,  Z.  i.  H.  Kl.,  1,  103 ;  4,  O'Reilly,  Dublin  Journ.,  1842 ;  5,
Ollivier,  Gaz.  d.  Hop.,  1863.

jyiinil, — Anxiety,  he  believes  his  death  is  near,  and  despairs  of  being
better  (during  the  vomiting  ;  more  courage  afterward  till  the  next  vomiting
turn),  (six  hours),^ — Disinclined  to  work,^ — Almost  unconscious,^

Heud. — Vertigo,  violent  on  going  upstairs,  so  that  he  staggered  against
the  sides  of  the  stairs  (the  vertigo  was  not  noticed  on  a  level  floor  or  going
downstairs),  (three  hours),''. — Vertigo  and  general  weakness,*. — Headache
increased  during  the  chill,'. — Violent  headache  in  the  forehead,^ — Violent
pressive  frontal  headache,  especially  worse  at  night,  and  accompanied  by
such  excessive  weakness  that  he  was  obliged  to  lie  in  bed  for  several  hours,
'after  eating  (first  and  second  days),'.

EyeK, — Eyes  yellow,  deeply  sunken,  with  broad  blue  circles  about
them,l — [10.]  All  the  hair  on  the  "  deadened  "  parts  became  snowy  white,
and  the  white  brows  formed  a  strange  contrast  to  the  dark-brown  face,^ —
Eyes  sunken,  lustreless;  conjunctiva  bulbi  red,'.

Nose. — Nose  and  lips  somewhat  excoriated,'. — Violent  sneezing,  and
such  coldness  of  the  nose  that  it  must  be  wrapped  up  with  warm  cloths,^.

Face. — Face  pale,*. — Face  yellowish,'. — The  features  were  painfully
drawn,". — Lips  colorless,^

Mouth, — Tongue  yellow,'. — Taste  bitter,'*.

(SfOJrtacAt.— Appetite  very  poor,'.— [20.]  Thirst  great,^ — Thirst  ex-
cessive,'.— Eructations,'. — Spasmodic  eructations  of  enormous  quantities  of
tasteless  gas,  from  the  stomach,  without  relief  of  the  pain  in  the  abdomen


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  551

that  causes  hira  to  moan  (six  hours),'. — Incessant  retching  and  vomiting,'.
— Vomits  everything  taken  into  the  stomach,'. — Violent  vomiting,  could
not  retain  the  slightest  thing,*. — Vomited  food,^ — Vomiting  with  the  colic,
of  green  mucus,  bitter  (six  hours),^ — Pressure  in  the  stomach,'. — [30.]
Pains  in  epigastrium,^ — Pressure  in  epigastric  region,  during  chill,'. — Vio-
lent cutting  pains  in  the  epigastric  region  and  below  it  (six  hours),^ —
Pressure  of  the  hand  causes  dull  pain  in  the  epigastrium,*.

Abdomen. — Distension  of  abdomen,  during  chill,'. — Glowing  heat  in
the  abdomen,  with  cold  extremities,^

Stool  and  Anns, — Obstinate  constipation,'.

TJrinai'jf  Orrians. — Hematuria,  passed  two  ounces  of  blood  through
urethra*. — Urine  dark,  reddish-black;  it  formed  a  thick  clot  of  blood  in  the
vessel, I

Sexual  Organs. — The  foreskin  and  glans  were  covered  with  pus-
tules, which  left  behind  small  round  superficial  ulcers,  sixty-five  on  the  out-
side of  the  foreskin  alone,^.

Respirntory  Airparatus. — [40.]  Voice  whispering,*.

Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest  during  the  chill,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  small,  rapid,'. — Pulse  90,  weak,*.

Nech  and  Bach. — Tearing  pain  in  the  neck,  during  the  chill,'. —
The  pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys  became  exceedingly  severe,  with
urging  to  urinate,'. — An  unpleasant  pressive  feeling  in  the  kidney  region,
which  rapidly  increased,  and  spread  up  the  back  to  between  the  shoulders
(four  hours),^ — Slight  pain  in  the  lumbar  region,*. — Very  violent  pain  in
the  lumbar  region,^

Extremities  in  General. — Coldness  of  the  extremities  (four
hours),l — [50.]  Extremities  cool,^

Upper  Extremities. — A  kind  of  stiffening  of  the  upper  extremi-
ties, which  afterward  extended  to  the  lower  extremities,  and  caused  a  prick-
ing sensation,*. — Tearing  pains  in  the  upper  extremities,  during  the  chill,'.
— Pains  in  the  elbows  and  upper  arms  (five  hours),^

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  in  lower  extremities,  especially  in  the
right,*. — Rheumatic  tearing  pains  in  the  knees  (four  hours),''.

Generalities. — All  the  hair  over  the  "deadened"  parts  became
snowy  white,  and  the  white  brows  formed  a  strange  contrast  to  the  dark-
brown  face,^ — Motion  difficult,*. — Great  fatigue  and  weakness,'. — -[60.]
Weak  and  prostrated  on  waking,'. — Sudden,  indescribable  weakness  and
nausea,'. — The  hands  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  forearm,  the  feet  as  far  as
near  the  knees,  the  nose,  the  eyebrows,  became  dead,  the  pulse  ceased,  and
every  sign  of  life  left  these  parts,  though  they  could  be  moved  (five  hours),'.
— Unpleasant  crawlings  in  the  deadened  limbs  (as  they  became  restored),
especially  in  the  nose,'.

Skin.— Skm  became  dark-brown,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Sleepless,'.

jPej'e*'.— Temperature  diminished,*. — Chill,*. — Chilliness  over  the  whole
body  (four  hours),'. — Chilly  while  walking,'.— [70.]  Chilliness  became  very
violent  on  undressing,  at  10  p.m.  (in  five  hours),'. — Severe  chill  (on  the
third  day),  at  3  p.m.,  at  the  time  when  the  headache  was  ustfally  worse ;
beginning  with  yawning,  discomfort,  anxiety,  and  chilliness,  accompanied
by  oppression  of  the  chest,  pain  in  the  neck,  and  drawing  in  the  upper  ex-
tremities ;  increased  frontal  headache.  After  a  two-hour's  chill,  came  a
moderate  heat,  which  lasted  till  8  p.m.,  with  a  hot,  dry  mouth,  thirst  only
little. After  the  heat,  a  very  slight  sweat,  during  which  the  patient  fell


552  ARSENICUM  lODATUM.

asleep;  at  first  frequent  startings,  during  the  unrefreshing  sleep,  but  after
midnight  he  became  quiet/. — On  the  fourth  day  a  slight  fever-paroxysm,'.
— On  the  fifth  day,  a  paroxysm  severe  as  on  the  third  day,  after  which  it
returned  every  day  (this  attack  was  cured  by  Nux  vom.,  but  was  renewed
on  ;i  subsequent  occasion  from  inhaling  the  same  gas),'.

Conditions. — Aggravation, — (Night),  Frontal  headache;  pain  in
lower  extremities. — (3  p.m.).  Severe  chill,  etc. — (After  moving  in  open  air),
Aggravated  always. — (During  chill).  Headache  ;  pressure  in  epigastric  re-
gion ;  distension  of  abdomen  ;  oppression  of  chest ;  tearing  in  neck  ;  tear-
ing in  upper  extremiti,''s. — (Damp  atmosphere),  AggravaXed  always. — (After
eating),  Fvouta,].  headache. — (Pressure),  Dull  pain  in  epigastrium. — (Un-
dressing), At  10  P.M.,  chill  became  very  violent. — (On  waking),  Weak,  etc.
— (  While  ivalklng).  Chilly. — (On  walking  upstairs),  Vertigo.

A7Helioi'ut'io'ii. — (Sweat),  "Deadness"  in  limbs. — (During  vomiting).
More  courage.


ARSENICUM  lODATUM.

Arsenious  Iodide,  Aslg,,  Iodide  of  Arsenic.  Preparation /or  use.  Tritu-
ration.

Authorities.  1,  E.  W.  Beebe  (U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  1,  339),  took  repeated
doses  of  one  grain  of  the  1st  dec. ;  2,  W.  Jas.  Blakely  (H.  Month.,  3,  265),
took  six  doses  of  the  2d  dec.  in  three  days.

Heod. — Headache  all  over  the  head  (after  twenty-five  hours),''. — Bad
feeling  in  head,  like  a  bad  cold  (third  evening),'. — Woke  in  the  morning
with  a  bad  headache,  which  lasted  all  day  ;  dull,  heavy,  with  pressing  from
within  outwards,  worse  on  motion,  stooping  or  studying  (fourth  day),' —
Head  seemed  enormously  large  and  heavy,  with  pain,'. — Dulness  of  the
head,  with  dull  pain  in  the  left  malar  bone,  and  occasional  slight  frontal
headache,  the  entire  morning,^ — Pain  in  head  prevented  sleep  (fourth
day  1,'. — Severe  frontal  headache,  with  dulness  of  the  entire  head  during
the  forenoon,  with  stiffness  and  soreness  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  worse
when  moving  the  head,". — An  exceedingly  sharp  pain  in  the  forehead  and
in  both  ears,  especially  the  left  ear,  when  riding,  in  a  sharp  cold  wind  (after
three  hours), ^ — Several  times  had  a  pain  in  the  right  temple,^

Ejjes. — [10.]  Weakness  of  the  eyes  with  burning  pain ;  feeling  as  if
laehrymation  would  set  in  (after  two  hours),^

Nose. — Nose  quite  dry  (fourth  day),'.

3Ioiith. — Intermittent  pain  in  the  first  right  upper  molar  tooth,^

Throat. — After  moving  about  a  short  time  (morning  of  fourth  day),
began  to  hawk  up  quantities  of  thick  mucus  and  clotted  blood  mixed;  this
continued  a  half  hour ;  it  seemed  to  come  from  the  head,  and  relieved  the
pain  very  materially,'.

Stomach. — No  appetite,  ate  nothing  all  day  (third  day),'. — Pains  in
stomach  aggravated  on  rising  after  sitting  (third  day),'. — Pain  and  pyrosis
became  unbearable  (somewhat  relieved  by  a  dose  of  Bry.  6th),'. — Con-
siderable pain  in  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon,  with  raising  of  wind  and
a  greasy  fluid  similar  to  that  after  eating  pork  (third  day),'.

Abdomen. — *The  abdomen  is  hard  and  distended  with  flatus,  which  is
constantly  discharged,^ — Sharp,  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  which  warned
him  to  go  to  stool ;  the  pains  became  excruciating,  embracing  the  entire
abdomen,  and  obliging  him  to  bend  almost  double ;  after  a  great  deal  of


ARSENICUM  lODATUM.  553

straining,  he  passed  a  large,  soft  stool,  which  afforded  some  relief  (after
eleven  houl■s),^ — [20.]  Severe  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  would
have  a  stool ;  he  had  no  stool,  but  large  quantities  of  wind  escaped  ;  these
pains  are  partially  relieved  by  an  escape  of  flatus,  and  by  the  application
of  warmth  to  the  abdomen  (after  eight  and  a  half  hours),^

Stool  and  Anus. — Continual  aching  in  the  anus,  with  a  seeming
inability  to  keep  the  sphincter  closed ;  this  would  amount  to  a  real  dysenteric
straining  at  stool  (third  day),\ — On  rising  in  the  morning  great  urging  to
stool,  but  stool  was  scanty  and  small  in  size,  as  though  the  anus  was  con-
tracted ;  the  stool  was  mushy,  with  occasional  scybalse,  also  small  in  size,
of  a  peculiar  black  color,  resembling  fseces  of  an  ox  ;  attended  with  strain-
ing as  in  dysentery  (third  day),^. — *DiarrhcBa,  for  six  or  seven  days,  five  to
ten  stools  each  day,  color  the  same  till  near  the  last,  when  it  began  to
assume  a  natural  color ;  the  diarrhoea  not  at  all  at  night,  but  the  urging  com-
menced on  beginning  to  move  about  in  the  morning,^.— Stool  in  the  evening
soft  and  mushy,  with  considerable  straining,  very  dark,  almost  black,
(secoud  day),\

R('Sl>iratoyy  Apparattts. — *Slight  hacking  cough,  with  dryness
and  stoppage  of  the  nostrils,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — *Pulse  irregular,  96 ;  in  health,  about  75  (after
ten  minutes),^

Wech  and  Hacli. — Burning  heat  in  the  back  (lumbar  region),  as  if
the  clothes  were  on  fire  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),^ — Soreness  of  the  back,
especially  of  the  back  of  the  neck,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten,^ — Itching  over
the  back  (after  two  and  a  quarter  hours),''.

Extremities  in  General. — [30.]  Heaviness  of  the  limbs,  with
weariness  of  the  whole  body,^

Upper  Extremities. — Sharp  pain  in  upper  third  of  right  humerus,
while  writing  (two  hours),  lasted  ten  minutes,  and  suddenly  shifted  to  the
metacarpal  bones,  remained  some  time,  and  was  then  felt  in  the  left  femur ;
pain  rheumatic,  as  if  in  the  shaft  of  the  bone,'. — Itching  of  the  back  of  the
left  hand,  followed  by  stinging  itching  of  the  back  of  the  right  hand  (after
two  and  a  quarter  hours),^.

Lower  Extreniities. — Peculiar  chilliness  of  left  thigh,  followed  by
formication  and  weight  in  the  left  foot ;  the  latter  afterwards  extended  up
the  left  leg ;  the  clothes  when  touching  the  limb  feel  cold ;  the  formication
and  weight  afterwards  extended  to  the  right  foot,  and  are  partially  relieved
by  walking;  the  chilliness  disappeared  on  the  application  of  warmth  ;  the
chilliness  began  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  and  was  noticed  more
particularly  there  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),^.— A  very  severe,  laming
pain  in  the  calf  of  the  left  leg,  afterwards  embracing  the  entire  leg,  disap-
pearing during  active  motion,  returning  when  at  rest,l — Tired,  weary  feel-
ing in  the  calves  of  both  legs,  while  kneeling  (after  two  hours),l — Dull,
heavy  soreness  of  the  calf  of  the  left  leg  (after  one  hour),^ — Formicating
prickings  on  the  extreme  left  ankle,  followed  by  the  same  on  the  inner
right  ankle  (after  one  hour),^ — *An  unpleasant,  slightly  painfulformication
on  the  external  border  of  the  left  foot,  followed  by  a  burning  pain  on  the
left  instep  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour,),^

Getieralities. — Felt  as  though  he  had  taken  cold ;  the  next  morning,'.

Skin. — [40,]  Itching  on  various  parts  of  the  body  (after  two  and  a
quarter  hours),^ — Persistent  itching  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  especially
of  the  back,^

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Constant  yawning ;  he  becomes  sleepy  much


554  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

earlier  than  usual  (after  two  hours)/. — Night  restless,  slept  little  (third
day),\

Fever. — Some  fever,  pulse  80,  strong  (third  day),\

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning),  On  waking,  headache  ;  on
rising,  dulness  of  head ;  urging  to  stool,  etc. ;  on  beginning  to  move  about,
diarrhoea ;  feeling  as  though  he  had  taken  cold. — {Forenoon),  Frontal
headache,  etc. — (Evening),  Stool,  etc. — (  While  kneeling).  Tired  feeling  in
calves. — (Motion),  Headache  ;  frontal  headache ;  hawking  of  thick  mucus,
etc. — (Rest),  Pain  in  calf  of  leg. — (Riding  in  cold  wind).  Pain  in  forehead,
etc. — (Stooping),  Headache. — (Studying),  Headache.

Amelioration, — (Escape  of  flatus),  F&ins  in  abdomen. — (Active  mo-
tion). Pain  in  calf  of  leg. — (Stool),  Pains  in  abdomen. — (  Walking),  Formi-
cation, etc.,  in  foot. — (  Warm  applications),  Pains  in  abdomen  ;  chilliness
of  left  thigh.

ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Preparation,  The  pure  metal,  triturated.

Authority.  Lippe  (N.  Am.  J.  of  Hom.,  1,  301).  Published  provings  of
Dr.  Stevenson,  in  Thesis,  1851.

3£ind. — Depression  of  spirits. — Despondency. — Indifference.

Head, — A  sensation  as  of  vertigo  (second  day),  (1st  potency). —
Sensation  as  if  the  fumes  of  whisky  had  gone  to  the  head  (first  day),  (3d
potency). — Heavy  and  dull  feeling  in  the  forehead  (first  day),  (1st  potency).
— Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  extending  to  the  left  ear  and  left  eye,
with  nausea  (third  day),  (1st  potency). — Head  feels,  as  if  swollen  in  the
morning  when  awaking  (second  day),  (3d  potency). — Sensation  of  fulness
in  the  head  while  sleeping,  and  worse  when  awaking  in  the  night  (fourth
day),  (1st  potency). — [10.]  Headache  worse  when  laughing. — Itching  of
forehead  which  cannot  be  allayed  but  by  pinching  of  the  skin  (twelfth
day),  (30th  potency). — Soreness  of  the  scalp  when  even  pulling  but  one
hair  (third  day),  (1st  potency).

Eyes. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  eyes. — Eyelids  slightly  inflamed
and  swollen  (first  day),  (1st  potency). — Eyes  so  painful  that  he  cannot
read  much.

Nose. — Fluent  coryza. — Scalding  water  runs  from  the  nose,  excoriating
the  nostrils  (fifth  day),  (30th  potency). — The  coryza  returns  in  fifteen  days
with  heat  in  the  face  and  hoarseness,  lasting  three  days,  when  it  became
accompanied  with  angina  faucium,  for  which  Bell.™,  one  dose  was  success-
fully administered.

Face. — Itching  and  burning  in  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  as  if  an
eruption  would  break  out  (fourth  day),  (30th  potency). — [20.]  Face  feels
as  if  bloated  (third  day),(lst  potency). — Bloated  face  (third  day),  (1st
potency). — -Itching  all  over  the  face,  which  can  only  be  relieved  by  pinch-
ing the  skin  (for  some  days). — Burning,  itching,  stinging  in  the  face,  with
swelling  ;  skin  feels  as  if  stiff,  relieved  by  bathing  the  face  with  cold  water  ;
later,  desquamation  in  small  scales. — The  itching  is  relieved  by  pressing,
but  not  by  scratching.

JKouth. — Ulcer  on  the  right  side  of  inner  under  lip  (first  day),  (3d
potency).^ — Ulcer  sore  when  touched  with  the  tongue  (first  to  second  day),
(3d  potency). — Ulcer  on  the  left  inner  side  of  the  under  lip  (first  day),
(3d  potency).— Dry  mouth. — Tongue  coated  white,  covered  with  mucus
(twelfth  day),  (1st  potency). — [30.]  Tongue  coated  white,  showing  the  im-


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  555

print  of  the  teeth  on  the  edges  (third  day),  (30th  potency). — Gums  swollen
and  painful  to  the  touch  (first  day),  (1st  potency).— Gums  swollen  and
feeling  as  if  scalded,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  ;  aversion
to  wines  and  liquors.

Stoma cJl.—l^iinsea,  (third  day),  (1st  potency). — Hot  eructations  as
of  bile  (third  day),  (1st  potency).

Abdomen, — Bloated  abdomen  (first  to  third  day),  (1st  potency). —
Tension  and  sensation  of  swelling  in  the  abdomen  (third  day),  (1st
potency).  —  Pulsation  in  the  umbilicus.  —  Numbness  and  sensation  of
paralysis  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  extending  from  the  vertebr88  to  the
crest  of  the  ilium  (first  day),  (30th  potency). — Lumbago. — [40.]  Varices
on  the  right  side  of  the  anus,  painful  after  stool  (not  bleeding),  (twelfth
day),  (1st  potency). — Varices  bleed  a  little  (fourth  day),  (30th  potency).
— Varices  feel  only  sore,  but  neither  pain  after  stool  nor  bleed  (sixteenth
day),  (30th  potency). — After  awaking  in  the  morning  at  6  o'clock,  dis-
tressing, lancinating,  griping  pain  in  the  bowels ;  afterwards,  one  sharp,
burning,  watery  stool,  relieving  the  abdominal  pain,  but  leaving  much  de-
bility ;  he  falls  asleep  sitting  on  a  chair,  and  has  no  appetite ;  pulse  60,
much  fuller  than  in  health  (second  day),  (1st  potency). — Constipated
(sixteenth  day),  (80th  potency). — Itching  in  the  right  groin  extending
down  to  the  knee  (twelfth  day),  (30th  potency). — In  the  right  groin  a
painful  swelling,  worse  when  extending  the  leg ;  pain  goes  up  to  the  hip'
and  continues  for  a  long  time.  In  the  same  place  where  this  painful  swell-
ing appears,  a  bubo  suppurated  twenty-four  years  ago.

Urine. — Red  sandy  sediment  in  the  urine  (third  day),  (30th  potency).
— Offensive  sweat  on  the  genitals  (for  some  weeks).

Chest. — Pulsation  under  the  sternum  (first  day),  (30th  potency). —
[50.]  Slight  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the  heart
(second  day),  (30th  potency). — Pain  in  the  muscle  of  the  left  chest  (second
day),  (30th  potency). — Hoarseness  with  coryza  (twenty-first  day),  (30th
potency).

Upper  Extremities. — Sensation  of  swelling  of  hands  and  fingers
(third  day),  (1st  potency). — Hands  and  fingers  feel  stiff;  they  feel  as  if
they  could  not  be  closed  (third  to  ninth  day),  (1st  potency). — Cracking  of
all  the  finger-joints  (second  to  fourteenth  day),  (1st  potency). — Dry  heat
in  the  palms  of  the  hands. — A  scab  which  had  been  on  the  first  joint  of  the
third  finger  of  the  left  hand  for  twenty  years,  healed  entirely  ;  whereas,
formerly,  when  the  scab  had  been  torn  off,  it  left  a  spot  of  a  liver  color,
and  a  new  scab  soon  formed,".

Lower  Extremities. — Sensation  of  lameness  in  the  right  hip-joint
(second  day),  (3d  potency). — Sensation  as  if  he  could  not  use  the  limb ;  but
he  can  walk  well  enough  after  he  has  been  on  his  feet  a  short  time  (second
day),  (3d  potency). — [60.]  Pulsation  in  the  right  hip-joint,  worse  in  the
morning,  better  in  the  evenings  (second  day),  (3d  potency). — Deepseated
numbness  in  the  right  hip-joint  (first  day),  (30th  potency). — Sensation  of
paralysis  in  the  right  hip-joint,  extending  to  the  pubic  symphysis  down  in-
side of  the  thigh  to  the  knee. — Pulsation  in  the  right  anterior  tibial  artery
at  the  superior  extremity  of  its  inferior  third  (first  day),  (30th  potency). —
Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  right  knee-joint  (fourth  day),  (3d  potency). —
Feet  burning  hot,  feel  as  if  bloated  (first  day),  (1st  potency). — Feet  burning
hot,  without  the  least  moisture  (second  day),  (30th  potency). — *Feet,  usually
icy  cold,  have  become  warm  and  sweat  much. — Feet  burning  more  at  night ;


556  ARSENICUM  SULFURATUM  FLAVUM.

he  has  to  hold  them  out  of  bed ;  cannot  have  the  least  cover  on  them  (first
to  fourteenth  day),  (1st  and  3d  potency).

Geneval  Symptoms.— Dehility;  weariness;  general  prostration  of
strength. — [70.]  Emaciation.- — ^Pulsation  all  over  the  body. — The  symptoms
appear  first  on  the  right  and  then  on  the  left  side. — Morning  exacerbations.
— The  symptoms  recur  again  after  two  weeks. — Aggravation  after  drinking
a  small  quantity  of  brandy,  for  which  he  had  not  the  slightest  desire.

Sleep. — Unusually  sound  sleep  at  night  (first  day),  (3d  potency). —
Irresistible  inclination  to  sleep  in  the  daytime  and  early  in  the  evening
(second  day),  (3d  potency). — Great  drowsiness  in  the  morning  after  rising,
having  had  a  sound  sleep  (second  day),  (30th  potency). — Very  reluctant
to  rise  in  the  morning  after  a  good  night's  sleep  (third  day),  (3d  potency).
— [80.]  Feels  as  if  he  should  tall  asleep  while  walking  in  the  street  in  the
afternoon  (second  day),  (3d  potency). — Stupor  in  the  morning,  notwith-
standing a  good  sleep  all  night  (third  day),  (30th  potency). — Very  sleepy
but  cannot  tall  asleep  (second  day),  (30th  potency). — During  sleep  a  sensa-
tion as  if  he  would  have  a  headache  when  awaking  in  the  morning. —
During  sleep,  dreams  of  danger,  especially  of  danger  on  the  water  (fifth
day),  (1st  potency). — On  awaking  in  the  morning,  sensation  as  if  the  head
were  swollen  (first  day),  (1st  potency). — Normal  pulse  being  55,  is  ac-
celerated to  68  in  the  morning  (first  day),  (1st  potency). — Normal  pulse
being  65,  is  accelerated  to  68  in  the  morning  (second  day),  (1st  potency).
— Normal  pulse  being  55,  is  accelerated  to  68  in  the  morning  (first  day),
(30th  potency). — Normal  pulse  being  55,  is  accelerated  to  68  in  the  morn-
ing and  falls  down  to  53  in  the  evening  (second  day),  (3d  potency). —
[90.]  Normal  pulse  being  55,  is  accelerated  to  68  in  the  morning,  and
lowered  to  43  in  the  evening  (fourth  day),  (1st  potency). — Normal  pulse
being  55,  is  now  72  in  the  morning,  64  in  the  evening  (fifth  day),  (1st
potency). — Normal  pulse  being  55,  is  now,  in  the  morning,  64,  in  the
evening  48  (first  day),  (30th  potency). — Pulse  after  midnight  48,  in  the
morning,  after  rising,  68  (third  day),  (30th  potency). — Pulse  64  in  the
morning  (fourth  day),  (30th  potency). — The  pulse  continues  to  rise  in  the
morning,  and  to  fall  in  the  evening  for  thirty  days  longer,  without  taking
more  medicine.

Conditions. — Aggravations.  —  {Morning),  General  aggravation. —
Pulsation  in  right  hip.  On  waking,  head  feels  swollen.  {Brandy),  Aggra-
vates.— {Laughing),  Headache.

Ameliorations. — {Evening),  Pulsation  in  right  hip. — {Pinching  or
vressing  the  skin),  Itching.


ARSENICUM  SULFURATUM  FLAVUM.

Arsenious  Sulphide  (AsSj). Orpiment. Preparation,  Triturations.

Authority.  1,  "  Lhr."  in  Hahnemann,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  2,  118  ;  2,  Forestus,
Obs.,  etc.,  1619  (taken  from  Wibmer)  ;  3,  Low,  Sydenham  II  (ibid.);  4,
Gerbezius,  Ephem.,  1700  (ibid.);  5,  Van  Swieten,  Crantz,  Mat.  Med.
(ibid.)  ;  6,  Welper,  Hufel.  J.,  1831,  from  the  fumes  (ibid.) ;  7,  Henke,
Zeitschrift  (Z.  f.  horn.  Kl.,  1,  88).

3Iitid, — Intense  anxiety  and  fear,^ — Great  apprehension,^

Head. — Confusion  of  the  whole  head ;  too  many  thoughts  crowd  upon
him  (eight  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — Violent  dizziness  on  walking  in  the
open  air,  felt  through  the  whole  head  as  from  drunkenness  (five  and  a  half


AK8ENICUM  SULFURATUM  RUBRUM.  557

hours),^ — Forehead  cold,*. — Needle  stitches,  externally,  in  the  right  frontal
region  (five  liours),\ — Throbbing  stitches  in  the  right  frontal  region  (five
hours),'.

Hyefi. — Gum  in  the  canthi  (thiriy-three  hours),\

EUTS. — On  brushing  the  hair  on  the  occiput,  a  tensive  feeling  behind
the  right  ear,  as  if  something  stuck  behind  the  ear  and  pressed  it  forward
(one  and  a  half  hours),^

Mouth. — [10,]  The  teeth  pain  as  if  they  were  loose,  on  chewing  the
food  (five  hours),'. — Tongue  whitish-yellow,*. — Tongue  swollen,  after  several
hours  it  becomes  dry,'. — Tongue  stiff,  immovable,". — Mouth  and  throat
dry,". — Taste  bitter,*.

Stomach, — Total  disgust  for  all  nourishment,'. — Thirst,''. — Thirst
slight,'. — Excessive  nausea  after  dinner,  at  noon  (five  and  three-quarter
hours),'. — [20.]  Nausea  and  vomiting,*. — Violent  and  persistent  vomiting,'.
— Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,'' "  *. — Burning  and  gnawing  in  the  stomach,^

Abdomen. — Abdomen  distended,  soft,  painless,'. — Violent  gripings,''  ^
— Violent  colic  as  from  a  cold,  morning  on  waking  (twenty-five  hours),'.

Stool  and  ^Wtes.— Tenesmus,'. — Stool  thin,  liquid,  frequent,'.

ResjAratory  Apjiaratus. — Respiration  difficult;  this  lasted  sev-
eral years,*.

Chest. — [30.]  Needle  stitches  from  within  outward,  in  the  right  side
of  the  chest  (six  hours),'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  frequent,  hard ;  afterward  small,  thready,'.
— Pulse  slow,  suppressed ;  afterward  A'apid,  scarcely  to  be  felt,*.

Lower  Extremities. — Pains  in  left  knee  (twenty-five  minutes),'.

Generalities. — Twitchings,^ — Twitchings  for  thirty  years  after  tak-
ing it,^. — General  weakness,*. — Fainting,'' '. — Body  cold,  stiff,*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — A  start  on  falling  asleep  in  the  evening,  as
if  he  would  fall  out  of  bed  (eighteen  hours),'.

Fever [40.]  Heat,l

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Morning  on  waJcing),  Violent  colic. —
(Brushing  hair),  Tensive  feeling,  etc. — (Chewing),  Toothache. — (After  din-
ner), Nausea. — (  Walking  in  open  air).  Violent  dizziness.


AESENICUM  SULFURATUM  RUBRUM.

Arsenic  Sulphide  (or  disulphide),  ASjSj.  Realgar,  Sandarach.  Prepara-
tion, Triturations.

Authority. Poisonous  effects,  from  cases  cited  by  Wibmer.

Swelling  of  the  face. — Vomiting. — Vomiting,  profuse,  slimy. — Abdomen
distended. — Gripings  in  the  abdomen. — Diarrhoea,  offensive,  bilious. — Heat
and  thirst.^Fainting,  absolute. — Twitchings.


ARTEMISIA  ABSINTHIUM.

(See  Absinthium.)

ARTEMISIA  CONTRA  AND  JUDAICA.
(See  CiNA.)


558 ARTEMISIA  ABROTANUM— ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.


ARTEMISIA  ABROTANUM. ■

A.  abrotanum,  L.  Nat.  order,  Compositse.  Common  names,  Southern-
wood, old  man,  etc. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  stems  and  leaves.

Authority.  Gatchell,  U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  5,  291 ;  two  lady
provers,  tincture  used.

Milid. — Excited,  loquacious,  like  shouting,  good-humored,  happy
(secondary,  after  ceasing  the  drug),^ — Gloomy,  desponding,". — Thinks  her
brain  is  softening,^. — Ill-natured,  irritable,  violent,^ — Exceedingly  peevish,
feels  as  if  she  would  like  to  do  something  cruel ;  no  humanity,'^ — Feeble-
ness and  dulness  of  mind,^.— No  capacity  for  thinking,  as  if  all  bodily  and
mental  power  were  gone,^.

Send; — Head  weak,  could  not  hold  it  up,''. — The  left  brain  seems
especially  weak,  easily  fatigued  by  conversation  or  mental  effort,". — [10.]
Taciturnity,". — Sensation  as  of  creeping  chills  along  the  convolutions  of  the
brain,  accompanied  by  prickling  sensation,^ — Scalp  sore,  especially  left
side,\ — Itching  of  scalp,".

Throat. — Scraping  in  throat,'.

Stoinacll, — Gnawing  hunger;  craves  bread  boiled  in  milk,'. — Burning
in  stomach  like  acidity  (after  ceasing  the  drug),".

Abdomen. — Weak,  sinking  feeling  in  the  bowels,". — Colic  pains,".

Stool  and  Anus. — Piles  appeared,  and  became  worse  as  the  rheu-
matic pains  abated,  with  frequent  inclination  to  stool,  hardly  anything  but
blood  being  passed  (second  day),'.

Urinary  Organs.— [20 i]  Bladder  full,  urging  to  urinate,".— Urine
scanty,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Darting  pain  in  region  of  left  ovary,". — Twitch-
ing in  both  ovarian  regions7  seems  to  extend  to  the  back,".

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Raw  feeling  in  respiratory  tract  caused
by  cold  air,". — Sudden  hoarseness,". — Voice  weak,".

JVecJe  and  Hack, — Back  weak,  with  ovarian  pains,".

Extremities  in  General. — Joints  stiff,  with  prickling  sensation
(one  hour),'. — Prickling  and  burning  in  joints,'.

Upper  Extremities. — Arms  very  weak,". — [30.]  Fugitive  pains  in
the  shoulders  all  night,  could  not  sleep  for  pain,'. — Aching  from  shoulder-
joints  to  elbows.— Numb  sensation  in  fingers  (quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Dull
aching  in  first  finger  of  right  hand,  followed  by  similar  pain  in  other  fingers
of  the  right  and  left  hand  (half  an  hour),'.

Generalities. — Remains  very  much  relaxed  and  incapable,". — Very
weak,". — Disposed  to  lie  prone,". — A  weak  sickly  feeling  continued  many
days,  with  internal  trembling  when  excited,".

ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

A.  vulgaris,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Compositse.  Common  names,  Wormwood,
Mugwort,  Beifuss,  etc. Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  root.

Authority. Noack  and  Trinks.  ,

Increase  of  the  epileptic  paroxysms. — Irritation  of  the  nervous  system. —
Profuse  sweat,  having  a  peculiarly  characteristic,  fetid,  cadaverous  odor,
resembling  the  odor  of  garlic. — Violent  contractions  of  the  uterus ;  labor
pains. — Prolapsus,  rupture  of  the  uterus. — Miscarriage. — Profuse  menstrua-
tion ;  metrorrhagia. — Increase  of  the  lochial  discharge.


AKUM  DEACUNCULUS— ARUM  ITALICUM.  559


AEUM  DEACUNCULUS.

A.  draeunculus,  Willd.  Nat.  order,  Araceee.  Preparation,  Tincture
from  the  root.

Authority.  1,  Journ.  d.  1.  Soc.  Gal.,  IV,  114 :  effects  of  cutting  and
pounding  the  root ;  Dr.  Demeures ;  2,  Biblioth^que  Homceopathique,  III,
192,  effects  of  tearing  up  the  leaves  and  stems ;  Dr.  Pitet.

Styptic  and  metallic  taste,  mingled  with  bitterness  at  the  back  of  the
mouth,'. — Prickings  as  with  thorns  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,'.— Feel-
ing as  if  the  hand  were  plunged  among  nettles,'. — On  rubbing  the  fingei-s
together,  sensation  as  if  a  vast  number  of  stings  were  driven  perpendicu-
larly into  them,'. — Pain  in  the  right  index  finger,  as  if  it  were  forcibly
pulled.'. — Pricking,  mingled  with  intolerable  itching,  in  the  fi^gers,^


ARUM  ITALICUM.

A.  Italicum,  Miller.  Nat.  order,  Araceee.  Preparation,  Tincture  ot  the
root.

Authority. Dr.  Paul  Pitet,  proving  in  Bib.  Hom.,  1871.

JKhld. — Extreme  mental  uneasiness. — Intellectual  incapacity,'.

Head,. — Dull  pains  in  the  brain  from  the  least  intellectual  exertion,
especially  in  stormy  weather. — From  time  to  time,  damp  weather  brought
on  a  dull,  pressive,  persistent,  general  headache,  more  severe  at  the  occi-
put.— Violent  and  permanent  contusive  pain  in  the  anterior  lobes  of  the
brain,'.

Abdomen. — Painful  sensitiveness,  and  constant  heat  in  the  abdomen.
— Symptoms  of  most  acute  entero-colitis. — Violent  attack  of  colic,  contrac-
tive, twisting,  principally  before  stool. — The  presence  of  food  in  the  stom-
ach (even  when  eating  less  quantity),  speedily  gave  rise  to  colic,  followed
by  diarrhoea.

Stool  and  Anus, — [10.]  Smarting  and  tearing  pains  in  the  rectum
during  stool,'. — From  eight  to  twelve  evacuations  in  twenty-four  hours,
preceded  by  colic,  mostly  in  the  umbilical  region,  and  renewed  with  each
urging  to  stool,  three  times  on  the  same  occasion,'. — Stools  generally  liquid
or  very  soft,  rather  scanty,  yellowish  or  dark,  accompanied  with  emission
of  flatus,  and  toward  the  last,  mixed  with  frothy  mucus,'. — Evacuations
more  frequent  from  3  to  6  a.m.,'.

JJriitury  Oi'fjnns. — The  colic  is  accompanied  by  pressure  in  the
vesical  region,  with  urging  to  urinate.

Resitiratory  A}>paratus. — Very  severe  and  obstinate  hoarseness,
worse  in  the  evening,  accompanied  by  tickling  in  the  larynx,  and  cough,
especially  after  sleeping. — Hoarseness  suddenly  aggravated  about  9  p.m. —
Shocks  of  dry  cough,  and  constant  hawking  up  of  thick,  tenacious,  gray,
or  brown  mucus,  often  blood-streaked.

Chest. — During  the  five  following  months,  dull  contusive  pains  in  the
left  chest,  sometimes  in  front,  a  few  centimetres  below  the  clavicle,  some-
times behind  below  the  spine  of  the  scapula  and  near  its  inner  border. —
Burning  heat  behind  the  sternum  and  anterior  portion  of  the  chest.

Necii  and  Bach. — [20.]  Dull  pains  behind  the  left  scapula.
Upper  Extremities . — The  fingers  colored  red,  as  with  wine  lees,
with  sensitiveness  and  burning  pain  as  if  from  a  burn  of  the  first  degree,


560  ARUM  ITALICUM— ARUM  MACULATUM.

increased  by  pressure  (after  tearing  up  the  plant). — The  skin  of  the  last
two  phalanges  of  the  fingers  covered  with  small  miliary  elevations,  almost
invisible,  and  giving  rise  to  constant  itching,  greatly  aggravated  after  bath-
ing, followed  in  two  days  by' desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  part  affected
(after  tearing  up  the  plant). — Intolerable  pricking  and  formication  on  the
tips  of  the  fingers,  as  from  hundreds  of  needles  (after  tearing  up  the  plant).

Genefdlities. — Diminution  of  strength. — Considerable  debility  and
emaciation  (after  some  days). — General  malaise. — Aggravation  by  pure
wine,  coffee,  brandy  ;  the  colic  and  evacuations  and  all  the  other  complaints
are  immediately  excited  and  renewed.

Skin. — Remarkably  violent  and  irritating  itching,  especially  aggra-
vated about  6  A.M.,  could  only  be  allayed  by  friction  with  a  very  rough
towel. — Fingers  colored  red,  etc. — [30.]  Small  miliary  elevations  on  fin-
gers, etc.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Every  morning  oppressive,  unconquerable,
drowsiness,'.

Fever. — Passing  chills  in  daytime,  at  the  slightest  draught  of  air. —
Heat  of  the  skin  and  hands  at  night,  in  bed,  with  accelerated  pulse. — In
the  afternoon,  coldness  and  passing  shiverings,  especially  down  the  back,
followed  in  the  evening  by  redness  of  the  face,  general  heat,  and  acceler-
ated pulse,  and  at  night  by  very  copious  sweats,  especially  on  the  chest,
having  an  odor  resembling  that  of  Hedera  helix  (ivy),  when  rubbed
between  the  fingers. — Night-sweats.


AEUM  MACULATUM.

A.  maculatum,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Aracese.  Common  names,  Cuckoo-
pint,  Gefleekte  Aronstab,  etc. Preparation,  Tincture  from  the  root.

Authorities.  1,  Hering,  Archiv.,  13,  1,  169;  2,  Gessner  Frsenkische
Samralung,  Tox. ;  3,  Bullard,  Hist.  d.  Plautes  Veneneuses ;  4,  Haller,
Hist.  d.  Plantes;  5,  Junker,  Conspectus  Therap. ;  6,  Weitsch,  Dissert,  d.
Aro  Mac,  1798 ;  7,  Schellass,  Dissert,  d.  Aro,  1701 ;  8,  Stork  in  Plenck
Tox.,  1785 ;  9,  Kolbani,  1807  ;  10,  Buchner's  Repert.,one  dr.  of  powdered
root;  11,  Canzella  Gazetta,  Med.  d.  Parto,  child  three  years  old  ate  roots
and  flowers ;  12,  Steele,  Lancet,  1872,  chewing  the  stem ;  (Frazer's  case,
Brit.  Med.  J.,  1861,  is  of  doubtful  origin).

Head,— Slight  pressure  in  the  left  temple,'.

Mars. — A  pressure  below  the  ears,  behind  the  lower  jaw,'.

3Iouth. — Bleeding  of  the  gums  (on  kissing),  immediately,'.-— Swelling
of  the  tongue,'^. — Their  tongues  were  so  much  swollen  that  they  could  not
swallow  (three  children),^. — Lancinations  in  the  tongue,  as  from  pin-pricks,'.
— Stitching  and  burning  on  the  tongue,  lasting  several  hours,''. — Burning
pains  in  mouth  and  lips,". — Caustic  effect  of  the  drug,  all  over  lips  and
mouth,  and  as  far  as  one  could  see,". — [10.]  Salivation,'^

Throat. — Throat  so  swollen  that  a  probe  could  not  be  introduced  into
the  oesophagus,". — Tickling  in  the  throat  becomes  a  violent  burning,'". —
Pressure  in  the  throat,  which  provokes  swallowing ;  it  seems  too  narrow  ;
swallowing  is  difficult,  as  if  there  were  a  swelling  on  the  left  side  above  the
larynx,'. — Pain  on  pressing  with  the  finger  on  the  left  side  of  the  throat,
near  the  trachea,  below  the  larynx,'. — Stinging  pain  in  the  tongue,  throat,
and  (Esophagus,'^ — Swallowing  difficult,  as  if  the  "  palate  were  down,'". —
Deglutition  impossible,".


ARUM  MACULATUM— ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  561

Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite  for  several  days,^l — Vomiting  for  several
hours,'^ — [20:]  Vomiting  of  blood,*'. — Cardialgia  (Stork,  Tox.,  Plenck),
1785,1 — Fatal  stomach-cramp,". — Pain  in  the  stomach  on  pressing  it,".

Abdomen. — Emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  after  vomiting,  mornings
after  eating,\ — Oppression  in  the  abdomen,  as  in  great  anxiety  and  fear,
without  palpitation,  afterward  this  ascended  into  the  chest,  so  that  he  felt
an  oppression  over  the  whole  chest,  with  hot  breath  ;  it  then  rose  into  the
throat,  first  like  a  pressure  from  without  inward,  in  the  back  part  of  the
palate,  above  the  larynx  ;  it  provokes  swallowing,  which  is  difficult ;  after-
ward it  feels  too  narrow,^. — Severe  painful  pressure  on  a  spot  in  the  abdo-
men, between  the  navel  and  top  of  the  hip,  especially  when  standing,  or
lying  on  the  side  or  back,  most  on  filling  the  chest  full,  or  making  the
abdominal  muscles  tense ;  it  is  painful  to  external  pressure,'.

Stool  and  Anns. — Very  bad  diarrhoea,^

Urinary  Organs. — Emission  of  blood  from  the  urethra,*. — In-
creased secretion  of  urine,*. — [30.]  Urine  watery;  smells  almost  like  burnt
horn  ;  becomes  cloudy  in  the  middle  on  standing,'.

JResplratory  Apparatus. — Hoarseness  lasts  several  days,'". —
Bloody  sputa*.

Generalities. — Horrible  convulsions  and  death  (of  a  child),'. — Great
general  lassitude  (in  an  active  person),'. — Prostrate,  unable  to  speak,  rais-
ing its  hands  frequently  to  its  mouth  and  throat,  uttering  at  intervals  a
sharp  cry,  and  starting  up  as  if  suffocated,". — Profound  torpor,  followed
by  violent  febrile  Teaction,".

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleepiness  almost  uncontrollable,  especially  an
hour  after  dinner ;  sleeps  with  red  face  (in  three  provers  the  same),'. — Very
taciturn  ;  sleepy  after  eating ;  eyes  closed  readily,'.

Fever. — It  excites  perspiration,". — [40.]  Very  profuse  perspiration,
even  in  the  case  of  persons  generally  indisposed  to  perspire,*.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

Arissema  triphyllum,  Torr.  (Arum  triphyllum,  Linn).  Nat.  order,
Aracese.  Common  names,  Indian  turnip,  Jack-in-the-pulpit.  Preparation,
Tincture  from  the  root.

Autlwrities.  Provings,  1,  Jeanes,  H.  Month.,  2,  467 ;  2,  Gus.  E.  Gramm,
ibid,  (took  3d,  10th,  and  30th  dils.) ;  3,  Mr.  H.,  ibid,  (took  3d  dil.) ;  4,
Mrs.  M.  (3d  and  30th  dils.^),  ibid.

JUind. — Low  spirits,  lassitude ;  sleep  at  night  restless,  with  heavi-
ness of  the  head  (ten  hours),^ — Irritable  disposition  (fifth  day),^ — Forget-
fulness,'.

Head. — Giddiness  (first  day),". — Giddiness  (third  day),*. — Dizziness
and  fulness  of  the  head,  with  absence  of  mind,'. — Head  dull  and  heavy
(second  day),*. — Dull,  heavy  feeling  in  the  head  (four  hours),*. — Head
dull,  full,  without  pain  (fourth  day),*. — [10,]  Heavy,  dull  feeling  in  the
head  (sixth  day),'. — Head  heavy  and  dull,  in  the  morning  (fourth  day),'.
— *  Headache  {mn\h  day),*. —  Violent  headache  (eighth  day),*. — Sensation  as
if  the  head  and  breast  were  obstructed  and"  full  of  mucus,  but  without  ex-
pectoration (ninth  day),'. — Pressing  headache,  worse  after  drinking  hot
coffee  (fifth  day),^. — Dull  headache  (first  day),*. — Dull  headache  (eighth
day),'. — Dull  headache  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head ;  the  part  feels  some-


562  AKUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

times  cold,  as  if  the  cranium  were  open,  without  covering  (fifth  day),'. —
Dull,  pressing  headache,  better  after  dinner  (second  day),*. — [20.]  Head-
ache better  after  breakfast  (fifth  day),'. — Head  better  after  dinner  (first
and  third  day),*. — Head  worse  at  night  (first  day),*. — Heaviness  and  dul-
ness  in  the  front  part  of  the  head  in  the  morning  (third  day),'. — Headache
in  the  front  part  of  the  right  side  of  the  head  (first  day),^ — Pressing  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (one  and  a  half  hours),''. — Terrible  press-
ing pain  on  both  sides  of  the  front  part  of  the  head,  and  heaviness  of  the
eyelids  (second  day),^. — Tearing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  in
the  right  temple  and  ear  (third  day),*. — ^In  the  evening,  shooting  headache
over  the  left  eye,  suddenly  repeated,  lasting  only  a  few  minutes  at  the
time  (second  day),'. — Pain  in  the  temples,  head,^ — [30.]  Darting  pain  in
the  left  temple  (first  day),*. — Shooting  pain  in  the  left  temple  and  over  the
left  eye,  lasting  about  five  minutes  (four  hours),*. — At  10  p.m.,  stitches  in
the  left  temple  (fourth  day),*. — Stitches  in  the  right  temple,  and  down
toward  the  submaxillary  bone  (four  hours),*. — Painful  boring  headache  on
the  right  side,  in  the  rooming,  when  getting  awake  (first  day),*. — Shooting
pain  in  the  occiput,  when  turning  the  eyes  upwards,  in  the  morning  (third
day),'. — Pain  and  soreness  of  the  scalp  to  the  touch,  on  the  crown  of  the
head,'.

Eyes. — Eyes  cloudy  (fourth  day),*. — Eyes  feel  as  after  shedding  many
tears  (fourth  day),'. — Eyes  heavy  (fifth  day),'. — [40.]  Eyes  very  heavy
(second  day),*. — Eyes  always  sleepy  (sixth  day),'. — ^The  same  pain  in  the
right  eye  (second  hour),^ — Smarting  of  the  eyes,'. — Stiteihes  over  the  left
eye,  but  soon  disappearing  (third  hour),*. — (^ Quivering  of  the  upper  eye^
lids)°  '. — In  the  evening,  tension  in  the  lower  eyelids,  as  if  swollen  (fourth
day),^. — From  morning  till  evening,  much  water  in  the  eyes,  especially  in
the  outer  corners,  with  swelling  of  the  margins  of  the  eyelids  (second  day),^
— Dimness  of  sight,  as  if  a  veil  were  drawn  before  the  eyes,  without  pain
or  giddiness ;  spectacles  do  not  assist  the  vision,'. — Obscuration  of  sight
(third  day),*.

Mavs, — [50.]  Burning  of  the  right  ear  (four  hours),*. — Tearing,  pain
in  the  left  ear  (sixth  day),*.

Wose. — *lfose  obstructed,  compelled  to  breathe  through  the  mouth
(eighth  day),'. — Obstruction  of  the  nose  in  the  morning  (third  day),'. —
*  The  left  side  of  the  nose  obstructed  (first  day),*. — Sneezing  (first  day),*. —
Much  sneezing  (tenth  day),'. — Frequent  sneezing  (first  day),'. — Sneezing
and  sleepy,  11  a.m.  (second  day),*. — Much  sneezing  at  night,  and  constric-
tion of  the  throat  (third  day),*. — [60.]  Sneezing,  and  much  watery  dis-
charge from  the  nose  4  p.m.  (second  day),*. — *Much  sneezing,  with  sensation
as  if  he  had  taken  cold,  with  repeated  chills  over  the  whole  body,  beginning  at
the  vertex,  in  the  afternoon  (third  day),'.— iVose  watery  (second,  fourth,  and
fifth  days),*.— Nose  moist,  but  obstructed,  in  the  afternoon  (third  day),'. —
Watery  discharges  from  the  nose  (first  day),*. — Much  watery  discharge
from  the  nose  (first  day),*. — *  Watery  discharge  from  the  nose,  but  at  the  same
time  obstructed,  especially  in  the  morning  (ninth  day),'. — Watery  discharge
from  the  nose,  but  the  nose  obstructed  (fourth  day),'. — Profuse  watery  dis-
charges from  the  nose,  right  side  obstructed  (first  day),*. — *In  the  morning,
discharge  from  the  nose,  with  streahs  of  blood  and  hardened  pieces;  during
the  day,  mucus,  yellow,  thick  (fourth  day),^.— [70.]  Much  discharge  of  mucus
from  the  nose,  tough,  yellowish,  with  sensation  of  approaching  swelling  in
the  soft  palate,  and  pressure  (second  day),^ — Nose  dry  (second  day),'. — '
Coryza  (third  day),*. — Coryza  (fifth  day),l — Fluent  eoryza  (first  day),'. —


ARUM  TEIPHYLLUM.  563

Profuse  fluent  coryza  (tenth  day),'. — *NostriIs  sore  (second  day),*. — *lI'os-
trils  sore ;  the  left  discharges  continually  (tenth  day),'. — *Nose,  lips,  and
face  feel  chapped,  as  if  he  walked  in  cold  wind  (fifth  day),'.

Fdce. — *Heat  in  the  face  (ninth  day),'. — [80.]  *Great  heat  in  the  face
and  head,  afternoons,  with  fluent  coryza  (eighth  day),". — *Lips  thick,
burning,  swollen  (second  day),*. — *Lips  chapped,  mouth  dry  (eighth  day),'.
— Lips  better,  but  dry  (thira  day),'. — *Lips,  as  if  scalded  with  hot  soup  or
coffee,  in  the  morning  (third  day),'. — *Picks  lips  till  they  bleed ;  corners
of  mouth  sore  and  cracked,"  (Lippe).

JMouth. — Towards  evening,  toothache  in  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,
in  decayed  teeth  (eighth  day),'. — Tearing  toothache  on  the  left  side,  but
disappearing  in  about  ten  minutes  (first  day),*. — "*  Cracked  tongue,  painful,
burning  (fifth  day),'. — Pain  on  the  left  margin  of  the  tongue,'. — [90.]
Smarting  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  tongue,  without
tasting  the  root,  merely  from  the  odor,'. — *Raw  feeling  at  the  root  of  the
tongue,  and  at  the  palate,'. — *Mouth  dry  (tenth  day),'. — *Mouth  very  dry
(first  day),*. — *Mouth,  lips,  and  soft  palate,  sore  and  burning,  in  the
morning  (fourth  day),'. — ^'Soreness  of  the  palate,  painful  when  eating  or
drinking  (fifth  day),'. — Mouth  watery  (fourth  hour  and  third  day),*. — Mouth
very  watery  (first  day),'. — *Scanty  but  constant  discharge  of  tough  mucus
from  the  mouth,  with  burning  in  the  throat  (first  day),l

Tnroat. — Internal  swelling  of  the  throat  on  the  right  side,  better  on
the  left  (second  day),'. — [100.]  *Oonsiderable  swelling  of  the  submaxillary
glands,  left  side  (first  day),'.^Tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat  (eighth  day),*.
— Much  mucus  in  the  throat  (seventh  day),*. — Much  mucus  in  the  throat,
with  tickling,  compelling  to  cough  (fourth  day),*. — Pain  in  the  throat,
worse  at  night ;  also  when  coughing  (fourth  day),*. — *Pain  in  the  joint
of  the  left  inferior  maxilla,  as  if  sprained,  when  swallowing  (second  day),'.
— ''''Burning  pain  in  the  throat,  all  day  (second  day),*. — Burning  in  the
throat,  in  the  mo/ning,  while  in  bed,  better  after  rising  (fourth  day),'. —
*  Burning  in  the  throat,  and  in  the  root  of  the  tongue  (four  hours),*. — Burn-
ing and  dryness  in  the  throat,  before  midnight ;  after  midnight  and  toward
morning,  much  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  goes  deeper  and  deeper  down  by
swallowing,  and  is  perceived  no  more  in  the  morning,  after  rising,'. — [110,]
Considerable  internal  swelling  of  the  throat,  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,
especially  on  the  right  side  (first  day),'. —  Constriction  in  the  throat  (first
and  fifth  days),*. — The  throat  feels  very  tight  (fourth  day),*. — *  Throat  very
sore,  4  p.m.  (ninth  day),*. — Throat  very  sore ;  much  coughing,  5  a.m.  (sixth
day),*.^-Throat  sore  again,  burning  (second  day),*. — *  Throat  sore,  burning
at  times,  then  better  (first  day),*. — Scratching  in  the  throat ;  better  after
drinking  hot  cofiee  (fourth  day),*. — *  Constant  scratching  and  burning  in  the
throat,  with  desire  to  swallow  (third  day),*. — Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
throat  (two  hours),*. — [120.]  Throat  better  during  the  morning  until  after
dinner  (fifth  day),*, — Throat  somewhat  better,  after  breakfast  (sixth  day),*.
— *  Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  soft  palate,  when  swallowing,  in  the  morning
(third  day),', — Constant  desire  to  swallow  (second  day),', — Much  desire  to
swallow,  with  stitching  in  the  throat,  which  is  painful  to  pressure  (first
day),'. — Deglutition  difiicult  (fifth  day),'. — Difiicult  deglutition,  without
pain,  in  the  morning  (third  day),'.

Stomach. — No  appetite  (third  day),'. — Thirst  to  drink  a  little  at  a
.  time  (eighth  day),'.

A.bdomen. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  first  in  front,  then  in  the
))ack  (fifth  day),', — [130.]  Rolling  in  the  ahdomen,  with  frequent  painful


564  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

urging  to  stool,  in  the  morning  (fourth  day)/. — Slight  cutting  pain  in  thd
abdomen  (third  day),^

Stool  and  A.nus. — Burning  at  the  anus  (third  day),^ — Urgent  desire
to  go  to  stool,  compelling  to  rise  from  the  bed ;  stool  watery,  dark  brown
(third  day),\- — Diarrhoea  till  noon,  like  mustard  (fourth  day),^ — Four
diarrhoeic  discharges  from  the  bowels,  each  succeeding  discharge  more
watery  (from  3  to  8  a.m.),  (third  day),l — Watery  diarrhoea  (second  day),^
— *  Watery,  brown  diarrheea,  with  eructation  of  food  (third  day),^. — Stool  soft
(ninth  day),l — Stool  soft,  painless  (second  day),^ — [140.]  Soft  stool  toward
evening,  with  much  tenesmus  (seventh  day),'. — Soft  stool,  with  tenesmus
(fifth  day),*. — Soft,  thin,  yellow  stool  in  the  morning  (third  day),'.

Urinary  Organs. — Much  urination  (fifth  dnj),".^* Discharge  of
much  pale  urine  (first  day),*. — Frequent  discharges  of  pale  urine  (.second
day),*. — Urine  yellow  till  noon,  in  the  afternoon  quite  clear  (fifth  day),'.

Sexual  Organs. — From  noon  till  evening,  repeatedly  sudden  tear-
ing pain  in  the  right  testicle,  sometimes  distending  in  the  abdomen,  but
quickly  disappearing  (third  day),'. — Cutting  pain  in  the  region  of  the  left
ovary,  lasting  about  an  hour  (first  day),*. — The  same  cutting  pain  in  the
region  of  the  left  ovary,  but  lasting  not  so  long  (second  day),*. — [150.]
Appearance  of  the  menses  at  the  usual  time  (always  too  soon)  but  darker
(first  day),*.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Internal  swelling  of  the  trachea,  first
on  the  right  side,  afterwards  on  the  left ;  when  pressing  against  it,  painful
soreness  of  the  left  parotid  gland  (fifth  day),". — *Voice  hoarse  (tenth
day),'. — Much  cough  (fifth  day),*. — Frequent  coughing  (seventh  day),*. —
Frequent  coughing,  after  getting  awake,  6  a.m.  (eighth  day),*. — Spasmodic
cough  (sixth  day),*. — Much  coughing,  and  mucus  in  the  throat  (ninth
day),*. — Much  coughing ;  burning  in  the  throat  and  lungs,  10  p.m.  (eighth
day),*. — *  Expectoration  of  much  mucus  (sixth  day),*.

Chest, — [160.]  Burning  in  the  lungs,  extending  tQ  the  pit  of  the
stomach  (ninth  day),*. — Burning  pain  in  the  lungs,  when  coughing  (seventh
day),*. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  thorax ;  soreness  in  the  left  lung  and
left  upper  arm,  and  pressing  pain  in  the  forehead  (second  day),". — Stitches
in  the  right  lung,  and  under  the  right  shoulder-blade  (ninth  day),*. — -The
lungs  feel  sore  (tenth  day),'.

Nech  and  Bach. — Neck  stifi"  (ninth  day),'-— Stifliiess  of  the  neck
(fifth  day),". — Stifiuess  of  the  neck,  and  intolerable  pressing  headache  (first
day),". — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  atlas  and  dentoid  vertebra,  and  extend-
ing to  the  right  side,^.

Eoctretnities  in  General. — Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  especially
in  the  lower  extremities  (eighth  day),'.

Upper  Extremities. — [170.]  The  same  pain  in  the  right  shoulder
and  between  the  shoulder-blades  (two  and  a  half  hours),". — Both  hands
swollen  and  stiff,  better  about  6  a.m.  (first  day),*.

Lower  Extremities. — Pain  over  the  hips  (eighth  day),*. — Pain  in
the  right  hip  under  the  trochauter,^ — In  the  morning,  when  getting  awake,
cramps  in  the  right  leg  (second  day),*. — Cramps  in  the  right  leg,  after
getting  awake  (third  day),*. — Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  left  tibia,  where
there  has  been  a  discolored  spot  on  the  skin  some  years,^ — Stinging  prick-
ing in  the  soles  of  the  feet,'. — Tickling  itching  in  the  centre  of  the  sole  of
the  right  foot,'.

Sleep  and  Dream^S.—MMch  yawning,  in  the  afternoon  (third
day),'. — [180,]  Much  yawning,  stretching,  and  sleepiness,  particularly  in


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  565

the  afternoon  (eighth  day)/. — Much  yawning,  and  cold  running  over  the
body,  at  the  same  hour  as  the  day  before  (fourth  day)/. — Very  sleepy,
yawning,  sneezing,  headache  worse,  eyes  heavy,  11  a.m.  (first  day),*. — Very
sleepy,  so  that  he  fell  asleep  sitting  in  a  chair,  soon  after  supper  (eighth
day),^. — Evening  drowsiness,'.

Fever, — Cold  running  over  the  body,  at  night  (first  day),*. — Flushes
of  heat,  at  night  (sixth  day),*. — Flushes  of  heat,  with  burning  face,  from
4  to  9  P.M.  (fifth  day),*.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning'),  Head  heavy,  etc.;  heavi-
ness, etc.,  in  front  part  of  head ;  when  getting  awake,  boring  headache  on
right  side;  when  turning  eyes  upwards,  pain  in  occiput;  obstruction  of
nose ;  watery  discharge  from  nose,  etc. ;  discharge  from  nose,  etc. ;  lips  as
if  scalded ;  mouth,  etc.,  sore,  etc. ;  while  in  bed,  burning  in  throat ;  when
swallowing,  sensation  of  swelling  in  soft  palate ;  difficult  deglutition ;  roll-
ing in  abdomen,  etc. ;  stool  soft,  etc. ;  when  getting  awake,  cramps  in  right
leg ;  after  getting  awake,  cramps  in  right  leg. — (Afternoon),  Water  in  the
eyes ;  much  sneezing,  etc. ;  nose  moist,  but  obstructed ;  tearing  pain  in
testicle;  much  yawning;  much  yawning,  etc. — (Towards  eveninff).  Tooth-
ache ;  soft  stool. — (Evening),  Shooting  headache,  etc. ;  tension  in  lower
eyelid ;  drowsiness. — (Night),  Head  worse ;  much  sneezing,  etc. ;  pain  in
throat ;  cold  running  over  body ;  flushes  of  heat. — (Before  midnight).  Burn-
ing, etc.,  in  throat. — (After  midnight  and  toward  morning).  Much  mucus  in
throat. — (3  to  8  a.m.).  Four  diarrhceic  discharges. — (5  a.m.).  Sore  throat. —
(6  a.m.).  After  getting  awake,  frequent  coughing. — (11  a.m.).  Very  sleepy,
etc. — (4  p.m.),  Much  sneezing;  watery  discharge  from  nose;  throat  sore. — ,
(4  to  9  P.M.),  Flushes  of  heat,  etc — (10  p.m.),  Much  coughing ;  stitches  in
left  temple. — (Hot  coffee),  Pressing  headache. — (Coughing),  Pain  in  throat;
burning  in  the  lungs. — (Drinking),  Soreness  of  the  palate. — (Eating),  Sore-
ness of  the  palate. — (Pressure),  Soreness  of  parotid  gland. — -(iSwallowing),
*Pain  in  joint  of  left  inferior  maxilla.

A-tneliovation. — (Morning),  Until  after  dinner,  throat  better. —
(About  6  A.M.),  Hands  swollen,  etc. — (After  breakfast),  Headache;  throat
better. — (Hot  coffee).  Scratching  in  thvont.— (After  dinner).  Dull,  etc.,
headache ;  head  better. — (After  rising).  Burning  in  throat.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

A.  Mauritanica,  Desf.  Nat.  order,  Graminese.  Common  names.  Reed  ;
(French)  Petit  chaume ;  (Ital.)  Cannizzola  Preparation,  Tincture  of  the
fresh  root-sprouts.

Aidhorities.  Dr.  Chagon  (Due  de  Sorentino)  Journ.  de  la  Soc.  Gallicane,
7,  345 :  2,  Brentano,  reviewed  in  A.  H.  Z.,  72,  63  (symptom  251).

JiTind. — Lascivious  ideas. — Laughs  easily. — Stupid  hilarity. — -Indiffer-
ence to  painful  sensations. — Anxiety  diminished  in  open  air. — Absence  of
ideas. — Dulness  of  mind.  0

Hend,. — -Vertigo. — Vertigo  on  getting  out  of  bed. — Pustules  on  the
head,  surrounded  with  a  red  areola,  and  accompanied  with  suppuration  and
formation  of  crusts,  in  children. — [10,]  Burning  pain  of  the  whole  head.
— General  burning  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  head. — Pain  and  heat  of  the  ,
forehead. — Deepseated  pain  towards  the  frontal  lobes  and  the  parietes. —
Prickings  on  the  forehead. — Painful  undulation  in  the  frontal  region. —
Formication  on  the  forehead. — Itching  on  different  parts  of  the  forehead. — -


566  ARUNDO  MAUEITANICA.

Pain  in  right  temple,  extending  to  the  top  of  the  head  and  causing  sleepi-
ness.—Pricking  in  the  left  temple. — [20.]  Sudden  formicating  pain  through
the  temples. — Prickings  on  the  top  of  the  head.— Formicating  and  stupefy-
ing pain  on  the  top  of  the  head, — Formicating  pain  on  the  top  of  the  head,
going  down  to  the  neck. — Deepseated  pains  in  the  parietes  of  the  head. — •
Pain  toward  the  occiput.- Pain  in  the  occiput. — Occipital  pains. — Falling
off  of  the  hair. — The  hair  falls  off  entirely,  in  children. — [30.]  Scurf  on  the
head. — The  roots  of  the  hairs  are  painful.

Eyes. — Violent  ophthalmia.— Ophthalmia  in  children.— Prickings  in
the  eyes. — Itching  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  especially  the  left.-^Intolerable
itching  of  the  left  eye  and  brow. — Pain  in  the  vault  of  the  orbit,  causing
heaviness  and  sleepiness. — Pricking  in  the  orbit,  when  looking  steadily. —
Pricking  in  the  vault  of  the  orbit. — [40.]  A  sudden  burning  pain  on  the
eyebrow  and  in  the  orbit. — Burning  pricking  in  the  left  eyebrow. — Formi-
cation in  the  eyebrow. — -Swollen  eyelids. — Jactitation  of  the  eyelids. — Red-
ness of  the  lids,  with  burning. — Heaviness  of  the  eyelids. — Burning  itching
on  the  eyelids. — Lachrymation. — Itching  on  the  conjunctiva. — [50.]  Ex-
crescences on  the  sclerotica. — Sclerotitis. — Burning  pain  in  the  sclerotica. —
Dilatation  of  the  pupil. — Dimness  of  vision. — Inability  to  look  upwards. —
Light  is  intolerable. — Photophobia,  especially  at  noonday  and  in  the
evening. — Objects  seem  veiled. — Luminous  objects  flutter  before  the  eyes. —
[60.]  Undulating  luminous  openings  appear  wherever  he  looks.

Mars. — Pain  at  the  base  of  the  external  ear. — Acute  pain  at  the  base
of  the  left  external  ear. — Formication  in  the  left  external  ear. — Inflamma-
tion of  the  external  meatus. — While  the  children  complain,  they  always
keep  their  fingers  in  their  ears. — Pain  and  excessive  itching  iu  the  auditory
canals. — Constant  burning  and  intolerable  itching  in  the  auditory  canals. —
Prickings  in  the  internal  auditory  meatus. — Burning  itching  in  the  audi-
tory canals  which  coincides  with  an  acute  pain  in  the  sublingual  glands. —
[70.]  Purulent  discharge  from  the  ears. — Hemorrhage  of  bright  red  blood
from  the  left  ear. — Noise  in  the  ears. — Sound  as  of  little  bells  in  the  ears.

JVose.— Ulcer  beneath  the  reddened  nose. — Snuffling  during  the  coryza.
— Constant  sneezing. — Sneezing  forces  out  of  the  nasal  fossae  pieces  of  in-
durated, greenish  mucus. — Coryza. — Running  of  water  from  the  nose. — ■
[80.]  Frothy,  watery  mucus  runs  from  the  nose. — Nasal  mucus  bluish,
purulent. — Putrid  nasal  mucus. — Pain  at  the  root  of  the  nose. — Dryness
of  the  Schneiderian  membrane. — Burning  in  the  inner  walls  of  the  nose. — •
Itching  burning  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane. — Itching  in  the  nose. — ■
Loss  of  smell.

Face. — Paleness. — [90.]  Itching  prickings  all  over  the  face. — Formi-
cation on  the  face. — Weight  on  the  left  side  of  the  face. — Pain  and  formi-
cation on  the  left  half  of  the  face. — Pain  and  burning  in  right  cheek.^
Erysipelas  on  the  cheek. — Pains  in  the  masseter  muscles. — Prickings  at
the  tip  of  the  chin.

3Iouth. — Swelling  of  the  gums. — Red,  sensitive  gums. — [100.]  Bleed-
ing of  the  gums. — Excoriation  of  the  nftuth,in  children. — Eruption  of  red
points  on  the  palate  in  children. — Burning  itching  and  irritation  of  the
palate. — Salivation. — Food  is  insipid. — Sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth. —
Water  has  a  bad  taste. — Bitter  mouth  on  waking  in  the  morning.

Throat. — Bruised  feeling  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  after  expectorating. —
[110.]  Stoppage  of  air  in  the  oesophagus. — Burning  and  redness  in  the
oesophagus. — "Globus  hystericus." — Obstruction  which  prevents  swallow-
ing.— Burning  and  pain  on  deglutition.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  567

Stomach. — Longing  for  acid  food. — Want  of  appetite. — Constant
thirst. — Constant  thirst,  in  children. — Thirst  after  waking  in  the  morn-
ing.— [120.]  Longing  for  acids. — Desire  to  belch,  with  inability  to  do  so. —
Empty  eructations. — Hiccough. — Attacks  of  very  painful  nausea. — Nausea
on  getting  up  in  the  morning. — Coldness  in  the  stomach. — Acute  pain  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Pain  on  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Pain
all  around  the  epigastrium.— [130.]  Prickings  through  the  epigastrium.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  liver. — Prickings  in  the  spleen. — Acute  pain
at  the  umbilicus. — Noise  in  the  bowels. — Borborygrai. — Abundant  flatu-
lence.— Movement  in  the  bowels  as  if  caused  by  a  living  thing. — Feeling
as  of  a  worm  crawling  on  the  right  side  of  abdorfien. — Pain  in  the  colon,
right  and  left. — [140.]  The  bowels  are  painful  when  pressed  by  the  hand. —
Wandering  pains  through  the  bowels. — Pinchings  in  the  colon. — Pain  at
the  pubis. — Pain  throughout  the  hypogastrium. — Burning  and  prickings
in  the  hypogastrium  after  coughing. — Stitches  in  the  groins. — Prickings
and  burning  heat  in  the  groins.

Stool  and  A.UUS, — Burning  piles. — Descent  of  haemorrhoids  before
the  stool. — [150.]  Stools  followed  by  burning  at  the  anus. — Prickings  in
the  anus. — ^Constunt  diarrhoea  of  nursing  c/ti/dreft,°— Diarrhoea  with  bear-
ing down. — Liquid  diarrhoea,  in  children,  with  red  blood. — Greenish  diar-
rhoea.— Blood-streaked  diarrhoea. — Hard,  greenish  stools. — Constipation.

Ufinartj  Organs. — Prickings  in  the  bladder. — [160.]  Weight  after
urinating. — After  urinating,  burning  itching|_in  the  urethra. — -Red  urine
with  sandy  sediment. — Urine  which  deposits  a  great  deal  of  red  sand.

Sexual  O/'fifaws.— Frequent  erections. — Pain  in  the  spermatic  cords,
after  an  embrace. — Desire  for  an  embrace. — Pricking  pain  in  the  uterus.
— Pain  in  uterus,  with  meteorism,  before  menstruation. — Pricking  pains  at
the  vulva. — ^[170.]  Violent  desire  for  an  embrace  (in  females). — Aversion
to  an  embrace  (in  females). — Leucorrhoea. — Menses  too  early,  and  very  pro-
fuse.— Long-lasting  menses. — Hemorrhage  of  black,  clotted  blood.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Whistling,  etc.,  in  the  bronchi,  when
breathing. — Rattling  during  the  cough.— Feeling  of  obstruction  in  the
larynx  after  coughing,  which  prevents  eructations  and  expectoration,  and
afterwards  causes  vomiting  of  frothy,  viscid  matter. — Anxiety  caused  by
mucous  accumulations  in  the  bronchi. — [180.]  Morning  hoarseness. — ^Loss
of  voice  in  an  instant. — Catarrhal  cough. — Cough  at  noon. — Cough  at
midday,  and  in  the  evening. — Cough  in  the  evening. — Cough  in  women,
with  pains  in  the  loins. — -Dry  cough  in  the  evening,  with  pains  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach. — Dry  cough,  with  viscid  vomiting. — Expectoration  followed
by  burning  at  the  pit  of  the  throat. — -[190.]  Difficult  expectoration. — Easy
expectoration  in  the  morning. — Whitish  expectoration. — Expectoration  of
round  ash-colored  clots. — Bluish  expectoration. — Desire  for  open  air. — •
Short  respiration. — Difficult  respiration.— Suffocative  paroxysm.-^Difficult
breathing  during  an  embrace. — [200.]  Dyspnoea  when  walking  and  going
upstairs. — Attack  of  dyspnoea,  with  profuse  sweat.

Chest, — Excessive  secretion  of  milk.— Pain  in  the  chest. — Burning
and  pain  in  the  nipples. — Anxiety  caused  by  cough. — ^Prickings  in  the
chest. — Prickings  under  the  clavicles.— Formication  in  the  chest. — Pain  in
left  breast,  caused  by  excessive  lactation. — [210.]  Prickings  under  the  left
breast. — Pain  in  right  side  of  chest,  towards  midnight.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Abnormal  movements  of  the  heart. — Oppression
of  the  heart.

Neeh  and  Sack. — Startings  in  the  neck. — Formicating  pain  on  the


568  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

in  the  scapulae.  —  Acute  pain  under  left  scapula.— Lumbago.  [220.]
Nephritic  pains. — Pain,  burning  and  formioatioa  in  the  loins. — Pain  in
loins  before  the  first  menstruation. — Stitches  in  the  loins. — Stitches  in  the
loins,  when  sneezing.— Pricking  pains  in  the  loins,  corresponding  to  like
pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

Extremities  in  General.  — Vaux  in  the  limbs  as  if  tightly-
bandaged.

Upper  Extremities. — Weakness  of  the  arms. — Acute  pain  in  the
arms. — Coldness  in  the  arms. — [230.]  Burning  pain  passing  from  the  arm
to  the  wrist,  from  the  wrist  to  the  forefinger,  and  from  the  forefinger  to  the
thumb. — Heat  and  heaviness  in  left  arm. — Formication  in  the  arms. —
Coldness  of  the  shoulders. — Prickings  in  the  axillje. — Burning  pain  in  the
elbows. — Paiu  beginning  in  the  elbow,  and  ending  in  the  ring  finger. —
Pain  in  right  wrist. — Pain  and  burning  heat  in  one  or  the  other  wrist. —
Burning,  jerking  pain  in  the  right  wrist. — [240.]  Formicative  pain,  with
heaviness,  in  left  wrist. — Stiffness  of  the  hands. — CEdema  of  the  hands. —
CEdema  of  the  hands,  in  children. — Burning  pain  in  both  hands. — Hands
as  if  plunged  in  boiling  water. — Formication  in  the  hands. — Pain  in  the
fingers. — Pain  in  the  metacarpal  joints  and  first  phalanges. — Burning  pain
in  right  thumb. — [250.]  Pricking  in  the  finger-tips.

Lower  Extremities. — Qj^dema  of  the  lower  extremities  (four  to  sis
drops  of  tincture),^. — General  redness  of  the  legs,  owing  to  an  eruption  of
microscopic  points,  with  violent  itching. — Burning  pain  from  hip  to  heel,
like  sciatica. — Weakness  of  thighs  and  legs. — -Burning  stitches  in  the  thigh.
— Swelling  of  the  knees. — Weakness  of  the  knees. — Pain  in  knees,  after-
noons.— Bui'ning  pain  in  the  knees. — [260.]  Cramps  in  the  knees,  often
with  a  sensation  of  heat. — Stitches  in  the  knees. — Pain  in  left  calf,  especially
when  standing  up,  and  when  walking. — Cramps  in  the  legs. — Burning  pain
in  the  heels. — Prickings  in  the  heels. — ^QEdema  of  the  feet,  in  children. —
CEdema  of  feet  and  ankles,  worse  on  movement. — Copious  and  oflfensive
sweat  of  the  feet. — Numbness  in  the  feet. — [270.]  Burning  beat  in  the  feet.
— Feet  as  if  plunged  into  boiling  water. — Cannot  bear  anything  on  his
feet. — Formication  in  the  feet. — Burning  and  swelling  of  the  soles  of  the
feet,  as  after  a  long  journey. — Beating  and  burning  heat  in  the  soles  of  the
feet. — Burning  stitches  in  the  toes.

Generiilities. — Twitchings  and  inclination  to  yawn. — Tendency  to
hysterics. — Prickings  in  the  arteries. — [280.]  Pain  and  prickings  in  the
glands. — In  women,  painful  constriction  of  the  pubis  and  loins,  which  pre-
vents walking. — Pain  beginning  in  the  kidneys,  passing  into  the  lumbar
region,  and  extending  to  the  pubis,  in  women. — ^Burning  paiu,  which  passes
from  the  kidneys,  through  the  left  ilium,  to  the  pubis,  in  women. — Heat,
with  formication,  beginning  at  the  loins,  rising  to  the  shoulders,  and  ex-
tending to  the  hands,  in  women. — In  women,  pain  starting  from  the  left
side  of  the  jaw,  running  along  the  left  eyebrow,  thence  extending  to  the
shoulders  and  loins,  and  finally  settling  on  the  pubis,  where  it  burns  like
fire. — Formicating  pain  rising  from  the  loins  to  the  shouldere,  and  settling
on  the  left  clavicle. — Towards  midday  attack  of  pain,  which  extends  to  the
loins,  the  knee,  and  the  foot. — The  pains,  which  settle  in  any  part,  almost
always  begin  somewhere  else,  and  pursue  a  winding  course  in  changing  their
location. — The  pains  alternate  with  local  sensations  of  coldness  or  heat.

Shin. — [290.]  Redness  of  the  skin,  like  a  birth-mark. — At  the  height
of  the  fever,  the  skin,  in  children,  turns  blue. — Eruptions  resembling  itch.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA— ASAFCETIDA.  569

on  the  breast,  in  children,  mostly  behind  the  ears. — Itching  papular  erup-
tion in  children ;  erysipelas  on  various  portions  of  the  body. — Itching  mil-
iary eruption  on  loins. — Pustules,  like  those  of  scabies,  with  intolerable
itching;  when  opened  by  friction  they  discharge  a  watery  fluid. — Eruption
of  suppurating  pimples  on  the  chest  and  arms. — Feeling  as  of  an  insect
crawling  over  the  loins,  the  shoulders,  and  sometimes  the  entire  surface  of
the  body.

Sleep  and,  Dreatns. — Sleepiness  in  dp.ytime. — Sleepiness  by  day,
and  sleeplessness  at  night. — [300.]  Sleepiness,  with  burning  in  the  eyes. —
Sleeplessness  and  weeping  of  children  at  night.

Fever. — Quotidian  fever  before  midnight. — Fever  preceded  by  cold-
ness, with  thirst. — Feverish  paroxysm,  with  burning  pain  and  formication
all  over  the  body. — Febrile  paroxysm,  with  nausea,  coldness,  thirst,  pain
in  bowels,  and  salivation. — Excessive  heat  at  night. — Nightly  fever.— A
sensation  of  burning  heat,  together  with  numerous  prickings,  rises  from  the
loins,  passes  over  the  shoulders,  and  then  invades  the  middle  of  the  head
and  face,  in  women. — In  women,  heat,  with  formication,  beginning  in  the
loins  and  rising  to  the  face,  where  it  is  succeeded  by  perspiration. — [310.]
Constant  sensation  of  heat ;  he  is  burnt  in  the  sun,  and  fi'ozen  in  the  shade.
— Alternate  heat  and  coldness  on  different  parts  of  the  body. — The  fever
is  always  accompanied  with  thirst. — Tendency  to  perspire. — Motion  causes
profuse  sweat. — The  fever  ends  with  sweat,  principally  on  the  shoulders  and
chest,  sometimes  accompanied  with  vertigo.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  On  waking,  bitter  mouth ;
after  waking,  thirst;  on  waking,  nausea;  hoarseness. — {Towards  noon),
Attack  of  pain,  etc. — {Noon),  Photophobia ;  covLgh.,— {Afternoon),  Pain  in
knees. — {Evening),  Photophobia ;  cough  ;  dry  cough,  etc. — (Night),  Sleep-
lessness and  weeping;  excessive  heat ;  fever. — {Before  midnight),  Q,\jiot\dia.n
fever. — {Towards  midnight).  Pain  in  right  side  of  chest. — {After  coughing).
Burning,  etc.,  in  hypogastrium ;  feeling  of  obstruction  in  larynx,  etc. —
{During  an  e.nhrace).  Difficult  breathing. — {After  an  embrace).  Pain  in  the
spermatic  cords. — {After  expectorating).  Bruised  feeling  in  pit  of  throat. —
{Getting  out  of  bed),  Yertigo. — {When  looking  steadily),  Yrickmg  in  the
orbit. — {Before  menstruation),  Vsiin  in  uterus,  etc. — {Motion),  The  pains;
oedema  of  feet,  etc. ;  profuse  sweat. — (  When  standing).  Pain  in  left  calf —
{Sneezing),  Stitches  in  loins. — {After  urinating),  Weight ;  burning  itching
in  urethra. — (  Walking),  Dyspnoea  ;  pain  in  left  calf. — (  Walking  upstairs),
Dyspnoea.

Amelioration. — {Morning),  Easy  expectoration. — {Open  air),  Anx-
iety.

ASAFCETIDA.

Ferula  Asafoetida,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Umbelliferse.  Common  name
(German),  Stinkasand. Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  gum.

Authorities.  1,  Franz,  Collection  Archiv.,  1,  3,  195  (provings  by  Stapf,
Gross,  and  Hahnemann);  2,  Voigtel,  ibid,  (from  Syst.  d.  Arzm.)  ;  3,  Prov-
ings by  Joerg  and  his  class  ( Joerg  Materialien),  symptoms  obtained  from  the
crude  drug;  4,  Lembke,  N.  Z.  £  h.  Kl.,  13, 129,  proving  with  crude  drug;
5,  Dr.  Boas,  Casp.  Wach.,  1841  (external  application  in  a  plaster)  ;  6,
Trinks,  A.  H.  Z.,  15,  63.

JKind. —  Very  irritable  in  disposition,  and  yet  indifferent  to  everything,'.
— Fretful  and  apprehensive  mood,  which  seems  to  arise  from  the  abdomen  ;


570  ASAFCETIDA.

it  is,  however,  not  difficult  to  fix  his  attention  (second  day),'. — Ill-humored,
and  dislike  for  work  (thirtieth  hour),'.

Head. — Vertigo,' ^^ — Slight  vertigo,'. — Turning  in  the  head  (third
hour),'. — Confusion  of  the  head,  with  pressure  in  the  temples  (first  day),'.
— Dulness  of  the  head,^ — Head  dull  and  confused,^ — [10.]  Heaviness,  ful-
ness, and  confusion  of  the  head,  followed  by  aching  headache  over  the  whole
brain,^ — Heaviness  of  the  head,'. — Headache,'. — Aching  in  the  brain,'.—
With  steady  heat  and  pressure  in  the  head  there  was  a  sensation  of  mo-
mentary unconsciousness  when  sitting  and  reading,*. — Continued  headache,
becomiug  alternately  more  severe  and  slighter,'. — During  the  night  when
awaking,  and  in  the  morning,  some  pains  in  the  joints  and  bones  of  the
head,*. — Weakness  in  the  head  (three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Headache,
like  an  emptiness  in  the  head,  which  attracts  the  attention  (first  day),'. —
Fulness  in  the  head,'. — [20.]  After  sleeping  well,  awoke  with  fulness  of  the
head,  which  gradually  changed  to  periodically  recurring  pains,  lasting  more
or  less  into  the  next  night,'. — Fulness  of  the  head,  changing  gradually  into
an  aching  and  pressing  pain,  as  if  the  whole  brain  were  compressed,  at-
tended with  dizziness,  increased  heat  of  skin,  and  some  quickness  of  pulse,'.
— Fulness  of  the  head,  with  frequent  stitches  of  pain  in  the  forehead  and
telnples,'. — The  brain  seems  to  be  tense,'. — Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  and
warmth  of  the  face  (firet  day),'. — Congestion  of  the  head,  with  heat  of  the
face  and  headache,'. — Severe  pressure  on  small  places  of  the  skull,*. — Pain
in  the  forehead,*. — Frontal  headache,'. — Headache,  more  particularly  on
the  left  side  of  the  forehead,'.^[30.]  Heat  in  the  forehead  and  face,  with
chills  in  the  back,  and  cold  hands  off  and  on  (three  and  a  half  hours),*. ^ — •
Sense  of  tensive  confusion  and  burdensome  heaviness  of  the  forehead  (after
frequent  smelling  it),'. — Frequent  drawing  in  the  forehead,*. — *Drawing,
wavelike  pressure,  through  the  left  half  of  the  forehead,  which  ends  in  a  dull
pressure  on  the  frontal  eminence^. — *Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  (sixth
hour),'. — *Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  from  within  outward  (fifth
hour),'. — Pressure  externally  in  the  forehead  (first  hour),'. — Especially  hard
to  bear  is  a  pressure  in  the  forehead  and  maxilla,*.— Pressive  pain  in  the
right  side  of  the  forehead  from  within  outward  (one  hour  and  three-quar-
ters),'.— A  slow,  intermitting  ache  (like  a  pushing  out)  beneath  the  right
frontal  eminence,'. — [40.]  Pressure  on  the  forehead  in  different  places,
sometimes  combined  with  stitching  pains,*. — Pressure  in  the  forehead,  with
weakness  in  the  whole  body  (two  hours  and  a  half),'.— Tearing  pains  in
the  forehead,*. — Fine  needle  stitches  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,'. — ^Single,
sudden,  and  deep-penetrating  stitches  under  the  left  frontal  eminence,  like
shocks,  followed  by  some  sensitiveness,^. — Swashing  and  gurgling  sensation  in
the  brain,  beneath  the  upper  part  of  the  frontal  bone  (second  day),'. — Near
the  frontal  eminence  externally,  continued  burning  stinging,  which  disap-
pears on  touch,  and  pains  as  if  ulcerated,  but  immediately  disappears  (sec-
ond day),'. — Tearing  in  the  right  temple,*. — Pressing  asunder  in  both  tem-
ples, sometimes  very  severely,*.— Presswre  in  the  right  temple  (one  hour  and
a  quarter),'. — [50.]  A  transient  dull  pressure  over  the  right  temple,  sud-
denly,'.— '■'Pressure  in  the  left  temple,  from  within  outward  (sixty-eighth
hour),'.- — *A  sudden  pain  in  the  left  temple,  like  an  inward-pressing  pointed
plug,^. — Intermitting  pressing-inwards  in  the  left  temple,  almost  like  a  push-
ing inward,'. — Slow,  successive,  dull  stitches  in  the  left  temple,'. — Single,
deep  stitches  in  the  left  temple,'. — Sensation  of  pressure  on  the  vertex,'. —
A  pressure  exactly  on  the  vertex,  and  on  the  forehead  over  the  right  eye,*.
— *Pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  extending  to  the  eyes,  and  changing  into


ASAFCETIDA.  571


intermitting,  severe,  and  slight  fulness  of  the  brain,'. — Stupefying
in  the  head,  especially  in  the  left  side,'. — [60.]  In  the  right  side


tension
ight  side  of  the
head  above  the  ear,  a  drawing,  which  changes  into  a  simple  sticking^. — Pres-
sive  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  (thirtieth  hour),'. — ^Pressure  in  the
left  side  of  the  head  from  within  outwards  (forty-fifth  hour),'.— A  suddenly
beginning,  rapidly  increasing  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  head,  as  from
a  dull  tool  being  pressed  in  ;  it  suddenly  goes  away,'. — *Pain  in  the  right
parietal  bone,  as  from  a  deeply  penetrating  plug ^. — Aching  pain  in  the  occi-
put, gradually  extending  over  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  were  compressed  by
a  cloth  thrown  over  it,^ — ^Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,*. — Drawing  and
pressure  in  the  occiput,*. — Pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  (nine
hours  and  a  half),'. — A  couple  of  fine,  superficial  stitches  on  the  right  side
of  the  occiput,'.

Eyes. — [70.]  Causes  trouble  in  the  eyes,^ — *  Troublesome  dryness  of  the
eyes,^. — Periodic  burning  in  the  eyes,  and  pressing  together  of  the  lids,  as  if
overcome  with  sleep  (twenty-sixth  hour),'. — Pressure  in  both  eyes  (second
day),'. — Aching  over  the  eyes,  as  if  from  great  sleepiness,^. — Burning  sting-
ing in  the  left  eye  (two  and  one-quarter  hours),'. — Rough  feeling  of  the
eyes,  as  if  sand  were  under  the  lids,'. — Itching  in  right  eye  (forty-ninth
hour),'. — Burning  in  the  left  brow  (sixty-second  hour),'. — *Severe  boring
pain  above  the  eyebrows,^. — [80.]  Pinching  drawing  across  the  supraorbital
region  (first  hour),'. — Dull  pressure  on  the  external  margin  of  the  left
orbit,'. — Twitchiugs  in  the  left  upper  eyelid,*.— Often  a  twitching  move-
ment in  the  upper  lid,'. — Frequent  burning  in  the  right  eyelid,*. — Burning
in  the  edges  of  the  right  eyelid,*. — Burning  in  the  inner  corner  of  the  right
eye,*. — A  transient,  dull  pressure  in  {he  middle  of  the  upper  lid,'. — Stitch-
ing and  itching  of  the  eyelids,*. — Stitching  and  itching  in  the  edges  of  the
eyelids,*. — [90.]  Itching,  stitching  and  burning  in  the  lids,  especially  the
right,*. — *  Burning  in  the  right  ball  (twelfth  hour),'. — Tensive  burning  in  the
right  ball  (twenty-sixth  hour),'. — '''Burning  in  the  left  ball,  as  from  within
outward  (five  and  a  half  hours),'. — Burning  stinging  in  the  right  ball  (sixty-
second  hour),'. — Some  dilatation  of  the  pupils,'. — Dimness  of  sight,'. — A
kind  of  dimness  of  the  eyes ;  on  writing,  the  letters  become  darker,  as  from  a
slight  veil  over  them ;  disappears  after  some  blinking,'. — Muscse  volitantes,*.

Mavs. — Strong  heat  of  the  ears,  which  burn,  and  are  very  red,*. —
[100.]  Drawing  behind  the  left  ear,*. — Slight  transient  drawing  on  the
outer  rim  of  the  concha  of  right  ear,'. — Drawing  and  stitches  around  the
left  ear,*. — Repeated  short  drawing  in  the  meatus  auditorius,'. — Pressive
pain  in  the  right  ear  (forty-nine  hours),'. — Pressure  in  the  left  ear  (two
and  a  half  hours),'. — Dull  sensibility,  especially  dull  hearing,  forenoon ;
he  hears  nothing  distinctly,  must  always  ask  a  second  time  (first  day),'. —
Clear  ringing  before  the  ear,'.

Wose. — Violent  sneezing  several  times  a  day,'. — Coryza  (thirty-sixth
hour),'. — [110.]  Pressure  in  the  nose,  as  if  it  would  burst,  especially  in  the
right  wing  (thirty-one  hours),'.

Face. — Heat  of  the  face  and  ear  continues,  and  with  hot  hands,  chills  •
run  down  the  back,*. — Heat  in  the  face,  even  the  ears  feel  hot,*. — Pressure
in  the  right  side  of  the  face  from  within  outward  (half  an  hour),'. — Heat
in  the  cheeks,*. — Severe  heat  in  the  cheeks,  perceptible  to  the  touch,*. —
Frequent  flushes  of  heat  over  the  cheeks,  afternoon  (first  day),'. — Heat  of
the  cheeks  and  forehead,  with  heaviness,*.— Stinging  burning  in  left  cheek
(four  and  a  half  hours),'. — ^Itching  in  the  right  cheek  (seventy-two  hours),'.
— [120.]  Stitches  in  the  skin  of  the  left  cheek,  then  on  the  right,*. — Pres-


572  ASAFCETIDA.

sure  on  the  zygomatic  bone,*. — Drawing  pain  in  the  left  cheek,*. — Pressure
in  the  left  cheek  (twenty-four  hours),'.— */n  various  places  in  the  face,  on
the  malar  bone,  the  nasal  hones,  painless  tension,  with  a  hind  of  numb  seiisa-
tion^. — On  the  left  angle  of  the  chin,  in  a  small  area,  a  numb  pressure,
which  extends  into  the  tooth  right  above  it,^ — Pain  in  the  maxillary
ioiuts,^ — A  transient  pain,  like  a'continuous  pinch,  on  the  ramus  of  the
lower  jaw,\ — Drawing  in  the  left  lower  maxilla,*.— Drawing  in  the  right
lower  maxilla,  then  in  the  right  forehead,*. — [130.]  Pressure  in  the  maxil-
lary joint,*. — -Severe  pressure  in  the  left  corner  of  the  maxilla,*.

IHoilth. — Bluatness  of  the  teeth,*. — Severe  drawing  in  the  lower  in-
cisors,*.— Soreness  of  the  gums,'. — Great  dry  sensation  in  the  mouth,  though
he  has  moisture  enough  (first  day),'. — Burning  in  the  mouth,  throat,  and
stomach,'.— A  biting  burning  pain  on  the  point  of  the  toague,  frequently
repeated,*. — Stitches  in  the  point  of  the  tongue,*. — Accumulation  of  spit-
tle,'.— :[140.]  Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,*. — Salivation,'. — Con-
tinual running  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,*. — Insipid  taste,'. — The  taste  (of  the
drug)  is  not  only  nauseous,  but  also  harsh  and  hard,  and  hard  to  be  got
out  of  the  mouth,*.— Fatty,  rancid  taste  in  the  mouth,'. — Rancid  taste  in
the  mouth,  as  if  the  stomach  had  been  disordered  by  rich  and  fatty  food,'.

Thvoflt. — Dryness  in  the  throat ;  while  swallowing,  tension  in  it
(twelve  hours),'.^*J)t  the  evening,  a  hysterical  rising  in  the- throat,  as  if
a  ball  or  large  body  ascended  from  the  stomacli  to  the  oesophagus,  or
even  pharynx,  obliging  him  repeatedly  to  attempt  to  swallow  it,^. — With  con-
striction of  the  throat,  pressure  in  the  chest  (sixty-three  hours),'. — [150.]
Drawing  along  down  the  left  side  of  the  throat,  on  motion  (first  day),'. — •
Spasms  in  the  oesophagus,'. — *Spasm  of  the  oesophagus,  like  that  of  hysteria,^.
— Hysteric  rising  in  the  oesophagus,'. — *Sensations  as  if  the  peristaltic  mo-
tion were  reversed,  and,  in  the  oesophagus,  were  being  driven  from  the  stomach
up  toiucirds  the  throat,^. — Aching  and  burning  in  the  oesophagus  and  throat,
resembling  heartburn,  like  that  after  eating  too  much  fatty  food,'.

Stomach, — Appetite  increased,'. — Hunger  with  nausea,*. — Hunger,
with  desire  for  strong  cooling  food,*. — Loss  of  appetite,'. — [160,]  Appetite
poor,'. — Aversion  to  beer,  it  tastes  slimy  (first  day),'. — Constant  eructations
of  air  having  the  taste  of  garlic,*. — Frequent  eructations  tasting  of  the
drug,*. — Eructations,'. — Frequent  offensive  eructations,'. — Eructations  fol-
lowed by  nausea  and  disgust  for  food,'. — Frequent  garlic-like  eructations,'.
— Frequent  eructations  with  the  garlicky  smell  of  the  remedy,'. — Eructa-
tions,'.— [170.]  Frequent  eructations,'. — Eructations  with  profuse  accumu-
lations of  saliva,'. — ^Disgust  and  nausea,'. — -Nausea,' '. — ^Distension  of  the
stomach  and  bowels,  with  a  feeling  as  if  the  peristaltic  motions  xoere  reversed,
with  much  spasmodic  working  in  the  cesophagui^,^. — Pain  in  left  side  of  the
stomach,'. — Increased  warmth  and  aching  in  the  stomach,  toward  the  left
side,  not  at  all  to  the  right,  but  more  up  into  the  oesophagus,  like  the  globus
hystericus,^. — Continuous  and  acute  pain  in  the  stomach,'. — Stomachache
in  alternating  exacerbations  and  remissions,'. — [180.]  Stomachache  in  in-
.  termittent  paroxysms,'. — Aching  and  distending  pain  as  if  from  flatulence
4n  the  stomach  and  oesophagus,  extending  more  toward  the  spleen  than
the  liver,'. — Feeling  as  if  the  stomach  had  been  disordered  by  indigestible
fatty  food,'.— Intermittent  j)ains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,'. — Burning
in  the  stomach  and  diaphragm,'. — Burning  in  the  stomach,'. — Aching  in
the  stomach,'. — Sickly  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  like  pressure,
not  exactly  painful,*. — Aching  and  drawing  pain  in  the  stomach,  extending
first  toward  the  spleen,  and  afterward  in  the  direction  of  the  liver,  iacreased


ASAFCETIDA.  573

on  full  inspiration,^ — ^Perceptible  pulsation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (first
day),'. — [190.]  Pulsation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  even  perceptible  to  the
finger  (second  day),^ — Violent  pressive  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  ex-
tending towards  the  liver  region,  when  sftting  (first  day),'. — Pressure  in  the
epigastric  region  shortly  after  eating  (first  day),'. — Pressure  in  the  epigas-
tric region,  with  great  dejection  after  eating  (second  day),'.

Abdomen. — Griping  {into  a  hall)  pain  below  the  navel  when  stand-
ing (first  day),'. — Pressive  pain  at  the  navel,  extending  outward  (twenty-
one  hours),'. — Burning  sticking  in  the  umbilicus  (twenty-nine  hours),'. —
Crawling  sticking  In  the  umbilical  region  (four  hours),'. — Fine  pointed
stitches  in  the  navel  (two  and  a  half  hours),'. — *In  the  flanks  a  pressive  pain
on  drawing  in  the  abdominal  muscles  (first  day),'. — [200.]  Abdomen  dis-
tended,^.— *  Great  distemion  of  the  abdomen,^. — All  the  symptoms  disap-
peared in  the  evening  except  the  distension  of  the  abdomen,''.— rGreat  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen,  notwithstanding  frequent  discharges  of  flatus,'. —
Remarkable  distension  of  the  abdomen,  somewhat  after  a  hard,  dark,  very
pungent  and  offensive  stool,  causing  pain  in  rectum,'. — Rumbling  in  the
bowels,'. — Violent  rumbling  in  the  bowels,'. — Rumbling  in  the  intestines
(eleven  hours),'. — Painless  rumbling  in  the  intestines  (one  and  a  half
hours),'. — Bellyache,  with  violent  movements  and  rumbling  in  the  bowels,'.
— [210.]  Discharge  of  flatulence,'. — Increased  passage  of  flatus,'. — Easy,
sometimes  almost  or  quite  involuntary  passage  of  flatus,  which  is  scarcely
noticed,'. — Many  expulsions  of  ofiensive  flatulence,'. — -Much  very  ofiensive
flatulence,  with  retained  stool,'. — Much  retained  flatulence,  which  only
passed  off"  the  following  morning,  with  a  half-diarrhoeic  evacuation,'. — Re-
lief from  time  to  time,  by  discharge  of  offensive  flatus,'. — Sensation  of  the
greatest  illness  in  the  whole  abdomen,  with  great  heaviness  and  pressure  in
the  sides  (second  day),'. — *Pain  in  the  upper  abdomen,  as  from  taking  cold,  and
as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue,  with  a  kind  of  ravenous  hunger  (second  day),'. —
Drinking  disagrees,  causes  immediate  heaviness,  and  chilling  sensation
in  the  intestines  (first  day),'. — [220.]  Burning  in  abdomen,'. — Flatulent
pain  in  abdomen  when  waiking  after  dinner  (first  day),'. — Tension  in  the
abdomen,  after  eating,  as  if  he  had  overfed  (second  day),'. — Pinching  in
the  intestines  (six  hours),'. —  Gripings  with  flatulence  (one  hour),'. — Inter-
mitting griping  in  the  upper  abdomen,^. — Violent  cutting  pains  in  the
bowels,'. — Cutting  pinching  in  the  intestines  (twenty-three  hours),'. — Cut-
ting in  the  abdomen  when  walking  or  sitting,*. — Sticking  gripings  in  the  left
side  of  abdomen  (twelve  hours),'. — [230.]  Violent  colic  pains,  with  rum-
bling in  the  bowels,'. — Pinching  drawing  across  the  abdomen,  when  sitting,
with  dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  extending  outwards
(second  day),'. — *Iii  the  morning,  sensation  in  the  epigastric  region,  and  in
the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  it  were  all  beaten,  with  sense  of  fulness  in  the  former,
and  eructations  (second  day),'. — Itching  in  the  skin  of  the  abdomen,  below
the  navel  (five  hours),'. — Stitches  extending  from  within  outward,  in  both
sides  of  the  abdomen,  while  sitting,  after  eating ;  disappears  on  pressure
(second  day). — Sticking  from  within  outward  in  left  side  of  abdomen
(seventy  hours),'. — Sudden,  jerklike,  violent  stitch  from  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  from  within  outward,  toward  the  parietes  (first  day),'. — Stitches  in
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  when  walking  (first  day),'. — -Pointed  stitches
in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  externally,  which  go  away  completely  on
rubbing  (three  and  a,  half  hours),'. — Clucking  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen,  extending  outwards,  with  flatulence  (sixty-two  hours),'. — [240.]
Attacks  of  slight  griping  in  the  lower  abdomen  (half  an  hour),'. — Labor-


574  ASAFCETIDA.

like  cutting  and  forcing  pains  in  the  lower  part  of  the  bowels,  in  the  region
of  the  uterus,^ — On  the  left  side  of  the  lower  abdomen,  violent  sticking
and  drawing,  which  extends  along  the  inner  side  of  the  ilium,  when  sitting
(second  day),'. — Violent  stitch  iiT  the  lower  abdomen  (two  and  a  half
hours),'. — Itching  sticking  in  the  skin  of  the  right  side  of  the  lower  abdo-
men (five  hours),'.

Stool  and  Anus. — Tenesmus,'. — *Pain  in  the  perineum,  as  though
something  dull  pressed  out  there  (first  day),'. — Constant  dysenteric  feeling,
as  if  a  stool  would  take  place,l — Persistent  but  fruitless  urging  to  stool,". —
Fruitless  urging  to  stool,^. — [250.]  Frequent  urging  to  stool,^ — More
frequent  stools  than  usual  in  twenty-four  hours,'. — Causes  diarrhoea,^. —
Watery  stools,'. — Mushy  stools,  with  much  flatulence,  without  pain,  but
with  feeling  of  fulness  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,". — Small,  partly  hard,
partly  mushy  stools,'. — *Profuse,  thick,  papescent,  brown,  and  very  offensive
stoolj'. — Vei^  solid,  dark-brown,  nauseously  offensive  stool,'. — Hard,  dark,
offensive  stool,'. — Fluid  stools,  with  violent  pressing  down  on  the  rectum,'. —
[260.]  Thick,  papescent  stools,  light  yellow,'.- — ^Symptoms  relieved  after
a  blackish-brown,  very  thick,  papescent,  and  exceedingly  offensive  stool,^. —
Watery  stools,  without  bellyache,  but  with  profuse  discharge  of  flatulence,
which  did  not  remove  the  great  distension  of  the  abdomen,'. — Diarrhoea,
with  pains  in  the  bowels  (two  and  a  half  hours),'. — Diarrhoea,  two  to  three
times  daily,  with  bellyache,  for  three  days.  Diarrhoea,  three  to  four  times
daily,  for  four  days  in  succession,  with  bellyache,'. — Flatulence  with  diar-
rhoea (five  hours),'. — Two  stools  without  pain,  but  sorhe  rumbling,  and
leaving  heaviness  and  distension  of  the  abdomen  behind,'.- — Constipation,'.
— Constipation  with  almost  constant  tenesmus,'. — Constipation  for  two
days,  then  a  difficult  hard  stool,'.- — [270.]  Constipation  and  much  tenes-
mus, with  distension  of  the  abdomen,'.

TIrinary  Organs. — Repeated  stitches  in  the  urethra,*. — Severe
slight  stitches  in  the  urethra,*. — Stitching  and  burning  in  the  urethra,  but
not  when  urinating,*. — The  urine  is  smaller  in  quantity  and  darker,*. — The
urine  smells  strongly  of  the  drug,*. — Urine  acrid  and  pungent,  though  lighter
colored,'. — Urine  brownish-yellow,'. — Urine  brownish-yellow,  ammoniacal,
but  without  sediment,'. — Urine  dark,  and  ammoniacal,'. — [280.]  Easy  dis-
charge of  dark-brown  urine,  which  deposited  no  sediment,  but  which
smelled  very  strong  and  pungent,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Peculiar  pressing  toward  the  genital  organs,  with
pains  in,  and  tenderness  of,  the  testicles,'. — Drawing  in  the  gltins  penis
while  urinating,'. — The  drawing  pain  in  the  glans  penis  alternately  disap-
peared and  returned,'. — Pointed  stitches  close  to  the  penis  in  the  mons
veneris  (second  hour),'. — Needle-like  stitches,  externally,  on  the  penis  (six-
tieth hour),'. — Swelling  of  the  scrotum,*. — Increase  of  sexual  inclination
for  several  hours,'. — *  Swelling  of  the  female  genitals  (so  great,  that  antiphlo-
gistic remedies  had  to  be  used),^ — Nymphomania  in  a  plethoric  woman
(from  large  doses),^ — [290.]  Violent  laborlike  pains  in  the  region  of  the
uterus,  intermitting,'. — Menses  ten  days  too  soon,  scanty  for  three  days,  then
became  natural,'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — So  smothered  in  the  air-passages  that
he  must  hack  repeatedly ;  the  tone  of  the  hacking  cough  is  not  clear,  but
hoarse  (from  smelling  the  strong  tincture),'. — Dry  irritative  cough,  excited
by  tickling  in  the  larynx,'. — Frequent  cough,  with  slimy  expectoration,'. —
Slightly  quickened  respiration,'. — Quickness  of  breathing,  interrupted  by
coughing  and  yawning,'.  I


ASAFCETIDA.  575

Chest. — The  breasts  swelled  as  large  as  if  she  were  in  the  last  month  of
pregnancy,  and  a  milky  discharge  escaped  from  them/. — In  the  region  of
the  short  ribs,  right  around  across  the  back,  a  jerklike  constriction,'. —
*Spasmodie  tightness  of  the  chest,  as  if  the  lungs  could  not  be  fully  ex-
panded,\ — [300.]  Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  chest,  so  severe  that  the
pulse  became  small,  contracted,  irregular,  and  slow — 60  or  65,^. — *  Oppres-
sive aching  feeling  in  the  chest,  relieved  by  mucous  expectoration,^. — Severe
pressure  in  some  dorsal  vertebrae,*. — ^Drawing  pressive  pain,  with  contrac-
tion of  the  chest  (half  an  hour),'. — Pressure  here  and  there  in  the  thorax
and  in  the  muscles  of  the  back,*. — Pressure  on  the  chest,  with  constriction
of  the  throat  (sixty-third  hour),'. — -Pressive  pain  in  the  left  intercostal
muscles,  from  within  outward  (thirty-seventh  hour),'. — ^Pressure  in  the  left
intercostal  muscles,  from  within  outward,  which  is  worse  during  inspiration
and  expiration  (fifth  hour),'. — Decided  oppression  of  the  chest,l — Slight
oppression  of  the  chest,'. — [310.]  Spasmodic  oppression  of  the  chest,''. — ■
*The  oppression  of  the  chest  increased  to  an  agonizing  degree,  preventing  res-
piration, and  driving  the  patient  about  in  a  restless  manner,^. — Great  oppres-
sion of  the  chest,  with  pressure  and  throbbing  in  it,  when  lying,  soon  after
a  meal  (second  day),'. — Burrowing  sticking,  from  the  diaphragm  out  to
the  left  ribs,  continues  on  inspiration  and  expiration  (sixty-seventh  hour),'.  •
— Penetrating  stitches  in  the  chest  after  hawking,  when  standing  and  sitting
(sixty-fourth  hour),'. — Needle  stitches  in  all  the  intercostal  muscles,  when
sitting,'. — Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  chest,  when  lying,  with  very  difficult
sighing,  sobbing  inspiration ;  on  pressing  with  the  hand  on  the  chest,  or  on
sitting  up,  it  disappears  (second  day),'. — Weak  movements  in  the  left  inter-*
costal  muscles  (four  and  a  half  hours),'. — When  stooping,  severe  pain  back
in  the  region  of  the  left  short  ribs,*. — Burning  drawing  in  the  right  inter-
costal muscles  (sixty-first  hour),'. — [320.]  Pressive  sticking  in  the  right
cavity  of  the  thorax,  then  fine  stitches,  with  pressive  pain,  in  the  ribs  near
the  spine  (fifth  hour),'. — Pressure  under  the  left  front  edges  of  the  ribs,*. —
Pressure  in  the  thorax,  to  the  right  side,  extending  outward  (sixty-ninth
hour),'. — Lasting  pressure  behind,  in  the  region  of  the  left  short  ribs,*. —
*  Pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  from  within  outward  (twenty-
sixth  hour),'. — Pressure  in  front,  below  the  edge  of  the  left  ribs,*. — Oppres-
sion of  chest,  especially  on  left  side,'. — Drawing  sticking  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest  (four  and  a  half  hours),'. — A  pressive  sticking  pain  on
the  lower  ribs  of  the  right  side,  which  extends  into  the  abdomen  to  the
flank  of  the  same  side  (half  an  hour),'. — Stitch  in  the  right  ribs  (sixth
hour),'. — [330.]  Tensive  stitches  in  the  left  intercostal  muscles  (fifty-eighth
hour),'. — Dull  stitches  in  the  left  ribs  (sixty-third  hour),'. — Pinching  sharp
stitches  in  the  right  inner  side  of  the  ribs  (twenty-seventh  hour),'. — Boring
stitches  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  from  within  outward,  continuing
the  same  during  inspiration  and  expiration,'. — Boring  dull  stitches  in  the
left  side,  extending  outward  to  the  ribs,  continuing  during  inspiration  and
expiration  (forty-seventh  hour),'. — Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm,
on  the  right  side  (twenty-fourth  hour),'. — After  a  meal,  stitches  in  the
region  of  the  last  true  ribs,  right  side,  and  oppression  of  the  chest,'. —
Pressure  in  the  sternum,*. — Pressure  in  the  sternum  and  on  the  right  side
of  it,*. — On  bending  the  thorax  forward,  a  pressure  on  the  lower  part  of
the  sternum  (first  day),'. — [340.]  Even  on  compressing  the  abdomen,  pres-
sure on  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and.  nausea,  with  fulness  at  the  pit
of  stomach  (second  day),'.^Pres8ive  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,
with  a  kind  of  nausea  rising  up  from  the  chest  (thirty-fourth  hour),', —


576  ASAFCETIDA.

Dull  pressure  in  the  sternum;  passes  ofl' on  inspiring  and  expiring,  but
returns  on  writing  (three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Pressive  stitches  in  the
sternum,  from  within  outward  (thirty-second  hour),'. — Fleeting  but  very-
painful  stitches  under  the  breast-bone,  with  aching  and  burning  in  the
chest,  and  frequent  inclination  to  cough,^ — Pressive  throbbing  in  the  tho-
rax, extending  to  the  fauces,  on  standing  and  sitting  (sixty-fourth  hour),'.

Heart  and  Ionise. — Congestion  and  distension  of  the  heart,  attended
with  smallness  of  the  pulse,  and  followed  by  loose  stool,^ — *  Slight  palpita-
tion of  the  heart,  more  like  a  tremor,  several  times,  when  sitting,*. — Aching
pain  in  the  region. of  the  heart,  as  if  from  overfilling,^ — Quickness  of  the
pulse,'. — [350.]  Fulness  and  quickness  of  the  pulse,^ — Pulse  small  and  fre-
quent,'.— *The  heating  of  the  heart  and  pulse  became  somewhat  small,  quick,
and  irregular,^. — Pulse  small  and  rather  slow,'.

Week  and  Hack. — Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the
neck  (twenty-third  hour),'. — Clucking  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  scapula
(forty-second  hour),'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  right
side,*. — Drawing  down  along  the  leftside  of  the  neck,  on  motion  (second
day),'. — Pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck  (second  hour),'. — Attacks
of  pain  in  the  back,  especially  below  the  scapula  (sixth  hour),'. — [360.]
Pain  in  the  back,  especially  in  the  right  scapula  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. —
Repeated  transient  drawings  in  the  left  scapula,'.-— Pressive  pain  in  the
right  scapula  (two  and  a  half  hours),'.— Cutting  pain  below  the  right
scapula  (fifty-fourth  hour),'. — Dull  stitches  externally  in  the  left  scapula
(twenty-fourth  hour),'. — *Fine  burning  stitches  in  and  behind  the  right
scapula,  extending  toward  the  ribs  (second  and  third  hour),'. — Under  the
left  shoulder-blade,  when  stooping,  severe  stitches,*. — Itching  on  the  right
scapula  (forty-second  hour),'. — Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  half  of
the  back,  when  sitting,'. — *  Cannot  work  on  account  of  the  backache  (thirtieth
hour),'. — [370.]  Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  back  (sixth  hour),'. — Per-
ceptible sensation  of  heat  along  the  back,*. — Burning  in  the  vertebrae,  more
on  the  left  side,'. — Severe  pressure  in  some  of  the  costal  vertebrse,*. — Press-
ing pains,  sometimes  very  severe,  on  both  sides  of  the  spinal  column,  in  the
region  of  the  short  ribs,  repeating  several  times,  and  sometimes  aggravated
by  the  motion  of  the  trunk,*. — Stitch  in  the  latissimus  dorsi,  near  the  upper
arm  (first  day),'. — Tensive  stitch  in  the  dorsal  muscles  of  the  left  side,  from
below  upward  (twenty-fourth  hour),'. — Transient  stitches  in  the  right  side
of  the  back  (forty-ninth  hour),'. — Crawling  in  the  skin  of  the  back,*. —
Drawing  pressive  pain  along  the  four  to  five  last  dorsal  and  the  first
lumbar  vertebrae,  as  if  it  were  internal  along  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae
themselves  (first  day),'. — [380.]  Continual  dull  pressure  in  the  lumbar  re-
gion,*.— Pressive  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  especially  on  bending  the
upper  part  of  the  body  forward  and  backward  (first  day),'. — Tearing  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  sitting,'. — Tensive  sticking  in  the  left  loin,
continuing  during  inspiration  and  expiration,  disappearing  on  walking
(twenty-sixth  hour),'. — Boring  sticking  in  the  left  loin,  from  within  out-
ward, disappears  on  inspiration  and  expiration  (forty-first  hour),'. — Bur-
rowing pressive  sticking  in  the  left  loin,  from  within  outward,  toward  the
ribs,  with  anxiety  (forty-fifth  hour),'. — Fine  stitches,  as  with  needles,  around
the  left  loin  (twenty-sixth  hour),'. — Fine  stitches,  from  the  right  loin  to-
ward the  ribs  (fifth  hour),'. — Stitch  extending  along  down  the  sacrum  to
the  anus  (first  day),'.

Extre^miiies  in  General. — In  many  places  on  the  limbs,  rapidly
passing  cramplike  drawings,  like  a  twitching,'. — [390.]  Bruised  feeling  in


ASAFffiTIDA.  577

the  extremities,  especially  in  the  knees,  when  sitting,*. — Rheumatic  pains  in
the  arras  and  legs,  especially  in  the  joints  and  shoulder-blades,  but  shifting
locally  from  time  to  time,'. — Drawing  and  stitching  in  the  calves,  in  the
muscles  of  the  arms,  here  and  there,  more  in  the  flexors,*. — Pressure  on  the
joint  of  the  right  great  toe,  above  the  right  carpus,  and  on  the  back  of  the
right  hand,*. — Shortly  after  waking  up,  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  and
several  times  in  the  left  tibia ;  after  rising,  in  the  joint  of  the  left  foot,  in
tlie  toes,  and  in  the  finger-joints,*. — Severe  bruised  feeling  in  the  muscles
of  the  upper  arm,  in  the  joints  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  severely  in  par-
oxysms in  some  places,*.

Upper  Extremities.— Twitchmg  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  toward
the  outer  side  (ninth  hour),\ — Twitching  in  the  left  shoulder  (first  hour),'.
— Twitching  in  the  deltoid  muscle  (second  hour),'. — Twitching  in  the  del-
toid muscle  (fourth  hour),'. — [400.]  Drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left
shoulder-blade,*. — Paralytic  drawing  pain  along  the  left  shoulder  and  down
the  upper  arm,  in  rest  (second  day),'. — Pressing  pains  in  the  shoulder-
joints,*.— Frequent  pressure  in  the  shoulders,  more  in  the  right,*. — Below
the  right  axilla  toward  the  front  an  intermitting  severe  inward  pressure,
without  oppression  of  respiration,'. — Beneath  the  left  axilla  a  transient  in-
ward pressure,'. — ^A  pressive  pain  at  the  scapular  end  of  the  clavicle  when
sitting  (first  day),'. — Dull  stitches  in  the  left  shoulder  (first  hour),'. — ■
Stitches  in  the  left  shoulder-joint  from  within  outward  (twenty-sixth  hour),'.
— Below  the  left  axilla  some  fine  superficial  but  sensitive  needle  stitches,'. —
[410.]  Fine  tensive  stitches  in  the  shoulder-joint  extending  inward  (second
hour),'. — Bruised  sensation  in  the  shoulder  and  elbow-joints,*. — Twitch-
ing in  the  left  upper  arm-joint,  extending  inward  (forty-eighth  hour),'. —
Twitching  in  the  muscles  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  upper  arm  (fourth
hour),'. — A  drawing  pain  around  the  head  of  the  humerus,  on  holding  the
arm  still,  with-  a  kind  of  trembling  over-irritability  (as  after  great  fatigue)
in  the  muscles  themselves,  so  that  he  must  constantly  move  them  (first
day),'.— Tensive  drawing  in  the  left  upper  arm  on  the  inner  side  (third
hour),'. — Pressing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm,*. — Pressure  on  the
muscles  of  the  right  arm,*. — Intermittent  cramplike  pressure  in  the  left
upper  arm  not  far  from  the  shoulder,'. — Burning  stitch  on  the  outer  side  of
the  right  upper  arm  (forty-eighth  hour),'. — [420.]  Tensive  stitches  in  the
right  upper  arm  from  the  upper  part  outward  toward  the  inner  side,  im-
mediately,'.— Boring  stitches  in  the  inner  surface  of  the  right  upper  arm,
which  do  not  disappear  on  motion  (forty-third  hour),'. — ^Pressive  sticking
in  the  right  upper  arm,  on  its  inner  surface  from  within  outward  (sixty-
eighth  hour),'. — Sticking  paiti  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  upper  arm
(twenty-sixth  hour),'. — Twitching  sensation  in  the  inner  muscles  of  the  left
upper  arm  (thirty-fourth  hour),'. — Burning  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right
elbow-joint  (seventh hour),'. — Fine stitchinthe elbows  (twenty-sixth  andsixty-
fourth  hour),'. — A  fine,  long  stitch  extending  into  the  bend  of  the  elbow
(sixty-fourth  hour),'. — A  cramplike  twitching  extends  down  the  right
forearm,  with  the  feeling  as  if  the  hand  would  stifiTen,'. — In  slow  intermis-
sions, eraniplike  drawing  streaming  up  along  the  inner  surface  of  the  left
forearm,'. — [430.]  Pressure  on  the  outside  of  the  left  forearm  (second
hour),'. — Boring  pressure  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  forearm  from  within
outward  (first  hour),'. — On  moving  the  finger,  tearing  pains  along  r.p  the
forearm,'. — Tearing  pains  up  along  the  forearm,  on  bending  the  fingers
(first  day),'. — Dull  sticking  on  the  inside  of  the  right  forearm,'. — Tearing
stitches  followed  by  burning  extend  up  the  right  forearm,  during  rest

VOL. I.— 37


578  ASAFCETIDA.-

(second  day),'. — Stitches  on  the  skin  of  the  right  forearm/. — Pain  as  if
beaten  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist,  in  rest  (second  day),\ — A  scraping  sensation
on  the  inner  (ulnar)  condyle  at  the  wrist,^ — The  hands  soon  get  icy  cold,
the  coldness  of  the  back  increases  and  keeps  on,  with  slow  pulse,^ — [440.]
Pressure  on  the  joints  of  the  hands,*. — In  bed,  repeatedly,  severe  pressing
in  the  joints  of  the  right  hand  and  in  the  right  temple,  and  these  appeared
at  6  A.M.,  exactly  on  awaking,  and  with  pressing  in  the  neck,*. — A  dull  pain
in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand  as  from  a  pressive  body,  with  the  sensation
as  if  the  hand  would  stiffen,*. — -Pressive  sticking  on  the  back  of  the  right
hand  (eighth  hour),'. — ■  Oramplike  sensitive  twitching  in  the  metacarpal
bones  of  the  left  thumb,'. — Frequent  pains  in  the  joint  of  the  left  thumb,*. —
A  numblike  pain  on  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left  middle  finger,  as  if  an
oppressive  body  lay  on  it,\— A  transient  cramplike  pain  in  the  right
thumb,  with  unhindered  motion  of  it;  immediately  afterward,  also  in  the  left
thumb,'. — Severe  aching,  from  time  to  time,  in  the  external  condyle  of  the
wrist-side  of  the  thumb,'. — Cramplike  aching  in  the  flesh  between  the  meta-
carpal bones  of  the  left  thumb  and  index  finger,'. — [450.]  Pointed  stick-
ing burning  at  the  tip  of  the  left  index  finger  (sixty-third  hour),'. — Draw-
ing pain  in  the  joints  of  all  the  fingers,*. — Drawing  in  the  joints  of  the
fingers,  on  the  dorsum  of  the  hands  and  feet,*. — Pressure  at  the  root  of  the
middle  and  index  finger  of  the  right  hand,  continuing  on  various  motions
(eighth  hour),'. — Pressive  pain  from  the  right  wrist,  extending  into  the
right  index  finger  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. — Pressing  pain  in  the  joints  of  the
left  thumb,*. — Pressure  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thumb  (ninth  hour),'. —
Severe  pressing  in  the  joints  of  the  left  thumb,  and  later  in  the  joints
of  the  other  fingers.*. — On  lying  and  in  rest,  drawing  pressure  on  the  back
of  the  finger,  and  jerks  from  the  forearm  to  the  elbow  (second  day),'. —
Stitches  in  the  finger-joints,*. — [460.]  Dull  stitch  from  the  thumb  outward
toward  the  back  of  the  hand  (forty-fifth  hour),'. — Frequent  stitches  in
paroxysms  in  the  joints  of  the  small  finger,  worse  on  motion  of  the  joint,*.
Lower  Extremities. — When  walking,  drawing  and  pressure  in
the  lower  extremities,*. — Violent  tearing  pressive  pain  in  the  whole  right
leg,  less  on  walking  (third  hour),'. — Tearing  around  the  hip-joint  on  walking
(first  day),'. — Drawing  fine  stitches  in  the  right  hip-joint,  extending  into  the
intestines  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. — Twitches  in  the  right  gluteal  muscles
(sixty-eighth  hour),'. — On  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh,  not  far
from  the  knee,  a  frequent  wavelike  twitching,'. — Twitchings  in  the  anterior
muscles  of  the  thigh,  in  the  upper  half  (forty-ninth  hour),'. — Twitchings  on
the  anterior  side  of  the  right  thigh  (twenty-fifth  hour),'. — [470.]  Twitch-
ings in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh  (fifth  hour),'. — Twitchings  of  the
muscles  of  the  left  thigh  (second  hour),'. — Superficial  twitchings  on  the
inner  sideof  the  left  thigh  (one-quarter  of  an  hour),'. — On  theinner  surfaceof
the  thigh,  at  the  upper  part,  sensitive  twitchings  in  slow  intermissions,'. —
Burning  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh  when  sitting,'. — Drawing  in
the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,*. — Tensive  drawing  on  the  inside  of  the
right  thigh,'. — Constant  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  running
down  the  knee  and  foot,  where  a  pressure  is  several  times  felt,  jumping
up  also  to  the  knee  when  sitting,*. — Paralytic  drawing  pain  on  the  outer
side  of  the  thigh  when  sitting,'. — Drawing  pressive  pain  in  the  hamstrings
on  making  them  tense  (first  day),'. — Pressing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
inside  of  the  right  thigh,  in  the  joints  of  the  right  foot,  recurring  several
times,  also  in  the  joints  of  the  left  foot,  in  sitting  as  well  as  when  walk-
ing,*.— [480.]  Twitching  tearing  in  the  left  thigh  (forty-eighth  hour),'. —


,  ASAFCETIDA.  579

Tearing  in  the  left  femur  when  sitting  (first  day)/. — Pains  in  the  flesh  of
the  right  thigh  as  if  a  pointed  body  stuck  therein,'. — Stitches  in  the  skin
of  the  external  side  of  the  left  thigh,*. — Dull  stitches  in  the  right  gluteal
muscles  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. — Dull,  sensitive,  regularly-beating  stitches  in
the  outer  surface  of  the  left  thigh  in  a  small  spot,  just  below  the  hip-joint,'.
— A  restlessness  (trembling)  in  the  thigh  and  leg  when  sitting,  like  a
violent  pulsation  of  the  arteries,  after  a  walk,'. —  Twitching  on  the  inner
side  of  the  right  knee-joint  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. — Twitching  in  the  outer
side  of  the  left  knee-joint,'. — The  pains  in  the  knees  are  severe  and  of  long
duration,*. — [490.]  Burning  aching,  which  sometimes  changes  to  a  burn-
ing throbbing,  in  a  small  spot  on  the  upper  part  of  the  knee,'. — Drawing
in  the  muscles  above  the  knee,*. — Stitching  drawing  pains  in  the  right
knee  and  above  it,  worse  when  walking,*. — Pressure  in  the  knees,*. — Fre-
quent pressure  in  knees,  more  in  the  right,  when  sitting,*. — Pressive  pain
behind  the  left  patella,'. — Burning  sticking  in  the  right  patella  (fourth
hour),'. — Stitches  on  the  knee  near  the  patella,  on  sitting;  the  patella  pains
on  touch  as  if  sore  and  ulcerated,'. — Stitching  pains  in  the  knees  and  joints
of  the  feet,  wandering  about,  when  sitting,*. — Fine  stitch  in  the  left  knee-
joint  when  sitting  (sixty-first  hour),'. — [500.]  Clucking  in  the  left  knee-joint
on  the  inner  side  (thirty-sixth  hour),'. — Itching  on  the  inner  side  of  the
right  knee-joint,  which  continues  on  motion  (thirtieth  hour),'. — Itching  of
the  skin  on  the  left  patella,  which  does  not  disappear  on  scratching  (twenty-
seventh  hour),'. — The  lower  leg  goes  to  sleep  easily,  if  its  nerves  are  the
slightest  compressed ;  for  example,  if  one  leg  is  crossed  over  the  other  in
sitting,  the  latter  goes  to  sleep  ipimediately,'. — A  drawing  in  the  skin  of
the  entire  external  surface  of  the  left  leg  several  times,*. — Itching  sticking
in  the  left  tibia  in  the  forepart  below  the  knee ;  disappears  on  walking
(sixth  hour),'. — A  general  twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  half  of  the
right  tibia,'. — Severe  drawing  in  the  right  tibia,*. — Pressure  in  the  left
tibia,  which  disappears  on  motion  (thirty-sixth  hour),'. — Sharp  stitches  from
within  outward  in  the  right  tibia  (second  hour),'. — [510.]  (Sharp  stitches
running  down  in  the  left  tibia  toward  the  inside)  (fourth  hour),'. — Tensive
burning  in  the  left  calf  (seventy-second  hour),'. — Drawing  in  the  calves,*.
— Drawing  pain  in  the  left  calf,*. — Pressive  pain  below  the  right  calf;  on
walking  it  disappears  (first  hour),'. — Severe  stitches  in  the  right  calf  when
sitting,  later  when  walking,*.^ — Stitches  in  the  right  calf,  and  like  pinching
when  sitting,  for  a  long  while,  then  the  same  pain  in  the  muscles  above  the
right  knee,*. — Twitching  in  the  right  ankle  extending  downward  (thirty-
sixth  hour),'. — (The  decided,  cold  swelling  around  the  malleoli  disappeared
in  the  first  twenty  hours ;  curative  action),'. — In  walking  about,  pres-
sure in  the  joint  of  the  right  foot  and  towards  the  calf,*. — [520.]  Itching
sticking  below  the  inner  malleolus  of  the  right  foot,  which  at  once  disappears
on  rubbing  (forty-second  hour),'. — Dull  stitches  in  the  left  ankle  toward
the  inner  side  (twenty-ninth  hour),'. — Sensitive  intermitting  throbbing  on
the  inner  side  of  the  left  foot,'. — Sensation  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  foot
(which  rides  over  the  other  and  hangs  down)  as  if  it  would  become  stiffened.
■ — Burrowing  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  foot  (forty-second  hour),'. — In
walking,  pressure  in  the  joint  of  the  left  foot,  for  a  great  while,*. — Severe
pressing  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  right  foot  when  walking,  after  awhile
the  same  pain  in  the  left  foot  when  sitting,  but  worse  when  walking,*. —
Pressure  in  the  joints  of  the  feet  and  knees,  in  walking,*. — Pressive  pain  on
the  back  of  the  left  foot  when  sitting  (forty-eighth  hour),'. — An  irregular
intermittent  severe  tension  as  from  a  tight  boot  on  the  right  instep,'. —


580  ASAFGETIDA.

[530.]  Pointed  stitches  in  the  doraum  of  the  right  foot,  which  go  away
completely  on  walking  (fourth  hour)/. — Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot
continues  when  sitting  and  walking  (sixty-sixth  hour),^. — Twitching  in  the
left  sole  toward  the  toes  (second  hour)/. — Pressive  pain  in  the  right  sole,
on  sitting  (forty-sixth  hour),'. — Sensation  in  the  ball  of  the  left  sole  as  if
he  had  stood  long  upon  it,'. — Slight  twitching  in  the  right  great  toe  (half
hour),'. — Drawing  pains  in  the  right  toes,*. — Burning  pressure  at  the  root
of  the  left  great  toe  (forty-ninth  hour),'.^ — Fine  stitches  in  the  third  toe  of
the  right  foot,  on  walking  (twenty-fourth  hour),'. — Burning  stitches  in  the
left  little  toe  (sixty-eighth  hour),'. — [540.]  A  sensitive  throbbing  in  the  left
great  toe  from  time  to  time,^. — In  the  left  great  toe  a  simple,  sometimes
throbbing  paiu,  on  rest  and  motion. — ^Painful  throbbing  in  the  tip  of  the
great  toe,^. — Itching  crawling  on  the  lower  surface  of  the  right  great  toe
(forty-ninth  hour),'.

Generalities. — Yawning,  discomfort,  restlessness,  and  debility,'. — •
Sense  of  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,'. — (Unusual  fatigue  at  evening,  fol-
lowed by  very  sound  sleep),'. — Troublesome  lassitude,^ — Great  lassitude  and
sleepiness  in  the  evening,'. — Great  weakness  on  moving;  so  long  as  he  lies
still  or  stands  he  feels  bright  and  strong,  except  a  languishing  feeling,
whereby  the  mouth  is  very  dry  (first  day),'.^[550.]  Sense  of  general  pros-
tration ;  the  limbs  sink  dowii  heavily  and  relaxed,  and  the  head  feels  dizzy,'. —
Causes,  in  large  doses,  hemorrhages,^. — { Asafoetida  penetrates  the  whole  or-
ganism (in  large  doses) ;  all  secretions,  the  breath,  sweat,  urine,  flatulence,  the
pus  in  the  carious  ulcers,  smell  of  it),\ — A  good  night's  sleep  was  followed,
early  in  the  morning,  by  oppression  of  the  chest,  quick  breathing,  and  beat-
ing of  the  pulse  and  heart,  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  in  three  hours
by  troublesome  aching  of  the  stomach  ;  all  relieved  in  three  hours  more  by
partly  solid,  partly  papescent,  dark-brownish  and  blackish  stools,  smelling
strongly  of  the  drug ;  also  the  rheumatic  pains  in  the  back  of  the  head,
extending  to  the  arms,  and  drawing,  rending  pains  in  the  back  of  the  neck
subsided  after  the  stools,'. — Drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  shoulder-blades,
thighs,  fingers,  and  in  the  right  cheek,*. — Pressing  pains  in  the  thorax,  in
the  elbow-joint  below  the  left  shoulder-blade,  in  the  hands,  shoulders,*. —
Drawing  pressing  pain  below  the  edge  of  the  ribs  on  the  left  side,  when
walking,  and  in  the  muscles  of  the  shoulder-blades,*. — After  rising,  pressure
in  the  forehead,  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  in  the  mus-
cles of  the  left  cheek ;  pressure  in  the  right  tibia,  in  the  left  calf;  drawing
and  pressing  in  different  places  of  the  forehead,*. — Stitches  as  with  needles,'.
— Stitches  in  the  points  of  the  toes,  in  the  skin  of  the  right  axilla,  on  the
right  cheek,*. — [560.]  Fine,  superficial,  sensitive,  needle-stitches  here  and
there,  so  that  he  must  rub,'. — Trembling  over  the  whole  body,  with  cold-
ness of  the  skin,  and  small,  weak  pulse,'. — Frequent  repetition  of  the  pains,*.
— The  pains  return  frequently,  and  jump  from  one  place  to  another,*.

[Note. — The  following  are  clinical:  (Chorea,  Geisschlager  in  Hufeland's
Journ.,  10.) — (A  very  "cold"  swelling,  pitting  on  pressure,  around  the
malleoli,  diminished  in  eight  hours,  and  disappeared  in  thirty  hours),'. — •
(The  pus  from  a  carious  tibia,  previously  ichorous,  very  oflfensive,  and  thin,
became  thicker  and  odorless ;  twelfth  hour),'. — (The  charpie  did  not  ad-
here to  the  sore  any  longer,  causing,  on  removal,  unendurable  pain  in  the
boue  underlying  it,  but  came  off  easily  and  without  pain,  even  without
previous  wetting ;  twenty-eighth  hour),'. — {No  longer  tormented  by  the  nightly
syphilitic  bone-pains,  but  can  again  sleep  under  his  feather-bed ;  twelfth  hour),'.


ASATCETIDA.  581

— (The  apparently  healthy  portion  of  the  tibia  lying  beneath  the  peculiar
carious  ulcer,  became  again  sensitive  and  painfid  to  the  slightest  touch,  or  even
the  approach  of  the  finger,  so  also  to  the  removal  of  the  charpie,  and  at  night
also  almost  unendurable;  second  day)/. — (The  superficial  sore  in  the  skin,
around  the  peculiar  carious  ulcer  in  the  calf  and  inner  side  of  the  knee,
becomes  again  bright-red,  bleeds  easily,  and  covered  with  a  tough,  mem-
branous, coagulated  lymph-crust,  to  which  the  charpie  sticks  fast,  and  when
it  is  removed  the  whole  epidermis  around  the  sore  is  painfully  abraded,
clear,  transparent,  lymphlike  pus  is  seen  in  the  sore  ;  second  day),'. — (Most
extreme  sensitiveness,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  carious  ulcer  of  the  tibia,  of  the
superficial  skin-sores,  and  also  of  the  ulcer  itself;  the  patient  cries  out  if  the
finger  touches  a  place  distant  from  the  ulcer ;  removal  of  charpie  causes  most
severe  pain ;  second  day),'.]

Skin. — Burning  in  the  skin  externally  on  left  leg,*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Unusual  desire  to  sleep  (thirtieth  hour),'. —
Toward  9  p.m.  the  pains  cease  entirely,  and  a  good  night  follows,*. — Sleep
disturbed  very  much,^ — Restless  night,^ — Vivid  dreams  of  business  and
feasting,'. — [570.]  Sleep  full  of  dreams  of  things  of  which  he  had  previously
spoken  or  thought ;  the  dream  becomes  a  true  continuation,  which  after-
ward is  completely  realized,'.

Fever. — *  Chills  ran  over  the  body  from  time  to  time,'. — Chilliness  lasts
till  after  9  a.m.,*. — Chilliness  in  the  back,  cold  hands,*. — Slight  chilly  feel-
ing in  the  back  and  loins,l — The  chilliness  in  the  back  increased,  ran
through  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  the  hands  got  cold,  a  creeping
chill  ran  through  the  whole  body,  the  nails  were  bluish,  much  salivation,
and  sometimes  Asafoetida  eructations,*. — In  walking  up  and  down  the  room
several  times,  severe  chilliness  in  the  back,  cold  feet,  cold  bauds,  with  blue
nails,*. — The  chilliness  seemed  to  be  somewhat  less,  perhaps  from  being
obliged  to  walk  incessantly  the  whole  morning,*. — Chilliness  at  6  p.m.,  with
increased  warmth  of  the  hands  (second  hour),*. — In  two  hours  the  hands
begin  to  get  cold,  and  some  chilliness  in  the  back;  the  same  wandering  pains
remain,  with  heat  in  head  and  face,*. — [580.]  Repeated  alternations  of
chilliness  in  the  back  and  cold  hands,  with  heat  and  heaviness  and  pres-
sure in  the  head ;  even  a  slight  motion  in  the  warm  room  aggravates  the
chilliness,*. — Coldness  of  the  hands,  with  blue  nails,  with  continued  heat  of
the  face  and  head,  visible  twitches  of  the  right  lower  eyelid,  stitches  in  the
point  of  the  tongue,  pressure  in  the  sternum,  chilliness  in  the  back,  wan-
dering pains,*. —  With  the  heat  of  the  face,  cold  hands  and  feet,  and  chills  of
the  back  from  85  to  9  a.m.,*. — The  fever  disappears  about  5^  p.m.,  and  a
sensation  of  heat  only  remains,*. — After  eating,  feverish,  with  heat  in  the
face  (without  perceptible  heat  externally),  without  thirst,  but  with  anxiety
and  sleepiness,'. — Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  limbs,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Pain  in  joints,  etc.,  of  head ;
sensation  as  if  beaten,  etc.,  in  epigastric  region,  etc.;  after  rising,  tearing  in
joint  of  left  foot,  etc. ;  early,  oppression  of  chest,  etc. — {Evening),  Hysteric
rising  in  throat ;  great  lassitude,  etc. — (Night),  When  awaking,  pain  in
joints,  etc.,  of  head. — {Bending  thorax  forward).  Pressure  on  lower  part  of
sternum. — {Bending  upper  part  of  body  back  and  forth),  Pressive  pain  in
small  of  back. — {After  dinner).  When  walking,  flatulent  pain  in  abdomen.
— {Drinking),  Causes  heaviness,  etc.,  in  intestines. — {After  eating),  Pressure
in  epigastric  region  ;  pressure  in  epigastric  region,  etc.;  tension  in  abdomen.
— {During  inspiration  and  expiration),  Pressure  in  left  intercostal  muscles ;


682  ASARUM.

sticking  in  left  loin. — (  When  lying),  Soon  after  a  meal,  great  oppression  of
chest,  etc. ;  stitches,  etc.,  in  chest. — {Motion),  Drawing  down  left  side  of
throat;  drawing  down  left  side  of  neck;  stitches  in  joints  of  small  finger;
great  weakness  ;  chilliness. — {On  moving  finger), ¥0,111  up  forearm. — {Motion
of  painful  joints).  Increases  sufferings. — {Rest),  Pain  along  left  shoulder,
etc.;  stitches  up  right  forearm  ;  pain  as  if  beaten  in  wrist-bones. — {Sitting),
Pain  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  cutting  in  abdomen  ;  drawing  across  abdomen,  etc.;
after  eating, stitches  in  both  sides  of  abdomen;  sticking, etc., in  left  side  of
lower  abdomen ;  stitches  in  chest  after  hawking ;  stitches  in  interco-tal
muscles;  throbbing  in  thorax;  palpitation  of  heart;  twitching  in  muscles
of  lower  half  of  back;  pain  in  small  of  back;  bruised  feeling  in  extremi-
ties ;  pi-essive  pain  at  scapular  end  of  clavicle  ;  burning  on  anterior  surface
of  thigh ;  pain  on  outer  side  of  thigh ;  tearing  in  left  femur ;  restlessiiess
in  thigh,  etc.;  stitch  in  left  knee-joint;  stitch  in  right  caff;  stitches  in  right
calf,  etc.;  pain  on  back  of  left  foot;  pain  in  right  sole. — {Standing),  Pain
below  navel ;  stitches  in  chest  after  hawking ;  throbbing  in  thorax. — (Stoop-
ing), Pain  in  region  of  left  short  rib ;  stitches  under  left  shoulder-blade. —
{Swallowing),  Tension  in  throat.— (MaJcing  parts  tense),  PsLin  in  hamstrings.
— (  While  urinating).  Drawing  in  glans  penis. — (  Walking),  Cutting  in  ab-
domen ;  stitches  in  left  side  of  abdomen ;  drawing,  etc.,  in  loiver  extremities ;
tearing  around  hip-joint;  pains  in  knee,  etc.;  stitches  in  right  calf;  pressure
on  joint  of  foot, etc.;  pressure  on  joint  of  left  foot;  pressing  pain  in  joint
of  right  foot ;  pressing  pain  in  joint  of  left  foot ;  pressure  in  joints  of  feet,
etc.;  stitches  in  right  toe;  pain  below  edge  of  ribs;  chilliness  in  back,  etc.
— {On  writing),  Dull  pressure  in  sternum  returns.

Amelioration, — {Evening),  All  symptoms  disappear  except  disten-
sion of  abdomen. — {Toward  9  p.m.),  Pains  cease  entirely. — {After  blinking),
Dimness  of  eyes  disappears. — {Mucous  expectoration),  Aching  in  chest. —
{Discharge  of  offensive  flatus),  Relief  from  time  to  time. — (  On  inspiration
and  expiration),  Pressure  on  sternum  passes  off;  sticking  in  loin  disappears.
— {Motion),  Pressure  on  tibia  disappears. — {Pressure),  *Stitches  in  both
sides  of  abdomen  disappear;  stitches,  etc.,  in  chest  disappear. — {Rubbing),
Stitches  in  side  of  abdomen  go  away ;  sticking  below  right  malleolus  dis-
appears.— {Sitting  vp),  Stitches,  etc.,  on  chest  disappear. — {After  blackish-
brown,  etc.,  stool),  Symptoms  relieved. — (  Walking),  Sticking  in  left  loin  dis-
appears; tearing,  etc.,  in  right  leg;  sticking  in  tibia  disappears;  pain  below
left  calf  disappears ;  stitches  in  dorsum  of  right  foot  go  away.

ASARUM.

A.  Europteura,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Aristolochiacese.  Common  name,  Ha-
selwurz. Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  root  and  whole  plant.

Authorifies.f  1,  Hahnemann,  M.  M.  Pura,  3,  225 ;  2,  Stapf,  ibid.;  3,
Franz,  ibid.;  4,  Ruckert,  ibid.;  5,  Hornburg,  ibid.;  6,  Murray  (Appar.
Med.,  3,  519),  ibid.;  7,  Helraont  (Pharmac.  Mod.),  ibid.;  8,  Wedel  (Amoe-
nit.  Mat.  Med.,  p.  240),  ibid.;  9,  Coste  and  Villemet  (Essais  sur  plant,
indig.,  1778),  ibid. ;  10,  Ray  (Hist,  uuivers.  plant.),  ibid. ;  11,  Linuseus
(Flora  Suecica).

JMind. — He  imagines  he  is  hovering  in  the  air,  when  walking,  like  a
spirit,^ — Great  cheerfulness  (after  six  and  twelve  hours),  sometimes  inter-

t  No.  6,  no  mention  of  A.  is  found  in  this  place;  7,  is  a  general  statement;  8,
casu  of  poisoning  (given  by  Kay) ;  9,  general  statement ;  10, general  statement  that
A.  is  abortifacient.


. ASAEUM.  583

rupted  for  a  few  moments  by  a  melaucholy  and  gloomy  mood,*. — Weeping,
sadness,  and  anxious  feeling,''. — Melancholy,  fretful,'. — Angry  and  cross,
before  cough,'. — Feels  quite  stupid  in  the  head  ;  is  not  disposed  to  do  any-
thing,*.— As  often  as  he  attempts  to  reflect  a  little  the  pains  in  the  head
and  the  nausea  increase  ;  he  has  to  abandon  his  ideas,  which  cannot  be  of
much  use,  since  he  is  quite  stupid,*. —  Condition  of  mind  as  if  just  falling
asleep ;  gradual  vanishing  of  ideas,^. — His  thoughts  are  so  overstrained  that
they  vanish  entirely,^. — [10.]  When  attempting  to  perform  some  intellectual
labor,  and  reflect,  his  thoughts  immediately  vanish  ;  there  is  a  drawing  pres-
sure in  the  forehead,  and  he  must  at  once  cease  thinking,*. — Inability  to  do
any  kind  of  work  whatever;  does  not  succeed  in  anything;  the  mental  facul-
ties fail  (previous  to  every  vomiting,  after  which  feels  somewhat  relieved) ;
in  general,  the  mental  faculties  are  deficient  during  the  whole  proving,*.

Jlen d.^^ouiusion  ;  stupid  condition  of  the  whole  head,  with  tension
in  the  region  of  the  ears,*. — Painful  tensive  confusion  of  the  head,^ — Con-
fusion  of  the  head,  less  perceptible  when  walking  than  when  sitting,  with
pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  with  a  dull  point  from  within  outwards,  especially
below  the  right  eyelid  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Sensation  of  vertigo,
as  though  not  standing  securely  (evening,  after  four  days),*. — Vertigo,  as
from  being  slightly  intoxicated,  when  rising  from  a  seat,  and  walking  about
(in  ten  minutes),''. — Early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  dizziness  in  the
head,  with  headache  in  the  left  forehead  (after  twenty-two  hours),^ — Weight
and  confusion  of  the  head,  with  pressure  on  the  .sagittal  suture,  as  if  he
were  intoxicated  (after  three  hours),". — Weight  in  the  head,  as  if  some  wab-
bling body  were  in  it,  which  presses  in  the  direction  the  head  is  turned,  for-
wards or  backwards,^. — [20.]  Drawing  headache,  as  if  it  would  extend  into
the  temples  (at  noon) ;  the  pain  seems  to  decrease  in  the  open  air,  and  when
lying  down,". — (Stupefying)  drawing,  here  and  there,  in  the  brain,  in  the
ear,  and  nape  of  the  neck,". — Pressure  in  the  brain,  mostly  forwards  (after
three-quarters  of  an  hour),*. — Pressure  over  the  greater  portion  of  the  brain,
from  without  inwards  (after  two  and  three-quarter  hours),*. — Pressure  in
different  places  in  the  brain,  mingled  with  various  sensations,*. — Dull  head-
ache (after  half  an  hour),^. — Sensation  of  a  more  or  less  violent  pressure
in  the  forehead,  from  above  downwards,*. — Pressure  in  the  brain,  at  a  place
in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  from  above  downwards,  as  if  from  a  stone  (after
a  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Violent  pressure  in  the  forehead,  pressing  down-
ward upon  the  eyes,  which  then  water  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),*. — Vio-
lent drawing  pressure  in  the  brain  below  the  forehead  (increased  when
retching),*. — [30.]  Pressive,  dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  causing  a  dreary
feeling,  as  after  being  awaked  too  early,". — Sharp,  pressive  headache  above
the  root  of  the  nose,^ — Tearing  headache  in  the  forehead  for  some  seconds,
after  stooping  and  raising  the  head  again,*. — Tearing,  pulsative  pain  in  the
forehead,*. — Throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead,  early  in  the  morning  when
rising  (after  twenty-four  hours),*. — Stooping  excites  a  throbbing  pain  in  the
forehead,*. — Headache  and  confusion  in  the  left  temple,  afterwards  below
the  parietal  bones,  and  lastly  in  the  occiput,". — Pressive  pain  in  the  temples,
e.specially  the  left,'. — *  Very  sensitive  compressive  headache  in  the  left  temple
and  behind  the  ears,  more  violent  when  walking  or  shaking  the  head,  less
when  sitting  (after  twelve  hours),". — *Tearing,  pressive  pain  in  the  left
temyjle,". — [40.]  Itching  below  the  left  temple,  commencing  with  fine  sting-
ing,'.— *Cold  feeling  on  a  small  place  at  the  left  side  of  the  head,  a  couple
of  inches  above  the  ear,". — When  bending  the  head  to  the  left,  pain  as  if  a
bundle  of  muscular  fibres  had  been  displaced  in  consequence  of  some  vio-


584  ASARUM.

lent  exertion ;  the  pain  extends  over  the  left  temple,  and  behind  the  ear
towards  the  left  shoulder,  increasing  and  decreasing  synchronously  with  the
pulse,l — Pressure  in  both  sides  of  the  head,  from  within  outwards,*. — Pres-
sure in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  which  moves  to  the  side  of  the  head
(aiter  three  miuutes),''. — He  feels  the  pulsations  of  the  arteries  in  the  occi-
put, afterwards  in  the  whole  of  the  body,*. — *Tension  of  the  whole  scalp,
making  the  hair  feel  painful,*.

JEf/Cfi, — Warm  feeling  and  slight  pressure  in  the  eyes ;  they  have  lost
a  good  deal  of  their  lustre,  and  look  weaker,*. — Painful  feeling  of  dryness
in  the  interior  of  the  eye,''. — Feeling  of  dryness  and  a  drawing  in  the  eyes,*.
— [50.]  Pressure  iu  the  left  eye,^ — As  soon  as  he  reads,  sensation  in  each
eye  as  if  pressed  asunder,*. — Pulselike,  tearing  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  left
eye  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),*. — Slight  swelling  of  the  upper  left  eyelid,
cannot  endure  much  reading,*. — Dry  burning  in  the  eyelids  and  the  inner
canthi,  especially  iu  the  left  eye,'. — Twitching  of  the  lower  right  eyelid,^ —
Cold  feeling  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  as  if  caused  by  a  cold
breath,^ — Sensation  of  twitching  in  the  left  upper  eyelid,  from  within  out-
wards, in  paroxysms;  it  occurs  only  when  holding  the  eyelid  still;  as  soon
as  he  raises  the  lid  to  look  at  something,  the  twitching  disappears  (after
nine  hours),*. — Crawling  under  the  upper  lid,  especially  of  the  left  eye,^ —
Obscuration  of  vision  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),^^[60.]  He  does  not  per-
ceive the  objects  which  surround  him,^.

Mavs. — The  whole  external  right  ear  is  hot  to  the  touch  ;  this  symp-
tom frequently  returns  during  the  whole  proving,*. — Warm  feeling  in  the
region  of  the  right  external  meatus  auditorius,  with  sensation  as  if  a  thin
membrane  were  stretched  across  it  (after  half  an  hour),*. — Sensation  in  the
left  ear,  both  on  the  outer  and  inner  side,  as  if  the  cartilages  of  the  ear
drew  towards  each  other,^ — Both  cars  feel  stopped  in  front,''. — Sensation  in
the  outer  meatus  auditorius  as  if  narrower,^ — The  sensation  of  tension  and
pressure  on  the  right  meatus  auditorius  almost  always  remains  the  same,
and  afterwards  extends  to  the  left  lower  jaw,  accompanied,  when  violent,
with  an  increased  secretion  of  apparently  cold  saliva  from  the  right  side
(after  half  an  hour),'. —  Continued  pain  owing  to  preasive  tendon  in  the  region
of  the  meatus  auditorius,*. — Sensation  as  if  a  membrane  were  stretched  across
the  right  meatus  auditorius  externus ;  tensive  pressure  in  it,  uninterrupt-
edly, tor  seven  days ;  worse  during  cold  weather,*. — He  imagines  a  mejn-
braue  is  stretched  across  the  meatus  auditorius,  with  a  sensation  as  if  it
were  compressed  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — [70.]  He  imagines  a  mem-
brane is  stretched  across  the  right  meatus  auditorius  (immediately),*. —
Pressure  behind  and  below  the  left  ear,^. — Twingeing  sensation  in  both  the
external  and  internal  ear,'°. — He  hears  worse  with  the  right  ear  than  with
the  left  (after  one  hour),*. — Dull  roaring  in  the  left  ear,  resembling  the  dis-
tant roaring  of  the  wind  ;  shrill  singing  in  the  right  ear,'. — Diminished  hear-
ing of  the  left  ear,  as  if  closed  with  the  hand  ;  it  feels  as  if  the  walls  of  the
meatus  were  nearer  one  another,  or  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  with  cotton,'.

Nose, — Discharge  of  bloody  mucus  from  the  nose,*. — Dry  coryza  ;  the
left  nostril  stopped  up,''. — Tingling  in  the  nose,  as  if  caused  by  the  copper
pole  of  the  galvanic  battery,  causing  a  sneezing  after  many  unsuccessful
attempts,  and  a  discharge  of  a  clear  fluid,^

Face. — Warm  ieeling  in  the  cheeks  (after  ten  hours),*. — [80.]  Warm
feeling  in  the  left  cheek  (after  four  hours),'. — Contractive  pain  of  the  left
cheek,  accompanied  by  gentle  thrusts,  as  with  a  pointed  instrument,  and
drawing  pains  in  the  third  molar  tooth,". — Fine  stinging  of  the  right  cheek,'.


ASARUM.  585

— Burning  stinging  pain  in  the  left  cheek,'. — Dryness  of  the  inner  side  of
the  lower  lip,'. — Cutting  cramp  pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  lower  jaw,'.

Mouth. — Cold  feeling  in  the  upper  incisors,  as  from  a  cool  breath,l —
Sensation  in  left  row  of  teeth,  as  if  hollow,". — Tongue  coated  white  (after
twenty-six  hours),^ — Burning  sensation  across  the  middle  of  the  tongue  ;
afterwards,  burning  and  dryness  in  the  whole  mouth  (after  twenty  min-
utes),^ — [90.]  Smarting  sensation  on  the  tongue  and  gums,^.— Frequent
contractive  sensation  in  the  mouth,  producing  an  accumulation  of  watery
saliva,*. — Accumulation  of  much  cool  saliva  in  the  mouth,''. — The  sijliva  in
the  mouth  appears  to  be  quite  tenacious  (after  twenty-four  hours),*. — The
saliva  in  the  mouth  was  burning  hot  when  discharging  it  (after  half  an
hour),^ — Sensation  as  if  the  breath  and  saliva  were  hot,  without,  however,
the  moutli  feeling  dry,''. — Mucus  in  the  mouth,  with  a  sweetish,  insipid
taste,'. — Taste  in  the  mouth  as  of  a  foul  stomach,*. — Bread  tastes  bitter,*.
— Bread,  eaten  without  butter,  tastes  bitter  (in  the  evening),'. — [100.]
When  smoking,  tobacco  tastes  bitter,'. — Smoking  tobacco  gives  him  no
pleasure,*.

Thvoat, — Tough  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  he  is  unable  to  hawk  up,
for  eight  days,*. — Dryness  of  the  throat,  with  stinging,'.^Inspiration  irri-
tates the  throat  and  excites  a  cough,*. — Scraping  in  the  throat,^. — Stitches
in  the  throat,  and  constriction,  on  account  of  which  the  breathing  is  short
and  jerking ;  the  constriction  was  relieved  for  a  short  time  by  the  hacking
cough,*. — Difficult  deglutition,  as  if  the  cervical  glands  were  swollen,*.

Stomach. — Hunger,  early  in  the  morning,'. — Frequent,  empty  eruc-
tations,''.— [110.]  Imperfect  eructations,  reaching  only  the  upper  part  of
the  chest,'. — Rising  of  air  from  the  stomach,  when  walking  in  the  open
air  ;  as  it  issues,  he  has  to  yawn  twice,  after  which  he  was  troubled  for  a
whole  hour  by  eructations  and  abundant  emission  of  flatulence,''. — Hic-
cough (after  one  and  a  half  hours),*  ^. — Nausea  (one  hour),^ — Nausea  and
loathing,  with  shuddering  (immediately),'. — *Naiisea  and  inclination  to
vomit,  with  pressure  in  the  forehead,  and  a  quantity  of  water  accumulating
in  the  mouth,*. — Nausea  in  the  stor-iach,  with  disinclination  to  attend  to
business ;  laziness,  and  sensation  as  if  without  a  head,*. — Nausea,  inducing
shivering,*. — Continued  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the  fauces,*. —
Empty  retching,  water  collecting  in  his  mouth  (after  half  an  hour,  and  one
and  a  half  hours),*. — [120,]  The  retching  increases  in  violence,  in  propor-
tion as  it  becomes  more  frequent ;  the  eyes  become  full  of  water,*. — During
the  retching,  all  the  symptoms  increase,  only  the  stupid  feeling  in  the  head
decreases,*. — Vomiting,  with  great  anguish,'. — Vomiting  (one  hour  after  the
first  attack  of  retching),  with  great  exertion  of  the  stomach,  in  five  or  six
paroxysms,  every  paroxysm  being  accompanied  with  a  sensation  as  if  the
head,  in  the  region  of  the  ears,  would  burst ;  only  a  small  quantity  of
greenish,  sourish  juice  is  thrown  up  from  the  stomach  (after  one  and  a  half
hours),*. — Vomiting,  with  great  exertion,  and  violent  pressure  on  the  stom-
ach; the  effort  to  vomit  takes  away  his  breath,  and  almost  sufibcates  him,
nevertheless,  nothing  but  a  quantity  of  sourish  water  is  thrown  up  (after
two  and  a  half  hours),*. — Vomiting,  with  exertion  of  the  stomach,  and  vio-
lent compression  in  the  epigastrium,  and  a  similar  sensation  in  the  head
(after  two  and  a  half  hours),*. — (Vomiting  is  followed  by  a  diminution  of
the  pains  in  the  head),*. — Vomiting,  diarrhoea,  death  (in  a  strong  man),*.
— Fulness  in  the  stomach,  with  hunger,'. — Pinching  in  the  stomach  (after
one  and  a  half  hours),^ — [130.]  Slight  pinching  in  the  stomach,  or  just
above  it,'. — Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  with  a  dull  point,^ — Pressure  in


686  ASARUM.

the  region  of  the  stomach,  during  an  inspiration,*. — Hard  pressure  on  the
region  and  pit  of  the  stomach,  two  days  in  succession,*. — Troublesome  pres-
sure on  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  makes  him  unable  to  decide  whether
he.  is  hungry  or  not,  the  whole  day,*. — Cutting  in  the  epigastric  region
(after  two  hours),*. — Occasional  sharp  cutting  on  different  parts  of  the  epi-
gastric region,  abating  after  the  emission  of  flatulence,*.

A-hdomen. — Constrictive  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm,*. —
Breaking,  in  the  abdomen,  of  the  flatus  not  emitted,^ — Painless  and  silent
movement  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,^. — [140.]  Qualmishness  in  the
abdomen,  with  repeated  attacks  of  oppressive  headache  along  the  coronal
siiture  (after  two  hours),^ — Fulness  in  abdomen,  with  appetite  and  hunger ,^
• — Pressure  in  the  abdomen,*. — Excessive  colic  and  vomiting,^ — Cutting  in
the  abdomen,  and  sharp  stitches  in  the  rectum  from  above  downwards,
previous  to  stool  (early  in  the  morning),*. — Sensation  of  pressure  and  pain-
ful bearing  down  on  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  felt  during  motion,*. —
Single,  painful  sensations  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  an  oblique
direction  below  the  umbilicus,^ — Raging,  intense  pain  in  the  left  groin,
darting  through  the  urethra  into  the  glans,  and  causing  a  violent,  sore,
smarting,  contractive  pain  in  the  same,  for  a  long  time,^

Stool  and  A.iius. — Diarrhoea," ". — Diarrhoea,  the  stools  resembling
resin,  and  consisting  of  tough  mucus  ;  for  six  days,  he  passes  shaggy  masses
of  mucus,  with  ascarides,^ — [160.]  *One  hour  and  a  half  after  stool,  he  has
another  pressing  .desire  for  stool,  with  Aitting  in  the  abdomen  and  rectum,
before  and  during  stool,  which  is  softer  than  the  former,*. — The  usual  morn-
ing stool  delayed  for  a  couple  of  hours ;  it  was  scanty,  yellow  (mucous),
and  came  out  in  a  thin  string,^ — Stool,  consisting  of  small,  hard  pieces,*. —
Stool  whitish-gray  and  ash-colored,  the  first  part  like  bloody  mucus,\

Urinary  Organs. — Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  during  and  after
the  emission  of  urine,^ — (Drawing  in  the  urethra),'. — Constant  desire  to
urinate,'.

Sexual  Organs. — Miscarriage  (abortion),'".

Mespiratory  Ax>X>aratus. — Several  attacks  of  cough,  brought  on
by  mucus  in  the  chest,  which  rises  into  the  throat,  and  causes  difiicult
breathing,  and,  lastly,  cough  with  expectoration,^ — Much  expectoration  by
hawking  and  coughing,' .^[160.]  (Whistling  respiration  when  beginning
to  cough),'. — Very  short  breath  (at  night),'. — Short  breathing ;  the  throat
feels  constricted,  and  he  is  attacked  with  a  hacking  cough,*.

Chest. — Visible  twitchings  and  jactitations  of  the  muscles  in  the  region
of  the  clavicle,*. — Pain  around  both  lungs,  as  if  constricted  with  a  sharp
wire,*. — Feeling  of  pressure  in  the  whole  chest,*. — Sharp  pressure  in  the
region  of  the  last  ribs,  as  with  the  back  of  a  knife,*. — Stitches  in  the  chest
when  taking  an  inspiration  (after  twenty-four  hours),*. — Dull  stitches  in
both  lungs  when  taking  a  rather  deep  inspiration,*. — Frequent,  dull  stitches
in  both  lungs,  during  an  inspiration,  for  eight  days,*. — [170.]  Burning  sen-
sation in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  more  external  than  internal,*. — Pain-
ful stretchings  in  the  left  side  (after  three-quarters  of  an  hour),'. — Con-
strictive sensation  in  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs,  as  if  a  wire  or  string  were
twisted  round,  cutting  it  through* — Strong  pressing  in  the  right  side  of
the  chest,  at  regular  intervals  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),*. — Stitches  in  the
right  lobe  of  the  lungs  during  an  inspiration  (after  twelve  hours),*. — Dull
stitch  on  the  left  side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (after  nine  hours),*. — Dull
stitch,  arresting  the  breathing,  deep,  apparently  in  the  left  lung,  at  every
inspiration  (after  fifteen  hours),*.


ASARUM.  587

Wecle  and  Bade. — Sensation  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck
as  if  a  cravat  were  tied  too  tight,  as  if  the  parts  were  pressed  upon  by  a
blunt  edge,'. — Spasmodic  contractions  of  the  left  cervical  muscles,  accom-
panied by  a  perceptible  bending  of  the  head  towards  the  left  side,l — Feel-
ing of  weight  about  the  neck,  and  sensation  as  if  the  muscles  were  com-
pressed by  a  cravat,\ — [180."|  Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,
as  if  a  bundle  of  muscular  fibres  had  been  displaced  by  violent  exertion ;
the  pain  afterwards  extends  over  the  head  and  shoulders  (after  six  hours),^
— Paralytic  pain  in  one  of  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  the
parts  were  bruised  when  moving  them,*. — Dull  stitches  below  the  scapulae,*.
— Paiu,  as  from  a  contusion  or  a  bruise,  along  the  inner  border  of  the  right
scapula,  especially  when  touching  the  scapula,  or  moving  it  inwards  (after
twefity-five  hours),^. — Bruised  pain  in  the  back,*. — Paralytic  pain  in  the
back,  as  if  bruised ;  felt  while  standing  or  sitting ;  disappearing  when  lying
down,*. — -Burning  pain,  with  stitches,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  while  sit-
ting,\ — Pain  across  the  spinal  column,  from  one  brim  of  the  pelvis  to  the
other,  as  if  the  flesh  were  torn  and  pulled  toward  the  outer  side,  in  tearing
jerks,  when  walking,*.

EMtremifies  in  General. — *  Lightness  of  all  the  limbs ;  he  is  not
aware  of  having  a  body,'. — Occasional  darting  and  tearing  pains  in  the
upper  and  lower  limbs,*. — [190.]  Bruised  feeling,  and  sometimes  a  tran-
sient, painful  tearing  in  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,*.

Upper  Extremities. — Paralytic  weakness  in  the  arm,*. — He  is
unable  to  let  his  arm  lie  upon  the  table  without  feeling  exhausted  ;  he  feels
no  pain  when  the  arm  hangs  down,*. — Tearing  ache  in  the  left  arm,  in  every
position,*. — Contractive,  tensive  pain  of  the  deltoid  muscle,  when  laying
the  hand  upon  the  table,  or  when  it  lies  there,'. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in
the  shoulder,  when  moving  the  arm,'. — Violently  tearing  stitches  in  both
shoulders,  both  when  in  motion  and  at  rest,*. — Pressure  in  the  left  axilla,
as  with  a  rough  piece  of  wood,^ — Sudden,  dull  pain  in  the  axilla,  appar-
ently in  the  axillary  glands,^. — Itching,  as  if  caused  by  a  flea-bite,  at  a
place  below  the  right  axilla,  in  front,'.- — [200.]  Drawing,  paralytic  pain
in  the  left  wrist-joint,^ — Sudden  drawing  and  burning  pain,  extending  from
the  wrist-joint  through  the  thumb  and  index  finger  (after  three  hours),^ —
Drawing  in  the  fingers,  evenings,  when  lying  in  bed,'.

Loiver  Extremities, — Feeling  of  lassitude  in  the  lower  limbs,  as
if  not  rested  sufficiently  by  sleep,*. — Lassitude  of  the  lower  limbs,  when
going  upstairs,  for  many  days,*. — Weariness  and  bruised  feeling  of  the
lower  limbs  and  knees,  as  in  the  beginning  of  an  intermittent  fever,*. —
— Painful  feeling  in  the  hip,'. — When  stepping,  violent  pain  in  the  hip-
joint,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh  ;  the  foot  feels  paralyzed  from  it ;  he
cannot  step  on  the  foot  well,^. — Drawing  ache  in  the  hips  (when  ■walking),^
— Dull  pressure  in  the  right  hip,^. — ^[210.]  Dull  pain  in  the  hip-joint  and  in
the  middle  of  the  thigh,  when  touching  the  parts,  or  when  walking,  or  when
moving  about  after  being  seated,^ — Sensation  from  the  right  hip-joint  to
the  knee,  as  if  the  limb  would  go  to  sleep,'. — Drawing  and  tensive  paiu  in
the  head  of  the  left  femur,  and  further  on  in  the  bone,  especially  when
walking,^. — Drawing  in  the  hamstrings,  evenings,  when  lying  in  bed,\ —
Sudden  grinding  pain  in  the  upper  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,'. — Lancinat-
ing, tearing  pain  in  the  left  thigh,*. — Spasmodic  contractions  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  right  thigh,  near  the  knee,  abating  when  extending  the  limb,'.
— Feeling  of  lassitude  in  the  knees,  with  visible  staggering  when  walking,
if  not  very  careful  (after  fifteen  minutes),^ — Drawing  in  the  knee,'. — Pres-


588  ASARUM.

sure  above  the  bend  of  the  right  knee,  as  from  something  hard  or  blunt/. —
[220.]  Uneasiness  in  the  left  knee-joint,  inducing  one  to  move  about  (after
half  an  hour),'. — Violent  tearing  stitching  in  the  knees,  during  motion  and
at  rest,*. — (Clucking  in  the  patella),'. — The  left  leg  feels  as  if  gone  to  sleep,
and  the  foot  is  insensible  as  when  very  cold  ;  it  looks  dead,^ — Feeling  as
from  bruises  in  the  left  tibia,^ — Visible  twitches  and  jactitations  in  the
calf  muscles,\ — Sudden  stitching  pain  in  the  sole  of  the  foot  (after  three
and  a  half  hours),^. — Drawings  in  the  toes,  evenings,  in  bed,'. — Both  little
toes  are  painful,  as  if  frozen,^.

Generalities. — Excessive  sensibility  of  all  the  nerves,  when  merely
imagining  (which  he  is  constantly  obliged  to  do),  that  some  one  is  scratch-
ing even  slightly  on  linen,  or  some  similar  substance,  with  the  finger-tips  or
nails ;  a  most  disagreeable  sensation  thrills  through  him,  momentarily
arresting  all  his  thoughts  and  functions  (after  eleven  hours),*. — [230.]
Laziness,  slowness,  and  indisposition  to  work,*. — Great  lassitude  after  din-
ner,^ — Great  faintness  and  constant  yawning,  every  afternoon,*. — General,
weary  feeling,  sometimes  as  if  bruised  all  over,*. — Towards  evening,  he  be-
comes so  faint  and  nauseated,  that  he  feels  as  if  he  would  die,  as  soon  as  he
rises  from  his  seat ;  he  is  obliged  to  go  to  bed,*. — Ebullition  of  blood,  even-
ings, in  bed,  for  two  hours,  prevents  sleeping,'. — General  uneasy  feeling  and
nausea,*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Frequent  yawning,*. — Great  drowsiness  by
day  (after  twelve,  thirteen,  and  fourteen  days),*. — Drowsy  ;  out  of  humor,l
— Restless  sleep  (every  other  night  cannot  sleep  well),'. — [240.]  During
sleep,  such  violent  stitches  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  that  he  dreamed
he  experienced  a  stitch,  whjle  a  blister  of  Cantharides  was  applied  to  his
foot ;  he  felt  nothing  on  waking  up,°. — Nightly  vexing  dreams  about  insults
received,^.

Fever. — Shuddering  over  the  whole  body  (immediately). — Slight
shuddering  over  the  body  (after  a  half  and  one  and  a  half  hours),*. — Shud-
dering (with  disgust  and  nausea),  (immediately),''. — Chilliness  and  shiver-
ing, without  any  thirst,*. — Uninterrupted  chilliness;  goose-skin  ;  hands  and
face  cold  ;  blueness  of  the  face,*. — Slight  chills  in  the  back  (suddenly
brought  on  by  biting  upon  a  hard  crust),^. — Chilliness  when  drinking,*. — ■
Chilliness  the  whole  day  ;  when  sitting  or  lying  still,  and  keeping  covered,
he  feels  nothing,  except  a  soreness  of  the  eyes,  a  pressure  on  the  forehead
and  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  sometimes  external  heat,  but  when  tak-
ing ever  so  little  exercise  in  the  room,  or  when  exposed  to  the  open  air,
without  taking  exercise,  he  feels  an  excessive  chilliness,  with  scarcely  any
thirst ;  when  walking  fast  in  the  open  air,  or  entering  a  warm  room  after
coming  out  of  the  open  air,  or  when  becoming  heated  by  violent  talking  in
the  room,  or  after  dinner,  or  when  lying  in  a  warm  bed,  he  feels  healthy,
naturally  warm,  even  a  little  hot,  and  has  a  desire  for  beer,*. — [250.]
Shaking  chills  in  the  evening,  with  extreme  faintness,  especially  in  the
knees  and  the  small  of  the  back,  without  any  thirst ;  hands  cold,  rest  of
body  naturally  warm,  forehead  hot,*. — Chills,  with  heat  in  the  face,*. —
Chilliness  when  not  well  covered,  or  when  moving ;  heat  as  soon  as  he
covers  himself,  sometimes  with  chills,*. — Cold  feeling  over  the  body,  as  if
a  cold  wind  blew  upon  him ;  at  the  same  time  he  was  cold  to  the  touch,
with  goose-skin,  the  warmth  returning  in  a  few  hours,  and  being  somewhat
increased  (in  the  afternopn),  with  a  slimy  mouth,  dryness  iu  the  throat,
and  thirst ;  afterwards  another  attack  of  coldness  as  before ;  and  iu  the
evening,  an  hour  previous  to  going  to  sleep,  an  increase  of  warmth,  con-


ASARUM.  589

tinuing  while  in  bed  ;  he  is  obliged  to  uncover  his  hands,  with  great  dry-
ness of  the  palate/. — Fever  the  whole  day ;  chilliness  in  the  afternoon,
abating  neither  during  exercise  in  the  open  air  nor  by  external  warmth  ;
hot  feeling  externally,  with  internal  chills  and  thirst,  after  dinner,*. — Chil-
liness after  the  hot  feeling,  the  heat  of  the  head  and  face  remaining;  chilly
at  the  slightest  motion,*. — Hands  icy  cold,  arms  and  rest  of  body  warm ;
still  they  are  covered  with  goose-skin,  and  he  has  violent  chills,*. — Heat
of  the  forehead  and  hairy  scalp,  the  rest  of  the  body  being  naturally  warm,
with  slight  chills  and  chilliness ;  no  thirst ;  pulse  strong  and  quick,*. — Hot
feeling  and  actual  heat  after  the  chills,  especially  in  the  face  and  palm  of
the  hand,  the  symptoms  in  the  ear  appearing  again,*. — Unusual  warmth
of  the  body,  the  whole  day  (after  twenty-four  hours),''. — [260.]  Warm  feel-
ing, as  if  sweat  would  break  out  (after  four  hours),*. — He  sweats  easily,
even  from  a  slight  cause,*. — Warm  sweat,  even  when  sitting  still,*. — Slight
sweat  only,  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body  and  on  the  upper  limbs,^. —
Sweat,  evenings,  in  bed,  immediately  after  lying  down,\ — Profuse  night-
sweat,*.

Conditions. — -Aggravation. — {Morning),  Early,  when  rising,  dizzi-
ness in  head,  etc. ;  early,  when  rising,  throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead ;
early,  hunger ;  previous  to  stool,  cutting  in  abdomen,  etc. — {Noon),  Draw-
ing headache. — {Afternoon),  Great  faintness,  etc. ;  warmth  increased  ;  chil-
liness.— {Towards  mening).  Becomes  faint,  etc. — {Evening),  Vertigo;  bread
tastes  bitter;  when  lying  in  bed,  drawing  in  fingers;  when  lying  in  bed,
drawing  in  hamstrings ;  in  bed,  drawings  in  toes ;  ebullition  of  blood ;
shaking  chills  ;  an  hour  before  going  to  bed,  increase  of  warmth ;  in  bed,
immediately  after  lying  down,  sweat. — {Night),  Yery  short  breath  ;  profuse
sweat. — {Every  other  night).  Cannot  sleep  well. — (  When  exposed  to  open  air,
without  taking  exercise).  Excessive  chilliness. — (  TFalking  in  open  air).  Rising
of  air  from  stomach,  etc. — {During  cold  weather).  Sensation  of  a  membrane
across  auditory  passage. — (Before  cough),  Angry,  etc. — {When  not  well
covered),  Chilliness. — {After  dinner).  Lassitude;  hot  feeling  externally,
etc. — ( When  drinking),  Chilliness.— (J/fer  getting  dry  again).  Vertigo,
headache,  burning  on  tongue  and  in  the  mouth,  contraction  of  left  cervical
muscles,  and  weakness  in  knees,  return  again. — {During  an  inspiration).
Pressure  on  region  of  stomach ;  stitches  in  chest ;  stitches  in  both  lungs ;
dull  stitches  in  lungs ;  stitching  in  right  lobe  of  lungs;  stitch,  apparently  in
left  lung. — (  When  attempting  to  perform  intellectual  labor).  Thought^  van-
ish, etc. — {Laying  hand  on  table),  Pain  in  deltoid  muscle. — (Letting  arm  lie
on  table).  Feels  exhausted. — ( When  hand  lies  on  table),  Pain  in  deltoid
muscle. — {Motion),  Pressure,  etb.,  on  side  of  abdomen  ;  chilliness. — {Moving
the  part  inward).  Pain  along  border  of  scapula. — {When  moving  arm).  Pain
in  shoulder.— (  When  moving  about  after  being  seated).  Dull  pain  in  hip-
joint,  etc. — {Attempting  to  reflect),  Pains  in  head,  etc. — {Retching),  Pressure
in  brain  ;  all  symptoms,  except  stupid  feeling  in  head.^ — {Rising  from  seat
and  walking  about).  Vertigo. — (  Taking  exercise  in  room),  Excessive  chilliness.
— {Shaking  head).  Headache  in  temple. — {Sitting),  Pain  in  back ;  pain,
etc.,  in  small  of  back. — {Standing),  Pain  in  back, — {Holding  eyelid  still).
Sense  of -twitching  in  upper  eyelid. — {Stepping),  Vain  in  hip-joint,  etc. —
{During  sleep).  Stitches  in  dorsum  of  foot. — {Before  stool).  Cutting  in  rec-
tum.— -{During  stool).  Cutting  in  rectum. — {Stooping),  Throbbing  pain  in
forehead. — {After  stooping  and  raising  head  again).  Tearing  in  forehead. —
{louching  the  parts).  Pain  along  border  of  scapula;  dull  pain  in  hip-joint,
etc. — {During  and  after  emission  o/wTOie),  Pressure  upon  the  bladder. —


590  ASCLEPIAS  CORNUTI.

(  Walking),  Pain  in  left  temple,  etc. ;  pain  across  spinal  column  ;  ache  in
hips ;  pain  in  hip-joint ;  pain  in  head  of  left  femur,  etc. — (  Walking  up-
stairs), Lassitude  of  lower  limbs.

Amelioration,. — (Open  air).  Drawing  headache. — (  Walking  in  open
air),  Headache  disappeared,  together  with  hot  feeling  in  cheek,  the  drowsi-
ness, and  ill-humor. — {Bending  head  to  left).  Pain,  as  if  muscular  fibres
displaced. — {Washing  face  with  cold  water),  Vertigo,  headache,  burning  on
tongue  and  in  mouth,  contraction  of  left  cervical  muscles,  and  weakness  in
the  knees,  disappeared. — (Hacking  cough).  Constriction  in  throat. —  (Ex-
tending the  Zm6),  Contraction  of  thigh-muscles. — (Emission  of  flatulence),
Ache  in  epigastric  region. — (  When  lying  down),  Headache  ;  paralytic  pain
in  small  of  back  disappears.— (iiete/wng').  Stupid  feeling  in  head. — (Sitting),
Pain  in  left  temple. — (After  vomiting),  Inability  to  do  work,  etc. — (  When
walking).  Confusion  of  head,  etc.


ASCLEPIAS  CORNUTI  (SYEIACA).

A.  cornuti,  Decaisne  (A.  Syriaca,  Linn.).  Nat.  order,  Asclepiadacese.
Common  names,  Silkweed,  milkweed. Preparation,  Tincture. of  the  root.

Authorities.  1,  Clerborne  (Am.  J.  of  Med.  Sciences,  vol.  42,  Hale's
New  Remedies),  took  the  fluid  extract  of  the  dried  root,  also  an  infusion
of  the  dried  root  and  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  fresh  herb;  2,  Pattee
(Tilden's  Journ.  of  Mat.  Med.,  Hale's  N.  R.),  took  an  infusion  of  the  fresh
root.

Mind. — Calm,  quiet  feeling,^

Sefld. — Dizziness  in  the  head  (lasting  only  a  couple  of  hours),'. — A
little  dizziness  (after  four  hours),'''. — Agreeable  sensation  in  the  brain,  fol-
lowed by  great  sleepiuess,^ — Headache,^ — Some  headache  (after  four
hours),^ — On  waking  in  morning,  severe  headache,  with  disagreeable  feel-
ing in  stomach,^ — Violent  headache,  principally  between  the  eyes,'. — Head-
ache, sense  of  constriction  across  forehead,  pain  between  eyes,'.  —  [10-]
Feeling,  after  vomiting,  as  if  some  sharp  instrument  was  thrust  through  from
one  temple  to  the  other^.

Face. — Appeared  dull  and  stupid,^

Mouth. — Tongue  covered  with  white  fur,'.

Throat. — Burning  and  tickling  sensations  in  the  fauces  and  throat,'.
— Tickling  sensation  in  the  fauces,^.

Stomach. — Increased  appetite;  even  after  a  hearty  meal,  a  feeling
of  hunger  would,  in  the  course  of  a  few  "hours,  be  again  felt,'. — Little
relish  for  food,l — Slight  sensation  of  nausea,^ — Excessive  nausea,^. — Vom-
iting,'.— [30.]  Violent  vomiting,  with  retching,'.  —  Severe  and  long-con-
tinued vomiting,  leaving  behind  it  a  sensation  of  rawness  in  the  stomach,
and  a  slight  pain,  celdness  of  the  surface  of  the  skin,  feeble  pulse,  and  a
feeling  as  if  some  .sharp  instrument  was  thrust  through  from  one  temple  to  the
other,^. — Vomiting,  leaving  the  system  much  relaxed,  and  the  pulse  fre-
quent and  feeble,'. — Uneasiness  of  the  stomach,'. — Slight  pain  in  stomach,'.
— Stomach  feeling  painful  and  raw,'.

Abdome^i. — Increased  secretion  of  bile,'.

Stool  and  Amis, — Excoriation  of  the  anus,'. — Slight  inclination  to
evacuate  the  bowels,^. — Bowels  moved  oftener  than  usual,^ — [30,]  Copious
discharges  from  the  bowels,  of  a  soft,  fluid  consistence,  yellowish  in  color,
and  attended  with  some  griping  pain,'. — Evacuation  soft  in  consistency


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  591

and  yellowish  in  color  (after  three  hours),'.— Copious  evacuation  of  soft
■  consistence,  and  brown  in  color,  accompanied  by  a  slight  pain  in  bowels
(after  five  hours)/.

TTrinary  Orquns. — Ardor  urinte,'. — Diuresis,^ — Increased  flow  of
uriue,^. — Increased  flow  of  pale-colored  urine,  of  lighter  specific  gravity
than  usual,'. — Passed  four  ounces  more  urine  than  usual,  in  morning,^. —
Urine  increased  from  35  ounces  to  128  ounces;  specific  gravity  changed
from  1019.7  to  1020;  quantity  of  solid  matter  increased  from  568  grains
to  600  grains  (first  day),^ — Quantity  of  urine,  130  ounces  ;  specific  gravity,
1019.97  ;  solid  matter,  608  grains  (third  day),'. — [40.]  Quantity  of  urine
passed  averaged  135  ounces  per  day  ;  amount  of  solid  matter,  700  grains
each  day  (fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  days),^^Small  increase  of  water  in  urine
(second  day),l

Sexunl  Ovgans. — Tickling  sensation  at  the  end  of  the  penis,'.

Bespifnforj/  Apparatus. — Increase  of  the  bronchial  secretions  j'.

Heart  and  False. — Action  of  the  heart  seemed  to  be  increased,^
—Pulse  98,'.— Pulse  lowered  from  98  to  67  (first  day),l— Pulse  64,1—
Pulse  63  (third  day),^— Pulse  60  (fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  days),^— [50.]
Feeble  pulse,  after  vomiting,'. •

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Drowsiness  and  sleep,l — "Slept  rather  hard"
during  night,^

Fever. — Coldness  of  the  surface  of  the  skin,  after  vomiting,'. — Dia-
phoresis,'''.— Skiu  quite  moist,^ — Profuse  sweat  (after  one  hour),^

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  On  waking,  headache,  etc.


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEEOSA.

A.  tuberosa,  Linn.  Nat.  order,  Asclepiadacese.  Common  names,  But-
terfly weed,  Pleurisy  root. Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  root.

Authorities.  1,  M.  S.  (Savery),  man,  32  years  old,  nervous  temperament ;
at  beginning  of  proving  had  a  slight  gastric  and  bronchial  irritation  ;  took
two  drops  of  the  tincture  in  some  water  at  one  dose,  J.  d.  1.  Soe.  Gal.,  2d
series,  3,  721 ;  2,  Thos.  Niehol  (Hale's  N.  R.,  2d  ed.)  took  20  to  50  drops
of  tincture  and  1st  dec.  dil.

JMOind. — Toward  evening,  unusual  elevation  of  spirits,^ — The  cheerful
mood  changed,  and,  without  exterior  cause,  he  became  fretful  and  peevish
(after  eleven  and  a  half  hours),^. — Mental  prostration  (fifteenth  day),'. —
Difficulty  in  thinking  (fifteenth  day),'. — Weakness  of  memory  for  two  days
(third  day),'.

Head. — Confusion  in  the  head  (nineteenth  day),'. — Swimming  of  the
head,  with  dulness  behind  the  forehead  (immediately),''. — Head  feels  dull
and  gloomy  (after  twenty-three  and  a  half-hours),^— Head  very  heavy  (fif-
teenth day),'. — [10.]  Heaviness  of  the  head ;  the  headache  begins  again
(second  day),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head ;  pain  worse  on  the  left  side  (one
and  a  half  hours),'. — Heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head  when  getting  up
(twenty-third  day),'. — Heaviness  and  uneasiness  of  the  head  (eighteenth
day),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  drowsiness,  for  one  hour  (noon,  eighth
(Jay)/. — Heaviness  of  the  head  and  eyes  (tenth  day),'. — Headache  (thir-
teenth day),'. — Headache  all  day  (fourteenth  day),'. — Great  headache  all
day;  he  goes  to  bed  late  (twenty-second  day),'. — Intolerable  headache,
which  lasts  all  day  and  a  part  of  the  night  (thirty-third  day),'. — [20.]
Very  bad  headache,  ceasing  after  taking  a  foot-bath  (twenty-fourth  day),''.


592  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

— Headache  in  the  morning,  when  getting  up  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — ^Very-
severe  headache  when  getting  up,  obliging  him  to  lie  down  again  in  con-
sequence of  too  great  debility  (8  a.m.,  fourteenth  day),'. — Frontal  head-
ache, which  went  on  increasing  (one  minute),'. — *Dull  achipg  headache  in
forehead  and  vertex,  aggravated  by  motion  and  relieved  by  lying  down
(after  one  hour"),''. — -Slight  headache,  right  side  (at  noon,  second  day),'.—
The  headache  presses  deeply  on  the  base  of  the  skull,  and  is  very  similar
to  the  Ipec.  headache,^ — Alopecia  (thirty-ninth  day),'. — Pain  of  the  hairy
scalp  (left  occiput);  pain  on  touching  the  place,  as  if  there  was  a  pimple
there  (twenty-sixth  day),'.

Eyes. — Dull  eyes;  he  looks  as  if  he  had  just  got  up  after  several
weeks'  sickness  (fifteenth  day),'. — [30.]  Fatigued  eyes  (forty-first  day),'. —
Eyes  fatigued  and  heavy  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — Ophthalmia  (fortieth  day),'.
• — Feeling  of  sand  in  the  eyes  (thirty-niuth  day),'. — Transient  pain  in  the
left  orbit  (ten  minutes),'. — Blepharitis  (the  prover  has  for  years  had  very
weak  eyes),  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — Blepharophthalmy,  heaviness  of  the  eyes,
itching  in  the  right  eyeball  (eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  upper  canthus
and  itching  in  the  globe  of  the  eye  ;  shutting  the  eyelid  makes  a  noise  like
the  sucker  of  a  pump-box  (twenty-fourth  *day),'. — Ulcerative  sensation  in
the  lower  eyelids  (forty-first  day),'. — Itching  in  the  right  inner  canthus,  in
the  lower  eyelid,  and  all  over  the  face ;  pricking  in  the  forehead,  as  with
pins,  and  in  several  parts  of  the  body  (6  p.m.,  second  day),'. — [40.]  Dis-
turbed vision  (pulse  55),  (one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Gaslight  is  painful  to
the  eyes  (ninth  day),'. — Large  dark  spots  (black)  before  the  eyes,'.

Nose. — Desire  to  sneeze  felt  in  the  left  nostril,  which  soon  passes  ofi"
(seventeen  minutes),'. — He  sneezes  three  times,  and  a  few  seconds  after,
sneezes  again  five  times;  the  sneezing  continued  for  some  moments,  even
after  he  has  blown  his  nose  several  times  (three  and  a  half  hours),'. — In
the  morning,  coryza  in  the  open  air  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Dry  coryza
(seventeen  minutes),'. — The  coryza,  which  was  previously  dry,  becomes
fluent  (three  and  a  half  hours),'. — He  blows  blood  from  the.  left  nostril
(thirteenth  day),'. — He  blows  a  very  small  quantity  of  blood  from  the  left
nostril  (fourteenth  day),'. — [50.]  Sudden  pricking  in  the  nose  like  a  flea-
bite  (twelfth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  nose  (forty-two  minutes;,'. — Itching
in  the  root  of  the  nose  on  both  sides  (twenty-fourth  day),'. — Itching  in  the
left  nostril  (twenty-five  minutes),'.

Face. — Hippocratic  face  (fifteenth  day),'. — Yellow  complexion  (fif-
teenth day),'.

JHout/i. — Yellow  teeth,  the  enamel  being  covered  with  yellow  tartar
(eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  lower  right  molar  teeth  (twenty-fourth  day),'.
— The  gums  and  buccal  membrane  are  very  pale,  inclining  to  yellow
(eighth  day),'. — Bleeding  of  the  gums  (fourteenth  day),'. — [60.]  Bleeding
of  the  gnms  of  the  right  upper  canine  teeth  (ten  and  a  quarter  hours),'. —
Tongue  coated  with  yellow  mucus  (eighth  day),'. — Fetid  breath,  having
even  a  smell  of  pepper  (ten  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — Putrid  taste  in  the
mouth  (fifteenth  day),'. — Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth  (fourth  day),'.

Throat. — Slight  constriction  of  the  throat  and  pricking  in  the  larynx
(first  day),'. — Angina  (twenty-sixth  day),'.

Stomach. — Insatiable  hunger  (at  noon,  second  day),'. — Deficient  ap-
petite (first  day), I — Anorexia,  in  the  morning  (fifteenth  day),'.^[70,]  De-
praved appetite  (tenth  day),'. — Eructation  (fifty-two  minutes),'. — Prolonged
eructation,  smelling  of  the  medicine  (one  and  a  quarter  hours),'. — Eepeated
eructations  during  the  day  (second  day),'. — Repeated  eructations  until


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  593

evening  (first  day)/. — Desire  to  vomit  in  the  morniug  on  getting  up  (seven-
teenth day),\ — Pain  in  the  stomach  (nine  and  three-quarter  hours),'. —
Gastralgia  (fourteenth  day),'.— In  the  evening,  after  supper,  violent  gas-
tralgia ;  it  seems  as  if  coughing  would  bruise  the  stomach  (twenty-ninth
day),'. — Nervous  pains  in  the  stomach  (forty-second  day),'. — [80.]  Burn-
ing in  the  stomach  and  intestines ;  burning  borborygmi,  though  with  slight
pain  (forty-two  minutes),'. — Cramps  in  the  stomach  (eighteenth  day),'. —
Pressive  pain  in  stomach,  with  rumbling  in  the  bowels  (after  seven  hours),''.
— Disagreeable  feeling  of  weight  at  stomach  (first  day),^ — Pain  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach  and  burning  in  the  stomach  (twenty-five  minutes),'.

A-bdometl, — While  lying  down,  twelve  successive  and  regular  grum-
blings in  the  right  hypochondrium,  without  pain,  after  being  magnetized
(in  the  evening,  thirty-first  day),'. — Feeble  intestinal  pains  in  the  right
hypochondrium  (five  minutes),'. — Throbbing  in  the  left  hypochondrium
(three  and  a  half  hours),'. — On  awaking,  at  6  a.m.,  rumbling  in  bowels,
with  soreness  of  the  peritoneum  (after  fourteen  hours),^. — Rumbling  and
uneasiness  in  the  bowels,  with  feeling  of  heat  in  the  umbilical  region  (after
eighty-five  minutes),'. — [90.]  Awaked,  at  3  a.m.,  by  rumbling  in  the
bowels,  with  sharp  cutting  pains;  felt  tranquil  and  calm,  though  the  pain
was  very  severe  (after  fifteen  hours), ^ — Burning  borborygmi  (nine  and
three-quarter  hours),'.— Repeated  emissions  of  flatulence  until  evening
(first  day),'. — Flatulence  which  smells  intolerably  of  the  medicine  (fifty-
two  minutes),'. — Burning  flatulence  for  some  days  (seventeenth  day),'. —
Emission  of  some  flatulence,  with  rumbling  in  the  region  of  the  transverse
colon  (one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Intestinal  pains  (fourteenth  day),'. — Wind-
colic  after  breakfast  (twenty-fourth  day),'. — Colic  in  the  forenoon  (twenty-
third  day),'. — Slight  colic  after  dinner  (second  day),'. — [100.]  Violent
colic  at  night  (eighth  day),'.— Colic  when  going  upstairs  (one  and  a  half
hours),'. — Very  severe  wind-colic  (while  walking) ;  pain  as  if  everything
would  fall  out  of  the  bottom  (seven  and  three-quarter  hours),'. — Flatulent
colic  and  stool  of  an  intolerable  smell,  with  a  sharp  pain  in  the  hypogas-
trium,  as  if  that  part  was  rotten,  with  soreness  on  pressure,  and  as  if  it
would  all  come  out  (eight  and  three-quarter  hours),'.— Violent  colic  at  1
A.M. ;  very  painful  and  pretty  large  stool ;  pain  as  if  all  the  intestines
would  fall  out;  1.30  a.m.,  another  very  small  and  very  painful  stool;  2
A.M.,  another  like  it,  and  the  pains  are  continually  increasing ;  so  aggra-
vated were  the  symptoms  and  so  impossible  was  it  to  endure  such  violent
colic,  that  he  took  a  single  dose  of  Veratrwn  album,  three  drops  of  the
eighth  dilution  in  two  spoonfuls  of  water.  The  colic  ceased,  as  if  by
magic  until  10  A.M.  (The  dose  taken  on  this  occasion  was  very  large,
considering  his  constitution,  and  especially  considering  his  habits,  but  he
acted  in  accordance  with  what  seemed  to  him  a  serious  emergency),  (four-
teenth day),'. — The  colic  continues  long  after  evacuation  ;  smarting  in  the
rectum  for  more  than  an  hour  and  a  half  (eighth  day),'. — Dull  pain  in
bowels  on  pressure  (after  fourteen  hours),*. — Pressing  pain  in  the  bowels
and  emission  of  fetid  flatulence  (after  six  hours),".

Stool  <iiid  Anus, — Blind  haemorrhoids  (fourteenth  day),'. — Urging
to  stool  (after  seven  hours),l — [HO-]  Stool,  at  9  A.M.,  of  a  very  strong,  in-
tolerable smell  (third  day),'. — *SoJt  and  fetid  stool,  at  11  A.M.,  preceded  by
rumbling  in  bowels  (second  day),'''. — Another  (soft  and  fetid)  stool,  like
that  in  the  morning  (unusual),  (after  one  hour),^ — 11  a.m.,  another  stool,
pretty  painful,  accompanied  by  colic.  The  stools  are  of  a  bistre  color,  and
slimy,  the  last  one  being  distinguished  from  the  others  chiefly  by  contain-
voL.  I.— 38


594  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

ing  a  large  quantity  of  false  membranes,  looking  as  if  the  intestines  had
been  scraped  with  a  knife.  It  also  showed  yellow  spots,  as  from  particles
of  grease.  The  stools,  when  passing,  feel  like  a  stream  of  fire.  Made  an
injection  of  tepid  water,  and  retained  it  more  than  two  hours.  Took
another  at  5  p.m.,  which  was  retained  only  a  quarter  of  an  hour  (fourteenth
day),\ — Liquid  stool  (after  eating  salad  ;  yesterday  and  to-day  the  symp-
toms are  less  striking)  (fourth  day),'. — Liquid  stool,  causing  smarting  ;  the
pain  continues  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  whereas  the  evening  before  (7
o'clock),  after  stool,  there  was  a  very  sensible  feeling  of  comfort  during  the
same  length  of  time  (2  p.m.,  second  day),'. — Dysentery ;  pulse  67,  and
threadlike  (fourteenth  day),'. — Stool  without  fecal  matter;  entirely  albu-
minous, and  containing  the  amount  of  at  least  four  or  five  whites  of  eggs
(fourteenth  day),'. — Yellow  stool,  like  tincture  of  turmeric,  with  yellow
and  green  flocks  (5.15  p.m.,  fourteenth  day),'. — [120.]  Stool  like  moss,  and
suspended  in  water  (4.30  a.m.,  fifteenth  day),'. — Sticky  green  stool,  of  an
intolerable  smell,  like  rotten  eggs  (eighth  day),'. — Insufficient  evacuation
(thirty -second  day),'. — The  evacuations  are  always  accompanied  with
colic  (fifteenth  day),'.

Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  the  urethra  (eighth  day),'. — Lancina-
tions  in  the  urethra  since  yesterday,  and  excoriation  of  the  glans  penis  in
several  places,  with  commencement  of  a  sanious  and  purulent  secretion ;
the  excoriation  disappeared  at  the  end  of  a  few  days,  after  bathing  the
glans  with  urine  (twelfth  day),'. — Very  red  urine  (sixteenth  day),'. — Red
urine,  mingled,  as  it  were,  with  blood ;  after  standing  a  short  time,  there
rises  to  the  surface  small  spots  of  a  deep-red  color  on  a  black  ground,  and
of  the  size  of  a  small  pin's  head ;  the  sediment  is  very  deep-colored  and
very  thick;  it  is  in  the  form  of  clouds  and  of  masses  of  moss,  while  the
surface  of  the  urine  (beneath  the  small  spots)  is  clear  and  as  if  decomposed
(seventeenth  day),'.

Sexual  Organs. — Flabbiness  and  insipid  smell  of  the  genitals
(twelfth  day),'. — Perspiration  and  insipid  smell  of  the  genital  parts  (thir-
teenth day),'. — [130.]  (Chancre  on  the  right  side  of  the  frsenum ;  it  was
merely  washed  with  the  urine,  passed  to  the  left  side,  and  disappeared  in
two  days),  (third  day),'. — Weakness  of  the  genital  organs  (tenth  day),'. —
Prolonged  erection  in  the  morning  (tenth  day),'. — Erection  without  desire
(eighth  day),'.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Slight  pain  in  the  bronchi  (thirtieth
day),'. — *Dry  cough  (third  day),'. — Dry,  spasmodic  cough,^ — '''Dry  cough,
with  constriction  of  the  throat  (after  fifteen  minutes),^. — *  Cough  dry  and
hard,  causing  pain  in  the  forehead  and  abdomen^. — Cough  dry  and  hacking,
though  a  little  mucus  is  raised  with  great  effort  (after  seventeen  and  a  half
hours),^ — [MO.]  More  forcible  inspirations  for  half  an  hour  (4  p.m.,  second
day),'. — Burning  and  forcible  inspiration,  the  lungs  seem  to  be  more  fully
dilated  (three  and  a  half  hours),'. — Asthmatic  paroxysm  (nineteenth  day),'.
— *  Respiration  painful,  especially  at  the  base_of  the  left  lungj\

Chest, — The  chest  feels  weak  and  sore,  i^ithout  cough,  though  no  pain  is
felt  on  drawing  a  long  breath  (second  day),^ — Feeling  of  warmth  in  chest,
with  dull  pain  at  the  base  of  both  lungs,  with  feeling  of  tightness  (after
fifteen  minutes),^ — Oppression  of  the  chest ;  great  difficulty  in  breathing
(twelfth  day),'. — Slight  oppression  after  the  forcible  inspirations  (three  and
a  half  hours),'. — Oppressed  feeling  after  smoking  the  quarter  of  a  cigar
(eighteenth  day),'.  —  Singing  or  loud  speaking  aggravates  the  thoracic
pain  (after  six  hours),^ — *TIie  pain  in  the  lungs  is  relieved  by  bending


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  595

forward^. — [150.]  Left  lung  dull  on  percussion/.— Paralysis  of  the  right
lung,  with  violent  pains  for  half  an  hour,  in  the  foi-enoon  (thirty-sixth  day),\
— Pain  in  the  left  lung  abated  and  left  a  feeling  of  weariness.  The  pain
returned  on  coughing  or  drawing  a  deep  breath  (after  seventeen  and  a  half
hours),^ — Return  of  the  pain  beneath  left  nipple,  with  palpitation  of  the
heart  (after  half  an  hour),'. — Pain  very  acute  on  right  side  of  chest,  and  se'ems
seated  in  the  pleura  (after  seventeen  and  a  half  hours), ^ — *Sharp  pains
shooting  from  the  left  nipple  dowmoard,  with  stiffness  of  left  side  of  neck  (after
forty-five  minutes),'.^* Pam  moves  up  to  behind  the  sternum,  and  becomes
more  sharp  and  cutting ;  aggravated  by  drawing  a  long  breath  and  by  motion
of  the  hands,  as  in  triturating  (after  five  and  a  half  Ijours),'''. — *The  spaces
between  the  ribs  close  to  the  sternum  are  tender  on  pressure,  and  the  pain,
which  is  quick,  darting,  and  more  acute  than  at  first,  shoots  over  to  the  right
side,''.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Carditis  (nineteenth  day),'. — Constrictive  paia
of  the  heart.  Pericarditis  (thirtieth  day),'.— [160.]  Lancinating  pain  near
the  heart  (twenty-ninth  day),'. — Repeated  lancinations  in  the  heart  and
intercostal  muscles  (right  side,  6  p.m.,  second  day),'. — Pain  in  the  heart,
as  from  the  prick  of  a  pin  (twenty-fifth  day),'.— Pulse  a  little  disturbed
after  dinner  (thirty-eighth  day),'.^Pulse  rose  from  64  to  88 ;  small  (after
forty-five  minutes),''.

N^eck  and  ^ttcfc.— Torticollis  on  waking  (twelfth  day),'. — Pain  be-
tween the  shoulders  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Sharp  lancinating  pain  between
the  shoulder^  (thirty-seventh  day),'. — Pain  in  the  back  and  between  the
shoulders  (twelfth  day),'. — Sharp  pain  in  the  loins  near  the  sacrum.  Lum-
bago (thirtieth  day),'.

Extremities  in  General. — Pain  in  the  right  shoulder  and  left  leg
(seventeenth  day),'. — -[170.]  Some  slight  pains  in  the  right  shoulder  and
left  knee  (fourth  day),'. — Sharp  bone-pain  in  the  right  arm  and  right  leg
(twenty-ninth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  right  arm  near  the  wrist,  and  in  the  left
leg  near  the  malleoli  (twenty-eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  wrist,  right
arm,  and  left  knee  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  right  thigh,  and  a
quarter  of  an  hour  after  in  the  left  arm  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — Pain  in  the
left  thigh  and  right  shoulder  (fortieth  day),'. — Oft-repeated  pains  in  the
left  knee  and  right  forearm  (sixth  day),'. — Arthritic  pain  in  the  left  knee
and  right  thigh  (twentieth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  knee  and  right  elbow
(twenty-third  day),'. — Pain  below  the  left  knee  and  in  the  arm  of  the  same
side  (seventh  day),'. — [180.]  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  arm.  ,  The  pains
are  always  felt  crosswise ;  when  the  right  leg  is  affected,  the  left  arm  is
equally  so,  and  when  it  is  the  right  arm,  it  is  also  the  left  thigh  (sixteenth
day),'.

Upper  JExtreniities. — Pain  in  the  right  shoulder  (after  dinner)
(two  aud  three-quarter  hours),'. — Pains  in  the  left  shoulder  some  seconds
after  getting  up  (seventh .  day),'. — Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  the  right
shoulder  (after  twenty-three.svnd  a  half  hours),^ — Pain  shooting  up  to  the
left  shoulder,  which  was  painful  oo  motion  (after  two  and  a  half  hours),^
— Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-blade  and  left  wrist  (fourteenth
day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  shoulder  and  pain  in  the  right  nipple,  felt  also  in
the  shoulder  on  the  same  side  (forty-first  day\'. — Pain  in  the  left  shoulder
aud  right  forearm  near  the  wrist  (eighteenth  day),'. — ^Arthritic  pains  in
the  right  elbow  (three  and  a  half  hours),'. — Sharp  pain  in  the  bone  of  the
left  arm  (eleventh  day),'. — [190.]  Pain  in  the  right  forearm  near  the  wrist
(3  P.M.),  (fifth  day),'. — Pain  tn  the  left  arm  near  the  wrist  (thirtieth  day),'.


596  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

— Numbness  of  the  left  hand  (one  and  a  half  hours),'. — Pain  in  the  left
hand  (9.30  p.m.),  (third  day),'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  hand  (eighth
day),'. — Neuralgic  pain  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand  (nine  and  three-
quarter  hours),'.

Lower  Extremities. — Coxalgia  in  the  right  hip  (eighth  day),'. —
Coxalgic  pain  in  the  left  thigh  (ninth  day),'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right
thigh  (sixteenth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  thigh  near  the  left  knee  (6.30  p.m.),
(fifth  day),'. — [300.]  Slight  pain  iu  the  left  knee  (seven  and  a  half  hours),'.
— Pain  in  the  right  knee  when  walking,  and  in  the  left  knee  when  sitting,
half  an  hour  after  (fortieth  day),'. — Rheumatic  paiu  in  the  left  knee
(twelfth  day),'. — Sharp  rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  knee,  felt  also  even  in
the  thigh  (1.30  p.m.),  (fifth  day),'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  knee  when
getting  up  in  the  morning  (eighth  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  knee  when
walking  (nineteenth  day),'. — Aching  pains  in  knees,  and  driving  pains  in
the  thighs  (second  day),^. — Sharp  and  lancinating  pain  in  the  left  knee,
felt  as  far  as  the  thigh  (nine  and  a  half  hours),'. — Lancinating  pain  in  the
left  knee,  and  when  walking  pain  in  the  hip-joint  (of  the  same  side,  2  p.m.,
third  day),'. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  legs  (thirty-third  day),'.-:— [210.]
Sharp  pain  in  the  right  tibia  near  the  knee ;  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the
slightest  pressure  is  unbearable,  the  pain  is  as  bad  as  if  there  were  a  sore
there  (6.30  p.m.),  (second  day),'. — Feeling  as  if  the  left  ankle  were  sprained
(twenty-fourth  day),'. — Sharp  bone-pain  near  the  malleoli  of  the  left  foot
(sixth  day),'. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  tarsus  of  the  right  foot  (thirteenth
day),'. — Pain  in  the  tarsus  of  the  left  foot  (twelfth  day),'. — Transient  pain
in  the  left  foot  (eighth  day),'. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  metatarsus  of  the
left  foot  (fourteenth  day),'.— Rheumatic  pains  in  the  fourth  and  little  toes
of  the  left  foot  (nineteenth  day),'. — His  corns  are  very  painful,  he  cannot
bear  them  to  touch  the  bedclothes  (when  lying  in  bed),  (forty-first  day),'.
— Painful  sensation  as  of  a  corn  on  the  foot,  and  appearance  of  a  callosity
on  each  foot,  on  the  fourth  toe  (thirty-eighth  day),'.

Generalities. — [220.]  Great  emaciation  since  the  beginning  of  the
proving  (forty-second  day),'. — It  seems  when  walking  as  if  he  leaned  for-
ward and  to  the  left  side  (twenty-fifth  day),'.— Pandiculation  .(thirtieth
day),'. — Felt  precisely  as  if  recovering  from  a  long  and  severe  sickness
(first  day),^ — Languor  and  disinclination  for  work,". — Languid  and  dull
all  day,  both  iu  body  and  mind  (first  day),". — Painful  weariness  (fifteenth
day),'. — General  debility  (fifteenth  day),'. — General  debility  in  the  morn-
ing (nineteenth  day),'. — Great  weakness  (ceasing  temporarily  in  the  even-
ing), (fourteenth  day),'. — [230,]  The  great  debility,  which  was  relieved  for
a  time,  returns ;  the  legs  can  scarcely  support  the  body.  Great  difiiculty
in  walking,  from  weakness  (fifteenth  day),'. — Numbness  of  the  whole  body
(second  day),'. — Sensation  of  intoxication,  after  a  few  puffs  at  a  cigar ;
obliged  to  stop  smoking,  as  it  caused  vertigo,  dimness  of  sight;  and  general
debility  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Distress  and  general  weakness  after  walk-
ing a  short  distance  and  smoking  a  cigar ;  aversion  to  all  movement  (ninth
day),'. — Very  great  oppression  from  after  dinner  till  evening  (third  day),'.
— Sharp  bone-pains  from  time  to  time  in  different  parts  of  the  body  (twenty-
eighth  day),'.— Continued  pains  in  the  joints  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Palpi-
tation in  the  muscles,  in  the  arms  and  in  the  back,  and  in  the  course  of  the
proving,  frequent  palpitations  of  the  flesh  and  muscles  in  various  parts  of
the  body  (forty-second  day),'.

Skin. — Pimple  on  the  left  temporal  region  and  on  the  back  (thirty-
second  day),'. — Pimple  on  the  nasal  septum  in  the  right  nostril,  and  another


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEEOSA.  597

■at  the  root  of  the  nose,  on  the  same  side,  with  constant  itching  (tenth
day),\ — [240.]  The  pimple  on  the  lip  disappears,  but  is  succeeded  by
another  below  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  and  one  on  the  eyebrow,  which  ie
very  painful  (right  side),  (twenty-fifth  day),'. — Since  yesterday,  appearance
of  a  pimple  below  the  upper  lip,  on  the  right  side  (twenty-first  day),'. —
Sensation  of  herpes  beneath  the  left  labial  commissure,  with  stinging  and
gnawing  itching,  and  composed  of  small  red  pimples  very  thickly  clustered
(fortieth  day),'. — Pimple  on  the  nape  of  the  neck  (thirty-first  day),'. — A
pimple  on  the  left  wrist,  which  disappeared  by  morning  (seventeenth  day),'.
— Pimple  on  the  left  middle  finger  (twenty-eighth  day),'. — ^Pimples  on  the
thighs  for  some  days  (sixteenth  day),'. — Red  pimples  on  the  right  thigh
(fortieth  day),'. — Appearance  of  a  very  red  erythematous  tetter  (an  hour
after  dinner)  on  the  right  thigh  below  the  ilium  ;  it  is  three  centimetres  in
length,  and  one  centimetre  in  breadth ;  is  painful  and  itches.  In  the
evening  it  is  less  inflamed  ;  but  at  a  distance  of  three  centimetres  behind  it,
in  the  same  direction,  there  appears  another,  of  lighter  color,  but  sore  to
touch.  (The  first  lost  its  dark  color  several  months  ago),  (twenty-third
day),'.-7-The  pimple  on  the  eyebrow  is  larger,  and  feels  uncomfortable
when  the  eyelid  moves;  that  below  the  corner  of  the  mouth  is  small  and
pustular  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — [250.]  Pimple  on  the  left  side  of  the  nose
filled  with  serum  (seventeenth  day),'. — The  pimples  below  the  under  lip
exude  a  white  limpid  humor  (forty-first  day),'. — Appearance  of  two  itch-
pustules  on  the  left  hand,  accompanied  with  itching.  (The  prover  had  itch
ten  years  ago),  (eighteenth  day),'. — Some  red  pimples  on  the  stomach  and
one  on  the  bend  of  the  left  arm,  which  is  pustular  and  like  a  variolous
pustule  (twenty-sixth  day),'. — Blister  as  from  a  bug-bite  between  the
sacrum  and  ilium  (right  side),  (tenth  day),'. — ^ Warmth  of  the  skin  (after
forty-five  minutes),^ — -Itching  all  around  the  body  (like  a  girdle),  in  the
evening  when  lying  down  (sixteenth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  waist  and  at
the  top  of  the  left  thigh  (thirtieth  day),'. — Itching  of  the  lobe  of  the  right
ear,  of  the  face,  the  nose,  and  especially  of  the  lips  (one  hour  and  a  quar-
ter),'.— Very  smart  itching  of  the  pimples  on  the  nose,  of  the  thighs,  and
of  the  back  (twenty-ninth  day),'. — [260.]  At  night  and  towards  morning,
intolerable  itching  with  an  eruption  of  pimples  on  the  back  (sixteenth
day),'. — Itching  in  the  sides,  and  on  the  left  thigh  (sixth  day),'. — -At  night,
itching  in  the  forearm  (twenty-third  day),'. — At  night,  violent  itching  of
the  wrists  (seventeenth  day),'.^At  night,  itching  in  the  arms  (twenty-
fourth  day),'. — Itching  in  the  left  hand  and  right  side  (twenty-third  day),'.
— Intolerable  itching  in  the  last  two  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  then  the  same
in  the  right  fingers  (fifteenth  day),'. — Itching  in  the  left  ham  (seventeen
minutes),'. — Itching  of  the  skin  of  the  thighs,  though  no  eruption  is  visible,^
— Continued  itching  of  the  thighs  and  nates,^.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — [270.]  Drowsiness  (sixteenth  day),'. — Irre-
sistible drowsiness  (eighteenth  day),'. — -Great  drowsiness;  somnolence  until
evening  (ninth  day),'. — Drowsiness  (ceasing  entirely  in  the  open  air),  (thirty-
eighth  day),'.^Tardy  slumbers  (twenty-third  day),'. — Tardy  slumbers,  with
great  drowsiness  in  the  morning  (ninth  day),'.^ Very  restless  night  (thirty-
fourth  day),'. — Uneasy  sleep  during  first  part  of  the  night,  with  frightful
dreams  (first  day),l — Sleeplessness  (thirty-fourth  day),'. — Dreams  of  the
country,  and  other  dreams  (second  day),'. — [280.]  Explanation  of  a  dream,
as  if  it  had  come  to  him  when  awake ;  this  dream  was  very  complicated,
and  it  was  clearly  explained  in  the  same  dream  (forty-first  day),'. — Extra-
ordinary dreams  of  political  affairs  (fortieth  day),'. — Fatiguing  dreams  of


598  ASCLEPIAB  TUBEROSA— ASIMINA  TRILOBA.

reckJess  boasting,  of  trying  to  siug  political  songs  in  a  very  loud  voice,  in
spite  of  spies  being  present  (forty-first  day),'. — Dreams  of  churches,  of
horses,  and  of  troublesome  things  (third  day),'. — Tiresome  dreams  of  duels,
flight,  etc.  (thirty-eighth  day),'. — Dreams  about  supernatural  things  (fourth
day),'. — Slept  all  night,  but  had  gloomy  and  frightful  dreams  (first  day),''.
— Slept  all  night  till  5  a.m.,  when  he  was  awakened  by  frightful  dreams,
which  had  haunted  him  all  night  (second  day),''.

Fever. — Chilly,  with  cold  feet,  though  the  room  was  warm  (after  five
and  a  half  hours),''. — Fever ;  pulse  70  (eight  and  three-quarter  hours),'. —
[290.]  Fever;  decided  adipsia;  pulse  92  (eighth  day),'.

Conditions. — Aggravation, — {Morning),  When  getting  up,heaviness,
etc.,  of  head;  when  getting  up,  headache;  in  open  air,  coryza ;  anorexia;
on  getting  up,  desire  to  vomit ;  prolonged  erection  ;  on  Tvaking,  torticollis ;
after  getting  up,  pain  in  left  shoulder ;  when  getting  up,  pain  in  left  knee ;
general  debility. — [Forenoon),  Colic. — (Noon),  Headache  ;  hunger, — (After-
noon), Great  oppression. — (Evening),  After  supper,  gastralgia ;  while  lying
down,  after  being  magnetized,  grumblings  in  right  hypochondrium  ;  when
lying  down,  itching  all  around  body. — (Night),  Colic  ;  itching,  etc. ;  itching
in  forearm  ;  itching  of  wrists. — (Towards  morning).  Itching,  etc. — (3  A.M.),
Rumbling  in  bowels,  etc. — (6  a.m.).  On  waking,  rumbling  in  bowels,  etc.
— (After  breakfast).  Wind-colic. — (Drawing  deep  breath).  Pain  in  left  lung ;
pain  behind  sternum. — (  Coughing),  Pain  in  left  lung. — (After  dinner).  Colic  ;
pulse  disturbed ;  pain  iu  right  shoulder. — (After  forcible  inspiration).  Op-
pression of  chest. — (Motion),  Headache  in  forehead,  etc. ;  left  shoulder
painful. — (Motion  of  hands).  Pain  behind  sternum. — (Singing),  Thoracic
pain. — (Sitting),  Pain  in  left  knee. — (Loud  speaking').  Thoracic  pain. —
(  Walhing),  Wind  colic ;  pain  in  right  knee  ;  pain  in  left  knee  ;  pain  in  hip-
joint. — (  Walhing  upstairs),  Colic. — (After  walking  a  short  distance  and  smok-
ing a  cigar).  Distress,  etc.

Amelioration. — [Morning),  Weakness. — (Toward  evening),  Eleva-
tion of  spirits. — (  Open  air).  Drowsiness. — (After  foot-bath).  Headache  ceases.
— ([Bending  forwards),  *Pain  in  lungs. — ([Lying  down).  Headache  in  fore-
head.

ASIMINA  TEILOBA.

Anona  triloba,  L.  Nat.  order,  Anonacese.  Common  name,  Pawpaw.
Preparation,  (?)

Authority.  Edward  PI.  Eisenboeg  (Thesis,  Hahnemann  Medical  College,
1870,  MSS.)  ;  1,  2d  potency,  repeated  doses  for  six  days;  2,  4th  potency,
repeated  doses,  three  days.

[Mind, — Did  not  care  to  hold  conversation  with  any  one,  even  his  best
friends,'.

Head. — Headache  unceasing  for  several  days,'. — Headache  on  awak-
ing in  the  morning,'. — After  exercising  by  walking  in  open  air,  the  head-
ache became  general  throughout  the  frontal  region,  and  somewhat  relieved,'.
— Slight  headache  through  temples,". — On  rising  iu  the  morning,  unusual
headache  in  the  temporal  region,  involving  the  eye,  with  an  occasional
sharp  pain  over  it,  which  was  increased  by  a  single  cough,'.

Throat. — Throat  only  slightly  sore;  not  so  much  so  as  the  hoarseness
would  indicate,'.

Stomach. — Soreness  in  region  of  stomach  on  pressure,^ — Stomach  felt
increased  in  size,'.


ASIMINA  TRILOBA— ASPARAGUS.  599

Abdomen. — [10.]  Pain  in  left  hypochoudrium,^ — Slight  pain,  resem-
bling colic  pain,\ — Soreness  in  abdomen,  worse  on  pressure,'. — In  evening,
rumbling  pain  in  abdomen,  with  desire  for  stool,  which  resulted  in  the  pas-
sage of  a  soft,  pappy,  insufficient  stool,\

Stool  and  Anus. — Inactivity  of  bowels  and  rectum,\ — Soft,  pappy,
insufficient  stool,  preceded  by  rumbling  pain  in  abdomen,'. — Insufiiciency
of  stool,'.

Jtespiratory  Apparatus. — Quite  hoarse,'. — Hoarseness ;  throat
did  not  feel  very  sore,'. — Hoarseness,  attended  with  unusual  difficulty  in
talking,^ — [20.]  Hoarseness  increased,  requiring  much  effort  to  talk,  and
seemiug  as  if  the  mucous  membrane  was  thickened,  and  the  organs  slow  to
respond  to  the  efforts  of  speech,'. — Slight,  dry  cough,".

Chest. — Dull,  aching  pain  in  upper  portion  of  left  lung,'. — Dull,  ach-
ing pains  in  upper  part  of  chest,  more  on  left  side  than  on  the  right,^ —
Soreness  on  pressure  at  the  lower  end  of  the  sternum,'.

Upper  Extremities. — Pain  in  left  shoulder,  apparently  involving
the  pectoral  muscles,'.

Lower  Extremities. — ^At  10.30  a.m.,  sharp  pain  in  left  hip-joint,
lasting  about  half  an  hour;  felt  the  same  pain  again  at  1.30  p.m.,  and  in
the  evening,'. — In  the  evening,  felt  other  pains  more  mild  than  the  former,
lasting  but  a  short  time,'.'

Generalities. — Felt  uncomfortable  all  day,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Did  not  rest  well  the  night  previous,'. — [30.]
Did  not  rest  well  at  night ;  kept  turning  and  moving  all  night ;  could  not
dismiss  from  my  mind  what  had  occurred  during  the  day  ;  got  up  feeling
unrefreshed,'. — Awoke  about  daylight,  unrefreshed,  with  headache,'.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning,  on  waking'),  Headache. —
{Morning,  on  riaire^'),  Temporal  headache,  etc. — {Eveni7ig),'P'a.in  in  abdo-
men, etc.;  pains  in  hip-joint.— (10.30  a.m.,  1.30  p.m.,  and  in  evening),  Vava
in  left  hip-joint,  etc. — {Coughing),  Pain  over  eye. — {Pressure),  Soreness  in
abdomen  ;  soreness  in  lower  end  of  sternum.

Amelioration. — {After  walking  in  open  air).  Headache


ASPARAGUS.

A.  oflBcinalis,  L.  Nat.  order,  Liliaceae.  Common  names.  Asparagus ;
(Germ.)  Sparge!;  (Fr.)  Asperge.  Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  young
sprouts.

Authorities.  1,  Buchner's  provings,  Hygea,  12,  426  (translated  by  Ship-
man  in  Journ.  of  M.  M.),  proving  by  N.  (30  to  250  drops  of  the  tincture)  ;  2,
Proving  by  St.,  with  tincture,  ibid.;  3,  Buchner,  effects  on  a  girl,  ibid.;  4,
Additional  proving  by  M.  with  the  tincture,  A.  H.  Z.,  20,  265.

3Iiud, — Serenity  of  mind  the  whole  day  (first  day),'. — A  peculiar  anx-
iety, with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  ill-liumor,^

Head. — Confusion  of  the  head,  and  a  vertiginous  staggering,l — -Slight
vertigo,'. — Confusion  of  forehead,*. — Vertigo  in  the  forehead,'. — Dizziness
in  the  forehead,  afterwards  aching  in  the  temples,  especially  the  left  (soon
after  taking  the  drug),'. — Heaviness  of  the  forehead,'. — Aching  in  the  fore-
head, with  confusion,'. — [10.]  Aching  of  the  brain  near  the  eyes,'. — Slight
pressure  in  the  forehead,*. — Pressing  pains  in  both  temples,  increased  by
pressure  upon  them,'.


600  ASPARAGUS.

Eyes. — Stitches  and  tickling  in  the  eyes,'. — Increased  acuteness  of
vision/.

Nose. — Frequent  irritation  to  sneeze,  and  even  frequent  sneezing,*. —
Violent  sneezing,*. — Frequent  sneezing  (from  smelling  tincture),'  ^ — Severe
coryza  and  catarrh,  with  pressive  pain  from  the  root  of  the  nose,  extending
over  the  forehead  to  the  forepart  of  the  head,*. — Severe  coryza  and  nosed
catarrh,  with  profuse  secretion  of  thin,  whitish  fluid  from  the  left  nostril,
afterwards  from  the  right  nostril,*. — [20.]  Coryza,  with  commencing  dry-
ness and  slight  swelling  of  the  internal  nostrils,  followed  by  impeded  en-
trance of  air,*. — Loss  of  smell,*.

Face. — Face  pale,^. — Increased  heat  of  the  face,'. — Burning  of  the
cheekp,'.

Mouth. — Painless  cavity  and  exfoliation  of  a  carious  molar  tooth,'. —
Increased  secretion  of  saliva,'. — The  saliva  was  so  sweetish  that  he  thought .
it  was  mixed  with  blood,'. — Diminished  saliva,*. — Sweetish,  insipid taste
in  the  mouth,'. — [30.]  Coppery  taste  in  the  mouth,'.

Throat. — Inclination  to  hawk  and  cough,  rising  from  deep  in  the
throat,'. — Hawking  up  of  mucus.'. — Almost  constant  hawking,  with  rough
feeling  in  the  throat,'. — Hawking,  and  inclination  to  cough ;  the  mucus  is
not  readily  loosened,  but  is  brought  up  by  paroxysms  of  cough,'. — Copious
discharge  of  tenacious  mucus  from  the  throat,^

Stomach, — Wind  in  the  stomach,'. — Increased  thirst,'. — Eructations,'.
■ — Retching,  when  attempting  to  cough,  that  brought  water  into  the  eyes,'.
— [40.]  Retching  while  coughing,'. — He  awoke  with  nausea  before  5  a.m.,
and  vomited  four  times  of  the  food  taken  in  the  evening,  with  bile  and
much  mucus;  then  fecal,  bilious  diarrhoea;  one-half  hour  later,  frequent
repeated  vomiting,  with  increased  effort,'.

Ahdonien. — Griping  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  which  is  painful  when
touched,'. — Pinching  in  the  belly  below  the  navel,  in  the  evening,'. — Ab-
domen distended,'. — Discharge  of  much  wind,'. — Sense  of  fulness  in  the
abdomen,'. — Colic,  with  bilious  diarrh'oea,^ — Drawing  pains  in  both  groins,^

Stool  and  Anus. — Burning  and  soreness  at  the  anus,^ — [50.]  (Itch-
ing in  anus),*. — Peculiar  desire  for  stool,  and  somewhat  difficult  passage  of
hardish  faeces,*. — In  the  afternoon  an  insufficient  stool ;  the  usual  stool  in
the  morning,  however,  occurred,'.

JltHtiary  Off/ans. — Burning  in  the  urethra,'. — Cutting  and  burning
in  the  urethra,  which  also  occurrred  after  eating  boiled  Asparagus,^. — After
urinating,  burning  in  the  urethra,  with  sensation  as  if  there  was  some  urine
yet  to  pass,'. — Urging  to  urinate,'  ^. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,'. — In-
creased flow  of  urine,  beer-brown,  without  sediment,'. — Frequent  urinating,
with  fine  stitches  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,*. — [60.]  Frequent  scanty  dis-
charge of  urine,  preceded  by  a  sensation  as  if  something  were  stitching  in
the  urethra,  with  slight  burning,'. — Urine  of  a  tolerable  strong  odor,^ —
Urine  scanty  and  cloudy,'. — A  little  straw-colored  urine  is  passed,  which
becomes  turbid  immediately  after  being  passed,  and  is  full  of  motes,'. —
Urine  clear,  but  of  unpleasant  odor,'. — Urine  of  peculiar  odor,'. — At  4  p.m.
the  urine  contained  motes,  as  was  usual  at  this  time,'. — An  hour  and  a  half
after  dinner,  the  urine  is  turbid  again,  without  being  dark,  with  fine  motes,
which  first  became  very  manifest  on  reducing  the  urine  with  distilled  water,'.
— White,  flocky  sediment  is  deposited,  and  the  urine  becomes  clear,  but  on
being  shaken  the  sediment  disappears,  and  the  motes  present  themselves  to
view  again  (after  four  hours),'. — The  urine  passed  was  turbid,  but  subse-
quently became  clear,  and  formed  a  white,  flocky  sediment  (after  an  hour


ASPARAGUS.  601

and  a  half),'. — [70.]  After  the  urine  was  shaken  out,  and  the  glass  well
washed  with  water,  a  fatty  coating  was  manifest  on  the  sides  of  the  glass,'.
— The  urine,  which  was  kept  over  night,  formed  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel
a  reddish  deposit,'.

Sexual  Orffans.—^y/eWmg  of  penis,  with  erections  and  urging  to
urinate,*. — Stitching  on  the  right  side  of  glans,'. — Excitement  of  the  sexual
passions,'. — Menses  continued  one  day  longer  than  usual/.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Tickling  and  inclination  to  cough,^ —
Cough  again,  towards  evening,'. — Straining  cough,  with  inclination  to
vomit,'. — Distressing  cough,  with  fulnet^s  of  the  chest,  and  copious  mucous
expectoration,'. — [80.]  The  cough  remitted,  after  taking  his  breakfast
(after  one  hour),'. — Difficult  expectoration,^ — The  mucus  is  more  readily
loosened  upon  each  turn  of  coughing,  without  producing  any  retching,'. —
Difficulty  of  breathing  when  moving  or  going  upstairs,". — He  was  obliged
to  sit  up  in  bed  to  relieve  his  breathing,  at  night,^

Chest. — Pain  in  the  chest  after  breakfast,'. — Pain  in  the  breast,  with
tension,  when  inspiring. — Sensation  as  if  the  chest  were  hollow,  with  ex-
ternal heaviness  of  the  same,'. — Tension  of  the  chest  increased  when  taking
a  deep  breath,'. — Constriction  of  the  chest,'. — [90.]  Constriction  of  the
chest,  chiefly  while  writing,'. — When  inspiring,  stitches  in  various  parts  of
the  chest,  especially  about  the  left  shoulder-blade,". — Pains  relieved  by
throwing  the  chest  forward  and  the  head  backward,'. — Sudden  darting
pains  through  the  right  side  of  the  chest  that  made  him  start  up,  at  10
A.M.,'. — Stitching  in  the  left  side  of  the  breast  on  inspiration,  but  of  short
duration,'.

Heart  and  Pulse. — Irregular,  quickened,  twofold  stroke  of  the
heart,'. — Pulsation  of  the  heart  perceptible  to  the  feel  and  hearing ;  also
upon  moderate  motion,'. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  while  sitting,  so  that  the
leaves  of  the  book  which  he  held  in  his  hand  trembled,'. — Palpitation  of
the  heart,  especially  after  motion,'. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  anxious
restlessness,  increased  by  motion  and  going  upstairs,'. — [100.]  ^Palpitation
of  the  heart  frequently  occurred,  with  oppression  of  the  chesty. — The  beat  of
the  heart  hardly  perceptible,'. — Slight  sensation  of  stitching  in  the  region
of  the  heart,  after  eating,'. — Pulse  slightly  accelerated,'. — Pulse  acceler-
ated, when  sitting,'. — Pulse  small,  compressible,'.

JVeck  and,  liack. — Rheumatic  pain  between  the  shoulder-blades,'. —
Shooting  pains,  while  sitting,  through  the  loins,  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar
vertebrse,'. — Pain  in  the  loins,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sacrum  (after  two
hours),'.

Upper  Extremities. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  shoulder,  on
touching  it,'. — [HO.]  Rheumatic  pains  in  the  region  of  the  right  axilla,'.

Lower  Extremities. — The  right  leg  is  weaker  than  the  left,'. —
Pain,  as  from  dislocation,  in  the  neck  of  the  right  thigh-bone,  while  walk-
ing,'.— Pains,  as  from  dislocation,  while  walking  (four  times  in  the  fore-
noon, second  day),  in  the  neck  of  the  right  thigh-bone,  which  prevents
rapid  motion,  and  now  and  then  compels  him  to  limp,'. — Pain  in  the  mus-
cles, in  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  as  if  bruised,  making  it  very  difficult  to
walk,  especially  when  going  up  an  ascent ;  on  touching  these  parts,  a  sore
pain,'.— -Sore  pain  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  thigh,  and,  when  bending  the
leg,  at  the  hip  and  knee  joints,  continuing  for  three  days,  which  made  it
very  difficult  to  walk,'. — Stitching  pains,  first  above  the  right,  then  below
the  left  side  of  the  left  knee,  when  sitting,  late  in  the  evening,'. — Slight
indications  of  cramps  in  the  calves,'. — On  awaking,  as  he  stretched  him-


602  ASPARAGUS— ASTERIA8  EUBENS.

self,  there  was  a  cramplike  pain  in  the  calf  of  the  left  leg,  which  compelled
him  to  ci-y  out,  but  was  relieved  by  rubbing  (after  one  day),^ — The  right
foot  was  weaker  all  day  than  the  left  (second  day),\ — [120.]  The  right
foot  much  more  painful  than  the  left,'. — Drawing  in  the  left  toe,  which  he
had  cut  with  an  axe  when  a  boy,  at  10  p.m.,  before  falling  asleep,'.

Sleep  and  Dreams, — Yawning,  drowsiness,  in  the  morning,'. —
Drowsiness  and  yawning,'.  ,

JFcver. — Slight  chilliness,  with  some  sleepiness,*. — Increased  warmth,'.
■ — Slight  febrile  excitement  and  some  sleepiness,  at  3  p.m.,*.

Conditions. — Aggravation. — (Afternoon),  Insufficient  stool. — ( To-
wards evening),  Cough  again. — (Evening),  Pinching  in  belly.— (Be/are  5
A.M.),  Awoke  with  nausea,  etc.— (10  A.M.),  Pain  through  right  side  of
chest— (3  P.M.),  Slight  febrile  excitement,  etc. — (10  p.m.).  Before  falling
asleep,  drawing  in  left  toe. — (Bending  leg  at  hip  and  knee),  Sore  pain  in
upper  surface  of  thigh. — (After  breakfast).  Pain  in  chest. — (Deep  breath-
ing), Tension  of  chest. — -(While  coughing),  Retching.  —  (After  eating).
Stitching  sensation  in  region  of  heart. — (When  inspiring).  Pain  in  breast,
etc. ;  stitches  in  various  parts  of  chest ;  stitches  in  left  side  of  chest. —
(Motion),  Most  of  the  pains;  difficulty  of  breathing;  perceptible  pulsation
of  heart;  palpitation  of  heart. — (After  motion),  Palpitation  of  heart. —
(Pressure),  Pressive  pains  in  temples. — (Sitting),  Palpitation  of  heart ;  ac-
celerated pulse ;  pains  through  loins ;  late  in  evening,  stitching  pain  above
right  knee,  etc. — (Touch),  Pain  in  region  of  shoulder ;  sore  pain  in  muscles
of  thigh. — (After  urinating).  Burning  in  urethra,  etc. — (  While  walking).
Pain  in  neck  of  right  thigh-bone. — (  Walking  upstairs),  Difficulty  of  breath-
ing ;  palpitation  of  heart,  etc. — (While  writing),  Constriction  of  chest.

A-inelioration. — (After  breakfast).  Cough  remitted.— (  Throwing  chest
backward  and  head  forward).  Pains  relieved. — (Rubbing),  Cramplike  pain
in  left  calf.


ASTEEIAS  RUBENS.

Asterias  (Uraster)  rubens  belongs  to  the  Invertebratse,  class  Radiata.
Common  name,  Star-fish.  Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  living  animal  cut
in  pieces.

Authority.  Petroz,  Provings,  Journ.  de  la  Soc.  Gal.,  1,  225.  1,  P. ;  2,
P.  J. ;  3,  T. ;  4,  M. ;  5,  M'me  B. ;  6,  M'me  T. ;  7,  M'lle  M.

JUifld. — Inclination  to  bite  (fifth  day),^ — Uncommon  cheerfulness  in
the  evening  (first  day),". — Moral  sensitiveness  prompting  him  to  weep  from
the  least  emotion  (eleventh  day),'. — Weeping,  with  despair,  followed  by
calmness  almost  immediately  (third  day),'. — Melancholy,  alternating  with
almost  intolerable  cerebral  excitement ;  she  is  inclined  to  give  herself  up
to  mental  or  bodily  work,  to  walk,  or  engage  in  violent  exercise ;  this  con-
dition is  not  at  all  like  inebriety  from  strong  liquors ;  it  is  rather  a  species
of  moral  intoxication  (second  and  third  day),'. — Feeling  of  excessive
anguish  from  noon  till  3  p.m.,  it  seems  as  if  some  misfortune  was  impend-
ing, as  if  he  was  going  to  hear  bad  news  ;  he  then  feels  as  if  he  should  give
way  to  tears  (sixth  day),*. — ^Depression,  feeling  of  weariness  ;  it  seems  as  if
some  misfortune  was  about  to  happen  to  him,  and  that,  should  it  actually
come  upon  him,  he  would  weep,  rather  than  brace  himself  to  meet  it,  or  be-
come angry  (sixth  day),*. — Irritation,  anger,  inclination  to  pick  a  quarrel
with  somebody  (from  noon  to  2  P.M.),  (sixth  day),*. — Slight  disturbance  of


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  603

the  understanding,  with  general  debility  (sixth  day)/. — [10.]  Is  scarcely
able  to  work  in  the  evening  (sixth  day),'.

Head. — Disturbed  feeling  in  the  brain  (first  day),\ — *Vertigo  (tenth
day),^ — Short-lasting  ■vertigo,^ — Vertigo  when  walking  (first  day),^ —
During  the  severe  pains,  the  whole  skull  is  painful,^ — *Heat  of  the  head,
aa  if  surrounded  by  hot  air  (first  day),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  in  one
hour  (first  day),'. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  heat,  throbbing  in  the  head,
flushed  face  (first  day),'. — Fulness  of  the  head,  seeming  to  disturb  it  later-
ally (first  and  second  day),'.  —  [20.]  Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  head
like  congestion ;  aud  even  sometimes  like  a  rush  of  blood  to  the  head
(second  day),'. — The  blood  goes  to  the  head  ;  feeling  of  fulness,  heat ;  the
head  seems  about  to  burst  (second  day),'. — ^Violent  rush  of  blood  to  the  head
(fourth  day),'. — Pain  as  if  the  skull  was  being  crushed  (third  day),'. —
Slight  twitches  in  the  brain,'. — ^Twitchiugs  in  the  brain  when  blowing  his
nose,  during  the  first  half  of  the  night  (fourth  day),^^Towards  noon,  the
headache  stopped,  with  a  detonating  sensation  which  made  her  thoughts
clearer,'. — Throbbing  in  the  head  (second  day),'. — Throbbing  in  the  head
when  climbing  a  height,  when  walking  (second  day),'. — In  the  night  he
wakes  up  in  great  distress;  it  seemed  as  if  the  brain  was  receiving  shocks
from  an  electric  battery ;  the  head  felt  as  if  bursting,  consciousness  was
almost  extinct ;  he  apprehended  a  fit  of  apoplexy  ;  this  condition  lasted
several  minutes ;  when  he  came  to  himself  his  pulse  was  hard  and  very
quick,  the  right  carotid  was  throbbing  violently  (night  of  the  sixth).  This
fever  lasted  until  the  close  of  the  following  day,l — [30.]  Boring  pain  above
the  left  eye,  coming  on  and  ceasing  suddenly  ;  it  causes  contraction  of  the
eyebrows.  While  this  pain  lasts  the  sight  is  dimmed  as  by  a  mist  (second
day),'. — Severe  pressive  pain  at  the  sinciput  in  the  morning,  which  hardly
ceases  in  the  daytime  by  walking  in  the  open  air,'. — Pressive  pain  at  the
forehead,  feeling  of  fulness,  contraction  of  the  muscles  and  compression
above  the  eyes,'. — Very  severe  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  above  the  eyes
(fourth  day),'. — Severe  pressive  pain  at  the  forehead,  seeming  to  crush  the
eyes  by  a  very  heavy  weight  (fourth  day),'. — Sharp  and  momentary  twitchings
in  the  forehead,  at  the  temples,  especially  the  occiput  (first  day),^ — Pressure
at  the  temples  (first  day),'. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  right  temple  (second
day),^ — Agitation,  spasms,  feeling  of  uneasiness  in  the  upper  part  of  the
brain,  especially  when  exercising  the  memory  or  the  understanding ;  this
sensation  is  similar  to  the  weariness  felt  in  a  limb  which  has  been  subjected
to  great  muscular  exertion  (tenth  day),^. — Pain  at  the  top  of  the  head,  as
if  the  skull  was  bruised  (third  day),'. — Flying  pain  in  the  right  half  of  the
head  (third  day),'. — [40.]  Pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  felt  suddenly
(third  day),'. — Pressive  pain  at  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  making  walk-
ing difficult  (fifth  day),'. — At  the  close  of  the  day,  the  pain  of  the  head  in-
creased, obliging  him  to  lie  down ;  pains  are  more  severe  at  the  back  of  the
head  than  at  the  forfehead ;  the  head  continues  painful  all  night  (ninth
day),^

Eyes, — Fatigued  look  of  the  eyes,'. — Bloodshot  eyes  (fourth  day),'. —
Pain  in  the  eyes  from  within  outward  (seventh  day),'. — Heat  in  the  eyes
(first  day),'. — Winking  of  the  lids,  their  free  border  is  red  (seventh  day),'.
— The  eyeballs  are  drawn  backward  (third  day),'. — Light  fatigues  the
eyea  (first  day),'. — [50.]  The  eyes  can  hardly  bear  the  light  (fourth  day),'.
— He  can  hardly  use  his  eyes  in  the  evening  (sixth  day),'.

Mars. — Lancinating  pain,  which  is  felt  during  some  seconds  in  the  au-
ditory meatus,  is  concentrated  at  the  occiput,  and  there  ceases ;  these  pains


604  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

return  in  the  course  of  the  day,  but  more  feebly  (third  day),^ — Sudden,  very
loud  noise,  but  lasting  only  a  second,  in  both  ears  (third  day),'. — Hard
hearing,  especially  in  the  right  ear  (second  day),^— Hard  hearing,  with
sounds  as  of  a  river,  of  waves  (seventh  day),'.

JVose. — Sneezing  and  coryza  on  waking  in  the  morning  (ninth  day),^ —
Epistaxis  (ninth  day),\ — Epistaxis,  which  returns  three  times  in  five  days.l

Face. — Expression  of  dulness;  a  sort  of  stupidity  in  the  posture  and
look  (seventh  day),*.— [60.]  *Redness  of  the  face  (fourth  day),^— Flushed,
swollen  face  (third  day),^

itfott^/j..— Swelling  of  the  tongue  (third  day),^ — Drawing  pain  in  the
tongue  (third  day),\ — Her  tongue  troubles  her ;  repugnance  to  talking  (fifth
day),l — Increase  of  saliva  (fifth  day),\

Throat. — Dryness  of  the  throat  (sixth  day),^ — In  the  morning  on
awaking,  sore  throat  with  constriction  (eighth  day),^ — Irritation  of  the
throat ;  short-lasting  sensation  of  heat,  which  is  renewed  several  times  dur-
ing the  day  (first  day),'\ — Irritation  of  the  throat,  slightly  felt  at  first,  after-
wards becoming  worse  (fifth  day),^ — [70.]  Dull  pain,  which  seems  to  ex-
tend ail  along  the  oesophagus  (first  day),^

Stomach. — Want  of  appetite;  loss  of  taste  (fourth  day),'. — Aversion
to  meat  (seventh  day),\ — Capricious  appetite ;  she  desires  highly  seasoned
dishes,  strong  cheese,  liqueurs,  coffee,  tea  (eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  days),'.
— In  the  morning,  loud  and  frequent  eructations  (first  day),'. — Nausea
(second  day),'. — In  the  morning,  after  many  loud  eructations,  lassitude  of
the  stomach,  with  great  heat  of  this  organ  (seventh  day),'.

A-bdomen. — In  the  course  of  the  twenty-four  hours  the  abdomen  is
alternately  swollen  and  lessened  in  size  (third  day),'. — Flatulence,  which
is  very  troublesome  after  each  meal,  because  it  does  not  pass  oft"  either
above  or  below  (third  day),'. — Severe  colic,  with  shivering,  alternating  with
fiushes  of  heat  in  the  face  (fifth  day),'. — [80.]  Colic,  followed  by  diarrhoea
(third  day),^ — Dull  pain,  in  shocks,  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  and
near  the  navel  (seventh  day),'. — Drawing  in  the  abdominal  walls  (third
day),'.

Stool  and  Anus. — Heat  in  the  rectum,*. — Slight  hsemorrhoidal  swell-
ing (third  day),'. — Hsemorrhoidal  flux,  lasting  two  days  (fifth  and  sixth
days),'. — Liquid  stool,  of  a  brown  color,  gushing  out  violently  (fourth  day),^
— Several  soft  stools  in  one  day,*. — Difficult,  thick  stool  (third  day),'. —
Constipation  ;  ineffectual  urging,  a  symptom  she  had  never  had  before  (first
day),'._

Urinary  Org aflS. — [90.]  Frequent  urging  to  urinate ;  urine  more
abundant  (seventh  day),'. — Frequent  emission  of  watery  urine  (second  day),'.
— Thick,  viscid  urine  (eighth  day),'.

Sexual  Organs. — Frequent  erections  during  sleep,'. — Erections  in
the  morning  (third  day),'. — Unusual  moisture  of  the  vagina,  which  affords
relief  (third  day),'. — She  is  harassed  by  sexual  desires,  so  that  she  fears
she  may  not  be  able  to  endure  these  painful  sensations  and  nervous  disturb-
ances (third  day),'. — Every  morning  in  bed,  excitement  of  the  sexual  ap-
petite (third  day),'. — Sensation  of  pressure  in  the  lower  organs  of  the  abdo-
men (womb?)  ;  walking  is  troublesome  (third  day),'. — Severe  general  pain
over  the  womb,  as  if  something  protruded  behind  it  (second  day),'. — [100.]
Jerking  in  the  uterus  (second  day),'. — The  menses  are  delayed  eight  days,
during  which  the  colic  and  other  sufferings,  which  usually  accompany  them,
are  present,  but  are  no  longer  felt  after  the  appearance  of  the  flow,  which
is  more  abundaut  than  usual,'.


ASTERIAS  EUBENS.  605

Chest. — Very  slight  eruption  between  the  breasts/. —  Slight  redness,
■with  branlike  efflorescence,  on  the  chest  (fourth  day),'. — Blotch  on  the  chest
as  large  as  a  child's  palm,  causing  a  great  deal  of  itching ;  this  redness
disappeared  in  five  or  six  days,'. — Swelling,  distension  of  the  breasts,  as
before  the  menses  (third  day),'.-^Sensation  of  fulness  of  the  chest,  which
makes  him  fearful  of  syncope  (seventh  day),'. — Drawing  pain  in  the  breasts
(second  day),'. — *  Drawing  pain  towards  the  inner  portion  of  the  chest  from
before  backward ;  under  the  left  breast,  this  pain  extends  over  the  whole  inner
portion  of  the  arm  to  the  end  of  the  little  finger  (fifth  day),'. — Lancinating
pain  in  the  anterior  inferior  portion  of  the  chest,  to  the  right  and  left  of
the  sternum  ;  this  pain,  which  lasts  only  a  little  while,  diminishes  by  throw-
ing back  tlie  upper  chest  and  shoulders  (fourth  day),^ — [HO.]  During  the
night  anxiety,  caused  by  undulating  pulsations  in  the  chest  (sixth  day),*. —
The  whole  left  side  of  the  chest  is  painful,  with  aggravation  from  move-
ment (first  day),^. — Sensation  as  if  the  left  breast  was  pulled  inward,*. —
Pain  under  the  sternum,". — Dull  pain  in  the  muscles  of,  the  prsecordial  re-
gion (second  day),^. — Compression  in  the  prsecordial  region,*.

Heavt  unci  JPulse. — Strong  and  frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,'.
— The  beats  of  the  heart  are  dull,  scarcely  perceptible,  and  prolonged  ;  it
seems  as  if  the  heart  had  ceased  to  beat,*. — Leaping  palpitation  (third  day),'.
— During  the  night  and  in  the  morning,  anxiety  in  the  heart  (seventh  day),'.

Nech  and  JBacJe. — [120.]  Drawing  pain  in  the  back,'. — Drawing
pain  in  the  sacrum  (first  and  second  days),'.

Extremities  in  General. — Diminished  sensibility  of  the  limbs,
especially  the  legs  and  thighs  (fourth  day),^

Tipper  Extremities. — Uneasiness  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the
bends  of  the  arms ;  he  can  hardly  bear  the  arms  covered  (fourth  day),'. —
Pain  extending  from  the  thumb-joint  to  the  shoulder  (seventh  and  eighth
days),^. — Coldness  of  the  left  arm,  as  if  a  cold  wind  blew  upon  it  (third
day),'. — On  the  left  shoulder,  over  the  olecranon  process,  a  red,  round  spot
as  large  as  a  quarter  dollar ;  it  neither  itched  nor  smarted,  and  was  covered
by  a  dry,  branny,  friable  coating,  which  entirely  fell  ofi"  in  two  days ;  a
similar  eruption,  but  not  so  extensive,  on  the  anterior  portion  of  the  same
arm  (eleventh  day),'. — Pain  in  the  right  shoulder  (second  day),^ — Pain  in
the  left  elbow-joint  (seventk  day),'.— Pain  in  the  flexor  tendons  of  the  left
wrist  (second  day),'. — [130.]  Numbness  of  the  hands  and  fingers  (sixth,
seventh,  and  eighth  days),l — -Numbness  of  the  left  hand,  extending  to  the
arm  (second  day),'. — Numbness  of  the  hypothenar  eminence  of  the  little
finger  (fifth  day),*. — Much  itching  around  the  left  thumb-nail,'.

Lower  Extremities. — Lassitude  of  the  lower  limbs  (fourth  day),'.
— Great  restlessness  in  the  lower  limbs  in  a  close  room  ;  need  of  fresh  air
(third  day),'. — Bruised  pain  of  the  lower  lirabs,^ — Formication  in  the  lower
limbs  (eleventh  day),'. — Pain  in  the  right  hip,  and  in  the  whole  left  side
as  far  as  the  scapula ;  it  lasted  till  the  sixth  day,  and  gave  rise  to  fever,''. —
Burning  lancination  in  the  left  great  trochanter  and  hip-joint,  darting  like
a  flash  to  the  outer  side  of  the  ham  (third  day),' ;  (same  symptom  on  the
ninth  day.) — [140,]  Sensation  of  drawing  in  the  right  hip,  as  if  the  leg
was  too  long  and  was  pulled  downward  (fifth  day),'. — Dull  pain  in  the  left
hip-joint  in  the  morning  (second  day),'. — Deepseated  lancinations  in  the
anterior  portion  of  the  thigh  (first  day),^ — Pulling  pain  at  the  outer  side
of  the  left  thigh  (seventh  and  eighth  days). — Very  great  and  unpleasant
itching  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  returning  towards  6  p.m.,  in  the  open  air
(seventh  day),'. — Pain  in  the  left  knee  (second  day),°. — A  small  sore,  made


606  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

on  the  leg  when  scratching,  is  the  seat  of  a  pretty  sharp  lancinating  pain
(eighth  day)/. — When  standing  up,  weakness  of  the  legs,  so  that  he  has  to
be  helped  in  walking  (third  day),^ — Pain  in  the  right  ankle-joint,^. — Severe
pain  in  the  left  ankle-joint,  aggravated  by  walking  (seventh  day),'. — [150.]
Intolerable  pain  in  the  left  foot  and  the  muscles  of  the  leg  (eighth  day),'.
— Pain  in  the  joints  of  the  left  foot  (second  day),'. — Burning  pain  in  the
feet  (eleventh  day),\ — Painful  drawing  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  in  the
toes  (eighth  day),l — Pain  in  the  left  foot;  it  centres  at  the  articulation  of  the
great  toe  with  the  first  metatarsal  bone,  and  continues  there  all  day  (sixth
day) ;  this  pain,  which  is  aggravated  by  movement,  and  makes  walking  im-
possible, has  the  character  of  a  gouty  pain,'*. — Lancinating  pain  in  the  toes,
especially  the  left  great  toe,  with  very  great  heat  and  extreme  soreness,
which  prevents  the  wearing  of  a  shoe ;  it  is  worse  after  sunset  and  in  a  close
room  ;  the  skin  is  red,  and  the  redness  is  increased  by  heat ;  cold  air,  or  the
application  of  cold  water,  gives  immediate  relief,  but  the  warmth  of  the  bed
renews  the  pain,  although  it  ceases  during  the  early  part  of  the  night  (third
day);  this  pain  continues  troublesome  for  a  few  evenings,  biit  finally  sub-
sides like  the  other  symptoms,'. — Severe  cutting  pain  at  the  left  great  toe  ;
soreness  of  the  left  sole ;  toes  very  painful  (third  day),'. — Three  days  after
leaving  off  the  medicine  the  pains  in  the  joints  are  renewed,  especially  those
of  the  left  great  toe,*.

Genernlities. — Difficulty  in  keeping  still,^ — General  malaise,  lassi-
tude, amelioration  after  eating,'. — [160.]  Desire  for  the  open  air;  anxiety
and  impatience  when  in  the  house  (fifth  day),'.

Slec'2)  and  Dreams. — After  reading  for  a  minute,  he  feels  sleepy,
and  has  to  lie  down  (tenth  day),'. — Sleep  from  2  a.m.  to  the  middle  of  the
day  (third  day),'. — Sleep  with  restlessness  (eleventh  day),'. — Much  dream-
ing about  persons  and  events.  At  night  the  illusions  are  quite  exception-
ally vivid  ;  he  believes  that  he  sees,  touches,  and  hears  the  individuals  he
dreams  of,  exactly  as  in  the  waking  state,  but  without  receiving  any  painful
impression  (second  and  third  day),'.

Fevev. — Shivering  with  drowsiness,  heat  of  the  skin,  restlessness  at
night  (third  day),'. — Increased  general  heat  during  the  whole  continuance
of  the  proving,'. — Antipathy  to  everything  which  increases  bodily  heat ;  ex-
treme desire  to  bathe  in  cold  water  (third  day),'. — Great  heat  in  the  head,
afterwards  in  the  whole  body;  desire  to  drink  cold  water,  and  to  cool  her-
self internally  and  externally  (third  day),*. — Great  lassitude  under  the  in-
fluence of  heat,  especially  the  warmth  of  the  bed,'. — [170.]  Heat  of  the
skin,  fever  at  the  close  of  the  day ;  shivering,  heat  followed  by  cold  (tenth
day),^ — After  the  evening  meal,  general  malaise,  heat  of  the  skin,  frequency
and  fulness  of  the  pulse  (first  day),'.

Coudltions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Pressive  pain  at  sinciput;
on  waking,  sneezing,  etc. ;  eructations ;  lassitude,  etc. ;  of  stomach  ;  erec-
tions ;  in  bed,  sexual  excitement ;  dull  pain  in  hip-joint. — {Evening),
Aggravation  of  symptoms  ;  pains  of  the  head  ;  can  hardly  use  the  eyes  ;
fever. — (iVi'jr/ii),  Wakes  in  great  distress,  etc.;  anxiety;  restlessness. — (12  fo
2  P.M.),  Irritation,  etc. — (12  to  3  p.m.).  Anguish. — {Blowing  nose),  During
first  half  of  night,  twitches  in  the  brain. — {Mental  exertion),  Agitation,
etc.,  in  brain. — {After  meals).  Flatulence. — {Movement),  Pain  in  left  chest;
pain  in  left  foot. — {In  close  room),  Restlessness  of  lower  limbs,  etc. ;  pain  in
toes. — (  Walking),  Vertigo  ;  throbbing  in  head  ;  pain  in  left  ankle-joint. —
{Walking  up  a  height).  Throbbing  in  head. — {Warmth  of  feed),  Pain  in  toes
renewed.


ATHAMANTA.  607

Amelioration, — {Evening),  Cheerfulness. — {Toivards  noon),  Head-
ache ceased. — {Cold  air),  Paia  in  toes. — {Cold  water  applications).  Pain  in
toes. — {After  eating).  General  malaise,  etc. — {During  menses).  Colic,  etc.,
no  longer  felt. — {Throwing  back  chest).  Pain  in  upper  chest.


ATHAMANTA.

Peucedanum  oreoselinum.  Munch.  (Athamanta  oreoselinum,  L.)  Nat.
order,  Umbelliferse.  Common  names,  (German)  Grundheil,  Hirschwurz.
Preparation,  Tincture  of  the  fresh  herb.

Authority. Franz,  Archiv,  17,  3,  177.

Head. — Pressive  confusion  of  the  head  and  upper  row  of  teeth  (sixth
hour). — Vertigo  relieved  by  lying. — Vertigo  and  drawing  in  the  brain,
now  here,  now  there. — Constrictive  headache  in  the  sides  of  the  head,
causing  dizziness. — Dull,  befogged  headache  (tenth  hour). — Severe  pressure
from  within  outward,  in  the  region  of  the  temples. — A  stupefaction  and
confusion  rises  like  a  vapor  from  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput ;  on  motion
and  walking  (ninth  hour).

JEljes. — Pressure  on  one  eyeball  from  below  upward.

Ears. — Sensation  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  with  wool  (one-quarter
of  an  hour).

Jtlout/l.— [10.']  Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  and  dry  sensation
at  the  root  of  the  tongue. — The  child  has  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. —
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  which  is  renewed  every  time  on  eatijig.

Stomach.^Evemngs  before  supper  very  great  hunger  with  flow  of
bitter  saliva. — Incomplete  eructatious,  which  come  as  far  as  the  throat  and
then  subside. — Tasteless  eructations,  after  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — In-
complete, frothy  eructations  with  nausea,  as  if  caused  by  excessive  hunger.

Abdomen. — Rheumatic  drawing  externally  in  the  right  groin  especi-
ally on  walking,  it  extends  into  the  hip  and  leg. — Drawing  and,griping  in
the  left  groin  (one  and  a  half  hours).

Stool  and  Anus.  — The  stool  is  sudden,  almost  iuvoluntary,  preceded
by  bellyache.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — [20.]  Bitter  mucus  in  the  air-passages,
which  does  not  loosen  by  hacking. — Evenings  after  supper,  profuse  watery
fluid  in  the  larynx ;  crawling  irritation  in  the  air-passages  provokes  hack-
ing (thirteenth  hour).

Chest. — Sensation  as  if  the  contents  of  the  thorax  were  constricted. —
Burning  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  externally  when  sitting  (half  an
hour). — Pinching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  thorax,  worse  on  inspira-
tion.

IIen,rt  and  JPulse. — At  evening,  rapid  pulse  with  increased  warmth
of  the  head  and  excitement  of  mind  and  the  powers  generally,  without
thirst  (fourteenth  hour).

Tipper  JExtremities. — Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  left  meta-
carpal bone  of  the  thumb  and  the  external  surface  of  the  metacarpus  lying
above  it.

Lower  Eoctremities, — Warm  sensation  on  a  part  of  the  left  thigh.
— Rheumatic  drawing  across  the  thigh  when  walking,  as  if  it  were  beaten.
— Gnawing  bruised  pain  across  the  thigh,  even  in  sitting. — [30.]  Pressure
inward  in  the  front  of  the  knee-joint,  during  a  walk ;  it  even  continues
while  at  rest ;  it  returns  again  on  walking. — On  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot


608  ATHAMANTA— ATROPINUM.

a  cold  scraping  sensation  when  sitting  (seventh  hour). — Tearing  burning
in  the  muscles  of  the  left  little  toe.

Generalities, — He  feels  weak  and  depressed. — He  feels  depressed
and  weak,  although  if  he  exerts  his  strength  he  finds  the  contrary ;
especially  his  eyes  seem  weak  (fifth  to  sixth  hour). — Burning  on  several
difl^erent  places,  that  disappears  on  laying  on  the  hand  ;  then  great  coldness
with  a  deadened  finger.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Sleep  good  and  sound ;  he  sleeps  longer,
mornings,  than  usual. (

Fever. — Hands  and  feet  are  icy  cold  and  he  shivers  through  the  whole
body,  with  a  kind  of  weakness  that  he  must  often  rest  (two  and  a  half  hours).

Conditions. — Aggravation, — {Morning),  Sleeps  longer  than  usual.
— {Evening),  Before  supper,  very  great  hunger,  etc. ;  after  supper,  watery
fluid  in  the  larynx,  etc. ;  rapid  pulse,  etc.— {Eating),  Bitter  taste  in  mouth.
— {Inspiration),  Pain  in  side  of  thorax. — {Motion),  Stupefaction,  etc.,  over
lower  part  of  occiput. — {Sitting),  Stitching  in  side  of  chest,  externally ;
cold,  etc.,  sensation  in  dorsum  of  foot. — (  Walking),  Stupefaction,  etc.,  from
lower  part  of  occiput;  drawing  in  right  groin,  etc. ;  drawing  across  the
thigh  ;  pressure  in  front  of  knee-joint.

Amelioration. — {Laying  on  the  hand),  Burning  in  different  places,
etc. — {Lying),  Vertigo.

ATROPINUM.

An  alkaloid,  obtained  from  Atropa  belladonna.  Formula,  CjjHjjNOj.
Preparation,  Triturations.  (Most  of  the  poison-symptoms  were  obtained
from  the  sulphate  of  Atropine.)

Authorities.  1,  Eidherz,  A.  H.  Z.,  60,  11  et  seq.  fproved  3d  and  4th
'  trits.)  ;  2,  W.  S.  Moffatt,  Hale's  provings,  Trans,  of  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  of  N.
Y.,  6,  83  (proved  the  2d  dec.  trit.)  ;  3,  C.  S.  Fahnenstock,  ibid.  (1st  dec.
trit.);  4,  C,  H.  Chamberlin,  ibid.  (1st  dec.  trit.);  5,  J.  M.  Smith,  ibid.  (1st
dec.  trit.) ;  6,  Shrofl",  Lehr.d.  Pharm.  (took .005  gramme) ;  7,  Kafka,  A.  H.Z.,
52, 178  (took  g\y  grain) ;  8,  Harley,  Old  Veg.  Neurotics  (effects  from  subcu-
taneous injection  of  j^^  to  j'g  gr.) ;  9,  Lusanna,  A.  H.  Z.,  55,  157  (general
statement  of  effects);  10,  Homan  (took  part  of  a  solution  2  grs.  to  1  oz.),
(prepared  for  the  eye),  N.  A.  J.  of  Hom.,  1,  115  (N.  Y.  J.  of  Med.);  11,
Sharpey,  Mon.  Hom.  Rev.,  18,  39,  from  Lancet  (took  a  sol.  of  Atrop.  by
mistake) ;  12,  Blackley,  M.  Hom.  Rev.,  17,  481  (Rose  E.  took  a  teaspoon-
ful  of  a  lotion,  2  grs.  to  1  oz.);  13,  Andrew,  Ed.  Med.  J.,  1852  (girl  21
years  took  §  gr.)  ;  14,  Piffingskold,  A.  H.  Z.,  54, 180  (took  6  drops  of  a  sol.,
5  grs.  to  1  oz.) ;  15,  Holthouse,  A.  H.  Z.,  M.  Bl.,  1,  38  (child  took  ^  gr.)  ;
16,  A.  H.  Z.,  M.  Bl.,  11,  59  (child  took  a  sol.,  i  gr.  to  1  oz.) ;  17,  Weil,
A.  H.  Z.,  1873  (Effects  of  Atrop.  on  conjunctiva) ;  18,  Virch.  Arch.,  49,
450  (^  gr.  in  sol.)  ;  19,  Virch.  Arch.,  48  (Effects  of  instillation  into  eye) ;
20,  Chittenden,  Med.  Invest.,  11,  478  (Effects  from  applying  a  sol.  of  1  gr.
to  ^  dr.  of  water  to  a  hollow  tooth) ;  21,  Hughes,  poisoning  of  a  boj"^  3^
years  old,  by  a  solution  of  i  gr.  of  Atropia,  B.  J.  of  Horn.,  v.  20;  22,
Grandi,  in  Pereira,  Experiments  with  Atropine,  Jg  to  1  gr.  (see  Hughes's
Monograph  on  Belladonna)  ;  23,  Leach,  Med.  Times,  1865  (from  Hughes)  ;

24,  Am.  Journ.  Hom.  Mat.  Med.,  Nov.,  1872,  from  Atropia,  gr.  ^J„,  bis-
quater  die,  in  a  case  of  ulcer  of  stomach  in  a  man  of  40  (from  Hughes) ;

25,  Rose,  Brit.  Journ.  of  Hom.,  27,  225  (from  Hughes)  ;  26,  Pereira,  Elem.
of  Mat.  Med.,  4th  ed.,  London,  1855  (from  Hughes)  ;  27,  Trousseau  and


ATROPINUM.  609

Pidoux  (from Hughes)  ; 28,  Practitioner,  4,  372  (from  Hughes) ; 29,
Ringer,  in  Practitioner,  vol.  9  (from  Hughes).

Mind.  Emotions  :  Frenzied  with  excitement,™. — A  long  chill,  fol-
lovred  by  delirium,  which  had  some  resemblance  to  the  subdelirium  of
certain  typhoid  fevers,". — Immediately  upon  closing  the  eyes,  after  retiring,
the  mind  would  become  filled  with  strange  and  fanciful  ideas,  rambling,
incoherent  speech,  spectral  illusions,  with  frequent  fits  of  wild,  uncon-
trollable laughter.  The  delirium  and  spectral  illusions  continued  through
the  night,  during  which  time  I  fancied  myself  afflicted  with  epilepsy,  and
was  constantly  fearful  lest  others  should  discover  my  unfortunate  condi-
tion ;  was  nearly  oblivious  to  all  that  transpired  during  the  latter  part  of
the  night,  but  know  from  the  bruises  received  and  the  sensations  of  pain
occasionally  experienced  upon  coming  in  contact  with  a  stove,  chair,  table
or  some  solid  body,  that  it  was  passed  in  the  wildest  delirium  (first  day),^
— Busily  influenced  by  pleasing  illusions  and  delusions,  meddling  with
everything  in  his  way,  picking  at  and  handling  imaginary  objects  in  the
air,  and  accompanying  his  acts  by  muttering  and  smiling,  or  with  loud
chattering,  interrupted  by  subdued  laughter,*. — Frightful  phantasies,^". — .
Spectral  illusions  (first  night),*. — On  lying  in  bed,  began  to  pick  at  specks
and  at  the  air,'^ — Picking  at  the  bedclothes  as  if  searching  for  something
lost,  with  confused  mutterings  (first  night),*. — At  times,  while  it  seemed  to
him  that  he  was  fully  conscious,  saw  persons  at  the  bedside  and  slowly
reached  out  to  grasp  them,  but  his  hand  would  pass  through  the  object
and  no  sense  of  touch  tell  him  that  there  was  any  material  in  the  appari-
tion ;  saw  books  and  newspapers  and  tried  to  grasp  them,  but  they  would
either  recede  or  the  hand  would  come  in  contact  with  them  and  feel
nothing,*. — [10.]  Mind  has  been  wandering  considerable  of  the  time  through
the  afternoon  ;  often  thinks  he  is  spoken  to  and  answers  imaginary  ques-
tions (after  ten  hours),^ — The  symptoms  during  this  period,  six  to  nine
hours  after,  exactly  resembled  those  of  delirium  tremens.  There  was  in-
cessant rambling,  great  restlessness,  a  grasping  at  imaginary  objects,  and
occasional  screaming  from  fright.  The  character  of  the  delirium  varied  ;
sometimes  the  child  saw  objects  which  frightened  him,  and  the  utmost
terror  was  depicted  on  his  countenance,  and  he  clung  to  his  nurse's  neck,  or
threw  himself  violently  in  difierent  directions  as  if  to  escape  them.  Later,
the  delusions  were  of  a  more  pleasurable  kind,  imaginary  playing  with
toys,  drawing,  eating,  etc.,'''. — Frequently,  through  the  forenoon,  thought
that  persons  in  the  room  spoke  to  me,  and  would  carry  on  conversation
with  these  imaginary  beings  (second  day),l — Now  and  then,  he  seems  to
have  almost  a  consciousness  of  what  transpires  about  him,  so  that,  at  times,
he  returns  an  answer,  when  addressed,  whose  commencement  shows  that
he  understood,  but  which  passes  into  irrelevant,  senseless  talk,'^ — As  to  my
sensations,  they  were  not  blunted,  but  I  misinterpreted  them.  Thus,  I  felt
a  wet  cloth  on  my  head,  but  supposed  I  had  been  out  in  the  rain  without
my  hat;  and  a  dose  of  bromide  of  potassium  given  to  me  I  recognized  as  a
saline  solution,  but  imagined  it  was  mineral  water  from  the  Airthry  Springs
which  I  had  tasted  on  the  spot  some  ten  days  before,". — The  patient  is
busied  with  subjects  which  at  other  times  occupy  his  mind,  politics  and
struggles  consequent  on  his  relations  in  life,'*. — -Very  restless  and  delirious,
talking  constantly  about  his  afiairs  apparently,". — Meddlesome  delirium,
and  he  will  require  attention  to  prevent  him  from  getting  out  of  bed,*. —
When  put  to  bed,  he  struggles  to  rise  almost  incessantly,". — -[20.1  He
jumped  out  of  bed  several  times,  and  insisted  on  dressing  himself,". — Keeps

VOL. I.— 39


610  ATROPINUM.

his  eyes  closed,  but  on  being  spoken  to  loudly  looks  at  speaker ;  caught
perhaps  one  word  or  a  part  of  a  sentence,  repeated  it,  and  said,  "  Oh,  I
shall  lose  my  train,"". — Expostulates  with  those  who  try  to  lead  him  to
bed ;  says  he  will  lose  the  train,  that  all  things  are  packed  up,  and  that  he
must  start  immediately,". — Resists  when  being  undressed,  saying  continually
that  he  will  lose  the  train.  Tries  to  put  on  his  trowsers  and  fasten  his
necktie,". — I  imagined  I  had  to  go  off  by  a  railway  train,  which  started  at
ten  in  the  morning,  and  that  the  hour  was  approaching,  whilst  I  had
nothing  ready  for  the  journey ;  and  I  believed  that  I  wished  to  dress  and
to  pack  my  things,  but  was  thwarted  and  prevented  by  the  people  about
me.  At  length  I  was  persuaded  that  it  was  too  late  to  catch  the  train,  and
agreed  to  wait  till  evening,". — Insisted  repeatedly  that  her  blood  did  not
circulate,  and  that  her  feet  must  be  put  into  warm  water  or  she  should
die,^°. — Talked  confusedly  and  almost  unintelligible  nonsense,  on  waking
in  morning,'*. — Agitation  and  delirium,  worse  at  night,''. — Violent  delirium
and  restlessness  (after  four  and  a  half  hours),'. — Delirious  and  a  little
drowsy,". — [30.]  Delirium  followed  by  stupor,'. — Loud  cries  without  any
•pains,''. — Sadness,'*". — Mentally  either  very  sad,  depressed  in  constant
anxiety  and  restlessness,  fearful  of  misfortune,  or  angry  and  inclined  to  be
alone,  seldom  lively,'. — Apprehensiveness  followed  his  internal  restlessness,
and  soon  amounted  to  great  anxiety,'.— Not  quarrelsome  or  ill-tempered,
but  attempts  to  reason,". — Very  sensitive,'^. — Constantly  fretful,',— I  then
became  sensible  that  I  was  lifted  into  bed,  and  ordered  on  no  account  to
rise,  which  I  thought  a  most  unreasonable  restraint ;  especially  as  I  was
tormented  with  irritation  in  the  bladder,  and  almost  incessant  desire  to
pass  urine,  which  was  in  very  small  quantity,". — Was  generally  restless
and  unmanageable,  refusing  to  answer,  to  swallow,  or  to  be  examined ;
appeared  profoundly  intoxicated  (after  one  hour),*.  —  [40.]  Evidently
unconscious  and  very  irritable,  striking  his  mother  when  she  took  him
from  the  nurse  (after  one  hour),^'. — Incoherent  quarrelling  (after  eight
hours),*. — Morose,  quarrelsome  the  whole  day,  everything  went  wrong ;
trifles  which  usually  passed  unheeded  irritated  him  to  anger,'. — Desire  to
scold  and  quarrel,'. — Intellect  :  Upon  making  vigorous  efforts  to  arouse
him,  he  also  exhibited  some  signs  of  consciousness,'". — When  he  closes  his
eyes  the  mind  becomes  confused  and  he  sees  all  sorts  of' spectres  (after
thirteen  hours),*. — Mind  confused  ;  would  commence  a  sentence,  and  forget
what  she  wished  to  say,™. — Peel  as  though  awakened  from  a  dream  (second
day),^ — Appears  dull  and  stupid  (after  ten  hours),'. — Has  only  vague
ideas  of  anything  she  said,  or  of  what  transpired  that  evening,''''. — When
left  to  himself  he  did  not  appear  to  drop  off  into  coma  as  do  those  who
have  taken  opium,  but  would  occasionally  open  his  eyes  with  a  vacant,
amaurotic  expression,  and  turn  his  head  from  side  to  side,'". — [50,]  At  first,
a  slowness  of  intelligence  ;  ideas  and  replies  are  imperfect  and  indifferent,''^
— Dull  and  stupid  all  the  afternoon  (after  six  hours),^ — Cannot  be  made
to  understand  where  he  is,  that  he  is  ill,  or  that  he  must  keep  quiet,". —
First,  indolence  of  mind,  then  vertigo,  and  a  condition  of  commencing  in-
toxication,'.— Feels  dull  and  not  inclined  to  move  about  or  to  converse
(after  one  hour),^. — Indisposition  for  mental  labor,'. — No  desire  for  his
ordinary  mental  labor,'. — Prover  was  dull  and  disinclined  to  study  for
several  days,^. — For  several  days  a  difficulty  of  fixing  the  attention  upon
anything  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  at  a  time,^ — [60.]  The  prover  was
absent-minded  at  intervals  for  several  days,  and  found  difficulty  in  fixing
his  mind  upon  any  subject  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  at  a  time,*. — Loss


ATEOPINUM.  611

of  memory  (after  eight  hours),'. — His  memory  is  wrong,  inasmuch  as  he  thinks
that  what  really  happened  from  the  eleventh  to  the  twelfth,  took  place  in  the
night  from  the  tenth  to  the  eleventh  (after  sixth  day),". — Am  absent-minded
and  forgetful ;  when  conversing  often  partly  finishing  a  sentence ;  was  often
obliged  to  stop  and  inquire  what  I  had  been  saying  (second  day),l — He
recognizes,  momentarily,  members  of  the  family ;  apparently  notices  when
the  door  opens  or  one  is  busy  about  him,  but,  when  spoken  to,  often  turns
his  head  to  the  wrong  side,^'. —  Unconscious,^' ". — Unconscious,  with  incoherent
speaking  at  intervals,". — Comatose,'*.

Head. — Confusion  and  Vertigo:  Head  feels  dull  and  unpleasant
(after  eleven  hours),^ — Dull  sensation  in  the  head,  with  feeling  as  if  his
hair  had  become  matted  into  a  thick  felt  (first  day),"*.— [70.]  Head  very
much  confused ;  could  be  held  up  with  difficulty,'. — Head  confused,  as
after  a  disturbed  night;  relieved  on  going  into  the  open  air  (morning,  sec-
ond day),\ — Dizzy  confusion  of  the  head,  evenings,  alternating  with  vivid
phantasies;  great  fatigue  of  the  whole  body,  and  at  times  ringing  in  the
ears,^ — Some  vertigo  (after  one  hour),^ — Some  vertigo  (after  three  hours),^
— Considerable  vertigo  (after  seven  hours),^ — Vertigo,  iu  consequence  of
which  I  was  obliged  to  lie  down,^ — Vertigo  at  intervals,  lasting  but  a  mo-
ment at  a  time  (after  one  hour)A — Vertigo  caused  by  turning  the  head
quickly  (after  one  hour),^ — Considerable  vertigo,  particularly  upon  turn-
ing the  head  suddenly  (after  half  an  hour),'. — [80.]  Vertigo  and  confusion
of  the  head,  on  waking,  which  increased  on  rising ;  vertigo  so  that  he  came
near  falling,'.— Vertigo  on  rising  in  the  morning,  so  that  it  became  dark
before  his  eyes,'. — Has  had  slight  vertigo  at  intervals  during  the  forenoon
(second  day),*. — Slight  vertigo  and  pressure  in  the  temples  with  little  or
no  pain  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),'. — Awoke  very  dizzy ;  cannot  walk
across  the  floor,  but  staggers  towards  objects  for  support  (after  three
hours),'. — Giddiness,'. — Giddiness,  heaviness,  drowsiness,  or  actual  sleep,
with  great  tendency  to  dreamy  delirium,  and,  in  women,  slight  occasional
startings  (from  -^  grain),*. — Awoke  still  feeling  quite  dizzy  (second  day),^
— Continued  giddy,  but  walked  steadily,  though  slowly  and  cautiously,'. —
Dizziness  upon  moving  the  head  suddenly  (after  eleven _  hours),^ — [90.]
Dizziness  upon  moving  the  head  quickly  (second  day),^ — Dizziness  when
attempting  to  walk  (after  two  hours),^.— Pains  :  Head  hot  (after  four
hours),^. — Head  very  hot,'. — Head  hot  (after  ten  minutes),'. — Head  feels
hot  (after  one  hour),^ — Head  and  face  much  flushed  and  hot ;  pulse  full,
bounding,  and  irregular,". — Head  subjectively  warm,  but  not  painful ;  cold
applications  are  grateful  (second  day),". — -Head  feels  full  and  uncomfort-
able (after  two  hours), ^. — *  Feeling  as  if  the  head  was  screwed  up  ;  walking
caused  the  most  severe  sticking  pains;  relieved  toward  11  a.m.,  and  disappeared
by  evening,^. — [100.]  Dull  pain  in  the  head  continues,  with  dizziness  upon
moving  suddenly  (third  day),^. — *Stieking  pains  in  the  hose  of  the  skull,  and
especially  over  the  eyes,  on  every  motion,  and  especially  on  stepping,^. — Sensa-
tion of  fulness  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  brain  (after  one  hour),'. — Slight
pain  in  the  antero-superior  cerebral  region,  coming  on  shortly  after  taking
the  drug,  continuing  through  the  night  and  next  day,^. — Headache  com-
mencing in  the  middle  of  the  forehead  (fifteen  minutes),'. — Fulness  in  the
forehead,  and  head  hot,  but  at  no  time  any  throbbing  of  the  carotids  or
arteries  of  the  head,^ — Slight  fulness  in  the  front  part  of  the  head,  and
dilatation  of  the  pupils,^. — Dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  dizziness  on
moving  suddenly,^ — Pressive  pain  in  forehead,'. — *Fine,  drawing,  very
sensitive  stitches  across  the  forehead  and  temples ;  recurred  every  four  to  ten


612  ATROPINUM.

minutes,  and  lasted  several  seconds  or  a  minute^. — [IIO.3  Slight  pain  in  the
temples  (after  half  an  hour)/. — Very  slight  pain  in  the  temples  and  eyes
(after  twelve  hours),*. — Fulness  of  temples  and  also  of  forehead,  with  very
slight  pain ;  can  scarcely  walk,  am  so  dizzy,^. — A  feeling  of  fulness  and
pressure  at  the  temples,^ — Slight  pi'essure  in  the  temples  (after  one  hour),^
■ — Feeling  in  the  head  as  though  the  temples  were  being  pressed  from  with-
out; pressure  worse  on  the  right  side  (after  one  hour),^ — *  Dull  pain  in  the
temples,  coming  on  at  intervals  of  perhaps  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and,  lasting  a
few  minutes.  This  pain  is  not  severe,  but  seems  like  a  deep  heavy  pres-
sure ;  at  other  times  it  is  a  steady  tension  in  the  anterior  cerebral  region,
as  if  the  brain  was  being  pressed  outward  in  all  directions  (first  day),l —
Has  a  dull  bruised  feeling  in  the  temples  (after  nine  hours),^ — *  Very  sen-
sitive sticking  in  the  left  temporal  region  on  waking  in  ike  morning ;  it  ex-
tended to  behind  the  ear,  and  scarcely  permitted  him  to  open  his  left  eye  ;  dis-
appeared after  moving  about  in  the  open  air,'. — Throbbing  in  the  temporal
regions  (after  ten  minutes),''. — [120.]  Feeling  of  pressure  under  the  parietal
bones,^

Eyes. — In  general:  Strange  appearance  of  the  eyes,  as  though  pro-
jected from  their  sockets  (after  one  and  a  half  hours),*. — Eyes  appear  fixed
and  glassy  (first  day),^- — Eyes  look  glassy  and  congested  (after  one  hour),'.
— Glittering,  excited  eyes,'^. — Eyes  restless  (after  one  hour),^ — Eyes  move
restlessly  hither  and  thither  (ordinarily,  his  look  is  not  steady),'^ — Simple
inflammatory  swelling  of  the  mucous  membrane,  with  muco-purulent  secre-
tion, often  accompanied  by  swelling  of  the  lachrymal  sac,  occasionally  with
less  swelling,  but  more  marked  hypersemia  and  flow  of  tears,". — Eyes  con-
siderably congested,  but  the  pupils  have  scarcely  commenced  to  dilate
(after  one  haur),^. — Eyes  feel  wearied  (second  day),l— [130.]  Consider-
able pain  and  lachrymation,". — Slight  pain  in  the  eyes  continued  for  about
two  hours,  accompanied  part  of  the  time  by  an  unpleasant  sensation  of  ful-
ness and  pressure  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  head,^  making  me  restless  and
uneasy,'. — Eyes  feel  swollen,  and  pain  in  the  eyes  and  temples  slightly  in-
creased with  each  pulsation  of  the  heart  (after  twelve  hours),*. — Dull  pain
in  the  eyes  and  head,l — Dull  pain  in  the  eyes,  and  slight  pain  in  the  tem-
ples (after  one  hour), I — Deepseated  dull  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  eye
(after  ten  minutes),^ — Eyes  and  lids  feel  sore  to  the  touch  (after  nine
hours),*. — Beow,  Lids,  etc.  :  *iSharp  pain  under  the  right  eye,  with  slight
pain  in  the  temples  (after  four  hours),'. — ^Neuralgic  pains,  commencing
under  the  left  ovhit,  and  running  back  to  the  ear,  lasting  perhaps  ten  minutes
at  a  time,  and  then  disappearing  for  fifteen  or  twenty ;  these  have  been  noticed
for  several  hours  (second  day),'. — Redness  and  excoriation  of  the  skin  of
the  eyelids,". — [140.]  Eyelids  swollen  (after  one  hour),'. — *  About  9  p.m.
eyelids  felt  heavy  and  difficult  to  keep  open;  yet  she  had  no  inclination  to
sleep,™. — Dull,  heavy,  aching  pain  in  the  eyelids,  not  severe  ^second  day),'.
— Eyelids  feel  sore,  are  red  and  congested  (second  day),'.— I  have  myself
once  or  twice  experienced  slight  congestion  of  the  entire  conjunctiva,  with
dryness  of  the  membrane  and  dull  aching  pain  in  the  eyeball,  after  the  use
of  a  very  weak  solution  of  Atropia.  On  one  occasion  this  condition  fol-
lowed the  instillation  of  12  drops  of  a  solution  of  1  part  of  Sulphate  of
Atropia  in  400,000  parts  of  water,'. — Slight  injection  of  the  conjunctival
membrane,'. — Conjunctivas  vividly  injected  (after  one  hour),^ — Acute  ery-
sipelatous inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  conjunctiva  and  eyelids,". —
Atropine  conjunctivitis,". — Severe  pain  in  the  left  eyeball  (after  nine
hours),*. — [150.]  Slight  pain  in  the  eyes  continued ;  it  is  as  if  the  eyeballs


ATROPINUM.  613

were  pressed  from  without  in  every  direction  (after  twelve  hours),'. — Pupils
not  unusually  dilated,  but  perfectly  immovable,"'. — Pupils  dilated,'. —
Pupils  somewhat  dilated,^ — Pupils  very  much  dilated ;  spectral  illusions
continue  (second  day),l^Both  pupils  dilated,  but  not  ad  maximum^^. —
Excessive  dilatation  of  pupils  (first  day),l — Complete  mydriasis,". — Pupils
are  still  dilated ;  can  see  to  read  quite  distinctly  for  a  few  minutes,  after
which  the  letters,  words,  and  lines  run  together  and  become  indistinct  (sec-
ond day),^. — Dilatation  and  immobility  of  the  pupil,". — [160.]  Pupils
slightly  dilated;  conjunctiva  not  injected,". — Pupils  still  dilated,  with
diplopia  (second  day),*. — Pupils  considerably  dilated ;  vertigo  increasing
(after  one  hour),*. — Vision:  Dimness  of  sight  (after  a  quarter  of  an
hour),'. — Dimness  of  vision  (after  eleven  hours),^ — Dimness  of  vision,  and
bright  circles  of  a  golden  color  dancing  before  the  eyes,'^ — His  difficulty
in  seeing  small  objects  which  were  near  him  (the  pupils  were  still  dilated)
was  now  the  most  prominent  feature  remaining  of  his  illness  (after  twenty-
'four  hours),^\ — Only  a  circular  line  of  iris  visible ;  was  nearly  blind  ;  a
thick  cloud  obstructed  vision,  and  images  were  confused,  with  a  reddish
tinge  (after  one  hour),^ — Can  see  but  little ;  pupils  considerably  dilated,
but  contract  readily  under  the  influence  of  light  (after  three  hours),l — Ob-
jects appear  at  first  enveloped  in  a  white  vapor;  the  contours  are  no  longer
distinct;  if  the  dose  is  increased,  almost  complete  blindness  may  ensue,'''\ —
[170.]  Disturbance  of  vision;  objects  seem  enveloped  in  a  cloud  (the  ob-
scuration increases  with  the  dose) ;  even  complete  blindness  ensues,  but
disappears  in  a  day  or  two  after  ceasing  the  medicine,". — Vision  obscured ;
pupils  dilated  ;  eyeballs  injected ;  she  seems  to  see  nothing  about  her,". —
Could  see  nothing  (first  day),^^■ — After  looking  at  objects  a  few  minutes,
they  become  indistinct  and  fade  from  view  (after  two  honrs),^ — While
reading  a  book,  the  letters  gradually  grew  indistinct,  and  seemed  waver-
ing before  the  eyes,^. — Can  see  to  read  a  little,  but  after  a  few  words  the
letters  grow  indistinct,  and  am  obliged  to  close  the  eyes  to  rest  them  (sec-
ond day),^ — While  talking  with  persons,  they  suddenly  vanish  (second
day),l — Eyes  intolerant  to  light  (second  day),l — The  eye  is  sensitive  to
the  light  held  in  front  of  it,  which,  however,  does  not  afiect  the  dilatation
of  the  pupil,'^ — It  is  impossible  to  cause  color-confusion  by  the  use  of
Atropine,  but  partial  color-blindness  may  be  induced  by  either  the  internal
or  external  use  of  it.  The  impressions  made  by  color  are  altered  by  Atro-
pine as  regards  strength  exactly  as  they  are  by  the  different  degrees  of  sola,r
light  on  different  days,^". — [180.]  On  several  occasions  through  the  night
she  had  vision  of  great  numbers  of  white  flies  on  the  door,  which  was  white,
and  requested  that  they  be  brushed  off.  They  were  not  in  motion,  and
were  rather  smaller  than  the  common  housefly.  This  perversion  of  sight
continued  until  noon  of  the  following  day,  on  closiug  the  eyes,™. — The
medicine  produced  temporary  bright  spots  and  stars  before  the  eyes,  and  a
brilliant  glow  around  the  letters,  which  frightened  him  greatly,^*. — Bright
flashes  before  the  eyes,  immediately  on  closing  them  (first  night),*. — On
one  occasion  my  patient  was  much  annoyed  by  the  appearance  of  a  large
black  bug,  with  veritable  legs,  a  few  inches  below  a  black  doorknob,''". —
On  the  following  morning,  imagining  she  saw  a  worm,  "  a  thousand-legged
worm,"  on  her  carpet,  she  sprang  out  of  bed,  and  was  found  trying  to  find
it ;  failing  in  this,  she  would  look  in  another  place  and  see  it  again.  This
illusion  kept  her  busy  some  time,  before  fully  satisfied  of  the  fallacy.  The
color  of  the  worm  was  brown,  the  predominating  color  of  the  carpet,''". —
Illusions  of  sight ;  during  the  increasing  dimness  of  vision,  manifold  pic-


614  •  ATROPINUM.

tures  of  gigantic  figures,  whirls,  double  images;  enlarged  appearance  of  all
objects  ;  laughable  or  frightful  appearances  of  all  kinds,'. — Objects  round
or  oval  seem  elongated ;  for  example,  the  human  figure  was  distorted  so
that  the  vertical  diameter  of  the  face  seemed  equal  to  the  rest  of  the  body;
especially  prominent  were  the  nose  and  chin,  which  seemed  of  considerable
length,  and  their  margins  enveloped  in  a  mist ;  these  appearances  lasted
some  hours,  for  as  I  woke  ^t  half-past  three,  these  images  still  floated
clearly  before  the  eyes ;  the  pupils  (on  the  next  day)  were  very  large  and
sluggish,'. — First  noticed  diplopia  (after  five  hours),''. — The  next  day  these
appearances  were  verified,  though  in  a  less  degree ;  all  objects  seemed  really
elongated,  especially  the  ears  looked  like  Midas  ears,  and  seemed  to  over-
top the  head  ;  a  round  rubber  ball  looked  eggshaped  ;  the  table  looked  oval
rather  than  round  (lasted  till  10  a.m.),\ — Vision  much  impaired  ;  the  fig-
ures on  the  carpet,  which  were  large,  appeared  to  be  constantly  and  succes-
sively rising  up  to  her  face  (perpendicular  diplopia,  the  apparent  object
below  the  real  one),™. — [190.]  As  late  as  a  week  she  still  experienced  a
sense  of  giddiness,  and  the  figures  on  the  carpet  would  at  times  appear  to
her  double,''". — Quick  rotation  and  duplication  of  objects,'. — During  the
evening  the  eyes  of  the  lady  attendant  seemed  to  her  very  large,  and  she
could  not  avoid  looking  at  them,™. — Upon  looking  at  a  newspaper  the  let-
ters seem  to  expand'  and  contract  with  each  pulsation  of  the  heart ;  can
read  but  little  (second  day),*. — In  attempting  to  walk,  would  reel  and
stagger,  catch  at  objects  which  appeared  to  me  in  close  proximity,  but
which  in  reality  were  far  from  my  reach  ;  would  often  stumble  over  objects
which  to  me  seemed  to  be  many  feet  away  (first  day),l — Cannot  estimate
distances  correctly ;  when  asked  to.  put  his  hand  upon  an  object  within  his
reach,  he  either  reaches  to&  far  or  not  far  enough  (after  seven  hours),''. —
Entire  loss  of  power  ta  compare  objects  with  the  eye  and  determine  their
respective  distances  (first  day),\

JEavs. — Throughout  the  succeeding  night  the  hearing  and  sight  were
morbidly  sensitive,^ — At  night,  when  the  eyes  were  closed,  though  not
sound  asleep,  he  heard  every  noise  and  every  voice  in  the  room  and  yard,'.
— Exquisite  sensibility  of  hearing,  and  frequent  illusions  of  this  sense
also,*. — [200.]  His  attention  cannot  be  attracted  without  speaking  loudly
to  him,". — Perceptions  of  noise,  tinkling  sounds  as  of  bells,  etc.,''^. — Some
roaring  in  ears,'. — Illusions  of  hearing,  ringing,  roaring,  etc.,'.

Nose. — Mucous  membrane  of  the  nose  dry  (after  one  hour),'. — Dryness
of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nose  and  eye,®. — The  dryness  (of  the
throat)  very  often  extends  to  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lower  passage
of  the  nares,*. — He  sneezed  and  rubbed  his  nose  frequently,^'.

Fnce. — Expression  e/ma?wa,'*^\ — Looks  and  acts  as  if  he  had  been  on
a  "  spree  "  (after  seven  hours),^ — [210,]  Pale,  slightly  sweating  face,'. —
Flushing  of  the  face,*. — Fhce  flushed  (after  one  hour),*. — Flushed  face;
burning  in  the  face  (after  a  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Face  slightly  red,'*. —
*Face  hot  and  very  red,™. — Face  red,  with  white  spots,'l — ^Twitching  of
the  facial  muscles,  especially  around  the  mouth  and  lids,'*. — Only  the  red-
dened face  is  warmer  than  the  rest  of  the  body,'*. — Parched  state  of  the
lips,*. — Mucous  membrane  of  the  lips  dry  and  parched;  water  affords  no
relief  (after  two  hours),l

Mouth. — Teeth  and  Tongue  :  [220.]  Teeth  and  lips  dry,  and  cov-
ered with  sordes,".— Teeth  feel  "  on  edge  "  (first  day),^ — Tongue  slightly
coated  white  (second  day),*. — Tongue  thickly  coated  with  whitish  mucus
(after  one  hour),*.— Tongue  thickly  loaded  with  a  dirty  gray  fur  (second


ATROPINUM.  615

day),". — Tongue  coated  whitish  on  margins,  and  yellow  in  middle,". — Tip
and  edges  of  the  tongue  light  red ;  tongue  trembles  when  protruded  from
the  mouth  (after  one  hour),\ — Anterior  part  of  the  tongue  or  whole  of  the
dorsum,  excepting  a  wide  margin,  will  be  found  dry,  brown,  and  rough,^ —
The  mucous  layer  of  the  tongue  becomes  completely  dry,  brown,  and  hard
(4'n  gi'ain),^. — Tongue  trembles  when  protruded  (after  three  hours),". —
[230.]  When  asked  to  protrude  the  tongue  he  does  it  with  difficulty,  and
only  after  considerable  effort ;  cannot  move  the  tongue  about  in  the  mouth
at  will,''. — The  tongue  (shown  onee  when  desired),  was  protruded  with  diffi-
culty and  incompletely,". — Tongue  thick,  cannot  articulate  distinctly  (first
night),*. — The  tongue  and  other  muscles  assisting  in  speech  were  difficult
to  move,''. — -Tongue  seemed  partially  paralyzed,™. — Tongue  moist,  coated
whitish-yellow  (second  day),"*. — Tongue  dry,". — Tongue  and  mouth  dry
(after  half  an  hour),*. — Tongue  dry  and  furred  (after  forty-eight  hours),^
— Dorsum  of  tongue  dry  and  parched,  and  the  entire  roof  of  the  mouth  and
velum  palati  dry  and  glazed,'. — [240.]  Complete  dryness  of  the  tongue,
roof  of  the  mouth,  and  soft  palate,  extending  more  or  less  down  the  pharynx
and  larynx,  rendering  the  voice  husky,  and  often  inducing  dry  cough  and
difficult  deglutition,^ — Dryness  of  tongue  and  fauces  (immediately),^ —
Mouth:  The  mouth  opens  but  little;  masticator  muscles  rigid,". — Thick,
viscid,  or  slimy  mucus  in  the  mouth,'. — Thin  coating  of  viscid,  slimy,  white
mucus  over  the  entire  buccal  cavity  (second  day),". — Mucous  membrane
of  mouth  dark-red  (second  day),'. — Loss  of  sensation  in  the  buccal  cavity,
with  complete  loss  of  taste.  When  swallowing  water  from  a  tumbler,  I
could  not  be  persuaded  that  I  had  drank  any  until  convinced  by  loojiing
into  the  glass  (first  day),^ — Can  drink  water  without  difficulty,  but  pro-
duces no  sensation  in  the  mouth  or  throat,  except  a  slight  feeling  of  cold-
ness ;  is  scarcely  aware  when  he  swallowed  it  (second  day),'. — The  hard
and  soft  palate  perfectly  dry  and  glazed,'. — Buccal  cavity  feels  hot  (after
one  hour),'. — Saliva,  Taste,  and  Speech  :  [250,]  Great  dryness  of  the
mouth,*. — Mucous  membranes  of  mouth  dry,". — Dryness  of  the  fauces,
seems  extending  over  the  whole  mouth,''. — Dryness  of  the  throat  has  ex-
tended over  the  entire  buccal  cavity  (after  two  hours), I — Mouth  very  dry,
so  dry  that  upon  inserting  the  finger,  it  will  not  be  moistened  (after  two
hours),''. — Food  will  remain  in  the  mouth  for  minutes  without  becoming
moistened  in  the  least,". — The  hard  palate  and  the  anterior  part  of  the
tongue  and  the  soft  palate  dry,  but  not  parched  or  glazed,'.— Dryness  of  the
mouth  continued  through  the  night,^. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  has  increased
and  now  extends  to  the  lips,  which  feel  dry  and  parched  (after  half  an
hour),'. — Those  parts  of  the  mouth  which  are  adjacent  to  the  median  plane
are  so  completely  parched  that  they  fail  to  impart  the  least  moisture  to  a
bit  of  bibulous  paper  or  sugar,  kept  in  contact  with  them  for  several  min-
utes. It  is  observable  that  this  dryness  is  greatest  along  the  median  line
and  on  either  side  of  it,  and  that  after  moderate  doses  it  ex:tends  only  a
short  way  outwards.  Dryness  of  the  lips,  the  buccal  mucous  membrane,
and  the'  pillars  of  the  fauces,  only  occurs  after  large  doses ;  but  a  very
moderate  dose  is  required  to  render  the  central  part  of  the  tongue  dry  and
parched  from  back  to  front,  and  the  hard  and  soft  palates  and  back  of  the
(Esophagus  as  dry  and  glazed  as  a  piece  of  paper,'.— [260.]  Mouth  very
dry ;  no  thirst ;  cannot  feel  the  passage  of  water  through  the  mouth  or
throat  when  drinking  (after  ten  minutes),'. — Mouth  and  tongue  very  dry,
with  great  difficulty  in  swallowing  (after  one  and  a  quarter  hours),*. — Diy-
ness  in  the  mouth,  and  especially  in  the  throat,  reached  such  a  degree  that


616  ATROPINUM.

ou  attempting  to  eat  a  piece  of  bread  and  butter  he  could  not  swallow  it,
unless  he  took  water  (two  to  three  hours),". — Dry  mouth  and  fauces,'. —
Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  fauces  increased,  so  that  swallowing  became
almost  impossible,'. — Gradually  increasing  dryness  in  mouth  and  fauces
(in  two  hours),  which  became  so  severe  in  one  hour  that  he  could  not  speak
a  word,  and  the  tongue  almost  stuck  to  the  roof  of  the  mouth,'. — Could
swallow  no  breakfast  on  account  of  deficiency  of  buccal  secretions  to  moisten
the  food  (second  day),''.^Had  great  difficulty  in  swallowing  food,  ou  ac-
count of  non-secretion  of  salivA  ;  food  will  remain  in  the  mouth  for  minutes
without  becoming  moistened  in  the  least  (after  one  hour),^ — While  the
appear  quiescent,  and  the  morbid  state  of  the  tongue  and  palate  renders  it
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  excite  a  flow  of  saliva  by  gustatory  impres-
sions; but  they  readily  pour  out  abundance  of  secretion  when  an  appropri-
ate stimulus  reaches  them.  In  a  patient  who  was  suffering  from  severe
neuralgia  of  the  face,  associated  with  profuse  salivation,  the  secretion  was
in  no  degree  diminished  when,  as  occasionally  happens,  a  severe  paroxysm
of  pain  came  on  during  the  action  of  a  full  dose  of  Atropia,^ — Stoppage  of
secretion  of  saliva ;  smoking  does  not  bring  any  saliva  iuto  the  mouth,^ —
[270.]  After  continuing  about  two  hours,  the  dryness  of  the  mouth  is  sud-
denly relieved  by  the  appearance  of  a  viscid  acid  secretion  of  an  offensive
odor,  like  the  sweat  of  the  feet.  The  mouth  becomes  foul  and  clammy,
and  a  bitter  coppery  taste  is  complained  of,^^Excessive  secretion  of  saliva
(second  day),^. — Everything  tastes  salt  (after  one  hour),^ — Same  slimy
taste  in  the  mouth  (after  three  hours),^ — Slight  sweetish  taste  in  the
mouth,". — Food  all  tastes-  alike,  like  sawdust;  tastes  dry  and  cannot  be
swallowed  except  by  washing  it  down  with  some  liquid,  owing  to  the  defi-
ciency of  secretion  of  saliva  (after  two  hours), I — Food  is  tasteless  (after
half  an  hour),^ — Difficult  speech,'. — Speech  thick,  probably  from  dryness
of  the  mouth  and  throat,". — [280.]  After  many  days'  action  of  Atropia,
there  manifested  itself  a  slowness  and  embarrassment  of  articulation  of
words,^l — Frequent  stuttering,  especially  at  words  difficult  to  pronounce
(never  used  to  do  so),  (sixth  day),'*. — Articulation  indistinct,  rapid,  and
chattering,™.

Throat. — Slight  throbbing  or  heaving  sensation  in  the  carotids,". —
Mucous  membrane  of  the  throat  slightly  darker  than  in  health,  and  pre-
sents a  mottled  appearance  (second  day),'. — Constant  choking  in  the  throat,
which  was  soon  followed  by  an  almost  complete  inability  to  swallow,  with
a  feeling  as  if  seized  by  the  throat,'. — In  a  few  minutes  a  feeling  of  dryness
in  the  throat,  causing  constant  inclination  to  cough,'''. — On  the  third  day  he
complained  of  sore  throat,  and  inability  to  pass  his  water,'". — Intense  feel-
ing of  dryness  in  the  throat,  which  abated  toward  morning,". — Shortly
after  taking  the  drug,  a  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  throat,^. — [290.]  Dry-
ness of  the  throat  and  feeling  of  pressure  in  the  anterior  and  superior  cere-
bral regions,^. — Great  dryness  of  throat  and  mouth  (twenty  to  forty  miu-
utes),'.^Violent  burning  in  throat,". — Burning  in  throat  and  stomach,".—
Slight  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  throat  (after  half  an  hour),\ — Sorcuess  of
throat  increasing  till  quite  hoarse  (after  eleven  hours),^ — Throat  has  been
quite  sore  for  the  past  six  hours ;  pain  upon  swallowing  (second  day),*. —
Throat  feels  raw  and  .irritated  (second  day),^. — Throat  feels  raw  and  sore
(after  seven  hours),^ — Drops  of  white  mucus  sticking  to  the  uvula  (after
ten  minutes),'. — ^[300.]  Fauces  and  uvula  red  (after  ten  minutes),^ — Slight
dryness  of  the  fauces,''. — Dryness  of  the  fauces  (in  two  hours),'. — Feeling


ATROPINUM.  617

of  dryness  in  the  throat,  causing  constant  inclination  to  cough ;  swallowing
water  affords  relief,''. — Swallowing  difficult,  but  not  impossible,'^ — Feeling
in  mouth  and  throat  made  her  think  she  "  could  not  swallow,"  but  when
impressed  with  the  necessity  of  so  doing,  she  drank  with  avidity  the  warm
water  offered,  though  at  first  it  seemed  quite  difficult,™. — *  Swallowing  ap-
peared to  give  pain,  manifested  by  grimaces  and  increased  spasms  of  the  facial
muscles^". — *  There  was  great  difficulty  in  getting  the  child  to  swallow,  each
attempt  to  do  so  producing  paroxysms  of  suffocation,  which  appeared  to
threaten  his  existence,^'. — Difficult  deglutition,  every  attempt  to  swallow  caused
suffocation^^. -^Dysphagia,  parallel  with  the  dryness  of  the  fauces,'. — [310.]
*  Difficulty  in  swallowing  on  account  of  dryness  of  the  throat,^.

Stomach' — With  constant  hunger,  was  soon  satisfied,  the  food  seemed
tasteless,'. — Increased  desire  for  salt  food  (anchovies,  herrings,  smoked
meats,  etc.),'.^-Ate  a  light  supper,  having  to  wash  the  food  down  with
water  (after  seven  hours),*. — Aversion  to  meat  and  beer ;  beer  increased
the  empty  feeling  in  the  stomach  and  caused  a  painful  pressure ;  this  aver-
sion to  beer  and  the  unpleasant  symptoms  caused  by  it  continued  through
the  whole  proving,'. — Appetite  wanting  (second  day),'^ — Less  of  appetite
(becomes  after  the  drug-influence  violent  hunger),'. — No  thirst,  in  spite  of
the  dryness  of  the  throat,'. — Thirst  moderate  (second  day),'*. — Frequently
asks  for  Water  to  drink,". — [320.]  Thirst  greatly  increased,  threefold,'.
— Frequent  empty  eructations  without  relief,'. — He  had  eructations  tasting
like  the  yolk  of  eggs,  at  intervals  through  the  day  (after  ten  hours),^ —
Nausea  (after  quarter  of  an  hour),*. — Slight  nausea  (after  one  hour),^. —
Slight  nausea  (after  ten  minutes),". — Slight  nausea,  lasting  but  a  few  min-
utes ;  these  coming  on  again  after  an  interval  of  half  an  hour  (first  day),^.
— Nausea,  and  transient  inclination  to  vomit,'. — Fruitless  vomiting  of
colorless  mucus,  and  afterward  of  green  bifcter  fluid  after  the  morning  ver-
tigo,'.— Vomiting,  readily  induced  by  drinking  warm  fluids  (after  two  and
a  half  hours),*. — [330.]  Vomiting  after  drinking  milk,'". — Hurried  from
bed  and  vomited  profusely;  easy  vomiting  of  a  watery  fluid,  tasting  bitter
at  first,  nearly  tasteless  afterwards  ;  during  the  vomiting,  very  severe  stick-
ing pains  in  the  umbilical  region  ;  vomited  about  five  minutes,  and  then
staggered  back  to  bed  (after  eleven  hours),*. — Great  distress>iu  the  epigas-
trium', which  seemed  indescribable,™. — Uncomfortable  sensation  in  stomach
(in  fifteen  minutes),'. — Uneasy  sensation  in  the  stomach,  accompanied  by
frequent  empty  eructations,  affording  no  relief.  The  uneasiness,  which
gradually  became  associated  with  nausea  and  retching,  increased  to  a  press-
ing, sticking,  and  contractive  pain,  accompanied  with  frequent  empty  eruc-
tations. This  spasm  of  the  stomach,  which  was  attended  with  paleness  of
the  face,  slight  perspiration,  singing  in  the  ears,  and  an  aching  pain  in  the
forehead,  lasted  two  hours,'. — Beer  caused  a  constrictive  pain  in  the  stom-
ach like  a  stomach-cramp,  which  obliged  him  to  sit  down,  was  increased  by
walking ;  with  copious  eructations  of  air ;  though  this  pain  steadily  increased
it  completely  disappeared  after  three  hours,'.— Some  sensitiveness  to  very
strong  pressure  in  gastric  region  (after  fourteen  hours),'*. — Much  relief
after  vomiting,  produced  by  copious  draughts  of  warm  water,™.

Abdomen. — Abdomen  a  little  tense  (after  fourteen  hours),'*. — Abdo-
men swollen  and  tense,  but  not  tympanitic;  upon  pretty  firm  pressure  upon
it,  patient  gave  signs  of  suffering,'".

Stool  and  A.nus.—[3i0!]  Paralysis  of  the  sphincters  of  the  rectum
and  bladder,'. — Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani  with  involuntary  fecal  dis-
charges (in  three  patients,  from  IJ  grain  and  upwards),'. — Hurried  from


618  ATROPINUM.

bed  by  urgent  desire  to  stool,  followed  by  very  copious  watery  stool  coming
with  a  gush.  This  stool  relieved  the  pain  in  the  umbilical  region  (after
thirteen  hours),*. — Another  copious  stool  (after  fourteen  hours),*. — Arose
and  immediately  had  another  copious,  watery  stool  (second  day),*. — During
stool,  felt  badly  generally,  weak  and  terribly  nervous,  with  general  perspi-
ration,™.— In  the  stool,  thin  fluid  seemed  to  be  mixed  with  urine  (after
three  hours),'^ — Stool,  only  two  to  four  days  (in  health,  daily),\ — No
evacuation  for  five  days,  and  then  only  induced  artificially,'^

TJi'inary  Oryans.—T&aesnms  and  frequent  desire  to  pass  urine
(after  four  and  a  half  hours),*. — [350.]  Frequent  desire  to  micturate,  pass-
ing only  a  moderate  quantity  of  urine,''. — Constant  and  frequent  desire  to
pass  water,  but  inability  to  do  so," — Incontinence  of  urine,  and  involun-
tary fecal  discharges,'. — Urine  profuse ;  first  at  6  p.m.  (after  twelve  hours),'*.
— Has  had  profuse  urination  for  the  past  twenty-four  hours  (second  day),^.
— Urine  passed  slowly  and  increased  in  quantity  (after  three  hours),^. —
Frequent  micturition  at  night,". — On  the  night  of  the  first  day,  between  10
and  1  o'clock,  was  compelled  to  urinate  as  often  as  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,
without  pain.  The  quantity  voided  was  profuse  and  almost  colorless,™. —
Urine  and  thirst  increased,'.-— Urine  not  increased,  notwithstanding  the
dryness  of  the  skin,'.— [360.J  Passed  very  little  urine,'. — On  the  fourth
day  he  passed  his  water  in  drops  and  with  great  difficulty,'". — Catheterisra
was  required  during  the  next  four  days,'. — Dysuria,  or  more  or  less  com-
plete retention  of  urine  for  two  or  three  hours,  or  longer,  invariably  follows
the  action  of  a  full  medicinal  dose  of  the  drug,'. — No  urine  for  niae  hours
(first  day),". — No  urine  passed  for  thirteen  hours,^'. — He  had  passed  no
water  since  the  preceding  evening ;  bladder  not  distended,'". — Urine  clear
and  corresponded  in  amount  to  the  water  drank  (increased),'. — Urine  acid,
dark,  brownish, 'without  sediment,  and  containing  Atropine,^^.

Respiratory  Apparatus. — Dry  tickling  cough,  periodic,  with  a
sore  feeling  in  the  throat  and  pressure  on  the  chest ;  excited  by  speaking
or  smoking,'. — Has  had  several  paroxysms  of  coughing,  caused  by  the  col-
lection of  mucus  iu  the  throat,  occurring  once  iu  fifteen  or  thirty  minutes,
attended  with  the  difficult  expectoration  of  a  thick,  tough  mucus;  after
coughing,  burning  in  the  throat  (second  day),'. — [370.]  Small  quantity  of
thick,  frothy,  white  sputa  is  ejected  at  intervals  (after  ten  minutes),". —
Huskiness  of  voice  (twenty  to  forty  minutes),'. — She  tried  to  call  out  but
her  voice  refused  her,". — The  voice  is  sometimes  weakened,  or  there  may
be  complete  aphonia,™. — Sensation  of  choking  in  an  hour  after  the  first
application,™. — Respiration  28,".

Chest. — Feeling  of  warmth  as  of  a  glow  through  the  thoracic  region
(after  half  an  hour),*.

Heart  and  Pulse. — ^Heart's  action  irregular  and  apparently  ob-
structed,".— Weak  doses  accelerate  the  heart  and  increase  blood  pressure  ;
poisonous  doses  have  the  reverse  effect,'. — Distressing  fluttering  sensation
in  the  cardiac  region,'. — Pulse  of  fair  fulness  and  strength,'". — [380.]  Pulse
very  weak  (after  two  hours),'. — After  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  an  accelera-
tion of  the  pulse  from  20  to  70  beats ;  no  apparent  change  in  volume,  but
a  decided  increase  in  the  force  of  the  cardiac  contractions  and  of  the  arte-
rial tone,'. — Pulse  accelerated,  increased  in  volume  and  power  (after  ten
and  twenty  minute.s) ;  if  previously  slow  and  feeble  or  intermitting,  the
change  will  be  very  decided ;  the  acceleration  amounts  to  20  to  25  beats
per  minute;  it  will  take  place  suddenly  and  attain  its  maximum  within  one
or  two  minutes;  after  being  maintained  for  half  an  hour  a  gradual  decline


ATROPINUM.  619

takes  place,  and  the  heart  soon  returns  to  its  usual  state,  and  continues  to
beat  as  quickly  and  powerfully  as  before ;  just  as  the  pulse  rises  a  slight
giddiness  is  often  perceptible,*. — Pulse  sank  at  first  ten  beats,  but  soon
began  to  rise,  and  in  an  hour  and  a  half  had  increased  forty  beats,^ — As
moisture  returns  to  the  mouth,  the  pulse  is  observed  to  fall,  and  it  now
rapidly  resumes  its  ordinary  rate  and  character,^ — She  was  able  to  rise  in
the  morning,  when  the  pulse  was  frequent,  small,  and  irregular,  and  she
complained  of  lassitude,*. — Pulse  150,  small  and  weak  (after  one  hour),*. —
Pulse  accelerated  to  140,  with  increased  tone,  but  diminished  volume,™. —
Pulse  138  (after  one  hour),^. — Pulse  1-36 ;  heart's  action  greatly  increased
(after  one  hour),^— [390.]  Pulse  132  (after  one  hour),=.— Pulse  130,  but
not  so  full  (after  ten  minutes),'. — Pulse  130,  and  small,". — Pulse  124,^*. —
Pulse  116  (after  half  an  hour),*.— Pulse  112  (after  one  hour),*.— Pulse  112
(after  one  and  a  quarter  hours),*. — Pulse  112;  is  hot  and  feverish  (after
three  hours),^ — Pulse  112,  lying  down.  Pulse  had  been  taken  until  now
when  the  prover  was  standing  (after  two  hours),^ — Pulse  110,  irregular,
generally  full,  but  varying  much  at  intervals,". — [400.]  After  twenty  min-
utes, pulse  110,  unchanged  in  volume  and  power,*. — After  one  hour,  pulse
108,  unchanged,*.— Pulse  108  (after  forty-eight  hours),*.— Pulse  106-110  ;
regular,  somewhat  fuller ;  pulsations  more  defined  (after  fourteen  hours),^*.
— Pulse  104  (after  one  hour),l — Pulse  104;  regular,  not  full,  easily  com-
pressed ;  the  single  pulsations  not  sharply  defined  (after  three  and  a  half
hours),^*. — Pulse  96,  full  and  soft ;  has  been  full  and  soft  for  several  hours
(after  seven  hours),^. — Pulse  86,  full  and  soft  (second  day),'. — Pulse  76
(after  twelve  hours),". — Pulse,  72 ;  full,  distinct  (after  twenty-four  liours),'*.
—[410.]  Pulse  60  (after  thirteen  hours),^

Neck  and,  SacJe. — Cold  sensation  along  the  spine,'.

Extremities  in  General. — Welkness  of  the  limbs,'. — Partial
paralysis  of  the  arms  and  legs  (after  eight  hours),*. — In  proportion  as  the
doses  of  Atropia  augment,  the  limbs,  and  especially  the  lower,  though  still
under  control  of  the  will,  become  heavy  and  inactive,^^ — The  feeling  of
numbness  and  heaviness  in  the  limbs  was  so  great  that  she  feared  the  result
of  going  to  sleep  lest  she  should  never  awaken,^". — Extremities  cold,".

Tipper  Extremities.— Const-Ant,  restless  throwing  about  of  the
arms,  hands,  and  fingers  of  both  sides,  similar  to  the  movements  in  typhus
delirium,'*. — Continual  opening  and  closing  the  hands,  and  grasping  at
imaginary  objects  in  the  air  (first  day),''. — Hands  feel  smooth  and  glassy
(after  ten  minutes),'. — [420.]  Hands  feel  dry  and  glossy  (after  two  hours),^
— Slight  numbness  and  prickling  in  the  hands,  extending  to  the  tips  of  the
fingers.  The  prickling  soon  ceased,  but  the  numbness  continued  and  in-
creased, till  in  a  short  time  there  was  complete  loss  of  sensation  (first  day),l
— Hands  cold  (after  two  hours),*. — Numbness  of  fingers,  with  partial  loss
of  sensation ;  jcannot  tell  when  I  am  holding  small  objects  in  the  hand
(after  two  hours),^. — Numbness  and  partial  loss  of  sensation  in  the  fingers  ;
feels  as  though  he  were  holding  a  book  in  his  hands,  which  he  is  afraid  he
will  drop  ;  upon  taking  a  small  object,  as  a  pin,  into  his  hand,  it  appears
to  him  as  though  there  were  five  or  six  of  them  (after  one  hour),*.

Lower  Extremities. — Dragged  the  legs  when  compelled  to  walk
(after  two  hours),*. — Stiffness  in  left  knee  and  lower  leg  and  in  right
great  toe,  though  no  pain  (second  day),'*. — Has  had  slight  jactitation  of
muscles  of  leg  (after  thirteen  hours),*. — Has  awakened  several  times  in
the  night  by  spasmodic  jerkings  of  the  muscles  of  the  legs  (first  night),".
— [430.]  Frequently  wakened  from  sleep  by  sudden  kicking  out  of  the


620  ATEOPINUM.

feet,'.— Her  "  limbs  felt  like  sticks ;"  thought  she  could  not  use  them  to
walk  across  the  room  to  the  sofa,  but  with  aid  did  so  with  considerable
difBculty,™.

Generalities. — After  moderate  doses  the  whole  circulation  is  iuci-eased
in  force  and  rapidity.  The  force  of  the  larger  arteries  is  good,  and  if  the
circulation  was  previously  slow,  we  find  that  they  are  usually  increased  in
volume  as  well  as  in  tone,^ — Different  parts  of  the  body  were  affected  with
spasms,'". — In  women  slight  occasional  starlings,'. — Occasional  jactitation,''.
— Convulsive  trembling  in  one  or  another  muscle  but  never  cramp;  as
consciousness  disappeared  these  movements  became  automatic,  as  carphology,
convulsions,'. — For  the  past  two  hours  has  had  occasional  spasms  of  the
voluntary  muscles,  particularly  those  of  the  extremities  (after  eight  hours),*.
— During  the  last  half  hour  has  had  several  slight  spasms  of  the  muscles
of  the  limbs  and  one  of  the  entire  body  (after  four  hours),'.— At  times
during  the  night  when  nearly  lost  in  sleep,  she  would  suddenly  start  as  if
frightened,'"'. — Jerkings  of  m.uscles,  particularly  those  of  the  legs,  arms,  and
face.  When  attempting  to  drink  from  a  glass,  arm  suddenly  contracted
and  the  water  was  spilled.  While  walking,  the  flexor  muscles  of  one  or
both  legs  would  suddenly  contract,  throwing  me  to  the  ground  ;  do  not  dare
to  walk  across  the  room  for  fear  of  falling  (second  day),^ — [440.]  Clonic
cramp  in  face  and  extremities  (moves  arms  forward  in  front  of  chest),'". —
Clonic  spasms  of  the  bideps  flexor  cubiti  and  of  the  muscles  of  the  jaw,'°.
— Spasms  not  diminished  ;  could  not  hold  a  vessel  of  fluid  in  his  hands  nor
carry  it  to  his  mouth,'". — The  spasms  of  the  muscles  above  spoken  of  were
increased  by  disturbing  the  patient ;  when  left  to  himself,  they  come  on  at
intervals  of  two  or  three  minutes,'". — Busy  with  his  hands  pulling  the  bed-
clothes about,". — Able  to  walk  home,  a  distance  of  a  mile ;  but  when  he
reached  the  house  he  could  not^ut  the  key  into  the  door,  "  because  he  felt
so  stupid  and  shaky  in  the  hand,"  and  had  to  seek  assistance,^ — Displays
considerable  strength,  but  his  raovenents  are  unsteady,  as  if  he  had  lost
some  control  over  his  limbs ;  for,' when  he  tried  to  wipe  mucus  from  his
lips  he  raised  his  right  hand  with  apparent  difficulty  a  short  way  from  his
mouth,  and  then,  with  an  effort  and  rather  unsteady  movement,  raised  his
left  hand  and  touched  his  lips,". — It  was  impossible  to  keep  him  in  bed,
and  very  difficult  to  prevent  his  walking  about  (after  two  hours),". —
Restless,  constantly  tosses  about  in  bed  and  moves  the  head  to  and  fro,''. —
Restlessness,  and  frequently  great  nervous  agitation  of  mind  and  body,^ —
[450.]  Restless  and  .slept  none,'". — Continued  tossing  about  and  changing
position  in  bed ;  did  not  sleep  any  till  next  morning,^ — Restlessness,  a
desire  and  inclination  to  perform  all  movements  hastily  and  rapidly,  be-
coming at  last  a  desire  to  fight,  so  that  the  two  provers  who  at  the  same
time  and  place  had  taken  the  same  dose,  actually  began  to  scuffle  and
wrestle,  which  they  never  before  did,'. — Has  been  nervous,  wakeful  for  the
last  three  hours  (after  eleven  hours),*. — Although  I  could  move  my  body
and  limbs,  it  was  only  by  a  great  effort,  and  when  I  raised  my  arms  they
nerves,  and  I  watched  with  some  interest  the  return  of  power  as  the  night
advanced,". — Gait  unsteady,'*. — Gait  weak,  tottering,  the  person  must  at
last  lie  down,". — Staggering,  or  complete  inability  to  walk,^ — Very  weak
and  unsteady  in  his  gait  (sixth  day),'*. — Very  weak,  in  the  open  air,^. —
[460.]  Great  weakness  of  muscular  action,  some  transient  but  general
trembling  of  the  limbs,  so  that  the  gait  was  tottering,  like  a  drunken
person,'. — Morning,  felt  very  weak,  could  not  decide  to  rise;  lay  in  a  half


ATEOPINUM.  621

dreamy  sleep ;  after  he  was  dressed  great  desire  to  lie  down  again/. —
Inability  to  rise,  although  he  makes  efforts  to  do  so,". — Patient  keeps  the
recumbent  posture  on  his  back,  and  only  at  times  makes  attempts  (which
are  easily  repressed)  to  rise  up  and  get  out  of  bed,'". — Lies  on  left  side,'". —
Sight  and  hearing  morbidly  sensitive  (1  gr.),^ — Daring  the  succeeding
night  he  was  morbidly  sensitive  to  sounds  and  objects,  with  symptoms  akin
to  the  early  stage  of  meningitis.  Pulse  in  the  morning  108,  furred  tongue
and  hot,  dry  skin,''^ — Felt  faint,  and  greatly  in  need  of  fresh  air,™. — On
asking  loudly  if  he  had  any  pain  in  the  head,  he  replied,  "  No  pains  what-
ever," ". — Torpor  and  paralytic  trembling,^ — [470.]  Anaesthesia,  absence  of
all  pain,  slight  sensibility  to  painful  pressure,  only  touch  seems  very  little
influenced,'. — Thrusting  pins  into  the  skin  causes  no  sensation  of  pain;
water,  either  warm  or  cold,  glides  over  the  surface  of  the  body  without
moistening  it  or  producing  any  appreciable  sensation.  This  anaesthesia
continued  several  hours  (first  day),". — Lost  the  power  to  estimate  distances,
either  by  the  eye  or  touch  ;  touching  an  object  does  not  produce  the  slightest
sensation.  Upon  attempting  to  place  the  hand  upon  a  table,  cannot  tell
when  the  hand  touches  it  (first  day),". — Was  unable  to  feel  the  arms  and
legs,  and  being  alarmed  called  for  help  (after  one-quarter  of  an  hour),^ —
General  discomfort,".

Skin. — Redness  of  the  skin  (after  thirty  to  sixty  minutes),^ — Skin  burn-
ing hot  and  dry,  red ;  child  scratched  it,'°. — Skin  feels  hot  and  dry  ;  lips
covered  with  dry  mucus,". — Skin  very  dry  and  hot  with  a  general  feeling
of  biting  and  tickling  as  from  vermin  (forty  minutes),'. — Skin  hot  and
pungent,".^[480.]  Skin  pungently  hot  and  dry,  and  covered  with  a  rash
closely  resembling  that  of  scarlatina,  which  the  child  was  frequently  scratch-
ing,".— The  skin  of  the  whole  body  began  to  feel  tinged  (?)  and  swollen
(after  fifteen  minutes).  In  about  an  hour  and  a  half  it  was  covered  with  a  ,
rash  precisely  similar  to  that  of  scarlatina,'*.

Sleep  and  Dreams. — Gaped  very  often,  and  said  he  should  soon
be  asleep  if  he  were  in  bed,*. — Tendency  to  sleep  (after  one  hour),*. — ■
Somnolency,*. — Somnolency  and  perversion  of  ideas,". — Somnolency,  with
sometimes  a  little  flushing  of  the  face  (from  gr.  g'jj),*. — Feels  drowsy  and
not  inclined  to  speak  or  move  about  (second  day),^  —  Felt  sleepy  and
a  little  giddy,*. — Heaviness,  drowsiness,  or  actual  sleep,  with  a  great
tendency  to  dreamy  delirium,*. — [490J  Had  slept,  and  continued  very
drowsy,*. — Was  restless  and  uneasy  through  the  night,  but  slept  consider-
able of  the  time  (second  day) ,^ — Was  very  restless  through  the  night;
dreamed  of  running  horses ;  of  playing  baseball ;  of  amputating  a  man's
leg;  saw  dim,  shadowy  forms  sitting  or  standing  by  the  bedside  or  moving
in  the  air  (first  night),'*. — Arose  feeling  uneasy  and  unrefreshed  (second
day),". — Arose,  feeling  weary  and  unrefreshed  (second  day),^. — Insomnia,*.
— Insomnia  (after  eight  hours),*. — Wakeful  and  delirious  (after  eight
hours),*. — Sleeplessness  till  one  at  night  and  then  frightful  dreams,'. —
He  will  have  little  or  no  inclination  to  sleep,  but  instead  of  this  a  little
moderate  delirium  (from  gr.  -j'^),*. — [500.]  Troubled  by  dreams,  and  at
intervals  disturbed  by  a  start.  A  fancied  noise  is  a  common  cause  of
awakening,  and  at  these  times  the  patient  generally  manifests  a  little  de-
lirium,*.— Dreams  pleasant,  of  flying  in  the  air,  etc.,  so  that  he  woke  in  the
morning  happy  and  continued  so  the  whole  day,'. — Frightful  dreams;  wake
from  sleep  three  times  in  the  night,'. — Dreams  of  being  frightened,  pursued,
great  exertion,  etc.,  etc.,  all  of  which  fatigued  him,  some  of  which  made
him  powerless,  and  he  rejoiced,  when  wakened  by  a  loud  cry,  to  be  rid  of


622  ATROPINUM.

his  unnatural  state. His  wife  said  that  he  was  restless  and  sighed  during
sleep,^.

Fever.  — Skin  rather  cool  than  warm  on  forehead  and  head,". — Chilli
ness  and  cramp,  arid  tingling  of  the  extremities  (after  one  hour),*. —
Internal  coldness  with  external  burning  heat  of  the  whole  body ;  toward
6  P.M.,  it  became  so  great  that  he  was  apprehensive,  and  so  restless  that  he
could  not  remain  anywhere;  he  hurried  home  expecting  misfortune;  scarcely
had  he  entered  the  house  when  he  had  to  seek  the  open  air,  only  to  return
again  to  the  house ;  at  7^  p.m.,  he  lay  down  hoping  that  the  restlessness
would  go  away  by  sleep ;  could  not  sleep  till  toward  eleven ;  he  tossed  about
in  bed,  with  audible  and  perceptible  palpitation  and  anxiety  as  great  as  if
he  had  committed  a  great  crime,'. — General  diffusion  of  warmth,^ — Skin
hot  (after  forty-eight  hours),*. — The  skin  is  hot  and  pungent,  face  flushed,
veins  of  forehead  tinged,  and  head  burning,''. — [510,]  Slight  elevation  of
the  temperature  of  the  surface,  rarely  exceeding  1°,  and  a  still  •  slighter
and  less  appreciable  rise  of  the  internal  temperature  of  the  body,*. —
Temperature  100°  (after  twenty-four  hours),'*. — Temperature  102°  (after
fourteen  hours),'*. — Temperature  frequently  varied,  now  glowing  heat,  now
cold  over  the  back  (cold  predominated),'. — -Alternate  heat  and  chill,  a
violent  tension  of  the  chest,  with  dyspnoea,  and  feebleness  of  the  pulse
(from  tasting  Atropia),". — Atropia  checks  sweating,  whether  physiological
or  morbid,".

Conditions. — Aggravation. — {Morning),  Talked  confusedly,  etc. ;  on
rising,  vertigo  ;  on  waking,  very  dizzy  ;  on  waking,  sticking  in  left  temporal
region ;  felt  very  weak. — {Night),  Immediately  upon  closing  eyes,  after
retiring,  delirium ;  agitation,  etc. ;  frequent  micturition. — {Toward  6  p.m.).
Internal  coldness,  etc.,  of  the  whole  body. — {In  open  air).  Very  weak. —
{Beer),  Caused  pain  in  stomach. — (  Upon  closing  eyes),  Mind  becomes  con-
fused, etc. — {After  coughing),  Burning  in  throat. — {After  drinking  milk).
Vomiting. — {Every  motion).  Pains  in  base  of  skull,  etc. — {Periodic),  Dry
cough,  etc. — {Each  pulsation  of  heart),  Pain  in  eyes,  etc. — {Rising),  Vertigo,
etc.  —  {Stepping),  Pains  in  base  of  skull,  etc. —  {Turning  head  quick).
Vertigo. — {During,  the  vomiting),  Pain  in  umbilical  region. — {On  waking).
Vertigo,  etc. — (  Walking),  Severe  sticking  pains ;  pain  in  stomach. — {Drink-
ing warm  fluids),  Vonliting.

Amelioration.  —  {Evening),  Pains  in  head  disappear.  —  {Towards
morning),  Dryness  in  throat. — {Toward  11  a.m.).  Pains  in  head. — {Going
into  open  air),  Confusion  in  head. — {After  moving  about  in  open  aig-).  Stick-
ing in  left  temporal  region. — (Sitting),  Feels  better. — {Standing),  Feels
better.
