Amadis of Gaul, Vol. II
Robert Southey, trans. (1803) (London: Longman)
From the Spanish of Garci Rodriguez de Montalvo (1508), after the 14th-c. Portuguese original
Source: Internet Archive (Google Books scan)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Foundational Iberian chivalric romance. OCR-derived from 1803 edition, lightly cleaned.

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


'tt


C f>Mi4U j Ifiiitlj'^ 'S3 7



' \'vr>j



ro



r-KgjBif


FRY COLLECTION


PRESENTED BY

THE MISSES ESTHER CATHARINE,

SUSAN MARY AND JOSEPHINE FRY

FROM THE LIBRARY OF

THE LATE JOSEPH FORREST FRY

AND SUSANNA FRY



^tmatKs; of ^attl



• ftp



m^»€(B fLmt^m.



IN FOUR VOLUMES*.



VOL. 1.



LONDON :
PriBtcdby N. Biggs, Crane-court, Flect-strcet,
»0» T. N. LOKGMAN AND O. RBES^ PATBH-

NOSTER ROW.

1803.



/'<^

O'



^uuivuasiTY


PREFACE.



r



Aniadis of Gaul was written by Vasco Lo-
beira, a Portugoeze, who was born at
Porto, fought at Aijubarrota where he was
knighted upon the field of battle by King
Joam of Good Memory, and died at Elvas^
1403; where he formed a Morgado, an en-
tailed and unalienable estate, which after-
wards descended to the Abreus of Alcara-
pinha.

The Spanish version, which is the oldest
extant, is by Garciordoaez de Montalvo;
Regidor of Medina del Campo. He says
he has corrected it from the old originals,
which were corrupted by different and bad
writers, and badly composed in an ancient
VOL. I. a



n



fashion ; that he has abridged it of many
Siipei*fluous words^ and inserted others of
a more polished and elegant style.

The Comte de Tressan has claimed the work
as a. French production. It is doing too
much honour to Vasco Lobeira, he says, to
consider him as the author. The French
translation by Nicolas d'Herberay was in-
deed made from the Castilian, but there is
reason to believe that he only restored it to
the literature of his own country, from
which it had first been taken by the Spa-
niards. D'Herberay remembered certain
manuscripts of Amadis in the Picard lan-
guage, and these he thought might be
the originals which Montalvo modernized.
These manuscripts, says the Gomte, might
very easily fall into the hands of the Spa-
niards. Philip the *Good, or Charles the



aa



* It is indeed probable that Anadis was in the Duke
cf Buigundy's Library, for Philip the Gcod married



ill



libM might have found them when they
carried their arms into Picardy ; thus they
might get into the library of Marie of Bur-
gundy, and her son the Archduke Phi-
lip might carry them into Spain. The
Comte does not found his opinion entirely
upon this concatenation of contingencies ;
iie thinks he has seen a manuscript of Ama-
dis, in the Romance, or what D'Herberay
calls the Picard language, among Queen
Christina's collection in the Vaticajn ; from
the manifest superiority of the three first
books to all the continuation, he argues
that they cannot have been written in the
same country; and from their good taste
and high tone of sentiment he proves that



Isabel daughter oF Joam of Portugal. The children of
Joam were distingQished for their love of literatUTT*
If she carried with her this Romance, it is not unl.ikcly
that a French translation may have been made, anterior
to Monulvo's version.

a2



IV



they must he originally French. This is in-
deed French reasoning !

Had the Comte de Tressan been versed in
Portugueze literature, he might have found
one single evidence in favour of his assump-
tion. In the Agiologio Lusitano, T. 1^ p.
480, Joze Cardoso says, that Pedro de Lo-
beira translated the History of Amadis de Gaul
from Jthe French language, by order of the
Infants Dom Pedro, son of King Joam I.
He calls him Pedro, says Bai-boza, that he
may be wrong in every thing. The first vo-
lume of the Agiologio was printed in 1652.
With this single exception, the Portugueze
have always ascribed the work to Vasco
Lobeira; and the authority of this tradi-
tion would alone outweigh all the possibi-
lities of the French writer. It is substantiated
by the work itself, apd by old and unques-
tionable testimony.

At the end of the 41st chapter. Vol. 2. p.42,
it is said, that Briolania would have given her-



self and her kingdom to Amadis^ but he told
her right loyally how he was another's. In the
Spanish version^ fF. 72, this passage foUowsy
*' But though the Infante Don Alfonso of Por-
tugal^ having pity upon this fair Damsel, or-
dered it to be set down after another man-
ner, that was what was his good pleasure,
and not what actually was written of their
loves ; and they relate that history of these
loves thus, though with more reason faith
is to be given to what we have before said.
Briolania being restored to her kingdom
and enjoying the company of Amadls and
Agrayes, persisted in her love : and seeing
no way whereby she could accomplish her
mortal desires, she spake very secretly with
the Damsel, to whom Amadis, and Galaor
and Agrayes had each promised a boon if she
would guide Don Galaor where -be could
find the Knight of the Forest. This Damsel
was now returned, and to her she disclosed
her mind, and besought her with many tears
to advise some remedy for that strong pas-
sion. The Damsel then in pity to her Lady,

a3



VI



demanded as the performance of his promise
from Amadis^ that be should not go out of a
certain tower, 'till he had a spn or daughter
by Briolania ; and they say^ tbat^ upon this,
Amadis went into the tower because he
would not break his word, and there because
be would not consent to Briolania's desii^es
he remained, losing both his appetite, and
his sleep, 'till his life was in great danger*
This being known in the court of King
Lisuarte, his Lady Oriana^ that she might
not lose him, sent and commanded him to
grant the Damsel's desire, and he having
this command, and considering that by no
other means could he recover his liberty or
keep his word, took that fair Queen for his
Leman^ and had by her a son and a daugh-
ter at one birth. But it was not so, unless
Briolania^seeing how Amadis was drawing
nigh to death in the Tower, told the Damsel
to release him of his promise, if be would
only remain 'till Don Galaor was arrived ;
doing thus, that she might so long enjoy
the sight of that fair and famous Kniglu,



VII



whom when she did not behold she thoi^ht
herself in great darkness. This carries with
it more reason why it should he beUeved^ be-*
cause this fait Queen was afterwards mar-
ried to Don Galaoo as the fourth book re*
lates."

Here then it -appears that an Infante of Por*
tugal commanded some alteration to be made
in the story : because he was dtpleased that /
Briolania should love in vain. There exists

a

a Sonnet ascribed to an Infante of Portugal^
and addressed to Vasco Lobeira^ praising
him as the author of Amadis^ and objecting
to this very part of the story. It is thus
printed in a work entitled Obras inediias do$
fiossos insignes Poetas dddas a luz por Anto-
nio L&urenfo Caminha. Lisboa 1791.

SONETO.

Feitopoh Stnhor Infante Dom Pedro, Jilho do Sen^
hor Rey Dom Joam primeiro, Outros dhem que
he daSenhorEey Dom Affonso quarto, mais provu'

a 4



Vlll.

se quefoi do antecedente, porque o Jjulera morreo
no anno de 1403.

Bom Vaaco de Lubera> e de grau seiu
De pram que vos avades bem contado
O feito de Amadis p namorado^
Sem que dar ende por contarirem> ^
£ tanto vos apprdve, e a tambem.
Que vos seredes sempre ende loado.
£ antre os homes bos por home(ado>
Que'Tos erau adiantej e que era bem.
Mais porque vos fizeste a formosa
Brioranja amar endoado hu nom>
£sto cobade^ e contra sa amarom vontade :
Ca en hey grao do da a ver queixosa
For sa grao formozura^ e sa bondade^
E'hor porque alfim amor no Iho pagarao*

Tom. 1. 215.

In the reign of Joam I. says Manuel de
Faria y Sousa^ the Infante Bon Pedro
wrote the Sonnets Bom Vasco S^c. Vinha
jlmor i^c. in praise of Vasco Lobeyra, the
inventor of the Books of Chivalry by that
of Amadis." , I know not where the second
of these Sonnets is tobefound,neitherof them
are among the Infante Dom Pedro's Poems



published by Joseph Scares da Sylva at the
end of his Memorias para a Historia del
Rey DomJoam 1. as copied from the Canci-
oneiro of Resende ; nor do I recollect them
in that very rare and valuable Collection,
to which I cannot now refer. But it is
impossible that this sonnet should have
been written by either of the Princes to whom
it has been ascribed. The Infante Dom
Pedro was but in his elev4?nth year when
Vasco Lobeira died^ and Lobeira himself
must have been a boy at the time of
Affonso the 4th's death. Montalvo and
Manuel de Faria and the Portugueze Editor
are in this point all in the wrong. If it be
the composition of a royal or of a princely
author^ it must be King Pedro. This howr
ever must remain uncertain. But we may
believe what Montalvo tells us that the story
had been altered in compliance with the
taste of some noble Portuojueze. The Ian-
guage of this sonnet is certainly as old as the
time of Joam 1 . It agrees with the opinion of
the person whom Montalvo calls the Infante

a S



X



Alfonso, and it addresses'Vasco Lobeira by
name as the author of Amadis of Gaul.

This evidence is sufficiently decisive. It is
incontrovertibly confinned by Gomes Ean-
nes de Zurara, in his Chronica do Conde
Dom Pedro de Menezes ; a work written in
1463, and first published in the Collecgao
de Livros Ineditos de Historia Portugueza,
1792. He expressly says that Vasco Lo-
beira wrote the book of Amadis, and that
the whole was his own invention. Could he
have foreseen that it would have ever become
A subject of controversy, his testimony could
Hot have been n^ore decisive. " Jaa seja,
que muitos Au tores cobigosos d'allargar suad
obras, forneciam seus Livros recontando
tempos que os Principes passavam em con-
vites, e assy de festas, e jogoSj e tempos
allegres, de bue se nom seguia outra cousa^
se nom a deleita^ao delles mesmos, assy
como som os primcuros fcitos de Ingraterra,
que se chamava Gram Bretanha, e assy
Livro d' Amadis, como qiier que svomcnte
este fotse feito a prazer de hum homenii que



XI



se chatnava Vasco hobeira^ em tempg dEl
Rey Dom Fernando^ sendo toda-tat comas
do dito Livro fingidai do Autor.'^ T. 2.
P. 422.

Therefore it can no longer be doubted^ that
Va*co Lobeira is the Author of Amadis of
Gaul. The Romance was written towards
the close of the fourteenth century ; if in
Fernando's reign, before 1383, but cer-
tainly after Edward III. had laid claim
to the crown of France, and when the
Court of Windsor was the most splendid in
Europe. This is evident from the work it-
self. Had it been written later, even by one
generation, Montalvo could not have com-
plained of its rude and ancient style.

Barboza says the original work was pre-
served in the family of the Aveiros. If
this copy has escaped the earthquake, it
may probably be traced from the wreck of
that family ; and it is greatly to be wished
that the Royal Academy of Lisbon would
publish it for the honour of Portuguese

a



xu



Literature, to which that Academy has al-
ready rendered such essential services, and
which by other nations is little valued, only
because it is little ktiovrn.



xm



2



Tressan claims for his countrymen only the
three first books; in the fourth, he says,
the Spanish taste begins to predominate; but
the ridiculous anachronisms which he parti-
cularizes, are all interpolated by D'Her-
beray. King Lisuarte's train of artillery, his
powder, his bullets, his bombs and his cul-
^erines, are not to be found in the Spanish
version. Cannon are once mentioned, as
they are in Hamlet ; but as in Hamlet it is
a casual absurdity, the effect of carelessness,
not of an ignorance which would have in-
fected the whole work. The beginning of the
fourth book is indeed very inferiour in inter-
est to what precedes it : the business and
bustle of adventure are succeeded by long
speeches, and a needless detail of the diflS^-
rent embassies. How much of this prolixity



XIV

is to be attributed to what Montalvo calls his
more polished and elegant style, it is now
impossible to ascertain. Yet this prolixity
has its effect ; if it provokes impatience, it
also heightens expectation ; it is like the
long elm avenues of our forefathers, we wish
ourselves at the end, but we know that at
the end there is something great.

The Comte was of opinion that the original
Komance concluded with the rescue of
Oriana. This woujd have been an unsatis-
factory conclusion, nor would it have
compleated the Author's desijgn. Amadis
is not safe, and cannot be happy while
King Lisuarte is bis enemy; the preemi-
nence of Oriana above all her sex is not
proved, till she has atchieved the adventure
of the Forbidden Chamber. The reconcilia-
tion of her husband and her father^ and this
triumph which proves that, as the best and
fairest of women, she alone is worthy to be
the wife of the best and bravest of men,
must be the work of the original autlior, un-
less he left the story incompleat. But therje



XV

is no reason to suspect that the work of Vasoo
Lobeira was not compleated. That, as well
as the rudeness of the language, would have
been mentioned by Montalvo; he would
have claimed the merit of finishing the story,
as well as of polishing the style.

With the celebration of the marriage, the
story obviously concludes. I have ended
here, and left the reader to infer that
Amadis and Oriana, like the heroes of every
nursery tale, lived very happy after. The
chapters which follow in the Spanish are
evidently added to introduce the fifth book,
or what Montalvo, in something like a
Quack's Greek, calls the Serges of Esplan**
dian. It is one Romance growing out of
another as clumsily as a young oyster upon
the back of its parent. The episode of the
Queen of Dacia has been introduced for the
same purpose. This has been here retained,
that if any person sht)uld hereafter continue
these volumes upon the plan of the Biblio*
th^que d€s Romam, every thing necessaiy
to render the after stories intelligible may be



XVI

found in thts^ though this is in itself com*
pleat. The patchwork of Montalvo's ima-
gination is in many places distinguishable :
the letters upon Espandian's breast^ the most
foolish fiction in the book^ are his inven-
tion, for the interpretation is in the Sergas,
Probably he has lengthened the period be-
tween the quarrel of Amadis and the Kiog,
and their reconciliation. Oriana has no spell
to preserve her charms, when she wins the
prize of beauty, and yet her son is at the
age of manhood ; it was convenient for the
continuation of the history, that Esplandian
should be of age to follow arms when his
father retired. If the faults inserted by the
Spaniard, with reference to his own sup-
plement, were weeded out, the skilful struc-
ture of the original story would not be less
admirable, than the variety and beauty of
its incidents.

The Orlando Tnnamorato is the only story
that has ever been successfully continued.
Boyardo had written but a fragment, and a
fragment it was left by Berni. Montfilvo



xvu

had no such plea for adding his supplement
to Amadis; the design was compleat^ and
whatever he added to the finished structure
could only mar its proportions. It is dan-
gerous to attempt subjects which have been
ennobled by a great master. Even the
Greek Tragedians were not equal to the task
of dramatizing the characters of Homer:
they could not bend the bow of Maeonides,
They teach us to despise Ajax^ and to disUke
Ulysses ; for they attribute nothing but
canning to the one^ and only bnital cou*
rage to the other. They caught the out-
line^ but the finer shades, and discrimina-
ting lines escaped them. In our own litera-
ture we have an illustrious instance ; who
can tolerate the tale of Paradise Lost in the
Thymes of Dryden's play ? It is fortunate
for the fame of even Milton> that he did not
execute his design of writing a second Mac-
beth.



XVUl



When the Carate purged Don Qoixote's li-
brary with fire, he spared three romances ;
Tirante the White, for it9 qnaintness; FaU
meirim of England, partly for its merits and
partly because by some unaccountable
blunder, he fancied that it was written by a
King of Portugal ; Amadisof Gaul, because
it was the first of the Idnd^ and the best

The censure of Cervantes was more efficient
than his praise. Lobeira, like Ariosto,
would have received no injuty from his ridi^
cule; if like Ariosto he had stood alone.
Butthe old judgement was reversed, the pro-^
scription acted like the laws of treason in
the East, and the father suffered for the
faults of his worthless children. Montalvo
and his imitators sheltered themselves under



XIX

a great name ; the Sergas of Esplandian if
called the fifth book of Amadis of Gaul^
the histories of Esplaadian's 8on> and his
son's son^ were the sixths seventh^ and eighth;
and thus they went on from generation to
generation. Fortes creantur Fortibus might
be their standing motto. Instead of con-
cluding. Chronicle-like, with '^ he died,
and bis son reigned in his stead," they keep
Amadis alive Uke a Patriarch, or an Adept ;
the fiM;her of a flock sees not so many gene-'
rationfl sprang from him ; to such longevity
do they prolong his life, that instead of fix-
ing his birth not many years after the Cruci-
fixion, it should have been dated some time
before the Flood.

This peipetoal succession of Heroes was ill
imagined. The son was always to exceed
the father, and in his turn yield to the
grandson; as our hosiers besides the best
stockings, sell the extra best, and the best
superfine. £splandiun must fight with
Amadis, and Lisuarte of Greece with £»«
plapdian^ and- Amadis of Greece with



XX

Lisaarte. Hence also the ridicalons hyper-
boles ; when all the yarieties of fighting had
been exhausted by Amadis^ it only remained
to make taller giants for Esplandian, and
give a stronger scythe-sweep to his sword to
mow them down. The fictions of Lobeira
are more modest. Famongomadan and his
family are bat giants of the O'Bryan breed,
with names^ to the great merit of their god-
fathers, of a most giantly proportion. If
the Attihor of Amadis be compared in his
battles with Ariosto, hb descriptions will
be found as lively and as varied^ he brings
every thing before the eye with the same
poet's power, but he rarely or never so wan-
tonly abuses his prerogative.

In one respect the after Romances copy
the original with undeviating servility ; they
all have their Amadis and their Galaor, the
constant and the general Lover. There is
at least some morality in the preference,
b^t all the first-born are illegitimate. The
hero must be every way iiTcsistible^ The
loves of King Perlon and of his son are justi-



XXI

f I

fied or palliated by a pledged promise^ which
the CathQiic Church considers binding. Lo-
beira expressly says they were not without
faulty because the promise had been so se-
cret. Montalvo's morals are more casuis-
tical and convenient. It is glory enough for
me^ says Urganda, when she gives the Bas-
tard sons of Galaor and King Cildadan as
comrades to Esplandian^ it it glory enough
for me, since I can have no children my-
self, that these, by my means, have been
born of others ; for they shall do such things
for the service of God, that not only will
they be forgiven who begot them against the
comm^and of the lioly Church, and I who
was the cause, but it will be imputed to them
as so great a merit, that they shall thereby
obtain rest for their bodies in this world, and
for their souls in the next. B. 4. if. 270.

Montidvo and his followers have totally
changed the machinery. The Urganda who
appears to Gal vanes and die Child of the Sea,
is a true Fairy, like Morgaine le Fay and the
Lady of the Lake. Arcalaus is but a poor



XXII

Enchanter; he has only a room in hiscasde
protected by a spell ; his courage is more
formidable than his blade art^ it is the fleet-
ness of his horse that preserTes him^ not his
magic. But the Urganda who sails about
in the Great Serpent is an Enchantres of a,
different species^ and her rivals Zirfea and
Melia are as tremendous as the Medea of
classical Romance.

The difference of religious temper is remark*^
able. Vasco Lobeira, who had never boriie
arms against any but the Castilians^ made
his h^o fight with Christian enemies, and
only now and then kill a stray Pagan. In
Montalvo's days the reign of persecution had
begun ; the expulsion or extirpation of the
Moors was a favourite hope of the Spaniards
after they had subdued them, and the heroes
of Spanish Romance naturally became the
champions of the faith. It is no wonder
that the original work diiSsrs so materially
from the swarm of imitations 1 Tressan need
not have supposed that they must h^ve



• <• •

XXIU



been written in a different coimtry to ac-
count for its superiority. Lobeira could
paint heroes from the Ufe. The fame of the
Black Prince and the odour of his virtues were
still fresh in Spain. It was the age of chi-
valry, the noon-day of heroism and honour.
A Portugueze, one of the good and loyal Por-
tugueze as their own excellent chronicler calls
them, who fought at Aljubarrota, for King
Joam of Good Memory, might conceive
the character of Amadis. Nuno Alvares Pe«
reira might b6 his living pattern. But a
Spaniard who described humane and gene-
' rous valour in the days of Ferdinand and the
Austrian family, could paint only from a
dim recollection of the past. . A century
the most eventful of any in human history
had changed every thing, the mode of
warfare, the politics, the religious feeling^
of Europe were all altered. The Inquisi-
tion and the house of Austria, two curses
more fatal than all the plagues of Egypt
were established in Spain, and her civil and
religious liberties were destroyed.



XXIV

Inferior as these after -books of Amadis
certainly are, they form so singular an
epoch in the history of literature that an
abridgement of the whole series into our
language is to be ^esired« Should this be
attempted, it must be from the Spanish, not
from the Bibliotheque des Romans, nor
from the versions of D'Herberay. D'Her-
beray has omitted much that is curious in
manners, and inserted much that is abomi-
nable in morals ; he is inaccurate and ob-
scene. There is occasionally, though but
rarely, a rude and savage nakedness in the
original which I have veiled. The French-
man has always delighted to expose it;
be has dilated single phrases into whole
paragraphs, with that love of lewdness
which is so peculiarly and characteristically
the disgrace of French literature.

What is become of these books which were
once so numerous ? in their own country
they are as rare as they are in this. Almost
one might suppose that the Curate and the



XXV

Barber had extended their inqaisitorialscni"*
tiny to the Booksellers shops^ and com-
mitted editions instead of volumes to the
flames.



VOL. !•



JCK^'l



'it is the hypothesis of Warton^ thatHo-
^mance was introduced by the Moors into
Spain^ and from thence diffused over Eu-
rope. Writers of equal eminence have con-
i:roverted this opinion^ and advanced others
>equally hypothetical. Romance, or ficti-
tious narrative, is, in iaict, like Poetry, com-
mon to all countries, and its character is in
like manner every where modified by the
^circumstances of society.

The machinery of the early Romance wri-
ters is probably rather of classical than of
oriental origin. Classical superstitions lin-
gered long after the triumph of Christianity.
The Spanish chronicles continually «peak of
augury. Certain practises of Heathen &ith
twere prohibited in Portugal, by a law cnac-



XXVU' '

tbd during the life of Vasco Lobeira. The
Fathers of the Church expressly assert that
the Gods of the Gentiles^ are the Fallen
Angels; and with this fcey^ a Catholic may
believe the whole of Ovid^s Metamorphoses.
St. Anthony the Great saw and conversed
with a Centaur^ and St. Jerome vouches
for his veracity.

Enchanted weapons^ may be traced to the
workshop of Vulcan as easily as to the
Swarfs of Scandinavia. The tales of dra-
gons may be originally oriental; but the
adventures of Jason and Hercules, were
popular tales in Europe, long before the sup-
posed migration of Odin, or the birth of
Mohammed: If magical rings were inven-
ted in Asia, it was Herodotus, who introdu-
ced the fashion into Europe. The Fairies
and Ladies of the Lake, bear a closer resem-
blance to the Nymphs and Naiads of Rome
aad Greece, than to the Peris of the East.



xxvm



The reputation of the book& of chivalry wa^
declining^ when Cervantes destroyed it.
Qeorge of Montemayor had newly introdu-
ced the Pastoral Romance ;. his Diana is, so
dull and worthless a story> that it is wonder-
ful it should ever have been successfulenough
to provoke imitation. Tales of intrigue
were becoming fashionable. Of these Juan
de Timoneda^ a Valencian^ is said to have
been the first writer in Spain. His first work
El Patranudo bears date 1576- These No^
velas were symptomatic of worse morals th^aai
the books of ohivalry. The comic romance^
of which the heroes are uniformly rogues,
was. still more mischievous. Lazarillo de
Tormes was the first of this class : of the
swarm which followed, G uzman de Alfarache,
and La Picara Justina are the best known.



XXIX

The common ballads of the country were in-
fectedj and ruffians and sharpers are still
the heroes of the popular songs of Spain.
The French Romances do not appear to
have been naturalized either in Spain or Por*
tugal. OF late indeed we are told by Fis-
cher that two editions of Cassandra have sold
in the space of a year and half at Madrid.
It is singular that Calprenade should have
found no readers in Spain^ till he was no
longer read in any other part of Europe.

The books of chivalry have become scarce^
in consequence of their popularity. They
have probably been fairly worn out by re-
peated perusal ; but as their fashion was gone
by, it was useless to reprint them for gene-
ral sale. Some few are still published for
childreii, and it is no little proof of their
merit that they are their favourite books.
In England we have Valentine and Orson,
and the Seven Champions of Christendom.
Parismus and Parismenos, which is amona
the boys' books u^entioned by Uncle Toby,

^^3



and in the very interesting Memoirs of Mir^
GifTord, has lost its ground. In Portugal^
Turpin's History of Cbarlemain aod the
Twelve* Peers is the popular wcark; the
parent of the whole stocky is the last
survivor.



^XXl



it remains that I should state in what
manner the .present version has been exe-
cuted.

To have translated a closely printed folio
would have been absurd. I have reduced it
to about half its lengthy by abridging the
words^ not the story ; by curtailing the dia-
logue^ avoiding all recapitulations of the
past action, consolidating many of those sin-
gle blows which have no reference to armo-
rial anatomy, and passing over the occasional
inoralizings of the Author. There is no
vanity in saying, that this has improved
the book, for what long work may not be
improved by compression ? meagre wine
may be distilled into Alcohol. The minu-
test traits of manners have been preserved^



XXXll

and not an incident of the narrative omitted.
I have merely reduced the picture, every
part is preserved, and in the same propor-
tions. Amadis of Gaul is valuable, not
only for its intrinsic merit, as a fiction, but
as a faithful representation of manners and
morality ; and as such, these volumes may
he referred to, as confidently as the origi-
nal. The edition which I have made use of
is that of Seville,* 1547. The copy, for



• M. le C. Goidon de Fercel in bis Fibliotheque dd*
Romans, says the oldest edkion of Amadts is tb«t of
Seville, 15S6. His work is- exceedingly inaccurate. He
has not mentioned that of 1547. I should conjecture^
that there must have been an Edition printed at Me-
dina del Campo.

The story of Amadis was certainly popular before the
date he has assigned for its first publication. When the
Spaniards first saw Mexico, they said to each other it
was like the places of enchantment which were spoken of
in the book of Amadis. This was 1519. There is ano-
ther passage in the excellent history of Bernal Diaz which
seems to imply th^t they knew the original Amadis, not



XXXlil

f

the book itself is exceedingly lare, was from>
the library of Mr. Heber^ a gentleman whose
liberality^ in the dii^sal of a very valuable
collection^ leaves his friends less reason to
regret^ that the public libraries of England
should be more difficult of access^ and con-
sequently less useful^ than those of any
other country in Europe.

The Comte de Tressan in his free transla-
tion^ has compleatly modernized and natu*
ralized the character of the Romance : his
book is what he designed to make itj an
elegant work ; but the manners and feelings
of the days of Chivalry are not to be found
there ; they are all hidden under a varnish
of French aentim^it. He has scoured thQ



(ke «or1i'of BSantalYO.; lie w$% they compared a boastM'^
maa who did nothing in battle to Agrajres. LUmtv^^mHU^
{«e era 9^^ Agrajes si» 6bras» It should feem. that the
character of Agrayes had been modified by Montalvo.
tet, could a Manofcript story have been M comaionly
known as to be the talk of t^ soldiery f



XXXIV

M shield; the glitter which it has gained*
does not compensate for the loss of itr
sharpness, nor for the lines that are effaced «•

I should have abridged' frcMn the English
translation had it been accarate> that the
character of the language might have as-
similated better with the work. But the
English version, which bears date as late
as> I6i8> a century after the publication of
the book in Spain^ has been made from the*
French ; every trcut of nianners which were
foreign to D'Herberay, or. obsolete in bis
time^ i» accordingly omitted, and^ all the
foolish anachronisms and abominable ob-
scenities of the Frenchman are retained*
\ kept my eye upon it as J proceeded,., for »
the purpose of preserving its language where
it was possible. . A modern style would have
altered the character of the book ; as far as
was..in my power I have avoided that faulty,
not by intermixing obsolete words, but by
rendering the original structure of sentence
aa literally as was convenient, and by re*



XXXV

jecting modern phraseology and forms ^f
period. It cannot be supposed that I have
•uniformly succeeded in this attempt : the
<>Id wine most taste of J;he new .cask«

The names which have a meaning in the
original have not been translated. I have
used Beltenebros instead of the Beautiful
-Darkling or the Fair Forlorn ; JFlorestan in-
stead of Forester; El Patin instead of the
Emperor GosHng ; as we speak of Barbarossa^
not Red-Beard ; Bocanegra^ not Black
Muzzle ; St. Peter, not-Stone the Apostle.

The praise of accuracy is all to which I lay
claim for the present work ; and that I claim
confidently. Perhaps others may not see
the beauties which I perceive; the necessity
of dwelling upon every sentence has pro-
educed in me a love for the whole. The
reader will pass rapidly where I have linger-
ed and loitered ; he who drives post through
a country sees not the same beauties as the
foot-traveller. But the merit of the work



XXXVl



^itself is not now to be ^certained^ the rer-
diet of ages has decided that. Amadis of
.Gaul is among prose^ what Orlando Fu*
rioso 18 among metrical Romances^ not the

oldest of its kind^ but the best.



1

JMJDIS of GAUL.



IBoo'k ti)t JFiritf.

CHAPTER 1.

Not many years after the passion of our Redeemer
there was a Christian King in the lesser Britain, by
name Garinter, who being in the law of truth,
was of much devotion and good ways. This King
had two Daughters by a noble Lady his wife.
The eldest was married to Languines King of
Scotland; she was called the Lady of the Garland,
because her husband taking great pleasure to be-
hold her beautiful tresses, would have them cover-
ed only with a chaplet of flowers. Agrayes and
Mabilia were their children, a Knight and Damsel
of whom in this history much mention is made.
Elisena the other daughter was far more beautiful,
and although she had been demanded in marriage
by many great Princes, yet she would wed with
none, but for her solitary and holy life was. com-
monly called the Lost ♦Devotee, because it was



♦ La Bcata perdida. Mtthod'ut^ Puritan, or the Elect,
would perhaps express the meaning of Beata, which is ia
common use, if they were not sectarian words.



considered that £>r one of such rank, gifted with
such beauty and sought in marriage by so many
chiefs^ this way of life was not fitting.

ILing Garinter who was somewhat stricken in
years, took delight in hunting. It happened one
day, that having gone from his town of Alima to
the chace, and being separated from his people, as
he went along the forest saying his prayers, he saw
to the left a brav^ battle of one Knight against two«
Soon had he knowledge of the twain, in that they
were his own vassals, who being proud men and of
powerful lineage had often by their evil customs
offended him. « Who the third was he knew not,
but not relying so much in the worth of the one^
as he feared the two, he drew aside, and waited the
event, which sorted to such effect, as by the hand
of that one the others were both slain. This donis
the Stranger came towards the King, and seeing
him alone, said. Gentle Sir, what country is this
wherein Knights Errant are tlius assailed ? The
King replied. Marvel not at this. Knight, for our
Country yields as others do, both good and bad :
as for these men, tliey have oflen offended, even
against their Lord and King, who could do no jus-
tice upon them, because of their kindred, and also
because they harboured in this covered mountain.



3



This King you speak of» replied the Stranger^ I
come to seek him from a far land^ and bring him
tidings from a dear friend. If you know where he
may be founds 1 pray you tell me. The King an-
swered^ Befall what may, I shall not fail to speak
what is true. I am the King. The Knight then
loosing his shield and helmet gave them to his
Squire, and went to embrace Garinter, saying
that he was King Perion of Gaul who had long
desired to know him. . Greatly were these Kings
contented that their meeting was in such a manner^
and conferring together they took their way
through the wood towards the City, when sud-
denly a Hart ran before them which had escaped
the toils. Tliey followed at full speed, thinking
to kiH it, but a Lion springing from a thicket be-
fore them, seized the Hart, and having torn it
open with his mighty ckws, stood fiercely looking
at the Kings. Fierce as you are, said King Perion,
you shall leave us part of the game ! and he took
his arms and alighted from his horse, who being
affrighted at the wild beast would not go near him,
and placing his shield before him went towards
the Lion sword in hand. The Lion left his prey
and came against him, they closed, and Perion at
the moment when he was under the beast and in
roost danger, thrust his sword into his belly.

b2



When Garinter saw him fall, he said within him-
self not without cause is that Knight famed to be
the best in the world. Meanwhile their train came
up, and then was their prey and venison laid on
two horses and carried to the City.

The Queen being advised of her guest they found
the palace richly, adorned, and the tables covered.
At the highest the Kings seated themselves : at
the other sate the Queen with Elisena her daugh-
ter, and there were they served, as in the house
of such a man beseemed. Then being in that
solace, as that Princess was so beautiful and King
Perion on his part equal, in that hour and point
they so regarded each other, that her great mo-
desty and holy life could not now avail, but that
she was taken with great and incurable love 5 and
the King in like manner, though till then liis
heart had been free, so that during the meal both
the one and tlie other appeared absent in thought.
When the tables were removed, the Queen would
depart to her chamber 5 Elisena rising dropt a
xincr from her lap, which she had taken off when
she wash'd her hands, and in her confusion of
mind forgotten. She stooped for it and Perion
who was near her stooped down also, so that
their hands met, and he taking her hand prest it.



She coloured deeply and thanked the King for
his service. Ah^ Lady, said he, it shall not
be the last, for all my life shall be spent in your
service.

She followed her mother, but so disturbed that
her sight was dizzy, and now not able to endure
her feelings she went and discovered them to the
damsel Darioleta in whom she confided, and with
tears from her eyes and from her heart, besought
her to find out if King Perion loved any other
woman. Darioleta surprized at this alteration,
pitied and comforted her mistress, and went to
King Penon's chamber. She found his Squire at
the door witli the King's garments which lie
was about to give him ; friend, said she, go you
about your other affairs, for I must wait upon
your master. The Squire, thinking it was the
custom of the country, gave her the garments
and went away. She then entered ^he chamber
. where the King was in bed. He, who had seen
her converse with Elisena confidently, now hoped
that she might bring some remedy to his passion,
and said to her all in trembling, fair friend, what
demand ye? I bring you wherewith to cloathe
yourself, she replied. That should be for my
heart, said Perion, which is now stript and naked

b3



6



of all my joy. As how ? said the Datosel. Thus,
quoth he, coming into this land with entire liberty,
and apprehending nothing but the chance of amis,
here in this house I have been wounded by a mor-
tal wound, for which if you fair Damsel, can pro-
cure me remedy, you shall be well recompensed.
He then charged her not to discover him but
where it was requisite, and told her his love for
Elisena. Then said Darioleta, my Lord, promise
me on the faith of a King and a Knight, that you
will take to wife my Lady- Elisena, when time
shall serve, and right soon will I bring ye, where
not only your heart shall be satisfied, but hers also>
who, it may be, is in as much or more thought
«nd dolour than you, with the same wound. But
without this promise yoa shall never win her.
The King whose will was already disposed by God
that that which ensued might come to pass, took
his sword which was by him, and laying his-right
hand upon yie cross of its hilt^ pronounced these
words, 1 swear by this Cross, and Uiis 5 word
wherewitli I received the order of Knighthood, to
perform whatever you shall require for the Lady
Elisena. Be you then of good cheer, said she, for I
also will effect my promise.

Parioleta returned to the Princess mi told her how



fthe had sped -, yoa know^ said she^ that in the
chamber where King Perion lodgeth there is a
door opening to the garden^ whence your father
used to go out, and which at this present is co»
vered with the hangings^ bat I have the key
thereof, and we can go in at night, when all in
the palace are at rest. When Elisena heard this
she was highly contented, but recollecting herself^
she replied, how shall this be brought to pass,
seeing that my father will lodge in the chamber
with King Perion? Leave that to me said the
Damsel, and with that they parted.

When it was night Darioleta drew aside the Squire
of Perion, and asked him if he was of gentle birth »
Aye, said he, the son of a Knight ! but why ask
ye ? for the desire I have, qudth she, to know one
thing, which I beseech you by the faitli you owe
to God and to the King your master, not to hide
from me. Who is the Lady whom your Master
loveth best? My Master, replied the Squire, loves
all in general, and none as you mean. While
they thus talked Garinter came nigh, who seeing
Darioleta in conference with Perion's Squire,,
called her and asked what he had to say to her.
In sooth my Lord, quotli she, he tells me that
bis Master is wont to be alone^ and certainly I

b4



8



think he will feel himself embarrassed by yotdr
company. Garinter hearing that went to King
Perion and said^ My Lord I have many aJOTairs
to settle^ and must rise at the hour of matins>
and that you may tiot be disturbed, you had better
be alone in your chamber. King Perion replied>
do as shall seem best to your liking. Then
Garinter understood that Darioleta had told him
rightly of his guest's inclination, and ordered his
bed to be removed from Perion*s apartment.
These tidings Darioleta carried to her mistress,
and they waited the hour when all should retire
to sleep.



CHAPTER 2.



At night when all was husht, Darioleta rose, and •
threw a mantle over her mistress, and they went
into the garden. When Elisena came to the
chamber door her whole body trembled, and her
voice that she could not speak. King Perion had
fallen asleep, he dreamt that some one, he kijew
not who, entered his chamber by a secret door,
who thrusting a hand between his ribs, took out
his heart and threw it into the river. He asked
why that cruelty was committed, and was answer-
ed — it is nothing ! there is another heart left there •
which I must take from you, though against my
will. Then the King suddenly awoke in great fear,
and blessed himself. At this moment the two
damsels had opened the door, and were entering >
he heard them, and being full of his dream sus-
pected treason, wheli he saw a door open behind
the hangings, of which he had not known, and
leaping froii^ the bed he caught up his sword and
shield What is this? cried Darioleta. The

b5



10



King then knew her, and saw Elisena his beloved ;
he dropt his shield and sword and throwing a
mantle about him which was ready by the bed, he
went and embraced her whom he loved. Dari-
oleta then took up the sword in token of his pro-
mise and oath, and went nito the garden, and
Perion remained alone with Elisena, in whom as
he beheld her by the light of the three torches, he
thought all the beauty of the world was * centered.



• Here, says the Spanish author, we should learn, that
when womeri turn aside their thoughts from worldly things,
df spising the great beauty with which Nature has endowed
them, the fresh youth which so much increases it, and the
delights and pleasures which with the riches of their pa-
rents they might hope to enjoy, and chuse for the salvation
, of their souls to place themselves as recluses in poor habi-
tations, and offer up with all obedience their own free will
to be subject to others, and pass their time without any of
the pleasures or glories of the world, though their sisters
and kindred are enjoying them *, they ought with great ear-
nestness to stop their ears, and close their eyes, and refuse
to see friend or relation, but retiring altogether to devout
contemplation and holy prayer, think them the true de-
lights, as indeed they are; lest by seeing and hearing, their
religious purposes be overcome, and it should be with them
as it was with the Pnncess Eli^na.



11



When it was time that they should part, Darioleta
returned to the chamber. I know, Lady, said she,
that heretofore you have been better pleased with me
than you are now; but we must go, for time calleth
us. Ellsena rose. I beseech you, said Perion, do
not ibrget the place ! and she departed with the
damsel. He remained in his room, and recollect-
ing his dream, which still affrighted him, a wish to
know its signification made him desirous to return
to his own country, where were many wise men
skilful in the solution of such things.

Ten days King Perion sojourned at Alima> and
every night his beloved mistress visited him. Then
it was necessary that he should depart, despite of
his own inclination, and the tears of £lisena. He
took leave of Garinter and the Queen^ and having
armed himself, when he looked for his sword to gird
it on, he missed it;, though the loss grieved him,
for it was a tried, and goodly weapon, he durst not
enquire for it^ but making his Squire procure him
another, he departed straight for his own kingdom.
Albeit before his departure Darioieta came and
told him of the great affliction and loneliness in
which his Lady was left. 1. commend hereto you
my friend, said he, as mine own proper heart;
then taking from his finger a mg of two whicb

b6



12



he wore, each resembling the other, he bade her
carry it to his love.

So Elisena remained, leading a solitary life, and
in great grief. Darioleta comforted her the best
she could, and the time past on, till she felt her-
self great with child, and lost the appetite for food
and the pleasure of sleep, and the fresh colour of
her countenance. Then was her sorrow and care-
fulness greater, and not without cause, for in
that time was there a law, that any woman, ci
what quality or estate soever, offending in such
sort, could not excuse herself from death. This
so cruel and abominable a custom endured, till the
coming of the good King Arthur, who was the best
King that ever there reigned, and he revoked it at
the time when he slew Floyoh in battle, before the
gates of Paris. And albeit because of the words
which Perion swore upon his sword, she was with^
out fault before God, yet was she not before the
world, for they had been so secret. To let him
know her condition, was what she could not think,
for he was young and proud of heart, and took no
delight elsewhere than where renown was to be
gained, and so was for ever going an Errant Knight
from one place to another. So she found no re-
medy for her life; yet did not the loss of life ai&ict



13



her so much as that of her dear and beloved Lord.
Bat God, by whose permission all this had come to
pass for his holy sen^ice, gave such discretion to
Darioleta, that she remedied all.

In the palace of King Garinter there was an arched
chamber separated from the rest, which overlooked
the river ) it had a little iron door through which
the Damsels sometime were wont to go out by the
water side, but now none inhabited the apartment.
This chamber, by Darioleta's advice, did Elisena
request of her father, as suiting her disposition and
solitary life, where she might perform her prayers
undisturbed, with no companion but Darioleta, who
had always served and accompanied her. This re-
quest she lightly obtained, and hereupon was the
key of the iron door given to Darioleta, to open
when it pleased the Princess to recreate herself by
the river. Here was Elisena somewhat comforted, to
find herself in a place so convenient for her purpose,
and she required council of her damsel what should
be done with the fniit that she travailed withal ?
What ? replied Darioleta, it must suffer to save
you. Holy Mary, then said Elisena, shall I con-
sent to destroy the child of him whom I love best
in the world ? Leave alone those thoughts, the
damsel answered, if they kill you they will not



14



spare the Infant : it were great folly to destroy your-
self and your lover, wlio could not live after you,
for the sake of saving the child, who if you dic^
must die also.

As this Damsel was of quick mind herself, and
now guided by the grace of Grod, she determined to
have the remedy ready before the need; and it
was in this guise : she took four boards and with
them made an ark large enough to contain a new
bom child and its garments, and long enough for
the sword, she fastened them together with bitur
mep in such sort, as the water should have no
place to enter. She hid all this under her bed till
she had compleated it ; and it was eveki and close
as if a master had made it. Then she. showed it
to Elisena and asked for what she thought it was
designed ? She answered, I know not. You shall
know, said the Damsel, when need is. £lisena
replied, but little do I care to know what is done
, or what is said, for J am near to lose all my joy
and comfort. Then had Dafioleta great grief, and
she went apart not bearing to see her mistress
weep.

It was not long before her travail came, and in
those new and strange pains^ in bitterness of heart.



15



and not daring to cry out or groan, it pleased tte
Lord that she was safely delivered of a son. The
Damsel took him in lier arms, and saw that the
boy was a fair boy had he not been bom to hard
fortune, but she delayed not to execute what of
necessity had been, resolved. She wrapt him in
rich garments, and laying him by his mother
brought the ark. Elisena cried what will you do ?
Place him here, she answered, and launch hin^
down the stream, and belike he may escape. Then
the Mother took him in her arms, and wept bitterly
over him. But Darioleta took ink and parchment,
and wrote upon U, this is Amadis,* son of a King.
It was the name of her saint, and of great reverence
in that country. She covered the parchment with
wax, and hung it by a string round the neck of
the babe, and Elisena fastened upon the string the
ring which King Perion had given her at his de*
parture. Danoleta then placed tlie infant in the
ark, and laid his father-s sword beside him ', this
done, she covered the ark, which was securely
joined and calked, and opening the iron door, took
it in her arms, and placed it in the river, com-
mending it to God.



SBBBS



♦ Este cs Amadis sin ticmpo, hijo de rcy ; y sin tiempb
dezia ella porque creya que lue^ $«ria muerto.



16



The tide ran strong, and- soon carried the ark into
the sea, which was not more ^ than a half-league
distant. Now the dawn appeared, and it pleased
God that there was a Knight of Scotland sailing on
that sea, returning from tlie lesser Britain to his
country, with his wife, who had newly been deli-
vered of a son called GanJalin. The morning was
both calm and clear, whereby the Knight Gandales
saw the ark floating among the waves, and he or-
dered the manners to put out a boat and take it up.
They speedily overtook it, and Gandales opened
the cover, and beholding the babe witliin he cried,
this is from no mean place ! and ^this he said be-
cause of the rich garments, and tlie ring and the
good sword, and he cursed the mother who had
for fear abandoned so fair a child. He carefully
laid aside all the things that were contained in the
ark, and desired his wife to breed up the infant,
and she ordered the nurse of her own child Ganda-
lin to suckle him. So they went their way through
the sea with a favourable time, and took port in a
town in Scotland called Antalia, and from thence
departing they came to his castle, which was one
of the good ones of the land 5 there he had the
child brought up like his own son, and such he
w^as believed to be, because the mariners who
took up the ark, had sailed away to odier parts.



17



CHAPTER 3.



King Perion having departed from Alima went
his way in great heaviness^ as well as for the
loneliness wherein he had left Elisena whom in his
heart he loved^ as also for the dream which in
such a season had come upon him. But having
reached his own country^ he sent for all his great
Lords^ and ordered the Bishops to bring with them'
the most learned Clerks in their parts^ to the end
they might expound his dream. When his vassals
knew of his return> many others, as well as all
who were summoned, came with great desire tq
see him who was beloved of all. The King
conferred with them on the state of the realm
but it was alway with a sad countenance, whereby
they were much afilictedj and this business being
dispatched, he dismissed tliem each to his own
lands, only staying with him tliree Clerks whom
he knew was the most skilful in what he desired
to learn. These men he took into his Chapel,
and there upon the sacred Host he made then)



*.^



18



swear to answer truly what he should demand,
without fear, how dangerous soever it were*
That done they left the Chapel, and he told them
his dream. Thea one of them whose name waa
Ungan the Picard, the most expert of them, thua
answered. Dreams Sire are vain things, and for
such ought to be esteemed 3 notwithstanding see-
ing it is your pleasure that some account should be
made of yours, give us tithe to consider thereoiu
Let it be so, said the King 3 take twelve days :
and he ordered them to be separated, that they
should neither see nor converge with each other.
They to their uttermost travailed upon this matter,
and when the time was elapsed they went to the
King. He first took Alberto of Champaigne apart,
and said to him, you know what you have
sworn, — now then speak to me» Sire, answered
Alberto, tlicn let the rest be called into your
presence for before them will I tell you. Where-
upon they were sent for, and being all met,
Alberto began. It appears to me that the closed
chamber, and he whom you saw enter by the
secret door, signify this realm which is close and
weU guarded, nevertheless some one shall enter
to take it from you, and Ukfe as he thrust his hanA
into your side and rent fortli your heart and threw
it iuto the river, even so shall town or Castle ba



19



taken from you^ ,and put into his hand from whom
you shall not easily recover them. And the other
heart? quoth the King, which he said should
remain with me, and yet he must take it away
against his will. It seemeth by this, answered
Alberto^ that some other shall invade your coun-
try, as the first did, yet constrained more by
another commanding him to do so, than by any
^ill in himself, and upon this. Sire, I know no*
tbing mOTe to say. The King then commanded
Anteles to say what he had discovered. He agreed
to all that the other bad said, except in this
quoth he,- that my art shows me it is already
done, and by the person that most loveth ye : this
makes me marvel, for nothing of your Kingdom is
yet lost, and if it were, it could not be by one who
loves you so dearly. Hearing this the King smiled
a little, for it seemed he had saidf something.
But Ungan the Picard who knew much more
then they, held down his head and laughed hearti-
ly, a thing which he had seldom done, being by
nature a thoughtful and melancholy man. The
King wondered at tliis, and said, now Master teli



* mis suertes tne muestran. f que na avia dicho nacU^



so



us what 70U know* Sire, said he^ peradventure
I have seen into things which should be mani-
fested to you alone^ therefore let these depart.
Then the doors were closed and they twain re-
mained together.

Know, King, said he, that what I laughed at
was a word of which you thought little, when
he said it was already done, and by the person
who best loveth ye. Now shall i reveal what
you keep closely concealed and think that none
knows. You love, where you have already accorti-
plished your will, and she whom you love is
naarvellously fair 3 then told he all the fashions of
her as if she were there before him. The cham-
ber in which you saw yourself enclosed, you well
know, and how she to ease your heart and her
own, entered without your knowledge by the
secret door 5 and the hand that opened your
side, is your union, and the heart which was
taken out sheweth that she hath by you a son
or a daughter. Master, said the King, what
meanetli then the casting thereof into the river ?
He replied, seek not to know that which is of no
importance. Tell me howbeit, quoth Perion, and
fear nothing. Since you are pleased to hear it*
answered Ungan, I demand aasurance that for



21



any thing which I may reveal, you will never
hereafter be wrath with her who loveth you
so loyally ; and Perion made the promise. Know
then, said the Master, that what you saw cast
into the river, is tlie cliild which she has had
by you. And that other heart that remained?
what should that be ^ — Y ou may interpret . the
one by the other, answered Ungan : you will
have another son, who will in some manner be
taken away against the will of her that caused
the loss of the first. Strange things hast thou
told me! said Perion, and may it please God
that the latter part, tlie misfortunes of my chil-
dren, prove not so true as what thou hast told
me concerning the Lady whom I love. The
Master answered, Npne can alter the things
which were ordained by God, nor know where-
in they shall end. Men therefore should neither
repine nor rejoice thereat, for oftentimes as well
■ the evil as the good proves far otherwise tlian it
seemed. And do thou O King, lay aside fi'om
thy memory all this which thou wast so soli-
citous to know, and pray to God to dispose
these things to his holy service. The King was
satisfied in what he de^red, and so pleased with
the wisdom and the last words of Ungan die



22



Picard, that he rewarded him well, and kept
him thenc^orward near his person.

As PerioQ parted from the Clerks^ he met a
Damsel more ornamented than beautiful, who
said to him, know King Perion, that when thou
recoverest thy loss, the kingdom of Ireland shall
lose its flower ! and away she went, so that he
could not detain her, and he remained thinking
upon tliese things.

The Author ceaseth to speak of this, and retumeth
to the child whom Gandales brought up. He was
called the * Child of the Sea, for so they had named
him, and with much care was he brought up by
that good Knight and his wife, and he grew and be*
came so fair, that all who saw him marvailed.
One day Gandales rode forth, for he was a right
good Knight and strong, and always accompa-
nied King Languiues at such time as they fol-
lowed arms, and though the King had ceased t6
follow them, yet Gandales ceased not. He, as he



* We have no word for the DmouI of the Spaniards^ and ^

Damohcl of the French.



S3



Tode along, met a Damsel^ that thus spake to him.
Ah, Gandales if many great personages knew
what I know, they would cut ofF thy head!
Wherefore ? quoth he. She replied. Because
thou nourishest their death. Now this was the
Damsel who had prophesied to King Perion,
. But Gandales understood not, and he said Damsel
I beseech ye for God's sake, what is this ? I shall
not tell thee, she answered, but so it must be.
And she went her way. He remained thoughtful,
but soon he saw her returning upon her palfrey
with all speed, and crying with a loud voice,
Oandales help me — or I am dead ! He looked
and saw a Knight come after her, sword in hand,
and he spurred his horse between tliem, and cry-
ed out. Sir Knight, God* confound thee, what
wouldst thou with the Damsel ? What ? said the
other, wouldst thou protect her, who by her
art has made mc lose body and soul? Of that
know I nothing, said Gandales, but protect her
I will, for women are nob to be thus punished,
even though they deserve it. The Knight answer-
ed, that we shall see, and returning his sword



♦ A quien Dios de ma^a ventura. It is the Irish phrase,

Bixd luck to you !



2-i



into the scabbard^ he rode to a little thicket where-
in there waite4 a Damsel exceedingly fair, who
gave him a shield and a lance^ and then he ran

at Gandales^ and Gandales at him.

ITiey had not long fought before she who had
desired succour of Gandales, stepped between
them, and cried, hold ! Forthwith the Knight
who had pursued her drew back, and she said to
him— come, make obeisance to me ! that shall I
do willingly, said he, as to the thing in the world
which I most love : and throwing the shield from
his neck, and the sword from his hand, he bent
his knees before her, to the wonder of Gandales -,
then she bade him tell the Damsel under the trees,
to get her away immediately, or he would take her
head off. • He turned to her and exclaimed. Thou
ill woman ! I know not why I spare thee. And
the Damsel saw that her friend was enchanted,
wherefore she mounted her palfrey and rode away,
making great sorrow.

The other Damsel then said, Gandales I thank
you for what you have done, go and good be
with you! as for this Knight, I pardon him.
That, said Gandales, you may 5 but I shall not
give over the battle, unless he confess himself



25



vanquished. She answered, give it over, for
though you were the best Knight in the world,
I could make him vanquish you. Then tell
me, said he, the meaning of what you said,
that I nourbhed the death of many great per-
sonages. She made him swear that none should
know it firom him till she permitted, and then
said, I tdl thee he whom thou foundest in the sea
shall be the flower of Knighthood in hb time ; he
shall cause the strongest to stoop, he shall enter-
prize and finish with honour that wherein others
have ^iled, and such deeds shall he do as none
would think could be begun nor ended by body
of man. He shall humble the proud, and cruel of
heart shall he be against those who deserve it, and
he shall be the Knight in the world who most
loyally maintains his love, and he shall love one
answerable to his high prowess. And I tell you
that on both sides he is of kingly parentage. Now
go thy way, and believe that all this shall come to
pass, and if thou discoverest it there shall happen
to thee therefore more evil thaiT good. Ah Lady i
said Gandales, tell me for God*s sake where I can
find you to talk with you]_upon this child*s affairs ?
She answered, that shalt thou never know. Tell
nie then your name I beceech you by the faith

VOL. I. c



26



you owe to the thing in the world that you love
best. — ^Thou conjurest me so that J will tell : but
the thing that I love best is that which least love^
me, and it is that fair Kni^t with whom you
combated; howbeit I cease not for that to bring
him to thy will, whatever he can do. My name is
Urganda the Unknown, mark me well, and know
me again if you can ! And he who first saw her
a damsel in her spring time, as one of eighteen
years, now beheld her so old and overspent, that
he marvailed how she could sit upcxi her horse,
and he crost himself. She took a perfume box
from her bosom and touching it became as she
was before. Now, said she, think you to find mc
h^eafter though you should seek me ? weary not
yourself for that, for though all living creatures go
about it, if I list, they should lose their labour. —
As God shall save me, I believe it Lady ! but I
pray you remember the Child who is forsaken of
all but myself. Doubt not that, said Urganda,
I love him more than thou canst think, for I shall
soon receive aid from him twice, which none else
could give me, and he shall receive two guerdons
to his joy. Now God be with thee ! thou shalt see
me sooner than thou expectest. And then she
took the shield and helmet of her friend to carry



27

iknm, and Gandales seeing his head disarmed
thoaght him the goodliest Knight that he had ever
beheld^ and so thej parted.

As Gandales returned to his Castle he foand that
other Damsel by the way; sitting beside a foun-
tain and lamenting. She kne^ him and exclaim*
ed^ how is it Knight that -the wicked woman
whom you helped has not destroyed you ? Wicked
she is not^ said Gandales^ but good and wise^ and
if you were a Knight I would make you pay dearly
for the folly of your words. Ah, the wretch^ quoth
she^ how she knows to beguile every one ! she
has taken from me the fair Knight who would
more willingly be mine^ but I will be revenged
if I can. Grandales answered, it is a wild thought
to hope to injure her who knows your very inten-
tions, and as for the Knight, it seems to me that
you are both without reason or conscience. With
that he left her and came to hia casde, and seeing
the little boy come running towards him, he took
him up in his arms, and lovii^ly embraced him,
and remembering all that Urganda had told him,
he said in his heart, my fair child God let me
live to see thy good days ! and with that the tears
came. At this time die child was of three years,
and his beauty was marvellous to behold, and he

c2



28



seeing the tears> put up his little hands to wipe
them sway, whereat Gandales rejoiced as a sign
that he would be gende-hearted^ and thencefor-
ward he taught him with a kinder will. And when
he came to the age of five^ he made a bow for
him suited to his strength, and another for his son
Gandalin, and they used to -shoot before him..

»

When he was seven years old. King Languines
and his Queen and household, passing through
his Kingdom from one town to another, came to
the castle of Gandales, where they were well feast-
ed ', but the Child of the Sea, and Gandalin and
the other children were removed to the back Court
that they might not be seen. It fortuned that the
Queen was lodged in one of the highest apartments
of the Castle, and looking firom her window she
saw the children at play with their bows, and
among tliem remarked the Child of the Sea for hig
shapeliness and beauty, and he was better clad than
his companions, of whom he looked like the Lord.
The Queen called to her Ladies and Damsels,
come and see the fairest creature that ever was
seen ! While they were looking at him, the Child
who was thirsty, laid down his bow and arrows, and
went to a water-pipe to drink. A boy bigger than
the rest took up his bow to shoot with it, this Gan-



29



dalin would not suffer^ the other struck him an-
grily and Gandalin cried out^ Help me^ Child of the
Sea ! He hearing this ran to him^ and snatch-
ed the bow and crying^ in an ill minute did you
strike my brother, struck him on the head with
all his force ; they fought awhile till the other was
fain to run away, and meeting their Tutor, who
asked what was the matter, replied, that the Child
of the Sea had beat him. The Tutor went towards
him with the strap in his hand, how is this. Child
of the Sea, said he, that you dare beat the boys ?
I shall punish you ! but the Child fell upon his
knees, I had rather you would strike me, said he,
than that any one before me should dare to beat
my brother; and the tears came in his eyes. The
Tutor was moved, and told him to do so no more.
All this the Queen saw, and she wondered why
they called him the Child of the Sea.



c3



30



CHAPTER 4.



At this time the King and Gandales entered, and
the Queen asked their host if that fair child was
his ? he answered; yes. Why then, said she, is
he called the Child of the Sea ?-^Because he wa3
bom on the sea^ when I returned from Brittany.
Truly* he is but little like you^ said the Queei} ;
and tliis she said because the child was beautiful
to a wonder, and Gandales was more good then
handsome. The King who was looking at him
likewise, bade Gandales call him, for I will take
him with me, said he, and have him brought up.
So let it be, said Gandales, but he is not yet of an
age that he should leave his mother : then he went
and brought him, and said. Child of the Sea, will
you go with the King my master? Wherever you
bid me, he replied, and my brother shall go with me.



* Por Diot is the original affirmation.



31



And I, quoth Gandalio, will not stay without him.
Grandales then looked at the King ^ I believe Sircj,
70U must take them both. I am the better
pleased^ answered the King, and calling Agrayes,
my son I would have you love these boys, as well
as I love their father.

When Grandales saw that the Child of the Sea was
placed in the hands of another, the tears came
into his tyes, and he said within himself, fair
son, thou art a little one to begin to go into
adventure and danger ! and now I see thee in the
service of those who may one day serve thee*
Grod guard thee, and fulfil what the wise Urganda
foretold^ and let me live to see the great wonders
which in arms are promised thee. When the
King saw that his eyes were full, be said, I did
not think thou hadst been so foolish. Nor am
I, answered Gandales, but if it please you, do
you and the Qneen hear me. The rest tlien
withdrew, and he told them bow he had found
the Child ; and he would have told what he knew
from Urganda, but for his promise ; and now,
said he, deal ye with the child as ye ought, for
as God shall save me by the way in which he
came to me, I believe he is of great lineage.
Then the Queen said, he should be her*8 so long

c4



33



as he was of an age to obey women, and the
next morning they departed, taking the children
with them. Now I tell you that the Queen
brought up the Child of the Sea as carefully as if
he had been her own son ^ and the trouble she
took with him was not in vain, for such was his
talent and so noble his nature, that better and
more quickly than any besides he learnt every
thing. And he was so fond of the chace, that
If they would have let him, he would have been
always shooting with the bow, or training the
dogs. And the Queen loved him so that she
would scarce suffer him to be out of her sight.

Now KingPerion, after consulting the Clerks,
abode in his kingdom, and many times he thought
upon the words which the Damsel had spoken,
yet could he not understand them. After some
time, he being in his palace, there came a Damsel
and gave him a letter from £lisena his love,
whereby she gave him to know that her father
was dead, and she was unprotected, and for this
cause he should pity her, for the Queen of Scot-
land her sister was coming with her husband to
take possession of the land. King Perion though
he was sorrowful for Garinter's death, yet rejoiced
to think that he should go for his mistress whom



S3



he never ceased to love ; and he said to the Dam-
sel, return and tell jour Lady that without de-
laying a single day, I shall speedily be with her }
and the Damsel returned joyfully. The King
then collecting a suitable retinue, set forth, and
joumied till he came to the lesser Britain, where
he found news that Languines was in mastery
of all the land, except those towns which her
fsLther had left to Elisena. So hearing that she was
at a town called Arcarte he went there, and if
he wias well received need not be said, and she
also by him who so dearly loved her. The King
told her to call together all her firiends and kin-
dred, for he would take her to wife, the which
Eliseua did with great joy, for in that consisted
the end of all her wishes. Now when King
Languines knew the coming of King Perion, and
how he would marry Eliseua, he summoned all
the noblemen of the land, and went with them
to meet him, and when tlie marriage and the
feasts were concluded, the Kings agreed to return
into their own dominions.

Perion returning with Elisena his wife came to a
river side where he would rest that night, and
while tiie tents were erecting, he rode alone aloi^
the banks, thinking how he might learn some-

c 5



34



thing from Elisena about the child of whom Un«
gan the Picard had told him. So long went he
on in this mood till he came to a hermitage^
and fastening his horse to a tree, he went in to
say his prayers. There was an dd man within
in the habit of his order, who asked him. Knight'
is it true that King Perion has married the Daugh*
ter of our King } yea verily, answered the King.
Praised be God ! sdd the good Hermit, for I know
certainly that she loved him with all her heart.—-
How know you that? By her own mouth, said
he. The King then thinking to hear of him the
thing he most desired to know, made himself
known, and besought the Hermit to tell him all
he had heard from her. Truly Sir, answered the
good man, therein should I greatly fault, and
you would hold me for a heretic if I should di-
vulge what was said in confession : suffice what
I tell you, that she loves you with true and loyal
love. But I would have you know what a Dam-
sel, who seemed veiy wise, said to me at the time
when you came first into this country, and I could
not understand her : That from the lesser Britain
^should come two dragons, who should hold thdr
sway in Gaul, ahd their hearts in Great Britain ;
and from hence they should go to devour the beasts
of otlier countries, and against some they should



35 .

be so fierce and furioii3> and against others so gra-
cious and mild, as if they had neither talons nor
hearts. The King wondered at this, which he
could not understand, hut there came a time when
he knew the prophecy was true. So he returned
to his tents.

When they were in hed together, he told the
Queen what had been interpreted of his dieam^
and asked her if she had brought forth a son.
The Queen hearing him, had so great shame that
she wished herself dead, and she altogether denied
it, so that at this time the King could not learn
what he desired. They continued their journey
till they arrived in Gaul, and those of the land
were well pleased with their Queen, who was a
most noble lady, and the King had by her a son
and a dlu^ter, whom he called Gralaor and
Melida.

When the boy was two years and a half old, it so
was, that the King his father sojourned at ^ town
called Bangil, which was near the sea. The King
was looking from a window towards the gardens,
where the Queen and her ladies were solacing
themselves, and the child with them, who then
began to walk. They saw enter through a postern*.

c 6



36



door, that went out to the sea, a Giant, with 3:
huge mace in his hand, so large and mismade that
never man saw him without afiright. The women
ran, some among the trees, and others fell dowa
and shut their eyes that they might not see him.
But he went straight to the Child, who was left
alone, and, taking him in his arms, he laughed,
and said, The Damsel told me true. And with
that he went oat by the same way, and, entering
into a bark, put to sea. The Queen, who saw
him cany away the child, shrieked loudly, but
it nothing availed, and her grief was so great, that
though the King was greatly afflicted for the loss
of his son, whom he could- not succour, yet, see-
ing there was no rcmedy> he went to* console EK-
sena," who was, as it were, destroying herself with
excess of grief> remembering the first son that she
had exposed upon- the sea, and now that she saw
this gone also, she made the greatest raving in the-
world. But Perion took her with him to their
chamber 3 and, when she was somewhat calmed,
he said to her. Now I know that what the wise
men tdd me was true, for this was tlie last heart :
so tell me all the truth, for, considering the state
in which you were, you ought not to be blamed.
And then the Queen, though with great shame,
related to him all 5 and he comforted her, and-



37



bade her lire in hope to hear good tidings of both
their sons^ whom it had pleased God to take
away.

This Giant, who carried away the child, was a na-
tive of Leonis, and he had two castles in an island,
and his name was Gandalac. He was not so
wicked as other giants, but of a gentle and good
demeanour, except when lie was enraged, and
then would he do great cruelties. He sailed on
till he came to the cape of an island, where there
was a Hermit : now tlie Giant had peopled that
island with Christians, and ordered alms to be
given him for his support. Friend, said he, take this
child, whom you must bring up for me, and teach
him all that is convenient for a Knight, for he is
the SOB of a King and Queen 5 and I forbid you
ever to be his enemy. The good man asked him,,
why he had committed that great cruelty. Tliat I
will tell you, said he. I was about to embark to fight
with Albadan, the fierce giant who slew my father,
and has t^en from me the rock Galtares, which is
mine ; but there came a Damsel to me^ and said,
this which you want to do must be accomplished
by the son of King Perion of Gaul, who will
have more strength and activity than thou hast. I
asked her, if that was true. That shalt thou see.



38



said she, when two branches of a tree shall be
joined, which now are separated. In this manner
Galaor was left with the Hermit.

While these things aforesaid past. King Falangriz
reigned in Great Britain, who, dying without
children, left a brother named Lisuarte, of great
goodness in arms, and much discretion ; who had
married Brisena, daughter of the King of Den-
mark, and she was the fairest lady that was to be
found in all the islands of the sea. So, after the
death of Falangriz, the chief men of his land sent
for Lisuarte' to be their king.



39



CHAPTER 5,



When King Lisuarte heard this embassage he set
sail with a great fleet, and on their way they put
into Scotland^ where he was honourably received
by King Languines. Brisena his wife was with
h\m, and their Daughter Oriana, born in Den-
mark, and then about ten years old, the fairest
creature that ever was seen, wherefore she was
called the One without a peer. And because she
suf^red much at sea it was determined to leave
her there. Right gladly did King Languines accept
this charge, and his Queen said> Believe me, I
will take care of her like her own mother. So
Lisuarte proceeded j and, when he arrived at Great
Britain^ he found those who disturbed him, as is
common in such cases> and for this cause he did
not send for his daughter. And with great trou-
ble that he took he was King at last, and he was
the best King that had yet been, nor was there ever
one who better maintained chivalry till King Ax-



40



thur reigned, who passed in goodness all Kingt
that were before him.

The Child of the Sea was now twelve years old,
but in stature and size he seemed filteen^ and he
served the Queen ; but now that Oriana was there,
the Queen gave her the Child of the Sea that he
should serve her, and Oriana said that // pleased
her, and that word which she said the Child kept
in his hearty so that he never lost it from his me-
mory, and in all his life he was never weary of
serving her, and his heart was surrendered to her,
and this love lasted as long as they lasted, for as
well as he loved her did she also love him. But the
Child of the Sea, who knew nothing of her love,
thought himself presumptuous to have placed his
thoughts on her, and dared not to speak to her ;
and she who feved him in her heart was careful
not to speak more with him than witli another ; but
their eyes delighted to reveal to the heart what
was the thing on earth tliat they lOved best. And
now the time came tliat he thought he could take
arms if he were knighted, and this he greatly
desired, thinking that he would do such things,
that, if he lived, his mistress should esteem him.
Witli this desire he went to the King, who was
at tliat time in the garden, and fell upon his knees
before him, and said. Sire, if it please you, it is



• I



41



time for me to receive Knighthood. How^ Child
o£ the Sea! said Languines^ are you strong
enough to maintain Knighthood ? it is easy to re*
ceive^ but difficult to maintain ; and he who would
keep it well^ so many and so difficult are the things
he must atchieve> that his heart will ofben be trou-
bled } and if, through fear^ he forsakes what he
ought to do, better is death to him than life with
shame. Not for this^ replied he^ will I fail to be a
Knight : my heart would not require it^ if it wbre
not in my will to accomplish what you say. And.
since you have bred me up^ compleat what you
ought to do in this ; if not, I will seek some
other who will do it. The King, who feared lest
he should do this, replied, Cliild of the Sea, I
know when this is fitting better tlian you can
know, and I promise you to do it, and your arms
shall be got ready ; but, to whom did you think
to go ? — To King Perion, who they say is a good
knight, and has married the sister of your
Queen. I would tell him how I was brought up
by her, and then he would willingly fulfil my de-
sire. Now, said the King, be satisfied, it shall
be honourably done. And he gave orders that
the arms should be made, and sent to acquaint
Gandales thereof.



42



When Gandales heard this^ he greatly rejoiced;
and sent a Damsel with the sword^ and the ring,
and the letter in the wax, wkich he had found io
the ark. The Child of the Sea was with Oriana
and the ladies of the palace, discoursing, when a
page entered, and told him there was a stranger
Damsel without, who brought presents for him,
and would speak with him. When she who loved
him heard this, her heart trembled, and if any
one had been looking at her they might hare seen
how she changed ; and she told the Child of the
Sea to let the Damsel come in, that they might
see the presents. Accordingly she altered,' and
said. Sir Child of the Sea, your gopd fiiend Gan-
dales salutes you as the man who loves you much,
and sends you this sword, and this ring, and this
wax, and he begs you will wear this sword while
you live for his sake. He took the presents, and
laid the ring and the wax in his lap, while he un-
rolled the sword from a linen cloth in which it was
wrapt, wondering that it should be without a scab-
bard. Meantime Oriana took up the wax, and
said, I will have this, not thinking that it con-
tained any thing : it would have better pleased
him if she had taken the ring, which was one of the
finest in the world. While he was looking at the



43



Bwcfrd, the Kiog came in and asked him^ what
he thought of it. It seems a goodly one^ Sir^ said
he, bat I marvaii wherefore it hath no scabbard.
It is fifteen years, said the King, since it had one ;
and, taking him by the hand, he led him apart,
and said. You would be a Knight, and you know
not whether of ri^t you should be one. I there'
fore tell you all that I know concerning you, and
with that he told him all that Gkindales had com-
municated. The Child of the Sea answered, I be-
lie\re this, for that Damsel said, my good friend
Gandales had sent her, and I thought she had
mistaken, and should have called him my father ;
but I am nothing displeased herewith, except that
I know not my parents, nor they me, for my heart
tells me I am well born 5 and now. Sir, it be-
hoves me more to obtain ktiightliood, that I may
win honour and the praise of prowess, siricc 1
know jiot my lineage, and am like one whose
kindred are all dead. When the King heard him
speak thus, he believed that he would prove a hardy
and good Knight. ,

As they were thus conversing, a Knight came to
inform the King, that King- Perion was arrived.

X^uiguines went to welcome him as one who knew

«

how to do honour to all -, and, after they had sa-



44



luted^ he asked how it was that he came so.unex*
pectedly. I come to seek for friends^ replied Pc-
rion, of whom I have more need than.ever^ for
King Abies of Ireland wars upon me^ and is now
with all his power in my country^ and Dagand^ hi&
half-brother^ is with him^ and both together have
collected sach a multitude against me^ that I stand
in need of all my friends and kinsmen^ for I have
lost, many of my people in battle already, and
others whom I trusted have failed me. Brother^
replied Languines^ your misfortunes grieve me not
a little^ and I shall aid you the best I can, Agrayes^
who was already knighted^ now canoe and knelt
before his father^ saying, Sir^ I beg a boon. The
which being granted, for King Languines loved
him as himself, he pursued, — I request that I may
go to defend the Queen my aunt. And I grant it»
answered Languines, and you shall be as honoura-
bly and well accompanied as may be.

This while had tlie Child of the Sea been looking
earnestly at Perion, not as his father, for of that
he knew nothing, but because of his great good-
ness in arms, of which he had beard tlie fame ;
and he desired to be made a knight by his hand,
rather than by any man in the world. To attain
this purpose, he thought best to entreat the Queen;



45



but her he found so sad that he would not speak to
her 5 and^ going to where Oriana was, he knelt
before her, and said. Lady Oriana, could I know
by you the cause of the Queen's sadness ? Oriana's
heart leaped at seeing him whom she most loved
before her, and she said to him. Child of the Sea,
this is the first thing ye ever asked of me, and I
shall do it with a good will. — Ah, Lady ! I am nei-
ther so bold nor worthy as to ask any thing from
one like you, but rather to obey what it pleases
you to command. What ! said she, is your heart
so feeble ? — So feeble, that in all things towards
you it woidd fail me, except in serving you like
one who is not his own, but yours. Mine ! said
she, since when ? — Since it pleased you, — ^How
stTKc it pleased me f — Remember, Lady, the day
whereon your Father departed, the Queen took
me by the hand, and, leading me before you, said,
I give yoa this child to be your servant 5 and you
said // pleased you. And from that time I have
held and hold myself yours to do you service :
yours only, that neither 1 nor any other while I
live can have command over me. That word, said
she, you took with a meaning that it did not bear,
but 1 am nv(ll pleased that it is so. Then was he
overcome with such pleasure, that he had no power
to answer, and Oriana, who now saw the whole



A6



power that she had over him, went to the Queen
and learnt the cause of her sadness, and, return-
ing to the Child c^ the Sea, tdd him, that it was
for the Queen her sister, who now was so dis-
tressed. He answered. If it pleased you that I
were a Knight, with your leave I would go and
aid the Queen her sister. — ^With my leave ! and
what without it ? would you not then go ? No,
said he ; for without the &vour of her whose it is,
my heart could not sustain itself in danger. Then
Qriana smiled, and said, since I have gained you,
you shall he my Knight, and you sh^ aid the sis-
ter of the Queen. The Child of the Sea kissed
her hand,'»the King my master has not yet
knighted me, and I had rather it should he done
by King Perion at your entreaty. In that, said
she, I will do what I can, but we must speak to
the Princess Mabilia, for her request will avail
with her uncle.

Mabilia, who loved the Child of the Sea with pure
love, readily agreed. Let him go, said she, to the
Chapel of my Mother, armed at all points, and
we and the other Damsels will accompany him ;
and when King Perion is setting off, which will
be before day-break, I will ask to see him, and
then will he grant our request, for he is a cour-



47



teoos knight. When the Child oi the Sea heard
this, he called Gandalin, and said to him, Mjr
brother, take all my arms secretly to the Queen's
chapel, for this night I think to be knighted, and,
because it behoves me to depart right soon> I
would know if you wish to .bear me company ?
Believe me, quoth Gandalin, never with my will
shall I depart from ye. The tears came in the
eyes of the Child at this, and he kissed him in the
iace, and said, do now what I told you. Gan«
dalin laid the arms in the chapel, while the Queen
was at supper; and, when the cloths were re-
moved, the Child of the Sea went there, and
armed himself all, save his head and his hands,
and made his prayer before the altar, beseeching
God to grant him success in arms, and in the
love which he bore his Lady.

When the Queen had retired, Oriana and Mabilia
went with the other damsels to accompany him,
and Mabilia sent for Pmon as he was departing ;
and, when he came, she besought him to do
what Oriana the daughter of King Lisuarte should
request. Willingly, said King Perion, for her
father's sake. Then Oriana came before him;
and, when he saw her, how fair she was, he
thought there could not be found her equal in the



48



world. She begged a boon^ and it^ was granted.
Hien^ said she, naake this my * Gentleman a
Knight 3 and she showed him to Perion, kneeling
before the altar. The King saw him how fair he
was, and approaching him, said, would you re-
ceive the order of Knighthood ? — I would.— In the
name of God, then ! and may He order it that
it be well bestowed on you, and that you may
grow in honour as you have in person. Then,
putting on the right spur, he said, now are you
a Knight, and may receive the sword. The King
took the sword, and gave it to him, and the Child
girded it on. Then, said Perion, according to
your manner and appearance, I would have per-
formed this ceremony with more honours, and I
trust in God that your fame will prove that so it
ought to have been done. Mabilia and Oriana
tlien joyfully kissed the King's hands, and he,
commending the Child of the Sea to God, went
his way.

But he who was now a Knight, took leave of the
Damsels who had watched with him, and Oriana,



♦ An awkward word, but mi Donzel cannot here be ren-
dered otherwise.



4d



whose heart Mras bursting though she dissembled
tliat, led him aisde, and said. Child of the Sea, I
judge of you too well to think you are the son of
Gandales : if you know any thing of this, tell me.
So he told all that from King Languines he had
heard, and she, greatly rejoicing thereat, com-
mended hina to God. He found Gandalin at tlie
palace-door, holding his lance and his shield, and
his horse j and he mounted and went his way, un-»
seen of any, for It was yet night.

They rode on till the noon was past, and then re-
freshed themselves with the food which Gandalin
had brought. And when evening came, they heard
in the wood the voice as of a man in great suffer-
ing; wherefore the Knight rode presently that
way. He found a Knight dead, and hard by him
anotlier sorely wounded, and a woman upon him,
who made him so cry out, for she was thrusting
her hands into his wounds. Help me. Sir Knight,
he cried, and let me not be murdered by this
wretch ! The woman at that fled, and the
Child of the Sea alighted, and took the wounded
man, who had swooned away, in his arms, ^nd so
dealt with him that he levivcd, and cried, take
me where I may have some help for my soul, for
I am slain ! Take courage. Sir Knight, said tlie
VOL. I. n



50



Child, and tell me how this happened. It is that
wicked woman, he replied, whom I took to wife,
and last night she forsook me to go with another,
whom ye now see lying dead. After I had slain
him, I told her that I would forgive her if she would
dishonour me no more j but she, seeing how weak
I was with the loss of blood, fell upon me, and
thrust her hands into the wounds to kill me, so
that well I perceive I cannot long live. Therefore
I beseech ye, good Sir, help me to an hermitage
which is near at hand. And they laid him upon
Crandalin*s horse, ahd went towards the hermi-
tage.

But the woman, who had a little before sent for
her three brothers to save her from her husband^
met them now, whom she had no sooner espied,
tlian she exclaimed. Help me ! for that wicked
Knight, who goes yonder, is carrying away my
husband, whom he hatli well nigh slain. Follow
him, and kill him, and the man with him, who
is as bad as he. Thi^ she said that her guilt
might not be known, and she went on her palfrey
to shew them the way. The Child of the Sea by
this had left the wounded Knight and was pro-
ceeding, when they overtook him, and cried. Stop,
Tr^torl You lie, replied the Child, I am no



51



traitor, and shall defend myself well from trcasOtt :
tome on like Knights ! He broke his lance upon
the first, whom he drove to the earth, both he
and his horse, whence they could neither arise -,
then took his shield from Gandalin, and so played
his part that he lightly discomfited the twain.
The woman attempted to fly, but Gandalin stayed
her. Then said one of the brethren. We know
not. Sir, whether this battle hath been for right
or wrong; and he tlien related what his sister had
told him. The Child blest himself at hearing
this, and told them how she had murdered her
husband, and he took tliem to mercy on condition
that they should carry her and her husband to King
Languines, and tell the King that a young Knight,
who had tliat day sallied out, had sent them to be
at his judgment.



D 2



52



CHAPTER 6.



Then the Child of the Sea gave his shield and hel-
met to Gandalin, and proceeded. They had not
ridden far, when fhey saw a Damsel coming oh
her palfrey^ and she had in her hand a lance with
its belt, and presently another Damsel, who came
by a different path, joined her, and they both
came on communing together. When they reach-
ed him, she with the weapon said. Take this
lance. Sir, and I tell you that within three days it
will stand ye in good stead, as therewith ye shall
deliver from death the house whence ye are de-
scended. He, wondering at her words, replied.
How, Damsel, can a house live or die ? She an-
swered. So it will be ; and this lance I give you
for some services which from you I expect j the
first whereof shall be when you shall do an honour
to one of your friends, whereby he shall be put
into the worst danger that any Knight hath been



53



these ten years space. Damsel^ said he, such ho-
nour, if God please, I will not do nay friend. She
answered. So it will be,— and spurred her palfrey,
and departed. Now this was Urganda the Un-
known.

The other Damsel who remained, then said to him.
Sir Knight, I am from a strange land, and, if it
please you, will abide with you till the third day,
and defer my journey to my mistress. Whence
are you ? said he. — From Denmark. — And he knew
this was truth, for he remembered the language of
Oriana in her childhood. Then, said he, if ye
please. Damsel, to go with me, I will defend ye
to my power j but i pray ye, know ye that otlier
Damsel ? Never till this meeting : she told me
that lance was for the best Knight in the world ;
and desired me, after her departure, to tell ye that
she bare you great affection, and that her name
was Urganda the Unknown. Ah God ! quoth he,
how unfortunate I am ! and I cannot find her
against her will ! And thus devising they went
until the dark evening overtook them.

At this time they met a Squire, who asked where
they were going. Along the road, replied the
Child. That, quoth he, is true 3 but,' if you meaa

D 3



54



to have lodging, ye must turn aside horn it. There
is no dwelling-place uear» ei&cept my Other's cas<^
tle^ and there shall ye be well entertained. And
Uiis the Squire did^ because far on was a castle
which tliey could not pass without doing battle,
and he had never seen the combat of Knights Er-
rant. So they were well served that night, and,
on the morrow when they departed, the S(]|(aire
said he would bring tliem again into their way, a$
far as a castle which they nuist pass.

After riding about three leagues they saw tlie cas^
tie, and a goodly one it seeaaaed, for befene it ran a
river, and it had a drawbridge, whereon was a fylx
tower at the end. The Damsel and the Squires
rode first, but as soon as the Damsel attempted to
pass, six fellows armed with cuirasses and head-
pieces seized her bridle, and told her to swear or
she should die. Swear what ? quoth she. Swear
never to «how favour to your lover till he promise
you to help King Abies against King Perion.
With diat she cried aloud for help, and the Child
of the Sea caught a hatchet from one of the ruf-
fians, and felled him. The rest fell upon him j
one he sliced to the eyes, another from the shoul-
der to the ribs : seeing this, their comrades fled.
Now Damsel proceed, quoth hc^^ and evil bet©



55



tliem that CDcoorage such villainy. But now ay
they went on^ a great noise was heard in the castle,
^nd the Damsel told him to take hi$ arms. Fear
not^ said he, wher« ladies are so evil intreated,
there can be no raeQ wortli any thing. Sir^ quotI>
she, I dare not go on unless you Xske your arms*
So he took them, and proceeded through the gate
of the castle^ where they met sl Squire lamenting
aloud> — ^Ah Qod, they are killing the best Knigh|
in the world for not taking an oath which he can-
not keep ! The Child of the Sea past him, an4
saw King Perion beset by two Knights and tea
Halberders^ who had slain his horse^ and now as-
called him on all sidefi^ crying, Swear or die.
Traitors ! quoth the Child, you shall die for faim.
With that they called to the porter to shut the
castle-gate ; and half of them leaving King Perion
fell upon the Knight. But soon had be slain the
two knights^ and rode among the halberders^ scat-
tering them^ till, with the King's help, they wer©
all slain, except some few who got upon the walls.
But then the Child alighted and followed them,
and some in their fear leapt down, two only ^ed
into a chamber, where lay an old Knight, so aged
that he could not rise, who cried out. From whom
are ye flying, villains ? — From a Knight, who hath)

D 4



56



played * the devil in your castle, killed both your
nephews, and all our comrades. The Child of the
Sea had followed them, and bade them shew him
their master or he would slay them -, and, when
he saw the old man in bed, he blest himself, and
said. Thou old wretch ! art thou on the very edge
of the grave, and dost thou maintain such cus-
toms ? With tliese words he made offer to smite
off his head. Ah, mercy ! quoth the old man.
Swear then, said the Knight, that, while thou
livest, no more such treason be maintained here.
Whereto the old man right gladly took his oath.
Now tell me, wherefore hast thou heretofore kept
this custom } — For the love of King Abies of
Ireland, who is my nephew, and because I could
not aid him with my body, I wished to assist him
with such Knights Errant as passed this way*
Palse villain ! quoth the Child of the Sea. With,
that he kicked down the bed, and the old maa
with it, and, commendiBg him to all the devils,
he left him, and went down into the court, and
took- the horse of one of the Knights whom he
had slain, and leading it to King Perion, cried.



« Que faze diabluras.



57

Mount, Sir ! for I little like this place, and thoser
who are in it. They then departed.

The Child of the Sea wonld not take off his hel»
met, lest tlie King should know him, and when
Perion asked who he was that had succoured him
in such need, he persisted in concealing himself,
till the Damsel took his helmet off, then presently
Perion knew him, that it was the youth whom he
had knighted at the Ladies* request, and embracing
him he said, truly I now know you better than
before. Sir, quoth the Child, I knew you well,
that it was you who gave me the order of knight-
hood, wherewith, so please it God, I shall serve
you in your wars in Gaul-. They came at length
to a' double way, and the Knight asked Perion
which way he took. The left, answered the King,
for it leadeth to my country. God have you then
in' his keeping, quoth the Child, for I must take
the right. Then said Perion, I pray you remem-
ber your promise. So took tliey leave of each-
other. The Damsel then said to the Child of the
Sea, Sir Knight, I have hitherto kept ye company,
because the Damsel who gave you the lance said
she brought it for the best knight in the world,
and surely I have seen so much that I know it was
■it truth. Now I will shape my course towards my

D 5



58



Lady. And who is she ? Oriana, the daughter
of King Lisuarte. But when he heard his Lady
named, his heart trembled in such sort that he had
nigh fallen from his horse. Gandalin, vrho saw
him totter, ran to him, and he cried. My heart
faiieth me t Tlie Damsel, tliinkipg some sudden
sickness was the cause thereof, would have had htm
unarmed, bi(t he told her it was needless, and
that he was liable to such seizures. They then,
parted company : the Damsel and the Squire to-
ward the court of Languines^ and the Child of the
Sea and Gaudalln going where fortune guided
them.



Two days tliey rode without adventure, and on the
iliird about mid-day arrived in sight of a goodly-
castle, that belonged to Galpano, the most valiant
Knight in those parts, but who followed the ser*
vice of the wicked enemy, instead of the Lord's^
who had endowed him with strength and coinage.
He had a custom to make all Ladies and Damsels
tliat passed his castle enter m, where forcibly he
took his will of them, and made them swear never
to take other lovers than him, which, if they re-
fused, he beheaded tliem, and what Knights came
be made combat with his two brethren, whom, if
they conquered, he would force the conqueror to



Sff



deal with himself^ who was the strongest Knight
in all that country^ and he made tliem swear to
call themselves the conquered by Galpano^ else he
cut off their heads ; and^ when they had swonv
he stript them of all they had^ and. sent them away
afoot«



96



60



CHAPTER 7.



As the Child of the Sea approaclied thC' Castle Be
met a Damsel accompanied by a Squire and page,
she was a fair damsel, and her hair was beautiful
which she rent as she went along, and made great
lamentation. When the Knight heard how she had
suffered from the custom of that Castle, he took
her bridle and said, come with me and I shaU
avenge you. So they rode on and entered the Base
Court where was a Knight on horseback who said
to him, come on and receive your dishonour ! tell
me, quoth the Child, art thou the villiau who forced
this Lady. No, said he, but if I were, what
wouldstthott then ?* Revenge her^ said the Child of
the Sea. The Knight of the Castle then spurred his
horse 'and ran at him full speed, but the Child
meeting him in full career gave him such greeting,
that shield nor breast plate availed, for the lance
went through his shoulder and he fell down deiad.
The Child drew out the lance and met the second
Kni'^ht so directly that he rent bis helmet frojpft



61



his headaod bore him to the ground. He cried
out for help, whereon three halberders issued out^
to whom he said kill this traitor ! they all ran vio-
lently on tlie Child and slew his horse^ but he
lightly rose, and first he drove his lance tlirough
the Knight, between the ear and neck, then be-
stirred hknself against the other three, who coming
behind had wounded him in the shoulder^ so tliat
he lost much blood, full well he recompensed tlie
villain that did.it, for he clove him down to tlie
chest. The others £ed, crying aloud for help>
the Child leapt on the horse of one of the Knights
and followed, and he saw a Knight unarmed at a
door who cried out to him what hath moved ^ee
to come here and kill my people ? Sir, quoth the
Damsel^ th'ts is the villain ? Villain said the Child,
dearly shalt tliou pay for thy disloyal dealing, go
arm thee, else I will slay thee naked as thou art,
for to such wretches there should be no mercy ,
shown. But the Damsel cried out, kill him that
tliat he live not to abuse any more, for that will be
to your account. Ah, wretch ! quoth he, in an
evil hpur came he hitlier in thy company, and he
went in telling the Child to wait for him, for it
was no use to fly.

Calpano soon came armed into the Court, mount-'



62



cd on a lusty white Courser^ and cried to the
Child,* well mayest thou repent the time that ever
thou sawest this Damsel, for it will cost thee thy
head. Thereat in auger he replied, each must
guard his own, and let he who cannot, lose itV
Without longer stay they couched their spears,
which in their encounter pierced through shield
and armour to the flesh, and so fofcibly did shields
helmets and bodies clash together that they botb
fell. Soon they arose, and laid hand to sword
and threw their shields before them and began a
fierce combat. The splinters of their shields were
strewn about, and pieces of their armours, and
their helmets were battered and brcAen, and the
ground whereon they fought covered with their
blood. Galpano who felt a sore wound in his head
drew back to wipe away the blood from his eyes^
How now Galpano ? quoth the Child, dost thou
not remember that we fight for our lieads, and
if thou defendcst not thy own thou wilt lose it!
Be patient a while, answered Galpano, and let us.



♦ Jy Cavaliers Malandantt. -^Tht phrase is untransIaUblie.
Erring Knight has something of the same play upon the
phrase.



63



breathe a little^ we have time enough to make an
end. Not so, said the Child, I do not combat
thee for courtesy ! and so fiercely then be smote
him that he bent his knees to the ground, yet
quickly he arose and defended himself} but the
Child pressed him that be could scarce lift
his sword, and now sought only to protect him*
self with the slileld, and the shield was hewn
away piecemeal, tlien having no remedy he fled,
and would have got into a tower where his men
were, but tlie Child overtook him by the steps,
and caught him *by the helmet, and smote his
head from his shoulders, then turning to the Dam-
sel, said, now may ye chuse another lover, for this.
to whom ye swore hatli discharged ye from your
vow. He would have ascended the tower, but
the steps were drawn up, then mounting the
horse of Galpano which was a goodly one, he said,
let us be gone. I will take the head of this villain >
said she, and present it to the Knight to whom I
am sent on your behalf. The Child answered, not
tlie head, that will be troublesome i take tlie hel^
met instead, and he asked to whom she was going.
To Agrayes, said she. Son of the King of Scotland,
she then by her importunity learnt who had suc-
coured her, and went her way.



64



The Child rode on, but he bled fast along the wajr^
and the white horse was stained with his blood, about
the hour of vespers he saw a Castle, from whence
an unarmed Knigkt came out to ineet him and
asked him where he took those wounds. — In a
Castle not far behind.— And that horse :— I took hira
in the place of my own which they slew there.-—
And where is the Knight whose he was ? He has
lost his head, said the Child. Then would the
Knight have kissed his feet, saying. Ah, Sir, you
are right welcome, for by you have I recovered
my honour ! for this was one whom Galpano had
conquered. Sir Knight, then said the Child, where
can I find some remedy for my wounds ? In my
house, he replied ', my niece shall cure ye better
than any other in this land. So he caused him to
be unarmed, and laid in a sumptuous bed, where
his wounds were looked to by the Lady, who told
him tliat if he could rest there for a few days, ha
would be made whole.



1



65



CHAPTER e.



On the third day afler the Child of the Sea had
left the court of King Languiries, the three bre-
thren arrived there with their false sister^ and her
wounded husband in a litter^ and they delivered the
woman into the King's hand^ on the part of a new
Knight who had latdy left his court. The King
blest himself at hearing the woman's wickedness^
and^ turning to the wounded man^ said^ Methinks
so wicked a woman as your wife deserveth not to live.
Sire, said he, do therein what you think £t, but I
.never will consent to kill the thing I most love.
So the brethren then took leave of the King, and
carried with them the wounded Knight^ leaving
their sister to receive judgment. The King said to
her. Thy husband is more loyal to tliee, than thou
Iiast been to him j but ye shall dearly abide your
falshood. And he made her be burat.



C6



Languines marvailed much who the Knight could
be^ for no one but Oriana> and the Damsels wha
had been with her, knew that the Child of the Sea
was knighted, and the King thought he was gone
to visit Gandales. The Squire was standing by
who had lodged him, and afterward conducted
him to the c^3tle where he delivered King Perion*
It may be, qnoth he, a young Knight, with whom
I and a Damsel of pen mark that is here, kept
company for a while. Know you his name ? said
Languines. — ^No, Sire ; but he is young, and >ex«^
{deeding fair, and I saw him do such rare deeds of
^chivalry in so little time, that in mine opinion, if
he live, he will pfove one of the best knights in
the world. Then discoursed he of all that he had
^een him atchieve in rescue of King Perion, and
^dded. Mayhap the Damsel who come hither with
me can tell ye more tidings of him, for I met
them together. Presently was she sent for, where^
upon sbe declared so much as she knew, chie6y,
how Urganda brought him the lance, and said it
was for the best knight in the world ; but in sooth,,
quoth she, I knbw not his name, for never could
I learn it of him Ah God ! said the King, who
may it be ? Now she who loved him, doubted
not who it was 3 but she was in great trouble^ for



(57



the King her father had sent for her^ and loath
was she to go where she could not so often re-
ceive news from him whom she loved more than
herself.

Afier six da}'s^ as the King was conferring with
his son Agrayes, who now was about departing to
succour the King his uncle, there qame in a Dam-*
sel and knelt to the Prince, and said. Sir, hear me
a while before the King your father. Then took
she in her hand a helmet, with so many sword-
dints and breaches that there was not a sound place
in it. Take, Sire, this helmet instead of the head
of Galpano. I present it to you on the part of a
young Knight, whom of all living it best becomes
to follow arms, and this he sends you because
Galpano dishonoured a Damsel who was going on
your service. What ! quotli the King, is Galpano
overcome by the hand of one man ? This certainly
must be tlie same young Knight. And he asked
the Damsel if she knew his name. That learnt I,
she answered, with great importunity. He is
called the Child of the Sea. Ah ! quoth Agrayes,
where may I find him ? — My Lord, he commend-
cth himself to you, giving you to understand tliat
you shall find him at the wars. Great was tha
joy for tiaese good tidings of the Child of the Sea ;



68



but above all was his Lady Oriana i-ejoiced, thougb
she concealed it. The King enquired from the
Damsels how he was knighted^ and when they
told him by their means, he replied. More cour-
tesy hath he found in you than in me 3 though I
only delayed, thinking he was yet too young.
The Damsel now delivered her bidding to Agrayes^
and he departed with a good company for Gai^,.



69



CHAPTER 9.



About ten days after the departure of the Prince^
there came three ships from Great Britam, wherein
as chief was the good Knight Gaidar de Rascuyl,
accompanied by an hundred knights^ and with a
sai table train of dames and damsels for Oriana.
Lisuarte sent them to give to King Languines his
hearty thanks for the gentle entreatance of the
Princess his daughter, and to request that Mabilia
would now come with her, who should be in like
manner J^^received and entertained. Right joyfully
did Languines consent, and adorned them well^
and made due preparations for their voyage. Ori^
ana, knowing that she must needs go, made ready}
and when she was putting her jewels in order, she
found among tliem the wax which she had taken
from the Child of the Sea, That recollection
brought tears into her eyes, and she clasped her
hands in thought^ so that tlie wax brake^ and she



70



law die writing within^ and read. This is Amadis,
Son of a King -, but^ when she had read tliis,
never did such joy enter tlie heart of man as she
felt. VVitliout delaj she called the Damsel of Den-
mark^ and said to her. My friend, I will tell you
something which no other than you and my own
heart must know ; tlierefore, do you keep it as
the secret of such a Princess as I am, and of the
"best Knight in the world. That will I do, quoth
the Damsel, and doubt not to confide in nae.
Then so it is, dear friend, said Oriana, you must
^ go and seek that young Knight whom you know— ^
he is called the Child of the Sea, and ye shall find
him at the war in Gaul : if he be not there,
await his coming, and give him this writing,
wherein he shall find his name written at tlie time
when he was cast into the sea. He is the son of
a King, and, if he was so good when he knew
not who he was, now will he be yet better. And
tell him that I am sent for to my father's court,
and I bid him, when he leaves the war, come there
also, that he may dwell there till I appoint him
what to do. With this errand the Damsel of
Denmark set out for Gaul. The Princesses now
embarked, Languines and tlie Queen commending



^



1



them to God. The weather wai prosperous, and
ia a short time they reached Great Britain,

The Child of the Sea remained fifteen days in that
castle, where the Damsel looked to his wounds,
and then, though they were hardly healed, de-
parted. It was on a Sunday morning that he and
Gandalin took leave of his host and his gentld
leech, and entered a great forest. This was
in the month of April, and he heard the hirds sing
in the wocx), and saw the flowers on all sides, and
then he thought of his love, and said aloud. Ah
Child without lands and without lineage ! how
hast thou dared to place thy heart upon her who
excels all other in goodness, and beauty, and pa«
rentage ? For each of these tliree things the best
Knight should not dare to love her, for more
avails her beauty than the worth of the best Knight
in the world, and her goodness than the wealth of
the wealthiest j and I, who know not what 1 am,
must live with the pain of my own rashness, and
die without declaring it ! He had made this moan
with his head hanging down, and now looking up
he espied a Knight on horseback, who had over-
heard him. The Knight perceiving that he stopt,
came before him and said. It seems you love your
mistress. Sir, better than yourself, when in com-



72



jnendlngber you dispraise yoursdf: tell me who
she is, that I may love her, as you by your own
confession are not worthy. Sir Knight, replied
the Child, you have some reason for what you say,'
but you shall know nothing more, 'and, if you
were to love her, you would have no success*
The Knight answered, toil and danger for the love
of one*s Lady ought to be deemed an honour, for
at die end comes the reward, slnd he that loveth in
so high a place as you do, should not be aggrieved
at aught tliat may happen. The Cliild of tlie SeH

•

thought that he spake well, and would have pro-
ceeded, but the other cried. Stay, Knight, for
cither by will or by force you must tell me what I
demanded ! Go to, then ! quoth the Child. So
^an they lace their helmets, and took their shields
and lances, and as they were separating for the
joust, a Damsel came up and cried. Stay, Knights,
and answer me one thing first, for I am in haste,
and cannot tarry the end of your combat. At these
words they stayed. — Have you seen a young
Knight called the Child of the Sea? And what
would you with him ? said the Child. — I bring
him tidings fiom his friend Agrayes, son of tlie
King of Scotland. Wait a little, replied he, and
I wiU give ye news of him- — and witli that he
turned towards the Knight, who v,'m calling tfe



73



him to defend himself. They ran their course :
the lance of the Knight flew up in shivers^ and
both he and his horse were borne to the ground.
The horse rose and was starting away^ but the
Child caught him and said^ Sir Knight^ take your
horse> and henceforth seek not to know any thing
against a man*s will.

Then turning to the Damsel, he asked her if she
knew him for whom she enquired ? No, said she,
but Agrayes told me he would make himself known
so soon as I should say that I came from him.
Right, quoth the Child, for I am he ! And with
these words he unlaced his helmet; and when
she saw his face, the Damsel cried, in truth do I
believe it, for I have heard him speak wonders of
your beauty. — Where did you leave Agrayes ?-—
Hard by the shore, not far hence, where he is
about to embark with his troops for Gaul, and he
wished to learn tidings of you, that you might
cross with him. God reward him ! said the Child,
lead on and show the way.

They soon came to the shore whereon the tents
were pitched; and being now near them, they
heard a voice behind. Stay, Knight, for you shall
tell me what I asked. He turned, and saw the
VOL. I. m



74



Knight whom lie bad dismocmted, «Bd' another
now with him^ and taking his arms met 'them badi
with their spears -in rest and careeriog at him^ full
speed. And thej from the tents saw him how firm
he rode in the sadcfie, so that they marvelled^ ibr
^ere was no Kn^ht of his tino^ who rode better,
or jousted with more grace^ so that by this he was
often discovered when he wished not to be known.
Their bolh speans struck his shield which fa^cd
him> bat his breast-plate not. He ran at the
Knight whom he had belbre overthrown^ and.
threw him again so roughly that in the fall he
brake his arm. The Child lost his kpce ; he
turned "With his sword against the other^ and gave
h him on the head that he ^iacced the helmet, and
he drew bade the sword so forcibly that the lacea
brake, and the helmet came with the sword.
The Child then passed the «word to his left hand,
and caught his enemy's shidd, and plodced it
from his neck and dashed it on his head, so that
he fell stunned. Then the Child gav« his anas to
Gandalin, and proceeded* to the tents^

Agrayes went to meet him, won^tedng who he
mi^t be that had so soon discomfited two KQights^
he knew him, and diey embraced, and there waa
great joy when it was known that the OaaUd a£ the



75



Sea "sras arrived. The Prince then sent for the
two Knights to hts tent. Believe me^ friends^
•aid he, jrou attempted great folly to meddle with
this Knight. True, said he with the broken arm,
jet I saw him in such plight that I little thought
to find any resistance from him ! and then he told
what had past in the fcH'est, only the lamentation
of the Child he durst not repeat.

The next day they decamped, and rode to Palin-
'gaes, a sea-town opposite to Gaul. Then they
entered the ships of Agrayes, and with fair wind
toon reached a town in Gaul, called Galfan, and
iir5Hn dience the Castle Baladin, wherein was King
Perion, who had lost many of his people, and was
right glad of their coming. Agrayes went to vbit
Queen Elisena, taking with him the Child of the
fiea, and two other Knights of good account.
When Perion saw the Child, he took him by the
band and led him to the Queen,— This is the good
Knigitt, of whom I told ye hereto&)re, who de-
fended me from the greatest danger that ever J was
in, and this I tell you that you niay love him better
than any other Knight. The Queen advanced her*
self to embrace him^ and he fell on his knee and
said. Lady, I am the servant of your sister, and
for her sake oome tp serve you, with like obedi-

«2



76



cnce as to her person. The Queen thanked him
lovingly^ and seeing him how £ak he was^ she
thought of her own sons who were lost^ and the
tears came $ so she wept for him who was before
her, and she knew him not. Do not weep. Lady,
quoth he, you shall be restored to your chearful-
ness with the help of God, and the King, and this
Knight your nephew, and me, who willingly will
serve you. When Agrayes departed he would
have taken tlie Child with him, but £lisena said
he was her Sister's Knight, and should be lodged
with them. So he became his Mother's guest.

King Abies and Daganel soon heard that succour
was arrived. Now, said the King, if King Perion
has a heart to fight he will give us battle. Daga-
nel replied, he feareth you too much, for Abies
was then the best Knight known. Galayn, Duke
of Normandy, who was present, then said, I will
tell you how we will make him. Daganel and I
will set out to night, and at Inreak of day we will
appear before his town with a reasonable force.
King Abies with the rest of the army shall lie in
ambush in the forest. He will take heart and
sally out upon us 5 we will feign a fear, and take
flight towards the forest, and there shall they all
be destroyed. You say well, replied Abies, let it



77

be done. Presently they and all their people were
armed and entered the forest, and there the King
remained, while Daganel and Galayn proceeded.

When the morning came, Perion and the Queen
went into the Child's chamber. v'W^>^-^ f^^nj
rising and washing ^\s hands, and they saw that
his eyes w<:ie red and his cheeks marked with
tears, so that it was plain he had slept little that
night, and truly he had been thinking of his Lady,
and how hopeless his love was, and tliat death was
all he could expect. Queen Elisena took Gandalin
aside, and asked him the cause of his Master's
sadness, if it was for any offence that he had re-
ceived there. He replied, he hath received great
honour here, and this. Madam, is his custom : he
is wont to weep at night, as you see. While they
were discoursing, the townsmen saw theirenemies
near, and shouted, to arms ! to arms ! Right glad
was the Child of the Sea at this alarm : they
armed themselves and rode to the gate, where
they found Agrayes in wrath, because tlie wardens
would not let him go forth, for he was one of the
most spirited Knights in the world, and if his
strength had been like his courage, there would
have been none to surpass him in prowess. At the
King's command the gates were opened, and all

£3



78

the Kni^ts went forth ; bat^ seeing their CDemiet
to be so great a number^ there were some who
. said it would be folly to attack them. But Agrayey
'Spurred his horse^ exclaiming ill luck to him who
tarries longer ; and the Child of the Sea had at-
jready advsneed- 4)efcre him,— so they went to the
charge. Daganel and (iaSf i)^ made ready to re*
ceive them as those whom they faoartily hated.
^The Child of the Sea encountered Galayn^ Who was
foremost^ and overthrew both man and horse> and
the Duke brake his leg in the fall. The Child had
broken his lance i he laid hand of his sword> and
rode among them^ striking on all sides so fiercely
that nothing could withstand his blows^ till he was
beset that his horse could not moye for the throng..
Agrayes with some of his followers forced their
way to him^ and made a great destruction among
their enemies ; and King Perion with his people
came up^ whom Daganel as well received. Then
were the armies mingled together : there might
you have seen the Child of the Sea doing wonders*
felling all that opposed him^ hewing and chining
his enemies^ and shewing such chivalry that none
durst abide him. Agrayes^ at seeing him, took
the more courage, and cried ^oad to encourage
his men^ Look at the best Knight that ever was
bom ! When Daganel saw the Child of the S<3iU



what havoc he made> he made up to him^ and
strove to kill his horse^ that he might &11 among
the thnmg ; but that he could not efiect, for the
Child gave him such a stroke on the helmet that
the laces bursty and it fell off^ and King Perion^
who had come to the Child's su«cour^ with ano-
ther blow clefl him to the teeth. Then were they
of Ireland and the Normans conquered, and they
£ed to the forest, crying aloud for King Abies that
he should not tarry longer, and suffer them to be
destroyed ; and Perion and his company pursued
till they saw Abies and his main army advance,
crying. Set on them ! leave not a man alive ! enter
the town with them ! When the Knights of Gaul
found themselves thus surprised, they were af-
frighted, for they were weary and their lances
lu'oken, and King Abies was the best Knight in
the world, and the one whom they most feared.

But the Child of the Sea cried, now. Sirs, ye must
maintain your honour ! it will be seen what each
is worth ! The Irish came •n like fresh men, and
who had a great heart to do mischief. King Abies
l^t not a Knight in his saddle so long as his spear
lasted -y tlien drew he his sword, and laid about
him so valiantly that King Perion's men could not
withstand him> and they retreated towards the

b4



80



town. The Child seeing that bestirred himself
more angrily, and fought in the front, so that he
gave the Gauls leisure to retire in some order, and
prevented their utter rout. Agrayes and Perion
always kept by him, and they tliree were the safety
of the host, and enough to do had those Irishmen
whom Abies had sent forward to enter the town,
that the war might be finished. And now the
Gauls had entered the gates, and King Abies came
up, hoping that his men had .entered with them,
and greatly was he grieved to see that it was other-
wise, and the more for he now heard how that
Galayn and Daganel were slain. One of his peo-
ple came up to him, and said. Sire, do you see
that Knight on the white horse, who does nothing
but wj^at is marvellous ? he it is who slew your
Captains. It was the Child of the Sea, who rode
the white horse of Galpano. With that King
Abies rode up to him and said. Knight ! thou hast
ilain the man in the world whom I most love,
and dearly shalt thou abide it if thou wilt come out
and continue the batfle. The Child replied, this
is not a time to fight with you : for your men are
many in number and fresh, and we are but few,
and so travailed, that it is a wonder how we have
resisted you ; but if ye will show tlie great har-
diness for which you are renowned, and revenge.



81



him of whom ye speak like a Knight, chuse you
of your people as many as you think fit, and I wifl
do the same, and then being equal you may gain
the more honour 5 which is not to be won by com-
ing with so great a number to take what is not
your own. King Abies replied, of how many
shall the battle be ? Since you leave it in my
choice, said the Child, I will propose what may
please you better. You are mine enemy for what
I have done to-day, and I yours for the wrong
you have done this land. It is not reasonable that
any other than ourselves should suffer. Let the
battle be between you and me, and presently, if
ye will, only let neither side stir till the end. — So-
let it be, said Abies 5 and he called ten of his best
Knights, who, with ten Knights of the Child's
party, were appointed to keep tlie fiel#. King
Perion and Agrayes would have had him delay the
combat till the next day, seeing that he was sore
wounded 5 but he would not be moved, desiring
the battle above all things, that he might prove him-
self against him who had tlie renown of the best
Knight in the world, and thinking that if he con-
quered, the war would be finished, and he might
retum to his Lady Oriana, on whom his heart and
all his desires were £xed.

£ 5



82



CHAPTER 10.



But they on both sides^ seeing that the greater
part of the day was spent» determined that the
combat should be delayed till the morrow, albeit
agaiiist the will of both cham^^ns, and this also
they did that their arms might be repaired, and
some remedy applied to their wounds, and because
both armies being >wearied, and having been
hardly handled, stood in need of rest. The Child
©f the Sea therefore entered the town with Agrayes
and King^ Perion, and, as he rode along with his
head unarmed, the people cried out. Ah, good
Knight ! God give tljce grace to proceed as thou
hast begun ! thou art a fair Knight, and CHae upoa
whom knighthood waswdl bestowed. As they
drew nigh the palace, a Damsel met them, and
said to the Child of the Sea, that the Queen de^
sired he would not be disarmed any where but ia
her apartments. This was at the King's desire,
^ho now said^ frieudj yea must needs grant this



83



Teqocst, and Agrayes mxist bear you company. So
they -went thither, where they found the Queen,
and with her many Ladies and Damsels ready to
disarm them, but the Queen would suffer none of
them to touch the Child of the Sea, whom she
herself disarmed, and threw a mantle over him.
The King then came and saw how he was wound-
ed, and asked him why he had not delayed the day
of battle. It had been needless, quoth the Child;
I have no wound to detain me. So they pre-
sently dressed his wounds, and the supper was
brought.

On the morrow the Queen and her Ladies went to
visit them, and they found them conversing with
the King. Then mass was said, which being
ended, the Child armed himself, not in the arms
which he had worn yesterday, for they had been
so dealt with that they were useless, but in a rich
and goodly armour. Then he took leave of the
Queen, and mounted a fresh horse. King Perion
carried his helm, and an old Knight called Aga*
non his lance, and Prince Agrayes his shield^
whereon were pourtrayed two azure lions in a field
of gold, rampant the one against the other. They
went out from the town, and foiuid King Abies
mounted on a large black courser, armed at aU

m6



84.



points .save his head. The townsmen and those
of the host placed themselves where they niight
best see the combat. The lists were marked out,
and scaffolding erected round them. Then they
laced on their helmets. King Abies hung round
his neck a shield, which bore a giant in a field
aznre, arid a knight beheading him, for so had he
once slain a giant who had lain waste his country.
When tliey both had taken their arms, all who
were in the lists went out, each commending their
own champion to God 5 and tlie two Knights ran
at each other, as they who were of great strength
and good heart. At the first encounter all their arms
failed, the lances pierced through shield and breast
plate^ and into the flesh, and the staves flew in
pieces, and they met body to body and horse to
horse so furiously that botli fell, and all the be-
holders thought them dead > but soon they rose,
and plucked the spear-heads from the wound, and
engaged so fiercely with their swords that it was
fearful to see tliem. Yet the combat seemed un-
equal, not that the Child of the Sea was not well
made and of goodly stature, but King Abies was
10 large that there was no Knight whom he did no'
exceed in stature by a palm, and his limbs were
like those of a giant 5 he was, however, beloved
hy his people^ and had in him aU good qualitie&'



85



except that he was too proud. The battle between
them was cruel and without any respite, and their
strokes resounded like the fight of twenty knights.
They sliced away the shields, and battered the hel-
mets, and hewed away the harness, and each bled
so fast, that it was a wonder how tliey could en-
dure, and thus tliey continued till the hour * of
tierce -, and then tlie Sun grew hot and heated
their armour, so tliat tliey began to wax somewhat
feeble.

At tliis time King Abies drew back. Hold ! said
he, and let us rest if you will : thou art the best
Knight that ever I combated withal — ^but I shall
not for that spare thee, for thou hast killed him.wliom
J loved best, and now puttest me to shame that
the battle should last so long, before so many good
men. The Child of the Sea answered him. King
Abies, thou hast shame for tliis, and not for enter-
ing this country in thy pride, and doing so much
evil to him who had not deserved it at thy hands I
Remember that men, and Kings especially, are not
to do what they can, but what they ougA/, And
now tliou wishest to rest ! — so have they whom



* Nine in the morning.



86



you in your oppression would not allow to rest ;
and that you may feel what you have made others
feel^ look to yourself^ for you shall not rest here.
Abies then took his sword and the little of his
shield that was left -, to thy own misfortune dost
thou brave me> quoth he^ for thou shalt not leave
these lists till I have cut off thy head. Do thy ut-
most ! replied the Child. Herewith more cruelly
than before tliey renewed the battle, as if it were
even then begun. King Abies, who was well
practised in arms, fought warily now, warding the
sword of his antagoiiist and striking where the
blow could injure most; but the lightness and
promptitude of the Child made him in the end lose
ground. And now has the Child destroyed all the
remaining part of his shield, and wounded him so
often that the sword turned in his hand for weak-
nessj and so prest he was that he gave back, and
almost turned to fly, seeking some safety against
that sword that so cruelly he felt. But, when he
saw no remedy but death, he grasped his sword in
both bands, and smote at the Child, thinking to
hew his helmet ; the shield caught the blow, and
the sword pierced in so deep that Abies could not
pull it forth. The Child, in return, struck him so
fiercely on the left leg that he cut it off, and the
King fell. The Child set foot upon him, and.



87



plucking off his helmet^ said. Thou art dead. King:
Abies, if thou dost not yield thyself vanquished !
He replied, I am indeed dead, not vanquished,
and my pride has overthrown me. 1 pray thee,,
let assurance be given to my people, that they may.
safely depart and carry me into my own country*
1 fbrgtve thee and all whom I hated, and all that
I have taken from King Periou shall be restored,
and I beseech you let me be confessed. When the
Child of the Sea heard this, he was exceeding
sorrowful for King Abies, though he knew that
he would have been without pity had he been the
conqueror } and now the men of the army and of
the town assembled in peace. King Abies ordered
all bis conquests to be restored, and Perion gave
assurance to the Irish that they might return in
safety. And Abies, having received all the sacra-
ments of the holy church, gave up the ghost ;
and tkey carried him to his own country, making
great lamentation ^sr his loss.

King Perion and Agrayes, and the Chiefs of the
realm, then came to the Child, and led him away
fcdta the field with such honoors as the conquerors
in these feats are wont to receive, who by their
prowess procure not only glory to themselves, but
the wel£u» of a ruined country. The Damsel of



83



Denmark had arrived at the commencement of the
battle, and now, seeing how happily it had ended,
she came up to him j — Child of the Sea, speak witli
me apart. He went aside with her, and then she
said, Oriana, your mistress, hath sent me, and I
bring you from her tliis writing wherein you shall
find your name. He took the writing, but he
had heard nothing save the name of his Lady, and
that had so confused him that the writing fell from
his hand, and he dropt tlie reins upon his horse's
neck. What now. Sir ? quoth she -, take you so
ill the message that comes from the noblest Damsel
in the world, and who so dearly loveth you, and
hatli made me endure so much toil in your search I
Friend ! said he, I did not hear what you said for
this pain which seized me, as you once witnessed
heretofore. She answered, you need not dissemble
with me. I know both your affairs and my Lady's,
for she hath trusted me, and, if you love her, you
do no wrong, for it is not easy to relate how
dearly she loveth you. And with that she repeated
Oriana's message, and gave him again the writing,
which he opened, and saw that his name was
Amadis. The Damsel having accomplished her
errand, would then have returned, but he besought
her to remain till the third day, and tlien he would
accompany her. I came to you, she replied, and



89



shall do ai jou command. ^ The Child then re-
joined King Perion^ who was awaiting him.

As they entered the city, the people welcomed with
shouts their deliverer. So they proceeded to the
palace, and in the Child's chamber they found the
Queen and all h^r Ladies, and they took him in
their arms from his horse, and the Queen disarmed
him, and Masters came and searched his wounds,
which tho' many were without danger. The King
desired that he and Agrayes would eat with him,
but he would have no other company than the
Damsel, to whom he did all the honour that could
be devised. Thus he remained some days, nor
did his wounds prevent him from walking fre«
quently in a great hall to converse with the Damsel,
whom he still detained till he could bear arms and
accompany her.



90



CHJFTER 11.



It 80 h^enedy that as he waa one day wa&ing m
the hall with the Damseli youog Melicia^ King
Perion's daughter^ past by him weeping. He
asked her why she wept^ and she told him for a
ring, which her father had given her to keep while
he slept, and which she had lost. I will give yoi^
another as good, said the Child^ afid he gave her
one from his finger. She looked at it, and cried,
this is the one I lost. Not so, said he. — ^Then it is
the one in the world most like it. So much the
better : you may give it for the other. And, leav-.
ing her, he went with the Damsel to his chamber,
and laid upon his bed, and she upon another that
was there.

The King awoke, and asked his daughter for the
ring ; then gave she him the same she had of the
Prince, which he put on, thinking it was his own -,



91



loot presently be saw his own lying where Melicia
bad dropt it^ and taking it ap he compared it with
the other, which he then' saw was the one which
be had given to Elisena, and which she told him,
when he had enquired ^r it^ had been lost He
demanded of the little girl how she came by that
ring 5 and she, who was much afraid of him, told
bim what had happened. Immediately he began
to suspect the Queen, that she bad fallen into
some dishonest liking of the young Knight for bis
great wortb and exceeding beauty ; and he took
bis sword, and went into the Queen* s chamber,
and fastened the door. Madam, said he, you ab-
wa3r8 denied to me the ring which I gave you,
and the Child of the Sea has now given it to Me^
licia ! How came be by it ? if you tell me a lie,
your bead shall pay for it. Ah Grod, mercy 1
quoth Elisena, and fell at bis feet. I will tell you
what I have hitherto * concealed, but now yon
suspect me ! And then she told him how she had
exposed the infant, with whom the ring and the
sword were placed ; and then she l»nented, and
beat her face. Holy Mary ! cried the King, I be-
lieve that this is our child ! The Queen stretched



* This 18 an oversight of the Author. Eltsena before- ro«
lated the exposure after the loss of Galaor.



D2



out her hands, — may it pfease God ! With that
they went into his chamber, whom they found
sleeping ; but Elisena wept bitterly because of her
husband's suspicion. The King took the Child'0
■word which was at the bed*s-head, and looking
at it he knew it well, as one wherewith he had
given many and hard blows 5 and ne said to £li»
«ena. By my God I know the sword ! Then Elisena
took the Child by the arm, and wakened him,
who awoke in wonder, and asked her why she
wept Ah I said she, whose son art thou ? — So
help me God I know not, for by great hap I was
found in the sea ! The Queen fell at his feet,
hearing him, and he cried. My Grod ! what is ail
this ? My son, quoth she, you see your parents !

•

When the first joy had a little subsided he remem-
bered the writing, and took it from his bosom.
Elisena saw it was what Darioletta had written.
Ah, my son, quoth she, when last I saw this
writing I was in all trouble and anguish, and now
am I in all happiness, — ^blessed be Grod !

It were long to tell what joy Agrayes made and
the Lords of the realm at this discovery. The
Damsel of Denmark could now no longer abide.
Sir Amadis, said she, I will go carry these good



93



tidmgs to my Lady, for you must tany to giro
joy and gladness to those eyes that have shed so
many tears for your sake. God have you in his
keeping ! replied Amadis. I shall soon follovt^,
and will come in ai'ms like those I wore against
King Abies, so shall ye know me.

At this time would Agayes also depart j for the
Damsel, when she brought him Galpano's helmet,
came with a message from his mistress, Olinda,
daughter to King Vanayn of Norway, desiring to
iee him with all convenient speed. He had won
her love when he was with Galvanes in that king-
dom. Now Galvanes was his uncle, and because
he had only one poor castle to his heritage, they
called him * Lackland. Cousin, said Agrayes, I
desire your company above all other things, but
I must now go where my heart leads me. Where
shall I find you on my return ? In the house of
King Lisuarte, said Amadis, for there they tell me
is chivalry more worthily maintained than in the
house of any other King or Emperor in the world j
and I pray you commend me to your parents,
for they as well as you may ever esteem me ia



• Galvanes lin tiern.



34



ffieir gervicc for the education th^ gave me. Thii
said, Agrayes took leave of the Qaeen his aunt,
and departed with his company. .The King and
Amadis conducted him through the city. As they
were going out of the city-gate, they met a Dam-
sel who took Perion*s bridle, and said to him. King
Perion, remember what thou wert . told, — ^how,
when thou didst recover thy loss, the kingdom of
Ireland should lose its flower. See now if the
Damsel told thee true ! for thou hast found thy son
who was lost 5 and that brave King Abies is slain,
who was the flower of Ireland. And now I tell
thee, that never shall that country have his like,
tin the good brother of the Lady shall come, who
ihaM proudly and violently make the tribute cf
other lands be brought there, and he shall die by
the hands of him who must perish £br the thing In
the world that he loves best. This was Marhaus
c^ Ireland, brother to the Queen, whom Sk
Trystcam de Lyons ^slerw on the quanel of tribute
demanded from King Mark of Cornwall, and
Tiystram hieiself was slain afterward because df
Que«] Isoude, who was the thing in the world
that he loved best. And this, said the Damsel,
xny mistress Urganda sends me to tell thee. Then,
said Amadis, Damsel^ and my friend, say to her
who sent you, that the Knight to whom she gav«



95



Ibe lanoe conunendeth himself to hex good gctet^
being now assured in the matter whereof then she
ipake^ that with that lance I should deliver from
death the honse from whence I sprung^ for I saved
with it the King my father. So the Damsel i^
tqmed^ and Agra)nes went his way.

Then King Perion summoned a cartes^ diat all
might see his son Amadis 5 and then were great
rejoicings and pastimes made in honour of the Lord
wiKKn God had given them, and mauy things were
done in that cortes, and many and great gifts did
the King bestow. And when Amadis heard how
the Giant had carried away his brother Galaor, he
determined to seek him, and recover him by force
of arms or otherwise. When the cortes was ended;,
he requested his father permission to go to Great
Britain. Much did the King and Queen labour to
detain him, but it might not be by reason of the
love he bare, which made him obedient to none
but his Lady. So he clad himself in armour like
that which Abies had destroyed m the combat, and
taking none with him but Gandalin set forth. They
proceeded till they came to the sea, then entered a
vessel, and sailed to a goodly city in Great Britain^



\



96



which is called * Bristol. Here he learnt that
King Lisuarte was at his town of Windsor, f whi-
ther ho shaped his course ; but far had he not gone
when he met a Damsel, who demanded of him if
that were her ready way to Bristol, and if she
could find shipping there for her speedy passage
into Gaul. Whom seek you there ? said he. — ^The
good Knight Amadis, who is the King*s son, and
has not long known his father. Greatly did Amadis
marvel thereat, and he asked her from whom $he
heard thereof. I know it, quoth she, from her to
whom nothing is hidden, from Urganda the Un-
known, who now stands in such need of him#
that by no other can she obtain what she desires.
Thanks to God ! replied Amadis, she who can as-
sist all, now requires me to assist her. Let us go^
for I am the man whom ye seek. And he forsook
his road, and followed her.



* Brestoya. f Vindilison.



97



CHAPTER 12.



Meantime * had Galaor grown latge-limbed and
strong of body^ and he read books which the old
man gave him^ discoursing of the old deeds which
Knights in arms had wrought^ so that by this> as
well as by nature^ he became deidrous to be knighted,
nevertheless he knew not whether by right such
honour appertained to him. Very earnestly he
questioned thereon with the Hermit 3 but he who
knew that so soon as the Child received the order
he should combat agamst the Giant Albadan^
would say to him in tears, my son, better were it for
you to chuse some other way safer for your soul.
Father, replied Galaor, badly should I follow that
which I took against my will 3 and in this which



* This first parBg;raph is transposed from the middle of
Chapter 6.

VOL. I. F



98



1 have chosen^ by God's good pleasure I will ad-
vance his service 5 but without it I care not to live.
The good man, who saw his grounded resolution,
replied, Certes, if you fail not f:>r yourself, you
will not for your lineage, for you are son of a King
and Queen -, but let not the Giant know that I
told ye this. And fearing lest Galaor should pri-
vately depart, he sent to tell the Giant that his
' scholar was now of fit age and eager to be knight-
td. Forthwith the Giant rode to the Hermitage,
and finding Galaor very comely and strong above
his years, he sad to him, I understand. Son, that
jou are desirous to be knighted 5 come with me,
and I will see that it shall be done 'greatly to your
iionour. But before he departed, Galaor kndt
before the Hermit, and begged that he would re-
member him. The good man wept, and kissed
him many times, and gave him his blessing. So
fee rode to the Giant's castle, who gave, him arms
to his measure, and made him ride and throw the
cane, and appointed him two masters to practise
hun with the sword and shield, and to teach him
all things convenient for a Knight, so that in a
year's space be was grown marvellous perfect.

Wh«i the year was compleat, Galaor said to the
Giant^ now. Father, let me be made a Knight !



99



md he who saw that it was time^ enquired of him
by whom he chose to be knighted. By King lisu-
arte^ said he^ of whom the fame runs. The Giant
•was well pleased^ and on the third day, having
prepared all things, they departed. In two days
they came near a strong castle, which was by a
-salt water. The castle was called Bradoyd, and it
was the goodliest in all that land. It stood upon a
rock 3 on one side was the water, and on the other
a marsh, and from the side of the water it was not
possible to enter without a bark 5 but, across the
fnarsh there was a causey, being so broad that
two cars might pass each other, and at the entrance
of the causey was a draw-bridge, and the water
under it was very deep. Facing the bridge tliere
grew two goodly elms, whereunder the Giant and
Galaor saw two Damsels and a Squire, and a Knight
mounted on a white courser, and bearing lions in
his shield, who, because he could pass no further
called with a loud voice to those of the castle.
Then Galaor said to the Giant, let us see what the
Knight will do.

Anon there came from the castle two armed
Knights and ten fellows on foot, who came and
demanded of the Knight what he would ? I would
enter in, quoth he. That, said the other, cannot

F 2



100

he, unless 70U first combat with lu.— Then lowar
the bridge^ and come oa \ This presendy thef
did, and he who was first, ran fiercely against the
Knight, who sent him man and horse to the ground.
He met the second on the bridge ; their lances
failed in the attaint, and they encountered so rudely
with their bodies, that the Knight of the castle
fell Into the water and was drowned. Then the
conquerors past on towards the castle, and the
viUjdns drew up the bridge after him. At this the
Damsds cried aloud to him, and he turned 5 but
there came against him three Knights, well armed^
who said to him, in an evil hour camest thou here,
iat thou shalt die in this water, as he has done who
was better than thee. AH three then ran at him,
and smote him so firmly that his horse knelt and
was like to fell, and their lances broke, and by
two of them he was wounded -, nevertheless, one
of them he met in such order that the lance en-
tered at one side, and came out at the other be-
yond the iron. This done, he drew his sword^
and addressed himself to the other twain, and see-
ing it was for death manfully he bestirred himself,
and smote off the right arm of one, who galloped
away, and cried out help, help, they are killing
our Lord ! When he of the Lions heard that he
with whom he must yet deal was the Lord of the



roi



CRstle, he delivered him such a rigorous blow on
the helmet that he lost his stirrups^ and staggered
and fell upon the horse's neck. The Knight then
seized his helmet and plucked it off, and got be-
tween him and the castle lest he should escape
like. the other^ and cried, yield thyself or thou art
dead. Mercy^ quoth he^ good Knight^ and I am
your prisoner ! But he of the Lions, who now
saw knights and villains coming from the castle
to succour their Lord^ held him by the shield^ and
placing the sword to his face^ bade him command
bis men to retum^ and make the bridge be lowered:
which when he had done he crossed the bridge^
taking his prisoner with him. When the Knight
of the castle saw the Damsels^ he knew that one
of them was Urganda the Unknown y and cried
out, ah ! Sir Knight, if you save me not from that
Damsel I am but dead ! As God shall help me>.
be replied, that shall I not do, but do with youi
what she commands. Then calling to Urganda, he
said, here is the Lord of the castle, what would y&
that I do unto him ? Smite off his head, quoth
she, if he will not release my friend whom he
keepeth in prison, and put the Damsel in my power
for whom he is detained. He besure made na
delay to send for them, and when they came, he of
the Lions said to the Knight, there is your Lady>

F 3



102

and great cause yoa have to love her for the pains
she hath taken to deliver you from thjaldom, and
I do love her^ quoth he^ more than ever I and then:
Urganda embraced him. Afterward the conqueror .
asked what should be done with the Damsel ? Shq
shall dle^ said Urganda^ I hare long borne with
her 5 and then she made a spell^ so that the Damsel
ran all trembling to throw herself into the water.
Ladj^ cried the Knight of the Lions^ let her not ■
die for the love of God> since by me she was taken.
For your sake then I forgive her, bijt let her take
heed how ahe again offend me. Hearing that the
Lord of the castle took heart, and said> Sif K.night>
I have performed with what hath been commanded,
I beseech you deliver me from Urganda. I re- .
lease you^ replied Urganda herself, for hiA sake.
The Knight of the Lions then asked the Damsel,
why she was going to throw herself into the water.
Sir, quoth she, it seemed that there were lighted
torches burning me on all sides, and I ran to save.-
myself in the water. Thereat he smiled. Certea ^
Damsel, your folly is overgreat to provoke her who
can so well avenge herself.

Gralaor seeing all this said to the Giant, I wiU be
knighted by him, for if King Lisuarte is so re-
nowned, it is for his greatness^ but this Knight de* .



103

serves to be so for his great hardihood. Go then
and ask him^ said the Giant^ and^ if he will not
do it, it will be to his own harm. Then Galaor
took with him four Squires and two Damsels, and
went towards the Knight of the Lions, who was
sitting under the elms, and saluted him and said>
Sir Knight, grant me a boc»i. He who thought
him the goodliest person he ever had seen, took
him by tlie hand and said, let it be lawful, and I
grant it. — ^Then I beg you of your courtesy make
me a knight, and you will spare me the journey to-
lyng Lisuarte. Great wrong should you do yourself>
replied he of the Lions, to leave receiving that ho*
nour from the best King in the world, and take it
from a poor Knight like me. Sir, quoth Galaor,
the greatness of King Lisuarte can put no courage
in me like that whicli I have seen you do 5 there-
fore, so please you, fulfil your promise. — Gentle
Squire, I shall be better content to grant any thing
than this which befits not me, and is to you little
honour. At this time Urganda came up as one
who had heard nothing of their talk, and asked
him what he thought of the Child. — ^Truly a fairer
have I never seen -, but he asks a tiling of me nei-
ther for himself nor me convenient 3 and then he
related what had past. Certes, said Urganda, I
advise him to insist upon the promise, and you ta



lO^



fulfil it ; and I tell you that knighthood \v>ll be
better employed in him than in any other in all
the Isles of the Sea^ except only one. Since it is
so, said the Knight, in God's name let us go to
some Church to perform the vigil. It is not ne-
cessary, answered Gralaor, for I have this day heard
mass, and seen the real Body of God. It sufficeth
then, said he of the Lions, and having fastened on
his spur, he kissed him, and said, now ^re you a
Knight, and may receive the sword from whom it
p\easeth you. That, said Galaor, must be only
from you; and he called a Squire to bring the
sword which was ready. Not that, then cried
Urganda, but this which hangs in a tree. They
all looked up, and saw nothing. She laughed
thereat ; — ten years hath it hung there, and no pas-
senger ever saw it, and now it shall be seen by all !
They looked again, and there hung the sword from
a bough, a fair sword and fresh, as if it were just "
hung there, and the scabbard was richly wrought
with silk and gold. He of the Lions took it down,
and girding it on Galaor said, so fair a sword be*
seemeth so fair a Knight, and whoso has kept it
there for you so long, bears you besure no ill will.
Then was Galaor well contented 3 Sir, quoth he,
I must needs go to a place whence I cannot be ex-
cused ', but I desire yom: company above that of

vS



105

any other in the worlds and if it please you tell mc
where I may find yon ? — ^At the house of King
Lisoarte, where I hope to win honour^ and where-
it is right that you should go for the same cause»
At this was Galaor right joyful, and turning ta
Urganda he said^ Damsel^ my Lady^ I thank you
for th» sword which you have given, and I pray
you account me for your Knight. Then taking
leave he returned to the Giant, who had remained
concealed under the river-bank..

This while had one of Galaor^s Damsels learnt fit)nx
the Damsel of Urganda that the Knight of the
Lions was Amadis, whom Urganda had brought
thither to deliver her friend by force of arms 3 for
her skill availed not, because the Lady of the cas-^
tie, who was learned in the same art, had first en-
chanted him. The D^smasd who had beguiled him-
there was the Lady*s niece, and she it was whq^
had been about to drown herself..

After Galaor was depacted,. Urganda demanded of
Amadis if he knew to whom he had given the
order of knighthood. No, said he. There is great
reason that you should know him, quoth she, for
be i& of like heart with yourself, and if ever ye*



106^

should encounter without knowledge of each odMv^^
it would be great unhappineat. He is ftur ••wDir
brother, whom the Giant took away in childhood,*
' and for your sake and his I have so long kept the.
sword for him, wherewith he shall make the best
beginning of chivalry that ever did Knight yet in
Great Britain, Then came tears of joy over th&
eyes of Amadis, — Ah, Lady, tell me where I shall
find him ! — ^Ybu need not seek him now, he nmst
go where it is ordained. -*Shall I see him soon h
Yes 5 but he will not be as easily known as you
imagine. So she and her firiend departed, and
Amadis and Gandalin took the way to Windsor.

When Galaor returned to the Giant, he cried out
to him. Father, I am a Knight I thanks to God^
and the good Knight who has made me ! Thereof
am I right glad, quoth he, and now grant me a
boon.— With a good will, bo be that you withhold
me not from seeking honour.— By God's good
pleasure it shall be to the advancement of your
honour. Son, you have heard me tell how Alba*
dan the Giant slew my father by treason, and took
the rock of Galtares, which should be mine. I
demand of you to right me, for none but you
can do it : remember how I have brought you up-.



and that I would ghre my body to death for yorar
sake. This, said Galaor, is what I ought to ask>^
not you 5 for, while life lasts, I am ready to do
whatever is to your profit and h<Mioar : let us go
there ! In the' name of God, said the Giant. So*
as they rode toward the rock of Galteres they met
Urganda, and courteously saluted. Know yoUj^
said she, who knighted you ? Yes, quoth he, the
best Knight in the world,— That is true, and he i&
yet better than you think ; but you must know
who he is. She then said to the Giant, Gandalac>
dost thou not know that this Knight whom thou. ,
hast nourished is the son of King Perion and Queea
Elisena, whom because of my words you carried
away ? The Giant answered that it was true*
Know then, my son, said she, that he who made
thee Knight is thine own brother, and elder than,
thee by two years : honour him as the best Knight
in the world, and strive to imitate him in all hardi-»
hood and goodness. Is all this true ? said Galaor,.
then is my life in the greater danger, since it bc»
comes me now to be like him. Of a certainty it
is true, said Urganda 3 and with that she went
her way.

As they rode on, the Giant told Galaor that the-
Damsel with whom they spake was Urganda*.



108

In this discourae they came to a river side^ where
by reason of heat they erected their tent 3 they
had not been there long, before they saw two Dam-
«els coming by difierent.ways, who met before the
tent. So soon as they espied- the Giant they would
have fled, but Galaor Went out and courteously
caused them to return, and then asked ^whither
they travelled. I go, quoth, one of them, by com-
mand of my mistress, to see a strange battle which
one only Knight hath undertaken against the
mighty Giant of the rock of G^altares, to the end
that I may bring her true tidings thereof. When
the other Damsel heard her, she replied, I marvel
that any Knight dare venture with such folly, and,
thougL my road lie otherwise, yet will I go widi
you and see a thing so out of reason. Hereupon
they would have left Galaor, but he said to them,
make no haste, fair Damsels, for we are going to
this battle, and will bear ye company. They
lightly consented, and took great pleasure to behold
him how fair he was in that dress of a new Knight.
So they all ate together, and made good cheer, and
Galaor took the Giant apart, and requested that he
would remain where he was till the battle was over :
this he did that the Damsels might not suspect it
was he who. was to do the battle ; whereto Gan-
dalac, though unwillingly^ accorded. So Galaor



109

proceeded wkh the Damsels apd ttlree Squire9>
whom the Giant sent to carry his armour and what
eke was needful. So far they went that they ar-
rived within tw^ leagues of the rock of Galtares^
«Qd there passed the night in the dwelling of a
Hern>it/ to whom^ becaus^ he was ordained^ Galaor
coni^ssed. But when he revealed that he came for
that combat, the gopd Hermit was greatly asto*
nished, and asked who bad advised him to such
madness : — there are not any ten such Knights in
all the country who would encounter him, so fierce
and terrible is he, and without mercy > asd yoii
who are so young would adventure yourself to the
loss of body and soul, for such as wilfully seek the
death which they might avoid, are very self-mur^-
derers. Father, said Galaor, God will do his will
with me, but I shall not forego the battle. Then
the good man began to lament — Grod help thee and
strengthen thee, quoth he, since thou art so obsti-
nate f but I am glad to find thy life has been so
good. Good Fatter, said Galaor,. remember me
in your prayers..

The next morning after mass, Galaor armed him-
self, and rode to the Rock which be saw before
him : it was very lofty and with many towers, sa
that the Castle was so goodly that it was a wondev



lid

»

to behold, the Uamnl asked Gakar if Itsfkoe^
the Knight who should perform the combat. *l
think I hav^e seen him^ said he -, and theo he asfe^
the Damsel who her Lady wa^ that had ttent her to
see the battle. Thqt^ quoth she^ must be told td
none but the Knight himself. ]^ this time theyf
had reached the Castle^ and found the gat^itmt.
Galaor called, and two menth^ appeared over the
gate, to whom he said, teI^the Giant that here is
a Knight who comes from Gandalac to defy him,,
and if he will not come out, there shall no man
ttther enter or leave the Castle. The men mocked
at him : — this heat will soon cool ; thou wilt either
fly or lose thy head 5 and they went to the Giant.
But when the Damsels heacd that Galaor himself
was the champion, they prayed Grod to help him j
and said they durst not abide to see the Giant.
Fair friends, said he, «tay and see that for which
ye are come, or else return to the hermitage, and
if I live I will join ye there. Then they took
courage, and retiring firom the castle stood at the
edge of a forest, thinking to escape there if the
Knight should not speed well.



Uh



CHAPTER 13.



4



The news went to the Giant, ancj presently fie
came out on horseback ; and be appeared so huge
upon the horse that not a man in the world would
dare look at him^ he had on plates of iron, so long
that they covered him from the throat to the sad-
dle, and a large and bright helmet, and an iron,
mace in his hand. Greatly afraid were the Squires
and Damsels to behold him, and Galaor was not so
hardy but that then he had great fear, but the
nearer he came the less he feared. Wretch ! said the
Giant, he who sent thee shall never see thee again 5
look, and see iiow a mace is used ! and he came
on like a tower. Devil ! quoth Galaor, thou shalt
be conquered and killed with what I bring on my
side, which is God and the right 5 and he ran at
him so fiercely that his lance broke, and the Giant
lost one of his stirrups. He on his part had lifted
up his mace to strike Galaor on the head, but the



112

Knight past so rapidly that it only struck the run
of his shield^ and burst ail the arm and ceck-fas-
tenings^ so that it fell^ and Galaor had well nigh
fallen also : this did not break the blow^ nor could
the Giant recover the mace^ which came upon the
head of his own horse and smote him down, sa
that he himself fell. Galaor twice rode over the Gi»
ant before he could rise 5 but then his own horse
stumbled over the Giant*s^ and he fell on the other
side. The Knight seeing himself in the chance of
deaths rose presently and drew the sword which
Urganda had given him, and met the Giant, who
had now taken his mace from the ground, and
struck it on the wooden stock that he severed it f
but with the piece that was left the Giant gave him
such a blow on the helmet as made him set one
hand to the ground, and twisted the helmet on his
head 5 but he who was nimble and of good heart,
rose presently, and turned to the Giant, and
avoided his next blow, and gave a stroke at him
iHrith so full force that it cut away the arm clean
from the shoulder, and passing down wounded him
in the leg. The Giant roared aloud, ah wretch ! am
I destroyed by one man ? and he caught at Galaor,
but his wounded limb failed him ; then he sate
down, and with his remaining hand sought to seize
the Knight^ but Galaor cut that hand through^ and



113

sprung upon him^ for in out- reaching he had
fallen along, and smote off his head. The Squires
and Damsels then came up^ and Galaor sent the
Squires with the head to Gandalac.

With that there came throu^ the gate ten Knights
chained together^ who bade him come and take
possession of the Castle, seeing that he had slain
the Giant and delivered them. What think you.
Damsels, said G^or, shall we sojourn here to-
night ? They assented thereto, and he freed the
Knights from their chain, and so went they all
into the Castle, where were many goodly houses,
and there they feasted and refreshed themselves.

The next day the people of the land came to do
him homage, bul he took their homage for Gan-
dalac to whom of right it belonged, and right
joyful were they hearing that their natural Lord
should ' return, for they had long been hardly
ruled, and like foreign subjects. This done, Ga-
laor and the Damsels, and one Squire who conti-«
nued with him, took the way to the hermitage,
and there the Knight received the good man's
blessing. The one Damsel then said, she would
pursue her joume}- to King Lisuarte's court, whi-
ther she was going to see a Knight, her brother^



114



Damsel^ then sftid Galaor, if you see there a Knighl
hearing two lioas in his slueld^ say the Child whom
he made Knight commends himself to him^ and
that I shall strive to be a good man^ and that if we
meet I shall tell him more concerning both me
and himsdf than he yet knows. And who) she wa»
gone, Galatfr asked the other who her Lady was
that sent her to 99c the battle ? If you would
know that, said sh$ follow me, and in five days
you shall see. That shall not let me, quoth he.
So they went on together.

At length they came to a forked way, and Galaor,,
wharode b^re, thought that the Damsel followed
him, but she had taken the other : this was at the
entrance of the forest called Brananda, which sepe-«
rates the cousties Clara and Gresca. It was not long
before he heard a voice cry, help me ! help me !
He turned, and the Squire said he thought it was
the Damsel who had left them. How ! left us ? I
have badly looked toher, quoth he, anil he took shield
and lance and galloped towards the sound. Hard
at hand he espied six villains, armed with morions
and battk-axes, and a> hideous Dwarf on horseback,
who cruelly laid on the Damsei with a staff. Thou
vncked a:id ugly thing, quoth the Knight, G04
^ead thee bad lufsk ! and passing the lance to hit



115

Xeft hand/ he seized the staff, and therewith smote
him to the ground and stunned him. The villains
then attacked him on all sides, but to the first he gave
such a grcetmg with the staff that he lay sprang-
ling on the earth 5 another, who had fixed his bat*
tle-axe in bis shield md could not pluck it out
again, he snK)te through with the lance, and left
the lance, and made at the otliers witli the battle-
axe which he plucked fi'om his own shield ; but
they durst not now abide hiff^, and fied into the
thick underwood where he. could not follow. By
this the Dwarf had got agsun on horseback, and
calling out to Galaor, in an evil hour hast thou
killed my men ! he galloped away. Then Galaor
drew his lance fi'om the body of the villain, and
saw that it was sdund, which pl<iased him ; and he
gave his arms to the Squire, find said. Damsel, go
you before me, and I ^ill guard you better than I
have done.

So took they again the way they had left, and it
SQpn brought tliem to the river Bran, which could
not be passed without a boat. Now rode the Dam-
sel somewhat f^r Ibefore Galaor, and finding the
boat ready she ccqsflfed before him. While he
waited for tike boat*6 return, the Dwarf came and
cried, by my faith, SkTtfdtor, thou shalt die, and*



116

leave the Damsel ! and Galaor saw tliat there came
with him three Knights weU armed and mounted.
What ! quoth the one, shall we all agree to set
upon a single enemy ? I want no help ! and he ran
with a full course against Galaor, who was ready
to entertain him, they encountered in such sort,
that the Knight pierced Galaor^s armour, making
him feel the naked point of his lance, and Galaor
bade him bravely welcome, end cast him from the
saddle. Whereat tlj^ other twain admiring, ran
both agdnst him, the one failing and the other
breaking his lance. Galaor smote off the helmet
of the one 3 the other turned and struck at his
breast and broke his lance ; but though Galaor
felt the blow sorely, it wounded him not. Then
they all laid hand to sword and began battle, the
Dwarf crying out, kill his horse that he may not
escape ! Gralaor aimed a blow at him whom he had
unhelmed, he raised up his shield, and the sword
cut through the rim of the shield, and the point
came on his head and cleaved it to the jaws 3 and
when the other Knight saw that stroke, he turned
his horse and away. Galaor followed, and made
a blow at him, which fell short upon the saddle^
and cut away many plates of his armour ; and he
then in the more fear, spurred his horse and threw
bis shield from his Deck> and galloped so fast that Gar



1



117

laor would follow him no longer. Galaor would
then have caught the Dwarf to have tied him by the
leg, but that little wretch had ridden off betimes*
Hereupon he came . to the first whom he had dis*
mounted, who was now somewhat recovered : I
am more sonyforyou^ Sir Knight^ saidhe^ than
for your comrades, for you attacked me in knightly
guise, though I know not wher^ore. It is true,
replied he> but that Dwarf told us that you had
beaten him and slain his men, and taken from him
a Damsel against her will. Galaor then shewed
him the Damsel waiting for him on the other side
the river. You see her, said he, and if she were
with me against her will she would not wait there.
Then relating how the truth was, he gave the
Knight his horse -, and, bidding him torment the
Dwarf for his villainy, he took leave of him.

Then Galaor crossed at the ferry, and proceeded
under the DamseFs guidage. Between nones *
and vespers she showed him a fsai Castle that stood
above a valley, and said to him, there we shall go
to rest } and they were well received, it being the
dwelling of the Damsel*s mother, whom she bade



* Three in the aftenioon.



ii8

%(jnotir her gueist as the best Knight that ever
hung shield from his neck. Then said she to Ga-
laor. Good Knight, you must wait awhile for me
here, tt^ I may perform what I have prc«niffed ;
I sball soon return. So she went, and without
long tarrying returned, and told him to mount and
^ome with her. In God*s name, quoth he, and
he took his arms, and mounted and followed her.
They rode iJirough a forest, and when the night
was advanced cattte to a city called Grandares, and
at the cafltle the Damsel told ftim to alight and fol-
low her, and there she would teH him what she
had promised. Shall I take my arms ? said he.
Yes, she replied, for man knows not what may
happen to him. He followed her to a wall ; she told
him to get over, and she would go round and meet
him. Gralaor with some difficulty got up, by rea-
son of his arms, and let himself carefully down
into a garden, where presently the Damsel came>
dnd another with her. Sir Knight, said she, be-
fore you enter you must tell me whose son you are.
Let that alone, qUoth Galaor, for I am of such pa-
rents that till I am of more renown I dare not name
&em.— You must tell me, and it shall not be to
your harm. — Know then, I am son to King Perion
and Queen Elisena, and I could not have told you
that seven days past. Ck)me in^ the Damsel them



119

said } and Immg entered they disanned him^ and
foew a mantle ever hbn, the one went before and
Ihe other behind him^ and so they passed thro* the
^ace, where were many Dames and Damsels in
bed, andirhen any one asked who was thei'e, the
two Damsels answered. Hius they wmt on tiM
they came into a chamber^ aftd theie Gakor saw a
beautiful Damsel on a rich bed combing het goodly
locks 5 and whoi she saw him, ^e put a fair gar*
land on her head and went to him $ you are very
wdcome. Sir, being the best Knight that I know ;
and you, Lady^ said he, are very well-found, being
the fairest Lady that eter I fliaw« Then said the
Damsel who had guided him, here. Sir, is my
mistress, and I have fulfilled my promise 5 her
name is Aldeva, the daughter of the King of Sc-
rolls, and she has been brought up here- by her
aunt, wife to the Duke of Bristol. Then turning
to her Lady, I give you the son of King Perion
of Gaul 3 you are both children of kings, and both
fair persons : if ye should love each other no one
can blame ye. And with that the Damsels lefl
them together, and n'othing more shall be here re-
lated, for these and' such like things which are nei-
ther conformable to good conscience nor virtue,
man ought in reason lightly to pass over, holding
them in as little estimation as they deserve.



120

The hour being come when it behoved him to de*
part^ the DamseU conducted him to the place
where overnight he had left his arms $ and being
armed he went again into the garden> and there ho
found the Dwarf^ who cried out^ in an ill hoar didst
thou enter here^ for now thou shalt die and the
wretch that led thee here ! Then he called 4Hit
aloudj come out. Knights, come out, for here is
a man come out of the Duke'a chaadi)er ! Galaor
lightly got over the wall, and mounted his horse,
but the Dwarf and his people speedily came out
upon him -, and when Galaor saw himself so beset,
he said within himself^ let me die if I be not re-
venged upon that villainous Dwarf ! but he kept
behind upon his horse^ and the rest compassed the
Knight on all sides. Galaor laid manfully about him,
and slew two before he broke his lance 3 then fell
on them with his sword, and made them so soundly
acquainted with its sharp edge, that he who thought
himself hardiest was glad to give way ; but before
he could cut his road through, they killed his
horse, and when the Dwarf saw him on foot he
attempted to ride over him. Galaor stept aside
and caught his bridle, and gave him such a blow
on the breast with his sword-hilt that he fell off.



121



and the blood gushed out of his ears and nose ;
then he leapt upon his horst, but in springing up
he dropt the reins^ and the horse rode off some
distance before he could recover them ; he would
then have turned back to revenge himself, but he
saw his Lady shaking a handkerchief from a tower
window in token that he should depart, and so he
rode into the forest.

There were some who were of opinion that they
should follow him, but others said it was in vain see-
ing that he had gotten into the wood -, and they were
all astonished at what they had done. The Dwarf
now recovering, cried out, carry me to theDuke, iand
I will tell him on whom to take vengeance. They
took him in their afms, and he told the Duke how
he found the Damsel in the forest, and wished to
bring her back, and all that had followed. The
Duke then asked him if he knew the Damsel,
which she was ? And all the Damsels in the pa-
lace were called before him, and as soon as the
Dwarf beheld her, he said, this is she by whom
your palace is dishonoured. Ah, traitor ! quoth
she, you were beating me in the forest, and that
good Knight defended me ! but the Duke was
greatly incensed, and said he would force her to

VOL. I. G



122

confess the tnitli^ and he put her in prison 5 yet
neither evils nor tc^rments made her discover any
things and there she remained in prison^ to the great
grief of Aldeva who dearly loved her^ and knew
not by whom to send tidings to her friend Galaor.



123



CHAPTER 14.



mmmf»m



AmadiSj afler he had lefl; Urganda^ rode on tiiro*
the forest till he was benighted. After some time
he saw a light above the trees^ and rode toward it
thinking to find a lodging. He came at length to
a goodly fortress wherein were the lights that he
had seen^ which were from the window of a
tower^ and he heard the voices of men and women
singing and making mirth. He called at the gate^
but they heard him not ; at last those in the tower
saw him tlirough the battlements^ and a Knight
asked who was there ?-^A strange Knight.— So it
seemsj quoth he^ you must be a strange Knight to
go about in the dark ; I believe it is for fear lest you
should be obliged to do battle with us by day-light^
and now you can meet none but the Devils.
Amadis answered, if you were good for any thing
you would know that many are benighted who
cannot help it. Be gone ! quoth the Knight, you

q2



124

shall not enter here. As God shall help me, said
Amadis^ I think thou hast no man of valour in thy
company! tell me thy name before we part. — That
shall I do on condition that whensoever we meet
thou wilt fight me. To that Amadis^ who was in
wrath, readily assented. — Know then, that my
name is Dardan, and badly as thou wilt fare this
night, thou wilt fare much worse the day that I
shall meet thee ! Come out, quoth Amadis, and
let them light us by diose torches to do battle I
What ! said Dardan, arm myself at this hour to
£ght with thee ? ill fall the Knight who should put
on his spurs and harness for such an enemy ! and
with that he went in.

Amadis proceeded through the forest, seeking some
bush under which he might shelter himself. Pre-
sently he heard voices, and proceeding faster he
came up to twoDamsds on their palfreys, attended
by a Squire. They saluted courteously, and Ama-
dis recounted his adventure. Know you the
Knight's name : said they. — He told me it was
Dardan. — ^True ! he is called Dardan the proud,
the haughtiest Knight in this country : 1)ut, Sir,
seeing that you are so unprovided of lodging, will
you abide this night in our tents which are pitched
near at hand ? He, glad of their courtesy, rode



125

with tnem ; and having there alighted he unarmed>
tod when the Damsels saw how fair he was they
delighted to see him. So they supped chearfiilly
together^ and a tent was spread for him wherein
he should sleep. Meantime they asked him whi-
ther he was bound ? — ^To the court of Kmg Lisu-
arte. — And we are going there also 5 to see what
wiU happen to a Lady, one of the best and noblest
in the land : all that she hath in the world is put
upon the issue of a combat, which is to be per-
formed within ten days before King Lisuarte j but
we know not who will appear to defend her, for
he against whom her champion must £ght is the
best Knight in Great Britain, that very Dardan
the Proud, whom you so lately left. And on what
cause, said Amadis, ariseth the combat ? — ^This
Dardan loveth the daughter of a Knight, who, at
his second nuptuals, married the Lady I speak of.
Now hath this Damsel conceived such hatred
against her stepmother, that she hath vowed never
to love Dardan unless he bring her to King Lisu-
arte's court, and affirm that all her step-mother's
goods appertain to her, and maintain it by battle
against whomsoever dare gainsay -, and the Dame>
who was not well advised, said she would produce
a champion, and this she did for her manifest
right, thinking that one would be found to combat

g3



125

for her ; but Dardan is so good a Xnight In armf^
that be it for right or wrong all fear him. These
tidings rejoiced Amadis, for the Knight was agaizut
all pride^ and now might he indulge his own anger
in a just cause^ and that in the presence of Oriana.
I pray je. Sir, said one of the Damsels^ for conr^
tesy acquaint us with the reason of your sudden
musing.— Willingly, if you will promise me, as
loyal Damsels, not to reveal it, I mean, quoth
he, . to combat for the Lady. Gentle Sir, that
thought proceedeth from a high resolved mind :
God grant it a good issue ! So gave they each to
other the good night, and went to rest.

In the morning the Damsels intreated that he would
not leave them, seeing they were bound to one
place, and that in the forest kept men of evil be-
haviour. They rode along witii sundry cKscour»-
ings, and among other talk they asked the Knight,
since God had placed them in company, that he
would tell them his name ; the which he did, but
charged them to let none know it. So they pro-
ceeded through unfrequented ways, lodging in their
tents^ and regaling on the food they took with
them. At length they saw two Knights under a
tree, armed and on horseback, who seeing them
plac«J themselves in the way, the one saying to



127

Kit companion^ which of these Damsels wHl yoix
have ? This ! quoth he^ and seized the one^ a»
his comrade did the other. What^ Sirs ! quoth
Amadis^ what manner of behaviour is this ? what
would ye do with the Damsels ? — Make them our
mistresses ! So lightly think ye to win them ?
laid he> and took his helm and shield and lance j— •
How release theml The one Knight met him
bravely^ and broke his lance; but Amadis gave
him such an attaint that he lay with his heels up-
wards. The second came on, and pierced through
his arms^ and slightly wounded Amadis. He on
his part failed with his lance, but shields and horses
metj and Amadis seized him and plucked him from,
the saddle, and dashed him down^ and then rode
on * with the Damsels.

When at length they came near Windsor, Amadia
said, fair friends, I would remain in secret here
till such time as the Knight come to the combat,
and, when the hour is, let your Squire bring me
hither tidings thereof. Sir, quoth the Damsel, if



* A sword combat with the same Knights, who followed to
revenge themselves, is omitted.

6 4



128



if please you we will remain with you j bo they
pitched their tents apart from the road, by the
river-side. Meanwhile Amadis went upon a little
eminence to look at the town, and there he sate
under a tree, and looked toward the towers and the
high walls, and he said in his heart, ah, God ! the
flower of the world is there ! and thou City con-
tainest now the Lady that hath no peer for good-
ness and beauty j and who is more loved than all
others that are loved, and that would I prove upon
the best Knight in the world. And in these
thoughts the tears trilled down his cheeks, and he
sat heedless of every thing about him. But Gan-
dalin, who saw a troop of Knights and Ladies
coming np, called to him, and asked if he did not
see that company ? he neither heard nor answered.
With that Gandalin took him by tlie arm,— so help
me God, Sir, you afflict yourself more than need
is ', take courage as you do in other things ! Ah,
Gandalin, quoth he, you had better counsel me to
die, than to endure this hopeless sorrow ! Then could
not the Squire refrain from lamenting.— This ex-
cessive love is a great misfortune j as God shall
help me, I do not think that there is any one, how
good and beautiful soever she may be, who can
equal your wortli, or whom you might not have.
At this was Amadis greatly enraged : Go, idiot !



129

said he, how dare you talk so madly ? if ever you
again repeat such thoughts, you shall go no farther
with me. Dry your eyes, said Gandalin, and let
not them who are coming see you thus 1 It was
the Lady coming to her trial, weeping and lament-
ing as she went, for there was none to defend hex
right.

On the day of the trial the Damsels rose at dawn^
and told Amadis that they would go before to the
town, and send him word when it was time to
appear. He rode with them to the edge of the
forest, and there awaited. By this it was sunrise,
and King Lisuarte with a goodly company went out
to the field which was between the city and the
forest 5 and there came Dardan, well armed and oa
a fair courser, leading the bridle of his Lady, who
was as richly adorned as she could be j and thus
they stopped before Kir^ Lisuarte. And Dardan
said, Sir, command that this Lady have that which
is her own delivered to her j or; if there be a Knight
to gainsay it, f am ready to combat him. Lisuarte
then called the Dame, and asked her if she was.
provided with a champion. She answered, no|.
and wept 5 and the King greatly pitied, her for
she was a virtuous Lady. So Dardan entered the.



130

lists, to remain there dtt the hoar of tierce ; by
trhich time« if no chan^ion ideated, the King
was to pronounce judgment in his favour, accord-
mg to the custom. Then one of the Damselft-
hastened to call Amadis, and he took his arms and
fold the Damsels and Gandaltn that if he sped well
he would return to them in the tents, and with
that he rode on, on his white courser. When the
King saw the Knight approach, how firmly he
rode and his arms how &ir they were and his
horse how g6odiy a one, he marvelled who he
might be, and asked the Dame, who was brought
to trial, if she knew the Kjiight who came to de*
fcnd her cause. I never saw him before, quoth
she, nor know I who he is. By this, Amadis en*
iered the lists and rode up to his enemy, — Dardan,
, defend your Lady*s cause, as I shall maintain and
acquit the promise which I made thee ! And what
didst thou promise me ? quoth Dardan. — ^To fight
thee, and that was when thou toldest me thy name,
n&d hadst dealt with me villainously. I make the
less account of thee now, said Dardan 3 and I,
9aid Amadis, care less for thy words, for I am
about to have vengeance. Let the Dame then, re-
plied Dardan, accept thee for her champion, and
avenge thyself if thou canst. The King then
t»me up 3 the Dame was asked if she would admit



131



that Knight for her defender. She replied, yes^
and God reward him ! Lisuarte saw that the shield
of Anoadis was pierced in manjr places, and that
the rim had many sword cuts, and he said, if the
Knight demanded another shield, he could lawfully
give iiim one 3 but Amadis was in no temper for
delay, for he remembered the insults he had re-
ceived. They ran their course, both lances pierced
through shield and armour and shivered, but with-
out wounding ; their horses and shields met, and
Dardan was thrown, but he held the reins fast,,
and sprung readily upon the horse again, and drew
his sword, and they attacked each other so fiercely
UiatalWho beheld them were astonished. The
town's people were on the towers and on the wall
and wherever else they could see the combat, and*
the windows of the Queen's palace, which were
above the wall, were full of Dames and Damsels,,
all marvelling at the valour of the combatants, for
the fire flew from their helmets as if they were all
ablaze, and plates and splinters fell on all sides
from their shields and mail, and neither a whit
abated of his courage. King lisuarte had been
himself in many a hard conflict and seen njany^
a one, but all appeared nothing to this. This is
the bravest combat, said he, that ever man hath
&een, and I will have the conqueror's image placed

65



132

over my palace gate, that all who are desirous to
gaiii honour may behold it.

But before the hour of tierce it was evident that
Dardan's force failed, though Amadis was nothing
abated of his strength, only his' horse was faint,
and Dardan's also stumbled, and he, thinking to
have the advantage on foot, said to Amadis,
Knight, our horses fail us for fatigue : if we were
on foot i should soon conquer thee. This he said
so loud that the King and all with him could hear 5
and Amadis, somewhat ashamed at the threat, an-
swered, alight then ! tliough a Knight should
hever leave his horse while he can sit on it. Then
alighting, they both took what of tlieir shields re«
mained, and assailed each other more fiercely than
before 3 but Amadis now prest on him, and Dar^*
dan retreated and staggered, and sometimes bent
his knees, so that all the beholders said he had
committed a great foUy in proposing to fight on
foot ; and he still giving back from the sword of
Amadis, came under the Queen s window, and
there was a cry there, *' Holy Mary, Dardan is
slain !'* and Amadis heard among them the voice
of tlie Damsel of Denmark. Then he looked up,
and saw his Lady Oriana at the window, and the
Damsel by her : that sight so overcame him that



133

the sword hung loose in his hand^ and he continued
looking up regardless of his situation. Dardan,
recovering by this respite, noticed his confusion,
and took heart again ; and, lifting the sword witli
both hands, smote him on the helmet so that it
was twisted on his head. Amadis did not return
the blow, he only jdaced his helmet right again,
and with that Dardan laid on him at all parts,
and he feebly defended himself, and Dardan's
courage increased. Then cried the Damsel of
Denmark, in an ill minute did that Knight look
up and see one here who made him forget him*
self when his enemy was at the point of death !.
Certes such a Knight ought not to fail in such a
time ! At these words, Amadis had such shame
that willingly would he have been dead lest his
Lady should suspect there was any cowardice in
him, and he struck a blow at Dardan that 1:)rought
him down, and plucked his helmet off, and held
the sword to his face, — Dardan, you are dead,
unless you yield the cause ! Mercy, Knight !
quoth he, and I yield it. Then the King came
up ; but Amadis, for the shame of what had be-
fallen him, would make no tarriance, but sprung to
his horse, and rode the fastest that he could into
the forest.



134

The mistress of Dardan^ who saw him so rudeljp
handled^ came up to him now and said^ seek
Dow^ Dardan^ some other mistress, for f will nei-
ther love thee nor any other than that good Knight
who overcame thee! What! saidDardan, have
I been so wounded and conquered in your quarrel,
and now you forsake me for the very enemy }
God ! thou art a right woman to say this^ and I
will give thee thy reward ! and he took his sword,,
and in a moment smote her head from her body.
Theuj after a minute's thought, he cried. Ah,
wretch ! I have slain the thing in the world that I
loved best ! and he ran himself through before any.
ent could stop his hand. In the uproar that this
occasioned, none thought of following Amadisf
and though Dardan was so brave a Knight, yet
tdost who were present now rejoiced at his death,
lor his strength had always been unjustly and t^r*
rannicaUy employed.



135



CHAPTER 15.



S9



King Lisoarte then commanded two monmnents ta
be placed upon lions of stone there^ in tbe place
where the battle was fought^ and Dardau and hl»
mistress were interred therein^ and their names
were inscribed on the monument^ and all that had
chanced ; and afterwards, when the King knew
the name of the conqueror, that also was written
there.

But now the rumour being appeased, Lisuarte asked
where was the stranger ? none could give tidings
of him, save only that he had ridden full speed to-
ward the forest. Well were he, quoth the King,
who should have such a man in his company, for,
strong as he is, he is right gentle > ye all heard
the insolence of Dardan, yet would he not slay
him when he was in his power^ though Dardan



136

would have shewn no mercy if the conquest had
been his. Amadis, meantime^ had entered the
forest 5 it was late when he reached the tents,
where he found Gandalin and the Damsels who
had made their meal ready ; and when the cloths
were removed, ' he took Gandalin apart, and bade
him go to the town and secretly speak with the
Damsel of Denmark, and learn from her how he
should proceed. Gandalin, that he might go more
privately, went on foot, and entering the town,
made toward the palace, where he had not awaited
long when he saw the Damsd, who was watchful
for him. Follow me, said she, and if you are
questioned, say you bring a message from the
Queen of Scotland to Oriana, and that you are
come to join Amadis in this country, for so shall
you appear in his company without suspicion.
They then entered the Queen's palace, where Ori-
ana then was, to whom the Damsel came, and
speaking somewhat loud, said, here is a Squifie
sent to you from the Queen of Scotland. Oriana
rejoiced thereat, but greater was her joy when she
saw it was Gandalin, who knelt before her and said.
Madam, the Queen salutes you as one who loves
and prizes you and whom your welfare will, make
glad. May the Queen have a fair fortune ! replied
Oriana ; I thank her kindness : come with me to.



137



this window, and tell me the rest. Then they re-
tired, and she made hun sit by her, and asked
him, friend, where did you leave your master ?
In the forest, whither he went after the battle.
Tell me how he fareth, so may God prosper you.
Even so, quoth Gandalin, as the man that is alto-
gether yours, and dies for you, and his soul suffers
so as never Knight endured, and then he wept.
Lady, he will not break your command fo/ good
nor for ill that may be^ him -, for God's sake have
compassion on him, for if he lives he will be the
best Knight that ever bore arms, but good fortune
failed him when he saw you, and he will die before
his time 3 and better had he died in the sea,, where
he was thrown before his parents knew him, for
now they see him perish, and can give him no re-
lief. Oriana wept, and clasping her hands and
interlacing her fingers one with the other, she cried,
for God's sake, Gandalin, say no more 5 you blame
me, because you know his feelings and do not
know mine. She then showed him the garden
under the window 5— go to your master, and tell
him to come secretly .to-night into this garden j
the chamber wherein I and Mabilia sleep is under-
neath this, and it has a grated windo\v near the
ground, there can we speak to each other, for Ma-
bilia knows my heart ; and she took a ring from



IS8

her finger^ and bade him give it to Amadis^ as the
jewel which she most prized. Then she called
Mabilia to see the Squire who brought tidings
from her mother j and Mabilia^ seeing Gandalin^
understood how it was.

Oriana went to the Qaeen^ who asked her when
the Squire would return^ for she would send pre-
sents by him to the Queen of Scotland. He i^
come^ said the PrinOess^ to seek for Amadis^ son
of the King of Gaul^ the good Knight of whom
there is so much talk. He saith it is more than
ten months since he heard that Knight was coming
here, and marvels that he iinds him not. Now
trust mc, replied the Queen, right glad would X
be to see such a Knight in the King my Husband's
company, great aid would be prove to him ; and
I tell you that if he come^ he shall not depart for
want of any thing that he can ask and that JLttkg
Lisuarte can give.

So Gandalin returned to Amadis with his tidings,
and after the hour of rest th^ look their arms and
rode to the town. They tied their horses in a
tuft of trees adjoining the garden, and entering
through a wigr made by a watercourse, came
to the window, aad^Gaadalin called in a low voice«.



139

Oriana, who did not sleeps heard him and rose
and called MabiJia^ for here^ said she^ is your
Cousin. My CouBin ? quoth Mabilia^ that indeed
he 19^ but you have a nearer interest in him than
all his lineage ; theri they both went to the window^
and placed candles there that gave a great light,
and cqyened it. By that light Amadis saw his Lady^
and she appeared more beaatiful than man could
fancy woman could be. She had on a robe of
Indian silk; thickly wrought with flowers of gold $
her hair was so beautiful that it was a wonder^ and
she had covered it only with a garland. Amadis
trembled all over with the great delight of seeing
her 5 there they conversed till day-break, and Ori-
ana bade him remain with her father if he
should intreat him, and at dawn Amadis returned
to the tents.

When it was morning, Amadis sent Gandalin into
the town, and he remained in the tent with one of
the Damsels, for the other had gone to the town;
Soon she returned in haste upon her palfrey, weep-
ing aloud. Sir Knight, said she, the Lady for
whom you did battle is detained by the King, who
will not let her depart till her champion appears.
He is wrath with her, thinking that she has con-
cealed you, and he has sent to seek you in all parts.



140

Tell her, said Amadis^ that if the King will de*
mand of me nothing ^igainst my will, I will appear
before him to-morrow at the hour of tierce. With
this bidding she returned. The news spread thro'
the palace and the town> and all greatly rejoiced
that they should see the good Knight who had sub-
dued Dardan.



141



CHAPTER \G.



That day Amadis made cheer with tlie Damsels ^
the next morning they rode with him to the apart-
ment of the Dame their cousin^ who seeing her
champion^ knelt to him and said^ Sir^ all that I
possess you have given me ! Lady^ said he, let us
go to the King that he may discharge you^ and I
may go my way. Then he took off his helm^ and
they all went to the palace^ and there was a great
cry, here is the Knight who conquered Dardan !
The King heard it and came out to him, and said.
Welcome, friend ! for you have been greatly de-
sired here ! and Amadis knelt down, and said. Sir,
God give you joy ! The King took him by the
hand, — so help me God you are a good Knight !
That praise Amadis heard thankfully, and he asked
if the Dame was free, and assured Lisuarte that
she knew not till now who had been her champion.
And when be saw her at liberty, he requested the



*.' *



wz



King's leave to depart. Ah, friend, said Lisuartc,
not so soon, unless you would do me great dis-
pleasure. That God forbid ! quoth he 5 I have it
rather at heart to do you service, if I were worthy.
Then I beseech you remain here, said *the King j
whereto Amadis assented, but he made no sem-
blance that it pleased him. So the King led him
to an apartment, and all the Knights of renown
who were there came to disarm him, for this was
the King who most honoured good Knights and
had the greatest number in his house. And Lisu-
arte gave him a robe to cover himself wiAal, and
calling King Arban of North Wales, and the Duke
of Gloucester, bade them keep company with that
Knight, for he was a worthy companion for good
men. He then went to the Queen, and told her
how he had in his house the good Knight who won
the battle. Know you his name ? quoth she t
peradventure he is the son of King Perion, for
yon Squire who is talking with Mabilia came in
search of him. And the King called to Grandalin^
come with me, and see if you know a Kni^t who
is in my palace. Gandalin followed him as one
who knew what he should do j and as soon as he
saw Amadis, he knelt to him and cried. Ah, Sir
Amadis ! great travail have I endured to find you.
Then replied the Knight, Gandalin! my good


US

friend !'right heartily art thou welcome : what news
from the King of Scotland ? — Good tidings. Sir,
of him and of aU your friends. With that LisU-
arte embraced him, — now. Sir, you need no longer
conceal yourself, for you are that Amadis, the sor
of King. Perion, who slew in battle the valiant
King Abies of Ireland. All then approached
to gaze at him the more, knowing that he^d
performed such feats in arms as none other could
have atchieved 3 much honour was there done him
all that day, and when night came King Arban of
North Wales lodged him,

Lisuarte meantime took counsel with his wife how
he might detain Amadis in his court. Sir, quoth
she, it would be an evil report of so great a man as
you, if such a Knight should leave his house^ and
had not received all that he asked. He asks me
nothing, said Lisuarte, for I would grant him any
thing. — I will tell you how it must be : let some
one ask him to remain on your part, and if he will
not consent bid him come see me before he departs,
and I and Oriana, and his cousin Mabilia, will en-
treat him, for they know him well, ever since he
was a child and served them. You say well, said
Lisuarte, and doubtless he will stay \ if not, we
may say of him with reason, that he hath more



144



lack of courtesy than courage. King AH>an of
r>Jorth Wales spoke with Amadis that night, but
could obtain no hope of his stay. In the momiBg
they heard mass with the King -, and that over,
Amadis went to take leave of him. Ccrtes, friend,
said Lisuarte, I am loth at your departure, yet for the
promise I made must not intreat your stay-j but the
Queen requests to see you befcn-e you go. Amadis
went to her, and would have kissed her hand -, she
made him be seated near her and conversed with
him, and Mabilia came and embraced him, as
though she had not seen him before. :Brisena called
to her daughter, receive this Knight who served
you when he was a child, and shall serve you now
he is a Knight if he fail not in courtesy 3 help me
all to persuade him to what I shall ask. Sir Knight^
the King my husband hath wished you to remain
with him, and he could not prevail 3 now shall I sec
if women have more power than men with a
Knight 5 I pray you remain and be my Knight,
and my daughter's, and theirs whom you see here ;
in this shall you show your comlesy, and you will
save us from the need of asking the King to give
us a Knight for our service, since having you we
can dispense with all his. Then they all came and
besought him, and Oriana made a sign with her
looks that he should consent. Well, Sir Knight,



145

said Brisena^ what will you do ?— Wliat can I do^
Lady^ but remain at your command, who are the
noblest Queen in the world ! I am at your service,
and your daughter*s, and afterward at the service
of all these -, but I am only yours, and if I shall
ever do service to the King, it shall be as your
Knight and not as his. As such I receive you,
said the Queen. Thus Amadis, by his Lady*8
command, abode in the house of King Lisparte.

Galaor, after he had left the Duke of Bristol's cas-
tle, where the Dwarf had so annoyed him, rode
on through the forest of Amida till the hour of
respers without finding any habitation, or knowing
whither he went, and at that time he met a Squire
on a right goodly steed. Galaor had received a bad
wound from one of the three Knights who assailed
him by the river, and his last night's dalliance had
inflamed it ; so he saluted the Squire and asked
him where he could go to be healed ? I know a
place, said the Squire, but such as you dare not
go there.— Shall I find one there who will cure my
wound ?— You will find those who will give thee
others. — Shew me the place !— That Tmay chuse.—
I^how me, or I will make thee, quoth Galaor, for
thou art such a villain that thou deservest all I can
do to thee.— You can do nothing that shall make

VOL. I. H



146

tne please such a worthless Knight. Then Galaor
laid hand upon his sword -, — show me the place> or
I will take off thy head. I will shew thee^ said
he^ where thou shalt pay for thy folly^ andl shall
have my revenge. Herewith he rode before^ lea¥»
ing the straight way. Galaor followed, and by the
time they had ridden the length of a league^ they
came to a fortress, seated in a pleasant valley,
bravely environed about with trees 3 here, quoth^
the Squire, is the place, now let me go ! Galaor
answered, go thy way, for I little like thy com-
pany. You will like what you find here less, said
the Squire 3 wherewith he turned bridle and away.
Then Galaor went to the fortress, which he saw
was newly edified, and at the gate he saw an armed
Knight on horseback, and with him five halberders,
and they asked Galaor if it were he who brought
their Squire there against his will ? I know not,
quoth he, if he be your Squire, but he who led
' me here was the worst varlet that ever I knew.
That, said the Knight, may_ well be ^ but what
would you have here ? — Sir, I am sore wounded,
and seek for one to give me help. Enter then^
said the Knight. Galaor went in, and then the
halberders attacked him on one side and the Knight
on the other. He snatched an axe firom one^ and
turned to the Knight and smote him, so that he



147

bad no oeed of a surgeon -, then fell upon thd
balberders^ and slew three of them^ the other two
fled into the castle^ and he was following 3 but
his Squire cried out^ take your arms^ Sir ! for I
htai a> great stir in the castle. This Galaor did,
and the Squire took shield and axe from one of the
dead men, and said. Sir, I will aid you against the
villains 5 but against a Knight I must not lift hand,
lest I should lose thereby all title to be knighted.
If I find the good Knight whom I seek, said 6a«
laor, that shalt thou soon be. Presently they saw
two other Knights and ten men on foot, and they
heard the Squire crying from one of the windows^
kill him ! kill him ! but save his horse for me.
When Galaor heard that, he was greatly enraged,
and he fiercely ran to meet the new assailants ;
their lances brake, but he made him whom he en-
countered, sure enough from ever bearing arms af-
terwards i then setting hand to sword, advanced
himself to the other, and felled him, and turned
among the halberders. The Squire had already
slain two ; kill them all ! said he, let not such
traitors live ! When the Squire of the castle saw
this, he ran up a ladder . into a high tower, ex-
claiming, arm yourself. Sir, unless you mean to
be slain I Then Galaor dismounted, because he

h2



148



could not ride through the portal^ and went towards
the tower 3 but^ before he reached it^ there came
out a Knight all armed^ and his horse was brought
him> but Galaor caught the bridk^ and said^
Knight^ thou shalt not mounts for I distrust thee !
Is it . you, quoth the Knight, who have slain my
nephews and my people ?— -I know not whom yoa
ask for, but this I can assure ye, how 1 found here
the most dbloyal and bad-minded people that ever
I dealt withal.— They whom thou hast slain were
better than thou art, and dearly shalt thou pay for
them. Then, afoot as they were, they, began a
cruel battle, for the Knight of the castle was a
right good Knight and a strong $ yet in the end he
could not endure the heavy and hard blows of Ga-
laor, and flying from him under a portal, he thought
to leap from a window to the gallery, but with the
weight of his arms he fell short, and falling a
great depth upon stones he was dashed to
pieces.

When Galaor saw this he turned away, pursing
tlie castle and its dwellers j but then he heard a
voice from one of the rooms, saying, ah, my
Lord, for mercy leave me not here ! Open the
door then, quoth he.— I cannot. Sir, I am chained.



149

He then placed foot against the door so strongly
that it flew open^ and entering he found a fair Lady
chained bj the neck* She asked him what was
become of the Lord of the castle^ and his com-
pany; and when she heard how they were all
deadj and how they set upon Galaor who came to
have his wound healed^ she said^' release me^ and
I will heal the wound. Presently he broke the
chain, and she took two little boxes from a coffer,
and other things for his wounds, and they departed
from the castle. In the gate-way Galaor found
the first Knight whom he had smote down, wha
was yet breathing and struggling; he trampled
him under his horse's feet, and then rode away.

That night they lodged in a forest, in the tent of
some hunters whom they found. The Damsel was
a fair Damsel, and what passed between ,tliem is
not to be written. She told him that she was
daughter of Teloys the Fleming, to whom King
Lisuarte had given the county of Clara, and of a
Lady who was his Leman 5 the Lord of that Castle
had seized her because she would not accept of
him for a husband. Where shall I conduct you ?
said Galaor, for I have far to travel. — To the mo-
nastery, where my mother dwells. So she guidqd

h3



150

Galaor there, and right gladly was he welcomed^
and the more when they heard what feats of arms
he had wrought 5 and there^ at the request of the
Ladles of the Convent^ Galaor repaained*



151



CHAPTER 17



I



After Agrayes had returned from the war of Gaul,
he prepared to cross to Norway, where was his
Lady Olinda, One day, when he was hunting,
he came to a high rock upon the sea- shore, and '
there arose a sudden storm, and he saw a ship in
great peril, wherewith he being moved to pity,
kindled up great fires as the night came on, that
the light might direct them, and there he him-
self awaited to see the end. At last, by the ski] \
of the mariners, and above all by the mercy of the
true God, the ship that was so often at the point of
perishing, took safe harbour. Tliere landed from
it some Damsels ; Agrayes sent his huntsmen to
assist them, and lodged them in his hunting-huts.
The mariners meantime took their suppers round
the fires that he had kindled, and there fell asleep.
The Prince after some time went to the apartment
where the Damsels were, and coming to the door

»4



1



ISS^



he saw them seated round a fire^ and among them
the fair Princess^ his Lady Olinda^ daughter of the
King of Norway. Amazed at seeing her, he ex-
claimed Holy Mary, help me ! the Lady of my
heart I Great joy was there at that meeting, and
full happily did those lovers, thus unexpectedly
met, pass the night together. Six days they re-
mained there, concealing their loves so well, that
none save her Damsels knew what passed. At the
end of that time the weather abated. Olinda told
him she was on her way to Great Britain, to hve
with Queen Brisena, and there Agrayes promised
to follow, since he had no reason to visit Norway,
and at Lisuarte*s court he should find his cousin
Amadis, and enjoy his Lady's company. So they
parted, and Olinda took ship again, and arrived
safely at the Js/and of Windsor.

Now remamed Agrayes on the shore giving many
a long look afler the ship, till having lost sight of
it he returned to Briantes, where the King his fa-
ther sojourned, and finding there his uncle Gal-
vanes, who was called Lackland^lie proposed to hixii
to visit King Lisuarte's court, for there, said .he„
we may gain honour and fame, which cannot be
done in this land. To this Galvanes willingly as-
sented^ for he had no lordship to det^ hjm, and



15S



the7 took leave of Languines^ and embarked with
their squires and horses^ and mailed prosperously
till they reached the town called Bristol. There
they landed^ and proceeded on through a, forest
till they met a Damsel, who enquired if that way
led to the rock of Galtares. They told her no,
and asked why she went thither. To seek a good
Knight, who will remedy the trouble J endure.
Damsel, said Agrayes, you go wrong, for at that
rode you will only find the great Giant Albadan,
and if you take sorrow to him he will double it.
But, said she, the Knight whom I seek hath slain
Albadan in single fight. — Certes, Damsel, you tell
"US wonder ! how, quoth Galvanes, for never Knight
fought singly with a Giant, save only King Abies
of Ireland, who fought with one, himself being
armed and the Giant naked, by which advantage
he slew him 5 yet was tliis undertaking thought
a madness : your speeches then sound not to any
likelihood, for this Albadan is the fiercest Giant in
all the islands of the sea. Sirs, said the Damsel,
this Knight hath slain him 5 and then she related
how the battle had been, and that the Knight's
name was Don Galaor, son of the King of Gaul.
Ah, Damsel, quoth Agrayes, you tell me the news
in the world that rejoices me most ! to hear of my
Cougin, whom I held as rather dead than alive !

H 5



154

but Mrh^ Would jou have with him ?— -Sir^ I seek
his aid in behalf of a Damsel who is imprisoned
on his account^ by the accusation of a Dwarf^ the
most villainous creature that ever was born ; and
then she told them what had passed with Galaor
and the Dwarf^ but concerning Aldeva*s love she
said nothings and because the Damsel will not
confess what the Dwarf hath avouched^ the Duke
of Bristol hath sworn that within ten days she shall
be burnt alive > and this is a great grief to the other
Ladies^ lest the Damsei for fear of death should
accuse any of them that for her sake Galaor came
into the Castle^ and four days of the ten are now
past. Agrayes answered^ since it is so^ you need
travel no fartlier j guide us thither^ and we will
perform what Galaor should do^ if not in strength
yet in good wiD. So she turned back^ and tliey
arrived at the Duke's Castle the day before the exe-
cution should be. The Duke was then at table 3
they dismounted, and entered the hall where he
was, armed as they were } and he saluted them^
and bade them eat. Sir, said they, we must first
declare the cause of our coming. And Don Galvanes
then proceeded : Duke, you detain a Damsel pri-
soner upon the false and wicked accusation of a
Dwarf. We beseech you to deliver her, because
she hath no way misdoue 5 and if it be needful to



155



prove her innocence, let come two others to main- .
tain his quarrel, for we are ready as her defenders.
You say much ! quoth the Duke, and with that
called for the Dwarf, and asked him what reply
he would make. Sir, said he, I have a champion
who will prove the truth of what I say 5 and he
called a Knight, who was'his nephew, but so strong
and large of limb, that he did not look to be of
the same kin, and he presented himself to do battle
for the accuser. The Duke rose from his meal to
see the fight. I shall not, said he, determine the
Damsel's fate by the issue of this battle. Sir, said
Agrayes, you have imprisoned her upon the Dwarf's
accusation, and if I defeat his champion you are
bound in right to acquit her. I have told you my
mind, replied the Duke.

Agrayes, tarrying for no more words, turned his
horse, running a brave career against the Dwarf's
Knight \ they brake their staves gallantly in tlie
encounter, meeting likewise so furiously with their
bodies tliat they were both laid along the ground j
yet quickly they recovered, and unsheathed tlaeir
swords, and delivered fierce and cruel strokes to
each other 3 tlieir swords were sharp, and the
Knights valiant and haughtily disposed, by means
whereof their armour helmets and shields were



U6

in a short time made of slender resistance. At
length the Dwarf *s Nephew gave back andsaid^
we hare combated enough^ and it appears to me
that neither the Knight^ .whose caase you have un-
dertaken^ is guilty, nor yet the Dwarf my Uncle
to blame^ for otherwise the battle could not have
lasted so long : if it please you, then, let them both
be held as loyal. Certes, quoth the Prince, the Knight
is a Ibyal Knight, but the Dwarf is a false Dwarf
and a wicked, and I will not leave you till your
own mouth confess him so. The battle wes then
renewed, but the Dwarf's Nephew was now so
sorely pressed, that the Duke returned lest he
should see his death, and said aloud as he went.
Henceforth I swear to take vengeance upon all
Knights Errant. A foolish war hast thou denounced,
quoth Galvanes, against Errant Knights, who go
about to redress wrong !

By this time his antagonist was at the feet of
Agrayes, who plucked off his helmet and struck
at his face with the hilt of his sword, saying, con-
fess the disloyalty of the Dwarf towards the
Knight. Ah, gentle Knight, quoth he, do not
slay me ! 1 own that he for whom you combat is
good and loyal, and I promise to gain the Damsel's
release -, but for God's sake do not make me say



157

that the Dwarf is false^ for he is my Uncle, and
he bred me up. At these words all the assistants
marvelled, and Agrayes was moved to pity. He
' replied, let be the Dwarf ! but for you, who are a
good Knight, I release you, provided you will do
your uttermost to deliver the Damsel.

While this past the Duke got near the Castle, but
Galvanes laid hold on his bridle, and pointed
where his champion lay at the Prince's feet j—
he is slain or conquered ! what say you of the
Damsel ? — Knight, you are more than mad if you
think I will do otherwise with her than 1 have re-
solved and sworn. — And what have you sworn ?-—
That she shall be burnt to-morrow, unless she con-
fess for whom she introduced tlie Knight into my
palace. What ! will you not deliver her ? No,
quoth the Duke, and if you tarry longer in this
land I shall find you also employment here ! As he
said this, certain of his attendants came up. Gal-
vanes then let loose the bridle 5 — you threaten us,
and you will not release the Damsel as right is,
therefore I defy you on my own behalf, and for all
Errant Knights ! And I defy you and all, replied
tlie Duke 3 in an evil hour shall any of you come
here! Greatly enraged was Agrayes at hearing
what had passed j a man like this, quoth he, from



158

whom no right can be obtained^ should not be the
Lord of a land. Then he cried to the Dwarf's
Nephew^ remember what thou hast promised;
and with that he and his Uncle departed. It was
now about vespers^ and thej entered the forest of
Arunda. Nephew^ said Galvanes^ let us lie in
wait here for the Duke or some of his people !
So they turned aside from the path into a thicket^
and di^mounted^ and sent their Squires into the
town for what things were needful^ and there they
remained that night.

The Duke meantime in great wrath sent for the
Damsel, and bade her look to her soul, for she.
should be burnt to-morrow unless she confessed 3
but she would disclpse nothing. The Dwarf's
Nephew then knelt down, and told the Duke
what he had promised to Agrayes, and besought
him for God's sake to release the Damsel ; but the
Duke swore he would rather lose his whole es-
tates than break the vow he had sworn ; and the
Knight was greatly troubled, for he hoped to have
discharged himself of his fealty. In the mornings
the Duke called again for the Damsel 3 chuse,
said he, the truth or the fire ! one or the other !
She replied, you must do your will, but against ,
all right ! Then he commanded two Knights and



159

twelve men at arms to take charge of her^ and he
himself mounted his horse with onl7 a truncheon
in his hand^ and went with them to bum the
Damsel at the forest edge 5 and when they arrived
and all was ready, he said. Now set fire to her,
and letiicr die in her obstinacy ! All this Galvanei
and his Nephew saw, and as they were already
armed they mounted, and commanded one of their
Squires to attend to nothing but the Damsel, but
to place her in safety 3 and then they rode towards
the smoke. But now had the Damsel so great a
fear, that she cried ouf. Sir, I will confess ! and
the Duke came nigh to hear her, when he saw
Don Galvanes and Agrayes come galloping up,
and they cried out, deliver the Damsel ! His two
Knights were lightly dismounted, and his men at
arms slain or maimed, and he himself fled full
speed towards the town, and Galvanes shouted
after him, stay. Sir Duke, and make proof of the
enemies whom you have defied !

The Duke speedily armed himself and collected
all his company, and sallied out to pursue them }
and coming to the forest he divided them into
parties of £ye, and sent them different ways. He
himself with his five companions had the lot to
find whom he sought. Now Nephew, quoth



160

Galvanes^ show your worth ! In the combat Ifae
Duke encountered Agrayes ; Agrayes made a blow
at him that only struck his vizor, but it went
through and sheared his nose dean away ; and the
Duke> who thought he had been slain^ turned
bridle and galloped away. The Prince then turned
to his Uncle's assistance^ and soon forced the two
Knights^ who still kept their saddles^ to make the
best use of their horses in flight.

This battle won^ they asked the Damsel if there
was any place of lodging near. Yes, said she, I
know the dwelling of a Knight hard by, named
Olivas, a mortal enemy to the Duke 5 and she
guided them there, where Olivas gave them the
better welcome for what had happened. The
morrow morning as they were about to depart,
Olivas said to them. Sirs, the Duke slew my Cousin
treacherously, and I shall accuse him for his death
before King Lisuarte j and for this I beseech your
advice, and your aid as Errant Knights who redress
wrong, if need should be. That did the Knights
readily promise, and Olivas accompanied them to
Windsor.



161



CHAPTER 18.



One day when Amadis was talking with the Queen
Brisena^ there came a Damsel into the palace^ who
knelt before her and said^ Madam^ is there a
Knight here who bears the Lidhs ? The Queen^
perceiving that she meant Amadis^ answered^ what
would you with him ? — I bring him tidings of a
new Knight^ who hath made a braver beginning
of chivalry than ever did Knight before in all the
Islands. Say you so ? said Brisena 3 noyr then tell
your tale^ for here is the Knight whom you seek.
Then said the Damsel to Amadis^ Sir^ the fair
Child whom you knighted before the castle of
Bradoyd, where yon conquered the two Knights of
the Bridge^ and the three of the causey^ and took
the Lord of the Castle^ and delivered by force of
arms iTrganda's friend, saluteth you by me, as
being the man whom he reputeth his Lord, and
bids me say that he will strive to be a good man^



162

or die in the attempt 5 and when he shall be such in'
prowess^ he will tell you more of his afiairs than
you yet know -, but if he fail to become such a
one as you could esteem^ he will still be silent,.
Then came tears into the eyes of Amadis^ so that
all the Dames and Damsels saw he was weepings
for he remembered his brother. Meanwhile the
Queen J desirous to hear what deeds of prowess the
new Knight had performed said to the Damsel^ I
pray you continue your message, and tell us that
brave beginning of chivalry you speak of. The Dam-
sel then related what she had seen at the Rock of
Galtaresj which, • when she had done, the Queen
asked Amadis if he knew who the Knight was ^
and Amadis told her it was his brother.

But Oriana, who sate too far off to hear what was
said, was greatly displeased to see Amadis in tear»,
and she said to Mabilia, call your cousin that we
' may know what hath happened 3 and when he came
to them she asked him, angrily, from whom the
Damsel could bring him news that should draw
tears ? But when he told her, she cried, pardon
me, my Lord, that I suspected where there was no
cause. Ah, Lady, he replied, how can I pardon
you who have never offended ; but if it please
you, may I go seek my brother ? And this he said



163

because he greatly desired to see him^ and because
he wished to. seek adventures wherein renown
might be won. Oriana answered^ as God shall
help vac, I should heartily rejoice to see that Knight
here^ and I freely permit you to seek htm j but let
it seem as if you went at the Queen* s command.
Amadis then went t<5 the Gtueen^ and said^ I would^
Lady^ that we had that Knight in the King*s com-
pany 5 yet, if he be not sought, it will be long
before he will come. In God's name, replied Bri-
sena, seek him then, but when you have found
him forthwith return here.

On the morrow Amadis heard mass, and departed
with only Gandalin. Towards the close of the second
day,, as he rode thro' a forest, he met a Lady with
two Damsels, and four Esquires, and there was a
litter with them, and they were all loudly lament-
ing. Lady, said Amadis, what have you in this
litter ? I have all my care and my sorrow, said
she 'y a Knight, my husband, who is wounded I
fear to death. Then he approached the litter, and
lifting a cloth that covered him beheld a goodly
Knight, but his face was all bruised and swoln,
and it had many wounds. Sir Knight, said he,
from whom have you received this injury ? but
the Knight turned his head a little^ and made no



164

reply- The Lady answered, from a Knight who
keeps a bridge upon this road^ and who hath tlius
wounded him in hatred to 'King Lisuarte^ upon
whom and all his companions he hath vowed re-
venge for the death of Dardan. Ladj^ said Ama-
dis^ lend me one of your Squires to guide me to
him^ for since for xnj sake your husband has been
so wronged, it behoves me to avenge him. Ah>
good Knight^ said she^ God prosper you! 80
they each went their way, and Amadis rode on till
he came to the bridge, and he saw the Knight
playing at tables with another, but quickly leaving
his pastime, he mounted on horseback and rode
toward Amadis, and cried, stay. Sir Knight, yoa
pass not the bridge till you have sworn ! Sworn
what ? quoth Amadis, — Whether you are of King
Lisuarte*s household ; if so, you shall lose your
head ! That, said Amadis, is not quite so certain.
I am of that household, the Knight of the Queen
his wife, and have been so since I won the battle
for a disherited Lady. By my head, replied he
of the Bridge^ thou shalt lose thine I for thou hast
slain the best of my lineage. Hereupon they gave
the spurs to their horses, and breaking their lances,
met so furiously that the Knight of the Bridge was
thrown to the ground } but, by reason the helmet
of Amadis was displaced in the encounter, he had



165



leisure to mount again^ and to give his enemy
three blows with the sword^ before Amadis had
adjusted the lacings; that done^ he of Gaul re-
quited him with one blow on the side of the neck^
that sent his head dangling upon his breast. NoWj
said he to the Squirc^ go tell your Lady what you
have seen.

Then Amadis rode on till he came to the end of
the forest, and entered a fair plain and wide, and
he was delighted with the green herbs that he saw
on all sides. Presently there came up an ugly
Dwarf upon a palfrey, whom he asked whence he
came ?— From the house of tlie Count of Clara.—
Have you seen there a young Knight called Galaor ? .
No, said the Dwarf, but in three days I will show .
you the best Knight in this land. — Ah, Dwarf!
lead me then to him.— That shall I do, if you will
grant me a boon, and go with me where I shall
appoint. This Amadis granted, hoping that the
Knight of whom he spake might be his brother.
So they rode on together. The following day
about noon they saw two Knights fighting against
one, and Amadis approached, and said. Sirs, may it
please ye stay awhile, and tell me on what occasion
your quarrel ariseth ? At these words they ceased,
and one of them replied, because this Knight



166

malntaioeth that he alone is able to atchieve as
great an enterprize as we two together. Certes,
said Amadis^ a slight cause ! for the goodness of
the one (^minisheth no jot of the other. They saw
that he spake with good reason^ and so ended their
strife ', and they then asked him if he knew the
Knight who conquered Dardan. Why ask ye ?
quoth Amadis. — Because we would gladly meet
with him. I know not, he replied, whether your
meaning be good or bad 3 but I saw bim not long
since in the court of King Lisuarte ; and he took
leave of them and went his way. The three
Knights conferred together a little and then gal-
loped after him. He no sooner heard them, than
he turned and took his arms 5 he had no lance,
neither had they, having broken them in their
quarrel. Alas ! my Lord, quoth the Dwarf, what
will ye do ? do you not see that they are three ?
I shall defend myself if they attack me, replied
Amadis 5 and by this they came up. Knightj
said they, we beg a boon of you, and you must
grant it if you would get from us. I shall grant
it the sooner, replied Amadis, if it be reasonable.
Tell us then, as a loyal Knight, where we may
find him by whom Dardan was slain. He who
was now compelled to avow himself answered,
I ani he. They exclaimed at once. Ah, Traitor,



167



thou dtest \. and all fell upon him. But Amadis
so bestirred himself^ that olily one of them escaped
with life from the adventure. Ah^ quoth the
Dwarf, ^ I take a better with me for my boon than I
had thoi^ht !

That night they lodged with a Hermit, and had
poor i&re for their supper. In the morning
about the hour of tierce, the Dwarf showed him
in a pleasant valley two tall pine-trees, and under
them sate a Knight all armed, upon a lusty courser,
and two Knights, whom he had just dismounted,
were endeavouring to catch their horses ', and in
the same shade another Knight lay leaning on his
helmet, having his shield by him ; and there were
twenty lances ready against the tree, and two
horses ready caparisoned. There, said the Dwarf,
he who leans on his helmet is the good Knight of
whom I spake, Angriote of Estravaus, the best
Knight that I have heard report of. — ^Why keepeth
he there so many lances ? The Dwarf answered,
I can resolve ye : he loveth a Lady of this country,
who hateth him above all others -, nevertheless, he
hath prevailed so much in fight that her parents
were constrained to give her to him. After he had
gotten her into his power, he thought himself the
happiest man in the world, but she told him it was



168

no courtesy to take a Damsel against her will^ and
that she never willingly would be his till he had
performed one thing for her^ which was that he
and his brother should keep this Vale of Fines fc^
a year against all Errant Knights^ and force them
to go to King Lisuarte*s courts and confess there
that she is more beautifiil than their mistresses.
And this she devised in her great hatred to him^
hoping that he would either be slain, or provoke
many enemies who might protect her against him.
For this cause they depart not hence all the day
time, and at night retire to the castle upon yonder
brow 5 three menths have past in which time An-
griote hath never set hand to spear against any
Knight, because his brother hath still been con-
queror. At the entrance of the valley a Squire
met them, and said. Sir Knight, you pass not on
unless you confess the mistress of yonder Knight
to be fairer than your own. That lie shall I never
utter, answered Amadis, and rode on*



16^



CHAPTER 19.



When the brother of Angriote saw hiin coming, he
took his arms and met him, saying, Certes,
Knight, great folly have you committed in not grant-
ing our demand ! Wherewith they gave the career
against each other 5 tlie shield of Amadis was
pierced, but the lance broke against his corselet 3
liis antagonist was thrown back, yet held he fast
the reins till they broke, and he fell upon his neck
in such plight that he knew nothing of himself.
Hereon Amadis alighted and took off his helmet,
and perceiving that he was in a swoon, drew hini
by the arm towards him 3 the Knight then opened
his eyes, and, fearing death, yielded. Amadis
mounted again, for Angriote was already horsed,
and had taken his arms, and sent a lance to him.
Soon they encountered so gallantly, that the staves
shivered, and both passed on, for they were good
Knights. Then Amadis seized bis sword, but

VOL. I, I



170

Acgriote cried, we may have die sword battle
anon, and to your cost 5 let us joust till yonder
lances fail us, or till one be sent to the earth. And
this he said, deeming that there was no Knight in
the world who could wield the sword better than
himself. Sir, answered Amadis, I have what to
do elsewhere, and cannot so long tarry.— What !
would you escape so lightly ? I pray thee one
course more ! They chose fresh spears, and met
in tlie course so strongly that Angriote fell, and his
horse upon him, and Amadis passing on fell over
the horse of Angriote, and a part of the spear
which had gone through his shield, was driven by
the fall through bis harness and into the flesh,
though but a little depth 5 but he rose lightly, as
one who would brook no shame * for himself and
in his Lady^s cause, and plucked the truncheon
out, and went to his antagonist sword in hand.
Knight, said Angriote, thou art a brave youth 5
I beseech thee confess my Lady is fairer than thine,
before it be worse with thee. Such lie, quoth
Amadis, shall my lips never utter. Then began a
strife which could not long endure, for rather
would Amadis have died than failed one jot in this
quarrel, and he laid on so fiercely that neither the
great strength nor skill of Angriote availed him j
for the sword came now upon his head, now upon



171



his body^ that the blood sprang from more thdo
twenty wounds. He^ as he could> drew baGk«««-
Of a truth. Knight, there is more worth in thee
than man can think. YieM I quoth Amadis, else
if we end the combat thy Ufe also will be ended ;
and that should I cepent, for I esteem of thee
better than thou weenest. This he said for his
great goodness in arms/ and for the courtesy which
he had used toward his mistress^ having her in h\4
power. Angriote, who could not chuse, gave him-
self up for vanquished, saying, believe me, I not so
much sorrow for my foil, as for the wreckful chance
Ihat I this day lose the thing which I love best.
That shall you not, said Amadis, if I can help
you^ and the Lady will be ungrateful if she ac-
knowlec^ not your honourable pains in her de«
fence. I promise you to employ my endeavours in
yourbehalfj so soon as I return from a quest-
Where, Sir, shall I find you ?-— In the court of
King Lisuarte, answered Amadis. So took he
leave of Angriote, and passed on with the .Dwarf*

Five days tlicy rode together, then the Dwarf
showed hin% a castl^ marvellously strong and plea«
sant, — ^There is Castle Valdfirin ! within that hold
you must perform the promise made to me ; take
your arms, for they sufSer none lightly to go out

I 2



172



ttrfao enter there. Amadii buckled on his helm
and rode on first, the Dwarf and Gand^din fofldw-
ed; they passed through the gate, and looked
uniiod, and coidd see no creature. The fJace is
de8erte4« quoth Amadis. So, said die Dwarf, it
seems.—- Why then host thoo broi^ht me here ?
Sir, said dieDwar^ there was here the fiercest
Knight that ever I saw, and the strongest in arms,
who in that porch slew two Knights } the one Was
my master, and him he slew cruelly, as a man in
whom there was no pity : the head of that traitor
is the boon which I required. I have led here
many Knights to obtain vengeance, but for their
sins they have either been slain or thrown into
cruel prison. Thou doest the part of a loyal ser-
vant, said Amadis 5 yet oug^test thou to bring no
Knight here without telling him against whom he
should fight. Sir, he answered, he is so known
forone of the fierce, that if I had named him none
would venture to accompany me, — ^it is Arcalaus,
the Enchanter. Again Amadis locked round about
if he might see any body ; he alighted and waited
till vespers, then asked the Dwarf what they
should do ? Sir, said he, the darkness is at hand :
it as not good to tarry here. Nay trust me, an-
swered Amadis, I will not budge hence till he
come, or some one who can tell me tidings of him.



173

I, said the Dwaif^ w31 not ttaj, lest he Aoaid
see and know me. Yet shak thou stay, qix>th
Amadis^ for I wtl> not excuse myself from the
pfromise, if I may peifbi'm it As thus they com-
munedj Amadis espied a conrt somewhat farther
on, wherein he entered and found no one, but
he saw a dark place, witk steps that went un-
der ground. Let us see what is here, said he.
For God's sake mercy ! cried the Dwarf, I woukt
not for the world go down. But Gandalin caught
him as he would have run away; fear not, tall
fellow ! said he. And Amadis said, you shall not
^o till I have performed my promise, or till you
see how it flares with me. htt me go, let me go f
quoth the little wretch, I acquit the promise ; for
God's sake, let me go ! Sdid Amadis^ thou shalt
not say hereafter^ I have &iled in my promise. I
desire thee not to discharge me of it. By my
^th I discharge you, said the Dwar^ and I will
wait for you in the road, to see if you come. Go
then, and good luck go with thee, quoth the
Knight } I shall remain till morning, . So the
Dwarf fled in haste.

Amadis went down the steps so far that he cQuId
see nothing ; he came to a plain ground, it was
utterly dark, yet he proceeded, and groping along

i3



174.



a "wsdl felt a bar of iron> whereto there hung a key,
and he opened the padlock of the grate 3 then heard
he a voice^ saying, Ah^ God ! how long shall this
misery continue ? Ah^ Death I why delayest thou
to come where thou art so needed ? He listened
awhile^ but heard no more 5 he then entered the
vault, havii^ his shield about his neck and the hel-
met laced, and the sword in his hand 5 and passing
furtlier he found himself in a great hall, where
was a lamp burning, and he saw six armed men
sleeping in one bed, and by them lay their shields
and hatchets. One hatchet he took, and advanced.
Anon more than an hundred voices were heard
ctying' aloud, liord God send us death and deliver
us ! Thereat was Amadis greatly astonished -, and
the men who were asleep awoke, and the one said
to the otlier, take a scourge and make those wretches
silent who disturb us in our sleep ! Aye, marry
will I, said the other ; and taking a scourge he rose,
but seeing Amadis he stopt, and cried, who goes
there ? — A strange Knight. The man turned
back and fastened the grate, and rouzed his com-
rades. Leave him to me, said the Jaylor, and I
will place him among the rest. This man was
great and strong of limb^ and taking his shield and
hatchet he advanced towards Amadis ; — if you fear
death lay down your arms, - if not^ expect what my



175



Imtchet will give diee ! Both raised their hatchets at
once^ and at once both blows fell 3 the Jaylor's en-
tered far into the Knight's helmet } the Knight's
pierced through the shield of his enemy> who
drew back, and so plucked the hatchet from his
hand. Then Amadis drew his sword ; the other
grappled with him, confiding in his strength, but
Amadis witli the pummel of his sword drove at
his face, and broke his jaw, and shook him off j
then followed that stroke with such another, that
he never needed a surgeon. Then sheathing his
sword, he recovered the hatchet from the shield,
and so played his part with the other five, that only
two escaped death by falling at his feet for mercy
Shewjne then the prisoners ! said Amadis : they
led the way. Who lies here ? said he, hearing a
lamentable voice from a cell. A Lady, said they,
in great torments j and taking two keys from the
Jaylor's girdle, he unlocked the door^ but she,
who believed it was her old tormenter, exclaimed,
kill me man, and do not infiict so many martyr-
doms ! O King, in an evil day was I beloved by
you, since that love has cost me so dear I The
tears came over the eyes of Amadis for great pity :
Lady, said he, I am not he whom you think, but
one who will if he can deliver you j and he called
for light, and when the soldier brought it, beheld

i4



176

a Lady cliained round the neck iKrith a great chain,
and her garments fretted and worn thro' to the skin.*
Wretched as yon behold me^ said she^ yet am I
the daughter of a King, and thus tortured for a
King's sake. So he caused the, chain to be takea
off, and commanded garments to be brought her^
and she covered herself with the scarlet mantle of
the Jaylor, and he led her from the prison.

There met them one at the grate, who called out
to the soldier with the light, Arcalaus demandeth
where the Knight is that entered ? whether he be
dead or taken ? At these words the man let fall
the torch with exceeding fear, and could make no
reply. Villain ! quoth Amadis, what fearest thou,
being under my guard ? Go on ! Then they as-
cended the stairs, and came into the open court.
The night was far spent, and the Moon was clear
above ; but that poor Lady beholding the Heavens,
and feeling the air, fell on her knees, and cried.
Ah, gentle Knight, God protect thee and give thee
thy reward !

Then Amadis raising her, looked round for Gan*
dalin, and finding him not, he feared, and ex-
claimed, if the best Squire in the. world be slain,
I will take such vengeance as never has been heard



y77

of. Presently he heard a cry,, and following it
found the Dwarf hanging by one leg from a beam,
over a fire of stinking smoke, and near him Gan-
dalin tied to a post. Him he was about to untie,
but the Squire cried, the Dwarf firft, for he is in
worst case \ and Amadis holding him in one hand,
while he cut the cord, set him on his feet \ then
set Gandalin at liberty, and said to him, in sooth,
my friend, he who placed thee here did not love
»thee as I do. He went toward the Castle, and
found the portcullis down. Gandalin shewed him
the place where his horse was stabled ; he burst
the door and took him out, and then seated liimself
on a stone bench in the wall with the Lady, for tho*
he wished to deliver the other prisoners, yet durst
he not leave her. So there he awaited daylight 5
meantime he asked the Lady, for what King's
sake she had sufiered. Sir, said she, Arcalaus
mortally hates him, and. therefore revenged himself
upon me \ he seized me in. the presence of many
friends, and covering me with a dark cloud carried
me away, and from that time till now I have never
seen daylight \ and this he did as the worst evil he
could dp to my lover. King Arban of North Wales.
Is it he ? quoth Amadis 3 now God be thanked,
for dearly do I love that Knight ! but now do I
not so much pity you as before^ fince you have

15



178

suffered for the sake of one of the best mea in the
world.

Wheo it was day, a Kn^ht looked from a wiiidow
and asked Amadis^ art thou be who hast slain my
Jajlor and my servants ? Art thou he^ answered
Amadisy who so treacherously murderest Knighta
and imprisonest Danes and Damsels ? thou art the
most disloyal and cruellest Knight in the workl !
As yet you know not all my cruelty^ Arcalaus re^
pliid^ and left the window $ add soon they saw
htm alter the court* . well armed, upon a histy
courser. Now this was one of the largest Kn^hts
in the world who were not Giants>. and Amadia
kK)ked at him with admiration, thinkii^ that he
must needs be of .great strength. Why lookest
thou at me bo earnestly ? quoth the Caste]ian.«*-fie**
cause thou wouldst be so good a Knight were it
not for thy foul disloyalty. I come in gobd time,
quoth Arcalaus, to be preached at by one like thee!
and with that he laid lance in rest, and ran the
tharge. The spears brake; horses and bodies
met, and both horses were driven to the ground.
Quickly the Knights arose, and bq^an a fierce com*
bat which lasted long ; at length the Castellan drew
back. Knight, said he, thou art in the chance of
death, and I know not who thou art ; tell me thai



179

I Oi^y know^ for I think rather to slay than take
thee. My deaths Amadis replied^ is in the will of
Crod, whom I fear 5 and thine in the will of the
Devil, who is weary of hdping thee^ and will now
let thy soul and body periih together. You ask
my name : I am Amadis of Gaul, the Knight of
Queen Brisena; Then renewed they their combat
with fresh fury till about the hour of tierce,
then Arcaiaus waKed faint, and Amadis smote him
down ; and; as he rose, staggered him with ano-
ther blow on the helmet, so that seeing himself near
to dle^ he Bed into the palace, and Amadis fol-
lowed. But he running into a little chamber, at
the door wh^^eof stood a Lady beholding the bat-
tle, took up a sword, for he had dropt his own in
the court, and called to Amadis, come in and finish
the fight ! This hall is larger, answered Amadis :
1^ it be here. I will not come out^ quoth the
Castellan. What ! quoth he of Gaul, thiukest
thou so to save thyself? and placing his shield be-
fore him he entered tlie chamber, his sword being
raised to strike 5 immediately the strength .of all
his limbs was gone, and he lost his senses, and fell
to the ground like a de^d man. Thou shalt die by
no other death than this, said Arcaiaus : what say
you, my Lady ? have I well avenged myself ? and
with that he disarmed Amadis, who knew nothing

16



180

of what was doing, and pat on the annour him-
wM, and said to his Ladj^ as 70a regard youraeS^
let none remove this Kni^ttill his soul shall have
forsaken his body. Then he descended into the
court, and said to her whom Amadis had delivered^
seek for some other to release yon, for this cham-
pion is dispatched. And when Gandalin heard
these wordsj he fell down senseless. Arcalaus took
the Lady, and led her where Amadis lay in that
deadly trance \ and she seeing him in such plight^
"^'anted no tears to express the abundance of her
grief. As soon as he is^ead, said Arcalaus to that
other Lady who was his wife^ place this woman
again in her prison. I will go to the court of King
Xiisuarte, and there relate howl performed this
battle, npon condition that he who conquered should
cut off his enemy's head, and within fifteen days
publish his victory at that court. By these means
none shall challenge me about his death, and I shall
obtain the greatest glory in the world, having over-
come him who conquered every one.

Then he went into the court, and ordered Gandalin
and the Dwarf to prison j but' Gandalin reviled
him with the names of traitor and villain^^rnd
provoked him to kill him, dearing death. Area*



181



laus made his men drag him by the leg to a dun-
geon 'y if I killed thee^ said he, thou wouldst en-
dure no farther pain, and there thou shalt have
worse than death. He then mounted upon the
horse of Amadis, and, accompanied by tliree
Squires, set forth for the court.



182



CHAPTER 20.



Grindalaya^ the Lady whom Amadis had delivered^
made such dole over him as was pitiful to hear.
The wife of Arcalaus comforted her so well as she
could^ for she was of disposition clean contrary to
her husband^ and always besought God in her
prayers to turi^ his heart. As they were thus to-
gether^ they saw two Damsels enter the haU^ each
bearing in her hands many lighted candles^ which

k

they placed along the sides of the chamber wherein
Amadis lay ; the Ladies who beheld them this
while being neitlier able to speak nor move, die of
the Damsels took a book from a casket which she
brought under her arm, and read from it aloud, and
at times a voice answered her, and presently the an-
swers were made by many voices together, as tho*
an hundred, and all in the chamber. Then there
came another book tlirough the floor of the cham-
ber, whirling as if driven by the wind, and it



183

rtopt at the feet of her who read, and she tbok and
broke it into fonr parts, and hurnt them at the
sides of the chamber wh^re the candles stood,
llien she \7ent to Amadis, and took him by the
hand ! — arise. Sir, fer yoa lie uneasily ! and Amadit
arose and cried. Holy Mary ! what is this ? I was
well nigh dead. Certes, 6ir Knight, replied the
Damsel, such a mair as you should not perish in
this sort^ for by your hand must others die who
better deserve it ! and with that, without more
words, both Damsels returned thiiher from whence
they came.

Then Amadis asked what had past, and Grindalay#
told him all. I felt him disarm me, said he, but
all seemed as in a dremn. Then arming himself in
the harness of Arcalaus, he said to his wife, look
to this Lady well till I return j and he went to der
liver Gandalin. Thi^ men of Arcalaus seeing him
thus armed, tan ail ways ', but he descended the
steps, and through the hall where he had slain the
Jaylor, and*8o to the dungeon : a dreadful place it
was for the captives 5 in length, an hundred times
as far as a man*s spread arms can reach ; one only
and a half of that span wide ; dark, for neither
light nor air could enter, and io full that it wds
crowded. Amadifi came to the door and called>



184

Gandalin ! but ht, who was like one dead^ hear-
ing the voice was greatly terrified, and made no
answer, for he believed that his master was slain,
and he himself enchanted. Gandalin ! where art
•thou ? again cried Amadis. O God ! will he not
answer ? and he said to the prisoners, tell me for
God*s sake is the Squire living whom^ they have
just now cast here ? but then the Dwarf knew his
voice, and answered, here we are ! Thereat
greatly rejoicing, Amadis went to the lamp in the
hall, and kindled torches and took them to the
dungeon, and loosed Gandaitn*s chain, for he lay
nearest the door, and bade him deliver his com-,
rades.

They catne from the dungecm, an hmkbred an4
fifteen men in all^ of whom thirty were Knights^
and they followed Amadis, exclaiming, O fortunate
Knight ! even so did our Saviour go out fi'om hell,
leading away his servants whom he had delivered.
Christ give thee thy reward ! and, when they
came to the sun-light and o^cxx sky, they fell upon
their knees, and with Med hands Uest God who
had given that Knight strength to their deliverance.

Atnadis seeing their faces so pale and overspent^
that they seemed like dead rather th^ living csea-



185



tores^ was moved to exceeding compassion. One
among them he remarked for his better shape and
stature, who came forward and -asked what they
should call their deliv(Brer5 and hearing it was
AmadiSj replied that he also was of King LLsu*
arte*s court, being by name Brandoyuas, Kight
glad was Amadis thereof, for he had oflen heard
his good report, and the sorrow that there was for
his loss. The other prisoners then confessed their
bounden duty to him, and desired him to ^point
what they should do^ and he willed them each to
do. as he thought best. They telling him that
wherever they might be they should be at his com*
mand, departed ; Brandoyuas and two Squires only
remaining with 4i^^dis.

They now went to the wife of Arcalaus. Lady,
said Amadis, for your sake, and the sake of these
women, I forbear to set tlie Castle on fire. She
answered him weeping, God is witness of the
trouble and grief I endure for my husband*s evil
ways ', but I must obey him, and pray for his
amendment : now I am at your mercy. Then
Amadis requested arms for Brandoyuas, and £t
garments for Grindalaya ; give them, said he, if
it please you, at your free will : the horse and
arms of Arcalaus I must take, for he hath taken



186

mine, and with fhem a sword of more value tbao
all this! This the Dame wilHngly accorded, aod
she besought them to take food before thejr de-
patted, and the best vimids were brought forth
that so short warning could aiford. But Gxmda'^
laya could not eat, uneasy to be gone \ wheieat
the Knights smiled, and still more at ^t Tywarf^
who could eat nothing and scarcely could he speak,
and his colour was gone. Dwarf, said Amadis,
shall we wait for Arcalausi tlmt I may give thee
the boon which you rdeased ? Sir, said he^ sd
dear hath that cost me/ that nevar while I Kve wiU
I beg another : let us go before the Devil corned
ha<^ agam. I cannot stand upon the leg he hung
me by, and my nose is so fuH of the brimstone
smoke of that fire that I can do nothing but sneeze.
So after they had repasted they took leave of the
Dame, and she commending Amadis to God said, I
pray God that there may be peace between my Lord
and you ! Certes, Lady, quoth he, however that
may be, there will be peace between you and me,
for you have deserved it. And the time came
when these words greatly profited that Lady.

They departed together, and on the second day
separated, Grindalaya and Brandoyuas going to the



187



court of Lisoftrte; AmadiB pursunif his searcti.
And where wilt 'thou go^ my friend ? said he to
the Dwarf. I would remain and be your servant,
quodi he, and he Idssed the hand of Amadis as his '
master* Not far had they travelled when they met
one of the Damsels who had disenchanted him y
^e was lamenting loudly, and Amadis enquired
wherefore. Yonder Knight hath taken a casket
from me, which will not profit him, though with
hs contents the best Knight in the world was de-'
livered from death by me and my companion, whom
another Knight hath now carried off with design
to force her. Now the Damsel knew not Amadis,
by reason that his bever was closed. But he forth*
with gallopping on overtook tlie Knight, and soon
forced from him the casket, and restored it to the
Damsel, and then hastened to her friend*s deliver-
ance. Her he found struggling with the Knight,
who seeing him took his arms )-— in an evil hour
dost thou hinder me of my will ! God confound
such a will ! quoth Amadis. If I do not revenge
myself, . said the Knight, may I never carry arms !
The world will lose little by that, quoth he of
Gaul ; and meeting him in full career, drove him
to the earth with a force that broke his neck, and
then trampled him under his horse's feet.



188



Amadis took off his hdmet^ and immediBldy the
Damsel knew bim^ and he remembered her, fu k
was she who had led him* to deliver Urganda's
friend from Castle Bradoyd. By this her compa-
nion with Gandalin was come up, and they both
embraced him, and thanked him for thdr deliver*
ance. On my faith, said he, in worse dai^r was
J when you succoured me : how knew ye of my
plight ? She who had taken him by tbfi hand an-
swered, my Aunt Urganda bade me ten days ago
hasten to be there by- that hour. So Amadis com-
mended himself to that his true friend, and cour-
teously taking leave of the Damsels^ they departed
^ach (m their way.



185



CHAPTER 21.



Such speed made Arcalaus in the armour and on
the horse of him whom he had enchanted^ that on
the tenth day he met King Lisuarte riding abroad
in the morning to take the air^ accompanied with
a great train. They seeing the horse and arms of
Amadis were greatly rejoiced, and rode on to wel-
come him ', but coming nearer, they saw that it
was not he for whom they looked, for Arcalaus
had his head and hands unarmed, and they were
greatljr amazed. Arcalaus came before the King
and said, I come. Sir, to acquit a promise wherein
I stand bound, to let you understand how I have
slain a Knight in battle. And ^beit I must be
content to declare mine own praise, which were
more honourable for me being reported by another
in mine absence, yet am I ccmstramed to do tio
less, for die covenant was between me and



190

whom' I have slain^ that the conquered: should cut
off the other's head^ and present himself before
you as this day. If he slew me, I told him it
was Arcalaus whom he would slay ; and much was
I grieved when he said that he was the Queen's
Knight^ and by name Amadis of Gaul. In this
guise came he to his death, and I remain with the
honour of the battle.

Holy Mary ! exclaimed the King, is the best
Knight in the world slain ? and with that they all
began to lament. But Arcalaus turned beck by
the way he came, and all cursed him and besought
(God that he might speedily die an evil death, which
they with their own swords would at once have
given him but for his own tale^ how Amadis was
slain in an accorded battle. ,

For^with the King returned in heavy affliction.
The news spread and reached the Queen's house^
and she and all her Ladies lamented^ for greatly
was Amadis beloved by all ; but Oriana hearing
^ir lamentation sent the Damsel of Denmark to
enquire its cause, who presently returned beating
her face, and with a wild cry looked at Oriana.
Ah, Lady 1 what a grief— ^hat a misery ! So that
Onana trembled from head to foot^ and exclaimed^



191



Holy Virgin, if Amadis should be dead ! The
Damsel answered^ ah me, he is dead ! and with
that Oriana's heart died away within her, and she
fell. Then ran the Damsel to Mabilia tearing her
hair, help, help, for my Lady is dying. Mabilia,
though her own grief was so great tliat greater
none could be, yet not for that did she neglect
what remedy might profit -, she took the Princess
in her arms, and poured * cold water on her face,
and bade the Damsel fasten the door of the cham-
ber, that none might see her in tliat passion. She'
recovering her senses, exclaimed. Ah friends, let
me die and be at rest : why would ye make me so
faithless that I should live even an hour after him 1
What though his dwelling be in the cold earth,
where all love ceaseth, yet greater shall be our
loves when in the other world we are united ! and
ihen again she swooned j her long hair hanging -to
the ground, her hands clenched upon her breast
that Mabilia thought she was indeed dead, and
cried. Oh God I Jet me die also> since they whom



•*3SZS



* The English translation says, she wilaced her .garmcncs
to give her moreJiberty, and bathed her teaa^les aad ^)ms
with vinegar and qold water*



19S



i loved best are gone. For (rod's sake, dear Lady,
quoth tlie Damsel, let not your good sense fail
you now, when it is so needed. Roused by these
words Mabilia recovered herself 5 they placed
Oriana in bed, and poured water again upon her
face and upon her breast, so that she revived. Take
heart, said Mabilia, and do not so readily believe
sudi tidings 5 that Knight may have borrowed the
4rms of Amadis, or stolen them : who shall vouch
for his truth ? But Oriana had fixed her eyes upon
the window where first she talked with Amadis,
and in a faint and feeble voice exclaimed, how
bitter is the remembrance that thou excitest ! long
as thou shalt last, never wDl two others discourse
in thee with such pure and perfect truth ! Think
yon, said Mabilia, that if I believed his death I
should have power to comfort you ? and thus with
such consolation all that day they strove to cheer
her who would not be comforted ; and the night
was worse than the day, and oftentimes they
icsLtcd that she would never see the nroming. But
the next day, at the hour when they were about to
lay the napkins before the King, Brandoyuas en-
tered the palace, leading Grindalaya, and they both'
went and knelt before the King. He who greatly
esteemed him, and had been troubled for his long
absence, enquired where he had tarried. Sir^ said



193



ke^ in a dungeon^ whence I should never have
come out, but for the good Knight Amadis^ who
delivered me and this Lady, and many others, do-
ing there such deeds of arms as only he could have
atchieved. And he would there have been slain by
die worst treason that ever was known, by the
traitor Arcalaus, if two Damsels had not helped
him, who surely mjist not a little have loved him.
Lisuarte at this, rose instantly from table -, — tell me,
my friend, by the faith which you owe to God and
to me, is Amadis alive ? By that faith, replied Bcan-
doyuas, J left him alive and well not ten days ago !
Then was there such joy that greater could not be.
The King sent Grindalaya to Brisena, and weU
was she welcomed for her tidings. The Damsel
of Denmark soon heard it, and hastened to Oriana,
and restored her from fleath to life 3 and Mabilia
sent for Grindalaya that they might hear the whole
from her own mouth, and the Princesses would
suffer her to eat no where but at their own table,
that she might relate it more at length. On
her return to the Queen*s apartment, she found
King Arban of North Wales, who dearly loved
lier. Then was there such joy as cannot be ex-
pressed ; and King Arban told Brisena how she
was daughter to King Ardroyd of Serolys 3 and
Brisena^ as well for her higb rank as for the good

VOL. I. K



194



tidings she had brought^ besocight faer to remaia
in her court -, to the whidi she was nothing loth.
Brisena also sent for Grindalaya*s sister^ Aldeva :
this was she who was the friend of Galaor^ and
for whose sake he had been so persecotSed by the
Dwarf. So there were great rejoidngi in the cooit
fif King Lisuarte.



195



CHAPTER 22.

Fifteen days Galaor abode in the monastery be-
fore his wounds were healed j then he departed,
and rode where chance guided him. About mid-
day . he came to a* fountain in a valley, and by
the fountain was an armed Knight, having no
horse, nor other beast. Marvelling thereat, Galaor
said to him. Sir Knight, how came you thus
afoot ? The Knight answered, in riding toward
my castle I fell in with fellows who slew my
horse, so tliat I must walk home, though sorely
tired, for my people know not rny case. Not so,
replied Galaor, you shall have my Squire's beast.
I thank you. Sir, quoth the Knight 5 but, before
we depart hence, you shall know the virtue of this
fountain, wluch is such t(iat no pcHson, however
strong, hath any force against the water. Beasts
that have been poisoned immediately recover by
drinking here, and all the people of the district

k2



19ff

come hither^ and find relief for their infirmities.
Id sooth you tell me wonders, said Galaor, and I
will alight and taste it. The Knight replied, good
reason you should, being near that which you
ought to seek from afar.

Galaor dismounted^ and bade his Squire alight and
4rink as he did, and he placed his arms against a
tree. Go and drink, said the Knight, and I ,will
hold your horse 5 and, while they were 4rinking,
he put on Galaor*s helmet, tooK his lance, and
mounted and rode away, sayiog, farewell. Sir
Knight, you must stay here till you trick another
as I have tricked you. Ah, knave, quoth Galapr,
thou shalt repent this ! You must provide your^
self with horse and arms first, said the traitor.

Gone is the Knight so fast as he coiJd >gallop, and
Galaor in great wrath followed in the same tract
upon the Squire's palj&ey. At length be came to a
double way, and knowing not which io take, stood
still in perplexity. Presently there came up a Dam-
sel, riding more than apace, of whom he demanded
if she had seen a Knight on a bay horse, bearing a
white shield .with a vermilion flower. — ^And what
would you with him ? I would recover my horse
and arms which he has stolen ; and he told her



197

what had happened. How^ said sfae^ would yon
jftGOver them being disarmed ? Only let me .find
him ! quoth Galaor. — Well> grant me a boon, and
I will bring you to him. So she rode on, and
Galaor after her i but the Damsel was foremost^
for Galaor*8 palfrey could not keep up with her,
carrying both him and his Squire, and they rode
three leagues without seeing her. Then they met
her returning, for the false Knight was her para-
mour, and she had been advising with him how
he might spoil Galaor of his armour. So she led
Galaor to a tent, where the Knight was ready to
kill him without danger. Galaor alighted) the
Knight stood at the entrance of the tent, and ex-
claimed, give me now the rest of your armour,
or I will slay thee ! Certes, quoth Galaor, I can-
not fear such a knave as thou art ; and, avoiding
his blow, he smote him so manfully upon the
head as made him put knee to earth, and then
griped his helmet and plucked it oiFj and the
Knight cried aloud to his leman for help. She
hastily drawing nigh, called to Galaor to hold, for
that was the boon which she required -, but she
spoke too late, for Galaor in his anger had already
made him in a state that needed no surgeon. Wretch
that I am ! said she, in beguiling another I have
deceived myself. An ill death kill thee. Knight!

- k3



198

I ^ill claim thy boon so that thott tfaalt die for it ^
and^ if thoa^ shouldst xdiue to grant it, I will
evoy where proclaim thee and shame tkee. Dam*
ael^ said Galaor^ jcu spoke too late, else wduM X
have spared him^ though he weli deserred death.
Then mounting, he rode on. After some tkne he
looked and saw that she was following him ; whi-
ther go you } said he—In yowr company, which
I win not leave, till I have found opportunity ttt
demand ray boon, and make thee die an evil death.
—Lady, you had better choose some other atone-
ment.— Nothing but thy Klfr ibr his. So they
rode on for three days; the Damsel perpetui^
re^^lhig^him;! and thoEt they entered the forest q£
Angaduza.

After Amadis had taken leave of Urganda^s Dam-
sels, about noon he left the forest, and came out
upon a plain, wherein there was a goodly Castle>
and in the plain there was a chariot, the richest
that ever he saw, drawn by twelve palfreys, and
covered with crimson sattin, so that he could see
nothing within. The chariot was guarded by eight
Knights on each side. As Amadis approached
to see what it might be, one of the Knights bade
him keep off. I have no ill intent, said Amadi s.
Be that as it may, quoth the Knight, you shall not



199

approach. Yqu are not such that jou ought to see
what goes th^e ; aui, if you persigt, you mu&l
4o bailie with m. ^h siiigly would be enough^.
bow much mare all together ! Tbeu he of Gaul
tockhi9am\8, and sped so well that there spon
lemaiDrd only one enemy to deal with > his helmet
be smote off, and whe» Amadis saw under it the^
&ce of aa old maa, and the grey hairs^ he drew
back. Sir Knight^ quoth be, you should now
leave this pursuit, for if you have cot before woa
honour, your age excuses you now. Nay, friend,
levied the old Knight, the young must fight to
obtain leoowa, and the old to preserve what they
bare won. Your wonls. Sir Kmght, «9 wke?
than mine, said Amadis ; and he advanced to the
chariot, and lifted up the hangings : within it he
saw a marble moonmeot, having the figure of 9
crowned King thereon in royal robes, but the crowji,
was KMt to the head, and the head dowq to the
neck. There was also a Dame sitting on a couch,
and by her a youngMaiden of most excellent beauty^
I pray ye tcU nac. Madam, said he, what figure is
this. She ^ing that he was not of her company,
replied, who gave thee permissfion to look here ?— p
None other than my desire thus to do.— And my
Knights, what did they ? More harm to me than
good, said Amadis. Then the Lady in years lifted

k:4



$00

the curtain and saw her Knights^ some lying
dead^ some endeavoonDg to catch their horsesy
and she was greatlj moved^ and said to Amadn,
cursed be the hour in which thou, who hast done
such devilries, wert bom ! Lady, he replied,
your Knights attacked me. I beseech you tell me
the meaning of this. — As God shall help me, 70a
shall never learn it from me whom you have so
injured. And when Amadis beheld how wroth she
was, he departed and went his way

The Knights of the Lady then placed their dead
comrades in the chariot, and went towards the
Castle with great shame. Amadis meantime rode
on, and when he had gone about a league, he saw
the old Knight riding afler him, who called to him
to stop. The Lady whom you saw, said he, sends
to you, and requests you will lodge in her Castle
to*night, that she may make amends for her ^s-
courtesy. Gentle Sir, quoth Amadis, she was so
moved that meseems my presence should cause her
more wrath than pleasure. Believe me, answered
the Knight; she will rejoice in your return. Ama-*
dis seeing the Knight was of an age that should
not lie, and won by his manner, turned back with
him. On the way he asked the meaning of the
figure, but th^. Knight would not resolve himj



201

and when they drew near the Castle, the old man
rode on to inform his Lady of her guest. Amadis
slowly followed to the gate, over which there was
a tower, and he saw the Lady and the young Dam-
sel at one of the tower windows, and the Lady
said to him. Enter, Sir Knight, for we greatly re-
joice at your coming. He answered. Lady, I re-
joice to obey rather than displease you 5 and en-
tered the Castle. Presently there was a great stir
within, and many Knights and armed men came
out and beset him, crying, yield or thou art dead I
Certes, quoth he, I will not willingly enter the
prison of such false ones ! and with that he laced
his helm ; but his shield he could not take, be-
cause of the press there was upon him. They struck
at him on all sides 5 he nevertheless worthily de-
fended himself so long as his horse could stand,
felling at his feet all whom he could reach with a
fair blow 5 but his horse being slain, and he him-
self sorely prest, he made toward a shed which was
in the court, and there by the wall defended himself
to better advantage. Gandalin and the Dwarf were
taken in his sight, which the more inflamed him j
but his enemies were so many, and laid ,on such
heavy load, that sometimes he was upon his knees,
and he saw no way of escaping death, aiid they

k5



S02

would shew him no mercy , because he had slaio
and grievously wounded so many. But God and
his own worth succoured him in this peril. The
young Damsel beheld the battle^ and seeing his
brave behaviour she was moved to pity, and call-
ing to one of her women, she said, I had rather
all my people were slain than that good Knight
should perish—follow me ! Lady, said tlie woman,
what would you do ? Let my lions loose upon
his enemies, said she, and I command you being
my vassal to release them, for you can do it be-
\cause they know you. Upon this the woman
loosed the chain of the lions, who were two in
number and very fierce, and then she cried out,
«ave youcselves, for the lions have broke loose I
They who were besetting Amadis forthwith fled,
yet not so lightly bat that many of them were
torn to pieces by the beasts. But Amadis imme-
diately made for the gate as well as he could, and
going out closed it behind him, and fastened the
Lons in the court. Then he seated himself upon a
stone, sore wearied as one who had fought hardly,
DtiU holding in his hand his sword which was
brokes.

The lions meantime having Scoured the court, ran
here and there^ and would fain have escaped thro*



203

the grate. The people of the Castle dared not de-
scend to them^ nor she who had let them loose^
for they were too fierce to be controlled. In thig
distress, not knowing how to help themselves,
they agreed that their mistress should ask Amadig
to open the gate, which perhaps he might do at ^
Lady's request Full loth was she to ask him,
considering how little she had deserved such favour
at his hands \ yet, knowing it was her last refuge,
she looked from the window and said. Sir Knight,
however hardly we have dealt with you, let your
courtesy exceed our demerit, open the gate
that the lions may go out and we may be safe.
We will make what amends we can for the past*
and. on my faith I assure you my intent was only
to hold you as my prisoner, till you would consent
to be my Knight. Amadis mildly answered, that
should have been gained in another guise : I would
willingly have become your Knight to do you
service, as I am the Knight of all Dames and
Damsels who, need it.— And will you not open the
gate ?— No ! as God shall help me you shaD not
receive that courtesy from me. With that she went
from the window lamenting, and the fair young
maiden said to him. Sir Knight, there are those
here who had no part in the wrong which has been
done you, and who deserve some favour at yda'



204

hands. Then Amadis greilly admiring her, an-
swered, fia\r friend, do you wish me to open the
gate ? I should thank you earnestly, said she ;
and seeing Amadis rise to do it, she stopt him,
saying, stay a moment while I make the Lady se-
cure your safety. So that he marvelled at her dis-
cretion. The Lady then warranted him that he
should be safe from her people, and promised to

_ •

release to him Gandalin and the Dwarf, and the
old Knight bade him take a mace and shield to kill
the lions as they came out. Give me the arais !
said Amadis ; but God forsake me if I do harm
to those who have aided me so well. Certes, Sir,
Knight, quoth the old man, you will not fail in
your faith to man, since you keep it so to beasts.
Then they threw to him the mace and shield, and
Amadis took them, and sheathed the little of his
sword that was left, and opened the gate, being
ready with the mace in his own defence. Imme-
diately the lions can by. him into the open country.
He entered the court, and presently the Lady and
her people canoe to receive him, and they brought
him Gandalin ttid the Dwarf. I have lost my horse
fccre, said Amadis j if It pfease you. Lady, give me
aiM9liier, else I must depart on foot. That, quoth
ahe, were dbame fat a Knight like you i but re-



205

main here this nighty and on the morrow we will
provide you a horse. Then they disarmed him,
and brought him a costly mmitle, and led him to
the apartment where the Lady and the young
Damsel expected him, and tiiey seeing him so
young and beautiful, being so brave a Knight^
were greatly amazed. He on his part no less
wondered at the Damsel, how fair she was ; but
addressing the Lady, he said,' If it please you, tell
me what the figure meant which 1 saw in the cha-
riot. She replied, promise me to do what you
ought after having heard it, and I will tdl. you ;
otherwise, I pray you hold me excused. It werfc
no reason. Madam, quoth Amadis, to promise
lightly I know not what : if it be to do what befits
a Knight, 1 shall not fail you. You say well. Sir,
said she > and then dismlsmng aii her attendants^
she began. *« . i ,

Sir Knight, th^ . figjijirci iof ^oflKt aft inasd^ in Te<^
membrance,,;p^(^..,|att^ 9frlfai£b'&ir .anaidea^

who lies in the.mpnHi^p^.^y^3j^^,9jft^»^tfaii
chariot. . He ^^ j^ crowJ^p^/I^grf^i* JMi«|f ^|W«[
his throne on. a. festiyai d^jr^iis bi^^bsfi ©We^tfrf
and di-awin^a sword.froi;^ ^^^:^^^8^(t§ll^$^
him on. the head .apl.^^fif^ ^1 a&dBft ^ jjft i^ t^^
statue. Tnis was a concerted treason 3 he had



206

brought with him many adherents^ and seized the
kingdom^ ivhich he still holds. This child^ the
only one of the murdered King, was then under
the care of that old Knight whom you have seen ;
who fled with her to me^ being her aunt. I pro-,
cured my brother*s body, and entombed it as you
have seen, and every day it is laid in the chariot,
and carried forth ; and I have sworn that none
should see the monument but those who attain the
sight by arms, nor leaving seen it, learn the mean-
ing without promising to take vengeance for so
wicked a treason. Now, if you be a noble Knight
bound to prosecute virtue, and on so just occasion,
you will employ the forces God bath lent ye in this
right cause 3 and I will continue this course, being
s^XP of you, till I have found two champions more,
to fight with the traitor and his two sons, for they
will not undertake the battle except they be to-»
gether.

Let them come one, by one, said Amadis, and I
will singly cope with them. That, quoth she,
they will never consent to ; but do you return here
at a year's end, and I will have the other two
champions ready. I will not fail, answered Ama-
dis ; and do not you trouble yourself in that search,
for I will bring those with me who shall well main-



207

tain your right. This he said trasting in that time
to meet his brother Galaor and Agrayes. They
heartily thanking him, bade him besure they were
good Knights, for that wicked King and his sons
were some of the strongest Knights in the world.
If I find but one of those whom I look for, said he,
I shall not care for a third, however strong they may
be. Tell us then, gentle Sir, of what country yoa
are, and where we may find , you ? — I am of the
house of Lisuarte, Queen Brisena's Knight. Now
then, let us go eat, said she, with the better ap-
petite after this agreement. Then went they into
a spacious hall, where such cheer and honour was
made him as might be desired till the hour of rest
came. The good night being given on all sides,
he was conducted to his chamber by the Damsel
who had loosed the lions. Sir Knight, said she,
there is one in this castle who helped you when
you knew it not.—- And when was that ?— When I
set the lions loose to save you by my young Lady's
order} for she pitied you : if she live, she will be
without peer for wisdom as well as beauty. Of a
tnitli, quoth Amadis, I believe so 5 but tell her I
truly thank her, and bid her think me her Knight.
She will gladly hear me say so, replied the Damsel j
and with that she departed, leaving Amadis in
bed. All this Gandalin and the Dwarf heard,.



fi08

who lay in another bed at his feet) and the
D warf^ ' who knew not of the loves of Amadis
and Oriana, thought that he loved the young
Maiden, and had therefore called himself her
Knight^ and sorely did Amadis suffer afterwards
for this error.

In the morning after mass^ Amadis asked the
names of those with whom he was to do battle.
The father^ said the Lady^ is called Abiseos^ the
sons Darasion and Dramis, all three of great
prowess. And' where do they reign ? In Sobra-
disa^ which borders upon Serolis^ and on the other
side is bounded by the sea. He then armed him-
self and mounted, and was about to take his leave^
when the young Damsel came to him^ bringing a
rich sword which had been her fatlier's. Sir Knight,
said she, use this sword while it may last you, for
my sake, and God prosper you therewitli. Amadis
received it with a smile : hold me. Lady, for your
Knight ! Certes, Lady, quoth tlie Dwarf, you
gain not a little in gaining such a Knight.



209



CHAPTER 23.



Amadis rode on without any adventure tffl he en^
tered the forest of Angaduza^ where he met a
Knight and a Damael } and the Knight coming
near drew his sword, and ran at the Dwarf to cut
off his head. The Dwarf fell from his horse with
fear, and cried lustily for help. Amadis with all
speed went to protect him. Why would you slay
my Dwarf ? quoth he 5 trust me it is but poor
manhood to lay hands on so poor a wretch : he is
mine, and I shall defend him. For that^ replied the
other, I am sorry ; but at any rate I must have his
head. Do battle first, quoth Amadis. They took
their shields, and ran at each other ; both shields
were pierced and both breast-plates. Their horses
shocked together and their bodies, and both were
driven to the ground } but the sword-battle that
ensued none could have seen without af&ight, for
never before had either warrior found himself so



210

matched^' nor in such peril) their shields were
shivered^ their helmets hacked and bnused, their
mail sliced away, and every where free 0penmga
for the sword. Both at length drew back to
breatlie» Knight, said the stranger, do not-sufier
this any longer for the s^e of a Dwarf : let me
cut eiF hiS' head, and I will make amends to you
for the wrong hereafter. Talk not to me of that>
said Amadis,: the Dwarf shall not be harmed. I
must dther pert$b« said the Knight, or f^vehw
head to that Damsel. Said Amactis, one ef oa
shall' perish first ! an4> refining bis shield and
fword, he renewed the combat laore fiercely, pro*
vokfd at the Knight's unreasonable will. But if
be was strong, the other was not weak, and tht
battle continued till each expected nothbg but
death, though neither of them a whit abated of
bis courage. When they were in this plight a
Knight came up, who crossed himself to see so
desperate a combat, and a^ed the Damsel how it
began. I set them on, said she, and end as it will
it must be to my joy ; I shall be glad if either of
them be killed, much more if both. That, quoth
the Knight, is an evil disposition : wherefore do you
so hate them } I will tell you : be who bath most
of his shield Jeit, is the man whose death my uncle
Arcalaus most desires> and is nanied Amadis ; the



odier is called G^iaor, and he slew the man whom
I bved bc»t I obtamed a boon from himj and
have asked him one which will cost him his life ;
ibr^ because that ether Knight is the best in the
worlds I haiw demoded the head of his Dwarf |
both are brought neat death herebj to mj great
pleasure. A curse upon thee^ woman ! cried the
Knight ) and he dr^nr his sword and smote her
bead from her shoulders : take this for the sake of
thy uncle Arcalaus and his prison^ ^m whence
that Knight released me ! and with that he gallop*
ped to the combatants. — Hold^ Sir Amadis^ for it
is your brother Galaor !

Then Amadis threw down his shield and sword^
and the brethren embraced^ and Galaor knelt down
and besought his pardon. Brother! quoth Amadis^
the danger -through which I have passed is well re-
quited, since it has proved to me your great prow-
ess i and then they unlaced their helmets, for they
had need of air, and the Knight told them how he
had served the Damsel for her wickedness. Good
fortune befall you for doing it, quoth Galaor ^ for
now am I clear of my boon. And indeed. Sir
Knight, said the Dwarf, I am better pleased that
you are quit by these means, than in the way you
first designed. Now, said the stranger, come with



212

me to my Castle. I am the hairiest man in the
worlds Sir Amadis, to have requited you with this
service for delivering me from the cmellegt don-
geon in which ever wretch lay.— Where was that ?
i— In the Castle of Arcalaus : my name is fial^a of
Carsante. So they went to that good Knight*s
CastlCj where they were laid in bed^ and their
wounds dressed ^ and Amadis dispatched his Dwarf
to inform Queen Brisena that he had found Galaor,
and would bring him to Windsor as soon as th^
were able to travel.



S13



CHAPTER 24.



King Lisaarte^ as he was a great hunter^ when
affairs of more consequence to his state did not oc*
cupy him^ went frequently to hunt in a forest near
Windsor. The forest being well kept, was stored
with beasts of chace^ and he always went out in
his hunting apparel, provided with all things need-
ful for the sport. In this equipage going one day
near the great road, he saw thi'ee armed Knights
and a Damsel on their way, and sent a Squire to
call them. When they came near, the King knew
Don Galvanes, and embraced him and bade hun
welcome. The other Knights also he courteously
received, for he was the man in the world who
with the best good will received all Errant Knights.
Sir, quoth Galvanes, you see here my ne[^ew
Agrayes, and I present him to you as one of the
best Knights in the world. Certes, gentle Sir,
said Lisuarte, I am greatly beholden to you for this



214

coming ; and with that he embraced the Frioce>
Then recollecting the third,— Sir Olivas ! it is long
since we have seen you, and I do not willingly let
so good a Knight be - absent. Sir, quoth Olivas,
mine own troubles have kept me 6x>m your sight
and service, nor am I yet free from them ; and
then he told the King how ihe Duke of Bristol
had slain his cousin. Thereat was Lisuarte moved
to sorrow, for he who was slain had been a good
Knight. Make your appeal in my court, said he,
and the Dake shall answer it. They then pro-
ceeded toward Windsor, relating as ib^y went
how they had saved the Damsel &oTa the £re,
wherein she should have been bumt fix Galaor'i
sake.

The news of their arrival soon reached the Queen's
fialace to the joy of all, but chiefly of Olioda.
She instantly leaving the chamber, went to Mabi-
lia : are you not rejoiced at your brother's coming?
Oh, yes ! quoth Mabilia, fix I love him dearly^
Then ask the Queen to send for him that you may
«ee him, and that those who love you may take
part in your pleasure. Brisena at this entreaty sent
for the new-come Knights. Right glad was
Agrayes of this smnmons 3 and, leaving the
QVjeea's converse m soon as might be, he seated



215

himself between his sister and his mistress. But
kus eyes were so fixed upon Olinda^ and his an-
swers to Mabilia so vague and from the purpose^
that she soon saw her brother's case ; and, to give
him opportunity of talk, called to her uncle Gal-
vanes. Come, said she, I would talk with you in
yonder window, that Agrayes may not hear our
^secrets. Besure the lovers lost not their time 5
and it was accorded between them that Agrayes
should remain in this court with Amadis, if hit
cousin so advised him.

By this time the Knights were summoned to table :
they found the boards spread with choice food, and
Lisuarte bade them be seated with other Knights
cf great worship. While they were placing the
napkins, two Knights entered the hall and knelt
before the King, and the one asked. Sir, is Amadis
^ Gaul here ? I would he were, replied Lisu-
arte. So also would I, quoth the Knight, who
need his assistance. Who are ye ? Angriote of
Estravaus -, and this is my brother. When King
Arban of North Wales heard that, he rose from
table i and taking Angriote, who was still kneel-
ing, by the hand, raised him bp and said, Sir^ do
you know Angriote ? No> quoth Lisuarte ; I



£16

nerer till now saw him. — Ccrtes, Sir, they who
know him hold him for one of the best Knights in
your land. Gentle Sir^ quoth Lisuarte^ pardon me
if I have not honoured you to your desert : it was
because I knew you not ; besure you are welcome^
and that with heart. Where knew you Amadis ?
Angriote then related what had passed between
them^ and his own overthrow. No sooner had he
xtiadc an end, than Ardian the Dwarf arrived, and
saluted the King in the name of his master Amadis.
—Where did you leave him ? — ^Alive and well ! but
if you would learn more, let me see the Queen,
for to her is my biddiiig. We will not remain ig-
norant for that, quoth Lisuarte, and forthwith he
sent to call Brisena, who came with fifteen of her
Ladies into the hall^ and there were those present
who blest the Dwarf for this sight of their mis-
tresses. Lady, then said the Dwarf, your Knight
humbly^saluteth you, and sends to say that he has
found his brother. Tlien told he the whole chance^
and that they would set forth as soon as their
wounds were healed.

So glad was the King thereof that he requested
and commanded all who were there not to depart
before their arrival^ for he would hold the most



217

honourable court that might be. They willingly
assented^ and prabed • him much for the design ;
and Lisuarte also desired the Queen to collect
about her the fairest and noblest Damsels^ that for
their sake the more good Knights might be drawn
to Windsor.



VOT . I,



^It



CHAPTER 25.



"tSThen Amadis and Galaor were well reoovcfed,
they and their host^ Sir Balays^ departed for
Windsor. After they had travelled five days they
came to a cross road^ and where the roads crossed
there was a great tree^ and under it there was a dead
Knight^ lying on a costly bed; one taper was
burning at his feet, aad another at his head, and
^ose tapers were so made that no wind could ex-
tinguish them. The Knight was armed^ but no
jcovmng over him j there were many wounds in
his head, and the truncheon of a lance was in his
throat, the iron appearing through, and he with
>both hands held the truncheon, as if striving to
draw it out. They were greatly amazed thereat.
Besure, quoth Amadis, this Knight is not thus
laid here without great causey if we tarry here
awhile some adventure will ensue. Then said Ga-
laor, I swear by my faith of knighthood not to



2id

leave &e i^laoe tUi I know who the ]&iight
aad why he was slam, and to revenge hkn if justice
demand it. Brother^ answered Amadis^ this vow
somewhat di^easeth me : I ftmr it will detain, you
long. Aod this he said inking of Oridna^ from
whose sight he -would not willingly be hindered.
Galaor replied^ I have sworn. And he alighted
and seated himself by the bed^ and his comrades
did Che same> fbr they would not leave liim alon6^

This was between nones and vespers. Presently
they espied a Knight and . two Esquires 3 the one
of whom carried a Damsel before him^ she giving
many shrieks and outcries^ because the Knight
often smote her with the end of his lance. As
they passed by the bed, the Damsel saw the three
companions^ and she cried out. Ah! thou good
Knight that there liest dead, wert thou living thou
wouldst not suffer this villainy ! At these words
the Knight smote her so cruelly that the blood ran
down her face, and then they gallopped away. So
villainous a Knight saw I never till now ! quoth
Amadis. I will not suffer this, brother ! if I tarry
long, proceed you and Balays to Windsor. Then
he mounted and took his arms, and calling Gan-
dalin to follow him, rode full speed in pursuit.

L 2



220

Galaor and Balays remakxed till the night closed.
There then came up an armed Knight along the
road which An:iadis had taken^ and he was groan-
ing. What Knight was he, quoth he, who went
full speed along the road ? They replied, why
ask you ? An ill death be his lot, quoth he, for
he is as fierce as if all the Devils were with him.
What fierceness hath he shewn to you ? — Be-
cause he would not tell me whither he went so
fast, I caught his bridle, and told him he should
cither tell or fight. Fighting will take less time,
said he, and in the encounter he drove me and my
horse to earth, and hurt me as you see. At this
Galaor and Balays laughed, saying, you are taught
not to be over curious another time. Do you laugh
at me ? quoth he : you shall have no cause to laugh.
Then coming near Galaor'« horse, he gave him
a blow in the face, that made him rear and br^
his bridle, and run away. He would have done the
same to the otlier, but they caught up tlieir spears
and prevented him. If 1 have paid for my dis-
courtesy to tlie other Knight, said he, so have you
for your laughter ; — and he rode of£ God never
help me in my need, said Balays, if I make thee
not give tliy horse for the one thou hast sent rang-
iiig ! So telling Galaor he v^ould be with him



221

tBc next day unless fortune failed, he galloppcd
away.

Galaor remained alone with the dead Knight, for
his Squire was gone after the horse. Five hours of
the night he remained watching -, then, overcome
with heaviness, he placed his shield against his
helmet as a pillow, and lay down and slept.
When he awoke there was no light of the tapers
to be seen, and the dead Knight was gone. Shame
on me, said he, that I could not watch ! but I
will take penance by seeking him on foot. As he
was doubtful which way to go, he heard tlie
neighing of horses, and shaped his course towards
the sound. After he had proceeded some way the
morning broke, and he saw two Knights, the one
of whom had dismounted to read certain letters
graven on a stone. They sent me here vainly, said
the one, for this is a foolish errand ; and he mount-
ed again, and they rode off together. Galaor
called out to them, know you. Sirs, who hath
carried the dead Knight from under tlie tree in the
cross- way ? The one answered, we do not know ;
but after midnight we saw tliree Damsels and ten
Squires with a litter. — Which way did they take ?
He followed the road which they pointed, and met

l3



d2&

a Denisdi of whom he asked the lamc qDcrtioii^
Sherfeplied, promise to revenge his death, aDdl
will resolve you. — ^That shall I do, if, as I bepeve,
it maj be done justlj.—* Then mqnnt my palfrey,,
and I will ride behii^. But Galaor would by na
means take the saddle *, so he rode behind her foe
two leagues, and came to a fair castle ; here, md
she, you will find what you seek. Tell me where ta
find you, and for whom to ask. — For Don- Galaor,
in the court of King Lisuarte. Then the Damsel
left him, and be went in.

In the middle of the court the dead Kftight was
laid, and they were making great dole over him.
Galaor drew nigh and asked of an old Knight who
the dead was. — Such a one as the world might
with reason lament, Antebon, a Knight of Gaul.«—
How came he by his death ? — He had a &ir daught
ter by that Lady whom you see bewailing him ; a
neighbouring. Knight loved her, and carried her
off by force, who greatly disliked him, while her
father was gone to the Tre« in the cross-ways to
wait, as was his wont, for adventures. But she
did nothing but weep, and she told the Knight
that she had sworn to her mother never to many
any Knight who had not as great renown in arms
as her father. You shall not for that refuse me.



m^ ftci b^p. three 4iorg yftiLsball kpqw tfiat. J^
am as d<m|[M7 ^sd)^^ And ^e tpok his.anps and
ipde. to thp Tree, ^d fip^ii^ Ai^tpbpn o|i f^bt an^.
upttlpnt hi9 shi^4.and Ijelp^t,, which Tyw-e lying
Igr biw^ sfljptp l^i|i> tlirqi^gb, thcj nec^, with l^ia.
8peiir.i. ^d^ after h^kfA fajlen dead^^ mangled his
hiead as you behold. W& tJiQcefpre liaise laid hioi
in that same place^ being a continual passage for
Knights Errant^ to try if any would be so honour*
ably pro^c^ed as to revenge him, when they had
heard how treacherously he was slain* But wh^
was he left alone ? said Galaor. — The murderer
had sent to threaten the four Squires who always
remainod by him^ and for this cause they had for-
sakcii the body, and' we afterwards removed it.
It has cost me much that I did not see you, quoth
Gabor. Are you he then whom we saw sleeping
HpoQ his shield ? — The same. — ^And why were you
tallying there ? — ^To revenge the dead, if his
death rightfully demanded it. — ^Ah, good Knight !
God in his mercy prosper the attempt ! And the
old man led him to the bed, and bade them allH
cease their lamentations ; for here, said he to the
Dame, is a Knight who will avenge us. And she
jfeU at his feet to kiss them. Grod reward thee,
thou'good Knight, for he is a stranger in this land^
4Q(] hath no kin to take vengeance. £or.tbat, said

1.4



£34

Galaorj am I the more eager^ seeing I am of the
aanle country. But he is a perilous Knight^ said
she, Fear not^ quoth Galaor^ let me be shewn the
place 5 and^ if it please you, provide me a horse.
That^ answered the Lady, I shall do on condition
that, if you revenge me, the horse be returned.
Galaor replied, so let it be.



t «



GC



25



CHAPTER 26.



Galaor was then conducted by two Damsels to a
Castle in a forest, seated upon a rock, where the
murderer Palingues dwelt. He called at the gate,
and a Knight appeared above it demanding what
he wanted.— To enter the Castle. — ^This gate is
only used to let those out who are within. I will
show you how to enter 5 but T fear my labour will
be lost, for you will not have courage. So help
niL^ God as I will go in ! quotli Galaor. — Alight,
then, and go to the foot of that Tower,

Presently that Knight a^'peared again upon the
Towtr, and another greater than himself com-
pletely armed J and tliey two winding a winch
about, let down a basket by a cord, saying, this is
the way in. Will ye promise to draw me up in
safety ? said Galaor. — Yea, truly 5 but afterwards
\vc will not warrant you. Wind up^ then, quoth

L 5



225

&e> T take your word ! and he placed himself id
the basket. God protect thee, thou gentle Knight,
cried the Damsels, for thoa hast a good heart !
They drew him safely up, and he leapt from the
basket. Then said they. Knight, you must swear
to defend the Lord of this Castle against those who
challenge him for Antebqn's death, else you shall
never depart. What \ quoth Galaor, did one of
you twain kill him ? — Why demand you ?*— That
J may make him know the great treason he hath
tlierein committed. The Knights answered, how
canst ihou be such a fool to threaten us, being ia
our power ? and then drawing their swords they
laid upon him furiously. He seeing himself m
peril, for they were two perilous Knights, naade
no trifling; Ah God, quoth the Damsels below,
hark ! what a battle ! what will become of our
champion B— Presently the two Knights were
thrown from the tower, and Galaor called to them,
look^ if either of these be Palingues. You have
so handled them, Sir, quoth they, that it is not
easy to know, but we believe neither of these i»
he. Then Galaor descended the tower, and en-
tering a large haU beheld a l^ir Damsel, and she
was exclaiming, Palingues ! why flyest thoa ?
art thou so brave in arms as to slay my father i&
Wttlfe, and wilt thou not meet this Knight ? At



a«7

ihcsB w^sdk Qalaov looked Jssm^ ao^ ^1^4 9
jLni^t iRfsell aime4» eiideayoi:img to op^. tl^
doer of anot^r tower. He can U> hun^?— falUigiae^^
fif or ^kt j yoKL shall not e^c^pe ) The traltoc
fi^eing no choice torne^ tiP battl^i ^d ^rc^
iunote at Gal^or^ hu mroti entering $o d^ep ioto
the shield that he covdd not draw it b^ctc. igut
Qslaor isdth 9Ae Uqw «^4 p^ H» anp^ ^id ov^-
taking hm with ^ se^ipi^ gs he fled, cleft hipn to.
the teeth : — take this for thy treason to Antebon 1
WheD the Damsel heard her &ther*s name, and
saw the vengeance, she came and blest the Knight
for what he had done. On my faith, fair friend^,
quoth he, he deserves shan>e who would wrong
one, like you I but tell me,, are there any more to
combat ?— None but servants are left, who are
ready to obey you. — ^Let the gate be opened thea
for your Mother's Damsels, who led me here^
Crteat joy did they make when they saw theic
young mistress for her deliverance;

When Galaor had laid aside his shield and helmet^
they were astonished to see one so young and beau-
tiful 5 and Brandueta ran to. her deliverer and em-
braced him. : — my honouraWe lord and friend,, more
cause have I to love you than any other living !'
tell me who you are ?— They call me Galaor, — Godj



228

be thanked that Antebon is revenged by such a
Knight ! my father often rgoiced in your fame^
and in that of your brother Amadis, for he said
you were the sons of King Perion^ his liege Lord;
and it was for fear of ye^ as Antebon* s country-
men^ that Palingues so fearfully kept his castle.
That night they returned to her mother's castle ;
and Brandueta so requited his services^ that Galaor
did not regret the Duke of BristoFs niece.



229



CHAPTER 27.



Such speed made Amadis, that, having overthrown
the Knight who would have known whither he
went, he overtook him who misused the Damsel,
and cried to him. Sir Knight, you have been com-
mitting great wrong : I pray you do so no more,— -
What wrong ? — The shamefullest that could be
devised, in striking that Damsel. — And you are
come to chastise me ? — JN^ot so : but to counsel
you for your own good. It will be more for
your's to turn back as you came, said the Knight.
Thereat was Amadis angered : and he went to the
Squire and said, let go the Damsel, or thou dieft !
and the Squire in fear put her down. Sir Knight,
you shall dearly abide this, quoth his mailer.
Amadis answered^ we shall see ! and ran his ca-
reer and drove him from his saddle, and was about
to ride over him, but he cried out for mercy I —
Swear tjien never to wrong Dame or Damsel '



23a

And^ as be approaciied to receive the oath« tiie^
traitor stabbed his hone. Amadis lecovevcd from
the fall, and with one blow paid him for the
treason.

The Damsel then besdvght him to oompleathis
coartesy by accorapanjrii^ her to a castle whither
she was going. He took the horse of the slajp,
and they went on together, and by the way he-
learnt from her the history of Antebon. About
midnight they came to a river-side, and, because
the Damsel would fiiin sleepi^ they stopt. Amadis
spread Gandalin's doak for her bed, and he laid
his head upon his helmet, and they all slept.
There came up a Knight as they were sleeping,
and he seeing the Damsel, gently wakened her
with the end of his lance. She seeing an armed
Knight, thought it was Amadis, and said, do joa
wish ns to depart ? He answcnd, it is time ! fa
God*s name then, lyioth she^ and, being still
drowsy, she suffered the stranger to plaoe her be-
Ibre him J but then recollecting, what is this?
she cried : the Squire should have carried me. And
when she saw it was a stranger, she shrieked OQt
and called to Amadis, let not a stranger carry me
off ! But the Knight ckpt spun to hb horse^ and
gallopped away,.



2S1

Amadi9 awoke at her ^oiee, ' and called to 6aii<£B^
lin for his horse^ aad pursued ^11 speed till he en-
tered a thicket and lost the track. Then albeit he
were tihe mildest Knight in the world j he was
sorely wroth against himself. The Damsel may
well report, thought he, that I have done hei* v»
much wroj^ a* succour j for, if I saved her from
one ravisher, I have suffered her to be stolen by
another. So he rode about, wearying his horse,,
till at length he heard a horn, and followed the
sound, and came to a strong^Castle set upon a hiU,^
walled high, and with strong towers, and the gate
was sluit. The watchman saw him, and called
o«t to know what man was ,there at such an hour,
and what he sought. A Knight, quoth Amadis,
who. hath stolen a Damsel from me.— We have
seen none such. Then Amadis wenU round the
Castle, and in another part he found an open pos-
tern, and saw the Knight on foot, and his mea
unsaddling the horse, who could not else pass
through. St<^, Sir Knight, quoth Amadis, and
tell me if you have taken my Damsel ? — You took
no care to keep her. — You stole her from me in a
way neither courteous nor knightly. Friend f
quoth the Knight, she came with me by her own.
will ; I ojQSsred her no force, and here I have her.
Shew me the Damsel^ said Aoiadis^ and> if she



232

says the same^ I will rest contented. — To-morrow
you shall see her, here within, if you will enter
upon the custom of the Castle. — What is the cus-
tom ? — I will not now tell you, for it is night : if
you wait till morning you may know. And he then
shut the postern. ' So Amadis passed the remain-
der of the night under the trees.

When the sun was up he saw the gate open, and
riding i^ to it saw an armed Knight in tlie gate-
way, and the porter ^»^ith him, who asked Amadis
if he would enter ? Why have I tarried here else ?
answered Amadis. First then, said tlie Porter,
you must hear our custom that you may not com-
plain of it hereafter : if you enter here, you must
do combat with this Knight, and if he get the vic-
tory you njnist swear to obey tlie command of the
Lady of this Caitle, otherwise you will, be cast
into a miserable prison 5 if the victor}' be yours,
you will find two other Knights at tlie next gate,
and farther in three more 5 with all these you roust
fight under the same condition 5 but, if you bear
away the honour in these attempts, not only will
it be great renown of prowess, but right sliail be
done in whatsoever you demand. Dear terms !
cried Amadis : but I must see the Damsel. The
first champion encountered him to his cost. Ama-



333

£s held his lance to him as he lay on the ground/
jieM or die I The Knight crimed, mercy ! and
shewed a broken arm : then he of Gaul rode on.
The two who kept the next pass ran at him -, the
<Hxe missed his blow^ the other he drove down, all
stomied, breaking his lance In his shield ; then,
with the truncheon of the lance, he smote the one
who ^was on horseback, so that the helmet came
off: both drew their swords. Knight, quoth
Amadis, it is foUy to continue the combat bare-
headed ! Look to thine own head I was the an-
swer ', but Amadis staggered him with one stroke,
then with the side of the sword struck his head as
he was reeling. Knight, it had been gone, if I
had laid on with the edge ! And afler this victory
he past on.

There within he saw Dames and Damsels on the
wall, and heard them say, if this Knight pass the
bridge in despite of the three, he will have done'
a most rare feat of chivalry. Presently there came
out three Knights, well armed on goodly coursers 5
yield, said they, or swear to perform our Lady g
will. I am not yet won, quoth Amadis ; and for
the Lady's will, I know not what it may be.
With that there began a fierce battle, for the three
of the Castle were hardy Knights, practised in



/



Vtm, «Dd ht: whom tktyt t0a »mk K/A *««» i«l»
cne thgt vQuU'lewne off wHh shame4 AflwdiiiflP'
dMs^ liiiQidf, ^3t. bb: apiig«m(l%. op Jngei^
Mt fat. mmj wonndt. and gneaitawo^ Uood^ ta.
«ttt«ikfaiQi» took to flights TbeoDftlieoiBKftoQk'
«id. made him )iiield^ the odMr tMEatt.he fijAonrads
isfeathebatt^ tiiefestPcd.attiiedpgrlhnirfaboa»
ftsMBtx Daooe&aiid Damsel^) wd-the £aiEsto#tlia»
aD said to him, hoid^ Si» Knight^ jov Ikam dott»
tmooghk Lady^ Itttbcgt o«m thamaehreajraa qni g fai cd f .
—• WhfioaiiMie? bowi kanre ditty^ wiKmged )ia«kl-^
I vas told to day Of ooaq^ec thenLbefoneX^eiM
obtaio mfi £kxfiatd*^^Tt»cy told^ yom if jod ^iM
penetralB hare by fbice> yon shouUlobtKA it >- a>f
tbea what yoa> woilId^havcu.•<^A D Mn o e l^ «wlioi»>i^
Knight stole from me while I skpC/ and bao
brought hither. I pray you. Sir, replied the lad^t
Best while I send Jbr the Knight to vxsmm yos.

ThoA be alighted^ and tile Lady sate down by Vnati
ajid asked him if he knew a Kaigbl cafled Ama-
4is >.*«Wliy atk you f^Because 9& the guard yoit
fcimd in Ala- Caatle. was appointed %&t his sake;,
if he eatered bare, he i^ould never depart till he
revoked a premise which he has made.— >Wbat
might it bare been ? — I will tell you, if you will
pvomise b^f arms or o^otwise to mak« bim rerokai



iS5

it, for it 18 an injof tice.-— Lad}r, whatever Amadiii
hath 80 promised, I will with my utmost power
make him discharge. Sir Knight, qiiothshe, this
Amadis promised Angriote of Estravaus to procore
his LaAf'B liking to him : this was ill done, for
love should be of liking, not of iarce. Certci,
Lady, yoQ say true, and that promise will I oiake
him rdieaae, said Anadis ; oo ksa glad £ar what
had past than the Lady, though fi>r another cause.
Belike then, yon are that Lady whom Angriote
M lovelh?-*Thtf same.-*Of a truth, IhoUhini
teiMeof the best Knigkta living, animethinka
tibeie i» bo Lady, however honoonble, who mi^
9Qt prUb hersdf to have such a servant aa he; 1
4»4PDt8ay this to reeal. the. word wihich iihA^giniea
7oa>.fafot because he is a better Knight than he
who gave him that promise.



C36



CHAPTER 28.



While they were thus devising there came in ano*
ther Knight^ large limbed and -strong, compleady
anhed^ except bis head and hands. Sir Knight,
quoth he to A^madis, they tell me you claun t
Damsel whom I brought here : I did ciot f(xtm
her from you j she chose to come with me^ rather
than remain \vith you, therefore it is no reasonifairt
I should resign her. — Shew me then the Damsel—
It is no reason tliat I should ; if you say otherwise,
I am ready to do battle. Now the name of this
Knight was Gasinan, Uncle to Grovenesa, the
Lady of the Castle j and she, who loved him the
best of all his kin, and was altogether governed by
his counsel, for he was the best Knight of his race,
said to him, 1 pray you. Uncle, forbear this dif-
ference, for if ill befal either of you it will be to
my loss : you are my best friend, and he hath



237

sworn to make Amadis revoke liis promise to An*
griote. Niece^ quoth Gasinan^ neither he nor
any^ other can make the best Knight in the world
revoke his promise 3 and for this quarrel^ so help
me God, as I will not give up the Damsel ! They
gave spurs to their horses and met 5 their spears
brake, their shields and breasts encountered, and
Gasinan fell : yet he arose quickly, and drawing
his sword stood by a strong pillar in the midst of
tlie court, thinking Amadis could little endamage
him, while he was on horseback, and as Amadis
drew nigb, he struck at the head of his horse j
but he of Gaul, moved to anger thereby, made a
blow at him with his sword, which fell upon the
pillar, and cut away a fragment thereof, though
the stone was very hard, but the sword brake in
three pieces. Seeing in what danger he was, he
leaped from his horse 5 and Gasinan came at him,
saying, confess the Damsel to be mine, or thou
art but dead ! That, quoth Amadis, shall I never
do, till she tell me it be with her good will. And
with his shield he warily received the blows that
fdl full fast upon him, and at times smote at Ga-
sinan with his broken sword, so that he twisted the
helmet on his head, and made him often give back.
Tlie battle lasted long, to the great peril of Ama-
dis, for his shield was cut away and his harness



S3%

laidqNn iQ scmdiy places ; lie^ -knowteg his dan*
ger^ mn suddenly upon Gkunneo and grappled widi
hhn, and dashed htm agatnst tiie -piHar^ so as^fbr
% moment to«stan him and make him drop hb
vword, winch Amadis quiddy seized^ and cat the
laces of his fadmet^ saying. Sir Knight, yon have
handled me hardly and jwroogfully, now^-will I be
levenged ! and he lifted his sword as if to slay
him. Seeing that, Grovenesa cried aloud, mercy,
good Knight ! and she ran towards him 3 but he
seeing her fear, made the more semblance of an-
^ger, saying, he hath so wronged me that I must
have his head. For God*s sake, quoth she, ask
any thing else that he may live ! Give me, my
Damsel, then, said he, and swear that you will
go to the first court which King Lisuarte shall hold,
and there grant me what I shall ask. Swear it,
niece ! cried Grasinan^ who had now recovered
apeech : and suffer me not to be slain ! and upon
that Grov^nesa made the oath. Lady, then, quoth
.Amadis, I shall faithfidly observe my promise tp
. you : hold you yours, and fear not that I shall ask
ought against your honour. Then was the Damsel
sent for, and she kneeling to Amadis, said, truly.
Sir, great pains have you taken for my sake ; and
Gasinau, though he stole me, must love me well,
since he preferred to fight rather than deliver me.



«39

As<arod shall help me, fair Damsel, cried Gasinan,
If 70a think so jqvl think rightly : I beseech 70a
stay with me. That will I do, willingly, she an-
swered, if it please this good Knight. Amadis
replied, Certes, you have chosen one of the best
Knights in the world ; hot if this be not with your
free will, speak HOW, HOkltnay not be blamed
hereifter. She answered, I thank you truly that
you let me remain. In God's name, quoth he.
Then' Mbdit'he^ was; greatly ^uitraated to abide thete
'that •night, he Hxrould depart to ngoinOalaoD^
^aiid mooadng bone, ^ bade Gan'daUn take with
-him ^ I»ees8. of his swoni. Hearin^^ that,- Gast-
ilan besought him to aocej^his weapon ', which,
1uitiag:tfaaiiklicdly^cc9plO(i, 4ad fiance also from
^^pemn^aa, ^ he «Mle^«#ay.



S40



CHAPTER 29.



SB3SS



^Balays of Carsante followed the Knight who had
driven Galaor*s horse astray^ so fast as possiblj he
.could. The darkness overtook him, neverthdess
-he rode on till midnight, when he heard voices by
a river . side, and shaping his . course thither he
found five thieves dragging a Damsel by the hair,
with design to force her, aad.they were all armed
in corselets and with hatchets. £alays crying out
upon their villainy^ ran at them and broke his spear
in the body of one, so that he fell down dead.
Then the other four beset him sharply, and slew
his horse 3 but he lightly clearing himself, cleft one
to the neck with a sword stroke, and suffering his
sword to hang by the chain, caught at the fellow's
hatchet and pursued the others, who fied before
him along a narrow path into a quagmire, where
they had a great fire, and there they tumed upon
him, for they could fly no farther. He drove his



2U

hatchet through the ribs of one^ and with another
blow made the fourth fall into the fire^ the other
one fell upon his knees^ M^cy^ for. God's sake^
and do not destroy me body and soul ! Since thou
seest thy crime/ repent it^ and amend thy life ! said
Balays ; and the thief performed his promise^ for
from that time he was a good man^ and led a good
life^ and became a hermit.

Balays then returned > to the Damsel^ and^ when
he saw how fair she was, he said to her^ Certes^
fair Lady, had your beauty so taken these fellows
as it hath ma, they would nevcx have suffered you
to Jdepart. Sir Knight, replied the Damsel, had
those thieves forced me to their desires, both God
and the world might hold me excused 5 contrari-
wise, if I jshould willingly grant your unhonourablc
Request, I neither could nor ought to be pard6ned :
hitherto you have shown yourself a good Knight,
let me intreat you to accompany prowess in arms
with continence and virtue, as by duty you are
bound. My good Lady, Balays answered, think
no more of what I said : it becomes Knights to
.<ierve Damsels, and to woo their love, and it be-
comes them to deny as you have done ; and albeit
at the first we think it much to obtain of them
what we desire, yet when wisely and discreetly

VOL. I. M



S42

tbtf fesist our itiardinate s^petitesj keeping ihsit,
without which th^ are worthf of no praise, thcf
ht evea of ourseives more reverenced and com-
mended. She kissed his hand, and answered, for
this reason I tl^k you noore for saving -my ho-
nour than my life.-— Then they left that place
where the dead men lay, and coming to a pleasant
meadow rested there till it was day; and then
Balays armed himself, and mounted the Damsel's
palfrey, because -his own horee was slain, and
taking her behind him rode on, for she had de^
sired him to leave her in some habitation, as he
could by no meatis abandon his quest.

As thus they rode on commumng together, thQr
$aw a Knight coming t6wards them having one 1^
upon the horses's neck, but drawing nearer he put
ibot in stirrup, and coached his lance against Balays,
and threw him and the DamUd iGrom the palfrey.
Mistress, said he then to the Damsel, I am sorry
for your fall, but I wffl take you wh6re amoads
shall be made : this fellow is not worthy to carry
you. By this Balays had risen and recognized the
Knight, and making at him shield and sword in
hand, he cried, Don Cavalier, you rode on more
than apace after driving my horse astray : by €rod's
help )^0u shall pay by daylight, for your night-



fi^3

knaveiy ! What ! quoth the other, you arc one
of those who laughed at me : it is my tum now I
And he drove at him with his spear so fiercely
that the shield was pierced -, but Balays with one
blow cut the spear from bis hand. The Knight
then drew his surord, tod struck Vipon his helmet^
and the gword went in two fingers' depth. Balays
took the occasion, and caught his enemy's shieldj
and drew him with siCch force toward him that the
saddle came round and he fell, and he cut the
laces of his helmet, and btiffetted his head with
the sword-hilt till he stunned him, and taking his
sword broke At against a stone. Then he placed
the Damsel on her palfrey, aUd mounted the
Knight's horse, and rode toward the Tree at the
eros8-way.

That night they wefe lodged by two women of
holy life, who gave them such poor cheer as they
could, and blessed Sir Balays for riddbig the coun-
try of the tlileves who had long infested it. Thence
they proceeded to the cross-way, where they found
Amadis, and had not tarried long before Galaor
came up. So having conducted the Damsel to
her father's castle, where they were honourably
entreated, they continued their way to Windsor.

M 2



244



CHAPTER so.



King Lisuarte was so content with the tidings of
Amadis and Galaor^ which the Dwarf had brought
him^ that)ie determined to hold the most honour-
. able court that ever had been held in Great Britain.
At tins time Olivas niade his appeal of treason
against the Duke of Bristol, for the death of his
cousin 3 and the King, with the advice of those
. who were best versed in these forms, summoned
the.Duke to answer within a month, and if he
would justify his cause with two Knights beside
himself, Olivas should produce othqf two their
equals to maintain his accusation. This done, the
court was prodsumed for the day of our Lady in
September.

*

One day when they were aU assembled in the pa-
lace, and devismg together of the festival, a strange



245

Damsel, wdl attired and accompanied by a gentle
page^ entered^ and dismounted from her palfrey,
and asked which was the King. Lisuarte answered,
he was the man. In sooth^ my Lord;, she re-
plied, you seepi like a King in your port and
oountenance, but J know not whether you be so^
m heart. Damsel, quoth he, you see the one, and
shall be satisfied when you prove the otlier. She
answered, you speak as I desire; remember,
therefore, what you have promised before so many
great persons, for^ when you hold your court in
London, on St. Marj*s day, I shall put you to the
proof. So took she leave of him, returning the
way she came. All present were much troubled
at the rash promise which he* had made to a
itrange Damsel, knowing that for no fear would'
he leave to perform it, and doubting that some ill
was designed him.

Presently three Knights came through the gate,
two of then^ armed at all points, the third unarmed,
of good stature and well proportioned, his hair
grey, but of a green and comely old age. He held
in his hand a cofier, and having enquired which was
the King, dismounted from his palfrey and knelt
before him, saying, Grod preserve yon. Sir ! for you
have made the noblest promise that ever King did,

M 3



S46

if *)rou hold it. What promise was that ? quoth
Xi^uarte.— To maintain chivalry in its highest ho'.
nour and degree : few princes now a days labour
to tliat end, therefore are you to be commended
above all other. — Certes^ Knight, that prooiisc
shall I hold while I live. God grant you life to com-,
pleat it I quo^ the old man^ and because you have,
summoned a great court to London^ I have brought
something here which becomes such a person fot
such an occasion. Then he opened the coffer, and
took out a crown of gold;, so curiously wrought
and set with pearls and gems^ that all were amazed
at its beauty^ and it well appeared duit it was only
fit for the brow of sonoe migbtj Lord« . Is it not a
work which the most cunning artists ^guld won-,
der at ? said the old Knight. Lisuarte ausweredj,
ia truth it is. Yet, said the Knight, it hath ^
virtue more to be esteemed than its rare work and
richness : whatever King hath it on his head, shall
alway? increase hia honour ; this it did for him for
whom it was made till the day of his death, since
then no King hath worn it : I will gire it you.
Sir, for one boon, which will save my head that
is now in danger to be lost. The Queen hearing
this, exclaimed, truly, my Lord, tuch a jewel
well becomes you : give any thing for it that the
Knight may ask. You also. Lady, said the Kni^t,



247

should purchase arkh mantle that I bring;— and
^e took from the cofiTer the richest and most beau-*
tlful mantle that ever was seen ^ for^ besides the
pearls and precious stones wherewith it was beau«
tified^ there were figured upon it all the birds and
beasts in nature, so that it looked like a miracle.
On my faith, exclaimed the Queen, this cloth can
only have been made l^ that Lord who can do every
thing. It is the work of man, said the old Knight;
but rarely will one be found to make its fellow :
it should belong to wife rather than maiden, for
she that weareth it shall never have dispute wit&
her husband. Brisena answered, if that be true,
it is above all price j I will give you for it what-
ever you ask : and Lisuarte bade him demand what
he would for the mantle and the crown. The old
man answered, I must go, to my sorrow, to him
whose prisoner I am, and have now no time to
Btay, nor to consider what their worth should be^
but I will be with you at your court in London j
till then, keep you the crown, and you my Lady
Queen tiie mantle : if you do not accept my terms,
you shall restore them ; -but, having proved their
virtue, you will be ready to pay me more than
BOW. Lisuarte replied, we will either give you
what you ask, or restore the crown and mantle^

Knights and Ladies all ! quoth the old man, youi

M 4



248

' hear what'the King and Queen proniiise ! that thej
will restore to me my crown and mantle, or give
me what I shall ask ! They answered^ we all
hear ! The.old man then took his leave, saying, I
go to the worst prison that ever man had ! One of
the armed Knights took off his helmet while he was

. there, and appeared young and sufficiently comely ;
the other would not unhelm himself, but held
down his head, and he was of such overgreat stature
that no Knight in court could equal him by a foot.
So they three departed, and the crown and mantle
were lefl with the King.



£49



CHAPTER 31-



Amadis^ QsXdxx, and Balays^ continued their course
till they reached the house of King Lisuarte, and
80 great was the general desire to see them that
scarcely could they make way thro* the thronged
streets^ or enter the palace. They were soon dis-
armed \ and^ when the two brethren were seen^
how &ir they were^ and of. what young years^ all
who beheld them cursed Arcalaus for the heart
he had to devise their deathsk Forthwith the
King led them to £risena*s chamber ^ when Ama-
dis past the door and beheld Oriana^ hb heart
leaped 3 and she who, albeit the ti^gs of his
safety had reached her, still feared he was dead
because of her exceeding love, could not now re-
frain from tears, and lingered behind her mother
to controul that passionate feeling. But Amadis,
taking his brotl^er by the handj knelt before £ri-

M 5



1150

sena and said, hers. Lady, is the Knight whom
you bade me^seek. She answered, and be Is right
wekcxne ! and then embraced the brethren. Ma*
dam, quoth Lisuarte, you should divide them witk
me 5 9s Amadi^ is your Knight^, give me GaJaor
for mine. She answered, never jet was so great
a boon granted in Britain ! but you deserve it^ be*
ing the noblest of all her Kings : what say you.
Sir Galaor : will you be the King*s Knight ? Ga-
laor replied, methinks whatever so great a King
demandeth shovild be granted : you haife me hei^
to obey you in this and every other respect, *so fer
as it be with the will of niy Lord and Brother
Amadis, for I will do nothing against his com*
mand. I am well pleased, quoth ^e, that yod
will obey him, for he is mine. I beseech you.
Brother, then, said Amadis, do what the Queen
desires } and Galaor then bade her dispose of him
as she would. My Lord, quoth she, I give you
Don Galaor, and I beseech you love him as he
deserves.

The King^ then seated himself by Brisena, and
tliey talked with Galaor. Mabilia, who was apart
with Oriana and Olinda, because they three were
the noblest Damsels, seeing Amadis with Agrayes,
called to her brother^ and bade him bring that



251

Knight nearer, for they greatly desired to see him^
They then came up, and she knowing what remet
dies dieir heatts required, j^aced Agrayes beiide
Ollnda and Amadis by Oiiana, and being herself
in the middle, ^d, now am I between the four
persons m the world whom I k)ve best. Whei»
Aknadis saw lumself near his Lady his |ieatt leaped^
She welcomed him, and putting out her liands be»-
tween the lace of her ociantle, look his hands and
pressed them as if she would liave embraoed him,
and said> my friend, what agony tJbat traitor made
me- endure 1 Never was woman in such danger,
and certes never with such reason 3 for pever ha4
any one so great a loss as I should suffer in losing
you f for as I am better beloved than ail others, sp
is it, my good jfortune io be beloved by him who
excels all others. Amadis, who hes^'d bimsetf'
Ihus prsused, couid make no reply, for so beautiful
did she appear that die words died upon bis lips^
biit she whose eyes were fixed upon him «aid, de^
friend, how shovdd I not love you above aU. Qtb^^
for all love and esteem you, and yoii ioveme.;
reason is it then that better tlian all other I JsliouM
love you. Lady, thcii, replied Amadis, I beseech
you rather pity the death which I daily endure for
your s^e ! that which they lold you had be&Ileo
me would be lasf consolation and rest : were it not

M 6



'252

for the strong desire my heart has to serve yo%
that heart could not resist its sorrows^ butwotild
■ink under them ; not that I £ul to confess that
one thought from you repays my pain, but some^
thing mpre is required, and without which it will
Boon bring me to my end. And .then the tearis
started in his eytB, Dear friend, said Oriana^
for God*s sake talk not of your death ! it makes
•my heart sink, for I could not live an hour after
you, and only desire to live for yon. What you
say I well believe, loving as much as you do 3 and
let come what will I promise you, that if fortune
offer us no means of rest, my weak courage shall
find one, though the displeasure of my father and
mother should follow, which would be more en-
durable than these fears and this suspence. Amadis
could not answer ; but he sighed from his heart
She took his hand, — ^fiiend, I will perfcnm this
promise} meantime do not quit the court. At
this time the Queen qalled to Amadis, and made
him sit near Galaor. The Dames and Damsds of
the court meantime talked only of the two brethren*
how Grod had made them as surpassing in beauty
as in deeds of arms and all goodness : they thought
Galaor of the fairer complexion 5. but Amadis had
crispi auburn locks, and more colour in his faco,
and was the larger limbed. When the tables wer^



253

ready^ Amadis and Galaor were placed at one table
by the King's command^ with Galvanes Lackland
and Agrayes^ and no others 5 and as these four
Knights had sate at the same board, so afterwards
did they partake of many the same dangers ; and
although Don Galvanes was akin to none of them
except Agrayes, yet Amadis and Galaor always
called him Uncle, and he called them his Ne-
phews, whereby his honour was afterwards greatl]r
increased*



S54



CHAPTER 32.



As it had pleased God to make Lisuarte^ of a
prince who had no heritage^ King of Great Bri-
tain^ and to give him the greatest glory and pros-
perity that man coold wish^ so now^ lest his heart
should wax proud and be corrupted^ his peace was
to be disturbed. He sent forth his summons to
hold the court on the fiflh day at London^ a city
which then was like an eagle above all the rest of
Christendom^ that they might take order for the
advancement of chivalry 5 'but there, where he
thought all the world would yield him obeisance^
began the first change of fortune, and his kingdom
and person were put in danger of utter ruin.

King Lisuarte with all his chivalry departed from
Windsor to the court> and the Queen with all her



S65

Dames and Damsds. The assembly was wonder-*
ftiUy greats young Knights costlily armed and.
adorned^ and Infantas who were King*s daughters,
and Damsds of high degree, for whom their lovers
were about to make pastime and pleasure. That
they might not lodge in the city, ;the King or^
dered pavilions to be pitched in the plain by
the brooks and fountains that ^»und in that
'land. Here led they the happiest life that could
be imagined. To this court theiie came a great;
Lord, more noble in estate and rank than jn the
dignity of virtue, Barsman, Lord of Sansuena;
not that he was vassal or fHend to King Lisuarte,
nor evenisnown to him, but for this cause.

He being in his own land, Arcalaus the Enchantef
came to him and said. Lord Barsinan, if you likd
it, I will so contrive that with little difficulty ot
labour you shall become King of Great Britain^
fiarsinan answered, I should gladly undergo any
labour or difficulty for such a reward.^-^Promise
then, to make me * Chief of your household for
hfc, and the thing shall be done. — T^at will I right



« Mayordomo msiyor«



256

wiUinglf^ but how shall it .be done? la thi»
manner^ quoth Azcalaus : Go yoa with a good
company of Knights to the £rst court that King;
lisoarte shall hold. I will contrive to cany away
the King prisoner^ so that no person shall be abl&
to succour hinij and at the same time I will give
you his daughter Oriana to wife. In five days-
time I will send Lisuarte's head to London ; then
doyoUj having the heiress to the throne in your
power^ take the occasion and seize the crown»

With this design came Barsinan to the cpust> where
he was honourably entertained^ and albeit his heart
failed him> and he almost repented of the enter-
prise, seeing the great power of knighthood that
was with Iisuarte> yet determined he to abide the
end. But Lisuarte, nothing misdoubting him^ to
do him the greater honour gave him b^ own pa-
lace, and pitched tents for himself and for the
Queen in the fields, and consulted with him upon
the business of that court, how he might best ad-
vance chivalry. To this effect the next day was
appointed for council. When morning came, the
King-ckd himself in royal robes, befitting the so-
lemnity, and sent for the crown which the old
Knight had left him, and desired the Gtueen to at-



^57

tire herself in • the mantle. She opened tlie coffer
wherein they were laid, with the key which she
always' kept herself, and found. nothing therein>
whereat she was greatly amazed, and crossed her-
self and sent to inform the King. He^ alheithe*
waa much troubled, dissembled his chagrin, and
going to the 4lueen took her apart and said, how>
Madam, have you kept so ill a thiiig of such va-
lue f Sir, she rq>lied, I know not what to say i
the cofier was locked, and the key, which I have
never trusted from me, in my own possession^
but I dreamt last night that a Damsel came an4
asked me to shew her the coffer, which in mj
sleep I did, and she demanded the key and I gavt
it her ^ and she opened the confer and took out the
crown and mantle, then fastened it again and re-
I^ced the key. And she dad herself in the man-
tle and pot on the crown, which so well became
her that I had great delight in looking at h^ 5 and
she said to me. He and She whose ttoe shall be^
before five days end shall, reign tn the reahn'of the
mighty one who now kbcHirs to defend it» and .to
conquer the lands of others. I asked ber of whom
she spake. She answered, you .wlU'know at that
time. And then she vanished^.iaking with her the
crown and mantle j but I know not whether thifr



2^8

happened to me in a dredm^ or in very deed. At
tills the King marvelled greatly^ and charged her
that she should tell no one.

Then leaving that tent they both went to the other,
accompanied by so many Knights^ and Dames and
Damsels^ that all who saw them wondered. The
Xing seated himself upon a rich scat^ and the
Queen sate on another somewhat bdow him, both
of which were placed upon carpets of cloth of
gold ; the Knights ranged themselves on the Kin'g^s
side^ and the Ladies on th€^ side of the Queen.
The four Knights whom the King most esteemed,
Were nearest him> Amadls, Galaor, Cralvanes,
^bid Agrayesj at hia bade wag King Arban of
North Wales, armed at all points, and holding a
drawn sword, and with him were two hundred'
Knights. Ill this order, all being silent, there
stood up a Lady/ exceeding fair, and ndhly gar«
^mented; and there arose with her at the same
time twelve Dames and Damsels, attired with like
bravery and the same adc»timents : for this custom
had the Ladies and Chiefs' of high degree to take
with Diem to such ftolemnities their followers, ap-'
parelled lilce their own proper persons. This Lady
with this attendance stood up before the King and
Queeuj and addressing Lisuarte she said, Sire^



i59

bear me! I have a claim against this Kiiight^-^
stretching forth her hand towards Amadls. She
contioqedy and related how Angriote of Estravauy
had sought her love^ and why he "kept the vale of
Fines^ and how Amadis, havixig forced the past*
had promised to propure for him his mistress's fa«
your. Whereof^ quoth she^ when J attained know**
^dgej I withdrew myself to my castle^ where I ,
kept such 9 strong guard and custom^ that it waa
thought no slrange Knight could enter ^ neverthe«<
less this Knight entered who is at your feet^-**
pointing to Amadis whom she knew not. He af^
terward of his good will promised to make Amadia
revoke his word to Angriote : but then thero,
chanced a combat between him and mine Uncl€»
Gasinan 5— and all eyes were fixed upon GasiBaa
while she related how the battle had been^ mar-^
veiling that he should have dared do battle with
Amadis.— And here. Sir, said she, am I come to
claim his promise, and discharge my own.

When she had ended, Amadis arose and said,'
What the Lady hath said is true, and I promise to
make Amadis revoke his word to Angriote : let
her also grant the covenanted boon. Thereat in
great joy she exclaimed, ask what you will !
Wh^ I demand is, quoth he, that you marry An-



2^0

griote^ and love him eren as he loveth you. Holy'
Maiy help me ! she exclaimed : what is this >
Fair Lady^ replied he, it is that you should wed st
Knight deserving one o£ your birth and beauty. —
But your promise ?— It is performed : 1 revoke my
word to Angriote, for I am Amadis ! but I claint
J, the |)erformance of your's j so give I you to him,
and keep my &ith with both. Sir, quoth she to
the King, is this Amadis indeed ?— Without doubt.
Ah wretch, she cried, it is vain for naprtal man to
avoid what Grod hath decreed ! it was for no dis-
like nor misesteem that I refused Sir Angriote, but
because being fret I would have preserved my sin-
gle liberty; and now,^ when. I thought myself
safely separated, 1 am thus put in his power.
Then said lisuarte, as God shall help me, fair
Lady, you have great reason to rejoice; for, as
you are fair and of high degree, so is he young
and of, great prowess; and, as you are rich iu
possessions, so is he ki all goodness : great reason
is there then in^ such a marriage, and so it must
appear to all. Grovenesa turned to the Queen,—
You, my Lady Queen, whom God has made one
of the best and wisest Princesses in the world,,
what do you say to me ?— ^That Angriote deserves
the love of any Lady. Trust me, quoth Amadis,
my promise to Angriote was made neither by



261

chance^ nor for any undue favour to him, but be-
cause having to my danger proved his worth in
.arms^ I felt myself bound to remedy as far as I
could his extreme passion for you, and your little
regard toward him. I must yield, quoth Grove-
xiesa i and, after all that has .been said, it were
folly not to be well pleased. Sir Angriote, quoth
Amadis, here is your Lady : I perform my word
on condition that the marriage be performed with-
out delay. The King commanded the Bishop of
Salerno tft go with them to liis chapel, and give
tbem the blessings of the church. Forthwith An*
griote and his bride with all their lineage went into
•the city, and there was the marriage ceremony
with . all solemnity performed -, and, we may say,
that all this had been so ordered to requite Angriote
for his great courtesy and forbearance towards this
Jjady when he had her in his power.



203



CHAPTER SS.



King Lisuarte rexnaining with his chiefe thus b^-
fipake them : FriencU ! since God hath made me
more rich in dominion and in subjects than an]r of
the Kings my neighbours, reason it is that for his
service I should perfoim more praiseworthy things
than they : tell me then how I may best promote
my honour and advancement together with your
own^ and what shall seem best that will I do.
Then Barsinan^ Lord of San^uena^ arose and 8aid>
Ye have heard> Sirs> the King's charge : I should
hold it good that if he pleased he would leave ye>
that ye might the more freely deliver each his
opinion ; and^ afterwards^ he may follow that
which most accords with his own. The King re-
plied that he said well^ and therewith departed into
another tent.



26^

Then Serolys the Fleming, who was CoUnt of
Clara^ began in this manner : Sirs, it id manifest
that men in this world can only become powerful
by strengthening themsdves with men and money ;
bat the money should be employed in procuring
men^ for by men must kingdoms be defended and
won. Other counsel than this. Sirs, the King
will not take -, to seek good Knights from all parts,
and love and cherish and honour and reward them
with his bounty, so that strangers shall seek him
for the fame thereof. They alone have been for-
tunate and mighty who have thus sti^ngthened
themselves with the aid of famous Knights, distri-
buting treasuies to them^ and acquiring by their
aid greatex treasures, the spoils of others* This
advice was weU liked of by all, except Barsinan>
whom it troubled, because if that were fdlowed
he should hardly effect the purpose for which be
came. Certes, said he, I never saw so many good
men yield so foolishly at a word ! If your Lord
were to do as the Count of Qara hath proposed,
before two years were at an end, the King would
have given to strangers what dse would have been
given among you, and you would be neglected and
of no account, while his favours would naturally
be bestowed upon them, being newly come : look



264

ye wen to tKis ! !t conoems^ not me $ ctAy that I
ihall rejoice if my advice diould be Ibaiid profita-
ble. • Some there were^ envious and greedy men^
yrho .were of this mind^ . so-that there arose a con-
tention, and it was agnced that the King should
come and decide., dnthe seeing the thing
pkarly before his eyes^ .aaid thus : Kings are pow-
erful not for the fmtc^, but for the many at their
command. With his own person what can he
do ? less perhaps than another maa. Can he go-
vern his estates with that ? 700 can answer me.
Can his Ueasures Mghten him of that care ? not
unless they are well expended : it is plain then that
human wisdom and human strength are the real
treasures. By this libei^ality have the noblest chiefs
been made fanidus, the great Alexander^ the
mighty Julius Csesar, the haugh^ Hannibal. Good
£riends> therefore^ not only do I tbipk it best, to
seek the service of good Knights, but I beseech
ye all to assbt me in the search, and bring them
to my court, that I being the more honoured in
foreign parts, your honour also may be the greater:
and be ye sure .that I shall never forget old friends
lor new ; and let me know now the best who are
GQflQe to my court, ^that we may have them in our
compai^ before tkeyxl^art. This accordingly was
done, and the King having the list, sununoned



265

them all before him zkcx his meal^ and besought,
them to enter loydly into hia service, and not to
quit his court without his permission, aud he on
his part promised to honoor and reward them.

To this all who were potent ^;reed, excepting
Amadis, for he was the Queen's Knight This
done the Queen requested them to hear her, for if
it jpleased them she would speak. They all drew
near her in silence, and she said to the King, Since
you, my Lord, have so favoured and honoured
your Knights, reasonable it is that I should do the
like to my Dames and Damsels, and for their sake
to all others wheresoever they be ; therefore, I beg
a boon of you and of these good men, for in festi->
vals like these good boons ought to be asked and
'granted. Lisoarte looked round his company,—-
friends, what answer shall we make the Queen ?
They all answered, grant her what she may de-
mand. What . else, quoth Galaor, but to obey so
excelient a Lady ? Then said the King, seeing
you are all content, let the boon be granted, how
weighty soever it may be to perform; And they
all answered, so be it ! The boon I ask is this,
said Brisena, that ye sAwajrs defend Dames and
Damsels from all wrong 5 and if by chance you
have made promise of two suits, one to a man, the

TOL» I. N



£66

other to a woman, yoa skail . aoeom^tiBii the wo«
man's reqnest first, as bang the woakest pexson,
and vvho hath most need to be hfllpen. Thus shall
women travel m<WB safely along the hi^nrays, aad
discourteous and cruel men shall fear to ofier
them force or mjury. Greatly iveie.Lisaarte and
all his Kfu^ts contented with that request, and
the King commanded that it ^ould bt obsenFed,
as it long was in Chpeat Britain, neirer Knight
breaking it ', but how it was ait last ixokon^ is not
to the purpose here to say.



i67



CHJPTEB 34.



I II t> I » * ^ dti mm i^S-



While King Lisuarte was with such company ia
^ch pleasure^ there came in a fair Damsel clad in
moiuroing, who falling on her knees before him,
saidj all here^ Sir« have joy but me^ and I have
gi:ief and wretchedness, and only you can relieve
nie ! Fvialdj quoth the King, how may that be ?—
My father and uncle are in the prison of a Lady>
who will never <Jeliver them till tliey give her two
XLnighis each as good in arms as one whom they
have slain.— Wherefore did they slay him ? — ^Be-
cause he vaunted that he alone could combat with
them both, and defied them with such insolence^ that
they were compelled by shame to enter lists with
him, and so he was slain. This was before the
Castle of Guldenda, who immediately made my
father and uncle prisoners, for that Knight was en-

N 2



268

gaged to wage a battle for her^ and she swore
never to release them till the7 gave her two other
Knights fbr that service^ each as approved in
anxto. Know 70a not^ said Lisoarte, where the
battle is to be fought? She answered^ Ilc^not
^cll : I only know my father and unde are unjustlj
cast into prison^ and none of their kin can help
them. And with that she began to lament bitterly,
so that the King moved with pity answered, is the
Castle far from hence ? You may go and return
in five days, quoth she. Then said Lisuarte, chase
two Knights, and take them with you. Sir, quoth
she, I am of a strange land, and know none of
them : if it please you, I will go to the Qneeo
my Lady and ask her counsel.

The Damsel repeated her tale to Brisena, and
asked her to name two Kmghts. O Damsel!
quoth the Queen, you ask me what I ought to do,
but T am loth to forego the twain. Then she called
fbr Amadis and Galaor : this Knight, said she, is
mine ; the othef is the K.ing*s : they are the best
Knights here or. elsewhere, Amadis and Gralaor.
What ! quoth the Damsel, are you Sir Amadis ?
the Knight that liath no peer ? now shall I of a
certanty accomplish what I defire, if you and yx>ur
brother will accompany me. Lady, for God's sake



259

iotreat them for me 1 The Qusen a^ hei* in-
treaties^ but Amadis looked at Oriana for her per->
mission ; . and she dropt her gloves in token that ht
ihould go^ for that sign had been agreed on be-
twtiBti them> and she had compassion on the Dam-,
sel. Then he replied^ that he would perform the
Queen*8 command. But Briselia commanded them
to hasten back without delay, let what would hap-
pen. Then Amadis approached Mabilia and Ori*
ana, as if to take leave of his cousin, and Oriana
said, dear friend, I repent the leave I have given
70U ', my heart misgives me : God grant that it be
for good ! Lady, quoth Amadis, may He ^who
made you so fair, always give you much joy !
wherever I may be, I am still yours to serve you.
I commend you to God*s good keeping, she re*
plied : may he preserve and give you glory above
all other Knights ! They then armed themselves,
and took their leave, and departed with the
Damsel.

She guided them till it was past noon, and they
entered a forest which was called the Forest of III
fortune, for never Errant Knight entered it with-
out mishap ', nor did these brethren escape without
sore suffering. They ate' of what their Squires
carried, and proceeded on till night ; it was broad

N 3



£70

aaoci^Iigbt, bdA the stm rode ob apice. Damsel,
footb Amodiiy jha}l we oot rcit ? We shull find
tcbto ftftber on, she answered, and those who wiU
gseady rryoioe at your conung : do joa keep yoia:
pace, and I will ride forward and make them ready
to receive jou. So ehe weM on. They had 0o4
Mkiwed far befoce they saw two lents by the way*
tide, where several Danosela stood ready with het
who had been their guide to welcome them. Sirsj
said she, dismount bene and rest, fos you have tra*
relied far. They alighted, and there were servanta
ready to take their horses^ and to disarm them^
and they took away aU the arms. Why do yon re*
move our arms ? quoth Amadis. The Dsmsd aa<«
gweredy they are taking them to the other teftt,
where you will sleep. Then they seated themselvel
vpon the carpet, expecting supper, when on a sod*
den fifteen armed men. Knights and others, came
mpon them, crying, yield or you are but dead ! They
started up thereat, but they bad nothing wherewith to
defend themselves, and lances were pointed at their
breasts and at their backs, and at their faces 3 then
was Amadia so enraged that the lAood gushed from
his nostrils and eyes. Ah, traitors ! quQth he, you
see how this is I if we had our arms the business
should end in another guise! That, said they,
will not avail yOu : you are our prisoners ! Cried



271

Oalaor, if we are k i» bj gxeat treaiofi, a^d that I
vnll prove upon the two best of 70a; aye> the
^t three> if yois^ will give me my arms ! The
Knigbt answered, the proof ii ncvt wanted : if you
talk molt it will be to your cost. What! cried
Amadit^ we wiU rather die than be thus taken !
The Knight went to the door of the tent— Madam^
they will not yield : shall we slay them ? She an«
awered, stay a little, and.if they will not obey my
wfil, then off with their heads. Then she en**
tered : she was a right £iir Lady> and in great an-
ger^ and she said to the brethren, yield to me, or
ye die ! Amadis was silent ) but Oailaar answered,
brother^ we cannot now hesitate, since the Lady
wills it Madam, let us have our arms and horses,
and if your men cannot then take us, we will sur-^
render ourselves to your Measure ; as Mce are now,
ttiere is no merit in yielding. I shall not trust you
this time, she lepHed -, but I counsel you to yield
yoursedves. And they seeing they had no remedy
yielded, and were thus made prisoners ; the Lady
not knowing who they were, for the Damsel
would not tell their names, being assured that if
she had named them they should immediately havo
been slain, and then would she be the most un-*
happy person in the world to have caused the death
of two svich Knights 3 and she wished herself dead

n4



272

before she had committed so great a treason^ but
now she could do more than, keep secret their
names. The Lady then said^ now that ye are my
prisoners 1 will propose a thing to you, to which
if ye consent I will set ye free ; else shall ye be
thrown into such a prison that it will be worse
than death. Lady, quoth Amadis, it may be that
what yoa require is a thing that we may readily
grant 5 and it may be ^ch, that if it is to our
shame we shall rather- sufier death. Of -your
shame, said she, I know nothing ; but if you wiU
forsake the service of KingLisuarte^ and go bcksc
him and tdl him you do it by command of Mada-
sima. Lady of Gantasi> I will set you free ; and
tell him that she does this because he keeps the
Knight in his court who slew the good Knight
Dardan. Gakor answered, if you do thus. Lady,
thinking to despite the King, it wiU not avail ; for
we are two Knights, who have as yet nothing but
our arms and horses, and as he has in his house-
hold so many of great prowess, he will care little
for us, what we do, or whither we go } but to us
it would be great dishonour, so that we can in no
ways consent. — What ! will you rather be cast
into that prison than forsake the ^sest King in the
world ? Lady, said Galaor, these speeches but ill
beseem you : the King is good and loyal, and no



273

Knight lives against whom I would not prove that
there is no falsehood in him. Ceftes> quoth she^
you utter your love for him in a luckless time -,
and she ordered her people to tie their hands.
That will I do willingly^ said one of her Knights,
and off with their heads too if you let me ! and he
took Amadis by the arms ^ but Amadis caught
hold of him^ and smote liim in the breast with
such force that he fell at his feet senseless. With
that they all fell upon him to kill him, but an old
Knight drew his sword, and stood between and
drove them off 3 yet not till Amadis- had received a
spear wound in his right shoulder, though it was
not deep. Madam, ' quoth the old Knight, you
are doing the greatest devilry in the world, to suffer
Knights and Hidalgos who are your prisoners to be
slain. She answered, why should they not slay
the most foolish Knight living, who at such a time
was so rash I Then said Galaor, we will suffer
none to tie our hands but you > foi^ you are a fair
Lady, and we are your prisoners, and it is just
that we obey you. Then I will do it, quoth sh^ i
atid she took their hands, and tied them tight With
a leathern thong ; and she ordered the tents to be
strack, and placed her prisoners upon two palfreys
that were led by her servants. Gandalin and Ga-
laor's Esquire went on foot, tied with a rope, and

K 5



274

in tl^is xpazmtf they proceeded all ttight. tbroagii
the forest. And I tell you that Amadis then wished
himself dead^ not for what he suffered^ for he
could endure such chances better than any one be*
side^ but because of what the Lady demwided j
for if he refused^ h^ should be Uirown where he
could not see Oriasa 5 and if he assented^ he mast
quit her father*s courts and so be separated from
her ; these thoughts greatly troubled him. The
old Knight saw his trouble^ and thought it was for
the pain of his wound. Now the Damsel whe
had deceived them was his daiighter^ and she told
him who they were, and besought him for merqy
and for God's sake to save their lives, if he could.
He then came nigh to Amddis, and asked him if
his wound pained him, and hc^w he fared. Amadis
seeing that it was the old Knij^ht who had saved him
from death, answered^ 8ir, my friend, I have no
wound- tp pain me ^ but I complain of a Damsel
who brought us here by deceit to give her succour,
and has foully betrayed us. You have indeed been
deceived, replied the Knight 5 I know you better
than you imagine^ and would willingly serve you,
for if it be discovered who you are, you are but
dead : take my advice 5 you are a handiome
Knight, and the Lady has heaitl that you are one of
the best in the world : carry yourself fairly towarda



275

lier^ and woo her in marriage or ebeways, for she
is a woman whose heart is to- takc^ her pleasure )
but lose no time^ for she will send from the place
"Where we are to deep to learn your names^ which
the Damsel who brought you here has concealed.
Ama<fis^ who regarded Oriana more than deaths
answered^ my friend, God's will be done ! but
this never shall be, even though she herself re-
quested my love, and would therefore set me free \
Certes, quoth the Knight, tlHs is a great marvail,
that you are in the point of death, and will not
seek to help yourself. Such help, cried Amadis,by
Crod's blessbg I will never seek ! but talk with
that other Knight, whom you may with more rea-
son commend than me.

When' the dd Knight repeated his advice to Galaor,
€ralaor was ^eatly pleased : if you i»nng this
about, said he, that I can win the Laffy*, we shall
always be bound to serve you. The Knight then
rode on, and coming up to his Lady, said, you are
ieading away your prisoners, and know not whom
you have taken.— *Why do you say this- ? — Because
you have taken the best Knight that I know, and
the most accomplished in all good manners. — Is it
Amadis, whose life 1 so much desire to take away ?
•-^No 5 I speak of the first : besides his great cou-

n6



i276

nge, he is the handsomest yoang Knight that ever
I saw^ and you are discaoiteous to him. You
should not do thisj for it is great villainy : you
have imfvisoned him who does not deserve it, be-
cause you hate another; it were better to treat
him honourably^ and show favour to him, far by
that way should you more readily win his consent
to what you demand. I will wait, said she, and
see what sort of man he is.— *You will see the
fairest Knight that ever yon beheld. By this the
two brethren had come close to each other : bro-
ther, saidOalaor, I see you in danger of death;
I beseech you follow my counsel. I will, said
Amadis, and God give you more honour than fear.
The Lady had stopt her palfrey, and waited lor
him. She saw him, better than she had done in
the night> and thinking him the handsomest naan
in the world, asked him how he fared ? Worse
than you should fare. Lady, he replied, if you
were in my power as I am io yours j for I would
do you what service and pleasure possible I could,
and I know not why you should do all the ccxitrary to
me who have not deserved this treatment $ reason
being that I should rather be your Kn^ht to serve
and love you as my I^dy, than be thrown into
your prison which is so little agreeable; Mada-
Aima, who was greatly taken with bim^ replied.



277

Kniglitj if I should chose.you for mj friend^ and
<ieliver you from prison, w<»ild you forsake the
■company o^ King Lisuarte for my sake, and tell
iiiixi wherefore you forsook him ? Yes, quoth
Galaor, and will make what covenant you please
.to do it ; and so shall my companion, who will not
refuse what I shall command him. You shall
swear this, said Madasima, before a Lady with
whom we are going to lodge. Meantime, promise
me not to depart from me, and your hands shall
be untied. Whereupon they were unbound, and
their Squires likewise released, to whom a palfrey
without a saddle was given that they mig|xt ride.

All the day Madasima and Galaor went on com-
muning ) at sunset they came to Castle Abies> the
Lady wherec^ honourably welcomed them, because
of the great friendship between her and Madasima.
Then before that Lady and two Knights, her sons^
she said, hear a covenant between us : this Knight
is my prisoner, and I chuse him for my friend j so
also is the other, and the covenant is in this man-
ner : they shall both forsake the service of King
Lisuarte, telling him how for my sake they do it,
and I will set them free on this condition 5 and
you and your sons shall meet them before King
Lisuarte^ and see that they fulfil their promise -,



278

therein if they &il> ye shall erery where publish
abroad their ^dsehood 5 and ttn days J give them
to execute thu. Good friend^ said the Lady of the
Castle^ I am well pleased to do this^ if they con-
sent thereto. We will perform it ! quoth Galaor.
So Gralaor that night took his pleasure with Mada-
sima^ a Lady who was very fair^ and of good
wealth and high lineage^ but not of such great
worth as beseemed her. In the morning their
arms and horses were restored them, and they de-
parted divers ways ; she to her Castle Gantasi, the
brethren towards London, right glad of their es-
cape, and weening that they should honourably
discharge their covenant. That night they were
lodged in a hermitage, and had poor fare for their
supper ; the next day they continued their road.



279



CHAPTER 35.



On the fourth day after the brethren's departure,
that old Knight who had brought the crown and
mantle entered the royal tent, and kneeling before
Lisuarte said, how is it. Sir, that you wear not the
crown which I left you ? nor you. Madam, the
rich mantle ? The King was silent. He con-
tinued, I am glad you like, them not, for now I
shall neither lose my head, nor the gift you were
to give me for them : let tliem therefore be re-
stored to me forthwith, because I may not tarry
here. When the King heard this he was trou-
bled, and replied. Knight, I can neither return
the crown nor the mantle, for both are lost : it
grieves me more for your sake who stand in such
need of them, than for my own, though I so
highly valued them. Wretch that I am ! quoth
the old Knight 3 I am dead ! and by the worst



280

death that ever Knight nndeservedl/ peri&bed I and
then he made great dole, and the tears ran down
his beard which was as white as wool } so diat the
King said to him in compassion, fear not for jour
head, for yoa shaU have whatever is in my power
to ransom it : so I have promised, and so will I
perform. The Kni^t fell at his feet and would
have kissed them, bat the King raised him up by
the hand -, now then, ask what you will. It is
true. Sir, quoth he, that you were either to return
me my crown and mantle, or give what I should ask
for them 3 and GU^d knows I intended not to ask
what I now needs must, and if other thing in the
world might save me, I would not distress you
thus : it will be a great evil to you, but it would
be as great if such a man as you should break his
^th : it will grieve you to give, and me to re«
ceive ! Ask what you want, said Lisuarte, for I
have nothing so dear that it should be refused.
The Knight answered, many thanks fer ^is assu-
rance 1 but I must be made secure of all who are
now in your court, that they offer me no wrong
or force because of the boon, and you yourself
also must promise me this^ for neither will you
keep your word, nor shall I be satisfied, if you
take away from me what you have given. Said
the King, this is but reason, and I promise you se-



281

curity ; and accordingly it was • so proclaimed.
Then the old Knight said. Sir, I can only be pre-
served from death -by the crown and mantle, or
by your daughter Oriana! now give me which
you will, but rather would I have what is mj
own.

Lbuarte exclaimed, ahltnight, thou hast asked a
great thing ! And all who were present were
greatly grieved 5 but the King, who was the most
loyal man in the world, bade them not trouble
themselves. It is better, said he, to lose my
daughter than to break my word j the one evil af-
flicts few, the other would injure all r for how
would the people keep ^ith one with another, if
they could not depend upon the King's truth ?
And he commanded his daughter to be brought*
When the Queen and her Ladies heard that^ they
made the most sorrowful outcry that evev was
heard ; but the King ordered them to their diam-
bers, and he forbade all his people to lament, on
pain of losing his favour. My daughter, cried he,
must fare as God hath appointed ; but my word
shall never wilfully be broken ! By this was
Oriana come before the King, like one amazed,
and falling at his feet she cried, my Father and
Lord ! what is it that you wouW do > I do it.



(juoth he^ that I may not break my word. Then
he said to the dd Knight^ you see here the gift you
have asked ? will there be other company with
her ? He repHecf ^ only the two Knights and the
two Squires who came with me to Windsor. I
can take no other company ; but this I tell you^
there is nothing to fear before I place her in thQ
hands of him to whom I must deliver her. Let a
Damsel go with faer^ for honour and decency sake^
said Lisuarte, that At may not be among yon
aiorre. llris the Knight granted, But when Ori-
ana heard all this^ she fell down senseless ) ytt
did not that avail hef, lor he took her up in his
arms^ weeping as if wfiat he did were against his
wiU^ and gave her to an Esquire who was mounted
on a strong horse and a fast goer^ to place her be-
Ibre him> and bade him hold her fast^ for she was
aenseless. God knt>ws^ quoth he^ there is none
ia the court more grieved for this than myself.
The King had sent for the Damsel of Dtenmark,
andmakbg her mount a palfrey, said to her, go
with yoiir Lady, and neither for good nor evil that
may befal you, ever leave her, so long as you may
continue with her. Ah, wretch that I am ! quoth
she, I never thought to take such a journey as this.
Then they moved from before the King, and the
great and large-limbed Knight who would not im-



S8d

bck» himsctf at WitUbor, took Orlaaa's baridle :
this was Arcalaus the Enchanter. As they went
out from the courts* Oriana sighed as if her heart
were breaking > and said to herself^ Desff friend, in
A woeful hour the boon wai granted, for by it
both you and I arc dead I And this she said^
remembering how she had given Amadis leave to
depart with the Damsel j but they who beard her
thought she spoke of her lather. Presently they
entered the forest, with her and rode on at a great
pace, tiH they lefk that road, and struck into a
deep valley..

The King mounted bis boxte, and w^^ * wand hi
hb hand sufiered none to go against them, fov §6
he had promised. Mabifia who was wee[mig at
the window, saw Ardiao the Dwarf of Amadit
near the walls i^n a great and swift horse, and
•be catted to him. Friend Ardko), if you love yottr
Master, rest neither day nor night till you have
found him, and tdd him this unhappy adventure.
You are a traitor to him, if you will not do this ;
for he would rather know this at this time than
have tliis whole city as his own. By Holy Mary,
cried the Dwarf, he shall know it as soon as pos^^
sible ! and giving the scourge to his horse, he



284

galloped along the road which AxnaifiB had taken
with the Damsels

While King Lisuale was at the entrance of the
forest with twenty Knights, making all those turn
back who would have gone to his daughter*s res-
cue, he saw the Damsel aj^roacb to whom he had
promised a boon. She came more than apace upon
a palfrey, and had a rich sword hanging from her
neck, and a lance, whose iron was fairly wrought
and its stave pamted. God give you joy. Sir, said
f he to the King, and a heart to fulfil what you
promised me at Windsor before your Knights !
He ii^Ued, Damsel, I have need of joy; how-
belt I remember the promise, and will perform it.
—With that hope. Sir, J came^o you, as the most
loyal King in the world : now then revenge me
upon a Knight in this focest, who slew my father
by treason, and forced me. But in such sort is he
enchanted, that he cannot be done to death except
the most honourable, man of the kingdom of Lon-
don give him a blow with this lance, and another
with this sword : these he gave in keeping to a
Iiady, thinking that she loved him ', but it was
otherwise, for she mortally hating lum gave me
the sword and lance that I might have my revenge.



285

It must be by your hand^ for there is oone else so
iionoarable. If 70a dare undertake this^ yaa must
go alone* for I have promised to bring a* Knight to
do combat with him this dajr, and he is ready^ not
thinking that I have got the laoce and the sword.
The covenant between ns is^ that^ if he conquers,
I shall forgive him 5 but, if he is vanquished, he
must obey my will. In God's name, quoth the
King, let us go! He called for his arms and
mounted his good horse, and leaving his own
sword, which was the best in the world, girded
on that which the Damsel gave him 5 he threw
his shield round his neck : the Damsel carried his
helmet and the painted lance, and he went with
h^> having commanded that none should follow
him. They rode some way along the. road, then
left it and turned among some trees, the same way
that Oriana had been carried, and there the King
met an armed Knight upon a black horse 5 he had
a green shield hanging from his neck, and his hel-
met was of the same colour. Take your arms^ Slr^
cried the Damsel, there is the Knight ! He laced
on his helmet, and taking the lance caUed out to
the Knight to defend himself. They ran at each
i^er, and broke both their lances 5 but the King's
broke so immediately, that he felt as though he



286

had miMed kis «trok«. They then dre\r their
sworda, and fitnick at eadi odier*a heLois; the
Knight's sword eateped halfwj^ into the King*«
heknet, but the King's broke tttf at the hih : then
he knew there was treason ; and seeing that the
Knight was attempting to kill his horse^ he canght
hold of him^ and struggled t^ th^ both feU to-
gether^ and Lisuarte being n^>ennost got the
s^'ord which bis enen^ had let fall^ and began to
smite at him. When the Damsel saw that, sheened
with a k>ud voice, help ! help ! Arcalaus 1 or yonr
eousin is slain ! Presently the King heard a great
noise, and looking round beheld ten Knights lidd-
ing towards him, and the one who was foremost
exclaimed. King Lisuarte, thou art a dead man !
thou shalt never reign anodic day, nor ever wear
cro^n again ! When the King heard this, he «V6»-
rily believed his end was coi^ *, but he answesed
him with that great courage which he dways had :
that may weU be^ seeing ye have me at sadi 9A*
vantage -, but ye shall die for me, like traitors and
liars as ye are ! The Knight then ran at him full
force, and smote him so rudely on the shield that
he came to the ground -, but presently riamg, he
struck at die horse and cut his leg clean off, so
that he fell and the Knight under hifia. By Uiis



287

the others came up mid all beset him^ and ihcy
bruiicd hm wkh the breasts of tfadr horses^ and
the two who Were dismounted closed with him^
and forced hb sword from his hands ', then took
away his shield and his helmet^ and fastened a
great chain round his neck ', then' they placed him
on a palfrey, and taking the ends of the chain, one
on each side, led him among the trees to the place
where Arcalaus was with Oriana and the Damsel
of Denmark -, and the foremost Knight cried to
him. Cousin, here is King Lisuarte ! Quoth Ar-
calaus, he is welcome : henceforth we shall neither
fear him nor his household. Ah, villain ! quoth
the King, wounded as I am, I would make thee
confess thy treason if thou wouldst do battle with
me ! I should not value myself more for con-
quering such a Knight as thou art, Arpalaus an-
swered. Then speaking to one of his people,-^Go
to London with all speedy and tell Barsinan to
make himself King, for all is ready, and I will
do what I promised him. Take you ten Knights,
said he to another, and carry Lisuarte to Daganel,
and cast him into the dungeon. I will take Oriana
with these four Knights, and show her my books
and things at Mount Aldin : this was one of the
^strongest castles in the world. So they divided



288

coifipaDyin this manner^ ixdiereby Arcalaus stowed
diat be thought himself equal to live * Knights.



* There follows in the original a column of advice to all

t

Emperors and Kings upon the mutability of fortune, as is-
stanccd in King Lisuarte's situation.



END Ot THE FIB ST VOLUJtfB.



INDEX.



VOL. I.



Pag«
Here heginneth the first Book qf the vaHant

end virtuous Knight Amadis, son of King

Perion qf Gaul and qf Queen Elisena, which

was corrected and amended by the honourable

and virtuous Knight Garciordonex de Mon-

talvo, Regidor qf the noble totvn qf Medina

del Campo, and he corrected it from the old

originals which were corrupted and badly

composed iu an ancient fashion, by the fault

qf different and bad writers, omitting mxmy

superfluous words, and putting in others of a

more polished and elegant style, touching

chivalry and the feats thereof,

CHAPTER 1.

The Introduction and Beginning qf this Mis'*
tory #•#•#••••••• 1

VOL. I. . O



INDEX.

CHAPIVB % Page

Haw Amadis was begotten and bom p

CtlAFTER 3.

How King Perion went to his own country,
<md of what befell Mm: > jind how Urganda
met Don Gandales and of that which she said
to Mm , , 17

CHAPTER 4.

How King Languines took with Mm Amadis
who was called the CMld of the Sea, and
^andaBn the son of Don Gandales 30

CHAPTER S.

How King lAsuarte sailing towards Great
Britain took port in the kingdom (f Scotland,
and how th$ Child of the Sea w^ made
Knight by King Perion, tuithout their know*
mg each other , , 39

CHAPTER (J.

How Urganda gave a hm^ to the CkUd ^
the Sea, and how he delivered King Perioii
Jrom those who would have slain Mm ••••*• 62



INDEX:

CHAPTER 7. Page

Cf the hajttk whkh the Child of the Sea had
^vith Gcdpano and his people , . • 60

CHAPTER 8.

How the three Knights came to the Court of
King Languines, and the other Knight in
the litter, and his traiterous Wife, ly com-
viand of Amadis 6S

CHAPTER 9.

How King Ldstiarte sent to the house of
King Languines for his daughter Oriana,
and he sent her, cmd with her his daughter
MahUia; and how the Child of the Sea and
Agrayes went to succour King Perion of
Gaul « *........«. 69

CHAPTER 10*

Cf the hattle which the Child of the Sea had
with King Abies, a$ui how he conquered him,
whereby the war between King Ahies and
King Perion was concluded 82

CHAPTER 11

How King Perion and Queen Elisena knew
the Child of the Sea to be tteir son Amadis , , QO

o 2



INDEX.

CHAPTER 12. V^gt

How Don Galaor was made a Kmghi dy
Amadis of Gaul his brother fff

CHAPTER- 13.

How Don Galaar fought the Giant of the
Bock of Galtares and conquered him Ill

CHAPTER 14.

How Amadis came to the Castle of Dardan
the Proifdj and of the words which he had
with him, and of the battle which he had
with him in the Court of King Lisuarte .... 123

CHAPTER 15.

Of the funeral which King lisuarte gave
Dardan and his Mistress, and of what Ama^
dis did meanwhile . . . .\ *. 135

CHAPTER l6.

How Amojdis made himself known to King
lisuarte, and the other Knights of his Court . ., 141

CHAPTER 17.

Of the things which happened to Agrt^es tfier
the war f^ Gaul .•.••••••••. 151



INDEX.

CHAPTER 18. Page

Of the news which Amadis had of Don
Galaor his brother, and how he departed from
the Court of King Lisuarte to go in quest of
him 1^

CHAPTER 19.

How Amadis fought with Angriote of Estra^
vaus and his brother, and conquered them , . . .l6g

CHAPTER 20.

Of the battle which Amadis had with Ar*
calaus the Enchanter, and how he escaped
from his enchantments 182

CHAPTER 21.

How Arcalaus carried tidings to the Court
of King Lisuarte thai Amadis was sUdn,
and of the lamentations that were made for
him ISgf

CHAPTER 5f2.

Of the trick which a Knight put upon Don
Galaor and how he revenged himself; and



\



INDEX.

^ what happened to Amadk m the Castle
where was the fair chUd Briolania ^ igs

Chapter 2a.

Of the cruel and hard battle^ letween Amadis
and Don Gtdaw, and how they knew each
other ^ 209'

CHAFTBR 24.

How Agrayes and Don Galvanes and Olivas
arrived at the Court of King JJsuarte ..... 213;

CHAPTER 25.

How Amadis and Galaor and -Balers of Car^
sante determined to go to King lAsuarte, and
of the great adventures which b^ell them on
the road 218

CHAPTER 2dL

How Don Galaor eompleated his adventure . . 22S>

CHAPTER 27.

How Amadis delivered the Damsel from the
Knight who mistreated her, and how afier*
wards when he was sleeping another Knight
carried her away ».•.••••» ...•.•.... 930



INDEX.
CHAPTER 28. Pago



• • • • «



How Amadis fought with the Knight who
had stolen away the Damsel, and conquered
him 236

CHAPTER 29.

How Balays atchieved his adventure ....... 240

CHAPTER 3Q.

How King Lisuarte held a Cortes and of what
happened there 244

CHAPTER 31.

How Amadis and Don Galaor and Balays
of Carsante arrived at the Palace of King
Lisuarte, and' Galaor remained as the Kings
Knight 249

CHAPTER 32.

How King Lisuarte ordained his Cortes to he
held in London , < . . . . ^ 254

CHAPTER 33.

How when the Cortes was assemlled King



IND£X.

Page
lAsuarte asked counsel of his Knights concern'

ing what he ought to do -. 2^2

CHAPTER 34. Page

How King Lisuarte being in great pleasure a
Damsel covered with mouming humbled her^
self before Am to beg a boon, the which was
by Um granted 267

CHAPTER 35.

In which is shown the ruin of King Lisuarte, and
aU that befell him in consequence of the rash promt-'
ses which h^ had made •,•.•••.*•• • • 2^9



jUgfs, Printer, Cr«iie-court| Flceuftfceu



'-' 5 D i D
