Amadis of Gaul, Vol. III
Robert Southey, trans. (1803) (London: Longman)
From the Spanish of Garci Rodriguez de Montalvo (1508), after the 14th-c. Portuguese original
Source: Internet Archive (Google Books scan)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Foundational Iberian chivalric romance. OCR-derived from 1803 edition, lightly cleaned.

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



/\>r\cic^;S Jc- Ga/t/v



i%iuiM0 of ^ata»



In?



®agM^ 2^sea(sia«



IN FOUR VOLUMES.



VOL. II.



LONDON :

Printed by N. Biggs, Crane-court, Fleet-street,
FOB T. K. LONGMAN AND O. BEE8^ PATER-

N08TBR BOW,

1803-


-si



,•0



I



1



JMJDIS of GAVL.



'Book t^t §ifft.



CHAPTER 3&



N, Araadis and Galaor were withia two leagues of
London when they saw Ardian the Dwarf coming
towards them as fast as horse could gallop. Never
trust me^ quoth Amadis^ if he comes not with the
news of some great mishap to seek us. Presently
the Dwarf came up and related all his tidings^ and
how Oriana was carried away. Holy Mary, help
me ! cried Amadis : which way did they take
her ? — By th^ city is the nearest road. Amadis
immediately spurred his horse, and gallopped
amain towards London, so confounded with the
terror of this news that he never spoke word to
Galaor, who followed him fiill speed. They '
passed close by the town without stopping a mi-
nute, only Amadis enquired of all he saw which
way the Princess had been taken ; but as Gandalia
passed under the windows where the Queen and

VOL. II. A



Q



lier Ladies were, the Queen called him, and threw
the King's sword to him, which was the l)est
sword that ever Knight girded on ^ take it to your
Master, quoth she, and God speed him with it !
and tell Galaor that the King went from hence
with a Damsel this morning, and is not yet re-
•turned, and we know not where she has led him.
Gandalin took the sword and rode as fast as he
<x>Qld after Amadis, who coming to a brook missed
the bridge in his hurry, and forcing the horse to
leap the tired animal fell short into the mud ; then
Gandalin came up to him and gave him the sword,
and the horse which he himself rode. Presently
they turned aside from the road to follow the track
of horsemen, and there they saw some woodmen,
who asked them if they came from London, for if a
Knight and a Damsel be missing there, said they, we
have seen an adventure j and then they told them
what they had beheld. Who is it that has taken
them ? quoth Amadis ; for he knew it was Lisuarte
by the description. They answered, the Damsel who
led the Knight here called loudly for Arcalaus. Lord
God ! quoth Amadis : let me but find that trai-
tor ! — ^The woodmen then told them how tlie party
bad seperated, and said tliat one of the five Knights
who went with the Damsel was the biggest Knight
they had ever seen. Amadis knew that that was



Arcalaus $ and bidding Galaor follow where the*
King went, he spurred on afler Oriana. By sun*
set the horse could carry him no farther, and he
being greatly distressed, saw a little to the right of
the road a Knight lying dead, and a Squire by him
holding his horse. Who slew that Knight ? cried
Amadis. A traitor that passed by, carrying the
iairest Damsel in the world by force, and he slew
my master only for asking who they were, and here
is no one to help me to remove the body. — My
Squire shall help you : . give me your master's
horse : I promise to give you two better in return.
He told Gandalin to follow him afler tlie body was
disposed of, and gallopped on. Towards day-break
he came to a hermitage in a valley, and asked the
Hermit if he had seen five Knights pass carrying
with them two Damsels ? Do you see yonder cas-
tle ? he replied : my nephew tells me that Arca-
laus the Enchanter is lodged there, and witli him
two fair Damsels whom he halh taken by violence.
By God the very villain whom I seek ! — He hath
done much evil in this land, replied the Hermit.
God remove him, or mend him ! — ^Then Amadis
asked him if he had any barley for his horse ; and,
while the horse was feeding, enquired who was
the Lord of the castle. Grumen, said the good
man, cousin to Dardan who was slain in Lisuarte*a

a2



court, and therefore the King*s enemies put up
there. Now God be with you, father ! quoth
Amadis ; I beseech you remember me in your
prayers ! which way to the castle ?— Amadis fol-
lowed the path which the good man had pointed
out, and came up to it, and saw that the wall was
high and the towers strong. He listened and could
hear no sound within, and that pleased him, for
hfe knew that Arcalaus was not gone forth 5 and he
rode round, and saw that it had only one issue.
Then he retired among some crags, and, dismount-
ing, stood holding the bridle, and with his eyes
fixed upon the gate, like one who had no will to
sleep. By this the morning broke, and he re-
moved farther across a valley to a hill that was well
wooded, for he feared that if those of the castle
saw him they would suspect there were others at
hand, and therefore not come out. Presently the
gate opened, and a Knight came out, and went to
a high eminence and looked all round ; then re-
turned into the castle. It was not long before he
saw Arcalaus and his four companions come out,
all well armed, and among them Oriana. Ah,
God ! quotli he, now and for ever help me in her
defence! They drew near him, and he heard
Oriana say. Dear friend, I shall never see thee
more, for I go to my death. The tears came



into his ejes $ he descended the hill as fast as lie

could, and came after them into a great plain, and
then cried, Arcalans ! traitor ! it becomes not one
like thee to carry away so excellent a Lady ! Ori-
ana knew the voice, and shook all over ; bnt Ar«
calaus and the other ran at him. He took his aim
at Arcalaus, and bore him right over the crupper ;
then turned his horse and smote at Grumen, so
that the point and part of the stave of tlie spear
came out at his back, and he fell down dead, and
the spear broke in him. Then he drew the King's
sword, and laid about with such rage and violence,
and felt such strength in himself, that he thought
if the whole plain were full of Knights they could
not stand before him. We are succoured ! quoth
the Damsel of Denmark : it is the fortunate
Knight ! look at the wonders he perforroeth ! Ah
God protect thee, dear friend ! cried Oriana : none
other in the world can save us. The Squire who
had her in his keeping seeing what had passed,
cried out, Certes I shall not wait till those blows
come upon my head which shields and helmets
cannot resist ! and he put tlie princess down, and
rode off full speed. By this. Amadis had cut thro'
the arm of atoother, and sent him away howling
with the agony of death -, and he cleft a third
down to the neck. The fourth began to fly, and

▲ 3



Amadk was after him^ when he heard his. Ladj
cry 5 and looking rounds saw that Arcalaus had
mounted again, and was dragging her up by the
arm. Amadis soon came up to them, and lifting
up his sword dared not put forth his strength
lest he should slay both,^ but with a half-blow he
smote him or. the shoulder, and cut away part of
the cuirass and the skin 5 then Arcalaus let Oriana
fall, that he might escape the better. Turn, Arcalaus,
cried Amadis, and see if I be dead as thou hast report*
ed ! but he in fear of death spurred on, and threw hi»
shield from off his neck for speed. The blow made
at him just reached his loins with the sword-end,
and fell upon the horse's flank and wovmded it, so
that the' beast rode away more furiously. Amadis^
albeit he so hated the Enchanter, did not pursue
him further, lest he should lose his mistress, he
turned towards her, and alighted and knelt before
her, and kissed her hand, saying, now let God do
with me what be will ! I never thought to see you
again. She being among the dead was in great
terror, and could not speak, but she embraced
him. The Damsel of Denmark going to hold his
horse saw the sword of Arcalaus on the ground,
and admiring its beauty gave it to Amadis > but he
seeing it was right glad thereof, for it was King
Perion's sword which bad been placed in hiscradle^^



and which Arcahiu had taken when he enchanted
him. Presently Gandalin came vtp, who had tra-
velled all night long : a joyful man was he seeing
how the quest had ended.

Amadis then placed Oriana upon the Damsels (>al-
frey, while Gandalin caught one of the loose
horses for the Damsel^ and taking her bridle they
left the place of battle. But Amadis as they went
along reminded Oriana how she had promised to
be his ; hitherto, said he, I have known that it
was not in your power to show me more favour
than you did -, but now that you are at full liberty,
h6w should I support disappointments without the
worst despair that ever destroyed man! Dear
^end, quoth she, never for my sake shall yon
sufier, for I am at your will : though it be an error
and a sin now, let it not be so before God.-* When
they had proceeded about three leagues they entered
a thick wood, and about a league farther there was
a town. Oriana, who had not slept a wink since
she left her father*s house, complained of fatigue :
let us rest in that valley, said Amadis. There was
a brook there and soft herbage ; there Amadis took
her from her palfrey : the noon, said he, is coming
on very hot, let us sleep here till it be cooler, and
meantime Gandalin shall go bring us food from the



8



town. He may go, replied" Oriana, but who will
give him food ? — ^They will give it him for his
horse, which he may leave in pledge, and return
on foot. No : said Oriana, let him take my ring,
which was never before so useful : and she gave it
to Gandalin, who, as he went by Amadis, said to
him, he who loses a good opportunity. Sir, must
wait long before he find another. Oriana laid her-
self down upon the Damsel's cloak, while Amadis
disarmed, of which he had great need, and the
Damsel retired fartlier among the trees to sleep.
Then was his Lady in his power, nothing loth 3 and
tlie fairest Damsel in tlie world became a Woman.
Yet was their love encreased thereby, as pure and
true love alway is.

When Galaor returned, the Damsel prepared the
food ; and, though they had neither many serv-
ing-men, nor vessels of gold and silver, yet was
that a sweet meal upon the green grass in the
forest.



CHAPTER 37.



Galaor rode on after the King so fast as his horse
coald carry him ; still following the track of the
horsemen. Alwat vespers he met a Knight who
cried out to lum, whither so fast ? stop and tell
me ! I have no time, quoth he. — By St. Maiy,
you pass not so ! tell me, or fight me ! But Ga-
laor still rode on.— Certcs, Knight, cried the
stranger, you have committed some villainy that
you fly so fast : defend yourself ! Galaor turned as
if to meet him in his career, but dextrously moved
aside, so that the Knight's horse in his speed car-
ried him a good way on. Ah, coward ! cried the
Knight, when at last he turned, thou shalt answer
me or die ! and he ran at him again full tilt.' Again
Galaor avoided the encounter, and rode on as fast
as he could. When the Knight saw him far be-
fore, he said, as God shall help me, he shall not
escape so ! and knov^iiig the country well^ he

S.6



10



struck across by a nearer way^ and took possession
of a pass. Faint-hearted coward ! qiioth he, chuse
now of three things : fight, or turn back, or an-
swer me ! I like neither, replied Galaor, and you
are discourteous : if you want to know why I go
so fast, follow me and see 3 I should lose time in
telling you, and you would not believe me, it is
for so great an evil. The Knight answered, In
God*s name tlien go on, and I will follow thee
though for- these three days.

In about half a leaguers time they saw one Knight
running after his horse, and another gallopping
away from him. He who was with Galaor knew
him on foot, for he was his cousin, and he caught
the horse for him, and asked him, how is this ?.
He replied, I was riding along tliinking upon ypu
know what, when tliat Knight yonder gave me
puch a thrust on ray shield that the horse fell upon
his knees and tlirew me. I drew my sword, and
called to him to do battle -, but he only cried out>
remember to answer auotha: time when you are
spoken to ! and so he rode away. By my faith ia
God, let us follow him, and see you how I will
Avenge myself. I cannot, said his cousin, now,
for I must keep this Knight company for three
days 5 and then be related what had befallen him



11



witli Gfllaor. Qooth the other^ oertes dfher he n
the greatest coward in the woiid, or he goes upon
tome great adventure : I will forego my own Ten-
geanoe to see the end of this. By this Galaor was
far before them* for he did not tarry a whit, and
they rode after him. It was now drawing towards
night. Galaor entered a forest, and soon lost the
tracks for it was dark, so that he knew not which
way to take. Then he began to pray to God to
guide him that he might be the first to succour the
King; and thinking that those horsemen might
have led the King apart from the road to rest them-
selves, he went along the bottoms listening every
wherp if he might hear tliem. The Knights
thinking he had kept the road, rode straight for-
ward about a league till they came through the
forest, and not seeing him there they imagined he
had hidden himself, and they turned aside to lodge
in the house of a Dame hard by.

When Galaor had searched the forest throughout*
and found uotliing, he resolved to proceed, and
ascend some eminence the next day to look about.
So recovering the road, he went on till he came
into the open country, and there he saw before
him in a valley a little £re. Thidier he went ; it
was some foigemen, and they seeing him come

a6



12



among them in arms^ took up lances and hatcheti
to defend themselves ; but he bidding them not
fesar, besought them to give him some barle7 for
his horse. The which they did, and he gave the
beast his supper. They would have given him also
to eat, but he would not ; only he lay down to
sleep, requesting them to wake him before dayr-
break. The night was two parts gone, and Galaor
lay down by the fire, completely armed. At dawn
he rosp, for he had not slept much for pure vexa-
tion, and, commending them to God, he took his
leave. His Squire had not been able to keep pace
with him, and thenceforth he vowed if God pros-
pered him, to give his Squire the better horse. So
he rode to a high hill, and from thence began to
look all round him.

The two cousins had now left the Lady*s house,
and it being now day they saw Galaor on the emi-
nence, and knowing him by bis shield rode to-
wards him. ' As they drew nigh they saw him de-
scend the hill as fast as horse could cany him.
Certes, quoth the one, he is flying and concealing
himself for some mischief : if I come up with
him, God never help me if I do not learn firom
him what he hath deserved, fiot Galaor, thinking
aothiug of them^ had just seen ten Knights pasa«



13



ing a strait at the eDtranoe of the forest^ of idiom
five rode first and five behind^ and some uoanned
men went in the middle. These he thought to bo
the vilhiins with the King, and went towards them
like a man who has devoted his own life to save
another. Coming near, he saw Dsnarte with the
chain about his neck ; and then, with grief and
lage that defied danger, he ran at the first five, ex-
claiming. Ah, traitors ! to your own misfortune
have you laid hands upon the best man in the
world ! The £ye at once ran at him ; he smote the
first so sternly, that the wood of his lance appeared
through his back, and he fisll dead; the others
smote him with such force that his horse fell upon
his knees, and one of them drove his spear be-
tween Galaor's shield and breast-plate. Galaor
forced it from him, and striking at another with
it, nailed his leg to the horsCj and left the broken
lance in them -, then putting hand to sword, the
others all came at him, and be defended himself so
bravely that every one wondered how he could
bear up against such blows. But being in this great
press of danger^ it pleased God to succour him
with the two cousins who were in his pursuit, who
seeing his great chivalry, exclaimed. Of a truth we
wrongly called him coward : let us go help the
best Knight in the world ! With that they raa



u



All! tilt to his assistance, like men who knew their
business, for they had each been Errant Knights
for ten years, and the one was called Ladasin, the
flword-player, and the other Don Guilan the pensive^
the good Knight. At this time Galaor had great
need of their aid, for his helmet was hacked and
battered^ his harness open in many places, and his
horse tottering with loss of blood 5 yet he felt as-
sured that, if his horse did not fail him, he should
bring it to a good end. But when the two cousins
came to his help, then he bestirred himself more
hopefully, for he marvelled at thek prowess. The
load of blows was lightened, and he had room for
action. When the Cousin of Arcalaus saw how
things were going, for his Knights were falling on.
all sides, he ran to Lisuarte to slay him. Those
who Were with the King had fled, and he got from
off the palfrey with the chain about his neck, and
caught up a shield and sword from the ground,
and received upon tlie ^ield the blow that was
meant for his death. The sword passed a palm*s
length through the rim of the sliieUl, and with its
point reaching the head made » slant wound to the
skull ; but the King smote at his enemy's horse
in the face, so that the traitor could not repeat the
blow, aud the horse reared and fell back upon the



15



rider. GalaOT now ou foot, for his horse coqU not
move, ran to him to smite off his head ; but the
Xing called out not to slay him. By this the two
cousins had made an end of their last enemy, and
then turning round they knew the King, to their
great wonder, for they knew nothing of what had
happened j and they took off their helmets, and
knelt before him. He raised them up, saying.
By my God, friends, you have succoured me in
time ! great wrong, Don Guilan, hath your mistress
done me in withdrawing you from my company,
and for your sake I lose Ladasin also. Guilan was
ashamed at these words, and his cheeks crimsoned,
for he loved the Dutchess of Bristol and she loved
him, and the Duke always suspected it was he who
had entered his castle when Galaor was there.

Galaor had now taken the chain from Lisuarte,
and fastened it round the cousin of Arcalaus -, they
took the horses of the dead, one for the King, and
one for Galaor, and rode towards London. They
halted at the dwelling of I^adasin, and there found
Cralaor's Squire and Ardianthe Dwarf, who thought
his master had taken that way. A Squire was sent
forthwith to inform the Queen of Lisuarte's safety.
They rested that night ; and^ as they set forth on



16



the morning, their prisoners confessed how all that
had passed had been concerted with Barsinan^
that he might make himself King of Gre^t Bri-
tain ; which, when Lisuarte heard^ he spurred on
in greater haste.



17



CHAPTER 38.



The woodmen had carried the news of Lisuaite'f
imprisonment to London ; immediately there was

>a great stir in the ci^ : the Knights all ran to
horse, and gallopped to his rescue, so that the
whole plain seemed full of them. King Arban of
North Wales was talking with the Queen, when
his Squires brought him horse and arms, and a

. Page said to him, arm yourself. Sir ! what are you
doing ? there is not a Knight of all the King*s
company, except yourself, who is not gone fiill
speed to the forest. And why ? quoth Arfoan.—
Because they say ten Knights are carrying away

.the King prisoner. Holy Maryl exclaimed the

. Queen j J always feared this ! and she fell down
in a swoon. Arban left her to the care of her
Ladies, all making loud lamentation, and armed

himself. As he was mounting, he heard a great
cry that the Tower was taken. Holy Mary t



IS



quoth he^ we are all betrayed ! and then he kne#
he must not leave the Queen. By this time there
was such, an uproar in the town^ as if all the peo« '
pie of the world were there. Arban drew up his^
two hundred Knights before the Queen's palace^
and sent two of them to discover the cause of the
tumult. They went to the Tower, and saw that
Barsinan had got possession of it, and was killing
some and throwing others from the walls, for he
had six hundred Knights with him, besides foot-
men, and the Kick's Knights suspecting nothing had
all gone to their master's rescue. The townsmen
hearing this, ran all armed as they could in haste
to the Queen's palace, and there also Barsinan
went that he might take her, and get possession of
the crown and throne. When he arrived he found
Arban ready for defence. Arban, quoth he, jaa
have hitherto been the wisest Knight of a young
man that has been known : see now that you lose
not your wisdom. Why do you say this ? cried
Arban.— -Because before £ve days end Lisuarte*&
head will be sent me, and there is no other in this
land who can and ought to be King except my-
self, and King I will be ! I give you the kingdom
of North Wales which you now hold, because you
are a good Knight and wise : so retire now, and
let me take the grown and throne, for whosoever



19

oppotct tat shall lose his head VUhun and TraU
tor ! quoth Arban ; and then began a sharp con*
flict, wherein many were slam» which lasted till
night, for the streets being narrow Barsinan could
not avail himself of his numbers, and King Arbaa
so behaved himself that he that day saved tbr
Uueen«

At night both p^tfties retired : the Queen theft
sent for Arban ; he went to her armed as he was,
and wounded in many ^piaecA, and, when he came
before her, took off his battered helmet. There
were five wounds in his face and necfc, and his
countenance was all Uoody ; but it seemed a beau*
tiful face to those who, under God, thought hioa
their protector. But the Queen seeing hhn, wept
aloud with great pity : Ah, good nephew, God
defend thee! what will become of the King ? and
what will become of us ? Of him, quoth Arban,
we shall have good news ; for ourselves, fear no*
thing from these traitors : your vassals who are
with me can defend themselves in their great
loyalty.— rBut, Nephew, you are not in a state to
bear arms, and what can the others do without
you ?— ^Fear not. Lady, so long as life is in me
I shall not forsake my arnu.



so



Barsinan^ who found his people had need of rest,
took twenty Knights with him in the moiiung,
and went to a post which Arban*s High Steward
kept. They at the barrier took their arms to de-
fend themselves^ but Barsinan cried out that he
came to speak with them^ and make a truce till
noon 5 ■ tcf -which Arban, being advised thereof,
assented willingly, for the most part of his com-
pany had been so hardly handled that they could
not bear arms. Barsman then went to Arban,
and said he would make a truce for five days.
Agreed, . said Arban, but provided that you shall
not atten^pt to take any tiling in the town 3 and
that if the King comes, we immediately act as
he may order us. I grant all this, said Barsinan,
that there may be no more battling, for I value
my own Knights, and I value you who will be
mine sooner than you think. I will tell you how :
the King is dead, and I have his daughter and will
make her my wife. God forsake me then, quoth
Arban, if ever thou shalt have truce with me,
since thou art a partaker in the treason against my
liege Lord ! go and do thy worst ! And before
night Barsinan made three attacks upon him, and
was repulsed.



^
\



SI



CHAPTER 59.



Meantime Amadis asked Oriana what Arcalans
bad said to her. He told me not to gneve, said
she^ for within fifteen days he would make me
Queen of London, and give me Barsinan for my
husband, to whom he was to give me and my father's
head, and be made his High Steward in return*
Holy Mary ! quoth Amadis : Barsinan, who seemed
such a friend ! I fear lest he do injury to the
Queen. Dear friend, cried Oriana, hasten on )
I must to my sorrow, replied Amadts, for else I
sliould have delighted to pass four days here in the
forest with you, \f it had pleased you. Oriana
answered, God knows how wilhngly ! but great
evil might happen thereby to this land^ which if
God pleases will one day be yours and mine. As
sooB as it was morning Amadis armed himself, and
leading his Lady's bridle, rode on as fast as they
could towards London } and every where they met



22



tke Knights, five by five, and ten by ten, as they
were seeking the King 3 more than a thousand they
met, and told them which way the King was gone,
and how Galaor was in quest of him. When they
came within five leagues of London they met Gru-
medan, the good old Knight who had fostered the
Oueen j twenty of his lineage were with him, and
they had been all night long scouring the forest.
He seeing Oriana went towards her weeping : Oh
God, Lady, what a good day with yoar coming !
but what tidings of the King ? They told him
what they knew, and Amadis said to him. Take
you charge o£ Oriana, and bid all the Knights that
you shall meet turn back, for if numbers can suc-
cour iMm, there are already more than enough
^one : I must go with all speed to protect the
dueen. With that he gallopped away: at the
entrance of the city he found the Squire whom
Lisuarte had sent with the news of his deliverance,
and learnt also the state of the city. So entering
as privately as he could he went to Arban, who
embraced him right joyfully, and asked, what
news ? As good as heart could wish ! quoth Ama-
dis : let us go to the Queen. He took with him
Lada$in*8 messenger, and kneeling before Brisena,
said. Lady, this Squire has left Lisuarte safe and
well, and I have lefi Oriana with your fosterer



23



Crumedan ; ^cy will sooq be here, but I must go
look after Barsinan. He then changed his shield
and helmet that he might not be known, and bade
Arbao throw down the barriers, that the traitors
might come freely on, for by God*s help tliey shall
pay dearly for their treason ! I'he bdrriers were
thrown down, and Barsinan prest on at the head
of his people, thinking that all would now be his^
for his own men were many and his enemies few,
and ke was eager to seize the Queen. The King's
party gave back being overpowered, then Amadis
went forth ; he had on a rusty helmet, and a plain
shield hanging from his neck ; but he was soon
judged to be a good one, and he went on making
iiis way through the press ; and having the good
sword of Lisuarte by his side. He forced his way
to Barsinan and encountered him ; drove his lance
through shield and corselet, and left the broken
spear in him half way of its iron ; then drew he
his sword, and smote off the crest and top of his
helmet, and the scalp of his head, for the sword
cut so finely that A mad is could scarce feel the blow
he gave ; with another stroke he sheared thro* gaunt-
let and hand, and the sword passing through the
bone of the wrist, fell on the leg and entered in
half through. Then Barsinan fell, and Amadis
turned upon the throng, and King Arban so prest



2+



them that they who could escape slaughter ran to
the Tower, and made fast the gates. Amadis fiiiding
he could not force entrance readily, went back to
Barsinan, and finding him still alive, ordered that
he should be carried to the palace and kept till the
King's return. Then the strife being over, he
looked at the bloody sword which he held in his
hand. Sword ! quoth he, in a happy day was the
Knight bom who shall wield you ! and certes you
are well employed, for being the best in the world,,
you belong to the noblest King ! He then dis*
armed himself, and went to the Queen ; and Arban
was laid in his bed, as there was great need^ £ar
he was sorely wounded.

At this time King Lisuarte was hastening to Lon*
don. Of the Knights whom he met, some he
made turn back, others he sent through the vallies
and by all roads to recal their comrades from their
search. The first whom he met were Agrayes and
Galvanes, and Solinan and Galdan, and Dinadaus
and Bervas, all six together making great moan ',
who when they saw him would have kissed his
hand, but he joyfully embraced them. Sir, said
Dinadaus, the whole city are in quest of you like
mad men. Nephew, replied the King, take some«
of these Knights with you, and carry my shield



25



that jou may be the sooner obeyed, and torn bick
all whom you meet. This Dinadaus was one of
the best Knights of the King's lineage, and well
esteemed among all good Knights, aft well for
courteous bearing as for his good chivalry and
prowess. When they came into the high road to
London they fell in with Grumedan, the King's so
dear friend, who was conducting Oriana home i
and I tell you their pleasure was exceeding greats
and the old man told him how Amadis was gone
to the Queen's succour. Presently they heard newt
what Barsinan had done, and how King Arban
had defended tlie city, and how by the coming of
Amadis all had been ended and the traitor taken.
By the time the King reached London, there were
in his company more than two thousand Knights.
When he came to the palace, who can tell the joy
that was made ? Immediately he had tlie Tower
surrounded, and having made Barsinan and the
Cousin of Arcalaus confess the whole manner of
their treason, they were both burnt in sight of their
own people, who having no provisions, neither any
remedy, in five days came to the King's mercy,
and he executed justice upon some and pardoned
otliers. Thus ended this treason, but it was the
cause of much enmity between the countries
of Great Britain and Sansuena, for a son of Bar*

VOL. II. ' B



rinan, who was a good Knight, came afterwards

against Lisuarte with a great power.

These dangers over the court proceeded as before,
making great pastimes and festivals as well by night
in the town, as by day in the fields. On one of
those days the Lady and her sons arrived, before
whom Amadis and Galaor bad made their covenant
-with Madasima. They seeing her went honour-
ably to bid her welcome. Friends, said she, you
know wherefore I am c<»ne ; what will you do in
this case ! will you not keep your promise, for to-
day is the time ? Jn God's name, replied Galaor,
let us go before the King. Let us go, quolh she.
Then coming into the presence, tlie Lady made
her obeisance and said. Sir, 1 come here to see
these Knights perform a covenant which they have
— "" ;; andthraisherepeatedwhatlheyhadpromised
adasima, the Lady of Gantasi. Ah Galaor, cried
Ling, you have undone me ! Galaor answered,
r this than to die : if we had been known, all
I'orld could not have saved our lives j and now
eraedy is easier than you imagme. Brother,
mber you have promised to follow my exam-
Then Galaor related before the King, and all
Knights present, by what treachery they had
taken. Sir King, said he, I now forsake you



27



imd yonr company for the sake of Madasima^ the
Lady of Castle Gantasi ; for it is her will to do
yon this displeasure, and whatever others she can,
for the hatred she bears you. Amadis affirmed
what his brother had said. Have we performed
our co\'enant ? then said Galaor to the three wit-
nesses} they answered, yes, truly, you have ac-
quitted your promise. In God's name ! quoth Ga-
laor, and now you may return when -you please,
and tell Madasima that she hath not made her terms
so cunningly as she thought, as you may see. Sir»
we have kept our covenant with Madasima, and
forsaken your service ', but it was not stipulated
how long we were to be out of your service,
therefore we are free to use our own will, and
freely again enter your service as before. At this
Lisuarte was greatly pleased, and said to the Lady,
Certes these Knights have fairly acquitted them-
selves of a promise so treadierously obtained, and
just it is that they who deceive should be tliemselves
deceived. Tell Madasima, that, if she hates me,
she had it in her power to do me the greatest ill
that could happen ; but God, who has preserved
them from other perils, would not* suffer them to
perish by such hands. If it please you. Sir, said
the Lady, tell me who these Knights are ? — Ama-
dis and Don Galaor his brother. What! was

b2



i^;^



28



Amadis in her power ? cried she : now God be
praised that they are safe^ for certes it had been
great misadventure if two such good men had so
perished ? She will be ready for pure vexation to
inflict the death upon herself which she designed
for them. Truly, quoth the King, that would be
more justly done. So the Lady went her way.



i9



CHAPTER 40.



Twelve days together did King Lisoarte continue
his court, and, when it broke up, though many
Knights departed to their own lands, it was a won-
der how many remained, and in like manner many
Dames and Damsels continued to abide with the
^ueen. Among those whom the King received
into his company were the cousins Ladasin and
Guilan the pensive, both good Knights, but Guilan
was the better of the twain, for in tlie whole king-
dom of London there was none who surpassed him
in worth 3 but so absent was he, that none could
enjoy his conversation or company, and of this love
was the cause, and that to a Lady who neitlier
loved him nor any thing else to such an excess :
her name was Brandalisa, sister to the Qneen of
Sobradisa, and married to the Duke of Bristol.

The day came whereon that Duke was summoned
to appear and answer the appeal of Olivas. The

B 3



so



Duke arrived^ and was courteously by the King
Teceived. Sir, quoth he> you have summoned me
to answer an accusation : he who made it lies, and
I am ready' to acquit myself as you shall judge
right. Then uprose Olivas, and with him all the
Errant Knights present. Lisuarte asked why they
all arose. Grumedan answered, because the Duke
threatens all Knights Errant, and therefore we are
all concerned. Certes, quoth the King, a mad war
hath he undertaken ! there is not in the world a
King so mighty, or so wise, that he could bring a
war like that to good issue ! but retire you at pre-
sent, and seek not now to avenge yo\irselves : he
shall have full justice. All then withdrew, but
Olivas, who said, the Duke who standeth before
you, - Sir, hath slain my Cousin-german, who
never by word or deed gave him occasion of of*
fence : I therefore accuse him as a traitor for this,
and will either make him confess it, or kill him>
or force him out of the lists. The Duke told him
he lied, and that he was ready to acquit himself.
The combat was fixed for the next day, for the
Duke's two nephews who were to fight on his side
were not yet arrived.

They came that evening -, the Duke made such
account of th^o) that be thought Olivas could not



51



produce their peers. They went before the King,
Olivas defied the Duke, who demanded battle,
three to three. Then Don Galvanes, who was at
the feet of the King, rose, and called his nephew
Agrayes, and said to Olives, Friend, we promised
to be on your side if need was : now then let the
battle be. When the Duke saw them, he remem-
bered how they had rescued the. Damsel whom he
would have burnt, and he was somewhat abashed.
They armed themselves, and entered the place
appointed for such trials ; one party through the
one gate/ the other oa the opposite side.. Fromi
the Queen's window Olinda overlooked the lists,
and seeing Agrayes about to fight her heart failed
her ; and Mabilia and Oriana were greatly grieved
for ^e love they bore to him and Galvanes. The
lists were cleared : the King withdrew from them,
and the champions ran their encounter. Agrayes
and his Uncle dismounted their enemies, and broke
both their lances. Olivas made the Duke fall on
his horse^s neck, but received a deep wound himself,
and the Duke recovered his seat. Agrayes rode
at him, and laid on him a heavy load of blows,
heartily hating him for his great discourtesy and
&lsehood ; but one of the dismounted Kuights
struck at the Prince's horse, and buried the sword in
bis flank ; the horse fell, and the Duke and his Ne^*

b4


52



phew both assailed Agrayes as he lay upon the
ground. Don Galvanes^ closely busied with his
antagonist^ saw nothing of this. At that hour all
wJio loved Agrayes were in great consternation ;
Amadis yearned to be among them, for he greatly
feared his cousin's death j the three Damsels above
were well nigh desperate, and it was pitiful to
behold Olinda, what she suffered. Howbeit,
Agrayes got on his feet, and with the good sword
of Amadis, which he wielded, laid lustily about
him. Ah, God, cried Galaor aloud, what is Olivas
about this while ! better that be had never borne
arms, if he fails at a time like this ! But Galaor
knew not what sore agony Olivas suffered j for he
had such a wound, and bled so ^st, that it was a
wonder how he kept his seat. He saw the peril
of Agrayes, and heaving a deep sigh, as one whose
heart did not fail him though his strength was
failing, he cried. Oh God, let me help my good
friend before my soul depart ! and then, feebly as
he could, he laid hand to sword and turned upon
the Duke, and his spirit kept him up. Agrayes
was now left man to man, and he remembered
that his Lady saw him, and he laid on so furiously
that his friends trembled lest his strength and
breath should fail him 5 but this was his custom,
dnd if his strength had been equal to his great ecu-



33



mge, he would have been one of the best Knights
in the world ; but even as it was he was right
good, and of great prowess. Anon he had cut
through armour and flesh in sundry places, and left
his foe quivering with death, at tlie same moment
when Oiivas, fainting for loss of blood, fell from
his horse. The Duke not seeing how Agrayes had
fated, turned upon Galvanes ; Agrayes leaped upon
Olivas's horse, and rode to his Uncle's assistance :
he smote the Duke's Nephew upon the helmet,
so that the sword stuck there; and plucking it
away, he burst the lacings, and left him bareheaded
to the wrath ^ of Galvanes, while he turned upon
the Duke. Presently Galvanes having finished his
enemy, attacked the Duke on the other side, but
his horse be^ng wounded fell and bruised him, so
that man to man were left. Still were all the be-
holders right glad 3 but above all Don Guilan, w,ho
hoped to see the Duke slain, for the love he bore
to his wife. The Duke was flying, Agrayes
reached the rim of his shield, the sword went in,
the Duke threw off the shield from his neck, and
still fled 5 then turned, while Agrayes was reco-
vering his sword, and struck twice at him. The
Prince, as soon as his weapon was free, requited

him with a blow on the left shoulder that went

*

through harness and flesh and bone, down to tlie

s5



o



4



ribs. The Duke fell, but hung in the stirrup, and
the horse dragged him out of the lists, and when
he was picked up his head was found dashed to
pieces by the horse's heels. Agrayes forthwith
alighted, and ran to his uncle, and asked how he
^ iared. Bravely, quoth Galvanes, God be thanked I
but I am right sorry for Olivas, for methinks he is
dead. They then cast the two nephews out of the
lists J then went toOlivas, and found that he had just
opened his eyes, and was asking to be confessed.
Galvanes looked at his wound : take heart, cried
he, it is not in a dangerous place ! Sir, replied
Olivas, my heart and all my limbs are dying away;
I have been sore wounded ere now, but never was
in such weakness. They disarmed him, and the
firesh air was of service, and the blood somewhat
ceased. The King sent a bed whereon to remove
him, and skilful surgeons dressed his wound, and
said that though it was very deep, by God*s help
they could heal it.

The Queen then sent Grumcdan to bring Branda-
lisa to court, and, with her, her niece Aldeva :
Thereat was Don Guilan well pleased, and in a
month tliey arrived, and were honourably wel-
comed. So the fame of King Lisuarte went
abroad, and m half a year it was a marvel how



35



many Knights came from foreign parts to serve
him, whom he rewarded bountifully, hoping by
their aid not only to preserve his own kingdom >
bat to conquer other, that in old times had been
subject and tributary to Great Britain.



B(5



36



CHAPTER 41.



This history has related to you how Amadis pro*
mised Briolania to revenge her father's deaths and
how she gave him a sword^ and that when in his
combat with Gasinan he broke the sword^ he gave
the pieces to Gandalin's care : You shall now hear
how the battle was performed, and what great
danger he underwent because of that broken sword,
not from any fault of his own, but for the igno*
ranee of his dwarf Ardian.

Aitiadis, now recollecting that the time was come
to perform his promise, acquainted Oriana, and re-
quested her leave, though to him it was like divid-
ing his heart from his bosom to leave her 5 and she
granted it, albeit with many tears, and a sorrow
that seemed to presage what evil was about to hap-
pen. Amadis took the Queen's leave for form's
sake, aud depax;ted with Galaor and Agrayes, They



37



had gone about half a league, when he asked
Gandalin if he had brought the three pieces of the
sword which Briolania had g^ven him, and finding
he had not, bade him return and fetch them. The
Dwarf said he would go, for he had nothing to
delay him"; and this was the means whereby
Amadis and Oriana were both brought into ex-
treme misery, neither they nor the Dwarf himself
being culpable.

The Dwarf rode back to his master's lodging,
found the pieces of the sword, put them in his
skirt, and was retiring, when, as he passed the
palace, he heard himself called. Looking up, he
saw Oriana and Mabilia, who asked him why he
had not gone with his master. I set out with him>
said he, but returned for this 5 and he showed her
the broken sword. What can your master want a
broken sword for ? quoth Oriana. Because, said
the Dwarf, he values it more than the two best
whole ones, for her sake who gave it him. — And
who- is she — The Lady for whom he undertakes
this combat, and though you are daughter to the
best King in the world) yet, fair as you are, you
would rather win what she has won, than possess
all your father's lands. — What gain so precious
hath she made ? perchance she- hath gained your



o



8



toaster ? — ^Yes, she has, his whole heart ! and he
remains her Knight to serve her ! Then, giving
his horse the lash, he gallopped away, little thinking
the wrong he had done. Oriana remained pale as
death -, she burst into bitter reproaches against the
. falsehood of Amadis, and wrung her hands, and
her heart was so agitated that not a tear did she
shed. It was in vain that Mabilia and the Damsel
of Denmark strove to allay her rage with reason-
able words : as passionate women will do, she fol-
lowed her own will, which led her to commit so
great an error^ that God*s mercy was necessary to
repair it.

The Dwarf rejoined his master, and showed him.
the pieces of his sword, but Amadis asked him no
questions, and he said nothing of what had passed.
Presently they met a Damsel, who asked whither
they were going. — Along this road. — I advise you
to leave it. — Why ? — Because no Knight hath
taken it for fifteen days but he hath been either
slain or wounded. And who hath done all this
mischief? quoth Amadis. — ^The best Knight in
arms that I have ever seen. Damsel, said Agrayes,
you must^ shew us this Knight. — He will shew
himself so soon as you enter the forest. The Dam-
sel then followed them } they looked all round the



39



forest in vain, till, as they were at the other side
thereof, they saw a Knight of good stature com-
pletely armed, on a roan horse, holding a laDce^
and a, Squire by him with four other lances. He
speaking to his Squire, the man laid the lances
against a tree, and came up to the Knights.-—
Sirs, yonder Knight sends to inform ye that he
hath kept this forest for fifteen days against all
Knights Errant with fair fortune, and for the plea-
sure of the joust hath yet stayed a day and a half
longer than his time appointed ; he says, that if it
please you to joust with him he is ready, but there
shall be no sword combat, for in that he hath done
much evil against , his own will, and will avoid it
henceforth if he can. Agrayes had taken his helm
and thrown the shield round his neck, while the
Squire was speaking : tell him to defend himself !
quoth he. They ran their race ; their spears
brake, and Agrayes was dismounted, and his horse
ran loose, whereat he was greatly ashamed. Ga-
laor took his arms to avenge him 5 the lances were
broken : their bodies met witli such force, that
Galaor's horse, being the weaker and more weary,
fell and threw him, and then ran away. Amadis
seeing this, blessed himself : iti truth, said he, the
Knight may well be praised, for he hath proved him-
self against two of the best in the world -, but as Jbe



4-0



! went on to take his turn he found Galaor on foot,
with his sword in hand defying the Knight to bat-
tle^ ^but the Knight laughed at him 3 and Amadis
said, brother, do not chafe yourself 3 it was the
covenant that there should be no sword-battle.
Then he bade the stranger defend himself, and they
ran at each other : their spears flew up in splin-
ters ; they came against each other, shield, and
helmet ; the horse fell with Amadis, and the horse
broke his shoulder ; the Knight of tlie forest was
dismounted, but he held the reins, and lightly took
the saddle again. Quoth Amadis, you must.joust
again, for this encounter was equal, we both fell.
I do not chuse to joust again, said he. Amadis
replied. Knight, you do me wrong. Right your-
self when you can ! said the otlier : I am bound
no farther, as I sent to tell you ! and then he gal-
loppcd away through the forest.

Amadis leapt upon Gandalin s horS^, and told his
companions to follow him as fast as they could to
find that Knight, for they were all greatly abashed.
Quoth the Damsel, it will be a foolish quest : all
the Knights of King Lisuarte's household would
fail to find him without a guide. My friend, said
Galaor, belike you know who he is, and where to
t>e found ? -If I do^ quoth she^ I mean not to tell



41



you^ for I would biing no harm to so good a man.
Ah^ Damsel^ said Galaor^ by the faith you owe to
Godj and by the thing in the world which you love
best^ tell me what you know of him. She an*
swered^ I care not for these conjurings^ and will
not discover him for nothing. Ask what you will,
quoth Amadis. — ^Tell me your name^ and promise
me each a boon hereafter, when I shall demand it.
They in their earnestness promised. When she
heard the name of Amadis, she exclaimed, God
be praised, for I was seeking you I — And where-
fore ?r^You shall know when it is time ; but tell
fue, have you forgot your promise to the daughter
of the King of Sobradisa, who let loose the liona
to save you ? I am now going, replied Amadis,
to perform the battle. Why then, quoth she,
would you turn astray to follow this Knight, who
is not so easy to find as you imagine, when your
day is appointed for the combat ? She says true.
Sir brother, said Galaor : go you with Agrayes
upon this "business 5 I will follow the Knight with
this Damsel, for I shall never have joy till I find
him, and I will join you in time for the battle if
it be possible. In God's name ! cried Amadis,
but tell us. Damsel, the name of the Knight. — I
know it not, yet once 1 was a month with him and
saw never else such deeds of arms ; but I can



43



show where he is to be found. Then Galsor de*
parted with her.

Amadis'and Agrayes proceeded till they came to the
castle of Torin^ the dwelling of that fair young
Damsel^ who was now grown so beautiful that she
appeared like a bright star. What think you of her }
said Amadis. Agrayes answered^ if her Maker de-
signed to make her beautiful, he has most per-
fectly accomplished his will. They were dis-
armed, and mantles given them, and they were
conducted into the hall. But wheo Briolania. saw
Amadis how young he was, for he was not twenty,
and bow beautiful, for even the scars in his face
became him, and of what fair renown he was,
she thought him the best Knight in the world, and
greatly affected him 3 so that when by his help she
had recovered her kingdom, she would have given
him herself and that, but Amadis told her right
loyally bow he was another's.



ii.



43



CHAPTER 42.



Four days Oalaor rode with the Damsel^ and so
wrathful was he for this fall that whatever Knight
encountered him in that time felt the effects^ saad
many were slain for the act of another. At length
they saw a fair fortress, built above a vale 5 the
Damsel told him there was no other place near
where he could lodge that night, and they made«up
fo it. At the gate they found many men and
Dames and Damsels, so that it seemed to be the
house of a good man, and among them was a
Kn^ght of seventy years, with a cloak of scarlet
skin, who courteously bade him welcome. Sir,
quoth Galaor, you welcome us so well, that, tha
we found another host, we would not leave your
hospitality. Then were they led into a hall, and
supper was given them right honourably > and,
when the clotlu were removed, the old Knight
went to Galaor and asked him if the Damsel was



44



to be his bedfellow. He replied, no 5 and two
Damsels then conducted her to her chamber, while
he was shewn- a rich bed for himself. Here rest
yourself, said his host : God knows the pleasure I
have in entertaining you, and all Errant Knights^
for 1 ' myself have been one, and have two sons
who are the like, but both now are badly wounded,
for there came by a Knight who dismounted them
both, and they greatly ashamed of their foil rode
after him, and came up to him by a river as be
was about to cross it in a boat 5 and they would
have made him do battle with the sword^ since
they knew how he could joust. The Knight, who
was jn haste, would have declined the battle, but
my sons prevented him from entering the boat. A
Lady who was in the boat then said to them, that
tbey were discourteous in detaining her Knight
against her will -, but they said, he must needs do
battle. Let it be, then, said the Lady, tlial .he
shall fight with the better of you twain, and if he
conquer him that shall suffice. Not so^ tliey an-
swered ', if one failed, the other would prove his
fortune. The Knight then grew angry, and cried,
come both, since you will not let me proceed ! and
one after the other he sent them from their horses,
utterly confounded ; then crossed the river and
went his way. I went afterwards to bring home



46



my MODS, for they were sorely wounded : you shall
see with what wounds^ such as never before were
given by any Knight. He then sent for the ar-
mour which they had wom^ and it was so cut
throc^ with the sword that Gralaor greatly mar-
veUed, and asked what arms the Knight bore.— -A
rennilion shield with two grey lions, and another
on his helmet, and he rides a roan horse. Know
you who he is ? cried Galaor. No, said the old
Knight, It is the same Knight whom I am seek-
ing, quoth Galaor, and, if I find him, I wiU re-
venge your two sons and myself, or die. Sir
firiend, quoth his host, I would counsel you to for-
bear the attempt, for as for what my sons have
-suffered they brought it on themselves ; and then
he bade him good night.

The next morning Gralaor and his guide departed 5
they crossed the river in the boat, and proceeding
about five leagues came to a fortress. Wait for me
a little, said the Damsel 5 I will be here presently :
and she entered the castle. Presently she returned,
bringing with her another Damsel and ten Knights
on horseback ; and that other Damsel, wlio was
passing fair, said to Galaor, Sir, my Cousin tells
me you are in quest of tlie Knight who bears two
grey lidns in a vermilion shield, that you may



46



know who lie is ^ but I tell you that you cannot
leant by force, for there is no Knight like him in
aU the islands, and he will neither tell you nor any
other for three years, unless it be forced from him.
Damsel, said Galaor, I sliall not cease my enquiry,
dnd would rather learn his name by force than by
other means. Since that be so, said she, within
three days I will bring you to him, at ury Cousin's
request. They set forth," and by vespers time
came to an arm of the sea that clipped round an
island, so that there was full three leagues of water
to cross 5 a bark was ready at the harbour, but be^
fore they entered it an oath was demanded, that
there was only one Knight in company. Why is
this oath required ? said Galaor. The Damsel to
plied, the Lady of the island will have it so 5 when
one Knight has crost over, no other is suffered to
come till the first return, or is slain. — Who is it
that kills or conquers them ? — The Knight whom
you are seeking ; he has been here half a year,
and by this occasion : a turney was held here by
the Lady of the island, and another Dame of great
beauty ; this Knight came hither from a foreign
land, and being on her side won the victory.
Whereat she was so pleased, that she never rested
till she had won him for her paramour ; but be-
cause he is desirous of seeking adventures, the



47

Lady, to detain him with her, invites Knights to
joust against him. If by chance they are slain,
they are there interred ; otherwise, they are sent
back, and he gives their arms and horses to his
mistress. She is a full fair Lady, and her name
Corisanda ; the island is called Gravisanda. How
came he, said Galaor, to keep the forest ? It was
a boon asked of him by a Damsel, said she, tho*
liis mistress hardly permitted him to perform it.

By this tliey had reached the island 3 the night was
some way advanced, but it was clear moonlight,
the Damsel liad two tents pitched beside a little
brook, and tliere they supped, and rested till the
morning. Galaor would fain have shared the
Damsel's tent, but to that, albeit^ she thought him
the fairest of all Knights and much delighted in
his conversation, she would not consent. In the
morning they set forward, and he asked his guide
if she knew the Knight's name ? — Neither man
nor weman in all this land know it, except his
mistress. Then was Galaor the more curious that
one of such worth in arms should so conceal him-
self. Presently they saw a castle on a height, sur-
rounded for a league on all sides by a rich plain.
In that castle, quoth the Damsel, is he whom you
seek. Having advanced farther, they found a stone



48



pillar curiously wrought, and a horn upon it*
Sound that horn, said she, and you shall pcbsently
see the Knight. Galaor blew the horn, and forth-
with there came certain men from the castle, and
pitched a tent in the meadow before the gate, and
then there issued out ten Dames and Damsels, >and
in the midst of them one richly clad, who was the
Lady of the rest. Why does the Knight tarry ?
quoth Galaor, who saw all this. The Damsel an-
swered, he will not come till the Lady send for
him.. I beseech you then, said he, go to her arid
request her to summon him, for I have much to
do elsewhere and cannot tarry. Wlien the Lady
heard this errand, what ! cried she, holds he our
Knight so cheap that he already thinks of doing
ought elsewhere ? he will depart sooner than lac
thinks, and more tp his cost. Theu she turned t6
her man : go, call the strange Knight. Anon he
came from the castle, armed and afoot ; his men
led his horse, and carried his shield and lance and
helmet, and he went straight to his mistress. You
see a foolish Knight yonder, said she, who thinks
lightly to take his leave of you : I desire you
would make him know his foolishness ! and then
she embraced, and kissed him* All this made Ga-
laor the more angry.



49



The Kuight mounted^ and slowljr rode down tlie
height. Galaor was ready as soon as he saw him
in the levels and bade him defend himself : they
ran at each other i both lances were broken^ both
shields pierced^ both Knights deeply wounded.
Don Galaor drew his sword : the stranger said to
him^ Knightj by the faith you owe to God, and
to the thing you love best, let us joust once more 1
You conjure me so, said Galaor, that I will do it,
but I am sorry my horse is not so good as yours,
else we would joust till one of us fell, or till all
your lances were broken ! The Knight made no
answer, but called to his Squire for two lances^
and sent the one to Galaor. Again they encoun-
tered : Galaor*s horse came on his knees and tot-
tered, and was almost down^ the stranger lost
both his stirrups, and was fain to hold round the
neck of his horse. Galaor spurred up hU^ and
had now sword in hand ; thereat the stranger,
somewhat abashed, exclaimed, you are desirous to
(Jo combat with the sword ; certes, I fear it rather
for you than for myself: if you*do not believe me,
you shall see. Do your worst ! quoth Galaor : I
will cither die, or revenge those whom you lett in
the forest. Then the stranger recollected that it
was he who had defied him on foot, and he an-*
swered him angrily^ revenge yourself if you can,

VOi.. II. c



50

but I rather think jroa will cany back one ^ame
upon another.

The Ladies, seeing how gallantly they had jousted,
thought thej would then have accorded, but when
they saw the sword-battle, they were ^eatly
amazed at the fury with which it was begun.
Such mortal blows they gave each other, that the
head was often made to bow upon the breast, and
thQ steel * arches of the helmets were cut through,
and their trappings, and tlie sword went through
the linings and was felt upon the head ; and tlie
field was strewn with the fragments of their shields
and their broken mail. This continued long, till
each wondered that his antagonist could hold out.
Galaor's horse at last began to fail him, and could
scarcely move, whereat he waxed exceeding wroth,
thinking that only this delayed his victory, for the'
atranger could lightly come on, and withdraw
again from his blows. Galaor, when indeed he
did reach him, made him feel the sword^ but his



* Cortando dc los yelmos los arcos de azero con parte de
las faldag dellos, assi qui las espadas dcscendtan a los almo-
faj:cs, y las sentian en las cabe^as.



51



hone tottered as if he htd heen blinds and he be*-
gail to fear "his own death more than he had ever
done before in any battle^ save in that with his
brother Amadis, for from that he never expected
to leave aff alive. Next to Amadis^ he thooght
this the best Knight he had ever encountered^ aU
bdt he doubted not of conquering him, were it
not for the fault of his horse. Being in this strait,
he called out. Knight ! either finish the battle on
foot, or give me another horse, or else I will slay
yours, and that villainy will be your fault. Do
your worst ! replied the stranger : the battle shall
not be delayed j it is a great shame that it hnth
lasted so long. Look to your horse then ! quoth
Galaor. The Knight rode close to him, fearing
for his horse ; so dose, that Galaor caught him
with both arras, and at the same instant spurred
his own horse violently, and they both fell upon
tlie ground, each holding his sword, and there
they struggled for some time before they released
each other. But, when they rose, they attacked
again so furiously ^s if the battle were but then
beginning 5 tliere was not a moment's respite, now
that they could freely close or strike. As the fight
continued Galaor perceived he 'was gaining the
better, for his enemy*s strength evidently wcak-

c 2



S2



ened : Good Knight ! quoth he, hold a while !
whereat the other paused^ being indeed in need of
rest. You see^ quoth Galaor^ that I ha^e the bet-
ter of the battle $ tell me your nan?e« and why you
so carefully conceal yourself^ and I will acquit you
fh)m the combat and shall receive great pleasure ;
but unless you do this! will not leave you. Cer-
tes^ quoth the Knight^ I shall not leave off with
these conditions : I never found myself so hardy
in any battle as in this^ and God forbid that any
single Knight should ever know me> except to my
great honour. Be not rash, cried Galaor > by my
faith I swear never to let you go till I know who
you are, and why you conceal yourself. God
never help me, quotlv the stranger, if ever you
learn it from me: I will rather perish" in battle
than tell it, except to two Knights, to whom, tho*
I know them not, I neither could nor ought to
deny any thing. Who are they whom you value
so much ? quoth Galaor. Neither shall you know
that, replied the stranger, because it seems that it
would please you. Certes, rejoined Galaor; I
will know what I ask, or one of us, or both, shall
die. I am not averse to that, quoth his enemy.
Then they renewed the combat with full fury ;
but the stranger waxed weaker, his armour was



53



every where laid open and streaming with bloody
till at last the Lady of the Island ran like one
frantic to Galaor^ and cried, hold. Knight ! would
the bark had been sunk that brought thee hi*
ther ! Lady,^ said he, if it ofiends you that I am
avenging myself, and one who is better than my-
self, the fault is not mine. Ofier him no more
harm, quoth she, or you shall die by the hands of
one who will have no mercy. He answered, I
know not how that may turn out, but I will not
leave him till I know what I have asked. — And
what is that ? — His name, and why he conceals it ?
and who the two Knights are whom he esteems
above the rest of the world. She ansswered, A
curse upon him who taught you to strike, and
upon you who have learnt so well ! I will tell
you : his name is Don Florestan -, he conceals
himself because he hath two brothers in this land
of such passing worth in arms, that, albeit you
have proved his prowess, he dares not make him-
self known to them, till, by his fame, he is wor-
thy to join them , and these two Knights are in
the household of King Lisuarte, the one is called
Amadis, the other Don Galaor, and tliey are all
three sons of King Perion. Holy Mary ! cried
Galaor, what have I done ? and then he presented
his sword to Florestan : good brother^ take my



54



jwprd^ and the honour of the battle l^^Are 700^
xny brother ?— I am your brother Don Galaor*
The^ FlQre^tan fell on hia knees before him> say*
ixkg, Sir^ pardon me I for this o£[ence that I have
committed in combatting agai^ist 700^ was cau3ed
by no other reason thaii that X durst not name my-
self your brother, as I 8m> till I had somewhat
resembled you in prowess. Calagr raised hiix) up,
and took him in his arms^ and wept over him for
joy, and for sorrow to see himi so sorely wounded.

But the X^ady beholding all this was greatly re-
joiced. Sir. quoth she, if you gave me great an-
guish you have repaid it with double pleasure.
They were then both carried into the castle an4
laid in bed, both in one apartment, apd Corisanda,
being skilful in chirurgery, looked to their wounds
herself with great care ; for she knew th^ if the
one died, the other would die also for pure sorrow,
and her own life would be doubtful if Florestax^
were in great danger.



65



CHAPTER 43.



w



This vidiaat and hardj Knight, Don Florestan,
70a skould know how and in what land he was
begotten, and by whom. Know then that when
King Perion, being a young man aud of good
hearty sought adventurea, he passed two years in
Gennany, doing great deeds in arms, and as be
was returning with great glory to his own land, he
lodged one day with the Count of Selandia, where
he was yight worshipfiiUy entertained, and at night
he was shewn to a rich bed, and there being
weary with bis journey fell asleep. Ere long he
felt a Damsel embracing him, and her mouth
joined to his ; and, waking thereat, was drawing
back, but she cried out, how is' this. Sir' would
you rather be alone in the bed ? The King then
looked at her by his chamber-light, and saw the
fairest woman that ever he saw : tell me, quoth
he, who you are? S)ie answered^ one that loves

c4



56



you, and gives you her love.— »First tell me your
name ? — Why do you distress me with the ques-
tion ? — I must know.— I am the Count* s daughter.
Thea the King said^ it becomes not a woman of
your rank to commit this folly* : I tell you I will
not do this wrong to your father. Ah, quoth she,
ill betide those who 'praise your goodness ! you
are the worst man in the world, and the most dis-
courteous ! what goodness can there be in you
when you thrust away a fair Lady of such lineage ? '
King Perlon answered, I shall do that which is
to your honour and my own, not what would
injure both. Then, quoth she, I will do that
which shall grieve my father more, than if you
consent to my will ! and she leapt up and took
King Perion*s sword, that same sword which was
laid in the ark with Amadis, and unsheathed it,
and placed the point against her heart :•— Will not
my father grieve more for my death ? When the
King saw that, he was greatly astonished,^ and he
sprung from the bed, crying, hold ! I will perform
your will ! and he snatched the sword from her, and
that night she became pregnant. On the morrow
Perion departed, and never saw her more.

She, so long as she could, concealed her situation,
and when the time drew nigk contrived to go visit



57



l|er Aunt^ with one Damsel $ bat as she was pass*
ipg through a forest her pains came on her, and
she alighted from her palfrey, and there brought
forth a son. The Damsel seeing her in this plight,
pat the babj to her breast. Now, Lady, said she,
the same courage that you showed in sinning,
show now in supporting yourself till I return ; and
then she mounted her palfrey, and rode on as fast
as she could to the Aunf s castle, and told her all
that had happened. The Dame was greatly troubled,
yet delayed not for that to succour her, but went
forthwith with a litter, wherein she used to visit her
brother to shade her from the sun ; and when she
saw her niece she alighted, and wept with her,
and had her placed with the infant in the litter^
and taken by night into the castle, and enjoined
secrecy to all whd were with her. So the mother
returned after her recovery to the Count's castle,
and nothing was known of what had passed, and
• the boy was educated till he was of eighteen years,
a braver youth, and better limbed than any other in
the district ; and the Dame his Aunt seeing this
gave him horse and arms, and took him to the
Count to knight him, who knew not that he wboin
he was knighting was his own grandson.

.As they. >^re retuniing, the Dame tolf'hkn the

c 5



58



secret of his birthj and said that he eqght to go

seek his father and make himseU* kDowfi to hioi.
Certesj Lady, quoth he, I have often heard of
King Perion, but never thought he was ikiy father $
but by the faith I owe to God, and to you whp
have brought me up, neither be nor any one elae
( shall know who I am, till they can say that I ^
worthy to be the son of so ^ood a man. Then
taking his leave, he went with two Squires to Con-
stantinople, where he heard there was a cruel war ^
there he remauxed four years, and did such deeds
in arms as never Knight had wrought before in
those parts, so that at the end of that tiine he de-
termined to go and discover himaelf to his father.
But as he drew nearer France, he beard the fame
of Amadis and Galaor, who were now beginning
to work wonders, so that he changed his first in-
tention, and resolved to gain more honour in Great
Britain, where there were more good Knights than
iu any part of the world, and that he would not
make himself known till his prowess had given
him sufficient renown : in which mind be con-



tinned till his combat with Galaor, as you have
heard.

Amadis and Agrayes remained five days at the
castle of Tor'w 3 then al^ ihmg^ ))cing F^paf ^>



59



^le^ set forward with fiiioboia and her aoDt, wbo
took with them two damssU and five ter/ing-men,
en hocid>ack^ and diree palfr^» laden with appa-
wdi, for Bttolania weot ia black> and would wctf
BodkiBg else tiU hsc &ther*s death wa» arengad.
As th^ began their jouriK^ Briolania requested
a taooQ of Amadis, and her Aunt another o£
Agn^es i the which the^ gmnte^ without know-
ing what it might be : they then demanded, that,
let what would happen^ the Knights shpuld not
teave the road, that so theic present quest might
not be intenrupted, Much did they re^nt their
promise, and great shame did they endure thereby,
§ov in many places was their succour needed, and
lightly might they have bestirred themselves if
thc^ had been at liberty. Thus they travelled
twelve days befoi^ they entered the kingdom of
So];>radisa -, it wj^ night when they reached it :
they left the highr road, and struck by a by-way
for three leagues ; and then, great part of the night
being past, they came to a little castle, where a
Lady dwelt named Galumba, who had served in.
tlie court of the King Briolania*s fatlier. She right
joyfully admitted them, and set supper before
them, and provided their night's entertainment 3
and the next morning asked the Aunt whither they
were going. A joyful woman was she, hearing

c6



60



that those Knights were going to revenge her Mas--
ter*s d6ath ; but Ifear^ said she, lest that tr^tor
sfaotild destroy them by some deceit : for that rea-*
Son^ said the dd Lady, am I eome to consult' with
you. Leave it to me, quoth Gaiumba. Then she
took ink and parchqoent, and w]rote a letter, and
sealed it with Bridania's seal, and gave it to a*
Damsel, and diirected her what she should do.
The Damsel mounted her palfrey, and rode on till
&he caine to the great city of Sobradisa, from
whence the whole kingdom took its name. She
went directly to the palace of Abiseos, and rode
through the gate,- being richly apparelled. The
Knights came around to assist her to dismount f
but she sai<1, no, she would not alight till the King
saw her, and commanded her so to do. They
then took her bridle^ and led her into a hall where
the King was, with his sons and many other
Knights, and he bade her alight if she had any
thing to say. She answered, I will. Sir, on con-
dition that ) ou protect me, and that I shall suffer
lio injury for any thing that I may say against you,
or against any other here. The King assured her
that she should be under his protection and royal
failh, and bade her deliver what she was come to
say. Upon that she alighted, and said. Sir, I
bring a message which must be delivered in the



61



peesenq^ of all the'Atefs of your realm : summoS
tfaem^ and it shall be made known. Quoth Abit
seos^ it is as 70a would wisb«: they are already in
my court, and have been assembled oa finest
these six days. Call them together, said she;
Forthwith th^ were summoned, and being all
met, the Damsel then said. King, Briolasia,. she
whom you disherited, sends you this letter, to be
read before this assembly. Wken Abiseos heard
the name of his niece be was touched wilii shame,
remembering the wrong he had wrought her i yet>
the lelter was openly read, which was to give cre-
dit to' the DamseFs words. To this he only re«
plied, that they were not to believe what the Dam-
sel might say on Briolauia*s behalf : but the people
of the realm who were there present were moved
with great compassion at the name of their lawful
Lady, who was so unjustly dispossessed, and they
besought God secretly that he would no longer
suffer so great a treason to reniain unpuni.-.hed.
Give your errand, quoth llie King. Sir King, said
the Damsel, it-is true that you killed the father of
Briolania, and have disherited her of her kingdom ;
and you have often declared, that you and your
sons would justify what you have done by £6rce of
arms. Briolania now sends to say, that if you
hold your word she wiU* bring here two Knights



6a



mho will undertake the baHte ia her caose^ aad
make you know yoai treasoa and great tyranny.
When Darasioo^ the ekiest of the sons.heai^ thig^
he arose m great anger^ beiag of a hot natui^, and
^without his Other's pcnnission replied^ Damsel^ if
Briolania bat these Knights^ I promise the combat
for mymlf, and for my father and brother 5 an4>
if I do ndt perform this> I promise befove all these
Xnighls to give n^ head to her^ that she may take it
ia reqaital of her father's. Gerte&Darasion^ answer-
ed the Damsel^ yoa answer like a Knight of greait
courage^ yet may X doubt your words to proceed
firom choler^ for I see you are enraged ', but if you
will oblaift from the King an assurance of your
words^ I shall think they proceed from that great
worth and hardihood which are in you. What
Vroold you have ? quoth he. Cause the King, she
tepHed> to give our Knights assurance that/- for
any mishap which you may receive- in the battle^
tliey shall Sustain no injury fi^m mf io this land^
nor be meddled withal but by you tbtee : give
them this safe conduct^ and the^ will be here
within three days. Darasion knelt down before
his father ; — you see. Sir, what the Damsel re-
quests, and what I have promised 3 and, because
my honour is yours, let it be granted, else they
will without danger have put us to abame, for we



63



lisir« always avowed Aai if aoy oae attaiated yom.
deedat we would justify it io battle ; and e?eii Vitb^
oat the piomi3e we oagbt to accept the defianccu
for they tell me these Knights are.aeme of Kiia^
Usuarte*s rash households whose pride- and foQp
oaakes them nuignify their own worth aqd deipise
all others. The Kiqg, albeit he fek bimsdf guilty
of his brotber*8 murder> and dreaded the battle*
yol^ because he loved h<s son as he did hinuelfj
gave the safe ccavluct as the Damsel had demanded^
the hour appointed by the Most High being come.
The Damsel having accomplished this> saidj hold
yourselves ready^ £ox to-morrow the Knights vfUl
be here. And then she mounted her palfrey^ and
departed.

Much were the Ladies and the Knights rejoiced at
the success of her embassy. When Amadis heard
that Darasion held ihein as Ibols, because they
were of King Lisuarte's household, be grew ^Pgry,
and exclaimed, there are those in that household
who could easily break his pride, and his head too !
but, when he had said this, be was ashamed that
he had been so mastered by anger. Eriolania, who
could not keep her eyes off him, observed this, and
said, you cannot. Sir, either say or do any thing
9gaiQ$t those traitors which they have not de«



64



fl^rved^ and worse : have pity on me, since you-
koow my fallier's murder, and my wrongs : my-
trust is in God and in you. Amadis, whose heart
was submiss to virtue and all gentleness, mov-
ed with pity for that fair Damsel, answered,
if God be so pleased. Lady, I ween that ere to-
morrow night your sorrow will be turned into joy.
Then Briolania would, for thankfulness, have hum-
bled herself to have kissed his feet, but he drew,
back abashed, and Agrayes raised her up. They
determined to set forward by day-break, and hear
mass at the chapel of the Three Fountains^ which
was hidf a league from Sobradise.

That night they made good cheer, and Briolania,
who talked much with Amadis, was oftentimes
moved to offer marriage to him, but seeing his fre-
tjuent reveries, and the tears that sometimes fell
down his cheeks, which she knew proceeded from
no ftaf ia his brave heart, she suspected that he
love^ elsewhere, and so refrained. At dawn they
all departed 5 and, arriving at the Three Fountains,
heard mass from the good Hermit, who hearing
wherefore they were on their way, besought God
to speed them well in the battle, as he knew their
cause was right. There they armed themselves aU
•ave the head and hands, and so proceeded to the


65



aty. Without the walls they found King Abiseos
and his sons^ and a great company attending them :
the people all flocked towards Briolania^ whom in
their hearts they loved^ thinking her their rightful
and natural Lady. Amadis led her bridle, and un-
covered her face,* that all might see her how beau-
tiful she was : she was weeping, and the multitude
blessed her in their hearts, and prayed that she
might now be restored to her rights. Abiseos dis-
sembled a feeling from which neither his ambition
nor his wickedness could shield him, and seeing
how tlie people flocked round Briolania, he ex-
claimed, fools, I see how you rejoice in her sight !
but it is to your honour and safety that a Knight
like me should protect you, not a weak woman;
who in so long a time has only been able to get
these two Knights for her champions j whom, be-
cause they are thus deceitfully brought to their
death, or dishonour, I cannot forbear to pity
These words so kindled the indignation of Amadis,
that blood seemed starting from his eyes ', he rose
in his stirrups that all might hear him, and an*



• Quitole los antrfaxes. She was muffled in the Moorish
manner, not veiled. '



66



sweredj King Abkeos, I well see how the coming
of BrlolanU troubles you, because you bare mur-
dered her father, who was your Kisg and brother :
if there be yet virtue enough in you to resign to
her what is her own, I will excuse the batde, that
you may have leisure for repentance, that, though
you have lost your honour in this world, you ma/
save your soul. Before the King could reply, Da-
rasion exclaimed. Thou fodish Knight of King
Lisuarte's court ! I never thoiigbt I could endure
to hear a speech Uko thine : come on ! and if
your heart fails, yon cannot fly where I cannot
reach you with such a vengeance, that none can
behold it without compassion. Arm thyself, trai-
tor, and do battle I quoth Agrayes. Darasion an-
swered, say what thou wilt now ! presently I will
send thy tongue without thy body to King Lisu-
*arte's court, as a warning to all such fools \ Then
they armed themselves -, and Amadis and Agrayes
laced on their helmets, and took their sliields and
^ears, and entered the place which had been of
yore marked out for such trials. Dramis, the se-
cond son, who was so good a Knight that no two
Knights of that country could keep the field against
him, said to his father. Sir, where you and my
brother are present, I might well be excused from
speaking ; but now I have to act with that strength



67



which I have received from God imd you. Leave
that Knight who has reviled you to me : if I do
ODt sl^ him with the first lance-thnift^ may I
never again bear arms ! or if it be his good fortune
that the spear does not strike right, the fumt blow
with the sword shall do it. There were many who
heard this speech, and did not think it vain boast-
ings he was of such exceeding strength. Darasioa
looked round the lists : how is this ? quoth he -, ye
are but two i hath the heart of the third &iled
him ? call him to come difectly^ for we will not
tarry. Trouble not yourself about the tbiid, said
AmadiSj you will presently wish the second away :
now look to your defence !

They placed their shields before them> and gave
their horses the rein, Dramis ran right at Amadif>
and pierced his shield and broke his lance against
})is side 3 but Amadis smote htm so xDUghly, that
the spear went through his shield* and^ without
piercing his breast-plate^ burst his heart withio
him^ and he fell like the M of a tower. In
God's name, cried Ardian the Dwarf, wj Mas*
.ter's deed is better th^n his word ! The other
twain ran at Agrayes : he and Darasion brcdce their
lances upon each other, and both kept their seats,
Abiseos failed in his course j he saw Pramis on



68



the ground^ and in great grief^ albeit he did not
suppose him to be d6ad^ ran full at Amadis^ and
pierced his shield^ and broke the lance in his arm,
so that all thought he could not continue the bat-
tle. Well may you think how Briolania felt at
that -f her heart sunk, and the sight of her eyes
failed her, and without support she would have
fallen from her palfrey. But he, who was not to
be dismayed. by such wounds, graspt well that
good sword which he had so lately recovered from
Arcalaus, and struck Abiseos upon the helm ;
throu^ helm it went, and slanted down the head,
and pierced into the shoulder 3 a slant wound, l)Ut
80 staggering that Abiseos tottered on his seat,,
and fell, half senseless. Then he of Gaul rode
up to Darasion, who was close engaged with
Agrayes : — now Darasion, you had rather the se-
cond were absent, than that the third were come !
Agrayes cried out to him to hold : — Cousin, you
have done enough, leave me this man who has
threatened to cut out my tongue. Amadis did not
hear him ; he had made a blow which sliced off a
part of the shield, and came through the pummel
of the saddle to tlie horse's neck j but Darasion,
as he past, ran his sword into the belly of Ama-
dis*s horse ; the horse instantly ran away 5 the
'tws broke in the nder*s hand, and Amadis seeing



69



tliat he had no remed^^ and that he should he car«
ried out of the lists, struck die beast between
the ears with his sword, and split his head ; the
fan bruised him sorely, but he arose, and turned
to Abiseous.

At this time Agfayes had driven his sword into
Darasion^s helmet, so that he could not recover it.
Dajasion had forced i{ from his hand, and was
driving at him. Agrayes grappled him -, they fell
together and struggled on the ground. Abiseos
came up^ and was lifting the skirts of his armour
to thrust his sword into him. Amadis came up in
time. The King was compelled to look to his own
safety 5 he lifted his shield, the blow dashed shield
against helmet, and made him reel. Agrayes and
DarasioD had loosed each other : Agrayes caught
up Darasion*s sword -, Darasion plucked the other
from his helm, and ran towards his father. Ama-
dis saw that Agrayes was all bloody from a wound
in his neck, and fearing it was mortal, he cried,
leave them to me, good cousin, and rest yourself !
1 have no wound, quoth Agrayes, to keep me
from aiding you : see if it be so ! Have at' them,
then ! cried Amadis 3 but the fear he felt for his
cousin gave him such anger, that presently his
enemies, their armour ail hacked, and their iiesh



70



too, began to turn here and there disorderly, and
with the fear of d^th. So it continued till the
hour of tierce, when Abiseos, seeing death be-
fore him, lifted l^ls sword in both hands, and ran
desperately at Amadis, and gave him a blow, such
as might not be looked for fi'om a man so wounded :
it cut away the brim of the helmet, and tlie shoul-
der mail and a part of the flesh with it. Amadis
felt it sorely, and did not delay to give him his
wages : he struck his shoulder, and lopt off that
arm with which he had murdered his own king
and brother 5 arm and shoulder he lopt off, and'
cried, that arm brought thee by jtreason to the
throne, and it now brings thee to death and the
depth of hell ! The King had fallen in the pangs
of death. Amadis looked round him, and saw
that Agrayes had smitten off tlie head of Darasion.
Then the people of tlie land went joyfully to kiss
the hand of Briolania their ♦ Lady.

The conquerors dragged their enemies out of ihs
lists. Amadis, though he was much wounded^



* There follows in the original a page of advice to all
tricked kings and rulers.



71



would not disarm himself till he knew if there
were any to gainsay Briolania's right But one of
the chiefs of the realm^ by name Goman, came
before him with an hundred men of his lineage
and household, and they declared that they had
only endured the usurpation of Abiseos because
they had no remedy : now God had delivered them,
they were in that loyalty and vassallage which they
owed to Briolania. Within eight days all the king*
dom came joyfully to do homage to her. Amadis
meantime was laid in bed, and that fair Queen
never left him but when she went to sleep herself.
Agrayes, who was dangerously wounded, was put
under the care of a skilful man, who suffered none
to approach him, tliat he might not speak, for the
«i^ound was in his throat.



73



CHAPTER 44.



Don Galaor and Florestan remained in the castle
of Corisanda till their wounds were well healed,
Uien took they their departure 5 bat Corkanda
made such sorrow that it was pitiful to see her, al-
beit Florestan comforted her, and assured her of
his speedy return. They crossed to the mainland,
and proceeded towards Sobradisa, hoping to arrive
there before the battle. Brother, quoth Florestan,
as they rode along, grant me a boon for courtesy.
Sir, and good brother, cried Galaor, is it a thing
that I shall repent ? You will not repent it, said
Florestan. — Ask it then 5 for what I can grant
without shame, I shall grant with good will. — I ask
then, that you will attempt no combat in this
journey till I have tried my fortune. Certes, quoth
Galaor, I repent. Not so, replied Florestan, for
if there be any worth in me, it is to your honour
as well as to mine. Four days tliey rode without



73



adventure : on the fifth at evening they came to a
Tower. A Knight^ who stood at the court-gate,
courteously invited them for the night ; and there
wcrctheyworshipfully entertained. The Knight their
host, was a &ir Knight and a wise, and of goodly
stature; but oftentimes he appeared so lost in
thought and sadness, that the brethren asked each
other what it might mean, and Don Galaor at last
said to him. Sir, methinks you are not so chearful
as you should be ! if your sadness is for any cause
which our aid can remedy, tell us, and we will
do your wili. Many thanks, replied he of the
Tower: I believe you would do so like good
Knights 'J but my sadness proceeds from the force
of love, and I will not tell you more now, for it
would be to my own great shame. The hour of
sleeping came on j their host went to his apart-
ment, and the brethren remained in a handsome
chamber where there were two beds. In the
morning he rode to bear them company, but un-
armed ; and, that he might see whether they were
such in arms as their appearance bespoke them, he
led them not along the high road, but through bye
ways, till they came to a place called the fountain of
the Three Elms, for there were three great and lofty
£lm-trees above the fountain. Three fair Damsels
and well apparelled, were by the fountain, and there

VOL. II. D



74



^as a Dwarf aloft in the trees. Florestan went
£rst and saluted them gently, as a courteous man,
and one who had been gently bred. God save you,
Sir Knight, quoth the one > if you are as brave as
you are handsome, God hath gifted you well.
Damsel, he replied, if my beauty pleaseth you,
my courage would please you more if it wtxc put
to proof. You aiisw^- well, quoth she : see oow^
if your courage be enough to carry me from hence.
-«-Certes, quoth Florestan, little goodness is enough
for that 3 since it is your pleasure, I will do it. —
He then bade his Squires place her upon a palfrey
which was tied to one of the Elms : when the
Dwarf, who was sitting up in the tree, cried out
aloud. Come forth. Knights^ come forth ! they
are carrying away your mistress ! At these words
a Kmght, well armed and on a great faorse, came up
from the valley, and cried out to Florestan, Knight !
who bid you lay your hands upon that Damsel ?
i do not think she can be yours, replied Florestan,
seeing of her own wiM she desired me to carry
her hence. The Knight answered, though she con-
sent, I do not ; and J have defended her against
better than you. — ^I know not how that may be,
but unless you act up to your words, cany her
away I will ! — Learn first what the Knights of the
Valley are, and how they defend their mistresses !



75



With that ihej nm at each other^ and Florestan
smote his shield so stronglj against his helmet that
the laces brake, and the helmet came off. The
Knight could not keep his .seat \ he fell upon his
sword, and broke it in two. Florestan turned his
horse and pointed his lance at him : — ^you are dead,
unless jrou yield the Damsel ! I yield her, quoth
he, and cursed be she, and the day wherein I first
beheld her, for she made me commit so many fol-
lies that at last I have destroyed myself. Florestan
left him, and went to the Damsel, saying, you are
mine ! You have well won me, quoth she, and
may do with me as you please. Let us go then !
said he 3 but one of the other Damsels then said
to him. Sir Knight, you are parting good com-
pany I we have been a year Together, and it grieves
us to be separated. Said Florestan, if you chuse
to go in my company I will take you also, other-
wise you must be separated, for I will not leave
so fair a Damsel as this. And if she be fair, quoth
,the Damsel, neither do I esteem myself so ugly, but
that Knight should venture something for me also 5
but I believe you are not of. that temper. What !
cried he, think you that I would leave you htrt
for fear ? so help me as I would have done so
only to respect your freewill, but you shall see.
He bade the Squires place her also on her pal-

d2



76

ftey, and the Dwarf^ ^Bidio sate up aiofV^ cried out
again for help.

Presently there came anotlier Knight from the
valley, and said to Florestan, Don Cavalier, yoa
have won one Damsel^ and, not content with her^
you would carry off another j you must, therefore^
lose both, and your head too ; for it is not fit that
a Knight of sudi degree as you should have in
your keeping a Damsel of such rank. You praise
yourself bountifully, quoth Florestan 5 yet had I
sather have two Knights of my kin for my helpers
than thee ! I neither regard thee nor them, said
the Knight : you have won this Damsel from him
who could not defend her 3 if I conqvier thee, ^e
shall be mine j if the victory is yours, you shall
take the other whom I defend. Content, quoth
Florestan. -Defend yourself now, if you can! said
he of the valley ; and they ran their encounter.
The Knight pierced through Florestan's shield, and
broke his lance against the sti'ong mail. Florestan
* failed in tlie race 5 ashamed at tliat, when the
Knight had taken from his Squire another lance,
he Tan again, and pierced the shield of his anta-
gonist and the arm that held it, and drove him
back upon the crupper of his horse 5 the horse
reared and threw him^ and, the ground being hard.



77

he neither moved hand nor foot. Damsel, said
Florestan, you are mine 5 for methinks your friend
csui neither help you nor himself* So it seems^
quoth she.

Florestan looked at the other Damsel, who now
remained alone by the fountain, and saw that she
was very sad. Damsel, said he, if it please you^
I will not leave you here alone. She did not an-
swer him, but said to his host. Go from hence, I
counsel you ! you know that these Knights are
not enough to protect you from him who will pre-
sently be here, and, if he take you, you are sure
to die. I will see what may happen, he answered,
my horse is swift, and my Tower at hand. Ah,
said she, take care of yourself 3 ye are but three,
and you unarmed, and you well know that is no-
thing against him. When Florestan heard this,
he became more desirous to carry away that Dam-
sel, and see him whom she praised so greatly.
So he had her also placed on her palfrey ; and the
Dwarf, who sate up aloft, said, Don Cavalier, in
an ill hour are you so bold : here comes one who
shall take vengeance for all ! and then he shouted
out, help ! help. Sir ! you linger too long ! Pre-
sently there came another Knight from the same
valley ^ his armour was inlaid with gold, and he

03



78



rode upon a bay horse, big enough £ot a pmt*
Two Squires came afbr him, armed with condets
aiid morions like serving men, and each carried a
huge battle-axe in his hand, in the use of which
weapon their master prided himself. He cried oat
to Florestan, stay. Knight, and seek not to ^,
for it will not save you : die you must, and it kf
better die like a brave man, than like a coward \
When Florestan heard himself threatened, be
waxed wonderous angry, and cried out, come on,
wretch and rascaf, and clumsy * fool ! So help me
God, asvl fear thee no more than a great cowardly
beast. Ah, quoth the Knight, how it grieves me
that 1 cannot wreak sufficient vengeance upoa
thee ! would that the best four of thy lineage were
here, that I might cut off their heads with thine I
Protect yourself from one, cried Florestan, you
may dispense with the rest. Then, being both
greatly incensed, they ran at each- other, and the
shields and the mails of both were pierced with the
violence of the encounter : the large Knight lost



* Ven cativa cosa ,y mala ,y fiiera de razon , sin talk.
The language of vitupcratioa is not easily translatable



79



bodi his tdfropi. md tiras fain to saye himadf bjr
dinging roand bis liorse's neck. Fkxcstan^ as be
past on, caught at one of tbe battle-aies, and
plucked it with such fofce fiom tbe Squire who
bdd it, that both the man and bis hone were
brooght to the gromML TbeKnt|^of tbeVaUey
bad xecovered his seat^ and was readjwttb the
dSicr battle-axe, and Florestan made at him with
equal aims : both struck at once, each on the hei«
met of his enemf ; the ases went in three fingov'
depth. Florestan bowed his ioKSt upon bb breast
with tbe weight of the bbw ; die Knight fell upon
the neck of his horse, and the axe, being fast ia
the other's hdmet, slipt 6om his hand $ before he
could raise himself, Fbrestan smote him as he lay
between tbe helm and gorget, so that his head
fell at the horse*s feet. This done, he turned to
the Damsels. Certes, good Knight, quoth the
first of them, I once thought that not ten such as
you could have won us.

The young Knight, their host, then came up to
Florestan, and said. Sir, I love this Damsel dearly,
and she loves me. It is a year since this Knight
whom you have slain hath forcibly detained her,
so that r could not see her : now, that I may re-
ceive hpr from your hands, I beseech you refuse

o 4



80



me not. My host, quoth Ftbrestan^ of a tmth I
will right gladly aid you, if it be as you say } but
against her will I will yield her to none, Ah^ Sir^
cried the Damsel* this is. with my will ! I beseech
you give me to him :. he is xny true love. Flo-
restan answered^ in God*s name^ dispose of yoUr«-
self as you like best ! and she went joyfully to her
true love. Galaor then gave his horse to their
friend^ and took the bay horse of the dead Knight>.
which was the handsomest he had ever seen^ and.
then they separ^ed. The two Damsels whcmi.
Florestan had won, were young and fair 5 he took
the one to himself, and gave the other to Galaor :*
I give you to this Knight, said he, and command,
you to do as he pleases* What ! quoth she, do
you give me to this Knight, who has not the heart
ef a woman ? who stood by and saw you in suck
danger, and did not help you ^ Damsel, answered
Florestan, by my faith to God and to you, I swear
that I give you to the best Knight whom J know
in the world, except it be Amadis my Lord. The
Damsel then looked at Galaor, and seeing him so
handsome, and so young, she marvelled at his
worth, and granted him her love. That night
they had their lodging at the house of a Lady,
sister to their last night's host. On the morrow
they resunoed their road, and said to their fair.



81



friends^ we have a long journey to perform thro'
ioreign lands^ where you would endure many
hardships in following us : teU us where you
would like best to go^ and there we will conduct you.
They replied^ that their Aunt had a castle four
days journey on that road whither they would go.
As they proceeded^ Galaor asked his Damsel how
she came into the power of those Knights. She
answered^ that great Knight who was slain loved
the Damsel who went with your host, but she
hated him. He took her by force^ for he was the
best Knight in all these parts, and none could gain-
say him, yet would she never yield him her love ;
and he, for tfie aiFection he bore her, withheld
froin oflering her any wrong ; and he said to her.
My fair friend, great reason is it that I should be
loved by you, being the best Knight in the world.
Now I will do this for yoiu" sake : there is a
Knight who is called the best that ever was, Ama-
dis of Gaul by name, and he slew my cousin
Dardan, in King Lisuarte's court ; I will fbd him,
and cut off his head, and then shall I inherit ail
his renown. Till I do this, I will give you two of
tlie fairest Damsels in all this land for your com-
panions, and they shall have the two best Knights
of niy lineage for their friends j and you shall
every day be taken to the fountam of the Three

d6



82



Elms, "where many Errant Knights paas^ ttuft jga
may see brave jousting, and learn to love me as I
love you. He then took us by force, and gave ua
to his kinsmen, and thus had we past a year, tili
Don Florestan broke the bonds. That Knight,,
quoth Galaor, had a haughty mind : what was his
name ? Alumas, she answered y and, if it had
not been for his exceeding pride, he was of great
prowess. Thus they proceeded till they reached
the Lady^s castle, who thankfully entertamed them^
because they had delivered her nieces from Alumaa
and his kinsmen, who had forcibly and dishonour*
ably detained them,

Galaor and Florestaii proceeded till they reached:
the kingdom of Sobradisa> and there heard the
joyful tidings of what their brother and Agrayes
had done. They hastened to the city, and went
immediately to the palace, where Amadis and his
cousin, now whole of their wounds^ were convers-
ing with the new Queen. Amadis, from the Damsel
who tad guided Galaor, knew who they were, and
went to welcome Florestan with tears of joy, em-
bracing and kissing him who would have knelt
before him. But when Briolanta saw four such
Knights in her palace, and recollected how pow-
erful she nowwas^ and how lately she had lived>



83



not without fear» ina sui^ castle, she kndt down,
and thanked the Most High for the mercy he had
Toacbsafed her. Of a truth. Sirs, said she, these
changes are the work of him, before whom the
mightiest are nothing ; but for this dominion, and
this wealth, which we suffer so much anxiety and
trouble to gain, and having gained, to keep ; would
it be better, as being neither certain nor durable in
themselves, and as things superfluous and destruc-*
live to the body, and moreover to the soul,— would
k foe better to reject and abhoj; them ? Certainly
I say, no : and affirm, that, when they are gained
with a good conscience, and justly administered^
we may enjoy from them comfort and pleasure
and joy in this worlds and everlasting glory in the
next



Here endeth the F^rsi Book of the nohU and viriwna
Knight i AmadU of Gaul, .



S4



AMAJDIS of GAUL.:



%tiih tlje i^eronft*



CHAPTER 1.



There was a King in Gtteect married to the sistep^
of tlie Emperor of Constantinople^ by -whom h©
had two fair sons^ especially the dder^ named
Apblidon^ who in his days had no equal for strength,
of body and courage of heart. Me having a subtle
genius^ which is so sddom found with valour^
gave himself to tlie study of the sciences and o£
all arts, so that he shone among those of his own.
time like the Moon among the stars 5 especially he
excelled in necromancy, whereby things that ap-
pear impossible are done. The King his fatlier
was very rich in treasure, but poor iii life, by rea-
son of his great age 3 and seeing himself at the-
point of death, he conmianded that the kingdom:
should be given to Apolidon, as his< eldest son, and
his. books and treasures to the other. The younger
was not contented with this, and told his father so
with tearsj and complained that he was disherited y



85



but the old man, not knowing what to do, wrxxog
his hands for pure sorrow. Then that famooB
ApolidoD^ seeing h» father's grief and the littib*
ness of his brother, bade him take comfort, for he
would accept the books and treasure, and relin-
quish the kingdom to his brother. Whereat the
father gave him his blessing with many tears. Sd
Apolidon took bis inheritance, and fitted out oer<-
tain ships, manning them with chosen Knights^
and set forth* into the sea, trusting himself to For-
tuae,. who- seeing his great obedience to his father,
and how he had thrown himself upon her mercy,
reserved to requite him widi ghny and greatness;
A fair wind carried him to the empire of Rome>
-where Siudan was dien Emperor, at whose court
he abode some time, doing great feats in arms, till
there- grew a true affection between him and the
Emperor's sister, Grimanesa, who then flourished
among all other women for beauty. So it was
that as he was loving, even so was he loved, and
zs their loves might no other ways be indulged',
they lefit Rome together, and set sail in Apolidon'b
fleet, and sailed till they came to thfe Firm Islands
There Apolidon landed, not knowing what coun-
try it was, and pitched a tent upon the shore, and
placed a couch there for his Lady, who was weary of
the sea; Presently there came down a fierce Giant, '



96



yfho vas Lord of the island> with whom^ actord-*
jtag to the custom of the place^ Apolidoa was to
do battle for the preservation of his Lady, and him-
aelf> and his company. It ended in such sort that
the Giant lay dead on the £eld> and Apolidon re-
mained master of the island. When he had seea
its strength^ he neither feared the Emperor of
Rome, whom he had offended, nor all the world
besides; and there he and Grrimanesa, being
greatly beloved by the klanders, whom he had de»
liya%d from their oppressor, dwelt m all happiness
for sixteen years. During that time many rich
edifices were made, as well with his great tre»-
lures, as with his surpassing wisdom, such as ifc
would have been difficult for any £mperor or King,
how rich soever, tahave completed. At the end.
<^ that time the Emperor of Greece died without
an heir, and the Greeks, knowing the ^eat worth,
of Apolidon, and that by his mother's side he wasr
of the blood and lineage of the Emperors, elected^
him with one common consent to. rule over them.
He, albeit he was enjoying aU. possible delights in
his own island, yet,, with Grimancsa*s consent, ac>
cepted the Empire ; but she,, before they left the
island where she had enjoyed such rare happiness>.
requested her husband that he would work such a
means by his great knowledge, that that island



«7



mig^l nerer be p o jsen ed, escept bj a Knt^t «#
excellent in aims and loyal in love as himself, and
by a Dame resembling her la beauty and truth*

Then ApoUdon made an arch at the entrance of m
garden^ wherein there were all kind of trees, and
also four rich chambers, but it was so surrounded
that none could enter, except by passing under
the arch, over which he placed the hoagp of a man
made of copper, hoWng a trumpet in his mouth
as if he would wind it. And in one of the chan»*
bers within he placed two figures, in the likeness
of himself and his Lady, the countenances and th6
stature Hke unto them, so true that they seemed
alive, and near them he placed a bright stone of
jasper ; and, about the distance of half a cross^
bow shot, he made a * perron of iron. Hence«
forward, said he, no man or woman who hatb
been false to their first love shall pass here, for
yonder Image shall blow firom that trumpet so



« Fadron is the Spanish wont : the English venioa ten*
ders it pillar, but the word means more ; there must be a
roof and a flooring^. Our market-crosses would be called
padrana. Ftrrom is used ia the English Amadts of Gretce.



ss^



dreadful a blast with smoke and flames of £re>
that they shall be stunned and cast out as dead:
But if Knight^ or Dame^ or Damsel corne^ worthy
by virtue of true loyalty to finish this adventure,
they shall enter without kt^ and the Image shall^
make a sound so sweet that it shall be delightful to
hear^ and they shall see our images^ and behold-
their own name written in the jasper. Grimanesa-
afterwards ordered some of her Knights and Ladies
to make trial, and then the Image blew the dread-
ful blast with smoke and flames of fire ; whereat
Grimanesa laughed, knowing them to be in more
dread than danger. But yet, my Lord, quoth she,:
what shall be done with that rich chamber whei:ei».
we have enjoyed such great contentment ? He
answered, you shall see. Then he made two other
perrons, one of stone, the other of copper : the
stone one was placed five paces from the chamber^,
the copper one &ve paces farther oflF. Know now,
said he, that hencefortli in no manner, nor at any
lime, shall man or woman enter ihis chamber, till,
a Knight come who. surpasses me in prowess, or a.
M'oman exceeding you in beauty; they shall enter..
He then placed tliese words in the copper perron :
Knights shall advance here, each according to his .
valour y and in the stone perron, he wrote : here
none shall pass except the Knight wlio exceeds



89



Apdidon in prowess. And over the door of the
chamber he wrote : He who surpasses me ia
prowess shall enter here^ and be Lord of the island.
And he laid such a spell^ that none could ^)proach
within twelve paces of the chamber round abdut>
nor was there any entrance but by the penrons.

Then he appointed a Governor to rule the island,
and collect the revenues^ which were to be reserved
for the Knight who should enter the chamber ^
and he commanded that aU who failed in attempt-
ing to pass the Arch of Lovers^ should^ without
ceremony> be cast out of the island ; but such as
passed through were to be entertained and served
with all honour. And farther, he appointed that
all Knights who attempted the adventure of the
Forbidden Chamber, and did not pass the copper
perron, should leave their arms there 5 but from
those who advanced any way beyond it, only their
swords should be taken. They who reached to
the marble perron should leave only their shields^
and if they penetrated beyond that, but failed to
enter the chamber, they should lose only their
spurs. From the Dames and Damsels who failed,
nothing was to be taken, only their names should
be placed upon the castle-gate, and an account how
far they had advanced. Apolidon then said, when



90



thii island ihall haive another Lofd, tbe toebtmU
ment shall be dissolved^ and all Knights naa^
fieely pass the perrons and enter the chamber f
but it shall not be free for wdmen, till the fairest
shall ha?e come, and lodged in the rich chamber
ivith the Lord of the island* These eochaotmenta
being thus made, Apolidon and his wife entered
their ships, and passed over into Greece, where
they reigned during their lives, and left children to
succeed them.



91



CHAPTER 2.



While Amadii vemaitied with his comrades at the
court of Sobradisa, his thoughts were perpetuallf
fixed \xptm his Lady Oriaim ^ and, so (boughtful
was be^ and so ofteo^ both sleeping and wakiog»
was he la tears, that all saw how he was troubled,
yet knew they not the cause, for he kept his love
silent, as a man who had all virtues in his heart*
At length, not being able to support a longer ab«
sence, be asked permissicm of the fair young Queea
to depart, which she not without reluctance having
granted, loving him better than herself, he and his
brethren and their cousin Agrayes took the road
towards. King Lisuarte. Some days had they tra-
velled when they came to a little church, and en-
tering there to say their prayers, they saw a fair
Damsel, accompanied by two others, and by four
Squires, who guarded her, coming €rom the door.
She asked them whither they went. Amadis aa«



9S



swtsted. Damsel^ we go to the court of Ring Lt*
suarte^ where, if it please yon to go^ we will ac»
company you. Tliank you, quoth the Damsel,
but I am faring elsewhere. ] waited, because 1
saw you were aroied like Errant Knights, to know
if any of you would go and see the wonders of the
Firm Island, for I am the Crovemor's daughter,,
and am returning there. Holy Mary ! cried
Amadis, I have often heard of the wonders of that
island, and should account myself happy if I might
prove them^ yet till now have I never prepared to
go ! Good Sh", quoth she^ do not repent of your
delay 5 many have gone there with the same wish,
and returned not so joyfially as they went. So l
bare heard, said Amadis : tell me^ would it be far
©ut of our road if we went there ? — ^Two days
journey.— Is the Firm Island then in this part of
the sea, where is the enchanted Arch of True
Lovers, under which neither man nor woman can
pass that hath been false to their first love ? The
Damsel answered, it is a certain truth, and many
Other wonders are there. Then Agrayes said to
his companions, I know not what you will da, but
I will go with this Damsel, and see these wonder-
ful things. If you are so true a lover, said she,
as to pass the enchanted Arch, you will see the
likenesses of ApoUdon and Grimanesa, and beliold



95



jour own namo written upon a stone« where you
will find only two names written besides^ though
^e spell hath been noade an hundced years. In
Grod's name let us go^ 4|uoth Agrayes^ and I will
try whether I can be third. With that> Amadis«
who in his heart had no less desire and faith to
proTe the adv<jiture» said to his brethren^ we arenot
enamoured^ but we should keep our cousin company
who is, and whose heart is so bold. Thereto the;r
^ consented, and set forth with the Damsel.
What is this island ? said Florestan to Amadis,
tell me. Sir, for you seem to know. A young
Knight whom I greatly esteem, replied Amadis,
•tdd me all I know ; King Arban of North Wales :
he was there foiur days, but could aooomplish none
•of the adventures, and so departed with shame.
The Damsel then related the history of the en-
«hantment8, which greatly incited Galaor and Flo*
jrestan to the proo£

So they rode on till sunset, and then entering a
valley, they saw many tents pitched in a meadow,
and people ^rting about them, and one Knight,
j*icbly' apparelled, who seemed to be the chief.
Sirs, quoth the Damsel, that is ray father : I will
go advertise him of your coming, that he may do
jrou honour. When he heard of their desire (o



94



try the enchantment^ he went on foot with all his
company to welcome them^ and they were honour*
* ably feasted and lodged that night. At morning
they accompanied the Governor to his castle,
which commanded the whole island^ for at the
oitrance there was a neck of l«id;, only a bow-shot
over, connected with the main land^ all the rest
was surrounded by the sea 3 seven leagues in
length it was^ and five broad, and because it was
all surrounded by the sea, except where that neck
of land connected it with the continent, it was
called the Firm Island. Having entered, they saw
a great palace, the gates whereof were open, and
inany shidids hung upon the wall 3 about an hun-
dred were in one row, and above them were ten,
and above the ten were two, but aae of them was
in a higher nich than the other. Then Amadis
asked why they were thus ranked. The Grovemor
answered, according to the {irowess of those who
would have eutered the Forbidden Chamber j the
shields ef those who could not enter the perron of
copper, are near the ground ; the ten above them
are of those who reached it 3 the lowest of the
two passed that perron, and the <H3e abibve all
reached to the marble perron, but could pass no
farther. Then Amadis approached the shields to
see if he knew them^ for eadi had its owner's



9S



name inscribed } the one which was the highest of
the tea bore a sable lion, with argent teeth and nails,
and a blood/ mouth, in a field sable : this he knew
to be the shield of Arcalans. Then he beheld the
two uppermost ; the lower bore, in a field azure>
a Knight catting off the head of a Giant ; this
was the shield of King Abies of IreUnd, who had
been there two years before his c<»nbat with Ama-
4is ; the highest had three golden fiowers in a field
aeure : this he knew not, but he read the inscrip-
tion. This is the shield of Don Qnadragante, bro«-
ther to King Abies of Ireland. He had proved
the adventure twelve days ago, and had reached
the marfale perron, which was more than any
Knight before him had done, and he was now
gone to Great Britain to combat Amadis, in re-
venge for his brother's death. When Amadis saw
all these shields, he doubted the adventure much^
seeing that such Knights had failed.

They went out from the palace towards the Arch
of True Lovers. When they came near, Agrayes
alighted and commended himself to Grod, and cried.
Love, if I have been true to thee, remember me !
and he past the spell ; and, when he came under
the arch, the Im^e blew forth sweet sounds, and
he came to the palace, and saw the likeness of



96



Apolidon and Grimanesa, aod saw also the jaqier*
stoDC, wherein two names were written^ ^id now
his own the third. The first said^ Madanil^ son
of the Duke of Burgandy^ atchieved this adven-
ture : and the second was^ this is the name of
Don Bruaeo o( Boaam^ ^ son to Vallados^ Mar-
quis of Troque : and his own said, this is Agraycs,
son to King Languines of Scotland. This Madanii
loved Guinda> Lady of Flanders. Don Bruneo
had proved the enchantment but eight days ago^
and she whom he loved was Melicia^ daughter to
King Perion, the sister of Amadis.

When Agrayes had thus entered, Amadis said to
his brethren, will ye prove the adventure ? No,
said they, we are not so enthxalled that we can
deserve to accomplish it. Since you are two, then,
quoth he, keep one another company, as I, if I
can, will do with my cousin Agrayes. Then gave
he his horse and arms to Gandalin, and went on
without fear, as one who felt that never in deed
or in thought had he been faithless to his Lady.
When he came under the arch, the Image began a
sound far different and more melodious than he
had ever before done, and showered down flowers
of great fragrance from the mouth of the trumpet,
the like of which had never been done before to



97

tny Knigbt whd entered. He past oa to the
Images, and here Agrayes, who apprehended
something of his passion, met him and embraced
him, and said. Sir, my Cousin, there is no reason
that we shookl henceforth conceal from each other
our loves. Bot Amadis made no reply, bat taking
his hand, they went to survey the beauties of the
garden.

Don Galaor and Florestan, who waited for them
without, seeing that they tarried, besought Ysanjo^
tiie Governor, to shew them the Foibidden Cham*
ber, and he led them towards the perrons. Sir
brother, said Horesttti, what will you do } No*
thing, relied Galacn: : I have no mind to meddle
with enchantments. Then amuse yourself here>
quoth Florestan, I will try my fortune. He then
commended himself to God, threw his shield be*
lore him, and proceeded sword in hand. When
he entered the speU, he felt himself attacked on
all sides with lances and swords, such Uows and
80 many that it might be thought never man could
endure them ; yet, for he was strong juid of good
heart, he ceased not to make his way, striking
manfully on all sides, coid it felt in his hand as
^ough he were striking armed men, and the sword
did not cut. Thus struggling, be passed the cop-

VOL. II. £



98

per perroa, and adTanced as far as the marble one,
but there his strittigth failed him, and he fell like
one dead^ and was cast out beyond the line of the
dpell. When Galaor saw this he was displeased^
and said, however little I like these things^ I must
take wj share in the danger ! and bidding the
Squires and die Dwarf to stay by Florestan, and
throw cold waiter in his face, he took his anns and
commended himself to God> and advanced towards
the Forbidden Chamber. Immediat^y the nnseen
blows fdl upon him> but he went on, and £orced
his way np to the marble pcnron, and there he
stood ; but, when he advanced anoth^ step be->
yond, the blows came on him so heavy a load,
that be lell. senseless^ and was cast out like Flo«
restan.

Aflsadts and Agrayes were reading the new inscrip-
tion ki the jasper. This is Amadis of Gaul, tlio
true lover, son to King Perion, — ^wben Axdiaa
the Dwarf came up to the line, and cried out,
He^ *• help. Sir AmadiSi, your brothers are slain I
They hastened out to him, and asked how ]t was.— «
Sir, they attenipted d»e ForlMdden Chamber, and
did not atchieve it, and there they lie for dead !
Immediately they rode towards them, and found
then so handled as you have heard, albeit somelittfe



99



recovering. Then Agrayes^ who was stout of hearty
alighted and went on as £aist as he could to the
Forbidden Chamber, striking aright and aleft with
his sword, but his strength did not suffice to bear
the blows, he fell senseless between the perrons,
aind was cast out as his cousins had been. Then
Amadis began to curse their journey thither, and
said to Galaor, who was now revived. Brother, I
most not excuse my body from the danger which
yours have undergone. Galaor would have with*
held him, but he took his arms, and went on,
praying God to help him. When he came to the
line of the spell, there he paused for a moment,
and said, O Oriana, my Lady^ from yon proceeds
an my strength and courage \ remember me now
at this time, when your dear remembnmce is sa
needful to me ! Then he went on* The blowi
fell thick upon him and hard till he reached the
marble perron, but then they came so fast as if all
the Knights in the world were besetting him, and
wdi an uproar of voices arose as if the ixrhole
world were perishing, and he heard it said, if this
Knis^t aiiould fiai, there is not one in the world
who can enler. But he ceased not to proceed^
winning his way hardly, sometimes beaten down
Bpon his hands, sometimes filing upc»i his knees ;
hit sword fell from his hand, and^ though it hung

E 2



100

by a thong from the wrist, he could not recover
it, yet holding on still he reached the door of the
chamber, and a hand came forth and took hkn by the
hand to draw him in, and he heard a voice which
said. Welcome is the Knight who shall be Lord
here, because he passeth in prowess him who made
the enchantment, and who had no peer in his time.
The hand that led him was large, and hard, like
the hand of an old man, and the arm was sleeved
with green sattin. As soon as he was within the
chamber it let go his hold, and was seen no more,
and Amadis remained fresh, and with all his
strength recovered ; he took the shield from his
neck and the helmet from his head, and sheathed
his sword, and gave thanks to his Lady Oriana for
(his honour, which for her sake he had won. At
this time they of the castle who had heard the
voices resign the lordship, and saw Amadis enter>
began to cry out, God be praised, we see accom*-
plished what we have so long desired. When his
brethren saw that he had atchieved that wherein
they had failed, they were exceedingly joyfiil, be-
cause of die great love they bore him, and desired
that they might be carried to the chamber ; and
(here the Governor with all his train went to Ama^
^is, and kissed his hand as their Lord. Then sav
ihcy the wonders whicb were in the chamber^ tha



101



works of art and tlie treasures, such that thej
were amazed to see them. Yet all this was uo-
thing to the chamber of Apolidon and Grimanesa,
for that was such^ that not only could no one
make the like^ but no one coald even imagine how
it could be made; it wa9 so devised, that they
who were within could clearly see what was doing
without, but from without nothing could be seen
within. There they remained some time wiih
great pleasure ; the Knights, because one of their
lineage was found to exceed in worth all living
men, and all who for a hundred years had lived :
the islanders^ because they trusted to be well ruled
and made happy under such a Lord, and even lb
fuaster other lands. Sir, quoth Ysanjo, it is time
to take food and rest for to-day : to-morrow, the
good men of the land will come^and do homage to
you. So that day they feasted in the palace, and
the following day all the people assembled and did
homage to Amadis as their Lord, with great so-
lemnities and feasting and rejoicing. *



• The Spanish Writer moralizes here a little upon the mu-
tability of foituoe.

£3



You have heard in the £rst part of thk great his-*
fory^ how Oriaua was moved to great aogcr and
rage bj what the Dwarf had said to her concem-^
ing the brc^en sword^ so that neither the wise
counsels of Mabilia nor of the Damsel of Den-
mark aught availed her. From that time she gave
way to her wrath, so that wholly changing her
accustomed manner of life, which was to be alto-
gether In their company, she now forsook them^
and for the most part chose to be alone, devising
how she might revenge herself for what she suf-
fered, upon him who had caused her suflferings.
So recollecting that she could by writing make
him sensible of her displeasure, even at a distance,
being alone in her chamber, she took ink and
parchment firom her coffer, and wrote thus :

My frantic grief, accompanied by so great a rea-
8on, causes my weak iiand to declare what my
sad heart cannot conceal against you, the false and
disloyal Knight^ Amadis of Gaid } for the dis-
loyalty and faithlessness are known which you
have committed against me, the most ill-fortuned
and unhappy of all in the world, since you have
changed your affection for me, who loved you
above all things^ and have placed your love upoa


103

one who hj her jtan caimot hare ditcretion to
know and love foa. Since then I hanre no other
vengeance in mxpower, Iwttbdiiw all diatcx*

ceeding and misplaced love which I bore towards
you ; for' great error would it be to love him who
has forsaken me^ when in requital for my sight
and passion I am deceived and deserted. There*
fore^ as the wrong is manifest, never appear be-
fore me ! for be sure the great love I felt is turned
into raging anger. Go, and deceive some other
poor woman as you deceived me with your trea-
cherous words, for which no excuse will be re-
ceived, while I lament with tears my own
wretchedness, and so put an end to my life and
unhappiness.

Having thus written, she sealed the letter with the
seal of Amadis, and wrote on the superscription,
I am the Damsel wounded through the heart with
a Sword, and you are he who wounded me. She
then secretly called a Squire, who was named
Durin, and was brother to the Damsel of Den-
mark, and bade him not rest till he had. reached
the kingdom of Sobradisa, where he would find
Amadis 3 and she bade him mark Ihe countenance

£4



104

of Amadis while he was reading the letter^ and
stay with him that day, but receive oo aaswer
£rom hka, if Swished tP give one«



105



CHAPTER S.



Dnrin, in obedience to the command of Oriana,
presently departed, and hasted so well that on the
tenth day he arrived at Sofiradisa, where he found
the new Queen Briolania, whom he thought the
fairest woman, except Oriana, that ever he had
seen ^ and learning from her that Amadis had de-
parted two days before^ he followed him, and
reached the Firm Island just as Amadis was pass-
ing under the Arch of True Lovers, and so he
beheld how the Image did more for him than ever
it had done for any other. And though he saw
Amadis after he came forth to his brethren, yet
he did not speak with him, nor give him the let-
ter, till after he had entered the Forbidden Cham-
ber, and been received by all as Lord' of the island.
This he did by Gandalin's advice, who, knowing
the letter to be from Oriana, feared that it might
cause his Master either to forslow or fail in the at-



£ 5



\06

chieving of so great an enterprise> for he would
not only hare left off the conquest of the Finn
Island, but also of the whole world, to fulfil what
she had commanded } but, when every thing was
finished, Durin went before him, and Amadis
took him apart from his brethren and from all
others into a garden, and asked him if he came
from the court of King Lisuarte, and what tid-
ings. Sir, said he, the court is as when you left
it : I come from thence by the command cf my
Lady Orrana 3 by this letter you will know the
cause of my coming. Amadis took the letter, and
he concealed the joy that was in his heart, that
Durin might know nothing of his secret \ but his
grief he could not conceal when he had read those
strong and bitter words, for neither his courage
nor reason could support him then, for he seemed
struck with death. When Durin saw him so dis-
ordered, he cursed himself and his ill fortune, and
death, that had not overtaken him on the way.
Amadis, for he cpuld not stand, sate down upon
th(^ grass, and took the letter which had fallen
from his hands, and, when he saw the superscrip-
tion, again his grief became so violent that Durin
would have called his brethren, but feared to do
so, observing what secresy Amadis had chosen.
Presently Amadis exclaimed, O Lord, wherefore



107

does it fkmt thee itant I ihoiild pahh, not hanrlng
deterred it ! and then again^ Ah, troth, an ill
guerdon dost thoa give him who never fiuled thee!
Then he took the letter again, tajing, yon are the
cause of mj wabatpfj end i come here, that it maj
be sooner ! and he phwed it in his bosom. He
asked Dnrin if he liad anght else to say; and
beartag that he had not, replied, well then thou
Shalt take, my answer* Sir, quoth he, I am for«>
bidden to leoetve any.— Did neither Mabilia nor
thy sister bid thee say any thing ?«**They knew
not my coming : my Lady commanded me to con«
ceal it fipom them.«— -Holy Mary help me 1 I see
now my wretchedness is withoat remedy. He
then went to a stream that -proceeded from a foan*
tain, and washed his face and eyes, and bade
Durin call Gandalin, apd bid him bring Ysanjo
the Governor 5 and he said to the Governor, pro-
mise me, as yon are a loyal Knight, to keep se^
cret all that you shall see till after my brothers
^have heard mass to-morrow 5 and tlic same pro-
mise he exacted from the two Squires. Then he
commanded Ysanjo to open privately the gate of
the castle, and Gandalin to take his horse and
arms ont, privately also. This done they left him^
and he remained alone, thinking upon a dream
which he. had dreamt the last night, wherein It



168

feciBed^ that being atmed and on horseback h«
vas on a hill covered with trees^ and many per-*
sons round about him making great joy ; when a
man from amongst them pissented him a box,
saying, Sir^ taste what I bnng you ; which he
did, and it was exceeding bitter ; and therewith
feeling himself cast down and disconsolate, he
loosed, the reins of his horse,, and let him go whi«
ther he! would y and he thought that the mirth of
all around him was changed into such sorrow at
was pitifiil to behold -, but his horse carried him
iiii away from them^. and took him through the
trees to a rocky place surrounded with water -, and
then it seemed in his dream that he left hb horse
and arms, as if by that he would have had vest>
and thens came to him an old man. in a religious
habit, and took him by the hand as if he had
compassion, and spoke to him in. a language which
he did not understand, whereupon^ he awoken
Upon this dream Amadis now mused,^ thinking
that he now found it true*.

Then hiding his face fronv his brethren> that they
might not see his trouble, he went to the castle-
gate, which the sons, of Ysanjo had opened.
Come you with me, said Amadis to the Governor^
«Qd let your sons remain hisss, aiod kecf this wstp-



'•



103

ter secret. So tbeiy went to the fool of the roeky

-where there was a little chapd^ and Gandalin and

Dniin went wkh them. There he anned himself^

and asked the Governor to what saint that chapel

was dedicated.— 'To our Lady the Virgin, who

hath wrought many miracles here. Hearing this,

Amadis went in and kaelt down, and 8aid> weep*

tag, Oar Lady Virgin Mary, the consoler aad

helper of those that are afflicted, I heseech you to

intercede with your glorious Son, that he may

have mercy on me; and, if it be your will not to

help me in my body, have mercy on my soul in

these my last days, for other thing than death I do

not hope. He then called Ysanjo, and said, pro**

mise as a loyal Knight to do what I shall direct I

aod turning tOrGandalin^ he took him. in hts arms

and wept abundantly, and held him somewhile, for

h& could not speak. At length he said, my good

friend Gandalin, yoa and* I were nursed by the

same milk, and our lives have been past together^

and never have I endured h^rdslnp and danger in

which you had not your part also* Yout father took

QIC from the sea when I was so little, being only that

night's child, and they brought me up as a good

father and mother bring up their beloved son ; and

you, my true friend, have always thought how to

wve m^Sjt and I have hoged in G<)d that he would



no

one daj enable me to re^te thee ^ but now ihjM
nuasry, which is worse thai deaths is come uipoa
me, and we must pait^ and I have nothing to
leave thee, except this island : I therefore com*
mand Ysanjo and ail others, bj the homage which
they have done to me, that so soon as they shall
know my death they take thee for their Lord,
The Lordship shall be thioe^ but I enjoin that thy
£tther and motiier enjoy it while they live, and af-
terwards it shall remam to thee. This I do &ir
what they did for my childhood, for my ill fortune
win not suffer me to do what they deserve, and
what I desire. He then told Ysanjo to take fi-om
the rents of the island, which had accumulated,
enough to build a monastery by that chapel, in
honour of the Virg'm Mary, and to endow it for
thirty friars. But Gandalin cried out. Sir, you
never yet had trouble wherein I was separated
from you, nor shall it be now -, and if you die, I
do not wish to live : and I want no honours or
lordships 5 give it to your brethren, I will not
take it, and I do not want it. Hold thy peace,
for God's sake, quoth Amadis, and say no such
folly to displease me. My brethren are of such
worth that they can gain lands for themselves, and
to bestow on others. Then he said to Ysanjo, it
grieves mc, my friend Ysanjo, to leave you before


Ill



I ooqU faanonr yoa accoidiDg to ywu desettg; tat
I kave yon with those who will doit. Ysanjo
aDswered, let me go with jo\a, Str^ ami suffer
what you sufier. Friend, answered Amadis, it
most be as I say ; God only can comfoit me ! I wiU
be guided by his mercy, and have no other com*
pany. He then said to Gandalin, if thou destrest
koighthood, take my arms > for, since' thou hast
kept them so well, it is right they should be thine.
I shall little need them : if not, my brother Ga«
laor shall knight thee. TeU him this Ysanjo, and
serve and love him as thou hast me, for I love him
above all my lineage, because he is the best, and
hath ever been humble towards me. Tell him,
too, that I commit Ardian the Dwarf to his care.
They for great sorrow could make him no answer.
Then Amadis embraced them, and conmiended
them to God, saying that he never thought to see
them more, and he forbade them to follow him ;
and witli that spurred his horse and rode away,
forgetting to take either shield, or helmet, or
spear. He struck into the mountain, going whi-
ther his horse would. Thus he kept tDl midnight,
being utterly lost in thought 5 the horse came then
to a little stream of water, and proceeded upward
to find a place so deep that he could drink thereat.
The branches struck Amadis in the face^ and so



}1S

irecalled him to himself^ and he looked round, and
fleeing nothing bat thickets^ rejoiced, thinking- that
he was hidden in that solitude. So he alighted,
and fastened his horse to a tree, and sate upon the
green herb by, and wept till his head became
giddy, and he fell asleep.



115



CHAPTER 4.



Gandalio and his conqMnionft remained by the
chape), looking afler Amadb as he rode so fast
away : then Gandalin, who was passionately weep-
ing, crie4 out, I will follow and carry his arms to
him, although he hath forbidden me! And I,
qooth Durin, will bear 3roa company for this night*
So they left Ysanjo, and getting to horse, rode
after him, coasting here and there about the wood,
till fortune brought them so near the place where
Jie was lying, th^ his horse scented theirs, and
began to neigh. Then they knew that he was
near, and Gandalin alighted, and went quietly
through the shrubs tiU he saw his Master sleeping
by the fountain. The Squire then took his horse
and led it where he had left Durin> and taking oft
the bridles from all the horses that they might
.browze the gre^ boughs, they remained still. It
•wa3 not long before Amadis awoke, for his sleep



114

Tvas restless : he rose^ and looked round : the
Moon was almost down, but it was yet some time
till day 5 then he lay down again, and broke out
into pitiful lamentations for his evil fortune.

The two Squires heard all he said and were greatly
moved tliereat^ yet durst they not appear before
him. Presently there came up a Knight singing
. along the way, and, when he was near the place
where Amadis lay, he exclaimed. Love, lore, I
thank thee for exalting me aboi>e all other Knights !
giving me good first, and better afterwards. You
made me afiect the fair Queen Sardamira, thinks
ing to secure her heart by the honour which I
should bear away from this land *, and now, for
my greater happiness, you make me love die
daughter oi the greatest King in the world, the
£iir Oriasa^ who hath no peer on earth : you make
tmt love her^ and you give me strength to serve
ben Saying this, he drew from the way-side to
a great tree, whereunder he meant to wait for
day-break. Then said Gaodalin to his comrade,
stay here while I go see what Amadis will do.
He went towaids the fountain, but Amadis had
risen and was -seeking his horse 3 and seeing Gan«
dalin dimly in the night, be cried out, who goes
there \ tell me, I beseech thee ?— Gandalin, Sir !



115



who is going to bring you your horse— Who
bade thee follow nie against my command ? you
have displeased me : give me my horse and go thy
way, and tarry ix>t here« unless tliou wouldst have
me slay thee and myself. Sir, cried Gandalin^
for God's sake no more of this ! did you hear the
foolish words of a Knight hard by. ? And this he
said to make him angry, that he might forget his
displeasure for a while. Amadis answered^ I heard
him^ and therefore want my horse to depart.— ^
How i is this all you will do ?— What would»t
thou more ?-*That you should fight with him, and
make him know his folly.— Fool that thou art {
I have neither hearty nor strength, ner spirit!
having lost all in losing her from whom all came :
she gave me courage, and hath takeu it away : the
most caitiff Krtight in Great Britain might slay me
now. Sir, said Gandalin, for Gkxl*s speak lower^
that Durin may not hear this, for he has heard
all that the Knight said.— What ! is Durin here ?
•—We came together : I think he tarries to see
what you will do, that he may report it to hef
who sent him. I am vex.ed at what you tell mc,^
quoth Amadis ; but his spirit arose, knowing that
Durin was th^ere, and he said, give me my horse
then, and guide me to the Knight. He mounted
and took his arms, and Gandalin lei him where



116

the Knight sate under a tree^ holding hU horse hy
the bridle* You Sir Knight^ quoth Amadls^ wha
are enjoying yourself, rise, and let us see if you can
maintain the love of which you boast. The Knight
arose, and cried, who are you who question me ?
you shall see how I maintain it, if you dare do battle
Ivith me, for I will strike terror into thee^ and all
•who are ^corned by Love. I am one of those>
quoth Amadis : Lov^ hath foully requited me : i
tell thee this. Sir Lover, where I have found one
truth in him, I have found seven lies. Come^ and
maintain his justice: let us see if he has gained
more in you than he has lost in me ! and, as he
spake these words, his anger kindled, feeling how
unjustly his Lady had abandoned him. The Knight
thounted and took his arms, and said. You Knight,
tvhom Love has justly forsaken, because you were
Hot worthy to serve him, get you gone I I am of-
fended even at the sight of you. And he would
have rode away, but Amadis cried out. What,
Knight ! do you defend your love only with words;
and ride off like a coward ? How ! quoth he : I
was leaving thee for contempt, and thou callest it
ftar ! thou art very desirous of thy own hurt r de-
fend thyself now if thou canst ! They ran against
each other, and both shields were pierced, but the
Knight was thrown down : he kept the reins, and



117



mounted again lightly. Quoth Amadis^ If jou d<i
not defend Love better with the sword than with
the lance, you will be a bad champion* The
Knight made no reply, but strack at him in great
fury : the sword fell on the rim of the shidd, and '
entered in aslant, and he could not pluck it out«
Amadis stood in his stirrups, and gave him a blow
on his head, and cut away the trappings of his
helmet and the skin <^ his head, and the sworcl
held on and came upon the neck of the horse, so
that he fell dead, and the rider senseless. Amadis
waited a minute, thinking that he had slain him ;
then seeing him recover, he said. Knight, what
Love has gained in you, and you in him, you may
both enjoy : I leave you. So departing from him,
he called Gandalin, and seeing Durin there, he said
to him, friend Durin, my sorrow hath no equal, and
my grief and recollections are intolerable : it is better
that I should die : pray God it may be soon ! Go^
with good fortune ! Salute for me, Mabilia, my
good cousin, and the Damsel of Denmark, thy
sister ; and tell them, if they grieve for me, that
I perish more undeservedly than ever Knight pe-
rished ; and tell them that I sorely regret that
those who have loved me so much, and done so
much for me, have never had their guerdon !
Durin stood weeping before him> and could make



118

no repty. Amadis embraced him, aad be cora-
tnended htm to God, and kissed the skirts of hi*
amiour and d«^rted. By tbit it wai day-break :
Amadia said to Gandalin, if 70U chtue to go with
me, attempt not to disturb me in whatever I say
or do : if you, will not obey this, go back. He
promijed obedience. Then Amadia gave him his
arms, and bade him pluck the sword from the
shield and pve it the Knightj aad so they rode on.



119



CHAPTER 5.



This wounded Knight was Patin^ brother to Don
5idon^ who was then Emperor of Rome ; he was
the best Knight in all those lands^ and therefore
greatly feared dironghout the empire. The Em-
peror was very old^ and had no son^ therefore all
thought this brother should succeed him. He
loved Sardamira^ Queen of Sardinia^ who was a
fair and comely Damsel, and being niece to the
Empress had been brought up in the court > and
he had so far profited by his service, that she had
promised him^ if ever she married, to marry him.
El * Patin upon this grew more presumptuous,
though his natural arrogance was enough 3 and he



* The article is vtnifbrmly prefixed to his name, except
nTheitt he b first sncntiofMd. la Mir Umpngt H is <mly
used where the . nsme is a famtly or dm afipellatiMk : Tkft
Plantagenety the Douglas^ the Graham.



120

sdd to her^ I have heard that King Lisuarte hath
a daughter who is renowned over all the world for
her beauty. I will go to his court, and say she is
not so fair as you, and this I will maintain against
the two best Knights who dare tmdertake her cause.
They say there are Knights there of great worth
in arms, but if 1 do not conquer them in one day,
I will that King Lisuarte do cause my head to be
cut oflF ! The Queen answered him, do not do
this j for, if that Princess be ftir, it impaireth not
the beauty which God hath bestowed upon me, if
beauty there be -, and, methinks, you might with
more reason and less pride prove your prowess in
some other cause, for this enterprize is not becom-
ing a man of so high a rank, and moreover it is
Unreasonable and arrogant, and you cannot expect
it to come to a good end. Come what will^ quoth
he, I will do it, to prove that you, who are the
fairest Lady in the world, have the best Knight for
yo^r servant. So he took his leave^ and with rich
arms and ten Squires passed over into Great Bri-
tain, and went directly to where King Lisuarte
was, who seeing him so accompanied thought him
to be some great personage, and courteously wel->
corned him. When he was disarmed, all that saw
his great stature judged him to be of great courage*
Lisuarte then asked him who he was. He an-



121



swered. King, I will tell jaa, for I do not come
to your hoiue to conceal myself, bat to make my-
self known. Know, then, that I am £1 Patin,
brother to the Emporor of Rome, and so soon as I
see the Queen, and your daughter Oriana, you
shall know the cause of my coming. When the
King heard that he was a man of so high rank, he
emjbraced him and said. Good ^friend, much are.
we pleased with your coming, and you shaU see
the Queenand her daughter and all others of my
house, when it pleaseth you. Then he placed him
at his own table, and they were feasted in a man-
ner befitting the table of such a personage. £1
Patin looked round him, and when he saw so
many Knights he was astonished, and began to
Jbold the household of his brother, the Emperor,
SB nothing. Don Grumedan took him to his lodg-
ing, by the King's conomand, and did him much
honour. The next day after mass, the King took
with him £1 Patin and Don Grumedan, and went
to the Queen, who received him honourably, and
made hun sit before her and near her daughter.
Now Oriana*s beauly was much impaired by rea-
son of her great trouble of mind, yet when £1
Patin 8XW her he marvelled greatly, and thought
that they ndio.praised her had jj^t mentioned half
'her beauty, and his heart was entirely changed
Vol. XI. t



12'2

from the purpose \frfth wbich he h^ cbrae, md
wholly htrX to obtain her. Whisreiibl^ caiii&g to
mind his 6vm high bhth aad |fretit qtudilies^ uoA
moreover that he should ofie daiy |i06le» tbe empire,
he thofight thatlf he dematided her hi BMrnage she
would not ht ttfiised him. Si> taking tluft King
and ^hxeefn apart, lie sftid, I coi^e hither eoTeqtiest
tbs marriage c^your d^^tir, Ibr y^cMT tircrth and
for her t)eauty : if I sdc^gkt outers of herxtnk, I
could o^btain l3iem, seeing ^hat I ma, and whdt
I expedt to be. tlie King answoKed, «oi^ thank
you much ibr whM you say, tat die Qnecn and I
have promised our dtmg^er not to gi^ her io mar*
tiage against her conftent : Ve mast talk ^th her,
befixre Ve can Knsi^^ Jron. l^is the King said
that ht tai^ net clfend him, but in iits loiiid be
Wds rescued tiot to jb^o te- to Jiim, or to asf
bther who 'iv^xrid darry h^ outixf theJand^lidch
^he iv^s to mh^irtt. £1 P«thi "was «attisfied widd
this, ^d wiitt«d fii^e days, «aspectbg la fin^umfate
dhs\vier i but tlie King ^aad QaeeQ, tkinkiag it
folly, had ndd tusthfa^ to Oriona. ^ea £1 Padn
a^ed t&e Kl&g bow the bosiiKSs ^went on. He
fifusn^ered, f do tvhBit 7 can, bitt h is neeesstsy that
you should ^peak to my daughter, and raqsest her
to <^3fef my commands. £1 Patin ^veat tx> the
Princess, and said. Lady Onma, I wish io ask &



1'23



iinug of ywk which will be nmch to your honour
and pr<At. What tbii^g is that ? quoth she.— That
you will do the will of youx father. She toowing
AOt for what reason he spake, replif 4/ that shall I
right willingly, beipg sure it will be 9fi ypu 3ay,
Then Patin was full joyg^l^ thiaktug he had won
her, and said, I wiU g« through this laud ^eokipg
fHlventures s before long you will hear such thiugf
«f me, a3 will make you wilh more rea^toa graut
what I require. And this also he said to the King,
telliog him that he would see the wQuder$ of his
land. The King replied, you have it in you to do
this ; yet would I diwwde you, for in this land jrou
will find QViny great and perilous adventure^, and
many sitrong aad hmdy Knights^ pmctisod in arn».
I like this, quoth £1 Patin : if they ^e strong and
hardy, I am iieitbor weak 9or fiint^ as my deeds
riiall show. So he departed^ rjgkt joyful at Oriaoa*8
answer, and for this joy he was pinging as you
have heard* wh^ his ill fortune led him where
Aaiadis waa making moan } and this i& the reason
why that Knigfot came from ao f^ a land.

Durin departed froBf> Amadis wheu it W9s clear
^ay-'Ught;, and ha passed by £1 Patin, who had
Uk&n Gff the piece of l»s helmet that was left, and

f2



124

had his face and neck all bloody. He sedfig Durln^
said to him^ Grood ehild^ so may God make you a
good man as you tell me if there be any place near
where I may have remedy for my wound. Yes,
quoth he, but all there are so afflicted that they
will hardly attend to you.-^For what cause ? — For
the loss of a good Knight, who hath won that
lordship, and seen the likenesses and secrets of
Apblidon, which none other could ever do, and he
is departed m such sorrow that nothing but hk
death is looked for.— Methinks you speak of the
Firm Island ?— I do.— What ! hath it found a
a master ? certes I am heartily sorry, for I was go-
ing there mysdf to prove the adventure and win
the Island. Durin laughed, and answered. Truly,
Sir Knight, if there be no tncn^ prowess in you
than you have just now manifested, you would
have gained little honour ! £1 Patin raised himself
as well as he could, and tried to catch his bridle,
but Darin turned aside. Tell me, siad he, what
Knight is he that hath won the Firm Island ?—
Tell me first who you are ?— I am El Fatln, bro-
ther to the Emperor of Rome.— God-a-oiercy !
quoth Dorin, yoor birth is better than your piowess
or your courtesy. Know that the Kntght you ask
about is tiie same who hath just now left ^you : by



125

what joa have leen yea may judge that he i»
worthy of what he hath won. So he went hia
way^ and took the straight road to . London,
greatly defliroos to tell Oriana all that he had aeea
of Amadte .



f3



i

'*



125^



CHJPTER 6.



Ysanjo, according to his promise, revealed nothing
concerning Amadis till afler mass the next day.
Then, when his brethren and his cousin enquired
for him, he said, arm yourselves, and I will tdl
you his commands. And, when they were armed,
Ysanjo began to weep passionately, and exclaimed,
O Sirs, what a grief and a misery is come upon
us, that we should lose our Lord so soon ! Then
he told them all that Amadis had said, and how he
besought that they would not seek him, for they
could not help his ill, and that they should not
grieve for his death. Holy Mary ! cried they, the
best Knight in the world is about to perish ! but
we will seek him, and, if we cannot with our
lives help him, we will bear him company with
our deaths. Ysanjo then told Galaor his brother's
request that he would make Gandalin a Knight^
and take the Dwarf into his service : this he deli-



127



Tcwd wacpiflf, a»4 tib^y wwpi^g al«o beard it

Tfas Dwarf £pr pu]?« grief was beating hU bead

^gaknaH « waU j but Cralaor caught him up and said,

Ai^diau coiue yif'itk ipc> since tby Master ksis so

cQmoiaadedi awd ipy tot iJiaU be yours. Th©

Dwarf msswtftd, S'lXs X will ^low you, but not

9s iipy Ma«ter# tiU we know some certain lidinga

Qf A»padi9« Fprthv^itk they wcat to horse> and

aU throe b^steiied aloug the road which Ysanjo

pointed. AU day they rode o^, ooeeting no one of

whom they CQuld ask tidlng^^ tiU they came where

£1 Padn lay wounded beside bis dead horse : his

Squires had found hm, and were cutting down

h<?ugb$ and polea tp make him a litter, for be was

exceeding faint with Ipes pf bloods ^ that he could

not apawer ^m> but made sign that they should

qpeok tp kh ^qp^fCSp and they replied, that il^eir

Lord had «ped so ill in an encounter with the

Knight wba had won the Firm Island. Good

Squires, know yo^ which way he went ? — No 5

but before we cama up to this place we met an

armed Knight m the forest, upon a stout horse^

and he was weeping and accusing his fortune : a

Square behmd him carried his arm3 5 the shield had

tw9 lions azure iu a ^eld or^ and the Squire wa^

lamenting also. That is he ! cried they ^ and they

pushed QH^ with great speed tiU tl^y cmv^ out of

V 4



1S8

the forest upon a great plain^ where there were
fiiany roads in eveij direction^ so that they knew'
not which way to take 5 therefore they ^reed to
separate^ and meet at the court of Lisuarte upon
St. John's day, that if by then they had been un-
successful in their search, they might consult anew
how to £nd him. There then they embraced and
separated^ each earnestly bent oa his quest, but in
vain j for^ when Amadis reached the open coun-:
try, he took none of those roads, but struck aside
along a glen, and thence made into the mountain*

He rode on lost in thought, suflfering his horse to

chuse the path. About noon the horse came to

some trees that grew beside a mountain-stream^

and then stopt, being weary with the heat and with

the toil of last ' night. Here Amadis lecollected

himself and looked round, and was pleased to see

no signs of a habitation : he alighted and drank of

the brook. Gandalin came up, and turning the

horses to feed came to his Master, whom he found

more dead than alive 5 and, not daring to disturb

him, he lay down before him. Amadis continued

in this mood tiD sunset, then rising, he struck his

foot against Gandalin : art thou sleeping ? quoth

he. No, replied Gandalin, but I am thinking

upon two tiungs which concern yoa« the wiuch> if .



129

It please you to hear, 1 will speak : if not, I wiD
be silent. Amadis answered, go nddie the horses^
and let us b^one : I do not chuse to be found hj
those who seek me. Sir, ssud Gandalin, you are
in a solitaiy place, and your hone is so weaiy that,
unlen you allow him some rest, he cannot carry
you. Amadis repUed, weeing, do ^at yott
think best : whether I stay or go> these is no rest
lor me ! Then Gandalio looked s^ter the horsesy
and letunied to his Master, and begged him to eat
of a pasty which he had brought, but he wocdd
not. Sir, said he, shaU I say die two thkigs
whereon I have been thinking ? Soy what you
will, quoth Amatds ; I care nothing now for any
thing that may be said or done, and wish to fire
no longer than till I can confess. — Then I pray you
hear me. Sir : I have thought much upon that
letter which Oriana sent you, and upon the words
of the Knight with whoiQ you fought ; and seeing
•how light is the faith of many women, it may be
that she hath changed her affections, and so has
feigned anger against you, before you discover it.
The other thing Is, that I believe her to be so good
and loyal that she could not have been thus moved;
unless some great falsehood had been spoken of
you, which she bdieves and feels in her heart ;
and, since you know that you have never beeh

f5



130

fito, you should make the truth koovm, wh^rebjr
$he win repent of what she hath dooe, and intr^t
jour fbrghfeness te the wroiig, and you wiU enjoy
your forcner happiness. It is better Id take £ood
wtdi this ho^ than, by ahandonuig yourself to
despair, to die and lose iier^ and the gkvy of this
world, and even the other. Hold thy peace, for
God*s sake ! quoth Amadis, ^ar aoch foolishness^
md lies as thou hast uttened^ are enough to pro* .
voke the whole world. Oriana> mj lAdy, haa
nev^ done wrong ; md, if I perish^ li is but rea->
iBonable, not £0^ my deserving^ but to accomplish
her will and command: if I did not kaowibat
ihou hast said this t^ comfort m^^ J would cut oSt
thy head ! you have greatly displeased nie 7 never
BSiy the Uke to me again ! He then tunied away
in anger, and walked along the side of the streaoi.

*
Bat Gandalin, who ffa two days and a night had
not slept^ was overcome with heaviness, and at
length fell asleep. When Amadis saw this, ht
saddled his horse, and hid. Gandalin^s saddle an«l
t>ndle among the bushes, that he noiight opt be
able to find them y and> taking his SLVBOfij he^s tivck
into the wildest part of the inouataio. AH nigbt
be went, and the ne^ day till Ye^)er&, then bfi
came to a pbin at the foot iof a xnpuntain : the^e



were two Ugb trees Ibore tk^t grew orer 9 #pw*
ta'iQj and tj>ere bis went tp give his l|ors^ imk»
for ttiex h^ found j)o water al) that ^^y** ^k^in
he came up to the fountain^ to paw po <4d man in
a religious bahit^ who was giving Jiis ass water ;
his beard and hair wq:^ g^^X^ ond his habk was
v&ry poor, being fm^ pf goat*s hair. Atnadis.
saluted hina^ and asked him if he was a Priest.
The good man answered^ he had been, oqe forty
years. God be praised ! quoth Anipdis : I be*
seecb you for the love of God stay here to^night>
and he^r my confession, of which I am in great
jvsed. la God's n^me I mi the old mgn. Then
Amadjs aligfaled, laid his arms upon the ground,
3nd topk tbe saddle from his horse and let bim
feed 5 and be dis^p»ed^ 9Qd Imfdt b^ore the good
fmn, and begaQ to kiss bis f^. The good man
took him by the hand md raised bim, and made
bim sit by bio)> snd# beholding him well, he
tbougbt bi^ thp goQidUiest Knight that ever he
saw, b|it hp w^ p^e, ^d bis face and neck were
ptjaiopi Wi^ te^rs^ so thqt tl^ fM- man had great
pity, a^d Bfiii, Sir Knigbt, it «eeBM. that you aip
<i)) great afiiictioil : If i^ be £Dr Bny sin that you
bave <;oa:Hnit|ied> and these tears spring from re-
pe^ta^ce^ in g b^i^ hour came you here^l but if
^t be fgf fiPY worldly conceins, £com which by your

f6



132



jdtt^Mideoiii^neis it seems you cannotbe removed,
remember God, and beseech him of his mercy to
bring jou to his setrioe. He then raised his hand
and blessed him, and bade him relate all the sins
he could call to mind. Hereon Amadis began the
whole discourse of his life, wkhoat letting any
thing pass^ The good man then said, seeing that
you are . of such understanding, aad of so high 2
' lineage, you ought not to despair and cast yourself
away for any thing that may befal you, much less
for the action of a woman, for they are- as easily
won as lightly lost. I counsel you to lay aside
such folly, for the love of God, to whom it is dis-
pleasing, and even for worldly reason, for roan
ought not to love where he is not beloved* Grood Sir>
replied Amadis, I am now in such extremity that I
cannot live any long time : I beseech you, by that
God whose faith you hold, take me with you for the
little while 1 have to live, that I may have comfort
for my soul. My horse and arms I need no longer :
I will leave them here, and go with you on foot,
and p^orm whatever penitence you enjoin. If
you «efis8e, you will stn before God, for else I
shall wander and perish in this mountain. When
the good man saw him thus resolute, he said td
hm» with a heart whoHy bent to his good, Certcs,
.Sir, it becomes sot a Knight Bke you to abandon



133

himsdf as if he bad lost the whole worid^ by rea*
son of a woman : ' their loire is no longer than
while they see you with their eyes^ and hear such
words as you say to them^ and that past« presently
they forget you } especially in those fidse loves
that are begun against the Lord : the same sin
which makes tbem sweet at firsts gives them a bit*
temess in the end^ as you experience. But you
who are 6f such prowess, and have such power,
you who are the true and loyal protector of such
as. are oppressed, great wrong would it be to the
world if you thus forsake it. I know not what she
is who hath brought you to this extremity, but if
all the worth and beauty of the sex were brought to«
gether in one, I know that such a man as you ought
not to be lost for her. Good Sir, quoth Amadis^ I
ask not your counsel upon this> where it ia not
wanted -, but> for my soul's sake, I pray you take
me in your company, for dse I shall have no re*
medy, but to die in this mountain. The old ma^
hearing this, had such compassion on him that the
tears fell down his loi^ white beard. Sir, my son,
said he, I live in a dreary place, and a hard life ;
my hermitage is full seven leagues out at sea, upon
a high rock, to which no ship can come except in
lummer time. I have lived there these thirty years,
and he who iives there must renounce all the plea««



134

suxes md delights of the world, and all my svi^
port is the aliQS which the people of the land her^
bestow upon roe. I promise yoi), said Amadis^
this is the Ufe 1 desire for the little while I shall live,
and I heseech you, for the love of God^ let me go
with you. The good man^ albeit against his will,
consented } and Aniadis said, now. Father^ coni'*
D^nd me what to do, and I will be obedient. The
good man gave him his blessing, and said vespers,
and then taking bread and fish from his wallet, he
bade Amadis eat i but Amadis refused, though he
had been- three days without tasting food. You
are to obey me, said tlie good man, and I com-
mand you to eat, else your soul will be in great
danger if you die. Then he took a little food ;
and when it was time to sleep, the old man spread
his cloak and laid him down thereon, and Amadis
laid himself dowu at his feet.

The most part of the night Amadis did noth'ujg
but turn from side to side, but at last being soje
wearied he fell asleep, aud in that sleep he dreamt
tliat he was fastened In a dark chamber, where
there was no light at all, neither could he find
any way to come out thereof, whereat he greatly
lamented -,, then he thought that hi» cousin Mabill^
icind the Damsel of Denmark came to bim, aod



135

tlMf«e ^ras a suo-beam befipre Ibcm wbkh 4upeUo4
the darkness, aud tbe}r took him by the hand, tajr*
ing, CoKDe ibnh^ Sir^ to tliU gneat palace. Aad
he thought that he was right joyful ; aod goiag out
be saw his Lady Oriana surrounded with a great
flame of Bxc, \vhereat he cried out. Holy Mary^
help her \ aud rao through the fire to sa\x her,
feeling no hurt, aud took her in her arms and car-
jried her into a garden, the greenest and pleasante^t
tliat ever he had seen. At the loud cry which he
made the good man awoke, and took him by the
hand, asking him what lie ailed ^ Sir, said he, I
felt such pain in my sleep that I wa^ almost de<ad«
So it seemed by your cry, said the old man, but
it 18 time to set out j then he got upon his ass«
Amadis would have walked by him, but the good
.man with great entreaty made liim mount his horse,
^d (o they fared oa togetlier.

As they went, Amadis besought him to grant one
,bopo, which shcHild be no-ways hurtfu], the which
the old man granted. I pray you thm> aaid Ama-
dis, that so long as we are togcith^ you will not
iteU mj n)an who I am, nor aiay thing concerning
tfne,.aiid di^ you will eall i»e by 9on»e other naioe»
jaot wy own 5 and, M/bcn 1 9m dead, you tell my
iwreth^o of me, tb^t they w^y iake my t)ody ipto



IS6

their ooantry. Your life and deaths said the goot
mat), are in the hands of God^ so talk no mor6
of.this^ he will help yon if jou know and love
and senre him as you ought ; but tell me, by what
name, will you be called ? — Even by whatever it
shall please yon. — So the old man, seeing bow fair
he was, and in how forlorn a condition, replied, I
win give you a name conformable to yonr appearance
and distress, you shaU be called Beltenebros. Now
Beltenebros being interpreted, «gnifyeth, the Fair
Forlorn. The name pleased Amadis, and he admired
the good sense of the old man in chnsing it ; so by
this name he was long known, till it became as re- ,
Downed as that of Amadis. Thus commaning
they reached the sea-side just as the night closed
in ; there they found a bark, wherein the good matt
might cross to his hermitage. Beltenebros gav#
his horse to the mariners, and they gave him ia
exchange a cloak of goat skin, and a garment of
coarse grey woollen. They embarked, and Belte-
nebros asked the good man what was his own name,
and the name of his abode. They call my dwell--
ing-place, said be, the Poor Rock, becaose none
can live there without enduring gveat poverty : my
own name is Andalod. 1 was a clerk ci some
learning, and spent my youth in many vanities, till
it pleased God to awaken.me^ and then I withdrew



137

to thii idiUrf abode : for thirty yotn I have nefor
left itj till now that I went to the burial of my
lifter. At length they reached the Rock and
landedj and the marinen returned to the main land*
Thui Amadiiy now called Beltendiroi^ remained
on the Poor Rock, partaUng the aniteritiei of the
hermit, not for devotion, but for despair, forgetful
of hii great renown in armi, and hoping and ex^
pectiog death,— all for the anger of a woman !

When OandaUn awoke in the mountain, he looked
round him, and leeing only his own hone, started
up, misdoubting what had happened i he called
aloud, and searched among the shrubs in vain, he
could find neither Amadis nor his hone. Theni
knowing that Amadis was departed, he tuned to
his hone to ride after him, but the saddle and hri«
die were gone I upon that he cuned himself and
his evil fortune, and the day whereia he was bom,
going from one place to another, till at length ha
espied the harness, and immediately set out on
pursuit. Rve days he rode on, sleeping in deiert
places, enquiring at ev^ habitation for his Muter*
On the sixth, chance led him to the fountain
where Amadis had left his armour. Here he be^
held a tent, hi which were two Damsels < h*



133

alighted, and askod them if thfffr had veeh a Itoight
who bore two Haas azuxe in. a golden fields The^r
aobwcrod that they had not aeon him, hut such a
shield and the whole harness of a Knight, thcyi
had found hesida that fountain. When Oaiidalin
heard this, he tore his hair, and exclaBned^ Hol;^
Mary, heipnie! my Master, the best Knight m
the world, ia dead or lost ! how badly have i
served yon, my. Lord ! and now with veasea ought
I to be hated by all men, and the earth ought not
to suflbr ine «poa her, mace I faa^ie left you at sfack
a time ! You were he wfao flnoemired all and
now all have fonahen yea ! the wovld and ali in it
have fliiandoofld yoal and I, caitiff ^wvelch, and
nieie wretehnd than all that eter warn bom, have
loft yott in your dnatlil And with that, f&r eaocsa
of passioni, be ftU down. The Damaefe shrieked
out. Holy Maiyj help ! the Squire is deed 1 and
they ran to him, and ^wg water 'm his fece^ but
it was Wg bef^r^ they wvid racal Una tofais senses*
pood Squire, they cvied, be n!»t deapoiate Ibr a
thing which is opt cintm : you bad better seek
))im till you Iwm whethw he be alive or dead ;
good men ovght to bear up against ^rrow> notuto
die in daspair. Gan<blin took heart at theiit wQi:ds»
#nd ^m)v^ to Hxk im J^a^tecv^s long^as Jia lived.



i



139

Ladies^ said Ite, where did you lee these arms ?<—
We will tell you willingly e we were in the cam-«
pany of Dou Guilan the Pensive, who delivered ii&
and twenty other Knights and Damsels from tl.e
prison of Gandinos the ruffianj behaving himself
there so valiantly that he hath destroyed the wicked
customs of the castle^ and constrained the Lord
thereof to swear never more to maintain the same.
We came with Guilan to this fountain four days
ago^ and when he saw the shield for which you
enquired, he was very sorrowful, and alighting,
said^ the shield of the best Knight in the world
should not lie thus ! and with that, weeping sorely,
he hung the shield upon this tree, and bade us
keep it while he rode to seek him whose it wa».
We set up our tents here, and Guilan sought for.
him three days without success : yesterday he re-
turned, aud this morning, giving his own arms
to his Squires, he girded on the sword and took
the shield, saying. By God, shield, thou makest
a bad exchange, in losing thy master to go with
me ! He told us, he would carry the arms to
Queen Brisena. We also, and all who were de-
livered by bim, are going to that court, to beg
the Queen of her goodness to recompense Don
Guilan, as the Knights will beseech the King,



140

Then God be with jrou ! quoth Gandatin. I ihalf
fake your advice } and, as the most caitiff and
unhappy wrrtch in the worlds go seek for him^
upon whom my life or death depends.



141



CHAPTER 7.



On the tenth day after he had left Amadis in the
forest, Durin reached London, and, alighting at
bis own lodging, went straight to the Qneen's
palace. So soon as Oriana saw him, her heart
throbbed violently, so that she could not cahn it,
and she went into her chamber and lay down upon
the bed, bidding the Damsel of Denmark go for
her brother, and bring him to her secretly. The
Damsel returned with Durin, and leaving him
with her mistress, went out to MabUia. Now,
friend, said Oriana, tell me where you have been,
and where you found Amadis^ and what he did
when he read my letter, and if you have seen
Xlueen Briolania : tell me every thing. Then
Durin related how he had followed Amadis from
Sobradisa to the Firm Island, and arrived there
just as Amadis 'was passing under the Arch <^
True Lovers, under the which none might past



140



that had been false to his first love. How, cried
she, dared he prove that adventure, knowing tliat
he could not accomplish it ? It did not turn out
so, replied tlie Squire 3 he accomplished it with
more loyalty than any other had ever there dis-
played, and was received with more honour, and
such signs as had never been seen before. When
Oriana heard this, her joy was very great, that
that which had occasioned her great anger was thus
xlisprov'ed. He proceeded with his tale^ • ho^f
Amadis had won the Forbidden Chamber. Hold !
quoth slie, and she lifted up her hands and began
to pray God that she might one day be in that
Chamber with him who had worthily won it.
^ow, quoth she, tell me what did Amadis when
you gave hina the letter ? The tears came into
Jhirin's eyes. J^iy, I advise you not to ask, for
you have doae the worst cruelty and devUry that
ever Damfiel conunitted. Holy Mary I cried Ori-
ana, what art thou saying ? I say, repeated Du-
liq, that you have unjustly destroyed the best and
jtruest Knight that ever wjoman bad, or will have
;to ^e end of the world. Cursed be the hour in
,which such. a thing was <levised, and cursed he
4eath that did iiot take me before I carried such a
npeas^ge : if I had -known what I carried, I would
rather have slain myself tlian have appeared before



143

Kitn^ lor you in sending <hat letter, and I io taking
it, Jaave been t^e cause of.his death. Then he related
every thkig that had passed* and aU diat Amadis
had said, and how he was- gone into the moaotaia
to die. • Whil^ he was relating these things, all
Oriana's anger was gone, and ber shame and an«
gttish became 00 intokradsle, that when he had
ceased she could not utter a word, but rvmained
like <MK who had lost her senses. Durin^ albeit
diat he thought she well deserved this suffering,
was yet moved to pity, and be went to Mabilia
and his sister, and said to them, go and help Oii-
^na, for, if she hath done wrong, her ptmiaboieQt
is come upon her : and he went hi$ way.

They ran to her, and seeing in what state she wail,
Jthe^ £tttened.the door of her cbember, and threw
^ater in her fiiccj and 4>iocigbt ber to herself, and
she ihen began Id lament what she had done, and
icry out §u deftth. But ^those tcue £iends scait
<i^in for IXipin, iand leatvt from hiaa all that had
(past, and then 1»egan to conifert her, aaai tftiqr
4iHide her 'wrilB a lettjer to teqiiest his^brgsrenesa,
4and bid lum come with all speed io the castlevf
.MUaflores^ there to recdkve her atonement. This
Jetler the Damsel o( Denm^irk would take and
.«ea»:h for hiiio, lor 'she xefuged ao tnoidale or ^iO-



144

culty for the two persons in the world whom she
loved best 3 and, because Amadis in his sorrow had
talked so much of Gandales> they thought he
ought be with him ; and they agreed^ as a pretext
for her going there, tliat she should carry gifts to
the Queen of Scotland, and tidings of her daughter
Mabilia. Oriana therefore tc^ her mother they
were about to send the Damsel, and Brisena ap«
provmg thereof,, sent also presents from herself.
'Hiis being settled, the Damsel, in company with
her brother Durin, and £nil, a nephew of Gan-
dales, rode to a port called Vegil, which is in that
part of Great Britain towards Scotland, and em-
barking there, in seven days they came to the town
called Poligez, in. Scotland. From thence they
proceeded to the castle of Grandales 5 him they met
going to the chace, and saluted him ; and he, per-
ceiving that the Damsel was of a foreign land by
her speech, asked her ^m whence she came. I
am the messenger, quoth she, of some Damsels
who love you much, and who have sent gifb to
the Gbieen of Scotland.— Good Damsel, and who
.are they ?— Oriana, daughter of King Lisuarte,
and Mabilia, whom you know. ThenGandales
joyfully bade them welcome, and took them to his
.castle. As they were conversing, the old Knight
enquired for his foster son, Amadis. At this the



14^

Damsel was grieved^ perceiving that he was not
there as they had hoped ', but^ not to distress Gan-^
tlales by the truths she only answered that he was
not yet returned from Sobradisa. We thought,
said she, that hewould first ac6ottipany his cousin
Agrayes here, to see you and the Queen his aunt ;
and I bring letters to him firom Queen Brisena and
•his other friends, which he would be right glad to
receive. This she said, that if Amadis were there
in secret, he might be induced to see her. She^
remained with Gandales two days, then proceeded
lo<the Queen.



rou ti.



14€



CHAPTER S*



«lB*alMM*irtM*MaiMaR



DdKi G«tlfta the Pensive proceeded wUh tke anas
toward the c^rt of LisMarte. He always oaniad
the shield of Amadis round his neck, except whea
he was constrained to £ght> and then he took his
own. So as he rode> two nephews of Arcalaus
met him and knew the shield, and attempted to
ibrce it from him, saying they would take that
^shield, or the head of him who carried it, to their
uncle. When Guilan knew of how bad a race
they were, he cared the less lor them, and gave
them both battle. They were strong Knights, and
both younger men than he ; he, nevertheless, was
a valiant man and tried in arms, so that he slew
one, and drove the other to Hight. That evening'
he took up ids lodging in the house of a Knight
whom he knew, who welcomed him gladly, and
^ve him another lance, for his own was broken
in the encounter. Jle continued his way till he



147

came to Pl river cdled Gatiioil> ifrhkh vm ft gtett
water, and over it was a wooden-biidge^ just §6
bR>ad that one horseittaA might Mme and axvdiher
go. At one end «f the Mdfe ^a« a Knight who
wished to pass ; he boma shield tett> with a bend
argent, whereby Ottilan knew him to be hi» cousin
Ladasin. On the other «de w^ a Knight who
kept te passage ; he rode a latge h»f horse, atid
did bear la his MM argent a lion sable : this
Knight oailed out^aloud to Ladttin, You must joust.
Knight, if y6a tvould pass. Yonr joust shall not
ptisve^ aio> quoth Laddbifl. they ran at eath
other Upon the bridge, and Ladastn and his hors^
lell int;o the river. Thece would Ladasin have pe<«
lished, by reason of tiie weight of his arms, and
the heigM whence he had fidlen, if by good hap
hehad BO^ caught the boughs of aome willows, by
which he got to the bank, Don Ooilan ran to hit
help^ ^tfid with the aid of hb Squires got him out
of the water. Gousin, said he, yoo would hatdiy
hare ben vaved without these boughs^: all Knighta
should oMd to joust u^Ob these bridges, for they
who keep them have their hones ]pactised to the
l^ace, and rather by that, than by their own prow-
ess, win the honoun I wouki rather turn out-oftho
way and go round, if tlus had not happened to
yoU) but now i must tty to revenge yoo. By this»

6 2



148



Ladasin*8 horse had got upon the opposite bank,
ead the Knight hade his servants lead him to tlie
castle, which was a strong and pleasant fortress,
built in the river, and the way to it was by a bridge
of stone. The Knight was ready at the bridge-
end. Don Guilan gave the shield of Amadis to
his Squire, and took his own, and they met to«
gether upon the bridge with a most rude encounter.
The Knight was unhorsed and fell into the water f
Cruilan also was dismounted, and his horse went
over, but he saved himself by clinging to the
planks. The Knight got upon 6uilan*s horse, and
fio to shore, while Gmlan*s Squires took the bay
courser for their master. Don Guilan presently^
$zw the Knight of the bridge shaking off the wa«
ter, and holding the l)ridle : give me my horse,
said he, and let me depart. How! quoth he,
think you to escape so lightly with this ? — Quoth
Guilan, have we not performed the custom?
The battle is not yet over, cried the Knight, be-
cause we 'both fell : we must decide it with the
sword. ^ Perforce must I £ght ? cried Guilan : is
not the wrong done already enough, for bridges
should be &ee for every passenger? Will you,
pill you, quoth he of the bridge, you shall feel how
my sword can cut. He then sprung upon GuilanV
horse^ without setting his foot in the stirrup, and



U9'

placed himself riglit in the road. Don Cavaliefi
tell me, said he, before we fight, if thou art of
Lisaarte*s country or court ? — Why ask you ? — I
wish it pleased God/ that I had King Lisuartd
here as I have thee, by my head his reign should
be finished*. Certes, quoth Guilan, you have noW
given me a good will to fight with thee, which be->
fore I had not : I am of his household, and, if it
be in me, you ^all never more do him disservice.-
Before noon, quoth the Knight, you shall carry
my message to him, and I will tell you who I am,
and what present I will send him : my name is
Gandalod, son to Barsinan, Lord of Sansucna^ .hq
whom King Lisuarte slew in London » The pre-*
sents you shall carry him, are the heads of foor of
his Knights, whom I hold prisoners in yonder
tower : the one is Giontes his nephew, and thy
own right hand, which I mean to cut off and tie
round thy neck. Don Guilan laid hand to sword :
you have boasting enough, if that were til tlA
were needed.

Then began so fierce a battle, that Ladasin and the
Squires thought even the conqueror could not es-
cape with life 5 but they were both hardy Knights,
and their armour of excellent temper, and they
knew how to defend themselves. Now when their

G 3



^ht wti$ at the hottestj tihey hoa^d tbe wlndij^
ipf a bom from the tap of Aq towe?. Qan^od

knew QQt what it eould ipean^ ^nd GuUan thoughl
it w^ a signal for auccour'to his en^my 5 therefore
they both iQore eagerly bestirred tbeinselves to en4
the battle. Gandalod grappled with hlip^ and they
both fell ; then wsia the %ht Cllo^er ^d more 4^-
gerous, but Gui)an h^d the advantage 3 it \ira^ evi*
dent that his antagonist wai;^ weary and weak^
and at lengthy by a well driven bloyr^ Dps Ouilan
lopt off hia right arm. He ahrieked outs and
turned to fiy to his tower^ but Guilan reached hi«Eb
plucked the helmet ficom hia head> and hade him
cbu^e instant death> car to preaent hims^ ^ith hia
presents^ but ill another guise^ to King Liauarte*
I will rather trust his mercy^ quoth Ga^dalpdj
than be slain here outright.

Don Guihin then ieck borse^ md rode with l^da^
An towards the tower^ where there was a great
uproar. The Knights had broken j&om their prisoi)
and seized arms^ and one of them it was who
wound the horn^ and now they had won the castle }
the gate was opened^ and the servants apd one
Knight came flying out : they called out to I^ada«
sin and Guilan to kill those villains^ and partipu*
larly the Knight : tliree of the men escaped theo)^



ISX



hvk t|» Kn^t Acy look* Then; mhi QwJfiVk i»
then^ Sirti I cawnpt tany, ^ ^j couaia Ladasiia;
«h«U keep yon covapmiy ^ ](el the oMtfe be k«pt far
B^ and do yoa carry this Knight aiijd Gandalod to-
lUng Lisumte for his^ i^dfment Tl^ahe gsiv#
his own shield, which w«4 i^Mch battered, ^ hit
Sq]aiFe> and look that of Amadts^ and an he hnog
it ifound h^ neck the tears caqte. Thegr knew the
shield, and hearing, how Dqa Gttihui had found i^
were sorely troubled, thinking that some great
mishap had befallen Aooadbu Sq he pioceeded to
the court, and all that saw the shield crowded
round him ; and the King said* for God*s sake,
I>QQ Guilaik, teU us what yon know of Amadia^
I know nothing of him. Sir, ^pioth he, but how^
I fcund the shield I wUi doctare before the Queen.
So ht was taken to the Quoei^ and he knelt be^
£om hsi weepmg, sad toM her how he had found
the arma of Amadis, and sought for him ttiree
days in vain. Knowing, said he» the value of that
gooMl Kn^t, and that it was his desire to employ
it till death Iq your se^vioe, I have faroughi you'
these arms, in testimony of the duty whicJI I dp
owe both to you and to him. Let them be placed
where all may see them 3 there may be some
among the many strangers who come here, who
may know some tidings of their master, and they

o4



158

will be memorials to all who follow armft^ that
4hey may take example by his great chivalry.
Greatly was the Queen distressed at this^ and Li-9
suarte also^ and all the court ^ but Oriana could
not remain there^ and she went to her bed, and
bitterly reproaching her own folly, wished for
death. Albeit Mabilia did somewhat cheer hei:
with a hope that the Damsel of Denmark might
find him and repair all.

The Knight and Damsels whom Don Guilan had
I'eleased, soon arrived, and the two Damsels vrhQ
had seen Gandalin> and they related what lamenta«
tion a Squire had* made over the arms. Presently
afl^ came Ladasin, and the Knights who led
Gandalod prisoner -, and when Lisuarte heard what
cruelties he had purposed, he said to him, here I
slew thy father for the great treason which he com*
mitted against me, and here thou shalt die for that
which thou didst purpose to commit. So he com*
mapded him, and the Knight his follower, to b^e
thrown from the Tower^ before which Barsina*
h^d been bunit.



15



13



CHAPTER 9.



Bcltenebros and the Hermit were one day sitting,
on the ^ston^bcnch by the door of their chapel,
when the (Ad man said;, I pray you, son, tell me
what it was that made you cry out so in your sleep,
when we were by the fountain of the plain?
That shall I willingly, father, he replied, and I
beseech you tell me what you understand by it.
Then he related to^ him the manner of his dream,
only the names of the women, those -he did not
tell. The good man mused for a while, and then
said, with a cheerful countenance, Bcltenebros,
you have given me great pleasure by this account^
and you also have great reason to rejoice. The
dark chainber, in. the which you thought yourself
to' be, and from- whence you could not get out,
signifieth this great tribulation* which you now en*»
dure. The Damsels who opened" the door, ar«
Ibose friends who continually soMch your cause

05



I54t '

with her whom 70a k)ye so much^ and they wili
succeed so well as to withdraw you from this place.
The sun-beam which went before them^ is the
joyful news that they are to send you here ; and
the fire, wherein you saw your L^dy enveloped, is.
the great pain, of love wliich she suffers for you as>
well as you for her : from that fire you delivered
her, that is,, from the pain whicK your presence
will remove > and the pleasant garden is a sign of
great happiness, wherewith you shall pass youc
lives. Truly, I know a man c^ my }ia})it shoi^lc)
not discoui;se of suph things as these> yet it is mons
ibr God's service to spea^ the truth that isMiy cpxn-y
fort you, than tQ. conceal U> seeing your desperate
state.

Beltenebrps knelt down and kissed the old man>.
I^^nds, thanking God for having givex^ him such a<
|fien4 in bis need, and praying with tears that ha
-^ould mecicifully be ploased tp accomplish the>
words of that holy man his servai^t. Then he be--
^^ght hifn to telV tl|p interpretation of tl^e drean),
^ had di^eam^ (before Bi^ri^ gave him the lettef^
^hjcliwlieii the Pprpait^d i^eard, he answered,.
Tfeis I cafl dwjiw you clearly, fpr it i^ all, ac^ona*
plishpf]. T\ip plapp overshadowed ^ith tr^es, wa§v
Ib9 YvTffi Isla«idj 901^ the peppljs ^hp ipa^e m^



ISS

ffiaat )0f about yon, signified the gieat pkarar* ^
Ihe Islanden in g«imQg jrou for their Lord. Tbo
ina^! who caoae to you vitk the box of hitter elec*
tuaiy^ was the messeug^ of your lo/fy, for the
hittemess of her word8> you^ who have proved^
them* can be^t tell v and you laid aiido your arms*
The stony place amidst the water> i9 this Poof
Bock y and the religions man who spoke to you in;
an unknown tongue^ dpi l, ^^Q tell you the holy
word of Godj which before you neither kjn^w noti
thought of*.

Yerily,. said Beltenehros, you teU me the truth ofi
this dream,, for these things have aB come to pass,,
and therefore great cause have I to hope for the
future. Yet was not this hope so great or so cer-
tain as to remove his sorrow, for he would oftoi^
sit with; his eyes fixed upon the ground, remem-
bering, what he had been, aad his fife would: hate
been efidangesed by exceedieg xnelancboly, i^. it
not been for the counsel of that good man* And
sometimes, to take him away from, that pensive-
ness, the Hermit would make him. go with .two
nephews^ that kept him. company there,, to. angle

iin a Uttlp stieam h«rd bj, ^ere they caught plen%
fish.

G 6



156

Here Beltetiebros dweh in penitence and great
grief, and he past the night most frequently undes
some large trees in the garden near the chapel>
that he might there lament, withoHt the know-
ledge of the Hermit or the boys -, and calling to
mind the great wrong he endured, he made this,
song in bis passion :

Sith that the victory of right deserved

By wrong they do ivithholdfor which I served;;

Now sith my glory thus hath had a fall.

Glorious it is to end my life withall.

By this my death, likewise my woesrelease^

My hope, my joy, my inflamed, love doth cease..

But ever will I mind my during pain, .

For they, to end my glory and my gain, '

Myself have murdered, and my glory slain.*''

He had passed one night as usual under theso*
trees, when towards morning he heard certain in*-



f* Thi^ is^the Torsion in the Bnglieh translation ffom tht
French : tlie matter is preserved, the manner lost, .Tht



t57

i^tmments touched so sweetly^ that he toak great;
delight in hearing them^ and marvelled what it
might be^ knowing that in that place there dwelt
none else than the Hermit and his nephews. He
rose^ and went sofdy towards th& sounds and saw
that there were two Damsels bjr a fountain, whoy
tuning their voices to their lutes, did sing a most
pleasant song. He stood awhile listenrng, theri
advanced, and said, God save you, gentle Damsel^^
but your sweet music has made me lose my rost^



'poem is carious- fiom its age ; it 10 printed wit|i thea^
iD»rks :.

Pues seme niega victoriac
dojusto mera deuida
alii do muere la gloria (:•:)

' «s gloria morir lavida.

Y con esta muerte mia.;
iporiran todas mis danos> (:•:) 0'^

mi esperanza y mi porfia.
~ «1 amor y sus enganos ;
mas quedara en mi memoria '"

kistima nunca perdida^ (^'^

<^ue por me matar' la glorm, *x

me mjataron gloria y TidAv ' i



t5$

fbifi t 'Jfaey woiulerod wborhe ^oiild'be> and uu^^
to. him^ telL us^ ^etid>. for court^ay^. liifhat place
11^ this where we have landed, a^d who are you»
9(ho speak to ^^ L^dies^ he replied^ thej call it
itm Rode of the i|epiiitage>^^ because of the Hermit
that dwells, hece. As for iue> I am a poo:^. man,
whobeachim company;^ doing great and bard pe*
l»ance for tlie sins that I have commuted. Them
said they^ iriendj^. is there any house here where
pur Lady could rest for two or three days ?- for she-
is very sick : she is a Lady of high rank and wealthy,
whom love hath greatly tormented Beltenebros>
answered^ here is a little cabin^. it is very small, in.
vhich I ^ge : if the Hermits pleases, you shalL
have it,' and I will, asleep abroad in the field, as L
often use to do. For this^ courtesy the Damsel3-»
heartily thanked hi(n. By tliis the day beg^ to«
break, and Beltenebros saw under some trees the
Lady of wJiom they spake,, lying upon a rich bed y,
fi)ur armed. Knights and five serving men, who.
attended her, were keeping on the shore, and a>
well appointed ship rode at anchor. The Lady
was young and beautiful, so.thatheitoc^ pleasure.-
in beholding^ heiw.

Beltenebros then went tp tlie Hi^anit, wlio wa»;
sobing himself to say mass, Ealliei;^< said, he^



159

4bi$re ant sttogera bem ; k will te well iawiutm^fl*
fQr them. So they both weot oyt-from the chapeU
The Knights. an4 serving-ioeil were c^nryiag tbp
6ick L44jr tow^r^^ theiQj 9pd ^ Damseb wer^^
coming witli hefi f^ they aske4 Ihe Hern^it i£
there wa^ any house whepeii) they i^i^d place her.,
^e anjiwered^ here are two cabins : I live in the
one, and by my will oever woman shall enter that*.
This poor naap« who makes^ his pepitence here>,
loiges in the other^ and I will not remove him
against his will. To this Beltenebros replied^ Fa«^
ther, ypu pi^y well gi*^e them that, foy I will rest,
^nder the trees, as } oftei> do* They then entered
Ihe chapel to hear inass ; but the sight of J^pights
^d Damsels, reminded ^eltenebros of what he had.
been, apd of bif own Lady,, and reaewed ix) hlq^
bis exceeding sorrow, so. that he sobbed aloud, and
t^neeling dpwp at the altar, besougjit the Virgin
IS/^axy to Mp bifa. in his affliction. The Knight^.,
apd Damsel^b wh^ ^^ l^pw he w^pt, held him fof
4 man of goQ4' life, ap4 marvelled how he could';
employ Ij^s youth^and be^uty< in tbfit deaert pl^cev.
i^^ any sin that, he could have comoutt^d, seeing:
tfa^t the iperey. of. God m,ay be obtained in alL
places alike, by sucl^ a» truly repept, A^ soon a#.
fiE^a^swas ended, they carried the I^ady into bif
lablPi. ao4 ¥d b^r. l^ 1^^ rjcl^ bed^ ^4 sb^ 1? j



160

there weeping and wringing her hands. TH<t
Damsels went for their lutes to solace her^ and
Beltenebros asked them wherefore she appeared so
distressed. Friend^ said they^ this Lady hath great
possessions^ and is of high rank and beautiful;
though her sorrow doth now diminish her fairness;
and we will teli you the cause of her sorrow, tho*
it should not be told to others. It is excessive
love that afflicts her : she lis going to seek him
whom she loves at the court of King Lisuarte, and
God grant that she may find him there ! When
he heard the house of King Lisuarte mentioned*
and that the Lady was sick of love, the tears came
into his eyes, and he said, I pray you. Ladies, tell
me the name of the Knight whom she loves:
They answered, he is not of this country, but i^
©ne of the best Knights in the world, excepting
only two who. are of the greatest renown. — By the
faith you owe to^ God, I beseech you tell his name;
and the name of those other two. — ^We will tel!
you, on condition that you in return tell us if you
be a* Knight, as you seem> by every thing, and
likewise what is your name. I am content, said
he, that I may know what I ask, — Know then,
tiie Knight whom our Lady loveth, is Don Flo^
lestan, brother to the good Knight Amadis of
Gaulj and tQ Don Galaor^ and son of King P^riozL



J61



pf Gaul and Ae Countess of Sdandria. Novr^
quoth he^ you tell ine truly of his goodness^ for
you cannot say so much good of him as he de-
serveth.— Do you then know him I — It is not long
^ince I saw him in the house of Briolania, for I
saw the battle there of Amadis and his cousin
Agrayes against Abiseos and his sons > after which
flprestan arrived there, and I heard Don Galaor
^peak great things of his prowess, for they say he
fought with him. — Yes> replied the Damsels, it
was in that battle they knew each other, and then
florestan went away .^— What ! is this the Lady of
jthe, island where that battle was fought ?•— The
same.— >Her name is Corisanda. I do not now
grieve for her so much, for be is so gentle and of
such di^sition, that well I know he will do whals
ever is her pleasure. Now tlien, said the Damsek^
tell us who you are. Gentle Damsels, replied h^^
I am a Knight who have had more pleasure in the
:yanities of the world than falls to my lot now, for
jwhich I am now suffering, and my name is Belv
tenebros. Grod's merey^ upon you ! said they : we
inust now go play to our Lady.

>

After they had sung to her awhile, they told her
jsrhat Beltenebros had said of Florestau. Ah, call
liim here> cried she, he must be some good man^



i6e

■ince he kamra Bon Floraitaii . n«7 brooght him
to her, Thete Qaiaseli, (aid ihe, ttll me dut
ycu have aeea and dtat you love Don Plotestan s.
■\ty the faith y«i owe to God, tell me all yoa know
ccstcening him. fieheocbrot then related how he
had -gone vilh lua brethren and Agmyes to the
Finn liland, and that he had not teen kim since.
Tell me, said Corismda, are jou akia to him, icx
ypu teem to lot« him ranch i — X^y, I lw« hira
for hia great valour, and because Ui b^r kn^ted
me, wherdwe I am gicady bonnd to him and his
aon> ; b«t I am very sad lor the tidiogs which I
head of Amadia hefere my coming here.— What
-«IV they ^— I met a Damsel in a fercst by (he way
fide, lipging a fwvct S9iig, aad I asked her vh/t
Jh4 made it. She answered, a Knight, ta wIuxb
God give more eomfoTt thai be had vhen that wai
KWdej liir Iv the wofds it seemed he bad Eufifered
great woHg in lace, mi compliuned heavily. I
#t«yed two daya with the 1
it. She teld mv that Amad
4t|at ba. wept at (he time at
1 beseech you, qopth Corii
Damsels, that they may si
-Ihat wilj Ij said be, for yi
Jiii stAis whom you love ; a
.«iPK>ng, nv fw aught that



163

ttien yifexii with t!ie Jhm^ to dn^ ehapd^ imd
sbowed thma (he sqog wbiob he htid made : his
voice WBfi qf nure fwfttaess^ and aow his melaii*
choljT 9)94e i| mojpr soft and in unison 5 and the
D^ipsels leamt the aong, and did sing it to their
IMy, who took great pkasuve to hear them.
Cpfisanda remained there four dajw 3 on the fiAh
gh^ tqqk leave of the Hermit^ and asked Bdtene*
bros if he should remain there long ? Lady> till I
^e« 1^ replied. Then she entered her ship^ and
i»ad^ voys^ge tp Iifndm.

|4iWrte 9^i the Queen reooivad her hi a manner
l\j^\tahW tei her )ugb rank, ai^l lodged her in the
jp^lmP, and the Qu^n asked her if she had any
f^it t9 Jisviart^* that> if so, she might furthet it.
Mj l^ijx «4id Ck>nsandaf I. thank you for the ^
ypvir i but i|iy QPming is to seek Don flerestai,
fX^ because ti^ingfi froa» all parts reach this courts
I wU) reip^n h^r^ §oeae time liU I hear news of
l^iip. Qood friendj relied Brisena, that may y^
^p ^ long a^ you thij^k good 5 at fvesent we have
1)9 pilfer n^ews of hkOj than that he is gone ia
se^^ Q^ h^ h^thf^ AQ)adia> who is lost, wt
}cQow not for what c^nsei gtid she then rdatnd ho«r
(J^^aI^ bad ^n4 tfee 9ri9«« Heairii^ this^ she
^aQ fy w?^ 9od ^^, O lm4 (}oA, what wilt



IS4

become of my lord and friend lion Blorestan \ fbf
be so lores that brother^ that, if he finds him not>
h,e also will become desperate, and I shall nevef
see him more! The Queen having great pity,
consoled h^^ and Oriana, who was by, hearing
the love she bore to the brother of Amadis> had
the greater desire tO' honour her, and accompanied
her to her chamber, and learnt from her all her
love. Thus talking with her and Mabilia of sundry
tilings, Corisanda related how she had been upo»
the Poor Rock, and found a Knight there doing
hard penance, who had taught her Damsels a song
made by Amadis in his affliction, and the words,
she said> were very sad. My good friend and
Lady, quoth Mabilia, beseech you let your Damsels
sing it ! I desire much to hear it, seeing it was
made by that Knight, my cousin. The Damsels
then sung the song, which it was a pleasure to hear,
and yet so sorrowful that it made those sad who
heard it. But Oriana, who understood the com*
plaint, could no longer abide there for the .shame
pf the tears that she felt flowing, and she went to
ber chamber. Mabilia therefore said to Corisanda,
I see Oriana is unwell 5 she hath for courtesy re-
mained here longer than she should : I must go
and assist her ; but tell me what manner of man
iraa he whom you saw upon the Poor Eock of Iha



165

Hermitage, and what did he know concerning
Amadis ? She then told her how they had found
him, that she had never seen a roan so comely in
^rief and being wasted, nor one of such manners
in poverty, nor a man so young of such discourse
and reason. Mabilia forthwith went joyfully to
her friend*s chamber* He who asks news, said
$he, sometimes learns more than he expects : the
melancholy man who lives upon the Poor Rock,
aad calls himself Beltenebros, by all that I can
learn from Corisanda, must be Amadis. Oriana
Ufled up her hands, O Lord of the World, grant
that it be true ! Dear fiiend, tell me what to do,
for I have neither seasc nor judgment : unfortu-
nate wretch, who by my own folly and intempe-*
rate passion have lost all my happiness ! Mabilia
turned away her face, that the tears might not b&
seen : we must wait for the Damsel's netum, said
«he ; if she should not find him, leave it to me :-
1 am Bure he is this Beltenebros.



im



CHAPTER 10.



mmmammmmm^mmtm



Tbi days that Damsd of Denmark remained in
Scotknd, not so much fo- pleasure^ a< becaase shtt
' had suf^ned mUch fiXMn the sea^ «tit^ for the Ul
success of her search^ and she fe^uxd diat to return,
when she had vpadi so iil» would be the dealh cf
ker mistress* At lengdi she took her ieave, Aid
leeehrlng presents from the Queen of Scx^tland to
Queen Brisena and OriaaA and Mabtlia, she tok*
liirked for Great Britain, not toowltig what other
ooone to pursue > but that Lord of tlie Wodd,
who to those that are utterly without hope or ne*
medy shows something of his power, that we may
know it is he that helpeth us and not our own
wisdom, he changed her voyage, to her own great
&ar, and tlie fear and sorrow of all in the ship 5
for the sea began to rage, and such a tempest arose^
that the sailors lost all power over the ship, and all
knowledge of their course^ and the ship was driven



J



167

'wMtber tbft winds woiiU^ tkef ikai were in her
liaving aa liope of life. At last one morning tkef
came to the foot of tlie Poor Rode $ tcnne of them
jknew tlie places Mid -said tJiat Acidalod the Hermit
lived th«re> wJiich^ wlmi the Daoosd heard, «lie
ordered thera t9 (wt to land, that being rescued
irora such a dai%er, she might hear mass from
that holy maa» ^nd return ^finks to the Virgin
Mary for the mercy which her f^kxkfm Son had
shown them*

Beltenebros was »tting -at this ihae by the foan«
tela under the treesi^ where he had passed the
aigh^ and he was now so reduced that he did not
^eaLpect to live fifteen days« What With wec^mig^
and with the wasting aws^y d Sonrow, his fiAee Wat
more deadly pale than sickness could have made
h^ and so worn down and wan that no one eoeM
lutve known lum. He saw the ship^ fund ^le
Damsels and two Squires landing $ but his thoug^to
being who^ bent upon de8th> the t&iags that omed
gave him (dearare^ as in aeek^ strangers that he
might hdp them if they needed auccour» now hasl
bec(»nt hdtefiil. So he rose and went Into dtt
«hapel, and told the Henmt that there weoo
strangers tended and coming up 5 and then lib
k»sk beiisre the altar, $jsd prayed God to hsvir



168

TBefcy upon his soul, for he was socm gomg to iid*
account. The Hennit vested himself to say niass^
and the Damsel with Darin and Enil entered. Aftct
she had prayed^ she uncovered her &ce. Beltene^
bros rose from his kuees, and seeing &er and Durin^
the shock was so great that he fell down senseless^ '
The Hermit thought hioa dead^ and exclain^ed^ Ah^
Lord Almighty, why has it not pleased thee to
have pity upon him who might have done so much
in thy service ! and the tears fell fast adown his
long white beard*. Good Damsel, said he, let these
men help me to carry him to his chamber, I be-
lieve it is the last ^ kindness we can do him. Enif
and Darin assisted to lift him up, and they carried
him into his chan^ber, and laid him upoil a poor bed>
and neither of them knenr him,

I

After the D»3isel had heard mass, shtsresolved to
make her meal ashore, for she .'was weary of the
sea. So by chance she asked whx>''tUat 'poor man
was^ and what sore sickness affictied* him. — He is
a Knight, who liveth htrt i!> penance. He is greatly
to be blamed, quoth she, to chuse so desert a place*
It is as you say, replied the Hermit, for he has
done so for the foolish vanities of the world, more
than for the service of God. I will see him, said
the Damsel, since you tdl me he is ^ Knight, per-
haps there may be something in the ship which



165

would relieve him. — ^Tiiat yavt joajAo, but he it
so near his end, that I believe Death will ease you
of that troohle. Beltenebros was lying upon bis
bed, thinking what he should do: if he made
hi mseljf known, that would be breaking his Lady's
comniand, and, if he did not;, he should remain
without any hope or possiUe remedy i but he
thought to disobey her will would be worse than
death, and so determined to be silent. The Dam-
sel came to the bed-side, and said. Good man, I
learn from the Hermit that you are a Knight, and
because Damsels are beholden to all Knights for^t^
dangers they encounter in our defence, X resolved
to see you, and leave with you any tiling whiciN^
in the ship that may contribute to your health.
He made her no answer, ,but sobbed with such ex-
ceeding passion, that she thought his soul was de-
partmg ; and because the room was dark, she
opened a shutter for the light, and drew near to
fee if he were dead. They looked at each other
some time, and tlie Damsel knew him not. At
last, 'She saw a scar in his faccj|i it was the mark
of a- wound which Arcalaus haa given ftim with
his lance, when Oriana was rescued ; then, tho*
before she had no suspicion, slie knew that this
was Amadis. — ^h, Holy Mary,, help me ! you are
he. Sir ! and she fell with her face upon the be4»

VOL. II. H



170

Ml Inelt 4owB, and kiA lu« hands. Now, Sir»
««dftlie) ytmt^mupmaiaxtad pardos 9tt m^dtd
fyr ber %ho has wnmged |rou« for^ if tier m^iiBt
so^iofi have reduced fou to ^h danger^ ihe hec-
aetf ^idi taOK Kaiion [uaaei a Iflfe nn« hkler tfaaR
deilh. BtiittiMteostaoklierlftliisaraas* andhdd
lier Wirhilc^ hmntig no ponirer so speak. SIk tboa
gave hiHi liie letter : your Lad^ aeads f on diis^ and
^ bids fou, tf fOQ ate Ihe saaae Aaiadia» wboos
febeloiFes9oiRrQl, tolngQt liie past, and come to
her ki the nestle <£ Mkaitovs, and dMtre nxdve
her atonesieat lor year ^vrongs^ wliidi excessive
love occasioRed* Amadhi kissed the letter^ and
placed it upon Ks heart, aayiog, Keait, take thf
Tcmcdy, for there was none other that ooiild sawj
thee ] Ihis tras At letter :

If great faolts committed bj^umitj, iffhen hm^
hly acknowlec^ged, deaerre pardon, what shafi we
say to those which procoeded ifooa ^cess of k)ve>
Not Aat by this do I deny, wiy true friend, that I
deserve etcecdin|r pnniafement, f43r nd^ier havw
ing considered yoor tmtk, dbai had never befoi«
Sailed, nor my owa mind ki how passionate a starte
Jt was. I pray j<m Mceivo this Dansel as coming
ftont aiTC w1k> humbly confesseth her fa«k, «nd
who will teU yoa the wretchedness whkii she en*



171

inms «li© veqvesti yaor pi^, f»l bec«ie sIm
deserret H, bat f or y«ir cowfiwl;, » w«H a» to
own.



SischjorkadBdtBadaroi at thifi letter, that he was
lost even ai la kit pa«l sorrow, and tears that he
did not fed raft dawn hi$ cheeks. It was agreed
between them, that the Damael should give tmt
bow fkut teok him aboard iov his health sake, be^
cauae ob that Bock be could have no help, and
i^tt as soon as possible th^ should take land, and
leave thfi ship. BeLteoebros then told the Hermit
by what hspff chance the Damsel had found him^
«nd besought him t^t he would take charge of
the Moodsteiy that was to be built by his com^
mand at the foot of the rock v£ the Firm Island.
This the okl man procnisGd, and Belteoebros then
embarked, bein^ known of none but the Damsel*

They soon landed with the two Squires, and left
.the mariners. Presently they found a pleasant
place upou the side of a brook, with many goodly
trees, and theie they resolved to rest, because Bel-
tenebros was so weak ; and there, if it had not
been that the absence of his Lady afflicted him,
he would have passed the. pleasantest life, and best
for his recovery tfut might be, for under those

XI 2



172

trees where the brook-springs arose, they had their
meals, and there :ivas -their -.tent for , the night.
There rdated they to each other all that had .past,
and a pleasure was it now to him to talk over his
misery. Ten days they remained, and in that time
he so regained strerigdt, that . his healf^ felt its old
inclination for arms. He made himself known to
Durin there, and took £nil for his Squire, who
knew not whom it was that he served, but was
well content with him for his . gentle speech^
Hence departing, in four days they reached a
nunnery 5 there they determined that he and £nil
should abide, while the Damsel and her brother
went to Miraflorcs; She then gave Beltenebros
money to buy horses and armour, and for hifi
wants 5 and she left behind her part of the. Queen
of Scotland's presents, that she might send Duria
for them as if they had been forgotten, and -so lift
might bring news.



178



CHAPTER lU



After their year's vaia search^ Agrayes^ GaIaor>
and FlorestaD, met at the plaoe apppinted, which.
was a chapel half a league from London. Ganda-
lin came with Florestan^ and, when he found no
tidings of his Master, he said to them, that they-
should leave their lamentatioa and begin their,
search again, remembering what Amadis would
have done for them if they had been in like case.
So- they determined to enter the court, and, if they,
learnt nothing there, to set out again upon their
quest 'y and they wept to think how happily tliey
had accomplished all adventures that had befallen
them, and yet had failed to find him whom they;
sought.

Then having heard mass at the chapel, they rode
towards the city. It was St. John's day, and pre-
sently they met King Lisuarte tiding out with all

H 3



174

his Knights in lionotur of that holy daj^ because
the Saint vras so great a Saints and also because on
that day he had been made King. When he saw
three Errant Knights approaching, he drew nigh
to welcome tliem. Great joy was there when they
imhelmed, and . at first Lisuarte thought Florestaa
was Amadis> for he much resembled him j but
Gandalin and the Dwarf^ when they beheld this
meeting> wept with great grief. The news soon*
spread? greatly was Corisanda rejoiced thereat,
and 01inda> die gentle friend of Agrayes^ who
knew how he had past under the Arch <tf True
Lovers. MabOia^ la joy fcnr her brother's coming,
went forOriana^ who was sitting sorrowfully at her
ehamber^wbdow^ reading. She answered^ weep-
hg and Bighli^ as if her heart-strings would have
broken, how can I go ? do you not see my face and
ciyes, how they show that I have been weeping }
and how can I see those Knight8> in whose com*
pany I was wont to see Anoadis : it is better t0
die ! Mabilia comforted her how the could :— the
Damsel might yet bring ti&gs. Nay> quoth Ot\^
ana^ if these Knights have failed^ who have sought
him so far and so long, how shall she succeed ? a
woman \ and seeking him but in one place ? But
she may induce him to discover hipnself, sai(d Ma-
bilia, for she banies comfort to him, and know$



175

HiesecrololbUJov^, vliiAthsydiilDot. SoUw
dbeaied h«% tad wude hm vadi bar ^fct > 9ii4
Cttlled OlkMk to go witli them Id te Qimm*
Loeki ^Qotk the King to Galaer, iMmr iU yom
friend Oriana is ! I frieve loaee lier thiv, leplicd
ke : leason is it tliat we ihoald try lo belp hev
health by oor services. My good friend^ Gabor»
said she^ Ood k it who ii^alt lickDeaft 894 aorraw^
and if It pleaselh bim be will me, and rtcofec
yotir brotber Aiiiadii> wbom yon have kat, and
^irhom we all bwMDl* Jjka an ootciy was heard
without, for Gandalin and the Dwarf seeiog th^
Ma8ter*s shield where it was hong, began to lament
tHood, and the Kni|^ weie >Qon^rtiag them.
What ! cried lAsoarte, k GandaUa hero ) flprcstaii
answered^ I met him two moalbs agQ seeking fo^
bis Master, and made him bear m« CQi9pai)y. (
bold Gandalin, said the Kii9g» |o bQ om ^ tbc
best Squires in the world, and we ongbt tp Qoqi^
fert him. So he rose, and wei^ out to biQlt
When Oriana heard the name of G^nclalia, ao4
the lamentation that he was making, die grew
pale, and would have fallen, but Galaor and Flo«
restan caught her. ^labtUa, who knew the cause^
ran to her, and put her arn^s round her neck.
Good and true i^enda, then said Oriana to the two
brethren, if I do not show you what honour .1

n4



1/6

ought and desire to sbov» I pray you impute, it
to its true cause, this sore, illness ! and then she
went to her chamber. Dear friend> said she to
Mabilia^ since we entered this city of London,. I
have never been without some cause of sorrow* :
let us go to Mira£ores, that is a delightful place^
and there I can have the comfort of solitude. We
will ask your parents* permission, said Mabilia^
and there the Damsel of Denmark will find us>
and there you may the more freely see him, when
he shall be found. Ah, quotb Oriana, let us lose
no time f

This castle of Miraflores was about two leaguea
from London, a little place, but the pleasant^
abode in all that land, for it was in a wood by the
side-of a mountain, surrounded with orebards and
gardens that abounded with fruits and flowers, and
there were fountains in the courts canopied with
trees, that aU the year round bore flower and fruit.
The King one day had taken the Queen and Prin-
cess there when he was hunting, and because the
Princess was much pleased with the place, he gave
it her for her own. About a bow-shot from the
gate was a nunnery, which she had founded, and
there were nuns in it of holy life. So that night
she asked permission of Lisuarte and her Mothev
to retire there, which was readily granted.



177

The King being at table with Agrayes and his
cousins^ said to them^ I trust we shall have good
news of Amadis^ for I have sent thirty Knights
of the best of my household to seek him, and» if
they fail, take you as many as you will and seek
him ; but 1 beseech you do not depart till after a
battle which has been appointed between me and^
King Cildadan of Ireland, who is a King renowned
in arms, and has married the daughter of Kiog
Abies, whom Amadis slew. The battle is to 'be
an hundred against an hundred, and the quarrel
this : That kingdom has been obliged to pay tri-
bute to the Kings of Great Britain : Cildadan de-
mands battle on condition, that, if he be con-
quered, the tribute shall be , doubled ; but, if he
succeed, the country shall be freed therefrom.
I trow he will need all his Knights and friends !
ll)e three companions, albeit loth to have their
search delayed, yet could they not refuse to stay
and share the- peril. After the dotbswere re-
moved, Florestan bade Gandalin go to Mabilia^
who wished to see him. He went accordingly,
and, when they saw each other^ they both wept.
Ah, Lady, quoth he, what great wrong hath
Oriana done to you and to your lineage, in de-
priving you of the best Knight in the world ! and

what wrong hath she done to him, who never
. ... . »



soli
bed



178

«

trred agaiast her ia deed oor word ! Ill hath Got
bestowed such beauty and such goodness, when
this could ke iii her ! and yet lUKie hath lost so
much by it as herself ! Say not thya, Gandi^ I
cried Ms&}iha, what she did was from eKceeding
lore^ and in the belief that he was loving another*
And then she related all that had been said by Ar-
dian concemtng the brdcen sword. O God I quoth
Gandalin^ where were all your understandings I
he would have buried himself alive for her dis*
pleasure ! and she believed this ! and thus is the-
best Knight in the world destrojred \ Oriana had,
listened to all this : she came forward as if she had
heard nothing ; aad weeping, so that hardly could
she speak^ she said> O Ganda^ ! God preserve
and bkss you^ as you shall do what you ou^t I
JLady^ said he^ in tears also, what do you command
me ? Kill me ! cried she^ for I killed your mas*
ter^ and you should revenge his deaths as he
Would have revenged your*s ! And then she fell
senseless.

The King bade Grumedan accompany his daughter
to Miraflores^ and see that there were ser\'ing-men:
left there^ and porters £ov the gate^ and all things-
needful. £arly the next morning they set out>
and when Oriana saw the placc^ how fresh it was^



179

vith £owers and roses, and tbe viter-pipet mi
ibuntatBs, her mind £dt greatly comforted. The
keys of the castle and of the gaidea-gates were
every night to be carried by the porters to tbe Ab-»
bess Adalasta, that she imgbt keep them securely..
I have desired to have tbe key» by day> said Qri-^
aba to Mabitia, that Gandalin may get another
tfet made> so that if by good fortone Amadis sboold
eome, wemay admit him by tfaepostem-door thco'
tbe garden -, and thete Oriaoa determioed to Te«
main till she saw Amadts, or till she died in that
solitude. Her apartments were fiill pleasant^ and
before the chamber-door there was a little court
wherein thi^ee trees grew, that quite siiadowed itf
and there they took dieir pleasure,, but with great
anxiety expected the Damsel of Denmark and ber
tidings^ The next day the Porter came andsaid,
aS^ire asked for Mabilia; Let l»m in, quoth
Oriana y it is Gandalin, a right good S<pitre, who
was brou^t up with us, and is the milk-brothev
of Amadis, whom» God preserve from haita ! God
preserve bnn, indeed ! cried the Porter, for great
lps» to the world would it be if such a Knight
were to perish^. Lo now ! said Oriana to her
friend, as the Porter went away, how Amadis is.
knred by all, even by these single men ! and I
Vho was so loved by Uim^ I have l)een his death!



180

Herewitbal Gandalin entered^ andOriana making -
faim sit by her side, . related how she had sent the
Damsel of Denmark to seek Amadis> and what
she had written to him : think you, Gandalin, said
the, that he will forgive me ? You little know
his heart. Lady, quoth the Squire; by God for
the least word in the letter he will come : if you
bade him, he would bury himself alive under, the.
earth,— how much sooner will he come at your,
command ! And the Damsel of Denmark willr
sooner find him than all the persons in the world f .
for, if ^he hid himself from me, he will not show
himself ta any other. And you. Lady, should
take comfort with this hc^, lest he should find
your beauty so altered when be comes, and fiy^
from you. What, Gandalin I seem I so ugly }
quotk she, being well-pleased at his words. You
seen^ so to yourself, said he, that you thus hide
yourself where none may see you. . I do it to this
end, said Oriana, that, when thy master comethy
it* he would By, he may not be able. She thea
showed him the keys, and bade him get others
made like them, that whea his master cgme they
might admit him af their pleasure.

Gandalin took the keys to London, and returned
^t same night with others so exactly like them/



181



tliat there was no difFerence^ except that these
were new and the others old. Here thej are !
cried Mabilia/ showing them to Oriana : come^
we have supt^ and all the people are at rest 1 let
us try them. They took hand, and went in the
dark to the posterns that opened from the castle
into the garden. When they were near the first,
Oriana cried, I cannot go on^ I am dying with
fear ! Fear nothing ! qaoth Mabilia^ laughing as
she spake, when I am here to protect you^ for I
am cousin to the best Knight in the worlds and
am going on his service. Oriana could not but
smile. I will take courage, and trust in your
prowess in arms. Come on boldly^ quoth Ma-
bilia, 9nd see how I finish the adventure ! if I fail,
I swear for one whole year never to hang shield
from my neck, nor gird on a sword. In this merry
mood she opened the first postern^ and presently
the other with as little difficulty, and then they
were in the garden. How will he get over the
wall ? cried Oriana. At yonder corner, replied
.Mabilia, there must be a piece of wood laid on the
other side, and we will give him our hands here.
You must perform this labour, for it is you who
will be paid for it. Oriana at this took hold of
her cousin's coif and tlirew it on the ground, and
they stood laughing for some time, then. returned



182

*

and fastened the gites, and went to aest. An^
Oriana lay down, M2d>ilia cried, I wi^ that poor
wretch were bere who is now de^niring ! eat^
cousin I and sleep, that 70a may recover 700c
heauty, as Gbodalia advised !



183



CHAPTER 12.



King^ksuarte was at table; the dothswerem*
moved^ and Galaor, florestan^ and Agrayes^ were
about to take their leave and conduct Corisanda ta
her island^ when there came a strange Knight inta
the palace^ all armed except his head and hands,
and with him, two Squires^ and he carried in hi&
hand a letter sealed with five seak^ which on hift>
knees he presented to the King^ sayings let this be
read> and then. I will say for what I am come..
Lisuarte saw that it was a letter of credence^ and
bade him speak his errand. Then s^ the Knight,.
King, I defy thee on the part of Famongomadan,
the Giant of the Boiling Lake ^ Cartadaque^ his
nephew^ Giant of the Defended Mountain 5 and
Uadanfabul^ his marriage-brother^ the Giant of
the Vermillion Tower ; and for Quadragante^ bro*
iher of King Abies> and Arcalaus the Enchanter :
Ihey tell thee that thy deaths, and Ihe death of all



t84

who call themselves thine is in their hands^ for
they are coming against thee on King Cildadan*s
side. Howbeit, if thou wilt give thy daughter
Oriana to Madasima^ the fair daughter of Famon-
goraadan^ to be her damsel and servant^ they will
not injure thee^ nor be thine enemies^ but will give
her in marriage when it is time to Basagante^ Ma-
dasima*s brother^ who doth well deserve to be Lord
of her and thy land. Therefore, King, look to
thy choice ! such peace, or such war ! Lisuarte
smiled when he began to reply, as one who set at
nought the defiance. Knight, said he, better is a
dangerous war, than a dishonourable peace : a bad
account should I render to Him, who hath placed
me in this high rank, if for lack of heart I should
so shamefully debase it ! Tell them I would ra-
ther chuse war with them all tlie days' of my life,
and death in that war at last, than consent to the
peace they offer ! Tell me where I may send a
Knight to carry them this answer ? They may
be found, replied the Embassador, in the Boiling
Lake, which is in the Isle of Mongaza. I know
not the manner of these Giants, quoth Lisuarte,
whether a Knight can go amongst them safely?
That, replied he, doubt not 5 where Don Quadra-
gante is present, no wrong can be committed : I
will be his warrant. In God's name ! said Lisa-



185

arte, now tell me who jaa are ?— Landin, tha
■on of QuadragaDte*s sister. We are come to re*
yenge the death of King Abies of Ireland, sad
greatly it grieves us that we cannot find him who
slew him, neither know we whether he be alive or
dead. Quoth Lisuarte, I would you did know
him to be alive and well ! all would then be right.
I know wherefore you say thus, replied Landin ;
you think him the best Knight living, but, be I
what I may, you shall find me in the battle with
Kii^ Cildadan, and see what I can do against you.
I had rather have yoa in my service, answered
Lisuarte ; but there will not be wanting those who
will oppose you there.

Meantime Florestan's anger was rising. Knight^
said he, I am a stranger in this country, and not
vassal to the King, so that there is no quarrel be-
tween us for what you have said to him^ nor do T
undertake it because there are many Knights in hi»
household. But, you say, you seek for Amadis,
and cannot find him ; that I believe is not to your
loss ! but if it please you to do battle with me,
who am Don Florestan, his brother, let it be with
this condition : if you are conquered, you shall
give over tlie pursuit of vengeance 5 if I am slain,
your wrath will in part be satisfied, for whatever



us

wotrcfw faa foA for ilie Idbs of King Ablet, Aai
aad mncfa greater would Amafo cnduie for my
detth* landin replied^ Don Florestan I peroelve
joa have a heart for btrttk^ bat I canoot satisfy
Xoa now, being bound to return with this eaha^f
QO an appointed day, and also haTing pledged my-
self to undertake no enteiprize before the battle 5
but, if I come from that field alfye, I win mett
70a in the lists. Landin^ quoth Florestan, josi
answer like a good and honourable Knight, as yoa
are bound to do ^ let it be as jou have said. And
he gave his gloves in gage to the King, and Landin
gave the lappets of his armour 3 and the day lor
their combat was fixed for the thirtieth after th^
battle. Lisuarte then sent a Knight called Filis-
paiel with Lan£n to carry his reply, and they de»
parted together.

When th^ wem gone, the King said to Galaor,.
and Florestan, and their cousin Agrayes, you shall
see something that vnll please you ! and he sent
for his daughter Leonoreta to come with her little
damsels and dance before him, as she used to do >
a thing which he had never ordered, since the
news that Amadb was lost. She came, and the
King' said to her. Daughter, sing now the song
which Amadis, being your Knight, made for your



187

love« So die cUM tod Ite odier joiiag datnselii
i)egan ta liagt

Leaner, aoeetRotet aUotiierJtavitrtexceiUngt
For thee Ij'eel ttrange thoughu in me rtbcUitigA

I lost my liberty uihen 1 did gaze
Uptm tkose lights whieh $etmtina maset.
And •/ ^nefree «m now become a tkrmllt
Pi*t to nicft fom ihou^ nrw'st %/miuii mitktdi^
And yet do I esteem this pain a pleasure,
Endured for thee whom I Une out of measure.
Leonor, sweet Rose, aU other fiowers excelling.
For thee J fed strange ikoughU in me rehelling.

I little joy in any other^s sight,
Jdy heart is ihine, thyself my chief delight.
But yet I see the more that I do love.
More smart J feel, more pain, moregrirf J prove*
Well I let Love rage, though he he amgry ewer,
FU tt^ my loss for gain, ihough J gain neoet.
Leonor, sweet Rose, aU od^er flowers CMeolUng,
For thee I feel strange thoughts in me rehelling»

And thovgh to you I manifest my woes.
My martyrdom, my smart, mnother knows ;
One unto whom I secretly invoke.
Who is the cause of this my fire, my smoke.
She hath a salve to cure my endless grief ,
And only she may yield me some relief



18a

Leonwt notei Rote, all other Jloweri exeiUingi,
For thee J feel strange thoughtt ifi me * reheUing,

Yoii should know by what occasion Ainadis made
this song for the Princess Leonoreta« One day, a»
he was talking with Queen Brisena, Oriana^ Ma-
bililia^ and Olinda^ told Leonoreta to go and ask
Amadis to be her Knlght> and that he would then
serve her and no one else. The little girl wept to
him^ and did so ; and Amadis^ smiling, took her



* The song of Amadis hu suffered much in this second
translation, this '' shadow of a shade."

▼ILLANCrCO.

Leonoreta, fin roseta,
blanca sobre toda flor»
. fin roseta, no me meta
en tal cuyta vuestro ainor* ■

Sin Ventura yo en locura

me meti ;

en TOs amar e» locura

que me dura, .%

siu me poder apartar,

o hcrmosura sin par,

que me da pena j dulzor^



189



In his arms, and placed her on the estrado. Sincfe
you would have me be your Knight, said he,
give me some jewel in token that you hold me-



■An roseta, no me meta
CO tal cuyta vuestro amor.

De todas las que.yo veo
no desseo

servir otra sino a vos ;
"bien veo que mi desseo
-es devaneo,
do no me puedo partir,
pues que no puedo huyr
de ser.vuestro servidor,
BO me meta, fin roseta
«n tal cuyta vuestro amor.

Aunque nil quexa parcce
referirse a vos senora*
otra es la vencedora>
■Otra es la matadora>
que m vida desfallece,
aquesta tiene el poder
de me hazer toda guerra ;
aquesta puede hazer,
sin yo selo merecer,
jque muerto biva so tierra.



• •


* •



\90

^ joun ; and then she took from htr head a gM
clasp aet with gems, and gafc it hkn. AU began
t9 laugh at seeing hov Tcrily ahe Mkved the jest»

and Amadis^ being thus chosen her Knight^ made
for her this song. - And when she and her damsels
sung it they were dressed alike^ having garlands
on their heads, and garments of the same costli-
ness and fashion as Leonoreta wore. She was a
£ur princess, albeit not so fair as Oriana, who had
no peer, and afterwards she became Empress of
Rome, and her twelve little damsels were all
daughters of Counts and noble chiefs. So having
6ung their song, they knelt betee Lisnarte, and
then returned to the Qoeen,

Galaor and Blorestan and Agrayes then asked the
King permission to guard Corisanda home. He
took them aside and said. Friends ! there are no
other three in the world ki whom I have the same
confidence as in you. Thit ba^e is to be the first
week in August, and yon hear who are coming
agamst me, and they will bring others with them,'
who are brave and terrible in arms, and are also
of the nature and blood of the Giants : therefore,
I request you not to imdertake any adventure that
nay^lay you from being theve to aid me, for
Vkh your aid, and tiie justice of my cause, I trust



191



im Godtp Off c&anies» j^aM as tfaefr «re^ wil
i>e put lo «bame. Str^ ml daejr, tbi$ ^"'■^«— *^
WIS Qol needed : as £Rint Ktm^^H, onr wish is
to be ia cboger, to be whcfe« betog conqiieiBn,
we inigr wm tbe saiowa wbiok we seek ; or, if
coBtiucindt oome to the end £ix wluch we were
aU bom : we wiU prasendf letom. So tlicy took
ihrnir Jeare. aad 4f*fta rt ftd wkh Corisanda.



KraodaUn, who saw tkeaa depan^ wcurit to Mini*
Hores, and rdatod to Oriana and Mabilia ail thja
had past Now, quoth Qriaoa, is Oorisanda io aU
luppness, for she hath with her Dob Flofostaa^
whooi she loves. God ever eoaiinae her joy 1 lor
she is a good Lady. And thea sheiieraelf bega*
ao weep, and off, Ix>ni God, let me see Amadii
agaio. If it be hot &r aday !«*Gandalia gieadjr
pdtod her, bot he afiectad aager, and said, I^^adf ,
yott will aodse aae stsyaway fom Misafloees, for
iMsoaiewe looking for good tidings, and yon wil
make ns thus vnha^py ! Oriana wiped away har
fears : l>o not reproach me, GtmMim \ I woiM
^ oOierwise If I couM ; b«t« wtetever s e nAl aBc e
I liliould put on, my heart is always weeping !
But tell me, what will become of the King my
father, since Amadis wiH not be in Ae halliBi
He cannot so have hidden luasadf, replied Gandn-



192

lin, that such news should not reach him ; and
though 70U have forbidden him your sights yet he
may be present there^ thinkiDg then to merit par-
don for a £axdt which he never committed^ mor
thought to commit. While they were thus com-
munings a little ^1 came running 'm, hady, here
is the Damsel of Denmark^, and she brings noble
presents for yOu ! At this her heart trembled^ .
and sunk within her^ so that she could not speak^
and she was altogether so agitated as one who ex-*
pected life or death from the messenger who was
coming, Mabilia answered for her : tell the Dam-,
sel to . come to us alone^ that we naay speak with
her in private. This she said that there might be
none to witness Oriana*s agitation ; but she herself
and Gandalin were dismayed^ not knowing wha^
was to come. The Damsel entered with a chearful

«

countenance^ and kneeling before Oriana gave her
a letter: here/ Lady^ are tidings of joy ! I have
fulfilled all your commands : read^ and see if Ami^
dis have not written it with his own hand. The
letter fell from Oriana*s hand^ she trembled so with
exceeding joy : she opened it^ and found in it the
Ting which she had sent by Gandalin to Amadls,
the day whereon he fought with Dardan at Wind-
fior^ the which she knew well and kissed it many
times, and 8aid> blessed be the hour in which thou



193

wert made, that art transferred with stich joy from
one hand to another ! So when she had read the
letter^ and blest God with lifted hands for his
mercy^ she made the Damsel relate how she had
found him. Greatly were they pleased at her wis-
dom in leaving a part of the presents with Amadis;
now then^ said they, produce the rest before those
who are here, and say how you have foi^otten
the others, that we may send for them.

They showed Durin to what part of the garden*
wall he was to bring Amadis, and he kissed Ori-
ana*s hands for sending him upon this errand, which
might atone for what unwittingly he had carried
before. It was agreed that Mabllia should publicly
ask him to go ; but he feigned himself little con-
tented at the bidding, and said, angrily, to Mabilia,
for you. Lady, I will go, but not for the Queen
or Oriana, for I have had great hardships in this
journey for their pleasure. Friend During said Ori-
ana, yon should not upbraid us with your ser-
vices, so that we shall not thank you for it. Your
thanks, replied he, I believe will be worth about
as much as my service ! however, said he to Ma-
bilia, since you desire it, I will set out to-morrow.
He then took leave, and went with Qandalin to the
town to sleep ; and GandaUn bade him remember

VOL, II. X



19^

him to Ins cooBia Enil^ and tell hw^ said hfi, to.
coma and see. me as sopa as be can^ (ot. X. hav^
nxucli to say. to bimi and request him while he
cpQtinoes with thjit K^night^ to see if he can leanv
any news of Aiua^ia* Thi^ be said that Amadis
might be the^ better disguised^ and that he might
not want a pretext to seaj(i £nil aw^. So Duria
i|^punte(rhi9 palfrejr the-i^e^mpming aM<idiq»arted,.



193



CHAPTER 13.



^11 Ml rn



While Beltenebros remained in the Nunnery, hig
health and strength recovered, and he sent Enii to
the next town to get arms made for him, a green
shield with as many golden lions as it could hold,
and to buy him a horse, and a sword and breast-
plate, the best he could find. In twenty days all
was ready, as he had ordered it, and at the end of
that time Darin arrived. Beltenebros was right
glad to see him, and asked him before Enil how
the Damsel was, and wherefore he had returned.
Durin answered, that tlie Damsel commended her-
self to him, and liad sent for two jewels which she
had left in her bed 3 and' then he delivered to Enil
the bidding of his cousm Gandalin. ^ Who is Gan-
dalin ? said Beltenebros. A Squire, my cousin,
replied Enil, who long time served a Knight called
Amadis of Gaul. Tlien Beltenebros took Durin
apart to walk with him, and heard the message of



i96

Oriana, and sdso how liis brethren were to be in
the battle with Cildadan, and of the defiance that
Famongomadan had sent^ and how he had de-
manded Oriana to be serving-damsd to his daugh-
ter, till he should give her in marriage to his son.
When he heard this, his fiesh shook with exceed-
ing anger, and he resolved in himself, so soon as
he had seen his Lady, to undertake no adventure
till he had found Famongomadan, and fought with
him a combat to the utteriance for what he had
dared propose*

That night Beltenebros took leave of the Nuns,
and early the next day, armed in his green armour,
he set forth, and £nil with him carrying his shield
and helmet and lance. The day was clear, and he
feeling himself in his strength and once more in
arms, began to manage his horse so skilfully that
Enil said to him, I know not. Sir, what the strength
of your heart may be, but I never saw a Knight
appear so well in arms. The worth, quoth Belte-
nebros, lies in a good heart, not in a good appear-
ance ! happy dole hath he whom Grod has gifted
with both ! You have judged the one, judge the
other as you shall see it deserves when put to proof.
Seven days they travelled without adventure, and
Beltenebros, as he drew nearer, wore his helmet



197

that he might not be known. On the eighth^ as
they were passing the foot of a mountain, they met
a Knight upon a large bay horse, so huge in sta-
ture that he appeared to be a Giant, and two Squires
carrying his arms. He cried out with a loud voice
to Beltenebros, Stop, Sir K<Wght, till you have told
me what I want to know I Bcltcnebros looked at
the stranger's shield, and seeing three gdden flowers
in a field azure, he knew it was Don Quadragante,
for he had seen a like shield in the Fu:m Island,
hanging above all the others, as his who had ap-
proached nearest the Forbidden Chamber. Yet',
remembering Famongomadan, he would willingly
now have avoided battle 5 as also, because he was
on his way to Oriana, and feared lest the great
prowess of tliis Knight should cause him some delay.
Howbeit he stopt, and bade Enil give him his arms
if they were wanted. God protect you ! quoth
Enil, he looks to me more like a Devil than a
Knight ! He is no Devil, quoth Beltenebros, but
a right good Knight, of whom I have heard here-
tofore. By this Quadragante was come up, and
said to him. Knight, you must tell me if you be-
long to the household of King Lisuarte ? — ^Why
ask you ? — Because I have defied him and all his
household, and kill all of tliem whom I meet. Bel-
tenebros felt his anger rising, and replied, you

i3



are one of tl^ose who have defied him ? — I am :
and I aoi he >vho ^vill do to him and his all tlxe
€ivil in my power. r- And who are you ?-.-My naoae
is Don Quadragante.— Certes, Don Quadragante,
notwitlistanding your high lineage, and your great
prowess in arms, t^is .4s great folly in you, to defy
the best King in the world ! they who undertake
more than they can effect^ are ratlief rai>h thaa
hardy. I am not this King's vasnal, oor ani I of
his land, but for his goodness my heart is disposed
to serve him, ^o that I may account myself among
those whom you have defied : if you chuse battle
,with me, you may have it ; if not, go your way !
I believe Knight, said duadragante, you speak
thus boldly because you know me so little r pray
you, tell me your name ? — ^They call me Belte*
nebros : you will know me by it no better thaa
before, for it is a name of no renown -, but, thoug{i
I am of a far land, I have heard that you are
seeking Amadis 6f Gaul, and, by what I heax of
him, it is no loss to you that you cannot find him.
What ! quoth^ Quadragante, <io you prize him,
whom I hate so much, above me ? Know, that
your death-hour is arrived ! take thy arms, and
defend thyself if thou canst. I might do it with
8ome doubt against others, he replied, but can
have none in opposing thee, who art so full of
pride and threats.



Ite liofte lof Beltieiiiebrdk PStlcd, and Ire lumldf
^vi«d "w^bbflded -aft th^ tn^lie t)f Us bitast. Qu^^-
^aM; <it«5 atilioMed atodliQtt in ikt ribs j lie ro^^
^od nm at Beltetiebtdii^ 1^0 did not b^ hlm> for
Ife t(^ adjustitig fai^ helhiH^ and lit )tti6TtaJly stab^
hcA fats borse. Belte^bros alighted^ and went
itgwHiA httti s«nottt ih hattd in great ang^r. Th^e
^Rras lib coutage in this ! rried he 3 yoar oWh horse
'W'as ^(jitig ehongfa to have finished thb battle
i;^itib(](at this di^couttesjr ! Thb blows f^ll as thiick
and loud a& though ten Knights had been in com-
bat, lor bodi put forth all their strength and skilly
«nd the fight lasted froiti the hour of tierce UD
VesJ)fetsj Init then (iuadragante, overcome with
fatigue, and with a blow that Beltehebros gave him
on the helmet, fell down senseless. Beltenebros
look off his helmet to see if lie \Vere dead j the
air revived hikn ; he placed die s^^ord-point al his
face, and said, Cltiadragante, remember thy soiil^
for thou art a dead man. Ah, Beltenebros, cried he,
for God*s sake let me li^e for tny soul's sake ! —
Yield thyself Vanquished^ tlien, and promise to
fulfil What i command I 1 will fulfil your will to
save my life, said Quadragaiite, but there is no
reason wherefore I should confess myself van-
quished : he is not vanquished, wHo in his defence

i4



200

hath shown no fear^ doing his utmost till strengtii
and breath fail him and he falls ; but he who does
not do what he could have done^ for lack of heart.
You speak well^ said Beltenebros, and I like much
what I have learnt from you : give me your hand
and your promise then $ and he called the Squires
to witness it. You shall go forthwith to the court
of King Lisuarte, and remain there till Amadis
arrives^ and then you shall pardon him for the
death of your brother. King Abies ', for they l^
their own will fought in lists together, and such
revenge, even among those of meaner degree,
ought not to be pursued. Moreover, you shall
make null the defiance against King Lisuarte, and
not take arms against those who are in his service.
All this did Quadragante promise against his will,
and in the fear of death. He then ordered his
Squires to make a litter, and remove him 5 and
Beltenebros mounting the bay horse of his antago-
nist, gave his arms to £nil, and departed.

Four Damsels, who were hawking with a mer-
lin, had seen the battle, and they now came up,
and requested Beltenebros would go to their casr
tie, where he should be honourably welcomed,
for the good will which he had manifested to
King Lisuarte. He thankfully accepted their



201

hospitality, being sore wearied with the strug-
gle, and accompanied them. They found no other
wound than that upon the nipple of his breast,
which bled much 3 howbeit, in three days he de-
parted. On the second day at noon, from a hill
top, he beheld the city of London, and, to the
right thereof, the castle of Miraflores, where his
Lady Oriana then abode. Here he stood awhile,
gazing, and devising how he might dispatch Enil.
Do you know this country? said he. Yes, re-
plied Enil J that is London, in the valley. — Are we
so near ? but I will not go to the court till I have
won some renown, and deserve to be there : go
you therdifore and visit your cousin Gandalin, and
there you will hear what may be said of me, and
when the battle is to be with King Cildadan. —
But shall I leave you alone ? — I sometimes go
alone 5 but we will first appoint a place to meet at.
They proceeded a little way and saw tliree tents
pitched by a river side, the middle a rich one, and
before it there were Knights and Damsels sporting ;
and he saw five shields at the entrance of one tent,
and five at another, and ten armed Knights, (here-
fore^ he turned aside from the road that he might
not joust with them. The Knights called out to
him to joust. Not now, said he, for you are
xaaay and fresh, aiKl 1 am alone and weary. I be«

I 5



S02

lieve, said the one, you arc afraid yoxx should lose
your horse.— Why should I lose him ?— Because
he would be won by the man who dismouDte4
you : a likelier cliance than that you should win
his. Since that is the case, said Beltenebros, I will
ride on ^nd secure hira while I can j and he con-
tinued his course. The Knights cried after him,
your arms. Sir Cavalier, are protected better by 9,
smooth tongue than by ^ stout heart : they will last
to be hung over your monument, tho* you should
live these hundred years ! Think of me as you
please, quoth he, your words will not destroy my
"worth such as it is. I would to h^ven you would
break one lance with me ! cried the Knight 5 I
would not mount horse again for a whole year, if
y ou rode to your lodging, this night upon that bay
steed I Good Sir, said Beltenebros, that is the very
thing I am afraid of^ and have therefore got put of
the way. Holy Mary, they all exclaimed, what a
cowardly Knight ! He nothing heeding them,
rode on to a ford, at which he meant to cross,
when he lieard a cry from behind. Stop, Knight I
and looking round saw a Damsel following hiia,
iipon a palfrpy richly trappinged. Sir Kiiight, said,
she, Leonoreta, daughter to King Lisuarte, is ia.
yonder tent, and she and all her Damsels request
thdt for their sftke you wili joust virjltb bee



203

KiAght3, a t&ing foti will be more bound to do
by this r6qtiest ihau by tfccif defiance.— What !
4^oth he, is (ht daugbfer of the Ctueen th6re ?—
Aye, iraiy !-=*-! should rathci^ do her service myself^
fito ccfioDiitiit entnity against her Knights^ but at
&er comfttabd I "^ill consent, oh condition that
fkty I'eqnire from iti6 nothing ^rther than the joust.
With iStits answer the Damsel fefcrhed > and Bel-
t^n^bfos took his amis, and rode to an open part
of tihe field to 'waft for the encounter. The first
"#lk)^ csffAt was fl&e ohe wlio Bad such an inclina-
fi^ii lb wih* &ia hor^e. BeltienebFos was pleased
tfiat* tiiis wa^ the first': h^ unhorsed' hlm,^ and bade
Eaik takt hiff hors6, tod said. Sir Knight, if you
feep yottT Yfoif&, you will not' have another fall for
ii'Whdl6 y^ar, fof to you promisedr unless you won
tfiy baj^ f but he lay groaningi for lie 6ad tliree
libs andahip'bx%}lt^D; Three others shared the same
ioi^ne with less hurt ; on the last, Beltenebros
M^ke'hi^ lanctf . Enil took tlieir Korses one by one,,
and* tied theih' tt>' the ttees, and iheii Beltenebfos
WtKiid \i2LV\6 disparted y but he saw another Knight
■iaking riSady, airid a Squire brought him four
laiic^s, and said. Sir, Leoriorcta sends you these
iMices, arid'bidiybu dd your duty with tHem against
the other Knights, sitace you have overthrown
their companions. For her sake^ said he^ who is



204

daughter to so good a King, I will do what sbere*
quires ; but for her Knights I would do notliing,
for they are discourteous to noake Knights who are
travelliug joust against their will. So he took a
lance^ and one after the other dismounted all the
rest ', only the last endm-ed two encounters, and;
fell not till the third, for he was Nicoran of the»
Perilous Bridge, and was one of the good jousters
in Great Britain. When Beltenebros had finished^
he sent all the horses that he had won toLeonoreta,
and bade her tell her Knights to be more courteous
^ strangers, or else to joust better, for they mights
find a Knight who would make them go afoot.
The Knights remained greatly abashed : if Amadifi
were alive and well, quoth Nicoran, verily I should
say this were he, for I know no other who would
have left us thus. It is not he, said Galiseo, some
of us should have known him, and he would not
have jousted with us, being his friends. Giontcs>
the nej^hew of King Lisuarte, who was one of themy
replied. Would it were Amadis, our dishonout
would be well gained ! but be he who he may,
God prosper him wherever he goes ! for he won
our horses like a good Knight, and hke a good
Knight restored them. Curse him, quoth Lasa-
mor, he has broken my hip and my ribs, but it
was my own fault.



205

Bdtenebros went on satisfied with his success^ anS
admiring the lance which he held^ for it was a good'
one. About a quarter of a league on, he saw a
chapel overbowered with trees, and tliere he de-
termined to alight for the sake of prayer, and be-'
cause the great heat and the exercise of jousting
had made him athirst. At the chapel-door were
three palfreys equipped for women, and two for
Squires. He went in, but there was no one there,
and commended himself from his heart to God
and the Virgin. As he was coming out, he saw
the three Damsels and their Squires sitting under
the trees beside a fountain, and made up to them
that he might drink : but neither of them did he
know. Knight, said they, areyouof KingLisuarte's-
household ? I would, quoth he, I were so good a
Knight as to be approved in such a company : but
whither go ye ?— To Mirafiores, to see our Aunt
who is Abbess there, and to see Oriana the Prin-
cess ', but we are waiting here till the heat of the-
day be over. In God's name, quoth he, and I^
will keep you company till it be time to travel :
how is this fountain called ?— We know not, but
there is one in yonder valley, by those great 'trees-
there, which is called the Fountain of the TJiree
Channels. He knew it better than they, for he
shad often passed it when hunting, and there he-



208

attempt adventure confiding in my own courage^
but in you : my gentle Lady^ assist me now, in
this great need ! He felt his full strength now,
and all fear was gone, and he cried out to the
Dwarfs to stop.

When the Giant heard him, he came towards him
with such rage that smoke came through the vizor
of his helmet, and he shook his boar-spear with
such force that its ends almost met. Unhappy
wretch ! cried he, who gave thee boldness enough
to dare appear before me ? That Lord, quoth
Beltenebros, whom thou hast offended, who will
give me strength to-day to break thy pride. Ccwne
on I come on 1 cried the Giant, and see if his
power can protect thee from mine I Beltenebros
fitted the lance under his arm, and ran against him
full speed : he "smote him below the waist with
such exceeding force that the spear burst through
the plates of steel, and ran through him, even so
as to strike the saddle behind, that the girths broke,
and ' he fell with the saddle, the broken lance re-
maining in him. His boar-spear had taken effect
upon the horse of Beltenebros, and mortally
wounded him. The Knight leapt off and drew his
sword. The Giant rose up so enraged that fire,
come, from him, and lie plucked the lance fromhia



209

wounds and threw it at Beltenebros so forcibly that
if the shield had not protected his helmet^ it would
have driven him to the ground; but his own
bowels came out with the weapon^ and he fell>
ciying^ help^ Basagante 1 I am slain. At this Ba-
si^ante came up as fast as his horse could cany
him : he had a steel axe in his hand, and with this
he thought to have cut his enemy in two; but
Beltenebros avoided the blow^ and at the same time
struck at the Giant*s horse : the stroke fell short,
but the end of his sword cut through the stirrup-
leather, and cut the leg also half through. The
Giant in his fury did not feel the wound, though
he missed the stirrup ; he turned and raised his
axe again. Beltenebros had taken the shield froni
his neck^ and was holding it by the thongs : the
axe fell on it and pierced in, and drove it from his
iiands to the ground. Beltenebros had made ano-
ther stroke, the sword wounded Basagante*s arm^
and, falling below upon the plates of fine steel,
broke, so that only the handle, remained in his
hand. Not for this was he a whit dismayed ; he
saw the Giant could not pluck his axe from th^
shield, and he ran and caught it by the handle
also j both struggled ; it was on that side where
the stirrup had been cut away, so that Basagante
lost his balance, the horse started and he fell, and



Bdtendn'08 get the %fl(t{)e«axe. The Giant drew
his sword in gresrt fwy^ and would have ran dt the
Knight^ but the nerves of his leg were CKt <fooi3^ >
he fell upon one knee^ and Beltenebite smcfte bim
on the helmet^ that the laces burst and it fen offl
He seeing his enemjr so near^ *thot!ght wi& fuik
sword, which was veiy long, to sm^ ^ff his head $
the blow was ahned too high, h cut off die wbc^
crown of the helmet, and cut away the hair wiA it.
Beltenebros drew back ; the helmet felicrver his head
upon his shoulders, and Leonoreta and the Damsels^
who were on their knees in tire ws^ctt praying to
God to deliver them, tore their hair and began to
^riek and call upon the Virgin, thinking he was
surely slain. He himself put up his hand to fed
if he were wounded to death, but feeling no harm,
made again at the Giant, whose swoi"d falling upon
a stone in the last blow had broken. Basagantt's
heart failed him now, he made one stroke more,
and cut him slightly in the leg with the brdkcn
•word J but Beltenebros let drive the battle-axe at
his head 5 it cut away the ear and the cheek and
the jaw, and Basagante fell, writhing in the agony
of death.

•
At this time Famongomadan had taken off his
helmet, and was holding his hands upon his woand



to check the blood. Wbeu fae saw bis son slaki,
he began to blaspbeipe God and hii Mother Ho^r
Mary^ i>aying that be did not so mvcfa grieve to
die as that he could destroy dieir xnooastenes and
churqhes^ because they had suffered him and htj
^pn to be cgnqi^ered by one Knight. Beltenebrot
was then upon his knees retuoiing thanks to Grod,
when he heard the blasphemer^ be eKclaimed^
Acci^rsed pf God aod of his Blessed Mother \ now
shalt thou mS&c for thy cruelties ) pray to thoM
IdoL t)iat, as thou hast shed so much blood before
him^ he may stop the blood of thine from flowing
out with thy life ! The Giant continued to curse
God and his Saints ; then Beltenebros plucked the
boar-spear firom the horse*s body^ and thrust it
into the moutli of Famougomadan/and nailed him
backward to the earth. He then put on Basan-
gante*s helmet that he might not be known^ and
mounting the other's horse^ rode up to the waggon
and broke the chains of all who were prisoners
therein^ and he besought them to carry the bodies
of the Giants to King Lisuarte, and say they were
sent him by a strange Knight called' Beltenebros ;
and he begged the Princess to permit him to take
tlie black horse of Famongomadan^ because it was
a strong and handsome horse^ and he would ride
him in the battle against King Cildadan, The bo-



2i2r

dies of the Giants were so huge, that they were^
obliged to bend their knees to lay them in the wag*
gon. Leonoreta and her Damsels made garlands
for their heads, and being right joyful for their
deliverance entered London singing in triumph.
Much was King Lisuarte astonished at their adven-
ture, and the more for Quadragante had already
presented himself on the part of Beltenebros, of
whom nothing else was known except what Cori-
sanda had related. I would he were among us,
said the King, I would not lose him for any thing
that he could ask and I could grant.



'213



CHAPTER 14.



Beltenebros having taken leave of the Princess^ fe-
turned joyfully to the fountain where the Danosels
-were. He bade Enil go to London^ and get him
other arms made the same as those he wore^ which
were now so battered as to be useless^ and he was
to buy him another sword^ and bring them in
eight days to the Fountain of the Three Channels.
£nil forthwith departed^ and the Damsels also
taking their leave, rode on to Miraflores, and there
told Oriana and Mabilia what great feats they had
seen that day atchieved by a Knight called Beltene-
bros. He meantime struck into the forest, and
rode slowly the same way, till he came to a brook
winding among the trees, and there, for it was
yet early, he alighted and took off his helmet, and
drank of the water, and cleansed himself from the
sweat of the battle j and there he remaihed, mus-
ing over his past and present fortunes and the



214

Strange vicissitudes of life^ till night approached 5
then he made for the castle. Durin and Gandalin
met him at the garden- wall, and took his horse.
Oriana and Mabilia and the Damsel were on the
wall ; they gave him their hands : presently he
was over, and held Oriana in his arms j but who
can tell what joy there then was in embracing and
kisses, and the mingling of tears ? Mabilia roused
them as from a dream, and led them into the cas-
tie; and there Beltenebros remained eight days
with Oriana in joys dearer < to him than even Pa-
xadi^.

*

Meantime King Lisnarte was preparing- for the
battle against King Cildadan, which he much
doubted, knowing what Giants arid mighty Knights
would be with hi« enemy. Florestan and Galaor
and Agrayes were returned, and Don Galvanes
Lackland had arrived, and many other good '
Knights; The whole talk was of Beltenebros,
and many said his deeds surpassed those of Amadis ;
whereat Galaor and Florestan were so eftraged, that
nothing biit their promise to undertake no adven-
ture before the battle, withheld them from seeking '
him and proving him in mortal combat, but of this
th^y only communed with each other. One day
there came into the palace an old S(juire with two



215

•

Others^ all dad in gannents of the same cloth*
The old man s heard was shorn, his ears were large,
and the hair of his head grey. He, kneeling be-
fore the King, addressed him in the Greek lan«
guage : Sir, the great fame which is gone abroad
of the Knights and Dames and Damsds of yoar
court hath brought me hither, to see if I can find
among them what for sixty years I have sought
through all parts of the world, and reaped no fruit
for my labour. Noble King^ if you hold it good,
permit that a trial may be made here, which shall
not be to your injury nor to the shame of any. AU
who were present, desirous to see what it might
be, besought the King*s assent^ which he, feeling,
the like curiosity, readily granted. The old Squke
then took in his hand a coffer of jasper, three cu^
bits long and a span wide, its sides being ^stened
with plates of gold ; this he opened, and took ont.
a sword, so strange as the like was never seen ;
the sheath was of bone, yet ^een like an emerald,
and so clear that the blade of the sword could be
seen through, and it was unlike other blades, for
the one- half was as bright as it could be, and the*
other burning red like fire 3 the hilt was of; the*
same green bone, and the belt also^ hem^ m^de*
of such small pieces fastened together with. gold,
screws, that it could be girt, on like a commoa*



21G

belt. This tlie Squire hung round his neck, and
took from the same cofFer a head-dress of flowers,
the half whereof were as beautiftif and fresh as
though they had just then been cut from the living
. stem 3 the other half so withered and dry^ that it
seemed they would crumble at a touch. The King
asked why those flowers, that all seemed to grow
from the same stem, were yet in such difierent condi-
tion, and what was the nature of that strange sword ?
King, said ^e old Squire, this sword cannot be
drawn from the scabbard, except by the Knight
who of all men in the world loveth his Lady best ^
and as soon as he shall have it in his hand, the
half which is now of burning red, shall become
dear and bright like the other part, and the whole
blade be of one colour j and when this garland o£
fliowers shall be set upon the head of that Lady or
Damsel, that with the same surpassing love doth
love her husband or friend, the dry flowers slwU
again become *fresh and green. And know, Siry
that I cannot be knighted except by the hands of that
true lover, nor take sword except from that loyal
Lady ; for this, O King, having searched all other
courts and parts of the world, I am come hither,
after sixty yeiars, hoping ihat as there is no court
of Emperor or Kii^ like this., here I may succeed
at last. Tell me^ said Lisuarte, how is it that the



217

half wUch is burning red^ does not bum the Bcab*
bard? You shall hear, quoth the Squire; Be-
tween Tartaty and India there is a sea so hot^ that
it boils like water over a'&re» and it is all green;
and in that sea serpents breed bigger than croco*
diles^ having wings wherewith thejr fly^^^nd so
venomous that all people run from them in fear $
nevertheless^ they who art any time find one dead
esteem it much> being a thing excellent in medi-
cine. These seipents. have one bone reaching
from the head to the tail, it as so strong that thq
whole body is formed upon this one bone, and
green as yon see it here in this scabbard and hilt
and belt, and because it grew in that boiling sea
no fire can burn it. Now I will tell yoii of this
garland : the fiowers are firom trees in Tartary. vS
an ifland fifteen miles from the shore ; the trees
are only two, nor is it known that there are any
such in any part elsewhere ; but in that sea is a
whirlpool, so terrible that men fear to venture to
take them, howbelt they that have dared pass and
succeeded, sell them for what they will to ask^
for this freshness and life-green never fails. Hav-
ing told you thus much, you shall know who I
myself am. I am nephew of the best man of his
own time, who was called Apolidon, and who
long time dwelt here in your country in the Firm

VOL. II. K



218

hiland. My father was King Ganor^ his broker,
to whom he gave his kingdom^ and my mother,
daughter to the King of Panonia, and^ when I was
of -age to be knighted, my father, because of the
exceeding love between him and my mother, made
me promise to be made Knight by none but the
most true Lover in the world, and to receive sword
only from the truest Lady. I lightly promised,
thinkiiig tp accomplish this as sooaas I should see
my Uncle Apolidon and his Grimanesa ^ bat so k
Was, tliat, when I arrived, Grimanesa was dead,
and he knowing wherefore I came, greatly pitied
me, for it is the custom of my land that no one
who is not a Knight can reign therein. So having
ho remedy to give me then, he bade me return to
him at a year's end, and at that time he gave me
this sword and garland, telling me by the labour
of this search to remedy the folly of such a pro-
mise. And now. Sir, I beseech you, as without
-virrong or shame it may be done, that you and your
Knights and the Queen and her Ladies be pleased
to make the proof j and if such can be found as
^^all accomplish it, let the sword and garland be
:theirs,^ the profit will be mine, and rest from my
weary toil, and the honour yours above all othej:
Princes, that 'they who could accomplish this ad-
iteiture ^xre found in your court. The King then



said^ that Santiago's da/ was but five dajrs off,
and then he had summoned many Knights to be
present, wherefore if it pleased him to wait so
long, his chance of success would be greater
among so many more Knights. This the Squire
thought good.

Gandalin was at this time in the court, and heard
all that the Squire had said. Forthwith he rode to
Mlraflores. Beltenebros and Oriana were playing
chess in the little court under the trees. When he
had related all that had past, and how a day was
appointed for the trial, £eltenebros sate musing for
a while, lost in thought, till Gandalin and his
cousin had left the place, and then, as he looked
up, Oriana asked what had made him so deep in
thought. Lady mine, quoth he, if by God*s help
and your*s my thought could be accomplished, I
should be a happy man for ever. Dear friend, she
answered, she who hath made you master of her
person will do for you any thing ! He took her
hands and kissed them often, and said, this is what
I have been thinking ; that, if you and I could
win this sword and garland, our hearts would be
for ever at rest^ and all those doubts that have
tortured us be utterly destroyed. But how can I
do this^ said Oriana, without great shame and

k2



S2(y

greater danger to myself and to these Damsels,
who are privy to our loves ? That^ replied Belte-
nebros^ may easily be done, you shall go so dis<*
guised, and I will obtain such security from the
King your father^ that we shall be as unknown as
before strangers. Then do your pleasure, quoth
she, and God prosper it to good ! I doubt not to
gain the garland, if it is to be won by exceeding
love. I will obtain your father's promise, said
Bdteoebros, that nothing shall be demanded from
me against my own consent, and will go com-
pletely armed ; and you. Lady, shall have a cloak
fastened round you, and your face muffled, so that
you shall see all, yet no one see you. Let us call
Mabilia, cried Oiiaoa, without her counsel I ^ust
not adventure. So they called her and Gandalin,
and the Damsel of Denmark, and they, albeit they
aaw great peril, did not gainsay their inclination ;
and Mabilia said, there was a rich cloak among
her mother's presents that the Damsel had brought,
which never had been worn or seen in that land.
She brought it, and took Oriana apart and dressed
her in it, so that when she came out with her
gloves on, and her face-cloths, ♦ no one knew her.



* Antifazes.



221

ihoagh they looked narrowly. Lady mine^ cried
B^ltenebros^ I never thought it would give me
pleasure not to see and know you ! He then bade
Gandalin buy the fairest palfrey that could be found
ill all that country, and bring it at midnight before
the day of the adventure^ to the garden-wall ; and
he told Durin to have his horse ready for him this
evening, that he might meet Enil, and send him
to obtain the security from King Lisuarte.

Bdtenebros rode that night through the forest, and
at day-break reached the fountain of the Three
Channels. Presently Enil came up and brought
with him the arms : they were good arms, and
pleased him well. He then asked the Squire what
news of the court, and Enil told him the talk there
was of his prowess, and was about to relate con-
cerning the sword and garland, butBeltenebros said,
this I learnt three days since from a Damsel wha
made me promise to carry her secretly to this
proof : this I must do, and will prove the sword
myself J but, as you know it is my will not to
make myself known to the King nor to any other
till my deeds make me worthy, you must return
directly and tell the King, that if he will promise
and secure us that nothing shall be said or done to
us against our pleasure, we will come and try the

k3



222

adventure ) and say yoM, before tlie Queen and her
Ladies^ that this Damsel makes me go greatly
against my inclination. On the day of the proofs
meet me here at dawn, that the Damsel may know
if she has this security j meantime I must return
to bring her here> for she dwells far oiF. Beltene*
bros then took his arms^ and while Enil went to
the city, lay down by the same brook-side till night,
then rode to Mirafiores. Durin was ready to take
his horse, and his fair friends expected him at the
garden-walL What, Sir Cousin ! quoth Mabiliaj^
seeing his arms, you return richer than you went.
Do yoi^ not understand it ? cried Oriana, he went
to get arms, that he might free himself from this
prison* Thus chearfuUy they entered the castl^
and they gave him food, for be had not eaten tho
whole day, lest fee might be s^u.



2S3



CBJPTER 15.



The next day the Damsd of DenmaA: was tent to
Londoa to learn what answer £ml obtained^ and
to tell the Queen and her Ladies that Oriana was
Hl^ and did not rise. It was late before she re-
turned^ because the King had gone forth to meet
Queen Briolania, who was come to his court, and
brought with her three hundred Knights to go in
search of Amadis, as his brothers might dispose
of them. Twenty Damsels accompanied her, all
dressed in mourning like herself, for in that dress
had he found her, and that dress had she worn
when he recovered for her her kingdom, and that
she would wear till some tidings of him were
known. Is she so handsome as they say ? quotji
Oriana. So save me Grod, Lady, replied the Dam-
sel, as excepting yotirself, I think her the fairest
and most graceful woman that I have ever seen.
And it grieved her much when she heard of yoET

k4



224

malady, and she bade me say, when it pleased yon,
she would come and see you.' I should be much
pleased, answered Oriana, for she is the person in
the world whom I most wish to see. Honour her
well, said Beltenebros, for she well deserves it,
although. Lady, you have suspected something.—
Dear friend, no more of this, I know my thoughts
were false. But this trial, quoth he, wiU make
you more free from this, and me more subject.—
Hie garland, said Orjanaj^ will prove whether isy
error proceeded firom excess of love. The Damsel
then told them how the King had promised £x»I
the security which he required.

They rose at midnight before the day of the proof.
Oriana was wrapt in Mabilia's mantle, and her iace
muffled, and Beltenebros armed himself in his new
arms. They crossed the wall ; Gandalin was there
with the horse and palfrey ; they mounted, and
rode alone into the forest. Mabilia and the Dam-
sel of D^miark remdioed in great fear lest ill
should befal ', but, when Oriana found herself in
the midst of the forest at night, she was so sf-
frighted that her whole body trembled and her
speech failed, an^ she began to apprehend that she
might fail to accomplish the adventure, and that if
8o her lov^r, who now trusted in her so fiiUy^



225

would suspect her trath^ and then she wished sbt
had never undertaken the danger. When Beltene-
hros perceived her agitation^ he said, I would ra<^
ther have died. Lady, than brought 70a here, if I
had thought you would have been so terrified $ we
had better turn back^ and he turned his horse and
led her palfirey round. But then Oiiana's heart
changed, seeing that so great an adventure would
be for her sake foregone, and she said, dear friend
do not heed my fears, for I dm a woman, and this
is a strange place to me ; regard only what you,
as a good Knight, ought to atchieve. Dear Lady^
mine, quoth he, your prudence ^ides my folly :.
X can neither do or say other than you command
me : so they proceeded, and about an hour before
the dawn leached the Fountain. When it was
broad day Bnil came up. Lady Damsel, said Bel*
tenebros, this is the Squire of whom I spake, let
«5 hear if the King grant your demand. Enil then
told them what Lisuarte had promised, and that
the proof was to begin inune^ately after mass..
£eltenebros then gave him his shield and spear, the
helmet he wore himself > they took tlie road to Lon^*
don, and in this gmse entered the gate. All flock*
cd to see them crying out, this is the good Knight
Beltenebros, who sent here Don Quadragante and
the giants ! This is the |>ruxie of all knighthood !

1L5



226

Happy the Damsel \irlio comes in his goard !
When Oriana heard this she felt a pride to know
herself the mistress of him, who^ bj his .great
valour, could command all others. Thus they
reached the palace, where the King and all his
Knights, the Queen and her J^adies, were assem-^
bled for the adventure. As soon «s their approach
was kno^n the King went to receive them at the
entrance. They knelt to kiss his hand« but he
withdrew it, saying, (7ood friend, I shall willingly
observe your pleasure, for in a shcMt time you have
done more for me. than ever Knight did for King»
before. Belteneb/os bowed thankfully, but made
no answer, and proceeded with his Damsel up to
the Queen. But Oriana*s flesh quivered with,
fear, seeing she was before her parents, but her
true friend never let go her hand, and so they both
knelt before Brisena. The Queen raised them an^
said. Damsel, I know not who you are, never
having seen you j but for the great services which
this Knight hath performed, and for your own de*
lerts also, you are both honourably and deservedly
welcome. Beltenebros thanked her, but Oriana
held down her head qs if for humbleness, and
made no answer. The King and his Knights
then went on one side of the hall, the Queen and
ber Ladies to the other i but Beltenebros saidj,



fi27

that if it pleased the King, he would stand apart
with his Damsel^ and prove the adventure last of
alL

Lisoarte then took the sword and drew it a hands *
breadtbi no more. Macandon, the old Squire,
said. King, if there be no better lover in the Court
than you, I shall depart without my wish, and he
thrust the sword back, for so it was to be at every
trial ; then Galaor essayed, and could only draw
it three fingers breadth. Florestan and Galvanes,
and Grumedan, and Brandoyuas, and Ladasin, all
tried, none so successfully as Florestan, who drew
it at a full pakn*s length. Don Guil^ the Pensive
was the next, and he drew it half out 3 had you
loved just as much again, said Macandon, you
would have won the sword. Others there w^re
who tried and could not move it, and. these the old
Squire caHed heretics in love. Then came Agrayes
to the proof, he looked at Olinda, and thought
surely the sword would be his, for his true anfd
loyal love 5 he drew it within a hand of the point,
and as he still attempted to pluck it forth the burn-
: ing part of the blade touched his cloak and burnt
it j then he retired sufficiently rejoicexi tliat he had
go far exceeded all others. Almost Sir Knight,
quoth old Macandon, had you been the winner, and

k6



228

J satisfied. Balomir and Dragonis, wbo had aniired
the day before, next essayed, and drew it no £uther
than Galaor. Knights, quoth the Squire, if you had
only as much of the sword as you can draw, yoa
Would have bat little for your own defence. True,
said Dragonis y and if you should be knighted at '
the end of the adventure, you are not sa young
but that you may remember the eeremony. At
this all laughed, bat there remained no more to
make the trial 5 Beltenebros then arose and took
bis Lady by tHe hand, and went towards the sword*.
Sir Stranger, quoth Macandon, thi» sword will be*
come you better than the one you wear, yet I would
not have you be so sure of it as to lay aside your
own, for this is to be won by truth of heart, and
not by force of arms. But he took, the sword^
and drew it from the scabbard, and immediately
the whole blade became clear and shining with
one brightness. When Macandon saw this, he
knelt down and said, O good Knight, Grod give
thee honour, for thou hast done great honour to
this court ! Reason is it that you should be beloved
well by your Lady unless she be the falsest and
most unreasonable of women. Now then give
me the honour of Knighthood, which I may re-
ceive from no other hand but yours ! and yact
will give me with it lands and the lordship over



229

oaany good men. Good £»end^ rq^lied Bdteoe^
bros, let the proof of the garland be made^ then I
will do with you what can rightly be done« Aod
then blessed t^e sword^ and laying his own aside,
bung it round his neck, and led his Lady back td
her station. Great were the praises then which, bo
received for e3u:ellence in anas and in love, so
that Galaor . and Florestan were moved to. great
anger, for they thought it shame that any other,
than Amadis should be esteemed above them» an^
they resdved .within themselves that . their firs^
'business aftei^the battle with King Cildadan 8houl4
be to fight him, and "either die or show to the'
world the difference there was between him and
their brother,

Lisuarte now called upon the Queen and her Ladies
to make their proof, without. fear^ and in the hope
of honour J for she who won the garland, if Dame
should be more loved and honoured by her hus^
band, if Damsel acquire the praise of loyalty
above all. Brisena first placed the flgwers on her
own head, they did not in the least alter. Queen
^and Madam, quoth old Macandon, if the King
ycur husband gained little by attempting the sword,
it seems you have well requited him 3 she an-
swered nothing, bat drew back ^eatly abc^hed..



£30

Next was Briloank, that Bar Qneta: of Sobradisa ;
Ae, like Brisena> produced no change. Lady and
most fair Damsd, cried the Squire^ 70a most be
loted befoie yon can love so as to gain the gar*
land ; foor other King's daughters came on^ Elnida
•ad EstreUeta her sister^ who was fair and prood,
and Aldeva and CHmda the gentle. Upon her
head the flowers began to revire so that all thought
ahe would win the praise^ bot they only began/.
and when the garland was taken d£f they withered
- again as before / more than a hundred other Dames
triedj but all witk less success thaip Olinda^ and
all received their jest from the old Squire. Oriand
had felt a fear when Briolama made the proofs and
she rejoiced at the failupe> lest^ had she succeeded;
her friend might deem it was for his love^ for never
had she seen so fair a Damsel^ and she thought-
surely, that if his heart were not won by her, there
was no danger of a rival. All others had noi^
&iled ; she made sign to Beltenebros to lead her
up, the garland was placed round her head, and :
immediately the dry flowers quickened with full
freshness and verdure. Excell^it Damsel, quoth
Macandon, you are she for whom I sought forty
years before you were t)orn !

Then the old Squire besought Bekenebros to knight



SSI

bim, tnd thatDiniMl to give him a swoid. 1/^
tl be presently^ taid Bdtenebrai^ f<ml cannot tany.
Macandon then pnt on white gamdenta, and white*
armoor over it like a new Knight, and Belteoe*
hros knighted him according to the manner, and
put on his right spur, and Oriana girded on a rich.
sword which hi» Squires had brought The Dama
and Damsels laughed at setiog him,, and Aldevm
said so lojLid that all heard her. What a &ir Child I'
and he will be a new Knight as long as he lives I
How know 70Q that ? cried the sest. She an-
swered^ because the dress he has now put on
will last as long as himself. Gentle Damsels^
quoth the old man, I would not exchange my
pleasure for your manners j my youth may be
ranked with your modesty. The King was pleased
at this reply, for he thought their speeches were
vinseemly.

This done, Beltenebros and his Lady took leave of
the Queen; and Brisena said to her daughter.
Lady, though it is your pleasure not to be known
here, yet I beseech you, when you are returned
home, ask of me whatever favour I can grant. I
know her Lady, quoth Beltenebros, just as much
as you do, though we have been seven days toge-
ther ; but this I can say, that she is fair, and she
has locks that need not be thus concealed. Dnxor



S3S

•

«d^ saia Briolania, I know you not : but if jm^
fnead love youas you love him^ and as he will do if
he be wise> love never made a better union. Her
woixls gave pleasure to Oriana -, then they took
their leave^ and mounted, the King and Don Gat-
laor accompanying them; and Beltenebros said to
the King, take this Damsel and honour her, Sif^
for she well deserves it, having honoured your
court. Lisuarte took h^ bridle, aed he woit ooi
talking with Galaor, who had little inclination for
iriendly talk with him, longing to engage him in
battle. When they had gone a little way Bdtene^
bros took the bridle from the King, and>8aid, Now^ ~
Sir, God be witb you, and if it please you that I
should be one of your hundred in the battle, I.
shall^williagly serve you. The King embraced and
thanked him, and said, that great- part of his fessr
was removed by having him on his part ; they
parted then, and Beltenebros and his Lady, £nii
following, entered the forest, he having round
his neck that green sword, and she that garland of
flowers upon her head.

Wlien they reached the fountain of the Threr
Channels, they saw a Squire on horseback coming
down the mountain, who said. Knight, Arcalaus
the Enchanter bids you send him that Damsel, if
^««w make him fetch her, he will cut off both you;



f3S

hdtida. Where is Arcalau the Indianter ? crM
Bcdtendbros | the Squire showed htm where he and
another Knight were under a tuf^ of trees^ both
being armed> and their horses ready by them.
At hearing this Oriana could scarce keep her seat
•upon the palfrey. Lady Damsel^ fear not ! quoth
be^ if this sword feil me not I will protect you.
He then toc^ his arms— 'tell Arcalaus I am a
stranger Knight^ who know him not, and have no
reason to obey him. When Arcalaus heard this'
he grew greatly enraged, and said to the Knight
with him. Nephew Lindoraque, take.^at garland
which the Damsd wears for your Mistress Mada*
sima 'y if the Knight attempts to hinder you cot
o£F his head, and hang the woman by the hair to a
tree. Lindoraaue mounted and moved on to do
it : he was a huge man, and weU might be so^
being son of Cartadaque ttie giant of the defended
mountain, hy a sister oi Arcalaus. But Belteno*
broa held him at nought, and placing himself right
in his way, for he had heard his errand, cried«
Knight, you pass no farther ! You shall not hinder
me, quoth he, from performing the pleasure of
Arcalaus. Beltenebros answered, we shall see
what your pride and bis villainy can do. Th^
couched their lances and ran, the lances brok««
Lindoraque fell with the truncheon in his bodji;



S34

be rose, beiog cf stout bcwet, and Mdog BdteB*»
bros about to ftrike bkm, bent from the blov« and
reded and fell upon the truncheoOy and drove it
clean through hU back, so that he died, instantlj.
Arcalau» was riding uy to he^ him. Belteoebroa
galloped up tf> him and made him lose the jousts
and struck at him with his sword a blow that cut
off the lance, and with it half the has^, ao th#t
only bis thumb was left. He turned to fly, and
threw away his shield, and by the fleetness of his
horse escaped. Beltenebros thea bade EnU take
the shield and hand of Arcalaus, and the head of
Lindoraque to the King, and tell him wliat had
happened. He and his Lady went on their way,,
and rested bende a fountain till it was near nigl4,
^en rode to Miraflores* The Squires were ready,
and Malnlia and the Damsel joyful^ received them,
for if there had been delay they only expedod'
death. Fair prizes have you won, quoth Mabilia>
but they have cost us« a great alami and mai^.
tears, .

As Lisuarte and Galaor were returning to tlie
town, a Damsel came up and gave them each a
letter^ and rode away. The King read his thuar:
To tliee Lisuarte^ King of Great Britain^ I Us-
i;anda, the Unknown, send salutation, and I tdl



235

thee that in the perilous and cruel battle between
thee and King Cildadan, Beltendborof^ in whom
joa confide, shall lose his name and his renown,
and for one blow that he shall gire all his great
deeds shall be quite forgotten. In that hour thou
shalt be in the greatest extremity, and in all dan^
ger of death, when the sharp sword of Beltenebros
shall shed thy blood. Cruel and dolorous will the
battle be ; there will be great rage and cruelty^
and no compassion. But at last by three blows
from the hand of Beltenebros his party shall re*
main conquerors. Look ta it King, for she who
sends thee this warning knows what is to come I

•
Brave as the King's heart was, this letter dismayed
him I he believed that Beltenebros was to lose hlii
life, and that liis own would be in the utmost
danger ; howbeit he put oa a good countenance,
imd gave the ktter to Galaor, and asked his coui^
ad. Sir, quoth Galaor, I stand in need of your
counsel myself; but if this battle can honourably
be avoided, I should advise that it be done so ; if
that cannot be, you should not be in the field i by
the sword of Beltenebros your blood is to be shed,
and by three blows fronii his hand bis party are to
lemain conquerors. Thia I do not understand,
iorheis tobeon yooratdei and yet the letter saya



use

otherwise. Friend, qaoth the 'King, jcfox love fyr
me m^es you advise me ill. I must not, for the
knowledge of any one, how wise soever, distnist
the power of him who ordaineth all things. My
good friend, I will be in the battle, and take what
fortune it please God to give. The King^s answer
roused Galaor ^ rightly are you esteemed the best
King in the world ! quoth he^ and he then shewed
liim his own letter.

You Don Galaor of Gaul, the strong and the brave^
2 Urganda, salute as him whom I esteem^ and
love ', know from me what must beM you in the
dolorous battle, if you be there. After many
cruelties and deaths that you will hSive witnessed
in the last press, your strong body and stout limbs
will fail your brave and ardent heart, and at the
end yoar head will be in his power, who, with 'the
three blows that he shall give^ is to decide tha
day.

Friend, quoth Lisuarte, if this say true, you wiH
be slain if you enter the battle ; I will so order that
you may honourably decline it. Sir, said Galaor,
it seems the advice I gave displeased you, that yo^
would command me to my shame. God forbid
«tbat I should herein obey you^ Don^Gakor ! yon.



ssr

Hre rights £he King answered^ we will trust in
God. Meantime say nothing of these letters lest
our friends should be discouraged. Before they
entered thb town two Knights came up to be pre-
sent in the battle^ they were Don Bruneo of Bo-
namar^ and Branfil his brother ; and'^runeo griev«
ed much that he had not arrived in time to prove
the sword, for he had passed under the arch of
Loyal Lovers, and by his love to Melicia doubted
not that he should have won it. Him Gralaor
courteously saluted, and took to his lodging as a
right worthy Knight. Presently Enil arrived with
the head of Lindoraque hanging from the horse's
breast^plate, and the hand and shield of Arcalaus«
Then was the great prowess of Beltenebros more
praised, and Galaor and Florestan more desirous
to prove in battle that he was not equal, to their
lost brother Amadis. At tliis time Filispinel re-
turned who had been sent with the King's defi-
ance to the giants; he brought word that they
were gone to Ireland, and would in four days time
land in the port of the plain where the battle was
to be fought, and he brought with him this letter.
To the great Lord Lisuarte, King of Great Bri-
tain, and to all our friends in his dominions. I
Arban, a wretch, once King of North Wales, and
I Angriote of Estravaus, inform you that our un-



238

happy fortune hath thrown us into the power of
the fierce Gromadaza, wife of Famongomadan,
who^ in vengeance for the death of her husband
and her son, inflicts upon us such torments, that
we wish for (Jpath to relieve us 3 but she will not
kill us that she may lengthen our sufierings, the
which are such, that we should have ridden our-
selves of life, if it were not for losing our souls
thereby ; but being now near death, we write this
letter with our blood, praying God to grant you the
victory over these traitors, who, in such inhuman
sort torment us. Great sorrow had the King here-
at, and all his Knights 5 however he comforted
(hem, assuring them that there was no other re-
medy, or way of helping their friends, than by con-
quering in this great battle : so they all prepared^
and set forth for the place appointed.



239



CHAPTER 16.



Three days Bdtenebros remaioed at Mirafloret^ on
<the fourth he departed alone at midnight. He
had told Enil to meet him at the Ca^e of an old
Knight, called Abradan, which was bj the place of
•battle, and there on the next day he found him.
The old Knight received him well, .for he always
hospitably welcomed all £rrant Knights. Pre-
sently two Squires arrived, the nephews of the
iiost, and said, that King Oildadan was landed, and
had pitched his tents upon the sea-shore, and his
Knights with him, and they were landing their
horses and arms. Gmmedan and Giontes had
been to them on the part of King Lisuarte,
and made truce till the day of battle, and also
concluded that neither party should bring out
more than the hundred Knights appointed.
Nephews, said the host, what think yoo of thete



S40

enemies whom God confoond ! Good Uncle^ said
they^ we mast not speak of them ', thej are so
strong and terrible^ that unless miraculously as-
sist our King^ he and his power will be nothing
against them. Herewithal^ the tears fell from the
old man*s eyes^ who cried^ O Lord, do not forsake
the best and justest King in the world! Grood
mine host^ quoth Beltenebros^ be not dismayed for
their fierceness^ for worth and modesty often over-
come proud valour. I pray you go to the King
far me^ and tell him that there is in your house a
Knight called Beltenebros^ who requests to know
^ day of battle that he miay be there. How, Sir,
cried old Abradan> are you he who sent Don Qua-
dragante to the King my Master, and who slew
Famongomadan and his son ! Now am I overpaid
for all the services that ever I have rendered to Er-
rant Knights. So taking his Nephews to guide
him, he went to King Lisuarte, who was arrlFed
within half a league of his enemies. Greatly was
the King rejoiced with what he said^ and he told
him the battle should be on the next day, and said,
there lacked him but one Knight of the hundred.
Don Grumedan replied, you are rather above the '
number, for Beltenebros should be counted for
five. When the old man returned with these tid-
ings^ £nil took his Master aside^ and kneeling



241

down, said^ Albeit Sir my services liave not merited
it, yet your great goodness emboldens me to ask a
boon, and I beseech you for God^s sake to grant
it me. Beltenebros raised him and said, ask any
thing that I can do. End would have kissed his
hand ; Sir, I ask you to make me a Knight, and to
entreat the King that I may be one of the hun-
dred since one is wanting> Friend £nil, replied
Beltenebros, let it not enter your heart to begin
^o perilously. I do not say this because I will not
make thee a Knight, but to advise thee to under-
take lighter adventures first. My good Master,
quoth £nil, where can I adventure so well? if I
come from the field alive it will always be to my
praise and honour, and if I die it will be dying
well, and my memory will be joined with all those
good Knights who must perish there. But then
an afiectionate pity was fek at the heart of Beltene-
bros^ and he said within himself, thou dost well
show thyself to be of the lineage of Gandales, my
excellent and true fosterer ! Be it so ! said he, and
he asked the host to give the Squire aitns ; and
Enil watched them that night, and after dawa
they heard mass, and Beltenebros knitted him,
and they departed, their host mid his Nephews
carrying their arms. They foviid Lisuarte put-
tmg his battle in order to go against the enemies.
Vol. II. I*



£43

who warn tniy m tbe plala. Tbe SLiog 8d4
hk Knights nyAocd to see BelteDobraB. Sit,
^uoth 'fafty J eome to peifefia wey proamt, mil
•bring with me this Knight to «ipp)f the one lack*
ing. The Ki&g jajfuUy wdiooBied hbn^ aadplaKi
his Knight to make up the complement Ihea
ihey moved on m one battahon : Ae King was m
tbe middle of the raok^ befom him Belfeeo^xea
and his companion were placed, and Gsiatx, Ho-
restan, and Agr^^ee^ Gandalac, the Giant whe
bad fiMtentd Galaor, and his two aoas Bramandil^
«and GavuA whom Gsiao^ bad knighted $ NicoFa%
of the Perilous Bridge^ Dr^gonis and Pab^iiir^ and
Finomnte, GKootesy nephew to the Kiflg* tbe
lenownsd Don Bfoneo of Bonamar» and his bc^
tber Bsanfily and Don Guilan tbe Pensive. Att
these were tpgstber> and before them went thai:
honourable and good «ld Knight Don Grumed^i^
Bnsena*s fosterer, with tbe banner of tbe Kisg^

KmgCildadaD onhis side placed U19 Gianta ia the
.font of the hniA^, ai»dt«i^ty Knights of hi< line*
age of great T^un He stationed Madanfabu^ tbe
Giant of the Isle oC. the Vennf Uioa Tower, upon
AHjtde J«i«)g grwnd» 4n4 with him tei» at the best
JEnigbts* eod dMrect^d them not to move UH tbey
esav tbflt ^ w^» w^ai^, and tbatthen- they shoiiU



foekc w^ fiehxljrtoRrattb Sing UfMai^ taU&
1dm orcanj lwxi.pcuMmec to tb« ships. Ja thur
aiva^r die tw« j^tia appnoadiaL with deUberatef
pac» tttl they ctou near,, and^ tb«n tbey met wUh
iuch. a shock dsat maii|r a maa fell^ and many »
Itoree ran orer the field without a ridcsr. That wai
» bani- and dolorous day fbc all who werq thero
present ! fat sinking and straggling they continued
tiius without rest ao intsrmissbn a third part4)f
the dsxy, with such toil and effort^ being in the
mid heat of srummer^ that thqr and their horses
were so wearied, and the wounded bled so fast,
that in many life could endure 'no longer, and
there they fell dead; especially those whom the
Giants had wounded with their great force. In
that hour Beltenebros did wonders in arms with
that good sword, striking and slaying all before
him, though the care with which he k^t watch
over the King most employed him } for Lisuarte
knowing that the great shame, or great gloiy of
the day would be his, thrust himself into the hot-^
test press of the battle! Galaor and Florestan, and
Agrayes kept l^ him, being emulous- to equal Bel-
tenebros that day, and Don Bnmeo watched to
assist Gdaor, who, like a lion made among the
Giants, to equal him whom he thought the rival
of Amadis,. ]]egardle9s of theijb g»eat strength,, and.



244

diose wh6m he saw M tmder their blows. Tnthb
heat he came before Cartadaque^ the Giant of the
Defended Mountain^ who with a heavy battle aKe^r
notwithstanding Florestan had given him a de^
wound in the shoulder^ had already killed six
Knights at his feet Galaor made at him^ and
with his sword struck him upon the helmet j it
cut away all it toadied^ and lopt off his ear^ and
passing downward cut the battle-axe helve from
his hand. When the Giant saw his enemy so
near^ and that he had no weapon to wound him^
he laid hold on him widi his hands^ and plucked
him so forcibly that the saddle girth broke^ and
he fell, but still the Giant held him j and Galaor
thought he never could escape from tliat mighty
grasp, and that all his bones were broken. Yet be-
fore his senses were gone he recovered his sword
that hung firom his wrist by the chain, and thrust
it through the vizor of Cartadaque's helmet; the
Giant*s gripe relaxed, and he fell dead. Galaor
arose then, bat so weak and exhausted, that he
could not pluck his sword from the Giant's head*
The Knights on both sides pressed towards him^
eome to kill him at this disadvantage, his own
iiiendfi to his help. The battle became fiercer
there than it had yet been ; King Cildadan came
up, aad^jon the 'Other part Beltenebros. Beltene-



245

bros twice smote Cildadan on the head snch staor*
ning blows that the King fell from his hone at
the feet of Galaor. Galaor caught up the sword of
Cildadan^ and laid about him till his strength and
senses were gone^ and he fell npon the body df
King Cildadan.

At this time the Giants Gandalac and Albadan^
zor were engaged 5 they smote each other so fu-
riously with their clubs^ that they and their horses
both fell. AIbadanzor*8 arm was broken, and
Gandalac*s leg ; howbeit he and his sons slew their
enemy. The day was now half over, and on this
two sides an hundred and twenty Knights had
been slain. Madanfabul, the Giant of the Ver-
million Tower, was looking on from the hill 5 he
saw how the field was thinned, that they who re-
mained were weary with their toil, their armoar
broken, and their horses stiff and exhausted. He
thought that he and his companions could noW
have discomfited all that were left on both sidtt,
and descended into the field, crying out. Leave
not a man of them alive ; I will kill or take King
Lisuarte. Beltenebros had just mounted a fiiesh
horse, which one of old Abradan's nephews gave
him ; he saw the Giant and his troop come on, and
placed hixnself before the King, and oaHkd aa

1,3



£4$

floresfan and AgrajCB, who were near ; witk these
DoD Broneoof fionamarjoiiied, and Braofi], and
GuHaa the Pennve^ aod Enil, who had done
Sdoc^ hi that battle^ and was therefore a h y ay
keld m high esteeoi^ all these albeit thej wen
gri^oasly wounded^ and their horses also, placed
themselves before the King. Before Madanfabnl
came a Knight called Sarmadan the Lioo> the
Unde of King Cildadan> and for strength and
fffowess the best oi his lineage. Bdtenebroa stood
foremost to naeet hisQ. Sarmadan drove his lanoe
at him, it broke, yet pierced the shield and woond-
cd him> though with no deep wound. Then Bd-
tenebroshit him a thwart blow with hit swosd
across . the bever, straight over both ejes^ aod
throngh both> that he fell dead. But Madan&bol
and his other comrades came on so fiercdy, that
the most of those who were of King Lisuarte's
part were beaten down before them, and he made
right for the King, with such fresh strength, that
the KflightB about the King, braveljr as Ihey ad-
inentared, could not protect himj he seized Liso*
arte round the neck, and grasped him so stroogly
that be lost all power of resistance, plucked him
from the saddle, and carried him towards the
abips. When Beltienebroa beheld that he ex-
daime^v O Lord God, let not Qriana have this at-



847

fictiitti Ife strack tbe iqmn into bis bom and
galloped aAer bitn bim sword in- hand, and roach*-
liDg him amole at him with his whole force. The
awoid leU oo tbe right aim with whkh he held'
the KiBg» and cut it dean through by the elbow |.
ahe weapon atajed not there, Ynjf, passing on cot
tbroi^b the King^a breast-plate, and womid^d him
ao that ti» blood streamed down. Lisuarte was-
left upon the ground^ and the Giant fled like a lost
Bumy bleediog toi death* When Beltenebros saw
jbat with that one blow he had slain that mighty
Gianl;^ and rescued King. Lisuarte from so great a
danger, he shouted out, Gaul! Gaul ! for I ax^.
Amadis. This he cried as he laid on among hia
Miemtes, fidling them or slaying them, and in good-
aeaaon did he exert this prowess, &r great havock
had been made among the Koightfr of his par^,.
80 many slain, others wounded, and fighting on:
foot, and the enemies had come fresh against them
with groat strength, and an eager desire to kill all
Ihey could. For this cause Amadis put forth his
atrength, so that it might well be said bis great
prowess was tbe sa£e^ and support of his party
that day $ but what most kindled him was, that he
had aeen his brother Galaor afi^oC and sore wearied,
and looking again saw him 9Q longer, so that
wrely he thonght him dead, and with Uiia grief

X.4



• 248

and ai^er he enconnteied no Kn^ht v/bom hii
did not slay. When they of King Cildadao's
party saw the great feats that he atduered, the^
took for their leader a Knight of the race of the
Giants^ whose name was Gadancuriel^ and who
had made such itaoghter that day that he was noted
by ali. They expected^ beiQg led by him to wut
the day> and at this time Amedis had thrust in so
far among the enemy that he was beset by thena
and in great peril. King Lisnarte had mounted
again, and with him were Don Bruneo of Bona-
mar, and Florestan^ and Gnilan the Pensive, and
Ladasin, and Galvanes Lackland, and Oliyas, mid
old Grumedan, from whose hand the- banner had
•been cut. The King seeing Amadis in such dan-
ger nude up to succour him like a worthy King,
although he had many wounds, and all rejoicing
that that Beltenebros was Amadis, forced their
way up to him, and released him from the press.
He then turned whither he would, and chance
guided him to where his cousin Agrayes, and Falo-
mir and Dragonis were on foot, and many Kn^hts
upon them striving to slay them, but they standing
together, and still defending themselves manfully.
He seeing them thus, called upon his brother Flo«
.reslan, and Guilan the Pensive, to their succour;
There came against him a Knight of gveat reaowa.



349

CRlkd Vadamigar, whose helmet had been strack:
6^5 he woiuided the hone of Amadis in the neck^
bat Amadis reached hkn^ and deft him down to
the ears^ and as he fell cried out^ Ck>usin Agrayes^
take this horse I And Florestan struck down a
good Knight^ called Daniel^ and gave his horfte to
Palomir, and Palomir then won one for Dragonis $
and Gailan wounded Landin sorely^ and unhorsed
him, and gave his horse to Branfil : tbua they werer
all helped^ and then they followed in the path of
Amadis, who went on cutting his way manfally,^
and shouting Gaul! Gaul! Amadis! that th6
enemy might know he was in the £eld. Such
courage did he then display, and so well did Flo*
festan and Agrayes, and those other Knights se«
^ond htm, and King Lisuarte also played his part
so well, that they won the battle ; the enemies
who survived flying to their ships, and Amadia
ItiU among them raging for the death of Galaor;
Bttt Gadanciiriel still made head with thoeat
whom he could turn from flight, and he turned
upon the King. Florestan, who had seen his featt
that day, thrust himsdf before Lisuarte to savt
him^ though he had oply a broken sword. Ga*
daocuriel'CUt thorough the helmet ' and woanded
htm in the head, he^-with his broken sword smol»
him OD the helmet 60 that it fell q£F^ and then Uag^

1.9



m

arte deft bis keads tktte was none •Ite ieftfer
maiotwii tbe field : they wto fled powhedbefiim
tlvj ooald.jreBGb tbe w^^ter^ or niUm vatcir |pef«i3t
tibiqraiaid reacb tbeir dups*

Tlien Amadis cried to fhoncttam «nd Acp9«b,
seeping as be spake« Qood lasmnfs^, I fear we
bare bMt Don Galaor, let U9 yeek f<;Nr hiio. Tbqr
went to tbe spot wbere Amadis bad smitteo down
King CiUadan> and seen bis brother last op loot )
bntso manj weie tbe dead wbo lax ^^^^^^ ^t tbcj
aaw hkn not^ till as the^ moved away tbe bodifis^
Floiiq^taa knew bim by the sleeve of bis soreoat^
wbich was of azoie worked with silver flew«ri#
and then tb^ made great faamn over bim* Art
yfbm Amadis saw biip thus with eieoedtfig grief
be tbie^ biiQs^fjxxn bis borse^ and bis wonnda
pver wbieb the blood bad <Jotted burst oficai wMb
the faU» end Ued abpmdantiiy^ afid be ^ywg aside
Jus «h^ aod helm that were aU backed sod
j^isod, went to Galaor and took off biy hckntUg

ipd tpok hi$ boad npm bis knees. Qalaar at tbe
#re8b air hsgm tQ move a little^ and th^ all gar
ibered nHmd bioa weflpM^ to see biro tbns*
Wbiie they were «bus standing twebre Oanxaeia
iMbly appaseUed eaom vp, and s<me Shakes wjtb
4bam, wbo farqivbt a bad cnaensd witb licb dm^



ftsf. Tbe Damselt knelt bdbre Amady aaA
taid^ Sir, we afe oome hitlier for Don Galaor, tf
JOQ would have him live give him to ni ! if not,
all the Mastcm in Great Britain cannot hdp him.
Amadisknew not the Damsels^and he saw the
great danger of Oalaq^ and could not tell what to
do 5 bot ihose Knigfati advised him to ttiiit hid
hrother to this fortune, rather thaftiee yaidkl
wkhoot any possibility of saving him- GoodDdUH
sels, said Amadis, may I know whither fan wouUI
cany him? Thqr answered, not as yet; but If
youdedre his lifo give him- to tts> else we must
goour way. Then Amadiii bescught liiat they
would take him also y this they refoaed/ but at hid
ae^uest they anfiaed. Aidian the^ Dwarfi and hie
8qnhe to foUow Ibedn. Then thay. laid him in ^
bed, aimed as he was, aU caooept his helmet and
gaontiets, and half dead 5 and Amadie and. the
Kmghta foBowed tbem, weepii^, to the shore;
A ship was ready there in wbieh l&e Damsdi
plaiccd him, and thenreenmedaind wentto Khig
liiBoairte, and besought him that he would be
pleased to give them King Cfldadan abo, who lay
eaaong the dead^ bidding him remembes that he
•waa a good Xing, and hadai^lered this evil in
dehig^^iat he was bound to do : and they prayed
Ae Hag ttf^ tmt pity 1901^ hio^ dMt he mi^t

2.6



252

look fiar pity hiauelf in his need. Lisnarte lesidAj
assented. Thej took up Ciidadan moie dead thao
alive, and carried him in tlie same bed on boanlj,
then made sail^ and were speedily out of sight



Meantime Lisnarte had secured the enemies fleet
that nothing might escape, taking prisoners all
who were not slain in battle. He now came w^
to Amadis> and the Kn^hts that were weeping^
with him^ and when he heard their lamentation
was for the loss of Galaor, he was grieved at hearty
for Galaor had faithfiilij and afiectionatdy served
him from the hour wherdn he became, his Knightf
then he dismounted, his armour being all staine4
with blood, and embraced Amadis, and bade him
take comfort, for God would not sufies such a
man as his brother to perish. They all then went
to the tent of King Cildadan, and there took
food, and he ordered that all the.Kni^ts who had
6Uen on his side should be buried in a monas?
teiy that was at the foot of a near, mountain* and
he ordered the due service for thdr souls, and as«-
signed rents for masses for them. Moreover he
ordered a stately ch^>el to be built there, and rich
moduments jtherdn for them, and that their namat
should all be engraved upon thdr tombs. Mesr
sengers were sent to inform Queen firisena of



853

hh good fortune^ and he aiid his Knighti them
went to Ganota^ a town foor leagues off, and these,
they remained till their wounds were healed^

While this, battle was expected Queen Briblania
went to visit Oriana at Micaflores. Oriana had
her apartments hung with rich hangings 4.0 recdve'
a guest whom she sa greasy desired to see. When
they met both were somewhat abashed^ for nd*
ther the^ proof of the Enchanted Avch, nor c^ the
Green Sword^ could keep Oriana's heart so celm^
but that it beat fast with fear, thinking that no af-
fection, how true soever, could resbt such beauty
as she saw bef<»?e her. And firiolania, who had
seen the tears and thoughtfulness of Amadis, and
knew what proof of love he had given at the
Firm Island, presently concluded it could be only
fbr this Princess, before whom she fek her own
beeuty -even as nothing. So as they were freely
€t)mmumng together, Briolania related at length
ail that Amadts had done for her, and said how
in her heart she loved him. Oriana then willing
«o learn fapkhor, asked her why, as they M^ete of
equal. rank, and she at her own disposal, she> did
aot make him master of h^self and her own do^
ISMBions? Fiiend and Lac^, rqtlied Briolania^
much as yofthaire seen hiip^ X think yoa know him



854

jKt Do jaa not believe I sboold think ioftdf
the hMpfkat woman in tbe world if tfak could be }
But you ihall know jdi*— «nd keqi it I pof 70a
secret^ as one like you should do« I ventured
upon this pn^osal, and it shames me whenever I
xemember it, but he lephed, tiiat he coukL nei*
tber b^ar affection to me nor to any other ; the
which I then believed; £cx unlike allother Knights,,
I never heard him speak, of woman* You tell ate
wonderSj quoth Oriana,. glad at heart of what
she heard; but unless Amadis loved some one
he could not have passed under the Arch of True:
Lovers, which yet showed him< more honour than^
^wer any other had reoQived^ He may love, r&^
flied Bridania, but in his bve het»the most secret
that ever yet Kn^ht was,

]Molania remained ten days with Oriana, and thctt*
they both went to join Queen Brisena al FeauM^
^ town, where she was waiting for Lisuaite.
Gieatiy rejoiced was she to see her dasigbter sd
iecovered. There the tidings came of the vietorjj
for joy whereat Brisena gave great tkm to the
diurches and comments, and to those who were ini
want But who can tell what joy tbeve was tai
lieaf that BdtBodbma wus Amadail WhaftdMt
ym now of Amaii% quoth BtMbdi* to €)iiatt%.



855

vrbo afiected the «ime surpriflc as the rest; I was
in doubt whether he or Bdtenebros most deserved
my love. Qaeen and Lady, replied Oriana, we
will ask him when he comes, wherefi>re ho
changed his name, a«H who ^ly> Damsel is that
won the garland of flowers*



&S6



CHAPTER 17.



Now you shall know wbat became of King Cil*
dadan and Galaor. The Damsels who removed
them dressed their wounds, and on the third da^
they recovered their senses. Galaor found him-
self in a rich room, which stood upon four mar«
ble pillars, and had an iron grating on all sides,
through which he saw that he was in a garden,
surrounded with a high wall, in which waa only
one little door covered with plates^ of iron. Asto-
nished to find himself in such a place, he thought
be was in prison, and felt such pain from his
wounds that he ejipected nothing but death i and
he remembered the battle, bat knew not who had
carried him from it, nor how he bad been re-
moved there. King Cildadan also, when h^ came
to himself, saw that he was lying in a rich bed
in the vaulted chamber of a large tower. He
looked round and saw no one, neither door nor



S57

any eatrance into the chiimber^ but over tbe an^
he, heard v<»ces. There was a window near his
bed from whence he looked out and saw the sea^
and it seemed that the tower he was in was a
high tower upon a roqk^ and that the sea washed
it on three sides. He too remembered the battle
but nothing more : but he well knew that if he
was thus a prisoper, his friends could not he in
better plight, and seeing no remedy, lay dowQ
again in bed, groaning and in great pain with hit
.wounds.

Don Galaor, as he was lying in the open cham<r
ber, saw the little door of the garden wall open,
and raised his head with great difficulty j theie
came in a Damsel very fair and richly apparalled»
and with her a man so fed)le and old that it waa
a wonder how he could walk, they came up to the
iron grating, and said to him, Don Qalaor, lodt
to your soul, for we cannot warrant you. The
Damsel then produced two little boxes, one of
iron the odier of silver, and showing them to Gah
laor, said. She who brought you here wills not
diatyoa should die till she knows whether you
will perform her will ; if so, your wo&ads shail
be healed, and you shall have food. Good Dam^
idt replied he^ if what die desiie be any thing



fi5S

tMt f o^glit not In do, it wBl be wane tluril
deadi. Da »• 70a please, ^otk die, we cave
little far yoar answer : it is at ybm* own chmce t»
live or die^ The t>ld mai thea opened the doot
ef the gratiB({, and they both went in, and die
look dse bot of ivon, and told the old man to
^thdraw, and dien she said toGotoor, Sir, f bare
mch compassion on yon, that I will renture my
own life to save yoars. I have been ordered t^
fil this boK with p(Mson^ and ibt other wMh aA
ointment to make you sleep > the poison bemg thai
rubbed into your wounds will act more instandy
end yott would presently die 5 but iiMcad of thia
I iiave pot here a remedy, the which, if yon take
St daily for seven days^ will so heal you, that by
dut time you shall be whdly reeovered, and abb
to ride on horseback as befoiee She then applied
the ointment to his wounds, and the pain w»
Instandy assuaged* Good Bamsd, quoth he, you
do so greatly bind me to your service, that if by
your help I may escape from hence, never was
Damsel so well guerdoned by Knight as you shdl
be: but if you have not means for this and yet wish
to serve me, contrive that Urganda the Unknown
nu^ know in what perilous prison I am laid, for in
her I have great hope. The Damsel theyi began to
Imi^— what hope can you have ia UnS^dS/ vIm



^59

ctres IkUe far fonr woal or -woe ? So mncfa, le*
plied GalaoTj that as she knows the wishes pf Ml^
she kaows how ^^eatly it is xsef wish to serw
her. The Damsel then answered^ Look for na
other Urganda than me, Don Galaor % and takf
you good hope, for it is the part of courage, not
only to encounter danger, but to endure its after-
chances ; for the danger in which I place mysdf
to heal you, and deliver you from hence, I ask
oneboon, which shall be neither to your disho-
nour nor hurt. I grant, quoth he, all that may
rightly be perlbrmed. Now then, said she, it is
lime to depart, lie you down, and feign to sle^
soundly. He did accordingly ; she called the okl
man and sf id. Look how he sleeps ! Now the
poison will work. So it ought, quoth the old man,
4tot he who brought him here may be avenged.
Since you have obeyed so well you VEoef come
alone for the future, and see that you keep him
. liftceii days, that he die not, but live in great
agony, and by that time they will be here who
•hall make him atone for the wrongs he hath
done them. When Galaor heard this he fouofl
that ^e old man was his mortal enemy* howbeit
he took hope for what she had said to him. The
iDld man and the Damsel the^ went out of the
ipurdea % ptefeaHif A^ returned, and brought with



£60

Ikcr two little girlSj fair girls and well apparelled;
who took food for Galaor ; and she let them into
the chamber to keep him companyi and gave them
books of history to read to him^ that he might not
sleep by day, and then she fastened the door and
left them.

King Cildadan in the tower saw also a door open
in the wall, a stone door so neatly fitted that it
looked like the wall itself, and a Dame of middle
age entered with two armed Knights, and ap^
proached the bed without saluting him ; he on his
^art spake to them with courteous salutation, but
they answered not. The Dame took off the bed
cloaths, and applied salves to his wounds, then
gave him food, and they went out again and fas-
tened the stone door, not having spoken a word.
The King thoiight that verily he was in prison,
imd where his life was not secure ; howbeit hav-
ing no remedy, he took as good comfort as he
could*

When it was time the Damsel returned to Galaor^
and asked him how he fared ? So well, quoth be;
^at if it proceed so I shall be in good plight by
the time you promised. Doubt not, said she, that
what I have said shall be accomplished. But yoa



&61

mnA promise me the bocm as a loyal Knight^ fbc
only by my help can you escape} the attempt
would be to your mortal danger and hurt^ and yoa
couJd not effect it at last. That Galaor promised,
imd he besought her to tell him her name. What*
quoth she, Don Galaor, know you not my name-)
I am deceived in you ! Time was that I did you
a service, which it aeems you little remember.
They call me the Wise * among the wisest. With
that she departed, and he remained thinking who
she might be ; and remembering the good sword
which Urganda had given him when he wag
knighted by Amadis, he thought it should be her^
but Urganda was old, and this was a Damsel. He
looked for the two little girls and they were gone^
but in their stead he saw his Squire Gasavel, and
Ardian the Dwarf of Amadis, both sleeping. He
joyfully called them, they awoke ^ and when they
saw who was there ran weeping for joy to kiss his
hand, and exclaimed, O good Sir ! blessed be God
who has brou^t us here to serve you ! He asked
them how they came there : they replied, they
knew not ; only that Amadis and Agrayes^ and



* Sabeocia sohre sabeacia.



rwttt^D, had Kttf tncnt wkd bflflt* Mxotmt^
qoodi he, was he fdund at rach a Ikne ? 8if>
said fhcy, know diat Bdtenebroa ie your owa hv^
ther AraacBs, and ibat by his proweaa the battle
was wos. Tbxm tcDest me great thtogs, cried
GdaoTj aod great pleasure have I diereixi> though
he has not given me cause for plcasnre in keeping
himself so long concealed from me. Thus abode
King Clldadan and Don Galaor r the one in Aat
great Tower, the other in the Garden-diamber,
where they were both healed of their hurts. Theil
Urgand^ made herself known ta them, for they
were in her power in her Undiscorexed Island;
and she told them that the fear wherein she had
put &em was to effect their cure more speedHy;
for m their perilous state it so behoved. And she
tent two Damsels to attend them and compleat
tiieir recovery j th^y were her nieces and feic
Damsels, being the daughters of King Falangris^
who was brother to Lisuarte by Grimota, Urgan»>
d^'s sister ; by him begotten: when he was a yotmg
batchelor. The one was called Julianda, ^ other
Solisa : and it so chanced that the one bore a son
named Talanque, to Don Galaor, and the other a
•on to King Cildadisn, who was called Maneli the
discreet, who were both valiant and strong Knights,
and in this atatlt>o#gfeat^ee8iife these two Knights .



863

^«»iaMud ^ ifc phaied Ui^aida «» mi tea m
liberty, 9$ jon AaQ bent faeveaftcr«



Wi^a Lisuarto aad An»<&> dod tbt other Knij^
vere atl whole of their w^^uadft, be went to FenuM^
where the Gtiieea thea w^oKomcd, and these was
jite received with suck joy by her» and by Bji»*
lania and Onaoa, and the other DaaofiB aad Dam*
sela^ as iiever welcomed joiaa beCore. But tiie joy*
ful greeting which Qneen Briplania gave to Amadii,
that can in no way. be written; she taking him bg
4he hand made him sit between her and Oriana,
4Uid she said «o him> my li^rd^ the gzief and sor*
cow which I felt when they told me you were los^
X cannot relate to yon. I dame hither with, aa
iiundred Kni^ts immediately that your brothers
^might order them whither thqr would in your
«earch« and because this battle delayed their de*
jparture^ I resolved to remain here till it was de*
/cided. Now then direct me what 1 diaU do, and
it shall be done. Good Lady mine, ^loth AwMdis^
it jou felt sorrow ibs n^y mishap^ great reason had
yon : fqr there is no man ia the world who. hatb^ a
l^ettev will to obey you i but sinee yoadesine mp
iQ direct you, I would have you abide heve teg
days, and di^tch your business with the Kil|g^
in; that tijqpe we m^ kijuawaeinethiqgaCii^'hn^



S64

Aer Dot! Galaor^ and there will be a battle which
has been appointed between Don Floarestao and
Landin^ after that I will conduct you to your king*
doni> and from thence I must go to the Firm Is-
land> where I hare much to do. So let it be^ rcn
plied Briolania^ and I beseech you tell us the won*
ders which you found in that Island. He would
hare excused himself^ but Oriana took his hand
and said^ You shall not leave us till you have told
us something of them. Good Ladies^ quoth Aina«
dis^ trust me, labour however I should^ I could
never relate all ; but this I say, that that Forbid^
den Chamber is the most rich and beautifuUest
thing in the world, and if by one of you it is not
atchieved, I believe none else will ever win it.
Briolania, after a while of silence, answered^ I do
not esteem myself such a one as can accomplish
that adventure, yet such as I am, if you will not
impute it to folly, I will prove it. Lady, quoth
Amadis, I hold it no folly to attempt that wherein
all have failed for want of beauty, especially in
you whom God hath gifted so bountifully therewith,
rather I hold it honourable to desire to win a fame
which may endure through long ages. At this
Was Oriana gready displeased, and her countenance
fell, so that Amadis, whose eyes never left her,
tmdecstood her feelings, and repented him of what



he had. said^ albeit thai all hk design had been to h^r .
gfieaterpraifie, for having seen the likttiess of Gri-
manesahe knew ihaX Bri(4ania> &k as she was»
did. not equal her beaoty^ and of his own Lady*s
success he notlung doubted. : ButOriana feared
that whatever was to be won by beauty Briolania
could win, and having requested her if she sue*
ceeded to let her know all the wonders of the
Chamber, she withdrew, and went to Mabilia and
told her what had passed. This always is the
case with your Cousin, said she, my poor heart
thinks only of pleasing him, neither regarding God
nor the anger of my paroits, and he knowing his
ftill power holds me at little price, and then the
tears came and coursed down her fair cheeks.
Mabilia answered, I marvel Lady what manner of
heart i$ yours ! ybu are no sooner out of one trouble
than you seek another. What great wrong is this
that my Cousin hath committed ? If Apolidon
left this Chamber to be proved by all, shall he for-
bid the proof to Briolania ? Certes I believe that
neither her beauty nor yours will avail to accom-
plish that which none in a hundred years for lack
of beauty could efiect. But this is his ovej'-ruling
destiny that hatli made him forsake all his lineage
for your service, and thus it is you reward him >
you do not desire his life, and will therefore drive

VOL. II. M



SS6



huatodetdi. Thif will be fait lewaid! and miiie^
£ir all the fricndaliip I have bonie 70a, will be to
aeetfaeflower of aUaD^finiulj^liimirliosodearijr
loves ine> perish before nxy cyea. This will I
sever remain to see : for my brother Agrajes, and
Galvanes mj Uncle, shall take me home to mj own
country ! and with that she wept and exdaiiped,
God grant that this croeltj toward Anoadis msy be
well requited to yon, and this wnx^ you do his
friends ! but their loss, great though it be, will be
less than yours, destroying him who fw your sake
has deserted them, to give himself wholly to you«
When Mabilia spake thus Onana*s heart was so.
overcharged that she could not speak, till at last the
tears came, and she cried, wretch that I am above
all others ! I came to you for relief and you in^
crease my sorrow, suspecting that which was^oever
in my heart ! Let God never help me if ever I
had such thought ! but what distresses me is, lest,
another woman should accomplish that proof
wluch would be to me worse than death, and this
fear has made me think wrongly of hun who per-
haps had but good in his intention : but come—
forgive me — ^and for the love you bear your Cousin
advise me ! And then with a sweet smile she em-
braced Mabilia, True friend and dearest, I pn>-
mise yon I will never speak of this to joai Ckio-



9S7 '

gin, nor let Inm kno«r that I have had such a
thought, bat way joa to him what yoa think best,
Mabilia answered, I will Ibtgive you on one con-
ditioD, that whatever anger yon coocnve against
him yoa never discover it to him till yon have first
consulted me, that no evil like the past may hap*
pen again. With this were they well reooociled,
between whom there could never .,be a want of
love.

But Mabilia sharply reprehended Amadis, and
warned him to be waiy in his conduct to Briolania,
remembering what he had suffered on her account,
'and how difficult it is to root out jealousy from a
woman's heart. Amadis replied. Lady and good
Cousin, my thoughts were very diffeffent. Brio-
lania is held by all for one of the most beautiii4
women in the world, so they make no doubt she
can eoter the Forbiddeo Chamber, but I who have
seen the likeness of Grimanesa know that it will
not be so. That honour which any one hitherto
has won, that certainly will Briolania win : but
Driana has only to try and to succeed. But if
Oriana atchieves the adventure before Briolania has
essayed it, all will say that the other would have
won had she been first ; on the contraiy, when
she will have failed, as sure I am she must fiiil^

M 2



26S

my Lady ^Ul have her full glory* Well was
Oriana satisfied at heariog this^ and greatly re-
pented her of her ^ult, to atone for which they ap-
pointed that Amadis should come to her apaftaaent,
dirough an dd water way that issued into a gar-
den. Presently Oriana and Briolania called Ama -
dis, and requested him to answer them truly what
they should ask, the wluch he promised. Tell us
then, s^d Oriana, who the Damsel was who won
the garland when you gained ihe sword ? Then
was Amadis grieved at the question because he was
bound to answer it traly. As God shall help me
Lady, said he, I know no more of her name than^
you do, though I w^s seven days in her company j
but this I can say, that she had beautiful locks, aud
as &r as I could see was right fair. Thas was Oriana
sporting with him, when there came a Damsel to
summon him on the King's part, saying, that Don
Quadragante and his nephew Landin were come to
acquit themselves of their promises. Being all as-
sembled Quadragante rose and said, I come to dis-
eharge a promise made to Amadis of Gaul ; and
he then related how they had done battle together,
and added, that both by the event of that battle,
and by reason he was bound to forgive him the
death of King Abies, who had been slain in feir
eombat, and to receive him for a firiend even in



269

what degree it pleased htm. Then Amadis em-
braced him and thanked Mm ; and notwitbstand*
ing this friendship appeared a thing canstrakied^
yet did it long and faithfully continue. And be-
cause Florestan and Landin were to fight upon the
same quarrel^ it was Judged^ that since Quadra*
gante^ who was principal in the cause had forgiven
it^ their dispute should cease ; the which pleased
Landin not a little^ for he had witnessed the prowess
of florestan in the great battle.

King Lisu^e now called to mind the cruel prison
of King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote of
* Estravaus, and«letermined to pass over to the Is-
land of Mengaza to deliver them ; this resolution
he imparted to his Knights. Then Amadis an-
swered. Sir, you kuow what loss to your service is
the absence of Don Galaor ; if it please you I and
my brother and my cousins will go in search of
him, and if it please God return .with him by the
time that you make this voyage. The King re-
plied, God knows with what good will I myself
would seek him, if so many things did not prevent
me, since I cannot, 4b what you say. Then more than
an hundred Knights arose, all good men in arms,
and said- that they would enter upon that quest, for



S70

ia no wordiiar adventore ooald tJbe^ be employed*
Theieat vas King Lisuarte well pleased, and
be b^ODght Amadif aot to depart^ for he would
gjptBk with him.



271



CHAPTER 18.



After sapper, it being almost the boor of ikep^ as
the Kiiig was in the f^dleay looking toward the
iea^ he saw two fires coming on through the water«
whereat ail were greatly astonished^ marvelling
how the fire and water could exist together. As
they drew nearer^ a fftfifj was seen between the
two fires^ and on its mast there were great torches
burning, so that the whole vessc^ seemed ablaze.
The uproar was greats for all the people ran to the
walls to see this wonder^ expecting that if the
water could not quench this fire nothing else could,
and the city would surely be consumed ; so they
were greatly terrified. The Queen with aH her
Ladies went in their fear to the chapel^ and the
King mounted^ and with his guard of fifty Knights
rodo down to the shore^ and found there^the mosft
part of his Knights^ and in the frcHit of all Ama-
dis^ md Guila^ the Pensive^ and £nil^ so near the

M 5



27a
♦ #

fires that he wondered how they could endarc
them ; then spurring his horse, whom the tumult
had frightened, he rode up to them. Presently he
saw come from under a cloth that covered the
deck a Dame clad in white holding a golden casket
in her hands, the which she opened and took out
a lighted candle and threw it into the sea^ -where
it was extinguished. At once the two great fires were
quenched so that no trace of tliem remained^ only
the torches upon the mast remained burning, aikl
cast a light along the shore. Then was the cloth
which covered the galley withdrawn, and they
saw how it was all hung with green boughs, and
strewed with roses and fiowers, and they heard iur
struments within 80un4ing very sweetly $ and
when the instruments ceased, ten Damsels came
forth, all richly garmented, with garlands on their
heads and wands of gold in their hands, and be-
fore tliem was the Lady who had quenched the
candle in the sea : and they coming to the galley'^
edge opposite to the King made obeisance to bim^
•and he on his part returned the greeting. 'Then
said Lisuarte, Dame, you have put u^ in.gr^t fear
with your fires, if it please you tell me who ypU '
are, though I believe with little difficulty we can
.divine. Sir, quoth she, in vain should he -labour
who strove to strike fear into your great heart, aod



273

lata these Kaights in whom no fear is; these fires
I bring to protect me and my Damsels : and if you
think I am Urganda the Unknown, you think,
aright 3 I come to you as the best King in the
world, and to behold the Queen, who for virtue
and goodness hath no peer. Then said she to Ama-
dis. Sir, draw nearer, and I will tell you of your
brother Galaor to save you and your friends the
labour of searching him; for though all in the
world were to seek him it would be. but labour
lost : he is healed of his wounds, and leads a life of
such pleasure as he never till now tnjoyed. Lady,,
quoth Amadis, I always thought that next to God
the safety of Don Galaor was in your hands, else
would I rather have died than suffer Jhim to be car^
ried from me as he was. * You shall soon see him,,
quoth she. The King then said, it is time that
you should leave the galley and come to my pa-
lace. Many thanks, she answered, but this night
1 will remain here, to-mbrro\v I will be at your
command 5 then let Amadis and Agrayes, and Don
Bruneo of Bonamar, and Don Guilan the Perisive
come fof met for they are all lovers and of high,
heart, even as I am myself. Use your own plear-
sure, replied Lisuarte, in this and every thing j
then ordering all the people to return- into the town
4ke took his leave^ and appointed twenty cross*bow-

M 5 .



874

men to Ifiep guard tbat none should go dosni M
the shore.

In the niorniog the Queen sent twelve palfiejrs
richly accoutrei for Urganda and her Damsels,
Amadis and the other Knights whom she had
named^ being clothed in costly garments^ went
with them ; they found Urganda and her company
in a tent which she had pitched upon the 8and> and
they placed them on their palfireys, jsaid went to-
wards the town, the four Knights surrounding Ur«
ganda. Now, (aid she, is my heart glad, because
I see those around me who are like myself and
this she said because of t:e love she bore to that
fair Knight who was her friend. When th^ ar-
rived at the palace the King welcomed her right
.courteously, and she kissed his hand 5 and looking
round and beholding the Kni£^ts on every side
Jbo^ many they were, she said,. Sir, you are weU
iiccompanied, and this I say, not so much for the
valour of these itnights as for the love they bear
you, for when princes are loved by their people
then are their kingdoms safe. Therefore preserve
' their love, ^nd beware of evil counsellors ! Now
if it please you I will see the Queen. So she and
the four Knights went to Brisena, by whom and
by Oiana, and Briolania, and all the Dames aq^



275

I}9ameh, abe was Jorki^y received. Much did
$bc admire the beauty of Briolania, and saw that it
feU fiur shmt of Oiiana's perfection. Lady^ quoth
ahe, I aame to this court to see the greatness of
the King and you, the hei^^t of prowess and the
flower of beauty^ and the. perfection of true love i
6x as valour was proved in the conquest of the
Finn Island^ and in the death of the giants^ and in
that dolorous battle with King Cildadan^ so was
true love in the proo& of the burning sward and of
ihe garland. When Onana heard her say this her
colour changed, and she greatly feared, as did
Mabtlia and the Damsel of Denmark, fearing that
Urganda should teQ all,; and Oiana looked at
Amadis, but be seeing her apprehension drew near
4o her and said,*&:ar nothings she will not say what
you imagine f and then he went to the Queen anfd
fiaid. Lady, ask Urganda who she was who won
the garland, and the Queen replied, if it please
you friend, tell us what Amadis desires to know !
She smiled and answered, he better ought to know
than I for he was in her company, and with great
toil delivered her from Arcalaus and Lindoraque.
I ? quoth Amadis ; it cannot be that I should know
eidier her or myself better than you know us, for
from you nothing is concealed. Then, said she, I '
will tell you what you know of her, and raising

M 6



276

her TCMoe that -all might hear her she pursued :
Though AmadiB brought her here as a Damsel she
is cercaioly no Damsel r and because she loves so
truly she won the garland. She is a native ckf this
kingdom, and in this kingdom she dwells and hath
here her heirship ; but her mother is not ^f this knd ;
and if she lacks any thing it is only because she
cannot have him whom she loveth. He who
would discover her must seek her in this kingdom,,
and he will lose his labour. She said no more^ and
Oriana's heart was then at rest Then^ went thej
to their meak

Urganaa besought the Queen that she might be
lodged with Oriana and Queen Bridania. That
shall youy replied Brisena, but I believe their follies
wiJJ disquiet you. Their beauty, quoth Urganda>
will more disquiet the Knights, whose valour cannot
protect them against that danger. They may easily,
replied the Queen, be paiKioned the deaths of all
they have yet slain ! So takii^ her leave Urganda
went to Oriaua's apartment, where there were four
beds, one for Briolania, and one for Mabilia, and
for Urganda and herself. When Urganda saw that
they were all asleep except Oriana^ slie said to her.
Lady and friend, if you do not sleep reason it is
that he should keep you waking who has no rest



277

but in your sight. Oriana was abashol at her
words : but she added, fear nothing, I will not di«
TU^ your secrets. Speak low> cried Oriana^ that
they may not hear yon. I will relieve you of that
fear/qubth Urganda; therewithal! she took forth
a hook wjiich was so little that a hand might have
shut over it, and began to read. Now, said 8he>
do what you will they shalLnot awake, an^ if any
one should enter the room she would fall down
asleep. Oriana rose and went to awaken Brbla-
nia but she could not> and she laughed and took
her by the head and hands and pulled her out of
bed, and did the same to Mabilia, but they neither
of them awakened ; and then she called the Damsel
of Denmark, who was just without the door, aUd she,
so soon as she entered, fell upon the floor in a deep
sleep. Thea Odana joyfcilly went into Urganda's
bed and said^ I beseech you, since you know what
is to come, tell me> what will happen to me ! Ur^
ganda looked at her and smiled. Dear daughter,
said she, do you think to escape it, if it be evil, by
knowing it aforehand ? Believe not so ! for that
which is permitted and ordained by the Most High
none can alter, whether it be good or ill, unless he
remedies it ; but since you so greatly wish me to
^ay something I will speak : look now, if when
jou have the knowledge you can profit by it ! A^



ituKt tiniCy ^vscD gfcst ionow nisU be pccsenC
with joa, ani mai^ thall faecaiue of yen. be gieady
atfcted^ ^ stnaig Lion with his beasts shftU come
Ibrtfa, and with his loud roaring sliall in snch sort
jstooish those who have ^oa in tiieir keeping,
that yon shall be left in his stroag talons. ^ And the
Amoos LioQ shall throw fnxn yoor head the Idffy
erowm which shall no longer be yoors, and the
hnngiy lion having yoar bodf In his power shsdl
tear It into his den that Jus tactrcme fiuninemn^
be slad^. Now daughter dear look how 70a
act, for this most oome to pass ! lady, qooth O19-
aaa, I should hare been better content tf I had not
enquired, for yon have made me in great tenor of
Aia stange and cruel end. La^ and daughter
£ur, replied Uiganda, seek not to know that whick
oetther your prudence nor strength can avert. Of
these dark things men often dread that for vtrhuh,
4hey ought to be j<^fid. Meandme be you happy,
3oit God has made you dai:^ter of the best Kii^
and Queen in the world, and has gifted you with
aoc!i beauty that it is ever spoken of as« wonder,
and has made that Knight love you, who shines
above all other in prowess, even as day above dark-
ness. Now it is time to awaken these ladies ; she
then opened her book again, and read, and they
tecovered.



279

After aome di^ Uxpmda besom^t ^the Xing t#
summon all his XLiughta^ and the Quean to asmiir
Ue her Dames and Damsels, that she might apeat:
to thorn before her departure i accordii^lf thcgr
met together in a spaqipus hall that was richly futr
nished> and U^ganda placed herself whece all mighf
hear her. Then she said to the Kix^ Sifj sino^
you tK(ye kept the k|ters which I sent to you and *
Don Galaor juat after Beltenebros had won ihp
fmcai, i beseeph yoa Jet them be fonoduoedj thai
^ here inay kpew tfiat I know what was to oomp
40 pass. The letters were then read, and it waa
^eeo how all had been aocompiiiihed^ whereat tbp
Knights marvelled, and still more admired the
courage of the King who, notwithstanding that
fearful forewarning, had dared enter the hattlq.
In. like sort ?9fa§J.t certainly known that by throe
Jitrokes from Mtenebros the battle was won ; tfap
first when he felled King Cildadan at Calaor's ^set,
the second when he slew Sarmadan the Lion, thp
third when succouring the King he lopt off the
,arm of Madanfabul the fierce pant of the Vermir
Jion Tower. That also was fulfilled which had
hota written of Don Galaor, that his head should
be in the power of him who should strike the three
strokes, for so it was when Amadis held it in hia
.lap as dead. NpWj ^id Urganda^ I will tell wh$^



280

shall come to pass in process of time. ContentioB
shall arise between the great Serpent and the strong.
Lioo^ in which many fierce beasts shatt take part ;
anger and fury shall come upon them, so that many
shall svifkr cruel death. The great Roman Fox
shall be wounded by the claw of the strong Lion,
and his skin crudly tora> whereby a p^at of the
great Serpent shall be in great afiKciion. In that
time the gentle Sheep covered with black wocd
-shall come between them, who by his humble and
loving blandishments sbafi assuage the fury of their
hearts. But presently the Wolves shall come down
from the mountains against the great Serpent, who
h^ng with all his animals by them conquered^
shall be blodced up in one of his dens } and tiie
tender Unicom putting his mouth to the ear of the
strong Lion shall rouse him frel^^Hlis sleep, and
make him "hasten to the syecour ^ the great Sep-
pent, whom he shall find so wounded and iHttett
that the blood shaU flew over Ins sodes, and he
shall deliver him irem the mouths of the Wolves,
and they &lilk\\ all^ be destroyed. Then the great
Serpent having his life- restored) and casting alf his
poison from his entrails shall copsent that the white
Doe shall be placed in the cruel talons of xh6 Lion.
Now good King, let all this be written, for so it
-must be. The King said it should be done, albeit



281



he understood it hot. Time will come, she an-
swered, when it shall be manifest to all. Then
lookil^g at Amadis, who was musing, she said>
Amadts, you muse upon that which cannot avail
you: let that be, aad tliink of a bargain you have to
make* At that time you shall be brought near to
death for another*s life, and for another's blood
shall e^^end your own, and of that bargain the
martyrdom will be yours, and another will have
the gain) and the guerdon which you shall have
will be wrath and the long delay of your will;'
then shall that keen and beautiful sword so pierce
thy flesh and bones that you shall be poor of blood,
and in such plight that if half the world were
yours you would give it so that that sword were
broken or thrown into some lake from whence it
could never be recovered. Look to it ! for so it
must be. Amadis saw that all eyes were upon him,
and he answered chearfully as he fek. Lady, by
what you have said of the past we may believe
this also ', but I knowing that I am mortal, and
that my life cannot be probnged one minute longer
than it pleaseth God, am desirous to end it justly
in some great and honourable enterprise. It were at
easy, quoth Urganda, to rob your heart of its cou-
rage as to drain the sea dry. Then said she to the
King, Sir, I must depart 5 remember what I have



882

jaid as one who desire your honoar and would
serve 70u,-«-shut your ears to those whose -works
you know to be evU ! With that she departed^ suf-
fering n(Xie but the four Kni^ts whom she liad
chosen to conduct her to the shore \ then she em«
barked^ and the ship put &rth to sea^ and was pro*
sently covered with a gteat darkncit.



S83 ^



CHAPTER 19.



Some few da3r8 after> as King Lbuarte was con-
saltiDgwith his Knights about the passage which
lie would make to the Isle of Mongaza, to deliver
King Arban of North Wales^ and Angriote of £#•
travaus, Uiey saw a ship making toward the port^
«id went thither to .see whom it brought. What
ibe7came neara Dmnsd and two Squires weielli
the boat^ and when the7 landed the Damsel asked
if King Lisuarte were there ? They answered yeSj
. but they were all astonished at her greatness^ for
there was not a Knight in the court who equalled
lier by a RiU palm in stature, and her features and
limbs were in proportion ; she was fair enough,
and richly attired. Sir, said ihe to Lisuarte, I
bnng you a message which, if it please you, I
would deliver before the Queen. Be it so, said
the King, and he returned to the palace, and the
JDamsel with him. llien being in presence of die



SS4

Queen and of all the Knights and Ladies of the
Courts she asked if Amadis of Gaul were there^ he
who had called himself fieltenebros. He answered,
good Damsel I am he. She looked at him with an
evil eye and said, you may well be he ! but now
it will be seen if you are as good as you are fa-
mous ! Then she produced two. letters with seals of
gold i the one she gaye the King, the other to
the Queen $ they were letters of credence, and the
King bade her say her bidding.

Sir, quoth the Damsel, Gromadaza, the Giantess
of the Boiling Lake, and the fan: Madasima, and
Ardan Caoileo the Dreadful, who is with them for
their d^ender, know that you design to come
against their country, and as that cannot be at-
tempted without gieat loss, they are willing to put
it upon trial of a battle m this guise, that Ardaa
Canileo shall combat Amadis of Gaul. If he coa«
quer or slay him the land shall t>e free, and he
shall be allowed to carry his head to the Boiling
Lake ; if he be. conquered or slain himself, thp
)and shall be yours, and King^ Arban of North
Wales, and Angriote of Estravaus shall be delivei;-
ed. They shall be brought hither, and if Amadis
.loveii thejn as they believe, and will fulfill the hope
they have in him, he will accept* the battle to deU-



S85 ■

T£r two such friends 3 if he be conquered^ Ardan-
Canileo will still hold them prisoners^ and if he
-will not accept the defiance he shall presently see
their heads cot off before him. Good Damsel,
qaoth Amadis, if I accept the battle, how shall the
King be certain that the terms will be aocom*
pjiished } She answered, the fair Madasima, with
twelve Damsels of great birth, will put themselves
as prisoners in the Queen*s power, in security that
the terms shall be observed, otherwise they are con-
tent to lose their heads, and they demand no other
assurance than that she may carry away your head
if you be overcome -, and moreover the* old giant
Andanguel and his two sons will enter the King's
prisons^ and nine Knights beside, who haveihe
towns and castles of the Island in their keeping.
Said Angiadis, if this be done the security is suffi-
cient 3 but from me you shall have no answer un«
less you and your Squires come and eat with me.
Why do yoa invite us ? quoth she ; this is no
wisdom, your trouble wiU all be lost, for I hate
you to death. Good Damsel, said Amadis, I am
sorry therefore, fot I love you, and will show you
all the honour that I can 3 if you desire to be an-
swered you must grant this. I grant it, quoth she,
Biore to get my answer than for any good will.



286

Then said Amadis^ good Daand to ventore my-'
self for two sudi fricndsj 9iid to increase the domi-
nions of the King is a just thing, and dierefore I
undertake the battle in the name of Ood, let there-
fore those whom yon have named corneas hostages^.
Truly yoa hare answered to my wiO, relied the
Damsel ; bat let the King promise^ that if you foil
to perform your word he will never protect you
against the kindred of Famongomadan. That pro-
mise, qooth Amadis, may be excosed, die KJtng
would have no one in his company who lacked
truth : how let us go eat, for it is time.— I wiU go,
and more joyfolly than I expected -, to-monovr
Madasima and her Damsels will be here, and tho
Knights wiU put themselves in the King's hands,
for Ardan CanUeo would have die battle without
May} but you must give him a safo conduct foom:
al but Amadis, whose head he will take fiom
hence. Don Bruneo of Bonamar answered. Lady
Damsel, sometimes it happens that he who thinki
i» take away anothers head loses hisown, and so
il may fall out to Ardan Canil^. Amadis be-
sought him to be silent, but the Damsel repUed to
Brmiieo, who are you who speak for Amadis ? A,
Knight, quoth he, who would wiUingly bear a part
ift tho battle if A^dea Caoileo will bdng a cobd^mu



287

nioD. She aaswtxoA, joa ntfj be excused from
that battle, bat if yoa are dekiroas of combat^ after«
that is finished I wiH prodoce a brother of mine to*
answer jon, as much the mortal eaaxxy of Atnadis
as 7cra are his friend, and one irho viit prevent you
firom taking up the quarrel again. Good Damsel,'
quoth Don Bruaeo, your brother had need be as
you boast to perfintn all that jaa have promised ! '
See,here is my ga|^ that I defy him, and he stretch*
cd out the end of his cloak towards the King. The
Damsel to(^ a silver net from her head-^here Sir,'
you see mine that I will make good my words.
The King took the pledges, though against hisr
will, for he thought the combat of Amadis against
Ardan Caniko enough to trouble him, £br that ene->
my was so dreadful that for ibur years he faad^^
found no Knight har4y enough to do battle agdinst.
him.

>

This being settled Araadn took the Damsel to hir
lodgings, winch he ongfak not to have done fi»r the
best castle ia his Other's lands; and to do her more
honour he lodged her in the Chamber whereGan-
<lalin kept his arms and aeeotHrements. She look-
ing round saw the sword of Amadis, and seeing
how strange a one k was^ she tcUher two Squires,
and the othera who wcae pn8eBt> to kave her



S88

alone* for a Httle Mrbile ; when they were gone
she drew the sword, and leaving the sheath and
belt so that the theft might not be discovered, she
\ifrrapt it under her mantle } then opoiing the door
she gave it secretly to one of her Squires under his
cloak, and bade him carry it to the vessel — this she
spalce softly ; then spake alood, go bring me my
cup ! and all present thought that the Squire was
sent for that. Then Aihadis and Branfil entered,
and they made the Damsel be seated on the £stra<»
do, and Amadis asked at what hour of the morrow
Madasima would arrive."— ^Before bieakfast : but
why ask you ? — Because we would go ctit to receive
her and show her every honour, that if she have re-
ceived any displeasure from me I may make her
lilQch amends, as she shall demand. If you keep*
your promise, quoth she, aod Ardan Canileo be
what he always hath been in arms, yoQ will give
her your head for amends ; any other amends will
be good for little. That, said Amadls, I shall keep
if! can ; but if It caould be I should gladly obtain
her pardon. With that he went out, leaving £nil



* Y pensando que algona cosa de las naturales que no se
pueden escusai hazer queria, dczaroa la sola.



889

and others to attend her, bixt she wai so desirous to be
gone, that the number of dishes provoked her, and
as soon as the -cloths were removed she rose and
said to Enil, Knight, tell Amadis that I am gone,
and that all the pains he has taken to jrilease me are
lost. Grod save me, quoth Enil, as I believe it I
and whoever should strive to please such a one as
you would lose his pains. She answered, you
please (ne little, and he still less ! Enil replied, nei-
ther he nor I nor any one else can like so insolent
a Damsel. With these words they parted.

The Damsel entered the ship glad. for the sword
which she had stolen, and she told Ardan Canileo
and Madasima how she had sped. Ardan thanked
Jier for what she had done, and he said to Mada-
sima, my Lady, account me not for a Knight if I
do not bring you back with honour 5 and if I give
you not the head of Amadis in less time than a man
xan go half ^ league, how swift soever he be, never
grant me your love. She answered him not, for
albeit she greatly desired vengeance for t^e death
of her father and her brother, yet for nothing in the
world would she have seen herself married to Ar-
dan Canileo, for she was fair and noble, and he
foul and deformed and hideous, that there was
none like him, and this agreement was naade at

VOL. II. ^



290

her mother*8 will, not at her own, who had pro-
mised, if he would defend and revenge her, to give
him Madasima and leave him all her lands. Now
whereas this Ardaa Canileo was a Knight famous
in the world, and of great prowess, the history
shall tell you of what land he was native, and the
fashion of his body and face, and what else to him
eppertaineth. Know then that he^ was bom in
the province c^led Canileo, of the blood of the
Giants, who abound there more than in other parts }
he was not unreasonably great of body, albeit ex^*
ceeding in stature any man who was not a giant $
his limbs were large, and his breast broad, and his
shoulders square, and -his hands and legs propor-
tioned 3 his face was Jarge and flat and like a dog,
wherefore he was called Canileo, and his nose w^as
flat and spreading, and his colour purple freckled
with black spots, which were all over his face and
neck and hands 3 his look was fierce like a lion,
and his lips were thick and curling out, and his
hair so woolly that it could scarcely be combed,
and the beard like it. He was now £ye and tbir^
years old, and for ten years past neither Knight
nor Giant had been able to withstand him, and so
bony was he that there was scarcely a horse could
carry his weight. When the Insolent Damsel
heard him promise the head of Ajnadis to Mada*



291



sima^ she said to him^ we may well hope so Sir,

since Fortune already shows herself adverse to your
i enemy. Here is his good sword which I bring
I you, which could not have bden gained for you
{ without great mystery of his ill fate, and your good
i fortune; then she gave it him and related how

she had stolen it. He took it and replied, I thank
t thee for the gift, more for the good manner in
i which you took it than for any fear I have of a bat-
f. tie. against a single Elnight. Then he ordered
^'. tents to be taken fron^ the ship, and pitched in a
d plain near the town, and there they all went with
^: their horses and palfreys, and the arms of Ardan
jjfji Canileo, expecting the next day to appear before
li King Lisuarte. Right joyful was Ardan that the
^i combat was thus appointed, and for two reasons :
feci; the one because he made no doubt that he should
jcei carry off the head of Amadis, who being so famous
3 Hi all his glory would remain upon him, and the other
^i because he should win the fair Madasima whom he

loved so well.



, . Meantime Amadis was with his fiiends who
. greatly feared this combat, so. dangerous, they es-
teem it. Presently Agrayes, and Don Florestan,
and Galvanes Lackland, and Don Guilan the Pen-



^ sive, came in, knowing nothing of what had past,

' n2



2®2

for tbe^ had been hunting in the forest ; bat m^bai
ihcy heard how the combat had been appoiirtodi
they complained that it had not been fixed for a
.greater number of Knights^ that they might have
entered it, and be who most passionately lamented
this was Don Giulan who had heard how Aidan
Canileo was the strongest of any Knight in arms,
and the most powerful^ and it grieved him to death,
for he thought that Amadis would never escape
with life from him, fighting him man to man in
lists, and he greatly wished to share his fortune if
Ardanhad brought a companion. Don Florestan
too exclaimed in great anger, as God shall save
me, brother, you think me of no account as a
Knight, or you do not love me, since you did not
remember me on such an occasion ! you make me
perceive that it is bootless to accompany you longer,
for you always withhold me from such perils.
Agrayes also and Don Galvanes complained in the
like manner. Sirs, quoth Amadis, you blame me
with little cause 5 the combat was demanded of me
alone, -so that without showing cowardice I could
not otherwise have answered 3 else, if I might have
had assistance whcHn else should I iiave looked to
but you, whose great valour might have aided
mine in danger. Thus iiaving excused himself he
said, it will be well that we ride forward to-mar-



293

row before the King goes forth^ to meet Madasima,
who is greatly esteemed by all who know her.

In the morning they apparalled themselves richly,
and having heard mass mounted on palfreys and
rode to receive Madasima. Don Bruneo of fiona-
mar went with them and his brother Branfil^ and
Enil, who was a goodly Knight and of great worth,
and of chearful heart, so that he was beloved and
esteemed by all, so they were eight companions.
And as they drew nigh the tents they saw Ma-
dasima coming, and Ardan Canileo and their com-
pany. Madasima was arrayed in black, mourning
for her father and brother, but her beauty was so
lively and excellent that it was a marvi^l, and her
Diunsels went near her all drest in the same cloth.
Ardan Canileo led her bridle, and there came tlie
<ild Giant and his sods, and the nine Knights who
were to be hostages. As they drew near to each.
other the Knights made their obeisance, aud she in
like manner bowed to them with gocxi semblance 5
then Amadls approached her and said. Lady, if you .
are praised it is with great reason I see, and happy
ought he to be esteemed who is. allowed to ho-
nour and serve you -, that would I willingly do in .
what it might please you to command me, Ard n
Canileo, who looked at him and saw how ha. d-

n3



294

some he was, so that he had seen none like him,
WI1& nothing pleased at this. Knight, quoth he,
give back, and dare not speak to one whona you
know not. It is that we taay know her and serve
her, replied Amadis^ that we are come. And who
are you ? cried Ardan scornfully ; let nie know
if you are worthy to serve her ? Such as I am,
quoth Amadis^ 1 have the will to serve her, and
shall not cease to have that will, however unwor-
thy I may be, and since you ask who I am, tell me
who are you ?--I am Ardan Canileo, who can bet-
ter serve her in a day than you can in your
whole life, though you were of twice your worth.
— :That may well be : but your great service would
not proceed from so good a heart as my ^fiing
one, this is plain from your pride and evil mind.
Know that I am Amadis of Gaul of whom you
have demanded battle. If I have offended and
grieved that Lady by doing that which -without
great shame I could not have left undone, right mtII-
lingly would I atone for it by some good service.
Ardan Canileo answered, if you dare perform your
promise, certainly she shall receive atonement -with
your head which I will give her. That amends,
quoth Amadis, she shall not have with my good
pleasure, but she shall receive a greater; for I ivill
break off your marriage. No man can so lack judg-



, '295

ment as to hold it good that your beauty and hera
should be united ! At this Madasima being no-*
thing displeased^ laughed a little^ and her Damsels
likewise, but Ardan became so wroth that his
whole body shook, and his &ce became so exceed-
ing terrible, that many thought Amadis was no-
thing in pomparison with him, and that this would
without doubt be his last battle, and the last day of
his life.

Thus they proceeded till they came before the
King, to whom Ardan Canileo said, you see here
the Knights ready to become your hostages, if
Amadis dare keep his word. Then Amadis came
forth and answered, you see me here : let the bat-
tle be without delay, and I tell you that though I
had not promised it, ] would undertake it now
solely to save Madasima from so monstrous a mar-
riage ; but let King Arban of North Wales, and
Angriote of Estravaus be brought here, that they
may be delivered if I conquer. They shall cf^me,
replied Ardan, but let Madasima be where she may
see the combat and the vengeance which I sh^U
take for her. So the old Giant and his sons, and
the nine Knights put themselves in the King'9
power, and Madasima and the Damsels went to
the Queen, and so meekly and decorously did M»-

n4



^ 296

dasima demean herself^ that albeit by her mean»
Amadis was brought into this great danger, yet were
they greatly pleased with her, and did her all ho-
nour. But Priana and Mabilia seeing the fierce-
ness of Ardan Canileo were greatly afirighted and
retired in great fear and weeping to their chamber,
for they thought the strength of Amadis was not
enough to resist that Devil : yet did they remem-
ber his good fortune, how often it had brought him
off witli honour, and Mabilia comforted hei* friend
the best she could. The following day was ap-
pointed for the battle ; King Lisuarte ordered his
huntsmen and bowyers to surround the lists with
chains and stakes, that neither Knight might lose
honour by the fault of his horse. The lists were
before the palace, and when Oriana saw them pre-
paring them from her window, the thought of how
great a danger was there designed for her Amadis
so overpowered her, that she fell almost senseless in
Mabilia's arms.

Lisuarte went to the lodging of Amadis where
many Knights were with him, and said to him^
that as the Queen and his daughter, and Queen
Briolania and the other Dames and Damsels would
pass that night in the chapel, beseeching God to
preserve 'their Knight, he would have him return



297

in his company to the palace, and with him Flo*-
restan and Agrayes, and Don Gal vanes, and Guilaft
and Enil, and that there tliey should regale them-
selves, and he desired Amadis to send his armour
to the chapel, that he might arm himself to-mor-
pow before the Virgin Mary, that so she and her
glorious son might be his protectors. They went ^
therefore with the King, and Amadis ordered Gan-
dalin to carrj^ his arms thither as Lisuarte had ad-
vised. But he taking them in obedience missed the
sword from the scabbard, whereat so amazed was
he and exceeding sorrowful that he wished himself
dead, not only because the loss fell out at a time
of such danger, but because he held it as a sign
that his Master's death was nigh at hand» He
sought for it cvejy where, and enquired of all who
might know any thing } but when he could learn
lio tidings he was on the point of throwing himself
from a window, if the thought had not come
upon him that in that case .he should destroy his
soul ; forthwith in trouble of heart he went to the
palace, and calling Ajmadis apart said to him. Cut
off my head Sir, for I am a traitor to you ; and if
you do ' not kill me I must slay myself. How^
now ? quoth Amadis : are you mad ? or what mis-
hap is this ? Better Sir, he said, that I were mad
er dead than that such a mishap should havebe^

N 5



298

fallen . I have lost your 8word> it has been stolen fi-om
tile scabbard. Is it for this you are so distressed ?
replied Amadis, I thought something worse had
chanced ; trouble yourself no more^ there will be
no want of another wherewith Grod will assist me,
if it be his good pleasure. But though he spake
thus to comfort Gandalin^ yet was he grieved at
heart for the loss of that sword^ as well for the
lack of it now in such need^ being one of the best
in the world, as because he had won it by the force
of his true love ; and it was a oomfort to him to
look at itj and remember that when he was absent
from his Lady. Howbeit he bade Gandalin say
nothing thereof to any person^ but bring him the
scabbard^ and he bade him learn of the Queen if
he could have the sword which Don Guilan had
brought there together with his own arms -, and if
he could see Oriana he made him request her in his
name that she would be somewhere where he might
see.her when he was in the lists, for the sight of
her would make him become conqueror in that or
in a worse danger. Gandalin went to perform hi*
bidding, and the Queen commanded the sword
should be given him ; but Briolania and Olinda said
to him^ Ah Gandalin, what think you can your
Master do against that Devil ? he answered smil-
ing, and with a chearful countenance. Ladies, this



299

is not the first perilous enterprise which he hath
undertaken, and as God as hitherto preserved him
so he will now. God grant it, cried they. Then
went he to Mabilia and told her what' his Master
requested of Oriana^ and then returned to Amadis,
and said that all things were^ done as he desired,
whereat he had great pleasure and took more cou-
rage, knowing that bis Lady would be where be
might see. her from the lists. Amadis then took
the King aside, and said to him. Sir, I have lost
my sword, and knew it not till now ; they have
stolen it and left the sheath. The King was griev-
ed thereat and answered him, although I had de-
termined and promised never to give my sword to
any Knight who was to %ht man to man before
me, yet will I now give it you, remembering how
many dangers you have encountered for my>sake.
God forbid, quoth Amadis, that I who ought to
maintain your royal word should make you break
it, and that too when you have pledged it before
so many good men. The tears came into Lisu-
arte's eyes, and he said, such a man are you for
maintaining j[ustice and right ! but what will you
do ? — I have here the sword which was laid in the
Ark with me, which Don Guilan brought hither,
herewith and with your prayers to the Lord which
will avail before him^ I may be assisted. Then he

n5



300

placed the sword in the sheath^ wbidi became it
'well, although the sword was somewhat short, and
the King was glad he took the sheath because of
its virtue, which would protect him from exceed-
ing heat or cold, for the bones of. the serpents
whereof it was made were of such a constellation -,
but of very difierent goodness was this sword firom
the other.

Thus they passed that day till^ it was the honr of
sleep^ and then all those Knights had their arms
around the King's bed. But all that night Ardan
Canileo had merry-making in his tents, with music
and dancing, and ever at the end of his songs Lis
people all cried out, come Morning, come! and
let tlie day be clear, that Ardan Canileo may per-
form what he has promised to the fair Madasima !
but it fell but otherwise than they expected. That
night Amadis slept in the King's chamber, but the
sleep which he slept was of no avail, for presently
at midnight he rose without speaking, and went to
the chapel, and having awakened the chaplain con-
fessed all bis sins to him, and there they both were
before the altar of the Virgin Mary making prayers,
and beseeching her to be his patroness in this bat-
tle. When it was dawn the King and those other
Knights arose, and heard mass^ and Amadis was



301

afmed by such Knights as well knew how to do it f
but before his breast-plate was put on Mabilia catne
up and hung round his neck certain reliques shrined
with go]d^ saying, that the Queen her mother had
sent them to her by the Damsel of Denmark ; but
it was not so^ for Elisena had given them to Ama*
dis wiien she knew him for her son, and he gave
them to Oriana when he delivered her from Area-
laus. When he was armed they brought him a
goodly horse, which Corisanda had sent with otliec
presents to her friend Florestan. Florestan car-
carried hh lance, and Don Guilan bis shield^ and
Don Bruneo his helmet, and the King went before
on a great horse, holding a wand in his hand. All
the people of the court and town were assembled
about the lists to see the battle, and the Dames and
Damsels were at the windows, and the fair Oriana
and Mabilia were at their chamber window, and
with the Queen were Briolania and Madasima, and
other princesses. As Amadis came up to the lists
they loosened one of the chains and he entered and
took his arms, and as he put on his helmet he look-
at his Lady, and felt therewith such strength as
though no one in the world could withstand him
Then the Judges entered the field, who were to
assign to each his right; they were three in num-
ber, that good old man Don Grumedaii, who was



302

well skilled in such thiogs, and Don 41uadragante^
who was now the King's vassal^ and BraDdo3ruas f
then came Ardan Canileo well armed^ and upon a
great horse : his harness was of thick mail^ and
his shield and helmet were of steely so polished
that it was bright like looking-glass 3 and he had
girded at his side the good sword of Amadis,
which the Damsel had stolen, and he bent his huge
lance as if he would have broken it, and thus he
entered the lists. When Oriana saw him, she said
in great agony, ah mj friend, how fierce and ter^
ribly my death approaches,' unless God in his mercy
prevent it. Leave this, quoth Mabilia, and make
good chear, for so shall you encourage your friend;*

Then Don Grumedan led -Amadis to one end of the
lists, and Brandoyuas placed Ardaa Canileo at the
other, with their hcffses heads fronting each other ^
and Quadragante at an equal distance between*
them held a trumpet >n his hand to sound tlie sig^
nal. Amadis, who was looking at his Lady, ex.-
claimed. What is Quadragante about that he does
not blow the trampet ? Quadragante then blew*
the blast, and the two Knights ran full speed, and
encountered lance against shield so fiercely that the
lances shivered, and they hurtled with such force
that the horse of Ardan Canileo fell ttnd broke hia



303

neck and died, and the horse of Amadis broke hi*
shoulder and coulcf not rise. Amadis presently
arose> though with some difficulty^ for a truncheon
of the lance was sticking in hb shield^ and through
the. lappets of his armour^ though it had not reach^
ed the flesh -, he plucked it out^ and laid hand to
sword and made at Ardan^ who had risen liardly.
and was adjusting his helmet. £ut Ardan seeing
his approach drew his sword^ and they joined battle
80 furiously that there was not a man who saw
them but was greatly amazed^ for their strokes fell
8o fierce and so fast that flames of fire seemed to
proceed from their helmets and swords as if they
burnt, and chiefiy firom the shield of Ardan Canileo,
for that being of steel, and the blows of Amadis so
rapid and heavy, it appeared as. if the whole
shield and arm were in a blaze of fire^ but the
great hardness of the shield protected him and
saved his body, which was to the mortal evil of
Amadis 3 for as his arms were not so good, and as,
Ardan had one of the best swords in the worlds
never blow reached him that did not pierce through
and reach his flesh, so that in many parts the.
blood ran down, and his shield was all hacked.
The ^word of Amadis could make no impression
upon the shield and helmet of his enemy, and
though his own harness was of thick and strong.



304

mail, it was pierced in more than fen places,
and the blood streamed from them all. What
then most profited Amadis was his activity,
for by that he made Ardan miss all his heaviest
blows, though Ardan was well practised and ey^-
pert with the sword. Thus they continued till the
hour of tieree, striking and foyning, and grappling
and struggling so manfully that Ardan Canileo was
in great amazement, for he had never before found
Knight nor Giant so strong as to -resist him thu»
much ; and what made him doubt the issue was,
that he always found his antagonist more active
and stronger than at the beginning, whereas he
himself waxed weary and faint, being full of blood.
Then Madasima knew that he had boasted vainly
when he promised to conquer Amadis before the
swiftest footman could run half a league, whereat
she was little grieved, nor would sht though Ardaa
were to lose his own head there, for such was her
mind, that she would rather lose all her lands than-
be joined in marriage with such as he. The
Knights still continued in battle, strikmg at each
otlier in every part where they could work most
harm, each striving for tite other's death 5 and if
Amadis had then had arms good as his own acti-
vity and breath, Ardan could not have held the
field against him^ but all hb efbrts were now



305

aeeded^ for his arms were broken^ and his shield
broken, and the blood flowing from many wounds,
and he had to deal with a Knight fierce and strong
in battle. When Oriana saw him in such plight
her heart failed her for sore anguish, and she threw
herself upon the ground, and beat her face, think->
ing that Amadis was come to his death. Mabilia
seeing this, notwithstanding her own- exceeding
trouble, put on an appearance of much anger, and
told her that at such a time and in such danger
she ought not to forsake her lover, and because she
could not endure to see his danger, Mabilia made
her stand with her back to the window that Ama-
dis might see her long hair. At this time Bran«
doyuas, who w^ one of the Judges, said, I am
grieved to see the arms and shield of Amadis so bet-
tered! and I, quoth Grumedan, I am much troubled.
Sirs, said Quadragante, I have proved Amadis in
combat, and his strength seems to double while he
fights, and of all Knights whom I have seen he
endures the best, and is the best breathed : he is
now in his full strength, which is not the case with
Ardan, if any fault be in Amadis it is that he is too
eager : he should suffer his enemy to press on him,
and then his own weight would weary Ardan.
But his great courage will not let him thus spare
lumself. When Oriana and Mabilia heard these



306

worda they were greatly comforted j but Amadls^
who had seeu his Lady retirev from the window,
knew that it was for sorrow at .beholding him> and
he made a blow at Ardan with exceeding fary,
and smote him so rudely upon the helmet that be
brought him down upon one knee> but that blo^i^
was so mighty, and the helmet so hard, that the
sword broke in three pieces, and a piece only re-
mained in his hand. Then was Amadis iU' all
fear of death, and they who beheld him expected
his death also. When Ardan saw this he rose and
drew back, and took his shield by the straps, and
brandishing his sword cried aloud to Amadis,
Look ! here is the good sword which thou hast
won to thy own destruction. Look at It ! tliis 19
k, and thou shalt die by it. Come, Lady Mada-
sima ! come to the window, and you shall behold
the full vengeance which I will give you ! When
Madasima heard this she fell at the Queen's feet,
and besought her to protect her from Ardan, which,
said she, you may lawfully do, for Ardan promised
to win the battle before a man could run half a
league, and it has now lasted four hours. J hear
you, replied Brisena, and will do what is just.
But when Amadis saw in what plight he stood,
his arms in pieces and without a swoi*d> he remem-
bered the words of Urganda when she told him



307

that he would give half the world if it were his^ 90
that that sword were sunk in a lake } and he looked
toward Oriana's window, and seeing her back to*
wards him^ knew why she had turned away, and
his courage revived so that he resolved to die ra-
ther than fail to do his utmost. He made at Ar-
dan Canileo as if he were about to strike him ', Ar«
dan raised his sword and awaited him, and struck
at him as he came up, but Amadis bent aside and
closed with him so close that Ardan could not in-
tjBrpose his sword, and he seized the shield by the
r.im, and plucked it with such ^rce that he tore it
from his arm ^nd well nigh brought him to the
ground, then he drew back, and put that shield
upon his own arm, and took up the truncheon of a
lance which had its point, and again turned to Ar-
dan, being now defended by Ardan's shields Ar«
dan in great fury for tliis loss ran at him thinking
tp smite him on the helmet ; Amadis caught tho
blow upon his shield, and though it was of fine
steel, such was the temper of that good sword that
it pierced through the rim and entered three fin-
gers' depth, and with the broken iance Amadia
wounded him in the right arm by the wrist, thrust-
ing the iron half through between the two bones,
therewith Ardan lost all power to piuck the sword
Qut, and Amadis forced it from his hand i. if bo



308

was then right glad and satisfied need neither be
asked nor said -, he cast away the broken lance^ and
drew the sword from the shield^ tlianking God for
his mercy. Mabilia^ who beheld, caught hold of
Oriana and made her turn and see her lover obtain
this victory over so imminent a danger. Ardan*
Canileo grew faint as he beheld his death at band,
howbeit he attempted to recover the shield in the
like manner as he had lost it^ but Amadis smote
him upon the left shoulder, and cut through ar-
mour^ and flesh and bone. Ardan felt the use of
his arm was gone, and he fled round the lists,
fearing that good sword. Amadis followed close
and caught him by the helmet, ind plucked it off>
and brought him to the ground at his feet, then
knelt upon him and cut off his head, to the great
joy of all, especially of King Arban of North Wales,
and Angriote, who had endured gre^t agony while
they witnessed the danger of Amadis. Thett
Amadis cast the head out of tlie lists, and he drag-
ged the body to a rock and threw it into the sea,
then he wiped the blood from his sword and placed
it in its sheath.

l*he King sent him a horse, on which he rode well
accompanied to his lodging, but he was sore
wounded and had lost much blood. With him- he



309

took King Arban and Angriote^ whom he had de*'
Jivered from their cruel chains. Brisena sent for
her nephew Arban^ and Angriote remained in the
chamber of his true friend Amadis^ and there were
tiiey both healed 5 and thejr werd lovingly visited
there by many Knights and Dames and Damsels of
the courts and his cousin Mabiiia came to Amadis,
and brought with her that true medicine wherewith
his heart could heal all lesser evils.



310



CHAPTER 20.



On the day after the battle Don Bruneo of Bona-
mar appeared before die King, and there he found
the Insolent Damsel, who said that her brother
was ready to do combat with him, and take that
poor vengeance for Ardan Canileo. Forthwith
they armed and went to the field, Don Bruneo ac-
companied by many good Knights, and Madaman
the Envious, for so he was called, by them who
bore his arms. At tlie first encounter Madaman
was thrown and Bruneo slightly hurt in the breast ;
he kept his seat, but when he turned the reins Ma-
daman cried out to him, sword in hand, Don Bru-
neo, if you would not lose your horse, alight or lejt
me mount. Take your own choice, quoth Bru-
neo. Alight then, said Madaman, for being of
huge stature he thought to have the advantage
afoot j then began a brave battle, and while they
were thus engaged there happened a ;itrange things



311



'whereby it wasr manifested that beasts know tbek
masters^ for the horses being loose in the field at-
tacked each other^ fighting with their feet and
teeth so furiously that ail were amazed thereat^
and this lasted till Madaman's horse being no
longer able to hold out ran away^ and in his fear
leaped over the barriers, the which, all they who
wished for the victory of Bruneo, held as a good
sign ', and turning their eyes now to the two com-
batants they saw how Don Bruneo prest. upon the
enemy hard, so that Madaman drew back and said.
Why do you fatigue yourself ? • is not the day
long enough ? Hold awhile and let us rest 3 look
at your arms and the blood which you have lost,
and yon will find it needful. Madaman, quoth
he, if oar combat were of another nature you
•should find in me all courtesy, but for this pride
and hatred I will not suffer thee to rest, and show
thy own faint-heartedness, lest my own fame
should be lessened ; with that he prest upon him
and fo3aied so fast at him, that Madaman had
, enough to do to defend himself from the blows ;
and he thinking he might protect himself better
among the rocks drew back towards the clifif^ and
there he stood upon the edge, being affrighted at
the depth, till Bruneo came up, and with his shield
sod h^d thrust him over^ so that he was all shat-



312

tered before he reached the water ; then Bruoeo
koelt and returned thanks to God.

But when Matalesa the Insolent Damsdi beheld

the fall of her brother, she ran furiously to the diff

and looked over, and seeing the bloody fragments

floating on the waves, she caught up his sword

which he had dropt and cried. Here, where the

blood of my Unde Ardaa Canileo and my brother

has been shed, shall mine be shed also, that my

soul may be with theirs $ apd she ran herself through,

and fell backward into the sea. Don Bruneo then

rode to the lodging of Amadis, and his bed was

placed by the beds of Amadis and Angriote, and

there were they all healed, and during their, con-

£nement the Knights and Ladies of the conrt oftea

went there to amuse them.

. Now Briolania perceiving that the malady of her
love increased, with the advice of Amadis departed
for her own kingdom ; but she determined first to
see the wonders of the Firm Island, and prove the
Forbidden Chamber, So she took £nil with her^
and promised to tell Oriana all that she should see
there, as shall be related hereafter.

As this history now proceeds you will see the little



31S

power of Imraan wisdom when it pleases Qod to
leave man to himself. You have heard how King
Lisuarte being a prince, and posseting nothing
but his arms and his horsej and going about with
only a few sei*vants seeking adventures, came to
Denmark^ where Brisena, the King's daughter, pre-
ferred him to all her many suitors, and chose him
for her husband 5 this was his first good fortune.
But ere long his brother died, and he became King
of Great .Britain, and subdued other Kingdoms, and
the sons of Kings, and Princes, and Dukes, abode
in his courts so that his name was famous above
all Emperors and Kings in the worlds Now there
were two Knights io his court who had served his
brother King Faiangris, and for this, and because of
their age more than for their goodness, they were
of Iisuarte*s counsel : the one wa^ named firoca-
dan, the other Gandandel. This Gandandel had
two sons who were thought passing good Knights
in arms, belbre Amadis and those of his lineage ar-
rived there, whose exceeding worth and courage had
now made them be forgotten. On this account Gan-
dandel neither fi^ring God nor regarding his duty
to the King, nor the good deeds do^e by Amadis to
hicasdf, devised in his evil heart a foul treason. He
led the King s^art and said to him. Sir, I have Idng
fbrbome to speak to you upon this matter^ hoping
yoL. II. o



o



14



some jother remedy might be devised, and therein

have I greatly sinned against you 3 but I should

sin both against you and Grod if I were longer to

keep silence, and I have been always careful to

preserve my soul and honour, and do evil to no one,

so that nciy judgment is free from all passion.

You know Sir what great quarrels have subsisted

between the kingdoms of Gaul and Great Britain,

because that country ought to be subject to this as

all the other neighbouring countries are, and this

is an evil which will never be thoroughly healed

till it be so. But now Amadls, who is not only a

native of Gaul, but the chief person of his lineage,

IS come hither with his kinsmen, and has acquired

such power that the kingdom is in his hand, as if

he were right heir thereto. True it is that^fironci

him and his friends I have never received any

wrong, but great honour and pleasure j butyoa

are my natural Lord, ^nd I .must discharge my

duty lestl fall into a wretched plight in this world,

.^nd my sold be cast .into hell in the other. The

King without any seeming alteration answered

him. These Knights hove already served me well

to my honour and profit, so that I cannot think of

them otherwise dian well. Sir, quoth Gandandcl,

:that is the worst sigti, for if they did any thing

against your service yoo would be upon your guard



315

against them^ but the treacfaeiy is concealed under
their good services. Thus have you heard all the
talk> for the King answered nothing fartlier. But
Oandandel took' counsel with his cousin Brocadan^
whose evil mind was like his own^ and they two both
working upon the King to the same effect wrought
in him a great change against those who had done
iiim such services^ so that he seemed to have for-
gotten how Galaor rescued him from the ten
Knights of Arcalaus, and Amadis from the arms of
Madan^bul^ although in both cases they saved his
life and his * kingdoms.

So much was Lisuarte moved thereby that he now
began to hate Amadis and his friends, and he left
off visiting Amadis where he lay wounded, and
'Would pass by his lodging without asking how he
^fared. All who saw this novelty marvelled much
thereat, and they sometimes talked concerning it
before Amadis, but he knowing his own true mean-
ing would not believe but that the King also
was like- himself, and that business occupied
him, and this he said to his fiends, and partico-



* Here follows a column of catttk>n against evil Counsel-
lors,



Sl6



larly to Angriote of Estravaus^ who was the most
troubled. While things were in this state King
Lisuarte sent for Madasima and her Damsels, and
the old Giant and his sons, and the nine Knights
whom he held as hostages, and he told them that
if they <Ud not forthwith cause the Island of Mod*
gaza to be given up to him, according to terms, he
would have their heads cut off ; which^ when Ma-
dasima heard, the tears came abundantly^ and not
knowing what to reply her flesh all shook with ex-
ceeding fear. But Andaguel the old Giant replied,
that if he would send him with a certain force he
would cause the Island to be surrendered to him,
or else return again. The King therefore dismissed
him with this forces and Madasima returned to
prison^ accompanied by many Knights, among
whom was Don Galvanes Lackland *, he beholdir^
the tears on that fair face was moved to exceedii^
pity, and yielded up that liberty which he had be-
fore preserved, and without delay speaking apart to
her, ; he opened his heart and said, that if it
pleased her to marry him he would so deal that
both her life and lands should be safe. Madasima,
who well knew his great worth, and of what line-
age he was, was nothing averse ; then (ralvanes
juielt down and kissed her hand, and it was not
long before he acquainted Amadis and Agrayes of



sir



his love^ and besought them to enable him to per-'
form what he had promised as they regarded his
llie. They marvelling at this sudden change told
him tbat^ considering his good services to King
Lisuarte, what he required was a little thing, espe<*
ctallj as tlie Lordship of the Island would remain
to the King, and Amadis promised, as soon as he
could rido^ to request the boon for him.

Meantime Gandandel often went to visit Amadis
with semblance of great regard, and always spuke
to hira of the King as being changed, and warned
him to beware of him lest some evil should happen,
which, said the old traitor, would be a great grief
to me, because of the many favours I and my sous
have received at your hands ; but never could he
kindle any wrath or suspicion in the mind of Ama-
dis, though he persisted so that Amadis grew angry^
at him, and told him to say no more, for if all in
the world were to tell him so he never would be-
lieve that so wise and good a King could be
moved against one, who sleeping and waking had no
thought of any thing but his service. After some
days, when the three Knights were healed of
their wounds, they rode out one morning being.
richly apparelled, and after hearing mass went to.
the palace, where they were right welcomed by all

o 3



318

except by the King, who neither looked at them
nor received them as he was Wont. Amadis di
not conceive that this proceeded from anj Ul wil]>
but that traitor Gaodandel came up to hini, and
embracing him^ said* with a smile^ people are some-
tunes not believed when they tell the truth. Ama*
dis made him no answer^ and he seeing how^ Aor
griote and Don Bruneo were ofl^nded that Lrisu*
arte did not notice thera^ went up to the King and
said, so that no one could hear him. Bo you not
sec Sir how those Knights look towards you ? Li-
suarte did not reply^ and Amadis then^ who sus-
pected no evil, came up with Galvanes and Agraye»
and said courteously. Sir, if it please you we would
^eak with you, and let whom you will be present}-
the King said, Gandandel and Brocadan ; thereat
was Amadis well pleased, for he believed them to-
be his true fiiends. Then they went together inta
a garden, where the King seated himself under a
tree, and they round about him, and Amadis said.
Sir, it has not been my fortune to sen-eyou ac-
cording to my good will, yet though I may not
have deserved it, relying upon your virtue and
great nobleness, I venture to ask a boon, which
shall be to your service, and wherein yow shall show
great courtesy and do what is right. Certes, said"
Gandaudel, if it be as you say you ask a fair boon^



31^

but let the King know wliat 70a would have. Sir,
replied Amadis, what I and Agrayes and Galvanes,
who have seryed you also, now request, is the Is*
land of Mongaza, that reserving to yourself the
Lordship you would give it with Madasima in mar*
nage to Don Galvanes, wherein you will show fa^
vour to him who is of such lineage and hath no
lands, and will gain a good vassal for yourself, and
also deal courteously with Madasima, who by ua
hath been disherited. Gandandel and firocadatt
bearing this looked at tlie King, and made signs to
him that he should not grant it ^ but he remained
ailentfor awhile, calling to mind the great worth
of Galvanes> and the services which he had re-
ceived from him; and how Amadis had won that
Island with the extreme peril of his life, and know-
ing also that what they asked was a reasonable and
becoming thing, and just. Bat because his will
was perverted he answered as one who had no in-^
dination to consent. He is not wise who asks for
what he cannot have. I say this with respect to
you, for you ask tliat which five days ago I pro-
mised the Queen for her daughter Leonoreta 3 this
answer he made to excuse himself, not because it
was true. At tliis Gandandel and Brocadan were
well pleased, and made signs to him that he liad
said well, but Agrayes, whose heart was warm,

o 4



320

•when he heard with how little courtesy the Kirj
bad refused them would not keep silence. You
make us feel Sir^ quoth he, that our services will
profit us little here; if my advice be taken,, oar
lives shall be difFerentl/ employed. Nephew, ex-
claimed Galvanes, services are worth little when
they are done to those who know not bow to re-
ward them : men should look where they bestow
them. Sirs, quoth Amadis, do not complain that
the King caimot give you what he hath already
promised to another. I will ask tlie Ki;ig to give
you Madasima and let him keep the land, and I
will give you the Firm Island till the King shall
have something else to bestow upon you. The
King answered^ Madasima is in my prison in
hostage for her lands, and if tliey be not surrender-
ed I will have her head cut off. Then Amadis re-
plied, of a truth Sir you should have answejcd us
more courteously, and you would not have com-
mitted this wrong if you had known ug better. If
I do not know you, said Lisuarte, the wdrld is
wide enough > go through it, and look for those who
rhay know you better. Certes Sir, quoth Amadis,
till now I thought there was no King in the world
who had wisdom such as yours 3 but seeing how
strangely different you are from what I believed,
since you are in this new mood we must seek a



321

new way of life. Lisuarte answered. Do your own
will as I shall mine^ and he rose angrily and went \
to the Queen.

Gandandel and Brocadan commended him much for
what he had done in thus dismissing such danger-
ous enemies, and he told Brisena all that had passed,
and how he rejoiced thereat. But she told him
that what he rejoiced at was to her cause for sor-
row, for Amadis and his friends had ever served
him faithfully and well ; and that otlier Knights
seeiug how they were recompensed would have great
reason to seek one who would know and reward them
better. Say no more, cried he, I know what I an^
doing, and remember to say what I tell you, that
you asked that Island for Leonoreta, and that I have
given it her. I will do as you command me, re-
plied Brisena, but God grant that it come to good !

Amadis returned to his lodging in a more melan-
choly mood than he was wont, he would say not
thing to the Knights of his company till he had
spoken with Oi;iana, so calling Durin aside he bade
him tell Mabilia tliat he must see Oriana that night,
aiid that they should expect him by the water
course in the garden. Then he ate and regaled
with the Knights as he used to do, and he desired

o 5



32a

them to assemble there on the morrow for he had
something to impart to them. When day was
gone and night wascome^ after they had retked and
all were at rest, he went with Gandaiin to the
water course, and having entered it went forthwith
to the chamber of Oriana, where she with as true
love expected him j and being in her arms she
asked him why he had sent that message by Durin,
and he told heralldiat had past. Now Lady mine,,
said he, since it is so that for my honour I must
depart 1 beseech you do not command me other-
wise, for I am more yours than ray own, and if I
am shamed the shame will be yours also. But
Oriana, though she felt as diough her heart were
breaking, took courage as she could and answered,.
True friend, with little reason can you complain of
my father, for it is not him but me whom you have
served, for my s^ke you abode here, and for my
sake have dose so many great actions, and from me
you have had your guerdon, and shall have while I
livej yet should not my father have done thus»-
sceing what you have been to him. Howbeit,
though your absence will be like as if my heart
were breaking, l will regard reason more Uian my
unbounded love. Do as you think best!^ myfa-
ther will iind when you are gone that all that is
left will be to him cause of sorrow and evil ! Ama-



325

4

dis kissed her hands 3 my own tme Lady^ many and
great kindnesses have I received from yon which
have saved me from deaths but for this I thank yoa
above all^ inasmuch as honour is above all delights.
Thus past they that night mingling tears with their
love^ thinking of the long soHtude that was to
come^ and towards day-break Amadis rose; that
dear cousin Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark
went out with him^ and he embraced them, and
c<Hnmended Oriana to their consolations^ and so
they parted weeping.

Amadts went to his lodging and slept the remainder
of the night and some part of the morning, but
when it was time he arose, and the Knights as-
sembled, they heard mass and rode forth, and be-
ing assembled in the field he addressed them after
this guise : — It is notorious to you good Sirs and!
honourable Knights, whether the affairs of King
Lisuarte have prospered or declined since I and
my brethren and friends for my sake came to GreaH
Britain. I may therefore b^ excused fi^om recalling
what is past to your memory, this only I ou^t to
say, that ye as well as myself might reasonably
have expected great recompence 5 but either tiiat
Fortune hath been using her accustomed incoii*'
staocy, or by the influence of evil cooitteUort, or

o 5



524

perhaps because age hath altered the cenditioDS of
the King» we have found him difierent from what
we expected ', for wheu I myself aud Agrayes^
and D<»i Galvanes besought him that he would .
give Madasima to Don Galvanes in marriage^ uid
with her her lands in vassaUage^ he nothing re-
garding the worth of this King nor .his high line-
age^ not otAy would not grant us the boon^ but de-
nied it in terms so discourteous and ^dishonourable^
that because they proceeded from a tongue so true,
and from a judgment so sound, I .would not Wil-
li ugly repesit them were not things at this extre-
mity that it cannot be excused. Know then Sire
that towards the end of our talk, when we said to
him that he did not know our services, he re-
plied, the world was wide enough and we might,
seek those who would know them better. So
therefore as we have hitherto obeyed him in coo-
cord and friendship, now must we in discord and
enmity, fulfilling that which he., thinks fitting ; it
cevuiued right to me that you should know this« be-
cause it not only concerns us in particular but all in
general.

Wheu these Knights beard what Amadis had said,
they were greatly astonished, and they talked one
with another and said^ that iU would their poor ser*



3^5 ■

vices be recompensed when what Amadis and his
brethren had done was so forgotten^ so that their
hearts, were moved against the King. An^ An-
griote of £stravau8> as one who had resolved to
take his share in the good or evil which might be-
fall Amadis^ said to them^ Sirs^ I have long known
the Kingi and have always seen him temperate in
all his actions, and never moved without great and
just cause, therefore I cannot believe that tliis
should proceed from his own nature or inclination
but from some meddling traitors who have berefl

•

him of his wisdom. Not for this do I excuse the
King ! for many days J have seen him speak more
with Gandandel and Brocadan than he was accus*
tomed to do^ they being false and treacherous men,
and I believe that they have done this thing hoping
to obtain, thereby for themselves and their sons that
which they have never merited, and that you may
see how the justice of God comes to pass I will
arm myself, and challenge them for their villainy
which they have done to the King and to Amadis,
and will do combat against them both, or against
their sons in their stead, if they dare sustaiii their
father's treason. Forthwith he would have de-
parted but Amadis withheld him saybg, God for-
bid my true and loyal fnend that your life should
be put in danger for an uncertain cause. I am



325

eertain^ quoth Angriote^ that it is as I say by what
I have long known of tliem^ and if it pleases the
King to speak truth he will confirm it. If you
love me^ repHed Amadis^ let this rest at present,
that the King may not be offended ; if these men
who seemed so friendly are indeed my enenaies,
that wiU be known hereafter, and then may yoa
better proceed against them. Then Angriote al-
beit unwillingly consented to delay vengeance.
Amadis then turned to the assembled Knights and
said. Sirs, I will take leave of the King and Queen
if they chuse to see me, and will go to the Firm
Island, where they who shall please to live wiA
me shall be partakers with me in aU the honour
and pleasures that I can command; The land is
rich and aboundeth with all things, there is store
of forests and of fair women, I have treasure
enough for our wants 3 they who know us will
come thither to see us, and strangers to demand
our help, and there we may return from our ad-
ventures to recover strength. While my father
King Perion lives the kingdom of Gaul will not
fail us, nor after his days. I have letters from
the lesser Britain telling me that they give me that
land, that then you may esteem our own ; I must
remind you also of Scotland, the country of my
Cousin Agrayes, and of JQiieen Briolama*s kingdom^



527

which will not fail ns for wcal.or ftr woe. That
you may My trdy Sir Amadis, quoth a Knight
present, whose name was Tantiles, and who was
governor of that kingdom. Sobradisa and its fair
Qaeeo, whom you have estabiialied there, will be
always at your service. Now then Sir, cried Don
Quadragaute, take leave of the King and then will.
it be seen who they are who love you, and will con-
tinue in your company. Amadis answered, greatly
shall I esteem those who at this lime will so ho*
nour me, yet do I not say, that if they can profita-
bly remain with the King they should notdo so,
for of a truth so good a Lord cainot soon be found.
As they weni thus talking the King and Gandandel
past by with many other Knights,, hawking with
merlins, and sported near them awhile without
■peaking to them or noticing theiii, &nd then re-
turned to the palace.



328



CHAPTER 21.



Then Aniadis taking with him all those Knights
weut to take leave of the King; they who were in
the palace, when they saw with how altered a coun-
tenance he entered, and at that hour when the
tables were placed, all drew nigh to hear what he
should say. He being before the King spake thus :
Sir, whether or not you have dealt ill with me
God and yourself can witness : of this I say no
more, for though my services may have been great,
much greater was the will I had to requite those
honours which I from you received. Yesterday you
told me that I might go about the world and seek
for one who would know me better, giving me to
understand that what you wished was my depar-
ture from your court ; since tliis would please you
it becomes me so to do. I do not come to dis-
charge myself of vassallage, for I never was sub-
ject to you, nor to any but God alone ; but I take



S-29

Icavt of tliat good will which you once manifested
to honour and favour me^ and of tliat great love
wherewith I ever strove to requite and serve you.
I'hen Don Galvanes also took leave, and Ag];pycs
and Florestan, and Dragouis and Palomir, wlio
were cousins to Amadis^ and Don Bruneo of £o-
nanoiar and his brother Branfil^ and Angriote pf
Estravaus^ and Grindonan his brother, and Pinores
his nephew. Don Quadragante tlien came before
the King and said. Sir, I abode with you only at
the request of Amadis, and because I have been
yours for his sake, for the same reason I will con-
tinue so no longer 3 small hope of recompence can
there be for my poor services when he is so re-:
warded ! for ill have you remembered how he^
saved you from the hands of Madanfabul, from
whence none other could have saved you, and how
he won for you that battle against King Cildadan,
and how his brethren and kinsmen there shed their
blood for you -, how he delivered you from my en-
mity, and from Famongomadan and his son Basa-^
gante, who were the strongest giants in the world,
and from Lindoraque, who was so mighty a
Knight, and from Arcalaus the Enchanter — all this
you have forgotten ; but I tell you that had all we
been in the field and Amadis away, how think you
would it tl^eti l^ve fallen out ? The King answered>



3S0

Don QuadragaDte I well perceive by yoar word»
tiiat yoxx liave do love towards me, neither are yovt
M beholden to Amadis that you should desire his
wel&re $ perchance what you say of that is not so
Irue as it sounds. Quadragante replied, you are
ef that rank that you may say what pleases youj^
but sure am I that you will not move Amadis with
ntachief-making words as others have been moved,
who will discover their error when too late. Then
Landin came up and said. Sir, of all your houshold
I could find DO help or healing, for my wounds
save only from Amadis, therefore shall I go with
him and with my uncle Don Quadragante. Certcs,
quoth Lisuarte, if yon staid I should not have a.
fiiend the more. Landin replied, such as they are
towards you will I be. At this time were assem-
bled together in another part of the palace, Don.
Brian of Monjaste, a right good Knight, who wag-
son of King Ladasan of Spain and of a »ster of
King Per ion, and Gandal, and Orlandin, son to the
Count of Orlanda^ and Grandores, and Madancil^.
he of the Silver Bridge,, and Listoran of the White
Tower, and Ladadin of Fajarque, and firaniiles the
haughty, and Don Gavarte of tlie Perilous Vale y
and when they saw how all those other Knights
were about to depart for the love of Amadis, they
aiso went befixre the King and said. Sir, we came



331



to your court to see Amadis and his brelhreu^ an(£
to obtaia his friendship^ and sth lie was the cause
of our coming so will he be of bur departure*.
These Kuights having departed, and there remaiu-
ifig no other, Amadis would have taken leave of th&
Queea but Lisuarte would not permit him, be-
cause she had always opposed this quarrel, so he
sent his excuses by Don Grumedan. Then went
he to his lodging, and after they had made their
meal they all mounted being fully armed, five huB**
dred Knights were they in all who followed Ama^
dis^ among whom were the sons of Kings and of
Counts> and others, who for their prowess aa,
well as birth, were renowned throughout all ther
world*

Mabiliia beheld tliem from a window of the Queen*)^
palace, in what order they went, their anns haw
xich they were, and how gUtteriog in the sun, s(^
that none who saw them depart but marvelled and
thought the King unhappy, that he would so lose
such a Knight and so goodly a companff. Thea
Mabilia went to Oriana and said. Cease thy sonom
and come look at your vassals ! and let yoar heart
rejoice that you have suck a lover ; for if till noi^
he has led the life of an\£rrant ELnight serving youjc .
iatbeTj, now that he haa left his. servicer^ he appeam



332

like a powerful Pnncc, and that Lady will redound
to year honour. Oriana beiug comforted by her
words looked at the company, subduing by ker
fortitude that grief and passbn which toraieDted her
heart. There went opt with Amadis to honour
him^ King Arbau of North Wales^ and Grumedaa
the Queen's fosterer^ and Brandoyuas and Quinor-
ante, and Giontes the King's nephew, and Listoiai>
the good jouster. All these rode with hin» apart
from his company and very sorrowful for his de-
parture, and Amadis besought them that they
would still be his friends so far as they could with-
out breach of honour, for he should still esteem and
love them as he bad dorie } nor though the King
had ceased to love him, having no cause for this
change, should they do so likewise, nor for that
cease to serve the King and honour him as for hi&
worth he deserved. They answered, that they
should never cease to love him however they were
bound by loyalty to serve the King. Then said
Amadis, I beseech you tell the King that what Ur-
ganda said before me is now made manifest, how
) should gain for another, and my guerdon should
be wrath, and the long delay of my will ! So has it
come to pass I but the just Judge of all will allot
to every <Hie his right. Don Grumedan cursed •
Urganda for prophesying so truly, and then they



333

returned to the town. Presently Don GuUan came
up and lie was hi tears ; and be £aid. Sir, You
know how it is wilh us, that I have neither will
nor heart of my own, but must obey her for whom
I sutler so much, and she has forbidden me to fol-
low you, and thus am I put to great shame ; now
would I repay tliose honours which I have ever
received from you and your brcthnMi, but I may
not < Bat Amadig, who knew the great and excess
sive love of this Knight, and remembered how he
himself loved and obeyed Oriana, embraced him
and said, Don Guilan my dear friend, God forbid
that a Knight like you should disc^iey your Lady,
not so would I advise you, nor so advising should
I be your friend j obey her and serve the King,
saA sure am I that you will keep your loyally aod
yet that I shall have in you tlie same friend. So
Guilan answered, he trusted in God to serve him
yet, and he took his leave. They rode on about
three leagues to the shore where Amadis had or-
dered tents to be pitched ; there they regaled that '
nigbt, congratulating each other that they had not
remained longer in the service of one so thankless,
but Amadis telt his heart fell hi
when he should again see Oriai
they set forth again and took
the Firm Island.



SS4



On tLe day after Aniadis had departed^ the King
when mass was over sate in his palace according to
custom^ and locked on one side and on the other^and
4>eholding how desolate the place appeared without
those Knights who were gone^ he began to muse
upon his own conduct^ and was lost in thou^t.
Gandandel and Brocadan^ who knew what An-
griote had said of them^ when they saw him thus
thoughtful began to fear that he was ill satisfied
with what had been done. Howbeit as they could
not now retreat they resolved to push farther on,
for this is the ill fate of all great errors. So Gan-
•dander went up to Lisuarte and said to him, hence-
forth Sir you may rest secure since those -who
could have injured you are dismissed from your
service) the trouble of your state and household you
may lay on us and we will attend to it more care-
fully than to our own concerns, and when you
think of the treasures which you must have be-
stowed upon those Knights but which are now^
your own, you should greatly rejoice. Lisuarte
looked sternly at them and answered, I marvel
much at what you say, that I should commit the
management of my state and household to you! that
I and those about me are not equal to the task-^but
you, in whom I dad not perceive such great abili^r
ate capable thereof ! £ven if you were^ my vassals



335



and household would be ill ooutented with the aa«

thority of such as you ! You tell me too that!

•shall save the wealth which would else have been

bestowed among those Knights. I would know how

it could be better employed than to my^xywn ho-

^ .nour and service^ my honour was defended by k,

\ :iny dominion increased, and so it at last re«

' turned to me again, for the weakh that is bestowed

>' where it ought, lies in a. good treasury whence it

^ sever can be lost. No more of this ! I shall not

take your counsel ! He then arose and called his

:huntsmen and went forth to the ield, leaving them

.in amazement and great dismay.



w;

^ ^ At this season arrived a Damiel from Queen Brio-

^f laniawith tidings to Oriana, whereat all greatly

^* .rejoiced for that Queen was much beloved by all.

re^ .Lady, quoth she, I come from Briolania to tell you

K^f* .the wonders of the Firm Island, that you may

0^ know all, for I was witness. God grant longJife

r^^ eto her ! said Oriana, suid good fortune to you for the

\j^ trouble which you have taken. So all drew jound

,to hear her. Then said the Damad, when Brio-

iiDit^ lania and her company had arrived at the Firm Is-

]q! ii>^ land she was asked if she would attempt the Fodi)id«

if^ dea Chamber or the Arch of True Lovers^ bnt she

10 answered, that she would leave those two pcoofs



336

till the last. They then led us to a fair dwelling
about a league from the Castle, which, because of
its goodly situation, was one of the chief habita-
tions of Apolidon, and when it was dinner time
they led us to a large hall, at the one end whereof
was a deep cave so dark and fearful that none durst
go nigh to it, and at the other end of the palace was
a fair tower where they led us, and we fouiid the
tables and benches placed by the windows, and
from thence we could see all that past below in the
large hall. So there were, we well served by Dames
and Damsels, and the Knights and our people
feasted below in the hall. But when the second
^ervice was brought in loud hissings were heard
from the cave, and a hot wind came forth there-
from, and there issued out a great serpent into the
middle of the hall, so fierce and terrible that none
dared look on him, and he breathed smoke from
his jnouth and nostrils, and lashed the ground ixrith
his tail so that the whole palace shook -, presently
two Lions came out of the cave and attacked him,
and began such a battle that there is not heart of
man which would not have felt fear at beholding
it. The Knights and people fled with all speed
from the table, and though the windows ivhereat
VK were were very high^ yet were we greatly terri-
fied. Half an hour that battle lasted till the XJlons



337

were so wearied that tliey lay . as though they,
were dead^ and the serpent so exhausted that he
could scarce draw breath ; but. after he had rested
a little he took one Lion ia his naouth and carried
him into the cave, then returned for the other, asfd
they were seen no. more that day. The men of
tlie Island laughed at our fear, and assured us that
they would appear no more that day, so we then
returned to the tables and finished our meal.

* I-

The next day they led us to a place still fairer^
where we were well feasted, and at night they show-
ed us a rich chamber, marvellously fair where there
was a rich and costly bed for Briolania, and otlier

I

good ones for us. . But about, midnight the doors
flew open with so great noise tliat we all awoke in
terror, and a hart came in, having lighted candles
upcm his horns., so that the whole chamber was as
light as day. One side of that hart was white as
mow, and the neck and the head were black as
pitch, and the one horn seemed gilt and the other
was red } four dogs pursued him in full cry, and
behind them, an ivory horn moved and sounded in
the air as if a man were soimding it, and gave the
proper sound of the chase^ and cheared the dogs so
that they pursued the hart and allowed him no
recite, and drove him from one part of the cham-
v6x.i II, - p



i%



3»



ber to another^ axld aometimes thef leaped over
our beds^ and sometimes they fell on them, so that
we rose up In our shifts and our hair faangiog
about and fled from them, and some hid them-
selves under the beds, till the Hart finding no safetr
tiiere leaped through a window and tiie dogs after
him 5 then were we right glad, and ts&ing up the
doaths which were thrown about eovered our-
selves, and gave ^ robe to Briolania wherein she
drest herself, and then as the fear was past we
laughed at the confusion into which we had been
thrown. While we were making our beds again,
a Dame and two Damsels entered and a little giil
with candles, and she spake to Briolania and said|.
How is it Xady that yon have risen at such an
hoar? butwhen'she heard they lauded and an-
swered. Now then Ladies go to sleep again, foi
vyou have nothing more to apprehend to night.

Early in the morning we went to a wood where
there were fine proves and fair gardens, and there
we had tents pitched by a brook side. We found
there a round bnilding with twelve marble pillars,
the walls were oi crystal so cvhriously made that
they who might be within could see ail without ; -
the doors were made of plate of gold and of silver,
and by every pillar there was placed the image of



339

t Giant made in copper, and these ims^ea had
bows in their hands, and the arrow heads were ^
£re. We were told that nothing could enter that
chamber but would be presently reduced to asbca
hy those arrows which never failed of thov marki-
and th^ put in two £dlow deer and a stag, invae*
dlately the images shot at them and they were re-
duced to ashes, and the arrews returned to the
bows from whence they fled. On the doo^rsof.
the chamber there were letters written which said.
Let no man or woman dare enter here except they
twain who love each tmly, aa truly at did Gri*.
manesa and Apolidon, and they namt enter ^hore
together, else will they die the croeUeal death
that ever was seen. This enchantment wiH en^
dure till th^ twain shall have entered the Forbid*
den Chamber, and then shall all the enchant*
menb of the Firm I$lan4 be done away. Then
Bnolama called Ysanjo and Enil, and told them
the wished to see nothing more except the Arch:
of True Lovers and 4ie F(ni»idden damber, and
she asked Ysanjo the meanmg of the Lion and
Serpent, and of the Hart and the Dogs. X^dy^
h^ replied, we kno^ nothing more than that al«
ways at that hour they appear 3 and the Hart and
the Dogs run from the window into a lake which
we believe proceeds from the sea, but were you.

. I' 2



340



to remain here a whole year you could not see
half the wonders* that are in this Inland.

On the- morrow we mounted our palfreys and re-
turned to the Castle 5 without delay Briolania
went to the Arch of True Lovers and past through
the Forbidden Perrons like one who had never
fkiicd'in her love, and the image with the trumpet
made so vast a sound that we were all astonished,
and when she entered where the images were of
Apolidbn and Grimanesa, it' ceased with so sweet
a finish as was marvellous to hear. There beheld
she those images as fair and fresh as life, and be-*
ing alone with- them she thought herself in good
company ; and while there she saw letters newly
written in -the Jasper, saying, this is the name of
Briolania> daughter to King Tagadan of Sobradisa^
the third Damsel that hath entered here. Then
she felt a fear of being alone and returned. The
fifth morning she went to attempt the Forbidden
Chamber 5 . she was in rich attire, and she wore*
nothing upon her beautiful head except a gold clasp
with jewels, and all who saw her said, that if she
<iid not enter the Chamber there was none in the
world who could, and that they should now sec
tlie end of all those enchantments. She* com-
mended herself, to God, and passed through the



341



copper Perron, and came up to the marble Per-
ron and read the writing there, and proceeded so
far beyond that all surely thought the adv^Qtore
was atchieved > .but when she wa^ within three
paces from the door three hands seized her bj
those beautiful locks, and pitilessly cast her out -
of the Forbidden ground as tliey had done all
others, and she lay in such plight that v/e
could not soon recover her. Till now Oriana's
heart had been misgiving her, but now she looked
at Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark, and they
at her, being all well pleased j the next day pur^
fiued the Damsel, Briolania departed for her own
kingdom. So the Damsel then received her bid-
ding from Brisena and Oriana, and the other La-
dies, and set out on her return jto her Mistress.

Now Amadis and his company arrived at the
Firm Island, where they were joyfully received by
ail the dwellers therein, who, as they liad felt great
sorrow for the loss of their new Lord, so now had
they double pleasure in welcoming him. But
when those Knights who were with him beheld
the Castle how strong it was, and how there was
no other entrance to the Island large as it. was, and '
that the land was so fertile, and peopled with so
many and such inhabitants, they thought it might

r3



342

tnaintain war again^ all the M'orld -, so they VfCTt
lodged in the largest town which stood under the
Castle. You are to know that this Island was
nine leagues long and seven wide, all full of vil-
li^es and rich dwelling-houses of the Knights of
the land. And in the pleasantest parts thereof
Apdidon had built four palaces for himseli^ the
strangest and most delightful that ever man could
behold. One was that of the Serpent and the
lions. Another that of the Hart and the Dogs.
The third was called the Whirling Palace, for
three times in the day and as ofl^ is the night it
whirled rounds so that they who were in it thought
It would dash to pieces -, and the fourth was that
of the Bull^ because eveiy day a wild Bull issued
out of an dd covered way, and ran among the
people therein' as though he would kill them, and
^hen they fled from him he ran against the iron
door of a tower and burst it open and went in, and
presently he came out agsdn being quite tame, and
ridden by an old Ape, so wrinkled that his skin
bung all in folds, which Ape flogged him into the
place from whence he came. Great pleasure had
all these Knights in beholding ^hese enchant-
ments, and enough pastime had they there, and
they were all Arm in their love to Amadis, and
ready to follow him wherever he would.



S43

At ibis time came Andalod the Hermit of thf
Poor Rock to establish the monastciy as had beea
appointed^ and he seeing Amadis gave thanks t9
God for giving life to so good a man^ and looked
at him and embraced him as if he liad never seen
iiim before. But Amadis k;st his hands, and with
fdl humility thanked him for his preservation and
for his life^ which he owed to God and to him.
So a. monastery was founded at the foot of th»
rockj where diat Chapel of the Virgin stood,,
wherein Amadis had prayed in his despair before h$
departed into the mountain. A good man called
Sisian, whom Andalod brought, remained ther^
9Qd thirty Friars with him, and Amadis assigned
to them rents enough, aad Andalod then returned
to the Poor Rock as before. Then Balays of Car*
«ante arrived, he whom Amadis had released
from the dungeon of Arcalaus, who had gone to
take^ leave oi King Lisuarte, so soon as he knew
ihat Amadis had left him in discontent ; with him
also came Olivas whom Agrayes and Don Gal-
vanes had helped in battle against the Duke of
Bristol. They asked (^Balays, what news in the
court ? he answered, enough to telL King Li-
suarte Sir has summoned all his people; for
Coiint Latine and tfaey . whom be sent to t^e pos-
session ^ the Island of Mongasa, have infonned

r4



344



liim that the old Giant had given up to them aM
tlic Castles which he and his sons had in tljeir
keeping. But Groniadaza refused to yield the
Castles by tlie Boiling Lake, which is the strongest
place in the Island, and also three other strong
Castles, for she says she will never yield the place
where slie was Mistress ip the life of her husband
Famongomadan, and Basagante her son, but al-
ways annoy Lisuarte to the utmost of her power,
and for Madasima and tlie Damsels she cares not
%vhat may become of them so she can do any harm
to- the King. The King therefoie hf.8 summoned
his forces, and hath sworn, if Gromadaza does not
yield up her Castles within a month, that he will
behead Madasima and the Damsels, and that he
will go against the Castle of tlie Boiling Lake-,
and not depart from before it till he shall have
Won it, and if he can take the old Giantess he will
throw her to the Ltons. At this news they were
all greatly troubled, and Gdlvanes said to them,^
Sirs, you all know the promise wiiich I. have made
to Madasima, to defend her with reason, or if that
failed by force of arms ; and for this cause was k
that Amadis and all of us forsook Lisuarte ; now I
beseech you, if he will not hear reason, assist me
in arms to fulfil my woid. ^ At that uprose Don
Florestan^ aitid said^ Don Galvaues^ there are bet*



3^5

ter advisers here than I, but if reason fail I will un-
dertake the battle in the name of God. Good
friend, replied Gralvanes, I tliank you With all wj
heart ; but if it must be by battle I have promised
and I wiU perform it. Then Don Brian of Mon-
jaste and Quadragante said that the quarrel apper-
tained to all^ and all ought to bear a part^ for all
Knights were bovmd to succour Damsels who were
opprest^ and as Madasima and her Damsels had
gone as hostages in obedience to her mother^ they
were innocent before God. Sirs^ said Amadis^
yoa rejoice me in what you say ; for whatsoever is
undertaken with such concord will have good issue.
But I will tell you what seems to me good : these
Damsels are twelve in number, and therefore
ought to be succoured by twelve Knights. Sure
I am that such as ye will think such danger bat
pastime^ if it please ye I will name twelve cham-
pions, and let the other Knights remain here for
greater perils ifthey should befal us. You> Sir Don
Galvanes shall be the first, as it is your quarrel^
and Agrayes your nephew, and my brother Flo-
restan, aiid my cousins Palomir and Dragonis, and
Don Brian of Monjaste, and Nicoran of the White
Tower, and Urlandin and Gavarte of the Perilous
Vale^ and Ymosil brother to the Duke of Bur-
gandy, and Madansil of the Silver Bridge^ and La«

t5



346



dadin of Fajarque ; let those twelre gp, ibcrc aie
among them the sons of Kings and Dnkes and
Counts^ so that their peers will not be fbond*
Hereat were all well pleased,' and the Knights ap«
pointed made ready flMthwith, and shortly after
midnight armed themselves and rode towards Ti*
filana^ the town where Lboarte then was.



347



CHAPTER 22.



ssc



Nov Oriana felt hers^ great with child> and she
asked Gounael of Mabilia smd the Damsel of Den-
mark in that dan^r ; they albeit they were sore dis-
mayed dissembled that^ and Mabilia bade hes
take heart fi>r all should be remedied. I always ex-
pected^ said she^ that to such* a saint such an ofier-
ing would be brought. Oriana could not forbear
a smile. I will feign myself worse^ she said^ and
withdraw as much as I can from all con^Kiny;
and if the Damsel of Denmark will hazard her



• This is D*Herbeny*s phrase, it is better than the ori-
final t Siempre me xwft por dicbo que de tales jaegos
^uiriade& lal c^maneii.

p6



348

honour for me^ my honour and life may both be
saved. Lady^ quoth the Damsel, I am at your
command even were it to my death. Gixxl friend,
quoth Oriana, this I hoped, and if I live you shaD
recover your honour and with great praise. Then
the Daiusel knelt and kissed her hands, and Qriana
proceeded : continue to visit Adalasta the Abbess
of my Nunnery as you have hitherto done, and
when it is time tell her that you are pregnant, and
beseech her to help you, so that you may lay the
child at the church door, av^ that she will order it
to be taken in and brought up for Cl^^s sake;
thus will my secret be safe, nor will you be
shamed, for none but this honourable Lady wiU
know what you shall tell her, and she loves yxm
much. Thus they detomined that it shoold
be.

When Lisuarte knew how Gromadaza persisted in
her warfare, by advice of Gandandel and Brocadaa
he sent for Madasima and her Damsels, and tdd
them that they must all be put to death for an
example. When "she heard this 'so rigorous docxn
the fair and fresh colour of her cheeks suddenly
changed to a pale and deadly hue, and fialling at
the King's feet she said. Sir, the fear of death
doth make my heart weaker than it naturally is.



o



^9



weak Damsel as I am, so that -I have, neither
thought nor words to answer you ; but if in this
cour^ there be any Knight willing to uphold the
right let him speak for me as a Knight is bound
to do, for I did not enter your prison willingly
but in obedience to my mother. If there be
none such here, do you O King, whom hitherto
never distressed Dame or Damsel hath implored in
vain, do you deal justly by me, and let not angex
have the mastery over you. Gandandel, who was
present, was greatly desirous that Madasima should
be slain, knowing that then Amadis could never
be reconciled with the King 5 and he said. Sir, do
not hear her, these Damsels were given you as hos-
tages to die if the conditions were not performed^,
and therefore justice ought to be executed without
delay. But Don Grumedan, who was a good
Knight, and well versed in all the laws of Knight-
hood, as one who had not only practised but read
much, replied, that shall not the King do if it
please (rod ! nor ever shall such cruelty and
wrong be by him committed. This Damsel came
hither in obedience to her mother, and as that obe-?
dicnce will in secret be by God rewarded, so
should it be in public by the King as his servant^
and one who obeys his will. Moreover I have
learnt that within three days here will arrive cer-



352

do an evil thing agaiust jour own honour and good
reason. I say to you^ give no heed to Gandandd
and Brocadan in what they say to you^ touching
Madasima, for there are others in your court who
inor^ honestly advise you ; you and all here shatt
know wherefore I say this, within twelve days^ if
you will delay following their will for so long.
Now Sir, God be with you, for I go to my Uncle
Angriote. God be with youj replied Lisuarte^
and remained musing on what he had heard.

Sarquiles rode on by the shortest way he knew
to the Firm Island, and when he arrived there hia
horse was so overspent with the speed he had
made that he could scarcely carry him. He
found Amadis, and Angriote^ and Don firuneq,
riding on the shore to hasten the equipment of
some vessels which they had ordered to pass over to
Gaul, for Amadis was desirous to see his -parents*
Right well was Sarquiles received, and Angriote
said to him^ Nephew, what business have you that
your horse is in such plight ? Very great, replied
he^ and he told him. how his Mistress Gandaza
had hidden him in Brocadan house, and what he
had ihere heard. Now Sir, quoth Angriote to
Amadis, was my suspicion right ? You would not
f uffer me to bnng the matter to an end^ but now



353

if it please God neither you nor ought else shafl
let> but that this great treason against the King
and against you '^hall be made mamfest. Good
friend, replied Amadis/ you may now do it with
reason and certainty, and God therewith will speed
you. I will depart to-morrow, said Angriote,
and Sarquiles upon another horse with me. Ac-
cordingly on the following mondng they twain
set out for the dwelling of King Liauarte,

Meantime the King mused much upon that
Saixp^les had tcjld him. One day Gandandei and
Brocadan came bef<Mpe him and said. Sir, we are
grieved to see bow little you regard your own
welfare ; that, quoth Lisuarte, may wdl be, but
why say you this ? — Because these Knights who
are your enemies are coming to your Ckmrt with-
out any fear to defend these Damsels for whom
you ought to have the land gvftn. up; If you \vill
take our advice you ought to behead them before
these champions arrive, and send to forbid the
Knights to enter your kingdom ; thus would you
make them fear you, and Amadis would not ven*
ture to offer you any wrong, for if they do not for-
bear for fear, for nothing else will they 5 the sooner
this b done the better will it be, and the more



354

terror will it strike. The King then calted e»
mind the words of Sarqoiles, and saw how he had
spoken truth. Yon tell me two things^ he n«
pliedj against all reason : the one that without
sny form of judgment I skould have these Dam-
sels slain, what account could I give lo the Lor(
whose minister I am if I should i» this ? He has
appointed me here in his stead to adraiaister right
in his name^ and if I did this wrong wbich yo«
counsel to strike fear into others^ it would &11
tipon my own head at last. Those Kings who
iR>Uow their own will instead of what is reaaoQahte
fdy on themselves and not oo God, which is the
wocst error into which diey cm fall. Their best
iecurify is to chuse out good counseHors, and
honest ones, and jto remember that howerer evil
actions appear at first, the just Judge directs, and
the end thereof cannot be good. You tell noe also
to ioMd these Knights from coming to my court ;
a dishonourable thing would it be to prevent any
one from claiming justice before me, much more
they being my enemies, for it is to my honour that
I. have the power and inclination to do what they
request. J do not like your counsel ! you have
done ill to those who deserved no ill at your
hands I I have sinned and I have my punishment i



355

and if you have bem lalf(r*io I trust will 70a hare
yours at the end. And with that he went awagr
and left them.

The following day Lisuarte rode ibrth after man
with a great company^ and aeeiog that the twelve
Knights were approaching he rode forward to
receive them^ for lie was a courteous nuin to all,
• and tliey well deserved such honour being what
ihey were. They made obeisance to him, and
while their people pitched tents in the field Don
'Galvanes spake to the King. Sir, confiding in
your virtue and in your wonted goodness, we ase
come hither to request that yon will hear Mad»*
sima and her Damsels, that they may have their
right i we are come to plead their cause, and if
by that means we cannot succeed, let it not ofifend
yoQ Sir if we support it by arms, for thare is no
cause wherefore they ought to die. The King an»
swered, go now and rest yourselves, I will do all
that can justly be done. Don Brian of Monjaste
then replied^ So Sir we hoped, that you. would do
what behoved your royal dignity and your consci^
ence, and whenever you have fttled so to act it
has been the work of evil advisers, and that, if it
did not ofiend you, I would prove upon any one
who dared gainsay. Don Brian, quodi tho King,



556

if you would listen to ymxr fetber I know tliat yc^
'would neither forsake me for another, nor come
hither to plead against me. Sir. replied Doa
Brian, my pleading is for you, it is that you should
do justice, and not listen to those who would
serve you less faithfully than I, and stain your
worth. You say Sir, that if I had listened to
my father I should not forsake you ^ I have not
forsaken you Sir, for I never was yours, albeit I
am of your lineage.' I came to your court lo seek
my kinstnan Amadis, and when you were pleased
that he «faoold be no longer yours, then I departed
with him; in all this I have not erred a single
point of duty. The King then returned to the
town, and they remained in their tents where they
were visited by their friends. But for Oriana I
tell you she never left the window, looking at
those who so loved her lover, and beseeching God
io give them the victory in this appeal.

•That xiight did Gandandel and Brocadan pass in
great perplexity, wishing that they could recall
what was past, but now perforce must tliey go on.
On Uie morrow the twelve Knights heard mass
with the King, and that done accompanied him to
his palace. He then called for Gandandel and
Brocadan^ and said to them^ You miist now sup^



$5f

port the advice which you have always given me*
m the afiair of Ma_dasima^ and make these good
men understand why she ought not to be heard,
and he bade them stand where all might hear
them. Ymosil of Burgandy, and • Ladadki of Fa**
jatque then came forward and said. We Sir, and
these Knights beseech you of your goodness that
Madasima and her Damsels may be heard, for so
we 'conceive it is right. Then answered Gandan-"
del, many talk about the right and few know
what it is 3 you say that of right these Damsels
might to be herard, which of right they ought not,'
for without any -such condition they bound them^
Selves to d^th, and entered the ptiscHi of the Kmg.
thereupon, that if Ardan Canileo were slain or van-»
quished, and the whole Island of Miragasa were
not then freely 'Surrendered, th^ and the Knights-
wiih them shpuid sttfierxleath. The Knights db*'
liivered up 'the : Castles in their keeping, whichr
Gromaidaza will not do, therefore there nei^er is
nor can be reason fqr which they s&ould be ex-'
cused from death. Ymosil ' replied, Certes G^an-
dandel, yoti might have been excused irom uttex-:
ing jsuch reasons 'before so gocid'a King .and sQek\
Knights .as ane here! It Ji&inanifest to ^ vrha
have any knowledge, that inan or wonnan are to be
heard, bfjEightln theijc owp def$nce> in aU cases



itec, and 1 will not appoint any of my Court to
combat against these Knights. Look ye to it !
Else will the Damsels be delivered^ and I shall
havebcenilladvisedby ye, and wrongfully. They
replied, that to-morrow they would be ready
with then: reply, and returned very sorrowfully to
their homes. And they agreed to persist in their
advice and maintain it by reason, but not put
their sons in danger, because the cause was not
just, and they were not such in arms as those
Knights; But that same evening tidings came to
the King how Gromadaza the Giantess was dead,
and had ordered her Castles to be delivered up to
save her daughter and the Damsels, and that they
had accordingly been yielded to Count Latine.
Greatly pleased thereat was Lisuafte, and when
tlie Knights came before him on the morrow he
said, proceed no ferther in this cause,- for you are
quit of your defence, and the Damsels* are free;
the Castles for which I held them in pledge hav-
ing been surrendered. Gandandel and Brocadan
then rejoiced, for they surely expected to be dis-
honoured. ^ Then Lisuafte sent for Madasima
and the Damsels, and said to them, ye are ftee ;
do what k pleases you, the Castles have been
given up; but he would not tell her that ber
motber was diead. Madasima would have kissed



s



361

his hand but tiie King perozHted not that^ for he
never suffered Dame or Damsel to kiss his hand
save wheu he bestowed upon thera some boon*
Tkea said she, since you leave me at my own dis-
posal ; . I give myself to my Lord Galvaues, who
hath been so willing to help me. Agrayes tpok
her by.the hand and said, good Lady, jrou do thai:
which is right 3 and though you are now disherited
of your o\yn land, you shall be hoaoured in anotber
till it pleaae God to remedy your loss. . But YmosU
ihcn said to the King^ Sir, if right be done to M»-
dasima she will not be disherited, for children who
arc Iq the power of their paroits must obey them,
however unwillingly, but not for that should they
be disherited, when obedience and not free will
liath made them bind themselves to what their
parents commanded* And because you Sir ^6 ap-
pointed here to make every one render to another
his ri^t, so ought you yourself to do as an exam-
.ple. Ymosil, replied the King, you have tiie
.Damsek at liberty, say no more upcm this other
matter^ I have had sufficient trouble about that
land, and will defend it now it is mine, nor can
i take it from my daughter Leonoreta, to whom I
have granted it. Don G^vanes then said. Sir, that
right which Madasima has to the land of her fa-
hers is now mine. I beseech you remember some

VOL. II. tt



362

services which I have done you, and do not disin-
herit me, for I would willingly be your vassal and
stand in your favour, and serve you as loyally as it is
possible. Say no more Don Galvanes, quoth Li-
suarte, that is done which cannot be undone. Since
it is so, quoth he, that I find neither right nor
courtesy here, I shall strive to win it how I can.
Do your utmost, replied the King, it was in the
power of those who were stronger than you, and
easier will it be to defend it from you, than it was
to win it from them. You won it, answered Gal-
vane», by means of one who was badly guerdoned,
he will help to recover it If he helps you, cried
Lisuarte, many others will serve me who would
not serve me before for his sake, when I had him in
lay household and protected him from them.
Agrayes then grew angry and exclaimed, Ccrtes
all here, and others beside can tell whether Ama-
dis was protected by you or you by him, though you
are a King and he was always as an Errant Knight.
Don Florest^n seeing how Agrayes was moved
laid hand upon his shoulder and drew him back,
and then said himself, it seems. Sir, you prize the
services of these you speak of above those of Ama-
dis, whether they be so indeed, we shall soon see.
Don Brian of Monjaste then stept forward^ hovr-
ever little you esteem the services of Amadis and



863

bis friends^ tliey must be of great worth indeed who
can reasonably make them to be forgotten. It is
plain Don Brian^ re^'lied the King, that you are
one of those friends ! — Sure Sir T am ; he Is my
kinsman and I shall do what he pleases. We have
enough, quoth Lisuarte, to dispense with you. All
you have, replied Don Brian^ will be wanted to re-
sist what Amadis can do. The Knights on both
sides drew nigh to answer, but Lisuarte stretched
out a wand which he held and commanded them
to say no more, and they returned to their places.

Just then Angriote of Estravaus, and his nephew
Sarquiles entered, compleatly armed, and approach*
ed to kiss the King's hand. The twelve Knights
marvelled at their coming being ignorant of the
cause thereof, but Gandandel and Brocadan were
put in fear, and they looked at each other, for they
knew what Angriote had said of them before, and
albeit they held him for the best Knight in the
King's dominions, yet they took courage to answer
what he might say, and they called their sons and
bade them say nothing more than they should tell
them. Angriote stood up before the King and
said, Sir^ let Gandandel and Brocadan come hitlier^
and I will say thit to them which shall make you
and all present know them better tlian ye have hi-

a2



364

thertb done. The Xing accordingly called cm them
to come forward, and all the Knights drew Digh
to hear. Then said Angriote^ know Sir that Gan-
dandel and Brocadan are disloyal and false toward
you, they counselled you wickedly and lyingly,
neither regarding Grod^ nor you, nor Amadis^ who
had so honoured them, and had never done them
wrong. They^ villains as they are> told you that
Amadis designed to seize your kingdom, a thing
which never was in his thoughts, for what he de-
sired hath ever been your service, and thus have
they made you lose the best Knight that ever King
had to serve him^ and many otlier good Knights
with him, for no fault of their own. Therefore I
say that these wicked and false men, in whom you
trusted, have committed a great treason against
you, which if they deny, I will do battle with them
both ; hut if their age excuses them, let their sons
come forward, and by God's helpl will make thenx
confess the disloyalty of their fathers before you,
that you shall understand it. Sir, replied Gandau-
del, you see how Angriote comes to dishonour
your court ! and this is because you permit those
to enter your land who do not seek your service,
if you had prevented that at first this would not
have happened 5 and now Sir do not marvel if Ama-
dis should come hither to-morrow and defy you



365

yourself! If Angriote,had met me in tliose days
when I did good service in arms for this kingdom,
and for your brother King Falangris, he would not
then have dared to say what now he says, but now
he sees me old and weak, and dares insult me as
on& already overcome ; this shame Sir falls more'
upon you than me. No Sir Knave, quoth An-
griote, I am not come hither to dishonour the
Court, but for its honour to destroy treason, and
root out the taj-es which you have scattered among
the good seed ! Then said Sarquiles, Sir, you know
tlie words which I spake to you upon tliis matter j.
with my own ears I heard the villainy which these
old traitors- were devising j they are old, but their
sons are young and strong -, let them answer for
them, they are three and we are two, then will God
discover the truth, and it will be seen if they are
such as to make amends for the ]pss of Amadis and
his lineage as their fathers have boasted ! When
the two sons of Gandandel heard this, and saw
that the whole Court were smiling to see their fa-
thers so prest, they thrust angrily through the
throng, and came before the King and said, Sir^.
Angriote lies in all that he hath said and we will
combat with him ; here are our gages, and they
threw their gloves into his lap. Angriote then
held out the lappet of his armour «— here Sir is

a3



366

mine ! let them go arm themselves^ and do yoa
Sir behold the battle. The King answered, the
day is far spent and there will not be time, let it
be after mass to-morrow. With that Adamas came
up, the son of Brocadan by a sister of Gandandel ;
he was great of stature and strong, but of so
villainous a nature that none esteemed him. He
said to the King, Sir, Sarqniles' lies in all he hath
said, and if he dare enter the field with his Uncle
I will combat him ! at this Sarqniles right joyfully
gave his gage ; the Court tlien broke up. An-
griote and Sarquiles went witli tlie twelve Knights
and Madasima, who had taken leave of the Queen
nd of Oriana, and Brisena sent her a rich tent to
lodge in.

The King remained with Don Grumedan and
Giontes his nephe\\^3 he sent for Gandandel and
Brocadan, and said to them, 1 marvel at you ! you
have so often told me that Amadis designed trea-
son and meant to seize my kingdom, and now
when the proof was necessary you shrunk from
it J and have suffered your sons to risque them-
selves who know not what is tlie justice of their
cause. You have sinned against Grod and me ;
great evil have you done me in making me lose
such a man and such KnightS; but you will not es«



S67



cape without jour punlshmcDt, for that just Judg^
will give to every one his due. Sir^ said Gaudan-
del, my sons came forward hastily thinking that
the proof was delayed. Of a truth, quoth Grume-*
dan, they thought right j for there neither is nor
can be proof that Amadis in this or in aught else
hath done wrong toward the King> and if you sus-'
pect it, it is against all reason -, even the devils kq
hell cannot think so ! If you had a thousand heads,
and the King were to cut them all off, he would not
be enough revenged for the wrong you have done
him, and now you will be left for noore mischief/
which Cxod forbid ! and your wretched sons must
suffer for your fau^t ! Don Grumedan, said they,
whatever you believe and wish we trust that our
sons will save iheir honour and our own. God
never save me, replied he, if I wish more than that
you be rewarded as your counsel deserves. The
King then bade them cease, and he went to table,
and they departed to their homes.

That night the arms and horses of the champions,
were made ready. Angriote and Sarquiles past the
remainder of the night ^om midnight in a chapel
of Saint Mary, which was near their tents. At
day-break the twelve Knights armed themselves^



368

for they doubted the King seeing how wroth he
was against them^ and with Madasima and her
Damsels, each upon her palfrey, they rode through
the town to the field of battle, Angriote and Sar-
qailes going before them. The King and his
Knights were already assembled, and three Judges
were appointed : King Arban of North Wales, and
Giontes the King*8 Nephew, and Quinorante the
good Jouster ; they placed Angriote and Sarquiles
at one end of the lists. Presently the two brothers
Tarin and Corian came with their cousin Adamas,
well armed and mounted, and disposed to do their
part well, if tlie M'ickedness of their fethers had not
been against them. They being opposed each to
the other, Giontes blew his trumpet aiKl they ran
the career, Corian and Tarin at Angriote, and
Adamas against Sarquiles. Tarin broke his lance
upon Angriote, who encountered Corian, and bore
him from his saddle, then turned and saw Tarin
sword in hand. Tarin struck at him but the blow
fell upon the horses' head and wounded him, and
cut away the headstall, so that the reins fell on his
neck, and the horse being thus at liberty, Angriote
was carried against his enemy, and they dashed
against each other and Tarin fell ; then Angriote
leaped lightly from his horse as one accustomed to



369

such penb> and took his shield^ and laid hand upon
that sword with which he had heretofore dealt
so many and mighty blows. He saw his nephew
maintaining a brave sword^combat on horseback^
and then made at the two brethren who stood by
each other, and laid on him a heavy load like brave
and strong Knights. But Angriote well defended
himself^ holding out his shield against one and lay*
ing on the other with the swordj so that he made
them give back^ for never stroke came from hin^
that did not shear away the armour^ for as I have
told you this Knight was the best foyner with the
sword of any in the King's dominions. So that
their shields were soon chipt away, and their har«
ness broken that the blood started through, nor was
he so whole but that the blood ran from many
wounds. When Sarquiles saw how his Uncle sped,
and that he was still coping in equal battlo with
Adamas, he spurred his horse and grappled with
his enemy, and tliere they struggled each to over-
throw the other. Angriote seeing them drew -nigh
to succour Sarquiles if he should fall undermost^
and tlie two brethren followed him to help their
cousin. At length the two Knights fell from their
horses, still grappling ^ then might you have seen a
great conflict,- Angriote pressing to help his nephew



370

and the brethren to assist Adamas. But in that
hour Angriote did such wonders in arms^ and kid
on such terrible and heavy blows that the brethren,
albeit they did their utmost, could not save Adamas
from the hands of Sarquiles. When Gandandel
and Brocadan saw this, who till now had hoped that
the valour of their sons might have defended their
wickedness they withdrew from the window in
great sorrow and pain of heart, and the King with-
drew also, for all the good fortune which befell the
friends of Amadis displeased him, and he would not
witness the victory of Angriote. Bnt all else who
were present rejoiced to see that Gandandel and
Brocadan would suffer some part of the punishment
on earth which they deserved. The four Knights
meantime continued their fierce conflict, but it did
not long endure, for now Tarin and Corian gave
ground and fled, seeking some place of safety, but
findin;;^ none they turned, and struck again at their
pursuers and then again fled, till they were smitten
down and slain to the great joy of Madasima and
her Damsels, and the Knights of the Firfn Island,
but above all of Oriana, who had never ceased
praying to God to grant her friends that victor}\
Angriote then asked the Judges if there was aught
more to be done ? they replied, he had done enougb-



371

for his honour, and led the two champions from,
the lists 5 their comrades then received and took
diem with Madasima to their tents where thej
were healed of their wounds.



Here endeth the Sectrnd Book ofAmadis ofGauU



END or THS SECOND TOtUME.



I N D E X.



VOL. n.



CHAPTER S6.

Page

How ATnadis and Galaor knew of this great
on and took counsel to procure, if they
could, the liberty of the King and Oriana . . , . 1

CHAPTER 37.

How Don Galojor delivered King Lisuarte
Jrom the cdptivity to which 'they were treachefr"
ously leading him away » . . 9

CHAPTER 38.

How tidings came to the Queen thktt King Li^
suarte was made prisoner, and how Bafsinan
executed his treason, and how at last he was
werthroum and the King restored to his king'
doni 17

CHAPTER 39.

How Amadis came to succour the City ofLon*
don, and what he did there ••,..•,....•,. 21
yoL. xi| • &



INDEX.



CHAPTER 40. pa^

How King LUuarte held a£ortes which lasted
twelve days, at which great f eastings were
made, and of the many Chiefs and Knights
f/uho came there *. •2§

CHAPTER 41.

€ff the latfle which ^madis had promised the
Jair child Briolama to perform against Ahiseos
mnd his ttuo sons in revenge of her father's death 3S

CHAPTER 42.

How Don Galaor went tinth the Damsel in
quest of the Knight who had overthrown them,
till he did battle with him 4$

CHAPTER 43,

Showing how Don ^orestan was the son of
King Perumhy a fair Damsd, daughter 'to
the Count of SaUmd&a ^ ...».«..*.. ^S

CHAPTER 44.

Hoiv Don Gaku>r and Florestan^gcing towards ^

the kingdom of Solradisa, met three Damsels

at the'Founttan of the Efm Trees 7^



JNDEX.

Mere leginneth the Second Book ofAmojdis of
Gaul; and because the great things which unU
he related in the Fourth Book concerning Ama^
dis are all relating to the Firm Island, it he^
hoves that in this second it should be related"
what this Island was, and who left those en^-
chantments and the great riches which were
therein ' 84

CHAPTER 2.

Wotv Amadis with his, brethren and his cousin
Agrayes went towards 'King Lisuarte, and
how by adventure they went to the Enchanted
Firm Island, and rfwhat befel them there . . 9t

CHAPTER 3.

How Durin went with the letter of Oriana to
Amadis, and how when Amadis had seen the
letter he abandoned every thing in desptdr, and
went to hide himself in the forest tOS

CHAPTER 4.

How Gandalin and Durin followed the track
of Amadis, earrying hk arms which he had
left, and how they found him, and how he did
iattli with a Knight md conquered him .... Ii3



INDEX;

CHAPTER 5. Page

Showing who the Knight was whom Amadis
conquered, and what had lefaUen him before
he was conquered 1 19

CHAPTER 6.

How Don Galaor and JFhrestan and Agrayes
went in quest of Amadis, and how Amajduifor^
saking his arms and changing his name betook
himself to a solitary life with a good man in a
hermitage 12f

CHAPTER ;.

How Dwin returned to his Lady qfkr having-
delivered her bidding to Amadis, and of the
grief she made for the news 141

CHAPTER 8.

How Guilan the Pensive took the shield and
armour of Amadis, which he found by the
Fountain, and carried them to the Court qf
King Lisuarte 14S

CHAPTER 9'

m

Relating how, Beltenebros being upon a Poor
Rock, Corisanda came there in a ship in search
of her lover Florestan, and qfwhat^ happened.



INDEX.

Page
r tmd what she said in the Court of King Lisu*

^rle 153

CHAPTER lOv

How the Damsel of Denmark tvent in search
ofAmadis, and hy adventure qfler much toil
came to the Poor Rock, where Amadis was,
who coiled himself Beltenehros l6@

CAAPTER 11

Haw Don Gcdaor and Fhrestan and Agrayes
havin^one a long time in search ofAmadis and
found no trace of him, came all disconsolate to
the Court of King Lisuarte IJZ

CHAPTER 12.

How, when^Klng Lisuarte was at talle, there
came in a strange Knight armed at all points,
and defied the King and all his Court, and of
what parsed between him and Florestan, and
how Oriana was comforted and Amadisfound, 183^

CHAPTER 13.

How Beltenehros ordered arms to^ be made,
and prepared to see his Mistress Oriana, and
tfthe aduentures which btfel kim upon the
road •., igs



Pagoi
€HAPTER 14.

ffofv BeUenelros having finished these adven*^
tares went to the Fountain of the Three Chcm*
nets, where he concerted his going to Mira^
floreSf where his Lady Oriana sojoztmed. And
how a Strange Knight brought certain jewels,
which were to try true lovers to the Court of
0te King, and how Amadis agreed with his
Lady Oriana thai they twain should go in dis^
guise to try them 2131

CHAPTER 15*
How Beltenehros and Oriana sent the Damsel
of Denmark to know what answer was given
to their demand, and how they^ went to the
proof , 22^

CHAPTER r(y.
How Beltenehros went to Mirqfiores and abode
there with his Lady Oriana after the conqueti
of the Sword and Garland, and how he went
from thence to the battle which had been ap*
pointed with King Cildadan, and of what
there lefel 239.

CHAPTER 17.
How King Cildadan and Den Galaor werB
tarried away to- he eured^and how they uteve-



INDEX.

Page
f)laced, the one in a strong tower surrounded
by the sea, the other in a garden with Mgh
walls and iron raiUngSj where each thought he
was in prison, not knowmg by whom he had
leen brought there, and of what befell them. . 256

CHAPTER 18.

How the King beheld a strange sight (f fires
Tipon the sea, and of what happened < . , . . ^ 27%

CHAPTER 19.
How when King Lisuarte was talking wUh
Ms Knights how he would go against the Is*
land of the Boiling Lake, to deMver King At*
ban of North Wales and Angnote of Estra"
vans, there came a Damsel of the race of the
Oiantsfrom the sea, and demanded before the
Court that Amadis should do battle with Ar^
dan Canileo, and if he conquered the prisoners
should be released and the Island surrendered
to the King; but if Ardan Canileo won the
Jjattle he desired nothing more than to carry
4he head ofAmadis to Madasima 283"*

CHAPTER 20.

How the battle was performed between Don
Bruneo of Bonamar, and Madaman the envi-'
