Amadis of Gaul, Vol. IV
Robert Southey, trans. (1803) (London: Longman)
From the Spanish of Garci Rodriguez de Montalvo (1508), after the 14th-c. Portuguese original
Source: Internet Archive (Google Books scan)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Foundational Iberian chivalric romance. OCR-derived from 1803 edition, lightly cleaned.

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



»— t

I



Aifr.aii'S de- '^■oha\cc.



9maMs{ of ^aul



ft?



m^ig^ca z^Be3f%x



IN FOUR VOLUMES.



VOL. IV.



« <



^ 4



LONDON :

Printed by N. Biggs, Cranccourt, Fleet-street,
FOR T. N, LONGMAN AND O. REE8^ PATER'

MOSTSR ROW.

1803.



868

A48

I B05
W.4



JMJDXS of GAUL.



'Soak tDt Xouttik



CHAPTER 1.



You have heard in the d^rd book of this {
toiy how King Lisuaite against the will i
Bubjccta great as well as little, dclivero
daughter Oii|tfia to the Romans, and how I
dis and his companions of the Firm Island
from them rescued ; now we will tell y
ensued. When Amadis had left the vest
the Princess was he went through the ftet
orders concerning the prisoners and th
coming neat the ship where Salustanqi
dead he heard a great lamentation, for tl
and the Knights of that Prince were maki
over him, and relating all his praises and
so that Agrayes and they who bad won
could neither quiet them, nor remove th
the body. Amadis therefore ordered t
should all leave the vessel, and he gave <

vol.. IT. A



^



that the body should be placed in a coffin^ and that
such burial should be given him as befitted such
a Lord^ for albeit he was his enemy, he had died
like a good man in l^is master's service.

The noise of this lamentation was so great that it
reached the ship wherein was Oriana -, but so
soon as Queen Sardamira heard that it was for
Salustanquidio*s death, forgetting all her former
grief, she wrung her hands and threw herself
upon the ground, and began to exclaim, O gene-
rous prince and of high lineage, the light and the
xnirrOT of tlie whole Roman Empire, what a grief
and a calamity will it be to all who Jorc thee when
they shall hear the tidings of thy unhappy and dis-
astrous end, and what grief wilt thou fed O Em^
peror when thou shah learn the death of this thy
cousin, who was the strong shield of thin^ empire,
and the destruction of thy fleet, and the disgrace-
ful loss of thy Knights. Either thou must tame-
ly submit to this loss and remain the most disho-
noured Prince in the world, or else prepare to
avenge it, putting thy state and person to great
peril and doubtful issue, for by all that I have
seen since my entering Great Britain in an unhap-
py hour, sure ana I that there is no Prince or
Power however great against whom these Knights



s



would fear to wage war. Alas^ my afflicted heart
grieveth more for the living who will suffer in this
quarrel, than for these dead whose share of the
evil is past ! But then Oriana and Mabilia raised
lier up and comforted her the best they could.



A 2



i i .



u «.



■ ^ •



CHAPTER 2.



Amadis and his Knights now assembled on board
Florestan^s vessel, and there resolved that they
flhould forthwith make sail for the Firm Island,
according to their own opinion and the pleasure of
Oriana ; they then placed all the prisoners in one
ahip and appointed Gravarte of the Perilous Valley,
and Landin the Nephew of Don Quadragante with
a body of Knights to guard them : and the spoils
they placed in another ship under the care of Don
Gandales the £:>ster-father of Amadis, ajid Sada-
mon, who were two prudent and trusty Knights ^
their own force they divided among the other
vessels in the manner that they Jbad first embarked,
and then they deputed Don Bruneo of Bonamar
and Angriole of Estravaus to inform Oriana that
they were ready to obey her and to request her
commands* Hiese two Knights went on board



her ship and kHeeliiig .before her said^ good Lad;
. all these Kitighls who are here assembled at youi
rescue, iiiforrivyou thit the fleet is now teady fqi
your scTOce; ■ and desire .'to know your' wtti thai
they. inayrfal^Jt it. 'My' true- frrcnds," replied
Onana, 1? should ^not desire to-'live'if I* thought
that, it would never be in -my power to re^juite
the love ye have all fehov^n me, but- 1 trust 'ih God
that as I have the will, «»o will he* one" day give
me the power to show my gratefiilncss. Say to
the Knights.that what has been before determined
should now be put in practice, that is, to go to
the Firm Island, there we can take farther coun-
sel, and there I hope that these difficult and pain^
fill beginnings will come to a good end.

When the two Knights had carried back this an-
swer po.. their companions they bade all their trum-
f pets sound, .aiid^ joyfully and with loud clamours

I tlie fleet began to move on. Joyfully and cou-

rageously did thftse Knights go -their way, being
of one accord and resolved not to-giVe-'over the
eiiterprize which thpy had began, till, they shoulc
have well and happily concluded it, for they were
all of high lineage and of great prowess, and the
knowledge that their cause was just now greatlj
heartened them, and they even rejoiced to 8e(



>v



themselves thus engaged against two snch potir-
esfal princes, for be the issue what it would^
they were sure by the contest to acquire a fair Bime
and leave behind them a remembrance which
jhould eiKiure for ever. Certes whoso had seen
them in that gallant fleet, how proudly they sailed
Qij^ so arme^ and with such a company, would
have weened that they were the train of some
great Emperor, and of a truth scarcely could there
be fi>uBd in the household c^ any Prince how gi'eat
soever, so goodly a company of Knights, high
bom, and so approved in arms. Seven days they
sailed along, and then took port in the haven of
the Firm Island, and there discharged the cannon
for joy 3 the Islanders in alarm, seeing so great a
fleet, took arms and ran to the beach, but then
they knew the banners and device of Amadis their
Lord. Forthwith the boats were put out, and
Don Gandales- landed to prepare the apartments
and order that a bridge of boats should be made
from the shore, that Oriana and her Ladies might
by that means land.



CHAPTER 3.



Now whra the fair Grasioda heard of the -coming
of the fleet and of all that had befallen^ she made
ready to receiye Oriaoaj whom of all persons in
the world she most desired to see, because of her
great repown that was every where spread abroad.
She therefore wished to appear before her like a
Lady of such rank and such wealth as indeed she
was ', the robe which she pat on was adorned with
roses of gold, wroujght witli marvellous skill,
and bordered with pearls and precious stones of
ejLceedrng value, this robe till now sho had never
worn, having reserved it to wear when she should
make trial of the Forbidden Chamber. On her
goodly hair ^he would wear no .other adornment
than the crown which tlie Greek Knight her
champion had challenged for her, and won for
her from all the Damsels in King Lisuarte's cou^

a4



8



She rode a white palfrey, whose trappings were
all curiously wrought with gold, in this guise had
she resolved, if her good fortune was such that
she should accomplish the proof of the Forbidden
Chamber, to return to King Lisuarte's court, and
there make herself known to Queen Brisena and
to her daughter Oriana, and to the other Princes-
ses and damsels, arid from thence to return with
great glory to her own country 5 but the issue
was «far otherwise than she hoped and imagined,
forfeir as of a truth she was, yet was not her
beauty equal to the beauty of Qoeen Briolania,
. who had attempted that adventure and failed-tjiere-
in. In this rich attire did that Lady go forth
from her apartment, and with her .all her dames
and damsels all richly apparelled, ten of her *
Knights on foot lei her reins, and with this array
ghe proceeded to the shore. The Bridge of Boats
had now been joined, it reached to the ship on
board of which was Oriana, and Grasinda watted
by the end of the Bridge to salute her as she
landed.

•

Oriana now came ont of her cabin, apparajled in
a manner more beseeming decency and her present
fortune, than for the advancement and display of
lier beauty. She seeing Grasinda thus ornament-



'ST-



cd awaiting her at the bridge-end, enquired of Don
firuneo if that was not the Dame who hadv-corne*
^ to her Father s court, and won the crown ftom. the
Damsels. Bruneo replied, tliat it was the same,
and bade Oriana accost and salute her honourably,
according ' to her deserts, for she was one of the
.worthy Dames of the world ; and then he related
what honours and good offioes Amadis and himself
iand Angriote had from her received. To this
.Oriana answered, reasonable is it then that you and
your friends should love and honour her, and thus
.will* I do. Then Don Quadrag«nte and Agrayes
.each took the Princess by the hand, and Don Flo-
irestan and Angriote led Queen Sardamira. Amadis
-alone led Mabilia, Olinda went between Don £ru-
-neo and Dragonis ; and in like manner the other
Damsels and Knights proceeded ^m the vessel.
When Oriana came near the end of the bridge,
Grasinda alighted and knelt down and took her
hand to kiss it, but Oriana drew it back, and em-
iMraced her with -much love, ^s one whose nature it
. was )t0^W ati&ble and nothing proud, where pride
. beseemed h^r 'not. But Grasinda seeing her ex-
ceeding beauty how &t it was beyond all the praises
• that she had heard theioof, wondered and was.great-
Jy astonished, for she ^ had not believed that such
beauty was possible in any mortal creature, and <••

A 5



10



this wonder she remaiued still on her knees^ though
Oriana would have rabed her ; good Lady^ qnoth
she^ now may I well give thanks to Grod that you
were not in your father's court at the season of my
arrival there ) for had you been there though my
champion was assuredly the best in the worlds a
Knight of little prowess would have discomfited
him in your behalf, if God as it be said, defends
the right ; with that she looked at Amadis, pardon
me Sir, if I wrong you in saying this, but my eyes
never before beheld the like of what they now see.
Amadis was full joyful to hear his Lady's praise ;
imreasonable would it be, he replied, if I should
think ill of what you have said, or complain of so
manifest a truth ! But Oriana was abashed at hear^
ing herself thus praised, and her thoughts were
more upon her present fortune then her own beau-
ty. She therefore answered, I cannot my Lady,
reply to you, for should I contradict your words
that would be discourtesy to one like you, aad to
aaaenf to them would in me be shame and folly,
only I would have you know, that such as I aos,
I should rejoice to do aught for your honour,
that is in the power of a poor disherited princesa
like me. She then begged Agrayes would kad
Grasinda to Olinda aad accooipany hex, h«vmg
' her with only Quadcagante.



11



Thus having landed they placed Oriana qpon a
palfrey, the most richly caparisoned that ever eyes
had seen^ which Queen Brisena had given her,
for her entrance into Rome. Queen Sardamira
also, and Grasinda, and all the other Dames and
Damsels were mounted j nor could Oriana prevail
upon the Knights but that they would proceed on
£30t and lead the reins, for they knew that what*
^ver honour and service they coiild manifest to these
Ladles would be to their own praise. In this or*-
der they entered the Island by way of the Castle,
and these Ladies and Oriana were conducted tor
the Tower in the garden where Don Gandales had
ordered their apartments to be made ready, that
bdag the best dwelling in the whole Island; fov
albeit there were many rich dweUing^, of rate
wc^kmanahip, yet that tower, whereia Apolidoa
had wrought the enchantnients> which were spok*-
en of at lengtb in the second part, had \feea hif
.ibvoorite place of sojourn, and for that reason he
lad fabricated it with such skill and such* coatli*
oeis, that the greatest Bmperor in the world woolft
not have ventured to attempt to ondbe the like.
In th^t tower were nine apartmentb, thtee on a
floor, and though some part was the work of
jkilful artist^, tbn xest was wrought by tba ski^
end fidPicc of Apolidoa himcielf 90 wonderously.

A a



12



that no man in the world could rightly value nor
even understand its exceeding rarety. And be-
cause it would be long to describe it all at length;,
I shall only say that the Tower stood in the middle
of a garden surrounded with a wall of goodly
stone and mortor> - and the garden was thQ goodliest
that might be seen by reason of its trees and herbs
and fountains of sweet -water. Of those trees^
many were hung with fruit 'the whole year through,
and others bore flowers, and round- about the gar-
den by tlie waU Were covered walks, with golden
trellis- work fhrou^ which might all that pleasant
greenness be seen, the ground was covered with
stories, some clear as the crystal, others coloured
Mke r«l5ies and other precious stones, the which
Apolidon had procured fi:6m certain Islands in the
East, wher6 jewels and gold and other rare things
are produced by reason of the great heat of the
sun continually acting. These Islands are uninha*
bited save only by wild beasts, and for fear of
ihose beasts no man durst ever set- foot thereon^
till Apolidon by his cunning wrought such spells
that it became safe to enter there 5 and then the
neighbouring'^ people being assured of this, took
advantage therecrf", and ventured there also, and
thus the world became stocked with sundry thinga
which it bad never before known. To the four



13



sides of the Tower water was broaght from the
neighbouring mountains by nietal pipes^ and col-
lected into four fountains, and the water spouted
so high from the golden pillars and through' the
mouths of animals, that it was easy to reach it
from the windows of the first story, for it was
caught in golden bascms wrought in the pillar^ nnd
by these four fountains was die whole garden
watered.

In this Tower then were the Princess Oriana
and all those Ladies lodged, each in her apart-
ment, . and there were they well served by Dames
and Damsels with all things convenient ; but no
Knight entered the Tower nor even the Crarden ;
for so Oriana had desired that it should be, and re-
quested t&e Knights to let it be so, till some terms
might be made with the King her father. Tliey all
esteemed her the more, and held her the more
praiseworthy, saying, that in that, and all things
else, their desire was to obey her will. Amadis
himself, altho* he had neither pleasure nor comfort
except in her presence, was yet well pleased that
she had so ordered, for far more than his own death
did he fear the least stain upon her honour ; and
he now consoled liimself with the thought that she
was now under his protection^ and that he would



14



ratlier die than lose lier. The other Knights and
Lords and all their people wei*e lodged in the
Island^ each according to their quality^ and abun-
dantly supplied with all things needful for their
subsistence and enjoyment^ for though Amadis
never appeared abroad but as a poor Errant Knight^
he had store of treasure in that Island^ not only
from the rents and from what he had found there,
but of jewels and other precious gifts which hia
mother and many other Ladies of high rank had
given him> all the which he had sent here> and
moreover the Islanders themselves who were all
rich and honourable men held themselves fortunate
to supply him with breads and meat^ and wines>
according to his need.



15



CHAPTER 4,



Bat Amadid albeit he manifested the great courage
which in truth he possessed, yet coold he not
but tbonghtiiilly reflect upon the end of this great
irasioess, of which the charge and weight lay
upon him : the Princes and Lords and Knights of
high degree were many whose lives were adven-
tured with his upon the issue, but when others
slept he waked thinking upon what measures he
should best pursue. Therefore with the advice of
Don Quadragante and of his cousin Agrayes, he
-soomioned all the Knights to council, in the apart-*
menfof Quadragante, in a large hall which was
«one of the richest In the whole Island. There
being all assembled, Amadis rose having Master
Hdisabod whom he ever greatly honoured by the
. h«nd^ and thua addressed them.



16



Noble Princes and Kiiiglits^ it is known through-
out the world how ye, abandoning those delights
which ye might have possessed in your own lands,,
have chosen rather to follow the honourable pro-
fession of arms, and encovuiter all dangers to gain
the praise of prowess and redress wrongs, in guer-
don of which worthy resolution, good fortune
hath now given into your hands this great; victory
which ye have at present gained. I call it not
great as to the conquest of the Romans, for con -
«idering what they were, . and what ye are, this
conquest would be little praise, but because by
that victory ye have rescued so great and excellent
a Princess, and saved her firom the worst wrong
tliat any one of her worth hath for many an age
endured, this, indeed is to your fair renown and to
the service of Almighty €rod, for in this have ye
done that for which ye were bom, succouring the
* oppressed and beating down the evil-doers. But
in thifi, what should most elate us is the defiance
which we have thus given to two so- high and pow*
^rful Princes as are the Emperor of Rome and King
rLisuarte, with whom, if they will not be brought to
reason and justice we ntiust perforce have great da-
bate and warfoe. Noble Sirs, what then have we
to expect? certea nothing but that defeodingthe



17



right and reasonable cause against those wl^ would
support injustice, we shall gain yet more victories,
such that the whole world shall ring therewith.
For if they are so mighty that their power is to be
feared, neither are we so destitute of great and
powerful Lords, our friends and kinsmen, but that
we could lightly so fill these plains with Kiiights
and soldiers, so that no enemies, how many soever
they be, could approach witliin sight of the Firm
Island. Now tlien. Sirs, speak your counsel, not
of what behoves us to do, for ye better than I
know and feel what is now our duty, but in what
manner we can prosecute and carry on what we
ha^e so well begun.

With a right good will did they listen to that,
brave and courteous speech of Amadis, and because
in that assembly there were so many who could
well reply, all for awhile remained silent, each
urging the other to make answer. At length Don
QuadragaQte said. Since ye are all silent Sirs, if it
please you I will deliver my advice. Agrayes an-
swered, Sir Quadragante, we all* beseech you so
to do ; for considering who you are, and what great
atchievements you have honourably brought to end^
it best becomes you of all others to make reply.
Don Quadragante thanked him for this honourable



18



praise, and then said to Aniadis : Noble Knight^
you have spoken right well and to omr fai^ con*
tentment ', on my part I shall only say what befits
our present situation. In what has passed, our ob«
ject has been not to gratify our own passion and
enmity, but to . do what we are bound to do as
good Knights, succouring Dames and Daaisels,
who have no strength and no helpers, save only
God and such as ye. My counsel is, that ye re-»
present tliis to King Lisuarte by fitting messengers,
and require him toacknowledge his error, and do
justice to his daughter Oriana, the which if he
eng^e to do, and make us secure thereof, we then
honourably may and ought to restore her. For
ourselves we should make no terms, for if this
matter can be ended, I ween he wUl ask peace of
us, and hold hin^iself a happy man if it he granted.
Meantime, for we know not what ooay be the issue
of this embassy^ let us call upon our kinsmen and
friends to assist us, that if King Lisuarte should
come to seek us, he may find us not as poor £rraRI
Knights, but as Lords and Princes, ready to give
him his welcome.



CIUPTER 5.



At tliia rep]/ of Quadragante all were welt pleased,
for they thought he had letl nothing to be saidi it
was therefore determined that Ainadis should letul
to advise King Perion his felber of what bad passed
and request help, not only from him, but from all
his oilier friends, who would be disposed to givs
him succour now, in acknowledgement of the
great services he had wiih so much peril, wrought
(hem. Agrayes also it was agreed should send, or
go to his father the King of Scotland for the like
purpose, and Don Bmneo to the Marquis his father, '
and to his brother Branfil, and with speed raii* all
the force he could. Don Quadrngante also said that
he would seud his nephew Landin, to the Queen of
Ireland, for he believed that altho' King Cildadan
her husband was bound with a certain number of
Knights to serve King Lisiiarte, yet she would



20



grant permission to her subjects, to serve under hinr^
and many good men of his friends and vassals
might be expected. In like rriannerall the o'thci'
Knights prepared to exert- tli^msetves. This being
determini^d they appointed Agraycs and Don Flo-
restan to inform the Princess Oriana, that she 'might
command whatever she thought most expedient for
her service. They then broke up the assembly, all
in good hope and greatly encouraged, more especi-
ally they who were of low condition and who in
some degree before had feared the issue of this ad-
venture, for they beholding what resources were to
be brought forward lost all apprehension of the
event,

»

Nov^ as they were at the gate of tlie Castle from
whence they could command the sight of the whole
Island they saw a knight come riding along the
coast, having with him fire Squhes vi'lio c»i:ried his
^arms and other accoutrements. They all stood look-
ing whom he might be, till as he came nearer they
knew that he was D^n JBii'i^ ofMonjaste, then
were they all full joyful, for well was he beloved by
them all, being in trutli a good knight, and on<^
who w6uld have been every where greatly esteem-
ed for his own wortli even though he had not been
Son to King Ladasin of Spain. Of all Knights



^^



21



living he was the one who most Idved his friends,
and was perpetually spordng wkh then^'and doing'
them the most pleasure that naight be, wherefore
he on his part was in return by^them beloved. They
knowing him^ all^ went out to meet him, but he
when he saw them, was greatly surprized, won-
dering by what chance they were all thus col-
lectedj and he alighted and went towards them
with open arms, ^saying, I could embrace you ail
at once, for I regard you all as one. But when they
came up to him, and he saw Amadis among them,
I need not say whether or no he rejoiced to meet
him, for besides • their nearness of blood, Don
Brian's mother being the sister of King Pericxi,
Amadis was the Knight in the world whom he
loved best. Are you here ? quoth he smiling, for
J come in yjour quest > though all other adventures
should faii us, we should have enough to do in
seeking you wJien you conceal yourself so well !
Say what you please, replied Amadis embracing
himy for I have you now where I shall take wj
amends, the^ Knights command you to mount
again^ and^come into the Island where thereis'a pri-
son ready for such as you.'

With that they all crowded to embrace him, and
however loth he was^ made him remount> and atten*



£2



ded him on foot to iht apartment of Amadis^ where
he alighted. ' His cousins Agrayes and Floiestan dis-
armed him theie and brought him a scaiietmantle -,
but he being thus dbarmed^ and seeing around him
60 many Knights and of such prowess^ said^ there
must be some great mystery and cause why so many
good Knights are thus assembled, f beseech ye Sirs
tell me the reason, for sometlung thereof I have
heard since my landing. Upon this they bade
Agraryes relate what had passed, and he whose
heart was in the enterprize recounted what had been
jdone, to the shame of King Lisuarte, greatly com-
mending what the Knights had undertaken. When
Brian of Monjaste heard this, he thought it a serious
thii^, being himself a prudent man, and one who
looked to the issue df such things as well as the be-
ginning : And had this thing been to do, belike he
not knowing the bve of Amadis and Oriana, might
have dissuaded the enterprize, or at least proposed
xneasures more moderate before so desperate a course
wwe taken, for he knew King Lisuarte how jealous
he was of bos honour, and as the injury thereto was
so ^eat, great in prop o rt io n would be his efforts
for vengeance 3 howbeit as the thing was, his assis-
tance rather than advice was now required, and
more especially as Amadis whom he so loved was
theChief of the enterprize. He praised them for



fS



what they had doDe sad promised the aid of ^is own
person^ and of all that he could raise in his father*^
dominionB^ bat he veqciested that he mig^t see the
Princess Oriana^ and leani from her what was her
{Measure. SirCoumn^ replied Amadis, you are just
come^om a kxig joomey^ and these Knights have
not yet taken food. If it please you rest now and
eat, meantime your arrival shall be made known to
the Princess. Hhs counsel Don Brian thought good«
80 the Knights took their leave of him and retired
each to his home.

When it was ev«jmg Agrayes and Florestan went
to wait upon Oriana as they had appointed, and
they took Don Brian with them. They found her
with all the other Princesses and Ladies of ber com*
pany, expecting them in the apartment of Queen
Sardamira. Don Brian knelt before her, and would *
have kissed her hand, but she withdrew it. and em-
^vaced him and welcomed him with her accustome<f(
courtesy. Kr, i|uoth sht?^ Don Brian, yon are
T^t\v«^x)me ! welcetne mdeedyon wotdd at any
time be, for your nobleness and great virtue ; hut
at this time more especially ! I need not tell you
what doubtless you have already learnt from yoar
friends, nor need I request you what to do, for you
are more worthy to give than to receive advice.



24



Don Brian answered^ the cause of my coming
Lady hath been this. After the battle which King
Lisuarte had \yith the seven Kings of the Islands^
I returned into Spain to the King my father^ and
there was busied in his disputes with the. Afncans,
till I heard that ngiy cousin Amadis was gone into
some foreign land no man knew whither. But
then^ because he was the flower and mirror of all
my lineage^' and the one whom I the most esteemed
and loyed, his loss so greatly grieved me^ that I
determined to go in his quests and therefore came
hither to this Island^ thinking that here I might
likdiest hear some tidings of hhn 5 so hither my
g6od fortune guided me not only to find him^ but
to arrive in a time when I niay manifest some part
of the great desire which I have ever felt to serve
you. For as } bu imagine Lady^ I have heard what
has happened^ and knowing the inflexible conditk>n
of^e King your father^ something also I can guess
of what is to ensue } but come what will^ my per-
son is at your disposal to serve you. Many thanks
did Oriana return to liim for this his courteous
speech.



25



CHAPTER 6.



^^^



Great reason is there that the cause wherefore all
these Knights were so ready and desirons to ex*
pose themselves to such danger for this Lady's
sake should be known, and, not remain in obli-
vion. Was it peradventure for the bountiful
favours which they had from her received ? Or
was it because they knew*the secret of her love
with Amadis and for this reason were so zealous to
serve both him and her ? Certes I tell you that
neither the one nor the other of these reasons was
that which so disposed them to her service. For
though she was of such high rank, yet had it
never been in her power to shew her bounty, for
she possessed nothing more than a poor Damsel,'
and as for what regarded her love for Amadis'
you have already read in 'this great history with
. what secrecy that was Concealed. But a cause

VOL. IV. B



£5



-diere roust have been, and would you know what
it was ? Why this Princess was the gentlest, and
of the best breeding, and of the most courtesy,
and the most affable and hnmble that lived in
those times, and ever was disposed to honour and
demean herself to every one according to his
Bierits, and this is a net and a bond whereby the
great who act thus can bind ooany to their service
Hhat would else be little bound to serve them.

Now after Don Brian of Moi^aste bad thus spo-
ken and had accosted Queen Sardamira, and
the other princesses and the Lady Grasinda,
Agrayes and Florestan addressed Oriana and
respectfully told her what the Knights had de«
puted them to say, the which she well approve
cd, leaving them to follow their own judgment
in these affairs, of which Knights could bet-
ter judge than women; but she besought them
ever to bear in mind an inclination and desire
to be at peace with her father, if so be that could
be brought about to their honour, for her sake
and for her reputation, lliis done, Oriana leav-
ing Florestan and Don Brian in talk with Queen
Sardamira, took Agrayes by the hand, and lead-
ing him apart said, good Sir, and my true brotbei
Agrayes, albeit the confidence, and trust whicl*



«7



I have in Amadts and in all these noble Knights
IS very great, yet have I greater confidence In you>
being brought up in the house of the King your
father, and having been so cherished by the
Queen your mother, who gave me Mabilia to be
my companion, and such a friend hath she been
that I may well say that as to God I owe the gift
of life, so to her do I owe the preservation of it,
which but for her prudence and consc^ations
would ere this have been lost, more especially
•ince for my ill hap the Romans came to my Fa«
thcr's house. For her sake and for the remem*
•brance of all these things will I reveal to you,
what I keep secret from all else, but for the pre-
sent I only beseech you, that laying aside all
wrath and resentment against my Father, you
would labour to bring about peace and concord
between him and your cousin Amadis, for yoa
Ivnow that by reason of their great spirits and
the enmity which hath so long endured between
them, they will not lightly yield to persuasion ;
but if by your endeavour this could be brought
about, not only would the death of so many good
men as else must perish be prevented, but my fair
name and honour, which may else be called In
■question, will be thtis manifestly justified.



b2



28



Tb thts Agrayes courteously and humbly made
answer, with great reason may and ought I to
assent to all Lady that you have said. The wish
of my father and of my mother is by all their
meanSy to increase your honour and dignity, as by
their deeds shall soon appear : for my sister Ma«
Jbilia and myself I need only say^ that all our ac-
tions show how entirely we desire your service*
True it is Lady, that I above all others am most
displeased with the King your father, for I have
witnessed all the great and signal services which
have been wrought for bim by Amadis and by all
us of his lineage^ as is to all the world notorious,
and I also was witness to the thanklessness and
ingratiiude whercwiih he requited us. For never
did we ask of him other guerdon than the Island
of Mongaza for my uncle Dpn Galvanes, which
Island was won, to the great honour of his court,
and to the more imminent danger of his life, who
was the winner, than man can think or express,
as you my good Lady beheld with your own cyea.
Yet neither did that avail, nor all our service, nor
the great deserts of my uncle, that we could pro-
cnre so small a meed, which should then have re-
mained in theKing*s vassalage, instead thereof he
rejected our supplication, as though instead of hia
servant^ he had been his enemy. I cannot there-



£9



fore deny but that in my heart I should rejoice i
serve against him tiil he should be reduced to sue
a st8te> that all the world might see how great!
t0 his loss he had wronged and insulted us. Bi
as'man obtains favour in the sight of God in pr<
portion as he curbs^ and conquers his own will f<
bis service } so Lady will I for your sake practii
this self-denial, and repress my own anger, thi
by this difficult service you may see how truly
desire to obey you, but J must do this warily, lest
should intimidate others to see me acting the roe
diator, whom they know to be so earnest in tli
quarrel. So I beseech you let it be, replied Or
ana, and good friend act to this intent in wh:
manner you think best. Having- ended this tal
they returned to the conrtpany. But Agrayes coul
hardly refrain Jiis eye from fixing upon Olind
whom he loved so' wqU, that by that love he ha
been enabled to pass under the Arch of Tru
I^overs, howbeit remembering his high birth an
duties, he now represt his inclinations, till
should be seen how all these things would enc
So having conversed together awhile, the Knigh
cheering the Ladies,' who women-like were al
frayed by all these preparations, they returned \
their companions with the answer of Orian^
Then without delay they began to put in execi

aa



30

tlon what thqr had resolved, and «cnd Embftssa*
dors to King Lisuartej and the office was unani-
mously assigned to Don Qnadragante and Don
Brian of Monjaste, as two Knights well befitting
>such an embassy. .



CHAPTER 7-



McaDtime Amadii went to the apflrtment c
ainda whom be greatly loved and cateemi
only for her own merita, bnt for the honoi
good offices which be had receired at her
*o havuig Rated himself on the eitrado
htr, be aaid, If Lady jon are not now lei
1 earnestly desire and wish to acrre you, \t
goodnesi pardon, for the time, ai you tee
faalt. And of thii as your judgment wi
ceiveit to be so, I shall say nothing mor
instead, I am come to learn what may 1
pleasnre and farther will t it is now )ooj
jou have been absent from your own counii
I know not if peradventure that may troab
but whatsoever you may will, that ehall I
to pcribrm. Grasinda answered. Sir, if 1



32



feel that from your company and friendship £
have acquired greater honour than could by any
other fortune have befallen me j and that whatever
3ervice I may have been able to render you in my
own country has been well satisfied and repaid,
I might well be held the most thankless person
in the world. But this is known and evident to
all ', and therefore Sir, I will explain to you my
whole desire. I see how many Knights and Prin-
ces are assembled in aid of this Princess 5 and I
perceive that you my good Sir are he to whom
they all look up, so that all their hope and con*
£dence of success is in your courage and wisdom >
and you cannot, considering your good heart and
hi^h renown, but feel yourself the Chief and
Leader in this danger; perforce therefore must
you call upon your friends and all who are be-
holden to you, for their succour, and as one of
them do I account myself. This therefore is my
will, that naaster Helisabad should forthwith re-
turn to my country, and summon all my friends
and vassals to naake ready, and come with a great
fleet to serve you Sir, when and where it may
please you to appoint. Meantime I will remain
in the company and service of this Lady, and not
leave he^ or you, till the end of this business shall



e I tbcD ought tD' par-



When Amaitis heard her »peak thus, he embraced'
ber wittia cheerful countenance and said. Trulj I
believe ibnt if all other virtue and uoblenesi
should periah from out of the world, it raieht
frotD you my good Lady be reproduced. S
it pleaaes yoa, let it be so ; aud as Master h
■abad is thus going on your bidding, albeit it
be to him much toil, yet shall he bear my i
ding to the Emperor of Constantinople. For (
■idering the gracious proffers which be made
and the little reasoa which as 1 tbcU' learnt,
has to be tatisfied with the Emperor of Roru^>
with whom my quarrel principally lies ; I hold
myself assured that he will willingly send to suc-
cour me as though I had done him good service,
(Srasinda approved of this design, observing that
Master Helisabad wouM think little of any tcAl
undertaken in his behalf. Then Amadis saidi
lince it is your pleasure Lady to abide here with
this Princess, it is reasonable that as the other
Ladies and Princesses are lodged with her, to also
should you, that you may recdve from her those
courtesies. and honours which you so well deserve;.



o



4



(^pon this he called his fosterer Don Gandale*
and bade him tell Oriana of the great desire which
Grasinda had to serve her, and request her to
receive her on his part. But Oriana gladly re-
ceived her with all due thankfulness, not so much
for her present services, as for the good offices
she had formerly rendered Amadis, and for the
preservation of her own life, when she preserved
his by giving him Master Helisabad for a com-
panion.

This being done and Master Helisabad being
ready with a good will to depart, Amadis wrote
thus to the Emperor of Constantinople. Most
high Emperor, the Knight of the.Gieen Sword
who by his own proper name is called Amadis
of Gaul, sends to kiss your hands, and to re-
mind you of what more by reason of your own
nobleness and goodness than of his deserts, you
were pleased to offer him ; for a time is now
come wherein I need the help of your highness
and of all my friends and well-wishers who de-
sire to follow reason and justice. Upon this
Master Helisabad. is instructed fully. I beseech
ycu give ear to his embassy, and let it have
that effect on which I rely. Having finished



tills, aad delivered Lis formal letters of credence
to Master Helisabad, the Master took bis leave
of Amadis and of tiis Lad/ Grasinda, and let



36



CHAPTER S.



After Amadts had dispatched the Master he called^
for Tantiles who was High Steward to the fair
Queen Briolania, and said to him^. my good
friend, I would now that you should take that
trouble and concern for me, which I would take-
in whatever concerned you. You see in what
manner my honour is now staked^ how greatly it
may now be increased, or otherwise tarnished ;
go then to your Lady and tell her' all that you
have witnessed, and that it behoves her to sum-
mon all her friends and vassals that they may be
ready when need shall be ; say to her that what-
so nearly concerns me, concerns her all also, for
she knows that in losing me, she would lose her
servant. Tantiles answered, this will I do with-
out delay, and make you no doubt but that there
could nothing happen so to rejoice the Queen my



37

lAistress, as to learn that sfae can dow maks im-
nifcsC the great love aod good will with vhich sbe
will perform whatever you can require from her
kingdom. Be you sure that when the tirae
comes I shall l>e ready to return with such array
as such a Lady ought to aeod to him, from whom
uoder God, she has Teceived her kingdom. He
then received bis letters <tf credence, and iocoor
tinenlly put to sea.

Then Araadis took Gandalin apart and saidj frieod-
Gandalia whether or no 1 need the aid. of my
friends and kiqscncn in thia necessity wherein'
perforce I have placed myself, you well caa
judge. Sortly therefore as I aball feel your ab-
seuce, yet it is now expedient that you should -
depart from me. You. know we have resolved
to call upon all our friends for succour, and
though 1 have good hope in many to whom X
have rendered good service, as yon know, and
trust that they will, now repay the debt of grati-
tude which, they owe me, yet have I most con-
fidence in King Perion my father, that ha, whe-
ther reason or not were oamy side will hasten to
my help. You are the man who can best and
most fully explain. the whole to him, and shame
and.sorrov would it be to him if I who am his



38



son and his eldest son, could not give these t\ro
Princes their fit answer when ihey come up
against me ! But before you go^ speak with my
Coqsin Mabilia and learn whether she hath any
bidding to her aunt or to my sister Melicia, and
speak also with my Lady Oriana^ for mine she
is, and though she be secret toward all other, to
only you will she discover what may be her will.
Meantime I will make ready your letter of cre-
dence, and therein I will request that Melicia may
come hither to be in Oriana's company. So shall
her virtues ajnd great beauty be seen by many, as
they have already been heard of. All this Granda-
11 n promised to perform.

Meantime Agrayes spakq with Don Gandales, the
fosterer of Amadis, and sent him to Scotland for
aid, nor was there need to write by him, for so
many years had he been trusted and found trust-
worthy, that he was rather regarded like a counsel-
lor and kinsman than as a vassal ; and he with all
diligence and earnestness prepared to perform this
embassy, because it nearly concerned Amadis,
whom above all others in the world he most loved.



CHAPTER 9-



DoD Quadraganle also, <m hU part, (pake with
bis nephew Landin, the good Knigbt, sayingi be-
loved nephew it is peceGsar}' that you depart for
Ireland with all speed, and speak there wilh (be
dueea ray niece, in private, so that King Ciida-
daa koow not your erraad ; for he being sworn
vassal to King Lisuarte, ihere is no reason tbal he
should know the thing. Tell her how we arc cir-
cumstanced, andlbat though so many good Knights
are here, yet they make great account, and place
great trust in me, as you Nepbcw behold, con-
Bidcriiig what I am, and of what lineage. And
say to her that I beseech her in her kindness to
{lermit as many of her people as shall be so dis-
posed to come serve me ; for tell her that in eon-
tests like these, such changes oftentimes take
place, that states and kingdoms are overthrown.



4f9



and vassals become Lords, and they who were the-
Lords are reduced to vassallage. She therefore
should not fear to grant my request. Do you
then with what aid you may thus obtain, and
with my friends- and vassals,, fit out a fleet, and
be ready to obey my call. Landin replied that by
God's help he would procure a good answer to his
demand. So he embarked on board one of the
Roman ships, and went his way.

And Dbn Bruneo bade his Squire depart with let^
ters to the Marquis his father, and to his brother
Franfil, and beseech them to collect forces for
their help. Lasindo, my good friend; said he;
you must perceive that though so many good
Knights are here, in this quarrel, yet Amadis is
the most nearly concerned 3 and much as the love
which we bear each other would influence me to
serve him, yet am I the more bound to this duty,
feeing that he is brother to my Lady Melicia;
Though he had been my enemy I should now
have been bound to serve him for her sake, how
much more when he is the man in the world
whom I love best !* I therefore above all others
am most concerned to support his honour. Of
this you will say nothing, but do you persuade
tny father to this succoor which so conceros mj



41

honour no^T. Of Branfil my brolht
ready assured, and well I know ibai
rather faave had his part in what has :
than have won an Empire, for all his i
honourable feats of chivalry. You i
more Sir, replied Lasindo, by God's
procure you such succour that your
be well served, aud your own renown
creased. So he embarked and put to
this Lasindo was a right good Squi
good lineage, and with true love and
will did he now go upon his Mastet's s



42



CHJPTER 10.



But Amadis never ceased to think how he might
best provide for his defence, because his Lady .
was now to be bj him protected. He called
Ysanjo, whom he had found governor of the
Firm Island when he made the conquest thereof.
Good Sir, said he, and my good friend, I know
your virtue and your prudence, and the desire
which you have ever shewn to promote my ho-
nour, and therefore will I now impose some
labour upon you, for considering the quality of
him to whom I am about to send, it behoves to
employ so worthy a Messenger. You shall go to '
King Tafinor of Bohemia, and take him my let-
ters, and tell him the confidence I have in his
friendship. He is a right noble King, and offer-
ed me his assistance with a free good will when .
J left his court. Sir, quoth Ysanjo, this em-



43



ployment is an Bononr not a trouble ', be assured
that even to death I should rejoice to serve you.
Then Amadis wrote thus. Noble King Tafinor of
Bohemia, if when I abode in your house as an Er-
rant Knight it was my good fortune to render you-
any service, I hold myself well repaid by the
honours and good offices which I there received
irotii you and from all of your court. And if
I now send to request your help in -my necessity,
it is because I know how nobly and virtuously you
have desired with your utmost power to uphold
the right cause. The Knight who bears this
letter will inform you of all that has passed ; give
him full confidence, and I trust his embassy will
have the like success that your bidding would
have found with me. Ysanjo then gave order
tlxal a ship should be prepared for his departure.



4-i



CHAPTER ul



All these messengers had now departed save only
Gandalin ; he went to the garden wherein the
Tower stood, and where as you have heard no man
was permitted to enter without the especial leave
of the Princess 5 the entrance bciiig kept only
by women. He coming to the garden gate bade
those within say to Mabilia that Gandalin was
preparing to sail for Gaul, and would speak- with
her before his departure. When Mabilia repeat-
ed this to Oriana, she was right glad of Gandalin's
coming, and gave orders that he should be admit-
ted. So he having entered, fell on his knees be-
fore her and kissed her hand, and then said to
Mabilia according as his Master had commanded
him. Upon that Mabilia said aloud to Orian»
that all might hear, Gandalin is going to Gaul,,
what now will you say to the Queen and to my



47



^erve this my Lady to her foil hononr, and for
nay death or life let that betide as it will. Take
you no fear fbi* that Sir, quoth Gandalin^ for as
God hath in all other adventures favoured you
above any other Knight, so ^ill he now in this
which you with so great justice have undertaken.

With that Gandaliu repaired to Agrayes, and said
to him as he had been directed. Agrayes replied,
this which my sister says is reasonable, and shall
be done ; and if it has not been done before, it
was only because these Knights knew it was the
pleasure of Oriana to live in retirement for her
honour's sake. We will go speak of it to my
cousin Amadis. So he went to Amadis, who an-
swered him as one that had known nothing of tlie
business before. Agrayes then went to the Knights
and represented to them that it would be well if
they visited Oriana to encourage her, for in perils
like these even the brave sometimes needed en«
couragement, how much more, then would feeble
women stand in need of such comfort ? So they
agreed that on the following evening they would
clad themselves in goodly arms, and mount their
palfreys 5 having their swords girded on all
adorned with gold, and in this array proceed to
the apartment of Oriana. Of this Agrayes sent



48



intiflaation to Oiiana^ and she sent to Queen Sar-
damira and to Grasinda and for the other Dames
and Damsels of her company, that they should
make ready to receive them«



'liJAir iiiiiiii



CHAPTER 12.



Now when these Knights entered the apartment of
Oriana tbey all respectfully made obei»ance to her,
and afterwords to (he other Indies, and she cour-
teous)}' welcomed them as beseemed her noble na-
ture; then Amadis bade Don Quadragante and
Brian of Monjaate go talk with Oriana, he him-
self went to Mabilia. Agrayes conversed with
Olinda, Don Florestan with Queen Sardamira,
and Don Bruneo and Angriote with Grasinda
whom they with great reason greatly esteemed j
the other Knights talked each with whom he liked
best. Presently Mabilid said to her cousin Amadig
with a loud Toice, Sir send for Gandalin hither,
diat he may take my bidding to the Queen my
aunt and lo my Cousin Mclicia, you sbatl give it
to him in charge, since it is with your embasty
Aat he b goii^; to Gaal. When Oriaoa heard
vol., IT. ", c ,



it)



:|lii9 she said, he shall also take my message to
^the Queen and her daughter. Then Amadis call-
ed for Gandalin^ ^ho was with the other squires
in the garden, expecting to be summoned. He
came in and went to Amadis and Mabilia where
they stood apart from the company, and after they
had talked awhile Mabilia said to the princess.
Lady, I have dispatched Gandalin, see now what
jTQu have to say to iiim. Oriana then turned to
Queen Sardamira and said, take you Don Qua-
dragante while I go speak with the Squh-e; and
with that, leading Don Brian of Monjaste with ker
9be went towards Mabilia, but as they «came Doa
Brian said with playful courtesy, as one who well
knew what- demeanour beseemed a Knjght ^ since
I am chosen Embassador to your father, I will not
be present at a Lady's embassy, for I fear your de-
^reitfulness^ lest you should impose upon me a more
courteous manner than would be suitable to what
the Knights have given me in charge. At that
Oriana smiled sweetly and answered, for this very*
purpose Sir Don Brian have I led you here,that we
may somewhat abate your choler agaiast my father;
yet I fear that your heart is not so well inclined
towards womankind, that your purpose can any-
way by us be changed. She said this sportively,
for though Don B^an was young and very Gomel|y



51



he was more disposed to follow arms and to the
converse of Knights than to hold talk with wo-
men 3 he indeed was ready to expose himself t6
any danger in defence of their rights, and he loved
all and was by all beloved, but not by any one
with particular affection. So he made reply, I
shall fly from you Lady and from your enticements
lest I lose in little time what I have been long
gaining. So laughing left he Oriana and turn-
ed towards Grasinda, whom he greatly desired
to know^ having heard so much in her praise. <

When Amadis saw his Lady before him, whom
he so dearly loved, and whom for so long time he
had not seen, for that sight of her on the sea in
that great uproar, he accounted as nothing, his
flesh trembled and his heart panted for exceeding
delight, and he stood like a man beside himself,
having no power to speak. Oriana saw his trou-
ble, and drew nearer and took his hand under
her mantle, and prest it in token of love, as though
she would have embraced him. My true friend
quoth she, and dear above all others in the world,
though fortune has placed me where I most de-
sire to be, in -your power, yet such is my ill hap
that now more than ever it behoves me to shun
your company, that this adventure which is so

c 2



SQ



]£Bown abroad through the world may appear n&
ways injurious to my honour^ and that you may
be believed to have undertaken it^ pursuing your
duty and virtuous inclination in redressing wrongs
and relieving the oppressed, rather than from any
other motive. J?or if the true cause were made
known a different judgment would be. formed by
pur friends as well as enemies. What therefore
we have so long carefuUy concealed, we must
with yet more care continue to conceal, till it shall
please God to bring these troubles to the end
which we desire. Amadis answered, for God*s
§ake Lady offer not to me any reason or CKcuse
for what you thiiik fitting, for I was bom only to
be yours and to do you service while the life con-
tinues in the body 5 nor have I any other desire or
will than to obey your pleasure. All I beseech
you is, that you would always remember this
truth and command me as you think best, for that
will be the best comfort and recompense I can re-
^eivq. While he said this, Oriana looked at him,
and saw that the tears were flowing down h\s
face. Dear friend, quoth she, it is no new thing
for me to believe what you say, and how my
heart returns this affection he knows from whom
nothing is hid. But now it behoves to be patient^
$yd I beseech you even with that love which yiooL






53



Bave ever denmi me to express, tb put away'
these^thoaghts of grief and trouble from your heart'
for one way or other, by peace or by war, our se-
cret must soon- be known, and then shall we be
nnited even accordmg to our desire. We have
now talked long together, I will rejoin these
Knights, do you dry up these tears, and speak'
with Mabilia. She will tell you what we haver
never before found means to let you know, and
shall rejoice your heart;

Oriana then sent to call Ddo Quadragante arid Don
Brian and returnexl between them to her place. Ama-
dis remained communing with Mabilia, who told
him every thing relating to Esplandian, of his birth,
and • how he was carried away by the Lioness, and
how he had been bred up by the Hermit. When
Amadis heard this he was as joyful as he could
be. Lady and good Cousin, he replied as soon as
the joy which disturbed his heart would permit-
him -'to tpcsk, when Angriote and Don Bruueo
came to me at the house of the noble Lady Gra-
sinda,. Angriote then told me this history of £s-
pladian, but whose son he was that could he not
tell. Yet it came into my mind then what you
had said tome in that letter which my foster-
father Gandales brought to this Island, that my

C3



54



lineage had been increased^ and I thoaght it pos-
sible considering the time ixrhen your letter was
written^ that this child might be -my son, bat this
was only a thought. Now after they conununed
together thus they returned to Oriana, and then
Gandalin took leave and set forth on his voyage^
and then the Knights broke up the company aodL
returned each to hislodgii^s..



CHATTER IS.



That day- whereon Ring Limarte had delivered
Mtt daaghter Oriaua to the Romaoi, hard and cnid
ai he had been le her in tfaii marriage, yet could
be not hear witboat pity her cries and lamentation,
wlucb vere M gricvoui that there wai not n man
in the world who could have heard tbem widiout
comptHJon. The tear* agaunt hit -vrill came Into
bit eyes, and be turned back more sorrow&l at
heart then he would let be ■ecu In his lendilaoce.
Now wheo he came to his palace he feund both
nun and women there making great moan fyr tfae
departive <^ Oriana, nor could the strict com-
mand which he gave any way prevail or abate
tfaii, (at that Princess was more honoured and
better loved by all, than ever was other pen<»)
in Great Britain. He looked round hii palacs'
nd law DO Kiu^ti there at be had been osed tv



SG



see them, except only Brandoyuas^ who told hlnr
that the Queen was lamenting in her chamber.
So he went thither^ but there also he could see
none of the Princesses and Dames and Damsels
who were, wont to be in. her company, and whea
he beheld how deserted the place was and how
greatly changed from what it had been, there
came a cloud over his heart,, asd he had no power
to speak. But when the Queen saw him enter
her apartment she fell down in a swoon. King
Lisuarte raised her up and held her in' his arms till*
her senses returned y and when he saw that she
was somewhat recovered, he sdid to> her, Lad^r
it neither beseems your prudence nor your virtue,
tp be thus cast down by what is no calamity,- but
instead of that, great honour and good fortune..
If you wish to preserve my esteem and love, let
this be the last display of such weakness, Yomr
daughter is not so despoiled, but that she ought to
be esteemed the greatess Princess of all her race.
To thk the Queen made no reply, but fell with;
her face upon the bed, sobbing in great agony.

The King then left has and returned to the hall ; there:
he fouiid none but King Arban of North Wale^
and Don Grumedan, both showing by their coun-^
tep^nces and demeanour the sorrow which at heart-



57



they felt. And though King Lisoarte was of
great hearty and could beyond all other men con-
ceal his thoughts, jet was it manifest how deeply
he was now afflicted. But he thought it would be
well to go hunt in the woods, till time should
remedy what he felt, and he bade King Arban give
command that the tents should be made ready and
all thing& needful for the chace, for he would go
out on the morrow; That night he would not
sleep in the Queen's, chamber lest his presence might
increase her grief. Early in the morning he heard
mass and departed, but when he saw with how poor
a company he was now attended, he who was so
desirous of the compmy of good Knights and who
had once had the best of the world in his house*
hold, in spite of himself he could notchuse but-
be greatly troubled. But Fortune now was bent
to give him real cause for grief and make him for-
get this displeasure which was brought on by him*
self} for some of the Roman prisoners who had
made their escape from the Firm Island learning
where the King was, came to him, and told him
every thing as it had happened in their sight/
How much soever Kingl^isuarte felt atsuch tidings
m unexpected and so nearly concerning him, with a
good countenance as Kings use to put on, he made no
/»how of displeasure^ but answered, I am grieved mf

C5



58



friends for the death of Salustanqiiidio and for ymit
loss ; but as for what regards myself I am t«ed
to receive injuries and to give them in return. Re-'
main ye in my courts and ye shall be assisted witfr
all things needful. Upon that they kissed his hand
and besought him that he would remenober their
companions and those Lords who had been taki^
with them. Be not troubled for them^ replied the
King, that shall be remedied in a manner befitting
my honour and the honour of your Master. Theft
he bade them go to the city where the Queen was,
but charged them to say nothing of what had hap*
pened till he should return.

Three days King Lisuarte remained hunting in
the forest in sudi mood as you may imagine, then
he returned to the city still bearing a chearful
Countenance. Forthwith he went to the Queen's
apartment, and she who was one of the noblest
Women in the world and the most prudent, seeing
that it nothing availed her to show her sorrow ap-
|)eared more tranquil. The King ordered all het
Attendants to leave the ^chamber, and sweating hirik*
iBelf beside her, said. In things of little nK)ment
Which by chattce may fall out to tronUe us, there
is some licende aUo^t^ed for the expressi<»i (^ grief
and sorrow, which as they are produced by slight



69



nay bf slight remedies be reinot/Bd. Bntia
great wn»gs that afflict us greatijr^ more esped<*
alljT when they concem our honour^ it is &r other-i
wise, the feeling expressed must be little and the
severity, of vengeanoe great. To come to the
point. You Queen have felt the loss of your
daughtnr, accordbg to the custom of mothers;
and you have shown what you have &lt, as otheiv
do at such marriages, and I rejoice that you have so
toon taken consolation. But this which hath fol*
lowed is of such a nature that tittle grief must be
shown, but' heavy amends earnestly and heartily>
sought. The Romans who departed with our
daughter have been with all their fleet destroyed^
OF taken, or slain with their Prmce Salustanquidio^'
aad she herself with all her Dames and Damsels
made prisoner by Amadis and the Knights of the
Firm Island, where they have carried them with
triumphs and rejoicings ; so signal a thing as this
hath never before beea perpetrated in the memcxy
of man. Now therefore it behoves us, you pru«>
dendy as a woman, and 1 strenuously as a King
and Knight, to remedy our honour by deeds and
not by idle resentment of sorrow^

When Queen Brisena heard tMs she remained for
swhile tAoAt, &«: «he was one of the women in

c 6



6(X



the wbrld'who best loved het husband^ and Wa^
aware in auch a case as this and with such rnenj^
it was fiaac better to make peace than to encourage
discord. Therefore she replied^ Sir^ greatly as
vou must needs feel this, yet when you judge it
you should recollect the time when you yourself
were an Errant Knight. You know what comn
plaints and lamentations Oriana and all her Dam-;
aels made for so long time, so that it was every
where known, and all men believed great forcQ
was done her. It is not to be wondered at that
these Knights as men whose profession it is to
succour all distressed damsels^ should have dared
attempt what they have atchieved. But Sir, tho'
ahe be your daughter, yet as you have delivered
her up to the Embassadors of the Emperor, th^'
injury is to him, and it behoves you to act now
with moderation lest you should appear to be
chiefly wronged,, for if you do otlierwise the of-»
fence can no ways be dissembled. The King an-*
fiwered, bear now in mind Dame what becomes
your honour as I said before ! For me, by God>
iielp I shall take such amends as will become
yovu* rank and mine.

Then King Lisuarte went to his palace and called
for King Arban of North Wales and Don Gru?



«I

Dsedan and GuQan the Penure, wba wu ncnr
recovered fiom hia sickness, and being apart witl^
these he told theiu all that had befallea, for theaq
three Knights were they in whom he chiefly
tntsted: and he besought ihem to consider xvbat
was the course best befitting his honour, and to take
due deliberaticHi bdbre they advised him. The
King also remained some days pondering what
he should do. But Queen Brisena remained full
of sorrow for the great rigour of the King her
husband : and because he had now for his enemies
these Knights who would rather die than lose one
jot of honour ; this also she knew was her hus-
band's temper, and ihcrcfore she thought all other
dangers that ever heretofore bad threatened him
were light to this. While she was in this trouble,
revolving what remedy might be devised, therecamc
in one to say that Durin the brother of the Damsel
ofDenmarkwasarrivcd from the Firm Island and
would speak to her. The Queen gave order
that he should be admitted, so he entered and
knell before her, and kissed her Iiand, and gave
her a letter from Oriana her daughter. But
when the Queen took it the tears came into her
eyes for the loss of her child, and for the thought
that she couid oerer agam recover her unless it



y



6e



pleased the mercy af God to remedjr this eril>^
ttid she could npt speak^ nor ask any thing of.
Durin till she had read tl^ ktter.



63



CHJPTEU U.



The letter was in this &shioa. Most high and
mighty daeeu Brisena, my Lady Mother, I the
sorrowful and unhappy Oriana, your daughter,
send with all humility to kiss your feet aud hands.
My good Lady, you know how my ill fortune
being to me more contraiy and evil-minded than
to all other women that ever have lived or will
be, made me be banished from my own country
with exceeding cruelty on the part of the King
my father, and on my part with such grief and
stgcmy of heart that I myself marvel how I could
have lived through it a single day. But that for*
tune prepared for me a remedy more cruel than the
wretched sufiferings which I had expected ; for in
the first state I should have died, and that would
only have been the death of ,an unhappy wretch,
for whom death was more desireable than lifi$.



64/



But in this which has happened, unless you, uu*
der God have compassion upon me , not I alone
but numberless others who have no fault here-
in, must miserably end their lives. For it has
pleased God, who knew- the wrong and cruelty
that have been done me, that the knights of the
Firm Island met and destroyed the Roman fleet,
and carried me and- ail mv Dames and Damsels
to the Firm Island, where I am now treated with
tlie same reverence and decorum, as if I was
in your royal house. And because they are about
to send certain Knights to the King my father,
with intention to procme peace) if any concession:
may be made in^ my favour, I have thought it"
well to write thus before they ean arrive, beseech*
ing you by the tears which I now am- shedding )9u4
do perpetually shed, that you will in goodness in;-
treat the King my fatlier to have pity on me,* and
consider the service of God more than the glories
and honours of this world, and not put his own for-
tunes upon hazard, for he knows better tlian any
other, the great force and injustice that he has done
to me, nothing deserving it.

Having read this letter the Queen told Durin not
to return till she gave him an answer, but that she
must first speak to the King, And Durin. theo



65



told her that the Princesses and. Dames and Dam-^
sels who were in her Lady's company, all sent to
kiss her hands. Brisena then sent to request the
King to come alone to her chamber, that she
might speak with himr So soon as he entered she C
fell on her knees before liim, weeping, and said.
Sir, read this letter which your daughter Oriana
has sent, and have mercy upon her and upon roe.
The King raised her up by the hand 5 and took
the letter and read k, and then that he might give
her some contentment he said, since Oriana writes *
that these Knights are about to send Embassadors
to me, peradv^nture the Embassy may be such as'
to satisfy for the wrong received. If it should
]^rqve otherwise, you must consider that it is bet-
tei| to support our honour with danger^ than
l^ avoiding danger, to suffer that it should bo
tamtshed. He then entreated her to put her trust
in God and cease to afflict herself^ and having said
tiiis^ left the apartment.

The Queen then called for Dunn, and said to himr.
friend Durin go till my daughter that till these
Knights aririve and their embassy be known, I can-
^ve no answer, for the King her father caiv come-
to no resolution, but if ai>y means of peace can be-
found out, I will with all my power labour to pro«



m



cxxre it, abd greet her loviogly from me^ aod greet
from me likewise all her Dames and Damsels. Tell
her also, that now is th^ time when she mast shoir
what she is, chiefly by regarding her own good
^ fame, .without which nothing to be valued would
be left her^ and also by enduring affliction at be-
comes one of her high rank -, for where God hath
bestowed rank there also hath he allotted cares and
troubles proportionately greater. I pray God to
protect her, and restore her to me with honoar.
So Durin kissed her hand and departed; but little
profit came of this jommey> nor did Oriaaa leceive
any hope from her mother's messE^e.

Now l^e history saith that one day wfaea King
Lisuarte having heard mass, waa prqporiBg to eal
with his chiefe in the palace hall } t^iere came in.
a Squire and presented a letter of credence to him.
Thsr Kii^ took and read, and then asked him
what he would have^ and from whom he came ^
Sir he replied^ I am the Squire of Don Quadra*
gante of Ireland^ and come to you with his faid«
ding. Lisuarte miswered^ say then what you would.
have, aad. I shall willingly listen. The Squire
mads answer^ Sir, Don Quadragante and Don
Brian of Monjaste are come into your kingdom
witih* the bidding of Axnadis and the other Prinoea.



\



s.



67



tod Knightfl who are with him in the Firm iBknd,
Ihk they send to notify to joUg before they enter
your court 5 if they may safely appear before you>
they will come and deliver their embassy, but if
not, they will publish it abroad, and return thither
from whence they came. Therefore Sir, give me
answer as it may please you, that they may not
be delayed. Having heard this King lisuarte re«
mained awhile without replying, as every great
man ought to do, that he may have time to con-
sider 3 * but reflecting that no inconvenience could
£;^ow from receiving an pmbassy from his enemies
and that it would discover little moderation if he
refused, be said to the Squire, tell these Knights
that they may come to my court, with full se-
cmty ; and that I will listen to what they have to
say.

With this answer Ae Squire returned. Don Qua*
dn^^e and Don Brian hearing tiiis landed from
their vessel, being armed in goodly arms, and on
the third day they reached the town wherein tha
King then sojourned, at such time as he had fi-»
Dished his meal. As they rode through the streets
great was the concourse of people to look at them>
for they knew them well, and said to eadi oth^»
Cwaed be the tmiton whose villainy hath ma^eoor ,



GS"



Lord the King lose these good Knights and so*
many others from his company.. But some among'
them who knew better how it had been^ laid all .
the fault upon the King^ because he submitted^
his prudence to the counsel of scandalous and-
envious men. Thus they rode along, and havings
entered the outer court of the Palace they there-
dismounted, and went in where the King was,-
and courteously accosted him, and he on his part,
reoeived them with courteous demeanour*

Don Quadragante then thus ^ddrest him, it be^^
comes great Princes patiently and without passion -
tO' hear the Messengers who are sent to them, for'
if the Embassy should content them> then will -
they have reason to rejoice that they received it
graciously, snd if otherwise the remedy is to be^
found in a courageous heart and brave resolution^
not in angiy words. It becomes Embasssdors also
req)ectfully to deliver, what they have in charge*
without fear of any danger that may on that ac-
count betide them. The cause of our coming to>
you King Lisuarte, is by. order and request of.
Amadis of Gaul and the other good Knights who.
are in the Firm Island. They send to tell you».
that they seeking adventures abroad to uphold:
the right and redress wrong, did hear fiom many ».



69



^hat you^ foHowi&g your own will instead of rea«
son and justice, and regarding neither the serious
admonition of yonr nobles, nor the tears of your
|>eople, and not having your duty to God before
your eyes, deteimined to disinherit your daughter
Qriaua, the lawful successor to these your king-
doms after your decease, that you might give them
to your younger daughter in her stead. Moreover
not regarding her intreaties and lamentations, that
you without mercy delivered her tip to the Ro-
mans, to be wife to the Emperor, against all right
and against her own consent, and against the in-
clination of all your people. But as things like
these are notorious to God, and he it is who gives
tlie remedy, it pleased him that we should hear
of this wrong, and that we should redress it, with
no will or design to commit injury ourselves, but
seeking to remedy what wrong had been com-
mitted, wluch without shame we could not
have forborne to do. We therefore having van-
quished tbe Romans, have carried the Princess
your daughter to the Firm kland, with the reve-
rence and respect due to her nobleness and royal
birth, and there we have left her in the con^jany
of many noble Ladies and Knights of high degree.
Now therefore as our intention was only to serve
4Qod and uphold the jaght^ tbsae Knights ^eod



70



to exhort joa, that you will appoint some means
whereby this noble Princess may be secured from
any farther such manifest wrong, and restored to
your love as heretofore. If peradventuie you bear
any resentment against us for what we have doae,
let that remain for its seascxi. For it is not rea-»
sonable the certain right of her cause should be con«
founded with our quarrel .

When Don Quadragante had finished his speech^
the King answered him after this manner. Knight
because angry words and severe answers, neither
increase courage, nor make the weak heart strong,
my answer shall be brief, and given with more
patience than your demand deserves. Ye have
done that which in your judgement was most for
your honour, with overweening pride and with
arrogant strength, for little glory is it to rob and
conquer those who were voyaging securely as they
thought, and with no fear. Ye did not bear in
memory that I, being God's Lieutenant, am ac«
countable to him and to none other for my acr
tions. When amends shall have been taken for
this, it will be time enough to talk of the accord
which you propose; farther speech would be use-
less now. Don Brian of Monjaste then answered^
nothing more then remains^ now that we know



71

your vlB, but diat each of iss prepare Ibr thai
which behoves our honour. With that thej took
their leare, and went to horse, and Don (]kiiine«
dan with them whom the King had mmmanded to
accompany^ them out of tibe town.

When GRnunedan saw that he was out of the King's
presence, he said to these Kn^hts, my good Sirs,
I am gre^y grieved at this which I have witnessed,
for Imowing the pmdeaoe of the King and the bo«
ble nature of Amadis and of aU ye, I had good
iiope that this might have come to good end 5 but
it is all dean contrary to what I hoped, aad so
>must be till it please God to bring about peace
^and concwd. But I pray you tell me how comes
it that Amadis is now in the Firm Island, for it
is long since any tidings have been known of him,
though hia friends were perilously seeking him in
foreign lands. Don Brian made answer, I need
not say much to you Don Grumedan concern*
ing our quarrel with the King, certes, we should
rejoice if setting that aside, some means might be
found to right the Princess Oriaoa, but since he
will proceed according to his anger rather thffii
his reason, he shall find the upshot more difficult
■than the commencement. But as for what my
l^ood Sir, you ask conceming Axaadis, you must



72



Iknow that till he came to this court callmg hiitt'
self the Greek Knight in the company with that
Lady for whom* he vanquished the Romans^ and
won the crown of the Damsels, we none of
us knew tidings concerning him. Saint Mary
help me ! quoth Grumedan^ was that Greek
Knight Amadis ? — Without doubt he was. Now
then, replied the old man I will tell you that I
think myself a man of poor understanding, for I
ought to have known that he who performed such
feats in arms could be no other than Amadis«
And I beseech you, who were the two Knights
whom he left to help me against the Romans ? «—
Your friends Angriote of Estravaus, and Don Bru-
neo of Bonamar.. — God-a-mercy ! if I had known
that, I should not have feared the battle as I did.
in truth then I gained but little honour there, for
with such helpers, I should not think it much to
conquer twice the number of such foes. I believe
by your courage Don Grumedan, said Quadra-
gante, that you alone would have been sufficient*
Be I what I may, replied the old man, ye have
my love and true good will with ye, and God
grant that this business may yet end well.

By this they had gcme out of ^e town and some
little beyond It, then as Grumedan was about to



73



Md them farewdl^ the fair Child Esplandian
came up to them returning from his sport, and
with him' Anchor, the son of Angriote of Estra-
vans. He rode upon a goodly palfrey and well
caparisoned, which Queen Brisena had given him^
and he was richly dad^ for the King and Queea
liberally provided him with all things, both by
reasdn of his great beauty, and also because of
what Urganda the Unknown had written concern-
ing him 5 and he carried apon his fist a goshawk.
So coming up they gave each to other the good-day !
and Don Brian asked of Grumedan who the fair
Child was. He is called Esplandian, and was
reared in si marvellous manner, said the old
Knight, and strange things hath Urganda pro-
phecied concerning him. Is this her quoth Qua-
drUgaote, we in the Firm Island have heard much
talk of this child, I pray you call him back.
Don Grumediin then called to him for he was
passing on. Come hither said he, and send
some bidding to the Greek Knight, who in cour-
tesy to you spared the lives of the Romans. £s-
pladdtan turned ' back and answered, right glad
should I be to learn tidings of that noble Knight
and know where I could send my thanks, as you
say, and as he truly deserves.~Thesc Knights,
are going whether he now is. He tells you'

VOL. IV. D



74



trulh, said Don Quadragante; we will carrf
your bidding to him, who when. he was here was
called the Greek Knight: but is now called
Aoiadis. What, cried Esplandian, is he the
Amadis of whom all men speak so highly? — *
Even so — In truth highly ought he to be esteem-
ed i and his gentleness and courtesy are not less
worthy praise than his valour. I went up to
him when he was ia wrath, and yet he did not
for that do me the less honour, nor refuse to
grant me the lives of those Knights who had
greatly incensed him« I thank him truly, and
would to God there may come a time, when I
may with the like honour requite him for it.
Much were those *Koights pleased to hear how
well the Child spake. God make you a good
man, quoth Don Bruneo, as good fair Child, as
he hath made you fair. I thank you, the Child
replied. But if God hath reserved any worth for
me i I would it were in me now that I might be
able to serve my Lord the King, who now needs
the service of all his people. God be with yoa
Sirs ! so he and Don Gramedan took their leaver
^jid thoie Knights proceeded to their ships.



75



CHAPTER 15,



After those Kulghts had departed. King Lisuarte
sent to summon King Arban of North Wales,
end Don Gnimedan, and Don Guilan the Pensive,
and he said to them^ Ye know my friends how
I stand with the Knights of the Firm Island, and
the great insult which I have received at their
hands, and 'certes if I did not take such amends
as shonld break their great pride, I should not
hold myself a King, nor should f think that
others woidd as sach esteem me. Therefore that
I may render such account of myself, as behoves
a prudent man, and that all may be done with
due advice and deliberation, I have now sent
for you to know your counsel.

l^en King Arban who was a good Knight^ and
prudent, and greatly desired to promote the King's

J)2



76



lionour^ replied, these Knights Sir, and I, have
thought much upon this matter, and consulted
together, as 3rou required us. And we have con-
cluded that since it is not your pleasure to come to
any terms of concord with these Knights, that
you ought with all diligence -to prepare the means
whereby they may be represt and their haughtiness
curbed. For the Knights of the Firm Island are
many and right powerful in arms, as you Sir well
knew, when by the grace of God they were aU
80 long in your service $ and more than this, we
are assured that they have sent on all sides to de-
mand succour, the which besure they will iind,-
being of high lineage^ sons and brethren of Kings
and of other great personages, and likewise they
have in their own persons made many friends,
80 that when people come from so many parts to
their help, there will be a great host presently
raised. But on the other hand Sir, we see that
your Court and Household is more destitute of
Knights DOW than we ever remember it to have
been; and the greatness of your pow6r hath
made you many enemies who wiUnow discover
their ill will, for troubles will break out in times
of need like these which are hushed in calm sea-
sons. It is therefore eipedient that all yoar
servants and Meoda should now be called npoo^



77



especially the Emperor of Rome> whotn as the
Queen hath said, this business more nearly
touches than it doth you 5 then when you have
seen the power which you can bring together
you may better judge whether to proceed rigo-
rously, or come to such accord as is proposed.

King Lisuarte thought himself well advised by this^
speech^ and bade Don Guilan prepare to go to
the £mperor> for for such an Embassy such an
Embassador was meet. Don Goilan answered;
in this Sir, and in far more than thb I am ready
to do you service, and God grant it may be to the
advancement of your honour ; let therefore the
dispatches be made ready, tbat you may be obeyed
without delay. There needs nothing more than
your letters of credence, said the King. Tell the
Emperor that in compliance with his demand, I
gave my daughter to his Embassadors to be his
wife, and tell him what hath befallen her, and
that the Knights have sent to me proferring cer-
tain terms, which I, knowing the insult concerned
him more than me, would not accept. And say
to him that what will satisfy o^e is that we should
surround the place where they detain my daugh-
ter and make all the world know that we like
great princes as we are have punished these



78



thieves and robbers for the insult and injury
which they have ofFercd us. Tell him then year
own opinion and say that wrongs of this nature
grow worse, the longer the reniedy is delay*d.
Don Guilan then received his credentials and went
on board. The King then called for Brandoyuas
and bade him go to the Island of Mongaza and
summon Don Galvanes with all his people, and
then pass over with the like bidding to King
Cildadan of Ireland -, and he sent Filispinel to
Gasquilan King of Sweden, to tell htm in what
state he was, he being a Knight who delighted in
all occasions wherein he could show his great har-
dihood and prowess. In like manner he sent to
all his other friends and vassals, and ordered all
his people to make ready, and set about preparing
arms and horses, to have the greatest force of
horsemen that he could raise.

Now the History saith that Arcalaus the Enchan-
ter being in one of his castles, and always de-
vising how he could do some mischief, as he
and all wicked ones like him are accustomed
to do, the tidings came to him of 'this great
quarrel between King Lisuarte and Amadis.
Whether he was pleased or no need not be said^
for they were the two men in the world whom he



79



snost hated, and whose destruction he never
ceased to have at heart, and the uppermost thio^
in bis thoughts; At such a time as this he
thought he might wreak his will, atid because he
could not in his heart prevail upon himsdf to
assist either of them, he in his subtlety resolved
to raise a third army- of those who were enemies
both to Lisuarte and to Amadis, and so dispose
of them that if a battle should take place, they
might fall on the survivors, and with little peril
utterly destroy them. Incontinently he went to
horse,' and with such a train as was needful set
forth travelling by land and by sea till he came
to King Aravigo> who with the six IslandTKings
had been hardly handled by Amadis and King
Lisuarte, as you have heard in the third book
of this- history. When he came to him Arcalaas
said, O King Aravigo, if your heart and resolu-
tion be answerable to your high estate, and (o
the prudence with: which you ought to govern,.
Fortune' who was once so much your enemy hath
sow so repented, and is ready to make you such
amends, that the loss of your honour shall be
repaired with double victory. Your revenge ia-
now in your own hands, our two great enemies
King Lisuarte and Amadis of Gaul, are at such
mter discord, that there can be uo other issue-

D 4



80



than a great battle^ and the destrucfion of one,
or peradventure of both. Now if you will heark^
en to my advice, you will not only recover the
loss, which by following my counsel heretofore,
you have suffered j but your kingdom shall be
greatly increased, and the possessions of all us
who desire your service. Friend Arcalaus, re-*
plied King Aravigo, the length of way which
you have travelled, and your manifest fatigue
make me well believe what you tell me -, but let
me hear it more at length, for never was it in my
will because of adversity to desist from such enter-
prizes as become the greatness of my person.

Then Arcalaua related bow Amadis had taken
Oriana from the Romans^ and carried her to the
Firm Island. And I would give you to know,^
said he, that this Amadis was one of those Knighta
of the Serpent who were against us in the battle
against the other six Kings ; he it was who wore
the golden helmet, and who by his great prow*
ess wrested the victory from your hands. Now
as Amadis on the one hand and King Lisuarte
on the other, will gather together all the force
they can, and as the Emperor himself will come
in person to revenge the great insult which he
hath received^ you may well judge what dcstruc-.



81



tioA there will be in the battle between them.
If therefore you will suromon your companionB'
I will bring you for allies fiarsinan^ Lord of San-
suena, the son of that Barsinan whom Kin^
Lisuarte put to death in Liondoo, and moreover
all the great lineage of that good Knight Dardan*
the Proud^ whom Amadis slew in Windsor^ and
they will be a company of right good Knights.
Moreover I will bring the King of the Deep Island^
who escaped with thee from the battle. We Will*
station ourselves so that after they shall have
fought their battle^ we may fall upon them and
destroy them all^ the conquerors as well as the
conquered, without difficulty or danger ; so that
by this greal victory all Britain will be subjected
to you, and your royal power shall be raised above
the power of any Emperor upon earth. Look to
it now King ! whether for so Uttle toil and peril
you will fofego such glory and such dominion.

To all this King Aravigo lent a willing ear.
Friend Arcalaus, he replied^ you tell me great
things, and though I had resolved to tempt For-
tune no more, great folly would it be to reject so
fair an opportunity. I will prepare my friends-
and vassals, do yon therefore do as^ you have said.
Forthwith Arcalaus departed for Sansuena, and

J)5



82



spake with Barsinan, bidding him remember the
death of his father, and also of his brother Bran -
'dolot> who, being conquered by Don Guilan the
Pensive and carried prisoner to King Lisuarte^ was>
by his command, thrown headlong from the Tow-
er> at the foot of which his father had been burnt.
He told him li Ice wise that the former enter prize
bad succeeded, and that his father would have
been King of Britain, he having made both Lisu-
arte and his daughter prisoners, whei^ aU was re--
covered from him by that traitor Amadis. Now
Barsiuan was young and haughty by nature, and
in his evil disposition resembled his father. Ar«
calaus therefore lightly prevailed on him to join
in this confederacy. With small persua^on too,
in like manner, did he win the King of the Deep-
Island, and all the lineage c^ Dardan the Proud :
this did he as secretly as he coul^, and exhorted
them to have their foEce ready for the occasion.



8^



CHAPTER 16.



After Don Quadragante and Hon Brian had*
parted from Don Orumedan^ thej proceeded to*
the shore^ and there embarked to carry their ti*^
dings to the Firm Island. The first day they
voyaged on with prosperous weather, but at nighl
the sea began to rage,, and so great a tempest
ttnose that the sailors lost all command of the ship*
and they were driven they knew not whither^
expecting to be swallowed up by the waves.
Thd^ they drove along all night, in sufficient
fear, for in dangers like these neither arms not
odnrage avail aoght ; and when the day brok«:
and the sailors could look about tbem^ they found
ttiey were near the Kingdom of Sobradisa where
the fair Queen Briohnia reigned. At this time
was the storm abated, and as they were about
to torn to their right conrse^ they saw on the



84



right a ship marveUousI/ great. Now as that
ship was so swift and manageable that they appre-
hended no danger even though this should prove
an enemy they resolved to wait her coming up,
and when she drew nearer^ th^ thought they had
never seen so goodly a ship, nor so large, nor so
richly ornamented, for the sails were all of silk,
and every part was covered with rich cloths,
and they could see upon the deck Knights and
Damsels all bravely attired. Much did Don
Quadra gante and Don Brian marvel at this sight»
and they could not imagine who came in her, so
they put out a boat, and sent a Squire to ask
whose ship it was.

The Squire did as he was commanded, and one
of Ihe Knightf answered that Queen Briolania
was aboard, on her way to the Firm Island.
God be thanked, quoth the Squire at that, they
who sent me to atk will be right glad of such ti-
dings! Good Squire, cried the Damsels, tell us if it
please you who be they ? Ladies, he replied, they
are two Knights who are voyaging to the same
port as yourselves, but by the fortune of the sea
have been driven hither, where what they have
here'met will well requite them for their fatigue,
they will make themselves known as soon fis I



85

return, therefore I need say no more. Fall joy-
ful! were those Knights when the Squire returned
and told them into what company they had fal-
len> and they brought their ship nearer to the
other vessel. And when they were come nigh
the Damsels knew them^ having seen them when
they were with their mistress at the Court of
King Lisuarte ; so they ran joyfully to tell the
Queen how they had met two Knights^ great
friends of Amadis« Don Quadragaute and Don
Brian of Monjaste. She hearing this went out
from her apartment to bid them welcome^ for she
had heard from her high steward Tantiles^ how
these Knights had been sent from the Finn
Island to Lisuarte. By the time she came out
they were already on board, and went to kiss her
hand, but not sufiering that, she put one arm
round each and thus awhile embraced them^
saying. Sirs and my good friends I thank God
for this meeting, than which nothing could have
delighted me more, unless it had been to have
seen Amadis of Gaul, whom as ye know I am
so much m duty bound to love. Now tell me
how ye have sped ? Tliey then tdd her all that
had past, and . how no hope of any accord with
King Lisuarte remained, and how they had been
driven by the storm, but now said they, we



8ff



think oarselves happy to have been so driveir,
since we caa now serve and protect you on your
voyage. I too, replied the Queen, had my fears^
during that siorm, for certes, I thought we-
sever could have outlived it, but my ship is large
and stout, and my auchors and cables strong^,
and . it phased God that we neither dragged nor
broke them. I knew from my high Steward
Tantiles that you were gone on this embassy,
and knowing how fortunate King Lisuarte hath<
been, judged that he would continue to presume
upon his fortunes. J have therefore summoned-
all my vassals and called upon my friends for help,,
and having left Tantiles- to assemble and conduct
the force, thought that it would be well mean-
time to go visit the Princess Oriana- at the Fimx<
Island, and abide with her the ehance which it
may please God to send us. This is the reason
why you have met me here, and I am right glad^
that we shall proceed together. Lady mine, re-*
plied Don Brian, from one «o fair at you and of
such high degree, nothing but what is virtuouft
and noble can be expected, and such we find'
in your doings. The QnecB then desired that
they would order their vessel to keep company
with hers^ and they themselves remain on board.
with her, so they were well lodged oo board



87

Queen Briolania's s&ip, and ate at her table; and
thus tbey sailed pleasantly over the seas.

Now you must know that when the Uncle of this
Queen Briolania^ Abist^os, was slain with his two
sons by Amadis and Agrayes, in vengeance for
the death of his brother, whom he had treache-
rously killed, he had yet another son left, who^
being but a child, was by a Knight carefully
brought up. This son was now a young Knight
of great hardihood and prowess, as had in many
encounters been proved -, and though for long
lime he was so young that he thought of nothing
but following arms and increasing his honour,
yet now certain servants of his father had told
him that he ought, to take vengeance for his
death, and either recover the kingdom which by
right was his, or else procure such compensa-
tion as might be worthy of his birth. So this
young £.night who was called Trion was now
always ruminating on what these servants told
him, and watching fair occasion to put in practice
his desires, and now knowing how Amadis, wkom
he regarded as the main let of his ambition, was
engaged with King Lisuarte, he thought he.
would have no leisure to direct his attention to
any thing but hia own great danger. He there*



1



8S



fore having understood the departure of Queen^
Briolania, and that she went with so small a cona-
pany that she had in her ship not more than twen«
tj mqn at arms, and among them none of great
prowess, he went out from a Castle which he-
possessed, which Castle was all that Abiseos
possessed before he murdered his bvother, and
gathered together his friends, not telling them for
whatenterprize, and having collected fifty men at
arms, and certain archers and cross-bowmen
beside;, he fitted out' two ships and put to sea^
with design to take the Queen, and to obtain
from her a share of the kingdom, or if he saw a
favourable opportunity recover the whole. He
knew the course she was steering, and one even-
ing came out to intercept her.

The sailors seeing these two ships coming toward
them, told the Queen ; immediately Don Quad-
ragante and Don Brian went on deck, and seeing
that the ships were bearing down upon them, gave
order that the men should arm 5 this the men did;
though with little apprehension of danger, and con-^
tinned to hold their course. The others were now
come so nigh that their voices might be heard;
Then Trion cned out aloud. Knights who are in
yonder ship, tell Queen Briolanta that her cousin



89

TrioD is here^ and would speak with her^ and bid
her order her people to make no resistance, for
else not one of them shall escape death. When
the Queen heard this she was greatly dismayed^
and said^ Slrs^ this is the greatest enemy that I
have in the world, and he would not venture upon
this without great cause, and a strong company.
My good Lady, replied Quadragante^ take you no
fear^ please God we will soon chastise his folly.
He then ordered answer to be made, that if Trion
would come alone to see the Queen he should
willingly be admitted. Since this is your answer
quoth Trion, I shall come against your will.
Then he ordered a Knight who had been one of
bis father's servants to ^bear down in the one
vessel and board the Queen's ship on one side
and he would do the same on the other. Don
Brian seeing the ships separate guessed what was
their purpose, and bade Quadragante with half
the men look to the defence on one side, as he
would on the others accordingly thus it was done,
and Don Quadragante had the side which Trion
himself attacked, and Brian was opposed to the
other Knight. Quadragante then bade his peo-
ple stand forward so that he might not be seen,
and he told them not to prevent Trion from en-
tering if he should attempt it. Anon the shi^



90



was hotly attacked on both sides^ for the as-
satlants, knowing nothing of these Knights of
the Firm Island, thought that no resistance
could be made which cooid be any way dan-
gerous. Immediately Trion, who was full of
confidence and eager for success, leaped .on
board ; the Queen*8 people gave way as they
had been directed, and Don Quadragante seeing
him fairly on board then came forward. He a»
you have heard in the second part of this history
was hugfe of stature, and when Trion beheld him,
he well knew that he was not such an enemy^
as he had expected to meet, howbeit hi^ heart
did not foil, and he made at him bravely ; they
gave each other such strokes that fire fled from,
their helmets and swords, but Don Quadragante
was the stronger man^ and laid on such a load, that
Trion*s sword dropt from his hand, and he fell
upon his knees.. Quadragante then looked round,
and seeing that the enemies were crowding on
board, he bade his men take charge of that
Knight, and went among the other assailants,,
the first whom he met he smote so soundly on
the head that he had no need of a surgeon, the
others seeing their Leader taken and this other
Knight slain, and how manfully Quadragante
vas bestirring himself among them, strove to



91



get back into their own ship, so that in tbeir
fear some were drowned, ^nd many were slain,
and the rest driven out of the vessel. Qnadra-
gante/then looked and saw that Don Brian was
on board the other ship making great slaughter
among his enemies and he sent more of his men
to his assistance, waiting himself to see if the
attack would be renewed* With this help Don
Brian speedily became master of the other vessel^
for he had already slain the Knight who com-
manded her, and the men now cried out for
mercy, so that he gave orders that no further
slaughter should be made.

All this while was Queen Briolania and her wo-»
men in their cabin, on their knees beseeching
God to preserve thera. Presently one of her
peo})le carae and said, come out hady and see
how Trion is made prisoner and all his men de-
feated, for these Knights of the Firm Island have
done such wonders in arms as no others could
hare atchieved. When the Queen heard this
she was as rejoiced as you may well suppose, and
she lifted up her hands and said, blessed be the
Lord Almighty that at such a time and for such
a purpose he sent me these Knights ! but from
Amadis and his friends, nothing but good fortune



92



can befall me ! She then went out and said Do»
Quadragante> greatly am I beholden to God and to
you for this service ! certes both my person and
kingdom were in great peril. He answered> my
good Lady here is your enemy> command that jus-
tice may be done upon him. When Trion beard
this he feared for his life^ and knelt down before
ber> saying, mercy Lady ! that I may not be slain !
I beseech you remember your own goodness^
and that I am of your blood, and that though I
have now offended 1 may yet hereafter serve you.
To this the Queen who because of her noble
nature had compassion on him, replied, Trion,
not for your own desert, I will save your life till
I have consulted with these Knights concerning
you, and she ordered him to be secured in aa
apartment.

]Jy this Don Bvian of Monjaste came up, and the
Queen embraced him and asked how he fared }
Kight well^ he replied, and full glad that it has
been my good fortune to do you any service ; one
wound I have received, but thank God it is not
dangerous. He then showed her how an arrow
had gone through his shield and part of his arm.
The Queen then with her fair hands drew oat
the arrow as gently as she could, and helped ta



93



disarm him^ and he was cilred as he had often
been of worse wounds. Glad were they all of
their victor/; and they saw Trion*s ship was
making her escape as fast as she could, and not
staying to pursue her they held their course for
the Firm Island.

When they entered the haven, it so happened
that Amadis with the roost part of the Knights
were riding on their palfreys in the plain below,
the Castle, as tb^ were wont to do, and seeing
these ships put to land, they rode to the shore to
know what they were. Presently they met the
Squires of Quadragante and Don Brian coming to
announce their arrival and when they reached
the shore they bade their friends wekx>me, and
Don Brian said, «peaking from the ship, we are
come back richer than we went, but as for you
poor people, you are shut up here ! At that they .
all laughedj and bade him show the riches of
. which he was so proud. A boat then pot out
and they and the Queen entered it and were put
to laud. Then all the Knights alighted and went
to kiss her hand, but she lovingly embraced,
them. Amadis then came and would have kissed
her hand, but she lovingly embraced him, and
lleld him so long as if she would never have let .



94



liim go, and the tears ran down her cheeks for
pure pj at seeing him^ for since the battle with
King Lisuarte and King Cildadan^ when she
was at Fenusa she had never seen him^ and
though she had now no thought of ever hav-
ing him for her husband, yet 1^ was the Knight
in the world whom she loved best^ and for
.whose sake she would willinglj risk her person
and her kingdom; and when she let him go
she coukl scarcely speak for joy. Many thanks
do I owe to Giod, Lady> said Amadis, that he has
brought me where I can once more see you
whom I have so much desired to see ; and at this
time are you more welcome than ever, for great
pleasure will the sight of you be to these Knights,
and yet greater to your friend the Princess Oriana,
for I believe there is no other person in the
worid whose coming would so much rejoice her
as yours. She answered, for this reason my good
Lord have I left my kingdom ; chiefly to see
you> which was the thing in the world that I
most desired. God knows the sorrow which I
endured so long a time that I could learn no
tidings of you, earnestly as I enquired ! And
DOW, as soon as my High Steward brought me
your letter^ I then thought it best to come with
all speed to see you and that noble Lady of whom



95



you speak, for now is the tiaae that all her friendt
and servants should manifest the love they bear
towards her. But in great danger should I have
been had it not been for the succour of these
Knights, as they will inform you. .

By this were all her women and attendants land-
ed, and they placed her on such a palfrey as was
becoming such a personage, and proceeded to«
wards the tower where Oriana dwelt. Greatly
was that Princess delighted to hear of her arrival,
and she desired Mabilia and Grasinda and the
oither Princesses to go and meet her in the garden,
while she and Queen Sardamira remained to
receive her in her apartment. Queen Sardamira
seeing how much they were all lejoiced at this
news, said to Oriana, who is this whose coming
is noatter of so great joy ? A Queen, replied she,
the fairest in her person as well as the goodliest
in her fame that lives, as yoa shall presently see*
When Briolania came to the garden^ gate, and
saw so many Ladies and in such attire, she mar«
veiled much, and thought herself happy that she
had resolved to come there, and turning to the
Knights she said, good Sirs, God be with ye !
these Ladies will now release ye of your charge;
aod smiling sweetly she alighted and went m



96



aod then the gate was closed. Those Ladies
then courteously saluted her^ and Grasinda was
greatly surprized at her exceeding beauty, inso-
much that had she not seen Oriana she should
have surely thought that no woman in the world
could be her peer. So they led her to the Tower
and when she and Oriana saw each other, they
met with open arms and embraced each other
with great love. - Then Oriana led her* to Queen
Sardamira saying. Lady Queen speak to^theOoeea
Sardamira, and honour her for she well desenres
it; so they with great counesy saluted each the
other, each observing such demeanouras became
her high rank; they then seated themselves on-
the estrado, Oriana being between them^ and Ihe
other Ladies seated around. Good my Lady,
said Oriana, great courtesy is this that you should
come to visit me from so £ir a land, and much
do I thank you, ior such a journey would not>
bav« been undertaken but for great love^ Lady^
replied the Queen, ungrateful should I deserve
to be accounted, if at this time I had not mani- .
fested to all the world the desire I have to da yoa
honour and service ; , especially as the business .
so nearly concerns Amadb of Gaul, to whom
you know how greatly I am beholden. 1 have
left TantDesto colledail the£xceof my donii-



97



mons, and meanwhile believe that I ought to
conie and bear you company till this business wa3
ended^ which may it please our Lord to end as
you would desire. May he do so in his mercy!
replied Oriana, I hope Don Quadragante and
Don Brian will bring good tidings of some ac«>
cord with' my father! but Briolania knowing
that in truth they brought none> did not re-
ply.

Thus they continued in discourse till at length
the Damsel of Denmark said, remember Lady
that the Queen is just come from her voyage,
and will be .glad to sup and retire to restj
it is time that you should take her to your
apartment, ^ as she is to be your guest, Oriana
then having asked if all was ready, took
leave of Queen Sardamir^ and Grasinda, who
went to their apartments, and went with Bri^
olania to her chamber. When they were alone
Briolania asked who was that goodly Lady with
Queen Sardamira, and being told it was Grasinda
and all that she had done for Amadis, wretch
that I am, she replied, that I should not have
known this when she accosted me ! now I pray
you when we have supt let her be sent for, that
I may honour, her as she deserves for the good

VOL IV. E



98



service she rendered Amadis. So after tbef
had supt, the Damsel of Denmark went for
Grasinda> and Bridania courteously excused her-
self that she had not with more kindness saluted
ber» not knowing the great help which Amadis
had from her received , and as they conversed
together, Grasinda told them how she had first
known Amadis when under the name of the
Knight of the Green Sword he had wrought
such atchievements in Romania and throughout
all Germany. I was so well pleased with him,
said she^ that though I was so great a l^ady in
that land, and he appeared only a poor Errant
Knight, I should have been well content to take
hinv in marriage, and should have thought no
Queen in the world equal to me in good fortune*
But seeing him so thoughtful and overcome by
so deep a n^lancholy, I suspected that the
cause could be nothing but love, and therefore
I asked Gandalin, who knew the drift of my
question and at one time denied it, and then told
me that he suspected it might be so, this he said
to divert me from any farther thought of that
which could not be brought to pass, and for that
I thanked him much, and from that hour enter-
tained such thoughts no longer. Brio)ania hear-
ing this smiled at Oriana> and said methinks I/ady



this Knight spreads this disorder farther than we
imagined ! rememher what he told lu at the Cas«
tie of Miraflores. So thus they communed till
it was the hour of rest^ Grasinda then took leave,
and Briolania slept with Mabilia in a bed which
was made near Oriana's;



t2



100



CHAPTER 17<



On the morrow all the Knights assembled to hear
mass and to learn what answer Don Qaadragante
and Don Brian brought from Lisuarte. Wheft
they were met together after mass, Qaadragante
said, good Sirs, our answer was so brief that I
have nothing to say, except that you ought to thank
God that with so great justice and reason you
may gain great renown, and prove the virtue of
your noble hearts. King Lisuarte will listen to no-
thing but rigour. He th^n related all that past and
how he knew that the King had sent to the Empe-
ror of Rome and to all his friends for aid. At
this Agrayes answered, who was nothing grieved
at this issue, and had so long moderated his anger
only in compliance with Oriana, Certes good Sirs,
I always thought it would be more difficult to
obtain security for the Princess and maintain our



101



own hoDoiirs^ than to raise bdp for the war;
and for my own part I will now tdl you that I
am better pleased to have war, than that we
ahoold hive made accord which might have easily
been broken j for King Lisuarte and the Emperor
are powerful Princes, and can at any time soon
collect their force, which we, who derire our
succours from many and distant places cannot so
easily bring together : better therefore is open wai
than so dangerous a peace 1 They all exchdmed
at this that what Agrayes said was true, and that
they ought to assemble their army without delay
and give Lisuarte battle in his own kingdom.
Now had Amadts all along been fearful lest ac*
cord should have be^n made with the King, for
though his honour would have been secured there-
by, yet should he have been obliged to deliver up
Oriana, who would in that case have again been
where he could have no means to see her, and
that to him would have been worse than death j so
that what the Embassador and Agrayes said, re-
joiced him more than if he had been miade Lord
of the World. Sir my Cousin, quoth he, your
acdons have been full chivalrous^ and greatly
ought we who are of your lineage to thank God
that we have among us a Knight like you, so able
to defend his honour in danger, and to increase

£ a



102

it in cdtmsel ! as yon and ihcst Chacii have «o
wdl detefmined^ it only remains for me to iblloifr
your will. Angriote of EstravAus wbo was a
brave Koight and of good keart, and who troly^
loved Amadis, rightly judged that though he .said
Bothing of his opinion, yet was he well pleased thai
no acxx)rd had been made : and this he thought
proceeded /rom his love of danger and arntt,* nol
suspecting the true causey he therefore said^ Sirs>
ye ought all to be well contented with the reaull
of this embassy^ for war is not t>nly oafer thaQ
peace, but more to ear hon6ar» and we shaU
leave a fame behind us in this world, as immor<*
tal as our souls will be in the next \ let o$
then lose no time in BummooSng all our force.
So having thua determined they all went to their
Boeal,



103



CHAPTER 18.



iAiadh*H*ii«B»



Saelk good speed had iMbister Hdisabad on hi»
f^y$ige, that he arrived safely at the land of hi»
Lady Qrasinds, and there having summoned all
the Chiefs of the land^ he prodnced his powers'
and etitteated theta to fdlill titiir Lady's wiHf
they all replied that they should with good will
accomplish it> and forthwith gave order to assem*
ble horsemen^ and arche^s^ and cross-bowmen,
ahd equipped what vessels they had and set about
building others. When the Master saw how ac-
tively they made these preparations, he left a
young Knight by name Libeo, who was his ne-
phew^ to superintend the armament, and put to
sea himself and went to Constantinople. When
he arrived at the Palace they told him the Em-
peror Was talking with his good men> so he went
la and kndt down and kissed the £mperor*s handy

S.4



104

'wbo received him courteously, as one whom he
knew and held for a good man. The Master
then gave hiro the letter of Amadis, but when
the Emperor learnt that the Knight of the Green
Sword was that Amadis of Gaul of whom he bad
heard so much, he said, Master I must complain
of 70U, if you knew the name of this Knight and
did not tell me, for I am vexied that a man of
such high lineage and so renowned should come
to my court and be by me honoured as only a
Kiright errant. Sir^ replied the Master, I swear
by my holy orders, that I never kn&w who hc&
was till he left oH* the title of the Greek Knight,
and discovered himself to Grasinda. How ! quoth
the Emperor, di^ be call himself the Greek
Knight after he went from hence ? What, cried
the Master, have ye not heard of the great things
which the Greek Knight atchieved ? and then bo
related how he had won the crown for Grasinda,
and in wb^t manner he had quelled the pride of
^he Romans, who despised him, thinking him to
be a Greek. Eight glad were all (hey who were
present to hear such tidings. Now then, said
be Emperor, deliver your bidding. With that
Master Helisabad related all that had fallen oat^
and besought him on the part of Amadis, that if
King Lisuarte instead of coming to reasonable



105

acconl, should come against Urn ^th the Em-*
peror of Rome and a great power, he woald bo
pleased to assist him in defending the wrongecl
Princess, he being one of the principal Ministers
whom God has appointed to maintain justice
Yipon eartW

When the Emperor heard this he saw that it was
a weighty matter, for he knew the worth of King
Xisuarte, and bow highly he prized his honour ;
aiid he knew also the haughty spirit of £1 Pa tin,
■how much more he was guided by pride than by
reason. Yet considering the justice of the canse>
and how Amadis had travelled so far to see him,

• and the promise be bad made, albeit it were made
'. lightly and with no stKb meaning as was now

• given to it, and caHing to mind also the wrongs
, lie had formerly received from the £mperor |)f
i Rome, he replied, you have told me great thiogSs

Master ! and irom a* good num Uke you it is to be be*

lieved y since then the brave Amadis .hath netd

of my succour, I will give it him as foily as I

promised, even as the word of so great a man givea

to so renowned a Knight ought to be accomplish*

cd. I never yet began thing which I did not carry

through to the end. Then were all they rejoiced

who heard, and above all Grastiles the nephew

ft6



106

of ibe Emperor, who knelt down ftnd besough^
that be might go with the succour. Good
Nephew replied the Emperor, I am well pleased
that yoU should, a&d I command you and the
Marquis Saluder to take charge of providing such
a fleet as becomes my rank, and if need be, ye
shall go in it, and give battle to the Emperor of
Borne. You may well think how Master Hel7-
sabad rejoiced to receive such an answer. Sir
said he, for what you have said, I kiss yoor hand
on the part oi the Knight who sent me, and for
myself who bears the embassy, being such as lam^
I kiss your feet. • Now then I pray you, for I
have much to do, give me leave to depart, and if
the Emperor of Rome should send bis forces, do
you dispatch yours in time to meet them. Go ia
God's nameMftster! replied the Emperor, leave
the rest to me, if need be you shall see who 1 am,
and how I esteem Amadis. The Master then
took leave and returned lo the Land of his Lady
Grasinda.



lOT



CHAPTER 19.



e



Joy^My was Gflndalia welcomed in Gaul because'
•f the good tidings which he brought of AraadiSf
of whom for loug tiaie nothing had been known.
Presently he took King Perion apart>. and told all
that he had been sent to say» Now because this
£ing was so brave that he feared no danger how
great soever^ especially if it regarded this his soa
who waft like a shining mirror in the world,, and
whom he so dearly loved,, he replied, Gandalin
M^batyou desire shall speedi^ be done^ and if yoix
•bould see your Lord before I see hin3« say to him
i)hat I should not have held hioi for a Knight if
Jie had suffered that wrong to go> unredressed^
Ibr such coterpnzes are appointed for such hearts^
^s hisr. . I say unto you that if King Lisuarte will
not be brought to reason, it shall be to his owa
ktta. But take heed that you say nothing, of this

\9



108

to my son Galaor, who it here so iU that we bare
often thought him more dead than alive, and
even now he is in great danger ', nor to his com-
rade Norandel who is come hither to see him,
for 1 will communicate it to him. Gandalia
replied, I will bear it in mind, and glad am I
that you have thus forewarned me. Go now
to him, said the Kiog, and tell him news of his
brother.

Gandalin then went to Galaor's chamber, Whon>
he found so weak and sick thist he wondered at
seeing him, and he knelt down to kiss his l^and j
then Galaor looked and knew that it was Gan-
dalin, and the tears came into his eyes for joy. —
Welcome friend Gandalin, what news bringest
thou of my Lord and Brother Amadis ? Sir,
replied the Squire, he remains well and in bealtk
in the Firm Island, and knows nothing of your
malady, neither did I till my Lord the King told
me thereof. I came hither by his command to
inform the King and Queen of his rcttim, and
greatly will he be troubled whfen he learns what
plight you are in, whom he loves and csteetna
more than any other of his lineage. Norandoi
then came up and embraced him, and asked for
Amadis. Gandalin said to him the sam« as he



109

had told Gakor : and he related some of the ad*
ventures which he had atchicved in the Islands
of Romania, and in those foreign parts thereabout.
Sir, quoth Norandcl to Don Galaor, reason is it
that at such news you should take heart and shake
off your sickness^ that \re may go sec this Knight >
as God shall help me, he is so excellent a Knight,
that all they who hare any worth in them ought
to think little of the toil of the longest journey
to see him- While they were thus talking,
the King came in, and taking Norandel by the
hand, after some talk, led him out of the chamber $
my good friend, then said he, it behoves you with-
out delay to go to the King your father, for by
what I team he will stand in need of your help, and
6f all his friends j but say.nothing of this to yous
friend Galaor, for it would excite in him such
agitation that much harm might come of it, see-
ing how weak he is. Norandcl answered, the
SHiviGe Sir ef so good a man as you^ ought to be
followed, without enquiry into its cause, I will
take leave of Galaor to-mglU, and put to sea to-
morrow, for my ship is ready. This the King did
that Norandel might fulfil his duty toward his
fether, and also, that he might not see the prepa-
xations for war which were going on.



lid

Thflt day were they more ih hope of Ddh ^aor;:
by reason of the joy he had for the tidiogs of
his brother. Grandalin also said to the Queen^
what Amadid had bidden him ; and she replied,,
that she wotild do all that he desired : but Gan*:
dalin my friend, said she, I am much troubled
at this news, for my son must now be in great
care and hereafter in great danger of his person^
Fear nothing. Lady, Gandalin made answeir, he
will raise such force that neither King Lisuarte
nor the Emperor of Rome will dare attack him^
May ^ it please Grod, quoth she, that it be so !'
When night came, Norandel said to Don Galaofj
Sir, I must now depart, fbc as your illness is so
lingering and I can nothing pro^t you, it is bet-^
ter that 1 should attend to other things. You
know it is not long since I have been a Knight^.
tioT have I yet gained honour to be esteemed a
man of worth by good men. The newsof yout
malady ealled me from ,a quest which I had ub-^
dertaken when I left the King my father's house,
dnd I must now go where I am needed. God'
knows this parting grieves me, but if it please hiav
while I am performing this, fl-om which I cannot
be excused, you will recover, and then I will
return to you, and we will go together to seek ad^
ventures. At this Galaor sighed with eiceeding;



Ill



ft>nrow,— -Aince tt must be so, yoa roust obej the
will of God, and if perchance joxx go to the court
of my Lord your father, kiss his hand for ine>
and tell him that I remain at his service, though
as you see, more dead than alive. Norandel thea
took his leave^ and on the morrow sailed t»
Great Britain.



112



/
i



CHAPTER 20.



Lasindo the Squire of Don Bruneo of Bonamar
arrived where the Marquis sqjournedj and when
he delivered his Master*^ bidding to him and to
Bfanfil^ so grieved was Branfil that he had not
been with those Knights at the rescue of Oriana,
that he fain would have killed himself> so he
knelt down to his father^ and earnestly entreated
him to do what his brother requested. The
Marquis^ who was a good Knight, and who knew
the great friendship which his sons bore tb Ama-
dis and all his lineage^ and the honour which
they had thereby gained, made answer, trouble
liot yourself my son, for I will compleatly do
what he desires, and if need be, will send you to
bim with such succour, that your's shall not be
the worst company there. For this Bra nlil kissed
bis hand; and orders were then immediately



lis



given to prepare a fleet and forces j for tbia
Marquis was a great Lord and wealtbyj and had
many good Knights in his Lordship, and man/
soldiers all well equipped.



114



CHAPTER 21.



When Ysanjo the Knight of the Firm Island
arrived in the kingdom of Bohemia ai^ ^ave the
letter of Amadis ta King Tafinor^ there is no
roan can tell the pleasure which the King felt»
You are welcome here Knight, said he, and I
thank God for the message which you have
brought me y you shall see with what good will.
I receive it, and whether or no the trouble of
your journey was well employed. Then he call*
ed for his son Grasandor and said to him. Sir,
read this letter, which the Knight of the Green
Sword hath sent me, for you were witness of the
service he did me, and how he delivered me from
the most cruel and perilous war in which ever
King was engaged, in which by reason of the
great power and unreasonable pride of the Ro-^
man Emperor, both you and I should have beea



115

undone and belike bronght to death but for his
succour. And know that this Knight is that
Amadis of Graul^ of whom such renown is gone
abroad through all the world. As soon as Ghra-
sandor had read the letter, and heard the bidding
of Ysanjo : he said, O Sir, what joy it is to my
heart that this noble Knight should now stand in
need of your help, and see the sense, and the
gratitude which you £sel for bis past services!
I beseech you let Count Galtines remain to lead
the succour, and give me leave to go immedi-
ately with twenty Knights to the Firm Island^
ior it will be greatly to my bonoar to be in oom-
paay of such Knights as ore there assembled* Let
at be so, iffi^ wish it, replied the King, and Ood
^end you a good voyage, and that we with oar
whole kiagdom, may repay bka the siicGOiir
which be with his single person afforded us ! So
Prince Grasandor, the h^ir of King Tafinor of
Bohemia, chose cut twenty Knights^ and pntta
sea> and sniled towards the Firm Island*



lis



CHJPTER 22*



Landin the Nephew of Don Qaadragante ar-
rived in Ireland^ and spake secretly with the
'Queen^ as he had been enjoined to do. And
when she beard of the great discord> albeit she
knew that her father King Abies of Ireland
had been slain by the hand of Amadis^ as it is
written in the .first part of this history, and
though she bore in her heart that enmity which
'in such cases is usnal^ yet she considered it
was better to remedy present evils then resent
the past. Therefore she spake with those whom
she trusted, and so devised that great aid was
made ready for her uncle Don Quadragante
without the knowledge of King Cildadan. Thus



11^

ss 70a have heard were all these yarioas. forces
raised, ^nd ready when they should be needed,
tiaving snch good will and eagerness as they
mrho would be conquerors.



118



CHAPTER 23.



Such speed did Don Guilan the Pensire make,
that in twenty days after his departure from Great
Britain he arrived at Rome. He found the Em*
peror Patin ready with a great train^ and great
preparations to receive Oriana, whom he every
day expected, for his cousin Salustanquidio and
Brondajel of the Rock had written to inform him
they were dispatched, so that he had made readj
for her reception, and marvelled much at their
long delay. Don Guilan armed as he was at all
points, except his head and hands, entered the
Palace, and knelt before the Emperor and kissed
his hand, and gave him the letter which he had
brought. The Emperor knew him well, having
often seen him in the house of King Lisuarte, at
what time he returned there badly wounded,
with the stroke which Amadis had given him



119

hy night in the forest, as joa have hear4 in &e
second book of this history ; and he said to him,
yon are welcome Don Goibn^ I suppose you ate
come with your Lady Qrianii^ tell me where she
and all my people tarry ? Sir, replied the Knight
she and your people are in a place neither be-
fitting them nor you ! read this letter and then
I will tell you more than you expect to hear.
When the Emperor had read the letter, being
impatient by nature, he exclaimed, now tell me
before all thef e what you have to say, for X can
Jiave patience no longer.

But when Don Guilan had finished his speech
he exclaimed, O wretched Emperor of Rome»
if thou dost not chastise this, thoo deserves! not
to live another hour in this world! and then he
turned to the Knight and said, is it certain tba/t
Oriana is taken away and my cousin slain ? Certain
beyond all doubt, replied Don Guilan, all ha^
passed as I have told you. Go back again Knight,
then said the Emperor, and tell the King your
Master, that I take upon myself this injury and the
vengeance due : s^d that he need do nothing
more than look on and behold what I will do,
for if I wished to be allied with him, it was>not to
give him care oar )i^ubk> but to i^cvenge hiip in



120

^taiy wrong that might be wrought him. Sir^ said
Don GaHai), you make answer like a mighty
Prince as you are, and a Knight of great conrage,
yet you will have to do with such men that all
King Lisuarte's force will be needed as well as
yours. The King my Master hath ever till hgw
taken full satisfaction from those who have wrong*
«d him, and so he will continue to do. Since
you have given me so good a dispatch I will re-
turn without delay, and see that all things need-
ful be made ready. With that he look his leave
and went his way, not well content in heart, for
he was a right noble and well -conditioned Knight^
Bnd when he saw how arrogantly, and with how-
little thought that Emperor spake, it grieved him
to the heart to see the King his Master allied
"with such a man, from whose company, unless
-by great good fortune, nothing but shame and
loss of honour was to be expected. And many
times he lamented as he went along, the great
loss which King Ltsuarte had suffered by hi^
own fault, in losing Amadis and all those good
lAen of bis lineage 'who for the sake of Amadis
had formerly been in his service, and were now^
become his enemies.

After much toil he reached Gbreat Britain, and



lit



foid tbe lt% th^th6 £Ki(l6f«tf <^dt {^dlttg te
i^t fbk'tk a^th all «ii«ed. t]^ gtdift Sil-, sdtd he«

tW ^111- ^rahcfe wKth thrs m^ may be ltd ydiit

hditCfOf^ fbt as OM dhdl h^ tti€, t Mi titfte
pleased tlHth hU ^itdgaAc^, anA baH etptct hd-
tMflg go6d fr^Yfi afty fofce whi6h dtffh &uch K
Le^e^f. Il3f6 Ring aAs^crtd, ^D<5ri CJullal! 1 t«.
joice dt four s^^ retiirh ! bavii^yoli and stibh ^
you in my service, \^e nted notliing mdfe thdtf
the fdr6es 6f thfe fempftror, for you ar6 well M6
to dh-^t both hbn afid khe; but since he hdth
^ivfen yoil such an toswer we must take care to
be so prepared^ that when ht arrives, ht shall not
think so much of his own power as he now does.
So wilh all diligence King Lisuarte prepared hit
forces, for he knew that his enemies were assem-
bling aid from all parts, and that the Eniperor of
Constantinople, and the Kmg of Bohemia, and
King Pcrion of Gaul, and many other Pritices
were raising men 'tp send to the Firm Island, and
tappy he thought himself if they should not seek
him in his own land. He likewise knew how
iCing Aravigo and Barsinan Lord of Sansuena
were arming, and he knew not for what purpose.
At this time Brandoyuas returned, and said that
Kii;ig Cildadan of Ireland was preparing to obey
' his summons, but that Don Galvanes requested

VOL. IV. p



123

\kc would not call upon him to act against Amadb
and his nephew Agrajet; bat if the King would
not be so content, he besought him to set him free
from his homage, and take back the Island of
Mongaza, as had been stipulated, that so long as
he held it he should be the King's vassal, and
when he chose to be so no longer, he might give
up the Island and remain free. The King though
his necessity was so great, yet saw that Don
Galvanes spake with reason, and sent to tell him
he might remain in peace, for though he could not
serve him in this quarrel, there nught come a
tiii^e when he might make amends*

Moreover tidings soon came by Filispind, that
King Grasquilan of Sweden had well received the
embassy, and had promised to come aid the
King, and fight with Amadis, which he had so
long desired to do. The King therefore knowing
what preparations were now made, called for
Giontes .and said to him. Nephew you must needs
go with all speed to the Emiieror Fatin, and tell
him I am well pleased with what he hath said
to me by Don Guilan, and that I am going to my
court at Windsor, because it is near the port where
he will land : there I shall assemble my force, and
he inrill find me encamped, expecting his anivaL



IStl

Saj that I beseedi him to come as speedOy as
possible, finr if at first we can Exceed our enemies
in Bomber* much of the aid which they expect'
will fail. Do not you, nephew, leave Rome till he
comes himself, for that will ha&lcn him. Then
Lisuarte departed for Windsor, and Giontesput to



y 2



1^4



CHAPTER Q4.



You have heard how Prince Grasandor had em*
barked with twenty Knights for the Firm Island ;
now it so fortuned that he fell in by night with the
ship which carried Gionte$ oq his embassy to Rome^
and gave orders to his men to bear up to her,
that he might see who was on board. Giontes hay-
ing none other tlian mariners with him^ and cer-
tain of his servants, could make no resistanccj
and was brought before Grasandor; who asked
bim who he was. He replied, a KDight of King^
Lisuarte, going with his bidding to the Emperor
of Rome ; if for courtesy you will release me, that
I may proceed ou my way, I shall hold myself
obliged, for you have neither cause nor reason
to detain me. Grasandor answered. Knight,
I expect soon to be against the King you speak of,
in aid of Amadis of Gaul^ and am therefore not



125

bovnd to treat aiof of Me peoj^e'itrell i yol thM
1 deal cowrteouily with yovt, and wilMet you de-
fBit, piovtdftd yea tell me your namoi and what
k yoitf cmbttsy to the Brnperer. It would be to
my honour^ and to my ,Ma§ter*8 service^ said
Oiontes^ if I were not asked that question 3 but
lay Embassy ie public^ and I skall do my duty in
avowing it : my naihe is Giontes^ King Lisuarte
\» my Uacfe. I go to bring the Emperor and all
hie ftree as speedily as can be^ to go with the
King my tJncYe against those ^ho have carried
away hisdaugltter Oriana; now' if it please you
let ne depart. You hare spoken like a Knight^
replied Grasandor^ I set you fiee ! and come
^ekly wilft the force 3rou are to bring, for you
-will ted those whom you seek, ready.

-Glontea tiieft wmt his way, and Grasandor imme^
Wisely sent one of his Knights in a vessel which
hx^ brou^t witili him, U> the King his father, to
lelt- him w^at he had leamt, and request him to
ebeetve when the Emperor departed and theft
without ddlay send off Count Galtines widk the
succour, for much to their honour would it be if
they should arrive the first. Grasandor then sail-
ed en, and arrived without let or danger at the
port ef the Tvan Island. When the Tslanders saw

f3



ii6

V

ft ifcij^ come Is tbejr ioJbnned AiDidii> wiio
fixrtbwith se&t to know who came in ber^ hsA
^bm be beard it was Prince Giasandor, ao^ to
tbe King of Bobemia^ be greaily njoked^ and
went to boise^ and (ook ^tb bim IXhi Quad-
lagHUe and Affd:ye8, and rode to wdcome bim.
Wben'tbejr met Ibey emtoK»d eacb oiber like
true friends, and Grasandor after their greeting
told bim bow be bad met Giontes, afid bad sent
to bid tbe succoon proceed ^w^tbont waiting for
&rtber sommons. If all our friends^ ^notb Qna-
dragante> belp ns with- the like good will, little
need we fear tbis danger. Then they rode to tbe
Castle, and Amadis took Grasandor to his i^art-
ment and gave order that bis oompacgr shoold be
weU lodged and provided, and be sent to inform
all bis Knights of the Prince's arrival, that tbqr
nugbt go welcome him -, forthwith thejr all repanv
ed to the apartment of Amadis, being dad ricbl/
in the dress of war, as thejr were ever accustomed
.to be when in time of rest; and when Grasandor
saw so many Kniights whose fame was so spread
abroad, be thought himself greatly bononred tp
be in their company.

JNfow when it was known to what end Giontes
bad been sent to Rome^ messengers were dis«



127

patched wlt&out dehy for all the racoonr, a&i
because it would be tedious to relate how they all
severally sped in their embassy, we will only tell
you ^at they all arrived, and that all the sucooun
embarked and sailed to the Firm Iriand. Hie good
King Perionbrougtit three thousand Knights. King
Tafinor of Bohemia sent one thousand five hundred
Knights with Count Galtines. Tantiles broaght
one dionsand two hundred from Queen Briolania,
Six hundred came with Branfil the brother of Bon
Braneo. Six hundred firom Ireland with Don
Quadragante^s nephew Landis. KingLadasin of
Spain sent two thousand to his son Don Brian of
Monjaste. Don Gandales came fiom Scotland
with fifteen hundred for Agrayes. Hie Emperor
of Constantinople sent eight thousand with his
nephew Gastiles. All these came to the Finn
Mand ; but the first who arrived was King Perion,
by reason that hi« kingdom lay the nearest. If he
was weU received by his sons and by all diose Chiefs
need not be smd. By his advice it was reserved
that all the forces of the Island should go out and
jntch thdr tents upon a plain that lay below the
Castle, which abounded with springs and was siu*-
rounded with trees ; and so socxi as any succours
arrived they were immediately there encamped;

f4



}i9

f 9t who qax) tn^H wbeQ thr^ were at) assembled
n^s^t ][pug])tt sa4 bocset apd arms weie there I
(^ert^ };qa i:pay we^ believe tbat oevcr Iq ooemor^
9f i^i^an vere suipb K.pigl^> ^ so a^c^^ 9Sfuso»l4p4
^Qgctber i" b^^ of apy prji^.

J^v^t- Orian^ 414 nethlag but weep ai)4 oofr^e her il^
i^rtune'tl^at wopld occasiq^ §p gp^t destpictionji
^upless it pleased Go4 i{^ 1)^ oa^i^ to pro^id^aome
i;empd7. AH those )^ea ii^hg were in hpr pom-
pany ^onspled her thp l^st th^ could, saying that
neitl^pr sbp, nor thej \^ho $erve4 ^^ could $tan4
acpuse4 to Qod qr to t^^ world. And i|)beit she
Hrai loth, they madp he? go u© ^ the top of t^e
Tow^r, from whence she CQuld see th^ jj^b a$i4
afi the people who were enpamp^d the^ i ^pd w^e|^
8|ie beheld the pl^n cov^ved with' pe^^te> ^nd sq-
nxany glitterii^ aifins, and so magy teptSj^ ah^
thought all the world were up if^ arms. Tl)fn ythUi^
t^e others we^ all wonderuig ^t the sights Ma^
billa^ seeing th^t ncv^e cqald h^r hfUTj^ i^id) Wk^t
think you^ is there another in tiie w^rld who hfitk
such a servant and frieud as you I O^i^n^ ^Qswer-r
cd. Ah, Laiy, m tr»^ ^pn* vb^* sjwU t 4»4
my heart cani\qt bp^ t^)9. On. 9^e s^e ii^ ^
who. is the light of inj eyei^ ^^ tfa^ie qq^^sc^tioi):
of my poor h»Eut> withqKjU^whom I could notUve«



and on the oAcr i* my feither, to whom, crnel
ks I hare frnmd htm, 1 csmtrot but feel Aat true
love trhich as his child I owe hhn. Wretch
that 1 am, ^vhtcherer of these should pei*ish, I
must be the most unhappy woman that ever
Kiredh and then she wept and wrung her hands.

■

MabiKa took her hands, For God's sake,Ladyt
dtesist fronv this, and put your trust in God f
if eri^ should come, remember that wrongs like
jours cannot be lightly remedied, and thank
God that the sin is not yours. Oriana felt the
truth of this, and was somewhat consoled.

When King Perion saw all the fo^*ces en-
camped, he took both Grasandor and Agrayes
and said' he would go visit Oriana, and^
he bade Amadis and Don Florestan remain
with the army. When .Oriana heard of the
coming of die King, she was greatly pleased,
for she ha^ never seen^ him since he knighted
tixe Child of the Sea by her request at the
house of King Languines of Scotland. She
assembled all her Ladies to receive him ; the
Ring- when he enter^ her apartment courte-
ously saluted her, and she humbly returned the
salutation ; then he addressed the Queens Brio«
lUnia and Sardamira and all the pther Princesses

f5



130

Mni Damsels. Mabilia then came forward and
Imek before him, and would have kissed his
hmdy but he drew her toward him and em-
braced her with exceeding loTe» and said to her,
I>ear Niece, I bring many remembrances from
the Queen your Aunt and from your Cousin
Melicia, as to one whom they greatly esteem and
love. Gandalin will tell you the Queen's bid-
ding, for he remains to come with Melicia^ that
she may keep company with this Lady who so
well deserves it. Then he turned to Oriana and
said. Good my Lady, the same reason that
made me feel for your wrongs, hath bound me
to labour to redress them, and for this am I
come hither. But do you take good heart, and
put your trust in God, for he will help you and
reinstate you in that greatness, which your
own virtue and the justness of your cause do-
serve. Oriana, the while he spoke, looked ear-
nestly at the King ; his person was so goodly,
and he spoke so well, that ^e thought in
herself he well deserved to be the father of
such sons, and that his great renown was but
reasonable. Sir, she replied, what requital can
a poor wretched and distressed damsel like
me make for what you have said I certes none
other than what all those whose injuries you



131

have heretofore redressed, have made, to tell
you that m so 4oing you are senring God, and
mcieasisg the great fame which you have al-
ready won. One thing I beseech yoo. Sir, do
for ni^,— -try every means to bring about peace
with the King my father, for this will please
God in saving the lives of so many as most
needs perish else, and it would make me the-
happiest woman in the world. The King an-
swered^ things are now in such state that this
would be very difficult ; but oftentimes when
enmity appears to be at its extreme, peace is then
procured which could never be obtained be«
fore : and be sure that if it can be, I shall with
all good will procure it, both for the service of
God and for your sake, as one whom I so
much desire to serve. At that Oriana humbly
gave him thanks, like one in whom virtue
abounded more than in any other woman.

While they were thus in talk, Agrayes and
Grasandor conversed with Queen Brlolania
and Queen Sardamira,and OHnda and the other
Ladies ; and when Grasandor saw Oriana and
all her company how excellently fair they were,.
above all that ever he had yet seen or heard of,,
so astonished w?.s he that he knev.* not what to



tin

Majy and he cohU sot but beK«^ dkat 6od

himself had made tiiem wi^i hi« own hand.
And albeit that except Melicxay who.wasBOfr
there present^ thefe was not one wha equalfecfr
die beauty of Oriana, and ^ueen Briohinia and^
01inda» yet was he so pleased with the gaiety-
and grace, and good humour of Mabilia, Uiafr
from that hour was he nerer inclined so to lo^e
and serve any other woman; and dius his heai^*
was taken, and the more he looked at her, ^e
greater his afiection gvew, as is usual in such
Occasions. He being thus disturbed, like a
young man who had never before been out oi
his father's kingdom, now desired Agrayes for
courtesy to tell him the names o£ those ladiee
who were with Orianac Agrayes named them^
all to him, and told him the greatness of dieir
rank. He then asked who Mabilia was, foi?
she was talking with King Perion. Agrayes-
replied she was his sister, and he did not be-
lieve there was a woman iii the worki- of bettet*
nature, nor more beloved by all who knew her.
Grasandor upon this was silent, and thought ii»
his heart assuredly what Agrayes said was true»
and' so in very deed it was, for all who knewt
the Princess Mubilia loved her for her geitde**
ness and gaiet}-.



IflMIt at d^tT^ vttt att eomBtning^ <j)0(ui^
tbB kop0 tft chepr Onaaa^ tnhot oould ftd w>
jojf Qwcea Briol^aisk said to A^vajes^ So»<^
SiB» :|ni mj great £tMDdt I l^ava occasion tcx
«p6ak mtb I)on> QaadM^fanto aad Don Bnan,
of Mbnjastt befera yo«i f I beseeoh yon Ist:
tfaem* come bidtec befofO- you dbpart* Iinino-^
diately- Agrayefr sen^ to call theniy and ivllon*
they came the Qt^ea ltd diem apart wM»
Agrayesy and 9aid» Yo Iraow ftom what im»
lament peri) I was^ delivered by yov,. andiMv
God, and how- ye> gave my oosein Tfiiotk^ ilitO'
my powev whom I now hold pvisoner. £ h^^e*
been pondering- much how to- deal wilh him;
fbr on the one hand, he i»th&son> of Abiseoe
my uncle who so treacherously stew mj fatbeiv
and die seed of so bad a man ought to perish
lest other like* treasons ^ring up from- it^ on
the other hand^ I remeoiber our nearness o^
!Hn» and that children- often difer- greatly froof
tfaeiir fad»ere, and tha^diie^attach whichhemad(s>
iq^n-me wa9Gommfttjed4il:e»young' maui whom
e^l counsellors had advised* I havenot thei«^.
feve known how to-determine> and beseech- you»
a& persons- whose^ prudence always knows what
ought to be done, to tell me your judgment.
To this Don 'Bijaa o{ Mfonjaste- replied) My



220

AajX receii^*^ vmH hrowt horn m^n^ s&ttt f^Kly
MtMfp ycmr hononn Tkan Tkioik best his brew
Wl^r^kMr, and kksad lierkuuiy^ aad^ £ip0m that
tiiiM^ forwavd W bore kimMV so- Ib^U^ii m s^
thkigs^ that hifr s^otheril^ ki* the Mkigdoiii- wae
abMQst lilM h/M* 0wn« Ybtt are fVee tiheii> sakf
shay a«d 1 veqom yo« to t2^» charge ef thee»
B19:' peeplifr wbo are here, andf toehejptha op^rs
#f Amswitis. Gfeady* ^d the Knights ptsase
this actioa o^ ^e ftiv Queen» and gveatijp dkl
t^y hoiie«x» Ttion» as »• trath h« weU> d^
aanred.

King Periea. and the Kiu^ghte now teok )»aTe^
and petHrned* to the ^amp>; they fevadi that?
BalTays e# (t^anante-hadjttstamred wkh twenty
Knights^ ^ ht» liifieagei alt good men and we^
zpmedi to serve Amadf^ Thts Baibys- wae one
o^ these* vf^tun- AinaJHi had delkereif ftom th»
evael pvi«oh of Arcalau^t^e BbchantePy and he*
it w(i$ whe^cut off the head of the Damsel tha^
had engaged Amadie and* Oafeior in fight to-
dUfitFoy each other; andcertest had it not been-
Ibr thi» actieaof Balays, the one or both- would
then have died. I^ brooght tidings that Kin^
l«isuapte wna encamped near Windsor, and
tba^ by'vAat^hec0nld heai^ he had- about six-



1S7

di«n I ^tid that th^ £«iperor 9f Koose h^ 9i;ri v-
ed with a gregt fle^t^and h^dUpd^d and pitf ha4
bis camp aeair the ^ng's, G^iquilaA ISing -of
Sweden also bad brought; f igbl buad9e4 go94
Knigbt^a aod King Cildadan two buudfed; bu(
II? b^licjved they wo^ld po^ a4yaiu:9 for fi^tff^
days* because they vcrc aU v^^yry iwth tb^ voy^
^e, AH tills Malays of Qar^aotQ could wdl
karn, fpr b^ bdd a i^oodcasd^ iQ tb^ I^qcdsiUt*
of Kipg X^i^uaft^ aRd it wa% $q aitwte d tba^ h«>
CQ11I4 wit;b little trouble kani Aew$ pf ixia.f(^cejU

»

l^arly OQ tks fbUowwi; i|ior;^qg MMt^r Hi Ifsii
bad arrived in the haven with Grasandor's sue*
couTy five hundred Knight$ and Archers. When
Amadts knew his arrival he went with Angri-
ote and Don Bruneo to receive them; the forces
were encamped, and Libeo the Master's ne-
phew with them as their Captain. They then
took the Master and led him to King Perioot
and told who he was, and how ho had sared
Amadis from death after the combat with the
EndriagOy and that at this season there could
not have been any person whose coming would
so profit them. The King courteously wel-
comed him and said. Good friend, after the



198

battle we must decide the question to wfaon
Axnadis it most indebted^ to me who under
CSod produced him from nothing, or to you
who fh>m death recovered him to life. The
Master kissed hit hand» and then said pka*
tantly. Let it be so» ISir» I will not yield tfae^
advantage to yoo tflt the question has been
searched. Thes be told the ^ing that he was
certainly informed how the Emperor of Rome
bad tct out with hit fleet, carrying ten thoutand
hortenen; and that GastOes nephew of the Em^

peror of Constantinople was now on the sea
with eight thousand horsemen in aid of Amadisj^
and would he be&eved arriTe now in three days..



180



CHAPTER ai



The History saith* that Gionte& after he left
Grasaador proceeded to Rome* and bj his di^-
ligence and that of the Emperor, the fleet wa«
soon equipped and the ten thousand Knights
embarked} and they set sailt and arriyed safely m
the haven near Windsor. When King lisu*
arte heardof bi& arrival, he rode with the Kingf
Cildadan and GasquUan, and many other good
men to receive him, and they embraced each
other with great joy* King, said the Emperor,
if you have received any wrong or grievance
for my sake, I am here to satisfy your honour
with double victory. And as I alone have
been the cause of this, I would you would ak
low that I alone might take vengeance^ thai
the punishment which I inflict may be an ex«
^ple to all, that none may dare offend a maa



140

go powerful as I. The King answeredy M/
good Lord and Friend, you and your people are
now weary of your voyagei let them recover
from their fatigue $ in the mean while we shall
learn tidings of our enemies, and when that is
known, you shall take what counsel pleaseth
you. The Emperor would have marched on
without delay, but li&uart^y who better knew
what was necessary, detained him, for he was
well aware, that on this battle every thing de-
pended. So they remained eight days in the
camp receiving the forces who every day eame

One ^a^ Its the Emperor tat^ the Kings, fend
many Kniriit^ in their company, were ridmg in
^ £erd» near ^te camp, they saw a Knight ap«
ppo^ch, and a Sqctre with him carrying liisarms.
tf^nycfoe asks who- this Knight was, I answer
th^t he was ^e go«4 Kniglt Enil, the nephew
o§ £>o» Gandal^- 'V^Xhen he came to the camp,
he ai^ed ^f Arqmsil were there, who was kins-
man t» th» Eimperor ; he was answeret) jes, nnd
that hewa9 then ricKng with the Emperor. Enil
ikefi rodt up to the company, who were now
halting by a brook side and talking about the
kMlfe: he humbly saluted diem, and they oir



141

their part bade him wekomei an4 asked whac
he would have. Enil answered, Sirs, I comm
from the Firm Islandi with the bidding of my
Lord the noble Knight Amadis of Gaul, soa
of King Perion, to a Knight called ArquisiL
Arquisil answered, I am be whom you seek*
Then said Enil, Arquisil, Amadis of Gaul sendi
to say, that when he was at the Court of King
Tafinor of Bohemia, calling himself the Knight,
of the Green Sword, on the day after bis battle
with Don Garadan, he entered into the lists
with you and your companions, and you were
made his prisoner, .and by him set at liberty on
your promise as a true Knight> that you would
return and put yourself into his power when*
ever he required it ; he now by me calls upoa
you to fulfil your word, as so good a man and
of so high a lineage ought* Certes, Knight*
axiswered Arquisil, what you say is true ; it
only remains to be assured, that he who called
himself the Knight of the Green Sword is
Amadis of Gaul. Certain Knights who were
present said, that without doubt it was sp.
Then Arquisil said to the Emperor, You have
heard. Sir, what this Knight demands, I can:
no ways excuse myself, but must perform that
which I owe f he gave me my li&i and pre*



143

tented the other Knights from killing ttie, who
were well inclined to do it. I beseech yotf, Sir, be
not displeased at my going, for if I should fsul in
my promise, you, powerful and great as you ate,
ought neither to have me in .your company,
nor acknowledge me for your kin. The Em-
peror, with his wonted want of temper, cried
Out, You Knight Who come hither on the part
of Amadis, tell him he ought to be quite satis*
Red with offering me those little insults which
little men can offer to the great : and that the
time is come wheh I shall show him who I am,
and what I can do. Tell him that he can no
where escape me, not even in that Den of
Thieves where he lurks ; he shall soon make
seven-fold restitution ! You, Arquisil, do as
you are required ; it will not be long before I
shall put this man by whom you were taken
into your hands, tliat you may have your will
of him.

When Enil heard this, he grew angry and fear-
lessly replied, I Ween, Sir, Amadis knows what
you can do already, for he met you once as an
Errant Knight, not as a great prince, and you
did not depart from him quite so easily ! But
now, as you come in another manner, so in



143

*

another maimer will he meet yon : let them
ivbo know the past remember it ! God only
knows the future. At this King Lisuarte was
fearful lest the Knight should receive some
hurt at the Emperor's commandi which would
greatly have displeased him, as indeed what
had been said had done ; for it was his manner
to be rigorous in deed, but fa'r in speech ; so
to prevent more, he took the Emperor by the
hand and said. Let us go to our tents, for it is
time to sup ; and let this Knight enjoy the
freedom which Embassadors use to and ought
to possess. The Emperor then went away» as
much in anger as though what had passed had
been with his peer*

•
But Arquial took Enil to his tent and showed
him much honour ; and they rode together like
friends to the firm Island. When they were
near the camp and Arquisil saw so great a
forcet for the succours from the Emperor of
Constantinople were now arrived, he marvelled
greatly, yet gave he no sign of wonder. Enil
took him to the tent of Amadis, by whom he
was courteously received. There he remained
four days, and Amadis shewed him the army
and all those noble Knights, the fame of whose



144

pfeW^Si ^afe g6he zhtokd tftfough all th*
\^orld. Much \^a$ h^ dstdnished to behold so
mighty a po^et", but in particular to behold so
many good Knights, for he well knew that if
any disaster should befall the Emperor, it
^ould be by their means, for of the rest he
thought little, and would have felt no fear of
theih if they had not had such leaders. Well
too did he perceive that his LoYd the Emperor
needed great force to give them battle, and he
thought himself an unhappy man to be held
prisoner at such a time : for if he had heard
afar off that such a battle Was to be waged, he
would have hastened to bear a part, and now it
would be in his sight even, and yet he could not
be there ! For this he accounted himself the
most unfortunate man in the world, and tlie
tears ran down his cheeks ; and in this great
grief he resolved to prove the virtue and noble-
ness of Amadis, So when the . brave Amadis
was with many other Knights in the tent of
King Perion, and Arquisil with them, because
the place of his prison had not be^n. appointed^
he rose up and said to the King, May it please
you. Sir, to hear me before these Knights, and
Amadis of Gaul. The King said, willingly»
)ind bade him speak. Then Arquisil related



U5

how he had been conquered by Atnadis, and
on what terms taken to metcy ; but now, quoth
he, if Amadis will deal towards me with that
generosity which he hath ever shown, and per-
mit me in this great battle to serve my Lord the
Emperor, I promise before yoti and all these
Knights, if I escape with life, to yield myself
iip into his hands again. Amadis, who had
listened to him standing, to shew him more ho-
nour, replied* Arquisil, my good Sir, if I re*'
garded the intolerable arrogance 6f your Em-
peror I might justly requite it with cruelty to
all his people ; but his fault is not yours, and
the time is hard at hand, when the virtue of
"each of us shall be put to proof: I give you
therefore leave to be in the battle, and if you
survive it, and are in no danger, come in- tea
days after to this island.

Thankfully did Arquisil acknowledge that no*
ble treatment, and he took his horse and arms>
and departed^ and arrived without let or
hindrance at the Emperor's camp. Now I
would have you know, that the season why all
these Knights performed such long journeys
without meeting any adventure, was, because
they heeded nothing but'to prepare for the great

VOL, ly. G



146

battle, and would therefore meddle with no*
thing of less moment that might keep them
from it. When Arquisil came to the camp,
he spoke with the Emperor apart, and told him
how Amadis had dealt with htm, and what a
mighty power was there assembled, and the
names of all the good Knights who were come
to his succour : and be assured, said he, that
so soon as they know }rou have moved on, they
will advance to meet you. Arrogant as the
Emperor was, yet when he heard this from so
good a Knight, and one who he knew would
speak nothing but what was true, he was dis-
mayed, as they use to be whose courage lies
more in words than in actions* and he wished
he had never been brought into this quarrel.
He had expected that Amadis never could have
raised a force to oppose him and King Lisu*
arte, and that they should have blocked him up
by sea and by land, so that, either by famine
or treatyv he might recover Oriana, and
vindicate his honour. But thenceforward the
hope and confidence which he expressed was
more than in truth he felt, and he conformed
himself more to the advice of King Lisuarte
and his good men.



147

Fifteen days they remained in the camp, mus-
tering their forces, which were found to be as
follows : the Emperor brought ten thousand
horsemen; King Lisuarte six thousand five
hundred; Gasquilan. King of Sweden eight
hundred; King Cildadan two hundred. When
all was ready the army were ordered to march;
the Emperor divided his host into three divi-
sions ; the first, of two thousand five hundred
Knights, he gave to Floyan, the brother of
Salustanquidio; the second, with a like num-
ber, to Arquisil ; the other five thousand he re-
served for his own command, and he requested
King Lisuarte to let him be in the van, to
which the King assented, though he would far
rather have taken that post himself, for he
thought little of the Romans, and feared that
they might by their confusion occasion some
great loss ; howbeit to do the Emperor honour,
he consented* which in such a case was ill
done, for then ^1 affection shouUt be laid
aside, and nothing but reason consulted. King
Lisuarte made two divisions of his force, the
one, of three thousand Knights, he gave to
King Arban of North Wales, and with him he
appointed Norandel to go, and Don Guilan
the Pensive, and Cendil of Ganota» and Bran-

g2



148

dojuas ; three thousand of his Ejiights he gare
to King Cildadan atid King Gasqailan, Mtrhicb^
with their own thousand, made another dxYi-^
sion; of the rest he took charge himself; his
standard he gave to tht good Don Grumedan^
who, with great sorrow and heaviness of heart*
reflected on that ill exchange which King li-
snarte had made, to make such men his enemies
and chuse such for his friends ! All this bein^
thus ordered, the army moved on behind the
'baggage, which went forward that the camp
might be pitched.



14a



CHAPTER 26*



The history saith> that as this King Perion was
a Knight of grejit cQurage^ and one whom for-
tune had always hitherto assisted to uphold his
honours he seeing himself brought into such a
contest which afiedtedhis sons and all his lineage,
and knowing likewise the great courage of
King Lisuarte and what a revenger of injuries
wrought to him he was : for these things he
was always pondering on what it behoved him
to provide for. He was well aware that if the
chance went against him that he would not be
satisfied with victory, but like a mad dog would
hunt them out wherever they should retreat,
and think nothing of any fatigue or difficulty in
pursuing chem/ even as he himself should do if
he were the conqueror. He, therefore, among
other needful things, was careful to have trusty

c 3



150

persons in those parts where they could observe
the movements of the enemy; and by them he was
now advised how and in what order they were
on their march. So on the morrow betimes he
rose and summoned all the .Chiefs and the
Knights of his lineage, and told them what he
knew, and how he thought tliey should raise their
camp, and divide their army, that every man
might '.. now what standard and what leader he
was to follow ; and that having so done they
should march to meet the enemy ^ and give
them battle, in full confidence that they should
be vidlorious in so just a cause. To this they
all accorded, and earnestly they besought that,
both because of his high rank, and of his great
courage and discretion, he would take the
charge of leading and direding them, all pro-
mising to obey his orders : this he accepted,
well knowing that what they proposed was right,
and that which he could not reasonably decline.
Then he ordered the counsel to be carried into
eflfect. The camp was raised, and the forces all
armed and mounted assembled in that wide
plain. •

This good King rode in the midst of them on a



151

goodly horse» and armed with rich arms, three
Squires were with him, and ten Pages all on
horseback and all bearing one device, whose
appointment was to ride about the field of bat«
tie, and give their horses to such ^ Knights as
should be in need of them. He was now at
that age that tlie most part of his hair and
beard was grey ; his countenance was somewhat
flushed with the heat of his armour, and some-
what by the thoughts of his heart. All knew
his courage, and the sight of him gave courage
to all ; so that they lost all fear, and made no
doubt but that, under God, such a leader
would assuredly give them the victory. He
looked at Don Quadraprante and said, brave
Knight, I entrust the van to you, with my son
Amadis, and Angriote of Estravaus, and Don
Gavarte of the Perilous Vale, and Enil, and
Balays of Carsante, and Landin, with the five
hundred Knights of Ireland, and fifteen hun-
dred of my people. You my good nephew
Agrayes shall lead the second division with
Don Bruneo of Bonamar and his brother
Branfil, and their troops and your own, in all six-
teen hundred Knights. You honourable Knight
Grasandor shall take the third division, and

G 4;



.Mi2

dioQ my son Florestaa with him and Don Hr^
gonisy and Ladadin of Fajarque, and Elian the
Bold, and Trion with the people of Queen Brio«i
lania, who with the forces of King Tafinor will
make a company of sixteen hundred Knigbts^
Then he turned to Don Brian of Monjaste, you
my good nephew shall have the fourth^ with
your own people, and with thr^ thousan4 qf
the Greeks ; so that ye shall be five thousand
in ally and with you Mancian of the Silver
Bridge and Sadamon and Orlandin. He ap«
pointed Don Gandales with a thousand to carry
suQcQur where it should he most needed. He
himself took to his charge Gastiles and the re«
xnainder of the forces which the Emperor of
Constantinople had sent ; and he hade all the
army look to the Emperor's standard^ and re-.
gard it as though he himself were there in per-
son. All being thus appointed, the army moved
on with the sound of many trumpets and other
instruments of war. Oriana with the Queen and
Princesses and Dames and Damsels of her cohr*.
pany heheld them, and in their hearts besought
God to help, or rather if it were his good plea*
sure, to give them pe^ce^



153



CHAPTER 27.



Now Arcalaus the Enchanter, had, as you have
heard, stirred up King Aravigo, and Barsinan,
Lord of Sansuena, and the King of the Deep
Island, who had escaped from the battle of the
Seven Ki^gs> and all the lineage of Dardanthe
Proud, and when he knew that Amadis and
King Lisuarte had collected their forces, he dis-
patched a Knight called Garin, who was the
son of Grumen one of the Enchanter's kinsmen,
whom Amadis slew when he rescued Oriana.
Him he bade rest neither day nor .night till he
had borne the intelligence to all those Chiefs.
Meantime he himself assembled the kinsmen of
Dardan and all his own forces. This Garia
came to King Aravigo, whom he found ia
Araviga the chief city of all his realm ; frcna

G 5



154

which all the Kings thereof were called
Aravigos,. because great part of their domi«
nions lay in the land of Arabia. The King at
this news without delay assembled all his forces,
and they pitched their tents in the plains near
Califan, which was a principal town in San-
suena. Twelve thousand Knights were they in
number ; there they prepared their fleet, and
stored it with food in abundance, as men
who were going against a strange land ; and
from thence they put to sea, and with a fair
wind in eight days they arrived at a port in
Great Britain where Arcalaus had a strong cas-
tle. Arcalaus had with him six thousand good
Knights, who all hated King Lisuarte and
Amadis for having hunted down and slain
many of their chiefs and put them to flight
themselves, like evil doers as they were. I
cannot tell you the joy there was ait this
meeting. So as Arcalaus had learnt from his
spies, that the King and Amadis were ad-
vancing to meet each other, he set forth with- x
out delay. Barsinan led the van ; he was a
young Knight and strong, eager to revenge
the deaths of his father and of his brother Gan- !
dalot, and to show his own prowess. He had






<.
■^



155

tinder him archers and cross-howmen and two
thousand Knights. Arcalaus, who> as you
may well believe^ was not inferior to him in
great strength and courage, led the second di-
vision. Though half his right hand was lopt
o£F, yet could. there hardly be found a better
Knight in arms, if his ill deeds had not taken
away all the renown which his hardihood
gained. He led on sir hundred Knights,
and two thousand four hundred whom King
Aravigo gave him. King Aravigo himself and
that other King of the Deep Island, led the
third detachment with all the other forces, and
they had with them. six Knights all akin to
Brontaxar Danfania, whom Amadis slew in
tlie battle of the Seven Kings, as is recorded in
the third book of this history. These six
Knights came from the Sagittary Island, where
it is said the Sagittaries at first made their ha-
bitation ; and they were huge in body, and
strong, like those who were descended in a
right line from the hugest and most valiant
giants that were ever in this world These
Knights when they heard of such great prepa-
rations, came by their o'wti good will to revenge
the death of that Brontaxar, who was the chief

G 6



156

of aU dieir lineage ; and also to prove t&em*
selves against those Knights of whom such re-*
nown was gone abroad. For these causes they
eame to King Aravigo, who gieatly rejoiced at
their comings and besought thefn to go in his
division, the which they promised, though
against their will j for it was their widi to have
been in the front of the battle.

At this time the Duke of Bristol arrived : he,
though he had been required by Ar-calaiis»
would not at first engage, thinking what he said
was rash and ill advised ; but when he saw so
great a power assembled; he then thought it
his wisest course to join them, that he might re^
venge the death of his father, whom Don Gal«
vanes and Agrayes and Olivas slew ; and also
that he might recover the lands which had heetk
forfeited by his father's death. He had con-
ceived that if Lisuarte was put to the worst, he
should regain his inheritance ; but if Amadis
was defeated, then should he be revenged upon
those wha had so injured him. When King
Aravigo and the other chiefs knew who he was,
they were more joyful of his coming, because he
was a native of the land, and had towns and castles



157

lliereifi, tBan they vo'uld have been if a foreigner
bad joined them with a greater force. Kin<F-
Aravigo gave h!ni five hundred Knighti
<Ution to his own force; and in this ana;
set forward, marching by bye ways, tha
might be the more secure.



out'



158



CHAPTER 28.



The History saith, that the Emperor of Rome
and King Lisuarte broke up their camp before
Windsor, and set forth witli all that company
whereof you have heard. The^ resolved to
proceed leisurely, that iheir men and horses
might be fresh at the meeting ; so the first day
they proceeded only three leagues ; and at this
pace they continued their progress till they
leamt that King Perion was on his way to meet
them, and was then only two days journey
distant. Incontinently King Lisuarte com-
manded Ladasin the cousin of Don Gullan the
Pensive to take fifty Knights and keep three
leagues before the army. He on the third day
fell in with the advanced guard of King Perion,
forty Knights led by Enil, and sent forward for
the same precaution. Both parties then stopt



1 5Q .

and sent each the tidings, not daring to come
to an encounter ; for that had been forbiddexr
them. The two armies continued to advance*
and were now within half a league of each
other upon a great and wide plain. In either
army there were many Knights skilful in war*
that neither in this respect could boast of much
advantage over the other ; and it seemed as if
by common accord they set about fortifying
their camp with ditches and other means of de«
fence, in case they should need such helps in re*
treat.

While the armies were thus employed Gan-
dalin arrived, who had taken Melicia to the
Firm Island, and had since hastened with his
utmost speed to come up before the battle. The
reason was this ; you know that Gandalin was
the son of the good Knight Don Gandales, and
the milk-brother of Amadis. From the day
oTt which Amadis, then calling himself the
Child of the Sea, was made a Knight, he knew
that thefy were not brothers, though till then
they had ever thought themselves such, and
from that hour Gandalm had always attended
hirii as his Squire. Now, though he had often
besought his master to make him a Knight, yet*



^madis could nererhave resolution to do that,,
urhich hj reason lie ought to have done, and to
which he wasgreatly boun^^for his father's sake
who fostered him, and for his own being the
best Squire that ever served a Knight ; yet be-
cause Gandalin knew the secret of his love and
was his only comforter, and the only one wnth
whom he could talk about Oriana, he could not
bear to lose him, as he must have done, had he
knighted him ; for then Gandalin must needs
have gone his way to seek adventures and gaia
the praise of prowess. But now that Amadis had
his Lady Oriana in his power, and was resolved
not to part with her except he lost his life,
Gandalin knew that he might reasonably de»
mand knrghthood, more especially on so great
and signal an occasion as this battle; for greatly
as he desired it, he had never much urged the
point, knowing how necessary be was to his
master. So having now delivered the bidding
of Queen Eltsena, and related his tidings he
took him aside and said — the reason. Sir, why I
have so long ceased to ask knighthood at your
hand with that earnestness which would have
become me, has been my great desire ta serve
you, and my knowledge how necessary I was
to your comfort* For this reason I have for-



l>orne to act as became my good Urth* and ittf-
fered xny honour to be neglected ; but now, Sir»
that ^e for whom you hare endured so much is
in your power; there is no excuse either to satisfy
myself or others why I should longer forbear
to seek the order of knighthood. Now I beseech
you give it me, for you know, otherwise, what
shame and lasting dishonour it will be to me V
it be now withheld.

When Amadis heard him speak thus» he was
to troubled^ that for a while he could not reply.
At length he said, O my true friend and bro-
ther, it is as grievous for me to fullfil what yon
require as though my heart were plucked from
my body; and if with any reason I could dis»
suade you, I would strive with all my might sa
to do ; but your demand is so just, that it can*
not be denied ; and I am grieved* that 1 did not
provide such arms and horse for the occasion as
you deserve« Then Gandalin knelt down ta
kiss his hand $ but Amadis raised him, and em-,
braced him, and wept over him, to think of the
solitude he should endure for his loss. Sir,
quoth Gandalin, Don Galaor in his great cour«
tesy, knowing my desire, hath given me his.
hors^ and arms, of which, he said, he had uo»



162

need in this malady ; I thanked him and took
the horse, which is a good one, and the breast-
plate and helmet, but not the other arms;
for they ought to be what beseem a young
Knight; and. those, therefore, I had made
while I remained with him. He'offered me his
sword also ; but I told him. Sir, that you would
give me one of those which Queen Menoresagave
you in Greece. Since it is so, replied Amadis,
do you watch your arms the night before the
battle in the chapel of my father's tent ; and
in the morning when we are about to encounter
the enemies, the King my father shall knight
thee: you know that no better man can be
found, nor one from whose hand you could re*
ceive more honour in the ceremony. Sir, quoth
Gandalin, what you say is true ; it would be
hard to find another Knight like the King ; bnt
I will. receive Knighthood from no hand but
yours. Lasindo,^ Don Bruneo's Squire, has
told me that his master has promised to knight
him, and we two will watch our arms toge-
ther. God grant that I may fulfil the duties of
knighthood, and manifest, the teaching which
I have from you received.

Two days did the armies remain within sight of



1 03

each other, fortifying their camps and pfepir*
ing all things for the battle. On the second
day at evening, the spies'of King Aravigo ar-
rived at the top of the mountains, and from
thence beheld how both hosts were encamped
below. When King Aravigo and tlie other
leaders heard this, they sent their scouts back
to observe all that should pass, and they them-
selves took possession of all the passes of the
Sierra, and so stationed themselves, that if need
were, they could with little danger retreat by
the mountains to the sea, and there embark.
But their doings had not been so secret that
King Lisuarte had not heard how so great an
army had landed in his dominions; and though
he knew not to what end they came, nor whither-
ward they marched, he had given orders to se-
cure all the stores, and drive away all the cattle
thereabout, and that the peasantry should go to
the fortified towns, and he had left certain
Knights to defend them. King Perion also had
heard of them, and was alarmed at the tid-
ings, .but neither did he know where they now
were : thus had they put both parties in fear.
Now had they remained three days, and the
Emperor Patin became impatient of longer de-
lay, desirous, either vanquished or victor^ to



IG4

return to bis own country. AmftdU also and
Agrayes and Don Quadragante and the other
Knights beisought Porion to come to battle*
that God might decide the cause. The King
was as desirous as they, but had delayed thus
long that all things might be ready : he now
made proclamation that all 'should hear mass
at dawn and arm themselves»and erery man then
repair to his own Captain, for the battle would
be waged. The same order was issued in the
other camp : so when the dawn appeared, the
trumpets sounded so loud and clear that they
were heard in both camps as though they had
been in concert. The Kntghts began to arm
and saddle their horses ; and they heard mass
in the tents, and mounted ; and each went ta
his proper standard.

Who is be that hath such thought and memory^,
though he had seen this sight and given it all
his attention, that he could relate or write of the
arms and horses with their devices, and the
Knights who were there embattled? Certes
the man would be a fool and devoid of under-
standing who could think to do this. Leaving,
therefore, the general description, something
shall be said here of the particular; and we



165

1^11 begin with the Emperor of Rome who
was strong of body and coarageous, and would
have been a right good Knight, if his little dis«
cretion and great pride had not nlarred him.
His armour was all blatk, helmet and shield
and surcoat ; except that on the shield he bore
the figure of a damsel from her girdle upward
made to the likeness of Oriana* well wrought
in gold and garnished with pearls and precious
stones, and fastened to the shield with nails of
gold ; and on his black surcoat he had a golden
chain-work woven, which device he swore never
to lay aside till he had Amadis in chains, and all
those who had been with him at the rescue of
Oriana. He was on a goodly horse arid of great
size, and his lance in his hand, and thus he rode
out of the camp. Next after him came Floyan
the brother of Salustanquidio : he bore for his
arms black and yellow quartered, and nothing
more ; he was a good Knight and greatly
esteemed by his own party. Arquisil was be-
hind him bearing arms of azure and argent
powdered with roses of gold. The arms of
X.isuarte were black with white eagles ; and he
bore one Eagle on his shield without any adorn*
xnent ; but those arms came out of the field with
|;r^at honour by reason of what their lord did



160

therein, King Cildadan appeared in arms that
were entirely black ; for, from the time of his
defeat in the battle of the Hundred, whereby'
his kingdom became tributary to King Lisuarte,
he had never worn others. I shall not tell you
what arms King Gasquilan of Sweden bore,
till another time. King Arban of North Wales,
and Don Guilan the Pensive, and Don Gru-
medan would wear no arms for show that day,
but only for use, that they might thus show the
sorrow they had to behold the King their mas-
ter placed in so great danger against those
who had been in his service and in his house-
hold, and who had won for him such honour.
Now we will tell you the arms of King Perion,
and the Knights of the other, host ; the armour
and the helmet, and the shield of the King
were all of burnished steel; and his surcoat
wa*- of silk of a bright and vivid colour ; he
rode a goodly steed, which his nephew Don
Brian of Monjaste had given him, being one
of twenty which the King his father had sent
from Spain, to distribute among the Knights ;
and in tliis guise he advanced with the banner
of the Emperor of Constantinople. Amadis
was armed in green armour, such as he wore
when he slew Famongomadan and Basagan^



16;

hh son, the two mightiest giants in the world ;
these arms were powdered with lions or; Ama-
dts had much affection for them, because he
assumed them on his departure from the Poor
Rocky and had worn them when'he went to
Crania at Miraflores. Don Quadragante wore
murrey arms with flowers argent, and rode
one of the Spanish horses. Don Bruneo of
Bonamar did not change his device* which was
a damsel in his shield and a Knight kneeling
before her. Don Florestan the good Knight
and jouster bore gules with golden flowers, and
rode a Spanish horse. The arms of Agrayes
were rose-colour, and in his shield was a dam-
sel's hand, holding a heart. The good An-
griote bore his usual arms of azure and argent;
and all the other Knights of whom no mention
is made, that they who read this history may
not be wearied, wore rich arms and of what co-
lour they liked best. -

Thus they went forth into the field in good ar-
ray ; and when they were all assembled, each man
under his leader, they advanced slowly on at
the time of sunrise, and the morning shone upon
theirarms which were new and bright,and shone
in such guise that it was marvellous to behold* A%



l68

ttiit time Gaiula}in and Lasindd came up in
vhice armour befitting new Knights. Lasiodo
went to Don Biuneo, and Gandalin toward
Amadis. When Amadis saw him - approach,
be tequested Don Quadnigante to take the
command) while he knighted his Squire : then
he went to Gandalin, and as they were going
toward King Perion, said to him, Mj true
friend I beseech you keep near me in this battle;
for though you have seen many battles, and
enough of dangers, and may think that you
want nothing but strength and coHrage, it is
not so : this is a signal battle ; and it behoves
you to look well to your life, and to your ho-
nour also, and not. to give such way to your
courage as to let it master your discretion :
keep near me and I will look to your defence
vhen you shall need help, and do you the sama
by me when you see I require assistance. They
were now come to where King Perion was, to
whom Amadis said, Sir, Gandalin would be
made a Knight, and it would have pleased roe
that he should have been made so by your hand g
but as he wishes to receive the order from me,
le to ask that he may receive the sword
f ou, that he may hereafter remember the
honour and by whom it was conferred.



The King looked at Gandaltn« and knew the
horse of his son Don Galacr, and the tears came
into his eyes: Friend Gandalin* said he» how did
you leave Don Galaor at your departure? Greatly
recovered from his malady, Sir» replied the SquirCf
but in griefy and heaviness of heart, for he disco-
vered, your departure, tliough it was kept so se-
cret, but not the cause. He besought me to
.tell him the truth, and I told hinii that by what I
had learnt, you were gone to help King Languines
of Scotland against certain neighbouring powers.
I would not tell him the truth in the state wherein
he is. The King at this heaved a sigh from his
heart, loving his son dearly, and believing truly,
that except Amadis, there was no better Knight
in the world, neither fdr arms, nor for all the man-
ners that became a Knight : and he said, God
grant, my good son, that I may never behold
tliy death, and that I may see thee honourably
freed from thy great love to King Lisuarte,. that
tht>u mayest be free and at liberty to aid thy bre-
thren and thj; lineage. Then Amadis took a
sword from Durin, brother to the Damsel of
Denmark, and gave it to the King ; and he him-
self knighted Gandalin, and kissed him, and put
on his right spur, and King Perion fastened on
his sword ; and thus was he knighted by the

VOL. IV. H



two best Knights that ever bore arms. Amadis
then went back with him to Don Quadragante,
who, to do Gandalin honour, came forward
and embraced him sapng, God grantf my friend,
that you may as well fulfil the duties of knight-
hood, as you have manifested all the virtues and
good-parts of a good Squire. I believe it will be
so, for good beginning for the most part bringeth
on good end. Gandalin humbled himself at this>
thanking him for the honour. Lasindo also was
knighted by the hand of bis master, and Agrayes
girt on his sword ; and you may be assured that
these twain in this their first essay of arms, per-
formed such feats, and endured such dangers and
such toil, that they in this great battle g^ned
honour and the praise of prowess for all the days
of their lives.



" "ot long before they saw their e

to meet them. When they were near
Amadis saw that the banner of the Em-
r Rome was in the van ; and at this he
to think that the first encounter wouW
him ; for much as he disliked King
, yet he always remembered how he had
elt in his court, and what honour he bad
from him, and above all that he was the



father of bis lady Oriana* for which he had re»
aolredt if possible, tp turn aside from him 'm the
battlei that he might not harm hini« though he
well knew that Lisuarte would show him oo such
courtesy, bnt rather seek bis death as a mortal
enemy. But I tell you that Agrayes had a far
other intention, for all his bope was that he
might meet King Lisuarte in the battle^ and slay
him. He ever bore in mind tbe King's ingra«
tttude ; and had he been in Monga^a when the
island was given to bis uncle, be could never have
consented that he should receive it, having been
vanquished, but would have given him another
such lordship in his father's kingdom. Whea
they were now so near that they only waited for
the trnmpets to sound, that they might begin the
attack, they saw a Squire come riding full speed
£rom the army, who enquired with a loud voice
if Amadis of Gaul were there ? Amadiis beckon-
ed to him in reply, and when he approached, said,
I am he, what would you ^ The Squire looked
m him, and thought that in his life he had never
beheld so goodly a Knight in arms, nor who ap-
peared so wdl on horseback. Good Sir, quoth
he, ofatrudi I believe thut you are he, for your
appeamnce bears testimony to your great re<
nown I Gasquilan, King of Sweden, my lord 4nd

H 2



172

master, sends me to tell you, that when King
Lisuarte made war upon your Knights in the
island of Mongaza, he came to his help, in the
hope of engaging you in battle, not for any enmity
which he bears toward you, but because of the re-
nown of your great chivalry: and now he is come
hither for the ^me intent, and saith that he would
willingly bi*eak two or three lances with you, be-
fore the armies join battle, for after that he may
not be able to meet you in the tumult. Amadis
replied. Good Squire, tell the I^ing your master,
that I have before heard of his wish, and attribute
it to no enmity in him, but rather to the greatness
bf his courage. Albeit, my deeds are not equal to
the fame, I am well {content that a man of such
renown should so esteerri me. This quarrel is
more of will than necessity, and I had rather it
had been in some other cause, more to his own ho-
nour and profit, but I am ready to do as it may
please him. . Sir, replied the Squire, my master
knows how you conquered his father, the Giant of
the Dolorous Island, to save Cildadan and your
brother Galaor ; and though that is nearly con-
cerning him, yet, because of the great courtesy
wherewith you used your victory, he is more be*
holden to you than bound to seek revenge. It is
only for your high renown that he desires to en-



173

counter yon 5 for the victory would be to his
great farae above all other Knights in the world,
and no shame will it be if he should be conquered
by him who has conquered so many Knights, and
Giants, and Monsters out of nature. Tell him,
<]uoth Amadi<:,that I am ready.



A 5



174



CHAPTER 29.



You have heard who this Gasquilan was, and m
what manner he became King of Sweden. This
King was enamoured of a Princess who was call-
ed the fair Pinela, and by her father's death be-
came Lady of the Strong Island, which was near
Sweden. She, because Gasquilan was of the
race of the Giants, and in himself proud and over-
bearing, would never encourage his hope; but
because her chiefs feared him, and she herself
saw no other remedy to prevent his love from
changing into exceeding hatred; she devised this
means. She told him that it was her determination,
and what she had promised to her father at the
time of his death, never to marry any other than
the best Knight in the world ; to find who this
might be, she had dispatched messengers into all
foreign parts, and the tidings they had all brought



J 75

back was, tliat a Knight called Amadis of Gaul
was the bravest and best Knight in die world,
who undertook and atchieved adventures which no
other dared attempt. If, therefore, he who was
so strong and courageous would seek out this
Amadis, and conquer him, she would then fulfil
her promise to her father, and make him master
of herself and her kingdom, fully believing that
he would then have no peer. This slie did, in
the hope that Oasquilan, strong as he was, was no
ways equal to Amadis.

When the Squire had brought him this answer, he
exclaimed. My friend, you tell me what I most
desire to hear; every thing is now as I wished, and
I shall win the love of my Lidy, for I am that
Gasquilan whom you know. Then he called for
his arms, which were after this fashion ; the field
of his surcoat and bever was murrey, bearing
griffins or; his helmet and shield were burnished
and bright as a mirror ; and on his shield he had
a griffin griping a heart in his talons, wrought in
gold, and fastened to the shield with golden nails,
and garnished with jewels ; by the griffin he gave
to understand the great rigour and cruelty of his
Lady, and that as that heart was pierced by his
talons, even so his heart suffered from its mortal



1/0

desires. He took a strong lance, whose iron was
long and bright, and going before tjie Emperor,
besought him not to let his troops begin the
attack till he had performed one joust with Ama-
dis, as he had agreed with him ; and he bade the
Emperor not hold him as a Knight, if he did not
in the first encounter rid him of his enemy. The
Emperor, who knew Amadis better than he did,
because he had proved him, thought within him-
self that tills was more easily conceited than per-
formed. So Gasquilan advanced forward be-
tween the armies, who both halted to witness this
signal encounter between two such Knights,

Amadis was ready to give him his welcome ; he
knew him to be a brave Knight, yet, because he
was so arrogant and vain-glorious, cared little for
Ills valour ; for when such men as he are in their
greatest need, then God breaks their pride ; he
turned his horse toward him, and covered himself
with his shield, and giving the spar rode at him
with all his force. Gasquilan did the same, driv-
ing at full speed ; their lances flew up in shivers*
their shields and bodies met with such force, that
all the beholders imagined that they would both
be dashed to pieces. Gasquilan was driven from
■<5 saddle with such fofce, that being of huge



177

bulk, and falling upon the hard earth, his right urm
broke, and he lay stunned and like a dead man.
The horse of Amadis had his shoulder broken,
and he himself was somewhat stunned, yet not so
much but that he leaped from his horse before the
beast fell, and went on foot toward Gasquilan
to see whether he was dead.

When the Emperor saw Gasquilan lying for dead,
and Amadis on foot, he called out to Floyan to
advance and help the King of Sweden. Don
Quadragante seeing them come on, cried out.
Attack them. Sir, and leaire not a man of them
alive! Both sides then hastened to encounter;
but Gandalin, who saw his master on foot, and
was fearful for his safety, rode the foremost to
help him, and seeing Floyan in the front of his
battle encountered him so rudely* that Floyan
fell, and he himself lost his stirrups^^but kept his
seat. Both parties now strove to horse their
Knights, and Quadragante dismounted four Ro«>
mans before he broke his lance, and the horse of
the first was given by Angriote to Amadis; mean
time the Romans carried Gasquilan, who was now
recovering his senses, out of the field. Gavarte
-of the Perilous Vale, and Landin followed die
))ath of Quadragante ; these Knigbts were uted to

H 5



178

such busineiss, and were before the host; but
when the two hosts encountered, then was there
such uproar that none could understand anodier,
and there might you behold horses without riders*
and the riders, some slain, others wounded, and
trampled under foot. Floyan, who was now
horsed again, and desirous both to gain honour
and to revenge the death of Salustanquidio his
kinsman, made at Angriote, whom he saw doing
great deeds in arms, and struck him in the side so
rudely, that he well nigh dismounted him ; the
blow broke his lance; then drew he his sword, and
dealt a blow to Enil, which made the fire flash
from his helmet, and rode on between them, so
that neither could strike him in requital, and they
wondered at his courage and great prowess ; and
before he joined his own people, he met a Knight
of Ireland, one of the servants of Don Quadra-
gante, and cut him on the shoulders to the flesh
and bone, so that he was constrained to quit the
field.

At this time Amadis, taking with* him Balays of
Carsante and Gandalin, attacked the flank of the
Romans as fiercely as he could, being enraged to
see how they defended themselves; his compa-
'nns followed the path he ma4e^ and be smote



170

such strokes with his sword; Aat the enemies
were astonished and dismayed) and gave way
before him, and strove to run back behind their
fellows, like a flock of sheep when they are se|
upon by the wolves. As he was thus making his
way without opposition* a bastard brother of
Queen Sardamira» by name FlamineO) who was a
good Knight) advanced to meet himi and pierced
his shield with a brave encounter^ but then his
lance failed htm. Amadis thought to strike him
on the helmet as he passed, but he went by so fast
that the blow fell upon the horse bdiind the sad-
dle> and cut away the greater part of his body
and of his bowels, so that Flamineo fell with such
violence that he thought his shoulders were burst
asunder. Mean time Don Quadragante and they
who were in his company prest so closely upon
the enemies, that they would have destroyed them
all, if Arquisil had not come up with the second
division* At his coming they took courage, and
such a shock was given, that' more than a thou*
sand from the two sides were dismounted. Ar-
quisil himself encountered Landin, the nephew of
Quadragailte, and both were driven to the
ground. Floyan, who with fifty Knights had
succoured Flamineo and remounted him, now
isaw Arquisil engaged afoot with Landin, and

h6



180

cried out, Knights of Rome, help your leader !
^e himself, with more than five hundred Knights,
rode to his succour, and Landin would surely
then have heen slain if it had not been for Angri-
ote, and Enil^ and Gavarte of the Perilous Valley,
who called upon Quadragante to support them
without delay, and bestirred themselves so brave-
ly, that it was marvellous to behold their prowess.
On the other part, Flamineo, who was again on
horseback* collected a company, and came to sup-
port his friends ; the battle then waxed hot, and
so many Knights were slain and beaten down,
that the field was covered with the dead and
wounded* But the Romans were so numerous,
that, maugre all their enemies could do, they res-
cued Arquisil and got him to horse, and Qua-
dragante and bis Knights did the same by Lan-
din, for there were horses enov at hand who had
no riders.

This wbile Amadis was doing wonders, and so
well had he now made himself known, that the
Romans wherever he appeared gave way ; great
need was there for such prowess* for the enemies
were so many, that had it not been for the good-
ness of the Knights, they would have had it all
their own way. But presently Agrayes and Don



18]



Bruneo came up with their divisiony and as the
Romans were now ronfused^ they broke them
and divided them, so that they would have had
no remedy, if the Emperor himself had not now
advanced with five thousand Knights ; this suc-
cour was so powerful that they presently recovered
the ground which they had lost. The Emperor
himself, armed as you have heard, led the way on
a huge horse, being himself of great stature, and
marvellously well did he appear, and was greatly
admired. Balays of Carsante was the first whom
ke found before him ; he struck hts shield so rude-
]y that the lance broke; their horses encountered,'
the Emperor's was firesh, but that of Balays
could not stand the shock, and fell and his mas-
ter with bim, who was sorely bruised with the
fall. At this success the Emperor was greatly
elated; he drew his sword, and shouted out,
Rome ! Rome ! at them Knights ! let not a man
escape ! and he thrust forward into the press,
dealing about his blows like a good Knight* As
he was thus making great havoc k, he met Doa
Quadragante, who on his part wa« laying about
him, sword in hand. They seeing each other, both
raised their swords, and gave such strokes ^n
each other's helmet, that fire flashed from them;
but as Don Quadragante was the stronger, the



182

Emperor lost his stirrups with that blow^
-and was constrained to hold round his horse's
neck, and was for a while astounded. It so
chanced that Constancio» a young Knight and a
good, who was brother to Brondajel of the Rocki
was hard at hand, and seeing his lord the Em-
peror in this plight, he pricked forward, and made
at Quadragante with an overhand thrust of his
lance, which pierced the shield and wounded him
a little in the arm. Quadragante turned to strike
him, and in that moment the Emperor had time
to shelter himself among his own Knights. But
Constancio tarrying there no longert rode away
toward the part where Amadis fought, and
when he saw what havock he made, that not
a man could stand before him, he was so
astonished, that he verily thought it was some
devil come there to destroy them. While he was
looking at him, a good Knight, who governed the
Principality of Calabria for Salustanquidio^ came
forward, and struck the horse of Amadis in the
neck : Amadis in requital gave it him on the hel-
met and head through helmet and head. At this
Constancio was greatly grieved for the loss of so
good a Knight, and he cried out to Floyan, Herel
here ! maim or kill this- man ! for this is he who
^^oys us without mercy ! Both he vad Floyan



183

then rode up to him together, and laid on blm
with their swords. It was Constancio whom
Amadis struclc in return; the sword came upon
the rim of lus raised shield and split it» and
went through upon the helmet with such weight
that Constancio fell stunned. More than twenty
Knights, who were appointed to look to Floyan,
now joined, and all at once assailed Amadis, but
they could not move him from his horse, and
every one was afraid to come too near him, who
had no need ever to make a second blow*

Howbeit the Romans were so many, that else*
where they had somewhat the advantage : they
had killed the horses of Agrayes, and Don Bru*
oeo, and Angriote, and surrounded the Knights*
L^ando, and Gandalin, and Gavarte, and Branfil,
came to their succour, but the multitude was so
great, that though with great danger they had
beaten down and slain many Knights, they could
not force their way to them. At this time Gra#
sandor and Don Florestan came up : O, Sir Flo»
restan, cried Lasindo, help here, or your friends
are lost ! Come on then ! replied Florestan, and
let us attack those who will not dare abide us !
then sword in hand he cut his way, and those
other Kiughts with him, to the place where their



182

Emperor lost his stirrups with that blow,
-and was constrained to hold round his horse's
neck, and was for a while astounded. It so
chanced that Constancio, a young Knight and a
good, who was brother to Brondajel of the Rock,
was hard at hand, and seeing his lord the Em-
peror in this plight, he pricked forward, and made
at Quadragante with an overhand thrust of his
lance, which pierced the shield and wounded him
a little in the arm. Quadragante turned to strike
him, and in that moment the Emperor had time
to shelter himself among his own Knights. But
Constancio tarrying there no longert rode away
toward the part where Amadis fought, and
when he saw what havock he made, that not
a man could stand before him, he was so
astonished, that he verily thought it was some
devil come there to destroy them. While he was
looking at him, a good Knight, who governed the
Principality of Calabria for Salustanquidio^ came
forward, and struck the horse of Amadis in the
neck : Amadis in requital gave it him on the hel*
met and head through helmet and head. At this
Constancio was greatly grieved for the loss of so
good a Knight, and he cried out to Floyan, Here!
here ! maim or kill this- man ! for this is he who
destroys us without mercy ! Both he axui Floyan



183

then rode up to him together^ and laid on him
with their swords. It was Constancio whom
Amadis struclc in return; the sword came upon'
the rim of his raised shield and split it, and
went through upon the helmet with such weight
that Constancio fell stunned. More than twenty
KnightSy who were appointed to look to Floyan^
now joined, and all at once assailed Amadis, but
they c<Mild not move him from his horse, and
every one was afraid to come too near him, who
had no need ever to make a second blow«

Howbeit the Romans were so many, that else«
where they had somewhat the advantage : they
had killed the horses of Agrayes, and Don Bru«
aeo, and Angriote, and surrounded the Knights*
Lasindo, and Gandalin, and Gavarte, and Branfil,
•came to their succour, but the multitude was so
great, that though with great danger they had
beaten down and slain many Knights, they conld
not force th«ir way to them. At this time Gra*
sandor and Don Plorestan came up : O, Sir Flo*
i^stan, cried Lasindo, help here, or your friends
are lost ! Come on then ! replied Florestan, and
let us attack those who will not dare abide us!
then sword in hand he cut his way, and those
other Knights with him» to the place where their



184

friends were so hardly beset. Who can tell the
feats which were performed in that succour !
but certes what those Knights had wrought, being-
on foot, and so few, and surrounded by so many
enemies, cannot be told. Yet would they even
then have been in great danger, if Amadis had
not heard the outcry ; he had now beaten down six
of the twenty who assailed him, and the rest bad
retired and left him at liberty, so he rode toward
that press, and knowing his friends by their arms,
called out to his people, and followed by more
than four hundred Knights, rode up to them. At
the same time Floyan, and Arquisil, and CoQstan-
cro, came up with the greatest body that they
could collect, and there began the fiercest and
most perilous battle that ever man beheld. Then
might you have seen Amadis do such wonders, as
it was never before seen or heard that living man
could perform, that both friends and enemies
marvelled to behold him, and such an uproar
arose then^ that the Emperor and the greatest part
of the army repaired thither. A cross-bowman
rode to Don Quadragante, who was in another
paH of the field, and told him what was going on;
and he took with him a thousand Knights from
his division, saying, Now, Sirs, show your worth
and follow me, for your succour is needed ; and



183

away they went : he led the way ; so thick was
the press that he could scarcely get at his ene-
mies; but he wheeled round, and attacked tlicm
in flank with such an encounter, that more than
two hundred Knights were thrown down to the
ground, and I assure you, that they whom he
reached with a full stroke had never need of a
surgeon.

At that hour, Arquisll, and Floyan, and Flamingo,
and many other of their comrades, did so well
that no Knights could do better, striving all they
could to slay Agrayes and those Knights who
were dismounted ; but JFlorestan and the other
Knights^ who had forced their way to tliem, never
gave back how hardly soever they were prest ;
and now were the Romans so sharply set on by
Don Quadragante, and by Amadis on another
side, who saw the feats of Quadragante, and so
bestirred himself, that he left not a man in the
saddle whom he could reach ; and also by Don
Gandales, who had come up with eight hundred
Ivnights, that they began to give ground. The
Emperor, who from the time he had received that
blow from Quadragante had employed himself
more in directing his troops than in fighting, called
out to rally them, but with little effect* For now



186

Agrayes, and AngriatCy and Don Bruneo, after so
much peril and so hard contest, got to horse at
last, and pricked forward into the press, and drove
back the Romans, till they had retired to the di-
vision of King Arban of North Wales, about the
hour of sunset. He made way for their retreat
to protect them, but he did not advance to battle^
because of the lateness of the evening, and be-
cause King Lisuarte had forbidden him, for many
of the otlier army had not as yet taken part in the
battle. They on their part ceased from pursuits
and thus that day ended with great loss to both
parties, although the Romans suffered most. The
field was in possession of Amadis» who had all
his wounded men removed, and his people spoiled
their enemies. But many of the wounded Ro-
mans perished for want of help.

When the armies had thus withdrawn, the religi-
ous men of the two hosts went out to help the
souls of those who were in need ; and when they
beheld the great destruction that had been made,
and heard the cries of the wounded, crying for
pity and help, they all agreed that it would be for
'God's service to make a truce, that the wounded
might have help and the slain be buried; so they
spoke to King Lisuarte and to the Emperor, and



187

also with King Perion, and a truce was made for
the following day. When morning came many
went to the field to seek their kinsmen and friends
and masters, and then might you have beheld
such lamentations, on all sides, as were pitiful to
*hear> and how much more to see ! The wounded
were all carried into the Emperor's camp, and the
dead were buried, so that the field remained clear.
That whole day the Knights passed in refitting
their arms, and looking to their horses ; the
wound in Don Quadragante's arm was dressed;
a:nd though it was such that if a Knight not so
good as he had received it, he would not ha-ve
borne arms nor encountered danger till it was heal-
ed, yet he would not be hindered from helping his
comrades in the following battle. On the follow-
ing day they rose at dawn at the trumpet's sound,
and heard mass, and put themselves in array, and
it was determined on both sides that they who
had not fought in the former battle should take
the lead in this.



CHAPTER 30.



iraarte placed in the van King Arban of
Pales, and Norandel, and Don Guilan tbe
andthoseotherEnighttof whom you have
He and King Cildadan came behind with
'ition to support them, and in the rear vas
wror with all his force. King Perion gave
t to bii nepliew DonBrian of MonjastCf
!lf and Gastile* nipported bim with the
af the femperor of Conjtantinople ; and
ne the other divisions, to arranged, that
>had borne least part of yesterday's battle^
low bear the brunt of this. When the tt-n
Irew nigh, the trumpet soundedi and the
Don Brian and King Arban encountered
Ji a shock, that more than five hundred
were thrown, and their horses ran loose
held. Don Brianand King Arban met i



i8g

tfaer brake their lances, and tfam fell to vrith their
swordsf as men who well knew their business.
Norandel and Don Gailan kept together, and
made great havock among their foes, and worse
they would have made it» had it not been for Fi*
leno, a kinsman of Dpn Brian» who» collecting a
body of Spanish Knights, charged so hotly in that
part where they fought, that, maugre all their
efforts, they made them give back, and then the
tumult became so great, that King Arban and Don
- Brian were separated by the throng. Each of
those Knights then did his best ; but the Spaniards
bein^ more in number, and better horsed, had
soon so greatly the advantage, that their enemies
would all have been cutoff, if King Lisuarte and
King Cildadan had iiot advanced to help them :
their coming retrieved the loss. King Perion,
who saw the wrath with which Lisuarte advanced,
then said to Gastiles, Now, my good Sir, let us go
on, and let us alway look to the standard, and
then they made their onset. King Lisuarte re-
ceived them like a man whose heart never failed ;
you may believe, that, without doubt, there was no
Knight in his time who more bravely adventured
his person whenever his honour was concerned, as
you have seen- throughout this great history.



Who can tell the feats of chiraliy that were now
wroagfat, when lo many were engaged together*
Ceites it would be impossible for zaj one who
would speak the truth. For so many good
Knights were now slain and wounded* that the
horses could not set foot to ground without tranap-
ling on them. King Lisuarte* like a man iffho
esteemed his life as nothing, thrust so bravely
among his enemies, that there was scarcely any
man who would dare abide him. King Penon in
another part, as he was doing wonders, encoon-
tered King Cildadan ; but they, because they knew
each other, would not engage, but past on, each
felling down his opponents. So great was the up-
roar, that the Emperor thought bis friends were in
danger, and gave orders to his troops to make
their attack. Upon that all the remainder of the
army came up, at the same time the rest of King
Perion's army advanced, and then the whole of
both hosts were engaged, and now were they all
so intermingled, that no one could attend to his
leader. They were so thronged that there was no
room to strike, not even with the sword, but by
force of hand they plucked their enemies down,
and in that affray they who were trampled to
death under the horses' feet, were more in number
than they who perished by the sword. The up-



roar end ftoise were so great, as well of voices as
of the din of arknsy that all the vallies of the moun-
tain rung, and it seemed as if the whole world
were there assembled in arms; and of a truth you
may believe, not that the whokx world, but that
the most part and the flower of Christendom was
there, which that day su£Fered so great a loss, that
it did not for long time recover therefrom. This
should be a warning to all Christian Princes to
take heed haw for their errors they make the inno-
cent perish thus; for peradventure, because of
their innocence, they who are slain go to a happy
place, and a worse and more perilous death re-
mains for those who caused the destruction,
though at the time they escape.

Agrayes, who alway was seeking King Lisuarte,
now saw that he had just broke his lance in over«
throwtng Dragonis, whom he was about to strike
•widi the sword. Upon this Agrayes cries out, At
me! at mel King Lisuarte! for I am the man who
most hateth thee. The King turned, and seeing
him, they made at each other with such fury, that
they met too closely to strike. Agrayes then let his
sword hang by the chain, and grappled with him.
Now, as you have heard heretofore, Agrayes was
the most impetuous Knight, and dfthe best heart



192

of any that lived in his time; and if his strength
had been equal to his courage, there would not
have been a better Knight in the world, and as it
was he was one of the good men. So they grap-
pled then, and struggled each to overthrow the
other ; and Agrayes would have found himself in
danger, for the King was of greater stature and
strength than he, if King Perion had not come up,
and with him Florestan, and Landin, and Enil, and
many other Knights. They came to help Ag-
rayes, and on the other side Don Guilan and
Norandel, and Brandoyuas, and Giontes, who al-
ways kept a watchful eye upon the King. Sword
in hand they all came up, for their lances had
long been broken^ both parties striving to succour
their friends ; but the King and Agrayes grappled
so closely that they could not separate them, nei-
ther could the one overthrow the other, for both
were upheld by their comrades. As the press of
the battle was now round about them, 'the uproar
brought thither maliy Knights on both sides ;
among others Don Quadragante came up, and
seeing what it was, he forced his way through.
He could not strike at the King, lest the blow
should wound Agrayes, but he laid hold on him,
and plucked so smartly, that he^ had well nigh
overthrown both, and though the Knights of Li*



193

suaru laid on him a heavy load of blbws, yet
would he not loose his hold. At this time King
Arban» came up» who till now had been with the
Emperor, and seeing the King's danger, he was
greatly dismayed, but he thrust forward and
seized Quadragante forcibly in his arms; and
thus they were all four entangled, and round
about them King Perion and his Knights and
Norandel and Don Guilan and their comrades all
fiercely battling. While they were in this tumult
the Emperor and King Cildadan came up with
three thousand Knights, and Gal tines and Gra-
sandor with a great company on the other side ;
all these ,came on with such force, and the press
became so great, that they who were struggling and
clasped together were fain to release each other,
and all four remounted on horseback, though soex-
hausted that they could scarcely keep their seats.
But now so great a multitude thronged to the
succour of King Lisuarte, that the day would
have been lost, if it had not been for the great
worth of King Perion and Don Quadragante and
Don Florestan and the Knights with them, who
valiantly bore the brunt of that assault. At this
time Amadis came from the right wing of the
battle, where he had slain Constancio with one
blow, and broken the enemy ; his sword was

VOL. IV. I



194

bloody tip to the hilt, and he rode a fresh horse
vhich he had just taken from one of the pages.
C^untGaltines and Gandalin andTrion came with
him; and when he saw- so many attacking his Fa-
ther, and the Emperor pushing on like a man who
thought the day his own, he spurred his horse,
and made so fierce an assault, that it was marvel-
lous to behold him. Floyan knew his arms, and
being fearful that if he encountered the Emperor^
all his people would not be able to save him,
thrust forward, adventuring his own life to save
his master's. Don Florestan placed himself bj
the side of Amadis, and seeing Floyan, encoun-
tered him with such blows that he beat him from
his horse, and what with the wound and with the
crowd who trampled on him, Floyan was there
slain. Amadis mean-time had set his eyes upon
the Emperor and his heart upon killing him, he
made at him through the throng, and maugre all
resistance forced his way up to him, and dealt
him a blow that made him drop his sword and
reel in the saddle ; before he fell, Amadis drove
down the sword a second time, it came upon the
shoulder, and cut through armour and flesh and
bone, slicing down, so that the whole quarter hung
loose, and the Emperor fell apd was de^4 pi^-
scntly.



195

When the Romans saw their Emperor slain, they
set up such a cry, that all who heard turned thU
ther, and among the rest Arquisil and Flamineo
came with many other Knights and beset Amadis
and Florestan. But then Count Galtines and
Gandalin and^Trion called out to Don Bruneo
and Angriote to join them, and they five made
way to their succour. King Peribn mean-time
and Agrayes and Quadragante were engaged
against King Lisuarte and King Cildadan, and
then was the hottest fight that had been seen that
day and the greatest slaughter. But now Don
Brian of Monjaste and Don Gandales, who had
collected about six hundred horse, made so fierce
a charge in that part where Amadis was fightings
that the enemies perforce were driven back. At the
great outcries which were then heard. King Arban
turned his head, and seeing how the Romans
were losing the field, he said to Lisuarte, Retire*
Sir, or you are lost* When the King heard this,
he looked round and saw that it was true ; he then
bade King Cildadan help him to withdraw his
men in good order, that they might not be
destroyed ; and thus they retreated, still facing
their enemies, and making head against them, till
they had fallen back as far as the Romans, and
then they all halted and stood their ground^ for-

i2



iqQ

M<)randel, and Don'Guilan, and Cendil of Ganota,
and Ladasin, and manjr other Knights, went to
assist the Romans, they being the weakest ; but
all was in vain, for the battle was lost. Amadis
now saw that Lisuarte had utterly lost the day,
and that if he pursued his victory it would be no
longer in his power to save the King, nor his own
good friends who were on that side : but above
all, he remembered that he was the father of
Qriana, and called to mind the favours which he
and his lineage had once received at his hands,
and he knew that forbearance now wxuld be to'
his glory and attributed to exceeding virtue, not
to lack of strength, for the Romans were carry-
ing their Emperor from the field with great la-
mentations, and scattered in confusion. The
night was now at hand, and he resolved, though
with danger of some shame, to try if he could
now serve his Lady. So taking with him Count
Galtines, he rode between the two armies with
great peril, for his own people, now knowing their
advantage, pressed so, upon the foe, that none ex-
cept Lisuarte, and CUdadan, and the best Knights,
could now make any defence. They rode up to
King Perion, and Amadis said to him. Sir, nigbt
comes on so fast that we shall soon not be able to
distinguish one another, and if tlie battle be con-



tinned there ii danger lest we iHaj friends fts well
as enemies i we had better call back the trocpst
the enemies have received such lossithat I believe
they will not dare abide us on the morrow. The
Kingi who was grieved in his heart to see so
many perish who had no faultr replied, Let it be,
soUi as you have said, that there may be no far-
ther slaughter i Godi who knows all things, sees
that we forbear for his sake, for they are all at
our mercy. Agrayes, whom Amadis did not see,
was near King Perion, and heard all that was
said : how, Sir Cousin, qiioth he, now that ycTs
have copquered your enemies, and are now on
the point of becoming tlie most honourable Prince
in the world, would you stay and spare them
now? Amadis replied, Sir Cousin, I would
spare our own people, lest in the darkness they
should slay one another ; as for the enemy, I
hold them as conquered, for they can make no
defence. But Agrayes, who well knew what was
his intention, exclaimed, Since you will not con-'
quer, you ought not to command, and you deserve
always to be an Errant Knight, since at such a
time you suffer compassion to overcome you ;
but do as you please ! Then King Perion on one
side, with Don Quadragante, who was nothing.

i3



sorry for the resolutioiiy because of King Cilda^
dan, with whom he was so nearly connected^ and
whom he lovgd so well ; and Amadis, and Oastir
les, on the other side, began to recall the troops,,
which they did with little diflSculty, fop it was
now night. King Lisuarte, who bad no hope of

«

recovering the field, and was resolved to die ra-
ther than be conquered, was greatly astoni^ed to
see these Knights withdraw their troops, and well
knew that this was not done without some great
^ cause, and he stood still to see what would come
of it. Now when Eling Crldadan beheld what
the enemies were about, he said to Lisuarte, I
believe these people do not pursue us that they
may do us honour ;. since it is so, let us secure
our retreat, and go to rest, for it is time. This-
accordingly they did, for King Arban of North
Wales, and Don Guilan tlie Pensive, and Arqui-
sil, and Flamineo, brought oiF the Romans ; and
thus then this great battle ended, as you have
heard.

Now because the beginning of all this great his-
tory was founded upon the love of King Perion
and Queen Elisena, by whom this Knight Ama-
dis was begotten, from whose love for his Lady



100

Oriatia all this great outcry hath proceeded, al-
though it may appear somewhat from the ' pur-
posCy yet reasonable it is, that for this reason, and
for the excuse of those Vfho love like them^ it
should be said how the strength of love is above
the strength of all -other things ; seeing that in
such an affair as this, so famous in all the world,
where so many nations were assembled, and there
was so great slaughter, and the honour of victory
was so greatf love had such power above anger
and rage, and pride, and old hatred, that Uiis
Knight forewent the glory of the greatest vic-
tory in the yrorld, whereby his enemies were
saved, as you have heard, for, beyond all doubt,
the destruction of King Lisuarte and all his peo-
ple was then in the hand of Amadis. But it is
not reasonable that this should be attribilted to
any other than that Lord who is the helper of all
things ; and we may well believe, that it was
permitted by him for the sake of the great peace
and concord which ensued after this great enmity,
as you shall hear*

The armies being thus separated, and having re-
tired to their camps, truce was made for two
days, because the dead were so many. What

j4



200

trooUe there was in burying tfaem» and what
mourning was made, I may be excused from re*
latingy because the death of the Emperor made
all other losses be, as it were, forgotteui and b€<^
cause it would be tedious.



201



CHAPTER SI. '



When King Lisnarte came to his tent, he be-
sought King Cildadan to alight and disarm there^
that before they rested they might give order re-
spectuig the body of the Emperor; then weary
and bruised as they were, they went to the tent
where the Emperor lay dead, and found his
Knights making dole over him ; for albeit, he was
so proud, yet was he so liberal of his gifts and fa-
vour that that covered many of his faults. The
two Kings then besought all these Knights to
go rest themselves, saying, that they would see
•the body disposed of as it ought ; and then they
gave orders to the officers of his household to
prepare the body that it might be carried a day's
journey to a monastcrynear the town of Lubayna,
from whence it might be removed at leisure to the
chapel of the Emperor at Rome« They then re-

i5



202

the tent, and Aen they snpt, 2nd it
with a chearful countenance; but there
who was troubled in his spirit, and that
ig Lisuarte ; for by the great advantage
(lies had gotten in die two former battles,
that when the truce expired, there was
ior him, but either he must be disho-
tnd vanquished, or what he was more cer-
slain.

mormw the Emperor and Floyan were
to the monastery, and Lisuarte and King
n went to the Emperor's tent, and called
r Arquisil and Flaminco and the chief
i among the Romans, and said to them,
d friends, God only can tell the grief 1 feel
loss, and the desire I have to revenge itj
past is without remedy, and we must shffw
i death of a Prince is not the destruction
s people. If all others should forsake me,
not depart from this place, except either
ror, or dead ; do ye, therefore, call to
what you are, and we may yet recover
Ivanlage we have lost, to our great glory.
, Arquisil, who was now the chief in rank
as courage, being next in succession to the
, replied, It b notorious to all the world



203

what signal things the Romans have atchieTed^
being among other nations like the morning' star
among other stars. Since we are of so great a
nation, do not you King Lisuarte believe, but that
we will fearlessly follow the example of our fore*
fathers : and therefore, for myself and for these
Chiefs I o£Fer, when this truce is at an end, to take
the front of the battle, and to resist the enemy,
even witli more heart and courage than if our
lord the Eitiperor were present. Greatly were
they all contented with this brave speech of Ar-
quisil: King Lisuarte^then said to- Cildadan,
Good Sir, since we have found such resolution in
the Romans, which I did not expect, and since they
have now so good a Knight as Arquisil to lead
them, we also should lay aside all fear, and take
this chance as we ought : for myself, I tell you,
that after the truce, there shall be nothing but
battle ; and if God does not give me victory, I
do not wish him to give me life ; for death would
be more desirable. Now, though King Cil-
dadan was always grieved at heart to think that
be was tributary to KingXisuarte, yet being so
good a Knight, and regarding his oatA and pro-
mise more than his own will and pleasure, he re«
plijed, 1 am rejoiced. Sir, by what the Romans
say, and still more at beholding your resolution i

16



aro4



for things like these, are the touchstones hf wHc&
Tirtue is proved* For myself, he assured, that
living, or dead, where you are, there shall my
body be found also. FroQi that hour King Li-
suarte resolved, let his fortune be what it might,
to release Cildadan from his vassalage for that
good will which be manifested to die in his de^
fence.



205



CHAPTER 32.



«



}^asciano> the boly man who liad brought up Es«
plandian, heard of the great discord between the
Kings, and what danger they were in, whether
by a special revelation of God, or by rumour that
reached him is not known, for the hermitage
wherein he had dwelt forty years, was in so re-
mote a part of the forest, that scarcely ever
traveller passed that way. He being sick, be^
sought God to give him strength, that he might
go to the Firm Island, to obtain Oriana's* consent,
without which it could not be done, that he might
reveal the secret of her love to Amadis, which he
might safely do, she being not in her father's
power, and whereby he trusted to bring about
peace. So being somewhat recovered, though still
very weak and infirm, he mounted his ass, and
took with him two men of the village where his



20fl

sister dwelt, and with much labour and slow tra-
veiling, arrived at the Firm Island, when King
Perion and the army had left it to give battle,
whereat he was greatly grieved. Being arrived,
he sent word to Oriana of his coming, at which she
greatly rejoiced, being desirous to consult with him
respecting her conscience ; and she sent the Dam-
sel of Denmark to bring him to her. So soon as
he came within the doors, she fell upon her knees
before him, and wept bitterly, and said, O holy
man, give yourblessingtothe unhappy and sinful
woman who, for her own misfortune and the
mischief, of so many others, was bom into this
world ! The tears came into the Hermit's eyes,
and he raised his hands and blessed her, saying.
That God who is the helper of all and almighty,
bless you and remedy all your-troubles ! He then
took her by the hand and raised her up, and said.
My good' lady and dear daughter, I am come hi-
ther with much toil to speak with you ; and when
you are so pleased, hear me, for I cannot tarry,
neither is it befitting my habit and manner of life.
Oriana, who could not answer him for sobs, tlien
led him into her chamber, and gave order that
they should be left alone*

When the Hermit saw be could speak safely,



207

be said, My good lady* I have heard all this newa
in my hermicagey and have therefore taken this
journey, because I knew the secret of your con«
science, and the great danger of your person and
fame, if the marriage which the King your fa-
ther designeth, should take place. Now, my dear
daughter, having learnt this from you in confes-
sion, I am not at liberty to apply the remedy to
all this evil ; but it is now a greater sin to keep it
silent, than to reveal it ; I therefore come, my
beloved daughter, that you may be persuaded that
your .father should be informed of what has pass*
ed, and how he cannot lawfully give you any
other husband than the one you already have ; for
while he thinks he may justly dispose of you in
marriage, he will persist in his determination to
the great destruction of so many ; and at last it will
be discovered, for the Gospel sayeth, that all hid-
den things shall be made known. Oriana who had
now somewhat recovered, took his hands and for-
cibly kissed them oftentimes, and said, O holy man
and servant of God, I commit my cares to you»
that you may do what is most for the good of my
soul ^nd the service of God ; and I beseech him
to direct you, not as I, sinner as I am, have de-
served, but as he in his infinite goodness, hath of-
tentimes been pleased to deal with those who, like



208

faify with tbeir whole hearts implore his inercy*
Put your trust in him^ replied the good man; and
I must without delay depart, for great evil might
arise if I made any tarriance. God be with youy
said Oriana ; I beseech you, if you return here,
bring with you the child who is indebted to yoQ|
under God, for his life.

•The holy man then took his leave ; but so infirm
was he, that not being able to travel in any other
manner than upon^his ass, he did not arrive at the
camp of King Lisuarte till these two battles had
been fought, and they were employed in burying
the dead. This sight greatly troubled him, and
he besought God to prosper him, that he might
be the means of ending this destructive quarrel,
and without any delay he rode straight to the
King's tent, and there alighted from his ass and
went in. When the King saw him he knew him
immediately, and marvelled at his coming ; for
he thought that by reason of his great age he
could not go from his hermitage ; and he pre>
sently judged, that so holy a man was not come
without great cause ; and he went to meet him
and fell upon his knees before him, and said»
Father Nasciano, my friend, and the servant of
God, give me your blessing ! The Hermit ruised



SCO

his handSf and aiid» That God-wbom I and all an
boapd to re^erey protect you and give you luch
understanding! that your soul may one day enjoy
the glory and repose for which it was created^ if
by youl* own fault it be not lost* He then gave
him his blessing, and raised him up» and, knelt io
his turn to kiss his hand t but Lisuarte embraced
him. The King then gave orders that food should
be brought him ; and after he had eat, he led the
. holy man into a recess of the tent and asked him
the cause of his coming, saying, that he marvelled
how so recluse a man and one of so great age
should have travelled so far from his l;al)itation«
The Hermit made answer, Certes, Sir, according
to my years, and condition, and inclination, I am
now only fit to go from my cell to the altar ;
but it behoves all those who would serve our
Lord Jesus Chiist* and would follow his example^
for no trouble or toil to turn aside. I learnt, Sir^
in my hermitage, of this cruel war, and that the
cause thereof was, that you were resolved to give
your daughter in marriage to the Emperor of
Rome. Now, this I knew could not be done, not
for the reason which the Chiefs and People of
your realm with good cause assigned, because
she is your lawful inheritrix, which ought in con«
science to have prevailed ; but for another cause



210

vhich i$ unknown to you and all yovtt people^ and
vrhichy adcording to all laWs» divine and human,
mak^s it impossible ; which Is, that your daughter
is already joined in marriage to the husband
whom it hath pleased our Lord Clirist to appoint
for bis service.

When the King heard this» he tlK)Ught either that
the good man's senses were impaired by his great
age, or else that some one had deceived him with
false tales, and he replied, Nasciano, my good
friend, my daughter Oriarta neither now has, nor
ever has had any other husband than that Empe-
ror to whom I gave her ; and God is my witness
that I did not that for the sake of disinheriting
her to give my kingdom to my other daughter,
as some have supposed, but in order by this alliance
with the Roman Empire, to increase his holy Ca-
tholic faith. If I had foreseen the great evils
which have occurred,! would gladly have changed
my purpose ; but as my designs were just and
good, I cannot think that what has ensued can
be imputed to my account. The good man
replied, 1 told you. Sir, that the cause was
unknown to you, but I know it. On that day.
Sir, when by your command, I brought Child Es-
plandian to your tent in the Forest, the Queen and



21 1

Oriana spake with me concerning the state of their
conscience^ and then I learnt fronv your daugfh-
ter Oriana, that when Amadis of Gaul delivered
her from Arcalaus and the four Knighta who
were carrying her away, that day when you were
decoyed away hy the Damsel^ and in danger of
losing your kingdom and your li&y unless you had
been, helped hy Galaor* she then, in recompence
for the service which he had done her, and still
more for what his brother had done for you, pro«
mised marriage to that noble Knightf who is the
flower and mirror of all chivalry ; and from this
marriage it has pleased God that Esplandian
should be bom, whom he has thought fit so to dis-
tinguish above all others that live* You know.
Sir,, better than I, what the wise Urgandathe Un«
known said concerning him ; and now I would
see if the great wisdom wherewith God has en-
dowed you be well bestowed, and the great power
wherewiJi he has entrusted you; for since hebatli
done for you so much more than you deserve, you
ought not to think much of following what his holy
destinies point out.

When the King heard this he was greatly asto-
nished, and said, O Father Nasciano, is it true
that my daughter is married to Amadis ^ He ve-



plMi it if ceruinly true that he !i the husband of
your daughter! and that Child Esplandian is
your grandson. Holy Mary I quoth the Kingy
how ill done was it'to keep this secret from me so
tong. If I had known. or guessed it, so many
would not have been slain tor no fault of their
own I My good friend, I wish you had informed
me in time to have prevented this^ evil 1 That, Sir^
could not be, replied the holy roan, Yor what it
revealed in confession must never be divulged r
and it is with the consent of the Princess that I
come. 1 trust in God that if the present he reme^^
died, as it may, he will with little penitenqs forgive ;
the past, in which the action hath been worse than •
the will. King Lisuarte made no answer, he sate
musing upon tho great worth of Amadis and tlie
services he had received from him, and he thought
also upon his love to Galaor, and above all to Es--
plandian, and what Urganda had prophesied. At
length he said. Father Nasciano, the friend of
God, subject as my heart hath been to pride, and
though I had resolved either to receive death or
to inflict it, your holy words have such virtue, that
they have prevailed ; and if peace be not now
brought, you shall witness before God that the
fault is not mine. Do you, therefore, speak with
Amadisi without letting him know my intention^



213

and learn what he would have done in this case»
and let us see how all can be settled to the ad-

' vantage and honour of both parties. . Nasciano»
weeping for pure joy, knelt before him, and ex-
claimed, O fortunate King ! may he who came
to saTe us thank you for this I I have not power
to do it. So he prepared to depart without delay,
that all might be settled before the truce expired.
But as he was going forth from the tent, Esplan-
dtan and Sargil came in, whom Queen Brisena
had sent to learn tidmgs of the King her Lord.
When the good man saw how he was grown, and
that he was almost approaching to the stature of
manhood, who can tell the joy and delight that
he felt ? certes, it is impossible to express it, and
being as he was with the King, he went towards
him as fast as he could to embrace him. Esplan-
dian, though he had not for a long time seen him,
knew him immediately, and knelt down to kiss his
hand, and the old man embraced him and kissed
him many times with exceeding joy, saying, O my
dear son, blessed be the hour wherein thou wert

' bom, and blessed and praised be the Lord, who
by such miracle preserved thy life, and hath made
thee what I now behold. All they who beheld
the exceeding love which the good man manifest?



$14

ed were greatly moved, but he who felt the most^
though he did not show the pleasure which he
felt, was Kiilg Lisuarte; for well as he had loved
the Child heretofore for liis beauty, and the hope
there was of him, that love was without the know-
ledge that he was in very truth his grandson, and
such force had this love, that all the hatred and
enmity which he had so long harboured gave way,
and his old feelings towards Amadts returned,
such as they were when Amadis was most in his
flavour, and now he kiiew that what Urganda had
said was true, how that Child should bring about,
peace between hixn and Amadis.

The Child now knelt to the King, and gave him a
letter from Queen Brisena, in which she besought
him to make peace, if it could be done to his ho-
nour. The good man then said, Sir, it would be
a great comfort to me if you would permit £s«
plandian to go with me, that I may have leisure
to look at him and talk with him. Let him go,
replied the King, and I charge him not to leave
you till it be your pleasure. For this the good
man thanked the King much, and he said, my
good and happy son, come with me since the King
4<oinmands it. The Child replied} Good Sir, and



±15

Riy true father, I am well pleased to go withyoti,
for 1 have long desired to see you. So he went
out from the tent and mounted his ass, and Es-'
plandian and Sargil rode each his palfrey, and
with this company the good man proceeded to the'
other camp, and rode directly to the tent of Ama-
dis. Amadis, for he had never seen him, knew
him not, and could not divine for what so old and
infirm a man should conie thither ; and he knew
Esplandian as little, for though be had spared the
Roman Knights at his intreaty, yet had he then
^en him for so short a time, that he had forgotten
him; butsofair was theChild, that he could scarce
believe such heauty could be in a mortal man.
But Don Quadragante knew him, and went up to
him, saying, I must embrace you, my good friend !
Don Brian of Monjaste and I gave the Greek
Knight your bidding! then he turned to Amadis,
This, Sir, is fair Child Esplandian. When Ama*'
dis heard that name, whether or no he was plead-
ed need not be said ; for he was so overpowered
with joy that he could hardly answer, and did not
recollect himself, and if any one had looked at
him they would have seen his agitation: but there
was jtion^ who suspected the truth, for they all be-
lieved that only Uganda Iokw the father of the
Child*



210

Tken Ainadts Would have embraced him while
Don Qaadragante was still holding him by the
hand, but Child Esplandian said, Good Sir, do ho*
noHr first to the holy man Nasciano, who is cOm#
to leek you. When the Knights heard that this
was Nasciano, the fiame of whose holiness and ri*
gorotts life was spread abroad in all parts, they all
humbly drew nigh, and knelt before him, and
asked his blessing. The Hermit then said, I be*
seech my Lord Jesus Christ, if the blessing of such
a sinner as I am can be of any avail, that it may
abate the pride and anger of your hearts, and give
you such understanding, that forgetting the vain
things of this world, ye may follow the true things
of the true one ; and then he lifted up his hands
and blessed them.

Amadis then embraced Esplandian, who made
oSetsanflC and reverence, not as to his father, but
as to the best Knight in the world, whom he had
long desired to see, and from whom he could now
hardly take off his eyes* Amadis seeing how ear-
nestly the Child looked at him, suspected that he
knew something of the truth; but the good Her-
mit beholding them both how fair they were, as
they were thus embracing, he was as happy as if
he had been in Paradise, and in his heart he prayed



2!7

Id God for them, and besought him that for hw
service he would be pleased to enable him to make
peace between these Knights, who were the flower

, of the world. He then said to Don Quadragante,
Sir, I have something to say to Amadls ; while I
speak with him, be pleased to take with you this
Child, since you better than any other of these
Knights know him. He then took Amadis by the
hand, and when they were sufficiently retired, he
said, my son,, before I open to you the principal
cause of my coming, I would have you call to mind
how. much more than all other living men you
ought to be thankful to the Lor dour God, for at the
hour of your birth you were shut up in an ark, and
cast into the sea, and the Redeemer of the world
had pity on you. He hath made you the fairest
Knight in the world, and tlie strongest, and most
well-beloved, and seeing that he hath done so
much for you., what.ought not you to do for him ?
I am come hither, son, with great toil and pain,
to sea if I can bring about peace, and having spo-
ken with King Lisuarte, and found him disposed
to obey God, as every good King who is the ser-
vant of God should do, I would now, my good

. 5ir, learn, whether you have most regard to him
who created you, or to the vain glory, of the

VOL. IV. K



218

^orld. You may speak to me withont resenre,
for I have been to the Firm Island, and have un-
dertaken this charge mth the permission of the
Princess Oriana, the secret of whose heart I have
learnt in confession. Amadis well believed that
this was true, because this was a holy man, who
would not speak an untruth ; he made answer,
friend of God, and holy Hermit, I should be the
most fortunate Knight that ever lived, if I could
discharge what I owe to our Lord Christ for the
benefits wherewith he has favoured me; but I am
a sinful man, who every day offend him, and right
glad shall I be if, by your coming, I may be taught
how to make atonement for the past. O my for-
tunate son ! exclaimed the good man, how have
you connforted my heart, that was so disconsolate
at beholding so great destruction ! that Lord who
is to save you give you the recompense which I >
cannot ! Now without fear I will tell you what I
have already done. Then he told him how, by
Oriana's consent, he had revealed the secret to
King Lisuarte, and with what patience the King
had learnt it ; and since, by God's help they were
in this state, he besought him to devise how, by his
marriage with the Princess, peace might be cstab»
lished.



210

At this the heart and all the flesh of Amadts
trembled for exceeding joy, to think that, by the
consent of his Lady Oriana, the secret of their
love was now made known. My good Sir, he re*
pliedj if King Lisuarte is in this disposition, and
will accept me to be his son, I will acknowledge
him for my Lord and Father, and serve him hi
whatsoever shall be to his honour. How then»
quoth the Hermit, shall I proceed to bring this
about before there be farther mischief? Amadis
made answer, methinks you, should speak with
the King, my father, and tell him wherefore you
are come hither, and request him to incline to
peace, if King Lisuaite slit.ulJ now accord to
what Don Quadragante and Don Brian here-
tofore demanded, with regard to his daughter
Oriana. I trust in his virtue that you will speed
with him, as you desire ; tell him that you have
commuaed with me, but that I refer every thing
to his pleasure. The good man incontinently went
to the tent of King Perion, taking with him Sar-
gil and Child Esplandian* King Perion^ know-
ing who the good man was, received him with
much love, and looking at Esplandian, whom he
had never before seen, he marvelled to. behold so
fair a creature, and asked the Hermit who he was.
The holy man repliedi That hs was one whom he.

k2



220

liad bred up, and whom God had given him by
great miracle. What! quoth King Perion, is
this the child whom the lioness suckled ? of whom
Urganda prophesied such wonders, and wrote to
King Lisuarte that he should one day bring about
peace between him and Amadis? This is he,
' said the good man Nasciano, and if you have
reason to love him now, much more will you
have when you know more concerning him : Son,
said he, kriss the King's hand ; but Ferion then
embraced him, and asked Nasciano if he knew
whose child he was. God's <:hild, the good man
replied, though bom of mortal man and woman ;
but it is manifest that God loved him like a child,
and it will please him that before long you shall
know more concerning him. He then led the
King aside, and said, I am come hither. King,
being thus aged and infirm as you see me, hop-
ing that the Lord my God will enable me to put
an end to this strife. I have spoken with King Li-
suarte, who, as one who serves God, is well dis-
posed for peace, so it may be concluded to the
honour of both parties ; and I have spoken with
your son Amadis, who says tliat he will obey
your will ; so that now peace or war is at your
choice. But all know how greatly you are bound

»

to serve the Lord, who hath so blessed you with



221

aU the good things of this life, your kingdom #
and your wife, and your sons ; and now will it
be seen in what nianner you acknowledge his
goodness, and are desirous to serve btm.. God is
" zny witness, replied tlie King, that I would wit
lingly have avoided this great discord ; but King
Lisuarte -would listen to no reason^ thinking, that
as he had the Emperor of Rome 6n his part> th6
whole world were to be subject to him, and what
hath ensued from this presumption all men now
behold* But if he will now show that reason
which hitherto he hath not shown, I trust that
these Knights, who are on our part, will easily fol-
low my inclination, which is to put a strp to this
slaughter. J^nd farther, that you may know for
how slight a demand he is thus obstinate, if he
would but come to some terms for his daughter
Oriana, that would remedy all. My good Lord»
replied Nasciano, God will give this remedy,
and I in his jflace ; do you then speak with your
Knights, and appoint certain of them who are de«-
sirous of the common good ; King Lisuarte wiH
do the same ; and I, as the soldier of God, will
be with them to close and repair the breach that
has been made. The good man then went away
with a joyful heart to ihe camp of King Lisu*
arte.

R 3



222

King Perion then called together his principal
Knights, and said, Noble Piinces and Knights*
even as we are bound to expose ourjselves to all
clanger to defend oar honours and estates, and to
nunntain justice, so atre we to lay aside all anger
luid resentment, and listen to reason when it is
proffered to us. The holy servant and friend of
God» Nasciano the Hermit,, lias come hither to
^y, that oar enemies are desirous of peace, more
conformable to good conscience than to points of
lumour, and he only requires that persons on both
sides be appointed to meet and consult together :
thh I thought right that you should know,,t]xa(
'your opinion may be taken and followed. At
this they were aH silent for a while, till Angriotc
arose and said, since none else adventures, I will
^peak. Sir ; we chose you for your great worth to
be our Chief in this war, knowing that neither
flavour nor affection would induce you to swerve
from what was tight : so also um I assured that
whatever you shall determine, there is none here
who would gainsay, for your single power is sxA
ficient to decide ; howbeit, since you.are pleased to
ask our judgment, I will tell you mine ; it would>
he great foUy in us, having so encreased our
honour, to deny peace when our enemies are de-.
sirous of it; as Don Quadragante atiADon^Briam.



223

of Monjaste were deputed before, they should be
again appointed, as men whose discretion and
virtue will justly decide whether for peace or
war. So thus it was detemnned that these two
Knights should consult with King Peri6n» and
resolve accordingly.



Kit



224



CHAPTER 90.



Th« good man Nasciano returned to Kmg
arte» and told bim how well he had' sped : and as
the King was now determined no longer to give
way to the Wicked One, as he had done to
the occasion of so great evil, he replied, peace
shall not be prevented by my fault, as you shall
see ; do you therefore remain here in my tent, and I
will go and speak with those Knights who hare
undergone such danger to support my honour-
Then he went to the tent of King Gasquilan, who
lay in his bed still from his encounter with Amap
dis, and there he sent for King Cildadan, and the
chief of the Romans and of his own army, and
told them what the good man Nasciano had
done, reserving only what related to Amadis and



225

his daughter^ for that he would not have know
as yet ; and he besought them to deliver their
opinion, in particular the Romans, for the great
loss which they had sustained in losing their Em-^
peror, bound him to follow their will, even though
it were different from his own. King Cildadan in
like manner requested the Romans to state their
opinion ; and upon that the good Knight Arqui-
sil arose and said, if my Lord the Emperor were
living, his opinion ought to be followed, because
this quarrel was his ; but he being dead, we may
say that what he was bound to do died with hiia,
and we, who areliis kinsmen and vassals, are now
no more a part, than as we are bound to follow
you. King Lisuarte, which we will do while a
man of u^ remains alive ; to you, therefore, as the
person whom this most nearly concerns, we leave
the decision. Much was the King pleased at
the speech of this Knight, which was as prudent as
it was courageous : so returning to his tent, he
appointed King Arban of North Wales, and Don
Guilan the Pensive, to treat on his part \ and he
said to the Hermit, as things are in this state, I
hold it advisable that you should return to King
Perion, and tell him that I have chosen these
Knights, and that as there always are xielays ia
such matters^ it would be weH if we both raisedr

k5



onr camp, because while \ve are here, neitfier
can the wounded be well looked to> nor the armies
supplied with food for men and beasts ;. he there-
Fore should fall back a.day's journey, and I to the
town of Lubayna, to see that my wounded men
be taken care of, and to send oS the Emperor to
his own country. Our modiators will know how
. to proceed^ and you shall be present ; and-if need
be, he and I may see each other, where we may
think good. This pleased the Hermit well ; for
though all was not yet settled, he knew the danger
would be farther removed, when the armies were
farther apart ;, for though this good man was itt
orders, and led so strict a life in so remote.-a.part,
be had in- his time been a right good Knight in
the court of King Liisuarte's father, and after o£
King Falangris, so that though he was perfect iu
things divine, he was also well versed in things
temporal.. Sir, said he. to the King, it only re-
mains to appoint a. certain day when your Am-
.bassadors shall meet here, which will be mid- way
between the two armies ; and by God's blessing I
uust they will so agree that you and King Perion
may meet. I will go without delay, asfd send to
tell you at wliat hour to break up your caanp. So
he went to King Perion, who, with the consau of
the two chosen Knights, was weU content that the



227

armies should remove on the morrow. King
Lisuarte was advised thereof, and in the morning
the trumpets were sounded, and the tents' raised,
and the two armies joyfully separated, each going
to the place appointed. '



K 6



228



CHAPTER S4k



Meantime King Aravigo, and Barsinan Lord of
Sansuena, and Arcalaus the Enchanter, remained
in the mountain ; they knew by their spies of the
two battles that had been fought, and how the
camps were so well fortified, that they could not
be forced at night; and the longer the struggle
continued, the mor^ were they rejoiced, being
assured that the one party would at length be
subdued, and thus they should win an easy victory,
and fully effect their purpose. But now the spies
brought tidings that the armies had broken up
their camps> and were separating, they knew not
for what cause. Aravigo presently concluded
that some accord had taken place, and he deter-
mined without delay to attack King Lisuarte ra*
ther than Amadis ; for if the King were slain or



229

taken) Amadis would care little concerning Great
Britain, and he might obtain possession of it.
Howbeit, he said» it would be best to attack them
by night, when they were utterly unprepared, and
he sent his nephew Esclavor, who was a man ^kil-
ftil in war, with ten Knights, to observe their mo-
tions ; accordingly he rode as privily as he could
along the mountain, watching tlieir march in the
plain. ■ -

Now King Lisuarte had alway been suspicious
of this army, though he had no certain knowledge
conce^^iing them ; but he had heard from some of
the country people that there were troops by the
sea side, though he had no leisure to attend to .the
information, being too much employed. But now
he was told that there were horsemen on the
mountain, who seemed to conceal themselves :
presently the King apprehended, that if they came
upon him, he could not escape without battle, the
which he greatly feared, seeing . how hardly his
army had been handled in the two former fights ;
howbeit, having so courageous a heari:, he did
not delay to apply the fitting remedy, and he
called King Cildadan and the other chiefs, and
telling them what he had heard, bade them hold
their trOops in readiness^ that if need were, they



230

might be found as Knights ought to be: They
all replied that they were ready to lose their lives
in his defence. Bnt S€»ne there were, and in par-
ticular Don Grumedan and Brandoyuas, who
secretly counselled him to advise King Perion,
for this army was fresh and numerous,^ and so
greatly were they his enemies, that if they con-
quered, they would show him no mer&y. But the
King, who ever regarded his honour more than
)iis life, refused to ask aid of the other army, say-
ing, that belike there was no danger, and if there
were, they had only to bestir themselves as they
had done in greater perils. He then sent Filis*
pinel with twenty Knights to the mountain, to see
what diey could discover. Then he made his
men halt and refresh themselves, for they had
now marched four leagues, and he was destrous
that they should not stop again before they
;^ched Liibayna, being fearfol of an attack by
night; and knowing, that if the men rested a
second time, they would disarm and skep, so that
a small force would put them to the rout. After
they had rested a while and taken food, he gave
order to mount again and proceed^ the baggage
and the wounded goicig before, though the greater
part of the wounded had been sent to Lubayua
duxing die truce.



231

f ilispinel went straight to the mountain, and made
such search, that he soon discorered Esclavor and
his company; and remaining himself in sight
of them, he sent to inform the King how he had
seen these few Knights upon the look out, and
that he helieved the rest were not far distant.
Lisuarte therefore quickened his march that he
might be near Lubayna, if the danger overtook
him ; for though the town were not strongly for-
tified, yet he could better defend himself there
than in the plain : so he was soon at a good dis-^
tance from the mountain^ Esclavor. now found
that he was discovered, and sent to say so to his
uncle King Aravtgo, and to tell him that he had
better descend into the plain without delay, fen-
King Lisuarte, having espied them, would not
halt till he had found a place to his advantage..
When the messenger brought this advice to King
Aravigo, his troops were all at rest, that they
might be fresh for the attack at night, so that there
was a great delay while they armed ; and the
ground which they had chosen for security, be-
cause it was rugged and broken, contributed to
embarrass them when they w^re thus in baste.
Howbeit, they began the pursuit,, but before they
had got down from the mountain, King Lisuarte
was so hx4yn his way, that it was manifest they



232

could not come up with him till he was very near
the town. Arcalaus, who knew the country, told
King Aravigo not to be grieved on that account,
neither to hurry his army so as to heat them, for
he knew the town, and that the King with his
small force would be in greater danger there thaa
in the field.

Meantime, by the will of God who would not
that this evil race should put their crooked pur-
poses into effect, it so befell that the good Hermit
sent Child Esplandian and his nephew Sargil to
the King to tell him, that he would be with hi na
in Lubayna, as soon as be could, to give order for
the meeting of the four Knights. When they
came to the camp the. army had already departed
and they followed till they came to the place
where the King had halted, and there they learnt
that he had advanced in fear and with greater
haste : upon that they quickened their pace; but
before they came in sight of the. King, they
saw the army coming down the mountain, and
immediately thought it was King Aravigo ; for
when they Vere* with Queen Brisena they had
heard of his arrival in the country, and knew
that the Queen had sent out troops different ways
to observe them : but now beholding how mighty



233

a power was with him, and that King Lisuarte's
army was few in number and sore wearied, £s«
plandian was greatly grieved to think of this
'danger, and said to Sargil, Brother follow me^
and do not let ns rest till the King be succoured,
vEnd with that they turned the reins and galloped

r

all the remainder of the day and the night also^*
till at dawn they overtook King Ferion who had
jetreated only four leagues, and had pitched his
camp beside a brook among fruit trees, and. set
guard upon the side of the mountain ; for he also
had learnt of this army by the report of some
shepherds. Esplandian went straight to the tent
of Amadis, and found the good man who had just
riten, and was preparing to set forth on his way*
Good son, cried the Hermit, why are you in such
baste ? I cannot stay to tell you, replied the Child»
till I have spoken with Amadis ; so be alighted,
and went In where Amadis was asleep, though in
his armour, as he had been all night for the de»
fence of the camp. Esplandian awoke him, and
said, O good Sir, if at any time your heart hath
desired great exploits, the hour is now come
wherein its worth may be made manifest ; for
though you have atchieved many and perilous ex«
ploits, yet never was there one so signal as this.
Know that the troops who we heard were in the



234

mountains with King Anyigo^ are advancing as
fast as they can against my. lord King Lisaaite ;
and they are so many and his force so little and
in sa ill a plight^ that under God he hath no reme*
■dy but in you. Amadis at this arose instantly)
and said. Good child, wait for me here, and if I
can prevail your labour shall not be in vain: then
he went to the tent of King Perion his father, and
telling him these tidings, besought his permissioa
to go to the succour of King Lisuarte, which woald
be greatly to his honour and praise wherever it
was known ; and he knelt down, and would not
rise firom his knees till- the King had answered
him. Son, quo& King Perion, do as you dunk
good; take such troops as yon chi^oseand ieadtlit
way, and I will follow. If wc are to have peace
l^ith King Lisuarte this will make it firmer ; and
if war, it is better that he should be overthrown
by us than by otfaois, vrttOf peradventure, might
be worse enemies to us than ke is.

The trumpets were then sounded, and the whole
army being already armed and suspicious of at^
tack, went to horse and arranged themselves in.
their ranks. King Perion told them what had
fallen out, and besought them, laying aside all
emoity to King Lisuarte, to inarch with good



236

will and succour him a^inst that wicked race.
They all approved of what he said, and declared
they were ready to obey him. Amadis then took
with him Don Quadragante, and his brother
Don Horestan, and Angriote of Estravaus, and
Gavarte of the Perilous Valley, and Gandalin, and
£nil, and four thousand Knights, and also Master
Helisabad,who in this war had performed miracles
in his office, giving life to many who could not
have lived but for the help of God and him.
With tliis company he hastened forward, and
Km^ Penon with the rest of the host fioUowed*



236



CHAPTER ^3.



King AraTigo might have overtaken LisuartCy if
it had not been for the advice of Arcalaus^ and the
night came on so dark now that they could not see
each other : so they continued their march all night,
Esclavor and the ten with him> and forty others
whom his uncle had sent to strengthen them, being
as it were mingled with the rear of Lisuarte's
army. Thus they proceeded till the day dawned,
and then they saw that they Ivere near each other,
and at little distance fron) the town. Then King
Lisuarte, like a brave prince as he Was, halted,
and divided his men into two bodies ; the one he
gave to King Cildadan, and with him were No-
ra adel» and King Arban of North Wales, and
Don Guilan, and Cetidil of Ganota, and about
two thousand Knights: in the other, Arquisil and
Flamineo with the l^omans, andGiontes, and Bran<^



237

dcyuas, and about sij( thousand Knights. If these
two divisions had been well armed, and their
hoiscs fresh, they would not have had much to
fear from their enemies; but it was otherwise, for
their arms were broken in the former battle, and
their horses spent, as well with their former fa-
tigue as with the present, having- now travelled
day and night with little respite.

King Aravigo had placed Barsinan in the van with
two thousand Knights, and as soon as it was light
enough the two armies attacked each other, with
so fierce an encounter that many were overthrown.
Barsinan broke his lance, and laid hand to his
sword, and dealt his blows around like a brave
man who was in great anger. Norandel who was
among the foremost met an uncle of Barsinan^
who had governed the land during his minority^
and he smote him so rudely that the lance went
through shield and breast-plate and came out be-
tween his shoulders, and he fell dead. King Cil-
dadan also and Don Guilan and King Arban
played their part soweU) that the host of Barsinan.
would have been discomfited if Arcalaus had not
advanced to their succour. Though he had lost
half of his right hand by a stroke which Amadis
had^iven him when he was catted Beltenebros, he



238

had now by practice learnt tome the left as 'well;
ah<f at his coming Barsinan and his company took
heart again, and many of King Lisuarte's Knights
Were slain, or badly wounded, or overthrown.
Great deeds in arms did Arcalaus then atchieve,
Hke one who was valiant and strong, and at that
hour you might have seen wonders done by King
Cildadan, and Norandel, and Don Guilan, and
Cendil of Ganota; for they were the shield and
rampart of the army ; but all ^ould have been of
no avail, for the enemies were so many and fresh,
if King Lisuarte, who never in.any danger, how
great soever, failed to do his duty, had not ad*
▼anced ; he, desirous rather to die than fail in his
devoir, pricked Ibrward before his men. The first
4nan whomhe met was brother to that Alumas, the
^cousin g£ Dardan, whom Florestan slew by the
Fountain of the Elms; him he thrust through with
his lance; and his Knights in like manner gave the
enemy so hot a charge as made them give back.
The King laid hand to sword, and gave such
blows that no man who received one of them full
had ever need of a surgeon. In that hour he was
«o enraged, that having no regard to danger, he
iSirust himself among the thickest of the enemy.
Arcalaus had before procured information of
^hat arms, be wore^ that he might know hita in



239

the field and do him the worst hurt he could, for
this was his custom; and when he saw^him ad-
vanced thus far before his men, he went to Bar«
^nan, and said. Your enemy is before you, if you
slay hini the business is done ; do you noc see what
King Lisuarte is doing \ Barsinan then took ten
Knighcsy and crying out to Arcalaus, Now have at
him ! and he or we shall perish ! they beset the
King on all sides, and beat him from his horse.
Now Filispinel and the twenty Knights who haS
gone with him to spy the enemy, had promised
to keep company in the battle, and he seeing the
King fall, exclaimed, O Sirs, now is the time to
die with the King \ They forced their way up to'
him, and found &at two Knights were grapplii^
with him, who had thrown themselves on lum be*
lore he could rise, and that they had forced his
sword from him. At this they assailed Arcalans
and his men so fiercely, that they made them fall
back ; but so many of the enemy collected at the
call of Arcalans, that the King would certes have
been slain, if the good Knight King Cildadan,
and Arquisil, and Norandel, and Branddyuas,
with a good company of Knights, had not come
up. NorafideU seeing in what danger the King
was, dismounted, and smiting at those- who stiU
held the Eling, zecovered.for him hi& giiod sword,



240

and placing it in his handy said, mount my horse^
Sir ! This the King did, but be would not move
from thence till Brandoyaas had gotten another
horse for Norandel, and then they joined their
men^ who fought so wel^ that the enemy began to
give way, and Arcalaus called to ore of his
Knights, ask King Aravigo why he would suffer
me to be slain ?

When King Aravigo heard this message, he re-

f

plied, I saw that he needed succour, but waited
till the enemy should advance farther from the
town ; howbeit, as he desires it, let us go on. The
trumpets then sounded, and he advanced with all
his people, and with the six Kfiights from the
Sagittary Island. He found King Lisuarte's men
so weary and heated, that he made his attack
safely and with great slaughter ; and the six
Knights did wonders, in slaying and beating down
all whom they encountered ; so that by reason of
their prowess, and of the great force which Ara-
vigo brought, Lisuarte's troops could no longer
sustain the attack, but began to yield the field
like people who were defeated. King Lisuarte
himself, who saw that the day was lost, and that
it could no way be recovered, took with him King
Cildadan, and Norandel^ and Don Guilan, and



241

Arquisily and certain other the best Knights, and
stood forward before the rest of the army, whom
he ordered to retreat into the town. What shall
I say? in this flight and defeat the King exerted
himself se to defend his people^ that never had
his prowess been so manifested since he was
made Knight, as it was that day: and all those
Knights that were with him did tlieir devoir well $
but at length with great loss, many being slain,
' many taken, and others wounded, they were
driven to the gates of the town, and there, as they
crowded to get through, and the enemy pressed
upon them in pursuit, a greater slaughter was
made. KingArban and Don Grumedan with
the banner of the King, were both beaten from
their horses, and taken there, and so also would
King Lisuarte himself have been, if some of his
people had not held him fast, and dragged him
per force within the gates, and then the gates were
shut ; but they who escaped were very few.

^he enemies fell back, for they within shot at
them with bows and arbalists, and they carried
^ith them King Arban of North Wales, and Don
Grumedan, with Lisuarte's baimer^ Arcalaus
was for putting them without delay to death ; but
King Aravigo said, let us watt till we have taken

TOL, IV. L



242

King Lisiiarte and the rest* and Aen with y6Qr
accord and the advice of these other Chiefs, we
will bring them all to justice ; he then set a guard
upon them to keep them catefully. Thus, as you
have heardy was King Lisuarte conquered^ and
the greater part of his army slain or taken, and
he and the remainder blocked up in that weak
town, where he expected nothing but death. King
Aravigo now took counsel with the Chiefs of his
army how they should proceed ; then were there
many opinions, as is usual after such victories,
when the success is so good, that the conquerors
know not how to make good, better* Some said*
it would be well now to make preparations -for
the attack of the town, and mean time set guards
around, that Lisuarte might not escape. Others
were for an immediate attack, before they within
could make any preparations lor defence, sayings
That being now defeated and disheartened, they
could easily be destroyed. When King Aravigo
had heard these opinions, they all looked for his
vhich they would follow, because he was the chief
id head of the enterprise. Good Sirs, and ho»
Aourabk Knights, said he, I have always heard
that meil oug^t to follow up good fortune when it
''omes ; therefore let Barsinan and the Duke of
tol go with their people to the other side of



243

the town, and I, and Arcalaus, and the King of
the Deep Islands will remain with our forces here»
and let uft all attack the enemy without delay^ be«
fore the darkness comes on, for we shall have but
two hours more of the Sun. If we do not cany
the city in this attack, we will fall back, and the
army may take their rest till day-break, and then
we will again assail ; but I myself promise to you
all, that I will never take enjoyment, till I have
them in my power ; on the word of a King I pro*
snise, that his death or mine shall befal to-morow.
At this wer^ all those Lords greatly encouraged
and rejoiced ; and as King Aravigo had sworn,
even so also did they swear: forthwith they
ordered food to be dealt, and made their men eat
and drink, and told them that now they were pa
the point of becoming rich and fortunate, if their
own want of courage did not prevent them; Thitf
done, Barsinan, jaind the Duke of Bristol, trith
half the army, went to the other side of the town,
and the other half remained, and they all alighted
now, and at the sound of the trumpet prepare^
for the assault.

King liisuarte, when he escaped into the town»
took no rest, for he saw his destruction was at
Jiand, yet, though be knew that the place could ,

' l2



244

not long be defended, he determined to do his
best till his ill fortune was fulfilled, and die like a
Knight, rather than fall into the hands of his mor-
tal enemies. The townsmen brought food to him
and his soldiers, and when he had ate, he placed
his Knights and all the people of the town.on such
parts of the wall as were weakest, telling them,
that, under God, their safety and lives were in
their own hands and hearts ; but such men were
they, that they needed no one to make them da
their duty, for every one expected to die like the
King his master. Presently the enemy came
fiercely on, like conquerors, covered with their
shields, with lances they who had them unbroken^
others sword in hand, and the archers and cross-
bowmen behind. They within received them
with stones, and arrows from their bows and arba*
lists i the wall was low, and in some places broken^
so that they joined battle almost as though they
had been in the plain. Yet, what with the little
defence the place afforded, and more with the
great courage of the besieged,, the assailants soon
lost their first confidence, and fell back; but
others kept up the assault. King Aravigo and
all the other captains, who were still on horseback,
ceased not to urge their people on, and they them*
selves rode up to the walls, and with their lanc^



245

thrust at those who were oo the bulwarks $ so that
King Lisuarte's place of refuge would soon have
been entered, if it had not pleased God that the
night came on with great daikness. Then the
assailants withdrew as they were commanded, the
wounded were dressed; and the enemy placed
themselves all round the town, setting strict watch,
and surely they thought that the first assault at
day-break would end the enterprize.



xS



245



CHAPTER S6.



Wlien Amadis atid his companions went forward
before King Perion, he hastened eagerly to be in
time for the succour, and that his Lady Orania
might know that, with reason or without it, he
always had her present to his eyes, to serve her.
But the way was long ; for from the place where
he set out, to the field where the two great battles
had -i)een fought. Was five leagues, and from
thence to Lubayna eight, thirteen leagues in all,
so that march as fast as they could, they were
three leagues from the town when night overtook
them. Amadis had ordered his guides to keep
always toward the mountain, that the enemy
might not retreat to any strong position ; but the
darkness came on, and the guides were con-
founded, and knew not where they were, nor
where the town lay, nor whether they had past iti



^247

When Amadis heard this, though he was the most
patient man in the world, and the one wlio upon
all occasions could best repress his anger, he could
not^ow refrain from often cursing himself and
his evil fortune, so that there was no man who
dared speak to him. Don Quadragante, who was
.also greatly grieved because of King Cildadan*
with whom he was so nearly allied, and whom he
loved so well, went up to him and said, good Sir,
be not so greatly disturbed, for God knows what is
best; if it please him that, by tliis, help should be
afforded to those Kings and Knights who are so
much our friends, he will guide us to them ; hvit
if his will be otherwise, no one hath power to act
against it. And certes as it fell out, if they had
not thus gone astray, the. issue would not have
been so honourable for them, as you shall hear.

Being thus perplexed, Amadis asked the guides
if they were near the mountain, and they replied
they must needs be near it, for by his command
they had inclined that way; he then bade Ganda-
lin go, with one of the guides, and seek a way up,
for if the army were encamped he would see their
fires. Gandalin kept to the left, on which hand
the mountain lay, and after some time found that
he was at the foot of the mountain, and getting



248

up as fast as he could, he looked over the plam»
and presently saw the fires $ be then called the
guide* and pointed them oQt» and asked htm if
he could lead the way thither^ the man answered
that he could. Then they hastened hack to
Amadts and told him this ; lead on then, said he,
as fast as possible, for the night is far spent. So
they moved forward, and at length came within
sight of the fires of Aravigo's camp. If that
pleased them need not be said, but especially the
brave Amadis, i^o, never in his life was so de-
sirous to fulfil adventure, that King L.isuarte
might know, how under God, he it was who
helped and supported him in all his dangers ; for
he knew the King could not escape death or cap-
tivity without his aid, and had resolved, after
having saved him, to return without seeing or
speaking to him. The morning now began to
break, and they were yet a league from the
town.

Now when it was day lighti King Aravigo and
all his Knights prepared joyfully for the contest,
and went up to the battlements. Lisuarte and
his people bravely defended themselves, but at
kngtli, the enemy being sa many, and encouraged
hj success^ and those on the King's side few, and



240

for the most part wounded and dUheartenedy they
could not prevent them from entering the town
with a mighty shout. Then was the uproar great
in the streets, where the King and his Knightj»
obstinately defended themselves ; and the women
and children, and they who could no way else
assist, helped them from the windows. The
sword-strokes fell so fast, and the arrows and
stones flew about so, and such an outcry was there»
as none could have beheld without dismay. As
King Lisuarte and his Knights saw that they were
lost, and feared more to be taken than slain, no
one can tell the feats they performed, and the
blows t^iey dealt about ; and their enemies dared
not come near them^ but prest on them with
lances and stones. On the other side, where
King Cildadan^ and Ai^uisil, and Flamineo, and
Norandel were opposed .to King Aravigo, you
may well assure yourself th^y were not idle ; and
there was a brave battle, till at length Aravigo
and Arcalaus, and the six Knights of the Sagittary
Island, made good the entrance. Two of these
Knights King Aravigo sent by a traverse through
the streets, to help the division of Barsinan and
the Duke of Bristol. He went with the other
four against Cildadan, saying to them, now my
friends is the time to satisfy your wrathi and re*

L 5



250

venge the death of the noble Knight Brontaxar
Danfania, for here you see those who slew him :
fall on them for they can make no defence!
These four Knights then drew their large swords,
and furiously advanced through their own people,
istr iking them down to clear the way, till they
came up to K!ing Cildadan and his comrades.
He, brave and resolute as he was, could not chuse
but fear, seeing how huge and terrible they were,
and he said to his friends, fall on Sirs, we shall
die worthily here, but in such sort, that if we can,
these shall go before us. With that they made at
each other like men who were determined to slay
or be slain* One of the four Knights made at
King Cildadan, and struck at his helmet, thinking
to cleave his head in twain. The King saw the
How, and raised his shield, the sword went
through the rim, and pierced so deep, that when
the Knight attempted to draw it out, he plucked
away the shield v^ith it. King Cildadan who was
used to such danger, lost neither his courage nor
his thought, but gave it him on the arm, which,
by reason of the weight of the shidd hanging
from his sword, he could not so speedily draw
back ; it was such a blow as cut through the mail
and the whole arm, and left it dangling by a bit
of flesh $ the sword fell at his feet, siad the Knight



251

I

drew back like a maimed man. The King then
went to help his companions, who were bravely
combating the other three, and by his coming, and
the sight of that blow, which he had given, the
enemy were somewhat dismayed : sind they de-
fended the street so well, that they received little
-hurt there, though King Aravigo was calling out
not to leave a man alive.

The other two Knights were now come up to the
other battle; when they arrived, King Lisuarte
•and his Knights were retiring to the cfossing of
a street, where some of his people were standing
idle, because the street itself was so narrow, that
they could not find room to fight ; there at the
crossing they stopt, but all was in vain, for so few
<were they, and their arms so hacked away, and
they themselves so wounded, that in less than half
an hour they must all have been killed or taken, rf
it had not plesfsed God to help them by the
coming of Amadis. Amadis had spurred on
from day-break ; when he came up and saw the
enemj in the town, and others still without the
walls, he charged them, and beat all who came itt
his way, and he through one gate, and Quadra-
gante through the other, entered with their people^
shouting out, . Oaul \ Gaul i; Ireland 1 Ireland 2

l6



252

The enemy were unpfepared send mthout order,
to that a great slaughter was^ made among them^
and many took refuge in the houses. They wiio
were fighting in the front heard the uproar, and
the war-criesy and immediately they thought that
King Lisuarte was succoured ^ and they were dis-
xnayed, and knew not what to do, whether to con-
tinue the battle where they were, or to turn back
And help -their people. King Lisuarte also hear-
ing this, and seeing how his enemies waxed faint,
took heart, and began to hearten. hi& comrades-;
and they bestirred themselves so bravely, that
they made their enemies give ground till they
met those who were flying before Amadis, and
then they had no remedy but to place themselves
back, to back,, and defend themselves. King Arar
'vigo and Arcala^s, seeing how the day was lost,
'got into a house, for they had not courage to die
m battle, and they were soon taken. Amadis was
now dealing about such blows, that none dared
meet him, except'the two Knights of the Sagittary
Island, who advanced against him. He, though
he saw what mighty men they were,^ was nothing
dismayed, but raised his good sword, and gave the
one suck a blow upon the helmet, that strong as
" he was, he came on both his knees; Amadi&
thrust bixQ. backward and passed by him ; aad



253

seeing bow Florestaa asx4 Angriote had orer*
thrown the other^ he left him to the care of his
people, and they three went on towards Barsi-
nan and the Duke of Bristol, who were now so
hardly prest by King Lisuarte, that seeing no*
thing but death before them, the one ran to Ama^
dis, and the Duke of Bristol to Florestan, crying
for mercy. These chiefs being thus taken, Ama-
dis looked and saw King Lisuarte, and that there
was no farther resistance there ; so with his
prisoners be turned back to aid Quadragante»
but on the way he. learnt that that Knight had
already done his work, and had taken King
Aravigo and Arcalaus ; and then he said to Gan-
dalin, go tell Don Quadragante, that I am leaving
town, and that as he has finished too, we should
depart without seeing King Lisuarte : and he
took horse himself, and made his people mount*

When Lisuarte saw how his life had been saved,
and that his enemies were destroyed or taken, he
was so astonished that he knew not what to say,
and he called to Don Guilan who was near him
and said. How is all this, and who are these
who have done us so much good? Who can it be,
ttr, replied Guilan, but the same as usual > No
ether than Amadis-of Gaul; for you heard Jbls



254

<Tj t and it would be well, Sir, tbat yon should
give him the thanks that he deserves. The
King answered, Go you forward and stop him If
he be departing ; he will stay for you. I will pre-
sently follow. When Don Guilan came to the gate,
•he then learnt for certain that it was Amadis ; and
that he had already taken horse and was depart-
ing with his people, not waiting for Quadragante,
lest he should be detained. Don Guilan then
cried out aloud to him to stay, for the King was
here. At this Amadis was troubled, but when he
<:ame nearer he looked at the King, and saw that
'his armour was all broken and clotted with the
•blood of his wounds ; and he was moved to pity
at beholding him thus ; for notwithstanding the
great enmity between them, he had always remem-
bered that he was the bravest and most honoura-
ble King in the world, ihd the best of heart ; so
coming still nearer, he dismounted and went up
to him, and knelt, and would have kissed his
•hand ; but the King raised him up and embraced
him with right good will. At this time Don
Quadragante earner up to follow Amadis, and
^ith him came Cildadan and many others who
.were going to detain Amadis, that he might see
the King. Quadragante, and Horestan, and
i^griote theift wenttoktss^the King's *haadi and



255

Amadis eml^raced King Cildadan, Who can tcH
the pleasure they all felt to see themselves thus
united, and the destruction of their enemies !

King Cildadan then said to Amadis^ Go you, sir,
to the King, and I will remain with my uncle
Don Quadragante ; thus accordingly they did ;
but now Brandoyuas came up with much pain,
for he was sorely wounded, and said to the King,
Sir, the townsmen and your people are killing the
enemies, who have fled into the houses ; and such
slaughter is there, that the streets are flowing with
blood ; but though their lords deserve this, their
people have not. Do you, therefore, give order
what should be done in this cruel destruction. Let
it be stopt, Sir, cried Amadis ; for it is in these
things that greatness of heart is shown. The
King then sent his son Norandel and Don Guilan
to put a stop to the slaughter, and look to the pri-
soners ; and Amadis bade Gandalin and Enil and
his foster-father Gandales take charge of Aravigo
and Arcalaus, and Barsinan, and the Duke of
Bristol. Lisuarte then took Amadis by the hand»
and said, Sir, if it pleases you, let us now go rest
and refresh ourselves, for we have need ; let us
go into the town, and have the dead carried out.
May it please yoU| replied Amadifl^ to give t^



256

leare^to depart, that we may retnm in time to
King Perion who is on his way with all the rest of
the army. Certes, quoth Lisuarte, that leave will I
not give. In virtue and strength none can conquer
you ; but in this you must yield to me, we will
receive your father here. After so signal a thing
as this, it is not reasonable that we should part so
soon ! and then he turned to King Cildadan and
said« Do you retain this Knight, since I cannot.
Sir, quoth Cildadan, do this which the King so
affectionately l>eseeches you ; and let not a man
who hath been so well brought up commit such
discourtesy. Amadis then turned to bis brodier
Florestan and the other Knights, and asked what
they should do since the King commanded them*
Quadragante answered, that as tliey were come
thither to serve t^e King, and had already done
so in the more important part, so ought they in
lesser things. Let it be so, Sir, then Amadis re*
plied.

He then bade his people dismount, and secure
their horses in the field, and seek for food. Prcs>
sently they saw King Arban and Don.Grumedan
come up with their hands, tied behind them ; for
their guaxds had left them, and it was a wonder
that they had not skkx them* Greatly did the



257

King rejoice to see tliem> for he tliought that the f
had been dead» and so certes they wouU have been
but for this succour: and they went and kissed his
hands, and then went to welcome Amadis with
such joy as the greatest friends in the world feel
when they meet. They now advised the King to
go with all those Knights to the Monastery which
vrzs near, till the town should be cleared of dead
bodies. Arquisil now, who had been placing
Flamineo where his wounds could be attended^
came up } and when he saw Amadis he embraced
him, saying. Sir, you succoured us in good time ;
if you have slain some of us, you have saved more*
Amadis replied with great pleasure. Sir, have I
succoured you, for you may believe that I truly
love you. Now as Lisuarte was going toward
the monastery, he saw King Perion and his army
coming up with great speed. Sir, quoth Don
Grumedan, this is a good succour ; but if the
first had been delayed, our safety would have been
delayed altogether. The King laughing repltedi
he who would dispute with you respecting Ama*
dis, would have a long quarrel, Don Grumedant
and a perilous one !

The King then called for a horse, and bade Kin^
Cildadan mount also, that they might ride to weif



258

jcome King Ferion. Str, said Amadisy it were (ar
better that yoa rested and took heed to your
wounds, and the King my father will come to
visit you ; but the King said, he would by all
means meet him ; so he and King Cildadan and
Amadis rode on, and Durin was sent forward to
let Perion know of his cOming. King Perion upon
this took with him Count GastUes, and Grasandor
and Don Brian and Trion, and besought Agrayet
to lead the troops while they advanced. This he
did knowing the enmity of Agrayes to KingXi*
suarte, and he who was well pleased, busied him*
self to delay the army, that he might not have oc*
casion to meet the King. When the two Kings
met they alighted and embraced each other ; and
Perion, seeing him so wounded, said, methinks,
you were not in this evil plight when you left your
camp, though there your arms had not lain idle lA
their cases, nor your person under the shade of
your tent. Sir, quoth King Lisuarte, I wished
you to behold me as I am, that you might know
in what state I was when Amadis • and these
Knights rescued me. He then told him how the
battle had been. I thank God for it, replied
King Perion, and for the peace there is between
US ; for through all this quarrel it has ever been
v^j wish, that my sons: and all their kin thould



259

look up tOy and reverence you as their lord and
father. Usuarte answered. We will leave tfait
for farther leisure* I trust in God that before frw
part we shall be connected by a near tie, and by
great love*

King Lisuarte now looked round for Agrayei»
and seeing him not» he asked for hioi» for though
he knew how that Prince hated him, yet both for
his own sake, and to show that no farther enmity
existed, he had resolved what to do. Perion re^
plied, that he had left him with the army, to pre-
vent any accidental mischief if tife armies should
meet. Let him be called then, said Lisuarte, for
I will not depart till I have seen him. Amadif
upon this went himself to Agrayes, knowing that
be could best prevail upon his cousin, and he told
him all that had passed, and besought him to go
with him, since friendship was now re-established.
Agrayes answered, Couiin, you know my anger
lasts no longer than it is your will; but God send
tiiat the service which youhave now done the King
may be better guerdoned than your former ones I
this' has made him suffer for the past, and that
belike may change his condition ! so he bade the
army halt till they received his orders, and rode
back with Amadis. When they came up^ tim



2(50

King took him in his arms and embraced him
a^n^ile saying, which is the most dangerous, this
embrace, or that which we gave each other in the
battle i Agrayes courteously answered. Sir,
longer time is necessary before that can be re
solved with truth. Now then, quoth the King,
let us move ; You, Sir, speaking to King Perion,
with those Knights must be my guests in the
Monastery ; the troops, as many as can, must
take their quarters in the town, and the rest en-
camp in these fields ; we will have all the stores
which are collected for the camp brought here,
that there will be no want. King Perion would
fain have had his leave to depart, but Li$u<irte
and Cildadan urged him so that he could not
deny, and they were all well lodged in the Moi*
iiastery. There King Lisuarte was attended by
the Masters whom he iiad brought with him, but
they were all as nothing to Master Helisabad,
who soon made the King and all the other
wounded Knights safe and sounds that it was
marvellous ; yet Lisuarte had been so grievously
hurt that it was more than ten days before he
could rise from his bed.

In the mean time the good man Nasciano arrive^,
at whpse coming they were all greatly rejoicedi



26l

and he on his part seeing these persons so joined in
friendship now, who but three days agone were so
cruelly striving to slay each other* lifted up his
hands and said, O Lord* how exceeding great is
thy mercy, the blood of the wounds which these
Knights and Kings made by the wicked enemy's
persuasion is not yet dried; and because I have
Spoken to them in thy name, they are now in the
beginning of the good way ! let me as thy servant^
sinner though I am, so bring all this to an ehd»
that they may forsake all other pursuits* which
are not to thy service, and give themselves altoge-
ther to the advancement of thy holy Catholic faith*
This good man never ceased to exhort them with
g6od examples and doctrine. One day when
tliey were all in King Lisuarte's chamber, the
King asked Perion how he had learnt the news of
his danger, and heing answered that Esplandian
had seen Aravigo's army and carried the alarm^
the King said to him, Esplandian you have done.
me great service, and I trust in God that I shall
one day well requite it I Son, quoth the Hermit, go
and kiss the King's hand for what he hath said.
The Child went and knelt and kissed his hand ;
and the King drew his head nearer, and kissed hi$
face, and looked at Amadis $ and Amadis who



232-

hid his eyei upon the child) ^w what the King
did| and how he h>oked at him; and his face co-
loured ; for he knew that Lisuarte was informed
of his love for Oriana^ and how Esplandian was
dieir child ; so that to see how the King loved
Esplandian made him more desirous to serve the
King; and Lisuarte was so fond of the child» that
while he was between them as a reconciler, no
difference could happen*

King Gasquilan now arrived at the Monastery;
he had been carried in a litter from the camp, and
by Lisuarte's advice he kept as far as he could to
the right of. the mountain, so that by reason of
the circuit, he was five days reaching Lubayna ;
and when he heard of the battle he was sorely,
grieved that he had not been present, and in his
]>ride said things to that e£Fect, which they who
heard did not think good. He was courteously
received by all that company, and his bed was
placed in King Lisuane's chamber. There see*
ing so many fair Knights about him, he asked
which was Amadis ? who^ame forward and bade
hint welcome, saying, I should be better pleased,
good Sir, to have seen you in health than thus,
fbr any malady is ill employed upon so good a
man as you ; may it please God soon to heal youy



i63'

and wfaaterer quarrel there may be between us,
shall be amehded with good works. Gasquilan
looked at him, and seeing him so fair and so gen*
tie, hC' would have thought him a fitter man for
Darner and Damsels than for feats of war, if he
had not to his cost proved him ; he made answer.
My good Six; Amadis, you are the Knight in the
world whom I most desired to see, not for your
good, but to combat with you; and if that had
befallen you from my hands, which has befallen
me from yotfrs, I should Have thought mysdf the
best Knight in the world, and should ^Iso have
won the love of my Lady, by whose command I
sought you, and before whom I know not how I
jshall appear, so that my evil is greater than it
seemeth. I am grieved at this, quoth Amzdis,
but you who hive performed such signal exploits^
'would not have gained much by conquering a
Knight of so little renown as I am. At this
King Cildadan said with a smile to Lisuarte^
yom should throw down your wand. Sir, to sepa-
mte these two Knights, and thus jestingly they
were led to talk of other things.

Mow King Perion besought Lisuarte that he
mod hU Knights might return to the Firm Island,
and send his two Knights to the meeting as had



264

been deternrined ; but King Lisuarte replied, that
since it had pleased God thus to bring them to-
gether« they would not separate till all was con-
cluded. Arquisil now spake with Amadis* say-
ing he was ready to perform his promise, and re-
turn to prison. Amadis then rode out with him,
and when they were away from all others, said,,
my good Sir, I have been jMrevented from speaking
to you before, as you have seen 5 but now that we
have opportunity to speak, I will tell you what is
in my mind. Now that the Emperor is dead, you
are the right ;heir to the Empire, afld I know like-
wise, that you are well beloved by all the people,
and if any one disliked you it was the Emperor^
for his envy of your good qualities. So great a
thing as this you ought to attend to. You have
here the greater part of the best Knights of Rome»
and I have in the Finn Island, Brondajel of the.
Rock, and the Duke of Ancona, and the Arch-
bishop of Talancia, with sundry others who wen:
taken upon the sea. We will send for them» and^
before we separate, they will do homage to yoa
as Emperor $ and if there be any opposition, I
will assist you to obtain your right. If Arquisil
was well pleased at this, you may easily gues9» for
he had expected to be held prisoner in some place
fy)m whence be should not soon have be» re^



265

leased. . My good Sir» lie replied, I know not whf
all m4io are in the world do not seek after yottr
friendship t If thanks were sufficient for si^ch a
kindness I would offer them ; but what can I
offer ? certes nothing but my person, and all that
God and my right may bestow upon me ; there-
fore^ as you have saidr bring this to effect, and what
I gain will be more yours than ^mine.. I will un-
dertake it, said Amadis, and with God*s help you
shall depart Emperor from hence, or else hold me
not for a Knight.

Before we return to the Monastery, said Amadis,
I will show you the man in the world who hates
me most ; with that they entered Lubayna, and
went to the lodging of Don Gandales, and to the
chamber where King Aravigo and Arcalaus wete
held prisoners. They found them in one bed, and
with their cloaths on; for since their captivity they
had never undressed. Amadis knew the En-
chanter, and said to him, what dost thou do,
Arcalaus? — Who art thou who askest? — Amadis
of Gaul, whom you have so much desired to see.
Then Arcalaus looked at him more attentively ;
certes you say truly; for though it is long since I
saw thee, I remember that thou art the same
whom ' I had in mf power in Castle Valdertn.

VOL. IV. u



2Q6

•

The compassion vrhich I then had upon thy*
youth and comeliness^ hath since occasioned me
many and great troubles^ and has at length
brought me to such state» that it behoveth rate to
ask thy mercy. Amadis replied, if I should have
mercy, would&t thou cease to commit those greac
iniquities and cruelties to which thou hast been
accustomed ? No, quoth he, for my age so
long addicted thereto by its own will, caanot now
give up what hath so long been its delight ; but
necessity, whose strong curb, can change all cus-
toms from good to evil, and from evil to good,
would make me do that in my age, which my
youth in liberty neither would nor could. What
necessity, replied Amadis, could I lay thee under,
if I set thee free ? Arcalaus. answered, I would
give thee up my castles and all my lands, to in-
crease \\liich I have done so much ill to my con-
science and fame, and would reserve no more than
it might please you, for your virtue, to allow me;
for at present I can do nothing else. It might be
that this pressure, and your, great goodness would
work that change in me, which reason hitherto
hath not been able to effect. Then Amadis re-
plied, Arcalaus, if I have any hope -that thy disr
position can be amended, it is only from the know-
ledge which thou thyself hast that thou art a



2«7

"iricMl pinner. Tsike courage, thettfcrt, in this -
consolatton ; it may be this prison of the body
which thou ao much drea<lest| mzy be the key to ^
release thy soul» which thou hast had so long
enthralled. Then he would have left him ; but
Arcalaus cried out, Amadis, look at this unhappy
King ! a little while ago, and he was on the poim
of becommg one of tlie greatest Prinoes in the
world, and ia a moment, fortune, which had been
so favourable, beat him down, and placed him in
this cruel captivity* Let him be an example to
thee, and to all who have, or desire to have, ho-
nour and dominion ; and remember that to con-
quer and to pardon is the character of great spi-
rits. Amadis did not answer, because he was his
prisoner, and this reason was against him, that he,
though by his arms and his enchantments had
conquered many, had never spared ; howbeit he
knew that what he had now said was spoken well.

As soon as they returned to the monastery, Ama-
dis called for Ardian his Dwarf, and bade him go
to the Firm Island, and teD Oriana and her com-
pany all that had taken place ; and he gave him
a letter for Ysanjo, wherein he bade him send all
the Roman prisoners. Well pleased was the
Dwarf to carry this news, because he hoped from

M 2



2d8

it great honour and much profit* He monnted
his horse, and rode by day and by night with
little respite till he arrived. Orianahad heard of
the two battles, and that the Emperor of Rome
vas slain, and how the good man Nasctano had
made a truce, but she knew nothing more, and
was now very sorrowful that he could not bring
about peace ; and she did nothing now but tell
her beads and make offerings apd romerias to all
the churches in the island, and continually pray
for peace. Now when she heard that the Dwarf
bad arrived and brought tidings for her,her heart
was greatly disturbed, fearing what he might tell
her both of her father and Amadis ; but he, as soon
as he saw her, said. Lady, I ask for aikrkias (the
reward of good tidings) not according to what I
am, but according to what you are, and what the
tidings are that I bring. Oriana answered, my
friend Ardian, it seems things go well with your
master, but tell me if my father is living ? Living ?
Lady, quoth the Dwarf, alive and well, and
happier than ever he was ! Holy Mary ! cried
Oriana, tell me all, and if ever God gives me any
good, I will make thee happy in this world. But
when she heard all that had befallen, she knelt
down, and lifted her hands and said, O Lord Al-
mighty, the helper of all that be in need, blessed



2C5Q

4

be thy holy name ! and blessed be that fair child
who hatli been the occasion of all tliis good ; I am
bound to love him better than any one can think !
They who heard her^ thought she said this because
.of the succour which Esplandian had procured for
the Kingy but it proceeded from the bowels of a
mother.

Qtieen Briclania and Melicia then asked him con«
ceming Child Esplandian, what manner of youth
he wasy and how the King requited his service.
Good.LadieSy heanswered» I was with Amadis in
the King's chamber^ when Esplandian went to kiss,
the«King*s hand for the favours which he promised
him i and I saw the King draw him closer, and
lay his hand upon his head and kiss his eyes. And
as for his beauty, I tell you» that though he is a
. man, and you tliink yourselves full handsome, if
he were before you, you would hide yourselves
and not dare be seen. It is well then, said the^,
that we are shut up here, where he cannot see tts«
. Oh, quoth the Dwarf, however you were shut up,
you and all fair Ladies would go far to seek him.
At that they all laughed merrily. But Oriana,
In .king at Queen Sardamira, b^de her - be
of good cheer, for when the Lord was thus
helping her sorrows, she also would not. be for-

M 3



270

gotten* The Queen thanked her, and *a^ked
Ardtan what was become of those unhappy Ro-
mans who were with King Lisuarte ? he told her
that he had seen Arquisil talking in friendship
with Amadis, and that her brother Flamineo was
liurt, but not badly.

When Ysanjo had read the letter of Amadis, he
took the Roman chiefs from the tower where they
were held prisoners, and gave theinhorses» and all
things fitting for the jonmey, and sent his own
son and other persons to guide them ; and the
other prisoners^ who were about two hundred. Be
released also, and sent them to Amadis. When
they arrived at the Monastery, they kissed the
king's hand« who received them kindly and with
good cheer. But when they saw Arquisil, neither
be nor they could refrain from tears* Amadis
courteoufilj received them, and taking them apan
without Arquisil, he said, good Sirs, I sent for
you, that as things appear to be drawing to ahap-
py end, ye might be present, being men of whom
reasonably much account should be taken ; and
;iIso to tell you, that I have Arquisil's promise to
return to prison, at my discretion, as probably
you have heard. But considering the lineage
from which he is sprungj and hb own nobleness.



271

I resolved to confer with you, that as there is no
other to whom the empire can of right belong, ye
should take him for your Emperor, in doing
which ye would do two things : first, ye would
discharge your duty, by giving to the Empire so
good a Knight, who is the rt jht heir, and who
would bestow great honours upon you ; and
secondly, as to what relates to your own captivity
and hisf for without delay ye should be at liberty
to return into your own country, «nd I would al-
ways be your good friend as long as it pleased
'you ; for I love Arquisil as though he 'Were my
own brother. Upon this the ^Roman Lords Re-
tired -Brondaj«l of the Rock to speak for tlittn :
Weave much beholden to you, 8ir Amadisf said
he, for this gracious speech. But this is a weighty
business, and the consent ef so BlaaywiHs is ne»
^essavy, that we cannot reply till we have con-
sulted with the Xaugfats whoar«kere ; for though
little account may be made of them, y%tfnthis»
4SiF, they are of g«eat importance; for th«y>po(isess
cities, and towns, and fortresses, in the Empire,
and many offices, w'bich omcem the election ; if
It p)ease7<iu, therefore, let ita^eeFkmiaeoyandrWe
^ill summon the rektki his' presence, 4t&d Uien^v^
•hail be euabkd deliberately to^answer. ' Amadis

bpoa dais ^i^aid, xbej had amswi^ered^Uke^good

M 4



, Knights, and he besought them that there might
be no delay ; incontinentlj those Lords went to
horse, and rode into the town, which by this time
was cleared of the 'dead, for King Lisuarte had
summoned the people of the surrounding dis-
tricts to bury thert^,

Glad were they to see Flamineo* albeit the great
misfortunes which had befallen them, made tlieir
countenances sorrowful. They told him what
had pasty and the chiefs of the Romans were
forthwith assembled* Then, when they were aU
met, Brondajel of the Rock thus began : Ho-
nourable Knight Flamineoy you» and these our
good friends, know the misfortunes which hav^
fallen upon us, since first we came to this Island
of Great Britain, by command of the Emperort
Whom God pardon ! of this I will not speak. We
were prifonera in the Fu'm Islands and it pleased
Amadis of Gaul to send for us hither, where he
hath shown us great honour, and spoken to us jat
length saying, that as ova Empire is now with*
out a Lord, and the succession more justly
appertaioeth to Arquisil than to any other, it
wpuld please him if we would chuse that Knight
to be our Lord and Emperor, and that he would
then set os free, and become our faithful friend



273

. and ally ; and so earnestly did he propose thf^*
that it appeared to us he would rejoice if we did so
with good-willy and that if we refused, he would
employ his force to bring it otherwise about ; for
this cause ye are now summoned ; and to me it
seems that this which Amadis desires of us is
what we ought most earnestly to have requested
of him. For who is there, who either by his rights
or for his courage, or for his virtues, deserves
the Empire €0 yell as Arquisil ? Certes none.
He is our countryman, brought up among us ;
we know his good disposition, and that we may
ask privileges of him as our right, which a stranger
belike would deny. Moreover, thus should we
win the friendship of the famous Amadis, who, as
when he was our enemy, he had such power to
injure us, so being our friend, will he remedy the
past with much honour and advantage. Now, then.
Sirs, speak as you may think fit, having no re-
gard to our captivity or tribulation^ but only as
reason and justice shall direct.

Such influence have those things that are just and
reasonable, that even the wicked cannot easily
withstand th^m. But these Knights were men of
much discretion and understanding, and though
on such occasions there are often many discordant

M 5



274

wills, they all agreed that what Brondajel of the
Rock had advised was reasonable, and that what
Aznadis recommended should be done ; that they
and their .Emperor mi-ght leave the land, iti which
so much evil had befallen them, and return to their
own country. With this answer the chiefs re-
turned to Amadis. Then all the chiefs and people
of the Empire there present, being assembled in
the churchy they did homage to Arquisil as their
£mperor,and he swore to maintain their privileges
and customs, and granted them all the favours
l^^ich they reasonably asked^



275



CHAPTER S7.



WKefn King Lkoane had left his ted» andiMat
sufficicfntly Fecovered» and all the other wounded
Knights had been healed by the skill of that great
master Helbab^d^ the King on a d^y sufnmoned
all the Kings iand Chiefs of both armies to the
thurch of the Monastery, and ad4re%ed them in
this manner. Honourable Kings and renowned
Knights, i need not call to your remembrance th^
thmgs whidi have now befssillen us, for ye also
wem present *; mad if an eadihad not been found to
^cttn, We also who are living, should have be^n
ki^ong the dead. Leaving this then >apart,'and
knowing the great evil to the service of God and
foour^e^^^t'son and kingdom tftfaeyiiad^gone

M 6



276

on, I hare detained the noble King Ferion of
Gaul and all the Princes and Knights of his
army, that I may speak in their presence, and in
yours. Then turning to Amadis, he said. Brave
Sir Amadis of GauU it is not my custom to praise
a man in his presence, nor is it your inequation to
be praised | but I must call to the remembrance
of these Knights all that hath passed between you
and me, since you first abode at my court as the
Knight of Queen Brisena my wife ; these things
^ere notorious to all, but tliey must see that I
also acknowledge them, and that there is a good
cause for the guerdon which I design to bestow.
After you had defeated Dardan the Proud in my
presence, and given me your brother Don Galaor
to be my Knight, which was the best gift that ever
yet was made to any King, I and my daughter
Oriana were entrapped by the wicked Enchanter
Axcalaus» and led away without any meant of de»
fence ; for my Knights were all withheld by the
word which I had given; so that, she and I were
in danger of death or cruel prisoiif and my king*
dom in hazard of being lost* Then did you and
Qalaor, returning from adventure 'on which, the
.Queen had sent you* put your lives upoi^ the
chance to help us, and we were both rescuedi and



ourenemies slam or put tofltghti and Immedialelf
•after the Queen my ^fnfe was succoured by you,
and Barsinan, the father of this Lord of Sansuena,
defeated, who besieged her in our city of London ;
so that as with great treachery and imminent
danger I had been taken, I was by you with
honour saved, to the safety of my kingdom. Again,
when the battle of the Hundred Knights on each
side was appointed between me and King Cilda-
dan who is here pre^nt ; before the day arriyed
you rid me of the enmity of this Knight Don
Quadragante^ and slew Famongomadan and Ba-
sagante, the fiercest giant of all the islands in
the sea, and rescued my daughter Leonoreta with

' all her ladies and ten of my bravest Knights, when
all my power could not have saved them* In the
battle, such were the Giants and Knights whom
King Cildadan brought against me, that I could
not have won the victory but for you, who slew with

' one blow the brave Sardaman the Lion, and with
another delivered me from Madanfabul of the
Vermilion Tower, who had disabled me, and
plucked me from the saddle to carry me on board
his ship* You then conquered that most valiant
and renowned Ardan Canileo the Terrible, to the
great honour of my court; forno where dse could



278

VEi'fotmd 6ii&»vfK>r twoy nor three, nor four Elnigbtv
who dared meet himia the lists. All this it ms^y
be said you ^ei« bound to perform, being in my
service, and for yourhonour. I will, therefore^
lekrte what you4iave done, since, by xny fault, wha
gave ear to evil coonsellorsy rather than by yours,
you Idt my house like an enemy* At that time
nrben we were at the greatestenmity, you and the
long your falhfft and-Doa Florestan your bro-
ther came t9 Hiy fa^p when King Aravigo with
At ^\k Ka^hts and so great a ^ower was come
i]|> againtt m^ and chiefty by the .power of ye
dire^ though I had many good Knights on my
part, I obtained such victory as secured my per-
von and kingdom, in greater honour than before,
though reasonably then because of our quarrel,
fou might have fought against me* And now at
the end, I know that after the second battle, it
was you who held back, whereby I and mine were
sd.ved from thd dang^ in which we stood, as they
all knew 4 of die last dai^er I need notiipeak^ for
ttbe jblood of our wounds is yet flowmg, and the*
A>uls .whidi we there let ioose, have not yet had
lime to find a resting .place. Now then^ Sirs»
what guerdon can be e^al to such services ?
none bat thisi that rtservhpg all my honours so



279

long as I sliall lire mj kingdoms, ^ich hare
so often been protected by his hand, should be
given him in marriage with my daughter Oriaaa;
and that as without my knowledge they are al-
ready joined in marriage by their own con-
sent, so now that 1 do know it» I acknowledge
them as my children, and the snccessors of my
kingdom.

4

When Amadis heard the consent which the King
had thus publickly given to his marriage, he
knelt before him, and per-force kissed his handy
saying. All that you have said in my praise, Sir»
might well have been excused,; for considering
the honours and favours which I and my lineage
have received from you, we were bound to these
and far greater services ; for this, therefore. Sir,
I will return you no thanks ; but for the last fa-
tout, not the inheritance of your kingdom, but foV
the gift of your daughter Oriana, I will serve yoi
while I live with more obedience and ailfectioh
than ever son served his father, or vassal his lord.
At that King Lisuarte right lovingly e)iibrace(i
him, and replied, and you also shall find in me
{fie same love as in ihe father that begot yod.
All they who were present marveUed greartly tirtt



280

the King had so entirely laid aside his former en-*
mity. Whether or no they were pleased, I may
be excused from saying ; and they asked one of
the other, what the King might mean by sayings
that Amadis and the Princess were already joined
in marriage ; as from the time she had been taken
on the sea by hii^ they had perceived no such things
and far less before : but then the King called upon
the holy man Nasciano to relate all, that they
might know with what justice Amadis had res*
cued herfrom the Romans, and also that the King
was without fault in delivering her up to the Em-
peror, being ignorant of her marriage ; and that
if Oriana had then plighted herself without her
father's knowledge, great cause and reason was
there that she should so do. The good man then
related it over as he had done to Lisuarte in the
tent. But when Child Esplandian heard who
wer^ his parents, it need not be asked if he were
pleased or not! The Hermit knelt with him before
both the Kings and before his father, and made
kim kiss their hands, and they gave him their
blessing.

Then Antiadis said to King Ltsuarte, Sir, as from
bence forward, it will be my pleasure to do.yoo



281

serTice» so am I now constrained to ask favours
of you ; and the first is that you would be pleased
to give your daughter Leonoreta to the Emperor
of Rome to wife ; and to beseech him to accept
her» that we may be both your sons, llie King
thought it well to accept this alliance with Ar-
quisily and promised him his daughter, whom he
was well contented to receive. King Lisuarte
then asked King Perion if he had any news of
Galaoff and King Perion told him how Gandalin
had brought tidings that he was somewhat better.
I tell you» quoth Lisuarte, that though he is
your son, I dq not love him less than as a son $
if it had not been for these differences, I would
have gone to see him in his sickness. I beseech
you send for him, if he be in a state to come.
I must go forthwith to Windsor where I have
ordered the Queen to meet me ; and for the honour
of Amadis, I and the Queen, and my daughter
Leonoreta will join you in the Firm Island, to be
present at his marriage, and at the Emperor's,
and we will see the wonders which Apolidon left
there ; and greatly would it please me if Don
Galaor should be there, for I have long desired
to see him. Agrayes then besought the King to
send for his uncle Don Galvanes and Madasima
and bring them in his company; this the King



282

pfomised*, and said that iie would depart on the
morrow and return as speedily as might be, that
all the Knights and their people might return to
their own countries ; and it was determined that
all the fleets should be made ready in the haven of
the Ilrm Island, that they might depart from
thence*



283



CHAPTER M.



Lisufttte took wtthUm King CHdadani and Kinl^
Ga^qutlan, and aU ht$ peoplei and in five-dayv
fnriTed at his town of Windsor^ being more dheai^
ful in ^mblance than in hean, for though he ^dl
knew that both his daughters were now koMwiu
able dffiposedf yet it was after he h^d been 'Ccn*
quered, and tlie glory all appertained to Amadie^
but he was now advanced in years> «nd grieved
to behold so much slaughter, and as he had bere^
tofore regatxled so inordinately the glories of the
world that he ha<l forgotten the state df his ewA
fioul, so now he felt that Ood had justly thus cha»-
{ised him. He took E&plandian by the handy
and led him to the Queen, who had already leanic
all that had past from Brandoyuas. When he
entered, the Queen knelt to him, and would h«y^
kissed his band^ but he drew her toward him and



284

embraced her lovingly as one whom he loved with
his whole heait ; and while the other Dames and
Damsels kissed the King's hand, Brisena took
Child Esplandian, who was kneeling before her,
in her arms, and kissed htm often times, and said,
O my fair and fortunate child, blessed be the hour
in which thou wast bom! and the blessing of
God and my blessing be upon thee ! The King
of Sweden and King Cildadan then came and sa-
luted her, and she courteonsly^ as was her man-
tier, welcomed them and the other Knights. By
this it was supper time, and the two Kings and
many other Knights, sate at table with the
Kiagt where they weie plentifully served with va-
rious meats, as was the custom and beseemed
the board of such a man. After they had supped.
King Lisuarte. gave order that these Kinghts
should be lodged in the Palace, and he and the
Queen retired to their chamber, and when they
were in bed, the King said. Dame, if peradven-
ture you marvelled at what you have heard con-
cerning your daughter Oriana and Amadis of
Gaul, so also did I, for certes any such thought
was far from us. I am only grieved that we
knew it not» for then all these deaths and lossiss
might have been spared. But now that it is coQic
to our knowledge there is no remedy but tl|as



285

Oriana should remain with the |iiisband whom
she has chosen* and setting Isidef all animosity^
to acknowledge the tnith« there is no Emperor or
Prince this day in the world who can equal him ;
and Leonoreta will be Empress of Rome. You
must therefore get ready, for I freely promised
Amadis to do him honour, that we would go to
him iti the Firm Island, and there you must put
on a chearful countenance, and forbear to speak of
what has past. The Queen then kissed his band»
because he had thus controuled the pride and an-
ger of his heart, and told him, she would obey,
^nd that smce he had two such sons, he should
give thanks to God, notwithstanding the manner
had not been according to his own will. So on
the morrow they gave order for their departure.



2aa



CHAPTER 89.



The history saitb^ that King Perion and his compa*
nions returned in good array as they had come ; the
Emperor alwayslodged in.the same tent with Ama-
dis, and slept in the same bed; and all his peopICf
and tentsy and accOutrements^were under the care
of Brondajel of the Rocky as his High Steward^
as he had been to the Emperor Patin. When
they arrived at the Firm Island, they found Ori-
ana and all her company in the garden, so fair,
and so richly attired, that it was a wonder to be-
hold, and you would have thought that they did
not look like earthly persons, but as if God had
made them in Heaven and sent them there. The
joy that they then had to see themselves met to-
gether again, in safety, and being now certain of
peace, cannot in any manner be expressed. King
Perion went first, and they whom it behoved hum-



287

bly saluted himy and the others kissed hU haad*
' Amadts led the Emperor to Oriana. Agrayes*
and Florestan, and Quadragante, and Don Brian
of Monjaste, went to Queen Sardamira^ and.
Olindap and Grasinda; Don Bruneo to his
beloved Lady Melicia ; and the other Knights to
the other Princesses and Damsels. Then Amadis
took Gastiles the nephew of the Greek Emperor,
and Grasandor the son of the King of Bohemia,
and led them to his Cousin Mabilia, and said, Mjr.
good Lady, take these Princes and honour them :
and she with that took them by the hand, and
seated herself between ,them» At this was Gra-
sandor greatly pleased ; for as we have told you,
on the first day that he saw her his heart was dis-
posed to her love.

Thus were all the Knights conversing, with the
Damsels as it pleased them, except Amadis, who
greatly desired to speak with Oriana, and could
not, by reason of the Emperor. So he took Queen
Briolania by the hand, and led her toward him,
and said to him^ Sir* speak to this Lady and keep
her company. The Emperor then looked round|
for till now he had not taken his eyes from Ori-
ana, and when he saw the Queen how fair she
was, and also those other Ladies^ how excellent



2S8

above all others that ever hehad seeh» he said to
Amadisy Truly, Sir^ I believe that these Ladies
were not bom into the world like other women,
but that the wise Apolidon made them bj his great
arty and left them here in this Island, where jou
found them ; I cannot think but that either they
or I must be enchanted, for if 70U should seek
such another company in the whole world, it
could not be found. Amadis at this embraced
him laughingly, and asked him if he had seen no
such company in any Court? Certes, he replied,
neither have I, nor has any other one, except it
were in the Court of Heaven. At this time King
Perion^ who had been talking with the fair Gra-
sinda, came up, and taking Queen Briolania by
the hand, said to the Emperor, Good Sir, if it
please you, let jou and I be with this fair Queen,
and Amadis talk with Ortana, which I believe
will be greatly to his pleasure. So Amadis then
full joyfully went to his Lady, and -seating him-
self with her apart, said, O Lady, with what ser-
vices can i requite you, that by your consent our
loves are now made known i Oriana answered.
It is now. Sir, no longer time that you should
proffer such courtesies, or that I should receive
them. I am now to follow antJ observe your will
with that obedience which wife owes to husband.



280

and heaceforward I desire to know tiie great love
which you bear me, only by being treated bf
youy my Lord, as reason reqnireit and no othar-
wise. Of this thai, no mere ; how is my father I
and how does he brook all this i Your fadier»
replied Amadis, hath a great heart, and though
in secret he may^feel otherwise, he appears well
satisfied. Yon know he is to come hither witji
the Queen and your sister. Oriana answered, I
cannot tell you the pleasure which my heart feels,
and may it please God that all may be fulfilled
as it has been agreed i for you may well believe,
my Lord, that next to yourself there is no other
person whom I love so well as him, notwithstand-
ing his cruelty* But tell me, what think you of
Esplandian I Esplandian, replied Amadis, in his
manners and appearance is your son, and more
cannot be said. I wished that the holy man
Nasciano might have brought him hither, for he
will soon be here, not chusing to coQie in so great
a company, but the King your fiiither desired he
might be left with the Queen, and said that they
would bring him with them.

Thus they remained talking of many things till
it was the hour of supper ; then King Perion rose
and took the Emperor by the hand, and they

VOL. IV, M



296

went to Onana, and said^. Lady, it is time that
we should retire. She bade them do as it pleased
them. ; so they all departed, and Oriana and her
Company remained wonderfully happy. That
night all these Knights supped in the lodgings of
King Perion ; and when they had supped, the
Joculars came in and made all manner of sports
for them, till it was time to sleep, and then they
all retired, except Amadis, with whom the King
his father would speak. So when they twain were
together in the King's chamber, Perion said, be-
loved Son, since this danger is so happily over, it
now.remains, that as you have shown yourself dili-
gent in procuring the help of all these honourable
Knights, so you should now display your sense
of their services; and as you have now a wife, pro-
cure wives for them also, that they may partake
the same happiness as they have partaken the same
perils ; for this end I leave my daughter Melicia
at your disposal, that you may give her conform-
ably to her virtue and great beauty ; the same
you may do with your cousin Mabilia, and I well
know that Queen Briolania will follow no will
but yours; with these there is your friend Gra-
sinda, and Queen Sardamira, for the Emperor ii
here who may command them, if they chuse to
marry in this land, where there is no lack of



201

Knights, their equals in lineage and lordship. But
remember that your brethren are now disposed to
wive, that they may leave a generation to keep
np the life and remembrance of their name ; let
this be done soon, for good works lose their worth
by delay.

On the morrow Amadis assembled all the
Knights, and said to them, good Sirs, reason-
able it is, that after the great perils yotx have un-
dergone, and the great renown which ye have
won, ye should now take your rest ; it hath pleased
God that by your help I have obtained what I
most desired in this world, and so I would that
ye should obtain what ye desire, if it be any way
in my power. Therefore, Sirs, do not hesitate to
tell me your loves and wishes, if there be any of
these Ladies here whom you would have to wife,
for as for ^eir cause ye have endured so many
wounds and dangers, it is reasonable now that ye
should enjoy the Lordships which they possess.
For this they all thanked Amadis, and without
dday Agrayes said, he would take his Lady
Olinda. Don Bruneo of Bonamar said, Amadis
knew all his hopes were in'Melicia. Grasandor
said, that he had never surrendered his heart to
any woman except the Princess Mabilia, and dntt

N 2



2Q2

he love^ her, and desired her for his^wife. Good
Sir, quoth Don Quadragante, time and fouth
have hitherto ■ prevented me from repose, and
from any other care than for my horse and arms,
but now reason and age invite me to another
manner of life ; if it please Grasinda to marry in
this land, I will take her to wife. Then Florestan
spake, it was my desire, quoth he, when these
wars were over, to go into Germany, whereof on
my motheir's side I am a native, and see all my
kinsmen there, whom I should now scarcely know ;
yet if I can win the good will of Queen Sarda-
niira I may change my purpose. The other
Knights replied, that their hearts were free, and
that being young men they had not yet acquired
enow honour, they therefore besought Amadis to
divide the conquests among th6 good Elnights
who were now about to enjoy a life of more re-
pose, and let them go seek adventures.

Amadis then made answer, I trust in God* Sirs,
that what ye thus determine is for his services and
will^have his blessing ; I will therefore thus alloc
the conquests. You Don Quadraganlsef who ast
s(m and brother to a King, and have no lands
equal to your birth and deserts, shall have '^
Lordship of Sansuena; and you^ my.good Sib



203

Don Brunco of Bonamary shall have the Kingdom
of King Aravigo with my sister Melicia, and the
Lands of the Marquis your father may then de»
volve to Branfil. Don Florestan, my brother,
shall have the Queen whom he desires, and be-
sides her Island of Sardinia, the Emperor will, at
my request, give you the Lordship of Calabria,
which was Salustanquidio's. You, Sirs, Agrayes
and Grasandor, will content yourselves for the
present with those great Kingdoms which you will
inherit ; and I with this little corner the Firm
Island, till it shall please God to give us more.
At this they were all well pleased, and because
to relate all that passed with respect to their mar-
riages with these Ladies would be great prolixity,
you shall only know that as the Knights had said,
so said they also. The Emperor granted to Don
Florestan what Amadis asked, and they were all
espoused by the holy man Nasciano, but their
nuptials were to be celebrated on the same day
with those of Amadis and the Emperor.



N 3



204



CHAPTER 40.



Amadis said to King Perion his father. Sir, it
would he well that you should send for my lady the
Queen, and for Don Galaor my brotlier, for whom
I hare reserved Queen Briolanea, with whom he
will be happy. King Perion replied, I will write to
the Queen, and do you send whom you please
with the letters : at that uprose Don Bruneo and
said, I will undertake this voyage with my bro-
ther Branfil, if it please you ; but then Angriote
of £stravaus cried, you shall not go without me:
then said Eling Perion, I consent that Angriote
and Branfil should go, but not you Don Bruneo ;
for he would not be your friend who should sepa-
rate you from your mistress. Don Bruneo smiled
and answered, Though this, sir, is the greatest of



205

all the favours I have received from you, yet will
I go to serve the Queen my lady ; for from thence
will come satisfaction to all others. Be it so then,
quoth the King ; and would to God my good
friend that you may find your brother Don Galaor
able to travel. Sir, cried Ysanjo, he is well : there
came some merchants here from Gaul, on their
way to Great Britain, being afraid of the war,
and I asked them for Don Galaor, they told me
that he had left his bed, and was able to go about,
though still weak.

On the following day these three Knights embark-
ed, and setting sail with wind at will, in short
time they reached Gaul, where they were honour-
ably welcomed by the Queen. But for Don
Galaor, I tcllyou, so great was his pleasure when
he saw them, that weak as he was he ran to em-
brace them, and thd tears came into his eyes, and
he said, O Sirs, and my great friends, when will
it please God that I shall go again in your com-
pany, and bear arms once more ? Be not grieved.
Sir, quoth Angriote, God will fulfill your desire ; ^
but hear now the tidings of great joy which we
bring. Then they related to the Queen and to
him all that had befallen from the beginning,
which when Don Galaor heard lie was much dis^-

N 4



2Q0

turbtdy and said. Holy Mary ! has King Lisaarte
endared all this^ and I not with him in the battle!
now indeed, may I say that God in his si^al
mercy sent me this^ malady; for certes else I must
have adventured myself to death in his servicei
though the King my father and my brethren were
on the other side. Truly, if I had known this
in my weakness I should have died for grief.
Don Bruneo repliedt it is better as it i8» and more
to the honour of all, that peace is made» as you
will see; and you have gained fair Queen Briolania
for your wife» who is now with Amadis : then they
gave the letter to the Queen, which was to desire
that she would come to join Queen Brisena and
Oriaha and all the great ladies, and be present at
the nuptials. When the Queen had read this, being
a noble lady and one who dearly loved her hus-
band and her children, she blessed God for what
had happened, and said, My son Don Galaor look
at this letter and take courage, and go see thy
father and brethren, and there you will find King
Lisuarte with more honour to your lineage than
he desired.

Queen Elisena now gave order to prepare ships for
her voyage ; eight days the Knights abode with
her, and then they all put to sea. So as they went



207

mldng with fair weather, on tke third day
thej saCw a ship coming up at i&ight with sails
aadoars ; and they sent one of Doa Golaor's
Sqaires'in a bo«t to know who waS' there. They
answered him courteottslj» that it wa» a Dame
going in great haste to the firan bland : tell her
then, quoth the Squire, &at ibis fll!et k boond
diithery and that she need not fear to join it ; for
it carries such persona that she maj well r^oice
to go in their company. When the Dame heard
thist she put out a boat also, and sent a Knight to
Imow/ if this were indeed true. He casae up to
the ship and said, Sirs, by the faith you owe to
God, tell me if the Dasne in )iK)nder vessel may
come up to you safely *, she is going to the Firm
Island, whither the Squire hath said ye also are
bound. Angriote answered, the Squire said true
and the Dame may come safely ; not only shall she
receive no harm, but she shall be aided against any
who would wrong her. God be praised ! quoth,
the Knight. I beseech you tarry for her ; you
are Knights and will have great sorrow to heair
what hath be&llea her.

Hearing this, diat other ship mad^ up to the
Queen's vessel, which seemed thie richest in it»ap»

N 5



2g8

pearance, and a Dame came forth covered with a
black mandey from head to foot, and asked who
went in that ship. Angriote answered, it was the
Queen of Gaul going to the Firm Island. Sir
Knight, said she, 1 beseech you by the virtue to
which you are bound, devise how I may speak
with her. That may presently be done, replied
Angriote ; come on board ; she is a lady who
will willingly speak with you, as she does with all
who require it. When the Dame was before
Queen Elisena, she courteously welcomed her,
and asked who she was.: at that she began to weep^
and said, I was the wife of the King of Dacia,
and in his company was I a happy Queen. By
him I had two sons and a daughter; the daughter
who was begotten for our evil fortune, we gave
in marriage to the Duke of Suecia, a great lord-
aliip which borders upon our country. Now, the
Duke being a young man and covetous of domi-
nion, thought that as the^ King my husband viras
in yearS) and our sonsbutboys, the eldest not pas-
i^ng fourteen years» he. might kill the King and
seize them, and thus obtain the kingdom in his
wife's right : and as he tliought, so did he ; for^
coming under pretext of a visit to. our court, and
with a large train, as if to do us honouri the King



200

my husband went out joyfully to meet him, and
that traitor slew him with his own hand. It pleased
God to save the boys ; for they were behind upon
their palfreys, and turned round and gallopped
into the city and the greater part of their Knights
with them, and there are they now besieged. At
this season I was gone upon a pilgrimage to a very
ancient church of -our Lady, which stands upon
a rock half a league out at sea ; there was I inform-
ed of their unhappy fortime, and having none
other remedy, I resolved to go to the Firm Island
to a Knight called Amadis, who is there with
"many other Knights of great renown, and beseech
them to have pity upon those young Princes, and
not su£Fer them to be so wickedly slain ; for if there
were but some to encourage and lead the people,,
that traitor would not dare continue there.^ .

When Queen Elisena heard this, she took her
hand and made her sit beside her, and besought
her pardon that she had not at first honoured her
according to her deserts. Since God hath brought
you here, said she, you shall, go in my company
to the Firm Island, and there you will find sue*
oour, as all have found it who are inne^d. I
have heard, replied the Queen of Dacia, how

H 6



300

Amadit rescued the daughter of King Lisuarttf
when her father had disinherited het for the sake
of a fonnger daughter, and delivered her up to the
Emperor of Rome against her will ; and diis made
me seek that bles^ Knig^t» who is the hdper of
all that are oppressed. But then Angriote and
his companions knelt down and besought Queen
Elisena that they might go and revenge the great
treason) for thej were now so near the Flrmlsland
that they might safely depart ; this they obtained ;
and tstking with them the QUeen of Dacia, who
who would needs go herself with them> saying*
that her presence would be of great avail, they
parted company from Queen Elisena.

Queen Elisena and Don Galaor proceeded, and ar*
rived safely at the Firm Island. When their com-
ing was known, the King her husband, and his
sons, and the Emperor took horse, and went i^th
all the other Knights to receive her. Oriana also
would have gone with all her company ; but the
King sent to request her not to take that trouble*
sayingy that he would presently bring the Queen
to her. After Amadis had kissed his modier's
hand, he embraced Don Galaor, and asked him
how he fared; Better, quoth Galaor, andbecter



301

I shall b«, since the quarrels between 7011 and King
Lisuarte are at an end. So they proceeded toward
the garden, and there Oriana was ready with the
Queens and all her company in rich attire to re-
ceive her. When she went in, Oriana and the
Queens Sardamira and Bric^ania hand in hand
knelt down to her with that obedience which they
owed to their true mother ; and the Queen em-
braced them, and kissed them, and raised them
up. Then came up Mabilia, and Melicia, and
Grasinda, and all the other ladies, and kissed her
hand, and led her to her apartment. When Don
Galaor appeared, I cannot tell you the love which
Oriana showed him ; for, except Amadis, t&ere
was no Knight in the world whom she loved so
well, both for his brother's sake, and because her
father Lisuarte so truly loved him, and he had
served the King so faithfully. Amadis took
Queen Briolania by the hand, and saifl to him.
Sir brother, I trust to you this fair Queen, whom
you have seen heretofore. Don Galaor, without
delay, received her, as one noways abashed at
seeing women. Sir, quoth he, t hold it a gr^at
favour in you that f ou give her to me, and in her
that she will accept me as her own^ The Queen
said nothing ; but her liace colbured, and be-
t:ame more beautiful. Galaov had net seen hev



302

since she went to Lisuarte's court to look for
Amadisy when she was very young; but now she
was in the perfection of her age and beauty ; and
so fair did she appear to him, that though he had
seen and toyed with many women^ yet his heart
was never surrendered in pure true love to any but
this fair Queen; and she on her part, knowing
how excellent a Knight he was, transferred to him
all the great affection she had once felt for his bro-
ther Amadis ; so that they lived ever after the
happiest and most honourable life that can be de-
vised.

When Queen Elisena had been thus received and
lodged with the other Dames and Damsels where
only King Perion was permitted to enter ; for so
it was determined, till King Lisuarte should ar-
rive and all the marriages be performed in his pre-
sence; the Knights went to such pastimes as
they liked best» especially those who affected
the chace, for about a league from the island,
on the firm land> there were the goodliest trees
and thickets, which, because the land was kept
well, were all full of venison, imd wild boars, and
rabbits, and other wild beasts, whom they kUled
with dogs and nets, or from 6u horseback. For
^wking alsOf there were hares, and partridges.



803

and water fowl ; so that it may be said that in
that little comer were collected the flower of all
the chivalry in the world, and all the beauty that
could be found upon earth, and all fitting sports
and pastimes whereof you have heard as well the
natural ones, as what Apolldon had made by his
enchantments.



S04



CHAPTER 41.



So joyful was the Queen of Dacia for the aid
which she had obtained, that it was some time
before she asked the Knights who they were.
Good Lady, quoth Angriote, so little will you
know us, that the knowledge of our names will
neither lessen nor increase your hope of help from
us. These two Knights are brethren, the one is
Don Bruneo of Bonamar, the other Branfil. Don
Bruneo, by hi$ spouse, is brother to that Amadis
of Gaul whom you were seeking. My own name
is Angriote of Estravaus. When the Queen heard
that, she exclaimed, O good Sirs, now do I thank
God that I hare found you ! for your renown is
every where gone abroad. They who told me of
the great wars between Amadis and KingLisuartt,
t^ld us also of the best Knights who were there



305

engaged, and I well remember your names among
the best. Thus they continued their voyage till
they reached the kingdom, and then it was re-
solved that the Queen should remain on ship-
board, till she saw what success they had ; and
they, taking their horses and arms and their
Squires, and two Knights unarmed, who were in
the Queen's company, to guide them, took their
way toward the city wherein the Princes were be-
sieged, which was a good day's journey from the
shore, and they bade their Squires carry with them
food and barley for the horses, that they might
not enter any inhabited place. They rode on tiU
evening, and then rested awhile upon the skirts of
a forest, and gave their horses to eat, then mount-
ed again, and continued their way, till about an
hour before day-break they arrived at the camp.
As covertly as they could, they reconnoitred it to
see where was the weakest part, that they might
break through ; and having done that, they bade
their Squires, and the two Knights, to use their
endeavour, while they were fighting, to reach the
town. Accordingly they three charged upon ten
Knights whoni they found before them ; at the
first encounter each overthrew his man, and ,they
broke their lances, and then laid about them so
manfully with their swords, that the other



300

Knights, thinking they were attacked by a greater
number, began to fly, crying out for help ! Now,
quoth Angriote, let us leave them and get to the
walls ; this they did ; the uproar had brought
some of the besieged to the ramparts, who knew
the two Knights; and without delay opeoed a
portal and admitted them.

The Princes hearing the outcry, hastily arose,
and when they heard that these Knighs were come
to their help, and that the Queen their mother
was living, of whom before they had heard no
tidings, whether she were alive or dead, ^ they
were greatly rejoiced, ^nd the town's-people also
took heart ; so the Knights were lodged in the
Palace, and disarmed, and then went to rest.
Meantime there was a great uproar in the Duke's
camp, the whole army were alarmed, and it was
day before the tumult subsided! The Duke ques-
tioned the Knights, and they said they had seen
about eight or ten horsemen, though they believed
there had been more, and that they had entered the
town i upon tlus he said they must be some of
the country, and I will enquire who they are;
and if I can learn, they shall lose their lands.
He then bade the army disarm, and retire to their
quarters.



307

After Angriote and his companions had slept
awhile, they rose and heard mass with the young
Princesy and then required them to summon all
their people, that they might see what was their
force. When this was done, they said it was
enough to resist the numbers of the Duke, and
they three took counsel together, and resolved,
that when it was night an attack should be made
upon the besiegers, and Don Bruneo, at the same
time, attempt to escape on another side with the
youngest Prince, and go to certain places in that
districtwhich were well affected, buthad been com-
pelled to supply the Duke's camp, -because they
saw their King slain, and that the Queen was fled,
and the Princes besieged. Among them, it was
thought, Don Bruneo might collect some suc«
cours, when they were encouraged by his presence,
and the sight of -the Prince ; the which if he could
do, he should make certain signals, and they would
sally by night, while he at the same time attacked
the camp.

When the night was far advanced, Angriote and
Branfil, and all the people of the town, sallied out,
and Don Bruneo and the Prince went out on the
other side, as had been agreed. Angriote and
Branfil led the way along a lane between gar«



308

dens which they had noted hy day^ and which led
into the plain where the army was encamped.

This plain was not guarded by day, but by night
about twenty men were* set to watch it; these they
charged fto hotly* that they soon overthrew them,
killing some, and beating down the rest. An-
griote and Branfil passed on, felling all those wbo
came from the camp at the uproar, and thus diey
continued their way till they came out into the
open plain. The Duke was now on horseback, and
being enraged to see such confusion excited by
so few enemies, he spurred at them, and his
people followed so furiously, that it seemed as if
the ground would split, so that the townsmen
were dismayed, and fell back into the lane, and
none remained in the field except Angriote and
Branfil, who bore the brunt of all that multitude ;
and they, though they bestirred themselves well,
and slew many, and even beat the Duke from his
horse, were perforce obliged to retreat into the
lane also, where they halted, for the place was
narrow. The Duke, though he had fallen, was
not wounded ; he was soon remounted; and when
he saw the enemies making good their ground,
and that those two Knights resisted all his power,
"icnd maintained the pass, he cried out shame upon



his KnightSy that they let two men balBe them»
With that, so many advanced with him^ and
made such an attack, that Angriote and his com-
radesy and their people^ were driven up the lane
some way, and the Duke thought he had won the
battle, and that he might enter the town with
them. So advancing like a conqueror before his
men, sword in hand, he came up to Angriote, and
smote him on the helmet, for which he received
payment without delay. For A ngriot e> after he had
seen how this man took the command, always had
had his eye upon him, and now that he was in his
reach, lifted up his sword and dealt him such a
blow upon the helmet, as took away all his
strength, and brought him to the ground at the
horses feet. Then he shouted to his people to
take him, for it was the Duke. He and Branfil
immediately advanced and beat hack the enemy ;
for as the lane was narrow they fought to advan*
tage» as they could only be attacked in front.
'Meanwhile the Duke was taken ; hcu as he re-
-covered, knew not in whose hands he was, but his
onen thought that he was slain^ and retreated
into the field. Then the two Knights forebore to
:pursue, being satisfied with die a^yantage which
-they had gained, and :retired into the town*
Their horses soon 4ied .of their wiQunds^aJHd their



SIO

arms were in bad plight, but they themselves had
no great hurt. At the gate they found Prince
Garinto, for so he was called, and you may ima-
gine the pleasure he felt to see them safe, and the
Duke a prisoner.

Of all this Don Bruneo knew nothing, save only
that he heard the uproar. There were only a few
men on foot left on the side where he went cut, for
the rest were gone toward the place of battle.
These men were without any to lead them, and he
would not endanger the Prince by attacking them,
but passed through them without hindrance, and
thus they rode on all the remainder of the night,
following their guide. When it was morning,
they came in sight of a good town called Ali-
menta, from whence they saw two armed Knights
coming towards them, and the guides told him
they belonged to the Duke's party. These were
they whom the Duke had sent to all the places
round, to learn who had succoured the town, and
to order more food for the cainp« Look you tothe
child, cried Don Bruneo, I will see what kind <^
Knights they can be who follow so wicked a Lord.
Then he made towards them, who thought he was
one of the camp, crying out, defend yourself, ye
bad Knights, who live with the traitor, for I defy



311

you to death. At this they replied, you shall hare
the reward. of your folly ! we should have let you
pass, taking you for a friend. With that they ran
at him ; all three brake their spears ; but he whom
Don Bruneo encountered, was driven to the ground
so violently, that he could neither move hand nor
foot. Sword in hand, Don Bruneo then turned
against the other, and a brave battle ensued ; but
that other Knight was not of such force as was Don
Bruneo, nor so practised in such dangers, and the
blows fell on him so heavy, that he dr opt his
sword, and lost both his stirrups, and ^ fell upon
the neck of his horse, crying for God's sake do not
kill me. Yield then ! quoth Bruneo. I yield, he
replied, to save my life and my soul. Alight
then ! this he did, but he tottered and fell. Don
Bruneo made him rise ; — go see if thy companion
be alive or dead, and he went and unlaced his
helmet ; and when the other Knight felt the air
it somewhat revived him.

Don Bruneo then beckoned with his sword to the
young Prince, for the guide had gone some way
forward with him, distrusting the event of the
combat. When the Child came up and saw what
Don Bruneo had done, he was greatly amazed.
Good Child, said he, order your enemies to be



312

slain, though this would be but poor rengeance
for the treason which their Lord conunitted
against your father. The Child replied, but per*
adventure,. Sir Knight, these had no part in that
treason, and if it please you, we had better take
them alive than slay them. This answer pleased
Don Bruneo, and he thought that if the Child
lived he would be a good man. He then bade the
guide lay the one Knightwho was stunned, across
his horse, and making the other mount, they all
proceeded to the town. Greatly did the towns-
men wonder to see those Knights who had left
them that morning, return in such a plights and
in this array were they carried along the street into
the square, where the people soon collected, vfho,
when they saw the Prince, they kissed his hand and
wept, saying, Sir, if we dared put in execution
what our hearts desire, or if we saw any hope, we
should be ready to die in your service ; but we
know of no reniedy, for we have no chief or leader.
O men of little heart ! quoth Don Bruneo, do ye
not remember that ye are vassals of the ]^ing»
this Child's father, and now also of the King his
brother ? how do ye now discharge the du,ty to
which ye are bound, seeing your Lord slain by
so great treason, and his children besieged by the
wicked Duke his enemy ! 3ir iKnight» replied one



313

of the most honourable of the townsmen, you say
truth ; but we have had none to lead us on, and
We are people who live more by our substance than
by arms ; but now that our Prince is here, and
you to protect him, say what we are able and
ought to do, and to the best of our power we will
do it. You speak like a good man, said Don
Bruneo, and it is reasonable that the King should
well reward you, and all who will follow your
opinion. I am come to lead you, and to die or
live with you ; and then he told them he was of
the Firm Island, and in what manner he had come
with the Queen. At this there was a great ac-
clamation, and the people cried, there never
a Knight of the Firm Island who was not fortu-
nate, since the famous Amadis of Gaul won it.
prdcr us as you think good, and we will obey.
Don Bruneo then thanked them for their good
will, and made the young Prince thank them also ;
he then had the gates made fast, and said to them,
go ye to your houses, and eat, and make ready
your arms. I and the Prince will go to the next
town, and return hither with such force as we
can raise there, and then I will lead you in such
manner, that if the enemy await us they shall be
all destroyed ; they have already enough to do,
now such help is come to the King.

VOL. IV. o



314

As tliey were preparing to depart at noon> two
countrymen came to the gate in great haste, and
bade the guards let them in, for they brought
g;ood tidings ; so they were led before the Prince
?ind Don Bruneo, to whom they related how the
Puke .had been taken, and that his army were
breaking up in confusion; we, said they^ are of a
neighbouring valley, and had been to xhe camp
with proi^isioi^s ; and seeing this, we came here,
that the townsn^en n^ight be on their guard, lest
these men should attempt to spoil them in itheir
retreat. Upon this Don Bruheo summoned all
the people to the great square, ^nd he and the
Prince rode among them, and made these coun-
trymen repeat their tidings. Now, good Friends,
said he, I wiil go no farther for succour, for we
are enough, and great shame would it be, if we
should have no part of this glory ! and the towns-
men all cried, as soon as it is dark let us set forth.
He would fain have persuaded the young Prince to
remain there in safety, but he would not forsake
Don Bruneo. So as^oon as it was night they set
out towards the camp ; and when they had ad-
vanced some way, made the appointed- signal ;
the townsmen seeing Jt, knew that Don Bruneo
Jiad sped well : and they prepared to sally ; but
the besiegers seeing their fires kindled by jaight.



315

and having lost their Duke, were in great alarniy
and as fast as they could broke up their camp*
and retired while it was yet dark, so that they
had gone some way before their retreat was dis-
covered ; and when Don Bninco came up to the
camp, and they of the town on the other &ide»
they found it deserted: howbeit they pursued
them, and coming up to them at day-break made
great slaughter, and took many prisoners, and
returned with much spoil and great glory to the
town.

They then sent for the Queen. Who can tell the
joy she felt when she came and saw her son safe»
f and her enemy a prisoner ? Angriote and his
i companions then besought her leave to depart*
I that they might return to the Firm Island ; but
i she entreated them to remain two days, that her
If son might be made King, and justice done upon
j: that traiterous Duke in their presence. They re-
'i plied, that they would willingly jiee the King
crowned, but not the punishment of the Dujce ; he
'f was in her power, and she might deal with him
j as she thought fit after their departure. The
'^ Queen then had a great scaffold erected in the
lij square, covered with rich cloth of silk and gold ;
and there the Chiefs of the realm were assembled^

o 2



'55



J*



316

and the Prince Garinto and the three Knights,
and they brought the Duke, in such evil plight
as he was upon a horse without a saddle. And
the trumpet sounded, and the Prince was pro-
claimed King of Dacia, and Angriote and Don
Bruneo placed upon his head a crown of gold,
set with pearls and precious stones. Then were
there great sports and rejoicings made for the
rest of the day, to the great shame and sorrow of
the Duke, whom all the people reviled ; but those
Knights besought the Queen to send the Duke
away, or else they would depart, for they would
not see such insults ofiFered to any prisoner in
their presence. Upon this the Queen remanded
him to prison, "seeing that it displeased the
Knights. She now besought them to. accept cer-
tain rich jewels ; but they said they would take
no reward for what they had done, only as they
had heard that the greyhounds and spaniels of
that land were excellently good, if it pleased
her they would take some for their sports in the
Firm Island. More than forty were then brought
them, and they chose such as. they liked best.

When the Queen saw that they would departf
she said to them, my good friends, since ye would
not take my jewels ye must needs take one which



317

I value above all others in the world, and that is
the King my son, whom ye shall present in my
name to Amadis, that in his company he may be
instructed in all good things that beseem a
Knight, as God hath already abundantly pro-
vided him with temporal goods; and tell him
that if my son should live to years sufficient, he
shall receive knighthood more honourably from
his hand than from any other living ; and that
for his own sake, and for yours, who have reco-
vered me my kingdom, it is at his and your dis-
posal. For this honour they thanked the Queen
as she deserved, and without delay embarked, the
Queen going with them to the shore ; and on her
return she had the Duke hanged, that all might
behold what fruit the flowers of treason produce.

They sailed on till they reached the Firm Island,
and then sent to tell Amadis that the young King
of Dacia was in their company. Amadis and
Agrayes went out to meet him, and they courte-
ously bade him welcome, and lodged him with
Don Bruneo, till he should have companions '
suitable to his age.



o 3



3i8



CHAPTER 42.



King Lisuarte, \vhen all things were readj for his
departure, set forth with Queen Brisenay and the
Princess Leonoreta, and his High Steward* King
Arban of North Wales, and King Cildadan, and
Don Galvanes, with Madasima his wife, who were
now come from Mongaza, and otiier Knights ;
but King Gasquilan had returned to his own
country. They travelled on till they came within
four leagues of the Firm Island, where they rested
one night. When Amadis heard that they were .
so near, it was resolved that all the Knights of
the Island, and all the Dames and Damsels should
go meet them two leagues out. On the follow-
ing day the Knights therefore went out, and all
the Queens, with Queen Elisena and their com*
pany. What dresses they wore, and what riches.



310

and how their palfreys were caparisoned, memory'
IS not equal to relate nor write ; but neither be-
fore nor since was there ever such a company of
Knights so highly born, and of such prowess, and
of such Princesses and fair Damsels, assembled in
the world. When King Lisuarte saw such a
company, and coming towards him, he guessed
who they were, and hastened to meet them, and
he and King Perion and the Emperor embraced.
Amadis was somewhat behind, talking with his
brother Galaor, and when he came near the King
he alighted, though the King called out to him to
keep his seat, but he notwithstanding went up to
him on foot, and kissed his hand per-force 5 atld
then went on to Queen Brisena, whose bridle
Child Esplandian was leading, the ^ueen bent
downward to embrace him, but he took her hands
and kissed them. When Galaor, who was so
weak that he could scarcely sit on horseback,
came near. King Lisuarte went to embrace him,
and they both wept, and the King held him thus
for a while, and could not speak ; some said, that
this feeling was for joy at their meeting, but
others thought it was for the remembrance of all
that-had passed, and for grief that they had not been
together when their hearts so greatly desired it ;
you may assign it to which cause you please, bui

o 4



322

embraces ; at -this he looked round with so sweet
a countenance that it was marvellous to behold,
and they went on with the Child between them,
talking to him, who answered them so well» that
they looked at each other, and Mabilia saidy was
not this nice food for the Lioness and her cubs ?
For God's sake, cried Oriana, do not remind me
of that ! His father, replied Mabilia, underwent
no less a peril when he was in the sea, but God
preserved him to be what you behold him, and in
like manner has preserved the son to excel him
and all others in the world At this Oriana
smiled from her heart, and answered, true Sister
mine, you are tempting me to see which I would
have the best \ I will sot tell you I only God
make them each without equal in his time, as ttU
now they have been.

When they reached the Firm Island) King Lisu-
arte and Brisena were lodged in Oriana's apart-
ment, and King Perion, and Elisena, and Sarda^
mira, and Oriana, with all the brides that were to
be, in the upper story of the Tower. The tables
were spread under the covered walks in the gar-
den, and supplied with such abundance of food
and wine, and fruit, that it was a wonder to be*
hold the plenty. Don Quadragante j^ook Kin|^



823

Cildadati to his lodgings, and thus did all the
other Knights, each taking one of King Lisuarte's
company whom he loved best. Amadis took for
his guests King Arban of North Wales, and Don
Grumedan, and Don Guilan the Pensive. No-
randel ^ent with his great friend Don Galaor*
But the joy which Agrayes had to see his Uncle
and Madasima cannot be related or imagined, for
he loved and reverenced him like his own fiither ;
and he took Don Galvanes to his own lodging,
and placed Madasima with Oriana and his sister*
Child Esplandian had^ for his companion the
King of Dacia, who was of his own age, and be-
came his great friend.

After the Knights had rested themselves two
days, they began to give order respecting the
marriages, that they might return each to his
own land. So as they were talking together un-
der the trees beside die fountain, of a sudden they
heard a great uproar without the garden, and
were told that the strangest and most dreadful
thing was coming across the sea that had ever
been seen. Immediately all the Knights went to-
horse and rode down to the Coast, and the Queens
and other Ladies went up to the top of the Towerj
and they saw the blackest and most fearful srnok^

6



324

upon tlic sea that could be imagined ; presently
the smoke began to clear away, and they saw in
the middle of it, a serpent much bigger than thS
higgest ship in the world, his wings were more
than an. arrow's flight asunder, and his tail
curled up higher than a tower, and the head and
the mouth, and the teeth, were so huge, and the
eyes so terrible^ that none could endure to look at
them, and that black smoke which rose as high a«
Heaven was the breath of his nostrils, and his
snortings and hisses, were so terrible, that it
seemed as if the sea would have burst asunder,
^nd he spouted the water from his mouth so far
and so fiercely, that if any ship, how great so-
ever, had come near, it would have been sunk.
The Kings and the Knights, brave as they were,
looked at one another, and knew not what to say,
nor what resistance they could possibly make*
The great serpent drawing nearer, flew round
and round as if in mirth, and clapped his wings
so loudly, that the rustling of the scales was
heard for half a league around; at that the horses
all took fright, so that the Knights having no
power to curb were obliged to alight, and some
said it behoved them to arm themselves; but
while they were all thus amazed, they saw a boat
let down from the side of the serpent, all covered



S25

with cloth of gold, and in it was a Daine» having
on each side of her a child richly clad, upon
whose shoulders she was leaning, and two dwarfs
marvellously ill-favoured ; and in this manner the
boat came towards the land. Never trust me,
quoth Lisuarte, if this be not Urganda the Un«
known 1

When the boat came near, they knew it was she,
for she manifested herself to them in her own na«
tural shape, in which she was seldom, for, for the
most part she assumed other appearances, seem-
ing sometimes an old woman, at others like a
girl. She landed, and approached to kiss the
King's hand, but he embraced her, and so also
did the Kings Perion and Ctldadan ; and then she
turned to the Emperor and said. Good Sir»
though you know me not, I know you, and shall
be your friend, and you must remeipber me when*
ever you need my help, for though you may
think my dwelling place is far from your country,
it would be for me no labour to perform the
whole journey in a day. Courteously did the
Emperor thank her, saying, that he had gained
more in gaining her good will, than by great part
of his dominions. She then looked at Amadis,
aiid said, I must not lose your embrace, noble



326

Knight ! though now you will {egard little what
such as we can do ! Good Lady^ quoth he, iny
will will always be to serve you for the great fa-
vours which I have received at your hands, but
my power will alway be weak to requite them.
Then having saluted her other friends, she pro-
ceeded to the garden gate, and there giving the
two fair children into Esplandian's care, she went
in, and was so well received as never other wo-
man was in other place* She looked round, and
seeing all that goodly company, exclaimed, O
my heart ! see what thou wilt hereafter, thou
wilt feel it like solitude, after having in one day
seen the best Knights in the worlds and the fair-
est and most honourable Queens and Damsels
that ever were born, and the truest love ? So she
besought leave of the Queen that she might be
Oriana's guest ; and there she was honoured of
Aem as though she had been the Lady of all*



327



CHAPTER 45;



Dragonisy the Cousm of Amadis, was not in thd
Firm Island when Amadis divided the conquests
among the Knights» and gave them those Dam*
sels in marriage; for he had gone from the^Monas*
tery of Lubayna with a Damsel to deliver her
father, the which adventure he had happily ac-
complished, and being then near Mongaza he had
gone thither, and was now returned to the Firm
Island in company with Don Galvanes and Ma«»
dasima. Now because he was so good a Knighty
Amadis, who dearly loved him, took him aside^
and told him, that he had learnt how the King
of the Profound Island, who had fled from the
battle of Lubayna sorely wounded, was since
dead, and that he would give him that Island to
be the King thereof, that the inheritance of his
father might descend to bis brother Palomir, and



328

«

the Princess Estrelleta to be his wife. Willingly
did Dragonis accept of this Princess and that
island for a kingdom, though he had before de-
termined to go with Don Bruneo and Quadra-
gante, and assist in putting them in possession of
their dominions, and he thanked Amadis as so
good an offer deserved, saying, that he was ready
to follow his advice, and at all times bound to his
, service.

Amadis then asked of King Lisuarte the dutchy
of Bristol for Don Guilan the Pensive, and the
Dutchessy whom he had loved so long, for his
wife ; the which the King readily granted in love
to Amadis, and for the desert of that good
Knight; for this favour Amadis kissed the
King's hand, and D<m Guilan would have kissed
Us, but Amadis embraced him lovingly, like the
man in the world who was more bountiful and
gentle to his friends.



329



CHAPTER 44.



The Kings now determined that the marriages
should be celebrated on the fourth day, and that
the feasts should continue fifteen days, after which
they would return home. When the day was ar-
rived, all the bridegrooms assembled at the apart-
ment of Amadis, being clad in such rich and
costly apparel as beseemed such personages upon
such an occasion. They mounted their palfreys;
and rode with the Kings and all their company to
the garden, where they found the brides, all in
rich array, and upon their palfreys also, and then
with the Queens and other ladies, the whole com-
pany proceeded to the church, where the holy Her-
mit Nasciano was ready to say niass. When the
ceremony and marriage had been performed with
all the solemnities which the holy church ^joins,
Amadis went to King Lisuarte and said. Sir, I
ask a boon of you, which you will be nothing loth
to grant. The King replied, I grant it. — Then,
Sir, be pleased to command Oriana before it be
dinner time to prove the Arch of True Lovers, and
the Forbidden Chamber, for hitherto we have none



330

of us been able to persuade her to the adventurey
by reason of her great. sadness. I have such con-
fidence in her truth and beauty that I doubt not
but she will enter without let or hindrance where
no woman hatli for a hundred years entered ; for
I sawGrimanesa's image, made with such cunning
as she were alive, and her beauty is nothing equal
to Oriana's. Our marriage feast shall then be held
in the Forbidden Chamber.

Son, replied the King, what you ask is easily done ;
but I fear lest it should disturb our feast; affection
will often delude the eyes, and this may have been
the case with you and Oriana. Fear noty quoth
Amadis, my heart is assured that it will be as I say.
The King then sent to Oriana^ who was with the
Queens and the other brides» and said to her.
Daughter) your. husband hath asked a boon cf me.
and it is only you who can perform it, I would
have yoU| therefore* make good my prozpise. She
knelt down, and kissed his hand, saying, Sir, I
would to God that I could in any way serve you:
tell me what it is to be, and if I can do it, there
shall be no delay ; then he raised her up and kissed
her cheek, and said, before dinner you must prove
the adventure of the Arch of True Lovers, and
of the Forbidden Chamber ; for this is what your



331

husband hath asked. When they heard this, some
there were who rejoiced that the attempt was to be
made, and others who were fearful lest she should
fail where many had failed^ and thus be put to
shame : so they left the church and made to the
place beyond which none could pass who were
not found worthy.

WTien they reached this place, Melicia and Olinda
said to their husbands, that they also would prove
the adventure: thereat Don Bruneo and Agrayes
were greatly rejoiced to see with what courage
they would put their truth to the proof; but yet
fearing lest it might turn out otherwise, they re-
plied, that they were so well satisfied, that the
proof need not be made. Nay, said the brides, we
will attempt it; if we were elsewhere it might well
be excused ; but being at the place, it shall never
be thought that we feared in our own hearts this
proof. Since it is so, replied the husbands, we
cannot deny that we shall receive from it the
greatest joy that can be. Then they told King
Lisuarte that these also would prove the adven-
ture. In God's name ! quoth the King. They
all alighted ; and it was agreed that Melicia and
Olinda should enter first. They then advanced,
and one after the other passed under the Arch
without opposition, and went where th



332

images of Apolidon aud Grimanesa stood ; and
the figure which stood upon the ^rch sounded his
trumpet sweetly, so that all who heard it were de-
lighted ; for except they who had before heard the
same, they had never heard so swreet sounds.
Oriana then came up to the line of the spell, and
she looked round at Amadis and her face co-
loured; then she turned and advanced, and when
she was under the Arch, the Image began his
music, and from the mouth of his trumpet show-
ered down flowers and roses in such abundance
that they covered the ground, and the sound was
far sweeter than what had before been uttered,
delightful to all who heard it, so that they would
willingly have remained listening so long as
it should continue ; but as soon as she had passed
the Arch the sound ceased. She found Olinda
and Melicia looking at their own names which-
were now written in the jasper table : they seeing
her joyfully went to her, and led her to behold
the Images. Oriana looked carefully at Grima-
nesa, and saw that none of those who were with-
out could compare with her beauty ; and she her-
self began to fear, and would willingly have de-
clined the adventure of the Forbidden Chamber;
In that of the Arch she had had no fear, knowing
her own heart and true love. Willingly would they
have tarried longer, if they who were without had



333

not expected them ; so hand in hai}d they went
oiity so well contented and so proud of what they
had atchieved, that their beauty seemed to have
been brightened by the success. Their three hus-
bands, who had before proved the adventure,
went through the Arch to meet them, which none
of the Knights could have done ; and tke trumpet
sounded again, and again showered more flowers,
and they eml>raced their wives and kissed them,
and thus they all came forth together.

This done, they proceeded towards the Fbrbidden
Chamber, then Grasinda approached Amadis and
said, Sir, though riiy beauty may not be such as
to gratify my heart's desire, yet I cannot for
pride forbear this trial ; it never shall be said that
this was atchieved, and that I had not proved it.
Let come what will, I will adventure. Amadis,
whose only wish was that all might prove it be-
fore Oriana, that her glory might be the greater,
replied. Lady, I can only attribute this resolution
to the greatness of your heart, which wishes to
atchieve that wherein so many have failed ; and he
took her by the hand, and said, this fair lady will
attempt the adventure, and so should you also
Olinda and Melicia ; for with such beauty as God
hath given you, ye ought without fear, on so
great an occasion to adventure it ; perchance ti



334

may be accomplished by one of you» and then
Oriana will be freed from the alarm which she
feels. This he said ; but in his heart he knew
that none but Oriana could compare with Grima-
nesa's beauty.

Grasinda then commended herself to God, and
began her way. She reached the copper perron
with little trouble, and went on ; but when she
was near the marble perron, she was opposed.
Howbeit, discovering mere resolution than could
have been expected from a woman, she held on^
and reached t}ie marble perron ; but then she was
seized without remorse by her goodly locks, and
thrown out senseless. Don Quadragante took
her; and though he knew there was no hurt in all
this violence, yet was he greatly moved ; for al-
beit, he was now not a young man, yet did he as
entirely love his lady as any of the other bride-
grooms. The gentle Olinda came next, led by
Agrayes, who had little hope that she would suc-
ceed, notwithstanding his great love, for he bad
seen the image of Grimanesa; howbeitt he
thought she could advance among the foremost.
She reached the marble perron without let, but
there tlie resistance began ; and having only ad-
vanced one step farther, she also was cast out.
Melkia then came on with good cheer and a proud



335

hearty and she passed both the perrons* so that all
thought she would have entered the chamber»
and Oriana herself was dismayed ; but when she
had advanced one step beyond Olinda, she was
thrown out, as if she had been dead, for they who
advanced farthest were thrown out with most vio-
lence, as it had been done to the Knights before
Amadis atchieved the adventure. The grief of
Don Bruneo to see her in such plight moved
many to compassion ; but all they who knew that
there was neither danger nor hurt laughed at his
alarm.

And now Amadis led on Oriana in whom all
beauty was centered. She advanced with gentle
step and firm countenance to the line of the spell,
and there she crossed herself, and commended
herself to God, and went on. She felt nothing till
she had passed both the perrons ; but when she
was within a step of the chamber, she felt hands
that pushed her and dragged her back, and
three times they forced her back to the marble
perron; but she with her fair hands repelled them
on both sides, and it seemed as if she were thrust-
ing hands and arms from her, and thus by her
perseverance and good heart, but above all by
reason of her surpassing beauty, she came, though



INDEX.

Page
<cfss Oriana, these Knights ' carried her to the
firm Island 4

CHAPTER 3.

Hoiv- Grasinda knowing the victory which
Amojdis had gained^ adorned to go forth, ojC"
companied by many Knights and Dames to
receive Oriana 7

CHAPTER 4.

How Amadis assemhled together all the Knights,
and the speech which he made to them, and
what they determined 15

CHAPTER 5.

How all the Knights were well contented
with what Don Quadragante proposed, .... 19

CHAPTER 6.

How all the Knights were greatly anxious Jbr

the service and honour of the Princess Oriana . 25



^



0'



INDEX.

CHAPTER 7. Page

How Amadis spake unlh Grasinda, and wluU
4he replied 31

CHAPTER 8.

How Amadis sent a messenger to Queen Bri-
olania 36

CHAPTER 9.

How Don Quadragante spake with his ne^
phew Landin, arid told him to go to Ireland,
and speak with the Queen his niece, that she
mighi allow his vassals to coihe and serbe
him \, . 39

CHAPTER 10.
How Amadis sent to the King of Bohemia . . * 42

CHAPTER 11.

How GandaSn spake with Malilia and

P 2



INDEX.

Page
Oriana, and wlmt they hade him say to
Amadis 44

CHAPTER 12.

Haw Amadis and Agrayes, and all the
Knights of high degree , went to see and con-
sole Oriana, and the Ladies who were with
ier , ..,. 49

CHAPTER 13.

How the news of the defeat of the Romans,
mnd the taking of Oriana came to King Us-
uartej and of what he did thereupon ....... 55

CHAPTER 14.

Of ifie letter which the Princess Oriana sent
to Queen Brisena her mother, from the Firm
Island ; 63

CHAPTER 15,
How King Lisudrte ashd counsel of King



INDEX.

page
Arlem of North Wales and Don Gramedan
and Gailan the Pensive,, and what they an-
swered 75

CHAPTER 16.

Hour it fortuned that Don Quadragante and
Brian 0/" Monjaste lost themselves at sea, and
fry adventure found Queen Briolania, and of
what befell them, 83

CHAPTER 17,

Of the answer which Don Quadragante and
Brian of Monjaste brought frr— "• — '-'-
uarte, and what all those Kk



CHAPTER 1

How Master Helisahad arrive
of Grasinda, and from tkena
stantinople with the bidding of
how he sped



INDEX.



CHAPTER 19. Page

How Gandalin arrived in Gaul, and spake
with King Perion, and of the answer which
he had •• . . . 10/



CHAPTER 20.

How Lasindo the Squire of D(m Bruneo of
Bonamar, went tvith the bidding of his Mas-
ter to the Marquis and to Branjil, and of what
he did with them H2

CHAPTER 21.

How Ysarjo went with the lidding of Amadxs
to the good King of Bohemia, and of the good
success which he met with 114

CHAPTER 22.

How Landin the nephew of Don Quadragante
arrived in Ireland, and of the success he Jif^
with the Queen .:..;•..«« t •••;;.. 1 1 1 .» • 1 1^



INDEX,

CHAPTER 23. Page

How Don Guildn the Pensive went to Rome
with the bidding of King Lisuarte^ and of
what he did in his embassy to the Emperor
Patin 118

CHAPTER 24.

How Grasandor son of the King oj Bohemia
met Giontes, and what passed between them . 124

CHAPTER 25.

How the Emperor of Rome arrived with his
feet at Great Britain, and what he and King
Lisuarte did ,...;.:..... 13g

CHAPTER 26. '

How King Perioh. advanced with his people
against his enemies, and how he arrayed his
army for the battle ,\ 240

CHAPTER 27.

How when Ar calms the Enchanter knew that
