The Improvisatore; or, Life in Italy (Hans Christian Andersen (translated by Mary Howitt; London: Richard Bentley (Standard Novels ed.)), 1847)
===============================================================================================================================================
Andersen's breakthrough 1835 novel — the Roman artist's-life romance that made him famous across Europe before the fairy tales. Staged from the 1847 Bentley edition in Mary Howitt's translation; distinct from Andersen's Fairy Tales. Public domain. Internet Archive (improvisatoreorl00andeuoft), OCR cleaned.

THE IMPROVISATORS.

COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME.

LONDON:

RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET

AND BELL & BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH,

<i4<db'b<srM

•'fy&2 ^C^-^i^

•:-M^7z^^^fi^n^ >^€/ --

THE

IMPROVISATORS:

OE,

LIFE IN ITALY,

jTrom fljc

HAWS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN,

BY MARY HOWITT.

LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET;

AND BELL & BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH.

THE LIFE

OF

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN is one of those men who.,
from their earliest youth, have had to keep up a warfare
with circumstances; a man, like Burns and Hogg, who
seemed destined by Fate to end their lives unnoticed in a
village, and yet through an instinctive sense of their
destined pre-eminence in the beautiful regions of art and
literature, and sustained by an irrepressible will, have
made themselves a part of the great world.

During my residence in Copenhagen, says Marmier, in
the year 1837, one day a tall young man entered my
room. His timid, and embarrassed, and somewhat awk-
ward manner, might, perhaps, have displeased a fine lady,
yet at the same time his friendly behaviour, and his open,
honest countenance, at the first meeting, must have
awakened sympathy and confidence. This was Andersen.
At that very moment a volume of his works was lying on
my table ; an acquaintance was thus soon made. Poetry
is a sort of freemasonry ; they who render homage to it
are related, although they may come from the opposite
ends of the world ; they speak a word, make a sign, and
immediately they know that they are brethren. They
who live together impart to each other mutually the
A 4

vili THE LIFE OF

emotions of their hearts; they who meet on foreign
ground relate to each other, like pious pilgrims, by what
paths they have wandered thither, and through what cities
they have come. Thus, then, it happened that Andersen,
after we had passed a few hours together in conversation
on poetry, which, more than any thing else, has the pecu-
liarity of unlocking the heart and calling forth mutual
confidence, told me of the adverse circumstances through
which he had passed, and, at my request that he would
make me acquainted with the history of his life, communi-
cated to me the following details : —

Andersen's grand-parents were, at one time, well to do
in the world, and even possessed of a farm in the country.
All kind of misfortunes, however, befell them ; the worst
of which was, that the husband lost his mind. The poor
wife then removed to Odensee, and placed there her only
son as apprentice with a shoemaker. The boy, full of
activity, found the beginning of his life happier than his
later years ; he employed his hours of leisure in reading
Holberg, in making toys, and in composing music.

When he was scarcely twenty, in the spring of 1804,
he married a young girl who was quite as poor as himself;
and so great, indeed, was their poverty, that, in going to
housekeeping, the young bridegroom could not afford to
buy a bedstead, and contrived to obtain one in this
manner. A count was dead somewhere in their neigh-
bourhood, and while he lay in state his coffin was supported
on a wooden frame made for the purpose, and this, after
the funeral, being sold, was purchased by the husband-
elect, who prepared it for future family use ; and yet he
could not have made very great alteration in it, for many
years afterwards it might still be seen covered with its
black cloth.

Upon this frame, on which had rested the corpse of

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. IX

the noble count, in his last splendour, lay, on the 2cl of
April, 1805, poor, but living, the first-born of his humble
parents, Hans Christian Andersen.

When the new-born child was taken to the church to
be baptised, it cried resoundingly, which greatly displeased
the ill-tempered pastor, who declared, in his passion, that
" the thing cried like a cat ; " at which his mother was
bitterly annoyed. One of the god-parents, however, con-
soled her by the assurance, that the louder the child cried,
the sweeter he would sing some day, and that pacified her.

The father of Andersen was not without education ;
the mother was all heart. The married couple lived on
the best terms with each other, and yet the husband did
not feel himself happy ; he had no intercourse with his
neighbours, but preferred keeping himself at home, where
he read Holberg's " Comedies," " The Thousand-and-
One Tales of the Arabian Nights," and worked at a
puppet-theatre for his little son, whom on Sundays he
often took with him to the neighbouring woods, where
the two commonly spent the whole day in quiet solitude
with each other.

The grandmother also, who was an amiable old lady,
and who bore the misfortunes of her family with
Christian patience, had great influence on the mind of
the boy. She had been very handsome, was kind to every
body, and, besides that, was scrupulously clean in her
poor clothing. With a feeling of deep melancholy, she
would often tell how her grandmother had been the
daughter of a rich gentleman of family in Germany, who
lived in the city of Cassel ; that the daughter had fallen
in love with a comic-actor, had left her parents secretly
to marry him, and after that had sunk into poverty.

" And now all her posterity must do penance for her
sin ! " sighed she.

X THE LIFE OF

Young Andersen was extremely attached to this good
grandmother. She had to take care of a garden at the
lunatic hospital, arid here, among its sunny flowers, he
spent most of the afternoons of his early childhood. The
annual festival in the garden, when the fallen leaves were
burnt, had for him an especial charm, although the pre-
sence of the insane ladies, a few of whom were allowed
to wander about, terrified him greatly. Frequently one
of the old nurses would fetch him into the house, and
take him into the spinning-room, where all the old ladies
would praise him for his eloquence, and would recom-
pense him for it with tales and ghost-stories, which they
related with wondrous effect, so that certainly no child of
his years ever heard more of suchlike histories, neither
could any child he more superstitioiis than he was.

Among the earliest recollections of Andersen, is that
of the residence of the Spaniards in Fyen, in the years
1808 and 1809. A soldier of an Asturian regiment one
day took him in his arms, and danced with him amid
tears of joy, which no doubt were called forth by the
remembrance of a child left behind him at home, along
the street, and pressed the image of the Madonna to his
lips, which occasioned great trouble to his pious mother.

In Odensee, at that time, many old festivities were still
in use, which made a deep impression upon the excitable
temper of the boy ; the corporation went in procession,
with their escutcheons, through the city; the sailors
also marched round in Lent, and the people made pil-
grimages to the miracle-performing well of the holy
Regisse.

So passed on the first years of the youth of our poet.
His father, in the mean time, read industriously in his
Bible, but one day shut it with the words, " Christ became
a man like to us, but a very uncommon man ! " Upon

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XI

which his wife burst into tears, at what she called the
blasphemy of her husband," which made such a deep
impression upon the son, that he prayed in solitude for
the soul of his father. " There is no other devil," said
he, afterwards, " but that which a man bears in his own
breast ! " After which, finding his arm scratched one
morning when he awoke, probably by a nail, his wife told
him that this was a punishment of the devil, who, at least,
would show him of his real existence.

The unhappy temper of the father, however, increased
from day to day : he longed to go forth into the world.
At that time war was raging in Germany ; Napoleon was
his hero ; and, as Denmark had now allied itself to France,
he entered himself as a private soldier in a recruiting re-
giment, hoping that some time or other he should return
as a lieutenant. The neighbours, however, thought that it
was folly to let himself be shot to death for nothing at all.
The corps, however, in which he served went no further
than Holstein ; the peace succeeded, and before long the
voluntary soldier sat down again in the concealment of his
citizen- dwelling in Odensee. But his health had suffered.
He awoke one morning delirious, and talked about cam-
paigns and Napoleon.

Young Andersen was at that time nine years old, arid
his mother sent him to the next village to ask counsel from
a wise woman.

" Will my poor father die ? " inquired he, anxiously.

" If thy father will die," replied the sibyl, " thou wilt
meet his ghost on thy way home."

It is easy to imagine what an impression this oracle
would make upon the boy, who was timid enough without
that ; it was, in fact, his only consolation, on his homeward
way, that his father certainly knew how such an apparition
would terrify his little son, and therefore he would not

Xll THE LIFE OF

show himself. He reached home without any unfortunate
adventure, without seeing the ghost of his father ; and on
the third day after that the sick man died.

From this time young Andersen was left to himself;
the whole instruction which he received was in a charity-
school, and consisted of reading, writing, and arithmetic,
the two last very imperfectly.

The poor boy, at this time, gained an entrance into
the house of the widow of the Pastor Bunkeflod, of Oden-
see, who died in the year 1805, and whose name, on
account of some lyrical productions, is known in Danish
literature. He was engaged to read aloud to the widow
and her sister-in-law ; and here, for the first time, he
heard the appellation poet, and saw with what love the
faculty which made the dead a poet was regarded. This
sunk deeply into his mind. He read some tragedies, and
then determined to write a comedy, and to become also a
poet, as the deceased pastor had been.

And now, actually, he wrote a true tragedy, for all the
characters lost their lives in it ; and the dialogue was inter-
larded with many passages of Scripture. His two first
auditors received this first work of the young poet with
unmingled applause ; and, before long, the report of it ran
through the whole street, and every body wished to hear
the tragedy of the witty Hans Christian. But here the
applause was by no means unmingled ; most people laughed
right heartily at it, whilst others ridiculed him. This
wounded the poor boy so much that he passed the whole
night in weeping, and was only silenced by his mother's
serious admonition, that if he did not leave off such
folly she would give him a good beating into the bargain.
Spite of the ill success of his first attempt, however, he
now, unknown to any one, set about a new piece, in which
a prince and a princess were introduced. But these lofty

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. Xlll

characters threw him into great perplexity, for he did not
at all know how such noble people as these conversed,
imagining, of course, that it must be impossible for them
to talk as other people did. At length it occurred to him
to interweave German and French words into their con-
versation, so that the dignified language of these princely
personages became a perfect gibberish, which, however, ac-
cording to the opinion of the young author, had in it a
something very uncommon and sublime.

This masterpiece also was introduced to the knowledge
of the neighbourhood, the result of which was, that not
many days elapsed before he was derided by the wild boys
in the streets, who shouted, as he went by, " Look ! look !
there goes the comedy-writer ! "

But it was not alone the rude boys, but the schoolmaster
also, who entirely mistook the genius which clearly be-
trayed itself, even in suchlike productions ; for, one day,
when young Andersen presented to him, as a birth-day
present, a garland, with which he had twisted up a little
poem of his own writing, he blamed him for it ; and the
only reward which the poor poet had for his first poetical
attempt consisted of trouble and tears.

In the meantime the worldly affairs of the mother grew
worse and worse ; and as the son of a neighbour earned
money in some kind of manufactory, it was determined
also that the good Hans Christian should be sent there.
The old grandmother conducted him to the master of the
manufactory, and wept right bitter tears, that the lot of
her grandson should be so early that of care and sorrow.

German workmen were principally employed in the ma-
nufactory, and to them the children used often to sing
their Danish songs. The new-comer, Andersen, was de-
sired to do so, and that he did willingly, because he knew
that he could produce great effect with his singing : the

XIV THE LIFE OP

neighbours had always listened when at home he sung in
the garden ; and once, indeed, a whole party, who were
assembled in the garden of the rich neighbour, had ad-
mired his beautiful voice, and loudly applauded him.
Similar applause fell to his share in the manufactory.

" I can also act comedy ! " said poor Andersen one day,
encouraged by their approbation, and forthwith recited
whole scenes from Holberg's comedies. All went well for
a time, and the other boys were compelled to do his work
whilst he amused the workmen ; but presently persecutions
began, and he found himself so roughly handled, even by
his former admirers, that he left the place, and flew back
weeping to his mother, praying that he might never be
sent there again.

His prayer was granted, because, said his mother, he was
not sent there for the sake of what he would get, but that
he might be well cared for while she went out to work.

" The boy must go to the theatre ! " many of her
neighbours had said to her ; but, as she knew of no other
theatre than that of strolling players, she shook her head
thoughtfully, and determined rather to put her son ap-
prentice to a tailor.

Andersen was now twelve years old, was altogether
quite at a loose end at home, and devoured the contents of
every book which fell in his way. His favourite reading
was, however, an old prose translation of Shakspeare. From
this, with little figures which he made out of pasteboard,
he performed the whole of " King Lear " and " The
Merchant of Venice." He very rarely went to the play-
house, but as he was in favour with the man who carried
out the bills, he obtained a copy of each of these from him,
and then, seating himself in the evening before the stove,
studied the names of the various actors, and thus supplied
to every piece which was performed an imaginary text.

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XV

Andersen's passion for reading, and his beautiful voice,
had, in the meantime, drawn upon him the attention of
several of the higher families of the city, who introduced
him to their houses. The simple, childlike behaviour of
the boy, his wonderful memory, and his sweet voice, gave
to him, in fact, a something quite peculiar ; people spoke
of it, and several houses were very soon open to him.
But still the first family which had noticed him and had
received him with so much sympathy, nay, indeed, who
had even introduced him to Prince Christian, remained
his favourites. This family was that of Colonel Hoegh
Guldborg, a man whose great accomplishments equalled
his goodness of heart, and the brother of the well-known
poet of the same name.

About this time his mother married a second time, and,
as the step-father would not at all interest himself about
the education of the son, our young Andersen had still
more liberty than hitherto. He had no playfellows, and
often wandered by himself to the neighbouring woods, or,
seating himself at home, in a corner of the house, dressed
up little dolls for his theatre, his mother, thinking the
while that, as he was destined to be a tailor, it was a good
thing that he should practise sewing ; and the poor lad
consoled himself by thinking that, if he really must be a
tailor, he should find many beautiful pieces of cloth from
which he could, on Sundays, make new dresses for his
theatrical wardrobe.

At length the time for his confirmation drew nigh, for
which occasion he obtained the first pair of boots he ever
had in his life ; and, in order that people might see them,
he pulled them up over his trousers. Nor was this all his
finery ; an old sempstress was employed to make him a
confirmation dress out of his deceased father's great coat;
and with this his festal attire was complete. Never before

XVI THE LIFE OP

had Andersen been possessed of such beautiful clothes j
his joy over which was so great, that the thoughts of them
even disturbed his devotion on the day of consecration,
and caused him afterwards such reproaches of conscience,
that he besought of God to forgive him such worldly
thoughts; and yet, at that very moment, he could not help
thinking about the beautiful creaking boots.

After the conclusion of the confirmation festival, it had
been determined that Andersen was to begin his tailor-ap-
prenticeship ; but he continually besought of his mother
that she would permit him to go to Copenhagen, and visit
the royal theatre there. He^read to her the lives of celebrated
men who had been quite as poor as himself, and assured
her that he also would some day be a celebrated man.
Already for several years had he hoarded up in a little
save-all his spare money,, and this had now grown into
what seemed to him the inexhaustible sum of about thirty
shillings of English money. The sight of this unexpect-
edly large sum of money softened also the maternal heart,
and she began to incline towards the wishes of her son ;
but yet, before she fully consented, she thought it best- to
consult a wise woman on his future prospects. The sibyl
was accordingly fetched to the house, and after she had
read the cards, and studied the coffee-grounds, the oracle
spoke these memorable words : —

" Your son will become a great man. The city of Oden-
see will be illuminated in his honour ! "

So good a prophecy of course removed the lastjmpedi-
ment out of the way.

" Go, then, in God's name !" said his mother.

When, however, her neighbours represented to her how
foolish it was to let the boy of fourteen years old set off to
the great city in which he did not know a single soul, she
replied that he let her have no rest, and that she was con-

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XV11

vinced he would soon come back again when he saw the
great water which he would have to cross.

Some one had mentioned to young Andersen a certain
female dancer at the royal theatre, as being a person of
very great influence : he obtained, therefore, from a man
universally esteemed in Odensee a letter of recommendation
to this lady; and provided with this important paper, and
his thirteen rix-dollars, he commenced the journey on
which depended his whole fate. His mother accompanied
him to the gate of the city, and here he found waiting for
him the good old grandmother, whose still beautiful hair
had become grey within a few weeks. She kissed, with
many tears, her beloved grandson ; her grief had no words ;
and within a very short time the cold grave covered all her
troubles.

Andersen travelled as gratis passenger by the mail as far
as Nyborg, and not until he was sailing across the Great
Belt did he feel how forlorn he was in the world. The
discomfort of a sea-voyage, even though short, would make
him feel this if nothing else did. As soon as he came on
shore in Zealand, he stepped to a spot that lay apart, and,
falling on his knees, besought of God for help in his forlorn
condition.

He rose up comforted, and went on now uninterruptedly
for a day and a night through cities and villages until on
Monday morning, the 5th of September, 1819, he saw the
towers of Copenhagen. He had travelled, as before, free
of cost, through the good-nature or compassion of the
drivers of the mail, and now before he reached the gate of
the city was obliged, of course, to dismount, and, with his
little bundle under his arm, entered the great city.

The well-known Jews' quarrel, which at that time ex-
tended from the south to the north of Europe, had broken

XV111 THE LIFE OP

out here the very evening before, and all was in com-
motion.

His journey had cost him three rix-dollars, and, with
the remaining ten in his pocket, the young adventurer took
up his lodgings in a public-house. His first ramble into
the city was to the theatre, and with astonishment he sur-
veyed the magnificent building, walked round it, and
prayed fervently that it might soon open itself to him, and
that he might become a skilful actor therein. At that time
certainly he had no presentiment that ten years afterwards
his dramatic work would be received with applause, and
that he would address the public for the first time.

On the following day, dressed in his confirmation suit,
he betook himself, with his letter of introduction in his
hand, to the house of the all-potential dancer. The lady
let him wait a long time on the steps ; and when at length
he was permitted to enter her presence, his awkward and
na'ive behaviour displeased her so much, that she regarded
him as insane, more especially as she knew nothing of the
gentleman who had addressed the letter to her.

After this unsatisfactory attempt, Andersen turned his
steps towards the director of the theatre, requesting from
him some appointment ; but here also his efforts were
unsuccessful.

" You are too thin for the theatre," was the answer
which he obtained.

< ' Oh," replied Andersen, " if you will ensure me one
hundred dollars, I will soon become fat ! "

But the director would not enter into arrangements on
these terms, and dismissed the poor supplicant, with the
information that they were not in the habit of engaging any
but people of education.

The poor lad went his way truly dejected in spirits : he
knew no creature who could give him counsel or comfort,

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XIX

no human being on whose breast he could weep. He
thought on death, and the terror of this thought drove him
back to God.

" When every thing," said he, " goes quite unfortu-
nately, then God will help me ; it is written so in every
book that I ever read, — and in God I will put my trust !"

He then went out and bought a ticket for the gallery
for " Paul and Virginia." The scene in the second act,
where the lovers part, affected him so much that he burst
into loud sobs, which drew upon him the attention of those
who sat near to him. They spoke kindly to him, and
inquired who he was. Their friendly sympathy unlocked
his whole heart, and he told all that related to himself —
who he was, and whence he came, and that his love to the
theatre was not less than Paul's love to Virginia, and that
he certainly should become as unhappy as Paul if he did
not obtain some little post in the theatre. They all looked
at him in amazement.

The next day brought no more cheering prospects, and
his money had before long all melted away to one single
dollar. What was he to do ? Either he must work back
his passage in a vessel to his native city, and be laughed
at there for his pains when he arrived, or else he must put
himself here to some handicraft trade, which would be his
fate if he returned to Odensee.

A joiner at that moment wanted an apprentice, and to
him Andersen introduced himself, but here again it did
not succeed : after a short time poor Andersen was perse-
cuted by the journeymen, who found him an object of
sport, and the end was like the working in the manufactory
at Odensee ; and, with tears in his eyes, he parted from
his master.

As now with a heavy heart he was walking through
the streets crowded by his fellow-beings, yet without the
a 2

XX THE LIFE OF

consciousness of having one friend among them, it occurred
to him that nobody as yet had heard his fine voice. Full
of this thought, he hastened to the house of Professor Si-
boni, the director of the Royal Conservatorium, where a
large party was that day at dinner, among whom were
Baggesen the poet, and the celebrated composer, Professor
Weyse. He knocked at the door, which was opened by a
very lively young housemaid, and to her he related quite
open-heartedly how forlorn and friendless he was, and how
great was his desire to be engaged at the theatre, which
the good-natured young serving-woman immediately re-
tailed again to the company, who became curious to see
the little adventurer, as Baggesen called him. He was
now ordered in, and was desired to sing before the com-
pany, and to declaim scenes from Holberg. Whilst he was
so doing, he came to a passage which brought to his re-
membrance his own melancholy circumstances, and he
burst into tears. The company applauded him.

" I prophesy," said Baggesen, " that he will turn out
something some day ; only don't become vain when the
public applauds thee !" said he to him.

On this, Professor Siboni promised that he would cul-
tivate Andersen's voice, in order that he might make his
debut at the Theatre Royal, and, highly delighted, the poor
lad left that happy house.

The next day he was ordered to go to Professor Weyse's,
who entered with the kindest sympathy into the forlorn
condition of the poor youth, and who most nobly made a
collection for him, which amounted to seventy dollars.
After this Professor Siboni took him to his house, and half
a year was spent in elementary instruction. But Andersen's
voice was in its transition state ; and, by the end of this
time, seemed entirely gone. Siboni, therefore, counselled
him to return home and put himself to some handicraft

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XXI

trade. And once more poor Andersen stood again in the
world as hopeless as at first. Yet, even in his apparent
misfortune, there lay the seed of a better progress. He
recalled to his memory, at this dark moment of need, that
there lived in Copenhagen a poet named Guldborg, the
brother of the kind colonel in Odensee. To him Ander-
sen bent his steps, and was kindly received by him. When
Guldborg saw that the young native of Odensee could
scarcely write a word correctly, he offered to give him in-
struction in the Danish and German tongues, and made
him a present of the profits arising from a little work
which he had just published. The noble-minded Weyse,
Kuhlau, and other respectable men, also extended to him a
helping hand.

Andersen now hired a lodging for himself in the city :
he lived with a widow, who seemed reasonable in her
charges ; and yet, after all, she was a hard, unfeeling wo-
man, who was not ashamed to fleece the poor lad of twenty
dollars for his month's charges, although she allotted to
him only a disused store-closet for his accommodation.
He gave her, however, the required sum, and received
from her now and then a few half-pence when he did
errands for her in the city. Yet nobody could feel them-
selves happier than the young Andersen in his present
condition, for Professor Guldborg had engaged the actor
Lindgren to instruct him, whilst one of the solo-dancers
had taken it into his head to make a dancer out of him.
Thus he went daily to the dancing-school, made his
appearance in one or two ballets, and, as his voice also was
beginning to recover itself, he had to sing in chorus too.

Thus then actually he had become one of the theatrical

corps, and nothing was now wanting but his dtbut and the

acquisition of the fixed salary belonging to it. Always,

however, the slave of superstition, he determined with

a 3

XX THE LIFE OP

himself that, if now, on this new-year's day, when he
came to the theatre, he were able there to declaim a piece,
he would hold it to be a certain token that, in the course
of the following year, he should be advanced to the dig-
nity of an actor. But, alas ! when he reached the house,
he found that, on this day, it was closed, and only by ac-
cident a small side-door was open. Through this he crept,
trembling as if he had something evil in his mind ; on-
ward he went to the dark stage, where not a creature was
to be seen, and, falling down upon his knees on the lamp-
stage, uttered the Lord's Prayer, the only thing, and the
best thing, which then offered itself to his mind, and,
after that, returned home comforted.

He always kept hoping that, by degrees, his fine voice
would wholly again return to him ; yet that was scarcely
to be expected, because the poor youth, through want of
money, was almost always obliged to go with torn boots
and wet feet; neither had he any warm winter clothing.
He was now already sixteen years old, yet he was quite a
child ; so much so, that he spent the whole evening alone
in his chamber, busied in making dolls for his little
theatre, which he dressed from the patterns which he was
in the habit of begging from the shops.

In this manner wore away his best years for learning ;
and many a sorrowful day had he yet to spend before a
milder period arrived. Guldborg practised him in the
Danish style, and, before long, he produced a rhymed
tragedy, which, from the facility and freedom of its lan-
guage, won the attention of Ohlenschlager, Ingemann, and
others. But no debut was permitted to him in the theatre ;
they excused him from any further attendance at the
dancing- school, or from singing in chorus, as it was
wished, they said, that he should dedicate his time to
scientific studies; yet nobody did any thing for him in

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. Xxitt

this respect, and it was as much as the poor lad could do
to obtain enough to keep body and soul together. In his
great need he wrote a new dramatic piece, in the hope
that it would be accepted ; but the hope was disappointed,
and, notwithstanding that, he persevered in a second and a
third attempt.

Just at this time the distinguished Conference- councillor
Collin, no less distinguished as an officer than universally
esteemed for the goodness of his heart, became director of
the theatre, and this wise and clear-sighted man soon per-
ceived what slumbered in the young poet. It is true that
he thought but little of his dramatic works ; but he went
immediately to the king, and obtained permission from him
that young Andersen should be sent at government charges
to one of the learned schools in the provinces, and became
from this moment a father to him in the noblest sense of
the word.

Andersen now went from dancing-lessons, romances,
and dolls, to mathematics, Latin, and Greek ; and the
youth of seventeen had to place himself among boys of ten
years old to learn the first elements of these things. The
school-rector in the meantime treated him with great se-
verity, pronounced him to be devoid of all intellectual
ability, and so greatly forgot himself, and mistook so en-
tirely the duty of a public instructor, as to make the poor
youth the object of ridicule among his schoolfellows,
which produced in him such a state of mental suffering as
within a short time must have been the death of him, had
he not been rescued from this misery. Two years had thus
been spent here, when one of the teachers went to Copen-
hagen, and informed the Conference- councillor Collin how
unkindly and negligently poor Andersen was treated by
the rector. No sooner was the good man made acquainted
with this than he took Andersen immediately from the
• a 4

XXIV THE LIFE OF

school, and placed him in the hands of a private tutor.
A year after this, in 1828, Andersen was academical citizen
of Copenhagen.

Within a few months from this time appeared his first
literary work in print, under the title of " A Journey on
Foot to Amack" (a small island on which a part of
Copenhagen is built), a humorous piece, which met with
such great success, that within a very few days a second
edition was called for, and after that a third. The young
poet was now received every where with the most flattering
attention. The Danish translator of Shakspeare, Com-
mander Wulff; the celebrated naturalist, Orsted, received
him at once as the friend of their house ; whilst he found
quite a paternal home with the Collin family.

" The Journey to Amack " was succeeded by a dramatic
work, an heroic vaudeville, entitled, " Love on the Nicholas
Tower," which was brought on the stage and reviewed by
Professor David. After this, Andersen passed his second
academical examination, in which he obtained the highest
honours.

In a short time afterwards he published his first col-
lection of grave and humorous poems, which met with
great favour from the public. At school, Andersen had
been so often accused of weakness, that afterwards he was
frequently ashamed of his best feelings ; and not seldom,
when he had written a poem from the full, noble emotions
of his soul, he would, as a sort of excuse for himself, write
a parody upon it ; hence, in this volume, there are fre-
quent instances of this kind, which displeased many, who
saw that a mind thus directed would be injurious to itself
as well as others.

In the summer of 1830, Andersen made a journey
through the Danish provinces, and, after his return, pub-
lished a new collection of lyrical poems, under the title of

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XXV

" Fancies and Sketches/' which showed that a great change
had taken place in him ; and, as if he would avenge him-
self for his former self-ridicule, these poems all bore the
impression of a quiet melancholy. Many poems in this
volume were translated into German ; and one poem in
particular, " The Dying Child," is said to he possessed
of such extraordinary pathos and beauty that it has been
translated into German, French, English, Swedish, and
Greenlandish. The poor Greenlanders, indeed, sing it when
out on their desolate seas in their fishing excursions ; and
it is to be found printed in their song-books.

This poem I have never met with ; indeed, I regret not
being possessed of this volume of Andersen's poems ; how-
ever, I will subjoin here a translation of one which Cha-
misso has rendered into German, and which is so full of
tenderness and beauty, that I am sure the reader will thank
me for it : —

« THE MILLER'S JOURNEYMAN.

" In this mill I was a servant, even when I was a boy ;
And here have fled for ever my days of youthful joy.
The miller's gentle daughter was kind and full of grace,
One seem'd to read her gentle heart whilst looking in her face.

" In the evening oft so trustfully she s'at down by my side ;
We talk'd so much together, I could nothing from her hide:
She shared with me my trouble, in my pleasure she had part ;
One only thing conceal'd I — the love within my heart.

" I think she might have seen it ; if she had loved she would ;
For there needs no word, no word at all, to make love understood !
I spoke unto my foolish heart — ' Forego it, and be still !
For thee, poor youth, such joy comes not — comes not, and never will ! '

" And whilst I thus was grieving, she said, with tenderest tone,
' Ah, why art thou so alter'd, and why so pale hast grown ?
Thou must again be joyful ; thy sorrow gives me pain ! '
And thus, because I loved so much, did I my love restrain.

" One day, beside the rocky wall, she took by me her stand,
Her eyes flash'd clearer light, and she laid on mine her hand,
' Now must thou wish me joy,' she said, ' must greet me as a bride,
And thou, thou art the first to whom I would my joy confide ! '

XXVi THE LIFE OF

" The while I kiss'd her hand I conceal'd from her my face ;
I could not speak a single word, my tears flow'd down apace ;
It seem'd as if had perish'd, in that same hour of woe,
My thoughts and all my hopes in the deepest depths below !

" That eve was the betrothal, and even I was there ;
They set me in the chiefest place, beside the happy pair ;
They clink'd their merry glasses, they sung their songs of glee ;
I made myself seem happy, lest all the truth should see.

" Upon the following morning, my head spun round and round ;
How stupid and perplex'd was I where all were happy found !
What wanted I ? one only thing ! 'Twas wonderful, yet true,
And they all loved me— she herself, and he, the lover, too !

" They were so kind unto me, but my woe they could not guess !
And as I saw them love and talk, so full of happiness,
The wish to wander far and wide took hold upon my heart ;
So I made my bundle ready— 'twas right I should depart !

" Said I, ' Now let me see the world, and by its joy be bless'd ! '
But I only meant, forget the world that lies within my breast.
She look'd at me, and said, ' Oh, Heavens ! what's come to thee !
We love thee here so kindly, where canst thou better be ? '

" Then flow'd forth fast my tears, this time it was but right,
' One always weeps at parting ! ' said she, that parting night.
They went with me for company some distance on my. track —
Now sick — sick unto death — they again have brought me back.

" With gentlest love and kindest care they tend me in the mill,
And she with her beloved comes to me when she will.
In July is the wedding ; and ever doth she say,
That I shall have a home with them, and soon again be gay.

" How dreamily I listen to the frothing waterwheel,
And think beneath it I might find the peace I cannot feel !
There know no longer sorrow, from every pain be free ! —
They wish me to be happy, and thus then let it be ! "

This is a beautiful poem ! And in the spring, when the
seas are open, and we can again have intercourse with the
north, I hope to receive Andersen's poems, from which, if
it be the pleasure of the public, I hope to give them other
specimens. But let us now return to his life.

Andersen's health was not strong, and, in 1831, he made
a journey into the Saxon Switzerland, of which he pub-
lished an account the same year. Neither were his pecu-
niary circumstances flourishing : like most authors, he had

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XXVU

many anxieties; and, at this time, to add to his other
perplexities, he furnished opera-text to the music of Bre-
dahl, from Sir Walter Scott's ' f Bride of Lammermoor ; "
and for his old benefactor, Professor Weyse, " Kenilworth,"
from the same author. For these works the critics handled
him severely. Yet, in the meantime, Andersen proved
how true a lyrical poet he was, hy his " Vignettes to the
Danish poets," and his " Twelve Months of the Year."
About this time, however, there appeared " Letters of a
Wandering Ghost," a satirical work, in which Andersen
was held up to ridicule, among other things, for his im-
perfect orthography. The poet's heart was wounded, his
health was indifferent, his circumstances unprosperous, and
the public laugh was against him, rather on account of his
misfortunes than his faults ; but, as had always been the
case through his life, light broke in when the darkness
seemed deepest, and at the very moment when he was
smarting under the lash of these jeering letters, he received
a royal stipend to enable him to travel through Germany,
France, and Italy. This stipend was granted to him on
the recommendation of Ohlenschlager, Ingemann, Heiberg,
Orsted, and Thiele ; and it is very remarkable that all these
gentlemen had recommended the poet, each for a peculiar
qualification ; the one for his deep feeling, another for his
wit, and a third for his humour. This mark of favour
excited still more the envy of the baser class of minds, and
many anonymous attacks were made upon him, which
wounded him so deeply, that, despairing of himself and
his own powers, he set out on the journey, which was to
be to him the noblest school.

He went immediately to Paris ; and it is singular that
the first letter which he received from his native land was
merely a blank envelope containing a newspaper, in which
was a satirical poem on himself. Andersen made the ac-

XXVili TFIE LIFE OF

quaintance of the first literary men in Paris ; thence he
went to Switzerland, where he was invited by a family
with whom he was acquainted, and who were living in the
valley of the Jura Mountains, to pay them a visit. This
invitation he accepted,, and under their roof, amid the deep
solitudes of nature, he completed a dramatic poem, entitled
" Agnes and the Waterman," which he had begun in Paris.
In this poem he poured out his whole soul, and hoped that
his fellow-countrymen would not begrudge him the favour
of his king, when through it they became better acquainted
with him.

On the anniversary of the day on which Andersen, four-
teen years before, a stranger and friendless, had entered
the gate of Copenhagen, he wandered over the Simplon
into that beautiful land which was to open to him a new
spiritual world, and call forth the noblest characteristics of
his soul. He went though Milan, Genoa, and Florence, on
to Rome, where Thorwaldsen and all his countrymen there
received him with the greatest affection.

His residence in Rome began like a sunshiny summer
day; but while it yet was morning, clouds arose ; the poem
which he had sent to Copenhagen, and which he hoped
would warm the hearts of his countrymen towards him, was
quite overlooked — a new young poet had just arisen, who
was the star of the moment. His friends wrote to him of all
these things, and candidly told him that they, like every one
else, thought that he was past his best. Another letter brought
him the sad intelligence of the death of his mother, the last
of his family connections. Andersen felt her death severely,
and many poems which he wrote at that time express the
dejection of his mind. Spite, however, of sadness and
untoward events, the glorious treasures of art around him,
and the fine country within which he was a sojourner,
with its bright southern life, operated beneficially on his

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. XXIX

spirit. With that intense love for Italy, which is peculiar
to the most spiritual-minded inhabitants of the cold north,
and, in some cases, has amounted to a passion like the
attachment of the Swiss to their mountains, Andersen en-
tered into the spirit of the life of the people, and has re-
flected all back to us with the most beautiful colouring in
his " Impro visa tore."

Thorwaldsen gratified the poet by the warmest admi-
ration of his last unfortunate production, " Agnes and the
Waterman," and from the great sculptor he received the
utmost kindness. Thorwaldsen told him how poor he also
had been, and how, in his early artist-career, he had had
to contend against envy, and how he also had been mis-
understood.

At this moment Andersen's bitterest enemy, Herz, the
author of the " Letters of the Wandering Ghost," arrived
in Rome ; and, as might often be the case would literary
enemies only condescend to a personal knowledge of each
other, no sooner did these two men meet than they became
fast friends. This was a bright event to the warm heart
of Andersen. They travelled together to Naples, and
ascended Vesuvius during a splendid eruption. They
visited Psestum and the Grotto Azurra together ; of all of
which we have such an exquisite reflex in the following
work.

The greatest harmony existed between these two Danish
sons of the Muses, and exists still, we believe, to the pre-
sent time.

In the following year Andersen returned home through
Venice, Vienna, and Munich, making in the two last cities
the acquaintance of the first German poets and artists.
Immediately after his return he published his novel, " The
Improvisatore," which was received with universal ap-
plause— which was read and re-read, and which the public

XXX LIFE OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.

never tired of reading. That a work of such singular
originality and beauty was universally admired was not at
all remarkable; but an extraordinary effect was produced
which, it seems to me, tells greatly to the honour of the
Danish heart. Not only did Andersen's friends, and the
public generally, acknowledge the merit of his work, but they
who had treated the poet with severity came now forward
and offered him the hand of congratulation ; and among
them was the rector of the school, the hard-hearted teacher
of the poor youth, who had taken all possible means to
crush into the dust the talent which God had given him.
He now came forward, acknowledged his fault, and deplored
it, which touched the good heart of Andersen not a little.
And this is but one of the many instances of generous
enthusiasm which was excited by this beautiful work to-
wards its author.

It does one's heart good to hear of noble actions, and I
have written of these with pleasure. And now, dear reader,
who hast gone with me thus far through the life of our
author, to thee I commend the following story, which may
be called a sermon preached from the text of his own life,
and which seems to me to be full of great and good lessons.
May it afford thee as much pleasure as it has afforded me !

The Elms, Clapton, January 15. 1845.

TO THE

CONFERENCE -COUNCILLOR COLLIN

AND

HIS EXCELLENT WIFE,

IN WHOM I FOUND PARENTS ;
AND

TO THEIR CHILDREN,

IN WHOM I FOUND BROTHERS AND SISTERS;
IN WHOSE HOME, A HOME ;

I BRING, WITH A FILIAL AND A FRATERNAL, HEART,
THIS THE BEST WHICH I POSSESS.

THE AUTHOR.

THE

IMPROVISATOR!.

CHAPTER I.

THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MY CHILDHOOD.

WHOEVER has been in Rome is well acquainted with the
Piazza Barberina, in the great square, with the beautiful
fountain, where the Tritons empty the spouting conch-
shell, from which the water springs upwards many feet.
Whoever has not been there, knows it, at all events, from
copperplate engravings ; only it is a pity, that in these the
house at the corner of the Via Felice is not given, that tall
corner-house, where the water pours through three pipes
out of the wall down into a stone basin. That house has
a peculiar interest for me ; it was there that I was born.
If I look back to my tender youth, such a crowd of bright
remembrances meet me, that I scarcely know where to
begin ; when I contemplate the whole drama of my life,
still less do I know what I should bring forward, what I
should pass over as unessential, and what points may
suffice to represent the whole picture. That which ap-
pears attractive to me may not be so to a stranger. I will
relate truly and naturally the great story, but then vanity
must come into play — the wicked vanity, the desire to
please. Already, in my childhood, it sprung up like a
plant, and, like the mustard-seed of the Gospel, shot forth

2 THE IMPROVISATOHE.

its branches towards heaven, and became a mighty tree, in
which my passions builded themselves nests.

One of my earliest recollections points thereto. I was
turned six years old, and was playing in the neighbour-
hood of the church of the Capuchins, with some other
children, who were all younger than myself. There was
fastened on the church-door a little cross of metal ; it was
fastened about the middle of the door, and I could just
reach it with my hand. Always when our mothers had
passed by with us they had lifted us up that we might kiss
the holy sign. One day, when we children were playing,
one of the youngest of them inquired, " Why the child
Jesus did not come down and play with us ? " I assumed
an air of wisdom, and replied, that he was really bound
upon the cross. We went to the church-door, and, al-
though we found no one, we wished, as our mothers had
taught us, to kiss him, but we could not reach up to it ;
one therefore lifted up the other, but just as the lips were
pointed for the kiss, that one who lifted the other lost his
strength, and the kissing one fell down just when his lips
were about to touch the invisible child Jesus. At that
moment my mother came by, and, when she saw our
child's play, she folded her hands, and said, ce You are
actually some of God's angels ! And thou art mine own
angel ! " added she, and kissed me.

I heard her repeat to a neighbour what an innocent
angel I was, and it pleased me greatly, but it lessened my
innocence — the mustard-seed of vanity drank in there-
from the first sunbeams. Nature had given to me a gentle,
pious character, but my good mother made me aware of it ;
she showed me my real and my imaginary endowments, and
never thought that it is with the innocence of the child
as with the basilisk, which dies when it sees itself.

The Capuchin monk, Fra Martino, was my mother's
confessor, and she related to him what a pious child I was.
I also knew several prayers very nicely by heart, although
I did not understand one of them. He made very much
of me, and gave me a picture of the Virgin weeping great
tears, which fell, like rain-drops, down into the burning
flames of hell, where the damned caught this draught of

THE IMPROVISATOR E. 3

refreshment. He took me over with him into the convent,
where the open colonnade, which enclosed within a square
the little potato-garden, with the two Cyprus and orange-
trees, made a very deep impression upon me. Side by
side, in the open passages, hung old portraits of deceased
monks, and on the door of each cell were pasted pictures
from the history of the martyrs, which I contemplated
with the same holy emotion as afterwards the masterpieces
of Raphael and Andrew del Sarto.

" Thou art really a bright youth," said he ; " thou
shalt now see the dead."

Upon this, he opened a little door of a gallery which lay
a few steps below the colonnade. We descended, and now I
saw round about me skulls upon skulls, so placed one upon
another that they formed walls, and therewith several chapels.
In these were regular niches, in which were seated perfect
skeletons of the most distinguished of the monks, enveloped
in their brown cowls, their cords round their waists, and
with a breviary or a withered bunch of flowers in their
hands. Altars, chandeliers, and ornaments, were made of
shoulder-bones and vertebrae, with bas-reliefs of human
joints, horrible and tasteless as the whole idea.

I clung fast to the monk, who whispered a prayer, and
then said to me, —

" Here also I shall some time sleep ; wilt thou thus visit
me?"

I answered not a word, but looked horrified at him, and
then round about me upon the strange grisly assembly.
It was foolish to take me, a child, into this place. I was
singularly impressed by the whole thing, and did not feel
myself again easy until I came into his little cell, where
the beautiful yellow oranges almost hung in at the window,
and I saw the brightly-coloured picture of the Madonna,
who was borne upwards by angels into the clear sunshine,
while a thousand flowers filled the grave in which she had
rested.

This, my first visit to the convent, occupied my imagi-
nation for a long time, and stands yet with extraordinary
vividness before me. The monk seemed to me quite a
different being to any other person whom I knew ; his
B 2

4 THE IMPROVISATORS.

abode in the neighbourhood of the dead, who, in their
brown cloaks, looked almost like himself, the many histo-
ries which he knew and could relate of holy men and won-
derful miracles, together with my mother's great reverence
for his sanctity, caused me to begin thinking whether I,
too, could not be such a man.

My mother was a widow, and had no other means of
subsistence than what she obtained by sewing, and by the
rent of a large room which we ourselves had formerly in-
habited. We lived now in a little chamber in the roof,
and a young painter, Federigo, had the saloon, as we called
it. He was a life-enjoying, brisk young man, who came
from a far, far country, where they knew nothing about
the Madonna and the child Jesus, my mother said. He was
from Denmark. I had at that time no idea that there
existed more languages than one, and I believed, therefore,
that he was deaf when he did not understand me, and, for
that reason, I spoke to him as loud as I could ; he laughed
at me, often brought me fruit, and drew for me soldiers,
horses, and houses. We soon became acquainted ; I loved
him much, and my mother said many a time that he was
a very upright person.

In the mean time I heard a conversation one evening
between my mother and the monk Fra Martino, which
excited in me a sorrowful emotion for the young artist. My
mother inquired if this foreigner would actually be eter-
nally condemned to hell.

" He and many other foreigners also," she said, " are,
indeed, very honest people, who never do any thing wicked.
They are good to the poor, pay exactly, and at the fixed
time ; nay, it actually often seems to me that they are not
such great sinners as many of us."

" Yes," replied Fra Martino, " that is very true — they
are often very good people; but do you know how that
happens? You see, the devil, who goes about the world,
knows that the heretics will some time belong to him, and
so he never tempts them ; and, therefore, they can easily
be honest, easily give up sin; on the contrary, a good
Catholic Christian is a child of God, and, therefore, the
devil sets his temptations in array against him, and we

THE IMPROVISATORE. 5

weak creatures are subjected. But a heretic, as one may
say, is tempted neither of the flesh nor the devil ! "

To this my mother could make no reply, and sighed
deeply over the poor young man ; I began to cry, for it
seemed to me that it was a cruel sin that he should be
burned eternally — he who was so good, and who drew me
such beautiful pictures.

A third person who played a great part in my child-
hood's life was Uncle Peppo, commonly called " Wicked
Peppo," or " the King of the Spanish Steps*," where he
had his daily residence. Born with two withered legs,
which lay crossed under him, he had had from his earliest
childhood an extraordinary facility in moving himself for-
wards with his hands. These he stuck under a frame
which was fastened at both ends to a board, and by the
help of this he could move himself forward almost as
easily as any other person with healthy and strong feet.
He sat daily, as has been said, upon the Spanish Steps,
never indeed begging, but exclaiming, with a crafty smile,
to every passer-by, " bon giorno ! " and that even after the
sun was gone down.

My mother did not like him much, nay, indeed, she
was ashamed of the relationship ; but, for my sake, as she
often told me, she kept up a friendship with him. He had
that in his chest which we others must look after, and if
I kept good friends with him I should be his only heir, if
he did not give it to the church. He had, also, after his
own way, a sort of liking for me, yet I never felt myself
quite happy in his neighbourhood. Once I was the witness
of a scene which awoke in me fear of him, and also exhibited
his own disposition. Upon one of the lowest flights of
stairs sat an old blind beggar, and rattled with his little
leaden box that people might drop a bajocco therein.
Many people passed by my uncle without noticing his
crafty smile and the wavings of his hat ; the blind man
gained more by his silence — they gave to him. Three had
gone by, and now came the fourth, and threw him a small

* These lead from the Spanish Place up to Monte Pincio, a broad flight of
stone steps. These, which consist of four flights, are an especial resort of the
beggars of Rome, and, from their locality, bear the name of the Spanish
Steps.— Author's note.

B 3

O THE IMPROVISATORE.

coin. Peppo could no longer contain himself; I saw how
he crept down like a snake, and struck the blind man in
his face, so that he lost both money and stick.

" Thou thief!" cried my uncle, " wilt thou steal money
from me — thou who art not even a regular cripple ? Can-
not see ! — that is all his infirmity ! — and so he will take
my bread from my mouth ! "

I neither heard nor saw more, but hastened home with
a flask of wine which I had been sent to purchase. On
the great festival days I was always obliged to go with
my mother to visit him at his own house ; we took with
us one kind of present or other, either fine grapes or pre-
served golden pippins, which were his greatest luxury. I
was then obliged to kiss his hand and call him uncle ;
then he smiled so strangely, and gave me a half-bajocco,
always adding the exhortation that I should keep it to look
at, not spend it in cakes, for when these were eaten I had
nothing left, but that if I kept my coin I should always
have something.

His dwelling was dark and dirty : in one little room
there was no window at all, and in the other it was almost
up to the ceiling with broken and patched-up panes. Of
furniture there was not one article, except a great wide
chest, which served him for a bed, and two tubs, in which
he kept his clothes. I always cried when I had to go
there ; and true it is, however much my mother persuaded
me to be very affectionate towards him, yet she always
made use of him as a bugbear when she would punish me;
she said then that she would send me to my dirty uncle,
that I should sit and sing beside him upon the stairs, and
thus do something useful and earn a bajocco. But I knew
that she never meant so ill by me ; I was the apple of her
eye.

On the house of our opposite neighbour there was an
image of the Virgin, before which a lamp was always burn-
ing. Every evening when the bell rang the Ave Maria,
I and the neighbours' children knelt before it, and sang in
honour of the mother of God, and the pretty child Jesus,
which they had adorned with ribands, beads, and silver
hearts. By the wavering lamp-light it often seemed to me

THE IMPROVISATORE. 7

as if both mother and child moved and smiled upon us. I
sang with a high clear voice ; and people said that I sang
beautifully. Once there stood an English family and lis-
tened to us ; and, when we rose up from our knees, the
gentleman gave me a silver piece ; " it was," my mother
said, " because of my fine voice." But how much dis-
traction did this afterwards cause me ! I thought no
longer alone on the Madonna when I sung before her
image ; no ! I thought, did any one listen to my beautiful
singing ; but always when I thought so there succeeded a
burning remorse ; I was afraid that she would be angry
with me ; and I prayed right innocently that she would
look down upon me, poor child !

The evening-song was, in the mean time, the only point
of union between me and the other neighbours' children.
I lived quietly, entirely in my own self-created dream-
world ; I lay for hours upon my back, with my face to
the open window, looking out into the wonderful, gloriously
blue, Italian heaven, into the play of colours at the going
down of the sun, when the clouds hung with their violet-
hued edges upon a golden ground. Often I wished that I
could fly far beyond the Quirinal and the houses, to the
great pine-trees, which stood like black shadow-figures
against the fire-red horizon. I had quite another scene on
the other side of our room : there lay our own and our
neighbours' yards, each a small, narrow space, enclosed by
tall houses, and almost shut in from above by the great
wooden balconies. In the middle of each yard there was
a well enclosed with masonry, and the space between this
and the walls of the houses was not greater than to admit
of one person moving round. Thus, from above I looked
properly only into two deep wells ; they were entirely
overgrown with that fine plant which we call Venus' hair,
and which, hanging down, lost itself in the darkness. It
was to me as if I could see deep down into the earth, where
my fancy then created for herself the strangest pictures.
In the mean time, my mother adorned that window with a
great rod, to show me what fruit grew for me there, that I
might not fall down and get drowned.
B 4

8 THE IMPROVISATORS.

But I will now mention an occurrence which might
easily have put an end to my life's history before it had
come into any entanglement.

CHAPTER II.

THE VISIT TO THE CATACOMBS. I BECOME A CHORISTER. THE

LOVELY ANGEL-CHILD. THE IMPROVISATORS.

OUR lodger, the young painter, took me with him some-
times on his little rambles beyond the gates. I did not
disturb him whilst he was making now and then a sketch ;
and when he had finished he amused himself with my
prattle, for he now understood the language.

Once before, I had been with him to the curia hostilia,
deep down into the dark caves where, in ancient days,
wild beasts were kept for the games, and where innocent
captives were thrown to ferocious hyaenas and lions. The
dark passages ; the monk who conducted us in, and con-
tinually struck the red torch against the walls ; the deep
cistern in which the water stood as clear as a mirror —
yes, so clear, that one was obliged to move it with the torch
to convince one's self that it was up to the brim, and that
there was no empty space, as by its clearness there seemed
to be ; — all this excited my imagination. Fear, I felt
none, for I was unconscious of danger.

" Are we going to the caverns ? " I inquired from him,
as I saw at the end of the street the higher part of the
Colosseum.

" No, to something much greater," replied he ; " where
thou shall see something ! And I will paint thee, also, my
fine fellow !"

Thus wandered we farther, and ever farther, between
the white walls, the enclosed vineyards, and the old ruins
of the baths, till we were out of Rome. The sun burned
hotly, and the peasants had made for their wagons roofs of
green branches, under which they slept, while the horses,
left to themselves, went at a foot's pace, and ate from the

THE IMPROVISATORS. Q

bundle of hay which hung beside them for this purpose.
At length we reached the grotto of Egeria, in which we
took our breakfast, and mixed our wine with the fresh
water that streamed out from between the blocks of stone.
The walls and vault of the whole grotto were inside covered
over with the finest green, as of tapestry, woven of silks
and velvet, and round about the great entrance hung the
thickest ivy, fresh and luxuriant as the vine foliage in the
valleys of Calabria.

Not many paces from the grotto stands, or rather stood,
for there are now only a few remains of it left, a little, and
wholly desolate house, built above one of the descents to
the catacombs. These were, as is well known, in ancient
times, connecting links between Rome and the surrounding
cities ; in later times, however, they have in part fallen in,
and in part been built up, because they served as concealment
for robbers and smugglers. The entrance through the
burial-vaults in St. Sebastian's church, and this one through
the desolate house, were then the only two in existence ;
and I almost think that we were the last who descended
by this, for, shortly after our adventure, it also was shut
up ; and only the one through the church, under the con-
duct of a monk, remains now open to strangers.

Deep below, hollowed out of the soft puzzolan earth, the
one passage crosses another. Their multitude, their similarity
one to another, are sufficient to bewilder even him who knows
the principal direction. I had formed no idea of the whole,
and the painter felt so confident, that he had no hesitation
in taking me, the little boy, down with him. He lighted
his candle, and took another with him in his pocket, fas-
tened a ball of twine to the opening where we descended,
and our wandering commenced. Anon the passages were
so low that I could not go upright ; anon they elevated
themselves to lofty vaults, and, where the one crossed the
other, expanded themselves into great quadrangles. We
passed through the Rotunda with the small stone altar in
the middle, where the early Christians, persecuted by the
Pagans, secretly performed their worship. Federigo told
me of the fourteen popes, and the many thousand martyrs,
who here lie buried : we held the light against the great

10 THE IMPROVISATORS.

cracks in the tombs, and saw the yellow bones within.*
We advanced yet some steps onward, and then came to a
stand, because we were at the end of the twine. The end
of this Federigo fastened to his button-hole, stuck the
candle among some stones, and then began to sketch the
deep passage. I sat close beside him upon one of the
stones ; he had desired me to fold my hands and to look
upwards. The light was nearly burnt out, but a whole
one lay hard by ; besides which he had brought a tinder-
box, by the aid of which he could light the other in case
this suddenly went out.

My imagination fashioned to itself a thousand wonderful
objects in the infinite passages which opened themselves,
and revealed to us an impenetrable darkness. All was
quite still, the falling waterdrops alone sent forth a mono-
tonous sound. As I thus sat, wrapped in my own thoughts,
I was suddenly terrified by my friend the painter, who
heaved a strange sigh, and sprang about, but always in the
same spot. Every moment he stooped down to the ground,
as if he would snatch up something, then he lighted the
larger candle and sought about. I became so terrified at
his singular behaviour, that I got up and began to cry.

" For God's sake, sit still, child ! " said he — <f for God
in heaven's sake !" and again he began staring on the
ground.

c< I will go up again !" I exclaimed — " I will not stop
down here ! " I then took him by the hand and strove to
draw him with me.

"Child! child! thou art a noble fellow!" said he;
" I will give thee pictures and cakes — there, thou hast
money !" And he took his purse out of his pocket, and
gave me all that was in it : but I felt that his hand was
ice-cold and that he trembled. On this I grew more
uneasy, and called my mother; but now he seized me
firmly by the shoulder, and, shaking me violently, said,

* The monumental stones here are without any ornament ; on the contrary,
one finds in the catacombs of St. Januarius, at Naples, the images of stints
and inscriptions, but all very indifi'erently done. On the graves of th Chris-
tians a fish is figured, in the Greek name of which occur the initial letters of
('lyo-ovi X^nr-ro;, ®io-j vies, (rurr^) Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Re-
deemer.— A ut/tur's nuic.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 11

" I will beat thee if thou art not quiet ! " Then he
bound his pocket-handkerchief round my arm, and held
me fast, but bent himself down to me the next moment,
kissed me vehemently, called me his dear little Antonio,
and whispered, " Do thou also pray to the Madonna ! "
" Is the string lost ?" I asked.

" We will find it — we will find it ! " he replied, and
began searching again. In the mean time the lesser light
was quite burnt out, and the larger one, from its con-
tinual agitation, melted and burnt his hand, which only
increased his distress. It would have been quite impossible
to have found our way back without the string, every step
would only have led us deeper down where no one could
save us.

After vainly searching, he threw himself upon the
ground, cast his arm around my neck, and sighed, c: Thou
poor child ! " I then wept bitterly, for it seemed to me
that I never more should reach my home. He clasped
me so closely to him as he lay on the ground that my hand
slid under him. I involuntarily grasped the sand, and
found the string between my fingers.
" Here it is ! " I exclaimed.

He seized my hand, and became, as it were, frantic for
joy, for our life actually hung upon this single thread.
We were saved.

Oh, how warmly beamed the sun, how blue was the
heaven, how deliciously green the trees and bushes, as we
came forth into the free air ! Poor Federigo kissed me
yet again, drew his handsome silver watch out of his
pocket, and said, " This thou shalt have !"

I was so heartily glad about this, that I quite forgot all
that had happened ; but my mother could not forget it,
when she had heard it, and would not again consent that
Federigo should take me out with him. Fra Martino said
also that it was only on my account that we were saved,
that it was to me to whom the Madonna had given the
thread — to me, and not to the heretic Federigo ; that I
was a good, pious child, and must never forget her kind-
ness and mercy. This, and the jesting assertion of some
of our acquaintance, that I was born to be of the priest-

12 THE ISIPROVISATORE.

hood, because, with the exception of my mother, I could
not endure women, instilled into her the determination
that I should become a servant of the church. 1 do not
myself know why, but I had an antipathy to all women,
and, as I expressed this unhesitatingly, I was bantered by
every girl and woman who came to my mother's. They
all would kiss me : in particular was there a peasant girl,
Mariuccia, who by this jest always brought tears to my
eyes. She was very lively and waggish, and maintained
herself by serving as a model, and always appeared, there-
fore, in handsome, gay dresses, with a large white cloth
over her hair. She often sat for Federigo, and visited
my mother also, and then always told me that she was my
bride, and that I was her little bridegroom, who must and
should give her a kiss ; I never would do so, and then
she took it by force.

Once when she said that I cried childishly, and behaved
myself exactly like a child that still sucked, and that I
should be suckled like any other baby, I flew out, down
the steps, but she pursued and caught me, held me
between her knees, and pressed my head, which I turned
away with disgust, ever closer and closer to her breast. I
tore the silver arrow out of her hair, which fell down in
rich abundance over me and over her naked shoulders.
My mother stood on the hearth, laughed, and encouraged
Mariuccia, whilst Federigo, unobservedly, stood at the
door, and painted the whole group.

" I will have no bride, no wife ! " I exclaimed to my
mother ; " I will be a priest, or a Capuchin, like Fra
Martino ! "

The extraordinary meditations into which I was wrapt
for whole evenings also were regarded by my mother as
tokens of my spiritual calling. I sat and thought then
what castles and churches I would build, if I should be-
come great and rich ; how I then would drive like the
cardinals in red carriages, with many gold-liveried ser-
vants behind ; or else I framed a new martyr-story out of
the many which Fra Martino had related to me. I was,
of course, the hero of these, and, through the help of the
Madonna, never felt the pangs which were inflicted upon

THE IMPBOVISATORE. 13

me. But, especially, had I a great desire to journey to
Federigo's home, to convert the people there, that they
also might know something of grace.

Whether it was through the management of my mother
or Fra Martino I know not, but it is enough that my
mother, early one morning, arrayed me in a little kirtle,
and drew over it an embroidered shirt, which only reached
to the knees, and then led me to the glass that I might see
myself. I was now a chorister in the Capuchin church,
must carry the great censer of incense, and sing with the
others before the altar. Fra Martino instructed me in the
whole duty. Oh, how happy all this made me ! I was
soon quite at home in that little but comfortable church,
knew every angel's head in the altar-piece, every orna-
mental scroll upon the pillars, could see even with my
eyes shut the beautiful St. Michael fighting with the
dragon*, just as the painter had represented him, and
thought many wonderful things about the death's heads
carved in the pavement, with the green ivy wreaths
around the brow.

On the festival of All Saints, I was down in the Chapel
of the Dead, where Fra Martino had led me when I was
with him for the first time in the convent. All the monks
sang masses for the dead, and I, with two other boys of
my own age, swung the incense-breathing censer before
the great altar of skulls. They had placed lights in the
chandeliers made of bones, new garlands were placed
around the brows of the skeleton-monks, and fresh bouquets
in their hands. Many people, as usual, thronged in ; they
all knelt, and the singers intoned the solemn Miserere.
I gazed for a long time on the pale, yellow skulls, and
the fumes of the incense which wavered in strange shapes
between them and me, and every thing began to spin
round before my eyes ; it was as if I saw everything
through a large rainbow ; as if a thousand prayer-bells
rung in my ear; it seemed as if I was borne along a
stream ; it was unspeakably delicious — more, I know not;
consciousness left me — I was in a swoon.

* The celebrated picture of St. Michael, the archangel, who, with the
beauty of youth, and with great wings, sets his foot upon and pierces the head
of the devil Author's note.

14} THE IMPROVISATORS.

The atmosphere, made oppressive by crowds of people,
and my excited imagination, occasioned this fainting-fit.
When I came to myself again, I was lying in Fra Martino's
lap, under the orange-tree in the convent garden.

The confused story which I told of what I seemed to
have seen, he and all the brethren explained as a revela-
tion : the holy spirits had floated over me, but I had not
been able to bear the sight of their glory and their ma-
jesty. This occasioned me before long to have many
extraordinary dreams ; I also imagined some which I re-
lated to my mother, and she again communicated to her
friends, so that I became daily more and more to be
regarded as a child of God.

In the mean time, the happy Christmas approached.
Pifierari, shepherds from the mountains, came in their
short cloaks, with ribands around their pointed hats, and
announced with the bagpipe, before every house where
there stood an image of the Virgin, that the time was at
hand in which the Saviour was born. I was awoke every
morning by these monotonous, melancholy tones, and my
first occupation then was to read over my lesson, for I was
one of the children selected, " hoys and girls," who,
between Christmas and New-year, were to preach in the
church ara coeli, before the image of Jesus.

It was not I alone, my mother, and Mariuccia, who
rejoiced that I, the boy of nine, should make a speech, but
also the painter Federigo, before whom I, without their
knowledge, had had a rehearsal, standing upon a table ; it
would be upon such a one, only that a carpet would be laid
over it, that we children should be placed in the church,
where we, before the assembled multitudes, must repeat
the speech, which we had learned by rote, about the bleed-
ing heart of the Madonna, and the beauty of the child
Jesus.

I knew nothing of fear; it was only with joy that my
heart beat so violently as I stepped forward, and saw all
eyes directed to me. That I, of all the children, gave
most delight, seemed decided ; but now there was lifted up
a little girl, who was of so exquisitely delicate a form, and
who had, at the same time, so wonderfully bright a coun-

THE IMPROVISATORE. 15

tenance, and such a melodious voice, that all exclaimed
aloud that she was a little angelic child. Even my mother,
who would gladly have awarded to me the palm, declared
aloud that she was just like one of the angels in the great
altar-piece. The wonderfully dark eyes, the raven-black
hair, the childlike, and yet so wise expression of counte-
nance, the exquisitely small hands — nay, it seemed to me
that my mother said too much of all these, although she
added that I also was an angel of God.

There is a song about the nightingale, which, when it
was quite young, sat in the nest and picked the green leaves
of the rose, without being aware of the buds which were
just beginning to form ; months afterwards, the rose un-
folded itself, the nightingale sang only of it, flew among
the thorns, and wounded itself. The song often occurred
to me when I became older, but in the church, ara cceli,
I knew it not, neither my ears nor my heart knew it !

At home, I had to repeat before my mother, Mariuccia,
and many friends, the speech which I had made, and this
flattered my vanity not a little ; but they lost, in the mean
time, their interest in hearing it earlier than I mine in
repeating it. In order, now, to keep my public in good
humour, I undertook, out of my own head, to make a new
speech. But this was rather a description of the festival
in the church than a regular Christmas speech. Federigo
was the first who heard it ; and, although he laughed, it
flattered me still, when he said that my speech was in every
way as good as that which Fra Martino had taught me,
and that a poet lay hidden in me. This last remark gave
me much to think about, because I could not understand
it ; yet, thought I to myself, it must be a good angel
which dwelt in me, perhaps the same which shows to me
the charming dreams, and so many beautiful things when
I sleep. For the first time during the summer, chance
gave me a clear notion of a poet, and awoke new ideas in
my own soul-world.

It but very rarely happened that my mother left the
quarter of the city in which we lived; therefore, it seemed
to me like a festival when she said to me, one afternoon,
that we would go and pay a visit to a friend of hers in

16 THE IMPROVISATORS.

Trastevere.* I was dressed in my holyday suit, and the
gay piece of silk which I usually wore instead of a waist-
coat was fastened with pins over the breast, and under my
little jacket ; my neckerchief was tied in a great bow, and
an embroidered cap was on my head. I was particularly
elegant.

When,, after the visit, were turned home, it was some-
what late, but the moon shone gloriously, the air was fresh
and blue, and the cypresses and pines stood with wonder-
fully sharp outlines upon the neighbouring heights. It
was one of those evenings which occur but once in a person's
life, which, without signalising itself by any great life-
adventure, yet stamps itself in its whole colouring upon the
Psyche- wings. Since that moment, whenever my mind goes
back to the Tiber, I see it ever before me as upon this
evening ; — the thick yellow water lit up by the moonbeams,
the black stone pillars of the old ruinous bridge, which,
with strong shadow, lifted itself out of the stream where the
great mill-wheel rushed round, nay, even the merry girls
who skipped past with the tambourine and danced the
saltarello.f

In the streets around Santa Maria della Rotunda all
was yet life and motion ; butchers and fruit-women sat
before their tables, on which lay their wares among garlands
of laurel, and with lights burning in the open air. The
fire flickered under the chestnut-pans, and the conversation
was carried on with so much screaming and noise, that a
stranger who did not understand a word might have
imagined it to be some contention of life and death. An
old friend whom my mother met in the fish-market kept
us talking so long, that people were beginning to put out
their lights before we set off again, and as my mother

* That part of Rome which lies on the higher banks of the Tiber.— Author's
note.

t A popular Roman dance to a most monotonous tune. It is danc<-d by one
or two persons, yet without these coming in contact with each other ; most
frequently by two men or two women, who, with a quick, hopping step, and
with increasing rapidity, move themselves in a half-circle. The arms are as
violently agitated as the legs, and change their position incessantly, with all
that natural grace peculiar to the Roman people. Women are accustomed in
this dance to lift up the petticoats a little, or else to beat time themselves
upon the tambourine : this, otherwise, is done by a third person on the mono-
tonous drum — the changes in the time alone consisting in the greater or less
rapidity with which the strokes follow one another — Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 17

accompanied her friend to her door it had now become as
silent as death in the street, even in the Corso ; but when
we came into the square di Trevi, where there is the beau-
tiful cascade, it seemed, on the contrary, quite cheerful
again.

The moonlight felt exactly upon the old palace, where
the water streams out between the masses of foundation-
rock which seem loosely thrown together. Neptune's heavy
stone-mantle floated in the wind, as he looked out above
the great waterfall, on each side of which Tritons, with
puffed-out cheeks, guided sea-horses. Beneath these the
great basin spread itself out, and upon the turf around
it rested a crowd of peasants, stretching themselves in the
moonlight. Large, quartered melons, from which streamed
the red juice, lay around them. A little square-built
fellow, whose whole dress consisted of a shirt, and short
leather breeches, which hung loose and unbuttoned at the
knees, sat with a guitar, and twanged the strings merrily.
Now he sang a song, now he played, and all the peasants
clapped their hands. My mother remained standing ; and
I now listened to a song which seized upon me quite in an
extraordinary way, for it was not a song like any other
which I had heard. No ! he sang to us of what we saw
and heard, we were ourselves in the song, and that in verse,
and with melody. He sang, " How gloriously one can
sleep with a stone under the head, and the blue heaven
for a coverlet, whilst the two Pifferari blow their bag-
pipes !" and with that he pointed to the Tritons who were
blowing their horns, " how the whole company of peasants
who have shed the blood of the melon will drink a health to
their sweethearts, who now are asleep, but see in dreams the
dome of St. Peter's, and their beloved, who go wandering
about in the Papal city." " Yes, we will drink, and that to
the health of all girls whose arrow has not an open hand.*
Yes," added he, giving my mother a little push in the
side, " and to mothers who have for their sweethearts lads
on whose chins the black down is growing.

* The arrow which the peasant women wear in their hair has a closed hand,
if they are free ; but if betrothed or married, it has an open one.— Author's
note.

18 THE IMFROVISATORE.

" Bravo !" said my mother, and all the peasants clapped
their hands and shouted, " Bravo, Giacomo ! bravo ! "

Upon the steps of the little church we discovered, in the
mean time, an acquaintance — our Federigo, who stood
with a pencil and sketched the whole merry moonlight
piece. As we went home, he and my mother joked about
the brisk Improvisatore, for so I heard them call the
peasant who sung so charmingly.

" Antonio," said Federigo to me, " thou, also, shouldst
improvise ; thou art truly, also, a little poet ! Thou must
learn to put thy pieces into verse."

I now understood what a poet was ; namely, one who
could sing beautifully that which he saw and felt. That
must, indeed, be charming, thought I, and easy, if I had
but a guitar.

The first subject of my song was neither more nor less
than the shop of the bacon-dealer over the way. Long
ago, my fancy had already busied itself with the curious
collection of his wares, which attracted in particular the
eyes of strangers. Amid beautiful garlands of laurel hung
the white buffalo-cheeses, like great ostrich eggs ; candles,
wrapped round with gold paper, represented an organ ; and
sausages, which were reared up like columns, sustained a
Parmesan cheese, shining like yellow amber. When in an
evening the whole was lighted up, and the red glass lamps
burned before the image of the Madonna in the wall among
sausages and ham, it seemed to me as if I looked into an
entirely magical world. The cat upon the shop table, and
the young Capuchins, who always stood so long cheapening
their purchases with the signora, came also into the poem,
which I pondered upon so long, that I could repeat it
aloud and perfectly to Federigo, and which, having won
his applause, quickly spread itself over the whole house,
nay, even to the bacon dealer's signora, who laughed and
clapped her hands, and called it a wonderful poem — a
Divina Comedia di Dante !

From this time forth every thing was sung. I lived
entirely in fancies and dreams. In the church, when I
swung the censer, in the stress amid the rolling carriages
and screaming traders, as wr as in my little bed beneath

THE IMPROVISATORS. 19

the image of the Virgin and the holy- water vessel. In the
winter-time, I could sit for whole hours before our house,
and look into the great fire in the street, where the smith
heated his iron, and the peasants warmed themselves. I
saw in the red fire a world glowing as my own imagination.
I shouted for joy, when in winter the snow of the moun-
tains sent down to us such severe cold, that icicles hung
from the Triton in the square; pity that it was so seldom.
Then, also, were the peasants glad, for it was to them a
sign of a fertile year ; they took hold of each other's
hands, and danced in their great woollen cloaks round about
the Triton, whilst a rainbow played in the high-springing
water.

But I loiter too long over the simple recollections of my
childhood, which cannot have for a stranger the deep
meaning, the extraordinary attraction, which they have for
me. Whilst I recall, whilst I hold fast every single
occurrence, it seems as if I again lived in the whole.

" My childhood's heart was to my dreams a sea
Of music, whereon floated picture-boats ! "

I will now hasten on to the circumstance which placed
the first hedge of thorns between me and the paradise of
home — which led me among strangers, and which con-
tained the germ of my whole future.

CHAPTER III.

THE FLOWER-FEAST AT GE??ZANO.*

IT was in the month of June, and the day of the famous
flower-feast which was annually celebrated at Genzano
approached. My mother and Mariuccia had a mutual
friend there, who, with her husband, kept a public-house. t
They had for many years determined to go to this festival,

* A little city in the mountains of Albano, which lies upon the high road
between Rome and the Marshes —Note by the Author.

t " Osteria e cucina" the customary sign for the lower order of hotels and
public-houses in Italy.— Ibid.

c 2

but there was always something or other to prevent it ;
this time there was nothing. We were to set off the day
before the flower-feast, because it was a long way ; I could
not sleep for joy through the whole night preceding.

Before the sun had risen, the vitturino drove up to the
door, and we rolled away. Never before had I been among
the mountains. Expectation, and joy of the approaching
festival, set my whole soul in motion. If in my maturer
years I could have seen nature and life around me with the
same vivid feeling as then, and could have expressed it in
words, it would have been an immortal poem. The great
stillness of the streets, the iron-studded city gate, the
Campagna stretching out for miles, with the lonely monu-
ments, the thick mist which covered the feet of the distant
mountains — all these seemed to me mysterious prepara-
tions for the magnificence which I should behold. Even
the wooden cross erected by the way-side, upon which
hung the whitened bones of the murderer, which told us
that here an innocent person had perished, and the perpe-
trator of his death had been punished, had for me an
uncommon charm. First of all, I attempted to count the
innumerably many stone arches which conduct the water
from the mountains to Rome, but of this I was soon
weary ; so I then began to torment the others with a thou-
sand questions abou» the great fires which the peasants had
made around the piled-up grave-stones, and would have an
exact explanation of the vast flocks of sheep, which the
wandering drivers kept together in one place by stretching
a fishing-net, like a fence, around the whole herd.

From Albano we were to go on foot for the short and
beautiful remainder cf the way through Arriccia. Resida
and golden cistus grew wild by the roadside, the thick,
juicy olive-trees cast a delicious shade; I caught a glimpse
of the distant sea, and upon the mountain-slopes by the
wayside, where a cross stood, merry girls skipped dancing
past us, but yet never forgetting piously to kiss the holy
cross. The lofty dome of the church of Arriccia I ima-
gined to be that of St. Peter, which the angels had hung
up in the blue air among the dark olive-trees. In the
street, the people had collected around a bear which danced

THK IMPROVISATORE. 21

upon his hind-legs, while the peasant who held the rope
blew upon his bagpipe the selfsame air which he had
played at Christmas, as Pifferari, before the Madonna. A
handsome ape in a military uniform, and which he called
the corporal, made somersets upon the bear's head and neck.
I was quite willing to stop there instead of going on to
Genzano. The flower-festival was really not till to-mor-
row, but my mother was resolute that we should go and
help her friend, Angeline, to make garlands and flower-
tapestry.

We soon went the short remainder of the way and
arrived at Angeline's house ; it stood in that part of the
neighbourhood of Genzano which looks on Lake Nemi ; it
was a pretty house, and out of the wall flowed a fresh
fountain into a stone basin, where the asses thronged to
drink.

We entered the hostel ; there was a noise and a stir. The
dinner was boiling and frizzling on the hearth. A crowd
of peasants and town-folk sat at the long wooden tables
drinking their wine and eating their presciutto. The most
beautiful roses were stuck in a blue jug before the image
of the Madonna, where the lamp would not burn well, be-
cause the smoke drew towards it. The cat ran over the
cheese which lay upon the table, and we were near stumbling
over the hens, which, terrified, hopped along the floor.
Angeline was delighted to see us, and we were sent up the
steep stairs near the chimney, where we had a little room
to ourselves, and a kingly banquet, according to my no-
tions. Every thing was magnificent ; even the bottle of
wine was ornamented ; instead of a cork, a full-blown rose
was stuck in it. Angeline kissed us all three ; I also re-
ceived a kiss whether I would or not. Angeline said I was
a pretty boy, and my mother patted me on the cheek with
one hand, whilst with the other she put my things to
rights ; and now she pulled my jacket, which was too
little for me, down to my hands, then again up to my
shoulders and breast, just as it ought to have been.

After dinner, a perfect feast awaited us ; we were to go
out to gather flowers and leaves for garlands. We went
through a low door out into the garden ; this was only a
c 3

22 THE IMPROVISATORS.

few ells in circumference, and was^ so to say, one single
bower. The light railing which enclosed it was strength-
ened with the broad, firm leaves of the aloe, which grew
wild here, and formed a natural fence.

The lake slept calmly in the great, round crater, from
which at one time fire spouted up to heaven. We went
down the amphitheatre-like, rocky slope, through the great
beech and the thick plantain wood, where the vines
wreathed themselves among the tree-branches. On the
opposite descent before us lay the city of Nemi, and mir-
rored itself in the blue lake. As we went along we bound
garlands ; the dark green olive and fresh vine leaves we
entwined with the wild golden cistus. Now the deep-lying,
blue lake, and the bright heavens above us, were hidden by
the thick branches and the vine leaves ; now they gleamed
forth again as if they both were only one single, infinite
blue. Every thing was to me new and glorious ; my soul
trembled for quiet joy. There are even yet moments in
which the remembrance of these feelings come forth again
like the beautiful mosaic fragment of a buried city.

The sun burned hotly, and it was not until we were
by the lake-side, where the plantains shoot forth their
ancient trunks from the water, and bend down their
branches, heavy with enwreathing vines, to the watery
mirror, that we found it cool enough to continue our work.
Beautiful water-plants nodded here as if they dreamed
under the deep shadow, and they, too, made a part of our
garlands. Presently, however, the sunbeams no longer
reached the lake, but played only upon the roofs of Nemi
and Genzano ; and now the gloom descended to where we
sat I went a little distance from the others, yet only a
few paces, for my mother was afraid that I should fall
into the lake where it was deep and the banks were sudden.
Not far from the small stone ruins of an old temple of
Diana there lay a huge fig-tree which the ivy had already
begun to bind fast to the earth ; I had climbed upon this,
and was weaving a garland whilst I sang from a can-
zonet,—

" Ah ! rossi, rossi fipri,
Un mazzo di violi !
Un gelsomin d' amore,"

THE IMPROVISATOBE. 23

when I was suddenly interrupted by a strangely whistling
voice, —

" Per dar al mio bene ! "

and as suddenly there stood before me a tall, aged woman,
of an unusually slender frame, and in the costume which
the peasant women of Frascati are so fond of wearing.
The long white veil which hung down from her head over
her shoulders contributed to give the countenance and neck
a more Mulatto tint than they probably had naturally.
Wrinkle crossed wrinkle, whereby her face resembled a
crumpled-up net. The black pupil seemed to fill the whole
eye. She laughed, arid looked at the same time both
seriously and fixedly at me, as if she were a mummy which
some one had set up under the trees.

( ' Rosemary flowers," she said, at length, " become
more beautiful in thy hands ; thou hast a lucky star in thy
eyes."

I looked at her with astonishment, and pressed the gar-
land which I was weaving to my lips.

" There is poison in the beautiful laurel -leaves* j bind
thy garland, but do not taste of the leaves."

" Ah, the wise Fulvia of Frascati ! " exclaimed Ange-
line, stepping from among the bushes, " art thou also
making garlands for to-morrow's festival ? or," continued
she, in a more subdued voice, "art thou binding another kind
of nosegay while the sun goes down on the Campagna ? "

"An intelligent eye," continued Fulvia, gazing at me
without intermission ; " the sun went through the bull he
had nourished, and there hung gold and honour on the
bull's horns."

"Yes," said my mother, who had come up with
Mariuccia, " when he gets on the black coat and the broad
hat we shall then see whether he must swing the censer or
go through a thorn-hedge."

That she intended by this to indicate my being of the
clerical order, the sibyl seemed to comprehend ; but there
was quite another meaning in her reply than we at that
time might imagine.

* Primus laurocerasus, which grows abundantly among these mountains

Author's note.

c 4

24 THE IMPROVISATORS.

" The broad hat," said she, " will not shadow his brow
when he stands before the people, when his speeches sound
like music, sweeter than the song of nuns behind the
grating, and more powerful than thunder in the mountains
of Albano. The seat of Fortune is higher than Monte
Cave, where the clouds repose upon the mountains among
the flocks of sheep."

' ' Oh, God ! " sighed my mother, shaking her head
somewhat incredulously, although she listened gladly to
the brilliant prophecy, "he is a poor child — Madonna
only knows what will become of him ! The chariot of
Fortune is loftier than the car of a peasant of Albano,
and the wheel is always turning; how can a poor child
mount it ? "

" Hast thou seen how the two great wheels of the
peasant's car turn round ? The lowest spoke becomes the
highest, and then goes down again ; when it is down, the
peasant sets his foot upon it, and the wheel which goes
round lifts him up : but sometimes there lies a stone in
the path, and then it will go like a dance in the market-
place." *

" And may not I, too, mount with him into the chariot
of Fortune?" asked my mother, half in jest, but uttered
at the same moment a loud cry, for a large eagle flew so
near us down into the lake that the water at the same
moment splashed into our faces from the force with which
he struck it with his great wings. High up in the air his
keen glance had discovered a large fish, which lay immov-
able as a reed upon the surface of the lake; with the
swiftness of an arrow he seized upon his prey, stuck his
sharp talons into the back of it, and was about to raise
himself again, when the fish, which, by the agitation of
the waters, we could see was of great size, and almost of
equal power to his enemy, sought on the contrary, to drag
him below with him. The talons of the bird were so
firmly fixed into the back of the fish, that he could not
release himself from his prey, and there now, therefore,
began between the two such a contest that the quiet lake

* The peasants mount into their tall cars by standing upon the spoke of the
ascending wheel. — Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 25

trembled in wide circles. Now appeared the glittering
back of the fish, now the bird struck the water with his
broad wings, and seemed to yield. The combat lasted
for some minutes. The two wings lay for a moment still,
outspread upon the water, as if they rested themselves ;
then they were rapidly struck together, a crack was heard,
the one wing sank down, whilst the other lashed the water
to foam, and then vanished. The fish sunk beneath the
waves with his enemy, where a moment afterwards they
must both die.

We had all gazed on this scene in silence ; when my
mother turned herself round to the others, the sibyl had
vanished. This, in connexion with the little occurrence,
which, as will be seen, many years afterwards had an
influence on my fate, and which was deeply stamped upon
my memory, made us all somewhat silently hasten home.
Darkness seemed to come forth from the thickset leaves of
the trees, the fire-red evening clouds reflected themselves
in the mirror of the lake, the mill-wheel rushed round
with a monotonous sound ; all seemed to have in it some-
thing demoniacal. As we went along, Angeline related to
us in a whisper strange things which had been told to her
of the old woman, who understood how to mix poisons
and love-potions; and then she told us about poor Therese
of Olevano — how she wasted away day by day from
anxiety and longing after the slender Guiseppe, who had
gone away beyond the mountains to the north — how the
old woman had boiled herbs in a copper vessel, and let
them simmer over the hot coals for several days, until
Guiseppe also was seized upon by a longing, and was
obliged to speed back again, day and night, without rest
or stay, to where the vessel was boiling holy herbs and a
lock of his and Therese's hair. I said an Ave Maria
softly, and did not feel easy until I was again in the house
with Angeline.

The four wicks in the brass lamp were lighted, one of
our garlands hung around it, and a supper of mongana al
pomidoro* was set out for us, together with a bottle full

* Veal and tomatoes.

of wine. The peasants in the room below us drank and
improvised ; it was a sort of duet between two of them,
and the whole company joined in the chorus, but when I
went with the other children to sing before the image of
the Virgin, which hung beside the great chimney where
the fire burned, they all listened and praised my beautiful
voice, which made me forget the dark wood and the old
Fulvia who had told my fortune. I would gladly now
have begun to improvise in emulation of the peasant's,
but my mother damped my vanity and my wish by the
inquiry whether I thought it becoming for me, who swung
the censer in the church, and, perhaps, some day should
have to explain the word of God to the people, to set
myself up there like a fool ; that it was not now carnival
time, and that she would not allow it. But when in the
evening we were in our sleeping-room, and I had climbed
up into the broad bed, she pressed me tenderly to her
heart, called me her comfort and her joy, and let me lay
my head upon her arm, where I dreamed till the sun
shone in at my window, and awoke me to the beautiful
feast of flowers.

How shall I describe the first glance into the street —
that bright picture as I then saw it ? The entire, long,
gently ascending street was covered over with flowers ; the
ground colour was blue : it looked as if they had robbed
all the gardens, all the fields, to collect flowers enough of
the same colour to cover the street ; over these lay in long
stripes, green, composed of leaves, alternately with rose-
colour; at some distance from this was a similar stripe,
and between this a layer of dark red flowers, so as to form,
as it were, a broad border to the whole carpet. The middle
of this represented stars and suns, which were formed by
a close mass of yellow, round, and star-like flowers ; more
labour still had been spent upon the formation of names —
here flower was laid upon flower, leaf upon leaf. The
whole was a living flower-carpet, a mosaic floor, richer in
pomp of colouring than any thing which Pompeii can show.
Not a breath of air stirred — the flowers lay immovable, as
if they were heavy, firmly set precious stones. From all
windows were hung upon the walls large carpets, worked

THE IMPROVISATORE. 27

in leaves and flowers, representing holy pictures. Here
Joseph led the ass on which sat the Madonna and the
child; roses formed the faces, the feet, and the arms;
gilly-flowers and anemones their fluttering garments ; and
crowns were made of white water-lilies, brought from Lake
Nemi. Saint Michael fought with the dragon ; the holy
Rosalia showered down roses upon the dark blue globe ;
wherever my eye fell flowers related to me biblical legends,
and the people all round about were as joyful as myself.
Rich foreigners, from beyond the mountains, clad in festal
garments, stood in the balconies, and by the side of the
houses moved along a vast crowd of people, all in full
holyday costume, each according to the fashion of his
country. Beside the stone basin which surrounds the
great fountain, where the street spreads itself out, my
mother had taken her place, and I stood just before the
satyr's head which looks out from the water.

The sun burnt hotly, all the bells rung, and the pro-
cession moved along the beautiful flower-carpet; the
most charming music and singing announced its approach.
Choristers swung the censer before the host, the most
beautiful girls of the country followed, with garlands of
flowers in their hands, and poor children, with wings to
their naked shoulders, sang hymns, as of angels, whilst
awaiting the arrival of the procession at the high altar.
Young fellows wore fluttering ribands around their pointed
hats, upon which a picture of the Madonna was fastened ;
silver and gold rings hung to a chain around their necks,
and handsome, bright-coloured scarfs looked splendidly
upon their black velvet jackets. The girls of Albano and
Frascati came, with their thin veils elegantly thrown over
their black, plaited hair, in which was stuck the silver
arrow ; those from Villetri, on the contrary, wore garlands
around their hair, and the smart neckerchief, fastened so
low down in the dress as to leave visible the beautiful
shoulder and the round bosom. From Abruzzi, from the
Marshes, from every other neighbouring district, came all
in their peculiar national costume, and produced altogether
the most brilliant effect. Cardinals, in their mantles woven
with silver, advanced under canopies adorned with flowers,

monks of various orders followed, all bearing burning
tapers. When the procession came out of the church an
immense crowd followed. We were carried along with it,
— my mother held me firmly by the shoulder, that I
might not be separated from her. Thus I went on, shut
in by the crowd ; I could see nothing but the blue sky
above my head. All at once there was sent forth a piercing
cry — it rang forth on all sides ; a pair of unmanageable
horses rushed through — more I did not perceive : I was
thrown to the earth, it was all black before my eyes, and
it seemed to me as if a waterfall dashed over me.

Oh ! Mother of God, what a grief ! a thrill of horror
passes through me whenever I think of it. When I again
returned to consciousness, I lay with my head in Mariuc-
cia's lap, she sobbed and cried : beside us lay my mother
stretched out, and there stood around a little circle of
strange people. The wild horses had gone over us, the
wheel had gone over my mother's breast, blood gushed out
of her mouth — she was dead.

I looked at the heavy, closed eyes, and folded the life-
less hands which lately had so lovingly protected me. The
monks carried her into the convent, and as I was altoge-
ther without injury, excepting that one hand was a little
scratched, Mariuccia took me back again to the hostel
where I had been yesterday so joyful, had bound garlands,
and slept in my mother's arms. I was most deeply dis-
tressed, although I did not apprehend how entirely forlorn
I was. They gave me playthings, fruit, and cakes, and
promised me that on the morrow I should see my mother
again, who, they said, was to-day with the Madonna, with
whom there was a perpetual flower-feast and rejoicing.
But other things which Mariuccia said also did not escape
my attention. I heard her whisper about the hateful
eagle yesterday, about Fulvia, and about a dream which
my mother had had ; now she was dead every one had
foreseen misfortune.

The runaway horses had, in the mean time, gone right
through the city, and, striking against a tree, had been
stopped, and a gentleman of condition, upwards of forty
years of age, half dead with terror, had then been helped

THE IMPROVISATORE. 29

from the carriage. He was, it was said, of the Borghesa
family, and owned a villa between Albano and Frascati,
and was known for his singular passion for collecting all
kinds of plants and flowers ; nay, in the dark sciences it
was believed that he was as knowing as even the wise
Fulvia. A servant in rich livery brought a purse con-
taining twenty scudi from him for the motherless child.

The next evening, before the ringing of the Ave Maria,
I was conducted into the convent, to see my mother for
the last time ; she lay in the narrow wooden coffin, in her
holyday apparel, as yesterday at the flower-feast. I kissed
her folded hands, and the women wept with me.

There stood already at the door the corpse-bearers and
the attendants, wrapped in their white cloaks, with the
hoods drawn over their faces. They lifted the bier on
their shoulders, the Capuchins lighted their tapers, and
began the song for the dead. Mariuccia went with me
close behind the corpse, the red evening heaven shone
upon my mother's face ; she looked as if she lived. The
other children of the city ran gaily around me, and col-
lected in little paper bags the drops of wax which fell
from the monks' tapers.

We went through the streets where yesterday had passed
the festival-procession — it lay scattered over with leaves
and flowers; but the pictures, the beautifil figures, were
all vanished like the happiness of my childhood, the bliss
of my past days. I saw when we reached the church-
yard how the great stone was lifted aside which covered
the vault into which the corpses were lowered. I saw the
coffin descend, and heard the dull sound as it was set down
upon the others. Then all withdrew except Mariuccia,
who let me kneel upon the grave-stone, and repeat an
" Or a pro nobis ! "

In the moonlight night we journeyed back from Gen-
zano ; Federigo and two strangers were with us. Black
clouds hung upon the mountains of Albano. I saw the
light mists which flew in the moonlight across the Cam-
pagna. The others spoke but very little, and I soon slept,
and dreamed of the Madonna, of the flowers, and my mo-
ther, who lived, smiled, and talked to me.

30 THE IMPROVISATORS.

CHAPTER IV.

UNCLE PEPPO. THE NIGHT IN THE COLOSSEUM. THE DISMISSAL.

WHAT should really now be done with me ? that was
the question which was asked when we came back to
Rome, and into my mother's house. Fra Martino advised
that I should go to the Campagna to Mariuccia's parents,
who kept flocks, and were honest people, to whom the
twenty scudi would be wealth, and who would not hesitate
to take me home to them, and to treat me as their own
child ; but, then, I was in part a member of the church,
and, if I went out to the Campagna, I should no longer
swing the censer in the church of the Capuchins. Fe-
derigo also thought it better that I should remain in Rome
with some decent people ; he should not like, he said, that
I should be only a rough, simple peasant.

Whilst Fra Martino counselled with himself in the
convent, my uncle Peppo came stumping upon his wooden
clogs. He had heard of my mother's death, and that
twenty scudi had fallen to me, and for this reason he
also now came to give his opinion. He declared, that as
he was the only relative I had in the world, he should take
me to himself ; that I was to follow him, and that every
thing which the house contained was his, as well as the
twenty scudi. Mariuccia maintained with great zeal that
she and Fra Martino had already arranged every thing for
the best, and gave him to understand that he, a cripple
and a beggar, had enough to do with himself, and could
not have any voice in the matter.

Federigo left the room, and the two who remained re-
proached each other mutually with the selfish ground of
their regard for me. Uncle Peppo spit forth all his venom,
and Mariuccia stood like a Fury before him. She would,
she said, have nothing to do with him, nor with the boy ;
she would have nothing to do with any thing. She said
he might take me and get me a pair of wooden crutches
made, and so like a cripple I could help to fill his bag !

THE IMPROVISATORE. 31

He might take me with him, but the money she would
keep till Fra Martino came back ; not a single stiver of
it should his false eyes behold ! Peppo threatened to knock
a hole in her head, as big as the Piazzo del Popolo, with
his wooden hand-clogs. I stood weeping near to them.
Mariuccia pushed me from her, and Peppo drew me to
him. I must follow him, he said, must attach myself to
him ; but if he bore the burden he also would have the
reward. The Roman senate knew well enough how to
do right to an honest man : and then he drew me against
my will out of the house door, where a ragged lad held
his ass : for on great occasions, and when haste was re-
quired, he cast aside his board, and held himself fast on
the ass with his withered legs ; he and it were, so to say,
one body. Me he set before him upon the beast ; the lad
gave it a blow, and so we trotted off, whilst he caressed
me in his own way.

" Dost thou see, my child ? '' he said, " is it not an
excellent ass ? and fly can he, fly like a racer through the
Corso ! Thou wilt be well off with me, like an angel of
heaven, my fine fellow ! " And then followed a thousand
curses and maledictions against Mariuccia.

" Where hast thou stolen that pretty child ?" inquired
his acquaintance as we rode onward, and so my history
was told and told again almost at every corner. The
woman who sold citron-peel water reached to us a whole
glass for our long story, and gave me a pine-apple to take
with me, the inside of which was all gone. Before we got
under his roof the sun had gone down. I said not one
word, but pressed my hands before my face, and cried.
In the little room which adjoined the larger room, he
showed me in a corner a bed of maize-leaves, or rather the
dried husks of the maize ; here I was to sleep. Hungry I
could not be, he said, nor thirsty either, for we had drunk
the excellent glass of citron-water. He patted me on the
cheek with that same hateful smile of which I always felt
such horror. He then asked me how many silver pieces
there were in the purse, whether Mariuccia had paid the
vetturino out of it, and what the strange servant had said
when he brought the money. I would give him no ex-

planation, and asked with tears whether I was always to
remain here, and whether I could not go home to-morrow.

" Yes, surely ! yes, surely !" said he ; " sleep now, but
do not forget thy Ave Maria ; when people sleep the devil
wakes : make the sign of the cross over thee, it is an iron
wall which a raging lion cannot break through ! Pray
piously ; and pray that the Madonna will punish with
poison and corruption the false Mariuccia, who would
overreach thy innocence, and cheat thee and me of all thy
property. Now go to sleep, the little hole above can stand
open, the fresh air is half a supper. Don't be afraid of
the bats — they fly past, the poor things ! Sleep well, my
Jesus-child ! " And with this he bolted the door.

For a long time he busied himself in the other room ;
then I heard other voices, and the light of a lamp came in
through a chink in the wall. I raised myself up, but
quite softly, for the dry maize-leaves rustled loudly, and
I was afraid that he would hear them and come in again.
I now saw through the chink that two wicks were lighted
in the lamp, bread and radishes were set on the table, and
a flask of wine went round the company. All were beg-
gars, all cripples ; I knew them all well, although there
was quite another expression on their countenances than I
was accustomed to see there. The fever-sick, half-dead
Lorenzo, sat there merry and noisy, and talked without
intermission; and by day I had always seen him lying
stretched out on the grass on Monte Pincio*, where he
supported his bound-up head against a tree-stem, and
moved his lips as if half-dying, whilst his wife pointed out
the fever-sick, suffering man, to the passers-by. Francia,
with his fingerless hands, drummed with the stumps upon
the shoulders of the blind Cathrina, and sang half aloud
" Cavalier Torchino." Two or three others sat near the
door, but so much in the shadow, that I did not know
them. My heart beat violently with fear. I heard that
they talked about me.

" Can the boy do any thing ?" asked one. " Has he
any sort of a hurt?"

* This is the public promenade which extends from the Spanish Stops to
the French Academy, and down to Porta del Popolo, looking over the greatest
part of Home and the sea, with the Villa Borghese. — Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 33

" No, the Madonna has not been so kind to him/' said
Peppo ; f< he is slender and well formed, like a nobleman's
child."

t( That is a great misfortune/' said they all. The blind
Cathrina added that I could have some little hurt, which
would help me to get my earthly bread until the Ma-
donna gave me the heavenly.

"Ay/' said Peppo, "if my niece had been wise the lad
might have made his fortune ! He has a voice, oh, like
the dear angels of heaven ! he was meant for the Pope's
chapel ! he ought to have been a singer ! "

They talked of my age, and of what could yet be done,
and how my fortune must be made. I did not understand
what they would do with me, but thus much, I saw clearly
that it was something bad they meant, and I trembled for
fear. But how should I get away ? This alone filled my
whole soul. Whither should I go ? No, of that I
thought not. I crept along the floor to the open hole ; by
the help of a block of wood I climbed up to it. I saw
not a single person in the street. The doors were all
closed. I must take a great ieap if I would reach the
ground ; I had not courage for the leap until I seemed to
hear some one at my door : they were coming in to me.
A shudder went through me, I let myself slide from the
wall. I fell heavily, but only upon earth and green turf.

I started up and ran, without knowing whither, through
the narrow, crooked streets. A man who sang aloud, and
struck with his stick upon the stone pavement, was the
only person I met. At length I stood in a great square :
the moon shone brightly. I knew the place : it was the
Forum Romanum, the cow-market as we called it.

The moon illumined the back of the Capitol, which,
like a perpendicular wall of rock, seemed to divide the
closely-built part of Rome from that which was more open.
Upon the high steps of the arch of Septimus Severus lay
several beggars asleep, wrapped in their large cloaks. The
tall columns which yet remain of the old temple cast long
shadows. I had never been there before after sunset:
there was something spectral to me in the whole ; and as I
went along I stumbled over the marble capitals which lay

34 THE IMPBOVISATOBE.

in the long grass. I rose up and gazed upon the ruins of
the city of the Caesars. The thick ivy made the walls
still darker ; the black cypresses raised themselves so
demon-like and huge in the blue air, that I grew more
and more fearful. In the grass, amid the fallen columns
and the marble rubbish, lay some cows, and a mule still
grazed there : it was a sort of consolation to me, that
here were living creatures which would do me no harm.

The clear moonlight made it almost as bright as day ;
every object showed itself distinctly. I heard some one
coming — was it some one in search of me ? In my
terror I flew into the gigantic Colosseum, which lay before
me like a vast mass of rock. I stood in the double -vaulted
passage which surrounds one half of the building, and is
large and perfect as if only completed yesterday. Here it
was quite dark, and ice-cold. I advanced a few steps
from between the pillars, but softly, very softly, for the
sound of my own footsteps made me more fearful. I saw
a fire upon the ground, and could distinguish before it the
forms of three human beings : were they peasants who
had here sought out a resting-place for the night, that they
might not ride over the desolate Campagna during the
hours of darkness ? or were they, perhaps, soldiers who
kept watch in the Colosseum ? or they might be robbers.
I fancied that 1 heard the rattling of their weapons, and I
therefore withdrew softly back again to where the tall
pillars stand without any other roof than that which is
formed by bushes and climbing plants. Strange shadows
fell in the moonlight upon the lofty wall ; square masses
of stone shot out from their regular places, and, overgrown
with evergreen, looked as if they were about to fall, and
were only sustained by the thick climbers.

Above, in the middle gallery, people were walking, tra-
vellers, certainly, who were visiting these remarkable ruins
late in the beautiful moonlight: a lady, dressed in white,
was in the company. Now I saw distinctly this singular
picture, as it came into view, vanished, and again showed
itself between the pillars, lighted by the moonbeams and
the red torch. The air was of an infinitely dark blue, and
tree and bush seemed as if made of the blackest velvet ;

THE IMPROVISATORE.

every leaf breathed night. My eye followed the strangers.
After they were all gone out of sight, I still saw the red
glare of the torch ; but this also vanished, and all around
me was as still as death.

Behind one of the many wooden altars which stand not
far apart within the ruins, and indicate the resting-points
of the Saviour's progress to the cross, I seated myself upon
a fallen capital, which lay in the grass. The stone was as
cold as ice, my head burned, there was fever in my blood ;
I could not sleep, and there occurred to my mind all that
people had related to me of this old building ; of the cap-
tive Jews who had been made to raise these huge blocks of
stone for the mighty Roman Caesar ; of the wild beasts
which, within this space, had fought with each other, nay,
even with men also, while the people sat upon stone
benches, which ascended, step-like, from the ground to the
loftiest colonnade. *

There was a rustling in the bushes above me ; I looked
up, and fancied that I saw something moving. Ah, yes,
my imagination showed to me pale, dark shapes, which
hewed and builded around me: I heard distinctly every stroke
which fell, saw the meagre, black-bearded Jews tear away
grass and shrubs to pile stone upon stone, till the whole
monstrous building stood there newly erected ; and now all
was one throng of human beings, head above head, and
the whole seemed one infinitely vast, living giant-body.

I saw the Vestals in their long white garments ; the
magnificent court of the Caesar; the naked, bleeding gla-
diators : then I heard how there was a roaring and a howl-
ing round about in the lowest colonnades. From various
sides sprung in whole herds of tigers and hyaenas ; they
sped close past the spot where I lay ; I felt their burning

* The Colosseum is of an oval form and is built of Travertine marble. There
are four stories, each of which is of a different order, Doric, Ionic, and Co-
rinthian. It was built under Vespasian, about seventy years after Christ.
Twelve thousand captive Jews laboured at its erection. There are eighty
arches, and its circumference is about 1641 feet. There was room within it
for 86,000 persons sitting, and upwards of 20,000 standing. The ruins are now
used for Christian worship.

" Whilst stands the Colosseum, Rome shall stand ;
V hen falls the Colosseum, Rome shall fall ;
And when Rome falls — the world." — BYRON.

Author's Note.
D 2

breath ; saw their red, fiery glances, and held myself fast
upon the stone upon which I was seated, whilst I prayed
the Madonna to save me : but wilder still grew the tumult
around me ; yet I could see in the midst of all the holy
cross as it still stands, and which, whenever I had passed
it, 1 had piously kissed. I exerted all my strength, and
perceived distinctly that I had thrown my arms around it;
but every thing that surrounded me tumbled violently
together — walls, men, beasts. Consciousness had left me,
I perceived nothing more.

When I again opened my eyes, my fever was over, but
I was enfeebled, and as if oppressed with weariness.

I lay actually upon the steps of the great wooden cross.
I noticed now all that surrounded me : there was nothing
at all terrific in it ; a deep solemnity lay upon the whole ;
a nightingale sang among the bushes on the wall : I
thought upon the dear child Jesus, whose mother, now
that I had none, was mine also, threw my arms around
the cross, rested my head against it, and soon sank into a
calm, refreshing sleep.

This must have lasted several hours. I was awoke by
the singing of a psalm. The sun shone upon the highest
part of the wall : the Capuchins went with burning tapers
from altar to altar, and sang their " Kyrie eleison," in the
beautiful morning. They stood now around the cross
where I lay ; — I saw Fra Martino bending over me. My
forlorn appearance, my paleness, and my being here at this
hour, made him uneasy. Whether I explained all to him
I know not ; but my terror of Uncle Peppo, and my for-
lorn condition, was clear enough to him ; I held fast by
his brown cloak, prayed him not to leave me, and it seemed
as if the brethren sympathised in my misfortune. They
all, indeed, knew me ; I had been in the cells of all of
them, and had sung with them before the holy altar.

How glad then was I when Fra Martino led me back
with him to the convent, and how entirely I forgot all my
need as I sat in his little cell, where the old woodcuts
were pasted upon the wall, and the orange-tree stretched
its green, fragrant twigs in at the window. Fra Martino
also had promised me that I should not again be sent back

THE IMPROVISATORE. 37

to Peppo. "A beggar," I heard him say to the others, —
" a begging cripple that lies in the streets craving alms;
the boy never shall be given up to ! "

At mid-day he brought me radishes, bread, and wine,
and said to me, with such solemnity that my heart trem-
bled within me, " Poor lad ! if thy mother had lived, then
had we not been separated ; the church would have pos-
sessed thee, and thou wouldst have grown up in its peace
and protection. Now must thou go forth upon the rest-
less sea, floating upon an insecure plank ; but think upon
thy bleeding Saviour, and on the heavenly Virgin ! Hold
fast by them ! Thou hast in the whole wide world only
them ! "

" Where then shall I go ? " I asked. And now he told
me that I was to go to the Campagna, to the parents of
Mariuccia, and besought me to honour them as father and
mother, to be obedient to them in all things, and never
to forget my prayers and the learning which he had given
me.

In the evening Mariuccia came with her father to the
convent-gate to fetch me ; Fra Martino led me out to
them. With regard to dress, Peppo looked almost more
respectable than this herdsman, to whom I was now con-
signed. The torn leather boots, the naked knees, the
pointed hat in which was stuck a sprig of flowering
heather, were the things which first caught my eye. He
knelt down, kissed Fra Martino's hand, and said of me
that I was a pretty lad, and that he and his wife would
divide every morsel with me. Mariuccia gave him the
purse which contained all my wealth, and afterwards all
four went into the church : they prayed silently to them-
selves. I kneeled too, but I could not pray ; my eyes
sought out all the well-known pictures : Jesus sailing in
the ship, high above the church door ; the angels in the
great altar-piece, and the holy St. Michael; even to the
death's heads, with ivy garlands around them, must I say
farewell. Fra Martino laid his hand upon my head, and
gave me at parting a little book, in which were woodcuts
liModo di servire la sancta messa," and so we parted
D 3

38 THE IMPROVISATORS.

As we went across the Piazza Barberini, I could not
help looking up to my mother's house; all the windows
stood open, the rooms had new inmates.

CHAPTER V.

THE CAMPAGNA.

THE immense desert which lies around old Rome was now
my home. The stranger from beyond the mountains,
who, full of love for art and antiquity, approaches the
city of the Tiber for the first time, sees a vast page of the
world in this parched-up desert ; the isolated mounds all
here are holy ciphers, entire chapters of the world's his-
tory. Painters sketch the solitary standing arch of a
ruined aqueduct, the shepherd who sits under it with his
flock figures on the paper ; they give the golden thistle in
the foreground, and people say that it is a beautiful pic-
ture. With what an entirely different feeling my con-
ductor and I regarded the immense plain ! The burnt-up
grass ; the unhealthy summer air, which always brings to
the dwellers of the Campagna fevers and malignant sick-
ness, were doubtless the shadow side of his passing ob-
servations. To me there was a something novel in all ; I
rejoiced to see the beautiful mountains, which in every
shade of violet-colour inclosed one side of the plain ; the
wild buffalo, and the yellow Tiber, on whose shore oxen
with their long horns went bending under the yoke, and
drawing the boat against the stream. We proceeded in
the same direction.

Around us we saw only short, yellow grass, and tall,
half- withered thistles. We passed a crucifix, which had
been raised as a sign that some one had been murdered
there, and near to it hung a portion of the murderer's
body, an arm and a foot : this was frightful to me, and all
the more so as it stood not far from my new home. This
was neither more nor less than one of the old decayed

THE IMPBOVISATOBE. 39

tombs, of which so many remain here from the most
ancient times. Most of the shepherds of the Campagna
dwell in these, because they find in them all that they
require for shelter, nay, even for comfort. They excavate
one of the vaults, open a few holes, lay on a roof of reeds,
and the dwelling is ready. Ours stood upon a height, and
consisted of two stories. Two Corinthian pillars at the
narrow door-way bore witness to the antiquity of the
building, as well as the three broad buttresses to its after-
repairs. Perhaps it had been used in the middle ages as
a fort ; a hole in the wall above the door served as a
window ; one half of the roof was composed of a sort of
reed and of twigs; the other half consisted of living bushes,
from among which the honeysuckle hung down in rich
masses over the broken wall.

" See, here we are ! " said Benedetto ; and it was the
first word he had said to me on the whole way.

"Do we live here?" I asked, and looked now at the
gloomy dwelling, now back again to the mutilated remains
of the robber. Without giving me any reply, he called to
an old woman, " Domenica! — Domenica!" and I saw an
aged woman, whose sole clothing consisted of a coarse
shift, with bare arms and legs, and hair hanging loosely.
She heaped upon me kisses and caresses; and, if father
Benedetto had been silent, she was only the more talkative;
she called me her little Ishmael, who was sent out into
the desert, where the wild thistles grow. " But thou
shalt not be famished with us! "said she. "Old Domenica
will be to thee a good mother in the place of her who now
prays for thee in heaven! And I have made thy bed
ready for thee, and the beans are boiled, and my old Bene-
detto and thou shalt sit down to table together! And
Mariuccia is not then come with you? And thou hast
seen the holy father? Yet hast not forgotten some pre-
sciutto, nor the brass- hook, nor the new picture of the
Madonna, for us to paste on the door beside the old one,
which is black with our kissing. No, thou art a man who
canst remember, who canst think, my own Benedetto!"

Thus she proceeded with a torrent of words, and led us
into the small room, which was called the chamber, but
D 4

which afterwards appeared to me as large as the hall of
the Vatican. I believe, indeed, that this home operated
very much upon my poetical turn of mind. This little
narrow room was, to my imagination, what a weight is to
the young palm-tree — the more it is compressed into
itself, the more it grows. The house was, as has been
said already, in the very ancient times, a family burial-
place, which consisted of a large room, with many small
niches, side by side, in two rows, one above the other, all
covered over with the most artistical mosaic. Now was
each put to very different purposes ; the one was a store-
room, another held pots and pans, and a third was the
fireplace, where the beans were cooked.

Domenica prepared the table and Benedetto blessed the
food: when we had had enough, the old mother took me
up a ladder, through the broken vault in the wall, to the
second story, where we all slept in two great niches which
had once been graves. In the farthest was the bed which
was prepared for me; beside it stood two posts support-
ing a third, from which swung a sort of cradle, made of
sail-cloth, for a little child : I fancy Mariuccia's : it was
quite still. I laid myself down ; a stone had fallen out of
the wall, and through the opening I could see the blue air
without, and the dark ivy which, like a bird, moved itself
in the wind. As I laid myself down, there ran a thick,
bright-coloured lizard over the wall, but Domenica con-
soled me by saying that the poor little creature was more
afraid of me than I of it ; it would do me no harm! and,
after repeating over me an Ave Maria, she took the cradle
over into the other niche where she and Benedetto slept.
I made the sign of the holy cross, thought on my mother,
on the Madonna, on my new parents, and on the executed
robber's bloody hand and foot which I had seen near the
house, and these all mingled strangely in my dreams this
first night.

The next day began with rain, which continued for a
whole week, and imprisoned us in the narrow room, in
which was a half twilight, although the door stood open
when the wind blew the rain the other way. I had to rock
the baby which lay in the cradle. Domenica spun with

THE IMPROVISATORS. 41

her spindle; told me tales of the robbers of the Campagna,
who, however, did no harm ; sang pious songs to me,
taught me new prayers, and related to me new legends of
saints which I had not heard before. Onions and bread
were our customary food, and I thought them good; but I
grew weary of myself shut up in that narrow room; and
then Domenica just outside the door dug a little canal, a
little winding Tiber, where the yellow water flowed slowly
away. Little sticks and reeds were my boats, which I
made to sail past Rome to Ostia; but, when the rain beat
in too violently, the door was obliged to be shut, and we
sat almost in the dark, Domenica spun, and I thought
about the beautiful pictures in the convent church; seemed
to see Jesus tossing past me in the boat; the Madonna on
the cloud borne upwards by angels, and the tombstones
with the garlanded heads.

When the rainy season was over, the heavens showed
for whole months their unchangeable blue. I then ob-
tained leave to go out, but not too far, nor too near to the
river, because the soft ground might so easily fall in with
me, said Domenica ; many buffaloes also grazed there,
which were wild and dangerous, but, nevertheless, those
had for me a peculiar and strange interest. The some-
thing demon-like in the look of the buffalo — the strange,
red fire which gleamed in its eyeballs, awoke in me a
feeling like that which drives the bird into the fangs of
the snake. Their wild running, swifter than the speed of
a horse, their mutual combats, where force meets with
force, attracted my whole attention. I scrawled figures in
the sand to represent what I had seen, and, to make this
the more intelligible, I sang it all in its own peculiar words
to its own peculiar melody, to the great delight of old
Domenica, who said that I was a wise child, and sang as
sweetly as the angels in heaven.

The sun burnt hotter day by day : its beams were like
a sea of fire which streamed over the Campagna. The
stagnant water infected the air. We could only go out in
the morning and evening. Such heat as this I had not
known in Rome upon the airy Monte Pincio, although I
well remembered then the hot time when the beggars

42 THE IMPROVISATORS.

had prayed for a small coin, not for bread, but for a glass
of iced water. I thought in particular about the delicious,
green water-melons which lay one on another, divided in
halves, and showed the purple-red flesh with the black
seeds : my lips were doubly parched with thinking of
these. The sun burned perpendicularly: my shadow
seemed as if it would vanish under my feet. The buffa-
loes lay like dead masses upon the burnt-up grass, or, ex-
cited to madness, flew, with the speed of arrows, round in
great circles. Thus my soul conceived an idea of the
traveller's suffering in the burning deserts of Africa.

During two months we lay there like a wreck in the
world's sea. Not a single living creature visited us. All
business was done in the night, or else in the early hours
of morning. The unhealthy atmosphere and the scorching
he'at excited fever-fire in my blood : not a single drop of
any thing cold could be had for refreshment ; every marsh
was dried up ; warm, yellow water, flowed sleepily in the
bed of the Tiber ; the juice of the melon was warm ; even
•wine, although it lay hidden among stones and rubbish,
tasted sour and half-boiled, and not a cloud, not a single
cloud, was to be seen on the horizon, — day and night
always the everlasting, never-changing blue. Every evening
and morning we prayed for rain, or else a fresh breeze ;
every evening and morning, Domenica looked to the moun-
tains to see if no cloud raised itself, but night alone brought
shade — the sultry shade of night; the sirocco alone blew
through the hot atmosphere for two long, long months.

At the sun's rise and setting alone was there a breath of
fresh air ; but a dulness, a death-like lethargy produced by
the heat, and the frightful weariness which it occasioned,
oppressed my whole being. Flies and all kind of tor-
menting insects, which seemed destroyed by the heat,
awoke at the first breath of air to redoubled life. They fell
upon us in myriads with their poison-stings : the buffaloes
often looked as if they were covered over with this buzzing
swarm, which beset them as if they were carrion, until,
tormented to madness, they betook themselves to the Tiber,
and rolled themselves in the yellow water. The Roman,
who in the hot summer days groans in the almost expiring

THE IMPROVISATORS. 43

streets, and crawls along by the house-sides, as if he would
drink up the shadow which is cast clown from the walls,
has still no idea of the sufferings in the Campagna, where
every breath which he draws is sulphurous, poisonous fire ;
where insects and crawling things, like demons, torment
him who is condemned to live in this sea of flame.

September brought with it milder days ; it sent out also
Federigo one evening to make sketches of the burned-up
landscape. He drew our singular house, the gallows, and
the wild buffaloes. He gave me paper and pencils, that I
also might draw pictures, and promised that when he came
next time he would take me with him for a day to Rome,
that I should visit Fra Martino and Mariuccia, and all my
friends, who seemed really to have quite forgotten me ; —
but Federigo forgot me also.

It was now November, and the most beautiful time
which I had yet spent here. Cool airs were wafted from
the mountains, and every evening I saw in the clouds that
rich colouring which is only found in the south, and which
the painter cannot and dare not give to his pictures. The
singular, olive-green clouds, on a grey ground, were to me
floating islands from the garden of paradise ; the dark blue,
on the contrary, those which hung like crowns of fir-trees in
the glowing fire of the evening heaven, seemed to ine
mountains of felicity, in whose valleys the beautiful angels
played and fanned cool breezes with their white wings.

One evening as I sat sunk in my reveries, I found that
I could gaze on the sun by looking through a finely-
pricked leaf. Domenica said that it would injure my
eyes, and, to put an end to the sport, she fastened the door.
The time went on wearily : I prayed her to let me go out,
and, as she consented, 1 sprang up gladly, and opened the
door ; but at the same moment a man darted in so suddenly,
that I was thrown to the ground : with equal speed he
closed the door again. Scarcely had I perceived his pale,
agitated countenance, and heard him, in a tone of distress,
utter the name of the Madonna, when a violent blow so
shattered the door, that it gave way and fell inward, and
the whole opening was filled with the head of a buffalo,
which glared upon us with his malicious, fiery eyes.

44 THE 1MPROVISATORE.

Domenica gave a scream, seized me by the arm, and
sprang up several steps of the ladder which led to the
upper room. The stranger, pale as death, cast his eyes
timidly around him, and perceiving Benedetto's gun,
which, in case of nocturnal inroads, always hung on the
wall ready-charged, he seized it in a moment. I heard
the report, and saw in the cloud of smoke how he had shot
the beast through the forehead. It stood immoveably
there, squeezed into the narrow doorway, and could neither
come forward nor be moved backward.

" But, all ye saints ! " exclaimed Domenica, e ' what
have you done ? You have really taken the life of the
beast ! "

<f Blessed be Madonna ! " replied the stranger ; cc she
has saved my life, and thou wast my good angel ! " said he,
lifting me from the ground. " Thou openedst the door of
salvation for me ! " He was yet quite pale, and the cold
sweat-drops stood upon his forehead.

We heard immediately by his speech that he was no
foreigner, and saw that he must be a noble from Rome.
He related, moreover, that it was his pleasure to collect
flowers and plants ; that for this purpose he had left his
carriage at Ponte Molle*, and was going along the banks
of the Tiber. Not far from us he had fallen upon the
bu<Ialoes, one of which had immediately followed him,
and he alone was saved by the nearness of our house, and
by the door suddenly opening, as if by miracle,

" Holy Maria, pray for us ! " exclaimed Domenica ;
" yes, she has saved you, the holy mother of God ! and
my little Antonio was one of her elect ! yes, she loves him !
Excellenza does not know what a child that is ! read can
he every thing, whether it is printed or written ! and draw
so naturally, that one can see directly whatever it is meant
for. The dome of St. Peter's, the buffaloes, ay, even fat
Father Ambrosius, has he drawn ; and then for his voice !
Excellenza should hear him sing; the Pope's singers could
not excel him ; and besides that, he is a good child, a
strange child. I would not praise him when he is present,
because children cannot bear praise ; but he deserves it ! "

* Pons Milvius.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 45

" He is, then, not your own son ? " inquired the
stranger ; " he is too young for that."

<e And I am too old," replied she. " No, an old fig-
tree has no such little heart-shoots ; the poor child has no
other father and mother in the world than me and my
Benedetto. But we will not part with him, even when we
have not a stiver left of the money ! But then, Holy Vir-
gin!" said she, interrupting herself, and taking hold of
the horns of the buffalo, from the head of which the blood
streamed into the room, " we must have this beast away !
one can neither come in nor go out. Ah, yes ! it is jammed
in quite fast. We can't get out before Benedetto comes.
If it only do not bring us into trouble that the beast is
killed!"

" You may be quite easy, good woman/' said the
stranger ; " I will answer for all. You have heard, per-
haps, of the Borghese ? "

" O Principe ! " exclaimed Domenica, and kissed his
clothes j but he pressed her hand, and took mine between
his, as he desired her to take me in the morning to Rome,
to the Borghese Palace, where he lived, and to which
family he belonged. Tears filled the eyes of my old
foster-mother on account of his great favour, as she called
it. My abominable scratches upon bits of paper, which
she had preserved with as much care as if they had been
the sketches of a Michael Angelo, must now be brought out.
Excellenza must see every thing which had pleased her,
and I was proud because he smiled, patted my cheeks, and
said that I was a little Salvator Rosa.

" Yes," said Domenica, " is it not extraordinary for a
child ? and is it not so natural that one can plainly see
what all is meant for ? The buffaloes, the boats, and our
little house. See ! and that is meant for me ! it is just
like me ; only it wants colouring, for that he can't do with
pencil. Now, sing for Excellenza ! " said she to me ;
" sing as well as thou canst, with thy own words ! Yes,
he can put together whole histories and sermons as well as
any monk ! Nay, let us hear ! Excellenza is a gracious
gentleman, he wishes it, and thou knowest how to keep
tune."

40 THE IMPROVISATORS.

The stranger smiled, and amused himself with us both.
That Domenica should think my improvisation quite a
masterpiece was a thing of course ; but what I sang, and
how, I remember not, and yet that the Madonna, Excel-
lenza, and the buffalo, were the poetical triad of the whole,
I recollect distinctly. Excellenza sat silent, and Domenica
read in this silence astonishment at my genius.

" Bring the boy with you," were the first words which
he spoke. " I will expect you early to-morrow morning.
Yet, no — come in the evening, an hour before the Ave
Maria. When you come, my people shall be instructed
immediately to admit you. But how am I to get out?
Have you any other mode of exit than this where the
beast lies ? and how shall I, without any danger from the
buffaloes, get to my carriage at Ponte Molle ? "

" Yes, getting out," said Domenica; " there is no pos-
sibility of that for Excellenza. I can, to be sure, and so
can the rest of us ; but it is no way for such a great gen-
tleman ! Above here there is a hole where one can creep
out, and then slide down quite well ; that even I can do
in my old age ! but it is, as I said, not quite the thing for
strangers and grand gentlefolks ! "

Excellenza mounted in the meantime up the narrow
steps, stuck his head through the hole in the wall, and
declared it was as good a way as the steps of the Capitol.
The buffaloes had betaken themselves long ago to the
Tiber, and on the road, not far from us, went a crowd of
peasants sleepily and slowly along the great highway.
These he would join : behind their waggon, laden with
reeds, he was safe from the buffaloes, if these ventured on
a new attack. Yet once more he impressed it upon old
Domenica to come the next day, an hour before the Ave
Maria, extended his hand to her to kiss, stroked my cheek,
and let himself slide down the thick ivy. We soon saw
him overtake the waggon, behind which he vanished.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 4?

CHAPTER VI.

THE VISIT IN THE BORGHESE PALACE. END OF THE HISTORY OF

MY CHILDHOOD.

BENEDETTO and a couple of herdsmen afterwards removed
the animal from the doorway ; there was a great talking
and gossiping ; but that which I distinctly remember was,
that next morning, before break of day, I was awake and
up, because towards evening I was going to the city with
Domenica. My Sunday clothes, which had lain for many
months under lock and key, were now brought out, and a
lovely rose was fastened into my little hat. My shoes were
the worst part of my habiliments, and it would have been
a difficult thing to decide whether they were that which
they were called, or were not rather a pair of antique Ro-
man sandals.

How long was it across the Campagna now, and how
the sun burned ! Never in later times has the wine of Fa-
lernia and Cyprus tasted more delicious to me than the
water which now poured from the mouth of the stone lion
in the Piazzo del Popolo.* I pressed my warm cheek
to the jaws of the lion, and let the water spout over my
head, to the great horror of Domenica, since by so doing
my dress was wet and my hair disorderly. In the mean-
time we strolled down the Via Ripetta, towards the
Borghese Palace. How often before now had I, and Do-
menica no less, gone past this building without regarding
it otherwise than any other indifferent object : but now
we stood and contemplated it in regular silence ; all seemed
so great to us, so magnificent, so rich, and especially the

* In coming to Rome from the north, the way passes through the gate del
Popolo, and the traveller then finds himself in the large, beautiful Piazzo del
Popolo, which lies between the Tiber and Monte Pincio. On either hand he
sees, under the shade of cypresses and acacias, modern statues and fountains ;
and in the middle of the square, between the well-known four stone lions,
stands an obelisk of the time of Sesostris. Beyond lie the three straight streets.
Via Babuino, II Corso, and Via Rip"tta, two uniform churches terminating
the principal one, II Corso. No dry can have a more pleasant, more gay-
cheerful appearance than old Rome from this point — Author's note.

48 THE 1MPROVISATORE.

long silken curtains in the windows. We knew Excellenza
within there; he was actually at our house yesterday; that
gave a peculiar interest to the whole. I shall never forget
the strange tremor which the pomp of the building and
of the rooms produced in me. I had talked quite fami-
liarly with Excellenza: he was, in reality, a human being
like all the rest of us ; but all this possession, this magni-
ficence ! — yes, now I saw the glory which . shows the
difference between saints and men. In the centre of the
palace four lofty whitewashed colonnades, filled with
statues and busts, inclosed a little garden * ; tall aloes and
cactuses grew up the pillars ; citron-trees stood there with
grass-green fruit which was not yet yellowed by the sun.
Two dancing Bacchantes held a water-bowl aloft, but so
obliquely that the water streamed upon their shoulders ;
tall water-plants drooped over them their juicy, green
leaves. How cool, green, and fragrant, was every thing
here in comparison with the sterile, burnt-up, burning
Campagna !

We ascended the broad marble steps. Beautiful statues
stood in niches, before one of which Domenica knelt, and
piously made the sign of the cross. She thought that it
was the Madonna ; afterwards I learned that it was Vesta,
the holy virgin also of a more ancient time. Servants in
rich livery received us : they met us so kindly that my
fear would somewhat have abated had not the hall been so
large and so magnificent ! The floor was of marble, as
smooth as glass, and on all the walls hung beautiful pic-
tures ; and where these were not, the walls were covered
with looking-glass, and painted with angels that bore gar-
lands and sprays of flowers, and with beautiful birds that
extended their broad wings and pecked at red and golden
fruit. Never had I seen any thing so splendid !

We had to wait a few moments, and then Excellenza en-
tered, accompanied by a beautiful lady dressed in white, with
large, lively eyes, which she riveted upon us. She looked
at me with a singularly penetrating but kind glance, stroked
my hair from my forehead, and said to him, <e Yes, as I

* This little garden has been since then altered into a flagged court —
Author's note.

THE IMPBO VISA TORE. 49

said, an angel has saved you ! I'll wager that there are
wings under that ugly, narrow jacket."

" No," replied he, " I read in his red cheeks that the
Tiber will send many waves to the sea before his wings
shoot out ; the old mother will rather not that he should
fly away. That's true, is it not? You would not like to
part with him ? "

" No ; that would be the same as blocking up the door
and window of my little house ! then it would be dark and
lonesome ; no, I can't part with the sweet child ! "

" But for this one evening," said the lady, ' ' he can stop
some hours with us, and then you can fetch him ; you have
beautiful moonlight to go back in, and you are not afraid of
robbers ? "

" Yes, the boy stops here for an hour, and you, in the
meantime, can go and buy one thing and another that you
have need of at home," said Excellenza, and thrust a little
purse into Domenica's hand. I heard no more, for the
lady took me with her into the hall, and left him and the
old mother together.

The rich splendour, the high-born company, quite daz-
zled me. Now I looked at the smiling angel-children that
peeped forth from among the green vine-leaves on the
walls j now on the violet-stockinged senators and the red-
legged cardinals, who had always appeared to me as a sort
of demi-gods, but in whose circle I seemed now to be re-
ceived. But, above all, my eye was attracted to the beau-
tiful Cupid which, like a lovely child, rode upon the ugly
dolphin, which threw up two great streams of water, that
fell back again into the basin in which it swam in the
middle of the hall.

The high-bred company, nay, even the cardinals and
senators, smiled to me a welcome, and a young, handsome
man, dressed as an officer of the papal guard, extended to
me his hand, when the young lady introduced me as her
uncle's good angel. They asked me a thousand questions,
to which I readily replied, and soon resounded laughter
and the clapping of hands. Excellenza came up, and said
that I must sing them a song, which I did willingly. The
young officer gave me a glass of foaming wine, which he

E

,50 THE IMPROVISATOUE.

invited me to drink, but the young lady shook her head
and took the glass from me before I had emptied it. Like
fire and flame the wine went through my blood. The
officer said that I must sing about the handsome lady who
stood smiling beside me, and I joyfully did as he desired.
Heaven knows what I mixed up together; but my stream of
words passed for eloquence, my boldness for wit ; and be-
cause I was a poor lad from the Campagna, the whole bore
the stamp of genius. All applauded me, and the officer
himself took a beautiful wreath of laurel from a bust which
stood in a corner, and placed it, half smiling, on my head.
The whole was a jest, yet I regarded it as sober earnest-
ness— as a homage which made me happy, and made this
the brightest moment of my life. I sang to them the
songs which Mariuccia and Domenica had taught me ; de-
scribed to them the wicked eyes of the buffaloes and our
room in the ruined tomb. Only too quickly passed the
time j I must now go home again with my old foster-
mother. Laden with cakes, fruit, and several silver coins,
I followed her : she was as happy as I was ; had made
many purchases — articles of clothing, cooking- vessels, and
two great bottles of wine. The evening was infinitely
beautiful. The night slumbered upon trees and shrubs,
but high above us hung the full moon which, like a lovely
golden boat in the far outspread dark blue sea of air, sent
down coolness over the burnt-up Campagna.

I thought upon the rich saloon, the kind lady, and the
many applauding claps ; dreamed, both waking and sleep-
ing, the same delicious dream, which was speedily to be
reality — beautiful reality.

More than once was I fetched to Rome. The lovely,
friendly lady, amused herself with my peculiar turn of
mind ; she made me tell her tales, talk to her just as I did
to old Domenica ; she had great delight in it, and praised
me to Excellenza. He, too, was kind to me, doubly kind,
inasmuch as he was the innocent cause of my mother's
death ; for he it was who sat in the carriage when the run-
away horses passed over her head. The beautiful lady
was called Francesca ; she often took me with her into the
rich picture-gallery which the Borghese Palace contained ;

THE IMPROVISATORE. 51

my naive questions and observations on the glorious pic-
tures made her smile she told them again to others, and
all laughed with her. In the mornings the hall was filled
with strangers, who came from heyond the mountains.
Artists sate and copied various paintings ; but in the after-
noons the pictures were left to their own solitude ; then
Francesca and I went in, and she related to me many his-
tories, to which the pictures gave occasion.

" The Seasons," by Francesca Albani, were, beyond all
others, my favourite pieces ; the beautiful, joyous, angel-
children, Loves, as she taught me to call them, were as if
creations of my own dreams. How deliciously they were
staggering about in the picture of Spring ! A crowd of
them were sharpening arrows, whilst one of them turned
round the great grindstone, and two others, floating above,
poured water upon it. In summer they flew among the
tree branches which were loaded with fruit, which they
plucked. They swam in the fresh water, and played with
it. Autumn brought the pleasures of the chase. Cupid
sits with a torch in his hand, in his little chariot, which
two of his comrades draw ; whilst Love beckons to the brisk
hunter, and shows him the place where they can rest them-
selves side by side. Winter has lulled all the little ones to
sleep ; soundly and fast they lie slumbering around. The
Nymphs steal their quivers and arrows, which they throw
on the fire, that there may be an end of the dangerous
weapons.

Why angels were called Loves ? why they went about
shooting ? — yes, there were many things of which I wanted
to have a plainer explanation than Francesca at this mo-
ment gave me.

" Thou must read thyself about them," said she ; c< there
is a great deal with which thou must become acquainted,
but the beginning is not attractive ! The whole day long
thou must sit on a bench with thy book, not play with the
goats in the Campagna, or go here and there looking after
thy little friends ! Which now shouldst thou like best,
either to ride with a helmet and sword beside the coach of
the holy father, and wear a fine suit of armour from head
to foot, like that in which thou hast seen Fabiani, or to
K 2

understand all the beautiful pictures which thou seest here,
know the whole world around thee, and a thousand his-
tories far more beautiful than those which I have told
thee?"

" But can I then never again come to thee ? " asked I ;
" can I not live with good Domenica ? "

" Dost thou still remember thy mother, thy dear home
with her ? Then thou desiredst ever to remain there ;
thought not of Domenica, not of me ; and now we are
both of us so much to thee. In a short time this may be
again the case ; and so it goes through one's whole life."

" But you two are not dead, like my mother ! " I re-
plied, with tears in my eyes.

" Die or part must we all ! There will come a time
when we shall not be altogether as we are now, and I then
would know thee joyful and happy."

A torrent of tears was my answer; I felt very unhappy,
without properly knowing how to explain the cause of my
being so. Francesca patted me on the cheek, and said
that I was quite too sensitive, and that this was not at all
good in the world. Now came Excellenza, and the young
officer with him, who had placed the garland on my head
the first time I had improvised before him. He was called
Fabiani, and was also very fond of me.

" There is a marriage, a splendid marriage at the Villa
Borghese," was shouted some evenings afterwards, till it
reached Domenica's poor house on the Campagna. Fran-
cesca was the bride of Fabiani, and must now, in a few
days, accompany him to his seat near Florence. The
marriage was celebrated at the Villa Borghese, just in
the neighbourhood of Rome, in the beautiful thick grove
of laurels and evergreen oaks, where the lofty pines,
winter and summer, lift up their perpetually bright green
crowns into the blue air. Then, as now, was that grove a
place of recreation for the Romans, as well as for strangers.
Rich equipages rolled along the thick oak-alleys ; white
swans swam on the still lakes, within which the weeping
willow was mirrored, and where artificial cascades fell over
blocks of stone. High -breasted Roman women, with
flashing eyes, rolled forth to the festival, and looked

THE I3IPR.OVISATORE. 53

proudly down upon the life-enjoying peasant-girl, who
danced upon the highway to the music of her tambourine.
Old Domenica went with me all the long way across the
Campagna, that we also might be together at the bridal of
our benefactress. Outside the garden, where the tall aloes
grew up like espaliers along the white wall, we stood and
saw the lights shine in the windows. Francesca and Fa-
biani were married. From the saloon came forth to us the
sound of music ; and from the green plain, on which the
amphitheatre was erected, rockets mounted, aud beautiful
fireworks played in the blue air. The shadows of a lady
and gentleman were seen on the curtains of one of the lofty
windows. " It is he and she ! " said Domenica. The
shadows bent towards each other in the half-darkened
window as if to unite in a kiss. I saw my old foster-
mother fold her hands and pray ; I also sank down in-
voluntarily before the black cypresses, and prayed for my
excellent signora : Domenica kneeled with me. <s May
they be happy ! " and now rained the fire like a thousand
fallen stars, as if in token of assent from heaven. But my
good old mother wept, wept for me, who was soon to be
separated from her. Excellenza had purchased me a place
in the Jesuits' school, where I was to be brought up with
other children, and to a more splendid life than old Dome-
nica and the Campagna could afford me.

" It is now for the last time," said the old mother,
"that we two, whilst my eyes are yet open, shall go
together over the Campagna ! Thy feet will tread on
polished floors, and on gay carpets : these old Domenica
has not; but thou hast been a good child; thou wilt
remain so, and never forget me and poor Benedetto ! Oh,
God ! yet can a dish of roasted chesnuts make thee happy ?
Thou shalt sit and blow up the reeds, and I will see God's
angel in thy eyes, when the reeds burn, and the poor
chesnuts roast ; so glad wilt thou never more be with so
small a gift ! The thistles of the Campagna bear yet red
flowers ; upon the polished floors of the rich there grow
no straws, and the ground is smooth, one falls so easily
there ! Never forget that thou wast a poor child, my little
Antonio. Remember that thou must see and not see, hear
E 3

54 THE IMPROVISATORS.

and not hear; then thou wilt get through the world.
Some day, when our Lord has called away me and Bene-
detto, when the little child which thou hast rocked goes
creeping through life with a poor husband in the Campagna,
thou wilt, perhaps, then go past in thy own chariot, or on
a fine horse ; halt thou before the old tomb-chamber where
thou hast slept, played, and lived with us, and thou wilt
see strangers living there, who will bow themselves deeply
before thee. Haughty thou wilt not be, but think upon
old times, think upon old Domenica ! Look in at the place
where the chesmits were cooked, and where thou rockedst
the little child. Thou wilt think upon thy own poor
childhood, thou heart's darling child ! " With this she
kissed me, and clasped me closely to her breast and wept :
it seemed to me as if my heart would break.

Our return home and her words were to me far more
distressing than our parting, even somewhat later; then
she said nothing, but only wept; and when we were outside
the door she ran back, and took down the old, half-
blackened picture of the Madonna, which was pasted behind
the door, and gave it to me ; I had kissed it so often — it
was the only thing which she had to give me.

CHAPTER VII.

SCHOOL- LIFE. HABEAS DAHDAH DIVINA COMEDIA. THE

SENATOR'S NEPHEW.

SIGNORA had journeyed away with her husband; I was
become a scholar in the school of the Jesuits ; new occu-
pations engrossed me ; new acquaintances presented them-
selves ; the dramatical portion of my life began to unfold
itself. Here years compress themselves together ; every
hour is rich in change, a whole cycle of pictures, which,
now seen from a distant point of view, melt together into
one great painting — my SCHOOL-LIFE. As it is to the
stranger who for the first time ascends the mountains, and
now looks down from above over a sea of clouds and mist,

THE 1MPROVISATORE. 55

which, by degrees, raises itself or separates, so that now a
mountain-top with a city peeps forth ; now the sun-illumined
part of a valley reveals itself. Thus comes forward and
changes the world of my mind. Lands and cities, about
which I had never dreamed, lay hid behind the mountains
which bounded the Campagna: history peopled every
portion of the earth for me, and sang to me strange
legends and adventures : every flower, every plant, con-
tained a meaning ; but most beautiful to me appeared my
fatherland, the glorious Italia ! I was proud of being
a Roman ; every point in my native city was dear and in-
teresting to me ; the broken capitals, which were thrown
down as corner-stones in the narrow streets, were to me
holy relics — Memnon's pillars, which sang strangely to
my heart. The reeds by the Tiber whispered to me of
Romulus and Remus ; triumphal arches, pillars, and
statues, impressed upon me yet more deeply the history of
my fatherland. I lived in its classical antiquity, and the
present time, that will speak for itself: my teacher of
history gave me praise and honour for it.

Every society, the political as well as the spiritual, as-
semblies in the taverns, and the elegant circles around the
card-tables of the rich, all have their harlequin ; he bears
now a mace, orders, or ornaments : a school has him no
less. The young eyes easily discover the butt of their jests.
We had ours, as well as any other club, and ours was the
most solemn, the most grumbling, growling, preaching of
harlequins, and, on that account, the most exquisite.
The Abbe H abbas Dahdah, an Arab by descent, but edu-
cated from his earliest childhood in the papal jurisdic-
tion, was at this time the guide and director of our taste,
the sesthetical head of the Jesuit school, nay, of the
Academia Tiberina.

In later years I have often reflected on poetry, that
singular, divine inspiration. It appears to me like the
rich gold ore in the mountains ; refinement and education
are the wise workmen who know how to purify it. Some-
times purely unmixed ore-dust is met with, the lyrical
improvisation of the poet by nature. One vein yields
gold, another silver ; but there are also tin, and even more
E 4

ordinary metals found, which are not to be despised, and
which sometimes can, with polishing and adorning, be
made to look like gold and silver. According to these
various metals I now rank my poets, as golden, silver,
copper, and iron men. But after these comes a new class,
who only work in simple potter's clay — the poetasters —
yet who desire as much to be admitted to the true guild.
Habbas Dahdah was one of these, and had just ability
sufficient to make a sort of ware, which with a kind of
poetical facility he overwhelmed people, with whom, as
regarded deep feeling and poetical spirit, he could not
measure himself. Easy, flexile verses, and the artistical
formation of them, so that they only brought before the eye
existences, hearts, and other such things, obtained from him
admiration and applause.

It might be, therefore, perhaps only the very peculiar
melody of Petrarch's sonnets that attracted him to this
poet. Perhaps, also, only fashion, or a fixed idea, a bright
gleam in the sickliness of his views, for Petrarch and Hab-
bas Dahdah were extremely different beings. He com-
pelled us to learn by heart almost a fourth part of the long
epic poem, " Africa," where salt tears and blows rained
down in honour of Scipio.*

The profoundness of Petrarch was daily impressed upon
us. " Superficial poets," said he, tf those who only paint
with water-colours, children of fancy, are the very spawn
of corruption ; and among the very greatest of these that
Dante, who set heaven, earth, and hell, in movement to
obtain immortality, which Petrarch has already won by a
single little sonnet — is, in my estimation, petty, very
petty ! To be sure he could write verse ! It is these
billows of sound which carry his Tower of Babel to the
latest age. If he had only followed his first plan, and had
written in Latin, he would have shown study ; but that
was inconvenient to him, and so he wrote in the vulgate,
which we now have. ' It is a stream/ says Boccaccio,

* In order to immortalise himself and the Scipios, Petrarch wrote an epic
poem called " Africa," which is now forgotten in the glory of his melodious
sonnets to Laura, which he himself did not set any high value upon — Author's
note.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 57

f through which a lion can swim, and a lamb may walk/
I find not this depth and this simplicity. There is in him
no right foundation, an eternal swaying between the past
and the present ! But Petrarch, that apostle of the truth,
did not exhibit his mettle with the pen by placing a dead
pope or emperor in hell : he stood in his time like the
Chorus in the Greek tragedy, a male Cassandra, warning
and blaming popes and princes. Face to face he dared to
say to Charles the Fourth, ' One can see in thee that virtues
are not heritable ! ' When Rome and Paris wished to
offer him the garland, he turned to his contemporaries
with a noble self-consciousness, and bade them to declare
aloud whether he were worthy to be crowned as a poet.
For three days he submitted to an examination as if he
were a regular schoolboy like you, before he would ascend
the Capitol, where the King of Naples hung around him
the purple mantle, and the Roman senate gave to him the
laurel crown which Dante never obtained."

Such was every oration which he made, to elevate Pe-
trarch and depreciate Dante, instead of placing the noble
pair side by side, like the fragrant night-violet and the
blooming rose. We had to learn all his sonnets by heart.
Of Dante we read not a word ; and I only learned through
the censure of Habbas Dahdah that he had occupied him-
self with heaven, purgatory, and hell, — three elements
which attracted me in the highest degree, and inspired me
with the greatest desire to become acquainted with his
works. But this could only be done in secret ; Habbas
Dahdah would never have forgiven me meddling with this
forbidden fruit.

One day as I was walking on the Piazzo Navone, among
the piled-up oranges, and the iron wares which lay on the
ground, among the old clothes, and all that chaos of rags
which this place exhibits, I came upon a table of old books
and prints. There lay caricatures of maccaroni-swallowers,
Madonnas with the sword in the bleeding heart, and such-
like highly dissimilar things. A single volume of Metas-
tasio drew my attention ; I had a paolo in my pocket — a
great sum for me, and the last remains of the scudi which
Excellenza had given me half a year before for pocket-

58 THE IMPKOVISATOnE.

money. I was willing to expend a few bajocci* on Metas-
tasio, but I could not separate myself from my whole
paolo. The bargain was nearly closed, when my eyes
caught a titlepage, " DivinaCommedia di Dante " — my for-
bidden fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil !
I threw down Metastasio, and seized the other ; but the
price of this was too high for me, three paoli I could not
raise. I turned the money in my hand till it burned like
fire, but it would not double itself, and I could only beat
down the seller to that price. This was the best book in
Italy — the first poetical work in the world, he said ; and
a stream of eloquence over Dante, the depreciated Dante
of Habbas Dahdah, poured from the lips of the honest
man.

"Every leaf," said he, "is as good as a sermon. He is
a prophet of God, under whose guidance one passes through
the flames of hell, and through the eternal paradise. You
do not know him, young gentleman ! or otherwise you
would immediately give the price if I asked a scudi for
him ! For your whole life long you have then the most
beautiful book of the fatherland, and that for two poor
paoli ! "

Ah ! I would willingly have given three if I had but
had them, but now it was with me as with the fox and the
sour grapes ; I also would show my wisdom, and retailed
a part of Habbas Dahdah's oration against Dante, whilst
I exalted Petrarch.

" Yes, yes ! " said the bookseller, after he had vindicated
his poet with much violence and warmth, " you are too
young, and I am too much of a layman to be able to judge
such people. They may both be very good in their way !
You have not read him ! you cannot ! A young, warm
fellow cannot cherish bitterness against a world's prophet ! "

As I now honestly confessed to him that my opinion was
merely founded upon the judgment of my teacher, out of
inspiration for his poet's works he seized the book and threw
it to me, demanding only, in return for the paolo short,

* A scudo contains ten paoli, and a paolo ten bajocci: these last are copper
coins, the other silver.— Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORK. 59

that I would now read it, and not condemn the pride of
Italy, his beloved, divine Dante.

0 how happy that book made me ! It was now my
own, my own for ever. I had always cherished a doubt
of the bitter judgment of Habbas Dahdah ; my curiosity
and the warmth of the bookseller excited me in the highest
degree, so that I could hardly wait for the moment when,
unseen by others, I could begin the book.

A new life was now opened to me; my imagination
found in Dante an undiscovered America, where nature
operated on a larger and more luxuriant scale than I had
before seen, where were more majestic mountains, a richer
pomp of colour. I took in the great whole, and suffered
and enjoyed with the immortal singer. The inscription
over the entrance to hell rung within me, during my wan-
dering with him below, like the tolling for the last judg-
ment . —

" Through me ye enter the abode of woe ;

Through me to endless sorrow are ye brought ;
Through me amid the souls accurst ye go.
Justice did first my lofty Maker move ;
By power Almighty was my fabric wrought,
By highest wisdom, and by primal love." *

1 saw in that air, ever black, like the sand of the
desert which is whirled by the tempest, the race of Adam
falling like leaves in autumn, whilst lamenting spirits
howled in the torrent of air. Tears filled my eyes at
the sight of noble, lofty beings who, unparticipants of
Christianity, had here their abode. Homer, Socrates,
Brutus, Virgil, and many others, the noblest and best of
antiquity, were here, for ever remote from Paradise. It
was not enough for me that Dante had made every thing as
comfortable and well as it could be in hell. Existence
there was yet a grief without suffering, a hopeless longing ;
they belonged still to the realm of the damned, were in-
closed by the deep marshes of hell, from which the sighs
of the damned rose up bubble on bubble of poisonous and
pestilent vapour. Wherefore had not Christ, when he was
down in hell, and again ascended to the right hand of the

* Wright's Dante.

Father, taken all with him out of the Valley of Longing ?
Could love make a selection among the equally unfor-
tunate ? I forgot entirely that the whole was but a fiction.
The deep sigh from the sea of boiling pitch went to my
heart ; I saw them, saw the herd of Simonists come up,
and the demons that pushed them down again with their
sharp forks. The living descriptions stamped themselves
deeply on my soul, and mingled in my ideas by day and
my dreams by night. Often when I slept they heard me
exclaim, " Pape Satan, alepp Satan Pape ! " They fancied
that I had combats with the Devil, and it was reminis-
cences of that which I had read that I repeated.

In the hours of instruction my mind wandered — a
thousand ideas thronged in upon me. With the utmost
willingness to do so, I could not drive them away. " What
art thou thinking of, Antonio ? " they exclaimed to me ;
and shame and terror overwhelmed me, for I knew very
well what I was thinking of, — but to leave Dante, and
not to finish wandering, was to me impossible.

The day seemed to me long and oppressive, like the
gilded mantle of lead which the hypocrite was compelled
to wear in the hell of Dante. With uneasiness of heart I
crept to my forbidden fruit, and drew in images of terror,
which punished me for my imagined sins. Nay, I felt
even the sting of the snakes of the pit, which stung and
writhed about in flames, wherefrom they, revivified like the
phoenix, ascended again to spit out their poison.

The other scholars who slept in the same room with me
were often awoke in the night by my cries, and told of my
strange, disconnected talk about hell and the damned. The
old custodian had seen one morning, to his terror, that I
had raised myself up in bed, with my eyes open, yet fast
asleep, called upon Lucifer, and wrestled with him, until
quite exhausted I had sunk back on the pillow.

It was now the universally received opinion that I had
combats with the Evil One j my bed was sprinkled with
holy water, I was enjoined to repeat a certain number of
prayers before I laid myself in bed. Nothing could
operate more injuriously on my health than exactly this
mode of treatment ; my blood was put only into a greater

THE IMPROVISATORS. 6l

state of ferment thereby, and I myself into a more anxious
condition, for I knew the cause of all this, and saw how I
betrayed it. At length I reached the point of transition,
and came out of the storm into a sort of calm.

Among all the scholars no one stood higher, either by
abilites or birth, than Bernardo, the life-rejoicing, almost
dissolute Bernardo. It was his daily jest to ride upon the
projecting spout high above the fourth story, and to ba-
lance himself upon a board between the two corner win-
dows under the roof. All the uproars in our little school
kingdom were attributed to him, and that mostly with
justice. It was wished that the stillness and repose of the
convent might be diffused over us and the whole building,
but Bernardo was the disturbing Kobold, yet he never
showed himself to be malicious. It was only with regard
to Habbas Dahdah that he played a little with the black
colouring, and then these two were always on bad terms.
But this did not annoy Bernardo. He was the nephew
of a senator of Rome, was possessed of great wealth, and
had brilliant prospects in life, " for Fortune," said Habbas
Dahdah, " threw her pearls into the hollow trees and
passed over the slender pines."

Bernardo had his determined opinion jn every thing ;
and when, among his school companions, he could not
make his word effective, his hands came to his service, in
order to inoculate his sap-green ideas upon the back of the
refractory : he was always, therefore, the dominant spirit.
Although we were of natures extremely dissimilar, there
still existed between us the best understanding. I was, to
be sure, always the one who yielded; but even this gave
him occasion to deride me.

" Antonio ! " said he, " I would cudgel you if I only
knew that, by so doing, I could excite a little gall in you.
If you would only for once show some character — strike
me in the face with your clenched fist when I laugh at
you, then I could be your most faithful friend ; but now
I must give up every hope of you ! "

One morning, when we were alone together in the great
hall, he seated himself upon the table before me, looked
into my face, laughing, and said, —

62 THE IMPROVISATORS.

*f You are, however, a greater villain than I ! You
play, indeed, an excellent comedy ! For this, folks have
their bed sprinkled, and their persons fumed. If you do
not guess why, I do. You read Dante's ' Commedia !' "

I grew crimson, and inquired how he could accuse me
of such a thing.

'•' Have you not to-night described the devil to me in
sleep, just out of the ' Divina Commedia ? ' Shall I tell you
a story ? You are possessed of much fancy, and can enjoy
yourself over such descriptions. In hell, there are not
merely fire-seas and infected moors, as you know very well
from Dante, but also great pools all frozen over; ice, and
ice, where the souls are eternally frozen fast: when one
has passed these, one descends to the very deepest depth,
where they are who have betrayed their benefactors ; con-
sequently there is Lucifer, the rebel against God, — our
greatest benefactor. He stands sunk up to the breast in
ice, with outstretched jaws, in which he holds fast Brutus,
Cassius, and Judas Iscariot ; and this last has his head
downwards, whilst the grim Lucifer shakes his monstrous
bat's wings. See, my son, when one has once seen the
fellow, one does not very soon forget him. I made ac-
quaintance with him in Dante's hell; and you have
described him to a hair this night, in your sleep. There-
fore, I say to you, how it is you have been reading Dante ;
but then you were honester than now. You bade me be
silent, and mentioned by name our amiable Habbas
Dahdah. Confess it only, now you are awake ! I will
not betray you. That is at last something in you that I
can like. Yes, yes, I had always a sort of hope of you.
But how have you got hold of the book ? From me you
might have had it; I possessed myself of it immediately,
for, when Habbas Dahdah spoke ill of it, I conceived the
idea that it was worth the trouble of reading. The thick
volume regularly terrified me ; but, that I might laugh at
him, I took it in hand, and now I am reading it for the
third time. Is not hell brilliant ? Where do you think
that Habbas Dahdah will go ? He may do with either
hot or cold ! "

My secret was now betrayed ; but I could depend on

THE IMPROVISATORS. 63

Bernardo's silence. A more confidential connexion was
knit between us. Our conversation, when we were alone,
turned upon the " Divina Commedia ; " that occupied and
inspired me ; and I must converse on that which employed
my soul and my thoughts. " Dante, and his immortal
work/' was, therefore, the first of my poems which I wrote
down.

In my edition of the " Divina Commedia," there was a
life of the author, a mere sketch, to be sure, but sufficient
to enable me to comprehend his peculiar character. I
sang of pure, spiritual love in him and Beatrice, described
his suffering in the struggle between the black and the
white, the weary wanderings of the excommunicated over
the mountains, and his death among strangers. I spoke
with most animation of the flight of the enfranchised
soul, — its glance backwards upon earth, and clown to the
deep. The whole thing was borrowed, in small features,
from his immortal poem. Purgatory, as he himself had
sung it, opened itself again ; the miracle-tree shone with
glorious fruit upon its bended branches, which were
sprinkled by an eternally rushing waterfall. He sat in
the boat where the angel spread out his large white wings
as sails, whilst the mountains around trembled as the
purified soul ascended to paradise, where the sun and all
the angels, like mirrors, reflected the beams of the Eternal
God ; where all was bliss, and where the lowest as well as
the highest, participated equally of happiness, according to
the degree in which every heart could comprehend it.

Bernardo heard my poem, and considered it quite a
masterpiece. "Antonio," said he, " you must repeat that
at the festival. It will vex Habbas Dahdah ! It is
splendid ! Yes, yes, this, and none other shall you
repeat ! "

I made a movement of dissent.

" How ? " exclaimed he, " you will not ? Then I will !
I will torment him with the immortal Dante. Glorious
Antonio, give me your poem. I will repeat it. But then
it must really be given to me ! Will you not be unwilling
to give up your beautiful plumage to deck out the jackdaw ?
You are really an incomparably good-natured fellow ; and
this will be a beautiful act in you ! You will consent ? "

64< THE IMPROVISATORS.

How willingly would I oblige him ; how willingly even
would I see the fun ! There did not need much per-
suasion.

Jt was at this time the custom in the Jesuit school, as
now in the Propaganda in the Spanish square, that on
the 13th of January, "in onore dei santi re magi," the
greater part of the scholars made speeches in public ;
either a poem in one of the various languages which was
taught here, or in that of his home or native country. We
ourselves could make choice of the subject,, which was only
submitted to the censorship of our teacher, after which we
were permitted to work it out.

" And you, Bernardo," asked Habbas Dahdah, on the
day on which we announced our themes — "you, Ber-
nardo, have not chosen any thing ? You do not belong to
the race of singing-birds — we may certainly pass by you !"

" Oh, no," was the reply, " I shall venture this time. I
have thought of singing of a poet — certainly not one of the
greatest — I have not courage for that ; but I have thought
on one of the least — on Dante ! "

"Ay, ay," returned Habbas Dahdah; "he will come
out, — and come out with Dante ! that will be a master-
piece ! — that will I gladly hear. But as all the cardinals
will come, and strangers from all parts of the world, would
it not be best to defer this piece of merriment till carnival-
time ? " And with these words he went on : but Bernardo
was not to be put off in this way, and obtained permission
from the other teachers.

Every one now had his theme ; mine was the beauty of
Italy.

Each scholar was expected wholly to work out his sub-
ject himself; but a sure way of winning over Habbas
Dahdah, and diffusing a sort of sunshine over his bad-
weather countenance, was to give him a poem to read
through, and to ask from him assistance and advice; in
that case, he commonly worked the whole poem over again,
botched and mended it, so that it remained as bad as at
first, only in a different way ; and, if it so happened that
a stranger praised the poem, he would let fall the remark,
that there were a few sparkles of his own wit which had
polished away the rough, &c. &c.

THE 1MPROVISATORE. 65

My poem on Dante, which was now Bernardo's, he
never saw.

At length the day came. The carriages rolled up to the
gate ; the old cardinals, in their red cloaks with long trains,
came in, and took their places in the stately arm-chairs.
Tickets, on which our names were inscribed, in the lan-
guages in which we were to write our poems, were handed
about. Habbas Dahdah made the opening oraticn, and
now followed poems in Syriac, Chaldaic, Coptic, nay, even
in Sanscrit, English, and other strange tongues, — nay, the
more outlandish and odd the languages sounded, the greater
were the applause and bravos, and clapping of hands,
mingled with the heartiest laughter.

With a beating heart I came forward, and spoke a few
strophes of my " Italy." Repeated acclamations saluted
me; the old cardinals clapped their hands in token of
applause, and Habbas Dahdah smiled as kindly as it was
possible for him to do, and moved prophetically the gar-
land between his hands; for, in Italian, Bernardo only
followed me, and it was not to be imagined that the English
poem which succeeded him would win any laurels.

Now stepped Bernardo before the chair. My eye and
ear followed him with uneasiness. Boldly and proudly he
recited my poem on Dante ; a deep silence reigned in the
hall. The wonderful force which he gave it seemed to
seize upon every one. I knew every word of it ; but it
sounded to me like the song of the poet when it is raised
on the wings of music, — the most unanimous applause was
awarded to him. The cardinals arose — all was at an end ;
the garland was given to Bernardo, for although, for order's
sake, the succeeding poem was listened to, and received also
its applause, people immediately afterwards turned again to
the beauty and the spirit of the poem on Dante.

My cheeks burned like fire, my breast heaved, I felt an
infinite, unspeakable happiness, my whole soul drank in the
incense which was offered to Bernardo. I looked at him,
he was become quite other than I had ever seen him before.
Pale as death, with his eyes riveted to the ground, he stood
there like a criminal — he, who otherwise had looked so
unabashedly into every one's face. Habbas Dahdah seemed

THE J3IPROVISATORE.

just like a companion piece to him, and appeared ready to
pluck the garland to pieces in his abstraction, when one of
the cardinals took it from him and placed it on the head of
Bernardo, who bent his knee, and bowed his face into both
his hands.

After the festival I sought out Bernardo. " To-mor-
row !" he exclaimed, and tore himself loose from me.

On the following day, I observed that he shunned me ;
and it grieved me, for my heart was infinitely attached to
him, — it needed one trusty soul in this world, and it had
selected him.

Two evenings passed, he then threw himself on my
neck, pressed my hand, and said, "Antonio, I must speak
with you ; I cannot bear it any longer, and will not,
either. When they pressed the garland on my head, it
was as if they had pressed in a thousand thorns. The
acclamations sounded like jeering ! It was to you that the
honour belonged ! I saw the joy in your eye, and, do you
know, I hated you ! you were to me no longer that which
you had been. That is a wicked feeling, I pray you for
forgiveness ; but we must now part, I am no longer at
home here. I will hence, and not for the next year be the
jest of the others when they find that I have not the stolen
plumes. My uncle shall and must provide for me. I have
told him so — I have besought it from him — I have done
that which is repugnant to my nature ; and it seems to me
as if you were the cause of it all ! I feel a bitterness
towards you, which wounds me to the soul ! We can only
be friends under entirely new circumstances! — and we
will be so, promise me, Antonio ? "

"You are unjust to me," said I, "unjust to yourself!
Do not let us think any more about that miserable poem,
or any thing connected with it. Give me your hand, Ber-
nardo, and do not distress me with such strange talk."

" We will always be friends," said he, and left me. It
was late in the evening before he came to his chamber;
and the next morning it was announced that he had left
the school to follow another profession.

" He is gone like a falling star," observed Habbas
Dahdah, ironically j " he vanished as soon as one noticed

THE JMPROVISATORE. 6?

the brightness ! The whole was a crack — and so was the
poem, too. I shall manage, indeed, that this treasure is
preserved ! Thou, Holy Virgin ! when one looks closely
at it, what is it? Is it poetry, — that which runs in and
out, without shape or consistency ? At first, I thought it
was a vase, then a French wine-glass, or a Median sabre ;
but, when I turned it and drew it, there came out the self-
same unmeaning, cut-and-dried shape. In three places
there is a foot too many ; there are horrible hiatuses ; and
five -and- twenty times has he used the word ' divina,' as if
a poem became divine by the repetition of this word.
Feeling, and feeling ! that is not all which makes the
poet! What a combating with fancies, — now one is
here! now one is there! Neither is it thought, no, dis-
cretion, golden discretion ! The poet must not let himself
be run away with by his subject. He must be cold — ice-
cold, must rend to pieces the child of his heart, that he may
understand every single portion of it : it is only thus that a
work of art can be put together. Not with all this driving
and chasing, and all this wild inspiration ! And then they
set a garland on such a lad ! Flogged he should have been
for his historical errors, his hiatuses, his miserable work !
I have vexed myself, and that does not suit my constitu-
tion ! The abominable Bernardo ! "

Such, probably, was Habbas Dahdah's speech of praise.

CHAPTER VIII.

A WELCOME AND AN UNWELCOME MEETING. THE LITTLE

ABBESS. THE OLD JEW.

WE all missed the wild, wilful Bernardo, and none missed
him more than I did. It seemed to me as if all was empty
and deserted around me : I could not enjoy my books ;
there were dissonances in my soul which I could not even
silence ; music alone brought a momentary harmony. In
the tones of the world, my life and my whole endeavours
F 2

OS THE IJIPROVISATORE.

first received clearness. Here I found more than any poet,
than even Dante had expressed ; not merely the feelings
comprehended from the soul-breathing picture, but the
sensitive part, the ear, drank in from living existence.
Every evening, before the image of the Madonna on the
wall childrens' voices sang to me remembrances from my
own childhood, which sounded like a cradle-song from the
melancholy bagpipe of the Pifferari. I heard, indeed, in
them the monotonous song of the muffled corpse-bearers
who carried the coffin of my mother. I began to think
about the past and of that which was to come. My heart
seemed so strangely to want room; I felt as if I must sing;
old melodies intoned within me, and the words came aloud
from my lips ; yes, too much aloud, for they disturbed
Habbas Dadhah, at several rooms distance, who sent to
inform me that this was neither an opera-house nor a sing-
ing-school, and that there could be no quavering in the
school of the Jesuits, excepting such as was in honour of
the Virgin. Silently I laid my head against the window-
frame and looked into the street, but with my thoughts
introverted.

" Felicissima notte, Antonio!"* reached my ear. A
handsome, proud horse was prancing under the window,
and then sprang forward with its proud rider. It was a
papal officer; with youthful rapidity he bowed himself to
his horse, waved his hand again and again till he was out
of sight ! but I had recognised him — it was Bernardo, the
fortunate Bernardo ! How different had his life been to
mine ! No ! I could not think of it ! I drew my hat
deeply over my brows, and, as if pursued by an evil spirit,
hastened out, and forth wherever the wind would carry me.
I thought not then how it was a regulation that no scholar
in the Jesuits' school, Propaganda, or any establishment of
learning in the Papal States, should go out of the building
without being accompanied by a fellow-student of equal
or superior age, and might never show themselves alone
without an especial permission. Such a universally known

* The inhabitants of the north wish each other •' good night, sleep well ! "
The Italians wish " the happiest night ! " The nights of the south have more
than dreams. — Author's Note.

THE I3IPROVISATORE.

law as this was never inculcated upon us. I forgot that
my freedom in this way was circumscribed, and from this
cause went out quite calmly. The old custodian thought
perhaps that I had obtained permission.

The Corso was crowded with equipages. A succession
of carriages, filled with the natives of Rome and strangers,
followed each other : they were taking their evening drive.
People stood in throngs around the print-sellers' windows
looking at the engravings, and beggars came up to them
craving for a bajocco. It was difficult to make one's way
through, unless one would venture among the carriages.
I had just slipped through in this manner, when a hand
took fast hold of my dress, and I heard a well-known hor-
rible voice whisper, " Bon giorno, Antonio ! " I looked
down : there sat my uncle, the horrible Peppo, with the
two withered legs fastened up to his sides, and with the
wooden frame on which he shoved himself onwards. We
had never been 'for many years so near to each other. I
had always made great circuits to escape him — had avoided
the Spanish Steps, where he sat ; and when I had been
obliged to pass by him in a procession, or with the other
scholars, I had always used my utmost endeavours to con-
ceal my face.

" Antonio, my own blood ! " said he, holding fast by
my coat, " dost thou not know thy own mother's brother,
Peppo ? Think upon St. Joseph *, and then thou hast
my name ! Oh, how manly and tall thou hast grown ! "

" Release me ! " exclaimed I, for the people around us
looked on.

" Antonio ! " said he, " hast thou forgotten how we two
rode together upon the little ass ? Thou sweet child ! Yes,
now thou sittest upon a loftier horse, thou wilt not know
thy poor uncle — wilt not come to me upon the steps.
Yet thou hast kissed my hand, slept upon my poor straw.
Don't be ungrateful, Antonio ! "

" Then let me go ! " I cried, and tore the coat out of
his hands, and, slipping between the intersecting carriages^
came into a side street. My heart trembled for horror of

* Peppo is the Italian abbreviation of the name Giuseppe — Joseph —
Author's Note.

F 3

70 THE IMPROVISATORS.

— yes, what shall I call it? — wounded pride. I fancied
myself to be scorned by every body who had seen us ; but
this feeling prevailed only for a moment, and then gave
place to another and a much more bitter one. Every word
which he had said was indeed the truth : I was really the
only child of his sister. I felt that my behaviour had
been cruel, was ashamed before God and myself: it burned
liked fire in my heart. Had I now been alone with Peppo,
I would have kissed his ugly hands, and prayed him for
forgiveness. I was shaken to my inmost soul.

At that moment, the bells of the church of St. Agostino
rang for the Ave Mai-ia. My sin lay heavy upon my soul,
and I went in, that I might pray to the Mother of God.
All was empty and dark in the lofty building ; the lights
upon the various altars burned feebly and dreamily with-
out rays, like tinder in the night when the damp sirocco
blows. My soul drank in consolation and pardon.

" Sigriore Antonio," said a voice close to me, " Excel-
lenza is come and the handsome signora. They are here
from Firenza, and have brought with them their little
angel. Will not you come directly and pay your visit,
and give your welcome ? "

It was old Fenella, the wife of the porter at the Palazzo
Borghese. My benefactress was here with her husband
and child. I had not seen her for some years. My soul
was full of joy ; I hastened there, and soon the old friendly
faces greeted me again.

Fabiani was gentle and gracious, Francesca glad as a
mother to see me again. She brought to me her little
daughter, Flaminia, a kind-hearted child with wonderfully
bright eyes. She put forth her mouth immediately for
me to kiss, came willingly to me, and we were, in two
minutes, old acquaintances and friends. She sat upon my
arm, and laughed aloud for joy when I danced round the
hall with her, and sang her one of my merry old songs.

" Make not my little abbess * a child of the world,"

* It is the custom in most of the Italian families, that when one of the
daughters is destined to the convent from .childhood, she bears one or other
name of honour, indicative of her destination, as " Jesus' Bride," " the Nun,"
" the Abbess," &c. — Author's Note.

i

THE IMPROVISATORS. 71

said Fabiani, smiling ; '•' dost thou not see that she bears
already the token of her honour ? " He then showed to
me a little silver crucifix, which hung by a cord upon the
child's breast. " The holy father gave her this : she bears
already her soul-bridegroom upon her heart."

In the plenitude of their love, the young couple had
vowed to the church their first female child, and the Pope
had bestowed* upon the little one in the cradle this holy
sign. As a relation of the rich Borghese family, the
highest place in the female convents of Rome was open to
her; and, therefore, with them and with all her con-
nexions she bore the honourable name of the Little Abbess.
Every story, therefore, that was told her, and every sport,
was calculated to fix her ideas on the world to which she
peculiarly belonged, on the happiness which awaited
her.

She showed me her Jesus-child, her little white-
garmented nuns, which went every day to mass, set them
up in two rows at the table, as the nurse had taught her,
and told me how beautifully they sang and prayed to the
Jesus-child. I drew for her merry peasants, who, in their
long woollen cloaks, danced around the stone Tritons, and
pulchinellos that sat upon one another's shoulders ; and
the new pictures unspeakably amused the little one. She
kissed them many times, then tore them in her wanton-
ness, and I must draw new ones, till the time came when
we must part, by the nurse coming to take her to bed, for
her bed-time was long past.

Fabiani and Francesca asked me about the Jesuit school,
about my health, and whether I were contented, and pro-
mised to be always kind to me, and wished me the best
fortune.

<f We must see you every day," said they ; "come very
often whilst we are here."

They inquired also about old Domenica on the Cam-
pagna, and I told how happy she was when I went in
spring and autumn to see her; how she roasted chesnuts
for me, and seemed to become young again in talking of
the days which we had spent together; and how I must
every time see the little nook where I had slept, and the
F 4

72 THE IMPROV1SATORE.

pictures which I had drawn, and which she preserved with
her rosary and her old prayer-book.

" How queerly he bows ! " said Francesca to Fabiani,
as, in the evening, I bowed in taking leave. " It is very
excellent to cultivate the mind, but neither must the body
be neglected : that is of much consequence in the world !
But that will come, will it not, Antonio ? " said she,
smiling, and extended her hand for me to kiss.

It was yet early in the evening when I again found
myself in the street on my homeward way, but still it was
pitch-dark. There were at that time no lamps in Rome ;
they belong, as is well known, to the last few years. The
lamps before the images of the Virgin were the only lights
in the narrow ill-paved streets. I was obliged to feel my
way before me, that I might not stumble against any thing;
and thus I went on slowly, occupied with the thoughts of
the adventures of this afternoon.

In going forward, I struck my hand against some
object.

" The devil ! " resounded from a well-known voice ;
" don't knock out my eyes, for then I should see still
less ! "

"Bernardo!" I joyfully exclaimed; " have we met
once more ? "

" Antonio ! my dear Antonio ! " cried he, and caught
me by the arm ; " this is indeed a merry meeting. Where
do you come from ? From some little adventure ? That
I did not expect from you ; but you are caught in the
path of darkness. But where is the slave corporal, the
cicisbeo, or whatever you call your faithful companion ? "

" I am quite alone," said I.

' ' Alone ? " repeated he ; " you are at bottom a fine
fellow ; you should be in the papal guard : then, perhaps,
we should make something out of you."

I related to him in a few words the arrival of Excel-
lenza and Signora, and expressed my delight at this our
meeting. His pleasure was not less than mine. We
thought not of the darkness around us, and talked as we
went along, without thinking where or in what direction
we went.

THE UJPROVISATORE. 73

" Do you see, Antonio," said he, " I have only just
now learned what life is : you know nothing about it. It
is too gay a thing to sit there on the hard school-bench
and listen to Habbas Dahdah's mouldy harangues. I know
how to manage my horse* — you saw me, perhaps, to-day ;
and the handsome signoras cast glances at me — oh, such
burning ones ! I am, to be sure, a very good-looking
fellow, whom the uniform becomes ; in this cursed dark-
ness here, you cannot see me ! My new comrades have
led me out into the world ; they are not such recluses as
you. We empty our glasses to the well-being of the state,
and have also little adventures of which his holiness would
not endure to hear. What a foolish fellow you are, An-
tonio ! I have had ten years' experience in these few
months. Now I feel my youth, it boils in my blood, it
wells forth in my heart, and I enjoy it — enjoy it in copious
draughts, whilst my lips burn, and this exciting thirst is
un allayed."

"Your companions are not good, Bernardo," said I.

"Not good!" interrupted he; "don't preach me any
sermon! What can you say about my goings on? My
companions are of the purest patrician blood that Rome
possesses; we are the holy father's guard of honour; his
blessing absolves our little sins. After 1 had left school, I
too had some of these conventual notions about me, but I
was wise enough not to let my new companions observe it;
I did as they did ; my flesh and blood, my whole proper I,
thrilled with joy and life, and I followed this impulse be-
cause it was the strongest; but I perceived, at the same
time, a hateful, bad voice within me — it was the Propa-
gandist convent breeding, and the last remains of good-
childism, which said, ' Thou art no longer innocent as a
child ! ' Since then I laugh at it, I understand it better.
I am a man ! the child is shook off: it was that which cried
when it could not have its way. But here we are really
at the Chiavica, the best inn where artists assemble. Come
in; we must empty a bottle of wine together, for our happy
meeting's sake — come in; it is merry within!"

"What are you thinking of?" replied I. "If they
should know at the Jesuit school that I have been here
with an officer of the papal guard ! "

ef Yes, that would be a great misfortune! To drink a
glass of wine, and to hear the foreign artists sing their
songs in their native speech, German, French, English, and
the Lord knows what tongues! It's a merry thing, you
may think!"

"What may he suitable for you is forbidden to me; do

not talk to me about it, and " I interrupted myself,

because I heard laughter and shouting from a little side-
street, and was desirous of turning the conversation to
other subjects: " there is such a crowd of people together
— what can it be? I think the sport goes on under the
image of the Madonna ; " and, so saying, I drew him to-
wards it.

Rude men and boys of the lowest class had closed up
the street; they made a large circle around an old Jew,
whom, as we found, they would compel to jump over a
stick, which one of the fellows held, because he wished to
go out of the street.

It is well known that in Rome, the first city of Chris-
tendom, the Jews are only permitted to live in their
allotted quarter, the narrow and dirty Ghetto, the gate of
which is closed every evening, and soldiers keep watch that
none may come in or go out. Once a-year, the oldest
amongst them are obliged to go to the Capitol, and, kneeling,
pray for permission to live yet one year longer in Rome;
which they obtain by binding themselves to bear the ex-
penses of the carnival, and promising that all of them,
once in the year, on an appointed day, shall go to a
Catholic church and hear a sermon for their conversion.

The old man whom we here saw had corne alone on
this dark evening through the street, where the boys were
pursuing their sport, and the men were playing at mora.

"Do you see the Jew?" one of them had said, and
began to scoff at and ridicule the old man; and then, as he
pursued his way in silence, they closed up the street. One
of the fellows, a thick, broad-shouldered man, held a long
stick stretched out, and cried, fi Nay, Jew, take thy legs
with thee, however; they will shut Ghetto, thou wilt not
get in to-night. Let us see how nimble thou art in the
legs!"

THE IMPROVISATORE. 75

"Leap, Jew!" cried all the boys; "Abraham's God will
help thee ! "

"What harm have I done you?" said he. "Let me,
an old man, go on my own way, and make not a jest of
my grey hair before her to whom you yourselves pray for
pardon:" and he pointed to the image of the Madonna
just by.

"Dost thou think," said the fellow, "that Madonna
troubles herself about a Jew? Wilt thou jump, thou old
hound? " and he now clenched his fist in his face, and the
boys pressed in a closer circle around him.

With this Bernardo sprang forth, pushed the nearest
aside, snatched in an instant the stick out of the fellow's
hand, swung round his sword above him, held the stick
which he had taken from him before him, and cried in a
strong, manly voice, "Jump thou, or I will cleave thy
head! — delay not! — by all the saints, I'll split thy skull
if thou do not jump over it!"

The fellow stood as if all heaven had fallen amid the
astonished crowd. The thundering words, the drawn
sabre, the papal officer uniform, all electrified him, and,
without replying one word, he gave a great spring over
the stick, which he had just held before the poor Jew.
The whole assembly appeared equally surprised; no one
ventured to say a word, but looked astonished by that
which had happened.

Scarcely had the fellow leapt over, than Bernardo seized
him by the shoulder, and, striking him lightly on the
cheek with the flat of his sabre, said, —

"Bravo, my hound! well done! Yet once more this
trick, and then, I think, thou wilt have had enough of this
dog's play ! "

The fellow was obliged to leap, and the people, who
went over to the merry side of the thing, cried "Bravo!"
and clapped their hands.

" Where art thou, Jew?" asked Bernardo. "Come, I
will lead thee ! " But nobody replied ; the Jew was gone.

"Come," said I, when we were out of the crowd, —
"come, let them say what they may, I will drink a bottle

of wine with you. I will drink your health. May we
always be friends in whatever circumstances we may be !"

"You are a fool, Antonio!" replied he, "and I also at
bottom, to have vexed myself about the rude fellow. I
think that he will not speedily be making any body j ump
again."

We went into the hostel ; none of the lively guests ob-
served us. There stood in a corner a little table, and here
we bade them bring us a bottle of wine, and drank to our
happy meeting and to the endurance of our friendship;
then we parted.

1 returned to the Jesuit school, where the old custodian,
my particular friend, let me in unobserved of any one, and
I was quickly asleep and dreaming of this evening's many
adventures.

CHAPTER IX.

THE JEW MAIDEN.

THAT I had been out for an evening without permission,
nay, drunk wine also in an inn with Bernardo, troubled
me afterwards; but Fortune favoured me — nobody missed
me, or, if they did, they supposed, like the old custodian,
that I had received permission, for I was indeed con-
sidered to be the quietest and the most conscientious of
the scholars. The days glided on smoothly for weeks; I
studied industriously, and visited in the mean time my
noble benefactress : these visits were my highest recreation.
The little abbess became dearer to me every day; I took
to her the pictures which I myself when a child had
drawn ; but when she had played some minutes with them
they flew in many pieces about the floor: these I collected,
and joined again for her.

At that time I was reading Virgil. The sixth book,
where the Cumsean sibyl conducts JEneas down to the
lower regions, interested me greatly, for it bore a relation-
ship to that of Dante. With this I thought of my poem,

THE IMPROVISATORE. 77

and that brought Bernardo vividly to my mind, whom I
had not seen for so long a time. I longed for him. This
was precisely on one of those days in the week on which
the gallery of the Vatican stood open to the public. I
obtained leave of absence to go and see the glorious marble
gods and the beautiful pictures ; but that which I particu-
larly wished for was to meet with my dear Bernardo.

I was already in the great open colonnade where the
most beautiful bust of Raphael stands, and where the
whole ceiling is covered with exquisite pictures from the
Bible, drawn by this great master and finished by his
scholars. The strange arabesques on the walls, the legions
of angels, which are either kneeling in every arch, or
spreading forth their great wings towards the Infinite,
were not new to me ; yet I lingered here a long time as if
contemplating them, but waiting in reality for any lucky
chance which might bring Bernardo there. I leaned over
the balustrade of masonry, and contemplated the magnifi-
cent range of mountains, tbe proud line of the waves
beyond the Campagna, but my eye at the same time looked
down into the court of the Vatican to see if it were not
Bernardo whenever I heard a sword ring up the broad
flag-stones : but he came not.

In vain I wandered through the arcades, visited the
Nile-group and the Laocoon, — all my looking was only
folly, and I grew out of humour. Bernardo was not to
be discovered, and, therefore, my homeward way seemed
to me about as interesting as the Torso and the splendid
Antinous.

Now skipped a light figure in helmet and with ringing
spurs along the passage, and I after it : it was Bernardo.
His joy was not less than mine; he drew me hastily along
with him, for he had, he said, a thousand things to tell
me.

"You do not know what I have suffered and still
suffer ! You shall be my doctor — you alone can help me
to the magical plants."

With these words he led me through the great hall,
where the papal Swiss kept guard, into a large room fitted
up for the accommodation of the officer on duty.

" But you are not ill? " I inquired, — " you cannot be
so ! — your eyes and your cheeks burn with the glow of
life."

" Oh, yes, they burn," said he, — " I burn from head to
foot; but it is all right ! You are my star of luck — you
bring with you charming adventures and good ideas. You
must help ! — sit down. You do not know how much I
have lived through since that evening which we two spent
together. But I will confide all to you — you are an
honest friend, and must have a share in the adventure."

He would not allow me to speak — I must hear that
which excited him so much.

ic Do you remember the Jew — the old Jew whom the
fellow would force to leap over the stick, and who hurried
away without thanking me for my knightly help? I soon
had forgotten him and the whole history. A few days
afterwards chance led me past the entrance into the
Ghetto ; I did not observe it until the soldier who had his
post at the gate presented arms, because I now belong to
the people of rank. I returned his greeting, and saw with
that a handsome crowd of black-eyed girls of the Hebrew
race just within the gate, and so, as you may imagine, I
was possessed with the de«ire to go down through the
narrow, dirty street. It was a whole synagogue within ;
houses jostling one against another high into the air —
from every window was heard " Bereschit Bara Elohim ! "
head to head, just as if they were going to pass over the
Red Sea. Round about hung old clothes, umbrellas, and
such like Rag-Fair goods. I skipped among iron-wares,
pictures, and dirt, of course, and heard what a buzzing
and screaming there was whether I would not trade, sell,
or buy ; they would hardly let me have time to notice a
pair of black-eyed, beautiful children, which laughed at
me from the door. It was such a wandering, you may
trust me, as Dante might have described. All at once an
old Jew fell upon me, bowed himself down before me as
if I had been the holy father.

" ' Excellenza,' said he, — ' my noble deliverer — the
saviour of my life, blessed be the hour in which I saw you !
Think not that old Hanoch is ungrateful ! ' and much more

THE IMPROVISATORS. 79

which I did not understand and cannot now remember. I
now recognised him ; it was the old Hebrew who should
have taken the leap.

" ' Here is my poor house/ continued he, f but the
threshold is too humble for me to pray you to cross it ; '
and with this he kissed my hands and my dress. I wished
to get away, for the whole neighbourhood was gazing upon
us; but just then I cast my eyes upwards to the house,
and I saw the most beautiful head that I ever had seen, —
a marble Venus with warm blood in her cheeks, and eyes
like a daughter of Arabia. Thus you can very well con-
ceive that I followed the old Jew in — he had, indeed,
invited me. The passage was truly as narrow and dark as
if it had led into the grave of the Scipios, and the stone
steps and the handsome wooden gallery — yes, they were,
in particular, formed to teach people stability in walking,
and circumspection to the extremest finger-point. In the
room itself it did not seem so much amiss, only the girl
was not there ; and what did I want to see besides ? I
had now to sit and listen to a long speech of gratitude, in
which the multitude of Eastern figures of speech would cer-
tainly have charmed your poetical turn of mind. I let it
go on, thinking to myself 'she will come at last !' but she
came not. In the meantime the Jew started an idea which,
under other circumstances, would have been very good.
He imagined that I, as a young man who was living in the
world, should want money, but yet, at the same time, have
no superabundance of it — that I had need occasionally to
fly to compassionate souls, who, at from twenty to thirty
per cent., showed their Christian love, but that he (and it
is a miracle in the Jewish kingdom) would lend to me
without any percentage at all. Do you hear ? — with no
percentage ! — I was a noble young man — he would trust
himself to my honesty ! I had protected a twig of the
stem of Israel, and not a splinter of this should rend my
clothing!

"As I was not in need of any money, I did not take
any ; so he then besought me to condescend to taste his
wine — the only bottle which he possessed. I know not
what reply I made, but this I know, that the loveliest girl

80 THE IMPROVISATORS.

of Oriental descent entered. There were form and colour

— hair shining and jet-black as ebony. She presented to
me excellent wine of Cyprus, and that kingly blood of the
line of Solomon crimsoned her cheeks as I emptied a glass
to her happiness. You should have heard her speak —
heard her thank me for her father, which, indeed, it was
not worth the trouble. It sounded like music in my ears

— it was no earthly being ! She then vanished again, and
only the old man remained."

"The whole is just like a poem !" I exclaimed, —
" it could be beautifully put into verse."

" You do not know," continued he, " how I have since
tormented myself — how I have formed schemes in my
head, and then pulled them down again, for meeting again
with my daughter of Zion. Only think, I went down
there to borrow money which I did not want ; I borrowed
twenty silver scudi for eight days, but I did not get to see
her, I took them unchanged back again to him on the
third day, and the old man smiled and rubbed his hands,
for he had not actually so entirely relied upon my boasted
honesty. I praised his wine of Cyprus, but she brought
me none ; he himself presented it with his thin, trembling
hands. My eyes peered into every corner — she was
nowhere. I saw her not, only as I went down the steps
it seemed to me that a curtain in an open window moved ;
it might be she.

" ( Adieu, signora/ I exclaimed, but all was still as a
wall — nothing showed itself. I have advanced no further
in my adventui e — give me counsel. To give her up I
cannot and will not ! What shall I do ? Strike out a
brilliant idea, my heart's youth ! Be to me a Juno and
Venus, which led JEneas and Libya's daughter together
into the lonely grotto."

<c What will you have me to do ? I do not comprehend
how I can do any thing here."

" You can do every thing, whatever you will. The
Hebrew is really a beautiful language, a poetical pic-
ture-world ; you shall study it, and take a Jew for your
teacher : I will pay for the lessons. Do you have the old
Hanoch, for I have discovered that he belongs to the

THE IMPROVISATORE. 81

learned portion in Ghetto. When your true-hearted
manner has won him, then you can make the acquaintance
of his daughter, and then you must bring me in also, but
at full gallop — at full, flying gallop. I have burning
poison in my blood — the burning poison of love. You
must go to-day to the Jew."

" That I cannot," I replied ; " you do not take into
consideration my circumstances — what a part I should
have to play; and how can you, dear Bernardo, demean
yourself so as to have a love-affair with a Jew girl ? "

" Oh, that you do not understand ! " interrupted he ;
" Jew-girl or not has nothing to do with it, if she is only
good for any thing ! Now, thou beloved youth, my own
excellent Antonio, set about studying Hebrew — we will
both of us study it, only in different ways. Be reason-
able, and think how very much you hereby promote my
happiness."

" You know," I said, " how sincerely with my whole
soul I am attached to you, — you know how your pre-
ponderating force seizes upon my thoughts and my whole
will. If you were angry, you could destroy me ! —
I should be forced into your magic circle. I judge not
your views in life by my own ; every one must follow his
own nature. Neither do I consider the mode by which
you would seize on pleasure to be sinful, for that is accord-
ing to your cast of mind. 1 am quite different ; do not
over-persuade me into an undertaking which, even if it
turned out favourably, could not tend to your happiness."

" Good — good !" said he, interrupting me ; and I saw
the distant, proud glance with which he so often had
regarded Habbas Dahdah, when he, from his position, was
the deciding party ; "good, Antonio, it is nothing but a
jest, the whole of it. You shall not have to do penance on
my account. But where would have been the harm of your
learning a little Hebrew, and that from my Jew, I cannot
comprehend. But not a word about it ! — thanks for
your visit! Will you eat? — will you drink? Here
they are at your service."

I was cast down ; the tone in which he spoke, his
whole manner, showed that he was offended. Icy coldness

82 THE IMPROVISATORS.

and formal politeness met the warm pressure of my hand.
Troubled and out of spirits, I hastened home.

I felt that he was unjust — that I had acted as was my
duty to do ; and yet there were moments in which it
seemed as if I had acted unkindly to him. In one of
these combats with myself I went through the Jews'
quarter, hoping that my fortunate star would conduct me
to some adventure which should turn out to the benefit of
my dear Bernardo. But I did not once see the old Jew;
unknown faces looked out from doors and windows, dirty
children lay upon the steps among all sorts of old trash of
iron and clothes, and the eternal shouting of whether I
would not buy or sell almost deafened me. Some young
girls were playing at shuttlecock, from window to window
across the street. One of these was very handsome ; could
it be Bernardo's beloved ? I involuntarily took off my
hat, but the next moment, ashamed of doing so, I stroked
my head with my hand, as if it had been on account of
the warmth, and not of the givls, that I uncovered my
head.

CHAPTER X.

A YEAR LATER. THE ROMAN CARNIVAL. THE SINGER.

IP I must uninterruptedly follow the thread which con-
nects together Bernardo's love and my ramble through
Ghetto, I must pass over one whole year of my life ; but
this year had in its daily progress onward much more for
me than the making me twelve months older. It was a
sort of interlude in the drama of my life.

I seldom saw Bernardo, and when we did meet he was
just the same merry-hearted, bold, young acquaintance as
ever ; but confidential as before he never seemed to be, the
cold, well-bred air betrayed itself from under the mask of
friendship; it troubled and depressed me, and I had not
the courage to ask how it had gone with his love-affair.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 83

I very often went to the Borghese Palace, and found
with Excellenza, Fabiani, and Francesca, a true home, yet
often, also, found occasion for deep pain. My soul was
filled with gratitude to every one of them for all which I
had received from them, and, therefore, any grave look
from them cast a shade upon my life's happiness. Fran-
cesca commended my good qualities, but wished now to
perfect me. My carriage, my mode of expressing myself,
she criticised, and that with severity — certainly with great
severity — so much so as to bring tears to my eyes,
although I was a tall youth of sixteen. The old Excel-
lenza, who had taken me from Domenica's hut to his
magnificent home, was also just as cordially kind to me as
at the first time when we met ; but he, too, pursued the
signora's mode of education with me. I did not take the
same interest as himself in plants and strange flowers, and
this he considered as a want of taste for that which was
solid : he thought that I was too much occupied by my own
peculiar individuality — I did not come sufficiently out of
myself — did not let the radius of the mind intersect the
great circle of the world.

" Reflect, my son," said he, f< that the leaf which is
rolled up in itself withers."

But after every warm conversation that he had with me
he patted me again upon the cheek, and consoled me by
ironically saying that we lived in a bad world, and we
must every one of us be pressed like dried flowers, if the
Madonna were to have handsome specimens of us. Fa-
biani looked at every thing on the cheerful side, laughed
at both of their well-meant lectures, whilst he assured
them that I never should become learned like Excellenza,
nor piquant like Francesca, but that I should be of a third
character, which also belonged to life, and which was not
to be despised either. And then he called for his little
abbess, and with her I soon forgot all my small troubles.

The family intended to pass the following year in the
north of Italy; the warm summer months they would
spend at Genoa, and the winter in Milan. • By me, also,
at the same time, a great step was to be taken ; I was to
enter by a sort of examination into the rank of abbe, and
G 2

thus gain a higher position in life than I had hitherto
possessed.

Before the departure of the family a great ball was
given in the Borghese Palace, to which I also was invited.
Pitch garlands burned before the house, and all the torches
which were borne before the carriages of the guests were
stuck into iron arms upon the wall, so that this seemed
like a complete cascade of fire. Papal soldiers were sta-
tioned at the gates. The little garden was decorated with
bright- coloured paper-lamps; the marble steps were mag-
nificently lighted, and upon every step, beside the wall,
stood vases filled with flowers or small orange-trees, which
diffused their fragrance around. Soldiers leaned their
shoulders against the doors. There was a throng of richly
dressed servants.

Francesca was splendidly beautiful : the costly bird-of-
paradise head-dress which she wore, and her white satin
dress with its rich lace, became her most exquisitely, but
that she extended to me her hand — yes, that I thought
the most beautiful of all ! In two halls, in each of which
was a full orchestra, floated the dancers.

Among these was Bernardo, and he was handsome ;
the scarlet, gold- embroidered uniform, the narrow, white
breeches, all fitted as if but a part of the noble figure ; he
danced with the most lovely women, and they smiled con-
fidingly and tenderly upon him. That which vexed me
was that I could not dance ; neither did any body take
any notice of me. In my own home it seemed to me that
I was the greatest stranger among strangers. But Ber-
nardo offered rne his hand, and all my ill-humour was
again gone.

Behind the long red curtains, by the open window, we
drank together the foaming champagne; he clinked his
glass familiarly against mine. Beautiful melodies streamed
through the ear into our hearts, and every thought of a
friendship less warm than in former days was extinguished.
I ventured to mention even the handsome Jewish maiden;
he laughed, and seemed quite cured of his deep wound.

" I have found another little golden bird," said he,
^ which is tamer, and has sung away my whim. We

THE IMPROVISATORS. 85

will therefore let the other fly; and it is gone indeed, lias
escaped away out of the Jews' quarter — nay, even out of
Rome, if I am to believe rny people ! "

Once more we joined glasses ; the champagne and the
enlivening music infused twofold life to our blood. Ber-
nardo again was in the midst of the dance ; I stood alone
there, but that great sea of happiness was in my soul,
which makes one right glad to embrace the whole world.
Down in the street below shouted the poor lads, as they
saw the sparks fly from the pitch garlands; I thought
upon my own poor childhood, when I also had played
like them, and now stood, as if at home, in the splendid
ball-room, among the first families of Rome. Thanks and
love to the Mother of God, who had led me so tenderly
forwards in the world, filled my whole soul; I bent my
knees in adoration, and the long thick curtains hid me
from the eyes of all. I was infinitely happy !

The night was over ; yet two days more, and the whole
family left Rome. Habbas Dahdah impressed upon me
every hour what this year was to bring me — the name and
the dignity of an abbe. I studied industriously, scarcely
ever saw Bernardo, or any other acquaintance. Weeks
extended themselves into months, and these brought on
the day in which, after close examination, I was to assume
the black dress and the short silk cloak.

All within me sung victoria. The lofty pines, and
newly sprung-up anemones, the crier in the streets, and the
light cloud which floated through the blue air !

With the short silk cloak of the abbe, I had become a
new and happier person. Francesca had sent me a bill of
a hundred scudi, for my necessities and my pleasure. In
my delight I hastened up the Spanish Steps, threw a
silver scudo to uncle Peppo, and hastened away without
hearing more from him than his " Excellenza, Excellenza
Antonio ! "

It was in the first days of February, the almond-tree
blossomed, the orange-trees became more and more yellow,
the merry carnival was at hand, as if it were a festival to
celebrate my adoption into the rank of abbe ; heralds on
horseback, with trumpets and splendid velvet banners, had
G 3

86 THE IMPROVISATORS.

already announced its approach. Never before had I yet
wholly enjoyed its delights, never rightly understood
what is meant in this country by "letting folly loose ! "

When I was a little child, my mother feared that I
should get hurt in the crowd, and I obtained only momen-
tary glimpses of the whole merriment, as she stood with
me in some safe corner of the street. As a scholar in the
Jesuits school, I had seen it in the same manner, when
permission was given to me, with some of the other scho-
lars, to stand upon the flat roof of the side-buildings of the
Doria Palace; but now to be able by myself to wander
about from one end of the street to the other, to mount
the Capitol, to go to Trastevere, — in short, to go and to be
just wherever I myself wished, was a thing hardly to have
been thought of. How natural was it then that I should
throw myself into the wild stream, and delight myself with
every thing just like a child ! Least of all did I think that
the most serious adventure of my life was now to begin ;
that an occurrence, which had once occupied me so vividly
and so entirely, the lost seedcorn, forgotten and out of
sight, should now show itself again like a green, fragrant
plant, which had wound itself firmly around my own life's
tree.

The carnival was all my thought. I went early in the
morning to the Piazza del Popolo that I might see the
preparations for the races, walked in the evening up and
down the Corso, to notice the gay carnival-dresses which
were hung out, figures with masks and in full costume. I
hired the dress of an advocate, as being one of the mer-
riest characters, and scarcely slept through the whole night
that I might think over and regularly study my part.

The next day seemed to me like a holy festival ; I was
as happy as a child ! All round about in the side-streets
the comfit-sellers set up their booths and tables, and dis-
played their gay wares.* The Corso was swept, and gay
carpets were hung out from all the windows. About three
o'clock, according to the French mode of reckoning time,

* These comfits are small red and white plaster of Paris balls, as large as
peas ; sometimes also they are grains of corn rolled in a paste of plaster of
Paris. During the carnival people throw them at each other — Author's note.

THE IMFROVJSATORE. 87

I went to the Capitol,, to enjoy for the first time the be-
ginning of the festival. The balconies were filled with
foreigners of rank ; the senator sat in purple upon a throne
of velvet ; pretty, little pages, with feathers in their velvet
caps, stood on the left, before the papal Swiss guard.
Then came in a crowd of the most aged Jews, who kneeled
down, bare-headed, before the senator. I knew one of
them, it was Hanoch, the old Jew, whose daughter had so
greatly interested Bernardo.

The old man was the speaker, made a sort of oration, in
which he prayed, according to old usage, for permission for
himself and his people to live yet a year longer in Rome,
in the quarter which was appointed to them j promised to
go once during that time into the Catholic church, and
prayed furthermore that, according to old custom, they
might themselves run through the Corso before the people
of Rome, might pay all the expense of the horse-racing,
together with the offered prize-money, and might provide
the gay velvet banners. The senator gave a gracious nod
(the old custom of setting the foot upon the shoulder of
the supplicant was done away with), rose up amid a
flourish of music in procession, and, descending the steps,
entered his magnificent carriage, in which the pages also
had a place ; and thus was the carnival opened. The great
bell of the Capitol rang for gladness, and I sped home
quickly that I might instantly assume my advocate's dress.
In this it seemed to me that I was quite another person.

With a kind of self-satisfaction I hastened down into
the street, where a throng of masks already saluted me.
They were poor working people, who on these days acted
like the richest nobility ; their whole finery was the most
original, and at the same time the cheapest in the world.
They wore over their ordinary dress a coarse shirt stuck
all over with lemon-peel, which was to represent great
buttons ; a bunch of green salad on their shoulders and
shoes ; a wig of fennel ; and great spectacles cut out of
orange-peel.

I threatened them all with actions at law, showed them
in my book of laws the regulations which forbade such
luxuriousness in dress as theirs, and then, applauded by
G 4

them all, hastened away to the long Corso, which was
changed from a street into a masquerade-hall. From all
the windows, and round all the balconies and boxes erected
for the occasion, were hung bright-coloured carpets. All
the way along, by the house-sides, stood an infinite num-
ber of chairs, " excellent places to see from," as those
declared who had them to let. Carriages followed car-
riages, for the greatest part filled with masks, in two long
rows — the one up, the other down. Some of these had
even their wheels covered with laurel-twigs, the whole
seeming like a moving pleasure house ; and amid these
thronged the merry human crowd. All windows were filled
with spectators. Handsome Roman women, in the dress
of officers, with the moustachio over the delicate mouth,
threw comfits down to their acquaintance. I made a
speech to them, summoning them before the tribunal, be-
cause they threw, not only comfits into the faces, but fire-
glances also into the heart ; they cast down flowers upon
me, as a reward for my speech.

I met with a decked out little old woman, attended by her
cicisbeo ; the way was blocked up to us for a few mo-
ments by a contest among a crowd of Punchinellos, and
the good lady was obliged to listen to my eloquence.

" Signora," said I, " do you call that keeping your
vow ? Is this maintaining the Roman Catholic customs
as you ought to do ? Ah, where now is Lucretia, the
wife of Tarquinius Collatinus? For this do you and
many other women of Rome send out their respectable
husbands in the carnival time, and let them go in exercitia
with the monks of Trastevere. You promise to lead a
quiet, God-fearing life in your house, and your husbands
mortify their flesh in the time of merriment, and pray
and labour night and day within the walls of the con-
vent. Thus you get free play, and flirt about with your
gallants on the Corso and about Festino ! Ay, signora,
I summon you before the tribunal, according to the six-
teenth clause of the twenty-seventh law."

An emphatic blow with her fan on my face was my
answer, the real cause of which was, we may suppose,
that I had, quite innocently, hit upon the truth.

THE 1MPROVISATOKE.

" Are you mad, Antonio ? " whispered her conductor to
me, and both made their escape among sbirri, Greeks.,
and shepherdesses. By those few words I had recognised
him : it was Bernardo. But who could the lady be ?

" Luogi, Luogi I Patroni /" cried those who had chairs
to let. I was bewildered in my thoughts; but yet who
will think on a carnival's day ? A crowd of harlequins,
with little bells on their shoulders and shoes, danced
around me, and a new advocate upon stilts, the height of
a man, strode in above us. As if he recognised a col-
legian in me, he joked about the humble position in which
I stood, and assured them that it was only he alone who
could win any cause, for upon the earth, to which I was
stuck fast, there was no justice — it was to be found only
above ; and then he pointed into the higher, pure air in
which he stood, and stalked on further.

On the Piazza Colonna was a band of music. The
merry doctors and shepherdesses danced joyously around,
even in the midst of the single troop of soldiers, which,
to preserve order, mechanically walked up and down the
street among the carriages and the throng of human
beings. Here I again began a profound speech, but there
came up a writer, and then it was all over with me, for
his attendant, who ran before him with a great bell,
jingled it so before my ears that I could not even hear
my own words ; at that moment also was heard the
cannon-shot, which was the signal that all carriages must
leave the streets, and that the carnival was at an end for
this day.

I obtained a stand upon a wooden scaffolding. Below
me moved the crowd, without allowing itself to be dis-
turbed by the soldiers, who warned them to make way
for the horses, that would soon pass at a wild speed
through the street, where no causeway made a determined
path.

At the end of the street, by the Piazza del Popolo,
the horses were led up to the barrier. They all seemed
half wild. Burning sponges were fastened to their backs,
little rockets behind their ears, and iron points hanging
loose, which in the race spurred them till the blood came,

90 THE IMPROVISATORS.

were secured to their sides. The grooms could scarcely
hold them. The cannon was fired. The rope before
the barrier fell, and now they flew like a storm-wind
past me up the Corso. The tinsel glittered ; their manes
and the gaudy ribands floated in the air j sparks of fire
flew from their hoofs. The whole mass of people cried
after them, and, at the same moment in which they had
passed, streamed out again into the open mid-path, like
the waves, which close again after the ship's keel.

The festival was at an end for the day. I hastened
home to take off my dress, and found in my room Ber-
nardo, who was waiting for me.

" You here ! " I exclaimed ; " and your donna, where,
in all the world, have you left her ? "

" Hush ! " said he, and threatened me jestingly with his
finger ; " do not let that come to an affair of honour between
us ! Yet how could you get the whimsical idea of just
saying what you did say ? — but we will give absolution
and show mercy. You must go with me this evening
to the Theatre Alibert ; the opera of ' Dido ' is given
there to-night. There will be divine music; many
beauties of the first rank will be there ; and, besides,
there is a foreign singer, who takes the principal cha-
racter, and who has set the whole of Naples in fire and
flame. She has a voice, an expression, a carriage, such
as we have no idea of; and then she is beautiful, very
beautiful, they say. You must take a pencil with you,
for, if she answer only half the description I have heard
of her, she will inspire you to write her the most
beautiful sonnet ! I have kept the last bouquet of
violets from the carnival to offer her, in case she should
enchant me ! "

I was willing to accompany him — I wished to drink
up every drop of the merry carnival. It was an important
evening for us both. In my Diario Romano, also, this
3d of February stands doubly underlined. Bernardo had
reasons that it should be so in his.

It was in the Theatre Alibert, the first opera-house in
Rome, that we were to see the new singer as Dido. The
magnificent ceiling, with the hovering Muses ; the curtain,

THE IMPROV1SATOKE. 91

on which is portrayed the whole of Olympus., and the
golden arabesques in the boxes, were then all new. The
entire house, from the floor to the fifth row, was filled ; in
every box burned lights in the lamps, the whole blazed
like a sea of light. Bernardo directed my eyes to every
new beauty who entered her box, and said a thousand
wicked things about the plain ones.

The overture began. It was the exposition-scene of
the piece in music. The wild tempest raged on the sea
and drove ^Eneas on the coast of Lybia. The horror of
the storm died away in pious hymns, which ascended in
triumph, and in the soft tones of the flute a dream-like
feeling stole over me of Dido's awakening love — a feeling
which I myself had not known till then. The hunting-
horns sounded, the storm arose again, and I entered with
the lovers into the secret grotto, where all intoned of love,
the strong tumultuous passion, which burst into a deep
dissonance ; and with this the curtain rose.

uEneas is about to go, to conquer the Hesperian king-
dom for Ascanius, to leave Dido, who received him the
stranger, who sacrificed for him her honour and her hap-
piness. But as yet she knows it not, " but quickly will
the dream vanish," said he, " soon, when the hosts of
Teucer, like the black swarms of ants laden with booty,
advance to the shore."

Now came forth Dido. As soon as she showed herself
upon the boards, a deep silence spread itself over the
house; her whole appearance — her queenly and yet easy,
charming carriage seized upon all — me also; and yet she
was not such an one as I had imagined Dido to be. She
stood there, a delicate, graceful creature, infinitely beauti-
ful and intellectual, as only Raphael can represent woman.
Black as ebony Jay her hair upon the exquisite, arched
forehead ; the dark eye was full of expression. A loud
outbreak of applause was heard ; it was to Beauty, and
Beauty alone, that the homage was given, for as yet she
had sung not a note. I saw plainly a crimson pass over
her brow ; she bowed to the admiring crowd, who now
followed with deep silence her beautiful accentuation of the
recitative.

92 THE IMPROVISATORS.

C( Antonio/' said Bernardo half aloud to me, and seized
my arm, f: it is she ! I must have lost my senses, or it is
she — my flown bird ! Yes, yes, I cannot be wrong ; the
voice also is hers j I remember it only too well !"

" Who do you mean ? " I inquired.

" The Jewish maiden from Ghetto" replied he ; " and
yet it seems impossible, purely impossible, she cannot
really be the same ! "

He was silent, and lost himself in the contemplation of
the wonderfully lovely, sylph-like being. She sang the
happiness of her love ; it was a heart which breathed
forth, in melody, the deep, pure emotion which, upon the
wings of melodious sounds, escapes from the human breast.
A strange sadness seized upon my soul ; it was as if
those tones would call up in me the deepest earthly re-
membrances; I also was about to exclaim, with Bernardo,
" It is she ! — yes, she whom I for these many years had
not thought or dreamed of stood now with wonderful vi-
vidness before me — she, with whom I, as a child, had
preached at Christmas, in the church ara coeli : that sin-
gularly delicate little girl, with the remarkably sweet voice,
who had won the prize from me. I thought of her, and
the more I saw and heard this evening, the more firmly was
it impressed on my mind, " it is she — she, and no other !"

When, afterwards, JEneas announces to her that he will
go — that they are not married — that he knows not of
their nuptial torch, how astoundingly did she express all
that which passed in her soul — astonishment, pain, rage ;
and, when she sang her great aria, it was as if the waves
of the deep had struck against the clouds. How, indeed,
shall I describe the world of melody which she revealed ?
My thoughts sought for an outward image for these tones,
which seemed not to ascend from a human breast, and I
saw a swan breathing out its life in song, whilst it now
cut, with outspread pinions, the wide ethereal space, now
descended into the deep sea, and clave the billows only
again to ascend. A universal burst of acclamation re-
sounded through the house, " Annunciata ! Annunciata !"
cried they ; and she was obliged again, and yet again, to
present herself to the enraptured crowd.

THE IMPROVISATORS. Q3

And yet this aria was not at all equal to the duet in
the second act, in which she prays ^Eneas not immediately
to go, not thus to forsake her — her who for his sake had
disgraced the race of Lybia, the princes of Africa, her
virginity and duty. " 1 sent no ships against Troy ; I
disturbed not the manes of Anchises and his ashes!"
There was a truth, a pain in the whole of her expression,
which filled my eyes with tears ; and the deep silence
which reigned around showed that every heart felt the
same.

JEneas left her, and now she stood for a moment cold
and pale as marble, like a Niobe. But quickly boiled the
blood in her veins: it was no longer Dido — the warm,
the loving Dido — the forsaken wife : it was a Fury.
The beautiful features breathed forth poison and death.
Annunciata knew so completely how to change her whole
expression, to call up the icy shudder of horror, that one
was compelled to breathe and to suffer with her.

Leonardo da Vinci has painted a Medusa's head, which
is in the gallery at Florence. Every one who sees it is
strangely captivated by it, and cannot tear themselves
away. It is as if the deep, out of froth and poison, had
formed the most beautiful shape — as if the foam of the
abyss had fashioned a Medicean Venus. The look, the
expression of the mouth even, breathe forth death. Thus
stood Dido now before us.

We saw the funereal pile which her sister Anna had
erected; the court was hung with black garlands and
night-shade ; in the far distance sped the bark of ^neas
over the agitated sea. Dido stood with the weapons which
he had forgotten ; her song sounded deep and heavy, and
then again ascended into power and strength, like the
lamentation of the fallen angels. The funereal pile was
lighted : her heart broke in melody.

Like a tempest burst forth the applause : the curtain
fell. We were all out of ourselves with admiration of the
glorious actress, her beauty, and her indescribably exqui-
site voice.

ce Annunciata ! Annunciata!" rang from the pit and
all the boxes ; the curtain moved; and she stood there,

94 THE IMPROVISATORS.

bashful and charming, with eyes full of love and gentle-
ness. Flowers rained down around her ; ladies waved
their white pocket-handkerchiefs, and the gentlemen, en-
raptured, repeated her name. The curtain fell, but the
acclamation seemed only the more to increase ; she again
made her appearance, and with her the singer who had
performed the part of JEneas ; but again and again they
shouted, " Annunciata ! " She appeared with the whole
corps who had contributed to her triumph; but yet once
more they stormed forth her name : and for the fourth
time she now came forth, quite alone, and thanked them,
in a few cordial words, for the rich encouragement which
they had given to her efforts. I had written a few lines
in my excitement on a piece of paper, and these, amid
flowers and garlands, flew to her feet.

The curtain did not rise again ; but still again and again
resounded her name ; people could not weary of seeing
her, could not weary of paying her homage. Yet once more
was she obliged to come forth from the side of the curtain ;
pass along before the lamps, and send kisses and thanks
to the exultant crowd. Delight beamed from her eyes ;
there was an indescribable joy in her whole look: it was
certainly the happiest moment of her life. And was it
not also the happiest of mine ? I shared in her delight as
well as in the acclamation of the others ; my eye, my
whole soul imbibed her sweet image j I saw only, thought
only, Annunciata.

The crowd left the theatre ; I was carried away with
the stream which bore onward to the corner where the
carriage of the singer stood ; I was pushed to the wall, for
all wished yet once more to see her. All took off their
hats and shouted her name. I spoke her name also, but
my heart swelled strangely the while. Bernardo had
pressed forward to the carriage, and opened the door for
her. I saw that in a moment the horses would be taken
out, and that the enthusiastic young men would themselves
draw her home. She spoke, and besought of them, with
a trembling voice, not to do so j but only her name in the
most exultant shout sounded through the street. Ber-
nardo mounted on the step, as the carriage was set in

THE 1MPROVISATORE. [)5

motion, in order to compose her, and I seized hold of the
pole, and felt myself as happy as the rest. The whole
thing was too soon over, like a beautiful dream.

It was a happiness to me now to stand beside Ber-
nardo ; he had actually talked with her — had been quite
close to her !

" Now what do you say, Antonio ?" cried he j " is not
your heart in a commotion ? If you do not glow through
marrow and bone, you are not worthy to be called a man !
Don't you now see how you stood in your own light when
I wanted to take you to her ; and would it not have been
worth while to have learned Hebrew, to have sat on the
same bench with such a creature ? Yes, Antonio, how-
ever incomprehensible it may seem, I have not any doubt
but that she is my Jewish maiden ! She it was whom, a
year ago, I saw with old Hancch ; she it was who pre-
sented to me Cyprus wine, and then vanished. I have her
again ; she is here, and like a glorious phoenix ascended
from her nest, that hateful Ghetto !"

" It is impossible, Bernardo," I replied ; " she has also
awoke remembrances in me, which make it impossible that
she can be a Jewess ; most assuredly is she one of the only
blessed church. Had you observed her as closely as I have
done, you would have seen that hers is not a Jewish form ;
that those features bear not the Cain's mark of that un-
happy, despised nation. Her speech itself, her accent, come
not from Jewish lips. O Bernardo, I feel so happy, so
inspired by the world of melody which she has infused into
my soul ! But what did she say ? You have actually
talked with her, stood close by her carriage ; was she right
happy, as happy as she has made us all?"

" You are regularly inspired, Antonio ! " interrupted he ;
fl now melts the ice of the Jesuit school ! What did she
talk about ? Yes, she was frighted, and yet she was proud
that you wild cubs drew her through the streets. She held
her veil tight over her face, and pressed herself into the
corner of the carriage ; I composed her, and said every
thing that my heart could have said to the Queen of Beauty
and Innocence ; but she would not even take my hand
when I would have helped her out ! "

96 THE IMPROVISATORS.

(i But how could you be so bold ! she did not know you.
I should never have ventured on such audacity."

" Yes, you know nothing of the world — nothing of
women. She has observed me, and that always is some-
thing."

I now read him my impromptu to her ; he thought it
was divine, and declared that it must be printed in the
Diario di Roma. We drank together her health. Every
one in the coffee-house talked of her ; every one, like us,
was inexhaustible in her praise. It was late when I parted
from Bernardo ; I hastened home, but sleep was not
to be thought of. It was to me a delight to go over the
whole opera in my own mind ; Annunciata's first appear-
ance ; the aria, the duet, the closing scene, which seized so
strangely on the souls of all. In my rapture I spoke forth
my applause aloud, and called her name. Then in thought
I went through my little poem, wrote it down, and thought
it pretty ; read it a few times to myself ; and, if I must be
candid, my love to her was almost increased by the poem.
Now, many years afterwards, I see it with very different
eyes. I then thought it a little masterpiece. She certainly
took it up, I thought, and now she sits half undressed upon
the soft silken sofa, supports her cheek upon her beautiful
arm, and reads that which I breathed upon paper : —

My soul went with thee, trembling and unshriven,
On that proud track where only Dante stays ;

In music, through the depths and up to heaven,
Thy song has led me and thy seraph-gaze !

What Dante's power from stony words hath wrung,

Deep in my soul hast thou in music sung I

I knew no spiritual world more rich and beautiful than
that in Dante's poem, but this now, it seemed to me, re-
vealed itself in a higher vitality, and with much greater
clearness than before. Her melting song, her look, the
pain and the despair which she had represented, had most
completely been given in the spirit of Dante. She must
think my poem beautiful ! I imagined her thoughts, her
desire to know the author, and I almost fancy that, before
I went to sleep, I was, with all my imaginings about her,
still most occupied with myself and my own little insig-
nificant poem.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 97

CHAPTER XI.

BERNARDO AS DEUS KX MACHINA. LA PRUOVA »' UN OPERA

SERIA. MY FIRST IMPROVISATION. THE LAST DAY OF THE

CARNIVAL.

THE next forenoon I saw nothing of Bernardo ; in vain I
sought for him. Many were the times that I went across
the Piazza Colonna, not to contemplate the pillar of Anto-
ninus, but to see, if it were only the sleeve of Annunciate,
for she lived there. There were visitors with her, the
lucky people ! I heard a piano ; I listened, but no Annun-
ciata sung : a deep bass voice gave forth some tones ;
certainly it was the master of the musical chapel, or one of
the singers in her company — what an enviable lot ! Were
one only in the place of him who acted j^Eneas with her !
thus to look into her eyes, drink in her looks of love, travel
with her from city to city, gaining admiration and renown !
I was quite lost in the thought. Harlequins with shells,
Punchinellos, and magicians, danced around. I had quite
forgotten that it was carnival time, and that it even now
was the hour when the sports began for to-day.

The whole gaudy crowd, the noise and the screams, made
an unpleasant impression upon me. Carriages drove past ;
almost all the drivers were dressed as ladies, but it looked
to me horrible ; those black whiskers under womens' caps ;
the vigorous movements, all were painted to me in frightful
colours, nay, were detestable, as it seemed to me. I did
not feel myself, like as yesterday, given up to mirth. I
was about to depart, and now, for the last time, cast a
glance at the house in which Annunciata lived, when Ber-
nardo rushed from the door towards me, and, laughing,
exclaimed, —

<f Come along, then, and don't stand staring there ! I
will introduce you to Annunciata ; she expects you al-
ready. Look you, is not this a piece of friendship in me ? "

t ' She ! " I stammered, the blood seeming to boil in my
ears, <f she ! don't make any sport of me ! Where will
you take me ?"

B

98 THE IMPROV13ATORE.

" To her, of whom you have sung," he replied — " to
her, about whom you and I and every body are raving —
to the divine Annunciata ! "

And, so saying, he drew me into the door with him.

" But explain to me how you got here yourself — how
you can introduce me here."

" Presently, presently, you shall know all that," replied
he ; ( ' now call up a cheerful face."

" But my dress/' I stammered, and tried hastily to
arrange it. ,

" Oh, you are handsome, my friend ! perfectly charm-
ing ! See now, then, we are at the door."

It opened, and I stood before Annunciata. She wore a
black silk dress of the richest material, which fell in ample
folds around her, whilst its simple, unadorned style showed
the exquisite bust and the sweep of the delicate shoulders
to the greatest advantage ; the black hair was put back
from the noble, lofty forehead, upon which was placed a
black ornament, which seemed to me to be an antique
stone. At some distance from her, and towards the window,
sat an old woman in a dark brown, somewhat worn dress,
whose eyes, and the whole form of whose countenance,
said, at the first glance, that she was a Jewess. I thought
upon Bernardo's assertion, that Annunciata and the beauty
of Ghetto were the same person ; but this was impossible,
said I again in my heart, when I looked at Annunciata.
A gentleman also whom I did not know was in the
room ; he rose, and she rose also, and came towards
me, half smiling, as Bernardo led me in, and said, jest-
ingly, —

" My gracious signora, I have here the honour to present
the poet, my friend, the excellent Abbe Antonio, a favourite
of the Borghese family."

" Signora will forgive," said she ; " but it is in truth
no fault of mine that my acquaintance is thrust upon you,
however desirable yours may be to me ! You have honoured
me with a poem," she continued, and crimsoned ; " your
friend mentioned you as the author, begged to introduce
you to me, when suddenly he saw you in the street, and
said, ' Now you shall see him instantly,' and was gone be-

THE I31PROVISATOUE. 99

fore I could reply or prevent — that is his way; but you
know your friend better than I do."

Bernardo knew how to make a joke of it, and I stam-
mered out a few words about my good fortune, my joy at
being introduced to her.

My cheeks glowed ; she extended her hands to me, and
in my rapture I pressed them to my lips. She introduced
the stranger gentleman to me ; it was the chapel-master,
or company's leader of the band. The old lady, whom she
called her foster-mother, looked gravely, almost sternly, at
Bernardo and me ; but I soon forgot that in Annunciata's
friendship and gay humour.

The chapel-master expressed himself as obliged by my
poem, and, offering me his hand, invited me to write opera
text for him, and to begin at once.

" Do not listen to him/' interrupted Annunciata ; " you
do not know into what misery he will plunge you. Com-
posers think nothing of their victims, and the public still
less. You will this evening, in La Pruova d'un Opera
Seria, see a good picture of a poor author ; and yet this
is not painted sufficiently strongly."

The composer wished to make some exception ; Annun-
ciata smiled, and turned herself to me.

<c You write a piece," she said ; " infuse your whole
soul into its exquisite verse. Unities, characters, all have
been well considered: but now comes the composer; he
has an idea tha.t must be brought in ; yours must be put
aside : here he will have fifes and drums, and you must
dance after them. The prima donna says that she will
not sing unless you bring in an aria for a brilliant exit.
She understands the furiose maestoso, and whether it suc-
ceed or not the author must answer for. The prima tenor
makes the same demands. You must fly from the prima
to the tertia donna, to the bass and tenor, must bow, flatter,
endure all that our humours can inflict ; and that is not a
little."

The chapel-master wished to interrupt her ; but Annun-
ciata noticed it not, and continued : —

" Then comes the director, weighing, measuring, throw-
ing away ; and you must be his most humble servant, even
n 2

in folly and stupidity. The mechanist assures you that
the strength of the theatre will not bear this arrangement,
this decoration ; that they cannot have it new painted :
thus you must alter this and that in the piece, which is
called, in theatrical language, ' to mend/ The theatrical
painter does not permit that this sea-piece should be brought
out in his new decoration : this, like the rest, must also
be mended. Then the signora cannot make a roulade on
the syllable with which one of the verses ends : she will
have one that ends with an a, let it come from where it
may. You must mend yourself, and mend your text;
and if so be that the whole, like a new creation, comes on
the stage, you may have the pleasure of having it hissed,
and the composer exclaim, " Ah, it is that miserable text
which has ruined the whole ! The pinions of my melody
could not sustain the colossus: it must fall \"

Merrily came up the sound of music to us from below.
The carnival maskers came buzzing over the square, and
through the streets. A loud acclamation mingled itself
with the clapping of hands, and called us all to the open
window. To be now so near to Annunciata, to see my
heart's first wish so suddenly fulfilled, made me unspeak-
ably happy ; and the carnival seemed to me as merry as it
did yesterday, when I played my part in it.

About fifty punchinellos had assembled under the win-
dow, and had chosen their king, who mounted a little car,
hung over with gaudy flags and garlands of laurels and
orange-peel, which waved about as if they had been ribands
and lace. The king ascended into the car. They set upon
his head a crown made of gilded and brightly painted eggs,
and gave to him, as a sceptre, a gigantic child's rattle,
covered with macaroons. All danced around him, and he
nodded graciously on all sides ; then they harnessed them-
selves to his carriage, to drag him through the streets. At
that moment his eye fell on Annunciata ; he recognised her,
nodded familiarly to her, and said, as he was drawn along,
" Yesterday, thee ; to-day, me ! Pure Roman blood before
the chariot !"

I saw Annunciata become crimson and step back ; but in
a moment, recovering herself, she bent forward over the

THE IMPROVISATORS.

balcony., and said to him aloud, " Enjoy thy good fortune !
Thou art unworthy of it, like me ! "

They had seen her, heard her words, and her reply. A
' ' vivat ! " resounded through the air, and bouquets of
flowers flew up around her. One of them struck her
shoulder, and flew into my bosom. I pressed it close : it
was to me a treasure which I would not have lost.

Bernardo was indignant at what he called the punchi-
nellos? audacity, and wished to go down immediately and
chastise the fellows j but the chapel-master, as well as the
rest, prevented him, and treated the whole as a jest.

The servant announced the first tenor singer : he brought
with him an abbe and a foreign artist, who desired to be
introduced to Annunciata. The next moment came fresh
visitors, foreign artists, who introduced themselves, and
brought her their homage. We were altogether a large
party. They spoke of the merry Festino the last evening,
at the Theatre Argentina ; of the various artist masks that
represented the celebrated statues Apollo Musagetes, the
Gladiators, and the Discus-throwers. The only one who
took no part in the conversation was the old lady whom 1
took for a Jewess : she sat silent, busied over her stocking,
and nodded very slightly when Annunciata several times
during the conversation turned to her.

Yet how different was Annunciata from the being which
my soul had imagined her, as I saw and heard her the
evening before. In her person she seemed to be a life-
enjoying, almost wilful being : and yet this suited her in-
describably well, and attracted me wonderfully. She knew
how to fascinate me*and every one with her easy, sportive
remarks, and the sensible, witty manner in which she ex-
pressed herself.

Suddenly she looked at her watch, sprang up hastily, and
excused herself, saying that her toilet awaited her ; that
she was that evening to appear in La Pruova d' un Opera
Seria. With a friendly nod of the head she vanished into
a side room.

" How happy you have made me, Bernardo ! " I ex-
claimed aloud to him, when we were scarcely out of the,
house-door. " How lovely she is, lovely as in song and
H 3

102 THE IMPROVISATORS.

acting ! But how,, in all the world, did you get admitted
to her? — how so suddenly make her acquaintance? I
cannot understand it : it all seems to me a dream, even
that I myself have heen near to her ! "

" How did I get admitted ? " replied he ; " Oh, quite
simply ! I considered it my duty as one of the young no-
bility of Rome, and as one of his Holiness's guard of
honour, and as an admirer of all beauty, to go and pay my
respects. Love did not require one-half of these reasons.
It was thus that I introduced myself; and that I could in-
troduce myself equally well as those whom you yourself
saw arrive without announcer or keeper needs no doubt
whatever. When I am in love, I am always interesting ;
and thus you can very well see that I should be very
amusing. We all had become, after the first half-hour, so
well acquainted with each other, that I could very well
bring you in, as soon as I saw you."

" You love her ? " I inquired, " love her, right ho-
nestly ? "

"Yes, more than ever !" exclaimed he; "and what I
told you, of her being the girl who gave me wine at the
old Jew's, I have now no doubt about. She recognised
me, when I stepped before her, — I saw that plainly; even
the old Jew mother, who did not say a word, but only sat
and beat time with her head, and lost her knitting-needle,
is to me a Solomon's seal to the truth of my conjecture.
Yet Annunciata is not a Jewess. It was her dark hair —
her dark eyes — the circumstances and the place where I
saw her first, which misled me. Ycur own picture is
more correct: she is of our faith, and* shall enter into our
Paradise."

In the evening, we were to meet at the theatre. The
crowd was great. In vain I looked for Bernardo ; he was
not to be seen. I found one place : all around me was
thronged ; the heat was heavy and oppressive. My blood
was already beforehand in a strange, feverish agitation ; I
seemed half to have dreamed the last two days' adventures.
No piece could be less calculated to give an equilibrium to
my agitated mind than that which had now begun.

The farce La Pruovu d' un Opera Seria is, as is well

THE IMPROVISATORE. 103

known, the fruit of the most wanton, fantastical humour,
scarcely any connecting thread goes through the whole.
Poet and composer have had no other intention than to
excite laughter, and to give the singers opportunity of
shining. There is here a passionate, whimsical prima
donna, and a composer who plays in the same spirit to-
gether with caprice on caprice of the other theatrical
people, that strange race, which must be managed in their
own way, probably as poison, which can both kill and cure.
The poor poet skips about among them, like a lightly
esteemed victim.

Shouts and garlands of flowers greeted Annunciata. The
humour, the liveliness which she showed, was called the
highest art. I called it nature. It was exactly thus that
she had been at home; and now, when she sung, it was as
if a thousand silver bells were ringing the changes of a
delicious harmony, which infused that gladness into every
heart which beamed from her eyes.

The duet between her and il compositore delta musica,
in which they change parts, she singing that of the man,
and he that of the lady, was a triumph to them both as
performers ; but in particular was every one captivated by
her transitions from the deepest counter-tenor to the
highest soprana. In her light, graceful dancing she re-
sembled Terpsichore upon the Etruscan vase ; every motion
might have been a study for a painter or a sculptor. The
whole graceful animation seemed to me a development of
her own individuality, with which I had to-day become
acquainted. The personation of Dido was to me artistic
study : her " prima donna " this evening was a realisation
of the most complete actuality.

Without having particular relation to the piece, there
are great bravura-arias introduced into it from other
operas. By the archness with which she sang these, all
was evidently natural : it was wilfulness and love of fun
that excited her to these magnificent representations.

At the close of the piece the composer declares that

every thing was excellent, and that now the overture may

begin ; he therefore distributes the music to the actual

orchestra. The prima donna assists him ; the sign is

ii 4

104- THE IMPROVISATORE.

given, and both of them join in with the movSt horrible
ear and heart-rending dissonances, clapping their hands,
and shouting, " Bravo ! bravo ! " in which the public join
them. Laughter almost overpowers the music ; but I was
captivated to my very soul, and felt myself half faint with
exultation.

Annunciata was a wild, wilful child, but most loveable
in her wilfulness. Her song burst forth like the wild
dithyrambics of the bacchantes ; even in gaiety I could
not follow her : her wilfulness was spiritual, beautiful, and
great, and, as I looked at her, I could not but think on
Guido Reni's glorious ceiling-painting of Aurora, where
the Hours dance before the chariot of the Sun. One of
these has a wonderful resemblance to the portrait of Beatrice
Cinci, but, as one must see, in the gayest time of her life.
This expression I found again in Annunciata. Had I
been a sculptor, I should have designed her in marble, and
the world would have called the statue Innocent Joy.

Higher and yet higher, in wild dissonances, stormed the
orchestra ; the composer and prima donna accompanied
them. " Glorious ! " they now exclaimed, (i the overture
is at an end ; let the curtain rise ! " And so it falls, and
the farce was ended ; but, as on the preceding night,
Annunciata must again come forth, and garlands, and
flowers, and poems, with fluttering ribands, flew towards
her.

Several young men of my age, some of whom I knew,
had arranged that night to give her a serenade : I was to
be one of them. It was an age since I had sung.

An hour after the play, when she had arrived at home,
our little band advanced to the Piazza Colonna. The
musicians were stationed under the balcony, where we still
saw light behind the long curtains. My whole soul was in
agitation. I thought only on her. My song mingled
itself fearlessly with the others ; I sang also a solo-aria. J
felt all that which I breathed forth. Every thing in the
world passed away from me. My voice had a power, a
softness which I had never imagined before. My com- '
panions could not restrain a faint bravo, but yet sufficient
to make me attentive to my own song. A wondrous joy

THE IMPROVISATORE. 105

stole into my soul; I felt the god which moved within me,
and, when Annunciata showed herself upon the balcony,
bowed deeply, and thanked us, it seemed to me that it
was alone with reference to me. I heard my voice dis-
tinctly above that of the others, and it seemed like the
soul of the great harmony. I returned home in a
whirl of enthusiasm ; my vain mind dreamed only of
Annunciata's delight in my singing. I had, indeed, as-
tonished myself.

The next day I paid her a visit, and found Bernardo
and several acquaintances with her. She was in raptures
with the delicious tenor voice which she had heard in the
serenade. I crimsoned deeply. One of the persons pre-
sent suggested that I might be the singer ; on which she
drew me to the piano, and desired that I would sing a
duet with her. I stood there like one about to be con-
demned, and assured them that it was impossible to me.
They besought me, and Bernardo scolded because I thus
deprived them of the pleasure of hearing the signora. She
took me by the hand, and I was a captive bird : it mattered
but little that I fluttered my wings, I must sing. The
duet was one with which I was acquainted. Annunciata
struck up and raised her voice. With a tremulous tone I
began my adagio. Her eye rested upon me as if she
would say, " Courage ! courage ! follow me into my world
of melody ! " and I thought and dreamed only on this and
Annunciata. My fear vanished, and I boldly ended the
song. A storm of applause saluted us both, and even the
old silent woman nodded to me kindly.

" My good fellow," whispered Bernardo to me, ei you
have amazed me ! " and then he told them all that I pos-
sessed yet another gift equally glorious — I was an Impro-
visatore also, and that I must delight them by giving them
a proof of it. My whole soul was in excitement. Flat-
tered on account of my singing, and tolerably secure of my
own power, there needed only that Annunciata should
express the wish for me, for the first time, as a youth, to
have boldness enough to improvise.

I seized her guitar ; she gave me the word " Immor-
tality." I rapidly thought over the rich subject, struck a

THE IMFROVISATORE.

few chords, and then began my poem as it was born in my
soul. My genius led me over the sulphur-blue Mediter-
ranean to the wildly fertile valleys of Greece. Athens lay
in ruins ; the wild fig-tree grew above the broken ca-
pitals, and the spirit heaved a sigh ; then onwards to the
days of Pericles, when a rejoicing crowd was in motion
under the proud arches. It was the festival of beauty ;
women, enchanting as Lais, danced with garlands through
the streets, and poets sang aloud that beauty and joy should
never pass away. But now every noble daughter of beauty
is dust, mingled with dust, the forms forgotten which had
enchanted a happy generation : and, whilst my genius wept
over the ruins of Athens, there arose before me from the
earth glorious images, created by the hand of the sculptor,
mighty goddesses slumbering in marble raiment ; and my
genius recognised the daughters of Athens, beautifully
exalted to divinity, which the white marble preserves for
future generations. " Immortality," sang my genius, " is
beauty, but not earthly power and strength," and wafting
itself across the sea to Italy, to the city of the world, it
gazed silently from the remains of the Capitol over ancient
Home. The Tiber whirled along its yellow waters, and,
where Horatius Codes once combated, boats now pass
along, laden with wood and oil, for Ostia. Where Curtius
sprang from the forum into the flaming gulph, the cattle
now lie down in the tall grass. Augustus and Titus ! proud
name's, which now the ruined temple and arch alone com-
memorate ! Rome's eagle, the mighty bird of Jupiter, is
dead in its nest. Rome, where is thy immortality ? There
flashed the eye of the eagle. Excommunication goes forth
over ascending Europe. The overturned throne of Rome
was the chair of St. Peter ; and kings came as barefoot
pilgrims to the holy city — Rome, mistress of the world !
But in the flight of centuries was heard the toll of death —
death to all that the hand can seize upon, that the human
eye can discern ! But can the sword of St. Peter really
rust? The eagle flies forth from the east to the west.
Can the power of the Church decline ? Can the impossible
happen ? Rome still stands proudly in her ruins with the
gods of antiquity and her holy pictures which rule the

THE IMPROVISATORS. 107

world by eternal art. To thy mount, O Rome ! will the
sons of Europe come as pilgrims for ever ; from the east
and from the west, from the cold north will they come
hither, and in their hearts acknowledge — "Rome, thy
power is immortal !"

The most vehement applause saluted me as I concluded
this stanza. Annunciata alone moved not a hand, but,
silent and beautiful as an image of Venus, she looked into
my eyes with a confiding glance, the silent language of a
full heart, and again words flowed from my lips in easy
verses, the offspring of the moment's inspiration.

From the great theatre of the world, I went to a more
confined scene, and described the fair artiste, who, with
her acting and her singing, attracted to her all hearts. An-
nunciata cast down her eyes — for it was she of whom I
thought — she, who could not but be recognised in the
description which I gave. " And," continued I, " when
the last tone has died away, the curtain fallen, and even
the roar of applause is over, then also her beautiful labour
is dead, and, as a beautiful corpse, lies in the bosom
of the spectators. But a poet's heart is like the grave of
the Madonna ; all becomes flowers and odour ; the dead
ascend from it more beautiful, and his mighty song intones
for her — ' Immortality !'"

My eye rested on Annunciata ; my thoughts had found
words • I bowed low, and all surrounded me with thanks
and flattering words.

" You have given me the sincerest pleasure," said An-
nunciata, and looked confidingly into my eyes. I ventured
to kiss her hand.

My poetic power had excited in her a higher interest for
me. She discovered already that which I myself perceived
only afterwards, that my love for her had misled me in
placing her art, and she who exercised it, within the range
of immortality, which it could never reach. Dramatic art
is like a rainbow, a heavenly splendour, a bridge between
heaven and earth ; it is admired, and then vanishes with
all its colours.

I visited her daily. The few carnival-days were over,
flown like a dream ; but I enjoyed them thoroughly, for

T08 THE IMPROVISATORS.

with Anmmciata I drank in large draughts of life-enjoy-
ment, such as I never had known before.

" You are really beginning to be a man ! " said Ber-
nardo, ' ' a man like the rest of us, and yet you have only
sipped of the cup. I dare swear now that you never
gave a girl a kiss — never rested your head on her shoulder !
Suppose now that Annunciata loved you ? "

1 ' What are you thinking of ? " I replied, half angry ;
and the blood burned in my cheeks, — " Annunciata, that
glorious woman that stands so high above me !"

" Yes, my friend, high or low, she is a woman, and you
are a poet, of whose mutual relationship no one can form a
judgment. If the poet have the first place in a heart, he
is possessed also of the key which can lock the beloved in."

" It is admiration for her which fills my soul ; I
worship her loveliness, her understanding, and the art of
which she is a votary. Love her ? the thought has never
entered my mind."

" How grave and solemn ! " interrupted Bernardo, laugh-
ing. " You are not in love ! no, that is true indeed. You
are one of those intellectual amphibious creatures that one
cannot tell whether they rightly belong to the living or the
dream-world — you are not in love, not at least in the same
way as I am, not in the same way as every body else —
you say so yourself, and I will credit you ; but still you
may be so in your own particular way. You should not
let your blood mount to your cheeks when she speaks to you,
should not cast those significant fiery glances at her. I
counsel you thus for her sake. What do you think others
must think of it ? But, in the meantime, she goes away
the day after to-morrow, and who knows whether she may
come back again after Easter, as she has promised."

For five long weeks Annunciata was about to leave us.
She was engaged for the theatre at Florence, and the
journey was fixed for the first day in Lent.

" Then she will have a new troop of adorers ! " said
Bernardo. " The old ones will be soon forgotten ; yes,
even your beautiful improvisation, for the sake of which
she casts such loving looks at you, that one is regularly
shocked. But he is a fool who thinks only of one woman !

THE IMPROVISATORE. 109

They are all ours! — the field is full of flowers ; one can
gather every where."

In the evening we were together at the theatre : it was
the last time of Annunciata's appearance before her
journey. We saw her again as Dido, and in acting and
singing she stood as high as at the first time: higher she
could not be, it was the perfection of art. She was again
to me the pure ideal which I had that evening conceived.
The gay humour, the playful petulance, which she had
shown in the farcical opera, and even in life, seemed to
me a gaudy world-dress which she put on. It became her
very well : but in Dido she exhibited her whole soul, her
peculiar and spiritual identity. Rapture and applause
saluted her ; greater it could hardly have been when the
enthusiastic Roman people greeted Caesar and Titus.

With the honest thanks of an agitated heart she spoke
her farewell to us all, and promised soon to return.
" Bravo !" resounded from the overflowing house. Again
and again they demanded to see her; and, in triumph, as at
the first time, they drew her carriage through the streets ;
I was among the first of them ! Bernardo shouted as
enthusiastically as I, as we took hold on the carriage,
in which Annunciata smiled, happy as a noble heart
could be.

The next day was the last of the carnival, and the last
which Annunciata had now to spend in Rome. I went to
pay my farewell visit. She was very much affected at the
homage which had been paid to her talent, and delighted
herself in the thought of returning here after Easter,
although Florence, with its beautiful country, and its
glorious picture-gallery, was to her a beloved place of
abode. In a few words she gave me so vivid a picture of
the city and its neighbourhood, that I distinctly saw the
whole — the wooded Apennines scattered over with villas;
the Piazza del gran Duca, and all the old magnificent
palaces.

" I shall see again the glorious gallery," said she,
" where my love for sculpture was first excited, and
where I perceived first the greatness of the human soul,
which was able, like a Prometheus, to breathe life into the

110 THE IMPUOVISATORE.

dead ! Would that I at this moment could lead you into
one of the rooms, the least of them all, but to me the
dearest, the very remembrance of which makes me happy.
In that little octagon room hang only select master-pieces;
but all fade before one living marble figure, the Medicean
Venus ! Never did I see such a living expression in
stone. The marble eye, otherwise without the power of
sight, lives here ! The artist has so formed it, " that by
the help of light it seems to see, to look into our very
souls : it is the goddess herself, born of the ocean-foam,
that stands before us. Upon the wall behind the statue
hang two magnificent pictures of Venus, by Titian : they
are, in life and colouring, the goddess of beauty, but only
earthly beauty — rich, luxurious beauty ; the marble
goddess is heavenly ! — Raphael's Fornarina, and the
superhuman Madonnas, excite my mind and my heart ;
but I always turn back again to the Venus : it stands
before me, not like an image, but full of light and life,
looking into my soul with her marble eyes ! I know no
statue, no group, which speaks to me thus ; no, not even
the Laocoon, although the marble seems to sigh with pain.
The Apollo of the Vatican, which you certainly know,
alone seems to me a worthy companion-piece. The power
and intellectual greatness which the sculptor has given to
the poet-god is exhibited with more feminine nobility in
the goddess of beauty."

" I know the glorious statue in plaster of Paris,"
replied I ; " I have seen good copies in paste."

" But nothing can be more imperfect," she said ; l( the
dead plaster gives a dead expression. The marble gives
life and soul ; in it the stone becomes flesh ; it is as if the
blood flowed beneath the fine skin. I would that you
were going with me to Florence, that you might admire
and worship. I would be your guide there as you shall
be mine in Rome, if I come back again."

I bowed low, and felt happy and flattered by her wish.

1 ' We shall see you next after Easter ? "

" Yes, at the illumination of St. Peter's and the giron-
dola," replied she. " In the meantime think kindly on
me, as I, in the gallery at Florence, will often remember

THE IMPROVISATORS. Ill

you, and wish that you were there ; and looking at that
treasure ! — That is always the way with me whenever I
see any thing beautiful — I long for my friends, and wish
that they were with me to participate in rny pleasure.
That is my kind of home-sickness."

She extended to me her hand, which I kissed, and
ventured to say, half in jest, e( Will you convey my kiss
to the Medicean Venus ? "

"Then it does not belong to me?" said Annunciata.
"Well, I will honestly take care of it;" and with this
she nodded to me most kindly, and thanked me for the
happy hours which I had caused her with my singing and
my improvisation.

" We shall see one another again," said she ; and, like
a dreamer, I left the room.

Outside the door I met the old lady, who saluted me
more kindly than common ; and in my excited state of
mind I kissed her hand. She slapped me gently on the
shoulder, and I heard her say, " He is a good creature !"
I was now in the street, happy in the friendship of
Annunciata, and enraptured with her mind and her
beauty.

I felt myself in the right humour to enjoy this last day
of the carnival. I could not imagine to myself that
Annunciata was about to leave Rome, our leave-taking
had seemed so easy ; I could not but think that our
meeting again must be on the morrow. All unmasked as
I was, I took the liveliest part in the combat of comfits.
Every chair through the whole length of the streets was
occupied ; every balcony and window was full of people ;
carriages drove up and down, and the gay throng of
human beings, like a billowy stream, moved among them.
In order to breathe a little more freely, I was obliged to
spring boldly before one of the carriages, the little room
between them being the only space in which one could in
any measure freely move oneself. Music sounded, merry
masks were singing, and behind one of the carriages II
Capitano was trumpeting forth his proud deeds on land
and water. Wanton boys, on wooden horses, whose hands
and hind-parts were only properly visible, whilst the rest

112 THE IMPROVISATORS.

was covered with a bright carpet, which concealed the two
legs of the rider, which personated the four legs of the
horse, thrust themselves into the narrow space between
the carriages, and thus increased the confusion. I could
neither get forward nor backward from the spot : the foam
of the horses behind me flew about my ears. In this
press I sprang up behind one of the carriages, in which
sat two masks, who were, as it seemed, a fat old gentleman
in dressing-gown and night-cap, and a pretty flower-girl.
She had instantly seen that it was not out of lawlessness,
but rather from fear, and therefore she patted me with
her hand, and offered me two comfits for refreshment.
The old gentleman, on the contrary, threw a whole basket-
ful into my face, and, as the space behind me was now
somewhat more free, the flower-girl did the same ; so that
I, not having any weapons of the same kind, quite pow-
dered over from top to toe, was compelled to make a hasty
retreat. Two harlequins brushed me merrily with their
maces ; but when the carriage again, in its turn, passed
me, the same tempest began anew. I therefore determined
to defend myself, in return, with comfits ; but the cannon
was fired, the carriages were forced into the narrow side-
streets, to give place to the horse-racing, and my two
masks disappeared from my sight.

They seemed to know me. Who could they be ? I
had not seen Bernardo in the Corso through the whole day.
A thought occurred to me that the old gentleman in the
dressing-gown and night-cap might be he, and the pretty
shepherdess his so-called " tame bird." Very gladly would
I have seen her face. I had taken my place on a chair
close to the corner ; the cannon-shot was soon heard, and
the horses rushed through the Corso up towards the Vene-
tian Square. The human mass immediately filled the
street again behind them, and I was just about to dismount,
when a fearful cry resounded " Cavallo!"

One of the horses, the first which reached the goal, had
not been secured, and had now, in a moment, turned itself
about, and was pursuing its way back. When one thinks
upon the thick crowd, and the security with which every
one went forward after the race was at an end, one may

THE IMPROVISATOBE. 113

easily imagine the misfortune that was likely to occur. The
remembrance of my mother's death passed through me like
a flash of lightning : it was as if I felt the frightful moment
in which the wild horses went over us. My eyes stared
immoveably forward. The crowd fled to the sides as if by
a magical stroke — it seemed as if they had shrunk into
the i selves. I saw the horse snorting and with bleeding
sides and wildly flying mane, pass by ; I saw the sparks
which flew from his hoofs, and at once., as if struck witli a
shot, drop dead to the earth. Anxiously inquired every
one from his neighbour whether some misfortune had not
happened. But the Madonna had held a protecting hand
over her people ; nobody was hurt, and the danger so hap-
pily past made the public mind still gayer, and much
wilder than ever.

A sign was made, which announced that all order in
driving was now at an end, and the glorious moccolo, the
splendid finale of the carnival, had begun. The carriages
now drove one amongst another; the confusion and the
tumult became still greater ; the darkness increased every
minute, and every one lighted his little candle, some whole
bundles of them. In every window lights were placed ;
houses and carriages, in the quiet, glorious evening, looked
as if scattered over with these glimmering stars. Paper-
lanterns, and pyramids of light, swung upon tall poles across
the street. Every one was endeavouring to protect his own
light, and to extinguish his neighbour's ; whilst the cry,
" Sia ammazato chi non porta moccolo ! " sounded forth
with increasing wildness.

In vain I tried to defend mine : it was blown out every
moment. I threw it away, and compelled every body to
do the same. The ladies by the sides of the houses stuck
their light behind them through the cellar windows, and
cried out to me, laughing, " Senza moccolo" They fancied
their own lights safe, but the children from within climbed
up to the windows, and blew them out. Little paper bal-
loons and lighted lamps came waving down from the upper
windows, where people sat with hundreds of little burning
lights, which they held on long canes over the street, crying
all the time, " Let every one perish who does not carry a
i

114 THE IMPROVISATORS.

taper!" whilst fresh figures, in the meantime, clambered
up the spouts with their pocket-handkerchiefs fastened on
long sticks, with which to put out every light, holding up
theirs aloft the while, and exclaiming, " Senza moccolo !"
A stranger who has never seen it can form no idea of the
deafening noise, the tumult and the throng. The air is
thick and warm with the mass of human beings and the
burning lights.

Suddenly, when some of the carriages had drawn off
into one of the dark cross streets, I saw close before me my
two masks. The lights of the cavalier in the dressing-
gown were extinguished, but the young flower-girl held a
bouquet of burning tapers aloft on a cane four or five ells
long. She laughed aloud for joy that nobody could reach
it with their handkerchiefs, and the man in the dressing-
gown overwhelmed every body with comfits who ventured
to approach them. I would not allow myself to be terri-
fied ; in a moment I had mounted on the back of the
carriage, and seized hold of the cane, although I heard a
beseeching " No," and her companion assailed me with
gypsum bullets, and that not sparingly. I seized fast hold
of the cane, in order to extinguish the lights ; the cane
broke in my hand, and the brilliant bouquet fell to the
earth amid the shouting of the people.

" Fie, Antonio ! " cried the flower-girl. It pierced me
through bone and marrow ; for it was Annunciata's voice.
She threw all her comfits at my face, and the basket into
the bargain. In my astonishment I leaped down, and the
carriage rolled on. I saw, however, a nosegay of flowers
thrown to me as a token of reconciliation. I caught at it
in the air, and would have followed them, but it was im-
possible to slip out ; for the carriages were all entangled,
and there was the utmost confusion, although some turned
to one side and some to the other. At length I escaped
into a side-street ; but when I was able to breathe more
freely I perceived a heavy weight at my heart. " With
whom was Annunciata driving?"

That she wished to enjoy this, the last day of the car-
nival, seemed to me very natural ; but the gentleman in
the dressing-gown? Ah, yes, my first conjecture was

THE IMPROVISATORE. 115

certainly correct : it must be Bernardo ! I determined to
convince myself of it. I ran in haste through the cross-
streets, and came to the Piazza Colonna, where Annunciata
lived, and posted myself by the door to await her arrival.
Before long the carriage drove up, and, as if I had been
the servant of the house, I sprang towards it. Annunciata
skipped out without seeming to notice me. Now came the
gentleman in the dressing-gown : he descended too slowly
to be Bernardo. "Thanks, my friend!" said he; and I
heard that it was the old lady-friend, and saw, by her feet
and her brown gown, which hung below the dressing-
gown, as she stepped out, how much I had erred.in my
conjecture.

" Felicissima nolle, Signora ! " cried I aloud in my joy.

Annunciata laughed, and said jestingly that I was a bad
man, and that she therefore would set off to Florence ; but
her hand pressed mine.

Happy, and with a light heart, I left her, and shouted
aloud the wild cry, " Perish every one who carries not a
taper ! " and all the while had not one myself. I thought
in the meantime only on her and the good old woman, who
had donned the dressing-gown and night-cap in order to
enjoy the carnival fun, for which she did not seem created.
And how beautiful and natural it was of Annunciata, that
she had not gone driving about with strangers, and had not
given a seat in her carriage to Bernardo, nor even to the
chapel-master ! That I, the moment I recognised her, had
become jealous of the night-cap, was a something which I
would not acknowledge. Happy and merry as I was, I
resolved to spend in pleasure the few hours which yet
remained before the carnival had passed like a dream.

I went into the Fes tin o. The whole theatre was deco-
rated with garlands of lamps and lights — all the boxes
were filled with masks, and strangers without masks. From
the pit a high broad step led to the stage, covering in the
narrow orchestra, and was decorated with drapery and
garlands for a ball-room. Two orchestras played alter-
nately. A crowd of quaqueri and vetturini masks danced
a merry ring-dance around the Bacchus and Ariadne. They
drew me into their circle; and, in the gladness of my
i 2

116 THE IMPROV1SATORE.

heart, I made my first dancing-essay, and found it so de-
lightful that it did not remain the last. No ! for as,
somewhat late at night, I hastened home, I danced about
yet once more with the merry masks, and cried with them,
" The happiest night after the most beautiful carnival ! "

My sleep was only short. I thought in the lovely
morning-hour on Annunciata, who now, perhaps, a?
moment left Rome — thought upon the merry carnival-
days, which seemed to have created a new life for ine, and
which now, with all their exultation and tumult, were
vanished for ever. I had no rest — I must out into the
free air. Every thing was all at dnce changed — all doors
and shops were closed — bnt few people were in the
streets — and in the Corso, where yesterday one could
hardly move for the joyous throng, there were now to be
seen only a few slaves in their white dresses with the broad
blue stripes, who swept away the comfits, which lay upon
the streets like hail, while a miserable horse with its hay-
bundle, from which it kept eating, hanging by its side,
drew along the little car into which the litter of the street
was thrown. A vetturino drew up at a house, then
fastened at the top of his coach trunks and bandboxes,
drew a great mat over the whole, and then hooked the iron
chain fast around the many boxes that were put behind.
From one of the side-streets came another similarly laden
coach. All went hence. They went to Naples or Florence.
Rome would be as if dead for five long weeks, from Ash-
Wednesday till Easter.

CHAPTER XII.

LENT. — ALLEGRl's MISERERE IN THE SIXTINE CHAPEL. VISIT TO

BERNARDO. AN»UNCIATA.

STILL and deathlike slid on the weary day. In thought
I recalled and revived the spectacle of the carnival, and the
great adventure of my own life, in which Annunciata

THE I3IPROVISATORE. 117

played the chief part. And day as it succeeded to day
brought with it again this uniformity and this gravelike
stillness. I was conscious of an emptiness which my
books could not fill. Bernardo had formerly been every
thing to me ; now it was as if there lay a gulf between us.
I felt myself constrained in his presence, and it became
more and more clear to me that Annunciata alone occupied
me.

For some moments I was happy in this consciousness ;
but there came also days and nights in which I thought on
Bernardo, who had loved her before I had done so. He,
indeed, it was also who had introduced me to her. I had
assured him that it was admiration, and nothing more,
which I felt for her — him, my only friend — him, whom
I had so often assured of my heart's fidelity towards him.
I was false and unjust. There burned in my heart the fire
of remorse, but still my thoughts could not tear themselves
from Annunciata. Every recollection of her, of my most
happy hours spent with her, sunk me into the deepest
melancholy. Thus contemplate we the smiling image,
beautiful as life, of the beloved dead ; and the more lifelike,
the more kindly it smiles, the stronger is the melancholy
which seizes us. The great struggle of life, of which I
had so often been told at school, and which I had fancied
was nothing more than the difficulties of a task, or the ill-
humour or unreasonableness of a teacher, I now, for the
first time, began to feel. If I were to overcome this
passion which had awoke within me, would not my former
peace certainly return ? To what, also, could this love
tend ? Annunciata stood high in her art ; yet the world
would condemn me if I forsook my calling to follow her.
The Madonna, too, would be angry ; for I had been born
and brought up as her servant. Bernardo would never
forgive me ; and I did not know, either, whether Annun-
ciata loved me. That was at the bottom the bitterest
thought to me. In vain I cast myself, in the church,
before the image of the Madonna ; in vain I besought her
to strengthen my soul in my great struggle, for even here
my sin was increased — the Madonna was to me like An-
nunciata. It seemed to me that the countenance of every
i 3

118 THE IMPROVISATORS.

beautiful woman wore that intellectual expression which
existed in that of Annunciata. No ; I will rend these
feelings out of my soul ! I will never again see her !

I now fully comprehended what I never "could under-
stand before — why people felt impelled to torture the
body, that by the pain of the flesh they might conquer in
the spiritual combat. My burning lips kissed the cold
marble feet of the Madonna, and for the moment peace
returned to my soul. I thought upon my childhood,
when my dear mother yet lived j how happy I had then
been, and what a many delights even this dead time before
Easter had brought me.

And all, indeed, was just the same as then. In the
corners and the squares stood, as then, the little green huts
of leaves, ornamented with gold and silver stars ; and all
round still hung the beautiful shields like signs, with
their verses, which told that delicious dishes for Lent were
here to be obtained. Every evening they lighted the gay-
coloured paper lamps under the green boughs. How had
I, as a child, delighted myself with these things ! how
happy had 1 been in the splendid booth of the bacon
dealer, which in Lent glittered like a world of fancy!
The pretty angels of butter danced in a temple, of which
sausages, wreathed with silver, formed the pillars, and a Par-
mesan cheese the cupola ! My first poem, to be sure, had
been about all this magnificence ; and the bacon dealer's
lady had called it a Divina Commedia di Dante I Then I
had heard not Annunciata, but neither did I know any
singer. Would that I could forget Annunciata !

I went with the procession to the seven holy churches
of Rome, mingled my song with those of the pilgrims, and
my emotions were deep and sincere. But one day
Bernardo whispered into my ear, with demon-like mirth,
"The merry lawyer on the Corso — the bold improvisatore,
with penitence in his eyes, and ashes on his cheeks ! Ay,
how well you can do it all ! how you understand every
part ! I cannot imitate you here, Antonio \" There was a
jeer, and yet, at the same time, an apparent truth in his
words, which wounded me deeply.

The last week of Lent was come, and strangers streamed

THE IMPROVISATORE. 119

back towards Rome. Carriage after carriage rolled in
through the Porta del Popolo and the Porta del Giovanni.
On Wednesday afternoon began the Miserere in the Sixtine
chapel. My soul longed for music ; in the world of
melody I could find sympathy and consolation. The
throng was great, even within the chapel — the foremost
division was already filled with ladies. Magnificent boxes,
hung with velvet and golden draperies, for royal person-
ages and foreigners from various courts, were here erected
so high, that they looked out beyond the richly carved
railing which separated the ladies from the interior of the
chapel. The papal Swiss guards stood in their bright
festal array. The officers wore light armour, and in their
helmets a waving plume : this was particularly becoming
to Bernardo, who was greeted by the handsome young
ladies with whom he was acquainted.

I obtained a seat immediately within the barrier, not far
from the place where the papal singers were stationed.
Several English people sat behind me. I had seen them
during the carnival, in their gaudy masquerade dresses :
here they wore the same. They wished to pass themselves
off for officers, even boys of ten years old. They all wore
the most expensive uniforms, of the most showy and ill-
matched colours. As, for example, one wore a light blue
coat, embroidered with silver, gold upon the slippers, and
a sort of turban with feathers and pearls. But this was not
any thing new at the festivals in Rome, where a uniform
obtained for its wearer a better seat. The people who
were near smiled at it, but it did not occupy me long.

The old cardinals entered in their magnificent violet-
coloured velvet cloaks, with their white ermine capes ; and
seated themselves side by side, in a great half-circle, within
the barrier, whilst the priests who had carried their trains
seated themselves at their feet. By the little side-door of
the altar the holy father now entered in his purple mantle
and silver tiara. He ascended his throne. Bishops swung
the vessels of incense around him, whilst young priests, in
scarlet vestments, knelt, with lighted torches in their hands,
before him and the high altar.

120 THE IMPROVISATORS.

The reading of the lessons began.* But it was impos-
sible to keep the eyes fixed on the lifeless letters of the
Missal — they raised themselves, with the thoughts, to the
vast universe which Michael Angelo has breathed forth in
colours upon the ceiling and the walls. I contemplated
his mighty sybils and wondrously glorious prophets, every
one of them a subject for a painting. My eyes drank in
the magnificent processions, the beautiful groups of angels ;
they were not to me painted pictures, all stood living before
me. The rich tree of knowledge, from which Eve gave
the fruit to Adam; the Almighty God, who floated over
the waters, not borne up by angels, as the older masters had
represented him — no, the company of angels rested upon
him and his fluttering garments. It is true I had seen
these pictures before, but never as now had they seized
upon me. My excited state of mind, the crowd of people,
perhaps even the lyric of my thoughts, made me wonder-
fully alive to poetical impressions; and many a poet's
heart has felt as mine did !

The bold foreshortenings, the determinate force with
which every figure steps forward, is amazing, and carries
one quite away ! It is a spiritual Sermon on the Mount,
in colour and form. Like Raphael, we stand in astonish-
ment before the power of Michael Angelo. Every prophet
is a Moses like that which he formed in marble. What
giant forms are those which seize upon our eye and our
thoughts as we enter ! But, when intoxicated with this
view, let us turn our eyes to the back-ground of the chapel,
whose whole wall is a high altar of art and thought. The
great chaotic picture, from the floor to the roof, shows
itself there like a jewel, of which all the rest is only the
setting. We see there the LAST JUDGMENT.

Christ stands in judgment upon the clouds, and the
apostles and his mother stretch forth their hands beseech-
ingly for the poor human race. The dead raise the grave-
stones under which they have lain ; blessed spirits float
upwards, adoring to God, whilst the abyss seizes its victims.

* Before'the commencement of the Miserere, fifteen long lessons are read ;
and, at the close of each one, a light in the grand candelabra is extinguished,
there being a light for every lesson — Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATOUE. 121

Here one of the ascending spirits seeks to save his con-
demned brother, whom the abyss already embraces in its
snaky folds. The children of despair strike their clenched
fists upon their brows, and sink into the depths ! In bold
foreshortening, float and tumble whole legions between
heaven and earth. The sympathy of the angels ; the ex-
pression of lovers who meet ; the child that, at the sound
of the trumpet, clings to the mother's breast, is so natural
and beautiful, that one believes oneself to be one among
those who are waiting for judgment. Michael Angelo has
expressed in colours what Dante saw and has sung to the
generations of the earth.

The descending sun, at that moment, threw his last
beams in through the uppermost window. Christ, and
the blessed around him, were strongly lighted up ; whilst
the lower part, where the dead arose, and the demons thrust
their boat, laden with damned from shore, were almost in
darkness.

Just as the sun went down the last lesson was ended,
and the last light which now remained was- extinguished,
and the whole picture-world vanished in the gloom from
before me ; but, in that same moment, burst forth music
and singing. That which colour had bodily revealed arose
now in sound : the day of judgment, with its despair and
its exultation, resounded above us.

The father of the church, stripped of his papal pomp,
stood before the altar and prayed to the holy cross ; and
upon the wings of the trumpet resounded the trembling
quire, " Populus meus, quid fed tibi?" Soft angel tones
rose above the deep song, tones which ascended not from a
human breast : it was not a man's nor a woman's : it be-
longed to the world of spirits : it was like the weeping of
angels dissolved in melody.

It this world of harmony my soul imbibed strength and
the fulness of life. I felt myself joyful and strong, as I
had not been for a long time. Annunciata, Bernardo, all
my love, passed before my thought. I loved, in this mo-
ment, as blessed spirits may love. The peace which I had
sought in prayer, but had not found, flowed now, with
these tones, into my heart.

When the Miserere was ended, and the people all had
gone away, I was sitting with Bernardo in his room. I
offered him my hand in sincerity, spoke all that my ex-
cited ^oul dictated. My lips became eloquent. Allegri's
Miserere, our friendship, all the adventures of rny singular
life, furnished material. I told him how morally strong
the music had made me., how heavy my heart had been
previously — my sufferings, anxiety, and melancholy, dur-
ing the whole of Lent ; yet, without confessing how great
a share he and Annunciata had had in the whole : this
was the only little fold of my heart which I did not unveil
to him. He laughed at me, and said, that I was a poor
sort of a man ; that the shepherd-life, with Domenica and
the Signora, all that woman's education, and, last of all,
the Jesuit school, had quite been the ruin of me; that my
hot Italian blood had been thinned with goat's milk; that
my Trappist-hermit life had made me sick; that it was
necessary for me to have a little tame bird, which would
sing me out of my dream-world; that I ought to be a
man, like other folks, and then I should find myself sound
both body and soul.

"We are very different, Bernardo," said I; "and yet
my heart is wonderfully attached to you ; at times I wish
that we could be always together."

" Then it would not go well with our friendship," replied
he ; " no, then it would be all over with it before we were
aware. Friendship is like love, all the stronger for separa-
tion. I think sometimes how wearisome it must be in
reality to be married. For ever and for ever to see one
another, and that in the smallest things. Most married
folks are disgusting to one another ; it is a sort of pro-
priety, a species of good nature, which holds them together
in the long-run. I feel very well, in myself, that if my
heart glows ever so fiercely, and hers whom I love burns
the same, yet would these flames, if they met, be extin-
guished. Love is desire, and desire dies when gratified."

" But if, now, your wife were beautiful and discreet
as "

" As Annunciata," said he, seeing that I hesitated for
the name which I wanted. " Yes, Antonio, I would look

THE IMPROVISATORS. 123

at the beautiful rose as long as it were fresh ; and when
the leaves withered, and the fragrance was lost, God knows
what I then should have a fancy for. At this moment,
however, I have a very curious one, and I have felt some-
thing like it before. I have a wish to see how red your
blood is, Antonio ! But I am a reasonable man — you are
my friend, my honest friend ; we will not fight, even if we
cross each other in the same love adventure." And with
this he laughed loud, pressed me violently to his breast,
and said, half-jestingly, t( I will make over to you my
tame bird; it begins to be sensitive, and will certainly
please you. Go with me this evening ; confidential friends
need not hide any thing from one another ; we will have a
merry evening. On Sunday the holy father will give us
all his blessing."

" I shall not go with you," I replied.

" You are a coward, Antonio," said he ; e< do not let the
goat's milk entirely subject your blood. Your eye can burn
like mine; it can truly burn; I have seen it. Your suffer-
ings, your anxiety, your penitence in Lent — yes, shall I
openly tell you the reason of them ? I know it very well,
Antonio ; you cannot hide it from me. Now, then, clasp
Beauty to your heart — only you have not the courage —
you are a coward, or "

li Your conversation, Bernardo," replied I, " offends
me."

" But you must endure it, though," he answered. At
these words the blood mounted into my cheeks, whilst my
eyes filled with tears.

" Can you thus sport with my devotion for you ? " I
cried. " Do you fancy that I have come between you and
Annunciata? — fancy that she has regarded me with more
kindness than yourself?"

" Oh, no ! " interrupted he ; " you know very well that
I have not such a vivid fancy. But do not let her come
into our conversation. Arid with regard to your devotion
to me, of which you are always talking, I do not under-
stand it. We give one another the hand ; we are friends,
reasonable friends ; but your notions are over-strained —
me you must take as I am."

This probably was tbe sting in our conversation — the
part which went to my heart, and, so to say, went into the
blood ; I felt myself wounded, and yet in his hand-pres-
sure, at parting, there was a something cordial.

The next day, which was Green-Thursday, called me to
the church of St. Peter's, into whose magnificent vestibule
the greatness of which has indeed led some strangers to
imagine that it was the whole church, as great a throng
was found as was seen in the streets and across the bridge
of St. Angelo. It was as if the whole of Rome flocked
here to wonder even as much as strangers did at the great-
ness of the church, which seemed more and more to extend
itself to the throng.

Singing resounded above us ; two great choirs, in differ-
ent parts of the nave of the church, replied to each other.
The throng crowded to witness the feet-washing, which
had just begun.* From the barrier behind which the
stranger ladies were seated, one of them nodded kindly to
me. It was Annunciata. She was come — was here in
the church ; my heart beat violently. I stood so near to
her that I could bid her welcome.

She had arrived the day before, but still too late to hear
Allegri's Miserere ; yet she had been present at the Ave
Maria in the church of St. Peter's.

" The extraordinary gloom/' said she, " made all more
imposing than now by daylight. Not a light burned, ex-
cepting the lamps at St. Peter's tomb ; these formed a
wreath of light, and yet not strong enough to illumine the
nearest pillar. All marched around in silence; I, too,
sank down, feeling right vividly how very much can be
comprised in nothing ; what force there lies in a religious
silence."

Her old friend, whom I now first discovered, and who
wore a long veil, nodded kindly. The solemn ceremony
was in the meantime concluded, and they looked in vain
for their servant, who should have attended them to their
carriage. A crowd of young men had become aware of

* On Green-Thursday the pope washes the feet of thirteen priests, old and
young ; they kiss his hand, and he gives to them a bouquet of blue stocks. —
Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 125

Annunciata's presence ; she seemed uneasy, and wished to
go. I ventured to entreat that I might conduct them out
of the church to their carriage. The old lady immediately
took my arm ; hut Annunciata walked beside of us. I had
not courage to offer her my arm ; but when we neared the
door, and were carried along with the crowd, I felt her
arm within mine : it went like fire through my blood.

I found the carriage. When they were seated, Annun-
ciata asked me to dine with them that day. " Only to eat
a meagre dinner," said she, "such as we may enjoy in
Lent."

I was happy ! The old lady, who did not hear well,
understood, however, by the expression of Annur data's
face, that it was an invitation, but imagined that it was to
take a seat with them in the carriage. She, therefore, in a
moment put aside all the shawls and cloaks which lay on
the seat opposite, and extended to me her hand, saying,
" Yes, be so good, Mr. Abbe ! there ir, room enough ! "

That was not Annunciata's meaning : I saw a slight
crimson pass over her cheek ; but I sat directly opposite to
her, and the carriage rolled away.

A delicious little dinner awaited us. Annunciata spoke
of her residence in Florence, and of the festival of to-day ;
inquired from me about Lent in Rome, and how I had
passed the time; a question which I could not answer
quite candidly.

' ' You will certainly see the christening of the Jews on
Easter Day ? " asked I, casting, at the same time, a glance
at the old woman, whom I had quite forgotten.

" She did not hear it ! " replied Annunciata, " and, if
she had you need not have minded. I only go to such
places as she can accompany me to, and for her it would
not be becoming to be present at the festival in the bap-
tismal chapel of Constantine.* Neither is it very interest-
ing to me ; for it so rarely happens that it is from convic-
tion that either Jews or Turks receive baptism. I re-
member, in my childhood, what an unpleasant impression

* Annually, on Easter day, some Jews or Turks are baptized. In the Diario
Romano this day is thus marked ; tifu ilbattcsimo degV Ebrei e Turchi. —
Author's note.

126 THE IMFROVISATOBE.

this whole scene made upon me. I saw a little Jew-boy,
who seemed to be seven years old ; he came forth with the
dirtiest shoes and stockings, with thin, uncombed hair ; and,
in the most painful contrast with this, in a magnificent
white silk dress, which the church had given him. The
parents, filthy as the boy, followed him ; they had sold
his soul for a happiness which they did not know them-
selves ! "

" You saw that as a child here in Rome ? " asked I.

" Yes ! " returned she, crimsoning, " but yet, for all that
I am not a Roman."

" The first time I saw you, and heard you sing," said I,
" it seemed to me that I had known you before. I do
not even know, but I fancy so still ! If we believed in the
transmigration of souls, I could fancy that we both had
been birds, had hopped upon the same twigs, and had
known one another for a very long time. Is there any
kind of recollection in your soul ? nothing which says to
you that we have seen each other before ? "

" Nothing at all ! " replied Annunciata, and looked me
steadfastly in the face.

cc As you have just told me that you were a child in
Rome, and consequently not, as I thought, had passed all
your young years in Spain, a remembrance awoke in my
soul, the same which I felt the first time that you stood
before me as Dido. Have you never, as a child, at Christ-
mas, made a speech before the little Jesus, in the church
Ara Coeli, like other children ? "

" That I have ! " exclaimed she, " and you, Antonio,
were the little boy who drew all attention ? "

" But was supplanted by you ! " returned I.

" It was you, Antonio ! " exclaimed she aloud, seizing
both my hands, and looking into my face with an inde-
scribably gentle expression. The old lady drew her chair
nearer to us, and looked gravely at us. Annunciata then
related the whole to her, and she smiled at cur recognition-
scene.

" How my mother and every body talked about you,"
said I ; " of your delicate, almost spirit-like form, and
your sweet voice ! yes, I was jealous of you, my vanity

THE IMPROVISATORE. 127

could not endure to be cast so wholly in the shade by any
one. How strangely paths in life cross one another ! "

" I remember you very well ! " said she ; (l you had on
a little short jacket, with many white buttons, and these
at that time excited most my interest for you ! "

" You," replied I, " had a beautiful red scarf upon your
breast ; but yet it was not that, but your eyes, your jet-
black hair, which most of all captivated me ! Yes, I
could not but recognise you, you are the same as then,
only the features more developed ; I should have known
them, even under a greater change. I said so immediately
to Bernardo, but he gainsaid me, and thought it must be
quite another "

u Bernardo ! " she exclaimed ; and it seemed to me that
her voice trembled.

te Yes ! " I replied, somewhat confused, " he fancied also
that he knew you, that he had seen you, I should say ; seen
you, and connected in such a way, as did not agree with
my conjecture. Your dark hair, your glance, — yes, you
will not be angry with me, he immediately changed his
opinion ; he fancied at the first moment that you were — "
I hesitated, — " that you were not of the Catholic church,
and thus that I could not have heard you preach in Ara

Cffili."

" That I was, perhaps, of the same faith as my friend
here ? " said Annunciata, indicating the old lady. I nodded
involuntarily, but seized her hand at the same time, and
asked, " Are you angry with me ? "

" Because your friend took me for a Jewish maiden ? "
asked she, smiling ; " you are a strange creature ! "

I felt that our connexion in childhood had made us more
familiar ; every care was forgotten by me, and also every
resolution never to see, never to love her. My soul burned
only for her.

The galleries were closed these two days before Easter ;
Annunciata said how charming it must be, if, at this time,
and quite at one's ease, one could wander through them ;
but that was hardly possible. The wish from her lips was
a command ; I knew the custodian and the porter, all the
dependants who now were returned to the Palazzo Borg-

128 THE IMPROVISATORS.

hese, where was one of the most interesting collections in
Rome, through which I, as a child, had gone with Francesca,
and made acquaintance with every little Love in Francesco
Albani's Four Seasons.

I entreated that I might take her and the old lady there
the following day ; she consented, and I was infinitely
happy.

In my solitude at home I again thought on Bernardo !
no, he loved her not, I consoled myself with thinking ;
"his love is only sensual, not pure and great, like mine !"
Our last conversation seemed to me still more bitter than it
had done before ; I saw only his pride, felt myself very
much offended, and worked myself up into a greater passion
than I had ever done before. His pride had been wounded
by Annunciata's apparently greater kindness towards me
than him. To be sure it was he who introduced me to
her,, but perhaps his intention only was to make fun of me,
and therefore he had expressed astonishment at my singing,
and at my improvisation — he had never dreamed that I
could outshine his handsome person, his free and bold
manner. Now, it had been his intention to deter me from
again visiting her. But a good angel had willed it other-
wise ! her gentleness, her eyes, all had told me that she
loved me, that she had a kindness for me, nay more than a
kindness, for she must have felt that I loved her !

In my joy I pressed hot kisses upon my pillow, but
with this feeling of the happiness of love a bitterness arose
in my heart towards Bernardo. I grew angry with myself
for not having had more character, more warmth, more
gall ; now a hundred excellent answers occurred to me,
which I might have given him when he treated me the last
time like a boy ; every little affront which he had given
now stood livingly before me. For the first time I felt the
blood regularly boil in my veins ; hot anger and the purest
and best emotions, mingled with a hateful bitterness, de-
prived me of sleep. It was not until towards morning that
I slumbered a little, and then awoke stronger and lighter of
heart.

I announced to the custodian that I was about to bring
a foreign lady to see the gallery, and then went to Annun-
ciata. We drove all three to the Palazzo Borghese.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 129

CHAPTER XIII.

THE PICTURE GALLERY. A MORE PRECISE EXPLANATION. — EASTER.

THE TURNING POINT OF MY HISTORY.

IT was to me quite a peculiar feeling to conduct Annun-
ciata to where I had played as a boy — where the signora
had shown to me the pictures, and had amused herself with
my naive inquiries and remarks. I knew every piece, but
Annunciata knew them better than I did ; her observations
were most apposite ; with an accustomed eye, and natural
taste, she detected every beauty. We stood before that
celebrated piece of Gerardo del Notti, Lot and his Daughters.
I praised it for its great effect — Lot's strong countenance,
and the life-enjoying daughter who offered him wine, and
the red evening heaven which shone through the dark
trees.

" It is painted with soul and flame ! " exclaimed she.
" I admire the pencil of this artist, as regards colouring
and expression ; but the subjects which he has chosen do
not please me. I require, even in pictures, a kind of fit-
ness, a noble purity in the selection of the subject ; there-
fore Correggio's Danae pleases me less than it might do ;
beautiful is she, divine is the little angel with the bright
wings, which sits upon the couch, and helps her to collect to-
gether the gold, but the subject is to me ignoble, it wounds,
so to say, my heart's feeling of beauty. For this reason is
Raphael so great in my judgment ; in every thing that I
have seen of his, he is the apostle of innocence, and he,
therefore, alone has been able to give us the Madonna ! "

" But beauty, as a work of art," interrupted I, ' ' can,
however, make us overlook the want of nobility in a
subject."

<e Never ! " replied Annunciata ; f( art in every one of
its branches is high and holy ; and purity in spirit is more
attractive than purity of form ; and therefore the naive re-
presentations of the Madonna, by the olden masters, excite
K

us so deeply, although, with their rough forms, they often
seem more like Chinese pictures, where all is so stiff and
hard. The spirit must be pure in the pictures of the
painter, as well as in the song of the poet ; some extrava-
gances I can forgive, call them something startling, and la-
ment that the painter has fallen into such, but I can never-
theless please myself with the whole."

" But," I exclaimed, " variety in subject is interesting ;
to see always "

" You mistake me !" she returned. " I do not desire
that people should always paint Madonnas ! no ; I am de-
lighted with a glorious landscape, a living scene out of the
life of the people, a ship in a storm, and the robber-scenes
of Salvator Rosa ! But I will not have any thing revolting
in the region of art, and so I call even Scidoni's well-
painted sketch in the Sciara Palazzo. You have not for-
gotten it? Two peasants upon asses ride past a stone
wall, upon which lies a death's head, within which sit a
mouse, a gadfly and a worm, and on the wall these words
are to be read, ' Et ego in Arcadia ! ' "

" I know it," replied I ; " it hangs by the side of Ra-
phael's charming Violin Player."

(c Yes," returned Annunciata ; " would that the in-
scription was placed under this, and not upon the other
hateful picture ! "

We now stood before Francesco Albani's Four Seasons.
I told her what an impression the little Loves had made
upon me as a child, when I lived and played about in this
gallery.

"You enjoyed happy life-points in your childhood!"
said she, repressing a sigb, which perhaps had reference to
her own.

" You, doubtless, no less so," replied I ; " you stood,
the first time I saw you, like a happy, admired child, and,
when we met the second time, you captivated the whole
of Rome, and — seemed happy. Were you so really at
heart?"'

I had bowed irfyself half down to her. She looked di-
rectly into my face with an expression of singular melan-
choly, and said, " The admired, happy child was fatherless

THE IMPROVISATORS. 131

and motherless — a homeless bird upon the leafless twig;
it might have perished of hunger, but the despised Jew
gave it shelter and food till it could flutter forth over the
wild, restless sea ? "

She ceased, and then, shaking her head, added, " But
these are not adventures which could interest a stranger ;
and I cannot tell how I have been induced to gossip
about it."

She would have moved on, but I seized her hand, whilst
I inquired, " Am I, then, such a stranger to you?"

She gazed for a moment before her in silence, and said,
with a pensive smile, " Yes, I, too, have also had beauti-
ful moments in life. And," added she, with her accus-
tomed gaiety, ec I will only think on these ! Our meeting
as children — your strange dreaming about that which is
past, infected me also, and made the heart turn to its own
pictures, instead of the works of art which surround us
here!"

When we left the gallery and had returned to her hotel,
we found that Bernardo had been there to pay his respects
to her. They told him that she and the old lady had
driven out, and that I had accompanied them. His dis-
pleasure at the knowledge of this I had foreseen already ;
but, instead of grieving over this, as I should have done
formerly, my love for Annunciata had awoke defiance and
bitterness towards him. He had so often wished that I
was possessed of character and determination, even if it
made me unjust to him ; now he would see that I had both.

For ever rung in my ear Annunciata's words about the
despised Jew who took the homeless bird under his wings;
she must then be the same whom Bernardo had seen at
the old Hanoch's. This interested me infinitely ; but I
could not again induce her to renew the subject.

When I made my appearance the next day, I found her
in her chamber, studying a new piece. I entertained my-
self for a long time with the old lady, who was more deaf
than I had imagined, and who seemed right thankful that
I would talk with her. It had occurred to me that she
had seemed kindly disposed to me since my first improvi-
sation ; and from that I had imagined that she had heard it.

132 THE IMPROVISATORS.

"And so I have done/' she assured me; "from the
expression of your countenance, and from some few words
which reached me, I understood the whole. And it was
beautiful ! It is in this way that I understand all
Annunciata's recitative, and that alone by the expression :
my eye has become acuter as my ear has become duller."

She questioned me about Bernardo, who had called yes-
terday when we were out, and lamented that he was not
with us. She expressed an extraordinary good-will to-
wards him, and great interest. " Yes," said she, as I
assented to it, " he has a noble character ! I know one
trait of him. May the God of the Jew and the Christian
defend him for it ! "

By degrees she became more eloquent. Her affection for
Annunciata was touching and strong. Thus much became
clear to me out of the many broken and half-darkly ex-
pressed communications which she made. Annunciata was
born in Spain, of Spanish parents. In her early child-
hood she came to Rome ; and when she became there sud-
denly fatherless and motherless, the old Hanoch, who, in
his youth , had been in her native land, and had known
her parents, was the only one who befriended her. After-
wards, whilst yet a child, she was sent back to her native
country, to a lady who cultivated her voice and her dra-
matic talent. A man of great influence had fallen in love
with the beautiful girl ; but her coldness towards him had
awoke in him bitterness, and a desire to obtain her by
craft. The old woman seemed unwilling to lift the mys-
terious veil which covered this terrible time. Annunciata's
life was in danger ; she secretly fled to Italy, where it
would be difficult to discover her, with her old foster-
father, in the Jews' quarter in Rome. It was only a year
and a half since this happened ; and during this time it
was that Bernardo had seen her, and when she had pre-
sented him with the wine of which he had spoken so much.
How indiscreet it seemed to me to show herself thus to a
stranger, when she might have expected an assassin in
every one of them. Yes, she knew indeed that Bernardo
was not such a one ; she had heard nothing, indeed, but
the praises of his boldness and of his noble conduct.

THE IMPRO VISATORE. 133

Shortly after this they heard that her persecutor was dead.
She flew forth, therefore, inspired by her sacred art, and
enraptured the people by it and her beauty. The old lady
accompanied her to Naples, saw her gather her first laurels,
and had not yet left her.

" Yes," continued the eloquent old lady, " she is also
an angel of God ! Pious is she in her faith, as a woman
ought to be ; and understanding has she as much as one
could wish for the best heart."

I left the house just as the joy-firing commenced. In
all the streets, in the squares, from balconies and windows,
people stood with small cannons and pistols, which was a
sign that Lent was now at an end. The dark curtains
with which, for five long weeks, the pictures in churches
and chapels had been covered, fell off at the same moment.
All was Easter gladness. The time of sorrow was over;
to-morrow was Easter, the day of joy, and of two-fold
joy for me ; for I was invited to accompany Annunciata to
the church festival, and the illumination of the dome.

The bells of Easter rang — the cardinals rolled abroad
in their gay carriages, loaded with servants behind — the
equipages of rich foreigners — the crowd of foot-passengers,
filled the whole narrow streets. From the Castle of St.
Angelo waved the great flag on which were the papal arms
and the Madonna's holy image. In the square of St.
Peter's there was music, and round about garlands of roses,
and woodcuts, representing the Pope distributing his
blessing, were to be purchased. The fountains threw up
their gigantic columns of water, and all around by the
colonnades were loges and benches, which already, like the
square itself, were almost filled.

Anon, and almost as great a throng proceeded from the
church, where processions and singing, exhibitions of holy
relics, fragments of food, nails, &c., had refreshed many
a pious mind. The immense square seemed a sea of
human beings ; head moved itself to head ; the line of
carriages drew itself closer together; peasants and boys
climbed up the pedestals of the saints. It seemed as if all
Rome at this moment lived and breathed only here.

The Pope was borne in procession out of church. He
K 3

134 THE IMPROVISATORS.

sat aloft on the shoulders of six priests apparelled in lilac-
coloured robes, upon a magnificent throne-chair; two
younger priests waved before him colossal peacocks' tails
on long staves ; priests preceded him swinging the vessels
of incense, and cardinals followed after, singing hymns.

As soon as the procession had issued from the portal, all
the choirs of music received him with triumph. They
bore him up the lofty steps to the gallery, upon whose bal-
cony he soon showed himself, surrounded by cardinals.
Every one dropped on their knees — long lines of soldiers
— the aged person like the child — the Protestant stranger
alone stood erect, and would not bow himself for the blessing
of an old man. Annunciata half kneeled in the carriage, and
looked up to the holy father with soul-full eyes. A deep
silence reigned around, and the blessing, like invisible
tongues of fire, was wafted over the heads of us all.

Next fluttered down from the Papal balcony two dif-
ferent papers ; the one containing a forgiveness of all sins,
the other a curse against all the enemies of the church.
And the people struck about them to obtain even the
smallest scrap of them.

Again rang the bells of all the churches ; music mingled
itself in the jubilant sound. I was as happy as Annun-
ciata. At the moment when our carriage was set in mo-
tion, Bernardo rode close up to us. He saluted both the
ladies, but appeared not to see me.

" How pale he was \" said Annunciata, " is he ill ? "

" I fancy not," I replied ; but I knew very well what
had chased the blood from his cheeks.

This matured rny determination. I felt how deeply I
loved Annunciata ; that I could give up every thing for
her if she yielded me her love. I resolved to follow her.
I doubted not of my dramatic talent ; and my singing
— I knew the effect which my singing had produced. I
should certainly make my debut with honour when I had
once ventured on this step. If she loved me, what pre-
tension had Bernardo ? He might woo her if his love
•were as strong as mine ; and, if she loved him, — yes, then
I would instantly withdraw my claim.

I wrote all this to him in a letter that same day, and I

THE IMPROVISATORS. 135

will venture to believe that there breathed in it a warm
and true heart, for many tears fell upon the paper as I
spoke of our early acquaintance, and how wonderfully my
heart had always clung to him. The letter was despatched,
and I felt myself calmer, although the thought of losing
Annunciata, like the vulture of Prometheus, rent my heart
with its sharp beak ; yet, nevertheless, I dreamed of accom-
panying her for ever, and of winning at her side honour
and joy. As singer, as improvisatore, I should now begin
the drama of my life.

After the Ave Maria I went with Annunciata and the
old lady in their carriage to see the illumination of the
Dome. The whole of the church of St. Peter's, with its
lofty cupola, the two lesser ones by its side, and the whole
facade, were adorned with transparencies and paper lan-
terns ; these were so placed in the architecture that the
whole immense building stood with a fiery outline amid
the blue air. The throng in the neighbourhood of the
church seemed greater than in the forenoon ; we could
scarcely move at a foot's pace. We first saw from the
bridge of St. Angelo the whole illuminated giant structure,
which was reflected in the yellow Tiber, where boat-loads
of rejoicing people were charmed with the whole picture.

When we reached the square of St. Peter's, where all
was music, the ringing of bells and rejoicing, the signal
was just given for the changing of the illumination. Many
hundreds of men were dispersed over the roof and dome
of the church where, at one and the same moment, they
shoved forwards great iron pans with burning pitch-gar-
lands j it was as if every lantern burst forth into flame ;
the whole structure became a blazing temple of God, which
shone over Rome, like the star over the cradle in Bethle-
hem.* The triumph of the people increased every mo-
ment, and Annunciata was overcome by the view of the
whole.

" Yet it is horrible ! " she exclaimed. ' ' Only think of
the unhappy man who must fasten on and kindle the ton-

* The church is entirely built of stone : so are the surrounding edifices ;
thus there is no danger from leaving the pitch-garlands and iron-pans to burn
out of themselves. All is, therefore, in flame through the whole night.—
Author's note.

K 4

136 THE IMPROVISATORS.

most light on the cross upon the great cupola. The very
thought makes me dizzy."

" It is as lofty as the pyramids of Egypt," said I ; " it
requires boldness in the man to swing himself up there,
and to fasten the string. The holy father gives him the
sacrament, therefore, before he ascends."

"Thus must the life of a human being be risked,"
sighed she ; " and that merely for the pomp and gladness
of a moment."

" But it is done for the glorifying of God/' I replied ;
" and how often do we not risk it for much less ? "

The carriages rushed past us ; most of them drove to
Monte Pincio, in order to see from that distance the illu-
minated church, and the whole city which swam in its
glory.

"Yet it is," said I, "a beautiful idea, that all the
light over the city beams from the church. Perhaps
Correggio drew from this the idea for his immortal night."

" Pardon me/' she said ; " do you not remember that
the picture was completed before the church ? Certainly
he derived the idea from his own heart ; and it seems to
me also far more beautiful. But we must see the whole
show from a more distant point. Shall we drive up to
Monte Maria, where the throng is not so great, or to
Monte Pincio ! We are close by the gate."

We rolled along behind the colonnade, and were soon in
the open country. The carriage drew up at the little inn
on the hill. The cupola looked glorious from this point ;
it seemed as if built of burning suns. The fa9ade, it is
true, was not to be seen, but this only added to the effect ;
the splendour which diffused itself through the illumined
air caused it to appear as if the cupola, burning with stars,
swam in a sea of light. The music and the ringing of
bells reached us, but all around us reigned a twofold night,
and the stars stood only like white points high in the blue
air, as if they had dimmed their shine above the splendid
Easter fire of Rome.

I dismounted from the carriage, and went into the little
inn to fetch them some refreshment. As I was returning
through the narrow passage where the lamp burned before

THE IMPROVISATORE. 13?

the image of the Virgin, Bernardo stood before me, pale
as when, in the Jesuit school, he received the garland.
His eyes glowed as if with the delirium of fever, and he
seized my hand with the force and wildness of a madman.

" I am not an assassin, Antonio," said he, with a
strangely suppressed voice, "or I would drive my sabre
into your false heart ; but fight with me you shall, whe-
ther your cowardice will or will not. Come, come with
me ! "

" Bernardo, are you mad ? " inquired I, and wildly
tore myself from him.

"Only cry aloud," returned he, with the same sup-
presseu voice, "so that the crowd may come and help
you, for you dare not stand single-handed against me.
Before they bind my hands you will be a dead man ! "

He offered me a pistol. " Come, fight with me, or I
shall become your murderer ! " and, so saying, he drew me
forth with him. I took the pistol which he had offered to
defend myself from him.

" She loves you," whispered he ; " and, in your vanity,
you will parade it before all the Roman people, before me,
whom you have deceived with false, hypocritical speeches,
although I never gave you cause to do so."

' ' You are ill, Bernardo," I exclaimed ; " you are mad ;
do not come too near me."

He threw himself upon me. I thrust him back. At
that moment I heard a report ; my hand trembled ; ail
was in smoke around me, but a strangely deep sigh, a
shriek it could not be called, reached my ear, my heart !
My pistol had gone off; Bernardo lay before me in his
blood.

I stood there like a sleep-walker, and held the pistol
grasped in my hand. It was not till I perceived the voices
of the people of the house around me, and heard Annun-
ciata exclaim, " Jesus Maria ! " and saw her and the old
lady before me, that I was conscious of the whole mis-
fortune.

" Bernardo ! " I cried in despair, and would have flung
myself on his body ; but Annunciata lay on her knees be-
side him, endeavouring to stanch the blood.

I can see even now her pale countenance and the stead-
fast look which she riveted upon me. I was as if rooted
to the spot where I stood.

" Save yourself ! save yourself ! " crieti the old lady,
taking hold of me by the arm.

" I am innocent ! " I exclaimed, overcome by anguish ;
" Jesus Maria ! I am innocent ! He would have killed me ;
he gave me the pistol, which went off by accident ! " and
that which I perhaps otherwise should not have dared to
say aloud, I revealed in my despair : " Yes, Annunciata, we
loved thee. For thy sake would I die, like him ! Which
of us two was the dearer to thee ? Tell me, in my despair,
whether thou lovest me, and then will I escape."

" Away ! " stammered she, making a sign with her hand,
whilst she was busied about the dead.

" Fly ! " cried the old lady.

" Annunciata," besought I, overcome with misery,
" which of us two was the dearer to thee ? "

She bowed her head down to the dead; I heard her
weeping, and saw her press her lips to Bernardo's brow.

" The gens d'armes ! " cried some one just by me.
" Fly, fly ! " and, as if by invisible hands, I was torn out
of the house.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE PEASANTS OF ROCCA DEL PAPA. THE ROBBEIl's CAVE.

THE PARC^E OF MY LIFE.

" SHE loves Bernardo !" rung in my heart: it was the
arrow of death which poisoned my whole blood, which
drove me onward, and silenced even the voice which cried
within me, " Thou hast murdered thy friend and bro-
ther !"

I instinctively rushed through bushes and underwood,
climbing over the stone walls which fenced in the vineyards
on the hill-side. The cupola of St. Peter's lit up the

THE IMPROVISATORE. 139

atmosphere to a great distance : thus shone forth the altar
of Cain and Abel, when the murderer fled.

For many hours I wandered uninterruptedly forwards ;
nor did I pause until I reached the yellow Tiber, which
cut off my farther progress. From Rome onwards, down
to the Mediterranean, no bridge was to be met with, nor
even a boat, which could have conveyed me over. This
unexpected impediment was as the stab of a knife, which,
for a moment, cut in sunder the worm that gnawed at my
heart ; but it speedily grew together again, and I felt that
my whole misfortune was twofold.

Not many paces from me I perceived the ruins of a
tomb, larger in circumference, but more desolate, than that
in which I had lived as a child with the old Domenica.
Three horses were tied to one of the overturned blocks of
stone, and were feeding from the bundles of hay which
were fastened to their necks.

A wide opening led, by a few deep steps, into the vault
of the tomb, within which a fire was burning. Two strong-
built peasants, wrapped in their sheep- skin cloaks, with
the wool outwards, and in large boots and pointed hats, in
which was fastened a picture of the Virgin, stretched
themselves before the fire, and smoked with their short
pipes. A shorter figure, wrapped in a large grey cloak,
and with a broad slouching hat, leaned against the
wall, while he drank from a flask of wine to a farewell
and a happy meeting. Scarcely had I contemplated the
whole group, before I was myself discovered. They
snatched up their weapons which lay beside them, as if
they apprehended a surprise, and stepped hastily to-
wards me.

" What do you seek for here ? " they asked.

" A boat to take me across the Tiber," I replied.

" You may look for that a long time," they returned.
ee Here is neither bridge nor boat, unless folks bring them
with them."

" But," began one of them, while he surveyed me from
top to toe, " you are come a long way out of the high-
road, signore, and it is not safe out o' nights. Caesar's
band may still have long roots, although the holy father

has been using the spade, till he has perhaps worked his
own hand off."

" You should, at least/' remarked another, "have taken
some arms with you. See what we have done — a threefold
charge in the gun, and a pistol in the belt, lest the piece
should miss fire."

" Yes, and I have also taken a good little caseknife with
me," said the first speaker, and drew out of his belt a
sharp and bright knife, with which he played in his
hand.

" Stick it again in its sheath, Emidio," said the second ;
" the strange gentleman gets quite pale : he is a young
man who cannot bear such sharp weapons. The first best
villain will get from him his few scudi — us he would not
so easily manage. Do you see ? " said the fellow to me ;
" give us your money to keep, and so it will be quite safe."

<c All that I have you can take," replied I, weary of life,
and obtuse from suffering ; " but no great sum will you
get."

It was evident to me in what company I now found
myself. I quickly felt in my pocket, in which I knew
there to be two scudi: but, to my astonishment, found
there a purse. I drew it forth : it was of woman's work ;
I had seen it before, in the hands of the old lady at An-
nunciata's : she must have thrust it into my pocket, at the
last moment, that I might have spare money for my un-
happy flight. They snatched all three at the full purse ;
and I shook out its contents upon the flat stone before the
fire.

" Gold and silver ! " cried they, as they saw the white
louis-d'or shining among the piastres. " It would have
been a sin if the beautiful souls had fallen into robbers'
hands."

" Kill me now," said I, " if such be your intention ;
so there may be an end of my sufferings."

" Madonna mia ! " exclaimed the first, " what do you
take us for ? We are honest peasants from Rocca del Papa.
We kill no Christian brother. Drink a glass of wine with
us, and tell us what compels you to this journey."

That remains my secret," said I, and eagerly took the

THE IMPROVISATORS. 141

wine which they offered to me ; for my lips burned for a
refreshing draught.

They whispered to each other ; and then the man in the
broad hat rose up, nodded familiarly to the others, looked
jestingly into rny face, and said, " You'll pass a cold night
after the warm merry evening ! " He went out, and we
soon heard him galloping.

(t You wish to go over the Tiber ?" said one : " if you
will not go with us, you will have to wait a long time.
Seat yourself behind me on my horse, for to swim after its
tail would not be much to your liking."

Secure I was not in this place : I felt my home was
with the outlawed. The fellow assisted me upon a strong
fiery horse, and then placed himself before me.

" Let me fasten this cord around you," said the fellow,
or else you may slip off, and not find the ground." He
then threw a cord fast round my back and arms, flinging
it round himself at the same time, so that we sat back to
back : it was not possible for me to move my hands. The
horse advanced slowly into the water, trying every step
before he took it. Presently the water reached the saddle-
bow ; but, labouring powerfully, he gained at length the
opposite shore. As soon as we had reached this, the fellow
loosened the cord which bound me to him, yet only to secure
my hands still more firmly to the girths.

" You might fall off and break your neck," said he.
" Hold only fast, for now we cut across the Campagna."

He struck his heels into the sides of the horse ; the
other did the same ; and away they sped, like well-
accustomed horsemen, over the great desolate plain. I
held myself fast, both with hands and feet. The wind
caught up the fellow's long, black hair, which flapped
upon my cheeks. We sped on past the fallen gravestones :
I saw the ruined aqueduct, and the moon which, red as
blood, rose upon the horizon, whilst light, white mists
flew past us.

That I had killed Bernardo — was separated from
Annunciata and my home, and now, in wild flight, bound
upon the horse of a robber, was speeding across the Cam-
pagna — seemed all to me a dream, a horrible dream !

142 THE IMPROVISATORS.

Would that I might speedily awake, and see these images
of terror dissipate themselves ! I closed my eyes firmly,
and felt only the cold wind from the mountains blowing
upon my cheek.

ic Now we shall be soon under grandmother's petticoat,"
said the rider when we approached the mountains. " Is
it not a good horse which we have ? Then it has also
had this year St. Antonio's blessing: my fellow decked
him out with bunches of silken ribands, opened the Bible
before him, and. sprinkled him with holy water ; and
no devil, or evil eye, can have any influence on him
this year."

Daylight began to dawn on the horizon when we reached
the mountains.

" It begins to get light," said the other rider, " and the
signore's eyes may suffer : I will give him a parasol ;" and
with that lie threw a cloth over my head, which he bound
so fast, that I had not the slightest glimmering of sight.
My hands were bound : I was thus entirely their captive,
and, in my distress of mind, submitted to every thing.

I observed that we were ascending for some time : then
we rapidly descended again ; twigs and bushes struck me
in the face ; we were upon an altogether unused path. At
length I was made to dismount : they conducted me for-
wards, but not a word was said : at length we descended
one step through a narrow opening. My soul had been too
much occupied with itself for me to remark in what direc-
tion we had entered the mountains ; yet we could not have
gone very deep into them. It was not till many years
afterwards that the place became known to me : many
strangers have visited it, and many a painter has represented
on canvass its character and colouring. We were at the
old Tusculum. Behind Frascati, where the sides of the
hills are covered with chesnut woods and lofty laurel
hedges, lie these ruins of antiquity. Tall white thorns
and wild roses shoot up from the steps of the amphi-
theatre. In many places of the mountains are deep caves,
brick-work vaults, almost concealed by a luxuriant growth
of grass and underwood. Across tfoe valley may be seen
the lofty hills of Abruzzi, which bound the Marshes, and

THE IMPROVISATORS. 143

\vliich give to the whole landscape a character of great
wildness, that here, amid the ruins of a city of antiquity,
is doubly impressive. They conducted me through one of
these openings in the mountain, half concealed with de-
pending evergreen and twining plants. At length we
came to a stand. I heard a low whistle ; and, immediately
afterwards, the sound of a trap-door, or door which opened.
We again descended some steps deeper, and I now heard
several voices. The cloth was removed from my eyes,
and I found myself in a spacious vault. Large-limbed
men, in sheep-skin cloaks, like my conductors, sat and
played at cards around a long table, upon which burned
two brass lamps, with many wicks, which strongly lighted
up their dark expressive countenances. Before them stood
wine in great bottles. My arrival excited no astonish-
ment : they made room for me at the table, gave me a cup
of wine, and a piece of their sausage, keeping up a con-
versation, in the meantime, in a dialect which I did not
understand ; which seemed, however, to have no reference
to me.

I felt no hunger, but only a burning thirst,, and drank
the wine. I cast my eyes around me, and saw that the
walls were covered with arms and articles of clothing. In
one corner of the vault was a still deeper apartment.
From its roof depended two hares, which were partly
skinned, and beneath these I perceived yet another being.
A meagre old woman, with a singular, almost youthful
bearing, sat there immovably, and spun flax upon a hand-
spindle. Her silver-white hair had loosened itself from
the knot into which it had been fastened, and hung down
over one cheek, and round her yellow-brown neck, and
her dark eye was steadfastly fixed upon the spindle. She
was the living image of one of the Parcae. Before her
feet lay a quantity of burning wood-ashes, as if they were a
magical circle which separated her from this world.

I did not long remain left to myself. They com-
menced a sort of examination of me, of my condition in
life, and of every thing connected with my circumstances
and family. I declared to them that they had already had
all that I possessed, "and that nobody in Rome, if they

144 THE IMPROVISATORS.

demanded a ransom for me, would give as much as a
scudo, and that I was a poor bird, which, for a long time,
had the intention of going to Naples, to try my talents as
an improvisatore. I concealed not from them the peculiar
ground of my flight, the unfortunately accidental going off
of the piece, yet without explaining the immediate circum-
stances of it.

ee The only ransom which you are likely to obtain for
me," added I, " is the sum which the law will give you
for delivering me up. Do it; for I myself, at this mo-
ment, have no higher wish ! "

" That's a merry wish ! " said one of the men. " You
have perhaps, however, in Rome, a little girl who would
give her gold earrings for your liberty. You can, how-
ever, improvise at Naples ; we are the men to get you over
the barriers. Or the ransom shall be the earnest-money of
our brotherhood ; so here is my hand ! You are among
honourable fellows, you shall see ! But sleep now, and
think of it afterwards. Here is a bed, and you shall have
a coverlet which has proved the winter's blast and the
sirocco rain — my brown cloak there on the hook."

He threw it to me, pointed to the straw mat at the end
of the table, and left me, singing as he went the Albanian
folks' song, " Discendi, o mia bettina I "

I threw myself down on the couch, without a thought
of repose. All the late occurrences passed before my mind
as a horrible picture ; nevertheless my eyes closed ; my
bodily strength was exhausted ; I slept deeply through the
whole day.

When I again awoke I felt myself wonderfully in-
vigorated. All that had so agitated my soul seemed to me
like a dream ; but the place in which I was, and the dark
countenances around me, told me immediately that my
recollections were reality.

A stranger, with pistols in his girdle, and a long grey
cloak thrown loosely over his shoulder, sat astride on the
bench, and was in deep conversation with the other robbers.
In the corner of the vault sat yet the old Mulatto-coloured
woman, and twirled her spindle immovably as ever, a
picture painted on a dark background. Fresh-burning

THE IMPROVISATORS. 145

wood was laid on the floor before her, and gave out
warmth.

" The ball went through his side/' I heard the stranger
say ; " he lost some blood, but, in a month, all will be
over."

(C Ei, Signore," cried my horseman, as he again saw me
awake ; " a twelve-hours' sleep is a good pillow ? Nay,
Gregorio brings news from Rome which will certainly please
you ! You have trodden heavily on the train of the Senate !
Yes ; it is actually you ! All circumstances agree together.
You have actually shot the nephew of the senator ! That
was a bold shot ! "

" Is he dead ?" were the only words I could stammer
forth.

"No, not entirely!" replied the stranger, " and will
not die this time. At least the doctors say so. The
foreign handsome signora, who sings like a nightingale,
watched through the whole night by his bed, till the doctors
assured her that she might be easy, for that there was no
danger."

" You missed your mark," exclaimed the other, " both
in regard to his heart and hers ! Let the bird fly, they'll
make a pair, and you stop with us. Our life is merry and
free. You may become a little prince ; and the clanger of
it is no greater than hangs over every crown. Wine you
shall have, and adventures and handsome girls for the one
which has jilted you. Better is it to drink of life in
copious draughts than to sip it up by drops."

" Bernardo lives ! I am not his murderer ! " This
thought gave new life to my soul ; but my distress on
account of Annunciata could not be alleviated. Calmly
and resolutely I replied to the man, that they could deal
with me as they liked, but that my nature, my whole edu-
cation, my intentions in life, forbade me to form any such
connection with him as he proposed.

" Six hundred scudi is the lowest sum for which we will
liberate you ! " said the man, with a gloomy earnestness.
" If these are not forthcoming in six days, then you are
ours, either dead or alive ! Your handsome face, my kind-
ness towards you, will avail nothing ! Without the six

L

hundred scudi you will only have your choice between
brotherhood with us, or brotherhood with the many who
lie arm in arm, embracing in the well below. Write to
your friend, or to the handsome singer ; they must both of
them be grateful to you at bottom, for you have brought
about an explanation between them. They will certainly
pay this miserable sum for you. We have never let any
body go so cheaply out of our inn before. Only think,"
added he, laughing, "• your coming here cost you nothing ;
and now, board and lodging for a whole six days, nobody
can say that it is unreasonable."

My answer remained the same.

" Perverse fellow ! " said he. " Yet I like it in thee ;
that I will say, even if I have to put a bullet through thy
heart. Our jolly life must, however, captivate a young
spirit : arjd thou, a poet, an improvisatore, and not charmed
with a bold flight ! Now, if I had desired thee to sing
( The Proud Strength among the Rocks,' must not thou
have praised and cried up this life, which thou seemest to
despise ? Drink of the cup, and let us hear your art. You
shall describe to us that which I have just said — the proud
struggle which the mountains see ; and, if you do it like a
a master, why, then, I'll extend your time yet one day
longer."

He reached to me a guitar from the wall ; the robbers
gathered around me, demanding that I should sing.

I bethought myself for some moments. I was to sing
of the woods, of the rocks — 1 who, in reality, had never
been amid them. My journey the night before had been
made with bandaged eyes, and during my abode in Rome,
I had visited only the pine-woods of the Villa Borghese
and the Villa Pamfili. Mountains had, indeed, occupied
me as a child, but only as seen from the hut of Domenica.
The only time in which I had been amongst them was on
that unfortunate going to the flower-feast at Gensano.
The darkness and stillness of the woods lay in the picture
which my memory retained of our ramble under the
lofty plantains by Lake Nemi, where we bound gar-
lands that evening. I again saw all this, and ideas
awoke in ray soul. All these images passed before me

THE IMPROVISATORE. 147

in one half of the time which it requires me to speak of
them.

I struck a few accords, and the thoughts became words,
arid the words billowy verse. I described the deep calm,
shut in among woods, and the cliffs which reared themselves
high amid the clouds. In the nest of the eagle sat the
mother-bird, and taught her young ones the strength of
their pinions and the practice of their keen gaze, by bidding
them look at the sun. " You are the king of birds," said
she ; " sharp is your eye, strong are your talons. Fly
forth from your mother ; my glance will follow you,
and my heart will sing like the voice of the swan when
death embraces her. Sing will I of ' proud strength ! '
And the young ones flew from the nest. The one flew
only to the next peak of the cliff and sat still, with his eye
directed to the beams of the sun, as if he would drink in
its flames ; but the other swung itself boldly in great circles,
high above the cliff and the deep-lying lake. The surface
of the water mirrored the woody margin and the blue
heaven. A huge fish lay still, as if he had been a reed
which floated on its surface. Like a lightning flash darted
the eagle down upon its prey, struck its sharp talons in its
back, and the heart of the mother trembled for joy. But
the fish and the bird were of equal strength. The sharp
talon was too firmly fixed to be again withdrawn, and a
contest began, which agitated the quiet lake in great circles.
For a moment, and it was again calm ; the huge wings lay
outspread upon the waters like the leaves of the lotus-flower;
again they fluttered aloft ; a sudden crack was heard —
one wing sunk down, whilst the other lashed the lake into
foam, and then vanished. The fish and the bird sank
into the deep water. Then was sent forth the lamenting
cry of the mother, and she turned again her eye upon the
second son, which had rested above upon the cliff, and he
was not there ; but far away, in the direction of the sun, she
saw a dark speck ascending and vanishing in his beams.
Her heart was agitated with joy, and she sang of the proud
strength which only became great by the lofty object for
which it strove ! "

My song was at an end ; a loud burst of applause saluted
L 2

148 THE I3IPROVISATORE.

me, but my eye was arrested by tbe old woman. In the
midst of my song I had indeed observed that she let the
hand-spindle drop, riveted upon me a keen, dark glance,
which made it exactly seem to me as if the scene of my
childhood, which I had described in my song, again was
renewed. She now raised herself up, and, advancing to
me with quickening steps, exclaimed, —

" Thou hast sung thy ransom ! the sound of music is
stronger than that of gold ! I saw the lucky star in thy eye
when the fish and the bird went down into the deep abyss
to die ! Fly boldly towards the sun, my bold eagle ! the
old one sits in her nest and rejoices in thy flight. No one
shall bind thy wings ! **

" Wise Fulvia ! " said the robber who had required me
to sing, and who now bowed with an extraordinary gravity
to the old woman, " dost thou know the signore ? Hast
thou heard him improvise before now ? "

cc I have seen the star in his eye — seen the invisible
glory which beamed around the child of fortune ! He
wove his garland ; he shall weave one still more beautiful,
but with unbound hands. Dost thou think of shooting
down my young eagle in six days, because he will not fix
his claws into the back of the fish ? Six days he shall
remain here in the nest, and then he shall fly towards the
sun ! "

She now opened a little cupboard in the wall, and took
out paper, upon which she was about to write.

" The ink is hard," said she," like the dry rock ; but
thou hast enough of the black moisture; scratch thy
hand, Cosmo, the old Fulvia thinks also on thy happi-
ness ! "

" Without saying a word, the robber took his knife, and,
putting aside the skin, wetted the pen with the blood.
The old woman gave it to me to write the words, " I
travel to Naples ! "

(C Thy name under it ! " said she, " that is a papal
seal ! "

" What is the meaning of this ? " I heard one of the
younger men say, as he cast an angry glance at the old
woman.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 1 4'9

" Does the worm talk ? " said she ; " defend thyself
from the broad foot that crushes thee ! "

" We confide in thy prudence, wise mother," rejoined
one of the elder ones ; " thy will is the tabernacle of bless-
ing and good luck ! "

No more was said.

The former lively state of feeling returned ; the wine-
flask circulated. They slapped me familiarly on the
shoulder ; gave me the best pieces of the venison which was
served up ; but the old woman sat as before immovably at
work with her hand-spindle, whilst one of the younger men
laid fresh ashes at her feet, saying, " Thou art cold, old
mother ! "

From their conversation, and from the name by which
they had addressed her, I now discovered that she it was
who had told my fortune, as a child, when I, with my
mother and Mariuccia, wove garlands by Lake Nemi. I
felt that my fate lay in her hand ; she had made me write,
" I travel to Naples ! " That was my own desire, but
how was I to get across the barrier without a passport ?
how was I to maintain myself in this foreign city, where
I knew no one ? To make my debut as an improvisatore,
whilst I was a fugitive from a neighbouring city, was a
thing I dared not to do. My power of language, however, and
a singular childish reliance on the Madonna, strengthened
my soul ; even the thought of Annunciata, which dissolved
into a strange melancholy, brought peace to my soul — a
peace like that which descends upon the seaman, when,
after his ship is gone down, he alone is driven in a little
boat towards an unknown shore.

One day after another glided on ; the men came and
went, and even Fulvia was absent for one whole day, and
I was alone in the cave with one of the robbers.

This was a young man of about one-and-twenty, of
ordinary features, but with a remarkably melancholy ex-
pression, which almost bordered on insanity ; this, and his
beautiful long hair which fell upon his shoulders, charac-
terised his exterior. He sat silent for a long time, with
his head sunk upon his arm. At length he turned himself
to me and said, " Thou canst read : read me a prayer out
L 3

150 THE JMPROVISATORE.

of this book ! " and with that he gave me a little prayer-
book. I read, and the most heartfelt devotion beamed in
his large, dark eyes.

" Why wilt thou leave us ? " asked he, offering me his
hand good-naturedly; "perjury and falsehood dwell in the
city as in the wood ; only in the wood one has fresh air
and fewer people."

A sort of confidential feeling arose between us ; and
whilst I shuddered at his wild manner I was touched by
his unhappiness.

" Thou knowest, perhaps," said he, " the legend of the
Prince of Savelli ? of the gay wedding at Ariccia? It
was, to be sure, only a poor peasant and a simple country-
girl, but she was handsome, and it washer wedding. The
rich lord of Savelli gave a dance in honour of the bride,
and sent her an invitation to his garden ; but she revealed
it to her bridegroom, who dressed himself in her clothes,
and put on her bridal veil, and went instead of her, and
then, when the count would have pressed her to his breast,
a dagger was driven into his noble heart. I knew a count
and a bridegroom like these, only the bride was not so
open-hearted : the rich count celebrated the bridal night,
and the bridegroom the feast of death with her. Her
bosom shone like snow when the pale knife found its way
to her heart ! "

I looked silently into his face, and had not a word
wherewith to express my sympathy.

" Thou thinkest that I never knew love — never, like
the bee, drank from the fragrant cup ! " exclaimed he.
" There travelled a high-born English lady to Naples ; she
had a handsome serving-maid with her — health on her
cheeks and fire in her eyes ! My comrades compelled
them all to dismount from the carriage, and to sit in
silence on the ground whilst they plundered it. The two
women, and a young man, the lover of one I fancy he was,
we took up among the hills. By the time that the ran-
som came for all three the girl's red cheeks were gone, and
her eyes burned less brightly : that came from so much
wood among the hills ! "

I turned myself from him, and, as if half to excuse

THE IMPROVISATORE. 151

himself, he added, " The girl was a Protestant, a daughter
of Satan ! "

In the evening Fulvia returned, and gave me a letter
which she commanded me not to read.

" The mountains have their foggy mantles around
them ; it 'is time to fly away. Eat and drink, we have a
long journey before us, and there grow no cakes upon the
naked rocky path."

The young robber placed food on the table in haste, of
which 1 partook, and then Fulvia threw a cloak over her
shoulders, and hurried me along through dark, excavated
passages.

" In the letter lie thy wings," said she, "not a soldier
on the barrier shall ruffle a feather of thine, my young
eagle ! The wishing rod also lies beside it, which will
afford thee gold and silver till thou hast fetched up thy
own treasures."

She now divided, with her naked, thin arm, the thick
ivy, which hung like a curtain before the entrance to the
cavern : it was dark night without, and a thick mist en-
wrapt the mountains. I held fast by her dress, and
scarcely could keep up with her quick steps along the un-
trodden path in the dark : like a spirit she went forward ;
bushes and hedges were left behind us on either hand.

Our march had continued for some time, and we were
now in a narrow valley between the mountains. Not far
from us stood a straw hut, one of those which is met with
in the Marshes, without walls, and with its roof of reeds
down to the ground. Light shone from a chink in its low
door. We entered, and found ourselves as if in a great bee-
hive, but all around was quite black from the smoke, which
had no other exit than through the low door. Pillars and
beams, nay, even the reeds themselves, were shining with
the soot. In the middle of the floor was an elevation of
brickwork, a few ells long, and probably half as broad ; on
this lay a fire of wood ; here the food was cooked, and by
this means, also, the hut was warmed. Further back was
an opening in the wall, which led to a smaller hut, which
was attached to the greater, just as one sees a small onion
L 4

152 THE IMPROVISATOKE.

grow to the mother bulb ; within this lay a woman sleep-
ing, with several children. An ass poked forth his head
from above them, and looked on us. An old man,
almost naked, with a ragged pair of drawers on made of
goat-skin, came towards us; he kissed Fulvia's handstand,
without a word being exchanged, he threw his woollen skin
over his naked shoulders, drew forth the ass, and made a
sign for me to mount.

IC The horse of fortune will gallop better than the ass of
the Campagna," said Fulvia.

The peasant led the ass and me out of the hut. My
heart was deeply moved with gratitude to the singular old
woman, and I bent down to kiss her hand ; but she shook
her head, and then, stroking the hair back from my fore-
head, I felt her cold kiss, saw her once more motioning
with her hand, and the twigs and hedges hid us from each
other. The peasant struck the ass, and then ran on beside
him up the path : I spoke to him ; he uttered a low sound,
and gave me, by a sign, to understand that he was dumb.
My curiosity to read the letter which Fulvia had given
me let me have no rest ; I therefore drew it out and
opened it. It consisted of various papers, but the darkness
forbade me to read a single word, however much I strained
my eyes.

When the day dawned, we were upon the ridges of the
mountains, where alone was to be seen naked granite, with
a few creeping plants, and the grey-green strong-scented
wormwood. The heavens were quite clear, scattered over
with shining stars ; a sea- like cloud world lay below us, it
was the Marshes which stretched themselves out from the
mountains of Albano, between Veletri and Terracina,
bounded by Abruzzi and the Mediterranean Sea. The
low, wavy clouds of mist shone below us, and I quickly
saw how the infinitely blue heaven changed to lilac, and
then into rose colour, and the mountains even became like
bright blue velvet. I was dazzled with the pomp of
colouring ; a fire burned upon the side of the mountain,
which shone like a star upon the light ground. I folded
my hands in prayer ; my head bowed itself before God in

THE IMPROVISATORE.

the great church of nature, and silently besought, " Let Thy
will be done ! "

The daylight was now sufficiently clear for me to see
what my letter contained ; it was a passport in my own
name, prepared by the Roman police, and signed by the
Neapolitan ambassador — an order on the house of Fal-
conet, in Naples, for five hundred scudi, and a small note
containing the words, "Bernardo's life is out of danger;
but do not return to Rome for some months."

Fulvia said justly that here were my wings and wish-
ing-rod. I was free, a sigh of gratitude arose from my
heart.

We soon reached a more trodden path, where some
shepherds were sitting at their breakfasts. My guide
stopped here ; they seemed to know him, and he made
them understand, by signs with his fingers, that they
should invite us to partake of their meal, which consisted
of bread and buffalo-cheese, to which they drank asses'
milk. 1 enjoyed some mouthfuls, and felt myself strength-
ened thereby.

My guide now showed me a path, and the others ex-
plained to me that it led down the mountains along the
Marshes to Terracina, which I could reach before evening.
I must continually keep tbis path to the left of the moun-
tains, which would, in a few hours, bring me to a canal,
which went from the mountains to the great highroad, the
boundary trees of which I should see as soon as the mist
cleared away. By following the canal, I should come out
upon the highroad, just beside a ruined convent, where now
stood an inn, called torre di tre ponti.

Gladly would I have bestowed upon my guide a little
gift; but I had nothing. It then occurred to me that I
still had, however, the two scudi, which were in my pocket
when I left Rome ; I had only given up the purse with
the money which I had received as needful in my flight.
Two scudi were thus, for the moment, all my ready
money ; the one I would give to my guide, the other I
must keep for my own wants till I reached Naples, where
I could only avail myself of my bill. I felt in my pocket,

154 THE IMPROVISATORS.

but vain was all my search ; they had long ago taken from
me all my little property. I had nothing at all : I there-
fore took off the silk-handkerchief which I had round my
neck, and gave it to the man, offered my hand to the
others, and struck alone into the path which led down to
the Marshes.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 155

VOLUME THE SECOND.

CHAPTER I.

THE 1'ONTINE MARSHES. TKRRACINA. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.

FRA DIAVOLO's NATIVE CITY. THE ORANGE GARDEN AT MOLO

DI GAETA. THE NEAPOLITAN SIGNORA. NAPLES.

MANY people imagine that the Pontine Marshes are only
marshy ground, a dreary extent of stagnant, slimy water, a
melancholy road to travel over : on the contrary, the
marshes have more resemblance to the rich plains of Lom-
bardy ; yes, they are like them, rich to abundance ; grass
and herbage grow here with a succulence and a luxuriance
which the north of Italy cannot exhibit.

Neither can any road be more excellent than that which
leads through the marshes, upon which, as on a bowling-
green, the carriages roll along between unending alleys of
lime trees, whose thick branches afford a shade from the
scorching beams of the sun. On each side the immense
plain stretches itself out with its tall grass, and its fresh,
green marsh-plants. Canals cross one another, and drain
off the water which stands in ponds and lakes covered with
reeds and broad -leaved water-lilies.

On the left hand, in coming from Rome, the lofty hills
of Abruzzi extend themselves, with here and there small
towns, which, like mountain castles, shine with their white
walls from the grey rocks. On the right the green plain
stretches down to the sea where Cape Cicello lifts itself,
now a promontory, but formerly Circe's Island, where
tradition lands Ulysses.

As I went along, the mists, which began to dissipate,
floated over the green extent where the canals shone like
linen on a bleaching-ground. The sun glowed with the
warmth of summer, although it was but the middle of

THE IMPUOVJSATORE.

March. Herds of buffaloes went through the tall grass.
A troop of horses galloped wildly about, and struck out
with their hind feet, so that the water was dashed around
to a great height ; their bold attitudes,, their unconstrained
leaping and gambolling, might have been a study for an
animal painter. To the left I saw a dark monstrous
column of smoke, which ascended from the great fire which
the shepherds had kindled to purify the air around their
huts. I met a peasant,, whose pale, yellow,, sickly exterior
contradicted the vigorous fertility which the marshes pre-
sented. Like a dead man arisen from the grave, he rode
upon his black horse, and held a sort of lance in his hand
with which he drove together the buffaloes which went
into the swampy mire, where some of them lay themselves
clown, and stretched forth only their dark ugly heads with
their malicious eyes.

The solitary post-houses, of three or four stories high,
which were erected close by the road-side, showed also, at
the first glance, the poisonous effluvia which steamed up
from the marshes. The lime-washed walls were entirely
covered with an unctuous, grey-green mould. Buildings,
like human beings, bore here the stamp of corruption,
which showed itself in strange contrast with the rich
luxuriance around, with the fresh verdure, and the warm
sunshine.

My sickly soul presented to me here in nature an image
of the false happiness of* life ; thus people almost always
see the world through the spectacles of feeling, and itappears
dark or rose-coloured according to the hue of the glass
through which they look.

About an hour before the Ave Maria I left the marshes
behind me ; the mountains, with their yellow masses of
rock, approached nearer and nearer, and close before me
stood Terracina in the fertile, Hesperian landscape. Three
lofty palm-trees, with their fruit, grew not far from the
road. The vast orchards, which stretched up the moun-
tain-sides, seemed like a great green carpet with millions of
golden points. Lemons and oranges bowed the branches
down to the ground. Before a peasant's hut lay a quan-
tity of lemons, piled together into a heap, as if they had

THE IMPROVISATORE. 15?

been chesnuts which had been shaken down. Rosemary
and wild dark-red gillyflowers grew abundantly in the
crevices of the rock, high up among the peaks of the
cliffs where stood the magnificent remains of the castle of
the Ostrogothic king Theodoric*, and which overlook the
city and the whole surrounding country.

My eyes were dazzled with the beautiful picture, and,
quietly dreaming, I entered Terracina. Before me lay
the sea, which I now beheld for the first time — the won-
derfully beautiful Mediterranean. It was heaven itself in
the purest ultra-marine, which, like an immense plain, was
spread out before me. Far out at sea I saw islands, like
floating clouds of the most beautiful lilac colour, and per-
ceived Vesuvius where the dark column of smoke became
blue in the far horizon. The surface of the sea seemed
perfectly still, yet the lofty billows, as blue and clear as the
ether itself, broke against the shore on which I stood, and
sounded like thunder among the mountains.

My eye was riveted like my foot : my whole soul
breathed rapture. It seemed as if that which was physical
within me, heart and blood, became spirit, and infused
itself into it that it might float forth between these two,
the infinite sea and the heaven above it. Tears streamed
down my cheeks, and I was compelled to weep like a child.

Not far from the place where I stood was a large white
building, against the foundations of which the waves
broke. Its lowest story, which lay to the street, consisted
of an open colonnade, within which stood the carriages of
travellers. It was the hotel of Terracina, the largest and
the handsomest upon the whole way between Rome and
Naples.

Tile cracking of whips re-echoed from the wall of rocks;
a carriage with four horses rolled up to the hotel. Armed
servants sat on the seat at the back of the carriage ; a pale,
thin gentleman, wrapped in a large bright-coloured dress-
ing-gown, stretched himself within it. The postilion dis-
mounted and cracked his long whip several times, whilst
fresh horses were put to. The stranger wished to proceed,
but as he desired to have an escort over the mountains

* Diderik of Born. — Author's note.

158 THE IMPROVISATOKE.

where Fra Diavolo and Cesari had bold descendants, he
was obliged to wait a quarter of an hour, and now scolded,
half in English and half in Italian, at the people's laziness,
and at the torments and sufferings which travellers had to
endure, and at length knotted up his pocket-handkerchief
into a night-cap, which he drew on his head, and then
throwing himself into a corner of the carriage, closed his
eyes, and seemed to resign himself to his fate.

I perceived that it was an Englishman, who already, in
ten days, had travelled through the north and the middle
of Italy, and in that time had made himself acquainted
with this country ; had seen Rome in one day, and was
now going to Naples to ascend Vesuvius, and then by the
steam-vessel to Marseilles, to gain a knowledge also of the
south of France, which he hoped to do in a still shorter
time. At length eight well-armed horsemen arrived, the
postilion cracked his whip, and the carriage and the out-
riders vanished through the gate between the tall yellow
rocks.

" With all his escort and all his weapons, he is, how-
ever, not so safe as my strangers," said a little, square-built
fellow, who played with his whip. " The English must
be very fond of travelling ; they always go at a gallop ;
they are queer birds — Santa Philomena di Napoli /"

" Have you many travellers in your carriage ? " in-
quired I.

" A heart in every corner," replied he ; " you see, that
makes a good four : but in the cabriolet there is only one.
If the Signore wishes to see Naples, that he can the day
after to-morrow, while the sun still shines on Sant Elmo."

We soon agreed, and I was thus relieved from the em-
barrassment in which my entire want of money had
placed me.*

' c You will, perhaps, wish to have earnest-money, sig-
nore ? " asked the vetturino, and held out a five-paolo piece
between his fingers.

* When people travel with vetturint, they pay nothing beforehand ; but, on
the contrary, receive money from them as an earnest that their honesty is to
be relied upon. The vetturini also provide board and lodging for the whole
journey. All these expenses are included in the agreement which is then
made, — Author's note.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 159

" Reserve the place for me, with board and a good bed,"
replied I. Ci Do we set off in the morning ?"

" Yes, if it please Saint Antonio and my horses/' said
he, " we shall set off at three o'clock. We shall have
twice to go to the Pass-Bureau, and three times to be writ-
ten in the papers : to-morrow is our hardest day." With
these words he lifted his cap, and, nodding, left me.

They showed me to a chamber which looked out to the
sea, where the fresh wind blew, and the billows heaved
themselves, presenting a picture very dissimilar to the
Campagna, and yet its vast extent led my thoughts to my
home there, and the old Domenica. It troubled me now
that I had not visited her more industriously; she loved
me with her entire heart, and was certainly the only one
who did so. Excellenza, Francesca, yes, they also had
some affection for me, but it was of a peculiar kind.
Benefits bound us together, and where these could not be
mutual, there must always remain, between giver and re-
ceiver, a gulf, which years and days indeed might cover
with the climbing-plants of devotion, but never could fill
up. I thought upon Bernardo and Annunciata ; my lips
tasted salt drops which came from my eyes ; or, perhaps,
from the sea below me, for the billows actually dashed high
upon the walls.

Next morning, before day, I rolled with the vetturino
and his strangers away from Terracina. AVe drew up at
the frontiers just at dawn. All dismounted from the car-
riage while our passports were inspected. I now for the
first time saw my companions properly. Among these was
a man of about thirty, rather bland, and with blue eyes,
who excited my attention : I must have seen him before,
but where I could not remember : the few words which I
heard him speak betrayed him to be a foreigner.

We were detained a very long time by the passports,
because most of them were in foreign languages, which
the soldiers did not understand. In the meantime the
stranger, of whom I have spoken, took out a book of blank
paper, and sketched the place where we stood — the two
high towers by the gate through which the road passed,

160 THE IMPROVISATORS.

the picturesque caves just by, and, in the background, the
little town upon the mountain.

I stepped nearer to him, and he turned my attention
to the beautiful grouping of the goats which stood in the
largest cave. At the same moment they sprang out ; a
great bundle of faggots, which had lain in one of the lesser
openings of the cave, and which served as door to the
descent, was withdrawn, and the goats skipped out two and
two. like the animals which went out of Noah's ark. A
very little peasant lad brought up the rear; his little
pointed hat, round which a piece of twine was tied,
the torn stockings, and sandals, with the short brown
cloak, which he had thrown around him, gave him a pic-
turesque appearance. The goats tripped up above the cave
among the low bushes, whilst the boy, seating himself
upon a piece of rock which projected above the cave, looked
at us and the painter, who drew him and the whole scene.

c ' Maledetto /" we heard the vetturino exclaim, and saw
him running towards us at full speed : there was some-
thing amiss about the passports. " It was certainly with
mine," thought I, anxiously, and the blood mounted to
my cheeks. The stranger scolded because of the ignorance
of the soldiers who could not read, and we followed the
vetturino up into one of the towers, where we found five or
six men half- stretched over the table, on which our pass-
ports lay spread out.

" Who is called Frederick ? " inquired one of the most
important-looking of the men at the table,

" That is I," replied the stranger, " my name is Fre-
derick, in Italian Federigo."

" Thus, then, Federigo the Sixth."

" Oh, no ! that is my king's name which stands at the
top of my passport."

" Indeed ! " said the man, and slowly read aloud,
ec c Frederic Six, par la grace de'Dieu Roi de Danemarc,
des Vandales, des Gothes, &c.' — But what is that?" ex-
claimed the man ; " are you a Vandal ? they are actually
a barbarous people ? "

" Yes," replied the stranger, laughing ; " I am a bar-
barian who am come to Italy to be civilised. My name

THE IMPROVISATORE. l6l

stands below, it is Frederick like my king's, Frederick, or
Federigo."

" Is he an Englishman ? " asked one of the writers.

" Oh, no ! " replied another, " thou confoundest all na-
tions together ; thou canst surely read that he is out of the
north ; he is a Russian."

Federigo — Denmark — the name struck my soul like a
flash of lightning. It was, indeed, the friend of my child-
hood, my mother's lodger ; him with whom I had been
into the catacombs, who had given me his beautiful silver
watch, and drawn lovely pictures for me.

The passport was correct, and the barrier soldier found
it doubly so, when a paolo was put into his hand that he
might not any longer detain us.

As soon as we were out again I made myself known to
him ; it was actually he whom I supposed our Danish
Federigo, who had lived with my mother. He expressed
the most lively joy at again meeting with me, called me
still *his little Antonio. There were a thousand things
to be inquired after, and mutually communicated. He
induced my former neighbour in the cabriolet to exchange
places with him, and we now sat together ; yet once more
he pressed my hand, laughed and joked.

I related to him in a few words the occurrences of my
life, from the day when I went to Domenica's hut, till the
time when I became abbe, and then, making a great leap
forwards, without touching upon my late adventures, ended
by shortly saying, " I now go to Naples."

He remembered very well the promise which he had
made, the last time we saw each other in the Campagna,
to take me with him for one day to Rome ; but shortly
after that he received a letter from his native country,
which obliged him to take the long journey home, so that
he could not see me again. His love for Italy, however, in
his native land, became only stronger every year, and at
length drove him there again.

" And now, for the first time, I enjoy every thing pro-
perly," said he ; " drink in great draughts of the pure air,
and visit again every spot where I was before. Here my
x

162 THE IMPROVISATORS.

heart's fatherland beckons me ; here is colouring ; here is
form. Italy is a cornucopia of blessing !"

Time and the way flew on so rapidly in Federigo's
society, that I marked not our long detention in the Pass-
Bureau at Fondi. He knew perfectly how to seize upon
the poetically beautiful in every thing ; he became doubly
dear and interesting to me, and was the best angel of con-
solation for my afflicted heart.

" There lies my dirty Itri ! " exclaimed he, and pointed
to the city before us. " You would hardly credit it, An-
tonio, but in the north, where all the streets are so clean,
and so regular, and so precise, I have longed for a dirty
Italian town, where there is something characteristic, some-
thing just for a painter. These narrow, dirty streets, these
grey, grimy stone balconies, full of stockings and shirts ;
windows without regularity, one up, one down, some great,
some small ; here steps four or five ells wide leading up to
a door, where the mother sits with her hand spindle ; and
there a lemon-tree, with great yellow fruit, hanging over
the wall.

" Yes, that does make a picture ! But those cultivated
streets, where the houses stand like soldiers, where steps
and balconies are shorn away, one can make nothing at
all of!"

" Here is the native city of Fra Diavolo ! " exclaimed
those inside the carriage, as we rolled into the narrow, dirty
Itri, which Federigo found so picturesquely beautiful.
The city lay high upon a rock beside a deep precipice.
The principal street was in many places only wide enough
for one carriage.

The greater part of the first stories of the houses were
without windows, and instead of these, a great broad door-
way, through which one looked down as if into a dark
cellar. Every where was there a swarm of dirty children
and women, and all reached out their hands to beg : the
women laughed, and the children screamed and made faces
at us. One did not dare to put one's head out of the car-
riage, lest it should get smashed between it and the pro-
jecting houses, from which the stone balconies in some
places hung out so far above us that it seemed as if we

THE IMPROVISATORE. l63

drove through an archway. I saw black walls on either
hand, for the smoke found its way through the open doors
up the sooty walls.

" It is a glorious city !" said Federigo, and clapped his
hands.

" A robber city it is/' said the vetturino, when we had
passed through it ; the police compelled one half of the
people to flit to quite another city behind the mountains,
and brought in other inhabitants, but that helped nothing.
All runs to weed that is planted here. But then poor folks
must live."

The whole neighbourhood here, upon the great high road
between Rome and Naples, invites to robbery. There are
places of deep concealment on every hand, in the thick
olive-woods, in the mountain-caves, in the walls of the
Cyclops, and many other ruins.

Federigo directed my attention to an isolated colossal
wall overgrown with honeysuckle and climbing plants. It
was Cicero's grave ! it was here that the dagger of the
assassin struck the fugitive, here the lips of eloquence be-
came dust.

" The vetturino will drive us to Cicero's villa in Mola
di Gaeta," said Federigo ; " it is the best hotel, and has a
prospect which rivals that of Naples."

The form of the hills was most beautiful, the vegetation
most luxuriant ; presently we rolled along an alley of tall
laurels, and saw before us the hotel which Federigo had
mentioned. The head-waiter stood ready with his napkin,
and waited for us on the broad steps which were orna-
mented with busts and flowers.

" Excellenza, is it you ?" exclaimed he, as he assisted a
somewhat portly lady out of the carriage.

I noticed her ; her countenance was pretty, very pretty,
and the jet-black eyes told me immediately that she was a
Neapolitan.

" Ah, yes, it is I," replied she ; " here am I come with
my waiting-woman as cicisbeo ; that is my whole train —
I have not a single man-servant with me. What do you
think of my courage in travelling thus from Rome to
Naples?"

M 2

THE IMPROVISATORE.

She threw herself like an invalid on the sofa, supported
her pretty cheek upon her round little hand, and began to
study the list of eatables. " Brodetto, cipollette, facioli.
You know that I cannot bear soup, else I should have a
figure like Castello dell' Ovo. A little animdle dorate,
and some fennel, is enough for me ; we must really dine
again in Santa Agatha. Ah, now I breathe more freely,"
continued she, untying the strings of her cloak, " Now I
feel my Neapolitan air blowing — bella Napoli ! " exclaimed
she, hastily opening the door of the balcony, which looked
on the sea, and spreading out her arms, she drank in great
draughts of the fresh air.

" Can we already see Naples ? " inquired I.

" Not yet," replied Federigo ; " but Hesperia, Armida's
enchanted garden."

We went out into the balcony, which was built of stone,
and looked out over the garden. What magnificence ! —
richer than fancy can create to itself! Below us was a
wood of lemon and orange-trees which were overladen with
fruit; the branches bent themselves down to the ground
with their golden load ; cypresses gigantically tall as the
poplars of the North of Italy, formed the boundary of the
garden ; they seemed doubly dark against the clear, heaven-
blue sea which stretched itself behind them, and dashed its
waves above the remains of the baths and temples of an-
tiquity, outside the low wall of the garden. Ships and
boats, with great white sails, floated into the peaceful har-
bour, around which Gaeta*, with its lofty buildings,
stretches itself. A little mountain elevates itself above the
city, and this is crowned with a ruin.

My eye was dazzled with the great beauty of the scene.

" Do you see Vesuvius ?• — How it smokes ! " .said Fe-
derigo, and pointed to the left, where the rocky coast
elevated itself, like light clouds, which reposed upon the
indescribably beautiful sea.

With the soul of a child I gave myself up to the rich
magnificence around me, and Federigo was as happy as
myself. We could not resist going below under the tall

* There ^Eneas buried his nurse, Cajeta, after whom this city is called.—
Author's note.

THE IMPROVISAT011E.

orange-trees, and I kissed the golden fruit which hung
upon the branches ; took from the many which lay on the
ground, and threw them like golden balls up in the air, and
over the sulphur-blue lake.

" Beautiful Italy !" shouted Federigo, triumphantly.
" Yes, thus stood thy image before me in the distant
North. In my remembrance blew this air which I now
inspire with every breath I draw. I thought of thy olive-
groves when I saw our willows ; I dreamed of the abundance
of the oranges when I saw the golden apples in the peasants'
gardens beside the fragrant clover-field; but the green waters
of the Baltic never become blue like the beautiful Medi-
terranean ; the heavens of the North never become so
high, so rich in colour, as the warm, glorious south. Its
gladness was inspiration : its speech became poetry.

" What longings I had in my home ? " said he ; " they
are happier who have never seen Paradise, than they who,
having seen it, are driven forth, never to return. My
home is beautiful ; Denmark is a flowery garden, which
can measure itself with any thing on the other side
the Alps ; it has beech-woods and the sea. But what is
earthly beauty compared with heavenly ? Italy is the land
of imagination and beauty ; doubly happy are they who
salute it for the second time ! "

And he kissed, as I had done, the golden oranges ; tears
ran down his cheeks, and throwing himself on my neck,
his lips burned on my forehead. With this my heart
opened itself to him entirely ; he was not indeed a stranger
to me, he was the friend of my childhood. I related to
him my life's last great adventure, and felt my heart
lighter by the communication, by speaking Annunciata's
name aloud ; by telling of my suffering and my misfor-
tune ; and Federigo listened to me with the sympathy of
an honest friend. I told him of my flight, of my adven-
ture in the robber's cave ; of Fulvia, and what I knew of
Bernardo's recovery. He offered me his hand with the
truest friendliness, and looked, with his light blue eyes,
sympathisingly into my soul.

A suppressed sigh was heard close to us behind the
hedge ; but the tall laurels, and the orange-branches, bowed

down with their fruit, concealed all ; any one might very
well have stood there and heard every word I said ; of that
I had not thought. We turned the branches aside, and
close beside us, before the entrance to the ruins of Cicero's
bath, sat the Neapolitan Signora, bathed in tears.

" Ah, young gentleman/' exclaimed she, " I am entirely
guiltless of this. I was sitting here already when you
came with your friend, it is so charming here and so cool !
You talked so loud, and I was in the middle of your his-
tory before I remarked that it was quite a private affair.
You have affected me deeply. You shall have no cause to
repent that I have become privy to it; my tongue is as
dumb as the dead."

Somewhat embarrassed, I bowed before the strange Sig-
nora, who had thus become acquainted with my heart's
history. At length Federigo sought to console me by say-
ing that nobody knew to what it might lead.

" I am," said he, " a real Turk in rny reliance on fate ;
besides, after all, there are no state secrets in the whole of
it; every heart has, in its archives, such painful memoirs.
Perhaps it was her own youth's history which she heard
in yours ; I can believe it, for people have seldom tears
for others' troubles, except when they resemble their own.
We are all egotists, even in our greatest sufferings and
anxieties."

We were soon again in the carriage, rolling on our way.
The whole country round us was of a luxuriant character ;
the broad-leaved aloe grew close by the road to the height
of a man, and was used as a fence. The large weeping-
willow seemed to kiss, with its depending, ever-moving
branches, its own shadow upon the ground.

Towards sunset we crossed the river Garigliano, where
formerly stood the old Minturnae ; it was the yellow Liris,
which I saw overgrown with reeds, as when Marius con-
cealed himself here from the cruel Sylla. But we were yet
a long way from Santa Agatha.

The darkness descended, and the Signora became ex-
tremely uneasy on account of robbers, and looked out conti-
nually to see that nobody cut away the luggage from behind
the carnage. In vain the vetturino cracked his whip, and
repeated his maledetto, for the dark night advanced faster

THE IMPROVISATORE. l6?

than he did. At length we saw lights before us. We
were at Santa Agatha.

The Signora was wonderfully silent at supper ; but it
did not escape me how much her eye rested upon me.
And the next morning, before our journey, when I went
to drink my glass of coffee'*, she came up to me with great
amiability. We were quite alone : she offered me her
hand, and said, good-humouredly and familiarly —

" You do not bear any ill-will towards me ? I am per-
fectly ashamed before you ; and yet I am quite guiltless of
the whole thing."

I prayed her to make herself easy, and assured her that
I had the greatest confidence in her womanly spirit.

" Yet you know nothing of me," said she ; " but you
may do ; probably my husband can be useful to you in the
great foreign city. You can visit me and him. You, per-
haps, have no acquaintance ; and a young man can so
easily make an error in his choice."

.. 1 thanked her heartily for her sympathy. It affected
me. One, however, meets with good people every where.

" Naples is a dangerous city ! " said she ; but Federigo
entered, and interrupted us.

We were soon again seated in the carriage. The glass-
windows were put down ; we became all better acquainted
as we approached our common goal — Naples. Federigo
was enraptured with the picturesque groups which we
met. Women, with red cloaks turned over their heads,
rode past on asses, a young child at the breast, or sleeping
with an elder one in the basket at their feet. A whole
family rode upon one horse ; the wife behind the husband,
and rested her arm or her head against his shoulder, and
seemed to. sleep ; the man had before him his little boy,
who sat and played with the whip. It was such a group
as Pignelli has given in his beautiful scenes out of the life
of the people.

The air was grey, it rained a little ; we could neither
see Vesuvius nor Capri. The corn stood juicy and green.

* In Italy people do not drink their coffee in cups, but in wine-glasses

Author's note.

M 4

THE IM PRO VIS A TORE.

in the field under the tall fruit-trees and poplars, round
which the vines enwreathed themselves.

(l Do you see," said the Signora, " our Campagna is a
table well spread with bread, fruit, and wine ; and you
will soon see our gay city and our swelling sea ! "

Towards evening we approached it. The splendid To-
ledo Street lay before us ; it was really a corso. On every
hand were illumined shops ; tables which stood in the
street, laden with oranges and figs, were lit up by lamps
and gaily-coloured lanterns. The whole street, with its
innumerable lights in the open air, looked like a stream
sprinkled over with stars. On each side stood lofty houses,
with balconies before every window, nay, often quite round
the corner, and within these stood ladies and gentlemen,
as if it were still a merry carnival. One carriage passed
another, and the horses slipped on the smooth slabs of
lava with which the street was paved. Now a little
cabriolet on two wheels came by ; from five to six people
sat in the little carriage, ragged lads stood behind it, and
beneath, in the shaking net, lay quite snugly, a half-naked
lazzarone. One single horse drew the whole crowd, and
yet it went at a gallop. There was a fire kindled before a
corner-house, before which lay two half-naked fellows,
clad only in drawers, and with the vest fastened with one
single button, who played at cards. Hand-organs and
hurdygurdies were playing, to which women were singing ;
all were screaming, all running one among another — sol-
diers, Greeks, Turks, English. I felt myself transported
into quite another world; a more southern life than that
which I had known breathed around me. The Signora
clapped her hands at the sight of her merry Naples.
" Rome," she said, " was a grave beside her laughing
city."

We turned into the Largo del Castello, one of the
largest squares in Naples, which leads down to the sea,
and the same noise and the same crowd met us here.
Around us we saw illuminated theatres, on the outside of
which were bright pictures, which represented the prin-
cipal scenes of the pieces which were being performed
within. Aloft, on a scaffold, stormed a Bajazzo family.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 1 §

The wife cried out to the spectators ; the husband blew
the trumpet, and the youngest son beat them both with a
great riding-whip, whilst a little horse stood upon its
hind-legs in the back-scene, and read out of an open book.
A man stood, and fought and sang in the midst of a
crowd of sailors, who sat in a corner; he was an impro-
visatore. An old fellow read aloud, out of a book, Orlando
Furioso, as I was told : his audience were applauding him
just as we passed by.

" Monte Vesuvio ! " cried the Signora ; and I now saw,
at the end of the street where the light-house stood, Ve-
suvius, lifting itself high in the air, and the fire-red lava,
like a stream of blood, rolling down from its side. Above
the crater hung a cloud, shining red from the reflected
glow of the lava ; but I could only see the whole for a
moment. The carriage rolled away with us across the
square to the Hotel Casa Tedesca. Close beside this
stood a little puppet theatre, and a still smaller 'one was
erected before it, where Punchinello made his merry leaps,
peeped, twirled himself about, and made his funny speeches.
All around was laughter. Only very few paid attention to
the monk who stood at the opposite corner, and preached
from one of the projecting stone steps. An old broad-
shouldered fellow, who looked like a sailor, held the cross,
on which was the picture of the Redeemer. The monk
cast flaming glances at the wooden theatre of the puppets,
which drew the attention of the people away from his
speech.

" Is this Lent ? " I heard him say. " Is this the time
consecrated to Heaven ? the time in which we should,
humbled in the flesh, wander in sackcloth and in ashes ?
Carnival-time is it ? Carnival always, night and day,
year out and year in, till you post down into the depths
of hell ! There you can twirl, there you can grin, can
dance, and keep festino in the eternal pool and torment
of hell ! "

His voice raised itself more and more ; the soft Neapo-
litan dialect rung in my ear like swaying verse, and the
words melted melodiously one into another. But all the
more his voice ascended, ascended also that of Punchi-

nello, and he leaped all the more comically, and was all
the more applauded by the people ; then the monk, in a
holy rage, snatched the cross from the hand of the man
who bore it, rushed forward with it, and exhibiting the
crucified, exclaimed, " See, here is the true Punchinello !
Him shall you see, him shall you hear ! For that you
shall have eyes and ears ! Kyrie, eleison !" and, impressed
by the holy sign, the whole crowd dropped upon their
knees, and exclaimed with one voice, " Kyrie, eleison !"
Even the puppet-player let fall his Punchinello. I stood
beside our carriage, wonderfully struck by the whole
scene.

Federigo hastened to obtain a carriage to take the
Signora to her home. She extended her hand to him,
with her thanks ; then, throwing her arm around my
neck, I felt a warm kiss upon my lips, and heard her say,
" Welcome to Naples ! " And, from the carriage which
conveyed her away, she waved kisses with her hand, and
we ascended to the chamber in the hotel which the waiter
assigned to us.

CHAPTER II.

PAIN AND CONSOLATION. NEARER ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE

SIGNORA. THE LETTER. HAVE I MISUNDERSTOOD HER.

AFTER Federigo was in bed, I continued sitting in the
open balcony, which looked into the street, with Vesuvius
before me. The extraordinary world, in which I seemed
to be as in a dream, forbade me to sleep. By degrees it
became more and more quiet in the street below me : the
lights were extinguished : it was already past midnight.
My eye rested upon the mountain, where the pillar of fire
raised itself up from the crater, towards the blood-red broad
mass of cloud, which, united to this, seemed like a mighty
pine-tree of fire and flame : the lava streams were the roots
with which it embraced the mountain.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 171

My soul was deeply impressed by this great spectacle —
the voice of God, which spoke from the volcano, as from
the still silent night-heaven. It was one of those moments
which occurs now and then, when, so to say, the soul
stands face to face with its God. I comprehended some-
thing of His omnipotence, wisdom, and goodness — com-
prehended something of Him, whose servants are the light-
ning and the whirlwind ; yet, without whose permission,
not even a sparrow falls to the earth. My own life stood
clearly before me : I saw in the whole a wonderful guiding
and directing; every misfortune even, and every sorrow,
had brought about a change for the better. The unhappy
death of my mother by the runaway horses, whilst I stood
a poor helpless child, seemed to shape out for me a better
future ; for was not, perhaps, the peculiar and nobler rea-
son which afterwards induced Excellenza to take charge of
my bringing up the circumstance of his having been the
innocent cause of my misfortune ? The strife between
Mariuccia and Peppo, the fearful moments which I passed
in his house, drove me out upon the stream of the world ;
for unless I had dwelt with old Domenica, on the dreary
Campagna, the attention of Excellenza had perhaps never
been directed to me.

Thus I reviewed in thought scene after scene of my
life, and found the highest wisdom and goodness in the
chain of events ; nor was it until I came to that last link
that all seemed to fall asunder. My acquaintance with
Annunciata was like a spring day, which in a moment had
expanded every flower-bud in my soul. With her I could
have become every thing : her love would have perfected
the happiness of my life. Bernardo's sentiment towards
her was not pure like mine : even had he suffered for a
moment by losing her, his pain would have been short :
he would soon have learned to console himself; but that An-
nunciata loved him annihilated all my life's happiness. Here
I comprehended not the wisdom of the Almighty, and felt
nothing but pain, because of all my vanished dreams. At
that moment a cithern sounded under the balcony ; and I
saw a man, with a cloak thrown over his shoulders, who
touched the strings from which trembled notes of love.

Shortly afterwards, the door of the opposite house opened
quite softly, and the man vanished behind it — a happy
lover, who went to kisses and embraces.

I looked up to the star-bright air — to the brilliant dark
blue sea which gleamed redly with the reflected light of
the lava and the eruption.

" Glorious nature ! " burst forth from my heart. " Thou
art my mistress ! Thou claspest me to thy heart — openest
to me thy heaven, and thy breath kisses me on my lips
and brow ! Thee will I sing, thy beauty, thy holy great-
ness ! I will repeat before the' people the deep melodies
which thou singest in my soul ! Let my heart bleed ; the
butterfly which struggles upon the needle becomes most
beautiful : the stream which, hurled as a waterfall from
the rock, scatters itself in foam, is more glorious ! — that
is the poet's lot. Life is, indeed, only a short dream.
When in that other world I again meet Annunciata, she
will also love me. All pure souls love one another : arm
in arm the blessed spirits advance towards God ! "

Thus dreamed my thoughts ; and courage and power to
come forth as an improvisatore, as well as a strong delight
in so doing, filled my soul. One thing alone lay heavily
on my heart — what would Francesca and Excellenza say
to my flight from home, and my debut as improvisatore ?
They believed me industriously and quietly occupied with
my books in Rome. This consciousness allowed me to
have no rest : I determined, therefore, that same night to
write to them.

With filial confidence I related to them every thing
which had occurred, every single circumstance — my love
for Annunciata, and the consolation which alone I found
in nature and in art ; and concluded with an urgent prayer
for an answer, as favourable as their hearts could give me;
nor before I obtained this would I take one step, or come
forward in public. Longer than a month they must not
let me languish.

My tears fell upon the letter as I wrote it ; but I felt
relieved by it; and when I had ended it, I quickly slept
more soundly and calmly than I had done for a long time.

The following day, Federigo and I arranged our affairs.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 1 73

He removed into a new lodging, in one of the side streets.
I remained at the Casa Tedesca, where I could see Vesu-
vius and the sea, two world's wonders which were new to
me. I industriously visited the Museo Bourbonico, the
theatres, and the promenades ; and during three days' re-
sidence in the foreign city had made myself very well
acquainted with it.

An invitation for Federigo and me came from Professor
Maretti and his wife Santa. At the first moment I be-
lieved this to be a mistake, as I knew neither the one nor
the other, and yet the invitation seemed to have particular
reference to me : I was to bring Federigo with me. On
inquiry, I found that Maretti was a very learned man, an
antiquarian j arid that Signora Santa had lately returned
home from a visit in Rome. I and Federigo had made
her acquaintance on the journey. Thus then she was the
Neapolitan Signora.

In the course of the evening Federigo and I went. We
found a numerous company in a well-lighted saloon, the
polished marble floor of which reflected the lights ; whilst
a large scaldino, with a loose iron grating, diffused a mild
warmth.

Signora or, as we now indeed know her name, Santa,
met us with open arms. Her light blue silk dress was
very becoming to her : had she not been so stout, she
would have been very lovely. She introduced us to her
company, and prayed us to make ourselves quite at home.

" Into my house," said she, " enter none but friends :
you will soon become acquainted with them all. With
this she mentioned several names, pointing to different
persons.

" We talk, we dance, we have a little singing," said she,
"and so the time flies on."

She pointed out seats to us. A young lady was seated
at the piano, and sang : it was precisely the very same aria
which Annunciata had sung in Dido ; but it sounded with
quite another expression, and seized upon the soul with a
much less powerful effect. Yet I was compelled, with the
rest, to applaud the singer : and now she struck a few
accords, and played a lively dance : two or three gentlemen

? THE IMPROVISATORE.

took their ladies, and floated over the polished smooth floor.
I withdrew myself into a window ; a little half-famished-
looking man, with ever-moving glassy eyes, howed himself
deeply before me. I had remarked him, like a little kobold,
incessantly popping in and out of the door. In order to
get up a conversation, I began to speak of the eruption of
Vesuvius, and how beautiful the lava- stream was.

" That is nothing, my friend," replied he, " nothing to
the great revolution of 96, which Pliny describes: then
the ashes flew as far as Constantinople. We have also, in
my time, gone with umbrellas in Naples, because of the
ashes ; but between Naples and Constantinople there is a
difference. The classical time excelled us in every thing —
a time in which we should have prayed, " Serus in ccelum
redeas f "

I spoke of the theatre of San Carlo ; and the man went
back to the car of Thespis, and gave me a treatise on the
tragic and comic Muses. I dropped a word about the
mustering of the royal troops ; and he immediately went
into the ancient mode of warfare, and commanding of
the whole phalanx. The only question which he himself
asked me was, whether I studied the history of art, and
gave myself up to antiquities. I said that the whole world's
life, every thing lay near to my heart; that I felt called
upon to be a poet; and the man then clapped his hands,
and began to declaim about my lyre —

" O decus Phcebi, et dapibus supremi
Grata testudo Jovis ! "

" Has he now got hold of you ? " said Santa, laughing,
and coming up to us ; " then are you already deep in
Sesostris' age. But your own times have demands upon
you : there sit ladies on the opposite side with whom you
must dance."

te But I do not dance ; never did dance/' replied I.

" But if I," said she, " the lady of the house, were to
ask you to dance with me, you would not refuse."

" Yes, indeed ; for I should dance so badly that we
should both of us fall on the smooth floor."

" A beautiful idea ! " exclaimed she, and skipped across

THE IMPROVISATORE. 175

to Federigo, and soon were they two floating through the
room.

" A lively woman ! " said the husband, and added, " and
handsome, very handsome, Signer Abbe."

" Very handsome/' replied I politely, and then we were,
heaven knows how, deep in the Etruscan Vases. He
offered himself as my guide in the Museo Bourbonico, and
explained to me what great masters they had been who had
painted these brittle treasures, in which every line contri-
buted to the beauty of the figures in expression of attitude,
and who were obliged to paint them whilst the clay was
warm, it not being possible to rub any thing out, whilst,
on the contrary, every line which had once been made must
remain there."

" Are you yet deep in history ? " inquired Santa, who
again came up to us; "the consequence then follows!"
exclaimed she, laughing, and drew me away from the
pedant, whilst she whispered, half aloud, " Do not let my
husband annoy you ! You must be gay, must take part in
the gaiety ! I will seat you here ; you shall relate to me
what you have seen, heard, and enjoyed."

I then told her how much Naples pleased me ; told her
of that which had given me most delight; of a little trip I
had this afternoon made through the grotto of Posilippo,
besides which I had discovered, in a thick vine-grove, the
ruins of a little church, which had been converted into a
family dwelling, whilst the friendly children, and the
handsome woman who had served me with wine, had
greatly contributed to make it all only the more romantic.

" Then you have been making acquaintances ? " said
she, laughing, and lifting her forefinger ; " nay, there is
no need for you to be confused about it : at your age the
heart does not amuse itself with a Lent sermon."

This was about all that I learned this evening of Signora
Santa and her husband. There was a something in her
manner that expressed itself in an ease, a na'ivete peculiar
to the Neapolitans, a cordiality which wonderfully at-
tracted me to her. Her husband was erudite, and that
was no fault ; he would be the best guide for me in the
Museum. And so he was; and Santa, whom I often

176 THE IMPROVISATORS.

visited, became to me more and more attractive. The
attentions which she showed to me flattered me, and her
sympathy opened my heart and my lips. I knew but very
little of the world, was in many things a complete child,
and grasped, therefore, the first hand which extended itself
kindly towards me, and, in return for a hand-pressure,
gave my whole confidence.

One day, Signora Santa touched upon the most im-
portant moment of my life, my separation from Annunciata,
and I found consolation and relief in speaking freely of it
to the sympathising lady. That she could see many
faults in Bernardo, after I had given a description of him,
was a sort of consolation to me ; but that she could also
find failings in Annunciata I could not pardon.

" She is too small for the stage," said she, " altogether
too slenderly made ; that certainly you will concede to me ?
Some substance there must be as long as we belong to this
world. I know, to be sure, right well, that here, in Naples,
all the young men were captivated by her beauty. It was
the voice, the incomparably fine voice, which transported
them into the spirit-world, where her fine form had its
abode. If I were a man, I should never fall in love with
such a being : I should actually fear her falling to pieces
at my first embrace."

She made me smile, and that, perhaps, thought I, was
her intention. To Annunciata's talent, mind, and pure
heart, she did the fullest justice.

During the last evening, inspired by the beauty of the
surrounding country and my own excited state of feeling,
I had written some short poems : " Tasso in Captivity,"
" The Begging Monk," and some other little lyrical pieces,
which perfectly expressed my unhappy love, and the shat-
tered picture- world which floated in my soul. I began to
read them to Santa, but in the middle of the first my feel-
ings, which I had there described, so entirely overpowered
me, that I burst into tears ; with that, she pressed my hand
and wept with me.

With these tears she bound me for ever !

Her house became to me a home. I regularly longed
for the hour when I should again converse with her. Her

THE IMPBOVISATORK. 177

humour, the comical ideas which she often started, made me
frequently laugh, although I was compelled to feel how
very different was Annunciata's wit and merriment — how
much nobler and purer ; but then, as no Annunciata lived
for me, I was grateful and devoted to Santa.

" Have you lately," she asked me one day, " seen the
handsome woman, near Posilippo, and the romantic house
which is half a church ? "

" Only once since," I replied.

' ' She was very friendly ? " inquired Santa, " the chil-
dren were gone out as guides, and the husband was on the
lake? Take care of yourself, Signore: on that side of
Naples lies the under- world ! "

I honestly assured her that nothing but the romantic
scenery drew me towards the grotto of Posilippo.

" Dear friend," said she, confidentially, *' I know the
thing better ! Your heart was full of love, of the first
strong love to her, whom I will not call unworthy, but
who, however, did not act openly towards you ! Do not
say one word to me against this : she occupied your soul,
and you have torn yourself from this image — have given
her up, as you yourself have assured me, and therefore
there is a vacancy in your soul which craves to be filled.
Formerly you lived alone in your books and your dreams ;
the singer has drawn you down into the world of human
life ; you are become flesh and blood, like the rest of us,
and these assert their right. And why should they not ?
I never judge a young man with severity ; and, besides
this, they can act as they will ! "

I objected to this last assertion ; but as to the desolation
which remained in my soul after the loss of Annunciata,
she was right in that ; but what could supply the place of
that lost image ?

" You are not like other people ! " continued she ; " you
are a poetical being ; and do you see, even the ideal Annun-
ciata required something more of a realist ; for that reason
she preferred Bernardo, who was so much inferior to you
in soul. But," added she, " you beguile me to talk to you
as it is hardly becoming for me, as a lady, to do ; your
wonderful simplicity and your little knowledge of the world

178 THE IMPROVISATORS.

make one become as na'ive in speech as you are in thoughts ;"
and with this she laughed aloud, and patted me on the
cheek.

In the evening, when I sat alone with Federigo, and he
became merry and confidential, he told me of the happy
days which he had spent in Rome, in which his heart also
had beaten strongly ; Mariuccia had played her part in
these adventures.

Many young men came to the house of the Professor
Maretti ; they danced well, talked excellently in company,
received glances of favour from the ladies, and were esteemed
by the men. I had known them but for a short time, and
yet they confided to me already their hearts' affairs, which
I shrunk from doing, even with Bernardo, and which only
my ingrained affection for him made me tolerate in him !
Yes, they were all different from me. Was Santa actually
right ? should I be only a poetical being in this world ?
That Annunciata really loved Bernardo was a sufficient
proof thereof ; my spiritual / was perhaps dear to her, but
I myself could not win her.

I had now been a month in Naples, and yet had heard
nothing either of her or of Bernardo. At that time the
post brought me a letter ; I seized it with a throbbing
heart, looked at the seal and the direction to divine of its
contents. I recognised the Borgbese arms and the old
Excellenza's hand-writing. I hardly dared to open it.

"Eternal mother of God!" I prayed, "be gracious to
me ! Thy will directs all things for the best ! "

I opened the letter and read : —

' ' Signore, — Whilst I believed that you were availing
yourself of the opportunity which I afforded you, of learn-
ing something, and of becoming a useful member of society,
all is going on quite otherwise ; quite differently to my in-
tentions regarding you. As the innocent occasion of your
mother's death, have I done this for you. We are quits.

" Make your debut as improvisatore, as poet, when and
how you will, but give me this one proof of your so-much-
talked-of gratitude, never to connect my name, my soli-
citude for you, with your public life. The very great

THE IMPROVISATORS. 179

service which you might have rendered me by learning
something, you would not render ; the very small one of
calling me benefactor is so repugnant to me, that you can-
not do any thing more offensive to me than to do that ! "

The blood stagnated at my heart ; my hands dropped
powerless on my knees ; but I could not weep ; that would
have relieved my soul.

" Jesus Maria ! " stammered I ; my head sank down on
the table. Deaf, without thought, without pain even, I
lay immovably in this position. I had not a word with
which to pray to God and the saints ; they also^ like the
world, seemed to have forsaken me.

At that moment Federigo entered.

<( Art thou ill, Antonio ? " asked he, pressing my hand ;
" one must not thus wall oneself in so with one's grief.
Who knows whether thou wouldst have been happy with
Annunciata ? That which is best for us always happens ;
that I have found more than once, although not in the
most agreeable way."

Without a word I handed to him the letter, which he
read ; in the meantime my tears found a free course, but
I was ashamed to let him see me weeping, and turned
away from him, but he pressed me in his arms and said,
" Weep freely; weep all thy grief out, and then thou wilt
be better."

When I was somewhat calmer, he inquired from me
whether I had taken any resolve. A thought then passed
through my soul ; I would reconcile the Madonna to me,
to whose service I was dedicated as a child ; in her had I
found a protector, and my future belonged to her.

" It is best," said I, " that I become a monk ; for that
my fate has prepared me ; there is nothing more for me
in this world. I am besides that only a poetical being,
not a man, like the rest of you ! Yes, in the bosom of
the church is a home and peace for me ! "

" Be reasonable, however, Antonio ! " said Federigo to

me. " Let Excellenza, let the world see that there is

power in thee, let the adverse circumstances of life elevate

and not depress thee. I think and hope, however, that

N 2

180 THE IMPROVISATORS.

thou wilt only be a monk for this evening ; to-morrow,
when the sun shines warmly into thy heart, thou wilt not
be one. Thou art really an improvisatore, a poet, and hast
soul and knowledge. Every thing will be glorious, excellent.
To-morrow we will take a cabriolet, and drive to Hercu-
laneum and Pompeii, and will ascend Vesuvius. We have
not been there ; thou must be amused and brought again
into humour, and when all the dark fumes are dissipated
then we will talk about the future quite rationally. Now
thou goest with me to the Toledo ; we will amuse our-
selves. Life speeds on at a gallop, and all of us have,
like the snail, our burden upon our backs, it matters not
whether of lead or mere playthings, if they are alike
oppressive."

His solicitude for me affected me ; I was still supported
by a friend. Without a word I took my hat and followed
him.

Music was merrily sounding in the square from one of
the little wooden theatres ; we remained standing before
it among a great crowd of people. The whole artistic
family stood as usual upon the stage ; the man and woman,
in gay clothes, hoarse with shouting ; a pale little boy,
with a care-depressed countenance, and in a white dress,
stood and played upon the violin, whilst two little sisters
twirled about in a lively dance. The whole thing appeared
to me very tragical.

' ' The unhappy beings ! " thought I, ' ' uncertain as
theirs, lies also my fate." I linked my arm closely in
Federigo's, and could not repress the sigh which ascended
from my breast.

"Now be calm and rational," whispered Federigo.
" First of all, we will take a little walk to let the wind
blow on thy red eyes, and then we will visit Signora
Maretti ; she will either laugh thee quite gay again, or
else weep with thee, till thou art tired ; she can do that
better than I can."

Thus for some time we wandered up and down the
great street, and then went to the house of Maretti.

" At length you are come one evening out of the common
course," exclaimed Santa kindly as we entered.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 181

" Signore Antonio is in his elegiac mood ; it must be
removed by mirth, and to whom could I bring him better
than to you ? To-morrow we drive to Herculaneum and
Pompeii, ascend Vesuvius ; if we could only be blessed
with an eruption."

" Carpe diem," broke forth from Maretti. " I should
delight to make the journey with you ; but not to ascend
Vesuvius, only to see how it goes with the excavations in
Pompeii. I have just received from there some little glass
ornaments of various colours; these I have arranged
according to their shades, and have within an opusculum
on them. You must see these treasures," said he, turning
to Federigo, "and give me a hint with regard to colour.
And you," continued he, clapping me on the shoulder,
" you shall begin to be merry, and then afterwards we
will empty a glass of Falernian, and sing with Horace, —

" ' Ornatus viridi tempora pampino,
Liber vota bonos ducit ad exitus.' "

I remained alone with Santa.

" Have you written any thing lately ? " inquired she.
" You look as if you had been composing one of those
beautiful pieces which so wonderfully speak to the heart.
I have thought many times on you and your Tasso, and
have felt myself quite pensive, although you very well
know that I do not belong to the weeping sisterhood. Be
now in a good humour. Look at me ; you say nothing
complimentary ; you see nothing, say nothing about my
new dress. See how becoming it is ; a poet must have an
eye for every thing. I am slender as a pine; regularly
thin ? Is it not so ? "

" That one sees immediately/' was my reply.

" Flatterer ! " interrupted she, " am I not as usual ?
My dress hangs quite loosely upon me ! Now what is
there to blush about ? You are, however, a man ! We
must have you more in women's society, and thus educate
you a little ; that we can do excellently. Now sit down,
my husband and Federigo are up to the ears in their
blessed antiquity ; let us live for the present ; one has
much more enjoyment in that ! You shall taste our
N 3

182 THE IMPROVISATORS.

excellent Falernian wine, and that directly ; you can drink
of it again with the other two."

I refused, and attempted to begin an ordinary con-
versation on the events of the day ; but I found, only
too plainly, how abstracted I was.

" I am only a burden to you," said I, rising, and
about to take my hat. " Pardon me, Signora ; I am not
well, and that it is which makes me unsociable."

" You will not leave me ? " said she, drawing me back
to my chair, and looking sympathisingly and anxiously
into my face. <c What has happened ? Have confidence
in me. I mean it so honestly and kindly towards you !
Do not let my petulance wound you. It is only my
nature. Tell me what has happened; have you had
letters ? Is Bernardo dead ? "

" No, God be praised," returned I j " it is another
thing, quite another."

I wished not to have spoken of Excellenza's letter ; yet,
in my distress, I disclosed every thing to her quite open-
heartedly, and with tears in her eyes she besought me not
to be troubled.

" I am thrust out of the world ; " said I, <( forsaken
by every one ; nobody — nobody at all loves me."

" Yes, Antonio," exclaimed she, " you are loved.
You are handsome ; you are good ; my husband loves
you, and I love you ; " and with these words I felt a
burning kiss upon my brow, her arm clasped my neck, and
her cheek touched mine.

My blood became like flame, a trembling went through
my limbs ; it was as if my breath stood still ; never had
I felt so before ; the door opened, and Federigo and
Maretti entered.

" Your friend is ill," said she, in her usual tone ;
" he has almost terrified me. Pale and red in one mo-
ment ; I thought he would have fainted in my arms, but
now he is better ; is it not so, Antonio ? "

And then, as if nothing had happened, as if nothing
had been said, she jested about me. I felt my own heart
beat, and a feeling of sharne and indignation arose in my
soul ; I turned from her, the beautiful daughter of sin.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 183

<( Qua sit hiems Velice, quod ccelitm, Vala Salerni ! "
said Maretti. " How is it with heart and head, Signor ?
What has he now done, the ferus Cupido, who always
sharpens the bloody arrow on the glowing whetstone ? "

The Falernian wine sparkled in the glass. Santa
clinked her glass against mine, and said, with an extra-
ordinary expression, " To better times !"

" To better times ! " repeated Federigo ; " one must
never despair."

Maretti touched his glass to mine also, and nodded,
" To better times ! "

Santa laughed aloud, and stroked my cheek.

CHAPTER III.

RAMBLE THROUGH HERCULANEUM AND POMPEII. THE EVENING

ON VESUVIUS.

THE next morning Federigo fetched me. Maretti joined
us. Fresh morning breezes blew from the sea, and our
carriage rolled round the bay from Naples to Her-
culaneum.

"How the smoke whirls from Vesuvius!" said Fede-
rigo, and pointed to the mountain. " We shall have a
glorious evening."

(i The smoke whirled in another manner," said Maretti ;
"it went like the shadow of a cloud over the whole
country, anno 79 post Christum. At that time the cities
which we now go to visit were buried under lava and
ashes ! "

Exactly where the suburbs of Naples end, begin the
cities Sant Giovanni, Portici, and Recina, which lie so
close that they may be regarded as one city. We had
reached the goal before I was aware of it, and drew up
before a house in Recina. Under the street here, under
the whole city, lies Herculaneum buried. Lava and ashes

covered the whole city in a few hours ; people forgot its
existence, and the city of Recina rose above it.

We entered the nearest house, in the garden of which
was a large open well, through which a spiral staircase
descended.

" See you, gentlemen," said Maretti ; " it was post
Christum 1720 that the Prince of Elbreuf had this well
dug. As soon as they had descended a few feet, they
found statues ; and so the excavation was forbidden
(mirabile dictu /) »For thirty years not a hand moved
itself before Charles of Spain came here, ordered the well
to be dug deeper, and they stood upon a great stone stair-
case, such as we now see here ! "

The daylight descended here but to a short distance ;
and these were the seats of the great theatre of Her-
culaneum. Our guides kindled a light for each of us to
carry, and we descended to the depth of the well, and
now stood upon the seats on which the spectators,
seventeen hundred years before, had sat ; like a giant
body, had laughed, been affected by, and had applauded,
the scenes of life which had been represented !

A little low door, close by, led us into a large, spacious
passage. We descended to the orchestra ; saw there the
different apartments for the different musicians, the
dressing-room, and the scenes themselves. The greatness
of the whole deeply impressed me. It could be lighted
for us only piecemeal, yet it seemed to me much larger than
the theatre of San Carlo. Silent, dark, and desolate, lay
all around us, and a world rioted above us. As we
imagine that a vanished race may, as spirits, enter into
our scene of life and action, seemed I now to have
stepped out of our age, and to be wandering, like a ghost,
in the far-off antiquity. I literally longed for daylight,
and we soon breathed again the warm air.

We walked straight forward along the street of Recina,
and an excavation lay before us, but much less than the
former. This was all the remains of Herculaneum on
which the sun shone. We saw one single street, houses
with small, narrow windows, red and blue painted walls ;
very little in comparison with that which awaited us in
Pompeii.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 185

Recina lay behind us, and now we saw around us a
plain, which seemed like a pitch-black, foaming sea, which
had run into iron-dross. Yet here buildings had raised
themselves; little vine-gardens grew verdantly, and the
church was half buried in this land of death.

"I myself saw this destruction!" said Maretti. "I
was a child, in the age between lactens and puer, as one
may say. Never shall I forget that day ! The black
dross over which we are now rolling was a glowing river
of fire; I saw how it rolled down from the mountain
towards Torre del Greco. My father (beati sunt mortui)
has even plucked ripe grapes for me where now lies the
black, stone-hardened rind. The lights burned blue
within the church, and the outer walls were red from
the strong glow of fire. The vineyards were buried, but
the church stood like a floating ark upon this glowing
sea of fire!"

Like vine-branches laden with heavy bunches swung
from tree to tree, and looking like one single garland, thus
united themselves city to city around the bay of Naples.*
The whole way, with the exception of the already-men-
tioned desolate extent, appears a Toledo street. The light
cabriolets full of people, riders on horseback and on asses,
passed one another; whole caravans of travellers, ladies
and gentlemen, contribute to the life of the picture.

I had always imagined Pompeii, like Herculaneum,
below the earth, but it is not so. It looks down from the
mountain over the vineyards to the blue Mediterranean.
We ascended at every step, and stood now before an open-
ing made in a wall of dark-grey ashes, to which grim
hedges and cotton-plants attempted to give a friendly
appearance. Soldiers on guard presented themselves^ and
we entered the suburb of Pompeii.

" You have read the letters of Tacitus ? " said Maretti.
" You have read those of the younger Pliny ; now you
shall have such commentaries on his work as no other
author has."

The long street in which we stood is called the Tomb

* Where Torre del Greco ends begins immediately Torre del Annunciata.
— Author's note.

THE IMPROV1SATORE.

Street. Here are monuments on monuments, Before
two of these one finds round, handsome seats, with beau-
tiful ornaments. Here, in those former times, the sons
and daughters of Pompeii rested themselves, on their
rambles out of the city. From the tombs they looked out
over the blooming landscape, the lively bend of the road,
and the bay. Next we saw a row of houses on each side,
all shops ; like so many skeletons with hollow eye-sockets
they seemed to stare upon us. On every hand were traces
of the earthquake which, earlier than the great destruc-
tion, had shaken the city. Many houses plainly showed
that they were in the progress of building exactly when
the fire and ashes buried them for centuries ; unfinished
marble cornices lay on the ground, and near to them the
models, in terra cotta, from which they were being
worked.

We had now reached the walls of the city ; up these,
flights of broad steps led us to an amphitheatre. Before
us stretched out a long, narrow street, paved, as in Naples,
with lava-flags, the remains of a much earlier eruption
than that which, seventeen hundred years before, had
devastated Herculaneum and Pompeii. Deep tracks of
wheels are visible in the stone ; and upon the houses one
still reads the names of the inhabitants, hewn in whilst
they yet lived there. Before a few of the houses there
yet hung out signs, one of which announced that here, in
this house, mosaic-work was done.

All the apartments were small ; the light was admitted
through the roof, or by an opening above the door, a
square portico inclosed the court, which was usually only
large enough for a single little flower-bed or basin, in
which the fountains played ; for the rest, the courts and
floors were ornamented with beautiful mosaics, in which
artistical forms, circles, and quadrants, cut through each
other. The walls were brightly painted with deep red,
blue, and white colours, with female dancers, genii, and
light floating figures around upon a glowing ground. All
was indescribably graceful in colouring and drawing, and
as fresh as if they had been painted only yesterday.
Federigo and Maretti were in deep conversation on the

THE IMPROVISATORS. 187

wonderful composition of colours which resist time so
uncommonly well, — yes, before I was aware of it, were
deep in the middle of Bayardi's ten folio volumes on the
" Antique Monuments of Herculaneum." They, like a
thousand others, forgot the poetical reality which lay
before them, and busied themselves with criticism, and
treatises thereon. Pompeii itself was forgotten amid their
learned researches. I had not been thus consecrated to
these outwardly learned mysteries ; the reality around me
was a poetical world, in which my soul felt itself at home.
Centuries melted together into years,, revealed themselves
in moments in which every care slumbered, and my
thoughts won anew repose and inspiration.

We stood before the house of Sallust.

" Sallust ! " shouted Maretti, and lifted his hat, ' ' corpus
sine animo ! The soul is hence, but we salute reverentially
the inanimate body."

A large picture of Diana and Actseon occupied the oppo-
site wall. The workmen exclaimed aloud and joyfully,
and brought forth to the light a magnificent marble table,
white as the stone of Carrara, supported by two glorious
sphinxes j but that which deeply affected me, was the
yellow bones which I saw, and, in the ashes, the im-
pression of a female breast of infinite beauty.

We went across the forum to the temple of Jupiter.
The sun shone upon the white marble pillars ; beyond lay
the smoking Vesuvius ; pitch-black clouds whirled out
from the crater, and white as snow hung the thick steam
over the stream of lava, which had formed to itself a path
down the side of the mountain.

We saw the theatre, and seated ourselves upon the
step-formed benches. The stage, with its pillars, its
walled background, with doors for exit, all stood as if
people had played there yesterday ; but no tone more will
sound from the orchestra, no Roscius speak to the exulting
crowd. All was dead around us ; the great stage of Nature
alone breathed of life. The succulent green vineyards, the
populous road which led down to Salerno, and in the back-
ground the dark blue mountain, with its sharp outline in
the warm ethereal colouring was a great theatre, upon

188 THE IMPROVISATORS.

which Pompeii itself stood like a tragic chorus, which sang
of the power of the angel of death. I saw him,, even him-
self, whose wings are coal-black ashes, and overflowing
lava which he spreads over cities and villages.

We were not to ascend Vesuvius till evening, when the
glowing lava and moonlight would have great effect. We
took asses from Recina, and rode up the mountain ; the
road lay through vineyards and lonesome farms ; very soon,
however, the vegetation diminished into small, woeful-
looking hedges, and dry, reed-like, blades of grass. The
wind blew colder and stronger, otherwise the evening was
infinitely beautiful. The sun seemed, as it sank, like a
burning fire ; the heavens beamed like gold, the sea was
indigo, and the islands pale blue clouds. It was a fairy
world in which I stood. On the edge of the bay Naples
grew more and more indistinct ; in the far distance lay the
mountains covered with snow, which shone gloriously like
the glaciers of the Alps, whilst aloft, quite close to us,
glowed the red lava of Vesuvius.

At length we came to a plain, covered with the iron
black lava, where was neitner road nor track. Our asses
carefully assayed their footing before they advanced a step,
and thus we only very slowly ascended the higher part of
the mountain, which, like a promontory, raised itself out
of this dead, petrified sea. We approached the dwelling
of the hermit through a narrow excavated road, where
only reed-like vegetation was found. A troop of soldiers
sat here around a blazing fire, and drank from their bottles
lacrymce Christi. They serve as an escort for strangers
against the robbers of the mountains. Here the torches
were lighted, and the winds seized upon their flames as if
they would extinguish them, and rend away every spark.
By this wavering, unsteady light, we rode onward in the
dark evening along the narrow, rocky path, over loose
pieces of lava, and close beside the deep abyss. At length,
like a mountain, reared itself before us the coal-black peak
of ashes : this we had to ascend ; our asses could no longer
be serviceable to us ; we left them, therefore, behind us
with the lads who had driven them.

The guide went first with the torches, we others fol

THE IMPROVISATORE. 189

lowed after, but in a zig-zag direction, because we went
through the ashes, in which we sank at every step up to
the knee ; nor could we keep a regular line behind one
another, because there lay great loose stones and blocks of
lava in the ashes, which rolled down when we trod upon
them ; at every other step we slid one backwards, every
moment we fell into the black ashes ; it was as if we had
leaden weights fastened to our feet.

" Courage ! " cried the guide before us, "we shall quickly
be at the summit !" But the point of the mountain seemed
for ever to be at the same height above us. Expectation
and desire gave wings to my feet ; an hour elapsed before
we reached the top — I was the first who did so.

A vast platform, scattered over with immense pieces of
lava thrown one upon another, spread itself here before our
eyes, in the midst of which stood a mount of ashes. It
was the cone of the deep crater. Like a ball of fire hung
the moon above it ; thus high had it ascended ; and now,
for the first time, the mountain permitted us to see it, but
only for a moment ; in the next, with the rapidity of
thought, a coal-black cloud whirled out of the crater, and it
became dark night around us ; deep thunder rolled within
the mountain ; the ground trembled under our feet, and
we were compelled to hold firmly one by another that we
might not fall. The same moment resounded an explosion
which a hundred cannon could only faintly imitate. The
smoke divided itself, and a column of fire, certainly a mile
high, darted into the blue air ; glowing stones, like blood-
rubies, were cast upwards in the white fire. I saw them
like rockets falling above us, but they fell in a right line
into the crater, or else rolled down the mound of ashes.

"Eternal God!" stammered my heart, and I hardly
ventured to breathe.

" Vesuvius is in a Sunday humour ! " said the guide,
and beckoned us onwards. I had imagined that our journey
was at an end, but the guide pointed forward over the
plain, where the whole horizon was a brilliant fire, and
where gigantic figures moved themselves like black shades
upon the strong fire-ground. These were travellers who
stood between us and the down-streaming lava. We had

1.90 THE IMPROVISATORE.

gone round the. mountain in order to avoid this, and had
ascended it from the opposite, the eastern side. In its
present restless state we could not approach the crater
itself, but could only stand where the lava-streams, like
fountains of water, poured out of the sides of the mountain.
We therefore left the crater on our left, advanced across
the mountain plain, and climbed over the great blocks of
lava, for here was neither road nor path. The pale moon-
light, and the red glare of the torches upon this uneven
ground, caused every shadow, and every cleft, to seem like
a gulf, whilst we could see only the deep darkness.

Again the loud thunder resounded below us, all became
night, and a new eruption glared before us.

Only slowly, and feeling before us with our hands at
every step, crept we onwards towards our goal, and quickly
we perceived that every thing which we touched was warm.
Between the blocks of lava it steamed forth hot as from an
oven.

A smooth plain now lay before us ; a lava-stream which
was only about two days old ; the upper rind of which
was already black and hard from the operation of the air,
although scarcely half an ell thick, under which lay, fathoms
deep, the glowing lava. Firm as the ice-rind on an inland
lake, lay here the hardened crust above this sea of fire.
Over this we had to pass, and, on the other side, lay again
the uneven blocks, upon which the strangers stood, and
looked down upon the new torrent of lava, which they could
see only from this point.

We advanced singly, with the guides at our head, upon
the crust of lava ; it glowed through the soles of our shoes ;
and around us, in many places, where the heat had caused
great chinks, we could see the red fire below us ; if the
rind had broken, we should have been plunged into the sea
of fire ! We assayed every footstep before we took it, and
yet went on hastily in order to pass this space, for it burned
our feet, and produced the same effect as iron when it
begins to cool and become black, which, when put in motion,,
instantly emits again fiery sparks ; on the snow, the foot-
prints were black, here red. Neither of us spoke a word ;
we had not imagined this journey to have been so fearful.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 191

An Englishman turned back to us with his guide ; he
came up to me upon the very crust of the lava where we
were surrounded by the fiery red rents.

" Are there any English among you ?" he inquired.

" Italian only, and a Dane," I replied.

" The devil ! " That was all that was said.

We had now arrived at the great blocks on which many
strangers were standing. I also mounted one, and before
me, down the mountain-side, glided slowly the fresh torrent
of lava j it was like a redly glowing fiery slime, as of melted
metal streaming from a furnace, and which spread it out
below us far and wide, to a vast extent. No language, no
picture, can represent this in its greatness and its fearful
effect. The very air appeared like fire and brimstone ; a
thick steam floated upwards over the lava stream, red with
the strongly reflected light ; but all around was night. It
thundered below in the mountain, and above us ascended
the pillar of fire, with its glowing stones. Never before
had I felt myself so near to God. His omnipotence and
greatness filled my soul. It was as if the fire around me
burned out every weakness within me ; I felt strength
and courage ; my immortal soul lifted its wings.

"Almighty God!" breathed forth my spirit, " I will
be Thy apostle. Amid the storms of the world I will
sing Thy name, Thy might, and majesty ! Higher shall
my song resound than that of the monk in his lonely cell.
A poet I am ! Give me strength ; preserve my soul
pure, as the soul of Thy priest and of Nature's ought
to be!" I folded my hands in prayer, and, kneeling
amid fire and cloud, poured out my thanks to Him whose
wonders and whose greatness spoke to my soul.

We descended from the block of lava on which we stood,
and were scarcely more than a few paces from the place
when, with a loud noise, it sank down through the broken
crust, and a cloud of sparks whirled aloft in the air ; but
I did not tremble ; I felt that my God was near to me :
it was one of those moments in life in which the soul
is conscious of the bliss of its immortality, in which there
is neither fear nor pain, for it knows itself and its God.

All around us sparks were cast upwards from small

1Q THE IMPROVISATORE.

craters, and new eruptions followed every minute from the
large one ; they rushed into the air like a flock of birds
which flew all at once out of a wood. Federigo was as
much transported as I was, and our descent from the
mountain in the loose ashes corresponded with our excited
state of mind ; we flew ; it was a falling through the air :
we slid, ran, sank. The ashes lay as soft as new-fallen
snow upon the mountains. We needed only ten minutes
for our descent, whereas we had required an hour in
ascending. The wind had abated ; our asses were waiting
for us below, and in the hut of the hermit sat our learned
man, who had declined making the wearisome ascent with
us.

I felt myself animated anew. I turned my glance con-
tinually backwards ; the lava lay in the distance like
colossal, falling stars ; the moon shone like day. We tra-
velled along the edge of the beautiful bay, and saw the
reflection of the moon and the lava in two long stretches
of light, the one red, the other blue, trembling on the mir-
ror of the waters. 1 felt a strength in my soul, a clear-
ness in my comprehension ; yes, if I may compare the
small with the great, I was so far related to Boccacio, that
the impression of a place, and its momentary inspiration,
determined the whole operation of the spirit. Virgil's
grave saw his tears, the world his worth as a poet ; the
greatness and terror of the volcano had chased away de-
pression and doubt ; therefore, that which I saw this day
and this evening is so vividly impressed upon my soul,
therefore have I lingered over this description, and have
given that which then stamped itself upon my breast,
and which I otherwise must have spoken of at a later
period.

Our learned man invited us to accompany him home.
At the first moment I felt some embarrassment, a strange
reluctance, after the last scene between me and Santa, to
see her again ; but the greater and more important decision
in my soul soon annihilated this lesser one.

She took me kindly by the hand, poured us out wine,
was natural and lively, so that at last I upbraided myself
for my severe judgment upon her ; I felt that the impure

THE IMPROVISATORS. 193

thought existed in myself; her compassion and sympathy,
which she had evidently expressed so strongly, I had mis-
taken for unworthy passion. I sought now, therefore, by
friendliness and jest, which was quite accordant with my
present state of mind, to make up for my strange behaviour
the day before. She seemed to understand me, and I read
in her glance a sister's heartfelt sympathy and love.

Signora Santa and her husband had never yet heard me
improvise ; they urged me to do so. I sang of our ascent
to Vesuvius, and applause and admiration saluted me.
That which Annunciata's silent glance had spoken was
poured in eloquent language from Santa's lips, and they
became doubly beautiful from these words : the eye burned
with looks of gratitude into my very soul.

CHAPTER IV.

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING MY DKBUT IN SAN CARLO.

IT was decided that I should make my debut as Impro-
visatore. Day by day I felt my courage to do PO increase.
In Maretti's house, and in the few families whose ac-
quaintance I had made there, I contributed, by my talent,
to the entertainment of the company, and received the
warmest praise and encouragement. It was a refreshment
for my sick soul ; I experienced a joy therefrom, and a
gratitude towards Providence, and nobody who could have
read my thoughts would have called the fire which burned
in my eyes vanity ; it was pure joy ! I had really a sort
of anxiety about the praise which they bestowed upon me;
I feared that I was unworthy of it, or that I should not
always be able to preserve it. I felt it deeply, and ven-
tured to express it, although it concerned me so much.
Praise and encouragement are the best school for a noble
soul; where, on the contrary, severity and unjust blame
either render it timid, or else awaken defiance and scorn.
I had learned this by my own experience.
o

19^ THE IMPROVISATORS.

Maretti showed me much attention, and went out of his
way to serve me, and introduced me to persons who could
be useful to me in the path which I had chosen for myself.
Santa was infinitely mild and affectionate towards me ; and
yet it seemed to me^that a something within me ever repelled
me from her. I always went with Federigo, or when I
knew that they had company with them ; I feared lest
the late scene should be renewed. Yet my eye dwelt upon
her when she was not aware of it ; and I could not help
thinking her beautiful. It happened with me, as it so
often happens in the world, people are jested with ; they
are told that they love somebody that they have never
thought about, nor have paid much attention to. But
then comes the desire to see what there may be in this
person, and why they should be fixed upon for our choice.
One begins with curiosity, which becomes interest; and one
has had examples of interest in a person becoming love.
With me, however, it only went no farther than to atten-
tion — a sort of outward regard which I had never known
before, but just sufficient to excite a beating of the heart
— an anxiety which made me bashful, and kept me at a
distance from her.

I had now been two months in Naples ; on the next
Sunday I was to make my debut in the great theatre of
San Carlo. The opera of the Barber of Seville was given
that night ; and, after this, I was to improvise on given
subjects. I called myself Cenci ; I had not the boldness
to have my family name placed on the bill.

An extraordinary longing for the decisive day which
was to establish my fame filled my soul ; but with it there
often went also an anxiety, a feverish terror, through my
blood. Federigo comforted me : said that that came
from the air — he, and almost everybody else, felt
the same ; it proceeded from Vesuvius, whose eruptions
increased so greatly. The lava- stream was already
come below the mountain, and had taken the direc-
tion towards Torre del Annunciata. We could hear, in an
evening, the thundering reports in the mountain ; the air
was filled with ashes, which lay thickly upon the trees and
flowers. The top of the mountain stood enveloped in

THE IMPROVISATORS. 1Q5

dark tempest-brooding clouds, from which, with every
eruption, darted forth the zig-zag pale-hlue lightning.
Santa was unwell, like the rest. " It is fever," she said,
and her eye burned. She looked pale, and expressed her-
self very much troubled about it ; because she must, and
would, be in San Carlo on the evening of my debut.

" Yes," said she, " that I shall, even though I have a
fever three times as severe the day after. I shall not re-
main away. One must venture one's life for one's friends,
even if they know nothing about it ! "

I passed my time now on the promenades, in the coffee-
houses, and the various theatres. Again, my excited state
of mind drove me to the churches, to the foot of the Ma-
donna ; there I confessed every sinful thought, and prayed
for courage, and for strength to follow the powerful im-
pulses of my soul. ' ' Bella ragazza ! " whispered the
tempter in my ear, and my cheeks burned as I tore myself
away. My spirit and my blood strove for the mastery ; I
felt, as it were, a period of transition in my individual I.
The next Sunday evening I regarded as the culmination-
point.

" We must j ust for once go to the great gambling-
house," Federigo had said many a time. "A poet must
know every thing ! "

We had not been there ; and I felt a kind of bashfulness
in going. Bernardo had not said of me, without some
degree of justice, that my bringing up with the good
Domenica, and in the Jesuits' school, had infused a little
goat's milk in my blood — cowardice, as he had also offen-
sively called it.

I needed more decision ; I must live more in the world
if I meant to describe it 1 These thoughts passed impres-
sively through my mind, as somewhat late in the evening,
I went to the most celebrated gaming-house in Naples.

" I will go up there, just because I feel the want of
courage to do so!" said I within myself. " I need not
play ; Federigo and my other friends will say that I have
done very rationally,"

Yet how weak one can be ! My heart beat all the time
as if I were about to commit a sin, whilst my reason whis-
o 2

196 THE IMPROVISATOBE.

pered to me that there really was no harm in it all. Swiss
guards stood at the doors ; the staircase was magnificently
lighted. In the lobby stood a crowd of servants, who
took from me my hat and stick, and opened the door for
me, which revealed to me a suite of well-lighted rooms.
There was a large assembly of people, gentlemen and
ladies. Endeavouring not to appear embarrassed, I went
quickly forward into the first saloon, and no one took the
least notice of me. The company sat around the great
gaming-table, with piles of colonati and louis-d'or lying
before them.

A lady advanced in years, who certainly had once been
handsome, sat with painted cheeks, and richly apparelled,
grasping the cards in her hands, whilst she fixed a falcon
glance upon the piles of gold. Several young and very
lovely girls stood in very confidential conversation with some
gentlemen — all of them the beautiful daughters of sin.
Even the old lady with the falcon eye had once won hearts,
as she could now win with their colour.

In one of the smallest of the chambers, there stood a
red and green diced table. I saw that they set one or
more colonati upon one of these colours ; the balls were
rolled, and, if they lay upon the selected colour, the stake
was won double. It went on like the beating of my pulse ;
gold and silver played over the board. I also took out my
purse, threw a colonati upon the table, which fell on the
red colour. The man who stood before it looked at me
with an inquiring glance, as to whether it should remain
lying there. I nodded involuntarily ; the ball rolled, and
my money was doubled. I became quite embarrassed
thereby ; it remained lying there, and the ball rolled again
and again. Fortune favoured my play ; my blood was put
into motion. It was only my lucky piece which I ven-
tured ; presently there lay a heap of silver before me, and
the louis-d'or shone beside it as a balance. I swallowed a
glass of wine, for my mouth was parched. The great
heap of silver increased more and more, for I took none of
it away. The ball rolled again, and, with the most
cold-blooded mien, the banker swept the whole glittering
heap to himself. My beautiful golden dream was at an

THE IMPROVISATORS. 197

end; but it also awoke me. I played no more; I had
only lost the colonati which I had risked at first. This
consoled me, and I went into the next saloon.

Among the young ladies there was one who attracted
my attention, by a wonderful likeness to Annunciata, only
she was taller and stouter. My eye rested continually
upon her. She observed it, stepped up to me, and, point-
ing to a little table, asked whether we should make up a
party. I excused myself, and returned to the room from
which I Avas just come ; she followed me with her eye.
In the innermost room a number of young men were play-
ing at billiards ; they were playing without their coat?,
although ladies were in their company. I did not remem-
ber what freedom was permitted in this company. Before
the door, but with his back towards me, stood a young
man of fine figure ; he steadied the queue on the ball, and
made a masterly stroke, for which he was applauded.
The lady even, who had attracted my attention, nodded
kindly, and seemed to say something amusing. He turned
himself round, and wafted her a kiss with his hand, whilst
she jestingly struck him on the shoulder. My heart beat;
it was actually Bernardo !

I had not courage to advance nearer, yet I desired to
have perfect knowledge. I stole along the wall towards
the open door of a large, half-lighted saloon, where, unseen
myself, I could more narrowly observe him. A twilight
pervaded this apartment ; red and white glass lamps cast a
faint light ; an artificial garden adjoined it, adorned with
bowers, which, however, were only formed with painted,
leaden foliage, surrounded by beautiful orange-trees ;
stuffed parrots, with brilliant plumage, swung among the
branches, whilst a hand-organ played, in low tones, soft,
graceful melodies, that went to the heart. A mild cool-
ness was wafted through the open door from the arcade.
Scarcely had I cast a hasty glance over the whole, when
Bernardo approached with light footsteps : I drew myself
mechanically into an arbour ; he saw me standing there,
smiled and nodded to me, and, hastening into the next
arbour, threw himself upon a seat, and hummed an air
half aloud. A thousand emotions agitated my breast : —
o3

198 THE IMPROVISATORS.

he here ? I so near him ? I felt a trembling in all my
limbs, and was obliged to seat myself. The fragrant
flowers, the half-suppressed music, the twilight, even the
soft, elastic sofa, all carried me into a sort of dream-world,
and only in such a one could I expect to meet with Ber-
nardo. Whilst I thus sat, the young lady whom I have
already mentioned entered the room and approached the
arbour where I was ; seeing this, Bernardo hummed
aloud, and she, recognising his voice, turned towards him.
I heard a kiss ; it burned into my soul.

Him — the faithless, fickle Bernardo, had Annunciata
preferred to me ! Already, so shortly after the happiness
of his love, he could forget her, could consecrate his lips
to an image of beauty formed of clay ! I darted out of
the room, out of the house ; my heart trembled with in-
dignation and pain. I got no rest till morning.

The day was now come on the evening of which I was
to make my debut in the theatre of San Carlo. The
thoughts of this and the adventures of yesterday had set
my whole soul in motion. Never had my heart prayed
more inwardly to the Madonna and the saints. I went to
church, received the sacrament from the priest ; prayed
that it might strengthen and purify me, and felt its won-
derful power ! One thought only seized disturbingly
upon the rest which was so necessary for me, and this
was, whether Annunciata were here — whether Bernardo
had followed her. Federigo brought me the certain intel-
ligence that she was not here ; he, on the contrary, as the
list of arrivals showed, had been here four days. Santa, I
knew, was ill of fever ; but, notwithstanding, she insisted
on going to the theatre. The playbills were pasted up ;
Federigo told histories, and Vesuvius threw up fire and
ashes more violently than usual ; all was in activity.

The opera had begun when the carriage conveyed me to
the theatre. Had the Fates sat at my side, and my life's
thread been between the shears, I believe I should have
exclaimed, " Cut away ! " My prayer and my thought
were, " God lets all things be for the best."

In the green-room I found a crowd of artists of the
stage, and some fine spirits, and even an improvisatore,

THE IMPROVISATORS. 199

and a professor of the French language, Santini, • with
whom Maretti had made me acquainted. The conversation
was easy; they jested and laughed; the singers in "The
Barber " came and went as if it were from a party ; the
stage was their accustomed home.

cc We shall give you a theme/' said Santini ; " oh, a
hard nut to crack ; but it will succeed. I remember how
I trembled the first time that I made my appearance ; but
it succeeded! I had my tricks — little innocent artifices
which reason permits ; certain little stanzas about love
and antiquity, the beauty of Italy, poetry and art, which
one knows how to bring in, to say nothing of a few stand-
ing poems ; that is a matter of course ! "

I assured him that I had never thought of preparing
myself in this way.

" Yes, that one says ? " said he, laughing, " but good !
good ! You are a rational young man, it will succeed
gloriously with you ! "

The piece came to an end, and I stood alone upon the
empty stage.

" The scaffold is ready !" said the manager, laughing,
and gave the sign to the mechanist. The curtain drew
up.

I saw only a black abyss, could only distinguish the
first heads in the orchestra and the first boxes of the five
heights in that lofty building ; a thick, warm air wafted
towards me. I felt a strong resolution within me which
was amazing to myself; to be sure, my soul was in a
state of excitement, but it was, as it ought to be, flexible
and susceptible of every thought. As the air is the
clearest when in winter severe cold penetrates it, thus felt
I an elasticity and clearness all at once. All my spiritual
abilities were awake, as in this case they must and should
be.

Any one could give me a subject on a slip of paper,
upon which I was to improvise, a secretary of the police
having in the first place examined that nothing contrary
to the law was suggested. From these subjects I could
make my selection. In the first I read " il cavalier ser-
vente ; " but I had never rightly thought over this kind
o4

of business. I knew, certainly, that the cicisbeo, as they
are also called, was the knight of the present time, who,
now that he can no longer enter the lists for his lady, is
her faithful attendant, who stands in the place of her hus-
band. I recollected the well-known sonnet, " Femina di
costume, di maniere,"* but at the moment not a thought
would arise in my mind to embellish this subject. I
opened with impatience the second paper ; in it was
written " Capri ; " this, also, was embarrassing to me ; I
had never been upon the island, had only seen its beautiful
mountain outline from Naples. What I did not know I
could not sing; I preferred rather " II cavalier servente."

I opened the third paper, and here I read, " The Cata-
combs of Naples ; " neither had I been here ; but with
the word catacombs a life's moment stood before me ; the
ramble in my childhood with Federigo, and our adventure,
arose livingly before my soul. I struck a few notes ; the
verses came of themselves ; I related what I had felt
and gone through, only that it was in the catacombs of
Naples instead of Rome. I seized for a second time the
thread of happiness, and repeated, stormy plaudits saluted
me ; they streamed like champagne through my blood.

They gave me now as a subject, " Fata Morgana; " I
had not seen this beautiful ethereal appearance, peculiar to
Sicily and Naples ; but I knew very well the beauty fairy
Phantasy, which dwelt in those splendid castles ; I could
describe my own dream-world, in which floated, also, her
gardens and castles. In my heart, indeed, abode life's
most beautiful " Fata Morgana."

I rapidly thought over my subject; a little story
fashioned itself therewith, and new ideas presented them-
selves in my song. I began with a little description of the
ruined church at Posilippo, without precisely mentioning

* This sonnet is in W. Muller's Rom, Romer, und Romerin. The cicisbeo
was established in Genoa, among the merchants. Business took these men
much fr,.m home, and, in order not to confine their wives to the house, they
were placed under tjje care of a friend, to become their attendant ; commonly
this friend was a priest. Afterwards it became the fashion : nobody could do
without a cicisbeo. The connexion was noble and pure, and there are in-
stances in which the dead have been praised on their monuments for the exact
and faithful fulfilment of their duty as cicisbcos. From morning till night
must the cicisbeo attend his lady, must show her the greatest attention, and,
on the contrary, be indifferent to others : tin's is his duty. — Author's Note.

THE 1MPBOVISATORE. 201

its name. This romantic house had captivated me, and I
gave a picture of the* church, which now had become the
home of the fisherman ; a little child lay asleep on his bed
below the window on which the picture of Saint George
was painted on the glass. In the still moonlight night a
beautiful little girl came to him, she was as lovely and as
light as air, and had beautiful, bright-coloured wings upon
her shoulders. They played together, and she led him
out into the green vine-grove, showed him a thousand
glorious things which he had never seen before; they went
out into the mountains, which opened themselves into
large, splendid churches, full of pictures and altars ; they
sailed upon the beautiful blue sea over against the smoking
Vesuvius, and the mountain appeared as if of glass ; they
saw how the fires burned and raged within it ; they went
below the earth and visited the old cities, of which he had
heard tell, and all the people were living; he saw their
wealth and pomp, greater even than we have any con-
ception of from their ruins. She loosened her wings,
bound them upon his shoulders, for she, without these,
was light as air, and needed them not. Thus flew they
over the orange-woods, over the mountains, the luxuriant
green Marshes to ancient Rome, amid the dead Campagna;
flew over the beautiful blue sea, far past Capri, rested
upon the crimson, shining clouds, and the little girl kissed
him, called herself Fancy, and showed him her mother's
beautiful castle, built of air and sunbeams, and there they
played so happily and so joyously ! But, as the boy grew
up, the little girl came to him less frequently, peeped only
at him in the moonlight between the green vine-leaves,
and the oranges nodded to him, and he became troubled
and full of longing. But he must now help his father on
the sea, learn to work the oars, to pull the ropes, and
steer the boat in the storm ; but all the more he grew, all
the more turned his thoughts towards his beloved play-
fellow, who never more visited him. Late in the moon-
light nights, when he lay upon the quiet sea, he let the
oars rest, and down in the deep, clear water, he saw the
sandy, seaweed-strewn bottom of the ocean. Fancy then
looked upwards at him, with her dark, beautiful eyes, and
seemed to beckon and call him downward to her.

202 THE IMPROVISATORS.

One morning many fishermen stood together on the
shore. Floating in the ascending beams of the sun, not
far from Capri, lay a new, wondrously beautiful island
formed of rainbow colours, with glittering towers, stars,
and clear, purple-tinted clouds. " Fata Morgana ! " ex-
claimed they all, and triumphed joyfully in the charming
apparition ; but the young fisher knew it well : there had
he played ; there had he abode with his beautiful Fancy :
a strange melancholy and yearning seized upon his soul ;
but, amid his tears, grew dim, and vanished the whole
well-known image.

In the clear moonlight evening again ascended, from
the promontory on which the fisherman stood, castles and
islands fashioned of brightness and of air ; they saw a boat
with the speed of an arrow dart towards the strangely
floating land and vanish ; and suddenly was extinguished
the whole creation of light, and, instead, a cold-black
cloud spread itself over the sea, a water-spout advanced
along the peaceful surface, which now began to heave its
dark green billows. When this had vanished, the ocean
was again calm ; the moon shone upon the azure waters,
but they saw no boat ; the young fisher had vanished —
vanished with the beautiful Fata Morgana !

The same applause as before greeted me again ; my
courage and my inspiration increased. The next subject
which was given furnished recollections out of my own
life, which it was only needful for me to relate. I was to
improvise of Tasso. He was myself ; Leonora was An-
nunciata ; we saw each other at the court of Ferrara. I
suffered with him in captivity ; breathed again freedom
with death in my heart, as I looked from Sorrento over
the billowy sea towards Naples ; sat with him under the
oak at the Convent of St. Onophrius ; the bell of the
Capitol sounded for his coronation -feast, but the angel of
death came and first placed upon his head the crown of
immortality.

My heart beat violently ; I was engrossed, was carried
away by the flight of my thoughts. Yet was one more
poem given to me, it was " The Death of Sappho." The
pangs of jealousy 1 had felt as I remembered Bernardo ;

THE IMPROVISATORS. 203

Annunciata's kiss upon his brow burned into my soul.
Sappho's beauty was that of Annunciata ; but the suffer-
ings of her love were my own. The ocean waters closed
over Sappho !

My poem had called forth tears; the most extraordinary
applause resounded from all sides, and after the curtain
had fallen, I was twice called for. A happiness, a name-
less joy, filled my soul, and yet seemed so to oppress my
heart till it was ready to break ; and when I had left the
stage, amid the embraces and congratulations of my friends
and acquaintance, I burst into tears, into violent, convul-
sive sobs.

With Santini, Federigo, and some of the singers, a very
lively evening was spent ; they drank to my well-being,
and I was happy, but my lips were sealed !

" He is a pearl ! " exclaimed Federigo in his gay delight,
speaking of me ; " his only fault is, that he is a Joseph
the second, whom we Danes, for the sake of clearness,
should call Joseph the son of Jacob ! Enjoy life, An-
tonio ; pluck the rose before it be withered ! "

It was late when I reached home ; and with prayers
and thanks to the Madonna, and Jesus Christ, who had
not forsaken me, I was soon deeply and soundly asleep.

CHAPTER V.

SANTA. THE ERUPTION. OLD CONNEXIONS.

THE next morning I stood before Federigo a new-born
man ; I was able to express my delight ; I could not do it
the evening before. Life around me interested me more ;
I felt myself, as it were?> ennobled ; I seemed to have be-
come more mature through the dew of encouragement which
had fallen upon my life's tree.

It was necessary, also, that I should pay a visit to
Santa ; she had probably heard me the evening before ; I
longed also to hear her praise, of which I was sure.

204 THE IMPROVISATORS.

Maretti received me with rapture, but Santa, I was told,
had through the whole night, after she returned from the
theatre, suffered severely from fever; at this moment she
was asleep, and sleep would be beneficial to her. I was
made to promise that I would call again in the evening. I
dined with Federigo and my new friends ; health after
health was drunk : the white lacrymce Christi alternated
with the wine of Calabria. I would not drink any more :
my blood was in flame, champagne must cool it.

We separated gaily, and full of delight. When we came
out into the street, we found the atmosphere lighted up by
Vesuvius, and the mighty streams of lava. Several of the
party drove out to see the fearful, but glorious spectacle.
I went to Santa, for it was a little past the Ave Maria. I
found that she was quite alone, much better : the servant
said the sleep had strengthened her : I was permitted to
see her, but nobody else.

I was introduced into a beautiful, snug little room, the
long thick window-curtains of which were drawn ; a lovely
marble statue of Cupid whetting his arrow, and an argantl
lamp, whose light gave a magical colouring to the whole,
were the first things which I saw. Santa lay, in a light
wrapping-dress, on a soft silken sofa : she half rose as I
entered, held with one hand a large shawl around her, and
extended the other to me.

"Antonio!" said she, "it has succeeded gloriously!
Fortunate man ! you have captivated every one ! Oh, you
know not what anxiety I had about you : how my heart
beat ; and with what delight I again breathed when you so
far exceeded my greatest expectation ! "

I bowed, and inquired after her health. She gave me
her hand, and assured me that she was better, " Yes, much
better," said she ; and added, " you look like some one
newly created ! You looked handsome, very handsome !
When you were carried away by your inspiration, you
looked quite ideal. It was you yourself that I saw in every
poem, in the little boy with the painter, in the catacombs,
methought — you and Federigo ! "

"• It was so," said I, interrupting her • " I have passed
through all that I have sung."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 205

<c Yes/' replied she, " you yourself have passed through
all — the bliss of love, the pain of love — may you be
happy as you deserve ! "

1 told her what a change there seemed to be in my whole
being — how entirely differently life seemed now to present
itself to me ; and she grasped my hand, and looked as if
into my soul, with her dark, expressive eyes. She was
lovely, more lovely than common : a fine crimson glowed
upon her cheeks : the dark, glossy hair was put smoothly
back from the beautifully formed brow. The luxuriant
figure resembled an image of Juno; beautiful as a Phidias
could form it.

" Yes/' said she, " you shall live for the world : you are
its property : you will rejoice and captivate millions : let
not, therefore, the thought of one single one seize distinc-
tively on your happiness. You are worthy of love : you

captivate with your spirit, and with your talent, with "

She panted ; and then, drawing me towards her, continued,
" We must talk seriously : we have, indeed, not been able
rightly to talk together since that evening, when sorrow lay
so heavily upon your soul ! You seemed then — yes, what
shall I call it ? — to have misunderstood me "

My heart had done so ; and very often had I reproached
myself for it. tc I am not deserving of your goodness,"
said I, impressing a kiss upon her hand, and looked into
her dark eyes with a purity of soul and thought. Her
glance still burned and rested, seriously, almost penetrat-
ingly, upon me. Had a stranger seen us, he would have
discovered shadow where there was only purity and light.
It was, my heart could assert it aloud, as if here met a
brother and sister, eye and thought. ,

She was greatly excited. I saw her bosom heave vio-
lently : she loosened a scarf to breathe more freely. " You
are deserving of love ! " said she. " Soul and beauty are
deserving of any woman's love !"

She laid her arm on my shoulder, and looked again into
my face ; and then continued, with an indescribably elo-
quent smile, a And I can believe that you only dream in
an ideal world ! You are possessed of delicacy and good
sense; and these always gain the victory. Therefore,

206 THE 1MPROVISATORE.

Antonio, are you dear to me ; therefore is your love my
dream, my thought ! " She drew me towards her : her
lips were like fire, that flowed into my very soul !

Eternal Mother of God ! Thy holy image, at that mo-
ment, fell down from the wall where it stood above my
head. It was not a mere accident ! No ! thou touchedst
my brow : thou didst seize me, as I was about to sink in
the whirlpool of passion !

" No ! no ! " exclaimed I, starting up : my blood was
like seething lava.

" Antonio !" cried she, "kill me ! kill me ! but do not
leave me." Her cheeks, her eyes, her glance, and expres-
sion, was passion ; and yet she was beautiful — an image
of beauty, painted in flame. I felt a tremour in all my
nerves ; and, without replying, I left the apartment ; and
rushed down the steps, as if a dark spirit had pursued me.

When I reached the street, all seemed in flame, like my
blood. The current of the air wafted forward heat. Vesu-
vius stood in glowing fire — eruptions in rapid succession
lit up every thing around. Air ! air ! demanded my heart.
I hastened to the Molo, in the open bay, and seated myself
exactly where the waves broke on the shore. The blood
seemed to force itself to my eyes : I cooled my brow with
the salt water ; tore open my coat, that every breath of air
might cool me ; but all was flame — the sea even shone
like the fire of the red lava, which rolled down the moun-
tain. Which ever way I looked, I saw her standing, as if
painted in flame ; and looking into my soul with those be-
seeching, burning gleams of fire. " Kill me ! but leave me
not !" resounded in my ears. I closed my eyes, turned my
thoughts towards God ; but they relapsed again : it was
as if the flames of sin had scorched the wings of my soul.
An evil conscience must indeed crush the spirit, when
thoughts of sin can thus enfeeble both mind and body.

" Will Excellenza have a boat to Torre del Annunciata? "
said a voice close beside me ; and the name of Annunciata
recalled consciousness to my soul.

" The lava-stream runs three ells in a minute," said the
fellow, who with his oar held the boat firm to the land :
"in half an hour we can be there."

THE IMPROVISATORS. 207

" The sea will cool me," thought I, and sprang into the
boat. The fellow stood from land ; spread out his sail ;
and now we flew, as if borne onward by the wind, across the
blood-red, glowing water. A cool wind blew on my cheek,
I breathed more freely, and felt myself calmer and better,
as we approached land on the opposite side of the bay.

" Never again will I see Santa," I firmly determined in
my heart. " I will fly the serpent of beauty, which shows
to me the fruit of knowledge. Thousands would ridicule
me for doing so j but rather their laughter than the
lamenting cry of my own heart. Madonna, thou didst
permit thy holy image to fall from the wall, that thereby
I might be preserved from falling ! " Deeply did I feel
her protecting grace.

A wonderful joy now penetrated me : all that was noble
and good sang hymns of victory in my heart : I was again
the child of soul and thought. " Father, direct Thou
every thing as is best for me!" I ejaculated in prayer;
and, full of the enjoyment of life, as if my happiness was
established for ever, I rambled through the streets of the
little town to the high road.

Every thing was in motion ; carriages and cabriolets
laden with people drove past me ; they shouted, huzzaed,
and sang, and every thing around was lit up by the flame.
The torrent of lava had approached a small city which lay
upon the side of the mountain ; families fled therefrom. I
saw women with little children at the breast, and with
small bundles under their arms, heard their lamentations,
and could not help dividing the small sum I had with me
with the first that I met. I followed the crowd up among
the vineyards, which were inclosed with white walls, and
towards the direction which the lava took. A large vine-
field lay between us and it, and the torrent, like red-hot,
fiery slime many fathoms deep, came moving itself onward,
and overwhelming buildings and walls in its course ; the
cries of the fugitives, the exultation of the strangers at this
imposing scene, the shouting of coachmen, and the vendors
of various wares, mingled strangely together, whilst groups
of drunken peasants, who stood in crowds around the
brandy-sellers, people in carriages, and people on horse-

208 THE IMPROVISATORS.

back, all lighted up with the red fire-lights, formed a
picture of which, in its completeness, no description can
be given. One might advance quite close to the lava,
which had its determined course ; many people stuck in
their sticks, or else pieces of money, which they took out
again, attached to a piece of lava.

Fearfully beautiful was it when a part of the fiery mass,
from its size, tore itself loose ; it was like the breakers of
the sea : the descending piece lay like a beaming star out-
side the stream. The air first of all cooled the projecting
corners ; they became black, and the whole piece appeared
like dazzling gold, inclosed in a coal-black net. There had
been hung on one of the vines an image of the Virgin, in
the hope that the fire would become suspended before the
holy form ; but it advanced onward in the same uniform
course. The heat singed the leaves on the tall trees, which
bowed down their crown-like heads to the fiery mass as if
they would beseech for mercy. Full of expectation, many
a glance rested on the image of the Virgin, but the tree
bowed itself deeply with her before the red fire-stream ; it
was only distant a few ells. At that moment I saw a
Capuchin monk close beside me throw his arms aloft and
exclaim that the image of the Madonna caught fire. " Save
her ! " cried he, " so will she save you from the flames of
the fire ! "

All trembled and drew back, when, at that moment, a
woman started forward, cried aloud the name of the Ma-
donna, and hastened towards the glowing death. Whilst
this was doing, I saw a young officer on horseback with
his drawn sword drive her back, although the fire stood
like a wall of rock by his side.

" Mad woman ! " exclaimed he, " Madonna needs not
thy help. She wills that her badly-painted picture, conse-
crated by the hand of a sinner, shall be burned in the fire."

It was Bernardo ; I knew his voice; his quick decision
had saved the life of a fellow- creature, and his speech
prevented all offence. I could not but esteem him, and
wished in my heart that we had never been separated.
But my heart beat more quickly, and I had neither courage
nor desire to see him face to face.

THE IMPROV1SATORE. 209

The fire-stream swallowed up the trees and the Madonna
image ; I withdrew to some distance, and leaned involun-
tarily against a wall, where several strangers sat around a
table.

" Antonio ! is it actually thou ? " I heard a voice ex-
claim ; I fancied that it was Bernardo ; a hand pressed
mine ; it was Fabiani, the son-in-law of Excellenza, the
husband of Francesca, who had known me as a child, and
who now, as I must imagine from the letter which I had
received, was angry with me like the others, and, like them,
had cast me off.*

" Nay, that we should meet here ! " said he. " It will
delight Francesca to see you ! But it is not handsome of
you that you have not been to visit us. We have actually
been eight days at Castelamare ! "

" I knew nothing of that," replied I, f{ besides "

" Yes, all at once you are become quite another person;
have been in love, and," added he, more gravely, " have
also fought a duel, on which account you have regularly
eloped, which I cannot at all commend. Excellenza has
just now announced it to us, and we were astonished at it.
He has, however, written to you, has he not, and that truly
not in the mildest manner ? "

My heart beat violently ; I felt myself thrown back into
the fetters which benefits had riveted upon me, and ex-
pressed the distress which I had experienced in being cast
off by them all.

" Nay, nay, Antonio ! " said Fabiani, ie it is not so bad
as that. Come with me to my carriage I Francesca will
be astonished to see you this evening ; we shall soon be at
Castelamare., and we will find a place in the hotel for you.
You shall tell me what you have seen. It is a sin to
despair. Excellenza is violent ; you know him ; but all
will be right again."

" No, that it cannot be," replied I, half aloud, falling
back again into my former suffering.

" It shall and will !" said Fabiani, with determination,
and led me towards his carriage.

He required me to tell him every thing.

' ' But you are not going to turn improvisatore ? " asked
p

210 THE IMPROVISATORS.

he, with a smile, when I told him of my flight and of
Fulvia in the robber's cave.

" It sounds so poetic," said he, ic as if it were your
fancy, and not your memory, that played the principal
part."

I showed him Excellenza's letter. ' ( Severe, too severe ! "
said he, when he had read it ; " but cannot you, however,
see by it how much he thinks of you, and therefore it was
so serious ? But you really have not made your appear-
ance in the theatre ? "

" Yesterday evening," replied I. \

" That was too daring," interrupted he ; " and how did
it go off? "

" Gloriously ! most fortunately ! " returned I, joyfully.
" I received the greatest applause — was twice called
for."

" Is it possible ? — You have succeeded? "

There was a doubt, a surprise in these words which
wounded me deeply, but the obligations of gratitude bound
my lips, as well as my thoughts.

I felt a sort of embarrassment in presenting myself to
Francesca ; I knew, indeed, how grave and severe she could
be. Fabiani consoled me, half jestingly, by saying that
there should be neither confession nor castigatory sermon,
although I had actually so well deserved it.

We reached the hotel.

" Ah, Fabiani!" exclaimed a young, handsomely dressed
and curled gentleman, who sprang forward to meet us. " It
is well you are come, your Signora is quite impatient.
Ah ! " said he, breaking off the moment he saw me, " you
are bringing the young improvisatore with you ! Cenci,
is it not ? "

" Cenci ? " repeated Fabiani, and looked at me in
amazement.

" The name under which I appeared in public," I re-
plied.

" Indeed ! " said he ; " well, that was very rational."

" He can sing about love," said the stranger ; " you
should have heard him in San Carlo last evening. That is
a talent ! "

THE IMPROVISATORS. 211

He offered me his hand obligingly, and showed his de-
light in making my agreeable acquaintance.

ff I shall sup with you this evening," said he to Fabiani,
" and invite myself on account of your excellent singer,
and you and your wife will not refuse me."

" You are always welcome, as you know very well," re-
turned Fabiani.

" But you must, however, introduce me to the stranger
gentleman," said he.

" There is no need of ceremony here," said Fabiani,
" we, he, and I, are sufficiently acquainted ; my friends
need not be introduced to him. It will be a great honour
to him to make your acquaintance."

1 bowed, but I was not at all satisfied with the mode in
which Fabiani had expressed himself.

(C Well, then, I must introduce myself ! " said the
stranger ; " you, I have already had the honour of know-
ing ; my name is Gennaro, officer in King Ferdinand's
Guard ; " and, added he, laughing, " of a good Neapoli-
tan family ! Many people give it even number ONE. It
may be that this is right ; at least my aunts make very
much of that ! Inexpressibly delightful is it to me to
make the acquaintance of a young man of your talent,
your "

" Be quiet ! " interrupted Fabiani, " he is not accus-
tomed to such speeches ; now you know one another.
Francesca waits for us ; there will now be a reconciliation-
scene between her and your improvisatore : perhaps you
will here find occasion to make use of your eloquence."

I wished that Fabiani had not spoken in this way ; but
they two were friends, and how could Fabiani place him-
self in my painful position ? He led us in to Francesca ;
I involuntarily held back a few steps.

" At length, my excellent Fabiani ! " she exclaimed.

" At length," repeated he, " and I bring two guests
with me."

" Antonio ! " exclaimed she, and then again her voice
sank ; " Signore Antonio ! "

She fixed a severe, grave glance upon me and Fabiani ;
I bowed, wished to kiss her hand, but she seemed not to
p 2

212 THIS IMPROVISATORS.

observe it — offered it to Gennaro, and expressed the great
pleasure she had in seeing him to supper.

<c Tell me about the eruption/' said she to her husband ;
ff has the lava-stream changed its direction ? "

Fabiani told her about it, and ended by saying that
there he had met with me ; that I was his guest, and that
now mercy must be shown before judgment.

" Yes," exclaimed Gennaro, " I cannot at all imagine
how he can have sinned ; but every thing must be forgiven
to genius."

" You are in your very best humour," said she, and
nodded very graciously to me, whilst she assured Gennaro
that she had really nothing to forgive me. " What do
you bring us for news ? " inquired she from him. " What
do the French papers say ? and where did you spend last
evening ? "

The first question he quickly dismissed ; the second he
discussed with great interest.

(< I was in the theatre/' said he, " heard the last act of
the f Barber ! ' Josephine sang like an angel, but when
one has once heard Annunciata, nothing can satisfy one.
I went there principally to hear the improvisatore ! "

" Did he satisfy you ? " inquired Francesca.

<c He surpassed my — nay, every body's highest expect-
ations," replied he. " It is not said to flatter him ; and
of what consequence, indeed, would my poor criticism be
to him ? but that was indeed improvisation ! He was tho-
roughly master of his art, and carried us all along with
him. There was feeling, — there was fancy. He sang
about Tasso, about Sappho, about the Catacombs; they
were poems which were worthy of being preserved ! "

" A beautiful talent ! " said Francesca ; " one cannot
sufficiently admire it. I wish I had been there."

<f But we have the man with us," said Gennaro, and
pointed to me.

" Antonio ! " exclaimed she, inquiringly ; " has he im-
provised ? "

" Yes, like a master," replied Gennaro ; " but you
know him already, and must therefore have heard him."

" Yes, very often," returned she, smiling ; " we ad-
mired him always as a little boy."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 213

cc I myself put the wreath on his head the first time
that I heard him/' said Fabiani, likewise in jest. " He
sang about my lady-love before we were married ; and, as
a lover, I thus worshipped her in his song. But now to
supper! Gennaro, you will conduct my Francesca; and,
as we have no more ladies, I will take the improvisatore.
Signore Antonio, I request your hand."

He then conducted me after the others into the supper-
room.

" But you have never told me about Cenci, or whatever
you call the young gentleman," said Gennaro.

lf We call him Antonio/' replied Fabiani ; <e we did
not really at all know that it was he who was to make his
debut as improvisatore. You see this is exactly the recon-
ciliation-scene of which I spoke. You must know that he
is, in a manner, a son of the house. Is it not so, An-
tonio ? "

I bowed, with a grateful look, and Fabiani continued,
fi He is an excellent person ; there is not a stain upon his
character ; but he will not learn any thing."

<: But if he can now read every thing much better out
of the great book of Nature, why should he not do so ? "

<e You must not spoil him with your praise," said the
Signora, jestingly ; " we believed that he was sitting deep
in his classics, and physics, and mathematics, and instead
of that he was over head and ears in love with a young
singer from Naples."

" That shows that he has feeling/' said Gennaro.
" And was she handsome ? What was her name ? "

" Annunciata," said Fabiani ; " of extraordinary talent,
and a very distinguished woman."

" I myself have been in love with her," said Gennaro.
<f He has good taste. Here is to Annunciata's health, Sir
Improvisatore ! "

He touched his glass against mine ; I coum not say a
word : it tortured me that Fabiani so lightly could lay bare
my wound before a stranger ; but he indeed saw the whole
thing from quite a different side to what I did.

ff Yes," continued Fabiani, " and he has also fought a
duel for her sake, wounded the nephew of the senator in
p 3

214 THE IMPROVISATOBE.

the side, who was his rival, and so he has heen ohliged to
fly. Heaven knows how he has conveyed himself across the
frontiers ; and, thereupon, he makes his appearance in San
Carlo. It is, in fact, an act of temerity which I had not
expected from him."

"The senator's nephew!" repeated Gennaro, " now
that interests me. He is within these few days come here,
has entered into the royal service. I have been with him
this very afternoon — a handsome, interesting man. Ah,
now I comprehend it all ! Annunciata will soon he here ;
the lover has flown hither before her, settles himself down,
and very soon we shall read in the play-bills that the singer
makes her appearance for the last — positively for the last
time."

" Do you fancy, then, that he will marry her ? " inquired
Francesca ; " but that would, however, be a scandal in his
family."

<f One has instances of such things," said I, with a tre-
mulous voice ; " an instance of a nobleman, who considered
himself ennobled and happy by gaining the hand of a
singer."

" Happy, perhaps," interrupted she, " but never en-
nobled."

" Yes, my gracious signora," interposed Gennaro, " I
should consider myself ennobled if she chose me, and so I
fancy would many others."

They talked a deal — a great deal of her and Bernardo ;
they forgot how heavily every word must fall upon my
heart.

" But," said Gennaro, turning to me, " you must de-
light us with an improvisation. Signora will give you a
subject."

" Yes," said Francesca, smiling, ' ' sing us Love ; that is
a subject which interests Gennaro, as you indeed know."

" Yes, Cove and Annunciata !" exclaimed Gennaro.

ce Another time I will do every thing which you can
desire from me," said I, " but this evening it is impossible
to me. I am not quite well. I sailed across the bay
without my cloak, it was so warm by the lava stream ;
and then I drove here in the cool evening."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 215

Gennaro besought me most pressingly to improvise not-
withstanding, but I could not in this place, and upon this
subject.

" He has already the artist's way with him," said Fa-
biani ; " he must be pressed. Will you, or will you not,
go with us to-morrow to Psestum ? there you will find
material enough for your poetry. You should make your-
self a little scarce. There cannot be much which binds
you to Naples."

I bowed and felt myself in a difficulty, whilst I did not
see how I could refuse.

" Yes, he goes with us," exclaimed Gennaro ; " and
when he stands in the great temple, and the spirit comes
over him, he will sing like a Pindar ! "

" We set off to-morrow morning," continued Fabiani ;
" the whole tour will occupy four days. On our return we
will visit Amain" and Capri. You must go with us."

A no might, perhaps, as the consequence will show,
have changed my whole fate. These four days robbed me,
dare I say it, of six years of my youth. And man is a free
agent ! Yes, we can freely seize upon the threads which
lie before us, but how they are firmly twisted together we
do not see. 1 gave my thanks, and said yes ; and seized
hold upon the thread which drew the curtain of my future
more closely together.

" To-morrow we shall have more talk together," said
Francesca, when, after supper, we separated, and she ex-
tended to me her hand to kiss.

" This very evening I shall, however, write to Excel-
lenza," said Fabiani ; iC I will prepare the reconciliation
scene."

" And I will dream about Annunciata," exclaimed Gen-
naro ; " for that I shall not be challenged," added he,
laughing, as he pressed my hand.

I, too, wrote a few words to Federigo ; told him of my
meeting with the family of Excellenza, and that I should
make a little journey towards the south with them. I
ended the letter ; a thousand feelings operated in my breast.
How much had not this evening brought me ! How many
events ran 'athwart each other !
p 4

'1HE IMPROVISATORE.

I thought on Santa, on Bernardo, by the burning pic-
ture of the Madonna, and then on the last hours spent
amid old connexions. Yesterday a whole public, to whom
I was a stranger, had received me with acclamation ; I
was admired and honoured. This very evening, a woman,
rich in beauty, had made me conscious of her love for me ;
and a few hours afterwards I stood among acquaintance,
friends, whom I had to thank for every thing ; and as
nothing before them but the poor child, whose first duty
was gratitude.

But Fabiani and Francesca had really met me with
affection ; they had received me as the prodigal son, had
given me a place at their table ; invited me to join them
in a pleasure tour on the morrow. Benefit was added to
benefit : I was dear to them. But the gift which the rich
present with a light hand lies heavily upon the heart of
the poor !

CHAPTER VI.

JOURNEY TO PJESTUM. THE GRECIAN TEMPLE. THE BLIND GIRL.

THE beauty of Italy is not found in the Campagna, nor
yet in Rome. I knew it only from my ramble by Lake
Nemi, and from what I had seen in my journey to Naples.
Doubly, therefore, must I have felt its rich beauty, almost
more even than a foreigner, who could compare its loveli-
ness with that of other countries. Like a fairy world,
therefore, which I have seen in dreams, nay, which lived
in them, lies this three days' journey before me. But how
can I describe the impressions which my soul received,
nay, as it were, actually infused into my blood ?

The beauties of nature can never be given by description.
Words place themselves in array indeed, like loose pieces
of mosaic, one after another, but one understands not the
whole picture put together piecemeal. Thus it is in na-
ture ; of the entire greatness there must be always some-

THE IMPROVISATOR E. 21?

thing wanting. One gives the single pieces, and thus lets
the stranger put them together himself; but if hundreds
saw the complete picture, each would represent it very
differently. It is with nature, as with a beautiful face, no
idea can be formed of it by the mere details of it ; we
must go to a well-known object, and only when we can
say, with mathematical precision, that this resembles that,
with the exception of this or that particular, can we have,
in any degree, a satisfactory idea.

If it were given to me to improvise on the beauty of
Hesperia, I would describe with exact truth the real scenes
which my eye here beheld ; and thou who hast never seen
the beauty of South Italy, thy fancy might beautify every
natural charm with which thou wast acquainted, and it
would not be rich enough. The ideal of nature exceeds
that of man.

In the beautiful morning we set off from Castelamare.
I see yet the smoking Vesuvius, the lovely rocky valley,
with the great vine- woods, where the juicy green branches
ran from tree to tree ; the white mountain-castles perched
on the green cliffs, or half buried in dark olive-woods. I
see the old temple of Vesta, with its marble pillars and its
cupola, now the church of Santa Maria Maggiore. A piece
of the wall was overthrown ; skulls and human bones closed
the opening, but the green vine-shoots grew wildly over
them, and seemed as if, with their fresh leaves, they would
conceal the power and terror of death.

I see yet the wild outline of the mountains, the solitary
towers, where nets were spread out to catch the flocks of
sea-birds. Deep below us lay Salerno, with the dark-blue
sea; and here we met a procession that doubly impressed
the whole picture upon my mind. Two white oxen, with
their horns an ell in span, drew a carriage, upon which
four robbers, with their dark countenances and horrible
scornful laugh, lay in chains, whilst dark-eyed, finely formed
Calabrians, rode beside them with their weapons on their
shoulders. *

Salerno, the learned city of the middle ages, was the
extent of our first day's journey.

" Old folios have mouldered away," exclaimed Gennaro,

218 THE IMPROVISATORS.

" the learned glory of Salerno is grown dim, but the volume
of nature goes into a new edition every year; and our
Antonio thinks, like me, that one can read more in that
than in any learned musty book whatever."

" We may learn out of both," replied I, " wine and
bread must go together."

Francesca discovered that I spoke very rationally.

" In talking there is no coming short in him," said Fa-
biani, " but in deeds ! You will have an opportunity of
showing us that, Antonio, when you come to Rome."

To Rome ! I go to Rome ? This thought had never
occurred to me. My lips were silent ; but my inmost
heart said to me that I could not — would not again see
Rome, again enter into the old connexions.

Fabiani continued to talk, so did the others, and we
arrived at Salerno. Our first visit was to the church.

" Here I can be cicerone," said Gennaro ; " this is the
chapel of Gregory the Seventh, the holy father who died in
Salerno. His marble statue stands before us upon the
altar. There lies Alexander the Great," continued he,
pointing to a huge sarcophagus.

'• Alexander the Great ? " repeated Fabiani, inquiringly.

"Yes, certainly; is it not so?" asked he from the
attendant.

" As Excellenza says," replied he.

" That is a mistake," remarked I, observing the monu-
ment more nearly. " Alexander really cannot be buried
here, that is against all history. See only, it is the tri-
umphal procession of Alexander, which is represented on
the sarcophagus, and thence is derived the name."

As soon as we had entered into the church, they showed
us a similar sarcophagus, upon which was delineated a
bacchanalian triumph, which had been brought hither
from the temple in Ptestum, and now had been converted
into the burial-place for a Salernian prince, whose modern
marble statue, the size of life, was raised upon it. I re-
verted to this, and gave it as my opinion, that the circum-
stances of this so-called grave of Alexander must be similar
to it. Quite pleased with my own penetration, I made a
sort of oration on the subject of the graves, to which Gen-

THE IMPROVISATORE. 219

naro coldly replied, " Perhaps ;" and Francesca whispered
in my ear, that it was unbecoming of me, wishing to ap-
pear wiser than he ; that I must not do so. Silently and
respectfully I drew back.

At Ave Maria I sat alone with Francesca in the balcony
of the great hotel. Fabiani and Gennaro were gone out to
walk : it was my place to entertain the gracious lady.

ee What a beautiful play of colours!" said I, and
pointed to the sea, which, white as milk, stretched
itself out from the broad lava-paved street to the rosy-
hued, brilliant horizon, whilst the rocky coast was of a
deep indigo blue ; such a pomp of colouring I had never
seen in Rome.

"The clouds have already said, ' Felicissima notte!"
remarked Francesca, and pointed to the mountain, where
a cloud hung high above the villas and the olive-woods,
and yet far below the old castle, which, with its two
towers, was nearly perched on the top of the mountain.

" There I should like to dwell and live ! " exclaimed I,
" high above the cloud, and look out over the eternally
changing sea."

" There you could improvise!" said she, smiling;
" but then nobody would hear you, and that would be a
great misfortune, Antonio ! "

" Oh, yes!" replied I, likewise jestingly, " if I must
be candid, entirely without applause, is like a tree without
sunshine ! That, of a certainty, gnawed into the flower
of Tasso's life, in his captivity, as much as did the
unhappiness of his love ! "

" Dear friend!" interrupted she, somewhat gravely,
11 I am now speaking of you, and not of Tasso. What
have we to do with him in this question ? "

" Only as an example," replied I : " Tasso was a poet,
and "

" You believe it to be so," interrupted she, hastily ;
" but, for Heaven's sake, dear Antonio, do not ever
mention an immortal name in conjunction with your own !
Do not fancy that you are a poet, an improvisatore,
because you have an easily excited temperament of mind,
and the art of catching up ideas ! Thousands can do this

220 TI:E IBIPROVISATORE.

as well as you ! Do not go and make yourself unfortunate
through it."

ei But thousands only lately have awarded to me their
applause ! " replied I, and my cheeks burned ; " and it
really is quite natural that I should have these thoughts,
this conviction : and I am sure that you will rejoice in
my success, and in that which conduces to my well-
bsing!"

e l None of your friends would do so more than I ! "
said she ; " we all value your excellent heart, your noble
character, and for the sake of these I will venture to
promise that Excellenza will forgive you ! You have
glorious abilities, which must be developed, but that they
must actually be, Antonio I Nothing comes of itself !
People must labour ! Your talent is a charming company
talent ; you may delight many of your friends by it, but
it is not great enough for the public."

" But," I ventured to suggest, ec Gennaro, who did
not know me, was yet enchanted with my first appearance
in public."

" Gennaro ! " repeated she, " yes, with all my esteem
for him, I set no value at all upon his judgment of art !
And the great public ? Yes, in the capital, artists very
soon hear quite a different opinion ! It was very well
that you were not hissed ; that would really have dis-
tressed me. Now it will all blow quietly over, and very
soon will be entirely forgotten both you and your impro-
visation ! Then you assumed a feigned name also ! In
about three days we shall be again in Naples, and the day
afterwards we return to Rome. Regard it all as a dream,
as it really has been, and show us, by industry and sta-
bility, that you are awake again. Do not say a word,
now — I intend kindly by you ; I am the only one who
tells you the truth ! "

She gave her hand for me to kiss.

The next morning we set off in the early, grey dawn,
in order that we might reach Paestum in time to spend a
few hours there, and be back again the same day in
Salerno, because visitors cannot pass the night at Paestum,

THE IMPROVISATORS. 221

and the road thither is unsafe. Gends'armes on horseback
accompanied us as escort.

Orange-gardens, woods I might call them, lay on either
hand. We passed over the river Sela, in whose clear
water were reflected weeping-willows and laurel hedges.
The wild hills inclosed a fertile corn-country. Aloes and
cactuses grew wildly by the road-side; every thing was
luxuriant and abundant, and now we saw before us the
ancient temple, above two thousand years' old, built in
the purest, most beautiful style ; this, a miserable public-
house, three wretched dwellings, and some huts of reeds,
were now all that remained of this renowned city. We
saw not a single rose-hedge, and the multitude and affluent
beauty of the roses had once given its celebrity to Psesturr.
At that time a crimson glow lay upon these fields ; now
they were blue, infinitely blue, like the distant mountains;
fragrant violets covered the great plain, springing up amid
thistles and thorns. A wilderness of fertility lay all around;
aloes, wild figs, and the red pyretrum indicum, twined one
among another.

Here are found the characteristics of Sicilian landscape;
its abundance and luxuriance ; its Grecian temples and its
poverty. A whole crowd of beggars stood around us, who
resembled the natives of the South Sea Islands. Men
clad in long sheep-skins, with the wool outside, with naked,
dark brown limbs, and the long black hair hanging loosely
around the brown yellow countenance ; girls of the most
beautiful forms, only half clad, with the short skirt hang-
ing in tatters to the knee ; a sort of cloak, of ugly brown
stuff, thrown loosely around the bare shoulders, and the
long black hair bound together in a knot, and with eyes
that flashed fire.

One young girl there was, scarcely more than eleven
years old, lovely as the Goddess of Beauty, and yet
resembling neither Annunciata nor Santa. I could think
of nothing else but the Medicean Venus, as Annunciata
had described it, as I looked at her. I could not love, but
admire, and bow before the form of beauty.

She stood at a little distance from the other beggars ;
a brown square piece of cloth hung loosely over one

222 THE IMPROVISATORS.

shoulder, the other breast and arm were, like her feet,
uncovered. That she thought of ornament, and had the
taste for it, was proved by the smoothly bound-up hair, in
which a bouquet of blue violets was fastened, and which
hung in curls upon her beautiful forehead. Modesty,
soul, and a singular, deep expression of suffering, were
expressed in her countenance. Her eyes were cast down,
as if she sought for something upon the ground.

Gennaro perceived her first, and, although she spoke
not a word, he offered her a gift, patted her under the
chin, and said that she was too handsome for the rest of
her company. Fabiani and Francesca were of his opinion.
I saw a fine crimson diffuse itself under the clear brown
skin, and raising her eyes, I saw that she was blind.

Gladly would I, too, have given her money, but I
ventured not to do it. When the others were gone to the
little hostel, followed by the whole troop of beggars, I
turned myself quickly round, and pressed a scudo into her
hand ; by the feeling she seemed to know its worth ; her
cheeks burned, she bent forward, and the fresh lips of
health and beauty touched my hand ; the touch seemed to
go through my blood; I tore myself away, and followed
the others.

Fagots and twigs burned in a great flaming pile in the
wide chimney, which almost occupied the whole breadth
of the chamber. The smoke whirled out under the sooty
roof, which compelled us to go outside, and behind the
tall, shadowy weeping willow our breakfast was prepared,
whilst we went to the temple. We had to pass through a
complete wilderness. Fabiani and Gennaro took hold of
each other's hands, to make a sort of seat for Francesca,
and thus carried her.

"A fearful pleasure-excursion !" cried she, laughing.

<c O Excellenza ! " said one of our guides, " it is now
magnificent : three years ago there was no getting through
here for thorns, and in my childhood sand and earth lay
right up to the pillars."

The rest affirmed to the truth of his remark, and we
went forward, followed by the whole troop of beggars,
who silently observed us ; the moment our eye met that

THE IMPROVISATORE. 223

of one of the beggars, he immediately stretched out his
hand mechanically to beg, and a miserabile resounded from
his lips. The beautiful blind girl I could not see ; she
now, indeed, sat alone by the way-side. We went over
the ruins of a theatre, and a temple of peace.

" A theatre and peace ! " exclaimed Gennaro ; " how
could these two ever exist so near to each other ? "

The Temple of Neptune lay before us ; this, the so-
called Basilica, and the Temple of Ceres, are the glorious,
proud remains which, like a Pompeii, stand forth again to
our age, out of oblivion and night.

Buried amid rubbish, and entirely overgrown, they lay
concealed for centuries, until a foreign painter, who sought
for subjects for his pencil, came to this place, and dis-
covered the uppermost of the pillars; their beauty attracted
him ; he made a sketch of them ; they became known ;
the rubbish and the wild growth of plants were removed,
and again stood forth, as if rebuilded, the large, open
halls. The columns are of yellow Travertine marble ,
wild vines grow up around them ; fig- trees shoot up from
the floor, and in clefts and crevices spring forth violets and
the dark-red gillyflower.

We seated ourselves upon the pedestal of one of the
broken columns. Gennaro had driven the beggars away,
that we might enjoy in stillness the rich scene around us.
The blue mountains, the near sea, the place itself in which
we were, seized strongly upon me.

" Improvise now to us ! " Fabiani said ; and Francesca
nodded to me the same wish.

I leaned against one of the nearest pillars, and sang, to
a melody of my childhood, that which my eye now beheld;
the beauty of nature ; the glorious memorial of art ; and
I thought on the poor blind maiden, from whom all mag-
nificent objects were concealed. She was doubly poor,
doubly forlorn. Tears came to my eyes : Gennaro clapped
his hands in applause ; and Fabiani and Francesca said
apart to each other, " He has feeling."

They now descended the steps of the temple. I fol-
lowed them slowly. Behind the pillar against which I
had stood sat, or rather lay, a human being, with her head

224 THE IMPUOVISATORE. .

sunk to her knees, and her hands clasped together : it was
the blind maiden. She had heard my song — had heard
me sing of her painful yearning and of her deprivations :
it smote me to the soul. I bent myself over her: she
heard the rustling of the leaves, raised her head, and to
me it seemed that she looked much paler. I ventured not
to move. She listened.

" Angela ! " she exclaimed, half aloud.

I know not why, but I held my breath ; and she sat
for a moment silent. It was the Grecian goddess of
beauty which I saw, with eyes without the power of
vision, such as Annunciata had described her to me. She
sat on the pedestal of the temple, between the wild fig-
tree and the fragrant myrtle-fence. She pressed a some-
thing to her lips, and smiled : it was the scudo which I
had given to her. T grew quite warm at the sight of it,
bowed myself involuntarily, and pressed a hot kiss upon
her forehead.

She started up with a cry, a thrilling cry, which sent,
as it were, a death-pang through my soul. She sprung
up like a terrified deer, and was gone. I saw nothing
more, every thing was in motion around me, and I, too,
made my escape through thorns and bushes.

" Antonio ! Antonio ! " I heard Fabiani calling to me
a long way rjehind ; and again I bethought myself of time
and place.

" Have you started a hare ? " asked he ; " or was it a
poetical flight which you were taking ? "

" He will show us/' said Gennaro, " that he can fly
where we can only get along at a foot's pace ; yet I would
venture to take the same flight with him ;" and, so saying,
he placed himself at my side, to race with me.

" Do you think that I, with my Signora on my arm,
can go step for step with you ? " exclaimed Fabiani.
Gennaro remained standing.

When we came to the little hostel, my eye in vain
sought for the blind girl : her cry continually resounded
in my ear: I heard it within my very heart. It was to
me as if I had committed a sin. I it was really, who had,
although innocently, sung care and sorrow into her heart.

. THE IMPROVISATORE. 225

by making her deprivations more intelligible to her. I had
excited terror and anxiety in her soul, and had impressed
a kiss upon her brow, the first which I had ever given to
a woman. If she could have seen me, I had not dared to
do it : her misfortune — her defencelessness — had given
me courage. And I had passed such severe judgment on
Bernardo ! — I, who was a child of sin like him, like every
one ! I could have kneeled at her feet, and prayed for
forgiveness ; but she was nowhere to be seen.

We mounted the carriage to drive back to Salerno ; yet
once more I looked out to see if I could discover her ; but
I did not venture to inquire where she could be.

At that moment, Gennaro exclaimed, " Where is that
blind girl ? "

" Lara ? " said our guide. " She still sits in the Temple
of Neptune: she is generally there."

«* Bella Divina ! " cried Gennaro, and wafted a kiss with
his hand towards the temple. We rolled away.

She was then called Lara. I sat with my back to the
driver, and saw when the columns of the temple became
yet more and more distant ; but within my heart intoned
the anguish-cry of the girl, my own suffering.

A troop of gipsies had encamped themselves by the
road-side, and had made a great fire in the ditch, over
which they were boiling and roasting. The old gipsy
mother struck upon the tambourine, and wanted to tell us
our fortunes, but we drove past. Two black-eyed girls
followed us for a considerable time. They were handsome :
and Gennaro made himself merry about their easy motions
and their flashing eyes ; but beautiful and noble as Lara
were they not.

Towards evening we reached Salerno. The next morn-
ing we were to go to Amalfi, and thence to Capri.

ee We shall remain," said Fabiani, " only one day in
Naples, if we return there at all. Towards the end of the
week we must be again in Rome. You can very soon get
your things in order, Antonio ? "

I could not — I wished not, to return to Rome ; but a
bashfulness, a fear, which my poverty and my gratitude
had instilled into me through all the years of my life, per-
Q

22tf THE IMPROVISATOKE.

mitted me to do no more than stammer forth that Excel-
lenza certainly would be angry at my audacity in coming
back again.

" We will take care of all that ! " exclaimed Fabiani
to me.

" Forgive me, but I cannot !" I stammered, and seized
Francesca's hand. " I feel deeply that which I owe you."

" Say nothing of that, Antonio," she replied, and laid
her hand upon my mouth.

Strangers at that moment were announced, and I with-
drew silently into a corner, feeling how weak I was.

Free and independent as a bird had I been only two
days before ! and He who permits not a sparrow to fall
unheeded to the ground would have cared for me ; and
yet I let the first thin thread which twined itself round
my feet grow to the strength of a cable.

In Rome, thought I, thou hast true friends, true and
honest, if not so courteous as those in Naples. I thought
on Santa, whom I never more would see. I thought on
Bernardo, whom I actually should meet in Naples every
day — on Annunciata, who would come here — on his
and her happiness in love. iC To Rome ! to Rome ! it is
much better there !" said my heart to me, whilst my soul
struggled after freedom and independence.

CHAPTER VII.

THE ADVENTURE IN AMALFI THE BLUE GROTTO OF CAPRI.

How beautifully Salerno looked out from the sea, as, in
the delicious morning hour, we sailed away from it ! Six
stout fellows pulled the oars. A little boy, handsome
enough to be painted, sat at the helm : he was called
Alphonso. The water was green as glass. The whole
coast to the right seemed like magnificent hanging gardens,
laid out by the bold Semiramis of fancy. The vast open
caves lay like colonnades down in the sea, within which

THE IMPROVISATORS. 227

played the heavy billows. Upon the projecting point of
rock stood a castle, below whose turreted walls floated a
small cloud. We saw Minori and Majori ; and, imme-
diately afterwards, Amalfi, the birthplace of Masaniello
and Flavio Giojas, the discoverer of the mariner's compass,
which looked forth from amidst green vineyards.

This great affluence of beauty overpowered me. Would
that all the generations of the earth could see these glorious
scenes ! No storm from the north or west brings cold or
winter to the blooming garden upon whose terrace Amalfi
is placed. The breezes come only here from the east and
the south, the warm breezes from the region of oranges
and palms, across the beautiful sea.

Along the shore, high up on the side of the mountain,
hangs the city, with its white houses with their flat, oriental
roofs ; higher still ascend the vineyards. One solitary
pine-tree lifts up its green crown into the blue air, where,
on the ridge of the mountain, the old castle, with its en-
circling wall, serves as a couch for the clouds.

The fishermen had to carry us through the surf from
the boats to the land. Deep caves in the cliffs extended
even under the city ; into some of these the water flowed,
others were empty. Boats lay beside them, in which
played crowds of merry children, most of them only in a
skirt or little jacket, which constituted their whole clothing.
Half-naked lazzaroni stretched themselves in the warm
sand, their brown cowls pulled up about their ears, this
being their most important covering during their noonday's
sleep. All the church bells were ringing ; a procession of
young priests in violet-coloured dresses went past us,
singing psalms. A fresh garland of flowers hung around
the picture which was fastened to the cross.

To the left, high above the city, stands a magnificently
great convent, just before a deep mountain-cave ; this is
the herberg for all strangers. Francesca was carried up in
a litter ; we others followed after, along the road cut in
the rock, with the clear, blue sea lying deeply below us.
We had now reached the gate of the convent, exactly oppo-
site to which a deep cave gapes in the rock. Within this
there were three crosses, on which were the Redeemer and
Q 2

228 THE IMPROVISATORS.

the two thieves ; and above them,, upon the stone of the
rock, were kneeling angels in bright-coloured garments,
and great white wings. No artistical work this, but all
carved out of wood, and painted ; but, nevertheless, a
pious, trusting heart breathed its own peculiar beauty
over the rudely-formed images.

We ascended directly up through the convent-court to
the rooms which were appropriated to our use. From my
window I saw the eternal sea, stretching away to Sicily,
the ships standing like silver-white points upon the far
horizon.

" Sir Improvisatore," said Gennaro, " shall not we
descend into the lower regions, and see whether the beauty
there is as great as it is here ! The female beauty is so, of
a certainty ! For the English ladies that we have here for
neighbours are cold and pale ! And you have a taste for
the ladies ! I beg your pardon. It is this exactly which
has driven you out into the world, and will give me a charm-
ing evening, and an interesting acquaintance ! "

We descended the rocky path.

(C The blind girl in Psestum was, however, very hand-
some!" said Gennaro. " I think that I shall send for
her to Naples when I send for my Calabrian wine ! Both
one and the other would set my heart in a glow !"

We arrived at the city, which lay, if I may so say, sin-
gularly piled upon itself. Beside of it, the narrow Ghetto
in Rome would have been a Corso. The streets were
narrow passages between the tall houses, and right through
them. Now one comes through a door into a long landing-
place, with small openings on the sides leading into dark
chambers, then into a narrow lane between brickwork and
walls of rock, steps up and steps down, a half-dark laby-
rinth of dirty passages : I often did not know whether it
was a room or a lane in which we were. In most places
lamps were burning ; and if it had not been so, although
it was mid-day, it would have been dark as night.

At length we breathed more freely. We stood upon a
great brickwork bridge, which connected together two
ridges of rock ; the little square below us was certainly the
largest in the whole city. Two girls were dancing there

THE IMPROVISATORS. 229

the saltarello, and a little boy, entirely naked, beautifully
formed, and with brown limbs, stood looking on, like a
little Cupid. Here, they told me, it never freezes. The
severest cold Amalfi has known for many years has been
eight degrees above zero.

Close beside the little tower, upon the projecting plat-
form of rock from which is to be seen the lovely bay of
Minori and Majori, a little serpentine path winds between
aloes and myrtles ; and, following it, we were soon over-
shadowed by the lofty arch of entwining vines. We felt
a burning thirst, and hastened onwards towards a little
white dwelling-house, which, at the end of the vineyard,
invited us, as it were, so kindly from among the fresh
green. The mild, warm air was filled with fragrance, and
beautifully bright insects hummed around us.

We stood before the house, which was highly picturesque.
There had been built into the wall, by way of ornament,
some marble capitals, and a beautifully-chiselled arm and
foot, which had been found among the rubbish. Upon the
roof even was a charming garden of oranges and luxuriant
twining plants, which, like a curtain of green velvet, hung
down over the wall ; in the front blossomed a wilderness
of monthly roses. Two lovely little girls, of from six to
seven years old, played, and wore garlands ; but the most
beautiful, however, was a young woman with a white linen
cloth on her head, who came to meet us from the door.
The intellectual glance, the long, dark eye-lashes, the noble
form, yes, she was very beautiful ! We both involuntarily
took off our hats.

" This most beautiful maiden, then, is the possessor of
this house ? " inquired Gennaro. ee Will she then, as
mistress of the house, give to two weary travellers a re-
freshing draught ? "

" The mistress of the house will do that with pleasure ! "
said she, smiling, and the snow-white teeth parted the
fresh, rosy lips. " I will bring out wine to you here ; but
I have only of one kind."

' ' If you serve it, it will be excellent ! " said Gennaro.
(C I drink it most willingly when a young maiden as hand-
some as you serves it."

Q 3

" But Excellenza must be so good as to talk to a wife
to-day !" said she, sweetly.

" Are you married ? " asked Germaro, smiling, " so
young ? "

" Oh, I am very old ! " said she, and laughed also.

" How old ? " inquired I.

She looked archly into my face, and replied, " Eight-
and-twenty years old ! " She was much nearer fifteen, but
most beautifully developed ; a Hebe could not have been
formed more exquisitely.

' ' Eight-and-twenty ! " said Gennaro. " A beautiful
age, which is very becoming to you ! Have you been long
married ? "

" Twenty years ! " replied she ; " only ask my daughters
there." And the little girls whom we had seen playing
came towards us.

cc Is that your mother?" inquired I, although I very
well knew that it was not so. They looked up to her, and
laughed, nodded thereto an assent, and clung affectionately
to her.

She brought us out wine, excellent wine, and we drank
her health.

" This is a poet, an improvisatore," said Gennaro to her,
pointing to me ; e ' he has been turning the heads of all the
ladies in Naples ! But he is a stone, a queer sort of
fellow. He hates all women ; never gave a woman a kiss
in his life ! "

ec That is impossible ! " said she, and laughed.

" I, on the contrary," continued Gennaro, " am of quite
a different sort ; I kiss all the handsome lips that come near
me, am the faithful attendant of woman, and thus recon-
cile the world and her wherever I go ! It is awarded to
me also, and I assert it as my right with every handsome
woman, and I now, of course, require here my tribute
also !" and, so saying, he took her hand.

"I absolve both you and the other gentleman," said
she ; " neither have I any thing to do with paying tribute.
My husband always does that !"

" And where is he ? " asked Gennaro.

"Not far off," she replied.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 231

" Such a handsome hand I have never seen in Naples !"
said Gennaro ; " what is the price of a kiss upon it ? "

" A scudo," said she.

" And double that price upon the lips ? " said Gennaro.

" That is not to be had/' returned she ; e< that is my
husband's property !"

And now she poured us out again the enlivening, strong
wine, joked and laughed with us ; and, amid her joking,
we discovered that she was about fifteen, had been married
the year before to a handsome young man, who, at this
moment, was in Naples, and was not expected to return,
before the morrow. The little girls were her sisters, and
on a visit to her till her husband's return. Gennaro
prayed them for a bouquet of roses, which they hastened
to gather, and for which he promised them a carlin.

In vain he prayed her for a kiss ; said a thousand
sweet, flattering things ; threw his arm round her waist ;
she tore herself away, scolding him, but yet always came
back again, because she found it amusing. He took a
louis-d'or between his fingers, and told her what charming
ribands she could buy with it, and how beautifully she
might adorn her dark hair with them ; and all this splen-
dour she might have only by giving him a kiss — one
single kiss.

" The other Excellenza is much better !" said she, and
pointed to me. My blood burned ; I took her hand,
saying that she must not listen to him, that he was a bad
man, must not look at his tempting gold, but must revenge
herself upon him by giving me a kiss.

She looked at me.

" He has," continued I, " said only one true word in
all his speeches ; and that is, that I have never kissed the
lips of any woman. I have kept my lips pure until I
found the most beautiful ; and now I hope that you will
reward my virtue !"

" He is actually an accomplished tempter!" said Gen-
naro. " He excels me by being so accustomed to his
work."

' ' You are a bad man with your money," said she ;
Q 4

" and for that you shall see that I care neither for it nor
for a kiss, and so the poet shall have it ! "

With this, she pressed her hands on my cheeks, her lips
touched mine, and she vanished behind the house.

When the sun went down, I sat up in my little chamber
in the convent, and looked from the window over the sea ;
it was rosy red, and threw up long billows on the shore.
The fishermen pulled up their boats on the sand ; and, as
the darkness increased, the lights became brighter, the
billows were of a sulphur-blue. Over every thing pre-
vailed infinite stillness ; in the midst of which I heard a
choral song of fishermen on the shore, with women and
children. The soprano of the children's voices mingled
itself with the deep bass, and a sentiment of melancholy
filled my soul. A falling star for a moment played in the
heavens, and then shot downward behind the vineyards,
where the lively young woman had kissed me in the day-
time. I thought of her, how lovely she was, and of the
blind girl, the image of beauty, amid the ruins of the
temple; but Annunciata stood in the background, intel-
lectually and physically beautiful, and thus doubly beauti-
ful! My spirit expanded itself; my soul burned with
love, with longing, with a deep sense of what it had lost.
The pure flame which Annunciata had kindled in my
heart, the altar-fire of which she was the priestess, she
had herself stirred out and left; the fire now burned wildly
through the whole building.

' ' Eternal Mother of God ! " prayed I ; " my breast is
full of love, my heart is ready to burst with longing and
regret ! " And I seized upon the roses which stood in the
glass, pressed the most beautiful of them to my lips, and
thought on Annunciata.

I could not bear it any longer, and went down to the
sea-side, where the shining billows broke along the shore,
where the fishermen sang and the wind blew. I mounted
the brickwork bridge, where I had stood during the day,
A figure wrapped in a large cloak stole close by me ; I
saw that it was Gennaro. He went up the serpentine road
to the little white house, and I followed him. He now

THE IMPROVISATORS. 233

softly passed the window, within which a light was burn-
ing. Here I took my station, concealed by the depending
vine-leaves, and could see distinctly into the room. There
was, exactly on the other side of the house, a similar
window, and some high steps led to the side-chamber.

The two little girls, undressed to their night-clothes, were
kneeling with their elder sister, the mistress of the house,
as she really was, between them, before the table, on which
stood the crucifix and the lamp, and were singing their
evening devotions. It was the Madonna with two angels,
a living altar-piece, as if painted by Raphael, which I
saw before me. Her dark eyes were cast upwards; the
hair hung in rich folds upon her naked 'shoulders, and
the hands were folded upon the youthfully beautiful
bosom.

My pulse beat more quickly ; I scarcely ventured to
breathe. Now all three arose from their knees ; she went
with the little girls up the steps into the side-room, closed
the door, and then went into the first room, where she
busied herself about her small household affairs. I saw
her presently take out of a drawer a red pocket-book, turn
it about in her hand a many times, and smile ; she was
just about to open it, but shook her head at that moment,
and threw it again into the drawer, as if something had
surprised her.

A moment afterwards I heard a low tapping upon the
opposite window. Terrified, she looked towards it, and
listened. It tapped again, and I heard some one speak,
but could not distinguish the words.

" Excellenza !" now exclaimed she aloud; "what do
you want? Why do you come here at this hour? For
Heaven's sake ! I am angry, very angry."

He again said something.

" Yes, yes, it is true," she said, " you have forgotten
your pocket-book ; my little sister has been down to the
inn to give it to you, but you were up in the convent.
To-morrow morning she would have gone there to you.
Here it is."

She took it from the drawer. He again said something,
to which she shook her head.

234 THE IMPROVISATORS.

" No ! no !" said she; " what are you thinking of? I
shall not open the door ; you shall not come in 3 "

" So saying, she went to the window, and opened it, to
give him the pocket-book. He snatched at her hand, she
let the book fall, and it remained lying on the window-
sill. Gennaro put his head in ; the young wife flew to
the window behind which I stood,, and I could now hear
every word which Gennaro said.

ef And you will not allow me to kiss your lovely hand
as thanks ; not receive the smallest reward ; not reach
me a single cup of wine ? I am parched with thirst.
There cannot be any thing wrong in that ! Why not
permit me to come in ? "

" No!" said she; " we have nothing to talk about
at this hour. Take that which you have forgotten, and
let me close the window."

" I will not go/' said Gennaro, " before you give me
your hand, before you give me a kiss. You cheated me
out of one to-day, and gave it to that stupid youth ! "

" No ! no ! " said she, and yet laughed in the midst of
her anger. " You want to obtain by force what I would
not give freely," said she ; " therefore I shall not — will
not do it."

" It is the last time," said Gennaro, in a soft and be-
seeching tone, " of a certainty the last time ; and can you
refuse only just giving me your hand ? More I do not
desire, although my heart has a thousand things to say to
you ! Madonna wills it really that we human beings love
one another like brother and sister ! Like a brother 1 Avill
divide my money with you ; you can adorn yourself, and
be twice as handsome as you are! All your friends will
envy you ; nobody will know." And with these words he
gave a quick spring, and stood within the room.

She uttered a loud scream, " Jesus Maria ! "

I shook the window violently where I stood ; the glass
jingled, and, as if driven by an invisible power, I flew
round to the open window, tearing away a support from
one of the vine-trellises, that I might have with me some
kind of weapon.

" Is it thou, Nicolo? " cried she loudly.

THE IMFROVISATORE. 235

" It is I ! " replied I, in a deep, resolute voice.

I saw Gennaro again fly out of the window, his cloak
streaming in the wind. The lamp was knocked out, and
it remained quite dark in the room.

" Nicolo ! " she cried from the window, and her voice
trembled. " Thou here again ! Madonna be praised ! "

" Signora ! " stammered I.

" All ye saints ! " I heard her say, and shut too the
window with all haste. I stood there as if riveted to the
spot. After some moments, I heard her go softly across
the floor. The door of the side-chamber was opened and
then closed again ; I heard her knocking something, as if
she were making bolts secure.

" Now she is safe," thought I, and crept softly away.
I felt myself so well, so wonderfully gay at heart. "• Now
I have paid for the kiss which she gave me to-day," said
I to myself; "perhaps she would have given me yet
another, had she known what a protecting angel I have
been to her ! "

I reached the convent exactly as supper was ready ; no
one had missed me. Gennaro, however, did not make his
appearance, and Francesca became uneasy. Fabiani sent
messenger on messenger. At length he came. He had
walked, he said, as far as the mountains, and had lost him-
self, but had had the luck to meet at length with a peasant,
who had put him in the right way.

" Your coat is, also, quite in tatters," said Francesca.

" Yes," said Gennaro, taking up the laps, " the missing
piece hangs on a thorn-bush ; I saw it, however ! Heaven
knows how I could ever lose my way so ! But it was all
the lovely evening, and then the darkness came on so
quickly, and I thought of shortening my way, and pre-
cisely by that means lost it ! "

We laughed at his adventure ; I knew it better ; we
drank to his health ; the wine was excellent ; we became
regularly excited. When we at length went to our cham-
bers, which were only divided by a door from each other,
he came before he undressed into mine, laughed, and,
laying his hand upon my shoulder, prayed me not to
dream too much about the handsome woman that we had
seen to-day.

THE I5IPROVISATORE.

<f But I had the kiss !" said I, jestingly.

' ' Oh, yes, that you had ! " said he, laughing, " and do
you think, therefore, that I came off with the step-child's
portion ? "

" Yes, so I think ! " returned I.

" Step-child, however, I never should remain," said he,
in a cold tone, in which was a certain degree of bitterness ;
but a faint smile played again around his mouth as he
whispered, " if you could keep your counsel, I could tell
you something ? "

" Tell me," said I, " nobody shall hear a syllable from
me ? " I expected now to hear his lamentations over his
unfortunate adventure ; his secret was this : —

" I forgot, to-day, intentionally, my pocket-book, at the
handsome woman's house, that I might have an excuse for
going there in the evening, for then women are not so
strict. There it is : I have been there, and with climbing
over the garden-wall and up among the bushes I tore my
coat."

" And the handsome woman?" I inquired.

"Was twice as handsome!" said he, nodding signi-
ficantly,— "twice as handsome, and not a bit stern; we
were quite good friends, that I know. She gave you one
kiss — she gave me a thousand, and her heart into the
bargain. I shall dream about my good luck all the night.
Poor Antonio !"

And, so saying, he kissed his hand to me and went to
his own room.

The morning heaven was covered as if with a grey veil,
when we left the convent. Our stout rowers waited for
us on the shore, and again carried us to our boat. Our
voyage was now to Capri. The veil of heaven was rent
asunder into light clouds ; the air became twofold high
and clear ; not a billow moved ; the soft curling of the
sea was like a watered ribbon. The beautiful Amalfi
vanished behind the cliffs ; Gennaro threw a kiss towards
it whilst he said to me, " There we have plucked roses ! "

" You, at all events, got among the thorns ! " thought I,
and nodded assentingly.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 237

The great, infinite sea, stretching on to Sicily and
Africa, spread itself before us. To the left lay the rocky
coast of Italy, with its singular caves ; before some of
these stood little cities, which seemed as if they had
stepped out of the caves ; in others sat fishermen, and
cooked their meals and tarred their boats behind the high
surf.

The sea seemed to be a fat, blue oil ; we put our hands
down into it, and they appeared as blue as it. The
shadow which the boat threw upon the water was of the
purest dark blue, the shadows of the oars a moving snake
of every shade of blue.

" Glorious sea ! " exclaimed I, in delight, " nothing in
all nature, with the exception of Heaven, is so beautiful
as thou ! "

I called to mind how often I, as a child, had lain upon
my back, and dreamed myself up into the blue infinite air ;
now my dream seemed to have become a reality.

We passed by three small rocky islands, II Galli; they
were immense blocks of stone thrown one upon another ;
giant-towers raised up out of the deep, with others, again,
piled upon them. The blue billows dashed up upon these
green masses of stone. In storm it must be a Scylla,
with her howling dogs.

The surface of the water slumbered around the naked
stony Cape Minerva, where in old times the Syrens had
their abode. Before us lay the romantic Capri, where
Tiberius had luxuriated in joy, and looked over the bay to
the coast of Naples. The sail was spread in our boat;
and, borne onward by the wind and the waves, we
approached the island. Now, for the first time, we
remarked the extraordinary purity and clearness of the
water. It was as wonderfully transparent as if it had
been air. We glided along, every stone, every reed, for
many fathoms below us, being visible. I became dizzy
when I looked down from the edge of our little boat into
the depth over which we were passing.

The island of Capri is approachable only from one
side. Around it ascend steep, perpendicular walls of cliff;
towards Naples they stretch out, amphitheatre-like, with

238 THE IMPROVISATORS.

vineyards, orange and olive-groves ; upon the shore stand
several cottages of fishermen and a watchhouse ; higher
up, amid the green gardens, looks the little city of Anna
Capri, into which a very small draw-bridge and gates con-
duct the stranger. We betook ourselves to the small inn
of Pagani, where tall palm-trees stand against the door, to
rest ourselves.

After dinner we were to ride up on asses to the ruins of
Tiberius's Villa, but now, however, we waited for our
breakfast, and between that and the following meal Fran-
cesca and Fabiani wished to repose themselves, in order to
have strength for the afternoon's walk. Gennaro and I
felt no necessity for this. The island did not appear so
large to me, but that in a few hours we could row round
it, and see the lofty portals of rock which, towards the
south, rear themselves isolatedly out of the sea.

We took a boat and two rowers ; the wind blew a little,
so that for half the distance we could make use of the sail.
The sea was broken on the low reef. Fishing- nets lay
outspread among them, so that we were obliged to go a
considerable distance from them ; it was a beautiful,
merry sail in that little boat ! Before long we saw only
the perpendicular cliffs ascending from the sea up towards
heaven ; in the crevices of which, however, here and there
sprang up an aloe, or gillyflower, yet with no footing even
for the mountain-goat. Below the surf, which flew up
like blue fire, grew upon the rocks the blood-red sea-apple,
which, wetted by the waves, seemed to have a doubly
bright hue ; it was as if the rocks bled at every stroke of
the billows.

The open sea now lay to the right of us, to the left of
us lay the island; deep caves, whose uppermost openings
lay but a little above the water, showed themselves in the
cliffs, others were only dimly visible in the surf. Down
amid these abode the Syrens ; the blooming Capri, upon
which we had climbed, being only the roof of their rock-
fortress.

" Yes, bad spirits live here," said one of the rowers, an
old man with silver-white hair. " It may be beautiful,
down there," said he; " but they never let their victims

THE IMPROVISATORE. 239

escape, and, if by any chance one does come back, he has
no longer any understanding for this world ! "

He now showed us at some distance an opening, some-
what larger than the others, but yet not large enough for
our boat to enter, without a sail, even if we had lain down
in it, either for length or breadth.

" That is the Witches' Cave ! "* whispered the younger
rower, and pushed out further from the rocks; " within,
all is gold and diamonds, but any one who goes in there
is burned up in a fiery flame ! Santa Lucia, pray for us!"

" I wish I had one of the Syrens here in the boat ! "
said Gennaro; "but she must be beautiful, then all would
be right."

" Your luck with the ladies," said I, laughing, " would
avail you, then, here also ! "

"Upon the swelling sea is the right place for kissing
and embracing ; that is what the waves are always at !
Ah ! " sighed he, " if we had but here the handsome
woman from Amalfl ! That was a woman ! was not she?
You sipped of the nectar of her lips 1 Poor Antonio !
You should have seen her last evening ! She was gracious
to me ! "

" Nay, nay," said I, half indignant at his unabashed
boasting, " it is not so ; I know better than that ! "

" How am I to understand that ? " asked he, and looked
with much astonishment into my face.

" I saw it myself," continued I ; " chance led me there ;
I doubt not of your great good fortune in other cases ; but
this time you only wish to joke with me."

* This is the name given by the inhabitants of Capri to the Blue Grotto,
which was only properly explored in 1831 by two young Germans, Fries and
Kopisch, and since then has become the goal of every traveller who visits
South Italy. Kopisch was born in Breslau, and is the author of a beautiful
novel called " Die Kahlkopfe auf Capri ; " in 1837 his poems were published.
— Author's Note.

Ernst Fries was a landscape-painter of extraordinary promise, the son of
Mr. Fries, the well-known and hospitable banker of Heidelberg. Ernst Fries
spent many years in Italy, and his finest pieces are scenes from that beautiful
country. He died suddenly, while yet quite young, at Carlsruhe, and lies
buried under a beautiful monument in one of the burial-grounds in Heidel-
berg. In memory of him, his fellow-townspeople have laid out a fine public
walk, leading from the splendid ruins of their celebrated castle round the
hill to the very ancient site of the Roman Castle. A graceful and beau-
tiful mark of respect to the memory of one who would so truly have enjoyed
the luxury of its exquiiste scenery. The road bears the name of the " Friesen
Weg," in honour of him. — Translator's Note.

24-0 THE I3IPROVISATORE.

He looked at me in silence.

" c I will not go/ " said I, laughing, and imitating Gen-
naro, " ' before you give me the kiss which you cheated
me out of, and gave it to that foolish youth ! ' '

" Signore ! you have listened to me ! " said he, gravely,
and I saw that his countenance became quite pale : " How
dare you affront me ? You shall fight with me, or I
despise you ! "

This was an effect which I did not anticipate that my
remarks would have produced.

" Gennaro, this is not your serious meaning," exclaimed
I, and took his hand ; he drew it back, made me no reply,
but desired the sailors to make for the land.

" Yes, we must sail round the island," said the old
man, ' '• we can only land where we set out from."

They bent to their oars, and we speedily approached
the lofty arch of rock in the blue swelling water ; but
anger and vexation agitated my mind ; I looked at Gen-
naro, who lashed the water with his stick.

" Una tromba ! " exclaimed the youngest of the seamen;
and across the sea from Cape Minerva came floating a
coal-black cloud-pillar in an oblique direction from the
sea towards heaven, the water boiling around it ; with all
speed they took down the sail.

l( Where are you steering to ? " inquired Gennaro.

" Back again, back again," said the younger rower.

" Around the whole island again ? " inquired I.

" Close under land ; close to the rocky wall ; the water-
spout takes a direction farther out."

l< The surf will draw the boat in among the rocks," said
the old man, and hurriedly snatched at the oars.

" Eternal God ! " stammered I, for the black cloud-
pillar came with the speed of the wind across the water,
as if it would sweep along the rocky wall of Capri, in the
neighbourhood of which we were, and, if it came, it would
either whirl us up with it, or force us down into the deep
close by the perpendicular rocky coast. I seized upon the
oar with the old man, and Gennaro assisted the younger ;
but we already heard the winds howling, and the waters
boiled before the feet of the water-spout, which drove us,
as it were, before it.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 241

<f Santa Lucia, save us ! " cried both the seamen, fling-
ing down their oars, and falling on their knees.

" Snatch hold on the oar," cried Gennaro to me, but
looked towards heaven pale as death.

Then rushed the tempest over our heads ; and to the
left, not far from us, went the dark night over the waves,
which lifted themselves up in the air, and then struck
white with foam upon the boat. The atmosphere pressed
heavily upon us, as if it would force the blood out of the
eyes ; it became night, the night of death. I was con-
scious but of one thing, and that was, that the sea lay
upon me ; that I, that we all, were the prey of the sea, of
death ; and further I was conscious of nothing.

More terrible than the might of the volcano ; over-
powering as the separation from Annunciata, stands the
sight before me which met my eyes, when they again
opened to consciousness. Far below me, above me, and
around me, was blue ether. I moved my arm, and, like
electric sparks of fire, millions of falling stars glittered
around me. I was carried along by the current of air. I
was certainly dead, I thought, and now was floated through
ethereal space up to the heaven of God ; yet a heavy
weight lay on my head, and that was my earthly sin,
which bowed me down : the current of air passed over my
head, and it was like the cold sea. I mechanically put
out my hands to grasp whatever might be near me : I felt
a solid substance, and clung firmly to it. A weariness, as
of death, went through my whole being ; I felt that I had
neither life nor strength within me ; my corpse rested
certainly within the depths of the sea, it was my soul
which now ascended to its fate.

" Annunciata!" sighed I. My eyes again opened. This
swoon must certainly have lasted a long time. I breathed
again ; I felt that I was stronger, and that my perception
was distinct. I lay upon a cold, hard mass, as if on a
point of rock, aloft in the infinitely blue ether, which was
lighted up around me. Above me vaulted itself the
heavens with singular ball-shaded clouds, blue as itself; all
was at rest, infinitely quiet. I felt, however, an icy cold-
ness through my whole being ; I slowly raised my hand.

242 THE IMPROVISATORS.

My clothing was of blue fire ; my hands shone like silver,
and yet I felt that they were my bodily hands. My mind
constrained itself to action ; did I belong to death or to
life ? I extended my hand down into the strangely
shining air below me ; it was water into which I thrust it,
blue, like burning spirit, but cold as the sea. Close beside
me stood a column, unshapely and tall, of a sparkling blue,
and like the water-spout upon the sea, only of a smaller
size. Was it my terror or my remembrance which pre-
sented to me this image ? After some moments I ventured
to touch it; it was as hard as stone, and as cold as it also;
I stretched out my hands into the half-dark space behind
me, and felt only hard, smooth wall, but dark-blue, as the
night-heavens.

Where was I ? Was that below me, which I had taken
for air, a shining sea, which burned of a sulphurous blue,
but Avithout heat ; was the illumined space around me
this, or was it light-diffusing walls of rock, and arches
high above me ? Was it the abode of death, the cell of
the grave for my immortal spirit ? An earthly habitation
it certainly was not. Every object was illumined in every
shade of blue ; I myself was enwrapped in a glory which
gave out light.

Close beside me was an immense flight of steps which
seemed to be made of vast sapphires, every step being a
gigantic block of this sparkling stone ; I ascended these,
but a wall of rock forbade all further advance. Perhaps I
was unworthy to approach any nearer to heaven. I had
left the world, burdened with the wrath of a human being.
Where was Gennaro ? Where were the two seamen ? I
was alone, quite alone. I thought of my mother, of
Domenica, of Francesca, of every one; I felt that my
fancy created no deception ; the glory which I beheld was,
like myself, either spiritual or physical.

In a crevice of the cliff, I saw an object standing ; I
touched it. It was a large and heavy copper cup, which
was full of gold and silver coins; I felt the individual
pieces, and my situation appeared to me stranger than be-
fore. Close to the surface of the water, and not far from
where I stood, I saw a clear blue star, which cast a single,

THE IMPROVISATORS. 243

long ray of light, pure as ether, over the mirror of the
water, and, while I yet looked at it, I saw it darken itself
like the moon; a black ohject showed itself, and a little
boat glided onward over the burning blue water. It was
as if it had ascended out of the deep, and then floated
upon its surface ; an old man slowly rowed it forward, and
the water shone red as crimson at every stroke of his oars.
In the other part of the boat sat also a human figure, a
girl, as I soon could see. Silent, immovable as images of
stone, they sat, excepting that the old man worked the
oars. A strangely deep sigh reached my ear: it seemed to
me that I recognised the sound. They rowed round in a
circle, and approached the place where I stood. The old
man laid his oars in the boat ; the girl raised her hand on
high, and exclaimed in a voice of deep suffering, " Mother
of God, forsake me not ! Here am I indeed, as thou hast
said."

" Lara ! " I cried aloud.

It was she ; I knew the voice ; I recognised the form ;
it was Lara, the blind girl, from the ruined temple in
Paestum.

" Give me my eyesight ! Let me behold God's beau-
tiful world ! " said she.

It was as if the dead had spoken ; my very soul trem-
bled. She demanded now from me the beauty of the
world, after which I, by my song, had breathed into her
soul deep longings.

"Give me " stammered her lips, and she sank back

into the boat, and the water splashed like fire-drops around
it.

For a moment the old man bent himself over her, and
then came out to where I stood. His glance rested upon
me ; I saw him make the sign of the cross in the air, take
up the heavy copper vessel, which he placed in the boat,
and then entered himself. I instinctively followed after
him. His singularly dark glance was fixed immovably
upon me ; he now snatched up the oars, and we floated on
towards the shining star. A cold current of air rushed
towards us ; I bent myself over Lara. A narrow opening
of rock now shut us in, but only for a moment, and then
B 2

244 THE IMPROVISATOR*:.

the sea, the great sea, in its infinite expanse, lay be-
fore us, and behind us reared itself up to heaven the per-
pendicular cliff. It was a little, dark opening through
which we had come ; close beside us was a low flat, over-
grown with scattered bushes and dark red flowers. The
new moon shone wonderfully clearly.

Lara raised herself up. I ventured not to touch her
hand ; she was a spirit, I believed. The whole were
spirits ; no dream images of my fancy.

" Give me the herbs ! " said she, and stretched out her
hand. I felt that I must obey the voice of the spirit. I
saw the red flowers growing upon the green bushes on the
low flat under the high cliffs. I stepped out of the boat,
gathered the flowers, which had a very peculiar smell : I
offered them to her. A weariness, as of death, went
through my limbs, and I sank down on my knee, but not
without perceiving that the old man made the sign of the
cross, took from me the flowers, and then lifted Lara into
a large boat which lay just by : the lesser one remained
fastened to the shore. The sail was spread, and they
sailed away over the sea.

I stretched my hands after them, but death lay as
heavily on my heart as if it were about to break.

" He lives ! " were the first words which I again heard.
I opened my eyes, and saw Fabiani and Francesca, who
stood with yet a third person, a stranger, beside me ; he
held my hand, and looked gravely and thoughtfully into
my face. I was lying in a large, handsome room : it was
day. Where was I ? Fever burned in my blood, and
only slowly and by degrees I became aware how I had
come there, and how I had been saved.

When Gennaro and I did not return, they had become
very uneasy about us ; neither could any tidings be gained
of the men who went with us; and, as a water-spout had
been seen to pass southward round the coast, our fate be-
came decided. Two fishing-boats were immediately sent
out to make the circuit of the island, so that they might
meet each other; but not a trace either of us or our boat
could they discover. Francesca had wept ; she was very
kind to me; she lamented with pain the deaths of Gennaro

i

THE IMPROVISATORE. 245

and the two seamen. Fabiani would not be satisfied with-
out himself going out to search: he resolved to examine every
little crevice of the rocks, to see whether some of us might
not have saved ourselves by swimming, and might perhaps
be even then enduring the most horrible of deaths — that of
distress and hunger ; for from not one single place was it
possible to climb up to human beings. In the early
morning, therefore, he had gone out with four strong
rowers, had visited the isolated rocky portals of the sea,
and every individual chasm of rock. The rowers were
unwilling to approach the terrific Witch's Cave, but
Fabiani commanded them to steer there towards the little
green flat. As he approached the place, he saw, at no
great distance, a human being lying outstretched : it was
myself. I lay like a corpse among the green bushes : my
dress was half dried by the winds ; they took me into the
boat ; he covered me with his cloak, rubbed my hands and
my breast; and perceived that I breathed faintly. They
made for land, and, under the care of the physician, I was
again among the number of the living. Gennaro and the
two seamen were nowhere to be found.

They made me tell them all that I could remember;
and I told them of the singularly beaming cave in which
I had awoke, of the boat with the old fisherman and the
blind girl, and they said it was my imagination, a feverish
dream in the night air : even I myself felt as if I ought
to think so; and yet I could not, it stood all so livingly
before my soul.

" Was he then found by the Witch's Cave?" inquired
the physician, and shook his head.

" You do not, then, believe that this place has a more
potent influence than any other ? " asked Fabiani.

" Nature is a chain of riddles," said the physician ; " we
have only found out the easiest."

It became day in my soul. The Witch's Cave, that
world of which our seamen had spoken, where all was
gleaming fire and beams ! Had the sea, then, borne me i-rr
there ? I remembered the narrow opening through which
I had sailed out of it. Was it reality, or a dream ? Had
I looked into a spiritual world ? The mercy of the Ma-
R 3

24 THE IMPROVISATORS.

donna had saved and protected me. My thoughts dreamed
themselves back again into the beamingly beautiful hall
where my protecting angel was called Lara.

In truth, the whole was no dream. I had seen that
which not until some years afterwards had been disco-
vered, and now is the most beautiful object in Capri, nay,
in Italy, the Grotta Azzurra. The female form was
really the blind girl from Fsestum. But how could I be-
lieve it? — how imagine it to be so? It was, indeed,
very strange. I folded my hands, and thought upon my
guardian angel. ,

CHAPTER VIII.

JOURNEY HOME.

FRANCESCA~and Fabiani remained yet two days in Capri,
that we might be able to make the journey back to Naples
together. If I had formerly been many times wounded
by their mode of speaking to me, and their treatment of
me, I now received so much affection from them, and they
had showed so much solicitude about me, that I clung to
them with my whole heart.

" Thou must go with us to Rome," they said ; " that is
the most rational and the best thing for thee."

My singular deliverance, the wonderful appearance in
the cave, operated greatly on my excited state of mind. I
felt myself so wholly in the hand of the invisible guide
who lovingly directs all for the best, that I now regarded
all chances as in the ruling of Providence, and was re-
signed ; and, therefore, when Francesca kindly pressed my
hand, and asked me whether I had a desire to live in
Naples with Bernardo, I assured her that I must and
would go to Rome.

" We should have shed a many tears for thee, Antonio,"
said Francesca, and pressed my hand ; " thou art our good
child. Madonna has held her protecting hand over thee."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 247

cc Excellenza shall know," said Fabiani, fc that the
Antonio with whom he was angry is drowned in the
Mediterranean, and that we are bringing back home with
us the old excellent Antonio ! "

" Poor Gennaro ! " sighed Francesca then ; " he pos-
sessed a noble heart, life, and spirit. In every thing he
was an example ! "

The physician sat beside me for many hours : he was
properly from Naples, and was only on a visit in Capri.
On the third day he accompanied us back. He said that
I was perfectly well, bodily at least, though not spiritually.
I had looked into the kingdom of death — had felt the
kiss of the angel of death upon my brow. The mimosa
of youth had folded together its leaves.

When we were seated in the boat, with the physician in
company, and I saw the clear, transparent water, all the
recollections of the past crowded themselves upon my soul,
and I thought how near I had been to death, and how
wonderfully I had been saved. The sun shone warmly
upon the glorious, blue sea. I felt that life was still so
beautiful, and tears rushed to my eyes. All my three
companions occupied themselves alone with me, nay,
Francesca herself talked of my beautiful talent — called me
a poet ; and when the physician heard that it was I who
had improvised, he told what deh'ght I had given to all his
friends, and how transported they had been with me.

The wind was in our favour, and instead of sailing direct
to Sorrento, as had at first been determined, and of going
from thence over land to Naples, we now sailed directly
up to the capital. In my lodging I found three letters, one
from Federigo ; he had again set off to Ischia, and would
not return for three days ; this distressed me, for thus I
should not be able to bid him farewell, because our de-
parture was fixed for the noon of the following day. The
second letter, the waiter told me, had been brought the
morning after I had set out; I opened it and read: —

" A faithful heart, which intends honourably and kindly
towards you, expects you this evening." Then was given
the house and the number, but no name, only the words,
" Your old friend."

B4

248 THE IMPROVISATORS.

The third letter was from the same hand, and con-
tained : —

" Come, Antonio ! The terror of the last unfortunate
moment of our parting is now well over. Come quickly !
— regard it as a misunderstanding. All may be right ;
only delay not a moment in coming ! " — the same signa-
ture as before.

That these were from Santa was to me sufficiently evi-
dent ; although she had chosen another house than hers
for our meeting. I resolved not to see her again ; wrote
in haste a few polite words to her husband, that I was
leaving Naples, that the hurry in which our arrangements
were made forbade me to pay him a farewell visit. I
thanked him for his and his Signora's politeness to me,
and besought them not to forget me. For Federigo I
wrote, also, a little note; promised him a regularly long
letter from Rome, because 1 was not now in a condition
to write.

I went out nowhere, for I wished not to meet Bernardo,
and saw none of my new friends. The only person whom
I visited was the physician, and I drove to his house with
Fabiani. His was a charming and friendly home : his
eldest sister, an unmarried lady, kept his house. There
was a something so affectionate, something so truthful,
about her, that I was immediately taken with her. I could
not help thinking of old Domenica, only that she was ac-
complished, was possessed of talents and higher perfections.

The next morning, the last which I was to spend in
Naples, my eye dwelt, with a melancholy sentiment, upon
Vesuvius, which I now saw for the last time ; but thick
clouds enveloped the top of the mountain, which seemed
as if it would not say to me farewell.

The sea was perfectly tranquil. I thought upon my
dream-pictures — Lara in the glittering grotto — and soon
would all my whole residence here in Naples be like a
dream ! I took up the paper Diario di Napoli, which the
waiter brought in : I saw my own name in it, and a critique
on my first appearance. Full of curiosity, I read it: my
rich fancy and my beautiful versification were in particular
most highly praised. It is said that I seemed to be of the

THE IMPROVISATORS. 249

school of Pangetti, only that I had a little too much fol-
lowed my master. I knew nothing at all about this Pan-
getti, that was certain ; and, therefore, could not have
formed myself upon this model. Nature and my own
feelings had alone been my guides. But the greatest
number of critics are so little original themselves, that
they believe, that all whom they pass judgment upon must
have some model to copy. The public had awarded me a
greater applause than this ; although the critic said that in
time I should become a master, and that I was now already
possessed of uncommon talent, rich imagination, feeling,
and inspiration. I folded together the paper, and resolved
to keep it: it would some time be a token to me, that all
this which I had lived through here was not a dream. I
had seen Naples, had moved about in it, had won and had
lost much. Was Fulvia's brilliant prophecy all come to
an end ?

We left Naples ; the lofty vineyards disappeared from
our sight. In four days we made the journey back to
Rome; the same way which, about two months before,
I had travelled with Federigo and Santa. I saw again
Mola di Gaaeta and its gardens of oranges : the trees were
now fragrant with blossoms. I went into the path where
Santa had sat and heard my life's adventure: how many
important circumstances had since that time knit them-
selves to it ! We drove through the dirty Itri, and I
thought upon Federigo. At the frontiers where our pass-
ports were given up for inspection, some goats yet stood
in the cave of the rock as he had painted them ; but the
little boy I saw not. We passed the night at Terracina.

The next morning, the atmosphere was infinitely clear.
I said my farewell to the sea, which had pressed me in its
arms, had lulled me into the most beautiful dream, and
had shown me Lara, my image of beauty. In the far dis-
tance I yet perceived, on the clear horizon, Vesuvius, with
its pale blue pillar of smoke : the whole was as if breathed
in air upon the brilliant firmament.

" Farewell ! farewell ! away to Rome, where stands my
grave ! " sighed I ; and the carriage bowled us away, over
the green marshes, to Velletri. I greeted the mountains

where I had gone with Fulvia: I saw again Genzano,
drove over the very spot where my mother had been killed ;
where I, as a child, had lost my all in this world. And
here I now came, like an educated gentleman ; beggars
called me Excellenza, as I looked out into the street.
Was I now really happier than I had been at that former
time ?

We drove through Albano : the Campagna lay before
us. We saw the tomb of Ascanius, with its thick ivy, by
the wayside ; farther on, the monuments, the long aque-
duct, and now Rome, with the cupola of St. Peter's.

" A cheerful countenance, Antonio," said Fabiani, as
we rolled in at the Porta San Giovanni. The Lateran
Church, the tall Obelisk, the Coliseum, and Trajan's Square,
all told me that I was at home. Like a dream of the night,
and yet like a whole year of my life, floated before me the
circumstances of the last few weeks. How dull and dead
was every thing here, in comparison with Naples ! The
long Corso was no Toledo street. I saw again well-known
countenances around me. Habbas Dahdah went tripping
past, and saluted us, as he recognised the carriage. In the
corner of the Via Condotti sat Peppo, with his wooden
clogs upon his hands.

" Now we are at home," said Francesca.

" Yes, home ! " repeated I ; and a thousand emotions
agitated my breast. In a few moments, I should stand,
like a schoolboy, before Excellenza. I shrunk from the
meeting ; and yet it seemed to me that the horses did not
fly fast enough.

We drew up at the Palazzo Borghese.

Two small rooms, in the highest story, were appropriated
to me. But I had not yet seen Excellenza. We were
now summoned to table. I bowed deeply before him.

" Antonio can sit between me and Francesca," were the
first words which I heard him say.

The conversation was easy and natural. Every mo-
ment I expected that a bitter remark would be aimed at
me ; but not a word, not the least reference, was made
to my having been away, or to Excellenza having been
displeased with me, as his letter had said.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 251

This gentleness affected me. I doubly prized the af-
fection which met me thus; and yet there were times
when my pride felt itself wounded, because — I had met
with no reproof.

CHAPTER IX.

THE EDUCATION. THE YOUNG ABBESS.

THE Palazzo Borghese was now my home. I was
treated with much more mildness and kindness. Some-
times, however, the old teaching tone, the wounding,
depreciating mode of treating ine, returned ; but I knew
that it was intended for my good.

During the hottest months, they left Rome, and I was
alone in the great palace : towards winter they returned,
and the old results were again produced. They seemed
to forget, in the mean time, that I had become older,
that I was no longer a child in the Campagna, who re-
garded every word which was spoken as an article of
faith ; or a scholar from the Jesuits' school, who con-
tinually and continually must be educated.

Like a mighty sea, where billow is knit to billow, lies
an interval of six years before me. I had swum over it :
God be praised ! Thou who hast followed me through
my life's adventures, fly rapidly after me. The im-
pression of the whole I will give thee in a few touches.
It was the combat of my spiritual education ; the jour-
neyman treated as an apprentice, before he could come
forth as a master.

I was considered as an excellent young man of talent,
out of whom something might be made ; and, therefore,
every one took upon himself my education. My de-
pendence permitted it to those with whom I stood con-
nected ; my good nature permitted it to all the rest.
Livingly and deeply did I feel the bitterness of my
position, and yet I endured it. That was an education.

252 THE IMPROVISATORS.

Excellenza lamented over my want of the fundamental
principles of knowledge : it mattered not how much soever
I might read : it was nothing but the sweet honey, which
was to serve for my trade, which I sucked out of books.
The friends of the house, as well as of my patrons, kept
comparing me with the ideal in their own minds, and
thus I could not do other than fall short. The mathe-
matician said that I had too much imagination, and too
little reflection : the pedant, that I had not sufficiently
occupied myself with the Latin language. The politician
always asked me, in the social circle, about the political
news, in which I was not at home, and inquired, only
to show my want of knowledge. A young nobleman,
who only lived for his horse, lamented over my small
experience in horseflesh, and united with others in a
Miserere over me, because I had more interest in myself
than in his horse. A noble lady-friend of the house,
who, on account of her rank and great self-sufficiency,
had gained the reputation of great wisdom and critical
acumen, but who had actually very little of the sense she
pretended to, requested that she might go through my
poems, with reference to their beauty and structure ; but
she must have them copied out on loose papers. Habbas
Dahdah considered me as a person whose talent had, at
one time, promised great things ; but which had now
died out. The first dancer in the city despised me,
because I could not make a figure in the ball-room ; the
grammarian, because I made use of a full stop where he
placed a semicolon ; and Francesca said, that I was quite
spoiled, because people made so much of me ; and for that
reason she must be severe, and give me the benefit of
her instruction, Every one cast his poison-drop upon
my heart: I felt that it must either bleed, or become
callous.

The beautiful and the noble in every thing seized upon
and attracted me. In tranquil moments I often thought
on my educators, and it seemed to me that they existed
in the whole of nature, and the life of the world for
which my thoughts and my soul only existed as active
artisans. The world even seemed to me a beautiful girl,

THE IMPROVISATORS. 253

whose form, mind, and dress had attracted my whole
attention ; but the shoemaker said, " Look only at her
shoes ; they are quite preferable ; they are the principal
thing!" The dressmaker exclaimed, " No, the dress;
see, what a cut ! that, above all, must occupy you ; go
into the colour, the hems, study the very principles of it !"
" No," cries the hair-dresser, " you must analyse this
plait; you must devote yourself to it!" " The speech
is of much more importance ! " exclaims the language-
master. f< No, the carriage!" says the dancing master.
" Ah, good Heavens ! " I sigh, " it is the whole together
which attracts me. I see only the beautiful in every
thing; but I cannot become a dress-maker or a shoemaker
just for your pleasure. My business is to exalt the beauty
of the whole. Ye good men and women, do not, there-
fore, be angry and condemn me."

" It is too low for him ! " " It is not high enough
for his poetical spirit!" said they all, deridingly.

No beast is, however, so cruel as man ! Had I been
rich and independent, the colours of every thing would
soon have changed. Every one of them was more pru-
dent, more deeply grounded, and more rational, than I.
I learned to smile obligingly where I could have wept;
bowed to those whom I lightly esteemed, and listened
attentively to the empty gossip of fools. Dissimulation,
bitterness, and ennui, were the fruit of the education
which circumstances and men afforded me. People
pointed always to my faults. Was there then nothing at
all intellectual, no good points in rne ? It was I myself
who must seek for these, who must make these availing.
People riveted my thoughts upon my own individual
self, and then upbraided me for thinking too much of
myself.

The politician called me an egotist because I would not
occupy myself solely and altogether with his calling. A
young dilletante in ^Esthetics, a relation of the Borghese
family, taught me what I ought to think, compose, and
judge, and that always in one mode, that every stranger
might see that it was the nobleman who taught the
shepherd boy, the poor lad, who must be doubly grateful

254 THE IMPROVISATORS.

to him in that he condescended to instruct him. He who
interested himself for the beautiful horse, and for that and
that alone, said that I was the very vainest of men because
I had no eye for his steed. But were not they all egotists?
Or were they right ? Perhaps ! I was a poor child for
whom they had done a great deal. But, if my name had
no nobility attached to it, my soul had, and inexpressibly
deeply did it feel every humiliation.

I who, with my whole soul, had clung to mankind,
was now changed, like Lot's wife, into a pillar of salt.
This gave rise to defiance in my soul. There were mo-
ments when my spiritual consciousness raised itself up in
its fetters, and became a devil of high-mindedness, which
looked down upon the folly of my prudent teachers, and,
full of vanity, whispered into my ear, " Thy name will
live and be remembered, when all theirs are forgotten, or
are only remembered through thee, as being connected with
thee, as the refuse and the bitter drops which fell into thy
life's cup ! "

At such moments I thought on Tasso, on the vain
Leonora, the proud court of Ferrara, the nobility of
which now is derived from the name of Tasso ; whose
castle is in ruins, and the poet's prison a place of pil-
grimage. I myself felt with what vanity my heart
throbbed ; but, in the manner in which I was brought
up, it must be so, or else it must bleed. Gentleness and
encouragement would have preserved my thoughts pure,
my soul full of affection ; every friendly smile and word
was a sunbeam, which melted one of the ice-roots of
vanity; — but there fell more poison-drops than sun-
beams.

I was no longer so good as I had been formerly, and
yet I was called an excellent, a remarkably excellent
young man. My soul studied books, nature, the world,
and myself; and yet they said, he will not learn any
thing.

This education lasted for six years, nay, seven, I might
say, but that about the close of the sixth year there
occurred a new movement in the waves of my life's sea.
In six long years there were certainly many circumstances

THE IMPROVISATORS. 25.5

which might have been communicated, many which were
of more marked interest than those of which I have been
speaking, but all melted themselves, however, into one
single drop of poison, as every man of talent, not possessed
of either wealth or rank, knows as well as the pulsations of
his own heart.

I was an abbe, had a sort of name in Rome as improvi-
satore, because I had improvised and read poems aloud in
the Academia Tiberina, and had always received the most
decided applause ; but Francesca was right when she said
that they clapped every thing which any body read here.
Habbas Dahdah stood as one of the first in the Academy ;
that is to say, he talked and wrote more than any one else :
all his fellow-professors said that he was too one-sided, ill-
tempered, and unjust, and yet they endured him among
them, and so he wrote and wrote on.

He had gone, he said, through my water-colour pieces,
as he called my poems, but he could not now discover one
trace of the talent which he had at one time, when in the
school I bowed myself before his opinion, found in me; it
had been strangled in the birth, he said, and my friends
ought to prevent any of my poems, which were only poeti-
cal misconceptions, from seeing the light. The misfortune
was, he said, that great geniuses had written in their
youthful years, and thus it had been with me.

I never heard any thing of Annunciata : she was to me
like one dead, who, in the moment of death, had laid her
cold hand crushingly upon my heart, and thereby it had
become more susceptible of every painful emotion. My
residence in Naples, all the recollections of it, were as a
beautiful paralysing Medusa's head. When the sirocco
blew, I bethought myself of the mild breezes at Paestum,
of Lara, and the brilliant grotto in which I had seen her.
When 1 stood like a school -boy before my male and female
educators, came to me recollections of the plaudits in the
Robber's Cave, and in the great theatre of San Carlo.
When I stood unobserved in a corner, I thought of
Santa, who stretched forth her arms after me, and sighed,
" Kill me, but leave me not ! " They were six long in-
structive years ; I was now six-and-twenty years old.

Flaminia, the young abbess, as tbey called her, the
daughter of Francesca and Fabiani, who already had been
consecrated in the cradle by the holy father as the bride
of heaven, I had not seen since I had danced her upon my
arm, and drawn for her merry pictures. She had been
educated in a female convent in the Quattri Fontane, from
which she never came. Fabiani had not seen ber either
for six long years ; Francesca only, as her mother, and as
a lady, was permitted to visit her. She was, they said,
grown quite a beautiful young woman, and the pious sisters
had brought her mind to the same state of perfection. Ac-
cording to old custom, the young abbess was now to return
home to her parents for some months, to enjoy all the
pleasures of the world, and all its joy, before she said for
ever farewell to it. She could even then, it was said,
choose between the noisy world and the quiet convent ;
but as, from the child's play with the dolls dressed as nuns,
so through her whole education in the convent, every thing
had been done with the design of riveting her soul and her
thoughts to her destined life.

Often when I went through Quattri Fontane, where the
convent was situated, I thought of the friendly child which
I had danced upon my arm, and how changed she must
be, and how quietly she lived behind the narrow wall.
Once only had 1 been to the convent church, and had
heard the nuns singing between the grating. Was the little
abbess seated among them ? thought I, but ventured not
to inquire whether the boarders also took part in the sing-
ing, and the church music. There was one voice which
sounded so high and melancholy above the others, and
which had a great resemblance to Annunciata's : I seemed
again to hear her, and all the remembrances from that gone
time seemed to awaken again in my soul.

" Next Monday our little abbess comes to us," said Ex-
cellenza. I long inexpressibly to see her. She seemed to
me, like myself, to be like a captive bird, whom they let
out of the cage with a string about its leg, that it might
enjoy freedom in God's nature."

I saw her for the first time again at the dinner-table.
She was, as they had told me, very much grown, somewhat

THE IMPROVISATORE. 257

pale, and, at the first moment, no one would have said that
she was handsome ; but there was an expression of heart-
felt goodness in her countenance,, a wonderful gentleness
was diffused over it.

There were at the table only a few of the nearest rela-
tions. Nobody told her who I was, and she appeared not
to recognise me, but replied, with a kindness to which I
was not accustomed, to every single word which I said. I
felt that she made no difference between us, and drew me
also into the conversation. She does not know me most
assuredly, thought I.

All the party was cheerful, told anecdotes and droll
passages in every-clay life; and the young abbess laughed.
This gave me courage, and I introduced several puns,
which, just at that time, had produced great effect in many
circles in the city. But no one laughed at them, excepting
the young abbess ; the others only faintly smiled, said that
it was poor wit, and that it was not worth repeating. I
assured them that, in almost every other place in Rome,
people found a deal to laugh at in them.

" It is but a mere play upon words," said Francesca.
" How can any one find pleasure in such superficial wit ?
What mere nothings can occupy a human brain ! "

I occupied myself very little, in truth, with such things.
But I had wished to contribute my part to the general
entertainment, and that which I had related appeared to
me very amusing, and exactly calculated for the purpose.
I became silent and constrained.

Many strangers were there in the evening, and I kept
myself prudently in the back-ground. The great circle
had gathered around the excellent Perini. He was of my
age, but a nobleman, lively, and, in fact, very entertaining;
and was possessed of all possible company talents. People
knew that he was amusing and witty, and discovered that
every thing which he said was so. I stood somewhat be-
hind him, and heard how they were all laughing, especially
Excellenza. I approached nearer. It was precisely that
very same play of words, which I to-day had so unfortu-
nately brought forward for the first time, that Perini now
related. He neither took from it nor added to it, but gave
s

258 THE IMPRO VISA TORE.

the very same words with the very same mien that I had
done, and they all laughed !

" It is most comic," cried Excellenza, and clapped his
hands ; " most comic, is it not ? " said he to the young
abbess, who stood by his side and laughed.

" Yes ; so it seemed to me at dinner when Antonio told
it to us ! " returned she. There was nothing at all bitter
in this remark of hers : it was spoken with her customary
gentleness. I could have fallen at her feet.

"Oh, it is superb !" said Francesca, to Perini's pun.

My heart beat violently. I withdrew to the window,
behind the long curtains, and breathed the fresh air.

I bring forward merely this one little trait. Every day,
as it went on, gave rise to similar ones. But the young
abbess was an affectionate child, who looked into my face
with gentleness and love, as if she would pray for forgive-
ness for the sins of the others. I was also very weak. I had
vanity enough, but no pride. That was occasioned, cer-
tainly, by my low birth, by my early bringing up, by my
dependence, and the unfortunate relationship of benefits
received, in which I was placed to those around me. The
thought was for ever recurring to my mind how much I
was indebted to my circumstances, and that thought bound
my tongue to the resolves of my pride. It was assuredly
noble ; but, at the same time, it was weakness.

Had I stood in an entirely independent position, things
could not have come to the state in which they were.
Every one acknowledged my sense of duty and my firm
conscientiousness; and yet, they said, a genius is not
capable of grave business. Those who were the most
polite to me said, that I was possessed of too much spiritu-
ality for it. If they meant what they said, how ill they
judged of a man of mind ! I might have perished of hun-
ger, it was said, had it not been for Excellenza; how much
gratitude, therefore, did I not owe him ?

About this time I had just finished a great poem —
ef David" — into which I had breathed my whole soul.
Day after day, through the last year, spite of the eternal
educating, the recollections of my flight to Naples, my
adventures there, and the severing of my first strong love,

THE IMPROVISATORS. 259

had given my whole being a more determined poetical
bent. There were moments which stood before me as a
whole life, a true poem, in which I myself had acted a
part. Nothing appeared- to me without significance, or of
every-day occurrence. My sufferings even, and the in-
justice which was done to me, was poetry. My heart felt
a necessity to pour itself forth, and in " David" I found
material which answered to my requiring. I felt livingly
the excellence of what I had written, and my soul was
gratitude and love ; for it is the truth, that I never either
sang or composed a strophe which appeared to me good,
without turning myself with child-like thanks to the eternal
God, from whom I felt that it was a gift, a grace which
he had infused into my soul ! My poem made me happy ;
and I heard with a pious mind every thing which seemed
to be said unreasonably against me ; for I thought, when
they hear this, they will feel what an injustice they have
done me, their hearts will warm towards me with twofold
love!

My poem was completed ; no human eye excepting my
own had yet seen it. It seemed to stand before me like a
Vatican Apollo, an unpolluted image of beauty known only
to God himself. I gladdened myself with the thought of
the day when I should read it in the Academia Tiberina. I
resolved that nobody in the house should in the mean time
know of it. One day, however, one of the first after the
young abbess was come home, Francesca and Fabiani were
so gentle and kind to me, that I felt as if I could have no
secrets with them. I told them, therefore, of my poem,
and they said, " But we ought first of all to hear it."

I was willing that they should, although not without a
kind of throbbing of heart, an extraordinary anxiety. In
the evening, just as I was about to read it, who should
make his appearance but Habbas Dahdah.

Francesca besought him to remain, and to honour my
poem by hearing it read. Nothing could have been more
repugnant to me. I knew his bitterness, ill-humour, and
bad blood ; nor were the others particularly prepossessed
in my favour. Nevertheless, the consciousness of the excel-
lence of my work gave me a sort of courage. The young
s 2

THE IMPROVISATORS.

abbess looked happy ; she delighted herself with the
thoughts of hearing my " David." When I first stepped
forward in San Carlo, my heart did not beat more violently
than now, as 1 sat before these people. This poem, I
thought, must entirely change their judgment of me —
their mode of treating me. It was a sort of spiritual
operation by which I desired to influence them, and there-
fore I trembled.

A natural feeling within me had led me only to describe
that which I knew. David's shepherd life, with which
my poem opened, was borrowed from my childhood's re-
collections in the hut of Domenica.

" But that is actually yourself," cried Francesca ; " your-
self out in the Campagna."

" Yes ; that one can very well see," said Excellenza.
(f He must bring himself in. That is really a peculiar
genius that the man has ! In every possible thing he
knows how to bring forward himself."

" The versification ought to be a little smoother," said
Habbas Dahdah. " I advise the Horatian rule, ' Let it
only lie by — lie by till it comes to maturity ! ' '

It was as if they had all of them broken off an arm
from my beautiful statue. I, however, read yet a few
more stanzas, but only cold slight observations met my
ear. Whenever my heart had expressed naturally its own
emotions, they said I had borrowed from another poet.
Whenever my soul had been full of warm inspiration, and
I had expected attention and rapture, they seemed indif-
ferent, .and made only cold and every-day remarks. I
broke off at the conclusion of the second canto : it was
impossible for me to read any more. My poem, which
had seemed to me so beautiful and so spiritual, now lay
like a deformed doll, a puppet with glass eyes and twisted
features; it was as if they had breathed poison over my
image of beauty.

" But David does not kill the Philistines ! " said Hab-
bas Dahdah. With this exception, they said that there were
some very pretty things in the poem ; that what re-
lated to childhood and to sentiment I could express very
nicely.

THE IMPROV1SATORE.

I stood silent, and bowed, like a criminal for a gracious
sentence.

c< The Horatian rule," whispered Habbas Dahdah,
pressing my hand very kindly and calling me " poet."
Some minutes, however, afterwards, when I had with-
drawn, greatly depressed, into a corner, I heard him say
to Fabiani that my work was nothing at all but desperate
bunglingly put-together stuff!

They had mistaken both it and me, but my soul could
not bear it. I went out into the great saloon adjoining,
where a fire was burning on the hearth ; I convulsively
crumpled together my poem in my hand. All my hopes,
all my dreams, were in a moment destroyed. I felt my-
self so infinitely small; an unsuccessful impression of
him in whose image I was made.

That which I had loved, had pressed to my lips, into
which I had breathed my soul, my living thoughts, I cast
from me into the fire ; I saw my poem kindle up into red
flame.

" Antonio ! " cried the young abbess close behind me,
and snatched into the fire after the burning leaves ; her
foot slipped in her quick movement, and she fell forward
on the fire. It was a fearful sight j she uttered a shriek,
I sprang forward to her and caught her up : the poem was
all in a blaze, and the others came rushing into the room.

" Jesus Maria ! " exclaimed Francesca.

The young abbess lay pale as death in my arms: she
raised her head, smiled, and said to her mother, —

" My foot slipped ; I have only burned my hand a
little ; if it had not been for Antonio, it would have been
a great deal worse ! "

I stood like a sinner, and could not say one word.
She had severely burnt her left hand, and a great excite-
ment was occasioned by it in the house. They had not
noticed that I had thrown my poem into the fire. I ex-
pected that they would afterwards inquire about it, but, as
I did not speak of this, neither was it spoken of by any
one, — by no one at all? Yes, by one, — by Flaminia, the
young abbess !

In her I saw the good angel of the house ; through her
g 3

gentleness, her sisterly disposition, after some time, my
whole childlike confidence returned ; I was as if bound to
her.

It was more than fourteen days before her hand was
healed. The wound burned, but it burned also in my
heart.

" Flaminia, I am guilty of the whole ! " said I one day
as I sat alone with her ; " for my sake you have suffered
this pain."

" Antonio/' said she, " for Heaven's sake be silent !
Let no creature hear a word of this ; you do yourself an
injustice; my foot slipped, it might have been much more
unfortunate had not you been there. I owe thanks to you
for it, and that my father and mother feel also ; they are
much attached to you, Antonio, more so than you think."

" I owe every thing to them," I said; " every day lays
me under fresh obligation."

" Do not speak of that/' said she, with indescribable
sweetness ; " they have their own mode of behaving to you,
but they only think that it is the best. You do not know
how much good my mother has told me about you ! We

have all of us our faults, Antonio, even you yourself "

she paused. " Yes," continued she, " how could you be
so angry as to burn that beautiful poem ? "

" It was not worth any thing better," said I ; "I
ought long before to have thrown it into the flames."

Flaminia shook her head. " It is a bad, wicked world ! "
said she ; " yes, it was very much better there among the
sisters in the quiet, friendly convent."

<c Yes," exclaimed I ; " innocent and good like you am
I not ; my heart has in its remembrance rather the bitter
drops than the refreshing draughts of benefits which have
been extended to me."

" In my beloved convent it was much better than it is
here, though you all love me so much," she would often say
when we were together alone. My whole soul was attracted
towards her ; for I felt that she was the good angel of my
better feelings and my innocence. I seemed also to per-
ceive in others a greater delicacy towards me, a greater
gentleness in word and in looks ; and I fancied that this
was the effect of Flaminia's influence.

THE IMPROVJSATORE. 263

She seemed to have such great pleasure in talking to me
about the things which occupied me most, — poetry, the
glorious, Godlike poetry. I told her a great deal about
the great masters, and often inspiration ascended into my
soul, and my lips became eloquent, as she sat there before
me with folded hands, and looked into my face like the
angel of Innocence.

" And yet, how happy you are, Antonio ! " said she,
" more happy than thousands ! And, nevertheless, it seems
to me that it must be an anxious thing to belong to the
world in the same degree as you and every poet must !
How very much good cannot one word of yours produce,
and yet how much evil likewise ! "

She expressed her astonishment that poets for ever sung
of human struggles and troubles ; to her it seemed that
the prophet of God, as the poet is, should only sing of the
eternal God and of the joy of heaven.

l( But the poet sings of God in His creatures ! " replied
I ; "he glorifies Him in that which He has created for
His glory."

" I do not understand it," said Flaminia ; " I feel
clearly, however, that which I mean to say, but I have not
the words for it. Of the eternal God, of the divinity in
His world and in our own hearts, the poet ought to speak,
ought to lead us to his heait, and not into the wild
world."

She then inquired from me how it was to be a poet ;
how one felt when one improvised ; and I explained to her
this state of spiritual operation as well as I could.

" The thoughts, the ideas," said she ; " yes, I under-
stand very well that they are born in the soul, that they
come from God ; we all know that, but the beautiful
metre, the mode in which this consciousness expresses itself,
that 1 understand not."

" Have you not," I inquired, " often in the convent
learned one or another beautiful psalm or legend which is
made in verse ? And then often, when you are least think-
ing about it, some circumstance or another has called up an
idea within your mind, by which the recollection is awoke
of this or that, so that you could, then and there, have
s 4

264 THE IMPROViSATORE.

written them clown on paper; verses, rhymes, even have
led you to remember the succeeding, whilst the thought,
the subject, stood clearly before you ? Thus is it with the
improvisatore and poet, — with me at least ! At times it
seems to me these are reminiscences, cradle-songs from
another world, which awake in my soul, and which I am
compelled to repeat."

" How often have I felt the same kind of thing ! " said
Flaminia, " but never was able to express it. That strange
longing, which often took hold upon me, without my
knowing wherefore ! To me it seemed, therefore, so often,
that I was not at home here in this wild world. The
whole seemed to me a great and strange dream ; and this
was the reason why I longed so again for my convent —
for my little cell ! I know not how it is,, Antonio, but
there I used so often to see in my dreams my bridegroom
Jesus and the Holy Virgin, now they present themselves
more seldom : I dream now so much about worldly pomp
and joy, about so much that is wicked. I am certainly no
longer so good as I was among the sisters ! Why should
I have been kept from them so long ? Do you know,
Antonio ; I will confess to you, I am no longer innocent,
I would too gladly adorn my person ; and it gives me so
much pleasure when they say that I am lovely ! In the
convent they told me that it was only the children of sin
who thought in this way."

" Oh that my thoughts were as innocent as yours ! " said
I, bowing myself before her, and kissing her hand.

She then told me that she remembered how I had danced
her on my arm when she was little, and had drawn pictures
for her.

" And which you tore in pieces after you had looked at
them," said I.

" That was hateful of me ! " said she ; ee but you are not
angry with me for it ? "

" I have seen my heart's best pictures torn in pieces
since then," said I ; " and yet I was not angry with those
who did it."

She stroked me affectionately on the cheek.

More and more dear did she become to my heart, that,

THE IMPROVISATORE. 265

indeed, had been repulsed by all the world ; she alone was
affectionate and sympathising.

In the two warmest summer months the family removed
to Tivoli ; T accompanied them, for which I certainly had
to thank Flaminia. The glorious scenery there, the rich
olive-groves, and the foaming waterfall, seized upon my
soul as the sea had seized upon it, when I had seen it for
the first time at Terracina. I felt myself so exhilarated to
leave Rome, the yellow Campagria around it, and the
oppressive heat. The first breath from the mountains, with
their dark olive-groves, brought again life's pictures from
Naples back to my soul.

Frequently, and with great delight, Flaminia rode, with
her maid, upon asses, through the mountain-valley of
Tivoli ; and I was permitted to attend them. Flaminia
had much taste for the picturesque beauty of nature, and I
therefore attempted to make sketches of the rich neighbour-
hood ; the boundless Campagna, when the cupola of
St. Peter's raised itself upon the horizon ; the fertile sides
of the mountains, with their thick olive-groves and vine-
yards ; even Tivoli itself, which lay aloft on the cliffs, be-
low which waterfall upon waterfall fell foaming into the
abyss.

" It looks," said Flaminia, " as if the whole city stood
upon loose pieces of rock, which the water would soon tear
down. Up above those, in the street, one never dreams
about it, but goes with a light step above an open grave ! "

fc So, indeed, do we always ! " replied I ; it is well and
happy for us, that it is concealed from our eyes. The
foaming waterfalls, which we see hurled down here, have in
them something disturbing, but how much more terrible
must it be in Naples, where fire is thrown up like water
here!"

I then told her about Vesuvius, of my ascent to it ; told
her about Herculaneum and Pompeii, and she drank in
every word of my lips. When we were at home again, she
begged me to tell her more about all the glorious things on
the other side of the Marshes.

The sea she could not rightly understand, for she had
only seen it from the top of the mountains, like a silver

THE IMPROVISATORS.

riband on the horizon. I told her that it was, like God's
heaven, spread out upon the earth, and she folded her
hands, and said, 'f God has made the world infinitely beau-
tiful ! "

" Therefore man ought not to turn himself away from
the glory of His works, and immure himself in a dark con-
vent ! " I would have said, but I dared not.

One day we stood beside the old sibyl's temple, and
looked down upon the two great waterfalls, which, like
clouds, were hurled into the chasm, whilst a column of
spray mounted upwards among the green trees, towards the
blue air ; the sunbeams fell upon the column, and caused a
rainbow. Within the cavern in the cliff, above the lesser
waterfall, a flock of doves had established themselves ; they
flew in wide circles below us, and above the great mass of
water, which is shivered in its fall.

" How glorious ! " exclaimed Flaminia ; " now impro-
vise for me also, Antonio ! " said she ; " now sing to me a
poem about what you see ! "

I thought upon my heart's dream, which had all been
shivered like the water-stream here, and I obeyed her, and
sang. Sang how life burst forth like the stream, but yet
every drop of it did not drink in the sunbeam, it was only
over the whole, over a whole human race, that the glory of
beauty diffused itself.

" No ! any thing sorrowful I will not hear ! " said Fla-
minia; "you shall not sing me any thing if you do not
like to do it. I do not know how it is, Antonio, but 1 do
not consider you like the other gentlemen whom I know !
I can say any thing to you ! You seem to me almost like
my father and my mother ! "

I possessed also her confidence as she did mine ; there
was so much which agitated my soul, that I longed for
sympathy. One evening I related to her much of my
childhood's life, of my ramble in the Catacombs, of the
flower-feast in Genzano, and of my mother's death,
when the horses of Excellenza went over us. Of that she
had never heard.

" O Madonna ! " said she ; " thus are we guilty of your
misfortune ! Poor Antonio ! " she took my hand, and

THE IMPROVISATORS. 267

looked sorrowfully into my face. She was greatly in-
terested in old Domenica; inquired whether I frequently
visited her, and I took shame to myself to confess, that
during the last year I had only been twice out there ; al-
though in Rome I had seen her more frequently, and had
always divided my little wealth with her; but that was
indeed nothing to speak of.

She besought of me always to tell her more, and so,
when I had related to her all about my life in childhood, I
told her of Bernardo and Annunciata, and she looked with
an inexpressibly pious expression into my very soul. The
nearness of innocence directed my words. I told her about
Naples, touching lightly, very lightly, upon the shadowy
side, and yet she shuddered at what I told, shuddered be-
fore Santa, the servant of beauty in my Paradise.

" No, no !" exclaimed she, " thither will I never go!
No sea, no burning mountain can cleanse away all the sin
and abomination of the great city ! You are good and
pious, and therefore did the Madonna protect you ! "

I thought of the image of the Mother of God, which
had fallen down from the wall when my lips met Santa's ;
but this I could not tell to Flaminia : would she then have
called me good and pious ? I was a sinner like the others.
Circumstances, the mercy of the Mother of God, had
watched over me. In the moment of temptation I was
weak as any of those whom I knew.

Lara was inexpressibly dear to her. " Yes," said she,
" when your soul was in God's heaven, could she only
come to you ! I can very well fancy her, fancy the blue,
beaming grotto, where you saw her for the last time ! "

Annunciata did not rightly please her. " How could
she love the hateful Bernardo ? I would rather not that
she had been your wife. A woman who thus can come
forward before a whole public ; a woman — yes, I cannot
properly make that intelligible which I mean ! I feel,
however, how beautiful she was, how wise, how many
advantages she possessed above other women, but it does
not seem to me that she was worthy of you. Lara was a
better guardian angel for you ! "

I must now tell her of my improvisation ; and to her it

268 THE IMPBOVISATORE.

seemed that it would be much more terrible in the great
theatre, than before the robbers in the mountain cave.
I showed her the Diario Napoli, in which was the critique
on my first appearance; how often had I read it since
then!

It amused her to see every thing which that paper from
the foreign city contained. All at once she looked up and
exclaimed, " But you never told me, however, that
Anunciata was in Naples at the same time you were there.
Here it is stated that she will make her appearance on the
morrow, that is on the day upon which you set out ! "

" Annunciata!" stammered I, and stared at the paper,
into which I had so often looked before, and yet, truly
enough, had never read any thing but what had reference
to myself.

" That I never saw ! " exclaimed I ; and we looked
silently at each other. " God be praised that I did
not meet her, did not see her — she was indeed not
mine ! "

" But if it were to happen now," asked Flaminia ;
" would it not please you ? "

" It would be painful to me ! " exclaimed I, " great
suffering. The Annunciata who captivated me, who still
exists idolised in my memory, I shall never again find ;
she would be to me a new creature, who would painfully
excite a remembrance which I must forget, must regard
as the property of death ! She stands among my
dead ! "'

On one warm afternoon, I entered the large general
sitting-room, where the thick green twining plants over-
shadowed the window. Flaminia sat, supporting her head
upon her hand, in a light slumber : it seemed as if she
were keeping her eyes closed only for sport. Her breast
heaved, she dreamed. " Lara ! " said she. ' In dreams
she certainly floated with my heart's dream-image, in that
splendid world where I last had seen her. A smile parted
her lips ; she opened her eyes.

'"Antonio !" said she, " I have been asleep, and have
dreamed. Do you know of whom ? ''

THE 1MPROVISATORE. 2,$

" Lara ! " said I ; for I too could not but think of her
when I saw Flaminia with closed eyes.

" I dreamt about her ! " said she. " We both of us
flew far over the great, beautiful sea, which you have told
me about. Amid the water there lay a rock, on which
you sat, looking very much dejected, as you often do. She
then said that we would fly down to you, and she sank
through the air down to you. I too wished to go with
her, but the air kept me far aloft, and with every stroke
of my wings, which I made to follow her, I seemed to
fly farther away. But when I fancied that there lay
thousands of miles between us, she was at my side, and
you also ! "

" Thus will death assemble us ! " said I. " Death is
rich, he possesses every thing which has been dearest to
our hearts ! "

I spoke with her about my beloved dead, the dead even
of my thoughts, of my affections, and we often turned
back to these reminiscences.

She then asked me if I would also think of her when
we were separated. Very soon she should be really again
in the convent, a nun, the bride of Christ, and we should
never see each other more.

Deep suffering penetrated my soul at this thought ; I
felt right livingly how dear Flaminia had become to me.

One day, when she, and her mother, and I, were walk-
ing in the garden of the Villa d'Este, where the tall
cypresses grow, we went up the long alley which runs up
to the artificial fountain. Here lay a ragged beggar pulling
up the grass from the walk, and, as soon as he saw us, he
prayed for a bajocco. I gave him a paolo, and Flaminia
smiled kindly, and gave him another.

" Madonna reward the young Excellenza and his hand-
some bride ! " cried he after us.

Francesca laughed aloud ; it ran like burning fire
through my blood j I had not courage to look at Fla-
minia. In my soul a thought had awoke, which I had
never dared to unveil before to myself. Slowly, but
firmly, had Flaminia grown into my heart : it must bleed,
I felt, when we parted from each other. She was the

only one to whom my soul now clung ; the only one who
affectionately met my thoughts and feelings. Was it love ?
Did I love her ? The feeling which Annunciata had
awoke in my soul was very different ; even the sight of
Lara, the remembrance of her, had something much more
allied to this feeling. Intellect and heauty had captivated
me in Annunciata; ideal beauty mingled itself with the
first view of Lara, which made my heart swell. No, this
was not my love for Flaminia. It was not the wild,
burning passion ; it was friendship ; a brother's most
living love. I felt the connexion in which I stood to her,
with regard to her family and her destination, and was in
despair at the thought of separation from her ; she was to
me my all, — my dearest in this world ; but I had no
wish to press her to my heart, to breathe a kiss upon her
lips, as had been my whole thoughts with regard to
Annunciata, and which, as an invisible power, had driven
me towards the blind girl j no, this was to me quite
foreign.

" The young Excellenza and his handsome bride ! "
as the beggar had cried, resounded continually in my soul.
I sought to read every wish on Flaminia's lips, and hung
about her like her shadow. When others were present, I
became constrained and dejected. I felt the thousand
bonds which pressed heavily upon me ; I became silent
and absent, for her alone was I eloquent. She was so
dear to me, and I must lose her.

" Antonio ! " said she, " you are unwell, or something
has happened which I may not know ? Why not ? may
I not?"

With her whole soul she depended on me, and I desired
to be to her a dear, faithful brother ; and yet my con-
versation perpetually tended to lead her out into the world.
I told her how I myself had once wished to be a monk,
and how unhappy I should have been if I had become so,
because sooner or later the heart asserts its right.

" I," said she, " shall feel myself happy, very happy,
to return again to my pious sisters — among them 1 am
only rightly at home. Then I shall very often think upon
the time when I was out in the world, shall think of every

THE I3IPROVISATORE. 271

thing of which you have told me. It will be a beautiful
dream, I feel it so already. I shall pray for you, pray
that the wicked world may never corrupt you ; that you
may become very happy, and that the world may rejoice
in your song, and that you may feel how good the dear
God is to you and to us altogether."

Tears streamed from my eyes ; I sighed deeply, " We
shall then never see each other more ! "

" Yes, with God and the Madonna ! " said she, and
smiled piously. <( There you shall show me Lara ! there
also shall she receive the sight of her eyes. Oh, yes, with
the Madonna it is the best ! "

We removed again to Rome. In a few weeks, I heard
it said, that Flaminia was to return to the convent, and
shortly after that to take the veil. My heart was rent
with pain, and yet I was obliged to conceal it. How
forlorn and desolate should I not be when she had left us!
how like a stranger and alone should I not stand ! what
grief of heart I should experience ! I endeavoured to hide
it — to be cheerful — to be quite different to what I was.

They spoke of the pomp of her investiture as if it had
been a feast of gladness. But could she, however, go
away from us? They had befooled her mind, they had
befooled her understanding. Her beautiful long hair was
to be cut away from her head, the living was to be clothed
in a shroud ; she would hear the funeral bells ring, and
only as the dead rise up the bride of heaven. I said
this to Flaminia : with an anguish as of death besought
of her to think about what she was doing, of thus going
down alive to the grave.

" Let nobody hear what you are saying, Antonio!"
said she, with a solemnity which I had never seen in her
before. " The world has all too firm a hold upon you :
look more to that which is heavenly."

She became crimson, seized my hand, as if she had
spoken to me with too much severity, and said, with the
most heartfelt gentleness, " You will not distress me,
Antonio ? "

I then sank down before her feet, she stood like a saint
before me, my whole soul clung to her. How many tears

did I shed that night ! my strong feeling for her seemed
to me a sin, she was really the bride of the church.
I daily saw her, daily learned to value her more highly.
She talked to me like a sister, looked into my face, offered
me her hand, said that her soul was filled with desires for
me, and that I was dear to her. I convulsively concealed
the night of death which lay in my soul, and it made me
happy that it was known to no one. God send death to a
heart which suffers as mine suffered !

The moment of separation stood horribly before me, and
a wicked spirit whispered into my ear, " Thou lovest her ! "
and I really did not love her as I had loved Annunciata :
my heart trembled not as it had done when my lips touched
Lara's forehead. " Say to Flaminia, that thou canst not
live without her ; she also is attached to thee as a sister
to a brother. Say that thou lovest her ! Excellenza
and the whole family will condemn thee, turn thee out
into the world : but then in losing her thou losest every
think. The choice is easy !"

How often did this confession arise to my lips, but
my heart trembled, and I was silent ; it was a fever, a
fever of death, which agitated my blood, my thoughts !

All was in a state of preparation within the palace for
a splendid ball, a flower-festival for the sacrificial lamb. I
saw her in the rich, magnificent dress : she was unspeakably
lovely.

" Now be gay like the others !" she whispered to me ;
" it distresses me to see you so dejected. Often shall I
certainly, for your sake, when I am sitting in my convent,
send my thoughts back to the world, and that is sin, An-
tonio. Promise me that you will become more cheerful —
promise me that you will forgive my father and mother
when they are a little severe towards you. They mean it
for your good. Promise me that you will not think so
much on the bitterness of the world, and will be always
good and pious as you now are ; then I may dare still to
think of you, still to pray for you, and Madonna is good
and merciful."

Her words penetrated my heart. I see her yet as she
was that last evening before she left us, — she was so

THE IMPROVISATORS. 273

tranquil. She kissed her father and the old Excellenza,
and spoke of the separation as if it were only for a few days.

" Now say farewell to Antonio/' said Fabiani, who was
much affected, while the others appeared not to be so. I
hastily hurried up to her, and bowed to kiss her hand.
" Antonio," said she ; her voice was so low, tears streamed
from my eyes. " Mayst thou be happy !"

I knew not how to tear myself away ; for the last time
I looked into her pious, gentle countenance.

" Farewell ! " said she, scarcely audibly. She bent
towards me, and, impressing a kiss upon my forehead, said,
te Thanks for thy affection, my dear brother ! "

More I know not ! I rushed out of the hall and into
my own chamber, where I could weep freely ; it was
as if the world sank away from under my feet.

And I saw her yet once more ! When the time was
accomplished I saw her. The sun shone so warm and cheer-
fully. I saw Flaminia in all her rich pomp and magnifi-
cence, as she was led up to the altar by her father and her
mother. I heard plainly the singing, and perceived that
many people were kneeling all around, but there stood
distinctly before me only the pale, mild countenance —
an angel it was — which kneeled with the priests before
the high altar.

I saw how they took the costly veil from her head,
and the abundant hair fell down upon her shoulders ;
I heard the shears divide it — they stripped her of her
rich clothing — she stretched herself upon the bier, the
pall and the black cloth, upon which are painted death's
heads, were thrown over ner. The church-bells tolled
for the burial procession, and the song for the dead was
intoned. Yes, dead was she — buried to this world.

The black grate, before the entrance to the interior to
the convent, was raised, the sisters stood in their white
linen vestments, and sang the angel's welcome to their new
sister. The bishop extended to her his hand, and the
dead arose as the bride of heaven arose. Elizabeth she
was now called. I saw the last glance which she directed
to the assembly ; after this she gave her hand to the
nearest sister, and entered into the grave of life.
T

274 THE IMPROVISATORS.

The black grating fell ! I still saw the outline of her
figure — the last wave of her garment — and she was
gone !

CHAPTER X.

OLD DOMENICA. THE DISCOVERY. THE EVENING IN NEPI.

THE BOATMAN'S SONG. — VENICE.

CONGRATULATIONS were now offered in the Borghese Pa-
lace. Flaminia-Elizabeth was really the bride of heaven.
Francesca's seriousness was not concealed by her artificial
smile ; the tranquillity which lay on her countenance was
banished from her heart.

Fabiani, most deeply affected, said to me, " You have
lost your best benefactress ! You have reason for being
very much depressed ! She desired me to give you some
scudi," continued he, " for old Domenica ; you have cer-
tainly spoken to her about your old foster-mother. Take
her these, they are Flaminia's gift."

The dead lay like a snake around my heart ; my thoughts
were life's weariness ; I trembled before them ; before them
self-murder seemed to lose its terrors.

" Out into the free air \" thought I ; "to the home of
my childhood, where Domenica sang cradle-songs to me ;
where I played and dreamed."

Yellow and scorched lay the Campagna ; not a green
blade spoke of the hope of life ; the yellow Tiber rolled its
waves towards the sea in order to vanish there. I saw
again the old burial-place, with the thick ivy over the roof,
and depending from the walls ; the little world which, as
a child, I had called my own. The door stood open ; a
pleasant melancholy feeling filled my heart j I thought of
Domenica' s affection and her joy at seeing me. It certainly
was a year since I had last been out there, and eight months
since I had spoken with her in Rome, and she had prayed
me to go very often to see her. I had very often thought
about her, had talked of her to Flaminia j but our summer

THE IMPROVISATORE. 275

residence in Tivoli and my excited state of mind since our
return had prevented my going out to the Campagna.

I heard, in thought, her scream of joy as she saw me,
and hastened my steps ; but, when I came pretty near the
door, walked very softly to prevent her hearing me. I
looked into the room ; in the middle of the room stood a
great iron pan over a fire, some reeds were laid upon it, and
a young fellow blew them ; he turned his head and saw
me ; it was Pietro, the little child, which I had nursed
here.

" Saint Joseph !" exclaimed he, and sprung up over-
joyed, " is it your Excellency ? It is a long, long time
since you were so gracious as to come here ! "

I extended to him my hand, which he would kiss.
" Nay, nay, Pietro ! " said I ; "it almost seems as if I
had forgotten my old friends, but I have not."

" No, the good old mother said so too," cried he ; ie Oh,
Madonna ! how glad she would have been to have seen
you."

" Where is Domenica ? " inquired I.
" Ah ! " returned he ; " it is now half a year since she
was laid under the earth. She died whilst Excellenza was
in Tivoli ! She was only ill for a few days, but through
all that time she talked about her dear Antonio. Yes, Ex-
cellenza, do not be angry that I call you by that name, but
she was so very fond of you. ' Would that my eyes could
see him before they are closed !' said she, and longed so
very much for it. And when I saw very well that she
could not last the night over, I went in the afternoon to
Rome ; I knew very well that you would not be angry at
my request. I would have prayed of you to have accom-
panied me to the old mother, but when I got there you
and the gentlefolks were all gone to Tivoli ; so I came home
full of trouble ; but when I came to the house she was
already gone to sleep."

He held his hands before his face and wept.
Every word which he had said fell heavily upon my
heart. I had been her dying thought, and, at the same
time, my thoughts had been far away from her. Would
T 2

276 THE IMPROVISATORS.

that I had only said farewell to her before I set off for
Tivoli ! I was not a good man !

I gave the money to Pietro from Flaminia, and all that
I had also. He sank down upon his knees before me, and
called me his guardian angel. It sounded like a jest in my
heart. With a twofold sense of suffering, cut, as it were,
to the very soul, I left the Campagna. I know not how I
reached home.

For three long days I lay without consciousness in a vio-
lent fever. God knows what, during this time., I said ;
but Fabiani frequently came to me ; he had appointed the
deaf Fenella to be my nurse. No one named Flaminia to
me. I had returned home ill from the Campagna, and had
laid myself immediately on my bed, when the fever took
hold upon me.

I recovered my strength, but very slowly ; in vain I en-
deavoured to compel myself to humour and cheerfulness ;
I was possessed of neither.

It was about six weeks after this time, when Flaminia
took the veil, that the physician permitted me to go out.
Almost without knowing whither I directed my steps, I went
to the Porta Pia ; my eye gazed down upon the Quattri
Fontane, but I had not courage enough to pass the con-
vent. Some evenings, however, after this, when the new
moon shone in the heavens, the emotions of my heart drew
me thither ; I saw the grey convent walls, the grated win-
dows, Flaminia's closed grave. " Wherefore dared I not
to see the burial-place of the dead ? " said I to myself, and
felt within me a resolution to do so.

Every evening I took my way past there. " I was very
fond of walking to the Villa Albani," said I to those of my
acquaintance whom I met by chance. " God knows what
will be the end of it!" sighed my heart ; " I cannot en-
dure it long ! " I was then just at the goal.

It was a dark evening ; a ray of light streamed down
the wall of the convent ; I leaned myself against the corner
of a house, fixed my eyes upon this bright point, and
thought on Flaminia.

" Antonio !" said a voice close behind me; " Antonio,
what are you doing here ? "

THE IMPROVISATORS. 277

It was Fabiani. " Follow me home!" said he.

I accompanied him ; we spoke not a word by the way ;
he knew it all as well as I myself did ; I felt that he did
so. I was an ingrate ; I had not courage to look at him.
Presently, and we were alone in my chamber.

II You are yet ill, Antonio," said he, with an unusual
solemnity in his voice. " You need occupation, change of
scene. It will do you good to mix more in the world.
There was a time when you spread out your wings for
freedom ; perhaps it was unjust in me that I decoyed the
bird back to his cage. It is a great deal better for human
beings to have their will, then if misfortunes befall them
they have only themselves to blame. You are quite old
enough to direct your own steps. A little journey will be
beneficial to you ; the physician is of the same opinion also.
You have already seen Naples, visit now the north of Italy.
I shall provide the means for it. It is the best thing for
you, necessary, and," added he, with a seriousness, a seve-
rity, which I had never known in him before, " I am con-
vinced that you will never forget the benefits which we
have conferred upon you. Never occasion us mortification,
shame, and sorrow, which indiscretion or blind passion
might do. A man can do any thing, whatever he will, if
he be only a good man."

His words struck me to the earth like a flash of light-
ning ; I bent my knee, and pressed his hand to my lips.

" I know very well," said he, half-jestingly, " that we
may have done you injustice ; that we have been unreason-
able and severe. No persons, however, will intend more
uprightly and more kindly towards you than we have done.
You will hear more flattering modes of speech, more loving
words, but not more true integrity than we have shown
you. For a year you shall move about. Let us then see
what is your state of mind, and whether we have done you
an injustice."

With these words he left me.

Had the world still new suffering for me — still fresh

poison-drops ? Even the only draught of consolation,

freedom to fly about in God's world, fell like gall into my

deep wound. Far from Rome, far from the south, where

T 3

278 THE IMPROVISATORS.

lay all the flowers of my remembrance, over the Apennines,
towards the north, where there actually lay snow upon the
lofty mountains ! Cold blown from the Alps into my
warm blood ! Toward the north, to the floating Venice,
the bride of the sea ! God ! let me never more return to
Rome, to the grave of my cherished memories ! Farewell,
my home, my native city !

The carriage rolled across the desolate Campagna. The
dome of St. Peter's was concealed behind the hills. We
drove past Monte Soracte, across the mountains, to the
narrow Nepi. It was a bright, moonlight evening. A
monk was preaching before the door of the hotel ; the
crowd repeated his Viva Santa Maria ! and followed him,
singing through the streets. The crowd of people carried
me along with them. The old aqueduct, with its thick,
twining plants, and the dark olive-groves around, formed a
dark picture, which corresponded to my state of mind.

I passed through the gate by which I had entered.
Just outside of this lay the vast ruins of a castle or con-
vent, the broad highroad running through its dilapidated
halls, a little path turned from the main road, and led
into the midst of them ; ivy and maiden's hair grew
dependingly from the walls of the solitary cells. I entered
into a large hall ; tall grass grew above the rubbish and
the overthrown capitals ; enwreathing vine-shoots moved
their broad leaves through the great Gothic windows, where
now were only small remains of loosely-hanging painted
glass. Aloft, upon the walls, grew bushes and hedges ;
the beams of the moon fell upon a fresco-painting of Saint
Sebastian, who stood bleeding, and pierced with an arrow.
Deep organ-tones resounded, as it seemed, continuously
through the hall ; I followed the sounds, and, passing out
through a narrow door, found myself among myrtle-hedges
and luxuriant vine-leaves, close to a perpendicular descent
of great depth, down which a waterfall was precipitated,
foamingly white, in the clear moonlight.

The whole romantic scene would have surprised any
mind, yet perhaps my distress would have allowed it to
slide out of my memory, had not that which I saw further
impressed it painfully, deeply into my heart. I followed

THE IMPROVISATORE. 279

the narrow, almost overgrown path, close to the abyss,
towards the broad highway. Close beside me, from over
the lofty, white wall, upon which the moon was shining,
stared three pale heads, behind an iron grating, the heads
of three executed robbers, which, as in Rome, . on the
Porta del Angelo, were placed in iron cages, to serve as a
terror and a warning to others. There was to me nothing
terrible in them. In earlier days, the sight would have
driven me away hence ; but suffering makes philosophers.
The bold head, which had been occupied by thoughts of
death and plunder, the mountain's daring eagle, was now a
silent, captive bird, which sat quietly and rationally in its
cage, like other imprisoned birds. I stepped up quite
close to them ; they had certainly been placed there within
these very few days ; every feature was still recognisable.
But, as I gazed on the middle one, my pulse beat stronger ;
it was the head of an old woman ! The skin was yellow-
brown, the eyes half open, the long silver-white air, which
hung through the grating, waved in the wind. My eye fell
upon the stone tablet in the wall, where, according to old
custom, the name and crime of the executed were engraved.
Here stood " Fulvia." I saw also the name of her native
city, " Frascati ;" and, agitated to the very depths of my
soul, I stepped back a few paces.

Fulvia, the singular old woman, who had once saved my
life, she who had obtained the means for my going to
Naples, my life's inexplicable spirit, did I thus meet with
her again ! With these pale, blue lips had she once
pressed my forehead ; these lips, which, to the crowd, had
spoken prophetic words, had given life and death, were
now silent, breathing forth horror from their very silence !
Thou didst prophesy my fortune ! Thy bold eagle lies
with clipped wings, and has never reached the sun ! In
the combat with his misfortune, he sinks down into the
great Nemi-lake of life ! His pinion is broken !

I burst into tears, repeated Fulvia's name, and slowly
retraced my steps through the desolate ruins. Never shall
I forget that evening in Nepi.

The next morning we journeyed onward, and came to
Terni, where is the largest and most beautiful waterfall in
T 4

280 THE IMPROVISATORS.

Italy. I rode from the city through the thick, dark olive-
groves, the first which I had seen ; wet clouds hung
around the summits of the mountains, every thing to the
north of Rome appeared to me dark, nothing smiling and
beautiful, as the Marshes and as the orange-gardens of
Terracina, where the green palm-trees grow. Perhaps it
was my own heart which gave the whole this dark colouring.
We went through a garden ; a luxuriant orange-alley
extended itself between the rocky wall and the river, which
rushed onward with the speed of an arrow. Between the
rocks I saw a cloud of spray ascend high up in the path,
upon which a rainbow played. We ascended amid a
wilderness of rosemary and myrtle ; and, from the very
summit of the mountain, above the sloping, rocky wall,
was hurled the monstrous mass of waters. A lesser arm
of the river moved along, like a broad, silver riband close
beside, and united below the rocks to form a broad cascade,
which, white as milk, whirled itself down the black chasm.
I thought upon the cascades at Tivoli, where I had impro-
vised to Flaminia. The lofty, rushing stream sang to me
with a penetratingly thrilling organ-tone the remembrance
of my loss and my suffering. To be crushed, to die, and
vanish, is the lot of Nature !

" Here," said our guide, " was an Englishman shot last
year by robbers. It was a band from the Sabine moun-
tains, although one may say that they have a home in all
the mountains from Rome to Terni. The authorities are
now always so much on the alert ! They laid their hands
on three unfortunates ; I saw them driven to the city
chained to the cart. At the gate sat the wise Fulvia, as
we called her, from the Sabine mountains ; she was old,
and yet always young ; she knew more than many a monk
who will get the cardinal's hat ; she could tell fortunes in
figurative words ; and since this people have said that it
was a sign that she was in connection with them. Now
they have taken her and many of the robbers. Her hour
was come, so now her head is placed grinning over the gate
at Nepi."

It was as if every thing, man as well as nature, would
cast night into my soul ; I felt a desire with the speed of

THE IMPIiOVISATOBE. 281

the wind to chase through the country. The dark olive-
groves threw more shadow into my soul ; the mountains
oppressed me. Away to the sea, where the wind blew !
to the sea, where one heaven bore us, and another vaulted
itself above us ! My blood burned with love, my heart
with longing. I had twice felt the pure, inspiring flame ;
I had looked up to Annunciata, and my youthful, increasing
strength clung to her — but she looked another. Flaminia
had slowly grown into my soul ; I had not been dazzled,
or transported, but I had learned to value one of the noblest
of human beings. Every time she extended her hand to
me as a sister, and I dared to press it to my lips, every
time she consoled me so kindly, and prayed that the world
might not spoil me, she pressed the arrow deeper into my
heart. I loved her not as a bride, and yet I felt that I
could not have endured to see her in the arms of another.
Now she was dead, dead to the world. No other man
would press her to his heart, or breathe a kiss upon her
lips : this anguish of hell was not allotted to me. I
sought to console myself by drawing this picture, because
I now called my feelings love, the strong passion of the
soul and the heart. If I had had to see her as the bride
of a young noble, daily to have witnessed the happiness of
their love — I, the cast-off herdling of the Campagna,
who had eaten the bread of charity in the rich palace —
would she then have been so gentle, so sisterlike, yet with-
out love ! It would have been madness to me ! No !
now she belonged to the cloister ; no one would raise his
eyes to her — no one saw her ! — Yes, it was better, it
was happier ! — [.The world's grief must be great when my
lot was to be envied !

To the sea, the wonderful sea ! That is to me a new
world. To Venice, the strangely -floating city, the queen
of the Adriatic ! But not through the dark woods, the
together-compressing mountains,, quick, in easy flight over
the billows ! So dreamed my thoughts.

It had been my plan to go first to Florence, and there-
fore through Bologna and Ferrara. I altered this, how-
ever, left the vetturino in Spoleto, took a place in the mail,
and posted over the Apennines in the dark night, through

282 THE IMPROVISATOR!^.

Loretto, without even visiting its holy house. Madonna,
forgive me my sin !

High up, on the mountain-road, I had already discerned
the Adriatic Sea as a silver stripe on the horizon ; the
mountains lay like gigantic waves below me, and now I
saw the blue, heaving sea, with its national pennons and
flags upon its ships. I thought of Naples as I saw this ;
but no Vesuvius heaved itself with its black column of
smoke, no Capri lay beyond. I slept here one night, and
dreamed of Fulvia and Flaminia. " The palm-tree of
thy fortune is budding green !" said they both, and
smiled. I awoke, and the day was shining into my
chamber.

" Signore !" said the waiter ; "a vessel lies here which
is about ready to sail for Venice ; but will you not first of
all see our city ? "

" To Venice ! " cried I, " quick, quick ! that is exactly
my wish."

An inexplicable feeling drove me onward. I stepped on
board, ordered my light luggage to be sent after me, and
looked out over the infinite sea. " Farewell, my fatherland ! "
Now, for the first time, I seemed rightly to have flown
forth into the world, as my feet no longer trod upon the
earth. I knew perfectly that the north of Italy would
present to me a new style of scenery. Venice itself was
really so different to any other Italian city ; a richly adorned
bride for the mighty sea. The winged Venetian lion
waved on the flag above rne : it \vas a ship from Venice
which bore me. The sails swelled in the wind, and con-
cealed the coast from me. I sat upon the right side of
the ship, and looked out across the blue billowy sea ; a
young lad sat not far from me, and sang a Venetian song
about the bliss of love and the shortness of life.

" Kiss the red lips, on the morrow thou art with the
dead ; love, whilst thy heart is young, and thy blood is fire
and flame ! Grey hairs are the flowers of death : then is
the blood ice ; then is the flame extinguished ! Come into
the light gondola ! We sit concealed under its roof, we
cover the windows, we close the door, nobody sees thee,
my love ! Nobody sees how happy we are. We are rocked

THE IMPROVISATORE. 283

upon the waves ; the waves embrace, and so do we ! Love
whilst youth is in thy blood. Age kills with frost and
with snow ! "

As he sung, he smiled and nodded to the others around
him ; and they sang in chorus, about kissing and loving
while the heart was young. It was a merry song, very
merry ; and yet it sounded like a magical song of death in
my heart. Yes, the years sped away, the flames of youth
are extinguished. I had poured the holy oil of love out
over the earth, which kindled neither light nor warmth :
to be sure it does no damage ; but it flows into the grave,
without brightening or warming. No promise, indeed,
binds me — no obligation ! Why do not my lips snatch at
the refreshing draught of affection which they pine for ? I
had a feeling; yes — how shall I call it? — a dissatis-
faction with myself. Was it the wild fire in my breast,
which had scorched up my understanding ? I felt a sort
of bitterness against myself for having fled from Santa.
The holy image of the Madonna fell down ! It was the
rusted nail which gave way ; and the Jesuit school's con-
ventual bashfulness, and the goat's milk in my blood,
chased me thence. How beautiful Santa was ! I saw her
burning affectionate glance, and I grew angry with myself!
Wherefore should I not be, like Bernardo, like a thousand
others, like all my young friends ? None, none of all these
would have been a fool as I had been. My heart desired
love : God had ordained it, who had implanted this feeling
within me. I was still young, however : Venice was a gay
city, full of beautiful women. And what does the world
give me for my virtue, thought I, for my child-like tem-
per? ridicule and time brings bitterness and grey hairs.
Thus thought I, and sang in chorus with the rest, of kiss-
ing and loving, whilst the heart was yet young.

It was delirium, the madness of suffering, which excited
these thoughts in my soul. He who gave to me iny life,
my feelings, and directed my whole destiny, will lead me
in love. There are combats, thoughts even, which the
most mortal dare not to express, because the angel of Inno-
cence in our breast regards them as sinful. They who
indulge the longings of their hearts may philosophise beau-

284 THE IMPROVISATORS.

tifully over my speech. Judge not, lest ye be judged ! I
felt that in myself — in my own corrupt nature, there
abode no good thing. I could not pray ; and yet I slept
whilst the vessel flew onward to the north — to the rich
Venice.

In the morning hour, I discerned the white buildings
and towers of Venice, which seemed like a crowd of ships
with outspread sails. To the left stretched itself the king-
dom of Lombard y, with its flat coast : the Alps seemed
like pale blue mist in the horizon. Here was the heaven
wide. Plere the half of the hemisphere could mirror itself
in the heart.

In this sweet morning air my thoughts were milder : I
was more cheerful. I thought about the history of Venice,
of the city's wealth and pomp, its independence and supre-
macy : of the magnificent doges, and their marriage with
the city. We advanced nearer and nearer to the sea : I
could already distinguish the individual houses across the
Lagunes ; but their yellow-grey walls, neither old nor
new, did not wear a pleasing aspect. St. Mark's Tower I
had also imagined to be much loftier. We sailed in be-
tween the mainland and the Lagunes, which, like a crooked
wall of earth, stretched out into the sea. Every where it
was flat. The shore seemed to be scarcely an inch higher
than the surface of the water. A few mean houses they
called the city of Fusina : here and there stood a bush ;
and, excepting these, there was nothing at all on the flat
land. I had fancied that we were quite close upon Venice,
which, however, still lay a mile distant ; and between us
and it lay an unsightly muddy water, with broad islands
of slime, upon which not a single bird could find footing,
and not a single blade of grass could take root. Through
the whole extent of this lake were dug deep canals, bor-
dered with great piles to indicate their direction. I now
saw the gondola for the first time : long and narrow, quick
as a dart ; but all painted coal-black. The little cabin in
the centre, covered over with black cloth : it was a floating
hearse, which shot past us with the speed of an arrow.
The water was no longer blue, as it was out in the open sea,
or close upon the coast of Naples : it was of a dirty green.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 285

We passed by an island where the houses seemed to grow
up out of the water, or to have clung to a wreck : aloft
upon the walls stood the Madonna and the child, and looked
out over this desert. In some places, the surface of the
water was like a moving green plain — a sort of duck-pool,
between the deep sea and the black islands of soft mud.
The sun shone upon Venice : all the bells were ringing ;
but it looked nevertheless dead and solitary. Only one
ship lay in the docks ; and not a single man could I see.

I stepped down into the black gondola, and sailed up
into the dead street, where every thing was water, not a
foot-breadth upon which to walk. Large buildings stood
with open doors, and with steps down to the water ; the
water ran into the great door-ways, like a canal ; and the
palace-court itself seemed only a four-cornered well, into
which people could sail, but scarcely turn the gondola.
The water had left its greenish slime upon the walls : the
great marble palace seemed as if sinking together : in the
broad windows, rough boards were nailed up to the gilded,
half-decayed beams. The proud giant-body seemed to be
falling away piecemeal ; the whole had an air of depression
about it. The ringing of the bells ceased, not a sound,
excepting the splash of the oars in the water, was to be
heard, and I still saw not a human being. The magnifi-
cent Venice lay like a dead swan upon the waves.

We crossed about into the other streets, small narrow
bridges of masonry hung over the canals ; and I now saw
people who skipped over me, in among the houses, and in
among the walls even ; for I saw no other streets than
those in which the gondolas glided.

" But where do the people walk ? " inquired I of my
gondolier ; and he pointed to small passages by the bridges,
between the lofty houses. Neighbour could reach his
hand to neighbour, from the sixth story across the
street ; three people could hardly pass each other below,
where not a sunbeam found its way. Our gondola had
passed on, and all was still as death.

" Is this Venice ? — The rich bride of the sea ? — the
mistress of the world ? "

I saw the magnificent square of St. Mark. ( ' Here is

THE IMPKOVISATORE.

life ! " people said. But how very different is it in Naples,
nay, even in Rome, upon the animated Corso ! And yet
the square of St. Mark's is the heart of Venice, where life
does exist. Shops of books, pearls, and pictures, adorned
the long colonnades, where, however, it was not yet ani-
mated enough. A crowd of Greeks and Turks, in bright
dresses, and with long pipes in their mouths, sat quietly
outside of the coffee-houses. The sun shone upon the
golden cupola of St. Mark's church, and upon the glorious
bronze horses over the portal. From the red masts of the
ships of Cyprus, Candia, and Morea, depended the motion-
less flags. A flock of pigeons filled the square by thou-
sands, and went daintily upon the broad pavement.

I visited the Ponte Rialto, the pulse-vein which spoke
of life ; and I soon comprehended the great picture of
Venice — the picture of mourning — the impression of
my own soul. I seemed yet to be at sea, only removed
from a smaller to a greater ship, a floating ark.

The evening came; and when the moonbeams cast
their uncertain light, and diffused broader shadows, I felt
myself more at home ; in the hour of the spirit- world, I
could first become familiar with the dead bride. I stood
at the open window : the black gondolas glided quickly
over the dark, moonlit waters. I thought upon the sea-
man's song of kissing and of love ; felt a bitterness towards
Annunciata, who had preferred the inconstant Bernardo to
me ; and why ? — perhaps precisely because of the piquancy
which this inconstancy gave him — such are women ! I
felt bitterness, even towards the innocent, pious Flaminia :
the tranquillity of the convent was more to her than my
strong, brotherly love. No, no, I would love neither of
them more : there was an emptiness in my heart of all,
even of those which had once been dear to it. I would
think of neither of them, I resolved ; and, like an uneasy
ghost, my thoughts floated between Lara, the image of
beauty, and Santa, the daughter of sin.

I entered a gondola, and allowed myself to be taken
through the streets in the silent evening. The rowers
sung their alternating song, but it was not from the
s: Gerusalemme Liber ata ;" the Venetians had forgotten

THE IMPROVISATORS. 28?

even the old melodies of the heart, for their doges were
dead, and foreign hands had bound the wings of the lion,
which was harnessed to their triumphal car.

" I will seize upon life — will enjoy it to the last drop ! "
said I, as the gondola lay still. We were at the hotel
where I lodged. I went to my own room, and lay down
to sleep.

That was the first day in Venice.

CHAPTER XI.

THE STORM. — SOIREE AT MY BANKER'S THE NIECE OF THE

PODESTA.

THE letters which I had brought with me obtained for
me acquaintances — friends, as they called themselves ;
and I was the Signore Abbe. Nobody instructed me, but
they discovered that every thing which I said was good,
excellent, and that I was possessed of talents. From
Excellenza and Francesca I had often heard such things
said as were very painful to me ; I was often told that
which was very unpleasant for me to hear ; it seemed to
me almost as if they sought out for every thing bad against
me, that they might tell me that there were a great many
people who did not at all mean so kindly by me. But
this failed of its object. Of a certainty I had, however,
no honest friends, since it was those only who told me dis-
agreeable things. But I, however, felt no longer my
subordinate condition, the sense of which not even Fla-
minia's goodness could remove.

I had now visited the rich palace of the doges, had
wandered in the empty, magnificent halls ; seen the cham-
ber of the Inquisition, with the frightful picture of the
torments of hell. I went through a narrow gallery, over
a covered bridge, high upon the roof, above the canals on
which the gondolas glided : this is the way from the doge's

288 THE IMPROVISATORS.

palace to the prisons of Venice. This bridge is called the
Bridge of Sighs. Close beside it lie the wells. The light
of the lamp alone from the passage can force its way be-
tween the close iron bars into the uppermost dungeon ;
and yet this was a cheerful, airy hall, in comparison with
those which lie lower down, below the swampy cellars,
deeper even than the water outside in the canals ; and yet
in these unhappy captives had sighed, and inscribed their
names on the damp walls.

" Air, air !" demanded my heart, rent with the horrors
of this place ; and, entering the gondola, I flew with the
speed of an arrow from the pale-red old palace, and from
the columns of St. Theodoret and the Venetian lion, forth
over the living, green water to the Lagunes and Lido, that
I might breathe the fresh air of the sea — and I found a
churchyard.

Here is the stranger, the Protestant, buried, far from
his native country, — buried upon a little strip of land
among the waves, which day by day seem to rend away
more and more of its small remains. White human bones
stuck out from the sand ; the billows alone wept over
them. Here often had sat the fisherman's bride or wife,
waiting for the lover or the husband, who had gone out fish-
ing upon the uncertain sea. The storm arose, and rested
again upon its strong pinions; and the woman sang her
songs out of " Gerusalemme Liberata," and listened to
hear whether the man replied. But Love gave no return
in song ; alone she sat there, and looked out over the
silent sea. Then, also, her lips became silent ; her eye
saw only the white bones of the dead in the sand ; she
heard only the hollow booming of the billows, whilst
night ascended over the dead, silent Venice.

The dark picture filled my thoughts, my whole state of
mind gave it a strong colouring. Solemn as a church re-
minding of graves and the invisible saints stood before me
the entire scene. Flaminia's words resounded in my ear,
that the poet, who was a prophet of God, should endea-
vour only to express the glorification of God, and that
subjects which tended to this were of the highest cha-
racter. The immortal soul ought to sing of the immortal ;

THE IMPROVISATORE. 289

the glitter of the moment changed its play of colour, and
vanished with the instant that gave it birth. Kindling
strength and inspiration fired my soul, hut quickly died
away again. I silently entered the gondola, which bore
me towards Lido. The great open sea lay before me, and
rolled onward to the shore in long billows. I thought of
the bay of Amalfi.

Just beside me, among sea-grass and stones, sat a young
man, sketching, certainly a foreign painter ; it seemed to
me that I recognised him, I stepped nearer, he raised his
head, and we knew each other. It was Poggio, a young
Venetian nobleman. I had been several times in company
with him in the families whom I visited.

" Signore," exclaimed he, " you on Lido ! Is it the
beauty of the scene, or," added he, " some other beauty
which has brought you so near to the angry Adriatic ? "

We offered each other our hands. I knew something
about him, that he had no property, but, on the other
hand, great talent as a painter; and yet it had been
whispered to me that he, in his solitude, was the greatest
of misanthropes. To judge of him by his conversation,
he was personified dissipation, and yet he was in reality
propriety itself. According to his account of himself,
Don Juan might have been his model, and yet, in fact, he
combated, like the holy saint Antonius, against every
temptation. A deep heart-sorrow was the ground of all
this, it was whispered; but what? — whether his small
worldly means or an unhappy love-affair? No, nobody
knew that rightly. He seemed to speak out every thing,
not to conceal the smallest thought ; his behaviour seemed
simple as that of a child, and yet nobody seemed rightly
at all to understand him. All this had interested me, and
this meeting with him now was very agreeable to me, it
dissipated the clouds from my soul.

" Such a blue, billowy plain," said he, pointing to the
sea, " is not to be found in Rome ! The sea is the most
beautiful thing on the earth ! It is, also, the mother of
Venus, and," added he, laughing, " is the widow of all the
mighty doges of Venice."

" The Venetians must especially love the sea," said I,

e ' regarding it as their grandmother, who carried them
and played with them for the sake of her beautiful
daughter Venetia."

" She is no longer beautiful now, she bows her head,"
replied he.

" But yet/' said I, " she is still happy under the sway
of the Emperor Francis."

" It is a prouder thing to be queen upon the sea than a
Caryatide upon land/' returned he. " The Venetians
have nothing to complain about, and politics are what I
do not understand ; but beauty, on the contrary, I do ; and
if you are a patron of it, as I do not doubt but you are,
see, here comes my landlady's handsome daughter, and
inquires whether you will take part in my frugal dinner !"

We went into the little house close by the shore. The
wine was good, and Poggio most charming and enter-
taining. No one could have believed that his heart se-
cretly bled.

We had sat here certainly a couple of hours, when my
gondolier came to inquire whether I would not return, as
there was every appearance of a storm coming on ; the
sea was in great agitation, and between Lido and Venice
the waves ran so high that the light gondola might easily
be upset.

" A storm ! " exclaimed Poggio, " that is what I have
wished for many a time. You must not let that escape
you," said he to me ; " it will abate again towards
evening, and, even if it do not, there is convenience here
for us to pass the night, and comfortably to let it go over
our heads, whilst the dash of the waves sings us to sleep."

" I can at any time take a gondola here from the
island," said I to the gondolier, and dismissed him.

The storm beat violently on the window. We went
into the open air. The descending sun illumined the
dark-green agitated sea, the billows heaved themselves,
crested with white foam, and sank down again. Far in
the distance, where the clouds stood like cliffs torn by
lightning, we perceived several boats — one moment they
were in sight, and then gone again. The billows lifted
themselves up and struck upon the shore, covering us

THE IMPROVISATORE.

with their salt drops. The higher the waves flew, the
louder Poggio laughed, clapped his hands, and shouted
" Bravo ! " to the wild element. His example infected
me, and my infirm heart felt itself better amid this ex-
citement of nature.

It soon became night. I ordered the hostess to bring
us in the best wine, and we drank to the health of the
storm and the sea, and Poggio sung the same song about
love which I had heard in the ship.

" Health to the Venetian ladies ! " said I, and he rang
his glass against mine to the beautiful Roman ones. Had
a stranger seen us, he would have thought that we were
two happy young friends.

" The Roman women," said Poggio, " pass for the
handsomest. Tell me, now, honestly, your opinion."

" I consider them as such," said I.

' ' Well ! " said Poggio, " but the Queen of Beauty
lives in Venice ! You should see the niece of our Po-
desta ! I know nothing more spiritually beautiful than
she; such as she is would Canova have represented the
youngest of the Graces had he known Maria. I have
only seen her at mass and once in the Theatre of Saint
Moses. There go all the young Venetians, like ms ; only
they are in love with her to the death, I only adore her;
she is too spiritual for my fleshly nature. But one really
must adore what is heavenly. Is it not so, Signore
Abbe?"

I thought on Flaminia, and my momentarily kindled
merriment was at an end.

(c You are become grave!" said he, " the wine is
really excellent, and the waves sing and dance to our
bacchanalia !"

' ' Does the Podesta see much company ? " inquired I,
that I might say something.

" Not often," replied Poggio, " what company he has
is very select ! The beauty is shy as an antelope, fear-
fully bashful, like no other woman that ever I knew;
but," added he, with a jocular smile, " it may be also a
way of making herself interesting ! Heaven knows how
the whole rightly hangs together ! You see, our Podesta
u 2

had two sisters, both, of them were away from him a great
many years ; the youngest was married in Greece, and is
the mother of this beautiful girl, the other sister is still
unmarried, is an old maid, and she brought the beauty
here about four years ago "

A sudden darkness interrupted his speech ! it was as if
the black night had wrapped us in its mantle, and at the
same moment the red lightning illumined all around. A
thunder-clap followed, which reminded me of the eruptions
of Vesuvius.

Our heads bowed themselves, and involuntarily we made
the sign of the cross.

" Jesus Maria ! " said the hostess, entering our room,
"it is a fear and a horror to think of! Four of our best
fishermen are out at sea ! Madonna keep her hand over
them! The poor Agnese sits with five children — that
will be a misery ! "

We perceived, through the storm, the singing of a
psalm. There stood upon the shore against which the
billows broke in lofty surf a troop of women and children
with the holy cross : a young woman sat silently among
them, with her glance riveted on the sea ; one little child
lay on her breast, and another, somewhat older, stood by
her side, and laid its head on her lap.

With the last fearful flash, the storm seemed to have
removed itself to a greater distance ; the horizon became
brighter, and more clearly shone the white foam upon the
boiling sea.

e( There they are ! " exclaimed the woman, and sprang
up and pointed to a black speck, which became more and
more distinct.

" Madonna be merciful to them ! " said an old fisher-
man, who, with his thick brown hood drawn over his
head, stood with folded hands, and gazed on the dark ob-
ject. At that same moment it vanished in a foaming
whirlpool.

The old man had seen aright. I heard the scream of
the despairing little group ; it grew all the stronger as the
sea became calmer, the heaven clearer, and the certainty
greater. The children dropped the holy cross ; they let it

THE IMPROVISATORS. 293

fall in the sand, and clung, crying, to their mothers. The
old fisherman, however, raised it again, impressed a kiss
upon the Redeemer's feet, raised it on high, and named
the holy name of the Madonna.

Towards midnight the heavens were clear, the sea more
tranquil, and the full moon cast her long beams over the
calm bay between the island and Venice. Poggio entered
the gondola with me, and we left the unfortunates, whom
we could neither assist nor comfort.

The next evening we met again at my banker's, one of
the richest in Venice. The company was very numerous ;
of the ladies I knew none, neither had I any interest about
them.

They began to speak in the room of the storm the
evening before. Poggio took up the word, and told of
the death of the fishermen, of the misfortune of the fa-
milies, and gave it to be very clearly understood how easily
a great deal of their distress might be relieved j how a
small gift from every person present would amount to a
sum which would be of the greatest benefit to the unfor-
tunately bereaved families, but nobody seemed to under-
stand him ; they deplored, shrugged their shoulders, and
then began talking of something else.

Presently those who were possessed of any company-
talent, produced it for public benefit. Poggio sang a merry
barcarole ; but I seemed to see the while, in his polite
smile, bitterness and coldness towards the dignified circle,
which would not allow themselves to be guided by his
noble eloquence.

" You do not sing ? " asked the lady of the house from
me, when he had done.

" I will have the honour to improvise before you," said
I, as a thought entered my mind.

" He is an improvisatore," I heard whispered around
me. The eyes of the ladies sparkled ; the gentlemen
bowed. I took a guitar, and begged them to give me a
subject.

" Venice ! " cried a lady looking boldly into my eyes.

" Venice ! " repeated the young gentlemen, " because
the ladies are handsome ! "

u 3

29^ THE IMPROVISATORE.

I touched a few chords ; described the pomp and glory
of Venice in the days of her greatness, as I had read
about it, and as my imagination had dreamed of its being,
and all eyes flashed, they fancied that it was so now. I
sang about the beauty in the balcony in the moonlight
night, thought upon Santa and Lara, and every lady
imagined I meant it for her, and clapped her hands in
applause. Sgricci * himself could not have had more
success.

" She is here ! " whispered Poggio to me, (f the niece
of the Podesta."

But we were prevented from saying more to each other.
I was requested yet again to improvise : a deputation of
ladies and an old Excellenza presented the wishes of the
company. I was willing, because it was my own wish ;
I had anticipated it, and only desired that in some one of
the given themes I might find occasion to describe the
storm which I had seen, the misery of the unfortunates,
and by the might of song to conquer where eloquence
could not move.

They gave me the Apotheosis of Titian. If he had only
been a seaman, I would have brought him forwards as
spokesman on the occasion, but in his praise I could not
bring in the idea which I wished to develope. The sub-
ject was, nevertheless, a rich one ; my management of it
exceeded expectation : I stood like the idol of the company,
it was my own Apotheosis !

" No happiness can be greater than yours ! " said the
lady of the house ; " it must be an infinitely delightful
feeling, that of possessing a talent like yours, that can
transport and charm all those around you."

" It is a delightful feeling ! " said I.

" Describe it in a beautiful poem ! " said she, beseech-
ingly ; " it is so easy to you that one forgets how unrea-
sonable one is in making so many demands upon you."

" I know one sentiment," returned I, and my design
gave me boldness, — "I know one emotion which is not
exceeded by any other, which makes every heart a poet,
which awakes the same consciousness of happiness, and I

* One of the celebrated improvisator! of our time. — Author's Note.

THE IMPROVISAT03E. 2Q5

consider myself to be so great a magician as to have the
power of exciting it in every heart. But this art has
this peculiarity, that it cannot be given, it must be pur-
chased.''

" We must become acquainted with it/' they all
exclaimed.

" Here, upon this table," said I, " I collect the sums,
— he who gives the most will be most deeply initiated
therein."

" I will give my gold chain," said one lady, imme-
diately., laughing, and laid it in sport upon the table.

<f I, all my card-money," cried another, and smiled at
my fancy.

" But it is a serious earnestness ! " said I, " the pledges
must not be reclaimed."

tc We will venture it," said the many, who had already
laid down money, chains, and rings, still inwardly having
doubts of my power.

" But if no emotion whatever takes hold of me," said
an officer, " may I not then take back my two ducats ? "

" Then, the wagers are forfeited ? " cried Poggio. I
bowed assentingly.

All laughed, all waited for the result full of expecta-
tion; and I began to improvise. A holy flame penetrated
me, I sang about the proud sea, — the bridegroom of
Venice ; about the sons of the sea, — the bold mariners
and fishermen in their little boats. I described a storm ;
the wife's and the bride's longing and anxiety ; described
that which I myself had seen ; the children who had let
fall the holy crucifix, and clung to their mothers, and the
old fisherman who kissed the feet of the Redeemer. It
was as if a God had spoken through me — as if I were
the work-tool of His strong word.

A deep silence prevailed through the room, and many
an eye wept.

I then conducted them into the huts of poverty, and

took help and life through our little gift ; and I sang how

much more blessed it was to give than to receive, — sang

of the delight which filled my breast, which filled every

u 4

296 THE TMPROVISATORE.

heart, that had contributed its mite. It was a feeling
which nothing could outweigh ; it was the divine voice in
all hearts, which made them holier, and loftier, and ele-
vated them to the poet ! And, whilst I spoke, my voice
increased in strength and fulness.

I had won every thing. A tumultuous bravo saluted
me ; and, at the conclusion of my song, I handed the rich
gifts to Poggio, that thereby he might take help to the
unfortunates.

A young lady sank at my feet — a more beautiful tri-
umph had my talent never obtained for me — seized my
hand, and, with tears in her beautiful dark eyes, looked
gratefully into my soul. This glance singularly agitated
me ; it was an expression of beauty which I seemed to
have once beheld in a dream.

" The Mother of God reward you ! " stammered she,
whilst the blood crimsoned her cheek. She concealed her
countenance, and withdrew from me, as if in horror at
what she had done ; and who could have been so cruel as
to have made a jest of the pure emotions of innocence ?
Every one pressed around me ; they were inexhaustible in
my praise. All talked about the unfortunates of Lido ;
and I stood there as their benefactor.

" It is more blessed to give than to receive ! " This
evening had taught me the truth of this. Poggio pressed
me in his arms.

" Excellent man," said he, " I esteem and honour you !
Beauty brings to you her homage; she, who with a look
can make thousands happy, bows herself before you in the
dust ! "

" Who was she ? " inquired I, with a constrained
voice.

" The most beautiful in Venice ! " replied he. " The
niece of the Podesta ! "

That remarkable glance, that shape of beauty, stood
livingly impressed in my soul ; inexplicable remembrances
awoke, and I also exclaimed, " She was beautiful ! "

" You do not recognise me, then, signore ? " said an old
lady, who came up to me. "It is a many years since I
had the honour of making your acquaintance ! " She

THE IMPROV1SATORE. 297

smiled, offered me her hand, and thanked me for my
improvisation.

I bowed politely ; her features seemed familiar to me,
but when and where I had seen her was not clear to me.
I was obliged to say so.

" Yes, that is natural ! " said she ; " we have only seen
each other one single time ! That was in Naples. My
brother was physician. You visited him with a gentleman
of the Borghese family."

" I remember it," I exclaimed. " Yes, now I recog-
nise you ! Least of all did I expect that we should meet
again here in Venice ! "

" My brother," said she, " for whom I kept house, died
about four years ago. Now I live with my elder brother.
Our servant shall take you our card. My niece is a child
— a strange child ; she will go away — away instantly. I
must attend her ! "

The old lady again gave me her hand, and left the
room.

" Lucky fellow ! " said Poggio, (C that was the Podesta's
sister ! You know her — have had an invitation from
her ! Half of Venice will envy you. Button your coat
well about your heart when you go there, that you be not
wounded like the rest of us, who approach in the slightest
degree towards the enemy's battery."

The beauty was gone. At the moment of emotion,
transported by her feelings, she had fallen at my feet;
but in the same moment had awoke her great bashfulness;
and maidenly shame, and anxiety, and horror, at her own
deed, had driven her away from the great circle, where she
had drawn attention to herself ; and yet nothing was said
but in her praise and admiration. They united her praises
with mine ! The queen of beauty had enchanted every
one. Her heart, they said, was as noble as her form.

The consciousness of having done a good work threw a
ray of light into my soul ; I felt a noble pride ; felt my
own happiness in being possessed of the gift of song.
All the praise and love which surrounded me melted away
all bitterness from my soul ; it seemed to me as if my
spiritual strength had arisen purer and mightier from its

298 THE 1MPHOVISATORE.

swoon. I thought of Flaminia, and thought of her with-
out pain ; she would, indeed, have pressed my hand as a
sister. Her words, that the poet ought only to sing of
that which was holy and for the glorifying of God, cast a
clear light into my soul. I felt again strength and courage,
a mild tranquillity diffused itself over my whole being ;
and, for the first time, after many, many months, I again
felt happiness. It was a delightful evening.

Poggio rung his glass against mine. We concluded a
friendship between us, and sealed it with a brotherly
thou.

It was late when I returned home, but I felt no want
of sleep ; the moon shone so brightly upon the water in
the canal, the atmosphere was so high and blue. With
the pious faith of a child, I folded my hands and prayed,
— " Father, forgive me my sins ! Give me strength to
become a good and noble man, and thus may I still dare
to remember Flaminia, to think upon my sister. Strengthen,
also, her soul ; let her never imagine of my suffering !
Be good to us, and merciful, Eternal God ! "

And now my heart was wondrously light ; the empty
canals of Venice and the old palaces seemed to me beau-
tiful, — a sleeping fairy world.

The next morning I was as cheerful as ever ; a noble
pride had awoke in my breast. I was happy because of
my spiritual gifts, and thankful to God. I took a gondola,
to go and make my visit at the house of the Podesta,
whose sister I knew : to speak candidly, I had also a
desire to see the young lady who had paid such living
homage to me, and who passed for the queen of beauty.

" Palazzo d'Othello ! " said the gondolier, and led me
through the great canal to an old building, relating to me
the while how the Moor of Venice, who killed his beautiful
wife Desdemona, had lived there ; and that all the English
went to visit this house, as if it were St. Mark's Church,
or the arsenal.

They all received me as if I had been a beloved rela-
tion. Rosa, the Podesta's old sister, talked of her dear
deceased brother ; of lively, merry Naples, which she had
not now seen for these four years.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 299

" Yes/' said she, " Maria longs for it, also ; and we will
set off when they least think of it. I must see Vesuvius
and the beautiful Capri yet once more before I die ! "

Maria entered and offered me her hand, with a sisterly
and yet singularly bashful manner. She was beautiful ;
indeed, I thought more beautiful that when last evening
.she had bent herself before me. Poggio was right, so must
the youngest of the Graces appear ; no female form could
have been more exquisitely formed — Lara, perhaps ?
Yes, Lara, the blind girl in her poor garments, with the
little bouquet of violets in her hair, was as beautiful as
Maria in her splendid dress. Her closed eyes had ap-
pealed to my heart more touchingly than the singularly
dark glance of fire in Maria's eyes ; every feature, how-
ever, had a pensive expression like Lara's ; but then, in
the open dark eye, was peace and joy, which Lara had
never known. There was, nevertheless, so much resem-
blance as to bring the blind beggar girl to my mind, whom
she never had seen, nay, even that strange reverential feel-
ing, as if to some superior being, again into my heart.

My powers of mind exhibited greater flexibility, my
eloquence became richer. I felt that I pleased every one
of them ; and Maria seemed to bestow upon my talents as
much admiration as her beauty won from me.

I looked upon her as a lover looks upon a beautiful
female figure, the perfect image of his beloved. In Maria,
I found all Lara's beauty almost as in a mirror, and Fla-
minia's entire sisterly spirit ; one could not but have con-
fidence in her. It was to me as if we had known one
another for a long time.

CHAPTER XII.

THE SINGER.

A GREAT event in my life lies so near to me here that it
almost dislodges all others from my mind, as the lofty
pine-tree of the wood draws away the eye from the low-
undergrowth ; I therefore only passingly describe that
which lies in the middle ground.

I was often at the house of the Podesta — I was, they
said, its enlivening genius. Rosa talked to me about her
beloved Naples, and I read aloud to her and her neice the
" Divina Comedia" Alfieri and Nicolini, and I was cap-
tivated with Maria's mind and feeling as much as with
the works of the poets themselves. Out of this house
Poggio was my dearest associate ; they knew it, and he,
too, was invited by the Podesta. He thanked me for this,
and declared that it was my merits and not his, and our
friendship, which had introduced him there, for which he
was the envy of the whole youth of Venice.

Every where was my talent as improvisatore admired,
nay, it was so highly esteemed that no circle would allow
me to escape before I had gratified their wish by giving
them a proof of my power. The first artists extended to
me their hands as brothers, and encouraged me to come
forward in public. And in part I did so before the mem-
bers of the Academia del Arte one evening, by improvising
on Dandola's procession to Constantinople, and upon the
bronze horses on the church of St. Mark, for which I was
honoured with a diploma, and received into their Society.

But a much greater pleasure awaited me in the house of
the Podesta. One day Maria presented to me a little
casket containing a beautiful necklace of lovely, bright-
coloured mussel shells, exceedingly small, delicate, and

THE IMPROVISATORE. 301

lovely, strung upon a silken thread ; it was a present from
the unfortunates of Lido, -whose benefactor I was called.

" It is very beautiful/' said Maria.

" That you must preserve for your bride," said Rosa ;
" it is a lovely gift for her, and with that intention has it
been given."

" My bride," repeated I, gravely, " I have not one —
really have not one."

" But she will come," said Rosa, — " you will have a
bride, and certainly the most beautiful of all."

"Never!" repeated I, and looked on the ground, in
the deep sense of how much I had lost.

Maria, also, became silent with my dejection. She had
pleased herself so much in the idea of astonishing me by
the gift, and had received it from Poggio, to whom it had
oeen given, for that purpose ; and I now stood embarrassed,
concealing my embarrassment so ill, and holding the neck-
lace in my hand. I would so gladly have given it to
Maria, but Rosa's words staggered my determination.
Maria certainly divined my thoughts, for, as I fixed my
eye upon her, a deep crimson flushed her countenance.

" You come very seldom to us," said my rich banker's
wife one day as I paid her a visit — "very seldom come
here, but to the Podesta's ! — yes, that is more amusing!
Maria is, indeed, the first beauty in Venice, and you are
the first improvisatore. It will thus be a very good match ;
the girl will have a magnificent estate in Calabria, — it is
her own heritage, or has been bought for that purpose.
Be bold, and it will succeed. You will be the envy of all
Venice."

" How can you think," returned I, t( that such a con-
ceited thought should enter my mind ? I am as far from
being a lover of Maria's as any body else can be. Her
beauty charms me, as all beauty does, but that is not love ;
and that she has fortune does not operate with me."

" Ah, well, well ! we shall see for all that ! " said the
lady ; ' ' love gets on best in life when it stands well in the
kitchen — when there is enough to fill the pot. It is out
of this that people must live !"

And with this she laughed and gave me her hand.

It provoked me that people should think and should talk
in this way. I determined to go less frequently to the
house of the Podesta, spite of their all being so dear to me.
I had thought of spending this evening with them, but I
now altered my determination. My blood was in agitation.
Nay, thought I, wherefore vex myself? I will be cheerful.
Life is beautiful if people will only let it be so ; free I
am, and nobody shall influence me ! — Have I not strength
and will of my own ?

In the dusk of the evening I took a ramble alone through
the narrow streets, where the houses met one another,
where, therefore, the little rooms were brightly lighted up,
and the people thronged together. The lights shone in
long rays upon the Great Canal, the gondolas flew rapidly
along under the single lofty arch which sustained the
bridge. I heard the voice of singing ; it was that ballad
about kissing and love, and, like the serpent around the
tree of knowledge, I knew the beautiful face of Sin.

I went onward through the narrow streets and came to
a house more lighted up than any of the others, into which
a crowd of people were going. It was one of the minor
theatres of Venice, Saint Lucas', I believe, it was called.
A little company gave the same opera there twice in the
day, as in the Theatro Fenize in Naples. The first re-
presentation of the piece begins about four o'clock in the
afternoon and ends at six, and the second begins at eight.
The price was very low, but nobody must expect to see
any thing extraordinary ; yet the desire which the lower
classes here have to hear music, and the curiosity of
strangers, cause there often to be very good houses, and
that even twice in the evening.

I now read in the play-bill, "Donna Caritea, Regina de
Spagna, the music by Mercadante."

te I can come out again if I get weary of it," said I to
myself ; " and, at all events, I can go in and look at the
pretty women. My blood is warm, my heart beats like
Bernardo's and Federigo's ; people shall no longer jeer the
boy from the Campagna with having goat's milk in his

THE IMPROVISATORE. 303

blood. If I had always been devoted to pleasure — as I
now am — I should certainly have been much happier !
Yes, life is short, age brings cold and ice ! "

I went in, received a dirty little ticket, and was con-
ducted to a box near the stage. There were two rows
of boxes, one above the other; the places for the spectators
were right spacious, but the stage itself seemed to me like
a tray ; several people could not have turned themselves
round upon it, and yet there was going to be exhibited an
equestrian opera, with a tournament and a procession.
The boxes were internally dirty and defaced, the ceiling
seemed to press the whole together. A man in his shirt-
sleeves came forward to light the lamps ; the people talked
aloud in the pit ; the musicians came into the orchestra —
they could only raise a quartett.

Every thing showed what the whole might be expected
to be, yet still I resolved to wait out the first act. I
noticed the ladies around me, — none of them pleased me.
A young man now entered the box next to mine ; I had
met him in company. He smiled and offered me his hand,
saying, —

"Who would have thought of meeting you here? —
But," whispered he, "one can often make very pleasant
acquaintances here : in the pale moonlight people easily
get acquainted."

He kept talking on, and was hissed, because the overture
had begun ; it sounded very deplorable, and the curtain
rolled up. The whole corps consisted of two ladies and
three gentlemen, who looked as if they had been fetched in
from field labour, and bedizened in knightly apparel.

l( Yes," said my neighbour, " the solo parts are often
not badly cast. Here is a comic actor who might figure
in any first-rate theatre. Ah, ye good saints ! " exclaimed
he to himself, as the queen of the piece entered with two
ladies ; ei are we to have her to-night ? Yes, then, I
would not give a half-zwanziger for the whole thing ;
Jeanette was much better ! "

It was a slight, ordinary figure, with a thin, sharp
countenance, and deeply-sunken dark eyes, who now came
forward. Her miserable dress hung loosely about her ; it

S04 THE IMPROVISATORE.

was poverty which came forward as the queen ; and yet
it was with a grace which amazed me, and which accorded
so little with the rest, — a grace which would excellently
have become a young and beautiful girl. She advanced
towards the lamps, — my heart beat violently, I scarcely
dared to inquire her name ; I believed that my eyes de-
ceived me.

" What is she called ? " at length I asked.

" Annunciata," replied my neighbour; " sing she cannot,
and that one may see by that little skeleton ! "

Every word fell upon my heart like corrosive poison ;
I sat as if nailed fast; my eyes were fixed immovably
upon her.

She sang ; no, it was not Annunciata's voice, it sounded
feeble, inharmonious, and uncertain.

" There are certainly traces of a good school," said my
neighbour ; te but there is not power for it."

" She does not resemble," said I tremulously, " a name-
sake of hers, Annunciata, a young Spaniard, who once
made a great figure at Naples and Rome ? "

" Ah, yes," answered he ; it is she herself ! Seven or
eight years ago she sat on the high horse. Then she was
young, and had a voice like a Malibran ; but now all the
gilding is gone; that is, in reality, the lot of all such
talents ! For a few years they shine in their meridian
glory, and, dazzled by admiration, they never think that
they may decline, and thus rationally retire whilst glory is
beaming around them. The public first find out the
change, and that is the melancholy part of it ; and then,
commonly, these good ladies live too expensively, and all
their gains are squandered, and then it goes down-hill at a
gallop ! You have then seen her in Rome, have you ? "
asked he.

" Yes." replied I, " several times."

11 It must be a horrible change ! most to be deplored,
however, for her," said he ; " she is said to have lost her
voice in a long, severe sickness, which must be some four
or five years since ; but with that the public has nothing
to do. Will you not clap for old acquaintance sake ? I
will help ; it will please the old lady ! "

THE IMPROVISATORS. 305

He clapped loudly; some in the parterre followed his
example, but then succeeded a loud hissing, amid which
the queen proudly went off the scene. It was An-
nunciata !"

" Faimus Troes ! " whispered my neighbour. Now
came forward the heroine of the piece; she was a very
pretty young girl, of a luxuriant form, and with a burning
glance : she was received with acclamations and the clap-
ping of hands. All the old recollections rushed into my
soul; the transports of the Roman people and their jubila-
tions over Annunciata ; her triumphal procession, and my
strong love ! Bernardo, then, had also forsaken her : or,
had she not loved him ? I saw really how she bent her
head clown to him, and pressed her lips upon his brow.
He had forsaken her — forsaken her, then she became ill,
and her beauty had vanished : it was that alone which he
had loved !

She again came forward in another scene ; how suffering
she looked, and how old ! It was a painted corpse which
terrified me. I was embittered against Bernardo, who
could forsake her for the loss of her beauty, and yet it was
that which had wounded me so deeply; the beauty of An-
nunciata's soul must have been the same as before.

"Are you not well?" inquired the stranger from me,
for I looked deadly pale.

" It is here so oppressively warm," said I, rising, left
the box, and went out into the fresh air. I hastened
through the narrow streets ; a thousand emotions agitated
my breast ; I knew not where to go. I stood again out-
side the theatre, where a fellow was just taking down the
placard to put up the one for the next day.

" Where does Annunciata live ? " whispered I in his
ear. He turned himself round, looked at me, and repeated,
"Annunciata? Signore means, no doubt, Aurelia ? she
who acted the part of the man within ? I will show you
her house ; but she is not yet at liberty."

" No, no," replied I, " Annunciata ; she who sang the
part of the queen."

The fellow measured me with his eye.

306 THE IMPROVISATORS.

" The little thin woman ? " asked he, " yes, she, I fancy,
is not accustomed to visitors, but there may be good reasons.
I will show the gentleman the house ; you will give me
something for my trouble ? — but you cannot see her yet
for an hour ; the opera will detain her as long as that."

" Wait, then, here for me," said I, entered a gondola,
and bade the man row me about wherever he would. My
soul was inwardly troubled ; I must yet once more see
Annunciata, — talk to her. She was unhappy ! But
what could I do for her ? Anguish and sorrow drove
me on.

An hour was scarcely gone when the gondola again lay
with me before the theatre, where I found the fellow
waiting for me.

He led me through narrow, dirty lanes, to an old de-
solate house, in the uppermost garret of which a light was
burning : he pointed up. '

" Does she live there ? " I exclaimed.

" I will lead Excellenza in," said he, and pulled at the
bell-cord.

ie Who is there?" inquired a female voice.

" Marco Lugano !" replied he, and the door opened.

It was dark night within; the little lamp before the
image of the Madonna was gone out, the glimmering wick
alone shone like a point of blood ; I kept close to him.
A door far above was opened, and we saw a ray of light
shine down towards us.

" Now she comes herself," said the man.

I slipped a few pieces of money into his hand ; he
thanked me a thousand times, and hastened down, whilst
I ascended the last steps.

" Are there any new changes for to-morrow, Marco
Lugano ?" I heard the voice inquire. It was Annunciata :
she stood at the dcor ; a little silken net was bound round
her hair, and a large dark wrapping dress was thrown
loosely about her.

" Do not fall, Marco," said she, and went before into
the room, whilst I followed after her.

" Who are you? What do you want here ?" exclaimed
she, terrified, as she saw me enter.

THE IMPROVISATORE. 307

" Annunciata ! " exclaimed I with painful emotion. She
stared at me.

"Jesus Maria!" cried she, and pressed her hands be-
fore her face.

" A friend ! " stammered I ; " an old acquaintance, to
whom you once occasioned much joy, much happiness,
seeks you out, and ventures to offer you his hand ! "

She took her hands from her face, pale as death, and
stood like a corpse ; and the dark, intellectual eyes flashed
wildly. Older Annunciata bad become, and bore the
marks of suffering ; but there were still remains of that
wonderful beauty, still that same soul-beaming but melan-
choly look.

'"' Antonio !" said she, — and I saw a tear in her eye, —
' ' is it thus we meet ? Leave me ! our paths lie so wide
apart, — yours upwards to bappiness, mine down — to
happiness also ! " sighed she deeply.

" Drive me not from you !" exclaimed I; as a friend —
a brother I am come ; my heart impelled me to it ! You
are unhappy, you to whom thousands acclaimed gladness,
who made thousands happy ! "

" The wheel of fortune turns round," said she. te For-
tune follows youth and beauty, and the world harnesses
itself to their triumphal car : intellect and heart are the
worst dower of nature ; they are forgotten for youth and
beauty, and the world is always right !"

et You have been ill, Annunciata ! " said I ; and my lips
trembled.

" 111 — very ill, for almost a year ; but it was not the
death of me," said she, with a bitter smile ; " youth died,
however ; my voice died ; and the public became dumb at
the sight of these two corpses in one body ! The phy-
sician said that they were only apparently dead, and the
body believed so. But the body required clothing and
food, and for two long years gave all its wealth to purchase
these ; then it must paint itself, and come forward as if the
dead were still living ; but it came forward as a ghost, and,
that people might not be frightened at it, it showed itself
again in a little theatre where few lamps were burning,
and it was half dark. But, even there they observed that
x 2

308 THE IMPROVISATORS.

youth and voice were dead, were buried corpses, Annun-
ciata is dead : there hangs her living image ! " and she
pointed to the wall.

In that miserable chamber hung a picture, a half-length
picture, in a rich gilded frame, which made a strange con-
trast to the other poverty around. It was the picture of
Annunciata, painted as Dido. It was her image as it stood
in my soul; the intellectually beautiful countenance, with
pride on the brow. I looked round upon the actual An-
nunciata; she held her hands before her face and wept.

"Leave me, — forget my existence, as the world has
forgotten it ! " besought she, and motioned with her hands.

" I cannot," said I, — " cannot thus leave you ! Ma-
donna is good and merciful ; Madonna will help us all !"

" Antonio," said she, solemnly, " can you make a jest
of me in my misfortune ? No, that you cannot, like all
the rest of the world. But I do not comprehend you.
When all the world acclaimed my praise, and lavished
flattery and adoration upon me, you forsook me, forsook
me so entirely ! And now, when my glory, which had
captivated the world, is gone, when every body regards
me as a foreign, indifferent object, you come to me, seek
me out ! "

" You yourself drove me from you ! " exclaimed I ;
tf drove me out into the world ! My fate, my circum-
stances," added I, in a milder tone, " drove me out into
the world ! "

She became silent ; but her eye was riveted with a
strangely searching expression upon me. She S3emed as
if she wished to speak ; the lips moved, but she spoke not.
A deep sigh ascended from her breast ; she cast her eyes
upwards, and again sunk them to the floor. Her hand
was passed over her forehead ; it was as if a thought went
through her soul, known only to God and herself.

" I have seen you again ! " exclaimed she at length ;
<c seen you yet once more in this world ! I feel that you
are a good, a nob'e man. May you be happier than I have
been ! The swan has sung its last ! Beauty has gone out
of flower ! I am quite alone in this world ! Of the happy
Annunciata there remains only the picture on the wall !

THE IMPROVISATORE. 309

I have now one prayer," said she, <: one prayer, which
you will not refuse me ! Annunciata, who once delighted
you, b?seeches you to grant it ! "

"All, all, I promise !" exclaimed I, and pressed her
hand to my lips.

" Regard it as a dream," said she, " that you have seen
me this evening ! If we meet again in the world, we do
not know each other ! Now we part ! " She offered me,
with these words, her hand, and added, " In a better
world we shall meet again ! Here our paths separate !
Farewell, Antonio, farewell ! "

I sank down, overcome by sorrow, before her. I knew
nothing more ; she directed me like a child, and I wept
like one.

" I come ! I come again ! " said I, and left her.

" Farewell ! " I heard her say ; but I saw her no
more.

All was dark below and in the street.

" God, how miserable may Thy creatures be ! " ex-
claimed I in my anguish, and wept. No sleep visited my
eyes : it was a night of sorrow.

Amid a thousand plans which I devised, and then again
rejected, I went to her house on the day but one follow-
ing. I felt my poverty ; I was only a poor lad, that had
been taken from the Campagna. My superior freedom of
mind had, in fact, laid me in the fetters of dependence ;
but my talents seemed really to open to me a brilliant
path. Could it be a more brilliant one than Annunciata's;
and how was this ended ? The rushing river which had
gleamed forth in cascades and amid rainbows had ended
in the Pontine Marsh of misery.

Yet once more I felt impelled to see Annunciata, and to
talk with her. It was the second day after our meeting
that I again mounted up the narrow, dark stairs. The
door was closed; I knocked on it, and an old woman
opened a side-door, and asked if I wished to see the room,
which was vacant. " But it is quite too little for you,"
said she.

" But the singer ? " inquired I.

"She has flitted," answered the old woman; "flitted
x 3

all away yesterday morning. Has set off on a journey, I
fancy ; it was done in a mighty hurry."

" Do not you know where she is gone ? " I asked.

" No," returned she ; " she did not say a word about
that. But they are gone to Padua, or Trieste, or Ferrara,
or some such place, as, indeed, there are so many." And,,
with this, she opened the door, that I might see the empty
room.

I went to the theatre. The company had yesterday
given their last representation : it was now closed.

She was gone, the unfortunate Annunciata. A bitter
feeling took possession of my mind. Bernardo, thought I,
is, after all, the cause of her misfortune, of the whole
direction which my life has taken, Had it not been for
him she would have loved me ; and her love would have
given to my mind a great strength and development.
Had I at once followed her, and come forward as impro-
visatore, my triumph, perhaps, would have united itself
to hers : we should have created ourselves a position ; all
might have been so different then ! Care would not then
have furrowed her brow!

CHAPTER XIII.

FOGGIO ANNUNCIATA MARIA.

POGGIO visited me, and inquired the reason of my depres-
sion of mind : but I could not tell him the cause ; I could
tell it to no one.

" Thou lookest really," said he, " as if the bad sirocco
blew upon thee ! Is it from the heart that this hot air
comes ? The little bird within there might be burned ;
and, as it is no phcenix, it may not be benefited thereby.
It must now and then have a flight out, pick the red
berries in the field, and the fine roses in the balcony, to
get itself right. My little bird does so, and finds itself all
the better for itj has excellent spirits, sings merrily into

THE 1MPROVISATORE. 311

my blood and my whole being. And it is that which
gives me the good-humour that I have ! Thou must do
the same also, and shalt do so ! A poet must have a sound,
healthy bird in his breast — a bird which knows both
roses and berries, the sour and the sweet, the cloudy
heavens and the clear ether !"

" That is a beautiful idea about a poet/' said I.

" Christ became a man like the rest of us," said he,
" and descended even down into hell to the damned ! The
divine must unite itself to the earthly, and there will be

produced therefrom a mighty result of But it is

really a magnificent lecture which I am beginning. I
ought, sure enough, to give one, I have promised to do so;
but I fancy it was on another subject. What is the
meaning of it, when a gentleman all at once forsakes his
friends ; for three whole days has never been to the Po-
desta's house ? That is abominable — very abominable of
him ! The family is also very angry. This very day thou
must go there, and, kneeling like another Frederick Bar-
barossa, hold the stirrup. Not to have been for three days
at the Podesta's house ! I heard that from Signora Rosa.
What hast thou been doing with thyself?

" I have not felt well ; have not been out."

ie No, dear friend," interrupted he, " one knows better
than that ! The evening before last thou wentest to the
Opera La Regina di Spagna, in which the little Aurelia
appears as a knight — that is, a little Orlando Furioso !
But the conquest need not bring grey hairs to anybody : it
cannot be so difficult. However, be that as it may, thou
goest with me to dine at the Podesta's. There are we
invited, and I have given my hand to take thee with me."

" Poggio," said I, gravely, " I will tell thee the reasons
why I have not been there ; why I shall not go there so
frequently."

I then told him what the banker's wife had whispered to
me; how Venice talked about its being my design to
obtain the beautiful Maria, who had a fortune and an es-
tate in Calabria.

"Nay," cried Poggio, " I would be very glad, indeed,
if they would say that of me ; and so thou wilt not go for
x 4

that reason ? Yes, truly, people do say so, and I believe
it myself, because it is so natural. But whether we are
right or wrong, that is no reason why thou shouldst be
uncivil to the family. Maria is handsome, very handsome,
has understanding and feeling, and thou lovest her too,
that I have seen all along plainly enough."

" No, no," exclaimed I, "my thoughts are a very long
way from love ! Maria resembles a blind child whom I
once saw, a child which wonderfully attracted me, as a
child only could. That resemblance has often agitated me
in Maria, and has rivetted my eye upon her.

" Maria also was once blind !" said Poggio, in a some-
what serious tone ; a she was blind when she came from
Greece ; her uncle, the physician in Naples, performed an
operation on her eyes which restored her sight."

" My blind child was not Maria,'' said I.

" Thy blind child ! " repeated Poggio, merrily ; " it
must be a very wonderful person, however, that blind child
of thine, which could set thee a-staring at Maria, and find-
ing out a likeness ! Yes, that is only speaking figuratively;
it is the little blind Love with whom, once upon a time,
thou madest acquaintance, and he has made thee look at
Maria. Now confess it thyself ! Before we ourselves are
aware of it, the nuptials will be announced, and you drive
off from Venice."

" No, Poggio," I exclaimed, " you affront me by talk-
ing in this way; I shall never marry. My love's dream
is over. I never think of such a thing — never can. By
the eternal heavens and all the saints, I neither will nor
can ! "

" Silence ! silence ! " cried Poggio, interrupting me,
" let's have no oath about it. I will believe thee, and will
contradict everybody that says thou art in love with
Maria, and that you are going to be married. But don't
go, and swear that you never will marry ; perhaps the
bridal is nearer than you imagine : even within this very
year it is quite possible."

" Thine, perhaps," replied I, " but mine never ! "

" Nay, so thou thinkest, then, that I can get married ? "
exclaimed Poggio ; " no, dear friend, I have no means of

THE IMPROVISATORS.

keeping a wife ; the pleasure would be much too expensive
for me."

" Thy marriage will take place before mine," replied I ;
fi perhaps even the handsome Maria may be thine, and
whilst Venice is saying it is to me that she will give her
hand, it is to thee."

" That would be badly done," replied he, and laughed ;
" no, I have given her a far better husband than myself.
Shall we lay a wager," continued he, " that thou wilt be
married either to Maria or some other lady ; that thou
wilt be a husband, and I an old bachelor ? Two bottles
of champagne we will bet, which we will drink on thy
wedding-day."

" I dare do that," said I, and smiled.

I was obliged to go with him to the Podesta's. Sig-
nora Rosa scolded me, and so did the Podesta. Maria
was silent ; my eye rested upon her : Venice said, actually,
that she was my bride ! Rosa and I touched glasses.

" No lady may drink the health of the improvisatore,"
said Poggio ; " he has sworn eternal hatred against the
fair sex ; he never will be married ! "

" Eternal hatred ? " returned I : " and what if I do not
marry, cannot I honour and value still that which is beau-
tiful in woman, that which more than any thing else ele-
vates and softens every relation of life?"

" Not be married !" cried the Podesta ; " that were the
most miserable thought which your genius ever gave birth
to ! nor either is it handsome behaviour in a friend," said
he, jestingly, turning to Poggio, " to reveal it."

" Only to make him ashamed of it !" returned Poggio;
"he might otherwise so easily get enamoured of this his
only bad thought, and, because it is so remarkably bril-
liant, might mistake it for an original one, and regularly
attach himself to it ! "

They jested with me, made fun of me : I could not be
other than cheerful. Exquisite dishes and glorious wine
were set before me. 1 thought upon Annunciata's poverty,
and that, perhaps, she was now famishing.

" You promised to send us Silvio Pellico's works," said
Rosa, when we separated. ' ( Do not forget it, and come, like

314 THE IMPROVISATOR*:.

a good creature, every day to us : you have accustomed us to
it, and nobody in Venice can be more grateful than we are."

I went — I went right often; for I felt how much they
loved me.

About a month had now passed since my last conversa-
tion with Poggio, and I had not been able to speak about
Annunciata : I was, therefore, obliged to trust to chance,
which often knits up the broken thread.

One evening as I was at the Podesta's, Maria seemed to
me singularly thoughtful : a vivid suffering seemed im-
pressed upon her whole being. I had been reading to her
and her aunt, and even during this her mind seemed ab-
stracted. Rosa left the room ; never had I until now been
alone with Maria: a strange, inexplicable presentiment, as
if of approaching evil, filled my breast. I endeavoured to
begin a conversation about Silvio Pellico, about the influ-
ence of political life upon the poetical mind.

" Signore Abbe," said she, without appearing to have
heard a word of my remarks, for her whole thoughts seemed
to have been directed to one only subject. " Antonio,"
continued she, with a tremulous voice, whilst the blood
mantled in her cheeks, " I must speak with you. A dying
person has made me give her my hand that I would do so."

She paused, and I stood silent, strangely agitated by her
words.

" We are actually not so very much of strangers to
each other," said she, " and yet this moment is very ter-
rible to me;" and as she spoke, she became pale as death.

'f God in heaven ! " exclaimed I, " what has happened ? "

" God's wonderful guidance," said she, " has drawn me
into your life's circumstances, has made me participate in
a secret, in a connection which no stranger ought to know;
but my lips are silent; what 1 have promised to the dead
I have not told, not even to my aunt."

With this she drew forth a little packet, and giving it to
me, continued, " This is destined for you : it will tell you
every thing; I have promised to deliver it into your hands;
I have had it in my possession for two whole days ; I
knew not how I should be able to fulfil my promise, — I
have now done it. Be silent, as I shall be."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 315

ff From whom does it come ? " inquired I ; " may I not
know that?"

" Eternal God ! " said she, and left the room.

I hastened home, and opened the little packet. It con-
tained many loose papers ; the first I saw was in my own
handwriting, a little verse written with pencil ; but under-
neath it were marked in ink three black crosses, as if they
were the writing on a grave. It was the poem which I
had thrown to Annunciata's feet the first time I saw her.

" Annunciata ! " sighed I, deeply : " Eternal Mother of
God ! it comes then from her ! "

Among the papers lay a sealed note, upon which was
inscribed, " To Antonio." I tore it open, — yes, it was
from her. Half of it I saw was written during the night
of the evening when I had seen her : the latter part ap-
peared fresher; it was extremely faint, and written with
a trembling hand. I read : —

" I have seen thee, Antonio ! seen thee once more. It
was my only wish, and I dreaded it for a moment, even as
one dreads death, which, however, brings happiness. It
is only an hour since I saw thee. When thou readest this
it may be months — not longer. It is said that those who
see themselves will shortly die. Thou art the half of my
soul — thou wast my thought — thee have I seen ! Thou
hast seen me in my happiness, in my misery ! Thou wast
the only one who now would know the poor forsaken
Annunciata ! But I, also, deserved it.

" I dare now speak thus to thee, because when thou
readest this I shall be no more. I loved thee — loved
thee from the days of my prosperity to my last moment.
Madonna willed not that we should be united in this world,
and she divided us.

" I knew thy love for me before that unfortunate even-
ing when the shot struck Bernardo, on which thou declared
it. My pain at the misfortune which separated us, the
great grief which crushed my heart, bound my tongue. I
concealed my face on the body of him whom I believed to
be dead, and thou wast gone — I saw thee no more !

" Bernardo was not mortally wounded, and I left him
not before this was ascertained of a truth. Did this

316 THE IMPROVISATORS.

awaken doubt in your soul of ray love for you ? I knew
not where you were, nor could I learn. A few days after-
wards a singular old woman came to me, and presented to
me a note, in which you had written, ' J journey to Na-
ples ! ' and to which your name was signed. She said
that you must have a passport and money ; I influenced
Bernardo to obtain this from his uncle the senator. At
that time my wish was a command, my word had power.
I obtained that which I desired. Bernardo was also trou-
bled about you.

" He became perfectly well again, and he loved me: I
believe really that he honestly loved me. But you alone
occupied all my thoughts. He left Rome, and I, too, was
obliged to go to Naples. My old friend's illness compelled
me to remain for a month at Mola di Gaeta. When at last
we arrived at Naples, I heard of a young improvisatore,
Cenci, who had made his debut on the very evening of my
arrival : I had a presentiment that it was you — I obtained
certainty thereof. My old friend wrote immediately to
you. without giving our name, though she mentioned our
residence. But you came not : she wrote again, without
the name, it is true ; but you must have known from whom
it was sent. She wrote, ' Come, Antonio, the terror of the
last unfortunate moment in which we were together is now
well over ! Come quickly ! regard that as a misunderstand-
ing— all can be made right — only do not delay to come.'

" But you came not. I ascertained that you had read
the letter, arid that you had immediately set off back to
Rome. What could I believe ? That your love was all
over. I, too, was proud, Antonio ! the world had made
my soul vain. I did not forget you — I gave you up, and
suffered severely in so doing.

" My old friend died ; her brother followed after her :
they had been as parents to me. I stood quite alone in
the world ; but I was still its favourite ; was young and
beautiful, and brilliant in my powers of song. That was
the last year of my life.

" I fell sick on the journey to Bologna, very sick : my
heart suffered. Antonio, I knew not that you thought
still affectionately on me j that you, at a time when the

THE IMPROVISATORS. 31?

happiness of the world deserted me, would press a kiss
upon my hand. I lay sick for a year ; the property which
I had accumulated in the two years in which I was a
singer melted away ; I was poor, and doubly poor, for my
voice was gone : sickness had enfeebled me. Years went
on, almost seven years, and then we met — you have seen
my poverty ! You certainly heard how they hissed off the
Annunciata who once was drawn in triumph through the
streets of Rome. Bitter as my fate had my thoughts also
become !

" You came to me. Like scales, all fell away from my
eyes : I felt that you had sincerely loved me. You said to
me that it was I who had driven you out into the world, —
you knew not how I had loved you, had stretched, as it
were, my arms after you! But I have seen you — your
lips have glowed upon my hand as in former, better times !
We ars separated — I sit again alone in the little chamber :
to-morrow I must leave it — perhaps Venice! Be not
anxious about me, Antonio ; Madonna is good and merci-
ful ! Think kindly of me : it is the dead which beseeches
this from you, — Annunciata, who has loved you, and prays
now, and — in heaven for you !"

My tears streamed as I read this : it was as if my heart
would dissolve itself in weeping.

The remainder of the letter was written some days later.
It was the last parting : —

" My want draws to an end ! Madonna be praised for
every joy which she has sent me: praised be she also for
every woe ! In my heart is death ! the blood streams from
it ! only once more and then it is all over.

" The most beautiful and the noblest maid in Venice is
your bride, the people have told me. May you be happy
is the last wish of the dying ! I know no one in the
world to whom I could give these lines, my last farewell,
except to her. My heart tells me that she will come —
tells me that a noble womanly heart will not refuse the
last refreshing draught to her who stands on the last step
between life and death ! She will come to me.

318 THE IMPROVISATORS.

cc Farewell, Antonio ! my last prayer on earth, my first
in heaven, will be for thee — for her who will be to thee
what I never could be ! There was vanity in my heart —
the world's praise had set it there. Perhaps thou wouldst
never have been happy with me, else the Madonna would
not have divided us !

'•' Farewell ! farewell ! I feel peace in my heart — my
suffering is over — death is near !

" Pray, also, thou and Maria, for me !

" ANNUNCIATA."

The deepest pain has no words. Stupefied — over-
whelmed— I sat and stared at the letter, which was wet
with my tears. Annunciata had loved me ! She was the
invisible spirit which had conducted me to Naples. The
letter had been from her, and not from Santa, as I imagined.
Annunciata had been ill, sunk in poverty and misery, and
now she was dead — certainly dead ! The little note which
I had given to Fulvia, with the words, " I journey to
Naples !" and which she had taken to Annunciata, lay also
in the packet of letters, together with an opened letter from
Bernardo, in which he sent her his farewell, and announced
to her his determination to leave Rome and enter into
foreign service, but without saying what.

To Maria had she given the packet of letters for me ;
she had called Maria my bride. That empty report had
also reached Annunciata, and she had believed it, had
called Maria to her. What could she have said to her ?

I recalled to mind with what anxiety Maria had spoken
to me, — thus she also knew what Venice imagined about
us both. I had not courage to talk to her about it, and
yet I must do it ; she was really mine arid Annunciata's
good angel.

I took a gondola, and was soon in the room where Rosa
and Maria sat together at their work. Maria was embar-
rassed ; nor had I courage to say what solely and alone
occupied me. I answered at random to every question.
Sorrow oppressed my soul; when the kind-hearted Signora
Rosa took my hand, and said, —

" There is some great trouble on your mind — have

THE IMPROVISATORS. 319

confidence in us. If we cannot console, we can sorrow
with a true friend."

" You really know every thing ! " exclaimed I, giving
voice to my distress.

" Maria, perhaps !" replied the aunt; " but I know as
good as nothing.

" Rosa ! " said Maria, beseechingly, and caught her
hand.

" No, before you I have no secrets ! " said I : "I will
tell you every thing."

And I then told them about my poor childhood, about
Annunciata, and my flight to Naples; but when I saw
Maria sitting with folded hands before me, as Flaminia
had sat, and as yet another being beside had sat, I was
silent. I had not courage to speak of Lara and of the
dream-picture in the cave, in the presence of Maria ;
besides, it seemed not to belong to the history of Annun-
ciata. I went on, therefore, directly to our meeting in
Venice and our last conversation. Maria pressed her
hands before her eyes and wept. Rosa was silent.

" Of all this I knew nothing — divined nothing!" said
she, at length. " A letter came," continued she, " from
the Hospital of the Sisters of Charity to Maria; a dying
woman, it said, besought her, by all the saints — by her
own heart, to come to her. I accompanied her in the
gondola ; but as she was to be alone, I remained with the
sisters whilst she went to the bed of the dying."

" I saw Annunciata," said Maria. " You have received
that which she has commissioned me to convey to you."

" And she said ? " I asked.

" ' Give that to Antonio, the improvisatore ; but, un-
known to any one.' She spoke of you, spoke as a sister
might — as a good spirit might speak ; and J saw blood —
blood upon her lips. She cast up her eyes in death,

and " Here Maria burst into tears.

I silently pressed her hand to my lips ; thanked her for
her pity, for her goodness, in going to Annur.ciata.

I hurried away, and, entering a church, prayed for the
dead.

Never did I meet with such great kindness and friend-

320 THE IMPROVISATORS.

ship as from this moment in the house of the Podesta. I
was a beloved brother to Rosa and Maria, who endeavoured
to anticipate every wish ; even in the veriest trifles I saw
evidences of their solicitude for me.

I visited Armunciata's grave. The churchyard was a
floating ark, with high walls — an island garden of the
dead. I saw a green plot before me, marked with many
black crosses. I found the grave for which I sought.
" Annunciate " was its sole inscription. A fresh, beautiful
garland of laurels hung on the cross which marked it, un-
questionably a gift from Maria and Rosa. I thanked them
both for this kind attention.

Plow lovely was Maria in her gentleness ! What a
wonderful resemblance had she to my image of beauty,
Lara ! When she cast down her eyes, it seemed to me
that they were, spite of the improbability, the same person.

About this time I received a letter from Fabiani. I was
now in the fourth month of my residence in Venice. This
astonished him. He thought that I should not spend
longer time in this city, but visit Milan or Genoa. But he
left it quite to me* to do whatever seemed the best to myself.

That which detained me thus in Venice was that it was
my city of sorrow. As such it had greeted me on my
arrival, and here my life's best dream had dissolved itself
in tears. Maria and Rosa were to me affectionate sisters,
Poggio a love-worthy, faithful friend. I should find no-
body like them ; but, nevertheless, we must part. In this
my sorrow found its nourishment. Yes, hence — hence !
— -that was my resolve !

I wished to prepare Rosa and Maria for it: it was
necessary that they should be made acquainted with it.
In the evening I was sitting with them in the great hall,
where the Balcony goes over the canal. Maria wished
that the servant should bring in the lamp, but Rosa
thought that it was much more charming in the clear
moonlight. The orange trees were so fragrant.

" Sing to us, Maria," said she ; " sing to us that beau-
tiful song which thou learnt about the Troglodite cave.
Let Antonio hear it."

THE IMPROVISATORE. 321

Maria sang a singular, quiet cradle-song to a low, strange
melody. The words and the air melted one into the other,
and revealed to heart and thought the home of beauty
under the ethereally clear waves.

" There is something so spiritual, so transparent, in the
whole song ! " said Rosa.

' ' Thus must spirits reveal themselves out of the hody ! "
exclaimed I.

" Thus floats the world's beauty before the blind ! "
sighed Maria.

" But then it is not really so beautiful when the eyes
can see it ? " asked Rosa.

" Not so beautiful, and yet more beautiful ! " replied
Maria.

Rosa then told me what I had already heard from
Poggio, that Maria had been blind, and that her brother
had given sight to her eyes. Maria mentioned his name
with love and gratitude ; told me how childish her ideas
had then been about the world around her — about the
warm sun, about human beings, about the broad-leaved
cactuses, and the great temples. " In Greece there are
many more than there are here," remarked she, suddenly j
and there was a pause in her relation.

" How the strong and the beautiful in sound," continued
she, " suggested to me colours. The violets were blue —
the sea and heaven were blue also, they told me ; and the
fragrance of the violet taught me how beautiful heaven
and the sea must be. When the bodily eye is dead, the
spiritual eye sees more clearly. The blind learn to believe
in a spirit world. Every thing which they behold reveals
itself from this ! "

I thought of Lara with the blue violets in her dark hair.
The fragrance of the orange-trees led me also to Psestum,
where violets and red gilliflowers grow among the ruins of
the Temple. We talked about the great beauty of nature,
about the sea and the mountains, and Rosa longed after
her beautiful Naples.

I then told them that my departure was near, and that
I, in a few days, must leave Venice.
Y

322 THE IMPROVISATORS.

" You will leave us ? " said Rosa, sorrowfully. " We
had not the slightest idea of that."

" Will you not come again to Venice ? " inquired Maria;
"•' corne again to see your friends."

" Yes, yes, certainly ! " exclaimed I. And although
that had not heen my plan, I assured them that, from
Milan, I would return to Rome by Venice. But did I
myself believe so ?

I visited Anmmciata's grave, took a leaf from the gar-
land which hung there, as if I should never return ; and
that was the last time that I came there ! That which
the grave preserved was dust. In my heart existed the
impression of its beauty, and the spirit dwelt with Ma-
donna, whose image it was. Annunciata's grave, and the
little room where Rosa and Maria extended to me their
hands at parting, alone were witness to my tears and my
grief.

" May you find a noble wife who will supply the loss
which your heart has sustained ! " said Rosa at our part-
ing. "• Bring her sometime to my arms. I know that I
shall love her, as you have taught me to love Annunciata !"

" Come back happy ! " said Maria.

I kissed her hand, and her eyes rested with an expres-
sion of deep emotion upon me. The Podesta stood with
a sparkling glass of champagne, and Poggio struck up a
merry travelling song about the rolling wheels and the
bird's song in the free landscape. He accompanied me in
the gondola as far as Fusina. The ladies waved their
white handkerchiefs from the balcony.

How much might happen before we saw each other
again ! Poggio was merry to an excess ; but I felt very
plainly that it was not natural. He pressed me vehemently
to his breast, and said that we would correspond industri-
ously. " Thou wilt tell me about thy beautiful bride, and
don't forget about our wager ! " said he.

" How canst thou jest at this moment?" said I. "Thou
knowest my determination ! "

We parted.

THE IMPROVISATORE.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE REMARKABLE OBJECTS IN VERONA THE CATHEDRAL OF MILAN

THE MEETING AT THE TRIUMPHAL ARCH OF NAPOLEON

DREAM AND REALITY THE BLUE GROTTO.

THE carriage rolled away. I saw the green Brenta, the
weeping willows, and the distant mountains. Towards
evening I arrived in Padua. The church of St. Antonius,
with its seven proud domes,, saluted me in the clear moon-
light. All was animation and cheerfulness under the colon-
nade of the street ; but I felt myself a stranger and alone.

In the sunshine all appeared to me still more unpleasing.
Onward, yet farther onward ! Travelling enlivens and
chases away sorrow, thought I, and the carriage rolled
forward.

The country was all a great plain, but freshly green, as the
Pon tine Marshes. The lofty weeping willows hung like great
cascades, over the ditches ; round about stood altars with the
holy image of the Madonna ; some of them were bleached
by time ; the walls even on which they were painted were
sunk in ruins, but in other places also stood newly painted
pictures of the Mother and Child. I remarked, that the
vetturino lifted his hat to the new pictures : the old and
faded he seemed not to observe. It amused me wonder-
fully. Perhaps, however, I saw more in it than there
really was. Even the holy, pure image of the Madonna
herself was overlooked and forgotten because the earthly
colours were faded.

I passed through Vicenza, where the art of Palladio
could cast no ray of light over my troubled heart, on to
Verona, the first of all the cities which attracted me. The
amphitheatre led me back to Rome, and reminded me of
the Coliseum : it is a pretty little model of that, more dis-
tinct, and not laid waste by barbarians. The spacious
colonnades are converted into warehouses, and in the
middle of the arena was erected a little booth of linen and
boards, where a little theatrical company, as I was told
Y 2

gave representations. I went in the evening. The Vero-
nese sat upon the stone benches of the amphitheatre, where
their fathers had sat before them. In this little theatre
was acted " La Cenerentola." It was the company with
which Annunciata had been. Aurelia performed the prin-
cipal parts in the opera. The whole was miserable and
melancholy to witness. The old, antique theatre stood
like a giant around the fragile wooden booth. A contre
bass completely drowned the few instruments ; the public
applauded, and called for Aurelia. I hastened away. Out-
side all was still. The great giant-building cast a broad,
dark shadow amid the strong moonlight.

They told me of the families of the Capuleti and Mon-
tecchi, whose strife divided two loving hearts, which death
again united — the history of Romeo and Juliet. I went
up to the Palazzo Capuleti, where Romeo, for the first
time, saw his Juliet, and danced with her. The house is
now an inn. I ascended the steps up which Romeo had
stolen to love and death. The great dancing-hall stood
there yet, with its discoloured pictures on the walls, and
the great windows down to the floor ; but all around lay
hay and straw ; along the walls were ranged lime-barrels,
and in a corner were thrown down horse-furniture and
field-implements. Here had once the proudest race of
Verona floated to the sound of billowy music — here had
Romeo and Juliet dreamed love's short dream. I deeply
felt how empty is all human glory ; felt that Flaminia
had taken hold on the better part, and that Annunciata
had obtained it, and I regarded my dead as happy.

My heart throbbed as with the fire of fever ; I had no
rest. To Milan ! thought I ; there is now my home ;
and I yearned towards it. Towards the end of the month
I was there. No ! there I found that I was much better
at Venice, much more at home ! I felt that I was alone,
and yet would make no acquaintance, would deliver none
of the letters of introduction with which I had been fur,
nished.

The gigantic theatre, with its covered boxes, which range
themselves in six rows, one above another, the whole im-
mense space, which yet is so seldom filled, had in it, to me,

THE IMPROVISATORE. 325

something desolate and oppressive. I once was there, and
heard Donizetti's Torquato Tasso. To the most honoured
singer , who was called for, and called for again , it seemed
to me, that, like a gloomy magician, I could prophesy a
future full of misery. I wished her rather to die in this
her beauty and the moment of her happiness ; then the
world would weep over her, and not she over the world.
Lovely children danced in the ballet ; my heart bled at
their beauty. Never more will I go to La Scala.

Alone, I wandered about the great city, through the
shadowy streets ; alone I sat in my chamber, and began to
compose a tragedy, " Leonardo da Vinci." Here he had
actually lived ; here I had seen his immortal work, " The
Last Supper." The legend of his unfortunate love, of his
beloved, from whom the convent separated him, was indeed
a re-echo of my own life. I thought of Flaminia, of An-
'nunciata, and wrote that which my heart breathed. But I
missed Poggio, missed Maria and Rosa. My sick heart
longed for their affectionate attention and friendship. I
wrote to them, but received no answer ; neither did Poggio
keep his beautiful promise of letters and friendship : he was
like all the rest. We call them friends, and, in absence,
knit ourselves firmer to them.

I went daily to the cathedral of Milan, that singular
mountain which was torn out of the rocks of Carrara.
I saw the church for the first time in the clear moonlight ;
dazzlingly white stood the upper part of it in the infinitely
blue ether. Round about, wherever I looked, from every
corner, upon every little tower with which the building
was, as it were, overlaid, projected marble figures. Its
interior dazzled me more than St. Peter's Church ; the
strange gloom, the light which streamed through the
painted windows — the wonderful mystical world which
revealed itself here — yes, it was a church of God !

I had been a month in Milan before I ascended the
roof of the church. The sun blazed upon its shining,
white surface; the towers stood aloft, like churches or
chapels upon a mighty marble space. . Milan lay far
below • all around me presented themselves statues of
Y 3

THE IMPROVISATORE.

saints and martyrs, which my eye could not see from the
street below. I stood up just by the mighty figure of
Christ, which terminates the whole gigantic building.
Towards the north arose the lofty, dark Alps ; towards
the south; the pale blue Apennines ; and between these an
immense green plain, as if it were the flat Campagna of
Rome changed into a blooming garden. I looked towards
the east, where Venice lay. A flock of birds of passage,
in a long line, like a waving riband, sped thitherward. I
thought of my beloved ones there, — of Poggio, Rosa, and
Maria, — and a painful yearning awoke in my breast. I
could not but remember the old story which I had heard,
as a child, on that evening, when I went with my mother
and Mariuccia from Lake Nemi, where we had seen the
bird of prey, and where Fulvia had shown herself; the
story which Angelina had told about the poor Therese of
Olivano, who wasted away with care and longing after the
slender Giuseppe, and how he was drawn from his northern
journey beyond the mountains, and how the old Fulvia
had cooked herbs in a copper vessel, which she had made
to simmer for many days over the glowing coals, until
Giuseppe was seized upon by longing, and was compelled
to go home, night and day ; to speed back without stop or
stay, to where her vessel was boiling with holy herbs, and
a lock of his and Therese's hair.

I felt that magic power within my breast which drew
me away, and which is called, by the inhabitants of moun-
tain regions, home-sickness ; but this it was not in me :
Venice was really not my home. My mind was strongly
affected ; I felt, as it were, ill, and descended from the
roof of the church.

I found in my room a letter — it was from Poggio.
At length there was a letter ! It appeared from the letter
that he had written an earlier one, which, however, I had
not received. Every thing was merry and well in Venice ;
but Maria had been ill — very ill. They had all been
anxious, and in great trouble ; but now all was over : she
had left her bed, although she did not venture to go out
yet. Hereupon Poggio joked with me, and inquired
whether any young Milanese lady had captivated me,

THE IMPHOVISATORE. 327

and besought me not to forget the champagne and our
wager.

The whole letter was full of fun and merriment, very
different to my own state of mind, and yet it gladdened
me ; it was actually as if I saw the happy, fun-loving
Poggio. How in the world can we form a true judgment
of men and things ? It was said of him that he went with
a deep, secret sorrow in his breast, and that his gaiety was
only a masquerade dress ; that is nature. It was said that
Maria was my bride, and yet how far from my heart ! I
longed, it is true, for her, and for Rosa also ; but nobody
said that I was in love with old Signora Rosa, Oh, that I
were but in Venice ! Here I could not stay any longer !
And again I jested over this strange voice within my breast.

In order to get rid of these thoughts, I went out of the
gate above the Piazza d'Armi to the triumphal arch of
Napoleon, — the Porta Sempione, as it is called. Here
were the workmen in full activity. I went in through a
hole in the low wall of boards which enclosed the whole of
the unfinished building ; two large, new horses of marble
stood upon the ground, the grass grew high above the
pedestals, and all around lay marble blocks and carved
capitals.

A stranger stood there with his guide, and wrote down
in a book the details which were given him ; he looked like
a man in about his thirtieth year. I passed him ; he had
two Neapolitan orders on his coat : he was looking up at the
building — I knew him — it was Bernardo. He also saw
me, sprang towards me, clasped me in his arms, and laughed
aloud.

" Antonio ! " exclaimed he, " thanks for the last part-
ing ; it was, indeed, a merry parting, with firing and effect !
We are, however, friends now, I imagine ? "

An ice-cold sensation passed through my blood.

" Bernardo," exclaimed I, " do we see one another again
in the north, and near the Alps ? "

" Yes, and I come from the Alps," said he, — " from
the glaciers and the avalanches ! I have seen the world's
end up there in those cold mountains ! "

He then told me that he had been the whole summer in
Y 4

Switzerland. The German officers in Naples had told him
so much ahout the greatness of Switzerland, and it was
such a very easy thing to take a flight in the steam-boat
from Naples to Genoa, and then one gets so far ! He had
been to the valley of Chamouni, ascended Mont Blanc, and
the Jungfrau, " La Bella Ragazza" as he called it. " She
is the coldest that ever I knew," said he.

We went together to the new amphitheatre, and back to
the city. He told me that he was now on his way to
Genoa, to visit his bride and her parents, that he was just
upon the point of becoming a sober, married man ; invited
me to accompany him, and whispered, laughing, into my
ear, —

" You tell me nothing about my tame bird, about our
little singer, and all those histories ! You have now learned
yourself that they belong to a young heart's history; my
bride might otherwise easily get a headach, and she is quite
too dear to me for that ! "

It was impossible for me to mention Annunciata to him,
for I felt that he had never loved her as I had done.

" Now, go with me ! " urged he. <e There are pretty
girls in Genoa, and now you are become old and rational,
and have got some taste for these things. Naples has been
the making of you ! Is it not so ? In about three days I
shall set off. Go with me, Antonio ! "

" But I set off to-morrow morning also," said I, invo-
luntarily. I had not thought of this before, but now the
thing was said.

" Where ? " inquired he,

" To Venice ! " replied I.

te But you can change your plan ! " continued he, and
pressed his own very much upon me.

I assured him so strongly about the necessity of my
journey, that I also began to see myself that I must go.

I had within myself neither peace nor rest, and arranged
every thing for my journey, as if it had been for a long
time my determination.

It was the invisible guidance of God's wonderful Pro-
vidence which led me away from Milan. It was im-
possible for me to sleep at night ; I lay for some hours on

THE IMPROVISATORE. 329

my bed in a short, wild fever-dream, in a state of waking
sickness. " To Venice ! " cried the voice within my
breast.

I saw Bernardo for the last time ; bade him to salute
his bride for me : and then flew back again whither I had
come two months before.

At some moments it seemed to me as if I had taken
poison, which thus fomented in my blood. An inexpli-
cable anxiety drove me onwards — what coming evil was
at hand ?

I approached Fusina, saw again Venice, with its grey
walls, the tower of St. Mark's, and the Lagunes ; and
then all at once vanished my strange unrest, my yearning
and anxiety, and there arose within me another feeling, —
what shall I call it ? — shame of myself, displeasure, dis-
satisfaction. I could not comprehend what it was that I
wanted here, felt how foolishly I had behaved, and it
seemed to me that every body must say so, and that every
body would ask me, (e What art thou doing again in
Venice ? "

I went to my old lodgings; dressed myself in haste, and
felt that I must immediately pay a visit to Rosa and
Maria, however enfeebled and excited I might feel.

What, however, would they say to my arrival ?

The gondola neared the palace ; what strange thoughts
can enter the human breast ! What if thou shouldst now
enter at a moment of festivity and rejoicing ? What if
Maria be a bride ? But, what then ? I really did not
love her! I had said so a thousand times to myself; a
thousand times had assured Poggio, and every one else
who had said so, that I did not !

I saw once more the grey-green walls, the lofty windows,
and my heart trembled with yearning. I entered the
house. Solemnly and silently the servant opened the door,
expressed no surprise at my arrival. It seemed to me that
quite another subject occupied him.

" The Podesta is always at home to you, Signore ! " said
he.

A stillness, as of death, reigned in the great hall ; the
curtains were drawn. Here had Desdemona lived, thought

330 THE IMPROVISATORS.

I ; here, perhaps, suffered ; and yet Othello suffered more
severely than she did. How came I now to think of this
old history ?

I went to Rosa's apartment ; here also the curtains
were drawn — it was in a half-darkness, and I felt agaii
that strange anxiety which had accompanied me in th.
whole journey, and had driven me back to Venice. A
trembling went through all my limbs, and I was obligee,
to support myself that I did not fall.

The Podesta then came in ; he embraced me, and
seemed glad to see me again. I inquired after Maria and
Rosa — and it seemed to me that he became very grave.

" They are gone away ! " said he ; " have made a little
journey with another family to Padua. They will return
either to-morrow or the day after."

I know not wherefore, but I felt as if I doubted his
word ; perhaps it was the fever in my blood, the wild
fever, which my pain of mind had increased, and which
now approached the period of its breaking forth. This it
was which had operated upon my whole spiritual being,
and had occasioned the journey back.

At the supper-table I missed Rosa and Maria ; nor was
the Podesta as he used to be. It was, he said, a lawsuit
which had rather put him out of sorts, but it was nothing
of consequence.

" Poggio is not any where to be met with either," said
he, (i All misfortunes come together ; and you are ill !
Yes, it is a rnerry soiree ! — we must see if the wine can-
not cheer us up ! But you are pale as death ! " exclaimed
he, all at once, and I felt that every thing vanished from
my sight. I had fallen into a state of unconsciousness.

It was a fever, a violent nervous fever.

I only know that I found myself in a comfortable,
darkened chamber ; the Podesta was sitting beside me, and
said that I should remain with him, and that I should soon
be well again. Rosa, he said, should nurse me ; but he
never mentioned Maria.

I was in a state of consciousness, as it were between
sleep and awake. After a time I heard it said that the
ladies had arrived, and that I should soon see them ; and

THE IMPROVISATORS. 331

I did see Rosa, but she was much troubled. It seemed to
me that she wept, but that, indeed, could not be for me,
for I felt myself already much stronger.

It was evening; there prevailed an anxious silence
around me, and yet a movement. They did not answer
my questions distinctly ; my hearing seemed quickened ;
I heard that many people were moving about in the hall
below me j and I heard, too, the strokes of the oars of many
gondolas ; and the reality was made known to me as I half
slumbered : they imagined that I was asleep.

Maria was dead. Poggio had mentioned to me her
illness, and had said that now she was recovered, but a
relapse had caused her death. She was going to be buried
this evening, but all this they had concealed from me.
Maria's death, like an invisible power, had weighed upon
my life ! For her was that strange anxiety which I had
felt ; ;but I had come too late ; I should behold her no
more. She was now in the world of spirits, to which she
had always belonged. Rosa had certainly adorned her
coffin with violets : the blue, fragrant flowers which she
loved so much, now that she slept with the flowers.

I lay immoveably still, as in a death-sleep, and heard
Rosa thank God for it : she then went away from me.
There was not a single creature in the room ; the evening
'was dark, and I felt my strength wonderfully invigorated.
I knew that in the church de Frati was the burial-place
of the Podesta's family, and that during the night the dead
would be placed before the altar. I must see her — I rose
up — my fever was gone — I was strong. I threw my
cloak around me — no one saw me, and I entered a gondola.

My whole thought was of the dead. The church-doors
were closed, because it was long after the Ave Maria. I
knocked at the sexton's door ; he knew me, had seen me
before in the church with the Podesta's family, and showed
me within the graves of Canova and Titian.

fc Do you wish to see the dead ? " asked he, guessing my
thoughts ; " she lies at the altar in the open coffin ; to-
morrow she will be placed in the chapel."

He lighted candles, took out a bunch of keys, and opened
a little side-door ; our footsteps re-echoed through the lofty,

silent vault. He -remained behind, and I went slowly
through the long empty passage ; a lamp burned feebly and
dimly upon the altar before the image of the Madonna. The
white marble statues around the tomb of Canova stood like
the dead in their shrouds, silently and with uncertain out-
lines. Before the principal altar three lights were burn-
ing. I felt no anxiety, no pain — it was as if I myself
belonged also to the dead, and that I was now entering into
my own peculiar home. I approached the altar ; the fra-
grance of violets was diffused around ; the rays of light fell
from the lamp into the open coffin down upon the dead. It
was Maria ; she seemed to sleep ; she lay like a marble
image of beauty scattered over with violets. The dark
hair was bound upon the forehead, and was adorned with a
.bouquet of violets; the closed eyes, the image of perfect
peace and beauty, seized upon my soul. It was Lara whom
I saw, as she sat in the ruins of the temple, when I im-
pressed a kiss upon her brow ; but she was a dead marble
statue, without life and warmth.

" Lara!" sighed I, and sank down before the coffin,
" in death thy closed eyes, thy silent lips speak to me : I
know thee — have known thee in Maria ! My last thought
in life is death with thee ! "

My heart found relief in tears ; I wept ; my tears fell
upon the countenance of the dead, and I kissed the tears
away.

' ' All have left me ! " sighed I ; ' ' thou also, the last of
whom my heart dreamed ! Not as for Annunciata, not as
for Flaminia, burned my soul for thee ! — it was the pure,
true love, which angels feel, that my heart cherished for
thee ; and I did not believe that it was love, because it
was more spiritual than my outward thought ! Never have
I understood it — never ventured to express it to thee !
Farewell, thou ! the last, my heart's bride ! Blessed be
thy slumber !"

I pressed a kiss upon her brow.

" My soul's bride!" continued I, " to no woman will
I give my hand. Farewell ! farewell ! "

I took off my ring, placed it on Lara's finger, and lifted
my eyes to the invisible God above us. At that moment

THE IMPROVISATORE. 333

a horror passed through my blood, for it seemed to me as
if the hand of the dead returned the pressure of mine ; it
was no mistake. I fixed my eyes upon her ; the lips
moved ; every thing around me was in motion : I felt that
my hair rose upon my head. Horror, the horror of death,
paralyzed my arms and my feet ; I could not escape.

" I am cold," whispered a voice behind me.

" Lara ! Lara ! I cried, and all was night before my
eyes ; but it seemed to me that the organ played a soft,
touching melody. A hand passed softly over my head;
rays of light forced their way to my eyes ; every thing
became so clear, so bright !

" Antonio ! " whispered Rosa, and I saw her. The
lamp burned upon the table, and beside my bed lay a
kneeling figure, and wept. I saw then that I beheld
reality before me, that my horror was only that of wild
fever-dream.

" Lara ! Lara ! " exclaimed I. She pressed her hands
before her eyes. But what had I said in my delirium ? This
thought stood vividly before my remembrance, and I read
in Maria's eyes that she had been witness to my heart's
confessions.

" The fever is over," whispered Rosa.

" Yes ; I feel myself much better — much better," ex-
claimed I, and looked at Maria. She rose up, and was
about to leave the room.

" Do not go from me ! " I prayed, and stretched forth
any hands after her.

She remained, and stood silently blushing before me.

" I dreamt that you were dead," said I.

' It was a delirious dream!" exclaimed Rosa, and
Banded to me the medicine which the physician had pre-
scribed.

(( Lara, Maria, hear me !" I cried. " It is no delirious
dream ! I feel life returned back to my blood ! My whole
life must then have been a strange dream. We have seen
one another before ! You have heard my voice before, at
Psestum, at Capri. You know it again, Lara! I feel it;
life is so short, why, then, not offer to each other our hands
in this brief meeting?"

I extended my hand towards her; she pressed it to her
lips.

11 1 love thee ; have always loved thee ! " said I ; and,
without a word, she sank on her knees beside me.

Love, says the Mythe, brought chaos into order, and
created the world. Before every loving heart creation
renews itself. From Maria's eyes I drank in life and health.
She loved me. When a few days were passed, we stood
alone in the little room, where the orange-trees breathed
forth fragrance from the balcony. Here had she sung to
me, but in softer tones, more spiritual and deeper, sounded
to my ear the confession of the noblest of hearts. I had
made no mistake ; Lara and Maria were one and the same
person.

" I have always loved thee ! " said she. " Thy song
awoke longing and pain in my breast, when I was blind
and solitary with my dreams, and knew only the fragrance
of the violets. And the warm sun ! how its beams burned
thy kiss into my forehead — into my heart ! The blind
possess only a spiritual world ; and in that I beheld thee !
The night after I heard thy improvisation in the Temple
of Neptune, at Passtum, I had a singular dream, which
blended itself with reality. A gipsy-woman had told me
my fortune — that I should again receive my sight. I
dreamed about her, dreamed that she said I must go with
Angelo, my old foster-father, and sail across the sea to
Capri ; that in the Witch's Cave I should receive again
the light of my eyes ; that the Angel of Life would give
me herbs, which, like Tobias's, should enable my eyes
again to behold God's world. The dream was repeated
again the same night. I told it to Angelo, but he only
shook his head.

" The next night, in the morning-hour, he dreamed it
himself, on which he said, ' Blessed be the power of
Madonna ; the bad spirits must even obey her ! '

" We arose ; he spread the sail, and we flew across the
sea. The day passed, evening came, and night, but I *
was in a strange world, heard how the Angel of Life
pronounced my name — and the voice sounded like thine.

THE IMPROVISATORS. 335

He gave us herbs and great riches — treasure collected
from the different countries of the world.

" We boiled the herbs ; but no light came to my eyes.
One day, however, Rosa's brother came to Psestum ; he
came into our cottage, where I lay, and, affected by the
yearning desire which I expressed to see God's beautiful
world, he promised me sight to my eyes, took me with
him to Naples, and there I saw the great magnificence of
life. He and Rosa became very fond of me ; they opened
to me another and a more beautiful world — that of the
soul. I remained with them ; they called me Maria, after
a beloved sister, who was dead in Greece.

" One day Angelo brought to me the rich treasure, and
said that it was mine. His death, he said, was at hand ;
that he had expended his last strength in bringing me my
own inheritance ; and his words were the last of a dying
man. I saw him expire, — him, the only protector of my
poverty !

" One evening, Rosa's brother inquired from me very
seriously about my old foster-father, and the treasure
which he had brought. I knew no more than that which
he had said, that the spirit in the glittering cave had given
him this. I knew that we had always lived in poverty.
Angelo could not be a pirate — he was so pious ; every
little gift he divided with me."

I then told her how singularly her life's adventure had
blended itself with mine ; how I had seen her with the
old man in the wonderful grotto. That the old man him-
self took the heavy vessel I would not tell her, but I told
her that I gave her the herbs.

" But," exclaimed she, " the spirit sank into the earth
as it reached to me the herbs ! So Angelo told me."

"It appeared so to him," I returned; " I was de-
bilitated ; my feet could not sustain me ; I sank on my
knees, and then fainted among the long green grass."

That wondrously glittering world in which we had met
was the indissoluble — the firm knot between the super-
natural and the real.

" Our love is of the spiritual world ! " exclaimed I ;
" all our love tended towards the world of spirits ; towards

THE 1MPROVISATOUE.

that we advance in our earthly life ; wherefore, then, not
believe in it ? It is precisely the great reality ! " And I
pressed Lara to my heart ; she was beautiful as she was
the first time I saw her.

" 1 recognised thee by thy voice when I first heard thee
in Venice," said she : " my heart impelled me towards
thee ; I fancy that even in the church, before the face of
the Mother of God, I should have fallen at thy feet. I
saw thee here ; learned to value thee more and more ; was
conducted, as it were, a second time into thy life's con-
cerns, when Annunciata hailed me as thy bride ! But thou
repelledst me ; said that thou wouldst never love again !
— never wouldst give thy hand to any woman ! — never
mentioned Lara, Paestum, or Capri, when thou relatedst
to us the singular destiny of thy life ! Then I believed
that thou never hadst loved me ; that thou hadst forgotten
that which did not lie near to thy heart ! "

I impressed a kiss of reconciliation upon her hand, and
said how strangely her glance had closed my lips. Not
until my body lay bound, as it were, for the grave, and
my spirit itself floated into the world of spirits, in which
our love was so wonderfully knit together, had I ventured
to express the thoughts of my heart.

No stranger, only Rosa and the Podesta knew of the
happiness of our love. How gladly would I have told it
to Poggio. He had, during my sickness, visited me many
times during the day. I saw that he looked extremely
pale, when, after I had left my room, I pressed him to
my heart in the clear light of the sun.

" Come to us this evening, Poggio," said the Podesta
to him ; " but come" without fail. You will only find here
the family, Antonio, and two or three other friends."

All was festally arranged.

" It is really as if it were to be a name's day," said
Poggio.

The Podesta conducted him and the other friends to
the little chapel, where Lara gave me her hand. A bou-
quet of blue violets was fastened in her dark hair. The
blind girl of Paestum stood seeing, and doubly beautiful,
before me. She was mine.

THE IMPKOVISATORE. 337

All congratulated us. The rejoicing was great. Poggio
sang merrily, and drank health upon health.

" I have lost my wager," said I, " but I lose it gladly,
because my loss is the winning of my happiness," and I
impressed a kiss on Lara's lips.

The gladness of the others sounded like tumultuous
music; mine and Lara's was silent as the night which
embraced us when all were gone.

" Life is no dream," thought I ; " and the happiness
of love is a reality," exclaimed I, as heart to heart lost all
thought in happiness which God only can infuse into a
human breast.

Two days after the bridal, Rosa accompanied us from
Venice. We went to the estate which had been pur-
chased for Maria. I had not seen Poggio since the bridal
evening. I now received a letter from him, which said
merely, —

" 1 won the wager, and yet I lost ! "

He was not to be met with in Venice. After some
time my conjecture became certainty ; he had loved Lara.
Poor Poggio ! thy lips sang of gladness, but thoughts of
death filled thy heart !

Francesca thought Lara very charming ; I myself had
won infinitely in this journey, and she, Excellenza, and
Fabiani, all applauded my choice. Habbas Dahdah even
smiled over his whole face as he congratulated me.

Of the old acquaintance there is yet living, in 1837,
Uncle Peppo ; he sits upon the Spanish steps, where, for
many years, certainly he will say his " bon yiorno ! "

On the 6th of March, 1834, a great many strangers
were assembled in the Hotel at Pagani, on the island of
Capri. The attention of all was attracted by a young
Calabrian lady of extraordinary beauty, whose lovely dark
eyes rested on her husband, who gave her his arm. It
was I and Lara. We had now been married three happy
years, and were visiting, on a journey to Venice, the
Island of Capri, where the most wonderful event of our
life occurred, and where it would clear itself up.

In one corner of the room stood an elderly lady, and
held a little child in her arms. A foreign gentleman, toler-
ably tall and somewhat pale, with strong features, and
dressed in a blue frock-coat, approached the child, laughed
with it, and was transported with its loveliness ; he spoke
French, but to the child a few Italian words ; gave merry
leaps to make it laugh; and then gave it his mouth to
kiss. He asked what was its name ? and the old lady, my
beloved Rosa, said it was Annunciata.

" A lovely name !" said he, and kissed the little one —
mine and Lara's.

I advanced to him ; he was Danish : there was still a
countryman of his in the room, a grave little man, with
an intelligent look, and dressed in a white surtout. I
accosted them politely ; they were countrymen of Federigo
and the great Thorwaldsen. The first, I found, was in
Denmark, the latter in Rome ; he, indeed, belongs to
Italy, and not to the cold, dark north.

We went down to the shore, and took one of those little
boats which are calculated to take out strangers to the
other side of the island. Each boat held but two persons :
one sat at each end, and the rower in the middle.

I saw the clear water below us. It saluted my re-
membrance with its ethereal clearness. The rower worked
his oars rapidly, and the boat in which I and Lara were
seated flew forward with the speed of an arrow. We soon
lost sight of the amphitheatre-like side of the island, where
the green vineyards and orange-trees crown the cliffs ;
and, now, the rocky wall rose up perpendicularly towards
the sky. The water was blue as burning sulphur ; the
blue billows struck against the cliffs, and over the blood-red
sea-apples which grow below.

We were now on the opposite side of the island, and
saw only the perpendicular cliffs, and in them, above the
surface of the water, a little opening, which seemed not
large enough for our boat.

" The Witch's Cave ! " exclaimed I, and all the re-
collections of it awoke in my soul.

" Yes, the Witch's Cave ! " said the rower ; " it was
called so formerly; but now people know what it is ! "

THE IMPROVISATORS. 339

He then told us about the two German painters, Fries
and Kopisch, who three years before had ventured to swim
into it, and thus discovered the extraordinary beauty of the
place, which now all strangers visit.

We neared the opening, which raised itself scarcely
more than an ell above the blue shining sea. The rower
took in his oars ; and we were obliged to stretch ourselves
out in the boat, which he guided with his hands, and
we glided into a dark depth below the monstrous rocks
which were laved by the great Mediterranean. I heard
Lara breathe heavily ; there was something strangely fearful
in it ; but, in hardly more than a moment, we were in an
immensely large vault, where all gleamed like the ether.
The water below us was like a blue burning fire, which
lighted up the whole. All around was closed ; but, below
the water, the little opening by wbich we had entered
prolonged itself almost to the bottom of the sea, to forty
fathoms in depth, and expanded itself to about the same
width. By this means the strong sunshine outside threw
a light within upon the floor of the grotto, and streaming
in now like a fire through the blue water, seemed to change
it into burning spirit. Every thing gave back the reflection
of this ; the rocky arch — all seemed as if formed of con-
solidated air, and to dissolve away into it. The water-
drops which were thrown up by the motion of the oars,
dropped red, as if they had been fresh rose-leaves.

It was a fairy world, the strange realm of the mind.
Lara folded her hands ; her thoughts were like mine.
Here, had we been once before ; — here, had the sea-
robbers forgotten their treasure, when no one ventured
to approach the spot. Now was every supernatural ap-
pearance cleared up in reality, or reality had passed over
into the spiritual world, as it does always here in human
life, where every thing, from the seed of the flower to our
own immortal souls, appears a miracle ; — and yet man will
not believe in miracles !

The little opening to the cave which had shone like
a clear star was now darkened for a moment, and then the
other boats seemed to ascend as if from the deep. They
came into the cave. All was contemplation and devotion.

The Protestant, as well as the Catholic, felt here that
miracles still exist.

" The water rises ! " said one of the seamen. " We .
must go out, or else the opening will be closed ; and then
we shall have to remain here till the water falls again !"

We left the singularly beaming cave; the great open sea
lay outstretched before us, and behind us the dark opening
of the Grotto Azzurra

THE END.
