CONSTITUTIONS 
Antient ad . 

FREE and AcckrrED VIASON 8 

CONTAINING 

Their 1 Charges, Regulations, Ke 

Corrzerzy and Dicrerzn 

By Order of the GRAND Lobos from their old Records, 
faithful Traditions and Lodge-Books, 

For the Uſe of the E 

By Jams ANDERSON, 5 1 
— — 
LON DOWN: 

Printed for Brothers CAR Ward and Ricyany CHANDLER 
. Bookſellers, at the Ship without Temple-Bay ; and fold at their 
Shops in Coney-Street, York, and at Sca BOROUGH-SPAW.. 

M DCCXXxxVIT. 
In the Vulgar Year of Maſonry 5738. 

= ws 

13 r 5 
0 r —_—_—— 
7 - — # 

* 
"P 

aw by >. _ N.. —_— 
_" SY Te ; 
— 3 ES. {SJ 

TO THE 
Moſt High, Puiſſant and moſt Iluſtrious PRINCE 

FRIDERICK LEWIS, 

Prince Royal of GREAT-BRITAIN, 

Prince and Stewart of ScoTLAND, 
PRINCE of W ALES, 

Electoral Prince of Byunſwick-Luneburg, 
Duke of Cornwall, Rothſay, and Edinburgh, 
Marquis of the Ile of Ely, 
Earl of Chefter and Flint, Eltham and Carrick, 

Viſcount Launceſton, 
Lord of the Jes, Kyle and Cunningham, 
Baron of Snaudon and Renfrew, 
Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Garter, 
Fellow of the Roya Society, | 

A Maſter MASON, and Maſter of a LODGE. 
GREAT SIR, 

iy DEDICATION 
GREAT SIR, 

Right Worſhipful GRAN D MASTER, 
| with his Deputy and Gardens, 
Pa) and the Fraternity, have ordered 
me their Author humbly to dedicate, in their 
Name, this their Book of Conſtitutions to 
Your ROYAL HIGHNESS.. . -- 

** 8 —— $$... ms alas 4.44 

It was peruſed and approved by the former 

and preſent Grand Officers, and was order'd 
to be publiſh'd by our late Grand Maſter the 

Earl of DARNLE with his Deputy and 

Wardens, and by the GRAND Lop OE in his 
Maſter ſhip. 

© Your ROYAL HIGHNESS wal knows, 

that our Fraternity has been often patronized 

by Royal Perſons in former Ages; whereby 

Architecture early obtain d the Title of the 

Royal. Art: And the Free-Ma/ors have always 
endeavour d to deſerve that Patronage by their 

For 

” 
3 
| 

HE Marquis of CAERNARVON our 

DEDICATION. v 
For ve meddle not with Affairs of State in 
our Lodges, nor with any Thing that may give 
Umbrage to Civil Mag iſtrates, that may 
break the Harmony of our own Communica- 
tions, or that may weaken the Cement of the 
Lop GB. . C176 

And whatever are our different Opinions in 
other Things (leaving all Men to Liberty of 
Conſcience) as Maſons we harmoniouſly agree 
in the noble Science and the Royal Art, in the 
Social Virtues, in being True and Faithful, and 
in avoiding what may give Offence to any 
Powers round the Globe, under whom we can 
peaceably aſſemble in Ample Form; as now we 
happily do in theſe Iſlands under Your Royal 
Father, and our Sovereign Lord 

King GEORGE II. 

The Fraternity being All duly ſenſible of the 
very great Honour done them by your becom- 
ing their Rovyar, Brother and Patron, have com- 
manded me thus to ſignify their Gratitude, 
their brotherly Love to your Royal Perſon, and 

their 

" JED CAT FON: 

their humble Duty to Your: Royal Princess ; 

wiſhing her to be the happy Mother of many 

Sans, whoſe Deſcendants ſhall alſo prove the 

Patrons of the Fraternity in all future Ages. 
In this the Free mw Accepted Maſons are 

unanimous, and none can more heartily with. 

7 it, than in all Humility, | 

GREAT SIR, 

Vour ROYAL HIGHNESS's 
af) Tuue and Faithful 

James Andes ſon. 

The Author to the Reader. 

HE Frez-MasoNns had always a Book in Manuſcript 

call'd the Boot of Conſtitutions, (of which they have 

ſeveral very antient Copies remaining) containing not 
only their Charges and Regulations, but alſo the Hiſtory of Archi- 
teFture from the Beginning of Time; in order to ſhew the An- 
tiquity and Excellency of the Craft or Art, and how it gradually 
aroſe upon its ſolid Foundation the noble Science of Gzome TR y,. 
by the Encouragement of Royal, Noble and Learned Patrons in 
every Age and in all polite Nations. | 
But they had no Book of Conſtitutions in Print, till his Grace 
the preſent Duke of Mo x TAG uv, when Grand Maſter, order'd 
me to peruſe the old Manuſcripts, and digeſt the Conſtitutions 
with a juſt Chronology. 
This new Book is above twice as large, having many proper 
Additions, . eſpecially the principal Tranſactions of the Grand 
Lodge ever ſince. | | 
| The Hiſtory is now in three Parts, and each Part in ſeven 
Chapters, viz. | 

PART 1. k ' | , 

The Hiftory of Masonry from the Creation throughout 
the known Earth, till good old Architefure, demoliſh'd 

by the Goths, was revived in 1taly. 

Cnae. | AQ) Page 
I. From the CREATION to Grand Maſter NIMROD. I 
II. From NIMROD to Grand Maſter SoLomon. 5 
III. From SOL'OM ON to Grand Hafer Cy xvus. II 

IV. From CYRUS to Grand Maſter SELEUCUS, 22 
V. From SELEUCUS to Grand Maſter 
| AvucusTus CæsAR. — — 29 

VI. From AUGUSTUS till che Havock of the Goths. 37 
VII. The RevivaL of good old Arebitedture in Italy. 7277 
ait 

£ 

Fiii Ihe Au2hor to the Reader. 
P A R T II. 

The Hiftory of MasoNnNRyY in Britain from Jvr ros 
CASAR“'s Invaſion, till the Union of the Crowns on the 
Death of Queen ELIZABETH, A. D. 1603. 

Cu Ap. I. From JULIUS CESAR | Page 
| till the firſt Arrival of the Saxons, ———— 55 
II. From the Arrival of the SAXONS bir PRINT 
to WILLIAM the Conqueror. 59. 
HI. From King WILLIAM the Compuerar HY 
to HENRY IV. —— — 67 
IV. From King HENRY iv. to to the Royal — 
or HENRY VII. ———— —— 7 

V. From King HENRY vir. 
till the Union of the Crowns, A. D. 1603, —— 75, 
VI. Maſonry in SeoTLAND till the ſaid Union, — 82. 
VII. Maſonry in IX ELAN) till Grand Maſter KI xs To. * 
„. | 
The Hiſtory of Mas oN xv in Britain from the Union of 
the Crowns, A. D. 1603. to our preſent Grand Maſter 
CAERNARV ON. 
"TIO I. The AvcuvsTANn STILE from the ſaid Union * 
till the Reſtoration. - - 
II. From the Re5ToRATION till the Revolution. — 101 
III. From the RevoruTion'to Grand Maſter MonTagv. 106 
IV. From MONTAGU to Grand Maſter:Ricnmond,. - 
including WAR TON and BuckLevcn, 114 
V. From RICHMOND to Grand Maſter Noxrol k, 
including ABERCORN, IxcxrqQuin, COLERANE 
and KINGSTON. 117 
VI. From NOR FOLK to Grand unge- CAAurvan, f 
including Lover, Viſcount Mo NTA eu, and 
STRATHMORE, I24 
VII. From CRAUFURD to our preſent. Grand Maſter 
| CAERNARVON, including | 
WzymourTH, Lounoun, and-DAxniLEyY. 132 
| NEXT, 

ö "ue RF... —_ 
3 Fa. n 

j P 4 * * 9 4 8 b 
FEY Deen 
Sy + 23 11 * A 
* d | 44 1 
d 1 * % 

"The Author to the Read: | ir 
ee 0 9 go 
= A Liſt of ine GAD Maerzns of: 3 Page: 
that are mention'd in this Book. wp r 140 

— The old Cuarxces of the Free Hat. — 143 

— The antient Manner of ConsT1TUTING nM Lader. Kat 
— The General 'RzevLaTions, Old and New; .'. - 

in oppoſite Columns. „-f 152 
— The Contkitution of the COαν nfs 
of Maſons Charity. ⁊³ĩé³⸗êm — 158 
A Lift of the Lop os in and about 
Tondon and Veſtminſter.ßxçy⁊ ³ñ qEZ—— 184 
— D utations of ſeveral Grand Maſters, to Wa r's 57 
to the Countty of EN LAND, and to Parts beyond Sea. 199. 
— The APPROBATION of this Book, ————— — 199. 
— Some of the uſual Maſons Soxos. — 200 
— 78 Hef ence of Maonay, in Anſwer to a, Pamphlet 
Wa Maſonry Difered. — —— 216 
— 2 Euclid's Letter to the Author | | 
- againſt unjuſt Cavils, — - 226 

Moſt regular Societies have had, and will have, their own 
Secrets; and, to be ſure, the Free= Mufons always had theirs, which 
they never divulged i in Mauaſcript ; anch therefore cannot be ex- 
pected in Print : Only, an "expert Brother," by the true Light, 
can readily. find many aſefol Hints in almot every Page of this 
Book, which Cowgns, and Others not Initiated, cannot diſcern, 

It had been tedious, and of no great Le, - jo. wo i. at 

all the Authors conlalted and" collated in _ 
cally ** 

of this Book; 4 as moſt of the F 
known in Sacred and Eoecisſiaſtisal r Only ſome 

Authors are quoted as more negeſfary Vouchers. But the Omiſ- 

ſion is well enough ſupply'd by at exact Chronology, viz. 

: 

A The 

x: The Autbor to the Reader. 

The Hebrew CnRONO OG before the Chriſtian Era, according 

to Uſher, Spanheim, Pudeaux, and other ſuch accurate Chro- 
nolopers, And after the Chriſtian Era begins, the Hiſtory is here 

dedaced according to the Vulgar Anno Domini, or the Year of 

the Chriſtian Era; as on the Margin of Page 2. 
Some few -Genealogies are put in the Margin (not to hinder the 
Reader) that are needful for the Connection of the Hiſtory. But 
in PART II. and III. they ſhew more diſtinctly how the Crafz 
has been well encouraged in the ſeveral Periods and Succeſſions 
of the Saxon, Daniſh, Norman, Plantagenet, Welch and Scots. 
Kings of England, down to the preſent Rox Al Family: 
But the Hiſtory here chiefly concerns MAsON RV, without med 
dling with other Tranſactions, more than what only ſeryes to 
connect the Hiſtory of MasoNR , the ſtrict Subject of this 
ms = is good to know: WHAT NOT 'TO 8AYy |: Candid Reader, 
rewell. 0 ö 7 + | eee 

— „ 

1 3 N 1 4 | #: . 1 9 
3 From my Study in Q n f a e PAP 9 ! * — 
Exeter · Court, Sand. 3. James Ander ſon. 
4 Nov. 1738. | | £ F k j 81 i#4 " 

$3 42 
, or 0 & \ F 3, = £ : 
_— 
I - 

* 
U * \ - 
4 
* 
N 
X 8 _— OK ae 
TRE" "14 THY * 287 474. £34 $01 
[4 ” : ” 8 > G +4 - > # ns . — 
14 Huh = S\.. Y * * 12 V. 8 % „ - = = * a. * * eius 
# $4 * * ! 1 — 
. „ A — 

+ 

* 1 

DDs neee esd = 

"p | hes.” 4 , ; $4 — 7 17 7 4 1 7 
re + 
N * 1 ” 

1 = + 

| 1 4 LETT ——_ 
* | - nr 55 
tte ng ta #4 +0007 4,7 0 
* , - 3 ; \ 1 = 72 3 * 
4 = * * 
* . * 7 N 1 * 4 
2 - , 4 

* 
$141} Tr 
— 0 
deri eee 888 

- - 
: 
=» A. 
- 

ST 4 

0 

n nen Ya! 
; *. we T3. 

is, 4 CT} , * 
> » KB\N 7 28 2890.4 

PS * {7 
hs 
SF | 

IJ/ HE REAS\ gn as Nov. 1123- the Grand #aldlin amplh For: 
ConsTITUTIONS without Leave of the» Grand Wongent(t:1 1!!! 
And whereas tome have: ritten and printed Hooks : Pamphlets 
rejating to the krteirp wlthour Leave" of the Grag odge! fore 

ol which haye een condemm'd as pyratical and ſtupid 7 

Lodge in Ample Form On 24 Fb. 17 32. when th en were 
warned nt to ue en nor .entourage'themto % htl . * 
And ꝛ0herer all 25 Famuary 1735. the laſt Grand Maſter the Earl 
after due Approbation, otder'd-our;Brather Aal, the. Author, t ” 
and publiſh this our tj’ Bot of . o ieh hes 2 

e gf ,the Lodges, as appears by their 

Lodge, we warn allithe Brethren agalnſt being employ?d =p 
writing and ſpreading, printing and pu Ning — 4 7 0 Gin 
to Maſons or Maſinry,. and againſt. uſing ah — Baut in any n 
a Lodge- Boot, as they ſhall be anſwerable to the Grand Lodge. 5. 

% A * * 
« + 

| | . ; Y . THE V W N | 1. "YF n 
ee NN e e de Grand Mager, 
nne g Rp, Heu rand Matters 
John Rebig. 1 e "GEORGE, SAA mew by * 

N, Mardeng. 

Secretary. . 1 ANPREW:RoBiNso0 

; 20 « "a - © 60 % 
W alle Hinte 

7 4 . 

— 
th » 
* 7 7 
1 
x 

4 
- 
l 
? 
l 
* 
a 
- 
. 

. iv yh 

— — 

— 

15 

0 

AR vt dd 

: 

THE 
CONSTITUTIONS 
OF THE 

Right Worſhipful FRATERNITY 
8 OF THE 

Free and Accepted MASONS. 
Collected from their old Records and faithful 

Traditions. 
TO BE READ 

At the Admiſſion of a NEwW BroTH en, when the Maſter 
or Warden ſhall begin, or order ſome other Brother to 
read, as follows. | 

PART & 
The. Hiſtory of Maſonry from the Creation throughout the 
known Earth; till true old Architecture was demoliſh'd by 
the Goths and at laſt Revived in Italy. 

CHAPTER I. 
From the Creation to Gand Pater NI MRO p. 

verſe having created all Things very Good and according 

to Geometry, laſt of all formed Ap Au after his own Image, 
ingraving on his Heart the faid noble Science; which Adam ſoon 
diſcover'd by ſurveying his Earthly Paradiſe and the Fabrica- 
tion of the Arbour or — Lodgment that God had Po 
| or 

T HE ALmicnaTy Architect and Grand. Maſter of the Uni- 

(2} 
for him, a well-proportion'd and convenient Place of Shelter 
from Heat, and of Retirement, Reſt," and _ after his 
wholeſome Labour in cultivating his Garden of Delights, and 

the firſt Temple or Place of Worſhip, agreeable to his original, per- 

fect and innocent State, A. M. or Year of the World I 

* B. C. or before the Chriſtian Era 4003 

But tho? by Sin Adam fell from his original happy State, and was 
expell'd from his lovely Arbour and- Earthly Paradiſe into the 
wide World, he till retain'd great Knowledge, eſpecially in 
GEOMETRY ; and its Principles remaining in the Hearts of his 
Offspring, have in Proceſs of Time been drawn forth in a con- 
venient Method of Propoſitions, according to the Laws of Pro- 
portion taken from Mechaniſm : and as the Mechanical Arts gave 
occaſion to the Learned to reduce the Elements of Geometry into 
Method; ſo this noble Science, thus reduced and methodized, is 
now the Foundation of all thoſe Arts (eſpecially of Architecture) 
and the Rule by which they are er finiſh*d, 

ADAM, 4 expell'd, reſided in the moſt convenient natu- 
ral Abodes of the Land of Eden, where He could be beſt ſhelter'd 

PE 

The firſt Chriftians 1 their Times as the Nations did among whom 
They lived till 4. D. 532. when 

Dionyfius Exiguus, a Roman Abbot, taught them firſt to compute from the Birth of 
Ebrift : but He loſt 4 Years or began the Chriftian Era 4 Years later than juft. 
Therefore, tho according to the Hebrew Chronology of the old Teſtament and 
other good Vouchers , ChRIisr was truly born in ſome Month of the Year of the 
World or 4. M. 4000. yet theſe 4 Years added make 

— 400 
Not before the Birth of Chrift, but before the Chriſtian Fra, viz. 8 
For the true Anno Domini or Year after Chris Birth is 1740 
But the Masons being uſed to compute by _ 

the Vulgar An Domini or Chriſtian Era 1737 | and ſo theſe Letters A. M. 
and —_— to it not 4004 as it ought, but ify Anno Mundi or Year 
the firit Years before Cbriſt's Birth, viz. 4000 | of the World: and here 

— B. C. is not Before Chrift 
They uſually call this the Year of Masonnty 5737 | but Before the Chriftian 
Inftead of the accurate Year 5749 | Era. 

and we muſt keep to the Vulgar Computation. 
The 4. M. or Arno Mundi is the fame follow'd by Uber and Prigeaux, &c. 

from 

(43+) 

from Colds and Heats, from Winds, Rains and Tempeſts and 
from Wild Beaſts ; till his Sons grew up to form a Lodge, whom 
he taught Geometry and the great Uſe of it in Arcbitecture, with- 
out which the Children of Men muſt have liv'd like Brutes, in 
Woods, Dens and Caves, Sc. or at beſt in poor Huts of Mud 
or Arbours made of Branches of Trees, Sc. 

Thus KANN, when expelPd * with his Family * A.M. 130. 
and Adherents from Adam's Altars, built forthwith 
a ſtrong City, and call'd it DEDIOAT RE or ConssEcRATE, 
after the Name of his eldeſt Son Enoch; whoſe Race follow'd the 
Example, improving the Arts and Sciences of their Patriarch : 
for TuBaL Kain wrought in Metals, JuBAL elevated Muſick, and 
JaBAL extended his Tents. 

Nor was his Brother SE T H leſs inſtructed, the Patriarch of 
the other half of Mankind, who tranſmitted Geometry and Maſonry 
to his late Poſterity, who were the better skill'd by Adam's living 
among them till he died. A. M. 930. 

Apam was ſucceeded in the Grand Direction of the Craft 
SeTH, Exosn, KAINAN, MAHALALEEL and JargeD, who 
Son Godly ENOCH died not, but was tranſlated alive, Soul 
and Body, into Heaven, aged 365 Years *. He was * 4. M. 08 
expert and bright both in the Science and the Art, . 997 
and being a Prophet, He foretold the Deſtruction of the Earth for 
Sin, * - by Aut, and ee 2 therefore Exocn 

wo large PiLLars®*, the one of , | 
Stone and the other of Brick, whereon he re * 15 -b 
engraved the CO . the Arts — — mo Goceny 
and Sciences icular eometry and Fillars, lev" 
Maſonry. N * of '9 5 Tradition: 2 

JARRD liv'd after his Son Enoch Years —ͤ— 7 * 
435. and died aged 962 f. M.—— 1422. in Syria to his Time. 
the oldeſt Man except his ; 
Grandſon METHuSELAaH the Son of Enoch, who ſucceeded Jared; 
but Methuſelab ruled not long: for the Immoral Corruption uni- 
verſally prevailing, 

METHUSELAH, with his Son Lamzcn and Grandſon Noan, 

B 2 retired 

* nn N 
. 7 
RSS 

8 (4) 

| retired from the e World, and in their own peculiar Fa- 
0 

mily preſerved the good old Religion of the promiſed Meæſſiab pure, 
and alſo Royal Art, till the Flood : for LAM EH died only five 
Years before the Food, and ME TRHUSsBLAR died a few Days before 
It, aged 969 Years: and fo He could well communicate the Tra- 
ditions of his learned Progenitors to Noa#'s 3 Sons; for JIAPRET 
liv'd with him 100 Years, Suzem 98, and Ham 96. 

At laſt, when the World's Deſtruction drew nigh, God com- 
manded Noa to build the great Ark or floating Caſtle, and his 
3 Sons aſſiſted like a Deputy and two Wardens : That Edifice 
though of Wood only, was fabricated by Geometry as nicely as 
any Stone-Bnilding (like true Ship-Building to this Day) a curious 
and large Piece of Architeure, and finiſh'd when Noah enter'd 
into his 600 Lear; aboard which he and his 3 Sons and their 
4 Wives paſſed, and having received the Cargo of Animals by 
God's Direction, they were ſaved in the | 
Ark, while the reſt periſh*d in the Flood * 3. M. —— 1656. 
tor their Immorality and Unbelief. A. C. —— 2348. 
And ſo from theſe Masons, or four 
Grand Officers, the whole preſent Race of Mankind are deſcended, 

Aſter the Flood, Noan and his 3 Sons, having preſerved the 
Knowledge of the Arts and Sciences, communicated It to their 
growing Off-ſpring, who were all of one Language and Speech, 
And it came to paſs, * as they journeyd from 
the Eaſt (the Plains of Mount Ararat, * Gen. XI. 1, 2. 
where the Ark reſted) towards the Jeſt, 
they found @ Plain in the Land of SHlnNaR, and dwelt there 
together, as NOAchipæ , or Sons of 
Noah: and when Peleg was born there to The firſt Name of 
Heber, after the Flood 101 Years, Fa- Maſons, according to. 
ther Noah partition'd the Earth, ordering ſome old Traditions. 
them to diſperſe and take Poſſeſſion ; but 
from a Fear of the ill Conſequences of Separation, they reſolved 
to keep together. 

CHAP. 

4 
* k " ad * VO OE "ROT Li 3 - Ter 
2 88 3 - i © Va... EF ate" * 
5 enn Fs 9 x 4 2, ; 4 22 4 g NN , 
2 wg x KEA — he „ © atk. ed ors vs > Loan. of 1 3 8 8 Ou" 1 
1 * ** * Y oy "Ve * »* 
— 4. 2 6 + * 4 ** n 2 . — WM yd * > — * "xt "WO 
E ec. Ws, RS. Pa . * 1 5 "98. * . ol”. P . 

(5) 

CHAP. II. 
1 21 
From NIuROD to Gzand- Pater Sor OD 

NZ MROD Be ton of Cuſb, the Eld- Nirwrop ſignifies a 
eſt Son of Ham, was at the Head Rebel, the name that 
of thoſe that would not diſperſe ; or if th ey the Mraeltes gave him; 
muſt ſeparate, They reſolved to tranſmic but his Friends call'd 
their Memorial illuſtrious to all future him Belus Lox. 
Ages; and ſo employed themſelves under | 
Grand Maſter NiMRop, in the large and fertile Vale of Shinar 
along the Banks of the Tygris, in building a great and ſtately 
Tower and City, the largeſt Work that ever the World ſaw 
(deſcribed by various Authors) and ſoon fill'd the Vale with ſplen- 
did Edifices; but They over-built it, and knew not when to 
deſiſt *rill their Vanity provoked their Maker to confound their 
Grand Deſign, by confounding their Lip or Speech. Hence the 
City was called Pabel Confuſfon. 
Thus they were forced to _— about 53 J. M. 1810.2 

Years after they began to build, or after the B. C 
Flood 154 Years, * when * REO 

The General MicraTion. from Shinar commenced, 

They went off at various Times, and travelPd North, South, 
Eaſt and Weſt, with their mighty Skill, and found the good Uſe of 
it in ſettling their Colonies, _ - - | 

But NIuROD went forth no farther than into the Land of 
Aſſyria, and founded the firſt Great Empire at his Capital 
Niniv.h, where he long reign'd ; and under him flouriſh'd 
many learned Mathematicians, whoſe Succeſſors were, long after- 

wards, called Chaldees and Magians : and though many of 

tem turned Image-Worſhippers, yet even that Idolatry occa- 
han an e in the Aris xf 2 * 
cfigning : or Nixus King of Vi- 2. tefure, Scuß- 
neveb or Myria, ordered his bel Artiſts = WN b 
to frame the Statue of Baal, that was * 
worſhipped in a gorgeous Temple. From, 

(%) 
From SHINAR, the Science and the Art were carried to the diſtant 
Parts of the Earth, notwithſtandihg the Confuſion of Dialefs : 
That indeed gave Riſe to the Maſons Faculty and univerſal 

Practice of converſing without ſpeaking, and of 
other by Signs and Tokens (* which 
they ſettled upon the Diſperſion or Migra- 
tion, 1n caſe any of them ſhould meet in 
diſtant Parts, who had been before in 
Sbinar) but It hinder'd not the Propagation of Maſonry, which 
was cultivated by all the firſt Nations ; till the Negligence of their 
Chiefs, and their horrid Wars, made them turn ignorant, and 
loſe their original Skill in Arts and Sciences. 

Thus the Earth was again planted and repleniſh'd with Ma- 
SONS from the Vale of SHinNAR, whoſe various Improvements we 
ſhall trace. | 

MITZRAIM or Menes,. the ſecond Son of Ham, led his 
Colony from Shinar to EcyeT (which is Mitzraim in Hebrew, 
a dual Word, ſignifying both Egypis, Upper and Lower) after 
the Flood 160 Years, and after the Confufion ſix Years, A. M. 1816. 
where they preſerved their original Skill, and much cultivated 
the Art : for antient Hiſtory informs us 
* of the early fine Taſte of the Egyptians, 
their many magnificent Edifices and great 
Cities, as Memphis, Heliopolis, Thebes with 100 Gates, &c, be- 
ſides their Palaces and Sepulchres, their Obelisks and Statues, the 
Coloſſal Statue of Spy 1nx, whoſe Head was 120 Foot round, and 
their famous Pyramids, the 
greateſt * being reckoned the 

knowing each 
* This old Tradition is 

believed firmly by the old 
Fraternity 

* Died. Sicul. lib. 1. 

* Some fay it was built of Marble 
Stones brought from the Quarries of Ara- 

firſt or earlieſt of the ſeven Won- 
ders of Art after the general Mi- 
gration. 

The Egyptiaus excell'd all Na- 
tions alſo in their amaſing LAB Y- 
RIN THS, One of them cover'd 
the Ground of a whole Province, 
containing many fine Palaces and 

bia; for there is no Veſtige of a Quarry 
near it. Others call them artificial 
Stones made on the Spot, moſt of them 
30 Foot long. The Pile at Bottom was 
oo Foot ſquare, and 481 Foot high; 
t Others make it much higher: And in 
rearing it 360,000 Maſons were employ'd 
for 20 Years, as if all the People had 

Join'd in the Grand Desicn. 

— 

100 

(») 
100 7 8 diſpoſed in its ſeveral Quarters and Diviſions, adorned 
with Columns of the beſt Porphyre, and the accurate Statues of 
their Gods and Princes; which Labyrinth the Greeks, long after- 
wards, endeavour'd to imitate, but never arrived at Its Extenſion 
and Sublime. 

The Succeſſors of Pitzraim (who ſtiled themſelves the Sons 
of antient Kings) encouraged the Royal Art down to the laſt of 
the Race, the learned King Au As1s. See Chap. IV. 

But Hiſtory fails us in the South and Weſt of Africa. Nor 

have we any juſt Accounts of the fair and gallant Poſterity of 
Noab's eldeſt Son FAPHET, that firſt — vaſt old 
Scythia, from Norway Eaſtward to America; nor bf the Japhe- 
tites in Greece and [taly, Germany, Gaul and Britain, &c. till 
their original Skill was loſt : But, no doubt, they were good 
Architects at their firſt Migration from Shinar. 
SHE M, the ſecond Son of Noah, remain'd at Us of the 
Chaldees in Shinar, with his Father and great Grandſon HzeBER, 
where they liv'd private and died in Peace; but Shem's Off-ipring 
8 into * South and Eaſt of 

reat Aſia, viz. ELAM, ASHUR, AR- q 
PHAXAD, Lup and ARAM, with SALA , 1 The on Conſti- 
the Father of Heber; and their Off- ſpring ar * 5 1. this 
propagatd the Science and the Art as far —__ A A 
as CHINA and Japan: while Noan, SHEM moo 8 5 great 
and HE BER diverted themſelves at Ur, in Ff his. comerry, and 
Mathematical Studies, teaching Peleg the f his teaching it to 
Father of Rebu, Father of Serug, Father h L Scholars, tho! all 
of Nachor, Father of Terab, Father of 7 Sons of the Free- 
ABRAM, a learned Race of Mathemati- n only. 
cians and Geometricians ®, 

Thus ABRam, born two Years after the 
Death of Noab, “ had learned well the Science and * 4, M. 2008. 
the Art, before the Gon of GLoxy call'd him 
to travel from Ur of the Chaldees, and to live a Peregrin, not in 
Stone and Brick, but in Tentg erected alſo by Geometry. So travel- 
ling with his Family and Flocks through Meſopotamia, he pitched 

at 

— — . th 

ſoon forced him down to Egypt; and re- 

(8) 
at Charran e, where old TER AH in 5 Years died . , , 6 
and then ABRAM aged 75 Years, travelPd into A. M. 2058 
the Land of the Canaanites* : but a Famine , , 1 6 

turning next Year, he began to communicate 
his great Skill to the Chiefs of the Canaanites, for which they 
honour'd him as a Prince. . 

ABRAM tranſmitted his Geometry to all his Off-ſpring ; aac 
did the fame to his two Sons, and Jacos well inſtructed his 
Family; while his Son Joszyn was Gzand-Paſter of the Egyp- 
tian Maſons, and employ'd them in building many Granaries 
and Store-Cities throughout the Land of Egypt before the 
Deſcent of Jacob and his Family. 

Indeed this peculiar Nation were chiefly .converſant in Tents 
and Flocks and military Skill, for about 350 Years after 4bran 
came to Canaan, till their Perſecution began in Egypt, about 
80 Years before the Exodus of Moſes : But then the Egyptians 
having ſpoil'd and enſlaved the Hebrews, train'd them up in 
Maſonry of Stone and Byick, and made them build two ſtrong 
and ſtately Cities for the Royal Treaſures, Pithom and Raamſes. 
Thus the divine Wiſdom — Ir in permitting them to be thus 
employ'd, before they poſſeſsꝰd the promis'd Land then abound- 
ing with fine Architecture. 

At length, after Abram left Charran 430 
Years, Mos Es marched out of Egypt at the A. M. ——2513, 
Head of 600,000 Hebrew Males, marſhalPd B. C. — 1491. 
in due Form ; for whoſe ſake God divided | 
the Red Sea, to let them paſs through, and drowned Pharaoh and 
the Egyptians that purſu'd them. 

While marching through Arabia to Canaan, God was pleaſed 

to inſpire their Gzand Maſter MOSES, Jaſbuab his Deputy, and 

Aholia * with Wiſdom of 
and 80 3 Heart; and ſo next Exod XXXII. 6. 
Bezaleel > dens. 5 Year they raiſed 3 
the curious TARERNACLE er Tent (where the divine Shechinah 
| | MET reſided 

(9) ; 

reſided, and the holy Ark or Cheſt, the Symbole of God's Pre” 

ſence) which, though not of Stone or Brict, was framed by Geo” 
metry, a moſt beautiful Piece of true ſymmetrical Architecture, 

according to the Pattern that Gop diſcover'd to Moſes on Mount 

Sinai, and it was afterwards the Model of SoLomon's Temple. 

Mos xs being well skill'd in all the Egyptian Learning, and alſo 
divinely inſpired, excell'd all Grand Maſters before him, and 
ord the more skillful to meet him, as in a Grand Lodge, near 
the Tabernacle in the Paſſover- Week, and gave them wife Charges, 
Regulations, &c. though we wiſh they had been more diſtinctly 
tranſmitted by Oral Tradition. But of this enough. 

When Moss King of Feſſurun died A. M. 2553. - 

JOSHUAH ſucceeded in the Direction, with Kaleb as Deputy, 
and Eleazar with his Son Phineas as Grand Wardens, He 
marſhall'd his Mraelites, and led them over the Jordan (which 
God made dry for their March) into the promis d Land: and 
Foſhuah ſoon found the Canaanites had fo — fortified their 
great Cities and Paſſes, that without the ſpecial Intervention of 
EL sHADDa1, in behalf of his Peculiar, They were impregnable 
and invincible. | f 

JosnvaAk having finiſh'd his Wars in 6 Years, A. M. 2559. 
fixed the Tabernacle at $Shilob in Ephraim, ordering the Chiefs 
of J/rael not only to ſerve IE HovARH their God, and to cultivate 
the Land, but alſo to carry on the Grand Deſign of Architecture 
in the beſt Poſaic Stile. 

Indeed the 1/-aelites, refined in Cities and Manſions, having 
many expert Artiſts in every Tribe that met in Lodges or Societies 
for that Purpoſe, except when for their Sins they came under 
Servitude; but their occaſional Princes, call'd Judges and Sa- 
viours, revived the Moſaic Stile along with Liberty and the 
Moſaic Conſtitution ; and only came ſhort of the Phenicians and Ca- 
naamtes in ſacred Architecture of Stone; for the Phenicians had 
many Temples for their many Gods: and yet the one Temple or 
Tabernacle of the one true God at Shiloh, exceeded them all in 
Wiſdom and Beauty, though not in Strength and Dimenſions. 

S Mean 

* 

(10) 
Mean while, in Leſer Ala, about 10 Years before the Exodus 
of Moſes, Troy was founded and ſtood ſublime till deſtroy'd 
by the emulous Greeks, about the 12th Year of Toa Judge of 

Jfrael. A. M. 2819. 

And ſoon after the Exodus, the famous Temple of JurtrER 
Hammon in Libian Africa was erected, that ſtood till demoliſh'd 
by the firſt Chriſtians in thoſe Parts. 

The Sipox1ans alſo, expert Artiſts, firſt built Tyre, and a 

Colony of Tyrians firſt built CARTHAGE ; while the Greeks were 

obſcure, and the Romans exiſted not yet. 

But the Phenicians improved in their ſacred Architecture; for 
we read of the Temple of Dagon in Gaza, very magnificent and 
capacious of 3000 People under its Roof, that was artfully ſup- 
ported only by Two Columns, not too big to be graſped in the 
Arms of Samson, who d them down ; and the large Roofs 
like a Burſt of Thunder, fell upon the Lords and Ladies, 
Prieſts and People of the Philiſtins ; nay Samſon was alſo intangled 
in the ſame Death that he drew upon his Enemies for the Loſs of 
Liberty and Eyes. After the Exodus of Moſes 379. Before the 
Temple of Solomon 101“. 

AB1BALus, King of Tyre, beautified that City; and ſo did 
his Son King Hizam who built 3 ſtately Temples to Jupiter, 
Hercules, and Aſtarte, the Yyrian Gods, and aſſiſted David King, 
of Iſrael in erecting his Palace of Cedar. 

Many Monuments of the primitive Architecture are obſcured 
with Fables; for the true old Hiſtories are loſt, or worn out by 
the Teeth of Time, and alſo the oral Tradition is darkened by 

the Blending of the Nations. 

— 

* 

* * _— — 

The Tradition of old Maſons is, that a learned Phenician called SancontatTHonN 
was the Architect, or Grand Maſter, of this curious Temple : And that Samson 
had been too credulous and efteminate in revealing his Secrets to his Wiſe, 
who betray'd him into the Hands of the P4i/iftins; for which he is not num- 
bered among the antient M2/oxs, But no more of this. 

(11) 

| CHAP, Ill. 
From SOLOMON to Grand Maſter CyRvus. 

UT the moſt magnificent Structures of Gaza, Gath and As- 
kelon, Febuſi and Hebron, Tyre and Sidon, Egypt and A- 
ria, &c. were not comparable to the Eternal's Temple at Feru- 
alem, built by that wiſeſt mere Man and moſt glorious King of 
2 SOLOMON, (the Son of David, who was denied 
t Honour for being a Man of Blood) the Prince of Peace 
and Architecture, the GRAND MASTER Mason of his Day, who 
rformed all by divine Direction, and without the Noiſe of 
ools ; all the Stones, Timbers and Foundings being brought 
ready cut, fram'd and poliſh'd to Feruſalem. 

It was founded in the 4th Year of SoLomon, on the ſecond Day 
of the ſecond Month of the Year after the Exodus —— 480 
and SOLOMON employ'd about it, tho* not all A. M. 2993, 
upon it, the following Number of Operators, viz. B. C. 1011, 
1. Harodim, Rulers or Provoſts, calPd alſo See 1 Kings V. 16.18. 

Penatzchim, Over/zers and Comforters 2 Ghrop. II. 18. 

of the People in Working, that were ex- 

pert Maſter Maſons, in Number — 
2. Ghiblim, Stone-Cutters and Sculptors, and Ich Chot- 
zeb, Men of Hewing, and Benai, Setters, Layers or 

Builders, or bright Fellow-Crafts, in Number ́ 980000 

4 

3600 

3. The of Aſſiſtants, under the noble AponiRam — 30000 
who was the Junior Gzand- Marten. — 
In all Free-Maſons 113600 

Beſides the Labourers called, Iſh Sabbal, or Men of Burden, 
who were of the Remains of the old Canaanites, and g 70000 
being Bondmen, are not to be reckoned among Maſons, 

In all — 183,600 
C 2 SOLOMON 

(12) 

SOLOMON had the Labourers of his own; but was much 
obliged to HIRAM King of Tyre, for many of the Ghiblim 
and Bonat, who lent him his beft Artiſts, and ſent him the Firs 
and Cedars of Lebanon: But above all, he ſent his Name fake * 
Hiram ABIT, the moſt accompliſh'd Deſigner and Operator 
upon Earth, who in Solomor's Abſence filPd the Chair as Deputy 
Grand Paſfer, and in his Preſence was the Senior Grand Warden, 
or principal Surveyor and Maſter of Work. Se 
SOLOMON 

— 
* 

3 —— 
— 

22 —— 

* In 2 Chron. II. 13. HiRAM King of Tyre (called there - in his Letter 
to King SoLomon, ſays, I have ſent a Cunning Man le Huram Abbi; which is 
not to be tranſlated, like the Vulgate Greek and Latin, Hur am my Father ; for his 
Deſcription verſe 14 refutes it; and the Words import only Hur am of my Father's, 
or the Chief Mafter Maſon of my Father AB1BaLus. Yet ſome think that King 
Hiram might call the Architect Hiram his Father, as learned and wiſe Men 
were wont to be call'd by Royal Patrons in old Times: Thus Joszyn was 
call'd ABR CH, or the King's Father; and this ſame Hiram the Architect is 
called SoLomoNn's Father, 2 Chron. iv. 6. 

Gnaſah Churam Abbif la Pelech Shelomoh 

Did Hiram his Father make to King S0LOMON. 

But the Difficulty is over at once by allowing the Word AnBIr to be the Sur- 
name of HiRam the Artif, call'd above Hiram Abbi, and here call'd Huram Abbif, 
as in the Lodge he is called Hizam ABB1y, to diſtinguiſh him from King Hiram : 
For this Reading makes the Senſe plain and compleat, viz. that Hi Au King 
of Tyre, ſent to King SoLomon the cunning Wor calld Hiram ABBiF. 

He is deſcribed in two Places, 1 Kings vii. 13, 14, 15. and 2 Chron ii. 13, 14. 
In the firſt he is call'd a Widew's Son of the Tribe of Naphtali, and in the other 
he is called he Son of a Woman of the Daughters of Dan ; but in both, that his 
Father was a Man of Tyre: That is, ſhe was of the Daughters of the City Dan, 
in the Tribe of Naphtali, and is call'd a Widow of Naphtali, as her Husband 
was a Naphtalite ; for he is not call'd a Brian by Deſcent, but a Man of Hre 
by Habitation, as Obed Zaum the Levite is call'd a Gittite, and the Apoſtle Paul 
@ Man of Tarſus. _ 

t 

(13) 

SOLOMON partition'd the Fellow Crafts into certain Lodges, with 
a Maſter and Wardens in each; that they FE 
might receive Commands in a regular Man- _ ** * 
ner, might take Care of their Tools and talk much of theſe Things. 
Jewels, might be regularly paid every 
Week, and be duly fed and clothed, Sc. and the Fellow Crafts 
took Care of their Succeſſion by educating Enter'd Pzentices. 

Thus a ſolid Foundation was laid of perfect Harmony among 
the Brotherhood, the Lodge was ſtrongly cemented with Love 
and Friendſhip, every Brother was duly taught Secrecy and 
Prudence, Morality and good Fellowſhip, each knew his peculiar 
Buſineſs, and the Grand Deſign was vigorouſly purſued at a pro- 
digious Expence. 

For beſides King DAvip's vaſt Preparations, his richer Son 
SOLOMON, and all the wealthy Maelites, nay even the 
Princes of the neighbouring Gentiles, largely contributed to- 
wards It, in Gold, Silver and rich Jewels, that amounted to a 
Sum almoſt incredible : but was all needful ; 

For the Wall round It was in Compaſs 7700 Foot, the Mate- 
rials were the beſt that the Earth produced, and no Structure was 
ever like it for exactly proportion'd and beautiful Dimenſions, from 
the moſt magnificent PokTico on the Eaſt, to the glorious 
and reverend Sanctum Sandozum on the Vet, with numerous 
Apartments, pleaſant and convenient Chambers and Lodgings 
for the Kings and Princes, the Sanhedrin, the Priefts and Levites 

of 

mm 

But tho' Hizam ABB1y had been a Brian by Blood, that d tes not from his 
vaſt Capacity; for the 7yrians now were the belt Artificers, by the Encouragement of 
KingH1Ram : and thoſe Texts teſtify that God had endued this HI RAM ABB1e with 
Wiſdom, Underſtanding, and mechanical Cunning to pertorm every Thing that 
SOLOMON required, not only in building the TEMUrIE with all its coſtly Magni- 
ficence ; but alſo in founding, faſhioning and framing all the holy Utenſils there- 
of, according to Geometry, and to "of out every Device that ſhall be put to him! 
and the Scripture aſſures us that He fully maintain'd his Character in far larger 
Works than thoſe of Aboliab and Bexaleel, for which he will be honoured in the 
Ledger till the End of Time. 

era 2 of = EPL | . a — 1 —_— : 
— —ů _— - - "EY * * . 3 — * 7 * __ * * e * 

(14) 
of Iſrael, and the outer Court of the Gentiles too, It being an 
Houſe of Prayer for all Nations, and capable of receiving in all 
its Courts and Apartments together about 300000 People. 

It was adorned with 1453 Columns of Parian Marble twiſted, 
or ſculptured or fluted, with twice as many Pillaſters, both having 
exquiſite Capitels or Chapiters of ſeveral different noble Orders, 
and about 2246 Windows, beſides thoſe in the curious Pavement ; 
and it was lined with maſſy Gold, ſet with innumerable Diamonds 
and other precious Stones, in the moſt harmonious, beautiful and 
coſtly Decoration: tho* much more might be faid, if it had 
not been ſo often delineated, particularly by Villalpandus. 

So that its Proſpect highly tranſcended all that we are now capable 
to imagine, and has been ever eſteemed the fineſt Piece of Maſonry 
upon Earth, before or ſince, the 2d and Chief of the 7 Wonders 
of Art, ſince the general Migration from Shinar. 

It was finiſh'd in the ſhort Space of 7 Years and 6 Months, 
to the Amazement of all the World; when AM 
the Cape-Stone was celebrated by the Fraternity 7 C. — 
with great Joy. But their Joy was ſoon inte- 104. 
rupted by the ſudden Death of their dear Maſter HI RAM ABI, 
whom they decently interr'd in the Lodge near the Temple accord- 
ing to antient Uſage. 

After Hitam ABB1Fr was mourn'd for, the {Tabernacle of 
Moss and its holy Reliques being lodged in the Temple, SoLomon 
in a General Aſſembly dedicated or conſecrated It by folemn 
Prayer and coſtly Sacrifices paſt Number, with the fineſt Muſic, 
vocal and inſtrumental, praiſing Jznovan, upon fixing the Holy 
ARK in its proper Place between the Cherubims ; when JeHovan 
fill'd his own Temple with a Cloud of Glory ! 

But leaving what muſt not, and indeed what cannot be committed 
to b tang we may certainly affirm, that however ambitious and 
emulous Gentiles were in improving the Royal Art, it was 
never perfected till the building of this gozgeous Houſe of Gop fit 
for the ſpecial Refulgence of his Glory upon Earth, * — 

_ awelt 

(15) 
dwelt between the Cherubims on the Mercy Seat above the Ark, 
and from thence gave his People frequent oraculous Reſponſes. 

This glorious Edifice attract 

ed ſoon the inquiſitive Connoiſſeurs 

of all Nations to travel, and ſpend ſome Time at Feruſalem, to 

ſurvey its pec 
Gentiles ;, and they 

joint Skill, came far ſhort of the Mraelites in the Wiſdom, Streng 

uliar Excellencies, as much as was allow'd to the 
ſoon diſcover*d that all the World, with their 

th 

— Beauty of Architecture; when the wiſe King SOLOMON 

was Grand Maſter of all Maſons at Feruſa- 
lem, and the learned King HIRAM “ was 
Grand Maſter at Tyre, and inſpired 
Hiram AIT, had been Maſter of 
Mort; when true compleat Maſonry was 
under the immediate Care and Direction 
of Heaven; when the Noz E and the iſe 
thought it their Honour to be the Aſſo- 
ciates of the ingenious Craftſmen in their 
well form'd Lodges; and ſo the Temple 
of JzHovan, the one true God, became 
the juſt Wonder of all Travellers, by 
which, as the moſt perfect Pattern, 
they reſolved to correct the Architecture of 
their own Countries upon their Return. 

The Tradition is, that 
King Hizam had been 
Grand Maſter of all Maſons ; 
but when the Tzurrt was 
finiſh'd, Hix Aud came to 
ſurvey It before its Conſe- 
cration, and to commune 
with SoLoMoN about // 
dom and Art; and finding 
the Great Archite# of the 
Univerſe, had inſpired 
SoLOMON above all mortal 
Men, Hiram very readily 
yeelded the Pre-eminence to 

OLOMON JEDIDIAH, the 

Beloved of God. 

SOLOMON next — the Fraternity in carrying on 

his other Works, viz. — 

is two PaLaces at Jeruſalem for him- 

ſelf and his Queen. The ſtately HALL of Judicature with his 
Ivory Throne and Golden Lyons.---M1LLo, or the Royal Exchange, 
made by filling up the Great Gulph, between Mount Moriab and 
Mount Zion, with ſtrong Arches, upon which many beautiful Piaz- 
⁊as were erected with lofty Collonading on each Side, and between 

the Columns a ſpacious Falk from Zion Caſtle to the Temple, 
The Hovsz of the Forre 

where Men of Buſineſs met. 

of 

Lebanon built upon 4 Rows of Cedar-Pillars, his Summer-Houſe 
to retire from the Heat of Buſineſs, with a Watch-Tower that 
looked to the Road to Damaſcus. Several Cities on the Road 
between Zeruſalem and Lebanon, Many Store-houſes We of 

; the 

(26) 
the Jordan and ſeveral Store Cities Eaſt of that River well forti- 
rify'd, —and the City Tadmor (call'd afterwards by the Greeks 
Palmyra) with a ſplendid Palace in it, the glorious Ruins o 
which are ſeen by Travellers to this Day. | | 
All theſe and many more coſtly Buildings were finiſh'd in the 
ſhort Space of 13 Years after the Temple, by the Care of 550 
Harodim and Fenatzchim : for Maſourny was carried on through- 
out all his Dominions, and many particular Lodges were conſti- 
tuted under Grand Maſter SoLoMon, who annually aſſembled the 
Grand Lodge at Feruſalem for tranſmitting their Affairs to Poſte- 
rity : tho? ſtill the Loſs of good Hiram ABBir was lamented. 
Indeed this wiſe Grand Maſter SoLomon ſhew'd the Imper- 
fection of human Nature, even at its Hight of Excellency, by 
loving too much many ſtrange Women, who turn'd him from 
the true Religion: But our Buſineſs with him is only as a Mazon 
for even during his Idolatry he built ſome curious Temples to 
Chemoſh, Polech and Achtaroth, the Gods of his Concubines, 
till about 3 Years before he died, when he compoſed his peni- 
tential Song, the Eccleſiaſtes; and fixed the true Motto on all 
earthly Glory, viz. VANITY of VANITI ES, ALL is VANITY 
without the Fear of God and the keeping of his Commands, which 
is the whole Duty of Man ! and died aged 458 | 
Years, | A. M. —— 3029. 
Many of SoLomon's Maſons before he A. C.- * 15 
died began to travel, and carry'd with 
**m the High Taſte of Architecture, with the Secrets of the Fra- 
ternity, into Syria, Leſſer Aſia, Meſopotamia, Scythia, Afſyria, 

| Chaldza, Media, Battria, India, Perſia, Arabia, Egypt, and 

other Parts of great As 1A and Ar RICA; alſo into Europe, no 
doubt, tho' we have no Hiſtory to aſſure us yet of the Tranſ- 
actions of Greece and [taly : But the Tradition is that they tra- 
vell'd to HERCULES PILILARS on the Veſt, and to CHINA on 
the Eaſt : And the old Conſtitutions affirm, that one call'd NIN us, 
who had been at the building of Solomon's Temple, brought the 
refined Knowledge of the Science and the Art into Germany and 

In 

Gaul. SY 

(7) 
In many Places being highly eſteem'd, they obtain'd ſpecial 
Privileges 3 and becauſe - taught their liberal Art only to the 

Freeborn, They were call'd Fa E Masons; conſtituting Lodges 
in the Places where they built ſtately Piles, by the Encouragement 
of the Great and Wealthy, who ſoon requeſted to be acce 

as Members of the Lodge and Brothers of the Craft; till by Me- 
rit thoſe Free and accepted Maſons came to Maſters and 
Wardens. 

Nay Kings, Princes and Potentates became Grand Paſters, each 
in his own Dominion, in Imitation of King Solomon, whoſe 
Memory, 4s 4 Maſon, has been duly worſhipp'd, and will be, till 
Arc bitelture ſhall be conſumed in the general Conflagration; for 
he never can be rivalPd but by one equally inſpired from above. 

After SoLomon's Death, the Partition of his Empire into the 
Kingdoms of Jrael and Judab, did not demoliſh the Lodges: 
For in 1/-ael, King IE ROBOAM erected the curious Statues of 
the two Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, with Temples for their 
Worſhip ; King Baaſba built Tirzab for his Palace, and King 
Omri built Samaria for his Capital; where his Son King Achs 
built a large and ſumptuous Temple for his Idol Baal (afterwards 
deſtroy'd by King Fehu) and a Palace of Ivory, beſides many 
Caſtles and fenced Cities. 

But SoLomoNn's Royal Race, the Kings of Fudab, ſucceeded him 
alſo in the GRAND MasTzR's Chair, or deputed the High Prieſt 
to preſerve the Royal Art, Their Care of the Temple with the 
many Buildings they raiſed, and ſtrong Forts, are mention'd in 
holy Writ down to Jos1an the laſt good King of Judab. 

SoLomon's Travellers improved the Gentiles beyond reſ- 
Gon. Thus the Syrians adorned their Damaſcus with a lofty 
Temple and a Royal Palace. Thoſe of Leſſer Ala became 
excellent Maſons, particularly at Sardis in Lydia, and along the 
Sea Coaſts in the mercantil Cities, as at Epheſus. 

There the old Temple of Diana, built by ſome Faphetites 
about the Days of Moſes, being burnt down about 34 Years 
after Solomon's Death, the Kings of Leſſer Afia refounded and 
adorn'd it with 127 Columns 1 2 Marble, each 60 Foot 

| 
: 
. 
' 

9. 

. 
high, and 36 of em were of the moſt noble Sculpture, by the 
Direction of Dꝛeſiphon and Archiphron, the Diſciples of Solomon's 
Travellers; but it was not finiſhed till after 220 Years in the 7th 
Year of Hezekiah King of Fudab. A. M. 3283. 

This Temple was in Length 425 Foot, and in Breadth 220 
Foot, with a duly proportion'd Height, ſo magnificent, ſo admi- 
rable a Fabrick, that it became the 3d of the 7 Wonders of Art, 
the charming Miſtreſs of Leſer Aſia, which even AXerxes, the 
avowed Enemy of Image Worſhip, left ſtanding, while he burnt 
all the other Temples in his Way to Greece. 

But at laſt, it was burnt down by a vile Fellow, only for the 
Euſt of being talkt of in after Ages (whoſe Name therefore 
ſhall not be mention'd here) on the Birth Day of Alexander the 
Great, aſter it had ſtood 365 Years, about A. M. 3680. when 
jocoſe People ſaid, The Goddeſs was ſo deeply engaged at the Birth 

of ber Hero in Pella of Macedonia that ſhe had no Leiſure to ſave 

Temple at Eyazsvs. It was rebuilt by the Architect Denocrates 

at the Expence of the neighbouring Princes and States. 

The ASSYRIANS, ever ſince NIM ROD and NIxus, had cul- 
tivated the Royal Art, eſpecially at their Great Nin1ven, down to 
King Por (to whom Jonab preached) and his Son Sardan Pul or 
SARDANAPALUS, CalPd alſo Toros Concoleros, who was beſieged by 
his Brother Tiglath Pul Eſer and his General Nabonaſar, till he burnt 
himſelf with his Concubines and Treafure in old Vimrod's Palace 
in the 12th Year of Jotbam King of Judah, A. M. ----3257. 
when the Empire was mary, between T1cLaTH PuLEsSER who 
ſucceeded at VINIVE H, and NA BON ASA R who got CHALD A A. 
See the Margin of next Page. 

| NayonassaR, called alſo Beleſis or Baladan, an excellent Aſtro- 
nomer and Architect, built his new Metropolis upon the Ruins 
of a Part of old Nimrod's Works near the Great old Tower of Babel 
then ſtanding, and call'd It BasyLon, founded in the firſt Year 
of the Nabonaſſarian Era. A. M. 3257. 

For this City BABY LOx is not mentioned by any Author before 
Jaiab, who mentions both Its Riſe and Its Ruin Sec Marſbant's 

Ch. XXIII. 13. ä 
NapoNAssAxR reign'd 14 Years, ſucceeded by Canon. on * 
4 Kings, 

( 19) 

Kings, who reign'd 12 Years, till his Son was of Age, viz. 
R . BALA DAN, or Mardoch Empadus, who reign'd 12 Years : 
and after him 5 more Kings, tho? not of his Iſſue, who reign'd 21 Years. 

Then follow'd an [nterregnum of 8 Years, ending An. Nabon. 67. 

— 

/ 

The 

„Ass Ria A. M. 3257. Sardanapalus being dead 
1. TIGLATH PUL ESER, called alſo Arbacer and Niuus junior, 
ſucceeded at Niniveh, and died 4. M. 3275 
A. 
— 

2 SALMAN Eszx died 3289, and his Son 3 SrNAcnII died 3297 

4 EszxHavpon ſucceeded his Father Sennacherib, and after he 
had reign'd at Nineveh 27 Years he 
took in BaByLon at the End of the 
Interregnum An Nabon 67. 4. M. 3324 
and fo annexed Chaldæa again to 

Aſjria. He died = — 3336 
— — 
5 SaosDuUCHinus, call'd in Judith, Nanucuonowosos, died 3635 
— — . — k 
6 CumiLapanus ſlain by his General Nabopolaſſar 3378 

NaBnoPoLassart ſometimes called 

7 Saracus ſlain by Nabo-[NeBucnapxezza, I. then ſeized / 
polar. 3392 |Chaldza and reign'd in the Throne 
of old NaBonassar at Babylon, 
years — 1 

. [till he deſtroy'd Saracus, A. M. 3392 
1. NaBoroLAs8aR Willing to pleaſe his Allies the Medes, demoliſh'd 
the Great Niniven. Thus BazyLon was now the Capital of the 

Mol. 
| The Medes revolting 
b NN Kin 
Affria A. M. 3: 
e their King 
1 Dzjocss, who in- 
adorned 

larged 
his CapitalExBaTa- 
— till ſlain in Battel 
the } 8 
y the M rian 334 

2 PutaonrTEs died 
* 
3 CrAXARES I. was 
the Patron of the 
Learned in the Fa, 
and died 3410 
— 

4AsTY AGEs married 
ARENA Siſter of 
Croeſus King of L 

dia. He died — 
leaving a Son and 
two TP VIE. 

———_.. os 

Aſjrian Empire. He died 3399 

2. NzBucyapnezzar\ JAuyTs the o- Craxanes II. K. of 
who captivated the ls; Daughter | Media, call'd in — 

ews adorned Ba- | of Afyages King | ture Darius the 
lon, died 3442. | of Media. Join'd his Nephew and 

— — 

3 EviiMexovacuſlain | N. N. Wife of | his Wars, reigud at 

A. M. 
— who ſlew Evik | zar 2 Years, died 3467 
6 * * ar E — 

ceeded Laboroſoarchod, | rei 3 TEAS. | CassENDANA the 
and was flain by Cy xus | ———-—— | Heireſs of Media and 

Son-in-Law Cyrus in | 

Manpantthe eldeſt 
Daughter, Wife of 
CAaMBYSEsa Perfian 
Prince, call'd 

ſome King of Perfia, 
the Father and Mo- 

3444 | ANTI | Babylon after Be/Gaz- | ther ot ** 

— — 
CYRUS the Grear, 

began the Perfian 
Monarchy 43468 

ARCH@D 1 Year. 

A. M. * 5 LaBoROS0-| Wife of Cyrus. 

| Canmr3zs King of Perfig, ſee Chapter IV. 

2 £3 

( 20) 

The Sciexce and the Art long flouriſh'd in Eaſtern Ala to the 
fartheſt Eaſt Indies, But alſo before the Days of Nebuchadnezzar- 
the Great, we find that old Maſonry took a Weſtern. Courſe :. 
For the Diſciples of Solomon's Travellers, by the Encouragement 

of Princes and States Veſt of the 4ſſyrian Bounds, built, enlar 
and àdorn'd Cities paſt Number, as appears from the Hiſtory 

of their Foundations: in many Books of Chronology. * 

After godly Josran King of Judab fighting for his ſuperior 
Nabopolaſſar, was ſlain in the Battel of Hadad Rimmon by Pharoah- 

Necbo, * * 3 394-6 all Things went wrong in Judah. 

For the Grand Monarch NzBucuapnzzzaR, firſt his Father's 
Partner having defeated Necho, made Jaſiab's Son Fehoiakim his 
Vaſſal, and for his revolting He ruin'd him, and at length captiva- 
| ted all the remaining Royal Family of Fudah with the Flower of the 
. Nobles, efpecially of the more ingenious Craftſmen, laid waſte: 
the whole Land of Jae, burnt and demoliſht all the fine Edi- 
fices, and alſo the glorious and Inimitable Temple of SoLomon,, 
after It was finiſht and conſecrated 416: Years, . 
A. M. 341 6. | 
2 C. 588. 5 oh lamentable ! | 
Mean while, Nebuchadnezzar was carrying on his Grand De- 
ſign of inlarging and beautifying BasyLon,, and employ'd the 
more Skillful Artiſts of Fudah, and of his other captivated Na- 
tions, to Join. his Chaldees in raifing the Falls, the Palaces, the 
Hanging Gardens, the amazing Bridge, the Temples, the long and, 
broad Streets, the Squares, Fc. of that proud Metropolis, ac- 
counted the 4th of the 7 Wonders of Art, deſcribed at large in 
many Books, and therefore needleſs to be rehearſed particularly here.. 

— —— 

8 * * — — = — 
. WELD * 

— 0 

F "9h Such as Beriſtbenes and Sinepe in PonTus*: Nicomedia, Prufias and Chal-. 
| | R cedon in BiTHy na : Bizantium (now Conſtantinople) Cyxicus alſo and Lampſacus 
| 6, in the HeLLEsPFONT': Mbdera in TRR ACR: Many Cities in Gx E: Tarentum, _ 
4 Regium, Rome, Ravenna, Crotona, Florence, and many more in ITALY: Granada, 
Malaga, Gades, &c. in Srain: Maſſilia and others on the Coaſt of Gavi : while 

Britain was unknown. og ? | 

: 
7 
=" 
BE - 
2 
A 
7 
3 
* 
1 
„ 
+» 
_ 
We 
KI 
3 
Lo 
= 0 
I ; 
IF = 
> 
a *X 
1 
5 
$ 
4 

But 

an 

But for all his unſpeakable Advantages of Wealth and Power, 
and for all his vaſt Ambition, he could not arrive at the ſublime 
of the Solomonian Stile. Tis true, after his Wars, He was a 
mighty Encourager of Architecture, a ſumptuous Gzand Maſter; 
— his Artiſts diſcover d great Knowledge in raiſing his Golden 
Image in the Vale of Dura 60 Cubits high and 6 broad, and alſo 
in all the beautiful Parts of his Great BasyLon :; Yet It was 
never fully peopled; for his Pride provoked God to afflict him 
with Brutal Madneſs for 7 Years,, and when reſtored, He liv'd 
about one Year only and died 4. M. 3442, but 23 Years after, his 
Grandſon Bel/hazzar was ſlain by CY RUS, who conquer'd that 
Empire and ſoon removed the Throne to Sus1awna in Perſia. 

he Mops and. Pzr$Sians had much 8 in the Royal 
Art, and had rivall'd the Afjrians and Chaldeans in Maſonry at 
_ Ekbatana, Suſiana, Perſepolig, and many more fine Cities, before 
They conquer'd *em in War; tho* They had nothing fo large as 
Niniveh and Babylon, nor ſo accurate as the Temple and the 
other Structures of SOLOMON. 

The Jewiſh Captives, after Nebuchadnezzar's Death, kept 
themſelves at Work in regular Lodges, till the ſet Time of their 
Deliverance ;z and: were thus the more capable, at the Redu#ion, of 
Rebuilding the Holy Temple and City of Salem upon the old Foun- 
dations 3 which was ordered by the Decree of Cyrus, accord- 
ing to God's Word that had. foretold his Exaltation and that 
Decree, publiſht A. M.— 3468, 

B. C. — 5 36, 

CHAP. 

| CH AP. IV. 
From CYRUS 70 Grand Maſter SzLEUcus Nicator. 

| „ 1. RUS now King of Kings, ha- 
5 ving founded the Perſian Monarchy 555 M. — 3468. 
| ; made his famous Decree to rebuild the (B. C, — 1 
| Temple of Feruſalem and conſtituted, for 

his Provincial Grand Maſter in Judah, ZeRuBBABEL the lineal 
Heir of Dav1p's Royal Race and Prince of the Reduction, with 
the High Prieſt Jeſhuah his Deputy; who next Year founded the 
ſecond TEILE. Cv Rus built a great Palace near Saras in Perſia. 
but before Zerubbabel had half finiſh'd, the good Cy Rus died 

A. M. 3474. | g 
ä 

2. CAMB LS Es neglected the Temple, being wholly Intent 
upon the Conqueſt of Egypt, that had revolted under Au As vs, the 
laſt of Mitzraim's Race, a learned Grand Maſter ; for whom the 
Fellow Crafts cut out of a Rock an Houſe all of one Stone 21 
Cubits long, 12 broad and 8 deep, the Labour of 2000 Maſons 
for 3 Years, and brought it ſafe to Memphis. 

He had built many coſtly Structures, and contributed largely 
to the Rebuilding of Apollo's famous Temple at Delphi in Greece, 
and died much lamented uſt as Cambyſes had reached to Egypt, 
A. M. 3478. | 

Cambyſes conquer'd the Land, and deſtroy'd many Temples, 
Palaces, Obelisks and other glorious Monuments of the antient 
Egyptian Maſonry, and died on his Way home, A. M. 3482. 

3. The falſe Smerdis, the Magian, uſurped during Part of this 
You, call'd by Ezrab Artaxerxes, who ſtopt the building of the 

ple. | | 

4. DARIUS HYSTASPES, one of the 7 Princes that 
cut off Smerdis, ſucceeded, married Artiſtona the Daughter of 
Cyxvs, and confirmed his Decree, 

80 

--... 
So that in his 6th Year, juſt 20 Years | 
aſter the Founding -of the Temple, HA. M. — 3489. 7 
ZERUBBABEL finiſh'd it“ and cele- BC. — 515, 
brated the Cape- Stone; and next Year Its | 
Conſecration or Dedication was ſolemnized. 
And tho? It came far ſhort of Solos Temple in Extent and 
Decorations, nor had in it the Cloud of Glory or Divine Shechinah, 
and the holy Reliques of Moſes ; yet being rear'd in the Solomonian 
Stile, It was the Kneſt Building upon Earth. 

In this Reign Zozoaſtregs flouriſh'd, the Archimagus or Grand 
Maſter of the Magians (who worſhipped the Sun and the Fire 
made by his Rays) who became famous every where, call'd by the 
Greeks, the Teacher of all human and divine Knowledge ; and his 
Diſciples were great Improvers of Geometry in the liberal Arts, 
erecting many Palaces and Fire Temples throughout the Empire, and 
long flouriſh'd in Eaſtern Aſia, even till the Mabometans prevaild. 
Yet a Remnant of 'em are ſcatter'd in thoſe Parts to this Day, who 
retain many of the old Uſages of the Free Maſons, for which 
They are here mention'd, and not for their Religious Rites that 
are not the Subject of this Book: For we leave every Brother to 
Liberty of Conſcience ; but ſtrictly charge him carefully to main- 
tain the Cement of the Lodge, and the 3 Articles of Noan. 
Zoroaſtres was ſlain by Argaſp the Scythian, A. M. 3517. and 
Hyſtaſpes died 3518. | 

mm Aged 

7 5. X ER XES his Son ſucceeded, who encouraged the Magian 
Maſons, and deſtroy'd all the Image-Temples (except That of 

Diana at Epheſus) in his Way to Greece, with an Army of-5 Mil- 

lions, and Ships paſt Number : But the confederated Greeks 
ſhamefully beat this common Enemy both at Sea and Land, 
A. M. 3525, at laſt Xerxes was murder'd, A. M. 3539. 

X 

6. ARTAXERXES Longimanus his Son ſucceeded, call'd 
Abaſhuerus ; and he married the handſome Jeweſi Queen Heſter, In 
his 3d Year he made a Feaſt during 6 Months, for all his Princes 

and Servants, at his Palace of Suſa or Suſiana; and the Drinking. 
WAS + 

— Prune 
ow 

(24 ) 
was according to the Law; None was compelld, for ſo the Ring 
had \ to all the Officers of his Houſe, that they ſhould do 
according to every Man's Pleaſure, Eſt. I. g. &c. 

He ſent Ez RA the learned Scribe to ſucceed Zerubbabel, who 
built Synagogues in every City: And next NEHEMIAR who re- 
built the Walls of Jeruſalem, and obliged the richer People to 
fill that City with fine Houſes ; whereby it recover'd its antient 
Splendor, When Abaſbuerus died A. M. 3580. 

. Malaga) + | 
7. XERXES his Son by Queen HxSs HER ſucceeded, but 
reign'd only 45 Days, being murder'd by 

8. SOGDIANUS the Baſtard of Abaſbuerus who reign'd 6 

Months till deſtroy'd 1 | 

9. DARIUS NOTHUS, another Baſtard of that King 
who reign'd 19 Years | 

In his 15th Year Nehemiah made his laſt AM 
Reformation; and Malachi being dead, we 7 c. 77 
read no more of the Prophets. | n 

This Year Nornus 2 Leave to Sanballat to build the 
Samaritan Temple on Mount Gerizzim, like That of Feruſalem, 
and made his Son - in- Law 

Manaſſeh the High Prieſt of it; (from the ſaid A. M. 3595. 
and It ſtood ſplendid till Jon x during Years — 279. 
Hyrcanvs, the Aſmonean Kin 
and High Prieſt demoliſht it: when till——— 4. M. 3874. 
alſo he made the Idumeans or Edo- B. C. — 1 ef 
mites conform to the Law of Moſes. 

Aſter Nebemiab, the High Pꝛieſt of Feru/alem for the Time 
being, was the Provincial Grand Maſter of Fudea, firſt under 
the Kings of Perſia, and afterwards under the Grecian Kings of 
Egypt and Syria. Darius Nothus died A. M. 3599. 

A 

10. ARTAXE RXES Mnemon his Son ſucceeded 46 Years. 

He was a great Encourager of the Craft, eſpecially after the Aſcent 
of his Brother Cyras, and the Retreat of Xenophon A. M. 3603. 

In 

(23) | 
In his 12th Year the brave Conox rebuilt the Walls of Athens, 
The King died, A. M. 3645. | 

A — 8 
11. DARIUS OCH Us his Son ſucceeded 21 Years, 

In his 6th Year, A. M. 3651. MavsoLus King of Caria, in 
Leſſer Aſia died, and next Year his mournful Widow Ax TEN 1814 
(alſo his Siſter) founded for him a moſt ſplendid Sepulchral 
Monument at Halicarnaſſus, of the beſt Marble, (Hence all great 
Tombs are call'd Mauſoleums)-in Length from North to South 
63 Cubits in Circuit, 411 Foot, and in Height 140 Foot, ſurrounded 
with 136 Columns of moſt accurate Sculpture, and the Fronts Eaſt 
and Weſt had Arches 73 Foot wide, with a Pyramid on the fide 
Wall, ending in a pointed Broch, on which was a Coach with 4 
Horſes of one Marble Stone. All was perform'd by the 4 beſt 
Maſons of the Age, viz. Scopas, Leochares, Timotbeus and Briax, 
It is reckoned the 5th of the 7 Wonders of Art. 

Ochus was murder'd by his favourite Eunuch Bagoas, who ſet up, 

C —— 8 8 

12. ARS E S his youngeſt Son, (the reſt being murder'd) 3667. 
But Bagoas fearing ARsts, murder'd him in two Years, and ſet up 
one of the Royal Family, viz. | 

13, DARIUS CODOMANNUS, who began to reign 3669. 
Bagoas prepared a Doſe of Poiſon for him, but Darius made 
him drink it - himſelf. He reign'd 6 Years, till conquer'd by 
Alexander the Great. 

At length the Royar ArT flouriſh'd in Greece, Indeed we 
read of the old Dedalus and his Sons, the Imitators of the Egyptians 
and Phenicians, of the little Labyrinth in Crete, and the larger 
at Lemnos, of the Arts and Sciences early at Athenes and Sicyon, 
Candia and Sicily before the Trojan Var; of the Temples of 

upiter Olympius, Eſculapius, Sc. of the Trejan Horſe, and other 

hings : But we are all in Darkneſs, Fable and Uncertainty till 
the Olympiads, N 
E Now 

| (26) 

Now the 35th Year of Uzziah King of Judab is the firſt Year 
of the firſt OLVMPIAD 5A. M. 3228.5 before the Founding 
when ſome of their bright CB. C 71 of Rome 28 Years. 
Men began to travel. 

So that their moſt antient famous Buildings, as the Cittadel of 
Athenes, the Court of Areopagus, the Parthenion or Temple of 
Minerva, the Temples of Theſeus and Apollo, their Porticos and 
Forums, Theatres and Gymnaſiums, ſtately publick Halls, curious 
Bridges, regular Fortifications, ſtout Ships of War, and magnifi- 
cent Palaces, with their beſt Statues and Sculpture, were All of 
em, either at firſt erected, or elſe rebuilt fine, even after the Temple 
of ZERUBBABEL ; for 

TRALES MiLes1vs, their firft Philoſopher, died eleven 
Years only before the Decree of Cyrus ; and the ſame Year 
3457, PYTHAGORAS, his Scholar, travelPd into Egypt ; while 
P1S1STRATVUS, the Tyrant of Athenes, began to collect the firſt 
Library in Greece. | 

PYTHAGORAS liv'd 22 Years a_ the Egyptian Prieſts 
till ſent by Cambyſes to Babylon and Perſia, A. M. 3480, where he 
pickt up great Knowledge among the Chaldean Magians and 
Babyloniſh Jews; and return'd to Greece the Year that Zerubbabel's 
Temple was finiſh'd A. M. 3489. | 

He became, not only the Head of a new Religion of Patch 
Work, but likewiſe of an Academy or Lodge of good Geometri- 
cians, to whom he communicated a Se- 
cret * viz. That amazing Propoſition which * Euclid. lib. 1. Prop. 
is the Poundation of all Maſonry, of what- XLVII. 
ever Materials or Dimenſions, call'd by 8 
Maſons his HEUREKA ; becauſe They think It was his own 
Invention. 

But after Pytbagoras, GxroMETRY was the darling Study of 
the Greeks, and their learned Men reduced the noble Science to. 
the Uſe of the ingenious Mechanicks of all Sorts, that perform by. 
Geometry as well as the Operators in Stone or Brick. f 

And. 

(27) 

And as Masonay kept pace with Geometry, ſo many Lodges 
appear'd, eſpecially in the Grecian Republicks, where Liberty, 
Wade and Learning flouriſn'd; as at Sicyon, Athenes, Corinth and 
Cities of Jonia, till They arrived at their beautiful Doexic, Ionic 
and Cox ix THIAN Orders: And their Improvements were ſoon 
diſ-over'd to the Perſians with a Vengeance, when They defeated 
Aerxes, A. M. 3525. 

GREECE now abounded with the beſt ArchitefFs, Sculptors, 
Statuaries, Painters and other fine Deſigners, moſt of em edu- 
cated at the Academies of Athenes and Sicyon, who Inſtructed many 
Artiſts and Fellow Crafts to be the beſt Operators upon Earth : 
So that the Nations of Aſia and Africa, who had taught the Greeks, 
were now taught by *em. 

The learned Greeks rightly judging, that the Rules of the beau- 
tiful Proportions in Architecture ſhould be taken from the Pro- 
portions of the Human Body, their fine Painters and Statuaries 
were eſteem'd Architets, and were then actually ſo (even as 
afterwards true old Maſonry was revived in [taly 
by the Painters ) nor could They have been See Chap. VII. 
fine Painters without being ArchiteFs. 

Therefore ſeveral of thoſe in the Margin below, excellent 
Painters and Philoſophers, are in the Lift of antient Architefs : 
Nay They all openly taught Geometry, and many of 'em practis'd 
Maſonry ; and being Gentlemen of good Repute, They were 
generally at the Head of the Craft, highly uſeful to the Fellow 
Crafts, by their Deſigns and fine Drawings, and bred them up 

—— 
— 

* No Country but Greece could now boaſt of ſuch Men as AMycon, Phidias, 
Demon, Androcides, Meton, Anaxagoras, Dipænus and Scyllis, Glycon, Alcamenes, 
Praxitiles, Polycletus, Lyfippus, Peneus, Euphranor, Perſeus, Philoftratus, Zeuxic, 
Appollodorus, Parbaſius, Timanthes, Eupompus, Pamphilus, Apelles, Artemones, 
Socrates, Eudoxus, Metrodorus (who wrote of Maſonry) and the excellent 
Theodorus Cyrenæus, who amplity'd Geometry, and 
pre the Art Analytic, thn Maſter of the divine Plat died A.M. 3656. 

LATO“, from whole School came Xenocrates and B. C.--.348, 
Ariſtotle the Preceptor of Al Ex AX DER the Great. 

E 2 clever 

(28 ) 
lever Artiſts : Only by a Law in Greece, no Slave was allowed 
to learn the 7 liberal Sciences, or thoſe 
of the Freeborn * ; ſo that in Greece alſo * According to the old 
They were call'd FR E Masons, and in Conftitutins Theſe are, 
their many Lodges, the Noble and Learned ': 8 EK n 
were accepted as Brothers, down to the 4 OE TX Mufie. 
Days of ALEXANDER the Great, and 7. Afronony. 
W for _ Ages. | 

That warlike Prince began to reign in 
Macedonia a little before 3 us — =; M. 3669. 
began in Perſia, and next Year ALEXANDER F. 339». 
entering 4/ia , won the Battel of Granicus ; and next Year the 
Battel of Ius, and next Year took in Tyre and Gaza, and over- 
ran HOP! and next Year won the Battel of Arbela, after which 
72 ot =: flying my Bactria, was murder'd by his General 

45, after reign hen the Perſian Monarch 
6 Years. After Cyrus began 4: M. 3674. ended, and —— — 
207 Years. B.C.--- 330. Smenced. 

But tho? from Ambition AL RxXAN DER order'd Denocrates the 
Architef to found Alexandria in Egypt, yet he is not reckon'd a 
Mason ; becauſe at the Inſtigation of a drunken Whore, in his. 
Revels, he burnt the rich and ſplendid Perſepolis, a City of 
Palaces in the beſt Stile, which uo true Maſon would do, was be 
ever fo drunk. 

He found the Loſs of that fine City when He returned from 
India, but did not retrieve it: Nor did he encourage the noble 
Propofal of Denocrates to diſpoſe Mount Athos in the Form of the 
King's Statue, with a City in one Hand, and in the other Hand 
a large Lake to water the City: Only He deſtroy'd no more 
Monuments of Art. Indeed he lov'd Apelles who drew his Picture, 
and Lyſippus who formed his Statue, and intended to encourage 
Arts and Sciences throughout the World ; but he was prevented by 

dying drunk at Babylon, 6 Yearsafter Copomannvus. A. M. 3680. 
B. C---324. 

ALEXANDER 

2 * 5 nn n — "0 
Z 

(29) 
ALEXANDER left his new Grecian Monarchy to be partition'd 
among his Generals, which may be ſaid to commence 12 Years 
after his Death, when SzLEvcus Nicator took in BaBYLON and 

began the Seleucian Era. 
A. M. 3092-? 
B. Coen 12. 

— 

C. HAF. V. 
From SELEUCUS 70 Grand Maſter Aueusrus CæsAR. 

QELEUCHSE Nicator prov'd an excellent Grand Maſter, 

founded the Great Seleucia on the Euphrates for his Deputy 

in the Eaſt; and in the Yet He built his ſtately Capital City 

the famous Ax r lock in old Syria, with the Great Grove of 

Daphne, a ſacred Aſylum, in the Middle of which He rear'd the 

Temple of Apoll Lo and DIANA (tho? It prov'd afterwards the 

Temple of Venus and Batchus) and alſo the leſſer Cities of old | 
Syria, as Apamia, Berrea, Seleucia, Laodicea, Edeſſa, Pella, &c. 

and having reigned 33 Years He died A. M. 3725. 

\ 

f md — 
Ax rTIochus Soter ſucceeded his Father, and died A. M. 3744. 

* * 

Ax riocnus Trees ſucceeded his Father, and died A. M. 3759, 
the Progenitor of a long Royal Race that were all ſet aſide by 
PomPty. But in the 4th Year of Theos 

ARSACES, a noble Parthian, revolted from the Syro Grecian. 
Kings, and founded the famous Kingdom 
of Parthia, Anno Ere Seleuci 57. in A. M. 3748. 
Eaſtern Aſia, that in Time ſet Bounds to B. C. 256. 
the Romans. 

Yet the Arſacidæ, and alſo the Seleucide, being chiefly conver- 
fant in War, we muſt travel into Egypt, to find the beſt Free- 

Maſons, 

(30) 
. Maſons, where the Grecian Architecture flouriſh'd under the 
Ptolemaide, For | 

PTOLEMY SOTER had ſet up A. M. ——— 3700. 
his Throne at Alexandria, which he much A. C. 304. 
inlarged and beautify'd. | . 

Euclip the Tyrian came to Ptolemy in this firſt Year, who 
had collected in his Travels the ſcatter'd Elements of Geometry, 
and digeſted them into a Method that was never yet mended ; 
for which his Memory will be fragrant in the Lodges to the End 
of Time. 

Prol EM v, Grand-Maſter, * with | 
EvcLip the Geometrician and STRATON According to the 
the Philoſopher, as Grand-Wardens, built Traditions and the old 
his Palace at Alexandria, and the. curious Conſtitutions. 
 Muſzum or College of rhe Learned, with 
the Library of Brucheum near the Palace, that was fill'd with 
400000 Books, or valuable Manuſcripts, before It was burnt in the 
Wars of JuLivs CæsAR. Soter died — A. M. 3719. 

NS 

" PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS ſucceeded his Father in 
the Throne and Solomon's Chair too: And in his 2d Year he 
carried on the Great Tower of Phazo, founded by his Father, * 
the 6th of the 7 Wonders of Art, built on an Iſland, as the Light 
Houſe for the Harbour of Alexandria, (whence Light Houſes in 
the Mediterranean are call'd Faros) a Piece of amazing Archi- 
tecture, by the Care of his Grand-Wardens Dexiphanes and his 
Son Soſtratus, the Father built the Heptaſtadium for joining the 
Iſland: to the Continent, while the Son rear*d the Tower. 

* Some prefer to This the pou Obelisk of Queen SeMIrRamis 150 Foot high 
and 24 Foot ſquare at Bottom, all of one intire Stone like a Pyramid, that was brought 
from Armenia to —_ ; alſo an huge Rock cut into the Figure of Semiramis, 
with the ſmaller Rocks by it in the Shape of tributary Kings : If we may believe 
Crefias againſt the Advice of Bereſus and 4ri/totle : For ſhe is not ſo antient as is 

generally thought, and ſeems to be only the Queen of NABONASSiͤR. | 

PHILADELPHVUS 

(31) 

' PHILADELPHUS founded the City Myos Hormus on the Red 

Sea for the Eaſt India Trade, built the Temple of the Zephyrian 
Uenus in Crete, Ptolemais in Paleſtine, and rebuilt old Rabbab 
of the Ammonites, calling it Philadelphia, Nay he was ſo accu- 
rate an Architect that for a long Time all fine Maſonry was calPd. 
Philadelphian, or after the Stile of Philadelphus, He died A. M. 

3757 
3 & | 

" PTOLEMY EUERGETES his Son ſucceeded the 
great Encourager of the Craft, with his Grand-Wardens his two 
learned Librarians, viz. Eratolthenes of Cyrene, and Apollonius 
of Perga. The Library of Brucheum being near full, He erected 
That of Serapium, which in Fime contain'd 300000 Manuſcripts, 
to which CLEoPATRA added 290000 more from the Library of 
Pergamus given to her by Mark Antony; but all were burnt in 
Ovens by the ignorant Saracens to bake Bread for 
their Army *, to the laſting and irreparable Da- * 4. D. 642: 
mage of the Learned. 

EuBRGETES was the laſt good Grand Maſter of Egypt; and 
therefore we ſhall fail over to the Helleſpont to view the glorious 

Temple of Cyzicus, with Threads of beaten Gold in the Joints of 

the Infides of the Marble Stones, that caſt a fine Luſtre on all the 
Statues and Images : Beſides the curious Eccho of the 7 Towers at 
the Thracian Gate of Cyzicus, and a large Bouleutorion or Town- 
Houſe, without one Pin or Nail in the Carpenter's Work; ſo that 
the Beams and Rafters could be taken off, and again put on, with- 
out Laces-or Keys to bind *em. | | 

The Rrop1ans allo employ'd Carts (the Scholar of Ly/ppus) 
the Architect, to erect the great Colossus of Rhodes, the laſt of 
the 7 Wonders of Art, made of Metal, the greateſt human Statue 
under the Sun, to whom It was dedicated. 

It was 70 Cubits high and duly proportion'd in every Part 
and Limb, ſtriding in the Harbour's Mouth, wide enough to re- 
ceive between his Legs the largeſt Ship under fail,” and appearing 
at a Diſtance like an high Tower, | 

It 

(32) | 

It began in the 4th Year of Tho! ſome prefer to It the Statue 
Ptolemy Soter A. M. 3704) of Jupiter Olympius fitting on 

and finiſh'd in Years 125 a fine Throne in his old Doric 
Temple of Achaia, made of 
A. M. 37162 innumerable Pieces of Porphyre, 
It ſtood firm, Years —— 66> Gold and Ivory, exceeding Grand 

. and exactly proportion*d ; for 

and fell by an Earthquake 37822 tho* the Temple was in Height 

B. C. 2225 68 Foot clear, Jupiter could not 
the laſt Year of Proll zur ſtand upright. It was perform'd 
Euergetes. by the great Phidias, as was 
The great Colossus lay in That of Nemeſis at Rhamnus, 
Ruins, Years — 894 10 Cubits high, and That of 
even till 4 DP). — 672 Minerva at Athens 26 Cubits 
when Mahowias the 6. Caliph of high. 
the Saracens carried It off to 
Egypt, the Load of goo Camels. 

While the Greeks were propagating the Science and the Art 
in the very beſt Manner, founding new Cities, repairing old ones, 
and erecting Statues paſt Numbers, the other Africans imitated 
the Zgyptians, Southward in Ethiopia down to the Cape of Good 
Hope; and alſo Weſtward to the Atlantic Shore : tho* Hiſtory 
tails, and no Travellers have yet diſcover'd the valuable Remains 
of thoſe many powerful Nations, Only we know that 

The CARTHAGINIANS had formed a magnificent Republick 
long before the Romans ; had built fome Thouſands 1 ſtately 
Cities and ſtrong Caſtles, and made their great Capital CaRTHAGE 
the Terror of Rome, and her Rival for univerſal Empire. Great 
was their Skill in Geometry and Maſonry of all Sorts, in Marble 
Temples, golden Statues, ſtately Palaces, regular Forts, and ſtout 
Ships that ſail'd in all the known Seas, and carried on the Chief 
Trade of the known World: Therefore the Emulous Romans long 
deſign'd its Deſtruction, having a prophetical Proverb, Delenda 
eſt Cathago | Carthage muſt be demoliſh'd ; which They accom- 
pliſh'd, as in the Sequel, 

Thus 

( 33 ) 

Thus HANNIBAIL the Warlike, in his Retreat from Carthage 
to Armenia, ſhew'd his great Skill in drawing for King Artaxes the 
Plan of the City Artaxata, and ſurvey*d the Palace, Temples and 
Citadel thereof. N 

The learned S1c1L1ans, deſcended from the Greeks, follow'd 
their Inſtructions in Architecture throughout the Iſland very early, 
at Agrigentum, Meſſana, Gela, Ce. eſpecially at Syracuſe ; for 
when It was beſieged by the Romans It was 22 Miles round, 
and Marcellus could not ſtorm it, becauſe of the amazing Devices 
of the learned Geometrician, Architect, | 
Mechanic and Ingenier, the Noble“ * Calld the on 
ARCHIMEDES, till by maſtering an Maſons the Noble and cf 
ill-guarded Tower, the City was taken by Syracuſe 
Surprize on a Feſtival Day. But tho? , 
Marcellus gave a ſtrict Charge to ſave ARcHIMEDES, a com- 
man Soldier ſlew him, while, not minding the Uproar, the 
noble and learned Man was deeply engaged in mechanical 
Speculations and Schemes to repulle the Romans and fave Syra- 
cuſe. MaRrcgLLus ſhed Tears for him as a publick Loſs to 
the Learned, and gave him an honourable Burial in the. Year 
of Rome 537. — A. M. 3792.) while Hannibal diſtreſsd 

B. C. 212. 8 Hay. | 

Many of the Grecian, Carthaginian and Sicilian Masons had 
travell'd into the North and Weſt of Europe, and propagated 
their uſeful Skill, particularly in 7aly, Spain, the Belearic lands, 
and the Coaſt of Gaul; but Hiſtory fails, till the Roman Armies 
came there, Nor have we certain Accounts of the Chineſe and 
other Eaſt Indians, till the —_— navigated thither in theſe 
later Times; only the Wall of China makes a Figure in the Map, 
tho* we know not yet when It was built: Alſo their Great Cities 
and moſt ſplendid Palaces, as deſcribed by Travellers, evidently 
diſcover that thoſe antient Nations had long cultivated Arts and 
Sciences, eſpecially Geometry and Maſonry. 

Thus hitherto the Masoxs, above all other Artiſts, have been 
the Favourites of the Eminent, who wiſely join'd the Lodges for 
the better conducting of their various Undertakings in old 

| F Architecture: 

(34 ) 
Architecture: And ſtill great Men continued at the Head of the 
Craſt; as will appear in the Sequel. | 
From Sicily we ſoon paſs into Ir AL v, to view the firſt Improve- 
ments of the Romans, who for many Ages affected nothing but 
War, till by Degrees They learned the Science and the Art from 
their Neighbours. But 
The HeTRuRIans, or Tuſcans, N uſed their own natural 
Tusc ax ORDER, never uſed by the Greeks, and were the firſt in 
Italy that learned from the Greeks the Dorxrc, Tonrc and Corrs- 
THIAN Orders; till the Royal An was there conſpicuous under 
their King PoRsNNA, who built a ſtately Labyrinth, not inferior 
to That of Lemnos, and the higheſt Mauſoleum on Record. 
| PorxsEnNaA died in the Year of Rome 303. A. M. 35562 
the 19th Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, while B. C. 446 
the Romans were only engaged in ſubduing their Neighbours in 
Italy, and their Taſte was yet but low; till 
_ TURRENUS, the laſt King of the Tuſcans, bequeathed his 
Kingdom to the Romans; in the 6th Year of Philadelphus, while 
Pyrrhus deſtreſs'd Italy. TurREnus died A.M, — 3725 
The Tuſcans had built many fine ſtrong Places; and now their 
Diſciples were invited to Rome, and taught the Romans the Royal 
Art, tho? ſtill their Improvements were not conſiderable, till 
Ma RcELLvus triumphed in the ſplendid Spoils of Syracuſe, upon 
the Death of the Great ARcyimenes, as above. 4 
MaRrcELLus, the Patron of Arts and Sciences, employ'd his 
Fellow-Crafts to build at Rome his famous Theatre, with a Temple 
to Uirtue, and another to Honour; yet the High Taſte of the Ro- 
mans was not general till | 
Scipio A/iaticus led em againſt Antiochus Magnus King of 
2 and took from him all the Country Jeſt of Mount 
aurus A. M. 3814 
In the 1 5th Year of Pol. Epiphanes BC. I = Inthe Yearof Rome 559 
For then, with Aſtoniſhment, They beheld the unſpeakable Beauties 
of the Grecian and Afiatick Architecture, ſtanding in full Splendor, 
which They reſolved to Imitate. 
And 

( 35 ) 

And ſo They went on Improving, till 

Scipio Africanus (who had always a ſet of the Learned at- 
tending him as their Patron) took in the great Rival of Rome the 
glorious CARTHAGE, which he demoliſh'd againſt his own Incli- 
nation by Command of the Senate; for 

Delenda eſt Carthago A.M. 3858 _ of Rome 603 

The Account of its Deſtration B. C. 146 

is lamentable 
while Conſul MuMmmrvs the ſame Year fack'd Corinth, the wealthy 
Queen of Greece, who diſcover'd his Ignorance, when he threatned 
thoſe that carried home, from Corinth, the Inimitable Pictures of 
Hercules and Bacchus, that if they loſt em, They muſt make em 
good with new ones, 

Both theſe Generals triumphed at Rome in the | pony Monu- 
ments of Art, brought from thoſe Cities, that had been the moſt 
opulent and glorious upon Earth. But now the Romans were ſo 
wiſe as to bring home too the ableſt Profeſſors of Science, and 
Practitioners of Art. After which we read of ſeveral ſtately 
Edifices at Rome, built in the fineſt Grecian Stile: as the famous 
Palace of Paulus Em11.1us of the beſt Phrygian Marble; the 
Triumphal Arch of Marius at Orange in Gaul, the Three ſur- 
prizing Theatres of * Scaurvs at Rome, &c. 

The mighty SyYLLa brought the Columns of the Temple of 
Jupiter Olympius from Greece, to adorn the Temple of Jupiter 
Capitolinus at Rome, after the old one, built by Tarquinius Super bus, 
was burnt; in whoſe Time Jupiter was only of Clay, but now of 
pure Gold. 

Lucullus, the learned and brave, erected a fine Library, and 
a ſplendid Houſe with Gardens, in the Aſiatick Stile. 

— — 1 -_ _—_— _— a. — 

—_ 
—̃ 5 
— 

+ The one held $0co00 People at the Shows or Plays. It had 3 Scenes or Lofts, 
one above another, with 360 Columns: the firſt Row of Marble, each 38 Foot 
high, the 2d Row was of Chry/ftal, and the zd of Gilded Ward: between the Co- 
lamns were 3000 Statues of Braſs, 

The other two Theatres were of Wood, ſuſtained on great dries, whereby They 
could be turn'd round, and joined in one great Amt bi- Ibeagre. Plin. 

172 Pomery 

EZ 

Pour the Great, built a Theatre that held 40000 People at 
the Shows, near his fine Palace, and his Temple of Uidozy. 
Theſe and other great Men, during the Roman Republick, much 
encouraged Architetts and Maſons as their Patrons ; and in their 
Abſence, the Conſul Reſident, or the High Prieſt of Rome, or the 
Arch Flamin, or ſome other Great Man on the Spot, thought it 
his honour to be the Patron of Arts and Sciences (what we now 
call Grand Maſter) attended duly by the moſt ingenious of the 
Fraternity ; till the Republic was near its Exit by the Competition 
of Pompey and Cæſar for Pre-eminence, 
But Pomyzy being routed at Phar/alia, and murder'd by the 
Egyptians in his Flight, the Republic expired, and 
JuLivs CæsAR obtain'd the Pre-eminence —— A. M. 3956 
CæsAR now perpetual DiFater g Year of Rome 701. B. C. 48 
and Imperator, a learned Geome- 2 Before the Birth of Chriſt 44 
trician, Architect, Ingenier and Aſtronomer, being High Prieſt, re- 
formed the Roman CALENDAR B. C. or before the Chriſtian Era 45. 
He and his Legions had built much in Gaul, and at Rome he 
rais'd his Great Circus or Square, a true Oblong, 3 Furlongs in 
Length, and one in Breadth, that held 260,000 People at the 
Shows: alſo his ſtately Palace, and lovely Temple of Uenus, and 
ordered Carthage and Corinth to be rebuilt, about. 

100 Years after They were demoliſh'd. * mg Ken. 2 
But Cs R, intending firft to quell the Par- theſe Things. 

thians; and then, as Grand Maſter of the Ro- 
man Republic, to encourage the Science and the Art beyond all 
before him in univerſal Peace, was baſely murder'd by his un- 
rateful Brutus under Pompey's Statue; upon of | 
e. * 3960 5 
eminence was in Suſpence during 14 Years, ** = 44 

till firſt Brutus and Caſſius were loſt at Philippi, and next Mark 
Antony was defeated at AMlium by OcTavianus, who then con- 
quer*d Egypt, and finiſn'd the Civil Wars: and ſo the Grecian 
Monarchy being fully ended, the Roman Empire began 
In the Year of Rome 719 — A. M. 3974 
Before the Chriſtian Era —— _ 
| CHA P, 

(37) 
CHAP. VL 
From AucusTvs till the Havock of the Eoths. 

R now the Miſtreſs of the known World, became the 
Center of Learning as of Imperial Power, and arrived at 
her Zenith under 

OcTAVvIaNnus, now called Sebaſtos, or AUGUSTUS CESAR, 
who patroniz d the Fraternity as their Illuſtrious Grand Maſter, 
(ſo call'd always by the od Masons). with his De; uty AGRIPPA, 
who adorned the Campus Martius, and built the rand Portico of 
the RourxpA Pantheon, with many more charming Piles men- 
tion'd in Hiſtory. | 

Viravvios the Learned, the Principal Warden, by his Writings 
has Juſtly acquir'd the Character of the Father or Teacher of all 
accurate Architects, and clever Connoiſſeurs to this Day. 

Avovsrvs firſt employ*d his Fellow Crafts in repairing all 
the publick Edifices (a moſt needful Work after the Wars) and in 
rebuilding ſome of em. But alſo he built the Bridge of Ariminum; 
and at Rome the Temple of Mars the Avenger, the Temple of 
Apollo, the Rotunda calPd Galucio, the great and ſumptuous Forum, 
the principal and magnificent Palace of Aveusrvs, with ſome 
lefſer Palaces, the fine Mauſoleum, the accurate Statue in the 
Capitol, the curious Library, the Portico, and the Park for People 

to walk in, Sc. Nay, He fill'd the Temples of Rome with the 
moſt coſtly Statues, and wittily ſet up That of CI Ro ATRA (of 
maſly Gold brought from Egypt) in the Temple of Vaxvs. 

In thoſe Golden Days of Aucusrvs, the Eminent following his 

Example, built above 100 Marble Palaces at Rome, fit for the 

greateſt 

(38) 
greateſt Kings; and every ſubſtantial Citizen rebuilt their Houſes 
too in Marble, all joining in the ſame Diſpoſition of adorning 
Rome : whereby many Lodges appear'd, in City and Suburbs, of the 

Free and Accepted Maſons : ſo that AucusTus, when a yn, juſtly 
ar 

laid, 7 found Rome built of Brick, but I leave it built of Marble! 

Therefore the preſent Remains of antient Rome in his Time, 
and of ſome following Emperors, are ſo accurate, that They are 
the beſt Patterns of true Maſonry extant, the Epitome of all the 
old Grecian Architecture, commonly expreſſed by the Avevsr an 
STILE: and we now wiſh to arrive at its glorious Perfection in 
Wiſdom, Strength and Beauty, | 

But before the Death of Auouvsrus, we muſt travel into Fudea: 
The High Prieſts of Feruſalem had been Provincial Grand Maſters 
there, under the Kings of Egypt then Sovereigns A ? 
of the Fews, till SgLEucus Philopater King of B * 3824 
Syria ſeiz d Fudæa, or Paleſtin. His Son viz. ne. 

Ax locus Epiphanes cruelly perſecuted the Jeus till reſcued 
by the valiant Aſnonæan Prielt Judas Maccabens: for long after 
Zernbbabel and Feſbua the High Prieft, an ordinary Prieſt, call'd 
Aſmoneus, appear'd, not of the Houſe: of Fe/na, but only of the 
Courſe of Foarib, the Great Grand Father of Mattathias, the 
brave Prieſt of Modin and Father of Maccaszuvs. 

For the lineal Succeſſor of 7q/ua was ON TAS IV. (Son of 
Onias III. the laſt good High Prieſt) who being depriv'd of his 
Right by the Syrian Kings, went to Egypt, where He got leave 
to build a Temple at Heliopolis, like That of Feruſalem, for 
the Jes in Egypt and Cyrene, then more numerous and opy- 
lent than thoſe in Fudeea. This Temple was founded A. M. 3855 

But the A/monzans or Maccabees fought their „ 
Way to Pre eminence d It Trood ſplendid til 4. D. 73% 
againſt the Syrian Kings, during Tears 222 

and alſo obtain'd it as Till deftroy'd by Veſpaſion the Emperor. 
High Prieſts and Princes of the Fews, during about 130 Years, 
till- Mark Antony and Octavianus got the Senate of Rome to create 

| HzRoD 

( 39), 
Hop the Edomite, or Jdumean Few, King of Jules in the 
A. M. 3964, and by the Help of the Romans, Hzxop conquer d 
AnT1convus, and mounted the Throne at Feruſalem 

See the 11 2h #C 3367 
— Margin Before the Chriſtian Era 37 
Before the Birth of Chriſt 33 

Below. 

r 

* Marrarfias the A/monzen Prieſt died J. M. 3837. B. C. 167. 
And three of his Sons ruled the ers, vis. 

— — — enrbramnts — — 
＋ ET" — 

— — 

eee 2 JONATHAN owned a 112 Stwon the King and 
| Free Prince and High gh Prieſt, erefied over 

acted as High Priel Path Prieſt. Murder'd 38 28. Traths' Grave a loft 
Ruler I Monunient of bine Marb/ 

2 — 
ruled independent of the Tennis, all manera 4 M. 3868 
4 Jous HYRCANUS — Father Simon, ll he died 3897 
1 

—— 2 

5, Axisronulvs I. reign'd one 6 . 1 W 27 years, 

year, viz. A. M. 3 r and died A. M. ai . leaving the Crown to 
7 ALEXANDRA his idow, and rammen tote d the ire, ll he died J I 3934 
10 — 3 EW, 
1 his Mother died, was King * Ax tsrosotus II. u 
Prieſt 3 Months, till deprived by his Brother. © | far 6 Years till de- 
ored by Powyregy only to the Mitre, till capti- poſed by Pourgr 3940 

was re 

vated by the Parthians, who ſet AwTiconus 3964. | and poiſongd 

Hyrcanus was beheaded by Herod, . A. M. 3974 * |. * 9? 

8 3 Annen ee 

1 Wife of her firſtC o — up by che Par- 

Couſin, vix. thians 3964. reign'd 3 Years, 0 

conquer d by Herod and crueify d 

by the Romans - 3967 

LA. TM.” 
Henos I. an Si o fre Miner Hrtod's Queen, was 5 — III. 
created at Rome K. of Juda by him beheaded —— and by made High Prieft 

3964 conquer'd Autigonus his Order her two Sons were | by Herod, till 
and began to reign 3 't 88 bat they left a Royal D in 4 Bath 

and in the laſt Vear without Iſſue yy 

of his Reign — 33 

Chriſt 4. M. — 4000. was born but the rf Year of our A. D. or Chriftian Era, 
is A. M. 4004. See Page 2. 

— a — — a _ — © ras 
—— ome I En - — — — 
— — Ir De . = 

— — — 
— 

10 
| 
on 
i 2 * 

— 
— —ũ—ñ———— eee r 
8 
. 

(49). 

He get rid of all the A/moneans, made the Sanbedrim uſe- 
leſs, and ſer up High Prieſts at his Pleaſure, But for all his 
great Faults, 1 > arts 

HxRop became the greateſt Builder of his Day, the Patron or 
Grand Maſter of many Lodges, and ſent for the moſt expert Fellow 
Crafts of Greece. to aſſiſt his own Jews: For after the Battle of 
Atium B. C. 30. Before Chri/i*s Birth 26. | 

Hzrop, being reconciled to Auguſtus, began to ſhew his mighty 
c 

Skill in Maſonry, by erecting a ſplendid Grecian THEATR 

Feruſalem, and next built the ſtately City Sebaſte, (ſo called from 

Sebaſtos or Auguſtus) formerly Samaria, with a curious little Temple 
in It like That of Feruſalem. He made the City Cæſarea the beſt 
Harbour in Paleſtine, and built a Temple of white Marble at 
Paneas—— the Cities Antipatris, Phaſaelis and Cypron, and the 
Tower of Phaſael at Feruſalem, not Inferior to the Pharo of Alex- 

andria, &c. | 

But his moſt amazing Work was his Rebuilding of the Temple 
of ZERUBBABEL 3 for having prepared Materials (which with 
thoſe of the old Temple were enough) and proper Inſtruments, 

Hzrop employ'd 10000 Maſons (beſides Labourers) and marſhalld 

'em in Lodges under 1000 Prieſts and Levites that were ſkilful 
Architects, as Maſters and Vardens of the Lodges, and ated as 
Grand MasTER himſelf with his Wardens HIILEIL and 
SHAMMA1, two learned Rabbins of great Reputation, 

He began to pull down the Temple of Zerubbabel, not all at 

once, but Piece by Piece, and levelled the Foot-ſtone of this 

Temple of Feruſalem, viz. e 
After the founding of the ſecond Temple 

518 Years A. M. ——— 3987 
In the 21 Year of Herod and 13Yea : 

r 
of Auguſtus and 55 Julian Year. Before the Cbr. fra 17 

In the 4th Year of Olympiad CXC. and | 

of Rome 732. Before Chrift*s Birth 14 
Juſt 46 Years before the ſecond Paſſover of Chriſt's Miniſtry ; 
tor the Jets ſaid 46 Years was this Temple in Building, Jahn xi. 20. 

The 

DV S 

| 

( 42) 

The Holy Place, and the Holy of Holieſs in the Welt, and the 
great Portico in the Eaſt, were finiſh'd at a wondrous Coſt, 
and in the ſhort Space of 1 Year and 6 m; Y and 6M 
and the Reſt deſign'd by Herod in 8 Years more. = l 

When the Fraternity celebrated the Cape Stone with great Joy 
and in due Form, and the King ſolemniz'd Its Dedication by Prayer 
and Sacrifice, on his Coronation _ , AM 8 7 
Day, of the 3 iſtYear of his Reign, Before the Chriſtian - 
1 Before Cbri't Bis 3 

Foſephus deſcribes It 4, as he 1 
vie wd It, with the Additions built 6 
after Herod died, a number of the moſt curious and magnificent 
Marble Edifices that had been rais'd ſince the Days of SoLomon 3 

et more after the Grecian Stile, and much Inferior to Solomon's 
N in Extent and Decoration, tho* larger than That of 
Zerubbabel, and was by the Romans eſteemed the ſame ; for 
Tacitus calls It the fame that Pompey walk'd thro'. 

But It was not fully. finiſh'd, in all Its A ts, till about 6 
Years before It was deſtroy'd, viz. A. D. 64. | 

| At length | 

AucusTus having ſhut up the —— of JAM; for that all 
the World was at Peace, In the 26th Year of his Empire, after 
the Conqueſt of Egypt, 4 

The W ORD was made FL ESA, or the Loxp J xsus 
CRRIST IMMANUEL was born, the Great Architect or Grand 
Maſter of the Chriſtian Church. | - - 
After Solomon's Death 9717 In the Year of the Julian Period 4710 
In the Year of Rome 745>1n the Year of Maſonry or A.M. 4000 
Inthe Year of Herod 34 JB. C. or Before the Chriſt. Fra 4 

King HERO p died a few Months after the Birth of CHRIST, 
and, notwithſtanding his vaſt Expence in Maſonry, He died rich. 
Alfter the Birth of Chriſt 4 Years, or when ChRIsrT was going 
in his 4th Year, The CurrsTiIan Era begins A. M. 4004, 

Commonly call'd Axno Domini, — 3. 
See the Margin of Page 85 

Cl 

And 

| . 

And when Cbriſt was aged near 18 Years, the Great AucusTus 
died at Nola in Campania, Aug. 19. —— 14 
In the Year of Rome 761 „In the Vulgar Year of Maſonry 4014 
After he had reign'd 44 C tho' the accurate Year is 4018 
Years : when TIBERIUS I. his Collegue began to reign alone, 
who alſo encouraged the Craft. 

In his 2oth Year after Auguſtus, or the Vulgar A. D. 34. 
The LORD JESUS CHRIST, aged 36 Years, and about 6 
Months, was Crucified, without the Walls of Feruſalem, by Pontius 
Pilat the Rom an Governor of Fudea, and roſe again from the 
Dead on the 3d Day, for the Juſtification of all that believe in him. 

T1iBERIus ante d Pontius Pilat for his Injuſtice to CRRISTH; 
and next Year That Emperor died A. D. 35. 

The AucusTAN SrIIE was well cultivated, and the clever 
Craftsmen were much encouraged by ſome following Emperors. 
Thus even 

NERO, for all his groſs Faults, rais'd his brazen Statue in 
Via Sacra 110 Foot high; and built his guilded Palace, a Nonſuch. 

VESPASIAN, who commenced A. D. 68. ſent his brave Son 
TIrus to ſubdue the Fews. TIrus took in Feru/alem, when a 
Soldier, without Orders, ſet fire to the TEMPLE 
VEesPASIAN ſhut the Temple of Janus, and built fon Chriſt's 1 
the Temple of PRAcz. He rais'd his famous © 448 x £36 
Amphi-Theatre, when the rich ComyosrTz ( OE 3 
ORDER was firſt uſed. He order'd the Jewiſb Temple in Egypt to 
be demoliſh*d, A. D. 73. and died . 

TITUS reign'd but 2 Years. | DOMITTAN ſucceeded Brother 
He had built his Triumphal Arch | Titus, and rebuilt the Temple of 
with fine Ingravings; and a Jupiter Capitolinus, moſt magni- 
ſtaately Palace with the famous | ficent, overlaid It with Plates of 
Sttue of Laocoon of one Stone, | Gold, and had all the Columns 
and died A. D. 79. cut at Athenes. | 
 Dom1Tian built alſo the Temple of MINERYA, and That of 

the Flavians ; and rais'd a Palace more Grand and Rich Ho 

( 43) 

That of Auguſtus, with ſtately Galleries in the Portico, beſides 
Halls, Baths and beautiful Apartments for his Women, He died 
A. D. 93. ſucceeded by NRRvA, who died — 95. after he had 
adopted N 

| FRA JAN, whoſe Warden was Apollodorus, the Architect, 
He laid his wonderful Bridge over the Danube, built his noble 
Circus and Palace, his two Triumphal Arches, the one at Ancona 
ſtill ſtanding, and the other at Rome, afterwards pull'd to Pieces 
to adorn the Arch of ConSTANTIN : beſides Trajan erected his 
famous Column, a Pattern of the Kind, well known to all 
Connoiſſeurs. He died A. D. 114. 

ADRIAN ſucceeded, a learned Deſigner, and even a dexterous 
Operator, repair*d the publick Edifices, like a Wiſe Grand Maſter, 
built Adrian's Wall in Britain, his commodious Bridge at Rome, 
and his famous Mau/oleum or MoLzs ApRIANI, with accurate 
Collonading, and died A. D. 135. 

ANTONINUS PIUS rais'd his curious Column, and died 

A. D. 159. 
MARCUS AURELIUS countenanced the Artiſts till he died 

A. D. 178. dy | 

COMMODUS, tho? educated a Deſigner, turn'd vicious; and, 
in his Time, Painting and Sculpture began to decline at Rome, tho” 
not yet Architecture. He died A. D. 191. 

- SEVERUS built his Corinthian Epizone at Rome, and Murſever 
in Britain. He died at Tork A. D. 209, _ 
38 

CORACALLA erected his ſplendid Circus, and died A. D.215. 
Nor find we much more till 

CONSTANTIN the Great, who commenced in Britain Em- 
peror of Rome, A. D. 306. He repair'd and beautify'd Feruſalem, 
Drepanum, Troy, Chalcedon, Theſſalonica, &c. and rear'd at Rome 
the laſt Triumphal Arch in the Auguſtan Stile. 

For He removed his Throne 2 Rome to Bizantium, which 
he calPd now Conſtantinople, and alſo carried off all the portable 

Monuments of Art from 7aly, _ the beſt Artiſts to embelliſh his 
2 | new 

(44) | 

new Metropolis, where He built See Pera Ollas his Antiquities of 

at a vaſt Rate, many artful Piles, 
Forums, Hippodroms, Temples or 
Churches, Porticos, Fountains, a 

Conſtantinople, tranſlated into Engliſh b 
Mr. Ball, A. D. 1729. "—_ 

ſtately Imperial Palace and Senate 

Houſe, a Pillar of Porphyre of 8 Stones, about 87 Foot high above 
the Pedeſtal; and the amazing Serpentin Pillar with his ow 
Equeſtrian Statue, &c. He died A. D. 336. Nl 
- CONSTANS brought with him to Rome the famous Architect 
Horm1sDas the King of Perſia's Son, who was juſtly aſtoniſh'd 
at the antient Structures and Statues, and declared them inimitable : 

for now all the Arts of Deſigning 

at Conſtantinople. Nay the 

windled at Rome, as They flouriſh'd 
byiſtians, in Zeal agamſt Heathen 

Idolatry, demoliſh'd many curious Things; till | 
The Roman Empire was partition*d between two Brothers, viz. 

VALENTINIAN i. Empe- 

ror of the WMeſt at Rome. Now the 

Chriftians at Rome adorn'd their 
old Church of St. Peter's with 
the Columns of Adrian's Mole, 
but could not follow the Juſt 
Proportions of the Antients. He 
died A.D. 374. and this Empire 
was ſoon ingroſſed by the Eaſtern; 

and VALENS Emperor of the 
Eaſt at Conſtantinople, who was. 

-diſtreſs'd by the Goths, and died 

without Ifſue, J. D. —— 378 

THEODOSIUS. the Great 
ſucceeded, who built a fine Co- 
lumn like That of Trajan, with. 
his brazen Statue on the Top of 
It, and a great Circus. 

Tnxopos tus gloried in being the Patron of all the Deſigners. and 
Operators (the ſame as Grand Maſter) and loved them ſo well, that 
by a Law, he exempted all the Craft from Taxation. 

The Northern Nations of Europe, the Goths, Vandals, Huns, 
Allemans, Herules, Sweves, Dacians, Alans, Franks, - Gepidans, 
Saxons, Angles,. Longobards, and many more, had gradually grown 
powerful as the Roman Empire decay'd, and invaded Greece, Aſia, 
Gaul, Spain and Africa, nay Italy Itſelf, over-running the polite 
World like a Deluge,' with warlike Rage and groſs Ignorance, the 
Enemies of Arts and Sciences. | 

But Tnropos us ſtopt their Carrier, became ſole Emperor of 

the Eaſt and Vet, and died A. D. 395. 
| THzo- 

Es 

1 Ae ce 

n 48 

0 
£ 

(/45,.) 

Tuzoposrus divided the be Empire | between. his two Sons, viz 

HONORIUS, Emperor of the Wet at 
Rome, in whoſe ReignMaricus the warlike 
Viſegotb took in Rome A. D. 409. 
Hoxo ius died A. D. 
VALENTINIA I 
whoſe Rel nATTILA the Han laid Huly 

waſte, and would have defttoy'd Rome It; 

but for the Prudence of the Biſhop. When 

he died A. D. — 455 
Ten nominal Emperors ſucceeded. Mean 

while GEN, ERICUS the Vandal came 
from Carthage, : 1 pl e 456] 

AUGUSTULUS. the Tenth of 12 
Nominal Emperors, fairly abdicated 

3 

Hr aus ine 

{ Obet 

— — — en 
—̃ ((— 

Ir tric peror of 
the at Conſtantinople 
1 who inriched that Ey 7 
with many fine Seruftires, 
and his'lofty Pillar, with 
a_Stair in the Heart of 
He 

t 147 Foot high. 
died A. D. 408. | 
Tu ropos u Fun; er a 
there Staties, Columms and 

Bs, the Spoils of 
Greece, and Aſia ; 
repair'd the great Church 

of St. Sophia, and died 449 

fear of Odoacer A of the Herules 4751 
So ended the A mpire, 4 2601 

en 
The Gornic Kings of Taly Mole 

viz. ODOACER King. of 2740 reign(dÞ 

17 Tears, till flain'by 
THEODORIC the Goth. A. D. 492 
He and his Race reign'd Kings of Haly 
during 48 Years, till A. D. 540. when 
 TOTILA was elected Nin 170 'Ttaly. 
But maliciouſly deſigning 

| 

to extünguifn 
the Name and Memorial of old Rome, 
TOTILA ſet it on fire during 13 Days, and 
had demoliſh'd about two Thirds of that 
lofty Metropolis of the World, before 
he was beat off by Belliſarius, A.D. 547 

O Gothic Ignorance 

The following Empe- 
ors of the Eaſt fupported 

vhs the” Lodges or Academies 

of the Artiſts or Crafts- 
„down to 

” JUSTINIAN I. who. 
began A. D. 526. 
He reſtor'd the whole 
Roman Empire almoſt 
to. its Priſtin Glory. 
Nay, in laudable Zeal 
for the Ausus r Ax SriIE, 
He ſent his General, the 
brave BXLLISA R fus, with 
an Army againſt TOTILA 
the Goth, whom he forced 
to run away; and ſo 

And here we may date the Total Depar- 
ture of the AucusTan STiILE in [tal 
and the Weſt. 

See Its Revival in the next Chapter, 

Belliſarius ſaved as much 
of old Rome as he could 

 JusTINTAN I. by his General Narſes, deſtroy'd Torrta 551 
He collected the Roman Laws in his Codex Fuſtinianus; and 
expended 34 Millions of Gold in rebuilding the Church of St. 
Sophia, which he intended to be equal, in Decoration, to Sol ouox's 
Temple, tho? in van. ko ib Th | | 
When chis learned Grand Maſter died A. D. 565 
. JUSTIN II. ſucceeded, who upon the Death of Teyas the laſt 
Gothic King of Naly A. D. 568. appointed the ExaRchs of Ravenna 
to ſucceed the Roman Couſuls, to rule Italy by the Roman Laws, 
and to ſtop the Incurſions of the LONGOBARDS ; which They 
did, till the laſt Exarch was expell'd by Luitprandus King of Lom- 
batt D. 24... gg 4 „ STADE 4 
. The LONGOBARDS began to reign in the North of Italy (from 
them called Lombardy) the ſame time with the Zxarchs of Ravenna, 
till conquer'd by CHaRLE MAIN, who; captivated Dęſiderius the 
laſt King of Lombardy, A. D. 77 1. But to return, 

JusT ix II. died A. D. 582. ſucceeded by TiBzRrus II. and he 
by Mauricus murder d P Hocas, and he was murder d by | 
HRA Ius, who com- | Now the 12th Year of Hzra- 
menced A. D. 610. Father of | cLiusA.D. 622. is the firſt Year 
Coxsr ANT IN III. Father of | of the Mabometan HECOIRA. 
Const ans II. Father of Con- | And fo if from this A. D. 1737 
$STANTIN IV. Father of Jusr 1“ We ſubſtract Years 621 
WAN II. murder'd A. D. 710. — 
When the Eaſtern Emperors cal- The preſent Anno Hegiræ is 1116 
led the Iconoclaſtes, or Deſtroyers | But the Grand Deſign of the 
of Images, began. So that here | MayomzTans was not to cul- 
we may date the Departure of the | tivate Arts and Sciences, but to 
AucusTANnST1LE fromthe Eaſt; | convert the World by Fire and 
after the Havock of TOTILA 163 | Sword: So that Architecture in 
Years, PR Aſia and Africa ſuffer'd by them 
Thus the AucusTANn STILE | as in Europe by the GO THS. 
was quite loſt, and the Loſs was ak en ” 7 Brit ; 

ublick | 
P * . g fi : ; 
N a - - - $5 0 «+ 
- 
* 
8 * . LS 
» 8 > 4 

- 

For 

* ö n 
. ren ee 2A n * 5 

Tea 8 

(2 

For when the Gothic Nations, and thoſe conquer'd by them, 
began to affect ſtately Structures, They wanted both Heads and 
Hands to imitate the Antients, nor could They do it for many 
Ages (as in the next er yet not wanting Wealth and Ambi- 
tion, They did their beſt: and ſo the more Ingenious gradually 
coaleſced in Societies or Lodges, in Imitation of the Antients, ac- 
cording to the remaining Traditions that were not quite obliterated, 
and hammer'd out a New Stile of their own, call'd the GOTHIC. 

But tho* This is more expenſive than the od Stile, and diſcovers 
now to us the Ignorance of the Archite#, and the Improprieties of 
the Edifice ; yet the Inventions of the Artiſis to ſupply the Want 
of good old Skill, and their coftly Decorations, have manifeſted 
their great Eſteem of the Royal Art, and have render'd their Gothic 
Structures Venerable and: Magnificent; tho? not Imitable by Thoſe 
that have the true High Taſte of the Grecian or AucusTAN STILE. 

. 

| CHAP, vnn. 
The REvivar of Old Architecture, ar the AuGusTAN Stil. 

— At. 

TJ HE Ko 4rt lies dead and buried ſtill in the Zaft, by the 

wilful Ignorance of the Mabometan Nations. But firſt in 
Ttaly It began to. peep. from under Its Rubbiſh: in Tuſcany: for 
the Piſans brought from | | 
Greece a tew Marble Columns After Tor 14's Havock, A. D. 547 

= 

and other Fragments of old Years — 466 
Maſonry for their new Cathe- — 
dral carried on by Busch Ero A. D. 1013 

the Greek, who firſt began to imitate the Antients, 

He join'd with Others to form a New Lodge, for that laudable 
Imitation, built St. John's at Piſa, and educated. many Artiſts. that 
long'd for the Revival, till I. Buono flouriſh'd at Ravenna, and 

built at Venice the Steeple of St. Mark. A. D. 1152, | 
| OLTRQ» 

p (48) 

\ OLTROMONTANO and Boxnxano built the Steeple of Pia 1174 
Marcnyione. of Arezzo rais'd the Marble Chappel of 

Preſepio at St. Mary Majore | 
James the German built the firſt fine Edifices of Florence, 

whoſe Son JAcoro ARNOTL FHO LaPo, with the Painter 

CiMasoius, deſign'd the Cathedral -of St. Mary Delfiore 1298 

CHARLES of Anjou, King of Naples, was the firſt Prince 
that publickly encouraged the Revival of the Arts of Deſigning, 
by employing the faid Cimaboius and Nicholas Piſan to build an 
Abby in the Plain of Taglia Cotzo, where CHarLEs had defeated 
the Pretender Conradin. Joan PisAx, ſon of Nicholas, built for 
the King his new Caſtle of Naples. This Royal Patron, (the ſame 
as Grand Maſter) of the Revivers, died A. D. 1285. And his 
Succeſſors inriched the Kingdom of Naples with learned Architects, 
and ſplendid Edifices. 

CimaBorivs and the Piſans, educated many fine Maſters 
and Fellow Crafts N 

Gloor ro the Architect; till the, þ 
Florentines arrived at a pretty good After ToT1LA's Havoke — K 

1216 

Imitation of the Antients, which “ Years —— 7538 
was diſcover*d in all the Parts of AD — 
the Church in St. Miniate. . 1300 

G1oTTo and his Pupils formed an Academy of Deſigners, or a 
learned Lodge at Florence, who, like thoſe of old at Athenes and 
Sieyon, inlightened all Italy, by ſending forth excellent Connoiſſeurs 
and dexterous Operators in all the Arts of De/igning. | 

Ax DbREWPIsAx, one of them, was made a Magiſtrate of 
Florence; and many of em afterwards floutiſh*'d Wealthy at Piſa, 
Ravenna, Venice, Urbino, Rome, and Naples. | 
_ LavRENnTIO GHIBERTO, educated there, conducted for ſome 
Time the Raiſing of the ſaid St. Mary Delfiore, and framed the 
Two Brazen Gates of St. Job's, of which, long afterwards, Michael 
Angelo ſaid in Rapture, that they were worthy of being the Gates 
of Paradiſe. | 7 | 
: | Do- 

(- 49 ) 
| DowATELLo next appear'd with Andrea Verrochio, the Maſter 

of Piedro Perrugino and. Leonardo da Vinci, prodigious Men! Alto 
Dominiga Ghirlandaio the Maſter of Michael Angelo and Maiano, 
and other ſublime and profound Architects. 

Let the Gothic Stile was not quite left off at Florence z till 

BRUNELEScH, having ſtudied at Rome the Beauty and Accuracy 
of the old Romax Buildings there ſtanding or proſtrate, return'd 
full fraught to Florence, where He eſtabliſh'd the ample and com- 
pleat Uſe of the Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Compoſite ORDERS 3 
and fo the Gr HI STiLz was. wholly laid aſide there, and the 

AvGuSTAN STLILE was entirely 

4 

ron After ToTiLan's Havock 547; 
Reviv'd. Years juſt 853 

This happy REVIVAL was yr 
alſo much owing: to the Coun- nen 

tenance and Encouragement given to the Learned, by the Princes of 
the Houſe of MR DICISs. Thus 

1. Joan de Medicis Duke of Florence, became the learned Patron 
of the Revivers, or their Grand Maſter, and carefully ſupported 
the ſaid Lodge, or Academy of Maſters and Connoiſſeurs, at 
Florence, till he died A. D. 1428. 

2. Cos o I. de Medicis, educated in that ſame 
Academy, ſucceeded his Father as Duke of Flo- 
rence, and Grand Maſter of the Revivers. He 
erected a fine Library of the beſt Manuſcripts 
brought from Greece and Aſia, and a curious 

LAuRENT 10 de 
Medicis, a Lord 
in Florence, ſlain 

1474. 

— 

Cabinet of the rareſt and moſt valuable Things 

that could be gather'd. He eftabliſh'd very great 

Commerce by Sea and Land, and juſtly, acquir'd 

the Title of Pater Patriæ, the Father of his Country, 
and died A. D. 1464. 

* 
— 

7 I. de Medici: upheld the Lodge, and died 
uke of Florence A. D. 1472. 
But he was not ſo Eminent as either his Father 

H 

or his Son. 3. Peter I. 

Joux JuLias 
de Medicis, the 
moſt beautiful 
841 and the 
moſt excellent 
Connoiſſeus in 
true old Archi- 
tecture in all 
Florence, 

This 

% w——_— 

(30) 

; I. 
.N Peter 

* 
— 

T bis Jo. 

Julian 

 4LaurenTIOl. de Medicis Duke of Florence, 

ſtiled the Magnificent, was both Horace and 
Mecenas, and Grand Maſter of the Revivers. 
He inrich'd his Grandfather's Library and 
Cabinet at a vaſt Expence ; and erected a 
great Gallery in his Garden for educating the 
more promiſing Youth ; among whom young 
Michael Angelo, as a Favourite, was admitted 

to the Duke's Table. | 
This kind Grand Maſter died g April 1492. 
— — 

5 PETER II. de Me- Jonx de Medicis was 
dicis ſucceeded Duke elected Pope LEO X. 
of Horence, upheld (1513. a zealous Patron 
his Father's curious | of theRevivers at Rome, 
Works, and coun- [eſpecially in Carrying 
tenanced the Aca-|on the gorgeous Cathe- 
demies and Lodpes, |dral of St. PR E xs, till 
till He died 1504, He died A. D. 1521. 

By his Wife By his Miſtreſs 
Duke Peter had Duke Peter had 

— 
6 LavRENT10 II.|7 ALEXANDER de Me- 
de Medicis ſucceed-| aicis, who ſucceeded 
ed his Father 1504, | Laurentio as Duke of 
Duke of Florence, Florence 1519, and by 
and Patron of the|the Emperor CharlesV. 
Revivers, till hedied | was made the firſt abſo- 
without Iſſue. 1319 Hlute Duke A. D. 1531. 
5 He patroniz'd the 
Deſigners and Operators, till He died with- 
out Iſſue, A. D. 1537. | 

N 

os 

Medici: 

tines to 

his Kinſ- 

Architect 

Peter's at 

1534. 

JuLIAx 

de Medicis 
ſlain 1478 
whoſe na- 

tural Son 

Joivsde 

was eleCt- 
{ed Pope 
Clement 7. 
1523, He 

ſubmit to 

manDuke 
Alexander 
1531. He 
was a molt 
Ingenious 

and carri- 
ed on St. 

Rome, till 

was alſo a 
dexterous 
operator, 
to the 
great Ho- 
nour of 
the Fellow 
Crafts. 
He died 
1498. 
e . 
Lewis, 
calPd 
Joann de 
Medicis, 
was edu- 
cated at 
Florence 
in Mathe- 
matical 
Learn- 
ing : but 
his Ge- 
nius was 
for War, 
and ſo 
affected 
the mili- 
tary Ar- 
chitecture 

He died 

he died, | 

1526, 

Lewis 

(51) 

Lzw1s, or Joux de Medicis. 

8 Cosmo II. de Medicis, ſucceeded Duke Alexander 1 537. as abſo- 
lute Duke of Florence. He Inſtituted the Knights of the Order of 
St. Stephen 1561. Por: Prius V. and the Emperor Ferdinand I. 
gave him the Title of GAT Duk E of Tuſcany A. D. 1569. 

He was the chief Patron, or Grand Maſter, of all the Lali an 
Deſigners and Craftſmen in ArchiteFure, Painting, Sculpture, Sta- 
tuary, Carving and layer why He Inſtituted the famous Academy 
or Lodge at Piſa for the Improvement of Diſciples and Enter'd 
Prentices. He made ſuch beautiful Alterations in the Buildings of 
Florence, that, like Auguſtus, when a dying, He ſaid, I found the 
City built of Brick and courſe Stone, but I leave It built of Poliſh'd 
Marble. He died aged only 55 Years, A. D. 1574. So much for 
the Revivers of the Art, in the Houſe of Medicis. But to return, 

After the Revival of the AucusTAN STILE in /taly, A. D. 1400. 

Lzon BaPTiISTA ALBERT I was the firſt Modern that wrote 
of Arcbitecture, and many excellent Maſons flouriſh'd in this 
15th . 3 but more were born and educated, that prov'd the 
Wonders of the World in the next Century, and will be ever 
mention'd in the Lodges with the greateſt Honour, for Improving 
the Revival, as if the Auguſtan Age It ſelf had revived, under the 
generous Encouragement of the Popes,, the Princes and States 
of Italy, the Patrons of the many Lodges then conſti- 
er 

BRAMANTE, the learned Monk of Urbino, ſtudied: Maſonry at 
Milan under CæSARTIANO; and after having narrowly examin'd 
all the Remains of the Antients throughout 7/aly, He was employ'd 
by 3 ſucceſſive Popes to. build at Rome the Cloiſter of the Church 
of Peace, the Palace of the Chancery, and St. Laurence in Damaſo. 
He adorn'd many old Churches with Frontiſpieces of his own De- 
ſigning, built the pretty little St. Peters in Mont Orio, rais'd ſome 
Buildings in the Vatican and in the Palace of Belvidere, 

Pope JuL1vs II. the learned Patron or Grand Maſter of Rome, 
retain'"d BRAMANTE as his Architect and Grand Warden, 1503 
and order'd him as Maſter of 3 to draw the Grand —_— 

2 0 

( 52 ) 

of St. PETERS new CATHEDRAL in Rome, the largeſt and moſt 
accurate Temple now in all the Earth: and the faid Po PE with 
BRAMANTE led a ſolemn Aſſembly of Cardinals, Clergymen and 
Craftsmen, to level the Foot-Stone of Great St. PxTER's in due 
Form, A. D 1507. | 

BRAMANT E conducted that Work 7 Years, till he died, and 
was buried in It by PoE LEO X. duly attended by his Craft/men, 
A. D. 1514. | | 

RAPHAEL of Urbino, the Prince of Painters, had learn'd Maſonry 
of his unkle Bramante, and ſucceeded him in ſurveying St. Peter's, 
till he died, aged only 37 Years, on his own Birth Day, 6 April 1520. 
when he was to be made a Cardinal by Pore LRO X. and with a 
univerſal Mourning was buried in the Rotunda Pantheon. 

FOCUNDE of Verona, and AnTony San GaLLo ſucceeded 
Raphael at St. Peter's, till They died A. D. 1535. when Port 
Pave III. preferr'd to that Office 
MICHAEL ANGELO, the greateſt Deſigner of his Time, and 
in his laſt Years the greateſt Architet, who finding fault with San 
Galle's Draughts, made a new Model of St. Peter's, according to 
which that lofty Temple was finiſh'd. 

This Grand Maſter leaving his Warden P1RRro LIOOR to at 
St. Peter's, erected the new Capitolium, the Palace of Farneſe, and 
other accurate Structures. He had before built the Mauſoleum in 
St. Peter's ad Vincula, with the curious Statue of Moſes, the fine 
Front of St. Laurence at Florence, by order of Pope LEO X, the 
| Sepulchre of the Houſe of Medicis by order of Duke Alexander, and 
the Apoſtolical Chamber at Rome. 

M1cHatL ANGELO certainly carried on Maſonry to Its higheſt 
Perfection, till he died at Rome aged go Years, on 17 Feb. 1564. 
highly eſteem'd by all the Princes of Europe; and Cosmo, the Great 
Duke of Tuſcany, ſtole his Corps from Rome, reſolving that ſince 
he could not have Ax ELO alive, He would have him dead, and 
ſolemnly buried him in St. Croſs at Florence, attended by the Fra- 
ternity, and order'd Vaſario to deſign his Tomb inrich'd with the 
three great Marble Statues of Architecture, Painting and Sculpture. 

James 

PF 
KF 
0 
4 
# 
* 
- 
7 
: 

„N | 

James Barotzi da VIGNOLA ſucceeded Michael Angelo at St. 
Peters, by order of Pope Paul V. but Ligorio the Grand Warden, 
for altering Angelo's Deſign, was turn'd out by PopeGrzcory XIII. 
VIOCNOLA, beſides his accurate Edifices at Rome and elſewhere, 
deſign'd for Philip II. King of Spain, the famous Escur1at, and 
St. Laurence, Maſterpieces of Art. He publiſh'd a Book of the 
Orders, and the Beauty of his Profiles is much admired; He de- 
ſign'd the Church of Feſus at Rome, the Caſtle of Caprarola and 
the ſide of the Palace of Farneſe that is next the Tiber, and died at 
Rome, aged 66. A. D. 1573. 

MA DER NI ſucceeded Vignola at St. Peters, and built the 
ſtately Frontiſpiece of that vaſt Temple, about the Time that Pope 
GREGORY XIII. made a New Calendar, or began the New STILE 
call'd, from him, the Gregorian, the firſt Year of which is A. D. 1582. 
Gregory dying 1585. was ſucceeded by Pope Skxxrus Quixrus, 
who employ'd 

Dou ix IcO FonTANA in many curious Buildings, and to move 
the Egyptian Obelisks into publick Places erect. After which 
Fontana was chief Ingeneer of Naples, and built the magnificent 
Palace of the Vice Roy. 

Tis endleſs to mention the ingenious Contemporaries of thoſe 
great Maſters, the other accurate Revivers and Improvers of the 
Royal Art, ſuch as | 

BALDASSARE PERVZZ1, who deſign'd and made the Model of 
the Palace of Chighi, and his Diſciple Sebaſtian Serglio. — Julio 
Romano, the chief Diſciple of Raphael, built for the Duke of 
Mantua his Palace of - /\ Delta, —— Lombard of Milan— James 
Sanſovino, recommended by Pope Leo X. to the Venetian: . 
Ferom Genga built for Duke Guido Baldo his Palaces at Urbino and 
Peſaro. — Pellegrino Tibaldi built the great Church of Milan, and its 
Dome was made by Jobn James de la Porta—Sir Bacrio Bandimelli, 
who was knighted by Pope Clement VII. for being a moſt excellent 
Sculptor. Benvenuto Cellini — Daniel da Volterra built pretty 
St. Helens in the great Church of Trinity dell Monte at Rome. 
Perrin del Vaga built at Genua the Grand Palace of Prince Doria, 

and was an inimitable Plaſterer, a fine Art then much in Requeſt. 
At 

( 34) 

At Venice alſo the Revival was carried on; for Focunde of Ve- 
rona, above-mention?d, built the Sone Bridge, and erected the ſtately 
Gates of Verona. 

When CHARLES V. beſieged Rome 1525, MickAkL An oELo 
retir*d to Venice, when the Doge got him to deſign the famous Bridge 
of Realto, ; 

James SAncovino conſtituted a Lodge of Architects (or Maſters) 
at Venice, artfully 8 the Dome of St. Mark then in Fe 
Danger *, embelliſh'd the Palace and Treaſury, and forti- 1527 
fy'd the whole Republick as Grand Paſter of Maſons. 

But at Venice the Auguſtan Stile was alſo well improv'd by the 
learned VINCENT SCAMOTZI, DANIEL BaRBaRo, and the great 
ANDREA PALLADIO. 

PaLLap 10's excellent Genius was highly diſcover'd by the ſacred. 
Edifices, the Palaces and Seats of Pleaſure, and the other charming 
Buildings of his, throughout the State of Venice. He wrote alſo 
with great Judgment of the ORD ERS of Old Arcbitecture, and of 
the Temples of the Antients; which is a noble Monument of his 
Merit, uſeful to all Ages. He died renowned A. D. 1580. 

Thus Italy was again the Miſtreſs of the World, not for Imperial 
Power, but for the Aris of Deſigning revived from Gothic Rubbiſh. 

But from the firſt Revival, the Maſons began to form New Lodges 
(called by the Painters Academies or Schools, as all true Lodges 
ought to be) far more elegant than the former Gothic Lodges; for 
inſtructing Diſciples or Euter d Prentices, for preſerving the Secrets 
of the Fraternity from Strangers and Cowans, and for Improving 
the Royal Art, under the Patronage of the Popes and the Halian 
Princes and States, as could be more amply prov'd. 

After ſhewing in Part II. how the Romans brought the Auguſtan 
Stile into Britain, and carried it off with em; and how the Gothic 
Stile prevailed there, till the Union of the Crowns. I ſhall ſhew 
_ e * Stile was revived in this Iſland by Ix 100 Jox xs, 
in Part III. | 

PART 

(55) 

TOTS ASTORSTOLOT SIO OTOL 2 877 Foxor SoroRofola 
BUN . r . . e . . ee DEM 4123912 Wi 

el 

The Hiſtory of MASONRY i BRITAIN, from 
FULIUSCASAR, till the Union of the 
Crowns, 1603. 

CHAP. L 
From Julius CAR to the Firft Arrival of the SAXONS 

in Britain. 

| ISTORY fails to tell, how long the Europeans in the 
North and Weſt had loſt their original Skill brought from 
Shinar before the Roman Conqueſt : but leaving our 
Brother Maſons of other Nations to deduce their Hiſtory of the 
Royal Art in their own Manner, we ſhall carry on our Deduction 
in the Britannic Iſles. | 
CESAR in his Commentaries gives us the firſt certain Ac- 
count of Britain. He landed at Dover A. M. 
on the 20th of Auguſt, and next Year BC. or Ch 1. K 3949 
He reached London; but purſued not B, G 20 rift. 357 pa 55 
his Conqueſts, becauſe of his Deſign to Nr Corye's BY 21 
be the GRAND MasTER of the Roman Republick. Let the 
Romans did not follow his Tract during about 97 Years, even till 
Aurus PLauT1us came from the Emperor Claudius, A. D. 42 
Next Year CLaup1us came himſelf, and afterwards he ſent Os ron ius 
ScaPULA, who was ſucceded by ſeveral: Roman Lieutenants, that 

ſoon formed Lodges for building Caſtles and other Forts to ſecure 
their 

Wi 

their Conqueſts : till the Emperor VESPASsTAN ſent his brave 
Lieutenant, about A. D. 77. viz. | 
JULIUS AGRICOLA, who conquer'd as far as the 
Imus, between the Firths of Clyde and Forth, which he fortifi'd 
by a Wall of Earth againſt the Northerns, But after he was 
recall'd, the Northerns got over the Wall, and made bold Incur- 
ſions into the South, till 

ADRIAN the Emperor came himſelf, [A. D.120] and finding 
the War tedious and hazardous, rather choſe to fence the Roman 
Provnice by a Rampart from Tine Mouth to Solway Firth, But 
afterwards Antoninus Pius ſent i + 90 

LOLLIUS URBICUS, who ſubdued the Brigantes, and 
repuls'd the Northerns, even beyond Agricola's Wall, which he 
fortify'd with Caſtles —— A. D. 131. 

After this we read of Lud, or Lue ius, a Briti/h King under the 
Romans, who became Chriſtian, and built Churches: while the 
War was carried on in the North with various Succeſs, till the 
Northerns forced Vir1us Lurus to purchaſe Peace with a great 
Sum of Money. This inraged the Emperor, viz. 

SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS, who came with a great Army 
— D. 207] vowing to extirpate them, but could not, even tho 

e penetrated to the Northern Sea; and having loſt 50000 Men 
in the Expedition, he was forced to imitate ApRI1an, and rais'd 
his old Rampart into a Stone Wall, call'd of old Mux Sever, 
or Wall of Severus, alſo Greme's Dyke, or Pid's Wall. | 

When Nonnivs PriLieeus [A. D. 238] came from the 
Emperor Gordian, EMILIUS CRISPINUS, his Maſter of Horſe, 
a fine Architect, built a pretty Temple at Caerliſie, the Altar Stone 
of which was lately found there, near old Mur Sever. 

The South Brittons had been long ſoftned in their Manners by 
the Romans, and affected their Politeneſs, wearing the Roman 
Dreſs, and ſpeaking Latin ; and abounding alſo in Commerce, they 
improv'd in Arts and Sciences, and found the Roman Conqueſt 
was a great Bleſſing to the Conquer'd, beholding with Pleaſure 
their Country, formerly all groteſque and wild, now adorn'd with 
- venerable Temples, ſolemn Courts of Juſtice, ſtately Palaces and 
Manſions, 

(57) 
Manſions, large -and beautiful Cities, regular Forts and Caſtles, 
convenient Bridges, &c. 
The joint Emperors Diocleſan and Maximian employ'd 

Caravgvs as their Admiral againſt the Saxon Pirates, who bein 
at Peace with the Pi#s, and gaining the Army, put on the” Purp 
and was own'd by the other Two. A. D. 287. 

CARAUSIUS encouraged the Craft, particularly at Verulam, 
(now St. Albans, Hertfordſhire) by the 4 
worthy Knight, Al BAxus, who after- This is aſſerted by all the 
wards turn'd Chriſtian, and was calÞd | old Copies of the Conſti- 
St. Alban,(the Proto Martyr in Britain | tutions,and the old Engliſ ' 
under the Diocle/ian Perſecution) whom | Maſons firmly believ d it. 
CaRavsivsemploy*d(astheold Conſti- — 
« futions affirm) to inviron that City with a Stone Wall, and to build 
« him a fine Palace; for which that Britiſß King made St. Al BAx 
«© the Steward of his Houſhold and chief Ruler of the Realm. 

« St, ALBAN loved Maſons well, and cheriſhed them much, 
« and he made their Pay right good, viz. Two Shillings per Week, - 
« and Three Pence to their Cheer ; whereas before he Time, 
« through all the Land, a Maſon had but a Penny a Day, and his 
« Meat, until St. Alban amended it. He alſo obtained of the 
« King a Charter for the Free Maſons, for to hold a general 
«© Council, and gave it the Name of Aſembly, and was thereat 
<« himſelf as Grand Maſter, and helped to make Maſons, and 
<< gave them good Charges, Sc. | 

When Diocleſian and Maximian abdicated, A. D. 304. 

CONSTANTIUS CHLokus ſucceeded Emperor of the Ht, 
a Lover of Arts and Sciences, and . much' encouraged” the Craft, 
till he died at Zork, A. D. 306. the ſame Year that his Britiſb 

_ Empreſs HELENA girt London with a Stone Wall. | 
PPE — 

CONSTANTIN the Great, their Son, born in Britain, ſucceed- 
ed, who partition*d South Britain into four Provinces. During his 
Reign . eb gion flouriſh'd, the Britons enjoy'd Peace 
and Plenty, and old Raman Maſonry * in many ſtately 
and curious Piles, till he _ A. D. 336. | 

| After 

(58) 

After. which, the Northerns joining the Saxon Pirates, invaded; 
the South, till A. D. 367. when 
TH EODOSIUS. (Father of the Emperor Theodofixs. 
the Great) came from the Emperor Laleminian I. and bravely 
beat them back, even over Agricola's Wall, which he. fortified 
with new Caſtles and Forts; and recovering. the Land af the old 
Meats between the two Walls, he made it. a fifth Province, calling 
it Valentia. He alſo beautified _ repair'd all.the Cities and. 
Forts, and left Britain, A. D. 3 
Maxiuus (call'd the Tyran) came next from the Emperor 
Gratian, who put on the Purple, ſail'd into Gaul but was de- 
feated in [taly by Theodofius 3 and beheaded A. D. 388. 
ConsTANTIN, a common Soldier, for the Sake of his for- 
_ Name, was choſen by the Sautherns to be their Leader, who 
22 on the Purple, ſail'd into Gaul, and was there defeated; 
headed by ü E. the Emperor Honorius. And now 
8 ius, not being able to protact the Scutberns againſt the 
Northerns, fairly renounced his Sovereignty over Rritain, the next 
Year after ALARIC had took in Rome, viz. A. P. 410. Yet 
Ex ius, the General of Yalentinian II, being victorious in Gaul, 
from Pity ſent the Britons one Legion under GALLI, who r d 
the erns beyond Mur Sever, which he rebuilt of Stone Work 
8 Foot hroad, and 22 Foot high: and being recalPd, he left the- 
South Britons to defend themſelves againſt he Northerns, and Car-. 
ried off his Legion, A. D. 426. 
tho”: the Raman Soldiers did not at All-depart til! A. D. 430. 

In the Vulgar Year „ U. 
After Cæſar s Invaſion, = Years, 
Aſter Aulus Plantius. came, 3 
Duripg which Time, e Meſonry in 
every — and had built fine — Number, even ta, 
the North Border, or the Wall of AcnicoLA, near which, 

at che Forth, they raiv'd the little Temple. of their God Tang aus, 
that ftands to this Day, now call'd by the Vulgar, Arthur's Oven, 
a curious Rotunda nber 8 at Rome, 20 Foot. 

* 

(39) 
high, and near 20 Foot in Diameter. Nay, in Times of Peace 
the Northerns might learn of the Romans to extend the Art to the 
fartheſt North and Mt, or the ULTIMA THULE. 

But true old Maſonry departed alſo from Britain, with the 
Roman Legions : for tho* many Roman Families had ſettled in 
the South, and were blended with the Britons, who had been well 
educated in the Science and the Art, yet the ſubſequent Wars, Con- 
fuſions and Revolutions in this Mand, rnin'd ancient Learning, 
till all the fine Artiſts were dead without Succeſſion, 

For the Northerns hearing that the Roman Legions were never to 
return, broke through Mur Sever, ſeiz d all the Nortb of the 
Humber, and ravaged the South the more eaſily, that the Soutberns 
were divided by petty Kings, till they choſe a General Monarch, 
viz. A.D. 445 

VorRTIGERN, who being unable to retrieve Affairs, the 
Conſent of his Nobles to invite the SAXONS in Lower Germany 
to come over and help him: and ſo Prince HNO, with 2000 
Saxons landed in Thanet upon Kent, A.D. 449. 

— — — —— 

C HAP. II. 

From the Firſt Arrival of the S AX ONS, 
To WILLIAM the Conqueror. 

THE Saxoxs having affiſted Vortigern to repulſe the Scots and 
Picts beyond the Humber, built THONG CASTLE in 
Lincolnſhire ; and being daily recruited from lower Germany, and 
the River Elb, they refolved to ſettle here; and after much Blood- 
ſhed in many Battles between the Britons and Saxons, they founded 
and eftabliſh'd their HeyTaRcny, or Seven Kingdoms, viz. 
1. Kingdom of KenT, founded by Hzncrsr, A. D. 455. 
2. Kingdom of Svusszx, by ELLa, — 491 
3. Kingdom of Wesszx, by Cxzapick, — 519. 
4. Kingdom of Essxx, by Encuxnwyne, — 525. 
5. Kingdom of Nox TWuMBR1Aa, by Ipa the Angle 547. 
6. Kingdom of EasT AncLes, by Urra, —— 571. 

7, Kingdom of MipIE AncLzsor MzxcIA, by Crina.g8 
12 And 

( 60- ) 

And as the Anglo Saxons encreas'd, the Britons loſt Ground';. 
till after the Death of Au BROS us Aurelius, and his brave Son 
King ARTHUR, the Britons had no Grand Monarch, but only a 
few petty Kings: but after CRI A landed, many of them ſub- 
mitted to him (as to other Saxon Kings) many fled to Cornwal, 
and by Sea to Armorica, (call*d ſtill Bretagne in France) and many 
went to North Britain among the Scoto Walenſes; tho“ the greater 
Part fled beyond the Severn, where they were coop'd in between 
the Mountains and the 1rifþ Sea, A. D. 589. 

The Anglo Saxons, who had always call'd the Britons GUALISH 
or Waliſhmen, now calPd: their Settlement beyond the Severn 
WALISHLAND or Wares, call'd ſtill by the French GaLLes 
from the GAULS their Progenitors. And here they elected the 
noble Capwan their King, the Progenitor of the Chr#ian Kings 
and Princes of WALES: ” 

During the horrid Wars, fince the Departure of the Roman 
Legions, about 160 Years, Maſonry was extinguiſh'd + nor have 
we any Veſtige of it, unleſs we reckon that of STON E HE NG, 
and allow, with ſome, that Au BRos ius, King of the Britons, 
rais'd that famous Monument on Salisbury Plain, by the Art of 
Marvellous MERLIN (whom the Populace counted a Conjurer 
and Prophet) in Remembrance of the bloody Congreſs, when 
Henc1sT murder*d 300 Britiſb Nobles. Others think it an old. 
Celtic 2. _ built by. the Britons long before the Romans came 
here: and, ſome have counted it only a Daniſp Monument. But 
the great Ix 100 Jox ks, and his Kinſman — 
Mr. Jonx WIV, have learnedly prov'd | See STone HEN 
it to be a Roman Temple, the largeſt Piece | reſtored, 
of Antiquity in the Iſland. 3 — | - 
The AncLo Saxons came over all rough, ignorant Heathens, 
deſpiſing every Thing but War; nay, in Hatred to the Britons 
* Romans, they demoliſh'd all acurate Structures, and all the 
glorious Remains of antient Learning, affecting only their own 
barbarous Manner of Life, till they became Chriſtians ; as appears. 
from Bede, the Saxon Annals, and other good Vouchers : therefore 
we have no. Account of Maſonry in their firſt Settlements. & 

ut. 

( 61 ) 

But where the WzLcx dwelt, we find the earlieſt Accounts, at 
leaſt, of Sacred Architecture; as at GLASTONBURY in Devonſhire ; 
Padſtow in Corn wal; Caerleon or Cheſter, afterwards tranſlated to 
St. Aſaph's in Flintſhire ; Llan Twit, or Church of [itutus ; Llan 
Badarn Vawr, or Church of Great St. Patern ; the Monaſtry of 
Llan Carvan ; Bangor in Caernarvonſhire; Holyhead in Angleſey ; 
Llandaff in Glamorganſhire ; Menevia, or St. David's in Pembroke- 
oy ; and many more Churches, Monaſtries, and Schools of 

rning. 
: Some pious Teachers came from Wales and Scotland, and con- 
verted many of the Anglo Saxons to Chriſtianity ; but none of their 
Kings till A. D. 597; when AvsTiNn, and forty more Monks, 
came from Pope GREGORY 1. and baptized ETHELBERT King 
of Kent; and in about 6a Years, all the Kings of the HeeTaRcny 
were baptized. | 

Then affecting to build Churches and Monaſtries, Palaces and 
fine Manſions, they too late lamented the ignorant and deſtructive 
Conduct of their Fathers, but knew not how to repair the publick 
Loſs of old ArchiteFure : yet being zealous, they follow'd the 
Gothic Stile, then only uſed, and rear'd foon 
They alſo built many Palaces and | The Cathedral of Canterbury, 

Caſtles, and fortified their Cities, | A. D. 600 
efpecially on the Borders of each | That of Rechefter, 602 
Kingdom. This requir'd many | St. Paul's London, 604 

Maſons, who ſoon form'd them- | St. Peter's Weſtminſter, 60g 
ſelves into Societies, or Lodges, And a great many more de- 
by Direction of Forreigners that | ſcrib'd in the Monaſticon An- 
came over to, help them. licanum, . 

Theſe many Saxon Lodges gradually improved, till 

ETHELBERT King of Mercia and general Monarch. ſent to, 
CHARLES MARTEL, the Right Worſhipful Grand Maſter of 
France (Father of King. Pippin) who had been educated by Brother. 
 Mimus Grecus : He ſent over from France [about A. D. 710] ſome 

expert Maſons to teach the. Saxons thoſe Laws and Uſages of the 
antient Fraternity that had been happily preſerv'd Re Hawvock 
of tlic Co; tho' not the Auguſtan Stile that had been long loſt 4 

the Wat, and now alſo in the Eaſt. This is ſtrongly aſſerted 
in all the old Conſtitutions, and was firmly believ'd by the old 
Engliſh Maſons. 8 
The CLERGY now found it convenient to ſtudy Geometry, 
and Architefure, ſuch as it was; becauſe the noble and wealthy, 
nay Kings and Queens, thought it meritorious to build Churches, 
and other pious Houſes, where ſome of them ended their Days in 
ſweet Retirement: for thoſe holy Houſes were all under the Di- 
rection of the Clergy ; and the Lodges were held in Monaſtries 
before the Inundation of the Danes, Yet at firſt they built moſtly 
of Timber only, till 
BENNET, the Abbot of Virral, introduced the Uſe of Brick 
and Stone, about A. D. 680: ſo that even the Gothic Stile was but 
in its Infancy during the Heptarchy, which laſted from Hengif*s 
Arrival. — A. D. 449 
— 
EoßERr, King of Veſſex, by Policy * — 
became Sovereign of the other ſix han, 945. 830. 
and the Angles being moſt numerous, he calPd his united Kingdom 
ENGLAND, and all the P ENGLISHMEN : tho? the 
Welch, the Iriſh, and Scots Hig call them ftill Saxons, 
after thoſe that firſt came with Hengiſt. Thus 
1. EGBERT, the iin King of All England, A. D. 830. 
fortified his Sea Ports, and died A. D. 836. 

— | 
2. ETHELwoLPH employ'd St. Swithin to repair the pious 
Houles, and died, A. D. 857. ' 

5. ErRELI- | 6. ALFRED the Great, the 4th 
BALD. | BERT. RED I. | Son, who commenc'd A.D.872 
died 860. | died 866, | died 872. | ſubdu*d the Dares, tho? not ex- 
in whoſe Reigns the Danes ſet- | pell'd them; he increaſed his 
tled in Eaſt Anglia and Northum- | Navy Royal, fortify'd and re- 
ria, pillaging and demoliſhing | built many Towns, and founded 
the pious Houſes: the Univerſity of 1 
ng 

2.ETHEL- 4.ETHzL- 

( 63.) 
King Arxrarp had about him the beſt ArchiteF;, and employ's 
the Fellow-Crafts wholly in Brick or Stone. The beft KING of 
England, and died illuſtrious, A. D, goo. 

beet 
7. EdwaRp Senior, left Maſonry to the Care, firſt of ETHRED, 
the Deputy King of Mercia, the Husband. of Edward's Siſter 
ELFrREDA, the glorious Heroin, who by her Valour expelPd the 
Danes out of Mercia, and fortified many Towns. and Caſtles to 
revent their Incurſions. Next the King put his learned Brother 
THELW ARD. at the Head of the Fraternity, and founded 
the Univerſity of — that had been long a Nurſery of the 

Learned. The King died 924. leaving 3 Kings and a Queen. 

— — 

8. ATHELSTAN the eldeft Son ſucceeded, tho” only the Son 
of a Concubine, and at firſt leſt the Craft to the Care of his Brother 
Edwin, call'd in ſome Copies his Son: for. in all the old Conſtitu- 
tions It is written to this Purpoſe, viz. a 

«© That thoꝰ the antient Records of the Brotherhood in England, 
«<. were moſt of them deſtroy d or loſt in the Wars with the Danes, 
«. who burnt the Monaſtries where the Records were kept; yet 
King Atþelftan (the Grandſon of King us ) the firſt anointed 
King of England, who tranſlated the Holy Bible into the Saxon 
<< Language, when he had brought the Land into Reſt and Peace, 
« built many great Works, and encouraged many Maſons 
from France and elſewhere, whom He appointed Overſeers 
thereof: they brought with them the Charges and Regulations 
8 89 and prevaiPd with the King to increaſe 

ages. 

That Princc Enwin, the King's Brother, being taught 
Geometry and Maſenry, for the Love he had to the ſaid Craft, 
and to the honourable Principles whereon it is grounded, pur- 
* chaſed a Free Charter of King Athelſtan his Brother, for the 
Free Maſons having among themſelves a CornecTion, 

or à Power and Freedom ta. regulate themſelves, to * 
« w 

( 64.) 

es -what might happen amiſs, and to hold an yearly Communication 
in a General Aſſembly. 

«© That accordingly Prince Epwin ſummon'd all the Free and 
« Accepted Maſons in the Realm, to meet him in a Congregation 
« at YORK, who came and form'd the Grand Lodge under him 
« as their Grand Maſter, A. D. 926. 

« That they brought with them many old Writings and Re- 
&« cords of the Craft, ſome in Greek, ſome in Latin, ſome in 
C French, and other Languages; and from the Contents thereof, 
% they fram'd the CONSTITUTIONS of the Engli/h Lodges, 
ce and made a Law for Themſelves, to preſerve and obſerve the 
« ſame in all Time coming, Sc. Sc. G. m 

But good Prince Epwin died before the King [A. D. 938] 
without Iflue, to the great Grief of the Fraternity ; Ex his 
Memory is fragrant in the Lodges, and honourably mention'd in 
all the old Conſtitutions. 

Some Exgliſb Hiſtorians ſay that Epwix being accuſed of a 

Plot, the King ſet him adrift in a Boat without Sail and Oars ; 

that EpwIx proteſting his Innocence, went aboard and jumpt into 
the Sea; and that his Eſquire was drove into Picardy. 

But the Hiſtorian Malmsbury disbelieves the whole Story as 

ounded only on ſome old Ballad, and becauſe of Athelſtar's : 
known Kindneſs and Love to all his Brothers and Siſters : and 
Huntingdon writes of the Loſs of Epwin by Sea, as a very fad 
Accident, and a great Misfortune to Atbelſtan, who was very 
fond of him. 

| King ATHELSTAN built many Caſtles in Northumbria to bridle 

the Danes (whom he had ſubdu*d) and the famous Abby of St. Jobn 
at Beverley (lately repair'd for Divine Service) and Melton Abby in 
Dorſethire ; He rebuilt the City of Exeter, and repair'd the old 
Church of the CuLpzzs at 27rk, He died without Iflue, 940. 

9. Epmunp I, 

(65 ). 

_ Saron Kings of Eg, Diſh Kings of ERH 

9 Epmuny Lilo Epxep ſucceeded 
ſucceeded Bro- nis Brother Edmund, re- 
ther Abelſtan, built Glaſtonbury, and 

TayzAa, Daughter of Ed. 

ward Senior (according to 
the Dani/h Hiſtorians) was 

married to Goxmo III. 

repaired the Ci Nied without Iſſue 9 55. 
ties and Church- 2 

es, and leaving two Sons, died, A. D. 

946. | 

- 
* : 

o 

11 EDwi ſucceeded}42 ] Epe Ax built 

his Uncle Edred, and}and rebuilt about 
died without Iſſue, 48 pious Houſes, 
939. by the Direction 
| of St. Dunſtan, 

| Gꝛand Malter, andſeveralmore expert 

Maſters, He alſo rigg'd. out a good 
Navy, which prevented the Invaſions 
of the Danes, and died 97. 

q - 
Aces —— * 

CY : . | > 
13 EDWARD Junior, 14 ET HEINE D 

call'd the Martyr, di-|H. was always di- 
ed without Iſſue 979 ſtreſſed by the 

trived their Maſſacre, A. D. 1002. 

ETHELR&ED, upon the Death of Suen 
Olio, returned, but died inglorious 1016. 

By his firſt Wife he had 

16 Epuuxp II. Von gy his 2d Wife 
/ides reigned in the] Ethelred had 
_ Weſt till murderd | RY A 
A. D. 1017, Father of[20, EDWARD 
; Prince "a 

King of Denmark, and bore 

to him 

— | | 2 
r VIII. King of 
Denmark. Dr 

a . 44 
SwRN Or ro, King of Den- 

mark, who finding that E- 
thelred neglected his Fleet, 
allowed his Danes to in vade 

England every Lear, and 

they left many Lowd 
Danes, to oppreſs the poor 

| Engliſh. But hearing of the 

Maffacre, - SWN Or ro 
ſailꝰd over withgreat Force, 
and drove Eibelred into 
Normandy. And fo, 

5 SWN Or ro was King 
0 

ſof Eugland— 1013 
but died ſuddenly — 1014 

— Yeerr——> 4 2 
17 CanvTvsor Nun, Ha g- 

uus, after the Death of King. 

crown'd King of all Eng- 
land, A. D. 1017. 
He built the Abby of 

died 1036. Father of 
18 Ha- 
K 

EpMunD Tron/ides, was 

St. Edmund s. Bury, and 

D — 8 

(66) 
Saron Kings of England. | Daniſh Kings of England 
un 

| —— —üü4̈m the Confe Vor 3 —— 
Prince Edward wholwho ſucceeded 18 HAROL p I. 19 H a R R- 

died at Londa 10 Kin Hardy-| Harefoot, King|dvy-KnurT, 

weak Thus in * of England, di- ro; of 
Prince EAI MARGA- Throne of Eu- ed without I. England, the 
gar Atbelingſu x r, Wife and, 1041. ſue. AD. 1039 laſt of the 
died withoutſof M A L-He Daniſh race, 

iodag mmm 
Iſſue. feor M Nan. Lat W died without Iſſue, A. D. 
== =Imore, Kii in a Body. 1041, | 

eee Un his Reign r | | 
A Arts and Sciences fouriſh'd. "Leofrick che 
Way Farl of Coventry, at the Head of the Free Maſons, built 
the Abby of Coventry, and Others built 12 more pious Houſes, The 
King rebuilt Veſtminſter-Abby, tho' not as it now ſtands, and 
died without Iſſue on 30 0 1063, when the Nobles and People 
21. HA ROD II. Son of Earl Goodwin, who reign'd nine 

Months, even till WIIIIAM the Baſtard, the Duke of Normandy, 
New Harold bravely fighting in the Battle of Haſtings in Suſſex, 
where the * were totally routed by the Normans, on the 14th 
of Oftober, 4 Di — — 1060. _ 
| | in the vu Igar Year of Maſonry 5066. 
89 After Hen — Arrival 617. 

gd ne? + - AO Bod of the Heptarchy, 236. 

As for the Danes. having no Princely by, 2 They had ſub- 

mitted to the Saxon Kin 5 and daily loſin their Genealogy, 
e blended . 
the Language. 

with the g 

ons, OM much 

CHAP: 

(67) 

CHAP, III. 

MasonRy in England from WILLIAM the Conqueror 7 
| King Henzy IV, 

I, ILLIAM I. the Congueror, having ſettled England, 

Oundulph Biſho 

appointed 
Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury and 

of Rocheſter, Roger 4c 
undel, and other I Ar- 

chitects, to be at the Head of the Fellow Crafts, firſt in civil and 
military Architecture, building for the King the Tower of London, 
and the Caſtles of Dover, Exeter, Wincheſter, Warwick, | Here- 
ford, Stafford, York, Durbam, and New-Caſtle upon Tine; where 

by the proud Normans bridled the Engliſb. 
Next in ſarred Architecture, building Bat?le- 
„St. Saviour's Southwark, and 

ings, in memory of his Con 

Abby near Haſt- 

more pious Houſes ; while Others built 42 ſuch, and 5 Cathedrals. 
The King brought many expert Maſons from France, and died 

in Normandy, A. D. 1087. 

A. 

2, 
his Father, and employ'd his Archi- 
tects and Craftsmen in building a new 
Wall round the Tower, and in rebuild- 
ing London-Bridge ; and 'by Advice 
of his Grand Lodge of Maſters, He 

built the Great Palace of Weſtminſter, | 

with large Weſtminſter- Hall, 270 Foot 
long, and 74 Foot broad, the largeſt 
one Room upon Earth; and 4 pi- 
ous Houſes, while Others built 28 
ſuch. He died without Iſſue, A. D. 

1100. 

K 

e 

William II. Rufus, ſucceeded| 
born at Selby in Yorkſhire, 

3. HENRY I, Beau Clerc, 
ſucceeded Brother William, 
tho? the eldeſt Brother Ro- 
ber 7 Duke of Normandy, 
was alive, 7 

Now the Norman Ba- 
rons, perceivin — — 
Poſſeſſions in Engle de- 
pended only on Royal Plea- 
ſure ; and finding the Laws 
of the Anglo-Saxons to be 
better for ſecuring Proper- 

7" I 

ty than the Laws of 
2 Normandy ; 

(668) 

Normandy; the Nomans began to call themſelves Ex LIsAM Mex, 
to aſſert the Saxon-Rights, and prevail'd with this King to grant 
them the firſt Magna Charta, or larger Paper and Deed of 
Rights in this firſt Year of his Reign, A. D. 1100. 

This King built the great Palace of Woodſtock, and a little one 
at Oxford to converſe with the Learned, and 14 pious Houſes, while 
Others built about 100 ſuch, beſides many fine Manſions. He 
died A. D. 1135. ſucceeded by his Nephew, viz. FP 

King Hewzy I. by] 4. STEPHEN, Count of Boulloign, Son of 
his Wife MavvpfAptria Daughter of William the Conqueror, 
(Daughter of Mar-Jby the Power of the Clergy. During the 
col M Keanmore King Civil Wars between him and Ma up the Em- 
of Scotland by his]preſs, the Nobles and Gentry, being courted 
Wite MAROC ARE TI by both, laid hold of the Occaſion to build 
the Saxon Heireſs. offabout 1100 Caſtles, that proved afterwards 
England) left only al very convenient for them in the Barons 
Daughter viz. Wars; ſo that the Maſons were as much 

— 2 employ'd as the Soldiers, under their 
Mavp the Empreſs, Gzand Maſter Gilbert: de Clare Marquis 
who next married of Pembroke, by whom the King built 4 
- Geoffrey Plantagenet Abbies and 2 Nunneries, with St. Ste- 
Count of Anjou, A. D. I phen's Chapel in the Palace of Weſtminſter : 
1147. While Others built about 90 pious Houſes. 
She came over, tho King Stephen died without Iſſue Male, 
too late, to aſſert her f ch A. D. — 1154. 
Claim (to which her the laſt of t 8 After the Conqueſt 8 8 
Father had ſworn the Royal Normans, Years, 
whole Kingdom,even > 

Stephen alſo) and ; | 
fought like a brave Heroine ; but refuſing to-confirm Magna Charta, 

ſhe was deſerted: And her beſt Friends dying, ſhe was forced to re- 
turn to Anjou, A. D. 1147, But her Son HENRY came over and 

aſſerted his Claim, till King Stephen agreed that Henry ſhould: ſuc- 
ceed him, 50S 

Accordingly, when Sephen died, 

(69) | 
The PLANTAGENETS of Anjou commenced, vis. 

1. HENRY II. Plantagenet, Count of Anjou became King of Eng- 
land, A. D. 1154, who tortify'd ſome Caſtles againſt the Welch and 
Scots, built ſome little Palaces, and 10 pious Houſes, while Others 
built about 100 ſuch, The Grand Maſter of the Knights Templars 
erected their Society and built their Temple in Fleafreet, London. 

The King died A. D. 1189. 

— — — — — — 
2. RIcHARD I. much abroad, died with- 
out Iſſue 11993 yet in this Reign about 20 

pious Houſes were built, 
made his Chaplain 

Peter de Cole-Church Ozand Maſter of the Maſons in rebuildi 

ondon- Bridge of Stone, which was finiſh'd by the next Maſter 
William Almain, A. D. 1209. Next Peter de Rupibus Biſhop 

of Wincheſter was Ozand Maſter, and under him Geoffrey Fitz 
Peter was chief Surveyor or Deputy Grand Maſter, who built 
much for the King; while Others built about 40 pious Houſes. 
The King died A. D. 1216, ſucceeded by his Son, 
N — 

5 4. HENRY III. a Minor of nine Years. When Peter de Rupi- 
zus, the old Grand Maſter, came to be the King's Guardian, he 
levelPd the Foolſtone of Weſtminſter Abby, in that Part call'd Solo- 
mon's Porch, A. D. 1220. 5 | 
Perrx Count of Savoy (Brother of the Queen's Mother) built 
the Palace of Savoy in the Strand London: And Jobn Balliol, Lord 
of Bernard Caſtle in Durham, (Father of Jon King of Scotland) 
founded Balliol College in Oxford. The Templars built their Domus 
Dei at Dover, and Others built 32 pious Houſes. The King died 

A. D. 1272. 

28 7 
5 Epwarp I. being deeply engaged in Wars, leſt the Craft 
to the Care of ſeveral ſucceſſive Grand Maſters, as alter Git⸗ 
kaꝛd Archbiſhop of York, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloceſter, and 
Ralph Lord of Mount Hermer, the Progenitor of the Montagnes ; 
and by theſe the King fortify'd many Caſtles, eſpecially againſt 

— 7 

3. King - Joun 
ſucceeded Brother 
Richard, and firſt 

[70] 
the Welch, till they ſubmitted to him, 4. D. 1284, when Edivard the 
King's Son and Heir was born at Caermarthen, the firſt Engliſh 
Prince of Wales. ? 

The King celebrated the Cape-fone of Weſtminſter Abby, A. D. 
1286, juſt 65 Years after it was ſounded. But that Abby and the Pa- 
lace being burnt down, 1299, the King order'd the Palace to be 
repair'd, but was diverted from repairing the Abby by his Wars in 
Scotland. In this Reign Merton College Oxford, the Cathedral of 
Norwich, and about 20 more pious Houſes were founded. The King 
died in his Camp on Solway Sands, 7th of Juby, 1507. 

——— 3 N | 

6. Epwaxp II. made Malter Stapleton Biſhop of Exeter 
Grand Maſter, who built Exeter and Oriel Colleges in Oxford; 
while Others built Clare-Hall Cambridge, and 8 pious Houſes. 
The King died A. D. 1327. "5 

—ꝛñů— ———— i 

”? 1 

7. Epwarp III. became the Patron of Arts and Sciences. He 
ſet up a Table at Windſor, 600 Feet round, for feaſting the 
gallant Knights of all Nations, and rebuilt the Caſtle and Palace 
of Windſor, as a Royal Gzand Maſter, by his ſeveral Deputies 
or Maſters of Work, vz. 

1. John de Spoulee, call'd Maſter of the Ghiblim, who rebuilt 
St. George's Chapel; where the King conſtituted the Order of the 
Garter, A. D. 1350. | 

2. William a Taickham, at the Head of 400 Free Majors, 
rebuilt the Caſtle ſtrong and ſtately, 4. D. 1357, and when he 
was made Biſhop-of Wincheſter, A. D.——1 $07: then next 

3. Robert 4 Barnbam ſucceeded at the Head of 250 Free 
Maſons, and finiſh*'d St. George's great Hall, with other Works 
in the Caſtle, A. D. 1375. 1 | 1 

4. Henry Pevele (call'd at firſt, in the old Records, the 
King's Free Maſon) built for the King the London Charter-hou/e, 
King's-Hall Cambridge, Queenborough Caſtle, and rebuilt St. Ste- 
phen's Chapel, now the Houſe of Commons in Parliament, 

5. Simon Langham, Abbot of Weſtminſter, who repair'd the 
Body of that Cathedral as it now ſtands, 

The 

771 
The King alſo founded the Abby of Eaſtminſter near the Tower ;; 
and his laudable Example was well follow'd; for the Queen en- 
dow'd Queen's College Oxford, while Others built many ſtately 
Manſions, and about go pious Houſes, for all the expenſive 

Wars of this Reign. | 
The ConsTiTUuTions were now meliorated; for an old 

Record imports, ** that in the glorious Reign of King Epwarp III. 
when Lodges were many and frequent, the Grand Maſter with bis 
Wardens, at the Head of the Grand Lodge, with Conſent of the 
Lords of the Realm, then generally Free Maſons, ordain'd, 

That for the future, at the Making or Admiſſion of a Brother, the 
Conſtitutions Hall be read, and the Charges hereunto annexed. 

That Maſter Maſons, or Maſters of Work, fall be exa- 
mined whether they be able of Cunning to ſerve their reſpefive 
Lords, as well the Higheſt as the Loweſt, to the Honour and Worſhip 
of the foreſaid Art, and to the Profit of their Lords ; for they be 

their Lords that employ and pay them for their Travel. 
That when the Maſter and Wardens preſide in a Lodge, the 

Sheriff, if need be, or the Mayor, or the Alderman (if a Brother ) 
where the Chapter is held, ſhall be ſociate to the Maſter, in help of 
bim againſt Rebels, and for upholding the Rights of the Realm. 

That Enter*d Prentices at their Making ſball be charged not to be 
Thieves, nor Thieves Maintainers. That the Fellow Crafts ſhall 
travel honeſtly for their Pay, and love their Fellows as themſelves ; 
46 That all ſhall be true to the King, 10 the Realm, and to the 

odge. ä 

Ti he if any 2 the Fraternity ſhould be frafious, mutinous, or diſ- 
obedient to the Grand Maſter's Orders, and after proper Admonitions,. 
ſhould perſiſt in his Rebellion, He ſhall forfeit all his Claim to the 
Rights, Benefits, and Privileges of @ true and faithful Brother, &c.. 
Concluding with, AMEN, So mote it be. 

En- 

- | + » 
King Ewan III. died 21 June 1397, 
5 Epwarp the Black Prince See the other Sons, with My 
of Wales died before his Father, | ſpe&t to the Succeſſion, in the 
Fig A. D. 1376. | Margin below.“ 
| 2 ” . 
g. Rrcuaxp II. ſucceeded his Grandfather, A. D. 1 377. He 
employ'd Milliam « Wickham, Biſhop of Wincheſter, Grand 
Maſter, to rebuild. Weſtminſter-Hall as it now ſtands 3 and Ttl- 
liam, at his own Coſt, built New College Oxford, and founded 
Wincheſter College, while Others built about 15 pious Houſes, 
At laſt, while King Richard was in Ireland, his Couſin Henry 
Duke of Lancaſter landed in Yorkſhire, rais'd a great Army, ſeiz'd 
King Richard, upon his Return, got the Parliament to depoſe 
him, and ſucceeded in the Throne, A. D. 1399; and next Year 
Richard was murder'd without Iſſue. | | 

——— 
—— J 
* d 

— — 
— — 

* The other Sons of King E DWA RD bw with reſpect to the Succeſſion, 

— —— — 
LioxrxzL Duke of] Ebuvxp Duke of | Jou a Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter, the 
Clarence, the ſecond | York, the fourth | third Son, Patriarch of the Red 
Son, left only Son, Patriarch of | Boſe. Wives. | | 

— 2 — the Uhite Role, I, Blanche of Lancaſter, Mother of 
88 of Ga- by his Wife Ja- | King Hemy IV. | 
rence, Wife of Ed.] bella, ſecond Daugh- 2. Conſtantia, eldeſt Daughter of Pie- 

mund Mortimer, Earl | ter of Piedro Gru- | dro Crudelis King of Caſtile, Mother of 
of Marth, Mother of delis, King of Ca- | Katharine married to Henry III. King 
— Am | file. of Caſtile. 
Roger Mortimer, Earl [ 3. Katharine Roet, his Concubine, 
of March, left only | E whom at laſt he married, and her 
— AC. : A Children were legitimated by Act of 

Ann Mortimer, the.) Richard Earl of Parliament, but not to inherit the 
Heireſs of Clarence ea 145 behead- | Crown. Mother of | 

and Marth. ed 1415. — —,5 | 
— —Xx.— -— | John Beaufort, (not Plantagenet) Earl 
Richard Duke of York, flain, 1460. of Somerſet. 
— — — —.— > 
King Eowa RD IV. | KingRicnaxp III. Fobn Beaufort Duke of Somerſet. 

7 

' "1 
Margaret Beaufort, Mother of Kin 
Hanavr VII. 4 

CHAP. 

(73 | ) 

F % 
— = — * — 
e CHAP. Iv. OY le e 

Mason Rx in England from HENRY IV. 
to the Royal TZwW Do- 

| Gs Bows ul 

| Joun a Gaunt, Duke of Lancaſter, Patriarch of 55 Rey 

Roſe, or the Royal Lancafrigns, by bis firſt Wite, Blanche of 
- Lancaſter, had + 

— — 

9. Han xy IV. Duke of Lancaſter, who n, and ſucceed- 
ed Kin Richard II. A. D. 1399. He appointed Thomas Fx 
Allen Earl of Surrey, to be Grand Maſter; and after his fa- 
mous Victory of Shrewsbury, the King founded Battle- Abbey there, 
and afterwards that of Fotberingay. Others built 6 pious Houſes, 
and the Londoners founded their preſent Guild-Hall, a large'and 

magnificent Fabrick. The King died 1413. 
—— 

10. Henzy 1 V while triumphing in France, orderd the Pa. 
lace and Abbey of Sheen (now calPd' Richmond upon Thames) to be 
rebuilt by the Direction of the Grand Maſter Henry 'Chichelep 
Archbiſhop of Canterbury; while Others built 8 Pious Houſes, 
The King died A. D. 1422. 

By his Queen, Katherine of France (afterwards the MA, of 
Owen Tewdo? below.) He ha 

Ab 

nN. Her nay VI. a MinorbF nine Machte Wbt third Year 
an ignorant Parliament endeavour'd to diſturb the: 3 —_— 
vain, by the following Act, vin. 

3 Hen. VI. Cap. I. 4. D. 1426. ; 8 
Towns rr 525 not 475, f in RG and r 

ions. 
n L WHEREAS 

- — — 

a — — 

away, and conſequently the Af is become of no 

— — — — - * — — — — — — _ — — — 
——— $544 —— 2 — — — 1 Ro = — * — — — — 
— —— ¶ ͤ FNF . ' , ‚ , , , , ‚ r m m. mgmM Ü ²ẽͥe! . é. ÄAAu 7—«;ͤͥf N .vr.. Ä.. -r — , 2 , — , ,,, — — PEI. — _ 
oY . * - 
. - : 
— - 5 * * * 1 
, = 
- . 9 

(74) INE. 

WHEREAS by yearly Congregations and Confederacies made 
by the Mafons in their Generat A es, the good Conrfe and Effet? 
of the Statutes of Labourers be openly violated and broken, in Subver- 
fion of the Law, and to the great Damage of all the Commons; Our 
Sovereign Lord the King willing in this Caſe to provide a Remedy, 
by the » "5p and Conſent aforeſaid, and at the ſpetiat Requeſt of the 
Commons, Hath Ordain'd and Eftablifh'd, 

That ſuch Chapters and Congregations Hall not be hereafter bol- 
den: And if any ſuch be made, They that cauſe ſuch Chapters and 
Congregations 0 be aſſembled and holden, if they thereof be convict, 
Hall be judged for Felons: And that other Mafons who come to ſuch 
Chapters and Congregations be puniſhed by Prifonment of their Bodies, 
and make Fine and Ranſom at the Vng Will. a aka nes 

But this Act is explain'd in Judge Coxs's Inſtitutes; Part III. 
fol. 19. where we find that the Cauſe why this Offence was made 
Felony, is for that the good Courſe and Effect of the Statutes of 
Labourers was thereby . violated and broken. Now fays my 

Lord Cole, 

' All. the Statutes concerning Labourers * this Act, and where- 
unto this Af doth refer, are repealed by the 5 ET IZ. Cap. 4. about 
A. D. 1562. whereby the Cauſe and End of making this AF is taken 
': Huy for ceſſante 
ratione legis ceſſat ipſa lex! and the inditement of Felony upon this 
Statute muſt contain, That thyſe Chapters and Congregations are to 
the violating and breaking of the good Conrſe aud Effef of the Statutes 
f Labourers I which now cannot be ſo alledged, becauſe thoſe Statutes 
e repeal d. Therefore this would be put out of the Charge of Fuſtices 
the Peace. | a 
2 80 this Act was never executed, nor ever frightned the Free 
Maſons from hold ing their Chapters and Congregations, leſſer or lar- 
r; nor did ever the Working Maſons deſire their Noble and 
minent Brothers to get it repeal'd, but always laugb'd at it: 
For they ever had, and ever will have their own Wages, while 
they coaleſce in due Form, and careſully preſerve the Cement un- 
der their own Grand Maſter ; let Cowans do as they pleaſe. 

Nay even during this King's Minority, there was a good Lodge 

_ 4 

(75) 
under Grand Maſter Chicheley held at Canterbury, as appears 
from the Latin Regiſter of William M-. lucuicd Liverats gee 
lart * Prior of Canterbury in Manuſeript, neralis Domini Gulielmi 
pap. 88. in which are named Thomas Sta-Prioris Ecclefie, Chriſti 
pyltion the Maſter, and Fobn Morris Cuſ-Cantuariemſis erga Feſtum 
tos de la Lodge Lathomorum or Warden Natalis Domini 1429. 
of the Lodge of Mafons, with fifteen Fellow-Crafts, and three Eu- 
ter'd Prentices all named there. And a Record in the Reign of 
Epw. IV. ſays, tbe Company of Maſons, being orbertoiſe termed 
Free Maſons, of auutient Staunding and good Reckoning, by Means 
fa able and kind Meetings dyverſe Tymes, and as a loving Brother- 

uſe to do, did frequent this mutual Aſſembly in the Tyme f Hen- 
ry VI. in the Twelfth Tear of bis Mat Gratious Reign viz. A D. 
1434. when HENzy was aged thirteen Years. + | 
Grand Maſter Cui cuzLey held alſo a Lodge at Oxford, where 
he built All- Soul- College, and Bernard, now St. Jobs College, 
Sc. till he died 1445. when the King appointed, Ns 2 
_ Ciflfam UWlaneficet, Biſhop of #in:chefter, to be Grand Ma 
ter in building Eaton College near Windſor, and _ College 
Cambridge, tho“ before the Civil Wars in this Reign, the Obapel of 
it was only finiſh'd, a Maſter-Piece of the richeſt Gothic that can 
hardly be matched. The King alſo founded Chris College Cam- 
bridge (afterwards finiſh'd by Margaret Beaufort Counteſs of Rich- 
mond) and his Queen Ma x cazeT of Arxjou founded Quren's College 
Cambridge. While Ingenious AHanetleet at his own-Coftbuilc 
Magdalene College Oxford ; and Others about 12 pious Houſes, 
So that before the King's Troubles, the Mum were much em- 
ploy*d, and in great Eſteem ; for the foreſaid Record faysfarther, 
Wat the — Laws of the Free Maſons have been feeen and 
peruſed by our late Severaign Henry VI. and by the Lords of bis 
moſt honourable Council, who have allow them, and declared, that 
They be right good and reaſonable to be holden, as They have been drawn 
out and collected from the Records of auntient Tymes, &c. bc. 
At laſt Maſorry was neglected during the ſeventeen Years of the 
| — Civil Wars between the two Royal Houſes of Lancaſter 
an 

ork, ot the Red and Mhite Ros. For 
4 | L 2 Richard 

(769) 

* Richard Plantagenet. Duke of York, Son of Richard Earl 

of Cambridge,” and 

une Mortimer the Heireſs of Clarence (as in 

the Margin Page 72.) claim'd the Crown in Right of his Mother, 

A. D. 1 

455. and after twelve ſore Battles che Bed Re/e loſt the 

Crown, poor King Henry VI. was murder'd, and all the Males of 
every Branch of Lancaſter were cut off; after John 4 Gaunt's 
Offspring had reigned 72 Fears, A. D. 1471. | wa 

i 

White Rose, ſee Page 92. 

* 

Thus Ricbaurd Duke of York lain in the Battle of Wakefield, 1460, 

SOT, 

— Epwarp IV. crown'd 156. ſometimes 
a King, and ſometimes not a King, till 
A. D. 1471. when Epwas. reigned with- 
out a Rival, and employ'd the Grand Ma- 
fer Richard Beauchamp. Biſhop of Sa- 
rum, to repair the Royal Caſtles. and Pala- 
ces after the Wars, and to make the Caſtle 
and Chapel of indſor more magnificent; 
for which the Biſhop was made Chancellor 
of the Garter. . nn 111 5 
Steat Men alſo repair'd and built apace; 
and now the Londoners rebuilt their Walls 
and Gates; while Others rais'd 7 pious 
Houſes. The King died g. April-1483; | 
13 Ewa RD V. Richard, 

a Minor, pro- Duke of tagenet, Wife of 
claim'd, but not nt. 2 enryVII. 

crown'd. © 

— — 
Elizabeth Plan- 

— 9 
14 Ricuarp III. 
kill'd and took Poſ- 
ſſeſſion, and was 
crown*d on 6 July; 
1483. and reign'd 
a wiſe and valiant 
Prince, till he was 
ſlain, bravely, con- 
tending for the 
Crown with his Ri- 
val Henzy : Tew-- 
dor Earl of Rich- 
mond, in the Battle 
Of Boſworth Leice- 

| fer/hire, on the 22 

Aug. 1483. with- 
out legal Iſſue. 
80 ended the 

1 -4, TUhite Noſe, or 

pegs below. 
Theſe two Sons were ſaid. == 
to be murder'd in the Toter 
by Order of their Uncle and 
Guardian Richard III. on 

23 May, 1483. 

— 

” 
* 

— 

7 

| during Years—— 331 
1.2 Ul 4. Dom.. 1 

Houſe of Tork 

And alſo the 14 Kings call'd Planta- 

N of the Houſe of Anjou, who 
ad . reign'd from King Stepben's 
| Death 

A. D. — 1134 

5 

(#4) 

For connecting the Hiſtory, 
The Genzayocyvf tha Royal TEWDons 
They are clearly deſcended (tho? not in Male Iſſue) from 
Capwan the Firſt, King of Wales, (Page 60.) W | 
RopzRIG Mawr, who partition d his Tres | into Principa- 
' lities among his 358 Sons, and died 41 . D. 958. 

Amarawpn, Prince of a 2 Cavan, Prince off 3. Ma 
Wales, whoſe © Male Iſſue fail'd in] Sub ales, whoſc lidcal]f'y Ws 
. 

LizwsLig a Daſh the laſt Sove- Male Iſſue ended in Gn vs- Peel. 

raign Prince of ales, lain in xYp Rhy/e, the laſt — n 
Balle, A. D. 1285. when the Welch Rice ef Ws Wales, [fail 

began to ſubmit to the Grown of 
England, _ | 

= Wo 

who died; 4 D. 1202. ä 
But his Sitter, viz... 
GWRNY LIAN, was the Wife of 

Ednyfked d Fychan, 14 Lord of — 

Sronm Us e I 
Theodore, or — Grome. 7 

" WY r 

gu 
EVA III. Ring of Zhgland. © 

rr a "Gaunt, 14 his third Wie, 
barine Roet, —* * | 

Amen treten 1 KX 
e 4 Gronw ap Teuber, 
rl of & 2 — _— 
e 4 Tewdoz: 4p Gronw, married MAAGA- 
Ni- 4uron z F OA x x7, Grand Daughter of Laws 1 1xap 
ke 'of Somerſet £5, 1 L 23 VI. Dash the laſt u n 90 | 
After all-the Hale ing of France. 8 1 
of Jobn a. G Des — —— Srrevich PY 2 " tt 
were extin en KATA -I * in 
his 11d. 41vz, Widow of Owns Pawoon, flain in the 
wes bs * 3 Xing Henry V. Battle of Mortimer Got, 1461 4; 
Margaret Zeau-\._/Edmund Tew ber Texpdor, Duke | Ouven Tees, 

fort. bot Karl of Bc nz ve. without | Monk. 

— —— — U — — 

* 

CHAP v. 

et SA 7 2 17 * 
917 Dee 

Mase nnr, in „ England Bons King iv VII. 
till the Union of the Crowns, A, D. 1603: 

WIe TG Richard III. was flain at Boſworth, his 
Crown was forthwith 17 upon the Head of the Conque- 
ror, HEMA Y Tewpos Earl of Richmond, in the Field of Battle, 
and the Army proclaim'd him. 

1. HENRY VII. King of E land, on 22 Aug. 1485. nor did 
he ever affect another Title and Claim. 

But his Wife ELIZABETH PLanTAGENET, Daughter of King 
Edward IV. was truly the Heireſs of all the Royal e 
and conveyed hereditary Right to her Offspring. 8 

New Worlds are now diſcovered, 
| The Cape of Good Hope, A. D. 1 

and America, — 1493. 

In this Reign the Gothic S:ile was brought to it's higheft Per- 
fection in Exgland, while it had been wholly laid aſide in 7a 17 
** the Revivers of the old Auguſtan Stile; as in Part I. Chap. VI 

John I Mp, Abbot of eſtminſter, finiſhed the Repairs of 
that Abby, 4. D. 1493. ſo, as it ſtood till the late Reparations 
in our Time, 

The Grand Maſter and Fellows of the Order of St. — at 

Rhodes (now at Malta) aſſembled at their Grand Lane 

King Henxr their Protector, A. D. 1900. .\ 

| This Royal GM any MasTE choſe for his Wardens of England, 

the foreſaid* John Jflip, Abbot of 7 or Deputies, by whom the King 

Weſtminſter, and ſummor'd a Lodge of Maſters 
Sir Reginald Bzap, Knight in the Palace, with whom he 

of the Garter. walked in ample Form to the 
5 Eaſt End of — Abby, 

and 

- {#8} : 
and levell'd the Foosſtone of his famous Chapel on 24 June, 1502. 
tho' it well deſerves to ſtand clean alone, being juſtly call'd by 
our Antiquary Leland the eighth Monden of Art, fineſt Piece 
of Gothic upon Earth, and the Glory of this Reign. It's Capeftone 
was celebrated A. D. 10. | 210 8 
The King employ'd Grand Harden Buy to raiſe the middle 
Chapel of Windſor, and to rebuild the Palace of Sheex upon 
Thames, which the King call'd Richmond; and to enlarge 
the old Palace of Greenwich, _ it Wlacentia, where he built 
the pretty Box call'd the Quren's- Hout. & >. 
He rebuilt Baynard Caſtle, London, founded fix Monaſteries, 
and turn'd the old Palace of Savoy into an Hoſpital: while Others 
built Braſen- Noſe College Oxford, Jeſus's and St. Jobn's Col- 
leges Cambridge, and about 6 pious Houſes; till the King, aged 
only 54 Years, died at New Richmond, on 22 April, 1 509. leaving, 
three Children, viz. | / | 

A en INC 
"2 Hanar VIII. T- Mag A RAET Tewdor, | Marky Tewdor, 
dor, Prince of Wales, firſt the Wife of James firſt the Wife of 

ed 18 Vears, ſucceed- IV. King of Scotland, Lewis XII. Kin 
his Father, A. D. next of Archibald Dow- of France; — 
1509. | glaſs, Earl of Angus [next of Charles 
CardinalCUoolſey was next of Henry Stewart, | Brandon, Duke 
choſen Grand Maſter, Lord Methuen. - Suffolk, ?, 
who: built Hampton-|| = rr 
Court ; and next rear d //þite-Hall, the College of Cbriſ's Church 
Oxford, and ſeveral more good Edifices, which upon his Diſgrace 
were forfeited to the Crown, A. D. 1330. 
Thomas Cromwell [Earl of Z/ex was the next Patron of 
the Craft under the King, for whom he built St. Zames's Palace, 
_ Chriſt's Hoſpital London and Greenwich Caſtle. - Mean while 
. The King and Parliament threw off the old Yoke of the 
\ Pope's Supremacy, and the King was declared the Supreme Head 
- - _ A. D. 1534. and Wales was united to England, * 
D. 1530. | 

PRI "4 

1 
— 

N 

1 , 

The 

The pious H. 
Cromwell, 

arl of 

Tur che 8 

TY i 5 
Prous 
to the Nobility and Gen 

Manſions: Thus Grand 

Kin 
and.le _ Children. 

C 
* 

n * 

nay — of a finer Stile 
Houſes and their Lands being 

18 * 

* CET — X 

- 

(%) 

„in number about 926. were 
Eſex, being 
Jaun Touchet, Lord Audley, became Grand o 
preſſion of the religious Houſes did not hurt Aaſon- 
ain'd. Ground: for thoſe 
ſold by the K ing at eaſy Rates 
ilt of thoſe Ruins many ſtately 

they 

ſuppreſs' d, 4D. 1.539. 

anjuſtly beheaded,” 4 B. 1540. 

Maſter. Che ©, 

er Audley built Magdalen Collage 
Cambridge, and his great Houſe of Audley End. 

88 — - 

2 Bun 

* 
1 1 8 

11 
* — — „ 3 * 

= 
* 
FED Pal | 11 

Henry VIII aged near 56 Years, died on-28 Jan. 2 54%. 

? 
- Aus 1 

9 4 ; 
F \ } 3. 892 
»# 4 5.4% {1 ey 
. 
L WF. - l 
«© & "EX } 

* 

3. e VI. Tow | 

47 born by: Queen Jane 
Seymour, a Minor of 
Years, - under-the Regen- 
cy of his Mother's Bro- 
ther, Epwazpd- Duke of 
Somerſet, who eſtabliſht 
the Proteſtant Religion 

and as Grand Maſter 
built his Palace in the 

Strand, call'd ſtill Somer- 

ſet-Houſe, tho forfeited} 
to the Crown, A. D. 1552. 
and when the Regent was 
beheaded, Jonx Poyne T, 
Biſhop of Winchefter, was 
the Patron of the Free- 
Maſons till the K ing died 
1 1553. 

9]ter of — 

* M ARY 
Tewdor, Daugh- 

of 
Aragon, 

| 38 Years, oped 
ceeded her Bro- 
ther Euward, 

as Queen Sove- 
reign. 

She del 
the Romiſh Re- 
ligion, and per- 
ſecuted the Pro- 
ſeſtants; mar- 
ried Philip II. 

King of Spain, 
and 1 died with- 
out Iſſue, 17 

| Wt 1558. 

3. ELIZABETH Tew- 
dor, Daugh. of Queen 
Anne Bollen, aged 2:5 
Years, ſucceded d Sitter 
Mary-as Queen Sove- 
reign) She teſtored 
the Proteſtant Reli- 

ed Supreme Head of 
the Church. Now 
Learning of all Sorts 
revived, and the good 
old AV6USTANSTILE | 
in Zxgland began to 
peep from under it's 
Rubbiſh: And it would 

have ſoon made great 

Progreſs, if the Queen 
hand? thi. 
tecture: But hearing 

6 

1 
- 

2 

== 

tain Secrets that could not be — t to her (for that ſhe could 
N. be Grand Maſter) and being jealous of all ſecret Aſſemblies, 

the Maſons had cer- 

ſhe 

gion, and was declar- _ 

Car) 

The ſent an armed Force to break up their annual Grand Lodge 
at York, on St. Jobn's Day, a7 Dec. 1561. * was 
But Sir Thomas Sackville, Grand [firmly believ'd by all 
Maſter, took Care to make ſome of the [the ed Engljb Maſons. 
chief Men ſent Free-Ma/ons,” who then joining in that Com- 
munication, made a very honourable * to the Queen; and 
ſhe never more attempted to diſlodge or diſturb them, but eſteem'd 
them as a peculiar ſort of Men that cultivated Peace and Friend- 
ſhip, Arts and Sciences, without meddling in the Affairs of 
Church or State. ei bee e 38 ters 
In this Reign ſome Colleges were built, and many ſtately Man- 
ſions, particularly famous Burleigh-Houſe : For Travellers had 
N home — good Hints of the happy Revival of the 
AvevsraAN Stile in Haly,/ with ſome of the fine Drawings and 
Deſigns of the beſt Architects; whereby the Eng/i/o began apace 
to ſlight the Gothic S ile, and would have entirely left it off, if 
the Queen had frankly enconraged the C ft. 
Here it is proper to ſignify the Sentiment and Practice of the 
Old Maſons,” viz. That Kings and other Male Soveraigns, When 
made Maſons, are Grand Maſters by Prerogative during Life, 
and appoint a Deputy, or 1 * of his Election, to preſide 
over the Fraternity with the Title and Honours of Grand Maſtar; 
but if the Soveraign is a Female, or not a Brother, or a Minor 
under a Regent, not a Brother; or if the Male Soveraigty or the 
Regent, tho a Brother, is negligent of the Craſt, then the old” 
Grand Officers aſſemble the Grand Lodge in due Form to 
elect a Grand Maſter, tho* not during Life, only he may be an- 
nually rechoſen while he and they think fit. | 
Accordingly, when Grand Maſter Sack [ This is the Tradition 

"VILLE demitted, A. D. 1567. Francs ſef the Oit Meſont” - 
Russ I, Earl of Bedford was choſen in the Vortb; and in the 
South Sir Fons GRESAu, who built the firſt Royal Exchange 
at Londen, A. D. z570. NMMq rr 88 
| Cnanrts Howarp” Lord of "Effingham, was Grand Maſter 
in the South till 1588. then GroROE HasTiNGs Earl of 
ST 3526 7.2500 A Humtingtony 

f (82 Y , 
Huntington, till the Queen died unmarried, ' 
| on 24 March, 1605. when Nr 
The Crowns of England and Scotland (tho“ not yet the King- 
doms) were united in her Sueceſſor, viz. _ {SIT 
James VI. Stewart, King of Scotland, Son of Mary Stewart 
Queen Soveraign, Daughter of King James V. Son of King 
James IV. by his Queen Maxcartet Tzwnpos eldeſt Daugh- 
ter of HENRY VII. King of England, by his Queen Er1za- 
BETE Planiagenet the Heireſs of England. And he was pro- 
claim'd at London, James I. King of England, France and 
Ireland, on 25 March, 1603. See Part III. [ 

9 — 

CH AP. VI. 

MaAsox R in Scotland 7Zil the Union of the Crowns. 
HE Hiſtory of the firſ# Kings of the Scots in Albin, or 
the Weſtern Parts beyond the Clyde and the middle Gram- 

ian Hills; and alſo that of the Pics in Caledonia along the Ger- 
man Sea Coaſt and towards England, not containing much to our 

Purpoſe, we may begin with the Reſtoration of the Kingdom. 
of Albin (according to the Scotiiſbi Chronicle) made by 

King FzRevs II. Mac Erch,. A. D. 403. 

And even after that Period, the Hiſtory of both theſe Nations 
conſiſts moſtly of War; only we learn that the Piais were a more 
mechanical and mercantil People than the Scots, had built many 
Cities, and firſt founded all the old ſtrong Caſtles in their Do- 
minion; while the Scots affected rather to be a Nation of Sol- 
diers, till mg! — | 

KENNE TE II. 'Mac Alpin, King of Scots, | * See his Race in the 

demoliſh'd the Kingdom of the Pis, and] Margin of next Page. 

ſo. became the fir# King of all Scotland, A. D. — 842. 
He repair'd the publick Edifices after the Wars, and died, 8 58. 

But both the 3 of his Royal Raee were nioſtly engaged 

in War till King Malcoru II. Mac Kenneth, ſucceeded his. 

Couſin King Grimus, A. D. 1008. as on the next Page, - 

For 

(83) 
For King Malcolm II. firſt compil'd the Laws in the famous 

Book of 2 call'd ROI AM MAJzSTATEM, partition'd the 
Land into Baronies, founded the Biſhoprick of Aberdeen (in Me- 
mory of his routing the Norwegians) A. D. 1@17. cultivated Arts 
and Sciences, and fortified his Towns and Caſtles till he died, 

— only two Daughters, vir. . 
Braram the Eldeſt, Wife TT the Younger, Wife of Beth 
of Albanach Thane of | finleg Thane of Angus, 

the es. | | | 
Wy - e 

" I. Pros. . ccc 2. Mackperh killd and took 
his Grandfather, . D. 1033. | Poſſeſſion, 1040. built the Caſtle of 
murder'd by Mac bei h- 1040. | Dun/innan and Lumfannan, &c. and 
but King Duncan I. was | much encouraged the Craft, till cut 
the Patriarch of the follow- | off Y Macduff, A. D. 1057. 

ing Kings on the next Page. | 

—_— 1 at” 1 * * - A 
* 1, Kenaru IL Aer Alpin, died 858, Father of 42. ae V. ſuc- 
— — A . ceeded his Bro- 
85 N II |, Ernvus ſucceeded Conſtantin II.] ther Kenneth II. 
ſucceeded Donald V. — Noe my ry 
— — — ——— [7, Cons TANTIN III. ſucceeded 
6. Dowatd VI, ſuc{ Donald VI. 
ceeded Gregory. — — — 5. GxaecoRY, Son 
— 42 — F InDv LP avsſucceeded Makcolml of King Cong allus, 
8. Max col M I. ſuc . — — — ou had reign'd 
CeedeUConftantin IIIIII. Coruna ſucceeded Duffus. re Kenneth II.) 
He received Gumber-|. om ſucceeded Ex uus. 
land and Weftmore-|1 13. Coxs TAN TIN IV. ſucceeded He built Aberdeen, 
land from Fl Kenneth III. \ | 
I. King of England, - 3 — 
Father of * 
u . A. ——— — ) 

10. Durtvs, who] 12. * I. ſuc- Dogattus tas "Dronce, 

ſucceeded Indul- ceeded Oulenns, A. D. — — 
2 976. the Year after 10 Gaius ſucceeded —— 

= Edgar King of Eng | tin IV. and died 1098. 
land died. Kx NAA enacted the Crown 
bereditary in his Family, and died, A. D. 994. Eancho de warderd by Tabelb 
ts — ow ö 

11 Matcorm II ſuccecded ore, 2 

A. Dom. 1008, King 

King Duncan J. n l | 
e 42 7 X e — nn * Y a =. 2 : ' ; * 
7 7 5. Do x cu 
4. Marcos 1. Keanmore, 4. 5e 5 Wy ; 

ad Throne," 1094. 
built the old Church of Dunſerm A. D 1093. 70d after = = 

Sepulc 
wed the Fyorſtone of the old Ca: 

ain 1095. Donald reign'd till his Ne- 
thedral of Durbam, which phew King Edjav aun for 
richly endo wd. He fortified his 10 
Borders, Cafttes and Seaports, as the Royal Fand Water r ind 
Patron of Arts and Sciences, till he died, 4. D. 55 

By his 05 MARGEARET, Siſter of prince E 5 Atheling,. 
and Grand- Daughter of King Emmunp Tron? 455 the Saxon 
Heireſs of England { {by the e Sccts calPd St, Margaret.) ) He had 

J. ALEXAN- 8. 8 ſuc- [Mav D, 
ox l. ſucceed- |ceeded Brother A. 
nald, and 4 ed Brother Ed. Ilexander, built the Henry 1 es, 
withoutlſſue ar, built the Abby of Holy - Rod King offCount of 
Abbies of Dun-¶ Houſe, and the Ca: England Boulogne.. 
| —fermlin, and'St.\tbedrals of four Bi-[ XA PSAS 
Came $ Inch, St. MichaePs|ſhopricks that he M xuDi]M av pe 
at Scone, &. and patroniz'd! eſtabliſh'd. , The[the Em: Wife of 

the Craft till he died, A. D. Clergy eall'd him preſs. King be. 
1124. without Iſſue. st. David for his] 101 pben. 
great Endowments —=— — 

to the Church; and the Maſons worſhipped him as as their beneficent 
Grand — till he died, A. D. 1153. 
BI his Q. Ma up, the Heireſs of | Huntington, King Davin: J. had 

x een T n 7 

- Henry, Prince of Sroand, died bee his a 11:52. 52. rice 

threr Sons, viz. 
Hog l 

9. 9. NAT coIx IV. calld t I 10. WiLLtamDAvaiD, Earl = 

Maiden,ſucceededGrand-father|the Lion. See Hun tington. See 

David, and died without Iſſue next Page. [acext Page. 
A. D. 1165. 1 Bs 10. WIILIA 

Fo. William the Lion ſuc- 
eeeded Brother Malcolm, built aſia England, A. D. 1219. 
Palace at Aberdeen, rebuilt th 
whole Town of Perth after 

(8%) 

I King WII 

David Earl of Hunliugton died 

But 

L1AM's Race fail- 

a Fire, ſing in the Maiden of Norway, as 

and was an excellent Grondſon the next Page, the Right of 
Maſter, by the Aſſiſtauce of theſSucceſſion was in the Heirs of this 

Nobility and Cle 
A. D. 1214. See 

1 

rey, till he die 
the next Page. 

petition for the 
Margin 

David and they made the Com- 

Crown, as in the 
IO, Wi L- 

| -- 

* * 

Ti 

omperition of Bxvee and Batror OO | 
Prince David Earl of Hung had 3 Daoghters, v. 

1. MaAAGARET, Wife of 

Ilan Lord of Galloway. 

— — — 2 —Uüüö 

Doixnacitta, Wife of 

John Malta Lord of | 

Bernard Caſtle in Durham. 
— | [2 ; - w4290% | WITS, 
1. Joux BALL oT, the 
Competitor, as deſcended from 
David's Eldeſt Daughter, 
was declar d King of Scor-- 
land, by the Umpire of the 
Competition King Ep w. I. 
of England, A. D. 1292. 
for John's owning him his 
Superior. | — *.. 
ut ſo nx revolting, EI 

4 

cbard depos'd him, 1296. 
baniſh'd him into Normandy, 
and parriſon'd Scotland for 
himſelf. But the Exgliſh were 
expell'd firſt by Sir Wil+ 
liam Wallace, and next 
by King Ro T Bavce; 
See the next Margin. 

Anandale, and by 

: 

Ep WAND I. made 

2. Is A8 ELITE, Wife of 
Ros gr Bec, an 
Lord, e Lord of 
dale in Scotland. 

cc — T 

Ros zar Baueg, the 
Competitor, as the ff Male 
from Prince David: But his 
Claim was over- ruled by 
the Umpire; and Robert ſoon 
died. ura 

Robert Bzuce, Lord of 

Earl of Carrick, was by King 
rl of 

Huntington to make him 
eaſy: And after Jobn Bal- 

lio was baniſh'd, King E- 

waARrD promis'd to make 
Baucx King of Srotland, 
in order to engage him a- 
wig Wallace. But next 
Day after the Battle of Fal- 
kirk, A. D. 1298. at a Con- 
ference or Interveiw. 

Engliſh 

14 
from Gaius King: 

Marriage, 

3. Ab, Wife of 
Lord Haſtings. 

Deſcent of dhe 

 RoyarSTEwaRTs 

| of Scotland who died 

Loos, 
2 — hr Pad. 
Bancho, Thane 

of Loch- Abyr, mar- 

der'd by Macbeth, 
1040. Page 83. 
of — 

— 

Fleance fled to 
Hales, and married 
Nerfta, Daughter of 
GabrFYO h Llew- 
elin, Prince of Hales, 
and died there. 
— 
Walter I. the young 
' Welchman came to 
| Scotland upon the 
Reſtoration of King 
Malcolm Neanmore, 
who made him he- 
ritable Lord High 
Stewart. 

Mallace. 
t Margin. 

See the nex 

Walran I; 

(8) 
10. WI IIIA the Lion. — £81; 

— » — — 

255 11. — —— II. rebuilt Cngbam, and died, A. D. 1249 
12. ALEXANDER III. the ſt Matetrom Duncan, died AD. 1265, 

| ' Maxcaner, Queen of Evi King of Norway mY.” 
c 64 
MaRcARET, the Maiden of 7 died coming over 12 
But from the Diſſolution of the Picliſb Kingdom, A. D. 842. 
the Got o Stille was well improv'd in Scotland during Years 448. 
till che aiden of Norway ons and the Competition began. 
This 

— " 2 8 FRET | 2 1 * 4 
* * a. a. «T. = tt 4 
— * * 

— 
— — 

* 

King Jo an Balliol. Houſe of Bavce. . Houſe of SrEWART. 
— — Mallace convinced | WAr TER I. the Stequart. 
3: EDbWAAD 'Balliol,| Bruce of his Error, 
woy 1 Ep w. III | who never ought in Aran the Stewart, 
of England, ſent to Scotl-| againſt the Scots, | e 
and, ee his Party, died 1303. ee 
expel d young King| !ñ„l,7 ALTER II. the Steapart. 
David Bruce, and wa; 2. ROBERT I. Bruce | _—-——— . 
crown'd 4. D. 1332 fled to Scotland, and | Ax £x-Pir Robert Stewart, 
but expell'd.—. 1 341-| was crown'd 1306 And | anverxſLord Darnley, Pa- 
Some ſay his Race] after many fore Con- II. theſtriarchoftheST x- 
are {till in France. flicts, he totally routed Stewart [an rs of Lennox, 
King Eo wand II. of | —A— [from whomdeſcend- 
l at er ar IT A. . dick 14. obtain'd | Jo 'un | 
an honourable Peace, and Waltripus, the Stec - Darnley, Father of - 
A. D. 1329. art. 
WL . 

4. Davio II. — Maxjory BRUCE, WALTER III the — 

eded, inor of car born of K ing Robert's the lineal Male of the Old 
—— Kin —_— — firſt Wie, Jabella, Royal Race, and Patriarchof 
Wife, was ſent to France till] Daughter of Donald, wi Royal Stecvarts, by his 
Edward Balliol was expell'd. Earl of Mar, a no-f Wife Marjory Bruce. 
He was afterwards captivatedſble Pic. | 
in England till ranſom'd, and F: 

WM — 2 |= (King Rops Rr II. Stexvart. See the next Main 

ge CITIES 

687) 

This had been more amply and accurately diſcover'd if the 

Learn d of Scotland had publiſh'd a Monaſticon. Scaticauum, wit 
Account of the old Palaces and Caſtles (as fine" as any in 
— before the Competition of Bxuor and BATLIoE, in 2 
Chronological Deduction: A Work long and much dejiderated I * 
During the Competition, MasonRy was neglected ; but after 
the Wars, King RozezT I. Bruce, having ſettled his Kingdom, 
forthwith employ'd the Craft in. repairing the Caſtles, Palaces and 
pious Houſes ; and the Nobility and Clergy follow'd his Example 
till he died, 4. D. 1329. 150 ee eee 4} | 
a King Davip II. Bruce, after his Reſtoration, much affected 
Maſonry, and built David's Tower in Edinborough Caſtle, till he 
died without Iſſue, A. D. 1370. leaving the Crown to his Siſter's. 

Son, vi. | 11 tr: "#4 Abs ot 
Neoyal Stewards, See the laſt Margin. 
1. Roptry II. Stewart, who left the Care of Maſonry to the 

Eminent Clergy, then very active in raiſing fine religious 

Houſes, till he died A. D. 1390. | 195 1 
2. Roper III. Stewart, being ſickly, left the Government to 

the Care of his Brother Robert Duke of Albany, a great Pa- 

tron of the Cru, till the King died A. D. 144. 

— = 
| 4 "7 —p + # 1 "EE 
x + » of 1 

Cal; lor "5 134 4 ' 1 2. RoBERT 
: — — — — — — — ——— —— 
RoraL STE warns. Ses the laſt Aargin.. .. NIE? 

1. Ronear II. Stexyart, ſo call'd. from, his hereditary Office that now re- 
verted 40 the Crown :-and hence the King's Eldeſt Son is ſtiled the Prin e 
and STE WAA of Kotland. This King was firſt the Eart of Strathern, till his 
Uncle King David died, A. D. 13 10. and King Robert II. died 1390. N 

His firſt Wife Ex iz ang TH Moin, 1 His ad Wife Evens 
was onl rr of Stratheyn, for ſhe diet MA Ros „ was} Queen- 
before he was King: Yet her Son, viz.” of Scotland. 593. 
—— — — — 1 — . 
2. Ros zar III. Stewart (call'd Joun formerly)! 51 70 
ſucceeded his Father, 4 D 1390. Upon hear-| Malter Stewart, Earl of 
ing that his only Son Jamrs, in his Voyage to _4bol. who murder'd King, 
France, was captivated by King Henry IV. of James I. at Perth. | 
England, tho in Time of Peace, King om — — 
broke his Heart, 1406. f a | 

* Janss I. Stexpart, after 18 Years was ranſom'd and. crown'd, 1424. 

juſtly lamented by All, his Murderers were ſeverely puniſh'd. 

(88 ) 

2. Robert III. ene en 1 | 
3. JAMES I. Stezoart, tho? unjuſtly , captivated, ruled by his, 
Regent the ſaid Robert Duke of Albany. 71 ey, N 
Henry WMardlaw, Biſhop of St. _ Andrews, was now Grand 
Maſter, and founded the Univer/fity there, A. D. 1411. tho' it 
was long before a: Place of Education.” .. A 2 
; Robert Duke of Albany died A. D. 1420. and his Son Duke 
Murdach was Regent till the King was ranſom'd, reſtor'd and 
crown'd, 4. D. 1424. INN | 
King James I. prov'd the beſt King ef Scoiland, the Patron 
of the Learned, and countenanced the Lodges with his Preſence 
as the Royal Grand Maſter ; till he ſettled an Yearly Revenue 
of 4 Pounds Scots (an Engliſh Noble) to be paid by every Maſter 
Maſon in Scotland, to a Gzand Waſfer Thi ihe Trace of the 
choſen by the Grand Lodge, and approv*d Old Scortiſh Maſons, and found 
by the Crown, one nobly born, or an |in-their Records. 
eminent Clergyman, who had his Deputies in Cities and Coun- 
ties: and every new Brother at Entrance paid him alſo a Fee. 
His Office impower'd him to regulate in the Fraternity what 
ſhould not come under the Cognizance of Law-Courts: to him 
appeal'd both Maſon and Lord, or the Builder and Founder, when 
at Variance, in order to prevent Law-Pleas; and in his Ab- 
ſence, they appeaPd to his Deputy or Grand Warden that reſided 
next to the Premifſes, 1 e ne ada” 
This Office remain'd till the Civil Wars, A. D. 1 640. but is 
now obſolete z nor can it be reviv'd but by a Roavi Grand 

Mas TER. And now the Maſons joy fully toaſ tel 
ITI To TR King AND THE CRAFT, | 
This excellent King repair'd Falkland and his other Palaces, | 
fortified all his. Caſtles — Sea - Ports, and influencd the Nobi- 
tity to follow his Example in much employing the Craft, till he 
was baſely murder'd in the Dominicans Abby at Perth, by his 
Uncle Waller Stewart Earl of Atboll, A. D. 1437. and being 

By 

f * 

(89) 

By his Wiſe Joan BE AUrox r, eldeſt Daughter of Fobn Beau- 
fort Far] of Somerſet, ' eldeſt Son of JO a ele by his 3d 
Wife Katharine Roet; he _ | 

1 

9 4. A. II. Stewart, a Minor of 7 Years under the Re- 
gency of Lord Calendar. 

In this Reign Milliam Sinclair the great Earl of Orkney 
and Caitneſ was Grand Maſter, and built Roſlin Chapel near Edin- 
borough, a Maſter Piece of 1 beſt Gothic, A. D. 1441. next 
| moge Turnbull of Glaſgow, who founded the Univerſity there, 

D. 1434. 

And the King, when of Age, encouraged the Craft tillz; 90 

he died, — 
3 his Wife Mazr, Daughter of Arnold Duke of Guelders, 

— — 

8. . III. : Stewart, a Minor of 7 Years ſucceeded, and 
* of Age, he employ'd the. Craft in more curious Archi- 
tecture than any King before him, particularly at S/erling, where 
he erected a ſpacious Hall, and a ſplendid Chapel Royal in the 
Caſtle, by the Direction firſt of Sir Robert Cockeran Grand 
Maſter; and next of Alexander Lord Forbes, who continued in 
Office till the King died, A. D. 1488. 

By Nang RET un Yes of Chriſtiern1. K. of Denmark. 

9 AMES «Iv. Stewart aged 16 Years ſucceeded, and by the 
Maſter TOitifam Elphi ppemtton Biſhop of Aberdeen, the 
King founded the Univerſity there 4, D. 14 494- Elpbinſton at 
his own Coſt founded the curious Bridge of near Aberdeen, 
finiſh'd by his Succeſſor Biſhop Gavin Dunbar an excellent 
Grand Maſter, who built many other fine Structures. 
The King delighted moſt in Ship Building, and encreas'd his 
Navy Royal, a very Warlike Prince; till aſſiſting the French in 
a Diverſion of War, he was loſt in Hoden Fiel 1 A. D. 1513. 
Buy his Wife MAAROGARET Tewpos, eldeſt Daughter of Henry 
VII. Kung of. wn Ke hed 

* 7. JAMES - 

(v9) 

r Veen Minorof' 7 Months; lat of Aleks 

MS . the ingenious Patron of the Learned, eſpecially of the Muſes. 
In this Reign the noble Gavin Downlas; er rg 
was Grand Maſter till he died, A. D. 1522. Next 
„ George Creighton Abe of Helyrood-Houe, till A. D: 1 52. 
and then 
Patrick, Earl of Lindſay (the Progenitor of our late Grand 
Maſter CR AwrUR D) who was ſucceeded in that Office by Sir 
David Lindlay, Lion King at Arms, ſtill mentior d' among 
Scottiſh Maſons by the Name of Davy LinpsAy the! lehne 
Grand Maſter ; nl the King died; 13 Dec. 1422ʒ⁊57hf 
By his Wife Maxx, Daughter of” Claut of Zorrain Duke of 
Guiſe, He left only | 

Poe OT er. 
8. May Stewart, Queen Soverai of OOTY 4 Mor of 
7 Days, who became Queen Conſort of France; and after the Death 
of her firſt Huſband King Francis II. without Iſſue, fhe return'd 
to Scotland A. D. 1561. and brought with her ſome fine Con- 
noiſſeurs in the AvevsTAN Stile. | 
She next married, A. D. 1565. Hxnrvy TIER) Nord B 
ley, eldeſt Son of Matthew Earl of Lennon, the lineal Male de- 
ſcended from Sir Robert _— * Darntty of che Old ' Royal 
Race, as in the 7 nd of Page R — 
She fell out with Nobles, 17 dethroned her; l being 
defeated in Battle, ſhe fled for Shelter into England 1 68. Where 
ueen Exizazzen derain*d her a Priſoner, 100 at ! af, W Rea- 
ſons of State, beheaded her on 8 Feb. SIS 

— ͤ car vL0*, Ab 
AMxs VI. Stewart,” dork x 66. on bd 
mega Abdication he was Toon d Fore, 15 6 Ups aged 
13 Months, under 4 ſucceſſive Regents; — when aged near 
12 Years he aſfum'd the Government . D. 1 578. 

He founded the Univer/ity of Edinburg A. D. 1580. He faild to 
Denmark, and married Ax N Princeſs Royal, A. D. 1589. when 
he viſited the noble Tycha Babe the TIRE of Aſtronomers, in 
his Scarlet Iſland. 4 

T 

(or) | 
The Nobility and Gentry daving? Would the Spoil of the 
Church's Revenues, built many ſtately Manſions of the Ruins of 
the pious Houſes, as was done in Enpland; and the Maſons be- 
n to imitate the Augnſtan Stile, — * the Direction of ſeveral 
ucceflive Grand Maſters. | FIRE 
For after the Death of Davy Lindſay, Antdew 
Lord Ochiltree was Grand Maſter ; next Sir James Sandflands 
Knight of Malta: Then Clatid Mamilton Lord Paiſley (Pro- 
genitor of our late Grand Maſter Ax Rcoam) who hr King 
Jamts a Brother Maſon and continued in Office till the Union 
of the Crowns, A. D. 1603. 1 
Hefore this Period, not only the Crown was —— of 
fine Palaces and ftrong Caſtles, but alſo the Nobles and Chiefs 
of Clans had fortify'd themſelves ; becauſe of their frequent 
Feuds or Civil Wars; and the Clergy had built many Abbies, 
Churches, Monaſtries and other pious Houſes, of as fine Go- 
hic as any in Europe, moſt venerable, ſumptuous, and nificent, 
The Fraternity of old met in Moxaſteries in foul Weather; 
but in fair Weather they met early in the Morning on the 
Tops of Hills, eſpecially on St. Joun Evangehſt's Day, and 
from thence. walk*d in due Form to the Place of Dinner, ac- 

13 * * * 1 1 * 
— ** — — _ — — b 4 VEE IFT 1 — 4 — _ _— 4 — 
| = 1 = 2 Fr. * by | 

CHAP. VI. 

MASONRY in Treland till Grand Maſter Kincsron, 
w T b , e ” A. D. 1730. 4 gh wm. * | 2 
| find onw eee an e 55s 

9 4 p 4 
E 4 4 * q 
* 

46h . . 
+. do} #7 4 DV 
92 * _ © 

0011 .£4 (p*atiiomsb.1 % 
EK antient Romans having never invaded © Ireland; we 
have no good Vouchers, of What happened there before 
St. Patrick in the Days of King LZOCAIA, 5 D Famer WF are 5| 
about: A. D. 430 He, founded St, Patricks 2 5 lden. I 
Han 22000 Aramagh, 

(92) 
Ardmagb, and the Priory of St, Aveg at Loch-Derg,' near the Cave 
call'd St. ant eee But afterwards many pious Houſes 
appear*d throughout Lreland. 065 25% rg: ft 
| Nor did the | Anglo-Saxons invade Ireland: But Bede and 
Others, in the 8th Century affirm, that then many . Britons, 
Saxons and Franks. reſorted: to the Schools of Ireland for Edu- 
cation, | | 
But the Norwegiaus, and Danes conquer'd the moſt Part of 
the Iſland; and tho at firſt they deſtroy'd the pious Houſes, | 
they built many Caſtles and Forts with lofty Beacons, to alarm 
the whole Country in an Hour; till they were converted to 
Chriſtianity by the rip, when the Danes built many religious 
. z as at Dublin St. Mary's Abbey and Chriſt Church, about 
At length, BRIEN BOR OM, the rg A 
Grand Monarch of all Ireland of Heber's 2 TP 3 _ 85 a 
Race, after defeating the Danes in many i{cended in a lineal MaleRace. 
Battels, totally routed em, A. D. 1039. | 
So the far greater Part of the Danes were forced to fail home, 
and carried with 'em (as the 7i/ affirm) the beſt old Records of 
Ireland, an irreparable Damage! But the Learned of Other Na- 
tions long to ſee the remaining Manuſcripts of Treland publiſti d 
with good Tranſlations, and alſo a better Monaſticon Hibernicum; 
that among other Antiquities, the Veſtiges of their old Celtic 
Architecture might be trac'd, if poſſible; for the Auguſtan Stile 
had never been there, and the Gotbic was only introduc'd by 
St. Patrick, bf | g 
After the Expulſion of the Danes, the Mileſian Kings of Ire- 
land order'd the Palaces, Caſtles and pious Houſes ta be repair'd, 
and much employ'd the Craft down to Ropexic O Connor, 
the laſt Monarch of all Ireland, who built the wonderful Caſtle 
of Tuam (now demoliſh'd) A. D. 1168. 
But the Royal Branches having made themſelves Petty Sove- 
raigns, were imbroil'd in frequent Civil Wars: One of them, vix. 
E RMO T King of Leinſter, being defeated by the Others, 
came to HE NR II. King of England, and got Leave to con- 

tract 

: (93) | 
tract with Adventurers, viz. Bichard Strongbow Earl of 
Pembroke, Robert Fitz-Stepben of Cardigan, and Maurice Fix- 
Gerald; who brought over an Army of Welch and Engliſh" to 
Dex MorT's Aſſiſtance, took in Dublin, Waterford and many 
other Places, which they fortify*d and ſurrender'd into the Hands 
of their King HENRY II. as ſoon as he had follow'd 'em into 
Ireland, A. D. 1172. | 

Kings of ENGLAND now Lords of IRELAND. 

The JTri/h, not without Reaſon, ſay, that King Hzenzv II. 
did not conquer 1re/and ; only ſome of their Petty Kings and 
Princes, rather than be farther imbroil'd in Civil Wars, choſe to 
come under his Protection, and of their own Accord receiv'd the 
Laws of England, with the Freedom of a Parliament at Dublin. 
But where the Eugliſb prevail'd, Maſonry and other Arts were 
moſt encouraged. | 

Thus the ſaid STRONGBOw Lord Warden of Ireland, built 
the Priory of Kill Mainbam; while St, Bar founded thelZ D. 1174. | 
Aboy on Finbar. _ F 

ahn de Coucy, Earl of K»g/az!, rebuilt the Abby [2.D. 118; 
of Jo Patrick in Down, the es 'of Nedrum and St. Sl 
with St, Mary's any of Innys, &c. 

In the Reign of Ricuaxy I. Alured, a noble Dane, built 
St. Jobn's in Dublin; and Archbiſhop Comin rebuilt | 7D: 1190] 
St. Patrick's there, all of Stone, which before was only of Tim- 
ber and Watles. . 

King Joux was King of Ireland (as the Iriſh affirm) till his 
Brother Richard died, 1199. and afterwards went into Treland, 
and employ'd Henry Launders- Archbiſhop of Dublin and 
Lord Zuftice, as Grand Maſter, in building the Caſtle |4. D. 1219f 
of Dublin; while William Earl of Pembroke built the Priory 
of Killkenny.. . 
King HENRY III. granted Ireland a Magna LE 1216] 
Charta the ſame with that of Exgland. Feltr © adam, 
Archbiſhop of Tam, rebuilt St. Mary's Dublin, and cover'd it 
with Lead; while Pugh de Lacy, Earl of Ulſer,jabour Z B. 1230. 

tounded' 

B or rr By 8 ns 

polis Dublin is now adorned with a ſtately To/lſell or Town-houſe, 

(94) 
founded Carrick- Fergus, a Friary in Down, the Priory of Ards, and 

famous Trim Caſtle, &c. as Gand Maſter, or Patron of the Craft. 

The Native Princes liv'd pretty well with the Exgliſb, till the 
Reign of King EDpwARD II. when Prince EpwARD Bxvet 
(Brother of Robert Bruce King of Scotland) headed the confede- 
rated Triſh, conquer'd the Iſiand, was crown'd Ming Ms D. 1315] 
all Ireland, and reign'd three Years, till Sir Roger Mortimer 
Earl of March landed with a ſtrong Eugliſoꝰ Army and flew 
King Edward Bruce in Battle. | | | 
Aſter this, Maſonry in the Engliſß Settlements revived ; and in 
the North of Ireland too, where the Scots had gradually ſettled, 
and brought with them good Gothic Maſonry, At laſt, | 
The Natives regarded the Kings of England as the lawful So- 
veraign Lords of Ireland down to King Henry VIII. who in 
Defiance of the Pope, proclaim'd himſelf King of ireland, which 
was confirm'd in the Parliament at Dublin, A. D. 1542. 
Ning of Ex LAND now Kings of IXELANPD. | 
_. Henxy King of Jreland' was ſucceeded by his Son King Ep- 
WARD, and he by his Siſter Queen MAR Tewdor, who got 
Pope Paul IV. to make her Queen of Ireland; ſucceeded by 
her Siſter Queen EL1izaBeTH Tewdor, who founded the fa- 
mous Univer/ity of Dublin, A. D. 1 591. 
__ Maſonry made Tome Progreſs in Ireland in the Reigns of 
TJamets I. and CHART ESõ I. till the Civil Wars, when all the Fa- 
brick was out of Joint till the Reſtoration A. D. 1660. After 
which it was revived by ſome of the Diſciples of Inigo Jones in 
the Reign of CHARLES II. and till the Wars of King JA uss II. 
But after King WILLIAM had ſettled the Country, Arts and 
Sciences were again well cultivated in the Reigns of Queen ANNE 
and King Geokox I. 

Many are the beautiful Remains of the beſt Gothic Architecture 
in this fine Iſland, of which the Learned of Ireland can beſt 
give a Chronological Deduction. But ſince the Revolution the 
Auousrax STILE has been much encouraged there, both by the 
Government and the Nobility and Gentry: So that the Metro- 

An 

” uo en ———— . ‚— a. cru. * 

( 95 ) 
an excellent Cyfom-houſe, a curious Armory in the Caſtle, a "fine 
Library in the Univerſity, neat arid convenient Barracks for the 
Garriſon, a Royal Hoſpital for old Soldiers, Stephen's Green Square, 
the largeſt — being an Eugliſb Mile round, or 1960 Fards, 
Stephens's Hoſpita}, beſides Churches and other Edifices raid 

good Architects, arly by Thomas Burgh Eſq; late Sy- 
Sr. General e Trend, and his Succeſſor Sir EdWAY'L& 
Pearce, che Architect of the new magnificent Parliament-AH 

(far beyond bat of = ware” founded on the 3d Feb. r when 
Lord Cartevet, then Lord Lieutenant, the Lords 'Fuftices; ſeveral 
Peers and Members of Parhament, ſome eminent Clergy, with 
many Free Maſons, attended by the King's Nomen of Guard, and 
a Detachment of Horſe and Foot, made a folemn Proceſſion thi- 
ther; and the Lord Lieutenant, having in the King's Name le- 
velPd the Footſtone at the South-/ide, by giving it 3 Knocks with 
a Mallet, the Trumpets ſounded, the ſolemn Croud made joyſul 
Acclamations, a Purſe of Gold was laid on the Stone for the Ma- 

ſons, who drank to the King and the Craft, &c. And in the 

Stone were placed Two Silver Medals of King GROROR II. and 
pom CAarxoLINE, over which a Copper Plate was laid with the 
following Inſcription. g 5 

3 

SERPNISSIMUS ET PoTENTISSIMUS 
Rex GrorGIvs SECUNDUS, 
PER EXCELLENT, Doux ux 
Joannem Dowinum Er BARON. DE Hawnes 
Locuu-TENEN TIM, 

ET PER EXCELLENT, Dominos 
HuGoNEM ARG@HIRP: ARMACHAN: 
THomam WinDHAM CANCELL. 

GuLigzt: ConoLLy Dom: Com: PrRoLocvuT. 
JusTICIARios GENERALES, 
PRIM UNd HujuscE Domus PARLIAMENT: LAPIDEM 
| PosvIT | 
T AQ TzRTIO DIE FeBRUARI MDCC XXVII. 

* * 
"I 5 _ 
4 

At 

a K % „ <a — ———ñ a 

: 

(96) 

At laſt the antient Fraternity of the Free and accepted 
Masons in Ireland, being duly aſſembled in their Grand Lo e At 
Dublin, choſe a Noble Grand Maſter, in Imitation. of their 2 
thren of England, in che gd Year of his reſent Majeſty Majeſty King 
GORE II. A. D. 1730. even our noble Brother 

James kino Lord Viſcount 1 the very next Year after 
his Lordſhip, had, with grout eputation, been the Grand 

5 England ; and he has —.— the ſame Conſtitu- 

trons and antient Uſages. - 
He bn hes ends ſucceeded by noble Brothers in Solo- 
mon 's Chair, and the Grand Lodge of Treland are firmly. reſolved 
to perſevere in propagating the Knowledge of the Noble Cone 
of GzOMETRAY and the Roya Art of ar. | 

PART 

NE CO ee Ion T CCC 7m mH em. ' ww ©Ys 

WP” | 

CE . — 

*** N » f E % 4 * 
er. 
* * a . * « 

— ay 1 
* * J U . hd * 4 
N IA N | 
. a [1 A th « - WS. — 
” 
6 * * 

PART III. 
The Piſtoꝛy of Maonzv in Britain, from the 
Uxiox of the Crowns to theſe Times. 

[ EY 1 OE 2 th 4 : . * * th. RY wy r 2 * a —- . WT 
— 

CHAP. I. 

The AucusTAN STiLE in Britain, from the Union of the 
| Crowns 1603. till the RzesToRATION 166. 

: EFORE this Period, ſame Gentlemen of fine Taite re- 
turning from their Travels full of laudable Emulation, 
reſalved, if not to excel the Halian Revivers, at leaſt to 

imitate them in old Roman and Grecian Masod R NY. But no 
Remains being here, no Veſtiges of the old Aucusran 
Stile, thoſe ingenious Travellers brought home ſome Pieces of 
old Columns, ſome curious Drawings of the Italian Revivers, and 
their Books of Architecture; eſpecially. _ 

 In160- Jowss, born near St. Pau London, A. D. 1572. (Son 
of Mr. Ignatius or Inigd Jenes, a Citizen of London) bred up at 
Cambridge, who naturally took to the Arts of Deſigning, and was 
Hrſt known by his Skill in Landskip-Painting 3 for which he was 
patroniz'd by the noble and learned WIILIAu HerBery (af- 
terwards Earl of Pembroke). at whoſe Expence Jones made the 
Tour of Haly, where he was inſtructed in the Roya! Art by ſome 
of the beſt Diſciples of the famous | 
3 | - AnDREA PALLADI1O, 

bs, | O Ini60 

( 900 
INIGO JON E'S, upon his Return, laid aſide his Pencil, and 
took up the Square, Level and Plumb, and became the Aitru- 
dius Bzitannicus, the Rival of Palladio and of all whe Iratian 
Revivers ; as it ſoon appeat'd after HAS; 
The Un1on of the Crowns, A. D. — | 
When the Nova Tz wpoks expired, and the Rorar STEWARTS 
+++ ſucceeded.” 

Scor z I1sH. Kings of all Britain. Coons Fob 
T. J AMES I. Stewa#t; now the firſt King of all Britain, a 
Royal Brother Maſan, and Royal Grand. Maſter by Prerogative, 
wiſhing for proper Heads and Hands for eſtabliſhing the Au- 
guſtan Stile here, was glad to find ſuch a Subject as Jniga 
Jones; whom he appointed his General Surveyor, and approv'd 
of his being choſen Grand Maſter of Eugland, to preſide over 
the Lodges. | 
The King order'd him to draw the Plan of a new Palace at 
Whitehall; and ſo when the old | Bunquetting-Houſe was pull'd 
down, the Kine with Grand Maſter Jones and his — 
Wardens, (the foreſaid WILL TIAM HERBERT Earl of Pembroke; and 
Nicholas Stone the Sculptor,) attended by many Brothers in due 
Form, and many eminent Perſons, walk'd to Hhitehall Gate, and 
levelPd the Fooztone of the New Banquetting-Houſe with 3 greats 
Knocks,” loud Huzza's, Sound of Trumpets, and a Purſe of broad 
Pieces of Gold laid upon the Stone for the Maſons to: drink. 

"1% 4.0004 Os ng and and the- Craft! | 

160 

Tho' for want of a eee Fund, no more was built 
but the faid glorious BANG GE TTING- Hovsz, the fineſt. ſingle 

Room of that large Extent ſince the Days of Auguſtus, and the 

Glory of this Reign. Afterwards the lofty CP was adorned 
by the fine Pencil of Peter Paul Rupens. 

The beſt Craftſmen from all Parts. reſorted to Grand Maſter 
Jox ks, who always allow'd good Wages and ſeaſonable Times 
for Inſtruction in the Lodges, which he conſtituted with excel- 

lent By-Laws, and made em like the Shoots or Academies of the 
Deſigners. 

2 

0 
— S.at_t At U. - 2 CCC - Tn TT EI <-> — — — 
2 as . = 1 * hs 
- - K 4 

(99) 
Deſigners in /aly, He alſo held the Sg 7 1 *. 
Quarterly Communication of the Głand Stone We og | 
Lodge of Maſters and Wardens, and the}Manuſcript burnt 1220 
Annual General Aſſembly and Feaſt on St. Johns Day, when he | 
was annually rechoſen, till A. D. 1618. when the foreſaid 
WIILIAM Earl of Pembroke was choſen Grand Maſter ; and 
being approved by the King, he appointed Jnigo Jones his 
Deputy Grand Maſter. * 5 | 
Maſonry thus flouriſhing, many eminent, wealthy and learned 
Men, at their own. Requeſt, were accepted as Brothers, to the We 
Honour of the Craft, till the King died 27 March 162 f. leaving 
two Children, ix. * vel} 1 „ Bit ods 

— — — — —ͤ —Ä—i — 
2. CHARLES I. Se- , Elizabeth Stewart Queen of Bohemia. | 
art, aged 25 Years ſuc- -—— — A— — 
ceeded ; alſo a Royal Bro- Princeſs Sophia, Electreſs of Brunſwig. 
— — — J 
thep | 900. 2 PEE George I. King of Great Britain. Below. 
well ſkill'd in all the Arts N | 3 — 
of Deſigning, he encouraged the beſt foreign Painters, Sculptors, 
Statuaries, Plaiſterers, &c. but wanted no Foreigners for Archi- 
tecture; becauſe none of em equall'd his own Inigo Jones and 
his excellent Diſciples. When Grand Maſter PRMRRORR demit- 
ted, 4. D. 1630. | | 3 
HENRY Danvers:Earl of Danby ſucceeded in Solomon's Chair 
by the King's Approbation; and at his own Coſt erected a ſmall, 
but moſt accurate Piece of the old Architecture, by: the Deſign of 
his Deputy Jones, even the famous beautiful Gate of the Phyſic 
Garden at Oxford, with this Inſcription. | EP 

— — 

 Grokim Der orTIMuI MaxIMI Honor CaRoLi REeGls, . 
Is UsvM. AcADP EMI ET ReipuUBLICE, A. D. 1632. 
_.} Hexxicus Comes Dax BY. | 

_ Tnomas Howard Earl of Arundel (the Progenitor of our 
late Grand Maſter Nox rorx) then ſucceeded Danby at the Head 
I- Nad 8 of 0 

(100 ) | 
of the Fraternity, a moſt excellent Connoiſſeur in all the Arts of 

Deſigning, and the great Reviver of learned Antiquities, who 
will be ever famous for his Marmora Crandelians f But Deputy 
Jones was never out of Office; and join'd Grand Maſter 
AzUNDEL, in perſuading Francis Ruflel Earl of Bedford, to 
lay out his Grounds of Covent-Garden in an Oblong-Square Eaſt 
and Vi, where he built the regular Temple of St. Paul with 
its admirable Portico, made Parochial A. D. 16 35. when 

Grand Maſter Bzprozp ſucceeded, and employ'd his Depur 
| to build the North and Eaſt Sides of that Square with 
large and lofty Artades (commonly call'd Piazzas) which, with 

the ſaid Church on the Veſt End, make a moſt beautiful Proc 
pect after che Italian or antient Manner. 

Ix IO Joxes ſucceeded ' Bedford in Solomont's Chair 
and before the Wars the King employ'd him to build the Tas 
t Ga of Somerſet- Houſe fronting the Thames: And 2 

King inte to carry on Whitebail according to Jones's Plan, 
but was An —— by the Civil Wars: For the Par- 
_ bament's Army conquer'd the King and Parliament too, and mur- 

der'd him at his own Gate on 30 January 1645. 

Tet even during the Wars, Maſons met occaſionally at 
ſeveral Places: Thus Elias Aſhmole i in his Diary Page 15. fays, 
T was made a Free Man at Warrington, Lancaſhire, with Colo- 
nel Henry Man ware by Mr. Richard Penket the Warden, and 
the Fellow Crafts (there mention*d) on 26 Oct. 1646. | 

The Great Ix 100 Jon s aged 80 Years died at London, and was 
buried in St. Bennei's Church at Paul's Wharf on 26 2 16.52. 
the Gzand Maſter of Arcbitects, who provgnt”'the Augnſtan 
Stile into England. 

He ſhew'd his great Skill alſo in deſigning wing the mages agnificent 
Rotve of Queen ſtreet, and the Vet Side of Lincoly's-Inn- 
Fields, with iful Lindſey-Houſe, le Chirurgeons Hall and 
Theatre, Shafiſbury-Houſe in ker ate-fireet,, Southampton- 45 
Bloomſbury (now the Duke of Bedford's) Berkeley-Houſe Piccadi 
(nom the Duke of Devonftire's) lately burnt and rebuilt; 4 

curate York-Stairs at the Thames, &c. And in the Country, 
_ Gunnersbury-Houſe 

6101) 
Gunner, Houſe near Brentford, Wilton-Houſe Wilthire, Caſtles 
Abby Nortbamptonſbire, Aa fu &c. res of 
Some of his beft. Diſciples met privately for their mutual Im- 
Yrovement till the Reſtoration, who preſerved his clean Draw- 
ings and accurate as, (ſtill preſerved by the ſkilful rect, 
the noble Ricuarp! BovLy the preſent Earl of Burlington) and 

after the Reftoration they propagated his oft y Stile. 

—_— „ 2 
* _ 
— 

— 

| CHAP, 1. 4 
From the ResTorAT10N 1660. till the Rx vol uriox 2688, 

3. CHARLES II. Stewart, ſucceeded his Father, and was mag- 
nificently reſtor'd, aged 30 Years, on his own Birth-Day, 
29 May 1660. In his Travels he had been made a Free Maſon, 
and having obſerved the exact Structures of foreign Countries, he 
- reſolved to encourage the. Auguſtan Stile by reviving the Lodges, 
and approv id their Choice of Lies * 
Henxy JexMyn Earl of St. Mbansas their Gꝛand Saſter, who 
appointed Sir Joun DENUA his. Deputy Grand Maſter, 
Sir Chiiſfopher TUren,2' Grand F According to a Copy of the 
Mr. John Teb, _ Tln. old Conſtitutions, this Grand 
Maſter held a General Aſſembly and Feaſt on St. Jown's Day 
27 Dec. 1663. when the following Regulations were: made, 
1. That no Perſon of what Degree ſoever, be made or accepted 
4 Free Maſon unleſs in a „ Lodge, whereof one to be a 
Maſter or a Warden in that Limit or Diviſion where: ſuch Lodge 
ts kept, and another to be' a Craftſman in the Trade of Free 
Maſonry. _ 9 55 2414 nde | 
2. That no Perſon hereafier ſhall be accepted @ Free Maſon, 
But ſuch as are of able Budy,' boneſt Parentage, good Reputation,. 
and an Obſerver of the Laws of the Land. N 4 
3. That no Perſon hereafter wh" ſhall: be arcepted a Free Maſon, 
hall be admitted into any. Lodge or Aſſembly, until be has-brought . 
4 Certificate of the Time and Place of his Acceptation res. = | 
1 * 

- 
f 
/ 

(' 1602)! | 
Lodge that accepted him unto the Maſter of that” Limit or Divi- 
ſion where 171 Lodge is kept : And the ſaid Maſter ſhall enrol the 

ſame in a Roll of Parchment to be kept for that Purpoſe, and ſhall 
give ay Account of all ſuch Acceptations at every General Aſ- 
ſembly. „„ | | 

"4. That every Perſon who is now @ Free Maſon,” Mall bring to 
the Maſter a Note of the Time of bis Acceptation, to the End the 
ſame may be enrolPd in ſuch Priority of Place as the Brother de- 
ſerves , and that the whole Company and Fellows may thz” better 
know each other. * 8 A r 

5. That for the Future the ſaid Fraternity of Free Maſons Shall 
be regulated and goveri'd by One Gxany'MasTER, and as many. 
Wardens as the ſaid Society ſhall think fit to appoint at every An- 
nual General Aﬀſembly. | FREDRINS Lon, 
6. That no Perſon ſhall be accepted unleſs he be 21 Years old 
or more. | 0 3 
Tuomas Sa vAeE Earl of Rivers ſucceeded St. Albans as Gand 
Maſter, 24 Zune 1666. who ap- Mr. Jobn Web, AY Grand 
7 5 Sir Chʒiſtopher Wren LMr. Grinlin Gibbons, IM ardens. 
his Deputy ; but the Deputy and Wardens manag'd all Things. 

This Year on 2 Sept. the Great Burning of London hap- 
pen'd, and the Free Maſons became neceſſary to rebuild it. 

AT ' Accordingly, 13 4851 
The King and Grand Maſter order'd the Deputy Uren to 
draw up a fine Plan of the new City, with long, broad and re- 
gular. Streets; but tho? private Properties hinder*d it's taking 
Effect, yet that noble City was ſoon rebuilt in a far better Stile 
than before. | ; | 
The King. levelFd the Foofſtone of the New Royal-Exchange in 
ſolemn Form, on 23 Od. 1667. and it was open'd, the fineſt in 
fuurope, by the Mayor and Aldermen on 28 Sept. 1669. Upon 

the Inſides of the Square above the Arkades, and between the 
Windows, are the Satues of the Soveraigns of England. After- 
wards the Merchant Adventurers employ'd Grand Warden 
Gibbons, to erect in the Middle of the Square the KI NG's Statue 

to 

( 103 ) 
to the Life, in Cæſarian Habit, of white Marble, with an elegant 
Inſcription, * below. | 36 wand 9, f 
- GILBERT: SHELDON, Archbiſhop of | Canterbury, an excellent 
Architect, ſhew'd his great Skill in defigning his famous Thea» 
trum Sheldonianum at Oxford, and at his Coſt it was conducted 
and finiſh'd by Deputy Uuren and Grand Warden IUeb; and 
the Crafiſinen having celebrated the Cape-Stone, it was open'd 
with an elegant Oration by Dr. South, on 9 July 1669. 
D. G. M. TUren built alſo that other Maſter Piece, the pretty 
Muſzum near the Theatre, at the Charge of the Univer/ity. Mean 
while TREES, 110 | Nl ot 
Lord Dom was rebuilding apace; and the Fire having ruin?d 
St. Paul's Cathedral, the Kino with Grand Maſter Rivers; 
his Architects and Craftſmen, Nobility and Gentry; Lord Mayor 
and Aldermen, Biſhops and Clergy, Sc. in due Form levell'd 
the Footftone of New St. Paul's, deſign'd by D. G. Maſter: 
ren A. D. 1673. and by him conducted as Maſter of Merk 
and Surveyor, with his Wardens Mr. Edward Strong Senior 

and Junior, upon a Parliamentary Fund. | 
The City rear*d beautiful Moor-Gate, and rebuilt Bedlam- 
Hoſpital in the beſt Old Stile, A. D. 1675.,and where the Fire 

. 

„ 

E. 
- 

* Cao SECUNDO CX8ARI. BRITANNI (oo 
A* PAT RIA PATRE. 

R ECU Or TIMO CLEMENTIssIMO AUGUSTISSIMO: 
GENERIS HUMANI DRLICIIS 
UTRiUusYVE FoR TUN VICTORI. 

Mazium: Domino Ac Vinpici 2; Dad 
SociETAs MERCATORUM ADVENTUR. ANGLIZ-. 
Q ?ER CCCC Jam PROPE ANNOS 

REGIA MajesTATE FLORET + © +; 
FiDE1i INTEMERATZE ET GRATITUDINIS AETERNE: 
Hoc TESTIMONIUn 

VENERABUNDA PosUIT 
Anno SALUT1s Humanz MDCLXXXITV. . 
| | began 

(104) 

began, the City raisd the famous . Monument of White Stone, a 
fine fluted Column of the LE Order, 202 Foot high from * 
Ground, and the 8b 15 Foot in Diameter, with an eaſy 
Stair of black Marble — the Shaft leading up to an Iron 
Balcony, at the Top, the higheſt Column upon Earth. 

It's Pedeſtal is 21 Foot Square and 40 Foot high, with moſt 
ingenious Emblems in Baſſo: Relievo, wrought by the foreſaid 
Gabriel Cibber, with Tatin en, It was finiſh'd 4 D. 

1677. 
ſtopt at Temple-Bar, the City built a fine 

80 where the Fire 
Roman Gate, with the Statues of Queen EL Iz ABE TRH and King 
Jaws I. on the Eaſt Side, and thoſe of King CrarLEs I. and 
CHARLES II. on the Hz. Side. 4 
= The eme diſcover'd alſo their fine Taſte by their ac- 
curate College, a Maſter-Picce ; and the Lawyers by the Front of 
Middle Temple-Lane... 

And after the Fire, the Pariſh Churches were many. of em ele- 
ks rebuilt, eſpecially -St. Mary-le-Bow with it's Steeple of 
Ce | mpeg and St. Mary el. Church with it's admirable 
Cu 

he: Kone, alfo 3 Cbelßa- Hoſpital for old Soldiers, and 
moſt curious New. Palace at Greenwich from a Deſign of Ingo 
Jones, conducted by Grand Warden Tel as Maſter, of Work; 
and another Palace at Wincheſter, delign'd by Grand Maſter 
Wren, an excellent Pile. of the richeft Corintbian Order, co- 
ver'd in before the King's Death, but never finiſh'd, and now 
in Ruins. | 
The King order'd Sir WI I LIAN "Bruce, Baronet, "Grand 
Maſter of Scotland; to rebuild his Palace of Holyrood-Houſe at 
Edinburg in the beſt Auguſtan Stile, and the Sco7tifh Secretary- 
Office at Whitehall.. G. 1 21 Bi dan 128 his own pretty 
Bear at Ae | | | 

80 

” | 
many _ Aan 

ry, were built ar 
ne- Houfe Bedfordſbire— 

Maſters : For after G. Maſte 
Rivers demitted, A. D. 1674. 
. .Gzokce VIEIAAs Duke of Bucks, an old Major, fucceeded as: 
G. Maſter of England; but being indolent, he leſt all) Baſineſs' 
to his Deputy Muren and his Warden; and when he demitted 
LRT WT TT Dan i 
_ Henxy Benner Eatl, of Arlingien ſucceeded, who was too 
deeply engag'd in Affairs of Stale to mind the Lodges: Yet in 
his Aſaſterſbip the Fraternity was conſiderable ſtill, and many; 
Gentlemen requeſted by he admitted. Thus the foreſaid Brother 
Aſemale (in his Diary Page 66.) lays, 1 oo 
On the * March 1682. I reteived a Sunmons to ere, next 
Day at a Lodge in Maſons-Hall London, ; when we. admitted into. 
the Feltywſhip, of Free Maſons Sir William Wilſon, Capt. Richard 
Borthwick, and four more. I was the ſenior Fellow, it being 35 
Years fince. I was admitted; and, with me were Mr. Thomas 
Wiſe (Maſter of ibe London Company. of Moons ) and eight mare 
old Free Maſonf, We. all dined: at the Half, Moon Tavern in Cheap- 
fide, noble Dinner, prepared or the Charge of the new /dceepted 
ajons. .. Mun! MASI 1.4 6 oh 11 4 
t many of the Fraternity's Records of this and former Reigns 
were loſt in the next and at the Revolytion ; and many of em 
were too N in our Time from a Fear of SR, * 
coveries: t we have not ſo an Account; as could be 
wiſh'd of the Grand res c. a 5 ay Ms 
| King Charles II. dying pn 6,Frbruary 1684. his Brother fuc+ . 
ceeded, viz, " FS: 2's. . * tad 2 | . 
4. James II. Stewart, aged þ Years. A moſt excellent 
Statue of him till ſtands in Wizteball, But not being a Brother 
Maſon, the Art was much neglected, and People of all forts were 

( x06 ) 
otherwiſe engag' d in this Reign: Only upon the Neath of Grand 
Maſter Arlington 168 5 the 9 met and eleted 1 

Sir Cuxtierorner Weary Oan — who aPpoirited 

Mr. Gabriel. Gibber, I Grand une. While carrying on 
Mr, Kdwand 8 15 ents iSt. K. Bae, he antually 
met thoſe- Brethren t — him; to keep up good old 
Uſages, till the Revolution, e eee e eee ee 
Wiilliam-of- Prince of. Orange, landed on 5 Nov. 1688, 
and King Jauss faib'd to France on 23 Dec. following. and died 

dend un 6 „CCC 

ni Ob N r in 9 e — en 1 — How Ie! 07 

r — 
P . "S 

+? 2 ” 7 JON \ | » 7 11 
e eee oo" E uns 
From the RevorurTton t Grind Muſter MoxTAou, 172 

Ze 

ON ke Conven Ff $ : 
. FOX King Zones gong if; 0 DET : LS 
au 

hrets 5 their Iſſue, diz. N Back 
All Sk $ of Damast: And fallin on 
Prince 0 W 5. * 5 his Mot Mother, Steward 10 01. 
James eldeſt Siſter: But Ox A 0 rel r 
ANY on 13 Feb. 1683. 785 bo "OM? the ing 5 
et _ aged 38 Yar, were proclai d King 
a and Queen, Joint ol | 
6. Goren Ma. RY U. Stewart, aged 26 22075 s of England; . 

Fcotlas 
"Se r gp ume 0 

Particular Lager were not 16 Kecpegt 400 Woti beſt in 
the .. South, except in or near the Places w where great Works 
were carried on. Thus Sit Nobert Cn got an Occaſional 
dge of his Brother Maſters to mee 15 St. Thomds's Hoſpital - 
wark, A. D. 1693. and to ad rie the Goyernours about 

ce lt Dali ig fue Rae a 5. ty Ran 

Herr 
580 1 

7 

( 167), 

moſt beautiful ; near which a Rated, Lodge continued long alicr- 

Wards. 

Beſides that and the old Lodge 3 St. Pauls, there was ano- 

ther in Piccadilly ovet againſt St. Fames's. Church, one near W-:|t- 

minſter Abby, another near Covent- Garden, one in Holborn, one 
on D and fone more that aſſembled ſtatedly, 

9 Tv 0. N. made a; Free Maſon, approved of 1 

„ Maft er Wax, an * 'd Bim in rearing 

q Qi: if 6 Cathedral, and che grea Pamptr 
in the A guſt an Falle, b far 8 ng? N ouſe 1 go Fla 

after an 814 Neſign. © where a brig he 2 Lie 
held during the Bü f Kiog alſo built 15 little __ 

of Kenſi 75 and finiſh'd 9 Hoſpital ; but . the 
II.) to be 

fine new Palace of Greenwith (begun by King Ch 
an Hoſpital for old Samen, A. D.4695.” and order'd it be fi- 
nityd as begun after oties's © Def 25. 

This Year our mo noble Brother CrarLes Lzx nos Duke 

of Richmond and Lennox (Father of the. preſent Duke) Maſter 
of a Lodge at Chichefter, coming to mual Aſſembly and Fat 
at London, was choſen Grave Mafer and approy'd 15 15 King 

D. Seh opher Are 5 his 1 5 5 Strong Jen. 
a 

Fer, Who acted as be- Ad eee 
Mageer, A. D. 1 

"Head" of the Craſh, "AT, Was, again choſen, & 2 
f K L Regt 500 Archite Sale yas. wonderful FER 

15 the” K:up diſcover'd. his Ut de Tate in building. his Wi 
© | 

Palace at Fro in Holland, till 

it 7 ANN ers eee oy 

38 "Year > We mg 8 770 at ; 
ar e 

bat: ied at Kenjih tou 2 Firing 22 dat and N ee 

1 5 Axx enla rg St. 5 7 Palac "and 78 5 1 8 

dien at W 8 

B of 1 A. e 105 N 2 ar 
Aue f nr LL 7 ba IT OS 5 Bike 5 

— —— 
1 : 
LEY 
- oy 4 

" | mes I. 
ifs of ing Jon 5 72 

— — 2 — 

* 

W —— ——— . U li —— Hu—ö—œ— . ˙ ² J õ i ũ Ä ̃%¶⁵Üùçcn Brno oe ne 

| 
| 
| 

| ( 108 ) 

The Queen, in her Sth Year, united the 12% Kingdoms of 
England And Scotland” into the one Kingdom of r 
which commenced on 1 May en ene 
Aſter the Niion of the Crowns” 10 Ves. enn -e (6 

The Queen and Parliament enacted the baiting 8 hw 
Churches in the Suburbs 2 u ; and the Pane ſhew'd 

07 Skill in Rucki rough Houſe in 
Jones, Park, = Hoe e e the Opera 

Hare 755 | Many more about OWN. : As in the 
5 . Hue of evon/hire Hie Chatfwirth i in Derbyſbire, 
Stourton a the 255 f Cartil?s Caſtle | ; hear York, 

FHinſty ouſe” or Hinein Falte Berry ouſe in Kent, 
Wilbury Honſe in Wilt/bire, &c. oO the Peace'of Utrecht 
Man) rich old Officers in the Arm ching home Con- 

| nou urs 1 in Architecture, Gef i i f ſtate anſions. 

But the tan 2 2 W welt y Fiehly Pay at Oxford 

in * New Chapel of 7; SAT e by Dr. B in Peek - 

| ater ar? of Chri 1 dlle A in 
195 0 g e by of 5 55 e 8 
Finting 

en 0 e | 
Yer, 720 the 15.0 e Lox d 
* 1 x be 10 7K of the ert a ages 3 
- vole Gran at pf 

Alem) 9 — not duly ; kita Ln, oh bio ft * 

G. M. Wa EN; who had defign'd. Fats Wondia Apache 
and as Maſter of Work had conducted it from the * Foorfaone 

| 7 Ionour to finiſh tft noble Cathedral, the fineſt and 9 47795 

Oy le he the e ee Stile except St. Peter's at Rome and, cele- 

f rected' the roß on of the 
7 i 7725 4 5 1988 __ 1 MY | Ae 
me few Yea after this Fir Chriſt opher Wien | n lecke He 

q 

& Office er Grand Mater; yet the 01d: 204 ec 5 0 St. 1 Pauls 32 

a few more continued their Rated Meetings 
f n Ann died at Kenſington without ne 60 W 1714. 
was the laſt of the Race of Kin Charles I. upon the Throne 

Owns, e 7, ate exclided by © 12 

aL} 11 

* 

414 
a#? 8 
"+ — — 

(109) 
Act of Parliament for ſettling; the Crown. upon the, Protefian! 
Heirs of his Siſter EL IZzabr TH Stewart Queen of Bobemia above, 
viz. on her Daughter the Princeſs, SoruiA Electreſs Dowager, of 
Brunſwig-Luneburg ; and ſhe dying a little before eee 
ber 20 the wag 8 Are A. Mee Tarr 

— 

us "SOL 146 ron. yn 7 de. 

» - = , 1 
. . e ese of Great-Britin bi ling. agg; 
SI \ N De * i 8 15 * ny 4 

VII TN Jen 4 1 
1 King Groxer 1 1 eb e moſt regen 27 0 5 or. 
20 Septs 1714. and hon was over A. B. 1121 
few: Lodges.at London: eg themſelves, ee Ty; 7 
her 25 e by to cement. 8 Cad 
Center of Union ALIMONY; vz, 5 e 
1. At the Gooſe and . St. F Took! 8 ſy 

ne near ane. 

2. At the Cremm Alethouſe an Par 
3. At the Apple- Tres Tavern in bn Mr Breet 4. . 

4. Ag che Rummer . ee 2 q Weſtminſter . 
"Key, and ſome et at, the Ort ec, An 
having put into the 5 7 Her | (now the A 

of a Lodge) ithey,conſtituted..themſelyes, a — | 
i deren, * E and, forthwith. revived the 
Commune . Lodges (call d the 

reſolv'd to 1 he Annua, 72 3 and Feats. 12 ut 
_chuſe a GRAND Te e 
dare de Hogour, of N alle Brather at Rat“? HH, 

73907 DAE 1 is Ic}? 63 | . ing 1 a 

22 e E yet 2 Wy os Ore 5 

 cepted Maſons was W Gooſe: and Cridim 

»h "Belore'Dinngr, th the atded] 417 Min row, the Mele of 
Lodge) in the Chair, propoſe Ha Lift, > 22 
the Be wan e Hands ee W t 

* 1 + : Y 'S 
$1010 2417 Ju L Tot | 2187 177 m * 1 A Chas of tr 
% « 5a, en. NM A Is MY ar 90 +75 : 1 . 5 * ** | . 19 4 EF. 
T. TJ Je 

j 

W (r) 

Mr. AN * Saver * Grand Mafer of Maſons, 
who being forthwith in- Capt. Joſepb Elliot, “ Grand 
veſted with the Badges diu, an, Landal, Carpenter; Wardens. 
of Office and Power by the ſaid on Aifter, and inſtalbd, was 
duly congratulated by the Aſſembly who -pay*d him the Homage. 

SAYER Grand Maſter commanded| 7 N 1. is call'q the Der 
the Mater and Wardens. of Lodges p ſhout, 

meet the Grand Officers every Quarter ſmeet arte according. fo 7 4 
tient Ulage. And | 

in Communication, at the Place that W and 10 
ent ban Pee in 27 orm ; 
[1 ee TOR e * otherwiſe, e coy in Die Fi ESE 
"ASSEM BLY- — Raff 

ſaid Place 24 June 17 14 $1949 9% 04 — EI. | 
Brother Sayer Log: gather'd' the Votes, after Dioner 
claim'd aloud dar Bricher PANE ES 20s 1503 41925 
- Gzo#oE one! 3 'Grand- 1 of Abb. who bei 
duly mveſted, bbn Cordwtl,; *City Cirpener 
inſtallbd, con =_ Thomas Mor rice; Stone Cutter, Wartens: 
tulatod and 55025 recominended the ſtrict Obſervance of the 
Quarterly Communication; and deſired any "Brethren to bring 
to 222008 Grand Lodge any - old Writmgs' and Records concernin —4— 

onry/ in order to thew the Uſages of 4 
mes: fm ane pony no ol Copies of the e ee. 
a * produced and coated. 
by ASSEMBLY and Feuſt at the baia Place, LEH 
Brother Payne having gather'd the Votes, after Pinner pro- 
claim'd aloud our Neven Brother Eon 
oN THEOPHILUS DzsAcul ERS, L. L. D. * F. R. 8. Grund 
Miter 

of Miſons, and be- Mr. Into Sayer foreſaid, 7 'Grand- 
duly inveſted; inſtalbd, & Mr. Tho. Morrice forcaid, Wardens. 
congratulated and ho 9, forthwith reviv'd the ad regular 
and * or - He the of the Free Mafons.” 

Now feverat o Brothers, that had neglected the Craft, v — 
ited the Lodges; ſome Noblemen yere alſo made Brothers,” 210 . 
2 en were . 2 

pon qo Bu 5 

Ent) 

ASSEMBLY and Nef ar the forefiid Place'24 une 1940. 
Brother e e r net the” Wald after ENS 

proclaim'd. aloud. ah 

Grone Payne Ed ; again Grand Maſters of. A7 "es 
duly invefteds DEA Hobby, Stone · Cutter, Grhν,ꝭE 

inftall'd; Mayan. Mr. Rich. Ware,Mathematician, F Wurilem. 

lated and homage; began che uſual ann of Joy; Love 

and Harmony. 0 1 s 
This Fear, at ſome hate — ſeveral very valuable a. 

nuſcripis (for they had nothing yet in Print) concerning the Fra- 

ternity, their Lodges, Regulations, Charges, Secrets, and V 
ele one writ by” Mr. Nicholas Stone the — If 
ee were too haſtily burnt by ſome ſcrupulons Brothers ; 
not fall into ſtrange Mands. -L 
At the | Quarterly 8 or Grand Lodee, in ample 
Form, on St. Jobn Evangeh/i's Da o. at the ſaid Place 
t was agreed, in order to avoi 
, "that; the ucw Grand after ſor the future ſhall be 

nt or old Grand Maſter ; and if 2 v*d, that the Bro- 

8 EOpoed, 1 ſhall be kindly, faluted; or even if ab- 

| be toaſted as Grand Maſter Ele,” ©: 

— agreed, that for the future the "Netw Grand MARE, 48 
foon as he is inſtall'd, fall have the ſole Power of appointing | 

both his Grand Wardens and à Deputy Grand Maſter ( ft 
as neceſſary as e according to antient N when Noble 
Brother) Ver Grand 

According a0 | 
At Penn i ample Form i Lad 1 97 5 172146 t 
the ſaid Place 255 Mer PAYNE propoſed or 1 Sache 
our môſt Noble Broth © 

Jon Duke of MoxTacv, Miſter of a Lodge ; nts Ve; 
preſent; was forthwith ſaluted Grand Maſter Ele, 488 his Health 

drank in due Form; when they all expreſs'd great Joy at the 
happy Proſpect of being again patronized by noble Grand Ma- 

laß ag in the proſperous Times of Free Maſonry. 
Payxt 

Diſpates on the Annual Feaſt- 
| propoſed to the Grand Lodge ſome time before the Feaſt; by 
the Pre 

aſtets. . 

_ neſs, After Dinner and Grace ſaid, 

\( 142 ) 
PavN Grand Maſter obſerving the Number of Lodges to en- 
creaſe, and that the General Aſembly requir'd more Room, pro- 
poſed the next Aſſembly and Feaſt to be held at Stationers- Hall 
Ludgate-ſtreet ; which was Fe | 
Then the Grand Hardens were order'd, as uſual, to ſomes 

, * 

: 

the Feaſt, and to take ſome Stewards to their Aſſiſtance, Bro- 
thers of Ability and Capacity, and to appoint ſome Brethren to 
attend the Tables; for that no Strangers muſt be there. But the 
Grand Officers not finding a proper Number of Stewardi, our 

Brother Mr. Joſiah Uilieneau, Upholder in the Barrougs 

Southwark, generouſly undertook. the whole himſelf; attended 
by ſome Waiters, Thomas Meorrice, Francis Bailey, &cc. 

\ 

- 
——_— — td * K 

9 . — *% * * 

—_— 

From Grand Mafter the Duke of MoxnTacu to Grand 
yd. yt 5 * Mafter Rrenmond. OO 
"A SSEMBLY: and Feaſt at Statioiers-Hall, 24 June 1721. 
Vn the 7th-Year of King Gzxoxce J. 
 *Payneg Grand Maſter with his Wardens, the former Grand 

Officers, and the Maſters and Wardens of 12 Lodges, met the 

Grand Maſter Ele in a Grand Lodge at the Ming - Arms Tavern 
St. Paul's Church-yard, in the Morning; and having forthwith 

recognized their Choice of Brother Mom r Au, they made ſome 
new Brothers, particularly the noble PEHILIr Lord Stanbope, now 
Earl of Cheſterfield : And from thence. they march. on Foot to 

the Hall in proper Clothing and due Form; where they were joy- 

ole receiv'd by about 150 true and faithful, all clothed. . 
fter Grace ſaid, they. ſat down in the antient Manner of 
Maſons to a very elegant Feaſt, and dined with Joy and Glad- 

: 
4 
· 4 

l 

Brother 

( 173 ) 
Brother PA vxx the old Grand Maſter madeſSce d of it ac 
the firft Proceſſion round the Hall, and when re-|chmond” Page 1 17; 
turn'd, he proclaim'd aloud the moſt noble Prince and our Brother. 
. I, Joun MonTacu Duke of Montagu Gz and MASTER 
of Maſons! and Brother Payne having inveſted his Grace”s 
Woxsxr1e with the Enſigns and Badges of his Office and'Autho- 
rity, inſtall'd him in Solomon's Chair and fat down on his Right 
Hand; while the Aſſembly own'd the Duke's Authority with 
due Homage and joyful Congratulations, upon this Revival of 
the Proſperity of Maſanry. 8 | 70 
MonTacu G. Maſter, immediately call'd forth (without na- 
ming him before) as it were careleſly, John Beal; M. D. as his 
Deputy Grand Maſter, whom Brother Payne inveſted, and in- 
l him in Hiram Abbiff*s Chair on the Grand Maſter's Left 
Ha | 
In like Manner his Vonſbip 5 Mr. Joſiab Villeneau 2 Grand 
call'd forth and appointed, T Mr. Thomas Morrice S Wardens, 
who were inveſted and inſtall'd by the laſt -Grand Wardens, 7 i 
Upon which the Deputy and Wardens were ſaluted and con- 
gratulated as uſual, | 
Then MoxnTacu G. Maſter, with his Officers and the old Of- 
ficers, having made the 2d Proceſſion round the Hall, Brother 
Deſaguliers made an eloquent Oration about Maſons and Ma- 
ſonry: And after Great Harmony, the Effect of brotherly Love, 
the Grand Maſter thank'd Brother Villeneau for his Care of che 
| Feaſt and order'd him as Harden to cloſe the Lodge in good 
ime, - | | | 
The O2and Lodge in ample Form on 29 Sept. 1721. at 
King's-Arms foreſaid, with the former Grand Officers and thoſe 
of 16 Lodges. , | | . 
His Grace's Jorſbip and the Lodge finding Fault with all the Co- 
pies of the od Gothic Conſtitutions, order'd Brother James Ander- 
/on, A. M. to digeſt the ſame in a new and better Method. 
The Ozand Lodge in ample Form on St. Joax's Day 27 Dec. 
1721. at the ſaid King's: Arms, with former Grand Officers and 
thoſe of 20 Lodges, x 114 den og 
«14187 1 Q MonTaGy 

(214 ) | 
MonTacu Grand Maſter, at the Defire of the Zodee, ap- 
pointed 14 learned Brothers to examine Brother Anderſon's Ma- 
nuſcript, and to make Report. This Communication was made 
very entertaining by the Lectures of ſome od Maſons. 
E Gzand Lodge at the Fountain Strand, in ample Form 2 5 March 
1722. with former Grand Officers and thoſe of 24 Lodges. 
T be ſaid Committee of 14 reported that they had peruſed Bro- 
ther Anderſon's Manuſcript, viz. the Hiſtory, Charges, Regula- 
tions and Maſter's Song, and after ſome Amendments ap- 
prov'd of it: Upon which the Lodge deſir'd the Grand Mafter 
to order it to be printed. Mean while RPE 
. Ingenious Men of all Faculties and Stations being convinced 
that the Cement of the Lodge was Love and Friendſhip, earneſtly 
requeſted to be made Maſons, affecting this amicable Fraternity 
more than other Societies then often diſturbed by warm Diſputes. 
Grand Maſter Mox a6v's good Government inclin'd the better 
Sort to continue him in the Chair another Lear; and there 
they delay d to prepare the Feaſt. | | 
But Philip Duke of Marton lately made a Brother, tho“ not 
the Maſter of a Lodge, being ambitious of the Chair, got a 
Number of Others to meet him at Stationers-Hall 24 June 1722. 
and having no Grand Officers, they put in the -Chair the oldeſt 
Maſter Maſon (who was not the projen Maſter of a Lodge, alſo 
irregular) and without the uſual decent Ceremonials, the ſaid old 
Maſon proclaim'd aloud © X 
© Philip Wharton Duke of Wharton Grand Maſter of Maſons, and 
Mr. Joſbua Timſon, Blackſmith, 2 Grand Toei his Grace ap- 
; 3 Mr. William Hawkins, Maſon, Wardens. I pointed no Depu- 
ty, nor was the Lodge opened and cloſed in due Form. 
Therefore the noble Brothers and all thoſe that would not coun- 
tenance Irregularities, diſownꝰd V barton's Authority, till worthy 
Brother Mog r aM heal'd the Breach of Harmony, by ſummoning 
The Gand Lodge to meet 17 January 1723. at the King*s- 
Arms: foreſaid, where the Duke of Wharton promiſing to be True 
and Faithful, Deputy Grand Maſter Beal proclaim'd aloud the 
moſt noble Prince and our Brother. 

I. PRIIIr 

(175) 
II. PIII WAARA TO Duke of Wharton GM AND MASTER of 
Maſons, who appointed Dr. Deſaguliers the Deputy Grand Maſter, 

Joſbua Timſon, foreſaid, Grand for Hawkins demitted as al- 
3 James Anderſon, A. M. SWardens.2 ways out of Town, 

When former Grand Officers, with thoſe of 25 Lodges paid 
their Hom 

G. Warden. Anderſon produced the new Book of Conſtitutions now 
in Print, which was again approv'd, with the Addition of the an- 
tient Manner of 9 a Lodge. 

Now Maſonry flouriſh'd in Harmony, Reputation and Num- 
bers; many Noblemen and Gentlemen of the firſt Rank defir'd 
to be admitted into the Fraternity, beſides other Learned Men, 
Merchants, Clergymen and Tradeſmen, who found a Lage 
to be a ſafe and * Relaxation from Intenſe Study or t 
Hurry of Buſineſs, without Politicks or Party. Therefore the 
Grand Maſter was obliged to conſtitute more new Lodges, and 
was very aſſiduous in viſiting the Lodges every Week with his 
Deputy and Wardens ; and his Worſhip 4 well pleasd with their 
kind * reſpectful Manner of receiving him, as they were with 
his affable and clever Converſation. 

— Grand Lodge in ample Form, 25 April 1723. at the 
White-Lion Cornbill, with former rand fficers and thoſe of 30 
Lodges call'd over by G. Warden Ander/on, for no — 2 was 
yet appointed: When 

WraxToON Grand Maſter propoſed for his Succeſſor the Earl 
of Dalkeith (now Duke of Buckleugh) Mafter of a Lodge, who 
was unanimouſly approv'd and duly ſaluted as Grand Maſter Elect. 

The Tickets for the next Fraß were order'd to be Ten Shil- 

s each, impreſs'd from a curious Copper Plate, and ſeal'd 
wic the G. Maſfer's Seal of Office, to be diſpoſed of by the 
Grand Wardens and the Steward. 

ASSEMBLY and Fra on Aunday 24 June 1723. at 
Merchant-Taylors-Hall, 

The Commiltee appointed to keep out Cowans came early, and 
the S/ewvards to receive the Tickets and direct the Servants. 

Mn”: WarartoN 

( 116 ) 
WraxTON Grand Maſter came attended by ſome eminent Bro- 

thers/i in their Coaches; and forthwith walking with his Deputy 
and Mardens into the Lodge. Room, he ſent for the Maſters and 

Wardens. of Lodges, who came from the Hall and form'd the 
Grand Lodęe eall'd over by Brother William Cowper, Eſq; now: 
appointed Secretary. | 
Some obſerving that Brother Dalkeith: was now in Seotland,. 
propoſed. to the G. Maſter to name another for Succeſſor ; but 
Dalketth's Wardens declar'd that his Lordſhip would ſoon re- 
turn,” Adjourn'd to Dinner. 
About 400 Free Maſons, all duly clothed, dined elegantly in 
due Form. 
SEE Its — l After Dinner, Brother WAR TON made the 
at Richmond, firſt Proceſſion round the Tables, and when re- 
turn d, proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother. 
III. FxaNcis:Scor. Earl of Daikeith Gand Maſter of Ma-- 
Hens. He had left with the Wardens. of his Lodge a Power to ap-- 
oint in his Name 
Dr. Deſagulters his Francis Sorrells Eſq; Grand 
Dep ty Grand Maſter, L Jobn Senex Bookſeller, 8 Wardens: 
4 ava the Chair; and having thank'd the S/ewards, order'd 
Grand Warden Sorell.to cloſe the Lodge in good Time. * 
_— 'G2and Lodge at the Crows in 7, breads eedle-ftreet 2.5 Nov. 
1723. in ample Form, with former Grand Officers and Thoſe of 
30 Laages. They agreed on ſeveral: Things for the Good of 
js "we which, with other Things afterwards' determin'd at Grand 
Lodges, are diſpers'd in the New Regulations, Committee of Cha- 
rity; &c. below: and ſpecial Care was taken to prevent ſtur-- 
bance and preſerve Harmony on Fraſt- Days. 

— Gand Lodge in ame Form at the foreſaid Crotun 
Feb. 1723. with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 26 Lodges. 
— Gꝛand Lodge in ample Form at the Crows foreſaid 2 April . 

1724. with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 31. Lodges. | 

*Stewards that ated at the Feaſt on 24 June 1723. and were publickly thank _ 
Mr.-Henry Prude, Capt. Benjamin Hodges, 
Mr. Giles See Mr. Edward Lambert, 
Mr. Jobn TEE Mr. Charles Kent. 

Dalkeith: 

(Ca 
' "Dalkeith S. Maſter propoſed for his Succeſſor the Duke of 
Richmond and Lennox (now alſo Duke d Aubigny) Maſter _ 4 
— who was __ EO Wluced Grand Aer Elef. | 

_ 

From Grand Mofter R1icuMonD to Grand Mafter N ORFOLK; : 

8s E M BLV and Feaſt at Merchant-Toylors-Hall on 
June 1724. 

Baabe Grand Maſter with-his Deputy and Wardens e 
on Brother Richmond in the Morning at Whitehall, who with 
many Brothers duly clothed, proceeded in Coaches from the Weſt 
to the Eaſt, and were handſomely received at the Hall by a vaſt 
Aſſembly. The Grand Lodge met, and having confirm'd their 
Choice of Brother Richmond, adjourn'd to Dinner. After Dinner 
G. Maſter * og made the firſt Proceſſion round the = 

bles; "viz; + 
Brother Clinch to clear the Way. [TIF ET Tees 
TheStewards'2 and 2 a Breaſt with white Rods. o avoid Reperitions. 
Secretary Cowper with the Bag, and on his Left | 
the Maſter of a Lodge with One Great Ligbt. . 
Two other Great Lights born by two Maſters of Lodges. 
FormerGrand Wardens proceeding one by one, according to Juniority. 

Former Grand Maſters proceeding, according to Juniority. 
 Soxell and Sener the two Grand Wardens; 

Deſagulters D. G. Mater alone. 
On the Left Hand. On the Right Hand. 
The Sword carried by the Maſter | The Book of —— ona: 

of the Lodge to wich the] Cuſhion carried by the Mater 
Sword belong de. . of the, Senior Late. wa 
Abita Grand Maſter _ DerKEITR Grand Maſter. 
During the Proce/jon,' 3 Times round the Tables, the Brethren 
ſtood up and fac'd about with the * Salutations 3 and when 

return d 

* 
- 

Brother. 

then proclaim'd aloud the moſt noble 

(' 118: ) 

Brother Dalkeith ſtood up, and bowing to the Aſſembly, thank'd 

*tm for the Honour he had of rey toe Grand Mafter, and 
rince and our Brother 

IV. CHARLES: Lznnos Duke of Richmond and Lennox 

Gꝛand Maſter of Majors ! - 

The Duke having bow'd to the Aſſembly, Brother Da LKEITH 
inveſted him with che proper En/igns and Badges of his Office 
and Authority, inſtalbd him in Solomon's Chair, and wiſhin 
him all Proſperity, ſat down on his Right Hand, Upon which 
the Aſſembly hoi di in due nee r e be en 
and other Signs of Joy. 

Ric HMOND Grand Maſter fandiog up. call forth. (as. it 
were by Accident) and appointed N 
Martin f wor Eſq; Tee Eſq; former! YG.M. Grind : 
his D. G. Maſter, UFPrancis Sorell late G. Warden, J Wardens. 
inveſted andiinſtalPd by the laſt Deputy in the Chair of Hiram Abbif. 
_ William Cowper Eſq; was continued Secre/ary, by the G. Maſter's 
returning him the Books, and all of em were formally congratu- 
lated by the Aſſembly. * 

R1c nMoND Grand Maſter Winde the ad Prvecſtos round the 
Tables like the #r/, except that Brother DALKEITEH walked firſt 
as the youngeſt late Grand Maſter, cloſe after the former Grand 
Wardens; and RicymonD walk'd alone laſt of all, with his De- 
puty immediately before him, and his #wo G. Wardens before the 
Deputy, and before them the Sword and Conſtitutions. 

When return'd, _ 

The G. Maſter began to toaſt the regular Healths, and due 
Reſpects to our noble Brothers preſent and abſent, particularly 
to our laſt good Grand Maſter DALKE1TH, 

After which, the uſual Expreſſions of Joy, Love and Friendſhip 

— that acted at the Beaſt on 24 June 172.3, and were publickly thank'd, 

Mr. Henry Prude. Capt. Samuel Tuffnell, 
Theſe firſt 6 Capt. Benjamin Hodges. > Mr. Giles Taylor. __ 
' ated at the Mr. Giles Clutterbuck, Capt. Nathaniel Smith. 
laſt Feaſt, - Mr. ZobnShepberd. Mr. Richard Grofts. 
; Mr. Edward Lambert. Mr. Peter Paul Kemp 
C Mr. Charles Kent. | Mr. North Stainer. 
went 
1 

* 

ö ( 119 ) 
went round; and the Aſembly was moſt agreeably entertain'd wick 
Orations, Muſick: and Maſon Songs, till the G. er order'] his 
Warden Payne to cloſe the Lodge in good Time. 2 
| Now Mason&y was illuſtrious at home and abload, and Lodę es 
multiplied, © n & 1.0 | 
| —"Gand Lodge in ample Form at the Crown foreſaid, 21 Nov. 
1724. with former Grand Officers and Thoſe of 45.Lodges. When 
Our noble Brother DALKEIT R, in Purſuance ſdes che Commuree. 
of Regulation XIII. propoſed a Fund of Gene- |of Gig. F 
ral Charity for poor Brothers, which was agreed to by all. | 
— G2and Lodge in ample Form at the Bell Weſtminſter 17 
March 17924, with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 36 Lodges. 
— Gand Lodge in due Form at the Devil Temple-Bar 20 May: 
1725, with former G. Officers and thoſe of 38 Lodges, D. &. Maſter 
FoLk xs in the Chair prompted a molt agreeable Communication. 
Grand Lodge in Due Form at the Crown foreſaid on 24 June 
1725.. when the Grand Officers were continued Six Months longer. 
— G2and Lodge in ample Form at the Bell foreſaid 27 Nov.. 
1725. with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 49 Lodges. When 
_ RicumonD G. Maſter propoſed for his Sueceſſor the Lord 
Paiſley (now Earl of Abercorn) Maſter of a Lodge, who was gladl 
ſaluted as Grand Maſter Elect. And no Stewards being a rs | 
G. M. Ricumonp deſired our Brother 7obn James Heidegger 
to prepare the Fraſt in the beſt Manner. © - des 
ASSEMBLY and Feaſt at Merchant-Taylor*s- Hall on St. Joun's 
Day 27 Dec. 1725. e HY | 
Lord ParsLEy being in the Country, had by Letter made 
the Duke of RicaumonD his Proxy, and all Things being regu- 
| larly tranſacted as above, Brother Richmond proclaim'd: aloud our 
noble Brother "A 2 , 5 
V. JAMES HAMILTON Lord Paiſſey G Mater of 
Mont. Brother Rio HMO ND as Proxy wb cou pf the Chair, 
and in &. Maſter PAISLE v's Name appointed | 
Dr. Deſaguliers a- 8 Daniel Houghton, 2 Grand 
gain D. G. Maſter, USir Thomas Prendergaſt, Bart. Wardens: 
The Secretary was. continued, and in both Proceſſions the Duxx 
walked alone. a 4 Brother 

van? 

Brother Heidegger was thank'd for the elegant and ſumptuous 
181 and the G. Maſter order d his Warden Houghton to. cloſe 

, 

27 *. in good Time. . 
be Hand Lodge in ample Form at the Bell foreſaid on Mon- 
iy 28 Feb. 1724 with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 36 Lodpes. 

27 7Ozand Lod ge in ample Form at the Crown foreſaid, on Mon- 
| day 12 Dec. 1726. with former G. Officers and thoſe of 30 Lodges. 
In this long Interval the D. G. Maſter duly viſited the Lodges 

till the Principal came to Town, who now propoſed for his Suc- 
ceſſor the Earl of Inchiquin.Maſter of a Tacke, and he was gladly. . 
ſal ted as Grand Mater. Elect.. 

o Stewards ; but Brother Eqward Lambert undertook 1 to pre. 
pare the Feafl. 

ASSEMBLY and Fraſt at Mercer s- Tall on Monday 27 Feb. 
1725. All Things being regularly tranſacted as above, Brother 
Paiſley. proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother 

VI. WII LIM O BAIExX Earl of Inchiquin Gund Maſter 
of Maſons, who appointed 

CUilitam Cowper Efqs. ( formerly. Seeretar ) bis D. G. Maſter. 
© Alexander Choke Eſq, 2 Grand 5 Mr. Edw, Wilſon, was made 

3 lion Burdon Eſq; Wardens3 Secretary, and Brother Lam- 
bert was thank*d fe his) Care of the Fal. 
Gand Lodge in ample Form at the Crows foreſaid on Wed- 
- neſlay 10 May 1 727. With lormer . Marre and Theta. 75 40 
Lodges, in great Harmon Ony. | Al | 

During the Maſter ſhip of In! QUAN: | | 

King GEORGE I. having reign'd near 13 Years, died at of 
nabruck where he was born, in his Way to Hannover, where he 
Was . aged 67 Years, on 1 Aan. V en his San ſuc- 

„ VIS 

2. King Tender pr © Oo Wears; rho-aicht his Queen 

Caroline were Crown'd 4 on 11 Off. 1727. 
In the laſt Reign paring of the 50 new Churches in the 
Suburbs of London were built in a fine Stile upon the Parliamen- 
tary Fund, particularly the beautiful St. Mary EN Strand. ws =o 
. 

838 2 

{ 222 

St. Martin's in Campis was at the Charge of the Pariſhioners re- 
built ſtrong and regular: And it being à Raya Pariſh! Church, 
King Gzorce I. ſent his Lende and Surveyon General, 

attended by Brother Gib, (che Architect of that grand Pile): with 
many Free Maſons, in a ſolemn Proceſſion from the Palace, to 

level the Foorflorie of the South" afl Carner, by giving it 3 Great 

Knocks with a Mallet in the King's s Name, and laying upon it 
a Purſe of 100 Guineas : when the Trumpets ſounded, all join'd 

in joyful ee and the Crafifmen went to the Tyne 
n Co the King and the Cratt. 
The herb below wis "cot in the Stone and Lead pit 

110 this Reign alſo the Ari was or in the New 2 

in and about Hanover- Square, as in the net Houſes of the 
of Bolton, Montroſe; and Roxborough, of Sir Nobert Sutton mw) 

General Vade, of the Earl of Burlington in Picadilly, of the Duke 
of Chandois at Canons near — the Court of the Rolls, Wanſtead- 

Hauſe in Epping: Foreſt by dhe Berl of G N in 

W N 

0 > 

u 

RY 4 3 FW — 

* 
* * nen. Ty V — 
* 

be nent! volt | ns. ad egen 5 
ene „„ M ee 
ten ER DEPUTADUM-SUUM, n 
REvERENDUM ADMODUM, IN. CAST Parma 

Ric RAR DUN EPisCOPUM SARISBURIENSEM 
Sumuun sun ELEEMOSINARIUM 
_ ADSISTENTE (Rois jussv) | 
Domino Troma HZWET EQUITE AURATO 
ZED1FICIORUM ReG10kRUM CurAToORI PRINCIPAL 
| PRIMUM HUJus ECCLESI® LAPIDEM. Nu 
Posu ir Dt. E 2 
MaxT11 19. Anno Domini 1721. 
 AnNoque ROI sI OcrA Vo. 

1288 R Norfolk 

+ 
wy 

{ 222 ) 
Norfolk by dir Robert Walpole Knight of the Garter, Sir Gregory 
Pages Houſe on Hlacbbenth, and many more either Eaiſh or 
founded before the Nang Death that ſne wa fihe A e 
enen 16:11 to 3 pid” A501) ax) 29074 yd! J 
o ee n mott noir oi mamlot on. ard K 5% oP Inattt 

1299) 's 579 In the Fit vent of King George l II. 

m W ir 

—— . 9 IN: Grand Maſter. aſſembled the Grand 
Quarter. Seen „ with former, G, Officers and ig i 
40 Lo Ke at the Devil empl le- Bar on Saturday 24 Fune 1935+ -.. 
— Oxnd Lodge in Di- Format che BA Toreſaid on Satur- 
P 2 OF. $727- ith farmer G-Officarrand Thoſe of 36 Lacher. 
G. Maſter Cowes x in the Chair. 
es den lee in Dig Form at ahbe Hes ſorclaid 7 Fr 
| 200 49 e with * E, Officers. and theſe of ani 
G, Lale, Cows in dhe Chairs + cloqueoty, 
70550 Grand Maſter's: Ablemce in Helen, and. bis wc 
them together; for that the Nat drew nigh, and that 
4 Maſter. had, hy Letter, impower?d! him to propoſe, for bis 
— the Lord Colerane Maſter of a Tacke, who'was forthwith 
. ae 
No Stewards bein in Brother Lambert” n Under 
took to prepare the Peak pl, | e 

ASSEMBLY bg rc nuf 66 St. Jorx's Day 
Wedneſday 25 Dec. 1727. AI Th ig regularly tranſacted 
as — D fand e 19 * aloud our noble 
Brother M2 1922 er A; 4 i g. Mig & - — 

VII. Haun Haas Tord Gelee G Maſter of Min 
who appointed Aletander* Choke Efqj* — Grand Maſter, 
| Nathamieb Blasen Blqs* + rund — 
1 1 8 Mir! Foſophs Hiębmors Fainter, uud. 
Mr. William Reid was made Seervlary,\ and Brother Lambert Was 
thank'd for his Care. 1150 
Gꝛand Lodge in Ample Form at the Crown forefaid on Wed- 
neſday 17 April ya. with former G. Officers: and Thoſe of 27 
| TE — Gꝛand 
4 | 

— 

3 n, 

— Gand Lodge in Ape Form at the Ng f Arms forefaid _ 
on Tueſday 25 June 1728. with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 
28 Lodges. | n 

Gand Lodge in Due Form at the Qgeemt.- Head in Great 
Quern Hreet on Tueſday 26 'Nov. 1928. with the Earl of In- 
CcHIQUIN and other former G. Officers and Thoſe of 30 
Lodges. D. G. Maſter Choke in the Chair excuſed the Grand 
Maſter's Abſence, and in his Name propoſed for Sucteſſor the 
Lord Viſcount Vngſon Maſter of a Lodge, who was well recom- 
mended alſo by Brother IN TIN, and was forth witir ſaluted 
as Grand Maſter Ele. eee een, g Ku 7 De | 

Brother Deſaguliers moved to revive, the Office of Steward to 
aſſiſt the Grand Wardens in preparing the Feat, and chat theit 
Number be 12, which was readily to. See their Names 
in the Ma in below. * AA 5 IF hd aid enn ft | ' _ 
_ ASEMBLY and Fa at Mercer's-Hall on St. Forin's 
Day Friday 27 Der, 1728. D. Grand Maſter Cn with his 
Wardens, ſeveral noble Brothers, former Grand Officers, and many 
Brethren, duly clothed, attended the Grand Maſter Ele in- Coaches 
from his Lordſhip's Houſe in Leiceſter-Square to the Hall EA. 
card: And all Things being regutarty tranſacted "as "above; 
D. G. M. Choke proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother 

VIII. James Kine Lord Viſcount Kineton Gzand Maſter of 
Maſons! who appointed Nathauiel Blakerby Eſq; D: C. Maſter, 
. gSur James Thornhill, 0 the Secretary was conti 
IMr Martin O Connor, 5 Wardens, nued. CY 29 4 
Gand Lodge in Ample Form at the 3 Tons Swithis's-- 
Alley near the Royat>=Exobange 27 March 1729. with former G. Of- 
fers and Thoſe of 31 Lodges. 140109 19 [fg ONT 

2 — 44 —_— we * . 1 8 1 — _ 
| J_— Wwe = N Fi + $52 ( 

ome S— OT on 7 n n | 
»Stewarps that acted bn 2) Der. 17 28. and were piblickly thank d., 
1 * "is a5 7 wry F 

"4" Mr. Fohn Rect, © 0 5 004 OMe. Wha Wilton. | 
2. Me. Ein Ward. © 8. Me iam Tach -d 
3 Mr. Samuel Steal. 9. Mr. Hilliam Hopkins, + 
4. Mr. Theodore Cheriholm, | _ to. Mr. Thomas Reaſon. 
_ . William Benn. | 11. Mr. Thomas Alford. 
Mr. Gerard Hatley. 1 oy Mr. H. Smart. 
2 

— Gzand | 

(124) 
cum Lodge in Due Form at the Kine” - Arm, ſoreſaic 
on Friday 11 57755 11525 with former G. Officers and Thoſe 1 
26 Lodges. D. G. M. BAKER EH was in the Chair. 
Szand 2 in Ample Form. at the Devil forefaid. on 
25 25 Nov. 1729. with former G. Officers and * of 

Lodges. a 

Tk 1 Grand 71K er at his own Coſt provided a "curious 
Pedeſtal, and a rich Cuſhion with golden * and Fringes for 
the Top of the Pedeſtal; a fine Velvet Bag for the Secreta 
and a Badge of Two golden Pens... a-croſs — his Breaſt: For 
which very 1 — eſents the Lodge return d hearty Thanks 
in ſolemn Manner. 

3 | in Due Farm: at the Devil forefaid on St. Joun's 

„Saturday 27 Dec. 1729. with our noble Brother Incxiquix 

=_ other former G. of cers, and Thoſe of 32 Lodges: when 
5! akerby D. G. Matter. in the Chair, in the Grand Maſter's 
Name and by his Letter, propoſed for Succeſſor the Duke of 
2 Maſter of a aka * was joyfully ſaluted Grand Ma- 
Jer Hun... ts: 

w— » A cont 

* 

_ : — — —̃ ©... — — » - - — — 
7 

CHAP. vi. 7 
From Grand Maſter Nonronx wo Gen "Moſer Cnavruzs 

CPE EDS x; 

 SSEMBLY ia Fea? at Arb! N aylor%s-Hall on Thur. 
day, 29 Jan. 1g. in the 3d Year of King Gzozes II. 
KinGcsTON. Gra 10 o/ter 80 his Deputy and Wardens, at- 
tended the Grand Mafter Elett in the Morning, at his Grace's 
Houſe in St. James's-Square:z where he was met by a vaſt Num- 
e ber of Brothers duly clothed, — from thence 
avoid Repetitions. they went to * Hall Baſt ward in or- 

ing Proceſſion of * S. * N Fa 

S WW. ww, 

. 
3 

— — % ww. - 

: wh NY L noa. 

ono 

( 125) 
Brother John nom. to clear the Way. 
* Sis of the Stewards clothe proper with their Badges and White 
Rods, Two in each Chariot. 
Brothers without Diſtinction duly clothed, in Gentlemen's S 
The noble and eminent Brethren duly clothed, in their own Chariots. 
Former Grand Officers not n proper, in ann. 

Former nobl: Grand Maſters clothed proper, in their ownChariots... 
The Secretary alone. with his Badge and Bag, clothed, in a Chariot. 
The Two Grand Waxdens 8 ot with their Badges, io. one 
ariot. 
The D. G. Me fer alone clothed proper with his Badge i in char. 
W Gzand Maſter clothed proper. with BD I Gre 
e all in one 
Nogrork G. M. El clothed anly: 8 4 A or l 
The Duke of Norfolt's Coach: of State emp cis, | 
The Stewards halted at Charing«Groſs.till the Meflenge 2 ht 
Orders to move on flowly, and l the Reſt fellow d And when 
the Grand. Maſter moved from the Square, * Habe 
Marſhal made haſte to che Hall to conduct the 
Proceſjien of Entry at the Hall. Gate, W 
The 12 Stewards ſtanding, 6. on each Side of "be Bates wid 

7 

16 
15 

their bite Rods, made a Lane: Wige 
Brother Johnſon to clear the Way. . 
Former Grand Mandens wall d one by one according to Juniority:- 

E ormer D. Grand Maſters wall d one by one according to 88 
Eo ormer Grand Aaſters by Enn Na 
N 

I ese — IJ Jo 2 an IF 6 i 
_ a: 1 

e 

N nr ye: . 

| were-all pub- 9 
eee 
Mr. — Bards, Junior. for their Care. 
Haar. 1 \3 4 ENT; 

— — * = — ©. d 
- : 
. P L ” y by - 
o *, * 7 0 - 4 \ - - 
* # p 4 % * © - 
441 | h * Vo, Ai 
4 J . 
- - ” . 1 1 * 
. 
. 

(126) 
Lord Cor xx Aux, Earl of Incutquin, Lord Pars RV, Duke, 
of RriouMonD, Ear! of DarxerTH, Duke of Mord, 
Dr. DESAGULIERS, Grokor PAYNE Eſq; and Mr. en 

* TW. 1 * 
"Then the Stewards cloſed, walking TWO and Two. 8 
ed £1 The Secretary alone fee 
8 The Two Grand Wardens together. " 
The D. Grand Maſter alone. 
119 82 the Left Hand, On the Right Hard... 

born by the" Miſe: The Book of Cos TI Tb rions 
* the Lodge w which 1 it be-] on the fine Cuſdian carried by 
long d. T7 en e 8515 he Senior Lodge. 
Nonroux Grand Maſtes Elec. Ktxesron Gr ad Mater. 
-Marſhal Pyne with his 7. A Blew, tipt 5 Gold. 
In this Order they decently walk'd into the 755 Noam (pile 
the Others'\walk*d” into the Hall) and there $e as and # 
dens of Lodges received their G. MAsTER "wi 5 and = 
rence in due Form, He fat down in 15 895 efore the Pe- 
deal, cover'd with the rich Cuſhion, upon ehe ai aid the on. 
fitutions and the Sword ; and the G. M. Elelt on his Right Hand. 
After opening the Lodge, the "laſt Minutes were read, b _- 
Secretary, and the enn ot mock Norfolk Was. Glemly r * 
cogniz'd. IV 
* | Adjout'd to Dinner, % Grand Fraft fatleed!, * 
Fe ur Richmond Aſtef Dinber ard the in Proceſſion ond oY 
Page 117. © | Tables, Brother Kingſton proclaun'd aloud the moſt. 
Noble Pres the n Duke, Marquis and, Earl of ( reat Britain, 
and our Brother 
"TK. Tuomas 5 7777 Duke of Norfolk Grand Matter of 
Maſons | and having inveſted him and inſtald him in Solomon's 
Chair, fat down on his Rig ht Hand. * pon Which the Mn ; 
join'd in their Homage an A Gong 1 

Nox rol x Grand Nauf with ap 1 pier e — or + AY 
Nathatttet'Blakerby F 00 Geo arpenter, nowY © on 
to continue D. G. M Y Lord Carpenter, ©" (Grand 

The Secretary was conti- Tho. Batſon Eſq; Coun-¶ Wardens... 
nued. ſellor at Law, And 

( 127 ) . 14a 017 10; IX 
And having mads the ad Proceſſion *rotipd che Tabley(as- 

at Richmond) you Harmony bounded, till be Gate 
order'd G. Warden Carpeiter to cloſe the Lodge in good Time. 
rand Lodge in Ample Form at the Devi! fbrelaid on 
Tugſday 21 April 1730. with the noble Brothers Richmond, uchi. 
guin, Kingſton, Colerane, and other former G. Officers, with thoſs 
of 31 1 Much Time was ſpent in receiving and beſtow- 
ing C arity. * ant e io * 4 © 4 
- Grand: Lodge in Due Form at the Devil foreſaid on N 

28 Hug. 1730. with former. G. LAN of 34 Lodge 
D. G. Auſter BAKER IBV in the Chair. Fe 563 101 eit e 

— Grand Lodge in Due Form at the King's- Arms forefaid | 

on Tueſday 1 8 Dec. 1730. with our noble Brother Colerans and 
other former G. Officers and Thoſe of 4 Lodges, © D. G. Maſter 
BLAkKERBY' in the Chair, moved to poſtpone the Feaf,” the 
Gꝛand Mer being at Venice, which was agreed to. 
Grand Lodge in Due Form at- the Devil foreſaid 2 
Jan. 173. with former G. Officers and Thoſe of 31 Lodges. 
D. G. Maſter BLAKERBY acquainted the Lodge, that -the* dur 
Right Worſhipful G. MasrER was now at Venice, he was not 
unmindful of us, but had ſent us 3 kind Preſents, di |» = 
. TwR NTT Pouwpsto the Fund of An Charity, See the 
Conſtitution of it, elo... tuen 
2. A Large Folia: Book of the fineſt Writing Payer for the 
Records of che G, Lodge, moſt richly bound in Turteh and! 
guilded, and on the Frontiſpiece in Vellum, the Ams of W. 1 
amply diſplay'd with a TLalin Inſcription of his noble Tiles. 
3. The Old Trufty Sword of Gusxavus Aporrnus King of 
| Sede TAE WAS Wöre next by his Süccelſör in War the —5 
Bernard Duke uf -Sax-Hcimery with both their Nameszanm@e* 
Blade; which the*Gyand N er had erder'd Brother1G#yrge Moody 
(the King's Sword. Outlet a Kft rn richly, with.the Hus of Nor- 
folk in Silver, on the Scabbard ; in qrder' to be .the:Grard Maſter's 
SWwo2n of Cate for the future. 
The Lodge expreſsd their grateful Acceptance in their own 
agreeable Manner. The Feaſt was again poſtponed, 

— 

Gand 

1 
Se en RY „„ —_ 
= 

Len. 6128) 
S crand Lodge in Due Form at the Devil ſoreſaid on Med 
neſday 17 March 1737. with our Brothers Ric NMjỹ¼M n and Col E- 
RANE and other former G: Officers, Lord LovzI L and the Officers 
of 29 Lodges, when D. G. M. BIAk ERB in the Chair propeſed 
Gn the Grand Maſter's Name) for Succeſſor, the Lord Lovel Ma- 
eriof a TK was ſaluted Grand Mafter Elect. 

_ ASSEMBLY and Fraſt at Hercer*s-Hall. 27 March 1731. 
The Proreſſion of March was from Lord Lovell's Houſe in Great 
Ruſfet-ſtreet Bloomſbury Eaftward to the Hall: But Lord Lover 
being]4ll of an Ague, return'd home, and left Lord CoLzxane 
* for the Day. All Things being regularly tranſacted 
ne ee e e TUE 
D. G. Maſter Blakerby proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother 
X. Txomas Coox Lord Lovel Gzand aſter of Maſons: and 
Lord Colerane being inveſted in his Name, appointdgd 
Thomas WBatlon-forefaid F George Dowglas, M. D. 7 Grand 
Depaty Grand Maſter, Janes Cbambers, Eſq; 1 
The Secretary was continued, and Brother George dy was 
appointed Sword - Beurer. See the Stewards in the Margin 

OW. 

_ — Gnand Lodge in Ample Form at the Roſe in Mary- la- Bonne 
on Friday 14 May 1731. with the noble Brothers Nox roll x, Ix- 
CHIQUIN, COLERANE, and other former G. Officers, and Thoſe 
of 37 Lodges. When Lovzl Grand Maſter moved that the Lodge 

ſhould now return Thanks to kind Brother Norfolk for his 52 
Preſents to the Fraternity ; which was forthwith done in ſolemn 
Form, and receiv'd by the Duke with Brotherly Affection. | 

1 5 42 
_—__ 

— 
4 = „ - CT * TE I. 

Stearns that afted on 2) March 1731. who were all publickly thank d. 
| 1. George Docuglas, M. D. 5. Mr. Haines, | (© 
| 9. Mr. Roger Lacy, | 
oo 10. Mr. Charles Trinquand. F 
11. Mr. Jobn Cala, 

4. Mr. George Page, | 12. Mr. John King. 

| \ . 138 | 
His Royal Highneſs FRANCIS Duke of Lorrain.(now Grand 

Duke of Fuscax v) at the Hague was made an Enfer'd Prentice 
and Fellow Craft, by Virtue df a Deputation for a Lodge there, 
conſiſting of Rev. Dr. J Jebn Stanhope," Elq; T Grand: | 
DzsacuLlitrs Maſter, & Fn, Holizendorf," RI; 3 Wardens. 

and the other Brethren, vix. PAIL IP STANRHOrE Earl of Cheſter- 
held Lord Ambaſſador, — Sirictland Eſq; Nephew. to the Biſnop 
of Namur, Mr. Benjamin Hadley and an Hollandiſb Nrother. 

Our ſaid Royal Brother LORRAIN comiag t land this 
Vear, Grand Maſter Lov'su formed 4 at 
Sir Robert Walpole”s Houſe of Hong hon Hall in Norfalt, and made 
Brother L. ORRAIN and Brother Tons PEuAd Duke 
of © Neweaſtle Muäſter Maſons. And ever- Hince, both in the 
G. Lodee and in particular Lodges, the Fraternity joyfully re- 
member His Royar HieHNESsS in the proper Manner. 

E Gand Lodge in Amp/e Form at the Half-Moon Cheap/ide; 

on Thurſday 24 June 1731. with former G. Officers.and Thole of- 

29 Lodges, oO oY TRE <> 0 
— Onand Lodge in Dre Form at the Devil forefaid, on Friday 
2 Dec. 173t. with Lord Colerane and other former Grand Officers; 
Fa Ralph © Far Winter the Proviadt Grand Maſter of Zaft- 
India, and the Officers of 46 Loden. hk 21/88. 1 

2 March 1731. with the Duke of " Richmand} and. other | former 

— Sten in Due Form at the Devil foreſaid on Thurſday 
- c 7 2 | 
G. Off ers, Viſcount Montagu, and the Officers of . 

D. G. Maſter Barsox in the Chak e, in che Grund 
i 

Maſter's Name, for Sucoeſſor, the Lord 

Elect. 8 | wo 
Sund Lodge in Due Format fe Devil forefaid, on Thu 
day 13 April 1732. with former G,Qfficers. and Thole of 27 Lodges, 

ASSEMBLY and Fraſt at Mereh n.- Taylors. Hall on Weane/- 

day 19 April 1532: D. Grand Maßen Birsox with his Fardens 

attended the G. Maſter Ele at his Houſe , in Bloom/dury-Square ; 
and with ſome noble Brothers, the Dukes of Antagu and Ric 

ond 
the Lord Colerane, the Land Girpencery Gu Earl of $rathmore and 

iſcount Montagu Maſter 
of a Lodge, who was immediately ſaluted 2 Maſter 

l . 
- 
—C ww © ow. . 

8 
** D r 

1 (_ 130 12 

Lord Teynham, and many Others, all duly clothed in Coaches, 
made the Proceſſion: of March Eaſtward to the Hall, where all 
Things being regularly tranſacted as above, D. G. M. Batſon 
proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother. 

XI. Ax rom v Bzown Lord Viſcount Ahn 1 Gꝛand Maſfer of 
Ma — who „ ee mas Batſon 2088. Sons D. G. Maſter. 
Ven ge Rook, i Grand "Fs Secretary and Stword- 

— . Ar- wk Eſqz.S Wardens. UBearer were continued. 
Lodge in Due Form at the Caſtle in Drury-Lane, on 
Mond 97 June 1732. with the Earl of Inchiquin and other former 
G. Officers and Thoſe of 39. Lodges. 
= — Om Lodge in Due Fo at the Devil foreſaid, on 

21 Nov. 1732. with Lord Colerane, Lord Soutbwell, and 
— & former G. Ari and Thoſe of 49 Lodges. 
— GzandLodge in Duc Form at the Devil foreſaid, on Tueſday 
9 May 173 | ewes Lord. Southwell, former G. Officers — 
Thoſe of 42 Lodges, 
D. G. M. ion in the Chair, propoſed, in the Grand 
Name, for Succeſſor, the Earl of Strathmore Maſter 
of a. Lodge ; who being in Scotland, our Noble Brother Tu o N48 
Lord SourTawRELL . undertook to 'be Proxy at the next Feaſt, 
and was ſaluted now as STRATHMORE Grand Maſter El:#, 

ASSEMBLY and Fraſt atMercer*s-Hall, on Thurſday y Func 
1733. D. G. M. Bars ox with his G. Wardens attended Lord 
Soutbwell at his Houſe, in Groſuenor-ſtreet, and with ſome Noble 
Brothers, and many Others, all duly clothed. in Coaches, wore; of na 
Proceſſion of March Eaſtward to the Hall. And all Thi 4 
regularly. tranſacted as above, D. G. M. Balſon proclaim” 
our N oble Brother 

ewas thar acted ar the Fealt "ITT ZE. 7772 wi were all Fay 

George Rook, | | Colonel John Pitt, | 
ames Moor Smythe, x Claud Cre way 5 Eſq | 
ohn Bridges, | William B | 
"yrriot Ormond, | Mr. Henry Tatam, 

Arthur Moor, Mr. Thomas Griffth, 

Final Taverner, | | Mr. Solomon Mendez. 

XII. James 

"_ =) nd oe Ae 
1 Vof &ralbmore 
800 wir beit ne and it in 
80 8 8 3 Zan 
ſun to, con. Famer Smythe, E {34 Cy 
2 1 es ow, A 
| „bee dbe dh | 
V3 A 05 56 97) * Hb) Nan __ \\> Jide 
f zany Lodge Hmple Form Ne arab on N 
455 wy Dec 733. EW 87 Zuse Manzl, Bart. Pro. C. Maſter 
of South Wales, —_— 1 cers, "the Earl of Craufurt and 

Officers of 992 7 
22 9901 that Hil rat) 

. — 
9 5 RS hon make ere 
t ittee arity, Who can m 
ont rand Lade; ec 994 

1 e of Charity belo vx. N (3 IF 
D. G., M. Batſon recommended the New 8 ot Gia 
bl North America to the Benevolence of the particular Lodges. And 
oro + Edward Eſq; Warden of the Duke of Richmond's 
eat the Horn Weſtminſter,” acquainted this Grand Lodge, that 
is other Capt. Ralph Fur winter, Pyovincial Ga AND Mares 
of Eaſt- India, 10 fone from his Lodge at Bengal a Cheſt of the beſt 
rack = the Uſe of the Grand Lodge, and TN Guinzas 
for the Maſons-Charity , Which the Lodge gratefully receiv'd and 

TE ſoſemh Thanks ro be return'd-to the Lodge at Bengal. 
3 e and Lodge in Du⸗ Form at the Devil foreſuid on Mio 
arth 1792, with former G. Officers, the Earl of Craafuru, 
4 ir Foes Mat oY, Bart. and the Officers"of 47 2 tk when 
D. G. M. Bar so in the Chair propoſed, in the Grand Ma 4h 
Name, for Succeſſor, the Earl of Graufurd,, Maſter of a 
who was gladly ſaluted as Grand Maſter Elact. | N 

* —_——— ih. 

* Stewards thata Red ar the Feaſt 7 Fane 1733 who were all publickly IST. 
s \ wh £4: K K M. D. £ 
2. obn Pollewfom 1 8 8. 975 Devig bt. 3% 7” 

. H Birtier Hay, 9. Mr. B " | 
3 A obs Read, d Eid | to. Mr. — Gent. 
5. William Busby, | 11. Mr. James Goſens, 

6. Philip Barnes, © 12. Mr. Charles Robinſon. 
S 2 CHAP, 

— — — 
—— OO 2 2 —— 

— ——— — — — — 
2 ᷣ —U . AY a — — — — ah/ "ara 
- 

—— — oe —— 

—— 

= a e — 0 6 —_ — — 
r XF: ̃ f ¾ - AO —— ——— —„»⸗„ „„ 

YN % - - 

——— fg te — has — 

| 
| 
| 
. 
| 
| 

— — — 

ww DV 9995 * — 2 w — 
— . — ' —ẽẽ 
” I F 

till all arrive: and all Things being regularly tranſacted as above 

other 

2 „«„„% „ „„%éP „„ 

| 
1 

| ( (2321) ) 
-#3 ,N9a3qe N (497 Abet 4b bun M Auν˙ 
2s. 10 Ss H A P. VII. Gülle. Jon id gains 

bas 10 IT 0e 

| ee erg. Maber CraveuRny 140 6 *. bi 

| S. Masrzx CAERMARTHENy os nb." 
l te 1% 3568) <rirto wb a nder 10 
2; — EMBLY and, Feaft, at Mercor's-Haili10n Saturday 
{4 4734+ D. G. M. BAT With bis 1 
— 9 the —— after Ele at his Houſe in Great | 
Arrei, with Noble "+ wp and many Others, all duly 
Crock *. Kan gn triage — Maren Kare . no the 

With a s v. Trumpets, — ant 

Drums and Freneb-Horns, to-lead:the| Vun, and play at che Cut 

D., G. M. Batſon proclaim'd alaud; tha. u U utiaud 
ad our Noble Brother | + N48 N\ 18 ne. : 
XIII. Jonn Linvsay Earl of Grand Gꝛand er of 
Maſons, who appointed Sir Cecil — Barouet, D. 

ET Hard, Eſq; — 2 yes John 2 was 

Sir — 1400 Bart 12 made Grand Secretary; and 

ther Mody was continued Swa‚rd- bearer. After neee 
— Tables, much Harmony abounded. „ i. 1018 
— Gand Lodge in Am + rg at the Devi forefaid | on 
day 24 Feb. 1735 the Dukes of Riacbmond and Buccleuph; and 
er Grand Officers, the Earl of Belgarras, the Viſcount 
Womeuth,. "add, ro MANY Lodges... 
1 2 vt) ks: od bas Xi Marc oA 
— 2 * TN. 

» that he Feaſt . "who were all 
eee, 8 nd E — $2: hs 

9. Richard E. L. bear RS 

% 5578. 12 
14 1 * af 
SHOT 211} [1107 
k o — . 
171 11895 S 2 Tr. md 
WT Ane. L 

5 2 ö . 
Car 

WELDY 
| Cxavruny' Grand Maſter made a very handſome Speech, ex- 
euſi ing his not calling them together ſdbner, even becauſe of 5 | 

Elections for P ra and po ublick Buſineſs ; A Pn 
ſed) for dae Ssstece th en Viicount 3 * 
Lodge, who was #orthwith ſaluted as G. Mate, Elk. 
Brother Anderſon, Author of the ry of COnoTELGE pane 
ntingothat a .ñNulition was become nece 
he had prepared Marertals for it; the Saane Nas — 
e-orde _—— —— before the preſent and forrner 
1 Officers'z that RG report their Opinion to the 
80 Lodge. Alſo the Bock ealf'd the Free! \Maſen"s Vade Aru, 
was cendemm d by the G. Lodge as a pyratical and filly” Thi 
done without Leave, and the Brechren were warned not to uſe 
. = 7 Bard enn F Ih bs His 
i Lodge in Ample eben at the Det ! Hreſaid on 
Monday 31 March 173 5. with former Grand hap and "Thoſe 
e Ae > Ons | b 208 FLEX 
„Eden de Grand nage n a "Jidicious Speech, proce \ſe2 
veral Things for the Good of the F-b/ervity, which were a anke 
and the Subſtance of am ure in the ys bay, pwn cet 

mitte of Charity, below. * „ . fi 

Brother Anderſon was order'd alſo to inert! in the New Editon ef 
the Conſtitut ions, the Par Roms of antient Maſlonry that could be 

collected from the Beginning of Time, with the Grand Maſte> 
and Wardens; antient and modern, and the Names of the Setwards 
ſince G. M. Amagy. Never more Love and Harmony Pd. 
ASSEMBLY and Feaſt at Mereer's- Hell on Thurſday 
x ITE... 2 
Lf. AUFURD Grand Maſter with his Deputy and Wardens, and the 
noble Brothers the Dukes of Riabmund and Atboll, the Marquis of 
Beaumont, the Earls of Wincbelſea, Weems, Loudoun and Balear- 
ras, the on ay; and Lord Vere Berty; with many Other 
Tee u duly dothed, attended the Grand Mafter Eles, and 
from his Honle 4 Grovenor-Square made the Paoceeiox. of 
March ** 5 and of * leading the Van Taſwurd to 
— Hal, 
7 . 22 All 

- 

| 
| 
| 
ſ 
' 

——— , EP Ge Hi ro = — — 
— . — » — —— o 

— — ety noe» 

OC cada I Ego — — 
bs - — — oy ay a> — — 

THYNNE, 

Maſter of 51 ; who appointed JohhWarvE 

Sir Edward Ma el, 9 | 48 5 =] 
Sar Clare and 'F, R. 8 Po 1. 
bearer 7 77 Ty N 1 and! bus 8 0g a Den 8 

Lodge in Due Form at the Dev Cond 
_ 21 11 "oy Mo 7 —— 2 

1 115 N AxÞD in the Cffair, in an 
0 Q | 
bees phe 5 

modes. Ti emper and 5 8 85 The Ries | 
Sund Lovg Lodge in Key Kab at Nur cet ſaid ori 
Ne i 75 eb. 1735. with former &. 0 e 

fi ek 15 8 me nobl 1 
ee 4 Vifcbünt 12 

G GrondkR PavNe, Eſq; formerly Grand ny 

Chair 3 Martin Clare N 9 acted * Dey. i 7, cha 
EF zm In. A 55 if Bi 
2 ts . mee n ur . r dur 

Brother Ri iphy f from Bengal, = ature from i thence 20 Spin & - 

dl) 3 4. 

tor the Charity. 
Sir "Robert Lawley Maſter of the ee Lodpe,\. with his 
Wardens and 9 more, with their new Badges, 1 ra full 12 
firft Time. i Nn IN, IG Anat 211083 
The Lodge orderd' a Lettet of Thanks“ to be ſent to he 
* at 2 M for their generous and kind Preſents, NOD bn. 

— AST” 

— — 0 Ie — — — > — a as Be, 

P_ 

— — 

* 1 e on 1) T who dere d 
Siews ” — 5 e 
ä 1. Sir Robert Lawley, Baroner, | 

; Pains, 
2. Hilliam, Dy Poe 8. 705 15 
3. Martin Clave 

— —— 

M. and F. R. 8. Robert i 155 
4. John Theobald, M. D, 4 8. ThomaiS — ee 
5. Charles ' Dlectewood, Eſq; es Kg apes . 

1 tt; be, Thomas Beech, Eſq. ID illiam Hogarth Painter. 

O2and 

Gig; 

pee bans 22 75 1 
, the Karl at « 

Maeder | * 
5 Le 85 SE 2 Yi, the ev. 55 
\D LE 7 3 5 4 ky air propoſed fome Rules af © 

munication that were 3 and now make the i Git of 

PE de Grant Mates Narh . 

1 Ml; ak Who. was 
Pa de Fm Ws 1-ardays land. the 
fy, re Wok Bir. of . 1 0 th Earls. 1 

Altema 585 11775 arcourt tue, i 
pb 9 at Arms, Nn Kar po e ae at 

Fa Anti 
A Real Web 1 other. Brothers a}l daly corhed, atten 
and, from his Fouts in H/biteh 

© Gund er. Ele 
made th þ Laſer of 1 5 with; the | BU of Muſick), Ea/?- 
ward to the" Hall „Where all Things be ing regularly f e 

K e Maſter Ward Pee 12 aloud, oor 2 Broder, has 
Ja AMZ8B EL Eatl o udoun + 

de! of Mens $4 appointed John UW rv, Bly ws * 

tinue 2 Sir Robert Lewie, Baronet, 

— Milliam i M. D. and F. * 

and cont e and ee Ma 

n 

185 Ki 
mon vert. all on 

ah * —_ — 4, 
Þ 7 , hs 4. a = 

4 
———— ta - —— — 
— —— uw eo — 1 —— 8 

# än = that ae ar the Pap 0 on 15 5 At wy ata 

publickly thank'd. 
a B 450 F R. S. NR. Benjahiin Gaſuy ys 

LI, T es Styles, Eq; 
Wet. 5 A bh 
| | | Mt Mr. Richard Sale 

| Ia 5 ef Ru . oy | irt. Mr. ame Priel, * 
+ 6. 2 on; sf 12. Mr, Francis 5 

. 

2 =” 
— Gzand Lodge in Ample Form ds, on 

Thurſiay 1 June 1736. with the Earl of Craufund and other foes 

mer C. Officers, the Steward, Lodge, the new Stewards, and the 

Qficers ot 36 Lodges. 

G. Marden Graeme ated? Lord Eregkine, GrandWardens 

as D. G. Maſter pro tempore. Capt.— u, Spro tem JE: 
— 06 Lodge in Dae Form at the Devil forefai 

St. Joux vangeliſt's Day, Monday 27 Dec; 1736. with = 

S. Officers, the Stewards Lodge, the Nen, Stewards, and the 

Officers of 52 Lodges.. | 

Sir RozexT LawLsy Sen. G. W. was in the Chair as Grand 
Maſter pro tempore. | 
D 110 6. Maſi .aeme ]. 6. W. was A Ghar G. Wardens 

eputy after pro tempore, acob Lamba rote 
The curious By-Laws of the Lodge, at Exeter. — A 
read and applauded, and a Letter of Thanks was order'd to 2 
2 to them for their handſome Beneficence to the, General 
Charity. 

— Gand Lodge in Ample Form at the Devi foreſaid on 
Tha. 13 April 1737. with the Earl of Crayfurd and other 
former G. Ee the Earls of Weems, Hume and Darnley, the 
Stewards 28 ſent Ste wards, and the Officers of 75 L 
Aſter the A was over 

Loupoun Grend Mater propo poſed for his Succeſſor the 
of Darnley Maſter of a Lodge, who was forthwith ſaluted as 

Grand IA er Zleß. 

1 * 1 MBLY_ and Feaſt at Fiſbrongers-Hall on Thurſday. 
28 April 1 3 

Ry LJ Maſter with his Deputy and MWardent, the noble 
Brothers, the Duke of _ Richmond, the Earls of C raufurd d 
Weemes, Lord Grey of Grooly, the Stewards and many other 
Brothers all duly clothed, attended the Grand Maſten Ele 
at his Houſe in Pall-Mall, and made the Proceſſion of March 
Eaftward to the Hall in a very ſolemn Manner, having 3 
Bands of Reer wum E 2. and Fart Horns, 

properly 

* 

- of Wales Palace of X2w near Richmo 

i ”» 

| (137). 
properly diſpoſed in the March; Where all Things being regularly | 
_ tranſacted as above, * : 
The Earl of Loudoun proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother 
XVI. 2 BTVY TAS Earl and Viſcount 890 Lord 
Clifton, Gzand Maſter. of Maſons, who continued 
nUard, Eſq Sir Robert Lawley, Baronet, - .. Grand © 
Grand Walter, William Greme, M. D. and F. R. S. Wardens. 
. and continued the Secretary and Sword · bearer. Of 
— Gzand Lodge in Ample Form at the Devil foreſaid on 
Wedneſday 29 June 1737. with the Earl of Loudoun and other 
former G Officers, the Stewards Lodge, the New Stewards and the 
Officers of 49 Lodges. 
On 5th Nov. 1737. an Occaſional Lod Lode vat. held at the Prince 
Bix. - 
The Rev. Dr. SEAN HAI KI (formerly Grand . 
Ba of this | 
Mr. Man a we! Attorney at Law, Senior & Grand 
Mr. Eraſinu » Mathematician, . Junior © Warden. ? 
The Right on. hart:s Calvert Earl of Ballimore, the Hon. 
Colonel James Lumley, the Hon. Major Madden, Mr. de Noyer, 
Mr. Vraden; and w n formed and tiled, 
His Royal Highneſs FRIDERIC Prince of Wa LA WS 
in the uſual Manner introduced, and made an Enter d Prentice and 
Fellow. Craft. 
Our fai Roy al Brother FRIDERIC was made a 
aſon by the ſame my aſſembled there r that 

Nes 

Faber the Fraternity joyfully remember his RoyaL At HNESS 
and his Sox, in the proper Manner. 5 

ſe, And ever ſince, in the Grand Lodge an icular 

eee that(oftad a, the Aaqf, Bop IT who vers. 

1. Sir Bouchier ray, Baronet, - 

2. George Bothomley,. 2 8. Mr. Thomas WT Merchanr, if 

7 

| 
| 
— Murr __ 9. Mr. Peter Leigh, ' 
; Capt. Jobn * 10. Mr. Thomas Boehm, . 
. — Charles os 22 Mr. Benjamin Da Cofta, 
S. Mr. Pes. Mac-Culloch 12. Mr. Nathaniel Auen. 

which the Grand 

Grand Mafter E 

( 138 ). | , 
e in Ample Form at the Devil foreſaid on 

., — G2and-Lodg 

Wedneſday 25 January 1733. with the Earl of Loudoun, Dr. De- 

uliers, George Payne, Nathaniel Blakerby, Thomas Batſon, Eſq; 
2 Aullerpen, and er former Grand Officers, Lord George 

Graham, the Stewards Lodge, the preſent Stewards and the Oſi- 

cers of 66 Lodges. After the Affair of D wha overs... 

The Gꝛand Lodge approved of this New K of Conſtitu- 
tions, and order d the Author Brother Anderſon to print the ſame, 
with the Addition of the New Regulation IX. See the Approba- 

tion below. 

and Lodge in Ample- Form at the Devil foreſaid on Thur/- 
day 6 eee e ee rs 
RNLEY G. Maſter ; Chair, John TCard, D. G. Maſter, 
Mam Graeme, "Tn, G. W. Fpro tem- The Earl of Iuchi- 

.C - pore. F quin, Dr, Deſaguliers, 

P s 

ames Anderſon, Jun. G. W 

Er Payne, late G. Maſters, Fobn Hammerton Eſq; Provincial 

G. M. of Carolina, Thomas Batſon late D. G. M. Nath. Blakerby 
Treaſurer, the Marquis of Caernervon, the Stewarts Lodge, the 

Preſent Stewards and the Officers of 60 Lodges, After the At- 
fair of Charity was over, | ö 

NMathaniel Blakerby, Eſq; the Feger er, having juſtly 

cleared his Accounts, demitted or laid down his Office. Upon 
aſter and the Lodge appointed the Secretary 
Revis to be Treaſurer. 5 8 | 
 DarnLey G. Mafter propoſed for his Succeſſor the Marquis 
of Caernarvon Maſter of a Lodge, who was forthwith ſaluted as 
Grand Maſter Elf. +» | 1 Wt 
ASSEMBLY and Feaſt at Fſbmongers-Hall on Thurſday 
27 April 1738. 4 = nn 6g) | 
- DARNLEY Grand Maſter with his Deputy and Wardens, the 
noble Brothers Richmond, Inchiquin, Loudoun and Colerane, late 

Gr. Maſters, Earl of Kintore, Lord Grey of Grooby, the Stewards 

and a great my other Brothers all duly clothed, attended the 

elt at his Houſe in Grovenor-ftreet, and made the 
Proceſſion of March, with the Band of Muſick, Eaſtward to the 
Hall, where all Things being regularly tranſacted as above, * 

— 

5 
88 
— 

(6139) 
The Earl of Darnley proclaim'd aloud our noble Brother 
XVII. HNA Bzx1pcss Marquis of | Caeraarven, Son and 
Heir apparent to the Duke of „Knight of the Bath, 
and one of the Bed-Chamber to our R Brother Fripezic 
Prince of Wales, On nd Waſter of aw who appointed 

V 
| ge m. ran continu Se 
— Fand Sword- bearer. f 4 

Cape. Andrew Robinſon, © Wardens. 
rother Revis the Secretary declin'd the Office of Treaj 

becauſe, he ſaid, that one Perſon ſhould not take upon him both 
Offices, for that the One ſhould be a Check upon the Other. 
— Gꝛand Lodge in Due Form at the Devil foreſaid on Wed- 

rea 28 June 1738. 
| GroRGE Oo Tice S G. W. in the Chair, as Grand Maſter, 

William Graeme, M. D. as D. G. Maſter tempore, 
Capt. Andrew Robinſon as — nf Grand I with Grade Grand 
2 Benjamin ' Gaſcayne as Warden. J Officers, the Stewards 

the preſent 8 Jo the Officers of 61 Lod 
— Minutes of the laſt Quarterly Communication — of the 

Committe of Charity were read and approved. Moſt of the 
Time was ſpent in receiving the Charity of the Lodges, and in 

relieving poor Brothers. 
Brother Revis the Secretary havin 8 declin'd the Office of Trea- 

ſurer, the Lodge deſired him to act as fuch, till One to their 
Mind can be found. 

rv that afted at the Feaſt on 27 1738. mad wer 
A blickly N * #73 

1 Mr. Chriſtod ber 7. 

11. Mr. — . 

12. Mr. Harry Leigh. 

i Succeſſacs for 42 Annual Feaſt, viz. 

Hon. Jou Caicuzzr EA, Eſq; Capt. Charles — * 3 Na- 
thaniel Oldham, Eſq; Mr. Mexander Pollock, Su 
fectioner, Mr. ir: Then Robinſon, Mr. Iazc Barrett, 22 Samuel Lowman, 12 Ed- 

«ard Maſtery, Mr. Thomas Auron, Mr. Joſeph fler. A Lift 

— 

654 

A A Lif of the GR AuD⁰ MasTzRs-or-Patrons of the Free 
WMalons in England, from the Coming in of the Ang/o- 
"Saxons to theſe Times, who are mention'd 1 in this Book. 

USTIN' the Mont, the fir} —The "jy, Ms MasTzRs of the 
Archbiſbop of Canterbury, ap Knights Templars Kos iy 

pear d at the Head of the Craft ir} Henry II. 

founding the old Cathedral, unden PETER de Cole-Church, 100 b 

Etbellert King of Kent, Page 61 Tuer Kg „Arnis, 
BNN ET Abbot of Wirrall undei] under King 

_ Kenred King of Mercia Jn by PETER King Tapas, and 
Miſtake in this Book Erbe ert) wh -GroryaavFiraPurn, id 
wrote to Charles Martel, ' 62] under King Henry III 
Sr. SW1THIN under the Saxon|—WasTER GIFFARD\. 
_ King Ethehwolph. Did] Archbiſhop of Dr, 
e Tbid. F de GI ARE +2221 
—E THRED uty ') | O BP. >=: 
King of Mercia, f | |-Raten 2 of Mount- * 

Prince ETHELWARD the > 62 
Learned, both under ä 
King Edward Senior. 1 
Prince EDwin under his Bro: 
King Athelftan. Lia. 
St. Duxs AN Archbiſhop of Can-| 5 | 
terbury r King Edgar. G65|—-Jorn de SrouLEE Maſter) 
King EDwARD the Confefſor, and . 5 the Ghiblim, 
— LEOFRICK Earl of _— ILLIAaMa WIck HAM 
Roo ERM de Montgomery) 1 Biſhop of Winche/ter, 
Earl of Arundel, — adi | |RoperTAa BARN HAM, 
—GuNnDULPH Biſhop of | | |—Hznxy YEUELE the 
Noche / er, both under King f 67] King's Free- Maſon, 

Herner, all under King 

Edward I. 1. 
—WALTER STAPLETON Biſhop 

of Exeter under K. Edward II. 70 
King EDpWARD III. and 

> bids 

William I. the Conqueror, —SrMox LANGHAM Abbot 

and alſo under of Weſtminſter, alſo * 

King William II. Rufus. ) | King Nicbard II. 72 
— King Hznzv I. Beauclerk, 68|-Tromas Fire Aion Tar of 
— GILBERT DE CLARE Surrey under King Henry IV. 73 

of Pembroke under King Stephen 
N rs 10 —Hzxay 

= - : | 1 
- mY 

(147 ') 
* =Hskxv Carcnz ity Archbiſhop King CHARLES I. and under bim | 

ol Canterbury under Kin HENRY DANVERS | 
Y lad WIS 45; * of Danby, / Page 
ne WANEFLEET -Tromas Howard Earl, 99 
of 'Winthefter" under ] | of Arundel, * © S and 

King Henry VI. 75 [FRANC18 R= L Eart of 100. 
"Rn BEAUCHAMP Bitho Bedford, | 135 ') 
"TEL of Sarum under e aa | 

King Edward IV. 76 King CHART ES II. and under him 
King Hewzy VII. ard un- Hz Jaamyn Ea; 
r Aim erde, TD 5 
Hear ban Abbot of Wot: |—THoMas SAVAGE Earl of r 
minſter, and | Rivers, 8 1 
—Sir REGINALD Bear | Gone vikians Duke 195: 
Knight of the Garter. | of Bucks, I” 
Cardinal Wootsey. I H zur BENNET. Eirt'of} 8 
 —Ta0MAs' CrRomwWeLLt| Arlington,” © * © 
Earl of Bfex, d ** 7 under King 7 amen — 
 —JoHN Nover Lord 79 U CuRISTO RER. RREN. 
Audi, all under King King WILLIAM III. and 2 
Hen VIII. — Sir CHRISTOPHER Wazny 
—EDwARD SEYMOURDuke again, 10 
of Somerſet, _. —CHarLlEs LENNOS Duke( 7 
—Jonan PoyntT Biſhop o 80] of Richmond. 5 
Wincheſter both under "© And under Queen Anv EF, 
Edward VI. 7 gyro Wau again, 
— Sir THOM As SACK 125 . tilFhe finiſh'd St. Pauls Cathedral i 
—Francis Russ Earl ol we" , 4 D-/wo8. +» 108 9 
Bedford, After which, no Grand Paſter till | 
—Sir THOMAS Ga ices | the Lodges met and choſe: one from. 
—CHarLEs HoWARD Farbe 81 among themſelves, vis. | 
of Effingham, {-AnTowgY SAYER in the 3d Year 
—GROROE HAsT NOS Er I of King Gerrgel. A. D. 177. 
of Huntington, under | , |—GeorGt Payne, Eſq; 110 | 
Queen Elizabeth. Rev. Dr. DzsAacuLitns Did. | 
King James I. and under him - GzoxGzPavNe again. 111 
—In1Go Jos, | After whom, the Fraternity came 
—W1iLLIamM HERBERT 98 to be govern'd by the following Noble 
Earl of Pembrake, Grand Walters, viz, | 

1 32 

- 
— 

- 

1. Joun 

EY 
9 * : 
2. 

———— ꝑ —— 

ö 
| 
[ 
| 
| 
{ 
t | 
i} 
| | 
| 

02 * 
1. Jonx MonTAGv Duke of. Tuo Ho w AA Duke of 

ontagu.. 1 * alan ra to 129 
2. PHILI S WHARTON Duke of 10. 9 Cooxp Lord. . 
. Wharton... 1 1175 / I 13.11 28 
' Francis Scor Duke of | II, 2 Banown. Lord Viſ- 
" Buedleugh: n 1160 count Montaga./ | 1 30 
CnarLes LEenNos Duke offi2. James LYON: Earl of © 
| Richmond, Lennar andd Aubigny, 118 Strathmore. | 131 
S. Janes HAMMILTON EARL offt 3. JoHn Lixnsav Earl of.” 
ercorn Le vm 215.008 

Craufurd. 
14. THoMAs Tavxny Lord E 

count Weymouth; - 11. 4 
15. Jonun Cana Earl of 

Theſe were under King, George I. 
_ the following ole Gran 
Maſters have ated under his pre 
ſent Majeſty. King Gerge II. viz. 

135 
6. WII LIAM O RIEN he of 116. 1 BurTuy Earl of 

Inchiquin;y . .. , 1120] Darnley, 137 

„HENRY Hans Lon. N HevAv BarnoesManguis of 

Calerane. 122] Caernaruon the oh at 'Grand 
Aus KI * + + Viſcount 

Walter. - 2 , 139 
n. 123 0 K 

£4. 
: 5 

1 ] "& : * " 4 TEAK © 
9 bh 
1 18 | ö 
> x 2. 
* J 
4 © \ * > IJ PF 
| Pa 3d | 
(. a Al = _— 
VN" — 
o 'L 5 
t 7 4 | — 
; * | = Py” © * . 
© 4 * 
6 7 
| * * 
1 
— on 
Ly 
* x 
LS. 
S % „ - 
* 
- 
* = 
IIa 

- 

" —- % * > NY |} = * gs ® 
"I, * * 9 * & \ 
dk =P as MA * , 
eee > 22 + | S - + (4 ASSL 41: 

THE OLD 

CHARGES 

e OF THR 

"= and Accepted Masons, 

Collected by the Author from their old Records, at the 
Command of the Grand "OPT the K Duke of 
MonTAG u. 

"= 

Approved by the G md Lo „and order'd to be printed i in 
1 firſt Edition £ t . of of Confittion on 25 March 1722. 

1 "908 4 & i 
—_— 
* — 

I. Cn ares, Gere Gov and Religion. 

LIES VIE Maso is obliged by his. Tenure to obſerve the 
Moral Law, d à true e and if he rightly 
I. underſtands "the Craft, he will never be a Stupid 
WEE Atheiſt, nor an Irreligious Libertin, nor act againſt 
en Conſcience. 

In. N Times the Cbriſtian Maſons were charged to comply 
with the Chriſtian Uſages of each Country where they travell'd 
or work'd: But Maſonry being found in all Nations, even of 
divers Religions, they are now only charged to adhere to that 
een in which all Men agree (leaving each Brother to his 

aun 

ca» 
——_ 

( 

own PE Opinions) that is, to be Good Men and True, 
Men of Honour and Honeſty,” by whatever Names, Religions 
or Perſuaſions they may be diftingaiſh'd : For they all agree in 
the 3 great Articles of Noa n, enough to preſerve the Cement of 
the Lodge. Thus Maſonry is the Center of their Union and the 

happy Means of conciliating Perſons that 9—— muſt have 
* d at a perperual Diſtance. 

— * 

U Cu ARG r. Of the c Wagittrate, Supreme and Subordinate) 

A Maſon i is a peaceable Subject, never to be concern'd in Plots 

inſt the State, nor diſreſpectful to Inferior Magiſtrates. Of 
of Kings, Princes and States encourag'd the Fraternity for their 
Loyal 7 who ever flouriſh'd moſt.” in Times of Peace; But tho? 
a Brother is not to be countenanced in his Rebellion againſt the 
State; yet if convicted of no other Crime, his Relation to 1, 
Lodge remains indefeaſible. 

III. ko: Concerning Lodges. 

A Loc is a Place where Maſons meet to work i in: Hence 

the Aſembly, or duly organiz d Body of Maſons, is call'd a 

Lops ; juſt as the Word Church is expreſſive both of the Con- 
egation and of the Place of Worſhip. 

© Brother ſhould belong to ſome particular Lodge, and 
cn abſent without incurring Cenſure, if not neceſſarily 

tain'd. 

The Men made Maſons muſt be Freeborn (or no Bondmen) 
of mature Age and of good Report, hail and ſound, not de- 
form*d or diſmember'd at the Time of their making. But no 
Woman, no Eunucb. | 
When Men of Quality, Emiuenee, Wealth and Eening ap- 
Ply to be made, they are to be reſpectfully accepted, after due 

xamination : For ſuch often prove Good Lords (or Founders) 
of Work, and will not employ Cowans when true Maſons can be 
Had; they alſo make the beſt Officers of Lodges, and the beſt 

Deſigners, 

(145) 

Deſigners, to the Honour and Strength of the Lodge: Nay, from 
among them, the Fraternity can have a Noble Gqand Maſter, 
But thoſe Brethren are \equally ſubject to the Charges and Regula- 
tions, except in what more immediately concerns Operative Maſons. 

IV. Cxazoz. Of Maſters, Wardens, Fellows and Prentices. 

All Preferment among Maſons is grounded upon real Worth 
and perſonal Merit only, not upon Seniority, No MasrER 
ſhould take a Prentice that is not the Son of honeſt Parents, a 
perfect Youth without Maim or Defect in his Body, and capable 
of learning the Myſteries of the Art ; that ſo the Lords (or Foun- 
ders) may be well ſerved, and the Craft not deſpiſed ; and that, 
when of Age and Expert, he may become an Enter'd Prentice, 
or a Free-Maſon of the loweſt Degree, and upon his due Im- 
provements a Fellow-Craft and a Maſter-Maſon, capable to un- 
dertake a Lord's Work. 

The WarDens: are choſen from among the Mafter-Maſons, 
and no Brother can be a Maſter of a Lodge till he has acted as 
Warden ſomewhere, except in extraordinary Caſes; or when a 
Lodge is to be form'd where none ſuch can be had : For then 
3 Aae. Maſons, tho* never Maſters or Wardens of Lodges 
before, may be conſtituted Maſter and Wardens of that New 
Lodge. 4 g = 

But no Number without 3 Maſter-Maſans can form a Lodge; 
and none can be the GRAND MasTER or a GRAN D WARDEN 
who has not acted as the Maſter of a pariicular Lodge. 

v. Cxaxct. Of the Management of /be Craft in Working, | 

All Maſons ſhould work hard and honeſtly on Working- 
Days, that they may live reputably on Holy-Days; and the 
Working- Hours appointed by Law, or confirm'd by Cuſtom, 
ſhall. be obſerv'd. | | 5 

A AMaſter-Maſon only muſt be the Surveyor or Maſter of Work, 

who ſhall undertake the Lord's Work reaſonably, ſhall truly 
2 7 25 U diſpend 

IS 6146) 3 | 
diſpend his Goods as if they were his own, and ſhall not give 
more Wages than juſt to any Fellow or Prentice. 75 

The Wardens ſhall be true both to Maſter and Fellows, taking 
Care of all Things, both within and without the Lodge, eſpecially 
in the Maſter's Abſence ; and their Brethren ſhall obey them. 
The Maſter and the Maſons ſhall faithfully finiſh the Lord's 
Work, whether Taſ# or Journey; nor ſhall take the Work at 
Taſk which hath been accuſtomed to Tournee. gt 
None ſhall ſhew Envy at a Brother's Proſperity, nor ſupplant 
him or put him out of his Work, if capable to finiſh it, | 

All Maſons ſhall meekly receive their Wages without Mur- 
muring or Mutiny, and not deſert the Maſter till the Lord's 
Work is finiſh'd : They muſt avoid ill Language, calling each 
Other Brother or Fellow, with much Courteſy, both within and 
without the Lodge. They ſhall inſtruct a younger Brother to 
1 55 bright and expert, that the Lord's Materials may not be 
ſpoiled. 
But Free and Accepted Maſons ſhall not allow Cowans to work 
with them; nor ſhall they be employ'd by Cowans without an 
urgent Neceſlity : And even in that Caſe they muſt not teach 
Cowans, but muſt have a ſeparate Communication. 

No Labourer ſhall be employ'd in the proper Work of Free- 

Wi, VI. Cnance. Concerning Maſins Behaviour. 

1. Behaviour in the Lodge before Clofing. | 
You muſt not hold private Committees or ſeparate Converſa- 
tion without Leave from the after; nor talk of any Thing 
impertinent; nor interrupt the Maſter or Wardens, or any Brother 
ſpeaking to the Chair; nor act ludicrouſly while the Zodge is 
engaged in what is ſerious and folemn :: But you are to pay due 
SOOT to the Maſter, Wardens and Fellows, and put them to 
3 Brother found guilty of a Fault ſhall ſtand to the Award 
of the Lodge, unleſs he appeals to the Grand Lodge; or _ 
| | Lord's 

(147) 

ee og is retarded ; For then a particular Reference may 
be made, \ 

No private Piques, no Quarrels about Nations, Families, Re- 
ligions or Politicks muſt be brought within' the Door of the 
Lodge: For as Maſons, we are of the oldeſt Catholick Religion 
above hinted, and of all Nations upon the Square, Level and: 
Plumb ;, and like our Predeceſſors in all Ages, we are reſolv'd 
againſt 2 Diſputes, as contrary to the Peace and Welfare 
of the Lodge. 

2. Behaviour er the Lodge is cloſed and the Brethren not gone, 

You may enjoy yourſelves with innocent Mirth, treating one 
another according to Ability, but avoiding all Exceſs ; not forc- 
ing any Brother to eat or drink beyond his own Inclination (ac-- 
cording to the Old Regulation * of King Ana-|* Page 24. Line 1- 
S$HUERUS) nor hindering him from going home when he pleaſes: 
For tho' after Lodge Hours you are like other Men, yet the Blame 
of your Exceſs may be thrown upon the Fraternity, tho unjuſtly. 

3. Behaviour a. meeting without Strangers, but not in 4 | 
| PFPormed Lodge. | * 

— 

You are to ſalute one another as you have been or ſhall be 
inſtructed, freely communicating Hints of Knowledge, but with- 
out diſcloſing Secrets, unleſs to thoſe that have given. long 
Proof of their Taciturnity and Honour; and without derogating 
from the Reſpect due to any Brother, were he not a Maſon : 
For tho? all Brothers and Fellows are upon the Level, yet Maſonry 
diveſts no Man of the Honour due to him before he was made 
a Maſon, or that ſhall become his Due afterwards ; nay rather, it 
adds to his Reſpect, teaching us to give Honour to whom it is due, 
eſpecially to a Noble or Eminent Brother, whom we ſhould diſtin- 
guiſh from all of his Rank or Station, and ſerve him readily, 
according to our Ability. 

U2 4. Behaviour 

(145) 
| ns to i Fer 1825 423 TI 4 
4. Behaviour 1 Preſence of Strangers not Maſons, 

You muſt be cautious in your Words, Carriage and Motions 
that ſo the moſt penetrating Stranger may not be able to diſcover 
what is not proper to be intimated : and the impertinent or in- 
ſnaring Queſtions, or ignorant Diſcourſe of Strangers muſt be pru- 

— 

dently manag*d by Free- Maſons. 1 
5. Behaviour 4. Home and in your Neighbourhood. f 

Maſons ought to be Moral Men, as above charged; conſe- 
quently good Huſbands, good Parents, good Sons, and good 
Neighbours, not ſtay ing too long from Home and avoiding all 
Exceſs ; yet wiſe Men too, for certain Reaſons known to them. 

6. Behaviour towards a foreign Brother or Stranger. 

You are cautiouſly to examine him, as Prudence ſhall direct 
you; that you may not be impoſed upon by a Pretender, whom 
you are to reject with Deriſion, and beware of giving him any 
Hints. But if you diſcover him to be true and faithful, you are 
to reſpe& him as a Brother; and if in want, you are to relieve 
him, if you can; or elſe to direct him how he may be. reliey'd : 
you muſt employ him, if you can; or elſe recommend him to 
be employ'd; but you are not charg'd to do beyond Ability. 

7. Behaviour bebind a Brother*s Back as well as before his Face. 

Free and Accepted Maſons have been ever charged to avoid all 
Slandering and Backbiting of a true and faithful Brother, or talk- 
ing diſreſpe&fully of his Perſon or Performances; and all Malice 
or unjuſt Reſentment : Nay you muſt not ſuffer any others to re- 
proach an honeſt Brother, but ſhall defend his Character as far as 
is conſiſtent with Honour, Safety and Prudence; tho* no farther, 

VII, Cares. 

(1491) 

VII. Cxarcs, Concerning Law-Hutts, 
If a Brother do you Injury, apply firſt to your own. or his 
Lodge; and if you are not ſatisfy'd, you may appeal to the Grand 
Lodge ; but you muſt never take a legal Courſe till the Cauſe 
cannot be otherwiſe decided: For if the Affair is only between 
Maſons and about Maſonry, Law-Suits ought to be prevented by 
the good Advice of prudent Brethren, who are the beſt Referees 
of ſuch Differences. | Ar! 
But if that Reference is either impracticable or unſucceſsful, 
and the Affair muſt be brought into the Courts of Law or Equity 3 
yet ſtill you muſt avoid all Wrath, Malice and Rancour in car- 
rying on the Suit, not ſaying nor doing any Thing that may 
hinder either the Continuance or the Renewal of Brotherly Love 
and Friendſhip, which is the Glory and Cement of this antient 
Fraternity ; that we may ſhew to all the World the benign In- 
fluence of Maſonry, as all wiſe, true and faithful, Brothers have 
done from the Beginning of Time, and will do till ArchiteFure 
ſhall be diſſolved in the general Conflagration. | if 

Amen! So mote it be! 

All theſe Charges you are to obſerve, and alſo Thoſe that 
ſhall be communicated unto- you in a Way that cannot be 
written. | 12 

The Antient Manner of Conſtituting a Lodee. 
A New Lodge, for avoiding many Irregularities, ſhould be ſo- 
F lemnly Conſtituted by the Grand Maſter with his Deputy 
and M ardens: Or in the G. Maſter's Abſence, the De uty acts 
for his Worſhip, the Senior G. TUarden as Deputy, the Junior 
G. Marden as the Senior, and a preſent Maſter of a Lodge as 
the Junior. 
Or if the Deputy is alſo abſent, the Grand Maſter may depute 
either of his G. Mat dens, who can appoint Others to be G. O- 
cers pro tempore. The 

3 (61500 

The Lodge being open'd, and the Candidates, or the New 
Maſter and Warden —_ yet among the Fellow Crafts, the 
G. Maſter ſhall aſk his Deputy, if he has examin'd them, and 
finds the Candidate Maſter well ſkill'd in the Noble Science and 
the Royal Art, and duly inſtructed in our Myſteries ? &c. 
The Deputy anſwering in the Affirmative, ſhall (by the 
G. Maſter's Order) take the Candidate from among his Fellows 
and preſent him to the G. Maſter, ſaying, Right Worſhipful 

GRAND MasSTER, the Brethren bere deſire to be form'd into a 

Lodge; and 1 preſent my worthy Brother A. B. to be their 
Maſter, whom I know io be of good Morals and great Skill, true 
and truſty, and a Lover of the whole Fraternity whereſoever diſpers'd 
over the Face of the Earth, | | | | 

Then the Grand Maſter placing the Candidate on his Left 

Hand, having aſk'd and obtain*d the unanimous Conſent of the 

Brethren, ſhall ſay, I conſtitute and form theſe good Brethren into 
a New Lodge, and appoint you Brother A. B. the Maſter. of it, 

10 doubling Y your Capacity and Care to preſerve the Cement of 
"I 

the Lodge, with ſome other Expreſſions that are proper and 
uſual on that Occaſion, but not proper to be written, 
Upon this the Deputy ſhall rehearſe the Charges of a Maſter , 
and the Gand Maſter ſhall aſk the Candidate, ſaying, Do y 
ſubmit to theſe Charges, as Maſters have done in all Ages? And 
the New Maſter ſignifying his Cordial Submiſſion thereunto, 
The G12and Maſter ſhall by certain ſignificant Ceremonies and 
antient Uſages, inſtal him and preſent him with the Book of 
Conſtitutions, the Lodge-Book and the Inſtruments of his Office; 
not altogether, but one after another; and after each of em the 

6. Maſter or his Deputy ſhall rehearſe the ſhort and pithy Charge 

that is ſuitable to the Thing preſented, _ $4 | 
Next, the Members of this New Lope x, bowing all together to 
the G. Maſter, ſhall return his Worſhip their Thanks; and ſhall 
immediately do Homage to their New Maſter, and ſignify their 
Promiſe of Subjection and Obedience to him by the uſual Con- 
gratulation. | | | 

The 

( 151 ) a 
The Deputy and G. Wardens and any other Brethren preſent 
that are not Members of this New Lodge, ſhall next congratulate 
the New MAsrER, and he ſhall return his becoming Acknow- 
ledgments to the G. Maſter firſt, and to the Reſt in their Order. 

Then the Gzand Maſter orders the New Mafter to enter im- 
mediately upon the Exerciſe- of his Office, viz, in chuſing his 
Wardens: And calling forth two Fellow-Crafts ( Maſter-Maſons,) 
preſents them to the G. Maſter for his Approbation, and to the 
New Lodge for their Conſent. _ Upon which TIO 

The Senior or Junior G. (Harden, or ſome Brother for him, 
ſhall rehearſe the Charges of each Warden of a private Lodge : 
And they ſignifying their cordial Submiſſion thereunto, 

The New MasTzx ſhall preſent them ſingly with the ſeveral 
Inſtruments of their Office, and in due Form inſtal them in their 
proper Places : And the Brethren of this New Lodge ſhall ſig- 
nify their Obedience to thoſe NR] WARDENS by the uſual Con- 
gratulation. | 1 

Then the G. Maſter gives all the Brethren Joy of their New 
Maſter and Wardens, and recommends Harmony ; hoping. their 
only Contention will be a laudable Emulation in cultivating the 
Royal Art and the Social Virtues. f 

Upon which all the New Lodge bow together in returning 
Thanks for the Honour of this Coxs 11 1urION. | 

The Gꝛand Maſter alſo orders the Secretary to regiſter this 
New Lodge in the Grand Lodge Book, and to notify the ſame to 

the other particular Lodges; and after the Maſter*s Song he 
orders the G. Warden to cloſe the Lodge. 

This is the Sum, but not the whole Ceremonial by far; which 
the Grand Officers can extend or abridge at Pleaſure, explaining 
Things that are not fit to be written: tho? none but Thoſe that 
have acted as Grand Officers can accurately go through all the ſe- 
veral Parts and Uſages of a new Conſtitution: in the jaſt So- 
lemnity. | , | | | 

TFT RE- 

(nz) 

...... 
FF ˙ w 

The General REGULATIONS 

N 

o TAE e 
Porn 93 Are Aso 

Compiled firſt by Brother Gronaf "REL Eſa; 1 7 und 
Mafter, A. D. 1720. and approv'd. by the General.Afembly 
at Stationers- Hall on 24 June 1721. Next by Order of the 
Duke of Mox radu when Grand Mgber, the Author James 
Anderſon compared them with the antient Records of the 
Fraternity, and digeſted them into this Method with proper 
"Additions and Explications from the faid Records; and the 
Grand Lodge having revis'd and appfov'd:themi;! order'd. em 
bo be.princd in the Book of and on 2g Mureh 1722. 

* Co 9 
To which are now added, i in a diſtiner ak ite rd 2 * 

The ew Re GU LATIONS, or the Alterations, Improvements'and bes- f 
tions of, * Old, made by en Grand EPS "9 2s oft A. 

GT © 

Old Raouiarions.. | New Recotarions. 
I, 1 G. Maſter | 1. * HAT Is, 'ofily when the 
or Deputy has full | 1 G. Wax pxs ate abſent: 

Authority and Right, not | For the G. Maſter cannot deprive em 
only to be preſent, but | of their Office, withoutſhewing Cauſe 
alſo to preſide in every | fairly appearing to the G. Lodge ac- 
Lodge, with the Mzfer | cording to the Old Regulation XVIII. 
of the Lodge on his Left | fo that if they are preſent in a particular 

Hand ; Lodge 

(153) 

Old Recviarions. 

Hand ; and to order his | e with Grand Maſter, the 
Grand Wardens to attend 2 act as 3 W fe chere. h 
him, who are not to act A n 
as Wardens of particular | The Ga, dev = cure ſome 
Lodges but in his Preſence : Irregularities, c N None but 
and at his Command: For the G. Mafter, his 2 War- 
the G. Mafter, while in | dens (who are the * Coand — hn 
a particular Lodge, may | ſhall wear their Fewels in Gab 
command the Wardens of | dant to Blue Ribbons a 

that Lodge, or any Other | Necks, and White pl ey — 
Mafter-Maſons, to act with Blue Silk ; which Sort of 

there as his Wardens pro | may be alſo worn by former 70 

tempore. L. 
II. The Mas r zA of a arti- arti | 
cular Lodge hag the Right and 

Authority of congregating the 
Members 15 his Lodge into a 

or Occurrence; as well as to 
1 the — and Place of 
their And in 
Caſe of Deck a or ickneks, or 
Abſence of the Maſter, 

the 'SzNTor Warpen | ſhall 
act as Maſter pro 
no Brother is —— who has 
been Maſter of that Zodge be- 
fore: For the Abſent Maſter | 
Authority reverts to the aft 
Maſter preſent, tho? he r 
act till the Senior” Warden has 

tempore, if? 

2 

Nein Recviarions, © © 

II. On 25 oo 1723, 

It wasa TA 

if a Maſter of a par 
ed or demits, the. . 

lar F324 
Chapter upon any Emergency Per, . s 
Harden ſhall forthwith fill che 
the Maſter”s Chair till the next 

Time of chuſing; and ever 
ſince, in the Maſters Abſence, he 
fills che Chair, even tho? a 
former Maſter be preſent; 5 
On 27 March 1538. 

' Maſters and Wardens of par- 
ticular Lodges may line. their 
white Leather Aprons with white 
Silk, and may hang their Jewels 
at white Roa _ their 

8 the Lodge. 

m be Sy 

X 1 III. In 

— 

« 

Old Rzcyiations. .: 

| I 218 ee 
iſt of ſhall, immediately 5 the 
1 Secretary. ; 

Town 3 with the u- | 
ſual Times and 2 
of their formi 
And alſo all T 
4 of their 
| are 
proper to be written. the Ge 
IV. No Ladee hall ogkeT, 
more. than Eye Neu 128 
Tins at ode and the 
without an urgent 

| any Man. und der 
coi 70 

25 Years (who | 
muſt be alſo ks: on Mailer) 
unleſs by a Ae 1 85 

The Precedency 
"the e of their, ait. 

154 ) 
+ New RecuLarIONs., + 

- ; A 

A. a the, ee e of Dae 

ven. by 

es the Bre- 
E "wh New. yp. 

e remove to a IE 
eeting, the Officers 

5 to the 
ge on 

1 

On Dec. 172 
$7.7 Lode 7 25 
On 27 Dec. 172 

for W ros Nod alt 
or e C 9 to 

Nero Lod age, 
pay col Glineas 
arity, 

EAT 

15 | a 

1 77 this e is ON 
for EN Renne, and now ob- 

. 

— bod — 
ms * 
— 
— 

che C. Auſter. L 
N No Man can be! aces . 5 Be can 
rarer. of a particular Lodge with direct the Petitioners in 
Notice one AMdonih before | the Firm,for a. Diſpenſa- 
tion, it wanted, But if 
they know the Candidate, 
they don't require a Diſ- 
penſation. 

E 
due aquiry 
a Diſpenſatton. 

given to the Lodge; in order to make 

into the Reputation and 
the Candidate, unleſs by 
| VT. But 

VI, On 

(2355) 
Old Rzoviarions. 
2 Bat no Mag P enter'd a 
ben in an icular or 
admitted 4 e e 
the unanimans Conſent of all the Mem- 
bers of that Lodge then preſent when 
the Candidate is propoſed 
Conſent is formally aſted by the Ma- 
fer. They ue to give their Oonſent 
in their 1 Way, either vim '1- 
tually or e Unanimity. 
Nor is 1 inherent Privilege ſubject 
to a Diſpenſation; becauſe the Mem- 
bers of i paricular Lodge ire the beſt 
Judges of it; and becauſe if 8 farb. 
lm Nember floutd” be impoſed on 
them, it might ſpoil their H. 
or hinder the Freedom: of their Com- 
munication, or even break and dif- 
perſe the Lodge, which 4 1 ket 
avoided by 4 Trap * Rauch Fa 

VII. Ev: 
Gay, 8 < lothe 

an o ite form 
2 he" e Ne « 611 Gs 

thren, as the Conditlate an Think 
ſow; over and above the ſmall Allow 
may be ſtated in the Hh Long of that 
— Lod er Which Char zy 1 
by the C ha 
Alſo the Cantidind Hal lenny 
tc ſubmit to the Con 
Ulages, that hall 
Time and ü n 

AF" 

— 

—— 

N 

intimated to » 
ent. 101 

1 

4 15 , 
i ©. 

| 

Mt oo Dated Hae 85 EG . 

Hall be Kept iv 

ations and other good 
aim in ri 

wine 45 
VIL 

ho rar ET; 
: VI.” On 19 Ray: oak 
NoYi/tor, _— ſk 
in Maſonry; Wall be ad- 
mitted into a Lage, un- 
leſs he is perſonally known 
to, or Wel vouck& And 
recommended by one of 
that Lodge preſent” 
But it was! found 5. 
Cavin infiſt u 
Unanitaity in Teveral 
ſes: And therefore the 
Grand Maſtery" Hay * 

low*d- the- 
25 

| 

mit a Mernb 
| above 3” Bulla 
inſt © mz 
2 deſire ne 
b nee. * kx * 
N . 1 14 105 
eh * ny I 
explait'd- in 
Account of 
27 tion of the 
wy vn 

5 3: 1885 
that 
Parti. 

[et 

d 
„ 

„ 

Old Recoviations. 
VIII. No Set or Num- 
ber of bbs ſhall with- 
w orſſeparatethemſel ves 
from the Ladęe in which 
they were made, or were 

after yar itted Mem- 

7 bers, ualeks.; the. * 
become tog numerous 
nor even then without al 

Mrrter Dow the G. 
RR or, Deputy; And 

, 

when thus, ſeparated, they | 

muſt Either immediately 
in themſel yes to ſuch o- 

a ther e they ſhall 

gx, elſc 

a8 6. Ma 55 8 Wor War- 
Ja voin in forming a 
e to. be regu-. 

115 "conf 10 0 in good 
ks 

Fany. 

£48 1 Bath 

Lodge,without tl e 
| fe s N98 regu- 
1 are not £0 
ag nice them, own. 
them as fair Brethren * 
formed . Np prove of 
their A 400 Deeds; 
but Pi hag them as 

Ke or Nene, 
ET led . 

(56) 

New Rrovr 4 7 10s. 
o VIII. On;25: April 1523. 

ery Brother concern'd in making 

Maſons 2 hall not be al- 
lowid to viſiteany Lodge till he has 
made due Submiſſion, . tho' the 
Brothers ſo made may be allow'd.. * 

| 

Lodge |. witi. 2%by On 19 Krb. 1724. 

None who form a Stated Lodge 
without the G. Maſter's Leave ſhall 
he admitted into 7eg#/ar Lodges, till 
they make Submiſſion and obtain Grace. 

n 21 Nov. 1724. . 

Here 

If any Brethrex rw a Lodge with- 
out Leave, and 

1 New Brothers, 5 
mitted into any ER Lodge, no 
not as Viktars,. they render a 
good, Reaſon. or make due Submiſſion. 
I Oh On 24 Fab. 1 1735. 
J. If any elke ithin che Bills of 
Mortality le, hs meet regular- 
ly hy dug 7 ont n * 

ace 

9204 124 Book 
and 1 A 

And if t 
tion to e 0 1 0 and 5 
28, fe 99 1 muſt loſe, ita 
ormer Iace and yk of Eran, 
and ſubmit to a New Conſtizazion. | 
4 On 3t March 1733. 
1 Seeing that extraneous . 

have been m e lately in a clande- 

* 
e aaarh 

Rebels until they humble | ſtine Manner, that is, in no regular 
themſelyes, as the G. Ma- Lodge nor — 

fer ſhall in his Prudence | penſation from 

NS 

Authority or Diſ- 
G. Maſter, and 

upon 

Old REGULATIONS. Ye 

(157) 

boa 

New Rrevrarions. 

direct, and until he ap- upon ſmall and unworth 

his tions, to the Diſhonour os ni pe "5 

prove of them 
Warrant ſignified the The Grand Lodge decreed," that no 
Orbe Lodges; as the Perſon ſo made, nor 1 concern d in 

Cuſtom is — 'a "New 
Lodge is to be regiſter d 
in the Grand Lodge Book, 

che 4 = 

LHR ; 

IX. Bot iff D N. 12 l 

| any Brother ſo 

far miſbehave | 

himſelf * a8 to 
render his Lodę 

uneaſy, he ſha 1/ 
be thrice duly |* 
admoniſh'd by 
the Maſter and 
Wardens. in a 

* ormed : 
he Will 
Fo —_ his. 
| nec, 
ee 
ſubmit to the 
Advice of — 
Brethren, 

| 

ſhall. be dal | 

with according 
to the By- Laws 
of that particu- 

| nation. ſhall be R by the Majority, 

lar Lodge, or 
elſe in ſuch a 
1 as the 
Quarterly 

_— g him, — pn Grand 
cory an Officer of a partitu 
nor ſhall any ſuch partake of 
eral Chirily, if they ſhould 
4 come to want it. 

1733 The Grind Lodge made 
wing REGULATION, ©, 

Wiki) Diſputes have ariſen about the Remo. 
| Val of Lodges Wont One Houſe to Another, and 
it has lies, deſtiond in whom that Power 4s 
veſted ; - it 18 fp declar d., 

That 0 ſhal} be removed without the 
Mafter*s Knowledge z that no Motion be made 
for removing in the Maſter”s Abſence ; and that 
KN Motion be ſeconded or thirded, che Maſten 

Summons, to dh 8 Mem- 

ber, 1 the Buſineſs, and appointing, a 
or Hearing and, Determining the Affait, at 

| Ten Days before: and that the Ze) we 

rovid 
the Maſter” be one of that Majority: Gur if if be 
be of the Minority againſt © . % the Lodge 
ſhall” not be_removed unleſs the Auer b 
m iſts of full To Thirds of the Members pte 77 
_—_— 

But if the. Mafter ſhall refuſe to direct ſuch. 
Sumtmons, either of the FYardens may do it: 
and if the Mafter neglects to attend on, the Day 
fix d, the Warden may pteſide in determining 
the Affair in the Manner preſcribed; but 8 

I} 

I 

(233) 

Old ReguLATIONs. | Wer 

1 Com- 
munication ſnlall 
in their great 
Prudence think 
fit; for which | 
A New! Regula- 
tion may be af. 
terwatds made. 

or Furaen ſhall ſend 

—_—_ 

New RnovrariIons. 

ſhalt not in the Maſter's Abſence, enter 4h 
any other Cauſe but what is 
| tjon'd in the mont o andi 
regularly orderd to be removed, hy” Maſter 
Notice thereof to the Serre- 
tary of the'GyLodpe for publiſhing! mono 
f next Wehe ommumication. | 155 

ftiou! 
the Lodt 

3 
is thus 

1 11 

X. The Majority of every paar] 
Lodge, when eee e (not elfe) ſha 
have the Privilege of giving Inftru 2 
to their Maſter and Wardens before the 
meeting of the Grand Chapter or Quar- 
terly Communication; becauſe the ſaid 
Officers are their Repreſentatives, and are 
ſuppoſed to ſpeak the Sentiment * 191 
Brethren at the laid G. Lodge. 

XI. All pariitular Lodges 1 to PE 

* the ſame ages as much as poſſible: 
in order to which, and alſo for cultivating 
a good Underſtanding am among Free- 

74 0 ſome Members of every Lodpe\ 

be deputed to viſit the other Lodges as 

— as ſhall be thought convenient. 
XII. The GRAND 
LODGE conſiſts of, 
and is formed by, the 
Maſters and Wardens of 
all the particular Lodges 
upon Record, with the“ 
GRAND MasTER at their 
Head, the Drury on 
his Let Hand, and the 
GRAND 

Al cr 25. Mo. 1923. 
No New L 
Officers admitted into the G. Ladge, 

par rubv it be regularly conflingitd and 

| 

| 

1 bien Aa fidden 
47. che rand 
Lodge has allow'd a 
Private Brother to — 
preſent, and With L 
alk'd and given to * 
nify his Mind, if it Was 
about what concern d 
Nen 72 1 0h; 

KI. The fame U- 
ſages, for Subſtance, are 
actually obſerved in e- 
very Lodge; Which is 
much owing to viting 

* 

1 

| Brother who e 
the U/ages. 1 

odge is o d, nor their 

| rm W Nov, 1724. 3 

"All who habe been or ſhall be 
Grand Maſters, ſhall be Members of 
r vote in all 2 . F. . 

On 

1 Wl 
Old RST ATT. Mel R2oviarions. | 
Granny Waapas in On a8 Fra, 
their proper Places. Al who have been of all be 5. 

Theſe: mult have, 3 Grand Miters dall be Members of 
Quarterly Comuni ation, and Vote in all G. a E SO 
before the Grand Feaſt, i inf On To-May 1 e 
ſome convenient Place, as | All Who have bem or al be 
the Grand. Maſter ſhall Grand Wardens ſhall be Members of 
appoint 3 where none are | and Vote in all G. Lodges. l 
to be. preſent, but it's ]] On ag = 178. 228 

r Members, without Maſter: and Wardens of Ladeer ſhall 
ve aſked and given: hever attend the G. Lot wirhout 
And | while ſuch, a, Stran- | their Jewels and Clothing... | 
(cho a Brother] ſtays; | On 26 Nov. 1728. 

is not allow'd ta vote, One of the 3 Officers of a Lodge 
nor even to {peak to any | was admitted into the C. Lodge wi 
Queſtion without Level 2 Jewel, becauſe the Fewels were 
of the Grand zz orf in the Cuſtody of the Officer abſent. 
unleſs he is defir?d' to give If any Officer cannot attend, he 
his Opinſn. may ſend a Brother ol that Lodee (but 

All Matters in the not a mere Enter Prentice) with his 
Grand Lodge are to be de- Feral, to ſupply his Room and tap 
iin by a Majority Ne SEU Ange. 99 
of Votes, each Member | + On 24 Fb. 1% 0 
having; one Vote, and 122 1 made b hn lod 
GRAND Maſter Foo Vajes; | Grand Officers, it was reſolv'd that the 
unleſs. the Lodge leave any | GrandOfficers preſent and former, each 

articular Thing to the of em who ſhall attend the Grand 

termination. of the Ladęs in Communication yr iow on 
Grand Maſter for the Sake | the £79/ Day) thall pay Half a Cr 
of. Expedition. towards the Charge of ſuch Came. 
| cation when he attends. 

XIII. At the G. Lode em ar- XIII. On 13 Dee: 1733. 
terly Communication, all "Matters — 1. What Buſineſs can- 
concern 1 Fraternity in general,” or 1 11 be tranſacted at one 

| particular, n Lodet 

— 
* 2 — — 
- 

Wi 

( 160 ) 
Old Rzecviarions. - 

articular Lodges, or ſingle Brothers, are ſe- 
durch and — to be diſcouts'd of, 1. 

i» Apprenticts muſt be + admitted - Fellow 

Crafts and Maſters only here, unleſs by a | by 

DN from the Grand Maſter. 2. 
gre alſo all Differences that cannot be 
made up ot accommodated privately, not 
by a particular. 3623% g are to be ſeriouſſy 
conſider'd and d and if Far: Brother 
thinks himſelf aggrieved by the Deciſion, 
he may a to the Annual Grand Lodge 
next enſuing, and leave his Appeal i in Wri- 

ting with the GE. Maſter, che Due my 

G. Wardens. 3. 
Hither alſo all the Officers of 8 
| Lodges ſhall bring a Lil of ſuch Members 

as have been m e, or eren admitted by | 

them ſince the laſt Grand Lodge. 

328 mall be a Book kept by the 

G, Maſter. or Deputy, or rather by ſome 
Brocher appointed Secretary of the Grand 
Lodge; wherein ſhall be recorded all the 
Lodges, with the uſual Times and Places: of | 
their Forming and: the Names: of all the 
. Members = Each Lodge: alſo all the Af- 
fairs of oh G. dane £ t are proper to be 
. written. 

The 6.5 e ſhall conſider of the moſt 
prudent and ual Methgd of collecting 
and.. diſpoſing of what Money ſhall be 

lodged with them in Charity; towards the 
Relief only of any true Brotber fallen into 
Poverty and Decay, but of none elſe. 
But each particular Lodge may diſpoſe } 

of their own Charity for poor Brothers | 

| 

Nein Reoviarions. 

may be re- 
d to the Com- 

fe 

dete Charity, and 
to the ner Grand 

2 82 

ba: On22. Novz1 tra. 

The 'Mafter' of a 
Lodge with his War- 
dens and a compe- 
tent Number of the 
Lodge aſſembled in 
due Form, can make 
Aaſters and Fellows 
at Diſcretion; '* 
"y. On 25 Nov: 1723 · 
It was agreed (tho' 
1 forgotten to be re. 
corded in the Grand 
| Lodge 7.701 that no 

p- 

on the be: Day or 
Annual Crand Eg , 
nor - ſhall any 
ſineſs be tranſacted 
that tends, to inter- 
rupt the Harmony o 
the Aſſembly, but mal 
be all SEA to the 

next G. Lodge. 

4. On 24 Tue 73. 

The G.. Load ge choſe 
Wi ende, ig 

according | 

| 

= . 

— * 

6161) | | 
Old Recvrarions. _ + New Rrovrations. 
according to their own By-Laews ; until it be agreed byſto be their 
all the Lodges (ina Nx] RgouraTron)to carry in theecretary. 
Charity collected by them to the G. Lodge at the Quar. But ever 
terly or Annual Communication; in order to make aſfince then, 
Common Stock for the more handſome Relief of pootſthe New 
Brethren, TIN Rood i anti Sth | G. M. upon 
They ſnall alſo appaĩint a Txraſuter, a Brother ofjhis + Com- 
Worldly Subſtance, who ſhall be a Member ofſmencement 
the G. Lodge by Virtue of his Office, and ſhall be al. ip pointsthe 
ways preſent, and have a Power to move to theſSecr2tary,or 
G. e any Thing that concerns his Office. © © [continues 
To him ſhall he committed all Money rais'd for theſhim by re- 
General Charity, or for any other Uſe of the G. Lodge; turning him 
which he ſhall write down in a Book with the reſpectiveſthe Books. 
Ends and, Uſes for which the ſeveral Sums are intended, His Badge is 
and ſhall N or diſburſe the ſame by ſuch a certainſof πꝗ) 0 Gol- 
Order ſign'd, as the G. Lodge ſhall hereafter agree toſden Pens a- 
in a New Regulation. 5. | roſs on his 
But by Vertue of his Office as Treaſurer, without any[Left Breaſt. 
other Qualification, he ſhall not vote in chuſing a NewjAnd 
G. Mafter and Wardens; tho*in every other Tranſaction. On 19 Feb. 
In like Manner the Secretary ſhall be a Member] 1721. 
of the G. Lodge by Vertue of his Office, and ſhall vote|TheOffctrs 
in every Thing except in chuſing Grand Officers. of particu» 
The Treaſurer and Secretary may have each a Clerk orflar "Lodgas- 
Aſſiſtant, if they think fit, who muſt be a Brother andjſhall bring. 
a Maſter-Maſon.; but muſt never be a Member of the G. to the 
Lodge, nor ſpeak without being allow'd or commanded.|Lodge | 
he GRAND MasTzx' or Deputy have Authority|Lifs of all 
always to command the Treaſurer and Secretary to at-[the Mem- 

tend him with their Clerks and Books ; in order to ſeeſbers of their 

how Matters go on, and to know what is expedient toſreſpective 
be done upon any Emergency. 45's Lodges to be 
Another Brother and Maſter-Maſon ſhould be ap- ſinſerted in 

| 27705 the Tyler, to look after the Door; but he muſt ſche E. Lodge 

no Member of the G. Lodge. | Book, 
Y But 5, See 

g . 
* 
22 
5 4 
* 
Lo” 

(162) c 
New Recvrartions. 

5. See This at lar 
in the Conſtitutian of 

- Dn Rxevrarions. 

But theſe Offices may be farcher ig 
by a New Regulation, when the Neceſſity 

or the Expediency of em may more en | the Committee of Cha- 

than at preſent, to the Fraternity. 

XIV. If at any G. 

8 Lo p o, ſtated or Oc- 
caſional, Quarterly or 

Annual, the Grand Ha- 
ter and Deputy ſnould 

both be abſent; then 

the preſent Maſter of a | 

- Lodge, that has been 

longeſt a Free-Maſon, 
ſhall take the Chair 

and preſide as Grand 
Maſter pro tempore, 
and ſhall be veſted with 
all his 

Honour and 
Power for the Time 
being; provided there 

dis no Brother preſent 

that has been Grand 

Maſter or Deputy for- 

merly; for the laſt for- | 
mer Grand Maſter or 

7 Deputy in Company 
takes place, of Right, in 

the Abſence of the pre- 
ſent G. Maſter or De- 

iy, Below. 
XIV. In the Fl Edition, the Right of 
| the G. WARDENS was omitted in this 
Regulation; and it has been fince found 
that the Old Lodges never put into the 
Chair the Mafter of a particular 2. 
but when there was no Grand War 
in Company, preſent nor former, and 
that in ſuch a Caſe a Grand Officer al- 
ways took place of any Maſter, of a 
Lodge that has not been a G. Officer... 
Therefore in Caſe of the Abſence of 
all E. Maſters and Deputies, the preſent 
Sen. G. WARkpen fills the Chair, and in 
his Abſence the preſent Jun. G Warnen, 
and in his Abſence the oldeſt former 
8. Waxpen, in Company; and if no 
former G. Officer be found, then the ode 
Frree-Maſon who is now the Mater of a 

Lodge. aye 
But to Rant Diſputes the G. Maſter 
| uſually gives a particular Commiſſion 

under his Hand 454 8 Seal of Office, coun- 

terſign'd by the Secretary, to the Senior 
G. Warden, or in his blence, to the 

XV. In the G. Lodge 
none can act as War- 
dens but the pr 2 2 Lo D finding 

G. ä in 

2 
FF 

Junior, to act as D. G. Mafter When the 
Deputy is not in Town. 

XV. Soon aſter che 2 Edition o& 
the Book of Conſtitutions, the GRAND 
it was always the an- 

tient 1 _ the oldeſt former 
| | G. WARDENS 

— 
Old Rxzoviarions, 

Company; and if abſent, 
the G. Maſter ſhall order 
private Wardens to act as 
G. Wardens. pro tempore; 

whoſe Places are to be 
ſupplied” by two Exllorv. 
Crafts, or Maſter-Maſons 
of the ſame Lodpe, 'call'd 
forth to act or ſent thi- 
ther by the Maſter there- 
of; or if by him omit- 

ted, the G. Mas rA, or 
He that preſides; ſhall call 
*em forth to act; that ſo 
the G. Lodge may be al- 
ways complear. pro tempore. 

take 
always done in the 

preſent Service. 

XVI. The Grand Wardens, or any Others, 
are firſt to adviſe with, the Deputy about the 

Affairs of the Lodges or of private ſingle Bro- 
thers ; and are nE to *pp'y to the G. Maſter 
without the Knowledge of the Deputy, unleſs he 
_ refuſe his Concurrence. 1 | 

In whith Caſe, or in Cafe of any Difference of 
Sentiment between the Deputy and G. Vardens or 

other Brothers, both Parties are to go to the G. 

Mafter by Conſent ; who, by Vertue of his great 
Authority and Power, can eaſily decide the Con- 
troyerſy and make up the Difference. 2. 

The G. Maſter ſhould not receive any private 

Intimations of Buſineſs concerning Maſons and 
Maſonry but from his Deputy firſt, except in 
ſuch Caſes as his Worſhip can eaſily Judge of : And 

if the Application to the G. Maſter be irregu- 

lar, his Worſhip can order the &. Wardens, or 
any Other ſo applying, to wait "—_ the Daa, 
* | 2 who 

4k treries © 1 

Mew Rrovrations, 9 . 
G. Warxpetns' ſupplied the Places 
of thoſe of the Year when abſent, the 
G. Maſter ever ſince has order'd them to 
lace: immediately and act as G. 
Wardens pro tempore; which the 

y have 
Abſence: of the 

G. Wardens for the Year, except when 
they have waved their Privil 

that Time, to honour ſome Brother 
whom they thought more fit for the 

ege for 

C 

But if no former Grand Wardens are 
in Company, the GRAND MasTER, 
or He that preſides, calls forth whom 
he pleaſes to act as Grand Wardens 

XVI. 1. This 
| was intended 
for the Eaſe of 
the GE. Maſter, 
and for the Ho- 
nour of the De- 
„ > Ala 
: 2. No ſuch 
Caſe has hap- 
pened in our 

ime; and all 
Grand Maſters 
have govern'd 
more by Love 
than Power. 

55 No irre- 
gular Applica- 
tions have been 
made to the &. 

Maſter 

„ a 
Old RESULATIONsV. 

who is ſpeedily to prepare the Buſineſs, and to 

lay it orderly before his Vorſbip. 3. 

XVII. No G. Maſter, D. G. Ma- 
fer, G. Warden, Treaſurer, Secretary, 
or whoever acts for them or in their 
Stead pro tempore, can, at the ſame 
Time, act as the Maſter or War- 
den of a particular Lodge; but as | 
ſoon as any of 'em has diſcharg/d | 
his publ ick Ofice, he returns to 
that Poſt or Station in his particular 
Lodęe from whith he was e to 
N fob I U 

5 

the 

his 

1 
— 

XVIII. If the 3 be rick or ne- 

ceſſarily abſent, the G. Maſter can chuſe 

any Brother he pleaſes to act as his Dau 
pro tempore. 1. 

But he that is choſen Derurr at the 

Annual Feaſt, and alſo the G. Wa RpRNS, 
cannot be diſcharg'd, unleſs the Cauſe fair- 
ly: appear to the G. Lodge: For the G. 
MasrER, if he is uneaſy, may call a 
G.' Lodge on Purpoſe, to lay the Cauſe be- 

fore 15 for their Advice and nn Ai 

rence. 

cannot reconcile the G. Maſter with his 

Deputy or Wardens, they are to allow the | 

G. Maſter to diſcharge his Deputy or War- 
dens, and to chuſe another Deputy imme- 
diately; and the ſame G. Lodge, in that 
Caſe, ſnall forthwith chuſe other G. War- 
dent; that fo Harmony and Peace may be 
* * 

XIX. If 

And if the Members of the. G. * | 

\ 

New RecvLatiIONs, 

Ae 3 in our 

XVII. Old 14 G. Officers 

are now, ſome of *em, Of- 

| Ps of particular Lodges ; 
ut are not thereby depri- 

ved of their Privilege in 

G. Lodge to ſit and vote 

there as ald G. Officers : 
Only he deputes one of 

particular Lodge to act 

pra tempore as the Officer 
of chat Lodge at the Quar- 
Te | terly Communication. 

ne XVIII. 1. The 
Senior G. WAR DEN 
now ever ſupplies 
4 theDzyvuTy'sPlacez 
the Junior acts as the 
'SENtoR, the oldeſt 
former G. Wargen as 
the Junior, alſo 
the elde Maſon, as as 
Pabel ans 
2. This was never 
done in our Time. 
See New. Fæula- 
lion Þ it 

3. Should this Caſe 
ever happen, the G. 
Mas 1ER appoints 
his G. Officers, as at 
firſt. See Old Re- 
| gulation XXXV. 

XIX. The 

( 165 ) 

+ Old ReauratiONs. New ReevraTiONs, 
XIX. If the G. Mas TER ſhould abuſe his XIX. The Free- 
great Power, and render himſelf unworthy of || Maſons firmly hope 
the Obedience and Suhjection of the Lodges, | that there never will 
he ſhall be treated in a Way and Manner to. be any Occaſion for 
be agreed upon in a New Regulation: Be- | ſuch a New Regu- 

cauſe hitherto the antient Aue have ag lation. oc 
no Occaſion for it ' | | 
XX. The es To ele Te Thai nd his G. Officer 0 3 
G. MASTER | the Lodges. This old and laudable Practice often 
with his De-;j renders a Deputy neceſſary: And when he viſits 
puty, G. Mar. 1 them, the Senior G. Wan px acts as Depuſy, the 
dens and Se- Funiar as the S NOR, as above: Or if both or any 
cretary, ſnall; of lem be ahſent, the Dx eur v, or he that preſides for 
at leaſt once, him, may appoint whom he pleaſes in their Stead 
go round and pro tempore. 
viſit. al ib, For when both the G. Maſters are . the 
Lodges about | Senior or the Junior C. Warden may preſide as De- 
Town dur- puty in viſitin ng the Lodges, or in the Conſtitution 
ing his Ma- of a New Lodges neither of which can be done 
feerjoip.-. [2 1] without, at leaſt, one of the preſent G. Officers... N 

XXI. 17 the U MAs TER die during his XXI. Upon ſuch 
 Maſter/hip,or by Sickneſs, or by being be- a Vacancy, if no 
yond Sea, or any other Way ſhould be ren- former G. MasrER 
der'd uncapable of diſcharging his Office, | nor former DgevTyY 
the Deputy, or in his Abſence the Senior] be: found, the pre- 
G. WAR DIN, or in his Abſence the Junior] ſent Senior G. WAR+ 
G.'WAxDEN, or in his Abſence any 3 pre- px fills the Chair, 
ſent Maſters of Lodges, ſhall aſſemble the | or in his Abſence the 
G. Lodge immediately; in order to adviſe Zunior till a N. G. 
together upon that Emergency, and to ſend | Maſter is \choſen ; 
two of their Number to invite the lat] And if no preſent 
G., Mas TER to reſume his Office, which | nor former G. Wars 
now of Courſe reverts to him: And if he | den be found, then 
refuſe to act, then the next Laſt, and fo back- | the Oldeſt Free- Maſou 

ward, who 

( 166 ) 

Oh RzoviartioNs. 

Netw Rzoviarions. 

ward. But if no former G. Mia be found, the who is now 
preſent DzevTy ſhall act as Principal till a Newlthe Maſter. of 

G. Maſter is choſen: Or if there be no De Fa, thenſa Lodg 
the oldgft Maſon the preſent Maſter of 

XXII. The Brethren of all 
the Lodges in and about London 
and Weſtminſter, ſhall meet an- 
nually in ſome convenient Place 
blick Hall. 1. 
ker ſhall aſſemble either on 
Joun Evangelif”s Day or 
I Jonx Baptifs Day, as the | 
S. Lodge ſhall think fit by 4a 
New Regulation; having of late 
Years met on St. Joux A 
tuft 5 Day. | 
Provided the Majority of the 
6. Tod ge, about Three Months 
denne ſhall agree that there 
ſhall be a Feaf and a general | 
Communication of all the Bre- 
thren For if they are againſt 
it, others muſt forbear it at that 
Time. 
But Whether chere ſhall be 
a Feat or not for all the Bre- 
_ thren, yet the G, Lodge muſt 
meet in ſome convenient Place 
on St. Joun's Day; or if 
it be a Sunday, then on the 

next Day, in order to chuſe | 

or recognize every Year a 
New G. Maſter, ow and 
WR | 

XXII. If. 

4 
a 

= 7 any 3 
round the Globe, who are True 
and Faithful, at the Place ap- 
pointed, till they have built A 
Place of their own. 

2. The annual Feaſt has been 
held on both the St. JonxsDays, 
as the G. Maſter thought fit. And 

On 25 Nov. 1723. it was or- 
dain'd that one of the Quarter. 
ly. Communications ſhall be held 
on St. Joux Avangelif*s Day, 
and another on St. Jon Bap- 
tiſt's Day every Lear, whether 
there be a Feaſt: or not, unleſs 
the G. Maſter find it incon ve- 
nient for the Good of the Cra 
which is more to be regar ed 
than Days, 

But of late Years, moſt of the 
Eminent Brethren being out of 
Town on both the St. Joun's 
Days, the G. Maſter ſus ap- 
pointed the Feast on ſuch a Day 
as appeared moſt convenient to 

the Fraterni 2 l 
On 2g Famer 1732. * 
It was ordain'd that no par- 

ticular Lodge ſhall have a ſepa- 
rate Fraſt on the Day of the 
General Fat. 

XXIII. The 

Old Recviarions, 

XXIII. If the 
G. MASTER and 
Lodge ſnall think 
it expedient to 
hold the Annual 
General Aſſembly 
and Feaf, accor- 
ding to the an- 
tient and laudable 
Cuſtom, of Ma- 
ſons ;, then the G. 
Wazpens ſhall 
have the _ of 

epari tickets" 
FT, Wich the 
G. Maſter s Seal of 
Office, of diſpo- 
ſing the Tickets, of 
buying the Mate- 
rials of the Feat, 
of . out a 
— — Place to 
| feaſt in, and of 
every other Thing 
that concerns the 

Entertainment. 1 

But that the 
Work may not 
be too burden- 
ſome to the Two | 
Grand Wardens, 

þ 
„ 
1 

( 167). 

New RxscvLiartions, 
XXIII. The Grand Warpexs were an- 
tiently aſſiſted by a certain Number of Stew- 
aras at every Feaſt, or by ſome general Un- 
dertaker of the Whole, | *. 

On 28 Abril 1724. the G. Lodge ordain'd, 
that at the Feaſt, the Stewards ſhall open no 
Wine till Dinner be laid on the Tables; that 

the Members of each Lodee ſhall fit together 
Lodg 98 

as much as poſſible: That after bt a Clock 
at Night, the Stewards ſhall not be oblig*d to 
furniſh any Wine or other Liquors z and that 
either the Money or Tickets ſhall be return'd 
to the SJewards. (EYE ahne 
Oa 26 November 1728. The Office of 
'STEWARDS, that had been diſuſed at 3 
| preceding Feaſts, was revived by the G. Lodge, 
and their Number to be always 12. who, to- 
gether with the G. Warpens, ſhall prepare 
the Feaf. | 

On 17 March 1737. The STEwarps for 
the Tear were allow'd to have Jewels of Silver 
(tho not guilded) pendent to Red Ribbons 
about their Necks, to bear White Rods, and 
— 1 their White Leather Aprons with Red 
Silk, -- | | 

Former Stewards were alſo allow'd to wear 

the ſame Sort of Aprons, dite and Red. 
| a. 
10 the 

On 2d March 1733. The G. Lo 

w'd each of the acting STEWAR Ds 
future, at the Feaſt, the Privilege of Naming his 
Succeſſor in that Office for the Year enſuing. 

On 24 June 1735. Upon an Addreſs from 
Thoſe that have been STzwarps,theG.Lodee, 

| 

and that all Mat- 

ters may be ex- | in Conſideration of their paſt Service and 

itiouſl 
10 | 8 ſafely 

and | ture Uſefulneſs, ordain'd, 

1. That 

Old REGULATIONS. 

ſafely managed, 
theG. Maſter or 
his Deputy ſhall 
have Power to 
nominate and 

_ appoint a cer- | 

tain Number of 
STEWARDS, as 
his or ſbip ſhall 
think fit, to act 
in Concert with 

the t π e WAR- 

DENS: And all 
Thingsrelating 
to the Feaſt ſhall 

be decided a- 

mongſt em by 
a Majority of 
Votes; except 

the G. Maſter 

or his Deputy 

interpoſe by a 
particular Di- 
rection or Ap- 
pointment. 

6168) 
New ReovrarTions. | 

1. That they ſhould be conſtituted a Lodge 
| of Maſters, to be call'd the STEwarxDs Lopox, 
to be regiſter'd as ſuch in the Grand Lodge 
Books and printed Liſt, with the Times and Place 
of their Meetings. | 

2, That the STEwarns: Lopcx' ſhall have 
the Privilege of ſending a Deputation 'of 12 to 
every G. Lodge, viz. the Maſter, Two Wardens 
and Nine more, and Each of the 12 ſhall vote 
there, and Each of em that attends ſhall pay 
Half a Crown, towards the Expence of the 
G. Lodge. | Fu» 

3. That no Brother who has not been a 
Steward ſhall wear the fame Sort of Aprons and 
Ribbons. | 397" of 

4. That each of the 12 Deputies from the 
Stewards Lodge ſhall, in the G. Lodge, wear a 
peculiar Jewel ſuſpended in the Red Ribbon; 
the Pattern of which was then approved. 
| 5. That the 12 STEzwarDs of the current 
Year ſhall always attend the G. Lodge in their 
| proper Clothing and Jewels, paying at the Rate 
of 4 Lodges towards the Expence of the Com- 
munication - But they are not to vote, nor even 
to ſpeak, except when deſired, or elſe of what 

| 

relates to the enſuing Feast only. | 

XXIV. The 

G. WARDENS and STEWARDS XXIV. The 

ſhall in due Time wait upon the G. Maſter or 
Deputy for Directions and Orders about the Pre- 
miſes: But if both their Vorſbips are ſick or 
neceſſarily abſent, they may call together the 
Maſters and Wardens of Lodges, on Purpoſe for 
their Advice and Orders : Or elſe they may take 
the whole Affair upon themſelves and do the beſt 
The 

STEWARDS 
now take the 
whole Affair 
uponthemſelves 
and do the beſt 
they can. ; 

Nor are their 

Accounts now 
audited 

Antttsiß 
dd Rroviarions. - 

The G. Wardens and Stewards are to account 
for all the Money they receive or expend, after 
Dinner, to the G. Lodge, or when the Lodge 
ſhall think fit to audite their Accounts. 

appoint one experienced and diſcreet Brother of 
his Lodge, to compoſe a Committee conſiſting of 
One from every Lodge, who ſhall meet in a con- 
venient Apartment to receive every Perſon that 
brings a Ticket; and ſhall have Power to dif- 
courſe him, if they think fit, in order to admit 
„ him, as they ſhall fee Cauſe, Pro- 
V * l ae 
They ſend no Man away before they have 
acquainted all the Brethren within Doors with 
the Reaſons thereof; that ſo no true Bro- 
ther may be debarr'd, nor a falſe Brother or a 
mere Pretender admitted. This Committee 
muſt meet very early on St, Joun's Da 
7 the Place, before any Perſons come _ wi 

— 

| 

ickets, ix Fe 
XXVI. The G. Masr zA ſhall appoint 
Two or more true and truſty Brothers to be 
Porters and Door-Keepers, who are alſo to 
be early at the Place for ſome good Rea- 
ſons 3 and who are to be at the Command 
of the ſaid Committee, - | 2 
XXVII. The G. Warpers or the Sr V ũ ] ?.D¾“ | 
ſhall, before-hand, appoint ſuch a Number of 
Brethren to ſerve at Table as they think fit: and 
they may adviſe with the Officers of Lodges about 

New Rzevrarions. 

audited by the 
G. Lodge; for 
that generally 

the Stewards are 
out of Pocket. 

XXV. The MasTzrs+ of Lodges ſhall each | 
 Fan.t723; The 

XXV, On 25 

G. Lodgeorder d 

that the Commit- 
tee of Enqui 

| andtheSteward; 

with Others, 

ſhall be early at 

—XXVI. The 5 
lers and other Ser- 
vants, within or with- 
out Doors, are now 

appointed onl 
the Stewards, . N * 

XXVII. Now 

che moſt proper Perſons, if they pleaſe, or may 
Wd Nn 2 retain 

the Place of the 

'Feaft for thoſe 
Purpoſes men- 
tion d in this Ola 
Regulation, and 
the Order was 
'confirm*d by 
the G. Lids to 
viz, on 17 Nov. 
1725. 

— 

only the Sr EW - 
ARDS appoint 
the Attenders 
at Table ; who 
| are 

- 

(! 190d; )) 

old Reb Ar Ions. 
retain | 

are to ſer ve that Day but Free 
Maſons that the Communication 
and harmonious, . 
XXVIII. All the Members of 
the G. Lope Ex muſt be at the 
Place of the Feaf? Jong befort 
Dinner; with the G. MASTER 
6r lis Dzvvry at their Head; 

ſel yes. And this in order, 
i. To receive any _ duly 
lodged as above regulated 
the "Appellant and Reſpondent tray 
Both be” heard, and the Affair 
may 'beamtcably decided before 
Dianer, if poſſible. 
But if it cannot, it mult be de- 
lay'd till after the New G. Maſter + 
fakes the Chair. | 

1a 
After 1 the G. Maſter mult 
Fefer it to a fpecidl Committee, that 
ſhall quickly adjuſt-it and make 
Report to the next G. Locke; 
that ſo brotherly Love may be 
2. To prevent any Difference or 
Piſguſt which may be fear'd to 
ariſe that Day; that ſo no In- 
derrption may be 
Harmony and Pleaſüre of the Ge- 
weral Afembly and Grund Feaſt. 
= 4 

* P 
F 
- 

ö 

© confult about whatever 

who ſhall retire and form them- | 

; that 

if it cannot be decided 

given to the 

Wein Retz rloxs. 

ſuch by their Recommendation : For none ¶ are the more ne- 

and Accepted ceſſaty if the 
may be free. | Cooksarid Butlers 

- "ets J atenotBrothers, 
| No Petitions. or 

Appeals on the Day of the Ge- 
| | wat” 4 8 0 
neral bly and Feaſt,” Ser 
6 New. Regulation XIII. at 23 
Nov. 1723. e 
In antient' Times the Ma- 
Her, Wardens and Fellows on 
St. Jon xs Day met ei- 
ther in a Monaſtery, of on the 
75 of the higheſt Hul near 
. them, by Peep of Day: And 
having there choſen their New 
'G. Officers, they deſcended 
walking in due Form to the 
Place of the Nat, either a 
ee or the Houle of an 
minent Maſon, or ſomie larg 

Houſe of Entertainment 5 | 
they thought beſt tyled.”/ ©: 
But of late they go in Coaches, 
as deſcribed in the March of 
| NoxroLx, Part HI. Pag. 72 3. 
Sometimes the Maafers and 
Wardens of particular | Lodges 
"have met the G. MaAsTEHR 
and his Retinue at the Door 
or Gate, and have attended 
him into the Zodge-Room - 
And ſometimes he with his 
Retinue has gone in firſt, and 

m 

concerns | 
| : | of 

a # 

ncy and Dceoru 

ſent his Wardens for the ſaid 
Maſters and Wardens, But 

( 477) 
Old Rremarioxs. Mew RequasriIONSs. 
of the Grand aſſambiy, and to pre- But it is equal: for the 
vent ill Manners ; the Aſſembly G. Lops s muſt be formed 
being promiſcuous, that is, of all before Diner. 
Sorts of Free. Maſons. icht 
XXIX. After theſe Things | XXIX. This old Regulation 
are diſcuſsd, the G. Mas TER, || was found inconyenient: There- 
the Dzrrö rr, the G. W az- | fore at the Afembly,; on 27 Dec. 
DE NS, the STEW ARDS, the | 1720, (Page 1z.) it was agree 
TREASURER, the SECRETARY, | that the New G.Mafterſhould by 
the Clerks and every ather Per- || the Preſent be propos d to the 
ſon, ſhall withdraw and leave the || G. Lodge at their Communica- 
Maſters and Wardens of po tion, ſome time before, the Day 
cular Zodges alone; in order to | of the Annual Feaſt ; and that 
their amicable Conſulting about if he was approv'd then, or 
the Election of a New G. Ma- Objection made, he was to, | 
Fer, or the Continuing of the | forthwith faluted G. Masrzg 
Preſent another Year; if the | Ele#, if there; or if abſent, his 
ſaid Mater! and Wardens have | Health was to be toaſted as 
not met and done it the Day | ſuch; and that as ſuch he was 
befor, 077 $1040! to march to the Feaſt on the pre- 
Andi if they agtee by a MA. ſext G. MasTzx's Left Hand. 
Jority to continue the preſent | Thus gnLady-day 1721. P. 111. 
G. Masr ER, his Wor/vip thall} . Payne G. Maſter propoſed 
be call'd in; and, after * ks, the Duke of Mod r Adu: 
Thall be humbly deſir'd to do All have ſince been ſo propoſed. 
the Fraternity che Honour” of | Therefore ; 
ruling them another Year. And] Now, before Dinner, there 
after Dinner, it will be known | is no Election, but only a;KRecog- 
whether he accepts of it or not; nixing of the former Approba- 
for it ſhould not be diſcover'd tion of the New G. Maſter, 
Un chen. 8 dons” 275 7-5; 
XXX. Then the Maſters and | XXX. The G. MasTrER 
Wardens, and all the Brethren | may ſay Grace himſelf, or em- 
may r ploy ſome Brother who is a 
or as they pleaſe to ſort toge- 13 or elſe the Secretary, 
| e enn 2 to 

not in Retirement, but in Pre- 

(972 2 
12 d Regau A r ions. | 
if . 

75 Brother takes his 15 at 

1 — Some Time after | 
5 Dinner the G. Lopes. is form'd, 

ſence of all the Brethren, Who 
vet are not Members of it; 

| New! Rrevr at IONS. 
the Dinner is coming in, | to; ſay. Crace, both 
before and after Din- 

9 ” - 87 r1 

Il. This old Method was 
found 8 N 
as the whole Membly ft toge- 
ther at Dinner in the Form of 
a Grund Lodęe, chere is nd Al- 

and none of thoſe that are not, teration, but the Members of 

muſt ſpeak, until they are * 
ſir d and allow'd. Al; 

XXXII. If the G. TA ER of laſt | 

Year has conſented with the Maſters and 
Wardens in private before Dinner to conti- 

nue for the Year enſuing, then One of the 
6. Lodge, deputed for that Purpoſe, ſhall | 

the G. Lodge continue * a 
cuous in their Scats. 

XXXII. "There 
has been ho Oc- 
caſion yet in our 
Time of putting 
this Old Regula- 

repreſent: to. kf the Brethren his Warſhip's | Zion in Practice; 

Government, &c. and turning to him, 

goo [| becauſe the New 
Il in the Name of the G. Lodęe, humbly re- 

Grand Masr R 

queſt him to do the Fraternity the great He- is propoſed hy 

naun (if nobly born, if not) the great Kind-, 
neſs of continuing to be their G. 
the Year enſuing: And his Morbid N 
his Conſent by a Bow or à Speech, as 
pleaſes, the faid deputed Member of . 
G. Lodge ſhall proclaim him aloude 
GRAND MASTER of Masons! ; 
All the Members of the G. Lo 
falute him in due Form; and all the Bre- 
- thren ſhall, for a few Minutes, have leave 
to declare their SauslaGian, 17 2 and 
ngratulation. net. 
XXXIII. But if either tie Maſters and | 

— — 

ANDY, Wye: not in N this Day before” | 

1 a oY Dinner, 

e ſhall! 
cauſe no G. Maſter 

| the preſentGRAND 
Maſter for | * Mas l 

AST 

dre Dy 1 the 

bd 
CANT ſome 

Time beiße the 

I Feaft as in the 

New Regulation 
XXIX. and be- 

has been yet re- 
queſted to cofiti- 
nue a 2d Lear. 
XXXIII. There 
has been no Oc- 
1 calion. 

00.11 
Old Rraur ATIo Ns. 

kit: nor the Day 
6. Maſter to continue in his Mafterſhip ano- 
ther Year; or if He, when oe _ not 
-conſented} Then | 
The preſent G. MaSTER ſhall. Hviniol> 
his Succeffor for the Year enſuing; Who, if 
unanimouſly approvd by the Grand Tiodge; 
and there 
luted and congratulated the New G. MA- 
s ER, as above hinted, and immediately 
inſtall'd Dy the laſt G. 2 5 de e to 

Unge.? LL r 7 . | 
| XXIV. r if that. Nomination is not 
i unaninonly approv'd, the New G. MASTER 

Hall be . Jnhmediurcly by Ballot ; every 
Maſter and Warden writing his: Man's Name, 
and the laſt G. Maſter writing his Man's: 
Name too; and the Man whoſe Name the 
lag C. Mlaſter ſhall firſt . out run or 
Ws Fae ſhall be... 

"GRAND MasTER 2 Wage 

25 the Year enſuing, and. if preſent, he ſhall 
be proclaim'd, ſalu 
above hinted, and forthwith kala d by the 
lat G. Maſter according to Uſage. 

XXXV. The lad G. Mast ER thus | 
3 or the Ne- G. MASTER thus | 
inſtalfd, ſhall next nominate and ap- 
point his Deputy 71 MasTER, 1 
the Laſt or a Mu One, ho ſhall be 
alſo proclaim d, ſaluted ang congraty- þ 
1 in due Form. 

he New G. Mas: z x: ſhall alſo| 
9 — 0, 

TY 

ful 

| 

the 

— 
— 

before; Aefir' the If caſion 
lo 

t, ſhall be proclaim'd, . 

1 and; congratulated, as 

Mew Rit@br ar ious. 

for put- 
[ ting this Old Re- 
| 82 in Prac- 
; becauſe no 
Grand Mater has 
been requeſted in 
our Time to c- | 
tinue a 24 Lear. 
See the Manner 
of / Iyfalment at 
Hi. Poets 
1 A 
l Thi 
has been no Oe- 
caſion in our Time 
for this od NRega- 
lation, nor can be 
- now for that there 
muſt be no Ballus- 

—— 

ing nor anyContro- 
I ſverh on the Feaſt- 

Day, according to 
Agreement. Sde - 
New Regulation 
XIII. at 25 Nov. 
41723. 94 9 
XXXV. A Dgvpv- 
was always need- 
when, the 6. MA- 

as ww — 

\$TER- Was-Mobly born: 
And 

in our Tüme, 
G. MASTER #- 

le. has not publickly 
ſignified. before Hand 

the 

n. 

ON un Mein RegvrartrIons. 
e his New, G. 8 * ee ee 
and if unanimouſly approv'd by t 1 1 Fs and Hardens, 

S. Lodge, they ſhall be 3 — 1 he is firſt inſtall'd 

claim d, ſaluted and congratulate in 2 — Chair. 
due Form, _ For then fr he calls 
But if not, they ſhall be.choſen 1 them forth by Name, 
Ballot i in the ſame Way as the G. Mafter and appoints, them to 
Was choſen, and as Wardens of private | officiate inſtant] tly , as 
Lodges are choſen when the Members | ſoon as Ma are in- 
do not approve of their an 5 Nomi: ſtall'd. | 
nation. 77 | 
XXXVI. But if the Brother whom, XXVI. The 
the preſent G.M a8T ER ſhall nominate Po wp. muſt be ei- 
for his Succeſſor, or whom the G. Lodge cher the /a# or a for- 
ſhall chuſe by Ballot, as above, is by | mer G. MasrER; : 
Sickneſs, or other neceſſary Occaſion, ab- | as the Duke of Rich- 
. ſent, he cannot be proclaimd G. M- mond was for Lord 
'STER 3 unleſs the old Maſter, or ſome | Paiſley,” Page 119. 
of the Maſters and Wardens of Lodges, or elle a very reput- 
can vouch upon the Honour of a Brother, | ableBrother.; ö rd 
that the ſaid Perſon, ſo nominated or ] Southwel! was for the 
choſen, will readily accept of the © | Earl of Strathmore, 
In which Caſe the old G. Maſter hal act. | | Page 130. 
as Proxy, and in his Name ſhall nominate ut the New De- 
the Deputy and Wardens ; and in his | puty and G. War. 
Name ſhall. receive the uſual Honours, Ho- dens are not allow 
_ and Congratulations. I Proxies when ap: 
4 pointed. 
XXXVII. Then the G. Nabe thall al- I XXXVII. This 

Jow: any Brother, a Felow-Craft, or Enter'd is not allow'd till 
Prentice, to ſpeak, directing his Diſcourſe to ſ the Neo G. M- 
his Worſvip in the Chair; or to make any Mo- sr ER has made 
tion we the 1 9 r of the LOL which _ 20 ys 100 

* 6k ſhall round 

Old ReoviarIONns. 

(175 )) 

New Reoveations. 

ſhall be either immediately confiderd,-or elſe-re- round the 
ferr'd to the Conſideration of the Grand Lodge at Tables; as at 

their next Com 
that is over, 
XXXVIII. The G. 

and 
laſtly, | | 
After ſome other Tranſactions 

cannot be written in any Language, | 
the Brethren may ſtay longer or 
away, as they pleaſe, when the Lo 

is cloſed in good Time. 
i vas 1 1 8 ' 

XXXIX. Every Annual G. 
Lopes has an inherent Power 
and Authority to make New Re- 
gulations, or to alter Theſe for the 
real Benefit of this antient Ha- | 
ternity, 7 always that the 
Old Land Marks be carefully pre- 
ferved, and that ſuch New Regu- 
lations and Alterations be propo- 
ſed and agreed to at the 3d ar. 
terly Communication preceding 
the Annual Grand Feast; and 
chat they be offer'd to the Peru- 
fal of all the Brethren before 
Dinner in writing, even of the 
youngeſt Euter d Prentice; the 
Approbation and Conſent of the 

1 

| MASTER, - 
Deputy, or ſome other appointed by 
him, ſhall harangue all the Brethren 
give them good” Advice, And 

munication ſtated or occaſional, When | Rrcumonn, 

| 118. 
F XXXVIII. Aﬀer the 
| Oration, the 5. publick 
Health may be toaſted 3 
and before or after each, 
a Maſons Song with the 
| — Inſtruments of Mu- 
ick. "pts 

Other Things relati 
ge | to the Charges, &. of 
the G. MAasTExR, are beſt 
N known to the Fraternity, 
XXXIX. On 24 Fane 1723. 
at the Fea}, the G. Lope 
before Dinner made this Re- 
SOLUTION, that i? is not in the 
Power of any Man or Body of 
| 7.9 
| Men to make any Alteration ar 
Innovation in the Body of Mn. 
fonry, without the Conſent first 
obtain d of the G. Lopez, And 
on 2 5 Nov. 1723. theG.Lopce 
in Ample Form refolved, that 
any E. Lodge duly met bas a 
Power to amend or. explain any. 
of the printed” Repulations in 
. the Book of Conſtitutiom, tobile 
| they break not in upon the an- 

| 

5 

tient Rules of the Fraternity. 
But that. no Alterations pal! 

Majority of all the Brethren pre- 
fent being abſolutely neceſſary to 

NT On 

be made in this printed Book of 
Pg Conſtitutions 

676) 
Old de DPRK, Nein Rz eu e * 
115 the ſame Binding and Obliga- Conſtitutions without Leave: 
tory 3: which muſt therefore after Din o/ in C. Loge. 
ner, and after the New G. Maſter i . Accordingly, +; 
inſtall'd, - be folemnly deſir'd; as. it All the Alterations or New. 
was defir'd and obtain'd for theſe © REGULATIONS above Writ- 

Regulations, when, propoſed. by theſen are only for amending” 
G. Lope to about, 150. Brethren, atſor explaining the OLD Re- 

Stationers-Hall, on St..J ou x Baptiſt douLraTiONs for the Good of 
Day 1721. ' [Mafonry, without breaking 
The End of the Old Regulations. ſin upon the antient Rules of 

-- be Fraternity, (till preſerv- 
mes "thc Ola Lond Marks; and were made at ſeveral Times, as 
Occaſion: offer'd, by the GRAND LO DE; Who have an in- 
herent Power of amending what may be thought inconvenient, 
and ample Authority of making NRW RecuLrarTrions for the 
Good ot Maſonry, without the Conſent of All the Brethren at the 
Grand Annual Fe azz 3 which has not been diſputed, ſince the 
ſaid 24 June 1721, for the Members of the G. Loox are truly 
the Repreſentatives of All the een: to 9 D 
REGULAT ION X. * 

5 And ſo on 6 April 1736. 

8 Wa xD, Eſq; D. Grand Maſter in the Re propoſed 
a New Regulation of 10 Rules for explaining what concern'd the 
Decency of Aſſemblies and. Communications; which was agreed to 
by that Grand Lodge, viz. . 

XL. 1. That no Brothers be admitted into the G. Loox but 
thoſe. that are the known Members. thereof; viz. The four pre- 
ſent and all former G. OzFicz rs, the 7 reafurer and Secretary, 
the . Maſters and Wardens. of all regular 5 the Maſters. and 
Mardens and Nine more of the Stewards, Lo except a Brother 
who is a Petitioner or a Witneſs 1 in ſome Ca, or one call'd in 
* a Motion. 

2. That at the 3d Stroke of = 4 7 Hammer (al- 
ways to be repeated by the Senior Grand Farden) there ſhall be 

a general Silence; and that he who breaks Silence without Leave 
— the Chair ſhall be publickly reprimanded. 3. That 

= 2 
4 3 
* * 4 1 I. 

(477) 

3. That under the ſame Penalty, every Brother | ſhall take his 
Seat and keep ſtrict Silence whenever the G. Mas TER or Deputy 
ſhall think fit to riſe from the Chair and call to order. 15 
4. That in the G. Lopos every Member ſhall keep in bis 
Seat, and not move about from Place to Place, during the Com- 
munication ; except the G. WAA bens, as having more imme- 
diately the Care of the Lodge. * 
5. That according to the Order of the G. Lopes on 21 April 
1730, (as in the pe Bot) no Brother is to ſpeak but once to 
ergy — unleſs to explain himſelf, or when calbd by the 
air to : — e 

6. very one that ſpeaks ſhall riſe and keep ſtanding, ad- 
dreſſing himſelf to the Chair: Nor ſhall an ſume to inter- 
rupt him, under the foreſaid Penalty ; unleſs the G. Mas R, 
finding him wandering from the Point in Hand, ſhall' think fir 
to reduce him to Order; for then the ſaid Speaker ſhall ſit dow: 
But 1 he has been ſet right, he may again proceed, if he 
ene en ee ee nn 
. 7. If in the G. Lopce any Member is twice call'd to Order, 
at one e for tranſgreſſing theſe” Rules, and is guilty ofa 
3d Offence the ſame N ature, the Chair ſhall peremptorily com- 
mand him to quit the Lodęe- Room for that Nigllt. 
8, That whoever ſhall be ſo rude as to hi/s at a Brother,” or 
at what another ſays or has faid, he ſhall be forthwith” ſolemnly 
excluded the Communication, and declared - incapable of ever be- 
ing a Member ef any Erand Lodge for the Future, till another 
Time he publickly owns his Fault and his Grace be granted. 
9. No Motion for a New Regulation, or for the Alteration of 
an Old One, ſhall be made, till it is firſt handed up in writing 
to the Cain: And after it has been peruſed by the G. MasrER 
at leaſt about Ten Minutes, the Thing may be moved publickly 
and then it ſhall be audibly read by the Secretary: And if be 
be ſeconded and thirded, it muſt be immediately committed to 
the Conſideration of the ' whole Aſſembly,” that their Senſe may be 
fully heard about it: After which the G. MasTzz ſhall put the 

* 10. The 

(rs) 

Er 1 Heh 

f N . WARDENS 8 | 
Hands, ſo unequal as, to. er Counting uſeleſs. 
> Hould any other Kind of Diviſion be ever... ited among 
APR eee e 

f 4 vo 0 oy * \ \ 

BP r OY LA 
AA 44.9 

aw | 

[The Conor nm the ee ens 72 
8 firſt We Fe oy Grand [#2 

943. 

Syd. Nov. 1724. | % (gat 1 9/4 oo 
C ITO Lew Düker Richmand alli Lone und Be 25 
ke d. Aubignuy) being Erond 8 War tin Folkes, Eſqz. 

De ut Grand Geo! e ne, Grand S with ſeveral 
hes, "Fran 1 5 3 oben, 

Brother 0 e Earl of Dalteitb (now Duke of Buck- 
Shy g) the laſt eg Ae porn; in Purſuance of the O-. 
R > links XIII. That in to promote © the charitable Diſpo- 
{tion of FREE-MASONS, and 10 render it more extenfively. 

Mera to the Society, each Lodge may make à cer tain Collection, 
acturding to Ability, 10 be pu into a Joint-Stock, lodged in - 
Hands of a Treaſurer at every Quarterly Communication, for tbe 
2 diureſid Brethren that ſhall 2 recommended 2 58 er. 

mos Gn, the Grand Officers from Time t0 Time 

The Motion being readily. agreed to. 
- | RICuMOND: Grand Maſber del al. preſent to come bear 
© give their _ of it, at next Lodge ; which was 
held in Ample Form on ty March 2724, When 
At the Lodges Deſire, G. M. Ricuwmonn named. 4 Camthnitiee 
Pn OR AK tht TONY fog RI = 7 

3 

79 
e | 1 Ne choſe e Cure 
| F E 8 Parliament, who'dre 

e 2 
great Beider en 
2 Kan — G 

* in Ample Wy 285 27 
525 when Aren G. rdggd. 1 Len xd 85 

It was well approved and eden . in the 
Lodge; for which that Committee receiv'd publick Thanks, and 
Oops it were order do be ſent to the particulat Eager il 
n Treaſurer was found, till at the Grand Lndg# n 
Form on 24 June 1727, Inculevin G. M. requ B 
Nathaniel. Blakerby, Tags to accept of that non,” meh 
he very kindly undertook. 
Then alſo it was reſoly'd, that the 4 Grand Officers: 

Time being, together with Brother Martin Folkes, Francis Aber 

fk 

and George Payne, Elqs; as a COMMITTEE of 7, ſhould, 
due W diſpoſe of the intended Charity; and fre 
Copies of che Report were ſent to the Lodges, - 

At laſt vel oth, Work of Charity was begun at the Chana 
Lodge on 25 29. KOSS TON gels Grand Maſter, and in 
hi 55 D. G. Maſter Blakerbp, the Treaſurer, in the Chair z 
who after a warm Exhortation, order'd. the es to be cal'd 

over a ſecond Time, when ſome Officers gave in the Benevolenge 
of their reſpective Lodges; for which they were thank*d, and 
their Charity being forthwith recorded, was put into the Hands 
| 58 the x HOLDS as an hopeful Beginning: and other Lodges, fol: 

Exam ple, 

© the G D e in Due Form on 27 Dec. 1 | 
D. Ae M. We th 15 in Da in the Chair, ” the 1982 
to thank many Officers of Lodges, for bringing their liberal Charity : 
When by a Motion of Brother Thomas 055 0n Counſellor at Law, 

che Grand Lo e ordained that every new Lodge, for their Conſtitu- 

tion, ſhall pay two Guinea: towards this General Charity of Maſons. 
And ever ſince, the Lodges, according to their Ability, have, 

by! their Officers, ſent Wer Benevolence to every Grand Lodge, 
on the Grand Fa Day: And ſeveral diſtreſs d Brothers 

have been handſomely reliev'd. 
. But 

(648699 5 
But fngläg the foreſaid Committee of S ven too Few'for'ths good 
Wk the Gzand Lodge in Due Form on 28 Aug. 4 

n being Grand Maſter, and in his Abſenee D. G. M. 

akerby; the Treaſurer, in the Chair, reſolv'd; Mal the Com- 
MITTEE of Charity ſpall baye added to em 12 Watters of contri- 
apr ei; that the fie 12 in the printed Lift all be ſucceeded 

27 ent 12, and ſoon: And thai for Diſpatch, any dr em ſo all 
0 4 Qubrum, provided one of the” 1 is 4 projent 'S Offer - 
e Webb 1 

The Cou Mi rrTE RE of Charity met bu E —— Biakerby 
the firſt Time in the Maſterfaip of Norrork © 
On 13 Nov. 1730. When 

They conſider'd the Petitions of ſome poor Brethren, oa 
they reliev'd, not exceeding 3 Pounds to each Petitioner :- And 
ever ſince they have adjourn'd, from Time to Time, for” ſup- 
plying the Diſtreſs d according to their Powers; or elſe have 
recommended 'em to the greater Favour of the Grand Lodge. 

Let the CouurrrEE had not all their Powers at once: For 
at the Gꝛand Lodge on 15 Dec. 1730. Nokrork being Grand 
Maſter, and in his Abſence the Deputy Blakerby in the Chair, 
it was ordain'd, That for Diſpatch, all Complaints and Tuforma- 
tions about Charity, Hall be referred, for the future, to the. Com- 
MITTEE of Charity ; and that they ſhall appoint à Day for bear- 
ing the ſame, Hall enter their Proceedings in their own Book, and 

ol 7 74 their Opinion to the Grand Lodge. 

And now hence forward, the Minutes of the Cecheur run of 
Charity are read and confider'd at every G. Lodge, crecpt on the 
G. Feat Day. 
At the Conn IT TEE of Charity 16 March 1732. it was 
agreed that to Petition ſhall be read, if the Petitioner don't attend 
the Committee in Perſon ; ary in the * 77 n Lang 
or Impriſonment. 
At the Gzand Lodge on 14 May 1731. upon the Motion of 
"Lover Grand Maſter it was reſolvd, 1. That all former Grand 
Maſters and Deputies Hall be Members 190 the Committee of 

- 135 
2. That 

(187) 
. That+ be CouMutrT TEE Hal baue . Power ta 
5 Pounds, as caſual 2 toe wy en, but. 0 Wiſes 

+83 - \a 

atteſted. | 
At the Gland Lodg on 8 June 55 Nane FEES 
being G. Maſter, and pe his Abſence G. M. Batſon in t 
Chair, having ſignified, That notwithſtanding the General Cha- 
rity, ſome poor Brothers had moleſted Noblemen and Oben 
(being Maſons) with private Applications for Charity, to the 
Scandal of the Craft; it was refoly' 'd, that, any Brother ub 
makes ſuch, private Applications for the future, Tall be for eve 40 
debarr'd from any Relief from the Committee of Charly," of t 
Grand Lodge, or any Aſſemblies of Maſons, 15 12 
At the CommiITTEE of Charity on 5 July 1732. it was a 
that no Brother ſhall be. reliev'd, unleſs his Petition be atteſied by 
3 Brothers of the Lodge to which be does,” or did once, belong. 
At the Gand Lodge on 21 Nov. 1732. Yiſcount Mon r Ad 
being G. Maſter, and in his. Abſence Deputy Batſon in the 
Chair, it was reſolv'd, hat all former and preſent Grand Officers, 
viz. G. Maſters, Deputies and Wardens, with 20 Maſters of cont 
buting Lodges in a Rotation, according to the printed Lift, ſhall þ 's 
Members of the Committee of Charity. And 
At the Gꝛand Lodge on 13 Dec. 1733. upon the Motion of 
SRATHMORE G Maſter in the Chair, it was reſolv'd, 
2. That all Maſters f regular Lodges, at have contribu} 4 
to the Charity within. 12. Months aſh Hall be Members ö 
COMMITTEE, togelver. with all former and preſent Grand 
Officers. | 
2. That conſi dering the uſual Buſineſs of a Quarterly Communis 
cation was too much for one Time; whatever Buſineſ3.cannot be di. 
- patched here, ſhall be referr'd to the CommiTTEE of W bay 
+ #heir: Opinion N to the next Grand Lodge. 

AT» 1. 

1 

(282) | 
Snot Deen debated at the oil Commiine Walt be de 

ng. 

ali by » ty of "the Nennt 

Þ 8 2 for Charity pro futed to de Grand 
be 7 

ren to the ſaid Committee, who are io report their 

pinion to the next Grand Lodge, viz. Whether or not the Caſe 
= any: tiſtreſs d Brother deſerves wok A en 15 in the Power 
_ of the Committee to give? 18 
. That: ther ſaid Committee Pall twice br { publick Notice, 
2 public News Paper, f the ' Time and Place of their 

{11 
91 Ae.the-Gzand 1 Lodge on 24 Feb. 1734. Crxavruard G. Maſter 
in the Chair, it was recommended by che Irn and "how 
reſoly d here, N Ot 14 0.4 0 008 ba 4 2 

1. Tbat no Maſter: of Lodge fall be: Member of h- Hie 
Committee, w hos Lodge bas not aur ibu 70 abe r ern 
rity during nths fl 
2. That — of the: W fyning and certifying o pow Be 
ther”s Petition, ay attend the ht e to atteſt it. 5 
At the Gzand e on 31 March 1735. Upon t Motion 
of 33 ove yy Mafter in the Chair, a EDD 4 1 

. That 10 extraneous Brothers, that is, not regularly mae; R 
but clandeflinaly; or only with a View to partake of "the Charity; 
nor any affiſting at ſuch irregular Makings,' ſhall be. ever dale 
o partake of the Maſons general Charity. 40 303 1G 

'2. That the Brothers atteſting à Petition for Charity ball: be able 
10 certify, that the Pair” has been —_ in nnn. hd 
: leaft, in tolerable Circumſtances. - 

3. That every Petition receiu'd ſhall be el or certified by 
thy Mens of the Lodge to which the Petitioner dhe, or 

4. _ the Name and Calling of thy: PUitioatr be - exyreſy | 
mention 

At the Gzand Lodge on 6 April 1736. we vu our bei 
Grand Maſter, and in his Abſence, D. G. Maſter Warte ue 
Chair; upon the Motion of the Cortal TAE of Charity, it 
Was 8 Wat no Petition for CEP ſhall be * which 
bas 

( 283 ) 

nor been afford fr to the Secretary aud laid in hit Hands 

en Days, at leaft, before the Meeting tbe Committee 'of Cha- 

are dubious. i 991 0 
NA G | 

55 that he may bave Time 4% be inform d F its Allegations, 7 

Thus the Cou Mu TIT TEE of Charity has been eftabliſh'd: 

among the Fzazz and Accepted Masons of Eagland, 
who have very handſomely contributed to their Central 

The CommETTEE rly meets and has reliev d many 
diſtreſs*d- Brothers with ſmall Sums, not exceeding gl. to each: 
And the Gand Lodge have order'd the Treaſurer to pay mare 
to ſome Petitioners, according to Exigence; ſometimes” To, or 
15, or 20 Pounds, as they thought the Caſe requir'd: So that 
the DiftreſPd have found far greater Relief from this General: 

Cbarity, than can be * from particular Lodges ; and the 
— being. paid by the Lodges in — at various 
Times, haye not been burdenſome. bt ONES 26g 3H. 
The Treaſurer's Accounts have been audited and ballanced at 
every..Graud. Ledge ; whereby all know the Stock in Hand, and 
how every. Parcel of the Charity has been diſpos'd of; every 
Thing being duly recorded in the Grand Lodge- Boot, and in bat 
of the COE, of which every Maſter of a contributing 

. | = TORR! 1 
The Treaſurer Nan not employ'd a Clerk or Alfi 
ſtant for ſaving Charges; being hitherto aſſiſted only by the Se- 
eretary of the Grand Lodge: And when the Treaſurer is call'd 
abroad, he leaves. Money with the Secretary Revis to pay What 
is drawn upon him; and for all his generous, Cares and good 
Conduct, the Crtaſurer is publickly and ſolemnly thank d by 
every Grand 2 . 18 i 
At laſt on 6, April 1738. at the amd Lodge, the. Trea/aer 
*Zlakerbp,. having juſtly cleared his Accounts, and 

vo 

which the Secretary Revis was appointed Frea/urer,. But 

„ © +4 

| the 
Ballance, thought fit to demit ar lay down his Office. Upon. 

A 

e 

Revis the Secretary declin'd the Office 
both thoſe Offices ſhou'd not be repoſed in one Man, the One 
being a Check to the Other: Yet the Grand Maſter Carnr- 

St. Paul's Church-Yard, removed from 

( 184 ) 

At the Gr xz naAL . on 29722 1538. Mr, Jo 
Treaſurer ; that 

'NARVON and the Brethren, defir'd Brother Revi to act as Trea- 

| furer till one is appointed. 

May this good Work of Chixies' abdiiad, as one of the 
happy Effects of the Love and Friend ſhip of iThe jos, till 
Time and Architecture ſhall be no more 

S e b 5 b B 6r . 45 . 2 . l . #5 

Nr rn gane 

IS EE 

A LIST of the Lopes i in and e Londen and 

AN Y Lodges 8 wi Pen . ot are par- 

tition'd, or elſe removed to new Places for their Conve- 

xn f and ſo, if ſubſiſting, they are called and known by thoſe 
laces or their Signs. . 

But the /ub/iting Lodges, whoſe Officers have attended the 
Gzand Lodge or Quarterly Communication, and brought their 
Benevolence to the General Charity within 12 Months paſt, are 
here ſet down according to their Seniority of n, as in 
the Grand Lodge: Boots and the Engraven Liſt. | 

of tlie Dates of cs Da ＋ 8 , 
— il 2 ben 

4 Thus the anon at 
. Kinc's-AzrMms Tavern in 

8 and Gatp mon, meet. inthe Month 

e- 

| 
2. HokN 

of ne. 

Tord, Wi 

2 

remoyed 
and Gn tvne, Mr Row, whoſe 

tion d Page 109. 

3 SHAKE SPARK Hale in Mere 

ü 1 url 16 

4. BzLL in en Lom- 
3. 5. ee rener in New 4 : 

© + Ba 

9. Krnc'sanms Ta 
B 4 — - 
10. 

This 2 

mention d Page 
Aer z. TazA US 
cet, Covent Garden, 

Tan "is immemorial: But a 
they removed to the QyzzN's - 
Head, upon ſome Difference, the \ 
Members that met there came un- | 
der a new Conflitution, tho they 
wanted it not, and it is therefore 
laced at this Number. N B. The 4 
ap own in fe | 
Other of the four 0 Id D now oe | 
extinct. 

11. Cas ri Tavern in Drury- 

Una Tavern in 22 Palace-"\ 
he Old non] 

Conftitmtion is alſo immemorial, it 
baby one of the AWE; 1 

$ 

6. . Tan in 2 
2 AT TR F. vithin 

8. 793 in RE | 

Qu EE x's-HzA D in Knave's- Ave." 

G 

dhe RUMMER 

* 

yern in New), 

fur Lodges 
9. vis. the 

in . | 
[whoſe Onſti 

1 

12. Buzy's Ceffee-bouſe in Pridges- 
_ where ther Ee, i alſo : a Maſters 

13. 1 $.- . Tevern in 

Great 

. 

4 W ye" 0-7 2 4 

| 

- Doys/of Brag... 
44+: 46s "i ++. hk. 

#2. 94! Ait 3 A! G 

f ” x 4 
Irn 1e 

r nd 3d Pedrefaay. 

I ak 

10 and zd aun ., 
14. Bur 

nnn 30; 3 | [Dates of Con- Days of Torming. | 
R reg GY . e, 27 nun ol! 
Houſes. 1 ; ot oe 
14. BVT T s- Had Tavern — ies, ID = Rd 
Soutkevark * inis, 
een v, g fe N 
1 n in Lower Holbourn — 5 Hay 7723. 1ſt and 3 . 
er 0 
| ” ape her Tavern at Ss 1725 ad nd en 
18. . Tavern in Lung-Aue, a ts Fame 15. 1ſt and 3d Mage. 
Lo 1 
3 0 — = and, Baptiſ's H Wag 4 Aug: 1723. 11 and laft Def. 
Tavern Chancery 1 4 £ 11 Hit. 1723. fist e, 
2 reer — 5 12 rs Kft. 1723. [iſtand 3 
21. Hais-Moon Tavern 5 * 2 W — 55 
22. Sway 755 * OATLRE SE. 5 is 723- 
be-cvoſs-ſto d 5 e 10 
23. Wurrs- 2237 in eme 4 Die. 173g. 2d Monday. 
ftreet, itfleffelds 4 | 8 
24 Fenner Ne haring un. . — 
the o [wort 4 Gow 
«5 The Sasu 8 cot July . 4 Rand 3 . 
Moor- Fields. b | 
6H 1 in Hooper's $quare, Good EIT 1724 "it and e 
- Fields. 
vs Tween in St. Paul's n run, Job Monday. == 
5 Ao 4 on Cap.] ] Tavern 4 e as; ” x and 34 2 
2 
ey Tayern Strang. — wa 
> King "avert in Long- Here, 7 67. 1 75 *. and laſt es 
Lodge. | 
Ben 1. = 2 1 * 2 Fe, 199. | [:4 ind gh Wd 
Finch- Lane, where there 1 
, Loage. | an, 1125 pf Thur, ; 
. — in Grovenor- ftreet. 25 1727. . & 4 3 3 
1 Grops Tavern in + in. Bur ** 35 a 1723 2d and 4th Priday. * 
34 N n Jar 5 
35. Hoop and Carin Tavern in 5 1540. ad and 4h Mono 
Leaden-hall-fireet. © E aer . 
36. . great = 1 N ft and d Friday T 
8 7 * k 

(ans! y 

- 

37. Oiv-May'; | 

* 
(87) 1 
ga" seg Der 
Signs of the | fitution. 
uſes. V Non 
37. OTLDU-M ANN che- fi, 2 Yet 1728. if and 0 
ing-Croſs. | | 
de ge. N. wy * — 5 2 e [00m ga ay. 
tin's- Lane. | "T «bs. IE oor ſl ad and 4th }/ edneſday. 
40. St. GxonxGE in F e Fw 7X. A end 2 
41 Fountain Ta ern on 24 3 ad. than a 1 
4 1 Greuille fireet, 1 1735 16, 3d Friday. 
arrow anger 
*. Nele f Lege as April 1130. e 
re there : * 
3 in 70 Market. — 15 jo phi iſt and 3d Monday 
45. Gros Tavern in - Z Taky Wy a _ 
46. —— ouſe Ius de 
Buildings. © K 1. | 
. EN HAD in ola - Bailey, 1 vun T © 1730 | 
* Lodge. EY 18 
48. BIAcx-Lion it 7 Fieldh.—11 Jan. 1 
49. Two AN OR: and Crown in - = 1731 [2 
Little St. Martin's- Lune. - — 
50. Tunzx Tous Tavern in Negev: {f O34: 
n b-field.|1 De 737. 
Tons Tavern i in Smith-field. | 17 5 
7. LG ANrπã· ꝓ2War Tavern pen : dads 7 
eedle-fireet. 
53. Fou TAI avern in Heb PETRO ho dog arts 
Burrough, So e e Ir, 
54. KN 8 Tavern on St. mat X Eb. 1 . 
Margaret - Hill, >: 

55. owns and N 1% 1133. 2 8 1 
Tavern in . } 5 15112 ad aud ll = 
w e Ply fon Mlb 2 25 rhe. 2 

N 
38 Kin and wy 94 i in e jon ies ' 
Ludgat cet. 8 « 
60. e wer iv Doſe 5 . Fly t732. 2 
a „ | Bb 2 61. Ki NG 

; 19 1 

* 
— 

< 11 ag | 
" of the 2 Dates of Cn s of Femme. 
ifes. 1477 Fitution, * is 1 
61. Kix cis- Anus Tren fn 2d. U 
e 25 1 1 1 2 aſt Tbunſdey 
oor an Aürrin Tavern | | | 
' InLoadephall. ret, angrher Lodge 118 Avg. 1732. tſt and an, 
63. Crown in Upper Moor Held. [29 Aeg 1732. 2d ee, 
9 eee e 5 Sept. 1732: | ilt and 3d Saturday. 
65. 4715 . Tavern 8 See. 1732. and 36 gf 
PE . Peelr 7 Noo! 1732. * eee, 
ee n . ez [54 b, 
68. Sale 1. i | : 
mit dx * ; 125 Feb. 1733. [1ſt and nee, 
Ar Tavern in dnas's 
1 * * 15. 4th Mendes. 
TT in. 8 
5 Se ven- Hiali. H 3 Wk 73h 250 n, 
| nw b, Terri Kurz: 7 {I LL | 
: Axes Str $| 23, March 1753s ad and qth 8 5 
52. Cao. . — 1 Dec. 1733. ict and 3d 22850 
73. Fons £57's Coffee ous Dang, 1 9.547 
. Groſs, another Lodge. 3 13] [at Wedneſday, 
v4 Krx 6% Ans Tavern in ora 5 46 
1 uhere! there is. ale 134. 14 4 2. 
y Lodge. * "1 3 c 2 * ap® | 
ou : Mac 
ien Lane, J 4 15 1734. jad and 4b Pd 
76. BE TIL in Nicholas- Lane near 5 oF 
Lombard rot, another * Lodge, > 1 June 1735 
where there is alſo a Maſters Logge. | 10 + 
| 776. 2 45 "at. Shake-P\ | | "ou 
Nr 45 Fune 1555 | 
= YE 4/47 en 5 eee 
18. N e 9 1 Fraud. 46 1735. dias h , 
2 An c no in Gd& on Soc HI. 30 03 18 204 34 _ 
| As UTE A London Punch-bo , 
eee eee, led es, 
81. KETHOUND b, Lend free 
; is Il une 1 6. and d Tueſday 
, Nan ah. 

( 189 ) 

- | Dates of . Days of Forming. . 
11 8 7 x | | py 
Houſes Hill | 16 4 1736 iſt and 3d . | 
82. S Tavern on r | AA 1 ah e. 
* YorxsninE-Grzy * ig 
Lang. Gees haps (ulare t J 
H. s N 
| 2B we; 0% in Cole from, [242 175 6. land 4h Ty 
Soeben Dials, where there is . 
95. n L thee er ore ane. 
. AS). Ae" 200 . 
in Swallw7 fag Jan, 1636; | 1 cio. © BO 
1 Gor . Deng { | itt and 3d Wedneſday. 
Pep oe We Abe I4 Nb. 1735. 1 e QT 
2 Deen An» M5 Tavern in 22 Feb. 1731. iſ and 3d eu. 
Cateaton- | 
89, Th ger 20s wy 22 March 1716, Ear 15 
Waed ſir et. | | 
Lon — hog ro | | 58. 2 IG 
a in — Alley, Biſbopſ- uod 75 a. * 
513 Hechihet Covar-Hovss in 18-4pril 1737; end 4th Haag. 
T i Tavern on Snow: 10 41737 Pra ma ptr ei, 
| Mus ON 2 
27 o'-Hea in Old BEI? 04 to May 1137. 2d and At edneſday. 
I 4 | 
= Gon Tavern in Jermyn ſtr 8 24 Aug. 1737. 2d and 4th Wedneſday. 
St. James's. | A ; 
- Maiden- Lane, oY. ; 
5 dave dhe 2 < je | 21 Copy. 1737. Fee 
d and 
Fas inssHzAD Tavern in St. 8 Dec. 1737. Era 4t we 
oh $-ftreet. 
. in Rn. Tavern in Baribolo- by Fas 7 a — 2 1 
mec Lans near the NR aa. Fo YARRA HA . Bb 
oo . — 4— 4 5 thore 1. 535. | 3d nen q. 8 
te Maſh Lodge. 
e Nee *. „. n eee 
1 4 too. A 

(99) 

Signs . | S.- ++» | Dates of = Ds s of Frum YR 
' "Houſes. | isn. . Dip B. * 
100, Andr t ia — LIT 17381] 1 and 30 Teo: 8 

„ re | . 
* KDox's Punch-bouſe in N 16 Way 1156. Lad 3d Pr, 
102. 4 and Da 

rect, St. n * 5 — dy 21100 Taft Funn. 
163. 8 4 Tayern upon 2 3 nate 

frreet- Hill. 
Croſs have „ 912 2 
-/- » - - | 2d and 4th Andy. 

104; Cuzcier 
4; rpms to be Con tuted. 
75 n en n 
-ftreet, St James s. 1 5 F iſt and 3d Friday. 

a us . 
98 =Y a Garz e ift and ath Hg. 

Pall- Mall | 
Wannen 
PR 

DEPUTATIONS 

FEW t ſeveral Grand Maſters 
* emo the n of ENG LAN D, and fake Parts, 

I. To Win The "dat of that old Principality can. 

beſt deduce their own Hiſtory of Maſonry from the noble 
antient Briton Cavwan the firſt King of Hales, A. D. 389. 
down to King Ropzxic Mawx, who partition d his 23 
into 3 Principalities amo Een, 3 Sons, which again cemented 

into one ele till EDwARD Ha King of * . 
Wales, 

(191 ) ki 
Wales, A. D. 1283. When, their Princes being lain without 

Iſſue, their Nobles at Gentry willingly ſubmitted to the Crown 
of England, till King Hznzy VIE. united Wales to England, 
A. P. 1536. and ſo down to theſe Times 

For in Wales there are many venerable Remains of moſt an- 
tient religious Houſes, and many ae Ruins of the ſtrongeſt 
Caſtles in the Gothic Stile. See Part II. Ch. 2. 

But now the AvevsTAN Slile is as well eſteem'd in Wales as 
in England, and there alſo the Brethren of the Royal Art have 
coaleſced into Lodges, as Branches of our JOY under our 

GRAND MASTER, 
Thus on 10 May 1727. n 

| Incyrovin Grad Maſter granted a Deputation to „ Hoon 
WAR BURTON, Eſq; to be Pꝛobiucial Grand Maſter of Norib- 
Wales at Cheſter. | 

And another on 24 June 1727. to Sir ED WAR » Max- 
$EL, Bart. to be Read 2 2 of South-Wates at 
Caetmiariben, * | 1 | 

e 
wn HS 8 RO 

II. DEP UTATIONS have been Pp from and ſent to 
ſeveral Countries, Cities and Towns of England. 

Thus, 

| 1 EL Grand Maſter granted a Deputation to Sir 
EpwarD MATTHEWS, to be P2ovincial Grand Maſter. of 
Shropſhire. 

—CrxAavruRp Grand Maſter. granted a Deputation to 
EDbw ARD ENTWIZLE, Efq; to be ]ÞP2ovincial Grand Auger 
of Lancaſhire. 

Another to Joszyn Laycock, Eſqy to be P7ovincial 
Grand Maſter of Durham. 

Another to MATTHEW RIprzr, _—_ to be * Probanctal 

Grand Maſter of Ann . 

8 

(, 192 ) 
Theſe and other Grand Maſters have alſo granted e 

dee ueſt 1 
bout England, for Co 

Brothers in Cities and Towns 

nſtituting the following Lodges, as 

ed in x.) Grand Lodge-Books, and in the engraven Lig, 
_ have their Rant of Seniority at the Grand Lodge, according 
to the Date of their Co NSTITUTI ON, viz. 

7 

The Las. GES at 

"124 Nod wiowiat-the 3 Tons, con- 

ſtituted 2. D. 1724. and meet every 
Month on the iſt Tburſday. 

— CHlcursTER, at the bite 
Horſe, conſtiturrd 17 July 1724. and 
meet 3d Friday. 

HESTER at the Spread Eagle, 
confiirured 4. D. 1724. and meet 
1ſt Tweſday. 

Dir ro at the Grown and Mitre, 
conſtituted 4. D. 1724. and meet 

uſt Thurſc 
— 1 at the Bunch 

ot Gr s, conſtituted A. D. _ 

ORTSMOUTH at the Vine 
ſtituted A. D. 1724. and meet 5 ad 
2d Friday. 

— Conciron in Cheſhire, at the 
Red-Lion, conſtituted A D. 17 24. 

— SALFORD near Mancheſter, at 
the King's Head, conſtituted 4 D. 
1727; and meet ift Monday. 

— Waxwicx, at the #/oolpack, 

3ſt and 3d Friday. 
D Scannoroven,at Piont's: Long 

Room conſtituted 27 Aug. 1529. and 
meet 1ſt Wedneſday. 

' —LyNxREc:s, Norfolk, at the Lion, | 

conftiruted 1 O&#. 1729. and meet 

. iſt Friday. 

.—NoxrTnaneron, at the George, 
conſtituted 16 Jan 1732, and meet 

iſt Saturday. 
a Tool Fu 
W 454-23 

— St. Roox'#H11.L near Chicheſter, 
conſtituted 4. D. 1730. and meer 
once in the Year, viz. on Tueſday in 
Eafter Week, 
 —CanTERBURY, at he Red-Lion. 
conſtituted 3 April 1730. and meet 
iſt and 3d Tueſday. 

— L1NcoL, at the Saracen” + Head, 
r 7 Sept. 1739. and meet 

—_— in Lancaſhire; at the 
King's- Arms, conſtituted 2a Feb. 17 32, 
— Buxy St. Epmvund's, at the 
Fountain, conſtituted 4. D. 1731. 

meet zv and th Tueſday. 

— Maccrzsrissp in Cheſbire, at 

|-rhe - Angel, conſtituted 4. D. 1731. 

meet 
Bous St. Epmund's, at the Fleece, 
conſtiruted 1 Nov. 1731. meet 1ſt 
aud 3d Tburſday. 
a in Staf- 

allied 22 April 1728. and meet fordſbive, at the Bell and Raven, con- 

ſtituted 28 2 1732. and meet 
1ſt Monday. TW 
— Is wick, at the Wh te Horſe, 
conſtituted 4 D. 1732. and meet 2d 
and 4th Thurſday. 
— Exx TER, at the ne e con- 
ſtituted 4 — 1732. and meet iſt and 
— DA 3% at. the Yr in- Inn, 

conſlituted 14 Sept, 1732. and meet 

— BOLTON 

— Borton Les Moors in Lan- 
caſbire, at a private Room, conſt ituted 
A 1732. and meet after every 

ull Moon, 1ſt Hedneſday. 

— Buxy St. EomvunD's, at the 
Seven Stars, conſtituted 15 Dec. 1732: 

and meet ad and 4th Thurſday. 

— SALISBURY, at the „con- 
ſtituted 2) Dec. 1732. and meet 1ſt 
and 3d Wedneſday. 

— Barn, at the Bear, conſtituted 
18 March |1733, and meet iſt and 
3d Friday. CET 

— Buxy in Lancaſbire, at the Red 
Lion, conſtituted 26 Fuly 1733. and 
meet after every Full Moon, 1ſt Tharſ- 

—$TOUR BRIDGE in Vorceſter- 
Hire, at the Dog, conſtituted 1 Aug. 
1733. meet each HYedneſday. 

— BixMI1NGH AM, at the Scan, 
conſtituted 4. D. 1733. and meet laſt 
Monday. 

— PLYMOUTH, at the Maſon's 
Arms, conſtituted 4. D. 1734. and 
meet 1ſt and 3d Friday. 

— NgwcasrrE upon Tyne, at the 
Fencers, conſtituted 4 D. 1735. meet 
1ſt Monday. 

— WaAarMINSTER in Hiltfbire, at 
Lord Weymonth's- Arms, conſtituted 
4. D. 1735. meet 1ſt Thurſday. 

— BxisTOL, at the Rummer, con- 
ſtituted 12 Nov. 1735, and meet 1ſt 
and 3d Friday. 

— Corcutsrer, at the 3 Cups 
conſtituted A. D. 1735. and meet 1 

. 

* 

(193) 

1 — Garzs-Hiap in the Biſbop - 

| 

rick of Durham, at the Fountain, con- 
ure $ March 1135, meet 
— SHREWSBURY, at the Fountain 

iſt Monday. 

conſtituted 4. D. 1736. meet 

conſtituted 4. D. 1736. meet 
| — LrvzsRyOoor, at the George, 

1ſt Wedneſday, 

and Foyſbee, conſtituted A. B. 1736. 
and meet ad and laſt Tee/day. | 

conſtituted 17 March, 1735. meet on 

| rt and 3d Tweſday. _ | 

— Syurieron Mart in Somer- 
ſelſbire, ar - - » conſtituted 12 Der. 
1737. and meet A 

— Lixncorn AMbove-Hill in the 
Baily-Wyke, at the Angel, | conſtituted 
23 Dec. 1737. and meet iſt and 3d 

onday. f 

— HerxtErorD, at the Swan and 
Falcon, conſtitute 16 Fan. "1737, 
iſt and 3d Monday. bs 

—GLoucts TER,at the ben 
Sheaf, conſtituted. 28 March 1738. 
meet 

E Hartrirax in Yorkſbire, at the 
Black-Bull, conſtituted 1 Aug. 1738. 

—— 

9 III. Dzy o- 

conſtituted 16 pril 1736. and meet 

— W vuovru and Mr cous 
RE Is in Dorſe!ſbire, at the 3 Crowns, - / 

— Nos wien, at the Ming -Head, 

conſtituted 25 June 1736. and meet 
— Biz tx Guan at the King's Am 

—BrAINTREE in hex, at the Horn, 

( 194 ) 
In DEPUTATIONS ſent + beyon Sea. 

a A4-x»'4 + — 

3 

Thus 

— 1 Grand Maler granted a Deptitatfon to fome- 
Brothers i in Spain, for conſtituting a Lodge at Gibraltar. | 

— CoLexane Grand Maſter granted one 1 conſtituting a 
Lodge at Mabzid. 

—Kanoston Grand Maſter granted one to Brother Gronen 
Powmr&RerT to conſtitute a Lodge at Bengal! in Eaſt- India, that 
had been requeſted by ſome Brethren reſiding there. 

— Norfolk Grand Maſter granted one to Captain RAlrn 
F had WiN TER, to be Provincial Grand Maſter of EasT- InDLA 
at Bengal. 

Another to Mon/ieur pu Tuo to be Poovincial Grand 
Maſter of the Circle: of Lower Saxony. 

— Another to Mr. DANIEL Cox to be Pꝛovincial G. Maſter 
of Ntw Jexsty in America. 

.— Lovsi, Grand Maſter granted one to noble Brother CE- 
STERFIELD Lord Ambaſſador at the Hague, for holding a Lodge 
there, that made his Roya! Highneſs FRANeis Duke of Larrain 
2 Grand. Nuke of 7 2 ) an Enter d Prentice and Fellow 

— 8 to > Capt. Jour Pn 15 to be Pzovincial G. A, 
of Russ 1A. 
ee to capt. Jans ConnrnronD: ts be Provincial 
G, M. of AypaLous14 in Spain. 
— Viscopxrx Menrzeu Grand Maſter granted one for | con- 
ſtituting a Lodge at Aalenciennes. 
Another for conſtituting a Lodge at the Hutel 4. 2200 is in 
PARIS. 
'—S$TrxATHMORE Grand Maſter granted one to eleven 
German. Gentlemen, good SPE for conſtituting a Lodge at 

Vamburg. 
_ 4 

— eymouth 

— 

(195 ) 
— Wrymourn Grand Maſter granted one to noble Brother 
Wieners for holding a Lodge at his Caſtle N Aubigny in 
rance 
| --- Another to Rannoren Tooks, Eſq; to be 20vincial 
C. M. of SouTny-AMERICA. 4 P 
--- Another to Brother Gzeox&6z Goxpon for conſtituting a 

Lodge at Lisbon in Portugal. 
— Another to Mr. Rocex Lacy, Merchant, for conſti- 

tuting a Lodge at Savanilah of Georgia in America. 

--- Another to RIcHARDY Hul, Eſq; to be Hobincial 
G. M. at Gamsar in Weſt Africa. 

--- Lovpoun G. M. granted one to Roagx T Ton- 
| LINSON, Eſq to be P2ovincial &. Ad. of Nzw-EnGcLanD 
in America. 

— Another to Jon HammsrTON, Eſq; to Be Peovinctal 
G. Maſter of SouTu-CaroLinag in America. 

-.-- Another to Davip CREIGHTON, M. D. to be P. G. M. 
at CapER-CoasT-CasT LI in Africa. | 

— DarxnLzY G. A. granted one to IAurs Warson, Eq; 
to be Pꝛobincial G. M. of che Iſland of MonTSSRRAT in 
America. 

— Another to Gone Hauutfrros, Eſq; to be 

G. M. of Geneva. 
--- Another to Henay WiLLtlamM tl earns Eſq; 
Hereditary Mareſchal of Thuringia, to be Pzovinctal G. M. of 
the Circle rr thr UppEx SAXONY. . 
— Another to Capt. WILLIAM DoveLas to be 3ovincial 
G. M. on the Coaſt of Arx ic and in the [ſands of AURICA; 
excepting ſuch Places where a Dovinctal G. M. is already 
de uted. | 

5 Another to Capt. Ricnanp Rr to be Provincial 
G. M. of New-York. 

C AERN AR VON the preſent G. M. has granted a 
Depuratton to his Excellency WI IIIA Marr xs, Eſq; 
Captain- Err re in 2 of his en 8 2 

| C'2 g 

SY (196 ) | 
Caribbee Tands, Vice-Admiral and Chanceltor of the ſame, 
to be PROVINCIAL G. M. there. 
All theſe foreign Lodges are under the Patronage of our Gand 
Potter of Eig. 
But the old Lodge at York City, and the Lodges of Scor- 
LAN b, IRELAND, FRANCE and ITALx, affecting Independen- 
cy, are under their own Grand Maſters, tho' they have the fame 
Conſtitutions,” Charges, Regulations, &c. for Subſtance, with their 
Brethren of Eveland, and are equally zealous: for the Auguſlan 
Sie, and the Secrets of the antient and honourable Fraternity. 
Thoſe inquiſitive Europeans who travel and traffick in Arx tea 
and Wefterni As 14, have there diſcover'd ſuch beautiful Remains 
of old magnificent Colonading, as give much Cauſe to lament the 
horrid Devaſtations made By the Mahometans, and heartily to 
wiſh for the Revival of the Arts of De/igning in thoſe Parts, that 
good old Maſonry may alſo be revived there. 7 
The antient Nations of Eaſtern As a, the Magulliſtans, Chineſe, 
Japoneſe, Siameſe, &c. are ſhy of communicating their Hiſtories 
and Antiquities to the Europeans; yet the Miſſionaries and Mer- 
chants have there diſcover*d many wonderful Monuments of 
old Architecture. ens AN ITY 
Me know not much of the Amzrzicans before the Spaniards 
came there A. D. 1593. and till the Spaniards gave us a few 
Accounts of the two old Empires of Mex1co and PRRU; where 
the Aborigines had built Cities and Caſtles after their own Manner. 
But in the European Colomes of America, true Maſonry .has flou- 
riſh*d, and will do more and more, along with Commerce and 
Learmng. - | | 
But in EUROPE, even after the Devaſtations made by the 
Ooths, and in the darkeſt Ages, while other Parts of Learnin 
were lock'd up in Monaſtries, ARCHITECTURE: appear'd abroad, 
tho? in the Gothick Stile, till the Aus us rA Stile gee. Part I. 
was revived in ax. ö Chap. VII. 
Nay, in Proceſs of Time, the Orders or Fraternities of the 
Marlite Knights (and ſome of the Religious too) borrow'd many 
ſolemn Uſages from our more antient FRATERNITY that has 

exiſted 

. 

(197) 

exiſted from the Beginning: For each Order of Kights" have 
their GRAND MasTER, or one like him, and. other Grand Offi 
cers, with their Conſtitutions, Charges, Regulations, their peculiar 
Jewels, Badges and Clothings, their Forms of Entrance," Promo. 
tion arid Aſſembling, of their Seſſions and Proceſſions, their Commu- 
nications and Secrets, with many other ſuch Cuſtoms, Gr. 
and as they were diſperſed over Chriſtendom, each Fraternity had 
in divers Places their ſeveral Meetings, or particular Chapters, or 
Lodges: with proper Officers, accountable to the Grand Chapter 
of their reſpective Gxand MASTER, who was often a King, or 
a Sovereign Prince, or ſome Nobleman (as the Prince's Deputy 
Gzand Maſter) reſiding at a certain Place in great State and 
Magnificence, and who govern'd the Fraternity wherever they 
were diſpersd, ſupported them in their Undertakings, and pro- 
tected them in their Privileges, Rights and Poſſeſſions, c. as 

lainly appears from the Hiſtories of thoſe Kniebtly Societies, and 
rom thoſe of *em that exiſt in Splendor to this Day. 

| From the Whole, it muſt be own*d ; 

That uo other Ax r has been fo much encouraged by the bette 
Sort of Mankind from the Beginning in every Part of the Earth ; 
as indeed none other is ſo extenſively uſeful : And the Masows 
thus countenanced by their Royal, Princely, noble and learned Bro- 
thers and Fellows, did ever ſeparate themſelves from the com- 
mon Croud of Artizans and Mechanicks in their well-form'd Lodges 
under their proper Officers. 

And now the Freebory BA TT ISN Nations, diſengaged from 
Wars, and enjoying the good Fruits of Liberty and Peace, the 
Brothers of the Royal 4: We much indulged their bright Ge- 
nius for true antient Maſonry, in many particular Lodges, quar- 
terly Communications and annual As8SEMBLIES 3 wherein their. 
Secrets and Uſages are wilely preſerved and propagated, the Science 
and the Art are duly cultivated, and the Cx MEN of the Lodge 
is made ſo firm, that the whole Body reſembles a well- built Axcu 

of the beautiful Auguſtan Stile. 
| Nay 

1 

1 
13 
| 

| 

14 

r OT TI In ne WOT" "IOTEN 
* FOOT Pa i 9 . R 

( 198") 
- Nay ſome Royar Perſons, with many NogL MAV, many 
eminent Gentlemen, Citizens, Clereymen Scholars of moſt Pro- 
feſſions and Denominations, have join'd this amicable Fraternity, 
have ftrengthen'd and adorn'd the Lodge, and have frankly ſub- 
mitted to the Charges and wore the Badges of a Fx ER and Accepted 
Mason; eſpecially from the Time of | 

Grand Matter the Duke of MONTAGU, to our preſent 

Stand Water the Marquis of CAERNARVON. 

w 

* 

(6199) 

CoCo REINER. 

The APPROBATION of this Book of the 
CoNSsTITUTIONS. 

HE REAS at the Grand Lovge en 24/5 February 27 37. che 
Earl of CRAUTURD Grand Maſter being in the Chait, the Author 
2 Anderſon, D. D. having repreſented that 4 New Bok of 

ONSTITUTIONS Was become neceſſary, and that be had prepar d Ma- 
terials for it; the GRAND MasTER and the Lodge &rder'd him to lay 
2 * . 5 the preſent and former Grand-Officers, as. in the. Grand 
p rpc ſaid Brother Anderſon having ſubmitted his Manuſeript to the 
Peruſal of ſome former Grand Officers, particularly our noble - Brother 
RicHmonD, and or Brothers: Defaguliers, . Cowper,. Payne, and 
others, who, after making ſome Corrections, have fignify'd their Approbation. 

And having next, according te the fireſaid Order, committed his Manuſcript - 
to the Peruſal of the preſent Grund Officers, tho: having ai revieiw'd and- 
corrected it, have declared their Approbation / it to the-Gtahd Lodge 
aſſembled in-ample Form an the,25th January 178. A. 

This GRAND LoDGE. then agreed to order. aur ſaid Brother Anderſon 
to print. and publiſh the ſaid Manuſcript or New Book of Consri1Tu- 
TiIONs.. And it is hereby approved and recommended as the only Boat 
of ConsTITUTIONsS, for the Uſe of the Lodges, of the FREE and: 
Accepted Masons, by the ſaid GRAND LoDGE on the ſaid 25th- 

: 

January 1733. in the Vulgar Year of Majoniy $73Þ 

Pa 1 111080 
© DARNLEPY,” Grand atk, 
: 1/211 Jon WaR D, Depary Stan Palter, . 
John Revis- RNongRr Lawuey, J Ginhd 
Secretary. 1 1, Wibbiam GANANuE, I Wardens. - 

— 

4 
* 1 : ? 1 ** - h 7 bo * 4 L 8 
84 a & * . "EF ; : #+ * 4 4 * 4 » 4 P * ome. 

oat 

% 
„ 

( 200 ) 
S o ICBOEEDOCCOREPRINERCOCCODOICOCCSICO) 

. Dy - 44 

Some of the uſual Pree-Maſons S o GS. 
The Maſters Sone, by the Author of this Book. 

In the firſt Book it is in 5 Parts, comprehending the Hiſtory of 
Maſonry ; but being too long, the 3d Part is only printed here. 
1. 

jy E fing of Masoxs antient Fame! 
VVV Lo, Eigbty Thouſand Craftſmen. riſe; 1. 
Under the MAsT ERS of great Name, 2. 
More than Three Thouſand Juſt and Wiſe. 
Employ'd by SOLOMON the SrRE, 
And Gen'ral MASTER Maſon too, 
As Hiram was in ſtately Tyre, 
Like Salem built by Maſon's true. 

The Royal Art was then Divine, 

* The ans counſelPd from above, 
The Temple was the GRAND Destcn, 
The wond'ring World did All approve. 

Ingenious Men from every Place 
Came to ſurvey the glorious Pile ; 
And when return'd, began to trace 
And imitate its lofty Stile. 

3. 
At length the Grecians came to know 
Geometry, and learn'd the Art 
PyTHAGORAS was rais'd to ſhow, 
And glorious EvcLrip to impart : 
Great AxcnIMEDEs too appear'd, 
And Carthaginian Maſters bright 
Till Roman Citizens uprear'd | 
The Art with Wiſdom and Delight.. 

5. They 

land 
w# 

44 

( 2or ) 

Bat when proud s thiy had quelrd. 

And Greece and Egypt overcome, 

i ES excell'd, 208 

prot the the Learning all to Rome + 
wes wiſe VITzuvivs Warden _ _— | 

Of Architects the At improv? 
In en AUGUSTUS. peaceful Time, 

hen Arts and Air were belov'd. 1 * 

al 

. 163 N 13 13/68 
They brought the Knowledge from the 255 
And as they made the Nations yield, 

_ They e it throꝰ the North and Welt, . 

t the World the Art to build. 
Witneſs her Cicadels and T _» 
To fortify their Legions fine, Nn 

Their N 5 and ae, * 80 8 
N, 

That ſpoke the r Gn D 

6. tel 1169 ON" 

Thus mighty 2 8 
Of AsRANM's Race, 
Of Egypt,” Syria, Greece and Rome; 
True Anentrrerunt * 

No wonder then if Maſon jõñ j 

To celebrate thoſe Masog-K1 nou, 
With ſolemn Note and flowi 
Whilſt every Brother Joi 

"Chow. 

Who can unfold iche Rojlt Art, © HO”, 
Or ſhew its Secrets in a Song? 

They're ſafely kept in on's Heart, 
And to the antient e belong! 

y fings. 

: 0 {1593391 

181 To the King the CR Arr. 
D d N 

— 

& 90 

9 
vr 

Wine, * vico vof 
n 

II. The 

a ( 202 ) 

II. The Wardens Sox o, alſo by the Aut bor of. this Book, 

| _- . In the firſt Book it was of 13 Verſes, too K But this laſt 
8 Verſe and Chorus is thought enough to 1 LO: 1 

ROM 8 ever ang 
| The Craft 20 and the 1 " 
| With Poetry and Muſick ſweet 
* | | Reſound their Harmony compleat, 

| i And with Geometry in ſkilful Hand 
bi | 7 Due Homage pay, 

* Without Delay, 

ü | To great CAERNARVON now our MASTER GRAND. z 
He rules the Freeborn Sons of Ari ? | 
By Love and Friendſhip, Hand and Heart, 

Cho zus of the Wardens Song. 

2A 4 

Who can rehearſe the Praiſe 
In ſoft Poetick Lay + 
Or ſolid Proſe, of Maſons true, - 1 
* Whoſe Art N the common view? 
ir Secrets ne*er to Stran n 1 80 
| Preſerv'd ſhall a 4 N | 
By Maſons Free, | 
And only to the antient Lodge diſlord ; z 
E 5 | Becauſe they're kept in Maſons Heart 
N | By Brethren of the Nagel, Art. 

DAN the einn Narri. e 

| 

a | 

* ' £ 

III. The 

( 203 ) 

III. The Fellow Craft's So No, by Brother 
_ CHARLE: DE LA Fay, Eſq; in the Firſt Book. 

0 1. A 
AIL MAsoNRYI Thou Craft divine 
AH Glory of 'Earth h from Heaven reveal'd! 
hich doth with Jewels precious ſhine, 
From all but Maſons Eyes conceal'd, 
Thy Praiſes que robo can rehearſe, 
In nervous Proſe or flowing Verſe ? 

A Maſon other Men excels ; © 811 
For what's in Knowledge choice and rare 
But in his Breaſt ſecurely dwells? 
| Choꝛus. 
His ſilent Breaſt and faithful Heart 
Preſerve the Secrets of the Art. — 

| 1 2 
| © As Men from Brutes diſtinguiſh'd are, 

From ſcorching Heat 3 piercing Cold, 
From Beaſts whoſe Roar the Foreſt rends, 
- From the Aſſaults of Warriors bold . 
The Maſons Ax r Mankind defends. 
Chous. 
Be to this Art due Honour paid. 
From which Mankind receives ſuch Aid. 

. 
Enſigns of State that feed our Pride, 
D iſtinctions troubleſome and vain, 
By Maſons true are laid aſide, . 
Arts Freeborn Sons ſuch Toys diſdain. 

4IChoms. © 
. Innobled by the Name they bear, | | 
2: 4. 4 Diftingui d by the Badge they wear. 6: Sweet 

IV. The Enter'd. 

( 204 ) 

Sweet Fellowſhip from Envy free, 

Friendly Converſe of Wb 

The Lodges laſting CEM ENA be, 
Which has for Ages firmly ſtood. | 

Chozus. 
A Lope n thus built for Ages paſt 

Has fates, and Hall any laſt. 

Then in our Somęs be Jofiic done 
To thoſe who have inrich'd the Art, 
From Apa to CABRNARVON down, 
And let each Brother bear a Part. 

| „ Cho s. : | 
Let noble Maſons Healths go round, 
Their Praife in Lofty Lodge reſound. 

To the Deputy Gxany MastzR and Grund UWatdens. 
e's Sono, by Brother 

Matthew Birkhead, deceas d, in the firſt Book. 

To be oY after grave Bulineds 3 is over. 

nah 

OM E tet us 8 
We Brothers that are, 

Aſſembled on merry Occaſion 3 

: Let's drink, laugh and ſing, 

' Our Wine has a „„ 

mn 
W er 

The Work! is in-Pain 2 015 
Our Secrets to gain, ö 

And ſtill let them ee ons 
Till they're ſhown'the 

Þ They'll ne're know the Wh 
| Word or Sign of an Accepted Maſon. 

. : : 4 23 = * 5 > 
oy" Za 6. 

«t 

3. "Te 

. 

( 205 2 * 

»Tis This and * 5 Wat, 
They cannot tell what, | 
Why ſo many great Men of the Nation, 
Should Aprons put on 
To make themſelves one, 

With a Free and an Accepted Maſon. 

87 ot 
Great Kings, Dukes and Lords 
Have laid by their Swords, 

Our Myſt'ry to put a good Grace on, 11 

And ne're been aſham'd 
To hear themſelves nam'd 
With a Free and an . Maſon. 

Antiquity's pride 4 
We have on our Side, 

There's but what's good 
To be underſtood 

By a Free and an u Maſon. 

We're true and ſincere 
And juſt to the Fair; 
© They'll truſt us on any Occaſion: 
No Mortal can more 
| The Ladies adore, 
Then a Free and an Accepted e 

dig Then j join Hund in Hand, 
| By — Brother firm ſtand, | 
Let's be merry and put a bright Face on : 
What Mortal can | | 
So noble a Toaſt, 

As A Free and an Aaccpted Maſi * 

42 

'Y * * 
* 

And it maketh Men juſt in their Station 5 

22 

To thoſe Brothers of 1 and Fellows of Kings. 

(206), 

Choꝛus. | * 
No Morlal can boaſt Le WES W 
So noble a Toaſt, * 
As a FREE and an ACCEPTED Magov. 
Thrice repeated in due Form. 
To all the Hamm round the Globe. 

The following Sons are not in the 5e Book, 8 being 
uſually ſung, they are now printed, > 

I. The Deputy Gzand Paſter 8 8 ON G. 
N. B. Every two laſt Lines of each Verſe is the Chorus. 

1. 
N, on, my dear Bretbren, purſue your great Lecture, 

And refinè on the Rules of old Architefure : 
High Honour to Maſons the Craft daily brings, 

'S, 
We drove the. rude mendals and Goths off the Stage, 
Reviving the rt of AvevsTus* fam'd Age: 
And Veſpaſian deſtroy'd the vaſt TEMTE in vain, 
Since ſo Se now riſe in CAERNARVON's mild Reign. 

a 
The nals five Orders compos'd with ſuch At, - - 
Will amaze the fixt Eye, and engage the whole Heart : p 
Proportion*s ſweet Harmony gracing the Whole, 
Gives our York, like the 2 Creation, a Soul, 3 

Then Maſter and Brethren, 1 7 RAN your great Nate; 
This Lopox ſo majeſtick will purchaſe you Fame; 
Rever'd it ſhall ſtand till all Nature expire, 

71 And * Glories ne're fade 1 World is on Fire. 

5. See 

5 

4 

% 
* 

(2%) a 

; - ip EN 
See, ſee, behold here, what rewards all our Toil, 
Inſpires our Genius, and bids Eabour ſmile : ; 
To our noble Grand MASTER let a Bumper be crown'd, 
To all Maſons a Bumper, fo let it go round. 

| 6 

Again, my lov'd Brethren, again let it paſs, 
Our antient firm Union cements with the Glaſs ; 

And all the Contention *mongſt Maſons ſhall be, 

Who better can work, or who better agree. 

Additional Stanza by Brother Gofton, at the Time when the PIN OE 

was made a Maſon, and while the PR INoESss was pregnant. 

7. 
Again let it paſs to the Roy AL lov'd NAux, 

Whoſe glorious Admiſſion has crown'd all our Fame: 
May a Lew1s be born, whom the World ſhall admire, 
Serene as his Mother, , Auguſt as his Sire. 

* Chozus. 4 | 
Now a Lzwrs is born, whom the World ſhall admire, 

© Serene as his MornER, Auguſt as his SIRE. 

To our Brother FREDERICK, his Royal Highneſs the Prince of Wales. 
To our Brother Fx ANIS, his Ryyal Highneſs the Grand Duke of Tuſcany. 
To the Lewie. 

II. The Gzand Mardeng Sono. By Brother Oates. 

Throughout the Globe to ſpread it's Fame, 
And eternize each worthy Brother's Name, 
Your Praiſe ſhall to the Skies reſound, 
In laſting Happineſs abound, 
And with ſweet Union All your noble Deeds5 Repeat 
be crown'd, | 2 

Chozus- 

| I. 
[7 T Maſonry be now my Theme, 

+ 

| ( 208 ) 
Chozus. 
Sing ** my Muſe, 10 Maſon s Glory, 
Your Names are fo rever d in Story, | 
That all tht admiring World do now adore Th ſ 

4. 
Let Harmony divine infoire 
Your Souls with Love and gen'rous Fire, 
To copy well wiſe SoLoMox your SIRE. © * "© 
owledge ſublime ſhall fill each Heart. 
The Rules of Gometry t impart, * 
While Wiſdom, Strength and agg crown the -2 Repeat 
glorious Art. this Line. 

Cho2us. Sing * my Muſe, 8c. 

All Charged.” | 
Let Great Carxnarvon's Health go round, 
In ſwelling Cups all Cares be-drown'd,” —© 
And Hearts united mongſt the. Craft be found. e 
May everlaſting Scenes of Joy ' 33 
His peaceful Hours of Bliſs employ, 
Which Time's n Hand ſhall ne'er, tal R 
ne*er deſtroy. this 

Choꝛus. "Te then wy Muſe, dec, 

My Brethren, thus Gt Cares reſign, 
Your Hearts let glow with Thoughts ts divine, 
And Veneration ſhew to So.oMon's 
Our annual Tribute thus we'll pay, | 
That late Poſterity ſhall ſay, _ . All Sing. 
We've crown'd with Joy hs \ ied Happy, 2 
Happy _ 

eus. | 
Sing then my Muſe to Maſons Clary,” * 
Your Names are ſo rever'd in Story, 
That all th* admiring World do now adore ye. 

| To all the z0ble Loxps that have been GRAND MASTTERSõ. 
L368 The 

- 
* 

(209) 
III. The Treaſurer's S oN. 
N. B. The two loft Lines of each Verſe is a Choꝛus. 

I, 
RANT me, kind Heaven, what I requeſt ; 
In Maſonry let me bleft ; 
Direct me to that happy Place 
Where Friend/hip ſmiles in every Face; 
Where Freedom and ſweet Innocence 
Enlarge the Mind and cheer the Senſe: 
2 

Where ſcepter'd Reaſon from her Throne 
Su the Lope E and makes us one; 
And — delightful Sway 
For ever ſheds Ambroſial Day ; 
Where we bleſt Eden's Pleaſure taſte, 
Whilſt balmy Joys are our Repaſt. 

Our Lope E the ſocial ire grace, 
And Wiſdom's Rules we fondly trace; 
Whole Nature, open to our View, 
Points out the Paths we ſhould purſue, 
Let us ſubſiſt in laſting Peace, 
And may our Happineſs increaſe. 

No prying Eye can view us here, 
No Fool or Knave diſturb our Cheer; 
Our well-form'd Laws ſet Mankind free, 

And give Relief to Miſery : . 
The PooR a" with Woe and Grief, 

Gain from our bounteous Hands Relief. 

To all Charitable Mas ON s. 
Ee The 

; (te W 
IV. The Sectetargs Sen 
VN. B. The two left Lines of ee Verb is "the hows, 

. . f y * H | | * 
ET Bretbrth of the antient Chai ah el 
e fav*rite Sons of Bm. 12 
Let Bumpers cheerfully be qu affe by 
To great Cazrnarvon's Name . 

Happy, long happy may he be, ds ale 5 bd : 

Who loves and honours 7 Maſonry. JN 58 155 , ” Ta 

With a Fa, 1a, la, la, S. | 2 oo lbb FT 

1 105 or v5 4 

In vain * — with his Wit“ . That t joſe | 

Our flow Reſentment raiſm hoh. t 
What He and all Mankind have writ” © nn ww 
But celebrates our Praiſe. _ . 
His Wit this only Tru# imparts, cauſe they kept 
That Masons have firm faithful Hearts, their own Se- 

N ; 1 crets. See Gr 
: With a Fa, hon” ; en 1 ions 

Ye Brin Fair, for 12 fam d, e 
1 Your Slaves we wiſh to be; c 
_ Let none for Charms like yours be nam ud 11 
1 That love not Maſonry. © 88 
=. This Maxim D* Anvers proves full well, 
That Masons never kiſs and tell. WL od ay 8 
| , . . ere 
. True Maſons! no Offences? Fre. 
— Let Fame your Worth declare, 
Within your Compaſs wiſely live, r 
And act upon the Square : e 
May Peace and Friend/hip e' er Ibound, 
And Great CaERNARVOR's Health 80 3 
With a Fa, la, la, la, la, Scr. 

To All True and Faithful. * 

* 

— . . —— . RAPD A 1 
N 4 ma * 2 N 5 
i N 
. 

Y 'S | FT . : 4 

* 

N. B. The h (oy Fe et er 9 

\ 

/(-211)) 
550.8 e Nei * 

Autog 2 The, nowdbearer's. OTE * A 

O all who Afi 438 

This Cqunſel I beſtow :. . _ _-. 4 

Don't ridicule, if you are wiſe, 
A Secret you don't know. 
2 — es you „but not it, 
ew your Spleen, but not your 1. 
2 Wel Fa, la, 1a, la, la. 

* 2 * / VP | 324 ; K \ 
*. d 2. | ; 

In zring Fietue by our R 
aſpirin in ourſelves — 

| We have Compaſſion for thoſe Fools 

Who think our A#s 1 2 

We know from Ignorance proceeds 

Such mean Opinion of our Deeds. 
With a " 1 | * a 

: WY? « 
y ad 

3. 
If Union and Sincerity - 
Have a Pretence to pleaſe, . 

We Brothers of the Masonay Th 
Lay juſtly Claim to theſe: 
To State-Diſputes we ne er give Birth, 
Our Motto Friend/vip is, and ow": 

With Aa wm Sc. 15) N J 

© &# mY fp - 
* * 
4 . * ” 7 L 4 
” 4 — 4 ww « . 
. ow 5 : i” * * 

„ 

HA 39.1. 
Ir 
6H 

— 657 „ 7 
8 * 
9 [A , 

41. 

on TH £4 fl 

[ WO 
++ 4611 i 

« 

* 
7 I 
: 9 

( TIS) 

Wos aA Il 

ee ee ee 
ö And 

1 75 Secret is diſclog'd A 
By ome falſe-hearted Brother : | 1 
2 mighty Stex bee why ves. 2124 
oft- Boy $4 7 ” " #oifiym al I 
With a Fa, la, lap e 2 lyoe 1wo g 
201d. — ar} is 2263/0 5. 
2 led WO not 1100 1155 * 

To all Maſters 2 Wandew of cen L. bn. 

VI. An Ode to the, Fakx Majors, o/ 

NN 29169 will oligo 

N, B. The wall Lines of each h Verte in che e 

by 0 101 

| a. al M iy ng! 2811 
110 7. rh 9 Tk Til if 
Y Masons Art th* af Done 
In ſtately Columns ſh * | 2 | 
All Climates are their Native 1 aged binds 
Their learned Actions reach, the Skies. tÞ ao oft 
Heroes and Kings reverse their Name 
W Poets ſing _ — * * : . 

— 

pits 1 91131 15 ins On. A a 

Great, Noble, Cen rous, Good and Brave, 
Are Titles they moſt quitly* clamm 
Their Deeds ſhall live beyond the Grave, "apt FRes 
Which thoſe unborn ſhall loud e 0 ny „ 
Time ſhall their glorious Acts enrol, Derr 

While Love and Friendſhip charm the Soul. 8. de 140 g 
T0 W Hauour of e Pine Was 

* 
a a. 9 
. ,» 
— — 
PSC 
. ” — * Fa 
r 
1108 * — a 
. — — — * 
= : 0 
%* ?”", "VE * 0 
3 1 
3 w_ * nd ? 
” wt 2 » N 1 
„ * 
* ſe 10 
0 A - 4 
- „ 
1 1 — * . 
ws . F < : 
* ov — - — 
5 „0 1 3 
2 A * 
= — 
— 

vn. An Ode on MASONRY, 

6 3 

Brother [Bai 
N. B. The two laft Lines of each erſc ig the 

14 *. i Df 

Þ eien Dk Aly * Du. 
2078 3 Siet A 
ENIUS of; Mean deſcerod, en T 
In myſtick Numbers while we * -N a 4 
Enlarge our Souls, the Craft defend, «$455 ay « | A 
And hither all thy Influence bri | | 
With ſocial Thoughts our Bong, * 
And give thy Turn to every W 

While at h N wt ae kv 
Neglect thy Beauties to explore 

Ang wining Se rw; adorn d unnd wich Tow, | Sr A | 4 

ments thee wand'ring from his Shore; L PT 5 x 

Here ſpread thy Wings, and glad theſe Iſles, 

Where Arts relide; and Freedom ſmiles. 

NN 32 fr * * NI 

Behold the Lopes riſe into Views | xz evenur 
The Work of Iidyſtry and Art ;- 25 | Y: 3 

Tis Grand, and Reg and True, 
For ſo is each good A Heart. 

Friendſbip cements it from the Ground, 

And Secrecy ſhall Race it ITT" 

- dit bas uy 
Rr WE 
A ſtately Dou o'erloaks,our! E. 
Like Orient Phahus in the Morn 3 
And two tall PII LARS in the Weſt: 
At once ſupport, us and ado rn. 
Upholden thus the Struture ſtands, Sun! 
Untouch'd by facrilegious. Hands. 

n * 17 

- 
= 
; 

— 

— * 

For Corpond, formed, . MW no 288 nf. 

NeeF Fate this Le, ſhall geſtre x 
WM oils and Sports alike are =o: T7 7 Rs al 

'So Sar 2's Temple. roſe ” Rule oy 15 
Without the "mn of noxious 7 5 a 7% | 
IG, 5: H | 0 Te, x1] 
As when Amphion tay his Bon 1 8 i N 
Ev'n rugged Rocks the Muſick 1450 WT 55 , 
- Smooth*d into Form, hey, glide {OOTY 
And to a Tnzzz's th e'Deſart grow: - F 67 M101 08. 
So at the Sound of Haage ac en n 
We riſe, we join, and we rejoice. 1662. au a vinb ba KA, 

| 3. 

7a Wi 2 1 wit ; 7 25 f l 5 
Then may our Yows 10 rt eee 

To Virtue own” 1 20 her P | 1 4 JED 11.6 
Come Candojur,, Innocence.and. i yy 

Come and poſſeſs our. faithful "bf r 
Mercy, who feeds the hungry Pour, 
And Silence, Guardian of WEN bi wines. 12 

ON 84% Irs 
And thou As rA wk from Es, $860 ah, 
When Men on Men, be pF ky a 
Thou fled'ſt to claim cel Both = WY 

Down from Olympus wing thy Way; 
And mindful of the 8 Sear, 15 
Be preſent ſtill where Mas ons meet. 
9. 4 
Immortal Sc1t NE too. be near, 
(We own thy Empire oer the Mind) „n 
Dreſs d in thy radiant Robes appear, © PO e 
With all thy beauteous Train behind 5 g 
INVEXNTTON young and bloomin end 
* GREOMETRT With N1ꝗ̈ Spare. WIG - 

GR 

+ 29188 elude 106 boot handy 10 
Veni ek. Rl en 204. 

In EevpPs Fazarcr'® Learning dwelt, © 
And Roman Breaſts could Vieue hike * 
But Vulcan's e the Building felt, 
And Brutus, laſt of Nee dyd: 

Since when, diſperꝰd the Hiker rove, 
Or fill n Thrones: above. 

. 7 1941 1.21 
a A 11. 101. 
But loſt to bal of human Race, 
With us the Virtues ſhall revive; 

And driv'n no more from Place to Place, 

Here Science ſhall be kept alive: 
And manly Taſte, the Child of Senſe, 
Shall baniſh Vice and Dulneſs hence. 

12, 
United thus, and for theſe Ends, 
Let Scorn deride, and Euuy rail; 
From Age to Age the CxArr deſcends, 
And what we build ſhall never fail: 
Nor ſhall the World aur Warks ſurvey; 
But every Brother Reeps the * 

To Aurs s and Screncns. 

n 
The — 
11 0 

0 Yi 97 \ 

l 4 F 3 
: 
F : L 00 
** . 77 

A Drgac 

>. 

e 8 eee | ASPEASI KOH A - 
USICOVUC URLS URLS CRHLST "X'Y SS GS TRIS 

A Donanas of MAas$SoNRy, public A. D. 1730. 
Occaſion d by a Pampblet call'd Maſonry 1 

Crap. I. MONG ths eee Dior of the preſent Ag 
A has been received with more a and Een Sure few 

Sheets, written, it ſeems, without Partiality, call'd Maney Difted. The Grand 
Secret, which has long withſtood the Batteries of Temptation, that neither Af 
ney, the Maſter Key of the Heart, nor good Liquor, that unlocks the 

nor Hunger, that breaks through Stone-Walls, nor Thirſt, a ſore Evil to a 

Maſon, could bring to Light; has at laſt been upon Oath, to the 
— the eternal Scandal of ave and the ood 
of the Publick never to be forgotten! The Deſign was no leſs then to diſburthen a 
loaded Conſcience, to acquaint - World, That * did 'o ridiculous an Impoſition 
appear among Mankind ; and to prevent ſo many innocent Perſons being drawn into / 
pernicious a Society! 

What could induce the Difefor to take that Oath, or the Magiſtrate to admit it, 
ſhall not at this Time be decided. 

However, I muſt give the World Joy of ſo notable a Diſcovery, fo honourable, 
ſo circumſtantiated ! a mighty Expectation was raiſed, and, without Doubt, is won- 
derfully gratified by this Courſe of Anatomy. Wr 1 it can be nothing elſe : 
1t is as we ahways Juppoſed, a whimfical C LN great Names to > ſeduce 
_ who, once gu 7 out of this Ming, 2 ne 
others 
I confeſs, I cannot come into this Method of Arguing ; nor is it , . 
nion, a fair Way of treating a Society, to run implicitiy with the Cry, without 
_ examining whether theſe Reproaches are. founded upon any Thing in the Myffery 
(25 now repreſented) either <vicked or ridiculous. For that ſtupid Imputation of 
drawing in Fools 3 the Sake of their . can have no Weight in the preſent 
Caſe; ſince the as it now ſtands, conſiſts 1 of — of 
great Honour and Diſti ion, much ſuperior to Views id and 

For once then, let this Digefion contain a the Secrets of FREE . 
admit that every Word of it is genuine and literally true, and that the whole Scheme 
conſiſts of no more nor no leſs: Yet under all theſe Conceſſions, under all the Diſ- 
advantages and Prejudices whatever, I cannot but ſtill believe, there haue been In- 
Poſitions pon 3 mare F Tidicxlas, ard that many have been drawn into a Nl 
more pernicious. 

J would 

| | (21 } 
. I wonlkt not be thought agitated upon this n, as if I were any Way con 
cern'd whether this Di/e&on be true or falſe? or whether the Credit of Fier Ma- 

ed it.0 Theſe Conſiderations can give me no Trouble. M 
ER oo Tele Pan of Making, by Wks om 

# 
_ -Impartial Remarks” upon this Dear, without contending 
Maſonry on the one Hand, or reflecting upon the Diſector on the other. 

of 

"KS & JF, ff 146 . ——— " - i . 
ena 4 11. . HE formidable Objection Which has ven Ofen to dhe 
Nene 1 Wan of Men, is the Copy of the Oarh as it lies in the 
Diſectian. It has been a Matter of Admiration, that ſo many Perſons of great 
Piety, ſtrit Conſtience and unſpotted Character, ſhould lay themſelves under fo 
ſolemn an Obligation, under Penalties fo terrible and aſtoniſhing, upon a Subject ſo 
trifling and inſignificant. * 
Jo obviate dus Gestion I obſerve ; that the End, the Abra, abd Purprt of 
\Masonar, as deſcri ( in the DiſeZion, is to ſubdue our Paſſions, not to da ar 
ill i make,,a; daily, Progreſe in a laudabl Art; to promote Morality, Charity, 
good \Felawfhipy goed Nature and Humanity, This appears to be the Subſtance, let 
been Yee be ever, unacoounable, r 
As for the Terms N to Arcbitocture, Geometry and Mathematicks, that 
diſperſed throughout the Diction, it would be range if a Society of {ach a Be. 
.. nomination, could ſubſiſt wholly without them; tho', they ſeem (to me at leaſt). to 
bea rather Technical and Formal (yet deliver'd perhaps by long Tradition) than ef 
ſentially attached to the Grand Dz$1cN. f 1 
Now here is the Inpiety, Where the Immorality, or Folly, for a Number of 
Men to form 3 _ a e whoſe main =* to improve in com- 
mendable Skill and Knowledge, , and to promote univerſal, Beneficence and the 
ſocial 2 human 1425 under the ſolemn Obligation of an 7215 And 
This, in what. Tom, under what.) ſecret Reſtrictions, and with what innocent Ce- 
_ weren, Liberty all Incorporate Societies enjoy without Impeachment or Reflection: 
An Apprentice is bound to keep the Secrets of his Maſter, a Freeman is obliged to 
. conſult the Intereſt of his Company, and not to proſtitute in common the My/te- 
vier of his Trade: Secret Committees and Privy Councils are folemnly-enjoin'd not to 
publiſh abroad their Debates and Reſolutions. There appears to be ſomething like 
Maſorry (as the D;/e&or deſcribes it) in all regular Societies of whatever Denomi- 
nation: They are , held together by a Sort of Cement, by Bonds and Laws that 
are peculiar to each of them, from the Higheſt to the little Clubs and Nightly 
Meetings of à private Neighbourhood. There are Oaths adminiſter'd, and ſome- 
times Obligations to . Secxecy :. There are a Mas TER, two Mlardens, 
and a Number of 4/i/ants, to make what the Diſector may call (if he p 
a Parfas Lodge in the Ci 1 N There is the Degree of Exter'd Prentices, 
Maſter of his Trade, or Fe/low Craft, and Maſter, or the Maſter of the Company, 
There are Confitutians and Orders, and a ſucceſſive, a gradual Enjoyment, of 

Offices, according to the ſeveral Rules and Limitations of Admiſſion, 4 
de ä FF HEEL But 

9 2.4 
* > *. 

(a) 

But it 8 d that the general Deſign of N. may be. abl 0 
leaſt —— dra yet be carried en tothe ſame Advantage without the Splemnity 
of an Oath, eſpecially preſſed under ſuch dreadful. Penalties M. Fa + 

In anſwer, I obſerve, t at the Qui is not whether the Purpoſe of Maſemy 
may as well be ſerved without an Oath? But avhether an Oath, in the preſent Cafe,. 
be lawful; and may be taken with a good Conſcience? And to folve this Difficulty-I = 
— — ſhall introduce the Opinion of Bi SN nSsO, the moſt 

De Obligatione Ju- | judicious Caſuiſt that ever treated upon the Subject of Oathiʒ 
ramenti Frælect. 3. who ſays, When a Thing is not 7 any Precept or Interdie,. 
SeR. 15. Divine or Human, ſo determin'd ; but every Man, pro hic & 
— nunc, may at his Choice ds or not do, as be ſees expedient ; Let 
him do what he will, he h net, 1 Cor. vii. 36. As of Caius fewear to ſell 
bis Land to Titius, or to lend bim an hundred Crowns; The. Anſwer is. brief, an Oath + 
in this ＋ is both laauful and binding. _ | | 

Now 1 would know what Precept, Divine or Human, has any way. determin'd 
epon the Contents of the Diſſoctiom ? And whether the general Deſign gf Klang, 
as there laid down, is not at leaſt of equal Benefit and Importance to. the i 

with the lending of an hundred Crowns to: a private lan? The Anſwers, to. theſe 

Queſtions are obvious, and the Conſequence. is equally plain, that. az Oath upon 
the Subject of Maſonry is at leaſt juſtifiable and lawful, nr hed Kong 

As for the Terror of the Falk, the World, upon that Occaſion, is commonly 
miſtaken ;. for the Solemmity of the Oath does not in the leaſt add to the Obliga- 
tion; or, in other Words, the Oath is equally binding without any Pena/ty at all, 
The fame Caſuiſt has this Expreflion ; 4-Solemn Oath of 22/e/f, and in its own Na- 
Prele&. 5. Sec. 12 ture, is not more obligatory than a Simple One 3. becauſe the Ob- 

Ugation of as Oath ariſeth preciſely from This, . that Col is invoked," as met 

and Revenger, no ke/; in à Simple Oath than in the" folemn and"coryoral ;; for the In- 

vocation is made preciſely by the Pronunciation of the Mord (#ohieh is the ſame both 

in the . and ſolemn] and not by any corpora} Motion or concomitant Sign, in 
«a $5 1 | | F"Y 4 

which the Solemnity of the Oath. con/ofs. | | | 
A. to intent Readers, and therefore this Citation wants not to be ex- 

' , g ; 7 T29 | 

But further, if the Oath in the Di/#28im be taken by all Maſons upon their Ad- 
miſſion,” no Member of the Fraternity, upon any Pretence whatſoever, dares vib- 
late the Obligation of it, without incurring the Guilt of Pemury; even ſuppoſing 
that Maſorry were more 'trifling and indifferent, than in the Diſſectiam it may ap- 
pear to be. And therefore if the Conduct of the Drife#or has ſtagger d the Con- 
ſcience of any one of the Brotherhood, concerning the Obſervation of thar Oath ;- 
and has induced him to trifle and play with the Force of it, I hope he will deſiſt 
betimes, left he becomes actually forworn. TIT | 

Fe 4. Seft. 17] This Caſe is thus determit'd by the fame Caſuiſt, 4 V- 

Lan Oath 7s the more binding for being Voluntary; Becanſg there ii no fraiter Ob- 
Feation than that which we take wilagh upon or ſebves. And in another Place 
Prelect. 3. Sect. 15 I che Caſuiſt is more particular, Where a Matter is ſo trivia 

. * : that. 

„ , 
1 * * 

* . 

(ary) 
Pat it in iH cb thi Deliberation of a avife\ Many tor matters u Straey-avbether it be 
Aut or ot” ont 5 dt be. uch up} a Chip af is rub one's Beard 3 or for the Sg 
of the Matter is not much to he oem ' as to give a Boy an Apple, er to lend a Pin; 
an Oath is binding in 4 Matter" of the leaſt Moment : Becauſe we weighty and trivial 
Things bat a like Reßpect uno Truth and Falſhood ; And farther, becauſe every 
Party fevearing is bound to perform all he promiſed as far as he is able, and as Far ar 
i is Inwyfil - But to give an Apple to a Boy is both poſſible and lawful ; he is bound 

N to n it, hey * to fall his Oath, 

| uur, III. Hoe wa off che Weight of the great ObjeQtion, the 

Defign of this Chapter is to remove an Imputation, which has 
yaa TY urged with great Confidence, wiz. The Principles and the whols Frame 
Van Free ge e is ſo very weak and ridiculous, that it refleds upom Men of the leaſt 

to Be concerif d init! And now, ſay the merry Gentlemen, it appears 

B photo the Di/eFim, which diſcovers nothing hut an unin igible 

argon, without common Senſe or Connection. 

Efes Jam of another Opinion: tho" the Scheme of Ma/orry, as reveal'd by 

de 8 Hor, ſeems liable to Exceptions: Nor is it fo clear to me as to be fully 

erſtood at firſt View, by attending only to the /tera/ Conſtruction of the 

ords* And for aught I know, the Syfemm, as taught in the regular Ladges, may 

[gp ſome Redundancies or Defects, occaſion*d by the Ignorance or Indolence of 

old Members. And indeed, conſidering through what Obſcurity and Dark- 

þ 2 ry has been deliver'd down; the many Centuries it has ſurvived ; 

untrith and Languages, and Sack ned e ee h ; 

. it ever arriv'd to the preſent Age, without more Im- 

— n ſhort, I am apt to think that MasoNRY (as it is now explain'd) 
ſome Circumſtances declined from its ori inal Purity ! It has run 

2 n under Grou Hor notwithſtanding the 

it may have contracted, and the forbi Light it is placed in by the 
— had there is (if 1 judge right) much of old Fabrick ſtill remaining ; 
= Wh Pillars of the Building may be diſcover'd throu h the R 
Superſtructure be over-run: with Moſs and 1 the Stones, by 
ape — 2; — be disjointed. And therefore, as the aſto of an old HAC 
Value among the Curious, tho it has loſt an Eye, the Noſe, or the 

Right Has Hand; ſo Mason with all its Blemiſhes and Misfortunes, inſtead of 

appearing ridiculous, - ought (in my humble Opinion) to be receiv'd with ſome 
Candour and Eſteem, from a Veneration to its Antiquity. © + 
I was exceedingly pleas'd to find the Diſeor lay the Original Scene of Ma- 
in the EAsr, a Country always famous for Symbolica) Learning ſupported 
by Secrecy; I could not avoid immediately thinking of the n who 
d the chief a of their Keligion under Signs and Symbo fu 
We and * was. their ny for Silence and dre 75, ta 

* 

( 220 ) 

F m/ had a Deity eall'd Hanyocratts, whom they reſpetted 
a'Fintentro Chartaris. with peculiar Honour. and Venefation. "A learned Author 
has given us a Deſcription of this 1s, thus; HarPockares the God Silence 
was formed with his Right Hand placed near the Heart, cover "d with a Skin 

e, Full 9 E es and Ears ; to fignify by this, that man " Things are to be ſeen 
and 1 ittle 7 be ſpoken. And among the ame eople, their great Gal. 
ft Isis Ing ame as REST As the Cod] of Strength and Wiſdom, among 

Greeks) had akways the I of a Sphinx placed in the Entrante of her 
- tes ; becauſe their Serrets Foy be 3 under ſacred Coverings, that they 

be kept from the Tolk of the Vulgar, as much as the Riddles of 

inx! 
"PyTHacoras, by travelling into Fgypr, became inſttucted in the Myfteries of 
that Nation; and here he laid the Foundation of all his Symbolical Learning. The 
"Vid JansLicnvs. Vit. Fythagore.| ſeveral Fries that have mention'd this Phi- 

Lakkrius, Vit. Pythagoræ. bee iven an Account of his Se and 
PorenyrIvVs. CLew. AL E x. Strom. Wen ve convinced me fully, that 

Fr Mison as publith'd by the Di/e@or,.is very nearly allied to the old 
Pythagorean Diſcipline ; from whence, I am perſwaded, it may, in ſome Circum- 
ſtances, very juſtly claim its Deſcent. To mention a few, 

Upon the Admiſſion of a Diſciple, he was bound by a ſolemn Oath to conceal 
the Meries from 72 Vulgar and Uninitiated. 
The principal and 9 of their Doctrines were . (lays JanaLGuws 
or kept * es themſelves; they were continued unwritten, and preſerved 2 
ect, to <vhom they deliver d them as. Myſteries of . 

, uw ſed with one another by Signs, and had 4-1 yang Words which t 
. — their Admiſſion, and which avere preſerved with great Rewerence, as t 
Diſftinian of their Sed : For (it is the judicious Remark of LA E RT IUS) as Gene- 
lt & Watch-Words to d:flingui/h their own Soldiers from Others, ſo it is proper to com- 
; 1 ate to the Initiated, egy Signs and Words, as diſtinive Mitts ks of 4 

ie 
** Tb F PyTHAGOREANS profelſed a great Regard for what the Di/e&ar calls the 
four. Principles of Masonky, wiz. F Point, à Line, a Superficies, and @ Solid 
and particularly held that a + ARE Was a very proper Emblem of the Diving 

Vid. PRoctys in N Eſence; the Gedi, they ſay, wwho are the Authors of every 
Lib. 11. Def. 2. & 34- ing eſtabliſhed in Wikdom, Strength and Beauty, are 
_——_— eſented by the Figure of a Square. . 

Many e ht — PREP would the Limits of my Deſign admit; 
core ALEXAN DEI ſhall only obſerve, that there was a Falſe Brother, one Hi1ryar- 
Strom: 5. CHUS, of this Se, who, out of Spleen and Diſappointment, 
beoke through the Bond of his Oath, and committed the Secrets of the Society to 

. Order to bring the Doctrine into . He was r ex. 

School, as a Perſon moſt infamous and 'd, as one dead 2 

. 

x 
. 
* 
| 

(221) 
Senſe of Virtue and Goodneſs ; and the Pythagortans, according | t6 their Clſtemy 
made 4 Tomb for him, Pe had ben af Bel The Shame and . Diſgrace? 
that juſtly attended this F:olation of his Oath, threw the poor Wreteh int 4 Pit 
of Madneſs and Deſpair, ſo that He cut his Throat and periſh'd by M own Hands; 
and (which ſurprized me to find) his Memory was ſo abhorred after Death, that 
his Body lay upon the Shore of the Iſland of Samos, and had no other Burial than in 
the Sands of the Sea! - | 

The EssENESs the 7ews were a Sort of Pythagoreans, and correſj 2 
in many Particulars, with the Practice of the Fraternity, as deliver'd in Dif- 
/eaion. For Example. 

When a Perſon deſired to be admitted into their Society, he was to paſs through 
Tao Degrees of Probation, before he could be perfect Maſter of their Myſlerier. 
When he was received into the Claſs of Nowices, he was preſented with a White 
Garment ; and when he had been long h to give ſome competent Proofs of 
his Secrecy and Virtus, he was adenine to. ch 2 : But ſtill he went 
on with the Trial of his Integrity and good Manners, and then was fully taken 
into the Society. | 

But before he was received as an eſtabliſh'd Member, T. . 
he was firſt to bind himſelf by folemn Obligations and | bade, jusg rave 
Profeſſions, To do Fuftice; to d u Wrong,” to keep Faith 2 lib 8c wakes 
with all Men, to embrace the Truth, * his Hand; 4 p. . 

the Myſteries, nor communicate ay them to the Profane, tho it ſhould be to ſave 
his Life ; to deliver nothing but he received, and ta endeavour to. preſerve the 
Principle that he profeſſes. They eat and drink at the ſame Common Table ; and 
the Fraternity that come from any other Place are fare to be received there. 

meet together in an Aſſembly, and the — 25 Hand 7s laid upon the Part between the 
Chin and the Breaſt, while the Left Hand i; lt down flraight by their Side. 
The CapaLrsrs, another Ses, dealt in hidden and myſterious Ceremonies. 
The Jeu had a great Regard for this Science, and Vid. Basxace's Hiſt. of the 
thought they made uncommon Diſcoveries by means | Fes, on Canara. | 
of it. They divided their Knowledge into Speculative Co Lis r's ionar 

and Operative. Da vip and Soromon, they ſay, I the Word Cabala. 

were exquiſitely ſkill'd in it; and no hody at firſt preſumed to commit it tq 
Writing : But (what ſeems moſt to pe Purpoſe) the Perfection of their 
Skill conſiſted in what the Diſector calls Lettering of it, or by ordering the 
Letters of a Word in a particular Manner. 1 | 

The laſt Inſtance I ſhall mention is That of the 
Dxvivs in our own" Nation, who were the only 
Priefts among the antient Britons, - In their Solem- ar Hi 6 Boa: 
nities they were clothed in White ; and their Cere- R 5 (e ON rata, 
monies always ended with a good Fal. Pouroxtus e r ! 
Me LA relates of em, | tha#, their Science was only an At of Au,; for | they 
aurote down nothing, an they ntver fail d to repeat many Veries, 0 wars 

rec 

* Cz Ants Comment. 

clear Je Theft and fraudulent Dealing; not to conceal from his Fellow Profeſſors amy of 

( 282 ) 

— CAR hat Thiy 144 . Hend u- NI 
fevertign Power: \ This Preſident parts Sort of ''Bxcommulnieat 
" Penalties; upon ſuch as vither ed or er their ror rg 

us, with reaſonable Allowance for Diſtance'of Time, Place, and other 8. 

Accidents, the preceding Colle#ions diſcover . at Lernt, like Ma- 
=== ſach * Arto n __ 0 

. ; Uu Dari 

J Hatever Noe may - thi "oy umd that 'follow 
in this Chapter, ariſing either from an Overflow of Wit, or 
ill Nature, I ſhall be unconcern'd, and leave them wholly to the Mercy of the 
ſeriom Reader i only deſiring them to remember that no more ought in any Caſe 
to be bara than what the Nature of it will reaſonably admit. I on freely, 
Frecei great Pleaſure in collecting, and was freq ty ſurpris d at the Diſco- 
veries that muſt evidently occur 2 e. ie 
The Conformity between the Rirer and Principles of ' Maferyy (if che 2 — 55 
true) and the many Cuſtoms and Ceremonies of the Hutients,' muſt give Delgn 
Perſon of a e and Curioſity; to find any Remains * 
Tee Society for many Ages, without Books , M. SE 

I. The Number Tanny is tly meide in the Di Bin; ns T find 
chat the Antients, both Greeks + Latins, profeſſed a great Veneration for that 
LEY Tugocxirus thus introduces a Perſon who dealt in ſecret 
W 8. 

a) "Eg reis d re x, This rade bree Ons 

Su, TV. ? 

e 

11to0 24 AT 

* r moin 
e rice, Thrice 1 jour, and thrice, repeat my Charms! ; OY 

16 Fae IJ 4 

11 ter * 
Oo Mem. i. IE ar Thrice be eu Wt . indo? 

rs 

ART Notte whos „0 
| CRT H Eo Three Colours in Three Knots -unite, =D daft” 10 
0 of $13 71 bo) N 

ele this Fancy owe s its Original to the Merle. Trunss, becauſe containi 
a Beginning, Middle and End, it ſeems to ſignify Al Things in the World; 2 
whether to the Eſteem the Pythagoreazs and other Philo/ophers had for it, on — 

—— of their TRIAD or TxiniTY ; or laſtly (to mention no more t 

alan l the — all the Gaui, who were divided ay an aher 

Celflial, e ber J ſhall leave to be determin' | 
"The Gals had a Eſteem for this Number, mind by Oe. 

Ea % 'Numero Deus impare gaudet. Unequal fees Weak The, ; 
We find Tyxzz fatal Sifters, Tux Furies, Taree Names and Appearances of 
Diana.” Tria — Ora Dianæ, r por dead Diana bear.” 
Vigil. * 4. 0 

1 me 
"roared wwe WP Yeder, — 

** 
D 

1 
f 
: 
: 

6 8 

| 875 | of. the. Houſe, ſoall "tremble ; 
| f K 
and the Grinders ceaſe, — yo are few; — thoſe that 18 xt. ver. 3, 4, 68. 

( 223) 
of Saturn, among whom the Empire of the World was divided, mere 

HRE 465 the fame Reaſon we read of JIT ER's Fulmen Triſaum or f 
Eunrg; And for and of Nærrung's Trident, with ſeveral other Tokens of the 
Vengration they bore to this particular Number, 

II. A particular Coramany belonging to the Oath (as declared by the | 
bears a near Relation to a Form of Swearing among the Antients mention Ter a 
la es Author — * — _—_ e Oath, was to be upon 

Knees wwithia pointed to bis Times, [A 
the Sung. Moon, and Stan is be Witneſs to the LD. Yap to. 

invoking 
Truth of aur be 1 
III. % Part of the. Ma50n8.Gatechifoe has given Occaſion to a deal of Ale 

Mirth, and Ridicule, as the moſt trifling and deſpicable Sort of that Men 
of common. Senſe ever ſubmitted to. The Bone Box and the Tow 1 
wonderful Diverſion: I think there are ſome Verſes in the laſt Chapter row 
Book of £ccl:faafttxgmhich in ſome Manner reſemble this Form of Exoreſion = 

Mall tranſcribe. th Wich che Opinion of the Learned upon them. . 

Te out at the Hindus be davined; and the Doors ſhall be ſhut in 705 Streets ; 
when the Saund of the Grinding is bw ;- and he ſhall rife up at the Vaice of the - Birdy: 
and all the Daughters of Mafick Gall be brought lau: Or ever the Cord be- 
loojed ; or the Golden Bowl be broken ;. or "Ms Pitcher be. broken at the Fountain ; 
or the Wheel broken at the Ciftern ! 

The ww ck upon theſe Verſes are almoſt unanimous in their . * 
Opinion, t to be thus explain d, wiz. The Keepers Biſh. Patrick, 
r er A „ Arms and Hands of an human Body ; Doctor Smith, 
the · Gzinders are the Teeth ; "thoſe that look out at the Min- 22 
dots are the two Eyes; the Doors. are the Lis; the Dtteets nag, in 
are the Mouth 3. the Sound of the Grinding is che Wi off eum: Kc. 
— Voice the Woice of the Bit d is the Crowin of the Cock ; the Daughters 

uſick are the en art; the Sil ver Coꝛd is the Seri of the Ton ge; 
4 den Bowl is the Pia Mater; the Pitcher at the Fountain is che 
Heart, the Fountain of Life ; the heel is the Great Artery ; and the Ciatern 

is the Left Yentricle of the Heart / | 
IV. There could not paſſibly have been deviſed a more ſignificant. Token of ; 
Love, Friendſhip, Integrity and Honeſty, than the 7 of the Riour Hands, 

a Ceremony made uſe of by all. civiliaed e a Token of a faithful and 
true He Fives or — —.— a Deity amon wg the Antients, of which a 
learned Writer. has given us thus ption, viz." 

proper Refidence of 0 2 or F an 7 avas thought. to be |Charterins in UÞ. ut ſupra. 
in the Right Hand, and therefore this Deity ſometimes vas repreſent EY Two Right 
Hands Joined: together; ;. ſometimes by two little Images ſhakin the Other's 
Right Hand; ſo that the Night Hand was by the 9 e, as a Sus I, 

yo gang And agreeable ta this are thoſe Expreſſions in Firgil, 

| 

(224) 

| of an honeſt 

Fn Doura Fide ew: . cr oþ hong Right Hand was an inſeparable Token 

54 | cur Dextrz jungere Dextram 
| Non datur, & veras audire & reddere Voces ? 

Fw Why ſhould aue not join Right Hand 20 Right Hand, and hear and ſpeak the 

Truth. 
Vol. I, | I all Contrafts and Agreements (fays Archbiſhop Porr Ex, 
Of. * E. 251. in his Antiquities of Greece) it was uſual to take Each Other by 
The Right II Hand, That being . the Mamer of of Pprighting aith, And this was done 
either out of ReſpeRt to the Number Ten, as ſome fay, there being Ten Fingers on 
the Two Hands; or becauſe ſuch a Conjunction was a Token of Amity and Con- 
9 at all friendly Meetings they join Hands, as a Sign of che Union of 
eir 
It was one of the Cautions of e to his Ditiphs, Take heed to 1 
you offer your Right Hand! which is thus explain'd ambli- 
In Vit, Pythagr. 1 Taſte 1 One by the Right Hand b the 22 that 
#5, in the & Myſtical Form ; for the hr and the Profane are altogether umworthy of 
the Myſtery ! 
= The DifſeFor frequently ta 7 of the Number Seven, 1 i 
M en ler to the old tian, who held the Number owes 
Pignoriu n be Sacred ; more wb. y they believ'd that whilft their Feaſt 
of Seven Days laſted, the Crocodiles loſt their inbred Cruelty : And Leo FIfer, in 
= Deſcription of Africa, Lib. VIII. fays, that even in his Time, the Cuſt -1 
N Seven Days and Nights, wwa 24 uſed for the e e 
The Greeks and Latins profeſſed the ſame Regard that Number, hich 
ht be proved by many Examples. 
2 The Accident, by which the Body of Mafter Hix am was found after his 
Death, ſeems to allude, in ſome Circumſtances, to a beautiful Paſſage in the 6th 
Book of VirgiPs Eneids. Anchi ſes had been dead for ſome Time; and EN EAS 
his Son profeſſed ſo much Duty to his departed Father, that he conſulted with the 
CTCumæan Sibyl, whether it were poſſible for him to deſcend into the Shades below, 
in Order to ſpeak with him. The Propheteſs encouraged him to go; but told 
him he could not ſucceed, unleſs he went into a certain and pluck'd a golden 
Bough or Shrub,” which he ſhould carry in his Hand, and by that means obtain 
| DireQions where he ſhould find his Father. The Words are well tranſlated ”y 

Dryden, viz. 

- In the nei n Grove 
There flands a The: the Queen of Stygian Jo vx 
Claims it her own : Thick Woods and gloomy Night 
Conceal the happy Plant from mortal Sight ! 
One Bough i. 2. but wondrous to behold, 
The ductile Rind and Leaves of Radiant Goll | 755 
s 

(225+) 

EY This from the ug Branches mu D 
8 Ard "fair Pkos Artur e Preſent l , 
FF Leave be given to tempt the net S WA. USE 2 UT 
De firſt thus rent, 4 ſecond will ariſe, * 
e Jame Metal the fame Room ach 
De willing Metal will obey thy | 

17 with Ea. | 
Nene the 9 of the eee e diſco- 
ver' d but by elp of a Bough, which was pluck'd with great Eaſe from the 
Tree; nor, x ol could Haas the Grand Master of Misonzr, have been 
found but by the Dire&tion of a Shrub, which (ſays the DiJe46r) . came 1 50 uh 
The principal Cauſe of RNA Deſcent into this Shade}, was to enquite 
Father the Secrets of the Fates, which ould ſometime be fulfilPd d among his 2 
ſterity: The Occaſion of the Brethrens” ſearching 6 Alen) for their 
was, it ſeems, to receive from him the '/ecret' Word of Maſonry, which ſhould be 
delivers down, to their Frazernity in After-Ages. This remarkable Verſe follows," | 
| Proteres'jacet exanintum tibi corpus ame. 
i K Heu neſcis ! net x 2 4 
9 Bolly of your „ hf. 2 vt 

0 | Ales you bw we lo 1 | bh 4 

Fan was m Ae , _ 
as (ſays the Pferde) Moſler — 1 1 gr hh 

t there is another Sto that ſtands in Penner Reladiow to the Caſe 
of HI RAM, and the Acci i by ali he is faid to far e = rh which 
is this: Patauvs King of Try roy, in the Beginning of an War, committed 
His "Son Pol pdorus to the Care of Pomelo King of o{ wy and ſent with 
him a t Sum of Money; But after Ty was taken, the Thractan, for the Sake 

of the Money, 3 vately buried him; EN EAS 
into that Country, me Oy 3 — was near him on 
the Sid of 6 eee the' mk urder'd Body of \Polyborus, neid: III. 

Dryden.” 24” 
Ft Net fi Hin Billock: ow! ts P, [ > 08 ind 241d 
n a Sharp e wn the Sides and Corneli SHEET MW 24g 
I went to crop the <p = * * 
nnr | And ads oa Mev wo the leaf) hr, | a | 
* potty Plant: With Horror 8 1484 04 er 
4 4 LOIN. aun full of "Fate! ag THO i SO NIN 
of ike tell the Sequel From "the Womb "oo OOO 
O CG Bank) — ths Tomb, | Ni 

Groan, as of à traubled Ghoſt; rentw'd !! . ws 

Fright ; and then theſe tne — Words agen : 

by dy the thus my ited Body vend? Por Re Tet. 
9 72 the Corps of thy unh Priend ! $845, 
| The [Agreement Vetwors IEG 6 —_— ee chat there yants no fr 
. | VIL We 

(28s ) | 
VIL Weare told that a Sprig of Caſſia was placed by the Brethren atthe Head of 

2 au's Graue; which refer to an old Cuſtom of thoſe Eaſtern Countries of 

balming the Dead, in which Operation Ca381a was always . uſed, eſpecially 

in i preparing the Head and up, the Brain ; as Herodotus more particular| 
The Sweet-Wood, 0.12, Hf Flowers, uſed about the Graves of he 

N occur ſo frequently in the old Poets, that it would he tedious to mention 

Metam: Tb. . nen. 
par” laue Tree [ es her 2 
ebe e | oat be es 2 er. Da PR 
15 ey Lag 2 5 Kae 5 
Balm, Cassia, Spikenard, Myrr and Cinamon : | 
2 782 Pile berfelf (oe lan, > rt 
Jong Oltoare exds fer. Yay: !; >; * ae: that 

44 AN ebeous 
Fr 

my | Brother Beofrot La 8 the Author | 
TY \' _ got: Fa ea hr: Cavike, 555 7 

 Rother Sr obs after Thanks far printing the clever Dr FEN CE, by the 
Advice of our Brethren, I ſend you. this Epiſtle, to. anſwer 22 ying 
E But firſt we would acknowledge, that 
Indeed,” the Free Maſons are much obli to the generous 1 
bilf'd Author” of the above D Tho“ had he been à Free- Maſon, he had in 
Time perceived many valuable hings ſuitable to his extended Views of Antiquity, 
which could not come to the Di//efo#"s Knowledge; for that They are not intruſted 
with any Brothers till after due Probation: And therefore ſome think the ingenious 
DzFEnnER has ſpent too much fine Learning and Reaſoning. upon the fooliſh 
DifeAion, that is juſt deſpiſed by the Fraternity, as much as the other — ng 
Diſcoveries of their ts in publick Nenum- Papers and Pa Wh * of a Sort; 
for all of em put together don't diſcover: the ound. and Things of o/d 
Maſonry "bp can any Man, not a Maſon, make uſe of thoſe incoherent 
Smatterin 2 (interſpers'd With ignorant Nonſenſe and groſs Falſities) among bright 
Brothers, for any Purpoſe but to be laught at; our Communications being of a 
quite different Sort. Next, it is well 
That the Antiquity and Decorum of our Worſhipful Fraternity have been envied 
ſome, who, very lately, have coaleſced into Societies, in Imitation of the Free- 
;/ors, and ſore in Oppoſition to them, tho' in vain; as the mee. 
vie aun diere, and Others Are going ge agg 
t 

* 
Go 

— 

( 227) 

Bat tho} we. eary not the Poon of cor. aol , nor meddle with their 
Tranſactions and Characters, we have not met with fuch fair Treatment from 
Others ; nay, even Thoſe that never had an Opportunity of obtaining any certain 
Knowledge of us, have run implicitly with the Cry, and without Fear or Wit, 
have vented their Spleen in accuſing and condemning us unheard, untry'd ; while 
we, inept any ſecure within, laugh only at their groſs Ignorance and impo- 
tent 025 .. . * | os * 
Have not People in former Ages, as well as now, alledged that the Free Ma 
in their Late TK the Devil in a Circle, and when they have done with my 
that they lay him again with a Noi/e or a Hub as they pleaſe ? | 
How have ſome diverted themſelves with the wild Story of an a Woman be- 
tween the Rounds of a Ladder ?' Only they ſhould allow the Free-Maſens to laugh 

- . 

too in their Turn. | 

Others will ſwear to the Cook's red-hot Tron. or Salamander, for making the br 
delible Character om the new made Maſon, in order ta pive him” the Facult of Taci- 
zurnity ! Sure ſuch; Blades will beware of coming through the Fingers of the Free- 

Mann. 22 DET 28 
p< have baſely calunmiated the Fraternity u the Anal: of Bb Fare Sex, 
in Terms not fit to be rehears'd, and unworthy of a Reply: But tho' in Lodge 
Hours Maſons don't allow of Womens Company (like many other Societies of 
Men) yet. they make as good Huſbands as any other Men, according to their 
laudable Charges, | | 743307” ing 
Others 068 2h at their admitting Men of all 1 Religions and Denomina- 
tions: But they don't conſider that Maſons are true Boachidac, and require no other 
Denomiaations, (all other Diſtinctions being of Yeſterday) if the new Brother is a 
good Man and True: For Thoſe of em that don't ſtudy Architecture, are often ca- 
pable of encouraging the Craf?, and help to ſupport the poor decay'd Brethren. 
Have not ſome rigid People been difpleas'd at the Admiſſion of worthle/5 
Men? But if the Free-Ma/ors are ſometimes deceiv'd about Mens ers, they 
are not the only Perſons ſo deceiv'd.: Vet when a Brother is obnoxious to Cenſure, 
if they don't expel him, they endeavour to reform him. However, the Grand 
Lie has taken due Cure of That. | M13 7 8 RN 
Others complain hat the Maſons continue too in the Lodge, ſhending their Money 
to the Hurt * therr Families, and come home — na — intoxicated with 
Liquor ! But they have no Occaſion: to drink much in Lodge Hauri, which are not 
long ; and when the Lodge is cloſed (always in good Time) any Brother may 
ome when he pleaſes : So that if any ftay longer and get intoxicated, it is at 
eir own C6ft, not as Ma ont, but as other imprudent Men may do; for which the 
| Fraternity is not accountable ; And the Expence of a Laage is not ſo great as That 
of many a private Club. | 
Some obſerving that Maſms are not more religious, nor more knowing, than other 
Men, are afloniſf'd at aubat they can be converſant about in e Hours ! But 
tho? a Lodge is not a School of Divinity, the Brethren are taught the great Leſſons 
of their o Religion, Morality, Humanity and Friendſhip, to abhor Perſecution, 
and to be peaceable Subjects under the Civil Government wherever they reſide : 
And as for otber Knowledge, they claim as large a Share of it, as other Men in 
their Situation. Gg 2 Indeed, 

3 _, (228) 
Indeed, che antient Lodges were ſo many Schools or Academics for teaching and 
- Improving the Arts of Deſigning, eſpecially Arebitecture; and the preſent Lodges 
are often employ'd that Way in. Lodge-Hours, or elſe in other agreeable Converia- 
tion, tho” without Politicks or Party Cauſes ; and none of them are ill employ'd, 
have no Tranſactions unworthy of an honeſt Man or à Gentleman, no perſonal 
Piques, no- rrels, no Curſing and Swearing, no cruel Mockings, no obſcene 
Talk, nor ill Manners : For the nable and eminent Brethren, are affable to the 
A and Theſe are duly reſpectful to their Betters in Harmary and Proportion; 
N oon the Level, yet always within Compaſs, and according to the Square and 
Nor can it be denied, that a Fraternity fo, ſtrongly cemented, is more eligible and | 
ſafe than moſt Others; eſpecially that there is no Fear of betraying Converſation - | 
and that ſince Maſonry has been ſo much countenanced by Great Men, there have | 
82 more ſine poten and more expert Fellow Crafts in Britain, than, perhaps, 
in all Europe beſides, Th tf ey vs 6; 1 $$64: 
FP 4 einn IT. + - 
This a by the ſtately and regular Buildings throughout theſe Nandi, from 
Af the firſt Pays of the Great Jnigo Jones, the Buck PALLADIO ; nor is 
the fine Taſte abated in. this preſent Reign of Ang GEORGE II. but is rather | 
improved; witneſs the curious Houſe for the Bank of England; the South-Sea- | [ 
Houſe, the Bum of the Ea/i-1:4ia Houſe, the Lord Talbots fine Houſe in 
Lincoln s- Imn-Fields, the many ſtately Fabricks in the Pariſhes of St. George Hanover 
and. St. Mary la Bonne, and many more in and about. London and Weſtminſter, and 
other Towns and Cities, beſides Country-Seats, raiſed in the good od Aucusran 
Stile; and ſome alſo deſign'd only, or n, as the Lord Mayor of London's . 
New Palace, the admirable New Bridge at Weſtminfler croſs the Thames, &c. all 
which diſcover the EMI Masons Grand Defign of rivalling fair Laß in ; 
— HrchiteZure, even thoſe eminent Revivers of the AuculTaxn Stile mentioned 4 
Part I. Chap. VIE | | <4 | | | 
May the Royal Axr go on and proſper, and ſpread itſelf from Pale to Polt, 
from Ea * As it certainly now does in all polite Nations, in ſpite of the 
Ignorant and Malicious. Iam- 3 | | 

From our l/ Lache, the Henn, Your true and faithful Brother- 
in New Kos x ke . ee 
fer, i r/aay, or 
gil Ts in the Fulgar © 
| of MasenAT 5738-. A 

1388 A, 
4 93 

(6229) 

While the BOOK 

The ans was Kindly encouraged 
| and Lodges, 

was in the Paz ss, 

by the few NOTTS Bretbre 
, VIZ; 8 

Aarguis of CAERNARVON the Right Worſhipful GRAND n 

Uke of Mon rA, 

Duke of Ricumonp, , 
— Ix cu, ,d, (Former 
Eri of Lou boux, Grand 

Earl of DazNnLEy, - 
—Gzoxcs Pavyns, Eft; 

| Walters 

—Joux Wax b, Eq; D. Grand Maſter. 
—LordGzor Gs CT -: ary 
—Capt Ann. Ronin, Wardens. 
Mr. Jobn Revis the Ern. 
[Edward Body, M. D. 4 
1 Richard Bawlinſon, L. L. U 

---Rev. Dr. Dz$s a GULISRS,. ames Buck Junior, Fx: 
—MAzTIN For x s 8, Eſq; Fotherdy Baer, | 
—W1rt, Cowen, Eſq; 7 Former amuei 3 on 
—Naruanrett BLAXER- Deputy —Jobn Jeſſe, — 
vv, Eſq; Grand / Chomas Jeffreys, | 
—T nomxsBarson,Coun-\ Maſters.|—Mr. Se Hide e Wen | 5 
ſellor at Law, ao; erchant, 8. 
Sir Ros kT LAWIEX, I- Mr. Henry Bunde, Apothecary. i 
Baronet, | —Mr. George onkman, Attorney. 
—WIIIIAu Gun, | Former [Mr. Nath, Adams, 8 ö 
M. D. \Grang Mr. James Coſin, Attorn J 
—MarxrTiy CL ant, A. M. * Wardens Mr. Samuel Lowman, crchant, 
and F. R. S. a preſent Seward. 
Mr. Tacos F — Mr: George Garret. 
nter. --- Mr. Leas Philip Boitard: \ 

—Hon. Charles Stanhope,” EG; 
—Hon. Edward Montagu, Eſq; 
—Capt. Robert Ma pnard. 
- Sir Hugh Mat Bꝛide, Baronet, of 
the antient Lodge of \Killwining. 
—Sir John de Lange, after of the 
\ Fountain- Lodge on 'Snow-hill. 
5 iy Pe 8 
— eg 
Benjamin Tayler, | 
dr. mas Deſaguliers, | 
Mr. Williant Gofton. 
Mr. Jobn Glaſs. 
— Mr. obn Banks. 

Capt. Thomas Burg 
* Samuel Greer. © 

I Mr. Jabn Baker, Carpenter. 

Mr. 

. Mr. Charles Hoar, 

— Mr, Wilkam Nane Aztornies. | 
— Mr, n i 
Jvraden 5. 

Mr. William Dodd, 

—Mr. Richard Skikeldborp, 

—Mr. . Aſplkey, Punch- maker. 
Mr. Triftram Chambers, Upholdet, © 
Mr. Daniel Delander, Watch maler. 
— Mr. Eraſmas Ning, Mathematician. . 
— Mr. Jobn Pine the Engraver. ff 
Seon the Inflrament-maker. 
— Mr. Fuliam Stepbenſon the Glover, 
Mr. Thomas Avis the Printer. | 
Meſſieurs Hard and Chandler, Book- 

ſellers, at London, York and Scarborough. | 

LODGES, 

1 

(23 
L O p 

* Sr awand's Lidge. © 
2 K1nc'sAzms in the Strand. 
-<—PFORREST'S e-bouſe. 
->-Ditto the ö oe 5 
—FounTAin on Snow- bill. 
Sw and RuuukRx in e 
—Qvzzx's-HzavD in Great Queen 
ſtreet. 
Mod NT in Grovenor-ſtreet. 
— Movs w 1d%-Bo. su near Alderſgate. 
---KinG's-Azms in New Bond-ſtreet. 
-Kinc's Arms in Vd ſtreet. 
—Kixnc'sAzms in Piccadilly. 
—FounTarn near the Roya Exchange. 
---GorDoN's Punch-bouſe in the Strand 
---La GuxRnx in St. Martin's: Lane. 
---JIoor and GryFFIN in Leadenball. 

feet 

— BEAR V's Cl \ bouſe in Bridges-ftreet. 
Ex y and GAATAA in-Pall-Mall. 
-—-Rovar STANDARD in Leiceſter 
Square, 
Brack Posrs in Maiden- Lane. 
-—VixsYarD in St. Fames's Park. 
--Sun in Holbourn. | 
—ANCHOR and Cx 0.x near the 

6 Seven-Dials. EY 
---Gvx in” ſtreet 
---Gunx at Billing gare. 

\ * 
[FF 4 
" 88. 

ö & 

| [BY in Nicbolas-Lave. 
 ]---Hartr-Moon in Che 

I Task Tons on Snoqw-bill. 

[ KAruARINE 

* 0 ) \ 

<3 8. 

Tos Heap in Greek-ftreet, A 4 

1 and Dracon near Golden- 
9 . 

* 
CT 

--Qvsz xv's Head in — 
---SHAKESPEARsHEtAD in Aude. 

roug b. ſtreet. 

|--Hox x in New Palace Tard. | 

---Crxown in Fleet- Market. 

—Crown' in Smithfield. 

— — 

—" 

Tax Tons in Smithfield. 

Tuns Tons in * 2 

--Brxavnd's-HEapD in New ond. ſtreet. 

Cu cap at Charing-Croſs. 

--AxTWERP near the Royal-Exchange. 

---STar and GanTER in St. Martin's-, 
Lane. 

—_— 

BAA in the Strand. 

--FounTAin in Katharine ſtreet. 
2 in Drury Lane. 5 3 
au EAOxN's Coffee-bouſe in Berry- 

Warns i in * G 
cet. 

2 in Tork - Buildings 8 
---Da x181.s Coffee-houſe, Temple-Bar. - 
nn Hp in the Old-Bailey. 

Inc's-Hsav in St. John's firect. 

--Grovs in Meet-firect. 
— Gros in Old Fewry 

---Baccnvs in Bliondhny- Market. 

w 

| 

--SUN in Fleet-ſtreet. 
---Sux in Sr. Paul 8 Charch-Yard. 

„ -RouuEx in Queen ftreet, Cheapite.” 

N. B. An INR RSs1ON in Polio of the Grand Maſter's Swor Þ of State 
(formerly the Sword of Gosravus Aporenvs King of Seeden, and next of 

Bexxard Duke of Sar- M eimar, with 

reſented to the Fraternity by our former Grand Ma 
| HOWARD Duke of Noa FO Lx, richly 

their Names on the Blade) which was 
er THOMAS 

adorn'd at the Hilt with Corinthian 

Columns of Maſly Silver, and on the Scabbard with the ms of NorxroL x in 
Silver, the Maſons Arms, and ſome Yieroglyphics, &c. (perform'd by Bro- 

ther George 
is to be ſold by Brother Joux PIN 

ny eek alſo may be had 

The Engraven Lift of the Lodges, 

the Seword-beaver) all explain'd, illuminated and embelliſh'd, 

Engraver, i in Old Bond:fireet near 
renew'd annually with their Removals. 

1 

Kt 
3 

CLI SIRI RIES RD 

CDS TECTED PPE a out 7 pes. 

| I | my Coprigenda, 

Page Line ge Line RARE - | 
'8 32. for Erand read Grand. 110 2. for Capt, g þ Elliot © 
16 22. for A. C. read B. C. \ 7..* Lamball, 
25 10. After the Word Cubits, make} | 
' a Comma. Capt. Fo/eph. Elliot. 
Ir , > In the in, Line 7. for eh read the it 
209 21. for Trees read Theos. | __ Tread 1724. 
36 - 29. for Wars ended read Wars began. In 
43 28. for .C@RACALLA read Cara- 5. Mr. William Hopkins, read 
ö . William Serjeant. 

CALLA. 
46 9. for Couſuls read Conſauls. for 7 Mr. Gerard tley, read 
itto 18. After Mavzicus read a 7. James Chambers, Eſq; 
- murder'd. 132; 3. for CAERMARTH N read 
48 22. for in St. Miniave read. of &. . .. CAE RNARFON. 
| miate, I ditto in the Margin, for: — 
58 26. Inſtead of did not at All Efquires.. | 
read did mt All depart. 134. In the Margin read, ws 
59 8, for rnind read ruin d. Wright, Eſq; 
61 30. forErusLozzr readKenno 137. In the n read, 
I r 1445. 1443 r. Peter Lei 
lt. 4 After Gap wan the Fick, ne . 4 5 of 
the Comma. | 9. Homo gen Bf | 
85. In the 24 Column of the Margi Harry Leigh Eilq; 
| at the End, after the Word[200:, The Reference arthe inſtead of | 

| Interview, inſtead of a 5. They, read 4. But. 
Pundtum make a Comma. | Accurate Reader, pra 
108 16. for h 10 read moſt richly. with your * or any y ke you "ou 4 

7 

Jiu Publiſed, { 
By Casan Warp and Ricuiny CHAN IEA, Bookſellers 
at the Ship juſt without Temple-Bar, London, and fold alſo at 
their Shops in Coney-Street York and at SCARBOROUGH SPaw, 

I. A General Dictionary Hiſtorical and Critical, including That of the cele- 
brated Moxs. BarLsz. The whole containing the Hiſtory of the moſt 
Illufrious Perſons of all Ages and Nations. In Ten Volumes Folio. Price 151. 

IT. A New Abridgtnent and Critical Review of all the State Trials and Pro- 
ceedings' for High-Treaſon, from the Reign of King Richard 11. to the Year 1737. 
By Mr. Salmen. In One Vol. Folio. Price 14. 105. 8 e 

III. The Vocar, MisczrrAu x, a Collection of abovs 1 celebrated Sangr, 
many of which were never before printed, with the Names of the Tunes prefixed 
to each Song. In Two Pocket Volumes. Price 6s. a 5 | 

N. B. Either Volume may be had ale. Price 3 

TV. The Beauties F the Engliſh Stage. Conſiſting of all the celebrated Paſſages, 
Solilequies, Similies, Deſcriptions, and other Poetical Beauties in the ExcI ISH Plays 
Ancient and Modern, continued down to the preſent Time. Digeſted under 
proper Heads in Alphabetical Order, with the Names of the Plays and their 
. ſeveral Authors referr'd to. In Two Pocket Volumes, Price g. 

Puriſſima mella Pipant.” Vrz. 

V. Les Amuſemens de Spa; or, the Gallantries of the Spa w in Gzxmany., Inter- 
mix'd with many entertaining Hiſtories of the principal Perſons, reſorting thither. 
Adorn'd with thirteen curious Copper Plates of the Fountains, Walks, Avenues, 
Sc. In Two Pocket Volumes. Price 65. with Cuts, or 5 5. without. 

VI. Macna Britannia AnTIQUa E Nova; or, a New Survey of Great 
Britain; wherein, to the Topographical Account given by Mr. Cambden, and the 
late Editors of his Britannia, is added a more large Hiſtory, not only of the Cities, 
Boroughs, Towns and Pariſhes mentioned by them, but alſo of many other Places 
of Note and Antiquity fince diſcovered ; with the Pedigrees of a// our Noble Fa- 
milies and Gentry, &c. In 6 Vols. Quarto, compleat. Price 3 l. f 

Of the faid WaRD and CHAN DIER Bookſellers, as above-mentioned, Gentlemen 
may be ſupphy't with great Variety 25 Books in all Sciences at the lee Prices. 
ho alſo give Ready for any Library or Parcel of Books. |
