Angela of Foligno (trans. Mary G. Steegmann), The Book of Divine Consolation of the Blessed Angela of Foligno (1909)
==========================================================================
Angela's Book — the visions and counsels of the great Franciscan mystic, dictated to her confessor — in Steegmann's translation. A cornerstone of medieval women's mysticism. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

Iffionooiatiou  of.


$  Mb*
m  ,«


THE    NEW    MEDIEVAL
LIBRARY


THE  NEW  MEDIEVAL  LIBRARY

THE  CHATELAINE  OF  VERGI.
Translated  from  the  Middle-
French  by  ALICE  KEMP-WELCH,
with  an  Introduction  by  Professor
L.  M.  BKANDIN.

[A  new  and  revised  edition.

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DUKE
OF  TRUE  LOVERS.  Now
first  translated  from  the  Middle-
French,  with  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  ALICE  KEMP-WELCH.

OF  THE  TUMBLER  OF  OUR
LADY,  and  other  Miracles.
Translated  from  the  Middle-
French,  with  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  ALICE  KEMP-WELCH.

THE  BABEES'  BOOK:  Medieval
Manners  for  the  Young.  Done
into  Modern  English  from  Dr.
FURNIVALL'S  texts,  with  Intro
duction  and  Notes,  by  EDITH

RlCKKRT.


THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  HOLY
FINA,  VIRGIN  OF  SANTO
GIMINIANO.  Now  first  trans-
lated  from  the  Fourteenth-Cen
tury  Manuscript  of  Fra  Giovanni
di  Coppo,  with  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  M.  MANSFIELD.

EARLY  ENGLISH  ROMANCES
OF  LOVE.  Done  into  Modern
English  from  the  original  texts,
with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by
EDITH  RICKERT.


EARLY  ENGLISH  ROMANCES
OF  FRIENDSHIP.  Companion
volume  to  above.


THE  BOOK  OF  DIVINE
CONSOLATION  OF  THE
BLESSED  ANGELA  OF

FOLIGNO  :  TRANSLATED
FROM  THE  ITALIAN  BY  MARY  G.
STEEGMANN  :  INTRODUCTION  BY
ALGAR  THOROLD


CHATTO  AND  WINDUS  :  LONDON

NEW    YORK  :    DUFFIELD    6"    CO.

1909


All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS

TREATISE    I


PAGE

OF  THE  CONVERSION  AND  PENITENCE  OF  THE  BLESSED
ANGELA  OF  FOLIGNO  AND  OF  HER  MANY  AND
DIVERS  TEMPTATIONS  I


TREATISE    II

OF   THE    EVANGELICAL    DOCTRINE    SET    FORTH    BY

THE    BLESSED    ANGELA
CHAP.

I.  How  it  may  be  known  that  God  hath  entered

into  the  soul      .         .....       24

II.  How  the  spiritual  man  is  deceived  .         .       31

III.  How,    being    lodged   within    the    soul,    God

worketh  alike  upon  the  understanding,  the
affections,  and  the  will      ....       36

IV.  How  that  our  perfection  doth  consist  in  know

ing  our  own  wretchedness  and  God's  mercy       40

V.  The  necessity  of  a  constant  consideration  and

profound  knowledge  of  Christ  Crucified   .       42


viii  CONTENTS

CHAP.  PAGE

VI.  How  all  the  ways  of  the  Passion  must  be
digested  within  the  heart,  or  at  least  be
repeated  by  the  mouth  ....  45

VII.  How  the  soul  may  speedily  and  easily  find
God  by  means  of  devout,  pure,  constant,
humble,  and  fervent  prayer  ...  49

VIII.  Of  the  Book  of  Life,  which  is  Christ,
wherein  man  learneth  to  know  God  and
man,  himself,  and  all  things  needful  for
man's  welfare  ......  53

IX.  Of  the  great  poverty  of  Christ      ...       54
X.  How  Christ  revealed  Himself  poor  in  power      56

XI.  How  Christ  laid  aside  His  wisdom  and  His

own  nature        ......       59

XII.  How  poverty  of  spirit  is  despised  by  many    .       63

XIII.  Of  the  humility  and  contempt  of  our  Saviour

Jesus  Christ 66

XIV.  Of  the  constant  and  many  sufferings  which

Christ  did  bear  in  divers  ways  .         .         -71

XV.  Of  the  many  and  divers  cruelties  used  towards

Christ 78

XVI.  How  that  we  should  follow  the  infallible
Guide  and  Redeemer  upon  the  straight
road  which  He  hath  shown  unto  us  .  .84


CONTENTS  ix

CHAP.  PAGE

XVII.  Of  how  pleasing  unto  God  is  the  service
of  the  poor,  who  serve  for  love's  sake
without  looking  for  a  reward  .  .  89

XVIII.  An  exhortation  to  take  comfort  and  to
follow  the  example  of  perfection  set
forth  by  Christ  the  Crucified  .  .  93

XIX.  Wherein  the  soul  may  see  how  that  the
Divine  Wisdom  hath  used  infinite  care
and  diligence  in  saving  us  through  mercy,
yet  not  offending  against  justice  .  .  96

XX.  Of  prayer,  of  the  which  there  are  three
kinds,  corporal,  mental,  and  super
natural,  outside  of  which  it  is  not
possible  to  find  God  ....  98

XXI.  How  the  heart  must  be  given  wholly  unto

prayer  and  not  unto  other  exercises         .     101

XXII.  How  that  we  should  submit  our  wills
unto  the  Will  of  God,  and  how  that
prayer  is  necessary  for  the  obtaining  of
all  mercies 103

XXIII.  The  greater  the  temptation,  the  greater  must

be  likewise  the  perseverance  in  prayer     .     105

XXIV.  Of  the    humility    and   example   of  Christ

the  Crucified  .  108


CONTENTS


XXV.  Of  how  greatly  true  humility  quickeneth
the  understanding  of  the  soul  in
knowing  its  own  vileness  and  the
Divine  Goodness  .  .  .  in

XXVI.  How  humility  doth  cause  us  to  see  the
multitude  of  our  sins  and  that  an
humble  life  doth  work  contrary  to
them 115

XXVII.  Of  charity,  and  how  that  we  should  fear
our  love  is  not  of  the  true  kind  and  doth
not  fulfil  the  conditions  needful  .  117

XXVIII.  The  soul  is  united  with  God  in  three
several  ways,  whereby  it  is  furnished
with  a  weapon  to  control  the  love  of
God  and  of  its  neighbour  .  ,  .123


XXIX.  Of  the  various  properties  of  love


125


XXX.  The  more  perfect  man  is,  the  more
earnestly  doth  he  endeavour  to  do
that  which  is  desired,  ordered,  and
counselled  of  God  .  .  .  .128

XXXI.  How  that  love  created  and  excited  by
the  vision  of  the  Supreme  Being  doth
make  us  to  love  God  and  His  creatures
according  unto  their  conditions  .  .130


CONTENTS  ati

CHAP.  PAGE

XXXII.  The  love  of  God  is  never  idle,  and  per-
suadeth  us  to  do  penance  as  long  as
life  and  as  harsh ;  it  telleth  us  to  do
it  as  often  as  is  convenient,  and  doth
perform  many  other  profitable  things  132

XXXIII.  The  way  to  find  the  love  of  God  is  by

constant,  untiring,  devout  and  ardent
prayer,  and  the  reading  of  the  Book
of  Life 133

XXXIV.  Of  the  properties  of  lovers  and  of  the

signs  of  love 136

XXXV.  How  that  each  person  should  desire  to
perform  his  penance  as  secretly  as
possible  and  in  a  seemly  manner  .  139

XXXVI.  Of    three    benefits    derived   from    the

most  holy  tribulation         .         .         .     141

XXXVII.  How  the  tribulations  which  lie  in
poverty,  contempt,  and  suffering  are
in  many  ways  most  profitable  .  .142

XXXVIII.  Of  the  most  sweet  gifts  of  God,
poverty,  contempt,  and  suffering ;
and  of  other  perfections  .  .  .143

XXXIX.  Of  the  many  signs  and  effects  of  love
which  are  caused  by  the  Sacrament
of  the  Eucharist  .  .  .  .146


xii  CONTENTS

TREATISE   III

OF    THE    MANY    VISIONS    AND     CONSOLATIONS    RECEIVED
BY    THE    BLESSED   ANGELA    OF    FOLIGNO

PAGE

First  Vision  and  Consolation,  wherein  she  beheld
God  inasmuch  as  He  is  all  goodness ;  whence
cometh  hatred  of  this  life  and  the  desire  to
enjoy  God .  157

Second  Vision,  wherein  she  beheld  God  inasmuch
as  He  is  beauty,  wherefore  all  created  beauty
seemed  deformed  and  hideous  unto  her  .  .169

Third  Vision,  wherein  she  beheld  God  inasmuch
as  He  is  invincible  omnipotence  in  all  things,
which  gave  unto  her  the  grace  to  be  of  benefit
both  to  the  present  and  to  the  future  genera
tions.  Moreover,  she  beheld  likewise  the  deep
humility  of  God 171

Fourth  Vision  and  Consolation,  wherein  she  beheld
God  inasmuch  as  He  is  supreme  wisdom,
whereby  she  did  learn  to  judge  of  all  things
without  error  .  .  .  .  .  .  .173

Fifth  Vision,  wherein  she  beheld  God  inasmuch
as  He  is  supreme  justice,  and  something  yet
higher  still ;  whereby  she  obtained  the  appro
bation  of  the  heavenly  judges  .  .  .  174


CONTENTS  xiii

PAGE

Sixth  Vision  and  Consolation,  wherein  she  beheld
God  inasmuch  as  He  is  Love,  whereby  she
was  transformed  in  the  divine  love  .  .  178

J  Seventh  Vision,  wherein  she  beheld  God  in  three
persons,  but  she  beheld  Him  darkly  ;  and  this
vision  did  inspire  her  with  perfect  and  holy
hope  and  full  assurance  .  .  .  .  181

Eighth  Vision  and  Consolation,  wherein  she  beheld
God  as  clearly  as  is  possible  in  this  life,  in  the
which  vision  she  acquired  strength  in  good
intentions  and  in  the  perfect  delight  in  God  .  1 86

Ninth  Vision,  wherein  it  was  certified  unto  her
that  in  her  visions  and  heavenly  conversations
she  had  not  been  deceived  .  .  .  .  194

Tenth  Vision  and  Consolation,  wherein  it  was
further  certified  unto  her  that  she  had  not
been  deceived  in  her  conversations  .  .196

HERE  BEGIN  THE  CONSOLATIONS  WHICH  SHE  DID  HAVE
WHEN  THINKING  UPON  THE  PASSION  OF  CHRIST

First  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  Christ  .  .  201
Second  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  Christ.  .  .  203
Third  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  Christ  ,  ,  205


xiv  CONTENTS

PAGE

Fourth  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  Christ  .         .     206
Fifth  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  our  Lord          .     209

Sixth  Consolation  of  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  Jesus

Christ 212

Seventh  Consolation   of  the  Passion  of  our  Lord

Jesus  Christ 220

HERE  BEGIN  THE  CONSOLATIONS  AND  VISIONS  WHICH

SHE    DID    HAVE    OF    THE    SACRAMENT    OF

THE  ALTAR

First  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar    .  .  222

Second  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  .  223

Third  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  .  .  224

Fourth  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  .  226

Fifth  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar    .  .  228

Sixth  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar     .  .  229

Seventh  Vision  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  .  230

HERE   BEGIN   THE  VISIONS  WHEREIN   SHE  WAS   COM
FORTED  BY  THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN

First  Vision  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  .         .         .         .231
Second  Vision  of  the  Blessed  Virgin       .         ,         .232


CONTENTS  xv

HERE    BEGIN    THE   VISIONS    WITH    WHICH    SHE    WAS

COMFORTED  CONCERNING    HER  CHILDREN  WHO

SHOULD  FOLLOW  AFTER  CHRIST

PAGE

First  Vision  concerning  her  children      .         .  .     234

Second  Vision  concerning  her  children   .         .  .     236

Third  Consolation  concerning  her  children     .  .238

Fourth  Consolation  concerning  her  children  .  .     238

Instruction   and   Consolation   received   from   God

concerning  her  tribulations      ....     240

A  further  Consolation  given  unto  her  of  God          .     24 $

An  Illumination  of  the  understanding  given  unto
her  of  God  concerning  the  way  and  the  state
of  salvation  .......  240

The  last  writing  of  the  Blessed  Angela  of  Foligno     252

The  testament  and  last  admonition  of  the  Blessed
Angela  of  Foligno  which  she  gave  unto  her
children,  she  being  nigh  unto  death  .  .258

The  passing  away  of  the  Blessed  Angela         .         .     262


ILLUSTRATIONS


B.    ANGELA   DA   FOLIGNO     ....  FfCHttSpUff

After  the  fresco   by   Picrantonio   Mezzastrii ;    Church   of
Sta.  Anna,  Foligno.

PAGE
FACSIMILE    OF  THE    TITLE  PAGE  OF  THE    1536  EDITION    XXxi

FACSIMILE   OF   A   PAGE   FROM   THE   TEXT   OF   THE    1536

EDITION  (verso  of  fol.  clxi.)      .         .         .  xxxiii

FACSIMILE    OF   A    DESIGN    REPRESENTING    THE    ADORA
TION    OF    THE     MAGI,    FROM     THE    1536    EDITION

(recto  facing  conclusion  of  text)          .         .         .  xxxv

FACSIMILE    OF    A    DESIGN    REPRESENTING    THE    CRUCI
FIXION,  FROM  THE   1536  EDITION  (recto  following

previous  design]         .....         xxxvii


xvii


INTRODUCTION


WHAT  is  the  secret  and  so  potent  attraction  of  the
Saints  ?  Renan  says  somewhere  that  he  would
have  given  everything  he  had  to  have  seen  St.  Mary  of
Egypt  pacing  the  desert  in  ecstasy,  half-starved  and  turned
to  the  semblance  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  And  Renan  liberally
discounted  the  value,  not  only  of  Theology,  but  also  of  the
particular  virtue,  the  loss  of  which  had  driven  that  Saint
to  such  an  unusual  mode  of  life.  The  interest  in  sanctity
evidently  survives  theological  and  ethical  pre-occupations.
Indeed,  to-day,  the  Saint  is  perhaps  an  object  of  higher
intrinsic  interest  to  "  unbelievers  "  than  to  the  faithful.
For  to  the  faithful  he  is  primarily  useful,  either  as  being
efficacious  in  various  troubles  of  life  or,  on  a  higher  plane,
as  a  sort  of  spiritual  agent,  obtaining  graces  for  his  clients.
0  admirabile  commercium  !  But,  like  everything  else,  this
celestial  intercourse  suffers  from  the  defects  of  its  qualities.
I  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  as  making  light  of  super
stition.  The  humblest  blossom  of  that  luxuriant  garden
is  of  infinite  value,  nor  do  the  roots  of  our  most  highly
rationalised  opinions  grow  outside  it.  Nevertheless  the
important  position  of  the  Saint  in  the  Catholic  economy


xx  INTRODUCTION

does  tend  to  conceal  his  real  personality  from  his  wor
shippers.  '  He  inevitably  tends  to  be  considered  more  as  a
means  to  an  end,  than  as  an  object  intrinsically  worthy  of
contemplation.  In  these  circumstances  the  actual  his
torical  value  of  his  personality  is  apt  to  be  obscured  by
legend  and  fancy.  Legend,  of  course,  if  at  all  contempo
raneous,  is  of  the  highest  value  as  illustrating  his  effect  on
those  with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  We  could  ill  spare
in  the  life  of  St.  Francis  the  Wolf  of  Gubbio.  Modern
devotional  fancy  is  less  illuminative.  It  throws  no  light
upon  the  character  of  St.  Anthony  of  Padua  to  learn  that
centuries  after  his  death  he  recovered  some  papers  lost  by
that  devout  man  King  Charles  II.  What  then  is  it  that
constitutes  the  intrinsic  interest  of  the  Saint  when  his
supernatural  value  has  gone  ?

One  reason,  I  think,  for  this  interest  is  that  the  Saint
represents,  in  a  quite  unique  manner,  the  satisfaction  of  a
desire  which  all  men  more  or  less  obscurely  feel.  Ever
since  man  emerged  from  amid  the  labyrinth  of  irrational
forces,  which,  until  his  appearance,  determined  the  evolu
tion  of  life  on  the  planet,  he  has  sought  for  power.  Power
at  first  over  the  hostile  or  indifferent  nature  which  sur
rounded  him,  over  the  stream,  the  spark  of  fire,  the  wild
bear  :  then  over  his  fellow-men,  and,  at  length,  when  he
began  to  turn  his  gaze  inwards,  over  himself.  It  is  notice
able  that  all  the  really  primitive  myths  divinised  various
aspects  of  power,  celebrated  the  triumph  of  force.  As  the
social  arts  began  to  develop,  and,  among  them,  of  sheer


INTRODUCTION  xxi

necessity,  morality,  men  began  to  attribute  moral  qualities
to  the  force  which  they  felt  around  them,  above  them,  and
within  them.  "  N'ayant  pas  pu  faire  que  le  juste  soit  fort,
nous  avons  fait  que  le  fort  soit  juste,"  says  Pascal.  This
attribution,  however,  no  less  than  morality  itself,  was  an
afterthought  unconsciously  conceived  in  the  interest  of  his
self-preservation — for,  without  morality  of  some  sort,  man
would  soon  have  disappeared  before  the  wolf  and  the  bear.
And,  by  giving  the  ultimate  sanction  of  force  to  his  social
rule  of  thumb,  he  naively  betrayed  his  intuition  that  that
ultimate  force  was  the  more  fundamental  reality.  Now
the  Saint  represents  the  achievement  of  this  longing  for
power,  carried  to  the  highest  and  most  difficult  point,  that
of  complete  self-mastery.  For  while,  to  the  primitive
savage,  the  conquest  of  external  foes  of  one  sort  and
another  is  evidently  the  most  pressing  need  of  his  position,
a  need  recurring  so  constantly  as  to  exhaust  his  store  of
energy,  and  veil  from  his  attention  other  possible  achieve
ments,  as  life  gets  more  secure  and  his  attention  is
directed  inwards,  man  becomes  aware  of  those  other
dangerous  foes  of  his  own  household,  the  appetites  and
caprices  of  his  inherited  brute  nature.  Turning  to  battle
with  these,  he  dimly  but  surely  perceives  one  aspect  of  the
ideal  of  sainthood.  For  the  Saints  of  all  religions,  from
the  most  elementary  to  the  most  highly  developed,  are
ascetics.  They  live  sparely  and  chastely,  and  the  morti
fication  of  the  twin  appetites  of  hunger  and  love  represent
to  the  ordinary  man  the  acme  of  self-control.


xxii  INTRODUCTION

The  Saint  is  also  more  than  the  ascetic.  Asceticism  is  a
refusal,  a  limitation,  a  constraint — in  a  word,  a  negation  ;
and  the  Saint  is  eminently  positive.  Moreover,  although
negative  qualities  might  impose  on  the  imagination  and
create  interest,  they  would  not  inspire  the  personal  devo
tion  that  is  invariably  felt  for  him.  The  positive  quality
of  the  Saint  is  love,  expressing  itself  in  joy.  Thus  he
is  a  fascinating  combination  of  the  familiar  and  the  un
familiar,  for,  if  few  of  us  are  ascetics,  we  have  most  of  us
some  experience  of  love.  But  the  Saint  drinks  from  the
Castalian  spring  of  his  interior  life  while  we  hand  about
the  Divinity  to  each  other  in  treacherous  and  remarkably
"  earthen  vessels."  His  love  is  not  as  ours  at  the  mercy  of
circumstances,  it  is  not  susceptible  of  betrayal  or  death,  for
he  has  found  his  treasure  beyond  time  and  space,  where
neither  satiety  nor  caprice  can  corrupt,  nor  can  rivals
break  through  and  steal.

There  have  been  all  kinds  of  Saints,  from  St.  Paul,  the
first  hermit,  to  Father  Damian,  but  the  "  active  "  Saints
seem  less  interesting  than  the  "  contemplative."  Cer
tainly  the  Fathers  of  the  Desert  are  very  seductive.  They
lived  in  caves  or  on  the  tops  of  pillars,  supporting  their
existences  on  roots  and  brackish  water,  while  they  exhaled
their  souls  in  a  hymn  of  timeless  ecstasy  like  Shelley's  sky
lark.  Solitude  was  to  them  as  water  to  the  fish,  and  they
preferred  the  society  of  beasts  to  that  of  men.  St.  Paul
had  his  attendant  lions,  and  St.  Anthony  Abbot  spent
twenty  years  in  a  tomb  with  serpents  who  turned  into  evil


INTRODUCTION  xxiii

spirits  by  night,  and,  in  these  unusual  circumstances,  be
came  one  of  the  most  important  personalities  of  his  gene
ration.  The  external  conditions  of  their  existence  were
often  grotesque,  almost  always  terrible.  Their  inner  spirit
was  the  most  precious  thing  humanity  possesses.  For
when  everything  else  has  failed  a  man,  he  arrives,  if  his
courage  holds  out,  at  the  joys  of  the  spirit.  The  forces
manifested  in  his  experience,  which  succeeded  in  the  long
run  in  eluding  his  dominating  grasp,  answer  submissively  to
the  call  of  his  mind  in  contemplation.  Like  fabled  Adam
naming  the  docile  beasts,  he  sits  in  their  midst,  assigning  to
each  its  post  and  due  perspective  in  the  panorama  of  life.
For  he  has  arrived,  if  without  the  help  of  metaphysical
analysis,  by  experience,  at  the  conviction  that  nothing  is
real  but  thought  which  is  the  first — and  perhaps  the  last —
word  of  philosophy.  Mystics  and  contemplatives  of  East
and  West  of  all  creeds  and  rites  have  borne  substantial
witness  to  this  truth.  This  is  no  doubt  the  reason  why
alike  to  the  popular  imagination  as  in  the  treatises  of
theologians  the  contemplative  life  is  extolled  at  the  ex
pense  of  active  virtue.  For,  to  all  of  us,  there  come
moments  when  we  are  aware  of  a  psychological  need,  more
profound,  more  urgent,  than  the  desire  for  action.  Before
certain  works  of  art,  or  occasional  aspects  of  nature,  or  it
may  be  at  the  exquisite  climax  of  some  mood  of  intimate
personal  emotion,  a  delicious  paralysis  steals  over  the  will :
we  feel  that  we  have  done  enough.  In  the  calm  that
follows  the  whirlwind  and  earthquake  of  volition  now,  it


xxiv  INTRODUCTION

seems,  definitely  stilled,  we  are  conscious  only  of  the
beauty  of  the  situation  on  which  we  gaze,  we  have  no
desire  to  modify  it,  we  only  wish  to  gaze  on  for  ever.  The
aesthetic  sense  has  entirely  replaced  ethical  striving.

Blessed  Angela  of  Foligno  was  a  true  daughter  of  this
ancient  line.  Born  in  1248,  she  entered  the  family  of  St.
Francis  as  a  Tertiary  Hermit,  and  became,  through  the
spiritual  autobiography,  which  she  dedicated  to  her  con
fessor  Fra  Arnaldo,  one  of  its  most  striking  illustrations.
St.  Francis  and  his  "  Knights  of  the  Round  Table  "  *
seem  from  the  first  to  have  struck  a  new  note  in  medieval
religion.  The  Monastic  Order,  whether  Benedictine
or  Cistercian,  wrapped  in  the  aloofness  of  its  splendid
cloisters,  frequently  governed  by  abbots  who  were  great
feudal  lords,  represented,  it  might  be  said,  the  aristocratic
principle  in  spirituality.  The  aims  of  the  monks  were
lofty,  unintelligible  no  doubt  to  the  villeins  of  the  soil,
who  were  their  dependents  ;  they  fed  and  educated  their
humble  neighbours,  but  their  own  life  remained  exclusive,
a  thing  apart.  St.  Francis  brought  the  spiritual  life  down
to  the  people,  the  po-polo  minuto,  and  he  did  so — here  was
his  splendid  originality — without  lowering  the  values  of
what  he  brought  within  their  reach.  The  religious  de
mocracy  that  he  created  remained  an  aristocracy  of  the
soul.  His  logic  was  amazing  because  so  simple.  In  most
men,  thought  and  action  move  on  different  planes  ;  with

1  "Isti  sunt  fratres  mei  milites  Tabulae  rotondse."  Spec.
Perfec.,  p,  72.


INTRODUCTION  xxv

them  action  implies  at  least  some  degree  of  compromise  ;
but  when  St.  Francis,  stripping  himself  of  his  father's
cloak,  and  flying  naked  to  the  Bishop's  arms,  proclaimed
the  divine  royalty  of  poverty,  that  most  unusual  pheno
menon  was  seen — a  man's  thought  and  action  in  perfect
harmony.  Something  of  that  divine  simplicity,  of  that
exquisite  unison  of  thought  and  will,  is  what  constitutes
the  Franciscan  spirit,  distinguishing  all  his  authentic
children  and,  not  least  of  them,  the  simple  woman  who
unfolds  her  wonderful  experiences  in  this  small  volume.

We  know  little  of  her  life.  Born  within  thirty  years  of
St.  Francis'  death,  she  entered  on  the  life  of  penance  after
a  youth  passed  in  moral  disorder.  She  lived  in  solitude
with  a  religious  companion  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
Church  of  the  Friars  Minor  at  Foligno,  until  the  year  of
her  death  in  1 309.  Her  "  Visions,"  which  are  of  the  most
touching  and  beautiful  description,  appear  to  have  been  all
of  the  kind  described  by  mystical  theologians  as  "  intel
lectual,"  that  is  to  say  they  were  unaccompanied  by  any
sensible  manifestations.  Some  of  them,  indeed,  as  she
notes  herself,  occurred  during  sleep.  They  are  an  extra
ordinary  blend  of  naive  candour  and  passion.  They  indi
cate,  with  an  accuracy  which  I  feel  tempted  to  ascribe  at
times  to  the  editing  of  the  possibly  more  analytical  Fra
Arnaldo,  the  moments  of  what  may  be  called  the  dia
lectical  process  of  sanctification.  The  point  of  departure
of  her  conversion  was  a  purely  self-regarding  dread  of  the
penalties  of  sin  :  the  contemplative  mood  of  the  love  of


xxvi  INTRODUCTION

God,  to  which  she  ultimately  attained,  absorbed  all  the
intervening  emotional  categories.  This  little  book  may  in
fact  be  called,  in  the  Hegelian  sense  of  the  term,  the  Logic
of  sanctity.  It  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  important
documents  we  have  of  medieval  psychology,  and  illus
trates  in  a  very  remarkable  manner  the  completeness  of  that
system  of  Mysticism  which  was  at  once  the  root  and  the
blossom  of  the  medieval  intellect.  Only  in  Angela  the  in
tellect  is  hidden  under  a  succession  of  emotional  moments,
which  develop  by  their  own  spontaneous  dialectic  out  of
the  whole  mood  of  which  each  of  them  is  the  passing  but
necessary  expression.  That  Mysticism  is  the  finest  and,
on  the  whole,  perhaps  the  sanest  there  has  ever  been.  It
is  far  from  being  exclusively  Christian.  Deriving  from  the
lecture  halls  of  Alexandria,  as  well  as  from  the  hills  of
Galilee,  it  has  come  down  to  us  through  a  series  of  great
experimentalists,  who  have  furnished  to  those  of  like  mind
with  themselves  its  justification  in  their  own  experience.
It  is  the  classic  Catholic  Mysticism,  as  the  Roman
Church  has  always  understood  and  still  understands
the  term.

Few  systems  of  thought  have  swayed  the  imagination
more  profoundly.  Remaining  a  true  Mysticism  by  nature
of  its  goal,  the  "  Beatific  Vision,"  it  has  succeeded  in  in
corporating  in  itself  the  ethical  aspirations  of  Western
energy.  It  thus  mediates  between  the  passive  ecstasy  of
Hindu  Pantheism  and  the  restless  volitional  activity  of  the
white  race.


INTRODUCTION  xxvif

The  dogma  of  the  Incarnation  has  here  been  of  the
greatest  service.  The  Unknown  and  Unknowable  All  is
contemplated  by  the  Catholic  Saint  in  the  person  of
Christ.  The  dogma  gives  him  a  lens  with  which  he  can
focus  the  rays  of  Divinity  and  unite  them  in  a  shaft  of
light  on  which  he  can  gaze  without  faltering.  In  this  way
he  is  provided  with  an  inexhaustible  object,  adequate  to  his
mind  and  will.  On  the  one  hand  he  can  never  know  the
tragedy  of  satiety,  for,  although  he  may  faint  with  fatigue,
his  object  is  inexhaustible,  and,  on  the  other,  his  will  is  not
ruled  out  as  an  illusion,  but  fortified  by  the  prospect  of
an  infinite  perspective  of  effort  and  achievement.  For
Catholic  Mysticism  may  perhaps  be  best  summed  up,  in
the  phrase  by  which  a  great  philosopher  of  our  day  has
described  life  itself,  as  a  creative  evolution.  The  acts  of
Virtue,  of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Chanty  of  a  Saint,  are  not
waste  of  time  or  of  merely  negative  use  ;  they  do  not
merely  serve  the  purpose  of  withdrawing  him  from
temptation,  they  actually  constitute  the  spiritual  life
within  him,  like  the  words  of  consecration  in  the  Mass,
they  create  in  his  heart  the  Divinity  which  they  assert.
The  mystic  gradually  passes  beyond  this  mood  into  that
profound  and  eternal  rest  of  the  soul,  which  theologians
call  the  Beatific  Vision,  and  which  is,  according  to  the
teaching  of  Aquinas,  enjoyed  by  some  still  in  life  with
an  even  greater  intensity  than  by  others  who  literally
"  sleep  in  the  Lord."

The  Roman  Church  has  ever  regarded  Catholic  Mysti-


xxviii  INTRODUCTION

cism  as  the  kernel  of  the  Depositum  Fidei  of  which  she
is  the  guardian.  It  was  for  it  she  fought  through  the  long
and  wearisome  controversies  which  brought  to  the  birth
at  Nicea  the  orthodox  dogma  of  the  Incarnation.  For,  as
•has  been  said,  without  that  dogma,  Catholic  Mysticism
would  have  missed  its  specific  and  characteristic  note
and  would  have  become  a  mere  variant  of  Neo-platonist
theurgy.  The  inherent  tendency  that  all  Mysticism  has
to  Pantheism,  indeed  to  Nihilism,  would  have  inevitably
asserted  itself.  Nothing  short  of  faith  in  the  descent  of
the  Infinite  into  the  finite  could  have  saved  the  wavering
lines  of  human  personality,  turned  inwards  to  gaze  upon
itself.  All,  including  that  personality,  would  have  become
an  unstable  illusion,  the  web  of  Maia  woven  by  the  falla
cious  dreams  of  human  desire.  And  European  religion,  at
least  at  the  point  of  its  highest  individual  development,
would  have  been  indistinguishable  from  Buddhism.  When
Schopenhauer  drew  his  parallel  between  Catholic  and
Buddhist  Mysticism,  he  failed  to  see  the  enormous  differ
ence  made  by  belief  in  the  dogma  of  the  Man-god.  It
is  perhaps  not  without  significance  that  he  dwells  so  much
on  the  value  in  that  connection  of  Madame  Guyon,  whose
Quietist  tendencies,  resting  ultimately  on  a  Docetic  view
of  the  Incarnation,  were  the  cause  of  her  difficulties  with
Bossuet.

At  first  sight  perhaps  the  visions  of  the  Blessed  Angela
may  seem  to  have  only  an  archaic  value  for  us.  The  world
in  which  she  lived  seems  so  remote  from  ours,  the  circum-


INTRODUCTION  xxix

stances  of  her  life  so  different  from  anything  that  could
possibly  occur  to  us,  that  her  experience  seems  hopelessly
irrelevant  to  our  own  needs.  But  this  is  a  superficial  view.
The  human  heart  is  always  the  same  :  there  exists  a  law  of
what  may  be  called  sentimental  constancy.  And  nothing
that  has  ever  been  believed  by  anybody  is  without  value.
It  is  enough  if  the  faith  and  the  experience  were  really
genuine.  Angela  is  an  authentic  specimen  of  a  clearly-
defined  class  of  human  beings.  Mystics  are  very  rare,  but
they  exist.  Moreover  they  are  only  rare  in  the  West.
Oriental  bazaars  are  crowded  with  them  ;  they  prophesy
at  the  corners  of  streets  surrounded  by  yellow  dogs,
picturesquely  clad  disciples,  and  occasional  European
tourists.  Quite  a  considerable  number  of  human  beings
pass  their  lives  in  a  state  of  more  or  less  constant  inspira
tion.  We  are  apt  to  forget  this  and  limit  the  possibilities
of  all  experience  to  our  own.  It  is  therefore  enlarging  to
our  minds  to  step  sometimes  into  other  people's  worlds.
In  the  world  of  Blessed  Angela  we  shall  find  much  to
interest  and  astonish  us,  and  perhaps  to  excite  our  admira
tion.  We  shall  at  all  events  enjoy  the  commerce  of  a  pure
and  candid  soul.

The  translation  here  offered  to  the  reader  is  that
of  the  first  Italian  version  which  was  made  in  1510
from  the  Latin  of  Fra  Arnaldo.  This  version  is  one  of
the  rarest  books  in  the  world,  and  has  a  special  value
as  being  one  of  the  earliest  popular  devotional  works
printed  in  the  vernacular  in  Italy.  It  takes  its  place


xxx  INTRODUCTION

with  the  "  Dialogo  "  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena  and  the
"  Fioretti "  of  St.  Francis,  among  the  attempts  to  popu
larise  Mysticism,  which  represented  a  too  little  known
side  of  that  complex  movement  which  we  call  the
Renaissance.


%ibzo  vtile  *  oeuo


tonelqualeficontiene  la  conueifione/pe

iNtenria/  tentatione/  dotrritu/  Viffoni/  8C

4iuinc  cofolationi  delk  bcata  Ange

la  de  Folfgni;ticuajncnte  tra/

duttode  latino  id  Jin/

gua  volgare


Title  page  of  original  Italian  edition,  published  (?  1536)
xxxi


IHulrif  native  &tfa  alta*B*  Angela*
vfue  in  lui/a£chf  non:&  mi  difsc  in  veri/'
fa  the  non  c  altra  via  dritta)Cha  quella  chi
fegmf*  U  mid  vcftigij  per  chc  i  quefta  via
non  cafca  ir^ganno,8C  quefta  parola  in  ve/
rita  K  grade chiareza/  piu  voIteSC in  mol
riparian  mi  fu  detfcu  Amen-

fFinifcoiiofe  vifioni  8£  confblarioni
della  beata  Angela  de  Foligni*


in  corpore
gefferimuf
fme  bonu
Cue  ma  /


fia

bimus  an/
re  tribunal
Chrifti,re/


Facsimile  of  page  of  original


xxxiii


[  Verso  offol.  clxi.
C


Pattu$}integrita$  difcordes  temporelogo
Vfrginis  I  gremio


[At  end  of  book  on  first  right  hand
page  after  conclusion  of  text.


Inhocffgnovinces*


VEXILLVMOMNIVM
CHRIST  IANOB.VM.


[At  end  of  book,  following  the  one
headed  "  Que  genuit,  adorauit.  '


xxxvii


A     BOOK     PROFITABLE     AND     DEVOUT

WHICH  CONTAINETH  THE  CONVERSION,

PENITENCE,     TEMPTATION,     DOCTRINE,

VISIONS,    AND    DIVINE    CONSOLATIONS

OF  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA  OF  FOLIGNO,

NEWLY     TRANSLATED     OUT     OF     THE

LATIN  INTO  THE  VULGAR  TONGUE

1536


PREFACE   BY   THE   OLD   ITALIAN
TRANSLATOR

Unto  all  Readers  Beloved  in  Jesus  Christ

ALTHOUGH  in  the  Holy  Gospel  our  most  loving
Lord  hath  plentifully  shown  unto  us  the  means
and  the  way  whereby  we  may  attain  unto  the  perfection
of  Christian  life,  yet  hath  His  consoling  spirit  (giver  of  all
comforting  and  spiritual  grace)  nevertheless  not  ceased,
nor  ever  will  cease,  to  reveal  unto  us  continually  by  means
of  His  most  worthy  instruments — the  which  are  saints
and  devout  persons — divers  ways  and  conditions  of  finding
the  most  perfect  and  consummate  union  possible  unto
wayfarers  in  this  life.  And  although  by  the  facility  of
printing  there  hath  been  put  forth  an  infinite  number  of
books,  so  many  that  they  do  obscure  the  sun  of  justice
upon  earth  (seeing  that  there  are  more  evil  books  than
good),  because  by  reason  of  their  perverse  judgment  and
voluptuous  desires  men  do  delight  more  in  imagining
and  in  hearkening  unto  hurtful  things  rather  than  unto
wholesome  ones,  and  because  through  the  world's  abuses
xli  d


xlii  PREFACE

evil  men  are  more  favoured  than  are  good  men,  yet  cannot
malice  overcome  wisdom,  neither  can  the  many  overcome
the  few.  For  this  reason,  also,  hath  God  elected  the
weak  to  confound  the  strong,  and  thus  in  our  own  times
hath  He  inspired  many  women  of  exalted  spirit,  and  they
did  lead  most  holy  and  exemplary  lives,  walking  upon  the
short  and  straight  road.  Amongst  these  is  the  Blessed
Angela  of  Foligno,  who,  although  a  woman  (and  therefore
of  the  weaker  sex),  did,  nevertheless,  by  means  of  her
humble,  patient  and  steadfast  despising  of  the  things  of
this  world  and  by  her  chosen  and  beloved  poverty,  over
come  all  the  strong  and  powerful  of  her  time.  Unto
whomsoever  shall  truly  read  and  prudently  consider
them,  her  conversion,  penitence,  temptation,  and  doctrine
(as  set  forth  in  this  book),  will  be  of  exceeding  profit  for
walking  in  the  way  and  service  of  God,  until  he  attaineth
unto  the  happiness  of  glory.  This  book  hath  already
been  printed  in  Latin,  divided  into  three  treatises,
namely — of  penitence,  of  visions,  and  of  doctrine.  But
because  it  was  neither  elegant  nor  learned  in  that
language,  it  was  neither  read  by  scholars  nor  understood
by  the  simple,  and  for  this  reason  hath  it  been  deemed
.well  to  translate  it  into  the  vulgar  tongue,  that  it  may  be
universally  understood  and  be  profitable  unto  a  greater
number  of  persons.  The  writer  hath  not  sought  to  put
it  into  elegant  language,  nor  yet  into  the  Tuscan  or  the
courtly  tongue,  but  only  to  render  it  intelligible.  Where
fore  each  one  is  exhorted  to  read  it  solely  for  his  profit  and


PREFACE  xliii

for  the  good  of  his  soul,  which  he  will  the  more  obtain
the  more  he  doth  carefully  read  and  digest,  and  put  into
practice  that  which  he  hath  read  and  digested.  For  it  is
not  the  readers,  but  the  doers,  of  good  works  who  attain
unto  grace.  And  although  it  is  to  be  believed  that  the
writers  of  that  time  put  down  everything  in  the  order  in
which  it  pleased  God  to  recall  it  unto  the  memory  of  the
Blessed  Angela,  yet  hath  it  seemed  more  convenient  in
this  translation  into  the  vulgar  tongue  to  put  the  treatise
of  doctrine  into  the  second  place,  the  which  in  Latin  is
given  the  third  place,  and  to  put  here  as  third  treatise
that  of  the  visions  and  consolations,  which  in  Latin  hath
the  second  place.  This  hath  been  done  because  these
consolations  and  visions  are  things  most  high,  and  it
hath  seemed  right  to  leave  them  unto  the  last  to  be  read
by  those  who  are  more  perfected  and  instructed,  and
first  to  set  down  her  teaching  (which  is  likewise  that  of
Jesus  Christ),  as  being  more  universally  profitable,  and
especially  unto  beginners.  The  treatise  of  doctrine  is
further  divided  into  several  chapters,  which  was  not  done
previously,  in  order  that  it  may  be  more  easy  and  less
wearisome  unto  the  reader,  because  certain  of  the  chap
ters  were  exceeding  long.  Each  one  is  now  prayed  and
exhorted  that  (for  his  own  good)  he  weary  not  of  reading
this  most  excellent  book,  wherein  he  will  find  pointed
out  that  straight  highroad  (the  road  of  poverty,  of  pain,
and  of  contempt),  whereby  it  is  easy  to  find  God,  and
from  which  none  can  excuse  themselves  as  they  might  do


xliv  PREFACE

from  the  contemplation  of  the  incomprehensible  Trinity.
And  it  will  be  unto  him  a  joy  to  hear  and  know  of  those
sufferings  and  other  ills  which  Christ  and  the  saints  did
willingly  endure  for  our  sakes,  piously  praying  God  that
He  will  open  the  treasures  of  His  mercy  unto  all.  Amen.


THE   BLESSED    ANGELA    OF
FOLIGNO

TREATISE    I

OF    THE    CONVERSION    AND    PENITENCE    OF    THE

BLESSED     ANGELA     OF     FOLIGNO     AND     OF     HER

MANY    AND    DIVERS    TEMPTATIONS

AS  I  walked  (said  the  Blessed  Angela)  by  the  way  of
JLjL  penitence,  I  did  take  eighteen  spiritual  steps  before
I  came  to  know  the  imperfection  of  my  life.

The  first  step  was  that  I  did  begin  to  reflect  upon  my
sins,  the  knowledge  of  which  did  fill  my  soul  with  so  great
a  dread  that,  fearing  to  be  condemned  unto  hell,  I  wept
bitterly.

The  second  was,  that  I  did  begin  to  be  so  exceeding
ashamed  of  those  my  sins  that  for  shame  I  could  not  fully
confess  them  ;  wherefore  many  times  did  I  communicate
whilst  yet  unconfessed  and  with  all  my  sins  did  I  receive
the  Body  of  our  Lord.  Being  day  and  night  reproached
by  my  conscience  because  of  this  thing,  I  did  pray  the
Blessed  Francis  that  he  would  grant  me  to  discover  a  con
fessor  meet  for  my  needs,  who  should  be  well  acquainted

A


2  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

with  my  sins  and  unto  whom  I  could  fully  confess  myself.
In  that  same  night  did  the  Blessed  Francis  appear  unto  me
and  say  :  "  Sister,  if  thou  hadst  prayed  unto  me  sooner
thy  prayer  would  have  been  sooner  granted  ;  that  which
thou  hast  asked  hath  been  done."  Upon  the  next  morn
ing,  therefore,  I  went  into  the  church  of  Saint  Francis  and
found  there  a  friar  preaching  in  Saint  Feliciano,  which
friar  was  chaplain  unto  the  bishop  and  did  hold  his  autho
rity  ;  and  to  him  I  did  determine  to  make  my  confession
immediately  that  the  sermon  should  be  ended.  Where
fore  I  did  confess  myself  most  fully  and  was  absolved  of  all
my  sins.  And  in  this  confession  I  did  feel  no  love,  but
only  bitterness,  shame,  and  pain.

The  third  step  was  that  I  did  consequently  persevere  in
the  performance  of  the  penance  imposed  upon  me,  and  as
yet  I  was  filled  with  pain  and  misery  without  any  other
consolation.

Fourthly,  I  did  begin  to  consider  and  to  know  the
divine  mercy  which  had  granted  me  the  aforesaid  grace
and  saved  me  from  hell.  Here  did  I  begin  to  be  en
lightened  and  I  did  now  weep  and  lament  more  than
heretofore,  forcing  myself  to  do  more  severe  penance,  of
the  which  I  will  not  speak  here.

The  fifth  was  that,  being  thus  enlightened,  and  finding
nothing  save  faults  in  me,  I  did  condemn  myself,  as  one
who  knew  and  was  most  assuredly  convinced  that  she  was
worthy  of  hell ;  whereat  I  did  again  weep  bitterly.  It
must  be  understood,  however,  that  between  the  one  step


OF  FOLIGNO  3

and  another  there  was  a  space  of  time,  and  I  did  ever  weep
and  dolefully  lament ;  and  there  was  nothing  else  vouch
safed  unto  me,  only  I  did  have  some  consolation  in  that  I
could  weep,  but  truly  it  was  a  bitter  consolation.

Sixthly,  there  was  given  unto  me  a  constant  and  certain
illumination  of  grace,  whereby  I  was  made  to  know  my
sins  so  profoundly  that,  having  offended  the  Creator,  I
saw  that  I  had  likewise  offended  the  creatures  made  for
me.  Therefore  I  did  recall  unto  my  memory  all  the  sins
which  I  had  committed  and  in  the  confession  (which  I  did
make  unto  the  Lord  my  God)  I  did  most  profoundly
ponder  over  them.  Wherefore  I  did  beseech  all  the
saints,  with  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  they  would  intercede
for  me,  and  I  did  pray  the  merciful  Lord  (who  had  vouch
safed  unto  me  so  many  good  things),  that  He  would  have
pity  upon  me,  and,  seeing  that  I  did  know  myself  to  be
dead  in  sin,  that  He  would  raise  me  to  life  again  through
His  grace.  Moreover,  I  did  pray  all  creatures  (seeing  how
that  I  had  offended  them  inasmuch  as  I  had  offended  the
Creator),  that  they  would  not  accuse  me  before  God.
Thus  did  it  appear  unto  me  that  all  creatures  and  all  the
saints  did  have  compassion  upon  me,  wherefore  with  a
greater  fire  of  love  did  I  apply  myself  to  praying  unto  God
more  than  was  customary.

The  seventh  was,  that  by  an  especial  grace  I  did  begin
to  gaze  upon  the  Cross,  whereon  I  did  behold  (as  much
with  the  eyes  of  my  heart  as  with  those  of  my  body)  Jesus
Christ  who  had  died  for  us,  and  I  did  feel  great  grief  at


4  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

that  sight,  notwithstanding  that  this  vision  and  medita
tion  were  as  yet  but  little  understood  of  me.

The  eighth  was,  that  as  I  did  gaze  upon  the  Cross  I  was
granted  a  greater  understanding  how  that  Christ  had  died
for  our  sins.  Whereupon  I  did  so  clearly  perceive  all
mine  own  sins,  and  with  such  exceeding  great  grief,  that  I
did  feel  that  I  myself  had  crucified  the  Lord.  Neverthe
less  I  did  not  yet  know  how  great  a  blessing  was  the
Passion  of  Christ,  nor  did  I  understand  as  clearly  then  as  I
afterwards  did,  how  that  He  had  redeemed  me  from  my
sins  and  converted  me  unto  repentance,  and  had  died  for
me.  In  this  beholding  of  the  Cross  I  did  so  burn  with
the  fire  of  love  and  remorse  that,  standing  before  the
Cross,  I  did  divest  myself  of  everything  and  did  thus  offer
myself  unto  Him.  And  although  I  feared  greatly,  I  did
nevertheless  promise  to  observe  perpetual  chastity  and  not
to  offend  with  any  of  my  members,  accusing  my  members
one  by  one  of  past  sins.  And  I  did  pray  Him  that  He
would  make  me  to  keep  this  my  promise,  that  is,  to  pre
serve  chastity  and  to  keep  guard  over  my  thoughts ;  for
upon  the  one  hand  I  did  greatly  fear  to  promise,  and  upon
the  other  hand  the  aforesaid  fire  compelled  me,  and  I
had  no  power  to  resist.

Ninthly,  there  was  given  unto  me  the  desire  to  seek  out
and  know  the  way  of  the  Cross,  that  I  might  stand  at  its
foot  and  find  refuge  there  where  all  sinners  find  refuge.
Unto  which  end  I  was  enlightened  and  instructed  after
this  manner  :  that  if  I  did  desire  to  find  the  way  and  come


OF  FOLIGNO  5

unto  the  Cross,  I  must  first  pardon  all  those  who  had
offended  me,  and  must  then  put  away  from  me  all  earthly
things,  not  only  out  of  mine  affections  but  likewise  in  very
deed,  and  all  men  and  women,  friends  and  kindred  and
every  other  thing,  but  more  especially  my  possessions
must  I  put  away,  and  even  mine  own  self.  And  I  must
give  my  heart  unto  Christ  (who  hath  done  me  such  great
good),  electing  to  walk  upon  the  thorny  path,  which  is  the
path  of  tribulation.  So  then  I  did  begin  to  put  aside  the
best  clothing  and  garments  which  I  had  and  the  most
delicate  food,  likewise  the  covering  for  my  head.  But  as
yet  it  was  a  shameful  and  a  hard  thing  for  me  to  do,  seeing
that  I  did  not  feel  much  love  for  God  and  was  living  with
mine  husband.  Wherefore  was  it  a  bitter  thing  for  me
when  any  offence  was  said  or  done  unto  me,  but  I  did  bear
it  as  patiently  as  I  was  able.  In  that  time  and  by  God's
will  there  died  my  mother,  who  was  a  great  hindrance
unto  me  in  following  the  way  of  God  ;  my  husband  died
likewise,  and  in  a  short  time  there  also  died  all  my  chil
dren.  And  because  I  had  commenced  to  follow  the
aforesaid  way  and  had  prayed  God  that  He  would  rid  me
of  them,  I  had  great  consolation  of  their  deaths,  albeit  I
did  also  feel  some  grief.  Wherefore,  because  that  God
had  shown  this  grace  unto  me,  I  did  imagine  that  my  heart
was  in  the  heart  of  God  and  that  His  will  and  His  heart
were  in  my  heart.

Tenthly,  seeking  to  know  from  God  what  thing  I  could
do,  the  which  would  be  most  acceptable  unto  Him,  He  did


6  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

of  His  mercy  many  times  appear  unto  me,  both  sleeping
and  waking,  and  appearing  fastened  upon  the  Cross  He
did  bid  me  gaze  upon  His  wounds,  and  in  a  marvellous
manner  He  did  make  me  to  know  how  that  He  had  borne
all  things  for  me  ;  and  this  happened  many  times.  And
when  He  had  showed  unto  me  one  by  one  all  the  things
which  He  had  borne  for  me,  He  said,  "  What  canst  thou
do  for  Me  that  will  suffice  ?  "  Likewise  did  He  appear
unto  me  many  times  when  I  was  awake,  but  in  a  manner
more  pleasing  than  when  I  was  asleep  (although  I  did
always  perceive  His  great  grief  and  suffering),  and  He
showed  unto  me  the  pains  of  His  head  and  the  hairs
plucked  from  His  eyebrows  and  His  beard,  counting  over
unto  me  all  His  scourgings  and  showing  them  unto  me  in
the  places  where  they  had  been  inflicted,  saying  unto  me,
"  All  this  was  for  thee."  Then  did  I  most  clearly  recall
unto  my  memory  all  my  sins,  by  the  which  it  seemed  unto
me  I  had  wounded  Him  afresh  and  therefore  had  cause
for  great  lamentation,  and  I  did  doubtless  feel  much  more
sorrow  than  before.  Thus  showing  His  Passion  unto  me,
He  did  say,  "  What  canst  thou  do  for  Me  that  will
suffice  ?  "  Then  did  I  weep  and  shed  such  burning  tears
that  they  did  burn  my  flesh,  wherefore  it  behoved  me  to
lave  it  with  cold  water  that  it  might  be  cooled.

The  eleventh  was,  that  because  of  my  sins  I  was  moved
to  do  penance  more  severely,  of  the  which  it  is  not  meet  to
speak  here.  And  as  I  reflected  and  did  oblige  myself  to
wish  to  do  this,  it  seemed  unto  me  at  last  that  I  could  not


OF  FOLIGNO  7

sufficiently  do  penance  the  whiles  I  was  possessed  of
worldly  things,  wherefore  in  order  the  more  freely  to  do
this  and  to  come  unto  the  Cross  as  I  had  been  inspired  to
do,  I  did  determine  most  certainly  to  forsake  everything.
The  which  determination  was  marvellously  sent  unto  me
by  God  after  this  manner.  In  mine  imagination  I  did
cherish  a  great  desire  to  become  poor,  and  such  was  my  zeal
that  ofttimes  I  did  fear  to  die  before  I  could  attain  unto
this  state  of  poverty.  Upon  the  other  hand  I  was  assailed
by  temptations,  the  which  did  whisper  unto  my  thoughts
that  I  was  youthful  and  that  begging  for  alms  might  lead
me  into  great  danger  and  shame,  and  that  if  I  did  this  I
should  be  forced  to  die  of  hunger,  cold,  and  nakedness.
Moreover  all  my  friends  did  dissuade  me  from  this  thing.
But  at  last  the  Divine  mercy  did  send  a  certain  great
illumination  into  mine  heart,  wherefrom  I  did  derive  a
certain  assurance,  the  which,  as  I  believed  then  and  do
believe  now,  I  shall  not  lose  even  in  eternity.  Wherefore
I  did  dispose  and  determine  that,  even  though  I  should  be
forced  to  die  of  hunger,  cold,  and  shame,  because  such  a
thing  was  pleasing  or  might  be  pleasing  unto  God — I
would  by  no  means  leave  from  my  purpose,  even  though  I
were  certain  that  these  aforesaid  evils  should  befall  me,
choosing  to  die  willingly  for  the  love  of  God  rather  than
to  fall  short  of  mine  intention.  So  then  I  did  resolve  in
good  earnest.

The  twelfth  was,  that  I  did  afterwards  pray  unto  the
Blessed   Mother   of  Christ   and   the   Blessed  John   the


8  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Evangelist  that  (for  the  sake  of  the  suffering  which  they
had  endured),  they  would  obtain  for  me  a  certain  sign
whereby  I  might  always  keep  in  memory  the  Passion  of
Christ.

The  thirteenth  was,  that,  persevering  in  the  aforesaid
prayers  and  desires,  a  dream  was  granted  unto  me  wherein
was  showed  me  the  Heart  of  Christ,  and  it  was  told  me
that  in  that  Heart  there  is  no  falsehood,  because  therein  all
things  are  true.  And  it  seemed  unto  me  that  this  sign  was
sent  because  I  had  mocked  at  a  certain  preacher.

The  fourteenth  was,  that  being  once  at  prayer,  Christ
did  show  Himself  unto  me  as  I  kept  vigil,  more  clearly  and
giving  me  greater  knowledge  of  Himself  than  heretofore.
Then  it  was  that  He  did  set  me  free,  and  it  was  after  this
manner.  Firstly,  He  did  question  me ;  then  He  did  say
unto  me,  "  Put  thy  mouth  into  the  wound  in  My  side."
Then  methought  that  I  did  put  it  there  and  did  drink  the
blood  which  was  running  freshly  from  out  of  His  side,  and
in  the  doing  of  this  it  was  given  me  to  know  that  I  was
cleansed.  And  here  I  did  begin  to  receive  great  consola
tion,  albeit  I  grieved  when  I  did  meditate  upon  the
Passion.  Then  I  did  pray  the  Lord  that  He  would  cause
my  blood  to  be  shed  and  poured  out  for  His  love's  sake,  as
His  had  been  shed  for  me,  and  I  did  desire  that  for  His  love
all  my  members  should  suffer  affliction  and  death,  more
vile  and  more  bitter  than  His  Passion.  Wherefore  I  be
thought  me  and  did  seek  to  find  one  who  should  put  me  to
death,  in  order  that  I  might  suffer  for  the  sake  of  His  faith


OF  FOLIGNO  9

and  love.  But  I  knew  that  I  was  not  worthy  to  die  as  the
holy  martyrs  had  died.  Nevertheless,  I  did  desire  that  He
would  cause  me  to  die,  and  by  a  death  more  vile  and  more
slow,  and  more  bitter.  I  could  not  bethink  me  of  a  death
as  vile  as  I  did  wish  for,  or  one  that  would  differ  from  the
deaths  of  the  saints — for  I  did  most  surely  deem  myself
unworthy  of  dying  their  death.

The  fifteenth  step  was  that  I  did  fix  my  mind  upon  the
Virgin  Mother  of  God  and  upon  Saint  John,  keeping  them
in  my  remembrance  and  praying  them  that  (for  the  suffer
ing  which  they  had  endured  because  of  the  Passion  of  our
Lord)  they  would  obtain  for  me  the  grace  that  I  should
always  feel  the  pain  of  the  Passion  or  at  least  of  their
sufferings.  And  they  did  obtain  this  grace  for  me  in  such
a  degree  that  one  time  Saint  John  did  put  upon  me  so
great  a  pain  that  never  did  I  feel  a  greater.  Then  did  I
perceive  that  the  sufferings  of  Saint  John  and  of  the
Mother  of  Christ  (the  which  they  did  endure  because  of
the  Passion)  were  in  very  truth  more  than  martyrdom.
Then  was  it  that  the  desire  was  given  unto  me  to  revile
myself  with  all  my  might.  And  although  I  was  much
assailed  by  the  devil  and  ofttimes  tempted  that  I  should
not  do  this  thing,  and  was  forbidden  by  the  Brothers
Minor  and  by  all  from  whom  it  was  meet  I  should  seek
counsel,  nevertheless  by  nothing  either  of  good  or  of  evil
that  could  be  done  unto  me  was  I  prevented  from  giving
all  my  possessions  unto  the  poor.  And  if  I  had  been
hindered  from  doing  this  I  would  at  least  have  forsaken


io  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

all  things  because  methought  I  could  not  keep  any  thing
for  myself  without  greatly  offending  Him  who  did  thus
enlighten  me.  Nevertheless  I  was  yet  sunk  in  bitterness
because  of  my  sins,  neither  did  I  know  if  the  things  which
I  did  were  pleasing  unto  God  ;  but  with  much  weeping  I
cried,  saying  :  "  Lord,  even  though  I  be  condemned,
nevertheless  will  I  not  cease  from  doing  penance,  and  I
have  put  away  all  things  from  me  in  order  to  serve  Thee."
But  being,  as  I  have  said,  still  sunk  in  bitterness  because  of
my  sins  and  not  yet  feeling  any  divine  sweetness  whatso
ever,  I  was  changed  out  of  this  state  in  the  manner  here
after  written  down.

The  sixteenth  was,  that  I  did  come  again  into  the  church
to  ask  of  God  that  He  would  bestow  some  mercy  upon  me.
And  whilst  that  I  was  praying  and  saying  the  Paternoster,
God  did  implant  that  Paternoster  in  mine  heart  with  so
clear  an  understanding  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  mine
own  unworthiness  that  I  could  in  no  way  describe  it.
Each  word  was  written  upon  mine  heart  and  I  did  speak
it  with  great  and  enduring  contrition  and  compunction.
So  that,  although  I  wept  because  of  my  sins  and  mine  un
worthiness  (the  which  I  did  here  perceive),  I  did  never
theless  have  great  consolation  and  did  begin  to  taste  some
what  of  the  Divine  sweetness,  because  in  the  Paternoster  I
did  see  the  Divine  goodness  better  than  in  any  other
thing,  and  here  likewise  did  I  find  it  best.  But  because
my  sins  and  mine  unworthiness  were  showed  unto  me  in
the  aforesaid  prayer,  I  did  begin  to  be  so  greatly  ashamed


OF  FOLIGNO


that  I  did  not  presume  to  raise  mine  eyes  either  to  heaven
or  to  the  Crucifix,  or  any  other  thing,  but  did  commend
myself  unto  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  she  should  implore
and  obtain  mercy  for  me  and  forgiveness  of  my  sins,  seeing
that  I  was  yet  sunk  in  the  bitterness  of  sin.  Oh,  sinners,
how  beset  with  difficulties  and  full  of  heaviness  is  the  way
of  the  soul  unto  repentance  !  How  art  thou  bound  with
strong  chains  and  thy  feet  shackled  !  How  evil  are  thine
helpers,  or  rather  they  who  hinder  thee,  the  world,  the
flesh,  and  the  devil  !  Ye  must  know  that  I  did  halt  in  each
one  of  these  aforesaid  steps  a  good  space  of  time  before
that  I  was  enabled  to  move  from  the  one  unto  the  other  ;
albeit  I  did  not  remain  equally  long  in  each,  but  in  some
more  and  in  some  less  time.

Then  at  the  seventeenth  step  were  these  things  made
manifest  unto  me,  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  had  obtained
for  me  the  grace  of  a  more  than  human  faith  ;  wherefore
did  it  seem  unto  me  that  until  that  time  my  faith  had  been
almost  dead,  when  compared  with  that  which  had  been
newly  given  unto  me.  Likewise  did  it  seem  unto  me  that
the  tears  which  I  had  hitherto  wept  had  been  shed  almost
unwillingly  when  compared  with  those  which  I  now  shed.
Wherefore  I  did  now  lament  for  the  Passion  of  Christ  and
for  the  sufferings  of  His  Mother  more  earnestly  than  I  had
done  before.  And  now  everything  which  I  did,  howso
ever  much  or  great,  did  seem  unto  me  but  of  little  ac
count.  And  I  did  desire  to  do  greater  penance,  and  I  did
fill  mine  whole  heart  with  Christ's  Passion,  because  unto


12  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

me  had  been  vouchsafed  the  hope  that  I  might  thereby  be
redeemed.  I  did  now,  moreover,  begin  to  find  consolation
in  dreams,  for  I  did  have  fair  and  pleasant  dreams,  so  that
I  was  thereby  consoled.  I  did  likewise  now  begin  to  feel
the  sweetness  and  consolation  of  God  within  mine  heart,
and  outwardly  in  my  body  continually,  both  sleeping  and
waking  ;  but  because  I  did  not  yet  feel  any  assurance,  my
joy  was  mingled  with  bitterness,  neither  did  my  heart
take  any  rest,  but  ever  desired  further  mercies  from
God.

The  eighteenth  was,  that  I  did  at  last  begin  to  have  the
understanding  and  the  visions  and  the  words  of  God,  and
I  so  greatly  delighted  in  prayer  that  I  did  forget  to  eat.
Wherefore  did  I  wish  that  there  were  no  need  for  eating,
in  order  that  I  might  be  ever  at  prayer.  This  desire  did
occasion  a  certain  temptation  not  to  eat,  or,  if  I  did  eat,
that  I  should  eat  but  a  small  quantity.  But  I  perceived
this  to  be  a  snare  ;  and  there  was  such  a  great  fire  of  love
in  mine  heart  that  I  did  never  weary  of  being  upon  my
knees,  or  of  doing  other  penance.  After  this  I  was  filled
with  a  yet  greater  fire  and  fervour  of  Divine  love,  in  such
a  degree  that  if  I  did  hear  any  man  speaking  of  God  I  did
cry  aloud,  and  even  had  there  been  one  with  an  axe  ready
to  kill  me  I  could  not  have  refrained.  The  first  time  that
this  happened  unto  me  was  when  I  did  sell  the  little  piece
of  land  which  was  mine  to  give  the  money  unto  the  poor
(this  was  the  best  possession  which  I  had),  but  in  the  be
ginning  I  did  mock  at  myself  for  this  crying,  as  one  mocketh


OF  FOLIGNO  13

at  Petruccio ; 1  then  I  perceived  that  I  could  by  no
manner  of  means  do  otherwise.  Wherefore  it  did  oft-
times  happen  that,  hearing  God  spoken  of,  I  did  cry  aloud,
albeit  that  I  was  in  the  company  of  other  persons,  no
matter  who  they  might  be.  And  when  those  persons  did
say  unto  me  that  I  was  disordered  in  that  I  should  do  such
a  thing,  I  did  answer  that  I  was  sick  and  overwhelmed,  and
that  I  could  not  do  otherwise.  Neither  could  I  convince
those  who  spoke  evil  against  me  because  of  this  thing,  but
I  did  feel  greatly  ashamed.  When  I  beheld  the  Passion  of
Christ  painted  in  a  picture  I  could  scarce  contain  myself,
but  was  seized  with  a  fever  and  fell  into  a  sickness ;  for  the
which  reason  my  companion  did  hide  such  pictures  of  the
Passion  from  me  whenever  it  was  possible,  in  order  that
I  might  not  behold  them.  During  the  times  of  these
cryings  I  did  have  many  illuminations,  understandings,
visions,  and  consolations,  of  the  which  several  will  be
written  down  in  the  following  treatises.


CHAPTER   I

OF    HER    MANY    AND    VARIOUS   TEMPTATIONS

IN  order,  therefore,  that  I  might  not  feel  myself  exalted  by
the  magnitude  and  the  number  of  the  revelations,  visions,

1  Petruccio  was  evidently  some  noted  personage  of  the  time,
whose  identity  it  is  impossible  now  to  trace.


i4  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

and  conversings  with  God,  and  that  I  might  not  be  puffed
up  with  the  delight  thereof,  the  great  tempter  was  sent
unto  me,  who  did  afflict  me  with  many  and  divers  tempta
tions,  wherefore  was  I  afflicted  both  in  my  soul  and  in
my  body.  The  torments  of  the  body  were  verily  number
less  and  were  administered  by  many  demons  in  divers
ways,  so  that  I  do  scarce  believe  that  the  sufferings  and
infirmity  of  my  body  could  be  written  down.  There  re
mained  not  one  of  my  members  the  which  was  not
grievously  tormented  ;  neither  was  I  ever  without  pain,
without  infirmity,  or  without  weariness.  Always  was  I
weak  and  feeble,  and  full  of  pain,  so  that  I  was  compelled
to  be  almost  continually  lying  down.  All  my  limbs  were
as  though  beaten,  and  with  many  troubles  did  the  demons
afflict  me.  Thus  was  I  perpetually  sick  and  swelled,  and
in  all  my  limbs  I  did  suffer  pain,  so  that  it  was  difficult  for
me  to  move  myself.  Nevertheless  was  I  not  weary  of
lying  still,  neither  was  I  yet  able  to  eat  sufficient.  In
short,  the  sufferings  of  the  body  were  great,  but  those  of
the  soul  were  beyond  all  comparison  more  bitter  and  more
numerous,  and  all  were  inflicted  by  the  same  demons.  I
can  only  liken  myself  unto  one  who  is  hanged  by  the  neck,
his  hands  tied  behind  his  back  and  his  eyes  bound,  and  who
is  left  hanging  by  a  rope  upon  the  gallows ;  and  although
he  hath  no  help  or  remedy  or  support,  he  doth  nevertheless
continue  to  live  in  that  torment  and  cannot  die.  And  I
do  affirm  that  even  more  desperately  and  with  greater
cruelty  was  I  afflicted  by  demons,  for  they  hanged  my  soul


OF  FOLIGNO  15

and  all  its  strength  was  overwhelmed  and  departed  from
it.  And  seeing  how  that  I  had  no  power  to  oppose  them,
my  grief  was  so  great  that  at  times  I  was  scarce  able  to
weep  for  rage  and  for  grievous  suffering.  Moreover,  I
wept  without  obtaining  relief,  and  ofttimes  was  my  rage
so  great  that  I  could  scarce  refrain  from  rending  myself
and  beating  myself  most  grievously,  thus  causing  my  head
and  all  my  members  to  swell.  When  my  soul  beheld  itself
cast  down  and  all  its  virtue  departed  from  it,  then  it  made
great  lamentation,  and  then  did  I  cry  unto  my  God.

After  this  I  did  endure  another  torment,  for  every
vice  was  re-awakened  within  me.  Not  that — albeit  re
awakened — they  had  power  to  overcome  my  reason,  but
they  did  occasion  me  much  tribulation.  And  not  only
did  I  remember  those  vices  which  assailed  me  in  times
past,  but  many  others  which  I  did  never  before  know
entered  into  my  body  and  did  inflame  me  and  cause  me  the
utmost  suffering.  But  because  they  had  no  lasting  power
over  me  they  did  afford  me  great  consolation  when  they
began  to  weaken  and  leave  me.  This  was  the  work  of  the
demons  into  whose  hands  I  perceived  I  had  been  de
livered,  but  when  I  do  remember  how  that  God  was
afflicted  here  below  and  in  poverty,  I  would  that  mine
own  sufferings  might  be  increased  twofold.

At  times  was  I  thrown  into  a  most  horrible  darkness  of
spirit  by  the  demons,  wherein  it  did  appear  that  all  hope
of  good  was  withdrawn  from  me.  Then  those  vices  which
were  dead  inwardly  in  the  soul  were  revived  outwardly


16  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

in  the  body,  both  those  which  I  did  never  before  feel  and
those  which  I  did  have  aforetimes.  And  I  did  suffer  so
greatly  that  I  was  constrained  to  put  actual  fire  upon  my
body  in  order  that  it  might  quench  the  burning  of  desire  ;
and  this  I  did  continue  to  do  until  my  confessor  forbade
me.  And  when  I  was  in  that  darkness  of  spirit  methought
I  would  have  chosen  rather  to  be  roasted  than  to  endure
such  pains.  Wherefore  did  I  cry  aloud  and  call  upon
death,  desiring  that  it  should  come  in  any  form  whatso
ever  if  only  God  would  permit  me  to  die.  And  unto  God
did  I  say  :  "  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt  send  me  into  hell,  I  pray
Thee  tarry  not,  but  do  it  instantly,  and  since  Thou  hast
abandoned  me,  make  an  end  of  it  now  and  plunge  me  into
the  depths."  Presently  I  perceived  that  this  was  the  work
of  demons  and  that  such  vices  exist  not  in  the  soul,  for
never  would  I  have  consented  thereto.  Howsoever,  the
body  doth  suffer  violence,  and  so  great  is  the  grief  and
pain  that  if  it  should  endure  the  body  would  not  be  able  to
bear  it.  Moreover,  the  soul  doth  find  that  all  its  strength
hath  been  taken  from  it,  and  albeit  it  doth  in  no  wise  con
sent  unto  vice,  yet  can  it  not  resist.  And  seeing  that  it
doth  act  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  it  loseth  all  hope  of
being  able  to  resist  and  is  tormented  by  those  vices.

Among  others,  God  did  permit  one  vice  to  enter  into
me  the  which  I  had  never  known  before,  but  I  did  clearly
perceive  that  it  entered  into  me  by  Divine  permission,  and
it  was  so  great  that  it  did  exceed  all  the  others.  Upon  the
other  hand  was  there  given  unto  me  a  certain  virtue,


OF  FOLIGNO  17

manifestly  wherewith  to  oppose  the  aforesaid  vice  and  by
means  of  which  God  did  most  potently  set  me  free.
Wherefore  even  if  I  had  not  already  possessed  a  sure  faith
in  God,  this  one  thing  alone  would  have  inspired  me  with
such  a  faith  and  a  certain  hope,  of  the  which  I  could  in
no  wise  doubt.  For  virtue  did  increase  and  vice  did
diminish,  and  I  was  so  upheld  by  that  virtue  that  I  could
not  consent  unto  wrong-doing,  and  likewise  by  means  of
that  virtue  was  I  so  enlightened  and  strengthened  that  not
all  the  men  who  were  in  the  world,  nor  all  the  demons,
could  have  persuaded  me  to  commit  the  smallest  sin.
Hence  proceedeth  the  aforesaid  faith  in  God.  The  afore
said  vice  was  so  great  that  I  am  ashamed  to  speak  of  it,
and  of  such  potency  that  if  the  virtue  had  tarried  in
coming  to  succour  me,  neither  shame  nor  suffering  nor
any  other  thing  whatsoever  would  have  sufficed  to  re
strain  me  from  instantly  falling  back  into  sin.  And  all
this  did  I  bear  for  the  space  of  more  than  two  years.

Furthermore,  beside  this,  was  there  a  continual  con
flict  betwixt  humility  and  a  certain  pride,  the  which  did
increase  in  my  soul  and  grievously  vex  it.  The  humility
was  because  I  did  see  myself  fallen  from  all  goodness  and
void  of  all  virtue  and  grace,  perceiving  in  myself  such  an
infinite  multitude  of  sins  that  I  could  not  believe  that  God
would  ever  desire  to  have  me  for  His  own.  I  perceived
myself  to  have  become  an  habitation  of  demons,  their
creditor  and  their  child.  Likewise  methought  that  I  had
strayed  from  the  right  way  and  from  all  truth,  and  finally


1 8  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

that  I  was  worthy  of  the  nethermost  depths  of  hell.  It
must  be  known  that  this  humility  brought  no  content
ment  unto  my  soul,  neither  any  understanding  of  divine
truth  and  goodness,  but  was  a  certain  humble  dejection  the
which  was  the  cause  of  innumerable  evils.  For  I  did  per
ceive  the  backsliding  of  both  soul  and  body,  on  account  of
which  I  did  know  in  my  soul  that  I  was  surrounded  by
demons.  Then  was  God  hidden  from  me  in  all  His
power  and  grace,  neither  could  I  by  any  manner  of  means
recall  Him  unto  my  mind,  because  He  would  not  permit
it.  Thus  did  I  perceive  myself  to  be  condemned,  but  I
could  not  believe  that  I  had  been  mine  own  damnation,
because  I  did  more  grieve  and  lament  for  having  offended
my  Creator  than  for  any  other  thing.  For  this  reason  did
I  strive  with  all  my  members  against  the  demons,  that  I
might  overcome  the  aforesaid  vices,  but  I  was  not  able,
neither  could  I  find  any  remedy  or  any  way  whereby  I
might  escape  or  help  myself,  so  deep  did  I  perceive
myself  to  have  fallen.  Wherefore  was  I  ofttimes  plunged
into  the  abyss  of  this  humility,  wherein  I  did  behold  my
sins  and  the  superabundance  of  mine  iniquities,  but  I  did
see  no  way  whereby  they  might  be  made  manifest  and
known  unto  all.  And  in  order  that  I  might  make  known
my  dissembling  and  my  sins,  it  came  into  my  mind  to  go
throughout  the  cities  and  open  places  with  meat  and  with
fishes  hanging  about  my  neck,  and  to  cry  :  "  This  is  that
woman,  full  of  evil  and  of  dissembling,  slave  of  all  vices
and  iniquities,  who  did  good  deeds  that  she  might  obtain


OF  FOLIGNO  19

honour  amongst  men  !  And  especially  when  I  caused  it
to  be  told  unto  those  whom  I  had  bidden  to  mine  house
that  I  did  eat  neither  fish  nor  meat,  and  when — being  the
while  full  of  greediness,  gluttony,  and  drunkenness — I  did
feign  to  desire  naught  save  what  was  needful.  I  did  dili
gently  make  an  outward  show  of  being  poor,  but  I  caused
many  sheets  and  coverings  to  be  put  there  where  I  lay
down  to  sleep,  causing  them  to  be  taken  up  in  the  morn
ing  in  order  that  none  might  see  them.  Behold,  there
fore,  the  devil  of  my  soul  and  the  iniquity  of  mine  heart  ;
hearken  unto  a  daughter  of  hypocrisy  and  pride,  a  deceiver
and  an  abomination  of  God  who  did  feign  to  be  a  child  of
prayer.  I  was  given  over  to  pride  and  to  the  devil,  but  I
did  feign  to  have  God  in  my  soul  and  His  consolation  in
my  chamber,  whereas  I  had  the  devil  alike  in  my  soul  and
in  my  chamber.  And  know  ye,  that  during  all  the  time
of  my  life  I  have  studied  how  that  I  might  obtain  the  fame
of  sanctity,  but  verily  I  say  unto  you  that  through  the
iniquity  and  the  hidden  dissembling  of  mine  heart  have  I
deceived  many,  and  have  been  the  murderer  of  many
souls,  and  of  mine  own  soul  likewise."

Then,  being  still  sunk  in  this  abyss,  I  did  turn  me
towards  these  my  brothers  (who  are  called  sons),  saying :
"  Henceforth,  oh  my  sons,  ye  will  no  longer  believe  in
me  ;  do  ye  not  see  how  that  I  am  possessed  of  the  devil  ?
Pray  ye  that  the  justice  of  God  may  compel  the  demons
to  go  forth  out  of  my  soul,  and  that  they  may  make  mani
fest  their  most  evil  works  in  order  that  God  may  be  no


20  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

more  dishonoured  by  me.  See  ye  not  that  all  that  which
I  have  told  unto  you  is  false  ?  See  ye  not  that  if  there
were  no  iniquity  whatsoever  in  the  world,  I  should  fill  it
out  of  the  abundance  of  mine  own  iniquity  ?  Wherefore
must  ye  no  longer  put  faith  in  me,  neither  must  ye  worship
this  living  image  ;  but  pray  that  the  justice  of  God  may
cause  it  to  be  cast  down  and  broken  asunder,  so  that  its
devilish  works  may  be  made  manifest,  its  lies  and  its
painted  and  gilded  words,  the  which  I  did  colour  over  and
conceal  with  divine  words  in  order  that  I  might  be  adored
and  honoured  as  a  thing  of  God.  Pray  ye  finally  that  the
devil  may  go  forth  out  of  this  idol,  and  that  by  this  woman
the  world  may  be  no  longer  deceived.  And  I  will  pray
unto  the  Son  of  God  (whom  I  dare  not  name)  that  if  it
pleaseth  Him  not  to  show  forth  my  sins  Himself,  that  He
will  cause  the  earth  to  witness  unto  them  by  opening  and
swallowing  me  up,  making  of  me  such  an  example  that
men  and  women  will  say  :  "  Lo,  how  was  she  painted  in
false  colours  and  a  dissembler  within  and  without !  "

At  times  I  had  a  mind  to  put  a  rope  about  my  neck,
verily  a  strong  band,  and  to  cause  myself  to  be  dragged
through  the  city  and  the  open  places,  crying  :  "  This  is
that  woman  who  during  all  the  time  of  her  life  hath
showed  the  false  in  place  of  the  true,"  and  that  all  persons
then  should  say  :  "  Behold  a  miracle  of  God,  for  He  hath
caused  this  woman  to  reveal  her  sins  of  her  own  self  and
to  declare  her  iniquities  which  have  heretofore  been
hidden  !  "  Yet  did  this  not  suffice  unto  my  soul,  for  I


OF  FOLIGNO  21

was  fallen  into  a  desperation  such  as  had  never  before  been
seen  in  this  world,  the  cause  thereof  being  that  I  did
despair  of  God  and  all  His  benefits  by  reason  of  having
made  conflict  betwixt  me  and  them.  For  which  reason,
also,  was  I  certain  that  in  the  whole  world  there  was  no
person  more  full  of  all  manner  of  wickedness  and  more
worthy  of  condemnation  than  was  I.  And  all  that  which
had  been  given  me  of  God  had  been  granted  for  the  in
creasing  of  my  despair  and  my  condemnation.  Where
fore  pray  ye  unto  God  that  He  tarry  no  longer,  for  my
head  is  already  breaking,  my  body  fainteth,  and  mine  eyes
are  dimmed  because  of  the  abundance  of  my  tears.  And
lastly,  all  my  members  are  loosened  and  can  no  more  give
proof  of  the  wickedness  of  my  soul,  but  I  do  rejoice  that
it  hath  been  made  manifest  in  part."  And  all  this  did
I  perceive  in  mine  humility.  Thou  must  know,  however,
thou  who  hast  written  down  these  matters,  that  what
thou  hast  written  is  but  a  small  thing  in  comparison  with
all  mine  iniquities  and  mine  abuses,  for  I  was  yet  very
young  when  I  did  begin  to  do  wrong.  These  and  other
like  things  was  I  constrained  to  say  when  I  was  sunk  in
the  aforesaid  humility.

After  this  came  pride.  Then  was  I  filled  with  wrath
and  vanity,  with  melancholy  and  bitterness,  and  all  puffed
up  with  pride.  Thereto  was  added  another  bitterness
concerning  the  benefits  which  God  had  bestowed  upon
me,  because  I  remembered  no  more  any  good  thing  of
them  whatsoever,  but  only  remembered  injuries  and


22  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

dolorous  grief,  marvelling  that  there  had  been  any  virtue
whatsoever  in  me  and  doubting  whether  in  truth  there
had  ever  been  any.  Neither  did  I  perceive  any  reason
wherefore  God  should  have  permitted  this,  and  for  this
cause  was  all  goodness  shut  away  from  me  and  hidden.
The  temptation  of  this  thought  did  make  me  to  be  rilled
with  pride  and  anger,  most  bitter  sadness  and  affliction
and  a  grief  greater  than  I  can  declare,  so  that  if  all  the
wise  men  of  the  world  and  all  the  saints  of  paradise  had
given  me  every  assurance  to  comfort  me  and  had  pro
mised  me  every  blessing  which  could  be  named,  not  even
they  could  have  done  aught  for  me  or  rendered  me  any
help,  if  God  had  not  changed  my  soul  and  worked
differently  within  it.  Neither  should  I  have  believed  in
them,  but  all  would  have  worked  together  to  increase
mine  anger,  affliction,  sadness,  and  pain  more  than  I  could
possibly  declare.  Wherefore,  if  God  would  but  have
liberated  me  from  these  torments  and  temptations,  in  lieu
thereof  would  I  willingly  have  suffered  every  ill  and  would
have  borne  all  the  infirmities  and  suffering  which  have
ever  been  known,  and  verily  do  I  believe  that  they  would
have  been  less  hard  for  me  to  bear  than  were  the  aforesaid
torments.  Wherefore  have  I  ofttimes  said  that,  if  only  I
might  be  set  free  from  them,  I  would  gladly  have  endured
every  form  of  martyrdom.  This  state  of  torments  and
temptations  did  begin  some  little  while  before  the  time  of
the  pontificate  of  Celestino  and  did  last  more  than  two
years,  during  the  which  I  was  ofttimes  tormented,  nor  am


OF  FOLIGNO  23

I  even  yet  entirely  freed,  albeit  I  do  now  feel  it  but
seldom,  and  that  only  outwardly,  not  inwardly  as  hereto
fore.  But  when  I  am  in  that  state  I  do  perceive  that  in
betwixt  that  evil  humility  and  that  pride  there  is  a  great
purging  and  purifying  of  the  soul,  by  which  and  through
which  is  acquired  that  true  humility  without  which  none
can  be  saved ;  so  that  the  greater  the  humility,  the
greater  is  likewise  the  purification.  Thus  came  I  to  know
that  betwixt  those  two  aforesaid  extremes  my  soul  must
be  burned  and  martyred,  and  through  the  knowledge  of
mine  offences  and  my  sins  (which  knowledge  it  did  obtain
through  that  same  true  humility)  my  soul  became  purged
both  of  pride  and  of  demons.  For  the  which  reason  doth
it  come  that  the  poorer  the  soul  is  made  and  the  more  pro
foundly  humiliated,  the  more  doth  it  abase  and  purify
itself  in  order  that  it  may  be  cleansed.  And  in  no  other
way  can  a  soul  be  cleansed  save  by  deep  humiliation  and  by
being  most  profoundly  implanted  and  rooted  in  veritable
and  true  humility.

Here  endeth  the  Conversion,  Penitence,  and  Temptation
of  the  Blessed  Angela  of  Foligno.


TREATISE   II

OF    THE    EVANGELICAL    DOCTRINE    SET    FORTH
BY    THE    BLESSED    ANGELA

CHAPTER   I

HOW    IT   MAY   BE    KNOWN    THAT   GOD    HATH
ENTERED    INTO   THE   SOUL

IT  must  be  known  that  God  cometh  sometimes  unto  the
soul  when  it  hath  neither  called,  nor  prayed  unto,  nor
summoned  Him.  And  He  doth  instil  into  the  soul  a  fire
and  a  love  and  a  sweetness  not  customary,  wherein  it  doth
greatly  delight  and  rejoice  ;  and  it  doth  believe  that  this
hath  been  wrought  by  God  Himself  there  present,  but
this  is  not  certain.  Presently  the  soul  doth  perceive  that
God  is  inwardly  within  itself,  because — albeit  it  cannot
behold  Him  within — it  doth  nevertheless  perceive  that
His  grace  is  present  with  it,  wherein  it  doth  greatly  de
light.  Yet  is  not  even  this  certain.  Presently  it  doth
further  perceive  that  God  cometh  unto  it  with  most  sweet
words,  wherein  it  delighteth  yet  more,  and  with  much
rejoicing  doth  it  feel  God  within  it ;  yet  do  some  doubts


THE   BLESSED   ANGELA   OF   FOLIGNO    25

still  remain,  albeit  but  few.  For  the  soul  possesseth  as
yet  no  perfect  certainty,  neither  is  it  assured  that  God  is
truly  within  it,  because  such  converse  and  such  feelings
can  be  produced  likewise  by  other  spirits.  Wherefore  is
it  still  in  doubt.  And  it  seemeth  unto  me  that  this
cometh  either  of  its  own  malice  and  sinfulness,  or  else
truly  by  the  will  of  God,  who  desireth  not  that  the  soul
should  feel  certain  and  secure.  But  when  the  soul  doth
feel  the  presence  of  God  more  deeply  than  is  customary,
then  doth  it  certify  unto  itself  that  He  is  within  it.  It
doth  feel  it,  I  say,  with  an  understanding  so  marvellous
and  so  profound,  and  with  such  great  love  and  divine  fire,
that  it  loseth  all  love  for  itself  and  for  the  body,  and  it
speaketh  and  knoweth  and  understandeth  those  things  of
the  which  it  hath  never  heard  from  any  mortal  whatso
ever.  And  it  understandeth  with  great  illumination,  and
with  much  difficulty  doth  it  hold  its  peace  ;  and  if  it  doth
hold  its  peace,  it  holdeth  it  out  of  the  abundance  of  its
zeal,  that  it  may  not  be  displeasing  unto  God  its  Lover
nor  cause  offence,  and  likewise  by  reason  of  its  humility  ;
for  it  desireth  not  to  speak  of  things  so  exceeding  high  that
it  may  not  draw  attention  unto  itself.  Thus  hath  it  hap
pened  divers  times  unto  me,  that,  out  of  my  burning
desire  to  work  the  salvation  of  my  neighbour,  I  did  speak
things  for  the  which  I  was  reproved,  and  it  was  said  unto
me,  "  Sister,  turn  thee  again  unto  the  Holy  Scriptures,
for  they  say  not  thus,  and  therefore  do  we  not  understand
thee."  But  with  that  feeling  whereby  it  is  certified  unto


26  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

the  soul  that  God  dwelleth  within  it,  there  is  given  unto  it
a  disposition  so  perfect  that  it  doth  most  entirely  and
verily  agree  with  the  soul  in  all  things,  and  in  every  way
do  all  the  members  of  the  body  agree  with  the  soul  and  do
truly  form  one  cause  together  with  it ;  neither  do  they
rebel  against  the  will  of  the  soul,  but  do  perfectly  desire
those  things  which  are  of  God,  but  which,  nevertheless,
they  had  not  heretofore  in  any  way  desired.  And  this
disposition  is  granted  unto  the  soul  through  grace —
whereby  it  doth  perceive  that  the  Divine  Being  hath
entered  into  it,  and  hath  granted  it  the  assurance  and  the
desire  of  God  and  of  those  things  which  are  of  God,  after
the  manner  of  the  true  love  wherewith  God  hath  loved
us.  Thus  doth  the  soul  feel  that  God  is  mingled  with  it
and  hath  made  companionship  with  it.

Further,  when  God  cometh  unto  the  soul,  it  is  some
times  given  unto  it  to  behold  Him,  and  it  beholdeth  Him
devoid  of  any  bodily  shape  or  form,  and  more  clearly  than
doth  one  man  behold  another.  For  the  eyes  of  the  soul
do  behold  a  spiritual  and  not  a  bodily  presence,  of  the
which  I  am  not  able  to  speak  because  words  and  imagina
tion  do  fail  me.  And  in  very  truth  the  soul  doth  rejoice
in  that  sight  with  an  ineffable  joy  and  regardeth  naught
else,  because  this  it  is  which  doth  fill  it  with  most
inestimable  satisfaction.  This  searching  and  beholding
(whereby  God  is  seen  in  such  a  manner  that  the  soul  can
behold  naught  else)  is  so  profound  that  much  doth  it
grieve  me  that  I  cannot  make  manifest  aught  whatsoever


OF  FOLIGNO  27

of  it,  seeing  that  it  is  not  a  thing  the  which  can  be  touched
or  imagined  or  judged  of.

Moreover,  the  soul  doth  know  in  many  other  ways  that
God  hath  without  doubt  entered  into  it,  of  the  which
ways  I  will  now  speak  of  two.  One  is  an  holy  unction
which  doth  so  instantly  revive  the  soul,  make  meek  all  the
members  of  the  body,  and  cause  them  to  agree  together
with  the  soul,  that  they  cannot  be  touched  or  offended  by
anything  whatsoever  the  which  could  even  in  the  smallest
degree  agitate  the  soul.  Therefore  doth  it  feel  and  hear
that  God  speaketh  within  it,  and  by  means  of  this  great
and  in  all  ways  unspeakable  unction  the  soul  doth  under
stand  with  the  utmost  certainty  that  God  is  within  it,
because  no  saint  nor  any  angel  in  Paradise  would  have
power  to  grant  this.  But  seeing  how  that  it  is  a  thing  the
which  cannot  be  expressed,  it  grieveth  me  that  I  can  find
no  words  wherewith  to  describe  it  in  comparison  of  that
which  it  truly  is.  Wherefore  I  pray  God  that  He  will
pardon  me,  for  this  is  not  of  mine  own  will,  and  if  I  were
able  and  if  it  were  pleasing  unto  God,  I  would  make  mani
fest  somewhat  of  His  goodness.

The  other  way  whereby  the  soul  knoweth  that  God  is
within  it  is  by  an  embrace  which  He  doth  give  unto  the
soul.  There  is  neither  father,  nor  mother,  nor  son,  nor
any  other  person  whatsoever  who  can  embrace  the  object
beloved  with  so  great  a  love  as  that  wherewith  God  em-
braceth  the  soul.  For  He  doth  embrace  it  with  such  love
and  draw  it  unto  Himself  with  such  sweetness  and  gentle-


28  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

ness  that  methinketh  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  world  who
can  declare  it,  nor  express  it,  nor  believe  it  unless  he  hath
himself  experienced  it ;  and  although  he  might  perchance
divine  somewhat  of  this  love,  yet  could  he  not  possibly
know  it  as  it  truly  is.  Of  a  surety,  God  doth  implant
most  sweet  love  in  the  soul,  the  which  doth  make  it  burn
for  Christ  alone.  And  it  beareth  with  it  so  great  a  light
(whereby  it  understandeth  the  fulness  of  the  goodness  of
God  which  it  experienceth  within  itself)  that  it  hath
understanding  of  much  more  than  it  feeleth  within  itself.
Then  hath  it  the  assurance  and  certitude  that  Christ
dwelleth  within  it ;  but  all  that  we  can  say  is  as  nothing
in  comparison  with  that  which  it  really  is.  Then  the
soul  hath  no  more  tears,  whether  of  joy  or  of  sorrow  or
of  any  other  kind,  seeing  that  when  the  soul  hath  tears  it
is  in  a  lower  state.  For  God  poureth  into  the  soul  an  ex
ceeding  great  sweetness,  in  a  measure  so  abundant  that  it
can  ask  nothing  more — yea,  verily,  it  would  be  in  Paradise
if  this  should  endure,  its  joy  being  so  great  that  it  filleth
the  whole  body ;  and  all  injury  which  the  soul  suffereth,
whether  by  deeds  or  words,  is  esteemed  as  naught  and  is
turned  into  sweetness.

Because  of  this  change  in  my  body,  therefore,  I  was  not
always  able  to  conceal  my  state  from  my  companion  or
from  the  other  persons  with  whom  I  did  consort,  because
at  times  my  countenance  was  all  resplendent  and  rosy  and
mine  eyes  shone  like  unto  candles,  and  at  other  times  I  was
pale  as  death,  according  as  the  visions  did  vary.  My  joy


OF  FOLIGNO  29

did  endure  for  many  days,  and  some  joys  have  I  the  which
I  do  think  I  shall  never  lose,  for  I  hold  them  to  be  full
and  perfect,  nor  am  I  now  without  them.  Wherefore,
when  sadness  cometh  upon  me,  I  do  instantly  bethink  me
of  those  joys  and  am  in  no  ways  distressed.  There  are  so
many  other  ways  whereby  the  soul  knoweth  that  God
dwelleth  within  it  that  I  can  by  no  manner  of  means
relate  them.

Through  the  aforesaid  things  and  ways  the  soul  doth
know  that  God  hath  entered  into  it,  but  it  hath  not  yet
been  told  in  what  manner  it  doth  lodge  Him  there.  And
all  that  hath  been  said  is  much  less  than  was  said  when  the
soul  did  lodge  the  Pilgrim,  who  is  God,  because  now  hath
it  come  to  so  full  an  understanding  of  the  divine  goodness
and  infinitude  that  when  I  do  reflect  within  myself,  I  do
sometimes  perceive  most  clearly  that  those  persons  who  do
best  know  God  (Who  is  infinite  and  unspeakable)  are  those
who  do  the  least  presume  to  speak  of  Him,  considering  that
all  which  they  do  say  of  Him,  or  can  possibly  say,  is  as
nothing  compared  with  what  He  truly  is.  Wherefore,  if
any  preacher  did  verily  understand  divine  things  (as  I
have  sometimes  heard  them  declare  they  do)  they  would
not  be  able  to  speak  of  them,  neither  would  they  presume
to  say  aught  whatsoever  of  God,  but  would  remain  silent
and  dumb.  And  because  God  is  so  much  greater  than  the
mind  and  all  other  things,  we  are  not  able  by  any  means
whatsoever  to  measure,  nor  speak,  nor  think  of  Him,  see
ing  that  His  goodness  cannot  perfectly  be  explained.  This


30  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

doth  not  happen  because  the  soul  hath  lost  all  bodily
sense,  or  hath  cast  off  the  body  itself,  but  because  it
understandeth  without  the  aid  of  the  senses.  Wherefore,
when  man  perceiveth  these  things  with  his  understanding
he  falleth  into  so  great  an  amazement  that  (in  so  far  as  it
may  be  expressed  in  bodily  words)  if  some  preacher  were
in  this  state  and  it  behoved  him  to  speak  of  God,  however
worthy  and  able  he  might  be,  he  would  say  unto  the
people,  "  Get  ye  gone,  for  I  know  not  how  to  speak  unto
you  of  God."  Wherefore  do  I  believe  and  declare  that  all
that  which  hath  been  said  either  in  writing  or  by  the
mouths  of  men  since  ever  the  world  began  hath  in  no  wise
described  the  true  nature  of  the  divine  goodness,  but  is  as
the  half  of  a  millet  seed  compared  with  the  whole  world.
But  when  the  soul  is  assured  of  God  and  is  refreshed  by
His  presence,  the  body  doth  likewise  receive  health  and
satisfaction  and  nobility,  and  is  refreshed  together  with
the  soul,  albeit  in  a  less  degree.  Then  do  reason  and  the
soul,  thus  refreshed,  speak  unto  the  body  and  unto  the
senses,  saying  :  "  Behold  how  great  are  the  benefits  God
hath  bestowed  upon  thee  through  me,  and  bethink  thee
how  infinitely  greater  are  those  which  have  been  promised
and  will  be  faithfully  paid  if  thou  wilt  only  follow  me.
Consider  likewise  how  many  and  how  great  benefits  we
have  already  lost,  thou  and  I,  because  thou  hast  not  con
formed  unto  me,  but  hast  gone  contrary  unto  me.  Where
fore  must  thou  in  future  be  in  all  ways  obedient  unto  the
things  of  God."  And  immediately  the  body  doth  submit


OF  FOLIGNO  31

itself  unto  the  soul  and  the  senses  unto  reason,  and  per
ceiving  how  that  it  shareth  in  the  delights  of  the  soul  it
maketh  answer  thus  :  "  My  delights  have  heretofore  been
bodily  and  vile,  because  I  am  a  body  ;  but  thou  who  wert
of  great  nobility  and  able  to  enjoy  divine  delights,  thou
shouldst  not  have  yielded  unto  me,  causing  us  both  to  lose
such  great  benefits."  Thus  doth  the  body  lament  against
the  soul,  and  the  senses  against  reason,  with  a  long  but
most  sweet  lamentation,  and  perceiving  the  delights  of  the
soul  to  be  greater  than  it  had  imagined,  it  doth  render
obedience  in  all  things.


CHAPTER    II

HOW   THE   SPIRITUAL    MAN    IS    DECEIVED

THERE  are  divers  ways  whereby  spiritual  persons  may  be
deceived.  One  way,  and  the  chief  one,  is  when  the  love
within  the  soul  is  not  pure,  but  is  mingled  with  a  love
which  is  personal  and  selfish — that  is  to  say,  with  man's
own  will.  Then  hath  he  certainly  somewhat  of  the  love
of  the  world,  and  the  world  flattereth  him  and  praiseth
him.  But  all  worldly  flattery  and  praise  on  account  of
devotion  is  false,  and  the  person  whom  the  world  doth
single  out  and  praise  seemeth  to  be  more  fervent  in
devotion,  and  his  tears  flow  more  abundantly,  and  that
sweetness  and  fear  and  trembling  are  increased  which  do


32  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

come  in  spiritual  love  which  is  not  pure.  And  these
things  are  not  done  inwardly  in  the  soul  but  outwardly  in
the  body,  neither  doth  pure  love  enter  into  the  soul,
wherefore  the  sweetness  speedily  fadeth  and  the  man
forgetteth  himself  ;  yea,  he  ofttimes  turneth  to  bitterness.
All  these  things  have  I  proved  within  mine  own  self,  and
I  should  not  be  able  to  discern  these  aforesaid  things  save
that  mine  own  soul  hath  attained  unto  the  certain  know
ledge  of  truth.  For  when  love  is  pure  it  doth  in  all  ways
deem  itself  dead  unto  the  senses  ;  and  it  doth  consider
itself  as  nothing  and  it  doth  die  in  God  and  putrefy,  and
it  doth  reverence  God  and  humble  itself,  neither  doth  it
remember  how  that  it  was  praised  nor  its  own  good.
Yea,  it  doth  find  itself  so  downcast  and  so  full  of  evil  that
it  doth  not  believe  it  can  be  entirely  saved  by  any  saint
whatsoever,  only  by  God  alone.  Yet  it  doth  ofttimes
more  readily  pray  for  assistance  unto  the  saints  rather
than  unto  God,  not  daring  because  of  its  unworthiness  to
pray  unto  God  Himself,  albeit  it  imploreth  help  from  the
Holy  Virgin  and  all  the  other  saints.  And  when  it  is
praised  by  any  person  it  deemeth  such  praise  to  be  a
mockery  and  a  jest.  And  this  love  is  pure  and  cometh
direct  from  God  and  is  implanted  within  the  soul,  to
whom  hath  been  thereby  revealed  its  own  defects  and
God's  goodness.  Wherefore  the  tears  which  are  now  shed
and  the  sweetness  which  is  enjoyed  do  never  occasion
bitterness,  but  assurance  and  sweetness ;  and  through  this
aforesaid  love  doth  Christ  enter  into  the  soul,  and  the  soul


OF  FOLIGNO  33

doth  thereby  know  that  it  can  suffer  no  deception  nor  yet
deceive  itself.  The  other  way  wherein  God  permitteth
spiritual  persons  to  be  deceived  is  this.  When  the
spiritual  and  devout  person  feeleth  himself  to  be  greatly
beloved  of  God  and  hath  spiritual  gifts  and  the  works
thereof,  and  doth  openly  speak  of  them,  because  he  is  too
sure  of  himself  and  hath  exceeded  the  right  manner,  God
doth  permit  him  to  be  in  some  way  deceived  in  order  that
he  may  thereby  learn  better  to  know  both  God  and
himself.

Another  way  is  when  the  spiritual  man  feeleth  God  to
be  very  near  and  is  filled  with  a  perfect,  pure,  and  ex
cellent  love  ;  when  every  day  he  doth  most  heartily  per
form  good  works  and  hath  determined  that  he  will  in  no
wise  seek  more  to  please  the  world,  or  to  gain  the  fame  of
sanctity,  but  in  all  things  to  please  Christ  and  submit
himself  entirely  unto  Him.  Nevertheless  the  soul  must
needs  learn  to  keep  that  which  is  its  own  and  to  render
unto  God  the  things  which  are  God's  ;  and  if  it  faileth  to
do  this  then  God  permitteth  deception  in  order  to  pre
serve  it,  and,  because  it  is  precious  in  His  sight,  that  it
should  not  overstep  its  proper  limits.  Moreover,  the  soul
is  not  content  with  what  hath  been  said,  until  God  leadeth
it  unto  the  knowledge  of  Himself  and  the  full  under
standing  of  His  goodness — wherefore  can  there  be  no  de
ception  here,  for  the  soul  is  so  completely  instructed  of  the
truth  that  it  doth  deem  itself  to  be  as  full  as  possible.  It
is  first  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God  Himself,  so  that

c


34  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

it  can  neither  see  nor  remember  aught  else,  and  thereafter
it  cometh  immediately  to  the  understanding  of  His  divine
goodness.  Then  doth  it  see  the  one  and  the  other  to
gether  in  a  way  the  which  cannot  be  described,  but  since
even  this  sufficeth  not,  God  doth  excite  it  to  yet  greater
zeal  and  permitteth  tribulations.

But  the  sentiment  wherein  He  doth  not  permit  the  soul
to  be  deceived  is  poverty  of  spirit,  and  verily,  I  have  heard
poverty  of  spirit  so  much  commended  in  the  divine  words
of  God  (and  with  such  great  and  good  proofs  thereof)  that
it  doth  in  all  ways  surpass  our  understanding.  Verily,
God  spake  thus  unto  me  :  "  If  poverty  had  not  been  a
most  noble  thing  (said  God)  I  myself  would  not  have
assumed  it."  Certain  it  is  that  pride  can  only  exist  in
those  who  do  possess  something,  or  who  believe  themselves
to  have  something.  For  this  reason,  because  they  did
believe  themselves  to  be  possessed  of  something,  came  the
pride  and  the  fall  of  the  first  man  and  the  angel ;  neither
the  angel  nor  the  man  did  possess  anything  in  themselves
of  themselves,  for  God  alone  hath  this,  and  humility  is
found  alone  in  those  who  are  poor  and  who  are  persuaded
that  they  do  possess  nothing.  Wherefore  is  poverty  a
most  excellent  thing,  and  God  Himself  did  cause  His
dearly  beloved  Son  to  be  more  poor  than  any  man  ever
was  before  or  will  be  hereafter  ;  and  albeit  He  is  greater
than  can  be  declared,  yet  did  God  nevertheless  make  Him
as  poor  as  though  He  were  naught.  And  unto  sinners  and
mortal  men  in  whom  was  no  true  light  this  thing  did  seem


OF  FOLIGNO  35

foolishness,  but  unto  the  wise  and  unto  men  of  under
standing  it  did  seem  just  the  contrary.  For  whosoever
hath  poverty  can  never  be  ruined,  neither  can  he  fall
through  deception,  and  if  any  person  were  truly  to  per
ceive  the  benefits  of  poverty  he  would  love  God,  and  if  he
were  but  to  consider  the  immeasurable  value  of  it  he
would  no  longer  be  able  to  keep  any  worldly  possessions,
and  whosoever  were  to  see  how  greatly  God  loveth  true
poverty,  would  retain  nothing  for  himself.  The  proof  of
this  is  the  proof  of  divine  wisdom,  which  first  maketh  us
to  see  our  faults  and  believe  ourselves  poor  in  all  merit  and
goodness,  and  thus  honestly  to  esteem  ourselves  for  what
we  really  are.  And  in  consequence  we  do  make  ourselves
poor  and  do  love  that  same  poverty,  and  those  who  love
it  are  enlightened  by  the  gift  of  grace  (which  is  given  unto
those  who  do  perceive  the  benefits  of  poverty).  Then
doth  it  make  us  to  see  the  divine  goodness  in  order  that
we  may  all  love  God,  and  whosoever  loveth  doth  esteem
himself  as  possessing  nothing.  And  as  a  man  loveth  so
doth  he  work,  and  thus  doth  he  lose  all  confidence  in  him
self  and  trusteth  in  God  alone  ;  wherefore,  because  he
confideth  himself  entirely  unto  God,  he  is  enlightened  by
God  Himself  and  all  doubts  fall  away  from  him.  Whoso
ever  knoweth  this  truth  cannot  be  deceived  either  by
demons  or  by  any  other  thing  whatsoever,  because  in  this
poverty  of  spirit  the  soul  receiveth  a  clear  and  perfect
comprehension  and  hath  a  most  enlightened  understand
ing  of  all  the  matters  of  this  life,  so  that  it  can  never  be


36  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

deceived  the  whiles  it  doth  possess  this  truth.  Wherefore
do  I  know  that  poverty  is  the  mother  of  all  virtues  and  the
revelation  of  the  divine  wisdom.  For  seeing  how  that
the  divine  wisdom  hath  by  the  Incarnation  taught  us
mortals  to  be  blessed,  it  hath  taught  us  more  by  poverty
of  spirit.  Wherefore  is  all  the  wisdom  of  this  world
nothing  worth  if  it  hath  not  this  truth  in  it,  but  turneth
unto  damnation  ;  and  thus  likewise  are  all  the  wise  men
nothing  whatsoever  if  this  truth  is  not  in  them,  but  they
fall  into  damnation.  Finally,  it  must  be  understood  that
when  the  soul  knoweth  not  this  truth  it  worketh  with  the
spirit  of  vainglory  and  the  hope  of  reward.


CHAPTER   III

HOW,    BEING    LODGED    WITHIN    THE    SOUL,    GOD    WORKETH

ALIKE   UPON    THE   UNDERSTANDING,   THE  AFFECTIONS,

AND  THE  WILL

THE  soul,  therefore,  heareth  and  understandeth  only
those  matters  into  the  inner  meaning  of  which  it  can
penetrate.  For  when  the  soul  is  illumined  by  the  pre
sence  of  God  and  doth  repose  in  God's  bosom  and  God  in
it,  then  is  it  exalted  above  itself  and  heareth  and  rejoiceth
and  doth  rest  in  that  divine  goodness,  concerning  which
none  can  report  because  it  is  above  all  intelligence  and  all
manner  of  speech  and  above  all  words.  But  herein  doth


OF  FOLIGNO  37

the  soul  swim  in  joyfulness  and  in  knowledge,  and,  thus
enlightened,  it  comprehendeth  the  meaning  of  all  the
difficult  and  obscure  sayings  of  Christ.  It  doth  likewise
comprehend  how  and  wherefore  in  the  soul  of  Christ  there
existed  suffering  without  any  relief  whatsoever.  For
which  reason  mine  own  soul  (the  which  was  illumined,  as
hath  been  already  said,  and  wholly  absorbed  in  the  Passion
of  Christ)  did  likewise  experience  such  great  suffering  that
here,  neither,  was  there  any  relief.  When,  therefore,  it
remembered  the  suffering  of  Christ's  soul,  it  could  find
nowhere  any  more  joy,  which  doth  not  happen  when  it
remembereth  the  passion  of  the  body,  because  then  grief
is  followed  by  joy.  It  understandeth  these  reasonings  by
virtue  of  its  aforesaid  exaltation  ;  it  understandeth,  more
over,  that  the  sufferings  in  Christ's  soul  were  sharp  even
while  He  was  yet  in  His  mother's  womb,  as  sharp  as  were
afterwards  His  sufferings  upon  the  Cross,  saving  only  that
as  yet  He  had  had  no  experience  thereof.  Through  the
judgments  and  the  unspeakable  things  of  God  doth  the
soul  further  understand  that  by  the  presence  of  God  it  is
exalted  even  unto  Himself.

Ofttimes  doth  God  work  within  the  soul  in  many  mar
vellous  ways,  which  none  save  He  alone  could  perform.
Sometimes  the  soul  is  suddenly  exalted  unto  God  with
such  joy  that,  if  it  were  to  endure,  I  do  think  that  the
body  would  not  be  able  to  bear  it,  but  would  lose  all  its
members  and  its  sensation.  God  doth  ofttimes  treat  thus
with  the  soul  and  in  the  soul,  and  when  the  soul  desireth


38  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

to  hold  Him  fast  He  doth  instantly  depart.  There  re-
maineth,  nevertheless,  great  joy  and  assurance  in  the  soul,
verily  such  great  joy  that  it  doth  in  no  wise  doubt  that
God  is  yet  present,  but  there  is  naught  which  I  can  liken
unto  that  seeing  and  hearing,  nor  am  I  able  to  describe  it.
These  revelations,  however,  and  exaltations  and  delights,
or  joys,  do  not  always  happen  after  the  same  manner,  but
in  divers  ways  and  almost  always  accompanied  with  some
new  thing  ;  yet  none  of  them  can  be  described.  The
revelations  and  visions  are  at  one  time  thus  and  different
at  another  time  ;  so  is  likewise  the  delight,  the  joyfulness,
and  the  happiness.  Of  all  this  I  can  say  no  more — in
truth,  were  I  to  speak  of  them,  by  reason  of  mine  un-
worthiness  it  would  be  speaking  ill,  spoiling,  faultily  de
scribing,  yea,  even  reviling  them  rather  than  making  them
manifest  as  I  should.  I  am  blinded  and  darkened  in  spirit
and  without  truth  ;  wherefore,  oh  my  sons,  hearken  unto
my  words  with  suspicion  as  unto  the  words  of  an  evil
person,  and  take  ye  good  heed  of  everything,  neither
believe  ye  in  any  saying  of  mine  save  those  which  are  like
unto  the  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  do  work
inwardly  and  lead  unto  the  imitation  of  Him.

For  the  present,  oh  my  sons,  I  take  no  delight  in  writing,
but  do  continually  bewail  my  sins  and  their  redemption,
the  which  was  effected  through  the  Passion  of  Christ  the
Immaculate  ;  yet  am  I  constrained  to  write  unto  you
because  of  the  letters  which  ye  send  unto  me.  Wherefore
do  I  now  write  unto  you  that  which  is  newly  impressed


OF  FOLIGNO  39

upon  mine  heart.  Ye  must  know,  therefore,  oh  my  sons,
that  there  is  only  one  thing  necessary  unto  us,  which  is
God,  to  find  God  and  wholly  fix  our  minds  upon  Him.
This  is  necessary  unto  us.  But  in  order  that  our  minds
may  be  the  better  fixed  upon  God  it  is  needful  that  we
should  cast  off  all  perverse  and  useless  habits,  all  super
fluous  familiarity  with  men  and  women  of  whatsoever
nature,  all  superfluous  knowledge  and  the  desire  to  hear
many  new  things,  all  superfluous  labours  and  occupations.
And,  briefly,  it  is  needful  that  man  should  put  away  from
him  all  things  which  do  distract  his  mind.  Then  must
he  instantly  plunge  into  the  abyss  of  his  wretchedness  and
bethink  him  what  things  he  hath  done  in  times  past,  what
he  is  doing  in  the  present,  and  what  he  will  do  in  the  future,
and  how  that  his  fate  in  the  next  world  will  be  according
unto  his  deserts.  Then  cometh  death,  which  will  be  unto
all  eternity.  And  no  day  and  no  night  must  pass  wherein
he  doth  not  think  upon  these  things.  Wherefore  must  he
constantly  think  and  meditate  and  use  all  his  endeavour
to  comprehend  the  mercy  of  God,  how  that  He  did  most
mercifully  ordain  that  Christ  Jesus  should  suffer  all  this
wretchedness  with  him,  and  he  must  take  heed  that  he
never  forgetteth  this  great  benefit.


40  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA


CHAPTER   IV

HOW    THAT    OUR    PERFECTION    DOTH    CONSIST    IN    KNOWING
OUR    OWN    WRETCHEDNESS    AND    GOD'S    MERCY

OUR  perfection  doth  certainly  consist  in  knowing  God  and
ourselves ;  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  world  whereof  I
do  still  delight  to  write  or  speak  save  these  two  things,
namely,  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  ourselves.  For  this
must  a  man  lie  ever  within  the  prison  of  his  own  self ;  and
if  he  obtaineth  no  profit  from  this,  he  must  seek  another
prison.

Oh  my  beloved  sons,  every  vision,  every  revelation,  all
sweetness  and  emotion,  all  knowledge,  all  contemplation
availeth  nothing  if  man  knoweth  not  God  and  himself ;
for  which  reason  I  tell  ye  truly  that  without  this  know
ledge  all  those  other  things  will  profit  you  nothing  what
soever.  Wherefore  do  I  marvel  that  ye  desire  to  have
letters  from  me  ;  I  perceive  not  in  what  manner  my
words  can  bring  you  comfort,  seeing  that  I  write  of  naught
else  save  of  this  knowledge,  for  I  take  no  more  delight  in
speaking  of  other  things — yea,  I  have  even  imposed  upon
myself  silence  concerning  any  other  matters.  I  do  be
seech  you,  therefore,  that  ye  pray  unto  God  that  He  will
grant  this  light  unto  all  generations  and  that  it  may
remain  unto  you  for  ever.

That  the  knowledge  of  God  is  necessary  unto  us  can  be
proved  and  made  manifest,  because  that  which  we  strive


OF  FOLIGNO  41

after  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  And  since  we  cannot
nor  ever  should  strive  after  it  save  in  the  same  manner  in
which  the  Son  of  God  did  attain  unto  it,  it  is  necessary  to
know  the  Son  of  God  and  His  life  and  works  and  those
things  for  the  which  He  did  obtain  grace,  in  order  that
through  the  imitation  of  His  works  and  the  transforming
of  ourselves  in  Him,  we  may  finally  follow  Him  by  virtue
of  His  merits  and  grace,  and  with  Him  possess  the  King
dom  of  Heaven.  I  say  unto  you  that  before  all  things  it
is  necessary  to  know  Christ,  how  that  He  was  crucified  for
us  and  did  suffer  the  Passion,  thereby  pointing  out  unto  us
the  right  way  of  life.  For  herein  hath  His  infinite  charity
and  His  inestimable  love  been  revealed  unto  us  more
clearly  than  in  any  other  of  the  benefits  He  hath  conferred
upon  us.  For  this  reason,  therefore,  and  in  order  that  we
may  not  be  ungrateful,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should
transform  ourselves  in  His  love,  that  is,  that  we  should
love  Him  as  He  hath  loved  us,  and  should  love  our
neighbours ;  and  likewise  that  we  should  lament  for  the
Passion  of  this  our  Beloved,  seeing  how  that  He  was
crucified  for  love  of  us.  Considering,  moreover,  how
many  things  God  hath  done  for  us  (and  especially  for  our
redemption),  we  are  required,  led,  and  instructed  to  re
flect  upon  our  condition  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  reflect  that  our
condition  is  most  noble,  being  so  beloved  of  the  most  high
God  that  He  was  willing  to  die  for  our  sake,  which  He
would  not  have  done  if  man  had  not  been  a  most  noble
creature  and  of  great  worth.  We  are  further  required  by


42  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

this  consideration  of  Christ  crucified  to  work  out  our  own
salvation  ;  for  God  Himself,  so  exalted  (and  so  far  removed
and  strange  unto  us),  did  use  such  diligence  in  obtaining
our  redemption  and  salvation  that  it  is  our  bounden  duty
to  take  heed  for  ourselves  and  our  salvation  and  to  further
the  will  of  God,  showing  penitence  for  our  sins.

The  knowledge,  therefore,  doth  afford  us  infinite  profit
in  many  ways,  but  chiefly  in  that  we  are  saved  through
His  Passion  and  are  filled  with  His  great  love.


CHAPTER   V

THE    NECESSITY    OF    A    CONSTANT    CONSIDERATION    AND
PROFOUND    KNOWLEDGE    OF    CHRIST   CRUCIFIED

A  CONSTANT  consideration  and  a  profound  knowledge  of
Christ  crucified  are  here  necessary,  for  as  we  behold  so
do  we  love,  and  the  more  we  do  behold  of  the  Son  of
God,  Jesus  Christ  the  Crucified,  the  more  perfectly  and
purely  do  we  love  Him  and  for  love  do  become  one  with
Him.  And  according  as  we  do  become  one  with  Him
through  love,  so  do  we  likewise  share  in  the  sufferings
which  the  soul  witnesseth  in  God,  the  Man  of  Sorrows.
And  seeing  that  we  do  love  according  as  we  see  and  know,
so  doth  the  soul  lament  according  as  it  beholdeth  the
sufferings  of  its  Beloved,  and  doth  suffer  with  His  suffer
ing.  Likewise,  the  more  intimately  any  person  knoweth
this  Man  of  Sorrows,  the  more  doth  he  love  Him  and


OF  FOLIGNO  43

suffer  with  His  sufferings,  and  through  grief  is  made  one
with  Him  whom  he  loveth.  And  as  the  soul  is  made  one
with  this  most  sweet  Christ  through  love,  so  is  it  likewise
united  with  Him  through  suffering  ;  and  all  this  cometh
about  through  perfect  vision  and  the  knowledge  of  God
and  of  ourselves.  In  truth,  moreover,  since  the  soul  be-
holdeth  the  infinitude  of  the  divine  majesty  (of  the  which
I  will  not  speak  for  fear  I  should  rather  disgrace  it  than
speak  of  it  worthily),  and  since  it  beholdeth,  upon  the
other  hand,  the  vileness  and  great  unworthiness  of  sin
ners  (whose  friend  and  kinsman  the  most  sublime  God
hath  deigned  to  be,  and  for  their  sake,  moreover,  hath
borne  the  most  shameful  death),  it  doth  sincerely  trans
form  itself  in  the  love  of  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ ;
and  the  more  it  knoweth  and  doth  profoundly  and  in
wardly  consider  and  behold  Him,  the  more  doth  it  then
enter  into  His  love.  When  it  further  beholdeth  the
sinners  and  the  creature  full  of  faults,  it  perceiveth  and
discerneth  that  these  faults  are  so  numerous  that  its  com
prehension  of  them  is  as  nothing  in  comparison  with
their  number.  When,  however,  being  illumined  by  the
divine  light,  the  soul  recogniseth  that  it  hath  itself  been
the  only  cause  of  such  great  and  sublime  suffering  as
Christ  Jesus  did  bear  for  its  sake,  and  reflecteth  upon  the
infinitude  of  the  divine  goodness  which  for  the  sake  of  so
vile  a  creature  did  so  abase  itself  that  it  became  mortal
man  and  was  tormented  with  great  and  immeasurable
suffering — and  this  not  only  once,  but  continually  the


44  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

while  He  did  live — and  how  in  the  end  He  who  was  the
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  was  willing  to  die  a  shameful
death,  when  the  soul  perceiveth  and  understandeth  this
it  is  itself  overwhelmed  with  grief — and  the  more  clearly
it  doth  perceive,  and  the  more  profoundly  it  doth  con
sider,  the  more  is  it  moved  unto  yet  greater  grief.

More  deeply  moved  yet  is  the  soul  when  it  perceiveth
how,  by  reason  of  his  sins,  miserable  man  is  deprived  of
all  good  things  and  benefits,  that  he  hath  merited  eternal
suffering,  and  is  despised  and  derided  of  that  sublime
Divinity,  and  of  the  angels  and  demons  and  of  all  crea
tures,  and  that,  in  order  to  raise  man  up  again  from  out
of  this  adverse  poverty,  the  most  high  God,  Christ  Jesus,
the  most  rich  in  all  things,  did  make  Himself  poor  for  our
sake  ;  how  He,  the  most  beatific  and  most  joyful,  did
make  Himself  most  wretched  in  order  that  through  His
infinite  suffering  He  might  redeem  man  and  save  him
from  everlasting  and  unspeakable  pain.  The  soul  doth
perceive,  moreover,  how  the  God  of  Glory,  worthy  above
all  things  to  be  praised,  did  make  Himself  obedient  and
humble,  willing  to  be  despised,  mocked  at  and  reviled,
seemingly  of  no  account  and  thus  reputed,  and  He  did
this  in  order  that  despised  man  might  thereby  be  made
glorious  and  honourable.  When  the  soul  doth  well  con
sider  and  more  clearly  perceive  these  things,  the  more
doth  it  incline  itself  unto  Him  and  suffer  with  His  suffer
ing.  For  the  more  clearly  the  soul  doth  know  God  and
His  exaltedness,  His  mercy  and  infinite  goodness  and


OF  FOLIGNO  45

worthiness  (which  things  it  maketh  known  unto  man  and
proveth  them  by  means  of  their  effect),  and  the  more
clearly  it  beholdeth  the  wretchedness  of  man,  his  faults,
his  unworthiness,  his  ingratitude,  infirmities,  and  vileness,
the  more  deeply  is  it  moved  towards  the  love  of  Christ
and  the  grief  of  His  Passion,  and  is  transformed  into  the
likeness  thereof,  wherein  consisteth  all  the  perfection  of
man.

It  hath  thus  been  made  clear,  therefore,  that  the
knowledge  of  God  and  of  ourselves  is  absolutely  necessary
and  above  all  other  things  profitable.  Wherefore  must
we  constantly  dwell  upon  such  knowledge,  day  and  night,
and  the  more  profound  man's  contemplation  of  the  afore
said  things,  the  more  perfectly  can  he  transform  himself
into  the  likeness  of  Christ,  both  in  sorrow  and  in  love,  as
hath  already  been  said.


CHAPTER   VI

HOW    ALL    THE    WAYS    OF    THE    PASSION    MUST    BE    DIGESTED

WITHIN   THE    HEART,    OR   AT    LEAST    BE    REPEATED    BY

THE    MOUTH

MY  beloved  son,  I  do  entreat  thee,  and  with  all  mine  heart
do  supplicate  thee,  that  thou  turn  not  away  the  eyes  of
thy  soul  from  gazing  upon  this  God,  this  Man  of  Sorrows.
For  this  sight  and  this  consideration  do  enlighten  the  soul
and  inflame  it  with  love  and  the  fervour  of  devotion,


46  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

keeping  it  there  fixed.  And  if  thine  eyes  should  stray,  do
thou  use  all  thine  endeavour  to  bring  them  back  and  hold
them  there  with  good  attention.  Further  do  I  exhort
and  pray  thee  that,  if  thy  mind  be  not  exalted  to  behold
the  Man  of  Sorrows,  thou  do  inquire  and  meditate  upon
all  the  ways  of  the  Passion  and  the  Cross.  And  even  if
thou  art  not  able  to  do  this  with  thine  heart,  at  least  with
thy  mouth  shalt  thou  earnestly  and  diligently  repeat
those  things  which  belong  unto  the  said  Passion,  because
when  a  thing  is  ofttimes  spoken  with  the  mouth  it  doth
in  the  end  impart  warmth  and  fervour  unto  the  heart.
If  any  person  were  perfectly  to  behold  this  One,  so  often
called  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  as  He  truly  was,  and  were  to
consider  how  He  became  most  poor  and  despised,  and
upon  every  side  filled  with  unspeakable  and  unceasing  pain
and  grief,  consumed  and  cast  down  for  our  sake  (which
beholding  cometh  only  of  grace),  he  would  assuredly
follow  after  Christ,  and  cheerfully  bear  alike  poverty,
scorn,  reviling,  and  unceasing  pain.

None  can  excuse  themselves  for  not  having  found  and
obtained  divine  mercy,  for  the  Lord  is  generous  and  doth
most  abundantly  give  it  unto  all  who  do  seek  and  desire
it.  I  desire,  oh  my  son,  that  thou  fill  thine  heart  with
naught  else  save  with  God  uncreated  and  the  knowledge
and  love  of  Him,  and  that  naught  else  be  found  therein
save  God  uncreated.  Nevertheless,  if  thou  canst  not
have  this,  do  thou  hold  fast  to  the  love  and  knowledge  of
Christ  crucified,  and  if  this  should  be  taken  from  thee,


OF  FOLIGNO  47

then  rest  thou  not,  oh  my  son,  until  thou  hast  verily
filled  thine  heart  with  one  of  these  two  things,  which  do
entirely  fill  and  satisfy  both  heart  and  mind.  Wherefore,
my  son,  do  thou  hold  fixedly  unto  me  and  believe  my
words  concerning  that  which  is  needful  unto  him  who
would  follow  the  way  of  God,  and  draw  nigh  unto  God
and  enjoy  His  benefits  in  this  world  and  the  next.

Before  all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  know  God
in  very  truth,  and  not  only  outwardly  and  superficially,
as  though  it  were  through  the  colour  of  writing,  or  the
sound  of  words,  or  the  likeness  of  some  creature  ;  which
manner  of  knowing  Him,  according  to  the  common  way
of  speech,  is  assuredly  a  simple  knowledge  of  God.  But
man  must  know  Him  in  very  truth  ;  he  must  understand
His  supreme  worthiness,  His  supreme  beauty,  sweetness,
exaltedness,  virtue,  goodness,  liberality,  mercy,  and  pity,
and  he  must  understand  that  God  is  the  supreme  good
and  highest  of  all.  True  it  is  that  these  things  are  under
stood  of  a  wise  person  otherwise  than  of  a  simple  person,
for  the  wise  doth  verily  understand  the  matter  as  it  is,
whereas  the  simple  understandeth  it  only  as  it  doth
appear  outwardly.  It  is  like  unto  a  precious  stone  which
hath  been  found  and  which  the  wise  and  the  simple  do
covet  in  different  ways.  The  simple  man  knoweth  not
its  virtue  and  desireth  to  possess  it  only  for  its  beauty  and
its  brightness,  and  for  no  other  reason  ;  but  beyond  the
splendour  and  the  brightness  of  the  precious  stone,  the
wise  man  knoweth  its  virtue  and  its  worth,  and  when  he


48  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

hath,  found  it  he  loveth  it  with  the  utmost  intelligence
and  fervour.  In  like  manner  doth  the  wise  soul  seek  to
know  God,  not  only  according  to  the  outward  appear
ance  and  with  only  careless  reflection,  but  using  all  its
endeavour  to  know  Him  in  very  truth,  to  taste  of  His
supreme  goodness  and  to  know  His  worth.  For  not  only
is  He  good,  but  He  is  the  Supreme  Good — and  knowing
Him,  man  doth  in  all  ways  love  Him  for  His  goodness —
and  loving  Him,  seeketh  to  possess  Him — and  He,  who  is
supremely  good,  giveth  Himself  unto  the  lover,  and  the
soul  feeleth  Him  and  tasteth  of  His  sweetness  and  en-
joyeth  that  greatest  of  all  delights.  Then  doth  the  soul
participate  in  that  supreme  good,  the  which  is  supreme
love ;  it  entereth  into  it  with  affection,  and  being
enamoured  of  the  love  of  its  Beloved,  it  desireth  to  hold
Him  fast,  wherefore  it  embraceth  Him  and  presseth  Him
unto  itself  ;  it  uniteth  itself  with  God  and  draweth  Him
unto  itself  with  the  utmost  sweetness  of  love.  Then,  by
the  virtue  of  love,  is  the  lover  transformed  in  the  beloved
and  the  beloved  is  transformed  in  the  lover,  and  like  unto
hard  iron  which  so  assumeth  the  colour,  heat,  virtue,  and
form  of  the  fire  that  it  almost  turneth  into  fire,  so  doth
the  soul,  united  with  God  through  the  perfect  grace  of
divine  love,  itself  almost  become  divine  and  transformed
in  God.  Nevertheless,  it  changeth  not  its  own  substance,
but  its  whole  life  is  transformed  in  the  love  of  God,  and
thus  doth  it  almost  become  divine  in  itself.

Behold,  how  greatly  it  doth  profit  us  to  possess  a  know-


OF  FOLIGNO  49

ledge  of  God.  And  truly  is  it  needful,  as  hath  been  said,
that  man  must  know  God  before  he  can  walk  in  His  ways
and  desire  to  possess  Him.  Thereafter  cometh  love,
which  doth  transform  the  lover  in  the  beloved,  and  of  this
nature  is  the  soul  who  knoweth  God  in  very  truth,  and
fervently  loveth  Him  whom  it  knoweth  so  well.


CHAPTER   VII

HOW   THE    SOUL    MAY    SPEEDILY    AND    EASILY    FIND    GOD    BY

MEANS    OF    DEVOUT,    PURE,    CONSTANT,    HUMBLE,    AND

FERVENT   PRAYER

YE  must  know,  however,  that  the  soul  cannot  obtain  this
knowledge  of  its  own  power,  neither  by  writings,  nor
learning,  nor  by  any  created  thing — albeit  it  may  use  and
profit  by  them — but  solely  by  divine  grace  and  the  light
thereof.  Wherefore  do  I  hold  that  the  soul  cannot  find
it  more  speedily  nor  implore  it  and  obtain  it  more  easily
from  the  most  high  God,  perfect  Good,  perfect  Light,  and
perfect  Love,  than  by  devout,  pure,  constant,  humble,  and
fervent  prayer,  and  that  uttered  not  only  with  the  mouth
alone,  but  with  the  mind  and  heart  and  all  the  strength
of  the  soul  and  the  feelings  of  the  body,  asking  and  im
ploring  with  most  ardent  desire.  It  followeth,  then,
that  the  soul  who  desireth  to  find  this  full  and  true  know
ledge  and  light  of  God  must  offer  its  own  prayers,  read-

D


50  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

ing,  meditating,  and  studying  continually  in  the  Book  of
Life,  which  Book  is  the  whole  life  of  Christ  during  the
time  that  He  did  live  this  mortal  life.

God  the  Father,  dearly  beloved,  hath  shown  and  set
forth  unto  the  soul  the  form,  manner,  and  way,  whereby
it  may  obtain  the  knowledge  of  God  Himself  through
love.  God  the  Father,  most  high,  wise  and  all  knowing,
hath  given  us  His  beloved  Son  as  a  sign  and  as  ensample.
Wherefore,  my  dear  children,  if  ye  are  eager  for  the  light
of  divine  grace,  if  ye  will  free  your  hearts  from  all  cares,
if  ye  will  escape  all  hurtful  temptations,  if  ye  will  perfect
yourselves  in  the  way  of  God  and  set  your  feet  verily  upon
this  way,  then  haste  ye  to  fly  unto  the  Cross  of  Christ,  for
verily  there  is  no  other  way  reserved  unto  the  sons  of  God
whereby  they  may  find  God,  and,  having  found  Him,
keep  Him,  save  the  way  of  the  life  and  death  of  Christ
crucified.  This  do  I  hold  to  be  the  Book  of  Life,  unto
the  reading  of  which  (as  I  have  already  said),  none  can
attain  save  by  continual  prayer.  For  continual  prayer
doth  illumine,  exalt,  and  transform  the  soul,  and  illumined
by  that  light  and  uplifted  by  prayer,  it  doth  clearly  be
hold  the  way  prepared  for  it  and  trodden  already  by  the
feet  of  the  Crucified.  Thus  walking  upon  this  way  with
an  awakened  heart,  not  only  do  we  escape  from  the  heavy
cares  of  this  world,  but  we  are  uplifted  above  ourselves
and  do  taste  of  the  divine  sweetness — and  being  thus  up
lifted  we  are  kindled  with  divine  fire,  and,  burning  with
love,  we  are  made  one  with  God,  And  all  this  cometh  of


OF  FOLIGNO  51

gazing  upon  the  Cross  through  the  medium  of  continual
prayer.

Wherefore,  my  beloved  son,  haste  thee  unto  this  Cross
and  pray  that  He  who  died  upon  it  for  thy  sake  will  so
enlighten  thee  that  thou  mayst  fully  know  both  Him  and
thyself,  and  that,  profoundly  knowing  thine  own  faults,
thou  mayest  raise  thyself  unto  the  divine  sweetness,  rising
from  a  love  of  thy  faults  unto  the  divine  mercy  and  cast
ing  away  all  falseness.  For  seeing  how  that  the  incom
prehensible  and  incomparable  God  hath  adopted  thee,
who  are  so  full  of  sin,  and  hath  elected  thee  to  be  His  son,
deigning  to  be  thy  Father,  thou  shalt  not  show  thyself  un
grateful,  but  thou  shalt  study  how  in  all  ways  to  obey  the
commands  of  so  marvellous  and  loving  a  Father.  For  if
the  Father's  will  is  not  fulfilled  in  His  lawful  sons,  how
shall  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  unlawful  ?  Unlawful  sons  are
they  who,  by  reason  of  the  evil  desires  of  the  flesh,  do
break  loose  from  the  discipline  of  the  Father,  and  lawful
sons  are  they  who,  by  reason  of  their  ardent  love,  do
endeavour  to  follow  their  Master  in  poverty,  suffering,
and  disgrace.  And  these  three  things,  my  beloved  sons,
must  ye  know  and  take  for  the  foundation  and  completion
of  all  perfection,  because  through  these  three  things  is
the  soul  illumined,  purged,  and  perfected,  and  made
ready  for  the  divine  transformation.

I  do  repeat,  therefore,  that  all  the  perfection  of  man
and  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  himself — that  is  to  say,
the  understanding  of  the  immensity  of  God  in  all  per-


52  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

faction  and  goodness,  and  of  his  own  nothingness — this
manifestation  and  knowledge  of  God  and  of  himself  is  only
granted  unto  the  lawful  sons  of  God,  who  do  pray  truly,
and  fervently  do  read  and  meditate  in  the  Book  of  Life.
Unto  these  true  sons  doth  God  the  Father  open  and
present  the  Book  of  Life,  which  is  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,
God  and  Man,  within  which  Book  they  will  find  all  things
that  they  can  possibly  desire  to  know.  Herein  can  they
learn  of  the  blessed  wisdom  of  God  which  maketh  not
proud,  and  herein  will  they  find  set  forth  all  doctrine
needful  for  themselves  or  for  others.  If  thou  dost  desire,
therefore,  to  be  well  enlightened  and  instructed,  read  this
Book  of  Life,  and  if  thou  goest  slowly  and  dost  not  read
lightly  nor  pass  things  over,  thou  wilt  be  enlightened  and
instructed  in  all  things  necessary  for  thyself  and  for  others
according  to  their  condition.  And  if  thou  dost  carefully
read  and  meditate,  using  no  haste,  thou  wilt  be  kindled
and  consumed  by  the  divine  fire  in  such  a  degree  that
thou  wilt  hold  all  tribulation  to  be  the  greatest  consola
tion,  and  wilt  deem  thyself  to  be  utterly  unworthy  of
suffering  tribulation.  And  what  is  more,  if  any  human
praise  or  prosperity  should  come  unto  thee  through  some
talent  which  God  hath  bestowed  upon  thee,  thou  shalt
not  be  puffed  up  with  pride  nor  raise  thyself  on  high,  for
if  thou  readest  the  Book  of  Life  thou  wilt  see  therein  and
verily  comprehend  that  this  thing  cometh  not  of  thine
own  merit.  This  is  one  of  the  signs  whereby  man  may
know  that  he  hath  the  grace  of  God,  that  he  groweth  not


OF  FOLIGNO  53

puffed  up  or  haughty  whatsoever  may  happen,  but  re-
maineth  ever  humble.

Ye  see  then,  my  son,  how  before  all  things  ye  must
endeavour  to  attain  unto  a  veritable  knowledge  of  God
and  of  thyself,  which  knowledge  is  not  attained  save
through  constant  and  fervent  prayer  and  diligently  read
ing  in  the  Book  of  Life.  Amen.


CHAPTER   VIII

OF    THE    BOOK    OF    LIFE,    WHICH    IS    CHRIST,    WHEREIN    MAN
LEARNETH  TO  KNOW  GOD  AND  MAN,  HIMSELF,  AND  ALL
THINGS    NEEDFUL    FOR    MAN'S    WELFARE

YE  must  know,  therefore,  that  this  Book  of  Life  is  naught
else  save  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  the  In
carnate  Word  and  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  and  He
appeared  amongst  us  in  order  that  we  might  be  in
structed  by  means  of  His  life,  His  death,  and  His  teach
ing.  For  which  reason  it  behoveth  us  to  see  what  was
the  manner  of  life  and  conversation  which  He  did
practise  whiles  He  did  dwell  within  this  mortal  body.

His  life  is  an  ensample  and  a  pattern  for  every  mortal
who  desireth  to  be  saved.  But  His  life  was  naught  save
a  most  bitter  penance,  which  did  ever  accompany  Him
throughout  His  mortal  life,  so  that  from  the  hour  wherein
the  soul  of  Christ  was  created  and  placed  in  His  most  holy
body  within  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  undefiled,  until  that


54  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

last  most  holy  hour  wherein  His  soul  departed  from  His
body  by  cruel  death  upon  the  Cross,  He  was  never  without
this  companionship  of  penance.  But  it  was  not  thus
with  the  other  saints,  nor  with  the  apostles  nor  the
Blessed  Virgin.

The  companions  which  God  the  Father  in  the  Highest
did  in  His  most  wise  dispensation  give  unto  His  Beloved
Son  in  this  world  were  these.  Firstly,  the  most  perfect,
complete,  and  continual  poverty  ;  secondly,  the  most
perfect,  complete,  and  continual  contempt ;  thirdly,  the
utmost  suffering.  These  were  the  companions  who  did
accompany  Christ  during  the  whole  of  His  life  in  order  to
furnish  an  ensample  unto  us,  that  we  may  choose,  love
and  endure  these  same  companions  until  we  die.  For
this  is  the  way  whereby  the  soul  must  reach  unto  God,
and  other  direct  road  is  there  none.  Needful  is  it,  there
fore,  and  seemly  that  the  members  of  the  body  should
follow  the  same  road  which  had  been  taken  by  the  head,
and  that  the  same  companions  which  had  accompanied
the  head  should  likewise  accompany  the  members.


CHAPTER    IX

OF    THE    GREAT    POVERTY    OF    CHRIST

THE  first  companion  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Book  of  Life  and
our  salvation,  was,  therefore,  constant,  supreme,  and  per
fect  poverty.  This  poverty  was  of  three  degrees  :  one


OF  FOLIGNO  55

was  great,  the  second  was  yet  greater  and  was  joined  with
the  first,  but  the  third  kind,  joined  with  the  first  and  the
second,  made  up  the  most  perfect  poverty.

The  first  degree  of  this  perfect  poverty  of  Christ,  who
is  the  Book,  the  Way,  and  the  Leader  of  the  soul,  was  that
He  deigned  to  be  poor  in  all  the  temporal  things  of  this
world.  Thus  did  He  own  neither  land,  nor  vineyard,
nor  garden,  nor  other  possessions ;  He  had  neither  gold,
nor  silver,  nor  money  whatsoever,  nor  any  other  thing  of
His  own,  neither  would  He  consent  to  accept  of  the
things  of  this  world  aught  save  what  did  suffice  to  succour
Him  in  the  depths  of  His  great  poverty  and  supply  the
needs  of  His  body,  that  is  to  say,  hunger,  thirst,  and  want,
cold  and  heat,  great  weariness,  austerity  and  hardship.
Yet  of  bodily  necessaries  would  He  accept  naught  that
was  delicate  or  pleasant  to  the  taste,  but  only  coarse
and  common  food  such  as  was  found  in  those  places  and
provinces  wherein  Christ  did  live  as  liveth  a  beggar,
without  house  or  habitation.

The  second  degree  of  Christ's  poverty  was  greater  than
the  first,  seeing  that  He  did  desire  to  be  poor  in  friends
and  kindred  and  in  all  familiarity  with  the  great  and
powerful,  and  finally  in  all  worldly  friendship.  Where
fore  did  He  not  possess,  nor  desire  to  possess,  any  friend
whatsoever  of  His  own,  nor  yet  of  His  mother  or  His
putative  father  Joseph,  or  His  disciples.  For  this  reason
did  none  hesitate  to  kick  Him,  strike  Him,  and  scourge
Him,  and  to  speak  hurtful  words  unto  Him.  And  He


56  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

deigned  to  be  born  of  a  poor  and  humble  mother  and  to
be  brought  up  subject  unto  a  poor  carpenter,  His  putative
father.  He  did  likewise  deprive  Himself  of  the  love  and
familiar  intercourse  of  kings  and  rulers,  of  priests  and
scribes,  and  of  the  love  of  friends  and  kindred — so  that
neither  for  Hrs  mother's  sake,  nor  for  any  other  person,
would  He  leave  undone  aught  the  which  could  be  pleasing
unto  His  Almighty  Father  or  according  unto  His  will.
Amen.

CHAPTER   X

HOW    CHRIST    REVEALED    HIMSELF    POOR    IN    POWER

THE  third  and  supreme  degree  of  poverty  was  that  He
did  put  away  from  Him  His  own  nature.  Firstly,  be
cause  He  made  Himself  poor  and  needy,  laying  aside  His
own  power,  He,  the  Omnipotent,  unto  whom  naught  was
impossible,  desired  to  appear  and  to  live  in  the  world  as  a
man,  weak,  infirm,  and  impotent,  in  order  that  beside  the
human  miseries,  the  helpless  childhood  and  other  burdens
which  He  did  take  upon  Himself  for  our  sake,  He  who  was
without  blame  or  sin  might  appear  as  but  a  feeble  man.
Verily  He  endured  much  weariness  in  His  journeyings,
visitations,  and  disgrace.

And  what  is  more,  not  only  did  sinful  man  rise  up
against  Him,  but  even  the  elements  and  senseless  bodies
received  power  from  their  Creator  to  cause  Him  suffering
and  affliction,  and,  as  though  He  had  no  power  to  resist,


OF  FOLIGNO  57

He  endured  all  for  our  sake.  He  gave  power  unto  the
sharp  thorns  to  enter  and  most  cruelly  wound  His  divine
and  trembling  head  ;  He  empowered  the  bonds  and
bitter  cords  to  bind  Him  fast  unto  the  pillar  and  tie  His
hands  together  ;  He  whose  death  awoke  the  thunder  and
shook  the  earth,  He  who  was  the  true  and  perfect  Light,
the  Light  which  illumined  all  things,  gave  power  unto  the
veil  to  hide  Him,  and  unto  the  scourges  that  they  should
long  and  cruelly  beat  Him  ;  He  gave  unto  the  hard  nails
power  to  pierce  and  enter  His  tender  feet  and  the  hands
wherewith  He  had  given  light  unto  the  blind  and  hearing
unto  the  deaf  ;  He  empowered  the  lofty  Cross  that  it
should  bear  Him  on  high,  His  body  scourged  and  bleeding
and  pierced  as  He  hung  there,  and  that  it  should  show
Him  naked  unto  all.  And  in  order  that  He  might  suffer
the  most  cruel  and  ignominious  death,  He  caused  the
vinegar  and  hyssop  to  make  bitter  His  mouth  ;  He  caused
(oh,  marvellous  to  hear  !)  the  lance  to  enter  and  pierce
through  His  divine  side  and  heart,  so  that  blood  and
water  issued  from  out  His  heart  and  body  and  fell  upon
the  earth.  Moreover,  He  did  give  unto  the  soldiers  who
crucified  Him,  unto  the  Jews  and  unto  Pilate  and  others
yet  worse,  the  power  to  judge,  accuse,  revile,  and  insult
Him,  to  beat,  mock  at,  and  finally  to  put  Him  to  death,  He
who  with  a  single  word  could  have  prevented  all  things.
With  a  single  sign  of  His  head  He  could  have  overthrown
and  destroyed  them  all ;  if  He  had  but  given  command
unto  His  angel,  an  infinite  multitude  of  the  heavenly


58  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

host  would  have  come  down,  and  would  in  an  instant
have  cast  all  things  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  If  He  had
not  verily  granted  them  the  power  and  had  not  shown
Himself  as  being  helpless  and  weak,  there  is  no  manner  of
doubt  that  no  single  creature  would  have  been  able  to
do  hurt  unto  its  Creator,  yea,  it  would  have  abhorred
such  a  deed.

A  yet  greater  thing  was  it  that  He  did  submit  Himself
unto  the  elements,  unto  cold  and  heat,  hunger  and  thirst,
and  other  insensible  creatures,  concealing  His  power  and
despoiling  Himself  thereof  in  the  likeness  of  man,  in
order  that  He  might  teach  us  weak  and  wretched  mortals
with  what  patience  we  ought  to  bear  tribulation.  He  de
prived  Himself  of  power  in  order  that  He  might  save  man,
and  by  the  glory  of  the  resurrection  did  He  make  him
strong  to  resist  and  to  endure.

A  thing  even  greater  still  was,  that  He  did  give  the
devil  power  over  Him  that  He  might  be  tempted  and  led
into  danger  and  persecuted  even  unto  death,  in  order
that  He  might  thereby  liberate  man  from  the  devil's
power.

Thus  did  the  invincible  Lord  of  all  become  a  sufferer  ;
the  Creator  of  all  things  became  impotent ;  the  strong
King  became  weak.  Neither  did  He  oppose  the  devil,
but  became  subject  unto  him,  to  all  insensible  creatures,
to  tribulation,  injury,  and  pain,  to  all  manner  of  grief
and  affliction,  thereby  putting  to  confusion  us  miserable
wretches,  who  do  esteem  ourselves  so  tender  that  not


OF  FOLIGNO  59

only  do  we  refuse  all  voluntary  tribulation  and  penitence
but  as  often  as  we  can  we  do  put  away  from  us  those  tribu
lations  and  afflictions  which  are  sent  unto  us  by  divine
command,  murmuring  against  God  most  iniquitously.


CHAPTER   XI

HOW  CHRIST  LAID  ASIDE  HIS  WISDOM  AND  HIS  OWN   NATURE

SECONDLY,  He  did  lay  aside  His  own  nature,  making
Himself  poor  in  wisdom  because  He  desired  to  appear  as
a  simple  man,  one  senseless  and  vain  in  the  sight  of  men.
He  appeared  not  as  a  philosopher  or  a  doctor  of  many
words,  or  as  one  who  disputeth  noisily,  nor  yet  as  a  scribe
renowned  for  wisdom  and  learning  ;  but  in  the  utmost
simplicity  did  He  talk  with  men,  showing  unto  them  the
way  of  truth  in  His  life,  His  virtues,  and  His  miracles.
Seeing  how  that  He  is  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  the
Creator  and  Inspirer  of  all  learning,  He  might  have  used
all  the  subtilty  of  knowledge  and  of  argument,  and,  had
He  desired,  He  might  have  shown  forth  His  wit  and
obtained  glory  ;  but  with  such  simplicity  did  He  declare
the  truth  that  He  was  esteemed  of  almost  all  people  to  be
not  only  simple  and  foolish,  but  even  ignorant  and  vain.
Herein  did  He  show  unto  us  the  way  of  truth,  that  is  to
say,  that  neither  in  learning  nor  in  wisdom  should  we  take
glory  unto  ourselves,  for  being  puffed  up  with  this  pride


60  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

we  seek  to  obtain  the  name  of  master  before  men  and  to
cover  ourselves  with  vainglory.

Thirdly,  He  did  lay  aside  His  own  nature  in  that  He
did  make  Himself  poor  of  the  fame  of  His  holiness,  good
ness,  and  innocence.  Which  thing  is  exceeding  marvellous,
because  He  did  so  walk  in  the  way  of  justice  that  not  only
did  very  few  persons  esteem  Him  holy,  but  He  was  held  to
be  a  sinner  and  the  friend  of  sinners,  a  destroyer,  seducer,
and  conspirator  against  His  country,  and  albeit  He  was
working  out  our  salvation  upon  earth,  He  was  reputed
and  condemned  as  a  blasphemer  and  numbered  amongst
thieves  and  evil-doers.  He  might  have  revealed  Himself
in  all  the  fame  of  holiness,  so  that  He  would  have  been
universally  held  to  be  the  greatest  of  all  saints  and  one  in
whom  there  was  no  sin  ;  but  He  did  choose  to  take  upon
Himself  the  sins  of  us  all  and  the  fame  of  holiness  did  He
give  unto  His  servant  John.  He  who  was  the  chief  of  all
saints,  and  king  of  all  virtues,  in  whom  was  united  all
goodness,  He  did  this  thing,  and  did  deign  to  put  away
from  Him  all  His  fame  of  holiness  (saving  only  the  truth
of  His  teaching,  life,  and  judgment),  and  to  become  poor
in  order  that  He  might  lay  bare  our  hypocrisy.  For  we
do  seek  glory  in  the  sight  of  men  ;  we  do  feign  to  possess
those  good  things  which  we  have  not ;  we  do  endeavour
to  beg  for  ourselves  the  fame  of  holiness  and  innocence,
falsely  denying  our  wickedness,  and  with  lies  attributing
unto  ourselves  good  works,  lawfully  and  unlawfully,  as
often  as  we  can.


OF  FOLIGNO  61

Fourthly,  He  did  lay  aside  His  own  nature  in  that  He
did  renounce  His  kingdom,  His  princely  estate  and  lord
ship,  and  all  things  which  He  did  possess.  He,  the  King
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  whose  kingdom  is  without
end,  deigned  to  live  amongst  men,  and  be  as  an  humble
servant,  one  dejected,  cast  out,  and  sold — and  when  they
did  desire  to  make  Him  king,  He  would  not,  but  unto  the
kings  of  this  world  did  He  remain  subject  even  unto  death,
obediently  paying  tribute  unto  the  courts,  judges,  and
tax-gatherers  who  did  ask  it  of  Him  ;  subjecting  Himself
not  only  unto  kings,  but  likewise  unto  the  lowest  of  their
servants,  officers,  and  ministers,  ever  obedient,  even  unto
scourging  and  death  upon  the  Cross.

And  He,  the  King  of  kings,  did  say  before  Pilate  that
His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  He  sought  not  after
the  kingdom  of  this  world  or  the  temporal  lordship  over
men,  but  was  ever  willing  to  be  in  subjection  ;  not  to  be
lord  or  king  or  prince,  but  the  most  humble  servant,
casting  Himself  entirely  aside.  Moreover,  He  was  sub
ject  unto  His  most  poor  and  humble  Mother  and  His
putative  father,  obedient  unto  them  and  humbly  serving
them  until  His  thirtieth  year.  He  was  obedient  in  the
midst  of  His  disciples,  who  were  few  in  number,  ignorant,
and  poor,  and  albeit  He  did  choose  to  be  as  a  king  or  ruler
over  them,  He  said  that  He  was  not  come  to  be  ministered
unto,  but  to  minister  unto  them,  even  unto  the  rendering
up  of  His  spirit  for  them  and  for  the  other  sinners  who
were  to  be  redeemed.  Yea,  He,  the  Head  and  Master  of


62  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

those  disciples,  did  suffer  hunger  and  thirst  and  tribula
tion  ;  for  He  was  not  their  Master  in  order  that  He  might
be  set  above  them,  but  that  He  might  be  the  first  amongst
them  to  suffer  affliction  and  be  cast  down ;  and  so  humble
was  His  intercourse  with  them  that  He  did  minister  unto
them  as  they  sat  at  meat,  even  washing  their  hands  and
their  feet.

Alas,  how  great  is  our  folly  !  The  mighty  Lord  and
King  of  kings  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  but  we
do  ever  seek  to  be  exalted  and  preferred,  and  to  live  in
liberty,  free  from  all  yoke  whatsoever.  Neither  doth  His
love  constrain  us  to  be  subject  and  obedient  unto  any
person,  but  we  do  always  desire  to  be  set  above  the  others.
Not  thus,  not  thus,  oh  Christ,  didst  Thou  act,  for  Thou
knewest  that  the  judgment  would  be  hard  exceedingly,
for  those  in  authority  and  power  will  suffer  great  tor
ments,  and  of  their  lives,  their  deeds,  their  sins,  and  of
those  in  subjection  unto  them  will  they  be  required  to
render  the  most  strict  account.

Thus  will  our  pride  be  confounded  by  the  Book  of  Life,
who  is  Himself  an  ensample.  And  we  do  desire  to  sub
ject  ourselves  unto  those  set  in  authority  over  us  (as  He
hath  ever  done),  not  doing  aught  according  unto  our  own
will,  but  submitting  for  love  of  Him  who  submitted  unto
all  things  for  our  sake.  And  for  our  safety  will  we  not
only  endure  the  state  of  subjection,  but,  fleeing  from  all
preferment,  we  will  seek  with  whole  hearts  and  fervent
desire  to  be  in  subjection  and  an  humble  state.


OF  FOLIGNO  63

Such,  then,  was  the  supreme,  constant,  and  perfect
poverty  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  who,  albeit  He  was
Lord  of  all  riches,  did  nevertheless  choose  to  be  poor
amongst  us,  that  He  might  teach  us  the  love  of  poverty.
And  verily  He  was  poor  in  possessions,  in  will  and  in
spirit,  beyond  man's  comprehension,  and  all  for  the  deep
love  wherewith  He  loved  us.  He  was  poor  in  riches  and
needy  of  all  worldly  things  ;  He  was  poor  in  friends  and
power,  poor  in  worldly  wisdom,  in  the  fame  of  holiness
and  in  all  dignities.  And  finally,  being  poor  in  all  things,
He  preached  poverty  and  said  that  the  poor  were  blessed
and  should  judge  the  world.  Upon  the  other  hand  He
did  condemn  the  wealthy  and  their  riches  and  abundance,
saying  that  they  did  deserve  condemnation.  He  did
preach  this  in  deed  and  by  word  of  mouth  and  by  example,
with  all  His  might.


CHAPTER   XII

HOW    POVERTY    OF   SPIRIT    IS    DESPISED    BY    MANY

OH,  the  shame,  oh,  the  pain  of  it  !  In  these  days  is
poverty  of  spirit  thrust  forth  and  put  to  flight  by  almost
all  persons.  And  what  is  worse  and  yet  more  detestable
is,  that  those  same  persons  who  do  read  of  it  in  that  Book
of  Life  and  understand  and  preach  and  glorify  it,  do
utterly  reject  it  in  deed  and  will  and  in  all  their  acts  and
intentions.  And  this  they  do  because  the  world  hateth


64  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

that  poverty,  and  God  loveth  and  approveth  it,  choosing
that  most  blessed  thing  for  Himself  and  for  His  followers.
But  what  man  is  there,  what  woman,  or  other  creature,
who  in  these  days  could  declare  themselves  accompanied
by  such  glorious  companions  as  those  by  whom  Christ
elected  to  be  accompanied  ?  Blessed  is  he  whose  re
pentance  hath  led  him  to  follow  Christ's  example  and
choose  poverty  in  this  world.

Alas,  alas,  we  do  hear  and  know  and  steadfastly  believe
in  what  manner  the  Son  of  God  (our  Creator  and  Re
deemer,  the  Master  given  unto  us  for  an  illumination  and
an  ensample)  was  clothed,  with  what  food  and  drink  He
was  satisfied,  with  what  garments  He  was  adorned,  in
what  palaces  and  chambers  He  was  lodged,  by  what
family  and  friends  He  was  surrounded,  what  learning  and
knowledge  He  did  pursue,  and  what  goods  of  this  world
He  did  enjoy.  All  this  do  we  know,  yet  nevertheless,
even  whilst  we  do  say  we  are  Christians,  desiring  to  be  so
called — by  no  manner  of  means  will  we  share  Christ's
poverty,  neither  do  we  desire  to  be  like  unto  Him.
Although  with  words  do  we  say  many  things  glorifying
poverty,  yet  in  actual  deeds  and  works  we  do  blaspheme
against  that  condition  of  Christ  and  the  perfection  of  His
poverty.  Woe  unto  us,  who,  together  with  so  great  an
ensample,  teacher,  and  master,  do  truly  thrust  away  from
us  our  own  salvation,  turning  from  it  and  from  His
teaching  to  seek  after  the  abundance  of  this  world,  and
are  left  empty  at  the  last !  Wherefore  neither  our  penance


OF  FOLIGNO  65

nor  our  Christianity  do  follow  the  straight  way  of  Jesus
Christ,  but  are  most  shamefully  opposed  unto  it.

Blessed  (saith  He),  verily  blessed  is,  and  shall  be,  he
who  loveth  poverty  in  all  the  aforesaid  things  and  who
desireth  to  be  truly  poor  in  worldly  things,  in  deed  and
not  only  in  words  ;  poor  in  friends,  in  familiar  inter
course,  in  all  delights,  vain  knowledge  and  curiosity,  poor
in  the  repute  of  holiness  and  in  all  preferment  and  dignity.
And  if  any  should  not  be  able  to  put  away  from  himself
utterly  all  these  aforesaid  things,  he  should  at  least  en
deavour  with  all  his  might  to  withdraw  his  affection
from  them.  Of  a  surety  these  poor  are  blessed,  for  they
shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  those  who  have
done  the  contrary  in  all  things,  and  have  only  preached
with  their  lips  and  uttered  empty  words,  shall  be  left
cursed  and  lamenting ;  because  theirs  shall  be  the
utmost  poverty,  eternal  hunger  and  the  house  of  hell,
where  there  is  everlasting  hunger  and  thirst,  where  there
is  neither  friend,  nor  brother,  nor  father  to  redeem  them,
nor  any  help  whatsoever.  Neither  will  they  have  power
to  issue  forth,  and  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world  will  not
avail  them  ;  but  all  things  will  be  taken  from  them  in
very  deed,  as  in  very  deed  they  did  desire  to  keep  them,
contrary  to  the  teaching  of  Christ.  Wherefore  shall  they
live  in  torments  everlastingly.  Amen.


66  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

CHAPTER   XIII

OF   THE    HUMILITY   AND    CONTEMPT    OF    OUR    SAVIOUR
JESUS    CHRIST

THE  second  companion  by  whom  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,
was  continually  accompanied  whiles  He  did  live  upon  the
earth  was  the  voluntary  and  perfect  contempt,  dejection,
ignominy,  and  shame  which  He  did  choose  constantly  to
endure  in  this  world.  For  He  did  live  as  a  base  servant
who  had  been  sold  and  not  redeemed ;  scarce  even  as  a
servant  either,  but  rather  as  one  who  was  reputed  evil  and
wicked,  knowing  that  He  was  to  be  mocked  with  insults,
covered  with  scorn,  derided,  bound  and  scourged,  and
that  finally  without  justice  and  without  defender  He
was  to  be  led  forth,  together  with  thieves  and  sinners,
and  with  them  condemned  and  slain,  dying  an  ignominious
death.  Whiles  He  did  live  He  did  ever  rebuke  with
words  and  deeds  whosoever  desired  to  do  Him  worldly
honour,  fleeing  from  the  honour  of  this  world  and  endur
ing  shame,  the  which  He  did  accept  willingly,  yet  never
of  His  own  self  giving  either  cause  or  occasion  for  it.

For  almost  all  persons  did  persecute  the  Giver  of  the
world  ;  they  did  deride  and  mock  at  Him,  without  reason
and  without  cause.  Even  from  His  cradle  and  swaddling
clothes  did  they  begin  to  persecute  Him,  driving  Him
forth  into  a  barbarous  country.  And  when  He  was  grown
to  man's  estate  they  did  call  Him  Samaritan  and  idolater  ;
some  did  even  assert  He  was  possessed,  a  glutton,  seducer,


OF  FOLIGNO  67

and  a  false  prophet,  saying :  "  Behold  the  devourer  and
drinker  of  wine,  who  is  neither  a  prophet  nor  just,  who
performeth  miracles  not  by  the  power  of  God,  but  casteth
out  devils  through  the  prince  of  devils."  Others  did  lead
Him  unto  the  summit  of  a  mountain  that  they  might  cast
Him  down  ;  others  took  stones  wherewith  to  stone  Him.
Beside  these  things  were  there  divers  rumours  against
Him,  divers  injuries,  mockings,  and  calumnies,  and  evil  re
ports  that  He  did  blaspheme.  Much  sorrow  and  suffer
ing  did  they  prepare  for  Him  both  in  words  and  deeds,
driving  Him  forth  from  their  habitations,  and  presently
they  did  basely  take  Him  and  bind  Him  and  bring  Him
before  divers  judges  and  councils.  Some  spat  in  His  face,
others  did  kick  Him  ;  others  put  His  white  robes  upon
Him  ;  others  crowned  Him  with  thorns,  smote  Him,  and,
kneeling  down  before  Him,  mocked  at  Him.  Others  did
smite  Him  upon  His  head  with  rods,  and  veiling  His  face
they  did  deride  Him  in  all  manner  of  ways.  Others  beat
Him  with  whips ;  others  did  gnash  their  teeth  at  Him,
like  unto  dogs  hungering  for  blood,  cursing  and  rebuking
Him  as  a  malefactor.  Finally,  He  was  led  naked  unto  His
Passion.  He  was  forsaken  of  all  His  disciples  ;  one  of
them  had  denied  Him,  another  had  betrayed  Him,  the
others  were  fled,  and  He  remained  alone  and  naked  in  the
midst  of  the  multitude.  Seeing  how  that  it  was  a  feast
day,  the  people  were  all  gathered  together,  and  as  an  evil
doer  betwixt  evil-doers  they  did  raise  Him  on  high  and
did  cruelly  slay  Him.  And  as  He  hung  there,  dying,


68  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

weeping  and  praying,  certain  of  them  did  deride  and
mock  at  Him,  saying,  "  Ah,  thou  that  destroyest  the
Temple  !  "  and  others  reviled  Him,  saying,  "  He  saved
others,  Himself  He  cannot  save  !  "  Others  did  cast  lots
for  His  raiment ;  others  gave  Him  vinegar  to  drink
mingled  with  gall,  offering  it  unto  the  dying  who  humbly
did  implore  water  wherewith  to  quench  His  thirst.
Others  did  pierce  His  dead  side  with  a  spear,  and  when
He  was  brought  down  from  the  Cross  He  lay  naked  upon
the  ground,  lacking  even  a  sepulchre,  until  one  came  and
sought  Him,  and  took  Him  up  and  buried  Him.  Some
there  were  who  did  speak  against  Him,  saying,  "  We  re
member  what  that  deceiver  said."  Some  did  conceal  the
resurrection,  others  denied  it.  And  thus  in  life,  in  death,
and  after  death  He  did  receive  naught  save  continual
scorn  and  ignominy  and  baseness,  and  all  this  did  He
seek  and  endure  in  order  that  man  might  attain  unto
the  glory  of  the  Resurrection  and  be  exalted  unto  the
supremest  glory.

For  this  reason  was  the  Son  of  God  given  unto  us  for  a
pattern  and  an  ensample,  a  teacher  and  master,  that  we
might  learn  to  despise  the  glory  of  this  world,  and,  not
only  that  we  might  not  seek  after  it,  but  that  we  might
refuse  it  even  though  it  were  offered  unto  us.  For  He
sought  not  His  own  glory,  but  that  of  the  Father ;  yea,
He  did  even  despise  and  refuse  it,  and  He  who  was  de
scended  from  heaven  did  humble  Himself  even  unto  the
feet  of  His  disciples,  making  Himself  like  unto  a  servant


OF  FOLIGNO  69

and  rendering  obedience  even  unto  the  death  of  the
Cross,  that  death  most  bitter,  most  despised,  and  most  vile.
Alas,  who  is  there  in  these  days  who  loveth  such  a  com
panion  as  this,  fleeing  from  honour  and  dignity  ?  Who
chooseth  the  shame  which  cometh  of  poverty,  of  an
humble  estate,  an  humble  office  or  other  lowly  things,
and  who  chooseth  to  be  overcome,  cast  down  and  reviled
rather  than  to  be  commended  and  praised  for  the  good
which  he  hath,  or  doth,  or  speaketh,  or  deemeth  himself
to  have,  and  who  giveth  no  welcome  or  good  words  unto
flatterers  ?  Verily,  each  one  goeth  his  own  way  and
there  is  not  one  who  doeth  this  good  thing.  And  if
there  should  be  any,  it  can  only  be  because  he  is  united  in
love  with  Christ  his  Head,  and  a  true,  living  member  of
Him.  For  seeing  how  that  Christ,  his  King,  his  Master
and  his  Head  loveth  such  company,  he  desireth  to  love  it
likewise.  But  there  are  many  who  say,  "  I  do  love  and
desire  God,  and  I  care  not  if  the  world  doeth  me  no
honour  ;  but  I  would  not  that  it  should  put  me  to
shame,  neither  would  I  that  it  should  cast  me  to  the
ground,  or  revile  me,  or  put  me  to  confusion  in  the
presence  of  others."  This  is  a  manifest  sign  of  little
faith,  of  little  judgment,  and  of  great  lukewarmness.  For
either  he  hath  truly  committed  that  for  the  which  he
deserveth  to  be  put  to  confusion,  and  to  suffer  pain  and
shame  (from  the  which  few  can  justly  excuse  themselves),
or  else  he  hath  not  committed  it.  If  he  hath  committed
any  sin,  manifest  or  hidden,  and  doth  verily  repent  him


70  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

thereof,  he  must  bear  the  punishment.  And  not  only
with  patience  shall  he  bear  it,  but  with  joy  of  soul  and
body,  and  this  especially  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  be
cause  that  shame,  confusion,  and  pain  which  he  endureth
is  pleasing  unto  God,  and  unto  his  neighbour,  according
unto  the  ordination  of  divine  justice.  And  if  he  hath
not  committed  that  evil  either  in  word  or  in  deed,  then
must  he  bear  and  endure  all  confusion,  shame,  and  pain,
if  God  hath  permitted  it.  And  he  must  bear  it  with  an
hundred  times  greater  patience  and  cheerfulness  than  he
would  have  done  in  the  first  case,  because  that  pain,  con
fusion,  and  shame  do  but  serve  to  increase  the  grace,  and
the  greater  the  merit  of  the  grace,  the  greater  is  likewise
the  gift  and  reward  of  glory.

Without  any  doubt  it  is  by  thus  enduring  shame  and
confusion  (which  do  come  without  sin),  that  the  holy
souls  and  the  friends  of  God  do  grow  in  grace  and  are
made  perfect,  in  the  same  manner  as  poverty  and  other
afflictions  sent  of  God  do  make  perfect  those  who  endure
them.  For  Christ  did  love  shame  and  refuse  honour  in
order  that  He  might  show  unto  His  friends  how  they
could  grow  in  virtue  and  in  grace.

For  this  reason,  therefore,  doth  this  second  companion
ever  accompany  us  through  life,  and  if  we  would  clearly
behold  the  beginning,  middle,  and  ultimate  end  of  the  life
of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  we  must  be  all  humility
and  must  live  in  the  world  without  honour,  despised  and
rejected  of  the  world  and  the  lovers  thereof.


OF  FOLIGNO  71

CHAPTER   XIV

OF   THE   CONSTANT   AND    MANY   SUFFERINGS   WHICH
CHRIST   DID   BEAR   IN    DIVERS   WAYS

His  third  companion  was  that  of  the  which  He  had
the  most  experience  and  which  did  endure  continually.
This  was  supreme  suffering,  the  which  did  instantly
afflict  His  soul  when  it  was  joined  unto  His  body.
For  in  that  moment  wherein  His  soul  was  united  with
His  human  body  it  was  instantly  filled  with  supreme
knowledge.  Wherefore  was  Christ  possessed  of  under
standing  even  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  mother.  He
did  instantly  begin  to  feel  the  utmost  suffering  ;  He
possessed  a  universal  and  singular  knowledge,  foresight,
consideration,  and  understanding  of  all  the  pains  which
His  soul  and  body  were  presently  to  undergo,  and  bear
for  our  sake,  and,  as  though  nigh  unto  death,  He  was
filled  with  such  agony  and  sadness  that  His  body  did
give  forth  a  bloody  sweat  which  dropped  even  upon  the
earth,  foreshowing  the  bitterness  of  death,  and  His  soul
did  lament  in  its  great  affliction,  albeit  His  body  felt
not  so  great  a  suffering  as  when  it  was  more  nigh  unto
its  Passion.  That  holy  soul  did  foresee  the  knives  of
those  most  evil  tongues,  and  the  sharp  and  cutting
words  of  each  especial  tongue.  He  knew  and  did  con
stantly  consider  by  whom,  and  when,  and  how,  and  in
what  degree  He  was  to  be  afflicted,  scoffed  at,  put  to


72  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

death  and  slain,  and  for  this  end  He  knew  that  He  was
born  into  the  world,  and  therefore  could  not  escape
suffering.  He  did  foresee  how  He  should  be  sold,
betrayed,  taken,  bound,  denied,  forsaken,  derided,
beaten,  accused,  reviled,  cursed,  scourged,  judged,  re
jected,  and  condemned,  how  He  should  be  led  to  the
Cross  like  unto  a  thief,  divested  of  His  raiment  and  left
naked,  crucified  and  done  to  death  and  pierced  with  a
spear.  He  did  know,  moreover,  of  all  the  blows  and
scourgings,  the  holes  of  the  nails  and  the  drops  of  blood,
and  how  many  tears  He  should  shed  ;  He  knew  of  the
sighs  and  weeping  and  dolorous  lamentations  of  Himself
and  His  mother  ;  all  things  were  foreseen  by  that  sacred
soul  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  this  lay  before  Him  and  He  did
meditate  thereon,  which  meditation  could  doubtless  not
be  without  exceeding  great  sadness  and  supreme  suffering
both  of  heart  and  mind.  Wherefore  was  the  whole  life
of  Jesus  Christ  filled  with  the  utmost  suffering,  sadness,
and  affliction.

Beside  all  this,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  veritable  Book
of  Life,  did  endure  countless  other  sufferings.  For
when  He  was  born  He  was  not  washed,  neither  cradled
upon  feathers  not  wrapped  in  skins ;  but  He  was  laid
upon  straw  in  a  stable,  He  did  lie  in  a  hard  manger  be
twixt  beasts  of  burden.  Thus  from  the  moment  of  His
birth  did  the  young  and  tender  infant  begin  to  endure
the  afflictions  of  the  body.  He  wandered  forth  with  the
sweet  and  tender  Virgin,  His  mother,  and  with  the  old


,


OF  FOLIGNO


73


man  Joseph.  He  was  carried  even  into  Egypt  by  way  of
a  great  desert,  wherein  the  children  of  Israel  sojourned
forty  years  without  food  prepared  by  human  hands.
Afterwards  He  did  appear  in  the  Temple  according  unto
the  law,  walking  thither  on  foot  whiles  He  was  yet  a
child,  for  His  dwelling  was  in  Nazareth,  distant  two  days'
journey  from  Jerusalem.  When  He  became  a  man  He
received  baptism  before  He  did  begin  to  preach;  then
He  entered  into  the  desert,  where  He  fasted  forty  days
and  forty  nights,  and  where  He  hungered  so  greatly  that
the  devil  did  think  by  means  of  His  hunger  to  persuade
Him  into  sin,  and  thereby  did  he  first  tempt  Him.  He
journeyed  throughout  the  villages,  hamlets,  and  cities,
enduring  hunger  and  thirst,  rain  and  heat  and  cold,
sweating  and  weariness,  and  at  last  the  torture  of  a  bitter
death.  And  all  this  weariness  did  He  endure  in  order
that  He  might  preach  the  way  of  truth,  and  cast  out
the  falseness  of  demons  and  their  vain  worship,  that  He
might  prove  unto  men  how  profitable  is  repentance,  and
lead  them  thereunto,  showing  them  how  in  the  enduring
of  pain  and  affliction  lieth  man's  true  happiness,  good,
and  glory,  and  that  He  might  furnish  them  an  ensample
for  the  bearing  of  the  aforesaid  things.

No  tongue  sufficeth  to  describe,  no  heart  can  imagine
the  sufferings  which  He  endured  at  the  time  of  the
Passion  ;  for  Christ  did  bear  ineffable  sorrow  in  many
ways.  There  was  a  most  deep  and  sharp  sorrow  caused
by  the  compassion  He  did  feel  for  the  human  race,  which


74  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

He  loved  with  a  surpassing  love,  and  not  as  man  loveth.
He  did  lament  for  the  whole  human  race,  lost,  cast  down
and  condemned,  but  He  did  also  bestow  especial  com
passion  and  love  upon  each  person  in  particular.  And
not  only  did  He  lament  for  the  sins  of  all  persons  in
general,  but  likewise  for  each  especial  sin,  according  to
its  sum  and  nature,  and  for  the  punishment  which  He
knew  of  a  certainty  that  each  one  had  deserved,  or  would
deserve  hereafter.  Howsoever  many  men  there  have
been,  therefore,  and  whether  they  be  now  sinners  or  will
be  hereafter,  and  however  many  grievous  sins  each  man
hath  committed  or  hath  yet  to  commit,  so  many  sorrows
hath  Christ  borne,  which  sorrows  proceeded  from  His
surpassing  mercy  and  compassion.  And  seeing  how  that
the  number  of  men  and  their  sins  and  the  punishments
they  must  endure  or  have  already  endured  is  infinite,
it  is  manifest  that  He  beareth  a  most  supreme  and  in
finite  sorrow  for  love  of  us.

Christ  did  of  a  certainty  love  His  elect  with  a  deep
and  ineffable  love,  continually  feeling  within  Himself,
according  unto  the  measure  of  each  one,  the  offences
they  had  committed  or  were  hereafter  to  commit,  feeling
likewise  the  punishment  they  should  suffer  for  such
offences.  Wherefore  did  He  lament  for  them,  taking
compassion  on  them,  and  all  the  while  bearing  their  pains
with  the  utmost  grief.  With  such  great  grief  and  com
passion  was  the  most  sweet  Jesus  afflicted  for  our  sake
that  He  was  thereby  constrained  to  bear  the  torments


OF  FOLIGNO  75

of  the  Cross,  a  horrible  death  and  infinite  suffering,  in
order  that  He  might  offer  satisfaction  for  our  offences,
that  He  might  redeem  us  and  liberate  us  from  punish
ment.

Without  doubt  Christ  did  likewise  endure  sorrow
for  Himself,  deeply  bewailing  Himself  because  of  the
dolorous  and  unspeakable  pains  which  He  did  clearly
behold  coming  upon  Him  without  fail,  and  because  He
beheld  Himself  sent  into  the  world  by  the  Father  unto
this  end,  that  in  His  own  person  He  might  bear  the  grief
and  pain  of  all  His  elect ;  nor  was  it  possible  for  Him  to
escape  the  bearing  of  the  aforesaid  pain  and  grievous
sorrow.  If  any  person  did  know  of  a  certainty  that  ex
ceeding  great  and  unbearable  grief  and  suffering  was
about  to  fall  upon  him  and  that  he  would  have  such
suffering  without  intermission  ever  before  his  eyes,
without  doubt  he  would  feel  compassion  for  himself  ;  and
the  greater  he  expected  the  suffering  to  be,  and  the  more
clearly  he  did  understand  and  know  it,  the  greater  would
be  his  misery.  All  this  did  Christ  feel,  more  deeply  than
we  can  describe,  but  this  example  hath  been  given  in  ex
planation  because  of  the  dulness  of  the  human  under
standing.

Christ  did,  moreover,  suffer  grief  for  His  most  merciful
Father,  the  Lord  of  mercy  and  of  all  pity,  whom  He
loved  with  an  infinite  love.  He  saw  that  God  His  Father,
whom  He  so  greatly  loved,  was  moved  to  such  compassion
and  mercy  for  us  that  He  was  willing  to  send  His  dearly


76  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

beloved  Son  to  suffer  death  for  our  sake.  Christ  did  suffer
for  His  exceeding  great  grief,  and  therefore,  in  order  that
the  Father's  will  might  be  fulfilled,  He  did  humiliate  Him
self  and  was  obedient  even  unto  the  death  of  the  Cross.

Suffering  like  unto  this  cannot  by  any  means  be  ex
plained.  Therefore  I  can  only  say  that  the  unspeakable
suffering  which  Christ  did  endure  was  conceded,  per
mitted,  and  assigned  unto  Him  by  the  ineffable  wisdom  of
the  Divinity,  which  divine  dispensation,  unspeakable  and
eternal,  unspeakably  and  eternally  one  with  Christ,  did
ordain  that  He  should  endure  this  supreme  suffering.
And  the  more  admirable  this  divine  dispensation,  the
sharper  and  more  intense  were  Christ's  sufferings,  where
fore  hath  there  never  been  any  mind  so  great  that  it  was
able  to  understand  these  sufferings.

This  divine  dispensation  was  the  true  cause  and  origin
of  all  suffering,  wherein  it  all  beginneth  and  endeth.  And
just  as  it  is  impossible  for  any  mind  to  comprehend  the
infinite  charity  of  Christ  (here  made  manifest),  because,
by  His  own  death,  He  hath  redeemed  us,  so  is  it  im
possible  to  comprehend  the  infinite  suffering  which  He
had  to  endure  and  for  which  He  did  lament.  And  this
suffering  did  proceed  from  the  ineffable  light  with  which
He  was  filled.  It  is  certain  that  by  this  enlightening,
Christ,  by  making  Him  one  with  this  divine  dispensation,
and  transforming  Him  with  divine  illumination  in  His
sufferings,  this  divinity  and  ineffable  light  did  inflict  upon
Him  such  pain  that  no  words  can  suffice  to  describe  it.


OF  FOLIGNO  77

Christ  likewise  suffered  pain  because  of  His  compassion
for  His  most  sweet  mother,  seeing  that  He  loved  her
above  all  other  creatures.  He  had  been  born  of  her
virgin  body,  and  she  did  bewail  her  most  sweet  Son  more
deeply  than  did  any  other  creature.  Wherefore  Christ
had  compassion  upon  her  when  He  beheld  her  weeping
and  lamenting  exceedingly  with  body  and  heart  and
soul.  Before  all  things  His  mother  did  bewail  the
sufferings  which  Christ  endured  in  Himself  and  which
were  ordained  by  the  divine  dispensation.

Christ  did  also  suffer  because  of  the  Father's  anger,
seeing  that  He  loved  Him  (as  hath  been  said)  with  a  sur
passing  love.  For  He  perceived  that  in  crucifying  his
Lord  and  Creator,  man  had  deeply  offended  God  the
Father  with  a  greater  sin  than  had  ever  been  before  or
would  be  hereafter,  the  sin  of  slaying  and  crucifying  the
Son  of  God,  and  consequently  God's  anger  was  greater
than  ever  before,  for  the  which  Christ  did  lament  without
measure.

Thus  moved  by  grief  and  compassion,  alike  for  the
offended  Father  and  offending  man,  Christ  spake  these
words,  Pater  ignosce  illis  quia  nesciunt  quid  faciunt,  that
is  to  say,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what
they  do."  Perchance  the  Father  would  have  condemned
the  whole  human  race  for  this  deed  if  Christ,  almost  for
getting  all  His  other  sufferings,  had  not  in  His  death  ap
peased  His  Father  with  this  gracious  prayer,  offered  unto
Him  with  tears,  and  with  love.  Likewise  did  He  endure


78  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

sorrow  for  His  disciples,  knowing  how  they  and  the
women  who  had  followed  Him  from  afar  were  lamenting
with  exceeding  deep  grief,  and  seeing  how  that  He  loved
them  with  a  great  love,  He  did  grieve  that  they  were
scattered  apart  and  in  tribulation.

Beside  these  sufferings  Christ  did  also  endure  many
others.


CHAPTER   XV

OF   THE    MANY    AND    DIVERS    CRUELTIES    USED
TOWARDS    CHRIST

HE  who  doth  well  consider  the  matter  will  find  that
Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  was  pierced  and  wounded
with  four  kinds  of  knives  and  spears.

Firstly,  there  was  the  perverse  and  continuous  cruelty
inflicted  wilfully  upon  Him  by  obstinate  hearts,  for  they
did  diligently  seek,  meditate,  and  conspire  in  what  manner
they  could  most  dishonourably  and  with  the  greatest
cruelty  drive  Him  from  the  earth,  He  and  His  name  and
all  those  whom  He  was  come  to  save,  and  all  those  who
followed  Him.

Secondly,  there  was  the  wickedness,  anger,  hatred,  and
malice  borne  Him  by  those  who  crucified  Him.  As
many,  therefore,  as  were  the  evil  thoughts,  perverse  in
tentions,  and  wicked  designs  conceived  against  Him,  so


OF  FOLIGNO  79

many  also  were  the  knives  and  spears  which  did  pierce  the
soul  of  Christ.

Thirdly,  there  was  the  malice  and  falseness  of  the
tongues  which  spake  against  Him  ;  for  as  many  as  were
the  accusations,  evil  counsels,  deridings,  mockings,  blas
phemies,  maledictions,  false  witnesses,  and  false  judg
ments,  even  so  many  pains  did  His  soul  endure.

Fourthly,  there  was  the  most  cruel  deed  of  the  Passion,
most  cruelly  inflicted  upon  Him,  the  which  is  manifest
unto  whosoever  doth  meditate  upon  the  whole  matter
thereof.  And  certain  is  it,  that  as  often  as  He  was
dragged  hither  and  thither,  His  hair  and  beard  plucked,
as  often  as  He  was  bound,  spit  at  and  scourged,  even  so
many  were  the  different  sufferings  which  He  did  endure.
But  especially  did  He  suffer  from  the  nails,  for  they  did
use  nails  of  the  largest  kind,  rough  and  square,  and  there
with  did  they  most  cruelly  pierce  through  His  hands  and
feet.  And  by  thus  piercing  them  quite  through  and
utterly  laming  them,  men  did  most  cruelly  fasten  them
upon  the  Cross.  This  kind  of  nail  did  cause  pain  worse
than  any  other  ;  and  even  had  they  been  simply  passed
through  His  hands  and  feet  and  not  driven  into  the  wood,
they  would  have  occasioned  the  most  acute  pain.  But
not  content  even  with  spreading  out  His  hands  and  feet,
with  stretching  His  bones  and  sinews  and  drawing  all  the
joints  of  His  body  asunder,  making  Him  fast  unto  the
hard  wood,  they  did  also  raise  the  Cross  on  high,  exposing
Him  naked  in  the  air  and  the  wind,  unto  the  gaze  of  all


80  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

people.  And  the  weight  of  His  body  did  thus  hang  from
His  hands  and  rest  upon  His  feet,  so  that  He  felt  more
acutely  the  hardness  of  the  nails,  and  the  blood  flowed
unceasingly  from  the  wounds  they  made.

Thus  He  died  in  the  greatest  suffering,  and  thus  was
accomplished  all  the  wickedness  of  men.  And  in  order
that  this  same  Jesus,  God  and  Man,  might  manifest
somewhat  of  this  intense  suffering  (and  not  for  His  own
sake,  but  for  us,  just  as  for  us  He  was  bearing  it,  and  that
we  might  enter  fully  into  that  suffering),  He  cried  aloud,
saying,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me."
It  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  forsaken  of  God,
seeing  that  He  Himself  was  God,  but  inasmuch  as  He
cried  that  He  was  forsaken  He  did  bear  witness  unto  His
manhood.

Thus  He  showed  forth  the  unspeakable  and  surpassing
pain  which  He  endured  for  our  sake,  and  without  doubt
God  did  share  that  pain  with  Christ  who  bore  it.  Where
fore  for  our  sake  alone  did  He  cry  aloud,  that  He  might
make  it  clear  unto  us  that  He  was  bearing  that  supreme
suffering  for  us  and  not  for  Himself,  which  did  provoke
and  move  Him  frequently  to  grieve  and  lament.

But  none  must  imagine  that  He  only  suffered  when  He
was  on  the  Cross  ;  because  the  formation  and  organisation
of  the  body,  the  infusion  into  it  of  the  soul  and  union  of
the  Word,  did  take  place  at  one  and  the  same  time.  This
union  marvellous  beyond  belief,  and  this  soul  full  of
ineffable  wisdom,  do  in  themselves  represent  all  those


OF  FOLIGNO  81

things  in  which  we  ought  to  believe  as  though  we  beheld
them  here  present ;  and  therefore,  He  beheld  coming
iipon  Him  that  pain  of  unspeakable  bitterness,  for  the
which  He  had  been  begotten  and  conceived.  And  be
cause  of  this  He  did  constantly  lament,  and  inasmuch  as
it  was  laid  upon  Him  by  the  divine  and  perfect  wisdom,
He  did  bear  this  great  suffering  from  the  time  when  His
soul  entered  into  His  body  until  it  departed  therefrom.
To  this  do  His  words  testify,  for  He  did  often  say  how
that  He  had  to  bear  the  Cross  and  that  He  must  bear  it
even  unto  death.  He  said,  "  My  soul  is  sad  even  unto
death,"  and  these  things  said  He  not  for  Himself,  but  for
His  disciples  and  for  us,  that  we  might  be  moved  the
more  perfectly  to  suffer  with  His  suffering.  And  this
suffering,  together  with  all  that  had  gone  before,  was
more  intense  and  more  keen  because  of  the  nobility  of
His  soul.  For  in  proportion  as  His  soul  was  most  holy,
most  tender  and  most  noble,  so  were  the  sufferings
wherewith  He  was  tormented  most  keen  and  most  intense.
The  injuries,  afflictions,  and  supreme  suffering  where
with  this  most  noble  soul  was  tormented  were  all  laid
upon  Him  by  the  aforesaid  supreme  and  unspeakable
divine  dispensation.  And  so  deeply  did  they  torment  the
soul  of  Christ,  that  each  particular  pain  in  itself  did  like
wise  afflict  the  body.  Moreover,  because  this  virgin  body
was  more  noble  and  more  delicate  than  any  other  body
born  of  woman,  the  pain  was  more  intense,  and  it  was
more  deeply  afflicted  by  it,

F


82  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Christ  did  feel  this  pain  the  more  acutely  because  He
Himself  was  the  true  God  ;  wherefore  every  affliction
and  injury  done  unto  Him  was  a  boundless  offence,  inas
much  as  it  was  not  done  unto  man  alone,  but  unto  the
true  God.  For  this  reason  had  He  cause  for  infinite
lamentation,  inasmuch  as  He  did  endlessly  grieve  over
every  wickedness  and  affliction  done  unto  Him.

Whiles  that  He  was  suffering  all  these  things,  the
Saviour  of  the  world,  Christ  Jesus,  God  and  Man,  did
neither  threaten  nor  curse,  neither  did  He  defend  or
vindicate  Himself,  nor  excuse  Himself  when  He  was
accused.  He  hid  not  His  face  when  it  was  spat  upon  ;
He  withdrew  not  His  hands  and  arms  when  they  were
stretched  upon  the  Cross,  He  sought  not  to  escape
death  ;  but  wholly  and  in  all  ways  did  He  deliver  Him
self  into  the  hands  and  unto  the  will  of  men,  in  order
that,  because  of  their  iniquity,  the  work  of  redemption
might  be  fulfilled,  notwithstanding  their  opposition  and
ingratitude.

The  most  wondrous  thought  of  all  is,  that  in  this
dreadful  deed  of  the  Passion  committed  against  the
Innocent  One,  He  did  furnish  an  example  of  patience  ;
He  taught  the  truth  unto  those  who  slew  Him,  and  with
cries  and  tears  did  pray  unto  the  Father  for  them,  and  in
return  for  this  greatest  of  sins  (for  the  which  the  whole
world  and  human  nature  deserved  to  perish),  He  did
bestow  upon  them  the  greatest  benefits.  Thus  by  the
pain  and  suffering  which  they  inflicted  upon  Him  did


OF  FOLIGNO  83

He  save  us  from  pain  and  suffering  ;  He  opened  the  gates
of  Paradise  unto  those  who  crucified  Him  and  unto  all
others,  reconciling  them  unto  the  Father,  arid  such  grace
did  He  obtain  for  us  that  we  are  thereby  become  the  Sons
of  God.  This  reconciliation  was  effected  through  that
self-same  deed  for  the  which  the  whole  world  and  every
creature  was  worthy  of  damnation  for  His  sake,  because
the  creature  had  been  found  guilty  of  committing  such
a  great  sin  against  its  creator.

Oh,  pity  !  Oh,  mercy  immense  !  Oh,  incredible  be
nignity  which  did  cause  such  infinite  grace  to  abound
there  where  only  infinite  iniquity  had  hitherto  abounded  !
Verily,  this  mystery  hath  no  end,  but  hath  been  ordained
by  that  infinite  Goodness  and  Mercy  in  order  that  we
might  have  an  example  of  endurance  in  all  tribulations
and  adversity,  and  to  teach  us  not  only  that  we  should
never  render  back  evil  unto  our  enemies,  but  that  for  love
of  Him  we  should  do  good  unto  them.  If  some  patriarch
or  prophet,  or  other  saint,  or  even  one  of  the  angels,  had
given  us  such  an  example,  we  should  of  a  certainty  ascribe
much  merit  unto  it ;  but  that  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God
should  have  appeared  amongst  us  incarnate,  that  the  in
fallible  truth  (which  can  neither  deceive  nor  be  deceived)
should  have  given  us  such  an  ensample  of  life  is  a  thing
to  be  on  no  account  passed  over  carelessly,  but  with  all
heed  and  diligence  it  must  be  followed  with  the  utmost
perfection.

We  know,  we  have  heard,  and  all  the  day  long  do  we


84  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

speak  and  discourse  of  how  the  Son  of  God  did  spend  His
whole  life  in  suffering,  and  how  that  He  not  only  patiently
bore  the  tribulations  which  chanced  to  fall  upon  Him,
but  that,  never  having  committed  sin,  He  did  choose  it,
and  of  His  own  will  did  take  it  upon  Him.  Yea,  He
sought  tribulation,  and  having  found  it  He  loved  it  and
submitted  Himself  unto  it,  showing  His  endurance  in
words  and  deeds,  and  preaching  that  all  they  were  blessed
who  endured  it  likewise.  Neither  did  He  only  with
empty  words  praise  and  glorify  these  afflictions  of  body
and  soul  patiently  borne  for  God's  sake,  but  He  did
actually  bear  in  His  own  body  and  soul  that  which  none
other  has  ever  borne.  And  He  saith  that  through  these
tribulations  He  did  enter  into  His  kingdom  and  His  glory,
affirming  that  by  no  other  way  or  means  save  that  of
suffering,  pain,  and  tribulation  is  it  possible  to  attain  unto
grace  eternal.


CHAPTER   XVI

HOW     THAT     WE     SHOULD      FOLLOW     THE      INFALLIBLE

GUIDE     AND     REDEEMER     UPON     THE     STRAIGHT     ROAD

WHICH    HE    HATH    SHOWN    UNTO    US

VERILY,  this  is  the  true  and  straight  road  pointed  out  by
God,  and  foolish  exceedingly  is  he  who  doubteth,  or  who
reckoneth  not  (seeing  how  that  the  Son  of  God  did  walk


OF  FOLIGNO  85

upon  that  road),  to  follow  the  Lord,  his  ineffable  Guide
and  Redeemer.  Of  a  certainty  He  knew  how  much  of
good  there  was  in  pains  and  tribulations.  For  which
reason  He  did  assume  and  choose  these  woes,  fleeing  from
joy,  censuring  worldly  consolations  and  declaring  them
to  be  hateful.  Wherefore  doth  it  not  unreasonably  ap
pear  that  before  the  Son  of  God  did  in  His  own  person
take  these  sufferings  upon  Himself,  it  did  in  some  ways
seem  as  though  there  might  be  found  some  excuse  for
those  who  followed  their  own  wills  and  fled  from  tribu
lation  (albeit  He  had  nevertheless  through  His  saints  and
prophets  shown  forth  the  contrary  a  long  time  before),
but  when  the  Son  of  God  Himself  did  choose  to  bear  such
great  adversities,  the  man  would  truly  be  both  miserable
and  mad  who  doubted  or  neglected  the  truth  so  clearly
set  forth,  and  so  loudly  preached,  and  of  which  the  Lord
Himself  hath  given  an  example  unto  the  world.  Of  a
certainty  none  would  doubt,  saving  he  were  void  of  sense
and  worthy  of  all  damnation.

Of  this  damnation,  therefore,  are  we  wretches  worthy.
For,  being  vile  sinners,  not  only  do  we  refuse  to  take
those  sufferings  upon  us  as  a  penance,  but  we  do  resist
even  when  God  in  His  supreme  mercy  and  wisdom
sendeth  them  upon  us  in  order  thereby  to  save  us  and
purge  us  of  evil ;  we  do  flee  from  them  and  refuse  them
impatiently,  murmuring  and  lamenting  grievously  against
them,  eagerly  seeking  consolations  and  remedies  whereby
we  may  be  relieved  from  these  tribulations.  Oh  wretched


86  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

and  truly  miserable  are  we,  who  not  only  seek  to  escape
those  worldly  pains  and  afflictions  which  are  the  remedy
and  cure  for  sin,  but  we  do  even  refuse  the  assistance  of
our  most  wise  physician  Jesus  Christ.  If  the  supreme
wisdom  of  God  ordaineth  that  there  should  come  a  little
cold,  we  do  immediately  draw  nigh  unto  the  fire,  and  do
cover  ourselves  with  many  garments  ;  if  it  chance  to  be
hot  or  scorching,  then  we  seek  the  cold  ;  if  our  head  or
our  stomach  do  hurt,  we  cry  and  weep  and  sigh  and  run
unto  the  physician  ;  we  seek  remedies,  we  lie  softly  in
bed,  eat  delicate  food,  and  in  order  that  the  pains  may  be
relieved,  we  do  weary  God  and  the  saints  with  constant
prayers,  with  promises  and  vows  of  fasting,  pilgrimages,
and  atonements.  Thus  merely  that  we  may  be  spared
those  pains  and  afflictions  which  are  profitable  unto  us  and
are  sent  from  God,  we  do  all  these  and  many  other  things
which  we  would  not  do  for  the  remission  of  our  sins  or
the  good  of  our  soul.  If  God  doth  further  permit  that
for  our  profit  we  should  suffer  adversity  or  injury  at  the
hands  of  some  man,  we  are  instantly  troubled  and  moved
thereat,  we  grow  angry  and  lament  and  do  judge  that
person  wickedly,  speaking  evil  against  him,  and  if  we  can,
we  do  take  revenge.  Fleeing  from  harm  and  injury,  we
do  refuse  as  far  as  we  are  able  all  suffering,  affliction,  or
adversity  which  the  Eternal  God,  our  heavenly  Physician,
hath  sent  unto  us,  and  nothing  will  we  endure  with
patience  or  resignation.

How  many  things  are  done  and  how  much  money  is


OF  FOLIGNO  87

spent  in  order  to  avert  those  pains,  afflictions,  and  ad
versities  which  God  in  His  mercy  sendeth  or  permitteth
to  fall  upon  us  !  It  would  doubtless  be  more  salutary
and  meritorious  were  we  to  accept  and  endure  these  things
willingly  instead  of  choosing  other  penances  and  afflictions
for  ourselves.  It  is  better  to  wait  for  God  and  patiently
to  bear  that  which  He  sendeth  ;  He  is  the  heavenly
Physician  who  sendeth  affliction  and  adversity  to  purge
and  teach  and  make  perfect  the  soul,  and  He  knoweth
better  than  sick  and  ignorant  man.  Wherefore  are  those
afflictions  and  penances  which  we  ourselves  seek  and
choose  often,  if  not  always,  an  excuse  for  vainglorious-
ness,  but  those  which  man  is  apparently  forced  to  bear  of
necessity  and  against  his  will  are  those  which  are  sent  by
divine  dispensation,  and  those  should  be  borne  with  great
patience  and  willingness,  albeit  their  heavenly  source  is
hidden  from  him.

Wherefore  do  I  say  and  counsel  you,  oh  my  children,
that  ye  shall  endure  cold  and  ice,  heat  and  scorching,
vermin  and  sweatings,  pains  in  the  head  or  stomach  or
other  parts  of  the  body  (saving,  however,  that  which
concerns  the  maintenance  thereof),  not  being  curious  to
seek  remedies,  save  in  urgent  necessity,  for  they  hinder
the  good  of  the  soul.  I  say  unto  you,  moreover,  that
when  God  ordereth  or  permitteth  poverty,  the  death
of  friends,  oppressions,  persecutions  and  shame,  beatings
and  rapine  to  fall  upon  us,  that  we  should  not  bewail  our
selves  ;  but  inasmuch  as  they  are  given  and  administered


88  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

by  the  supreme  Physician,  our  Saviour,  we  should  not
only  bear  them  with  patience,  but  for  His  love  and  our
own  great  good  we  should  accept  them  very  willingly.
For  if  we  do  gladly  and  readily  accept  them  of  our  own
free  will,  it  is  an  act  far  more  meritorious  than  if  we
accepted  them  only  to  do  penance,  albeit  of  our  own  will.
Oh,  wretched  that  we  are,  what  more  can  we  say  ?
Not  only  do  we  seek  to  escape  the  pains,  afflictions,  and
adversities,  sent  unto  us  by  a  most  wise  and  merciful
God  (and  like  unto  what  He  bore  Himself),  but  we  do
endeavour  day  and  night  to  enjoy  bodily  luxury  and
softness,  diligently  seeking  worldly  consolations  and  con
tinually  begging  for  vain  delights.  Verily,  this  is  not  the
way  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  all.  How  shall  a
miserable  soul  who  is  ever  seeking  consolation  in  the
world  approach  Him  who  is  the  way  and  the  example  of
suffering  ?  Of  a  truth,  the  wise  soul  who  desireth  to
live  wisely  should  regard  naught  else  in  this  world  save
suffering  ;  yea,  if  it  did  gaze  upon  Jesus  its  Beloved  and
possessed  naught  save  one  drop  of  love,  it  should  seek  for
no  other  gain  and  no  other  state  in  this  world  save  His  ;
that  is  to  say,  the  state  of  pain,  anguish,  and  tribulation.
And  this  should  be  its  whole  consolation,  not  only  in
earthly,  temporal,  and  bodily  things,  but  in  spiritual
things  likewise.


OF  FOLIGNO  89

CHAPTER   XVII

OF    HOW    PLEASING     UNTO     GOD     IS     THE     SERVICE     OF

THE    POOR,    WHO    SERVE     FOR     LOVE'S     SAKE      WITHOUT

LOOKING    FOR    A    REWARD

IN  the  service  of  God  we  should  not  always  be  thinking  of
the  spiritual  consolations  therein  to  be  found.  Can  it  be
supposed  that  when  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  beheld
her  beloved  Son  upon  the  Cross,  crying  aloud  and  dying,
that  she  asked  sweetness  or  consolation  of  Him  in  that
hour  ?  Assuredly  not ;  she  accepted  the  anguish,  bitter
ness,  and  pain,  and  such  anguish  should  be  likewise  in  our
souls.  It  is  a  sign  of  little  love,  yea,  of  great  presumption,
if  the  soul  should  desire  to  feel  in  this  world  aught  of
Christ  save  pain.  Wherefore  doth  God  doubtless  take
greater  pleasure  in  the  service  of  the  poor,  who  serve  Him
faithfully  without  reward  or  benefit  whatsoever,  than  in
that  of  the  rich,  who  every  day  receive  great  rewards.
And  those  who  serve  Him  for  the  sake  of  reaping  spiritual
benefits,  whose  souls  are  fat  and  full  of  spiritual  sweetness
which  they  derive  from  the  service  of  God,  who  run  unto
Him  and  serve  Him  for  love's  sake,  these  have  not  as
great  merit  as  have  those  who  run  unto  God  and  serve
Him  likewise  for  love's  sake,  but  without  any  consolation
whatsoever,  indeed,  rather  with  pain.

Thus,  methinketh,  doth  the  divine  light  which  pro-
ceedeth  from  the  life  of  Christ  instruct  me  concerning  the


90  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

way  whereby  I  may  through  suffering  reach  God  and  be
in  God,  namely,  by  that  way  whereon  walked  Jesus  Christ
our  Head.  By  that  way  must  go  hand  and  arm  and  foot
and  all  the  other  members  ;  and  thus  through  worldly
poverty  will  the  soul  at  last  attain  unto  eternal  riches ;
through  scorn  and  shame  will  it  attain  unto  supreme
honour  and  glory,  and  through  a  little  penance  (per
formed  with  grief  and  pain)  will  it  come  to  possess  the
greatest  blessing  with  the  greatest  joy  and  consolation.

Nevertheless,  the  soul  is  bound  to  adore  God  for  Him
self.  For  He  is  worthy  of  being  infinitely  loved  and
served  by  all  creatures  with  the  utmost  reverence,  be
cause  of  His  great  and  surpassing  goodness,  to  whom  be
honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.

Glory,  therefore,  unto  the  omnipotent  God,  whom  it
hath  pleased  to  call  us  into  being  and  create  us  in  His
own  likeness,  we  ourselves  being  nothing.  To  Him,  the
all-merciful,  be  honour,  power,  and  glory,  for  it  hath
pleased  Him  to  redeem  and  exalt  us,  we  who  were
miserable,  wicked,  lost,  and  damned  because  of  the
sufferings,  pain,  contempt,  and  poverty  which  His  Son
did  endure.

Glory  also  unto  the  most  merciful  and  pitiful  God,
whose  mercy  and  goodness  was  so  unfailing  that  He  did
give  His  kingdom  unto  miserable,  unworthy  sinners,  in
order  that  man  might  without  fail  attain  unto  it.

Praise  and  glory,  likewise,  unto  our  most  sweet  God,
who  of  His  pity  did  give  us  His  kingdom,  and  make  us  to


OF  FOLIGNO  91

gain  the  fellowship  and  enjoyment  of  Himself  through
tribulation,  pain,  contempt,  and  poverty.  If  we  were
able  to  purchase  His  kingdom  with  wealth,  with  gold,
silver,  and  precious  stones,  with  luxury,  knowledge,  and
power,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  could  not  be  gained  by  all,
inasmuch  as  we  are  not  all  alike  and  do  not  all  possess
these  things.  But  it  hath  pleased  Him  to  grant  that
His  kingdom  may  be  gained  with  things  all  persons  may
possess  at  all  times  and  of  which  we  may  easily  have  an
abundance.  For  there  is  no  person  whatsoever  who  can
not  be  poor  for  love  of  Christ,  and  who  cannot  work  and
do  penance  at  least  in  his  heart,  and  endure  contempt.
Certain  is  it  that  no  man  can  pass  through  this  life  with
out  encountering  some  of  these  things,  which,  if  he
beareth  them  patiently  and  cheerfully  for  Christ's  sake,
will  make  him  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

Blessed  be  God,  moreover,  in  that  He  hath  not  set  the
long  and  heavy  endurance  of  these  things  as  the  price
wherewith  His  kingdom  may  be  gained,  but  only  the
span  of  this  life  ;  so  that  the  eternal  kingdom  may  verily
be  bought  with  a  moment  of  time.  And  surely,  even
though  we  had  to  wait  thousands  of  years  and  long
centuries  for  the  love  of  God  and  such  a  kingdom,  even
though  they  were  years  most  grievous  and  bitter,  yet
should  we  nevertheless  accept  them  with  boundless  joy
and  longing,  with  hands  clasped  in  deepest  gratitude  !
How  much  more,  therefore,  should  we  rejoice  for  that
the  merciful  God  hath  ordained  and  permitted  that  the


92  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

aforesaid  things  need  be  endured  only  for  the  brief  space
of  this  our  mortal  life  !

Blessed  be  God,  who  by  His  own  word  hath  promised
unto  us  these  gifts  and  blessings,  appearing  visibly  unto
us  in  His  own  person  to  give  us  assurance  thereof,  and
confirming  them  by  His  example.  Wherefore  there  re-
maineth  no  manner  of  doubt  that  with  the  brief  labours,
afflictions,  and  penances  of  this  short  life  we  may  gain  His
kingdom  ;  for  He  hath  directly  promised  it  unto  us,  and
what  is  more,  hath  confirmed  the  promise  by  His  own
example.  He  desired  tribulation,  and  not  otherwise  than
through  the  endurance  of  supreme  suffering  and  con
tempt  did  He  wish  to  obtain  possession  of  that  kingdom
which  was  truly  His  by  inheritance.

Come  ye,  oh  my  children,  hasten  unto  the  Cross  of
Christ,  take  upon  yourselves  this  pain,  contempt,  and
poverty,  and  enter  with  all  your  might  into  the  Passion
of  Christ,  who  so  loved  us  that  for  our  sakes,  oh  ye  chil
dren  of  God,  was  He  willing  to  suffer  a  most  bitter  and
ignominious  death  ;  and  He  did  this  only  that  He  might
thereby  redeem  us  and  furnish  unto  us  an  example  of
how  we  should  bear  hard  things  for  love  of  Him.  Doubt
less  the  perfection  and  the  true  sign  of  sonship  is  to  love
God  and  one's  neighbour.  And  inasmuch  as  this  holy
Man  of  Sorrows  did  so  faithfully  and  purely  love  us  that
He  had  no  pity  upon  Himself,  but  wholly  gave  Himself
up  to  suffering  for  love  of  us,  so  doth  He  desire  that  His
lawful  sons  should  likewise  do,  according  as  they  are  able.


OF  FOLIGNO  93

Ye  must  know  then,  oh  ye  children  of  God,  that  this
Man  of  Sorrows  doth  continually  bid  me  help  and  com
fort  you.  Ye  must  be  faithful  unto  Him  who  was  faithful
unto  you,  and  in  faithful  love  must  ye  be  united  with
your  neighbour,  for  he  who  is  faithful  unto  God  will  also
be  faithful  unto  his  neighbour.  How  greatly,  purely,  and
faithfully  this  holy  Man  of  Sorrows  hath  loved  us  hath
been  made  clearly  evident  by  His  life,  teaching, and  death.
But  because  of  our  unbelief  we  perceive  not  that  for  our
sake  He  was  born  poor  and  despised,  neither  do  we  re
flect  earnestly  and  continuously  as  we  should  upon  His
grievous  death,  His  hard  life,  and  His  sweet  and  most  true
teaching.  And  because  we  do  not  entirely  comprehend
these  aforesaid  divine  and  salutary  things,  we  are  not
dead  either  unto  the  world  or  unto  sin,  albeit  He  Him
self  died  in  poverty,  humility,  and  contempt.  Who  is
there  in  these  days  who  will  repay  the  sweet  faith  shown
unto  us  by  the  Son  of  God  with  even  a  little  faith  and
constancy  ?  Verily,  we  do  thrust  these  things  behind  us
as  though  they  had  never  been.

CHAPTER   XVIII

AN    EXHORTATION    TO   TAKE    COMFORT   AND   TO    FOLLOW

THE    EXAMPLE    OF    PERFECTION     SET    FORTH     BY    CHRIST

THE    CRUCIFIED

COME  ye,  oh  my  blessed  children,  and  gaze  on  this  Cross
and  on  Christ  who  died  upon  it  for  our  sins,  and  weep


94  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

with  me  because  our  countless  iniquities  were  the  cause
of  so  much  suffering.  And  albeit  ye  have  not  offended
God  as  deeply  as  have  I  (who  am  all  sin),  yet  weep  ye  none
the  less,  for  it  is  not  ye  yourselves  who  have  resisted  sin,
but  the  grace  of  God  which  hath  preserved  and  defended
you  through  the  merits  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  There
fore,  ye  saints  and  innocents,  ye  should  not  lament  your
state  less  than  do  I,  the  sinner.  For  the  greater  the
grace  which  hath  been  vouchsafed  unto  you,  the  greater
is  your  debt  ;  and  since  ye  have  not  been  as  thankful  as
ye  should  be,  ye  have  in  some  degree  sullied  your  lives
and  have  lost  somewhat  of  your  purity.  Wherefore
must  ye  all  lament  and  weep  and  raise  the  eyes  of  your
minds  unto  that  Cross ;  because  in  gazing  upon  the  Cross
(unto  the  which  the  soul  cannot  attain  save  by  constant
prayer,  as  hath  already  been  said)  are  we  granted  full
knowledge  of  our  sins,  we  are  overcome  with  grief  and
contrition  because  of  them,  and  are  given  the  light  of
profound  humility.  Of  a  certainty,  when  in  gazing  upon
the  Cross  the  soul  beholdeth  all  its  sins  in  general  and
each  one  in  particular,  and  how  for  all  together  and  each
in  particular,  Christ  was  crucified  and  afflicted,  it  is
overwhelmed  with  sadness  and  is  thereby  moved  to
punish  and  reform  itself,  with  all  its  members  and  its
senses.

Observe,  then,  ye  sons  of  the  blessed  God,  and  behold
in  Christ  crucified  the  principal  example  of  life,  and
from  Him  learn  true  perfection.  Behold  the  Book  of


OF  FOLIGNO  95

Life,  namely,  the  life  and  death  of  Christ  crucified,  the
Man  of  Sorrows  ;  through  gazing  upon  His  Passion  and
Cross  the  soul  attaineth  unto  the  knowledge  of  its  sins,
and  through  profound  humility  unto  knowledge  of  the
heart.

The  soul  doth  likewise  behold  and  know  the  multitude
of  its  sins,  and  how  grievously  it  offendeth  God  in  all  its
members.  Also  doth  it  behold  above  it  the  manifesta
tion  of  divine  mercy,  that  is  to  say,  it  perceiveth  how
Christ  crucified  did  endure  cruel  pain  in  all  the  members
of  His  body,  because  of  the  sins  of  each  of  our  members.
Thus  by  means  of  the  Cross  it  may  reflect  how  greatly
and  in  what  manner  it  hath  offended  God.  Firstly,  by
the  head  :  man  doth  wash,  comb,  and  anoint  his  head,
doing  also  divers  other  things  to  render  himself  pleasing
unto  men,  and  then  he  perceiveth  how  because  of  this
his  sin,  Christ  hath  done  penance  in  His  own  head  and
hath  borne  grievous  pains.  To  make  reparation  for
man's  washing,  combing,  anointing,  and  twisting  of  his
hair,  Christ's  most  holy  head  was  shorn  of  its  hair,  it  was
pierced  by  the  crown  of  thorns,  beaten  with  rods  and
made  all  bloody  with  His  blood.  In  like  manner  the
soul  beholdeth  the  other  members  (as  Christ  Himself,  as
though  unwittingly,  in  certain  visions  and  sayings  doth
almost  murmur  and  lament  against  us,  counting  over  all
the  members),  and  not  only  doth  it  behold  the  multitude
of  sins  committed  by  each  member,  but  likewise  the
grievousness  thereof.


96  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Verily,  when  the  soul  meditateth  upon  the  Cross  the
infinite  grievousness  of  sin  is  made  plainly  manifest ;  then
doth  it  comprehend  that  its  guilt  could  never  have  been
wiped  away,  its  offences  forgiven  and  its  punishment  re
mitted  if  Christ  had  not  done  such  great  penance  for  its
misdeeds,  which  is  a  surpassing  great  matter  to  think
upon.  Moreover,  the  soul  will  read  in  this  Book  (more
clearly  than  in  any  other  book  whatsoever)  of  divine
justice  and  of  how  impossible  it  is  for  sin  ever  to  remain
unpunished.


CHAPTER   XIX

WHEREIN   THE  SOUL    MAY    SEE    HOW    THAT   THE  DIVINE

WISDOM     HATH    USED     INFINITE     CARE    AND    DILIGENCE

IN    SAVING  US   THROUGH    MERCY,    YET    NOT  OFFENDING

AGAINST   JUSTICE

THE  soul  doth  also  perceive  how  God  the  Father  willed
that  His  Son  should  suffer  the  pains  of  death  and  the
torments  of  the  Cross  rather  than  that  the  sins  of  the
human  race  should  remain  unpunished.  In  this  Book
doth  it  see,  moreover,  how  infinite  was  the  goodness  and
pity  of  Christ  ;  He  had  such  great  compassion  on  us
that,  perceiving  that  neither  we  ourselves  nor  any  other
creature  whatsoever  could  offer  sufficient  satisfaction  for
our  sins,  He  did  Himself  offer  satisfaction  for  us  in  order
that  we  might  not  be  left  in  damnation  and  torments
eternal.


OF  FOLIGNO  97

Herein  is  seen  the  infinite  will  of  God,  and  the  infinite
care  and  diligence  which  He  used  in  saving  us  and  bring
ing  us  back  unto  the  Father  ;  unto  Him  was  it  no  great
thing  to  cause  the  death  of  His  Son,  provided  He  could
with  justice  give  us  eternal  happiness  and  His  most  blessed
joy  and  fellowship.  Herein  is  seen,  moreover,  His  in
finite  wisdom,  how  by  ineffable  and  unthinkable  means
(namely,  by  that  death  suffered  with  infinite  mercy),  He
was  able  to  do  good  unto  all  creatures,  to  save  and  exalt
them,  without  doing  anything  whatsoever  contrary  unto
His  own  justice,  or  in  any  wise  lessening  His  divinity.
The  seducer  and  murderer  of  our  race  had  led  us  away
from  the  straight  path,  but  He,  true  God  and  true  Man,
overcame  him  upon  the  Cross  and  saved  us.  Even  whilst
He  was  held  to  be  dying  and  helpless,  He  did  quicken  all
things  and  destroy  death  for  us  all,  and  through  His
torments  and  sufferings  He  prepared  delights,  joy,  and
glory  for  the  whole  world,  and  thereby  procured  for
it  glory  everlasting.  Through  the  agony  of  the  Cross
(which  unto  men  seemed  but  foolish),  He  did  confound
all  the  wisdom  of  this  world  and  make  manifest  the
divine  wisdom.  These,  and  an  infinitude  of  other  things,
albeit  indescribable,  are  made  manifest  by  the  Cross  unto
whosoever  will  intelligently  consider  them  with  the  help
of  God's  grace.

In  this  Book  the  soul  further  beholdeth  the  infinite
meekness  of  Christ,  who,  when  He  was  slain,  cursed  not
nor  sought  vengeance,  but  in  return  for  the  sin  and  great

G


98  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

injury  committed  against  Him,  did  promise  eternal  glory
unto  those  same  sinners  who  crucified  Him.

Upon  the  Cross  doth  the  soul  likewise  behold  the  in
finite  humility  of  Christ,  than  which  none  can  be  greater,
seeing  that  He,  the  King  of  Glory,  suffered  so  vile  and
ignominious  a  death.  It  beholdeth  how  the  torments
of  the  Cross  procured  for  us  liberation  and  redemption
from  hell,  the  gaining  of  Paradise  and  reconciliation
with  the  Father.  They  did  likewise  furnish  us  with  an
example  and  instruction  in  virtue  and  in  steadfastness
against  enemies,  and  obtained  for  us  the  reward  of  ever
lasting  joy.  And  in  this  way  alone  can  we  wretched
sinners  be  saved.

Wherefore  is  it  plain  that  we  may  read  an  infinity  of
things  in  this  blessed  Book,  because  verily  it  is  the  Book
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  infallible  Truth,  to  whom  be  glory
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.


CHAPTER   XX

OF    PRAYER,    OF    THE  WHICH  THERE  ARE    THREE    KINDS,

CORPORAL,    MENTAL,   AND    SUPERNATURAL,    OUTSIDE    OF

WHICH  IT  IS  NOT  POSSIBLE  TO  FIND  GOD

FORASMUCH,  therefore,  as  the  knowledge  of  God  uncreate
and  of  Christ  crucified  is  needful,  and  seeing  that  without
it  we  cannot  transform  our  minds  in  His  love,  it  behoveth
us  to  read  diligently  in  that  aforesaid  Book  of  Life,  that


OF  FOLIGNO  99

is  to  say,  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  whereas
this  reading,  or  rather  knowledge,  cannot  possibly  be  ac
quired  without  devout,  pure,  humble,  fervent,  attentive,
and  constant  prayer  (not  with  the  lips  alone,  but  with
the  heart  and  mind  and  all  the  strength),  something  must
be  said  of  prayer,  as  well  as  of  the  Book  of  Life.

It  is  through  prayer  and  in  prayer  that  we  find  God.
There  are  divers  kinds  of  prayer,  but  in  these  three  kinds
alone  is  God  to  be  found.  The  first  is  corporal,  the
second  mental,  and  the  third  supernatural.

Corporal  prayer  is  that  which  is  always  accompanied  by
the  sound  of  words  and  by  bodily  exercises,  such  as  kneel
ing  down,  asking  pardon,  and  bowing  oneself.  This  kind
do  I  continually  perform  ;  and  the  reason  thereof  is,
that,  desiring  to  exercise  myself  in  mental  prayer,  I  was
sometimes  deceived  and  hindered  therefrom  by  idleness
and  sleep,  and  did  thus  lose  time.  For  this  reason  do  I
exercise  myself  in  corporal  prayer,  and  this  corporal
prayer  leadeth  me  unto  the  mental.  But  this  must  be
done  very  attentively.  Therefore  when  thou  sayest  the
Paternoster,  thou  must  consider  well  that  which  thou
sayest,  and  not  repeat  it  in  haste  in  order  to  say  it  a
certain  number  of  times,  as  do  those  vain  women  who
perform  good  deeds  for  a  reward.

Mental  prayer  is  when  the  meditation  of  God  filleth
the  mind  so  entirely  that  it  thinketh  on  naught  else  save
on  God.  But  when  some  other  reflection  entereth  into
the  mind  it  asketh  not  that  it  should  be  mental  prayer


TOO  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

because  that  prayer  doth  hinder  the  tongue  from  per
forming  its  office  and  it  cannot  speak.  So  completely  is
the  mind  filled  with  God  that  it  can  concern  itself  with
naught  else,  neither  think  of  anything  save  of  God.
Hence  from  this  mental  prayer  proceedeth  the  super
natural.

Supernatural  prayer  is  that  during  which  the  soul  is  so
exalted  by  this  knowledge,  or  meditation,  or  fulness  of
God  that  it  is  uplifted  above  its  own  nature  and  under-
standeth  more  of  God  than  it  otherwise  could  naturally.
And  understanding,  it  knoweth ;  but  that  which  it
knoweth  it  cannot  explain,  because  all  that  it  perceiveth
and  feeleth  is  above  its  own  nature.

In  these  three  degrees  of  prayer,  therefore,  man
learneth  to  know  God  and  himself.  And  knowing  Him,
he  loveth  Him,  and  loving  Him  he.desireth  to  possess
Him  ;  and  this  is  the  sign  of  love,  for  he  who  loveth  not
only  a  part  of  himself,  but  the  whole,  transformeth  him
self  in  the  thing  beloved.

But  because  this  transformation  endureth  not  for  ever,
the  soul  seeketh  and  examineth  all  other  means  whereby
it  may  transform  itself  in  its  Beloved,  in  order  that  this
union  may  be  repeated.  Wherefore  must  it  be  known
that  the  divine  wisdom  hath  ordered  all  things  and  given
unto  each  its  appointed  place.  For  this  reason  hath  the
ineffable  wisdom  ordained  that  no  man  should  attain  unto
mental  prayer  who  hath  not  previously  exercised  himself
in  corporal  prayer,  neither  doth  it  permit  the  super-


OF  FOLIGNO  101

natural  to  be  vouchsafed  unto  any  person  who  hath  not
first  performed  both  corporal  and  mental  prayer.

This  orderly  wisdom  doth  further  desire  that  the
prayers  set  apart  for  certain  hours  should  be  offered  at
the  hours  appointed,  as  is  seemly  and  due.  Excepting
only  if  we  be  so  hindered  by  the  great  joy  of  mental
or  supernatural  prayer  that  the  tongue  is  absolved  from
performing  its  office,  or  if  because  of  grievous  infirmity
we  are  not  able.  In  such  a  case  satisfaction  may  be
offered,  if  possible,  in  mental  quiet,  with  solitude  and
bodily  solicitude,  according  as  we  are  able.  And  God
doth  further  desire  that  when  we  pray,  we  should  do  so
with  our  whole  attention.


CHAPTER   XXI

HOW   THE    HEART   MUST   BE   GIVEN    WHOLLY   UNTO
PRAYER   AND    NOT   UNTO    OTHER    EXERCISES

WHEN  we  pray  we  must  keep  our  whole  hearts  fixed
thereon,  for  if  our  hearts  be  divided  we  lose  the  fruit  of
true  prayer.  In  all  other  exercises  that  we  perform,  such
as  eating  and  drinking  and  other  actions,  it  is  not  needful
that  we  should  be  so  single-minded,  nor  that  we  should
perform  them  with  our  whole  hearts  and  bodies.  But
these  things  do  we  only  perform  outwardly,  whereas  we
must  give  our  hearts  wholly  unto  God  if  we  desire  to


102  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

profit  by  the  fruits  of  true  prayer  and  not  to  lose  them
utterly.  The  reason  wherefore  we  are  tempted  during
prayer  is  because  our  hearts  are  not  wholly  given  unto
God.

Pray,  therefore,  and  pray  often,  because  the  more  often
thou  prayest  the  more  wilt  thou  be  enlightened  and  the
more  deeply  and  clearly  and  nobly  wilt  thou  perceive  the
supreme  Good,  and  that  which  is  supremely  good,  and
the  more  deeply  and  excellently  thou  perceivest  it  the
more  wilt  thou  love  it,  and  the  more  thou  lovest  it  the
more  wilt  thou  delight  in  it  and  be  able  to  comprehend
it.  Then  wilt  thou  attain  unto  the  fulness  of  light,  and
wilt  thou  know  that  which  heretofore  thou  couldst  not
know.

An  example  of  this  most  glorious  prayer  and  of  the
doctrine  and  form  thereof,  and  of  how  we  should  earnestly
persevere  in  this  same  prayer,  is  given  unto  us  in  Jesus
Christ,  who  hath  taught  us  both  by  words  and  deeds  to
pray  in  divers  ways.  By  words  did  He  teach  us  when  He
said  unto  His  disciples,  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter
not  into  temptation."  And  in  like  manner  in  many
other  parts  of  the  Holy  Gospel  thou  wilt  find  how  He
instructed  us  in  this  venerable  act  of  prayer,  the  which,
as  He  hath  signified  unto  all,  He  holdeth  most  dear.
Thus  hath  He  many  times  admonished  us  upon  this
matter,  as  one  who  truly  loveth  us  and  desireth  our  good.
x\nd  no  excuse  remaineth  unto  us,  for  inasmuch  as  He
said,  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,"  the  result  of  our  prayer


OF  FOLIGNO  103

doth  depend  upon  ourselves.  He  desireth  also  that  we
should  pray  unto  Him  in  order  that,  moved  and  drawn
thereto  by  His  example,  we  may  love  this  above  all  other
things.

The  Gospel  saith  that  when  He  did  pray  for  a  great
while  the  sweat  ran  down  upon  the  ground  like  unto
drops  of  blood.  Wherefore  hold  thou  this  example  of
prayer  ever  before  thine  eyes,  and  see  that  thou  followest
it  closely,  seeing  that  He  prayed  not  for  Himself,  but  for
thee.

There  was  also  that  prayer  of  supplication  when  He
said,  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  ;
nevertheless,  not  My  will  but  Thine  be  done."


CHAPTER   XXII

HOW    THAT    WE    SHOULD    SUBMIT  OUR  WILLS  UNTO  THE

WILL   OF    GOD,    AND    HOW  THAT    PRAYER    IS    NECESSARY

FOR    THE    OBTAINING    OF    ALL    MERCIES

THOU  seest,  therefore,  that  when  our  Saviour  Christ
prayed,  He  did  submit  His  will  unto  that  of  the  Father.
Do  thou  follow  His  example.  Afterwards  He  prayed
again  when  He  said,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I
commit  My  spirit."  But  wherefore  should  I  repeat
more  things,  seeing  that  His  whole  life  was  a  prayer,  in
asmuch  as  He  was  continually  engaged  in  making  known


io4  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

and  manifesting  both  God  and  Himself.  Shall  we  say-
that  Christ  prayed  in  vain  ?  Then  wherefore  art  thou
neglectful,  seeing  that  nothing  is  obtained  without
prayer  ?  Forasmuch  as  Christ,  true  God  and  Man,
prayed  not  for  Himself,  but  that  thou  mightest  have  an
example  of  true  prayer,  it  is  needful  that  thou  shouldst
pray  if  thou  desirest  aught.  For  without  prayer  canst
thou  obtain  nothing.  If  He  who  was  actually  God  would
accept  nothing  without  having  prayed  and  asked  for  it,
how  darest  thou,  miserable  creature,  hope  to  receive
without  supplication  and  prayer  ?

Now  thou  knowest  well  that  without  the  divine  light
and  grace  none  are  saved  ;  through  the  divine  light  doth
man  start  out  and  progress  upon  the  right  way.  There
fore  if  thou  desirest  this  divine  light  thou  must  pray ;
and  if  thou  hast  begun  to  make  progress  and  desirest
the  light  to  be  increased  in  thee,  thou  must  pray ;
and  if  thou  hast  attained  unto  the  highest  perfection  and
desirest  to  be  yet  more  enlightened  in  order  that  thou
mayest  remain  in  that  state,  thou  must  pray.  Pray,  if
thou  desirest  faith  ;  pray  if  thou  desirest  hope  ;  pray
if  thou  desirest  charity,  or  poverty,  or  obedience,  or
chastity  ;  pray  if  thou  desirest  any  virtue  whatsoever.

The  way  in  which  thou  must  pray  is  this  :  thou  must
read  the  Book  of  the  Life  of  Christ  Jesus,  which  life  was
poverty,  suffering,  contempt,  and  true  obedience.  When
thou  shalt  be  fully  entered  into  this  life  and  shalt  have
profited  thereby,  thou  wilt  be  afflicted  by  many  tribula-


OF  FOLIGNO  105

tions  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  In  many
divers  ways  will  they  molest  thee  and  horribly  persecute
thee,  and  if  thou  wilt  overcome  thou  must  pray.  When
thy  soul  desireth  to  pray  it  behoveth  thee  to  be  both
mentally  and  bodily  clean,  and  thou  must  bethink  thyself
well  of  all  the  evil  and  the  good  which  thou  hast  done,
examining  the  intention  of  thy  good  deeds,  thy  fastings,
prayers,  tears,  and  other  things,  and  reflecting  how  that
thou  hast  done  but  little  of  God's  work,  and  even  that
little  without  reverence  and  faultily,  and  hast  done  evil
with  great  diligence.  Confess  thy  sins  and  acknowledge
them  readily,  repenting  of  them  abundantly.  And
through  this  confession  of  the  heart  and  contrition  of
the  soul  thou  wilt  find  cleanliness,  and  thus  wilt  thou
pray  like  unto  the  publican  and  not  like  unto  the  Pharisee,
and  by  prayer  thou  shalt  be  enlightened.

All  who  desire  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  must  pray  ;
for  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  Holy  Spirit  descended
not  upon  the  disciples  save  when  they  were  at  prayer.


CHAPTER   XXIII

THE    GREATER   THE   TEMPTATION,    THE    GREATER    MUST
BE    LIKEWISE   THE    PERSEVERANCE    IN    PRAYER

WATCH  and  pray,  therefore,  that  thou  givest  no  ad
vantage  unto  the  adversaries  who  continually  surround


io6  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

thee  ;  for  when  them  ceasest  to  pray,  thou  givest  place
unto  the  enemy.  Therefore,  the  more  thou  art  tempted
the  more  must  thou  persevere  in  prayer.  Sometimes,
however,  prayer  is  the  cause  of  thy  being  tempted,  as
when  demons  do  endeavour  to  hinder  it.  But  take  no
heed  of  aught  save  of  prayer,  so  that  thou  mayest  always
be  worthy  of  being  freed  from  temptation.  For  through
prayer  art  thou  enlightened,  through  prayer  art  thou  set
free  from  temptation,  through  prayer  art  thou  cleansed,
and  through  prayer  art  thou  united  with  God.  Prayer
is  nothing  else  save  the  manifestation  of  God  and  of
oneself,  and  this  manifestation  is  perfect  and  true  humilia
tion,  for  humility  consisteth  in  the  soul,  beholding  God
and  itself  as  it  should.  Then  is  the  soul  in  a  state  of
deep  humility,  and  the  deeper  the  humility  the  greater
is  the  divine  grace  which  springeth  therefrom  and  in-
creaseth  there.

The  more  the  divine  grace  humbleth  the  soul,  the  more
quickly  doth  this  same  grace  increase  and  spring  afresh
out  of  the  depths  of  that  humility.  And  the  more  the
grace  increaseth  the  more  deeply  doth  the  soul  abase
itself  in  true  humility  through  the  continuance  of  true
prayer.  Thus  do  grace  and  light  divine  grow  ever
within  the  soul,  and  the  soul  is  ever  prostrate  in  true
humility,  duly  reading  and  meditating  upon  this  Life
of  Christ.

Man's  perfection  consisteth  in  knowing  the  greatness  of
God  and  his  own  nothingness.  But  how  he  attaineth


OF  FOLIGNO  107

unto  this  through  gazing  upon  that  Book  of  Life  hath
already  been  said.  Therefore,  oh  my  son,  cast  away
from  thee  all  slothfulness  and  negligence.  I  certainly
desire  thee,  oh  my  son,  and  do  exhort  thee,  that  thou
watchest  and  prayest  no  less  and  dost  no  fewer  good
works  when  thou  art  deprived  of  the  grace  and  fervour
of  devotion  than  in  times  when  thou  obtainest  that
grace  of  devotion.  Verily  it  is  pleasing  unto  God  if,  in
the  fervour  of  grace,  thou  dost  pray  and  watch,  labour
and  perform  other  good  works.

In  all  ways  pleasing  and  acceptable  unto  God,  oh  my
son,  is  thy  sacrifice  when,  grace  and  fervour  being  with
held  from  thee,  thou  dost  watch  and  pray,  and  do  good
works  no  less  than  when  thou  didst  enjoy  grace.  Where
fore,  my  son,  if  the  divine  fervour  and  ardour  doth
sometimes  constrain  thee  to  watch,  pray,  and  offer  praise,
do  it  with  all  thy  might  whilst  the  fire  burneth  within
thee.

When  it  so  happeneth  that  God  depriveth  thee  of
warmth  and  fervour  (whether  because  of  thine  own  fault,
as  is  most  often  the  case,  or  whether  for  the  augmenting
and  strengthening  of  grace  in  thee),  thou  must  neverthe
less  watch,  pray,  and  do  good  works  as  heretofore.  And
if  temptation  or  tribulation  (whereby  the  children  of
God  are  purged  and  punished)  should  fall  upon  thee  and
grace  and  fervour  be  withheld,  do  thou  endeavour  none
the  less  to  perform  the  aforesaid  good  works  and  strive
that  thou  mayest  overcome.  Keep  thyself  in  subjection


io8  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

by  constant  prayers,  vigils,  tears,  and  importunities,  so
that  God  in  His  mercy  will  at  last  give  thee  back
thy  warmth  and  fervour.  Do  thy  part,  for  God  will
assuredly  do  His.

Constant,  ready,  and  insistent  prayer  is  very  acceptable
unto  God.  Therefore  do  thou  persevere  in  prayer,  and
concern  not  thyself  with  other  occupations  immediately
when  thou  beginnest  to  feel  more  than  commonly  filled
with  God.  And  see  that  thou  givest  not  thyself  unto
any  occupation  or  thought  before  thou  hast  learnt  to
separate  thyself  from  all  others.  Take  heed  likewise  unto
thy  fervours  and  thy  spirit,  which  rusheth  forward  eagerly
before  thou  canst  follow  it.  Inquire  and  see  the  be
ginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  road  it  would  take,  and
thou  shalt  follow  it  only  so  far  as  it  keepeth  unto  the
way  of  the  Book  of  Life.  And  take  heed  of  those  who
say  they  have  the  spirit  of  liberty,  for  they  do  openly
oppose  the  Book  of  the  Life  of  Christ,  the  which  is
written  according  to  the  law,  He  being  the  founder  of
the  law,  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.


CHAPTER   XXIV

OF    THE    HUMILITY    AND    EXAMPLE    OF    CHRIST
THE    CRUCIFIED

VAIN  is  all  prayer  without  humility  ;    for,  after  prayer,
humility  is  the  thing  most  needful  unto  man.     Behold


OF  FOLIGNO  109

then,  ye  blessed  sons  of  God,  the  example  of  humility
furnished  unto  us  in  Christ  crucified,  and  herein  may
ye  see  the  form  of  all  perfection.  Behold  His  life
and  hearken  unto  His  teaching,  which  was  set  forth
not  in  words  only  but  in  actual  works  and  fortified
with  marvellous  virtues,  and  therefore  endeavour  with
your  whole  minds  and  energy  to  follow  in  His  steps.
He  who  was  in  the  form  of  God  did  abandon  His  own
nature  and  take  the  form  of  a  servant,  humbling  Himself
and  rendering  obedience  even  unto  death  upon  the  Cross.
Truly,  He  doth  offer  Himself  unto  us  as  an  example  of
humility,  ofttimes  advising  us  to  take  heed  unto  ourselves,
saying,  "  Learn  of  Me  "  (Quia  mitis  sum  et  bumilis  corde,
which  is  to  say,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart ").

Oh  my  sons,  take  heed  now  and  see,  and  with  wisdom
reflect  upon,  the  depth  and  profitableness  of  His  teaching,
the  sublimity  and  worth  of  His  instruction,  whence  it
springeth  and  whereon  it  is  founded.  "  Learn  of  Me,"
He  saith,  "  and  not  of  the  angels  or  disciples,  but  of  Me
whose  humility  is  all  the  greater  because  My  majesty  is
more  sublime."  He  asketh  us  not  to  learn  fasting  of
Him,  albeit  He  fasted  forty  days  for  an  example  unto
us ;  neither  doth  He  ask  us  to  reject  the  world  and  live
in  poverty,  albeit  He  lived  in  poverty  and  bade  His
followers  do  likewise  ;  neither  doth  He  ask  us  to  learn  of
Him  how  He  made  the  heavens,  or  performed  miracles,  or
other  similar  things.  This  only  saith  He,  "  I  am  meek
and  lowly  of  heart,"  as  though  He  would  say,  "If  by


i  io  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

word  and  deed  I  have  not  shown  you  an  example  of
humility,  believe  Me  not."

Yet  another  time  did  He  set  us  an  example  of  humility
and  bid  us  do  likewise  and  obey  Him.  For  after  that  He
had  washed  the  disciples'  feet  with  His  own  hands,  He
said :  "  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  unto  you  ?  If  I  then,
your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet,  ye  also
ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet.  I  have  given  you  an
example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you.  Verily
I  say  unto  you,  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord.
If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."

The  Saviour  of  the  world  hath  verily  shown  meekness
and  lowliness  of  heart  to  be  the  root  and  foundation  of
all  virtue.  Thus,  neither  abstinence  nor  the  hardship  of
fasting,  nor  poverty,  nor  vileness  of  raiment,  nor  outward
show  of  good  works,  nor  the  performing  of  miracles  can
avail  aught  without  humility  of  heart.  United  with
that,  abstinence  would  be  blessed  and  right,  then  would
hardship  and  poorness  of  raiment  be  blessed,  and  living
and  stable  would  be  the  works  builded  upon  this  founda
tion.

This  lowliness  of  heart  is  mother  of  all  the  virtues,
whence  springeth  even  the  exercising  of  these  virtues,
as  the  trunk  and  branches  spring  from  the  root.  So
precious  is  this  virtue  of  humility  and  so  firm  its  founda
tion  (upon  which  is  built  up  the  whole  perfection  of  the
spiritual  life),  that  the  Lord  did  especially  desire  that
we  should  learn  it  direct  of  Him.  And  inasmuch  as  it


OF  FOLIGNO  in

is  the  root  and  the  safeguard  of  all  virtues,  the  Virgin
Mary,  forgetful  of  all  the  other  virtues  of  body  and  soul
which  she  possessed,  did  trust  only  in  this  one,  affirming
that  God  was  made  man  of  her  expressly  because  of  her
lowliness  of  heart,  saying,  "  For  He  hath  regarded  the  low
estate  of  His  handmaiden,  for  behold,  from  henceforth
all  generations  shall  call  me  blessed."

In  this  humility  must  ye  build  your  foundations,  oh
my  sons,  and  in  all  ways  establish  yourselves,  in  order
that  ye  may  show  yourselves  as  members  joined  unto  the
Head  by  a  natural  unity  and  in  Him  find  true  peace,
unto  the  which  no  soul  can  attain  excepting  it  be  founded
in  this  humility,  without  which  all  those  virtues  whereby
we  strive  after  God  are  as  nothing.


CHAPTER   XXV

OF    HOW    GREATLY    TRUE    HUMILITY    QUICKENETH    THE

UNDERSTANDING    OF   THE    SOUL    IN    KNOWING    ITS    OWN

VILENESS    AND   THE    DIVINE    GOODNESS

THIS  lowliness  of  heart  which  Christ  desired  that  we
should  learn  of  Him,  oh  my  beloved,  is  a  certain  mar
vellous  and  clear  light  which  doth  open  and  quicken  the
soul  in  knowing  its  own  vileness  and  nothingness  and
the  greatness  of  the  divine  goodness.  The  better  a  man
perceiveth  all  this  the  more  perfect  will  be  his  knowledge


ii2  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

of  himself.  Therefore,  perceiving  and  knowing  himself
to  be  nothing  and  empty  of  all  good,  he  will  more
earnestly  offer  praise  and  prayer  unto  the  majesty  of  the
divine  goodness  which  he  seeth  and  comprehendeth
through  this  humility,  and  here  is  virtue  born  in  him
through  the  grace  sent  him  of  God.

The  greatest  and  chief  of  all  virtues  is  charity,  which
is  love  towards  God  and  one's  neighbour.  And  this  love
springeth  from  that  light ;  for  when  the  soul  perceiveth
itself  to  be  nothing,  and  God  inclined  towards  such  vile
nothingness  and  abasing  Himself  and  uniting  Himself
thereunto,  it  doth  so  violently  burn  with  love  for  Him
that  through  this  burning  love  it  is  made  one  with  God.
And  being  thus  transformed  by  love,  what  creature  is
there  who  would  not  love  unto  the  utmost  of  his  power  ?

Verily  the  soul  thus  transformed  through  love  of  its
Creator  loveth  all  creatures  created  by  Him  according  as
is  seemly  ;  for  it  perceiveth  God  in  all  His  creatures,
and  beholdeth  how  greatly  He  loveth  them.  The  soul
rejoiceth  thereat  and  at  the  good  fortune  of  its  neigh
bour,  and  grieveth  and  lamenteth  at  his  evil  fortune ;  and
being  kindly  disposed  it  presumeth  not  to  judge  him  or
despise  him  when  misfortune  falleth  upon  him.  For,
illumined  by  the  aforesaid  light,  it  beholdeth  itself  and
knoweth  itself  to  be  in  a  plight  as  bad  or  even  worse
than  that  which  hath  befallen  its  neighbour.  And  if  the
soul  is  not  fallen,  yet  it  knoweth  that  it  had  no  power  of
itself  to  resist,  but  that  it  had  been  helped  by  the  grace


OF  FOLIGNO  113

which  upholdeth  it  and  comforteth  it  against  evil  and
temptation,  or  even  removeth  the  temptation.  Where
fore  it  judgeth  no  man,  but  rather  doth  it  humiliate
itself  the  more ;  for,  seeing  the  defects  of  its  neighbour,
it  looketh  unto  itself  and  perceiveth  clearly  that  if  it  had
not  been  upheld  by  God  it  would  have  fallen  into  those
same  evils  even  more  easily  than  did  its  neighbour.
And  beholding  the  bodily  ills  suffered  by  its  neighbour,
by  the  strength  of  its  love  it  feeleth  them  to  be  likewise
its  own  and  hath  compassion  on  him,  as  saith  the  apostle,
"  Who  is  there  that  hath  an  infirmity  and  I  have  it  not  ?  "

What  I  have  said  of  love  which  hath  its  origin  in  the
root  of  humility,  may  likewise  be  said  of  faith,  of  hope,
and  of  all  the  virtues,  which,  according  unto  their  several
natures,  are  founded  upon  humility,  and  of  which  we  will
now  speak  one  by  one.

Faith  is  born  of  humility,  for  knowing  itself  to  be
nothing,  and  lacking  in  all  divine  things,  it  believeth
what  is  told  unto  it  according  unto  our  faith.  Per
ceiving  through  its  humility,  moreover,  that  it  hath  no
power  of  itself  and  is  not  able  by  its  own  power  to  achieve
aught,  it  putteth  its  hope  in  God.  It  is  thus  likewise
with  the  other  virtues,  of  the  which  ye  can  better  think
for  yourselves,  taught  by  divine  obedience,  than  by  seeing
them  put  down  in  any  writing  whatsoever.

I  say  unto  you,  therefore,  that  ye  must  lay  firm  hold
of  this  virtue  and  see  that  it  increase  within  you  ;  be
cause  unto  him  who  is  truly  rooted  in  humility  is  given

H


1 14  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

angelic  conversation,  pure,  holy,  and  peaceful.  Because,
also,  this  precious  virtue  of  humility  rendereth  the  soul
kindly  unto  all,  welcome  and  loving,  and  especially  unto
the  elect  of  God  who  have  to  be  converted.  These  are
given  us  for  an  example  and  a  light,  for  through  their
meekness  they  are  the  more  easily  converted.  And  that
man  may  enjoy  inward  peace  let  him  not  be  disturbed
by  any  adversity  whatsoever,  so  that  he  say  truly  with  the
apostle,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "
Quis  separabit  nos  a  charitate  Chris ti  ?

Oh  my  sons,  cease  not  from  searching  until  ye  shall
have  found  that  foundation  without  which  all  works  fall
into  ruin  and  none  can  make  progress  upon  the  way  of
God.  This  search  is  verily  important  and  needful,  in
asmuch  as  without  humility  all  other  virtues  are  nothing
worth.  Hearken  unto  the  desire  of  the  eternal  King,
Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  so  ardently  prayed  you  that  ye
should  learn  this  virtue  of  Him.  Rest  upon  this  founda
tion  and  reflect  upon  your  own  vileness  and  nothingness.
Hearken  unto  the  wish  of  the  eternal  Truth  and  Wisdom,
who  concealeth  the  value  of  humility  from  the  wise  of
this  world  and  revealeth  it  unto  babes,  preaching  it  and
showing  it  forth  in  examples.

My  desire  after  which  I  do  hunger  and  thirst  is  that  ye
should  plunge  yourselves  into  the  depths  of  the  divine
goodness,  for  if  ye  trust  in  the  immensity  thereof  and
have  a  knowledge  of  yourselves,  ye  will  possess  a  solid
foundation  in  humility.  Then  will  ye  not  be  so  inclined


OF  FOLIGNO  115

to  strife  and  contention,  but  ye  will  be  rather  as  the
deaf  who  hear  not,  and  as  the  dumb  who  open  not  their
mouths,  and  in  consequence  thereof  ye  will  be  true
members  of  Christ,  of  whom  the  apostle  saith  that  they
enter  not  into  strife  or  any  contest  of  the  flesh.

Of  how  many  good  things  is  this  humility  the  cause  !
Those  who  are  filled  with  it  are  cairn,  quiet,  pleasing
unto  God  and  abounding  in  grace,  and  this  are  they  be
cause  of  their  inward  and  outward  peacefulness.  When
they  hear  any  hard  thing  spoken  against  themselves  or
against  some  truth,  they  seek  not  to  excuse  themselves
but  only  answer  briefly  and  with  a  low  voice,  even  unto
those  who  do  falsely  accuse  them,  and  they  will  confess
their  ignorance  and  be  ready  to  give  way  rather  than
contend.


CHAPTER   XXVI

HOW    HUMILITY    DOTH    CAUSE    US    TO    SEE   THE    MULTI
TUDE    OF    OUR  SINS   AND   THAT  AN   HUMBLE  LIFE  DOTH
WORK    CONTRARY    TO    THEM

THIS  silence  proceedeth  from  naught  else  save  from  that
twofold  overwhelming,  namely,  by  the  divine  immensity
and  its  own  vileness ;  and  the  soul  is  thus  overwhelmed
in  the  aforesaid  light  of  humility.

But,  I  pray  ye,  where  is  this  humility  ?     Where  is  this
vileness  ?     Where  is  this  light  ?     Where  is  this  silence,


ii6  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

and  by  what  may  we  attain  unto  these  aforesaid  things  ?
Of  a  certainty  we  may  attain  unto  them  by  fervent,  pure,
constant,  and  earnest  prayer  and  by  reading  the  Book  of
the  Life  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  is,  reflecting  upon  His  life
and  death.  And  when  the  soul  reflecteth  upon  His  suffer
ings,  it  is  given  unto  it  to  know  the  multitude  of  its  sins
and  how  it  hath  offended  God  with  all  its  members,  and
it  humbleth  itself  in  consequence,  as  hath  already  been
said.

Wherefore  do  I  pray  you  that  ye  be  always  of  one  mind,
that  there  be  no  divisions  or  sects  amongst  you,  but  that  in
your  souls  there  be  that  which  maketh  all  discord  to  agree
under  one  will ;  and  this  is  lowliness.  Lowliness  regardeth
not  any  sufficiency  of  knowledge  or  of  common  sense,  but
only  inclineth  the  soul  to  perceive  its  faults  and  wretched
ness,  to  make  accusation  and  judgment  against  itself  in
order  to  convince  itself  of  its  own  sins  that  it  may  en
deavour  to  remedy  them.  Lowliness  doth  not  hold  itself
to  be  superior  to  any,  neither  persuadeth  any  to  think
themselves  superior  to  others ;  it  doth  not  make  men  im
portant  or  contentious  of  speech,  albeit  its  life  offendeth
all  who  are  opposed  unto  this  simplicity.

Therefore,  oh  my  children,  I  do  desire  that  your  lives,
your  tongues  silent  in  this  lowliness  of  babes,  and  the  zeal
of  your  discreet  compassion  should  be  as  a  clear  mirror
unto  the  adversaries  of  this  life.  Oh  my  beloved,  if  I
should  hear  it  said  of  you  that  lowliness  had  made  you  to
be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind,  my  soul  would  be  at  peace


OF  FOLIGNO  117

concerning  you  !     And  of  a  certainty  I  perceive  not  how
ye  can  be  pleasing  unto  God  if  ye  are  not  thus  united.

Forgive  my  presumption,  oh  my  children,  which  hath
impelled  me  to  urge  you  unto  the  virtue  of  humility,  for
it  is  through  zeal  and  because  of  your  love  that  I  have
thus  spoken.


I ;  CHAPTER   XXVII

OF    CHARITY,    AND    HOW   THAT    WE    SHOULD    FEAR     OUR

LOVE     IS     NOT    OF     THE    TRUE     KIND     AND     DOTH     NOT

FULFIL   THE    CONDITIONS    NEEDFUL

CHARITY  and  the  love  of  God  is  the  greatest  of  all  virtues ;
without  it  prayer  is  of  no  account,  neither  pleasing  unto
God,  and  all  the  other  virtues  are  without  profit  whatso
ever.  That  ye  may  believe  this  is  true,  hearken  unto  the
Book  of  the  Life  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  saith,  "  If  thou
bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar  and  there  rememberest  that
thy  brother  hath  aught  against  thee,  leave  there  thy  gift
before  the  altar  and  go  thy  way  and  first  be  reconciled  to
thy  brother."  For  the  gift  of  prayer  is  nothing  worth  if
it  be  not  offered  in  the  bonds  of  charity.  Moreover,
when  in  the  Lord's  prayer  we  are  taught  to  ask  for  the  re
mission  of  our  sins,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  for
give  them  that  trespass  against  us,"  it  meaneth  that  our
debts  will  be  forgiven  us  in  prayer  according  as  we  have
forgiven  our  brothers  the  injuries  and  offences  they  com-


ii8  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

mitted  against  us,  and  if  we  forgive  them  we  shall  attain
unto  the  state  of  charity  in  unity.

Know  ye,  my  children,  that  like  as  love  containeth  all
worth  and  goodness,  so  hate  containeth  all  unworthiness,
sin,  and  evil.  Wherefore,  my  dear  children,  there  is
nothing  in  this  world,  neither  man  nor  devil  nor  any
other  thing,  which  I  do  fear  as  greatly  as  I  fear  love.
For  love  penetrateth  the  soul  more  than  any  other  thing,
neither  is  there  anything  which  doth  so  fill  the  mind  and
the  whole  heart  as  doth  love  ;  so  that  if  the  soul  hath  not
the  arms  wherewith  to  protect  itself,  it  may  easily  fall
into  evil  and  suffer  great  ruin.  I  am  not  speaking  here
of  wrongful  love,  the  which  must  be  eschewed  by  all  and
shunned  as  a  thing  perilous  and  diabolical,  but  I  am
speaking  of  good  and  spiritual  love,  such  as  existeth  be
twixt  God  and  the  soul,  or  betwixt  one  neighbour  and
another.

That  this  is  true  is  plainly  proved.  For  if  the  love
which  the  soul  beareth  unto  God  be  not  armed  with
great  wisdom  and  discretion,  but  moveth  with  undue
fervour,  then  doth  it  either  presently  cease,  or  it  is
deceived,  or  it  tendeth  unto  some  unseemly  end.  For
things  wherein  is  no  order  are  neither  good  nor  healthful ;
and  for  this  reason  are  there  many  persons  who  believe
they  are  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  whereas  they  are
filled  with  hatred  of  Him  and  do  love  instead  the  world,
the  flesh,  and  the  devil.

When,  therefore,  any  man  loveth  God  because  He  can


OF  FOLIGNO  119

save  him  from  bodily  infirmities  and  tribulations  and
from  temporal  perils,  he  loveth  himself  and  God  in  a
manner  unbefitting,  placing  himself  before  God,  who
should  be  loved  before  all  other  things.  One  man  loveth
everything  for  himself  and  thus  maketh  a  god  of  himself
and  his  own  heart,  not  loving  God  save  for  his  own  sake.
Another  loveth  all  worldly  things  for  himself  and  for  the
profit  of  himself  and  his  body  ;  he  loveth  his  kindred  for
his  own  profit  and  for  the  honour  which  they  do  him.
He  loveth  men,  and  saintly  and  spiritual  persons  in  order
that  he  may  cover  himself  with  the  mantle  of  their
holiness,  albeit  He  loveth  them  not  for  their  goodness.
Verily,  such  love  is  not  pure,  because  the  fruit  thereof  is
the  delighting  of  the  flesh  and  the  body,  with  all  manner
of  vice  and  concupiscence.  Others  are  there  who  love
bodily  attainments  and  talents,  and  would  know  how  to
read  and  sing  for  the  pleasure  of  others.  They  delight,
moreover,  in  great  and  profound  learning,  in  order  that
in  argument  they  may  overcome  learnedly  and  with
much  reasoning  ;  yet  not  out  of  charity,  but  that  they
may  with  pride  correct  others  and  be  exalted  in  their  eyes.
There  are  also  some  who  believe  they  love  God,  and
who  do  love  Him,  but  with  a  feeble  and  imperfect  love.
These  love  God  in  order  that  He  may  forgive  them  their
trespasses  and  liberate  them  from  hell  and  give  them
the  glory  of  Paradise,  and  not  because  of  His  goodness.
Others  love  God  for  the  sake  of  having  divine  consolation
and  sweetness,  spiritual  thoughts,  and  delights.  Others


120  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

love  Him  in  order  that  He  may  love  them.  Some  love
their  kindred  and  friends  from  a  desire  that  they  should
be  spiritual  and  good,  that  they  may  not  be  ashamed
because  of  them,  but  may  derive  profit  and  honour.
Some  love  God  in  order  that  He  may  give  them  under
standing,  knowledge,  and  intelligence  of  books,  and  that
they  may  be  able  to  speak  spiritually,  yet  not  for  the
honour  and  profit  of  others,  but  that  they  themselves
may  be  more  loved  and  honoured.  They  love  to  be
spiritual  that  they  may  be  esteemed  spiritual  and  be  be
loved  of  the  spiritually  minded,  but  it  is  for  their  own
spiritual  honour  and  profit  that  they  do  this.  They  love
to  be  poor,  patient,  obedient,  and  outwardly  humble  and
virtuous,  in  order  that  they  may  appear  more  virtuous
than  other  persons,  desiring  that  none  may  seem  better
than  themselves,  or  even  approach  unto  their  perfection.
And  inasmuch  as  they  desire  to  have  none  equal  unto
them,  they  are  in  this  matter  like  unto  Lucifer,  who
desired  that  no  creature  should  be  equal  unto  him.

Others  there  are  who  desire  that  their  fame  should  be
noised  abroad  in  order  that  they  may  be  commended
as  saints  alike  by  good  and  evil  persons.  They  do  praise
both  those  who  are  spiritual  and  those  who  are  not,  in
order  that  they  may  not  be  accused  of  judging  boldly.

Some  do  love  the  devout  persons  who  come  unto  them
with  a  spiritual  and  perfect  love,  wholly  loving  them  in
God.  Nevertheless,  this  love  doth  sometimes  increase
too  greatly,  and  if  it  be  not  armed  with  the  weapons  of


OF  FOLIGNO  121


discretion  it  turneth  unto  evil.  Sometimes  it  becometh
carnal  love  and  unprofitable  ;  then  is  it  very  hurtful  for
them  to  converse  together  and  they  do  uselessly  lose  their
time,  inasmuch  as  their  hearts  are  united  in  an  unseemly
bond.  This  love  increaseth  and  ever  desireth  the  pre
sence  of  the  beloved,  and  falleth  sick  if  it  hath  it  not.
And  if  the  beloved  is  there,  the  love  groweth  too  great
and  the  lover  becometh  one  with  the  beloved,  so  that
what  pleaseth  one  pleaseth  likewise  the  other,  and  what
displeaseth  one  displeaseth  the  other.  Therefore,  if  the
soul  be  not  so  fortified  that  it  can  control  the  ardour  of
this  love,  which  ever  increaseth  and  hath  not  perfect  order
or  discretion,  it  must  needs  fall  at  last  into  disorder.

And  if  when  this  disorder  cometh  about,  the  beloved
hath  not  the  aforesaid  weapons  for  protection,  and  is
likewise  wounded  by  the  sword  of  love,  then  is  it  very
much  more  dangerous,  because  they  do  then  begin  to  dis
close  their  secrets  one  unto  the  other.  Amongst  other
things,  they  disclose  how  greatly  they  love  each  other,
saying  one  unto  the  other,  "  There  is  no  person  in  all  the
world  whom  I  so  greatly  love,  nor  whom  I  do  bear  so
entirely  in  mine  heart."  These  and  many  other  things
do  they  say,  because  they  must  needs  speak  of  that  which
they  feel.

Thus  they  still  desire  to  love  each  other  for  devotion's
sake  and  for  the  spiritual  profit  which  they  believe  they
do  obtain  from  such  love,  but  they  are  in  peril  of
being  tempted  unto  unlawful  things  which  might  be


122  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

occasioned  by  their  love.  At  first,  reason  doth  dissuade
them  therefrom,  for  as  yet  it  hath  not  been  entirely
overcome  by  love  ;  but  love  groweth  and  reason  beginneth
to  be  obscured  and  the  spirit  is  weakened  and  commenceth
to  believe  that  it  is  no  sin  and  in  no  wise  hurtful  unto  the
soul  to  touch  the  thing  beloved.  Wherefore  doth  it
permit  this,  and  so  doth  it  begin  to  do  wrong  and  to  fall
from  the  state  of  perfection  little  by  little,  as  reason  is
obscured  by  love.  And  according  as  it  sinketh  it  be
ginneth  to  esteem  as  naught  those  things  which  are
dangerous,  and  to  say,  "  This  may  we  do,  for  we  mean  no
evil  and  it  is  not  a  great  sin."  So  gradually  these  things
come  to  be  considered  lawful,  and,  the  love  increasing
more  and  more,  one  submitteth  entirely  unto  the  will  of
the  other,  each  doing  what  the  other  desireth  and  not
opposing  any  reason  to  the  contrary.  Hence  it  followeth
that  the  lover  obtaineth  all  his  desire,  and  because  of  the
aforesaid  disorder  he  cannot  refuse  if  he  be  invited  unto
evil-doing  ;  and  if  he  be  not  invited  then  doth  he  invite,
knowing  that  it  is  pleasing  unto  the  beloved.

Then  do  they  refrain  from  prayer,  from  abstinence,
from  solitude,  and  from  all  the  other  virtues  which  they
did  formerly  practice,  imitating  divine  love  in  this  most
miserable  worldly  love.  And  sometimes  this  love  in-
creaseth  to  such  a  degree  that  neither  the  words  nor  the
presence  of  the  beloved  do  give  the  satisfaction  they  did
at  first.  But  loving  more  ardently,  each  desireth  to  know
if  the  beloved  be  wounded  by  the  sword  of  love  as  deeply


OF  FOLIGNO  123

as  is  the  lover,  and  then  it  is  that  they  fall  into  peril.
Then  are  they  confident  and  sure  one  of  the  other,  and
because  they  are  satisfied  neither  with  words  nor  with
presence,  both  lover  and  beloved  are  inclined  unto  all
evil.

For  this  reason  do  I  say  that  I  fear  love  more  than  all
things,  for  herein  are  all  evils  committed.  Wherefore
take  ye  heed  thereof,  as  of  a  serpent.

Because  of  evil  love,  therefore,  do  I  fear  good  love
betwixt  one  person  and  another,  for  good  love  oft  turneth
into  evil  in  the  aforesaid  manner.


CHAPTER   XXVIII

THE    SOUL    IS    UNITED    WITH    GOD    IN    THREE   SEVERAL

WAYS,    WHEREBY    IT    IS    FURNISHED    WITH    A   WEAPON

TO    CONTROL   THE    LOVE    OF    GOD    AND    OF    ITS

NEIGHBOUR

IF  the  love  of  God  be  not  directed  with  discretion  and
protected  by  its  weapons,  it  turneth  unto  evil.  The
weapons  wherewith  the  good  love  of  God  and  one's
neighbour  may  be  controlled  are  given  unto  man  in  the
transformation  of  the  soul.

Now  this  transformation  is  a  threefold  one  :  some
times  the  soul  is  transformed  in  the  will  of  God,  some
times  with  God,  and  sometimes  within  God  and  God
within  it.


i24  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

The  first  transformation  is  when  the  soul  useth  all  its
endeavour  to  imitate  the  life  of  Christ  crucified,  for  herein
is  made  manifest  the  will  of  God  Himself.

The  second  is  when  the  soul  is  united  unto  God  and
loveth  God  ;  not  only  because  it  so  willeth,  but  because
it  hath  great  knowledge  and  joy  of  God,  the  which,  how
ever,  it  is  able  to  explain  and  set  forth  in  words.

The  third  is  when  the  soul  is  so  entirely  made  one
with  God  and  God  with  it,  that  it  knoweth  and  enjoyeth
with  God  the  most  high  things,  the  which  cannot  possibly
be  set  forth  in  words,  nor  imagined  save  by  him  who
feeleth  them.

Therefore,  the  first  doth  not  control  the  love  of  lovers
as  perfectly  as  it  should  (albeit  it  hath  much  control),
because  it  can  still  be  deceived.  The  second,  if  it  be
very  alert,  is  sufficient  to  control  love.  But  the  third  is
supreme  in  the  ruling  of  love,  because  this  third,  together
with  the  second,  is  perfectly  instilled  into  the  soul  and
is  given  unto  it  by  grace.  And  this  third  and  the  second
(albeit  not  perfect),  do  nevertheless  produce  certain
wisdom  by  means  of  which  the  soul  is  enabled  to  control
both  the  love  of  God  and  of  the  soul.  For  the  know
ledge  and  the  sweetness  and  the  fervour  which  came
of  the  grace  of  God  do  so  rule  the  soul  and  fill  it  with
this  wisdom  that  love  endureth  and  doth  continue  as  it
began,  and  doth  not  show  itself  forth  as  an  example  with
laughter  and  dancing  or  other  like  gestures.

In  like  manner  doth  it  behave  wisely  and  soberly  in  the


OF  FOLIGNO  125

love  of  neighbour  or  penitent,  showing  when  and  how  we
must  condescend  unto  our  neighbour  and  when  not.

It  is  assuredly  in  its  union  with  God  that  the  soul  doth
acquire  the  aforesaid  knowledge  with  a  certain  maturity
and  gravity  of  wisdom,  with  fair  discretion  and  enlighten
ment,  so  that  with  these  things  the  soul  is  enabled  so  to
control  the  love  of  God  and  its  neighbour,  that  it  can
neither  be  deceived  nor  can  it  fall.

Whosoever  doth  not  feel  himself  to  be  filled  with  this
wisdom  should  never  unite  himself  in  cordial  and  singular
love  with  any  person  whatsoever,  however  much  he  might
do  it  for  God's  sake,  and  with  good  intentions  of  avoiding
those  perils  which  do  proceed  from  such  love.  Neither
should  any  man  ally  himself  with  any  one  for  love's  sake,
unless  he  hath  first  learnt  those  things  whereby  he  is
enabled  to  separate  himself  easily  from  any  person  when
ever  he  shall  choose.


CHAPTER   XXIX

OF   THE   VARIOUS   PROPERTIES    OF   LOVE

IN  order  to  understand  how  the  aforesaid  wisdom  ruleth
the  love  of  God,  ye  must  know  that  love  hath  various
properties.  Firstly,  it  maketh  tender ;  secondly,  it
maketh  sick ;  and  thirdly,  it  maketh  strong.

When  the  soul  feeleth  divine  love  it  crieth  aloud  and
maketh  a  noise  like  unto  a  stone  which  is  placed  in  a


126  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

furnace  to  be  turned  into  lime.  If  the  stone  be  touched
by  the  fire  it  cracketh  noisily,  but  if  it  be  baked  it  maketh
no  noise.  Thus  the  soul  doth  in  the  beginning  seek
divine  consolation,  but  when  it  hath  been  overwhelmed
thereby,  it  groweth  weak  and  crieth  out  against  God,
lamenting  and  saying,  "  Lord,  why  hast  Thou  sent  this
weakness  upon  me  ?  "

Great  audacity,  however,  is  born  of  that  assurance
which  the  soul  hath  of  God.  It  knoweth  of  a  certainty
that  God  loveth  it  deeply  and  doth  sometimes  favour  it
by  giving  it  marvellous  and  ineffable  consolations ;  but
these  must  not  be  demanded  with  importunity.  Never
theless,  if  God  giveth  them  they  are  not  to  be  refused,  for
they  draw  the  soul  nigh  unto  the  beloved,  they  are  its
food,  they  do  cure  its  weariness,  and  through  them  is
it  uplifted  and  drawn  unto  seeking,  loving,  and  being
united  with  its  beloved.

In  this  state  is  the  soul  contented  with  consolations,
but  through  the  deprivation  thereof  doth  love  increase
and  begin  to  seek  for  the  beloved.  And  when  it  findeth
him  not  it  falleth  sick  and  is  no  more  contented  with
consolations,  because  it  seeketh  its  beloved  alone.  And
the  more  consolation,  knowledge,  and  other  such  things
that  it  hath,  the  more  doth  love  increase,  and  the  more
sick  and  weary  doth  it  become  if  it  be  not  in  the  presence
of  its  beloved.

But  when  the  soul  is  united  and  placed  in  the  seat  of
truth,  which  truth  is  the  seat  of  the  soul,  it  crieth  no


OF  FOLIGNO  127

more,  neither  doth  it  murmur  against  God  ;  it  groweth
no  more  weak,  nor  falleth  sick,  but  is  filled  with  marvellous
wisdom  and  ripeness  and  becometh  stable  and  orderly,
and  is  so  strengthened  that  for  love  of  its  beloved  would
it  go  even  unto  death,  inasmuch  as  it  possesseth  in  abun
dance  the  qualities  needful  for  that  union.

And  God  Himself  maketh  the  soul  to  grow,  in  order
that  it  may  hold  all  that  which  He  desireth  to  put  into
it.  And  the  soul  beholdeth  this  thing,  and  perceiveth
that  all  other  things  are  as  nothing  if  they  come  not
from  this.

Then  the  soul  esteemeth  as  nothing  all  that  it  had
been  heretofore  in  comparison  with  what  it  is  now  ;  it
regardeth  not  anything  created,  it  careth  neither  for
death  nor  infirmity,  neither  for  honour  nor  disgrace,  and
so  peaceful  and  full  of  comfort  is  it  that  nothing  can  rouse
it ;  it  hath  lost  all  desire  and  it  cannot  work,  for  when  it
seeth  the  aforesaid  visions  it  can  do  nothing  whatever.

Thus  it  appeareth  that  God  doeth  all  things  according
to  His  wisdom  and  in  an  orderly  and  seemly  manner  ;
for  we  fall  not  sick  even  when  He  is  absent,  and  thus
do  we  conform  unto  His  will.  Although  He  be  absent
we  seek  Him  not,  but  are  satisfied  with  what  He  hath
ordained  and  trust  wholly  in  Him.

But  when  these  visions  are  withdrawn  from  the  soul
(because  none  are  allowed  in  this  present  life  to  continue
therein),  there  is  given  and  doth  remain  unto  it  a  new
and  ardent  desire  to  perform  without  trouble  the  works


128  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

of    penitence    more    vigorously    than    heretofore,    and
assuredly  this  state  is  more  sublime  than  was  the  other.

And  the  love  now  kindled  is  perfect  and  causeth  the
loving  soul  to  imitate  its  Beloved,  Christ  crucified,  whose
sufferings  did  endure  all  the  time  that  He  lived  this
mortal  life.  Thus  He  began,  continued,  and  ended  ;  He
was  ever  upon  the  Cross  of  poverty,  grief,  contempt,  and
obedience,  and  all  the  other  hard  deeds  of  penitence.
Whosoever  loveth  another  perfectly  useth  all  his  en
deavour  to  make  himself  one  with  that  person,  following
his  example  and  doing  those  things  which  please  him.
Likewise  whosoever  loveth  Jesus,  God  and  Man,  will
endeavour  to  transform  himself  in  Him,  following  His
example  and  doing  that  which  he  believeth  will  please
Him,  and  in  his  manner  of  life  seeking  to  be  as  like  unto
Him  as  possible.


CHAPTER   XXX

THE    MORE   PERFECT    MAN    IS,   THE    MORE   EARNESTLY

DOTH     HE     ENDEAVOUR     TO     DO     THAT     WHICH      IS

DESIRED,    ORDERED,    AND    COUNSELLED    OF    GOD

THE  more  perfect  a  man  is  and  the  more  he  loveth  God,
the  more  doth  he  strive  to  do  these  things  which  God
did,  which  He  desireth,  commandeth,  and  counselleth
should  be  done,  and  to  avoid  those  things  which  displease
Him.  And  he  must  do  this  all  the  days  of  his  life,  for


OF   FOLIGNO  129


when  the  Man  of  Sorrows  lived  this  mortal  life  He  was
ever  upon  a  bitter  cross  of  penitence.  The  length  of
time,  therefore,  ordained  for  penance,  is  as  long  as  a
man  shall  live.  The  amount  and  severity  thereof  must
be  according  as  a  man  can  with  discretion  perform.  And
this  is  unity  with  the  will  of  God,  a  unity  which  He  hath
ordained  should  not  be  only  in  words,  but  in  doing  the
works  of  the  Cross  and  of  penitence,  such  as  Christ  Him
self  performed.

When  the  soul  is  transformed  in  God  and  is  in  God,
and  hath  that  perfect  union  and  fulness  of  vision,  it  is
quiet  and  worketh  nothing  whatsoever.  But  when  it
cometh  again  to  itself  it  striveth  to  transform  itself  in
the  will  of  God  in  order  that  it  may  behold  again  that
vision  wherewith  it  directeth  the  love  of  God  and  of  its
neighbour  as  though  with  arms.  For  herein  doth  the
soul  behold  the  Being  of  God,  and  how  all  creatures  have
their  being  from  that  Supreme  Being,  and  it  perceiveth
that  there  existeth  nothing  which  doth  not  derive  its
being  from  that  same  Supreme  Being.

From  this  vision  doth  the  soul,  thus  instructed,  draw
marvellous  learning,  ineffable  wisdom,  and  ripe  gravity,
and  from  this  vision  it  draweth  likewise  the  true  know
ledge  of  the  perfection  of  all  things  appertaining  unto
that  Supreme  Being  ;  and  it  cannot  doubt  it,  for  it  per
ceiveth  how  that  all  things  made  by  Him  are  well  made.
Bad  are  they  only  when  we  ourselves  destroy  what  the
Supreme  Being  hath  made  well.


130  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

This  vision  of  the  Supreme  Being  awakeneth  a  love
corresponding  unto  itself.  The  Supreme  Being  inciteth
us  to  love  everything  which  hath  its  being  from  Him,  all
good  things  and  well  made  things,  and  teacheth  us  to
love  all  creatures,  rational  and  irrational,  for  love  of
Him  ;  and  everything,  whatsoever  it  may  be,  which  hath
its  being  from  Him  and  which  He  loveth,  doth  He  incite
us  also  to  love.  Especially  doth  He  teach  us  to  love
those  creatures  in  which  we  perceive  He  taketh  an
especial  delight ;  for  when  the  soul  findeth  that  Supreme
Being  yearneth  in  love  towards  His  creatures,  then  will
it  also  yearn  towards  them.

The  sign  manifest  of  those  who  stand  in  the  friendship
of  the  Supreme  Being  is,  that  they  are  true  followers  of
His  only  Son,  that  they  keep  the  eyes  of  their  mind  ever
fixed  upon  Him,  ready  to  love  and  follow  Him,  and  in  all
things  to  transform  themselves  in  the  will  of  the  Beloved,
namely,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  Supreme  Being.


CHAPTER   XXXI

HOW     THAT     LOVE     CREATED      AND      EXCITED     BY     THE

VISION     OF     THE     SUPREME    BEING     DOTH    MAKE    US    TO

LOVE      GOD     AND     HIS      CREATURES      ACCORDING     UNTO

THEIR    CONDITIONS

THUS  the  love  created  and  excited  by  the  vision  of  the
Supreme  Being  maketh  us  to  know  and  love  Him,  to  know


OF  FOLIGNO  131

and  love  His  creatures  according  unto  their  conditions,
and  more  or  less  according  unto  the  inclination  of  the
Supreme  Being,  for  in  no  wise  may  it  overstep  the  bounds
of  His  will.  Yet  everything  that  is  love  is  to  be  feared
unless  this  love  is  given  unto  the  soul  by  the  Supreme
God  ;  but  when  God  sendeth  the  vision  of  the  Supreme
Being,  together  with  love  due  and  sufficient  unto  Him,
then  is  it  safe,  and  even  though  it  have  other  visions  and
revelations  it  doth  not  change.

Moreover,  those  who  have  had  this  ineffable  vision  of
God  are  not  only  able  to  resist  the  sword  of  every  un
lawful  love,  but  this  close  thinking  upon  God  sufficeth
to  cast  out  the  wickedness  of  every  other  kind  of  love.

The  aforesaid  vision  of  the  Being  uncreate  doth  not
only  bestow  love  uncreate,  but  it  leaveth  within  the  soul
a  love  uncreate  which  preventeth  the  soul  from  working,
inasmuch  as  it  is  wholly  absorbed  by  the  vision  ;  but
that  which  worketh  is  the  love  uncreate.  It  should  be
supposed  that  when  this  vision  is  given  unto  the  soul,
the  soul  worketh  and  desireth  to  be  united  as  closely  as
possible  with  the  Supreme  Being  ;  but  then  the  love
uncreate  worketh  within  the  soul  and  persuadeth  it  to
forsake  all  creatures  that  it  may  be  more  closely  united
with  itself.  Wherefore  doth  this  love  uncreate  do  the
works  of  the  other  love.  The  principle  of  such  a  love  is
to  illuminate,  and  to  awaken  fresh  desire.  And,  verily,
the  new  love  is  the  stronger,  and  for  this  the  soul  worketh
nothing.  But  the  love  uncreate  is  the  one  which  worketh


132  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

all  the  good  which  we  perform,  whilst  the  evil  which  we
do  cometh  of  ourselves.  All  goodness  cometh  from  love
uncreate,  not  from  ourselves.

And  this  is  true  humility  and  undoing  of  ourselves,
that  we  should  verily  realise  that  we  ourselves  can  work
no  good  thing  ;  and  whosoever  feeleth  this  hath  the
spirit  of  truth.


CHAPTER   XXXII

THE  LOVE  OF  GOD  IS  NEVER  IDLE,  AND  PERSUADETH
US  TO  DO  PENANCE  AS  LONG  AS  LIFE  AND  AS  HARSH  ;
IT  TELLETH  US  TO  DO  IT  AS  OFTEN  AS  IS  CONVENIENT,
AND  DOTH  PERFORM  MANY  OTHER  PROFITABLE  THINGS

THE  love  of  God  is  never  idle,  for  it  constraineth  us  to
follow  in  the  way  of  the  Cross.  And  the  sign  of  the
working  of  true  love  is  that  it  suggesteth  unto  the  soul
the  way  of  the  Cross,  and  maketh  it  to  do  penance  long
and  hard  as  life  itself,  the  which  it  must  bear  as  it  con
veniently  can.

This  true  love  hath  no  smile  upon  its  lips  ;  it  behaveth
not  unseemly  in  eating  and  drinking,  nor  doth  it  exhibit
any  vain  joyfulness  or  say,  "  I  am  under  no  law,"  but  it
is  always  subject  unto  the  law  ;  and  where  there  is  none,
then  doth  it  make  one  for  itself.

When  love  shall  have  followed  the  way  of  the  Cross
and  shall  have  done  penance  unto  the  utmost  of  its


OF  FOLIGNO  133

power,  it  will  perceive  itself  to  be  unprofitable  and  not
working  according  to  the  truth  ;  and  it  will  know  God
to  be  all  love  and  itself  all  hatefulness.  Having  attained
unto  such  knowledge,  it  is  needful  that  it  do  bodily
penance  ;  and  whether  it  be  easy  or  difficult  for  man  to
do  this,  it  is  all  ordained  by  the  love  uncreate  for  the
good  of  the  soul.  Be  ye  not  troubled,  therefore,  by  the
workings  of  penitence,  for  it  is  God  who  worketh  within
you.  And  in  order  to  induce  your  will  to  consent  to
God  working  within  you,  your  Master  is  come  to  do
penance  for  you  and  to  give  you  an  example  thereof,  for
all  the  days  of  His  life  did  He  live  in  most  bitter  penance.
And  those  who  have  been  exalted  unto  the  vision  of
the  Uncreate  and  of  the  Being  of  God  do  rest  in  the  Cross
and  in  virtuous  works,  and  with  a  new  and  burning  love
are  they  inspired,  the  which  doth  incite  them  unto  good
works.  But  those  in  whom  is  not  this  spirit  of  truth  do
make  idols  of  good  works,  attributing  unto  themselves
the  glory.


CHAPTER   XXXIII

THE   WAY   TO    FIND    THE    LOVE    OF    GOD    IS    BY    CON
STANT,     UNTIRING,     DEVOUT     AND     ARDENT     PRAYER,
AND    THE    READING    OF   THE    BOOK    OF    LIFE

THE  way  unto  this  love  is  by  constant,  assiduous,  devout
and  ardent  prayer,  and  the  reading  of  the  Book  of  Life,  of


134  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

which  much  hath  already  been  said,  and  whence  we  obtain
that  knowledge  of  God  which  it  is  needful  for  us  to  have
if  we  would  also  have  His  love,  as  hath  already  been  set
forth.

Oh  my  beloved,  take  comfort,  and  see  that  we  love  God
and  wholly  transform  ourselves  in  Him  ;  for  this  Christ,
God  uncreate,  God  incarnate,  is  all  love,  and  therefore
loveth  all  and  desireth  to  be  wholly  loved.  Wherefore
doth  He  desire  that  His  children  should  be  wholly  trans
formed  in  Him  through  love.

I  pray  you,  oh  ye  spiritual  children,  chosen  through
love,  ye  who  live  in  the  grace  and  charity  of  the  good  and
perfect  God,  I  pray  you  transform  yourselves  with  the
perfection  of  love.  True  is  it  that  we  are  all  sons  of  God
by  creation,  but  His  elect  spiritual  children  are  they  in
whom  the  God  of  love  hath  planted  His  love  and  in
whom  He  delighteth,  because  He  findeth  His  own  like
ness  in  them,  which  likeness  in  the  soul  of  each  one  of
the  sons  of  God  is  formed  there  solely  through  the  grace
of  God  and  the  perfect  love  divine.  And  perfect  is  he
who  hath  already  transformed  his  manners  and  life  in  the
likeness  of  the  life  of  Christ,  who  lived  in  this  world  poor
and  despised  and  full  of  suffering.

God,  therefore,  whose  nature  is  noble,  desireth  to
possess  the  whole  heart  of  His  son  and  not  only  a  part
thereof,  and  He  desireth  it  immediately,  and  without
companionship  or  hindrance  or  anything  contrary  what
soever.  But  He  is  so  merciful  unto  the  soul  that  if  it


OF  FOLIGNO  135

giveth  Him  its  whole  heart  He  accepteth  it  willingly,  and
if  it  giveth  Him  only  a  part  He  accepteth  also  the  part,
albeit  His  perfect  love  longeth  naturally  for  the  whole  and
not  only  a  part.

We  know  that  the  bridegroom  who  loveth  his  bride
cannot  endure  that  she  should  have  any  other  companion
either  openly  or  in  secret.  In  like  manner  cannot  God
endure  it.  But  well  do  I  know  that  if  any  person  were
to  understand  and  taste  of  that  divine  love  of  God  who
was  made  man  and  crucified  for  us  and  who  is  the  Supreme
Good,  he  would  give  himself  wholly  unto  Him,  he
would  take  himself  away  not  only  from  other  creatures,
but  also  from  his  own  self,  and  would  love  this  loving
God  with  his  whole  heart,  and  transform  himself  entirely
in  God,  the  Supreme  Love.

Wherefore,  if  the  soul  desireth  to  attain  unto  this  per
fection  of  perfect  love,  which  giveth  itself  wholly  and
doth  not  serve  God  for  sake  of  the  reward  which  it  hopeth
to  receive  from  Him,  or  because  of  the  future  life,  but
giveth  itself  unto  God  and  serveth  Him  for  His  own  sake,
who  is  essentially  good  in  Himself  and  worthy  of  being
loved  for  Himself,  then  the  soul  must  enter  by  the
straight  way  and  must  walk  thereon  with  the  feet  of  pure
love,  upright,  fervent,  and  orderly.

But  the  first  step  to  be  taken  by  the  soul  who  entereth
upon  this  straight  way  and  desireth  to  draw  nigh  unto
God  is  to  learn  to  know  God  in  very  truth,  and  not  only
outwardly,  as  though  by  the  colour  of  the  writing  (as


136  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

hath  been  already  said).  For  as  we  know  so  do  we  love  ;
therefore  if  we  know  but  little  and  darkly,  if  we  do
reflect  and  meditate  upon  Him  only  superficially  and
fleetingly,  we  shall  in  consequence  love  Him  but  little,
as  hath  been  said  afore.


CHAPTER   XXXIV

OF   THE    PROPERTIES    OF    LOVERS

THERE  are  three  properties  peculiar  unto  lovers  of  which
it  is  needful  to  know.  Likewise  certain  signs  of  love,
whereby  each  may  know  whether  he  be  a  true  lover  or  not.

The  first  property  is  to  be  truly  transformed  in  the  will
of  the  Beloved.  To  me  it  seemeth  that  His  will  is  His  life,
which  He  showeth  forth  in  His  own  self  ;  herein  doth  He
show  us  poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt,  which  we  must
all  experience  indeed,  and  when  the  soul  is  strengthened
and  practised  in  these  things  neither  vice  nor  temptation
can  enter  into  it.

The  second  property  is  to  be  transformed  in  the
properties  of  the  Beloved,  of  which  I  will  at  present
mention  three  only.  The  first  is  love ;  that  is,  to  love
all  creatures  according  as  is  seemly.  The  second  is  to
be  humble  and  gentle.  The  third  (which  is  given  by
God  unto  His  lawful  children)  is  steadfastness ;  for  the
nearer  the  soul  is  unto  God,  the  less  doth  it  change  in


OF  FOLIGNO  137

its  own  self.  We  are  ashamed  when  we  are  moved  by
anything  vile,  and  herein  know  we  our  great  wretchedness.

The  third  property  is  to  be  wholly  transformed  in  God,
and  then  we  are  beyond  all  temptation.  Then  do  we
no  longer  live  in  ourselves,  but  in  Him  ;  but  when  we
fall  back  again  into  our  misery  we  do  beware  of  all
creatures  and  of  our  own  selves.

I  pray  you,  keep  control  over  yourselves  and  give  not
yourselves  unto  any  creature,  neither  lend  yourselves
unto  aught  whatsoever  ;  but  give  yourselves  wholly  unto
Him  who  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  with  all
thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  soul,
and  with  all  the  strength  that  thou  hast."

Of  the  Signs  of  Love.

These  are  the  signs  of  love.

The  first  sign  of  true  love  is  that  the  lover  submitteth
his  own  will  unto  the  will  of  the  beloved.

The  second  is  that  he  forsaketh  all  other  friendship
which  might  be  contrary  unto  his  love.  He  likewise  for
saketh  father  and  mother,  brother  and  sister,  and  all
other  affection  which  is  contrary  unto  the  will  of  the
beloved.

The  third  is,  that  there  is  nothing  hidden  in  one  which
is  not  revealed  unto  the  other  ;  and  this  (according  unto
my  thinking)  is  the  sum  and  complement  of  all  the  other
signs  and  workings  of  love.


138  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

The  fourth  and  last  is,  that  the  lover  doth  strive  to
make  himself  like  unto  the  beloved.  If  the  beloved  be
poor,  he  striveth  to  be  poor ;  if  the  beloved  be  reputed
vile,  then  he  seeketh  to  be  vile  also  ;  if  the  beloved  be  in
grief,  he  seeketh  to  be  a  sharer  of  that  woe,  in  order  that
the  condition  of  one  may  be  like  unto  that  of  the  other.

Of  a  truth  I  do  hold  that  true  and  perfect  love  cannot
exist  betwixt  rich  and  poor,  honourable  and  vile,  sorrowful
and  joyous,  because  these  conditions  are  widely  different
one  from  another,  and  there  can  be  no  perfect  love  be
twixt  them  because  one  doth  not  share  the  condition  of
the  other.  Love  is  a  true  virtue,  which  not  only  maketh
things  like  unto  each  other  but  also  uniteth  them,  and  it
always  leadeth  the  soul  unto  its  like  and  not  unto  its
opposite.

Of  a  certainty  did  Jesus  Christ,  the  Eternal  Love,
possess  all  these  signs.  He  submitted  His  will  unto  man's
will,  and  even  unto  death  was  He  obedient  unto  those
who  slew  Him,  albeit  He  could  have  overthrown  them
by  only  raising  His  hand.  Moreover  He  forsook  all
friendship,  His  kindred  and  His  mother  and  His  own  flesh
and  blood  for  man's  sake,  leaving  them  and  going  to.  His
death  upon  the  Cross.  He  did  also  reveal  unto  us  His
secrets,  saying,  "  I  have  not  called  you  servants,"  &c.
Moreover,  He  desired  to  make  Himself  like  unto  man,
taking  upon  Himself  true  humanity  and  mortality,  be
coming  like  unto  man  in  all  things,  saving  only  sin.

Therefore  ought  we  also  to  do  all  these  things  for  His


OF  FOLIGNO  139

sake  ;  otherwise  love  goeth  halting  upon  our  side,  and
doth  great  wrong  unto  that  passionate  Lover.  Where
fore  let  us  make  ourselves  like  unto  Him  in  all  things  (in
which  He  made  Himself  like  unto  our  wretchedness),
doing  penance  in  that  poverty,  contempt,  pain,  and  con
trition  of  heart  in  which  He  always  lived.  Of  a  truth,
if  one  person  alone  were  to  perform  all  the  acts  of  penance
which  are  performed  by  all  the  men  in  the  world,  they
would  not  suffice  to  repay  the  smallest  drop  of  sweat
which  Christ  shed  for  us,  nor  would  they  be  enough  to
merit  the  least  of  the  joys  of  Paradise  promised  unto  us,
nor  to  give  satisfaction  for  the  least  of  the  mortal  sins  by
us  committed,  nor  yet  to  repay  God  for  our  creation.


CHAPTER   XXXV

HOW  THAT   EACH    PERSON    SHOULD   DESIRE  TO    PERFORM

HIS     PENANCE     AS     SECRETLY     AS     POSSIBLE     AND     IN    A

SEEMLY    MANNER

EACH  person  should  endeavour  to  do  his  penance  as
secretly  as  possible  ;  and  if  he  cannot  do  this,  then  should
he  desire  to  do  it,  and  he  must  do  his  penance  in  public
and  endeavour  not  to  be  observed.  If  we  neglected
good  works  for  this  reason  we  should  seem  lukewarm  and
fearful,  and  we  ought  to  neglect  them  in  no  wise  whatso
ever.  In  these  matters  have  we  our  Master's  example,


140  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

for  He  did  many  things  which  were  never  written  down
nor  noised  abroad.  Moreover,  for  our  sake  He  did  many
things  in  public,  nor  did  He  cease  from  doing  good  even
though  He  was  seen  of  men.

And  although  we  may  find  it  hard  to  do  penance
(which,  however,  seemeth  unto  me  to  be  necessary),  let
us  at  least  make  a  virtue  of  necessity  and  bear  patiently
and  willingly  those  tribulations  which  are  sent  us  of
God.

There  is  no  doubt  that  when  men  are  troubled  out
wardly  and  inwardly,  it  is  a  sign  that  they  are  loved  of
the  Beloved.  Those  things  which  God  the  Father  loved
and  chose  and  gave  unto  His  only  dearly  beloved  Son,
doth  this  only  Son  choose  and  give  unto  His  dear  children.
God  the  Father  chose  for  His  Son  poverty,  contempt,  and
suffering,  persecutions  and  afflictions,  these  things  out
wardly  and  inwardly  did  the  Son  of  God  endure —
weariness,  fear,  anxiety,  and  agony,  and  other  things  so
innumerable  that  tongue  cannot  tell  nor  heart  imagine
them.

Let  us  study,  then,  how  to  bear  worldly  tribulations
with  patience,  yea,  even  with  cheerfulness,  because
herein  lieth  the  sign  that  the  Beloved  delighteth  in  us
and  hath  chosen  us  and  will  give  us  the  pledge  of  His
inheritance.

When  ye  suffer,  think  only  upon  the  sufferings  of
the  Man  of  Sorrows,  and  all  your  own  griefs  will  be
healed.


OF  FOLIGNO  141


CHAPTER   XXXVI

OF    THREE    BENEFITS    DERIVED    FROM    THE    MOST
HOLY   TRIBULATION

FROM  this  most  holy  tribulation  proceed  three  things
unknown  unto  us.

Firstly,  it  converteth  us  unto  God  ;  and,  being  con
verted,  it  draweth  us  more  nigh  unto  Him.

Secondly,  it  maketh  us  to  grow  ;  just  as  good  earth,
well  prepared,  putteth  forth  shoots  and  beareth  fruit
when  the  rain  falleth  upon  it,  so  doth  the  soul  grow  in
virtue  when  tribulation  cometh  upon  it.

Thirdly,  it  giveth  peace,  comfort,  rest,  and  calm.

This  most  holy  tribulation  is  exceeding  profitable  for
us  ;  wherefore  let  us  not  avoid  it  nor  hold  it  in  horror.
For  of  a  certainty  and  with  all  mine  heart  say  I  unto  you,
that  our  noblest  advocates  and  truest  witnesses,  those
who  will  be  most  readily  believed  in  the  presence  of  God,
are  precisely  these  holy  and  precious  tribulations,  whose
worth  we  know  not ;  for  with  them  do  we  purchase  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  joys  of  eternity  are  obtained
through  poverty,  tears,  suffering,  and  persecution.

And  I  do  firmly  believe  that  nothing  doth  so  help  to
wards  the  leading  of  a  good  life  as  do  these  tribulations ;
wherefore  do  I  feel  an  holy  envy  of  all  who  are  troubled.
It  is  certain,  oh  my  sons,  that  if  the  worth  and  profit  of


142  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

tribulation  were  known,  there  would  be  great  strife  and
thieving  of  trouble,  and  each  would  forcibly  take  away
from  the  other  the  causes  of  tribulation,  which  proceeding
would  greatly  grieve  Him  who  is  the  light  of  tribulation.
May  His  true  consolation  comfort  us  neath  the  burden  of
tribulation,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.


CHAPTER   XXXVII

HOW    THE     TRIBULATIONS     WHICH     LIE     IN     POVERTY,

CONTEMPT,      AND     SUFFERING     ARE      IN      MANY     WAYS

MOST   PROFITABLE

I  HOLD  that  the  tribulations  which  lie  in  poverty,  con
tempt,  and  suffering  are  very  profitable  for  us  and  meet
for  our  endurance.

The  reason  thereof  is  this :  it  is  needful  that  man
should  know  himself  and  God.  Now  the  knowledge  of
God  pre-supposeth  a  knowledge  of  self,  and  therefore
man  must  consider  and  diligently  observe  Him  who  is
offended  and  who  it  is  who  giveth  offence.  Through
this  consideration  is  granted  grace  upon  grace,  light  upon
light,  and  vision  upon  vision,  and  hereby  cometh  he
unto  a  more  ample  knowledge  of  God.  The  better  he
knoweth  the  more  doth  he  love,  the  more  he  loveth  the
more  powerfully  doth  he  work,  and  this  work  is  the  sign
and  measure  of  love.  For  herein  is  it  shown  if  the  love  be
pure,  true,  and  upright,  that  is  to  say,  if  he  loveth  and


OF  FOLIGNO  143

worketh  with  due  effect  and  endureth  those  three  things
which  Christ  who  loved  him  did  endure  and  practise  all
the  days  of  His  life.

Therefore,  he  who  loveth  Christ  must  love  and  practise
those  things ;  for  inasmuch  as  He  who  was  all  wisdom  did
choose  them  for  Himself,  He  did  thereby  show  them  to
be  meet  for  us.


CHAPTER   XXXVIII

OF    THE    MOST    SWEET    GIFTS    OF    GOD,  POVERTY,    CONTEMPT,
AND    SUFFERING  ;      AND    OF    OTHER    PERFECTIONS

THESE  are  the  sweet  gifts  of  God,  and  whosoever  doth
fully  obtain  them  may  know  himself  to  be  perfected  and
consummated  in  the  most  sweet  God,  Jesus  Christ,  and
Jesus  Christ  to  be  perfected  in  him  through  transforma
tion.  And  the  more  perfect  man  is  in  these  things,  the
more  wholly  will  he  be  transformed  in  Jesus  Christ.

The  first  is  the  love  of  poverty,  whereby  the  soul
putteth  away  from  itself  the  love  of  every  creature  ;  for
it  desireth  not  the  possession  of  any  save  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  it  trusteth  not  in  the  help  of  any  creature
whatsoever  in  this  life  ;  and  thus  doth  love  of  Him  not
only  reign  alone  in  the  heart,  but  is  also  shown  forth
in  the  works.

The  second  is  the  desire  to  be  despised,  scorned,  and
hated  of  every  creature,  and  the  wish  that  every  creature


144  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

should  esteem  the  soul  worthy  of  disgrace,  so  that  none
should  have  compassion  on  it.  It  should  desire  likewise
to  be  cherished  in  the  heart  of  none  save  of  God  alone,
and  by  Him  alone  to  be  held  in  good  repute.

The  third  is  the  desire  to  feel  all  the  sufferings,  burdens,
and  griefs  borne  by  the  heart  and  body  of  the  most  sweet
Jesus  Christ  and  His  tender  mother,  and  that  all  creatures
should  inflict  upon  the  soul  those  same  unending  woes.
And  if  it  feeleth  not  able  to  desire  these  three  things,  it
may  know  itself  to  be  very  far  removed  from  the  likeness
of  Christ.  For  these  three  things  were  with  Him  in  all
places,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  His  deeds,  and  likewise  with
His  mother,  that  is  to  say,  they  did  bear  the  utmost
poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt.

The  fourth  is  that  each  person  should  deem  himself
unworthy  of  so  much  good  ;  that  he  should  know  that
he  could  never  have  these  things  of  his  own  self  ;  and  the
more  abundantly  he  hath  them,  the  more  must  he  deem
himself  to  lack  them,  for  whoso  thinketh  to  possess  the
thing  beloved  doth  thereby  lose  the  Beloved  Himself.
Wherefore  must  we  never  deem  ourselves  to  have  attained
unto  it,  but  must  ever  consider  that  we  are  beginning
anew,  that  we  have  as  yet  achieved  nothing  and  have
obtained  none  of  these  things.

The  fifth  is,  that  the  soul  should  strive  constantly  to
reflect  how  these  things  were  always  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  ever  imploring  God  with  fervent  prayers  that  He
would  clothe  its  heart  anew  and  give  it  these  companions,


OF  FOLIGNO  145

and  asking  naught  else  ;  that  it  should  find  all  its  joy  in
this  life  in  the  perfect  transformation  of  all  these  things
and  strive  ever  to  rise  unto  the  thought  of  how  the  heart
of  the  most  sweet  Jesus  was  full  thereof,  yea,  running  over
and  infinitely  more  full  than  He  did  show  forth  in  His
body.

The  sixth  is,  that  it  must  flee  as  though  from  a  pesti
lence  from  all  who  hinder  it  from  attaining  unto  these
things,  whether  it  be  a  carnal  or  spiritual  person,  and
all  the  things  of  this  world  which  it  holdeth  to  be  unlike
or  contrary  unto  that  good  thing  must  it  hold  in  horror
and  flee  from  them  as  from  a  serpent.

The  seventh  is,  that  it  pronounce  no  judgment  upon
any  other  creature  whatsoever,  nor  seek  to  judge  others,
as  saith  the  Gospel,  it  must  esteem  itself  more  vile  than
all  others  (howsoever  evil  they  may  be),  and  unworthy  of
the  grace  of  God.  It  must  know,  moreover,  that  whoso
ever  striveth  to  possess  these  three  things  in  this  present
life  and  mortal  struggle  will  possess  God  in  fulness  here
after.

Thus  is  the  soul  wholly  united  with  God  by  trans
formation.  God  doth  give  us  of  His  transformation  in
this  life  in  order  that  we  may  share  His  humility,  poverty,
and  pain.  For  the  soul  should  desire  no  other  consola
tions  in  this  life,  not  even  spiritual  ones,  save  perchance
for  the  healing  of  its  infirmity.  But  it  should  desire  only
the  perfect  crucifixion  of  Christ,  the  Poor,  the  Suffering,
and  Despised,


146  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA


CHAPTER   XXXIX

OF   THE    MANY    SIGNS    AND    EFFECTS    OF    LOVE    WHICH
ARE    CAUSED    BY   THE    SACRAMENT    OF    THE    EUCHARIST

I  COME  now  unto  the  Sacrament  of  love  and  grace  which
is  called  the  Eucharist,  and  hereof  will  I  say  something
more  than  what  hath  already  been  said.

This  Sacrament  hath  to  arouse  devout  prayer  in  us  and
make  that  the  power  thereof  worketh  for  good  in  us.  It
doth  likewise  grant  us  deep  humility  of  heart  and  moveth
us  with  the  desire  for  true  love  and  charity.  And  I  doubt
not,  but  am  very  certain,  that  no  soul  who  beholdeth
and  contemplateth  this  holy  Sacrament  could  not  be  so
insensible  unto  love  that  it  would  not  be  instantly  filled
with  it,  reflecting  how  greatly  it  had  been  loved  in  this
Sacrament.

Verily,  it  seemeth  unto  me  that  this  Sacrament,  this
holy  Mystery,  must  be  considered  with  great  diligence  by
those  who  desire  to  celebrate  and  receive  this  sacrifice  ;
the  soul  must  not  pass  hastily  over  this  meditation,  but
must  dwell  upon  it  carefully  and  earnestly.  And  albeit
the  things  which  may  be  said  of  this  Sacrament  cannot
be  expounded  or  set  forth,  methinketh  they  can  be  re
duced  unto  seven  points,  or  meditations,  the  which
should  be  considered  one  by  one.

Firstly,  this  holy  Mystery  is  new  and  above  all  things


OF  FOLIGNO  147

marvellous,  and  far  beyond  our  understanding.  Albeit
this  Mystery  was  shown  of  old,  as  is  set  down  in  the  Holv
Scriptures,  and  is  ancient  as  regardeth  its  form,  it  is  never
theless  new  as  regardeth  the  exhibition  of  the  Sacrament
whereby  the  creature  receiveth  grace  and  new  strength.
For  well  do  we  know,  and  by  faith  do  we  hold  without
any  doubt,  that  at  the  holy  words  ordained  and  first
spoken  by  Christ  Himself,  and  which  He  commanded
should  be  likewise  spoken  by  the  priest,  His  minister,
the  bread  and  wine  do  through  infinite  divine  power  sub
stantially  become  Christ.  Therefore  doth  this  substance
of  bread  and  wine  by  transubstantiation  become  the
body  of  Christ,  and  Christ,  God  and  Man,  entereth  by
consecration  into  that  Mystery.  The  colour,  taste,  virtue,
shape,  and  all  the  qualities  of  that  same  bread  and  wine
do  still  remain  ;  yet  not  in  Christ,  but  through  the  divine
power  over  their  own  natures.  For  the  colour  is  in  itself,
and  the  taste  and  shape  and  other  qualities  are  all  in
themselves.

Wherefore,  in  very  truth,  this  new  thing  is  very  great
which  the  divine  wisdom  worketh  of  its  supreme  charity,
infinite  power,  and  great  goodness,  which  the  Creator
doth  work  in  His  creatures,  and  there  are,  moreover,
many  other  special  new  things,  which  the  body  and  blood
of  Christ  work  in  His  friends  and  His  elect.  But  let  no
man  marvel  thereat,  nor  at  other  things  which  are  done
in  the  Sacrament,  for  he  must  remember  the  power  of
Him  who  doeth  them.  Neither  let  him  marvel  how  the


148  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Sacrament  can  be  upon  many  altars  at  the  same  time,
upon  this  side  of  the  sea  and  upon  that,  and  here  and
also  in  other  places.  For  He  saith  :  "  Ye  understand  Me
not,  and  this  have  I  done  without  you  and  have  worked
without  you,  and  unto  Me  is  nothing  impossible.  I  am
He  who  made  you  what  ye  are,  but  now  for  your  own
good  can  ye  not  understand.  If  I  had  desired,  I  could
have  made  you  strong  to  understand,  but  this  have  I
done  in  order  that  by  your  faith  ye  may  be  deserving  ;
for  there  would  have  been  no  merit  therein  if  ye  had
seen  clearly  wherefore  it  was  done.  Believe,  therefore,
and  doubt  not."

Secondly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  gracious
and  kindleth  love.  For  that  which  moveth  Him  who
ordained  this  most  holy  Sacrament  was  the  greatest  of
all  things,  and  not  less  was  the  profit  which  should  pro
ceed  therefrom.  I  know  not  what  name  I  should  give  it,
save  that  of  immeasurable  love,  because  of  His  bound
less  love  did  He  institute  this  Sacrament.

Because  of  His  great  love  towards  us  did  He  enter  into
the  Sacrament  and  will  abide  therein  until  the  end  of  the
world.  This  He  did  not  only  in  memory  of  His  death,
which  is  our  salvation,  but  that  He  might  ever  and  always
remain  nigh  unto  us.  And  whosoever  will  enter  into  this
deep  Mystery  must  needs  have  good  eyes.  Christ  knew
at  His  last  supper  that  He  must  presently  depart  bodily ;
wherefore,  overcome  by  the  love  which  always  uniteth
the  lover  and  the  beloved,  He  did  institute  this  Sacra-


OF  FOLIGNO  149

ment  in  order  that  He  might  always  be  bodily  united
with  us.

Oh,  burning  and  unquenchable  love  !  Such  was  and
is  the  love  which  He  bare  unto  us  !  For  albeit  He  had
death  before  His  eyes  and  foresaw  most  horrible  suffer
ing,  yet  nevertheless  He  gave  Himself  for  those  same
sinners  who  persecuted  Him,  in  order  that  He  might  be
with  us  at  least  in  this  Sacrament,  the  joy  whereof  lieth
in  being  united  with  the  Son  of  Man.

What  soul  is  there  so  cruel,  who,  profoundly  and
earnestly  reflecting  on  that  love,  would  not  feel  moved
to  return  the  love  of  such  a  Lover,  who  never  forgot  us
either  in  life  or  in  death,  but  did  wholly  give  Himself
that  He  might  be  ever  united  with  us  in  love.  Verily
there  is  no  soul,  who,  thinking  well  upon  this,  would  not
be  wholly  transformed  in  love.

Thirdly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  com
passionate  and  induceth  unto  compassion  and  suffering,
because  He  endured  mortal  and  unspeakable  suffering.

When  Christ  ordained  this  most  holy  Sacrament  He
was  on  the  point  of  separation  from  His  beloved  disciples
and  from  the  Virgin,  His  most  dear  mother.  He  knew
and  saw  before  Him  all  those  whom  He  must  forsake  ;
He  saw  the  traitor  and  that  other  who  denied  Him,  unto
whom  He  gave  His  body  and  His  whole  self ;  He  knew
that  most  bitter  sufferings  were  about  to  fall  upon  Him,
during  the  which  He  Himself  would  be  forsaken  ;  He
foresaw  the  dreadful  death,  the  scourgings,  the  ill-


150  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

treatment,  the  Cross,  the  hard  nails  and  the  other  things
then  being  prepared  for  Him.  For  this  reason,  when
praying  after  supper,  He  did  sweat  drops  of  blood,  and
not  only  a  little,  but  so  that  it  ran  down  upon  the  ground.
Nevertheless,  He  refrained  not  from  instituting  this
Sacrament  and  giving  Himself  unto  us.

This  Sacrament  is,  therefore,  most  proper  as  a
memorial  of  His  grievous  and  bitter  Passion  and  the
shedding  of  His  blood  for  us  miserable  sinners.  Where
fore  did  Christ  say,  "  As  often  as  ye  shall  do  this,  ye  do  it
in  remembrance  of  Me."  And  what  soul  is  there  who
could  behold  these  sufferings  and  not  itself  be  trans
formed  in  suffering  ?  Of  a  certainty  not  one,  saving  only
he  who  remembereth  not  the  cruel  sufferings  of  Christ's
heart.

Fourthly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  worthy
and  venerable,  to  be  regarded  with  the  utmost  reverence
and  humility,  because  He  who  ordained  this  sacrifice  was
Jesus  Christ,  God  supreme  and  uncreate.

The  soul  who  considereth  this  sacrifice  hath  not  only
to  consider  Him  who  ordained  it,  but  likewise  that  which
is  contained  in  that  Sacrament.  For  herein  is  contained
God  uncreate,  invisible,  and  omnipotent,  He  who  doeth
all  things,  who  is  most  merciful  and  just,  Creator  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth,  of  all  things  visible  and  invisible ;
and  this  is  the  chief  thing  upon  which  we  need  here
reflect.

There  is  also  a  lesser  thing  joined  together  with  this


OF  FOLIGNO  151

great  thing  :  for  herein  is  found  God  made  Man,  which
is  to  say,  divinity  and  humanity  united  in  one  person.
So  that  sometimes  in  this  present  life  the  soul  receiveth
greater  delight  from  this  lesser  thing  than  from  the
greater,  inasmuch  as  it  is  better  able  to  receive  and
understand  the  lesser  thing  which  it  beholdeth  in  God
incarnate.  For  the  soul  is  a  creature,  which  liveth  by
its  flesh  and  all  the  members  of  its  body,  wherefore  doth
it  in  this  life  delight  in  God  uncreate,  whom  it  beholdeth
in  human  form,  and  Christ  the  Creator  and  the  creature,
Deity  and  soul,  with  the  flesh  and  blood  and  all  the
members  of  His  most  holy  body.

Of  a  certainty  the  soul  here  beholdeth  the  union  of
many  things  herein  contained,  and  from  the  lesser — that
is  to  say,  from  the  humanity — is  it  led  unto  the  divinity,
and  in  like  manner  from  the  divinity  unto  the  humanity.
For  which  reason  doth  the  soul  who  well  considereth
it  behold  here  the  ineffable  divinity,  in  which  are  all  the
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  incorruptible
riches.  In  that  divinity  it  beholdeth  likewise  the  only
joys  which  do  satisfy  our  minds,  and  many  other  things
unspeakable  doth  it  find.

Moreover,  it  beholdeth  here  the  most  Precious  Soul
and  the  holy,  immaculate  oblation,  with  all  the  virtues
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  beholdeth  here  the
most  precious  body  of  our  Redeemer,  the  blood  with
which  we  were  saved  and  given  new  life,  together  with
other  unspeakable  things,  which  should  all  excite  in  us


152  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

the  utmost  reverence.  For  here  verily  is  He  whom  all
the  dominions  of  heaven  adore,  whom  all  the  celestial
spirits  do  fear,  and  before  whom  the  strongest  powers  of
the  heavens  do  tremble.  If  we  did  but  behold  Him  as
they  do,  with  what  reverence  and  humility  should  we
look  upon  and  receive  that  Sacrament  !  What  soul  is
there  so  proud,  who,  when  it  considereth  the  aforesaid
things,  doth  not  humble  itself  in  heart  and  body  in  the
presence  of  that  Sacrament !

Fifthly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  profitable,
and  above  all  things  high  and  spiritual,  and  it  upraiseth
us  unto  heavenly  things.

This  Sacrament  was  ordained  by  the  most  holy  Trinity
in  order  that  It  might  bind  unto  Itself  that  which  It
most  greatly  loved,  that  It  might  draw  the  soul  unto
Itself,  unto  God,  and  away  from  all  created  things
joining  it  together  with  God  uncreate  ;  and  thus  did
It  bestow  upon  the  soul  spiritual  and  divine  love  and
mortify  and  purify  it  from  its  sins.  It  was  ordained  by
the  most  holy  Trinity  in  order  that  It  might  unite  and
incorporate  Itself  with  us  and  us  with  It,  and  It  desireth
that  we  should  receive  the  Sacrament  in  order  that
He  may  receive  us  ;  It  desireth  that  we  should  bear
it  in  order  that  He  may  bear  us,  fortify  us,  and  com
fort  us.

What  soul  is  there  so  wretched,  therefore,  who,  if  it
well  considereth  the  matter,  will  refuse  to  let  itself  be
drawn  nigh  unto  such  a  Lord,  seeing  how  that  such  clear-


OF  FOLIGNO  153

ness  of  vision  hath  been  sent  from  heaven  to  draw  it
away  from  earthly  things  ?

Sixthly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  profitable,
and  giveth  us  all  good  things  and  all  grace.

Verily,  God  uncreate  doth  not  come  unto  us  spon
taneously  in  this  Sacrament,  with  so  great  a  perfection  of
Deity  and  humanity  ;  but  of  a  certainty  He  is  there  to
be  received  by  the  soul  if  only  it  hath  been  tried  and
hath  no  desire  to  sin.  Hereby  He  granteth  remission
of  sins,  strength  against  temptation,  it  restraineth  our
opposers,  augmenteth  grace,  and  heapeth  up  merit ;
wherefore  should  it  be  received  often  and  with  great
reverence.  Concerning  the  words  of  Saint  Augustine
wherein  he  saith,  "  I  do  neither  praise  nor  blame  the
custom  of  receiving  it  every  day,"  I  say  that  Saint
Augustine  was  a  most  wise  and  holy  man  who  saw  how
good  and  evil  were  mingled  together  in  the  Church  of
God  ;  and  in  order  that  he  might  not  hinder  the  good,
he  blamed  not  this  practice,  and  in  order  that  he  might
not  thereby  give  security  unto  the  evil,  he  praised  it  not.

Many  other  gifts  and  benefits  innumerable  are  con
ferred  upon  us  if  we  receive  this  Sacrament  worthily ;
it  cannot  be  declared  how  much  grace  the  soul  obtaineth
in  one  single  worthy  reception,  provided  only  that  its
misdeeds  cause  no  hindrance.

Seventhly,  this  Sacrament  is  above  all  things  to  be  ex
tolled,  and  is  supremely  worthy  of  all  grace  and  praise.

All  that  is  good,  all  that  is  holy,  all  that  is  beautiful  is


154  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

found  in  this  Sacrament.  For  this  reason  is  it  the
Supreme  Good  uncreate,  which  is  the  Divinity,  and  it
is  the  supreme  good  created,  which  is  the  humanity  of
Christ  Jesus.  Therefore  should  we  ofttimes  praise  it,
because  the  holy  angels  cease  not  to  extol  it,  saying,
"  Holy,  holy,  holy."  And  not  only  the  holy  angels,  but
all  the  saints  and  the  blessed  do  see  and  hear  and  stand
ever  before  it,  and  within  it.  Of  a  certainty  they  do
stand  within  this  sacrifice,  in  God  the  infinite  Good  ;  for
these  blessed  ones  are  here  ever  in  the  presence  of  God
uncreate,  the  Supreme  Good,  and  of  God  made  Man,
who  is  found  in  this  most  admirable  Sacrament.

And  in  this  Mystery  do  they  receive  new  sweetness  and
joy,  and  offer  new  praise  and  thanksgiving.  And  I  do
think  this  is  because  of  the  union  and  understanding
which  they  have  ;  for  inasmuch  as  they  do  communicate
with  the  Head  and  the  members,  that  is,  with  Jesus
Christ,  with  God  the  Head,  and  His  faithful,  they  do  see
and  hear  and  understand  that  Christ  rejoiceth  greatly  in
this  most  high  Mystery,  herein  manifesting  and  showing
forth  His  goodness,  and  herein  taketh  He  singular  pleasure,
for  and  in  the  good  of  His  followers  and  friends,  with
whom  He  is  joined  together  by  means  of  this  sacrifice.
For  this  reason  also  do  the  saints  and  angels  rejoice  with
Christ  in  this  Mystery,  with  new  joy  and  praise  and
thanksgiving.  For  that  which  pleaseth  Christ  pleaseth
these  likewise.  Christ  rejoiceth  also  to  be  in  this  Sacra
ment  with  men,  yea,  He  delighteth  to  be  with  the  sons


OF  FOLIGNO  155

of  men.  And  all  the  blessed  of  the  church  triumphant
do  rejoice  because  of  the  good  and  the  profit  which  the
holy  souls  in  the  church  militant  do  receive  through  this
Sacrament.  Wherefore  should  the  whole  church  rejoice
and  praise  God  for  such  great  blessings  and  benefits,
giving  Him  great  thanks  and  honour.

Therefore,  whosoever  meaneth  to  come  unto  this  most
holy  Sacrament  must  consider  to  whom  he  cometh,  how
he  cometh,  and  for  what  reason.  For  he  cometh  unto  a
certain  good  thing,  which  is  itself  all  good  and  the  cause
of  all  good,  the  giver,  maker,  and  possessor  of  all  good  ;
yet  it  is  itself  the  only  good,  without  which  there  can  be
none  other.  This  good  thing  sufficeth  and  filleth  every
thing,  satisfying  all  the  saints  and  holy  spirits,  all  those
who  are  justified  by  grace,  and  all  the  souls  and  bodies  of
the  blessed  who  reign  in  everlasting  glory.  Man  cometh
to  receive  this  good  thing,  which  is  God  made  Man,
in  whom  are  all,  and  who  is  above  all  beings.  Oh,  Good
Supreme,  unconsidered,  unknown,  unloved,  but  found
by  those  who  with  their  whole  hearts  entirely  do  desire
thee!

If  man,  therefore,  doth  only  consider  and  regard  the
morsel  which  he  eateth  with  his  body,  if  he  beholdeth  it
not  with  his  soul,  and  doth  not  meditate  and  reflect  before
he  receiveth  this  great  good,  which  is  eternal  and  infinite,
if  he  receiveth  it  unworthily,  then  it  bringeth  eternal
death  unto  both  soul  and  body.  But  if  he  receiveth  it
worthily,  it  overcometh  death  and  gaineth  life  blessed


156    THE  BLESSED  ANGELA  OF   FOLIGNO

and  eternal,  and  without  he  receiveth  this  he  hath  no
life.  Christ  saith,  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son
of  Man  and  drink  His  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."

We  should,  therefore,  approach  that  table  and  that
great  and  good  thing  with  the  utmost  reverence,  fear,
and  trembling,  but  above  all,  with  exceeding  great  love.
And  the  soul  should  approach  unto  this  Sacrament
humbly,  exalted,  and  adorned,  for  it  goeth  unto  that
which  is  the  height  of  all  beauty  and  perfect  glory,
supreme  holiness,  happiness,  blessedness,  exaltedness,  and
nobility,  all  sweetness  and  all  love,  and  which  hath  the
sweetness  of  love  without  end.

Thus  should  the  soul  go  to  receive  the  Sacrament,  in
order  that  it  may  itself  be  received.  It  should  be  pure,
that  it  may  be  purified  ;  alive,  that  it  may  be  quickened  ;
just,  that  it  may  be  justified  ;  ready,  that  it  may  be
incorporated  with  God  uncreate  who  was  made  man,  and
that  it  may  be  one  with  Him  unto  all  eternity.  Amen.


TREATISE   III

OF  THE   MANY   VISIONS  AND  CONSOLATIONS  RE
CEIVED    BY    THE    BLESSED    ANGELA    OF    FOLIGNO

FIRST  VISION  AND  CONSOLATION,  WHEREIN  SHE  BEHELD

GOD     INASMUCH     AS     HE    IS    ALL    GOODNESS  ;     WHENCE

COMETH     HATRED     OF     THIS    LIFE    AND    THE    DESIRE   TO

ENJOY    GOD

BLESSED  God  and  Father  of  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who
comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulations,  Thou  hast  verily
deigned  to  console  me,  a  sinner,  in  every  tribulation.
For  during  the  time  of  my  conversion,  already  related
in  the  eighteenth  step,  and  after  the  enlightenment
miraculously  granted  unto  me  as  I  was  repeating  the
Paternoster,  I  did  feel  great  consolation  and  sweetness  in
this  manner.

I  was  inspired  and  drawn  unto  the  contemplation  of
the  blessed  union  of  the  divinity  and  humanity  of  Christ,
and  in  this  contemplation  did  I  feel  an  exceeding  great
delight,  the  which  was  greater  than  any  I  had  ever  felt
heretofore.  For  this  reason  did  I  remain  for  a  great  part
of  that  day  standing  in  the  cell  where  I  was  praying,
157


158  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

astonished,  locked  in  and  alone.  My  heart  was  all
wrapped  up  in  that  joy  and  I  became  as  one  dumb  and
did  lose  my  speech.  Wherefore  did  it  happen  that  when
my  companion  came  she  believed  that  I  was  about  to  die  ;
but  she  did  only  weary  me  and  was  an  hindrance  unto  me.

Once,  before  that  I  had  finished  giving  all  I  possessed
unto  the  poor  (albeit  but  little  then  remained  for  me  to
give),  when  I  was  persevering  in  these  matters,  it  chanced
that  one  evening  when  I  was  at  prayer  methought  I  did
feel  nothing  whatsoever  of  God.  Wherefore  I  lamented
and  prayed  unto  God,  saying  :

"  Lord,  that  which  I  do,  I  do  only  that  I  may  find
Thee ;  wherefore,  having  done  it,  do  Thou  grant  me  the
grace  that  I  may  find  Thee."

And  many  other  similar  things  did  I  say  in  my  prayer,
and  this  answer  was  vouchsafed  unto  me,  "  What  de-
sirest  thou  ?  "

Then  I  said  :  "I  desire  neither  gold  nor  silver  ;  yea,
if  Thou  wouldst  give  me  the  whole  world  I  would  not
accept  it,  seeing  that  I  desire  Thee  only."

Then  did  He  say  unto  me,  "  Strive  diligently  and  make
thyself  ready,  for  when  thou  hast  accomplished  that
which  thou  art  now  doing,  the  whole  Trinity  will  de
scend  unto  thee."

Many  other  things  were  also  promised  unto  me,  which
did  ease  me  of  my  tribulation  and  fill  me  with  divine
sweetness.  And  from  that  hour  I  did  await  that  the  thing
which  had  been  told  me  should  be  immediately  fulfilled.


OF  FOLTGNO  159

And  I  related  this  unto  my  companion  with  some  doubt
fulness,  seeing  that  great  things  had  been  told  and
promised  unto  me ;  nevertheless  they  had  left  me  with
that  divine  sweetness  and  gentleness.

After  this  I  went  unto  the  church  of  Saint  Francis,
near  unto  Assisi,  and  the  promise  was  fulfilled  by  the
way  as  I  went  thither.  Nevertheless,  I  had  not  yet
finished  giving  all  things  unto  the  poor,  but  there  was
little  yet  remaining.  This  had  happened  because  of  the
death  of  a  noble  and  holy  man,  to  whom  this  matter  had
been  entrusted  and  who  had  not  been  able  to  accomplish
it.  He  had  been  converted  by  God's  grace  through  our
admonitions,  and  was  about  to  deprive  himself  of  all  he
had  and  give  his  possessions  unto  the  poor.  But  he  died
upon  the  way.  Nevertheless,  God  did  perform  many
miracles  by  means  of  him,  and  his  tomb  is  held  in
reverence.

As  I  went  unto  Saint  Francis,  therefore,  I  prayed  by
the  way.  And  amongst  other  prayers,  I  did  ask  the
Blessed  Francis  that  he  would  implore  God  for  me,  that
I  might  serve  well  his  Order,  unto  which  I  had  but
lately  renewed  my  promises,  and  that  he  would  obtain
for  me  the  grace  that  I  might  feel  somewhat  of
Christ,  but  above  all,  that  He  would  make  me  become
poor  and  end  my  days  in  poverty.  For  this  cause  (namely,
to  have  the  liberty  of  poverty)  had  I  journeyed  unto
Rome,  to  pray  the  Blessed  Peter  that  he  would  obtain  for
me  the  grace  of  true  poverty.  And  thus,  through  the


160  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

merits  of  the  Blessed  Peter  and  the  Blessed  Francis  the
gift  of  true  poverty  was  vouchsafed  unto  me  by  divine
mercy,  even  as  I  was  asking  for  them  in  prayer  as  I  walked
by  the  way.

Now  when  I  was  come  to  that  place  which  lieth  be
tween  Spello  and  the  narrow  road  which  leadeth  upward
unto  Assisi,  and  is  beyond  Spello,  it  was  said  unto  me  :

"  Thou  hast  prayed  unto  My  servant  Francis,  and  I
have  not  willed  to  send  thee  another  messenger.  I  am
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  am  come  unto  thee  to  bring  thee
such  consolation  as  thou  hast  never  before  tasted.  And
I  will  go  with  thee  even  unto  Saint  Francis  ;  I  shall  be
within  thee  and  but  few  of  those  who  are  with  thee  will
perceive  it.  I  will  bear  thee  company  and  will  speak
with  thee  all  the  way  ;  I  will  make  no  end  to  my  speaking
and  thou  wilt  not  be  able  to  attend  unto  any  save  unto
Me,  for  I  have  bound  thee  and  will  not  depart  from  thee
until  thou  comest  for  the  second  time  unto  Saint  Francis.
Then  will  I  depart  from  thee  in  so  far  as  this  present  con
solation  is  concerned,  but  in  no  other  manner  will  I  ever
leave  thee,  and  thou  shalt  love  Me."

Then  began  He  to  speak  the  following  words  unto  me,
which  did  persuade  me  to  love  after  this  manner  :

"  My  daughter  who  art  sweet  unto  Me,  my  daughter
who  art  My  temple  ;  My  beloved  daughter,  do  thou  love
Me,  for  I  do  greatly  love  thee  and  much  more  than  thou
lovest  Me."  And  very  often  did  He  say  unto  me  :  "  Bride
and  daughter,  sweet  art  thou  unto  Me,  I  love  thee  better


OF  FOLIGNO  161

than  any  other  who  is  in  the  valley  of  Spoleto.  Foras
much  as  I  have  rested  and  reposed  in  thee,  do  thou  also
rest  thyself  and  repose  in  Me.  I  have  been  with  the
apostles,  who  did  behold  Me  with  their  bodily  eyes,  but
they  did  not  feel  Me  as  thou  feelest  Me.  When  thou
shalt  be  come  unto  thine  house  thou  shalt  feel  another
sweetness,  such  as  thou  hast  never  yet  experienced.  I
shall  not  speak  unto  thee  as  I  now  speak,  but  thou
wilt  only  feel  Me.  Thou  hast  prayed  unto  My  servant
Francis,  hoping  with  him  and  through  him  to  obtain  the
things  thou  desirest,  seeing  that  as  my  servant  Francis  hath
greatly  loved  Me,  I  have  done  many  things  for  him.  If
there  were  to-day  any  person  who  loved  Me  more,  much
more  would  I  do  for  him."

Then  said  He  unto  me  that  there  are  few  good  persons
in  these  days  and  but  little  faith,  for  which  cause  He  did
lament,  saying,  "  So  great  is  the  love  of  the  soul  who
loveth  Me  without  sin,  that,  if  there  were  any  one  who
loved  Me  perfectly,  I  would  show  him  greater  mercy
than  I  have  ever  shown  hitherto,  and  Thou  knowest  that
many  great  things  are  recorded  which  I  have  done  unto
divers  persons  in  times  past."

None  can  excuse  themselves  for  not  having  this  love,
because  it  is  possible  for  all  persons  to  love  God,  and  He
asketh  nothing  save  that  the  soul  shall  love  and  seek  Him.
He  is  the  love  of  the  soul.  But  these  are  deep  sayings.

That  God  is  the  love  of  the  soul  did  He  set  forth  unto
me  with  lively  proof,  by  His  advent  and  His  Cross  borne


162  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

for  us,  albeit  He  was  so  great  and  glorious.  And  He  did
expound  unto  me  His  Passion  and  the  other  things  which
He  did  for  our  sake  ;  then  He  did  add,  "  Behold  now,  if
there  be  aught  in  Me  save  love."  He  did  grieve  for  that
in  these  times  He  could  find  no  person  upon  whom  He
could  pour  out  His  grace,  and  He  did  repeat  that  He
would  show  far  greater  mercy  unto  whosoever  should
love  Him  at  this  present  time  than  He  had  shown  unto
the  saints  and  the  blessed  ones  hitherto.

Then  did  He  begin  again  to  say  unto  me,  "  My  be
loved  daughter  who  is  sweet  unto  Me,  love  thou  Me,  for
I  do  love  thee  more  than  thou  lovest  Me.  Love  Me,
My  beloved,  for  boundless  is  the  love  which  I  bear  unto
the  soul  who  loveth  Me  without  any  sin."  Methought
He  did  desire  to  be  loved  with  that  same  love  which  He
bore  unto  the  soul,  according  unto  the  power  and  virtue
of  the  soul,  and  that  if  only  the  soul  itself  would  desire
this,  He  would  bring  it  to  pass.

•  Again  He  said  unto  me,  "  My  beloved  and  My  bride,
love  thou  Me  !  All  thy  life,  thy  eating  and  drinking
and  sleeping  and  all  that  thou  dost  is  pleasing  unto  Me,
if  only  thou  lovest  Me."  And  He  said,  "  I  will  do  great
things  through  thee  in  the  sight  of  all  people  ;  thou
shalt  be  known  and  glorified,  so  that  many  shall  praise
My  name  in  thee."

These  and  other  similar  things  did  He  say  unto  me.
Then,  when  I  heard  these  words  I  did  count  over  my
sins  and  consider  my  faults,  and  how  that  I  was  not


OF  FOLIGNO  163

worthy  of  such  great  love.  And  I  did  begin  to  cast
doubt  upon  these  words,  wherefore  my  soul  said  unto
Him  who  had  spoken  unto  it  :  "  If  Thou  wert  truly
the  Holy  Spirit  Thou  wouldst  not  speak  thus  unto  me,
for  it  is  neither  right  nor  seemly,  seeing  how  that
I  am  weak  and  frail  and  might  grow  vainglorious
thereat."

He  answered  me,  "  Reflect  and  see  if  thou  couldst  be
vainglorious  because  of  all  these  things  for  the  which  thou
art  now  grown  proud  ;  and  see  if  thou  couldst  not  per
ceive  the  folly  of  thy  words  by  thinking  of  other  things."

So  then  did  I  endeavour  to  grow  vainglorious,  that  I
might  prove  if  what  He  had  said  were  true  ;  and  I  began
to  gaze  at  the  vineyards,  that  I  might  learn  the  folly  of
my  words.  And  wheresoever  I  looked  He  said  unto  me,
"  Behold  and  see,  this  is  My  creation,"  and  thereat  did  I
feel  the  most  ineffable  sweetness.

In  the  meantime  I  had  remembered  all  my  sins,  and
on  my  side  I  beheld  nothing  save  sins  and  wrong-doing,
so  that  I  did  feel  greater  humility  than  I  had  ever  felt
before.  Then  did  He  tell  me  that  I  was  beloved,  that
the  Son  of  God  and  of  the  Virgin  Mary  had  inclined
Himself  unto  me  and  was  come  to  speak  with  me.
Wherefore  Christ  said  unto  me  : —

"  If  all  the  world  came  now  unto  thee,  thou  couldst
not  speak  with  others ;  for  when  I  come  unto  thee,  there
cometh  more  than  all  the  world."  But  in  order  to  calm
my  doubts  He  said :  "  I  am  He  who  was  crucified  for


164  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

th.ee,  and  for  thy  sake  did  I  endure  hunger  and  thirst,  and
so  greatly  have  I  loved  thee  that  I  did  shed  My  blood  for
thee,"  and  He  expounded  unto  me  all  His  Passion  and
said  :  "  Ask  mercy  for  thyself  and  for  thy  companions  and
for  all  whom  thou  wilt,  for  I  am  much  more  ready  to  give
than  thou  art  to  receive."

Then  did  my  soul  cry  aloud,  saying,  "  I  will  not  ask,
for  I  am  not  worthy  and  I  remember  all  my  sins  !  "
And  it  said  further,  "  If  Thou  who  hast  spoken  with
me  from  the  beginning  wert  truly  the  Holy  Spirit,  Thou
wouldst  not  have  told  me  such  great  things ;  and  if
Thou  wert  verily  within  me,  then  my  joy  would  be  so
great  that  I  could  not  bear  it  and  live."

Then  did  He  make  answer:  "  Nothing  can  exist,  nothing
can  be  done  save  according  unto  My  will.  At  present  I
will  only  give  thee  joy  in  the  measure  in  which  thou  hast
it.  Unto  another  have  I  given  less  joy  than  this,  and  he
fell  upon  the  ground,  neither  hearing  nor  seeing.  Yet
will  I  give  thee  this  sign,  that  thou  mayest  know  who  I
am  :  go  now  and  endeavour  to  speak  with  thy  com
panions  and  think  of  any  thing  that  thou  willst,  either
good  or  evil,  and  thou  wrilt  see  that  thou  canst  not  think
of  aught  else  save  of  God.  For  I  am  He  who  alone  can
bind  the  thoughts.  And  all  these  things  do  I  unto  thee,
not  because  of  thy  merits,  but  of  My  goodness."

Whilst  He  was  speaking,  all  the  evils  I  had  committed
returned  into  my  memory  more  clearly  than  before,
wherefore  did  I  more  than  ever  deem  myself  worthy  of


OF  FOLIGNO  165

hell.  Afterwards  He  said  unto  me  that  if  I  had  come  in
the  company  of  other  persons,  not  such  as  those  with
whom  I  was  come,  the  aforesaid  things  would  not  have
been  done  or  said  unto  me.  These  persons  did  perceive
somewhat  of  my  languor,  for  at  each  word  did  I  receive
great  sweetness ;  I  had  no  desire  to  reach  the  city  or  that
the  road  should  ever  come  to  an  end.  I  can  never  de
scribe  the  joy  and  sweetness  which  I  felt,  especially  when
He  said,  "  I  am  the  Holy  Spirit  who  am  entering  into
thee  ;  "  but  briefly,  great  was  the  sweetness  which  I  re
ceived  at  each  one  of  His  sayings.

In  this  manner,  therefore,  I  did  arrive  at  Saint  Francis',
as  He  had  foretold.  And  He  departed  not  from  me,  but
remained  with  me,  even  when  I  sat  down  to  meat,  until  I
went  unto  Saint  Francis'  for  the  second  time.

When  I  did  bend  my  knees  upon  entering  in  at  the
door  of  the  church,  I  immediately  beheld  a  picture  of
Saint  Francis  lying  in  Christ's  bosom.  Then  said  Christ
unto  me : —

"  Thus  closely  will  I  hold  thee,  and  so  much  closer
that  bodily  eyes  can  neither  perceive  nor  comprehend  it.
But  now,  My  beloved  daughter  and  temple  of  My  de
light,  the  hour  is  come  when  I  must  fill  thee  with  My
spirit  and  must  leave  thee.  I  have  told  thee  that  be
cause  of  this  consolation  I  must  leave  thee  ;  nevertheless,
if  thou  lovest  Me,  I  will  not  leave  thee."

Albeit  the  words  were  bitter,  yet  were  they  full  of  joy.
Then  looked  I,  that  I  might  behold  with  the  eyes  of


i66  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

both  body  and  mind.  And  I  beheld ;  and  if  thou
seekest  to  know  what  I  beheld,  truly  I  can  only  say  that
it  was  a  thing  full  of  great  majesty  ;  and  more  than  this
can  I  not  say,  save  that  it  seemed  unto  me  to  be  full
of  all  goodness.  Then  He  departed  with  great  gentle
ness  ;  not  suddenly,  but  slowly  and  gradually.  Of
the  words  which  He  spake  unto  me,  the  greatest  are
these  : —

"  Oh  my  daughter,  who  art  sweeter  unto  Me  than  I
am  unto  thee,  temple  of  My  delight,  thou  dost  possess
the  ring  of  My  love  and  art  promised  unto  Me,  so  that
henceforth  thou  shalt  never  leave  Me.  The  blessing  of
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  be  upon  thee
and  thine  understanding."

Then  cried  my  soul,  "  If  only  Thou  wilt  not  leave  me,
I  will  commit  no  mortal  sin  !  "

And  He  answered  me,  "  That  say  I  not  unto  thee."
Then  as  He  was  departing,  I  did  ask  a  blessing  for  my
companion,  and  He  replied,  "  Unto  her  will  I  give
another  blessing,"  and  so  He  departed.  And  at  His
departure  He  would  not  that  I  should  prostrate  myself
before  Him,  but  that  I  should  stand  upon  my  feet.  But
after  that  He  was  gone  I  fell  down  upon  a  seat  and  began
to  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  clamouring  and  calling  without
any  shame  and  uttering  these  words,  "  Oh  Love,  hereto
fore  have  I  never  known  Thee,  why  leavest  Thou  me  in
this  manner  ?  "  And  more  than  this  I  could  not  say,  for
my  voice  was  so  suffocated  with  crying  that  scarce  could


OF  FOLIGNO  167

I  pronounce  even  this,  wherefore  was  it  not  heard  by  the
persons  around  me.

This  clamouring  and  crying  did  come  upon  me  as  I
entered  into  the  door  of  the  church  of  Saint  Francis.
Here  was  I  overwhelmed  again  and  began  to  make  a
noise  and  call  aloud  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people,
that  those  who  were  come  with  me  and  did  know  me  did
stand  afar  off  and  were  ashamed,  believing  that  I  did  it
for  another  reason.  So  was  I  left  with  the  certainty  that
it  was  God  who  had  spoken  with  me  ;  and  because  of  His
sweetness  and  the  grief  of  His  departure  did  I  cry  aloud,
desiring  to  die.  And  seeing  that  I  did  not  die,  the  grief
of  being  separated  from  Him  was  so  great  that  all  the
joints  of  my  limbs  did  fall  asunder.

After  these  things  I  departed  from  Assisi,  and  with  great
comfort  did  I  go  upon  my  way,  speaking  of  God.  And
with  much  difficulty  did  I  hold  my  peace  ;  nevertheless  I
strove  to  abstain  from  talking,  because  of  the  company.

Then  said  Christ  unto  me,  "  I  will  give  thee  a  sign  by
the  which  thou  mayest  know  that  I  am  Christ  who  have
talked  with  thee.  This  sign  is  the  Cross  and  love  of  God
which  I  do  place  within  thee  and  which  shall  be  with  thee
for  ever."  And  immediately  I  felt  the  Cross  and  the
love  of  God  within  my  soul  and  spreading  throughout  my
body,  so  that  I  did  actually  feel  it  corporally  ;  and  feeling
it,  my  soul  was  dissolved  in  God's  love.

When  I  was  returned  I  stayed  within  the  house,  and  I


1.68  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

felt  a  sweetness  so  peaceful,  quiet,  and  great  that  I  know
not  how  to  describe  it.  Wherefore  did  I  long  for  death,
and  because  of  the  aforesaid  peace  and  sweet  joyfulness
was  life  a  greater  grief  unto  me  than  I  can  say.  I  longed
for  death  that  I  might  attain  unto  that  delight  of  the
which  I  now  felt  something,  and  because  of  this  did  I
wish  to  depart  from  this  world.  Life  was  a  greater  grief
unto  me  than  had  been  the  deaths  of  my  mother  and  my
children,  more  heavy  than  any  other  grief  of  which  I  can
bethink  me.

Thus  did  I  remain  eight  days  within  the  house,  all
feeble.  And  I  cried,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  and
grant  that  I  may  remain  no  longer  in  this  world."  From
this  time  forth  I  was  often  aware  of  indescribable  odours  ;
but  these  and  other  things  can  I  not  explain,  so  great  was
the  sweetness  and  joy  which  I  did  feel  in  them.  The
voice  spake  unto  me  many  other  times,  but  never  at  any
great  length,  nor  with  so  much  sweetness  or  deep  meaning.

Being  returned,  therefore,  from  Assisi,  as  I  have  said,
and  lying  in  mine  house,  my  companion  (who  was  of
marvellous  simplicity,  purity,  and  virginity)  heard  a  voice
saying,  "  The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  the  cell."  Then  she  came
unto  me  and  began  to  seek  round,  asking  of  me,  "  Tell
me  what  aileth  thee,  for  three  times  have  I  been  bidden
to  come  unto  thee."  And  I  answered,  "  I  am  glad  of
that  which  hath  been  bidden  thee."  And  from  that
time  forth  I  related  unto  my  companion  many  of  these
secret  things.


OF  FOLIGNO  169


SECOND    VISION,    WHEREIN    SHE    BEHELD    GOD    INASMUCH

AS     HE    IS    BEAUTY,     WHEREFORE    ALL    CREATED     BEAUTY

SEEMED    DEFORMED    AND    HIDEOUS    UNTO    HER

UPON  a  certain  time  when  I  was  at  prayer  and  my  spirit
was  exalted,  God  spake  unto  me  many  gracious  words  full
of  love.

And  when  I  looked,  I  beheld  God  who  spake  with  me.
But  if  thou  seekest  to  know  that  which  I  beheld,  I  can  tell
thee  nothing,  save  that  I  beheld  a  fulness  and  a  clearness,
and  felt  them  within  me  so  abundantly  that  I  can  in  no
wise  describe  it,  nor  give  any  likeness  thereof.  For  what
I  beheld  was  not  corporal,  but  as  though  it  were  in
heaven.  Thus  I  beheld  a  beauty  so  great  that  I  can
say  naught  concerning  it,  save  that  I  saw  the  Supreme
Beauty  which  containeth  within  Itself  all  goodness.
And  all  the  saints  were  standing  before  this  beauteous
Majesty,  praising  it.

Methought,  however,  that  I  stayed  in  this  trance  but
a  very  brief  while  ;  then  said  God  unto  me,  "  My  be
loved  daughter,  dear  unto  Me,  all  the  saints  of  Paradise
do  bear  an  especial  love  toward  thee,  and  likewise  doth
My  mother,  and  they  will  bring  thee  unto  Me."  And
albeit  these  words  were  spoken  unto  me,  all  concerning
His  mother  and  the  saints  seemed  unto  me  but  a  small
thing.  For  so  great  was  my  joy  in  Him  that  I  took  no
heed  of  looking  at  the  angels  and  the  saints,  because  all


i/o  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

their  goodness  and  all  their  beauty  was  from  Him  and  in
Him  ;  He  was  the  whole  and  Supreme  Good,  with  all
beauty,  and  so  great  a  joy  had  I  in  His  words  that  I  paid
no  heed  to  any  creature.

Again  He  said  unto  me,  "  Infinite  is  the  love  which  I
bear  thee,  but  I  do  not  reveal  it  unto  thee — yea,  I  do
even  conceal  it."

Then  answered  my  soul,  "  Wherefore  hast  Thou  such
love  and  joy  in  me,  who  am  hateful,  inasmuch  as  I  have
offended  Thee  all  the  days  of  my  life  ?  "

To  this  did  He  make  answer,  "  So  great  is  the  love  I
bear  thee  that  I  no  more  remember  thy  sins,  albeit  Mine
eyes  do  see  them  ;  for  in  thee  have  I  much  treasure."

Then  did  my  soul  feel  an  assurance  so  true  that  it
doubted  no  more.  It  felt  and  saw  that  the  eyes  of  God
were  searching  within  it,  and  it  had  such  joy  in  those  eyes
that  neither  man  nor  saint  come  down  from  heaven  could
declare  it.  When  He  told  me  that  He  concealed  much
love,  because  I  was  not  able  to  bear  it,  my  soul  answered  :
"  If  Thou  art  God  omnipotent,  make  Thou  me  able  to
bear  it."

Then  He  made  answer  finally  and  said :  "If  I  were  to
do  as  thou  askest,  thou  wouldst  have  here  all  that  thou
desirest,  and  wouldst  no  longer  hunger  after  Me.  For
this  reason  will  I  not  grant  thy  request,  for  I  desire  that
in  this  world  thou  shouldst  hunger  and  long  after  Me
and  shouldst  ever  be  eager  to  find  Me."


OF  FOLIGNO  171

THIRD  VISION,  WHEREIN  SHE  BEHELD  GOD  INASMUCH
AS  HE  IS  INVINCIBLE  OMNIPOTENCE  IN  ALL  THINGS,
WHICH  GAVE  UNTO  HER  THE  GRACE  TO  BE  OF  BENEFIT
BOTH  TO  THE  PRESENT  AND  TO  THE  FUTURE  GENERA
TIONS.  MOREOVER,  SHE  BEHELD  LIKEWISE  THE  DEEP
HUMILITY  OF  GOD

UPON  a  certain  occasion  it  was  told  me,  saying,  "  I  who
speak  with  thee  am  the  divine  Power,  who  bring  unto
thee  divine  grace.  The  grace  is  this  :  I  desire  that  thou
shouldst  be  of  benefit  unto  all  men  who  shall  behold  thee  ;
and  not  only  unto  these,  but  likewise  unto  all  who  shall
think  of  thee  and  remember  thee  and  hear  thee  spoken
of.  Nevertheless,  thou  wilt  be  of  the  greatest  benefit  unto
those  into  whom  I  have  most  fully  entered."

Then,  albeit  the  soul  rejoiced  greatly,  it  said,  "  I  de
sire  not  this  grace,  for  I  fear  that  it  would  be  hurtful  unto
me  and  make  me  to  be  vainglorious."

But  the  Lord  answered,  "  With  this  hast  thou  naught
to  do,  for  it  concerneth  thee  not  and  thou  hast  only  the
care  thereof.  See  that  thou  servest  it  well  and  renderest
it  again  unto  Him  to  whom  it  belongeth."

Then  my  soul  saw  and  understood  that  in  this  way  it
could  be  neither  perturbed  nor  hurt.  And  the  Lord  said
also  unto  me,  "  Much  am  I  pleased  by  thy  great  fear."

After  this  I  went  into  the  church,  and  there  did  the
Lord  speak  most  sweetly  and  graciously  unto  me,  whereat
all  my  mind  did  greatly  rejoice  and  take  comfort.  He


172  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

said,  "  My  beloved  daughter,"  and  many  other  things
better  still,  and  added,  "  No  creature  can  console  thee,
only  I  alone,  who  desire  to  reveal  My  power  unto  thee."

And  immediately  the  eyes  of  my  soul  were  opened  and
I  beheld  the  plenitude  of  God,  whereby  I  did  compre
hend  the  whole  world,  both  here  and  beyond  the  sea,  and
the  abyss  and  all  things  else  ;  and  therein  did  I  behold
naught  save  the  divine  power  in  a  manner  assuredly  in
describable,  so  that  through  excess  of  marvelling  the  soul
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  "  This  whole  world  is
full  of  God  !  "  Wherefore  did  I  now  comprehend  that
the  world  is  but  a  small  thing ;  I  saw,  moreover,  that
the  power  of  God  was  above  all  things,  and  that  the
whole  world  was  filled  with  it.

Then  said  He  unto  me,  "  I  have  shown  thee  something
of  My  power,"  the  which  I  did  so  well  understand  that
it  enabled  me  better  to  understand  all  other  things.  He
said  also,  "  I  have  made  thee  to  see  something  of  My
power  ;  behold  now  and  see  Mine  humility."  Then  was
I  given  so  deep  an  insight  into  the  humility  of  God  to
wards  man  and  all  other  things  that  when  my  soul  re
membered  His  unspeakable  power  and  comprehended
His  deep  humility,  it  marvelled  greatly  and  did  esteem
itself  to  be  nothing  at  all,  for  in  itself  it  beheld  nothing
save  pride.

Thus  did  I  begin  to  think  within  myself  and  to  esteem
myself  in  every  way  unworthy  of  the  Holy  Communion,
wherefore  did  I  refuse  to  communicate.


OF  FOLIGNO  173

After  that  He  had  shown  me  this,  the  Lord  said  :  "  My
daughter,  there  is  no  creature  who  can  attain  unto  this
point  of  beholding  My  power  and  humility  (unto  which
thou  hast  attained)  unless  he  be  inspired  thereto  by
special  divine  grace."  When  I  was  in  the  church  after
the  elevation  of  the  Body  of  Christ  He  said  unto  me :
"  Behold  My  power  which  is  now  upon  the  altar,  and  yet
am  I  within  thee  ;  if  thou  receivest  Me,  thou  receivest
Me  as  thou  hast  ever  done.  Communicate,  therefore,  in
the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  for  I  who
am  worthy  do  make  thee  worthy."

Then  was  I  filled  with  unspeakable  sweetness  and
great  joy,  which  I  do  think  I  shall  never  lose  all  the  days
of  my  life.


FOURTH    VISION     AND     CONSOLATION,     WHEREIN     SHE

BEHELD    GOD    INASMUCH    AS    HE    IS    SUPREME   WISDOM,

WHEREBY    SHE    DID    LEARN    TO    JUDGE    OF   ALL  THINGS

WITHOUT    ERROR

A  MAN  did  once  ask  of  me  that  I  would  pray  God  for
certain  things  which  he  was  desirous  of  knowing.  But
I  doubted  whether  I  should  do  this,  for  I  held  it  to  be  an
act  of  pride  and  great  folly  to  pray  unto  God  for  such
things.  And  as  I  meditated  upon  this  matter,  my  mind
was  suddenly  rapt  unto  the  first  elevation,  and  placed  at
a  table  which  had  neither  beginning  nor  end.  I  was
not  placed  there  to  behold  the  table,  but  that  which  was


174  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

upon  it.  There  I  beheld  the  ineffable  fulness  of  God  ;
but  I  can  relate  nothing  of  it,  save  that  I  have  seen  the
plenitude  of  divine  wisdom,  wherein  is  all  goodness.

In  this  plenitude  I  saw  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  seek
or  desire  to  know  that  which  the  divine  wisdom  is  going
to  do,  for  this  is  a  forestalling  and  dishonouring  of  it.
When  I  see  persons,  therefore,  who  seek  to  know  such
things,  I  am  persuaded  that  they  do  err.

From  the  time  when  I  beheld  this  vision  it  hath  been
given  me  to  understand  and  judge  all  spiritual  persons
and  things  when  I  hear  them  spoken  of.  But  I  judge
not  with  that  judgment  to  make  use  of  which  is  always
to  err  ;  but  with  another  and  true  judgment,  whereby
I  understand  whence  I  have  the  consciousness  of  sin  in
judging.

I  can  say  nothing  more  concerning  this  vision,  save
that  the  one  word  "  table  "  remained  in  my  memory.  I
have  said  that  in  the  first  elevation  I  was  placed  at  a
table.  But  of  the  things  which  I  beheld  on  that  table,
I  can  say  nothing  save  what  I  have  already  said.


FIFTH    VISION,  WHEREIN   SHE    BEHELD    GOD    INASMUCH    AS

HE    IS    SUPREME     JUSTICE,    AND     SOMETHING    YET    HIGHER

STILL  ;     WHEREBY    SHE    OBTAINED    THE    APPROBATION    OF

THE    HEAVENLY    JUDGES

BEING  one  day  at  prayer,  I  asked  of  God  (not  because  I
doubted  or  desired  in  this  manner  to  know  more  of  God),


OF  FOLIGNO  175

"  Wherefore,  oh  Lord,  didst  Thou  create  man,  and  where
fore,  having  created  him,  didst  Thou  permit  so  much
suffering  to  be  laid  upon  Thee  as  was  borne  by  Thy  Son
because  of  our  sins  ?  For  surely  Thou  mightest  have
created  us  with  double  the  amount  of  virtue  we  do
possess  now,  and  thus  couldst  Thou  have  ordained  it
exceeding  well  that  we  should  have  been  grateful  and
pleasing  unto  Thee  without  those  sufferings."

Hereupon  was  I  given  to  understand  that  the  reason
wherefore  God  had  done  and  permitted  this  was  that
because  in  this  way  His  goodness  could  be  more  clearly
made  manifest  unto  us,  and  also  because  it  was  thus  made
more  suitable  unto  our  needs.  Yet  did  this  not  suffice
me  for  the  full  understanding  thereof,  inasmuch  as  I
knew  of  a  certainty  that  God  could  have  acted  otherwise
if  He  had  so  pleased.

Another  time,  when  I  was  exalted  in  spirit,  I  per
ceived  that  this  quest  had  neither  beginning  nor  end,  so
that  when  the  soul  found  itself  thus  in  darkness  it  in
stantly  desired  to  turn  back  ;  but  it  was  not  able,  neither
was  it  permitted  to  advance.  And  being  in  this  un
certainty  and  anxiety,  I  was  exalted  yet  higher  still  and
enlightened  that  I  might  behold  the  ineffable  power  of
God.

Here  was  seen  the  will,  justice,  and  goodness  of  God,
and  in  these  virtues  I  clearly  beheld  that  which  I  had
sought  to  know.  Thus  was  my  soul  brought  forth  out
of  the  darkness  wherein  it  lay  upon  the  earth  ;  for  in


176  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

this  illumination  it  was  raised  up  straight  and  I  stood
upon  my  feet,  even  upon  the  tips  of  my  toes,  in  such
bodily  agility  and  renewed  life  as  I  had  never  hitherto
experienced.  Moreover  there  came  upon  me  such  a
fulness  of  charity,  and  with  so  great  a  joy  did  I  under
stand  that  power,  will,  and  justice  of  God,  that  not  only
was  I  satisfied  concerning  the  questions  I  had  asked,  but
likewise  concerning  all  creatures,  even  the  demons  and
the  damned,  for  I  felt  I  was  called  to  save  them  one
and  all.

But  inasmuch  as  this  was  a  supernatural  thing  I  cannot
show  it  forth  in  words,  albeit  I  perfectly  understood  that
God  could  have  saved  us  in  another  manner  if  He  had  de
sired.  Nevertheless,  I  could  not  see  how  His  power  and
goodness  could  possibly  have  been  better  manifested  or
more  plainly  set  forth  than  in  this  manner.  From  that
time  onwards  I  did  feel  myself  so  contented  and  safe  that
if  I  had  known  of  a  certainty  that  I  was  to  be  damned,
I  should  on  no  account  have  bewailed  myself,  nor  should
I  for  this  reason  have  striven  and  studied  less  to  worship
and  honour  God  than  I  had  done  before,  so  clearly  had
I  understood  His  justice  and  the  righteousness  of  His
judgments.  Wherefore  was  my  soul  filled  with  so  great
a  peace,  quietness,  and  firmness  that  never  do  I  remember
any  other  so  complete  ;  and  herein  have  I  continued.

After  I  had  seen  the  power  of  God,  His  will,  and  His
justice,  I  was  uplifted  yet  higher  still,  and  then  I  no
longer  beheld  the  power  and  will  of  God  as  before.  But


OF  FOLIGNO  177

I  beheld  a  thing  as  fixed  and  stable  as  it  was  indescribable  ;
and  more  than  this  I  cannot  say,  save  what  I  have  often
said  already,  namely,  that  it  was  all  good.

And  although  my  soul  beheld  not  love,  yet  nevertheless
when  it  saw  that  indescribable  thing  it  was  itself  filled
with  indescribable  joy,  and  it  was  taken  out  of  the  state
it  was  in  before  and  placed  in  this  most  great  and  in
effable  state.  I  know  not  whether  I  was  at  that  time  in
the  body  or  outside  it,  but  it  sufnceth  to  say  that  all  the
other  visions  seemed  unto  me  to  be  less  great  than  this.
In  this  vision  was  I  granted  the  mortification  of  sins  and
assurance  of  virtue,  whereby  I  now  love  things  both
good  and  evil,  both  well  and  evilly  made,  for  these  things
do  I  no  longer  despise.

I  was,  therefore,  left  in  great  peace  and  veneration  by
the  heavenly  judgments  ;  so  that  now  when  I  cry,  "  By
Thy  judgments,  or  by  Thy  judgment  deliver  me,  oh
Lord,"  I  say  it  with  as  much  joy  and  trust  as  though
I  said,  "  By  Thy  Passion  deliver  me,  oh  Lord."  The
cause  of  this  is,  that  I  cannot  recognise  the  goodness  of
God  more  clearly  in  a  saint  or  a  holy  man,  or  in  many,
than  in  one  condemned  or  a  multitude  of  damned.
Albeit  this  profound  truth  was  not  shown  unto  me  save
once  only,  it  hath  never  left  my  memory,  nor  have  I  lost
the  joy  thereof.  If  it  were  possible  that  all  the  things
which  appertain  unto  faith  should  fail  me,  there  would
nevertheless  remain  unto  me  the  true  certainty  of  the
supreme  God,  of  His  perfect  justice  and  His  judgments.


178  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

How  deep  is  the  meaning  of  this  saying  !  But  all  this
turneth  unto  the  profit  of  the  blessed,  for  the  soul  who
hath  attained  unto  a  knowledge  of  the  divine  judgments
and  understandeth  them,  will  through  this  knowledge  of
God  derive  profit  from  all  things.


SIXTH  VISION  AND  CONSOLATION,  WHEREIN  SHE  BEHELD

GOD    INASMUCH    AS    HE    IS     LOVE,     WHEREBY     SHE    WAS

TRANSFORMED    IN    THE    DIVINE    LOVE

METHOUGHT  one  time  in  Lent  that  I  was  exceeding
parched  and  lacking  in  devotion,  wherefore  I  prayed  God
that  He  would  give  me  something  of  Himself,  because  all
goodness  was  dried  up  within  me.  Then  were  the  eyes
of  my  soul  opened  and  I  beheld  love  advancing  gently
toward  me,  and  I  beheld  the  beginning  but  not  the  end.
Unto  me  there  seemed  only  a  continuation  and  eternity
thereof,  so  that  I  can  describe  neither  likeness  nor  colour,
but  immediately  that  this  love  reached  me,  I  did  behold
all  these  things  more  clearly  with  the  eyes  of  the  soul
than  I  could  do  with  the  eyes  of  the  body.

This  love  came  towards  me  after  the  manner  of  a
sickle.  Not  that  there  was  any  actual  and  measurable
likeness,  but  when  first  it  appeared  unto  me  it  did  not
give  itself  unto  me  in  such  abundance  as  I  expected,  but
part  of  it  was  withdrawn.  Therefore  do  I  say,  after  the
manner  of  a  sickle.  Then  was  I  filled  with  love  and  in-


OF  FOLIGNO  179

estimable  satiety  ;  but  although  it  did  well  satisfy  me,
it  did  generate  within  me  so  great  an  hunger  that  all
my  members  were  loosened  and  my  soul  fainted  with
longing  to  attain  unto  the  remainder.

Then  did  I  refuse  either  to  see  or  to  hearken  unto  any
creature  ;  I  spake  not,  but  my  soul  spake  within  me,
crying  out  and  beseeching  that  love  would  not  make  it
thus  to  faint  for  love's  sake,  because  it  held  life  to  be
but  death.

Then  did  I  first  invoke  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  after
wards  the  holy  apostles,  that  they  would  go  with  my  soul
and  beseech  and  implore  the  Most  High  that  He  would
no  longer  cause  it  to  suffer  this  death,  but  that  He  would
permit  it  to  attain  unto  that  which  it  desired,  namely,
unto  the  remainder  of  righteous  love.  Likewise  in  this
faintness  I  did  pray  unto  the  blessed  Francis  and  the
holy  Evangelists  and  did  make  earnest  supplication  and
cry  unto  them,  inasmuch  as  I  was  drawn  nigh  unto  them
through  the  love  which  I  felt.  And  believing  myself  to
be  all  love,  I  said,  "  Many  are  there  who  think  they  do
dwell  in  love  and  they  dwell  in  hatred,  and  many  on  the
contrary  think  they  dwell  in  hatred  and  they  do  verily
dwell  in  love."  But  my  soul  sought  to  know  this  of  a
certainty,  and  God  permitted  me  to  feel  it  so  clearly  that
I  was  wholly  content.  For  I  was  so  filled  with  this  love
that  after  this  happened  I  do  not  believe  I  could  ever
have  been  without  it,  nor  could  I  believe  any  creature
who  said  otherwise  ;  even  had  it  been  an  angel  I  would


i8o  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

not  have  believed  it,  but  would  have  answered,  "  Thou
art  he  who  is  fallen  from  heaven."

And  methought  that  I  beheld  in  myself  two  sides,  as
though  a  road  had  been  made  through  me  ;  upon  the
one  side  I  saw  this  love  and  all  goodness  (the  which  was
of  God  and  not  of  me),  and  upon  the  other  side  I  saw
myself  all  dried  up,  where  there  was  nothing  good.
Wherefore  I  considered  that  the  thing  I  loved  proceeded
not  from  me,  albeit  I  was  in  love,  but  that  it  came  from
God  alone,  in  whom  all  love  was  joined  together.

Then  gave  He  unto  me  greater  and  more  ardent  love
than  before,  and  I  desired  to  go  unto  this  love.  Thus
were  there  two  loves,  that  of  which  I  have  already
spoken  and  which  was  so  great  that  I  knew  not  that  any
could  be  greater,  until  there  came  upon  me  a  mortal  love,
and  betwixt  this  love  and  that  other  mortal  love  a  great
heat.  There  is  a  certain  middle-place  of  the  which  I  can
say  nothing,  so  deep  was  it,  so  full  of  joy  and  unspeakable
delight.

Then  do  I  wish  to  hear  nothing  of  the  Passion,  neither
would  I  that  God  should  be  named  before  me,  because
when  I  hear  Him  named  it  exciteth  in  me  so  much  de
votion  that  I  faint  and  am  distressed  for  love  of  Him,
and  all  lesser  things  do  trouble  me.  In  comparison  with
this  I  do  esteem  as  nothing  all  that  is  related  in  the
Gospel  of  the  Life  of  Christ,  or  in  other  places,  for  in  God
do  I  behold  greater  and  yet  more  incomparable  things.

Since  He  hath  left  me  I  am  remained  as  contented  as


OF  FOLIGNO  181

an  angel ;  for  I  love  toads  and  serpents,  and  even  fools
and  demons,  and  nothing  that  I  see  them  do,  even  sins
committed  against  others,  can  displease  me,  inasmuch  as
I  believe  that  God  doth  justly  permit  it  and  desire  that
it  should  be  done.  And  when  I  am  in  this  state  I  should
take  no  heed  if  dogs  were  to  bite  me,  neither  should  I
seem  to  suffer  any  pain.

In  this  state,  therefore,  there  can  be  no  thought  or
grievous  remembrance  of  the  Passion  of  Christ,  or  any
tears,  albeit  there  was  at  one  time  added  unto  this  love
the  remembrance  of  the  inestimable  worth  of  the  precious
Blood  through  which  the  world  was  redeemed.  Where
fore  do  I  marvel  how  they  can  exist  together.  Never
theless,  there  was  none  of  the  suffering  of  the  Passion,  for
the  Passion  showeth  us  the  way  we  have  to  go  and  teacheth
us  what  we  have  to  do.  And  this  state  is  greater  than
that  of  standing  ever  at  the  foot  of  Christ's  Cross,  in
continual  remembrance,  as  did  the  Blessed  Francis,  albeit
the  soul  frequenteth  both  the  one  and  the  other  state.


SEVENTH  VISION,  WHEREIN  SHE  BEHELD    GOD    IN    THREE

PERSONS,     BUT     SHE    BEHELD    HIM    DARKLY  ;     AND   THIS

VISION     DID    INSPIRE    HER     WITH    PERFECT    AND    HOLY

HOPE   AND    FULL   ASSURANCE

THERE  was  a  time  when  my  soul  was  exalted  to  behold
God  with  so  much  clearness  that  never  before  had  I


182  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

beheld  Him  so  distinctly.  But  love  did  I  not  see  here
so  fully  ;  rather  did  I  lose  that  which  I  had  before  and
was  left  without  love.  Afterwards  I  did  see  Him  darkly,
and  this  darkness  was  the  greatest  blessing  that  could  be
imagined,  and  no  thought  could  conceive  aught  that
would  equal  this.

Then  was  there  given  unto  the  soul  an  assured  faith,  a
firm  and  certain  hope,  wherein  I  felt  so  sure  of  God  that
all  fear  left  me.  For  by  that  blessing  which  came  with
the  darkness  I  did  collect  my  thoughts  and  was  made  so
sure  of  God  that  I  can  never  again  doubt  but  that  I  do
of  a  certainty  possess  Him.  Thus  is  my  hope  now  made
certain,  for  now  do  I  see  so  clearly  that  what  I  see  can
neither  be  told  by  the  mouth  nor  imagined  in  the  heart.
And  by  that  blessing  (most  certain,  and  including  also
that  darkness)  have  I  attained  unto  all  my  hope,  and
inasmuch  as  now  I  see  clearly,  I  have  all  that  I  desired
to  have  or  to  know.

Here,  likewise,  do  I  see  all  Good  ;  and  seeing  it,  the
soul  cannot  think  that  it  will  depart  from  it  or  it  from
the  Good,  or  that  in  future  it  must  ever  leave  the  Good.
The  soul  delighteth  unspeakably  therein,  yet  it  beholdeth
naught  which  can  be  related  by  the  tongue  or  imagined
in  the  heart.  It  seeth  nothing,  yet  seeth  all  things,
because  it  beholdeth  this  Good  darkly — and  the  more
darkly  and  secretly  the  Good  is  seen,  the  more  certain  is
it,  and  excellent  above  all  things.  Wherefore  is  all  other
good  which  can  be  seen  or  imagined  doubtless  less  than


OF  FOLIGNO  183

this,  because  all  the  rest  is  darkness.  And  even  when
the  soul  seeth  the  divine  power,  wisdom,  and  will  of  God
(which  I  have  seen  most  marvellously  at  other  times),  it
is  all  less  than  this  most  certain  Good.  Because  this  is
the  whole,  and  those  other  things  are  but  part  of  the
whole.  Another  difference  is,  that  albeit  those  other
things  are  unspeakable,  yet  they  do  bring  great  joy
which  is  felt  even  in  the  body.

But  seen  thus  darkly,  the  Good  bringeth  no  smile  upon
the  lips,  no  fervour  or  devotion  or  love  into  the  heart,
for  the  body  doth  not  tremble  or  become  moved  or  dis
tressed  as  it  doth  at  other  times.  And  the  cause  thereof
is,  that  the  soul  seeth,  and  not  the  body,  which  reposeth
and  sleepeth,  and  the  tongue  is  made  dumb  and  cannot
speak.  All  the  many  and  unspeakable  kindnesses  which
God  hath  shown  unto  me,  all  the  sweet  words  and  all
other  divine  sayings  and  doings  are  so  much  less  than
this  which  I  have  seen  clearly  through  the  darkness,  that
I  do  put  no  hope  in  them.  Yea,  even  if  it  were  possible
that  all  these  were  not  true,  it  would  in  no  wise  lessen
the  hope  which  I  have  in  this  and  all  other  good.

Unto  this  most  high  power  of  beholding  God  in
effably  through  such  great  darkness  was  my  spirit  up
lifted  but  three  times  only  and  no  more  ;  and  although
I  beheld  Him  countless  times,  and  always  darkly,  yet
never  in  such  an  high  manner  and  through  such  great
darkness.

And  when  upon  the  one  hand  my  body  is  wasted  by


1 84  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

infirmity,  when  the  world  with  its  thorns  and  bitterness
chaseth  me  forth,  and  demons  do  likewise  afflict  me  with
much  vexation,  and  do  continually  persecute  me  and
molest  me  (because  they  have  power  over  me  and  be
cause  God  hath  given  me  soul  and  body  into  their  hands,
so  that  I  do  almost  seem  to  behold  them  falling  bodily
upon  me),  upon  the  other  hand  God  doth  draw  me  unto
Himself  with  that  Good  which  I  beheld  through  the
darkness,  in  which  darkness  I  did  doubtless  behold  the
Holy  Trinity.  And  to  me  it  seemeth  that  I  am  fixed
in  the  midst  of  It  and  that  It  draweth  me  unto  Itself
more  than  anything  else  the  which  I  ever  beheld,  or  any
blessing  I  ever  yet  received,  so  there  is  nothing  which
can  be  compared  unto  It.

All  that  I  say  of  this  seemeth  unto  me  to  be  nothing,
I  do  even  feel  as  though  I  offended  in  speaking  of  it,  for
so  greatly  doth  that  Good  exceed  all  my  words  that  my
speech  doth  appear  to  blaspheme  against  it.

When  I  behold  and  am  in  that  Good,  I  remember
nothing  of  the  humanity  of  Christ,  of  God  inasmuch  as
He  was  man,  nor  of  aught  else  that  had  shape  or  form  ;
and  albeit  I  seem  to  see  nothing,  yet  do  I  see  all  things.

When,  however,  I  am  separated  from  that  aforesaid
Good  then  is  it  given  unto  me  to  see  Christ,  who  draweth
me  with  such  gentleness  that  sometimes  He  saith,  "  Thou
art  I,  and  I  am  them."  I  see  those  eyes,  and  that  face  so
gracious  and  so  pleasing,  which  embraceth  and  draweth
my  soul  unto  itself  with  infinite  assurance.  And  that


OF  FOLIGNO  185

which  proceedeth  from  those  eyes  and  that  face  is  nothing
else  save  that  Good  of  which  I  spake  before  and  which  I
beheld  darkly,  which  proceedeth  and  issueth  forth  from
within.  And  it  is  that  Good  wherein  I  delight  so  greatly
that  I  can  in  no  wise  speak  of  it.

Being  thus  one  with  Christ  the  soul  liveth.  And  in
this  God  do  I  live  more  than  in  the  darkness,  and  although
He  who  dwelleth  in  darkness  draweth  me  beyond  all
comparison  more  strongly,  yet  do  I  live  so  constantly  in
Christ  that,  inasmuch  as  I  have  been  once  and  for  all
granted  assurance  of  God,  nothing  can  ever  come  be
twixt  me  and  Him.

From  that  time  forth  there  hath  never  been  day  or
night  wherein  I  have  not  constantly  rejoiced  in  the
humanity  of  Christ,  wherefore  do  I  long  to  sing  and  to
praise  God,  saying  :

"  Thee  do  I  praise,  oh  God  my  delight,  for  upon  Thy
Cross  have  I  made  my  bed,  and  instead  of  a  pillow  have
I  found  poverty,  instead  of  repose  have  I  found  suffering
and  contempt,  for  upon  this  bed  was  He  born,  He  lived,
and  laid  Him  down  to  die."

These  companions,  poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt,
were  so  beloved  of  God  the  Father  that  He  gave  them
unto  His  Son,  and  the  Son  desired  ever  to  lie  upon  this
bed.  And  on  this  do  I  always  love  Him  and  do  agree
with  the  Father.  And  upon  this  bed  have  I  laid  me
down  to  rest,  for  it  is  my  bed  whereon  I  hope  to  die,  by
which  I  hope  to  be  saved.  But  the  joy  which  I  have  of


1 86  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

those  hands  and  feet  cannot  be  described,  and  when  I
see  Him  I  do  desire  never  to  depart  from  Him,  but  draw
nearer  unto  Him,  wherefore  is  my  life  but  as  death,  and
the  more  I  do  remember  Him,  the  less  can  I  speak,  for
then  iny  tongue  is  tied.  When  I  leave  Him  the  wicked
ness  which  I  find  compelleth  me  to  desire  Him  yet  more,
and  because  of  this  my  desire  and  the  weariness  of  waiting
am  I  plunged  into  mortal  pain,  but  in  this  vision  is  my
soul  uplifted  and  consoled  by  the  most  sweet  God,  to
whom  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.


EIGHTH  VISION  AND  CONSOLATION,  WHEREIN  SHE  BE
HELD  GOD  AS  CLEARLY  AS  IS  POSSIBLE  IN  THIS  LIFE,
IN  THE  WHICH  VISION  SHE  ACQUIRED  STRENGTH  IN
GOOD  INTENTIONS  AND  IN  THE  PERFECT  DELIGHT
IN  GOD

BEING  thus  exalted  in  spirit  during  the  time  of  Lent,
therefore,  I  was  joined  with  God  in  a  manner  other  than
was  customary  for  me.  Methought  I  was  in  the  midst
of  the  Trinity,  in  a  manner  higher  and  greater  than  was
usual,  for  greater  than  usual  were  the  blessings  I  re
ceived,  and  continually  were  there  given  unto  me  gifts
full  of  delight,  and  rejoicing  most  great  and  unspeakable.
All  this  was  so  far  beyond  anything  which  had  heretofore
happened  unto  me  that  verily  a  divine  change  took  place
in  my  soul,  which  neither  saint  nor  angel  could  describe


OF  FOLIGNO  187

or  explain.  This  divine  change,  or  operation,  was  so
profound  that  no  angel  or  other  creature,  howsoever
wise,  could  comprehend  it,  wherefore  do  I  say  again
that  it  seemeth  unto  me  to  be  evil-speaking  and  blas
phemy  if  I  do  try  to  tell  of  it.

Here  am  I  drawn  forth  put  of  all  things  wherein  I  did
formerly  take  delight,  such  as  the  life  and  humanity  of
Christ  and  the  consideration  of  those  most  deep  com
panions  whom  God  had  greatly  loved  from  all  eternity
and  had  given  unto  His  Son.  Likewise  did  He  draw  me
forth  from  the  aforesaid  delight,  that  is  to  say,  the
poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt  borne  by  His  Son
(wherein  I  was  accustomed  to  find  my  repose  and  my
bed)  ;  also  was  I  withdrawn  from  that  darkness,  in  the
vision  of  which  I  had  so  greatly  rejoiced.  And  finally
I  was  drawn  out  of  all  former  states  with  so  much  unction
and  in  sleep,  that  I  could  in  no  wise  comprehend  it,  and
do  only  know  that  now  I  have  not  those  things.

In  these  divine  benefits  and  operations  which  were
accomplished  in  my  soul,  God  did  first  present  Himself
unto  it  thus  ineffably  in  His  works  ;  then  did  He  manifest
and  reveal  Himself  fully  unto  the  soul,  bestowing  upon  it
great  gifts,  with  indescribable  clearness  and  certainty.
-  There  are  two  ways  wherein  God  showeth  Himself
unto  the  soul.  One  way  is  when  He  showeth  Himself  in
timately,  and  it  doth  then  know  Him  to  be  present,  as
He  is  present  in  every  creature  and  in  everything  that
hath  being  ;  as  much  in  demons  as  in  good  angels,  in


i88  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

hell  as  in  Paradise,  in  adultery  and  murder,  in  all  good
works,  and  in  all  things  which  exist,  both  beauteous  and
ill-favoured.  When  I  have  this  unity,  therefore,  I  do
rejoice  in  God  no  less  when  I  see  a  bad  angel,  and  an  evil
deed  than  when  I  see  a  good  angel  or  deed  ;  and  in  this
manner  doth  He  most  often  present  Himself  unto  my  soul.
And  this  presentation  doth  bring  enlightenment,  with
great  truth  and  divine  grace,  so  that  when  the  soul
beholdeth  this  it  cannot  offend  in  any  way.

Moreover,  this  enlightenment  bringeth  many  divine
benefits  unto  the  soul ;  for  example,  when  it  becometh
aware  that  God  is  already  present  it  doth  deeply  humble
itself  and  is  confused  by  reason  of  its  sins.  Also  it  re-
ceiveth  much  wisdom  and  divine  consolation  with  great

joy-
God  showeth  Himself  in  another  and  more  special
manner,  very  different  from  the  foregoing,  which  like
wise  giveth  joy,  but  different  from  the  former  joy.  For
here  He  draweth  all  the  soul  unto  Himself  and  worketh
many  divine  things  in  it,  with  much  greater  grace  and
an  unspeakable  depth  of  joy  and  enlightenment ;  so  that,
without  any  other  gifts,  this  presentation  of  God  is  the
blessing  possessed  by  saints  in  the  life  eternal.

Of  the  gifts  received  by  saints  in  the  life  eternal,  how
ever,  some  have  more  and  some  less.  But  of  these  it  is
impossible  to  speak,  as  I  have  already  said,  because  my
words  are  so  feeble  that  they  do  deface  and  blaspheme
rather  than  justly  describe.  I  will  only  say  that  amongst


OF  FOLIGNO  189

these  gifts  is  the  enlargement  of  the  mind,  whereby  it
becometh  more  capable  of  understanding  and  knowing
God  ;  for  when  He  presenteth  Himself  unto  the  soul
He  doth  reveal  and  make  Himself  manifest,  and  doth
thus  enlarge  it  to  receive  gifts  and  sweetness  never  known
before  and  greater  and  deeper  than  hath  been  described.

Unto  the  soul  (now  drawn  forth  out  of  all  darkness)
is  then  vouchsafed  the  utmost  knowledge  of  God  which
I  do  think  could  be  granted.  And  it  is  given  with  so
much  clearness,  sweetness,  and  certainty,  and  hath  such
depth,  that  the  human  heart  cannot  attain  unto  it,  nor
can  my  heart  ever  return  again  to  the  understanding
and  knowledge  thereof,  or  to  the  imagining  of  aught
regarding  it,  saving  only  when  the  supreme  God  doth
vouchsafe  unto  the  soul  to  be  exalted  even  unto  that
which  the  heart  can  no  more  reach.  Therefore  is  it  not
possible  to  say  anything  whatsoever  concerning  it,  or  to
find  words  wherewith  to  express  it ;  neither  can  the
imagination  or  the  understanding  in  any  way  reach  unto
it,  so  immeasurably  doth  it  exceed  all  things.

Thus  do  we  perceive  that  by  nothing  that  we  can
think  or  say  can  God  be  exalted.  The  Holy  Scriptures
are  so  far  above  us  that  no  man— be  he  the  wisest  in  all
the  world  and  possessing  all  the  knowledge  it  is  possible
to  have  in  this  life — can  fully  and  perfectly  know  and
understand  them ;  there  is  none  whose  intelligence
would  not  be  always  overcome  by  them.

Of  these  most  excellent  and  divine  workings  in  the


190  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

soul  whereby  God  doth  manifest  Himself,  can  man  in
no  wise  speak  or  even  stammer.  But  inasmuch  as  my
soul  is  ofttimes  uplifted  to  know  the  divine  secrets,  I  do
understand  wherefore  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  written,
what  they  do  appear  to  affirm  and  deny,  that  which  is
easy  and  that  which  is  difficult,  and  why  some  derive  no
profit  from  them,  and  why  those  who  do  not  observe
them  are  condemned  and  those  who  do  observe  them
are  saved  by  them.  Thus  have  I  an  advantage  in  know
ing  these  things,  and  after  learning  the  secrets  of  God  I
can  speak  some  few  words  with  certainty  ;  yet  are  my
words  outside  of  those  divine  and  ineffable  workings,  and
in  no  way  do  they  approach  nigh  unto  them,  but  rather
do  they  spoil  and  blaspheme,  as  I  have  always  said.

Therefore  do  I  say  that  if  all  divine  consolations,  all
spiritual  joys,  all  heavenly  delights  which  ever  were  in
this  world — if  all  the  saints  who  have  lived  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  until  now  were  to  expound  and
show  forth  God,  if  all  the  worldly  delights,  both  good
and  evil,  which  ever  existed  were  all  to  be  converted  into
one  good  and  spiritual  joy  which  should  endure  until  I
were  made  perfect,  I  would  not,  even  that  I  might  ob
tain  all  this,  give  or  exchange  even  for  the  space  of  the
twinkling  of  an  eye  that  joy  which  I  have  in  the  un
speakable  manifestation  of  God.

These  things  have  I  spoken  that  I  might  in  some  way
instil  into  the  hearts  of  men  the  conviction  that  this
unspeakable  blessing  is  infinitely  above  all  those  aforesaid


OF  FOLIGNO  191

things.  And  I  possess  it  not  only  for  the  space  of  the
opening  and  shutting  of  an  eye,  but  ofttimes  for  a  good
while.  In  that  way  do  I  have  it  with  much  effect,  but
in  another  way — that  is  to  say,  with  less  effect — do  I
have  it  almost  continually.  And  albeit  I  do  feel  a  little
of  both  grief  and  joy  from  without,  yet  within  my  soul
there  is  a  chamber  into  which  there  entereth  no  sort  of
grief  or  joy  of  any  virtue  whatsoever,  nor  anything  that
can  be  named  or  expressed.  But  into  it  there  entereth
that  greatest  Good,  and  in  that  manifestation  of  God
(which  I  do  blaspheme  in  thus  naming  it,  seeing  that  I
have  no  word  wherewith  to  speak  of  it  perfectly)  lieth
the  whole  truth.

In  Him,  therefore,  do  I  understand  and  possess  all
truth  that  is  in  heaven  and  earth  and  hell,  and  in  all
creatures ;  and  so  great  is  the  truth  and  the  certainty
that  were  the  whole  world  to  declare  the  contrary  I
would  not  believe  it,  yea,  I  should  mock  at  it.  For  I
behold  Him  who  is  everything ;  I  perceive  how  surely
in  Him  are  all  created  things ;  I  likewise  perceive  how
that  He  hath  made  me  capable  of  perfectly  understanding
the  aforesaid  matters  in  a  way  better  than  there  had  been
until  I  saw  in  that  great  darkness  wherein  I  did  so  re
joice.  For  I  do  behold  myself  thus  alone  with  God,
wholly  clean,  wholly  pure,  wholly  sanctified,  wholly  up
right,  wholly  assured,  and  wholly  celestial  in  Him,  and
when  I  am  in  this  state  I  do  remember  naught  else.

Once  when  I  was  in  that  state,  the  most  high  God


192  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

spake  thus  unto  me :  "  Daughter  of  divine  wisdom,
perfect  temple  of  delight,  joy  of  joys ;  daughter  of
true  peace,  in  thee  reposeth  the  Holy  Trinity  and
the  whole  truth,  and  thus  thou  holdest  Me  and  I  hold
thee."

One  of  the  operations  of  the  soul  vouchsafed  unto  it
by  our  Lord  God  is  that  with  great  rejoicing  I  do  most
fully  understand  how  God  entereth  into  the  most  holy
Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  together  with  that  most  high
and  noble  company.  But  when  I  remain  outside  of  that
state  I  do  perceive  myself  to  be  full  of  sin,  obedient  unto
sinfulness,  unjust,  unclean,  wholly  false  and  earthly.
Nevertheless,  I  do  stay  quiet,  having  in  me  a  divine  and
constant  unction,  above  all  which  I  have  ever  felt  in  all
my  days.

I  came  not  unto  that  aforesaid  state  of  mine  own  self,
but  I  was  led  and  drawn  thereunto  by  God  ;  so  that,
albeit  of  mine  own  self  I  should  not  have  known  how  to
desire  or  ask  for  it,  I  am  now  in  that  state  continually.
Ofttimes  is  my  soul  uplifted  of  God  without  my  will  or
consent,  and  when  I  am  not  hoping  or  thinking  to  re
ceive  aught  from  Him,  my  soul  is  suddenly  exalted  and
dominated  by  Him.  And  when  thus  exalted  I  under
stand  the  whole  world  and  do  believe  myself  in  heaven
with  God  instead  of  upon  the  earth.  This  state  is  far
more  excellent  than  any  other  I  have  experienced  ;  it
is  so  full  of  satisfaction,  so  clear,  ennobling,  and  enlarging
that  I  never  felt  any  other  state  approaching  unto  it.


OF  FOLIGNO  193

This  manifestation  of  God  have  I  experienced  more
than  a  thousand  times,  and  each  one  was  different  from
the  others.  Thus  once  at  the  Feast  of  Saint  Mary  at
Candlemas  I  did  have  that  unspeakable  manifestation  of
God,  and  whiles  that  it  was  being  revealed  unto  the
soul,  the  soul  did  behold  a  representation  of  itself ;  and
it  beheld  itself  more  noble  and  high  than  it  could  possibly
imagine  or  understand,  and  I  could  not  otherwise  have
believed  that  either  mine  own  soul  or  the  souls  of  those
in  Paradise  could  be  of  such  nobility.  For  my  soul  did
then  behold  itself  in  such  wise  that  it  could  not  under
stand  itself.  If,  therefore,  the  soul  which  is  finite  and
circumscribed  could  not  comprehend  its  own  self,  how
much  less  could  it  comprehend  its  Creator  who  is  im
mense,  infinite,  and  boundless  ?

Then  did  my  soul  present  itself  before  God  with  the
utmost  assurance  ;  it  had  no  fear  whatsoever,  but  it
went  into  God's  presence  with  the  greatest  joy  it  had
ever  felt,  with  a  new  and  most  excellent  pleasure,  in  a
manner  so  miraculous,  so  new  and  clear  that  my  own
soul  could  never  have  understood  such  a  thing.  At  this
meeting  of  my  soul  with  God  (when  I  saw  and  under
stood  the  aforesaid  unspeakable  manifestation  of  God),
the  most  high  God  spake  unto  me  certain  words  which  I  / -
do  not  desire  should  be  written  down  ;  and  when  the
soul  returned  unto  itself,  it  found  and  retained  within
itself  the  consciousness  that  it  could  endure  all  suffering
and  torment  for  God's  sake,  and  that  by  nothing  whatso-


i94  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

ever  that  could  be  done  or  said  could  it  henceforth  be
separated  from  God.

Then  did  my  soul  exclaim  and  say,  "  Oh,  most  sweet
Lord,  who  can  separate  me  from  Thee  ? "  and  I  heard  a
voice  make  answer  that  nothing  could  separate  me  from
Him  because  of  His  grace.

All  these  things  did  I  hear  spoken  by  God  in  a  manner
more  wondrous  than  I  can  describe.  It  was  likewise
told  me  that  the  aforesaid  unspeakable  manifestation  of
God  is  that  Good  enjoyed  by  the  saints  in  the  life  eternal,
and  that  this  Good  is  naught  else  save  this,  but  otherwise
experienced  and  so  different  from  the  other  that  the
lowest  of  the  saints  who  hath  the  least  in  the  life  eternal
hath  yet  more  than  can  be  given  unto  any  soul  before  the
death  of  the  body.

This  is  what  my  soul  hath  understood  in  that  marvellous
manifestation  of  God.


NINTH    VISION,   WHEREIN   IT   WAS  CERTIFIED  UNTO   HER
THAT    IN    HER   VISIONS    AND    HEAVENLY    CONVERSATIONS
SHE    HAD    NOT    BEEN    DECEIVED

UPON  a  certain  occasion,  at  the  Feast  of  the  Blessed
Virgin  Mary,  some  little  while  after  my  conversion,  I  did
pray  the  Blessed  Virgin  that  she  would  implore  her  Son
to  grant  me  grace  whereby  I  might  know  that  I  had  not


OF  FOLIGNO  195

been  deceived  in  the  conversations  which  had  been  held
with  me.  Then  came  unto  me  a  heavenly  voice  promising
me  that  my  request  should  be  granted,  and  saying  fur
ther  :  "  God  hath  shown  Himself  unto  thee,  hath  spoken
with  thee,  and  hath  endowed  thee  with  understanding
of  Himself ;  take  heed,  therefore,  that  thou  neither
speakest,  beholdest,  nor  hearkenest  unto  anything  what
soever  save  according  unto  His  will."  I  perceived  that
these  things  were  said  unto  me  with  much  discretion  and
ripe  wisdom.  The  aforesaid  conversations  had  left  me
with  great  joy  and  the  hope  of  obtaining  that  for  which
I  had  asked,  and  the  foregoing  words  did,  moreover,
tell  me  that  God  would  grant  the  grace  that  everything
I  did  should  be  done  with  His  permission.

I  began,  therefore,  to  do  the  three  things  which  had
been  told  unto  me.  Accordingly  my  heart  was  uplifted
from  all  things  earthly  and  fixed  on  God.  And  nothing
that  I  did,  or  ate,  or  spake  prevented  my  heart  from
being  always  fixed  on  God  ;  neither  could  I  see,  or
think,  or  feel,  save  according  unto  God's  will.  When  I
had  been  engaged  in  prayer  and  desired  to  go  and  eat
and  drink,  I  did  humbly  ask  permission,  and  He  answered,
"  Go  and  eat  with  the  blessing  of  the  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Spirit."  And  thus  did  He  give  me  permission,
sometimes  immediately  and  sometimes  later.

This  lasted  three  days  and  three  nights.  Finally  I  be
held  God  in  spirit  during  Mass,  at  about  the  time  of  the
elevation  of  the  Bodv  of  Christ.  After  this  vision  there


196  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

remained  unto  me  an  indescribable  sweetness  and  great
joy,  which  I  do  think  will  never  fail  me  all  the  days  of
my  life.  And  in  this  vision  was  I  assured  of  all  that  I
had  asked  ;  there  remained  unto  me  no  doubt  whatsoever^
but  I  was  fully  satisfied  and  persuaded  that  I  had  not
been  deceived  in  the  foregoing  conversations.


TENTH    VISION    AND    CONSOLATION,    WHEREIN    IT   WAS

FURTHER    CERTIFIED    UNTO    HER    THAT   SHE    HAD    NOT

BEEN    DECEIVED    IN    HER    CONVERSATIONS

UPON  another  occasion  whilst  I  was  at  prayer,  ex
ceeding  pleasant  words  were  spoken  unto  me  after  this
manner :

"  Oh  my  daughter,  who  art  far  sweeter  unto  Me  than
I  am  unto  thee  ;  thou  art  the  temple  of  My  delight,  and
the  heart  of  the  Omnipotent  God  resteth  upon  thy
heart."

Together  with  these  words  there  came  upon  me  a  feel
ing  of  the  utmost  joy,  such  as  I  had  never  before  ex
perienced,  inasmuch  as  all  the  members  of  my  body  felt
it.  And  as  I  did  prostrate  myself  at  these  words,  it  was
further  told  me :

"  The  Omnipotent  God  loveth  thee  more  dearly  than
any  other  woman  of  this  city.  He  rejoiceth  in  thee  and
in  thy  companion.  Do  ye  both  strive,  therefore,  that
your  lives  be  as  a  light  unto  all  who  desire  to  follow  your


OF  FOLIGNO  197

example  ;  but  unto  those  who  follow  you  not,  shall  your
lives  be  as  a  judgment  strict  and  hard."

My  soul  did  here  understand  that  this  cruel  judgment
was  pronounced  against  the  learned  rather  than  against
the  laity,  because  they  do  despise  these  heavenly  things
by  reason  of  knowing  them  in  the  Scriptures.  Yet  was
I  told  that  so  great  was  the  love  which  Almighty  God
bare  unto  us  that  He  was  continually  with  us,  albeit  not
with  these  feelings.  And  I  was  told  that  His  eyes  were
now  upon  us ;  whereupon  methought  that  I  beheld  His
divine  eyes  with  the  eyes  of  my  mind,  and  I  rejoiced
more  than  I  can  say.  Nevertheless,  I  do  grieve  because
the  words  we  are  now  saying  are  so  unworthy.

Albeit  I  had  great  joy  of  this  matter,  yet  did  I  re
member  my  sins  and  I  did  esteem  that  neither  now  or
at  any  time  had  there  been  in  me  any  good  which  might
be  pleasing  unto  God.  Wherefore  began  I  to  doubt,
seeing  that  great  things  had  been  spoken  unto  me  ;  and
I  said  :

"  If  Thou  who  speakest  unto  me  wert  truly  the  Son
of  Almighty  God,  my  soul  would  feel  a  joy  higher  and
greater  than  this,  and  I  should  not  be  able  to  bear  it,
feeling  that  Thou  wert  in  me,  who  am  so  unworthy."

Unto  this  He  made  answer,  "  I  desire  not  that  thou
shouldst  have  a  greater  or  more  perfect  joy  than  this  at
the  present  time,  but  I  have  prepared  a  greater  one  for
thee.  Thou  must  know  that  the  whole  world  is  full
of  Me."


198  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

And  verily  I  did  then  perceive  that  every  creature  was
full  of  Him.  Again  He  spake  unto  me,  saying,  "  I  can
do  all  things,  I  can  make  thee  to  see  Me  as  when  I  talked
with  My  disciples  and  yet  to  feel  Me  not."

This  was  not  said  unto  me  in  actual  words,  but  my
soul  comprehended  that  which  He  said,  and  many  things
greater  still,  and  thus  it  felt  them  to  be  true.  Yet  in
order  to  be  clear  whether  that  which  was  said  was  verily
true,  my  soul  cried  :

"  Forasmuch  as  Thou  art  Almighty  God  and  the
things  Thou  tellest  me  are  true,  give  Thou  me  a  sign
whereby  I  may  be  sure  thereof,  and  release  me  from  this
great  doubt."

Then  I  besought  Him  that  He  would  give  me  some
tangible  sign,  something  which  I  could  see  ;  such  as
putting  a  candle  into  my  hand,  or  a  precious  stone,  or
some  other  thing,  or  that  He  would  give  me  any  sign
He  pleased,  promising  Him  that  I  would  show  it  unto
no  person  save  unto  whom  He  should  desire.  Then  He
replied  :

"  This  sign  that  thou  seekest  is  one  that  would  only
give  thee  great  joy  when  thou  didst  behold  or  touch  it,
but  it  would  not  free  thee  from  doubt,  and  thou  mightest
be  deceived  by  that  sign.  Therefore  will  I  give  thee
another  sign,  better  than  the  one  thou  seekest,  and  which
will  be  for  ever  with  thee,  and  in  thy  soul  thou  shalt
always  feel  it.  The  sign  shall  be  this  :  thou  shalt  be  ever
fervent  in  love,  and  the  love  and  the  enlightened  know-


OF  FOLIGNO  199

ledge  of  God  shall  be  ever  with  thee  and  in  thee.  This
shall  be  a  certain  sign  unto  thee  that  I  am  He,  because
none  save  I  can  do  this.  And  this  is  a  sign  which  I  will
leave  in  thy  soul,  the  which  is  better  for  thee  than  that
which  thou  didst  ask  of  Me.  My  love  do  I  leave  in  thee,
so  that  for  love  of  Me  thou  wilt  endure  tribulations,
and  if  any  person  speak  or  do  evil  unto  thee  thou  wilt  be
grateful,  declaring  thyself  unworthy  of  so  much  mercy.
Such  is  the  love  which  I  bare  unto  you  all,  for  whose
sake  I  patiently  and  humbly  endured  all  things.  Thus
thou  shalt  know  whether  or  not  I  am  in  thee  if,  when  any
person  shall  speak  or  do  evil  unto  thee,  thou  art  not  only
patient,  but  even  desirous  that  they  should  hurt  thee
and  be  grateful  unto  them.  And  this  is  a  certain  sign  of
the  grace  of  God.  And  behold,  1  do  now  anoint  thee
with  an  ointment  wherewith  a  saint  called  Siricus  and
many  other  saints  were  anointed."

Then  did  I  immediately  feel  that  ointment,  and  so
sweet  was  it  that  I  longed  for  death,  and  that  I  might
die  with  all  manner  of  bodily  torments.  The  torments
suffered  by  the  martyrs  who  had  died  for  Christ  did  I
esteem  as  naught,  and  I  desired  that  for  love  of  Him  my
torments  should  be  more  terrible  than  theirs,  and  that
the  world  should  cry  out  upon  me  with  insults  and  re-
vilings.

Moreover,  I  rejoiced  greatly  in  praying  for  those  who
might  work  me  these  evils,  and  I  marvelled  not  at  the
saints  who  prayed  for  their  murderers  and  persecutors ;


200  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

for  not  only  ought  we  to  pray  unto  God  for  them,  but
we  should  beseech  Him  to  grant  them  especial  grace.
Therefore  was  I  very  ready  to  pray  for  those  who  did  me
evil,  to  love  them  with  a  great  love,  and  to  take  com
passion  upon  them.  In  that  anointing  I  did  feel  such
sweetness  both  within  and  without  that  I  never  felt  the
like  before,  and  I  have  no  words  wherewith  I  can  show
forth  the  least  part  of  it.

This  consolation  was  different,  and  of  a  nature  unlike
the  others.  For  in  the  others  I  had  desired  immediately
to  quit  this  world,  but  in  this  my  desire  was  that  my
death  should  be  grievous  and  prolonged,  with  all  manner
of  torments,  and  that  my  members  should  suffer  all  the
tortures  of  the  world.  Yet  all  this  seemed  but  a  small
thing  unto  me,  for  my  soul  knew  well  that  every  torment
was  but  a  small  thing  in  comparison  with  the  blessings
promised  in  the  life  eternal.  My  soul  knew  of  a  certainty
that  it  was  thus,  and  if  all  the  wise  men  of  the  world  had
told  me  the  contrary,  I  should  not  have  believed  them.
And  if  I  should  swear  that  all  who  walked  upon  the  afore
said  way  would  be  saved,  I  should  believe  that  I  spake
the  truth.

This  sign  did  God  leave  so  firmly  implanted  in  my
soul,  with  so  bright  and  clear  a  light,  that  methinketh
I  could  endure  any  martyrdom.  This  sign,  moreover,
leadeth  continually  upon  the  straight  way  of  salvation,
that  is  to  say,  it  leadeth  unto  love  and  the  desire  to  suffer
for  love  of  God.


OF  FOLIGNO  201

Moreover,  I  heard  the  words  which  God  spake  unto
me,  saying,  "  At  the  end  of  these  things  shalt  thou  cause
to  be  written,  *  Unto  God  be  the  thanks,'  and  whoso
desireth  to  keep  the  grace  which  he  hath  shall  not  turn
his  eyes  away  from  the  Cross,  whether  it  be  joy  or  sorrow
that  I  do  send  upon  him."

All  these  aforesaid  things  concerning  this  sign  did  my
soul  comprehend  much  more  fully  than  I  can  explain,
and  with  a  completeness  whereby  I  was  enabled  to  under
stand  many  more  things  than  I  have  told  here.  My  love
and  joy  wras  so  great  that  I  can  in  no  wise  express  it,  and
may  God  not  impute  it  unto  me  for  a  sin  that  I  have
related  all  this  with  so  many  faults  and  shortcomings.


HERE     BEGIN     THE     CONSOLATIONS    WHICH     SHE

DID     HAVE     WHEN     THINKING      UPON

THE    PASSION    OF    CHRIST

FIRST    CONSOLATION    OF   THE    PASSION    OF    CHRIST

As  I  was  once  meditating  upon  the  Passion  and  poverty
of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  Christ  appeared  unto  me
and  showed  unto  me  His  great  poverty,  the  which  He
was  minded  to  put  into  my  heart  in  order  that  I  might
clearly  see  it  and  diligently  reflect  upon  it.  I  likewise
beheld  those  for  whose  sakes  He  had  become  poor,  and
for  them  I  felt  such  great  grief  and  aversion  that  my
heart  did  almost  fail  me.


202  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

After  this,  He  did  show  His  Passion  unto  me  more  fully.
Then  I  beheld  Him  poor  of  kindred  and  of  friends,  and
moreover  so  poor  of  Himself  that,  having  regard  unto
His  humanity,  He  was  not  able  to  help  Himself.

Again  after  this  it  pleased  Him  to  make  me  under
stand  more  things  concerning  His  Passion  than  I  had  ever
hitherto  heard  related.  Then  did  1  understand  how  in
His  Passion  Christ  saw  that  the  hearts  of  those  wicked
and  obstinate  men  were  all  turned  against  Him  ;  He  saw
how  all  the  members  carefully  destroyed  His  name,  and
how  they  used  great  attention  and  diligence  to  destroy
it  speedily ;  He  saw  the  subtlety,  the  cunning  machina
tions  with  which  they  conspired  against  Him,  and  He
saw  their  evil  designs,  their  slanders,  rage,  and  fury,  and
the  plans  and  preparations  which  they  had  made  in  order
that  they  might  most  cruelly  afflict  Him.  Of  a  certainty,
the  cruelty  of  the  Passion  was  very  great,  inasmuch  as
He  foresaw  all  the  pain,  the  injury  and  shame.

My  soul  beheld  far  more  of  the  Passion  than  I  have
will  to  say,  yea,  rather  will  I  keep  silence.  Therefore
did  my  soul  then  cry  aloud,  saying  :

"  Holy  Mary,  mother  of  Him  who  is  thus  afflicted,
give  me  something  of  this  Passion  of  the  Son  of  God,  for
thou  hast  seen  more  of  it  than  hath  any  other  saint.  Thou
hast  seen  Him  with  the  eyes  both  of  thy  body  and  thy
mind,  and  most  intently  hast  thou  observed  Him,  because
thou  hast  loved  Him  more  than  all."  And  my  soul
cried  again,  saying,  "  Is  there  here  any  saint  who  can  tell


OF  FOLIGNO  203

me  aught  concerning  this  Passion,  of  which  I  do  hear
nothing  spoken,  nor  any  mention  made,  in  the  manner
in  which  my  soul  hath  seen  it  ?  For  so  great  is  it  that
I  myself  cannot  describe  it.  My  soul  hath  seen  the
Passion  of  Christ  to  be  so  great  that,  even  if  Saint  Mary
saw  it  in  many  respects  more  plainly  than  did  any  other
saint,  not  even  she — and  far  less  any  other — could  de
scribe  it.  And  if  there  be  any  who  can  describe  it,
methinketh  it  is  Thou  who  hast  borne  it."

When  I  had  thus  seen  the  Passion  of  the  Son  of  God,
I  fell  into  a  much  greater  grief  than  ever  before,  and  if
my  heart  had  failed  me  then  it  would  have  been  no
marvel,  for  when  I  do  even  now  remember  me  of  these
things  I  begin  to  grieve,  seeing  that  I  have  lost  that
strength  of  mind  which  did  formerly  keep  me  joyful,
wherefore  for  a  long  time  have  I  felt  no  joy.


SECOND    CONSOLATION    OF   THE    PASSION    OF    CHRIST

ANOTHER  time  there  were  shown  unto  me  the  bitter
suffering  in  the  soul  of  Christ,  the  which  was  so  awful
that  heart  cannot  imagine  nor  tongue  describe  it.  And
forasmuch  as  I  beheld  such  suffering  in  the  Virgin's
Son,  my  soul  was  most  grievously  afflicted  and  my  own
suffering  was  greater  than  I  had  ever  felt  before.

Seeing  how  that  I  could  find  no  ease  or  joy  in  this
meditation,    my    soul    did    perceive    many    causes    and


204  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

reasons  for  that  bitter  suffering.  Firstly,  because  that
soul  was  most  holy  and  entirely  without  sin,  for  which
reason  it  deserved  no  punishment  whatsoever.  Then,
because  He  endured  it  for  love  of  us,  and  we,  ungrateful,
hostile,  and  unworthy,  did  despise  and  mock  at  Him  even
whilst  He  was  redeeming  us  through  His  Passion.  Then,
because  the  sin  of  those  who  crucified  Him  was  exceeding
great,  and  that  Soul  which  did  hate  and  utterly  abhor
all  sin  grieved  more  over  this  than  over  any  other  sin.
There  were,  moreover,  many  persons  who  committed
this  sin,  because  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  who  were
gathered  together  for  the  Feast  did  conspire  against  Him,
causing  Him  the  utmost  grief.  Also  because  of  the  deep
malice  and  wickedness  of  His  adversaries,  whose  whole
endeavour  was  to  destroy  Him,  His  memory,  and  His
name,  and  also  His  elect  disciples.  He  suffered  likewise
because  He  had  compassion  upon  those  disciples  who
fell  from  faith,  and  He  endured  persecution  for  their
sakes.  He  suffered  likewise  because  He  had  compassion
upon  His  most  unhappy  mother,  and  because  He  found
Himself  in  great  trouble  without  any  help  or  consola
tion.  And  finally,  He  suffered  above  all  things  because
that  most  noble  soul  was  dolefully  assailed  upon  every
side  ;  every  person  was  unto  Him  a  cause  of  grief  ;  His
Soul  felt  pain  and  anguish  from  all  the  pain  and  anguish
inflicted  upon  that  most  holy,  virginal,  and  delicate  Body.
And  all  these  things  together  were  laid  upon  that  one
most  holy  Soul.


OF  FOLIGNO  205

Many  other  things  were  clearly  set  forth  unto  me,  but
I  neither  can  nor  will  relate  them.

Drawn  forth  out  of  myself,  therefore,  I  was  trans
formed  in  the  suffering  of  the  Crucified,  and  the  divine
mercy  did  vouchsafe  these  things  unto  me  :  Firstly,  that
my  will  was  so  straitened  that  I  could  desire  nothing
save  what  He  permitted.  Secondly,  that  He  hath  placed
within  my  soul  a  state  which  changeth  but  little  and
I  possess  God  in  such  fulness  that  I  am  no  longer  in
that  state  wherein  I  was  wont  to  be,  but  I  do  walk  in
such  perfect  peace  of  heart  and  mind  that  I  am  con
tented  with  all  things.


THIRD    CONSOLATION    OF    THE    PASSION    OF    CHRIST

I  WAS  meditating  one  time  upon  the  great  sufferings
borne  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  upon  the  Cross,  and
more  especially  upon  the  nails,  which  I  did  hear  were  of
such  a  sort  that  they  had  driven  the  flesh  of  the  hands
and  feet  into  the  wood  ;  and  I  desired  to  behold  those
little  pieces  of  flesh  which  the  nails  had  so  violently
driven  into  the  wood.

Then  did  I  feel  such  great  pain  because  of  Christ's
pain  that  I  conld  not  stand  upon  my  feet,  but  I  bent
mine  head  and  sat  me  down  on  the  ground  ;  and  I
beheld  Christ,  who  inclined  His  head  upon  mine  arms
which  I  had  stretched  out  upon  the  ground.  Then  He


206  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

showed  unto  me  His  throat  and  His  arms,  whereupon
my  grief  was  instantly  changed  into  joy  so  great  and  so
different  from  all  other  joys  that  I  neither  saw  nor  felt
aught  else  ;  for  the  beauty  of  that  throat  was  a  thing
most  great  and  ineffable.  Then  I  understood  that  His
beauty  proceeded  from  His  divinity.

Naught  else  did  He  show  me  saving  that  most  comely
and  gracious  throat,  the  beauty  whereof  cannot  be
likened  unto  any  thing  or  any  colour  in  the  world,  save
only  unto  the  clearness  of  Christ's  body,  which  I  do
sometimes  behold  when  it  is  raised  on  high  at  the
elevation.


FOURTH    CONSOLATION    OF   THE    PASSION    OF   CHRIST

UPON  the  fourth  day  of  the  great  week  I  was  meditating
with  grief  upon  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  striving  to
empty  my  mind  of  all  other  things  in  order  that  my  soul
might  be  the  more  absorbed  in  this  Passion  and  Death.

Being,  therefore,  wholly  occupied  with  the  endeavour
and  desire  to  cast  out  every  other  matter  from  my  mind
in  order  that  I  might  the  more  speedily  and  completely
think  only  upon  this,  I  heard  the  divine  voice  saying
within  my  soul,  "  My  love  for  thee  was  no  deceit."  This
word  was  as  a  shock  of  mortal  pain  unto  my  soul,  for  the
eyes  of  my  mind  were  instantly  opened,  and  I  saw  that
what  He  said  was  very  true.  I  saw  the  working  and


OF  FOLIGNO  207

effect  of  that  delight ;  I  saw  all  that  the  Son  of  God  had
done  for  the  sake  of  this  love,  and  I  saw  what  Christ  Cruci
fied  had  borne  in  life  and  in  death  for  the  sake  of  this
deep  and  unspeakable  love.  Wherefore  did  I  understand
that  it  was  indeed  true  that  His  love  for  me  had  been
no  deceit  or  jest,  but  love  most  perfect  and  profound.
Then  did  I  perceive  just  the  opposite  in  myself,  that  is
to  say,  I  knew  that  I  loved  Him  deceitfully  and  not
truly.  For  this  reason  did  I  suffer  such  mortal  pain  and
intolerable  grief  that  methought  I  was  about  to  die.

Then  were  other  words  spoken  unto  me,  which  did
make  mine  anguish  greater  still ;  and  the  words  were
these  :

"  Again  I  say  unto  thee,  My  love  for  thee  was  no
deceit,  My  service  of  thee  was  not  feigned,  nor  was  My
feeling  for  thee  one  of  enlargement."

Then  cried  my  soul,  saying,  "  Oh  Master,  that  which
Thou  sayest  is  not  in  Thee,  is  wholly  in  me  ;  for  never
have  I  loved  Thee  saving  deceitfully.  I  have  served  Thee
with  lies  and  I  have  never  desired  to  draw  nigh  unto  Thee
in  very  truth  for  fear  lest  I  might  feel  those  burdens
which  Thou  didst  feel  and  bear  for  my  sake.  Wherefore
have  I  never  served  Thee  sincerely  and  for  Thine  own
sake,  but  with  negligence  and  duplicity."

Now  when  I  perceived  how  that  He  had  loved  me
sincerely,  how  that  He  bore  in  Him  all  the  signs  of  true
love,  and  how  that  He  had  drawn  nigh  unto  me  to  such
a  degree  that  He  was  become  Man  in  order  that  He


208  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

might  more  completely  bear  and  feel  in  Himself  all  our
sufferings,  I  did  feel  such  exceeding  great  anguish  that
my  ribs  seemed  disjointed  and  methought  mine  heart
would  burst  asunder.  Reflecting,  moreover,  upon  these
words,  "  My  feeling  for  thee  was  not  one  of  enlarge
ment,"  I  did  hear  Him  say  further  unto  me,  "  I  know
thy  soul  more  intimately  than  it  knoweth  itself,"  and
these  words  did  increase  mine  anguish,  inasmuch  as
the  more  I  perceived  how  intimately  God  did  know
me,  the  more  did  I  realise  that  I  myself  had  become
enlarged.

After  this  He  spake  certain  words  unto  me  which  did
manifest  and  show  forth  His  boundless  love,  saying :

"  If  there  were  any  person  who  desired  to  feel  Me  in
his  mind,  I  would  not  withdraw  Myself  from  him  ;  and
unto  whomsoever  did  desire  to  behold  Me  would  I
willingly  show  Myself,  and  with  whomsoever  did  desire
to  speak  unto  Me  would  I  joyfully  converse."

These  words  did  arouse  in  me  the  desire  never  to  feel
or  say  or  do  aught  which  should  offend  God.  And  this
is  what  God  desireth  and  especially  seeketh  in  His  sons
and  His  elect ;  for  He  hath  called  and  chosen  them  in
order  that  they  may  think,  see,  and  speak  according  unto
His  will,  and  that  they  may  take  heed  to  do  nothing  con
trary  thereunto.  Thus  was  it  set  forth  and  told  unto
me  :

"  Those  who  love  My  poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt
are  My  lawful  sons  and  Mine  elect,  whose  thoughts  are


OF  FOLIGNO  209

fixed  on  My  Passion  and  Death,  for  here  and  nowhere
else  is  found  salvation  and  true  life  for  all ;  wherefore
are  these  and  none  others  My  lawful  sons."


FIFTH    CONSOLATION    OF   THE    PASSION    OF   OUR   LORD

UPON  a  certain  occasion  when  I  was  in  the  church  of
the  Blessed  Francis,  and  it  was  nigh  unto  the  time  of
the  elevation  of  the  Body  of  our  Lord,  whilst  the  organ
was  playing  the  angelic  hymn,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  my
soul  was  caught  up  in  that  Light  uncreate,  and  therein
was  it  so  rapt  and  absorbed  in  a  manner  wholly  in
describable.

After  this  (I  being  still  in  the  first  rapture  and  attrac
tion),  there  appeared  unto  me  the  figure  of  the  Blessed
Christ  Crucified,  as  though  He  had  been  only  just  then
taken  down  from  the  Cross ;  His  blood  was  as  fresh  and
red  and  flowed  from  His  wounds  as  easily  as  though  it
had  only  that  instant  been  shed.  Moreover,  there
appeared  such  a  dissolution  of  all  the  members  of  that
blessed  body  that  the  sinews  and  joints  of  the  bones
seemed  unto  me  as  though  loosened  from  their  due
harmony— that  is  to  say,  from  their  proper  position  in
the  body ;  and  this  was  caused  by  the  hard  and  cruel
stretching  and  the  horrible  ill-treatment  of  those  virgin
limbs  at  the  hands  of  wicked  men  upon  the  torturing
Cross ;  nevertheless,  the  skin  was  nowhere  broken.


2io  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

At  this  sight  my  bowels  were  so  pierced  with  com
passion  that  verily  I  seemed  all  transformed  in  the  pain
of  the  Crucified,  both  bodily  and  mentally.  And  with
a  sharper  knife  still  was  I  pierced  at  the  sight  of  the  cruel
and  violent  dissolution  of  all  His  limbs,  where  methought
His  sinews  were  loosened  and  undone  and  His  bones  dis
placed  ;  and  so  likewise  at  the  sight  of  the  open  wounds,
for  in  these  did  I  behold  a  great  secret  of  the  Passion
and  of  the  hardness  and  cruelty  of  the  tortures  He  had
borne.

The  sight  of  the  crucified  body  of  the  good  and  be
loved  Jesus  did  awaken  such  great  compassion  that  in  all
my  inward  parts  and  my  bones  and  joints  did  I  feel  new
pain,  and  I  lamented  afresh  with  terrible  anguish.

As  I  stood  thus  absorbed  in  suffering  and  as  though
transformed  in  the  pains  of  the  Crucified,  I  heard  Him
speak  again  concerning  the  devout  persons  and  the  fol
lowers  of  His  Passion,  and  those  who  had  taken  com
passion  upon  Him.  I  heard  Him  give  thanks  unto  them
and  say :

"  Blessed  are  all  ye  of  my  Father,  who,  having  had
compassion  upon  Me  and  passed  through  tribulation
with  Me  and  followed  after  My  life,  have  merited  to
wash  your  robes  in  the  most  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb.
Blessed  are  ye  who  suffer  with  Me,  who  am  crucified
and  afflicted  with  boundless  suffering  in  order  that  I
may  offer  satisfaction  for  you  and  redeem  you  from
immense,  bitter,  and  endless  torments,  and  who  have


OF  FOLIGNO  211

rendered  yourselves  worthy  of  it  by  thus  bearing  with
Me  poverty,  suffering,  and  contempt.  Blessed  are  ye
who  shall  remember  and  be  pitiful  of  My  Passion,  which
is  the  Miracle  of  all  ages,  the  salvation  and  life  of  the
lost  and  the  sole  refuge  of  sinners — for  thereby  shall  ye
share  in  the  kingdom,  the  glory  and  the  resurrection
which  I  have  purchased  by  that  same  Passion,  and  ye
shall  verily  be  co-heirs  with  Me  for  ever  and  ever.
Blessed  are  ye  of  My  Father  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  yea,
verily  blessed,  and  ye  shall  therefore  have  the  blessing
which  I  shall  give  at  the  last  judgment,  inasmuch  as  ye
did  not  repulse  Me  when  I  came  unto  Mine  own  place,
as  did  My  persecutors,  but  of  your  compassion  did  re
ceive  Me  into  the  lodging  of  your  hearts  as  a  desolate
pilgrim  ;  when  I  hanged  naked  upon  the  Cross,  hungry,
thirsty,  and  sick,  and  pierced  by  nails,  ye  did  suffer  with
Me  in  My  death  and  desired  to  be  in  all  things  My
companions.  Herein  have  ye  verily  accomplished  the
works  of  mercy,  wherefore  in  the  last  dread  hour  ye
shall  hear  it  said, '  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the
world.'  Upon  the  Cross  I  did  hunger,  and  at  least  through
your  compassion  did  ye  give  Me  to  eat,"  and  then  He
added  most  marvellously  the  remainder  of  His  saying,
and  I  cannot  possibly  describe  the  burning  love  which
shone  upon  these  blessed  ones  from  the  eyes  of  that
blessed  Face  of  God  made  Man,  Jesus  Christ.

After  this  He  spake  again,  saying,  "  Oh  verily  and  in


212  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

all  ways  blessed  are  ye  ;  for  if  upon  the  Cross  I  did  pray
unto  My  Father  with  tears  and  cries  for  those  who
crucified  and  tormented  Me,  excusing  them  and  saying,
'  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do,'
what  shall  I  say  for  you,  who  have  had  compassion  upon
Me  and  have  been  My  faithful  companions,  when  I  shall
be  no  longer  upon  the  Cross,  but  judging  the  world  in
glory  and  happiness  ?  "

Thus  did  I  remain  unspeakably  consoled,  and  mine
affection  for  the  Passion  of  the  Son  of  God  was  greater
than  I  can  express.

And  many  other  words  spake  He,  more  than  I  can
know  or  declare,  all  of  which  did  kindle  my  love  and
inflame  it  unto  the  utmost.


SIXTH    CONSOLATION    OF   THE   PASSION    OF   OUR   LORD
JESUS    CHRIST

ANOTHER  time  when  I  was  praying  and  meditating  with
great  grief  and  compassion  in  mine  heart  upon  the
Passion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  did  bethink  me  over
and  over  again  of  how  great  was  the  iniquity  of  all  my
sins,  seeing  that  before  God  could  be  appeased  or  I  could
be  reconciled  unto  Him,  or  obtain  remission  of  those
sins,  it  was  needful  that  the  Son  of  God  should  not  only
pray  with  tears  and  supplication,  but  that  He  should  die
for  this  upon  the  Cross.


OF  FOLIGNO  213

I  reflected,  moreover,  upon  how  complete  must  be
the  damnation,  how  great  the  infinite  miseries  and
countless  torments  which  awaited  me  for  each  mortal
sin  which  I  had  committed,  if,  in  order  to  give  satisfac
tion  for  them,  it  was  needful  that  not  angel  or  archangel,
but  the  very  God,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  should
Himself  suffer  for  me  and  endure  the  misery  of  death  and
the  tortures  of  the  Cross.

I  did  likewise  reflect  upon  mine  ingratitude,  and
how  that  not  only  do  I  nothing  in  return  for  such  a
great  benefit,  but  do  even  offend  Him  every  day,  re
fusing  to  remember  the  benefit  of  His  redemption  or,  by
doing  penance,  to  work  together  with  Him  for  my  salva
tion.  And  I  was  amazed  at  these  things,  at  the  infinite
goodness  and  mercy  of  God  and  mine  own  great  iniquity
and  foolishness.  And  as  I  thought  upon  this,  it  was
shown  unto  me  how  that  by  the  Passion  of  Christ  we  are
liberated  from  all  the  sins,  torments,  and  punishments
which  we  have  deserved  ;  and  this  was  shown  unto  me
so  clearly  that  scarce  could  I  restrain  myself  from  crying
aloud  in  the  presence  of  all  people.

Thus  was  it  told  me  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when
He  appeared  unto  me  that  forasmuch  as  He  had  been
hanged  for  us  upon  the  Cross,  no  man  or  person  whatso
ever  could  excuse  himself  if  he  were  not  saved.  For  in
order  to  procure  salvation  it  is  only  needful  to  act  as
a  sick  man  acteth  with  his  physician,  who,  desiring  to
regain  his  health,  showeth  his  infirmity  and  disposeth


2i4  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

himself  to  obey  in  all  that  the  physician  commandeth
him.  So  here  likewise  is  it  needful  to  do  naught  else,
nor  to  spend  money  for  medicine,  but  only  to  show
himself  unto  the  Physician  by  the  acknowledgment  of
his  sins,  to  do  that  which  the  Physician  ordereth  arid  to
take  heed  that  he  oppose  Him  not  in  any  way.

My  soul  did  comprehend  that  the  medicine  was
Christ's  blood,  which  He  giveth  freely  without  price,
and  it  costeth  nothing  unto  the  sick  sinner  save  this
disposing  of  himself,  and  the  Physician  Christ  giveth
him  health  and  healeth  him  of  his  infirmity.

Then  were  all  my  sins  shown  unto  my  soul,  and  I  per
ceived  that  each  member  had  its  special  spiritual  in
firmity.  Wherefore,  hearing  what  had  been  said,  the
soul  did  instantly  endeavour  to  show  forth  all  the  sins
which  it  had  committed  with  the  different  members  of
the  body  and  with  all  its  own  strength  and  powers,
saying :

"  Oh  Lord,  Master  and  Physician  of  eternal  health  !
Oh  my  God,  forasmuch  as  by  only  showing  forth  unto
Thee  my  infirmities  and  diseases  Thou  hast  consented  to
heal  me,  and  because,  oh  Lord,  I  am  very  sick  and  have
no  part  in  me  that  is  not  corrupt  and  defiled,  I,  wretched
that  I  am,  will  show  Thee,  oh  Lord,  all  mine  infirmities
and  all  the  sins  of  all  my  members  and  of  all  the  parts
of  my  soul  and  body  !  "

Then  did  I  begin  and  point  them  all  out,  saying,  "  Oh
Lord,  most  merciful  Physician,  look  upon  mine  head  and


OF  FOLIGNO  215

see  how  ofttimes  I  have  adorned  it  with  the  emblems  of
pride,  how  I  have  many  times  deformed  it  by  curling
and  braiding  my  hair,  and  have  committed  numerous
other  sins.  Look,  oh  Lord,  upon  my  wretched  eyes,
full  of  uncleanness  and  envy  !  "

In  like  manner  I  strove  to  number  and  show  forth  all
the  sins  of  mine  other  members.  And  when  He  had
hearkened  thereunto  with  great  patience,  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  did  gladly  and  joyfully  make  answer  that
He  had  healed  these  things  one  after  another — and  then,
taking  pity  upon  my  soul,  He  said :

'*  Fear  not,  My  daughter,  neither  do  thou  despair  ;  for
even  wert  thou  tainted  with  a  thousand  deadly  diseases,
wert  thou  dead  a  thousand  times,  yet  could  I  give  thee  a
medicine  whereby  thou  mightest  be  healed  of  everything
if  thou  wouldst  only  apply  it  unto  thy  heart  and  soul.
For  the  infirmities  of  thine  head  which  thou  hast  told
and'  shown  unto  Me,  and  for  which  thou  art  displeasing
unto  God  and  grievous  unto  thyself,  which  infirmities
thou  hast  incurred  by  washing,  combing,  anointing,
colouring,  adorning,  and  braiding  thy  hair,  by  setting
thyself  up  in  pride  and  seeking  vainglory,  for  which
things  thou  dost  deserve  to  be  cast  into  the  uttermost
parts  of  hell,  to  be  humbled  in  all  eternity  and  reputed
as  one  most  vile,  for  these  infirmities  have  I  given  satis
faction  and  done  penance.  I  suffered  the  most  grievous
pain  inasmuch  as  My  hair  was  plucked  out  and  my  head
pierced  by  sharp  thorns ;  with  a  rod  was  it  smitten  and


216  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

covered  with  blood,  it  endured  all  manner  of  mockery
and  scorn,  and  with  the  vilest  of  crowns  was  it  crowned.

"  For  the  infirmity  of  thy  face,  which  thou  hast  con
tracted  likewise  by  washing  and  anointing  it,  by  showing
it  unto  miserable  men  and  seeking  their  favour,  I  have
made  and  ordained  a  medicine.  For  these  sins  have  I
also  given  satisfaction,  for  wicked  men  did  spit  in  My
Face,  making  it  all  filthy  and  stained  ;  it  was  swollen  and
deformed  by  rude  and  heavy  blows  and  a  vile  cloth  was
hung  before  it.

"  Moreover,  for  thine  eyes,  with  which  thou  hast  looked
at  vain  and  hurtful  things  and  hast  delighted  in  gazing
at  many  things  which  were  opposed  unto  God,  have  I
given  satisfaction,  shedding  copious  and  bitter  tears  from
My  eyes  which  were  veiled  and  filled  with  blood.

"  For  the  ears  wherewith  thou  hast  offended  God  by
hearkening  unto  vain  and  hurtful  things  and  taking  de
light  therein,  I  have  done  great  penance,  hearkening  unto
many  grievous  things,  such  as  false  accusations,  slanders,
insults,  curses,  mockings,  lies  and  blasphemies,  and  finally
the  wicked  judgment  spoken  against  Myself — but  above
all  I  did  penance  in  hearkening  unto  the  weeping  of  My
most  loving  and  lowly  mother,  who  grieved  for  Me  with
exceeding  great  grief.

"  Because  of  the  sins  of  thy  mouth  and  throat,  where
with  thou  didst  take  delight  in  feasting  and  drunken
ness  and  in  the  sweetness  of  delicate  meats,  My  mouth
hath  been  dry  and  empty,  hungry  and  thirsty,  it  hath


OF  FOLIGNO  217

fasted  and  been  made  bitter  with  vinegar  mingled  with
gall

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  tongue,  which  thou  hast  let  loose  in
slanders,  calumnies,  derisions,  blasphemies,  lies,  perjuries,
and  other  sins,  I  did  shut  My  mouth  in  the  presence  of
judges  and  false  witnesses,  no  excuses  issued  from  My
mouth,  and  with  all  Mine  heart  did  I  pray  unto  God  for
those  who  did  Me  evil,  and  I  always  preached  the  truth.

"  Because  of  the  sins  of  thy  power  of  smell,  whereby
thou  didst  delight  in  flowers,  I  did  smell  the  abominable
spittle  which  I  endured  upon  My  face  and  eyes  and
nostrils.

"  For  the  sins  committed  with  thy  neck,  by  shaking  it  in
anger,  pride,  and  lasciviousness,  and  against  the  Supreme
God,  I  suffered  many  and  divers  blows  upon  My  neck.

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  shoulders  and  back,  whereby  thou
hast  offended  in  bearing  many  things  which  were  opposed
unto  God,  I  did  penance  by  bearing  upon  My  shoulders
the  Cross  whereon  I  was  to  hang.

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  hands  and  arms,  with  which  thou
hast  done  much  wickedness,  in  embraces,  touches,  and
other  evil  deeds,  My  hands  were  driven  into  the  wood  of
the  Cross  by  large  nails  and  torn  through  bearing  the
weight  of  My  body  in  Mine  agony.

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  heart,  with  which  thou  hast  sinned
through  anger,  envy,  sadness,  evil  love,  and  base  covetous-
ness,  My  side  and  heart  were  pierced  with  a  sharp  spear,
and  from  the  wound  issued  there  forth  a  most  potent


2i 8  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

medicine,  sufficient  to  heal  all  the  passions  and  sins  of  the
heart — that  is  to  say,  water  to  cool  evil  desires  and  loves,
and  blood  for  the  remission  of  anger,  sadness,  and  enmity.

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  feet,  wherewith  thou  hast  sinned
through  vain  running  and  dancing  and  loose  walking
about  for  thy  pleasure,  My  feet  were  not  only  twisted  and
bound,  but  were  nailed  upon  the  wood  of  the  Cross ;  in
place  of  shoes  laced  and  adorned  with  cut  leather,  I
had  feet  all  bleeding  and  covered  with  the  blood  which
flowed  from  My  whole  body.

"  For  the  sins  of  thy  whole  body,  wherewith  thou  hast
sinned  by  giving  it  up  to  delights,  repose,  and  dreams,
taking  pleasure  therein  in  divers  ways,  My  body  was
fastened  upon  the  Cross,  terribly  scourged,  and  stretched
out  thereon  after  the  manner  of  a  skin  ;  I  was  closely
fastened  upon  the  hard  wood  until  I  was  bathed  in  a
bloody  sweat  which  ran  down  even  upon  the  ground ;
and  finally  I  suffered  here  the  most  dreadful  torments,
crying  aloud,  sighing,  weeping  and  lamenting  until  I
died,  slain  by  cruel  men  for  the  sins  of  thine  ornaments
and  thy  needless,  vain,  and  curious  raiment.  I  was  hung
naked  upon  the  Cross,  and  vile  men  stripped  off  My  tunic
and  My  vest  and  cast  dice  for  them  before  Mine  eyes.
And,  naked  as  when  I  was  born  of  the  Virgin,  in  the  cold,
the  wind,  and  the  air,  I  was  exposed  and  stretched  out  on
high  in  the  sight  of  all  men  and  women,  in  order  that  I
might  be  the  more  easily  seen  and  mocked  at  and  might
suffer  the  greater  shame.


OF  FOLIGNO


219


"  Because  of  the  sin  of  thy  wealth,  wherewith  thou  hast
done  evil  by  acquiring,  wrongfully  spending,  and  saving
it,  I  have  been  poor,  possessing  neither  palace,  nor  house,
nor  hut,  wherein  I  might  be  born  or  where  I  might  dwell
during  My  lifetime  ;  in  death  I  should  have  had  no
sepulchre  wherein  I  might  rest  (but  should  have  been  left
a  prey  unto  dogs  and  birds)  if  one  had  not  been  moved
through  compassion  of  My  misery  to  receive  Me  into  his
own  sepulchre.  My  blood  and  My  life  have  I  given  unto
perverse  and  sinful  men  ;  nothing  whatsoever  have  I
kept  for  Myself,  but  in  life  and  death  have  I  desired  to
be  and  to  remain  poor  for  ever.

"  But  wherefore  should  I  say  more  ?  Howsoever  thou
mayest  discourse,  thou  canst  not  find  any  sin,  any  disease
of  the  soul,  for  the  which  I  have  not  brought  the  true
medicine  and  given  sufficient  satisfaction  for  all  sinners
and  for  all  the  infinite  torments  and  grievous  pains  which
the  wretched  soul  ought  to  suffer  in  hell.  But  if  thou
remainest  not  in  thy  neglectfulness  thou  needest  lament
no  longer,  if  only  thou  dost  here  suffer  with  Me  and  have
compassion  upon  Me  always,  and  be  My  companion  in
poverty,  ignominy,  and  contempt  as  long  as  thou  livest.
Mary  Magdalene,  who  was  sick,  had  all  these  things  and
desired  to  be  wholly  liberated  from  them.  Wherefore  was
she  healed  of  all  her  infirmities — and  in  like  manner  can
all  persons  who  have  these  things  find  health  as  she  did."

The  Crucified  One  spake  further  unto  me  and  said  :
"  When  these  My  sons,  who  through  sin  have  departed


220  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

from  My  kingdom  and  made  themselves  sons  of  the  devil,
do  return  unto  the  Father,  He  hath  great  joy  of  them  and
showeth  them  His  exceeding  great  delight  in  their  return.
So  great  is  the  Father's  joy  at  their  conversion  that  He
bestoweth  upon  them  supernatural  grace,  the  which  He
giveth  not  unto  virgins  who  through  sin  have  not  departed
from  Him.  And  this  He  doth  because  of  the  boundless
love  which  He  beareth  them,  and  because  of  the  pity
which  He  hath  of  their  wretchedness ;  also  because  they
do  grieve  for  that  they  have  offended  so  great  a  Majesty
and  do  know  themselves  to  be  worthy  of  hell.

"  Because  of  these  two  reasons,  even  he  who  hath  been
the  greatest  sinner  may  find  the  greatest  grace  and  mercy."

After  this  the  Lord  spake  unto  me  again  and  said :
"  Whosoever  desireth  to  find  grace  must  not  lift  his  eyes
from  the  Cross,  whether  I  do  grant  and  permit  him  to
live  in  joy,  or  whether  he  live  in  sorrow."


SEVENTH    CONSOLATION    OF   THE    PASSION    OF    OUR   LORD
JESUS    CHRIST

UPON  another  occasion,  as  I  was  gazing  at  the  Cross  with
the  Crucified,  and  was  looking  at  the  Crucified  with  my
bodily  eyes,  such  a  fervent  love  was  suddenly  kindled  in
my  soul  that  even  the  members  of  my  body  felt  it  with
great  joy  and  delight.  I  saw  and  felt  that  Christ  em
braced  my  soul  with  the  arm  wherewith  He  was  crucified,


OF  FOLIGNO  221

wherefore  I  rejoiced  with  a  joy  greater  than  I  had  ever
had  before.

From  this  time  forth  there  hath  remained  unto  me  a
certain  joy  and  clear  enlightenment,  whereby  the  soul
knoweth  and  understandeth  how  it  is  that  we  see  our
flesh  made  one  company  with  God.  And  this  true
delight  of  the  soul  was  more  unspeakable,  this  joy  was
more  constant  and  this  enlightenment  was  clearer  .than
I  had  ever  had  before.  There  remained  unto  me,  there
fore,  so  complete  an  assurance  and  certainty  of  my  state
that  I  had  no  more  doubt  whatsoever  but  that  this  state
is  most  certainly  from  God,  and  likewise  that  the  admoni
tions  or  words  which  I  heard  within  me  are  also  from
God.  And  I  marvelled  how  hitherto  I  could  possibly
have  doubted  this.  And  so  entirely  certain  was  I  of  this
state  that  I  could  not  have  believed  otherwise  even  if  all
the  men  in  the  world  had  told  me  the  contrary.

Even  now,  when  I  am  rapt  in  this  vision  and  embrace,
my  soul  is  so  filled  with  joy  that  I  can  feel  no  sadness
whatsoever  of  the  Passion,  albeit  I  see  that  that  Hand  is
wounded.  All  my  joy  lieth  now  in  Christ  Crucified,  and
sometimes  it  seemeth  unto  my  soul  that  in  the  aforesaid
close  embrace  it  entereth  into  the  side  of  Christ — and  the
joy  which  my  soul  hath  of  this  illumination  cannot  be
described,  for  it  is  so  great  that  sometimes  I  cannot  stand
upon  my  feet,  but  do  fall  down  and  lose  my  speech.

Here  end  the  Consolations  of  the  Passion  of  Christ.


222  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA


HERE     BEGIN     THE     CONSOLATIONS    AND    VISIONS

WHICH    SHE     DID     HAVE     OF     THE     SACRAMENT

OF    THE    ALTAR

THE  first  vision  was,  that  upon  one  occasion  whilst  Mass
was  being  said,  and  as  I  was  striving  to  think  with  devotion
of  the  humility  of  God  and  of  His  supreme  goodness  (in
that  it  pleased  Him  to  come  unto  us  in  the  Sacrament  of
the  Altar),  I  was  exalted  in  spirit  and  obtained  a  new  and
clear  understanding  of  how  God  cometh  in  the  aforesaid
Sacrament.

Firstly,  it  was  told  me  that,  by  virtue  of  His  divine
power,  the  body  of  Christ  could  be  upon  every  altar,  a
thing  not  to  be  comprehended  in  this  present  life.  And
although  much  is  said  in  the  Scriptures  of  that  power,
those  who  read  do  nevertheless  understand  but  little  of
it.  "  But  those  who  feel  something  of  Me,"  said  God,
"  do  understand  more  of  it ;  nevertheless,  neither  the
former  nor  the  latter  do  fully  understand,  but  the  time
cometh  when  ye  shall  understand."

After  this  I  was  enlightened  and  did  comprehend  in  a
manner  clearer  than  had  been  shown  me  either  before  or
afterwards,  how  God  cometh  in  this  Sacrament.  I  be
held  how  Christ  cometh  together  with  a  most  beauteous
company,  at  whose  beauty  I  marvelled  greatly.  And
desiring  to  know  who  they  were,  it  was  told  me  that  they
were  the  thrones.  That  company  was  most  bright,  and


OF  FOLIGNO  223

was  an  exceeding  numerous  multitude  ;  so  that  if  I  had
not  known  that  God  doeth  all  things  with  measure,  I
should  have  deemed  it  to  be  without  number  or  measure,
but  innumerable  ;  for  it  could  not  be  measured  either  in
length  or  breadth,  but  was  ineffable.


SECOND    VISION    OF   THE    SACRAMENT    OF   THE    ALTAR

BEING  in  the  church  of  Foligno  at  the  Feast  of  the
Angels  in  September,  I  desired  to  communicate,  and  I
prayed  unto  the  holy  angels,  especially  unto  Saint  Michael
and  the  seraphim,  saying  :

"  Oh  ye  ministering  angels,  who  have  received  power
and  office  from  God  that  ye  may  administer  Him  unto
others  by  showing  forth  His  knowledge  and  love,  I  do
beseech  you  that  ye  present  Him  unto  me  such  as  the
Father  of  Mercies  did  give  Him  unto  men,  such  as  He
desireth  that  I  should  receive  and  worship  Him — that  is
to  say,  as  one  poor,  suffering,  despised,  wounded,  bleeding,
crucified,  and  dead  upon  the  Cross."

Then  did  the  angels  reply  unto  me  with  infinite
graciousness  and  sweetness :

"  Oh  thou  who  art  pleasing  unto  God,  behold,  He  hath
been  administered  unto  thee  and  is  present  with  thee,
and  moreover,  it  is  given  unto  thee  to  administer  and
present  Him  unto  the  others."

And  verily,  I  did  then  have  Him  present  with  me,  and
I  did  of  a  certainty  behold  Him  with  mine  eyes  in  that


224  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Sacrament  in  the  manner  as  I  had  prayed — that  is  to  say,
poor,  suffering,  bleeding,  crucified,  and  dead  upon  the
Cross.  At  the  sight  of  such  a  grievous  vision  I  did  then
feel  a  pain  so  exceeding  sharp  that  methought  mine  heart
would  burst.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  I  was  filled
with  joy  and  gladness  because  of  the  presence  of  the
angels,  and  if  I  had  not  myself  beheld  them,  I  should
never  have  believed  that  angels  were  so  pleasing,  or  that
they  could  have  filled  the  soul  with  so  much  joy.

Now  whilst  the  Mass  was  being  said,  there  was  a  priest
who  was  celebrating  near  unto  the  time  of  the  Com
munion.  And  as  he  was  taking  the  Body  of  Christ  and
breaking  the  Host,  I  heard  a  voice  weeping  and  saying,
"  Alas,  many  are  there  who  break  Me  in  pieces  and  who
do  even  draw  blood  from  My  back  !  "  I  did  therefore
think  that  the  priest  was  not  in  a  state  meet  for  receiving
the  Body  of  Christ,  and  I  prayed,  saying,  "  Grant  that
he  may  not  be  such  a  one,"  and  instantly  it  was  answered
me,  "  He  shall  not  be  thus  eternally."


THIRD   VISION    OF   THE   SACRAMENT   OF   THE   ALTAR

ANOTHER  time  I  was  in  church  hearing  Mass,  and  about
the  time  of  the  elevation  of  the  Body  of  Christ  (when  the
congregation  kneeleth  down  to  adore  it),  I  was  uplifted
in  spirit,  and  the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared  unto  me  in  a
vision  and  said :


OF  FOLIGNO  225

"  Oh  my  daughter,  sweet  unto  my  Son  and  unto  me,
my  Son  is  now  come  unto  thee  and  thou  hast  received
His  blessing."

Then  did  she  make  me  to  understand  that  after  the
consecration  of  the  Host,  her  Son  was  upon  the  altar,  as
though  she  were  telling  me  some  new  thing  with  great
joy.  And  these  words  gave  me  such  pleasure  and  delight
that  I  neither  think  nor  believe  that  there  be  any  person
who  could  possibly  relate  it.  For  the  Blessed  Virgin  told
this  unto  me  with  great  humility,  and  with  a  new  feeling
and  the  utmost  sweetness.  Wherefore  I  marvelled  how
that  I  had  been  able  to  remain  standing,  so  great  was
my  joy.

Then  she  spake  again  and  said — "  Forasmuch  as  thou
hast  received  the  blessing  of  my  Son,  it  is  meet  that  I
should  come  unto  thee  and  give  thee  mine  likewise."
Then  did  she  bless  me,  saying,  "  Be  thou  blessed  of  my
Son  and  of  me,  and  strive  thou  with  all  diligence  and
earnestness  to  love  Him  to  the  utmost  of  thy  power  ;  for
thou  art  greatly  beloved  and  shalt  attain  unto  that  which
is  infinite."

Then  was  my  joy  greater  than  before,  and  it  was  yet
more  increased  at  the  elevation  of  the  Body  of  Christ.
Yet  I  beheld  nothing  in  the  Body  of  Christ  as  I  had
hitherto  beheld  it,  but  I  felt  Christ  verily  within  my  soul.

Thus  came  I  to  know  by  this  that  there  is  nothing
which  so  filleth  the  soul  with  the  burning  fire  and  delight
of  love  as  having  Christ  within.  For  this  is  the  fire  of


226  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

sweetest  love,  and  when  it  burneth  in  the  soul,  then  know
I  that  God  is  verily  there  likewise,  because  none  other
can  produce  this  effect.  Then  do  all  my  members  feel
as  though  they  were  loosened  and  disjointed,  and  when
they  are  thus  loosened  they  do  make  a  noise.  This  do  I
feel  chiefly  during  the  elevation  of  the  Body  of  Christ,
and  especially  in  my  hands,  which  become  disjointed  and
fall  apart.


FOURTH   VISION   OF  THE   SACRAMENT    OF   THE    ALTAR

ANOTHER  time,  when  I  came  to  communicate,  a  heavenly
voice  spake  unto  me  and  said — "  Oh  beloved,  in  thee  is
all  good,  and  thou  goest  to  receive  all  good."

Whereupon  I  began  to  think,  "  If  all  good  is  in  thee,
wherefore  goest  thou  to  receive  it  ?  "  Unto  this  came  an
answer  immediately,  "  Although  all  good  is  in  thee,  it
will  not  be  effaced  by  that  which  thou  art  now  going  to
receive."  And  as  I  drew  nigh  unto  the  Communion,
the  voice  spake  again  and  said,  "  Now  is  the  Son  of
God  upon  the  altar,  according  both  unto  His  divinity
and  His  humanity,  and  with  Him  is  a  multitude  of
angels."

And  forasmuch  as  I  desired  greatly  to  behold  Him  with
the  angels,  God  was  then  shown  unto  me.  I  saw  Him
not  in  any  form  whatsoever,  but  I  beheld  plenitude  and
beauty — that  is  to  say,  I  beheld  all  goodness.  And  it


OF  FOLIGNO  227

was  told  unto  me,  "  Beloved,  thus  shalt  thou  stand  before
Him  in  the  life  eternal,"  and  the  comfort  my  soul  derived
therefrom  cannot  be  described.

When  I  communicate,  the  Host  swelleth  in  my  mouth
for  a  little  time  after  I  have  received  it,  and  it  hath  a
taste  neither  of  bread  nor  of  meat  such  as  we  do  eat,  but
it  hath  quite  another  taste  which  resembleth  nothing  in
the  world.  Moreover,  the  Host  is  not  hard  as  heretofore,
and  doth  not  go  down  my  throat  in  little  pieces,  but  it
goeth  down  whole,  and  it  is  so  sweet  that  I  would
willingly  hold  it  in  my  mouth  for  a  great  while  if  I  had
not  heard  it  said  that  man  should  swallow  it  instantly.
Thus  it  goeth  whole  down  my  throat,  with  that  taste  of
an  unknown  meat,  and — saving  that  it  is  the  custom —
there  is  no  need  to  drink  anything  after  it  in  order  to
swallow  it  more  easily.  And  as  it  goeth  down  my  throat
it  produceth  in  me  a  great  feeling  of  pleasure,  which  is
apparent  outwardly  in  the  body,  for  it  maketh  me  so  to
tremble  that  scarcely  can  I  hold  the  cup.

Now,  when  I  do  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  and  place
my  hand  upon  mine  head,  saying,  "  In  the  name  of  the
Father,"  I  feel  nothing  new.  But  when  I  place  my  hand
upon  my  heart,  saying,  "  and  of  the  Son,"  I  do  instantly
feel  such  love  and  consolation  that  methinketh  I  have
found  Him  there.

This  would  I  not  have  related  or  caused  to  be  written
down  like  the  other  things  had  I  not  been  advised  there
unto.


228  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA


FIFTH    VISION    OF   THE    SACRAMENT    OF   THE    ALTAR

DURING  a  certain  time  of  sickness  I  greatly  desired  to
communicate  at  the  Feast  of  the  Angels,  and  forasmuch
as  there  was  no  person  to  bring  me  the  most  holy  Body
of  Christ,  I  began  to  grieve  exceedingly.

Then,  in  the  midst  of  my  grief  and  desire  for  Com
munion,  behold,  I  began  to  reflect  upon  that  same  Feast
of  the  Angels,  upon  their  praise-giving,  and  how  they  do
praise  the  Lord  continually ;  and  I  reflected  upon  the
office  of  the  angels,  which  is  to  praise  God,  to  serve
Him  and  minister  unto  Him.  And  behold,  I  was  then
suddenly  exalted,  and  I  saw  before  me  a  great  multitude
of  angels  ;  and  they  led  me  unto  an  altar  and  said  unto
me,  "  This  is  the  altar  of  the  blessed  angels."  And  upon
the  altar  did  they  show  unto  my  soul  Him  whom  the
angels  praise,  that  is  to  say,  they  showed  Him  who  is  all
praise  ;  and  they  said —

"  In  Him  who  is  now  upon  the  altar  is  the  true  perfec
tion  and  complement  of  the  most  worthy  sacrifice  which
thou  seekest.  Wherefore  prepare  thyself  worthily  to
receive  Him,  for  He  hath  espoused  thee  with  the  ring  of
His  love  and  the  marriage  hath  already  been  celebrated,
but  now  wilt  thou  see  a  new  way  of  accomplishing  the
marriage."

I  cannot  describe  the  great  joy  which  I  had  of  this,  for
my  soul  felt  it  all  in  very  truth,  seeing  that  it  was  more


OF  FOLIGNO  229

full  of  meaning  than  can  be  related  in  words.  Hereby
was  it  also  signified  unto  me  that  I  should  presently
depart  out  of  this  world,  because  this  thing  happened  at
the  beginning  of  my  last  illness.


SIXTH    VISION    OF   THE   SACRAMENT    OF   THE   ALTAR

ANOTHER  time  I  beheld  Christ  in  the  consecrated  Host  as
a  Child.  He  appeared  certainly  to  be  a  child  of  twelve
years  of  age,  very  lordly,  as  though  He  held  the  sceptre
and  the  dominion.  He  appeared  to  hold  something  in
His  hand  as  an  emblem  of  lordship,  but  I  know  not  what,
and  although  I  saw  it  with  my  bodily  eyes  I  cannot  say
what  it  was  that  He  held  in  His  hand.  When  I  beheld
Him  I  did  not  kneel  down  like  the  others,  so  great  was
my  delight  at  beholding  Him,  but  I  was  much  displeased
and  grieved  because  the  priest  replaced  the  Host  too  soon
upon  the  altar.

Verily,  His  beauty  and  adornment  cannot  be  described,
and  so  great  was  my  joy  at  the  sight  of  Him  that  I  do
think  it  will  never  fade,  and  there  was  such  certainty  with
it  that  I  do  in  no  way  doubt  of  the  truth  thereof.  And
finally,  my  delight  in  that  vision  was  so  great  that  I  asked
no  help  of  Him  and  spake  neither  good  nor  evil,  for  I
was  so  absorbed  in  the  delight  of  that  beauty  that  I  knew
not  what  to  say.


230  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA


SEVENTH    VISION    OF    THE    SACRAMENT    OF    THE    ALTAR

ANOTHER  time  whilst  Mass  was  being  celebrated  I  was
uplifted  in  spirit,  and  I  did  question  the  Lord,  saying —

"  Behold,  Lord,  Thou  art  in  this  Sacrament  of  the
Altar,  but  tell  me  where  are  Thy  faithful  ones  ?  "

Then  opened  He  mine  understanding  and  made
answer,  "  Where  I  am,  there  are  My  faithful  ones
with  Me."

Then  I  perceived  that  it  was  so,  and  I  comprehended
clearly  that  in  every  place  where  He  was,  there  should  I
be  also.  But  this  being  is  not  the  being  within  God,
but  the  being  which  is  outside  of  Him.  And  it  is  He
alone  who  is  in  every  place  and  comprehendeth  all
things.

I  have  many  times  seen  the  Body  of  Christ  in  divers
forms  in  this  Blessed  Sacrament.  For  sometimes  I  have
seen  the  throat  of  Christ  more  splendid  and  beauteous
than  the  sun,  and  by  that  beauty  was  it  certified  unto  me
that  God  Himself  was  here,  seeing  that  it  was  incom
parably  greater  than  the  sun  both  in  beauty  and  quantity,
wherefore  doth  it  greatly  grieve  me  that  I  cannot  make
it  manifest.  Sometimes  I  have  seen  two  eyes  of  great
splendour,  and  so  large  that  I  beheld  nothing  of  the
Host  save  the  edge  thereof.

At  the  sight  of  both  these  things  was  I  refreshed  with
so  much  joy  that  I  cannot  compare  the  one  with  the


OF  FOLIGNO  231

other,  because  both  are  so  great  that  I  do  think  I  shall
never  lose  them.


HERE    BEGIN    THE    VISIONS    WHEREIN    SHE    WAS
COMFORTED    BY    THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN

FIRST    VISION    OF    THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN

UPON  one  occasion  I  was  exalted  in  spirit  although  I  was
not  then  at  prayer,  but  as  it  was  after  dinner  I  had  sat
me  down  to  meditate,  and  therefore  I  was  not  thinking
about  it  in  any  way.  And  suddenly  my  soul  was  uplifted
to  behold  and  contemplate  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  in
glory ;  and  beholding  a  woman  placed  in  such  nobility,
glory  and  dignity  as  was  she,  I  was  filled  with  marvellous
delight,  and  the  sight  did  produce  in  me  most  immense
joyfulness.  The  glorious  Virgin  was  praying  for  the
human  race,  and  so  great  was  her  exaltedness,  humanity,
and  virtue  that  she  was  wholly  ineffable,  wherefore  was
my  joy  unspeakable.

And  as  I  gazed  at  these  things,  Jesus  Christ  did  sud
denly  appear  in  that  place,  seated  beside  her  in  glorified
humanity.  And  as  I  gazed  at  Him  (albeit  I  knew  how
His  flesh  had  been  tormented,  lacerated,  reviled,  and
ignominiously  crucified,  and  miraculously  knowing  all  the
heavy  sufferings,  injuries,  scoffings,  and  vilenesses  borne
for  our  sake),  I  did  in  no  wise  grieve,  indeed,  it  is  im
possible  to  describe  the  delight  I  had  thereof,  and  my


232  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

speech  failed  me,  so  that  methought  I  was  about  to  die.
I  say,  moreover,  that  it  was  unto  me  an  exceeding  great
grief  that  I  did  not  die,  so  that  I  might  speedily  attain
unto  that  unspeakable  thing  which  I  beheld.

This  vision  endured  for  three  days  in  succession,  and  I
was  not  hindered  from  eating,  albeit  I  ate  but  little.  My
body  did  lie  down  in  constant  weakness  and  I  spake  not
at  all.  Nothing  else  did  hinder  me,  but  when  I  heard
God  spoken  of  I  could  not  contain  myself  for  my  im
mense  joy.

SECOND   VISION    OF   THE    BLESSED    VIRGIN

WHEN  I  was  in  the  church  of  the  Brothers  Minor  at
Foligno  upon  the  morning  of  the  Feast  of  the  Purification
of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  a  voice  spake  unto  me,  saying,
"This  is  the  hour  wherein  the  Virgin  Mary  came  into
the  Temple  with  her  Son."  This  thing  did  my  soul
hear  with  exceeding  great  love  ;  thereupon  it  was  exalted
and  I  beheld  our  Lady  entering  that  place.  My  soul
advanced  to  meet  her  with  great  reverence  and  love  ;  but
because  it  feared  somewhat  to  approach  near  unto  her,
our  Lady  did  greatly  reassure  it,  and  holding  out  her
Son  towards  me,  she  said,  "  Oh  lover  of  my  Son,  take
Him  !  "  And  with  these  words  she  placed  her  beloved
Son  in  mine  arms.  And  as  I  gazed  upon  Him,  His  eyes
appeared  to  be  fast  closed  as  though  He  were  asleep,  and
He  was  wrapped  in  clothes,  or  rather  swaddled.


OF  FOLIGNO  233

Our  Lady,  who  was  wearied  by  walking,  then  sat  her
down  and  made  such  beautiful,  fair,  and  pleasing  gesture
(showing  how  honest  and  gracious  were  her  manners),
that  for  the  sweetness  and  delight  which  it  had  of  behold
ing  her  my  soul  was  not  only  unable  to  look  at  the  Lord
(whom  I  held  clasped  in  mine  arms),  but  it  was  constrained
only  to  contemplate  our  Lady  herself.

And  as  I  stood  thus,  the  Child  remained  all  naked  in
mine  arms ;  and  opening  His  eyes  He  lifted  them  and
looked  to  me.  And  at  the  look  of  those  eyes  I  did
suddenly  feel  myself  filled  with  so  much  love  that  I  was
altogether  overwhelmed.  Because  from  those  eyes  there
issued  forth  such  splendour  and  fire  of  love  and  joy  that
it  is  a  thing  indescribable.  After  that  there  appeared
suddenly  a  great  and  ineffable  Majesty,  saying —

"  He  who  beholdeth  Me  not  small  will  not  behold  Me
great."  After  this  He  added,  "  I  am  come  unto  thee  and
have  offered  Myself  unto  thee  in  order  that  thou  mayest
offer  thyself  unto  Me."

Then  did  my  soul  in  a  manner  most  marvellous  and
indescribable  offer  itself  unto  the  Lord  ;  finally  I  offered
myself  wholly,  and  likewise  my  children  who  followed
after  me  perfectly.  I  offered  myself  in  all  things,  keeping
back  nothing  whatsoever  either  of  mine  own  possessions
or  of  theirs,  and  my  soul  understood  that  God  had
very  willingly  accepted  this  offering,  receiving  it  with
great  readiness.  Wherefore  I  cannot  tell  how  great  was
the  joy,  jubilation,  and  delight  which  my  soul  felt  when


234  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

it  saw  that  God  accepted  my  offering  with  so  much  joy-
fulness  and  graciousness.

Yet  another  time  did  I  behold  the  glorious  Virgin
Mary  and  she  exhorted  me  to  go  unto  Communion,
giving  me  her  blessing  and  relating  unto  me  the  sufferings
of  compassion  which  she  had  for  her  Son.

Here  end,  the  Visions  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.


HERE     BEGIN     THE     VISIONS     WITH    WHICH    SHE

WAS     COMFORTED    CONCERNING    HER    CHILDREN

WHO    SHOULD    FOLLOW    AFTER    CHRIST

FIRST   VISION    CONCERNING    HER    CHILDREN

BEING  exalted  upon  one  occasion,  and  drawn  and  absorbed
into  the  Light  uncreate,  I  beheld  that  which  cannot  be
related.  And  as  I  remained  in  that  state,  there  appeared
unto  me  the  image  of  the  blessed  God  made  Man,  Christ
Crucified,  as  though  He  had  been  but  then  lifted  down
from  the  Cross,  and  His  blood  issued  forth  from  His
wounds  as  fresh  and  red  as  though  it  were  at  that  very
moment  first  bursting  from  the  new-made  wounds.  In
all  His  joints,  moreover,  there  appeared  such  a  dissolution
of  the  sinews  (caused  by  the  cruel  stretching  upon  the
Cross)  that  the  bones  seemed  all  to  be  loosened  from  their
proper  places.


OF  FOLIGNO  235

At  this  sight  my  bowels  were  pierced  with  anguish  and
I  grieved  more  than  I  had  ever  grieved  before.  And  as
I  stood  thus  plunged  in  grief,  there  suddenly  appeared
around  the  Crucified  a  multitude  of  my  children  who  were
devout  and  given  unto  preaching  and  to  following  the
example  of  poverty,  contempt,  and  suffering  of  Christ
Crucified.  The  Blessed  Jesus  called  them  unto  Himself,
and  drawing  each  one  unto  Him,  He  embraced  him  and
made  him  to  kiss  the  wound  in  His  side,  and  clasping  him
close  with  His  own  hands,  He  laid  his  head  there  in  that
place.  And  because  of  the  joy  born  in  my  soul  at  this
sight,  I  did  forget  the  aforesaid  sorrow.

The  degree  of  my  children,  however,  was  different  one
from  another,  for  some  did  He  press  less  and  some  more
into  His  side  ;  some  did  He  place  there  often  and  some
were  wholly  absorbed  into  His  side,  whence  there  appeared
on  their  lips  the  redness  of  red  blood,  and  the  mouths  of
some  were  adorned  with  this  blood  and  their  faces  all
coloured  with  it,  according  unto  their  aforesaid  degrees.
And  bestowing  upon  each  one  His  liberal  blessing,  He
said —

"  Oh  ye  blessed  sons,  discover  ye  the  way  of  the  Cross-
that  is  to  say,  the  way  of  My  poverty,  contempt  and
suffering.  For  in  these  times  especially  do  fellow-workers
abound,  and  ye  have  I  most  especially  elected  in  order
that  through  you  and  your  preaching  and  example  may
be  discovered  and  made  manifest  My  truth  which  hath
hitherto  been  trodden  upon  and  hidden  by  the  world."


236  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Then  did  my  soul  understand  that  in  like  manner  as  my
children  had  been  pressed  upon  His  side  according  to  their
different  degrees,  so  also  unto  each  one  were  these  words
diversely  addressed.  In  no  wise  is  it  possible  to  describe
the  exceeding  great  love  which  shone  in  that  blessed  Face
and  especially  in  those  Eyes  of  God  made  Man,  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  upon  these  children  as  He  pressed  them  upon
His  sacred  wounds,  and  which  was  moreover  revealed  in
all  the  signs,  words,  and  benedictions  made  and  pro
nounced  over  them.


SECOND    VISION    CONCERNING    HER    CHILDREN

UPON  another  occasion,  when  I  was  walking  in  a  certain
procession,  I  felt  that  same  unfathomable  attraction  of
the  Word  Uncreate  in  the  aforesaid  ineffable  manner.
And  I  beheld  the  blessed  God,  Three  in  One,  dwelling  in
the  minds  of  my  sons  and  transforming  them  diversely
in  Himself  according  unto  their  degrees,  to  behold  which
thing  was  verily  like  unto  being  in  Paradise  !  For  so
tenderly  and  lovingly  did  He  descend  upon  them  that  I
wearied  not  of  gazing  at  them,  and  so  full  and  sweet,  so
cordially  spoken  was  the  blessing  which  God  Uncreate
poured  out  upon  these  children  that  it  is  altogether
indescribable.  Then  called  I  unto  my  children,  saying —
"  Oh  my  sons,  be  ye  as  a  burnt  sacrifice,  wholly  con
sumed  both  in  mind  and  body."


OF  FOLIGNO  237

In  like  manner  was  the  supreme  God  made  Man,  Christ
Crucified,  shown  unto  me,  with  all  His  joints  loosened  as
hath  already  been  said,  and  during  the  whole  time  of  the
procession  was  He  carried  through  the  air  before  mine
eyes  without  the  help  of  any  hand  whatsoever.  And  He
gathered  the  children  unto  Him  and  pressed  them  upon
the  wound  in  His  side,  saying  unto  them —

"I  am  He  who  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.
Your  sins  have  I  taken  away  and  they  shall  never  more  be
imputed  unto  you.  For  this  is  the  fountain  of  the  true
and  perfect  cleansing,  this  is  the  price  of  the  true  redemp
tion  and  this  is  the  house  of  the  true  habitation.  Where
fore,  oh  My  children,  fear  not  to  discover  and  to  defend
both  by  word  and  deed  this  most  excellent  truth  of  life
and  of  My  way,  which  is  assailed  by  the  perverse  and
the  wicked,  for  I  am  ever  with  you,  your  Helper  and
Defender."

Moreover,  both  now  and  also  at  other  times  was  there
shown  unto  me  the  cleansing  of  all  my  sons  in  three
degrees.  One  was  a  special  gift  of  great  grace  made  unto
some  of  them  for  the  joyful  perfecting  of  themselves  in
works  of  virtue.  Another  degree  was  the  special  gift  of
great  grace  and  strength  for  the  easy  resisting  of  sin.  The
third  and  last  degree  was  the  perfection  of  the  soul  and  its
transformation  in  the  Crucified.  And  although  much
beauty  is  bestowed  upon  the  soul  in  all  these  changes  and
graces,  yet  is  nevertheless  the  first  degree  of  great,  pleasing
and  most  excellent  beauty.  Likewise  is  the  last  degree


238  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

greater  than  I  can  say.  These  children  did  appear  unto
me  to  be  so  entirely  transformed  in  God  that  now  I  do
behold. scarce  aught  else  save  Christ  Crucified  and  not  yet
glorified,  so  wholly  do  my  children  seem  to  have  been
absorbed  and  transubstantiated  into  Him.


THIRD    CONSOLATION    CONCERNING    HER    CHILDREN

DURING  that  same  procession,  as  we  were  approaching
unto  a  church  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  behold,  the  Queen  of
Mercy  and  Mother  of  all  Grace  herself  arose,  and  inclining
herself  unto  these  children  in  a  new  and  gracious  manner,
she  bestowed  on  them  blessings  sweeter  than  all  other
blessings,  kissing  them  all  upon  the  breast,  some  more  and
some  less ;  and  some  did  she  embrace  with  her  arms  as
she  kissed  them.  Of  so  great  a  charity  was  she,  that —
being  apparently  all  luminous — she  did  seem  to  absorb
those  children  into  that  infinite  light  within  her  own
breast.  Yet  it  seemed  unto  me  that  I  beheld  no  arms  of
flesh,  but  a  certain  miraculous  light  into  which,  as  hath
been  said,  she  absorbed  them  with  a  most  great  and  tender
love.


FOURTH    CONSOLATION    CONCERNING    HER    CHILDREN

UPON  that  same  day,  amongst  many  other  things  which  I
saw,  whilst  Mass  was  being  celebrated,  there  appeared  unto


OF  FOLIGNO  239

me  the  Blessed  Francis,  all  glorious,  offering  me  his
customary  salutation,  the  which  is — "  The  peace  of  the
Most  High  be  with  thee."  His  manner  of  saluting  is
always  to  speak  in  a  voice  pious,  humble,  gracious,  and
affectionate.

Then  did  he  praise  greatly  unto  me  the  ardent  in
tentions  of  some  of  my  sons  and  their  zeal  in  observing
the  poverty  of  the  Order.  But  he  desired  that  it  should
increase  with  the  work  and  he  said —

"  May  the  eternal,  perfect  and  abundant  blessing
(which  I  have  received  from  God  Eternal)  descend  upon
the  heads  of  these  beloved  children  of  mine  and  thine.
See  that  thou  biddest  them  live  according  unto  the
way  of  Christ,  showing  it  forth  fearlessly  both  in  word
and  deed ;  for  I  am  with  them  and  the  Eternal  God
is  their  Helper."

With  so  much  affection  did  he  then  praise  these  chil
dren  for  their  good  intentions,  comforting  them  with
the  promise  that  they  should  assuredly  make  good  pro
gress  and  that  he  would  help  them  in  his  own  inten
tion,  and  blessing  them  so  lovingly  that  he  appeared
as  though  he  would  rend  himself  for  love  of  them.

Many  other  things  did  I  behold  concerning  myself
and  my  children,  all  of  which  I  cannot  describe.  But
this  will  I  say,  that  I  have  seen  and  clearly  comprehended
that  the  blessed  God  doth  most  tenderly  overshadow
us,  and  likewise  His  sweet  Mother,  and  they  are  ready
to  bear  the  burden  of  our  penitence,  asking  only  that


240  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

ye,  oh  my  sons,  should  be  shining  examples  of  splendid
gentleness  in  suffering,  poverty,  and  derision.  They
desire,  moreover,  to  see  you  dead  unto  this  life,  so  that
your  habitation  be  in  heaven  and  your  body  alone  in
this  world.  And  as  a  dead  man  is  not  moved  either
by  honour  or  beauty,  so  must  ye  be  in  all  ways  un
changeable  and  outside  of  all  worldly  fear  ;  and  ye  must
preach  unto  others  rather  for  the  mortification  of  your
own  lives  than  for  the  sake  of  making  contentious  dis
course.  They  do  likewise  desire  that  in  all  your  deeds
your  whole  intention  should  be  fixed  in  heaven  in  the
blessed  Christ  Crucified.

Thus,  whether  outwardly  ye  work  or  speak  or  eat,  ye
are  inwardly  one  with  Him  who  desireth  that  ye  should
continually  bear  Him  about  with  you  in  every  place  and
land,  and  that  He  should  ever  direct  all  your  actions.
And  I  pray  that  He  who  hath  deigned  to  ask  this  thing
of  you  will  likewise  deign  to  fulfil  His  desire  in  you,
through  the  merits  of  His  most  holy  Mother,  the  Virgin
Mary.


INSTRUCTION    AND    CONSOLATION    RECEIVED    FROM
GOD    CONCERNING    HER   TRIBULATIONS

ONCE  I  besought  God  that  He  would  give  me  something
of  Himself,  and  He  made  for  me  the  sign  of  the  Cross.
Then  I  prayed  Him  that  He  would  show  me  who  were


OF  FOLIGNO  241

His  best  beloved  sons.  Wherefore,  amongst  other  things,
was  this  example  immediately  told  unto  me  :

"  Let  us  suppose  that  there  was  a  man  who  had  many
dear  friends  whom  he  had  bidden  unto  a  feast  prepared
with  great  care  and  diligence.  If  it  should  happen,
now,  that  many  of  those  who  were  bidden  refused  to
come,  dost  thou  not  think  that  he  would  grieve  for
those  who  came  not,  seeing  that  he  had  abundantly  and
with  great  cost  prepared  the  feast,  and  that  he  would
receive  those  who  did  come  with  great  honour  ?  And
is  there  any  doubt  but  that,  amongst  those  who  were  all
joyfully  received,  there  were  not  some  more  familiarly
loved,  whom  he  placed  near  unto  himself  at  table,
eating  with  them  out  of  the  same  dish  and  drinking
with  them  from  the  same  cup  ?  "

With  great  joy  in  my  soul  I  then  asked  :  "  Oh  Lord,
when  Thou  biddest  all,  do  Thou  tell  me  more  fully  of
the  difference."

And  He  answered  :  "  I  have  bidden  all  unto  the  life
eternal  and  preparations  have  been  made  for  all,  and
none  can  excuse  himself  for  that  he  hath  not  been  asked.
But  of  all  who  were  bidden  only  few  come  and  are
given  places  at  the  table."  And  He  gave  me  to  under
stand  that  He  Himself  was  the  table,  and  not  only  the
table,  but  the  food  likewise.

I  did  also  ask  by  what  way  were  those  come  who  were
come,  and  it  was  immediately  told  me  by  the  way  of
tribulation,  such  as  the  virgins,  the  chaste,  the  poor,  the

Q


242  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

sick,  and  the  patient,  with  many  others  who  had  suffered
tribulation  and  were  destined  unto  salvation.

Understanding  thus  the  reasoning  and  explanation,
every  word  did  greatly  delight  me.  Yet  all  had  He  bidden
and  all  did  He  equally  call  His  children.  In  these  words
was  it  notified  unto  me  that  virginity,  poverty,  sickness,
loss  of  children  and  possessions  and  other  temporal  goods,
and  finally  that  all  tribulations  were  sent  by  God  unto
His  children  for  their  good,  albeit  at  that  time  they  did
not  know  this  and  could  not  understand  it.  For  this
reason  there  were  many  greatly  troubled  in  the  beginning,
but  afterwards,  like  true  sons,  they  endured  everything
with  patience  and  thanksgiving.

Such  are  those  who  most  commonly  attain  unto  eternal
life,  nor  is  there  any  other  way.  But  those  who  are  bidden
unto  the  special  table,  whom  God  maketh  to  eat  out  of
the  same  dish  and  drink  out  of  the  same  cup  with  Himself,
are  those  who  desire  and  strive  to  know  who  is  this  good
Father  and  Lord  who  hath  bidden  them  to  the  feast,  and
who  seek  to  please  Him  by  the  imitation  of  His  most  holy
Cross  and  by  voluntarily  taking  upon  themselves  poverty,
contempt,  ignominy  and  affliction.  For  unto  such  sons  as
these  doth  God  send  many  tribulations,  the  which  are
sent  unto  them  as  an  especial  grace  in  order  that  they  may
eat  out  of  one  dish  with  Him.  "  For  at  that  table,"  said
Christ,  "  I  was  called  to  drink  the  cup  of  the  shameful
Passion,  which  was  made  sweet  unto  Me  through  your
love,  although  it  was  of  itself  exceeding  hard  and  bitter."


OF  FOLIGNO  243

Recognising  this  grace  and  mercy,  therefore,  albeit  they
do  find  the  tribulations  bitter,  these  sons  do  nevertheless
esteem  them  supremely  sweet  because  of  the  love,  grace,
honour  and  worthiness*contained  therein.  Therefore  are
they  now  not  afflicted  by  their  troubles,  and  the  greater
their  tribulations  the  more  delighted  are  they  and  the
closer  do  they  feel  themselves  unto  God.  Wherefore  do  I
say  and  affirm  that  the  children  of  God  do  feel  the  divine
sweetness  mingled  with  persecutions,  tribulations,  and
penances,  all  of  which  was  set  forth  unto  me  in  the  afore
said  preaching.  Countless  times  have  I  experienced  this,
and  I  could  not  reveal  or  declare  the  sweetness  I  felt  or
the  tears  of  exceeding  great  joy  that  I  shed  when  I  was
troubled  or  reviled  by  my  brethren,  my  friends,  or  my
kindred.

During  a  time  of  great  sickness,  as  I  was  lying  very
weak,  there  did  again  appear  unto  me  God  made  Man,
Jesus  Christ  the  Consoler,  and  methought  that  He  had
great  compassion  on  me  and  said  unto  me  :  "  I  am  come
to  serve  thee."  The  service  which  He  rendered  me  was
to  stand  before  my  bed,  showing  Himself  to  be  so  pleasing
and  so  gracious  that  it  is  a  thing  wholly  unspeakable.
And  I  beheld  Him  more  clearly  with  the  eyes  of  my  mind
than  it  is  possible  to  behold  any  person  with  the  eyes  of
the  body,  and  so  great  was  my  joyfulness  and  supreme
delight  that  it  can  in  no  wise  be  expressed  or  declared,
because  it  is  wholly  ineffable.

Again,  upon  a  certain  Holy  Thursday  I  said  unto  my


244  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

companion  :  "  Let  us  seek  Jesus  Christ  the  Crucified,  and
let  us  go  unto  the  hospital,  for  perchance  we  shall  find
Him  amongst  those  poor,  suffering  and  afflicted  ones."
So  we  took  the  cloths  we  wore  upon  our  heads  (not  having
aught  else),  and  giving  them  unto  the  servant  of  the  hos
pital,  we  bade  her  sell  them  and  with  the  money  buy
something  for  the  poor  of  the  hospital  to  eat.  And
albeit  she  feared  to  do  it,  telling  us  that  we  should  cause
ourselves  to  be  reviled,  yet  because  of  our  great  impor
tunity  she  went  and  sold  those  poor  little  cloths  and
purchased  fish  with  the  money,  unto  which  we  did  add
the  bread  which  had  been  given  unto  us  for  the  love  of
God  for  our  own  sustenance.  After  this  we  washed  the
feet  of  the  poor  women  and  the  hands  of  the  men,  but
especially  those  of  a  leper  which  were  all  putrefied  and
spoiled  and  full  of  corruption.  Afterwards  we  did  drink
the  water  wherewith  we  had  washed  him,  and  that  drink
was  so  sweet  unto  us  that  we  tasted  of  its  sweetness  all
the  way  as  we  returned  until  we  arrived  at  this  place.
And  because  a  scale  from  those  sores  had  got  into  my
throat  I  endeavoured  to  swallow  it  as  though  I  had  re
ceived  it  in  communion  ;  and  at  last  I  did  swallow  it,
and  I  found  it  to  be  so  sweet  that  I  can  in  no  wise
describe  it.

This  have  I  told,  because  although  man  is  troubled  in
the  beginning  by  the  penances,  afflictions  and  tribulations
he  has  accepted  of  God,  yet  doth  he  at  last  find  exceeding
great  consolation  therein.


OF  FOLIGNO  245


A    FURTHER    CONSOLATION    GIVEN    UNTO    HER    OF    GOD

ANOTHER  time  when  I  was  stirred  by  spiritual  tribulation
it  seemed  unto  me  that  for  the  space  of  a  month  I  did
feel  nothing  whatsoever  of  God  ;  yea,  it  seemed  even  as
though  He  had  wholly  forsaken  me  and  I  was  not  able  to
confess  my  sins.

Although  upon  the  one  hand  methought  this  had
happened  unto  me  because  of  my  pride,  upon  the  other
hand  I  perceived  my  sins  so  plainly  and  with  such  deep
conviction  that  I  doubted  if  ever  I  should  be  able  to
confess  them  with  due  contrition,  or  even  declare  them
with  my  mouth.  For  this  reason  I  could  neither  praise
God  nor  pray  ;  but  I  perceived  that  this  alone  remained
unto  me  of  God,  that  I  was  not  as  greatly  troubled  as  I
deserved  to  be  for  having  desired  to  depart  from  God
through  sin,  yet  I  could  not  have  desired  to  offend
God  for  all  the  good  and  evil  in  the  world,  or  consent
unto  wickedness.  Thus  was  I  deeply  and  most  terribly
troubled  and  afflicted  during  the  whole  of  the  aforesaid
time.

Then  through  the  mercy  and  pity  of  God  there  spake
unto  me  a  voice  and  said  :  "  Daughter  beloved  of  Almighty
God  and  of  all  the  blessed  saints  in  Paradise,  God  hath
placed  His  love  in  thee  and  beareth  more  love  toward  thee
than  toward  any  other  woman  in  the  Valley  of  Spoleto."

Then  did  my  soul  cry  aloud  and  answer  :   "  How  may


246  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

I  believe  this,  seeing  that  I  am  full  of  tribulation  and  do
seem  to  be  forsaken  of  God  ?  "

The  voice  made  answer  :  "  When  thou  thinkest  thyself
to  be  most  forsaken,  then  art  thou  most  dearly  be
loved  and  nearest  unto  the  eternal  God."  And  again  he
added :  "  A  father  who  hath  but  one  dearly  beloved  son
doth  administer  unto  him  delicate  meats  in  moderation,
and  permitteth  him  not  to  drink  pure  wine  ;  but  he  doth
mingle  the  wine  with  water  and  permitteth  him  to  eat
nothing  hurtful,  in  order  that  his  food  may  do  him  no
hurt  but  always  good.  And  God  doth  likewise,  mingling
temptations  and  grievous  tribulations  with  His  conso
lations,  and  keeping  the  soul  in  these  tribulations  and
temptations ;  for  if  He  did  not  do  this,  it  would  plunge
into  intemperate  enjoyments  as  into  a  sea  and  would
be  drowned.  Wherefore,  as  I  have  said,  when  the  soul
seemeth  to  be  most  forsaken,  then  is  it  most  loved."

Then  were  my  tribulations  somewhat  tempered,  but
not  wholly  taken  away,  for  I  did  not  yet  feel  disposed  to
confess  and  communicate.  But  in  a  short  time  they  were
all  taken  away  and  thus  was  it  told  me —

"  It  pleaseth  Me  that  thou  shouldst  communicate —
because  if  thou  receivest  Me,  thou  hast  already  received
Me,  and  if  thou  receivest  Me  not,  thou  hast  received  Me
nevertheless.  Communicate,  therefore,  with  the  bless
ing  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  And
do  it  for  reverence  of  Almighty  God,  of  Saint  Mary  the
Virgin,  and  of  Saint  Anthony  whose  Feast  it  is  to-day  ;


OF  FOLIGNO  247

for  unto  thee  shall  be  given  a  new  and  most  excellent
grace  which  thou  hast  never  had  before."

There  was  vouchsafed  unto  me  accordingly  the  grace
to  confess  and  the  desire  to  communicate,  and  I  did
confess  immediately.

Now  whilst  Mass  was  being  said,  I  perceived  myself  to
be  so  full  of  sins  and  shortcomings  that  I  could  not  speak,
and  I  thought  that  the  Communion  which  I  then  desired
would  be  a  judgment  upon  me.  Nevertheless  there  was
presently  granted  me  such  an  admirable  disposition  that
I  was  able  to  place  myself  wholly  in  Christ.  Then  I
entered  into  Him  with  a  faith  and  security  such  as  I  had
never  before  experienced  ;  I  placed  myself  in  Him  and
in  His  merits  as  though  I  were  dead,  with  an  admirable
certainty  that  He  would  raise  me  up  to  life  again.  Where
fore  I  communicated  in  His  faith,  and  there  was  granted
unto  me  a  marvellous  feeling  which  left  in  me  a  peace
whereby  I  was  given  to  understand  and  to  feel  that  all
tribulation  which  had  happened  unto  me  was  for  my
good.  And  this  Communion  which  I  received  did  bring
my  soul  in  faith  unto  this  perception  and  desire — that  is
to  say,  I  desired  to  give  myself  wholly  unto  Christ  because
He  hath  given  Himself  unto  us.  Wherefore  do  I  take
new  delight  in  the  longing  for  martyrdom,  and  I  desire
so  much  that  I  rejoice  when  grief  and  tribulation  more
than  usual  do  fall  upon  me.  Hence  do  I  conclude  that  in
the  end  God  consoleth  every  troubled  soul.

Thus  I  do  remember  me  that,  being  one  time  afflicted


248  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

and  believing  myself  forsaken,  I  heard  it  said  unto  me  :
"  Know,  thou  beloved,  that  thou  art  not  forsaken — yea,
rather  is  God  nearer  unto  thee  and  thou  unto  God  in
tribulation  than  in  times  more  prosperous."

Then  cried  my  soul — "  If  it  be  true  that  I  am  nearer
unto  God  in  tribulation,  may  it  please  Him  to  take  away
all  my  sin  and  through  the  merits  of  His  Passion  to  give
me  free  absolution,  to  give  also  His  blessing  unto  me  and
unto  my  companion,  and  likewise  unto  the  brother  who
hath  written  down  these  things."  And  the  answer  was
given  me,  saying,  "  Thy  sins  have  been  taken  away,  and  I
bless  you  with  the  flesh  of  that  Hand  which  was  nailed
upon  the  Cross."

Then  I  beheld  that  Hand  stretched  out  in  blessing
over  our  heads  ;  and  I  rejoiced  greatly  at  the  sight  of  that
Hand,  because  verily  it  was  a  joyous  thing  to  see  it.  And
unto  us  three  He  gave  His  blessing,  saying — "  The  blessing
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  be  upon
you,  and  may  ye  keep  it  through  all  eternity."  More
over  He  said  unto  me,  "  Say  unto  thy  brother  the  writer
that  he  should  seek  to  make  himself  little,  and  forasmuch
as  he  is  greatly  beloved  of  Almighty  God,  he  must  strive
to  love  Him  yet  more."

Thus  in  many  ways  did  He  deign  to  console  me,  He
who  consoleth  all  who  are  in  tribulation,  unto  Whom  be
honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.


OF  FOLIGNO  249


AN     ILLUMINATION    OF    THE    UNDERSTANDING    GIVEN     UNTO

HER    OF    GOD    CONCERNING    THE    WAY    AND    THE

STATE    OF    SALVATION

UPON  a  certain  time  as  I  was  praying  in  my  closet  these
words  were  spoken  unto  me — "  All  who  are  instructed
and  enlightened  of  God  to  the  end  that  they  may  under
stand  the  way  of  God,  and  who,  in  spite  of  this  light
and  revelation  especially  given  them  of  God,  do  shut
their  ears  that  they  may  not  hear  and  their  eyes
that  they  may  not  see,  who  refuse  to  understand
or  hearken  unto  that  which  God  sayeth  unto  the  soul,
but  do  more  readily  debase  themselves  and  follow  after
other  doctrine  than  that  given  them  of  God  (desiring
against  their  conscience  to  keep  upon  the  broad  high
way),  all  these  I  declare  to  have  merited  the  curse  of
Almighty  God."

Not  once  only,  but  many  times,  was  this  judgment  told
unto  me,  and  I  was  filled  with  horror  when  I  heard  it ;
it  seemed  unto  me  a  thing  most  grave,  for  I  feared  there
was  no  deception  therein — that  is  to  say,  that  God  did
curse  those  to  whom  He  had  first  given  His  light  and
grace.  Then  was  an  example  showed  me,  and  it  was
commanded  me  that  I  should  cause  it  to  be  written
down  ;  and  the  example  was  this  :

"  Suppose  there  was  a  father  who  sent  his  son  unto
the  school,  spending  large  sums  upon  him,  clothing  him


250  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

honourably  in  fair  raiment  and  furnishing  him  with
books,  and  who,  after  that  the  son  hath  been  instructed
by  an  inferior  master,  procureth  that  he  shall  be  trans
ferred  unto  a  better  one  and  advanced  higher.  If  this
scholar,  then,  behaveth  negligently  and  careth  nothing  for
the  knowledge  he  hath  learnt,  but  returneth  unto  a  vulgar
state  and  vile  occupations,  and  unto  work  of  great  fatigue
and  labour,  so  that  nothing  remaineth  unto  him  of  all
that  he  hath  learnt,  the  father  must  assuredly  feel  great
perturbation  and  indignation  at  his  son."

Now  such  a  son  is  he  who  is  first  instructed  by  preaching
and  the  Scriptures,  and  afterwards  especially  enlightened
by  God,  and  unto  whom  it  is  given  through  especial  light
and  divine  inspiration  to  know  and  understand  how  he
should  follow  in  the  way  of  Christ ;  which  learning  God
first  caused  him  to  be  shown  by  others  and  did  then
Himself  instruct  him  by  His  especial  light  and  doctrine,
which  cannot  be  taught  save  by  God  alone.  And  this
He  doeth  that  the  man  may  know  how  to  direct  himself
and  may  also  be  as  a  light  unto  others.  But  if  such  a
man  declineth  unto  negligence,  debasing  himself  and
growing  fat  and  despising  the  light  which  he  hath  and
the  divine  doctrine  and  inspiration,  then  God  will  take
away  from  him  that  light  and  that  grace  and  will  curse
him  instead.  This  was  I  commanded  to  have  written
down  in  order  that  I  might  tell  it  unto  a  brother  unto
whom  I  made  confession,  because  it  was  a  matter  which
concerned  him.


OF  FOLIGNO  251

In  another  heavenly  conversation  was  I  told  that  there
is  a  certain  generation  which  knoweth  God  only  through
the  manifold  goodness  of  the  good  things  He  hath  done
unto  them,  and  that  these  know  Him  but  little.  And  I
was  told  that  there  is  another  generation  of  men  who,
albeit  they  know  God  through  the  aforesaid  good  things,
do  nevertheless  know  Him  much  better  through  His  good
ness  which  they  experience  in  themselves.

In  yet  another  conversation  I  heard  a  voice  crying  and
saying,  "  Oh,  how  great  are  they  !  How  great  are  they  !
Not  the  great  readers  of  My  Scriptures,  but  those  who
do  them  and  fulfil  them  ;  for  the  whole  of  the  divine
Scriptures  are  fulfilled  in  the  example  of  the  Life  of
Christ  Jesus."

Once  when  I  was  at  prayer  I  said  unto  God — "  I  know,

0  Lord,  that  Thou  art  my  Father,  for  Thou  art  my  God  ;
teach  Thou  me,  therefore,  that  which  Thou  wouldst  have
me  do,  and  instruct  me  in  that  which  pleaseth  Thee,  for

1  am  ready  to  obey  Thee."

Now  reflecting  upon  these  words  from  morning  even
until  the  hour  of  tierce,  I  beheld  and  heard,  but  that
which  I  beheld  and  heard  am  I  in  no  wise  able  to  declare.
But  it  was  a  most  unspeakable  abyss,  and  it  was  shown
me  what  it  was,  who  dwelt  therein  and  who  dwelt  not
therein.  And  God  said —

"  Of  a  truth  there  is  no  other  straight  way  than  that
which  followeth  My  footsteps,  for  upon  this  road  none
are  deceived."


252  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

And  this  hath  been  told  unto  me  many  times  in  truth
and  great  clearness.     Amen.

Here  end  the  Visions  and  Consolations  of  the
Blessed  Angela  of  Foligno.


THE    LAST  WRITING    OF    THE    BLESSED    ANGELA    OF    FOLIGNO

THIS  is  the  last  writing  and  the  last  letter  given  by  our
Mother,  the  Blessed  Angela  of  Foligno,  before  she  fell
sick  unto  death,  and  which  she  said  was  the  last  of  her
letters.  She  foresaw  her  happy  passing  away  a  long  time
before  it  happened,  wherefore  with  great  affection  did
she  constrain  her  writer  to  write  thus,  saying —

"  Oh  my  God,  Jesus  Christ,  make  me  worthy  that  I
may  know  Thy  most  high  mystery,  which  hath  been
wrought  by  Thy  most  ardent  charity.  That  is  to  say,
the  most  high  and  profound  mystery  of  Thy  most  holy
Incarnation,  which  Thou  hast  wrought  for  our  sake  and
which  hath  been  the  beginning  of  our  salvation,  for  it
doeth  two  things  unto  us.  Firstly,  it  filleth  us  with  love  ;
and  secondly,  it  maketh  us  to  be  verily  certain  of  our
salvation.

"  Oh,  how  unspeakable  is  this  charity  !  Truly  there  is
none  greater  than  this,  that  my  God,  the  Creator  of  all,
should  have  become  a  creature  in  order  that  He  might


OF  FOLIGNO  253

make  me  as  God.  Oh  burning  love  !  Thou  hast  effaced
Thyself  and  made  Thyself  the  least  of  all  in  order  that  I
might  be  great,  and  hast  taken  the  form  of  a  vile  servant
in  order  that  Thou  mightest  confer  upon  me  a  royal  and
divine  beauty.  When  Thou  tookest  my  form,  however,
Thou  didst  not  make  Thyself  so  small  that  Thou  didst  in
any  way  lessen  aught  of  Thine  own  substance,  or  take
away  from  Thy  Godhead,  but  the  depth  of  the  humility
of  Thy  Incarnation  constraineth  me  to  speak  these
difficult  words.  Oh  Thou  Incomprehensible  One,  who
hast  made  Thyself  comprehensible  unto  me,  Thou  God
Uncreate  made  creature  for  me  !  Oh  Unthinkable  One,
made  conceivable  for  me  !  Oh  Untouchable  One,  made
so  that  I  may  touch  Thee  !  Oh  Lord,  make  me  worthy
to  behold  the  depth  of  this  charity  which  Thou  hast  com
municated  unto  us  in  this  Thy  most  holy  Incarnation  !
Oh  happy  fault  (which  came  not  of  thee,  however,  but
of  God's  pity),  unto  whom  it  hath  been  permitted  to
show  us  the  hidden  depths  of  divine  charity  which  had
been  concealed  from  us.  And  in  very  truth,  a  greater
charity  cannot  be  imagined.

"  Oh  Thou  Most  High,  make  me  capable  of  understand
ing  this  high  and  ineffable  charity.  Oh  Lord,  make  us
capable  of  understanding  the  mysteries  which  Thou  hast
wrought  for  us  !  The  first  is  the  mystery  of  Thy  most
holy  Incarnation.  The  second  is  the  ineffable  mystery  of
the  example  of  Thy  doctrine  of  penitence  and  affliction.
The  third  is  the  bitter  death  borne  for  our  sake.  The


254  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

fourth  is  the  glory  of  Thy  Resurrection.  The  fifth  is  the
exaltation  of  Thine  admirable  Ascension.

"  The  first  is  love  unspeakable.  Oh  love  supreme  and
transformed !  Oh  love  all  too  ineffable !  Blessed  be
Thou,  oh  Lord,  because  Thou  makest  me  to  understand
that  Thou  wert  made  man.  Oh  how  glorious  is  this
knowledge  and  understanding,  that  I  do  see  and  know
that  Thou  art  born  in  me.  Verily  this  understanding  is
full  of  all  delight  and  sweetness.  Oh  Thou  Admirable
One,  how  admirable  are  the  mysteries  which  Thou  hast
wrought  for  me  !

"  The  second  mystery  which  Thou  hast  wrought  for  us
maketh  us  certain  of  the  way  of  life.  For  Thou  tookest
our  flesh  upon  Thee  and  wast  born  and  didst  live  in  such
wise  that  we  do  possess  Thy  teaching  and  example,  oh
Jesus  Christ,  who  wast  born  unto  poverty,  suffering  and
contempt,  and  therein  didst  live  and  die.

"  The  third  is  the  mystery  of  Thy  death,  for  thereunto
wast  Thou  born,  that  by  dying  for  us  Thou  mightest  work
our  redemption.  There  are  five  things  to  be  considered
in  this  death  of  Christ.  Firstly,  the  declaration  and
operation  of  our  salvation  ;  secondly,  our  strengthening
and  our  victory  over  our  enemies ;  thirdly,  the  fulness
and  superabundance  of  the  divine  love,  as  manifested  by
that  same  death  ;  fourthly,  that  He  hath  filled  us  with  a
most  high,  most  loving,  and  profound  truth,  whereby  we
may  know,  see,  and  understand  how  God  the  Father
hath  shown  forth,  glorified  and  declared  His  Son  ;  and


OF  FOLIGNO  255

fifthly,  that  hereby  we  may  know  also  how  the  Son  of
God  did  make  manifest  the  Father,  by  the  obedience
which  He  did  observe  throughout  His  whole  life,  even
unto  the  bitter  death  of  the  Cross,  and  hath  given  satis
faction  for  the  whole  human  race.  Make  me  worthy,
oh  Thou  God  Uncreate,  to  know  the  depths  of  Thy  love
and  the  unfathomable  extent  of  Thy  ardent  charity ;
make  me  worthy  to  understand  the  ineffable  charity
which  Thou  didst  communicate  unto  us  when  Thou
didst  show  unto  us  Thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  in  this  flesh
and  when  this  Thy  Son  did  make  Thee  manifest  unto  us.
Oh  marvellous,  indescribable,  and  joyful  love,  in  Thee  is
all  savour  and  sweetness  and  all  delight,  the  contempla
tion  whereof  exalteth  the  soul  above  the  world,  making
it  able  to  stand  alone  in  joy,  peace  and  rest.

"  The  fourth  mystery  is  in  the  triumphant  Resurrection,
in  the  which  two  things  chiefly  are  to  be  considered.  The
first  is,  that  His  resurrection  giveth  us  hope  of  our  own  ;
and  the  second  is,  that  it  maketh  us  perfectly  to  know  the
spiritual  resurrection  which  God  worketh  of  His  grace
when  He  raiseth  up  a  dead  man  to  life  again  and  restoreth
the  sick  to  health.  Oh  most  high,  unspeakable,  unknown
and  ineffable  mystery  wherein  Thou  hast  shown  the
fulfilment  of  our  perfection,  make  me,  oh  Lord,  worthy
of  knowing  this  most  high  mystery.

"  The  fifth  is  the  mystery  of  the  Ascension.  Make  me,
oh  Lord,  worthy  and  capable  of  understanding  the  most
high  mystery  of  Thine  Ascension,  whereby  was  fulfilled


256  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

the  whole  of  our  salvation.  Oh  Jesus  Christ,  then  was  it
that  Thou  didst  give  us  possession  of  Him  who  is  Thy
Father  and  ours  !

"  These  five  mysteries  are  the  school  of  true  scholars,
and  the  veritable  school  where  we  learn  continual  prayer.
Therefore,  oh  Lord,  make  me  to  know  and  understand
the  supreme  charity  through  which  Thou  didst  create
and  redeem  me.  Oh  Thou  Incomprehensible  One,
make  me  able  to  understand  Thine  inestimable  and
ardent  charity  and  that  burning  love  through  which
Thou  hast  chosen  the  human  race  unto  all  eternity  to
attain  unto  the  vision  of  Thyself  and  through  which  Thou,
oh  Most  High,  hast  deigned  to  look  upon  us.  Make  us,
oh  Lord,  to  know  our  faults  that  we  may  escape  the
punishments  wherewith  Thou  hast  threatened  those
who  are  ungrateful  and  who  know  not  Thee  nor  Thine
ineffable  mysteries  and  benefits."

Beside  these  things,  she  spake  of  seven  spiritual  gifts
and  benefits  conferred  upon  us  by  the  divine  goodness,
and  she  said —

"  Oh  most  sweet  Lord,  make  me  able  to  understand
these  seven  gifts  which  Thou  hast  bestowed  upon  us
amongst  the  multitude  of  Thine  other  gifts  !  The  first
gift  is  the  ineffable  creation.  The  second  is  the  admir
able  election  whereby  Thou  hast  deigned  to  exalt  us  unto
Thy  glory.  The  third  is  the  inestimable  gift  vouchsafed
us  when  Thou  didst  send  Thy  Son  to  give  us  life.  The
fourth  is  the  most  high  gift  of  Thy  goodness,  whereby


OF  FOLIGNO  257

Thou  didst  deign  to  make  me  sensible  and  reasoning,  and
not  brutal  and  unreasoning.  This  admirable  power  of
reasoning  which  Thou  hast  placed  in  me  doth  work  three
things  in  me  ;  firstly,  it  maketh  me  to  know  that  Thou
art  marvellous  ;  secondly,  it  maketh  me  to  know  my  sins ;
and  thirdly,  through  Thy  grace  it  maketh  me  able  to
resist  sensuality,  which  doth  make  me  inclined  unto  sin.
Oh,  Thou  Incomprehensible  One,  there  is  no  gift  greater
than  this  which  Thou  hast  granted  unto  me  !  Thou  hast
made  me,  oh  Lord,  in  Thine  own  likeness ;  Thou  hast
given  me  understanding  and  clothed  me  with  Thy  light
and  Thy  reason.

"  The  fifth  gift  is  wisdom.  Oh  Lord,  make  me  to  under
stand  Thy  most  ardent  charity  through  which  Thou  hast
granted  me  this  gift,  namely  wisdom.  For  verily  this  is
the  gift  of  gifts,  that  is  to  say,  being  able  to  enjoy  Thee
in  very  truth.

"The  sixth  is  the  gift  of  understanding.  Oh  Lord,
make  us  to  know  this  gift  which  Thou  hast  granted  us,
that  is  to  say,  the  understanding,  in  order  that  we  may
understand  Thee,  oh  my  God.

"  The  seventh  gift  is  love.  Oh  Supreme  Being,  make  me
to  understand  this  gift,  for  all  the  angels  and  saints  do
behold  naught  else  save  Thee,  loving  Thee  and  contem
plating  Thee.  Oh,  gift  above  all  other  gifts,  for  Thou
Thyself  art  love  !  Oh  Supreme  Good,  Thou  hast  deigned
to  make  us  know  that  Thou  art  Love  and  makest  us  to
love  that  Love,  wherefore  shall  they  who  come  before

R


258  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

Thy  Face  be  rewarded  according  unto  their  love,  and
there  is  nothing  which  leadeth  the  contemplative  unto
contemplation  saving  true  love  alone.  Oh,  Marvellous
One,  how  marvellous  are  the  things  which  Thou  workest
in  Thy  children !  Oh  Supreme  Good — oh  Incompre
hensible  Goodness  and  Ardent  Charity !  Oh,  Person
Divine,  who  hast  deigned  to  grant  us  substance  in  the
midst  of  Thine  own  Substance  !  Marvellous  above  all
other  things  which  Thou  workest  in  Thy  children  !  Oh,
hidden  and  marvellous  thing,  there  is  no  human  under
standing  which  faileth  not  before  this  substance,  but
through  divine  grace  and  light  do  we  feel  it.  And  this  is
the  pledge  of  those  who  do  verily  live  solitary,  and  all
the  choirs  of  angels  are  herewith  occupied.  And  in  this
true  occupation  are  engaged  all  true  contemplatives,  who
shall  afterwards  be  solitary  and  separated  from  the  earth,
having  their  conversation  in  heaven.  Thanks  be  unto
God  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."

Here  endeth  the  last  writing  given  by  the  Blessed
Angela  of  Foligno  unto  her  children.


THE    TESTAMENT    AND    LAST    ADMONITION     OF    THE    BLESSED

ANGELA    OF    FOLIGNO    WHICH    SHE    GAVE    UNTO    HER

CHILDREN,    SHE    BEING    NIGH    UNTO    DEATH

"  THAT  which  I  now  speak  unto  you,  oh  my  children,  I
speak  for  no  other  reason  save  for  the  love  of  God,  and


OF  FOLIGNO  259

because  I  did  promise  unto  you  that  I  would  not  willingly
carry  away  with  me  beneath  the  earth  aught  of  what  I  do
know  which  might  be  profitable  unto  you.

"  That  which  I  am  about  to  say  is  not  of  myself,  but
wholly  of  God,  because  it  hath  pleased  His  divine  good
ness  to  give  into  my  care  all  His  sons  and  daughters  who
are  in  this  world,  both  here  and  beyond  the  sea.  1  have
been  as  careful  of  them  as  I  was  able,  and  I  have  grieved
for  them  and  have  suffered  more  sorrow  because  of  them
than  ye  would  readily  believe.  Oh  my  God,  now  do  I
render  them  unto  Thee  again,  and  I  pray  Thee  that  of
Thine  ineffable  charity  Thou  do  protect  them  from  all
evil  and  do  keep  them  in  the  way  of  all  goodness,  in
the  love  of  poverty,  contempt,  and  suffering,  and  in  the
transformation  and  imitation  of  Thy  life  and  perfection,
which  it  hath  pleased  Thee  to  show  forth  in  word  and
deed  and  actual  life.

"  Oh,  my  beloved  sons,  I  do  exhort  you  in  this  my  last
exhortation  that  ye  strive  to  be  little  and  truly  humble
and  meek,  not  only  in  outward  works  but  in  the  depth
of  your  hearts,  in  order  that  ye  may  be  true  scholars  and
disciples  of  Him  who  said,  '  Learn  of  Me,  for  I  am  meek
and  lowly  of  heart.'

"  Have  no  care  for  power,  or  honours,  or  being  preferred
before  others,  but  strive  ye  to  be  of  no  account  in  order
that  Christ  may  exalt  you  in  the  perfection  of  merits  and
in  His  grace.  Be  ye  so  humble  that  ye  do  perpetually
esteem  yourselves  as  nothing.  Cursed  are  those  self-


260  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

sufficiencies  which  make  souls  proud,  such  as  power,
honour  and  preferment, — fly  ye  from  them,  for  in  them
lieth  great  deception  and  danger.  And  greater  decep
tion  still  is  there  in  spiritual  self-sufficiency  even  than  in
the  worldly — that  is  to  say,  in  knowing  how  to  speak  of
God,  in  understanding  the  Scriptures,  in  performing  great
penances  and  keeping  the  heart  busied  over  spiritual
things.  For  the  spiritually  self-sufficient  do  often  fall
into  error  and  are  more  difficult  to  correct  than  those
who  have  worldly  self-sufficiency.  Esteem  yourselves,
therefore,  as  nothing,  as  nothing  known  or  nothing  un
known.  Of  a  truth,  the  soul  can  possess  no  better  insight
or  knowledge  than  to  perceive  its  own  nothingness  and
to  remain  within  its  own  prison.

"Strive  ye,  oh  my  sons,  to  possess  charity,  without  which
there  is  neither  salvation  nor  merit.  Behold,  God  saith,
'  All  My  things  are  thine.'  Who  is  there  who  deserveth
this,  that  all  God's  things  should  be  his  ?  Verily,  there
is  naught  else  that  deserveth  this  save  the  most  ardent
charity.

"  Oh  my  sons,  fathers  and  brothers,  see  that  ye  love  one
another  amongst  yourselves  and  that  ye  have  true  charity
and  love  ;  for  if  it  hath  this,  the  soul  deserveth  to  inherit
the  divine  possessions.  And  I  do  exhort  you  that  ye
desire  not  only  to  have  this  charity  amongst  yourselves,
but  likewise  unto  all  people.  For  I  say  unto  you  that  of  a
certainty  my  soul  hath  received  more  profit  from  weeping
and  lamenting  over  the  sins  of  my  neighbour  than  over


OF  FOLIGNO  261

mine  own.  And  the  world  doth  scoff  at  that  which  I
now  say,  namely  that  a  man  may  weep  for  his  neighbour's
sins  as  for  his  own,  or  even  more  than  for  his  own,  for  it
seemeth  to  be  contrary  unto  nature,  but  the  charity  which
bringeth  this  about  is  not  of  this  world.

"  Oh  my  children,  strive  to  possess  this  charity  and
judge  not  any  man,  even  though  ye  should  behold  him
commit  a  mortal  sin.  I  do  not  say  that  sin  should  not  be
displeasing  unto  you  and  that  ye  should  not  hold  it  in
the  greatest  horror,  but  I  do  say  that  ye  should  never
judge  the  sinners,  and  moreover  I  say  that  ye  should  never
despise  them,  for  ye  know  not  the  judgments  of  our  Lord
God ;  and  many  are  there  who  do  appear  unto  men  to  be
condemned  unto  hell,  but  who  are  saved  in  the  sight  of
God,  and  many  who  appear  unto  men  to  be  saved  are
reprobate  in  the  sight  of  God  and  condemned  unto  hell.
I  could  tell  you  of  some  whom  ye  have  despised,  but  of
whom  I  have  the  sure  hope  that  God  will  lead  them  back
into  His  own  Hand.

"  I  will  make  no  other  testament,  saving  that  I  do  com
mend  unto  you  this  mutual  love  and  profound  humility.
And  all  mine  heritage  do  I  leave  unto  you,  the  which  is
likewise  that  of  Christ  Jesus,  namely  poverty,  suffering,
and  scorn.  Your  life  is  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  Those  who
shall  possess  this  heritage  of  the  Life  of  Christ  shall  be  my
children,  because  they  are  the  children  of  God  ;  where
fore  is  there  no  doubt  that  they  shall  possess  the  heritage
of  eternal  life."

s


262  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

When  she  had  made  an  end  of  saying  these  things,  she
placed  her  hand  upon  the  head  of  each  person,  saying —

"  Blessed  be  ye,  both  of  the  Lord  and  of  me,  oh  my
children,  ye  and  all  the  others  who  are  not  here  present.
And  even  as  it  hath  been  signified  and  shown  forth  unto
me  by  the  Lord,  even  so  do  I  give  this  eternal  blessing
unto  you  who  are  present  and  unto  those  who  are  absent,
and  may  that  same  Christ  Himself  give  it  unto  you  with
the  Hand  whereby  He  was  nailed  upon  the  Cross.  Amen."


THE    PASSING   AWAY    OF   THE    BLESSED    ANGELA

ABOUT  the  Feast  of  the  Nativity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
(at  which  time  she  passed  away  unto  Christ),  as  she  lay
very  sick,  she  said,  "  The  Word  is  made  Flesh,"  and  after
a  long  silence,  as  though  she  were  returning  from  some
other  place,  she  said,  "  Oh,  every  creature  faileth,  and  the
whole  of  the  angelic  understanding  sufficeth  not  to  com
prehend  this."  Then  she  added,  "  My  soul  is  washed
and  cleansed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  which  was
as  fresh  and  warm  as  though  it  had  but  this  moment
issued  from  the  body  of  the  Crucified."

After  this  she  said  :  "  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  hath
now  presented  me  unto  the  Father,  and  these  words  have
been  spoken  unto  me —

" '  Oh  bride  and  fair  one,  oh  thou  who  art  beloved  of
Me  with  perfect  love,  of  a  truth  I  would  not  that  thou


OF  FOLIGNO  263

shouldst  come  unto  Me  with  these  exceeding  great
sufferings,  but  I  would  thou  shouldst  come  with  the
utmost  rejoicing  and  with  joy  unspeakable,  even  as  it  is
seemly  that  the  King  should  lead  home  the  bride  whom
He  hath  loved  so  long,  and  clothed  with  the  royal  robe.'

"  And  he  showed  me  the  robe,  even  as  the  bridegroom
showeth  it  unto  the  bride  whom  he  hath  loved  a  long
time.  It  was  neither  of  purple  nor  of  scarlet,  nor  of
sendal,  nor  of  samite,  but  it  was  a  certain  marvellous  light
which  clothed  the  soul.  And  then  He  showed  unto
me  the  Bridegroom,  the  Eternal  Word,  so  that  now  I  do
understand  what  thing  the  Word  is  and  what  it  doth
mean — that  is  to  say,  this  Word  which  for  my  sake
was  made  Flesh.  And  the  Word  entered  into  me
and  touched  me  throughout  and  embraced  me,  saying,
'  Come,  My  love,  My  bride,  beloved  of  Me  with  true
delight — come,  for  all  the  saints  do  await  thee  with  ex
ceeding  great  joy.'  And  He  said  again  unto  me,  '  I  will
not  commit  thee  in  charge  unto  the  blessed  angels  or
other  saints  that  they  should  lead  thee  unto  Me,  but  I
will  come  personally  and  fetch  thee  and  will  raise  thee
unto  Myself,  for  thou  hast  made  thyself  meet  for  Me  and
pleasing  unto  My  Majesty.'  "

Now  when  she  was  nigh  unto  the  time  of  her  passing
away  (being  the  day  before  it),  she  did  often  repeat,
"  Father,  into  Thy  Hands  I  do  commend  my  soul  and
my  spirit."  Once,  after  repeating  these  words,  she  said
unto  us  who  were  present —


264  THE  BLESSED  ANGELA

"  Now  hath  an  answer  unto  those  words  been  given
unto  me,  and  it  is  this  :  *  It  is  impossible  that  in  death
thou  shouldst  lose  that  which  hath  been  impressed  upon
thine  heart  in  life.'  "  Then  did  we  say  unto  her,  "  Wilt
thou,  then,  depart  and  leave  us  ?  "  And  she  made  answer
— "  A  long  time  have  I  hidden  it  from  you,  but  now  will
I  conceal  it  no  longer.  I  say  unto  you  that  I  must  needs
depart."

And  upon  that  same  day  ceased  all  those  sufferings
with  which  for  many  days  previously  she  had  been
grievously  tormented  in  all  her  limbs,  both  within  and
without,  and  afflicted  in  many  ways.  And  she  did  then
lie  in  such  repose  of  the  body  and  cheerfulness  of  spirit
that  she  appeared  as  though  she  already  tasted  somewhat
of  the  joy  which  had  been  promised  unto  her.

Then  did  we  ask  of  her  whether  that  aforesaid  joy  had
yet  been  granted  unto  her,  and  she  replied  that  the  above-
mentioned  joy  had  commenced.

And  in  this  repose  of  body  and  cheerfulness  of  spirit
she  lay  very  joyfully  until  the  hour  of  Compline  on  the
Saturday,  surrounded  by  many  of  the  brethren  who  did
administer  the  Holy  Mysteries  unto  her.  And  upon
that  same  day,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  Octave  of  the
Innocents,  at  the  last  hour  of  the  day  she  gently  fell
asleep  and  rested  in  peace.  And  that  most  holy  soul  was
set  free  from  the  flesh,  and  being  drawn  into  the  abyss
of  the  divine  infinitude,  it  received  from  Christ,  its
Bridegroom,  the  garment  of  innocence  and  immortality,


OF  FOLIGNO  265

in  order  that  it  might  reign  together  with  Him.  And
unto  this  same  place  may  He  likewise  bring  us,  through
the  virtue  of  the  Cross,  the  merits  of  the  Virgin,  His
Mother,  and  the  intercession  of  this  our  mother,  the
Blessed  Angela.  Amen.

End  of  the  Testament  and  Passing  Away  of  the
Blessed  Angela.


The  venerable  bride  of  Christ,  Angela  of  Foligno,
passed  from  the  shipwreck  of  this  world  unto  the  joys
of  heaven,  which  had  long  been  promised  unto  her,  in
the  year  of  our  Lord's  Incarnation,  one  thousand,  three
hundred  and  nine,  on  the  fourth  day  of  January,  in  the
time  of  Pope  Clement  the  Fifth.


Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  <5r*  Co.
Edinburgh  &•  London


MQL18T


/


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
