The Religious Quests of the Graeco-Roman World (S. Angus, 1929)
==========================================================
Angus's 1929 Religious Quests — the spiritual hungers of the ancient world on the eve of Christianity; mystery cults and philosophy. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

D Ir oit ite 
2 SARs 
Sie UIT 


Bre 


Rebate a: 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/religiousquestso0000unse_t903 


x » 
- tr 


T 


t > 
—-—À ME 


LN 
-> 


THE RELIGIOUS QUESTS OF THE 
GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD 


By the Same Author 


THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 
AND CHRISTIANITY 


A Study in the Religious Back- 
ground of Early Christianity 


“A book of quite unique value and 
importance. It is a monument of 
vast learning, fascinatingly interesting, 
and gives a more complete and detailed 
account of its subject than has before 
appeared within the covers of one 
volume, at least in the English 
language.’—Church Times. 


THE ENVIRONMENT OF 
EARLY CHRISTIANITY 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


THE RELIGIOUS QUESTS 
OF THE 


GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD 


A STUDY IN THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
OF EARLY CHRISTIANITY 


BY 


Bo ANGUS. PIED, DT, DD: 


PROFESSOR OF NEW TESTAMENT AND HISTORICAL THEOLOGY 
ST. ANDREW'S COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY 


LONDON 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W. 


esta t 
E N, 


WEE Oe 


TO 
MY MOTHER 


664-6 
n 


T 


3 ^ X m, , 
^ (60U a TOLA TAaVTA 


f 


FOREWORD 


CHRISTIANITY arose as an historical religion, historically 
conditioned in a definite environment. It was based on 
certain historical facts; it was preached by and to men 
who held a view of the world which differs radically in 
many respects from the views of the present. Chris- 
tianity not only made history but was modified and 
shaped by history. No genetic study of Christianity 
will ever explain Christianity, yet ignorance of its ante- 
cedents and of the contemporary spiritual forces and 
mentality renders a true appreciation impossible. There 
is a more excellent way of magnifying Christianity than 
by ignoring or decrying Paganism, or disparaging the 
rival systems which Christianity overcame and laid 
under tribute. 

During the last generation there has been an increasing 
recognition of the effect of environment on early, Chris- 
tianity and of the necessity of envisaging Christianity 
in its complete cultural and religious background. The 
Graeco-Roman world was the soil on which the Sower 
went forth to sow the Christian seed; the growth 
depended not only on the vital forces inherent in the 
seed but on the preparation and fertility of the soil. We 
must know the ancient habits of thought and intellectual 
postulates with which Christianity came into contact and 
which it partially at least adopted, to understand 
adequately its task. 

To the question, ‘ Is God the God of the Jews only ? ’ 
students of ancient history must affirm that He is also 
the God of the Greeks and the Orientals and the Romans. 
There was a rich Pagan preparation for Christianity as 
there was undoubtedly a rich Jewish contribution to 
‘the fullness of the times.’ The spiritual values of 

1x 


x FOREWORD 


Hellenistic-Oriental syncretism cannot be overlooked by 
students of the history and evolution of Christianity. 
The Christian Ecclesia is best appreciated when observed 
at work in an intensely religious world in competition 
with the Synagogues of the Dispersion, the Guilds of the 
Mystery-Religions, and the Schools of Greek philosophy. 

In Paganism there was a ' groping after God if haply 
they might find Him,' and such aspirations are of direct 
interest to us as enabling us to appreciate better the 
Gospel which satisfied them. In every age Wisdom, 
* entering into holy souls,’ makes men ‘ friends of God 
and prophets,’ eager to apprehend and live the Truth. 
* Those who lived with the Word and were Christians 
before Christ, those who delivered their testimonium 
animae naturaliter Christianae, prepared the way of the 
Lord. And among those who later opposed the irresist- 
ible progress of our Faith, when spiritual issues were 
often confused in political and sectarian zeal, there are 
found sincere ‘ men who were lovers of wisdom both in 
their characters and in their discourses,’ and believed 
that * we must absolutely by no means let go our hold 
of God by day or night.' Christianity proved unable 
to discover a method of coming to terms with or appro- 
priating ancient culture without rending the rich fabric 
of Graeco-Roman civilization. We observe its champions 
often so conscious of moral perils that in their alarm they 
rooted up wheat with the tares, refusing to let both grow 
together till the harvest. 

In the hope of contributing, in however modest a 
fashion, to a knowledge of the conditions in the Medi- 
terranean world at the rise and during the spread of our 
Faith, this volume is published. It consists of lectures 
given in Yale University during October and November 
of last year ; delivered also in part in Chicago University ; 
Toronto University ; Oberlin College, Ohio; and Hart- 
ford Seminary Foundation, Connecticut. In revision of 
the work for the press, the original lecture form has been 
adhered to, even at the risk of occasional repetition. 


FOREWORD xi 


An attempt has been made not only to interpret the 
Graeco-Roman period, but also to present it speaking 
for itself in its own words. Considerations of space, 
however, rendered compression and selection necessary 
and made only brief citations possible; numerous other 
citations and references accumulated from ancient 
records have been regretfully omitted. 

Quotations from ancient sources are indicated by 
single quotation marks; those from modern authors in 
double quotation marks. Translations from both are, 
unless otherwise specified, by the writer. 

Thanks are due to my colleague Professor Edward 
E. Anderson for having read the manuscript and for 


helpful suggestions. 
S. A. 
Sr. ANDREW'S COLLEGE, SYDNEY. 
December 22, 1928. 


CONTENTS 
FOREWORD  . ; : ; : : pp. ix-xi 


THE RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE 
GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD 


CHAPTER I 
THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE GRAECO-ROMAN 
PERIOD 


Sources of Western civilization: (1) Hellenism, (2) Hebraism, (3) 
Christianity—superficial adaptation—study of spiritual antecedents— 
sympathetic humanism in reading history—conservatism and experi- 
ence—religious aspirations—Philo—Seneca—Celsus—Porphyry — lam- 
blichus—Simplicius—Augustine—persistence of human  problems— 
difficulty of estimating a complex period of the past—variety of ex- 
pression—Myths—Sallustius—Julian—crises—West disposed toward 
Oriental gospels—religious earnestness—summary : - pp. 1-18 


CHAPTER II 


THE VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS AND THE 
DOMINANT CONCEPTIONS OF SALVATION 


Yearning for salvation—negatively and positively—eclectic tenden- 
cies—main types of religion in the field—connotations of term salvation, 
soteria—Salvation conceived (1) politically and _ socially—philan- 
thropia—Oriental and Hellenistic deification of rulers—saviours and 
gods manifest—the imperial cult—(2) Moral self-realization, especially 
in Stoicism—anthropocentric—self-examination—immortality—resigna- 
tion rather than joy—(3) Unio mystica—general character of ancient 
mysticism—Platonism—Christ-mysticism—Plotinus—Philo—(4) Escape 
‘from cosmic necessity—tyranny of the world-rulers (kosmokratores)— 
demons—in Christian thought—cosmic pretensions of the Mysteries— 
philosophy—(5) ritualistic henosis, union by sacrament—(6) deliver- 
ance from sin and weakness—Orphism and original sin—introspection 
—superstition—penances, etc.—asceticism Pp. 19-46 


CHAPTER III 


THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 
Judaism—Greek philosophy—the Mystery-Religions—Christianity— 
eclectic tendencies in religion—Judaism and Christianity—Jews in 


xiii 


xiv CONTENTS 


world-history—importance of the Diaspora—anti-Semitism— success of 
Jewish propaganda—ethical code—appeal of the Synagogue—God in 
history . E 4 5 : ` 5 « PP. 47-57 


CHAPTER IV 
GREEK MORAL AND GREEK MYSTICAL PHILOSOPHY 


Socrates and morality—only real things knowable—Beauty and 
Goodness—man ‘a heavenly plant ’—services of Greek philosophy to 
the ancient world—to Christianity—early Christian testimonies—the 
Platonic temperament—timeless message of Platonism—philosophy and 
religion—Stoicism and cosmopolitanism—humanitas—advance made by 

v Christianity on Stoicism—Mysticism—individualistic and religious 
philosophy—transcendentalism—appeal to religious experience—striving 
for union with God—mysticism the culmination of Greek thought— 
Numenius—Plotinus—the ‘ Spirit in Love ’—Neo-Platonists rationa- 
lists—Plotinus's religious experience the basis of Neo-Platonism— 
limitations of Greek philosophy ; $ : à s pp: 58-75 


CHAPTER V 
THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


General features—variety—chief cults—message of the Mysteries— 
services to ancient world—personal and universal religions—in syncre- 
tistic movement—new social values—sympatheia and identification 
—tolerance—saved and unsaved—influence on Christianity—success 
of Mysteries—long  reign—superior advantages of Christianity— 
emotional cults—visions—testimonies of initiates—guarantees of im- 
mortality—channels of sacramentarianism A ^ . pp. 76-92 


CHAPTER VI 
CHRISTIANITY 


The new religion—rallying centre of spiritual forces—an historic 
centre—mythus—circumstances favourable to Christianity— Christianity 
and Syncretism—apocalyptic enthusiasm— dangers to which Christianity 
was exposed—‘ the fullness of the times ’—universalism through St. 
Paul—complexus oppositorum—problem of catholicizing a religion— 
reasons for victory of Christianity—the threefold victory—external 
means employed after Constantine’s edict . . - PP. 93-106 


CHAPTER VII 


CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


Christianity assimilated and repudiated—fabric of Graeco-Roman 
culture rent—the spirit of Greece in Christian history— Christian mis- 
giving toward Pagan culture—íalse alternatives—extreme positions in 


CONTENTS XV 


crises—rise of Christian philosophy—Christian apologists divided in 
attitude toward philosophy—Justin—Clement—Origen—victory of 
intolerance and legalism—evils of Africanism—need of perspective— 
contemporary outlook—Aramaic Gospel reshapen for Hellenistic world 
—application to complex needs of Mediterranean world—necessary 
evolution—developments: (1) institutionalizing and rise of sacerdotal 
caste, (2) standardization of opinions, (3) radiance and liberty super- 
seded by asceticism and code of morals, (4) exclusive vehicles of saving 
grace, (5) an intercessory religion with another conception of Deity— 
corresponding anthropological pessimism—Augustine—possible alterna- 
tives—Christianity more catholic than any Church . « pp. 107-126 


THE RELIGION OF MAGIC, SACRAMENT 
AND SYMBOL 


CHAPTER VIII 


ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


Surprising developments within Christianity—the immediacy of the 
religion of Jesus giving way to mediatorial offices—new conditions of 
forgiveness—two synchronous processes in religion—equipment with 
rites and sacraments. Sacramentarianism in ancient world: (ri) rites 
before deities; (2) associations of magic and religion; (3) difficulty of 
abstract thinking; (4) symbolism—difference between ancient and 


modern ‘‘ symbols ’’; (5) realism—examples; (6) the ‘ power’ of the 
Name . . : : : d : : : . pp. 127-145 
CHAPTER IX 


ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM INTO CHRISTIANITY 


Causes contributing to rise of sacramentarianism in Christianity: 
(x) sacerdotalism of the Old Testament; (2) John the Baptist's influence 
—nature of Johannine baptism; (3) rise of officialdom; (4) conversion 
of Constantine; (5) esotericism—character of—examples; (6) aesthetic- 
religious cravings and needs—influence of Greek and Roman religions; 


(7) the retreat of Platonism . : : ^ : + pp. 146-164 
CHAPTER X 
THE EVOLUTION OF MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL IDEAS 
AND USAGES 


Progressive materializing of the sacraments—dominance of Gentile 
Christianity—magical working of rites among Christians, orthodox and 
heretical—Cyprian—vicarious potencies—among the Jews—among 
Christians—Pagan protests against ex opere operato virtues—difference 
between ancient and modern mentality—continuity in religious history 
—difference between Christian and Pagan sacramentarianism 


pP. 165-175 


xvi CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XI 
THE PERSISTENCE OF ANCIENT SACRAMENBARIANISM 
(1) Presumed Dominical institution—value not de n historic 


institution—no sure historic warrant—interpretation ofthe historic 
data—(2) the mystery of the relation between visible and invisible— 
(3) emotion at communion—differences in sacramental experiences— 
exaltation and purification of feelings apart from sacraments—sacra- 
mental practice and the fruits of the Spirit—(4) by isolation of certain 
ecclesiastical symbols from the general symbolism of life—(5) acceptance 
of Patristic authority—use of Church Fathers—precariousness of such 
appeal—proves too much—example from Augustine—(6) ignoring of 
process from rites to deities—practical value of sacraments—need of 
sacraments—sacraments one of the three ‘‘ modalities ’’ of religion— 
von Hügel—sacramental and sacramentarian tendencies . pp. 176-194 


CHAPTER XII 


RELATION OF ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 
TO SACRAMENTARIANISM 


Alleged sacramentarianism of St. Paul—inconclusive—no evidence 
of physical significance of either sacrament—mystic experiences in 
connexion with the sacraments—regeneration—no causal connexion 
between Spirit and rite—centrality of Faith-mysticism—sacraments 
symbolic-mystic—no official ministrant—forgiveness and rite—Paul’s 
attitude to the Mysteries—Christianity a mystery subsequent to Paul’s 
day—Pauline material promoting sacramentarianism—examples—moral 
emphasis in Paul . pp. 195-208 

Fourth Gospel—advance toward AEE place 
of sacraments—but (1) paradoxical character of Johannine thought, 
(2) twofold conception of Life—regeneration and baptism—character 
of the Bread Discourse—sacraments as problems—water and Spirit— 
three corrective enunciations—Eucharistic teaching: (1) Eucharist and 
miraculous feeding, (2) life in Logos-Christ now, (3) ‘the Spirit 
quickens, (4) ' words of eternal life,’ (5) only Spirit can produce 
Spirit—Johannine doctrine of sacraments (1) against popular magical 
efficacies, (2) against the Gnostics—‘ signs '—bold sacramentarian 
statements—contradiction between conception of life-giving Logos and 
life imparted by rite—Fourth Gospel promoted sacramentarianism— 
validity of the Sacrament as spiritual and inward . - pp. 208-218 


CHAPTER XIII 
THE PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


Utility of sacraments: (1) man a creature of two worlds—alliance of 
material and spiritual—'' godlike hours ''— Plotinus on the Intelligible 


CONTENTS xvii 


and the Sensible; (2) human nature sensitive to impressions of the 
external world—sacraments as meeting-places of finite and Infinite— 
symbols natural, or conventional—religious use of the economy of 
Nature; (3) the rticulate in religion—the Absolute in symbols; (4) 
difficulty ining high levels of spirituality—many channels 
of the Infini o the soul—subjective receptivity—differentiation be- 
itween symbol and sacrament—‘‘ uncovenanted mercies "'—sacraments 
and character—varieties of sacramental experiences—the Real Presence 
— rite and Love—abuses of sacraments (1) as surrogates for Reality— 
confusion of sensible sign and sacrament; (2) isolation from general 
sacramentalism; (3) overlooking other modes of revelation—especially 
in personality; (4) obligatory, or ‘“ generally necessary to salvation '' 
—other types of mystics j pp. 219-238 


CHAPTER XIV 
SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


Three essentials of a sacrament: (1) predisposing psychological condi- 
tion, (2) objective means or material channel, (3) spiritual insight— 
examples of use of tangible objects—Joan of Arc—Mary of Scots— 
R. L. Stevenson—Keats—Robert E. Lee—through sense to spirit— 
practical tests of sacraments—congregational value—use of symbols 
and images—legitimate use of external means of grace: (1) ex opere 
operato credence strengthens magic—possible incongruity between rites 
and morals; (2) sacraments not exclusive or chief gateway to reality— 
‘the Soul has its sense '; (3) abolish difference in kind between ecclesi- 
astical rites and the symbolism of human life; (4) and between Christian 
and Pagan sacraments—cleavage between popular and reflective reli- 
gion in every age—For future (1) the sacramental principle to be 
carried all through life, (2) advance toward healthy mysticism—sub- 
jectivity and objectivity in religion ` 5 3 2 PP: 239-299 


ASTRALISM, OR THE RELIGION OF ASTROLOGY 


CHAPTER XV 
ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS CATHOLIC APPEAL 


Cosmic and astral Zeitgeist—persistence of astrology—a science- 
religion—wide appeal—four postulates of astralism: (1) Element-mysti- 
cism—‘ like by like ’—‘sun-like eyes’; (2) Cosmic unity—Stoics on 
cosmos—universal harmony; (3) Ensouled universe; (4) Microcosm- 
macrocosm—Astralism (x) a practical religion—fatalism and freedom 
—Providence—correspondences; (2) sidereal mysticism and cosmic 
‘emotion; (3) ethical aspects—(a) Providence, (b) commerce with heaven, 
(c) inward cleansing—testimonies—Philo; (4) Solar monotheism—Sun- 
cult and philosophy—importance of the Solar worship . pp. 254-278 


2 


xviii CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XVI 
ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


Fluid conceptions—Blessedness, (1) release from the body, (2) en- 
raptured by harmony of the spheres, (3) contemplation of earth from 
celestial spaces—astralism a mystic faith—Posidonius—Seneca—other 
Stoics on immortality—astrologists dubious on individual survival— 
return to the Elements—refining influence of philosophy on astralism 
—Platonic transcendentalism competing with Stoic immanence—solar 
cult spiritualized—symbolism—wings of the soul—Eros—contiguity of 
the sensuous and sensual in religion—Greek aestheticism—a new Erotic 
—‘ Yonder World’ now—the earthly and heavenly Loves—Philo— 
Plotinus—symbols of the soul's aspiration  . c - DP- 279-294 


CHAPTER: XVII 
THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


Source of the idea—means of transit—lran—the Orphics—Pytha- 
goreans—Plato—adoption by Stoicism—nature of the Soul—Posidonius 
—Cicero—Seneca—doctrine of the Ascent of the Soul: (1) prior descent, 
(2) kinship with the sidereal world, (3) need of purification from earth- 
pollution—toil and dangers of Ascent—through the seven Spheres— 
fate of impious soul—means of Ascent: (1) because of the constitution 
of the soul, (2) solar attraction—‘ upward-bearing rays’ of the Sun, 
the Eagle, (3) moral health and purity, (4) a divine escort—Mode of 
Ascent: (x) eschatologically, (2) empirically in ecstasy and ‘ en- 
thusiasm ’—Christian parallels—Vettius Valens—Manilius, (3) cosmic 
contemplation—Ptolemy— Seneca, (4) dream-trance, (5) transfigura- 


tion pP. 295-320 
ANCIENT GREEK THEOSOPHY AS A RELIGION 


CHAPTER XVII 
CHARACTERISTICS OF HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


Syncretism on Platonic basis—no dogmatic uniformity—fatalism and 
freedom—dualism—immortaliy—origin of evil—punishment—astralism 
—incarnation—origin of world—cosmic speculation and Fourth Gospel 
—perseverance of Hermetic saints—esoteric religion—secrecy of propa- 
ganda—asceticism—procreation of children—enduring persecution—not ` 
a  sacramentarian  cult—spiritual sacrifices—symbolism—Christian 
idolatry—revelation—grace—íreedom—not a church—aristocratic sect 
—mutual obligations—ineffable experiences . : + PP- 321-355 


CHAPTER XIX 


THE HERMETIC ‘ UPWARD WAY ' 


Cosmocentric religion of three terms—man’s destiny connected with 
his origin: (1) microcosm-macrocosm, (2) his place in the universe— 


CONTENTS xix 


ensouled cosmos—God, cosmos, man—greatness of man—his weakness 
and limitations—no uniformity—the three leading anthropologies— 
‘the path to the things above’ not easy—anti-Christian apologetic— 
piety based on gnosis—the light of knowledge—the illuminated and 
destiny—immortality—privileges of the Vision—ecstatic experiences— 
‘expansive cosmic consciousness—modern parallels—regeneration—saved 
undergo marvellous change—both in the body and eschatologically— 
Pauline analogies—corporeity and incorruptibility—perils attendant on 
missing Hermetic salvation—ignorance in the soul—disease of godless- 
ness—forfeiting immortality—salvation without a Saviour pp. 356-375 


THE WAY OF GNOSIS 


CHAPTER XX 


MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM: ITS ENTRY INTO 
CHRISTIANITY 


What is Gnosis?—definitions of—heterogeneous character of Gnosti- 
cism—aim of Gnosticism—theories as to origin—motives and causes: 
(1i) Hellenistic-Oriental syncretism, (2) desperate religious need, (3) 
cosmic outlook, (4) metaphysical interests—relation to Astralism— 
Christianity as focus of Gnostic movement: (1) both spread rapidly in 
same centres of religious ferment; (2) laxity of ecclesiastical organiza- 
tion and freedom of teaching—the Spirit; (3) inadequacy of primitive 
Messianism; (4) ancient (Greek) attitude to history—Time ' the moving 
image of eternity ’—Paul—Fourth Gospel—dramatization of history; 
(5) lack of cosmic outlook in Jerusalem community; (6) the personality 
‘of Jesus; (7) Gnostic tendencies in Paul—perversion of Paulinism— 
Pauls asceticism—Christ-mysticism—freedom—his cosmic drama of 
redemption—scanty references to facts of Jesus’ life—Pauline gnosis 

pP. 376-397 


CHAPTER XXI 


REACTIONS OF GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY : 
GNOSTIC PIETY 


Dangers to Christianity—Hellenizing and Orientalizing of Christianity 
—divinity of Christ—gains to the Church—rise of Catholic Church— 
‘intolerance and excommunications—concessions made by Church— 
problem of faith and history raised—extreme positions in controversy 
—humanity of Jesus at issue—Gnostics conscious of value of Hellenism 
—Estimation of Gnosticism: (1) by testimonies of the Gnostics them- 
selves—Naassene Hymn—Hymn of the Soul—Prayers from Acts of 
John—Valentinus—Pistis Sophia; (2) influence on opponents of Gnosti- 
cism who understood it—Fourth Gospel—Ignatius—Clement—Origen 

Pp. 398-413 


xx CONTENTS 


RELIGION AND MEDICINE 


CHAPTER XXII 


RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC IN PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN 
CIRCLES 


Soteria as health and salvation—sensitiveness to suffering—science 
and credulity—faith-healing and psychopathic conditions—Jesus as 
Physician—his exorcisms and healings—his attitude to ' sign-seeking ’ 
—healing and preaching in the early Church—prayer and unction— 
Gospel both physical and spiritual—the Logos as Paeonian Healer— 
Origen and Celsus on miracles and faith-cures—Aesculapius versus 
Christ—medical aids and nursing part of Christian ministry—super- 
vision of sick—religion as means of healing for Pagans and Christians 
—humanity of Pagan practitioners—unscientific spirit among early 
Christians—Epidauros and Lourdes—Pagan Healer-Gods—Incubatio— 
treatments—spread of cult of Aesculapius—testimonies to his miracu- 
lous cures—the magician as physician—demonology—Jesus and demons 
—magic, medicine, religion . ; ; : : - pp. 414-438 


INDEX OF NAMES . ' i i . PP. 439-442 
INDEX OF SUBJECTS . i : : - PP. 443, 444 


THE RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE 
GRAECO-ROMAN WORLD 


CHAPTER I 
HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE GRAECO-ROMAN PERIOD 


THE study of the Graeco-Roman world, stretching from 
Alexander the Great to Constantine or Julian, will 
always be of great historic interest for the intrinsic value 
of a period profoundly civilized and pulsating with 
religious life ; for its striking modernity and its relevance 
to modern problems; but chiefly as the cultural back- 
ground of that religion which has won its way to be the 
religion of our Western civilization. Study of the New 
Testament and of the popular enthusiastic movement 
which became conquering Christianity has suffered 
through being pursued apart from its historic back- 
ground and religious environment. Much New Testa- 
ment study is of the same order as if Shakespeare were 
studied largely in the background of Victorian Britain 
or in the atmosphere of the Enlightenment instead of in 
that of '' the spacious times of great Elizabeth." Or— 
since Christianity is an Oriental religion and the New 
Testament has reached mostly Western readers—our 
New Testament has suffered much in the same way as if 
it were looked upon and interpreted largely in the light 
of present-day Japan rather than first in that of peasant 
Galilee, the Jewish Diaspora, and Hellenistic culture. 
Moreover, this ancient Mediterranean basin, where 
civilization reacted on civilization and ideals came into 
conflict with ideals, is of immediate relevancy to us, 


inasmuch as there are three main elements in our modern 
I 


2 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


Western civilization, or, to change the figure, three main 
strands in its warp and woof, and all three have come 
to us from that Graeco-Roman world—Hellenism, 
Hebraism, and Christianity. 

One can scarcely exaggerate the importance and value 
of the Greek contributions and of the momentous de- 
cision of Greece to consecrate her matchless genius to 
Christ instead of to Mithra. Shelley exaggerates when 
he says ‘‘ we are all Greeks; our laws, our religion, 
our art, have their roots in Greece," as does Francis 
Thompson on the other hand when he says ‘‘ Paganism 
is lovely because it is dead," since Hellenistic-Oriental 
Paganism was not without high moral and spiritual 
values. Hellenism, or ‘‘ the thirst for richness and 
harmony,” is an essential for fullness of life. Why does 
Greece live? Because of that inspiring ideal of a full 
and integral manhood—‘‘ Hellas the nurse of man com- 
plete as man ’’; because in the Greek schools of Ionia 
and Athens and Magna Graecia European philosophy 
took its rise and saved the West from the inchoate 
thought of the Orient and from submission to the external 
authority of sacerdotalism ; because her philosophy was 
the first to embrace complexity in unity, and to refuse 
to rest in half truths ; because in ethics and religion and 
in all else the typically Greek outlook was the rare 
attitude of Sophrosyne, a moderation of perfect poise 
without exaggeration and without weakness; because 
she was the mother of rational civilization and the first 
advocate of the supremacy of reason which posited no 
limit to inquiry ; because she was the first to assert the 
right of “ man’s meddling intellect "" to raise questions 
and to pursue their solution to the utmost horizon; 
because of her sanity in religion, Greece being the first 
to expel fear from religion and the first to subject religion 
to fearless criticism ; because Greek religion ‘‘ proclaimed 
the divine consecration of the intellectual life” +; 
because, in a word, Greece is '' the mother-country of 

1 Farnell, Higher Aspects of Greek Religion, p. 124. 


HELLENISM AND HEBRAISM 3 


the mind ” ! to which every man instinctively points 
when he would illustrate the indefeasible claims and 
inherent destinies of human nature. 

Hebraism has made its perennial contribution, 
especially to the religious life. If Shelley exaggerated 
regarding the Greeks, Romanes has exaggerated still 
more regarding the Jews when he says, '' If it had not 
been for the Jews the human race would not have had 
any religion worth our serious attention." Matthew 
Arnold has more truthfully affirmed, '' As long as the 
world lasts, all who want to make progress in righteous- 
ness will come to Israel for inspiration, as to the people 
who have had the sense for righteousness most glowing 
and strongest, and in hearing and reading the words 
Israel has uttered for us, carers for conduct will find a 
glow and a force they could find nowhere else." 

.'' Judaea, pregnant with the living God,’’ bequeathed a 
stern morality as the basis of both social and individual 
life, a tenacious social consciousness such as no other 
race in antiquity knew, an indomitable faith in a personal 
God which made her defiant in defeat, a belief in an 
increasing purpose in history, an attitude to suffering 
which has left the sublimest interpretation in all literature 
of the redemptive power of suffering. 

The third element in our civilization, Christianity, was 
** the revelation of personality and depth ” in a deepen- 
ing of conscience and in appeal to experience. Its 
message of the infinite worth of personality with all its 
subtle modulations of individuality is our peculiarly 
Western pride. It satisfed best the two dominant 
passions of our self-hood, the passion for love and the 
passion for knowledge; it discovered the mysterious 
depths, range, and complexity of human personality and 
the privileges and awful responsibilities of freedom. 

With no more accuracy than should be expected from 
general statements we may summarize by saying that 
Greece contributed philosophy, Israel morality, and 

1 Butler, Hist. of Ancient Philosophy, Y, p. 268. 


4 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


Christianity personality ; that the watchword of Greece 
was Freedom, of Israel Law, and of Christianity Love ; 
that Hellenism stressed Beauty, Hebraism Duty, and 
Christianity Selfless Service ; that the first was anthropo- 
centric, the second theocentric, and the third Christo- 
centric; the first issued in individualism, the second 
developed a social and corporate consciousness, the third 
is a synthesis of both; the method of the first was 
inquiry, that of the second trust, that of the third faith- 
knowledge. 

These three extensive views of life from that Graeco- 
Roman era have been superimposed upon an alien racial 
and cultural basis—the character and genius of our 
Western, especiallp Teutonic, race. Our Western 
civilization is an attempted, but as yet very imperfect, 
synthesis ' of these three great heritages of the things of 
the spirit. The West has not yet been wholly converted 
to Christianity, only nominally, and with all the perils 
of a superficial adaptation. It has not yet adjusted itself 
to the full religion of Jesus, nor assimilated these three 
heritages, nor taken them in their healthful proportions. 

In making an incursion into this ancient world we are, 
therefore, making a practical study of our spiritual ante- 
cedents and of the near and the remote associations of 
Christianity. We should be less than human and lacking 
in historic imagination did we not hear the appeal of our 
distant predecessors. 


““The souls of now two thousand years 
Have laid up here their toils and fears 
And all the earnings of their pain.'' 


Every effort made by the human spirit in its pursuit of 
reality is of perennial worth. Had these ancients made 
no mistakes and proved infallible, they should be dis- 


* “ If the Church had fully understood and accepted the purpose and 
spirit of Christ, the great rational Graeco-Roman civilization, so far as 
we can see, need not have been swept away ” (Lilian Dougall, Modern 
Churchman, XII, p. 327). 


SPIRITUAL ANTECEDENTS 5 


qualified as our predecessors. We must attempt to 
relive their perplexing experiences, to face life as they 
did, to capture their mentality, and to develop a sym- 
pathetic humanism. Unprejudiced historians are no 
longer unequivocally oblivious of the inner conditions of 
the soul as the real creators of the external facts of 
history, nor are they ashamed to acknowledge the re- 
current and inevitable reactions of the spirit as the 
epoch-making factors, whether these reactions operate 
on economic, philosophical, or religious problems. His- 
tory has always an inner side in the secret happenings 
of the soul ; it presents also the external aspect of happen- 
ings chronicled in outward events. There is nothing 
more humanly interesting than to contemplate man 
making his experiments in different ways and directions 
after satisfaction—his ignorance and blind strugglings, 
. his disappointments, his renewed efforts to find the light, 
and his unquenchable thirst for truth— veri avidus.' 
Every endeavour to secure '' news from the inner court 
_ of things "' and to bring man into touch with the Eternal 
is of worth in our human story. Without undue gener- 
osity we may have patience with men who set out for 
a goal which they never reached, as we realize that the 
failures of former generations are as interesting and often 
more instructive than their successes. Deep calls to deep 
and spirit to spirit speaks across the intervening cen- 
turies, levelling with its humanism artificial and external 
and chronological differences. We may enter into the 
reverence of those who knelt not at our altars. We may 
gratefully appreciate bygone strivings. Humanity speaks 
a common language, and it is essential to the historian 
who would read the lessons of the past to hear it and to 
ponder reverently the varying expressions from age to 
age of the unchangeable truths. ‘‘ Sorrow sobs in all 
the languages of the world," and “‘ the martyr souls of 
heathendom ’’ deliver their courageous message only to 
martyr souls to-day. In the flux of things oftentimes 
* with the course of time the ancient things again become 


6 | HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


new,’ ' and, as another ancient thinker ? observed, God is 
‘ ever substituting new blessings for the older.’ Despite 
Tertullian's petulant ‘ what has Jerusalem to do with 
Athens? ', there were saints and martyrs of Athens and 
Alexandria and of the Orient as well as of Palestine and 
Italy. There were regenerating and cleansing forces 
then as in every society and culture. Satan did not cast 
out Satan in the Graeco-Roman age. If what was said 
about Truth and Happiness and Beauty two thousand 
years since is not final for us, neither is our apprehension 
of these adequate. We are at one with the Graeco- 
Roman age in moving about in worlds not realized. 

Considering the innate conservative tendency of man 
to cling to venerable customs and stale beliefs, we must 
the more admire the daring experiments made during 
these seven wonderful centuries. Men were then as now 
divided between the charm of the old and the appeal of 
the new. Experience is ever setting up and casting 
down human theories and values. In the process of 
progress much that is Reason becomes un-Reason, and 
much that was both precious and useful to man at one 
stage loses its value in face of new values and fresh 
aspects of truth, but this does not relieve the student of 
history of the duty of discovering how and why what 
may have now become antiquated and nonsense was 
once reason and science to the most enlightened con- 
temporaries, and of recognizing how some ancient for- 
mulas of truth have been corroborated by the passing 
generations. In the unresting striving of the human 
spirit toward an ever far-off, realizable and unrealizable 
goal, we may thankfully receive the torch of truth from 
the runners who have finished their course; we may 
enter sympathetically into the experiences of those who 
have laboriously and unfalteringly climbed 


' Upon the great world's altar-stairs, 
That slope thro’ darkness up to God.” 


1 máMv xpbyw rápxata kawà ylyvera, Stobaeus, Ecl. I. 8, 12. 
? Philo, De post. Caini, 43, C.-W. 145; M. I. 254. 


BYGONE ASPIRATIONS 7 


So doing we shall appreciate why Plotinus called his 
great master ‘ the divine Plato.’ Only those who, amid 
the rush and commercialism and superficiality of our 
modern world, have leisure and love for ‘ the things of 
yonder world,' as had Plotinus, can confess his great- 
ness and power and yield to his appeal. Only those who 
have paused to hear the throbbings of the human heart 
and to know ‘ the yearning and love of the soul’ and 
‘ the soul’s frequent rapturous joys ' ! can find in Philo, 
amid grotesque exegesis and antiquated cosmology, a 
perennial testimony to the things in life that endure. 
Philo’s aspiration,? ‘ Strive then, O Soul, to become the 
house of God, His holy temple, His loveliest abode,’ is 
but too rare in the breathlessly organizing Christianity 
of the twentieth century. 

Well might Lactantius ? on the ‘ admirable sentiment ' 
of Seneca, ‘ There is some great Deity, and greater than 
can be imagined; and for Him we endeavour to live. 
Let us approve ourselves to Him. For it is of no avail 
that conscience is confined ; we lie open to the sight of 
God,' write, * What can be spoken with greater truth 
by him who knew God, than has been said by a man who 
is ignorant of the true religion ? ' 

Origen,* the stalwart defender of Christianity, could 
not withhold his complete assent from the following 
words of his anti-Christian adversary, which he admitted 
were spoken when ' his judgement was not disturbed by 
demons ': ‘ We must absolutely by no means let go our 
hold of God, neither by day nor by night, neither in 
public nor in private; constantly in every word and 
deed, nay with and without these [words and deeds] 
let the soul ever be directed towards God.’ 


Though our Christian predecessors in the fifth century 
sought out and burned all accessible works of Porphyry 
1 Leg. Alleg. III, 60; C.-W. 173. ? De Som. I. 23; C.-W. 149. 

3 Div. Inst. VI. 25; tr. by Fletcher, I, p. 417. Seneca is saepe noster, 


Tert. de anima, 20. 
t C. Celsum, VIII. 63. 


8 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


as a shrewd critic and writer against Christianity, no 
unprejudiced reader can fail to be uplifted by the sin- 
cerity and contagious enthusiasm of this philosopher's 
exhortation in the beautiful Letter to Marcella, his wife, 
of which only the briefest extracts are possible: 


‘ Prayer accompanied by vicious deeds is unclean, 
and therefore not acceptable to God; prayer with good 
works is both clean and acceptable. In our relations to 
God let these four things be made strong as the founda- 
tion—faith, truth, love, hope. Faith we must have that 
there is no salvation except conversion to God, and, 
believing, we must use all possible diligence to know 
the truth about Him, and, when we know, we must love 
Him who is known, and, having come to love Him, we 
must nourish the soul throughout life by good hopes, 
for it is by good hopes that good men are superior to 


base men. These are the foundations, the ABC, and ~ 


let these things be made strong.’ * 


In the reference to prayer, though from the pen of a 
doughty defender of Paganism, many Christians will 
recognize a genuine personal experience: 


“To spend a long time in prayer nourishes our 
spiritual understanding, makes a far wider room in our 
soul for the reception of the Gods, opens the things of 
the Gods to men, gives us familiarity with the flashings 
of the Light, little by little perfects us internally for the 
Divine contact, till it leads us upward to the highest 
height, gently uproots the habits of our own minds and 
plants instead those of the Gods, awakens trust and 
communion and indissoluble friendship, increases the 
Divine Love, kindles what is Divine in the Soul, purges 
away from the Soul everything of contrary quality, 
eliminates so much of the shiny aether-stuff round about 
the Soul as disposes us to physical reproduction, perfects 
good hope and faith in the Light: in sum, Prayer makes 
those who employ it, if one may use the word, familiars 
of the Gods.' ? 

1 Ch. 24; tr. by Bevan, Later Greek Religion, p..218, with insertion 
of a clause omitted by him. Or tr. by Alice Zimmern, Porphyry to 
Marcella, p. 71. 

2 Iamblichus, De Mysteriis, V. 26, tr. by Bevan, ib. p. 227. 


PRAYERS OF PAGANISM 9 


And we may infer something of the genuine religious 
feeling, sincere piety, and aspiration of waning Paganism 
from the prayer—which we may term the last prayer of 
Paganism—with which Simplicius, the Aristotelian com- 
mentator (who was driven from his chair of philosophy 
at Athens when Justinian by edict closed the Pagan 
schools of philosophy), concludes his commentary on the 
Encheiridion of Epictetus: 


* I beseech Thee, O Lord, our Father and Guide of 
our reason, make us mindful of the dignity of which 
Thou hast deemed us worthy. Grant unto us moral 
freedom, that we may be cleansed from the contagion 
of the body and of all irrational passions ; may we over- 
come and master them, and, as is fitting, use them 
properly as our instruments. Assist us to a proper 
direction of the reason within us and its harmony with 
all Reality by means of the light of Truth. Thirdly, I 
beseech Thee, my Saviour, remove completely the mist 
from our eyes that, as Homer says, we may know God 
and man.’ + 


We may even learn from Augustine, who was none 
too generous to contemporary Paganism, to whom the 
* virtues of the ancients’ were nothing but ' splendid 
vices’ and who also owed more than he knew to 
Plotinus and Plato, when in his Confessions * he thanks 
God for a book, now lost, of the Pagan Cicero, ‘ that 
book changed my whole disposition and directed my 
prayers to Thyself, O Lord, and it transmuted my 
desires and wishes. Suddenly every vain hope lost its 
charm for me, and with an incredible warmth of heart 
I began to yearn for the immortality of wisdom, and 
I began to arise to return to Thee.’ * Truly ‘ in -every 
people and nation I [Wisdom] got a possession.’ * 


! Ed. by Enk (Vienna, 1866); or Prussian Acad. ed. by Heiberg; or 
PP- 331-2 of Wolff-Salmasius ed. (Leyden, 1634). 


ARLE 4: 

? Cf. his advice as to the Christian use of Pagan culture and training 
in De doctr. Christiana, II. 18: '' profani si quid bene dixerunt, non 
aspernandum."' 


* Ecclesiasticus xxiv. 6. 


r0 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


If our experience in investigating the voluminous 
literature, the thousands of inscriptions and papyri 
and archaeological remains of the Graeco-Roman 
period is that described by the philosopher-mystic of 
old, ‘ those who seek gold dig much earth and find 
little gold,’ * it is but the same experience in wending 
one’s way through the present-day productions of the 
press. 

Yet this incursion into a far-off period with its conflict 
of religions is not a purely academic affair: '' all of 
great, Or Good or lovely, which the sacred past In truth 
or fable consecrates '" may still send to our hearts 
“ choicest impulses." Race-memory persists and re- 
ligious instincts repeat themselves. In spite of all the 
changes of time, the differentia of nationality, and 
divergence of culture, the fundamental needs of the race 
remain the same to-day on the shores of the Pacific and 
the Atlantic and the North Sea as on the shores of the 
Mediterranean lake. In a sense men are to-day what 
they have always been, endowed with inquiring minds,’ 
hungry hearts, and uncertain wills. To-day as of old 
* great is the conflict and divine the task ' ° of winning 
the ‘ kingdom of self-control and moral freedom.’ We 
may be thrilled by ancient enthusiasms, quickened by 
ancient faiths, and instructed by old beliefs. With the 
aid of our predecessors we may make more articulate 
what they could merely suggest in symbol. Spiritual 
needs, like our own, may have long ago sought and 
found satisfaction in rituals and prayers strange to us 
and outgrown, but once palpitating with life. Ancient 
worship, at first sight weird and grotesque, may be 
eloquent with universal yearnings and aspirations, joys 
and sorrows. ‘‘ I have no longer any antagonism,” says 

‘ Heraclitus, Byw. fr. 8 (in Clement, Str. IV. 2; 4, 1). 

2 ' Mobilis enim et inquieta homini mens data est; nusquam se tenet, 
spargitur et cogitationes suas in omnia nota atque ignota dimittit vaga 
et quietis inpatiens et novitate rerum laetissima ' (Seneca, Ad Helv. 


matrem, VI. 6). 
3 Epictetus, II. 18, 5. 


LINKS WITH THE PAST II 


George Eliot,’ ''towards any faith in which human 
sorrow and human longing for purity have expressed 
themselves," an attitude of intelligent sympathy that 
commands our reverence. 

There’ are certain aspects in which it is easier to 
estimate a bygone epoch than to judge the contemporary 
epoch ; others in which it is decidedly more perplexing. 
If it can be said of the present, ‘‘ This huge complicated 
world, the sum of countless interacting tendencies, 
driven by forces that are often dark till they issue in 
apparently abrupt explosions—incalculable, changeful, 
exhaustless—which of us can see more than a little way 
into its working ? '',? how much more pertinent are those 
words to the Graeco-Roman world ? 

The extant literature is a mere fragment of the whole,’ 
and Augustine's testimony to the Hortensius proves that 
the survival of ancient literature did not depend on its 
worth and beauty. Posidonius, whose influence on great 
writers like Cicero, Virgil, Seneca, Philo, and on the 
leading religious systems was so permeating, is repre- 
sented only in quotations. And this literature, again, 
was on the whole a product of a small and élite coterie. 
But this is not so serious as might appear, as in all ages 
the prophetic spirits have caught the best ideals of their 
day, and genius has ever anticipated the path along 
which the common pilgrim slowly moves. Yet the 
ordinary man is not quite disfranchised. The rustic 
stonemason carved his sorrow with ungrammatical 
eloquence into sepulchral stones in many a forgotten 
graveyard, and many such memorials survive. Numer- 
ous papyri convey to us the interests and occupations 
of the average man. And a considerable proportion of 
our New Testament belongs to the same popular 
literature. 


1 Letter to John Blackwood, May 18, 1860. 
2 Bevan, Hellenism and Christianity, p. 251. 


3'O quam multarum egregia opera in obscuro iacent? (Seneca, 
Ad Helv. XIX, 5). 


i2 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


Vast indeed were the differences in the expression of 
the moral and religious life in these centuries which 
offer an amazing medley of contrasts. On the one hand 
magic, and theurgy, and terror, and degrading forms 
of superstition ; on the other a lofty mysticism with keen 
critical insight and clear philosophical alignment, and 
a high and unselfish morality. On the one hand 
asceticism in its unlovely disproportions; on the other 
the culture of self-knowledge, self-reverence, self- 
control: on the one hand a nervousness about the dis- 
turbance of past orthodoxies and the repudiation of 
picturesque and venerable myths; on the other a recog- 
nition that myths are the poetic wrappings and symbolic 
veils of religious truth. This latter view is so excellently 
represented by Julian and by Sallustius that it is worth 
while to cite some extracts, e.g. from Sallustius: 


“We may well inquire, then, why the ancients for- 
sook these doctrines and made use of myths. There is 
this first benefit from myths, that we have to search and | 
do not have our minds idle. That the myths are divine 
can be seen from those who have used them. Myths 
have been used by inspired poets, by the best of 
philosophers, by those who established the mysteries, 
and by the Gods themselves in oracles. But why myths 
are divine it is the duty of philosophy to inquire. Now, 
the myths represent the Gods themselves and the good- 
ness of the Gods. . . . Just as the Gods have made the 
goods of sense common to all, but those of intellect only 
to the wise, so the myths state the existence of Gods to 
all, but who or what they are only to those who can 
Mang. They also represent the activities of the 
Gods.’ 


Julian holds that myths are part of philosophy and 
due to Nature’s desire for concealment of her secrets. It 
is accordingly that which is most incongruous and para- 
doxical in them that furnishes the key to the truth. 
Myths dealing with sacred subjects must be beautiful 
both in diction and in thought: 

t De Diis et Mundo, chs. 3, 4; tr. by Gilbert Murray. 


THE USE OF MYTH I3 


“Our language must be wholly dignified and the 
diction must be as far as possible sober, beautiful, and 
entirely appropriate to the gods . . . therefore there 
must be no incongruous element in diction thus em- 
ployed, but all must be dignified, beautiful, splendid, 
divine, pure, and as far as possible in conformity with 
the essential nature of the gods. But as regards the 
thought, the incongruous may be admitted, so that under 
the guidance of the gods men may be inspired to search 
out and study the hidden meaning, though they must 
not ask for any hint of the truth from others, but must 
acquire their knowledge from what is said in the myth 
itself. . . . Do you not perceive that the myth is 
obviously an allegory?’ ! 


In these concurrent tendencies (which are those of 
every age in the evolution of a religion) men proved, as 
Plutarch shrewdly remarked, 'in some things too 
credulous, and in others too incredulous.’ And as in 
our own age, so of old thoughtful spirits turned wistfully 
toward the rising sun and welcomed the new with all 
its mental discomfort and moral readjustments, while 
their contemporaries turned their gaze fearfully toward 
the setting sun, blindly preferring the antique in religion, 
plausibly declaring ‘no man having drunk old wine 
asks for new, for he says the old is better.’ Religious 
men look on in every age, some in dismay, others with 
increasing faith, at that incessant process whereby all 
human things are shaken ‘ that the things which cannot 
be shaken may remain.’ 

That ancient world passed through crisis after crisis 
and weathered tempests which would have wrecked any 
less virile civilization. The Graeco-Roman age was a 
period of profound transition and of the blending of 
East and West. It witnessed vast changes, revolutions 
in material, social, political, and religious conditions, the 
extent of which we can scarcely measure. The spirit of 

1 Oration, VII. 216b-219b, Wright’s tr.; v. Macrobius’s defence of 


the use of myths by philosophers, Com. in Som. Scip. I. 2; Maximus 
Tyrius, Orat. IV (Hobein). 


3 


i4 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


man was awakened to new demands and fresh vital 
issues. Society was dashed again and again from its 
moorings and compelled to voyage on uncharted seas, 
upon which many, like the Trojan women, pontum 
adspectabant flentes.  Politically the collapse of the 
Greek city-state (polis) formed a crisis of the first 
magnitude in the Mediterranean world, accompanied 
by the shifting of the moral centre of gravity from 
rigorous collectivism to perplexed individualism. Then 
came the new world of Alexander with his ‘ marriage of 
East and West,’ with the consequent meeting both in 
collision and in alliance of Oriental and Western ways 
of interpreting life, and the rise of cosmopolitanism * and 
the acceleration of religious theocrasia: then the break- 
up of the Diadochian kingdoms and the passing of these 
one after another under the domination of Rome. The 
devastating Republican wars of conquest reduced pro- 
vinces from a high state of civilization to a condition of 
misery and depopulation. Greece entered upon her long 
career as educator of her conquerors, both Macedonian 
and Roman, the first result of which was a disintegrating 
criticism. Then with the establishment of the Roman 
peace and the Roman Empire nationalism disappeared ; 
racial barriers were thrown down and the world reduced 
to such a unity as hardly obtains to-day even with rapid 
transit of goods and ideas. Under the aegis of Rome, 
Hellenistic and Oriental propaganda produced a unique 
blending of religious thought and philosophic specula- 
tion, which with its syncretism emphasized what had 
once been essential differences. If the Empire solved 
some problems, it accentuated others. Finally, that 
Damocles sword of aggressive barbarism, which was 
menacingly suspended over every ancient civilization, 
and fell successively on each when over-ripe, fell upon 


1 Cf. Kaerst, Gesch. d. hell. Zeitaltevs. 

3 “La vie cosmopolite remplaça la vie nationale, la vie privée rem- 
plaça la vie publique ” (Chantepie de la Saussaye, Manuel, Fr. ed. 
p. 586). 


INTERMINGLING OF POPULATIONS AND RELIGIONS 15 


* eternal Rome ’ itself. The State religions of Greece and 
Rome were dead, though enchoric cults retained their 
hold in country districts, especially in Greece, and the 
imperial cult was merely a religious badge of loyalty. 

In this religious and social upheaval the West increas- 
ingly gave ear to the new gospels offered by the mission- 
ary-zeal of the Orientals, with their sacramental grace, 
cathartic rites, with their enthusiasm and their ecstasies, 
with their definite promise of a rewarding immortality 
through deification, with their esoteric properties and 
traditions of sacerdotal infallibility eminently suited to the 
mentality of the age disposed to accept truth on authority 
rather than seek it through the painful process of inquiry. 
The Jewish Dispersion formed an important intermediary 
in the contact of East and West which was pregnant with 
vast issues for that Mediterranean civilization and for its 
heir, our own civilization. There were other diasporae 
—of the Syrians with their stellar religion; of Persians 
and the populations of Pontus and Commagene with 
their Unconquered Mithra; of Egyptians with Lord 
Serapis and Queen Isis of the many names; of Baby- 

-lonians with their astralism; of Hellenes with their 
philosophy. All these people were living together, 
generally on friendly terms, and meeting in the markets, 
in clubs and trades-unions and in religious guilds, and 
on town councils. Their more inquisitive members fore- 
gathered at great university centres, such as Athens, 
Alexandria, Tarsus, or Rhodes. 

These centuries of baffling crises, change, and con- 
vulsions produced a new and personal interest in religion 
and corroborated the remark of one of the shrewdest 
observers of the phenomena of religion who lived in that 
era, that ‘in the days of adversity the minds of men 
turn more eagerly toward religion.’ * One could not 
point to any other centuries in which religious interests 
were more universal and dominant than in these seven 


1 ‘ Multoque in rebus acerbis acrius advertunt animos ad religionem ' 
(Lucretius, De rerum nat. III, 53 f.). 


16 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD. 


centuries, or in which adherents of religious institutions 
were more actuated by the spirit of propaganda. The 
cry for Soteria (salvation) became persistent, and only 
Saviour-gods * could command a hearing. Inquiry was 
raised as to the causes of irreligion and the cessation of 
oracles in what appeared a process of disintegration. 
Tiberius, we are told, was so concerned about the story 
of the Egyptian pilot, Thammous, who was commanded 
by a mysterious but unmistakable voice from the isle of 
Paxis to announce when passing Palades that ‘ the Great 
Pan is dead,' that he summoned the pilot to Rome and 
instituted inquiries as to this Pan." The prophetic soul 
of Virgil was more oracular than he knew when in the 
year 40 B.C. he wrote 


* Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo.” 


It has been remarked by Rittelmeyer ? that '' twice in 
the history of the world under the common experience 
of great inward premonitions has the yearning for re- 
demption (Erlósungssehnsucht) become the potent and 
fundamental sentiment of wide circles,” first in ancient 
India of about the sixth century B.c., and again at 
the beginning of our era in the Roman Empire, when 
the dissonance between the external and imposing 


* Cf. Harnack, Soter in Reden u. Aufsätze; E. B. Allo, Les dieux 
Sauveurs du paganisme gr.-rom. (in Rev. d. Sciences phil. et théol. 
1926, p. 5 ff.); H. Lietzmann, Der Weltheiland; J. Weiss, Heiland in 
Relig. in Gesch. u. Geg.; Wendland, Zwrhp in Zeits. f. d. neut. Wiss., 
V, pp. 335-53. 

? Plutarch, De def. orac. 17. 

5 Relig. in Gesch. u. Gegenwart, II, art. Erlöser, col. 474: '' Zweimal 
in der Weltgeschichte ist jedoch unter dem allgemeinerem Erlebnis 
grosser innerer Spannungen die Erlósungssehnsucht zur mächtigen 
Grundstimmung weiter Kreise geworden . . . wurde um die Wendung 
unserer Zeitrechnung im róm. Reich die Wertlosigkeit des Lebens 
empfunden in der Form einer Spannung zwischen den hochentwickelten 
&usseren Verháltnissen und der wahren menschlichen Bestimmung, die* 
mann in Anlage und Ahnung zu fühlen glaubte und trotz aller Kultur 
nicht erreichen kónnte. Von der Aermlichkeit und Beflecktheit seines 


Lebens suchte mann sich in immer neuen Weihungen und Sühnungen 
zu befreien.'' 


COMPLEXITY OF GRAECO-ROMAN AGE I 


religion and that human need which no culture could 
satisfy was keenly felt, and when '' in ever-new rites 
and propitiations release was sought from the misery 
and stain of human life." This expectation was in- 
tensified by the fervid Messianic hopes of the Jews and 
their ineradicable belief that God would intervene in 
world-history for a brighter future. 

This age can as little be reduced to a formula or sum- 
marized in a quotation as any age, especially an age of 
transition. Then, as ever, the Spirit as life manifested 
itself more surely and readily in change and motion than 
in stereotyped forms, prescriptive beliefs, and arrested 
developments. There was an almost pathetic eagerness 
for new religions with promises of salvation and guar- 
antees against failure. Man was continuing his moral 
pilgrimage; he was setting the eternal verities against 
the temporal seemings; he was striving as in all ages 
for the truth, conscious that he must find the truth and 
live by itor perish. Reason was persisting in its onerous 
task of grappling with the irrational and liberating man, 
notwithstanding the growing distrust toward unaided 
reason and the strong disposition in many quarters to 
elevate revelation above reason and to substitute 
authority for argument,’ both in Pagan and in Christian 
thinking. This age was a wistful, yearning, even pro- 
phetic age when men were— 


15 Wandering between two worlds, one dead, 
The other powerless to be born.’’ 


It was a serious, brooding, emotional, even sentimental, 
introspective age, but not an age of darkness and despair 
as it is too often depicted ; it was sad and disillusioned, 
but not hopeless. We may say of it what Tasso said of 
another epoch: 


1“ The authority of the past became the watchword in all depart- 
ments of spiritual and intellectual activity '" (Bevan, Hellenism and 
Christianity, p. 1x1). Thus Julian (Or. V. 162d) holds that the theories 
of Aristotle must be harmonized with those of Plato, ‘ or rather har- 
monized with the oracles given by the gods.' 


18 HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PERIOD 


* Il mondo invecchia, 
E invecchiando intristisce.'' 1 


In growing old it became sad,? but it was not within the 
Graeco-Roman era that the Dark Ages fell like a pall 
upon the human spirit. 


1 Dafne to Tirsi, in L’Aminta, II. 2, 71. 

2 The close of this period when syncretism was most active Wendland 
summarizes thus: '' Eine alte, reiche Kulturwelt im Sterben und in 
der Agonie, im Sehnen nach einer Neuschópfung und Wiedergeburt, 
in einer nicht zum Ziele kommenden Unruhe des Gottsuchens—so stellt 
sich uns das niedergehende Heidentum dar’’ (Hell.-rém. Kultur, 
2nd-3rd ed., p. 186). 


CHAPTER. II 


THE VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS AND THE 
DOMINANT CONCEPTIONS OF SALVATION 


THERE arose from these intensely religious centuries a 
universal cry for release * and ' safety ' or salvation as 
diverse and comprehensive as human needs. The ex- 
ternal and political upheavals had reacted on the spirit, 
and amid the welter of new systems and in the per- 
plexities of a new world-order, men were disposed to 
give a ready hearing to confident gospels such as that 
of Orphism, which in the happier days of Greece had 
failed in its message concerning the fall of man and the 
need of grace. The Orphic and Pythagorean revivals 
bear witness to the intense interest of the Greek world 
in the salvation of the soul. From the break-up of the 
City-state system and the rise of the individualistic sub- 
jective post-Aristotelian philosophies there grew a more 
persistent inquiry: ‘ What must I do to be saved? ' 
The longing for Soteria, salvation, was more prevail- 
ingly negative than positive—for release from the 
burdens of finitude and the contradictions of the world, 
and exaltation from the cloying weight of bodily 
existence into the raptures of ecstasy, from the dread 
tyranny of the Seven Archons and the oppressive 
fatalism of astralism, from the universal power of Fatum 
inexorabile? and the caprices of inscrutable Fortune, Fors 
inopinata, from the terrors of the magician who with his 
science-religion had as much supernatural power to bind 
or loose as the mediaeval priest, from the fear of death 


1 Cf. Kattenbusch, ‘‘ Das wundersame tiefe Sehnen jener Zeit nach 
einem ' Heile,’ einem heilenden, rettenden Gotte, nach einer owrnpla, 
einem corjp,' Real-Ency. 3rd ed. XVII, p. 351. 

? Cf. prayer to Isis, translated in Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 240. 

19 


20 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


‘ which affects practically all men ' * regardless of youth 
or age,? from the malefic agencies of the demons to 
inoculate with disease, to thwart the best laid plans of 
men and grant or prevent answers to prayer, from the 
sense of degeneracy, from the ills and sorrows of life 
accentuated by the new individualism and heightened 
sensitiveness to personal suffering and pain, from 
economic insecurity, from social and political convul- 
sions, from the aggravated sense of guilt and moral 
failure, from the perils threatening the bravest soul on its 
upward path to its home, from the discouragements en- 
countered in following the heroic spirits of a classical past. 
Nevertheless the negative demands were only a means 
to an end, symptoms of a positive outlook. Thus the 
concern about death is the verso to which the recto is 
that ardent desire of these centuries for immortality, 
“the hope of immortality and the hope of existence is 
the most venerable and the mightiest of all affections.' ? 
The sense of moral slackness has as its positive expres- 
sion the earnest search for a moral dynamic. The burden 
of pain and suffering produced that clamant desire for 
sympatheia with the Divine which made philanthropia 
(the love of human kind) the chief attribute of a God. 
The soul had its moods then as now, its high levels of 
faith and love and its depths of distrust and despair, its 
revealing insights and its recurrent doubtings. In that 
eclectic epoch in nothing were men so catholic as in their 
religious affairs so far as the character of their religion 
permitted. Pagan tolerance fostered eclecticism, variety, 
and catholicity, but even the marked intolerance of 
Judaism and Christianity could not prevent either their 
ablest representatives from availing themselves of work- 
able views from elsewhere or withdraw their masses from 
the influences operative around them. Thus even Philo, 
while professedly loyal to Moses, acknowledges the great- 
ness of his Greek master, Plato, and his whole writings 


1 * Fere sic afficiuntur omnes’ (Cicero, De Fin. V. 11). 


? Seneca, Ep. XXII. 14. * Plutarch, Non posse suav. 26. 


ASCETICISM 21 


are interspersed with Stoic, especially Posidonian, and 
Platonicideas. Similarly the writer of the Fourth Gospel 
recognized the advantage or the necessity of reinterpret- 
ing his religion under the influence of the Hellenistic 
spirit. 

In the process of the unification of civilization and the 
cross-fertilization of cultures and religions brought about 
by Alexander, by his successors, the Diadochi, and by 
the Romans, there obtained varied types of religion, the 
characteristics of which were by no means exclusive, 
their peculiar nature being determined by the combina- 
tion and adjustment of several elements and the relative 
emphasis on one phase rather than on another. Thus, 
for example, the disciplina arcani was admitted in some 
degree by every religion from Orphism in the sixth 
century B.C. to Hermeticism in the fourth or fifth cen- 
turies A.D., and speedily effected an entry into Chris- 
tianity, greatly to the advantage of sacerdotalism. The 
importance and necessity of sacral acts were not so 
universally accepted, such a belief being absent from 
Stoicism, the religion of Plotinus, and Hermeticism, 
but appearing elsewhere with such prominence that 
Christianity lost no time in adopting such an attractive 
practice. Asceticism ! was a postulate for practically 


1 The Orphics introduced to the West asceticism and continence as 
an ideal of holiness for all, and their Pythagorean successors made 
asceticism necessary to salvation. The extent to which this ideal 
gripped Christianity and the scorn with which the sex instinct was 
repudiated is amazing. Tatian was as opposed to all sex relations as 
to the dangers of philosophy. Cf. the Beatitudes in the Acts of Paul 
and Thekla (II. 5, tr. in James, Apoc. New Testament, p. 273): 


' Blessed are they that keep the flesh chaste, for they shall become 
the temple of God. 
Blessed are they that are continent, for unto them shall God 
Speak s. 
Blessed are they that possess their wives as though they had them 
not, for they shall inherit God. . . . 
Blessed are the bodies of the virgins, for they shall be well-pleasing 
unto God and shall not lose the reward of their continence.' 


Clement exalted married life to the level of celibacy and defended the 
liberty of Christians to marry. He even defended the marriage of the 


22 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


every religion of the period which made salvation consist 
in deliverance from the world rather than in the deliver- 
ance of the world from itself by the realization of the 
Divine Spirit in it.' 

Generally speaking, we may say that the following 
types of religion were operating in the Graeco-Roman 
period in easy juxtaposition and in looser or compact 
alliances, as also in conflict. 

(1) The political religion of the imperial cult and the 
State religions of Greece and Rome, the latter of which 
had lost their vitality and were maintained as merely 
venerable institutions of the past. The imperial religion, 
or Caesar-worship,? cannot, properly speaking, be termed 
a religion. It was a badge of loyalty, just as if to-day 
a man's only compulsory duty consisted in standing up, 
respectfully uncovering, and singing '' God Save the 
King " or “ My Country, 'tis of thee," and forthwith 
were free to accept any religion or as many religions in 
as many proportions as he wished, or to repudiate all. 
It was the cosmopolitan form of the national Roman 
religion. The Caesar-cult was a test of uniformity and 
an outstanding example of religion being forced to do 
duty as a political bond of coherence as practised by the 
Seleucids or by the Tudors of England. 

(2) The ritualistic-sacramental religions, represented 


Christian Gnostic as superior to celibacy and attacked heretical asceti- 
cism (Str. VIII. 12; 70, 7; III. 6; 48, 1). Tertullian with much reluct- . 
ance permitted marriage, but advocated virginity as of superior 
spiritual value. Jerome regarded matrimony as little short of disobedi- 
ence to God.  Encratism, based on dualistic views, tended to become 
the hall-mark of sincere piety, both among Pagans and Christians, 
and in certain Jewish sects such as the Essenes and the Therapeutae, 
but the Jews in general and the Stoics advocated procreation within 
marriage. A Pagan poem (Stob. IV, 22-32, cited Scott, Hermetica, 
III, p. 139) addressed to a young lady exalts virginity in language more 
refined than that of, e.g., Jerome. Cf. Fehrle, Kultische Keuschheit 
im Alt.; Swain, Hellenic Origins of Christian Asceticism; Scott, Her- 
metica, III, pp. 135-43. 

1 Cf. Caird, Evolution of Religion, Il, p. 284. 

a “ Caesar-worship was an attempt to perpetuate the theocracy under 
the changed conditions of society ” (Bigg, The Church's Task, por32» 


TYPES.OF RELIGION 23 


chiefly by the Mystery-Religions and by later Christi- 
anity. (3) Religions of divine revelation, Gnosis, and 
sacrament—the Gnostic type. (4) Religions of Gnosis 
without sacrament or with a minimum of sacramental 
practices, chiefly the Hermetic brotherhoods of Greek 
theosophy. (5) The individualistic-ethical type, of which 
the best representative is Stoicism. (6) Social-ethical 
type, chiefly Judaism and primitive Christianity. (7) The 
ethical-mystical type, found chiefly in Neo-Platonism, 
Neo-Pythagoreanism, and in some of the latest phases 
of Stoicism, as also in such a phase of Christianity 
as became articulate in Dionysius the Areopagite. 
(8) Astralism, or the religion of astrology, which was 
less distinctive but penetrated all other religions and 
philosophies.* 

Our term “‘ salvation " has long retained a rather 
negative, individualistic, and apocalyptic connotation as 
implying the rescue of the soul from serious.disaster here- 
after, to be consummated catastrophically at some im- 
pending or distant world-ending and society-terminating 
spectacular event on a last day. In the more enlightened 
circles, which do not seek signs in the heavens from a 
God who writes his sign-manual within, the term has 
acquired a more positive and present significance as the 
realization of the highest manhood and the enrichment 
of personality ih communion with an immanent God and 
expressed in Christlikeness. If within one religion there 
is such a disparity between the popular chiliastic con- 
ception of salvation and that of the more reflective 
spiritual experiences, and if within our own religion 
there obtain two distinctive types of soteriological out- 
look corresponding to the '' miserable sinner Christi- 
anity ° and that which appeals to the divine powers 
resident within and to the God-implanted love which 
draws man to its source, we may expect wide varieties 
as to the way of salvation in the Graeco-Roman world 


€ 


! Cf. Boll, Die Erforschung dev antiken Astrologie (N. Jahrb. f. d. 
klass. Alt., XXI, p. 112). 


24 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


not only between one religion and another, but within 
the same religion, e.g. in the Mystery-Religions, in 
Stoicism, in Judaism, and in Hermeticism. 

Thus again, in a general way, salvation, Soteria, in 
its ancient comprehensive sense was conceived in the 
Graeco-Roman world: 

I. Politically and socially. It is difficult for those who 
live in the more stable centres of Western civilization 
even after the confusion and ravages of the world-war 
to realize the universal yearning in the ancient world 
for that social and political security which affords leisure 
for the higher interests. Perhaps a resident in Soviet 
Russia or in Mexico or in China would be best qualified 
to enter into sympathy with the harassed Roman pro- 
vinces which had served as battlefields for the Roman 
armies and to appreciate the universal acclamations of 
joy with which the pax romana * was hailed. Soteria, 
salvation, must include security of life and property, 
economic stability, and the opportunity of conducting 
one’s business with a fair degree of protection. Part of 
the duty of the Man-God was to afford such opportunities 
for life and its necessary occupations. The Oriental 
usages of prostration before kings and rulers as the 
incarnate presences or representatives of deity facilitated 
the increasing connexion of political safety with religion. 
The close connexion of economic conditions and religious 
conditions has often been manifested at historical crises, 
as, e.g., at the Reformation and in the present day. The 
appearance of colossal personalities like Alexander and 
Caesar suggested to the ancient imagination supermen 
endowed with a mission of philanthropy from heaven. 
Such ' philanthropic’ men and the more useful and 
successful Gods acquired with a growing prominence the 
epithet of ‘ Saviours,’ which the Greeks had been accus- 
tomed to address to Zeus. 


1 The immensa Romanae pacis majestas brought, as it were, ‘a new 
dawn to humanity,’ velut alteram lucem . . . rebus humanis (Pliny, 
HENE 27 i]: 


SAVIOUR-GODS 25 


Demetrius the Besieger was lauded by the Athenians 
in 307 B.C. as ' the only true God’ when the gods of 
mythology were asleep: ' the other gods are remote or 
are not and hear us not, but we see thee face to face, 
not in wood and stone, but in living form. Therefore 
we pray thee, Beloved God, grant us peace, for thou 
art our Lord.’ ' The Rosetta inscription of March 27, 
196 B.C., declares of Ptolemy Epiphanes: 


‘ Having restored the life of humanity . to whom 
the Sun gives the victory, the living image of God, son 
of the Sun, Ptolemy of eternal life, loved of the God 
Phtha . . . in manifold aspects he rendered service to 
the temples and the priests and to all his subjects, being 
God of God and Goddess, as Horus son of Isis and 
Osiris . . . and by all his powers he proved his philan- 
thropy.' ? 


‘Saviour’ and ‘ manifest’ (God) became titles of 
Hellenistic kings. Seleucus himself after death was 
honoured as ' God the Conqueror ' (Zeus Nikator) and 
his son as ‘ Antiochus-Apollo the Saviour.’ 

After the break-up of the Diadochian kingdoms and 
the ruinous wars of succession and the still more ruinous 
wars of Roman conquest, this habit of recognizing peace- 
bringers and stabilizers of society as ‘ gods manifest ’ 
and as special revelations of heaven was given new 
impetus with the appearance of the Romans. The 
triumvir Antony is hailed as ‘ God and Benefactor ’ 
in an Alexandrian inscription * of 33 B.C. Likewise 
an Athenian inscription * designates Julius Caesar as 
“Saviour and Benefactor,’ while an Ephesian inscrip- 
tion ^ of 48 B.c. recognizes the same Julius as ‘ God 
manifest and the universal Saviour of human life.’ 


1 Athenaeus, VI. 253c, Hymn in honour of Demetrius at the Eleu- 
sinia procession, September 290 s.c. Metrical tr. in Bevan, Later 
Greek Religion, p. 60. Cf. Plutarch’s caustic remarks, Vita Dewietrii, 
X ft. 

? Dittenberger, Or. gr. inscr. 9o. 

PAO 195. 

* Dittenberger, Sylloge, 3rd ed. 759; 1G. 428. 

* Ib. 3rd ed. 760; C.I.G. 2957. 


26 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


It was under Augustus and with the establishment of 
‘the Roman peace’? that religious thanksgiving, not 
without an admixture of flattery and servility, was 
directed to the emperor as the personal cause of all the 
world’s rest. ‘ It isa God who has given us this peace,’ 
says the devout Virgil. ‘ The Fates have bestowed 
nothing better or greater on earth than him,’ says a court 
poet, interpreting the popular sentiment.” 

The inscription of Halicarnassus,? about 2 B.C., testifies 
‘ since the eternal and deathless nature of the universe 
has bestowed upon mortals the greatest boon in abound- 
ing benefits by bringing to our happy life Caesar 
Augustus . . . tutelary God and Saviour of the whole 
human race, whose Providence has not only fulfilled but 
surpassed our prayers, for land and sea enjoy peace, 
and the cities bloom under good government, internal 
peace, and prosperity.' 

A decree of the Greek cities of Asia in 9 B.C. on the 
introduction of the Julian calendar reads: 


* What could be more pleasant or more fraught with 
blessing than the birthday of the most divine Caesar, 
which we might rightly regard as like the first beginning 
of all things? . . . He gave a different aspect to the 
whole world that would otherwise have readily fallen a 
prey to ruin. . . . It is difficult to give thanks com- 
mensurate with such acts of blessing by him . . . whom 
Providence filled with virtue to do good to mankind... . 
The birthday of the God was the beginning for the world 
of the good tidings (evangelia) which he brought.' * 


Naturally in the court poets we find abundant expres- 
sion of this sentiment, not merely from the distant pro- 
vinces accustomed to accord divine honours to worthy © 
rulers, but from the very heart of Rome itself. To 
Propertius, e.g., Augustus is ‘ saviour of the world ’ 
(mundi salvator).* 


1 On the celebration of this peace, cf. Virgil, Geor. I. 500 ff. 
? Horace, Carm. IV. 2, 38. 

* Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, No. 894. 
* Dittenberger, Or. gr. inscr. 458. 5 IV. 6, 36. 


CAESAR-WORSHIP 27 


In a twofold fashion the religious aspects of this new 
era of social salvation appear; first, in the equation of 
Augustus with divinities such as Jupiter Augustus, 
Apollo-Augustus ; in his equipment with divine attributes 
such as saviour, benefactor, eternity, divine descent ; 
and in the erection of a temple ' and elevation to divine 
rank in heaven on account of ‘ philanthropy ’ toward 
mankind ; secondly, in the direction of prayers to him as 
the ‘God manifest.’ Visibility of deity ? was a weakness of 
ancient religion as of modern superstition, and the ability 
of the visible manifestation to satisfy all kinds of external 
wants of men was taken for granted. Ovid in praying 
for the favour of the gods significantly adds, ‘ than 
whom he (Augustus) is more tangible.’ ° Similarly 
Horace: * 

‘ praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores 


iurandasque tuum per numen ponimus aras, 
nil oriturum alias, nil ortum tale fatentes.' 


There were certainly many who felt with Valerius 
Maximus * that preference should be given to the Caesars 
as visible incarnate deities above the invisible and distant 
Olympians. 

The spontaneity of this religious outburst of thanks- 
giving for tangible blessings much needed for human 
life was of course imitated later and expressions of real 
sentiment became forms of mere conventionality or even 
of servility. Tiberius, none too lovable, is ‘ the common 
Benefactor of the world,' * and Claudius ' saviour of the 
world ' 7 and ' God visible ' *; to the Alexandrines he is 

* our God Caesar.’ °? In A.D. 37 an inscription of Assos '? 


1 Cf. Virgil, Geor. III. 16. 

2 ' Praesens Divus habebitur Augustus’ (Horace, Carm. III. 5, 2). 
SUE Y Ponto, I: 1, 63; 0f. 40.. IV.(9; IIR Ep: Uoti EE 
eae 6 I.G. XII. 2, 206. 77.G. XII. 2, 541. 


Inscr. Graec. ad res rom. pertinentes, III. 328. 
? Papyrus 1912, p. 23 in Bell & Crum, Jews and Christians in Egypt : 
- note the title eds here used in an official document for a living 
emperor. 
1? Dittenberger, Sylloge, 3rd ed. 797; or, Graeci inscr. sel. 666. Simi- 
larly Oxyrh. Pap. VII. 1021, 1, 9. 


28 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


declares of Caligula: ‘ The world knows no limit to 
its joy, and every State and people has turned eagerly 
to gaze on the face of the God as if now the happiest age 
had dawned for mankind.' An altar dedicated to Nero 
in A.D. 67 reads, ‘ To Nero God the deliverer for ever,’ i 
who is likewise ‘the Good Daemon of the world.’ * 
Trajan is in Greek eyes ' God, the invincible son of 
God.’ ° 

II. Another path along which salvation was sought by 
multitudes of earnest men was that of self-realization by 
self-reliance here, represented chiefly by Stoicism, and 
particularly Stoicism of the Roman type. This quest was 
based on the conviction, first, that man can do all the 
things necessary for his highest life, and secondly, that 
all other things extra potentiam humanam can be 
accepted in resignation to the will of God, with which 
one’s own will can and ought to be brought into con- 
formity, so that man can rise superior to all ineluctable 
circumstances. The individual is placed as a responsible 
actor under divine law, and he gains his freedom by 
recognizing his place in the scheme of things and playing 
his part manfully. The system was wholly anthropo- 
centric. Its ethics were stern and its cosmic specula- 
tions * involved a pitiless determinism, from which, 
however, it departed as conscientiously as the most rigid 
Calvinist in asserting man’s freedom and his capacities 
for every lofty demand together with his awful re- 
sponsibility. It was partially in its inconsistencies, its 
adaptability, and its inclusiveness that the strength of 
Stoicism lay ; it was thereby equipped to be not only a 
philosophy of an élite coterie but a way of life for the 
ordinary man. Like many another excellent system, 
including Christianity, it retained enough of the past to 

1 Dittenberger, Syll., 3rd ed. 814. 

3 C.I.G. II. 4699. 

? C.I.A. 462. 

* “ To its support more than to any other single cause was due the 


long reign of astrology '"' (Halliday, Pagan Background of Early Chris- 
tianity, p. 160). 


ETHICAL IDEAL OF STOICS 29 


appeal to the populace; too much for its own advance- 
ment. and progress. It could with almost equal 
truth be presented as a materialistic monism, or as 
pantheism with God immanent in the universe, or 
as a lofty monotheism, as in Cleanthes Hymn 
to Zeus, from which Paul cited. Its citadel was 
the will; it regarded the emotions as something in- 
different, to be eradicated or at least to be severely 
disciplined. Nevertheless, so subtle and strong is the 
Zeitgeist, Stoicism was gradually drawn into the emotion- 
alism and sentimentality of the later Graeco-Roman age. 
It learned to make concessions to the weakness of men, 
and it ultimately became the home of a mature mysticism 
and conceded a place to the intuitive motions of the soul. 
The Stoics modernized, or at least removed the offence of 
ancient religious classics by a liberal use of allegory,’ 
which could make Homer, for example, the text of an 
up-to-date philosophy and could render the Homeric 
poems a Greek Bible in the same way in which allegory 
and imagination can constitute Leviticus, Numbers, and 
the Song of Solomon part of the Christian Bible and rich 
inhomiletic material. They also returned to the Socratic 
insistence on the imperious authority of conscience and 
agreed with the Pythagorean requirements of self- 
examination in the interests of the moral progress of 
* God's athletes.’ ? 

The ethical ideal of Stoicism was the ideal Wise Man 
whose personality is— 


' dignified, magnificent, consistent, since reason de- 
clares that moral good is the only good, he alone must 
be happy . . . he will more properly be termed king 
than Tarquinius . . . richer than Croesus . . . rightly 
will all things be said to be his who alone knows their 
use; rightly too will he be styled beautiful since the 
lineaments of the soul are more beautiful than those of 
the body ; rightly is he alone free, under the domination 


! E.g. in Cornutus, Theologiae graecae compendium. 
? Epictetus, IV. 4, 32. 


4 


30 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


of no one and obeying no appetite; rightly is he in- 
vincible whose body may be fettered but whose soul is 
not to be enchained.' * 


There was no unhealthy delusion about the difficulty 
of discovering such a man or attaining such a lofty ideal, 
but ideals however remote are in no age inoperative. 
Stoicism was at a disadvantage in not being able to point 
to its wise Man incarnate ? as Christianity could point to 
the historic Jesus. Nevertheless it was a potent ideal 
that guided and uplifted many, and it presented a worthy 
phase of human life which is necessary in every age. 

On the burning question of immortality, Stoicism, 
strictly speaking, consistently with its physics was 
obliged to deny this faith, and many noble Stoics were 
heroically content with a return to the elements, such 
as Panaetius, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. But here 
again Stoicism proved inconsistent and allowed human 
yearnings to have the right of way over their logic, and 
“an assimilation of the religious ideas attaching to 
Babylonian cosmology enabled Stoicism to develop a 
theory of astral immortality which harmonized with its 
general account of the universe.’’ ? 

This system, for which inner freedom alone was of 
supreme worth, proved a veritable gospel and afforded 
a strong spiritual support * to thousands of tried souls 


* Cicero, De Fin. III. 22, 75; with which cf. 2 Corinthians vi. 9 f. 

? Cf. Seneca, Dial. IX. 7, 4 (de tranquillitate); Cicero, Acad. pr. 145. 
Plutarch, De com. not. 33 (‘ He is nowhere on earth, nor has ever 
been ’). 

3 Halliday, Pagan Background, p. 162. 

^ Halliday (ib. p. 162 f.) gives as reasons for the dominant position 
of Stoicism in the thought of the empire: ''It provided a complete 
and intelligible account of the universe, adequate to satisfy minds which 
were neither preoccupied with, nor peculiarly endowed for, subtle 
metaphysical speculation. The virtues of conduct which it particu- 
larly inculcated were eminently those which appealed to the sympathy 
and admiration of Rome’s inherited tradition. But, above all, its 
elasticity and adaptability enabled it to reconcile existing religious 


practice with its tenets and to absorb into itself alien philosophic 
theories.'' 


THE UNIO MYSTICA 31 


who lived unselfishly and died fearlessly under its in- 
spiration. It appealed to all classes of earnest men, 
from the Phrygian slave to the solemn Roman emperor 
writing his inmost thoughts as he guarded the frontiers 
against threatening barbarism. Its asseveration of 
character as man’s only and inalienable possession was of 
far-reaching importance for ancient society and for the 
spreading Christian Church. Its insistence that the only 
way of overcoming the world is self-conquest cannot be 
antiquated ; rather this thought was taken up afresh in 
Christianity under the new and more favourable environ- 
ment of love, a moral passion the rights and powers of 
which were inadequately revealed to these path-finders 
for the Christian preachers. Stoicism heartily accepted 
the religious submissiveness of ‘ Thy will be done,’ but 
failed to enter into the complementary or resultant ex- 
perience of ‘ rejoicing in the Lord.’ 

III. Religion of the unio mystica, which manifests 
much the same characteristics in every age and culture, 
and which was then represented chiefly by the mystical 
Christianity of Paul and the Fourth Gospel; the 
Platonism of Philo and Plotinus, and in the speculative 
asceticism of revived Pythagoreanism. 

Ancient mysticism, generally speaking, rested upon a 
dualistic basis, on an antithesis between soul and sense, 
between spirit and matter, between this world and 
yonder, between the promptings of intuition and the 
evidence of sense perception. The general outlook was 
an other-worldliness which assigned to the evanescent 
things of this terrene world a negligible or inconspicuous 
place. Its starting-point is the divine spark within, 
whether this be the anamnesis (recollection) of Plato, or 
the intuition of Plotinus, or the indestructible pneuma 
(spirit) of Paul, or the congenital Logos in man to which 
the universal or divine Logos makes its appeal. Like 
Stoicism, this mystical religion would discipline the will 
to do right, but its main inspiration was Love, or an 
imperious desire for the things that are real and abiding 


32 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


and of transcendent worth. Like Stoicism it was pre- 
eminently a practical religion of reformation of life and 
integrity of conduct. Like later Stoicism it preached the 
identification with the Divine as the aim of all religious 
striving, but unlike Stoicism it refused to regard this | 
identification as merely absorption into the cosmic forces 
or into the rational element of the universe, but viewed 
it rather as the identification of love with its object, of 
the lover in the beloved. It frankly recognized that 
there is more in man than can be satisfied by conceptual 
knowledge; that there’ are aspects of truth and reality 
irreducible to formal logic ; that there are other avenues 
to the higher knowledge than sense perception or ratio- 
cinative deductions. It would neither wholly distrust 
nor trust the emotions, but it learned increasingly to 
appeal to personal experiences as validating a way of 
life that approved itself by its uplift and by its standards 
of ineffable values. The leaders of this quest of reality 
by the unio mystica, though proving in no way inferior 
intellectually, accepted contemplation and vision, 
ecstasy and enthusiasm, as modes of union with the 
Divine. 

The most catholic factor in this high and timeless 
religion was naturally Platonism, which in its transcen- 
dental idealism is the ageless refuge from the tyranny 
of the material, and which is everlastingly summoning 
men to make all things according to the pattern shown 
on the mount of vision. It affected every philo- 
sophical and religious system until Stoicism blended 
into Platonism in the conflict with Christianity, and 
Neo-Platonism became the main source of Christian 
mysticism. 

This could never naturally in any’age be a popular 
religion. Within some of these same circles, probably 


* “ The Neo-Platonists are from first to last rationalists . . . and they 
are as ready as any philosophers who have ever lived to expound their 
reasons for their convictions’’ (Taylor, Proc. Arist. Soc. XVIII, 
p. 605 £.). 


‘THE TRUE LIFE IS THERE’ 33 


no more or no less universally experienced, there was 
another form of rich idealism, the Christ-mysticism of 
Paul and of all those who were drawn to this central 
experience of his religion as against the multitudes who 
found in him a legalistic system, and also that suggestive 
and more mature Hellenistic mysticism of the Fourth 
Gospel which constituted God and Christ and believers 
who were ‘ not of the world’ into a mystical organic 
unity. Such Christian circles could not fail to recognize 
a spiritual kinship with the Pagan religious experience 
expressed by Plotinus: 


* God, says Plato, is not far from every one of us, but 
is near to all without their knowing it. It is they them- 
selves who flee away from Him, or rather they flee away 
from their own true selves. Hence they cannot seize 
that from which they have fled, and cannot, having 
destroyed their own true self, seek for another: as a 
child which has become insane and has become beside 
itself does not recognize its own father. But the man 
who has learnt to know himself will also know whence 
he comes. . . . We are not cut off from God or severed 
from Him . . . but we breathe and consist in Him, since 
God does not give and then withdraw, but He ever lifts 
and carries us, so long as He is what He is. . . . There 
too in union with Him the soul rests after she has fled 
away from Evil to the place which is pure from evils. 
And the true Life is there; for the life here and without 
God is but a trace of life in imitation of that Life. . . . 
The good of the soul is there, and a Longing Love (Eros) 
is innate in the soul. For, since the soul is indeed other 
than God and yet from God, she loves and longs for Him 
of necessity ; and when she tarries there she possesses 
Heavenly Love, whereas straying here below she be- 
comes, as it were, a common courtesan (Aphrodite 
Pandemos).’ * 


A conspicuous example of the unio mystica is found 
in the philosophy of Philo, which forms an interesting 


1 Plotinus, En. VI. 9, 7 ff.; tr. from von Hügel's Essays and 
Addresses, cited by Bevan, Later Greek Religion, p. 202 f. 


34 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


stage between the original and the later Platonism. As 
in Plato and Plotinus, Philo's mysticism went hand-in- 
hand with deep religious and perhaps with stronger 
ethical motives. His dualism is more pronounced than 
that of Plato, and therefore an unnecessary stress is put | 
on askesis, ascetic discipline. In regard to ecstasy, Philo 
magnifies its function as a means to the highest know- 
ledge and union beyond any parallel in Plato * and far 
beyond the róle assigned by Plotinus to this fugitive 
psychical experience.? Faith appears as a new factor 
in Philonian mysticism which was to prove of great 
moment in the history of religion.? This faith, like the 
Plotinian intuition, was not to be exercised in such 
isolation or exaggeration as to conduce to mysteriosophy 
or credulity: it was ‘ the work of an Olympian under- 
standing ’ and demanded the utmost concentration and 
ratiocination. 

In another aspect Philo prepared the way for 
Christian Mysticism; his mystic quest was for know- 
ledge of and a union with a personally-conceived God, 
with the One God,* and not merely with the meta- 
physical and Abstract One, which is likewise the All, 
to which Plotinus surrendered his pure spirit on his 
agonizing death-bed. 

Philo, like Plato and Plotinus, was a practising mystic 
in a workaday world of flux and change and political 
concerns, despite his yearning for retirement and con- 
templation in the desert. ^ Something of the health and 


1 Plato recognized the sudden flash of transcendental ecstatic ex- 
perience as in Diotima’s prophetic and glowing language (Symp. 210e). 

? Inge, Phil. of Plotinus, II, pp. 142 f., 152, 158. 

3 “ For the first time in the history of religion we find the thought 
of faith in the centre of religion. Philo is the first great psychologist 
of Faith '' (Bousset, Religion des Judentums, 2nd ed. p. 514. Cf. 
H. A. A. Kennedy, Philo’s Contrib. to Religion, p. 121 f.). 

* '' Philo ist der erste Mystiker und Ekstatiker auf dem Boden 
spezifisch monotheistischer Frómmigkeit. Als solcher hat er seine 
bleibende Bedeutung in der Geschichte der christlichen Mystik "' 
(Bousset, p. 520). 

5 Bousset, p. 511; Drummond, Philo Judaeus, 1 ff., 24. 


MYSTIC EXPERIENCES OF PHILO 35 


humanism of Greece clung to his mysticism and so set 
it in relief against much of the cloistered and morbid 
mysticism of the Christian recluses.* 

Of the numerous references in Philo to direct mystical 
experiences, a few meagre quotations must suffice: 


‘I am not ashamed to relate the way in which I am 
myself affected, which I know I have experienced count- 
less times. Intending sometimes to come to my usual 
occupation of writing the doctrines of philosophy, and 
having seen exactly what I ought to compose, I have 
found my mind fruitless and barren and left off without 
accomplishing anything, reproaching my mind with its 
self-conceit and amazed at the power of Him who is, 
by whom it has turned out that the wombs of the soul 
are opened and closed. But sometimes, having come 
empty, I suddenly became full, ideas being invisibly 
showered upon me and planted from above, so that by 
a divine possession I was filled with enthusiasm, and 
was absolutely ignorant of the place, of those present, 
of myself, of what was said, of what was written, for 
I had a stream of interpretation, an enjoyment of light, 
a most keen-sighted vision, a most distinct view of the 
subjects treated, such as would be given through the 
eyes from the clearest exhibition (of an object).' ? 


His soliloquy when ' any yearning comes upon thee, 
O Soul,' is quoted on p. 293, and on p. 273 that on the 
Nous or Spirit ‘ raised aloft on wings ' and ' conducted 
by Love ’ ; it outsoars all the senses and attains ' a sober 
intoxication ’ in the splendour of the Divine presence. 

Again, a revelation of the nature of God came to him 
in such an immediate experience:? ' I heard once a 
more earnest argument from my soul that had been 
accustomed to be much enraptured by the Divine and 
concerning things of which it did not know how to sur- 
mise the meaning. I shall tell you about it so far as I can 


1 Inge, II. 153-4. 
2 De migr. Abr. 7, C.-W. 34 f.; tr. from Drummond, I, p. 15. 
3 De Cherubim, 9, C.-W. 27. 


36 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


remember,' and the revelation was that there are in the 
One God two supreme powers, Goodness and Might, with 
Reason as a third harmonizing these.’ 

IV. Another escape sought was from cosmic necessity. 
A scheme of cosmic ‘ safety ' was absolutely indispens- 
able to every religion which would make a successful 
and popular appeal in that age. Each religion must 
aim at making men comfortable in an uncomfortable 
universe overwhelming to the detached individual. So 
much was this need felt that Christianity itself in its first 
contact with the outer and larger world was compelled 
to equip itself with cosmic apparatus and to impose 
cosmic functions upon the person of Jesus, who, indeed, 
was better able to bear them than His mythical com- 
petitors. Christianity supplied the lack partly by a 
modification and intensification of Jewish apocalyptism 
of the two-aeon theory of history in the dénouement of 
which Jesus played the supreme róle under God, and , 
partly by the adoption and assimilation, of current 
Hellenistic cosmic speculations. To the Gentile Chris- 
tians the new religion was not only an escape from the 
curse of the Law, but a release from ' slavery to the 
Elements,' that is, the star deities. A modern Christian, 
for whom the geocentric view of the Universe has yielded 
to a view of countless universes, for whom the demons, 
good and bad, have become a dead category, and for 
whom the dread ‘ world-rulers ' have become chemical 
bodies operating with mathematical precision, can hardly 
appreciate the good news ' that neither the Ascension of 
the stars nor their Declinations ' should be able ‘ to 
separate them from the love of God in Christ.’ 

Christianity and its competitors and all the philo- 
sophies were summoned to lift the cosmic burden and 
to offer a way of escape. Some minds, finding the 
Universe too great and inevitable, cast in their lot with 


! Cf. also De Cherubim, 14, C.-W. 48 f. 
? '' To make men at home in the universe ’’ is Bevan's summary of 
the activity of Posidonius, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 98. 


DELIVERANCE FROM COSMIC NECESSITY 37 


it and with its laws by a pantheistic identification; they 
accepted the universe, as Carlyle remarked that the lady 
“had better." Accept fate and work with it was a 
mode of winning cosmic freedom, at least of a kind. A 
dread uncertainty dogged men's steps.  Tyche, or 
Chance, was a capricious goddess as compared with the 
fixed Fate. The ' tempests of Fortune ' might wreck 
the strongest life and turn for the individual his world 
upside-down. The only refuge was in fellowship with 
a Deity superior to Chance. 

The demons * remained to be dealt with by some 
supernatural means. Plato’s elaboration of the doctrine 
of demons in the Banquet as intermediaries between . 
gods and men had proved very fruitful in the early 
centuries of the Christian era. Through contact with 
the Orient these beings occupied an increasingly con- 
spicuous place. It never occurred to Pagans or Chris- 
tians to wipe them out as a category. The Pagans as 
a whole inclined to regard the majority of demons as 
good and useful, though they still believed in the exist- 
ence of evil demons. Christians treated them all as evil ; 
the bad demons were as real to them and as busy as the 
good angels, despite the fact that in the preaching of the 
missionary of Gentile Christianity angels and inter- 
mediary hierarchies occupied no flattering place. 

In Pagan thought the demons exercised much the 
same function as their angelic counterparts, especially in 
supplying the demand for intermediaries created for both 
Pagans and Christians by the conception of a transcen- 
dental deity; by the dualism between Stuff and Mind, 
and the need of an adequate theory of the origins both 
of the world and of evil. There must be to Pagans, 
Jews, and Christians an ordered hierarchy of super- 
human beings, demons, saints, angels, seraphim, logoi, 


Q1 Cf. J. A. Held, Étude sur les démons dans la littérature et la reli- 
gion des Grecs (Paris, 1881); Oakesmith, The Religion of Plutarch 
(London, 1902); Tambornino, De antiquorum Daemonismo (Giessen, 
1909). 


38 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


to carry out the will of the Deity in a world unworthy 
of His presence. Demons acted as 'satraps of the 
Gods.’ + They carry up the prayers of men to the gods 
and bring back the answers and blessings." They also 
executed the behests of the Deity in protecting the 
righteous and punishing the wicked both here and here- 
after. They may also act as guardian genius ? or as the 
voice of God or the conscience of men, an example of 
which was the demon of Socrates, about which there 
arose so much interesting speculation. They are not 
wholly beneficent; evil demons stil exist, for they 
deceive men by forging oracles, they cause divorces ? 
and other evils. The Deity can be justified or exonerated 
from evil on the theory that it is the demons that per- 
form evil, and so a solution is offered of the existence 
of evil under a good Deity. 

By one of the many surprising developments within 
Christianity the much-maligned Pagan demons became, 
with their Jewish compeers, the predecessors of the 
Christian angels and saints, to whom they bequeathed 
their more useful and popular functions. As in 


1 Origen, C. Celsum, VIII. 35. 

? “Per quas (potestates) et desideria nostra et merita ad deos com- 
meant. . . . Inter terricolas caelicolasque vectores hinc precum inde 
donorum qui ultro citro portant hinc petitiones inde suppetias ceu 
quidam utriusque interpretes et salutigeri' (Ps.-Apuleius, De deo 
Socratis, VI. 133). 

* For the demon as the moral imperative, cf. Marcus Aurelius, V, 
10: 'Itis possible for me to do nothing contrary to my god and demon. 
No one can force me to transgress this '; ‘ He lives with the gods who 
constantly shows them his soul pleased with what they appoint and 
obedient to the will of the demon,’ 27; and Epictetus, Diss. I, r4: 
“God has placed by each one a guardian, every man’s demon, and He 
has committed him to the guardianship of one who never slumbers and 
who cannot in any wise be deceived. To what better and more careful 
guardian could he have committed us? When therefore you have shut 
your doors and darkened your room, remember never to say that you 
are alone. God is within you and your demon is within. What need 
have they of light to behold your actions? To this Deity you should 
swear such an oath as soldiers do to their emperor.' 

“ Cf. Ps.-Apuleius, De deo Socratis; Plutarch, De genio Socratis, 9 fi., 
580 Bf.; Maximus of Tyre, VIII and IX (Hobein's ed.). 

5 As in Grenfell and Hunt papyri, New Classical Frags. 76. 


OFFICES OF DEMONS 39 


Catholicism the path to sainthood is open officially to 
the most meritorious members, so demonology held out 
to Pagan saints the possibility of becoming demons after 
death charged with the honourable privilege of shepherd- 
ing their fellow-men or even of becoming deities in full 
sympathy with mankind. Cleombrotus affirms * that the 
better class of souls undergo a transformation from men 
to heroes, from heroes to demons, and of the demons 
some few by thorough purification in virtue attain to 
participation in the divine nature. Elsewhere ? Plutarch 
cites Isis and Osiris as examples of demons raised to 
the rank of deities. When an Egyptian priest went to 
the Iseum on the Campus Martius to interview the 
demon of Plotinus, he found to his amazement that he 
was no longer a demon but had become a god. Thus 
the doctrines of demonology furnished to the most con- 
vinced believers a religious idealism * by becoming the 
vehicle of expression for the faith that there is no limit 
to the spiritual attainment of mankind, that we know 
not yet what we shall be.’ 

In Christian apologetic the demons were put to all 
kinds of uses to prove the superiority of Christian 
exorcism and the Name of Jesus. The demons hate the 
Christians and stir up rulers against them.* Jesus and 
His followers as well as the Pagans attributed diseases 
to demoniacal activities, an attitude against which 
Plotinus * vigorously protested when attacking the 
Gnostics. He attributed ailments to natural physical 
causes and denounced the use of magic in medicine or 
invocations in healings. Anything of truth expressed 


* Plutarch, De def. Orac. xo, 415 C. 

Deis. el Os: (27; 360 E. 

3 Porphyry, Vita Plotini, 1o. 

4 Cf. Oakesmith, Religion of Plutarch, p. 173 f. 

5 “ The doctrine created an eschatology by which vistas of moral 
perfection were opened before purer spirits in worlds to come, and the 
infinite responsibilities of this life were terribly enforced by threats of 
endless degradation ’’ (Dill, Roman Society from Nero, p. 426). 

$ Cf. Justin, Apol. II. rz. 

T En ii. 9,14. 


40 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


by Pagans was done when the demons had temporarily 
left their minds free.! The Pagan miracles, too patent 
to be denied, were the work of demons. When the 
demons learned that Jesus would be a physician of all 
diseases and raise the dead, they anticipated Him by 
bringing Aesculapius on the scene.? Christians some- 
times called for test cases * of demon-possessed to prove 
the superior Christian way of dealing with them. Chris- 
tians held that images of the Deities and Pagan temples 
were the favourite abodes of demons. Christian ecclesi- 
astics * did not doubt that demons could enter even 
Christian bodies through eating foods consecrated to 
idols. According to Tertullian, the demons are all the 
more dangerous because they are equipped with wings 
like the angels ; they are everywhere at once, and know 
all that is taking place in every quarter. The demons 
also forced polytheism on the heathen, mimicked the 
Christian sacraments, and hardened men’s minds against 
the force of evangelical arguments. They were more 
afraid of Christians than of the heathen.? Gregory of 
Nyssa tells in his Life of Gregory the Thaumaturge 
how the latter banished the demons from a Pagan 
shrine and by the Name of Christ and the sign of the 
Cross purified the air. Subsequently at the challenge 
of the local priest, who had returned and found 
his temple empty of demons, Gregory caused the 
demons to come back in obedience to the permission 
* Gregory to Satan, enter.' * And just as in our oldest 
Gospel written for the Church at Rome the evangelist 
descries a valuable argument for the pre-eminence of 
Jesus in representing the demons as confessing His 
Messiahship, so in later days the demons reluctantly 
departed from human bodies, confessed the truth, and 

1 Cf. Origen, C. Celsum, VIII. 63. 

2 Justin, I. 54. 

3. As Tert. Apol 23. 

* Cf. Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 256. 


5 Tert. Apol. 27. 
5 Migne, P.L. XLVI, p. 913 D. 


COSMIC DEITIES 41 


brought converts to Christianity, and this was ' no 
unusual occurrence.’* It was not forgotten that the 
demons compassed the crucifixion as they had com- 
passed the execution of Socrates.” In fact, a Christian 
Platonist asserted that Jesus became man to destroy the 
demons,? to whom His very name was terrible.* 

As the Mystery-Religions were rich in cosmic preten- 
sions and secured safety by union with cosmic deities, 
they were very popular. Thus Attis was ' the Most High 
and bond of the Universe ' * ; Serapis ê ‘ the Coryphaeus 
of the Universe, holding the beginnings and the ends ' 
and 'for all things everywhere through thee and on 
account of thee happen to us’; Mithra ‘ the Demiurge 
and Lord of Creation ' * ; Isis the rerum naturae parens, 
elementorum omnium domina, the Una quae est omnia ;* 
or ' the Aeon makes the world ' and ‘ holds this Universe 
together.’ ° Dolichenus is aeternus conservator totius 
pon"? 

Philosophy collaborated with religion to ease this 
cosmic burden. Stoicism in one mood would solve the 
problem by an emotional application of its pantheism ; 
in another mood it would transmute its pantheism into 
theism to satisfy personal longings and bestow personal 
assurances. Even in the same Stoic these moods might 
alternate. Cleanthes, for example, while holding that 
the world is divine or even a god, immediately 
dictates his famous theistic Hymn to God, or he 
could practically correlate God and Destiny as in the 
prayer: 

! Tert. Apol. 23. 

? Justin, Apol. II. 5, 7, 8; x Cor. i. 6, 8; Col. ii. 15. 

3 Justin, II. 6. 

* Dial. with Tryphon, 3o. 

5 C.I.L. VI. 509; Hepding, Attis, p. 83. Cf. Julian, Or. V. 161 C. 

$ Aristides, Or. Sacrae, VIII. 53. Dind. I, p. 91 and p. 87. 

7 Porphyry, De ant. nym. 5, 6. 

* Apuleius, Metam. XI. 5; Orelli-Henzen, 1871; Dessau, Inscr. lat. sel. 
4362, from Capua. 


* Corp. Herm. XI (1), 2 and 5 (adopting W. Scott's reading in 5). 
19 C.I.L. VI. 406. 


42 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


' Lead me, O Zeus, and lead me, Destiny. 
Whither ordained is by your decree. 

I'll follow, doubting not, or if with will, 
Recreant I falter and I shall follow still! '1 

Philosophy would also remove the terror from the 
universe and so lighten the burden of daily living for 
thousands by the conception of a benign and loving 
Providence which guarded against the implacable blind 
‘ Powers.’ In reading the later philosophies one is con- 
stantly reminded how these are preparing men for the 
attitude and confidence of approach of ' Abba Father ’ 
and how earnestly they grappled with the problem of 
raising men above the fear of relentless and incalculable 
cosmic forces. Amid the deepening pessimism and evils 
of dualism and the travail of the material world the 
servants of philosophy offered a guiding light—o vitae 
dux philosophia.” 

V. Another way of escape was the religion of ritual- 
istic henosis or union with God by rite and sacrament, 
represented chiefly by the Mystery-religions and sub- 
sequently by the magical-mystical Christian sacraments. 
Such union was secured not so much ethically as cere- 
monially and emotionally. The correct ritualistic process 
released the divine element to make its ascent to the 
higher world. The Mystery furnished the initiated soul 
with the pass-word to bliss. By sacramental efficacy 
akin to contemporary magic the material man was in 
rebirth transmuted or remade into immaterial and there- 
fore immortal substance. A guarantee of immortality 
so passionately longed for was given here to each 
member of the Mystery fraternities. Initiates were ‘ de- 
mortalized,’ and thus rendered divine were endowed 
with deathlessness. (See Ch. V.) 


* Matheson's tr. in Bevan, Later Greek Religion, p. 15. Arnim, Fr. 527. 

? “Sed et huius culpae et ceterorum vitiorum peccatorumque nos- 
trorum omnis a philosophia petenda correctio est. . . . O virtutis 
indagatrix expultrixque vitiorum! quid non modo nos sed omnino vita 
hominum sine te esse potuisset? . . . ad te confugimus, a te openr 
petimus . . . est autem unus dies bene et ex praeceptis tuis actus 
peccanti immortalitati anteponendus '' (Cicero, Tusc. Disp. V. 2, 5). 


SIN AND. ATONEMENT 43 


VI. Religious aspiration takes two general forms. 
First, release from the thraldom of the external world 
and its transiency, necessity, death, and perplexing 
enigmas; and, secondly, from the constricted or re- 
bellious self. Hence another conception of salvation 
which accompanied the increasing religious emotion was 
that of deliverance from moral stain and the forgiveness 
of sins. In passing from the classical to the Hellenistic 
age one is arrested by this heightened sense of sin * and 
the consciousness of need of divine grace in the upward 
struggle and the new attitude of self-abasement.” The 
reaction had been equal to the previous Promethean 
position and inaugurated an outlook on man which 
found its culmination in the Augustinian doctrine of 
grace ahd in the mediaevalism against which the 
Renaissance claimed the dignity of man and the worthi- 
ness of all human interests and efforts. 

Orphism ° first heralded in the West this new doctrine 
of the weakness and sinfulness of man and his need of 
grace and of cathartic ritual which a thousand years 
later in Augustine's Confessions found its classic expres- 
sion. The Pythagoreans took up the Orphic pessimistic 
anthropology and furthered it by emphasizing the neces- 
sity for holiness and by dwelling on the awful retribution 
awaiting the unforgiven sinner beyond. The Neo- 
Pythagoreans in the first and second centuries carried 
on the intensification of the consciousness of sin and the 
need of atonement. In all the later phases of Pagan 
religion we are made acutely aware of the urgent demand 
for reform of life and purity of soul, and the frag- 
mentary remnants of Pagan religious literature are 
eloquent on the theme of the manifold privileges and joys 
of the cleansed soul and Godward-directed spirit. 


1 Cf. J. Lebreton, La Connaissance relig. à la fin du II° siècle dans le 
monde hellénistique et dans l'église chrét. (Rev. d. sciences relig. 
1926, 4); Réville, Religion à Rome sous les Sévéres, p. 152. 

? ' Bonus vero vir sine deo nemo est ' (Seneca, Ep. 41, 2; cf. 28, 9). 

3 Pausanias, IX. 30, 12, speaks of the Orphics as discovering purifi- 
cations and means of placating deity. 


44 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


The quest on which Socrates set the West brought 
unpleasant discoveries of helplessness and guilt which 
wrung from agonized souls the Miserere Domine. By 
the failure of collective responsibility in the city-state 
the individual responsibility was augmented to an extent 
perplexing to the average man. The emergence of this 
brooding sense of failure, the consciousness of sin and 
its ineluctable moral issues, the bewilderment of in- 
dividualism, were the moral counterparts of the great 
social upheavals. A religious crisis of universal magni- 
tude was the loss of faith in Occidental ways of securing 
atonement. Self-sufficiency gave way to a cry for help 
in oppressive weakness. Such was the ''failure of 
nerve " that introspection became morbid and means 
of purification were eagerly sought in asceticism and 
sacramentarianism and in esoteric knowledge. Con- 
sciences became hypersensitive. Lucian’s parodies of 
such consciences, the attitude of the Superstitious Man 
in Theophrastus’s Essay seeking monthly absolution on 
monthly confession, Plutarch’s On Superstition, and 
Lucretius’s sublime protest against superstition, are 
depicted from life. The need and accessibility of grace 
for atonement grew only more clamant with the in- 
creasing inwardness and the new religious value of the 
individual. Demands for self-examination are made by 
all the moralists. With the rise of the Roman Empire 
and the leisure for personal concerns possible in the 
Roman Peace the soul turned still more for refuge to 
compassionate Saviour-gods. Penance, confession, and 
purgatorial rites and pilgrimages became more prom- 
inent' The pathological morbid reaction and the 
accepted dualism ? with its concomitant doctrine of the 

1 “ Throughout the world of St. Paul we see a mighty wandering of 
pilgrims desirous to wash away their sins at the great shrines and to 
be delivered of their need '' (Deissmann, St. Paul, p. 44). 

? '' Dualism, with the asceticism inseparable from it, was, so to 
speak, in the air; it was the strongest spiritual tendency of the time, 
almost equal to Christianity in power '' (Dobschütz, p. 112), but in 


several aspects it proved stronger than Christianity by distorting 
Christianity. 


EXTRAVAGANCES OF ASCETICISM 45 


evil of matter issued in an extravagant asceticism in 
Pagan circles, the severity of which is astonishing. 
Social life was decried + in favour of some form of flight 
from the world or monasticism, an interesting example 
of which are the recluses in the Serapeum ? of Memphis, 
who formed an order of a very rigorous kind. From 
the first generation onwards the early Church found the 
regnant asceticism as a mode of religion so strong that, 
in forgetfulness of the sanity of its Founder, but exagger- 
ating suggestions of Paul, it took over Pagan asceticism 
in such a wholesale fashion as to magnify the merits of 
fasting, to make celibacy and virginity a higher life than 
the obligations and duties of married life, to encourage 
the practice of ‘ brothers ' having ' sister ' wives, and 
to find its expression in the unlovely asperities of the 
scholarly Jerome and the self-tortures of Stylites. Chris- 
tianity recognized that if it adopted asceticism it must 
surpass the Pagans in their excesses and discomforts. 
The devotion of the Isiac devotee crawling on bleeding 
knees to break the ice in winter and bathe in the icy 
waters, the self-flagellation of the Galli, the gashing with 
knives, the long fasts, the monastic life, the insensibility 
to pain, and such exercises as sometimes issued in the 
death of the penitent must be surpassed. If the Phrygian 
priest offered his virility to his Lord, Origen inflicted 
upon himself a similar emasculation. An historian of 
early Christianity rightly assesses the '' two influences 
‘which worked with disintegrating effect " in the first 
centuries as ''the divergence between the intellectual 
and moral side of Christianity ° and '' the effect which 


1 Asceticism and resignation resulted '' from exaggerated attention 
‘to the individual consciousness at the cost of social and political life ’’ 
«Arnold, Rom. Stoicism, p. 258). 

* Cf. Rev. des études grecques, XXXVI, p. 82. K. Sethe, Sarapis 
u. d. sogen. károxo. des Savapis (in Abt. ges. Wiss. Göttingen, XIV. 
1913), decides for reclus rather than religiously possessed, for which 
U. Wilcken (Archiv f. Pap. VI. 1913, pp. 184-212) contends. Cf. Bouché- 
Leclercq, Les Reclus du Sérapeum de Memphis, and Preuschen, Mónch- 
tum u. Sarapiskult. 


5 


46 VARIETY OF RELIGIOUS INTERESTS 


RIL 


the ascetic tendencies of the age had on its morals. 
It is no exaggeration to say that '' it was not so much 
immorality as the excessive chastity of many Christians 
which was the danger which threatened the congrega- 
tions ’’ ? in the sub-apostolic age. 


1 Dobschütz, Christian Life in the Primitive Church, p. 251. 
2 Wernle, Beginnings, II, p. 320. 


CHAPTER III 
THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


IN the first century religiously-minded men responding 
to the ubiquitous religious appeal might have recourse 
for religious support and the communion of sympathetic 
souls to one of four main religious refuges—Judaism, 
Greek moral and Greek mystical philosophy, the 
Mystery-religions, or Christianity. This enumeration by 
no means implies that there were only four religions or 
that each of these proved impervious to the others and 
to outside influences. Even the conspicuously exclusive 
of the Graeco-Roman religions—Judaism and Christi- 
anity—proved unable, to their own enrichment, to erect 
effectual barriers against encroachments from without. 
Moreover, these religions were interpreted in categories 
of that day and with acquiescence in the philosophical- 
religious postulates, for example, individualism, dualism, 
demonology, asceticism. The contemporary cosmologies 
and scientific views made lasting impacts upon each. 
Thus each religion was compelled to the task of making 
man comfortable in the universe, and this naturally led 
to comparison and contrast with the cosmic pretensions 
of its competitors. Again, Astralism compelled the 
attention of Greek philosophy and at certain points 
entered into dangerous competition with it, and at 
others, for example, on the ascent of the soul, it entered 
into alliance with it. It forced recognition from 
Judaism. It compelled Christian preachers to counteract 
its appeal and to outbid its claims, and it secured a place 
in canonical writings in the Apocalypse. It obliged 
.Origen in the most comprehensive early Christian 
philosophy of history to treat of the ensouled heavenly 
47 


48 THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


bodies and to hold that the sun, moon, and stars 
pray to God.’ Its largest scope was probably in the 
Mysteries. 

Again, we may not look for mysticism in any one 
corner. We find it in one quarter confused with 
occultism and theurgy, in another operating with the 
exalted experiences of the Mysteries, in another pro- 
claiming the triumphant faith that '' our destiny, our 
being's heart and home, is with Infinitude and only 
there," in another finding the world sacramental and 
issuing in a soul-purifying cosmic emotion. 

Or the political associations of religion were not wholly 
neglected by any of the above four forms of religion. 
The religious standing of Israel was constantly jeopardiz- 
ing her peace with the political powers, and in a real 
way her religion constituted an imperium in imperio in 
the Empire. Her faith in providence had a keen eye 
for the embarrassments of Seleucid or Roman overlords. 
Christianity at first was indifferent to political life, but 
learned to imitate the Mystery priesthoods in seeking 
political power: ? at first it learned to pray for the powers 
as ordained of God; then challenged them to a mortal 
conflict for two and a half centuries, after which it 
became the State religion, when Christ succeeded to the 
place vacated by Serapis and Mithra, and the Madonna 
gradually to the place vacated by Isis and the Great 
Mother. 

Finally, as an illustration of the working of a general 
belief, magic may be mentioned, which was regarded 
as too dangerous to neglect. In this field the Jews were 
experts, and their scriptures and divine titles were put 
to frequent magical working. Greek philosophy in its 
clarity and power opposed magic, yet we note the tragic 
declension of the system of Ammonius Saccas into a 
theurgy in Iamblichus, Proclus, and Maximus. The 
Christians at first attributed magic to demons, but 


* De Prin. I. 7; C. Celsum, V. 11, VIII. 67. 
NEB CL. IV 787, XOT: 


JUDAISM 49 


learned in larger commerce with an alien world to assign 
to their own rites the pernicious or the blessed efficacies 
of the rites of the magician. Philosophy and Christianity 
had close contacts. The first great reinterpretation of 
Christianity as a timeless religion—the Fourth Gospel— 
was the achievement of a mind which was attracted by 
Greek mysticism. Pantaenus, the founder of the Cate- 
chetical school of Alexandria, and Clement were both 
brought to Christianity through Greek philosophy. 
Ammonius, the master of Plotinus, was a Christian 
before he became a philosopher and teacher of the 
philosopher Origen. Justin Martyr was a devoted 
Platonist before he became a Christian, and as a 
Christian asseverated that ' the teachings of Plato 
are not different from the teachings of Christ' and 
saw no incongruity in wearing the philosopher's mantle.' 
Though Augustine abandoned Plotinus because there 
was no Incarnation in his doctrine? he could 
not withdraw himself from the spiritual influence of 
Plotinus, whose philosophy through his Christian 
follower has found a permanent place in Christianity. 
And from Proclus the Areopagite drew his mystical 
inspiration. Jerome in his preface to the De Viris 
ilustribus—the earliest Christian ‘‘ Who's Who ’’— 
contends that there are men among the Christians whose 
culture confutes the arguments of Celsus, Porphyry, and 
Julian. 

To multitudes in quest of a religious refuge, Judaism 
offered a spiritual home. The prophecy of Baruch ? was 
abundantly fulfilled, * I will scatter this people among 
the Gentiles, that they may do good to the Gentiles.' 
And ' the Father and Creator of the universe did not 
abandon mankind. He gave a Law and sent holy 
prophets to proclaim and to teach the race of men that 
each of us might awaken and come to know that there 


1 Apol. II. 12-15. 
2 Conf. VII. ro. 
3 Apoc. of Baruch, I. 4. 


50 THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


is one God.! The Synagogue deserved better of that 
ancient world Pagan and Christian than has been gen- 
erally acknowledged. Too long has Judaism been set 
in stark contrast to Christianity and judged by the hostile 
references of the Gospel narrative and by the detrac- 
tion of Judaism that early became fashionable in the 
triumphant Gentile Christian communities. On the other 
hand, Judaism has been so presented as to detract from 
Christianity. But the researches of Jewish and Christian 
scholars have revealed the fact that there was a type 
of Judaism inward and spiritual, prophetic and un- 
conventional, preparing the way in Palestine for the 
prophetic preaching of John the Baptist and of Jesus, 
and in the Diaspora for the propaganda of Philo and the 
missionary career of Paul, just as Lindsay has shown 
that the Reformation movement which culminated in 
Luther was in gestation in the quiet religious family life 
of the German people. This more spiritual Judaism, 
though pessimistic about man's nature and loud in 
lamentation that ' a corruptible body weigheth down the 
soul ' (Sap. ix. 15), gave rise to a profounder sense of sin 
such as is found in the Wisdom of Solomon or in Paul, 
and intensified the desire for a Redeemer from sin and 
from the conflict of flesh and spirit and for a Saviour- 
God to ensure victory in that supra-mundane conflict 
against Principalities and Powers, against the World- 
rulers of Darkness, and so to deliver men from the 
Powers of Darkness. This type of Judaism, while 
rendering religion an inner and personal concern, also 
lifted it into the plane of universalism co-extensive with 
human needs. 

From the days of Alexander the Great the Jews took 
their place in world-history in closer contact with the 
movements, political, intellectual, and religious, of the 


1 Theophilus, Ad Autolycum, II. 34. Cf. ‘thy sons through whom 
the incorruptible light of the Law was destined to be given to the world 
(aeon), Sapientia, xvii. 4. Cf. Moore, Judaism in the First Centuries, 
I, p. 115 f. 


JEWISH ATTITUDE TO SYNCRETISM 5I 


Mediterranean world. They participated in the mis- 
sionary zeal' of the religions which in Alexander's 
Empire and that of Rome were carried beyond their 
geographical and racial boundaries and came daily into 
collision and contact. To an amazing degree the Jews, 
while obstinately maintaining their racial characteristics 
and cult, were affected by the regnant syncretism ° or 
blending of religious ideas and usages in the congeries 
of peoples. In a world craving spiritual power and 
moral reformation they attracted converts by the appeal 
of a venerable antiquity—an important item of apologetic 
in the Graeco-Roman world; by an austere and virile 
morality which gave them pre-eminence among the laxer 
morals of Paganism; by a resolute and robust theism 
and an invincible personal faith in God as the omnipotent 
Dispenser of the happenings of history; by regular 


1 For the popularity of Judaism cf. Josephus, C. Ap. II. 39; Seneca 
in Augustine, De Civ. Dei, VI. 1r, ' major pars populi facit quod cur 
faciat ignorat.’ Cf. the legislation on circumcision, vide Schürer, I, 
p3677 11.5 TID paI7 f. 

2 The Jews, particularly of the Diaspora, were active commissaries 
of syncretism or eclecticism in religion; cf. Gunkel, Zum religionsgesch. 
Verstündnis d. N.T., p. 25 ff.; Bousset, Religion des Judentums, 2nd 
ed. p. 542 ff.: '' Das Judentum war die Retorte, in welcher die ver- 
schiedene Elemente gesammelt wurden," p. 594. It is surely an under- 
estimation to say ''alles in allem aber ist, wenn wir von der Zauberei 
absehen, die jüdische Religion für den heidenischen Synkretismus nicht 
von grosser Bedeutung geworden, weil es ihr an Toleranz und Anpas- 
sungsfáhigkeit gebrach '' (art. Synkretismus in Alt. in Relig. in Gesch. 
und Geg. V. 1053). A truer estimate of the Diaspora is given by A. 
Causse (Quelques remarques sur les origines de la Diaspora, Paris, 
1924, p. 12 ff), who points out that since the Exile Israel had begun 
to forget her native tongue: ‘‘ c'est assurément une heure grave quand 
un peuple change de langue. Avec la langue nouvelle de nouvelles 
pensées pénètrent l'àme d'Israél. . . . C'est le moment où l'iranisme 
et le sémitisme tendent à fusionner; et non seulement iranisme et 
sémitisme, mais aussi les religions et les superstitions de tous les 
peuples d'Orient. Déjà commencent à se propager certains cultes 
mystiques. . . . Israél dispersé sur la terre ne devait pas échapper à 
la contagion. Il était particuliérement bien placé aux carrefours des 
nations pour la subir. C'est un fait significatif que les grands centres 
de la diaspora étaient justement les grands centres de culture syncré- 
tique.” 


52 THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


congregational worship in democratic religious brother- 
hoods; by the scrupulous attention to the religious 
education of children ;' together with a general educa- 
tional policy for the people ;? by the denunciations and 
promises of the synagogue pulpit; by the assurances of 
moral self-control and moral progress; by their superior 
holy books translated into the lingua franca, and by an 
energetic and competent literary apologetic. The prayer 
with which, according to Philo, the translators of the 
Hebrew scriptures into the Greek Septuagint version 
approached their historic task, received an abundant 
answer in that this Greek version not only '' kept millions 
in the old faith, to win fresh millions for whom the 
Hebrew text would have remained a buried treasure," * 
but became the first, and remained for a considerable 
time the only, Bible of missionary Christianity:^ ' He 
heard their prayers that not only the majority but rather 
the whole human race might be benefited by giving heed 
for reformation of life to wise and noble ordinances.’ 
Add to this the amazing ability '' of this grimly earnest 
people " to comprehend the nature of Hellenistic- 
Oriental mysticism, which they not only adapted with 
great success to Judaism and made a means of modern- 
izing their scriptures, but which they also associated with 
stronger religious and moral purposes and motives than 
in its native environment. It was this larger, eager, 
aggressive Judaism of the Diaspora that sponsored 
Christianity in the Gentile world—sub umbraculo insig- 
nissimae religionis certe licitae ;? and after the catastrophe 
of A.D. 70 and the end of the sacrificial system, and 

1 Cf. Philo, De Sept. 6, C.-W. 60; Moore, Judaism in the First Cen- 
turies of the Christian Era, I, p. 308 ff. 

* Cf. Moore, ib. I, pp. 284 f., 308 ff. The Synagogue had features 
in common with a Mystery collegium, a school of philosophy, a mutual 
benefit society, and a court of civil jurisdiction. 

3 Hausrath, New Testament Times, I, poxt42: 

* “Greek Judaism with the Septuagint had ploughed the furrows for 
the Gospel seed in the Western world ’’ (Deissmann, New Light on 


the New Testament, p. 95). 
5 Tertullian, Apol. 21. 


DEMANDS OF JUDAISM 53 


particularly after the final rupture with Christianity in 
the Bar Cochba war, it was the Diaspora that saved 
Judaism as a spiritual force in the world. 

That Judaism proved a religious home to numerous 
converts, including those of high rank and culture, we 
have abundant evidence. The success * of their propa- 
ganda is as certain as the difficulties in its way were real. 
The Jewish mission was confronted with the odiwm 
generis humani hurled against a people who were repre- 
sented as a genus hominum invisum deis, and this 
pronounced anti-Semitism ? was aggravated by the un- 
compromising attitude of the Jews toward the current 
theocrasia ?—mixture of rites and deities—and toward 
the imperial cult * as the symbol of loyalty and by their 
disdain of many of the social customs of their neighbours. 
In the Roman period they also fell under the deep sus- 
picion of disloyalty and of readiness to take advantage 
of every crisis threatening the Empire. They also stood 

aloof in their spirit of intolerance which Christianity in- 
herited from them. They were adamant on the question 
of monotheism and on the observance of the sabbath, 
on dietary regulations and on aniconic worship, and 
above all on the rite of circumcision by which alone 
outsiders could receive the full benefits of the special 
covenant mercies, thus cutting themselves off from their 
former social and religious alliances. The utmost 
concession made was the recognition of a class of God- 
fearers or Metuentes who were adherents of the Syna- 
gogue without becoming full Jews by circumcision. 
Judaism exemplified the strength and weakness of a 


1 Cf. Schürer, Gesch d. jüd. Volkes, 4th ed. III, p. 155 f. 

? Cf. Bousset, p. 86. 

3 '' The separateness of the Jews, their dju£ía, was one of the prime 
causes of the animosity toward them, especial in the miscellaneous 
fusion of people and syncretism of religions in the Hellenistic 
kingdoms and the Roman world; but it accomplished its end in the 
survival of Judaism, and therein history has vindicated it ’’ (Moore, I, 
P: 21). 

* Cf. Juster, Les Juifs dans l'empire romain, I, p. 340 ff. 


s4 THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


nationalistic * religion with catholic pretensions. There 
was, however, a universalism latent even in Mosaism, 
and the prophets undermined particularism and privilege 
in religion. On such an important question there was 
much heart-searching and intense conflict within the 
ranks of Judaism between the liberals and the orthodox. 
Two tendencies became manifest, the one issuing in the 
exclusiveness of Ezra and Rabbinism in the supposed 
interest of self-preservation, the other stressing the in- 
wardness of a denationalized religion and its independ- 
ence of outward forms and expressing itself in love of 
God and Man.’ 

The Jewish mission * for righteousness and morality 
and monotheism and for a social religion with an in- 
dividual responsibility captured many not only from 
among the masses, but from the higher circles. 

The literary remains of Alexandrine Judaism, such 
as the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, and the works 
of Philo, show how the Jews could hold their own in 
the academic groups of the University of Alexandria 
and how they could adapt and assimilate new and 
foreign thought to strengthen their propaganda without 
sacrificing any essential of their faith. They learned to 
present their faith as a sacerdotal or a legalistic or a 
prophetic or a mystical religion.* 

Christianity inherited the lofty ethical ideals of 
Judaism. The Apostle of the Gentiles found it easier 
to win converts to the new Christian society than to 


1 *' The strength of Judaism rested on its ethical and spiritual content, 
its weaknesses on its national political aspirations’’ (G. la Piana, 
Harvard Th. Rev. XX. 4, p. 384). 

? Cf. Archiv f. Religionswiss. XXV, p. 218 ff. 

8 Cf. Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 15. 

* “ Dennoch bleibt das alexandrinische Judentum eine Erscheinung 
von allerhóchster Wichtigkeit. . . . Es hat in her Tat die Brücke 
geschlagen, auf dem das Evangelium in die Welt einziehen konnte. . . . 
Hier wurden die Formen geschaffen, die das Evangelium braucht, um 
sich der Welt verstándlich zu machen. Hier entstand die Logostheo- 
logie, hier wurden die Mittel bereitet, mit denen die christliche Apolo- 
getik arbeitete ” (Bousset, Religion des Judentums, 2nd ed. p. 502). 


ATTRACTION OF JUDAISM 55 


improve their morals. It was the Jewish system of 
ethics intermingled with Stoic principles and suffused 
with the new enthusiasm of Christian love which Paul 
sought to impose upon the Gentiles. The poorer Jewish- 
Christian Churches more than repaid the Gentile- 
Christian contributions in money by the wealth of their 
ethical heritage. The former were agitated by questions 
of legalism, while the latter were endeavouring to restrain 
libertinism by the adoption of the ethical code of Judaism 
and Christianity. Because Christianity sprang from 
Judaism, its birthmark was morality. '' The Jewish 
Christianity of Palestine trained by the Law was, so to 
speak, the backbone, which supported the moral con- 
science of the whole. . . . And the Judaistic agitation 
in his (Paul's) churches, in spite of the injury that it 
did, still achieved the result of laying more stress on the 
moral side of Christianity.” * 

Judaism offered the ancient world all the advantages 
of a religion of authority, appealing to weary minds 
seeking for a sure word in days of religious doubt. The 
authority of its proclamations rested on the fact that it 
was professedly an exclusive revealed religion which, 
though consonant with the highest philosophy, was 
beyond the will of men and permitted no questioning 
of its claims.” A scheme of redemption satisfying to 
numerous proselytes was offered. The unequivocal 
message of a divine purpose working itself out in the 
events of time and advancing surely towards a goal 
supplied an inspiring world-view to those who were dis- 
satisfied with the Hellenic, especially Stoic, view of the 
world-process as a never-ending recurrent series of cycles 


! Dobschütz, Christian Life in the Primitive Church, p. 172; cf. 
p. 139; Wernle, Beginnings of Christianity, I, p. 20 f. 

2 Judaism was ‘‘a revealed religion, which did not ask man's 
approval but demanded obedience to the whole and every part, reason 
and inclination to the contrary notwithstanding; an exclusive religion 
which tolerated no divided allegiance; a religion which made a man's 
eternal destiny depend on his submission of his whole life to its law, or 
his rejection of God who gave the law '' (Moore, op. cit. I, p. 324). 


56 THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS REFUGES: JUDAISM 


which merely repeated the past without any very definite 
aim or consummation, the same events occurring, and 
the same acts of baseness and of heroism transpiring on 
the same stage. And Israel would not be balked of the 
conviction that God and good shall triumph, if not here 
in this order then in another and better succeeding order. 
This heroic message—for it was of faith—likewise sup- 
plemented and acted as a wholesome corrective to the 
world-view of those who under later Platonic influence 
removed the world of reality into the supernal realm and 
belittled the mightiest events of history as symbols of 
the eternal world or as ideas. Thus the Jews gave to 
these centuries in the throes of change and renewal a 
concrete present value to the very history, with all its 
perplexity, of which they were a notable part. To the 
Greek, God reveals Himself, at least supremely, in pure 
‘form ' or sublime ideas; to the Jew, God reveals Him- 
self in history, in the temporal happenings of the years. 
The Greek interpreted history as philosophy teaching 
by examples ; the Jew as a continuous concrete vindica- 
tion of right over wrong, as a moral system of rewards 
and punishments.!' 

The supreme interest of the Greek was in philosophy, 
he philosophized his religion ; the supreme interest of the 
Jew was in religion, he moralized his religion. Jewish 
character was rooted in Jewish religion. '' The people 
whose religion forms the foundation of Christianity and 
Mohammedanism, the people whose religion is the source 
of that of nearly half the population of the world, must 
be peculiarly endowed with the genius of religion—more- 
over, the people who have given to the world the Old 
and New Testaments must needs stand out as pre- 


1 Cf. Bevan's excellent contrast of the Hebraic and the Hellenic 
world-views in Legacy of Israel, p. 50. Inge speaks of ''the most 
formidable problem of Christian theology—how to make room for the 
Jewish philosophy of history by the side of the Platonic philosophy of 
eternal life ’’ (Phil. of Plotinus, II, p. 19; cf. Carpenter, Phases of Early 
Christianity, p. 9). 


JEWISH VIEW OF HISTORY 57 


eminently endowed with the spirit of religion." ! And 
yet the time came when ' it is absurd to use the name 
Jesus Christ and play the Jew. For Christianity has 
not believed in Judaism, but Judaism in Christianity.' * 
But by one of the most astonishing reactions in history, 
Judaism, which had so thoroughly prepared the way for 
Christianity and had contributed so liberally to its 
missionary equipment, began to look askance at the 
readiness with which the Greeks accepted, enlarged, and 
universalized the primitive Gospel; then as a whole 
Judaism rejected Christianity and thereby practically 
rejected Hellenism,? and so turned its face toward Asia 
rather than toward Europe, in which Paul had found 
such a response to a vitalizing message. 

! Oesterley & Box, The Religion and Worship of the Synagogue, p. 20. 

? Ignatius, Ad Magn. X. 3. 

-° Cf. H. H. Schaeder, Der Orient und das griech. Erbe in Die Antike, 
IV. 3, p. 245 ff. 


CHAPTER IV 
GREEK MORAL AND GREEK MYSTICAL PHILOSOPHY 


Amonc the religious refuges of the Graeco-Roman world 
Greek philosophy, moral and mystical, occupies a con- 
spicuous place because of its pre-eminent services to 
ancient seekers after truth who strove to attain a syn- 
thesis of life’s varied activities. It enabled earnest men 
to determine their bearings in face of the contradictions 
of the universe. Greek moral philosophy made its appeal 
to virile morality and love of truth; it advocated the 
high potencies resident within man, making him less 
dependent on external or supernatural help and fostering 
moral self-respect. Greek mystical philosophy, con- 
tinuing Plato’s mystical quests and deeply influenced by 
Oriental mysticism, granted increasing recognition to the 
soul’s intuitions. 

Socrates, ‘‘ almost the ideal of humanity itself,’’ fully 
conscious of a divine call, diverted inquiry from physics 
to logic, from the objective to the subjective, to in- 
vestigate human nature itself and its ethical concerns, to 
determine the good and the evil in conduct. Against 
the dogmatism of his predecessors he introduced the 
system of ‘humble inquiry,’ ‘ always doubting and 
causing others to doubt,’ that they might have convic- 
tions and attain knowledge rather than hold mere 
opinions, and that they might know things as they are. 
The discovery of conscience (‘ the wife from whom there 
is no divorce’) by Socrates and all the deepening of 
personality and moral responsibility based on inner 
freedom gave rise to a high sense of the supreme worth 
of the individual and of the value of moral integrity and 
autonomy, of which the martyr death in the Athenian 

58 


SOCRATES 59 


prison became the supreme expression. Socrates gave 
a new and defiant security to moral strivings.' This 
type of moral philosophy taught men to look within and - 
find salvation there in the realization of the inherent 
divinity of man and of the true nature of the soul to 
aspire on high in love of the things that are true and 
noble. 

Plato, following up the method of Socrates to discern 
the true nature of things, discovered a new mode of 
knowledge, or rather he found a way of escape from the 
world of uncertainty inherent in the Heraclitean doctrine 
of the flux of all things, about which opinion only is 
possible, by setting over against this shifting successive 
world of sensible things a world of eternal forms which 
neither ‘ become’ nor perish and by claiming that of 
these latter alone true knowledge is possible—the forms or 
ideas are the proper and only objects of the understand- 
ing, that is, only real things can be completely known,’ 
Thus he delivered the spirit of man from the puzzling 
multiplicity of things and from depressing instability. 

Plato and his master both believed that men have only 
to contemplate virtue to be enamoured of it so as to 
pursue it, and to behold Beauty (in its large Greek sense) 
to be attracted by it. Plato enthroned Goodness in the 
centre of the Universe by making the Good the source 
or ultimate cause of the Universe as also the goal of the 
whole world-process. The world itself with all its full- 
ness is the overflow of the Good, as argued by Timaeus 


1 ' From them [Socrates and his followers] in effect comes the 
connected scheme of virtues and duties within which the educated con- 
science of Christendom still moves when it is impartially reflecting on 
what ought to be done. Religious teachers have no doubt affected 
the hopes and fears which actuate us in the pursuit of virtue or rouse 
us from its neglect. Religious societies have both strengthened men 
in the performance of recognized duties and taught them to recognize 
relations of duty . . . but the articulated scheme of what the virtues and 
duties are, in their difference and in their unity, remains for us now 
in its main outlines what the Greek philosophers left it ’’ (Green, 
Proleg. to Ethics, V. 249). 

2 Cf. Repub. 477 A. 


60 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


in the dialogue of that name, and this overflow is not 
due to any compulsion or even to free choice, but arose 
wholly from the constitution of the Good to give forth 
itself without jealousy or niggardly motives. Something 
of the Good persists in all its emanations or self- 
expressions, because it imparts its own characteristics. 
Plato accordingly made the Good the universal quest or 
nisus of all things: he would have approved as heartily 
as did Aristotle of the famous declaration of the 
astronomer Eudoxus: ‘ It is the Good for which all 
things strive.’ He therefore asseverated unequivocally 
that man always seeks the Good; being ‘a plant of 
heavenly origin’ he can rest in nothing short of the 
Good; nor accept, save for a time and under illusion, 
any substitute. This doctrine of the inherent worth of 
the soul, its inalienable goodness, and its equipment with 
wings for heavenly flights was a message very much 
needed as a wholesome corrective during subsequent 
ages of pessimism as to man's nature. The juggernaut 
of the fatalism of astralism was for many deprived of its 
terrors by Plato's lofty faith that the things of the eternal 
world are found within and are realizable in daily 
experience. That immortality is man's constitutionally 
and yet something to be gained through the forth-putting 
of the moral powers resident within, and that the ration- 
ality of man rests on the activity of the divine element 
within him which alone renders him truly human, was 
a healthful gospel. 

It is impossible to estimate the incalculable blessings 
to the ancient world accruing from Greek philosophy. 
It remained the strongest bulwark against the senti- 
mentality and emotionalism, and, though it too was over- 
taken by a desire for Revelation, the tradition of inquiry 
and the brilliant achievements of the Greek genius were 
too strong to yield easily to traditions of sacerdotal learn- 
ing. It delayed for centuries the advent of the Dark 
Ages of credulity and miracle. It is possible to-day to 
realize its attraction and respond to its timeless appeal. 


SERVICES OF PLATONISM TO CHRISTIANITY 6r 


No earnest reader can to-day study Plato's disciples, 
Philo and Plotinus, without his soul expanding in sym- 
pathy with those who so lived in the reality of the spiritual 
and eternal, and without being elevated toward the 
height of their pure loves. And the more Christian the 
reader the more sensitive he will be to their deep in- 
tuitions of truth and their experiences of joy. He will 
gratefully acknowledge the anima naturaliter Christiana. 

It is also impossible to estimate the contribution of 
Greek philosophy to Christianity both nascent and later." 
Little wonder that the Christian teachers who knew 
Greek philosophy best, such as Justin, Clement, Origen, 
esteemed it highly as a preparation for and ally of 
Christianity in supplying standards of values. Clement 
protests that ‘ philosophy is not false,’ and even con- 
ceding that ‘ philosophy was discovered by the Greeks 
by human understanding,' such understanding was God- 
sent, so that Greek philosophy is a revelation from God ; 
it was God's ' peculiar covenant with the Greeks as a 
basis for the philosophy according to Christ.’ ^ Clement 
quotes the influential Preaching of Peter as proving that 
the one eternal God ' known to the Greeks in a Gentile 
fashion and to the Jews in a Jewish fashion and to us in 
a new and spiritual fashion ' was ' the Giver of Greek 
philosophy to the Greeks,’ * which he recognized as one 
of the two divine antecedents of Christianity. Justin * 
was ‘ delighting in the teachings of Plato’ when the 


1 *'* The philosophy of Greece provided the inward conditions whereby 
its [Christianity] ideas could be interpreted and brought into that 
systematic form which was necessary to secure their permanent influence 
upon the human mind . . . Greek philosophy supplied the form in 
which the reflective thought of the time was cast, the intellectual 
weapons with which it worked, the categories or general conceptions 
by means of which it sought to deal with any new matter. . . . 
Greek philosophy may be regarded as the germ out of which Christian 
theology sprang, or as the great adverse force which it had to combat ”’ 
(Caird, Theology in the Greek Philosophers, I, p. 49, II, pp. 363, 369). 
“ Hellas has dominated the creed as she has dominated the intellectual 
history of Christendom ” (Farnell, Evolution of Religion, p. 81). 

ANSAN TS (62, 4; 67, 1). 

«bu E. 5; 42, 6. * Apol. II. 12-15. 

6 


62 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


heroic testimony of Christian confessors induced him 
to become a Christian, * not that the teachings of Plato 
are different from those of Christ, though not wholly 
similar,’ but because the doctrine of the incarnate Logos 
as ‘Son and Apostle’ rendered Christianity ' superior 
to all human philosophy.’ 

The insistence of Platonism on hearkening to the 
intuitions of the soul as a source of true knowledge 
additional to ratiocination and the carrying of all things 
for meaning to their eternal idea, the demand of Neo- 
Pythagoreanism for holiness and renunciation and kind- 
ness and the unambiguous testimony of Stoicism to 
autonomous personality as man’s only inalienable 
possession, cannot be antiquated in the strivings of man- 
kind, though much in each of these systems has been 
antiquated and become even grotesque. But the mystic, 
the ritualist, and the moralist abide. 

The most potent strain in Greek philosophy was 
Platonism, which penetrated or affected every sub- 
sequent system of thought, especially Neo-Pythagorean- 
ism, Stoicism, and Neo-Platonism. Platonism entered 
Christianity largely through Neo-Platonism, and Neo- 
Platonism mostly through three channels—from Am- 
monius Saccas through Origen, from Plotinus through 
Augustine, and from Proclus through Pseudo-Dionysius.' 
The supreme value and abiding appeal of Platonism to 
the world and especially to aggressive Christianity is its 
amazing combination and fusion of the keenest critical 
search of truth intellectually with the moral and religious 
contemplation of truth itself. In fact the Platonic tem- 
perament is constituted of ''the singular blend of 


* “Tt is in the main from him [Proclus] that Christianity received 


the Neo-Platonic impress still distinguishable in orthodox theology 
under all the guise of a formal Aristotelianism. . . . The main sources 
of the unmistakable Neo-Platonism of the great scholastic philosophers 
are two—the writings of the so-called Dionysius, themselves the work 
of some Christianized follower of Proclus, and the work De Causis” 
(of Proclus) (Taylor, Phil. of Proclus, in Proc. Aristotelian Soc. N.S. 
XVIII, p. 600). 


TIMELESS APPEAL OF PLATONISM 63 


humanism and asceticism, poetry and logic, the critical 
and the devotional spirit." ! The Platonist is at once 
mystic and rationalist: he believes that the soul makes 
its ascent both by reason and by love and in this ascent 
the logical is joined with the emotional. Platonism has 
proved a vast enrichment of our faith. To-day we need 
not less but more Platonism to revitalize dogma and to 
quicken with a genuine mysticism which refuses to 
become synonymous with abnormal non-moral mani- 
festations or to be restricted to exceptional individuals 
in cloistered calm or of towering greatness, but is 
workable by and accessible to such classes as fisherfolk, 
day-labourers and craftsmen and peasants, who first 
heard its loftiest expression and promise, ‘ Blessed are 
the pure in heart: for they shall see God.’ If Clement 
of Alexandria reminded nervous and conventional Chris- 
tians that philosophy was not a hobgoblin to frighten 
them, such Christians may still be reminded that in that 
practical and catholic practice of thinking on ‘ whatever 
things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good 
report,’ Greek philosophy cannot be excluded. Christi- 
anity will be clarified and enriched and the greatness of 
its Founder enhanced by moving in the direction advo- 
cated by the Cambridge Platonists back to '' her old 
loving nurse, the Platonick philosophy,” to realize with 
one of them (Whichcote), ‘‘ I oppose not rational to 
spiritual, for spiritual is most rational.'' 

Cicero said of Plato scribens est mortuus, but his 
timeless message abides, and his prophetic voice will 
never cease to be heard while the problem of the transient 
and the immutable presses upon man. He will ever 
invite men to hearken to and identify themselves with 
the divine principle within. In every age the follower 
of Plato, borne far ‘‘ above the howling senses’ ebb and 
flow," will be able without confusion both to contem- 
plate and to participate energetically in that ceaseless 
process whereby— 

! Dodds, Select Passages, p. 9 f. 


64 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


“ Our little systems have their day; 
They have their day and cease to be ''; 

his soul will find a sure anchorage in the realization (in 
the most succinct statement of Platonism from Christian 
lips and from one who professed no love for philosophy) 
that ‘ the things which are seen are temporal, but the 
things which are not seen are eternal.' Plato has taught 
his own a more excellent way of building Eternity than 
out of the ruins of Time: Eternity may be securely built, 
even during its ‘ moving image,’ out of the more precious 
material of the heavenly mind loving and living now in 
the ‘ eternal and immutable ideas.’ Speaking thus of 
Platonism, it is no more intended to deny the presence 
of contemporary and antiquated elements in Plato than 
in first-century Christianity. Platonism was the last 
and loftiest refuge of noble souls who in the waning of 
Paganism could not accept Christianity in an age, alas! 
when the unhappy alternatives of Either—Or, of 
Catholicism or Platonism, were thrown out by Christi- 
anity in its oblivion of Clement and Origen. 

Greek thought has rendered one lasting service to the 
universality and validity of religion, not only in banish- 
ing fear and bringing criticism to bear, but in insisting 
that the religion of rational and intelligent beings must 
be at least rational and intelligible in its principles, and 
in maintaining, in the words of Whichcote, that there 
cannot be “‘ an action of religion which is not an act of 
the understanding ; for that is not a religious act which 
is not human,” so that religion is something embraced 
with reverence both by the intellect and the emotions. 
And Greek philosophy did this while recognizing in- 
creasingly in its epistemology the rights of intuition, and 
the truths that wake, not by the ratiocinative faculty, 
“ to perish never," and the aspiration of man to 
'* breathe in worlds To which the heaven of heavens is 
but a veil." 

If Platonism offered to the yearnings of the Graeco- 
Roman age an ideal world of eternal Beauty and Good- 


MESSAGE OF STOICISM 65 


ness within, Stoicism preached eloquently a new ideal 
humanity as a spiritual unity, permeated and held 
together as a mystic organism by the Logos or Pneuma 
and in which all are members of one another and akin. 
Stoicism pursued the double aim of rendering the in- 
dividual self-sufficient and independent of externals and 
at the same time of qualifying him to act strenuously as 
a member of society and a citizen of the world. In 
Stoicism there is neither Roman knight nor freedman 
nor slave: ‘ this mind may belong as well to a Roman 
knight, as to a freedman, as to a slave.’ ‘ Nature made 
us kin when she produced us from the same things and 
to the same ends.’ Nature ‘ gave me alone to all men 
and all men to me alone.' ' Virtue is barred to none: 
she is open to all, she receives all, she invites all, gentle- 
folk, freedmen, slaves, kings, exiles alike.’ * All are 
‘ kinsmen, brothers by nature, children of God.’ ? 
* Love the human race; follow God.’ ? 

This rich humanism, called by the Romans humanitas, 
was a clarion call in a caste-ridden world, and it was the 
cause of much humanitarian legislation.* With the stress 
on the inwardness of virtue and the worth of the in- 
dividual on the one hand and the social worth of each 
in the ideal humanity of the cosmopolis, a potent stimulus 
was given to high endeavour on the part of men as 
* God's athletes.’ ° While Stoicism was rigorous in its 
logic, it learned increasingly to take account of man’s 
emotions and yearnings, and later Stoicism veered more 
and more toward Platonism, until they practically blend. 
While its ideal as represented by the Wise Man was 
tantalizingly high, as ideals should be, it believed this 
was within the reach of the humblest lover of virtue. If 
Platonism appealed most to the individual, Stoicism was 
a gospel for the masses, which their street-preachers took 
out of the schools and popularized. 

' Lightfoot, St. Paul and Seneca in Phil. p. 304 f. 


A EpieE D T3: 3 Marcus Aurelius, VII. 3r. 
* Cf. Arnold, Rom. Stoicism, p. 384. — 5 Epict. IV. 4, 32. 


66 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


Immense indeed were the services rendered by 
Stoicism to the ancient world and to Christianity. But 
even in Stoicism at its best there was something lacking 
— something intensely human. The Stoics learned thor- 
oughly, wrestling without tears and cries, the lesson of 
self-renunciation, but they never fully or adequately 
achieved their ideal of self-realization, despite their firm 
belief in the unity of man and God and an interpenetrat- 
ing Reason. This unity was one in which the difference, 
as found in devotion and in religious experience, was 
not duly noted. They placed the individual under divine 
Law, but that Law offered not the sympathy for which 
the heart craved. Further, Jesus had given the primacy 
to Love among the virtues, which produced among His 
followers an ‘‘ enthusiasm of humanity." Beside the 
Stoic ‘‘ ideal of Detachment ”’ * the Christian '' ideal of 
Love ” stood out in its superior uplifting and human- 
izing power: the Stoic self-discipline bore its fruit in 
Christian self-sacrifice. Stoicism, like Christianity, was 
called upon in its humanism to deal with the perennial 
enigma of suffering, and in the attitude to suffering we 
find the true heroic fibre of the Stoic soul. The Stoics 
did not deny suffering, but they steeled themselves to 
hardness against sensibility thereto. The Stoics could 
not consistently weep with those that weep, and sym- 
pathy must be more assumed than real. The Stoic calm, 
endurance, self-discipline, and the consciousness of the 
throes of the cosmic-process gave moral victory to the 
strong athletic souls. But all men are not of the heroic 
temperament and few are capable of becoming experts 
in philosophy, and fewer still are able to bring their 
philosophic convictions to bear upon the conduct of life. 
The problem of pain and suffering is perhaps insoluble, 
but Christianity offered to the average man not an 
idealized Wise Man nor an abstract ideal of perfection, 
but an historic Leader who Himself, ‘ having learned 
obedience from His sufferings,’ invited men ‘ into the 

1 Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 67. 


STOICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 67 


fellowship of His sufferings ' that they might ‘ have My 
joy fulfilled in them.’ + 

It would not be just to compare Stoicism with the 
thought of the present day, which has not even yet 
actualized the two great Stoic ideals of inwardness and 
universal brotherhood, but its message can be under- 
stood only in the needs and circumstances of its day and 
may be compared with the Christianity contemporary 
with it. Thus we may recognize that the parochial and 
nationalistic form of the earliest Christian preaching was 
far inferior to the cosmopolitanism and_ universal 
humanity preached by Stoicism, and also that Paul’s 
catholic gospel of a World-Society did not take its rise 
from Judaism or from the provincialism of his fellow- 
apostles, but from the wide horizons for mankind made 
familiar by Stoicism to his native Tarsus. We shall also’ 
recognize that the Pauline universalism was more 
dynamic and more humanistic than that of the Stoa. 


‘* At length,’’ says Lightfoot,” ‘‘ the bond of coherence, 
the missing principle of universal brotherhood has been 
found . . . the magic words èv Xpior@ (in Christ) have 
produced the change. A living soul has been breathed 
into the marble statue by Christianity; and thus from 
the ‘ much admired polity of Zeno’ arises the Civitas 
Dei of St. Augustine.”’ 


In assessing the indebtedness of Christianity to its 
antecedents the vital importance of the morality of 
Judaism causes the Stoic contribution to the moral 
education of the ancient world to be overlooked or 
written off as merely Pagan. But in the larger world 
of the early Christian mission the ‘ God-fearers ' were 
tutored in moral values by the codes of both the 
Synagogue and the Stoa, which in many respects supple- 
mented each other. The Stoic insistence on Duty, 


1 “ Stoicism throve because, like Christianity, it is a philosophy of 
suffering; it fell because, unlike Christianity, it is a philosophy of 
despair ’’ (Bigg, Christian Platonists, p. 288). 

? Op. cit. p. 306. 


68 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


Providence, and propria virtus, and the unremitting 
endeavour to render man independent of externals, pro- 
duced a strength of character which qualified for the 
martyr spirit of early Christianity and resulted in an 
unshakeable conviction that a man's life consists not in 
the abundance of the things which he possesses. If the 
ethics of Stoicism were in some respects hard and too 
regardless of the emotions, it cannot be asserted that 
early Christian ethics can be imposed literally upon 
Christian society to-day. For example, the attitude of 
most Stoics toward suicide offends our moral sense, but 
do not Paul's repugnance to marriage and the sex- 
instinct and his morally questionable concession of 
marriage for the incontinent (1 Cor. vii. 9) fall short of 
moral ideals to-day and the spiritualization of the passion 
of love? With all its defects but with its more abundant 
excellencies, Stoicism may properly be termed a “‘ root 
of Christianity." * The influence of Platonism was 
strongest in Christian theology and philosophy ; that of 
Stoicism in Christian ethics. 

By an evolution that only at first sight appears strange 
—for the whole trend of Greek thought was a quest for 
unity and a resolution of the most obstinate philosophical 
antitheses of the One and the Many stated so clearly by 
Parmenides, a progression from concrete to abstract— 
the latest phase of Greek philosophy took on the char- 
acter of mysticism, not the anti-rationalistic quietism of 
the Orient, but a wholesome mysticism which repudiated 
neither dialectic methods nor logical articulation but 
summoned the emotions ? to collaborate with the reason 


! As by Winckler, Dev Stoicismus eine Wurzel des Christentums. For 
other favourable estimates cf. Arnold, Roman Stoicism, pp. 408-36 
(The Stoic Strain in Christianity); and especially P. G. Chappuis, La 
Destiné de l'homme, de l'influence du Stoicisme sur la pensée chrét. 
primitive (Paris, 1926), on which de Faye remarks: '' Tout le monde 
reconnait que la morale ecclésiastique est largement redevable à l'éthique 
stoicienne ” (Rev. de l'hist. des religions, XCVI. 4, p. 83). 


* Cf. Intellektual u. Mystik in gr. Phil. (N. Jahrb. f. d. klass. Alt 
XLIX-L, 1922, pp. 137-57.) i 


GREEK MYSTICISM 69 


with a view to the apprehension of a larger and fuller 
truth. Greek contemplation was intensive concentration, 
like that of Plotinus. The amazing double strain in 
Socrates of rationalism and mysticism came to expres- 
sion. The period of subjective and individualistic 
philosophies after Aristotle * naturally led to that of 
religious philosophy and introspection. This mystic 
quest was doubtless accentuated and fostered under 
contact with Oriental contemplative genius ; nevertheless 
the highest form of this mystic philosophy—Neo- 
Platonism—tremains essentially true to its Greek origin 
and Greek master. Loyal to the genuine Greek 
tradition, it exalted vision above emotion. Greek 
thought in its wonderful comprehensiveness had sought 
unweariedly to explore man's rational and moral 
faculties, and during this process it discovered and tried 
to do justice to the boundless aspirations and to the deep 
thirst of the spirit. It discovered that ' our greatest 
difficulty is that consciousness of the One comes not by 
knowledge, not even by such an intuitive Intellection 
as possesses us of the lower members of the Intellectual 
Orders, but by an actual Presence superior to any 
knowing.’ * It discovered, too, the land that is very 
far off from the prosaic man, but is none the less real 
because visited by the few and sincere travellers: ' the 
Supreme is not absent from anyone—and yet is absent 
from all; present everywhere, it is absent except only 
to those who are prepared to receive it, those that have 
brought themselves into harmony with it.' ^ The moral 
. factor ? in the cognition of reality is projected into the 
foreground ; a man must be good and love the Good to 
know the Good, for— 


1 Cf. Caird, Evol. of Theology in the Greek Philosophers, Ul, pp. 
178, 248 f. 

2 Cf. Caird, t5. II, p. 238 ff. 

3 Plotinus, En. VI. 9, 4 (Mackenna’s tr.). 

^ Plotinus, ib. (Mackenna). 

ô‘ For without virtue God would never have appeared to men’ 
(Proclus, In remp. I, p. 255 (Kroll)). 


70 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


‘ If the eye that adventures the vision be dimmed by 
vice, impure, or weak, and unable in its cowardly 
blenching to see the brightness, then it sees nothing even 
though another point to what lies plain to sight before it. 
To any vision must be brought an eye adapted to what 
is to be seen and having some likeness to it. . . . Let 
each become godlike and each beautiful who cares to 
see God and Beauty.’ ! 


Thus a katharsis, purification, is necessary before 
knowledge as for initiation into the Mysteries. ; 

Moreover, with this new epistemology a new court of 
appeal for the testing of reality was opened, the appeal 
to the self-consciousness and religious experience—to 
those secret movements and disturbing experiences of the 
inner life. Dialectic thought and teaching pointed the 
way, but only vision disclosed the reality. “ Anyone that 
has seen [the Good] knows what I intend when I say 
that it is beautiful. Even the desire of it is to be desired 
as a Good. . . . One that shall know this vision, with 
what passion of love shall he not be seized, with what 
pang of desire, what longing to be molten into one with 
this, what wondering delight’ ?; or ' those who have 
seen will know of what I speak when I affirm that both 
in her approach to the Divine, and again when she is 
come near and has fruition of it, the soul lives with 
another life; so that by her own condition she is assured 
that the Dispenser of true life is present to her. Beside 
this consciousness man has need of nothing else.’ * Love 
opened wide the gate of deepest knowledge.  Plato's 
beautiful myth of Eros and Psyche was frequently used 
in Neo-Platonism to suggest in regions inaccessible to 
ratiocination.* 

This philosophy of mysticism was one phase of the 


1 Plotinus, I. 6, 9 (Mackenna). ? Plotinus, I. 6, 7 (Mack.). 

* Id. VI. 9, 9 (Dodds' tr. in Select Passages illustrating Neo- 
Platonism, p. 122). 

* “Following Love, the guide to Wisdom’ (Philo, De Opif. Mundi, 
23, C.-W. 70). Cf. Plotinus, VI. 7, 23. 


CULMINATION OF GREEK THOUGHT 7I 


sustained endeavours of later Paganism to become like 
God, to live in the communion with the Divine, and to 
enjoy immediate union with God. The prolonged con- 
centration of interest in the welfare and salvation of the 
individual soul was sure to raise a demand for the dis- 
covery of the means of access of the individual to God 
and of personal union with Deity. The Stoic pan- 
theistic conception of an all-pervasive Spirit or Reason 
as the principle of the world conduced to a mystic 
yearning for union therewith as experienced in cosmic 
emotion. 

Moreover, Viewed in perspective of centuries of Greek 
speculation, Mysticism is recognized as the culmination * 
of Greek thought. If Platonism and Neo-Platonism 
failed to discover a complete harmony of the pheno- 
menal and the ideal, of soul and sense, in some divine 
counterpoint, they at least impelled the spirit to the 
quest for a synthesis or reconciliation and lent a burning 
intensity to religious and philosophical life. The tense 
idealism of Plato, the strong antithesis both in Plato 
and Aristotle between Form or Reality and Matter or 
Phenomenality, the pronounced subjectivism of the 
Stoics with their emphasis on unity and their desperate 
mode of escape from Dualism by the practical identity 
of mind and matter, and their immanence, find a 
meeting-place in Plotinus’s mysticism and a synthesis 
as complete as thought can render. 

Numenius, writing under the influence of Philo and 
Plato, recommends the following method to attain know- 
ledge of the Good: 


* So must a man go far away from sensible things to 
converse with the Good, alone with the Alone, where 
there is no other man, no other living thing, nothing 
corporeal small or great; only a vast divine solitude, 
unutterable, indescribable, the region where the Good 


1 Cf. Caird, ib. II, p. 250—the philosophy of Plotinus is ''a kind 
of summary, or concentrated expression of the whole movement 
of Greek philosophy ''—also p. 236 ff. 


72 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


ranges, Its playing-meads and pleasances ; and the Good 
Itself abides in peace, in loving-kindness.' ' 


Plotinus is pre-eminently ? the exponent of mystical 
philosophy and the psychologist * of this mode of union 
with the Divine. Four times during Porphyry's sojourn 
with him he enjoyed the consummate experience of 
becoming uniate with God.* Brief quotations cannot 
convey any adequate idea of the richness and beauty of 
Plotinus's thought in treating of the divine potentialities 
inherent in the Soul, and the ineffable joy of the Soul in 
immediate contact with reality and of the supreme duty 
of man to bring all his conscious life into identification 
with God. In the tractate on Beauty he gives expression 
to this striving: 


‘ The soul includes a faculty peculiarly addressed to 
beauty—one incomparably sure in the appreciation of 
its own, never in doubt when any lovely thing presents 
itself for judgement. . . . Such vision is for those only 
who see with the Soul’s sight—and at the vision they will 
rejoice, and awe will fall upon them and a trouble deeper 
than all the rest could ever stir, for now they are moving 
in the realm of Truth. . . . This is the spirit that 
Beauty must ever induce, wonderment and a delicious 
trouble, longing and love and a trembling that is all 
delight.’ 5 


The discursive intelligence is recognized as preparatory 
or propaedeutic, but the intuitive intelligence or ‘ Spirit 


1 In Eusebius, Praep. Ev. XI. 22, 1; tr. in Bevan, Later Greek 
Religion, p. 150. 

2 Caird designates Plotinus as ''the greatest of all mystics,” and 
*' Plotinus is one of the greatest names in the history of philosophy, 
the classical representative of one of the main lines of human thought; 
he is the Mystic par excellence '' (op. cit. II, pp. 208-10). Dom Butler 
with less justification claims one who drew from Plotinus, Augustine, as 
“the prince of mystics '" (Western Mysticism, p. 24). 

* '' He is not the originator of the doctrine of ecstasy. . . . But 
no Greek writer, perhaps no other writer of any period, has brought 
to the attempts to describe this remarkable psychical condition so 
much introspective ability as Plotinus, or to the interpretation of it 
so sane an imagination ’’ (Dodds, Select Passages, p. 14). 

* Porphyry, Vita Plotini, 23. S DX6r3-4 


PLOTINUS THE MYSTIC 73 


in love ' which transports beyond intelligence gives an 
immediate and ineffable experience, as in VI. 7, 35. 
But Plotinus was too profound a philosopher and too 
sober a psychologist to set great store by abnormal 
psychopathic excitations or raptures or ecstasies. In 
those conditions he recognized that the percipient in- 
dividual could not give any logical exposition of his 
experiences, and that therefore such raptures could not 
be the source of philosophical truth. And on issuing 
from ''rapture " the subject could not recall with 
accuracy the details. These rare experiences were of 
a corroborative character, but could not pass as a sub- 
stitute for philosophical inquiry. In fact in their philo- 
sophy the Neo-Platonists were essentially rationalists, 
as Whittaker remarked, and no school of philosophers 
was ever more prepared to give adequate reasons for 
their belief, while in religion advocating the value of 
personal experience. They were neither pure intellectu- 
alists nor emotional anti-rationalists. They generally 
remained genuine mystics in that they never really set 
feeling above reason as a means of knowledge.' They 
recognized various modes of apprehension ? commen- 
surate with the five grades of Being. At the one extreme 
stood the One who as ' being beyond reality ' is un- 
knowable save in ecstasy or the uniate state; at the 
other, ‘ matter,’ which could be known only negatively 
as non-being. Between these extremes the things of the 
sensible world admit only of ' opinion '; those of the 
Soul are apprehensible by discursive reason, while those 
of the Nous (Mind) are accessible to intuition. 

It was the profound religious experience and earnest- 
ness of Plotinus which gave vitality to the Neo-Platonist 
movement. He made religious experience a criterion 
of truth. Like Jesus, he believed that his highest state- 


1 Cf. Burnet, Greek Philosophy, I, p. 168. The philosophy of 
Plotinus “‘ is nothing more than the ecstatic experience rationalized '' 
(Stewart, Plato’s Doctrine of Ideas, p. 160). 

* Cf. Dodds, p. 63 n. 


74 GREEK PHILOSOPHY 


ments about the possibilities of the life of the Spirit 
were referable to and verifiable by experience. By 
prompting man to taste the joys of possession by God 
now he would strengthen his endeavours to realize man's 
nature in actualizing the potentially divine within him. 
Plotinus would have his philosophy conceived as the 
most practical thing in the world for earnest men. He 
would enable the soul to enjoy foretastes of the blessed- 
ness of return ‘ to the Father and the dear dear Home- 
land.’ He indicates a double method of leading fallen 
souls back to their source, by revealing to them the 
shame of their present desires and so bringing home to 
them their sorry plight, and then by reminding them of 
their race and primal high dignity, for ' our soul did not 
descend in its entirety: something of it always remains 
in the spiritual world.’ * 

Greek philosophy was the supreme and perennial 
Western contribution to religion as that of the East had 
been the redemptive Mystery-cults and the high morality 
and monotheism of Judaism. Yet this profound revela- 
tion to Greece was not qualified for a catholic destiny 
as a religion, not merely because of the obviously less 
extensive appeal of an intellectual and rational system 
with a mysticism going hand in hand with knowledge, 
but for two other reasons: (1) Because the Greek lovers 
of wisdom did not feel a moral necessity laid upon them 
of carrying the fruit of their search for knowledge as 
a message to the masses, and in fact they frankly con- 
fessed the impossibility of uplifting mankind at large 
by converting them into lovers of wisdom. The God of 
Platonism was difficult to find and more difficult to 
declare to all, and the God of Stoicism was too un- 
sympathetic and too involved in the cosmic process him- 
self. The missionary impulse never became a moral 
passion with the philosophers ; few were the chosen, and 
the many were not called, save by the street-preachers 
of the Stoics and the mendicant friars of the Cynics. 

1 En. IV. 8, 8. 


LIMITATIONS OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY 75 


(2) Greek philosophy was one of the most eloquent ex- 
pressions of man as seeking God near and within, and 
finding him because of his native kinship with God and 
the unity of divine and human, but it was relatively 
weak in that correlative aspect of religious comfort 
emphasized by Christianity that God is seeking and find- 
ing men. The Soul loves and seeks God rather than 
God seeks and loves the Soul. 


` 


CHAPTER V 
THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


Tue third main religious refuge was the type of religion 
known as the Mystery-Religions or Sacramental Re- 
ligions, which stressed the approach to Deity through 
rite and liturgy after a severe probation and an oath 
pledging to secrecy. The Mysteries presented immense 
variety * both in detail and in outlook, but may be 
brought under a common denominator in their agree- 
ment on the view of man as having a divine element 
from a higher world imprisoned within, which must be 
released to ascend to its heavenly source, on the necessity 
of solemn initiation for salvation, the need of cathartic 
rites to wash away sin, the impartation of sacramental 
grace, the participation in or repetition of the experiences 
of the Deity, the uplift of communion or even identifica- 
tion with the Deity, the sure promise of immortality to 
the members of their religious fraternities, contrasted 
with the sad destiny awaiting those who neglected to 
avail themselves of their salutary sacraments. The 
gamut of differences among the Mysteries was as great 
as that obtaining in Christendom to-day, when adherents 
of the Greek Orthodox Church with its lovely symbolism 
and the members of the Society of Friends, or the 
members of the imperial Roman Communion, with its 


1 Cf. Anrich, Das antike Mysterienwesen, p. 24. Ch. Lécrivain 
(Daremberg et Saglio, Dictionnaire, III. 2137a) classifies thus: (x) 
''fétes mystiques avec ou sans initiation," especially Dionysiac; (2) 
'' mystéres complets,’’ especially the Kabiri, Isis, Eleusinian; (3) '* mys- 
téres de thiases,’’ the cults of Sabazios, Adonis, Attis, Cybele, Bendis, 
Cotytto; (4) “ mystéres orphiques." For a summary of the chief 
Mysteries see Nicola Turchi, Le Religioni misteriosofiche del mondo 
antico, chs. III-IX; R. Pettazzoni, I Misteri, PP. 41-281, Cumont, 
Religions orientales. 


76 


VARIETY. OF MYSTERIES 77 


elaborate ceremonial and appeal to the imagination 
through the sense, and the Presbyterians equally claim, 
and equally justify, their title to be called Christians. 
There were both public and private Mysteries, parochial 
and ecumenical. The pages of Pausanias, for example, 
abound in references to local Greek Mysteries. Each 
great type of Mystery admitted numerous developments 
‘and modifications both in East and West. Mithraism, 
for example, cannot be proved to have maintained in 
the West the rite of the Mithrakana which survives in 
Parseeism to-day. On account of the absence of an 
authoritative Mystery-Catholicism each Mystery per- 
mitted itself certain enchoric licences, as to-day in South 
Italy and Sicily many local Madonnas attract the de- 
votion of the inhabitants because each is endowed with 
some special parochial miraculous power or territorial 
patronage. In some Mysteries the rites were orgiastic 
and bloody ; in others they had become dignified sacra- 
ments. In some magic was more apparent and more 
in vogue than in others. Some Mysteries overstepped 
their primitive boundaries and entered upon universal 
dominion, and local secret societies evolved into 
universal religious institutions. For example, the local 
telluric secret society possessing the magic key to the 
fertility of the Rarian plain became the most eminent 
of the Greek Mysteries, ' the universal shrine of the 
world ' as Aristides names it, which for over a thousand 
years supported the faith in immortality and called forth 
eloquent expressions of gratitude from all parts of the 
Greek world. 

Pre-eminent among these cults were the Orphic and 
Pythagorean fraternities ; those of the Great Mother and 
Attis; the Egyptian Lord Serapis and Queen Isis; the 
Syrian Baals and Adonis; the Samothracian Kabiri; the 
Persian Mithra; the Greek Eleusinia; the Gnostic 
fraternities ; the Phrygian Sabazios; the Dea Syria and 
her satellites; Dionysos; the theosophical Hermeticists. 
These and similar Mystery-cults were the most popular 


7, 


78 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


means of satisfying the ardent desire for soteria and 
of maintaining the democratic spirit in religion. Like 
certain types of Christianity, chiefly African, they did 
not require men to reason or encourage them to ask 
questions, but only ‘ to enter into a certain frame of 
mind ’ and to believe and to hold a vicarious faith by 
acceptance of assurances of infallible hierophants in a 
sacred succession. They had their message—and a com- 
prehensive one—to the burdened minds of the age. To 
those moving nervously in a world disturbed by 
puissant demons they promised union with a deity 
to whom even the demons were servants. To those 
burdened by matter and the evils of dualism they vouch- 
safed a way of escape and of exaltation in ecstasy and 
enthusiasm and liberating psychopathic emotionalism. 
To those ‘‘ servile to skyey influence " they effected 
henosis with a cosmic deity to whom the astral gods and 
the elements were in submission. To those overwhelmed 
by the sense of finitude they opened ' the path to the 
stars ' or secured participation in the life of the deity. 
To those oppressed by the dread of death they imparted 
demortalizing sacraments guaranteeing immortality 
through deification. To uneasy consciences they brought 
thé*assurance of divine favour ? and indulgence or the 
comfort of a confessional.” For the dying a viaticum 
was provided and prayers and promises for the closing 
hours. 

Among further services rendered to the ancient world 
by the Mysteries, mention should be made of the fact 
that they made the ancient world familiar with the pos- 
sibility and necessity of a rebirth conceived as a quasi- 
spiritual, quasi-magical operation. Such regeneration 
bestowed upon the recipient a new divine substance. He 
underwent some mysterious change, a metamorphosis 


5 For the ram as a sin-offering in the Kabiri cult, vide Kroll, Sam. 
Kabeiroi in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Ency. X, 1427. 


* Cf. Steinleitner, Die Beicht im Zusam. mit d. sahralen Rechtspflege 
in der Antike, pp. 110-23. 


SERVICES OF MYSTERIES TO RELIGION 79 


whereby he was endowed with deathlessness and put on 
immortality. The Mystes became a supernatural being 
of immortal substance. 

The Mysteries were the first religions to remove all 
gentile and social barriers and to declare that there is 
neither slave nor master, Greek nor barbarian, neither 
male nor female in religious privileges. They en- 
franchised the masses religiously and fostered the demo- 
cratic spirit in the Pagan world as the Synagogue did 
in the Jewish world. They not only denationalized 
religion, but they made religion a matter of personal 
choice, rendering it at once universal and individual, 
cosmic and personal. A man was no longer born into 
a religion, but entered it of his own volition, choosing 
his God and his cult. Itis indisputable that the Mysteries 
in fostering personal religion intensified faith in the pos- 
sibility of an intimate and mystic communion with the 
Deity, and made escape from sin a serious quest. They 
tutored men in the high faith that they might be ‘ par- 
takers of the divine nature ' ; ‘ thou shalt be God instead 
of mortal. They were the first to bring men together 
in mystic religious brotherhoods, and from the days 
of Alexander the Great voluntary associations for 
religious purposes have been a decisive factor in 
history.? 

Stoicism had inculcated the idea of humanity as a 
mystic organism, all of the same origin and divine 
parentage sharing the same reason, but the Mystery- 
Religions limited this corporate idea and so qualified 
the solidarity of mankind through their exclusiveness, 
that is, they gave rise to a new conception of vast im- 
portance in the history of religion, the conception of 
a mystic exclusive supernatural society held together by 
sacramental bonds and drawing its life from common 
channels of grace, and the members of such a society 


1 Cf. Poland, Gesch. d. griech. Vereinswesens, p. 20 ff.; Foucart, 
Mystères d'Eleusis, p. 67. 
2 Cf. Legge, Forerunners and Rivals, I, p. 27. 


80 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


were ‘members one of another’ rather than of the 
brotherhood of Nature." 

The Mysteries also exercised an immense influence in 
the great syncretistic movement which blended East and 
West and prepared the ancient world for the most 
syncretistic religion, Christianity. They were of great 
historical significance in that ‘‘ they provided an oppor- 
tunity for the evolution of new religious ideas." ^ In 
the isolation of the individual the Mysteries through their 
social fellowship imparted a new dignity to the life of 
the humblest by the recognition of their personal worth 
and by the opportunities offered for self-expression. 
These Mystery fraternities were scattered all over the 
Graeco-Roman world and with the Synagogue furnished 
a model to the Christian house-churches; but as the 
converts after the first generation came overwhelmingly 
from the Pagan guilds rather than from the Synagogue, 
it was only natural that they should transfer the guild 
system into their new faith and adapt the guilds to 
Christian practices. These guilds were specially numer- 
ous and influential in the great centres of the Pauline 
mission-field. Indeed, the Christian Agape or ‘ love- 
feast ' was modelled more after the pattern of the guild 
common meals than after any other form of social 
religion. These fellowship meetings became centres of 
enthusiastic propaganda. They lifted the lowliest above 
the transiency and misery of the present order; they 
opened the highest offices to the humblest member ; they 
were the harbingers of new social values. Like Christi- 
anity and Judaism, they were of immense significance 
in inculcating the dignity of labour, the duty of self-help 
and of mutual service. The Mysteries removed God 
from the realm of the transcendental to intimate fellow- 


1 “The Catholic conception of sacraments as bonds uniting religious 


communities and as channels of grace flowing from a corporate treasury 
was as certainly part of the Greek Mystery-Religions as it was foreign 
to Judaism ’’ (Inge, Outspoken Essays, 2nd ser. P. 227). 

* A. D. Nock, The Historical Importance of Cult-Associations, in 
Class. Rev. 1924, XXXVIII, p. 105b. 


FELLOWSHIP OF SUFFERING 8r 


ship with man in his needs. The Mystery Deity granted 
theophanies and immediate assurance of salvation. 
Unlike the God of Jewish and Platonic thought, and 
unlike the God of the Greek Compendium of Theology 
who can as little suffer as rejoice, the Mystery Deities 
were conceived as suffering ` and entering into fellow- 
ship with man in a sympatheia. By identification, 
deification, demortalizing, or mystic marriage the 
devotee could become one with the God in his death 
and resurrection. 

The Mysteries were thus the popular allies of Greek 
mystical philosophy: they accomplished for the masses 
through their symbolism what the higher philosophy 
did for the élite. This intense desire for exalting union 
with the Divine accounts for the vogue of Dionysos as 
the most typical ? Mystery God who had first offered to 
the West identification with himself. With this con- 
ception may be compared the Pauline doctrine of the 
Christ-Pneuma, which confers an indestructible char- 
acter upon the Christian, but the Pauline doctrine is 
based on a faith towards which the Mysteries groped 
but of which they fell immeasurably short. Nearer to 
the conception of the Mysteries is that of Justin that the 
eating of consecrated bread and drink effects a change 
in our flesh and blood leading to incorruptibility, even 
guaranteeing the resurrection of the body. But we have 
evidence that in this mysterious borderland where the 
magical impinges on the spiritual and the boundaries 
between immateriality and corporeity are left in- 
determinate, there obtained as wide divergences in the 
apprehension of the new life of the regenerated and 
the means and mode thereof as in Christian reflection 
upon the relation of ritual transaction to spiritual results ; 
as, for example, between the Pauline mystic doctrine of 


1 On a Gnostic gem, Orpheus is represented as stretched on a cross: 
Eisler, Orpheus, pl. xxxi. 

2 “ Keinen Gott sucht der antike Mensch so innerlich zu erfassen ’’ 
(Poland, ib. p. 67). 


82 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


baptism and the post-Pauline laver of regeneration, or 
as between the Fourth Gospel conception of the Lord's 
Supper and that of Ignatius or Irenaeus. 

These were religions of faith rather than of works; 
the ascent of the soul was guaranteed not by its native 
powers but by supernatural expedients in the hands of 
sacerdotal purveyors. The divine within man was 
released by correct ritual and gnosis, and communion 
with God was secured, on the whole, not so much ethic- 
ally as emotionally. 

Although the Mysteries were most tolerant and showed 
amazing hospitality to one another and their members 
were so catholic in their tastes that they made assurance 
of salvation doubly sure by undergoing initiation into 
several Mystery fraternities, these religions propagated 
in the ancient world the High Church principle or cult- 
exclusiveness ! which was destined in its long career to 
exercise a malign and divisive influence in Christianity. 
The thesis of Cyprian,? ' without the Church no salva- 
tion,’ was largely the adoption of the exclusiveness of 
the Mysteries that without initiation or incorporation by 
Sacrament in the membership of a sacred society which 
secured fellowship with its deity there could be no salva- 
tion. So far as our knowledge goes, the Orphics were 
the first to enunciate this principle of exclusiveness. All 
were not candidates for salvation, merely those who 
lived the Orphic life, observed the Orphic rites, and 
secured their passwords for the hereafter—for the rest, 
they were to lie in mud in Tartarus and undergo dreadful 
torments and suffer reincarnation. It should be added, 
however, that the Mysteries were more tolerant than 
Christianity. Since even in the twentieth century neither 
the ordinary members nor the priests of the more ex- 
clusive varieties of Christianity may be buried beside 
each other in the same ‘‘ consecrated ’’ ground, it is 
worth remembering that even the priests and high 


* Cf. Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 272. 
? But cf. Origen, Hom. in Jos. Ill. 6. 


ADVANTAGES OF MEMBERSHIP 83 


officials of the Mysteries feared so little the posthumous 
contagion of their competitors in rival cults that they 
could without offence be buried side by side and on 
their epitaphs proclaim this fact to the world. There 
were also other graveyards apparently as exclusive as 
the Christian, as, for example, for the Bacchic dead.? 
This type of religion, like Christianity, divided man- 
kind into the saved and the unsaved, the ' thrice blessed ' 
initiates and the uninitiated who die without the * better 
hope.' Part of the appeal was that common to a type 
of Christianity in the same age, and even now—the in- 
eluctability of punishment hereafter for those disobedient 
to the preaching. Indeed the dreadful apparatus of the 
Christian mediaeval hell pourtrayed so graphically in 
Dante owed much to the ingenuity of the imagination 
of Orphics, Pythagoreans, and other adherents of the 
Mysteries in devising torments for the non-initiated. 
The assurance of the initiates concerning their own 
future was proportionate to their dreadful certainty con- 
cerning the uninitiated—a feature also of early Christian 
apologetic which seems so strange to the modern reader. 
In the Mystery-Religions outward signs and psycho- 
pathic outbreaks and ecstatic conditions were regarded 
as indicative of religious experience, as in early popular 
Christianity. The emotional exaltation brought about 
as a result of tense expectancy, prudent sacerdotal sug- 
gestion, the contagion of other worshippers, fasting and 
ascetic asperities and physical stimuli, was highly prized. 
It was in competition with the psychic experiences and 
miracles of these cults that Christianity appealed for 
authentication to ‘ signs and wonders and powers ' and 
* distributions of the Spirit.’ 
These sacramental religions are of direct interest to 
every student of the history of Christianity. Not only 
* Orelli-Henzen, Inscript. lat. ampl. sel. collectio, 6042; Réville, 


Religion à Rome sous les Sévéres, p. 92; Dill, Roman Society, p. 610, 
12 i 


2 Notizie degli Scavi, 1905, p. 378; Leipoldt, Religion in der Umwelt 
des Urchristentums, no. 173. 


84 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


were they in the ascendant during the centuries of the 
struggles of early Christianity, but they attracted the 
largest number of religiously-minded men. In the pro- 
tracted conflict between national and universal religion 
and in the liberation of religion from political bonds to 
become a matter of personal choice, '' all the religions 
advancing from the Orient rendered pioneer service to 
Christianity." * They have not only left their permanent 
mark upon our religion, but they so operated upon it 
and upon the mentality of the New Testament world 
that they effected the transformation of Christianity into 
a mystery-esoteric religion of their own order,? though, 
of course, with the vast difference arising from the con- 
nexion of Christianity with history through the person 
of Jesus, and the difference in the evolution between 
an historical religion and mythical cults. Yet they 
contributed to the preparation for and modification of 
Christianity as the religion of Europe, so that '' it was 
as a Mystery-Religion that Europe accepted Christi- 
anity.” ° They formed one of the chief environmental 


1 Wendland, Hell.-rém. Kultur, 2nd-3rd ed. p. 254. 

2 On the vexed question of the extent to which Christianity took on 
the character of a Mystery-Religion cf., e.g., on opposite sides, Loisy, 
Les Mystéres paiens et le Mystére chrét., and Clemen, Einfluss d. 
Mysterienreligionen auf das älteste Christentum. Clemen, p. 82, cites 
with approval Heinrici, ''Fragt man nach dem Gesamtcharakter des 
Urchristentums, so kónnte es eher eine Antimysterienreligion genannt 
werden als eine Mysterienreligion," and concludes, '' Ein tiefergehender 
Einfluss der griechischen Mysterienreligionen auf das Christentum 
beginnt erst im Gnostizismus.'' 

We cannot adopt either extreme conclusion. Christianity from at 
least the post-Pauline period took on increasingly the character of a 
Mystery-Religion, but with the differences necessitated by its historical 
association with the person of Jesus. Pettazzoni is nearer the truth 
than Clemen or Loisy: ‘‘ Il resultato fu che il cristianesimo, essenzial- 
mente affine sotto certi rispetti ai misteri (ultranazionalismo, interiorità, 
individualismo, soteriologismo) fini per assumere formalmente l'aspetto 
di un mistero; e dai misteri tuttavia per altri rispetti essenzialmente 
diverso (fondazione storica, assenza di miti, monoteismo, spirito esclusi- 
vistico), si mise contro di essi e fini per vincerli "' (I Misteri, p. 328). 

* Inge, Outspoken Essays, p. 227. “ Christianity was always, at 
least s Europe, a Mystery-Religion ” (Lake, Earlier Epistles of St. Paul, 
p. 215). 


INFLUENCE OF MYSTERIES ON CHRISTIANITY 85 


factors of early Christianity. They were one of the 
main coefficients in the gradual Orientalization of the 
West, which persuaded the West to give its loyalty to 
an Aramaic gospel. They fostered new and profound 
religious cravings and stirred up high hopes which 
Christianity alone could adequately satisfy. Indeed the 
conquest of the Graeco-Roman world by the Mysteries 
was one stage t in the conquest of that same world by 
Christianity ; the success of these Eastern cults was a 
promise of the success of Christianity. They supplied 
Christianity in its Hellenistic mission-field with a soterio- 
logical vocabulary and ideas which proved both fruitful 
and of lasting value. Christianity derived in a great 
measure from the Mysteries the ideas of secrecy and 
esoteric privileges in religion, and it was also tutored in 
the use of symbolism in worship. Christian baptism, 
at first the immersion of responsible adults, was soon 
extended in the form of sprinkling infants, so that the 
children of Christians should not suffer a serious dis- 
advantage compared with the children of the members 
of the Mystery-Churches in which children ? of tender 
years were permitted to receive the privileges of 
initiation with all the blessings for this life and beyond 
accruing to initiation. One chief source of that distorting 
asceticism, which from the first generation seduced 
Christianity away from the health and sanity of Jesus' 
religion, was to be found in cults which accepted the 
dualism of flesh and spirit, soul and matter, and required 
the most rigorous abstinences and self-torture. The 


1 ‘‘ The change from old Roman to Graeco-Roman gods, the rise 
of the Eastern religions, and the triumph of Christianity, are thus 
successive steps in an orderly progression °’ (Showerman, The Great 
Mother of the Gods, p. 326). 

? Cf. for Eleusinian usage, Foucart, Mystéres d’Eleusis, p. 274 ff. 
For a child-priest of seven, cf. J.G. XIV, 1449. One of the paintings 
in the Villa Item outside Pompeii represents a child-priest officiating 
by reading from a roll in a scene of initiation; cf. De Petra, Notizie d. 
Scavi, 1910, p. 140 ff.; Macchioro, Zagreus, p. 117, and plates facing 
p. 134, or Journal of Rom. Studies, III. Cf. further instances in Anrich, 
Das antike Mysterienwesen, p. 55. 


86 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


devotee of Isis, who on bleeding knees would wend her 
way through the Campus Martius to take her ritualistic 
bath in the waters of the frozen Tiber, was the fore- 
runner of many a Christian penitent. 

The immense success of the Mysteries may still be 
gauged by the numerous references in ancient literature, 
by the countless and ever-increasing archaeological 
remains, by the numerous places of worship still known, 
the relentless persecution by organized Christianity, and 
the unsparing terms of denunciation of the Christian 
apologists. The double appeal of the Mysteries both 
to the masses and to the cultured proves that they were 
more than mere pantomimic representations. 

The millennial reign of these religions witnesses to their 
satisfying to some extent the needs of very different 
periods. Thus Orphism with its amazing powers 
of absorption and assimilation ! had a history of about 
two thousand years. The Great Mother was known in 
the Greek world from the fifth century B.c. and held 
her place till practically the collapse of ancient civiliza- 
tion, and when she passed she bequeathed her titles and 
honours to the Christian Virgin-Mother.* Adonis entered 
Athens before the end of the fourth century B.C., and was 


celebrated with great pomp in the cultured city of 
Alexandria in the second century A.D. Sabazios entered 
Greece during the Peloponnesian War and Men in the 
fourth century B.c. Mithra, after a long history in his 


* “The greatest characteristic of this development [the Orphic 
movement] was always its readiness to incorporate elements possibly 
alien to the original Dionysos mystery, till it finally takes all Greek 
religious tradition within its scope ’’ (M. Tierney, A New Ritual of the 
Orphic Mysteries, in Classical Q. XVI, p. 77). For this Orphic docu- 


ment from the recently discovered Gurob papyrus, vide also Kern, 
Orphica, p. xor. 


* Dieterich, Kleime Schriften, p. 479. 

* The similarities between the Mother of the Gods and the Mother 
of God were not unnoticed by the ancients. It is a striking fact that 
it was Ephesus, the chief capital of the Phrygian and Hittite Great 
Mother, that gave the formula ‘ Mother of God’ to the Church at the 


Council of Ephesus (431), and here too are found the earliest traces 
of the cult of the Christian Virgin-Mother. 


SUCCESS OF THE MYSTERIES 87 


native Iran, reigned in the Roman world for half a 
millennium and challenged Christianity to conflict for 
the throne of the Caesars. Isis entered the Peiraeus in 
the fourth century B.C. and held her sway till the end of 
the fourth century A.D. Serapis, the brilliant creation 
of the first Ptolemy, with a view to uniting his Greek 
and his Egyptian subjects in a deity including both as 
* Serapis alone is Zeus (God),’ won thousands of devoted 
worshippers during the intervening centuries till the 
destruction of the Serapeum of Alexandria, 391 A.D. 
Gnosis was for over five centuries the path to salvation 
sought by inquiring souls. Eleusis for over twelve cen- 
turies stood as the catholic shrine of the Greek world 
and dispensed its sacraments of immortality till destroyed 
by Christian fanaticism in 397. Another evidence of the 
strength of the Mysteries was their ability to transform 
Christianity into a religion of their own order and compel 
it to use their terms and teach it to claim their strange 
and inexplicable potencies for its rites. So influential 
and popular was this type of religion that but for Paul’s 
resolute stand and catholic attitude on the foreign- 
mission question in the first great cause of division in 
Christianity one cannot see what other type of religion 
could have won the allegiance of the West. 

And this success is all the more arresting inasmuch as 
it was achieved without the four incalculable advantages 
enjoyed by Christianity in (1) the thrilling moral power 
of the person of Jesus, (2) the decision of Greece to 
consecrate her whole-hearted devotion and peerless 
genius to Christ, (3) the organizing genius of the Bishops 
of Rome, and (4) the fact that Christianity made a new 
beginning untrammelled by naturalism and venerable 
but perplexing rites, and without being held to strict 
account with the past. 

The Mysteries were passionately emotional cults which 
did not always aim at or succeed in guiding emotion 
into ethical channels, and in this respect were infinitely 
inferior to Christianity. In their excessive sacrament- 


88 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


arianism they ignored character and never produced 
an ethical code as did Judaism, Stoicism, and Christi- 
anity. 

By intensifying feeling, however, they afforded an 
uplift * to man from his finitude and prepared him for 
the fuller and more healthy participation in the higher 
mysticism regnant in the first centuries among Pagans 
and Christians. The extant testimonies of the initiates 
with their warmth of devotional language deserve 
credence as expressions of intimate personal experiences. 
There were exultations of joy and raptures of religious 
emotion at initiation which were to the mystae corrobor- 
atory experiences and of which they could speak only in 
language akin to ‘ what eye hath not seen nor ear heard.’ 
The psychopathic outbreaks and revivalistic phenomena 
familiar in primitive Christianity had their parallels 
among the initiates. The glossolalia or ecstatic speaking 
with tongues so prized among the early Christians had 
its counterpart in the mania of the Pythia of the Delphic 
Apollo, as also in the enthousiasmos characteristic of the 
Dionysiac worship. The visions ? and trances familiar 
to the initiates are no longer denied in view of similar 
experiences among the Christians and in the light of the 
investigations of modern psychology. Some of these 
visions doubtless were rather hallucinations or were 
artificially induced, but delusions were not confined to 
the ancient mystae. St. John of the Cross knew of folk 
who fancied they were talking with God when they were 
merely holding a conversation with themselves. Origen 
knew of ‘ many ’ instances in which dreams or visions 
caused by ‘ some kind of spirit ' produced conversions.? 


* On ecstasy or tense exaltation of the emotions in the Mysteries cf. 
especially de Jong, Das antike Mysterienwesen, pp. 180 fi., 243 ff., 
272 ff. et passim; id., De Apuleio Isiac. mysteriorum teste, p. 99 ff.; 
Graillot, Culte de Cybéle, p. 187; Rohde, Psyche, pp. 255-60, 285 etc. 

* On epiphanies and visions in the Mysteries, cf. Dibelius, Die Isis- 
wethe bei Apuleius, p. 25 ff.; De Jong, Das antike Mysterienwesen, 
2nd ed. pp. 244 ff., 301 fi., 317 ff. 

* Contra Celsum, Y. 46. 


EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES IN INITIATION 89 


Practically all men, according to Tertullian, receive their 
knowledge of God from visions. He narrates * how ‘a 
sister amongst us ' enjoyed ecstatic visions at the weekly 
worship; she held conversations with the angels and 
even with the Lord Himself and saw and heard sacra- 
menta. Cyprian also recognized the reality of visions 
in the direction of life. Eusebius records the conversion 
of Basilides, a pupil of Origen, owing to a dream-vision 
in which Potamiaena appeared putting a crown on his 
head.* The culmination of tense emotion at Christian 
baptism as the entry upon a new life was the Christian 
counterpart to the reassuring and exhilarating emotions 
of Pagan initiation. Indeed part of the Christian 
ritual and practices was taken over directly from 
Paganism. 

As illustrating ? the emotional exaltation in the Mys- 
teries and also indicating the privileges possible to the 
spiritually prepared, the passage in Plutarch may be 
cited in which he compares the soul at death to the 
condition at initiation : * 


* When it undergoes such an experience as those do 
who are initiated into great mysteries. Thus death and 
initiation closely correspond, word to word, and thing 
to thing. At first there are wanderings and laborious 
circuits, and journeyings through the dark, full of mis- 
givings where there is no consummation; then before 
the very end, come terrors of every kind, shivers and 
trembling, and sweat, and amazement. After this a 
wonderful light meets the wanderer ; he is admitted into 
pure meadow-lands, where are voices, and dances, and 
the majesty of holy sounds and sacred visions. Here 
the newly initiate, all rites completed, is at large.' 


But all initiates did not attain the highest possible 
experience, as Proclus testifies :- 


1 De Anima, 9. 2 H.E. VI. 5, 6. 

3 For other testimonies cf. Halliday, Pagan Background, pp. 256-74; 
Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 238 ff. 

* Stobaeus, Flor. 120, 28; Meineke, IV, 107; Turchi, Fontes Hist. Mys- 
ieriorum, p. 81; tr. by Prickard, Selected Essays of Plutarch, p. 215. 


go THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


‘ For who would not agree that the mysteries and the 
initiations lead the souls upward away from this life of 
matter and mortality and bring them into contact with 
the gods, that they cause to disappear the disturbance 
which has crept in from unreason, by intellectual illumin- 
ation, and that they eject the undefined and the darkness 
from those who are being initiated, by the light of the 
gods? But nevertheless nothing deters the vulgar from 
not suffering all kinds of distortions of these things and 
from misusing the benefits and the powers of them 
according to their own disposition towards the worse, 
whereby they are set aside from the gods and from the 
true holy worship, and are borne into the life of sensa- 
tion and unreason.’ * 


Beside the cultivation of the emotional life in con- 
nexion with religion, the greatest service rendered by 
the Mysteries was in their gospel of life and immortality 
to the multitudes who were little touched by philosophical 
arguments on behalf of the hope of man. ‘ Beautiful 
truly is the Mystery given us by the blessed Gods ; Death 
is for us mortals no longer a bane but a blessing,’ is 
the confession of an Eleusinian hierophant.? Cicero ° 
affrms that the Greek Mysteries have given ‘ not only 
good cause why we should live joyously but also a better 
hope in death.’ The Great Mother and Attis were in- 
voked as ‘ guardians of soul and mind.’ ^ Attis becomes 
the assurance of a resurrection and appears as bursting 
the bars of death." The Orphic dead passed to bliss as 
' offspring of Heaven, of immortal race.’ Their spiritual 
kin, the Pythagoreans, were assured of safe-conduct 
across the waters of death and a gracious welcome from 
the God of Light. The Taurobolium guaranteed ‘ re- 


1 Comm. in remp. I, p. 75 (Kroll), tr. by Halliday, p. 274. 

? Ephem. Arch. 1883, p. 82. 

3 De Legg. Il, 14, 36; In Verrem, V. 72, 187. 

^ * Animae mentisque custodes,’ C.I.L. VI, 499; Pettazzoni, I Misteri, 

1137: 
j * Bull. d. corr. hell. 1895, p. 538. 

* Cf. Carcopino, La basilique Pythag. p. 292 ff.; E. Strong and N. 
Jolliffe, Journal of Hellenic Studies, XLIV, p. 103 f. 


PLEDGES OF IMMORTALITY 91 


birth for eternity.' On the tombs of those departed in 
the faith of the Egyptian Mysteries could be read, ‘ May 
Osiris give thee the water of refreshment,' and ' Be of 
good cheer with Osiris,’ ‘ May Isis grant thee the holy 
water of Osiris.’ >  Mithra-Helios assured his devotee 
not only of ' a cable and sure anchorage during life,' 
but on departure ‘ thou shalt go with a good hope.’ ? 
As early as the seventh century B.c. the Goddess-mother 
of Eleusis imparted the faith: ‘ Happy is he of mortals 
on earth who has seen those Mysteries ; but the initiate 
who has no part in these holy things cannot, when dead 
and down in the murky gloom, have like portion of 
such blessings.’ * Initiation accompanied by righteous- 
ness had rich reward, ‘ for to us alone there is sun and 
cheerful light who have been initiated and lived 
piously.’ * 

The Mystery-Religions are certain more and more to 
engage the attention of students of the evolution of 
Christianity as being one of the chief channels whereby 
sacramentarianism * entered the Western world to 
dominate two millenniums of the religion which arose 
from the penetration of the spirit of Jesus into humanity. 
Christianity hastened, in a world taught to esteem sacral 
acts, to equip itself with such rites as requisite to enjoy- 
ment of communion with God. Contemporary magic 
was refined into sacramental efficacy. The robes of 
the Mystery-priest were worn and the privileges of the 
Mystery-hierophant appropriated by the Christian priest. 
The pontiffs of the Mysteries anticipated the Christian 


I.G. XIV, 2098. ? Julian, Caesars, 336, C. 
Hymn to Demeter, 480 ff.; Turchi, Fontes, p. 79. 

Aristophanes, Frogs, 455. 

'' Just as Jewish Christians took with them the whole framework 
of apocalyptic Messianism and set the figure of Jesus within it, so the 
Greeks took with them the whole scheme of the Mysteries with their 
sacraments, their purifications and ‘ fasts,’ their idea of a mystical 
brotherhood, and their doctrine of ‘ salvation’ (cwrnpla is essentially 
a mystery word), the membership in a divine society, worshipping 
Christ as the patronal deity of their Mysteries’’ (Inge, Outspoken 
Essays, 1st ser. p. 227). 


1 
3 
4 
5 


92 THE MYSTERY-RELIGIONS 


hierarchy in seeking political! power and in using 
religious associations for other than religious purposes. 
Christianity soon claimed magical potencies for its rites 
similar to those claimed by its most catholic competitors. 
The God of the Mysteries, like the Deity of the larger 
sections of Christendom to-day, was approached properly 
and most securely through sacral acts of immense but 
mysterious intrinsic value enhanced by the official char- 
acter of the ministrants, 


1 Cf. one of the graffiti from Pompeii: ''Cn. Helvium aed. Isiaci 
universi rog(ant) ’’ (C.J L. IV. 787, and ib. 1011). : 


CHAPTER VI 
CHRISTIANITY 


INTO à world of seething hopes and impalpable yearnings 
and religious ferment, into a mystery-laden atmosphere, 
Christianity entered as a new religion, new not in point 
of time only, but in character and power, ' the spirit of 
life in Christ Jesus,' and with a startling claim to possess 
truth not through an idea or a theory of knowledge, but 
in a person who ‘ bestowed on us light, who addressed 
us as a father his sons, and saved us when perishing.' ' 
To a world seeking divine help it immediately proved 
itself the very ‘ power of God’ to countless souls. It 
wrought such a transformation in character that it 
attracted attention as the best means of lifting man 
above himself. The new faith had reaches far beyond 
its competitors in its transmuting influences. ‘ He 
opened the gates of Light to them who had been the 
sons of darkness and of night, but had devoted them- 
selves to become sons of the Light,’ * was a confession 
gratefully and joyously made by many. Though at first 
a religion with no missionary outlook—the apostles and 
its first adherents remaining in Jerusalem awaiting 
the end of the world—Christianity became the most 
aggressive missionary religion, spreading a network of 
vigorous propagandist brotherhoods over the Mediter- 
ranean world, succeeding to a higher place than the 
religion from which it sprang, and within three centuries 
driving all others off the field? and superseding the 
mightiest empire of antiquity. 

In Christianity the spiritual forces of the Pagan world 
found a new rallying-ground. It was in Christianity 
ultimately that the creative powers and assimilative 


1 II Clement, Ad Cor. 1. ? Origen, C. Celsum, II, 67. 
* Vide Origen's striking words, ib. II. 79. 


8 93 


94 CHRISTIANITY 


energies of Graeco-Roman civilization became most alive 
as the forerunner of modern civilisation. It met the 
needs and satisfied the demands ' of that age in breath- 
less search for a new religion with a redemption at once 
personal and cosmic, based on authority and revelation, 
conspicuously other-worldly, promising cleansing and 
supernatural aid, and envisaging a mystic humanity. 
* What the soul is to the body, Christians are to the 
world,’ ? was the assertion of an early apologist. 

Christianity was a view of the world (Weltanschauung) 
and a way of Life with the inestimable advantage over 
all its competitors of possessing an historical? and per- 
sonal centre in the person of Jesus, which saved nascent 
Christianity from evaporation in excessive apocalytic 
emotionalism, and which later, in the life-and-death 
struggle between history and metaphysics in Gnosticism 
and in the Christological controversies, preserved for 
all ages a concrete convincing reality. This unique 
Personality proved potent to awaken moral enthusiasms 
and release spiritual powers in many lives and remains 
the perennial means of renewal through the course of 
Christian history. Jesus could never be presented as 
an abstraction or reduced to a beautiful myth. 

In an eminently practical age when incarnate 
examples * of human perfection were sought as guides 
to conduct and inspirations to high endeavour, it is 
obvious that Christians had an immense superiority of 
appeal in the character, life, and ideals of one who had 
actually lived within recent times and died a martyr 
death, ‘ crucified under Pontius Pilate.’ When an 
earnest Stoic could despairingly ask of his ideal Wise 
Man ‘ Where is he to be found whom we have sought 
so many ages? ’ ? the Christians could point to one who 

1 Cf. Wendland, Hell.-vém. Kultur, p. 235 f. 

2 Ep. ad Diognetum, VI. 1. 


* Cf. Ignatius, Phil. 8. Loisy, Les Mystères païens, p. 343 ff. 


* ' Quia longum iter est per praecepta, breve et efficax per exempla' 
(Seneca, Ep. VI. 5). 


5 Seneca, De Tranq. VII. 4; cf. Cic. De Fin. IV. 65; Acad. 145. 


MYTH AND HISTORY ^ 95 


was not only Lord in the cult, but the Elder Brother 
in a numerous divine family (Romans viii. 34). The 
difference in point of appeal and relativity to everyday 
life stands out in stark contrast in the statements of two 
contemporaries, that of Plutarch,’ ‘ This [Wise Man] 
is nowhere on earth nor has he ever been,' and that of 
‘the Prologue to the Fourth Gospel, ‘ The Logos became 
flesh.’ 

The mythus, or story of divine passion and victory 
and of man's redemption, has played an important róle 
in the evolution of religious thought. In Christian 
theology the myth with its symbolic expression has either 
been harshly expelled as mere superstition or more 
generally been treated with undue respect as literal fact. 
Christian apologists treated all myths of their com- 
petitors and contemporaries as false or grotesque, while 
their own mythopoeic activities undertook to match or 
‘outstrip Pagan myths. Christian apologists also, even 
Augustine, insisted that Pagans accepted their myths 
literally—in the face of abundant evidence to the 
-contrary extant to this day—and popular Christianity 
has ended by accepting its own myths in the same literal 
fashion. A religious myth may be the poetical and 
imaginative expression of truth, and Greek mythology 
has been found wonderfully suggestive of timeless truth. 
There is the truth of myth, and there is the truth of 
historical fact. And it is just here that Christians could 
point with a sense of triumph to their historical Master, 
who in the universality of His personality was superior 
to their historical examples like Socrates, and who in 
His historical tangibility was superior to their mythical 
Heracles and the Great Mother, and Serapis. In the 


1 De Com. not. 33. 

2 '''The initiates into the Mystery-Religions might believe themselves 
rooted and grounded in trust begotten of incommunicable personal 
experiences; the followers of Christ could produce the title-deeds of 
a historic faith ’’ (Carpenter, Phases of Early Christianity, p. 5. Cf. 
Kennedy, St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions, p. 213 f.). 


96 CHRISTIANITY 


myth of redemption the passion of Dionysos was sym- 
bolism or legend, but the passion of Jesus was real. 
In the last analysis Jesus was an historical person whose 
character needed no burnishing and whose ideals were 
beyond criticism, but there never was a Mithra, and he 
never slew the mystic sacramental bull. In the cults 
of His competitors it was the religion that made the 
myth and the deity, but it was Christ who made 
Christianity, not Christianity who made Christ, however 
much mythical elements were superimposed upon His 
person. 

In addition to possessing a creative personality 
Christianity made its appearance in history with other 
incalculable advantages, chief of which was the fact that 
it made a new start in the world without the encumbrance 
of a hoary past, which proved intractable to Judaism, 
Stoicism, and even to Neo-Platonism. Christianity was 
not interested in reproducing a past world in some 
glorious prime, but in giving birth to a new world. 
Christianity suffered from none of the disadvantages of 
survivals of naturalism, nor was it hampered by a com- 
promising past, nor was it called upon to find new 
explanations for grotesque and absurd though venerable 
usages, of the difficulties of which Plutarch is so keenly 
conscious in his essay on Isis and Osiris. Nor was it 
burdened with an entail of myths, repulsive or puerile, 
which must be courageously allegorized, as the Stoics 
and Orphics did myths of the past, so as to elicit the 
esoteric or spiritual meaning amid a mass of incredible 
literalism. 

Its emergence on the scene when the general trend 
of religion was toward syncretism and the amalgamation 
of faiths constituted a peril indeed to a new religion, 
but a source of strength to a religion with such an ideal 
as Jesus Christ and imbued with such a moral earnest- 
ness. The religious syncretism, the blending and 
borrowing, assimilations and alliances among the re- 
ligions of the Mediterranean world, was a wonderful 


EFFECTS OF SYNCRETISM 97 


preparation for and a decided advantage to Christianity," 
though in the closing conflict it was also the last despair- 
ing opposition to the rapidly spreading faith. Christi- 
anity was more vitally and healthily syncretistic than 
Judaism -and its competitors, and therefore able to 
borrow lavishly without suicidal results and able to 
assimilate forms of thought and methods of social 
cohesion to hand. Similarly, even the fiery energy of 
apocalyptism, the evanescence of which constituted a 
crisis, lent to its preachers a propagandist zeal and 
spiritual passion which awakened men to the eternal 
issues and called them to witness a mortal combat in 
the skies which affected every man. The impassioned 
appeal, the tender urgency, the breathless expectancy, 
the other-worldliness, caused earnest men to give ear to 
the ‘ good-news’ concerning human destiny. The 
prayer repeated at every service, ‘ May grace come 
and let this world pass away: come Thou, Lord 
(maranatha), was but one symptom of that world- 
renouncing spirit which gave rise to the heroic tempera- 
ment in which Christianity accomplished a social and 
religious revolution against heavy odds. The Kingdom 
of God was in line with the religious cosmopolitanism. 
And the threatening Great Assize, at which the books 
will be surely opened, made the eternal things more 
precious. Enthusiasm with self-control and humanism 
can move the world. 

1 “ Die neue durch die Synkretismus aufgenommene Religiositát mit 
ihrer schwármerischen Innigkeit, gestattete eine völlige Hingabe an 
Christus, ein Sichversenken in das einzigartige seines Wesens, das 
schliesslich seiner Religion zum Siege verhelfen musste '' (Relig. in Gesch. 
u. Geg. V. 1055). '' Das Christentum ist eine synkretistische Religion. 
Starke religióse Motive, die aus der Fremde gekommen waren, sind in 
ihm enthalten und zur Verklárung gediehen, orientalische und hellenis- 
tische. Denn das ist das Charakteristische, wir dürfen sagen, das Provi- 
dentielle, am Christentum, dass es seine klassische Zeit in dev weltge- 
schichtliche Stunde erlebt hat als es aus dem Orient in das Griechentum 
übertrat. Darum hat es Teil an beiden Welten. So stark auch spáter 
das Hellenistische in ihm geworden ist, so ist doch das Orienta- 


lische, das ihm von Anfang an eignete, niemals ganz verschwunden '' 
(Gunkel, Zum relig. Verständnis d. N.T. 2nd ed. p. 95). 


98 CHRISTIANITY 


Yet the Christians handicapped themselves by this 
proclamation, as unwise as it was confident, of an 
imminent society-ending catastrophe, which on the one 
hand tended to foster a perilous religiosity, and on the 
other to raise such obvious questionings as ‘ Where is 
the promise of His Coming, for since the Fathers died, 
everything remains as it was? ' ; which necessarily drew 
upon themselves the hostile attentions of the political 
powers of the time and gave rise to suspicions as to their 
citizenship in an earthly state, for the end of which they 
hoped and prayed. 

Christianity, though an Oriental religion, found its 
future in the West, and has proved the most successful 
fusion of East and West, the blending of Semitic and 
Aryan hopes and aspirations. It fell heir to a rich 
heritage of religious language and religious ideas and 
associations. It reaped the advantages of the protracted 
propaganda of Jewish prophetism and Greek philosophy 
for monotheism. It discovered ready to hand a world- 
language, the Greek koiné, an efficient vehicle for its 
message ; within a surprisingly few years from its origin 
and before our Gospels were written it was divinely 
guided to adopt this language and so linked its destiny 
with Hellenism.' In an age seeking divine revelations and 
respecting hoary antiquity in its religion it found ready 
to hand a collection of holy books written by another 
faith which could be used at once as the authoritative 
Bible of the new faith, a corpus so venerable and 
authoritative that the greatest of all the missionaries of 
Jesus would clinch nearly every argument in his con- 
troversial letters with an appeal to this book. There 
awaited its message—which overflowed all the ordinary re- 
sources of expression—a rich mysticism cultivated by the 

1 '' There is hardly any fact which deserves to be turned over and 
thought over so much as this, that the religion of Jesus has never been 
able to root itself in Jewish or . . . upon Semitic soil. Certainly there 
must have been, and certainly there must be still, some element in 


this religion which is allied to the greater freedom of the Greek spirit '' 
(Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, Y, p. 74). 


THE FULLNESS OF TIME 99 


suggestive sympathy of the Mysteries, by the propaedeutic 
symbolism of contemporary Judaeo-Alexandrianism and 
familiar in the empyreans of joy and spirituality in the 
philosophy of Neo-Platonism. It found the Stoa and 
the Synagogue prepared with a mature ethical system 
to be adapted and furthered by the Ecclesia ; and Platon- 
ism was ready to tutor it in its first attempts toward a 
theology and a philosophy. A ' gentler spirit ' awaited 
its advent—a wonderful preparation for the social revo- 
lution and humanitarian message of Christianity. A 
profound deepening of religious life preceded and ran 
concurrently with its spread.t It found men groping 
for God and seeking truth, and yearning for comfort 
and experimenting in quest of satisfaction. It heard the 
oracular souls, its harbingers and contemporaries, pro- 
claiming a new inwardness prophetic of a deepening 
spirituality and a more responsible sense of personality, 
and asseverating ‘ all that is best for man lies beyond 
human power ; it can neither be given nor taken away,’ ” 
as ‘ My peace ' is not given ‘ as the world gives,’ and 
* your joy no man taketh away ' because enshrined at 
the centre of the personality. Its competitors were its 
allies in the affirmation that there is one pure cult, that 
of the pure soul, as in the lovely Letter to Marcella by 
Porphyry, and only one supreme method of worship, 
deum colit qui novit.? 

If no religion ever came in such ‘ fullness of time ' or 
was planted in a more favourable milieu, no religion 
braved such perils when cast upon the stream of evolu- 


1 ‘t Niemals lauschte die antike Menschheit gespannter auf die Offen- 
barungen der Gottheit als in jener Periode, zu deren Ende Jammer und 
Not noch lauter und eindringlicher beten lehrte. Das ganze Wesen 
jener Zeit wurzelt in der Religion und in ihrer Äusserungen ’’ (Geffcken, 
Der Ausgang d. griech.-rém. Heidentums, in N. Jahrb. f. d. klass. Alt. 
XLI, p. 96). 

2 * Quicquid optimum homini est, id extra humanam potentiam iacet; 
nec dari nec eripi potest’ (Seneca, Ad Helv. VIII. 4). 

* “He worships God who has come to know God’ (Seneca, Ep. 
95, 47). 


I00 CHRISTIANITY 


tion to become a world-religion. The waning of the 
enthusiastic apocalyptism and the delay of the Parousia, 
to the witnessing of which the apostolic preachers had 
pledged their converts, created a moral crisis of the first 
order, and had Christianity not been more than a re- 
vivalistic outbreak it should have perished with the crisis. 
Christians with some consternation realized that instead 
of being ‘ metamorphosed ' to glory, they were called 
upon to live in an uncomfortable world which they had 
hoped to abandon; that instead of witnessing a tran- 
scendent combat of spiritual forces in the air and hailing 
the victory of the conquering Christ over His super- 
human adversaries, they were called upon to wage an 
incessant conflict within and with human foes without. 
Moreover, as a spiritual movement Christianity was 
called upon to experience the most acute internal oppos- 
ing tendencies contending for mastery: to decide whether 
it was to remain a Jewish sect and out-Judaize Judaism 
in its exclusiveness, or to offer a religious home to man- 
kind; whether to hearken to the bigotry of those who 
had known Jesus in the flesh, or to the larger visions 
of those who had not seen Him with the eyes of sense, 
but had believed and loved. When the question of the 
Gentile mission was forced upon it by the hard logic of 
facts or by the incidents of persecution, it was rent over 
the question as to the terms of admission of Gentiles to 
the privileges of the Messianic society. One of the out- 
standing features in Church history is the regularity 
with which the Church chose the via media between 
extreme positions. One of the earliest of such decisions 
was the choice between the chiliastic literalistic Ebionite 
gospel and the Gnostic gospel, and the Church chose 
neither, though it repudiated much of value from each. 
At least it decided against restricting itself after primitive 
precedent to being a Jewish sect, as also against becom- 
ing. the most comprehensive and alluring theosophy. 
The principle of life maintained its continuity in evolu- 
tion and identity of essential spirit, but the form changed 


CONFLICTS WITHIN CHRISTIANITY IOI 


almost beyond recogn N ndeed, as Harnack re- 
marks,’ '' primitive Christianity had to disappear in 
order that Christianity might remain.”’ 

In the universalism which Christianity attained 
through Paul? it offered no pre-eminence to the race 
and religion from which it sprang; in point of fact it 
meant the loss to the Jews of some of their most prized 
religious privileges. They were not as a people who 
had been ‘ leaders of the blind’ prepared to pay such 
a price, and so they found in expansive Gentile Christi- 
anity an ‘ offence.’ Paul, who had so uncompromis- 
ingly opposed the Judaizing of Christianity, expressed 
the fond hope that this ‘ turning away ’ to bring in ‘ the 
fullness of the nations’ would be only temporary to 
the end that ‘ all Israel will be saved.” Nevertheless the 
future of Christianity was destined to be determined not 
by the Aramaic mother Church of Jerusalem, but by 
the Gentile Church of Antioch. In fact, the universalism 
of Christianity was immensely furthered by the oppor- 
tune destruction of Jerusalem. 

In this evolution from primitive to universal form the 
Christian movement suffered all the agonizing of the 
clarifying conflict between the literalists and the en- 
lightened, between the Judaizers and the Hellenizers, 
between the puritan and ascetic interpreters and the 
humanistic and aesthetic, between the ever-present and 
noisy ' weak brethren’ and the ' strong,’ between the 
institutionalist with his rigid adherence to history and 
the mystic and philosopher who finds in the events of 
time and place mere expressions of the eternal ideas. 
Christianity early took on the character of a complexus 
oppositorum, which it retains. 


1 What is Christianity?, lect. I, p. 14. 

2 “Tt is true that Christianity never would have become a world- 
religion at all but for the inward experience of Saul of Tarsus, a typi- 
cally Hellenistic experience of individual soul-redemption. We may say 
truly that Saul of Tarsus never would have had this experience if he 
had not been born and bred on Gentile soil '' (Bacon, Christianity Old 
and New, p. 95). 


LINCOLN BIBLE INSTITUTE 


ks 


IO2 CHRISTIANITY 


The problem of catholicizing a great spiritual religion 
is always serious, and it cannot be said that any great 
historical religion has wholly succeeded in bringing its 
message to the masses without making some conces- 
sions? to the weakness of average humanity. Many 
are called but few chosen, though the many may be 
uplifted by the experiences of the few. Jesus early 
discovered the colossal task of securing popularity for 
a religious appeal without contaminating its spirituality, 
purity, and inwardness, and its high demands for un- 
selfish living, and He consistently turned away from a 
popularity resting on concessions to lower ideals. In 
the first days of spiritual fervour the messengers of the 
Cross had not felt this problem so acutely as their organ- 
izing successors, who were forced to recognize the diffi- 
culty noted by an observant Greek, that ‘ for the crowd 
of women and the uneducated masses ' ' there is need 
for the instrument of superstition which cannot be 
aroused without mystery and marvels.’ Hence con- 
cessions were made at almost every point; for example, 
in the recognition of a lower and a higher ethical ideal, 
and of a double Christianity requiring the minimum 
from the masses or laity, and imposing the maximum 
upon the few or priestly caste; in finding room within 
Christianity for the notions and practices to which people 
were used, as when angels took over the mediatorial 
functions of demons, or when Christian rites were 
identified with the magic mystery-rites. 

Yet every religious movement, in order to live, must 
strive to bring its message to the masses. The weakness 
of Greek philosophy was that it did not feel morally 


* “Tt is unfortunately by no means true that there is a natural 
tendency for a higher religion to displace a lower, except at those rare 
flowering-times of the human spirit which come and pass unaccountably 
like the wind which bloweth where it listeth. A religion, as believed 
and practised, cannot be far in advance of the mental and moral 
capacity of its adherents. A religion succeeds, not because it is true, 
but because it suits its worshippers. It may be a superstition which 
has enslaved a philosophy ” (Inge, Platonic Tradition, p. 14). 


EVOLUTION TO UNIVERSALISM I03 


compelled,’ like Hebrew prophetism and the Christian 
mission, to ‘ evangelize’ mankind at large. Christi- 
anity had qualifications for a catholic destiny and for 
a religion of humanity beyond its competitors. It was 
not by any fortuitous concourse of circumstances or by 
any happy historic accident that it won its way over 
its competitors, but because it outstripped them in 
the universality of its appeal, ''the enthusiasm of 
humanity," in its fulfilment of the moral values of 
Paganism, and in the number and combination of its 
elements of power and '' the congruity of its teaching 
with the spiritual nature of mankind.’’ '' It was because 
it was true to the moral sentiments of the age, because 
it represented faithfully the supreme type of excellence 
to which men were then tending, because it corresponded 
with their religious wants, aims, emotions, because the 
whole spiritual being could thus expand and expatiate 
under its influence, that it planted its roots so deeply 
in the hearts of men.” ? 

The progress of Christianity from a sect of Judaism 
to a catholic religion is marked within the Graeco-Roman 
era by various stages and conflicts in the advance from 
the religion of Jesus to the religion about Jesus, and 
from the religion about Jesus to a highly contentious 
metaphysical Christology concerning a pre-existent de- 
scending and ascending Lord. The battle of popular 
and orthodox faith against heretical gnosis and Mon- 
tanist prophecy proved inconclusive, but faith won 
sufficiently to put an end to the absence of a dogmatic 
uniformity and to prepare for the days when faith 


1 “ Das ist klar, dass die kosmopolitische Tendenz des Christentums 
eine werbende Kraft besass, mit der die philosophischen und die in einer 
Gnosis gipfelnden synkretistischen Religionssysteme nicht konkurrieren 
konnten. . . . Die Liebe, der Paulus seinen Hymnus singt, hat mehr 
positive Kräfte entfaltet als der philosophische Humanitatsgedanke '' 
(Wendland, Hell.-róm. Kultur, 2nd-3rd ed. p. 233). 

? Lecky, Hist. of European Morals, I, ch. iii. Cf. McGiffert, Influence 
of Christianity in the Roman Empire, p. 43: '' Its victory in the Roman 
Empire was fairly earned by sheer superiority.'' 


104 CHRISTIANITY 


became practically synonymous with credulity and with 
submissive obedience to external authority. In another 
direction this progress was marked also by three 
stages which might be characterized as the popular, 
the philosophical, and the political, or as designated by 
Bishop Westcott * '' the history of a threefold contest 
between Christianity and the Powers of the Old World, 
closed by a threefold victory," which he explains as 
‘“ the Church and the Empire . . . met in the market 
and the house ; they met in the discussions of the Schools ; 
they met in the institutions of political government; and 
in each case the Church was triumphant." Thus 
Christianity asserted '' its sovereign power among men 
by the victory of common life, by the victory of thought, 
by the victory of civil organisation.” 


'* The Christian victory of common life was wrought 
out in silence and patience and nameless agonies. It 
was the victory of the soldiers and not of the captains 
of Christ’s army. But in due time another conflict had 
to be sustained, not by the masses, but by great men, 
the consequence and the completion of that which had 
gone before." 


The religion of Jesus might have secured a spiritual, 
rather than a political, victory in the ancient world, but 
for the so-called conversion of Constantine and his 
elevation of Christianity by edict as practically the state 
religion and royal cult with the baneful alliance of throne 
and altar. This establishment of the State Church and 
the reinforcement of Caesarism with religious sanctions, 
which was later carried out more drastically by 
Theodosius and Justinian, were accompanied by the 
consequent full equipment of the Church with the sacer- 
dotalism to which the peoples of the Empire, legislated 
into Christians, had been accustomed and by the external 
splendours with which a religion purchases popularity. 

Henceforth Christianity won its way partially by 


1 Religious Thought in the West, p. 195 f. 


CHRISTIANITY STOOPS TO PERSECUTE 105 


persecution and by attempting to exterminate heretics 
and Pagans. It became easier to be a Christian than 
to remain a Pagan or a Jew; and safer to be orthodox 
than to risk being guilty of thinking. Conscientious 
objectors were henceforth treated as Christians had 
formerly been treated for their ‘ sheer obstinacy.’ No 
one could have dreamed that the Christians, who had 
themselves suffered so much from persecution and pro- 
tested so vehemently against the injustice and futility of 
persecution, would so quickly have turned persecutors + 
and surpassed their Pagan predecessors in fanatical 
savagery and efficiency,? utterly oblivious of the 
Beatitude of the Divine Master (Matt. v. 1o, 44, 45). 
It became ominous for subsequent history that the first 
General Council of the Church was signalized by bitter 
excommunications and banishments. Christians, having 
acquired the art of disposing of hostile criticism by 
searching out and burning the objectionable books of 
their Pagan adversaries, learned to apply the same 
method to the works of such groups of Christians as 
were not in power or in favour for the time; when this 
method proved unsatisfactory, they found it expedient 
to burn their bodies. The chained skeleton ? found in 
the Mithraic chapel at Sarrebourg testifies to the drastic 
means employed by Christians in making the truth 
conquer otherwise than by the methods taught and 
exemplified by the Founder. The stripping and torture 
to death with oyster-shells in a Christian church and 
the subsequent mangling of limb from limb of Hypatia, 
the noblest representative of Neo-Platonism of her day, 
by the violent Nitrian monks and servitors of a Christian 


1 A papyrus of May or June A.D. 335 (?) (1914 in Bell & Crum, Jews 
and Christians in Egypt, pp. 53-71) has preserved a first-hand account 
by Callistus of the cruelties and indignities inflicted by Athanasius and 
his orthodox followers upon fellow-Christians of the Meletian schism. 

?^ Halliday remarks: ‘‘ Whereas pagan persecution failed to crush 
Christianity, Christian persecution of Paganism succeeded '" (Pagan 
Background, p. 321). 

* Cumont, Textes et M., p. 519; Mysteries of Mithra, p. 204 f. 


106 CHRISTIANITY 


bishop, and probably with his connivance, were sympto- . 
matic and prophetic of that intolerance and fanaticism 
which Christianity was to direct throughout the centuries 
upon its disobedient members and troublesome minorities 
until the day—yet to dawn—when a purer, more con- 
vincing because more spiritual, Christianity gains '' the 
consent of happier generations, the applause of less 
superstitious ages.'' 

The empire was partially Christianized and the Church 
partially paganized. The imperialism of Rome rather 
than the freedom * and educational value of the Greek 
tradition generally triumphed with and after Constantine. 
With this nominal conversion of the empire, the new 
Roman power, based on a Semitic religion for which 
Greece had so largely won the victory, began that process 
whereby the Roman genius for order and organization 
in government acquired a vaster and more permanent 
dominion through religion than it had lost in the political 
and military fields. The bishops of Rome acquired a 
more lasting authority than that secured by their imperial 
predecessors and by the legions of Rome. 


1 “In the late Roman Empire . . . no political freedom was toler- 
ated, no freedom of speech, thought, or conscience was permitted, 
especially after the victory of Christianity ’’ (Rostovtzeff, Social and 
Economic History of the Roman Empire, p. 473). 


CHAPTER VII 
CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


Tue record of the relations of Christianity to the great 
rational Graeco-Roman civilization and culture * is an 
unhappy one, but one for which there are ample parallels 
in every spiritual upheaval and turning-point in history. 
Christianity appropriated much of permanent interest 
and moral worth from that ancient civilization. Christi- 
anity also acted in much the same way to its old home 
as Israel did to Egypt, from which it brought the cult 
of the golden calves but left the doctrine of immortality. 
So Christianity appropriated much that had better been 
abandoned and that has proved perilous and a handicap 
to its subsequent history. But it also repudiated much 
as Pagan which impoverished its outlook and narrowed 
its apprehension of its universal mission. Had Christi- 
anity accepted the comprehensiveness of the spirit of 
Christ, this rich Graeco-Roman heritage need not have 
been repudiated and almost perished ; there is no reason 
why it could not and should not have been baptized into 
Christianity as so much—in fact too much—of Judaism 
was, and there is good reason to believe that such an 
attitude would have delivered present-day Christianity 
from many of its divisions and perplexities. 

The fact remains that that rich Graeco-Roman culture 
almost perished and that ancient society was disintegrated 
while Christianity or a type of Christianity prevailed. 


2 Cf. Wendland, Hell.-rYóm Kultur, 2nd-3rd ed. pp. 225-40; E. de 
Faye's treatment in Clément d Alexandrie, Etude sur les rapports 
du Christianisme et de la phil. grecque au II° siècle (Paris, 1898); 
Dieterich, Der Untergang der antiken Religion (Kl. Schr. pp. 449-539); 
A. Causse, Conflict dw Christianisme primitif et de la civilisation (Paris, 
1920). 

107 


108 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


That there were disintegrating forces in that ancient 
culture will be too apparent, but that Christianity 
attempted to save that culture, or to baptize it into Christ 
or to stay the dissolution ' of society, cannot be main- 
tained. The Church did not then consider itself called 
upon to undertake such a mission. That a thousand 
years of darkness fell upon the Christian world as a 
result of the passing of Graeco-Roman culture did not 
trouble the Church, and those ages are still looked upon 
by the romantics in religion as the ages of faith. When 
Europe arose from her long slumber, it was the light 
from Pallas Athene’s holy hill that shone upon her and 
enabled her to read her own Christian philosophy. 
When the Renaissance schools opened in Italy under 
the inspiration of Plato and Plotinus, a day had again 
dawned for the liberation of the human spirit like that 
epochal day when the first school of philosophy opened 
in Ionia. As European philosophy came to birth in 
Ionia and Athens, so Christianity in its demand for 
freedom and quest of truth for truth’s sake was reborn 
two thousand years later when Greece '' rose from the 
dead with the New Testament in her hand." It was 
not by accident that Platonism or Neo-Platonism was 
in the ascendant during the centuries when Christianity 
waged its sternest conflict and won its victory, and that 
the system of the keener logician, Aristotle, ‘‘ the 
philosopher ° and ''the master of them that know "' 
(as the best interpreter of the mediaeval spirit names 
him), reigned supreme during the thousand years 
between the passing of ancient culture and the beginning 
of modern civilization at the Renaissance, and Aristo- 
telianism was pressed into the service and the comfort- 
able practice of submitting complacently to the infallible 
wisdom of a bygone age and to the divine authority of 
spiritual powers with civil and temporal means of per- 
suasion. Greece thus proved the link between the old 


* On their neutrality, so objectionable to Pagans like Celsus, cf. De 
Faye, Les Difficultés, etc., p. 13 ff. 


FALSE ALTERNATIVES 109 


and the new worlds, conserving the tradition of con- 
tinuity of thought. 

The early Christians saw so much of evil in their 
environment against which they were in revolt’ that 
they were naturally less conscious of the elements of 
good. Paganism essayed to meet the religious situation 
by a process of selection and assimilation of the best 
elements and by toleration; Christianity by intolerance 
and repudiation of surrounding culture as the wisdom 
of this doomed aeon. Besides, traditions of culture rarely 
or never appeal to the leaders of a popular movement. 
Because the Pagans employed physicians and physic, 
many Christians regarded medicine as the possession 
and mark of heathenism and the employment of 
physicians as disloyalty to Christ the Physician. As 
philosophy was the occupation of Pagan thinkers, the 
term took on for many Christians the connotation given 
it by Paul as synonymous with false teaching and became 
'* caviare to the general." ‘ What has Christ to do with 
Socrates ? ' a large section of Christians would ask. And 
the unfortunate position arose—unfortunate both for the 
conservation of the spiritual values of Paganism and 
for the comprehensiveness of Christianity—that the 
Christian propaganda offered as irreconcilable alter- 
natives Plato or Christ, Greek truth or Christian 
revelation. ‘What has the Christian to do with the 
philosopher? ' asked Tertullian. Thus came to pass the 
same realignment as in every crisis, as, for example, at 
the Reformation: some preferred to cling to the ancient 
and venerable for the charm of antiquity and the ap- 
preciation of an established culture; others with avidity 
for the new preferred to try ' the Way.' Some, pain- 
fully faced with such false alternatives, chose to adhere 
to Plato when they might have discovered that ' the 
ever-divine Plato ' was both a forerunner and the most 
loyal servant of Him in whom Christians were experi- 
. encing the way and the truth and the life. The Octavius 

1 Cf. Wendland, Hell.-róm. Kultur, 2nd-3rd ed. p. 227. 

D 


110 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


of Minucius Felix gives us a welcome insight into the 
warm friendly relations between the Christian Octavius 
and the Pagan Caecilius; it also gives us some idea of 
the serious and unnecessary difficulties which prevented 
a cultured Pagan from embracing Christianity, especially 
as it took on a more popular form to enlist the masses. 
To the Hellenic mind the incarnation was an almost 
impossible doctrine. Deification or apotheosis was as 
congenial to the Greeks as the incarnation was repellent. 
A tragic misunderstanding arose here. On the one hand 
the Christians stated the incarnation in such stark 
isolation from the life of mankind and in conjunction 
with such doctrines as the virgin birth and the bodily 
resurrection that the Greeks failed to find therein their 
own high doctrine of the essential unity of the human 
and the divine, and of the kinship of God’s spirit and 
the spirit of man. Consequently the most promising 
and fruitful Logos doctrine, which was in many aspects 
the real meeting-place of Greek speculation * and Chris- 
tian theology, and which superseded the Messianic 
Christology of the Jews and removed the last Jewish 
limitation from Christianity, was forced into creedal con- 
structions which obscured the very truth that during 
nine centuries the Greeks had attained in the Logos 
conception. 

In every great crisis which divides the loyalties of 
men that crisis is yet to be recorded in which the moder- 
ates and thinkers of either party win as against the 
extremists and iconoclasts. Intolerance and popular 
prejudice too often sway even a liberalizing movement 
and finally capture its organization. It is easier to shout 
battle-cries and hurl anathemas than to reason together. 
And when “the tumult and the shouting dies " the 
victor has allowed the vanquished to impose upon him 
some of the very terms of contention, or points of dispute 
are ignored in the settlement. 

The early Christians took up a position of suspicion 

2 Harnack, What is Christianity?, XI, p. 206. 


NEED OF A CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY Tr 


towards ' the wisdom of this aeon ' while they awaited 
their transference into ‘ that aeon.' But the question 
of their attitude toward contemporary education and 
culture was pressed upon them as ' that aeon ' did not 
break in according to their programme and as they saw 
themselves obliged to meet argument with argument 
rather than with an eschatological threat. Christianity 
could not dwell permanently in the region of exalted 
emotionalism and the empyrean of mystical fervour ; it 
was obliged to construct a formulation of its faith in 
intellectual categories and elaborate a philosophy to 
meet the rival religious philosophies. It must offer its 
solution of the moral problems and intellectual needs 
of its believers and co-ordinate the data of the new 
Christian experiences, and both by reasoning and by 
conduct remove the prejudices and misunderstandings 
against their faith. Like its competitors, it must 
attempt to penetrate the mysteries of '' this ambiguous 
world." Without abdicating the high claims it made in 
a truth-seeking world to be the Truth, it dare not evade 
inquiry or ignore criticism,’ or fail to realize that faith 
and knowledge are inseparable in an adequate religion 
and that each reacts on the other.” Just because of the 
exclusive character of its claims Christianity stood in 
special need of the services of philosophy. 

The first apologists manifested the cleavage that was 
destined to run through Christianity and became more 
marked.* The greatest apologists recognized the neces- 
sity of providing a philosophy or comprehensive theology 
of their faith intelligible to their day and of claiming an 
alliance of culture and faith, of a sincere devotion and 
the scientific spirit. Such were Clement and Origen. 
Others, e.g. Tatian * and Tertullian, furthered the aliena- 


1 Cf. Bréhier, on the absence of a Christian philosophy, Hellénisme 
et Christianisme, in Rev. philosophique, 1927, 1 and 2. 

? Cf. Origen's demand for such faith and religion, Phil. 18, 23. 

3 Cf. Boissier, La Fin du Paganisme, 2nd ed. p. 277 ff. 

4 Thus in Oratio 3, ‘I laugh at the teaching of Plato, an imitation 
of that of Pythagoras." 


i12 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


tion of many from culture and set Christianity and 
philosophy in antithesis, as when Tertullian * properly 
designated philosophy as the mother of all heresy. 
Theophilus has neither an understanding of nor any 
sympathy with philosophy. Even in the graceful Epistle 
to Diognetus those philosophers who call fire divine will 
be punished by being hurled into that fire. But Justin 
Martyr claims a place for and a recognition of Socrates 
and Plato and Greek philosophy. As a Christian convert 
he saw no inconsistency in wearing the Greek philo- 
sopher's cloak, and he repeatedly cites the philosophers 
as authorities in his arguments for Christianity. 

Clement would have enriched Christianity with the 
deep spirituality of Platonism and enthroned Christ on 
the highest culture of the age if the vox populi and the 
masters of ecclesiastical organization had permitted. He 
acclaimed Greek philosophy as inspired of God while 
critically sifting its propositions, and he begged Chris- 
tians not to be frightened of it as of ghosts.” He protests 
against those who would attribute the rise of philosophy 
to the devil; ‘ man has been born chiefly for the know- 
ledge of God,' and Clement discovers in Greek philo- 
sophy an aid to the attainment of that knowledge, just 
as he represents Christianity as ' the faith of knowledge ’ 
(gnostic faith). Indeed, philosophy had been to the 
Greeks the praeparatio evangelica which the Law had 
been to Israel. The loaves and fishes with which Jesus 
had fed the hungry multitude symbolized respectively 
the religion of Israel and the wisdom of Hellas. While 
the work of the thinkers of Greece was to him ‘ a torn- 
off fragment of eternal truth,’ Christianity was ‘ the 
genuinely true philosophy.’ * He advocated a Christi- 
anity resting not on credulity but on frank inquiry: ' it 

1 De Praesc. 7. Cf. ib., “What has Athens to do with Jerusalem? 
What agreement between the Academy and the Church? ' His tone 
is somewhat modified in De Testimonio Animae, and Apol. 17. 

2 Strom. I. 7. * Ib. VI. 8 (65, -66, 2, 68, 2). 


BID VA I7; I. 5; I. 16, iU Los NUES cy 
SNORT: £3; VIII T. 


CLEMENT AND ORIGEN II3 


is impossible to find without having sought, or to have 
sought without examining, or to have examined without 
analysing and raising questions with a view to lucidity,' 
and ' one indeed is the way of Truth, but into it, as 
into an ever-flowing river, streams from everywhere are 
confluent,’ ! and one of these main tributaries was the 
Greek wisdom which other apologists set in opposition 
to Christianity. The acceptance of Clement's Platonic 
conception of God would have saved Christianity from 
those persistent types of Christian theology of Oriental 
despotism resting upon Aristotelianism and common to 
Romans and Calvinists—though these were not the only 
or best alternatives. 

Origen recognized the value of the thought and culture 
of his day, and especially Platonism,? as an important 
element not only in preparing the way for Christianity 
but in the explication of the Christian faith. ‘ We should 
follow reason and a rational guide ' was not generally 
accepted by the mentality of the early Christians. He 
observed that a ‘ gentler spirit ' * had entered the world 
preparatory for Christianity. Himself brought to 
Christianity through Greek philosophy, he was frank to 
acknowledge the call to conversion in such philosophy.* 
In his letter to his pupil Gregory Thaumaturgus he 
exhorts him to devote himself to Greek philosophy as 
a preparatory study for Christian philosophy. At a later 
date Porphyry tells that many learned men were begin- 
ning ' to pry into the secrets of this [Christian] philo- 
sophy.' A man of scientific outlook like Galen testifies 
to the growing interest of Christians in true philosophy 
and admits that some of them are the equals of their 
Pagan contemporaries. The correspondence and warm 
personal respect between Ambrose of Milan and Sym- 
machus, the impassioned advocate of the ancient religion 

MONT. 3: 

? According to Porphyry, he was constantly studying Plato and very 
familiar with other Greek philosophy, especially Stoicism (Euseb. H.E. 


METOS): 
* Contra Celsum, II. 30. * Ib. III. 51-4. 


114 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


and culture, and the correspondence between the Platonic 
bishop Synesius of Cyrene and the talented daughter of 
Theon, destined to be martyred in the cause of Greek 
culture against fanaticism, are pleasing episodes in the 
long struggle between Christianity and Paganism. Not- 
withstanding the angelic rebuke in a dream to his protest 
that he was a Christian—' Nay, thou art a Ciceronian, 
for where your treasure is, there also is your heart '— 
and his vow henceforth never to open a Pagan volume, 
Jerome confesses later to be still ‘ enraptured by the 
grace and beauty of profane wisdom.’ * The historian 
Socrates, commending the command of Paul to ‘ prove 
all things; hold fast to the good,’ declares, “ Whatever 
anywhere is good belongs to the Truth.’ ? 

Yet, triste dictu, it was not tolerance and eclecticism 
and the freedom of inquiry that won the day, but in- 
tolerance and ignorance.? Not the generous spirit of the 
writer of the Fourth Gospel, Clement, and Origen and 
Synesius of Cyrene, but the legalism and intolerance of 
. Tertullian and Augustine, of Athanasius and Jerome and 
Cyprian, an intolerance not indicative of any deeper 
loyalty to the Christian faith, for none proved his de- 
votion to Jesus more than did Origen, whose life was 
* one uninterrupted prayer ' and whose confession was 
sealed in martyrdom. Not Antioch and Ephesus and 
Alexandria, with their finer literary traditions and alert 
Hellenic mentality and Greek confidence in the truth and 
in the rationality of man's nature, but Carthage and 


' Epp. XXV, LXXIII. Cf. Ep. XVIII, ‘ What is therein common to 
Horace and the Psalmist; to Virgil and the Gospel; to Cicero and the 
Apostles? ' 

? Socrates, H.E. III. 16. 

* Asa phenomenon of decay of ancient civilization Rostovtzeff includes 
“ the development of a new mentality among the masses.’’ ‘‘ It was the 
mentality of the lower classes, based exclusively on religion and not 
only indifferent but hostile to the intellectual achievements of the 
higher classes. . . . It is revealed by the spread among them of the 
various mystic religions, partly Oriental, partly Greek. The climax 
was reached in the triumph of Christianity ’’ (Social and Economic 
History of the Roman Empire, p. 479). 


INTOLERANCE 15 


Rome set the mode for Western Christianity. The West 
turned away from its greatest teacher, Origen, the 
“master of the Churches’ in whom ancient culture, 
Greek philosophy, and a dauntless Christian faith formed 
a dynamic unity, in whom the Greek * and the Christian 
met in a marvellous equipoise as the Greek and the 
Hebrew met in Philo and in a lesser degree in Paul, and 
as the Oriental and the Greek met in Plotinus. During 
his lifetime he was forbidden to teach, and after his 
death his bones were exhumed as a penalty for his 
heresy. 

Contrast Origen's participation in the belief of his 
Pagan contemporaries which made the contemplation 
of the heavens sacramental and the contemplation of 
the beauties and mysteries of nature part of the bliss of 
departed souls with Tertullian's martyr-cry that in the 
impending bouleversement the redeemed should find at 
least part of their felicity in gazing upon the exquisite 
tortures of their erstwhile tormentors,? and the same 
Father boasts that the pragmatic doctrines of heaven 
and hell originate from Christianity.* Contrast the 
martyr-philosopher’s generous faith that those before 
Christ who had lived with the Logos were Christians, 
such as Socrates and Heraclitus, with the effrontery of 
Tertullian’s reference * to Socrates’ guardian demon as 
“doubtless distorting his mind from the Good.’ Or 
contrast Arnobius’s vehement protest against the doctrine 
of the native immortality and divine origin of the soul 
as calculated to precipitate men into vice? with 
Clement’s Platonic view of the inherent deathlessness of 
the soul. The Gnostics were attacked by the orthodox 


1 “Tl est encore un vrai fils de la Grèce. Il se sent lui-même une 
affinité profonde avec la pensée hellénique. Les philosophes lui en 
transmis ce qui en est le caractére vraiment distinctif. Il a leur 
curiosité d'esprit. Comme eux, il éprouve un besoin irrésistible de 
poser des questions ’’ (de Faye, Origéne, I, p. 220). 

?^ De Spect. 30. * Apol. 47. 

* Apol. 22. But cf. even Origen's similar remark about Celsus, 
VIII. 63. 

5 Adv. Gentes, II. 15, 29, 30. 


116 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


Fathers ? for denying the resurrection of the body and 
the flesh, so objectionable to a Greek like Celsus.” Again, 
contrast the advocacy of an inquiring faith by Clement 
and Origen with the attitude of the Africans, such as 
Tertullian, ‘I believe it because it is absurd,’ or of 
Augustine, ‘I would not believe the Gospel if the 
authority of the Catholic Church did not compel me.’ * 
When such alternatives were presented to Christianity we 
may well lament with Bishop Westcott '' the evils of 
that Africanism which has been dominant in Europe 
since the time of Augustine ’’ and '' the shadow of his 
(Augustine's) power is perilous to the growth of truth,’’ * 
and re-echo the affirmation that Greek Christian thought 
“ has not yet done its work in the West.” 

Let us, however, mingle appreciation with criticism, 
and gratitude with regrets, and remember that it is our 
privilege to speak from full perspective of these early 
centuries. Christianity could not what it knows now 
know at first. We see the greatness as also the weak- 
nesses and false alternatives of our predecessors. The 
issues at stake were so vast that we need not be aston- 
ished if extreme positions sometimes won, and if, as in 
every crisis, the issues were often clouded. The Fathers 
generally repudiated all Greek philosophy rather than 
run the risk of accepting evil with the good and false- 
hood with truth. An infallible Christianity requires an 
infallible human nature. We are the heirs not merely 
of the obvious errors, but also still more of the virtues 
and the heroisms of those before us. Christianity is still 
in the making, still confronted with crises, and regularly 
compelled to stand at the parting of the ways and choose, 
as it was during the first four centuries, and the spirit 
of Jesus has yet many things to declare unto us, opening 
up new vistas of truth and compelling to new and larger 
loyalties. All our history is the unfolding of a divine 


1 E.g. Tert. De Resur. 19. 
? C. Celsus, VIII. 49. 3 Cont. ep. Man. VW. 6. 
4 Religious Thought of the West, pp. 246, 250. 


NEED OF HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 117 


purpose, under which we are active workers together with 
God. Ifsome things from the past remain to be undone, 
more remain to be carried to completion and others to 
be begun in the name of Christ. Christianity was, like 
man, '' made to grow, not stop.”’ 

Yet the Church as an institution has been, and remains, 
the home of sincere souls in whom the Spirit of Christ 
is expressing itself for the enrichment of personality and 
for the regeneration of society—an institution the exalted 
passion of which has been directed both to kindly and 
to persecuting purposes, in which hatreds and ignorance 
have been manifested beside self-devotion and spiritual 
idealism. It has suffered from phases of degeneration, 
which, however, have been more than compensated for 
in its phenomena of development. If it remains for 
modern Christianity to exorcise the hardness and to 
correct the defective ethical ideals and narrowness of 
the past, the task also remains of carrying forward the 
ideal of making all things new and of realizing a 
redeemed humanity. Early Christianity was a world- 
renewing movement carried on by the men of the first 
four centuries sharing the contemporaneous views and 
outlook and conscious of, or seeking to discern, the 
highest strivings of their fellows; twentieth-century 
Christianity is still entrusted with the same programme 
under similar conditions and similar limitations. They 
without us cannot be made perfect. 

Christianity, cast upon the stream of evolution and 
becoming a great social and revolutionary movement, 
was liable to many unexpected checks and encourage- 
ments, and exposed to many diversions and even per- 
versions in its development. The mind of the Master 
and the mind of the disciples were not always at one, 
though always assumed to be one. A personality like 
that of Jesus was certain to attract men in a deeply 
religious world, but their needs, and yearnings, and 
presuppositions would play their part in presenting His 
personality and interpreting His message and functions. 


118 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


A creative genius like Paul would modify the outlook of 
the new religion. And the adaptation of an Aramaic 
gospel to a Hellenistic world necessitated a radical re- 
casting. Such a recasting was justified and furthered 
by the conversion of the Graeco-Roman Pagan world, 
rather than the Jewish, to Christ and by the unexpect- 
edly brilliant progress of Christianity in the Greek world. 
Who can say how far the idealizing tendency of Greek 
thought and Greek art contributed to place Jesus before 
the world as the central person of history rather than as 
a Jew who lived under Tiberius ? 

During these early centuries of missionary expansion 
and the facing of new situations and developing formula- 
tions Christianity was granted no immunity from the 
varied influences which surged around it. While main- 
taining its own marked entity and continuity of life, it 
evolved a strong self-consciousness responsive to the 
enlarging currents of thought; in its primitive freedom 
it learned to take over new elements. The application 
of the Christian message to the complex conditions and 
deep needs of the Mediterranean world soon revealed the 
complexity which was implicit in the religion from the 
beginning. It could not grow up side by side with other 
evangels without borrowing and remodelling under 
contrast. Its history then, as always, was one long 
process of disintegration and reintegration as a living 
faith meeting the needs of men. It changed its character 
drastically while conserving its message. Its native 
vitality qualified it to become the spiritual centre of the 
religious movement in the ancient world. 

Notwithstanding the unfailing inspiration of Jesus, the 
conviction in the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and the 
pretensions of following apostolic teaching and precedent, 
Christianity could not escape the accidents of history 
and the conflicts of men, conscientious and selfish, con- 
cerning truth. As in many spiritual movements, there 
were difficult contradictions within Christianity which 
must lead to conflict in order to be resolved or reconciled. 


DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN CHRISTIANITY 119 


Those conflicting tendencies and problems indeed gave 
rise to movement and progress, but such movement and 
progress were determined and qualifed by the needs 
and character of the period and by the limitations of the 
leaders. Ideas were always in gestation as in every 
living religion. Certain diversions in its development 
are obvious; all of which qualified historic Christianity 
at the time to become a popular and catholic religion ; 
some of which have conduced to the unity of Christen- 
dom, while others have become means of division. Some 
changes were necessary in the interests of the self- 
preservation of the society and the purposes of propa- 
ganda ; others were unhappy perversions. 

Briefly stated, the main developments affecting the 
character and programme of the new religion were: 

(1) The institutionalizing of the new religion and the 
growth of increasingly elaborate organization and the 
rise of an ecclesiastical caste. The Church became 
authoritative, as the Spirit had been during the first 
age of enthusiasm and spontaneity. The profound in- 
tuition of Jesus was institutionalized in a corporation 
controlled by a professedly divinely appointed apostolic 
hierarchy. Ecclesiastical officials secured the precedence 
over prophets and teachers in the interests of the peace 
and good order of the society and with a view to arrest the 
partisanship and fissiparous tendencies manifested in the 
loosely associated fraternities. These officials then assumed 
the functions of teachers themselves or claimed the right 
to select or ‘ ordain’ teachers, and finally constituted 
themselves the supreme authorities as to what standard 
of teaching was to be taught and as the guardians of 
the traditions of the sacred past. Christianity tended to 
become more ecclesiastic than Christian. The right of 
appeal to the individual conscience was thrust aside. It 
became the religion of authority with a canonical book 
and an authoritative Church speaking peremptorily and 
pontifically through the episcopate. As such it was 
qualified to become catholic by its appeal to the masses, 


i20 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


who welcomed an authoritative dogmatic system which 
relieved them from the onerous duty of inquiry.' With 
this ecclesiasticism there came necessarily a certain ex- 
ternalism, since no ecclesiastical power on earth can 
control or detect or punish thoughts and dispositions of 
the heart. In Christianity, as in every religion, the 
priest performs the historic functions of carrying on with 
painful conscientiousness the externals of the cult and 
forms of worship and maintaining the traditional con- 
tinuity between the periods, long or short, at which the 
prophet with his new vision and revolutionary truth 
appears. 

(2) Consequently belief hardened into fixed dogmas 
and faith degenerated into an intellectual accepta- 
tion of creedal constructions. Christian experience 
was labelled and catalogued to become normative. 
Standardization of opinions and morals superseded the 
-earlier spontaneity. In the arrest of mental growth a 
system could now be imposed. Authority succeeded to 
the place of argument, as in waning Paganism. 

(3) The radiance and expansiveness and rational liberty 
of the religion of Jesus gave way to asceticism and repres- 
sion. Jesus’ religion was not a sombre code of morals, 
but a liberating faith. The spread of monasticism, the 
increasing retreat from the world, the practice of having 
‘ virgin wives ' or ' sisters,’ the view of marriage * as 


1 '' The more peremptory and exclusive is the claim of faith which 
any religion makes, the more trustworthy and secure does that religion 
seem to the majority; the more it relieves them of the duty and re- 
sponsibility of reflecting upon its truth, the more welcome it is. Any 
firmly established authority acts as a sedative. And more: the most 
welcome articles of faith are just the most paradoxical. . . . ‘ Blind 
faith ' never gains its final haven until its authority is living, until 
questions can be put to it, and answers promptly received from it,” 
ie. the episcopate (Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 278 f. Cf. What is 
Christianity?, 3rd ed. p. 212). 

* Cf, Tertullian’s three grades of virginity: the virginity from 
birth (as in Rev. xiv. 4); virginity from the second birth by the laver, 
either by mutual agreement (as in 1 Cor. vii. 5), or by maintaining a 
purely spiritual marriage (as in 1 Cor. vii. 25 ff.); and the virginity of one 
marriage precluding a second marriage (De Cast. 1; cf. Ad Ux. I. 6). 


1 


EXTERNALISM I2I 


little better than adultery and the attitude to women as 
temptations to carnal desires, the hatred of the world 
because of the love of heaven,’ the indifference to claims 
of citizenship and patriotism, were ominous signs of an 
unhealthy other-worldliness which fostered an interest 
in the Church rather than in the Empire, and which 
set the Civitas Dei and the Civitas Terrena in hopeless 
opposition. The principles of the Founder could not be 
entrusted to errant human nature; they were therefore 
codified into rules of conduct, and the simple ethical fact 
quietly overlooked that no rules can be of universal 
validity or operate irrespective of the individual motive 
and the individual occasion and circumstance. The 
application of the eternal principles enunciated by Jesus 
is the solemnly responsible task of those who have been 
* made free by the Son.’ In the growing barbarization 
of Europe on the decay of ancient culture such rules 
were perhaps a necessity, or at least the most obvious 
method of reducing the rude peoples beyond the Empire 
to obedience. 

(4) The direct experience of joy in doing the Father’s 
will and the morally conditioned accessibility of the 
vision of God and the apprehension of spiritual things 
were replaced by a mediated religion and by the im- 
partation of grace through sacraments ? and the requisite 
operations of holy persons. The Church and the Sacra- 
ments became the exclusive vehicles of saving grace, 
and in and through them the Spirit, which once 
functioned independently for transformation of life, now 
operated and magnified them by such restricted opera- 
tion. Inspiration belonged to a classic past from which 
it could be drawn by an ecclesiastical tradition of 
physical impartation by laying on of hands. 

1 Knopf, Nachapost. Zeitalter, p. 437 ff. 

2 '' Certainly in the long light of Christian history sacraments have 
proved bitter enemies to these ideals (of Jesus); they have been the 
largest and most easily opened door in the Church through which to 


admit sub-Christian teaching and practice in the form of pagan super- 
stition '' (Major, Mod. Churchman, XVI, p. 257). 


122 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


(5) Correspondingly the old priestly religion of inter- 
cession and mediatorial functions and departmental 
offices with Deity supplanted the immediacy of Jesus' 
religion of the direct approach of every son, however 
sin-polluted and conscience-stricken, to a Father whose 
love required no pleader and was moved by deeper 
motives than merit. The conception of the equality of 
men before God and of the ever-open thoroughfares con- 
ducting from the soul to the eternal things was displaced 
by that of an approach through the aristocratic caste 
of hierarchs or martyrs. Another God was enthroned + 
with whom the intercessory offices of a clergy, and saints 
and confessors and angels, availed much, and before 
whom Jesus was constituted ‘ through His blood ’ as the 
mediator and eternal High Priest procuring access for 
those who merited refusal. The philosophical situation 
became worse as Aristotelianism with its Great Absolute 
displaced Platonism and became the means of reducing 
philosophy to a mere department of organized religion, 
of assigning to it a merely apologetic function, rather 
than that of inquiry into the facts of an historical religion 
and the data of religious experience. 

Consonant with the intensive contemporary pes- 
simism,? and with the ideas of the guilt and weakness 
of man and his utter dependence on supernatural aid 
and his distrust in his own power of will, the painful 
and stormy personal experiences of two men—the 
student of the universities of Tarsus and Jerusalem and 
the Bishop of Hippo, whose theologies must ever attract 
study as direct rescripts of their own unique experiences 
—became ever more and more normative as types of 
religious experience for Christians in general and fos- 
tered that pessimistic estimate of human nature as 
‘children by nature of wrath’ so alien to Jesus’ 


* Cf. Wendland, Hell.-rém. Kultur, p. 240: '' Schon im II Jahr. wird 
' der christliche Gott in die abstrakten Formen des platonischen gekleidet 
und dadurch in eine solche Ferne versetzt, dass das Schwergewicht des 
religiósen Lebens aus der Welt herausgerückt wird.'' 
? Cf. Wendland, ib., pp. 234-9. 


PESSIMISTIC VIEW OF MANKIND 123 


optimism. It was found easier to give expression to 
the remorseful agonies of soul and the loathing and 
reaction of the spirit after dissipation or labyrinthine 
wanderings than to the quiet power of the peace of 
God in the obedient soul. It seemed more obvious to 
pit flesh and spirit, sense and soul, in constant conflict 
and irreconcilable antithesis, than to regard them as 
allies and modes of self-realization. Despite the great- 
ness of Augustine as the typical Church Father of our 
Western Christianity, a debauchee turned ascetic, with 
the dualism of an ascetic, was an unfortunate choice as 
the intellectual guide to the rude West which had yet to 
be tutored in the deep spiritual things while learning 
'' the uses of the flesh ’’ in the discipline of reducing 
its fresh energies to a unity. Hence the tempestuous 
experiences of a Paul, an Augustine,’ a Jerome, became 
more typical than the Olympian calm of the Divine 
Master, the quiet power of the writer of the Fourth 
Gospel, or the less spectacular history of a Pelagius. 
Hence, too, divine grace and divine law secured their 
pre-eminence in Christian preaching, to the detriment 
of such an earlier conception as that the worst sinner 


| In Manichaeanism and Augustine's Idea of Massa Perditionis (Harv. 
Th. Rev. XX, 1927, pp. 117-27), Buonaiuti traces the origin of Augus- 
tine’s pessimistic doctrine of mankind as a contaminated Massa to 
Manichaeanism working with Pauline language and points out how the 
anti-Pelagian controversy and the controversy with Julianus of Aeclanum 
called forth “‘ the deep anthropological pessimism with which his soul 
and his religious experience were saturated.” Ambrosiaster first sug- 
gested such a connexion, but ''it was Augustine who . . . finally 
identified the Pauline ‘Massa’ with the Manichaean conception of 
* BGdos. At least there is no doubt that the two most remarkable 
conceptions of Augustine . . . his anthropological doctrine and his in- 
terpretation of history expounded in the De civitate Dei, are both based 
on a dualistic view of human nature and human history, according to 
which the individual as well as the collective life of men is centred in 
the highly dramatic effort of light and goodness to free themselves from 
the Bolos of universal corruption and misery. Both of these are funda- 
mentally Manichaean conceptions. The use of the term ‘ Massa ' reveals 
in the very language of theology the connexion that links the epoch- 
making Augustinian formulation to the preceding Manichaean thought '' 
(pp. 123, 127). 


124 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


can arise and come to the Father. Consequently, 
especially in the West, the Christian soul more readily 
learned from its de profundis to raise its miserere mei, 
Domine, than on the arduous heights of ethical obedience 
and faith mysticism to participate in the exhilarating 
experience of ‘ all that the Father hath is Mine.’ 
Tracing the course of Western Christianity, we ask 
what would be its character and message and philosophy 
to-day if the great conception of the Eastern and Greek 
Fathers of salvation as being a deification or divinizing 
of man, so well expressed by the orthodox Athanasius, 
‘ He was made man that we might be made God,’ had 
become dominant or at least a corrective against the 
exclusive Western cry for grace? What would have 
happened had Christianity had the courage, even amid 
the dangers of heresy and the heat of Christological 
controversies, to stand by the Greek contention of the 
unity of the Divine and the human in all men, which 
was also that of Jesus, rather than on the one hand 
formulate a two-nature theory of Christ's person and on 
the other limit the union of human and divine, the in- 
dwelling of God in man, to Christ? What if the Christian 
belief in the persistence of personality and the account- 
ability of man had followed the more spiritual Platonic 
conception of the divine nature and native immortality 
of the soul rather than have laid hold with avidity on the 
more materialistic Jewish eschatology of a resurrection of 
the body or a resurrection of the flesh? What if the 
Pagan Greek view of the overflowing love and kindness 
of God, together with His ineluctable justice, had become 
more prominent than the awful wrath of God? What 
if Origen's larger hope for all men and for the whole 
universe in a final restoration had occupied the minds 
of the West as conspicuously as the ‘‘ massa perditionis "' 
of Augustine? We cannot reply, but from the modern 
trend in untrammelled Christian philosophy and from 
the results of historical study of the message of Jesus 
and His view of man, we may anticipate much from 


CHRISTIANITY OF THE FUTURE I25 


the recapturing of truths that were dropped or forgotten 
by the way. The development of theology was in each 
outstanding period—necessarily perhaps—one-sided to 
conserve some vital truth which for the time being threw 
some other important truth out of perspective, a pheno- 
menon of which examples lie to hand in the controversies 
with Montanism, Gnosticism, and Donatism. 
Restoration of the first or the fifth century is im- 
possible or too perilous to the life of a developing faith. 
Christianity as a living organism can rest neither in 
the theology of a Paul, nor in the world-view of an 
Origen or an Augustine or a John of Damascus, an 
Aquinas or a Calvin. It is destined to suffer from 
attempted restorations by romanticists, and to come to 
a clearer self-consciousness through spiritual upheavals 
and prophetic revivals, through meeting new situations 
and making new readjustments to the increasing 
demands made by man of his religion. Christianity is 
required to do a great deal more for a Christian to-day 
than in the first centuries, and while the motive power 
is the inspiration of the Galilean, Christianity can meet 
the growing demands made by the life of mankind. 
Christianity to-day is likewise relieved from several 
functions which it performed in the beginning, such as 
guarantees against the astral influences and against 
magical incantations in names lesser than ‘ the Name’ 
and against the invasion and annoyances of demons. 
As an historic movement Christianity has yet to learn 
or confess that no ecclesiastical polity or confessional 
allegiance can standardize either man or the faith which 
unites him with the infinite. It has yet tolearn that loyalty 
to Christ is more catholic than the most Catholic Church. 
Hitherto it has failed to reconcile freedom and authority, 
to cultivate without contradiction the Western genius for 
law and order and the Greek-Oriental genius for reflexion 
and intellectual inquiry. If the prophecy of Kipling 
“ East is East and West is West, And never the twain 
shall meet " is ever to be falsified, it must be in the 
IO 


126 CHRISTIANITY AND THE ANCIENT CULTURE 


religion of Christ. Organized Christianity has strenu- 
ously essayed to suppress subjectivity in the interests 
of the external unity of objectivity. It has with more 
specious success treated the recalcitrant brother or un- 
worthy member on the ecclesiastical principle so naively 
imputed to Jesus, ‘ Let him be to you as an alien,’ 
rather than with the illimitable patience of the love of 
* seventy times seven.’ 

Yet despite the fact that no seed grows so slowly as 
that planted in human nature, this Christian institution 
will learn and unlearn through experience, but chiefly 
through the deep insight or enlarging visions of its 
prophets and teachers. It will yet make room for the 
ritualist and the jurist, the mystic and the philosopher, 
as abiding types in human nature, and enable them to 
live together without offence. The Sower went forth 
to sow, and the firstfruits of nineteen centuries are a. 
promise of the rich harvest to be garnered by the sons 
of God in the coming generations. 


THE RELIGION OF MAGIC, SACRAMENT 
AND SYMBOL 


CHAPTER. VIII 
ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


IN a living and vitalizing religion like Christianity, 
developments were inevitable and evolution from ger- 
minal to riper forms. But that all the developments 
which have taken place within institutional Christianity 
were either inevitable or for the best it would be pre- 
carious to affirm. No one conversant with Jesus and 
with the religion of Jesus and forecasting the fortunes 
of Christianity when cast upon the stream of history 
could have anticipated the eagerness with which the 
new religion at an early stage stepped forth on the by- 
paths of dogmatism and sacramentarianism, or how the 
rich and suggestive sacramentalism which was of Jesus' 
own religion should hold dalliance with the ubiquitous 
contemporary magic and degenerate into a rigid sacra- 
mentarianism—dogmatic, exclusive, miraculous. Jesus, 
in the interests of ethical and personal religion, protested 
against the monopolies and pretensions of sacerdotalism, 
but sacerdotalism survived and secured greater prestige 
in His religion despite His protests and despite His con- 
ception of a God whose love needs no mediatorial offices. 
No one could have forecasted that the things which 
have proved divisive in Christendom were concerns for 
which no sure warrant can be discovered in His teaching 
and which lay wholly outside His interests. The Divine 
Master recognized among His followers, disciples and 
teachers, apostles, prophets and cross-bearers, but no 
priests ; and the priest in the course of Christian history 
127 


128 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


has taken an ample revenge for having been so slighted. 
How tragically significant in the history of the religion 
called by His name was that unseemly dispute at the 
Last Supper as to pre-eminence in the Kingdom among 
the Apostles, a dispute still continued among those who 
partake of the same spiritual food and as yet no nearer 
solution when judged by His standard of fruit-bearing. 

Dean Inge holds that if Christ had not instituted 
Baptism and the Eucharist, the Church would have had 
to invent them, which may be taken to mean that the 
Christian cult would have evolved a system of Christian 
symbolism. He also maintains * that ‘‘ a Christianity 
without sacraments could never have converted Europe,”’ 
which is probably true for the kind or degree of Christi- 
anity to which Europe was converted, but it would be 
truer to say with Charles Kingsley that, with the con- 
version of Constantine and the legislation of the Pagans 
into Christians, Christianity won rather than converted 
Europe.* And to that wholesale influx of Paganism * 
into Christianity and this partial or superficial conver- 
sion are largely due the dialectics of sacramentarianism. 
Ab initio sic non erat. 

In the religious life of the centuries in which Christi- 
anity arose and made its way to the status of the State 
religion, and the house-churches of the apostolic period 
developed into the ancient Catholic Church, one cannot 
fail to be impressed with the extraordinary attention paid 
to sacral acts, the excessive importance of ceremonial, 
the scrupulosity as to correct millinery for religious 
occasions, and the impossibility of saying where magic 
ends and where religion begins, where Paganism and 
Christianity meet and part. | 

Similarly in passing from the religion of the Founder 

* Contentio Veritatis, p. 279. 

* “The Christianity that triumphed was the Christianity of blind 


faith, which Celsus has depicted ” (Harnack, Exp. of Christianity, I, 
p. 280). 


* There was another aspect of Paganism from which Christianity 
borrowed with advantage and could have borrowed more. 


THE RELIGION OF JESUS 129 


of Christianity to the Christianity of the post-apostolic 
days we are made acutely conscious at once of a dif- 
ference in atmosphere between the religion of immediacy 
and that of mediacy through holy rites and holy persons, 
between the religion in which ' the pure in heart see 
God ' and that wherein such privileges are reserved for 
those who have been duly admitted into the Society by 
certain ritual acts controlled by a sacerdotal succession. 
In the first, a man's standing is determined absolutely 
by what he thinks in his heart and by his loyalty to the 
Lord Jesus; in the second, his present privileges and 
future prospects are determined by his proper relations 
to an institution claiming divine origin and authority 
and dispensing in rite and ritual the promises of the 
Founder. In the first, Jesus says without reference to 
initiatory rite in retrospect or prospect, ‘ Suffer the little 
children to come unto Me, and forbid them not’; in 
the second, no membership is possible in the organized 
Society and no salvation thinkable save by the initiatory 
rite of baptism, the Church having overlooked ‘ the 
word of the Lord’ that ‘ John baptized with water, 
but you shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit’ (Acts xi. 16). 
In the first, faith alone is sufficient ; in the second, sacra- 
mental potencies are requisite in transforming the 
psychic or physical man into the pneumatic or incor- 
ruptible man. In the first, forgiveness of sins is con- 
ditioned wholly by the moral attitude of repentance and 
obedience to a loving Father; in the second, this solace 
of anxious souls has been theologized into conformity 
with an ancient,' particularly Semitic, blood-ritual which 
interpreted. the martyr-death of Jesus as a, or rather 
the, propitiatory sacrifice, the ground and objective 
means of all God's gracious forgiving activities. Or, 
in the first, Jesus and His disciples could declare to the 
contrite heart ‘ thy sins are forgiven ' as an immediate 
and verifiable experience of the sin-laden soul; in the 
second, ‘ there is no other way [to forgiveness] except 
1 Cf. Marrett, Evolution of Religion, p. 121 f. 


130 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


by coming to know the Christ and by taking the bath 
for remission of sins.’ ! In the first, men are sons of God 
constitutionally, obedient or far away in the land of 
self-indulgence and forgetfulness of their birthright but 
able to ‘ arise and go to the Father ' ; in the second, a 
process of ‘ adoption ’ after mediatorial offices with God 
is necessary, and this ‘ adoption ' becomes synonymous 
with baptism, as Hesychius defines adoption * when one 
received the adopted son and the holy baptism,' ? or, 
more ambitiously, ‘ man is made God (rendered Divine) 
by water and the Holy Spirit after the rebirth of the 
laver.' ? 

In the primitive Christian Society the rites, which 
were not of Jesus' appointment, were of a simple and 
very obvious symbolic character, though capable of 
infinite expansion in elaboration and in dogmatic 
elucidation and in adaptation to contemporary practices. 
Baptism was washing in running (living) water to the 
use of the Name of Jesus. Anon was added the im- 
position of hands as the necessary and material channel 
of communication of the Spirit and of the “‘ validity "' 
of the sacrament, and soon a collateral sacrament was 
attached to the primitive rite, unction with conse- 
crated oil. 

There are in every religion two synchronous processes 
in action—the continuous externalization and institution- 
alizing or the objectifying of the main ideas in outward 
form to render the religion catholic in its appeal; and 


1 Justin, Dial. 44. 

2 vioüecla óráv Tis Oerdv viðv AauBdvy Kal rò dyov Bdarricwa, Suicer, 
ad verb.; cf. Clement of Alex., who, treating of Jesus as having been 
‘perfected by the washing of baptism alone’ as synonymous with 
the ‘ descent of the Spirit,’ says ‘ we, whose example Christ was, have 
the same experience. Baptized, we are illuminated; illuminated, we 
become sons; being made sons, we are rendered perfect; and rendered 
perfect, we become immortal’ (Paed. I. 6; cf. also Photius, Ep. 97, 
ad Basil. Mac.). 

3 Hippolytus, De san. Theophania, 8; cf. ‘‘In my Baptism, wherein 
I was made a member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of 
the kingdom of heaven ” (Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer). 


INTUITION AND INSTITUTION I3I 


on the other hand, in the more spiritual circles there is 
an ascending in heart and mind to the inmost secret of 
the religion, an introrsum ascendere, a Verinnerlichung, 
a movement, in the language of the Roman Catholic 
scholar and mystic, von Hügel, from the '' exteriorisms ”’ 
to the ''interiorisms." The former process tends to 
obscure and sometimes to crystallize the vital idea of 
the religion; the latter tends to release the spirit of 
the religion to break through even venerable forms and 
contemporary manifestations and to seek the timeless 
both in experience and in reflexion, while not necessarily 
casting aside cult forms and practices which in the ex- 
perience of many have proved helpful. 

In every religion practices are more tenacious than 
beliefs, and changes in beliefs—slow as they are—are 
ever ahead of alterations in practice. Cult forms are 
even more static than dogmas. Hence new dogmas are 
often fitted into the framework of old cult forms, so that 
there is half a truth in the words of Sir James G. Frazer, 
** The history of religion is a long attempt to reconcile 
old custom with new reason, and to find a sound theory 
for absurd practices.”’ 

Every religion is burdened with survivals which have 
been dissociated from their original context. Super- 
stition is dead religion, generally picturesque and always 
popular, the fossil of what was once a living faith. 

The evolution of historic Christianity in the first cen- 
turies was marked by a progressive equipment with 
rites and sacraments, and with the rationale thereof, and 
concurrently by a constant reshaping of the religion 
under apologetic necessity into a philosophy with a 
theological system based partially on historic facts, the 
life and teachings of Jesus, partially on the mythologiz- 
ing and speculative tendencies of the times, and partially 
on philosophic principles common to Greek thought and 
the new religion. 

There are several reasons why sacramentarianism as 
the belief in the salutary and obligatory importance of 


132 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


rites and the expectancy of ex opere operato efficacies 
obtained in the ancient world in which Christianity arose 
and spread. 

(x) It is a general principle of religious evolution that 
rites precede deities, and sacraments enter the field before 
the gods under whom at a later date they are to enter 
on a new career. In religion it is a deep-seated con- 
viction that everything ancient is venerable, quoniam 
antiquitas proxume accedit ad deos.' The rites which 
men performed in remote days for corporate safety and 
to secure the outward means of life were too important 
to discard when personal gods took over the providence 
of human life. The course of religion may be conceived 
as generally proceeding from animism to fetichism, or 
from totemism to personalism. Numina or powers 
become di, anthropomorphic deities. But the religious 
mind, which is tenaciously conservative, could not, 
on attaining personalism ? for its unseen powers, easily 
break with the idea of the animated forces of the first 
stage, and still less with the idea of the supernatural 
powers resident in the external object or visible home of 
the daemonic powers of fetichism. The conception of 
* power ' or Mana, in objects and natural phenomena, 
was through anthropomorphism and rationalism assigned 
to ' Powers.’ This Mana, which exists prior to and 
independently of gods, was merely distributed to the 
good and evil divine persons, for these ‘ Powers’ both 
attack and protect. If ideas of taboo acted deterrently 
with regard to one object, they heightened the import- 
ance of another. The action which once took place as 
an opus operatum of itself or automatically is now 
addressed to beings endowed with will who can repeat 
the desired action and assure its mysterious efficacy. 

! Cicero, De Legg. Il. xr, 27. 

* For the persistence in the Graeco-Roman period of a deeper interest 
in the power or ‘virtues’ of the god (dper}, Swdues, évépyerar) 
rather than in the personality or in the god himself, cf. A. D. Nock, 


Studies in the Graeco-Roman Beliefs of the Empire (J.H.S. XLV, 
pp. 84-101). 


INFLUENCE OF MAGIC 133 


It is also well known that many of the loftiest con- 
ceptions of religion can be traced back to primitive and 
naturalistic rites which antedate personal deities, but 
which through their long-established usage and obvious 
utility were forced into higher service in a higher stage 
of religion. Age and custom consecrate religious habits 
without critical inquiry as to whether they are good 
now. Man is particularly cautious in his religious ex- 
periments. He will keep one of his old gods if only to 
hide under the bed. He retains a wistful hankering after 
the picturesque and tangible gods whom his fathers 
worshipped on the other side of the flood. The Israelites 
were prudential to placate the local telluric gods of 
Canaan until they should be assured by experience 
whether their war-god, Jahweh, could grow crops and 
ensure increase in a strange country. Examples need 
not be multiplied. The earth-ritual of Eleusis for the 
fertility of the Rarian plain became the ecumenical sacra- 
ment for immortality, feeding the ' sweet hopes' of 
countless pilgrims through long ages. The local Thes- 
salian earth-daemon, Aesculapius, became the Saviour 
and Healer for the Graeco-Roman world.  Rites of 
human fertility were slowly subtilized into sacraments 
of henosis or union with deities. 

(2 Though religion probably did not arise from 
magic,’ as Sir James G. Frazer contends in The Golden 
Bough, its connexion with magic has from the beginning 
been of the most intimate and generally friendly kind, 
and this connexion is far from broken in most institu- 
tional Christianity to-day. Magic came before cult, and 
cult forms were largely the adaptation of the postulates 
of magic to a higher department. Man has always 
wanted something done for him in religion, and long 
before there were gods to do it. '' Before man learns 
to address prayers to the gods for the success of his 
undertakings, he uses magic to effect his object; and 
_when he has learned to believe in the gods he does not 
* Cf. K. Barth, Religion u. Magie bei d. Naturvólkern (Leipzig, 1914). 


I34 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


forget his ancient rites. They survive within or 
alongside of the cult, that is, if it be a cult with old 
traditions.’’ * 

Magic rests on a system of correspondences in nature, 
which is linked together by a chain of grand potencies 
and vast affinities. Man as a microcosm of this vast 
unitary macrocosm stood in closest affinity with all the 
things around him, and by knowledge of their nature 
could turn them to his own purposes. If only he knew 
the ‘ secret,’ the ‘ powers ’ immanent in the world could 
be turned to account. This sympathetic magic was too 
deeply ingrained in ancient social and religious thought 
to be ejected, especially by a new religion which almost 
from the beginning manifested its reliance on the external 
ceremonies of worship and shared with its Pagan con- 
temporaries the postulate of the necessity of ritual, 
both for the enjoyment of religious privileges and for 
the purposes of rendering religion popular or catholic. 
This sympathetic magic gradually assumed the char- 
acter of and furthered a mystic sacramentarianism.* 

Magic was the primitive meeting-place of human fears 
and hopes, needs and wishes. It sought to strike a 
bargain with deity or to employ means of compulsion 
upon spiritual agents. Magic was also the harbinger of 
natural science * and the first crude form of nature- 
mysticism. By the process of experimentation, happy 
coincidences, the power of suggestion and auto-sugges- 
tion, and the association of ideas, it attained immense 
vogue, such as is difficult for the modern student to 
conceive. This quasi-science that could manipulate 
theurgic apparatus, sway or control demons, secure or 
retard fertility, influence the issue in love-affairs,* cause 
the death of doomed victims, even of prospective wearers 

1 Nilsson, Hist. of Greek Religion, p. 89. 

2 Cf. Harrison, Proleg. to Greek Religion, p. 487 f. 

3 ‘ Historically, in the broader sense of the word, there is ground 
for finding in magic an ancestor of science, of political and social 


morality, and certainly of medicine ' (Glover, Progress, p. 16). 
* Which the demons also control (Tatian, Ad Graecos, 17). 


MAGICIAN AND PRIEST 135 


of the Roman purple, and bind beyond the grave, could 
not lightly be put aside, and its power was all the more 
terrible as it was also a semi-religion, which corrobor- 
ated the working of ritual. It was an arrested develop- 
ment at which the many were content ta stop.' It 
satisfied the inveterate demand of each ‘ adulterous and 
sinful generation ' to ‘ show us a sign,’ and it throve 
on miracle and thaumaturgic exhibitions. 

This ‘‘ bastard sister of religion ’’ was kept in control 
in the West by the inquisitive scientific spirit of Greece. 
The rise of European philosophy in the Ionian colonies 
stemmed the tide of sacerdotalism and sacramentarianism 
from the East, where magic had always held a more 
assured place than in the Graeco-Roman world, and 
where it had developed in the temples of the Oriental 
deities. '' Magic first returns when the genuine Greek 
spirit vanishes in the great transformation of philosophy 
and religion which began during the Hellenistic 
period.”’ ? 

In the first centuries of Christianity and especially in 
the final conflict of Paganism and Christianity, a conflict 
which was not considered irreconcilable with a liberal 
assimilation of phases of Paganism, magic secured such 
a hold in ecclesiastical Christianity as was not relaxed 
for centuries ; it lingers still in theological niches, where 
its presence is concealed by a refusal to ask questions 
or by a disposition to evade difficulties on the principle 
that omnia exeunt in mysteria. In the ancient period 
of Christianity, the power of the priest must not be less 
or less manifest than the power of the magician. If the 
magician could bind in this life * and beyond the grave,* 


1 “ As the best points in the Mysteries were absorbed by Christianity, 
so the worst were absorbed by magic—magic, which always appears 
as the dark shadow cast by religion, and which takes the place of 
religion in the view of those who have not in them the seed of religious 
growth ” (P. Gardner, Rel. Exper. of St. Paul, p. 67). 

^ Nilsson, Hist. of Greek Religion, p. 52. 

* Cf. Tacitus, Annales, II. 69, and Dio Cassius, LVII. 18 (on the 
death of Germanicus). 

* Quintilian, Decl. X. 7. 


136 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


the Christian priest must not operate with less ghostly 
powers. Such a confession as, ' I was united with thy 
holy form (morphé); I was strengthened by thy holy 
name,'' made to magical incantation, suggested ritual 
values not to be overlooked. Where the external 
evidences of religious worth were essential to establish 
a religion, the miracles of the officials of the Church 
must not be less impressive than those of the magician 
or of the Mysteries. An uttered curse was recognized 
as operative, and this proved suggestive in the evolution 
of ecclesiastical excommunication, the beginnings of 
which we notice in the administration of the Corinthian 
Christian community under Paul's own directions 
(T Copn vos) 

(3) The difficulty of, or disinclination for, abstract 
thinking in antiquity and the preference for concrete 
forms of thought. A pure religion which produces a 
spiritual philosophy and seeks that highest rationality 
commended by Jesus, as ' Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, 
and with thy whole mind, and with thy whole strength,’ 
was then, as it is to-day, a formidable undertaking for 
the multitude. When we consider the arduous character 
of abstract thinking even to-day, we shall be more 
sympathetic with the ancients. And their task was all 
the greater as the Greeks had to forge the instruments 
for exact and conceptual thinking. One must admire 
the clarity with which Aristotle defines the categories 
before the establishment of a philosophical terminology. 
But Christianity appeared on the scene at a time when 
the process of the Orientalization of the West was pro- 
ceeding apace. Except for those who still found a refuge 
and guide in Greek moral philosophy, the general trend 
was toward Oriental ways and fashions in religion, with 
Oriental vagueness and fogginess and sfumato. The 
Oriental thought pictorially rather than in Aristotelian 
categories. Truth came to him in images rather than 

* Wessely, Griech. Zauberpapyri, Y, p. 48. 


ANCIENT SYMBOLISM I37 


in ideas; it was symbolic rather than dialectic. The 
Oriental cast his deepest intuitions into the mould of a 
cult or acted religion ; the Greek into that of a philosophy 
or reflective religion, though he was very sensitive to 
the value of symbolism in religion. 

This mental outlook was more accordant to a religion 
in mimetic action than to an exact theology. Edification 
would be promoted more by sacral acts than by an 
appeal to the mind. It inclined to seek for motions of 
the soul which might find fitting expression in action. 


(4) The function of symbolism in antiquity was of 
immense influence in the evolution of sacramentarianism. 
But here the ancient mind was different from ours. In 
the first place, to the ancients the symbol did not denote 
the thing symbolized; it was in some mysterious way 
the thing itself without metaphysical distinctions.! And, 
secondly, in the symbol itself was supposed to be resident 
the dormant power which, when required, could be 
evoked by due and correct rites owing to deep and 
invisible correspondences. Hence the Christendom- 
dividing distinctions between Romans, Zwinglians, 
Lutherans, and Calvinists on ‘ hoc est corpus meum ’ 
would to them have been almost unintelligible and cer- 
tainly indifferent. The line of demarcation between 
symbol and fact was simply not drawn. Symbols were 
neither vivid mnemonics, nor pale substitutes, nor mere 
signs: they were something in their own right and they 


1 “ The symbol is the mystery, and the mystery was not conceivable 
without a symbol. What we nowadays understand by 'symbol' is 
a thing which is not that which it represents; at that time ' symbol’ 
denoted a thing which in some kind of way really is what it signifies; 
but, on the other hand, according to the ideas of that period, the really 
heavenly element lay eithér in or behind the visible form without being 
identical with it. Accordingly, the distinction of a symbolic and 
realistic conception of the Supper is altogether to be rejected ’’ (Har- 
nack, Hist. of Dogma, Eng. tr., II, p. 144 f.). Cf. also p. 207: '' The 
symbolical of that time is not to be considered the opposite of the 
objectively real, but as the mysterious, the God-produced (musterion), 
as contrasted with the natural, the profanely clear '"'; also pp. 212-26, 
IV. 288 f. 


E t 
138 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


did something, and though the exact nature of that action 
and of the effect was not unimportant, it was not too 
curiously scrutinized. In this connexion it is note- 
worthy that symbolum was used by the Early Church 
for sacramentum, and as a synonym with mysterion."* 
In fact ‘‘ the ‘ symbol ' was never a mere type or sign, 
but always embodied a mystery,’’ ? and '' each symbol 
has a mysterious but real connexion with the fact which 
it signifies." * It was a ‘‘ mysterious drómenon (trans- 
action)," as Windisch terms Paul's rite of baptism. 

Ancient religion was symbolic to an extent beyond 
ours, partly because of the disinclination for abstract 
thinking and the consequent absence of a rigid theology ; 
partly because of its closer association with art, ritual 
being the half-way house between art and religion ; and 
partly from the consciousness that many things defy 
articulation, and at least for the masses should be 
represented rather than defined. Ancient theology was 
more poetical than prosaic; it was mythus rather than 
creed; and the ceremonial was acted myth. With the 
ancients, mythology was more in demand than theology: 
it was the first form of theology. They, on the whole, 
preferred to suggest rather than define; to produce awe 
and reverence rather than an intellectual satisfaction ; 
to encourage emotionalism and devotionality rather than 
critical inquiry. It is in the perception of this appeal to 
human nature at large that Protestantism has failed 
compared with Catholicism *; it is in the perception 
that other things are needed beside devotionality, and 
that a satisfactory personal religion insists on submitting 

* Cf. Robinson, Epistle to the Ephesians, p. 234 fi. 

* Harnack, Hist. of Dogma, IV, p. 289. 

* Id., Exp. of Christianity, I, p. 286. 

* W. Hale White (Mark. Rutherford) writes in Letters to Three 
Friends: '' The symbolism of Catholicism, as for example at Candle- 
mas, is sometimes expressive of a deeper truth than anything that 
can be put into words. Catholicism here shows profounder insight 
than Protestantism into the nature of truth and of man. Catholicism 


knows what words cannot do. Protestantism struggles to put everything 
into words. The vital part of religion is wordless and purely symbolic."' 


: REALISM I39 


its faith and most holy symbols to inquiry, that 
Catholicism has failed compared with Protestantism. 

No student of ancient religion can put himself en 
rapport with his subject or realize its message and the 
beauty of its appeal without a sympathetic comprehen- 
sion of its symbolism. For example, a few leisurely 
visits to the lovely underground Neo-Pythagorean 
basilica * by the Via Praenestina, where the Pagan pure 
in heart were realizing God at the time when the house- 
churches of early Christianity were meeting in or around 
the same city, will bring home to one the varied and 
eloquent appeal of a rich religious symbolism: the 
frescoes seem to proclaim defiantly, ‘ Where is thy 
victory, O Death?’ And no religious man could have 
gazed in the spirit on the delicately beautiful white 
marble plaque in the recently discovered (in 1922) 
Capuan ? Mithraic chapel without some apprehension of 
“ the forms whose kingdom is where time and space 
are not." There carved in relief is a winged Psyche 
draped in a pleated robe fastened with straps crossing 
between the breasts; beside her stands Eros, holding a 
lighted torch, grasping her left hand and wistfully look- 
ing at her with confident entreaty. ‘‘ Love faileth not,” 
seems to be the message. 

(5) Closely associated with this symbolism was ancient 
realism, which makes ancient axioms modern enigmas, 
and which throve in an atmosphere of mysticality and 
supernaturalism in the absence of a scientific spirit of 
inquiry. Realism, it should be remembered, is not 
necessarily to be identified with materialism, though it 
may conduce to it; it may go hand in hand with credulity 
or with mysticism. Under the religious syncretism— 
during which Christianity spread—magic and theurgy, 
spiritism and occultism, grew apace and fostered a kind 


! Cf. Lietzmann, Vorträge d. Bib. Warburg, 1922, I. 60 ff.; Pari- 
beni, Culti et Religioni in Roma, etc., in Atena e Roma, 1920, p. 169 ff.; 
Carcopino, La Basilique pythagoricienne, 1926. 

? Notizie d. Scavi (1924), XXI. 1924, pp. 353-75, by A. Minto, with 
reproductions of the frescoes. 


140 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


of realism. The bright light of Hellenic philosophy was 
' a less favourable milieu for realism than the crepuscular 
Hellenistic light. As the symbol was in some real way 
the thing itself, so the thought and the object bore to 
each other more than an epistemological relation. The 
question of differentiating between the symbol and the 
transaction was not seriously pressed. One fruitful cause 
of regnant realism was that in the ancient mind the 
identity of subject and object was scarcely questioned. 
‘Tt is indisputable that the Greek people never com- 
pletely outstepped the confines of their pre-logical men- 
tality and that they attained only at a late stage, after 
Plato, a truly rational and genuine mentality. In Greek 
philosophy we must come down to the Stoics to find the 
distinction, so obvious for us, of the subjective and the 
objective." * Later the tides of realism swept over the 
Pauline churches, carrying with them magical sacra- 
mentarianism. 

In that ancient world spirit was only the most attenu- 
ated matter; it was corporeity near but never at the 
vanishing point. In fact the immateriality of the spirit 
or Nous was first clearly established by Plotinus. 
Popular as well as theological conceptions never refined 
the Christian Spirit to the high transcendentalism of the 
Platonic Idea, but retained its nearer kinship with the 
quasi-material Stoic penetrating Spirit and the Hebraic 
Ruach. Hence the bestowal of the Spirit was not 
through the rich and overflowing personality of Jesus, 
but by His breathing on His disciples. This conception 
of the Spirit was soon heightened when Jesus' followers 
could transmit the Holy Spirit by the touch of the hand 
or by the act of water-baptism. The ' power ' of Jesus 
could be invoked together with the spirit of an apostle 
at a distance to cause the death of an unworthy Church 
member. Images were possessed of demonic powers, 
and inanimate objects could through a proper ritual 
handling be changed in nature for weal or woe. A 

* Macchioro, Zagreus, p. 165; cf. id., Orfismo e Paolinismo, p. 59 ft. 


EXAMPLES OF REALISM I4I 


material instrument might even be tried and found 
guilty. One should abstain from meat offered to idols, 
since through such offering the demons secured entry 
into the food, and thereafter, as Pagans and ecclesiasts 
knew,' they would find lodgement in the stomach and 
cause physical disturbances. Certain foods seem to have 
offered easier lodgement than others to evil spirits.^ By 
a solemn act of consecratio a material object could be 
endowed with mysterious efficacies and produce sacra- 
mental grace or exercise a sacramental curse. The latter 
is familiar in the devotiones and dirae of magic which 
devoted the victim to the lower powers, and in Christian 
excommunication. Through a misuse of the elements of 
the Lord's Supper in the first generation in the Corinthian 
Church an epidemic of serious illness broke out resulting 
in several deaths. 

Papias's account of the miraculous change in the 
composition and appearance of Judas Iscariot’s body 
presented no difficulty as a solution of divine justice in 
a world of magical postulates.? Only by means of this 
realism does Clement of Alexandria * struggle through 
his argument on milk as transmuted blood. An able 
apologist of our religion in critical days believed not 
only in the existence of demons as really as in that of 
God and the angels, but asserted that these beings 
became visible to advanced or spiritual Christians.? 

In the apocryphal Acts of John, John's body is at 
one time quite impalpable, so that the hand could pass 
through it like air; at another, normally tangible—a 
view which was merely a further elaboration of the 
late orthodox realistic corporeity of the resurrection- 
narratives of the Gospels. Hermas’s speculations * were 
readily comprehensible to his readers when he boldly 

1 Angus,, The Mystery-Religions, p. 256. 

2 Eusebius, Praep, Evang. IV. 22, from Porphyry. 

3 Patr. Apost., Gebhardt's ed. minor, p. 73; Greek Catena on Matt. 
Xxvii. 5. 

i 4 Paed. I. 6, 39 f. 5 Tatian, Ad Graecos, 15. 
* Sim. IX. 16, 2 f., opposed by Clement, 1 Ep. to Cor. 49, 1; 50, 3. 

II 


142 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


cut a Gordian knot in soteriology by averring that the 
unbaptized Old Testament saints were baptized with 
water in Hades after they had heard the proclamation 
of the evangel in that quarter by Christ and His apostles, 
thereby conserving the theory of the necessity of baptism 
with water and of Church membership to eternal salva- 
tion. For this purpose these saints naturally retained 
their physical human shape and the ministrants their 
hands. So unquestioned was this realism that one who 
endeavoured, while maintaining the necessity of the 
sacramenta] practices of his day, to correct or moderate 
the regnant magical views, could write by the end of the 
first century, ‘ Unless one is begotten of water and 
spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God,' and 
‘Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink 
His blood, you have no life in you.’ 

Clement of Alexandria * quotes Artapanus as relating 
how Moses, miraculously released from prison, over- 
whelmed Pharaoh Chenephres by speaking in his ear 
the name of the Hebrew God, and later revived the 
speechless king. This supernatural and magical realism 
was easily and as a matter of course, in a world devoid 
of natural science and hungry for miracle, transferred 
into the sacramental department of Christianity, where 
it retains its place. Jesus by His own baptism conveyed 
sacramental power to the water: ‘ Our God Jesus the 
Christ . . . was born and baptized that by His suffering 
(or experience) He might purify the water.'? In an 
even more realistic fashion the great Church Father of 
the West could write: ‘ For He took from the earth 
earth, because flesh is from the earth, and He received 
flesh from the flesh of Mary. And because in that very 
flesh He walked here and gave that very flesh to be 
eaten by us for salvation, no one eats of that flesh unless 


he has first adored . . . and not only do we not sin by 
adoring, but we sin if we do not adore.’ ? 
t Str. d; 23 (1545 3). ? Ignatius, Eph. XVIII. 2. 


* Augustine, Enar. in Ps. xcviii. 9, cited Modern Churchman, XVI, 
p. 386. 


IRENAEUS ON CORPORAL PRESENCE 143 


As a further and—for the history of the sacraments— 
instructive example of this realism may be cited 
Irenaeus's bald doctrine of the corporeal presence of 
Christ in the Eucharist. Attacking those who ‘ deny 
the salvation of the flesh and despise its regeneration 
as being incapable of incorruptibility ' he asserts: 


“Tf this [the flesh] is not saved, then of course the 
Lord did not redeem us with His blood, nor can the 
cup of the Eucharist be the participation in His blood, 
nor the bread which we break a participation in His 
body. For there is no blood except that from veins 
and flesh and other human substance. . . . Since we 
are His members and nourished by the material creation 
. . . He acknowledged the cup of material creation to 
be His own blood from which He moistens our blood; 
and the material bread He affirmed to be His own body 
from which He causes our bodies to grow. . . . When 
the Eucharist becomes Christ's body, from these the 
substance of our flesh grows and consists. How can 
they deny that the flesh is incapable of receiving the 
gift of God which is eternal life—the flesh being 
nourished from the body and the blood of the Lord? 
... We are members of His body, of His flesh and 
His bones.’ [The blessed Paul] ‘ does not say this of 
some spiritual and invisible man, for the spirit has 
neither bones nor flesh, but about the genuinely human 
condition consisting of flesh and nerves and bones, such 
as is nourished by His cup which is His blood and grows 
from the bread which is His body. . . . So also shall 
our bodies, fed by the Eucharist and after being 
deposited and dissolved in the earth, rise at their 
appropriate time.’ * 


This extract conveys some idea of how and where 
sacramentarian doctrine began and of the extremes to 
which it was certain to be carried. It also reveals the 
tendency of controversy to overpress logic and isolate 
truth. Irenaeus, contending for the orthodox view of 
the resurrection of the flesh as against the Hellenic 


1 Adv. Haer. V. 2-3; cf. IV. 6. 


144 ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


doctrine of the immortality of the soul adopted by 
Gnostic Docetists, discovered an ingenious argument 
for his cruder doctrine in a magical doctrine of the 
Eucharist. 

(6) ‘‘ What's in a name? " was an attitude utterly 
unknown to ancient mentality, Jewish, Pagan and 
Christian alike. Names were never to the ancients mere 
appellatives or convenient designations. The name was 
an essential part of the person, indeed the power of the 
person ; it partook of the essence and was pregnant with 
the Mana of the owner. Hence the mystic-magical use 
of the name was axiomatic. '' The modern logical view 
of names as merely indifferent speech-symbols, which 
can be changed without affecting the essence of things, 
was by no means the old-world view. The formula 
nomina sunt numina was valid in all the old religions 
of the Mediterranean area, including earlier and even 
later Christianity; the divine name was felt to be 
part of the divine essence and itself of supernatural 
potency." > The daemonic power of the name was 
accepted both in magic ? and in religion. There was a 
secret name of Rome, hidden from its most learned and 
patriotic citizens, but revealed to and kept secret by the 
priests, lest enemies should take away the protection if 
the mystic name were divulged.? A scholar like Origen 
sees the main difference between Pagan and Christian 
exorcisms to lie chiefly in the greater potency of Jesus' 
Name, in addition to the superior magical effect of the 
repetition of Christian scriptures.* So potent is the 
Name of Jesus that it will prove effectual even when 
pronounced by wicked men. 


* Farnell, Evolution of Religion, p. 32. '' Name and thing tend to 
be one in essence. The name is not a mere convention; in some deep 
mysterious bond of nature it is the thing; and if anyone knows the 
name he is master in some measure of the thing '" (Glover, Christian 
Tradition, p. 114). Cf. Jevons, Intr. to History of Religion, p. 245. 

? E.g. ddpdv por CSwphow rhv 700 peylorou cod óvóparos yvGou, in Pap. Paris. 
ed. Parthey, II. 127. 

3 Macrobius, Sat. III. 9, 5. * C. Celsum, I. 6. Cf. also 24, 25. 


ANCIENT MENTALITY 145 


The psychological effect of this attitude of mind could 
not fail to prize the material channels and visible elements 
of sacramentarianism and to stress the ritual appeal of 
the Name. The nominalism of contemporary magic 
was transferred into religion. Symbols secured an im- 
portance in their own awful and exclusive right. Grace 
by unction, which smacks of the magical, was more in 
demand because more obvious than Plotinus’ union 
with God in contemplation. Association of religious ex- 
periences and hopes with cult acts became causal. The 
ethical association of baptism and spiritual renewal was 
transcendentalized into baptismal regeneration. 

Such being the religious outlook of the world of early 
Christianity, it is only natural that sacramentarianism 
should be regarded as the prevailing mode of religion,’ 
and that grace should be sought especially in cult acts 
and salvation be dependent on sacrament. And it was 
historically almost inevitable that Christianity should be 
swept into the mighty current of refined magic, despite 
Jesus’ own religion and the deep spirituality which 
accompanied the launching of the new movement into 
a world of religious ferment. It was the whole men- 
tality ? of the ancient world, which Christians shared 
with Pagans, which forced this missionary faith to equip 
itself with what were regarded as the essentials or tokens 
of a religion in that age: miracle, secrecy and sacrament. 

! Cf. Harnack, Exp. of Christianity, I, p. 288. 

2 '' We may admit that the triumph of a new and great creed may 
imply a potent revelation, perhaps a sudden mental transformation in 
the catechumens difficult to equate with any formulated law of evolu- 
tion. Still, we cannot gainsay the experience that as the religion 
establishes and organizes itself, it draws nourishment from the old 


soil which is full of living germs of past organisms '' (Farnell, Evolu- 
tion, p. 23). 


CHAPTER IX 
ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM INTO CHRISTIANITY 


OPERATING on and through the contemporary mentality 
and the same realistic supernaturalism, a combination 
of causes tended to make the new religion conform as 
far as possible to its sacramentarian competitors. 

The Old Testament and Judaistic heritage had a two- 
fold tendency: on the one hand, toward the personal 
and spontaneous and immediate religion of prophetism, 
independent of ritual and liturgy ; and on the other, the 
religion of rule and ritual and intercession, dependent 
on a class of religious specialists. Unless we are justified 
in interpreting the account of the relations between 
believers and the Jewish Church in the opening chapters 
of Acts as part of the author's re-working of history in 
favour of the view that the Christians were the true 
Israel and their religion of the requisite antiquity, the 
early preachers never for a moment contemplated with- 
drawal from the ancestral cult. They were not the 
heralds of a new religion, but of a new era. The pomp 
of the Temple seems to have been intriguing to the 
Galilean provincials, who inaugurated what was merely 
to be a Messianic movement within the pale of Judaism. 
The * New Way ' took over wholesale the Jewish Scrip- 
tures and ceremonial. In spite of the religious reaction 
of Philo and the Alexandrines in favour of a religion 
of faith, the general trend in Judaism was back to 
Ezekiel and Ezra and away from Jeremiah and the 
Wisdom of Solomon; it was toward a punctilious 
ritualism, and this was hastened by the silence of 
prophetism. Religious men accustomed to the meticulous 
observance of externals did not become less meticulous, 
but inclined to be rather more. 

146 


SACERDOTALISM AND SACRIFICE 147 


As Christianity became officially organized the Old 
Testament priest appeared more to the front than the 
prophet and the laity were pushed steadily into the back- 
ground. As soon as the early Gentile Church won in 
its anti-Judaistic conflict it proceeded to appropriate the 
spoils. The Jewish Scriptures suggested lines of advance 
for Christian theology and administration. Such tenets 
as the necessity of bloody sacrifice, the prescriptions as 
to externals of cult, and the intercessory functions of 
priests, were too venerable and too deep-rooted to be 
discarded. The splendour of the ritual of the great Day 
of Atonement, bearing upon a human need, appealed 
to the Church which found in Christ's blood the last 
and final sacrifice for sin; likewise the necessity of 
priestly office was a postulate which was not to be 
antiquated but was taken over in two ways: first, by 
making Christ the Great High Priest mediating between 
man and God, as the priest did in all contemporary 
religions; and secondly, by establishing a Christian 
order of priests with functions and powers analogous to 
,those of the Old Testament priesthood and of the 
Mysteries. 

It is also remarkable how readily Jerusalem lent itself 
to the appeal of Hellenism under Antiochus until his 
mad attempt to hasten the process provoked the in- 
evitable reaction of the Maccabean revolt. Apparently 
the Jews were growing more responsive to aestheticism 
in religion. Pseudo-Aristeas (99) speaks of the marvel- 
lously transporting effects of the sight of the public 
processions and the ceremonies in Jerusalem. And 
Judaism, in its attempt to make its creed attractive, 
inclined to bring its cult, so far as its exclusivism per- 
mitted, into line with the competing Mystery-Religions, 
which magnified the priestly office. Even two centuries 
before Philo's day Judaism had been presented as a 
Mystery in conformity with prevalent esotericism.' 


1 Cf. Cerfaux, Influence des mystères sur le Judaisme alexandrin 
avant Philon (in Muséon, 1924, vol. XXXVII, p. 87). 


148 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


The long-continued and penetrative influence of the 
leader of that prophetic revival out of which Christianity 
arose enhanced the importance of ritual. It was a 
strange fate indeed which attended this ascetic’s revolt 
against the priestly type of religion and his protest 
against reliance on conformity with the externals of cult, 
but no more strange than that which attended the pro- 
phetic ministry of the greater ‘ Coming One.’ It was 
as if the Cynics and the Cyrenaics had laid claim to 
be the real successors of Socrates by putting in the 
foreground what had been secondary or adventitious 
elements in Socrates’ teaching. The Baptist’s influence 
was greatest in the very centre of Pauline-Johannine 
Christianity, Ephesus, and the sect within the Christian 
Church which adhered to ‘ the baptism of John’ died 
out only in the nineteenth century. 

There is considerable uncertainty as to the nature and 
object of the baptism of John due to the scanty refer- 
ences of the Gospels with their differences and the 
probability of the influence of later Christian theology, 
and to the wholly different acceunt given by Josephus.* 
According to the Synoptists, the baptism was an eschato- 
logical rite, a symbol of repentance as preparation for 
the expected Kingdom and ‘for remission of sins.’ 
According to Josephus, John’s rite was originally for 
‘body purification ' for the few ascetics who had re- 
nounced the world ‘ after the soul had been previously 
thoroughly cleansed by righteousness,’ marking an 
advance in virtue rather than a sign of repentance for 
remission of sins. Then, according to Josephus, came 
‘the others ' (“ the multitudes ' of the Synoptic story), 
whose arrival as penitents may have modified the rite 
somewhat along the lines of the Synoptic account. The 
brief references and the later tendency to accentuate the 
sacramental and magical point rather to a symbolic ? 

! Cf. Jackson & Lake, Beginnings of Christianity, I, pp. 1o1-9. 


* As by Schürer, Gesch. d. jüd. Volkes, 3rd-4th ed. III, p. 185 
(n. 90). 


INFLUENCE OF THE BAPTIST 149 


interpretation than a sacrament.’ It was a lustral bath 
whereby John received and sealed penitents for the 
Kingdom without any indication that thereby or ipso 
facto their sins were purged away, but with no ambiguity 
that they were thereby pledged to ‘ bring forth the fruits 
meet for repentance.’ Further, John came as a prophet, 
in the succession of those who saw in the cult-worship 
symbols rather than efficacious means of cleansing. And 
his emphatic contrast of water-rite with the spiritual 
baptism of the new era decidedly points to the immer- 
sion in the Jordan as a symbol and seal rather than as 
a sacrament.? The adoption by Peter and the first 
Apostles of this rite of the prophetic forerunner casts 
welcome light on the primitive usage of the Christian 
baptism. 

Early Christianity could not forget, even to its em- 
barrassment, its connexion with the Baptist’s personality 
and mission, which offered to its opponents an obvious 
means of depreciation and called forth such an apologetic 
motif as Matt. iii. 14, 15, and such a protest as that of 
the Fourth Gospel, in which the Baptist is reduced from 
the great prophet with an original and independent 
mission of the Synoptists to the lesser figure of a per- 
sonal witness to point out the Messiah. If John the 
Baptist as ‘ the greatest of mortals ’ exercised such an 
influence over Jesus Himself, it is not surprising that 
he exercised a still greater and lasting influence on Jesus’ 

1 In a recent review of the problem a Jewish scholar interprets the 
Johannine rite as the baptism of repentance in conjunction with the 
Levitical purification: ‘‘ Le baptéme de Jean n’a donc été ni le bap- 
téme des prosélytes, ni le baptéme juridique au sens de la future com- 
munauté chrétienne, ni la lustration lévitique ou le baptéme de 
pénitence seul, mais le baptéme de pénitence joint à la purification 
lévitique ’’ (Rubinstein, Le Baptême de Jean in Rev. d. études juives, 
LXXXIV, p. 70). 

2 '' Since what he emphasizes is not the efficacy of the rite but the 
obligation to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, and since, further, 
he contrasts it with an efficacious Spirit-baptism of the future, there 
can hardly be a doubt that he views it as no more than an outward 
seal of the inner reformation ” (Morgan, Religion and Theology of Paul, 
p. 209). 


150 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


followers. But Jesus' originality, compared with that 
of John, and His independence in important elements 
of His Gospel, as in His personal habits and methods, 
are equally striking. It was not without some weighty 
reason that Jesus discarded the rite so characteristic of 
His predecessor's mission—a rite to which He Himself 
had submitted and at the performance of which He had 
received His call—the ‘ baptism of repentance for re- 
mission of sins.' The origins of Christian baptism are 
notoriously obscure, but it appears that with the found- 
ing of the Church the Johannine rite was revived as 
the token of admission into the new Messianic Society 
which looked for the speedy consummation of the 
Advent. The connexion of repentance and the forgive- 
ness of sins was inherent in the rite from its adoption 
by the Apostles, and this connexion, at first indetermin- 
ate and symbolical as in a Jewish rite and not a Pagan 
sacrament, became increasingly causal and transcen- 
dental until it issued in ' the laver of regeneration and 
of spiritual renewal ' (Titus iii. 5). 

As Christianity was carried into the wider world in 
which baptism was an initiatory and immortality- 
bestowing rite in the ubiquitous Mysteries, the Christian 
rite became the equivalent and was embellished with the 
ideas and the postulates of such rites. While the rite 
was the complete immersion of an adult moral agent 
confessing .his sins and signifying his desire to secure 
the life of the coming aeon, its symbolism as marking 
the need of cleansing and his complete change of moral 
attitude to his past was obvious and necessitated no 
subtle question-begging explanations, but the last trace 
of this symbolical and moral significance was lost when 
immersion gave way to the sprinkling of a few drops 
of water on a morally unconscious infant. Already 
before the close of the first century (as in the Fourth 
Gospel) this process of the interpretation of the rite had 
set in which was to receive its full sacramentarian- 
magical expression in the syncretism of the third to 


RISE OF OFFICIALDOM I5I 


fifth centuries, which dominate the thinking of the 
present in the Christian Churches. 


The rise of officialdom and formalism must be re- 
garded as a contributory cause to the evolution of sacra- 
mentarianism. In the Christian Church as elsewhere 
'* Genius does what it must and Talent what it can."' 
When creativeness gives way to imitation, punctilious- 
ness in such imitation becomes a prime virtue. The 
imitator also probes into the theories and rules of the 
creator, forgetting that the latter was guided by inspira- 
tion and not by an elaborated theory. The original 
prophetic or apostolic ministry began at an early stage 
to be displaced by the official or administrative ministry, 
which naturally stressed order, uniformity and tradition, 
and magnified its authority, first, by assuming control 
of the administration of the religious rites of the Society, 
and secondly, by attributing enhanced, even eschato- 
logical, importance thereto, on the supposed authority 
of Jesus. The men who thus assumed control of the 
Society did so out of conscientious motives and from a 
sincere desire to maintain the faith unimpaired, even if 
reduced to a reproduction of the character of an assumed 
classic past and in the interest of a fictitious original 
uniformity. They were largely unconscious of the 
extent or the direction of the process of consolidation 
which they were conducting. Such a development was 
inevitable in a Church which was obliged to subsist 
longer than it had expected among ordinary earthly 
conditions; and such an administrative ministry was 
necessary to counter the aberrations arising out of 
the tense apocalyptic chiliasm* under which the 
earliest converts were secured and still more necessary 
to counter the greater aberrations of the psychological 
reactions of the second and subsequent generations due 

1 “ The dying down of the fervid inspiration of the first Christians, 
and the formation of a hard skeleton of creed and a crust of mystery 


and ritual, cannot be a pleasant thing to observe '" (Gardner, Growth 
of Christianity, p. 185). 


152 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM _ 


to the disappointments in regard to the so surely 
promised Parousia of the Lord. This delay necessitated 
giving more attention to matters of organization, dis- 
cipline and ritual. In these conditions, and with the 
increasing authority assigned to tradition, it was inevit- 
able that greater importance should be attached to the 
rites, and from such importance to the magical-mystic 
theory of them the step was easy and natural in the 
ancient world. The episcopos or overseer was at first 
mainly concerned with financial matters, but soon took 
over the office of the ‘ teacher ' and became the authority 
for doctrine, and thereafter assumed the office of priest 
as the dispenser of grace-conferring rituals and as the 
custodian of the kingdom of Heaven entrusted with the 
dread ' power of the Keys.' 


The so-called conversion of Constantine formed an 
epoch in the transition of Christianity into the form of 
a Mystery equipped with the requisite sacerdotal sacra- 
mental apparatus. Constantine turned the servants of 
the Church into priests and pontiffs in political succes- 
sion to the imperial pontiffs, whose chief function was 
public ceremonial with its impressive external effects. 
Constantine gave the priest the supremacy in the new 
faith, and the politics of the Empire became a formative 
factor in the creed and practices of the Church. Not 
only were the religions which were competing with 
Christianity for Graeco-Roman civilization intensely 
sacerdotal and scrupulously sacramentarian * and in- 
sistent on a disciplina arcani, but through Constantine's 
edict and the persecuting enactments of his successors 


1 “ The day is far distant when the mass of men will be capable of 
the austere mystic vision, which relies little on external ceremonies of 
worship. Certainly the last ages of paganism in the West were not ripe 
for any such reserved spirituality. And the religions which captivated 
the ages that preceded the triumph of the Catholic Church, while they 
strove to satisfy the deeper needs of the spirit, were more intensely 
sacerdotal, and more highly organized than the old religions of Greece 
and Rome ” (Dill, Roman Society from Nero, p. 610). 


CHRISTIANITY THE IMPERIAL RELIGION 153 


the whole sacerdotal system of the previous State religion 
of Rome and of the most successful of the Mysteries was 
taken over en bloc into the new State religion. The 
increasing love of pomp and ritual under the Empire 
had now to be catered for by the established Christian 
Church. And that religion—Mithraism—which was 
specially in the ascendant politically near the time of 
Constantine’s conversion, and which had been declared 
the State religion less than twenty years before Christi- 
anity succeeded to the same perilous status, was a 
sacerdotal-sacramentarian Mystery with its ‘ high Pontiff 
of Mithra,’ its ordo sacerdotum, its holy virgins, and its 
stern ascetics. 

The exclusiveness of the early Christian society as that 
of the spiritually elect out of a sinful world was now 
necessarily modified by the forcible opening of the doors 
of the Church by legislation and by the ‘ compelling ’ 
of Jews, Pagans and heretics ‘ to come in’; but such 
modification only accentuated its exclusiveness by 
magnifying the sacerdotal powers of those set apart to 
keep or to impart the ' secrets,’ and by stressing the 
magical-sacramentarian character of the rites of initia- 
tion, and the cult acts of communion. Its catholicity 
was co-extensive with its exclusiveness, whereby it 
became the great secret religious society of the Empire, 
persecuting and exterminating competing religious secret 
societies. 

The new principle of exclusiveness which had been 
introduced into the West by Orphism in the sixth century 
B.C., namely, that without initiation there can be no 
salvation or immortality, culminated in the Cyprianic 
‘ outside the Church no salvation,’ and admission into 
the Church in a world where God only knows the secret 
conditions of the heart was effected by baptismal rites 
according to the religious traditions of Paganism and 
Christianity. The original adult baptism gave place to 
the sprinkling of infants as soon after birth as possible 
lest the ‘ little ones ’ should by dying without the water- 


154 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


rite face a dread destiny in the next world. And the 
baptism of the blood-stained and utterly unscrupulous 
Christian emperor in extremis mortis was the forerunner 
of numerous other similar theurgical acts and magical 
expedients of escape from penalties hereafter. But as 
in the best ages of the Church, and even in the worst 
ages through spiritually-minded members, the moral 
earnestness of Christianity is never wholly silenced, so 
the conviction that purity is an inward disposition of 
soul restrained the Church from fully naturalizing the 
sacramentarian magic of its milieu during the first cen- 
turies and ever recalled it to the moral appeal of Jesus.” 


Esotericism.—While historic Christianity in some 
respects uncompromisingly set itself in opposition to the 
contemporary outlook and customs (e.g. on tolerance, 
sexual morality), in others it hastened to adapt itself to 
the religious fashions in vogue, and in thus becoming 
popular it lost something of the creative spirit of its 
Lord. One of these fashions which early intrigued it 
was the principle of esotericism in religion. To the 
ancient mind secrecy was an essential in a respectable 
religion—secrecy as to the correct name of the Deity, 
of the proper ritual of approach, of the method of 
initiation into membership, of the nature and the mode 
of working of the symbols, andso on. And this principle 


1 Cf. Loofs, Symbolik, p. 269. According to the Tridentine Cate- 
chism children dying unbaptized ''are born to eternal misery and 
perdition.’’ This awful injustice is somewhat ameliorated by the Jesuit 
scholar Bellarmine by locating such children in a higher part of Hell 
than Purgatory, so that the fire cannot reach them: ‘‘ est tamen com- 
munis opinio scholasticorum limbum puerorum esse in loco inferni 
altiore, quam sit Purgatorium,/ita ut ad eum ignis non perveniat ’’ (De 
Purgatorio, II. 6; ref. in F. J. Paul, Doctrinal Decrees of the Council 
of Trent, p. 21). 

? ' Auch wäre es leicht zu zeigen, wie bald die Kirche in ihrer 
Sakramentspraxis dem heidnischen Mysterienwesen verfallen ist. Aber 
So stark war das einmal eingepflanzte Element der sittlichen Forderung, 
der Reinheit der Seele, dass es sich in der katholischen Kirche auch 
neben der schlechten Sakramentspraxis behauptete '" (Harnack, Texte 
w. Unters. VIII. 4, p. 134). 


INVASION''OF ESOTERICISM 155 


of secrecy not only necessitated the existence of a select 
person or persons, charged with the observance and the 
impartation of the secret, but it aggrandized sacerdotal 
pretensions and gave added value to rites of initiation 
and rites of advance in degrees of membership. A 
hierophant was a person clothed with unique authority, 
on whom the present and future salvation of the non- 
initiated depended. The uninitiated might not have 
much to learn, and might have a limited understanding 
of their motives and actions, but however few or trite 
or traditional were the solemn words, they were fraught 
with significance as passwords to bliss. The mimetic 
or interpretative ritual might be difficult for a thought- 
ful person to explain, except by a liberal allegorism such 
as Plutarch applies to the offensive items of the Osiris- 
Isis cult, but it was by agelong theory the gate to 
salvation. A certain religious habit of mind was en- 
gendered which affected Christians in the formulation 
of a new religion in an esoteric milieu, and disposed 
them toward a strange romanticism under the charm 
of the antique in religion. 

It is one of the many striking phenomena in the 
evolution of historic Christianity that a religion which 
was at first preached by Jesus ' with authority ' to the 
understanding of the common people, and brought 
within their apprehension, ' for without a parable spake 
He not unto them,’ which proclaimed its secrets to the 
unchurched classes and outcasts, and offered its Beati- 
tudes to peasants and fisher-folk and day-labourers, and 
of which an early apologist declared ' brief and concise 
were His discourses, for He was no sophist, but His word 
was the power of God,’ * should so rapidly ? accept the 


1 Justin, Apol. I. 14, 11. 

? *'* Just as the Gospel courts publicity, so its scope is universal... . 
There is nothing esoteric in the teachings of Jesus from first to last. 
It is one of the great and comforting features in His character that love 
of mystery and aristocratic self-sufficiency are alike alien to Him. Hence 
Christianity and the Mysteries are mutually exclusive '" (Wernle, 
Beginnings of Christianity, II. 124). 


156 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


prevailing mode of a disciplina arcani—so rapidly, for in 
the earliest Gospel the writer, without being conscious 
of any incongruity and without reference to other cor- 
rective statements of his own, represents Jesus as justify- 
ing Himself in one of the most lucid of the parables 
thus: ‘ To you is given the mystery of the kingdom of 
God, but to outsiders everything is imparted in parables 
that they may see and not perceive, that they may hear 
and not understand, lest they should be converted and 
be forgiven ' (Mark iv. rr). Christianity began with 
Mystery as something not concealed, but as something 
once concealed and now revealed to all or revealed as 
far as possible.! At first Christians were not pledged 
to secrecy even concerning their mysteria—a noted dif- 
ference from the adherents of the Mysteries. The first 
Apologies intended for the public, such as those of 
Justin, not only speak without reserve of the Christian 
doctrines and sacraments, but challenge their opponents 
to ‘ study our religion; you will be convinced how little 
reason we have for avoiding light. Indeed, Justin's 
frank and welcome description? of the Christian 
Eucharist about the middle of the second century should 
not have been penned by an apologist of the succeeding 
century. 

By the second century the existence of an esoteric and 
an exoteric type of Christianity was beginning to be 
recognized ° and is distinctly evident in Origen and 
Tertullian. The evolution was probably inevitable—due 
to the natural differences manifested by catechumens in 
their training, the rise of the official ministry over the 
prophetic, the organization of Christianity as an exclusive 
society, the contemporary postulate of the value of the 
secret, the differentiation between catechumens and 
initiated, the effect of persecutions and the refusal of 
the State to recognize Christianity as religio licita (which 
forced Christians to hold secret meetings and live as it 


* Cf. Chrysostom, ad 1 Cor. vii. 2. * Apol. I, ch. 65 f. 
3 Cf. Hatch, Influence of Greek Ideas, p. 293. 


ORIGEN ON RELIGIOUS SECRECY 157 


were underground and to guard their scriptures and 
rites), together with certain scriptural references, such 
as that cited above from Mark's Gospel and Paul's 
reference to the distinction of spiritual nourishment as 
milk for babes and food for the maturer, and such a 
logion as 'cast not your pearls before swine.’ But 
Paganism was the chief tutor of Christianity in the 
mysterious values of esoterics.! Stobaeus ? lays down 
the principle: ‘ the mystical secrecy of the rites renders 
the divine more awesome by imitating this nature which 
eludes our comprehension. Hence the value of the 
“secret ' was highly prized and the obligation to secrecy 
was strictly observed.? 

Celsus's first objection against Christianity was as a 
system of ‘ secret societies,’ which Origen does not deny 
but proceeds to justify the co-existence of esoteric and 
exoteric Christianity after the example of philosophies 
and the customs of the Mysteries.* The same advocate 
of esotericism elsewhere ? dilates on the purport of scrip- 
ture with its ‘ mysterious economies,’ which explain such 
tales as the intercourse of Lot with his daughters, and 
the two wives of Jacob and his two slave-girls who 
became mothers of patriarchs. Because of the ineffable 
mysteries, individual readers make serious mistakes 
without the ‘ key of knowledge,’ which is mainly deft- 
ness with allegory. Of a threefold character are scrip- 
tural ideas; the common man is edified by the ' flesh ’ 
of scripture, the more advanced or psychic by the ' soul ' 
of scripture, and the ‘ perfect ' by the spiritual things. 
As God has compounded man of body, soul and spirit, 
so He has ordered the scripture according to the same 


1 Ammonius, Origen's teacher in philosophy, refused to commit his 
doctrines to writing and imposed a promise on his students not to 
divulge his secret teachings. 

2 X. 3, 9, P. 467. 

* Cf. Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 77; Graillot, Culte de Cybéle, 
p. 175; and ‘ tu pius mystes sacris teletis reperta mentis arcano premis,’ 
C ch x779.d. 

1 Origen, C. Celsum, I. 1, I. 7. 5 De Prin. IV. 9-20 (IV, 2, 4). 

I2 


158 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


arrangement for the salvation of man. Certain passages 
are fraught with a ‘ corporeal,’ others with a ‘soul ’ or 
psychic sense, and others contain the very spirit. The 
possession of the Spirit enables one to sit loose to history 
and to historical interpretation. Origen carried his 
principle of esoteric explanation so far as to affirm that 
certain Christian secrets should not lightly be committed 
to writing for fear of being divulged: thus ‘ it is not 
without danger to commit to writing the elucidation of 
such things, inasmuch as the masses do not need 
more teaching than that concerning the punishment of 
sinners.’ * 

Clement, Origen’s teacher and predecessor, accepts 
the same cleavage of a common and a secret Christi- 
anity. He quotes a logion ? of Jesus from an apocryphal 
gospel, ‘ My mystery is for Me and for the sons of My 
house.’ He describes,? for example, the two kinds of 
knowledge corresponding to milk diet and flesh diet, 
blood ‘ being as it were liquid flesh.’ He adopts the 
Greek analogy of the Lesser and Greater Mysteries to 
the Christian discipline. 

The Gnostics vied with the orthodox Church in main- 
taining the principle of secrecy. The first charge brought 
by Epiphanius against his opponents is their ‘ hiding 
in silence their unspeakable mysteries.’ ^ Tertullian ? 
brings a like charge against the Valentinians. The 
Gnostics differed from their orthodox brethren only in 
bringing their cult earlier and more thoroughly into 
alignment with the Mysteries and in the success with 
which they established secret, aristocratic, sacramental 
societies, the entrance into which was zealously guarded. 
To a greater extent than they were conscious of, the 
Christian officials were influenced by the Mysteries, 
especially in their ideas as to the character and efficacy 


HEVI ZO, 2 Str. V. 10, 63; cf. Clem. Homilies, XIX, 20. 
Paed: 1L: 16139: 
* Phil. I pro (Cruice, pp. 2-3). ‘‘ Yet this very Secrecy was natur- 


alized in the Church ’’ (Hatch, ib. 293). 
5 C. Valent. 1. 


 AESTHETIC-RELIGIOUS CRAVINGS 159 


of sacraments, and in the ordinary ranks of the laity 
this influence was all the more subtle because of the 
facility with which converts from Pagan mystery- 
societies would carry over their magic-sacramental ideas 
and esoterics into the service of the Lord Jesus. 

One cannot overlook historically the propagandist 
value for the early Christian mission of the possession 
of such occult holy lore guarded by Christian hiero- 
 phants, ‘the mystagogues of the secret Mysteries,’ 
endued with more terrible prerogatives over their fellow- 
men here and hereafter than their Pagan predecessors 
and contemporaries and operating in connexion with 
sacraments ensuring salvation and delivering from 
devils.' 


Moreover, Christianity spread in a world of Paganism 
with deep-rooted artistic-religious cravings, and not in 
the mother-soil of Judaism, which was indifferent to 
plastic and pictorial art. The Mediterranean world, 
tutored by the Greeks in aestheticism, sought the satisfac- 
tion of sensuous impulses in worship. The aestheticism 
of Graeco-Roman Paganism lived on in Christianity, the 
love of a well-ordered impressive ceremonial and a liturgy 
appealing to the imagination through the senses. It was 
a world which pressed art, plastic and pictorial and 
choregic, into the service of religion. Ritual was the 
bridge between art and religion, and as the taste for 
art was too innate to be exorcised by early Christian 
puritanism, ritual was greatly esteemed. The import- 
ance of this factor is borne out by the observation that 
the old lands of Graeco-Roman culture are those which 
cherish the rich and elaborate ceremonial of the Greek 


1 '' Tt is beyond question that this aspect of Christianity, which went 
on developing almost from the very hour of its birth, proved of the 
highest moment to the propaganda of the religion. Christianity 
acquired a special weight from the fact that in the first place it had 
mysterious secrets of its own, which it sought to fathom only to adore 
them once again in silence, and secondly, that it preached to the perfect 
in another and a deeper sense than it did to simple folk '' (Harnack, 
Expansion, I, p. 289). 


160 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


Church and of Rome, while the northern lands are 
satisfied with a simpler form of worship. 

If the religion of Greece was one in which Beauty 
was consecrated in worship and the sensuous represented 
in rich symbolism, that of Rome was concrete and 
materialistic. It consisted largely in things done, cult 
acts performed to a crowded, sacred calendar and to 
the most meticulous ritual. Because of the more solid 
qualities of Roman character, Roman religion was more 
strongly institutionalized in static forms which survived 
tenaciously; the Romans never turned criticism so re- 
lentlessly on their religion as did the Greeks. Roman 
cult and ritual were never supplemented in Roman life 
with anything corresponding to Greek philosophy or the 
richness of Greek mythology. Hence Roman religion, 
intellectually barren, tended to become and remained 
statuesque and external, unimaginative and materialistic, 
dignifed, while overburdened by ceremonialism and 
picturesque formalism, and never hospitable to change 
like that of the Greeks. Roman religion bequeathed 
to its imperial successor the deep interest in a cult, the 
importance of accuracy in the routine of ritual, the con- 
ception of religion as a mode of political power, the 
appeal of rich vestments and stately processions, and 
the value of organization against centrifugal forces of 
thought and questioning of authority. '' As materialism 
crept into the sacraments through the influence of 
Asia, so materialism crept into ritual through Roman 
influence.” * 

Art was perhaps more certain to be accompanied by 
devotion than by morality. The gorgeous processions 
that wound their way to sacred shrines or through the 
streets of the Graeco-Roman cities did not cease; they 
merely changed their banners and some of their symbols, 
but generally retained their costumes and their festive 
moods. Greece, which made such a strong impression 
on the creeds of the new faith, was still vital enough, 

* Gardner, Growth of Christianity, p. 150. 


GREEK AESTHETICISM 161 


even amid the loss of nerve and the tyranny of 
asceticism, to impart somewhat of its message of Beauty 
and a sensuous response thereto, and its characteristic 
alliance of art and religion. More particularly was this 
so when after the conversion of Constantine the Christian 
Church was augmented by hosts of Pagans, because it 
was the State religion and because of its repressive 
measures towards other faiths, and the confiscation of 
Pagan ecclesiastical endowments. The long-established 
habits of seeking a religion interpreting itself in action 
and mimetic rite and symbol and in mythos rather than 
in creed and philosophy persisted, and the thirst for 
satisfaction of the aesthetic tastes abetted picturesque 
ritual; which necessitated a clerical succession to the 
venerable priesthoods that had so long and so excellently 
catered to aestheticism. In Greek lands, and especially 
in country districts, to this day, one can at special 
seasons of the Church calendar easily transport himself 
back over the centuries and witness the genius of ancient 
Greece for supplementing her metaphysical interpreta- 
tion of religion by an interpretation in festive ceremonial 
and mimetic aestheticism.? And Greek aestheticism had 
long been acclimatized or at least imitated in Roman 
ritual, and was supplemented by Roman love of display. 
The penchant of the Roman mind for pageantry, festive 
religion, and processions,? the poverty of Roman 
mythology, and the ingrained desire of Rome for an 
imposing State religion as a mode of political power, 
disposed the Romans towards borrowed ceremonial. 
The thirst for pageantry and processions grew apace 

1 Cf. Hatch, Influence of Greek Ideas, p. 309. 

? For the Epiphany as the Christian development or adaptation of 
the Parousia festival of Dionysos, cf. Usener, Das Weihnachtsfest, VII. 

* “ Meaningless as they were, the stately processions remained, and 
could be watched with pride by the patriotic Roman all through the 
period of the Empire until the Roman Church adapted them to its own 
ritual and gave them . . . a new meaning. As the cloud-shadows move 
“slowly over the hollows of the Apennines, so does the procession of 


the patron saint pass still through the streets of many an Italian city '' 
— (Fowler, Religious Experience of the Roman People, p. 218). 


162 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


under the Empire, to meet which religious and other 
spectacles were multiplied. 

Another cause decidedly favourable to the elabora- 
tion of a supernatural machinery of rite and the 
materialization of the Christian sacraments into what 
they became toward the end of the Pagan supremacy 
and through the Dark Ages and what they are to the 
majority of the Christians to-day was the passing of 
Platonism and the coming of the long reign of Aristo- 
telianism in the Christian Church. The impetus given 
to dialectics, the advances in biology, and the original 
and fruitful metaphysical work of Aristotle were gains 
dearly bought at the price of the arrest of the brilliant 
and promising career of Greek science, for which the 
authority of Aristotle may rightly be held responsible.* 
Had Aristotle retained Plato's predilection for mathe- 
matics and interest in astronomical studies, the whole 
course of Christian theology, especially of the sacra- 
ments, would have been far other than it has been. Had 
Aristotle understood more intimately his master's mys- 
tical craving, which sought something deeper than 
intellectual satisfaction and security, the history of 
Christian mysticism would have been different—and 
saner. Platonism in alliance with Stoicism was supreme 
during the centuries of the heroic struggle and victory 
of Christianity, but Aristotelian realism ? came in from 
the end of the fifth century onwards, and for a thousand 
years ''the Master of them that know '" dominated 
Christian thought. He was the master of the keen 
scholastic intellects with their brilliant dialectic. To this 


' Prof. A. E. Taylor in his last book on Plato (Comm. on Plato's 
Timaeus) has much to say on this topic in commending tbe Pytha- 
gorean and Platonic combination of ' mathematics’ with philosophy: 
“Pythagorean and Academic science was moving as directly in the 
direction of Galileo and Newton as in that of Copernicus and Kepler, 
and it is a tragedy of the human intellect that Aristotle and the Stoics 
with their crude Ionian prepossessions were able to arrest the tendency 
as thoroughly as they did ” (p. 441). 

? Westcott, Religious Thought in the West, p. 222. 


LONG REIGN OF ARISTOTELIANISM 163 


day Aristotle remains the master philosopher in the 
theology of the Roman Church, especially through 
Aquinas, in whom one can detect the constant conflict 
for authority between these rival philosophies of Plato 
and Aristotle, in which, however, the logic of Aristotle 
wins. Had Aquinas, the last great representative theo- 
logian of united Western Christianity, sought to Christi- 
anize Plato, as he so successfully Christianized Aristotle, 
the division between Western Christianity to-day would 
not be so acute. Under Aristotelian categories only 
could the typically Western doctrine of Transubstantia- 
tion have evolved. Outside the Roman Church his 
supremacy has been and is increasingly disputed by 
Platonism. 

In the early centuries even the idealism of Plato could 
not prevent the, Christian rites from being assimilated 
to their Pagan analogues, but it did prevent the literaliz- 
ing and materializing * of them by ever keeping open 
a door of escape from the accidental, individual and 
corporeal to the Form or Idea. But when Aristotle in- 
augurated on its long history the distinction between 
substance and accident, a new weapon had been forged 
for miraculous realism. 

And as Latin Christianity parted company with Greek 
Christianity and lost touch with the humanism and more 
comprehensive breadth of view of the Greek Fathers, 
the domination of Aristotle was strengthened by the 
character of the Western mind, which, not being philo- 
sophically inclined, formulated its doctrine with a crude 
concreteness. The transcendental ideas and sublime 
abstractions of Greek thought took on under the Latin 
genius the character of magical realism and super- 
naturalism resting upon an ultimate mysterious divine 
fiat and a palpable theurgy. Greek science was dead 
and modern science not yet born: neither philosophy 
nor theology had yet parted company with mythology. 
Mystagogic theology held the field and fostered sacra- 

1 Cf. Inge, Contentio Veritatis, pp. 292-9. 


164 ENTRY OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


mental magic in ever coarser and more extravagant 
forms of theurgy. The sacraments have not yet re- 
covered from their implication in the barbarization of 
Europe on the passing of classical culture. When 
Christianity adopted the Pagan basilica, it took over 
much of its furniture and practices. 


CHAPTER X 


THE EVOLUTION OF MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL IDEAS 
AND USAGES 


THE progressive materialization of the Christian sacra- 
ments cannot be assigned directly to any of the above- 
mentioned causes or to the conjunction of them all, or 
perhaps even to the direct influence of the Mysteries, 
but rather to the whole ancient mentality ;* to the retreat 
of the Jewish influence and the preponderant influence 
of Pagans who from the damnosa haereditas of Con- 
stantine were transferred by legislation from Pagan 
conventicles into the Christian ecclesia with their Pagan 
ideas and practices ; and to the difficulty of maintaining 
the spirituality of large and mixed masses at the high 
fervour of the first missionary preaching. 

At the cost of millennia of experimentation it was 
brought home to man that ‘ God is not to be worshipped 
with bulls but with a devout and righteous will,’ ? and it 
will require millennia yet adequately to realize that 
‘neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem shall ye 
worship the Father, or that God has no decided 
preferences for one mode or tradition of cult-acts above 
another. 

There were among the ancients, as among ourselves, 
two main ways of approach to the Deity, though not 
necessarily exclusive: the path of intuition and reflexion, 
in which spirit to spirit speaks and reason unites with 


1 “ For the materialization of the sacraments we need seek no origin 
but the constitution of human nature. The mass of mankind tends to 
be materialistic, dominated by that which is seen and felt, unable to 
recognize spiritual truth unless it is incorporated in some material 
vehicle " (Gardner, Growth of Christianity, p. 178). 

? * Colitur Deus non tauris sed pia et recta voluntate ' (Seneca, Ep. 
95). Cf. Iamblichus, Protr. II, p. xo, ed. Pistelli. 

165 


166 MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL USAGES 


its source, and the path offered by institutional religion 
in cult forms and outward acts which symbolize or typify 
or convey inward benefits. The former path is taken by 
the mystic and the philosopher ; the latter by the masses 
of men who find fasting easier than concentration or 
contemplation and prefer visibility even in spiritual 
experiences and crave for something material in religion. 

One fact should never be allowed to drop out of sight 
in considering the history of Christian sacramentarianism. 
While the sacraments took their rise within Jewish 
traditions and from Jewish cult rites, it was on Pagan 
soil and under Hellenistic traditions and mysticism that 
they acquired their premier place in the life of the 
Church. This is of course but one aspect of the rupture 
of early Christianity with Judaism, the failure of Christi- 
anity to gain a secure footing on its native soil, and its 
amazing success on Gentile soil. But the bearing of 
this epochal transition or change of fulcrum upon the 
evolution of sacramentarianism is not always adequately 
recognized. 

It should not therefore be overlooked that the early 
house-churches of Christianity developed into the 
Catholic Church under the dominance of Gentile (Greek- 
Oriental) Christianity,! and that the end of the second 
century and the third century was the era of consolida- 
tion of Christian doctrine under Clement and Origen 
under whom Christianity was taken into the category 
of Mystery-Religions, and that the organization of the 
Catholic Church was largely the creation of the genius 
of Cyprian, who was a firm believer in magic. Cyprian 
cites four examples ? of the elements of the sacrament 


1 “Tt was inevitable that Hellenic religion should leave a deep 
impression upon earlier and later Christianity; partly because the reli- 
gious temper of the Greek world, throughout the centuries immediately 
preceding the adoption of Christianity, was more powerful and fervid 
than it had been in the days of Homer or Pericles, and mainly because 
Hellenic converts became the pillars of the Church’? (Farnell, Evolu- 
tion of Religion, p. 23). 

SeeeDeULapsis, 25, 26; 


SUPERNATURAL QUALITIES IN ELEMENTS 167 


partaken unworthily ; one on the inability of a little girl 
to consume the elements of the sacrament after she had 
eaten the demon-charged food offered to idols. In 
another instance a woman, surreptitiously partaking of 
the elements, * received not food but a sword ' and suf- 
fered from internal convulsions. Another woman sought 
‘ with unclean hands to open the box in which was the 
holy thing [body] of the Lord, and was prevented by 
fire breaking forth from it, so that she dare not touch 
it.’ Again, a man unworthily participating received 
from the priest the elements, which turned to cinders 
in his hand. 

Such language presented no difficulties to Pagans. In 
several of the Mystery-Religions baptism was the means 
to the remission * of the penalties of sin, and of regenera- 
tion. The baptism of the taurobolium was valid for 
twenty years, only the idea of baptism in certain 
Christian circles being able to surpass this as conferring 
an indelible character. Initiation in the Orphic brother- 
hoods delivered from ‘ the wearisome painful wheel ' of 
reincarnation, and resulted in deification. The sacra- 
mental meal of the Mysteries had almost the vogue in 
popular religion which the Eucharist enjoys to-day in 
Christian circles, and it offered the same wide field of 
speculation as to its blessings and modes of operation. 

It is but aslight transition from this world of 
sacramental efficacies to Christian sacramental grace. 
Ignatius ? views the Eucharist as ' the medicine of im- 
mortality ’ and ‘ the antidote against death’ and the 
guarantee to Christians of their resurrection. Irenaeus * 
proves the incorruptibility of Christian flesh by appealing 
to participation in the Eucharistic meal, in the elements 
of which Christ is present far other than symbolically or 
spiritually, in a way which conserves material bodies. 
Similarly, but with less realism, Gregory of Nyssa * holds 

1 Cf, Tertullian, De Bapt. 5; Adv. Haer. 40. ? Eph. 20. 


3 Adv. Haer. IV. 18, 4 f. 
* Cat. Or. 37 (ed. J. H. Srawley). 


168 MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL USAGES . 


‘God the Word ' ‘ blending Himself with the bodies of 
believers, to secure that by this union with the immortal, 
man too may be a sharer in incorruption.' 

The magical power or physical efficacy of baptism is 
startlingly prominent in Tertullian. For example, it 
seems to him a perverse and amazing thing that one 
should regard the * attainment of immortality ' through 
immersion in water and the repetition of a few words 
as incredible. ‘ Surely we cannot wonder that death is 
abolished by the laver.' He essays to treat ' regenera- 
tion by water ' and the supernatural powers infused into 
the ‘ water of the sacrament,’ and tells how the waters 
after the invocation acquire the sacrament of sanctifica- 
tion by the Spirit immediately descending from heaven 
and sanctifying them for Himself and thereby imparting 
to them the power of sanctification. Through the super- 
natural medicinal qualities of the consecrated waters 
and angelic agency the spirit is corporeally cleansed and 
the flesh spiritually cleansed.* He prudentially recom- 
mends the postponement of baptism because of the 
mortal danger attendant on post-baptismal sins, previous 
sins being left behind in the laver. Clement? of 
Alexandria sees in baptism ' healing medicine,’ masévov 
$ápuakov. Gregory of Nyssa ° says categorically, ‘I affirm 
that it is impossible apart from the laver-regeneration 
for a man to have part in the Resurrection,’ and he 
attributes immortality-bestowing qualities to the bap- 
tismal waters. He also describes baptism as muesis 
(initiation). Hippolytus * assigns to the Christian rite 
the mortality-removing powers familiar in the contem- 
porary Mysteries: man by becoming * immortal becomes 
also God,’ and he is ‘ rendered God [divine] by water 
and the Holy Spirit.’ And Cyril * of Jerusalem declares 
‘partaking of the body and blood of Christ, that you 


De Bapt. 2-6. 2 Paed. I. 6, 29. 

Or. Cat. Mag. 35, dixa rijs karà rò Xovrpüv dvaryerioews. 

On Holy Theophany, 8. Cf. Gregory of Nyssa, Cat. Or. 37 above. 
Catech. 3. 


1 
3 
4 
5 


VICARIOUS OPERATION OF RITES 169 


may become concorporate and consanguineous with 
Him ; for thus we become Christophori by His body and 
blood entering into our members.’ Origen * affirms that 
the invocation of the name of Jesus even by worthless 
men may be potent for exorcism. He shares with his 
contemporaries their unquestioning belief in magic and 
admits the efficacy of incantations according to secret 
formulae. Methodius remarks on the repetition of the 
passion by the indwelling Christ, ‘ for not otherwise could 
the Church continually conceive believers and bear them 
anew through the bath of regeneration, unless Christ 
were repeatedly to die, emptying Himself for the sake 
of each individual.’ ? 

This sacramental religion was not confined to the 
orthodox. The apostle John ? by prayer and breaking 
of bread accomplished the death of the impenitent 
Fortunatus after he had been restored from the dead 
to his wife Drusiana, so that John could say, ‘ Thou 
hast thy child, O Devil’; whereupon follows: ‘ John 
therefore was with the brethren rejoicing in the Lord.’ 
Another instance: ‘ Now they brought to Paul [in Rome] 
bread and water for the sacrifice, when Rufina, an 
adulteress, appeared ‘ to receive the Eucharist of God,’ 
and at Paul’s rebuke she collapsed.* 

The magical character of sacral rites is better revealed 
in their vicarious potencies in the beliefs of Jews, Pagans 
and Christians. The noble Judas, when his soldiers died 
so heroically but, alas ! in such mortal sin—symbols and 
tokens of the idols of Jamnia being found on their bodies 
—took up a collection and sent it to Jerusalem to make 
a sin-offering on behalf of their resurrection ; ‘ wherefore 
he made a thorough atonement on behalf of the dead that 
their sins might be discharged.’ ? Plato * tells of Orphic 


1 C. Celsum, I. 6, I. 22-4. 

2 Cited Inge, Christian Mysticism, p. roo. 

3 Acts of John, 73 (James, Apoc. N.T. p. 246). 

* Acts of Peter (Vercelli), 2 (James, p. 304 f.). 

5 2 Macc. xii. 38 ff. $ Rep. II. 364. 


170 MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL USAGES 


rites extending to the dead, and we read of Dionysiac 
rites performed for those who died unhouseled: < They 
will perform rites aiming at the deliverance of godless 
ancestors.’ 1 Even in the imposing ritual of the tauro- 
bolium, bath in bull's blood, substitutes were possible as 
surrogates for non-initiates.? 

Examples among Christians are more striking. Paul, 
so far from rebuking, founds an argument upon the 
vicarious baptisms for the dead at Corinth. As these 
rites had a tremendous eschatological value, it is not 
surprising that the custom spread. Thus Chrysostom ? 
tells us of the Marcionites: ' Whenever any of the 
catechumens among them dies, they conceal the living 
under the bed of the dead and then approach the dead 
and talk with him and inquire if he wishes to receive 
baptism. Then when he makes no reply, the one con- 
cealed replies for him that he wishes to be baptized, 
and so they baptize him in the stead of the dead.' The 
Cerinthian Gnostics had the same rite which they 
practised as ‘ tradition,’ ^ and Tertullian knows of the 
same practice. In his treatise On the Resurrection of 
the Flesh he comments with approval on ‘ vicarious 
baptism ' as being ' beneficial to the flesh of another 
with a view to the resurrection ' and as being meaning- 
less ‘unless bodies thus baptized rise again.’ ? 
Epiphanius bitterly attacks Aerius for disparaging rites 
and prayers for the dead, the heretic’s objection being 
on the moral ground that such practices would encourage 
the living to adopt the easier method of securing good 
friends, even by payment of a fee, to attend to their 


> Abel, Orph., fr. 208, öpyia r’ éxredécover Adow mpo'yóvov àbepiorwv 
padpevor, 

2 Cf. Anrich, Das Antike Mysterienwesen, p. 120. For an interesting 
vicarious blood-baptism (taurobolium) of one priest on behalf of another, 
vide Réville, Religion à Rome, p. 96. 

3 Cat, 310. 

* Epiph. Haer. 28, 6. 

5 48. Cf. De Corona 3, ‘ oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis, annua 
die facimus." 


PAGAN PROTESTS AGAINST RELIGIOUS MAGIC}: 171 


eternal safety after death.' In Africa the Montanists ad- 
ministered both baptism and the Eucharist to the dead.’ 
That the practice was far from confined to heretics is 
attested by the regulation of the Council of Carthage 
in 397: ‘item placuit, ut corporibus defunctorum 
eucharistia non detur . . . deinde cavendum est, ne 
mortuos etiam baptizari posse fratrum infirmitas credat.’ 
In Hermas baptism is not merely an absolute condition 
of salvation for the living, but for the saints under the 
Old Covenant because it blotted out all prior sins.’ 

It should be noted that Pagan protests were registered 
against ex opere operato virtues from at least four cen- 
turies before Christ. The Orphics had a proverb based 
on bitter experience of human frailty, ‘ Many are the 
thyrsus-bearers, but few the mystae.' Plato * protests 
vehemently against the religious charlatans who, appeal- 
ing to scriptures of Musaeus. and Orpheus, profess by 
means of sacrifices, incantations and Mysteries, to 
procure absolution both for living and dead, and, for 
a monetary consideration, to make due amends for the 
misdeeds of a man's ancestors, and even, ' at a trifling 
cost, to sell indulgences to those who intend to inflict 
an injury upon a detested victim, whether good or 
wicked. His protest rests on the fact that these things 
cannot affect character and they give wrong impressions 
to serious-minded young men. After such sacraments 
men live lives contemptible here and after death enjoy 
* an eternity of carouse.' Like a true Greek, he calls on 
man to ‘ adorn the soul in her own jewels—self-restraint, 
justice, courage, nobility and truth. Arrayed in these, 
the soul is prepared for her journey to the Underworld 
when her time comes.’ And again, the man who ‘ fixes 
his gaze upon truth ' lives honourably, virtuously, and 
can suffer no evil.’ 


1 Panarion, III. Haer. 75; Oehler, Corpus Haeresiologicum, II, pt. I, 
p. 180; p. 907, Petav. 

2 Philastrius, Haer. 49. 5 Sim. IX. 16. 

4 Rep. II. 364a-365a. 5 Gorgias, 527d. 


172 MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL USAGES 


Plutarch? represents Diogenes, on hearing of 
Sophocles' threefold beatitude of the initiated, as trench- 
antly asking: ' Shall Pataikion, the brigand, have a 
fairer lot in death because he received the sacrament 
than Epaminondas ? ' and Diogenes Laertius ? represents 
the same Cynic, when invited by the Athenians to accept 
initiation at Eleusis, as replying, ‘ It would be absurd 
that Aegesilaus and Epaminondas should lie in mud 
{in the lower world] while some vile wretches, because 
of initiation, should enjoy the Islands of the Blessed.’ ° 

A Pythian oracle * declared ‘ the temples of the gods 
stand open for all good men: there is no need of 
purification, for no stain can cleave to goodness. But 
avaunt, whosoever is baneful of heart, for thy soul 
will never be cleansed by the cleansing of the body.’ 
And the Saviour of Epidauros maintained, ‘ within the 
incense-filled shrine one must be pure, and purity is to 
have righteous thoughts.’ ? 

Even Ovid * protests against the externality of sacra- 
ments : 


' Omne nefas omnemque mali purgamina causam 
Credebant nostri tollere posse senes. 

Graecia principium moris fuit; illa nocentes 
Impia lustratos ponere facta putat 

O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis 
Fluminea tolli posse putetis aqua.' 


Epictetus ’ emphasizes the preparation of sacrifice and 
prayer, of bodily and inward purification before 
approaching the Eleusinian Mysteries, and scoffs at the 
idea that ‘ the words have a holy power within them- 
selves.’ Philo testifies: ‘If often happens that good 


» De Audiendis Poetis, 4 (21 F). 2 VI. 39. 

3 Julian (Orat. VII, 239 B.c.) adds: ' Because he observed that the 
one who recommended initiation neglected uprightness in his life while 
setting great store by his initiation’; and ‘ Initiation is for those who 
have lived worthily of it,’ and ‘ No advantage comes to the wicked, 
though they gain access into the inner shrine.' 

* Anth. Pal. XIV. 74 (Farnel's tr. Evolution, p. 138). 

5 Wilamowitz-Móllendorf, Isyllos, 6. 

6 Fasti, II. 35 ff. Ti Dissc Lien: 


PRIMITIVE CHRISTIAN MENTALITY 173 


men are not initiated, but that robbers and murderers 
and base women are, if they pay cash to the initiators 
and hierophants. The ancients were confronted with 
the same practical enigma about sacral operations as 
moderns when they observed that some who had par- 
ticipated in the sacraments (Pagan or Christian) led 
lives of questionable worth, while others who took no 
sacraments or sat loose to them, lived irreproachable 
lives. Origen ' regretted that ' not all those who are 
bathed [baptized] in water are forthwith bathed in the 
Holy Spirit.' 

So great is the gulf between the mentality ? of the 
Graeco-Roman world and ours that the early Christians 
would hardly recognize any of our sacraments (not even 
the Roman Mass nor the mysterious rites of the modern 
religious romantics). Even the Roman Church may be 
said to have maintained the early realism and thorough- 
going opus operatum credence more in theory than in 
practice: the lessons of its mystics have not been lost 
upon it. And now, lest magic should perish from 
Christianity, the romantics born out of due season are 
coming in ever-increasing numbers to its rescue. His- 
torically the early Christians who first practised our 
sacraments and later elaborated them would repudiate 
our ideas of sacraments as symbols, even if we omit 
the word “‘ mere’’ before symbols. Such modern 
“ symbolism ’’ would have to ancient minds annihilated 


! Hom. in Num. III. 1. 

* Loofs, in art. Abendmahl in Realencyk., 3rd ed. I, p. 41, quotes 
the striking paragraph from Strauss’s Leben Jesu: ''For the writers 
of our Gospels the Bread in the Supper was the Body of Christ; but if 
one had asked them whether the Bread was changed, they would have 
denied it; if one had spoken to them of a partaking of the Body with 
and under the Bread, they would not have understood it: if one had 
inferred that the Bread means or represents the Body, they would not 
have been satisfied with that." Loofs’s comment on this is: ‘‘ So 
far as concerns the writers of our Gospels, these words are scarcely 
quite true: but they apply mutatis mutandis to the Fathers of the old 
Catholic Church ’’ (from F. J. Paul, Doctrinal Decrees of the Council 
of Trent, p. 24). 


I3 


174 MAGICAL-SACRAMENTAL USAGES 


the ' mystery ' or prevented it from imparting its 
blessings.! They would likewise unanimously repudiate 
all ideas of the Eucharist as merely a memorial of 
redemption. They would likewise probably disagree 
with all of us in making the Eucharist the major sacra- 
ment. Neither could they conceive fellowship here or 
elsewhere with those many Christians who do not accept 
Church sacraments, nor with those still more numerous 
Christians who accept them because of tradition and 
ancestral sentiment, but with the minimum of belief in 
or the maximum of doubt about their efficacies. And 
in no Church would they easily discover the thorough- 
going supernaturalism ? in which Christianity took its 
rise. 

There was a continuity in the historic and psycho- 
logical reactions between the Paganism and the Christi- 
anity which was recruited out of it. The Gnostics, who 
once represented half the Christian Church, differed 
from what became the orthodox Catholic Church in the 
greater zeal with which they laboured to combine Pagan 
and Christian practices and metaphysics. It was, 
generally speaking, religious-minded Pagans who became 
Christians, and they could not leave behind them their 
habits of thought. Dominant ideas or deeply-rooted 
primitive conceptions in one religion do not vanish in 
its successor, particularly on the same soil geographic- 
ally. Such ideas either take a new life and enter upon 
a more extensive career or, if lopped off by the new 
religion, while their roots are deep in the same soil they 
produce a plentiful growth of saplings. For example, 
the Mediterranean Maid-Mother,? by imparting her 
prestige and garments to the Virgin-Mother, has exer- 
cised a colossal influence in historical Christianity. The 
lineage of the ancient ‘ holy butcher ' with his concrete 


* Cf. Sakramente in Rel. in Gesch. u. Geg. V. p. 210. 
2 Cf. Holtzmann, Neutest. Theologie, 1, p. 114. 
3 Vide Usener, Religionsgesch. Unters. p. 27 f.; Farnell, Evolution, 


P. 34 f. 


HISTORICAL CONTINUITY 175 


mentality has not become extinct. Or the dogma of 
apostolic succession, mostly physical and material in 
Graeco-Roman lands, has been refined in Christianity 
into semi-material; one may say quasi-spiritual not- 
withstanding its questionably spiritual working. Yet 
Christian sacramentarianism, though of the same genus 
as Pagan sacramentarianism, was widely different, above 
all in two phases: (1) the historical reality in the myth 
of its most frequent sacrament, and (2) the emphasis 
on concomitant morality due to the heritage of Judaism 
and the native spirit of Christianity. The early mystical- 
ethical connexion established by Paul was never quite 
lost in the process of either transcendentalizing or of 
materializing. There was a continuity in permutation 
in Christian sacramentarianism from the simple rites of 
the common meal and breaking of bread of the first 
Jerusalem Churches to the sacraments and their doc- 
trinal position in Paul and to the quasi-magical rites of 
the third century and the magical opera operata of 
mediaevalism. 

A similar continuity of life may be noted between the 
sacrament and sacramental theology of the first Chris- 
tians and ourselves—the identity of life and not that 
of imitation. As the sacraments were conceived under 
the regnant philosophies of antiquity, first Neo-Platonism 
and then Aristotelianism, they must to-day be conceived 
under the regnant forms of present-day thought. 
Further, all the theologies of sacramentarianism accepted 
by the Church were fashioned under a belief in magic, 
and since the almost complete disappearance of this 
malign influence no Aquinas or Calvin has arisen, a 
simple fact but worth bearing in mind in disputations 
about sacraments. 


CHAPTER XI 
THE PERSISTENCE OF ANCIENT SACRAMENTARIANISM 


ANCIENT sacramentarianism persists and defends itself 
in divers ways: 

(x) By the unquestioning acceptance of tradition, and 
the dogmatic asseveration of a definite establishment of 
sacramental rites by Jesus and His command to continue 
such rites ‘in remembrance of Me.’ The sacraments, 
therefore (with all their accrued theories of ‘ working ’ 
and overworked logic), must be continued in obedience 
to the command of Jesus Himself. Their observance is 
based on an explicit authority and is obligatory. Being 
divinely instituted, they must ex hypothesi be regarded 
' as generally necessary to salvation." Thus the 
Council of Trent (1547) pronounced anathema against 
anyone holding that ''all the sacraments of the new 
law were not instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, or 
that they were more or fewer than seven.’’* The 
Reformers as definitely asserted '' there be only two 
sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the 
Gospel, that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the 
Lord." 

It is amazing to find so much dogmatism where there 
is so much obscurity. One of the most perplexing 
problems confronting historical research ? is just to dis- 
cover what happened ' on the night in which He was 
betrayed,' and only less baffling is it to find the Ariadne 
thread guiding us from the common meal (apparently 
memorial and eschatological) of the Jerusalem com- 
munity to the sacramentalism as observed in Corinth, 

A Sess. VIL Can. T. 
2 Cf. Völker, Mysterium und Agape, 1927, p. 14 fi. 
176 


QUESTION OF DOMINICAL INSTITUTION 177 


and then further to the magic-sacramentarian realism 
of Ignatius and Irenaeus. Similarly strewn with diffi- 
culties is the path from ‘ the baptism of John’ to that 
of the Petrine preaching and thence to the symbolic- 
mystical baptism of Rom. vi and 1 Cor. x, and further 
to the full-blown magic-sacramentarianism of the second 
century. 

Fortunately when, if ever, the theologians of sacra- 
mentarian doctrine, which base the worth and validity 
of sacraments wholly or partially on the express com- 
mand and institution of Jesus, recognize how precarious 
their position is, and when, if ever, they accept the 
verdict of an ever-increasing number of independent 
investigators of at least a non liquet, the sacraments 
need not disappear with the disappearance of this, 
now important, support from early Christian history, 
any more than they need disappear with a recognition 
of much superstition, magic and exclusiveness from 
other ages which have gathered round them. 

Some recent and valuable treatises on the sacraments 
rest on the assumption of their historical institution by 
Jesus and on His command to memorialize Him. Thus 
Bishop Gore has no doubt whatever on the question of 
Dominical institution, on which he bases the objective 
operation of the sacraments and their right to the premier 
place in the corporate life of the Church.” Though Dean 
Inge considers that the point whether Jesus instituted 
baptism '' cannot be proved either way,” ? he will not 


1 Cf. Modern Churchman, XVI, p. 262. 

? Dominical institution is of course a postulate in Father Dalgairns's 
Holy Communion and in all Roman theology. Cf. from a Presbyterian 
writer, Wotherspoon, Religious Values in the Sacraments: ‘‘ The symbol 
can become sacrament—that is to say, a means by which God takes 
action in the soul—only in the hands of Christ; and we can recognize 
it as sacrament only by tracing it to the appointment of Christ which 
guarantees to us its content " (p. 23 f.; cf. p. 145). For an authorita- 
tive statement of the Roman attitude to this historical question, cf. 
de la Taille, Mysterium Fidei, ch. vi; Eucharistie in Vacant & Mangenot, 
Dict. de Théologie catholique, col. 1024 ff.; Messe, ib. 797 ff. 

* Contentio Veritatis, p. 282; cf. Christian Mysticism, p. 258. 


178 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


dispute the tradition. Fortunately, though he argues 
on the assumption of Dominical institution, he writes 
with such sanity and comprehensiveness on the sacra- 
ments that their place would remain if this assumption 
were invalidated. It is otherwise in such a presentation 
as that of N. P. Williams, who bases the value and 
validity of the sacraments on their institution by Jesus: 
** there would seem to be in logic, as there has always 
been in Catholic belief, a tenacious mutual connexion 
and cohesion between the ideas of Dominical institu- 
tion," '' general necessity for salvation," and '' ob- 
jectivity of operation," * and then proceeds to an 
examination of the historical evidence in the New 
Testament which is largely question-begging and wholly 
overlooks the cavalier fashion in which the early 
Christians, who were interested in dogma and aetio- 
logical concerns, treated the historic events of their 
tradition.? 

But the observance of sacraments may rest on surer 
than historical grounds. If Christian sacraments do not 
derive from the institution by Jesus, they may still be 
accepted as of divine origin and rest on the sacra- 
mentalism which is as old as our human nature or which 
makes the whole order of nature instinct with meaning 
for spiritual beings.? This sacramentalism Jesus Him- 
self practised in observing the lilies of the field, or in 
the acted parable of foot-washing, or in finding spiritual 
analogies in the natural world. 

Students of the New Testament and of primitive 
Christianity fail to find such a warrant of the direct 

1 Essays Catholic and Critical, pp. 373, 377 ff. 

? '' Veracity in matters of fact suffers as readily as righteousness in 
every religion. This is writ clear upon the pages of Church history 
from the earliest period right onward ’’ (Harnack, Exp. of Christianity, 
By pe 272). 

3 Sacramentalism ‘‘ is no excrescence of primitive superstition, but 
corresponds to a permanent demand of the human consciousness, the 
demand that the visible and tangible should be a seal to faith of that 


which is unseen and eternal ’’ (Kennedy, St. Paul and the Mystery- 
Religions, p. 263). 


« 


PRIMITIVE SPIRIT-BAPTISM 179 


authority or the practice of Jesus. Dr. Clow * admits 
“it is doubtful whether Christ Himself ordained the 
sacrament of baptism ” ; and Glover remarks:? ‘‘ There 
is a growing consensus of opinion among independent 
scholars that Jesus instituted no sacraments." The 
history of the first generation of apostolic propaganda 
is very obscure, and at the end of the first generation 
rites appear in the practice of the Church which bear a 
strange resemblance to the rites of surrounding cults, 
such a resemblance that Christian apologists attribute 
the latter to diabolic plagiarisms from Christianity. 
Thus ‘ the wicked demons have imitated [the Eucharist] 
in the mysteries of Mithra, commanding that the same 
thing be done,' * and ' the Devil has his Christians.' * 

An examination of our earliest documents reveals that 
(a) it cannot with any degree of assurance be affirmed 
that Jesus established any sacraments or ritual acts; 
(b) the Church from practically the beginning adopted 
and practised two rites, baptism, the Lord's Supper, 
and from a very early stage the laying-on of hands and 
unction ; (c) interesting vestigial evidence of a primitive 
period when Christian baptism was conceived as 
‘baptism in Spirit’ as contrasted with Johannine 
‘ baptism in water,’ though this tradition is overlaid by 
or interwoven with another which adds the Spirit to 
the water-rite. Thus the promise put on the lips of 
Jesus in Acts i. 5, ‘ John baptized with water, but you 
shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit,’ could not arise 
out of the later Catholic practice of the ritual act, and 
so must represent an authentic early source. Similarly 
the Pentecostal phenomena are interpreted in the Petrine 
preaching as the fulfilment of Joel’s prophecy, ' I will 
pour out My Spirit upon all people ' (Acts ii. 17), with 
which the subsequent editorial modification ‘ repent, 


! The Church and the Sacraments, p. 26. 

? Conflict of Religions, p. 158. 

? Justin, Apol. I. 66. 

* Firm. Mat. De Err. 22. For the ‘ devices of the devil’ vide Tert. 
De Corona, 15. 


Qi80 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


and let each of you be baptized in the Name of Jesus 
Christ for remission of your sins; and ye shall receive 
the gift of the Holy Spirit' ill accords. A like striking 
incongruity appears in the duplicate account of the 
incident of Cornelius, in which after the reception of the 
Holy Spirit by his hearers, Peter says, “ I remembered 
the word of the Lord, that He said John baptized with 
water, but ye shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit,' 
without reference to a preliminary or subsequent ritual 
act of water-baptism as in the first account of the same 
incident (Acts x. 47). All this is corroborated by the 
well-attested logion of the Second Source (Q), in which 
the contrast between the Baptist’s mission and the 
Messianic epoch is stated as ' I baptized in water, but 
He shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit and in fire '; 
(d) the rites practised from a very early date by the 
Church in its native Jewish environment were not sacral 
acts, but symbolic acts, to which the Jewish mind and 
its synagogue proselytes were accustomed. Baptism 
was immersion, a dramatized religion, in which the 
subject broke with his past and received the token of 
* remission of sins,' and the Eucharist was an eschato- 
logical meal of memorial ' until He come ' to preside at 
the banquet of the Messianic Kingdom. These symbolic 
rites rapidly and inevitably in the larger Hellenistic 
environment developed into sacraments and were 
equipped with the efficacies of Hellenistic mysticism.! 

(2) By refusing to permit the question to be raised 
or discussed of the nexus between the visible and the 
spiritual, i.e. the modus operandi of the symbol, the 
relation of cause and effect. Thus Inge:? 


' Prof. E. F. Scott, speaking of Paul's relations to the Mystery- 
cults and Hellenistic influences, says: '' The two peculiar rites which 
the Church had practised from the first were now construed as sacra- 
ments... . From the time of Paul onward a like virtue was attributed 
to the Christian ordinances. They ceased to be merely symbolic rites 
and became in the full sense sacraments ’’ (First Age of Christianity, 
p. 199 f.). 

? Christian Mysticism, p. 258 (italics not in original). 


DEAN INGE ON SACRAMENTS 181 


** Most of the errors which have so grievously obscured 
the true nature of this sacrament [Supper] have pro- 
ceeded from attempts to answer the question ' How 
does the reception of the consecrated elements affect 
the inner state of the receiver? ' To those who hold the 
symbolic view, as I understand it, it seems clear that 
the question of cause and effect must be resolutely set 
aside. . . . We should abstain, I think, from speculat- 
ing on the effects of the sacraments and train ourselves 
instead to consider them as divinely-ordered symbols." 


We shall see later why Inge recommends this asylum. 
It would deprive sacramentarians of their second line 
of defence and it would abolish the difference in kind 
between Pagan and Christian sacraments, and between 
** divinely-ordered ’’ symbols and divine symbols appar- 
ently not ordered but in Christian experience indubitably 
effective. 

One should have grave suspicion of any theory resting 
on a refusal to raise ’ or attempt to answer a question, 
not because we can ever comprehend everything,? which 
would require omniscience, but because our business in 
this world is to raise questions wherever we suspect 
them, to attack problems and pursue their solution to 
the utmost horizon. Besides, as a matter of fact, 
'" man's meddling intellect " was made in the same 
divine workshop as the centre of his emotions and 
refuses to accept any notice of trespassing until it has 


* Dr. Major (Modern Churchman, October 1926, p. 264) enumerates 
the '' sacramental dangers '' as (1) '' being dominated in our conception 
of them by the authority of the past '' and (2) '' intellectualization of 
the sacraments. This was the temptation which beset Patristic, 
Scholastic, and even Protestant theologians. Sacraments are essentially 
mystical, dramatic, poetic, creative, but not dogmatic. They exist that 
we may duly use them, not dispute about them." But in using them we 
cannot arrest the faculties of our nature: we must seek to understand 
our sacred emotions, whether we can give a full answer or not, and we 
can do so without turning '' poetry into prose '" or '' symbolic action 
into a metaphysically definable process ’’ (ib.). 

2 On the '' irrational ” in religion cf. R. Otto, West-óstliche Mystik, 
p. 191 ff.; The Idea of the Holy, passim; K. Edward, Religious Experi- 
ence, ch. III. 


182 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


convinced itself of the sin of trespassing. Further, we 
are Westerners, the ever-grateful sons of Ionia, and we 
recognize, with one * who accepts mysticism as the way 
of life and sacramentarianism even beyond Inge, that 
the three chief forces of our Western civilization are 
Hellenism (‘‘ the thirst for Richness and Harmony "'), 
Christianity (‘‘ the revelation of Personality and 
Depth ’’), and Science (‘‘ the apprehension and concep- 
tion of brute fact and iron law ’’). 

Now, Inge’s faith rests on the lawful appeal to the 
emotions and sentiment while denying the equally 
lawful appeal to the mind. As a matter of fact, 
psychology is on the track already, though sane 
psychology will never deny the seemingly impenetrable 
mystery surrounding our life or the mysterious relations 
of the material and the spiritual. Moreover, psychology 
makes it no longer necessary to fall back with Thomas 
Aquinas on miracle as the only or chief explanation of 
the spiritual efficacy of sacraments. 

(3) The psychological effect of every dignified worship 
is necessarily quickened enthusiasm and an access of 
or intensification of feelings. Moral danger and spiritual 
power are found in close proximity. The refinement and 
exaltation of feeling is of practical moment for moral 
aims. And the recognition of the Numinous with its 
ineffability and of the mysterium tremendum which 
prompts worship is essential to the fullness and vigour 
of personality. But the danger of stressing the non- 
rational elements in religion is perhaps greater even 
than the ruthless ratiocination of intellectualizing re- 
ligion. The feelings even at Communion are morally 
indifferent or even neutral. Modern Christians need a 
charisma to test sacramental feelings as the early Chris- 
tians sorely needed one to test the spirits in pathological 
outbursts (r Cor. xii. ro). The Numinous expresses 
itself not only in feelings but in rational and ethical 
terms. 

* Von Hügel, The Mystical Element of Religion, I, pp. 10-39. 


SACRAMENTAL EMOTIONS 183 


The emotions experienced or enjoyed in receiving a 
sacrament cannot be adduced as proof either of the 
supernatural or miraculous character of the ritual trans- 
action, or as corroborative evidence of its validity, or 
as intrinsically of spiritual import. The value of ecstasy 
or feeling depends entirely on the methods by which 
they are caused and the state of moral health of the 
subject. It cannot therefore be too emphatically main- 
tained that he who in faith and love receives a sacrament 
will acquire an access of grace whether or not he feels 
this grace in emotions which rest on a biological basis. 
The operations of psychological states of suggestion, 
concentration, or the contagion of mass psychology are 
not in abeyance at the altar, and the aesthetic effects 
of dim religious light and of appropriate symbolism act, 
but act at the altar by the same modes as elsewhere. 
The Spirit may be imparted in a physical process such 
as laying on of hands or eating consecrated elements. 
But again it may not; it may be, and in religious ex- 
perience is known to be, imparted also and perhaps 
more potently and immediately in some solemn intimacy 
of the soul or in the call of a great duty, or in some high 
resolve *' to grapple danger whereby souls grow strong." 
The emotions at the Communion may denote the physical 
significance of the sacrament, but may not always 
assure its spiritual significance or prove that through the 
physical processes the Spirit has operated: '' Certain 
persons habitually receive the sacraments of the Church, 
and habitually are conscious that they derive benefit 
after so doing. On this is based the theory that they 
derive this benefit because they receive the sacraments. 
It is held that this is propter hoc as well as post hoc. 
This theory of course is open to argument." ' The 
physical may conduce to the spiritual and the psychical 
to the ethical, but not by any law of psychological 
necessity. The emotional condition neither proves that 


1 Kirsopp Lake, Earlier Epistles of St. Paul, p. 495. 


184 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


the spiritual process has taken place nor justifies the 
contention that it does not take place except synchronous 
with or dependent on the physical and intrinsically 
operative action of the sacrament. 

There are vast differences in sacramental experiences 
due to philosophical presuppositions, credal allegiances, 
culture, and the poise, or lack of poise, which obtains 
among the various faculties of our being, particularly 
the emotional and the aesthetic. For example, a man 
who believes in a special miracle taking place in the 
use of consecrated physical objects will have one class 
of emotion based on and accordant to his expectancies ; 
another who believes that the Divine Love is doing in the 
same way—but in a special degree or fashion—in the 
ecclesiastic sacramental cult what it is doing in the whole 
revelation of the external world will have another kind 
of emotion. Yet another who approaches in the spirit 
of reverent obedience to a supposed dominically insti- 
tuted observance as a means of conveyance of grace 
and act of fellowship will have another set of emotions. 
It would be a marvellous argument for sacramentarianism 
if it could be shown that such high emotions as are 
experienced by these three different worshippers were 
denied to those who would join with them in the sacra- 
mental cult, but without the belief that these sacraments 
were dominically instituted and that their observance 
rests on authority and the promises of Christ, rather 
than on the nature of the symbolism itself and its relation 
to the historical person of Jesus and His spiritual 
presence with them. 

Nor dare any theologian of sacramentarianism assert 
that the similar high and uplifting emotions, which mean 
so much to the sacramentarian, do not visit the hearts 
of those who, while holding aloof from ecclesiastical 
sacramentarian practice, consecrate themselves to the 
Highest; nor dare he deny that in the great spiritual 
states, especially of love and sorrow, the soul undergoes 
experiences that are very immediate and morally com- 


VARIETIES OF SACRAMENTAL EXPERIENCE 185 


pelling, and also inexpressible save in poetry or symbol 
or music. 

The claim made for sacraments by Bishop Temple— 
‘“ that they are something more than efficient instru- 
ments for producing a psychological state: it is claimed 
that in them God Himself takes action upon the soul "' 
—may be admitted, provided that one does not over- 
press the claim to mean that these are the chief or ex- 
clusive methods or occasions in which '* God takes action 
upon the soul." On such sacramental occasions many 
have been visited by new and life-transforming visions, 
as was Jesus Himself on His reception of the Johannine 
baptism. Saint Teresa, for example, was visited by her 
visions at the reception of the Eucharist. 

But some of the greatest experiences which have 
proved epoch-making for Christian history came quite 
apart from and unmediated by sacrament. It was while 
‘ breathing threatening and slaughter ' on the road to 
Damascus that the greatest of all Jesus' followers was 
* apprehended by Christ ' in a direct experience which 
rendered the sacraments secondary to faith-mysticism. 
It was not by sacrament but by the preaching of Ambrose 
that Augustine was won from debauchery to Christi- 
anity. Similarly, God took action upon the souls of 
Francis of Assisi, Martin Luther, George Fox, and John 
Wesley apart from sacramental mediation—whatever 
their attitude to sacraments may have been after the 
crisis. And in the convent chapel, without special 
reference to sacramental operations, Catherine of Genoa 
passed through her crisis of conversion into the '' trans- 
ports of pure and all-purifying love." Pagan and 
Christian mystics alike have discovered that the scala 
perfectionis is not the monopoly of the votaries of sacra- 
mentarianism. There are powers inalienable from the 
soul which enable it to make its ascent in its own divine 
right through the three stages of exaltation recognized 
by Augustine, self-abasement, illumination, identifica- 
tion; or the three similar stages distinguished by 


186 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


Iamblichus: (1) uerovoeéa, presence ; (2) xowevía, fellow- 
ship; (3) &wous, identification. 

On the other hand, it cannot be asserted that those 
who are most susceptible to ecclesiastical sacramental 
experiences and influences are most susceptible to the 
finer issues of the spirit. Not the most devout sacra- 
ment-practising Christians are the most catholic in their 
love, or conspicuous by the ethical quality of their 
self-effacing service. When such sacrament-practising 
Christians put to shame by the beauty of their lives and 
the winsomeness of their service those who accept 
sacramentalism as an all-pervading divine principle, an 
irrefragable argument shall have been discovered for 
sacramentarianism. 

(4) By isolation of certain sacral acts, two or seven, 
from the operation of the general psychological principles 
of sacramentarianism and from the indisputable effect 
of symbolism, whether ecclesiastical or Pagan or that 
of daily life. Inge? may say truly ''the reciprocal 
action of spirit and matter is the one great mystery 
which, to all appearances, must remain impenetrable to 
finite intelligence," but this same mystery obtains in 
extra-ecclesiastical symbolism. If we could tell why and 
how a primrose lifts us into the world of Beauty, or 
why and how music transports its chosen into worlds 
unknown to others, we should have solved the sacra- 
mental nexus. 

And the Dean proceeds that we should consider the 
sacraments as “‘ divinely-ordered symbols, by which 
the Church, as an organic whole, and we as members 
of it, realize the highest and deepest of our spiritual 
privileges." But if the earth is the Lord's and the full- 
ness thereof, ''if Nature the body is, and God the 
soul," and if man is surrounded by symbols which lift 
him to that plane of life where man meets his God, and 

* De Mysteriis, III. 5. Cf. Adam, Religious Teachers of Greece, 


P- 393. 
? Christian Mysticism, p. 258. 


ALL LIFE SACRAMENTAL 187 


if to a thinking man his whole environment is sacra- 
mental and infused with an unseen power, are not all 
symbols both divine and divinely-ordered? And is 
it only or especially through the two alleged ‘‘ divinely- 
ordered symbols ’’ that we realize our deepest privileges ? 
Do the pure in heart not see God at any time and im- 
mediately? Does the love of heaven not make us 
heavenly whether at the Lord's Supper or in the office 
or field ? 


'* The Catholic sacramental system is in part an im- 
perfect attempt to realize that side of life (relation of 
happenings of life to the real world). The mistake which 
so many Protestants make is in thinking that, because 
they can see the mythical element in the Mass, or the 
sacramental system in general, they can achieve truth 
within merely by cutting those things out; whereas the 
error in the Catholic system is not in claiming a sacra- 
mental value for the Mass, but in denying the possibility 
of that same value to all the events of life. The 
Protestant who rejects the Catholic Mass and puts 
nothing in its place has lost rather than gained. The 
Protestant who rejects the Catholic Mass . . . but finds 
in all life true sacraments has learned the lesson of 
Catholicism: and such a man is not eager to speak un- 
mixed evil of the Catholic Mass, . . . because he realizes 
that it is not so much wrong as an imperfect and limited 
appreciation of a truth which he has come to find on a 
larger scale throughout life." ? 


In the earlier stages of a religion men are willing to 
assume or assert belief in what they cannot understand, 
and to accept and operate with postulates which are 
only examined later when equivocation becomes dis- 
tasteful. 

(5) By accepting as authoritative or final statements 
made by Church Fathers on one particular phase of 
religion which was so sensitive to contemporary thought, 
while in other—once important—matters rejecting 


* Lake, Religion of Yesterday and To-morrow, p. 37 f. 


188 PERSISTENCE’ OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


wholesale the considerate views of the same Fathers, 
e.g. on demonology, physiology, the nature of the soul, 
the resurrection of the flesh, physical fire of eternal 
punishment, and their fanciful etymologies and 
allegorical biblical interpretations. For example, tran- 
substantivists, consubstantivists, receptivists, and mem- 
orialists all seek to buttress their sacramental doctrines 
in such an account as the following from Justin Martyr, 
and all perhaps rightly, inasmuch as their discrimina- 
tions were not present to Justin’s mind: 


‘For not as common bread and common drink do 
we receive these, but in like manner as Jesus Christ 
our Saviour, having been made flesh by the Word of 
God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation, so 
likewise have we been taught that the food which is 
blessed by the prayer of His Word, and from which 
our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished, is 
the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh.’ * 


The Patristic writers should be studied, as all ancient 
sources, not to verify private predilections, but first to 
understand them in the context of their age. It is 
another matter to inquire whether in light of the in- 
creasing revelation since their day we can hold their 
opinions, and not only hold their opinions but hold them 
for the reasons given by the Fathers. What divine right 
of authority have the Fathers over the living Church 
of the present which claims the same sources of inspira- 
tion open to the Fathers? Christian theology followed 
Origen on such a central doctrine as the Atonement by 
paying tribute to Satan for a thousand years for man’s 
release until the Cur Deus Homo of an Archbishop of 
Canterbury by his satisfaction theory put God’s justice 
in the place of Satan. On the sacraments the Fathers 
are neither unanimous nor explicit in their statements. 
Origen differs from the mystical-realism of his age by 
interpreting the Bread Discourse in Capernaum—the 
Johannine doctrine of the Eucharist—allegorically. The 

i * Apol. I. 66. 


NO PATRISTIC UNIFORMITY 189 


first theologian of the Latin Church, Tertullian, may be 
plausibly cited for both the symbolic and the mystic- 
magical view. The difficulty of deducing a consistent 
doctrine of the Eucharist from the various statements 
even of one Father, Augustine, is confessed. And by 
what canon are we commanded to acceptance of such 
a doctrine when formulated and relegate to the depart- 
ment of antiquities his statement of the bearing of the 
literal raising of Lazarus’ already putrefying body upon 
the future physical resurrection of believers *; or that 
Christ ascended into heaven with His flesh in which He 
arose ^; or how discriminate between the faith-healings 
and fancies in the list of miracles ? recorded in the City 
of God, XXII. 8, ut crederet mundus? Or are we to- 
day committed to acceptance of the corporeity of the 
soul because attested in a Father like Tertullian ? 

The Fathers must be understood in the light of the 
cosmology, the mystic-realism, and the thriving Mystery- 
cults and the controversies of their day, and be allowed 
to diverge in opinions and in emphasis as earnest and 
sincere men do to-day. We shall recognize that the 
life-and-death struggle of the Church with Gnostic 
Docetism in favour of the reality of Jesus’ humanity 
has left its trace as deeply upon the conception of the 
Eucharistic ‘ body of Christ’ as upon the apocalyptic 
doctrine of Resurrection. But the appeal to Patristic 
authority proves both too much and too little, for we 
are not living in the Patristic age, and it is impossible 
to label any one confessional sacramental system as 
Patristic. The language of the Fathers tends to prove 


! Tractate XLIX. 1. ? De Civ. Dei, XXII. 8. 

* * Miracles wrought in the name of Christ, whether by sacraments, 
prayer, or relics,' including the restoration of a dead boy in the shrine 
of a martyr; an Innocentia cured of cancer of the breast by the signing 
of the cross over the affected spot by the first woman coming from 
the baptistery at Easter; a doctor delivered from both gout and tbe 
visits of black demons ' by the laver of regeneration '; an Hesperius 
freed from malign influence of evil spirits by the sacrifice of the 
Eucharist. 


14 


rgo PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


that the Church held to the doctrine of transubstantiation 
long before this doctrine was ecclesiastically formulated. 
To Justin and Ignatius, for example, the consecrated 
elements were the flesh and blood of Jesus, though the 
method of ‘ conversion ' is not stated, but the realism 
of their language and the absence of any qualification 
agree best with what was later formulated as transub- 
stantiation. Augustine, who held to the magical work- 
ing of sacraments in such a way that the sacraments 
administered by heretics were valid, maintains that such 
heretics, even of unblemished lives and with valid sacra- 
ments, cannot be saved; their valid sacraments, being 
outside the Church, are deprived of efficacy. Thus ' let 
us suppose someone, therefore, chaste, continent, free 
from covetousness, no idolater, hospitable, ministering 
to the needy, no man's enemy, not contentious, patient, 
quiet, jealous of none, envying none, sober, frugal, but 
a heretic; it is, of course, clear to all that for this one 
fault only, that he is a heretic, he will fail to inherit the 
Kingdom of God ' ?; to which some Christian Diogenes 
with a sense of spiritual proportion might have replied, 
like his Pagan predecessor, ' Shall Pataikion the high- 
wayman have a fairer lot in death because he was 
initiated than Epaminondas? ' who died unhouseled. 
To see how far Patristic authority would carry us we 
may cite the doctrine of Gregory of Nyssa, who held 
that man is a composite of soul and body, the former 
of which can be saved by faith, but not the latter, 
which can only be saved by the antitoxin of another 
body (that of Christ), which was ‘ the receptacle of the 
Deity ' and ' received the grace of immortality.' ? 


' Cf. Baumgarten, Relig. in Gesch. u. Geg. V, p. 212. 

* De Bapt. IV. 25; cited Modern Churchman, XVI, p. 385. 

* Cat. Orat. 37, in which he also says: ' We believe that now also 
the bread which is consecrated by the Word of God is changed into 
the body of God,’ who ‘ disseminates Himself in every believer through 
that flesh whose substance comes from bread and wine, blending Him- 
self with the bodies of believers, to secure that by this union with the 
immortal, man too may become a sharer in incorruption ' (cited ib. 
p. 380). 


RITUAL AND REVELATION IQI 


(6) By the failure to recognize that the steady move- 
ment in religious history is from rites to deities, from 
protoplasmic magic to institutional cult, from spell to 
prayer, and from cult-acts to a deepening of man’s con- 
sciousness of his native divinity and of his kinship with 
the Father of his spirit. The movement is inward, 
toward a deepening of man’s self-consciousness, and of 
the world of eternal verities immediately within his 
grasp. The security which he once sought by doing 
for himself or through ghostly representatives certain 
acts he seeks later by being. He has also discovered 
by experience that he can elevate himself better by the 
exertions of his will and the agonizing of moral decisions 
about the things primary and secondary to life than he 
can by any ceremonial. He may not lose faith in 
ceremonial as a help, but he has learned to find the 
springs of action within his own God-endowed nature. 
A recognition of the immoral and unscientific character 
of magic has induced him to eject magic from his 
religion. He is coming to realize that the true line of 
religious advance is by the apostolic succession of 
Jeremiahs and Amoses and not by that of Ezekiels, 
Ezras and Malachis. And history seems to corroborate 
that ‘‘ the strongest moral impulses have not been given 
to mankind by the guardians of ritual and sacrament ; 
they have come from without.”’ ! 

Yet the practical value of sacraments (not their 
theological validity) in religion and perhaps their 
necessity for the masses of religious adherents may be 
granted. The day of immediacy and of pure spirituality 
is yet far distant, except for the few,? though Jesus 


* Glover, Progress in Religion, p. 84. 

? “Tt is true the day will probably never come when the religion 
of many will not begin and end in solemn, stately rite, consecrated to the 
imagination by ancient use, and captivating the sense by scrupulously 
ordered ceremonial. The ritualist and the puritan conception of wor- 
Ship wil probably always exist side by side, for they represent two 
opposite conceptions of religion which can never entirely blend "' (Dill, 
Roman Society from Nero, p. 603). 


192 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


assumed that ordinary men and women could rise to an 
immediate vision of God and could enter with Him into 
the secret of the Father. But usage in religion is more 
tyrannical than elsewhere, and the weakness of human 
nature so obvious that Dean Inge asserts:* ‘‘ The need 
of sacraments is one of the deepest convictions of the 
religious consciousness. It rests ultimately on the in- 
stinctive reluctance to allow any spiritual fact to remain 
without an external expression. . . . Nearly all the 
states or motions of the soul can find their appropriate 
expression in action." But what of the states or motions 
of the soul for which an external expression cannot be 
found? And would Dean Inge affirm that to the con- 
templative Mystics sacraments are either necessary to 
evoke their intuitions or to confirm them? Do the pure 
in heart anywhere and always not see God immediately ? 
Further, Dr. Inge very persuasively represents sacra- 
ments as '' symbols of mystical union '"' ; yet individuals 
have repeatedly experienced that that mystical union 
is independent of and prior to sacramental acts. Would 
he affirm that the heart of Paul's religion, the Christ- 
mysticism, was induced by or dependent on sacraments 
rather than on justification by faith? He says again: 
** That deepest sense of communion with God, which 
is the very heart of religion, is in danger of being shut 
up in thought and word, which are inadequate expres- 
sions of any spiritual state." Does the Dean mean that 
symbols even in his ecclesiastical sense are adequate 
expressions of either the soul's unutterable intuitions or 
its enlarging uprisings? Does he not himself warn of 
the danger ?—'' The maintenance of a real correspond- 
ence between sign and significance seems to be essential 
to the idea of a sacrament, but then the danger of 
degrading it into magic lies close at hand.” 

Professor Kirsopp Lake admits ‘‘ sacraments have, I 
believe, their own great value in religion. Myths based 
on sacraments, or sacraments based on myths, have 

* Christian Mysticism, p. 253 f. 


SACRAMENTS IN INSTITUTIONAL CHRISTIANITY 193 


been the door which has opened the way to Reality," 
with which we agree, with the caveat that these are 
neither the exclusive nor the necessary door to Reality 
for many souls, and also with the reminder that holy 
seasons of the soul are dependent not on seasons of sun 
and moon or on hours of day, or on an ecclesiastical 
calendar, but on the tides that sway the spirit—tides 
which have their ebb as also their flood. 

Sacraments have their place and use. They belong 
to the first of the three modalities or forms of appeal and 
outlook of religion as classified by von Hügel as Insti- 
tutionalism,* Intellectualism and Mysticism, or feeling 
and volitional requirements, the co-existence and suc- 
cession of which in history he describes. The fist is 
historic or static or traditional, and makes its appeal to 
sense and memory ; the second is analytic, and works by 
question and argument ; the third is synthetic, and makes 
its appeal to unifying experiences. The first expresses 
itself in cult; the second in a philosophy of religion ; 
the third in experimental-ethical life. The first takes 
shape under the regnant social, legal and political 
thought-forms and habits; the second is influenced by 
the critical and speculative ideas of its day; the third 
is dominated by individual and racial habitudes and 
gifts. The priest dominates the first, the philosopher 
or theologian the second, and the prophet the third. 

Hügel has also drawn attention to how each of these 
three modalities tends to isolation and excess: the first 
tends to excess in superstition, formalism and legalism ; 
the second in rationalism; the third in fanaticism. 
** And whole races have tended and will tend, upon the 
whole, to one or other of these three excesses: for 
example, the Latin races to Exteriorism and Superstition ; 
the Teutonic races to the two Interiorisms—Rationalism 
and Fanaticism.'' ^ This tendency of the Latin races 
to Exteriorism and Superstition is not to be overlooked, 


1 The Mystical Element of Religion, I, pp. 59-75. 
2 fb. T, p» 59. 


of 


194 PERSISTENCE OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 


inasmuch as the genius of the Latin races has con- 
tributed most to the formulation of our Western theology 
(Augustine, Aquinas, Calvin). Hügel has also remarked 
that each of these elements is liable to encroach upon 
or even suppress the others, and of these the first has 
been most successful in this narrowing process. 

Yet the overworking of a helpful principle does not 
abolish its use. There are in experience and practice 
two opposite tendencies in regard to sacraments—the 
sacramentarian and the sacramental. The one, giving 
to sacral actions efficacies in their own awful right, 
tends to magnify sacramentarianism and multiply the 
occasions and the material channels and tangible sacra 
of sacramental communications; the other passes 
through and beyond the propaedeutic symbol to the 
inward truth and spiritual experience. The one tends 
to rely upon the external means; the other tends to 
outgrow them. The one furthers a devotional mystic- 
ality ; the other a moral enthusiasm. The one justifies 
itself in a reverential mysteriosophy which evades the 
main difficulties and through an unwholesome deference 
to antiquity and tradition pays its tribute to magic; the 
other seeks to attain the ''faith that inquires '" and 
attempts a reverent philosophy of Christian life and 
experience, for which it claims no infallibility. When 
sacraments become opera operata, magic has again 
claimed its own; when ritual becomes more than a 
vehicle of religious expression, the moral appeal is 
weakened rather than strengthened.  '' Certes," says 
Chaucer, in “< The Persone's Tale," “a shadwe hath 
the lyknesse of the thing of which it is shadwe, but 
shadwe is not the same thing of which it is shadwe,"' 
which may be supplemented by Isaac Penington’s 
words: '' All truth is shadow except the last. But all 
truth is substance in its own place, though it be but a 
shadow in another place. And the shadow is a true 
shadow, as the substance is a true substance.”’ 


CHAPTER XII 


RELATION OF ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 
TO SACRAMENTARIANISM 


So strongly was the tide moving towards sacra- 
mentarianism that Paul and the Fourth Gospel writer 
were claimed as sponsors for the heightened importance 
of cult-acts as vehicles of grace and necessary to salva- 
tion. Certain phrases of Paul provoked explanations 
which in their apprehension by Hellenistic modes of 
thought could not result otherwise than in the accom- 
modation of Christian rites to the rites of the Mystery- 
CUNS a © 

Many scholars — Loisy,? Heitmiiller,* Hoffmann,* 
Lietzmann, Wernle,® J. Weiss,’ Weinel? Wrede,? 
Lake *°—maintain that Paul is the first Christian sacra- 
mentarian, the first to transform Christianity from its 


* Cf. Wetter, Das chr. Mysterium: Stud. z. Gesch. d. Abendmahles 
(i921), p. 122 ff. 

? Les Mystères paiens et le Mystère chrétien (Hibbert Journal, 
October r9rr). 

? Taufe u. Abendmahl bei Paulus. 

* Das Abendmahl im Urchristentum, p. 156 ft. 

^ Handb. z. N.T., ad Rom. vi, p. 29; Messe u. Herrenmahl. 

* Beginnings of Christianity, I, p. 273: ''It was Paul who first 
created the conception of a sacrament’’; II, p. 128. 

7 Urchristentum, p. 496 ff. 

* Bib. Theologie d. N.T., p. 330 ff.; St. Paul, p. 119 f. 

* Paul, p. 120. 

'" Earlier Epp. of St. Paul, pp. 200 ff., 231 f., 385 ff. '' Baptism 
is for Paul and his readers universal and unquestionably accepted 
as a ' mystery ' or sacrament which works ex opere operato, and from 
the unhesitating manner in which Paul uses this fact as a basis of 
argument, as if it were a point on which Christian opinion did not 
vary, it would seem as though this sacramental teaching is central in 
the primitive Christianity to which the Roman Empire began to be 
converted. Three factors were regarded as essential- Water, Name, 
and Spirit." 


195 


196 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


more primitive form into a Mystery-Religion, or that 
Paul operates with two conceptions of sacrament—the 
primitive and the Hellenistic,! or that he begins with 
the conception of a memorial and ends with a Sacra- 
ment,? after mystery precedents. 

Other scholars— Anrich,? Harnack,* Dobschiitz,° 
Feine,* Deissmann,' Kennedy,? Morgan,’ Glover '?—as 
emphatically exonerate Paul from having introduced 
sacramentarianism into Christianity. 

There is no dispute that Christianity became pro- 
nouncedly sacramentarian at an early date. The 
question is whether this departure began with Paul. At 
first sight there is much to lend support to the view of 
Paul as the first sacramentarian, due largely to 
‘ Pauline germs of unpauline thought." " Paul as a 
son of the Diaspora was thrown into intimate contact 
with Hellenistic mysticism, which would make him 
familiar with the main doctrines and practices of the 
Mysteries with their communion meals and raptures of 
initiation. And in Paul’s world there is evidence of a 
deepening spiritual conception of the Mystery-rites from 
the magical to the sacramental, from the physical to the 
spiritual, which would facilitate the employment of their 
usages and analogies in a new religion. His native 


1 As J. Weiss, Urchr. p. 502: ‘‘ Die ältere, aus der Urgemeinde 
stammende wonach die Mahlzeit vor allem ein Akt der Gemeinschaft der 
Jünger ist... und die jüngere, die hellenistische, wonach der Herr selber 
nicht nur der Mittelpunkt, sondern irgendwie auch der Gegenstand der 
Beier ist.” 

* J. Hoffmann, Das Abendmahl im Urchristentum, p. 150: “‘ Begnügt 
sich Paulus nicht damit, die Wirkung des Herrenmahls zu verobjek- 
tivieren, sondern er materialisiert sie auch geradezu.’’ 

* Das antike Mysterienwesen in seinem Einfluss auf das Christentum, 
Deut f. 

^ E.g. Expansion of Christianity, Y, p. 289. 

5 Sakrament u. Symbol im Urchristentum (in Theol. St. u. Kritiken, 
1905, p. I ff); Christian Life in the Prim. Church, p. 19. 

* Theologie d. N.T. 2nd ed. p. 490 ff. 

7 St. Paul. 8 St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions. 

* Religion and Theology of Paul, p. 203 ff. 

10 St. Paul. 1t J. R. Ropes, Apostolic Age, p. 257. 


THE 'WISDOM' OF APOLLOS 197 


Tarsus was a centre not only of Stoicism, which in his 
day had manifested decidedly mystical tendencies, 
enabling its adherents to become one with the all- 
pervasive Spirit, but also of Oriental mysticism. His 
missionary journeys led him through the great centres 
of the Mediterranean world where the Mystery-cults 
were predominant. 

It is clear that Paul's gospel underwent some drastic 
modification after his acquaintance with the Alexandrian 
Apollos, who, to an apostle familiar with the cosmic 
Sophia and eager to adapt the new religion to Hellenism, 
could point the way to a more universalistic and mystic 
interpretation. It is noteworthy that Paul, who would 
resist to the death Judaizing opponents or any who 
would assail his apostolic authority, not only had no 
jealousy of this Apollos with his ‘ wisdom,’ but accepted 
him as a fellow-worker. Paul's long residence in 
Ephesus must have brought him through his converts 
into close touch with the ideas of the Mysteries, and his 
literary activity from that centre in defending his gospel 
must have revealed to him the advantages accruing to 
Christianity from the adaptation of suggestive religious 
ideas in a Pagan world familiar with sacramentalism. 
Thus in the Mysteries the conception of regeneration was 
associated with baptismal rites.! In these too regenera- 
tion is compared with dying.? But Paul never conceives 
baptism strictly as rebirth or regeneration, but as a 
mystic death. 

Initiation, which guarantees regeneration, is also 
conceived as a dying,’ or as participation in the death 


! Cf. Tertullian, De Bapt. 5. 

? Liturgy of Mithras (Dieterich, 3rd ed. p. 15). 

* Cf. Themistios (or Plutarch?) in Stob. Fior. IV, 128; Maas, 
Orpheus, p. 303 ff. Apuleius records that Lucius at initiation under- 
went the ‘ symbol of a voluntary death’ (ad instar voluntariae mortis, 
XL. 21). The candidate for initiation into the mysteries of Attis is 
admitted as moriturus, ' about to die” (De Err. Prof. Rel. 18) In the 
Dionysiac-Orphic, ' most secret of all initiations,’ symbolic burial was 
practised, Cf. Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 96 ff. 


198 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


and resurrection of a Mystery-Saviour. That Paul 
should use such conceptions in connexion with baptism 
does not, however, prove that baptism was viewed by 
him as identical with initiation rites in Paganism. It 
should also be noted that in Paul's day the Church was 
as yet not alarmed at the arresting similarities between 
Pagan and Christian sacraments; there would not be 
the same suspicion of Pagan sacraments as when the 
charge of plagiarism was raised by Christian Apologists 
against the religious fraternities and the initiations 
assigned to the wicked demons. 

The use of the terminology of the Mysteries such as 
soteria, mysterion, psychikos, pneumatikos, pneuma, 
Nous, tedeios (‘ initiated ' and ‘ perfect’), yveio bar, euBareveuw 
certainly implies a considerable knowledge of their 
current use, though no conclusive proof of Paul’s slavish 
borrowing without modification. He ‘‘ presupposed 
his hearers’ acquaintance with these terms through the 
medium of the Mystery-Religions, and at least to some 
extent adopted the current usage.” ? 

It is also true that baptism and the Lord’s Supper 
are represented as acts or occasions of fellowship 
in the death and sufferings of Christ as the Mystery- 
sacraments were the means of union with the 
periodically dying and again living Deity. Also 
Paul speaks not only of fellowship with Christ, but 
of fellowship in ‘the body’ and ‘the blood of 
Christ.’ He also speaks of ‘the cup of the Lord’ 
and ' the table of the Lord ’ in contrast to ‘ the cup of 
the demons ' and ‘ the table of the demons.’ Further, 
the cosmic sweep of Pauline redemption, the use of 
Kyrios as the favourite designation of Christ, and the 
personal mysticism ' in the Lord ’ of the Christian cult, 


1 Justin Martyr, Apology, I. 66; Tert., De Praesc. 40. 
* Reitzenstein (Zeitsch. f. d. neutest. Wiss. XIII, p. 17) argues that 


the employment of mystery terms implies the use of mystery 
ideas. 


3 Kennedy, p. 171. 


WANT OF EVIDENCE FOR SACRAMENTARIANISM 199 


point towards the usages of the Mysteries. The 
possibility of unworthy partakers ' eating and drinking 
judgment’ also suggests the magical associations of 
the Mysteries. As a wise missionary, eager to bring 
the Gentiles to Christianity, Paul was not the man 
to refuse to avail himself of the propaedeutic value 
of the current sacramental ideas ' of his converts 
from the Pagan guilds, for whom the Mysteries 
had proved a ‘ paedagogue to Christ’ as the Law 
to Israel. 

But all this is inconclusive, and there appears in- 
dubitable evidence that Paul must be acquitted of 
sacramentarianism which finds the physical cult-act the 
means of or necessary medium of the spiritual con- 
dition. Of the physical significance or objective opera- 
tion of either sacrament, not one sure word can be cited 
from Paul. In his scanty references we find no elaborate 
sacramental doctrine. The very scantiness of the refer- 
ences to the sacraments is unfavourable to the view of 
the writer as a sacramentarian, and this difficulty cannot 
be evaded by asserting that Paul took for granted 
the acceptance of sacramentarian doctrines. Sacra- 
mentarians accept as a postulate the necessity of a priest 
and of due priestly succession as essential to a valid 
sacrament. Yet never once does Paul mention priests 
as among the ' gifts’ given by Christ to the Church; 
never once does he appropriate the title or claim its 
exclusive prerogatives in his impassioned defence of the 
originality and independence of his apostleship. While 
Paul strove for a seemly and orderly worship, he laid no 
stress on the externals of cult-acts and physical ritual 
and holy days. ‘ Christ sent me not to baptize, but 
to evangelize ’ is at least a surprising assertion from one 
who saw in sacramental acts the chief means of union. 
It is indeed striking that the apostle nowhere argues 
for or even suggests the uniqueness or superiority of a 


* Cf. Kennedy, p. 280 f. 
? As by Lake, Earlier Epp. p. 233. 


200 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


formal ordinance like baptism as an initiation rite in 
contrast to circumcision.' 

In Pauline thought Gnosis overshadows Sacrament. 
Though Paul is familiar with the term ‘ Mystery,’ he 
sedulously avoids applying it to either sacrament. The 
mysteries of the Christian faith were not for him the 
sacraments. 

Paul was a mystic, and mystics may be either sacra- 
mentarians or sacramentalists. Paul’s theology is 
essentially experiential theology, a rescript of his own 
experiences. Never once does he appeal to his own 
baptism as a verification of his experiences or revelation 
of the mind of Christ. He does appeal to the fact that 
‘I saw the Lord,’ and that ‘ God revealed His Son in 
me ' and ‘ the dawning of the Light of the Glory of the 
Gospel of Christ,’ which were divine transactions on the 
road to Damascus, rather than to a subsequent water- 
rite. His statements concerning the sacraments must 
be interpreted in the light of his undoubted mystic ex- 
periences, such as ' I have been crucified with Christ. 
I no longer live. Christ lives in me,’ or in accordance 
with his recognized allegorical exegesis, as in I Cor. 
RIUT 

In fact, this disputed chapter in r Cor. is most in- 
telligible as a protest by the apostle against the physical 
quasi-magical ideas from the sacraments of the Mystery- 
Religions which his converts were already attaching to 
Christian baptism as bestowing an indelible character 
or ensuring salvation. So thoroughly had his converts 
been tutored by Greek symbolism and the Mysteries in 
the miraculous and soteriological qualities of initiation 
rites, that they naturally heightened the supernatural 
values of corresponding rites in the name of the superior 

1 '' The apostle constantly lays emphasis on faith and the Spirit of 
God as the characteristic factors of the Christian experience. It would 
seem that if, denying all spiritual value to such a physical rite as 
circumcision, he ascribed effective force to baptism, his arguments 


should have turned, as they nowhere do, on the superiority of baptism 
to circumcision ’’ (Burton, Galatians in I.C.C. p. 205). 


BAPTISM AND THE SPIRIT 201 


* Lord Jesus. The experiences which he found in the 
sacraments were those of his ordinary or daily mystic 
apprehension of Christ; they were ethical-mystic, not 
physical-magical. 

In his doctrine of regeneration it is striking that the 
sacraments do not even come in for mention; surely 
this was the proper place for a sacramentarian to treat 
of sacraments, or at least to relate them to the teaching 
of the ‘ new creation ' and the life in the Spirit. 

Closely bound with the faith-mysticism is Paul's 
original and fruitful conception of Spirit, and neither 
explicitly nor implicitly is the Spirit once mentioned as 
conferred by baptism. ‘‘ In the vast majority of cases 
in which Paul speaks of the giving of the Spirit there is 
no reference to any material medium ; in definite terms 
he makes its communication contingent on faith.” * 
Only in two passages—1i Cor. xii. I3, vi. II—is the 
Spirit associated with baptism. ‘‘ But it is not asserted 
and not necessarily implied that the former is mediated 
by the latter." ^ No causal connexion is established 
binding the Spirit to the ritual act. That Paul should 
bring into association baptism and the reception of the 
Spirit was natural because of their primitive association, 
and also because baptism with personal confession would 
generally follow immediately upon conversion, and in 
the psychopathic conditions in the early community 
would generally or often be accompaniéd by visible 
‘ spiritual ' manifestation.? The symbolism of primitive 
baptism was also too obvious and too instructive to fail 
to find a place in Paul's mystic-ethical apprehension of 
the Gospel. 


1 Morgan, Religion and Theology of Paul, p. 206. ? Morgan, ib. 

3 Cf. Morgan, p. 207: '' That the apostle speaks of renewal as wash- 
ing rather gives the impression that the rite is no more than the 
symbol of a spiritual change spiritually wrought. In view of the fact 
that in general he speaks of the Spirit as given directly by God and 
explicitly establishes faith as the condition of its reception, nothing 
short of an unambiguous statement would justify us in attributing to 
him the idea that it is communicated through a material agency. But 
such is nowhere to be found.” 


202 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


The chief obstacle to interpreting Paul as the first 
Christian sacramentarian lies in the confessedly central 
place of faith-mysticism in Paul's own life and teaching ; 
this was neither induced by nor dependent on sacra- 
mental operations. In his gospel, which is ‘ the power 
of God to salvation to every believer, salvation comes 
only and always through faith and accompanied by the 
Spirit. This faith-mysticism stands in irreconcilable 
antithesis to a union vouchsafed through physico- 
spiritual acts. The antithesis is so apparent, the religious 
attitude of faith so basal, and the ethical conditions so 
stressed that some interpreters like Heitmüller,' Weinel,? 
Holtzmann,? Hoffmann,* who find a warrant for sacra- 
mentarianism in Paul, accept the antithesis and leave 
the riddle unsolved. Sacramentarianism they detect 
present in certain forms, but only as a foreign ingredient 
in Paul’s thought and quite incongruous with his con- 
ception of the union of the Christian with the life-giving 
Spirit and the unrestricted activities of the Spirit. In 
Paul’s thought the Christian life begins in a mystic 
act of justification by faith, and it remains through- 
out a ‘life hid with Christ in God’ in this same 
unbroken fellowship, whether at the Lord’s table or 
at work or in prison. The Christian is always ‘ in 
the Lord,’ whether he eats or drinks or whatever he 
does. 

Paul accepted the rites which he found in existence 
in the Church at his conversion, but he left nothing in 
Christianity the same as he found it. In these rites he 
saw not a renewal of fellowship or a supernatural act 
of union-—for the Pneuma-Christ was always in the 

1 Taufe u. Abendmahl bei Paulus, p. 35 ff. 

* Bib. Theol. d. N.T. p. 330 ff. 

* Neutest. Theol. II, pp. 198, 207. 

* Hoffmann, p. 152, speaks of '' a clear contradiction ’’ between the 
conception of the body and blood of Christ as symbols of His sacrificial 
death and again as the means of participation in the life of the Spirit 
which is Christ. This contradiction is assigned to a fusion of the 
Jewish conception of a memorial meal and the Hellenistic conception 
of a mystical relation with God through sacraments. 


FAITH-MYSTICISM 203 


Christian—but rather the cult-expression or venerable 
symbol of what was the daily and hourly privilege of 
the Christian. It is thus that there are scores of refer- 
ences to this initial and sustained communion through 
faith-mysticism in which Paul never mentions the sacra- 
ments as the antecedent causes or media or material 
vehicle; and this unquestionable usage of the apostle 
deprives the one solitary reference, 1 Cor. x. 14 ff., to 
fellowship in connexion with the Supper of any exclusive 
potency or ex opere operato significance: '' The truth 
is that the Supper did not lend itself in the way baptism 
did to body forth the mystical union as Paul conceived it. 
While it might express the idea of union with Christ in 
His death, it could not express the complementary idea 
of union with Him in His resurrection." * This suggests 
that Paul's expressions regarding the sacraments should 
be treated as mystic experiences. If this explanation 
fails, recourse may be had to the physical-sacra- 
mentarian. But starting with the faith-mysticism, there 
is not à single expression which eludes the mystical 
explanation, and indeed on this explanation his 
statements are not so remote from modern think- 
ing as are words like ‘I have been crucified with 
Christ.’ 

Such statements as Rom. vi. 3-5, and 1 Cor. x. 16-17, 
might be forced into an ex opere operato significance if 
Paul's ever-present faith-mysticism did not stand in the 
way. Or they might be given this construction if we 
had any hint elsewhere in Paul to support this view, 
but they demand no more and permit no less a meaning 
than the mystic experience.’ 

There is no reference to the Supper outside the pas- 
sages I Cor. x, xi, and in them there is not a word to 
indicate without dubiety that the Lord's Supper is either 
the medium or the objective cause of union with Christ, 
or even a bond of union with one another, or that the 


* Morgan, ib. p. 226. 
? Cf. Kennedy, St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions, p. 296. 


204 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


elements are spiritual nourishment.’ Neither is there a 
trace of evidence of an infusion of supernatural or 
mysterious powers into the bread and wine. Never is 
the water ‘ consecrated ’ or supernaturally charged, nor 
are the elements spirit-infused and ‘ converted ’ as they 
appear by the end of the first century. Nor in Paul 
does the official position of the ministrant (who is never 
designated as priest) lend any validity to the sacrament: 
as yet sacerdotal control of the machinery of the sacra- 
ments with its inevitable magical implications is absent, 
though such control is to the modern sacramentarian of 
prime importance. As yet, however, any Christian, 
especially a presbyter or overseer or teacher or prophet, 
could administer a sacrament long before Ignatius 
forbade baptism ' without the bishop.’ * What con- 
stitutes the whole value of the sacraments is the moral 
condition of the participant and a life of faith. 

Whenever Paul mentions the means of union with 
Christ or the ground of forgiveness, it is never once a 
cult-act or rite that he indicates, but faith or grace or 
the love or power of God: the absence of one such 
unambiguous declaration assigning to either sacrament 
an effective and causal value in its own divine right is 
surely noteworthy. Forgiveness which gives peace with 
God and righteousness never appears in association with 
baptism. And it is by way of exception ? that references 
to death with Christ or union with Christ in death appear 
in sacramental association, the only two clear references 
being Rom. vi. 3-4, Col. ii. 12. 

Paul’s relation to the magical-physical sacraments and 
mystic * ritual was similar to his relation to contemporary 


1 ““ Even the conception of the rite as binding believers into a fellow- 
ship with one another never emerges. . . . A memorial of Christ's 
sacrificial death, a means of proclaiming it—that and that alone is 
what the Supper signifies to Paul '' (Morgan, ib. pp. 221, 224). 

? Ad Smyr. VIII. 2. 3. Cf. Kennedy, p. 225 ff. 

* The differences between Paul's mysticism, as determined by its 
character of Christ-mysticism, and Hellenistic mysticism, are exag- 
gerated by Deissner into a repudiation of mysticism by Paul, but quite 


PAUL'S ATTITUDE TO THE MYSTERIES 205 


religious ideas. He was not averse to using Pagan ideas 
and fostering mystic yearnings which made his gospel 
intelligible to his hearers, nor to employing the analogies 
and suggestions of rival cults, in which he could discover, 
as in the Law, a praeparatio evangelica. The prevalent 
Hellenistic conception of mystic union with the Divine 
had much affinity with his own personal experience, 
though never to the point of either identification or 
absorption. His attitude to the Mysteries has been in- 
structively compared by Wendland + to Plato's toward 
Orphism. The origin of a religious idea did not trouble 
Paul, nor did the idea itself compel him to sheer imita- 
tion. He seems to have had no fear that his terminology 
through its kinship with Pagan ideas would mislead his 
converts. In Paul's efforts to formulate for himself the 
content and scope of Christianity and to commend it to 
others, he eagerly laid hold of every idea and suggestion 
that could do Christ service. The aspirations fostered 
in his converts by the mystic rituals of Paganism, their 
emotional experiences of communion, and their hopes 
of incorruptibility attained in prior worships would not 
be rudely thrust aside.^ But Paul's emphasis upon the 
moral aspects ? of the Christian message was of infinitely 
greater and more lasting worth to Christianity than his 
application of Hellenistic mysticism in the interpretation 
of the new faith. 

That Christianity became soon after Paul's day a 
unconvincingly (Paulus u. die Mystik seiner Zeit, 2nd ed. p. 80 ff.). 
Schweitzer designates Paul's mysticism as '' eschatological mysticism '' 
explicable from Jewish and primitive Christian ingredients (Gesch. d. 
paul. Forschung, pp. 176-89). 

1 Hell.-vém. Kultur, 2nd ed. p. 185. 

2 “We believe that he found the practices of the Mysteries sugges- 
tive as a practical method of mysticism, and that he indeed reinter- 
preted the old practices of baptism and the Church meal in the light 
of this experience, and opened the way to further developments in the 
sacramental direction. But with Paul the sacraments are mystical 
rather than magical, symbolical rather than miracle-working, and 
secondary to the spiritual and ethical elements of faith ’’ (Bulcock, 


The Passing and the Permanent in St. Paul, p. 34). 
* Cf. Dobschütz, Der Apostel Paulus, I, p. 42 f. 


I5 


206 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


Mystery-Religion, and that even Paul's presentation of 
this missionary faith tended in this direction cannot be- 
denied, but evidence is wholly lacking that Paul changed 
Christianity into a Mystery-Religion and transformed the 
primitive rites into the magical ex opere operato sacra- 
ments in vogue in the Church from at least the end of 
the first century and prominent in Ignatius and Irenaeus. 
Where rites of initiation were deemed requisite and of 
mysterious efficacy, it was inevitable that Christian 
baptism should be brought into line with parallel 
practices. Out of sympathetic magic it was natural that 
a sympathetic rite should be evolved. 

Indirectly, however, sacramentarianism traced its 
ancestry to Paul. His mystic significance of the sacra- 
ments easily declined into magical or semi-physical 
operations. His symbolic and mystic connexion of 
baptism and the Supper with union with Christ prepared 
the way for a causal connexion.’ His ethical idea of 
the sacrament retreated before transcendental ideas. 
Regeneration by the Spirit and the association of baptism 
with the Spirit without mention of the laver lent them- 
selves readily, in magic religious associations, to the 
Paulinist evolution of the ‘ laver of regeneration and of 
spiritual renewal ' (Titus iii. 5). 

Further, it was inevitable that some of Paul's expres- 
sions, such as ‘ baptism into Christ's death,’ ‘ fellowship 
in the body and blood of Christ,’ ‘ buried with Him in 
baptism,’ ‘ eating and drinking judgment,’ in the circle 
of his Pagan converts, many of whom had come from 
mystery-guilds, should be interpreted along lines familiar 
in the Pagan worships. As in the cult of the Great 
Mother the primitive sacrifice of the taurobolium 
evolved ? into a grand act of initiation and the supreme 
sacrament of ' rebirth for eternity,' so in an age sub- 
sequent to Paul when rites were multiplied and rituals 
elaborated, when '' every hand that was stretched out 


1 Cf. Holtzmann, Neutest. Theol. II, p. 197. 
* Cf. Hepding, Attis, p. 199 f.; Graillot, Culte de Cybéle, ch. iv. 


PAULINE GERMS OF SACRAMENTARIANISM 207 


for religion tried to grasp it in a sacramental form ; the 
eye saw sacraments where sacraments there were none 
and the senses gave them body," * certain germs latent 
in-Pauline thought rapidly put forth a new growth, and 
secondary elements kept in the background in Paul's 
own experience and in his sane reflexion thereon came 
to the front consonant with the materializing of religious 
conceptions. 

Though a positive magical working of rites is not to be 
discovered in Paul, it could with plausibility be asserted 
that he recognized at least the negative or destructive 
effects. The epidemic of illness and deaths attributed 
by Paul to the abuse of the Agape in the Corinthian 
Church would most naturally be interpreted as parallel 
to the destructive agencies of magic through the infusion 
of supernatural power in objects rather than, as Paul 
may possibly have wished to indicate, as a result of divine 
judgment.* How even a learned ecclesiastic like Cyprian 
would read the account is not a matter of conjecture.? 

An excommunication 'in the Name of our Lord 
Jesus ' to effect the physical death of an immoral Church 
member in order that his spirit might be saved at the 
Parousia could not fail to suggest to the ancient mind 
the powers of the invocation of a Name rather than a 
special punitive act of Providence. Such punishments 
would not sound so strange when death * was the penalty 
awaiting those who proceeded prematurely to initiation 
without the express permission of the Deity mediated 
through a spiritual Father. 

Similarly Paul's enployment of the custom in the 

1 Harnack, Expansion, II, p. 288. ? As in Morgan, ib. p. 223. 

3 Cf. Angus, Mystery-Religions, p. 256; Bigg, Church's Task, p. 83 f. 

4 Cf. the threat of death by the high-priest Mithras to Lucius in 
Apuleius, XI. 21. Also the words in a letter of Apollonius, a neophyte 
of Serapis in the temple of Memphis, to his spiritual father, Ptole- 
maeus: ' And if we cannot die and if you see that we are to be saved, 
let us be baptized,' so interpreted of a baptism in obedience to a divine 
vision by Reitzenstein, Hell. Mysterienreligionen, 2nd ed. p. 85, but 


modified, 3rd ed. p. 297. For a different interpretation vide U. Wilcken, 
Urkunden d. Ptolemderzeit, I, p. 330 f. 


208 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


Corinthian community of vicarious baptism on behalf 
of dead friends as an argumentum ad hominem in his 
proof of the resurrection, would suggest intrinsic 
efficacies in the rite and encourage this magical 
practice until it assumed such proportions that it was 
prohibited as an abuse by an ecclesiastical Council in 
A.D. 397. i 

As Gentile Christianity came into more familiar contact 
with Paganism and its theological formulation proceeded, 
as Pagan and semi-Pagan doctrines secured full right 
of citizenship in Christian theology, the questions which 
Paul either did not raise or at least did not attempt to 
answer were raised and answered according to con- 
temporary conceptions: causal and transcendental con- 
nexions were evolved out of his symbolic or suggestive 
associations. 

As the ecstatic condition normally experienced at adult 
baptism ceased, as ‘the spiritual gifts’ became un- 
familiar, baptism became the recognized mode of the 
reception of the Spirit conceived as akin to the imparta- 
tion of the supernatural substance in the Mystery- 
sacraments. 

The moral emphasis * of Paul on the sacrament as a 
pledge of loyalty became less popular than the ritual 
guarantee of a fresh access of grace or infusion of 
power or a supernatural assurance of resurrection or 
immortality. 


Passing from Paul to the Fourth Gospel, a distinct 
advance towards sacramentarianism has been made, 
though the author of this ‘ spiritual Gospel’ halts far 
short of the ecclesiastical sacramentarianism regnant in 
his day and becoming ever more marked as organization 


* “ Paul was the first and almost the last theologian of the early 
Church in whom sacramental theology was really held in check by 
clear ideas and strictly spiritual considerations. After him all the 
floodgates were opened, and in poured the Mysteries with their lore ’’ 
(Harnack, Exp. I, p. 289). 


DUALITY IN JOHANNINE THOUGHTS 209 


displaced spontaneity and liberty. Nowhere does the 
writer advance the position of any per se validity of an 
ordinance, nor does he intimate that consecration brings 
down supernatural power into material objects of cult, 
nor does he venture to assert that Spirit is always the 
concomitant of correct ritual. The enhanced importance 
of ritual since Paul's day, the inevitable interpretations 
given to Paul's expressions in closer contact with Pagan 
mysticism, the current inability to differentiate between 
symbol and effect, the penetrative influence of the 
Mysteries with the increasing preponderance of Gentile 
Christianity, all tended to externalize and magnify the 
earlier rites. 

Though the Fourth Gospel writer disparages all 
magical-physical operation of rites, he advances con- 
siderably beyond the Pauline standpoint. While holding 
the Pauline mystic-symbolic doctrine, he attempted to 
graft thereon a refined sacramentarianism. He claims 
a greater place for the sacraments in the corporate life 
of the Society than does Paul, or he attaches a greater 
importance to them, though always to the accompani- 
ment of a warning or a corrective statement. Hence this 
Gospel, more than any New Testament writing, has pro- 
moted the cause of sacramentarianism. 

The attitude of the Fourth Gospel to sacraments is 
determined, first, by the marked paradoxical character 
or duality of Johannine thought, whereby the higher 
spiritual conception does not drive the lower and more 
material entirely off the field. Thus the free activities 
of the Spirit appear in co-ordination with the material 
acts, but in such wise that it was easier for the spiritual 
man duly to evaluate the physical channel of grace, than 
for the orthodox member of the Church of his day to 
correct the seemingly extravagant claims for the sacra- 
ments by the qualifications and warnings ; and, secondly, 


1 ** Nearly every sentence in the Gospel might be paralleled with 
another which appears to indicate a view of different tenor ’’ (Scott, 
Fourth Gospel, p. 12). Cf. Holtzmann, Neutest. Theol. II, p. 551). 


210 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


by the author's twofold conception of Life which is 
conceived spiritually and metaphysically, so that the 
Logos-Christ imparts life directly by knowledge or faith 
and again mediates it through the sacraments. 

In the discourse on Baptism the Synoptic assertion 
that John's baptism was a water-rite and that of the 
Coming One a baptism in Spirit is modified into a 
baptism of water and Spirit as co-efficients of rebirth. 
The being ‘ begotten from above ' is absolutely essential 
for entrance into the Kingdom, but such rebirth is both 
a spiritual and a ritual transaction: a man must be ' born 
of water and of spirit.' 

Regeneration is associated with baptism, certainly not 
yet causally but in a more intimate fashion than in Paul. 
Statements like those in xix. 34 and 1 John v. 6 could 
only be interpreted in accordance with the sacra- 
mentarianism which gripped the Church before the 
beginning of the second century. A step has already 
been taken in the direction of Tertullian's statement * 
that ' we little fishes after the example of our Fish, 
IXOTZ, Jesus Christ, are born in water, nor have we 
salvation in any other way than by permanently remain- 
ing in water.' 

The Bread Discourse in Capernaum particularly 
reveals the author's point of view and his problem of 
adjusting his own personal and fundamental conception 
of salvation through faith and knowledge and that of 
the Church through sacramental mediation. He seems 
at times perplexingly conscious of the superfluity of 
material mediation of that Life which is imparted directly 
to faith and enjoyed in the mystic experience of abiding 
in Him who is the Life. Throughout this discourse 


1 “ His conception of Christ as Logos involves him in a view of 
Life which can only be described as semi-physical, and which runs 
parallel throughout with the purely religious view. Life as so regarded 
cannot be communicated except by a magical agency, and John dis- 
covered this agency in the Lord's Supper’’ (Scott, Fourth Gospel, 
p. 128; cf. also p. 260 ff. and Holtzmann, Neut. Theol. II, p. 508). 

2 De Bapt. 1. 


CONCESSIONS TO ECCLESIASTICAL USAGES 211 


Christ is the Bread of Life, the Nourisher of Souls, but 
in the first part, vi. 26-50, Christ is the life-giver through 
faith to the believer (47). The language is clearly 
symbolic: ‘I am the Bread ' is parallel to ‘I am the 
Life,” as in Philo’ the manna is symbolically ‘ the 
heavenly Logos.’ But with 52b there is a startling 
transition. ‘ Body’ with its mystical possibilities is 
replaced by ‘ flesh ’ with its realism ; ‘ eating,’ payeîv, is 
reinforced by ' manducation,’ 6 rpeyev. Such expres- 
sions as ' unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man 
and drink His blood, you have no life in you’; ' he 
that eats My flesh and drinks My blood has eternal 
life '; or ‘ abides in Me and I in him,’ seem strange or 
superfluous to us after the assertion of 47, ‘ truly I tell 
you that he that believes has eternal life,’ but they 
represent the orthodox sacramentarian view of the 
writer's day which he cannot see his way rudely to cast 
aside. His estimation of the Church and his loyalty to 
its traditions induce him to reassert the Church's point 
of view of the sacraments even in the immediate context 
of the more spiritual mode of reception of eternal life, 
though he takes pains in the immediate subsequent 
context to supply the corrective that ‘ the Spirit is the 
life-giver.' 

In the discourses on both sacraments the writer treats 
the established sacraments as problems, as paradoxical 
experiences defying definition in a way unknown in Paul. 
In the one case Nicodemus, the type of the cultured 
man of his age, appears as being initiated into the 
mystery of rebirth in sacramentarianism. In the other 
case a twofold problem is enunciated: how can ‘ Jesus 
son of Joseph’ be the bread which descends from 
Heaven and by faith gives Life to the world? and how 
can the Son of Man give His flesh to be eaten and His 
blood to drink ? 

In the discourse on baptism the writer unambiguously 
quotes the current ecclesiastical view of regeneration 


1 Quis Rerum Div. Haer. 15. 


212 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


through the co-operation of water and Spirit. But he 
immediately takes steps to correct or supplement the 
ecclesiastical physical-magical ideas which had gathered 
as accretions around the rite. The words must be read 
in the light of i. 33, ‘ this is he who baptizes in the Holy 
Spirit.’ Water is mentioned, but only with Spirit in 
the first instance; in the subsequent three references 
Spirit is mentioned independently and as sole agent.' 
Again, three corrective truths are thrown into promin- 
ence, first that baptism by itself cannot effect the 
transmutation of substance from material or psychic to 
pneumatic or spiritual, as the sacraments of the Mysteries 
effected. Only spirit can produce spirit. Thus the 
Pauline ethical-mystical doctrine of baptism into Christ 
as Spirit and the indwelling of the Spirit in the ' new 
creature ' guides the writer in his speculations in perilous 
proximity with the magic already baptized into Christ. 
Secondly, the water-rite may effect or guarantee re- 
generation, but then it may not, for ‘ the spirit bloweth 
where it pleases ' and its operations are inscrutable. As 
was known in the writer's day, the manifestations of 
possession by the Spirit may precede baptism or arrive 
independently of it. Thus while not denying, or even 
conceding, the current doctrine of the co-ordination of 
Spirit with water-ritual, he asserted that the Spirit cannot 
be restricted to the baptismal operation.” Thirdly, the 
Pauline doctrine of the Spirit-Christ appears in the form 
of the ascent of the Son of Man with the soteriological 
purpose that ' everyone who believes may have in Him 
eternal life,’ to which there is found a corresponding 
conception after vi. 53, ' The words that I have spoken 
to you are spirit and life.’ It is noteworthy that in the 
Farewell Discourse the central theme of the doctrine of 

1 “ Aber die letzte Meinung des Evangelisten ist diese Konzession an 
die kirchliche Praxis doch nicht. . . . Auf keinen Fall aber tritt die 
Taufe als ein selbstándig wirkendes Prinzip neben den Geist hin, son- 
dern beide wirken in und mit einander, trotz begrifflicher Unterschei- 


dung ” (Holtzmann, ib. II, pp. 555-7). 
2 Cf. Pfleiderer, Primitive Christianity, IV, p. 232. 


CORRECTIVES TO SACRAMENTARIAN VIEWS 213 


the Spirit is treated quite independently of ritual trans- 
actions. 

In his conception of the Eucharist the writer so esteems 
the Church sacrament that he cannot and will not set 
it aside. But he would purify it of all magical ex opere 
operato significance as if to deprive it of any intrinsic 
office: (1) By connecting the Eucharist not with the 
sacrificial death of Jesus on the last night, but with the 
miraculous feeding in Galilee in such a way that the 
language of the first part could not fail to be under- 
stood symbolically or allegorically. He practically 
separates the Agape of the new commandment from the 
Synoptic Eucharist of the new covenant. (2) He leaves 
no dubiety that faith-union with the Logos-Christ is 
eternal life now and assures it eschatologically, thus 
logically as well as in religious experience rendering the 
mediation through material channels superfluous. The 
life of Christ is imparted immediately to and by faith, 
whatever the sacrament may effect or fail to effect. 
(3) After the declarations of eating the flesh and drinking 
the blood, he as emphatically asserts, following Paul, 
2 Cor. iii. 6, ‘ it is the Spirit that gives life,’ whereby 
he does not intend to stultify himself by retracting what 
he has just said about the Eucharistic rite: he does not 
disparage the rite, but he disparages all popular ideas 
as to its working. It has an importance which he appar- 
ently cannot explain to himself or reconcile with his con- 
ception of life in Christ, an importance probably due to 
his own experiences at participation ; it is to him perhaps 
also a substitute for the apocalyptic presence, Parousia, 
which he sets aside. (4) Immediately after the ' hard 
discourse ' which offended many, Peter is represented 
as, out of profounder insight, making the assertion 
* Thou hast the words of eternal life,’ which brings the 
mind back to the first part of the discourse, in which 
Christ as the heavenly manna and the bread of life is 
immediately the life-bestower. '(5) The ' offence ' lies 
in the hearers' failure to understand that the reference 


on 


214 'ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


is to the flesh and blood of ‘ the Son of Man ascended 
to His former estate ' (62), and so the flesh and blood 
are not realistically by ‘ conversion’ of the elements 
the body and blood of Jesus son of Joseph (42) or even 
of Christ from Heaven, but mystically and spiritually 
of one who by exaltation became spirit for spiritual 
fellowship (vii. 39). Only spirit can produce life and 
impart spirit (iii. 6; vi. 63). | 

The doctrine of the sacraments in the Fourth Gospel, 
with its blend of what Réville calls '' materialistic 
mysticism '"'! with spiritual immediacy, admits most 
readily of interpretation as a double apologetic ? against 
what appears to this writer two extreme views, that of 
the popular magical offices of material things of the 
Christian cult, and that of the Gnostics ? who denied 
that the elements were the very flesh and blood of Christ. 
Others besides the Gnostics objected to the idea of eating 
flesh and drinking blood in the Lord's Supper. Ata 
later date Porphyry on John vi. 53 asks, ‘ Is it not then 
bestial and absurd, surpassing all absurdity and bestial 
coarseness, for a man to eat human flesh and drink the 


1 Quatrième Évangile, 2nd ed. p. 182. ‘‘ Déjà l'incarnation du 
Logos était une infidélité à l'idéalisme strict; cependant il était encore 
possible de l'expliquer au point de vue philonien tout au moins. Mais 
la manducation de la chair et du sang dans lesquels ce Logos s'était 
incarné, pour assurer la vie éternelle à ceux qu'il sauve parce qu'ils 
ont foi en Lui! En vérité, cette parole était dure à entendre ’’ 
(pp. 182-3). 

? Professor Scott includes an apologetic against Judaism, with which 
Christianity came into conflict through the sacrament of the Supper 
(p. 71). In the Eucharistic address (Bread Discourse) the Evangelist 
had also probably in view the heathen and Jewish calumnies against 
the Christian communion meal as ‘ Thyestean banquets ' (Holtzmann, 
Neutest. Theol. II. p. 560). 

* “ Weil er der kirkliche Gnostiker ist, der gar wohl die Berechti- 
gung des Anstosses erkannte, den die Gnostiker in doppelter Hinsicht 
an der üblichen Abendmahlsauffassung nahmen, dass nämlich (x) der 
Genuss der Symbole des Sühnetodes Christi, d. h. seines irdischen 
Leibes und Blutes, in der Tat absurd sei, und dass (2) die starke 
Betonung des realen Genusses leicht zu der Vorstellung von einer 
magischen Wirkung des Sakraments hinführe '" (Hoffmann, p. 201). 
Cf. Holtzmann, II, p. 572; Pfleiderer, Primitive Christianity, IV, p. 232. 


A DOUBLE APOLOGETIC 215 


blood of his fellow-tribesman or relative and thereby 
win life eternal?’ * 

The writer is conscious of the value both of sacraments 
and of Gnosis, and he goes as far as possible with the 
sacramentarians and Gnostics ° of his day while opposing 
both. He could not advocate the magical and material- 
istic views of Ignatius, to whom the Eucharist was ' the 
medicine of immortality and antidote against death,’ 
and who in opposition to the Gnostics asserted the factual 
identity of the elements with the body and blood of 
Christ. Nor could the writer commit himself to such 
statements as appeared in Irenaeus,’ to the effect that 
participation in the Eucharist guarantees incorruptibility 
of the flesh for purposes of a resurrection of the flesh. 

It is not by accident that the writer introduces the 
Eucharistic discourse by two ' signs ' conveying the idea 
that Jesus' body is free from earthly limitations and 
unconditioned by time and space, which is of course 
possible only through his Logos-Christology and from the 
Pauline conception of the incompatibility of flesh and 
blood in Christ with the offices of Spirit. 

The evangelist's deft apologetic method ^ causes him 
to cite the baldest and most extreme sacramentarian 
statements of the Church, which he seeks to correct ? 
and supplement by putting his own personal view of the 
reception of life by faith or knowledge or mystic union 
in the foreground. That the transition from death unto 
life is an act of faith (v. 24) remains fundamental, and 


1 In Macarius Magnes, III. 15, cited Harnack, Exp. I, p. 287. 

2 Cf. Heitmüller in Rel. in Gesch. u. Geg. I, p. 150; Holtzmann, II, 
p. 568. 

* Adv. Haer: IV. 18, 4. 

^ '' He does not discard the common beliefs, even when they clash 
with his own, but accepts them formally in order to interpret and 
spiritualize them . . . he takes the popular conception of the religious 
value of the Supper, and sets it in the light of a higher and more 
reasonable conception '' (Scott, Fourth Gospel, p. 124 f.). 

š “Tt is his usual plan, when he has said anything which may tend 
to confirm ritualism, thus to supplement it with an antidote ’’ (Gardner, 
Ephesian Gospel, p. 206). 


216 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


cleansing can be effected through the word (xv. 3). He 
would retain the outward ordinance because of his con- 
ception of the Church, while subordinating it to the 
essential spirit: ‘‘ With his profound insight into the 
spiritual meaning of Christianity, John saw a danger 
in the increasing reverence attached to the outward rite 
of the Supper. The natural craving for something 
visible and material in religion had seized on the simple 
ordinance bequeathed by Jesus and invested it with a 
superstitious value." * 

But in the writer’s attempt to blend popular and 
philosophical Christianity, the baptismal doctrine of the 
reception of the Spirit and of regeneration by baptism 
with the more inward view of rebirth by faith, and to 
accommodate the conception of the Mysteries of the im- 
partation of immortal substance by sacrament, to his 
own conceptions consonant with his guiding Logos- 
speculation of Christ as being life and imparting it, there 
results directly a strange contradiction which is left un- 
resolved.” Hence his teaching, which was intended to 
evaluate the sacramental principle while subordinating 
it to the Spirit and to serve as an antidote to the 
paganizing of Christian worship, has, contrary to the 
writer’s intention, conduced to the evolution of sacra- 
mentarianism in Christianity. The parallelism which 
he left unexplained between the transformation accom- 
plished by faith in and knowledge of the Life-giving 
Logos and regeneration by semi-physical miraculous 
ritual acts hastened the evolution of the very magical 
conception and miraculous working of ordinance which 
he endeavoured to stay. He operated with two con- 
ceptions of Life and of its impartation, and of these 
credulity chose its own. 

The instructive and timeless Hellenistic idealism, 

M ScotG p. 122. 

? '' Ganz ähnlich also, wie wir es beim Herrenmahl finden werden, 
ist das sakramentale Moment der Taufe gleichzeitig gesetzt und ver- 


leugnet, anerkannt und verfluchtigt '" (Holtzmann, II, p. 557 f.). 
* Cf. Gardner, ib. pp. 195-210. 


SACRAMENTARIANISM IN FOURTH GOSPEL 217 


mysticism and symbolism * were not able in lesser minds 
to maintain their high place over or beside the puzzling 
contemporary supernatural realism. Even expressions 
of his deep spirituality have been wrested from their 
contextual settings and forced to support * the heightened 
value of outward ordinances and to confuse the dis- 
tinction, so clear to his mind, between the symbol of 
the cult transaction and the spiritual reality of religious 
facts. Sacramentarian ideas were indirectly deduced 
from his statements isolated from their correctives. 

According to his mind, the whole validity of the 
sacrament was spiritual and inward, not physical and 
intrinsic. There is as yet not a trace of the magical 
working to appear so clearly from Ignatius and Irenaeus 
onward, not a hint that God or Christ can be drawn 
down from Heaven through or in ritual act, nor that 
‘ consecration ' can infuse elements so as to charge them 
with supersensual potencies. And as yet the only 
baptized are adult moral agents on their own confession, 
and not non-moral infants. 

The evangelist’s healthful sacramental doctrine, the 
perception that the Spirit may work through material 
things, could not thrive save in the lofty mysticism 
suffused with ethical qualities, and could not but suffer 
declension into the magical fashion of the days when, 
on the cessation of the primitive spiritual manifestations, 
the outward rite was correspondingly highly esteemed, 
and when the idea from the Mysteries had taken per- 
manent root in Christianity that no member of the 
brotherhood could be saved or benefit by the grace or 
blessings of the religion except through participation in 
its rituals of initiation and rebirth. 

It is of course another matter that by making con- 
cessions to contemporary sacramentarianism, and by 
adapting even its extreme expressions in his own 


1 The amalgamation of which Inge finds characteristic of Johannine 
thought (Swete, Essays, p. 258). 
Z CEScobt; pp. 128, 132. 


218 ST. PAUL AND THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


elucidating contexts, the Johannine writer commended 
the religion of Truth both to the cultured classes familiar 
with Oriental-Hellenistic mysticism and to the masses * 
expectant of physical-magical preparation for immor- 
tality by transmutation of their natures into the divine 
substance. To both classes Christianity early appeared 
to offer the best means ? of satisfying their yearnings 
for union with the divine and their hopes of divinization 
(becoming pueumatikot) into the deathless nature.? 


! Cf. Harnack, Expansion, I, pp. 287, 292. 

2 “ Gerade der transzendente Hintergrund des hellenistischen Christus 
dazu diente, das Christentum als die wahre Erfüllung der heidnischen 
Mysterienweisheit, als die Befriedigung ihres ungestillten Verlangens 
nach Erschliessung der geheimnisvollen jenseitigen und göttlichen Welt 
erscheinen zu lassen ’’ (Pfleiderer, cited Holtzmann, II, p. 423, n. 5). 

* In a writer of a Jewish cast of mind like Hermas, ' ascent through 
water ’ is necessary to the dead for life and entrance into the Kingdom 
of God, because the only means of ' putting off the mortality of their 
prior existence ' (Sim. IX, 16, 2). 


CHAPTER XIII 
THE PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


THE need and utility of sacraments rest primarily on the 
obstinate fact of man being a creature of two worlds, 
the successive and the Eternal: ' that is not first which 
is spiritual, but that which is natural. Man is neither 
body alone nor spirit alone, but a body informed by 
spirit and receiving all the impacts of the outer sense- 
world. Spiritual experiences are often inextricably 
woven with natural or physical experiences. Body and 
Spirit may in unhealthful asceticism or in dualistic 
philosophy be set in antithesis and opposition, and 
the futile attempt made here in our time-space existence 
. to separate what God has joined together. This is 
fraught with serious perils to both body and spirit: 
properly speaking, they are in our present constitution 
allies. The body informed by spirit connects * through 
sensory nerve channels and emotions with the outer 
world from which it brings much useful information to 
the spirit; while the spirit, not disdainful of such in- 
formation, converts it to the purposes of a clearer 
self-consciousness, and through sense learns to transcend 
sense. Through sense and the sensuous man can rise 
to the spiritual. Deep correspondences link him with 
the material order which reflexion proves to be instinct 
with vast significances.? 


2 *' Tt is not magic, but a sheer fact traceable throughout our many- 
sided life, that we often grow, mentally and spiritually, almost solely 
by the stimulation of our senses or almost solely by the activity of 
other minds. Magic begins only when and where things physical are 
taken to effect spiritual results apart altogether from minds trans- 
mitting and receiving ’’ (von Hügel, Essays and Addresses, p. 251). 

2 '''The physical echoes and repeats the spiritual. ‘ Things made’ 
are figures of reality. The external is the outward sign of the inward 


219 


220 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


The problem of sacramentalism is therefore only one 
aspect of that agelong problem of the meeting in our 
mysterious being of the material and the spiritual, the 
finite and infinite, which, since the days of Heraclitus 
and particularly since the intuition of Plato, has engaged 
the mind of our Western thinkers. It is and will 
continue to be a philosophic problem to resolve the 
seemingly oppressive antithesis of time and eternity 
within us. But it is also a problem for every man who 
has a serious purpose to discover the meaning and end 
of his life. As denizens of— 

‘“ two worlds immense, 
Of spirit and of sense," 
we experience strange pressures from a mysterious 
Beyond ; we catch momentary glimpses of an intriguing 
Otherness than ourselves which, though they pass, leave 
us not as we were; again and again in some definite 
place we are compelled to say, ' Surely the Lord is in 
this place, and I knew it not,’ or to cry with the Psalmist, 
* Whither shall I flee from Thy Spirit? ’ 

Various indeed has been the expression given to this 
consciousness of our compound nature, and various 
the solutions offered. It is almost as futile to attempt 
to flee the body as to escape the spirit. The body has 
been tortured and maligned by some of the greatest of 
the saints for the sake of the health of the spirit, and 
the spirit has been cramped and mutilated in the vain 
attempt to comport itself as if discarnate. Yet the 
alliance of sense and spirit persists after all our protests. 
Our consciousness of the finite is the measure of the 
consciousness of the infinite. We may be cribbed, 


and imponderable. The concrete and the abstract in some inexplicable 
fashion correspond, and in our consciousness answer to one another. 
We who are in God’s image understand both forms of utterance, the 
voice of God in creation and the voice of the Spirit who bears witness 
with our spirit: both are intelligible to us, and both carry to us the 
same messages. Light and truth, darkness and evil—they have some- 
thing more than analogy: they connote each other " (Wotherspoon, 
Religious Values in the Sacraments, p. xo). 


MAN A DENIZEN OF TWO WORLDS 221 


cabined, and confined in this ‘‘ too too solid flesh,’’ but 
at least we know it, and we know also by experience 
that we can and may take a holiday ' in the heavenly 
places.’ We know, with Plato, that the spirit of man 
does not beat its wings in futility against the barriers of 
time. 
*'* "There's not a man 
That lives who hath not known his godlike hours,” 


and in such hours we have transcended time and space 
sufficiently to return in triumphant confidence to walk 
the firm earth. Even if we are imprisoned in the dark 
cave of the world, it has an ' entrance exposed to the 
Light ’ and even the moving shadows evoke disturbing 
thoughts of another order: we can cast off our chains 
and make the 'transition from the shadows to the 
images and from the images to the Light.' ' 

The recognition of this twofold existence of ours is the 
first step in our education.  Discounting the Neo- 
Platonic disparagement of matter, Plotinus' recognition 
of this twofold order may be taken as representative: 


* Since there exists a twofold nature, Intelligible and 
Sensible, it is indeed better for the soul to dwell in the 
Intelligible, but being what she is she must needs par- 
ticipate the Sensible also; and she has no occasion to 
be vexed with herself if she is not everywhere her noblest 
self, seeing that in the universe she fills an intermediate 

station. She is of the divine estate, but her dwelling is 

upon the last confines of the Intelligible, so that she has 
the Sensible for neighbour and gives to it a part of what 
.is hers. From that Sensible she must in turn receive, 
if in guiding it she stay not by the unfaltering part of 
herself, but through overmuch zeal sink into the deeps 
of Matter, no longer resting in entireness with the All- 
Soul.’ ? 


1 Plato, Repub. VII. 514, 532b. 
| 2 Enn. IV. 8, 7; tr. in Dodds, Select Passages illustrating Neo- 
Platonism, p. 79 f. 
16 


222 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


In a beautiful passage * from Dio Chrysostom’s On 
the First Notion of God, Pheidias is made the spokes- 
man for the use of images for those who cannot form 
a mental image of the Divine: 


‘Pure spirit and thought by itself no sculptor or 
painter can portray. . . . We attribute a human body 
to God, seeing in it the vessel of thought and reason. 
Unable to show the unimaginable and the unpresentable 
by an example of it, we try to do so by means of the 
visible and the representable. We so use this that it has 
the virtue of a symbol. . . . No one surely will main- 
tain that it would be better if no statue or image of the 
gods at all had been appointed among men and that 
we ought simply to look up to the heavenly bodies. 
Certainly every reasonable man offers adoration to the 
heavenly bodies, believing that he is looking at blessed 
Divine Beings from afar. But something in man drives 
him towards God. There is in all men an urgent craving 
to come to close quarters with the Divine Beings whom 
they honour and serve, approaching them and handling 
them with confident faith, sacrificing to them and crown- 
ing them.' Surely ' the symbols of heaven and earth 
have been placed side by side.’ ? 


The use of sacramentalism rests also on the sensitive- 
ness of our human nature, both physical and spiritual, 
to impressions of the external world. The appreciation 
of the existence of a successive and an eternal world, 
and of the former as the temporal reflexion of the ideal 
world, does not rudely set aside or depreciate the material 
world by means of which we have been awakened to 
another sphere. If ‘Time is the moving image of 


1 Tr. by Bevan, Later Greek Religion, p. 114 f. 

2 o)pavoU è kal ys maplópvra. rà otuBora (Philo, De Vita Mosis, II 
(III), ro, C.-W. 105. 

* “They [the Sacraments] are the harmonious incidents of an 
economic system within a concatenated universe, in which the material 
is uninterruptedly expressive of the spiritual and is the peculiar instru- 
ment of God for spiritual ends. The symbol (and sacraments are in 
the first place symbols) is the spirituality of matter emerging into 
service ’’ (Wotherspoon, Religious Values in the Sacraments, p. 20). 


MEETING-PLACE OF FINITE AND INFINITE 223 


Eternity,’ surely Time is of an immense worth to us 
other than the problems it prescribes us. We have more 
than an awareness of the external world: in this aware- 
ness there are possible all degrees of response and 
interpretation—the whole diapason of emotional and 
spiritual sensitiveness, from a Peter Bell's uncompre- 
hending attitude to the primrose by the river's brim, 
to the comprehensive sympathy of a St. Francis with 
all nature; or the lofty sacramental use of Nature as 
in Wordsworth and the Lake School of poets, to whom 
on the going out of the light of sense “‘ a flash that has 
revealed the invisible world " imparts ''a faith that 
fails not." ! 

It is at this meeting-place of the finite and the infinite 
within us that sacraments play their chief róle. In some 
circumstances of the soul and for many people— 


'* Sacramental religion does open a door, through 
which the Infinite comes with its gifts right down into 
the common life of our half-animal race; and we again 
can go out towards it, so far as our love, purity, and 
courage permit us—for this path between the soul and 
God is utterly misconceived by us, if we allow ourselves 
to think of it as a one-way street. So apparently hedged 
in by our most humiliating and least spiritual limitations, 
so full of distressing reminiscences of a racial past that 
we should like to ignore, it does give in human ways 
and under human conditions a veritable access to 
Ultimates.” ? 


The symbol or external thing may be either natural 
or artificial or even conventional. For a Wordsworth 
the beauty of Nature may induce the spirit of worship 
and lift to God as the sacraments may do for another, 
because in both cases the symbol mediates the universal 

and because the sacramental power of Nature comes 
from God: in the words of Sir Thomas Browne, '' In 


1 Prelude, Book II. 
? Underhill, Man and the Supernatural, p. 183. 


| 
224 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT © 


brief all things are artificial, for Nature is the Art of 
God.’’ If the mystery and grandeur of Nature expand 
our capacity for God; if there lie in this external world 
such aids and stimulation for the spirit, it is altogether 
fitting that proper use should be made of the sensible 
appeal in religion and in cult. If our outward world 
with its sensibly conveyed appeals can bring— 


‘“ A presence that disturbs me with the joy 
Of elevated thoughts, a sense sublime 
Of something far more deeply interfused,”’ 


it is rational to suppose that in worship, God will come 
to the soul along sense-channels as He does in the unity 
of Nature, provided in each case we have the power to 
see and to feel and the receptiveness of love, in a word, 
'* the Vision and the Faculty Divine."' 

A rude wooden cross’ gathering for us an intensity 
of meaning by concentrating thoughts on the Passion 
of Jesus in both His life and death and summoning us 
to acknowledge that for us, as for Him, we must lose 
life to find it; a war-worn flag on a hard-fought field ; 
a Gothic cathedral ; the mutilated Parthenon—all operate 
by the same laws of our being, though they affect 
different people in different degrees. The spirit of man 
is ever rising through the “‘ sensible signs '' of his world 
to grasp the immensities, through the sensuous to be 
transported to the eternal: ‘‘ in these weaker glories ”’ 
it spies ‘‘ some shadows of Eternity." The sensuous 
ravishment may give an awareness of immaterial things. 
According to the mysticism of Dante, the love of a 
woman becomes the most fitting medium of communion 
with the Divine. Every Uranian lover finds his Beatrice 
both on earth and in heaven. 

Religion may usefully avail itself of this economy of 


* “Thus the crude image, the simplest suggestion, may do just as 
well for religion as the aesthetic masterpiece: often indeed better, 
because it offers a freer passage, a wider range of interpretation to 
the many grades of soul using this great human highway towards God "' 
(Underhill, Man and the Supernatural, p. 171). 


THE INARTICULATE IN RELIGION 225 


all nature! by which external things suggest invisible 
things and evoke a sense of the Infinite in its proximity 
to us: ‘‘ To eliminate the sensible as aids to spiritual 
life has against it all analogy. The appeal to psychology 
and history, so decisive in favour of cultus, carries 
logically with it the admission of some sensible signs as 
contributing, when used by souls in and with the cultus, 
to the spiritual awakening and sanctification of such 
souls.'' ? 

Another reason for the use of sacraments is the recog- 
nition of the immense stretches of the inarticulate in 
religion and in all human life. There is something tran- 
scendental and ineffable in all the deepest experiences 
of life, especially of love and sorrow and rapturous joy. 
The most eloquent and carefully chosen words can 
convey but a most inadequate idea of these estates. 
Words are '' under-agents '" and represent while they 
also perforce misrepresent. There is always something 
more than can be said; much so mysteriously elusive 
that ‘‘ it lies far hidden from the reach of words." But 
our nature has within it an unresting urge towards self- 
expression: hence art, music, poetry, and sacraments. 
In the rationality of our being we often feel more than 
we see or can express. Often, like the herdsman in 


2 


“ The Excursion," a man may— 


‘‘ feel his faith, 
Nor did he believe—he saw.'' 


Philosophy, which in the nature of its office strives most 
to make all things articulate and to label them each in 
its place, suffers from the limitations of logical verbal 
expression and, despite itself, must fall back on concrete 
terms and use spatial symbols. And as religion has for 
its special sphere the emotions, it is compelled to avail 


1 Cf. Alice Gardner, History of Sacraments in Relation to Thought 
and Progress, p. 46 ff. 

2 Von Hügel, Essays. Cf. similar words in Eternal Life, p. 328, on 
“the elimination of sensible impressions and of sensible things as 
joint-awakeners and joint-vehicles of spiritual life ’’ (cf. op. cit. p. 389). 


226 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


itself of symbolism to suggest and for purposes of 
worship. Although God cannot be attained by the 
faculty of sense, yet through sensibly perceived signs 
the mind may be prompted in its striving towards God. 
It was not without reason that an artist-philosopher like 
Plato passed at the high and enthusiastic pitch of his 
argument from dialectic to myth. Absolutes can be 
comprehended only by an Absolute Being, but may be 
brought near to us in symbols. 

Another use of sacraments arises from the supreme 
difficulty of maintaining the high levels of spirituality 
equally at all times, and the consequent need of trysting- 
places where the spirit meets its better and diviner self 
and renews its sense of communion with the Divine or 
Infinite. Sacraments may contribute to the renewal of 
spirituality to those who have been apprehended or seek 
to be apprehended by the spiritual: they may in certain 
moods of the soul supply the requisite ‘ evidence of 
things not seen’; they may not only express religious 
desire and faith, but in some measure awaken such 
desire and faith. Thus writes Baron von Hügel:' “ I 
kiss my child not only because I love it: I kiss it in 
order to love it. A religious picture not only ex- 
presses my awakened faith; itis a help to my faith's 
awakening.”’ 

‘“ There is a difference between one and another hour 
of life in their authority and subsequent effect. Our faith 
comes in moments; our vice is habitual. Yet is there 
a depth in those brief moments which constrains us to 
ascribe more reality to them than to all other experi- 
ences." ^ We wish to multiply these brief constraining 
moments of vision ; we wish to recapture the transporting 
emotion; we wish in drab days to renew the strength 
of which we once were so conscious. A special effort 
is demanded, a concentration of awareness, a determined 
resolve to retrace the stream of our life to its source. 


* Essays and Addresses, p. 251. 
? Emerson, Essays, ‘‘ The Over Soul." 


EBB AND FLOW IN SPIRITUAL LIFE 227 


Every normal life knows these experiences of ebb and 
flow. Every one knows that the Spirit, like the wind, 
* bloweth where it wills,’ betimes without our knowing 
its whence and whither, and that— 
“ We cannot kindle when we will 
The fire that in the heart resides.’’ 

The renewal of power and the recapturing of the vision 
come to individuals very differently ; to some in con- 
templation and intuition; to some in the general sacra- 
mentalism of the outer world ; to some in confronting a 
crisis and making a fateful decision ; and to multitudes 
of others in sacraments. 


‘ Human instinct in its vague reaching-out towards 
the supernatural has always tended to make special 
places traps as it were for the celestial sunshine. It has 
always set apart and held precious, certain suggestive 
objects, actions, and ideas; which carry a weight of 
meaning, a halo of significance stretching far beyond 
appearance, and are able to release from succession the 
mind that surrenders to their appeal." * 


In this recognition of the general use of the outer world 
to the interpreting spirit it is impossible to restrain the 
inrush of the Infinite or the access of God to the soul 
to one channel of sense more than to another. All 
depends on the spiritual health and training and tradition 
and temperament of the individual and of the mixture 
of the emotional, aesthetic, and intellectual elements in 
his essential selfhood. Some symbols may contain a 
more catholic appeal than others, or from their aura of 
reverence and hallowed association of history may prove 
more generally effective than others. A sacrament like 
the Eucharist has a wider appeal through the simplicity 
of its elements and its historical associations with the 
life of Jesus and the traditions of Christian worship than 
Nature-mysticism or art. The Church sacraments may 
represent the theology of the masses and present to their 


! Underhill, Man and the Supernatural, p. 163. 


228 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


eyes and ears what others can formulate in dogma. 
They are acted dogma, dramatized ritual. No other 
sacrament can compete with the Eucharist in the com- 
bination of simplicity with profundity; nor can any 
other sacrament present in such a vivid and dramatic 
way the essence of Jesus’ self-sacrificing life and so unite 
us in ‘ the fellowship of His sufferings.’ 

In a world where God only can register all the 
movements of the soul and respect the distinguishing 
individuality of selfhood, it is precarious to differentiate 
between sacrament and symbol or to delimit the sacra- 
ments, as the Seven Mysteries of the Greek Church, or 
the Seven Sacraments of the Latin Church, or the two 
Sacraments of the Evangelical Churches. God may 
have as little respect for numbers as for persons. Nor 
does it necessarily follow that the ecclesiastical sacra- 
ments—two or seven—are more effective because of the 
Evangelical belief that there be only two sacraments, 
or the Roman anathema against those who either dispute 
their number or deny their Dominical institution. In 
the practice of sacraments, man’s eager demand for aid 
and for at least occasional escape from self will recognize 
differences of values where such exist, and he will exalt 
that sacrament which most exalts him by enabling him 
to transcend himself. 

The value of the sacrament depends neither on its 
Dominical institution, nor on the sacerdotal qualities of 
the ministrants, nor on the correct posture or impeccable 
ritual or vesture of the clergy, but on the receptivity and 
faith of the participant. The claims of Ethics are more 
compelling in the long run than the powers of magic. 
We must take up towards ecclesiastical sacraments the 
position taken by Philo * towards the sacrifices of his 
religion and ‘ the intention of the one who offers ’: 


' De Vita Mosis, III, xo, C.-W. 106-8. Cf. also the strong protest 
against the outward things of cult unaccompanied by purity of soul 
in De Cherub. 28, C.-W. 94 ff. Cf. Porphyry’s remarks, De Abs. II. 
I5, 34, 60. 


SACRAMENT AND SYMBOL 229 


‘ For if he is witless and unrighteous, the sacrifices are 
no sacrifices, his acts of worship unhallowed, and his 
prayers unacceptable, bringing only sheer destruction. 
For when they appear acceptable, they effect not remis- 
sion but remembrance of sins. But if the worshipper is 
holy and righteous, the sacrifice remains valid even if 
the flesh be consumed, nay, even if no victims at all be 
offered. For what is the true worship save the piety of 
a God-loving soul? ’ 


The protagonists of sacraments consider it part of their 
duty to aggrandize sacraments by strictly delimiting 
sacraments from symbols, and “‘ divinely ordained 
sacraments ’’ from other rites of a quasi-sacramental 
value. ‘‘ Symbols suggest and represent; but sacra- 
ments work. They always have a dramatic and dynamic 
quality. They are special deeds, in which the action 
proceeds at two levels. Something genuinely done 
within the natural sphere by and to the body—a real 
washing, eating, touching, or anointing—involves some- 
thing genuinely done within the supernatural sphere by 
and to the soul." ? A symbol may be fortuitous or 
universal, but ‘‘ a rite outside the ordained use has not 
the nature of a sacrament,’’ according to Melancthon.? 
Or according to the Roman view, a sacrament surpasses 
symbol in that “ the sacraments confer the grace which 
they contain." 

Symbols are occasional and representative, but the 
sacraments are also causal ; symbols merely symbolize or 
convey a message, but sacraments effect. Thus '' sacra- 
ments are not merely dramatic but effectual signs.” 


1 Miss Underhill protests thus: '' The Christian theist does or should 
reserve the term ' sacramental' for this real self-giving of Spirit along 
the channels of sense; and ‘symbol’ for that object or image which 
evokes in us an intuition of the Transcendent, or creates for religious 
emotion a suitable path of discharge. We ought therefore to resist 
the diffuse application of 'sacrament' to any and every natural act 
and thing which seems to carry a religious reference” (op. cit. 
p. 176). 

? Underhill, op. cit. p. 176 f. 

? In Saxon Confession, cited Modern Churchman, XVI, p. 415. 


230 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


and ‘‘ when we say that sacraments are effectual signs 
we mean that certain actions or objects are invested by 
divine authority with certain spiritual or supernatural 
properties.” +. 

According to N. P. Williams, sacraments differ from 
symbols in that they are invested not merely with the 
powers of auto-suggestion and congregational hetero- 
suggestion of symbols, but by the presence of ''an 
element of divine invasion and hetero-suggestion—a 
power which comes entirely from without and which 
transforms and quickens the emotional forces evoked 
by the mere symbolism of the rite from within," and 
‘“ sacraments are in some sense causal; they are verae 
causae, and not merely symptoms, of the reception of 
grace.” ? 

The strength of this dogmatic position lies in the fact 
that those who approach with such sacramental faith 
accompanied by moral receptivity will by all the laws 
of psychology receive an access of grace. The weakness 
of this dogmatism lies in the fact that the highest offices 
of the Holy Spirit and the profoundest and most ethical 
experiences granted to such sacramentalists are not in- 
accessible or denied to those who approach the sacrament 
with a wholly different mentality and with a faith poles 
apart from the above, though such undeniable spiritual 
results are forsooth among the ‘‘ uncovenanted mercies ”’ 
graciously permitted by Bishop Gore to fall like crumbs 
from the divine table at which he and his traditional 
sacramentarians have the privilege of occupying the 
chief seats. Nor are these experiences denied to those 
who do not observe ecclesiastical sacraments at all. 
Truly God's thoughts are not as man's, and God's 
ecclesia must be—to some confessionalists—disturbingly 
catholic and comprehensive, even as wide as envisaged 
by the philosopher-martyr who claimed as Christ's all 
those in whom from the beginning of time the Logos 
dwelt, including the ‘ obscure’ mystic Heraclitus and 

1W. Spens, Essays Catholic and Critical, pp. 428-9. Ib. p. 371. 


VARIETIES OF SACRAMENTAL EXPERIENCE 23r 


the ethical mystic Socrates.‘ The world will be nearer 
a decision on this divisive question of symbol and sacra- 
ment, and the operating and validity of sacraments, 
when, e.g. within the Church of England the Anglo- 
Catholics shall have manifested a superior type of 
manhood and “ soul-making’’ to their Modernist 
brethren ; we shall then have a conclusive argument in 
favour of the greater preponderance of the objective 
efficacy of sacraments. Or when the Greek Church 
members prove their pre-eminence in character over the 
Quakers, or when members of the imperial Roman 
Communion are known beyond the Presbyterians for 
their greater success in obeying ‘ the greatest and first 
commandment’ of the Divine Master, we shall have 
surer guidance as to one sacramental usage above 
another. To assess the worth of a Church or a religion 
by the often-used test of the number of its adherents is 
a crude and unsatisfactory method: it may be in every 
religion that the seven thousand who have not bowed 
the knee to dominant religious fashions or been carried 
away by crowd-psychology count for more ultimately 
than the obvious majority. Fortunately the salvation 
armies of the Kingdom are otherwise known than by 
their banners and their war-cries. 
: Since— 
‘f men from men 

Do, in the constitution of their souls, 

Differ, by mystery not to be explained,’’ 
there is and must be a vast difference in the sacramental 
experiences of Christians, as diverse as our human 
nature ? and as incalculable as our inviolable individu- 
alities: we are both solitary and social beings. 

But there is also a vast difference among sincere 
Christians in their attitude towards the Church sacra- 
ments. To some the sacraments, magnified by an aura 

| Justin, Apol. I. 46. 
? “Mille hominum species et rerum discolor usus; 


Velle suum cuique est, nec voto utitur uno’ 
(Persius, V. 52 f.). 


232 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


of reverence acquired through centuries of their use, are 
the very breath of their spiritual life; to others they are 
‘“ optional appendages ’’ of worship. To some sacra- 
ments are obligatory and rest on the supposed Dominical 
institution and command to memorialize ; to others they 
are blessed privileges to be exercised in the religion of 
the Spirit. To some sacraments are, genetically and by 
objective efficacy, Mysteries of a unique order ; to others 
they belong to and hold a supreme place in the general 
sacramental order with which the universe is informed. 
To some they are endowed with virtue in themselves 
because of the sacerdotal consecration and miraculous 
response to produce beneficent effects; to others they 
are the means by which God provides effects commen- 
surate solely with the sacramental experience of the 
adorant. To some they are the core or the sine qua non 
of mystical religion; to others mystical religion is the 
whole of life and consists in the fellowship of our spirit 
with the Father of our spirits in the consciousness that 
at all times ‘ I am not alone; the Father is with Me.’ 

Or on the presence of Christ in the sacraments: all 
who accept sacraments believe in the Real Presence, but 
to some this Presence is localized * in ‘ converted ' 
elements ; to others it is an intensification of ‘ I am with 
you always ' in obedient hearts. By some this Presence 
cannot be conceived as localized objectively save through 
the correct invocation of an officiant; by others this 
Presence is felt independently of such sacerdotal media- 
tion. By some the Gift is identified with the Elements ; 
by others the Elements are esteemed as the material 
channel of the sacrament, while the sacrament as a whole 
is the means of the conveyance of grace.? 


* On localized presence cf. Dalgairns, Holy Communion, 8th ed. I, 
p. x19: '' In the little round of the consecrated Host is He contained. 
Here is my Lord and not there.’’ 

? '' The real is not that which occupies a limited area of space, but 
that which is present to the healthy consciousness of a personal being '' 
(Inge, Contentio Veritatis, p. 307). Cf. Temple, Christus Veritas, p. 239, 
and his doctrine of ‘‘ convaluation.’’ 


ABUSES OF THE SACRAMENTS 233 


If such is the case, it is tragic that confessional and 
theological differences over the sacraments should have 
produced so much bitterness and evoked so much un- 
charitableness. It seems a travesty of Christianity that 
the Eucharist of Love and Communion has been and 
remains the storm-centre in the religions of authority. 
But despite divisive rites and attempts to explain 
Christian experiences yet in the hearts of the faithful, 
“Faith, Hope, and Love abide,’ and still ‘ the greatest 
of these is Love.' Facing a similar divergence over 
externals, cherished by some and neglected by others, 
the great apostle with his comprehensive charitableness 
and toleration proclaimed, ‘ Let not him that eateth 
set at naught him that eateth not; and let not him 
that eateth not judge him that eateth, for God hath 
received him. . . . Let each man be fully assured in 
his own mind. . . . He that eateth, eateth unto the 
Lord, for he giveth God thanks ; and he that eateth not, 
unto the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks ' 
(Rom. xiv. 3 f.). Love remains the most catholic and 
most potent sacrament. 

It is acknowledged even by sacramentarians that the 
practice of sacraments is liable to gross abuse * and to 
unethical exaggerations, but abuse and exaggerations are 
no valid argument against the legitimate use of sacra- 
ments. In no department of our religion do the crudities 
of bygone superstition threaten re-emergence more per- 
sistently than in the practice of sacraments. Atavism 
to primitive and absurd rites is all too easy, and magic 
is ever ready to renew its old and seductive alliances. 
Fetichism in regard to the elements entered Christianity 
with the inrush of Pagan converts, and from at least the 
time of Cyprian it has been persistent in the theology 
of the sacraments and promises to remain persistent. 
When the light within burns low, compensation is sought 
in an over-emphasis on the objective element in worship. 


1 '''The use of sacraments has always a tendency to degenerate into 
superstition ’’ (Dr. Gore, Can We then Believe? p. 119). 


234 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


When the spiritual power weakens or the. spiritual 
sensitiveness wanes or rational faith wavers, sacramental 
occasions may be multiplied in the fashion of tonics or 
stimulants, with deceptive external appeal and with 
emotions which furnish no guarantee of the moral 
validity of the sacrament. 

Just because of the physical framework of our life 
and the greater awareness of the external world, it is 
all too easy to confuse the sensible sign with the sacra- 
ment and to forget that an efficient sacramentum works 
as ves et sacramentum or virtus sacramenti ; it is easier to 
concentrate on the visible than to penetrate with the 
inward eye into its background in the invisible; it is 
natural to surrender oneself to the fugitive emotion as 
a witness of spiritual visitation. Sacraments may them- 
selves become surrogates for the Reality or become 
objects of devotion in themselves. Sacraments may be 
received as meritorious acts of cult or as efficacious in 
themselves, or there may be undue dependence on them 
in moral ill-health as unfailing tonics and stimulants, 
just as invalids may have recourse to tonics rather than 
strive to secure general health for the whole system. 
This does not dispose of the use of tonics, but regards 
them as rare or extreme measures to health, rather than 
as the normal régime. 


'* There are two ways of using symbols. They may 
and should be gateways through which news comes to 
the sense-conditioned mind from the supersensual world : 
like the royal doors of the iconostasis, which open to 
reveal something of the mysteries within. But they may 
also become substitutes for reality ; decorated screens 
set up between the soul and the Eternal, and merely 
offering to it a series of images or objects on which to 
spend surplus emotion in a pious way. Religious history 
wavers between these extremes. Where the exact form 
of the symbol becomes the subject of anxious thought, 
and the graded and poetic character of its message is 
ignored, we are entering the danger-zone."' ! 


* Underhill, op. cit., p. 171 f. 


REVELATION IN PERSONALITY 235 


Another abuse in the usage of sacraments is to remove 
them from the general sacramentalism of the divine 
order in which we live. If the sacraments produce 
effects in the soul, it is because they are '' divinely 
instituted,’’ like all the beauty and wonder and mystery 
of the outer world. If the sacraments work, they work 
in a similar—though more potent—fashion to every other 
symbol that uplifts or brings near to the Divine. It is 
no derogation to sacraments to discover that they operate 
by means and laws which may be explored as part of 
our being, and that after the most exhaustive and 
sympathetic exploration by psychology they leave the 
same—or greater—residuum of the ineffable or inexplic- 
able as other appeals made to the spirit along our sensory 
mechanisms. The sacraments are part of the divine 
economy of art and poetry and painting and symbolism. 
As one star differs from another star in glory and 
majesty, one sacrament differs from another in glory 
or catholicity. But the pre-eminence of a Church sacra- 
ment may be best grasped and manifested through 
comparison with and contrast to the general symbolism 
which is everywhere awakening man to a sense of the 
Infinite.’ 

Similarly it must not be overlooked that God is ever 
revealing Himself not only: in things, but in history and 
experience, and above all supremely in personality. 
Sacraments form only one of these three modes of divine 
revelation, and not the highest, especially when com- 
pared with the personality of Jesus, which has been 
fittingly termed the one supreme sacrament of the 
Christian religion. Sacraments form only a part, if 


1 '' All life is sacramental, though not in the same degree, and every- 
thing that reveals to us the nature or purposes of God may be called 
a sacrament. . . . Though this view of life as sacramental may tend 
to derogate somewhat from the exclusive dignity of the great sacra- 
ments, it imparts no new idea into the conception of a sacrament, but 
rather helps us to understand what a sacrament is '" (Inge, Contentio 
Veritatis, p. 289). 


236 | PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


a special department, of divine communications or 
mysterious messages in '' things."' 


'* The acknowledgement of symbols and sacraments 
as true bridges to Reality, especially calculated to meet 
and satisfy the needs of the whole man, weaving together 
his double nature and double capacities—this must 
never mean for us the equation of sacraments and grace, 
a binding down of the soul to this one means of access 
to the Transcendental. Still less must it mean any 
arbitrary limitation of the Transcendent to this one mode 
of self-giving to the human soul.’’ * 


The overworking of sacraments ? is more perilous to 
their proper operation and to their practical benefits in 
experience than the underestimation of them. Historical 
symbols, especially religious symbols such as the 
Eucharist, which have acquired an aura of spiritual 
meaning and suggestiveness, have a place—a larger 
place, perhaps—in deepening and strengthening person- 
ality than natural symbols. The religious life, which is 
the most unstable portion of our being, must strive to 
maintain the same balance and harmony and control 
as we recognize essentials of that ideal of ‘‘ man 
complete as man.” 

It is also misuse of the sacraments to make them 
obligatory, either as being '' generally necessary to 
salvation " or as the hall-marks of Christian faith. 
However the ecclesiastically minded may judge of sacra- 
mental allegiances, the world in general will apply the 
simpler and more obvious test of ' by their fruits ye 


> Underhill, Man and the Supernatural, p. 186. 

* “Let the faithful soul take care that, whilst contemplating an 
image, the senses be not absorbed in it, whether it be material or in 
the imagination, and whether the devotion it excites be spiritual or 
sensible. Let him . . . venerate the image as the Church commands 
and lift up his mind at once from the material image to those whom 
it represents. He who shall do this will never be deluded '' (St. John 
of the Cross, Ascent, cited by von Hügel, The Mystical Element of 
Religion, II, p. 344). 


MYSTICISM WITHOUT SACRAMENTS 237 


shall know them.' Despite institutional Christianity, 
Christians cannot be standardized in creed or in their 
estimation and use of sacraments. The man whose 
main interests are ethical values may find less in sacra- 
ments and feel less need of sacraments. Mystics of the 
intuitive type, like the master-mystic Plotinus * and 
George Fox, are not so dependent ? on external symbols 
for their realization of the Eternal world within them- 
selves and as the background of this world. And 
St. Paul's Christ-mysticism did not originate in the use 
of sacraments, but in the deeps of his own sensitively 
mystic nature in touch with the exalted Christ as Spirit. 
The ineffable experience enjoyed by Monica and her 
son at the window in the garden of Ostia ° was one in 
which the senses were completely transcended. Both 
the experience and the description of it owe more to the 
insight of Diotima in Plato's Banquet and to the per- 
sonal experience and intuition of Plotinus than to the 
author's theology of sacraments. 

To one man there comes an inrush of a larger con- 
sciousness of the Unseen in the meteor-flash of intuition ; 
to another in concentrative contemplation; to another 
in a transporting joy or a purifying sorrow ; to another 
in the sacrament at the altar. But the sacramentarian 

1 A pupil of Plotinus who understood and loved his master informs 
us that 'to this inspired man, lifting himself often to the first and 
transcendent God by meditation and by the path explained by Plato 


in the Banquet [i.e. by Eros or Divine Love], that transcendent God 
appeared,' and this without sacramental mediation (Porphyry, Vita 
Plotini), 23. 

2 J. C. Hardwick, writing on '' Sacramental Tolerance '" in Modern 
Churchman, XVI, p. 479, suggests that '' the unique role of sacramental 
religion ’’ is to supply the ''tertium quid ” alongside ''the religion 
of miracle and mystical religion."  '' Sacramentalism may stand be- 
tween the cruder forms of miracle religion and the more exalted forms 
of mysticism. A sacrament may be defined as the concentration of an 
idea in tangible and visible form, as the temporary embodiment of a 
permanent and universal principle. It enables us to find in a particular 
instance what the mystic finds everywhere, and thus may help us to 
do for ourselves what the mystic can do even without a sacrament to 
help him.” 

* Augustine, Conf. IX. 1o. 


17 


D 


238 PLACE AND FUNCTION OF SACRAMENT 


has no right to deny the worth of the experiences of the 
others, or to assert his mode of contact with transcen- 
dental things as obligatory upon or essential to the 
others. Deus non alligatur mediis, and neither is the 
spirit of man at all times. 


CHAPTER XIV 
SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


WHAT is a sacrament to-day? There are three essentials: 

(1) The requisite psychological attitude disposing the 
adorant to find what he seeks and to see what he expects 
—an attitude valid alike in religion, in psychology, and 
in some phases of medicine. You have the expectancy, 
the first thrill caused thereby, and then through associa- 
tion of ideas that first thrill tends to induce the next 
more easily. The initiand of the Mysteries knew by faith- 
knowledge that he would witness a theophany because 
he was convinced of it. The Australian aborigine 
knows he will die as a result of the lethal rites which 
he witnesses in operation against his life, and he dies. 
However acrimonious the dispute about the objectivity 
of sacraments, there is complete consensus as to the 
indispensability of the subjective preparedness. The 
saying of Heraclitus that ' eyes and ears are poor 
witnesses to men if their souls lack wit’ is no argu- 
ment against the use of eyes and ears, but an assertion 
that only the soul can interpret sense. 

This correspondence of expectation and emotion is the 
secret, or one secret, of the Mass in which Protestants 
see so much superstition and too close an affinity with 
the magic of the ages during which it was developed. 
But the Mass is not merely the superstition seen in it by 
Protestants, nor is it effective only for the more ignorant 
Roman Catholics, though it is naturally more effective 
to credulity. Educated and enlightened Catholics as 
well as some Protestants experience the uplift of that 


1 Bywater, fr. 4. 
239 


240 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTUKE 


sacrament. It brings by visible means and a perverted 
theology before the eyes of the mind the reality of the 
great Passion which is the central principle of all spiritual 
life. ' Be it unto you according to your faith ' is the 
ever-valid principle of the use of sacrament, and the 
Mass affords to many Roman Catholics the locum 
refrigeri, lucis et pacis.. A symbol can mean anything 
a man wishes when he uses it. There are as wide 
divergences in the sacramental experiences of Christians 
as in their opinions. 

(2) The objective means or material channels. It is 
easier for all to realize the tangible existences than the 
immaterialities, and it is easier, perhaps necessary, for 
the many, to realize the spiritual through the material, 
the invisible through the visible. Even Philo, whose 
deep intuitions gave him immediate access to the eternal 
verities, admits that only the perfect, the saints ' born 
of God,' can dispense with symbols. And Suso, with 
some exaggeration, contended: '' It is better to learn 
the inward from the outward than the inward from the 
inward.’’ Spiritual results can be attained only and 
always through spiritual causes, but spiritual causes 
may be uprisings from the soul itself, or deep haunting 
intuitions of truth, or mental anguish and moral self- 
loathing ; or, on the other hand, these causes may arise 
from or accompany physical events—the death of a 
loved one, the revisiting of a scene of moral conflict, 
the decision which thrusts us face to face with the great 
authenticities of life, the discovery of a Bethel, the sight 
of something that links us with the alter ego of an 
esteemed friend, or the sudden discovery of that higher 
life within us which wings the soul into the Infinite— 
in fact a '' sunset-touch, a fancy from a flower-bell.'' 
The things visible may be fading and fade, but before 
fading they may have made lasting impressions of 
spiritual values on the soul. Life has many ways of 
teaching with Francis Thompson's The Mirage: 


1 Words from Commemoration of the Dead in the Canon of the Mass. 


ESSENTIALS OF A SACRAMENT 24I 


'* Even so 
Its lovely gleamings, 
Seemings show 
Of things not seemings.'' 1 


These ‘‘ lovely gleamings ’’ may project the mind “ far 
in the Unapparent.’’ 

(3) The spiritual background in which the subject of 
the first condition and the object of the second condition 
unite, i.e. a belief in a world of unseen powers which 
impinges on this world of ours and the faith which 
unites, which draws the infinite as it were within the 
finite. It is not the sunset in itself nor the act of the 
gazer that makes the sunset far more than a sunset: it 
is an intuition of a world of Light which ever overcomes 
darkness both physical and spiritual. 

Where these three conditions obtain we have un- 
failingly effects produced, deepened intuitions, purified 
emotions, thirst for goodness, the fountain of the great 
devotional deep within broken up, which is far from 
an assertion either that such effects are produced apart 
from the subjective precondition mentioned or that they 
are effected only through such helpful visible means, 
or even that these external media are the highest means 
of lifting the soul into the high levels of Love where 
man walks with his God. In the words of a Pagan 
contemporary of St. Paul, ' only the pure and holy soul 
can receive God,' whether through rite or independent 
of it. 

Living in a tangible and visible world, we may profit- 
ably use these things to reach the interpenetrating and 
interpretative Spirit. The long-continued practice of 
sacraments in Paganism and Christianity witnesses to 
their utility, though this argument by itself would be 
dangerous. The use and even necessity of symbolism 
are deep-rooted in human nature, but the working of 


* Or, in prose form, ‘‘ Earthly Beauty is but heavenly Beauty taking 
to itself flesh '' (Works, III, p. 87). '' The roots of the Seen remain 
unseen ’’ (George MacDonald). 


242 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


' this great principle is rather hindered than helped by 
exclusive theories of the ''two symbols divinely 
instituted." 

The intrepid Maid of Domremy faced the flames in 
the market-place of Rouen with firmer faith when an 
English soldier acceded to her request for a cross by 
making an impromptu one from the end of a stick. 
‘“ Joan received it reverently and kissed it with tender- 
ness, making prayers to our Lord who had suffered on 
the Cross for redemption, of which this was the sign 
and the representative. She placed it in her breast, 
between the flesh and her garment. She then asked me 
humbly to have the cross brought from the church, in 
order that she might be able to see it continually until 
her death," says Massieu.' 

Mary of Scots found a similar comfort in the crucifix 
which she grasped upon the scaffold.? 

In R. L. Stevenson's poignant Olalla the Protestant 
lover looks upon the wayside crucifix to which the 
Catholic girl directed his attention and says: 


** I looked at the face of the crucifix, and though I 
was no friend of images, and despised that imitative 
and grimacing art of which it was a rude example, some 
sense of what the thing implied was carried home to my 
intelligence. The face looked down upon me with a 
painful and deadly contraction; but the rays of a glory 
encircled it and reminded me that the sacrifice was 
voluntary. It stood there, crowning the rock, as it still 
stands on so many highway sides, vainly preaching to 
passers-by, an emblem of sad and noble truth; that 
pleasure is not an end, but an accident, that pain is the 
choice of the magnanimous, and that it is best to suffer 
all things and do well.’’ 


Keats negotiated the lonely passage into the silence 
holding constantly in his hand through the closing days 
! A. B. Paine, Joan of Arc, II, p. 304. 


? Sir Walter Raleigh confessed that his familiar long carved silver 
pipe aided him to face the ordeal on the scaffold. 


STRENGTH THROUGH TANGIBLE THINGS 243 


the little white cornelian given him by Fanny Brawne 
and her last letter unopened. 

Even a great general and consummate strategist— 
inured to the shock of battle—was not indifferent. 
Robert E. Lee not long before he died referred to the 
oak in the yard of the Fitzhugh mansion at Chatham 
overlooking Fredericksburg:, ‘‘ It was under that oak 
that I courted my wife ; and standing yonder on Marye's 
Height, at the fiercest moment of the battle of Fredericks- 
burg, I yearned to get a sight of that tree. When the 
smoke cleared a bit, I caught a glimpse of its upper 
branches—and it strengthened me for the day's work.” * 

Were the selfishness of the disciples and their shameful 
conduct at the Last Supper with their Lord not brought 
home to them better by Jesus' use of the towel and basin 
than by a direct denunciation? It was a wonderful 
psychological appeal, an acted parable. 

If through sacraments the spirit has in any real 
measure— 


** From the top of sense looked over sense 
To the significance and heart of things 
Rather than things themselves,'' 


they have profited. But this does not imply that this is 
exclusively the way, or deny that many souls, in 
antiquity and in the present, have without rite and 
sacrament seen the things that are invisible. If sacra- 
ments in any way assist during an eclipse of faith; if 
they vouchsafe to men an uplift into the ideal world of 
their striving; if they give even inadequate expression 
to the uprisings of the soul ; if they purify the emotions ; 
if they rend the veil of our earthliness to envisage the 
encompassing eternities of human life; if the use of 
visible objects suggests invisible aids to human effort, 
they justify themselves, however false or unhistorical 
or unpsychological our theories of their working may be. 
They prove aids to devotion, though devotion is far 
from being all of religion. They also foster the social 


! Scribner’ s Magazine, November 1925, p. 471. 


244 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


aspects of religion and so promote the communion of 
the saints. A company of men and women meeting 
together, taking part in the same devotional act, with 
approximately similar expectancies, will be fused into a 
unity and entranced with a spirit of worship better than 
solitaries.! This congregational or fellowship value of 
sacramental acts is important. This is one valuable 
function of sacraments. They are more social and 
democratic than poetry and art; they body forth beyond 
poetry and art our membership one of another and one 
with Christ ; they help to correct the asperities of creedal 
barriers in declaring more impressively than by dialectics 
that we all partake of the same spiritual food. 

Sacraments as symbols retain their value for religion, 
and so far as we can see of human nature are likely to 
continue in some measure to do so because of hallowed 
associations, the power of sentiment to move masses 
untouched by logic, the conservatism of religious people, 
and the natural correspondences in things and the deep- 
seated desire of the majority for visualization of truth 
rather than verbal or logical enunciations. Verily 
nihil enim ammo videre poterant, ad oculos omnia 
referebant. Thus Bishop Stephen Gardiner, the con- 
servative of Tudor days, advocating images for the 
commonalty: ''If the Cross be a truth, why may we 
not have a writing thereof such as all can read, that is 
to say, an image? " A Platonist of the second century 
in a sermon on the use of images or external objects in 
worship remarked : ? 


* It is not that the Divine Being stands in any need 
of images or statues. It is poor humanity, because of 
its weakness and the distance dividing it from God, '* as 


* '' Ritual is more impressive and emotion more active when a whole 
society is concerned in the same ritual and the same emotion ’’ (White- 
head, Religion in the Making, p. 23). 

? Cicero, Tusc. Disp. I. 16, 37. 

3 Maximus Tyrius, Diss. II, 2 (tr. by Bevan, Later Greek Religion, 
P. 147). 


CAVEATS 245 


the heaven is high above the earth,’’ which has contrived 
these things as symbols. People who have an exception- 
ally strong power of mental realization, who can lift 
their soul straight away to heaven and come into contact 
with God—such people, it may be, do not stand in any 
need of images. But such people are few amongst men. 
You never find men in the mass with a realization of 
God and able to dispense with aids of this kind. It is 
as with the teaching of letters to children.' 


Philo,’ exegeting the words ‘ all the people saw the 
voice’ of lightning, comments, ‘ It happens that the 
voice of men is to be heard, but the voice of God is in 
reality to be seen. Why? Because what God speaks 
is not words but deeds, such as the eyes appreciate 
before the ears ! ' 

But while accepting these external means of grace 
and aids to devotion and expressions of communion, 
we may do so only if remembering: 

(1) That to hold sacraments as opera operata or as 
the means of salvation or the pre-condition for highest 
spiritual privileges is to strengthen the ancient alliance 
between magic and religion without strengthening 
religion. Neither the performance of sacraments nor 
their non-performance avails, but only faith working 
through love. To make the performance of Church 
sacraments or the acceptance of the Church's theology 
of the sacraments the mode of Church membership ? or 
the bond of Christian communion is to fail to appreciate 
Jesus’ religion of immediacy. 

Sacraments may be a means of grace, even a means 
of salvation, but then they may not. The correct sacra- 
mental system went with Daphnic morals during more 
than one age of the Church and can be maintained even 
when periodically a deep sleep falls on the Church. 


1 De Decalogo, II, C.-W. 47. 

2 The dying Jacob Boehme of the Mysterium Magnum was permitted 
to receive the sacrament only on condition of accepting the Lutheran 
Confession. 


-246 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


Even Augustine admits ‘ the sacrament is one thing, 
the virtue of the sacrament another. How many receive 
it at the altar and die, even die because of receiving 
it?'' Asa man thinketh in his heart, so is he. To 
the pure in heart all things are pure, and to the man 
spiritually prepared to find grace in sacraments grace 
will fow. But this man will probably not be the man 
to excommunicate his Christ-like brother because of his 
failure to accept sacraments or his sacraments. Neither 
will he be the man to affirm that Plotinus’ communion 
with the Divine through direct contemplation was inferior 
to the method of the quasi-magic Mystery-sacraments 
and those of fifth-century Christianity. 

(2) We admit that sacraments are to their predisposed 
participators the means of grace and the gateway to 
reality. This does not affirm that they are the only 
or even chief gateway to reality, though to many they 
may be so. 

The ‘‘ sacramental system," by which is ‘‘ meant the 
regular use of sensible objects, agents, and acts as being 
the means or instruments of Divine energies, ‘ the 
vehicles of saving and sanctifying power,’ ’’ ? need not 
be repudiated or slighted, but in the interests of spiritual 
religion and on the sure evidence of human experience 
as valid as that under the sacramental system, ‘‘ sensible 
objects, agents, and acts °’ must be repudiated as the 
exclusive, or necessarily highest, ‘‘ vehicles of saving 
and sanctifying power ” ; and in the interest, too, of a 
great truth for which Neo-Platonism stood, that, in the 
words of Proclus, ‘ the soul has its sense ' independent 
of external media, that ‘ it is not the sense of the body 
but the sense of the soul by which alone truth and false- 
hood are recognized,’ ? that ‘ there is access in one 
Spirit to the Father.' The priest of God is not necessarily 


! In Joh. Tract. XXVI. 11. 

* Paget, in Lux Mundi, 8th ed. p. 406. 

* Philo, De Vita Cont. 2, M. 473, C.-W. 10. Cf. De Conf. Ling. I. 
418, C.-W. 92, ' the eye of the soul, the most penetrating and purest 
and keenest of vision of all, by which alone it is possible to see God.’ 


‘IN DIVERS MANNERS’ 247 


or only he who is duly and canonically '' ordained,” 
but every man whose presence is an incentive to men 
in the pursuit of goodness and truth and a sanctuary 
to those who are discouraged in this pursuit. And the 
sacrifice of God is not necessarily that material thing 
‘consecrated ’’ by prayer formulas, but that described 
by Persius,* ' a heart rightly attuned towards God and 
man ; a mind pure in its inner depths, and a soul steeped 
in nobleness and honour.’ It is no derogation to specific 
Church sacraments to assert that God has a thousand 
doors by which He enters the soul and that the appre- 
hension of truth comes in manifold ways. What may 
find entrance to one experience through sacral acts may 
find entrance to another in a parable or in an allegory, 
or in the rhythm and fantasy of poetry, or in the appeal 
of music or in the world of colour. Symbols are visible 
or acted parables, but neither symbol nor parable is the 
only or necessarily the best way to the heart of man. 
Augustine’s testimony to the deep influence of the 
reading of the Pagan book Hortensius is instructive: 
it implanted in him a thirst for God. Could sacraments 
do more? Brother Lawrence could realize the presence 
of God when buying wine in Burgundy or engaged in 
the prosaic work of the monastic kitchen just as when 
he knelt at the sacrament. 

(3) We must, both in the interests of religion and the 
interests of man’s nature, remove the difference in kind 
between the ecclesiastic or canonical sacraments: and 
other Christian rites and the general symbolism of human 
life, thus abolishing Inge's category of the '' other 
religious forms for which no divine institution is claimed, 
but which have a quasi-sacramental value." The sacra- 
mental principle, having to a degree discarded its 
primitive magic and fetichism, must be released from 
the prison-bars of sacerdotalism. Again, this does not 
impair the grandeur of the regular or historical sacra- 
ments, but it does enlarge life by finding the same 

1 II. 71 (G. G. Ramsay’s tr.). 


248 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


principle of symbolism everywhere around us. The 
difference in degree of appeal and also in the catholicity 
of its appeal may be considerable. The Lord's Supper 
as a symbol of self-sacrificing love is certain to maintain 
its place. We would carry the sacramental principle all 
through life, and hear God speaking in every portion 
of His universe, until we overcome the falsity of the 
distinction between the secular and the sacred. Though 
unrecognized as a Church sacrament, surely there never 
was a more impressive one than Jesus' use of the towel 
at the last meal with His disciples—an act so in keeping 
with the whole of His life. 

If men had been taught to find the sacramental 
principle in the sincerity of little children, in the 
sanctities of human love, in the glory of the sunset, and 
in everything fitted to purify our affections or increase 
our reverence, life would be larger and richer to-day. 
The three essentials of a sacrament may be satisfied, 
in varying degrees according to the depth of insight and 
richness of personality, and the accumulated wealth of 
association, in connexion with a photograph of a loved 
one, or with an image, or with a ring, or with a special 
scene of former conflict or uplift, and if so, these and 
other such objects prove sacramental. 

(4) We must likewise remove the difference in kind 
between Christian and Pagan sacraments. The Christian 
sacraments can stand in their own grand right, and the 
Name of Jesus is still above every name. Wherever, 
within or without Christianity, we meet the operation of 
the three essentials given, we have sacramental influence. 
That the sacraments of the Mystery-Religions were real 
sacraments to man cannot be disputed on the testimony 
of the initiates. That the reverent use of symbols with 
the due psychic preparation produced religious effects 
is what we should expect. The baptismal waters not 
only signified purification, but in some way effected it: 
the resultant faith was in remission of sins. The average 

» Cf. Inge, Contentio Veritatis, p. 289. 


SUPERSTITION AND REFLEXION 249 


‘peasant woman and the cultured woman of the Graeco- 
Roman world gazed upon the Egyptian Madonna with 
‘similar inward emotions to those felt to-day by the 
average peasant Catholic woman and the educated lady 
in devotional contemplation of the Virgin. Even in the 
Hermetic religion, which discarded sacraments, a plea 
was made for the use of images. And a reformer like 
Maximus of Tyre, who held a high view of prayer, 
recommended the use of images as means of devotion. 
It might be said that Christianity naturally took over 
more readily and easily the external forms and uses of 
tangible sacra than the spiritual heritage of Paganism. 
It was only natural that those who were moved by the 
intriguing beauty of Pheidias' Olympian Zeus should 
demand similar visualizations in Christianity. 

For the future what shall we prophesy? Here we 
must note the cleavage between popular religion, whether 
Christianity or other religions, and the religion of those 
who have reflected upon their faith in the effort to secure 
a unity of the emotional, intellectual, and intuitional. 
The former will always incline to superstition, the latter 
to experimentation. The former will manifest the con- 
servatism which has strangely accompanied religion in 
all its history; the latter will try to bring history and 
experience, the past and the present, into harmony. The 
adherents of the former accept religion, Christian or 
other, as a heritage of holy rites, ancestral customs, a 
book-religion, or a group of invariable opinions handed 
down by an idealized classical past, as ‘ the faith once 
delivered to the saints’: those of the latter regard 
religion as an emprise of the soul and the mind, as an 
ever-increasing comprehension of God, antiquating and 
confirming. As in all ages of history, it appears as if 
the former will prevail quantitatively and the latter 
qualitatively. As in antiquity the masses chose the way 
of ritual and sacrament in preference to that of in- 
tuition and reason aided by divine grace, so it is likely 
to be. The philosopher held that immortality is a native 


250 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


quality of the soul or the health of the soul ; the Oriental 
cults insisted that it was attained by initiation and sacra- 
ment, and the multitudes took the easier path and 
accepted the sacerdotal authority. The Neo-Platonists 
preferred intensive contemplation and ecstasy as a surer 
gateway to truth than ritual observances, which however 
some of them admitted as predisposing to ecstasy. 
Porphyry admitted that sacraments might operate 
advantageously on the lower or ' pneumatic ' part of 
the soul, but were powerless in the highest or ‘ intel- 
lectual' part; they could elevate the soul to the stars,’ 
but could not unite it with the Supreme Being. The 
philosopher is his own priest. But the greatest of Neo- 
Platonists, Plotinus, repudiated sacraments in favour of 
ecstasy or more commonly of silent contemplation: 
revelation or gnosis is morally conditioned rather than 
vouchsafed in liturgy. 

Historically the lower and the higher elements have 
co-existed on friendly terms in the highest religions. 
Remote primeval conceptions can thrive beside their 
maturer counterparts, and ancestral instincts may not 
seriously upset individual reactions. Religious logic is 
not always of the same order as workaday logic or the 
relentless logic of the classroom. Yet revolt in religion 
against its ancestry is not infrequent. And religion is 
often compelled to quicken its stride to keep pace with 
secular advancement. If, however, we are to judge a 
religion by its prophets rather than by its priests, by its 
audacious explorers rather than by its fearful saints, 
by its ideals, alluring and unachieved, rather than by 
its deposit of dogma and programme of cult, then we 
may venture to say that the religion of the future will 
advance and expand along two lines: 

(a) The sacramental principle will be carried all 
through life and the difference between the secular and 
the sacred ? will disappear in a recognition of our total 


* Cf. Cumont, After-life in Roman Paganism, p. 125. 
? Cf. Alice Gardner, History of Sacraments, p. 96. 


HEALTHY MYSTICISM 251 


environment as a means of grace and spiritual growth. 
Since '' earth's crammed with heaven ” the sacraments 
of Nature are also the sacraments of God. Like Meister 
Eckhart, we shall '' not dally with the symbols but 
penetrate to the actuality," and everything will be a 
sacrament which brings man into union with God, or 
clarifies his vision of life. Such a commonplace act as 
* considering the lilies ' quickened the faith of Jesus in 
the care of a loving Father on whom He could cast 
Himself utterly. And Paul taught that in ordinary eating 
or drinking or whatever we do we may do it to the glory 
of God and so make the daily acts of life sacraments. 
““ He does not bind the working of God to material 
agencies. Of the sacraments he might have said what 
he said of circumcision, that neither their observance 
nor their non-observance avails anything, but faith 
working through love." ' If the long-established usage 
of specific Church sacraments tends to widen the spiritual 
perception of men, they have historically been part of 
the revelation ‘ in many pieces,’ and the employment of 
tangible things and visible signs dear to Christendom 
may be justified by educating men to rise from the things 
that perish to the things that endure and to look out 
on God’s whole world in the faith that ‘ the invisible 
things of Him . . . are clearly seen, being perceived 
through the things that are made.’ 
“ What if Earth 


Be but the shadow of heaven, and things therein 
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought? '' 


This will lessen the bitterness of theological controversy 
and register ecclesiastical pride as the first or unpardon- 
able sin. This will enable the children of the Kingdom 
to say, ' I love to feel the oneness of feeling which 
pervades the sons of God amidst vitally opposed com- 
munions.”’ ” 

(b) The other and, I believe, surer and more important 


1 Morgan, Religion and Theology of Paul, p. 227. 
2 Letter of Robertson of Brighton, of date May 22, 1841. 


252 SACRAMENTS TO-DAY AND THEIR FUTURE 


line of advance will be toward a healthy mysticism of 
the Platonic order. Herein I agree with Professor Lake 
that one of the two functions of the religion of the future 
*' js to afford a centre towards which mystics may turn. 

The religious society of to-morrow will have room 
for mystics.’’ * Religion will be inspired more by vision 
carrying us into the unknown future than by ceremonial 
which links us with those to whom we owe such a debt 
in the past and with whom we maintain unbroken fellow- 
ship even with difference of ritual. 

The present revival of mysticism, despite much morbid 
mysticality and mysteriosophy and sentimental anti- 
quarianism accompanying it, is a wholesome and 
prophetic sign. It is an index that the general trend of 
religion is from external to internal concerns, from what 
Hügel calls the ‘‘ exteriorisms ’’ to the '* interiorisms."' 
Of course with mystics, as with prophets, the Spirit is 
like the wind, and it would be embarrassing to give them 
the front seats in institutional Christianity or on ecclesi- 
astical councils. 

The symbolic mystics will always be able, without 
inconsistency, to avail themselves of sacraments and 
ceremonial, but only consistently in the acknowledge- 
ment of the sacramental idea in general as just men- 
tioned. Indeed sacraments will mean more to them than 
to the uncompromising institutionalist. 

The intuitive or contemplative mystic may avail him- 
self of sacraments, but will be independent of them. 
This is the mysticism of the pure in heart, and this 
apprehension of spiritual things is within the grasp of 
each. Religion as worship or devotion will not cease, 
but religion as experience of self-attesting truth will 
increase with an increasing impatience with sensuous 
media. The Church has taken her orders largely from 
the institutionalist and to a lesser degree from the 
philosopher and theologian with uneasy awakenings 
from the mystic. But when the Church shall have in- 

1 Religion of Yesterday and To-morrow, pp. 177-9. 


* 


SUBJECTIVITY 253 


culcated and fostered the mysticism of Jesus for nineteen 
centuries as she has for nineteen centuries sacra- 
mentarianism and sacerdotalism, we shall find a new 
earth on which the long-delayed Jeremiac oracle shall 
be fulfilled in each knowing the Lord. It will be con- 
fessed with one of the greatest and sanest of ancient 
mystics that ‘ the man who is a lover of God and loved 
by God, though not of priestly lineage and standing 
outside the lustral shrine, is in reality in its inmost 
recesses,’ * and it will be experienced with his greater 
contemporary that Christ-Mysticism is neither induced 
by nor necessarily maintained by cult-acts. Lactantius’ 
protest * is not yet out of date, and he knows not God 
who imagines that God esteems vestments and jewels 
and such precious things which even a man would be 
rightly commended for despising: 

Worship need not be stripped of symbols, ancient or 
recent, but worship with symbols is not the exclusive 
worship or the only worship which produces reverence 
or provokes in the spirit a receptivity of the eternal. 
Spiritual idealism cannot be forced to cling to one symbol 
more than to another. Christianity, without ceasing to 
have its institutional and sacramental aspects, will place 
God's altar in the obedient heart; it will insist that not 
that which enters into a man consecrates him, but 
elevated thoughts which arise within. Having so long 
emphasized objectivity in religion and failed to escape 
its excesses, it will no longer dread or denounce the 
corrective subjectivity that ' the spirit of man is the 
candle of the Lord.' Early Christianity did not secure 
its victory through or because of its sacraments ; neither 
shall modern Christianity win the world to spiritual 
obedience and to all that the Name of Jesus stands for 
through its sacramental system, which divides Christians 
on the externals of cult and polity rather than unites 
them in the spiritual unity of * one, even as we are one.’ 


2 Philo, Quis Rer. Div. Haer. 16, C.-W. 82. 
a Div. Inst. VI. 25. 


18 


ASTRALISM, OR THE RELIGION OF 
ASTROLOGY 


CHAPTER XV 
ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS CATHOLIC APPEAL 


As we hear St. Paul's triumphant asseveration, ‘ I am 
persuaded that neither the ascension of the stars nor 
their declinations shall be able to separate us from the 
love of God,' or read his reference to the previous con- 
dition of Christian converts as ‘ we were enslaved to the 
elements of the world,’ ! we are reminded that his Gospel 
was preached to first-century Christians and to an age 
'' servile to all the skyey influences '" when astrology 
was the queen of the sciences. It is not without some 
effort that we can put ourselves ex rapport with the 
ancients in the cosmic sweep of their religion without 
losing their religious ardour, or wallowing in the slough 
of arid speculation, or sinking into the abyss of occultism. 
And perhaps we are deterred and handicapped some- 
what by the tenuity of modern survivals of this once 
venerable faith. It may sound strange to us, but it 
seemed necessary to the greatest philosophers of early 
Christianity, that Jesus should die for all creation, in- 
cluding the stars: ‘ He did not die on behalf of men only, 
but on behalf of all other rational beings. . . . It would 
be absurd to affirm that it was only for human sins He 
tasted Death, and not also on behalf of every other 
creature beyond man who has been involved in sins, 
such as the stars.’ ? Or when Jesus says,? ‘ Many times 


* Cf. K. Dieterich, ATTEAOZ,I, p. 1 ff.; Bousset, Hauptprobleme, 
p. 223 ff. 

? Origen, In Joh. I. 35 (Brooke's ed. I, p. 48). 

* Texts and Studies, IV. 2, 130. 


254 


THE GOSPEL OF ASTRAL IDEAS 255 


now I have told you that I must needs be crucified and 
taste death for the universe,’ the term universe has in 
this connexion the comprehensive connotation familiar 
to minds acquainted with astralism. 

To the early Christians, whose wrestling was not with 
flesh and blood but with the Principalities and the Powers, 
there was a vital content in the cosmic declarations of 
the Gospel message which it is somewhat difficult for us 
with our modern conceptions of the universe to recapture. 
An instructive example may be taken from Eusebius: ' 
* Is not the Gospel of our Saviour, Jesus Christ of God, 
great and marvellous which teaches every race of men 
to worship with becoming thoughts the Lord of the sun 
and moon and Maker of the whole universe as being far 
above and beyond all? And to praise not the Elements 
of the heavenly bodies but the Nourisher of life itself 
and the Dispenser of all blessings; nor to be affrighted 
at the visible parts of the world or by anything appre- 
hensible by the outward senses, which is of a perishable 
character, but to stand in awe of him who is invisible in 
all these, the only creative Mind both in the part and in 
the whole.' 

We must remember that if Astralism in one respect 
had a depressing effect ? because of its determinism, in 
other respects it proved a joyous and even enthusiastic 
religion. Moreover, the gulf now yawning between 
science and religion in the weird survivals of astrology ? 
had not opened. Astrology and astronomy had not yet 
parted company. There was therefore no conflict 
between science and religion to the believers in astral 
salvation. Their religious system could claim on the 
one hand to rest on the most respectable philosophical 


1 Pyaep. Evang. III. 6. Cf. Cicero, Som. Scipionis, 8, 18. 

2 Cf. Wendland, Hell.-rom. Kultur, 3rd ed. p. 156 ff. Dobschiitz 
designates astrology '' the chief tendency of the time, the most impious 
and most immoral of all religions '' (Christian Life in Primitive Church, 


p- 367). 
3 Cf. W. S. Urquhart, Theosophy and Christian Thought. 


256 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


basis, no less than Plato ! and Posidonius and far behind 
them, on Sumerian, Chaldean, and Persian science ? ; 
and on the other to have much in common with earnest 
and progressive circles such as the Orphics, Neo- 
Pythagoreans, Neo-Platonists, Hermeticists, the leading 
Stoics, and the Judaeo-Alexandrines like Philo. Aris- 
totle, as against Plato, had represented the earth as 
fixed and the world as geocentric, set in a system of 
rolling concentric spheres. His mistaken physical 
theories, adopted and furthered by the Stoics, prevented 
any advance in astrology until Copernicus. Of course 
there were hefty opponents of astrology, especially the 
later Academicians and Sceptics like Sextus Empiricus,’ 
and Stoics like Panaetius. Plotinus * severely repri- 
mands the astrologers and denounces their astral 
fatalism, against which he sets reason as more potent 
than external phenomena. Macrobius * approves of 
Plotinus' contention and holds that portents are the 
most that can be expected. 

This ancient religion commands our attention because 
of its long persistence and because of the lasting influence 
it exerted on leading systems of thought for centuries 
before and for a millennium and a half after the Christian 
era, and on Pagan, Jewish, and the Christian religions. 
Students of religion cannot dismiss without serious 
attention *' a learned superstition, which up to modern 
times has exercised over Asia and Europe a wider 
dominion than any religion has ever achieved," * nor 
can it be without profit to review '' that desperate error 
on which the intellectual powers of countless generations 
were spent." ' And for the environment of early 
Christianity astralism is important, inasmuch as '' after 
having reigned supreme in Babylon, it subdued the cults 

1 Cf. Bouché-Leclercq, Astrologie, I, p. 247; K. Kerényi, Astrologia 
Platonica in Archiv f. Religionsw. XXII, pp. 245-56. 

3 Bouché-Leclercq, ib. 206. 3 E.g. Adv. Math. V. 2. 

4 Enn. II. 3. * Com. in Som. Scip. I. 19, 27. 


$ Cumont; Astrology and Religion, p. xv. 
7 Ib. p. xxv. 


FASCINATION OF ASTRALISM 257 


of Syria and of Egypt, and under the Empire—to 
mention only the West—transformed even the ancient 
Paganism of Greece and Rome.” ' Astralism guided 
even the Great Alexander, swayed the shrewdest of 
Roman emperors, Augustus, and brought terror or 
comfort to his successors; it formed an element in the 
connotation of salvation for the early Christians, and 
it forced its way—with deplorable results—into our New 
Testament, in the Apocalypse. 

Astrology stood high in esteem throughout the Graeco- 
Roman centuries ? as at once a religion and a science,’ 
a speculative system and a mystical experience. It was 
“ the scientific theology of waning heathenism.” * It 
offered its answer to man's Whence, Why, and Whither. 
It offered man support in the present world ? from the 
thraldom of Fate and beyond death a home in or beyond 
the stars, as Titus assured his soldiers at the siege of 
Jerusalem that the souls of the fallen warriors would 
enter the ether and be seated in the stars. It was of 
sacerdotal origin and bore the charm of venerable 
antiquity, to which the Graeco-Roman age was so 
sensitive. From the days of Alexander the Great, whose 
campaigns disestablished the priestly colleges of the 
Euphrates, the influence of Babylonian stellar religion 
grew apace in the Greek world, the soil of which had 
been prepared by the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle, 
who assigned high honour to the heavenly bodies. From 

! Cumont, Astrology and Religion, p. xvi. 

2 Cf, H. Gressmann, Die Hellenistische Gestirnreligion (Beibeft z. 
“ Alt. Orient," 5, Leipzig, 1926), pp. 28-31. 

* Cf. Boll, Bezold, (3rd ed. by) Gundel, Sternglaube u. Sterndeutung, 
ay Hen Erforschung der antiken Astrologie (in N. Jahrb, f. d. klass. 
Alt. XXX, p. 111). 

* ‘* So bot die Gestirnreligion ihren Gläubigen nicht nur einen festen 
Halt im Diesseits durch eine wissenschaftliche Weltanschauung und 
nicht nur eine hohe Gottesvorstellung in theologischer Beziehung . . . 
sondern sie stillte zugleich auch das religióse .Sehnen, indem sie die 
sichere Hoffnung auf ein jenseitiges Leben in Aussicht stellte und 
Verwandschaft des Menschen mit den Góttern ihn in den Schauern der 
Mysterien schon im voraus erleben liess " (Gressmann, ib. p. 31). 


258 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


the beginning of our era it made rapid progress in the 
Roman world to become predominant in the third 
century. It is not by accident that it was in the 
most virile competitor of Christianity—Mithraism—that 
astralism played the largest part. 

Wide, therefore, was the appeal of this religion, despite 
the fact that it was essentially a learned religion ? and 
a cult for the elect, for indeed paucissimi pura mente 
praediti sortiti sunt caeli suspiciendi venerabilem curam. 
Because of its scientific interest and speculative acumen 
it appealed to the intellect. Because of its Nature- 
mysticism it awakened exalted sentiments. Because of 
its cosmic unity it promoted that pantheism which drew 
the Greek mind like a magnet and fostered the cosmic 
emotion to which the ancients were so susceptible. 
Because of its evident centre in the shining Sun it 
promoted monotheism.* Because of its demonstrated 
harmony and mathematical regularity it confirmed faith 
in a Providence and adumbrated order within man as 
without, in the microcosm as in the macrocosm. Because 
of its silent contemplation it proved congenial to the 
mystic tendencies of the age. Because it required special 
knowledge or instruction it appealed to the ancient spirit 
that considered that there must be something secret in 
a true religion to be divulged only to the esoterics. 

This imposing faith rests on four basal ideas without 
which it would be unintelligible: 

First, that Element-mysticism which took its rise from 
Greek, particularly Stoic, pantheism, astrological lore, 
and sympathetic magic. Its text is that of Posidonius, 
* Light is apprehended by the light-like power of vision ; 
sound by air-like hearing; and similarly the nature of 
the universe must be apprehended by the Reason which 
is akin to it.' * That is, the elements of which we are 


! Cf. Cumont, in Daremberg-Saglio, Dictionnaire, V. 1056a. 

? Cumont, Mysticisme astral, p. 257. 

* Asclepius, 9. * Cumont, ib. 2, 256. 
5 Sext. Emp. Adv. Math. VII. 93. 


ELEMENT-MYSTICISM 259 


compounded are of the same order as the cosmic 
elements which adhere in the one cosmos. ‘‘ Element- 
mysticism teaches that men reach the vision of God 
which deifies by means of the elements in them of which 
the first principles exist in the deity." ! 

We have in us the very nature of the planets:? ‘ these 
star-gods were assigned the race of mortals, and we 
have within us Moon, Zeus, Ares, the Paphian Lady 
(Venus), Kronos, Helios (Sun), Hermes: wherefore it 
is our lot to draw from the ethereal spirit (breath) tears, 
laughter, anger, birth, speech, sleep, and desire,’ * so that 
' the powers and passions’ (ŝvvápers kai rá£7 ) are common 
to us with the planets.* The soul took on the qualities 
of the planets on its earthward passage,? which it will 
render back to each on its upward flight.? This doctrine 
of community of elements was essential to astral 
religion. ' In the first place,’ says Firmicus Maternus—’ 


* You must know that God, that artificer of man, has 
produced under the directions of Nature the form of 
man and his whole stature and substance after the 
pattern and fashion of the world. He has compounded 
man's frame, as that of the world, out of the four 
elements, fire and water, air and earth, so that out of 
the mixture of these He might equip a living being after 
the divine fashion. He compounded man by divine 


1 Kennedy, St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions, p. 204. 

S (Uf. Tusc: Dispel 19, 43. 

* Stobaeus, I, p. 77, Wach; Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 532. 

4 Cat. Cod. Astr. Graec. III. roo. 

5 Cf. Servius, Aen. VI, 714: ‘ Docent autem philosophi, anima ad 
ima descendens quid per singulos circulos perdat. Unde etiam mathe- 
matici fingunt, quod singulorum numinum potestatibus corpus et anima 
nostra conexa sunt ea ratione quia, cum descendunt animae, trahunt 
secum torporem Saturni, Martis iracundiam, libidinem Veneris, Mercurii 
lucri cupiditatem, Iovis regni desiderium; quae res faciunt pertur- 
bationem animabus, ne possint uti vigore suo et viribus propriis.' 

6 Cf. Poimandres. Also Servius, Aen. XI. 52: ' Dicunt physici, cum 
nasci coeperimus, sortimur a Sole spiritum, a Luna corpus, a Venere 
cupiditatem, a Saturno humorem, quae omnia singulis reddere videntur 
exstincti.’ 

7 Math. III, prooem. 2. 


260 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


handiwork, that within the small compass of his body 
He might bestow under the requirements of Nature the 
whole energy and substance of the elements, thus pre- 
paring an abode, frail if you please but similar to that 
of the world, for that Divine Spirit which descended 
from the celestial mind to sustain the mortal body. 
Wherefore man, as a microcosm, is sustained by the 
five planets and the Sun and the Moon by their fiery 
and eternal motion, so that as a being endowed with 
life after the fashion of the world he should be controlled 
by the same divine substance.’ 


The astrologists were unanimous: ' since all material 
substances are composed of the four elements or bodies, 
man too because of community of nature must par- 
ticipate in these four elements.’ * 

This participation in the elements was put to practical 
purposes in the two religious-philosophical doctrines: 
(x) that like is apprehended by like, a doctrine which 
Aristotle refers to Empedocles ^ and which Sextus 
Empiricus ? characterizes as a venerable opinion among 
the physicists ; and (2) that we are endowed with ‘ sun- 
like eyes.' 

The Orphic verse,* ‘ It is by brightness we see; with 
the eyes we see nothing,’ would be accepted by the 
greatest physicists, philosophers, and mystics such as 
Plotinus and Philo. ' That which sees must be akin to 
and made like unto that which is seen to be adapted 
for vision. Never would the eye have seen the sun 
unless it were constituted sunlike, nor could the soul 
ever have seen the Good unless it had first become 
good.'* The same view meets us in Proclus * and in 
a devotee of astrology like Manilius, who asks, in the 

1 Cat. Cod. Astr. Graec. I, cod. Flor., p. 146. 

2 On Aristotle's view of vision cf. De Anima, I. 2; II. 7; De Sensu, 
II f.; and for the difference from the Platonic cf. Archer-Hind, Timaeus, 
pp. 156-7. 

3 Adv. Math. VII. 116. Cf. Proclus, In Remp. I, p. 255, 22 (Kroll). 

* Kern, Orphicorum Fragmenta, p. 337 f. 

5 Plotinus, Enn. I. 6, 9. 

* In Remp. Il, p. 164, 12; p. 52, ro (Kroll). 


'  *SIDEREAL EYES’ 261 


famous lines: * Who could know heaven save by the 
gift of heaven or find God unless himself were part of 
the Divine? ' ! 

This possession of a vision-faculty akin to and cor- 
responding to the object of vision was a favourite 
thought.” Gifted with 'sidereal eyes’ we can con- 
template the stars; gifted with sunlike eyes we can 
contemplate the sun. So Sextus Empiricus,’ supporting 
this postulate, cites Empedocles: ‘ By earth we have 
perceived earth ; by water water ; and by air the celestial 
air; but destroying fire by fire, and love by love, and 
strife by baneful strife.’ It is man’s unique privilege— 

'stetit unus in arcem 


Erectus capitis victorque ad sidera mittit 
Sidereos oculos," 


just as the mystic Blake says: 


** The sun's light, when he unfolds it, 
Depends on the organ that beholds it.” 


This doctrine of the 'light-like vision’ was not 
orginated by Posidonius, but popularized through the 
combination of science and religion in his cosmic 
mysticism. It furnished at least a scientific hypothesis 
and it supplied a new religious epistemology; for the 
astrologists, natural law prevailed in the spiritual world 
and spiritual law in the natural world. And this religious 
epistemology was capable of immense development in 
later Neo-Platonic and Christian mysticism. Plotinus is 
emphatic that the soul only by becoming good may 
attain the vision of the Good.* His whole system rests 
on this epistemology, e.g. stated in Ennead VI. 5, 9. 
Philo too could speak of ' knowledge the most sun-like 
light of the soul ' * and Ps.-Aristotle asserts * that ‘ the 
soul readily recognizes its kinship and by the divine 


bU TD orm. 
2 Cf. L. Weniger, Wär nicht das Auge sonnenhaft in N. Jahrb. f. d. 


klass. Alt. XXXIX. 1917, p. 238 ff.; Boll, Studien z. Ptol. p. 238. 
3 VII. 92. 4 Enn. 1.6.9. 
`B De Congr. Erud. Gratia, 9; C.-W. 47. 5 De Mundo, c. 1. 


262 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


eye of the soul apprehends divine things.' This ancient 
mysticism of an all-penetrating kinship finds many 
echoes in that familiar Nature-mysticism of the Words- 
worth type with its poetic beauty, philosophic truth, and 
religious appeal. 

Secondly, a corollary of this element topina was 
the doctrine of cosmic unity, the prevalence of a system 
of deep affinities and endless correspondences. The 
astrologists saw the universe as Dante saw it in the story 
of creation in the Divine Comedy as '' legato con amore 
in un volume." Never until modern times did such a 
unitary conception of the universe dominate thought. 
The cosmos is one, and the cosmos is in God and God 
in the cosmos. Never did religion and philosophy hold 
more unhesitatingly to what Emerson calls ‘“‘ the linked 
purpose of the whole."  '' Never was there an age 
which heard so distinctly and responded so willingly to 
the call of the cosmos to its inhabitants. The unity of 
all life, the mysterious harmony of the least and nearest 
with the greatest and most remote, the conviction that 
the life of the universe pulsated in ail its parts, were as 
familiar to that ancient cosmic consciousness as to 
modern biology and psychology." >? A subtle and 
deeply mystical pantheism had altered the whole 
Hellenistic-Oriental theology.* Ivacis @cod (‘knowledge 
of God’) was identical with rerum cognoscere causas and 
with yvad ceavrov ( know thyself’), for, as the oracle 
declared, * know thyself, and thou shalt know God and 
the universe.’ 

None were more emphatic on this unity than the 
Stoics, who in this respect did not permit their 
materialistic monism to interfere with their pantheistic 
penetrating spirit. Marcus Aurelius is a representative 

* Cf. the latest and excellent study of cosmic sympathy in K. Rein- 
hardt’s Kosmos u. Sympathie: Neue Unters. üb. Poseidonios (Munich, 
1926). 

B. Mystery-Religions, p. x. 
* Cf. Mead, Quests, p. 19r. 
* Denied by Panaetius, Schmekel, p. 191. 


UNIVERSAL 'SYMPATHY' 263 


Stoic spokesman that the universe is a ‘ web spun of 
one texture,' and ' all things have been interwoven and 
holy is the bond. Nothing can really be said to be alien 
to anything else. Things have been marshalled and 
combine to make an ordered universe. There is one 
universe consisting of all, and one God through all, and 
one substance, and one law, and one reason common 
to all intelligible beings, and one truth.’ * ‘ Don't you 
think,’ says another Stoic, ‘ that all things have been 
reduced to a unity? . . . that the things of earth are 
in sympathy with the things of heaven? '? The 
harmony and providence of the universe are emphatic- 
ally taught in the early second-century De Mundo, which 
presents a God through whom and from whom all things 
have their source. A Platonist like Plutarch asserts ‘ the 
soul [of the world] participating in mind, reason, and 
harmony, is not merely the work of God, nor was it 
made by Him, but it has come from Him and out of 
Him,' ? with which we may compare the cosmic theology 
of Paul in r Cor. viii. 6; Col. i. 16; Eph. iv. 5. 

To the same end worked the Stoic doctrine of the 
Spermatic Logos or Logoi (Seminal Reason) common to 
all and that of a quasi-material interpenetrating Spirit. 
* Chrysippus lays it down that all existence is brought 
into a unity by the penetration as it were of spirit through 
it all, whereby it is both drawn together and remains 
compact and the whole is harmonious [sympathy] with 
itself.' * 

Because one spirit pulsated in the whole life of the 
universe there obtained a mysterious ' symatheia of the 
whole,' * by means of which man could enter into fellow- 
ship with the cosmic process. The soul was a fragment 
of the celestial fires with which it maintained its kinship 


! Comm. IV. 40; VII. 9; cf. V. 21; VI. 38. 

? Epict. Dis. I. 14, 1. 

3 Q. Plat: 11. 2- * Alex, Aphr. De Mixt. 142. 

5 ‘ Estque in ea (natura) iste quasi consensus quam guuráðeav Graeci 
vocant ' (Cic. N.D. III. 28; cf. De Div. 2, 34). 


264 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


and to which it would return. Men are not merely 
members one of another, but of the whole cosmic order.* 
The world is the image of God and man the image of 
the world. Man as part of the cosmos is sympathetic 
with it as a whole. The salvation of the part is to 
recognize its place and fulfil its function in the whole. 
There is nothing alien to man because there is nothing 
alien in the whole. ‘The things of earth are in 
sympathy with the things of heaven.’ * ‘ Earthly things 
depend on the heavenly things by a kind of natural 
sympathy.' ? 

This cosmic harmony and universal sympathy were 
dear to the adherents of astral religion. Manilius dwells 
eloquently upon the harmony and immanent divinity in 
Nature, until he asks (II. 105), ' Quis dubitet post haec 
hominem conjungere caelo? ' for into the soul of man 
alone God descends and dwells and seeks Himself (II. 
IO7Í.). It lifted man above himself to experience that 
** the love of heaven makes us heavenly.” 

Thirdly, this cosmic unity implied for the ancients 
an ensouled cosmos.* ‘ Just as we ourselves are con- 
trolled by a soul, so the world possesses a soul holding 
it together, and the soul is designated God, primordially 
and ever-living and the source of all life.’ * ‘ The world 
is one living organism (£àov) with one substance and 
one soul. è As a living being, animal, the world is 
possessed of a World-Soul, a doctrine which Plato's 
Timaeus and Posidonius' commentary thereon popular- 
ized. Even though the Stoics identified God and the 
World-Soul, they held to the Platonic idea.” Cleanthes * 
maintains ' there is one soul interpenetrating the whole 
cosmos, by participation in which we too become 


1 Cf. Sext. Emp. IX. 78 f. ? Epict. I. 14, 2. 

3 Philo, De Op. Mundi, C.-W. I. 41. 

* Cf. J. B. Mayor, on Cicero, N.D. II. 19; Arnim, St. Vet. Frag. II, 
p. xor ff. 

* Cornutus, Comp. Theol. graecae 2; cf. Cic. N.D. I. 14, 37. 

5 M. Aurelius, IV. 40. 

7” Arnold, Rom. Stoicism, p. 184 f. 8 Doxogy. Gr. 654, 30. 


THE ENSOULED WORLD 265 


endowed with soul. Man was made ‘ animal quod ad 
imitationem mundi factum est, simili divinitatis sub- 
stantia gubernetur.' * According to Pliny,” ‘ Hipparchus 
can never be sufficiently praised for having better than 
anyone else proved the kinship of the stars with man 
and that our souls are part of the heavens.’ 

The stars and planets? are ' the heavenly race of 
gods,’ ‘ gods visible and created.’ * Plotinus 5 bitterly 
attacks the Gnostics for denying the divinity of the stars, 
necessitated by their dualism. This doctrine was familiar 
from the days of Anaximander’ and goes back 
ultimately to Berossus. Even plants have soul." 

We must keep this conviction of a working soul- 
permeated unity before our minds to do justice to astral 
religion and to understand the ardours of its adherents 
and the apparent extravagance of their cosmic emotion. 
It will bring them near to many mystics of the objective 
type to whom Nature-worship is a religion and the world 
of order and beauty calls forth ready responses from 
the human spirit. The Platonic Bishop Synesius * 
exclaims, ‘ Wise is he who knows the kinship of the 
parts of the universe.’ The modern Platonist Taylor ° 
quaintly says: 


'* I confess that I am wholly at a loss to conceive 
what could induce the moderns to controvert the dogma 
that the stars and the whole world are animated, as it 
is an opinion of infinite antiquity, and is friendly to the 
most unperverted, spontaneous, and accurate concep- 
tions of the human mind. Indeed the rejection of it 
appears to me to be just as absurd as it would be in a 
maggot, if it were capable of syllogizing, to infer that 


1 Firm. Mat. Math. III, prooem. 3. 

2 H.N. II. 26, 24; cf. Cic. N.D. II. 37. 

* Cf. Maas, Tagesgétter, p. 24 fi. 

* Plato, Tim. 40 A.D. Cf. Ps.-Apul. De Deo Socratis, 2. 

5 Emn. II. 9. €. Cic. ND, T. 25. 
* Porphyry, De Abst. I. 18. 

* De Insomniis, 2 (Migne, LXVI. 12854). ° I, p. xviii f. 


266 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


man is a machine impelled by some external force when 
he walks, because it never saw any animated reptile so 
large.” 


Fourthly, another doctrine familiar to Hellenistic- 
Oriental theology was basal to astral religion,’ namely, 
man is a microcosm of the macrocosm, an epitome of 
the universe, who holds the secrets of the universe 
within himself and who knows and is known by his 
infinite affinities. It is only for such a microcosm that' 
astral salvation is possible, and only in such can deep 
cosmic emotion be evoked. ' Is it astonishing that men 
should be able to know the world, since the world is 
in themselves and each man is a copy of God in a small 
image? '? Firmicus Maternus shows how man, com- 
pounded out of the same elements as the universe, is 
sustained by the sun, moon, and five stars ' as it were 
a smaller world ' and ‘ as a living being made after copy 
of the world.’ He is possessed of body, soul, and spirit 
like the larger cosmos; he is, in his present body em- 
bracing all the elements, the product of divine work- 
manship ' in order that God might prepare an abode, 
frail but like the world, for that Divine Spirit which 
descended from the heavenly mind to sustain the mortal 
body.’ ? 

It was Posidonius who popularized in religious in- 
terests the microcosm-macrocosm doctrine originating 
in Chaldean speculations. He held that ‘ the world is 
administered according to Mind, since Mind permeates 
each part of it as Soul does in us.' * Of Posidonian 
origin is the statement of Macrobius *—‘ the physicists 
had declared that the world is a great man and man a 
little world.’ Posidonian influence in Philo ê has caused 


* Cf. Boll, Stud. z. Ptol. p. 288 fi; Bouché-Leclercq, Astrologie 
grecque, p. 76 ff.; Dieterich, Mithraslit. 3rd ed. p. 55 f. 

? Manilius, IV. 893. ? Math. III prooemium. 

4 Diog. Laert. VII. 138. 5 Comm. in Somn. Sc. II. 12, 11. 

* Cf. Apelt. De Rationibus quibusdam quae Philomi Alex. cum Posi- 
donio Intercedunt. 


A PRACTICAL RELIGION 267 


the same thought to appear frequently, e.g. ' traverse 
the greatest and most perfect man, this world’ *; and 
“thus some have been bold enough to declare that the 
smallest animal in the world, man, is equal to the world 
on the ground that each man is composed of body and 
rational soul: hence analogically they make man a little 
world and the world a great man, and in this they are 
not far wrong.’ ? 

I. In the practical working of this eminently practical 
religion which envisaged both the daily affairs of earth 
and the high things of the celestial world, we discover 
what might be termed a Calvinistic combination of 
determinism and freedom, fatalism and joy, which is 
another illustration that men's theories and their 
practices are not always brought into alignment. If the 
adherents shuddered at the dread mysterious powers 
of the world-rulers (Kosmokratores) and especially ' the 
Seven, they also experienced the thrills of cosmic 
emotion and the elevating joys of sidereal mysticism. 

Astrology contributed to ease the bewildering com- 
plexity of the world. The faith certa stant omnia lege ? 
rested on the double basis of an order and harmony 
which established a Providence and a fixity of order 
which issued in fatalism. Inexorable Fate became at 
least intelligible, being explained by the order of the astral 
divinities. If on the astralists' theology the course of 
human life was predetermined apart from man's 
voluntary exertions and independent of his moral ante- 
cedents, they at least pursued virtue as if happiness 
depended on their own efforts. Man through self- 
knowledge is a Son of God and not a Slave of Fate, as 
Poimandres revealed. 

This religion was grounded on an all-embracing series 
of correspondences which magic and divination * sought 


! De Migr. Abr. 39, C.-W. 220. Cf. De Plant. 7, C.-W. 28; De 
Providentia, I. 40. 

? Quis Rer. Div. Haeres, 31, C.-W. 155. * Manilius, IV. 14. 

4 Cf. Kroll, Evforschungen der antiken Astrologie, p. 107. 


268 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


to turn to practical use. Astrology held to both fatalism 
and freedom and encountered no serious difficulty in 
reconciling them. If astrology laid on the ancient world 
the heavy burden of a necessity arising out of cosmic 
mechanism, it also balanced its credit ledger by so treat- 
ing Fate as to make it an incentive to effort rather than 
a cause of despairing pessimism. This '' belief in Fate 
not only became a source of moral inspiration to noble 
minds, but also proved a justification of the necessity 
of positive worship." * 

The burden of this fatalistic creed ? was also lightened 
very considerably by the fact that the laws and order 
and beauty of the celestial mechanism established a 
Providence, even the existence and working of a con- 
trolling Deity, and also the mighty stellar Powers were 
conceived as personal deities * who might be known and 
therefore propitiated. There was further a way of escape 
for those astrologists who were sufficiently catholic in 
their tastes or prudential in their motives to seek 
identification with the potent Lords of the Mystery- 
Religions, the proud boast of the adherents of which 
was that their gods were cosmic deities who, like Isis, 
could awaken the victorious faith: ' Thou unravellest 
even the inextricably tangled web of Fate. Thou dost 
alleviate the tempests of Fortune and restrainest the 
harmful courses of the stars.’ There was also another 
method of escape or release from the cosmic powers 
which was open to anxious or fearful adherents of 
astralism in common with the adherents of every ancient 
form of religion—magic. The magician was the expert 
in astral lore who by possession of esoteric knowledge 
and correct formulae could sway or pompa! the dreaded 
powers to the will of man. 

II. Another expression of astral religion was sidereal 
mysticism with its accompanying cosmic emotion, a form 


1 Cumont, Astrology and Religion, p. 161. 
a ' Voluit hoc astrum meum ' (Bücheler, Carm, Lat. Epigr. 1536). 
* Wendland, Hell.-róm. Kultur, 3rd ed. p. 132 ff. 


COSMIC EMOTION 269 


of religion which was popularized largely through the 
genius of Posidonius, who united scientific knowledge 
with religious enthusiasm. 

We have abundant testimony ! to the impression made 
upon the ancients by sidereal mysticism and their 
sensitiveness to the cosmic emotion which in all ages 
arises from Nature-mysticism. It was a sentiment 
which united the Epicurean Lucretius and the mystical 
Plotinus. The ancients were no strangers to such an 
experience as that of J. Russell Lowell: ‘‘ I never before 
so clearly felt the spirit of God in me and around me. 
The whole room seemed to me full of God. The air 
seemed to hover to and fro with the presence of Some- 
thing, I knew not what.’’ 

No one is more sensitive to this astral mysticism than 
Philo, who was so deeply indebted to Posidonius: thus, 
commenting on the necessity of distinguishing between 
the spiritual and the sensible, he adds: ' But the vision 
sent upward by Light and beholding the nature of the 
stars and their harmonious movement, and the well- 
ordered revolutions both of the fixed stars and the planets 

. and the harmonious dances of all arranged by the 
laws of perfect music, imparts to the soul an ineffable 
joy and pleasure.’ ? 

This sidereal mysticism * was a contribution of no 
mean character to the religious life of the Graeco-Roman 
world. About rooo B.c. the mystic strain had been 
introduced into Greek religion by Dionysiac enthusiasm, 
and a re-enforcement of mysticism came again in the 
sixth century in the Orphic identification with Deity, 
and these were enlarged by Pythagorean symbolism. 
But astral mysticism differed from these in that the 
religious sentiments were stirred to their depths not by 

1 See references collected in Badstübner, Beitrdge z. Erkl. d. phil. 
Schriften Senecas, p. 1x ff.; Cumont, Acad. royale de Belgique, Cl. des 


Lettres, 1909, p. 260 ff. 
? Cf, Lucr. V. 1214-40; Plot. En. V. 8, 9. 
* De Op. Mundi, 17, C.-W. 54. 
* Cf. F. Boll, Jahresb. des philolog. Vereins zu Berlin, 1921, p. x ff. 


I9 


270 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


quasi-magical sacraments nor by external stimuli, but 
by the quiet contemplation of the beauty and harmony 
of the world, especially the firmament of stars. ** The 
source of mysticism is transferred from earth to 
heaven." + ; 

III. Astral religion did not merely appeal to the 
intellect and stir the emotions, but it affected purity of 
soul and was shot through and through with ethical 
issues. It takes an effort of the imagination fully to 
realize how this science-religion evoked such exalted 
feeling ? and moulded to virtue and beauty the lives of 
its adherents and caused them to record their enthusiastic 
testimony to its salutary effect. Cosmic emotion was not 
a torrent picturesquely rolling over precipices of ecstasy 
and exaltation: it was harnessed to moral life. “< The 
love of heaven makes us heavenly," was its credo. In 
Manilius’ phrase the knowledge of heaven calls us ‘ im 
caelum sacra ad commercia,’ ' into holy fellowship with 
heaven’ (II. 125). Man, who to Plato was ‘ the 
spectator of all time and all existence,' becomes to his 
disciple, Posidonius, ' the contemplator and exegete of 
the universe.' Physical beauty became the symbol of 
and incentive to moral beauty. The first effect of this 
contemplation of the visible things of the universe is the 
conviction of an artificer and an orderly Providence.? 
Thus Cicero, after a survey of the earth and heavens 
and man himself as ‘contemplator of heaven and 
earth,' concludes: 


* Therefore when we see these and other innumerable 
objects, can we possibly doubt there is some one as 
their Author, if, according to Plato, they came into 


1 Cumont, Astrology, p. 147. 

2 Dill, Roman Society from Nero, p. 598 f.: '' It is well to remember 
that there was a time when the mystery of the stellar spaces, and the 
grandeur and beneficence of the sun, were the most awful and impres- 
sive things in human experience.'' 

* Cf. Wendland, Philos Schrift üb. Vorsehung, and Capelle, Schrift 
von der Welt, p. 534. ' The beauty of the world manifests it as the 
poema of God’ (Diog. Laert. I. 35). 


MORAL EFFECTS OF ASTRALISM 271 


being, or if they have always existed, as according to 
Aristotle, that there is a Director of such a work and 
function? So the mind of man, although you do not see 
it as divine, you recognize as divine from its works.’ ' 


In a memorable passage of the De Natura Deorum, II. 
95, he translates Aristotle with strong commendation of 
this argument which a later writer than Cicero likewise 
uses: ' The invisible things of Him since the creation of 
the world are clearly seen, being understood through the 
things that are made, even His everlasting power and 
divinity.' Aristotle likewise assigned a unique value to 
the moral significance of the celestial phenomena. 


* Aristotle held ' (says Sextus Empiricus) ? ‘ that the 
knowledge (ennoia) of God has come to men from two 
sources, from the experience of the soul and from the 
celestial phenomena. . . . For having observed the 
sun by day making its circuit, and by night the well- 
ordered movement of the other stars, they concluded 
that there must be a God as author of such motion and 
order,' 


as Plato had affirmed that earth and sun and stars and 
seasons proclaim a Deity.? 

The contemplation of the heavens became a means of 
grace as a communion with the Divine, because ‘ there 
is a fellowship common to the soul with heaven and the 
stars.' ^ The wonder of heaven evokes wonder in man's 
soul: ‘ The mind which has observed their rotations and 
movements has proved that his own mind is like to Him 
who had made these in the sky.’ The astrologist 
Vettius Valens testifies that ‘ men tracing out the circle 
of heaven and the movements of the stars and the course 
of the sun and moon . . . from such foretaste of im- 
mortality would seem to have partaken before the time 
in communion with the gods ' *; and again he adds in 

1 Tusc. Disp. I. 28, 70. ? Adv. Math. IX. 20 and fr. 12. 

3 De Legg. X. 11. * Macrobius, Comm. I. 14, 16. 


5 Tusc. Disp. I. 25, 62. 
* Anth. p. 346, 1. 16 ff., and p. 242, 1. 29. 


272 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


a parenthesis: ‘ The writer enjoys enthusiasm, especially 
on these things, and seems to hold converse with God.’ 
And this communion rests on ‘ the kinship of the stars 
with man and the fact that our souls are part of 
heaven,’ * so that the poet? asks, ‘ Who could know 
heaven save by grace of heaven, or find God unless he 
were part of God? ’ 

The testimonies of the ancients to the practical moral 
effects and religious uplift of this cosmic communion 
are too emphatic and sincere and too firmly grounded 
in their personal experience to permit us to discredit 
them. They believed, and therefore they spoke. In 
the midst of his great scientific work Vettius Valens 
pauses to give his testimony: ‘I desired to obtain a 
divine and reverential contemplation and thoroughly to 
cleanse my way of all wickedness and of all defilement 
and to render my soul immortal beforehand.’ He 
‘regrets that he did not live in the classic days of the 
great astrologers,’ who ‘ manifested such zeal and virtue 
that they abandoned earthly interests to walk in heaven 
with immortal souls and in full concord with divine and 
holy thoughts.’ ? 

Marcus Aurelius * supports these testimonies: ‘ The 
impressions of these [stars] cleanse the defilement of 
earth-life.' Julian ° prays to the King Sun to grant 
him ' a good life and more perfect understanding and 
a divine mind.’ In the Pseudo-Platonic Epinomis— 
'' the first gospel preached to Hellenes of the stellar 
religion of Asia "—the study of the celestial pheno- 
mena is recommended as the means to the beautiful 
life. 

In this connexion Philo cannot be overlooked, both 
because of Posidonian influence and because he is one 
of the world’s master mystics. In his De Opificio 
Mundi * he tells how the Mind— 

1 Pliny, H.N. II. 26, 95. ? Manilius, IT. 115. 


$ Anih. p. 242, 16; p. 241, 13. Cf, Twsc. Disp. I. 19, 45. 
4 VII. 47. 5 Or. IV. 158b. 9 23, C.-W. 70. 


CONTEMPLATION OF HEAVEN 273 


* Raised aloft on wings to the air and having surveyed 
conditions therein is carried still higher into the ether 
and to the circuit of the heavens. There it is carried 
round in the dances of the planets and fixed stars accord- 
ing to the laws of perfect music, and following the Love 
that leads to Wisdom and surmounting everything of 
the sensible world, it strives to attain the spiritual. And 
on contemplating in yonder world the patterns and ideas 
of surpassing beauty which it saw in the world of sense, 
it is overcome with a sober intoxication and enjoys 
enthusiasm like the Corybantic, but it is filled with a 
different desire and a loftier yearning by which it is 
inspired to the very height of the spiritual things and 
seems to enter the very presence of the great King 
himself.’ 


And again * God provided generously for man ‘ both 
to live and to live nobly,’ the former by supplying the 
things requisite for his enjoyment, and the latter by 
* the contemplation of the heavenly things, by which the 
Mind is smitten to conceive Love and Desire for these 
things, whence arose philosophy, whereby man, a mortal 
though he is, is rendered immortal.’ 

Commenting on the command,’ ‘ Look up to heaven 
and count the stars,’ he finds the real meaning to. be 
that the soul of the wise man is ‘a copy of heaven,’ 
or hyperbolically ‘a heaven upon earth within itself,’ 
manifesting ‘ most starlike and radiant rays of virtues.’ 

IV. Another result of astralism of far-reaching 
importance was the culmination of the sidereal cult in 
Sun-worship,? the purest and most elevating form of 
Nature-worship. This was partly a natural evolution 
of sidereal devotion, since among the planets the Sun 
was the most conspicuous as the source of life and light, 
‘the heart of the world’ or ‘ the eye * of the world ’ 

1 Op. cit. 25, C.-W. 77. * Quis Haeres, 17; C.-W. 87. 

3 Cf, Fr. Boll, Die Sonne im Glauben u. in der Weltanschauung der 
alten Völker. (No. 3 of Astr. Schriften des Bundes der Sternfreunde.) 

4 Cf. Ovid's address to the Sun (Met. IV. 227): 


‘Omnia, qui vides, per quem videt omnia tellus, 
Mundi oculus.’ 


274 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


or ‘ the mind of the world,’ and the mover of the planets. 
Of course, all the constellations were objects of reverence, 
the seven planets, and the twelve signs of the Zodiac, 
and the thirty-six Decans. In the hot plains of 
Mesopotamia the Moon had the premier place, but as 
Babylonian celestial lore moved westwards and north- 
wards to colder climates where the Sun was not so 
overpowering, it was inevitable that the Sun should 
secure its place of primacy. But other factors were 
working towards the practice of adoration of the Sun. 
The scientific influence of Greek astronomy working on 
Oriental astrology was bound to recognize the natural 
superiority of the Sun. Further, Stoic hylozoism, with 
its deification of the world, and its theory of a universally 
penetrating principle, easily lent itself to the advance 
of astral pantheism, which also recognized a ' heart of 
the world.’ As the Stoics regarded fire as the highest 
and purest of the elements and as divine and creative, 
they were tending in the same direction as astralism. 
Leading Stoics had from the beginning recognized the 
principate of the Sun: ‘ It was the opinion of Cleanthes 
that the Sun is the ruling power of the world ' * and also 
that ' the Sun is the potent ruler and master of the 
universe” ? Though the whole heavenly bodies are 
divine, the Sun is as it were the concentration of 
Divinity. The principate of the Sun became increas- 
ingly a religious and scientific dogma. The Sun is 
‘leader and ruler and regulator of the other lights, the 
mind of the world which tempers it,’ * which Macrobius ? 
re-echoes as Sol mundi mens est. To the astrological 
writer Julian of Laodicea,* ‘ the Sun has been appointed 
King and ruler of the universe, leading and originating 


! Arnim, Frag. I. 499. ? Cic. Acad. II. 41, 126. 

3 Cf. Seneca, Benef. VII. 31, 3. 

t Cic. Som. Scip. IV. 9, cf. Tusc. D. I. 28, 68. Cf. Thiele, Antike 
Himmelsbilder, p. 136 f. 

5Sat. I. 19, 9. 

5 Cat. Astrol. Gr. I. 136; Cumont, Rel. Orient. (Eng. tr.), p. 259, 
n. 87, and Pliny, H.N. II, 6, 12, cited ib. : 


SUN-WORSHIP 275 


all.” And to ‘‘ the Hegel of Neo-Platonism,"' ? the Sun 
is “ King of the Universe’ whom ‘ the Demiurge set 
over the Universe and established as guardian ordered 
to rule over all.' 

As men looked upon the external world as divine and 
replete with symbols of divinity, it was inevitable that 
the Sun should be accepted as the supreme symbol of 
the divine unity. It might—with that ancient disregard 
of the distinction between symbol and that beyond the 
symbol common to Pagans and Christians—be regarded 
indifferently as the symbol of the Supreme God or the 
supreme God Himself. But thinking men recognized a 
distinction between the Sun of the sensible world and the ‘ 
Intelligible Sun, or the light of the Spirit, which was the 
creator or source of human reason. 

Naturally astrological pantheism with a Sun-centralized 
cosmos and a deified world came into conflict? with 
another religious and philosophical conception, chiefly 
Platonic and Neo-Platonic, which placed God beyond 
and above the universe and out of contact with matter. 
Thus astrological immanence and philosophical tran- 
scendence joined that issue on which the last word is 
not yet said either in science or in philosophy. Neither 
conception—of astrological immanence or philosophical 
transcendence—drove the other off the field. To the 
former the Sun was the supreme power ? and deity; to 
the latter the Sun was a subordinate power but the . 
supreme symbol and highest sensible expression of the 
spiritual Sun. Thus there arose two Suns, correspond- 
ing to the two worlds, the Visible Sun and the Spiritual 
Sun. And finally, in later Neo-Platonism of Iamblichus 
and Julian, a third Sun, ‘ the Intelligent Sun,’ appeared 
as the intermediary between the ' intelligible ' and the 
‘ sensible ’ worlds. 


1 Proclus, Bury, Later Rom. Empire, I. p. 13. 

? Cf. Cumont, After-life, p. 134 f. 

* Cf, the hymn In laudem Solis, in Baehrens, Poetae Latini Minores, 
IV, pp. 433-7. 


276 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


But solar monotheism was also due to the philosophical 
and religious quest for unity: it was the working toward 
a spiritual synthesis and the result of syncretism. So 
alluring was the solar adoration that the most aggressive 
deities of the Mystery-cults were identified with the Sun 
or brought into a working agreement with him. 

Julian’s view of solar theology in his Hymn to the Sun 
is of great interest. He contemplates the Sun in three 
aspects, or rather three Suns corresponding to his triad 
of worlds, the Sun of the Intelligible World, and that 
of the intermediate world of Intellectualism, and that 
of the Sensible world, in which the Sun is identified 
with Mithra. The ardent and sincere language’ of 
Julian at the opening and close of his Hymn gives some 
idea of the emotional warmth and moral power of this 
religion. 

This solar faith was the culmination of Hellenistic- 
Oriental and Roman Paganism. It was the vitalizing ? 
power in pagan theology and afforded the most con- 
vincing symbol of that light which was the aim of 
philosophy and religion. It was the source of a mystical 
devotion in which peasant and philosopher could par- 
ticipate. 


“ Heliolatry, the last refuge of monotheism in 
heathenism, which refused to accept the religion of 
Galilee, swept all the great worships of strong vitality 
into its system, softened their differences, accentuated 
their similarities, by every effort of fancy, false science, 
or reckless etymology, and in the end, ‘ Sol Invictus ’ 
and Mithra were left masters of the field.” ? 


Solar adoration occupied a prominent place in ancient 
hymnology, if we may judge by what has survived. In 
Proclus' Hymn to the Sun we read: 


1 Cf. especially 130c, 131ab, 158b. 

* Cf. the '' plus important des cultes populaires, celui du Soleil, qui 
avait peu à peu effacé les autres et dans lequel semblaient se concentrer 
en ce moment toutes les forces vives du paganisme '' (Boissier, La Fin 
du paganisme, 2nd ed. vol. I, p. 113). 

3 Dill, Rom. Society from Nero, p. 556. 


SOLAR MONOTHEISM 277 


* Hear, thou King of the intellectual fire, Titan of the 
golden-reins; O thou Prince who hast the key of the 
life-sustaining Fountain. From the world above thou 
dost direct a rich stream of harmony to the worlds of 
sense. . . . Grant me, O Lord, if thou please, the 
secure wealth of gladsome piety, for thou art able to 
accomplish all things willingly ; thou possessest mighty 
and boundless strength. But if any mischief befalls us 
from the spindles of Fate as they make their revolutions 
to the star-driven threads, do thou restrain this for us 
by thy potent sway.' 


Of the same tenor is the Hymn to the Sun found in 
the Orphic Hymnbook (VIII), of which the following 
are excerpts from Taylor's translation: 

' Agile and vig'rous, venerable Sun, 
Fiery and bright around the heav'ns you run, 
Foe to the wicked, but the good man's guide, 
O'er all his steps propitious you preside. 
With various-sounding golden lyre 'tis thine 
'To fill the world with harmony divine. 


Propitious on these mystic labours shine, 
And bless thy suppliants with a life divine.' 


Truly in a world in which religious thought was deeply 
exercised with the themes of Life and Light, this solar 
symbolism was suggestive. The ôs voepóv, ‘ intelligent 
light,’ of the physical luminary suggested the pôs voyróv 
or ‘ intelligible (spiritual) light’ of truth. The Sun is 
in the macrocosm what the Reason is in the microcosm.’ 
Sun-worship was also the justification of ancient cosmic 
religion. It confirmed the unity of the universe and 
was another phase of the doctrine of cuprdGea Tov drov, 
* universal sympathy.’ * 

Against astralism Christian preachers naturally in- 
veighed, as did also the Jewish sects. Arnobius, 
without specifically designating the astrologists, speaks 
of adherents of ‘ presumptuous schools ’ who, ‘ born of 


1 Cf. Diog. L. VII. 139. 
2 Cf. Proclus, In Remp. II, pp. 258 f., 372 (Kroll); Bouché-Leclercq, 


_ Astrologie, I, p. 28 ff. 


278 ASTRAL RELIGION AND ITS APPEAL 


God ' and ' superior to Fate,’ can after a life of self- 
control return ‘ without let as to their Father's house.’ ' 

Tatian, though agreeing with the astrologists that the 
* spirit ' in stars and angels, plants and waters, men and 
animals, is ‘one and the same, boldly attributes 
astralism, ‘ the placing of living beings in the heavens,’ 
to demons, but Christians are ‘ above Fate. Instead of 
wandering demons we have come to the knowledge of 
one Lord who wanders not.' ' The Sun and Moon were 
made for us; how am I to worship what are my 
servitors? ' and ‘I refuse to render worship to the 
planets.' ? 

Clement has preserved an ancient testimony to the 
release of the Christians from no merely imaginary 
* Powers ': 

* From this strife and conflict of the Powers the Lord 
rescues us and grants us peace from the combats of the 
Powers and the Angels ' ; and ' Up to Baptism Fate is 
valid, but after this the astrologers no longer assert 
truly. It is not the laver only that releases us, but the 
gnosis of what we are, why we are, where we are, whither 
we were cast, whither we tend, and whence we are 
ransomed ; what is birth and rebirth.’ * Origen, who 
held more in common with the astrologists than any 
other Christian philosopher, declared that the sun and 
moon and constellations pray to God. 


1 Adv. Gentes, II. 62. 


* Ad. Graecos, 4, 9, 10, 12. Cf. Sapientia, XIII. 1-10. 
* Exc. ex Theodoto, 72, 78. 


CHAPTER XVI 
ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


Ir after nineteen centuries of institutional Christianity 
and insistence on uniformity and standardization of 
dogma there obtain such diverse conceptions on the 
hope of man as the realistic and spectacular chiliasm of 
popular Christianity, the intellectual conceptions of 
spirit of philosophic reflexion, and the anticipatory 
experimental faith of mystics, it will not surprise us to 
discover the absence of dogmatic uniformity among the 
adherents of astralism. The yearning for felicity and 
the aspiration for perfection express themselves with as 
marked uses of imagery as is natural for transcendental 
experiences and hopes beyond bounds of time and space. 
Out of this fluidity of conceptions arise personal or quasi- 
personal and impersonal eschatologies, the eschatology 
of absorption and that of blissful consciousness, an 
eternal and a limited immortality. The rendezvous of the 
blessed was left alluringly indefinite—the moon in lunar 
immortality, the sun in solar immortality, the highest 
heaven of the fixed stars in stellar immortality, or that 
supramundane world of immediate vision of the true 
and beautiful, which was suggested by the astrological 
conception of the ascent of the Soul ever up and onward. 

The astrologist might be indifferent to the logic of 
early Stoicism and make way for an astral mysticism 
and personal immortality, or he might cleave to Stoicism 
with the logical conclusions of its physics and its 
ethical view of the life here as the scene of man's self- 
realization and reward; or he might—as became in- 
creasingly the case—veer from Stoicism to Platonism 
with its more spiritual and other-worldly conceptions ; 

279 


280 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


or again his dominant outlook might be that of Neo- 
Pythagoreanism with its re-incarnations; or he might 
find a spiritual home in Hermeticism with its essentially 
cosmic salvation; or his chief faith might be in the 
sacramental system of the Mysteries. His view of astral 
immortality would be determined by the amalgam of 
beliefs produced by syncretism and by his relative 
interest in science or in religion, and by the relative 
importance attached to logic or to intuition. In fact 
religious and philosophic syncretism neither demanded 
nor permitted strictly logical consistency: its result was 
variations of belief, e.g. as in Seneca and Cicero. The 
ancients were also permitted to give expressions to vary- 
ing religious moods of faith and unfaith. 

The bliss of the blessed spirits * in heavenly abodes 
is variously conceived as necessary with such ineffable 
experiences. The estate of the ascended provoked 
thought, and the ancients, like ourselves, were obliged 
to argue from the known to the unknown and to seek 
there the fruition of the highest hopes cherished here. 
Generally speaking there were, among many suggestions, 
three main ideas as to the occupation or condition of the 
blessed. 

(1) The astral salvation was a complete release ? from 
the body which was a hindrance to the soaring soul. It 
was an elevation above the crassness of earth existence 
and above the mists and gloom of the sublunar 
atmosphere into the pure empyrean of endless light. It 
was a translation from darkness to light; ‘ restoration 
to the light of perennial life,’ ? elevation from the earthly 
things which cannot delight the soul to the supernal 
things which impart lasting joy.* As the Persian and 

* Clement (Sty. IV. 26; 167. 2) quotes with approval Epicharmus, 
that 'if you have become pious in mind you will in death suffer no 
evil, but the spirit dwells above in heaven’; and Pindar, that ‘ the 
souls of the pious dwell in heaven ' engaged in praise. 

a Cf. Badstübner, Beiträge, p. 2 ff. 


* Macrobius, Comm. in. Som. Scip., Y. 12, 17. 
* Cf. Seneca, Ad Helv. IX. 2. 


THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES 281 


the Hebrew thought Glory or Light-existence the form 
of the presence of the Divine and the accompaniment 
of immortality, so astrologists dreamed of unbroken 
splendour. ' Having traversed all the lower planes the 
soul makes its way through to the supreme height and 
enjoys the most beautiful spectacle of the divine ones, 
and, mindful of its eternity, it inquires into all that was 
and shall be for ever.'' The newly arrived soul inter 
felices currit animas ? and knows no longer in part, ex 
conjectura, but ex vero peritus in arcana naturae. In 
that region ‘ we see not like you on earth enveloped in 
deep night.'? Again, in his Consolation to Polybius * 
Seneca affirms: 'the soul of my brother, released as 
it were from its long prison, exults at length in its 
freedom and enjoys the spectacle of nature and looks 
down from its higher reaches on human things beneath, 
but it contemplates the divine things with immediacy, 
the understanding of which it had so long sought in 
vain.' 

This conception of blissful observation above 
ultimately derives from Heracleides * of Pontus in his 
story of the vision of Empedotimus, whence it was 
popularized by Posidonius and Varro. 

(2) Another occupation of the blessed was to be en- 
raptured by the harmony of the spheres and to be 
carried around in the chorus of the stars. If the music 
of earth could so intoxicate the soul and awake it to 
Corybantic enthusiasm, how ravishing must be the sweet 
harmony produced by the rhythmic rotation of the 
spheres. Ancient religion had more than a poetic con- 
nexion with the— 


** Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere 
Of Planets and of fixed, in all her wheels 
Resembles nearest; mazes intricate, 
Eccentric, intervolved yet regular 


! Seneca, XX. 2. ? Ad Marciam, XXV. 

3 Ib. XXVI. 3. 41X73. 

5 Rohde, Psyche, pp. 330, n. III; 517, n. 54. 

€ Cf. Macrobius, Com. to the Dream of Scipio, II. 1-7. 


282 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


Then most, when most irregular they seem; 

And, in their motions, harmony divine 

So smooths her charming tones, that God's own ear 

Listens delighted.’’ 1 
It was the fruition of their religious ‘ uniting ’ with the 
Soul of the World, of which foretastes were granted in 
exalted or ecstatic experiences now. The enraptured 
dreamer in the Somnium Scipionis ? asks ' what is the 
sound so impressive and so sweet, which fills my ears? ' 
and is informed that it is this marvellous harmony 
produced by the stars, to which oppletae aures hominium 
obsurduerunt. 

(3) Another oft-repeated beatitude will be the con- 
templation of the earth from the celestial heights and 
that of the stellar spaces in their briliance. The 
Somnium Scipionis dwells eloquently upon this esteemed 
privilege of the elect. The same author expatiates on 
the same theme in his Tusculan Disputations: quum 
totam terram contueri licebit.? The domesticus interpres 
on high ' commands to cast your gaze upon the deeps 
of earth, for it is pleasant to look back from on high 
on the things left behind.' * 

The attitude of two men, both Stoics, one of whom, 
Posidonius, made astrology a warm and mystic faith, 
and the other, Seneca, who was very susceptible to 
astral mysticism, is of interest to us. 

Posidonius reacted against his teacher Panaetius' 
scepticism ° on the question of survival, and taking 
advantage of the great freedom on eschatological 
speculation permitted by Zeno, the founder, and com- 
bining oriental mysticism and emotion with his physics, 
he held to both the pre-existence * and post-existence 
of the soul. ' The whole air is full of immortal souls ' * 


1 Paradise Lost, V. 620 ff. Cf. Cumont, After-life in Rom. Paganism, 
Dyers 

AVE tO. 3 I. 19, 44-7. Seneca, Ad Marciam, XXV. 

* Arnold, Rom. Stoicism, p. 267. 

* Schmekel, Phil. d. mit. Stoa, p. 250. 

* Cicero, De Div. I. 30, 64, citing Posidonius, 


RETURN TO THE ELEMENTS 283 


which have ascended from the murk of earth to find 
their equilibrium in the sphere of the moon,! where they, 
like the stars, are fed by the exhalations from the earth- 
region and form a choral company round the moon.? 
This lunar immortality, advocated with the learning, 
enthusiasm, and religious earnestness of an inspired 
teacher like Posidonius, not only proved attractive in 
itself£, but it opened the way to further evolution of 
celestia! immortality in solar and stellar forms. 

Seneca's ideas about immortality fluctuate consider- 
ably, from a philosophical questioning ? or an intriguing 
possibility of ‘a beautiful dream ' ^ or an assent to 
the position of Cleanthes ? ' that only the souls of the 
wise outlast the conflagration,' * or the practical denial 
in ‘ death as non-existence,’ * to the faith in a real and 
personal future existence.* But apparently to Seneca’s 
mind, after entry upon the aeterna requies, and the life 
in the higher ether, and the converse with blessed souls, 
the final consummation will be to “‘ suffer a sea-change ”’ 
back to the original elements at the conflagration and 
begin the cycle again: ‘ when the time has arrived that 
the world should be extinguished for renovation... 
we blessed souls who have obtained our eternal lot. . . 
shall revert to the former elements.’ ? 

Other Stoics who were in sympathy with astral 
religion availed themselves likewise of the liberty of 
speculation permitted by Zeno. ‘ Cleanthes held that 
all souls endure till the conflagration; Chrysippus only 
those of the wise.’ '^ A limited immortality till the final 
conflagration was the most general doctrine, and then 
the individual souls mingle with the world soul or are 
re-absorbed into the elements. 


1 Cf, Norden, Komm. zu Aen, VI, p. 23. 
2 Arnold, ib. p. 263; Cumont, ib. p. 98. 


* Ad Polyb. IX. 1-3; Ad Mar. XXV. Ep IO2 2. 

5 Ad Mar. XXVI. 7; Ad Helv. VIII. 4; Ep. 57, 9. 

* Arnim, Frag. St. II. 811, p. 223. 7 Ep. 54, 4. 

8 Ep. 102. 9 Ad Mar. XXVI. 6-7. 


2 Diog. Li V. 157- 


. 284 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


* On certain points all Stoic teachers seem to be 
agreed; first that the soul is, as regards its substance, 
imperishable; secondly, that the individual soul cannot 
survive the general conflagration ; lastly, that it does not 
of necessity perish with the body. . .. We find it 
generally held that the souls of the good survive till the 
conflagration, whilst those of the wicked have but a short 
separate existence.'' ' 


Marcus Aurelius is a typical representative of this 
immortality of absorption along with the ethical effects 
of astral religion. Assuming the survival of souls he 
says— 


* How can the air hold them from all eternity? How, 
we reply, does earth hold the bodies of generation after 
generation committed to the grave? . . . so too the 
souls transmuted into air, after a period of survival, 
change by processes of diffusion and ignition, and are 
resumed into the seminal principle of the universe, and 
in this way make room for others to take up their 
habitation in their stead,’ 


and again, ‘ You exist but as a part inherent in a greater 
whole. You will vanish into that which gave you being, 
or rather, you will be re-transmuted into the seminal 
and universal Reason.’ ? 

It would seem as if the attitude of Stoic faith to 
celestial immortality was determined by the ascendancy 
of physics or ethics or religious sentiment. 

The astrologists proper cannot be said to be insistent 
upon individual immortality* or upon that high 
mysticism of Plotinus in ' the flight of the Alone to the 
Alone.’ It is a great testimony to the power and 
fascination of astral religion that in competition with the 


1 Arnold, Rom. Stoicism, p. 263. 

? IV. 21; IV. 14; quotations from Arnold, pp. 270, 126. 

* Cumont (Le Mysticisme astral, p. 276): '' D'une facon générale, 
les espérances eschatologiques n'occupent aucune place chez les astro- 
logues.'' 


FORETASTES OF IMMORTALITY 285 


Mysteries and Christianity which offered more definite 
and individual immortality, it exercised such a sway and 
forced recognition from these competitors. Instead of 
the apparently more satisfying immortality of these, 
astrology offered the exaltation and refinement of the 
emotions here by heavenly contemplation, the converse 
in ecstasy with the divine now and a foretaste of 
immortality, and a soul purified in this world by its 
self-consciousness of heavenly kinship ; and after death ? 
some, like Posidonius, might offer a limited personal 
immortality, but the majority would, while denying 
individual survival, maintain a continued existence in 
the larger whole, by conceiving the soul as a spark of 
the divine fire returning to its origin in the cosmic fires, 
or a release from the pitiless laws of mechanical necessity 
which was somewhat to be discounted through loss of 
personal consciousness. Release from fate was also the 
release from the bonds of individuality. Others an- 
ticipated a celestial existence in the bliss of the knowledge 
of the secrets of nature and the music of the heavenly 
choirs until in antiqua elementa vertemur. The great 
astrologist Ptolemaeus seems to have no need for a 
future existence, his deepest desires being satisfied in 
the profound occupation here with the heavenly 
bodies. Another astrologist, Vettiud Valens, is quite 
inconsistent, expressing a doubt as to whether there is 
‘requital for good and evil after death’ while again 
holding that ‘ the godless and evil-doers have not only 
missed their share in immortality, but also that of 
humanity.’ * 

The influence of philosophy upon astral religion led 
to further developments and refinement in conceptions 
of the supreme bliss. The aspiration of the soul sublime 
ferri ? could not rest satisfied with a seat of bliss in the 
Moon, or in the Sun as the centre of the seven planetary 
spheres, or even in the Hebdomas or seventh sphere of 


1 Refs. in Cumont, Le Mysticisme astral, p. 275, n. 1. 
2 Tusc. Disp. I. 17, 40. 


20 


286 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


Saturn: the soul still continued its ascent into the 
Ogdoad, or eighth sphere of the Fixed Stars, the 
imepoupavios Tózos Where Fate lost its sceptre and 
which for a time satisfied as the abode of God.* But 
thought discovered a higher God than the summus ipse 
deus, arcens et continens ceteros ? of the eighth sphere, 
the Most High,’ öyıoros, the Ultra-mundane and 
Exsuperantissimus enthroned above the Eight in the 
purest Light beyond the spherical world. This God 
is ‘seated on the most high place, his power inter- 
penetrating the whole Universe, giving motion to sun 
and moon and causing the rotation of the whole heaven, 
and the source of safety to all upon earth.’ * 

The change in religious outlook was due to the in- 
creasing influence of Platonism and Neo-Platonism over 
Stoicism ; it was a movement from the immanence of 
Stoicism with its highest God within the cosmos to 
Platonic transcendence with its God beyond the 
cosmos. 

Hence the highest bliss, both in experience now and 
the hope beyond, was the complete escape from the 
Sensible world of the astrologist to the Intelligible or 
Spiritual world of the Idealist, from the world of the 
visible gods—the stars—to that of the incorporeal in- 
visible Deity. Man was privileged to outsoar the height 
of heavens to the rapturous heights of the unio mystica 
in the world of pure Ideas and to the beatific 
vision of ineffable Beauty and of intuitive immediate 
Truth. 

The highest phase of astral religion—the solar cult 
—was likewise spiritualized by philosophic reflection 
and religious experience. The great visible orb became 
but the symbol of another Sun which shines in the soul 
of man and in the infinite ultramundane Light, the 


1 Cf. Cicero, N.D. I. 34. ? Som. Scip. 4, 9. 

* Cf. Cumont, Juppiter summus exsuperantissimus (Arch. f. Reli- 
gionsw. IX. 1906, p. 329 ff.). 

* Ps.-Aristotle, De Mundo, 398b, 6. 


GOD THE SUN'S SUN 287 


loftiest symbol of that eternal light '' that never was on 
sea or land." A Platonist like Philo ? knows that the 
contemplative who sees ' not with the eye of the body 
but with the eye of the soul, by which good and evil 
are distinguished,’ ‘ in desire for the vision of reality,’ 
must ' overpass the material Sun ' to God who is ' the 
Sun's Sun,’ the vonrds aicOnrod, who from his in- 
visible sources ' causes the visible rays to shine upon 
him who sees.’ ' For as the rising sun dissipates the 
darkness and floods all things with light, so when God, 
the Intelligible (moetos) Sun, arises and shines in the 
soul, the darkness of passion and evil is dissipated, 
and the purest and spotless character of most radiant 
virtue is manifested.' This is an experience here 
and now which makes men 'ravished with divine 
Love' leave earth life behind, while it is also the 
foretaste of immortality of a severe and pure 
spirituality. 

Plato's suggestive symbolism of ' the wings of the 
soul' was gladly laid hold of for religious purposes, 
and in the lofty spirituality of Platonism the soul so 
equipped by nature could not rest anywhere, even in 
the purest ether, in the material and planetary system. 
It must outsoar even ‘ the hyper-celestial place ’ to the 
transcendental world. 

Another thought of Plato's was also destined to bear 
much fruit both in Pagan and Christian mysticism, the 
Eros or Divine Love by which the ravished soul is 
carried into unity with the object of its longing. It was 
not enough for the Soul to gaze upon the ennobling 
beauty of the earth and firmament: strengthened by 
Eros the Soul may make a sacramental use of sensuous 
beauty to rise to the supersensuous. 

Religious, mythical, and psychological motives run 
concurrently in the evolution of the high doctrine of 


1 De V.C. C.-W. to-11, M. 473; De Hum. 22, M. 403; C.-W. 164. 
See passages collected in Conybeare's note in Philo, About the Contem- 


plative Life, p. 41. 


288 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


Eros. The myth of Psyche and Cupid (the unfortunate 
Latin translation of Eros) is an expression of this 
religious eroticism. It is recognized by psychologists 
how closely the religious emotions run to the erotic, so 
close that the mystics have found it too congenial to 
express their ineffable experiences in erotic language 
which is harmless or perhaps even helpful to themselves 
but dangerous to second-rate or imitative mystics. But 
the members of the Graeco-Roman world in their 
profound desire for love, could, no more than we, draw 
definitely the line of partition between the heavenly and 
the earthly love. And when they faced the problem 
of the relation of sex love to the celestial love they were 
no more successful than many individuals and sects 
to-day. They saw in the process of generation a demonic 
or divine quality which closely allied it with the unity 
of deep religious emotion. Or again, they viewed it as 
on the one hand a matter of indifference as a material 
act which could not touch the spirit separated by the 
impassable gulf of dualism from the body, and hence 
antinomianism, or on the other hand a diabolic bodily 
function which soiled the soul and must be shunned— 
hence asceticism. 

The sensuous, and even sensual, and the religious 
could in ancient thought lie contiguous. This need not 
surprise us in whose Hebrew canon an ancient ritual 
of a fertility-cult^ has taken a permanent place as a 
devotional book, and for whom the language from that 
suspicious quarter has, especially through the sermons 
of Bernard of Clairvaux, become the expression of the 
soul with its bridal deity and the classic religious erotic. 
Bernard's use of the language of marriage and fecundity 
has had a disastrous effect on Christian devotion, 
especially in the substitution of Eros for Agape, in the 
elaborate use of sexual imagery for the union of the 
soul, and in directing the later mediaeval mysticism to 


* Cf. Th. J. Meek, The Song of Songs: a Symposium (Philadelphia, 
1924), Pp. 48-79. 


RELIGIOUS EROTIC 289 


the Old Testament rather than to the New Testa- 
ment.! 

Greek aestheticism was sensitive to the sensuous 
beauty, in which it saw the reflection of a higher beauty.? 
Hence it need not surprise us that Plato sees a pro- 
gression in love from that of beautiful forms to that of 
the unchangeable beauty, or that he treats his doctrine 
of Eros in connexion not with the love of the sexes but 
in connexion with that perilously moral Greek form of 
friendship, paiderastia, though forbidding its excesses.? 
A new world was dawning with a passion for love and 
liberation of the soul. And it is this new thing to which 
Augustine has given expression in ' I did not yet love 
and I was loving to love and I sought something to 
love, being in love with Love,’ * and which was pre- 
figured by the beautiful myth of Cupid and Psyche. 
Correctly has Whittaker remarked—* 


'* A thought arrived at by Graeco-Roman civilization 
only at the end was thus present to the new civilization 
of the West from the beginning. Among other things 
there appeared in the world, after a long and complex 
transition, the elements of a new kind of love; some- 
thing not without sex, yet directed in a new way to the 
inward essence of the individual. In this kind of love 
there is a metaphysical element."' 


And the erotic poetry of paganism was transmuted 
into an erotic of the spirit, to which the unwholesome, 
because excessive, asceticism of early Christianity, the 
disparagement of sex love as represented by Jerome, 


1 Cf. Dom C. Butler, Western Mysticism. ‘‘ With surprising spiritu- 
ality Bernard uses the texts of Canticles to set forth the love of the soul 
to Christ, of man to God. The texts are what they are, burning, sen- 
suous, fleshly, intense, and beautiful—everyone knows them; but in 
Bernard's sermons, flesh fades before the spirit’s whiter glow '' (Taylor, 
Mediaeval Mind, Y. 428). 

? Cf. Zeller, Plato, p. 194 f. * Zeller, ib. p. 455. 

* * Nondum amabam; et amare amabam; quarebam quid amarem, 
amans amare’ (Conf. III. 1). 

5 Macrobius, p. 2 f. 


290 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


the practice of living with virgin-wives, and the in- 
difference to the future of society in an exclusive other- 
worldliness, all conduced.* The passion for love which 
is a passion of normal selfhood was diverted into other 
channels, and the repression obliged an excessive con- 
centration which produced tense psychopathic conditions. 

From the days of Plato onwards Eros and Psyche, 
originally synonyms, appear side by side. And Psyche 
represents both the present incarnate soul in its appre- 
hension of truth and the discarnate soul in its future 
immortality. Eros is also that subtle quality of the soul 
by which it rises to its true home in ecstasy or purification 
from evil; it also appears as the psychopomp which 
leads the soul over the waters of death into bliss, and 
ushers it into the eternal existence. Both the conception 
and the experience of the eternal within the present order 
were known to philosophic Judaism as represented by 
Philo, to Neo-Platonic Paganism as represented by 
Plotinus, and to Pauline and especially Johannine 
Christianity. 

In truth Plotinus’ ‘ Yonder World’ is not so much 
the discarnate existence as the elevation of the soul from 
the ‘ things here ' which are perishable to the Spiritual 
(Intelligible) World of present-eternal realities. His 
Yonder is the state entered into at any time by ‘ the 
Spirit (Nous) in Love,’ which can in Goethe's phrase 
' dem Augenblick Dauer verleihen." A later philo- 
sopher of another race and school expresses this in mens 
aeterna est quatenus res sub aeternitatis specie concipit 
(Spinoza). 

Truly the ‘ ever divine Plato ' builded better than he 


> A recent writer in The Times Literary Supplement (July x, 1926, 
p. 442) calls attention to '' one of the most extraordinary and trium- 
phant metamorphoses in the history of civilization: the fusion in the 
work of Dante and his contemporaries, of Ovid with Christianity, of 
the Art of Love with the Worship of the Virgin; the formation conse- 
quently of the most complete and most exalted erotic . . . that the 
world has ever known . . . European erotic, by which we mean not 
‘eroticism,’ but the conscious refinement and intensification of the 
sex impulse, which is one of the great achievements of Europe.’ 


THE DIVINE EROS 291 


knew in the Phaedrus and Symposium when, in one of 
those symbolic myths so congenial to this mystic- 
philosopher, he gave expression to the yearning of the 
soul. Love is the remembrance of the archetypes, the 
quickening of the anamnesis. It produces in the soul 
enthusiasm akin to frenzy (mania) and to Bacchic con- 
ditions. It is aroused by Beauty which is inseparable 
from the Good. ‘ All beauty is the object of Love ’ says 
Diotima in the Symposium. But this love, awakened 
by external and sensuous beauty, evolves through 
gradations of different forms to ever higher forms.! The 
goal of Eros is immortality or the fruition of self- 
realization.” 

As a result partly of Plato’s antitheses which are 
often interpreted as dualism and partly of his Greek 
aestheticism, there emerges an apparent dualism in his 
great doctrine of Love, that of the Earthly Love and the 
Heavenly Love, but only an apparent dualism. What- 
ever the source from which Love may rise it flows 
steadily toward and empties itself in the ocean of Reality, 
which is both a present experience and a condition 
beyond death. 

This phase of Platonic idealism and recognition of the 
deep intuition of humanity has had a long and unbroken 
history. Perhaps no one has more faithfully presented 
it than Edmund Spenser in the Hymn of Heavenly 
Beauty. 


1 « Love is, generally speaking, the endeavour of the finite to expand 
itself to infinity, to fill itself with what is eternal and imperishable, to 
generate something enduring. The external condition of Love’s exist- 
ence is the presence of Beauty. . . . Love is as various as Beauty in 
kind and in degree . . , He (Love) is realized in a graduated series of 
different forms. The first is the love of beautiful shapes—of one and 
then of all; a higher step is the love of beautiful souls, which operates 
in moral words and efforts, in works of education, art and legislation; 
a third is the love of beautiful sciences—the seeking out of Beauty 
wherever it may be found; the highest of all is the love which rises 
up to the pure, shapeless, eternal, and unchangeable Beauty, unmixed 
with aught finite or material—to the Idea '" (Zeller, Plato, p. 193 f.). 

2 Symp. 208e-212a. 


292 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


But Plato found an earlier disciple * in another mystic, 
Philo, who remembered that Eros was in Platonic 
symbol the son of Want (Penia) and of Plenty (Poros) 
the son of Metis (Counsel). Philo, like Plotinus and 
Plato, spoke because he believed and believed because 
of having the personal experience of practising mystics 
and inquiring philosophers. They were ' men who were 
lovers of wisdom both in their characters and in their 
discourses.’ ? ‘ Those also aim at attention to the 
Divine (Oepareíav) not from convention nor from the 
encouragement and promptings of other people, but 
because ravished by the Heavenly Love, they enter into 
the condition of enthusiasm, like Bacchic and Corybantic 
worshippers, until they behold the objects of their long- 
ing.' Then, such is their yearning for the deathless 
and blessed life, they consider that they have already 
died to their mortal life and leave their goods to their 
sons and daughters and kinsfolk.? Philo is sensitive 
to the difference between 'the Eros and heavenly 
Aphrodite ' and ‘ the common and vulgar Eros.’ * 

In a famous passage * answering the question ‘ who 
is the heir of divine things? ' after averring ' only he 
who is inspired from above is deemed worthy (to inherit 
the incorporeal and divine things), having obtained his 
heavenly and divine portion, that is the Nous in its 
greatest purity . . . for only incorporeal natures can 
inherit the things of the Spirit,’ he apostrophizes thus: 


! Philo criticizes his master while acknowledging his greatness in 
his remarks on the Symposium (De Vita Contemplativa, 7, C.-W. 57), 
though his criticism is lacking in insight through his Jewish misunder- 
standing of Greek aestheticism and his failure to observe that, as Walter 
Pater remarks, Plato is '' a seer who has a sort of sensuous love of the 
Unseen ’’ (Plato and Platonism, ch. VI). And '' Philo, like St. Paul, 
was insensible to, if not unconscious of, those higher and more ideal 
aspects of Greek chivalry, which had in a measure once redeemed it, 
but had not survived the decay of the old Greek city life ’’ (Conybeare, 
Philo about the Contemplative Life, p. 235). 

? De Vita Cont. M. 480, C.-W. 57. 

370, 2, C.-Wi., 12-13. 4 Ib. C.-W. 59-60. 

5 Quis Rer. Div. Haer. M. 482; C.-W. 64-70. 


EROS AND PSYCHE 293 


‘ If therefore any yearning comes upon thee, O Soul, 
to inherit the divine blessings, abandon not only ' thy 
country ' (the body), and 'thy kinship ' (the senses), 
and ‘thy father’s house’ (ratiocination), but flee 
from thyself and leave thyself, like the god-possessed 
Corybantes, and in ecstasy be divinely inspired to some 
prophetic exaltation. For while thy thought is in con- 
dition of enthusiasm and no longer self-centred, but 
vehemently agitated by Divine Love and guided by 
Reality and drawn to Reality, Truth leads the way and 
clears the obstacles that it may advance by an easy 
path.’ 


The next to be captivated by this fruitful conception 
of Divine Love was Plotinus, whose memorable words 
in Ennead, III. 5,’ on Love are spoken under the 
inspiration of his master and from his own profound 
experience of soaring on the wings of the soul. The 
function of Love is ‘ the motive power of the soul to 
the Beauty of Yonder World or to augment the already 
conceived aim for such,’ ‘ love is the energy of the 
soul in its striving for the good.’ And ‘ Yonder 
World’ is not after death but an experience of the 
present. 

This myth of Eros and Psyche became a favourite 
symbol of the aspiration of the soul for the divine. And 
Platonic philosophy, working in and with astral religion, 
modified it by aggrandizing the native powers of the 
soul for flight upward, by the intense moral appeal 
against evil as depriving the soul of its wings,” by the 
necessity of Beauty, Wisdom, and Goodness as the means 
of strengthening the wings of the soul, and above all by 
bringing the deepest realities from beyond the grave 
into the present experience of ' the soul in Love.’ The 
supramundane world lay not in or beyond the highest 
heaven, but in the soul of man; it was indeed emphatic- 
ally a world beyond the senses, but a world appre- 
hensible by Nous, or highest part of man’s life. If 


Cf also Vi. 9774: * Phaedrus, 246d. 


294 ASTRAL IMMORTALITY 


astral religion elevated the conception of the heavenly 
world philosophic reflection spiritualized astralism.' 

Eros also became a common symbol of the soul beyond 
death on sarcophagi and in religious Pagan art. In the 
Capuan? Chapel of Mithra, recently discovered, a 
Psyche is represented as gently encouraged by an Eros. 
In the basilica at the Porta Maggiore Erotes are 
prominent in the stuccoes. In the rich symbolism of 
the apse stucco ? there is presented an apotheosis of 
the soul by water in which an Eros gently assists a 
veiled lady bearing a lyre—the soul or the dead initiate 
—into the stormy waters of death, while on an opposite 
promontory Apollo, god of Light, is graciously beckon- 
ing the soul to the last ordeal while a Victory is ready to 
crown her. 


1 Cf. Cumont, After-life in Rom. Paganism, p. 212 f. 

? Notizie degli Scavi, XVI. 1924, p. 353 ff. For the Mithraeum at 
Ostia vide ib. XVI, p. 68 ff. 

3 Cf. D. Curtis, Il rilievo nell’ abside del monumento sott. fuori 
Porta Maggiore (Diss. dell’ Accad. pont. di Arch. XV, p. 31rfJ; 
E. Strong and N. Jolliffe in J.H.S. XLIV, p. 103 f. 


CHAPTER XVII 
THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


AMoNG the doctrines of Astralism none was of greater 
power than the Ascent of the Soul' (dvodos yuyñs), or 
the Soul Drama, a tenet held in common with variations 
by the Stoics, Platonists, Pythagoreans, the Hermeticists, 
Gnostics, and the adherents of the Mystery-Religions, 
particularly the Mithraists. 

It is futile to seek to designate the ultimate source of 
this widely spread idea. Anz?’ traces it back to a 
Babylonian source influenced by Iranian soteriology ; 
Bousset ? claims an Iranian origin with Babylon as a 
secondary origin; Reitzenstein discovers its source in 
popular Iranian beliefs as a replica of the destiny of 
the World-Soul 4  Cumont? views it as Chaldaean- 
Persian; Dieterich,® rejecting all Oriental influences, 
claims it as an ancient popular Greek idea. Kroll” 
more guardedly affirms that the idea is essentially Greek 
but transformed under Oriental influences. 

The belief in the Ascent of the Soul is of too remote 
antiquity definitely to date, and too universal to assign 
to the religious thinking and mythical symbolism of one 


i Cf, K. Hónn, Studien z. Gesch. d. Himmelfahrt; Bousset, Himmel- 
veise d. Seele (Arch. f. Religionsw. IV, pp. 136-69, 229-73), Kroll, Lehren 
d. Hermes Tris. pp. 294-316, 363-72; Dieterich, Mithraslit. 3rd ed. 
pp. 179-212; Diels, Himmels u. Hollenfahrten (N. Jahrb. f. d. kl. Alt. 
1922, p. 239 ff.); Cumont, After-life, ch. VI; Strong, Apotheosis. 

? Z, Frage nach d. Ursprung d. Gnostizismus, pp. 71-8. 

* Ib. pp. 136 f., 229 f., 250. 

* Das ivan. Erlésungsmysterium, and Die Göttin Psyche (in Sitzb. d. 
Heid. Akad. 1917, no. ro). 

5 After-life, pp. 95, 107. 

* Ib. pp. 196-203. 7 Ib. pp. 302, 358. 

295 


296 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


race. Itis well known that early speculations as to man's 
soul and its destiny, being of a fluid character, readily 
blended in man's search for some comforting and 
rational faith as to his future. Ancient eschatologies 
rejected nothing that could nourish hope. Illogicality 
has never been a serious obstacle to combining alien 
elements in a theological system, hardly excepting that 
of an Aquinas and a Calvin. So the idea of the Ascent 
of the Soul was welcomed as one of the early solutions 
of the perennial problem, and fitted into, or naively 
placed in juxtaposition with, other cognate and with 
disparate ideas. It was also an attractive faith, which 
later reflexion would modify and corroborate. Popular 
imagination, poetical symbolism, and mythical theo- 
logoumena would work eagerly upon such material. 

The abode of souls and the means of transport thither 
engaged serious reflexion. The future might be located 
in the graveyard, or in the lower region in the heart of 
the earth, or beyond the West separated by the water 
of Ocean from here, or in the Blessed Isles, or in the 
world of light in the heavens, or beyond the region of 
the planets in the Ogdoad, or highest heaven, or in the 
transcendental ultramundane region. 

Mythologies, ancient and modern, are familiar with the 
idea of a journey of the dead to the next world. Such 
a journey might be conceived as a pilgrimage on foot; 
or a voyage by water in a boat* to a far land; or 
transit by ferry across a river; or a descent of the 
demonic self into the lower world; or a leap from the 
rock of the dead; or an ascent by a ladder ? or trans- 
lation by a chariot into the heavens, like Parmenides ; 
or a journey on horseback, as in the myth of Bellerophon, 
or by the winged steed Pegasus ; or a conveyance upward 


» The ship for the dead is well illustrated in the discovery at Oseberg 
in Scandinavia, dating from ninth century. 

? For the seven-stepped ladder in Mithraism cf. Origen, C. Celsum, 
VI. 22; Cumont, Textes et Mon. II, p. 525; Kroll, Ovacula chald. 
p. 63. 


MEANS OF TRANSIT 297 


on wings," of which there are many classical myths, such 
as the rape of Ganymede.? 

The Ascent of the Soul, though an early, is a relatively 
mature form of eschatological faith, which has been 
influenced and transformed by other solutions. It is, 
e.g., obviously more recent than the belief in Elysian 
Fields on earth or the descent into Hades. For a variety 
of reasons, which we can detect, the ascent became the 
most catholic of eschatological doctrines in serious 
religious and philosophical circles. And like every other 
victorious idea it laid its rivals and auxiliaries under 
heavy tribute. 

The religious dualism of Iran, which in the physical 
conflict of Light and Darkness saw the symbol of a 
moral cosmic conflict into which men were pressed as 
combatants, made participation in the Light the main 
element in its soteriology. The region of Light was the 
scene of ultimate victory and there the blessed milites 
(soldiers) will find their abode. If ‘ the Mediator ’ 
Mithra secured enthronement with the victorious Sun, 
the follower of Mithra saw in this the symbol of his 
ultimate victory and eternal hope. In the religious 
literature of Paganism the idea of Light as the symbol 
or synonym of life and truth and salvation is frequent. 
The prevalence of such symbolism could not allow the 
descent of the soul into the murky darkness of Hades 
to retain a vital place in faith. 

Again, the way was specially prepared in the Greek 
world by Orphism, Pythagoreanism, and by Plato’s 
adoption of Orphic-Pythagorean ideas, as in the Phaedo, 
which depicts the descent of base souls and their en- 
tanglement in bodies. The Orphics were the first to 
bring into the West the solemn doctrine of souls fallen 
from their native high place and handicapped by original 


1 Cf. G. Weicker, Der Seelenvogel in der antiken Lit. u. Kunst (1902). 
On a relief in the Palazzo dei Conservatori in Rome, Antoninus Pius 
and Faustina are represented as being carried to heaven by a winged 
figure. 

2 Cumont, Etudes syriennes, p. 86. 


298 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


sin,' their punishment or purification during the ‘ cycle 
of births, their deliverance through sacraments of 
identification with a saviour-deity, by means of which, 
after submitting to a judgment in Hades, they could 
say, ' Child of Earth and starry Heaven, my race is 
divine.’ | 

The Orphics were also the first in the West to insist 
that ethical discrimination must extend to all souls after 
death, not merely to egregious sinners or eminent saints, 
and that souls must find abodes fitting their merits. 
They were therefore the first to moralize Hades, separat- 
ing it into the regions of penal Tartarus and blissful 
Elysium. Hades was for the Orphic believer not a 
home, but merely an intermediate region ? from which 
the soul was released into the larger freedom of the next 
incarnation. Later Orphics, like other religious sectaries 
of later antiquity, yielded to the tendency to remove the 
kingdom of souls from the earth or from the lower world, 
Hades, to the upper world of light, an eschatological 
transition to which the Syrian cults and Mithraism 
contributed much. Hades became more an episodic 
experience of judgment or purgation, and later Orphics 
co-operated with philosophic speculation in making the 
air or the higher ether the abode of souls, and in trans- 
ferring Hades thither.* 

The Orphics, having first segregated in the underworld 
the region of the blessed, Elysium, from that of the 
damned, Tartarus, the next step was taken by their 
followers, the Pythagoreans, in removing Elysium from 
the underworld to the region of the moon and in identify- 
ing the Blessed Islands with the Sun and Moon.* The 
Pythagoreans were therefore the first to preach celestial 
immortality to Greece and Southern Italy, and were 

* Farnell, Higher Aspects of Greek Religion, p. 134. 

* Cf. Rohde, Psyche, p. 343. 

mp Cumont, Religions orientales, pp. 186, 235; Études syriennes, 
p. 80 ff. 


* Cf. Rohde, Psyche, p. 356, n. 45; p. 359, n. 75. 
* Cumont, After-life, p. 97. * Ib. 194. 


PYTHAGOREANS ON CELESTIAL IMMORTALITY 299 


dogmatic on the stars and planets, especially Sun and 
Moon, as the abodes of the elect souls.' Their pro- 
founder scientific interests and mathematical speculations 
promoted an immortality in alignment with astrology 
by bringing their system under the influence of Babylonia 
and Egypt. The renaissance of Pythagoreanism in the 
syncretistic capital of the Ptolemies and the rise of Neo- 
Pythagoreanism in the Roman Empire under senator 
Nigidius Figulus, astrologer and mystic, removed Pytha- 
goreanism still farther from the parent faith, or, rather, 
the influence of the astral religions of the Empire became 
as marked as the severe ethics of Orphism. The 
Pythagoreans, confronted with the rival eschatologies of 
an underworld and the upper regions, adopted the latter,” 
declaring ‘ the whole air is full of souls.’ * The Orphic 
purgatory was removed into an aerial position. The soul 
was conceived as a particle of the eternal ethereal fires, 
which at birth condescended to enter the body with the 
charter of its reascension at death to its source above. 
This sublunar world is the dark cave of imprisoned souls 
yearning for the upper light. The Neo-Pythagorean 
Numenius in the second century elaborated the doctrine 
of the descent of the soul from the summit of heaven 
through the seven planetary spheres, each of which con- 
tributed its peculiar qualities to the soul in transit, and 
to which the soul in toilsome purificatory ascent would 
render back those qualities to attain its primal purity 
in the Ogdoad, or the eighth heaven.? 

Plato's adoption of the doctrine of the ascent into light 
gave immense impetus to the belief.^ The beautiful and 

1 Cf. Rohde, Psyche, p. 357, n. 76. 

2 Cumont, ib. pp. 81, 96. * Diog. Laert. VIII. 32. 

4 Cf. Plato, Repub. VII. 514. 5 Cumont, ib. p. 107. 

* '' (Spätere Himmelfahrtslehren) bekommen durch Platons Hand 
den markanten Zug, der sie, bis in spáteste Zeit in all dem Gewirr 
mystischer Gedankenstriche hell hervorscheinen lásst. Seit Platon hat 
in der greich. Welt jedes tiefere religióse Denken u. jede philosophische 
Lehre, wenn sie nicht eine Unsterblichkeit der Seele ausdrücklich 


ablehnte, den Aufstieg der Seele zum göttlichen Licht als festen 
Vorstellungsbesitz weitergeführt ’’ (Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie, p. 199). 


300 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


impressive imagery of the Phaedrus in the description 
of the upward-tending charioteer of the soul could not 
be forgotten with the penetration of Platonism into 
subsequent systems.' In the Timaeus (42 B) he asserts, 
* He who has lived well during his allotted span should 
depart again to his abode in his kindred star and there 
enjoy a blessed and congenial life.' 

As a result of Orphic mysticism and philosophic 
speculation on the nature of invisible beings, pueumata, 
Greece transposed the future of her dead from the 
orthodox dark underworld to the regions of light:? ‘ It 
is impossible to suppose that souls should be carried 
downwards ; they are composed of the subtle particles, 
and being of the nature of fire or spirit they tend upward 
by their lightness.’ * Among the first evidence of the 
change is the inscription erected by Athens over her 
soldiers who fell at Potidaea: ‘ The earth received their 
bodies ; the ether their souls.’ * Henceforth immortality 
was prevailingly conceived as the ascent to the ether or 
to the highest regions, and finally to the supramundane 
region.? 

In the Roman world the doctrine was popularized by 
Stoic ideas operating in the atmosphere of mysticism. 
The Stoic conception of the soul as refined fire, part of 
and akin to the celestial fires, and their doctrine of a 
quasi-material pneuma (fiery breath), the divinus spiritus 
per omnia," readily lent itself to such mysticism. The 
soul is composed of two parts, one igzea and one 


1 The Naassene Hymn in Hippolytus, Phil. V. 10, represents the 
aspiration of the soul in Gnosticism. 

2 '' The establishment in later Orphic poetry of the theory that the 
yvxai dwelt in the air may have been assisted by the philosophic 
theory of the soaring-up of the veóuara into their element, the 
aether °’ (Rohde, p. 356, n. 45). 

* Sextus Emp. IX. 71. Cf. Badstübner, Beitr. z. Erkl. d. phil. 
Schriften d. Senecas, p. 2 f. 

* C.I.A. 442; Kaibel, Epig. gr. 21. 

5 Cf. Rohde, cited Dieterich, ib. p. 200. 

* Seneca, Ad Helv. VIII. 3; cf. Arnim, St. Vet. frag. II. 1027, 
p. 306. 


ETHER THE ABODE OF SOULS 301 


| animalis, i.e. fire and air, and therefore ‘ it is clear that 


< souls on leaving the body, whether they are animales, 


id est spirabiles, sive ignei, must be borne aloft.'* Also, 
according to Stoic conceptions, souls inhabit the air, and 


. Chrysippus held that ' after death souls take on the 


character of spheres’ (c¢aipoedeis)?; ‘to remove 
into the air' became a euphemism for death. As 
Pauline speculation provided the early Christians with a 


. * pneumatic ' body for purposes of participation in the 


Parousia and the enjoyment of immortality above 
* where Christ is,' so philosophic thought conceived an 
ethereal or light substance for Pagan souls. The Stoics 
even held that the soul itself is ' an ethereal body ' or 
' light-character ' or even lumen.’ 

But it was above all the Platonizing Stoic, Posidonius, 
and the Stoicism ^ remodelled by him through the 
accession of mystical emotionalism and the adaptation 
of Babylonian cosmography and astral immortality, 
that popularized the upper air or highest ether as the 
place of souls. Pythagorean suggestions ? and theories 
of Heracleides Ponticus regarding the Milky Way as 
the dwelling of souls * contributed to the establishment 
of the dogma of the Descent and Ascent of the Soul 
through the planetary spheres with the accompanying 
cosmological conception of a finite universe with a 
geocentric centre as an integral part of the religious, 
magical, and philosophical systems of the age. The 
starting-point was the Platonic view ’ that the soul after 
death departs to the upper regions or to heaven. This 
idea is recurrent in all the literature influenced by 
Posidonian mysticism, as, e.g., in Cicero's Dream of 


L Gica Tuso Disp. 1. 17, 40. 2 Arnim, 222. 

3 Rohde, Psyche, p. 517, n. 53. 

* Cf. Halliday, Pagan Background, pp. 1:74, 209, 224f. Bevan, 
Stoics and Epicureans, p. 98 f. 


5 Cf. Rohde, p. 395, n. 35; Pp. 517, n. 53. 
* Rohde, pp. 330, 517. Cf. Thiele, Antike Himmelsbilder, p. 148, 


for the Milky Way as one of the stations in the ascent. 
7 Phaedo, 81b. 
2I 


302 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


Scipio. In the Tusculan Disputations Cicero tells how 
the soul, the most swift of all things, escaping from the 
air— 


‘ must enter and pass through all this region in which 
clouds, storms, and winds gather, and which is damp 
and misty by the exhalations from the earth. When 
the soul has risen above this region and attained to a 
nature resembling its own and recognizes it, it takes 
its place with the fires composed of the most rarefied 
air and of the tempered heat of the sun; the soul then 
ceases to ascend. For it has thus secured a lightness 
and warmth like its own and has been as it were brought 
to equilibrium and remains motionless. That is its 
natural abode, where it has reached that which is akin 
to itself, in which it will be in need of nothing and will 
be nourished and sustained by the same qualities by 
which the stars are sustained and nourished.’ * 


Elsewhere he could ask, ‘ Is not almost the whole heaven 
peopled with the human race? ' ? by the dead becoming 
stars or taking up stellar abodes. 

The same idea is enthusiastically expressed by Seneca. 
In his Consolation to Marcia (25) he reminds her that 
the grave does not contain the personality of her son, 
but only bones and dust and garments, for— 


‘ He himself is untouched, leaving on earth nothing that 
was his: he has escaped and departed in his entirety. 
Hovering for a little while over us, until he undergoes 
purification, puts off his faults, and doffs the whole 
manner of mortal existence, he is carried on high and 
takes his place among the blessed souls. The holy 
assembly has received him. . . . Although in that 
world everything is akin to everything, your progenitor 
attaches himself to his grandson as he rejoices in the 
new light and teaches him the movements of the 
neighbourly stars; he gladly initiates him into the 
mysteries of nature, not from guess-work but from real 
experience; . . . he is to him an intimate interpreter 
as he wishes to pry into the causes of heavenly things.’ 


Rule TOMAS: LRLS 


DESCENT OF THE SOUL 303 


This astral doctrine is composed of several ingredients. 
First, it implies a descent of the soul from its primitive 
abode into man who is at least a double being, of soul 
and body, or a tripartite being, of body, soul, and mind 
(nous) or spirit (pneuma). According to Orphic theology 
‘we are duplex, composed of Titanic, or evil, and 
Dionysiac, or divine, elements,’ yet ' we are part of 
him (Dionysus) ' ? and ' the Mind in us is Dionysiac 
and a veritable image of Dionysus.'' The soul cannot 
rise higher than its original source. It could not rise to 
heaven unless it had come from heaven and unless, 
despite its fall and weakness and wanderings, it had 
retained some vague entrancing memories of its prior 
existence in bliss. It is because we are ' of the race of 
heaven’ that the contemplation of the heavens is a 
divine communion and a means of purifying the soul 
from the tarnishing touch of earth. The Poimandres 
gives an elaborate myth of the incarnation of the soul 
through ignorance and deception with the burden of 
qualities which it took on in its descent through the 
spheres to the bosom of Nature (Phusis). From the 
same Hermetic circles the Kore Kosmow describes the 
fall of man and the descent of the soul into the sensible 
"world and the sad plaint of the soul on discovering the 
stern actualities of earth-life. But the fall is not beyond 
repair, the promise of restoration being held out on 
certain terms. 

Another constituent of this astral doctrine is the kinship 
of the soul with the sidereal world. Assuredly ' every 
soul by its nature tends upward as if aspiring to its 
natural abode.’ 4 Souls are of astral stuff, of the 
intelligible fire (voepòv vp), and of the same con- 
sistency as the celestial bodies: * Composed of the finest 
particles, and indeed being of the character of fire or 
1 Cf, Eisler, Weltenmantel, I, p. 448 £.; II, p. 664. 

? Olympiodorus, in Rohde, p. 355, n. 42. 
3 Proclus, In Crat. p. 82 (Bois). 


4 Proclus, In Remp. II, p. 126 (Kroll). 
5 Cf. Kroll, Lehren des Hermes Trismegistos, p. 241. 


304 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


spirit (breath), they are carried upward by their own 
lightness into the more elevated regions . . . there (in 
the sublunar region) on account of the greater purity 
of the atmosphere they tarry longer and enjoy their 
proper nourishment in exhalations from the earth like 
the stars.’? Again: ‘The soul is always striving to 
view on high the things akin to itself.” ? The revolutions 
of the planets teach the contemplative soul that ' his 
soul is like that of Him who created these in the 
heaven.'? It is after ascending omne caelum hoc that 
the soul recognizes naturam sui similem.* 

Thirdly, this kinship cannot be realized without 
purification of the soul from the contacts of earth and 
of vice, and many are the dangers of the transit of the 
soul on its upward way. Cicero, speaking under the 
inspiration of the Phaedo, makes Socrates declare that— 


* There are two ways and two courses open to souls 
departing from the body. Those who have polluted 
themselves with the vices of humanity and surrendered 
themselves wholly to passion . . . takea certain devious 
way far from the assembly of the gods, but those who 
have maintained their moral integrity and purity, to 
whom there was the least possible contagion with body 
and who always held themselves aloof from bodies and in 
their bodies imitated the life of the divine beings, find 
open an easy path of return to those from whom they 
had taken their departure.’ ° 


The soul is here in a state of agitation because its 
home is elsewhere, and it attains psychic equilibrium 
only in a region of the same rarity and purity of 
atmosphere as itself. This can be effected only after 
release from the body and from earthly cares. 

Elevated above the confusing mists by which we are 

Eusextus-Emp: 117110737 

* Cf. Seneca, Ad Helv. VI. 8: ‘i nunc et humanum animum ex isdem 
quibus divina constant seminibus compositum moleste ferre transitum 
ac migrationem puta.’ 

* Cicero, Tuse. D. I. 25, 62. SUBS 1 > 19; 45- 

PED. Ua 30.387 2 POLO E. 19.43. 


TWO PATHS OPEN TO SOULS 305 


now surrounded (circumfusi caligine), we shall see clearly 

. With the perception of the mind (acie mentis). On the 
necessity of virtue and the difficulty of the upward 
transit we may cite the beautiful passage of Seneca: + 
man, ' mindful of his origin, strives' for equality 
with God. 


“Our soul is endowed with capacities; it is carried 
thither if vices do not keep it down. . . . If the soul 
uses its native powers and stretches up into its own 
region, it is by no alien faith that it struggles to the 
heights. Great would be the task to journey to heaven, 
but the soul is making its return. And when once it 
has discovered the way, it marches boldly and despises 
all things.’ 

* It is ordained for every soul, whether or not it possess 
Mind (Nous) on leaving the body, to spend a period, not 
the same for all, in the space between earth and the 
moon, . . . but the virtuous must spend an appointed 
time, long enough to purify and exhale the pollution 
from the body, as of a poisonous atmosphere, in the 
mildest portion of the atmosphere which is called the 
Meadows of Hades. There, as if returning from banish- 
ment and exile to their homeland, they taste joy such 
as the initiates know, mingled with tumult and dread 
but with a peculiar hope '— 


is Plutarch’s statement.’ 


Both the righteous and the wicked die ‘ the first death ' 
in the region of Demeter (earth), by which the tripartite 
man becomes bipartite (soul and mind) by losing the 
body, and of which the earthly Hermes is patron; but 
only the righteous die ' the second death ' admitting 
* to the blissful life of the gods,' and this ' second death ' 
takes place ‘ in the moon of Persephone,’ and by it man 
progresses to be one, or Nows, the Psyche (soul) being 
returned to the Moon which gave it, whereas the Nous 
was furnished by the Sun.? 


1 Ep. 92, 30-32- Cf. Ad Marciam, 24, 5. 
2 De Facie in Luna, 28, 943d. sp. 


306 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


As the soul had fallen from high estate, so it must 
rise again laboriously. By descent into the sublunar 
region it had taken on a thick misty substance which 
must be sloughed off before it may pass the limit between 
the atmosphere and the fluid ether of the celestial spheres. 
By realizing the littleness of earthly things (and ' angustus 
animus est quem terrena delectant ' *) and by the ethical 
effects of the contemplation of heaven and its splendours 
it may purify itself for entrance upon the upward way. 
All the terrors and toils of the Descent to Hades were 
carried over into the later conception of the Ascent to 
Heaven. The process of purgation continues through 
the entire ascent. Through air to ether, and through 
winds, clouds, rain, snow, hail, and scorching air, 
it must struggle until the lucid ether envelops it. Even 
to attain to the Moon—on the humblest eschatological 
ambition—was toil considerable ; but to attain to the Sun 
—in the fourth and central circle of the spheres—or to 
attain to the eighth region of the Fixed Stars was sore 
labour and of age-long duration.” So essential was 
purification that the traditional Purgatory was removed 
from the Underworld to the air between the Earth and 
the Moon. And in this interspace souls effect their 
atonement: 

‘ aliae panduntur inanes 


Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto 
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.' ? 


Ancient myths were—as usual in ancient religion— 
pressed into service to teach the difficulties and perils 
of the way and the bliss of the final ascent. The 
Pythagoreans chose the letter Upsilon as a symbol of 
the moral life of man. At the junction of the arms 
each stands on reaching the years of responsibility or a 
moral crisis. At these cross-roads he is bound to choose 
between a life of ease and vice and that of arduous 
1 Seneca, Ad Helv. 9, 2; ct. Ep. 923, 31. 


2 Cf. Cumont, After-life, pp. 185 f., 196. 
3 Virgil, Aen. VI. 740 ff. 


LABOURS OF THE SOUL 307 


endeavour, with the promise of final rest to be enjoyed 
in the celestial light. 

In à common conception the soul was obliged to pass 
through all the elements represented by the planets, each 
of which was conceived as a tightly-barred sphere, the 
entrance of which was guarded by a Ruler who exacted 
the correct password and suitable credentials. The soul 
had descended through these same spheres, and in 
making its ascent must give back to each the qualities 
acquired in downward transit. To Saturn, the seventh 
and last, it surrendered its slothfulness and finally 
emerged into the luminous bliss of the eighth sphere. 
This doctrine was popularized by the Neo-Pythagorean 
Numenius * and by the most morally strenuous of the 
Mysteries, Mithraism, in which the seven-stepped ladder, 
composed of seven different metals, symbolized the 
seven labours of the soul to identification with the 
victorious Mithra. But the Mithraist must on earth 
have submitted to his cult-discipline and taken advantage 
of the holy sacraments, and then even after death 
undergo an ordeal of judgement in the presence of 
Mithra ere the soul might dare the ascent and be accepted 
by Mithra in the eternallight. Having descended from 
the presence of Ormuzd by the low gate of Cancer, the 
much-tried soul finally emerges through the distant and 
lofty gate of Capricorn to the presence whence it came.’ 

No impious soul may hope to escape purgation or elude 
the heavenly watchers, for ' no wicked or unpurified 
person ' ascends to the region beyond the limit of earth ; 
‘the wicked and unchaste pay the penalty for their 
wrong-doing,' while the righteous behold some wicked 
souls failing to reach the Moon, and others on reaching 
it ‘ being hurled headlong back into the abyss.'? An 
interesting sepulchral Pythagorean bas-relief ^ tells the 

1 Cf. Cumont, 7b. p. 107. 

? Cf. Dill, Roman Soc. from Nero, p. 600. 


3 Plutarch, De Facie, 27-8, 9435 f. 
* Brinkmann, Rhein. Museum 1911; LXVI, p. 622; described Cumont, 


After-life, p. 151. 


308 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


same moral. The symbolic Pythagorean letter Upsilon 
divides the scene into sections: on the right Virtue as a 
woman is seated with a little child, while above her the 
arduous life of virtue is depicted under the symbol of 
a ploughman driving his plough, and above this another 
scene depicts him seated at the celestial banquet as a 
reward. On the other (left) side there comes to view 
another woman, symbolizing wantonness, also with a 
child, and above her an indolent figure reclining in bed ; 
while the third scene presents the recumbent figure being 
hurled head-foremost into a great gulf. 

A confirmed believer in stellar religion, Macrobius, 
knows, beside the blissful condition of the soul which 
has passed through its probation, an endless exile of 
the wicked soul from the presence of God.* 

As to the means of the Ascent, there were various 
religious and cosmographical theories working con- 
currently. Naturally with the removal of the place of 
the dead from the Lower World to the Upper Regions 
the means of transit must be altered so far as religious 
conservatism would permit. Religion still used the 
suggestive and symbolic myth where definiteness of 
expression was impossible. 

The soul made its ascent partly in virtue of its physical 
constitution,? partly in virtue of its moral character, 
and partly because of the grace of the deity. The soul 
was not conceived as quite immaterial or ‘ essential,’ 
but as the most attenuated matter. 

(x) Souls ascended into the air because they were of 
airy-fiery * composition, or as igneous breath, pneuma. 
This physical ex inflammata anima nature of the soul 
and its upward-tending character is elaborated by Cicero, 
under Posidonian inspiration,* in Tusculan Disputations 

T Som: Scip. T. x3. 

? ' Nititur illo unde demissus est’ (Seneca, Ad Marciam, 24, 5); 
* Sursum illum vocant initia sua’ (Ep. 79, 12). 

* Cf. Rohde, Psyche, p. 516, 53. 


* Cf. for Posidonian mysticism, Holl. in N. Jahrb. f. d. klass. Alt. 
XXIX, p. 416 f, 


SOLAR ATTRACTION 309 


(I. 18, 42-44), but that the soul naturally strives upward 
was a tenet common to Platonists, Pythagoreans, Stoics, 
and Astrologists. ' It is impossible to conceive of souls 
bearing downwards,’ says Sextus Empiricus'; and 
“every soul by its very nature strives upwards,’ says 
Proclus. Souls were of demonic character, and demons 
were creatures of the upper world. 

(2) Another view of the means of ascent was solar 
attraction,? a doctrine popularized by the Pythagoreans,? 
according to whom the motes dancing in the sunbeams 
were souls emitted on the rays of light by the King-star 
to be incarnated on earth, and on discarnation to return 
on ' his upward-bearing rays ' * to their home above. 
As the Sun attracts and repels the other heavenly bodies, 
so he sends down and brings up souls. His action on 
earth is thus both physical and psychical. According 
to Porphyry,? the Sun has two gates, the gate of descent, 
Cancer, and the gate of ascent, Capricorn. Julian is 
explicit on ' the uplifting rays of the Sun ’: 

“The Sun, by his vivifying and marvellous heat, 
draws up all things from the earth and calls them forth 
and makes them grow. . . . We ought then to make 
these things proofs of his unseen powers. For if among 
corporeal things he can bring this about through his 
corporeal heat, how should he not draw and lead up- 
wards the souls of the blessed by the agency of the in- 
visible, wholly immaterial, divine and pure substance 
. that resides in his rays? . . . It has been demonstrated 
. that the god's rays are by nature uplifting; and this 
is due to his energy both visible and invisible, by which 
very many souls have been lifted up out of the region 
. of the senses, because they were guided by that sense 
which is clearest of all and most like the sun.' * 

This form of ascent appears in the sepulchral inscription 
. Sol me rapuit incautum (‘ the sun has caught me up ’).’ 


SODEX 7I: 

2 Cf. Cumont, After-life, pp. 101, 160. 

3 Rohde, p. 395, n. 35, 40. * Julian, V. 172a. 

5 De Antro Nym. 22. “V..172b f. (Wrigbt/s tr. )- 


IG TIE. VE. 32500. 


310 THEVASCENT OF THE: SOUL 


The ancient belief in a bird-soul was accommodated 
to solar attraction by the popularity of the eagle* as 
the symbol of ascent. This belief was largely of Syrian 
origin, the eagle being in Syria the bird of the sun.” A 
popular belief in the Roman Empire was that the eagle 
carried the blessed aloft not with his talons, as in the 
myth of Ganymede, but comfortably on his back. Hence 
the eagle became the token of apotheosis for Roman 
emperors, an eagle always being fastened to the funeral 
pyre of the deceased emperor for this purpose, but “‘ this 
kind of aviation was not peculiar to monarchs. The 
eagle has often this meaning in funeral art.’’ ? 

(3) These semi-physical theories yielded to increasing 
moralization so that they remained symbols of an ascent 
which was conditioned wholly by the soul’s health and 
purity. A ‘ Pythagorean life’ of discipline and virtue 
was essential in such circles to attain the celestial felicity. 
The Mithraic aspirant could ascend only after a life of 
strenuous endeavour demanded by his cult. Only 
blessed souls might be lifted by the rays of the Sun.* 
In the instructive scenes of apotheosis in the under- 
ground basilica of a mystery-cult near the Porta 
Maggiore in Rome there is an elaborate symbolism of 
the palaestra of life and of purifications before the 
reception of the crown of victory. The way to heaven 
was unambiguously the steep and rugged path of the 
Hesiodean parable and of the Pythagorean T. The 
more spiritual the aspirant the more arduous became the 
ascent. Thus Porphyry:? 


‘ It is impossible that those who desire to be mindful 
of their return should accomplish their journey home 
from this terrestrial exile pleasantly and easily, as 
through some smooth plain. For no two things can be 
more entirely opposed to one another than a life of 


1 Cumont, Études syr. p. 57 ff. 

2 Ib. After-life, p. 158 ff.; Études syr. p. 85 f. 

* Tb. pe 159. 1 Julian, V. 172a-c. 
5 To Marcella, 6 (tr. Alice Zimmern). 


A DIVINE ESCORT 311 


pleasure and ease, and the ascent to the gods. . . . Ease 
is most dangerous for souls which have sunk to this 
earthly life, making them forgetful in the pursuit of alien 
things, and bringing on a state of slumber if we fall 
asleep beguiled by alluring visions.’ 


(4) Corresponding to the increasing sensibility to a 
doctrine of divine grace, we find that the soul, though 
endowed with the upward-tending nature and purified, 
welcomes for the ascent the personal assistance of a 
divine escort. In the passage of Plutarch, cited above, 
“the heavenly Hermes’ is the patron (cvvoixos, con- 
tubernalis) at “ the second death’ of the purified one 
whereby he attains to the unity of spiritual existence 
(Nous). As a psychopomp, notably Hermes, had for- 
merly conducted souls on the downward journey to 
Hades, so now he performed like functions on the 
upward transit. The tombstone of a sailor who died 
at Marseilles witnesses: ‘ Among the dead there are two 
companies ; one moves upon the earth, the other in the 
ether among the choruses of the stars. I belong to the 
latter, for I have obtained a God for my guide,’ * and 
this popular conception appears again in an epigram 
of the first century: ‘ Hermes of the winged feet, taking 
thee by the hand, has conducted thee to Olympus and 
made thee to shine among the stars.’ ? 

There were other developments of the idea of the 
Leader (dvaywyevs) of the soul so beautifully described 
by Plato ° in the Phaedo. As in Egypt, the dead em- 
barked in the boat of Ra (Sun-deity) for a personally 
conducted voyage to Amenti, the dead of the Graeco- 
Roman period found in him a favourite psychopomp * 
or dvaywyets. To Julian this was a comforting 


1 Kaibel, Epigr. gr. 650, cited Cumont, After-life, p. 163. 

2 Haussoullier, Rev. de phil. XXIII, p. 6; cited Cumont, ib. In the 
Mithraic Catacomb on the Appian Way Mercury or Hermes conducts 
the initiated before Pluto and Proserpine: Réville, Religion à Rome 
sous les Sévéres, p. 94. 

* 107d ff. * Cf. Cumont, After-life, p. 160. 


312 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


thought. His. Mithra-Sun’s rays were ‘ uplifting ': 
towards the end of his satire on the Caesars,’ where the 
company is invited to select each his ‘ guardian and 
leader, Hermes addresses Julian: ' Do thou keep his 
commandments, and thus procure for thyself a cable 
and sure anchorage in life, and when it is necessary to 
depart from this world thou shalt with fair hope find 
him a Leader-God propitious to thyself.' 

The doctrine of the ascent of the soul to heaven and 
of the attainment of communion with the celestial bodies, 
being a composite of philosophical, scientific, and 
religious ideas, permitted considerable fluidity of con- 
ception and latitude of speculation. It was deeply 
affected by the regnant forms of earnest religion, 
especially by ideas from the Mysteries, such as identifica- 
tion with deity, rebirth, transfiguration into divine 
substance. No cecumenical council of astrologists ever 
standardized one form of interpretation of the cosmic 
problem and anathematized all the others in the interests 
of simplicity. Hence we find various conceptions 
running concurrently and often converging. — . 

(x) Of course there was necessarily an eschatological 
conception of union with the blessed gods. 

(2) But the astrologists were eminently empiricists in 
religion and gave prominence to the actual religious 
experience arising from their faith. In reading their 
works we often meet the facile transition. from mathe- 
matics to mysticism, from science to personal faith, just 
as if in a modern standard work on arithmetic the author 
were to make digressions to convey the enthousiasmos 
or the religious value of science. Owing to this em- 
piricism the eschatological communion is by no means 
the most common or most prized. The soul could leave 
the body and ascend to heaven not merely at or after 
death, but in certain psychic conditions which could be 
experienced by believers. One of these was ascent and 
union by ecstasy before death. In such estates the soul 

1 336c. 


ECSTATIC ESTATES 313 


could abandon the body on earth and, because' of its 
constitutional kinship with the heavenlies, pay a visit of 
more or less duration to the stars or become absorbed 
in cogitationes divinas, as in the experience described by 
Seneca. 

Again, we have this ascent in his striking words:* 


* Then shall our souls have reason to rejoice when 
released from this darkness in which they roll, they shall 
have caught sight of the clear light with no feeble vision, 
but have admitted the full light of day and been restored 
to their heaven, when they shall have retrieved the 
place which they occupied at birth. The souls are 
summoned upward by their origins; they will regain 
their place even before release from this prison when 
they shall have put off sin and leaped up in purity and 
lightness into heavenly thoughts.’ 


This was an experience attested in various religions, 
from Paul's visions in 2 Cor. xii. 2 ff. to that so prized 
in the Hermetic faith by which one could be ' carried 
away from the body to the enjoyment of the loveliest 
Vision, + or-- 


* [Increase thyself to the immeasurable height, leaping 
clear of all body and surmounting all time, become 
eternal, and thou shalt know God. There is nothing 
impossible in thyself. Deem thyself immortal and able 
to do all things, . . . become higher than all Height, 
and lower than all Depth, . . . be everything at the 
same time in earth and sea and heaven . . . dead and 
beyond death, . . . perceive all these things together 

. . and thou shalt know God.' * 


. This ecstatic experience was for astrologists lifted out 
. of the region of speculation as ecstatic elevations were 
for the Corinthian Christian brotherhood, though only 
the few contemplatives or the specially strenuous 
adherents might attain thereto. Vettius Valens tells 

AXE gi NO UL, praef. 2-3. 

Ep. 79 Iz. * Corp. Herm. X. 5. 

* Ib. XI (ii), 20b. 5 Anth. p. 241, 13 ff. (Kroll). 


314 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


how the ancient astrological masters ' attained such a 
height of earnestness and virtue that they left the things 
of earth to walk in heaven with immortal souls and to 
enter into the knowledge of divine and holy love.' Else- 
where,' again, ‘ the writer is overcome with enthusiasm 
especially about these things and seems to hold converse 
with God.’ And such converse is ‘an anticipation of 
immortality.’ ? 

Manilius is eloquent on this uplifting experience: ‘ A 
gladsome thing it is to pass through the air and, stretch- 
ing oneself out in space, to live in the boundless heaven.’ 
' The world summons me to hasten my way around all 
the stars and to traverse the entire heaven.’ ? 

In this exalted condition the ecstatic soul enters into 
true gnosis of itself and recognizes its kinship and 
destiny. It thus satisfies the natura inest in mentibus 
nostris insatiabilis quaedam cupiditas veri videndi.* This 
culmination of sidereal, and as it were mediate, 
mysticism was a valuable support of that purer and 
immediate mysticism of Neo-Platonism which was to 
make such a lasting contribution to Christianity and 
affirm with Christianity that only the pure in heart 
see God. 

(3) A kindred method of union often inseparable or 
indistinguishable from the condition of ecstasy was that 
of intensive cosmic contemplation, to which the ancients 
were so responsive. If the intellectual life was cultivated 
with intensity under Ionic philosophy, the emotional life 
received more attention in the Graeco-Roman period 
with the forcing to the front of those intuitive elements * 
so noted by the greatest of the Ionian philosophers, 
Heraclitus, and with the popularizing of Platonism, 
which, after the decline of the rationalism of the 

„Academics, retained with more fidelity its double aspect 


1 Anth. p. 242, 29. ? P. 346, 16. 
3 I. 13 f.; V. 8; cf. also IV. 399 ff., 920 ff. 

* Tusc. D. I. 19, 44. 

5 An interesting study in V. Macchioro, Eraclito (Bari, 1922). 


COSMIC MYSTICISM 315 


of scientific speculation and mystical, poetical presenta- 
tion of truth. 

This cosmic emotion called forth from the ancients 
seemingly extravagant expression, but it was a fact of 
experience by which the soul ‘ united ' with the divine 
life palpitating throughout the universe and especially 
in the resplendent heavenly bodies. The acutest 
scientific spirit of astrology blended with the most re- 
sponsive mystical spirit. Cicero, reproducing Posidonian 
mysticism, speaks of the eschatological abode of the 
Soul in hanc sedem et domum suam and of that prepara- 
tion therefor by which the soul still inclusus in corpore 
eminebit foras et ea quae extra erunt contemplans quam 
maxime se a corpore absirahet.! A scientific writer like 
Vettius Valens makes a digression to assert his religious 
interest in astrology and mathematics and his desire for 
‘a divine and reverent contemplation of the heavenly 
bodies,’ so that ‘ the divine things seemed to hold con- 
verse with me and I had disposed my intellectual faculty 
for sober inquiry.’ * The great master, Ptolemy himself, 
asserts in an epigram,? ‘ That I am mortal and a creature 
of a day, I well know; but when I gaze upon the in- 
humerable spiral motions of the stars, no longer do I 
‘touch earth, but with God Himself I am regaled with 
‘the divine food of ambrosia.’ The writer of the Pseudo- 
Aristotelian On the World tells at the beginning of his 
‘Scientific textbook how the soul may leave the body 
‘with the aid of philosophy and take Mind as a guide 
‘to investigate the wonders of the universe and know 
‘things divine. 

_ Seneca is the most eloquent witness to this feeling of 
‘cosmic union and the emotion of infinity. 


i ‘ Whom does the cosmic order [mundus], as it nightly 
E forth its fires and enkindles such a host of count- 
tess stars, not hold in rapture? . . . Contemplate those 


1 Som. Scip. 8, 2 (21). 
H a P242 T4xff- 3 Anth. Pal. IX. 577. 


— 


316 THE ASCENT. OF THE SOUL 


bodies gliding on high in such an assemblage: see how 
they conceal their swiftness under the appearance of a 
static and fixed order. How much is transacted in that 
night by which you mark and measure the days! What 
a host of things transpire in that silence! ' * 


And: 


‘ This world, the most majestic and lovely product 
of Nature, and the soul that contemplates and gazes 
with awe thereon, the most glorious part of the world, 
are ours and eternal and destined to last as long as we 
ourselves shall last. .... Wherefore, while my eyes 
cannot be wrested from that spectacle, with which they 
are insatiable, while it is mine to contemplate sun and 
moon and to follow the other planets, while it is mine 
to investigate their risings and settings, their periods and 
the causes of their slow or swift return, while it is mine 
to gaze upon myriads of stars gleaming in the night, 
some fixed, some not making their circuit into immense 
space, but returning within their own orbit, comets 
suddenly appearing and others blinding the eyes with 
their diffuse light, . . . while I am united with divine 
ones, as is man's privilege, while I can keep my mind 
ever on high in aspirations for the view of kindred 
stars, what matters it to me which earth I tread? . . . 
A meagre soul it is whom earthly things delight. The 
soul must be led away to those things which everywhere 
have the same appearance and everywhere shine with 
the same brilliance.’ ? 


Truly Seneca could say of this communion, mihi 
dulcis est inspectio, and asseverate, ‘I return thanks 
to Nature, since I see her not merely as everybody does, 
but because I have entered into her secrets, because 
I discover the nature of the universe—who is its Maker 
or Guardian, and what God is. . . . Were I not ad- 
mitted to such secrets, it had been better for me not to 
be born.’ * 


1 De Benef: IV. 23, 2 f. ?2! Ads Helv VIIES6 TX. 
S NTO VL 4; (22 4 Jb. Ij pr: 2:£ 


JOYS OF CELESTIAL CONTEMPLATION 317 


In a similar strain Cicero explains: 


* With what joy, pray, must then the soul of the wise 
man be thrilled when in such company he spends his 


life and passes his nights in their study! . . . No 
wonder the spectacle of all this stimulated those men 
of old and encouraged them to further search. . . . To 


the soul occupied night and day in these meditations 
there comes the knowledge enjoined by the god at 
Delphi, that the mind should know its own self and 
feel its union with the divine mind, the source of the 
fullness of joy unquenchable. For meditation upon the 
power and nature of the gods of itself kindles the desire 
| of attaining an immortality that resembles theirs, nor 
| does the soul think that it is limited to this short span of 
life, when it sees that the causes of things are linked 
one to another in an inevitable chain, and nevertheless 
their succession from eternity to eternity is governed by 
reason and intelligence. As the wise man gazes upon 
this spectacle and looks upward or rather looks round 
upon all the parts and regions of the universe, with 
what calmness of soul he turns again to reflect upon 
what is in man and touches him more nearly! Hence 
comes his knowledge of virtue.’ * 


- A later ‘ spectator of all time and all existence ' and 
-' follower of the King-Sun ' testifies: 


“From my childhood an extraordinary longing for 
the rays of the God penetrated deep into my soul; and 
from my earliest years my mind was so completely 
swayed by the light that illumines the heavens that not 
only did I desire to gaze intently at the sun, but when- 
ever I walked abroad in the night-season, when the 
firmament was clear and cloudless, I abandoned all else 
without exception and gave myself up to the beauties 
of the heavens; nor did I understand what anyone might 
say to me nor heed what I was doing myself.’ ? 


This heavenly contemplation yielded to the ancients, 


1 Tusc. Disp. V. 24, 69 ff., tr. by J. E. King. 
2 Julian, To the King-Sun, 130c.d. (W. C. Wright’s tr.). 


22 


318 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


sometimes within the same pagan breast, those appar- 
ently contradictory or complementary emotions and 
moods produced to-day in nature-mystics—the crushing 
sense of annihilation and a consciousness of infinity with 
the passion for continuity of personality; the in- 
significance of man beside the welling up of the infinity 
within him.’ . 

(4) To the ancients the gates of heaven stood ajar 
oftener than to modern scientific mechanism. Dreams 
to them were not the otiose phenomena which are 
thoughtlessly cast aside or readily forgotten or offer raw 
material to psychologists. They conveyed messages from 
a higher source. Cicero quotes Posidonius as holding 
that ‘ there are three ways in which men dream under 
divine impulse: first, when the soul sees of itself because 
of its kinship with the divine; secondly, the air is full 
of immortal souls on which as it were the marks of 
truth are stamped; thirdly, the gods directly hold con- 
verse with the sleepers.’ ^ So dream-trances and semi- 
wakeful conditions are means of releasing the soul for 
special revelation and privileges: ‘ The souls of men 
released by sleep are freed from the body, or stirred by 
the mind move about in freedom of their own volition, 
and are able to apprehend things which they cannot see 
when mingled with the body.’ * Such a condition is 
that described in the Dream of Scipio, the scene of which, 
according to Macrobius, was in the Galaxy (Milky 
Way); or that of the recipient of the revelation in the 

1 Cf. words of Littré: ‘‘ Voltaire in his old age writes in one of 
his letters that at the sight of a starry night he was wont to say to 
himself that he was about to lose that spectacle; that through all 
eternity he should never see it more. Like him, I love to contemplate 
—with the reflection that it is perhaps for the last time—the starlit 
night, the greenness of my garden, the immensity of the sea. . . . My 
room opened upon the beach . . . how often did I sink into contem- 
plation, imagining to myself those Trojan women who fontwm adspec- 
tabant flentes. I did not weep, but I felt that those solemn spondees 


best harmonized with the grandeur of the night and with the vagueness 
of my own meditations.”’ 


? De Div. I. 30, 64. ED 1577 1207 


REGENERATION AND DEMORTALIZING 319 


Poimandres. Before Macrobius launches into his com- 
mentary of the Dream of Scipio (I. 3) he insists on the 
preliminary necessity of surveying the various kinds of 
dreams (somniandi modos, somnium, visio, oraculum, 
insomnium), which are assessed according as they possess 
divinatory or oracular value or otherwise. 

(5) Yet another mode of celestial communion was that 
of transfiguration or transubstantiation * of the material 
(hylic) substance into the noetic or pneumatic by way of 
regeneration. As in the Pauline Churches the Christian 
believer took on the indelible character of Pneuma 
(Spirit), which could not be destroyed even in the fiery 
assize of the Parousia (2 Cor. iii and v), so the ancient 
astrologist believed that his soul was constitutionally of 
astral stuff or celestial substance, the quality of which 
was strengthened by the acquisition of virtue and by 
contemplation of the heavens. 

* This is regeneration, my son, no longer to look upon 
the body of three dimensions, but upon the incorporeal,’ 
and the body of regeneration ‘ composed of the divine 
powers can never suffer dissolution.’ * 

This seems to be the method of ‘ demortalizing ' so 
vividly described in the Parisian magical papyrus 
published by Dieterich as the Liturgy of Mithra, in which 
the mystes ‘ this day begotten anew by thee, out of so 
many myriads rendered immortal in this hour,’ sees the 
gates of the spheres open, greets the seven Tychae (god- 
desses of Fortune), and ‘ the seven other gods with the 
faces of black bulls and wearing seven golden diadems ' 
—the rulers of the poles of heaven—and finally returns 
thanks that ‘ begotten of life-producing birth and released 
for dissolution I go away, as thou hast ordained, as thou 
hast ordered, as thou hast effected in sacrament.' ? 

In certain circles so realistically was the ascent con- 
ceived and so sacramentally, and so close the alliance 


1 Cf. Dieterich, Mithraslit. p. 185. 
2 Corp. Herm. XIII. 3a, 14. 
3 Mithvaslit. pp. 12, 15 ff., p. 14. 


320 THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 


of magic and religion, that the ‘ demortalizing of the 
soul' for its ascent became an important department 
of theurgy ' and hastened the degradation of Neo- 
Platonism into a theurgic system, as represented by 
Iamblichus.? 


1 Cf. Lobeck, Aglaoph. p. 105. 
? E.g. De Myst. 8. 


ANCIENT GREEK THEOSOPHY AS A RELIGION 


CHAPIER XVIII 
CHARACTERISTICS OF HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


Tue Hermetic * religion is one of the most remarkable 
products of the syncretistic ferment of the Graeco-Roman 
world ; a veritable olla podrida of the religious, ethical, 
scientific, and philosophical speculations.” It presents, 
however, less of the abracadabra which we meet so often. 
in its cousin Gnosticism and in some of the Mysteries. 
The system is fundamentally Platonic,? the Timaeus 
being specially employed, but on this Platonic basis 
there is built a superstructure of Stoicism from different 
periods with its different views. Greek thought hesitated 
between the Platonic conception of God as Nous and 
the Stoic as Pneuma. Christianity adopted the latter ; 
Hermeticism moves rather within the Platonic con- 
ception, but it would not be inaccurate to say that for 
the Hermeticists Nous performs most of the functions 
performed in Christian thought by the Spirit, and has 
! On the origin of Hermes Trismegistos cf. F. L. Griffith, Stories of 
ihe High Priests of Memphis, p. 58; P. Boylan, Thot, the Hermes of 


Egypt. 

2 Cf. W. Otto, Priester u. Tempel im hellenist. Aegypten, II, p. 218 ff. 
‘‘L’hermétisme est proprement une tentative poursuivie à travers les 
siécles pour concilier les traditions religieuses et scientifiques de 
l'Egypte à la fois avec l'astrologie venue de Babylone et avec la 
philosophie grecque, et il est impossible de séparer nettement ce qui 
appartient à l'Orient ou à l'Occident '" (Cumont, J. Rom. Studies, XV. 
1925, p. 273). A '' Hellenistic amalgam '' (Bevan, Hellenism and 
Christianity, p. 103). 

* “ Cette religion philosophique a emprunté à Platon. Si elle ne le 
suit pas de tout point, du moins on ne voit rien qui soit nécessairement 
venu d'ailleurs " (Père Lagrange, L'Hermétisme in Rev. Biblique, 
XXXIV, p. 104). 


321 


322 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


the same, or greater, vagueness and fluidity, and similar 
subjective and objective aspects. 

Some Hermetic writers are more conscientiously loyal 
to Plato, e.g. Tractate II ; while others are more imbued 
with Stoicism, as, e.g., Tvactate III ; others, again, are 
influenced in cosmogony by Jewish ideas from Genesis, 
like the writers of the Poimandres and Tractate III. 
The Egyptian influence appears strongest in the Kore 
Kosmou. 

As might be expected, the Hermetic conception of 
deity revolves between the poles of Platonic transcen- 
dental monotheism and Stoic pantheism in both its 
varieties of hylozoistic (material) and dynamic. This 
pantheism receives diverse emphases: it appears very 
pale in the Kore Kosmou, while in the Asclepius it is 
dominant. 

No fixed dogmatic system can be discovered in the 
Corpus Hermeticum. No uniform creed or rigid 
orthodoxy was imposed, and each writer, while drawing 
on the common sources and ideas, could exercise a 
selective and assimilative freedom and make his own 
combinations. We might as well seek a uniform Christi- 
anity in the temperaments, experience, and theology of 
the Church Fathers. The Hermetica are all the more 
interesting. as furnishing unexpected nuanciering of some 
stock doctrine or argument. The Hermetic teachers reveal 
as wide a variety of outlook as Christian teachers in the 
interpretation and presentation of a common religion. 
They attract by a similar variety in unity. The Her- 
meticist was no more disturbed about inconsistencies as 
to moral retribution or his own origin than the average 
Christian by the Christologies of Peter's preaching and 
of Colossians. 

One writer reveals the Augustinian mind in regard to 
fatalism or predestination ; another adopts the Pelagian 
viewpoint of man's native powers. Thus: 


‘If it is absolutely destined for a man to commit 


HETEROGENEOUS ELEMENTS 323 


adultery or sacrilege or some other evil deed, why can 
one thus compelled of Destiny to commit the deed be 
punished, for all things are the result of Destiny? My 
son, nothing either good or bad, having to do with 
corporeal interest, can happen apart from Destiny, but 
it has been ordained that the evil-doer should suffer the 
penalty. Indeed, he does it for this very purpose that 
he may suffer the penalty for having done it,’ ' 


as against another writer who loudly proclaims the 
* whosoever will’ note ‘ to the hearts of men ' to secure 
participation in the Gnosis (esoteric faith) by dipping 
in the basin of Nous (Mind-Spirit), ‘ Baptize thyself, O 
soul that can, into this Basin, and believing thou shalt 
ascend to him who sent down the Basin by recognizing 
the purpose of thy being ' (IV. 4). 

Similarly, the pessimistic dualism that ' the world is 
the pleroma of evil and God the pleroma of Good ’ 
(VI. 4) is not uncontested, for ‘ the region of evil is the 
earth, not the cosmos, as some will blasphemously assert 
in days to come’ (IX. 4b). ‘ The universe is full of 
God,' but again the cosmos is neither bad nor good, 
but partly material and partly incorporeal (X. 10b-11). 
One holds that ‘ the Good is God and God the Good ’ 
(II. 16); to another, ‘ the Beautiful and the Good are 
parts of God ' (VI. 46). 

Immortality, variously conceived, is the boon of 
Hermetic faith, but the author of Tractate III. 4 offers 
only the immortality of remembrance, the individual 
disappearing into the elements and leaving behind only 
his name. Another (VIII. 5) positively rejects the 
Platonic hope of individual immortality of the soul, 
since man does not belong to 'the deathless living 
beings ' (the cosmos and the heavenly bodies), but to 
‘the dissoluble organisms ': he does not ' perish,’ but 


1 Tract. XII (i), 5. For the convenience of readers, references will 
be given according to Professor Walter Scott's annotation in his ed. 
of Hermetica. The writer cannot at many points accept his drastic 
treatment of the MS. readings or his rearrangements. When Scott's 
translation or restored text is used it will be indicated as WS. 


324 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


is resolved into the imperishable cosmic elements—the 
‘ dear and congenial elements ' of Epictetus’ future." 

The origin of evil is a vexing but persistent problem. 
The general view may be said to be the Platonic one 
of the Poimandres that Hyle (Matter) is the cause. In 
the most uncompromising dualism ' God is good: man 
is bad’ (Exc. XI. 19), and ‘ His will is wholly good- 
ness ’ (Asc. 14b, 15) and the natura materiae is maligni- 
tatis eadem est aeque fecunda (Asclepius). The question 
was immensely complicated by the regnant doctrine of 
Anangké (Necessity), Pronoia (Providence), and Heimar- 
mené (Fate), which were the modes of operation of a 
world made by a good God. Inexorable logic was never" 
permitted to overleap these barriers between God and 
evil and attribute evil to Him either directly or remotely. 
Beside a determinism due to Stoicism, to cosmic 
mechanism and order, and to astrology, the ways of 
God were clearly justified so that man appeared the 
originator of evil by free choice. ‘ God is blameless, yet 
we are to blame for evil by choice’ (IV. 8a). Never- 
theless it could also be asseverated ‘the good is 
voluntary, the evil involuntary’ (Exc. XI. 20); and 
again,” ‘men choose evil under the illusion of good.’ 
This choice was partly prenatal, as in the Anthropos 
(Man) myth of the Poitmandres, and partly in the in- 
carnate estate. 

Astralism made its contribution in various guises; 
e.g. that man took on the seven passions or affections 
of the soul, one from each planet, on his descent to the 
sublunary world, and on its way homeward the soul 
will slough off these beguiling passions by parting with 
them to their respective stellar sources (I. 13, 25). 
Another writer derives from the twelve signs of the 
Zodiac the view that the operation of the Zodiac produces 
the ‘ manifold forms’ or twelve ‘ torments’ of evil 
passions ‘for the purpose of deceiving man,’ from 
which deliverance comes only through the Ten Powers 

= Diss. LLY. 137 T. ? Exc. XI. 21, according to Meineke’s text. 


ORIGIN OF EVIL 325 


of the Decad.' Another holds that evil arises from the 
gradual degradation of the soul through its increasing 
separation from the World-Soul and through the increase 
of the body drawing the soul into matter and producing 
forgetfulness:? ‘ Having separated itself from the Good 
and the Beautiful, it no longer shares in these but through 
forgetfulness becomes evil' (X. 15). Fatalism in con- 
junction with a doctrine of divine grace appears in the 
view that ' the illuminated of God ' receives the seeds 
of his thoughts from God, whereas bad thoughts and 
impious deeds springing therefrom come from some 
demon entering the man and depositing in his mind evil 
seeds (IX. 3), and this same writer immediately further 
justifies God for withholding prevenient grace by a 
different theory that ‘ God, the Demiurge of all things, 
makes all things like Himself, good when made, . . . 
for the movement of the cosmos varies the births of 
things, giving them this or that quality; it fouls with 
evil the births of some and purifies with good the births 
of others. Demonology was always conveniently to 
hand to help in this moral impasse. The demons effect- 
ing entrance through the body into the two irrational 
parts of the soul pervert souls in different ways, but 
have no power over the rational parts of the soul 
(XVI. 15). A more philosophic view construes evil as 
rather an accident in God's good work, arising like rust 
on brass, for ‘to the Maker nothing is considered * 
good or evil,’ whose glory is to make all things. 

Ample provision was made for the punishment of sin, 
whether prenatal or post-natal. Sometimes the punish- 
ment is meted out eschatologically, sometimes here. 
Sin may be its own punishment, or penal agents may 
be employed. In the Kore Kosmow incarnation in a 

RN. I2 ef. Scott ad. loc. 

Cho Plotinus, Enn. 1. 8, 13; IV. 8; 7: 

* 5 partly WS.; cf. Asc. 35. 

* XIV. 7. The meaning is considerably and unnecessarily altered by 


WS.'s ''correction " of the MS., vojfóuevov into vomoréw and cape 
into ovcla. 


326 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


‘human organism’ is the penalty of pre-temporal 
audacity of souls in claiming equality with the heavenly 
gods and in transgressing their order (Exc. XXIII. 24). 
In Poimandres (I. 23) the avenging demon tortures the 
impious and equips him for lawlessness that he may 
earn the greater penalty. Elsewhere Nous itself entering 
the impious soul ‘ torments it with the scourges of its 
sins,’ impelling it to crimes and outrages (X. 21). The 
childless atone for their ‘ very great sin’ of dying with- 
out issue by being compelled by demons to pass into 
non-human bodies after death (II. 17a). The punish- 
ment may be self-inflicted both in the case of the dis- 
carnate soul and in its embodied estate. The wicked 
soul not only fails to become Nous while in the body 
and to become a daemon after separation from the body, 
but ‘ it remains of its own substance, undergoing self- 
inflicted retribution and seeking re-entrance into an 
earthly body’ (X. 19a). Yet here and now, Hermes 
informs Tat— 


‘ What greater punishment can there be, my son, than 
impiety? What fire burns so fierce as impiety? what 
ravenous beast has such power to mangle the body as 
impiety has to mangle the soul? See you not what 
tortures the impious soul endures? It cries and shrieks, 
** I am burning, I am all on fire, . . . wretch that I am, 
I am devoured by the miseries that have hold of me." 
Are not such cries as these the outcries of a soul that is 
suffering punishment? ' (X. 20, WS.). 


Incarnation was variously viewed, as a reward of 
excellence or as a punishment for a degrading choice, 
or as a stage in man's return to the higher world. The 
Kore Kosmou gives the most elaborate statement of 
penal ensomatosis, with which, however, it couples a 
gospel of release. Again, the discarnate impious soul 
strives for reincarnation (X. 19a). On the other hand, 
souls undergo all kinds of changes, some gravitating to 
bestial embodiments, the ‘ airy ' souls into men, and 


INCARNATION AND RE-INCARNATION 327 


such souls on attaining immortality are transformed into 
demons and ' pass into the choir of the gods,’ thus 
reaching ' the most perfect felicity of the soul.’ But 
the impure soul may reverse this career and be subjected 
to irrational reincarnation. ‘If a soul when it has 
entered a human body persists in evil, it does not taste 
the sweets of immortal life, but is dragged back again ; 
it reverses its course and takes its way back to the 
creeping things; and that ill-fated soul, having failed to 
know itself, lives in servitude to uncouth and noxious 
bodies. To this doom are vicious souls condemned ’ 
(X. 8, WS.). 
| Asclepius teaches that incarnation is a necessary 
provision of the ‘ material integument’ (the Platonic 
éynua), that man may be in a position to tend both 
the earthly and the heavenly worlds, for which faithful 
service and ' co-operation with the will of God ' he will 
be restored ' pure and holy to the highest divine part 
of his nature.’ Such a ‘ return to heaven’ is denied 
. to the wicked, for whom is ordained a shameful migra- 
tion ‘into other bodies unworthy of the holy Mind 
(7c-12a). Again, this Pythagorean-Platonic doctrine of 
_metensomatosis is vigorously assailed as ‘ very grievous 
error’; reincarnation may take place only ‘into a 
. human body, for no other kind of body can contain a 
. human soul. It is not permitted that the human soul 
should sink into the body of an irrational animal; it 
is God's law that the human souls should be saved from 
such an outrage. . . . A soul may rise to a higher 
estate; it cannot sink to a lower’ (X. 195-22a). 

The usual view of the origin of the world is that God 
is not directly its maker, but that He operates through 
a Demiurge such as the Nous, or the Word (Logos), or 
the Aeon, or the Sun, or the Tofos-Nous (Space-Mind) 
(II, but all such intermediaries are rejected by the 
writer of Tractate XIV as ' vain talking ': God made 
the cosmos, and so there exist only God and the cosmos. 
It is striking that the Stoic pantheistic idea of Spirit 


328 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


as a cosmic force has failed to secure a place in this 
question of uere with its inevitable bearing upon 
man's salvation.' 

In the creative and AMEE functions the Logos 
is not prominent. We read in Cyril’s quotations: 
* God's Word, who is all-accomplishing and fecund, 
went forth, and flinging Himself upon the water, which 
was a thing of fecund nature, made the water pregnant,’ 
and ' the Word presides over and governs the things that 
have been made through Him ' (the Master of the All) 
and ' the nature of His intellectual Word is generative,' ? 
but such views do not permeate the body of Hermetic 
writings. 

In this connexion arises the problem of the relation 
of the cosmic theology of the Prologue of the Fourth 
Gospel and of some of the sayings of Jesus in that Gospel 
to the Hermetic movement.  Reitzenstein,? recognizing 
Egyptian-Hermetic kinship of ideas, posits Hermeticism 
and Hellenistic mysticism as an origin of Johannine 
thought. But in the Cosmogony of Strassbourg * it is 
Hermes who is commissioned ' to make a very beautiful 
world,' in the execution of which he is assisted by the 
Logos, ' his shining Son.’ * The Demiurge is therefore 
Hermes, not the Logos, who occupies an inferior position. 
Hermes is also the civilizer, in which capacity he again 
employs the services of the Logos.? 


' Lagrange (Rev. biblique, July 1925, p. 387) says of the Perfect 
Word (Asclepius): ‘‘ La notion d'esprit ne parait guére sous la forme 
stoicienne d'une force qui anime le monde," and of the Hermetic 
citations in Cyril only '' des tentatives assez voisines du gnosticisme, 
de faire entrer dans l'hermétisme la doctrine du Logos, ou de ramener 
à la conception du monothéisme platonicien le róle stoicien de l'esprit 
dans la nature '' (p. 396). 

? Con. Julianum, 552d; 553 A: WS. I, p. 544. 

3 Zwei relig. Fragen, p. 47 ff.; Poim. p. 247 ff. 

* Ed. by Reitzenstein in Zwei rel. Fragen, p. 53 ff. 

5 Ib. p:456; 1: 6. 

* *' C'est le rôle humain de la raison et de la parole que l'esprit 
religieux du poéte rattache à une généalogie divine '' (Lagrange, ib. 
October 1924, p. 497). 


FOURTH GOSPEL AND HERMETICISM 329 


On the other hand, Krebs' and Lagrange ? contest 
Reitzenstein's position. The former relies chiefly on 
Old Testament parallels and synoptic sayings of Jesus 
as the line of filiation with the cosmic-mystic conceptions 
of the Fourth Gospel. But Krebs's source is quite in- 
sufficient. Contemporary Judaism would be at least as 
influential as the Old Testament scriptures and would 
put forward the Memre or the Wisdom of God as cosmic 
intermediaries, except in philosophic circles where such 
a conception as the Philonian Logos would find 
acceptance. Pére Lagrange has recourse to a large in- 
filtration of Christian ideas into Hermeticism. He is 
probably right in asserting the influence of Christian 
ideas in the Hermetic quotations of Cyril and Lactantius,? 
but these are lacking in the regular Corpus Hermeticum, 
so that we cannot determine with certainty their primitive 
form. He maintains that the text of the Perfect Word 
(Asclepius) has been retouched with Johannine ideas or 
terms,* and that the citations of Lydus suggest a Christian 
rehandling of the Latin text of the Asclepius.? His con- 
clusion is: '' Mais par ailleurs c'est le Dieu supréme qui 
est créature dans l'hermétisme tel que nous le connaissons 
déjà. Il faut dont conclure que le Logos-Demiurge est 
une innovation qui n'avait pas penétré partout, méme 
là ou l'on faisait une place au Logos," and '' Par 
ailleurs le Logos est une surcharge contraire à l'esprit 
de la religion du Nous.’’ * 

Reitzenstein,' on the other hand, denies the presence 


1 Logos als Heiland, pp. 157-72. 
* L'Hermétisme, in Rev. Bib. October 1924, January, April, and 


July 1925. 
* Rev. Biblique, XXXIV, pp. 388-96. STON 38a. 
5 Ib. pp. 387, 393. € Ib. pp. 392, 396. 


7 Poim. pp. 247-8: '' Das Christentum hatte schon früher (than the 
writing of the Fourth Gospel) schon als es sich bildete u. seine erste 
Literatur schuf, diese Mystik u. ihre Literatur am Platz u. in jüdis- 
chen Kreisen wirksam gefunden . . . in dem Herm. Corpus mancherlei 
jüdisches, aber kein christliches Sprachgut nachweisen, wohl aber 
umgekehrt in der spátjüdischen wie der frihchrist. Literatur viel 
Hermetisches.'' 


330 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


of Christian elements in Hermeticism. It is noteworthy 
that the latest editor of the Hermetica corroborates 
Reitzenstein: ''I have failed to find anything in the 
doctrines taught that is of Christian origin—with the 
possible exception of the doctrine of Rebirth in Corp. 
XIII. That is the only extant libellus in which the 
notion of rebirth occurs; and its author . . . may have 
got it from a Christian source; but it cannot be said to 
be certain that he did," * with the first part of which 
statement we would agree, but dissent from the un- 
necessary caution of the second part concerning a 
doctrine which cannot be attributed exclusively to a 
Christian source, but was made familiar by the Mystery- 
Religions of Paganism. 

We cannot approach this question with either the 
parti pris of Reitzenstein or that of Krebs and Lagrange. 
It must be confessed that Paganism, both early and later, 
exercised a considerable and lasting influence over 
Christianity, and also that later Paganism, e.g. that of 
Julian and Porphyry, was influenced by Christianity as 
also by Jewish literature. It must also be admitted that 
the influence of Judaism within Christianity waned with 
the increasing schism between it and Christianity and 
with the immense preponderance from the second century 
onward of Gentile membership in the organizing Catholic 
Church. The assignment of exclusive parentage to an 
idea in a new and plastic religion in a world of seething 
religious syncretism is a hazardous task. The greatness 
of the unknown writer of the Ephesian Gospel (Fourth 
Gospel) and his inestimable services in presenting an 
original reinterpretation of Christianity as a timeless 
religion are not lessened by our recognizing in his 
guiding Logos conception a parentage stretching from 
the fruitful guess of the Ephesian mystic philosopher ? 
of the sixth century B.C. to the Pauline pre-existent 
Christ with lines of filiation through Jewish transcen- 


1 Scott, Hermetica, I, p. 12. 
2 Cf. treatment by V. Macchioro, Evaclito (Bari, 1922). 


STEDFASTNESS IN HERMETIC FAITH 33I 


dentalism, Stoic immanence, and the cosmic require- 
ments, which were postulates of every religion in the 
Graeco-Roman world. 

To claim Hermeticism as the source of Johannine 
mysticism, and especially of the Logos functions, is as 
unwarranted as to claim Johannine thought as the 
main ingredient or even a permeating influence in 
Hermeticism. Let it be remembered that the Hermetic 
writings are but a torso of a vast literature and of a 
movement which Christianity sought to sweep out of 
its path, and that if we had the same proportion of 
Hermetic literature as of that of early Christianity, the 
kinship in thought would probably be more, not less, 
striking. Also, the origins of Hermeticism go back to 
at least the second century B.C., and so its ideas were 
in operation and forming their combinations at the same 
time as Christianity was growing to self-consciousness in 
literature. Both movements were drawing to a large 
extent from the same speculative sources, the Christians 
having the decided advantage of possessing also the 
historic facts of the life of Jesus and the valued tradition 
of His teaching. Both were affected by the atmosphere 
of mysticism of their age, and both, seeking to enlist 
the serious-minded, operated with the same terms of 
Life, Light, Truth, which were catch-words of their 
. contemporary Zeitgeist, and both were deflected by the 
| Same excessive transcendentalism in theology and 
. religion. 

On such a vital question as the perseverance of the 
Hermetic ' illuminated’ uniformity was not attained. 
Hermeticism permitted within it the same divergences as 
to moral miscarriage of its adherents as Christianity 
recognized within the New Testament itself and still more 
in later days of Church organization. Within the New 
Testament we find that Paul makes no reference to 
entreaty for forgiveness of sins after conversion or 
baptism. Paul neither prays for forgiveness daily nor 
commands his Churches to do so. Such forgiveness is 


ou 


332 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


not a recurrent or constant necessity for himself and he 
does not make it normative for his converts.* Christians 
are ‘ dead to sin’ and ‘ living to righteousness.’ The 
‘new creation ' in Christ is so thorough that it cannot 
be undone or destroyed even by poor workmanship 
(x Cor. iii. 13-15) or by gross sin (v. 5). ‘ If any [i.e. 
Christian] sin, we have an Advocate,’ was a thought 
quite alien to the mind of Paul and to his conception 
of the Christian vocation. The auctor ad Hebraeos 
agrees with Paul as to the ideally sinless character 
(iv. 15) of Christians, but he makes a wide divagation 
from Paul in holding that ‘ renewal to repentance ' is 
impossible for those who ‘after having tasted the 
heavenly gift’ have lapsed (vi. 4-8). A second re- 
pentance can cover only involuntary sins: voluntary 
sin ‘ after receiving the knowledge of the truth’ can 
meet only ‘ a fearful expectation of judgment ’ and find 
even for seeking ‘ no place of repentance’ (X. 26 ff., 
XII. 16 f.). The rigorism of Hebrews is firmly sup- 
ported by another canonical writer, who, while holding 
that ‘ if any [Christian] sin, we have an Advocate ' for 
venial sins, ‘ there is a mortal sin, and I do not affirm 
that you should make entreaty concerning this ' (1 John 
ii. 1; v. I6). Dissenting from both Paul and Hebrews, 
the Apocalyptist declares expressly for a second re- 
pentance (Rev. ii. 5, 16, 21 f.; iii. 3, 15, 19). This 
practical question of the higher moral life received much 
attention later among Christians. Justin Martyr ” 
declares that there is no other way to salvation than 
* that we should know this Christ and be bathed in the 
laver for forgiveness of sins . . . and lead henceforth 


2 “ The fact can hardly be disputed that the petition ' Forgive us 
our debts, as we forgive our debtors, has no place in the Apostle's 
teaching. The sins from which the believers are justifed are those 
committed before he became a Christian. The message of forgiveness 
in Paul's gospel stands at the beginning, and has no reference to lapses 
in the Christian life. For post-baptismal sins no provision is made '' 
(Morgan, Religion and Theology of Paul, p. 152). 

? Dial. XLIV. 263b. 


PROBLEM OF BACKSLIDING 333 


a sinless life,’ and in the Shepherd of Hermas * ‘ there 
is no other repentance than when we descended into 
the water and received forgiveness of our former sins.' 
The stricter view was championed chiefly by the 
Montanists and later Novatians. The Church officially 
adopted the milder view of a second repentance, not 
only for involuntary sins but for deliberate sins and 
backsliding, on the theory stated by Hermas,? ' For the 
Lord, being a heart-searcher and foreknowing all things, 
knew the weakness of men and the wiles of the devil. 

He took pity on His work and established this 
(second) repentance.’ 

Among the Jews the same question had caused serious 
reflexion, and from the days of Ezekiel onwards sins 
of relapse were treated with increasing severity (Ezek. 
xvii. 21 ff.). Although there was a liberal view, as 
represented, e.g., by the Wisdom of Solomon (xii. ro, 
I9), the more rigorous view gained sway, as, e.g., that 
of Philo, that ‘ the soul that has been once divorced 
(from the Good] and has changed its abode, has been 
cast out for ever as irreconcilable, and unable to return 
to its previous home,' and ' many souls who desired to 
avail themselves of repentance were denied by God.’ ° 

In view of the uncertainty of Jewish and Christian 
thought on this moral enigma of the instability of the 
higher life, we are not surprised to find diversity of 
outlook among the Hermeticists. The author of the 
important tractate on Regeneration (XIII. 14) holds that 
‘the body composed of the divine powers, i.e. the 
incorporeal reborn man, cannot suffer dissolution, his 
character being indelible; and with this teacher agrees 
Exc. II5, 3: 


* He that is religious shall know both where and what 
the truth is, and having learned it he will be yet more 

1 Mand. IV. 3, 1. 2 Ib2VEV 26330455. 

3 Quod Det. 40, C.-W. 149; De Legg. All. ITI. 213, p. 129. Cf. also 
De Cherub. 1o, p. 140. Other references in Windisch's note Hebrder- 
brief, pp. 50-4. 

23 


aa 


334 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


religious. For never, my son, can à soul! that has raised 
itself to the apprehension of that which is really Good 
and True slip back to the opposite. For when a soul 
has learned its parentage it acquires a strange yearning 
and a forgetfulness of all evil, and it can no more fall 
away from the Good.’ 

' We are not informed what happens to those who 
have made shipwreck in this struggle: the disciples of 
Hermes must all attain victory when once they have 
enlisted in the combat." ? 


Yet the prayers for steadfastness in the Poimandres 
(32) and in the Asclepius (41b) ( be pleased that we 
be kept in Thy knowledge and love that we may never 
fall away from such a life") imply the disastrous 
possibility of ‘ falling away from that knowledge of 
Thee.’ 

In regard to the divulgence of the revelation the 
fascination for the esoteric to which Christianity easily 
yielded in establishing an élite or esoteric type, and an 
exoteric or popular type of religion, proved even more 
attractive to the Hermeticists. The principle of such 
secrecy was stated by Strabo ? as ‘ the mysterious con- 
cealment of holy things adds to reverence for the divine 
by imitating the nature of the divine which eludes our 
apprehension.’ Orthodox Christians condemned secrecy 
among heretics, but held it necessary and laudable 
among themselves. Origen candidly admits? the 
existence of esoteric and of exoteric dogmas and justifies 
the distinction on the analogy of Greek philosophy and 
the Pagan Mysteries. He even asserts that ‘ it is not 
without elements of danger to entrust the plain truth of 
such things to writing,’ and with this view the cultured 
Clement was in agreement.* 

The Hermeticists faced a similar difficulty about the 


! Adopting WS. text. ? Lagrange, R.B. XXXIV, p. 104. 
CA X63 Oy D.04067: * Hippolytus, Phil. I proem, p. 4. 
5 C. Celsum, I. 7, p. 325. 

6 


Cf. references in Hatch, Influence of Greek Ideas, p. 293, 0. I. 


QUESTION OF PROPAGANDA 935 


value of religious secrecy and failed to reach accord. 
The authors of Tvactates I and VII outstrip all in their 
missionary zeal to make known the revealed truth to 
all: ‘ Have you not received all to become a guide to 
the worthy in order that the race of mankind may be 
saved through thee? ' asks Poimandres !' ; and: 


* I began to preach to men the beauty of piety and of 
the knowledge of God, saying, '' Hearken, ye folk, men 
born of earth, who have given yourselves up to drunken- 
ness and sleep in your ignorance of God; awake to 
Soberness; cease to be sodden with strong drink and 
lulled in sleep devoid of reason." And when they heard 
they gathered round me with one accord. And I said, 
'* O men, why have ye given yourselves up to death, 
when you have been granted power to partake of im- 
mortahty? Repent, ye who have journeyed with Error, 
and joined company with Ignorance; rid yourselves of 
darkness and lay hold on the Light; partake of im- 
mortality, forsaking corruption," the experience of one 
who prayed, ''put power into me, that so having 
obtained this boon, I may enlighten those of my race 
who are in ignorance, my brothers and thy sons.” ' ? 


The other preacher, taking as his text ' The greatest 
evil among men is ignorance of God,' proclaims: 
. * Whither are ye carried, O men, in your drunkenness, 
. having drunk the strong word of ignorance? You are not 
| able to bear it and are even now vomiting it forth. Stand 
up in soberness, gazing upward with the eyes of your 
. hearts, and if you cannot all do this, at least those who 
can’ (VII. ra), which reminds one of the Oxyrhynchus 
logion of Jesus, ‘ I stood in the midst of the world, and 
in the flesh was I seen of them. And I found all men 
revelling, but none found I thirsting among them. 
And my soul grieves for the sons of men, because 
they are blind in their hearts and (see) not their 


poverty.’ 


! 26b. 2027:3321 WS: 


336 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


Another writer encourages proclamation. God, having 
put Nous into the Basin, sent a Herald to announce to 
the hearts of men, ‘ Baptize thyself, heart that can, into 
this Basin. . . . And as many as took notice of the 
proclamation baptized themselves in the Nous, became 
participators in the Knowledge and became perfect men 
by the reception of the Nous.’ 

But other teachers enjoin secrecy and emphasize the 
esoteric character of the Hermetic revelation. ‘ Avoid 
converse with the multitude, not because of envy, but 
(x) because you will be laughed at, (2) as like welcomes 
like, so the Hermeticist cannot be friend to the non- 
Hermeticist, and (3) these discourses will find few 
worthy, and (4) because they involve something peculiar 
which provokes the wicked to greater wickedness.’ ” 
And Hermes commanded Tat to keep silence on Rebirth 
‘and not to reveal to any the tradition of the Rebirth 
lest we be counted as blasphemers’ (XIII, 22b), an 
attitude which the ancient editor commends, ‘ This 
discourse about Rebirth I have set down privately in 
writing, to be read by those to whom God Himself wills 
it to be known, and not by the many, that we may not 
be deemed maligners of the universe.’ * And the writer, 
or editor, of Tvactate XIV. 1 professes to ‘ give a 
more esoteric exegesis ' of ‘ the leading doctrines ' of 
Trismegistus to Asclepius. Egyptian particularism * 


LEV: 4b; WS. 2 Byes OX As 
* XIII. 13b, WS. text and tr. 
* Lagrange says of the Hermetic excerpts from Stobaeus: ‘‘ Au 


surplus le caractère concis et parfois énigmatique de ces formules 
s'explique par cette reflexion que la doctrine ne pas doit étre propagée. 
Et chose étrangére pour une doctrine de salut . . . Car les hommes 
sont portés au mal, et s'ils viennent à savoir que leurs actions leurs 
sont imposées par le destin, ils lui laisseront la responsibilité et 
pécheront davantage. L'hermétisme se révéle ici comme une vérité 
qui doit étre tenue secréte, parce que nuisable au plus grand nombre. 

. L'homme est mauvais et il péche, mais, c'est involontairement et 
en exécutant ce que est réglé par le destin. Voilà pourquoi il ne faut 
pas répandre la doctrine d'Hermes: ce serait encourager les hommes 
à pécher en excusant leurs manquements '' (Rev. Bib. XXXIV, pp. 99, 


104). 


‘“FIRST HATE THE BODY’ 337 


appears in the protest to king Ammon against trans- 
lation of the sacred writings into Greek, since the Greeks 
* have words devoid of conviction ' and their philosophy 
is a ' noise of words’ (XVI. 2). The Perfect Discourse 
of the Asclepius would be profaned by an unauthorized 
crowd of listeners: ‘ Don't invite anyone else besides 
Ammon, lest a deeply reverential discourse on matters 
of such import be profaned by the appearance and 
presence of many ' (1b). Yet this same writer rebukes 
the envy of those who would deny to men the gift of 
immortality by the gnosis. 

Hermeticism naturally accepted, with every vital 
religion of that day, asceticism as a sine qua non for 
spiritual advance, but not so unqualifiedly * as its com- 
petitors. With Paul's antithesis, ‘the flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh ’ (Gal. 
v. 17) the Hermeticist agrees: ‘ Unless you first hate 
the body, my son, you cannot love your true self; and 
if you love your true self, you shall have Nous, and 
possessing Nous you shall partake also of knowledge ' 
(iv. 6b). The renunciation requisite in realizing that 
“no man can serve two masters’ is unambiguously 
demanded: ' It is impossible, my son, to be concerned 
about the things of both worlds, that is about things 
mortal and things divine. For there are two classes 
of things, the corporeal and the incorporeal, the mortal 
and the divine, and the choice of either is left free to 
the chooser, but it is impossible to choose both ' (IV. 6b). 

Again, another teacher affirms: 


‘ It is necessary that you first tear off the garment 
that you wear, the web of ignorance, the living death, 
the sensible corpse, the portable tomb, the robber in 
the house, the enemy who hates the things which you 
desire, and who grudges you the things you wish. Such 
is the hostile garment in which you have clothed your- 
self, and which holds you down to itself, lest you should 


1 Cf. Kroll, Lehren des H-Trismeg, p. 348. 


338 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


look up and contemplate the beauty of Truth and the 
Good that abides in yonder world.' * 


The prize of self-denial is great indeed, no less than 
the possession of the highest principle of spiritual life, 
the Nous. ' For oftentimes the Nous departs from the 
soul, and in such an hour the soul neither sees nor hears, 
but is like unto an irrational animal. . . . Mind cannot 
endure a torpid soul ; it abandons the soul that is attached 
to the body and held down by it. Such a soul, my son, 
has no Nous, and consequently such a one is not to be 
deemed a human being ' (X. 242). 

A word of praise should be spoken of the Hermeticists 
for their wise moderation on the question of procreation 
of children, on which they stand on common ground 
with the saner Stoics ? and with the Jews. Flight from 
the world's affairs, hatred of the body, and indifference 
to domestic ties advocated by Platonists, Pythagoreans, 
and Christians, both orthodox and heretical, resulted 
in race-suicide which contributed largely to the downfall 
of ancient Graeco-Roman civilization. This moderation 
of the Hermetic teachers is all the more astonishing as 
they never made pretensions to a universal religion as 
did the Christians. One teacher views childlessness as 
“a very great sin’ to be punished hereafter by demons 
in non-human reincarnations (II. r7). According to 
Asclepius, the bisexual God made both sexes in a unitas 
incomprehensibilis and * devised and bestowed upon all 
creatures the mystery of eternal procreation with all its 
innate endearment, joy, gladness, yearning, and divine 
love ' of a ‘ necessary sacrament ' (ib. 21). 

The dualism of the Poimandres compels the writer to 


* VII. 2b, an amazing mixture of metaphors to express contempt 
for the body as ‘ the tomb of the soul.’ I do not follow Scott in his 
transposition of the words rò cxorewàv meplBorov. I observe that 
Professor E. Riess also regards Scott’s transposition as otiose (Amer. 
J. Philology, XLVII. 2, p. 191). I adopt Scott’s emendation in the 
omission of the ô’ before à» in both cases (I, p. 172). 

2 Cf. Kroll, Lehren, p. 348; Scott, III, pp. 138-42. 


QUESTION OF PROCREATION 339 


hold that the first incorporeal Man * (15) and his seven 
Men (the issue of the first Man and Nature, 16) were, 
like God, bisexual and therefore free from Eros or sexual 
desire, which effected births and consequently deaths. 
Man's orginal position was that to which he shall return 
according to the logion of Jesus in the Gospel according 
to the Hebrews: ‘ Death shall cease when you shall have 
trodden under foot the garment of shame, and whenever 
the two [sexes] shall become one, and the male with 
the female is neither male nor female.' On this logic, 
since Eros prompts to marriage which produces death, 
it would seem that marriage is necessarily evil. Yet 
since the original androgyne character is lost, the author 
represents the Creator as commanding mankind to 
‘increase and multiply’ (17) with the promise of an 
ultimate return to primal conditions. A similar command 
to procreate is repeated in another Tvactate, III. 3b. 
And God's creative activity is cited as an encouragement 
to imitate God by procreation (II. 17a). In these sections 
we detect the influence of the creation story of Genesis. 
Asclepius accounts for the diversity of the sexes and their 
procreative powers by the fact that God has endowed 
all things with fecundity (200 ff.). 

The Hermetic religion was never offered as an easy 
religion. The Hermetic disciple must be prepared to 
suffer persecution and endure calumny. 


* Wherefore those who are in Gnosis (faith-knowledge) 
are neither pleasing to the multitude nor the multitude 
to them. Indeed, they appear as madmen and incur 
derision ; they are hated and despised and possibly even 
put to death. . . . But the godly man will endure all 
things, holding fast to his knowledge ; for to such a man 
all things are good even if they prove evil to others; 
and when he is plotted against, he measures all things 
by his knowledge, and he alone makes good out of the 
evil ' (IX. 45). 


And it is probable that the persecutors here were our 
1 Cf. C. H. Kraeling, Anthropos and Son of Man, p. 41 ff. 


340 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


Christian predecessors ' who in their advocacy of faith 
(pistis) against knowledge (gnosis) produced in their 
victims similar moral results to those so often manifested 
by themselves under sufferings, for * transmuting evil into 
good '; the Hermetic believer is like the righteous man 
of Plato ? who ‘ will be scourged, tortured on the rack, 
bound; will have his eyes burned out, and finally, after 
enduring much suffering, he will be crucified.' Again, 
the Hermetic religiosus ' will be deemed insane’ and 
his cherished articles of faith, such as the divinity of 
the world and the immortality of the soul, will be turned 
to mockery or pronounced vanity, by the Christians 
whose victory he fears and whose laws were suppressing 
his faith. These writers were striving to encourage the 
martyr-spirit in their communities as earlier the writers 
of the Epistle to the Hebrews and of the Apocalypse had 
done for their co-religionists. 

The Hermeticists occupied the position among the 
ancient religiously minded distinctive of the Quakers 
to-day, inasmuch as their faith necessitated no fixed 
cult-forms and dispensed with sacraments and their 
concomitant sacerdotalism.* Considering how sacra- 
mentarianism was inseparable from the ubiquitous 
Mystery-Religions and from the nearest type of religion 
to Hermeticism, that is, Gnosticism, and how it had 
taken control of Christianity, this inwardness and in- 
dependence of Hermetic spiritual life is all the more 
arresting. Theurgia was as utterly repudiated by them 
as by Jesus Himself. Gnosis was for the most part 
illuminatio when not intuitive, and initiation was by 


> Cf. Scott, II, p. 204. 

? Repub. II. 362a. Cf. Phaedr. 249d; Gorgias 521d ff.; Thaet. 174a 1.; 
Cicero, De Repub. III. 17. 

? Lagrange's language (Rev. Bib. XXXIV, p. 104) must be under- 
stood only in connexion with the Kore Kosmou fragments; it is inac- 
curate in the italicized words for Hermeticism as a whole: '' C'est une 
religion, si l'on veux, mais une religion naturelle, sans prêtres, sans 
sacrifices, et même sans prière. C'est une ascése volontaire en suite 
de la connaissance, ce qui n'est sans noblesse, mais exclut le surnaturel.’’ 


SPIRITUAL WORSHIP 341 


instruction in a ‘ divine discourse '; wherever teacher 
and taught met was a holy shrine (adytwm) in which 
‘ Divine Love spake’ (Asc. 1), and ‘ that shrine was 
consecrated by the true religion of four men and filled 
. with God's own presence ' (19). 
.  Hermeticism was decidedly of the prophetic, not of 
the priestly, type of religion, the priest being quite un- 
necessary either for the exercise of the religion or as an 
agent of salvation. The sympathetic spiritual teacher 
with his word of saving knowledge, or the guide of souls 
to the Basin of Nous, was in demand. ' Seek a Guide 
to lead you to the doors of Knowledge, where is the 
bright Light pure from darkness, where none is drunken, 
but where all are sober, looking with the heart to him 
who wills to be seen.’ * 

The sacrifices of God ? are ' reasonable sacrifices ' 
(XIII. 21), ‘holy and from heart and soul directed 
toward thee’ (Poim.). ' There is only one worship of 
God, not to be wicked ' (XII. (2) 235), since God only 
can be called good. ‘ The love of heaven and of all 
therein is the one practice of worship ' (Asc. 9), of which 
man alone is capable. ‘ He raises his eyes to heaven ' 
[suspicit caelum, Asc. 6] and only the few endowed 
with pure mind can exercise this ‘ lofty duty of con- 
templating heaven ' (9). ' Man, united in kinship with 
the gods, worships them in religion and with a pure 
mind’ (225). Even ‘to add the customary incense 
and perfume ' to prayer to God is ' the greatest impiety : 
these and such gifts are unfit for Him,' which must have 
sounded as strange to users of the Orphic Hymn-book 


BEVITT. 

2 Seneca’s words, which commended themselves to Lactantius, would 
have been acceptable to the Hermeticists: ' Will you think of God 
as great and placid and a friend to be reverenced with gentle majesty, 
and always at hand? not to be worshipped with the immolation of 
victims and with much blood . . . but with a pure mind and with a 
good and honourable purpose. Temples are not to be built to Him 
with stones piled up on high; He is to be consecrated by each man in 
his own breast’ (Div. Inst. VI. 25; tr. by Fletcher, Ante-Nicene 
Christian Library, I, p. 419). 


342 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


or the Liturgies of the Mysteries as a Roman Mass would 
to a Quaker to-day. ' Let us adore and give thanks, 
since thanksgiving on the part of mortals is the offering 
of the supreme God’ (Asc. 414), or according to 
Lactantius' version, ‘ praise is His only sacrifice ': ' to 
worship God . . . this is philosophy,' ' which is Her- 
metic gzosis. Hence thanksgiving (eucharistia) and 
fervid prayer are the highest expression of this religion 
and the ‘ offering acceptable to God the Father of all ' 
(XIII. 21). Reverential and rapt silence was also an 
important element in the worship and practices of 
Hermeticism, as of other forms of ancient religion. 
Nowhere is the efficacy of sacramental formulae and 
acts recognized. Visions of the highest order, securing 
henosis with God and revealing the spiritual world, are 
vouchsafed by illumination as in the mental concentra- 
tion or as in the rarer visions of Plotinus, and not 
mediately by the stimuli of external suggestion or 
tangible symbols or sacral acts. The Hermetic convert 
can become ousiodes, ' essential,’ or spiritual, and cast 
off his former hylic or material nature,” and the soul can 
make its ascent to the divine Ogdoad without having 
undergone sacramental catharsis and without any mystic 
password communicated in participation in a sacrament. 
The gnosis which ensures salvation and bestows the 
highest bliss is imparted by instruction or intuition or 
by a divine revealer, never in cult-acts. It is remarkable 
that the boon of Palingenesia (rebirth), in protest against 
the doctrines and practices of baptismal sacramental 
operation in the Mysteries and Christianity, is represented 
as effected by God through a ministrant, a ‘ Son of 
God, a Man, acting by the will of God ' by means of a 
process of instruction to one prepared ' to alienate his 


! Cf. Scott, Asc. 14a. 

* Philo relates how Moses, ‘summoned by the Father’ to put off 
mortal being from a double being of body and soul, became a ' single ' 
being, ' transformed wholly into the most sun-like Mind’ (Nous) (De 
Vita M. II. 39, C.-W. 288). 


A NON-SACERDOTAL RELIGION 343 


mind from the deceit of the world’ and actually to 
experience the ‘deification ' ‘into a God, a Son of 
the One.’ 
Even when the language or symbolism of a salvation 
|! by baptism, as in IV. 4, is employed, it is made plain 
that no virtue is to be derived from the act,’ and that 
there is no sympathy with the popular Pagan and 
Christian religious usages of the day. The same writer 
speaks contemptuously of processions ‘ which can of 
themselves do nothing but only obstruct other people ' 
(7), as an illustration of the function of those who choose 

"the worse, ‘ in a similar fashion these merely pass along 
in procession, conducted by things corporeal.' 

And the Hermeticists had the advantage over many 
modern Christians, to whom the same sacral act with 
the same liturgy and actions in the evening would be 
devoid of the virtues emanating therefrom before break- 
fast. To the Pagan Hermeticist every hour was a holy 
season: ' at what time shall I sing hymns to Thee? for 
it is impossible to find an hour or any season apart from 
Thee’ (V. ri) No gesture gives more grace than 
another, and every place? is hallowed ground and 
pregnant with a mystic presence: ' Where shall I look 
as I praise Thee? upward or downward? within or 
without? for Thou art Place?; there is no place outside 
Thee ; all things are in Thee ' (V. rob). 

Yet though popular sacramentarianism is rudely cast 

aside, the rich symbolism of tangible things may serve 
the purpose of bringing nearer the incorporeal realities. 
The Hermeticists, despite their dualism and the constant 
irruption of transcendental deism into their Stoic 


1 “ The figure (i.e. of dipping in the great Basin of Nous) must have 
been suggested to him by some sacramental rite with which he was 
acquainted; but it seems clear that he himself attached no value and 
ascribed no efficacy to the sacramental rite of which he was thinking, 
and that he uses it merely as a figure to illustrate his doctrine of 
Nous ’’ (Scott, II, p. 140). 

MCE el (2) 210), WS?text. 

3 Adopting WS.’s correction rózos for rpórmos. 


344 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


Pantheism, differed from their Gnostic kin * in holding 
the world of sense to be an image or copy of the in- 
telligible world, and hence pregnant with sacramental 
suggestiveness and parallelisms. The visible sun is an 
image of the invisible God. And the visible cosmos is 
a symbol of Him who made it. 

In Tractate XVII Tat discourses to king Ammon on 
‘the incorporeal images of corporeal things ' and ' the 
reflexions of the incorporeal in the corporeal.' Images, 
elwa, are given off by material things, and forms, 
ideae, by the intelligible things, rà »voyrà, on the 
principle laid down by Plotinus: ° 


* Now the ancients seem to me to have been wise in 
having made shrines and images to induce the presence 
of the gods. I think, therefore, that those ancient sages, 
who sought to secure the presence of divine beings by 
the erection of shrines and statues, showed insight into 
the nature of the All; they perceived that, though this 
Soul is everywhere tractable, its presence will be secured 
all the more readily when an appropriate receptacle is 
elaborated, a place especially capable of receiving some 
portion of it or phase of it, something reproducing it, or 
representing it, and serving like a mirror to catch an 
image of it.' 


It was enjoined, ‘ Wherefore worship statues, O King, 
inasmuch as they have within them the visible forms of 
the intelligible world ' (XVII). 

The question of the use of images and sensible objects 
in worship is further discussed in the Asclepius (24a, 
37, 38). As God is the maker of the heavenly gods 
(planets), so is man a fictor deorum or ' maker of gods.’ 
‘ Mankind, ever mindful of its nature and source, persists 
in that imitation of the divine . . . so that mankind 
makes its gods in its own likeness, . . . I mean statues, 
animated with feeling and full of spirit (life), and per- 


1 Cf. Kroll, Lehren, p. 116. 
3 Cf. Scott, IL, p. 459. 3 IV. 3, 11, Mackenna’s tr. 


USE OF IMAGES 345 


forming mighty works, . . . inflicting diseases and 
curing them, and bestowing sadness or joy according 
to merit.' ! 
. The Hermeticists were evidently in conflict with some 
. party impugning the usage of images for worship—their 
Christian opponents. It is a strange fact of history that 
in the early centuries of Christianity we find cultured 
Pagans defending idolatry against Christian attacks, and 
later, with the waning of Paganism, we find Christianity 
taking over by degrees idolatry,? though solicitously 
discriminating by poor logic between the principle of 
their idolatry and that of the Pagans, as, e.g., we find 
in the Roman Catechism. Yet the same arguments 
which were advanced by Pagans were taken over, 
mutatis mutandis, by the Christians. Thus Maximus of 
Tyre, in his essay ‘ Ought images to be erected to the 
gods? ' warmly advocates the use of images in their 
honorific functions as means whereby the deity sym- 
bolized is honoured and as a valuable means of over- 
coming the weakness of the masses to comprehend 
spiritual things.? 

Early Christian worship was, like that of its mother- 
religion, an aniconic cult, and as Christians grew in 
numbers and self-consciousness they manifested a 
fanatical hatred toward surrounding idolatry. Then 
they gradually realized its attraction and its religious 
advantages. Pictorial art was the first form to be 
. used by them, but apparently only for decorative or 
edificatory purposes, as in the Catacombs. As late as 
the fourth century Christians were sharply divided on 
the permissibility of even pictorial art in churches. The 
enemy of heretics, Epiphanius, tore down a curtain on 


* Cf. further references too long to cite, in chs. 37, 38. 

? Cf. art. Images in Catholic Ency., and the excellent article by Ed. 
Bevan on Idolatry in Edinburgh Rev. April 1926. 

* See tr. of passage in Bevan, Edin. Rev. p. 267, or Later Greek 
Religion, p. 147. 

* * Judaea gens contumelia numinum insignis’ (Pliny, H.N. XIII, 
4, 9). 


346 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


which a sacred picture was painted. Pictures were 
excluded from churches by a canon of the Council of 
Elvira, ‘so that that which is worshipped and adored 
shall not be painted on walls.’ 

Christians were long reluctant to avail themselves of 
plastic art or sculptured images. The first of such 
images of Christ * were used by heretics, the Carpocra- 
tians. By the end of the second or the beginning of the 
third century orthodox Christians were familiar with 
statues of Christ as the youthful Good Shepherd. With 
the rapid paganizing of the Church after Constantine's 
adoption of Christianity as the imperial religion, richly 
furnished with a new sacerdotalism, the adoration of 
pictorial images grew apace in the Greek East, while in 
the Latin West adoration of such was positively for- 
bidden, their use being restricted to mental suggestive- 
ness. As late as the beginning of the seventh century 
Serenus, Bishop of Marseilles, destroyed ecclesiastical 
pictures to which his flock were offering homage, con- 
cerning which the letter of Pope Gregory I stated the 
view of the Roman See: 


'* Old custom, and not without good reason, permits 
stories of the saints to be pictorially represented in 
sacred places. That you forbade homage to be offered 
them, we wholly agree. But we consider that you did 
wrong in destroying the pictures. It is one thing to offer 
homage to a picture and quite another thing to learn, 
by means of a story pictorially told, what the proper 
object of adoration is. What a written document is to 
those who. read, that a picture is to the unlearned who 
look at it.” ? 


It is interesting to note that the very rationale of 
Christian image-worship, as stated in Basil's words ézi 
Tò mporórvrov SiaBaiver, that ‘the homage passes 
through [the image] to the person whom it represents,’ 
and adopted officially by the Roman Church in the 


» Bevan, Edinburgh Rev. p. 259. 2 Cited Bevan, ib. p. 268. 


A RELIGION OF REVELATION 347 


Tridentine Catechism as ''honos qui imaginibus ex- 
hibetur, refertur ad prototypa,'' ' is that recognized by 
the Hermeticists and by the cultured Pagan advocates 
of images. It is also noteworthy that the moral perils 
attendant on the use of images did not escape Pagan 
theologians and are recognized by the Roman 
Catechism.? It was against these abuses that the 
Christians chiefly inveighed in their attacks upon Pagan 
idolatry and which led to the discarding of images by 
the more thoroughly Reformed Churches. 

This age-long controversy concerning the relations of 
the material and the spiritual in worship and of the 
function of eidola and ideae (forms) in the apprehension 
of the spiritual, which agitated Hermetic circles and 
which divided Christians and Pagans and set Christians 
in opposing camps, is still unsettled.? 

Hermeticism was a religion of Revelation; it was 
revealed rather than natural religion. It was committed 
to the widespread conception of henosis with God 
through gnosis, but that knowledge of God was difficult 
for man to attain; it must be vouchsafed from above. 
The Hermeticists therefore ranged themselves with those 
who, after Aristotle's days, despaired of knowledge by 
the conceptual methods and analytical processes of the 
Ionian schools and by the dialectic of Socrates, and 
looked for a revelation from without, or accepted the 
intuitions without subjecting them to critical examina- 
tion, or encouraged mystic experiences. 

God is unknown and unknowable, invisible and un- 
manifest, ineffable and above designation. The Platonic 
view * is asserted, ‘ It is difficult to apprehend God, and 
it is impossible even for one who may apprehend Him 
to describe Him ' (Exc. 1).5 Nevertheless, * God wills 
to be known and is known to His own ' (I. 31). Indeed 


1. Pass. III, Q. 24. ? Os. 18-24. 

3 Cf. Ch. Clerc. Théories vel. au culte des images chez les auteurs 
grecs du He siècle aprés J.-C. (Paris, 1915). 

num. 28c. 5 Cf XV: 6. 


348 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


the object of creation is revelation: “Who is more 
manifest than God? He made all things for this very 
purpose, that through all things you might behold him ’ 
(XI. (ii) 22a); but according to another view, God 
‘made the visible things to the end that He Himself 
might remain invisible,’ ‘ since the things generated are 
seen, He is unseen ; for this very purpose He made them, 
that He might be invisible.’ * Hence the paradox, ' It 
is not at all difficult to apprehend God, if you will, 
and to see Him. Look at the order of the world ' 
(XII. (ii) 20b). Thus the Father of all, ‘ who is too 
great to be named God,' is through His immanence 
in the cosmos ' unmanifest, yet most manifest; He 
is apprehensible by Mind; He is visible to our eyes ' 
(V. roa). 

The revelation with its salutary gnosis is imparted in 
the Hermetic religion in three ways: 

(r) Mediately by a divine prophet and teacher to a 
sympathetic and prepared pupil, e.g. by the divine 
Poimandres, ‘ the Mind of Sovereignty,’ or by Hermes 
to Tat or Asclepius or Ammon, or by Isis to her divine 
son Horus (Kore Kosmou), or by the Agathos Daemon 
to Hermes (XII. (1) 8. According to a section of the 
Kore Kosmou (4-6), Hermes was the chief divine 
mediator between the Maker. and later agents of 


revelation. 


* While the Maker of the All did not will to be known, 
ignorance held all things. But when He decided to 
reveal Himself, He inspired enthusiastic love in divine 
ones and He bestowed on their minds a ray greater than 
had visited their breasts that they should first be willing 
to seek, and then desire to find and then be empowered 
to succeed. This, my wondrous son, Horus, would have 
been impossible for mortal offspring, nor would it have 


2 XIV. 3, which Scott, with his usual attempts to reduce the 
Hermetic writings to consistency, corrects into conformity with the 
statement in XI (ii), 22b with the translation ' inasmuch as the things 
generated are seen, the Maker also can be seen; for to this end He 
makes them that He may be seen.’ 


NOUS AS REVEALER 349 


occurred as the soul was not yet endowed with its 
sympathy with the divine mysteries. But such a one 
was Hermes, who knew all ; who also saw all, and having 
seen he understood, and having understood he was able 
to reveal and to receive [revelations?]. . . . He was 
succeeded by his son Tat, . . . and all the holy men 
who were destined to search out with great accuracy the 
things of heavenly study.’ * 


(2) By means of Nous’; ‘the exercise of Nous 
[noesis] alone beholds that which is unmanifest. . . . 
If you are equal to it, He will appear to the eyes of 
your Mind’ (V. 2). The ‘ sober’ can gaze upon Him 
‘ invisible to the eyes, but visible to Mind and Heart ' 
VII. 2a), for he is mente sola intelligibilis (Asc.). 

(3) By converting to religious usages the ancient 
commonplace thought that ‘ like is apprehended by like.’ 
* Unless you make yourself equal with God, you cannot 
apprehend God, for like is apprehensible by like ' (XI 
(1) 20b) by a cosmic-mystical experience whereby one 
expands oneself to be co-extensive with the universe, 
leaping clear of the body and transcending the longe 
flammantia moenia mundi so as to attain to that unity 
of subject and object recognized in Aristotle's epistemo- 
logical dictum, ‘ In things immaterial thought and its 
object are the same.’ ? 

As a corollary to a religion of Revelation it follows 
that Hermeticism was pre-eminently a religion of grace, 
here again betraying Gnostic affinities. The ' hidden ' 
God, ' by presenting all things to us by the images of 


! Exc. XXIII. 4-5. Cf. Kroll, p. 17; Lagrange, R. Bib. XXXIV, 
p. 83. Scott's drastic rewriting of this passage may be indicated in 
his translation: ‘‘ But when he (Craftsman) determined to reveal him- 
self, he breathed into certain godlike men a passionate desire to know 
him . . . that so they might first will to seek the yet unknown God. 
But this . . . it would not have been possible for men of mortal breed 
to do, if there had not arisen one whose soul was responsive to the 
influence of the holy Powers of heaven,” etc. (I, p. 459). 

* On God as Nous cf. Diels, Doxogr. Gr. p. 301 ft. 

3 De Anima, III. 4. Cf. Plotinus, Enn. I. 6, 9. 

“Cf. Liechtenhahn, Offenbarung im Gnosticismus, p. 102. 


24 


350 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


sense, manifests Himself through all and in all, and 
especially to those to whomsoever He wills to reveal 
Himself. Pray therefore . . . that you may find favour 
and that but one ray of Him may flash upon your mind ' 
(V. 2). ‘On God's will depend all things ' (Asc. 7c), 
even the knowledge of God (Divimitatis etenim. ratio 
divina sensus intentione noscenda, 3b). The boon of 
rebirth with its immortalizing is conferred ‘ by the mercy 
of God’ (XIII. 3)—' the bodily senses all depart from 
him who has obtained mercy of God’ (7b). Rebirth 
is wholly ‘ of the will of God,’ even the ministrant 
thereof, ‘a son of God, a Man,’ effecting it ' by the 
will of God ' (2). 

This religion of grace produced the like problems of 
all such systems in the antinomies of predestination and 
freedom. As in Christian theology, some emphasized 
the divine co-efficient almost to the neglect of the human 
(as in phases of Paulinism' and Augustinianism) ; others 
proudly asserted human freedom and power; while 
others adopted a view equivalent to the Christian 
doctrine of synergism. The pessimism of the writer of 
Tractate VI on the theme that ‘ In God alone is Good- 
ness, and nowhere else ' is corrected in the protest of 
Tractate X, in which the destiny of the soul lies within 
the soul. In IV. 3 gnosis is a prize for souls to win and 
the choice of the material or the immaterial blessings 
‘ is left to the chooser,’ though even in this tractate the 
proclamation is ‘ baptize thyself, the soul that can’ (4). 

The prevailing view was that, though Nous, the 
highest potency ? of spiritual life and practically the 
equivalent of the Holy Spirit in Christian thought, is 
the organ of gnosis (Asc. 6b), God ‘ did not impart Mind 
[Spirit] to all men’ (IV. 3). ‘ God said, Let the man 
endowed with Spirit recognize himself.’ ‘ Have not all 
men Spirit? . . . I, Spirit, come to the holy and good 
and pure and merciful; and My presence is their 


' Morgan, Religion and Theology of Paul, p. 246 ff. 
* Cf, X. 24a. 


AN ELITE SOCIETY 351 


succour ' (Poim. 2x f.). Another doctrine is that of the 
good Mind which selects the pious soul for entry, and 
an evil Mind which attaches itself to impious souls 
(X. 19-21). Still again, on another view, Mind or Spirit 
is the common endowment of humanity differentiating 
it from beasts, but all men do not avail themselves of 
the privilege of exercising the Mind, the functions of 
which are determined in some men, the evil, by the 
demons who implant the seeds of all their thinking; 
others, saved by God from such demonic operations, 
think good thoughts (IX. 5). ‘The Mind, thinking 
| good thoughts when it receives its seed from God, and 
the opposite kind of thoughts when its seed is of demonic 
origin ' (3). 

The Hermetic religion could not properly be designated 
a communion of the saints, save exceptionally. Elect 
souls sought their kindred, convinced that few are saved. 
“There are not many religious men in the world, or 
rather so few that they may be counted’ (Asc. 22a). 
The Hermeticists enjoyed on the whole a solitary but 
comforting religion of the severer type. The use of 
hymns and thanksgiving in the first person plural 
suggests some elemental form of united worship. Where 
four men are gathered together in quest of saving 
knowledge is a holy shrine (Asc. 15). However élite 
was their religious society, it would manifest the tendency 
of all human societies to organize, however unofficially, 
for the purpose of self-preservation. The Hermeticists 
did not organize into powerful institutions like the 
Mystery-brotherhoods, the Synagogues, and the Christian 
Churches. They were content to occupy a place in the 
alien religions around them somewhat like that of the 
Friends or the Plymouth Brethren to-day. 

Hermeticism was an aristocratic’ religion like 
Gnosticism, but could not vie with the latter in com- 
bining its gnostic-mystery character and pretensions 
to catholicity. The Hermeticists indeed deliberately 

* Liechtenhahn, Offenbarung, p. 84. 


352 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


eschewed popularity and were satisfied to remain ar 
esoteric and select brotherhood.! They believed tha 
their difficult way of life was for the few. All pretence 
to catholicism is renounced in such a claim as * withou 
philosophy it is impossible to be religious in the highes 
stage ' (Exc. II B, 2). Even the subsequent modifica 
tion, ‘ but the religious man shall know where and wha 
reality ? is,' hardly brings the religion within reach o: 
the masses to whom the Christian, the Cynic, and the 
Mystery preachers appealed. Mysticism, unaccompaniec 
by sacraments and cult, deprived Hermeticism of th 
charm of popularity ; its chances of winning the suffrage: 
of the multitude were further lessened by the unconcealec 
difficulty attendant on the saving knowledge. Salvatior 
was procurable elsewhere on easier conditions and witl 
more of the outward trappings of impressive cult anc 
spectacular worship. The task of the true Hermetist i 
‘to recognize himself’ in the religious consummatio: 
of the message of Socrates, and on the other hand ' t 
contemplate the world and God.’ Abundant emphasi 
is laid on the necessity of self-abnegation and escap 
from hampering selfhood, but not so much for servic 
to the brethren as for victorious transcendence of spatia 
and temporal bounds in cosmic expansion. 


“ The writer of XI. (ii), when he bids a man brea! 
out of his narrow cell in space and time and ' becom: 
eternal, is at one with what may be called the cosmi: 
side of the religion of Paul and the Fourth Gospel, a 
distinguished from its * human ' side; but he has nothin; 
to say about the brotherhood of men, or the “love o 
one's neighbour. For him, as for most of the Her 
metists, human society hardly exists, and the onl: 
human relation recognized is that between teacher an: 
pupil. The individual man stands solitary, face to fac 
with the universe at large ; and if he would escape fror 


1 Cf. Lagrange, R. Bib., pp. 99, 104. 
2 Tb. 3. So codd., gratuitously corrected by Scott to ‘he wh 
pursues philosophy to its highest pitch,’ etc. 


GNOSIS AND WORKS 353 


his isolation, it is in the life which fills the universe, and 
the God whom he sees behind that universal life, that 
he must ‘ lose himself to find himself.’ ’’ * 


Even martyrdom is to be endured at Christian hands 
not primarily for a ‘ witness ’ to the persecutors, but for 
its purifying effects in the martyr himself (IX. 4). 
Hermetic goodness is religious rather than ethical 
(religio quam sequitur bonitas, Asc. 11a), consisting in 
the resisting of desire and in scorning all that is alien to 

the true man, including his body and earthly possessions 
(ib.). True religion is ‘ to avoid being wicked’ (XII. 
(ii) 235), since God only can be called good. In con- 
formity with this is the definition of true religion for 
the ‘ daemonic and divine soul’ as ' to have come to 
the knowledge of God and to have wronged no man.’ 
Being born again is naturally followed by ‘ the immortal 
offspring of truth ' (the Pauline ‘ fruits of the Spirit ’), 
but this seems to be of the same religious character for 
* you have come to a knowledge of yourself and of your 

Father ' (XIII. 22a). 

_ The Hermeticists were justified by gnosis rather than 
by works. But social activities and ‘ mutual obligations 
which is the strongest link binding humanity together ' 
- (commodationes alternae quae est humanitatis inter se 
- firmissimus nexus, Asc. 8) were not overlooked. The 
Hermetic Gnostic could not be guilty of the base deeds 
which marked the corporeal hylic or unregenerate. 
That soul which ‘ the Spirit enters and guides to the 


AjiSeotb; Mapi 304. f. 

2 '''The Hermetist has chosen to write ‘ not to.be bad’ rather than 
‘to be good,’ presumably because he considers that God alone can 
properly be called good (VI), and that ' not to be bad ' is the utmost to 
which man, while yet in the body, can attain. The ' not being bad’ 
of which he is thinking is probably not abstinence from wrong-doing 
towards one's fellow-men (the iustitia which Lactantius, in his com- 
ment on the passage, takes this phrase to imply); he would doubtless 
have said, like other Hermetists, that the chief and all-inclusive virtue 
is not  Owatocóvg (justice towards men), but «eéeégea (piety towards 
God) '' (Scott, II, p. 371). 


354 HERMETICISM AS A RELIGION 


light of knowledge’ ‘can never weary praising and 
blessing God and doing good in every way in word 
and deed to all men, in imitation of its Father ’ 
COD AT. 

Ample compensation for the meagre realization of 
‘the communion of the saints’ here was made to the 
true Hermeticist in the ineffable and exalted experiences 
which it was his privilege to enjoy here, and in the 
plenitude of the realization of such communion in the 
next world, or to the vigorous soul that has already in 
this life made the ascent of heaven, and also in the 
unity of all life here with the life of the all. The 
Hermetic literature is rich in testimony to the triumphant 
character of Hermetic religion. Men may so know God 
and themselves that they may be identified with the 
All; they may even sometimes leave the body on a 
religious quest to enjoy the ecstatic vision." We must, 
in estimating the Hermetic communion or comparing it 
with that of other religions, remember that Hermetic 
fellowship is not only that of man with man, but rather 
that of man with God and with the ' heavenly gods ’ 
(celestial ensouled magnitudes) and with every class of 
being and order of existence in the cosmos. St. Francis's 
Cantico delle Creature with its pervading sympathy with 
all natural things and its brotherhood of man and beasts 
and birds and plants would have commended itself to 
the Hermetic communities. ' There is a communion of 
souls. And the souls of the gods hold communion with 
those of men, and the souls of men with those of 
irrational beings’ (X. 22b). Individual souls, as 
separated fragments of the World-Soul, may through 
the stages of human souls and demons ‘ pass into the 


choir of the gods, . . . the most complete glory of the 
soul’ (X. 7). 'If a man uses these (Mind and Logos) 
as he ought, . . . when he leaves the body he will be 


guided by them to the troop of other gods and of the 
blessed ' (XII. (1) 12). In the Poimandres the ascended 


1 Kroll, Lehren, p. 355 ff. 


COMPLETE GLORY OF THE SOUL 355 


soul in ecstasy not only receives its own spiritual powers, 
but itself becomes identified with the Powers so as to 
participate in the universal hymn of praise, and ‘ they 
that are there [the astral gods and the blessed human 
souls] rejoice together at his coming ' (26) and ' they 
become in God.' 


CHAPTER XIX 
HERMETIC RELIGION AND THE UPWARD WAY 


HERMETICISM was a cosmocentric religion of three terms, 
God, the Cosmos, and Man, and deeply committed to 
speculation. Tertullian knew Hermes as "magister 
omnium physicorum,’ or cosmogony-writers. We are 
at once arrested by what seems the excessive attention 
and religious earnestness with which the origin of things 
and of man is treated, but this is due not merely to a 
love of speculation, but to the accepted fact that the 
life of man is inseparably linked with that of the sun 
and stars and nature, so that man cannot be known 
apart from the knowledge of these. If this stern religion 
was to find a way of escape for man, cosmology and 
cosmogony must be mastered and his destiny sought in 
his origin, the Whither explained by the Whence. To 
lead life aright, man must philosophize, and this includes 
the knowledge of the nature, order, origin, and purpose 
of things.^ These investigators were interested to dis- 
cover '' the Hills where his life rose "' that they might 
trace it to “‘ the Sea where it goes." ‘ Let the man 
endowed with Mind recognize himself’ (Poim. 21) isa 
postulate of all Hermetic teachers who would affirm: 
“ Know this, O man, sole root of sin in thee 
Is not to know thine own divinity.” 

Two other causes contributed to this insistent cosmic 
inquiry: first, the doctrine of man as a microcosm of 
the macrocosm, the world. The knowledge of each of 
these was therefore necessary, as well as mutual and 
complementary. The microcosm stands in alignment 


1 Adv. Valen. 20. * Bac: U B, 23 ct 2 XVIA17 € 
356 


COSMOCENTRIC SPECULATIONS 357 


with the macrocosm. ‘ First of all is God, . . . the 
second is the world made by God in His own image, 
. . . and the third is man made in the image of God ’ 
(VIII. 2, 5). ' There are these three—God the Father 
iof all and the Good ; the World, and Man. God contains 
ithe world; the world contains man: the world is a son 
of God, man a son of the world and as it were an off- 
ispring of God.* 

Secondly, the deity was conceived either so transcen- 
dentally or so pantheistically that the individual stands 
solitary in a vast universe the law of which is change. 
Man's only escape then is into the engulfing All or larger 
universal consciousness. His only safety is to bring him- 
self into obedience to the laws and divine economy of 
the cosmos. His isolation can be removed only by 
deliberate unification with the universal life.? 

Hermeticism accepted the current ensouled unitary 
cosmos ° of the day ; mundus unus, anima una (Asc. 3a). 
" All are filled with soul and in motion, things in heaven 
and things on earth’ (XI. (ii), 8a). ' This whole body 
(the world) in which are all bodies, is full of soul, and 
soul is full of Mind, and Mind is full of God.’* The 
cosmos received at its creation both sense and thought 
(aesthesis and noesis) from God, who is moving all 
things and in whom are all things (IX. 9). ‘ The 
cosmos is made by God and is in God; man is made 
by the cosmos and is in the cosmos: but God is the 
beginning, the circumference, and the constitution of 
all things ' (VIII. 5). There obtains an all-penetrative 
koinonia or fellowship (X. 22b). 


‘ This whole cosmos—which is a great god and an 
image of him who is greater, and is united with him 


! X. 14b. Scott, with more probability than his usual emendations, 
corrects éxyoves (offspring) to @yyovos (grandson). 

? Lagrange (Rev. Bib. XXXIII. p. 494) speaks of the Egyptian '' con- 
fusion traditionelle qui leur permet d'attribuer à chaque dieu, à chaque 
élément du monde, à chaque partie du corps la méme valeur qu'à tout 
le reste. Tout est tout." Cf. Scott, II, pp. 303-5. 

? Cf, Kroll, Lehren, p. 275. * XI (1), 45, Reitzenstein's v.l. 


358 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


and maintains its order in accordance with the Father’s 
will—is one mass of life; and there is not anything in 
the cosmos . . . that is not alive. There is not, and 
has never been, and never will be in the cosmos anything 
that is dead. For it was the Father’s will that Kosmos, 
as long as it exists, should be a living being, and therefore 
it must needs be a god also.’ * 


Naturally there were gradations of being from the 
Supreme Father to the Demiurge-Creator, astral gods, 
demons, men, animals, and plants. And there were 
also different kinds of souls, the divine, the human, and 
the irrational (Exc. IVa, 5). 

Though the Hermetic religion was construed on a 
cosmocentric basis, its object was man, whose origin, 
nature, and destiny speculation probed relentlessly. 
Man stands third in order after the Father-Demiurge 
and. the cosmos:? ‘ God, the Lord of eternity is first, 
the cosmos second, man third ' (Asc. 10). He is subject 
to the cosmos as the cosmos is subject to God (X. 22b). 
The cosmos and man are as son and offspring, or on 
Scott's emendation, son and grandson of God (X. 14b). 
He is a ' mortal image of immortal being,’ the world 
(IV. 2; VIII. 5). Man is a ‘ second image of God,’ 
being an image of the cosmos (Asc. 10), for sunt imagines 
duae mundus et homo. His place is again between 
gods and daemonic beings (XVI. 18; Asc. 6a). The 
greatness of man appears emphatically in the Hermetica, 
though not without several inconsistencies: ‘ magnum 
miraculum est homo, animal adorandum atque honor- 
andum. Hoc enim in naturam dei transit, quasi ipse 
deus . . . deis cognata divinitate coniunctus est . . 
suscipit caelum . . . colit terram . . . omnia illi licent 

. omnia idem est et ubique idem est ' (Asc. 6a). 

Man is a fictor deorum, ‘ a miracle and the greatest 
of all creatures ' (Asc. 236), and ‘ mankind, ever mind- 
ful of its origin and nature, persists in the imitation of 


Xr, 150 WS. tte 
EXC. XI. 6; ick.) C.H. VIII. 5. 3 T5 Sik. aves 


DESTINY OF MAN 359 


God ' (ib.). God made man to gaze upon the beauty 
of His lovely world; He made him incorporeal and 
eternal, to tend the things of heaven; but perceiving 
that man needed a material integument to tend the 
things of earth, He supplied him with a body, that the 
terrestrial part of the universe might be kept in order by 
man (Asc. 8). God ' sent man down to be an ornament 
of the divine body,’ the earth, to contemplate the 
heavens and their glory (III. 35 ; IV. 2; Asc. 8) and to 
tend both worlds of heaven and earth. Nature was 
entranced at his beauty (I. 14). Along with God he 
governs the world (Asc. 10): ' Thou hast delivered to 
him all power’ on earth (Poim. 32), and ' omnia illi 
licent" (Asc. 6a). He alone is possessor of Logos (Reason 
and Speech) and Nous (Mind and Spirit) (IV. 3; XII. 1, 
II f. ; Asc. 4, 1b). Some men (by the Nous) are divine, 
and the humanity of such is near to deity; for as the 
Agathos Daemon (Good Demon) said, ‘ Gods are im- 
mortal men and men mortal gods’ (XII. i. I). It is 
not to be deemed impossible that ‘ you should make 
yourself equal with God ' (XI. ii. 20b) and * participate 
in immortality.' ' Man is receptive of God and capable 
of fellowship with God, for with this being alone God 
holds intercourse’ (ib. 19). ‘ He not only has sym- 
patheia with the second God’ (c.%mos), but has ‘a 
spiritual intuition of the first God ' (VIII. 5) with whom 
he is capable of identification (XI. ii. 22a). In short— 


* Man is a being of divine nature; he is comparable, 
not to the other living creatures upon earth, but to the 
gods in heaven (astral deities). Nay, if we are to speak 
truth without fear, he who is indeed a man is even above 
the gods of heaven or at any rate he equals them in 
power. None of the gods of heaven will ever quit 
heaven and pass its boundary and come down to earth ; 
but man ascends even to heaven without quitting the 
earth.’ 


1 IV. 2, with a play on Kosmos. 
2 X. 24b-25, WS. tr. 


360 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY: 


Yet his weakness is not overlooked and his limitations 
arising from his twofold nature are too obvious. He 
sees ‘as through a dark mist things of heaven,’ for 
‘ when we aspire to such lofty things our power is very 
limited ’ (Asc. 32b). Man is a creature fallen from high 
estate (Poim.; Exc. XXIII. 24); prone to error from 
birth (Exc. VII; XI. 5); and incapable of absolute 
goodness (II. 6) but relatively good (VI. 2b). True, 
he is not handicapped by original sin (‘ behold how 
lovely is the soul of a child as hardly yet separated from 
the world-soul, X. 156); he is evil in so far as he is 
mortal (X. 12); he is imperfect and composite (Exc. II 
A, 2); he is not real because not abiding (7b. II ff.). 
He is weak and blind, choosing evil through illusion, 
but involuntarily (Exc. XI. 20 f.), but the rational part 
of his soul cannot be devastated by demonic potencies 
(XVI. 16). Man stands in need of grace; it is because 
God has endowed us with sensu, disciplina, and intel- 
ligentia that ‘ we are able to escape the deceptions and 
traps and corruptions of evil’ (Asc. 16a). Our twofold 
nature as participating both in the corporeal and the 
spiritual worlds is our misery as also our greatness 
(Asc. 7b; Poim. 15). '' Trailing clouds of glory do we 
come,’’ but through contact with matter there results 
separation from th. Beautiful and the Good with the 
evil of oblivion (X. 155), but not an absolute forgetful- 
ness of ** God who is our home,” for humanitas semper 
memor naturae et originis suae (Asc. 23b). 

Owing to the Hermetic conception of salvation as the 
return of man to his original home, it was of first im- 
portance to inquire whence came this marvellous and 
composite creature, this miraculum, this animal ador- 
andwm atque honorandum (Asc. 6a). 

As in nearly every department of Hermetic theology, 
no dogmatic uniformity was attained or imposed in this 
vital inquiry. We may cite the three most elaborate 
and characteristic accounts of man's origin and destiny 
as given in the Poimandres, the Asclepius, and the Kore 


THREE CHIEF ANTHROPOGONIES 361 


Kosmou respectively. These three anthropogonies are 
different in outlook and would entail differences in the 
details of salvation. The first is largely an attempted 
conflation of the widespread idea of an archetypal or 
Primal Man' with the cosmogony of Genesis on a 
Platonic and Stoic background together with Egyptian 
suggestions. The second represents Greek conceptions 
and may be termed roughly Posidonian. Incarnation is 
neither an accident nor a punishment, but the means of 
a divine purpose. The third is the most syncretistic 
and most difficult; it is mostly a variant mingling of 
Greek, Jewish, and Egyptian elements, the Greek and 
the Egyptian being the chief ingredients in the amalgam. 

From the foregoing account of this ancient faith it is 
apparent that the Hermetic teachers did not offer either 
an easy religion or a cheap salvation. As it secured the 
highest bliss of a ' deified ' life, it imposed hard con- 
ditions. Hence the complaint of the prophets of every 
high religion, that ‘ few are the chosen.’ It is a ‘ system 
incredible to the masses ' (Asc. I. 10) ; ‘ some men, and 
those few indeed, endowed with a pure spirit (mind), 
have been appointed the high task of contemplating 
heaven’ (9). ‘In this earthly life souls stand in 
jeopardy for the hope of the coming eternity’ (12a). 
Man cannot serve two masters: confronted with the in- 
corporeal and the corporeal, ' the choice is free to him 
who wishes to choose either; it is impossible to choose 
both . . . and the choice of the better is most glorious 
to the chooser ; it will deify the man.’ ? Health of soul 
comes only by a severe moral surgery: ' for as a good , 
physician inflicts pain on the body, burning or cutting 
it, when disease has taken possession of it, even so Mind 
inflicts pain on the soul, ridding it of pleasure, from 


1 Cf. Reitzenstein, Das ivan. Evlésungsmysterium; C. H. Kraeling, 
Anthropos and Son of Man. 

2 IV. 6b—7; reading drodesoce for codd. dmo0eQea, contra Scott's 
&Tocó(ovca, who here and in XIII unjustifiably removes this ancient 
catholic doctrine of apotheosis. 


362 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


which springs all the soul’s diseases. And godlessness 
is a great disease of the soul.’* True religion is ‘ the 
path to the things above ' (IV. IIb), a path known from 
the days of Hesiod and the Pythagoreans to be a steep 
and rugged path. The soul ‘ having completed the 
contest of true religion—and this contest of religion is 
to come to know God and to injure no man—becomes 
wholly Nous’ (X. 19). ‘ God has willed that Spirit 
(Nous) should be set as a prize in the midst for souls to 
win ' (IV. 3). 

A dignified, but silent and contemptuous, apologetic 
against Christianity may be detected in the magnifying 
of man,? in warning without a firm hope against the 
coming of another alien religion, in encouragement to 
martyrdom, in the rejection of rites, liturgies, and sacra- 
ments, in the blessing on the mysterium of procreation, 
and probably in the refutation of the doctrine of in- 
carnation ? by the denial for the future of the coming of 
‘immortal offspring ’ to mankind and by the declaration 
that such an advent was that of the great Father Osiris 
and the great Isis,* and in salvation by knowledge rather 
than by faith. 

Salvation is by piety based on gnosis: ' This alone is 
man’s means of salvation, even the knowledge of God ; 
this is the ascent to Olympus; by this alone the soul 
becomes good’ (X. 15a). This gnosis is the circle of 
self-knowledge, knowledge of the cosmos and of God 
(Pom. 3), and, discounting its pantheism and its 
mysticism, it approaches Ritschl’s requirements of a 
religion that '' three points are necessary to determine 
the circle by which a religion is completely represented 
—God, man, and the world.” * It is the apprehension 
of Reality, of cosmic processes, and of the Good 
(X. 8b-10a). It is initiation into magna et divina 

LOST ICD) sape WS. 
? Lagrange, Rev. Bib. July 1925, pp. 374, 387. 
Sel bwian.) 1925) poo; 


4 Exc. XXIII. 64, 1, 32, following cod. contra Scott. 
* Justification and Reconciliation (Eng. tr.), p. 30. 


THE LIGHT OF ‘KNOWLEDGE’ 363 


mysteria (Asc. 19). Without philosophy it is impossible 
to be religious in the highest degree; but he who has 
learned what things are, and how ordered and by whom 
and to what end, shall give thanks to the Maker of all 
as to a good Father and gentle fosterer and faithful 
guardian; and giving thanks, he will be religious.’ * 
“The virtue of the soul is knowledge; he who has 
acquired knowledge is good and religious and already 
divine’ (X. 9). Thus the Hermetic gnosis embraces 
(x) the cosmic story, (2) man's true origin and dual 
character and the means of ascent of the soul, (3) the 
knowledge of God as the means of becoming divine and 
equal to God (XI (ii), 205), and (4) the knowledge of 
things as the corollary or counterpart to the knowledge 
of God (Poim. 3). All this puts man securely on ' the 
only road leading to Reality’ Exc. IIb, 5). ‘Itis a 
holy and smooth road, but difficult for the soul while 
in the body to travel.' ? 

* The light of knowledge ' (X. 21) is ‘ the knowledge 
of God’ (154), ' the vision of the Good’ (45), ‘ the 
knowledge of the Good ' (5), ‘ the opening of the eyes 
of the Spirit to contemplate the beauty of Goodness ' 
which is imperishable and ineffable, ‘ the presence of the 
Nous’ (Poim. 22), and ‘ the sobriety of soul, and the 
closing of the eyes, true vision ' (Poim. 30). The Her- 
metic salvation consists in seeing with the eyes of the 
heart (VII. ra) and in finding ‘ the upward way ' (IV. 
ir5)—a return to Life and Light (Poim. 21), whence 
we came (IV. 9). It is ‘ the path to Truth’ (Exc. IIb, 
5), and the one road to the Beautiful (VI. 5). Seeing 
with the eyes of the Mind we acquire that zoesis by 
which we apprehend the invisible (V. 2). It is an estate 
of light without darkness, where ‘all are sober, 
looking with the heart to Him who wills to be seen ' 
(VII. 2a). 

» Exc. IIb, 2, retaining MS. evoeBdv and adxpws, contra Scott: 


tr. mostly Scott’s. 
* Ib., MS. reading, contra Scott's conjecture. 


364 THE HERMETIC 'UPWARD WAY' 


The Hermetic illuminated face Destiny differently 
from other mortals (XII (x), 7-9. They are delivered 
from the power of the demons and from the necessity 
imposed by astralism (XVI. 16); they may even rise 
through the gradations of demons to become astral gods 
(X. 7); the ‘ most perfect glory of the soul’ is to join 
the choir of the sidereal gods in the Ogdoad, though 
the Platonic conception that the soul can surmount even 
the highest heaven on the flight to a higher supracosmic 
world is the view of the writer of Poimandres, 26a. Or, 
after death the Hermetic may become a daemonic being 
with a body of fiery substance (X. 194). By becoming 
equal with God the Hermetic apprehends God (XI 
(ii), 20b). 

Another boon of Hermetic religion is the attainment 
of immortality by apotheosis. Such athanasia, deathless- 
ness, is the privilege of enjoying the state of the gods 
by seeing the Good and so being secure against all ill. 
It is more than deliverance from the fear of death, for 
“the fear of death frightens the multitude as a great 
evil,’ * but Asclepius learns (27e) that ‘ hope and terror 
torture the masses ignorant of the true religion,’ which 
holds that after death there is a strict judgment (28) 
according to deserts (arbitrium examenque meriti) 
which has no dread for the ‘ pious and righteous 
soul.’ 

This immortality may come to a man by the vision 
of the Good and by conformity therewith, or by the 
process of apotheosis. And apotheosis is conceived by 
some Hermeticists as effected here, and by others as 
eschatologically attained. Thus C.H. XIII holds to 
apotheosis by regeneration and by initiatory instruction 
(3, 5, 74) and by the abolition of the senses of the body 
(5, 7, 10b). Asclepius joins in the Hymn of Thanks- 
giving (41a): ' We rejoice that in our mortal frames 
thou hast divinized us ' ; while the writer of Tvactate X 
regards apotheosis as taking place at or subsequent to 

! Stobaeus, Wachs. V, p. 1087. 


APOTHEOSIS 365 


death, ‘ it is impossible for a human soul to be rendered 
divine in the body ' (6). 

The enjoyment of the vision was as prized in Her- 
meticism as in several other phases of Graeco-Roman 
religious life.! ' The vision of the Good is not like the 
ray of the sun that in its fiery nature blazes upon us 
and causes the eyes to close; on the contrary, it shines 
in proportion as one is able to receive the inrush of its 
spiritual radiance.'? This vision cannot take place except 
* by leaping clear of the body and by the suppression of 
all time ' (XI (ii), 20), a condition which may be fulfilled 
in two ways: either by ecstasy, in which the soul leaves 
the body to return later bearing the secret of the revela- 
tion, or at or after death—in either case ‘in yonder 
world ’ of reality. The former experience is that of 
Poimandres: *' When my thoughts soared on high and 
my physical senses were overcome, like those oppressed 
by sleep from surfeit of food or bodily toil, I thought 
I saw one of boundless proportions. . . . I beheld a 
boundless vision, all things changed to a pleasing and 
joyous light, and I greatly rejoiced at the sight’ (1, 4) 
—a testimony which recalls the personal experience of 
Philo,® of the rapt Apostle in the ' third heaven’ un- 
conscious of ‘ whether in the body or out of the body,’ 
the ecstasy of Plotinus,* or of Monica and her son.* 
There is no implication that the speaker was dead, but 
rather ‘ having been instructed in the nature of the 
universe and having contemplated the highest vision ’ 
(27), he resumes earthly existence ‘to enlighten my 
brothers thy sons’ (32). He could say, ‘ My bodily 
sleep had become soberness of soul and the closing of 
my eyes true seeing’ (30). This was a privilege for 
the advanced saints: ‘ Those who are endowed to draw 
somewhat more from that vision are often carried away 


1 Kroll, Lehren, p. 357 ff. 

? X. 4b, following the MS. contra Scott. 

3 Migr. Abr. 7; C.-W. 34 f. 

* E.g. Enn. IV. 8, 1. 5 Augustine, Conf. IX. to. 


25 


366 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


from the body to the supreme vision ' (X. 5). ' Would 
that we too might enjoy that vision.’ But for the 
majority— 


* We are in this world still unequal to the vision, and 
so we are not able to open the eyes of our Mind to 
behold the beauty of Goodness which is incorruptible 
and incomprehensible. Then shalt thou see it when 
thou canst say nothing of it: the knowledge of it is a 
reverential silence and a suppression of all the senses. 
He who has come to a spiritual apprehension of this 
Beauty can apprehend nothing else, nor can he who has 
gazed upon it gaze upon aught else, nor can he listen 
to aught else, nor can he move his body at all, for 
oblivious of all physical sensations and movements he 
keeps still. Radiating around his Mind it draws up his 
soul and draws it through the body, and transmutes 
him into essence.' ! 


Analogous to the visionary apprehension of truth the 
Hermetic might attain the realization of a larger cosmic 
self, transcending time and space, and, identifying him- 
self with the whole cosmos, escape from the bounds of 
isolated individuality. He may lose himself, not to find 
himself, but to discover the secret of the world and his 
place in its order and the supreme realities of the in- 
corporeal. The writer of XI (2) has entered most deeply 
into this experience, of which he has left first-hand 
testimony : 


* Leap clear of all that is corporeal, and make your- 
self grow to a like expanse with that greatness which 
is beyond all measure; rise above all time and become 
eternal; then you will apprehend God. Think that for 
you too nothing is impossible; deem that you too are 
immortal, and that you are able to grasp all things in 

1 Professor Scott has evidently erred (I, p. 190; II, p. 239 ff.) in 
this passage so critical for the understanding of Hermeticism, by failing 
to observe (1), that Poimandres supplies an instance of a soul leaving 
the body in ecstasy, as in death, and having enjoyed the vision takes 
up life here again; (2) that the contrast is between of duvduevo and 
hues. Therefore, instead of Scott's textual alteration and misleading 
translation based thereon, we should adhere to the traditional text. 


"OUT OF THE BODY: 367 


your thought; . . . find your home in the haunts of 
every living creature; make yourself higher than all 
heights and lower than all depths; . . . think that you 


are everywhere at once, on land, at sea, in heaven; 
think that you are not yet begotten, that you are in 
the womb, that you are young, that you are old, that 
you have died, that you are in the world beyond the 
grave; grasp in your thought all this at once, all times 
and places, all substances and qualities and magnitudes 
together; then you can apprehend God. . .. Every- 
where God will come to meet you; everywhere He will 
appear to you, at places and times at which you look 
not for it.' ! 


The opposite to this realization of the larger and 
infinite self is ‘ to imprison the soul in the body and 
abase yourself ' to ignorance and evil. Elsewhere, the 
reborn Hermetic can say: 'I perceive that I have 
entered an immortal body. . . . I have been begotten 
again in Mind. . . . I am in heaven and on earth, in 
water and the air; I am in animals and plants; I am in 
the womb, not yet begotten and after birth ; I am every- 
where, . . . it is rebirth when no longer the body of 
three dimensions is perceived,' after which experience 
“do you not know that you have become divine, and 
a son of the One?’ (XIII. 3, IIb, 132, 14). 

These experiences may seem echoes from a far-away 
world, but they are merely instances, valuable because 
first hand, of a class of mystical experiences which 
psychologists and students of religion recognize as valid 
and confined to no one type of religion or culture. Poets 
like Wordsworth and Walt Whitman would feel at home 
with these experiences. The words used by Shelley of 
one who was dead would describe a possible experience 
for the Hermetic still in this life * but ‘ out of the body ’: 


‘But the pure spirit shall flow 
Back to the burning fountain whence it came, 
A portion of the Eternal which must glow 
Through time and space unquenchably the same. 


! XI (ii), 20b-21b, WS. text and tr. —* Scott, II, p. 333, n. 1. 


368 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


He is made one with Nature; there is heard 

His voice in all her music, from the moan 

Of thunder, to the song of night’s sweet bird; 
He is a presence to be felt and known 

In darkness and in light, from herb and stone, 
Spreading itself where’er that Power may move.” 


Similarly Amiel asks in his Journal: 


“ Shall I ever again have any of those prodigious 
reveries which sometimes came to me in former years? 
One day in youth, at sunrise, sitting in the ruins of the 
castle of Faucigny ; and again, in the mountains, under 
the noonday sun, above Lavey, lying at the foot of a 
tree and visited by three butterflies ; once more at night 
upon the shingly shore of the Northern Ocean, my back 
upon the sand and my vision ranging through the Milky 
Way; such grand and spacious, immortal, cosmogonic 
reveries, when one reaches to the stars, when one owns 
the infinite. Moments divine, ecstatic hours; in which 
our thought flies from world to world, pierces the great 
enigma, breathes with a respiration broad, tranquil, and 
deep as the respiration of the ocean, serene and limitless 


as the blue firmament; . . . instants of irresistible in- 
tuition in which one feels one's self great as the universe, 
and calm as a god. . . . The vestiges they leave behind 


are enough to fill us with belief and enthusiasm, as if 
they were visits of the Holy Ghost.'' + 


Tractate XIII deals with Rebirth. ' No one can be 
saved without being born again’ (r), the doctrine of 
which cannot be received apart from ' alienation from 
the world’ and ‘ from the world’s deceit.’ ‘ Spiritual 
Wisdom is the womb, conceiving in Silence, and the 
Seed is the true Good ' sown ' by the will of God.’ ‘ The 
ministrant of Regeneration is the Son of God, a Man 
working by the will of God.’ ‘ The begotten becomes 
other than he was,' divine and a son of God, constituted 
of the Powers of God. Hermes, in reply to Tat's 
perplexed question, ‘ Have I become an alien from my 

! Cited by James, Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 394. Other 


interesting instances are cited by Scott, II, pp. 329-31; Inge, Christian 
Mysticism, chs. 7-8. 


REBIRTH AND TRANSFIGURATION 369 


Father's race? ' can only reply, ‘I see that by God's 
mercy there has come to be in rge a form which is not 
fashioned out of matter, and I have passed forth out 
of myself and entered into an immortal body. I am 
not now the man I was; I have been born again in 
Mind, and the bodily shape which was mine before 
has been put away from me.’* This ‘ change ' deceives 
the observer who thinks that the features remain as 
before (5): ‘in this you are mistaken. The mortal 
form changes day by day ; it is altered by lapse of time, 
and becomes larger and smaller; for it is an illusion," 
but the true form is changeless, unbounded, and 
luminous (6). ‘ Cause the physical sensations to cease 
working and the birth of the deity will take place ' (7a), 
after cleansing from the irrational torments of matter 
and by the mercy of God (8a). So ' the knowledge of 
God has come to us; . . . ignórance has been driven 
out.' The reborn man, composed of the divine Powers, 
is like the Pauline pneumatic and cannot suffer dis- 
solution (14). The pupil learns that he has become 
divine, ceasing to be corporeal and therefore mortal, 
and gratefully hears the Hymn of Regeneration.? 
Those saved by the knowledge of God differed from 
the unsaved by undergoing a marvellous and sweeping 
change,? ueraf8oX, by which at once they were delivered 
from the bondage of matter and rendered of divine 
essence. The conception is so fluid * and the language 
so ambiguous that it is difficult to reproduce in certain 
terminology the details of this mysterious Hellenistic 
transfiguration. The nature of the change and when 
and how it takes place are left indefinite. It was a 


1 WS. text and translation, but with some hesitation as to his 
correction of @éav ‘ vision,’ into idéay ‘ form.’ 

3 Scott’s tr., I, p. 251; the writer’s tr. Mystery-Religions, p. 98. 

3 Cf. Reitzenstein, Myst.-religionen, 2nd ed. p. 139 ff. 

* “ Die schillerende, unklare Sprache ist eine Haupteigentümlichkeit 
all jener hellenistischen, d. h. unter Einwirkung des Orients griechisch 
geformten religiósen Schriften und macht ihre Erklárung so schwer '' 
(Reitzenstein, op. cit. p. 135). 


370 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


phase of that ancient realism which had become natural- 
ized in the Christian Church from the first generation. 
Paul’s converts with their Greek conceptions of the im- 
mortality of the soul had some difficulties in bringing 
home to themselves the features of the Jewish conception 
of a resurrection, but they had no difficulty in conceiving 
themselves as in some mysterious way in process of 
metamorphosis from flesh into spirit, which would be 
consummated at the parousia, when the remaining stages 
of the process would be achieved in the twinkling of 
an eye. 

In the Poimandres (24), ‘ at the dissolution of the 
material body you yield the body to change, and the 
visible shape (eidos) which you had becomes invisible.’ 
And at the end of complete gnosis is deification, but 
properly in the Ogdoad (26a). In the tractate on 
Regeneration (XIII. 3) Hermes, who belongs to the 
incorporeal world, speaks of his change as giving him 
a form invisible to the unregenerated eyes of Tat, while 
implying that Tat can and will undergo similar change. 
He confronts his pupil’s confessed inability, ‘ I cannot, 
O Father,’ with ‘ God forbid, my son: draw it into you, 
and it will come; will it, and it happens. Cause the 
physical senses to cease working and there shall be born 
the divinity’ (7a), and finally declares ‘ you have 
become a god’ (14). This Tat while still in the world 
is ‘ in the world of Spirit ' (êv rê vont, 21). Tat has 
“come to a spiritual knowledge of himself and of our 
Father ’ (225), and this involves transformation, since 
6 vocas éavróv eis Ücóv «cepe? (‘he who has come to 
a spiritual knowledge of himself departs to God ’). 

Much depends on the passage X. 5-6, the difficulty of 
which is accentuated by the textual uncertainty. Both 
Reitzenstein * and Scott ? following him take it to refer 
to a condition after death. This is wholly unlikely. The 
way to the misunderstanding by Scott was opened by 
his arbitrary correction of the manuscript in 5 from 

* Hellenist. Mysterien-religionen, p. 139 ff. * dl, “piney d 


*LEAVING THE BODY’ 371 


words indicating a present experience for the advanced 
or eager, into the post-mortem experience for all. In 
paragraph 6 Scott holds that the aorist participles and 
the language make it— 


** equivalent to saying that he is either dead or dying. 
It is clear, therefore, that in the writer's view, the @éa, 
vision, of which he speaks is incompatible with the 
continuance of earthly life. We may hope to see the 
beatific vision, but not until the moment of our release 
from the body. Ifa living man attains to it, his earthly 
life is then and there at an end ; the vision ' draws his 
soul up out of the body ' and transforms him into pure 
ousia, or in other words, changes him from a man into 
a god." ! 


But these are gratuitous assumptions. We know 
elsewhere ? that this condition is possible even here when 
the soul in trance or ecstasy or by ‘ spiritualizing ' ° 
leaves the body, or when a man is ‘ in knowledge ' (èv 
yvooe, IX. 4b). The meaning of the passage is that 
the bodily sensations are stayed by the vision of truth 
which enlightens the whole Nous and draws the Soul 
(Psyche) from the body, so that no longer does Soul 
dominate the man, but he becomes wholly Nous or 
Ousia (essence). The MS. reading need not be so 
violently emended as by Reitzenstein and Scott, but 
may read,* ‘It is impossible, my son, for a soul to 
be deified in a human body, but having beheld the 
beauty of the Good, deification is possible.’ 

We may conceive the Hermetic experience and hope 
in a fashion similar to the Pauline. The man ‘ in know- 
ledge ' (IX. 4) could here at least have premonitory 
glimpses of the vision and the beauty of Goodness in 


i TU p. 241.f. 

SUC fisDoUn- 1,273. 30: 3 Cf. Msc) AID. 

* Inserting ôè after Jeacauévny and with Reitzenstein and Scott rà 
before káANos and omitting with Scott 7@ before dmo6ew0S9va, dwvardv 
being quite easily understood from the preceding dóóvarov. 


372 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


mystical conditions when the body’s domination was in 
abeyance, but, generally speaking, his hope for full 
fruition, like the Christian’s, was ‘in yonder world.’ 
* He who has not come to a knowledge of these things 
cannot adequately apprehend God, or, to speak boldly, 
cannot become an actual beholder and so become 
blessed. . . . It is impossible for one in the body to 
attain this felicity. He must discipline his soul here in 
order that on its arrival in yonder world it may not 
miss the way ' (Exc. VI. 18). 

The enemy of the Hermetic was Hyle, matter, or 
body, as to Paul the flesh was the enemy of the Spirit. 
Man must be either ‘ hylic,’ ‘ corporeal,’ or ousiodes, 
‘essential, spiritual,’ as in the Pauline churches he was 
either sarkikos, ' carnal,’ or synonymously $sychikos, 
‘psychic,’ or on the other hand pneumatikos. The 
Hermetic was saved by anticipation here, but, like his 
Christian contemporary, he would be completely saved 
only eschatologically. 

The body and matter were too obstinate to deny as 
mere illusion, but proper gnosis and love of the Good 
planted in man ‘ the seed of God,’ and so he was already 
of divine substance and had the earnest of that complete 
transfiguration which would ensue on the dissolution 
of the body. He could confess confidently with the 
Christians that he was ‘ begotten again not of cor- 
ruptible, but of incorruptible seed ' (1 Peter i. 3, 23). 
He could even now on occasion be ' transported out 
of the body to the supremely beautiful vision ' (X. 7); 
he could ' out of the body ' be ' snatched up ' to his 
third heaven, or even to the loftier Ogdoad and hear 
the ineffable words ; but the continuity of such experience 
was reserved for his ' becoming wholly spiritual ' (Nous) 
in ‘ the most perfect glory of the soul’ (X. 7), as his 
Christian brother anticipated being ' known’ of God 
“face to face’ in the luminous glory of the Parousia. 
Religious ecstasy linked with religious experience 
brought Reality near to him, as to the Christian, 


THE DRUNKEN SLEEP OF IGNORANCE 373 


Platonist, or Jewish mystic. The words of Origen are 
in agreement with the Hermetic standpoint: ' The soul 
being lifted up, follows the spirit, and departing from 
the body, not only follows the spirit, but becomes in 
the spirit.' ! 

The greatness of the salvation procured by this ‘ true 
religion ' may be estimated also by the loss entailed in 
missing this way of Truth. It is ‘a drunken sleep in 
ignorance of God ' ; it is the tragedy of ' those who have 
the privilege of partaking of immortality giving them- 
selves up to death’ (Poim. 27 f.). ' He who through 
deceit of carnal desire had loved the body, remains 
wandering in the darkness of the senses, suffering the 
lot of death ' (19). He remains under the twelve deadly 
torments of sin (XIII. 7b) and falls a prey to the 
avenging demons (Asc. 335). In the absence of the 
salutary gnosis ' all vices increase in strength and wound 
the soul with incurable vices (?); the soul, infected with 
this vicious contagion, breaks out as if with tumours, 
unless those whose souls have the supreme remedy of 
knowledge and intelligence ’ (Asc. 22a). 

* The evil of the soul is ignorance ^: the soul that has 
not come to know reality or the nature of things, nor 
the Good, but is blind, is tossed about by the passions 
of the body ; and the wretched soul, not knowing itself, 
is enslaved to monstrous and adulterous bodies; it 
carries round the body like a load, not controlling it 
but controlled by it’ (X. 8b). Consequently ‘ those 
who have not travelled that path of piety ’ are so warped 
in judgment that they believe evil to be good, and in 
this delusion are insatiable for evil (VI. 6). Such ‘ know 
not for what purpose they have been made, nor by 
whom they have been made, are held under constraint 
by anger and incontinence ; they admire the things that 
are not worth looking at; they give heed only to their 


* Gk. text Reitzenstein, Hellenist. Mysterien-veligionen, p. 140. 

2 Cf. Philo, De Ebr. 39, C.-W. 160, dyvo ôè xaXemwrépav ris & TQ 
chmare whpwow éripépovca TH Vvxt) mávrev àuaprquárov alrla ylverat. 

H p 


ow 


374 THE HERMETIC ‘UPWARD WAY’ 


bodily pleasures and desires, and believe that man has 
been made for such things as these.’ * 

Godlessness is a great disease (XII (1), 3). Those 
without Nous are swept along by irrational passions, 
like beasts in their craving for evil (4); they are even 
driven by right teaching to greater wickedness (Exc. 
XI. 5). These godless are hylic instead of ousiodeis, 
spiritual (IX. 5). They are led and driven by demons 
(XVI. 16), and compose merely the train of Destiny 
(Frag. 19), whereas ‘ neither demon nor Fate has power 
over a religious man ' (Asc. 29b). 

And hereafter the godless forfeit the hope of immor- 
tality (Asc. 22b ; Poim. 28). Barred from returning to 
heaven, they undergo a shameful migration into menial 
bodies (Asc. 124) or suffer other commensurate penalty. 
‘The soul that has once entered a human body, if it 
continues evil, never tastes deathlessness nor participates 
in the Good ; reversing its course, it reverts back to creep- 
ing things’ (X. 8a). It thus misses ‘the consummation 
of religion,’ which is, ‘ Thou shalt live nobly and die in 
bliss, and your soul shall not fail to know whither it 
must wing its way upward ' (Exc. IIb, 4). 

This venerable faith was essentially a religion of 
salvation, yet without a Saviour.” Its salvation is of a 
high order and comprehensive for the needs of man, 
but a definite personal Saviour like the Galilean, or the 
Stoic Wise Man, or the Gnostic Redeemer, or the saviour- 
gods of the Mysteries, does not emerge. Man has within 


1 IV. 5, WS. and tr. 

2 '' The Hermetists have no Christ, and no equivalent for Christ... . 
The ‘second God’ of the Hermetists differs fundamentally from the 
Christ of the Christians in this, that he is not a Saviour of mankind. 
There is in the Hermetica no t.ice of a ‘ Saviour’ in the Christian 
sense—that is, of a divine or supracosmic Person. . . . Hermetists 
might speak of salvation; it was salvation that they sought and held 
that they had found; but they did not speak of a Saviour such as was 
worshipped by the Christians. According to their doctrine, it is by 
the operation of the divine vos in a man that the man is saved; and 
the divine voüs was never incarnated upon earth ' (Scott, I, pp. 12, 
13. Cf. Lagrange). 


SALVATION WITHOUT A SAVIOUR 375 


himself the potencies of his own salvation’; e.g. he 
can in obedience to the gospel proclamation baptize 
himself in the Basin of Mind; or he is assisted thereto 
by the grace of God or the divine Nous; or the Logos 
or the Son of God may mediate the gnosis of salvation. 


1 “In naturam dei transit quasi ipse sit deus’ (Asc. 6a). 


ov 


THE WAY OF GNOSIS 


CHAPTER X 


MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM: ITS ENTRY 
INTO CHRISTIANITY j 


THE Jews sought visible signs and the Greeks speculative 
wisdom, and between these two cravings for miracles 
and for metaphysical formulation early Christianity 
found it difficult to maintain the highway, especially 
when it travelled into the larger environment of the 
Graeco-Roman world. 

What is Gnosis? The translation ‘ knowledge ' is 
wholly inadequate and misleading as suggesting 
syllogisms and intellectualism or an ancient phase of 
the Enlightenment.* Gnosis was essentially an earnest 
system of salvation and an heroic attempt to explain 
man’s place in the world—at once a religion and a 
philosophy. It was one of the two competing schemes 
of soteriology, salvation by ' faith,’ pistis, and salvation 
by ‘ knowledge,’ gnosis. As pistis, faith, may also 

1 “ Es handelt sich nicht um intellektuelles Begreifen des Verstandes, 
um Philosophie und Spekulation, vielmehr ist die synkretistische Gottes- 
erkenntnis das Schauen und mystisch-ekstatische Ergreifen Gottes mit 
dem ganzen Komplexe von Vorstellungen, . . . wie die Mysterien und 
die Kosmologie und Soteriologie. . . . Ist sie selbst ihrem Wesen nach 
nicht intellektuell, so setzt sie doch ein intellektuelles Streben voraus 

. . die Religion ist nie reines Schauen und Erleben, sondern begreift 
ein Weltverstándnis in sich. Insofern führt die Gnosis doch—sekundár 
und als Folgerung—in Philosophie und Spekulation hinein. Immer aber 
ist sie auf übernaturlicehem Wege erworbene Kenntnis” (Köhler, 
Gnosis, p. 11). '' Die Gnostiker sind nicht Religionsphilosophen; Gnosis 
ist nicht verstandesmássige Erkenntnis, sondern Schauen Gottes, 
Geheimwissen, das durch persónlichen Verkehr mit der Gottheit und 


durch Offenbarung gewonnen wird ’’ (Wendland, p. 166). Cf. Norden, 
Agnostos Theos, p. 97 f. 


376 


GNOSIS A CHARISMATIC ENDOWMENT 377 


appear as belief, and conviction, and degenerate into 
opinon and credulity, so gnosis was a holy saving 
science, a way of life, heavenly illumination, satisfying 
the intellect and touching the emotions, the light of 
Revelation and the communications of spiritual intuition 
or of spiritually-endowed and specially receptive natures, 
but Gnosis in degeneration might appear as occultism, 
religious magic, and cabalistic love. Gnosticism adapted 
a Pagan cosmology into a Christian scheme of redemp- 
tion. The light of Gnosis might be imparted in a vision 
or theophany or by a revered teacher or superman, or 
by a divine being familiar with the heavenly region from 
which man had descended and to which the Gnostic 
soul returned, or it might arise after the fashion of the 
Platonic remembrance (anamnesis) or by plumbing the 
depths of the soul. Its content was ‘ the deep things ' 
of God’ and the mysteries of the universe in relation 
to ‘ this imprisonment in the body.’ Gnosis ‘is not 
taught, but when God wills it is brought to remem- 
brance.'^ The ' word of Gnosis’ was to the orthodox 
and the Gnostics a charisma or supernatural endowment. 

Gnosticism is a comprehensive term for a phase of 
religion which appeared in Paganism, Judaism, and 
Christianity, but it was in Christianity that it grew most 
aggressive. According to Harnack,? Gnosticism was 
“ the acute secularizing or Hellenizing of Christianity ”’ ; 
according to Reitzenstein, it was ''not Hellenizing 
but a more extensive Orientalizing of Christianity.” 
Farnell * presents it as '' the doctrine which laboured 
most zealously to combine the various elements of the 
Pagan and Christian creeds ’’; Inge ? as the “‘ attempt 
to complete this reconciliation between speculative 
and revealed religion, by systematizing the symbols of 


transcendental mystical theosophy ’’; Legge * as “a 
1 Corp. Herm. XIII. 2 Hist. of Dogma, I, p. 227. 
3 Stud. z. ant. Synkretismus, p. 141. 
4 Evolution of Religion, p. 36. 5 Christian Mysticism, p. 81. 


6 Forerunners and Rivals, I, p. 96; Pistis Sophia, tr. by Horner, 
p. iii 


oe 


378 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


belief in the importance of acquaintance with the divine 
world, its motives, and the influences to which it is 
subject ’’; or “ the belief that man’s place in the next 
world is determined by the knowledge of it that he 
acquires in this." Such definitions have at least the 
merit of throwing into relief some outstanding phase or 
motive of Gnosticism. But from definitions one can 
as little understand Gnosticism as Christianity or 
mysticism. Gnosticism, a glaciation of very different 
strata, shows as marked varieties * and contradictions 
as any great system of thought or any organized religion. 
Thus there is as vast a difference between earlier and 
later Gnosticism as between the Christianity of Paul and 
of Hermas. The weird cosmogonies of the Ophites and 
the beautiful mysticism of, e.g., Ptolemaeus to Flora 
claim a similar common denominator as do, e.g., the 
Epistle of James and the Fourth Gospel. That species 
of Gnosticism known as Hermeticism, while sharing the 
general postulates of Gnosticism, stands apart from its 
congeners in being less ascetic, in having no personal 
Saviour, in being non-sacerdotal and  non-sacra- 
mentarian, in neglecting organization, and in assigning 
to Nous the place given by Christian Gnostics to 
Pneuma. Gnostic schools were as divergent as those of 
Christianity—it is a heterogeneous complex in which, 
however, there is a certain unity of ideas and motives. 
As in Christianity, its creators were followed by 
organizers, its imaginative thinkers by scholastic 
systematizers. We note this same declination in 
Gnosticism as in Christianity from its classical prime. 
As faith declined into assent to creed and dogma, so 
Gnosticism declined in the third century and sub- 
sequently into puerility and phantasies and parted 
company with reason which had been the pride of 
Hellenism. 

Gnosticism was one of the greatest efforts ever made 
to satisfy the religious needs by seeking a religion which 

i Cf. de Faye, Gnostiques et Gnosticisme, pp. 15, 417, 427. 


ORIGINS OF GNOSTICISM 379 


"would conserve the maximum of the past and yet adjust 
ütself to the contemporary outlook. It was the religious 
reaction of the syncretistic centuries to the intellectual 
forces of the time. It was a long-sustained attempt to 
reconcile religion and culture and to make religion at 
once rational and uplifting and enthusiastic. It was the 
matural evolution of the persistent Hellenic demand 
* Know thyself ’ and thereby ‘ thou shalt know God and 
the universe ' and obtain salvation. 

Scholarship has devoted much attention to the question 
of the origin of Gnosticism, but, generally speaking, with 
unsatisfactory results. Anz traces Gnosticism back to 
remote Babylonian sources; Bousset, to the Oriental 
mysteries. Legge would find its ultimate source in 
Orphism, while recognizing three other more general 
sources: (I) “the decay of the earlier faith, which 
showed itself in the popular taste for cosmogonical and 
other myths ’’; (2) ‘‘ the great spread of ceremonial 
magic ’’ ; and (3) astrology. The truth is that we cannot 
assign the origin of this influential movement to any one 
cultural, geographical, or racial source. One can easily 
discover in the Gnostic systems Babylonian mythology, 
Persian dualism, Egyptian mysticism and occultism, the 
Orphic cosmology of a fall and the restitution of the 
soul from the weary circle of reincarnations, Jewish 
theology, Greek philosophy, especially Platonism and 
Pythagoreanism, astral ideas and mystical conceptions 
and practices, together with the idea of a First or 

Heavenly Man of Eastern provenance. Hegesippus 
blamed Jewish sects for giving birth to Gnosticism. 
Tertullian lays the blame on philosophy as the mother 
of all heresies, in which he is undoubtedly correct, in- 
asmuch as Gnosticism arose from man's asking questions 
and seeking a solution on the great problems of his 
Whence and Whither.” 


+ Cf. Reitzenstein, Das iranische Erlósungsmysterium; Kraeling, 
Anthropos and Son of Man; Schaeder, Studien z. antiken Synkretismus, 
pp- 205-305. 

* CL Ezcerpta Theod. 78, 2, in Clem. Alex. (St4blin, III, p- 131). 


380 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


Gnosticism must needs have come in the conditions 
of the world from the days of Alexander the Great. It 
was an inevitable expression of the human spirit in its 
deepest needs and desire for freedom. It was a pre- 
Christian product, Oriental and Pagan in its origin, but 
finding a permanent place in Judaism and Christianity. 

While one must refuse to remain unconvinced by 
attempts like those of Anz or Bousset or Legge to delimit 
strictly the definite source of Gnosticism, we can clearly 
discover the motives and beliefs out of which Gnosticism 
arose and the religious and philosophical conditions 
which shaped it. 

(x) The first of these is Hellenistic-Oriental syncretism,* 
which set in as a mighty tide from the Orient since the 
day of the marriage of East and West under the 
Macedonian conqueror. The barriers of nationalism had 
been thrown down and men were brought together on 
the basis of a common humanity rather than as Greeks 
and barbarians. The religious tolerance which Alexander 
had inherited from Persia inaugurated a new era in the 
history of religion. In the concurrence of religions and 
religious philosophies men sought the most practical 
religious support.  Exclusivism in religion became 
antiquated and an active process of borrowing and 
assimilation set in. Gnosticism was the maturest ex- 
pression of the interaction of religious ideas in the 
Graeco-Roman age. It was a religion of conglomerates 
decidedly international in character and outlook. There 
was more disposition to borrow new elements and accept 
new ideas and to conserve all that each religion or 
culture offered than to criticise and reject. Hence 
superstitions and primitive phantasies survive in 
Gnosticism with ideas of Platoitism and Stoicism. 

! Usener with reason attributes the beginning of the Gnostic move- 
ment to the propaganda and syncretism of the Oriental cults (Weih- 
nachtsfest, 2nd ed. p. 25 ff.).  ''Der Anstoss zu den gnostischen 
Bildungen ist ausgegangen von der religiósen Invasion des orientalisch- 


hellenistischen Synkretismus " (Wendland, p. 167, cf. p. 165). Cf. 
Reitzenstein-Schaeder, Studien z. antiken Synkretismus, p. 141 ff. 


PRACTICAL CHARACTER OF GNOSTICISM . 381 


Gnosticism, like early Christianity, found it a difficult 
problem to maintain its continuity with the past without 
conserving much that had better been left behind. 
Gnosticism, being thus the characteristic expression of 
the interaction of religions, philosophies, and sciences 
of the time, deals with the great themes that we find in 
each of the Mystery-religions and in each of the religious 
philosophical systems, such themes as the origin of the 
world and of matter, the origin and destiny of man, both 
as an individual and as a member of the cosmic order, 
the problem of the origin and the supersession of evil, 


the descent and ascent of the soul, and the mode of the 


deliverance of man from Fate and finitude and the 
means of the acquisition of immortality. 
(2) But Gnosticism did not arise merely out of contact 


of thought with thought, but out of the desperate need \~ 


of man at the time. The pursuit of Gnosis was by no 
means speculation for the sake of speculation or with 
the aim of a disinterested philosophy in search of truth 
for its own sake, but for practical religious ends. It 
arose out of the aspiration ofthe divine in man to 
return home. De Faye! has correctly remarked that 
Gnosticism was born of the new spirit of aspiration 
which commenced with the Roman Empire in the 
universal revival of religious interests. It is only when 
one places oneself so far as possible in the situation of the 
earnest men of the Graeco-Roman age and envisages 
their fears and hopes, their problems and difficulties, 
that one can fully understand how truly Gnosis or 
salvation-knowledge was a veritable way of life for 
cultured men. Astralism seemed to have brought men 
more hopelessly under the power of Heimarmene 
(Destiny); the prestige of the magicians from the 
Euphrates and the Tigris had added new terrors to the 
_enchoric magic of Greece and Rome and placed at the 
| disposal of the magicians a power over life and death. 
Orphism had brought to the West the unwelcome 


* Gnostiques et Gnosticisme, p. 445. 


26 


RAN 


382 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


doctrine of the fall of the soul from its native high 
estate and that of the body as the tomb of the soul from 
which deliverance must be sought at the peril of ever- 
lasting punishment. Ignorance was the main hindrance 
to safety, and this ignorance could only be removed by 
the divine revelation of Gnosis or holy science for soul 
and body. Gnosis was one of the two passionate quests 
of Hellenistic piety and philosophy, the yearning to know 
God and to acquire deathlessness; it was the striving 
to knowledge throügh love to attain the vision of God ; 
* the will of God is the deeper knowledge (epignosis) of 
God, which is participation in incorruptibility.' * 

The Gnostics were keen students of philosophy and no 
learned triflers or dispassionate inquirers. They were 
»grimly in earnest in search for a way of life and for a 
solution of the great problems of human destiny. It 
might be said that in them the two elements in Socrates' 
character and work—the dialectic and the mystical— 
which fell apart after Plato, were again united. Yet 
though they did not despise reasoning and even en- 
couraged speculation, their path to gnosis was rather by 
love and imagination and sincere piety and ascetic 
morality. 

(3) Another sure promise of Gnosticism was the cosmic 
outlook of the time due to a combination of causes, such 
as Astralism, Oriental mysticism, and the yearning to 
live comfortably in an intimidating world. As in much 
Christian thinking the doctrine of Adam's fall is the 
first postulate in the construction of Christian soteri- 
ology, so the dualism of soul and body, spirit and matter, 
was a postulate for Gnostic salvation to Pagan and 
Christian. Man had missed his way into his present 
sphere—he was out of his place in the cosmic order, 
and hence exposed to all the discomforts of finitude and 
of cosmic necessity here, the attacks of the demonic 
powers upon his material and moral progress, and 
finally exposed to all the perils attending his return 

+ Clem. Alex. Str. IV. 6, 27. 


METAPHYSICAL INTERESTS 383 


upward to the world of light whence he came. The 
drama of the soul with its incarnation and disincarna- 
tion, its primal disobedience and its purification, its 
dependence on divine grace and sacramental potencies, 
and its relation to the whole world of spirits constituted 
the mythos of salvation.* 

With the universal prevalence of Astralism the outlook 
of man was widened and his cosmic problem intensified. 
Hence Gnosticism was a necessity, and may be viewed 
either as the response of deeply religious spirits to human 
needs or as a reaction ? against the fatalism inherent in 
Astralism. Gnosticism is therefore another interesting 
example of how in every age the spirit of man discovers 
a solution—partial and inadequate—for an immediate 
difficulty. 

(4) Metaphysical interests. Even to a serious student 
of Gnosticism to-day Gnosis assumes such bizarre forms 
that it is often unintelligible to him—hence the im- 
pression that Gnosis is an arid speculation, an aimless 
excursion of degenerate or overtired minds into the realm 
_ of phantasies. Of course we grant that there are many arid 
stretches in Gnosticism and much febrile guessing and 
magical puerilities. But we must remember in the first 
place, that the key of Gnosis has been lost to us, partly 


through the fanatical destruction of the Gnostic writings: 


by victorious orthodox Christianity and partly because 
such Gnostic writings as survived were written not for 
propaganda among outsiders, but for esoteric circles 
whose catechumenate had furnished them the key to the 
study of their scriptures; and in the second place, that 
our concrete Western mind does not naturally express 
itself in the same metaphysical moulds as that of the 


> 'L'aspiration mystique qui rêvait d'un retour à Dieu ou aux 
dieux de tout ce qu'il y a divin dans l'homme et dans le Cosmos est 
- alors dans l'air '" (de Faye, Gnostiques et Gnosticisme, p. 444 f.). 

2 “ Die gnostischen Religionen sind die Reaktion gegen die Astral- 
religion, die des Menschen Schiksal unter die Gewalt der Sterngótter 
‘stellt. Die Erlósungsreligionen wollen durch ihre theurgischen Mittel 
diese Bande sprengen ’’ (Wendland, p. 176). 


\ 


384 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


Graeco-Roman world. In fact metaphysics was to the 
Gnostic age what the scientific spirit is to us. As to-day 
we demand of our religion conformity with the results 
of science and with the philosophical ideals of the age, 
so the ancients demanded of a religion that it should not 
only furnish a mythos of salvation, but should prove 
capable of being reduced to a comprehensive and 
elaborate metaphysic.! Further, religion had in those 
days to fulfil functions which in our more specialized 
age have been partiallp taken over by science, art, 
medicine, and philosophy. This penchant for meta- 
physical formulation was immensely increased when 
Hellenic genius interested itself in Oriental revelation 
and when the competition of religious and philosophical 
systems furnished a new material for the exercise of 
speculative inquiry. 

In all these tendencies Christianity, after it was carried 
beyond the boundaries of Judaea, partook wittingly and 
unwittingly. The new faith could not escape the 
religious influences so powerful around it: in the new 
cosmopolitanism it could not remain a sect partitioned 
off. The points of view shared with its contemporaries 
were so numerous that they exposed it to the inroads 
of other ideas. Despite the obvious advantage of 
Christianity in making a new beginning as a religion, it 
was soon drawn into the currents of asceticism, dualism, 
demonology, and the mythologizing of its historic 
content. Indeed Christianity offered a more promising 
field than elsewhere to those who sought Gnosis. There 
were many reasons why the Christian Church should 


» “ Religion im Sinne des Orients ist die Erklärung alles dessen was 
ist, also eine Weltauffassung ’’ (Winckler, Himmelsbild der Babylonier, 
p. 9, cited Cumont, Or. Religions, p. 230). '' Der Orientale glaubt die 
Welt zu erkennen, wenn er den Gott in seiner wahren Gestalt schaut. 
Aber der Gott ist zugleich das Selbst in ihm, in ihm schaut man die 
Welt, und nur durch Gott selbst kann man ihn schauen, ja er tritt 
durch diese Schau ganz in uns ein. Das ist der Grundgedanke aller 
Gnosis, das entscheidende Erlebnis '' (Reitzenstein—Schaeder, Stud. 
z. antiken Synkretismus, p. 141). 


ENTRY OF GNOSTICISM INTO CHRISTIANITY 385 


become the home of the Gnostic movement. (x) It was 
in the very lands and centres of Hellenistic-Oriental 
culture and religious ferment, where the intellectual life 
of the age was most active, that Christianity spread in 
its missionary career. The apostolic preachers availed 
themselves of the common language of the Koiné to 
carry the message to the chief centres of population 
where East and West met and mingled. Christianity 
kept pace with the penetration of the oriental religions 
in the West and availed itself of an organization of 
conventicles after the muster of the Jewish synagogue 
and the Mystery fraternities. A new religion cannot 
spread independent of its historic milieu, nor can it forge 
for itself at once new categories of thought and a 
psychology of its own. Every new religion lives and 
expands by facing the problems of the age and by 
offering new incentives towards the realization of its 
ideals. Religions of redemption were everywhere in 
request with saviour-gods who guaranteed salvation to 
their followers by identification with themselves. It 
was to the religious quests of its age that Christianity 
addressed itself in enthusiastic earnest, and even if 
Christian preachers could have overlooked or discredited 
the ideas of redemption of the age, their converts would 
not allow those ideas to become sterile. 

(2) The laxity of organization in the early Christian 
conventicles, the fluidity of doctrine, and the unrestricted 
freedom of teaching facilitated the entry of Gnosticism 
which could arise only in an age of the Church when 
teachers and prophets and itinerant evangelists were 
carrying on their work, not in an age when an episcopal 
hierarchy with its. apostolic claims represented the 
highest authority. Theological constructions had as yet 
not crystallized, and the teacher had not yet been sub- 
jugated to the bishop. It was still the period when the 
promise of the Spirit to lead men into truth was taken 
seriously by every member of the Church, when ‘ where 
the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.’ This Spirit 


386 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


was the representative of Jesus, and continued His wotk. 
It showed itself in the revivalistic phenomena, in 
prophecy, in the application of the example and teach- 
ing of Jesus. Every prophet and evangelist claimed 
this Spirit as their authority, and there was as yet no 
court of arbitration which could say them nay. Diversity 
of doctrine did not trouble the primitive conventicles on 
the obvious theory that all teaching came from the one 
source—the Spirit, The New Testament itself is the 
best evidence that during the three generations of its 
composition there was no stark uniformity of dogma, 
and this early tolerance of diversity of teaching did not 
prevent the Church from the second to the fourth cen- 
turies from choosing this selection of Christian scriptures, 
which on such a critical matter as the Person of Jesus 
contains such divergent christologies as that of Mark, 
the supernatural birth-stories of Matthew and Luke, the 
pre-existent descending and ascending divine Being of 
Paul, the Logos incarnation of the Fourth Gospel, and 
the mediatorial high-priesthood of Hebrews. Christianity 
offered a new Saviour which necessitated a new soteri- 
ology or story of redemption amid plans of salvation 
by competing saviours. The formation of the Christian 
story of redemption could not take place except in 
contrast to and in contact with concurrent systems of 
redemption. Christian converts must be instructed in 
the nature of their scheme of salvation and in its 
superiority over its competitors. This was the office of 
the teacher. But Christian converts did not create or 
accept their story of redemption in a vacuum ; they had 
been familiar with other stories of redemption under 
other redeemers and lords before they became Christians. 
They were also living as a minority in a society where 
religious interests were being daily discussed and in 


1 In the apostolic age '' the moving and controlling power '' of life 
was ''the disciples’ vivid sense of the presence and activity of the 
Holy Spirit. It is its spiritual character which distinguishes the age 
from all subsequent periods in the history of the Church ’’ (McGiffert, 
Apostolic Age, p. 540; cf. Wernle, Beginnings, II, pp. 178, 199). 


INADEQUACY OF MESSIANISM 387 


which they were compelled in argument to give a reason 
for their faith.” Their difficulties were brought for further 
discussion before the brotherhoods in which the teacher 
was free to speculate without reference to a dogmatic 
authority over him. Freedom is ever a perilous path, 
and this primitive freedom and lack of homogeneity 
exposed the Church to such opposite dangers as ecstatic- 
prophetic Montanism and the seductive speculations of 
Gnosticism. 

(3) The crude Messianism of the first preachers could 
not long survive amid the demands of the larger Graeco- 
Roman world. The Jewish Messiah or Son of Man was 
not calculated to meet the needs of the Gentile world. 
The conditions of preaching in a missionary activity in 
the centres of Graeco-Roman culture were different from 
the tense apocalyptism of the Jerusalem community. 
This Messianism could not win the allegiance of a world 
familiar with such religious conceptions as the Jewish 
Sophia or Wisdom as an intermediary or agent of the 
Most High, the Logos conception of the Greek and 
Alexandrine thought, the pre-existent Heavenly Man, 
the ascending divine Redeemer of competing religions. 
Hence theology was called upon to give an adequate 
explanation of the Messiah in relation to descending 
redeemers, to hypostases like Wisdom, Memre, and to 
the Alexandrine Logos.) It is noteworthy that when the 
first theologian of Christianity appeared to adapt the 
new faith to the larger Gentile world his speculations 
about the pre-existent Christ and Power of God took 
a direction which pointed toward later Gnosticism. It 
is also noteworthy to contrast the Christology of the 
Letters of his imprisonment with that'of his first extant 
Letters, those to Thessalonica. Between the writing of 
Thessalonians and Ephesians and Colossians Paul had 
recognized the dangers threatening his Churches from 
incipient Gnosticism, and from the extravagances of his 
own doctrine of liberty. He had also recognized the 
necessity of claiming for his Lord all the cosmic preten- 


388 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


sions put forth by his adversaries for other lords, without 
realizing how far his speculations about the origin and 
nature of the Christian redeemer would carry others 
who did not share the depth of his religious experience 
or his conviction that his loftiest speculations were based 
on a historic personality. 

(4) There obtained among Pagans, Jews, and 
Christians a free treatment of historical facts which it is 
difficult for us to understand. Historical events were 
the mere alphabetical symbols of the human story with 
which one construed the interpretative idea according 
to his own insight and intelligence. We recognize that 
history is more than annals, and that the philosophy of 
history seeks to find the key to the reading of history, but 
we are not indifferent to the records, nor do we identify 
our philosophy of history with the events. But to the 
ancient philosophers the ‘ idea’ as the reality had the 
right of way over the historic fact. As phenomena are 
merely shadows pointing to the substance, so time- 
events are but shadows of the eternal ideas as Time 
itself, in Platonic thought, is but ‘ the moving image 
of Eternity.’ Hence ancient thought tended to move 
in the sphere of lofty abstractions rather than to drag 
its slow course attendant on the happenings between 
sunrise and sunset. History became at an early date for 
Christians the amalgam of factual events and ‘‘ accepted 
fiction.” 

Origen is Plato’s truest disciple in his contemplation of 
“the moving image of Eternity.’ He likens history to 
a ladder,’ the first steps of which are time and space 
happenings leading up to the Mysteries and to the hidden 
meaning revealed only to those who scale the heights 
towering above mere history. He is concerned, almost 
exclusively, with the pre-existent Logos rather than with 
the historic Galilean. The Christian dispensation is a 
twofold gospel of progression consisting of an historical 
or aicO5róv evayyédcov (external or sensible gospel) and 

+ n Joh. Y. 20. 


FOURTH GOSPEL AND HISTORY 389 


a higher vonrov xal mvevparwóv gospel. This was 
part of Origen's defence against the growing literalism 
and realism which so alarmed his Platonic soul. 

Here again the way was prepared by Paul. He was 
familiar with the outlines of the life of Jesus, but he 
prefers to treat those historic events as merely the time- 
appearances of a supratemporal cosmic plan in a trans- 
mundane setting. When, for example, he desires to 
bring home to his beloved Church of Philippi the lesson 
of humility and to rebuke their self-seeking, he refers 
not to any example or word of the Prophet of Nazareth, 
but to a pretemporal divine being who thought not 
equality with God a thing to be grasped at, but descended 
to earth, taking upon himself the form of a servant. 
Again, he refers not to one who said, ‘ I came not to 
be served, but to serve,' but to a pre-existent one who, 
* though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor ' 
by means of a Kenosis. 

Yet more amazing to the modern historian is the 
attitude of the writer of the Fourth Gospel to facts of 
history, to whom historical events are symbols and 
adumbrations of Christian doctrine.' It is somewhat 
surprising to find in this anti-gnostic gospel with its 
emphasis on the Incarnation how scanty are the traces 
of that humanity of Jesus which the author wishes to 
establish. His conception of history has been so recast 
into the categories of the Logos Christ that his gospel 
narrowly escapes Docetism, and escapes it in such a way 
that if the Fourth Gospel alone survived without the 
Synoptists we could not properly speak of the humanity 
of Jesus. 

Faintly does the Carpenter of Nazareth appear on the 
pages of the Fourth Gospel. Jesus did not increase in 
wisdom, for the Logos Christ had learned all things 
from His Father in His pretemporal existence. Nor did 

1 ** History is to him merely a setting in time and space of the Divine 


ideas; and he feels quite at liberty to embody them, not in history but 
in doctrine " (Gardner, Ephesian Gospel, p. 205). 


390 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


He submit to a baptism of repentance for remission of 
sins, nor did He pass through a religious crisis at His 
baptism wherein He received His call—rather, the Bath 
Qol was vouchsafed to the baptizer to announce the 
incarnation. The experience at the Jordan did not lead 
to a time of self-testing and of severe temptations in 
the neighbourhood. He who went around doing good 
and healing the demonized as at first the herald and 
then later the inaugurator of the Kingdom of God 
summons men to believe in Himself. So far from 
devoutly declining the appellation of ' good,’ He de- 
fiantly challenges His opponents—' Which of you con- 
vinces Me of sin?’ Instead of spending a night of 
lonely vigil in prayer before selecting a group of disciples 
and receiving an answer in the inscrutable ways of 
God in such a manner that one of the twelve whom He 
considered specially fitted for the task of ' fisher of men ’ 
proved a traitor, the Logos Christ, acting from His 
omniscience and from a full knowledge of the future, 
deliberately chose ‘ the son of perdition ' to betray Him. 
He nowhere prays for strength and guidance; prayer 
would be impossible and superfluous. He nowhere fails 
to effect a faith-cure, but rather proves thaumaturgic in 
a scale far transcending the Synoptic powers in seven 
stupendous ' signs.’ The pathos and the moral grandeur 
of Gethsemane have been superseded by a scene in which 
Christ acknowledges without ‘ loud crying and entreaty 
to Him who was able to save Him from death,' that 
there is no struggle but merely that His hour has come. 
In the Synoptic story surely the poignancy and the real 
victory lie in the fact that the victory was enacted within, 
without supernatural intervention. In the story of the 
arrest we have the legend of one before whom even a 
band of Roman soldiers fell back in terror. We can 
understand therefore with what suspicion this ‘ spiritual 
gospel' was looked upon and with what difficulty it 
secured its place in the canon. Its dualism of God and 
the world, light and darkness, the children of God and 


PAROUSIA AND COSMIC OUTLOOK 391 


the born of Satan, is the Gnostic dualism. So also is 
its pessimism in regard to the world and the present 
reign of the Prince of Darkness. '' However great the 
vehemence with which St. John engages in the struggle 
against the Gnostics, it must be admitted that the 
expressions which he employs are often practically in- 
distinguishable from those of his adversaries."' * 

This writer was a vigorous opponent of Gnostic 
Docetism, yet it is only in the light of the Synoptic 
Gospels that we could form any idea of the humanity 
of Jesus. The disciple of Paul, writing this Ephesian 
Gospel to a Pauline foundation, has not only sublimated 
history to a greater extent than Paul, but while pro- 
fessedly casting his interpretation of Christianity into 
the mould of a Gospel has dramatized and reshapen 
history. He meets the Gnostic contentions not as we 
should have expected by appealing to the historical facts 
of the life of Jesus, but in three ways—first, by asserting 
that the Logos became flesh in an episodic career in 
Jesus Christ ; secondly, by meticulously giving evidences 
of the physical reality of his death; and thirdly, by 
accentuating the realistic stories of the Resurrection, not 
as a return from the dead, but as a reanimation of the 
dead body from the tomb with tangibility and visibility. 

(5) In the Jerusalem community at the foundation of 
the Church there lacked a cosmic or universal outlook 
due partly to the imminence of the Parousia, partly to 
the stress on individual salvation, and partly to the lack 
of contact with the great Hellenistic world outside. 
Properly speaking, apocalyptism had no cosmic out- 
look; its framework was the two-aeon disjunction of 
history into this age and that age separated by a 
catastrophic definitive event and the rescue of the elect. 
The primitive Christians had no idea of cosmic redemp- 
tion—indeed, ‘‘ they had no idea of cosmology.” ? This 
apocalyptism could not do service in an outside world 


1 Wernle, Beginnings of Christianity, II, p. 184. 
? De Faye, Gnostiques, p. 440. 


392 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


where redemption was cosmically conceived. And this 
lack of cosmic interest and equipment in the primitive 
message exposed it more to the speculation necessary 
to enlarge its redemptive outlook. 

(6) Such a personality as Jesus was certain to attract 
cosmic speculations, as it did the pre-Christian christo- 
logical elements such as pre-existence, the idea of the 
archetypal Heavenly Man, the incarnation of a divine 
being, His descent to the underworld, His ascent to 
heaven, the conceptions of intermediary beings between 
God and man. So great was Jesus that He compelled 
His followers to the task of attempting to explain Him, 
and until dogmatic uniformity was insisted upon, those 
approaching the task did so with the ideas to hand and 
with the conviction that the previous agencies of salva- 
tion must yield to Jesus as the supreme agent. Hence 
Christians, Gnostic and orthodox alike, assigned to Jesus 
the cosmic and mediatorial functions of the Logos and 
Wisdom. 

Inasmuch as in Gnosticism, properly speaking, there 
was no need of a personal Redeemer and inasmuch as 
‘the Logos became flesh ' presented serious difficulties, 
the central place given to the Christian Redeemer by 
Gnosticism and His function of saving by disclosing 
Mysteries is a striking historic testimony to the greatness 
of Jesus. The Gnostics were quick to perceive the 
advantages and superiority of a new and vigorous 
religion with a Founder of the stature of Jesus. He was 
given a premier place in their cosmic scheme, partly as 
the Revealer ‘ from above’ imparting to ‘ the earthly 
ones’ the things of heaven, partly by making His 
descent and ascent the epitome of the Gnostic scheme 
and symbolic of the history and destiny of the soul, and 
partly by identifying him with the Ideal or Archetypal 
Man who had cast off the material elements. 

(7) Lastly, Paul himself could be cited by the Gnostics 
with considerable plausibility as the founder of Gnosis, 
and it is striking to note the number of parallelisms 


PAULINE GERMS OF GNOSTICISM 393 


between the Gnostic drama of redemption and that of 
Paul, and also at how many points the Gnostics pursued 
the Pauline speculative construction beyond the limit 
at which he had found it unnecessary or impossible 
to proceed. But Paul was no more the father of 
Gnosticism ! than of sacramentarianism, though the 
germs of both are latent in his system. In a large 
measure Paul is a Gnostic, though he would have re- 
pudiated the Gnostics as his spiritual offspring. In his 
soteriology we have the preparation for Christian 
Gnosticism which may be regarded as a hyper-Paulinism 
with over-statements of his epoch-making positions and 
distortions or one-sided expressions of his characteristic 
. $ . . ` 

presentations. '' The Gnostics simply carried ‘out con- 
sistently the Hellenistic tendency which voiced itself to 
a limited degree in Paul. . . . The controlling influence 
of his principles in their thought is not to be mistaken.” * 
The Gnostics took literally the bold statements of Paul 
apart from their context. The Pauline doctrine of the 
fall of man based on the Adamic theology was akin to 
the Gnostic scheme of the descent of the Soul. 

The Pauline ethical dualism of flesh and spirit, founded 
on his own experience, became a metaphysical and 
cosmic dualism which must conduce to asceticism. The 
ascetic tendency was quite obvious in Paul, especially 
in his relation to marriage. It was something for the 
Gnostics that a leader of Paul's rank could be cited as 
favouring a dualistic asceticism. 

His doctrine of Christ-mysticism, founded on his own 
experience and suffused with Gnosis, enabled the 
Gnostics to claim that the Resurrection is past already 
because they had been raised with Christ and already 
seated in the heavenly places with Him. The Pauline 


* ** He could not endure to see the glory of Jesus Christ obscured by 
the mist and fog of Gnosticism ’’ (A. T. Robertson, Paul and the 
Intellectuals, p. viii). 

? McGiffert, Apostolic Age, pp. 503, 504. In Marcion and the Gnostic 
schools of the second century ‘‘ the characteristic views of Paul found 
their fullest acceptance and their most remarkable development '' (ib.). 


394 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


character of Christians through the possession of the 
Christ-pneuma was the harbinger of the Gnostic 
proclamation of the superior and indestructible character 
of those who had received Gnosis. It was the Gnostics 
also who took seriously Paul’s position that Christians 
were no longer sinners, having done with sin when they 
died to it in baptism into Christ, and it was against this 
spiritual idealism as a self-deception that the writer of 
the First Johannine Epistle protested as delusion on 
the part of those who say that they have no sin, whereas 
the orthodox Christians have an Advocate with the 
Father for those who sin. 

Paul’s advocacy of Christian freedom could hardly 
escape proving perilous when dislocated from his 
practical moral interests. When Paul contended that 
we are no longer under the law but under grace and 
that we have ceased to be in the flesh when transferred 
into the Spirit, he could not foresee how readily this 
expression of his own experience and interpretation of 
Christianity as liberty against legalism should by un- 
worthy Gnostics become a justification for immorality 
on the grounds that the illuminated spirit was indifferent 
to or untainted by the deeds of the flesh, though the 
great Gnostics were strict rigorists. Paul’s revolutionary 
attitude to Judaism and his view of the Law as an 
inferior and interim dispensation suggested that more 
radical attitude to Judaism and. the religion of the Old 
Testament as represented by Marcion. 

In regard to the treatment of history the Gnostics 
merely carried to its ultimate issue Paul’s free treatment 
of history and of his rendering of it into a cosmic soterio- 
logical system. It is in Paul that the greatest problem 
of early Christianity emerges—the relation of the Man 
Jesus to the descending and ascending Christ whose 
home is in the transcendent world from which He comes 
merely on an episodic visit for the obedience of death, 
after which He returns to His home in Heaven to acquire 
higher rank and to receive the Name above every name. 


PAUL'S COSMIC DRAMA 395 


The divine facts of salvation are the Cross and the 
Resurrection rather than the moral power and spiritual 
appeal of Jesus' life. Christ is made the centre of a 
cosmology, and such scanty historical facts as Paul uses 
he fits within a cosmic plan of a redemption drama 
amidst transcendent scenery. It is increasingly recog- 
nized that Paul’s Christian speculations are not to be 
discovered even in germinal form in Jesus’ teachings, 
and for not one of them does Paul cite any teaching of 
Jesus as authentication. Of his Christianity as of his 
gospel he would have claimed with honesty that he ‘ was 
not taught,’ but that it came ‘ by an apocalypse of Jesus 
Christ,’ and that it was a product of the new loyalty 
and sense of spiritual power arising from the ‘ appear- 
ance.’ Of course Paul's boldest speculation and his 
most daring Christology were always and only under- 
taken in the practical interest of Christian morality and 
never with a view to a disinterested philosophy of 
history. But they suggested endless themes and en- 
thralhng enigmas to those who had the genius for 
speculation without Paul's commensurate capacity for 
obedience. Moreover, to whatever lofty heights Paul's 
inquiring thought would soar, or into what mysterious 
abysses it might descend, Paul was always conscious 
that his speculations and attempted formulations rested 
ultimately on a solid basis of history. To Paul the 
Incarnation appeared the necessary and divinely or- 
dained means of redemption, but to the Gnostics the 
Incarnation presented a problem arising from their 
dualism of matter and spirit. Gnostic thought, unfettered 
by historic fact, soared to giddy heights unknown to 
Paul. Paul's scanty attention to the historic facts of 
Jesus’ life exposed the Church to a real danger 
heightened by the sweep and fascination of his specula- 
tion on an historic basis. 

In Paul's transference of Christ's work from mankind 
to the cosmos the first step was taken to the remodelling 
of Christianity into a cosmic drama after Hellenistic- 


396 MOTIVES AND AIMS OF GNOSTICISM 


Oriental models. Christ redeemed not merely from sin 
and the curse of the law, but from the domination of 
demons and from cosmic necessity. These functions He 
could perform as the supreme intermediary between God 
and man, and also as the pre-temporal agent of creation 
and the present principle whereby the universe is held 
ogether. Such thoughts, penned by the Apostle for 
immediate moral interest, were not likely to remain 
fruitless. He had indicated directions which were to be 
followed by those who shared his speculative interests 
without his moral sobriety. 

Lastly, had not Paul himself claimed a Gnosis and 
indicated it as a privilege for advanced Christians and 
was not this Gnosis clearly akin to Hellenistic Gnosis ? 
Every Christian had faith, but every Christian had not 
Gnosis, though—and here Paul differed both from the 
Gnostics and from the Fourth Gospel, for the psychic 
man could become spiritual—Gnosis was accessible 
to every Christian and not merely to certain super- 
naturally endowed individuals. The nature of Gnosis, 
the wonder of Gnosis, was a coveted charisma and 
therefore attainable chiefly in the ecstatic state, wherein 
divine disclosures were supposedly more immediate and 
infalible than in everyday consciousness or by the 
journeyman method of ratiocination. It was akin to 
wisdom, but a wisdom not of this aeon nor of the doomed 
demonic authorities; it was something above faith and 
superadded to faith. It is the privilege of the few, not 
of the many, for not all men have Gnosis, though all men 
ought to have Gnosis. It comes by revelation from 
above, and is impossible to the natural or psychic man 
who cannot understand the things of the Spirit, to whom 
they are foolishness. It can be imparted not to babes 
but to the perfect or Christian initiates. Elementary 
knowledge suffices for the Christian neophyte, but the 
superior Gnosis characterizes the initiated. 

Wide and deep is the content of this Gnosis, nothing 
less than the things that have been bestowed on us by 


PAULINE GNOSIS 397 


God and the full meaning of the Cross and of the cosmic 
scope of the same. God's wisdom is a mystery hidden 
from the world-rulers, who in their blindness had 
crucified the Lord of Glory to their own undoing. It is 
the apprehension of the ineffable things prepared for 
those who love God. Only those who have the mind 
of Christ can understand it. In addition to furnishing 
the key to the cosmic secrets of redemption and the 
plans of God for the future, Pauline Gnosis furnished 
its adepts with an esoterid interpretation of the Old 
Testament whereby Christian baptism and the Eucharist 
were discovered in type in the transit of the Red Sea 
under Moses and in the feeding on manna in the wilder- 
ness and in the interpretation of the political enemies of 
the psalmist, 110, as demons. Gnosis thus is vouch- 
safed by the Spirit and is fathomable only by the Spirit. 
It offered the first Christian Weltanschauung whereby 
Christ subjugated all things to God, that God may be all 
and in all. Thus Paul formulated a Christian Gnosis, 
but unfortunately in the subsequent generations it was 
forgotten that there was a more excellent way than 
even this supernatural Gnosis—the way of love. 


27 


CHAPTER XXI 


REACTIONS OF GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY : 
GNOSTIC PIETY 


Gnosticism was the third and perhaps the greatest crisis 
in the history of early Christianity, the first being the 
dangers consequent on the waning of the earliest 
apocalyptic enthusiasm; the second, the controversy 
about the universalism of Christianity, of which Paul 
was the champion ; and the third, the tides of Hellenistic- 
Oriental syncretism which threatened to sweep away 
Christianity as an historic religion. It was a crisis in 
which the very existence of Christianity was at stake. 
When Christianity was spreading in the larger and freer 
milieu of the Pagan world and the Gentile influences 
winning at the expense of the primitive Jewish, it was 
historically inevitable that Hellenistic-Oriental thought 
should claim Christianity and adopt it as it had done 
other Oriental gospels and seek to qualify its character 
as Judaism had done in its nascent stages. As Paul, 
after much effort, had vindicated the independence of 
Christianity from Judaism and his contention had been 
corroborated by the reception given his universal Gospel 
by the Greeks, it was not surprising that the severance 
from Judaism should be carried to extremes by those 
who were not Jews either by birth or sympathy. 
Gnosticism was an attempt to dissever all genetic con- 
nexion with the mother-religion and to place Christianity 
under the tutelage of Hellenism. The religious syn- 
cretism, eager and aggressive and in search of a new 
and satisfying religion, laid hold on Christianity and 
sought to win it from its historical antecedents. 
Gnosticism was more than “‘ the acute Hellenizing of 
398 


HELLENIZING OF CHRISTIANITY 399 


Christianity." It was almost as much an Orientalizing ' 
of Christianity. At least the Hellenism was strongly 
diluted with Oriental ingredients, or rather the later 
Hellenic spirit was operating on Oriental materials ? 
though by Greek methods and traditions. 

The Church refused to permit Christianity to be 
absorbed into Hellenism and the content of the Christian 
message to be dissolved into a theosophical mysticality. 
If in the confusion of the conflict the Church could not 
with safety absorb, or consider even the advisability of 
absorbing, Hellenism into Christianity, it took the safer 
alternative and averted the immediate danger. ‘‘ In 
Christianity, pagan philosophy and mysticism have in 
a certain measure been absorbed by the Gospel and 
utilized by it, but in Gnosticism it is rather the Gospel 
which has been absorbed by pagan philosophy and 
mysticism.’’ $ 

The conflict was all the more dangerous because of 
the ground common to Gnostics and the orthodox, 
between whom the main quarrel was not about the 
divinity of Christ, but about His real humanity. The rise 
of the Catholic Church in opposition to Gnosticism was 
a narrowing process, but it was also a saving process. 
Notwithstanding the manner in which the conflict was 
carried on, the defamatory names applied by the 
orthodox to their opponents, and the misrepresentations 
of the Gnostic systems, our sympathy must be on the 


> “Nicht Hellenisierung, sondern weitere Orientalisierung des 
Christentums bietet die Gnosis’’ (Reitzenstein-Schaeder, Stud. z. 
ant. Synk, p. x41). '' Es lässt sich ganz allgemein sagen, dass yrôsıs 
eo . . . eine Zentralbegriff war, um den sich die Religionen des 
Orients in konzentrischen Kreisen bewegten. Von Hellas dahin eine 
Verbindungslinie zu ziehen liegt ausser dem Bereiche der Möglichkeit; 
dagegen scheint der umgekehrte Weg . . . eher gangbar ° (Norden, 
Agnostos Theos, p. 96). 

? The result, according to Leisegang, of the operation of Hellenistic 
metaphysics on Oriental fantasy, imagery, and symbolism (Die Gnosis, 

2:3) :8.). 
1 * Loisy, Les Mystères païens et le Mystère chrét. p. 355. Cf. Gardner, 
Growth of Christianity, p. 99 f. 


400 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


side of the Church. To protect herself against the 
present danger ' and such abuses of liberty in the future, 
the Church surrounded herself with the threefold wall 
of apostolic authority in the Episcopate, thus ending 
democratic freedom, the Apostles’ Creed, the end of 
fluid theology, and the New Testament canon. 

The gains to the Church were many. The Church 
was strengthened by a new self-consciousness. It was 
better equipped for its missionary work in the Graeco- 
Roman world. Its principles were clarified by develop- 
ing what was implicit in its teachings. If the conflict 
deepened and developed clefts within Christianity, 
it widened its horizon by the presence of speculative 
beside moral elements and mystical beside legal. Its 
equipment with the Episcopate, with one credal formula, 
and with one canonical book enabled it later to undertake 
the vast work of civilizing the barbarians who were to 
conquer the ancient civilizations. 

The house-churches of early Christianity became the 
Church. The Catholic Church was largely the product 
of the Gnostic controversy. The Church won the 
victory, but at what a cost! It was a Pyrrhic victory. 
The Church took the via media and entered upon her 
long career of compromise; the hierarchic organization 
standardized faith, and forbade the former spontaneity. 
The Spirit was no longer free for individuals and in- 
dividual communities—it spoke in classical writings and 
through ecclesiastical organization. Apostolic tradition 
was enthroned oftentimes at a considerable violence to 
history. The dangers of subjectivity among Gnostics 
and Montanists were all too obvious and must be 


1 Gnosticism constituted a threefold danger to the Church: (xr) 
doctrinally, especially on the Person of Jesus; (2) morally, in the lia- 
bility to abuse in the extravagant form of Paul’s doctrine of liberty; 
(3) as imperilling the unity of the Church and encouraging a sectarianism 
disruptive of organization. Gnosticism would have made it impossible 
for the house-churches and the later and larger communities to coalesce 
into the ancient Catholic Church by rendering the Christian fraternities 
as fissiparous as the Mystery brotherhoods. 


FAITH AND HISTORY 401 


prevented, but only by over-emphasizing the opposite 
principle of objectivity which was later to lead to vast 
schisms within Christianity. Now for the first time 
within the circles of those who called themselves 
Christians the exclusive principle was introduced, the 
orthodox stood in contrast to the heretics in doctrine. 
The Church would no longer allow the wheat and tares 
to grow together until harvest; while attempting to 
remain a missionary Church it turned persecutor and 
prepared the way for later defections. As the Catholic 
Church later, in the throes of the Donatist controversy, 
formulated a mystic-magical view of baptism which 
recognized the validity of heretical (Donatist) baptism 
and so facilitated for numerous Donatists the path of 
return to the Church, so the earlier Catholic Church 
was quite willing to accept the sacramentarianism and 
vicarious value of ecclesiastical rites as held by the 
Gnostics. Gnostic magic became easily acclimatized in 
Christianity. Similar ideas appear. The later Gnostics 
. drew the conclusion that the sacraments guarantee salva- 
tion and confer immortality just as in Pseudo-Justin 
the Eucharist secures the incorruptibility of the bodies 
of believers that they may share in a physical Resurrec- 
tion. A loftier view appears earlier in Valentinus, who 
held that we are saved by becoming wholly ‘ spiritual ' 
and not by works ' ; only the ‘ imperfect ' need works, 
and with this Origen agrees. 

The problem of faith and history was definitely raised 
and that of the relation of the historical to the eternal. 
The Church awoke to the dangers of the severance of 
Christianity from history and of the sublimation of its 
historical content into mythical abstractions and also of 
the solvent effects of mysticism upon history. The 
Gnostics recognized that history limits and necessarily 
hinders the redemptive ‘ idea,’ especially the limitations 
inherent in human conditions. The orthodox leaders, 
asserting that historic facts are in their relations and 
effects more than mere facts, rightly insisted that 


402 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


speculative reconstruction should not cut the tap-root 
in history. Yet the conflict between the rights of history 
and of experience and the formulation. of both were 
inconclusive. The Church made more concessions to 
Gnosticism than it was aware. It fought for the full 
and real humanity of Jesus, but on securing this it lifted 
Jesus out of humanity into a pre-existent divine descend- 
ing and ascending Being subordinate to God. The very 
formulation of Christianity in Pauline thought which 
lifted it above the narrowness and the particularism of 
Judaism to become the conquering spiritual power in 
the Gentile world proved a source of danger. The gospel 
of Jesus was fitted into a cosmology which demanded 
wholesale remodelling. Gnosticism also raised acutely 
the question of the human and the divine in Christ 
which had the lamentable issue in the Church of restrict- 
ing the unity of human and divine to Christ who had 
so perfectly lived the unity. In the transposition of the 
Jesus of history into the metaphysical and semi-mythical 
figure of the later Christologies and as the Second Person 
of the Trinity the Gnostic contention triumphed.* 

As in every controversy, truth suffers by the over- 
emphasizing of differences and the rigorism of logic, so 
truth suffered on both sides in this controversy. The 
unity of the Person of Jesus was rent in twain by a two- 
nature formula. In opposition to Docetism, the Passion 
story was retold with increasing realism and materialism. 
The primitive Resurrection story of an ascent from the 
world of the dead, which in the evangelistic narratives 
had been with increasing literalism cast into the form 
of a reanimation of a physical body from a tomb, 
retreated almost beyond the ken of orthodox thought. 
So great was the emphasis on the real humanity of Jesus 


1 


““The heresy that reduced the humanity of Christ to an illusive 
appearance was defeated in its direct aim, but it was victorious in so 
far as the glorified Christ was absolutely separated from and raised 
above all his fellows, till it became almost a paradox to say that 
‘ He was in all points tempted like as we are’ ” (Caird, Evolution of 
Theology in the Greek Philosophers, II, p. 366). 


PARTIAL VICTORY OF THE CHURCH 403 


that even the ascended Lord was represented as taking 
again tangible form and enjoying table fellowship as of 
old with His followers. The danger to monotheism 
arising from Gnosticism was averted, but at considerable 
danger for the future of Christian theology, inasmuch 
as a Trinity arose which could only by desperate 
arguments be distinguished from tritheism. In opposition 
to the Gnostic plan of salvation wherein the soul of man 
was saved from its materialistic environment, the Church 
elaborated the literal resurrection of the flesh such as we 
find in Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Augustine. The 
more refined Gnostic view of the ascent of the soul was 
rejected in favour of an apocalyptic eschatology in crude 
Jewish terms which has burdened Christianity to this 
day. Further, the Church so resented the Gnostic attack 
on the Old Testament that it gave to the Old Testament 
an influence in Christianity which promoted sacer- 
dotalism and affected the Christian conception of God. 
Neither the Gnostics nor the orthodox were correct in 
their extreme attitudes to the Old Testament, the in- 
feriority of which to the Christian message was pointed 
out by the Gnostic Marcion. 

If the Church rescued the humanity of Jesus from 
being absorbed in His divinity, it rendered a great service 
by reaffirming the claims of history. But the dissolution 
of history into ideas did not cease either during or 
because ‘of the Gnostic controversy. The speculation 
of Paul and the tendency to allegorize history or to 
resolve it into metaphysical ideas reached its consumma- 
tion in the formulation of the Nicene and Chalcedonian 
Creeds. Origen takes the same stand to history: ‘‘ His 
conviction is that when the development of religion has 
reached its highest level, anything historical or positive 
becomes of as little value as the idea of redemption and 
salvation itself." * This is borne out by such affirma- 
tions as ‘ Christ crucified is a teaching for babes’ and 
‘Happy are they who have come no longer to need 


? Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 143. 


404 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


God's Son as the physician who heals the sick or as 
the shepherd—people who now need not any redemption 
but wisdom, reason, and righteousness alone.'' It is 
striking to note how little interest the apologists take 
in the career of Jesus compared with their speculation 
in the pre-existent Christ, the two supreme questions of 
the early Church being the nature of this pre-existent 
Christ and his relation to God. An appreciation of the 
mythologizing of history whether in Philo or the New 
Testament or the Church Fathers is necessary to under- 
stand the evolution of Christian dogma, and particularly 
of Christology. And in this mythologizing of history 
the Gnostics differ from the orthodox only in the greater 
degree to which they carried it. 

Gnosticism '' left the world of thought to be fought 
for by two powers which joined issue over its corpse,” ? 
the revived Pagan enthusiasm, especially of Neo- 
Platonism, and the Christian philosophers of Alexandria, 
Clement and Origen and their successors, and the conflict 
has not always been decisive or the issue unambiguous. 
The Gnostics, conscious both of the worth of Greek 
culture and the moral power of Christianity, sought to 
absorb Christianity into Hellenism rather than Hellenism 
into Christianity. The orthodox, conscious of the 
dangerous fascination of Hellenism in alliance with 
nebular theosophy, in their reaction thrust Hellenism 
out as far as they could, though to a less extent than 
they imagined, in favour of the cruder and more severely 
moral and literal Judaistic heritage, and thus im- 
poverished Christianity by closing to it sources of 
spirituality and idealism to which its greatest teachers 
ever gratefully return without disloyalty to Jesus or 
violence to its Jewish beginnings. The orthodox victory, 
with its over-emphases and its refusal to distribute the 
spoils of Gnosticism, compels modern Christianity, in 
the interest of permanence and universality, to reclaim 


1 Com. in. Joh. I. 22, Lom. I, p. 43, cited Harnack, ib. 
? Gardner, Growth of Christianity, p. roo. 


ESTIMATION OF GNOSTICISM 405 


as its rightful heritage in the name of Christ the rich 
message of Hellas as the revelation of divine truth in 
history. By such a recognition Christianity will not 
become less Christian, but will incorporate new elements 
of power and deepen its content in its appeal to man's 
nature in its entirety. 

If the struggle with Gnosticism and with Montanism 
led as a precautionary measure to the closing or crystal- 
lization of Revelation in a book, a tradition, and a holy 
office, the enemy has been sufficiently vanquished to 
enable us with safety to recognize to-day the possibility 
of fresh truth, as in the first generation, and to 
acknowledge the continued revealing activity of the 
Spirit of the Father who ‘ worketh up to the present.’ 
We may also discover a deeper and more intimate 
content in Revelation by recognizing that it is not some- 
thing dropped from another world and attested externally 
by miracle and guaranteed by an hierarchical office, but 
rather as something arising from and concomitant with 
all history as the record of those who from the beginning 
of time have been ' fellow-workers with God ' and in 
the oracular experiences of the soul through the ages. 

There are two ways in which we should estimate 
Gnosticism : 

First, by the remains of the Gnostics themselves. Too 
long have the Gnostics been condemned unheard at the 
bar of their ecclesiastical opponents,’ who rarely under- 
stood them and more rarely had the grace to tell the 
truth dispassionately. The Church Fathers were con- 
troversialists—a difficult office in the present constitution 
of human nature. We should hear what the Gnostics, 


1 The Church Fathers ''took minor and unimportant details and 
magnified them and treated them as the essentials of a system or 
systems. . . . The essential principles were largely the same through- 
out; the difference was chiefly in regard to details. It is this conduct 
on the part of the Fathers that gives us such a distorted and often 
ridiculous view of Gnosticism ’’ (McGiffert, Proleg. to Church History 
of Eusebius, Y, p. 179, n. 17, cited in Horner's tr. of Pistis Sophia, 


p. iv). 


on 


406 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


who were libelled by their opponents ‘savage wild 
beasts,’ ‘ sons of the Devil,’ antichrists, mad dogs, liars, 
atheists, madmen, doomed to unquenchable fire, and 
were held guilty of nameless obscenities and ludicrous 
puerilities, have to say, and read their few extant prayers 
and their hymns. Even Hippolytus finds it difficult to 
make a good case against the Ophites in the Hymn of 
the Naassenes expressing the aspiration of the soul, in 
which they ‘ hymn all the mysteries of their error ’: 


‘ Now she weeps (and now) rejoices; 
Now laments (and now) is judged; 
Now is judged (and now) is dying. 
Now no outlet is left or she wandering 
The labyrinth of woes has entered, 
But Jesus said: Father, behold! 

A strife of woes upon Earth 

From thy breath has fallen, 

But she seeks to flee malignant chaos 
And knows not how to win through it. 
For this cause send me, O Father, 
Holding seals I will go down, 
Through entire aeons I will pass. 
All mysteries I will disclose; 

The forms of the gods I will display; 
The secrets of the holy way 

Called Gnosis, I will hand down.’ ! 


He quotes a Naassene writer as saying, ‘ The beginning 
of perfection is the knowledge of man, but the knowledge 
of God is completed perfection,’ surely an inoffensive 
tenet. 

The Hymn of the Soul ? presents with all the wealth of 
Oriental imagery the mythos of the descent and redemp- 
tion of the Soul under the symbolism of a king’s son 
gorgeously robed and sent into Egypt to bring a pearl 
guarded by a serpent. Seduced by the allurement of 
Egypt, he neglected his mission and forgot that he was 

1 Philosophoumena, tr. Legge, I, p. 145. 

2 In Acts of Thomas, 108-13; Eng. tr. by James, Apoc. N.T. p. 411 ff., 
by F. C. Burkitt as the Hymn of Bardaisan, and by G. R. S. Mead as 
the Hymn of the Robe of Glory; German tr. in original metre by 


Schultz, Dokumente der Gnosis, p. 13 ff. Cf. Bevan, Texts and Studies, 
V. 3; Hoffmann, Zeitschr. f. neut. Wiss., IV, p. 273 ff. 


GNOSTIC HYMNS AND PRAYERS 407 


a king's son until he received a missive from the home- 
land declaring— 
* Unto our Son that is in Egypt, peace. 
Rise up and wake out of sleep, and hearken unto the words of the 
letter, 
And remember that thou art a king's son; lo, thou hast come under 
the yoke of bondage. 
Remember the pearl... . 
Remember thy garment spangled with gold. . . . 
Thy name is named in the Book of Life.’ 


He bestirred himself, rescued the pearl from the serpent, 
cast off his filthy garments, and ‘directed my way 
forthwith to the light of my Fatherland.’ Laboriously 
he made his return, arrayed himself in a resplendent 
royal robe, and the father ‘ rejoiced over me and 
received me with him into his palace ’—a story of 
aspiration and redemption which recalls the parable of 
the Prodigal and in which the writer of the Acts of 
Thomas probably saw + the descent of Christ through 
the aeons to redeem the soul from the bondage of matter 
and restore it cleansed to the Father. 

From the Acts of John (106-7) may be cited the 
admonition of the apostle before administering the 
Eucharist: 


* Brethren and fellow-servants and coheirs and par- 
takers with me in the kingdom of the Lord, ye know the 
Lord, how many mighty works He hath granted you 
by my means. . . . Be ye therefore established in Him, 
remembering Him in your every deed, knowing the 
mystery of the dispensation which hath come to pass 
_towards men, for what cause the Lord hath accomplished 
it. . . . Let not then our good God be grieved, . . . 
even our God Jesus Christ, who is above every name 
that we can utter or conceive, and more exalted. Let 
Him rejoice with us because we walk aright, let Him 
be glad because we live purely, let Him be refreshed 
because our conversation is sober. Let Him be without 
care because we live continently, let Him be pleased 

1 So Preuschen, Zwei Gnost. Hymnen, p. 46 ff; Bousset, Haupt- 
probleme, p. 252 ff. 


408 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


because we communicate one with another, let Him smile 
because we are chaste, let Him be merry because we 
love Him.' 


Or his pre-eucharistic prayer (108), which is more in 
the spirit of Bernard of Clairvaux than the utterance of 
* savage beasts ’: 


*O Jesu, who hast woven this crown with Thy 
weaving, who hast joined together these many blossoms 
into the unfading flower of Thy countenance, who hast 
sown in them these words: Thou only tender of Thy 
servants, and physician who healest freely: only doer 
of good and despiser of none, only merciful and lover 
of men, only saviour and righteous, only seer of all, 
who art in all and everywhere present and containing 
all things and filling all things. Christ Jesu, God, Lord, 
that with Thy gifts and Thy mercy shelterest them that 
trust in Thee, that knowest clearly the wiles and the 
assaults of him that is everywhere our adversary, which 
he deviseth against us: do Thou only, O Lord, succour 
Thy servants by Thy visitation. Even so, Lord! ' 


The final prayer of the dying apostle bears re- 
semblances to the language of Augustine: 


* O Thou who hast kept me until this hour for Thyself 
and untouched by union with a woman: who when in 
my youth I desired to marry didst appear unto me and 
say to me, John, I have need of thee: who didst prepare 
for me also a sickness of the body: who, when for the 
third time I would marry, didst forthwith prevent me, 
and then at the third hour of the day saidst unto me 
on the sea: John, if thou hadst not been Mine I should 
have suffered thee to marry: . . . who didst save me 
from the temporal fantasy and lead me into that which 
endureth always: who didst rid me of the foul madness 
that is in the flesh: who didst take me from the bitter 
death and establish me on Thee alone: who didst muzzle 
the secret disease of my soul and cut off the open deed: 
who didst afflict and banish him that raised tumult in 
me: who didst make my love of Thee spotless: . . . now 


GNOSTIC CHASTITY 409 


therefore, Lord, whereas I have accomplished the dis- 
pensation wherewith I was entrusted, account me worthy 
of Thy rest, and grant me that end in Thee which is 
salvation unspeakable and unutterable. . . . And grant 

. me to accomplish the journey unto Thee without suffering 
insolence or provocation, and to receive that which Thou 
hast promised unto them that live purely and have loved 
Thee only.’ * 


In Valentinus’ faith there was a cordial acceptance of 
the beatitude of Jesus (Matt. v. 8): ‘ There is one Good, 
whose presence is the manifestation by the Son, and 
through Him alone can the heart become pure and every 
evil spirit be banished from the heart. . . . When the 
only good Father visits the soul, it is sanctified and 
becomes radiant with light. He who has such a heart 
is blessed because he shall see God.’ ? 

The use of the canonical Psalms and the Odes of 
Solomon ? in the circles of the Pistis Sophia gives some 
indication of the warmth of Gnostic piety as also Gnostic 
taste in hymnody. In the section of the Pistis Sophia 
known as The Books of the Saviour Jesus instructs His 
disciples: * Whenever I should go unto the Light, preach 
ye to all the world, say unto them, Desist not in the 
day with the night seeking, and hold not yourselves back 
even until ye find the mysteries of the kingdom of the 
Light ' ; and then to the refrain ‘ that ye may be worthy 
of the mysteries of the Light ' follow the Renunciations: 
‘ Renounce all this world with all the matter which is 
in it, with all its cares, and with all its sins,' together 
with ‘ the murmuring,’ ' the listening,’ ' litigiousness,’ 
‘false calumny,’ ‘ false witnessings,’ ‘ the boastings 
with the prides,’ ‘ the gluttony,’ ‘ the garrulity,’ ‘ the 
wiles which are evil,’ ‘ the lovings of the greater por- 
tion,’ ‘ the lovings of the world,’ ‘ the robberies,’ ‘ the 


1 Acts of John, 112-14; tr. by James. 
2 Cited by Clement, Strom. II. 20; 114, 3; reading mapovola for 


moappnola. 
* Cf. Gunkel, in Zeit. f. d. neutest. Wiss. IX. 1910. 


410 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


words which are evil,’ ‘ the wickednesses,' ‘ the angers,” 
“the curse,’ ‘the blasphemy,’ 'the thievings,’ ' the 
slander,’ ‘ the fightings and the quarrellings,’ ‘ the 
ignorance,’ ‘ the villanies,’ ‘ the senselessness,’ ‘ the © 
adulteries,’ ‘ the murders,’ ‘ the unmercifulnesses with 
the impiousnesses,’ ‘ the godlessnesses,’ ‘ the witchcraft,’ 
‘the blaspheming,’ ‘the teaching of error.’ Then 
follow exhortations and promises: ‘ do love of man,’ 
be meek, be peaceable, be merciful, do alms, ‘ minister 
unto the poor with those that are sick,’ ‘ do love of 
God,’ be righteous, be good, and ' receive the mysteries 
of the Light.’ * 

In view of the many calumnies of the morality of the 
Gnostics, many citations could be given to prove that 
the peril to morality was the excessive chastity or en- 
cratism which was also practised by their orthodox 
brethren. 

Secondly, Gnosticism should be judged also by 
observing that it was the strongest and sanest opponents 
of Gnosticism who felt its power and recognized the 
rights of Gnosis besides Pistis, especially the writer of 
the Fourth Gospel, Ignatius, Clement, and Origen. 

The writer of the Fourth Gospel made even greater 
concessions to the Gnosis,” which he recognized as 


! Pistis Sophia, 235a-239b; tr. by G. Horner, pp. 128-31. 

? Schaeder's brilliant attempt to construe the Prologue of the Fourth 
Gospel as the Christianizing re-working of a Gnostic hymn in con- 
junction with later Jewish Gnostic material seems unconvincing 
(Studien z. ant. Synkretismus, pp. 306-32, 350). He summarizes: 
“Die mandàáische und die evangelische Überlieferung schöpfen gemein- 
sam aus einer álteren Tradition, die von Johannes aufgenommen und 
von seinen Jüngern auf ihn selber bezogen wurde, und die dann von den 
Johannes-jüngern einerseits an die Verfasser der Evangelienquelle Q 
und des IV. Evangeliums, anderseits—durch unbekannte Zwischen- 
glieder—in das Chaos der mandáischen Überlieferung gelangte” and 
'' Der Prolog des IV. Evangeliums ist, wie die Rekonstruktion seiner 
aramáischen Urgestalt lehrt, die christianisierende Bearbeitung eines 
gnostischen Hymnus, der mit Hilfe der—bei den Mandáern fortlebenden 
—Hauptsymbole der spátjüdischen Gnosis die Einheit des in Welt 
kommenden góttlichen Gesandten Enos mit dem Lichte der góttlichen 
* Wortes ' (Memra) feiert.’’ 


GNOSTIC INFLUENCES 4II 


endangering Christian truth, than he did to the regnant 
sacramentarianism. His scheme of salvation is one of 
illumination and of revelation by the eternal Logos 
rather than one of redemption by the historic trans- 
actions of the passion-history. The glorified Son draws 
men to Himself and grants participation in the heavenly 
glory. This salvation, as against Paul, was accessible 
only to those spiritually endowed, a striking aspect of 
the writer's strong predestinarianism. Life and Light 
are the highest boons bestowed by the Logos Christ. 
The means of the acquisition of this eternal Life and its 
content consist in ' knowing the only genuine God and 
His Apostle Jesus Christ.' 

The dualism between God and the World, Light and 
Darkness, is almost as pronounced as in the system He 
was combating. God is transcendent as in Gnosticism, 
but the gulf is bridged by one divine though subordinate 
Being who fulfils all the functions of the aeons. Jesus’ 
* works ' and ' powers ' become ' signs,’ the inner mean- 
ing of which is disclosed in discourses. 

Ignatius, who was conversant with Gnostic pretensions 
in Asia Minor and cognisant of the dangerous fascination 
of Gnosis, likewise used Gnostic methods and offered 
Gnostic satisfaction to overcome the Docetism he so 
dreaded. In emphasizing the incarnation and the reality 
of the sufferings of Christ, in the corporeity of the 
eucharistic presence, in his opposition to excessive 
allegorism and to the rigours of asceticism, he stood 
resolutely apart from Gnosticism. But he did not 
hesitate to employ its mysticism, or to speak of ‘ the 
Logos proceeding forth from the Silence’ (Magn. 8). 
Christians may ' always partake of God’ (Eph. 4) and 
be ‘ filled with God’ (Magn. 14). In the ‘ three 
mysteries of crying’ which deceived ‘ the Archon of 
this aeon ° and the ‘star above all stars’ (Eph. ro) 
there appears a '' Gnostic colouring ’’ as detected by 
Lightfoot. Similarly the cosmic elements in Paul are 
enlarging toward Gnosticism in the sure judgment 


412 GNOSTICISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


awaiting ‘ the heavenly existences ' and ‘ the visible and 
invisible principalities ' which do not believe in the blood 
of Christ (Smyr. 6). 

Clement is the most striking example of how advan- 
tageously Christianity might have been presented so as 
to satisfy the legitimate demands of the Gnostic for a 
philosophy of history and for a comprehensive theology. 
He understood Gnosticism and he welcomed philosophy 
and mysticism in the interpretation of the facts of 
Christian history. To Clement the true Christian is the 
true Gnostic, and the true Gnostic is ‘ the Lord's brother 
and friend and son.’* The Gnostic ‘ practises being 
God’ and ' has already become God.’ ? 

Similarly, to Origen, Christianity was Gnosis, but the 
true and only Gnosis. Though he recognized the dangers 
of an aristocratic religion ? in which salvation was rather 
the rescue of the spiritual moiety of men out of the 
general class of natural, in holding that only the ‘ im- 
perfect ' require works * he stood not far apart from 
Valentinus’ teaching that men are saved by becoming 
wholly spiritual ? rather than by works. 

And no Christian philosopher elaborated a more 
comprehensive philosophy of history than did Origen 
in his Principia. A devoted Platonist, a sympathetic 
and shrewd critic of extravagant Gnosticism, a daring 
metaphysician, a thorough Biblical scholar, his range of 
speculation was vaster than that of the only other three 
Christian thinkers who might be compared with him, 
John of Damascus, Aquinas, and Calvin. For him 
Christianity must embrace more than personal salvation 
and forgiveness within the limits of an apocalyptic 
scheme. It must give some definite guidance on the 
great problems on which earnest minds were engaged 
—the origin of the world and of orders of spiritual being, 


2 Str III- To. 2: 1b. IV. 23. 
3 C. Celsum, VII. 6o. 

4 In Ezech. Hom. III. 4, IV, p. 47, Lomm. 
5 Cf. Irenaeus, Adv. Haer. I. 6. 


ORIGEN'S PRINCIPIA 413 


of deliverance from finitude and the attainment of death- 
lessness. Hence in this first Christian Summa there 
appears a comprehensive world-view—angels, reprobate 
and faithful, demons, planets and ensouled stars, men, 
and a descending Redeemer execute the will of a 
Supreme God. 

Had Origen secured a hearing or had successors to 
him arisen, the Church’s victory over Gnosticism would 
have proved less perilous and would have issued in a 
liberalizing and expansive tendency rather than in a 
narrowing and codifying process with anathemas of 
excommunication. 


28 


CHAPTER XXII 


RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC IN PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN 
CIRCLES 


RELIGION and Healing were closely associated in the 
Graeco-Roman world. Soteria connoted to both Pagans 
and Christians more than its special meaning to us; it 
connoted health of body and of soul, for neither 
Christians nor Pagans distinguished rigidly between 
physical ills of body and maladies of soul. The 
philosopher, the Christian teacher, and the medical 
practitioner were all healers. The word soteria meant 
safety, health in fullest human sense, and alleviation of 
pain to which individualism had rendered people more 
sensitive. Medical language was used in moral teaching 
and preaching, religious language in the work of 
medicine. Vices were diseases in the eyes of Christian 
teachers and Stoic and Platonic moralists. Even sacra- 
ments were spoken of as medicine, baptism being 
“medicinal water’ and the Eucharist ‘ medicine of 
immortality, and penance a vera de satisfactione 
medicina. Philosophy is to Porphyry ‘ the salvation 
of the soul, and ‘ the medicine of our doctrine ' * is 
the cure of every rational soul. Clement, using the 
same medical language, says: 


* Censure is like a surgical operation on the passions 
of the soul. The latter are abscesses on the body of 
the truth, and they must be cut open by the lancet of 
censure. Censure is like the application of a medicine 
which breaks up the callosities of the passions, and 
cleanses the impurities of a lewd life, reducing the 


! Origen, C. Celsum, III. 54. 
414 


HEALING IN RELIGION 415 


swollen flesh of pride, and restoring the man to health 
and truth once more.’ * 


‘ Even as the physician secures health for those who 
co-operate with him to that end, so does God secure 
eternal salvation for those who co-operate with Him 
for knowledge and good behaviour. ? This ancient 
alliance of religion and medicine, which has been ratified 
afresh in the various forms of psychotherapy in minister- 
ing to minds diseased and in the general recognition 
that the physician must know the inner history of his 
patient to minister to his physical diseases, is quite 
explicable in the conditions of the Graeco-Roman age.? 

The break-up of collectivism and the dominance of 
individualism with a deepening inwardness and a new 
emotionalism produced a keen sensitiveness to suffering. 
“ The refinements of material civilization and mental 
culture made people more sensitive to the element of 
pain in life. . . . There was a real demand for purity, 
consolation, expiation, and healing, and as these could 
not be found elsewhere, they began to be sought in 
religion.” * Men faced suffering in the same twofold 
fashion of to-day, desiring an escape (soteria) or seeking 
support in it from a fellow-being or a supernatural being 
—a desire for sympathia which made ‘ man a sacred 
thing to man’ (Seneca), and which heightened the 
prestige of the Mystery-gods, who each and all offered 
sympathia in a communion or identification, and this 
was a fellowship of deities who had themselves been 
previously either ' men of sorrows ' or divine sufferers. 

Moreover, beside a fairly advanced science of 
medicine, as witnessed by the works of Hipparchus and 
Galen, and the surgical finds in Pompeii, and numerous 

1 Paed. I. 8, 64f., cited Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, I, 
p. 140 f., whence tr. 

? Strom. VII. 7, 48, tr. ib. p. 142. 

* Cf. C. R. Simboli, Disease-Spirits and Divine Cures among the 


Greeks and Romans (New York, 1921). 
* Harnack, op. cit. p. 127. 


416 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


medical practitioners, there was still a strong belief, not 
only among the populace but among the enlightened, in 
what was regarded as supernatural or faith-healings. 
When physicians failed, sufferers had still the temple- 
hospitals to visit. Hospitals were not as numerous and 
as accessible as to-day and medical practitioners were 
not such a numerous brotherhood. 

In a less scientific age than our own there were 
abundant opportunities for the religious cultivation of 
the healing art. We must remember that it took the 
highly efficient medical science of to-day centuries to 
sever its original connexions with magic and alchemy, 
and the identity of the barber and the dentist belongs 
to no remote antiquity. Mediaeval London of six cen- 
turies ago stood nearer to this ancient period in the 
practice of calling in the priest rather than a doctor in 
cases of severe wounds. There were also psychopathic 
conditions in the ancient world, as to-day, which could 
not be assigned exclusively to either the medical 
or to the religious department, and common sense 
wisely assigned them to both. Such was demon- 
possession, which covered a large number of 
modern nerve-derangements and abnormal psychic 
states. 

In the origins of our own faith we find the same 
alliance of religion and healing, an alliance which 
obtained throughout centuries and has left the ‘ Good 
Physician ' as one of the titles of the Christian Saviour. 
Jesus, despite the fact that He looked upon cures as 
generally interruptions to His main work and the cause 
of deceptive popularity, occasionally exercised the 
healing virtues that were usually expected from prophets 
and men of God, and with such success that He was 
probably the most popular physician in Galilee. He 
used the language of medicine (Mark ii. 17, Luke v. 31), 
and admitted that the popular proverb ‘ Physician, heal 
thyself, might be applied to Himself, whose motto was 
to find life by laying it down. Like His contemporaries, 


JESUS AS PHYSICIAN 417 


He did not strictly differentiate between physical and 
spiritual ailments. Like His contemporaries, He regarded 
various form of mental disturbances and nervous diseases 
as due to demon-possession, which He on occasion, by 
His commanding authority, expelled, and proved an 
efficient exorcist even in cases that baffled His disciples, 
though in others He failed through the absence of con- 
comitant faith (Mark vi. 5, 6). 

The Gospels portray Jesus as physician both of body 
and of soul, but that the emphasis laid by the Gospels, 
especially by Mark, on Jesus' miracles of healing and 
exorcisms and their evidential value is much exaggerated 
and represents rather a rescript of the popular beliefs 
of the early Church and the demand for signs, the 
Gospels themselves give evidence. No professed wonder- 
worker or healer would have left a crowd of sick people, 
after healing some of them, and fled before dawn from 
his usual abode to a quiet place outside the town and 
not only refused to return at the entreaty of his disciples, 
who were sensitive to their Master's popularity and to 
the appeal of physical sufferings, but affirmed that he 
must go elsewhere to preach, a mission which was 
threatened by the healings which Jesus’ compassion 
rendered a temptation to Him. 

That He claimed no monopoly of the performance of 
exorcisms or any exclusive method is also clear, as He 
admitted that even His critics could do the same. He 
sternly rebuked His disciples for their attempt to hinder 
others in the exercise of exorcisms. 

The words whereby Jesus describes His work in 
Luke vii. 18, Matthew xi. 2 ff. are the symbolic expres- 
sions of a prophet describing the religious revival of his 
people in the language of healing, as Hosea described 
such a revival as a ‘ raising up again.’ If taken literally, 
as physical signs, they would render pointless the 
Baptist’s mission as they exhibit all the exterior signs 
that could be wished for. And Luke’s attempt to render 
the words into physical acts by bringing certain classes 


418 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


of diseases on the spot to be dealt with as outward 
evidences is only partially successful inasmuch as the 
lepers and the dead are absent. Further, this array of 
faith-healings culminating in ‘dead men are being 
raised ’ leads to an anti-climax in ‘ the outcastes are 
receiving the good news.’ Finally, if this were a 
catalogue of such outward signs as Luke states, it renders 
otiose the clause, ‘ Blessed is he whosoever is not 
offended in Me,’ as even the most sign-seeking age or 
prophet would be satisfied and find no cause of ' offence ’ 
in such a list. 

Jesus’ consistent attitude toward sign-seeking, which 
he characterized as the expression or symptom of an 
‘adulterous and sinful generation’ and which He refused 
to satisfy, would be stultified if His miraculous works 
bulked so largely in His mission as they do on the pages 
of the Gospels, to the writers of which ‘ wonders ' and 
‘ powers ° and ‘signs’ were buttresses of Messianic 
faith. Jesus realized that in His day, as in our advanced 
age, crowds are more actuated by the Wundersucht than 
by love of the eternal things; such gatherings are no 
evidence that there are more physical invalids than 
spiritual invalids in the world. 

It is questionable whether Jesus commanded His 
followers to carry on a practice of the disadvantages of 
which He was acutely aware, but it is certain that in 
the early Church, with its popular character, healings 
and preaching were looked upon as conjoint missionary 
work. When a member of the Christian society grew 
ill, it would have been a breach of faith to call in a 
professional physician ; the non-scientific elders were to 
be summoned, who by their prayers and the age-long 
beneficent custom of massage or unction with oil were 
to restore the sick. The Christians thus acted like their 
fellow-townsmen in the Jewish synagogue, who called 
in the rabbi instead of the doctor. The explanation 
offered in case of the decease of the sick believer we 

1 Cf. Wetstein, Ad Jac. V. 14; Mayor, Ep. of St. James, pp. 169-73. 


PRIMITIVE CHRISTIAN PROPAGANDA 419 


are not given, and as the mortality rates among 
Christians would be approximately the same as among 
non-Christians, the situation must sometimes have been 
delicate. The dangerous epidemic in Corinth was not 
to be arrested by medical prophylactics, but by a proper 
observance of the Love-feast, the abuses of the elements 
of which had caused the epidemic resulting in the deaths 
of several members. Charismata, or gifts of healings, 
were among the more spectacular gifts which abounded 
in the same community, causing envy and being rated 
by its apostolic founder as inferior to the ‘ more excellent 
way ' of love. 

In the early Christian propaganda the Gospel was 
presented as a therapeutic of body, mind, and soul. 
The preacher was a physical healer, and such ' powers 
of healings ' were greatly prized as a boon to sufferers 
and as corroborating the truth of the message. He also 
preached a Lord who was Saviour, and this Saviour 
meant Redeemer-Healer, the potency of whose Name 
was above the potency of His competitor saviours, whose 
saving-acts could not be denied but were merely treated 
as inferior or performed for ulterior evil ends, or inspired 
by demons. 

Jesus was preached as the Redeemer-Healer, as the 
Great Physician who saves and restores life. A Church 
historian * describes Jesus, in language taken from a 
medical textbook of pseudo-Hipparchus, as: ‘ Like 
some excellent physician, in order to cure the sick, Jesus 
examines what is repulsive, handles sores, and reaps 
pain Himself from the sufferings of others.” The vogue 
of the term ‘ physician’ in reference to Jesus in the 
early centuries indicates not only how widely human was 
the conception of His functions, but also testifies to the 
deep sense of need of the centuries when Paganism and 
Christianity stood face to face. A prayer from that 
afflicted age was restored to us in an inscription found 
at Timgad in 1919: ' Come Thou to our help, O Christ ; 

! Eusebius, H.E. X. 4, 11; tr. Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 136. 


420 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


Thou art the only physician. ' But the physical- 
spiritual conception of salvation and the title ‘ physician ° 
were in Christianity from the beginning. ' There is one 
physician of the flesh and of the spirit,’ says Ignatius.’ 
Jesus Christ is ‘ our physician.’ Christ the Logos is 
to Clement? ' the only Paeonian physician of human 
infirmities, and the holy charmer of the sick soul, 
the all-sufficient physician of humanity, and ‘ the 
Logos is called Saviour because he has devised 
rational medicine for men.’ Tertullian names Him 
‘Christ the healer’ and Augustine ' the omnipotent 
physician.’ 

One of the most interesting specimens of Christian 
apologetic extant is that of Origen against Celsus, in 
that it shows how the best-educated Christians were men 
of their age in the acceptance of demonology and in 
their uncritical attitude to miracles * and in the way in 
which they operated with the ideas of their day. It also 
shows how Christians and Pagans agreed in making 
healing part of religion and how with similar arguments 
each of two honest men advocated the relative superiority 
of his Saviour against his rival's Saviour. It is one of 
numerous examples of how Christian apologists then, 
as now, took their weapons from the armoury of their 
enemies and used antiquated and clumsy weapons when 
more efficient weapons lay rusting in their own rich 
armoury. 

Origen is obliged to admit that * miracles occurred in 
all lands, or at least in many places. Celsus himself 
admits in his book that Aesculapius healed diseases and 
revealed the future in all cities that were devoted to 


* Sub(veni) Christe tu solus medicus, in Acad. des Inscr. Comptes 
vendus, 1920, pp. 75-83; Cabrol-Leclercg, Dict. d'archéologie chrét., 
art. Inscriptions, fasc. 72, 1073. 


? Ad Eph. 7. 

pbacd. 1.22716: 

* “ In the field of miracle in the second century the heathen could 
easily match the Christian. . . . The Divine power was everywhere, 


and miracle was in the air " (Dill, Roman Society from Nero, p. 482). 


ORIGEN ON MIRACULOUS CURES 421 


him, such as Tricca, Epidaurus, Cos, and Pergamum,’ * 
a point which Origen can turn only by showing how 
this would lead to the recognition of other divine healers 
besides Aesculapius. Equally feebly Origen, forgetful 
that apotheosis was the earliest form of Christology, 
replies to Celsus' objection that the Christians' refusal 
to acknowledge Aesculapius as divine is due to his having 
been first a man by remarking that Zeus killed 
Aesculapius with a thunderbolt. 

When we remember that the first preaching of the 
living Lord rested not on an empty tomb and a 
physically tangible form, but on ‘ appearances, we 
realize what a subtle objection Celsus raised when he 
affirmed that ‘a considerable number of men, both 
Greeks and foreigners, confess they have seen and still 
see not a mere ghost of Aesculapius, but Aesculapius 
himself healing and doing good and predicting the 
future, ? whereas Christians are satisfied to believe in 
such ghostly appearances. It may seem strange to 
us that Origen did not deny such appearances of 
Aesculapius, but he could not with safety do so, as he 
lived in an age sensitive to theophanies. Neither does 
he appeal to the Gospel narratives of physical reanima- 
tion, but merely to the dangerous popular argument that 
Jesus had won as many suffrages as Aesculapius since 
“a countless number of Greeks and foreigners accept 
Jesus.’ 

One is relieved to find that Origen, as if conscious that 
he had been using merely the weapons of his adversary, 
- shifts the argument to higher ground in affirming: ° 


' Even were I going to admit that a demon named 
Aesculapius had the power of healing bodily diseases, 
I might still remark to those who are amazed at such 
cures or at the prophecies of Apollo, that such curative 
power is of itself neither good nor bad, but within reach 
of godless as well as of honest folk; while in the same 

1 TII. 3; tr. Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 130. 
MILE 24: 3 III. 25; tr. Harnack, op. cit. I, p. 131. 


422 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


way it does not follow that he who can foretell the 
future is on that account an honest and upright man. 
One is not in a position to prove the virtuous character 
of those who heal diseases and foretell the future. Many 
instances may be adduced of people being healed who 
did not deserve to live, people who were so corrupt and 
led a life of such wickedness that no sensible physician 
would have troubled to cure them. . . . The power of 
healing diseases is no evidence of anything specially 
divine.’ 


The work of the Church embraced the functions of 
the medical profession, the nursing profession, and the 
ministry of preaching. Care of the sick of body was its 
duty as much as soul-culture, and people devoted their 
lives to Christ the Healer as others did to Aesculapius 
the Healer. Its inspiration was ‘the kindness and 
philanthropy of God our Saviour.’ Christianity— 


** did more than set up the actual Jesus against the 
imaginary Aesculapius of dreamland. Deliberately and | 
consciously it assumed the form of 'the religion of 
salvation or healing,’ or ‘ the medicine of soul and body,’ 
and at the same time it recognized that one of its cardinal 
duties was to care assiduously for the sick in body."' ! 


The associations of medicine cling to the ideals of the 
Church. Reference has been made to the summoning 
of the elders and unction with oil in James, which is 
not mentioned as something novel in the life of the 
community. The words on the return of the disciples 
to Jesus, ' they anointed with oil them that were sick,’ 
depict rather the condition of the Church in the days 
when the evangelist wrote. Elders are charged to care 
for the sick and neglect no poor person.? The presiding 
officer (bishop) is to dispense from the weekly offerings 
of the local ecclesia to those who are in want through 
sickness.? 


! Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 131. 
? Polycarp, VI. r. ? Justin, Apol. I. 67. 


‘MEDICINE OF SOUL AND BODY’ 423 


In the developing organization of the Church the 
bishop * became the centre of supervision of the sick 
and poor relief, and under him were deacons and female 
assistants or deaconesses. The bishop is himself com- 
pared to a physician or surgeon. The deacons are to 
be ' the eyes of the bishop,' inquiring not only into the 
conduct of Church members, but ‘ let them find out the 
physically sick and tell the congregation who are in 
ignorance of them that they may be visited, and let 
them supply the wants [of the sick] according to the 
decision of the president.'? The following description 
from the Apostolic Constitutions of the duties and 
qualifications of a * widow ' sounds very modern: ' She 
is to be obliging and sober, she is to report cases of need 
to the elders, she is not to be greedy or addicted to 
drink, in order that she may be able to keep sober for 
calls to service during the night.' ? 

So insistent was the Church on its duty of caring for 
the sick that none was exempted on the ground of not 
being a trained nurse or skilled in medicine: ' The sick 
are not to be overlooked, nor is anyone to say that he 
has not been trained to this mode of service. No one 
is to plead a comfortable life, or the unwonted character 
of the duty, as a pretext for not being helpful to other 
people.' * 

Pagans were in agreement with Christians in making 
healing a part of religion, and though Christians were 
on the whole conspicuous in the exercise of love, the 
virtues of loving-kindness and care for the sick were not 
neglected by their Pagan contemporaries. The ideal 
of humanity of the ancient physicians is attested by 
the instruction given in the Parangeliae of Pseudo- 
Hipparchus: 


! Probably in many cases himself a physician; cf. Harnack, Expansion, 
I, p. 149. 

? Ps.-Clem. Ep. ad Jac. XII; tr. Harnack, op. cit. p. 150. 

3 Cited Harnack, op. cit. p. 149. 

4 Harnack, op. cit. p. 150. 


424 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


‘I charge you not to show yourselves inhuman, but 
to take the wealth or poverty [of the patient] into 
account, in certain cases even to treat them gratis and 
to consider future gratitude more than present fame. If, 
therefore, the summons for aid happens to be the case 
of an unknown or impecunious man, he is most of all 
to be assisted; for wherever there is love to one's 
neighbour, it means readiness to act.’ * 


The unscientific and popular view predominated in 
the early Church. Christians, convinced that Christ 
was ' Healer' in the double sense, were inclined to 
despise ? the medical profession as the possession of 
heathendom and as identical with magical operations, 
and to trust to their own methods of cure by fasting, 
prayer, the use of the potency of the Name of Jesus, 
and by unction with oil. Yet the leading Church Fathers 
did not accept this rejection of the use of recognized 
medical means, but the popular view proved more 
tenacious, and in the first conflict of science and religion 
in Christianity, science was denied its rights, only to 
claim them in later centuries, after the science of 
medicine had passed through its dark ages of neglect 
of inquiry and experiment. 

Another evidence of the persistence of the unscientific 
popular spirit and the contact of religion and disease 
was the widespread belief that God used diseases and 
plagues to punish the unbelievers and the enemies of 
Christianity. Both Pagans and Christians stood on the 
same footing, the former accusing Christians of the 
calamities and sufferings which fell thick and fast upon 
the Mediterranean world in the third and fourth cen- 
turies. This argument must often have proved as broken 
a reed in Christian hands as that of matching Pagan 

! Harnack, Expansion, I, p. 128. 

2 “ Muss man sich freilich erinnern, dass die Medicin mit Zauberei, 
Astrologie, und dem ganzen Apparat des Heidentums zusammenhing, 
und dass die Christen ihre eigene Methode der Heilung hatten. Den- 


noch verwarfen die grossen Kirchenváter die Medicin als solche nicht ”’ 
(Harnack, Medicinisches aus der ältesten Kirchengeschichte, p. 56). 


EPIDAURUS 425 


miracle with Christian miracle, and Pagan exorcisms 
with Christian exorcisms. But it offered a crude 
exhibition of justice and satisfied the popular clamant 
demand for visibility in the operations of deity. If the 
apocalyptist John, somewhat forgetful of the dying 
prayer of Jesus, exercises his imagination in inventing 
tortures for the majority of mankind who have per- 
secuted the elect, and if the Christian jurist Tertullian 
can represent part of the bliss of Christians hereafter as 
the contemplation of their opponents in torture in hell, 
it need not astonish us that some premonitory examples 
of this retribution were enacted here, despite the view 
that the victims of the collapse of the tower of Siloam 
are not necessarily thereby adjudged sinners beyond the 
survivors. The writer of Acts represents Judas as dying 
not by his own hand, as in Matthew, but by an accident 
on his own farm. 

As we journey to-day from the ruins and museum of 
Epidaurus to the Roman Cathedral with its black Virgin 
overlooking Algiers in the ancient province of Mauretania 
and on to Lourdes, it is difficult to realize that one has 
traversed such distances in miles or in era. After all 
that time and Christian fanaticism have done to 
Epidaurus,? the personal testimony still graven on stones 

and the vota of the limbs or portions of the body healed 
by the great Healer belong to the same world of ideas ? 


! E.g. both Pagans and Christians turned to their respective apolo- 
getic purposes the legend of the Thundering Legion and the providential 
rainfall, the Christians by attributing the happy issue to their prayers, 
and the Pagans with equal conviction assigning it to their prayers, 
directed to the Immortal Gods, especially to Jupiter Pluvius, as on the 
Antonine column. Cf. Dio Cassius, LXXI. 8; Tert. Apol. 5; Orosius, 
VII. 17; Eusebius, H.E. V. 5. 

? For account of the excavations by the Greek Archaeological 
Society, vide Ephemeris Archaeol. 1883, p. 197, 1887. 

3 Consult Frazer's note, Pawsanias, III, p. 248 ff. The cures include 
Thyson, a blind boy; Cleon, a woman with child five years; Arata's 
daughter for dropsy; an Aristagora of Troezen with a worm in her 
stomach, whose head was cut off by the sons of Aesculapius, the worm 
removed, and then she was sewed up; Gorgias, for an arrow wound 
received in battle in one lung. 


426 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


as the votive offerings crowding the walls in the modern 
Catholic cathedral of Algiers or in its shrine of Lourdes. 
They are alike attestations of the reality of faith-cures 
and the potency of expectation and suggestion and the 
control of spirit over body. Of course as a weapon of 
religious apologetic such cures lose their force as also 
taking place daily on those who have little or no religious 
sympathies and at the hands of “‘ unordained '' doctors. 
Exorcisms are being performed to-day both without and 
within the Church. 

Pagans and Christians alike turned to religion for 
healing of mind and body, and the boundaries between 
religious ritual, magical incantations, and medical 
prescriptions were somewhat fluctuating.! Serapis early 
added to his popularity by taking over the functions of 
Aesculapius or by being through theocrasia identified * 
with him, and at least in one of his shrines there is 
evidence of a chapel of Aesculapius being attached.* At 
Serapis’ shrine of Canopus, Strabo * found multitudes 
of patients of all ranks of society attracted by the 
miraculous cures of the god. His consort Isis was 
equally celebrated for her miraculous cures*; even 
hopeless cases of inveterate disease were successfully 
treated by her deity, so that her priests could confidently 
point to the walking testimonies of her divine healing.‘ 
In the National Museum of Naples to-day may be seen 
the vota once offered by her grateful clients in the local 

1 '''The conditions of health and disease are so obscure, the influ- 
ences of will and imagination on our bodily states are so marked, that, 
in all ages, the boundaries between the natural and the unknowable are 
blurred and may be easily crossed. The science of medicine, even down 
to the age of Hipparchus or the age of Galen, had not abandoned all 
faith in the magical and mysterious.  Incantations long held their 


ground beside more scientific remedies '' (Dill, Rom. Society from 
Nero, p. 459). 

? Bouché-Leclercq, Rev. de l'hist. des relig., 1902, p. 39. 

? Cf. De Preslé, Le Sérapeum de Memphis, p. 261 ff. ` 

* XVII. 17. For other miracles of Serapis, cf. Oxyrh. Papyri, 1242, 
and O. Weinrich, Neue Urkunden zur Serapis-Religion, pp. 12, 19, 31. 

5 Cf. C.I.G. 2304; C.I.G. II. 3386. 

Sa Diod. Sich 1,725. 


INCUBATION IN TEMPLES 427 


temple. In her temples painted representations * of cures 
prompted prayers from expectant sufferers, as in 
Tibullus: ? 
' Nunc Dea, nunc sucurre mihi, nam posse mederi 
Picta docet templis multa tabella tuis.' 

The institutions of religion extended their organization 
to embrace the medical functions, and by this means 
undoubtedly increased their endowments and their 
clientele. If our modern cathedrals had physicians 
enrolled on their staffs and also managed the hotels in 

- which their patients resided, it would give us some idea 
of the condition of affairs in important centres of the 
Graeco-Roman world. Incubatio,’ the practice of sleep- 
ing by proxy or personally within the consecrated 
precincts of the temple, was much in vogue, and on 
the site of Epidaurus to this day the ground-plans both 
of accommodation for tourists and of a dormitory for 
inquiring sleepers-in are traceable. The chief object of 
the enkoimesis was to be vouchsafed a dream-oracle of 
directions as to the curative treatment.* As in every 
beneficent institution, there was opportunity in incubatio 
to impose on credulity and to practise charlatanry for 
the profit of a religious centre. Also from the constitution 
of our nature all patients would not be alike psychically 
responsive and their imagination would require artificial 
aid or even deception from the temple acolytes. No 
doubt, in many cases robed human beings did service 
for the theophany and human lips whispered to the 
occupants of the incubatio ward the generally wholesome 
directions and dietary. But after discounting liberally 
for all such imposture and for the greed of grasping 

1 Cf. Caton, Temples and Ritual of Asklepios, p. 36 f. 

a: 1:537 27. 

3 Cf. Hamilton, Incubation, or Cure of Disease in Pagan Temples and 
Christian Churches (London, 1906); Walton, Cult of Asklepios, pp. 57-66; 
Deubner, De Incubatione. 

* In Greece to-day the practice of patients sleeping in the shrine of 


a favourite ikon or saint is still known. In Southern Italy and Sicily 
to-day the sick often prefer a local patron saint or madonna to physic. 


428 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


priesthoods, there is abundant evidence? that to faith and 
psychically-predisposed patients such salutary dream- 
oracles were granted and such ' appearances ' vouch- 
safed. To understand adequately the hold of Aesculapius 
on his worshippers, or indeed to put ourselves en rapport 
with ancient religious possibilities, we must keep in mind 
that divine epiphanies and the reception of supernatural 
messages belonged to the accepted creeds of Pagans and 
Christians.? It did not occur to Christian contemporaries 
to set down the therapeutic appearances of their healing 
rivals to fraud, but rather to attribute them to demons 
or to demon-infected statues of the gods. Origen did not 
seek to evade the difficulty of Celsus' appeal to the 
numerous and even contemporary ' appearances ' of 
Aesculapius by denying them. Nor did Jerome deny 
such divine visits of Aesculapius at Epidaurus in 
the first half of the fifth century. Christians in 
Rome could not dispute the testimony, engraved on 
stone, of Roman officials who had personally ex- 
perienced thesalutary vision. Besides, if there were 
shrewd priests there were also shrewd patients, all 
of whom could not be deceived. Psychology also 
renders it unnecessary to appeal to fraud. The tense 
expectancy of relief on the part of acute sufferers, the 
medical treatment with drug and herb, the infectious 
faith of the ministrant priests, and the evidence in stone 
and clay and lead and on painted canvas of those who 
had received their desires with the additional testimony 
from the lips of convalescent or restored friends and 
acquaintances, the prescribed religious-dietary fasting, 
the overwrought brain and racked nerve, the vesper 
prayers and promises of religion, the injunction of 
silence, and the catholic belief in mysterious interven- 


5 Cf., e.g., Oxy. Pap. 1381, 102 ff. 

2 Cf. L. Weniger, Theophanien; altgriechische Gótteradvente (Archiv 
f. Religionsw. XXII, pp. 16-57): Pfister, in Pauly-Wissowa, IV, Supp. 
p. 277 ff.; epiphany of the God and healings, ib. 295. 

3 In Is. 55 (p. 482). 


RELIGIOUS-MEDICAL REGIME 429 


tions—these and other conditions all contributed toward 
the end sought by the patients.' 

Apart from the dream-oracles of incubatio, the whole 
religious-medical régime was calculated to work for 
' the restoration of numerous worshipper-patients. If 
the ancients were shrewd enough to advertise their 
demonstrable cases of successful miraculous healing to 
attest their science-faith and to be reticent on their 
failures, they merely used the discretion observed among 
faith-healers to-day. But similar conditions would 
- produce similar results then and now. The change to 
a bracing and beautiful spot, the regulation of diet, the 
. complete rest, gymnastic exercises,” the comforts of 
religious ritual, lecture-rooms ? to divert or occupy the 
mind, the virtues of naturally or artificially medicated 
springs, the assiduous attendance of nurses, produced 
results similar to those at numerous spas to-day. 

The vogue of the comprehensive idea of soteria as 
physical-spiritual, and the universal inclination to seek 
. healing in religion are attested by the extraordinary 
growth of the cult of Aesculapius, who from being a 
local Thessalian earth-demon became the great 
cecumenical Saviour-God ° in the second and third 
centuries. Not without reason was it believed by the 
ancients, 


“To mortals Apollo ê gave Aesculapius and Plato; 
The One a healer of the body, the Other a healer of the soul.’ 


He had established his reputation in Rome as early as 
290 B.C., when, summoned from Epidaurus, he stayed 
a great pestilence. His shrines multiplied with wonderful 
rapidity through the lands of the Mediterranean basin. 


2 Cf. Dill, Roman Society from Nero, p. 460 f. 

2 E.g. Dittenberger, Sylloge, 3rd.ed. III. 1170, 9; cf. Allbutt, Greek 
Medicine in Rome, p. 462. 

$ Cf. Traemer, in Roscher, Awsfühv. Lex. I, col. 631. 

4 Cf. A. Walton, The Cult of Asklepios, in Cornell Studies in Class. 
Phil. III. 

5 Cf. Farnell, Higher Aspects of Greek Religion, p. 123. 

$ Apollo himself is the Physician (e.g. Aristophanes, Birds, 584). 


29 


430 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


He attracted sufferers under the name of religion to each 
of his shrines, as to-day does Lourdes. He was so 
helpful and granted such gracious appearances of 
himself, that he proved one of the last of the competitors 
of Christ to yield. And when he yielded he bequeathed 
to his more successful rival a salvationist terminology 
and sound rules of health which were to carry men on 
through many centuries. He won from sincere hearts 
such titles as ‘ Saviour of the world,’ * ' the great Joy 
to all mortals,’ ? Lord,* Healer, ‘ Gentle One,’ ‘ the 
greatest lover of men.’ By his miracles of healing he 
evoked enthusiasm such as expressed in the following 
prayer: * 


‘These are the words of thy loving servant, O 
Asklepios, child of Leto’s son. How shall I come into 
thy golden house, O blessed one, O God of my longing, 
unless thy heart is favourable to me and thou art willing 
to heal me and establish me again in thy shrine, that 
I may behold my God who is brighter than the earth 
in springtime? Thou alone, O divine and blessed one, 
art mighty. Thee, that lovest compassion, the Supreme 
Gods have granted as a mighty boon to mortals, as a 
refuge from their sorrows.’ 


In his sanatoria men acquired health of body and 
restoration of mind. The evidences of his humane 
services are abundant both from inscriptions and 
archaeological remains and from literature. ‘ His 
oracles are everywhere on earth.’ ? His sanatoria were 
found in Ephesus, Pergamum, the island of Cos, Tricca, 
in Corinth, in Athens, in Rome on an island of the 
Tiber, Tarentum, Aegae, and elsewhere. 

Pausanias,* the archaeologist, records of the temple of 
Epidaurus: ‘Inside the enclosure pillars had been 


1 Julian, Orat. IV. 153b. 

2 Pausanias, II. 26, 6 (171). 3 Aristides, 72. 

4 C.I.A. III. 171. Farnell's tr., Greek Hero-Cults, De 2772 

5 Julian, Against the Galileans, 235c. 8: "I1..275 53:1 c£:380 E 


AESCULAPIUS THE SAVIOUR 43I 


erected: of old there were many, but in my day six 
still remain, and on these are inscribed the names of 
the men and women who had been cured by Aesculapius 
with the addition of the disease from which each patient 
suffered and the means of the cure.’ Strabo,’ the 
geographer, records that Aesculapius ‘ has his temple 
always full both of the patients and of those engaged 
in erecting votive tablets inscribed with the cures effected, 
as in Cos and Tricca.’ 

Aristides’ eulogy on Aesculapius is based on personal 
testimony. It is too long to cite, but extracts may give 
an idea of this first-hand testimony: ‘ Both great and 
many are the powers (dvvduers, miracles) of Aesculapius, 
or rather of all kinds.’ ‘ He it is who disposes and 
guides all things, the saviour of all and guardian of 
the immortals.’ ‘ I have heard several who told how in 
the straits of sea-voyages the god appeared and reached 
out his hand.’ ‘O my Master (déc7ora) Aesculapius, 
many and various are the blessings that have accrued 
to me from thee and thy kindness.’ ? 

To Julian, ‘ Aesculapius does not heal men from the 
hope of a reward, but in the fulfilment of his peculiar 
function everywhere to benefit mankind.’ * Julian also 
speaks of the kindness of Helios in ‘ begetting Aesculapius 
to be the saviour of all,’ * and in his Against the Galileans 
he contrasts Aesculapius with the Christ as ‘ the greatest 
gift of Helios and God.’ ‘ Zeus begot Aesculapius 
from himself among the intelligible gods,' and ' Aescu- 
lapius multiplied himself, and by his visitations stretched 
out over the whole earth his saving right hand . . . 
he is present everywhere on land and sea. He visits 
no one of us separately, and yet he raises up souls that 
are sinful and bodies that are sick ' ; and he too adds his 
personal testimony: ' At any rate ofttimes Aesculapius 
healed myself by prescribing remedies, and of this God 
is witness.' ? 


1 VIE 6; 5; p: 324: ? 37, 39, 40. 3 Ep. 40 (78), 419b. 
4 Orat. IV. 153b. 5 200b. $52356. 


432 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


Equally eloquent and indisputable is the archaeological 
evidence. Numerous vota are extant representing the 
parts of the body healed by this ‘ saviour ' and inscrip- 
tions erected in his honour by the cured. 

A glance through the inscriptions from Epidaurus 
collected by Kabbadias in his Fouilles d’Epidaure or 
the selection in Dittenberger's Sylloge or in Weinreich's 
Antike Heilungswunder or Besnier's L'ile Tibérine will 
show that Aesculapius was far éminence the ' Healer.' 
Or a visit to his chief shrine of Epidaurus will bring 
home in a vivid fashion to the modern student the 
genuine faith evoked by this ' Saviour ' as attested by 
evidence of a vast concourse of worshippers and the 
abundant remains of their thanksgiving. As one sits in 
the local theatre, which is one of the best-preserved 
and impressive remains of the Graeco-Roman world, 
with a selection of the often rude Doric inscriptions of 
long-silent visitors seeking and finding healing, and with 
the picture of the many vota of cures in one's memory, 
the past seems to return and to make one contemporary 
with many generations of patients and worshippers. 

Only a few examples may be cited. An inscription * 
from Epidaurus has preserved to us a list of forty-eight 
cures of men and women from the most diverse ailments, 
slight and serious, most of which present no difficulty 
to modern readers, though others obviously bear marks 
of the ancient Wundersucht dear to both Pagans and 
Christians. Repeated reference is made to the ' sleeping- 
in,’ incubatio, and to the visionary visitation. To one 
lady, Sostrata, Aesculapius ' manifested the Parousia 
of himself and ordered her to send her gift for the cure 
to Epidaurus.' ^ Another patient, Alketas,? ‘ although 
blind, saw the dream-vision; the God seemed to come 
to him and to open his eyes with his fingers, and he first 
saw the trees that were in the temple. At daybreak 


+ Dittenberger, Syl. 3rd ed. III. 1168-9. 
? Op. cit. 1169, 26-36. 
* Op. cit. 1168, 120 ff. 


PERSONAL TESTIMONIES _ 433 


he went away cured.’ Another patient, M. Julius 
Apellas, suffering from several ailments, records, ‘I 
prayed the God to discharge me more quickly ’; and 
again, in language parallel to that of Paul’s prayer 
concerning the thorn in the flesh, he records of severe 
headache after the cure, ‘ For concerning this also I 
besought the God.’ 

Of Aesculapius’ success at Rome there is the same 
ample evidence. A certain blind Gaius,’ obeying the 
divine instructions, ‘ received his sight in the presence 
of the people, who congratulated him because living 
virtues had operated.’ A Lucius,® ‘ suffering from 
pleurisy and despaired of by all,’ ‘ was cured [ ¢od0n] 
and gave thanks publicly to the God, and the people 
rejoiced with him.’ ‘To Julianus who was spitting 
blood and was given up as hopeless by everyone the 
God vouchsafed a dream-oracle to come, and from his 
triple altar to take grains of sirobilos and eat them with 
honey for three days, and he was cured [éc#6y], and 
he came and returned thanks publicly before the 
people.’ * 

Similarly emphatic is the testimony of a Roman 
soldier from the same shrine on an island in the Tiber: 
‘To Valerius Aper,? a blind soldier, the God gave an 
oracle to come and take blood of a white cock with 
honey and to mix them into a salve and anoint his eyes 
for three days, and he received sight and came and gave 
thanks publicly to the God.’ 

These instances justify the hold which the gracious 
figure of Aesculapius had on the imagination and loyalty 
of his grateful worshippers and interpret something of 
the yearning with which sufferers turned to the Healer. 
They also indicate some of the practical difficulties in 

* Dittenburger, Syl. 3rd ed. III. 1170. Cf. Deissmann, Light from 
East, p. 311; Licht, 4th ed. p. 261; Fiebig, Antike Wundergeschichten, 

. 20. 
i ? Sylloge, III. 1173; Weinrich, Heilungswunder, p. 64. 


* C.I.G. 5980; Dittenberger, III. 1173; Besnier, p. 214 f. 
5 Besnier, L’ile Tibérine, p. 216. 


434 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


which Christian apologists entangled themselves by 
matching signs with signs,’ and by making the physical 
the proof of the spiritual. The gracious figure who was 
to Aristophanes ? and to numberless cured ' the great 
Light of men’ and ‘the great Joy of the world,’ * 
presented a difficulty to the Christian philosopher Justin, 
which he audaciously solved by asserting that the evil 
demons in their foreknowledge of a greater than 
Aesculapius raised up Aesculapius as a counterweight 
to detract from the claims of Christ. It was difficult 
to discredit a ‘ saviour ' whose works were everywhere 
manifest in Pagan circles in miraculous cures which the 
Christians could not and did not deny. As a suffering 
woman came to Jesus surreptitiously to touch the hem 
of His garment, expectant sufferers would approach the 
figure of the Healer, as on an extant sculpture a kneeling 
woman touches Aesculapius’ garment with her right 
hand. 

The alliance of primitive medicine with religion was 
fraught with real danger to both religion and to the 
scientific spirit. The '' bastard sister of religion ’’ 
profited and the Church profited by popularity but lost 
in inwardness. As medicine was not delimited from 
religion, neither was magic, especially when it proved 
beneficent. And just as religious men were disposed 
in this syncretistic age to lose nothing by neglecting any 
form of religion, so neither were Christian nor Pagan 
masses averse to availing themselves of help from any 
plausible quarter; the former would assist Christ’s 
miraculous powers by those of the magician, and the 
latter the great and many powers of Aesculapius by 
the same means. Some had more faith in magic than 


1 A good example of the use of miracula in defence of Christianity 
will be found in the list of faith-cures detailed by Augustine in De Civ. 
Dei, XXII. 8, against some of which we may be disposed to place a 
similar note of interrogation as against some heathen cures. 

? Plut. 640. 

3 Pausanias, II. 26, 7. * Apol. I. 54; cf. 21, 22. 

5 Photo in Rev. des études grecques, XXIX, p. 78. 


CHRISTIAN EXORCISMS 435 


in religion or medicine, and attributed their cures to the 
mysterious secret rites and incantations and formulae. 

The entry of magic into Christian ritual and its long 
and disastrous influence cannot here be pursued; still 
less can one deal with the more disastrous supposition 
that magic is antiquated in the Christian ritual and 
dogma because certain crasser forms cannot bear the 
light of day; nor can one deal with the remarkable 
renaissance of magic in the resurgence of superstition 
under a false romanticism which would stay the courses 
of the sun. One has only to be a member of a reunion 
conference to be made painfully aware how much magic 
persists in devout circles to-day. It is one thing to 
recapture with an historic imagination and human 
sympathy the mentality of a long past age; it is another 
thing deliberately to set out to live in the twentieth 
century with fourth-century mentality. 

The same connexion was maintained in the Church's 
adoption of demonology, especially from the second 
century,’ and of the consequent need of exorcism.” The 
Christians did not deny the existence of demons, who 
executed for the Pagans mostly the identical functions 
performed in popular Christianity by the angels. The 
demons were all written down as evil, as infesting Pagan 
images, as inflicting disorders and disease, and causing 
divorce between husband and wife. They could, both 
in Pagan and Christian thought, take up their residence 
singly or in companies in a human being and evidence 
their presence there by certain symptoms. Christianity 
took over exorcism, which was regarded as part of her 
healing work. An ' order ' of exorcists was appointed,? 
and there stands in the Roman Pontifical ritual to-day 
the Latin formulae of expulsion. The Church drew a 


* Harnack, Medicinisches, p. 107. 

2 Probst, Sakramente und Sakramentalien, p. 39 ft. 

* Harnack, ib. p. 116. 

* Cf. F. J. Dolger, Exorzismus im altchrist. Taufritual (Paderborn, 
1909); art. Exorcismus, in Catholic Encyclopaedia, V. 711b. 


436 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


strict line between exorcisms in the name of Jesus and 
those by other formulae, and endeavoured to prevent 
Christian charlatans. 

It is indubitable that Jesus shared with His con- 
temporaries a belief in the existence of demons and 
their malefic influences on men, and also that He per- 
formed exorcisms like the rabbis of His day. It is 
certain that in the days of the writing of the New 
Testament and in the subsequent age the practice had 
assumed a large place and official importance. Even 
as early as the composition of Mark (circ. 70) exorcism 
had such an apologetic value that Mark, writing for 
the Roman Church, unduly magnifies exorcism in the 
ministry of Jesus and advances it even as evidential 
for Jesus' Messiahship, to which the demons are forced 
to give testimony. 

The Church did not deny the reality of the miraculous 
cures of Paganism or of the repeated exorcisms, but it 
attributed such cures to magic, whereas Christian 
exorcisms were by fasting and prayer or, imitating their 
Master's inconsequent critics in the self-stultifying 
argument of expelling demons through collusion with the 
Prince of Demons, Christians assigned such exorcisms 
to demons whose names were less potent than the name 
of Jesus, just as Celsus attributed Christian exorcism 
to demons ;* or, shifting to safer ground, they attributed 
* possession ' which called for expulsion to malign 
demons, to break whose power was one end of the 
Incarnation of the Son of God.? 

But after the first creative outburst Christianity yielded 
more and more to the unscientific outlook and readily 
accepted current superstitions. From the middle of the 
second century onwards Christians saw in exorcism a 
popular apologetic and sought to claim a monopoly of 
it by a practical denial of exorcism to Pagans and 
heretics, a dangerous step which a scholar like Origen 


1 C. Celsum, I. 6. ? Justin, Apol. II. 6. 


DOMINANCE OF UNSCIENTIFIC OUTLOOK 437 


could not take in the face of facts. Thus Tertullian * 
bases the truth of Christianity on the truth and antiquity 
of the Christian Scriptures, and on the confession of 
defeat from demons in Christian exorcisms. The 
Christian Church equipped itself with exorcists to out- 
strip its competitors. Demonology took up its home 
in the Church in the second century to supply the legions 
of devils throughout mediaevalism,? and, though it was 
based on a moral perception of the conflict of good and 
evil, it tended to externalize that conflict by making the 
protagonists supernatural beings other than men rather 
than man and God, and by shifting the scene of conflict 
from the moral and inner life of man to transmundane 
regions. 

The association of magic with religion ? and the use 
of magic for purposes of healing and the general practice 
of exorcism in Pagan and Christian antiquity is too 
large a topic for the end of a chapter. We have magical 
recipes for cures very akin to the directions given by 
Aesculapius in his sanatoria, and no difference can be 
detected between exorcism in Paganism, Judaism, and 
Christianity save in ' the name.' Indeed the general 
trend of the later Graeco-Roman world, Pagan and 
Christian, was toward the mediaeval mentality of 
credulity and emotion and the acceptance of authority 
and the substitution of miracle for argument. In 
Iamblichus and Proclus we find a similar decline 
of virile spiritual Neo-Platonism into theurgy * as 


1 Apol. 46. 

3 Cf. Tambornino, De Antiq. Daemonismo, pp. 106-10. 

* Cf. L. Thorndike, Place of Magic in the Intellectual History of 
Europe (New York, 1905). 

4 Cf. Halliday, Pagan Background, p. 233: ''It is a characteristic 
feature of the time that the less intelligent influences tended to become 
increasingly dominant. The magical element became more and more 
prominent in religion, and this in turn affected philosophy. .. . Finally 
in Neo-Platonism, in which mystical apprehension supplemented or 
even supplanted rational perception, philosophy was to claim a perilous 
kinship with theosophy and theurgy. . . . Plotinus, Porphyry, 
Iamblichus, Maximus: how swift and abysmal a descent! "" 


438 RELIGION AS A THERAPEUTIC 


we find in Christianity its creative sanity and spontaneity 
yielding to a popular identification of science, 
philosophy, and magic, especially from the throwing 
open by edict of the gates of the Church by 
Constantine. 


INDEX OF NAMES 


: Abel, E., 170 
` Adam, J., 186 
- Alexander Aphrodisius, 263 
Allo, E. B., 16 
Angus, S., 19, 40, 89, 141, 
197, 207, 262 
- Anrich, G., 76, 85, 170, 196 
Anz, W., 295, 379 
Apuleius, 41, 197, 207, 265 
- Aristides, 41, 77, 430 f. 
Aristophanes, 9I, 429, 434 
Aristotle, 60, 108, 122, 162, 260, 
271, 347, 349 
Arnim, H. V., 42, 264, 274, 283, 
300 f. 
Arnobius, 115, 277 


157, 


- Arnold, E. V., 45, 65, 68, 264, 
282, 284 
Athanasius, II4, I24 
Athenaeus, 25 
Augustine, 9, 49, 95, I16, 123, 
. 142, 189, 190, 237, 246, 289, 


E 434 
. Augustus, 26 f. 


Bacon, B. W., xor 

Badstübner, E., 269, 280, 300 

| Barth, K., 133 

Baruch, 49 

Baumgarten, 190 

Bell and Crum, 27, 105 

Besnier, M., 432 f. 

Bevan, E. 8, Ir, 17, 25,36, 42, 

56, 66, 222, 301, 321, 345 
Bigg, C., 22, 67, 207 

Boissier, G., 111, 276 

Boll, Fr., 23, 257, 261, 266, 269, 


273 

Bouché-Leclercq, A., 45, 256, 266, 
277, 426 

Bousset, W., 34, 51, 53. 54. 254, 
295, 379, 407 

Boylan, P., 321 

Bréhier, E., xxi 

Bulcock, H., 205 

Buonaiuti, E., 123 

Burnet, J., 73 

Burton, E. de W., 200 

Butler, C., 72, 289 


439 


Butler, W. A., 3 


Caird, E., 22, 61, 69, 71 f., 402 

Capelle, W., 270 

Carcopino, J., 90, 139 

Carpenter, J. E., 56, 95 

Caton, R., 427 

Causse, A., 51, 107 

Cerfaux, L., 147 

Chappuis, P. G., 68 

Chrysostom, 156, 170 

Chrysostom, Dio, 222 

Cicero, 20, 30, 42, 63, 90, 132, 
244,259, 2603 f., 271127452982; 
285 f., 301, 304, 314 f., 317 

Cleanthes, 29, 41, 264, 274, 283 

Clemen, C., 84 

Clement of Alexandria, 2r f., 61, 
T12, 130, TAL 5.41595) 168, 0275, 
280, 382, 409, 412, 415 

Clement of Rome, 93, 141 

Clerc, Ch.) 347 

Clow, W. M., 179 

Conybeare, F. C., 287, 292 

Cornutus, 29, 264 

Cumont, Fr., 76, 105, 250, 256 ff., 
268, 270, 274 Í., 282, 284, 285 f., 
294 ff., 306 ff., 321 

Curtis, D., 294 

Cyprian, 82, 89, 166 

Cyril, 168, 328 


Dalgairns, J. D., 177, 232 

Deissmann, A., 44, 52, 196, 433 

Deissner, K., 204 

Deubner, M., 427 

Dibelius, M., 88 

Diels, H., 264, 295, 349 

Dieterich, A., 86, 107, 197, 266, 
295, 299, 319 

Dieterich, K., 254 

Dill, S739; 93, 252, LOL, 270,276; 
307, 420, 426 

Dio Cassius, 135, 425 

Diodorus Siculus, 426 

Diogenes Laertius, 172, 266, 270, 
277, 283, 299 

Diognetus Ep., 94, 1x12 

Dittenberger, W., 25 ff., 429 ff. 


440 


Dobschütz, E. v., 44, 55, 
205, 255 

Dodds, E. R., 63, 70, 724., 221 

Dólger, F. J., 435 

Dougall, L., 4 

Drummond, J., 34 


196, 


Edward, K., 181 

Eisler, R., 81, 303 

Eliot, G., 11 

Epictetus, 10, 29, 65, 172, 263 f., 
324 

Epiphanius, 158, 170 

Eusebius, 72, 89, 113, I4I, 255, 
419, 425 


Farnell, R. L., 2, 61, 144 f., 166, 


174, 298, 429 
Faye, E. de, 68, 107 f., 115, 381, 
383 


Fehrle, E., 22 

Feine, P., 196 

Fiebig, P., 433 

Foucart, P., 79, 85 
Fowler, W. W., 161 
Frazer, J. G., 131, 133, 425 


Galen, 113, 426 

Gardner, A., 225, 250 

Gardner, P., 135, 151, 160, 
215 f., 389, 404 

Geffcken, J., 99 

Glover, T. R., 134, 144, 179, 191, 
196 

Gore, C., 230, 233 

Graillot, H., 88, 206 

Green, T. H.,:59 

Gregory of Nyssa, 40, 167 f., 190 

Gressmann, H., 257 

Griffith, F. L., 321 

Gunkel, H., 51, 97, 409 


165, 


Halliday, W. R., 28, 30, 89, 105, 
301, 437 

Hamilton, M., 427 

Hardwick, J. C., 237 

Harnack, A., 16, 54, 98, ror, rro, 
120, 128, I37 f. 454, 159, 179, 
196, 207 f., 415, 421 ff., 435 

Harrison, J. E., 134 

Hatch, E., 156, 158, 161, 334 

Hausrath, A., 52 

Heitmiiller, W., 195, 202, 215 

Held, J. A.; 37 

Hepding, H., 41, 206 

Heraclitus, 10, 239 

Hermas, 141, 171, 218, 333 

Hippolytus, 130, 168, 300, 334, 
406 


INDEX OF 


NAMES 


Hoffmann, J., 195, 202, 214 

Holtzmann, H. J., 174, 202, 206, 
209 f., 212 

Hönn, K., 295 

Horace, 26 f. 

Hügel, F. V., 33, 131, 182, 194, 
219, 225 f., 236 


Iamblichus, 8, 48, 165, 186, 320 

Ignatius, 57, 94, 142, 167, 204, 
41I, 420 

Inge, W. R., 34 f., 56, 80, 84, 91, 
102, 128, 109, 177! ISL X80) 
192, 217, 232, 235 

Irenaeus, 143, 167, 215, 412 


James, M. R., 21, 406 

James, W., 394 

Jerome, 22, 49, 114, 428 

Jevons, F. B., 144 

Jong, K. H. E. de, 88 

Josephus, 5r 

Tulian, 13, 17, 41, 91, 172m 272 
276, 309 f., 312, 317, 430 f. 

jaster, Ja 53 

Justin Martyr, 40 f., 49, 61, 112, 
II5, I30, 155, 179, 188, 198, 
231, 332, 422, 434 : 


Kabbadias, P., 432 

Kaerst, J., 14 

Kattenbusch, F., 19 

Kennedy, H. A. A., 34, 95, 178, 
196, 198 f., 203 f., 259 

Kerényi, K., 256 

Kern, O., 86, 260 

Kohler, W., 376 

Kraeling, C. H., 339, 361 

Krebs, E., 329 

Kroll, J., 295, 303, 337 f. 344, 
349. 354. 357 

Kroll, W., 267, 296, 313 


Lactantius, 7, 253 

Lagrange, Père, 321, 328 f., 334, 
336, 340, 349, 357, 362 

Lake, K., 84, 148, 183, 187, 193, 
195, 199, 252 

Lebreton, J., 43 

Lecky, W. E. H., 103 

Lécrivain, C., 76 

Legge, F., 79, 377, 379 

Leipoldt, J., 83 

Leisegang, H., 399 

Liechtenhahn, R., 349, 351 

Lietzmann, H., 16, 139, 195 

Lightfoot, J. B., 65, 67, 411 

Lobeck, C. A., 82, 320 

Loisy, A., 84, 94, 195, 399 


INDEX OF NAMES 


iLoofs, F., 154, 173 
lLucian, 44 
‘Lucretius, 15, 269 


iMaas, E. W. T., 197, 265 

‘Macarius Magnes, 215 

iMacchioro, V., 85, 140, 314, 330 

iMcGiffert, A. C., 103, 386, 393, 
405 

‘Macrobius, 13, 144, 256, 266, 271, 

3. 2745280, 318 f. 

‘Major, H. D. A., 21, 181 

iManilius, 261, 264, 266f., 
272, 314 

‘Marcus Aurelius, 38, 65, 263, 272, 
284 

‘Maternus, 179, 259, 265 

‘Maximus of Tyre, 13, 38, 244, 345 

‘Mayor, J. 13., 264, 418 

‘Mead, G. R. S., 262, 406 

Meek, Th. J., 288 

Methodius, 169 

Minto, A., 139 

"Minucius Felix, 110, 197 

‘Moore, G. F., 50, 52 f., 55 

Morgan, W., 149, 201, 204, 207, 
251, 332, 350 


270, 


Nilsson, M. P., 134 f. 
Nock, A. D., 80, 132 
Norden, E., 283, 376, 399 
Numenius, 71, 299 


Oakesmith, J., 37, 39 

Oesterley and Box, 57 

Origen, 7, 38, 40, 45, 48, 82, 88, 
93, III, 113 ff., 144, 157, 169, 
173, 254, 296, 334, 388, 403, 
412, 414, 420 

Otto, W., 181, 321 

Ovid, 27, 172, 273 


Paget, F., 246 

 Parabeni, R., 139 

Pater, W., 292 

Paul, St., ch. XII, 45, 68, 81, IOI, 
122 Í., X95 ff., 254, 392 ff. 

Paul, B: J., 154, 273 

Pausanias, 43, 430, 434 

Persius, 231, 247 

Petra, de, 85 

Pettazzoni, R., 76, 84, 9o 

Pfleiderer, O., 212, 214, 218 

Philastrius, 171 

Phvo Orie 33 E. 52, 70,211, 222; 
228, 240, 245 Í., 253, 261, 264, 
267, 269, 273, 287, 292, 333. 
342 

Photius, 130 


441 


Piana, G. da, 54 

Plato, 34, 37, 59 f., 62, 169, 171, 
221, 205, 287, 291, 301, 340, 
347 

Pliny, 24, 265, 272, 345 

Plotinus, 33, 39, 69f., 221, 237, 
256, 260, 265, 293, 325, 344, 
349 

Plutarch, 16, 20, 25, 30, 38 f., 95, 
172, 197, 263, 305, 307, 311 

Poland, Fr., 79, 81 

Porphyry, 8, 39, 72, 99, 113, I41, 
228, 237, 250, 265, 309 f., 414 

Posidonius, 11, 36, 261, 264, 266, 
282, 301, 308 

Preslé, De, 426 

Preuschen, E., 45, 407 

Probst, F., 435 

Proclus, 48, 62, 69, 90, 260, 275 f., 
303 

Propertius, 26 

Ps.-Apuleius, 38 

Ps.-Aristotle, 261, 263, 286, 315 

Ps.-Hipparchus, 419, 423 

Ps.-Plato, 272 

Ptolemy, 285, 315 


Quintilian, 135 


Reinhardt, K., 262 

Reitzenstein, R., 198, 207, 295, 
328 ff., 361, 399 

Réville, J., 43, 83, 170, 214, 311 

Rittelmeyer, 16 

Robertson, A. T., 393 

Rohde, E., 88, 281, 298 ff., 303, 
308 f. 

Ropes, J. R., 196 

Rostovtzoff, M. I., 106, II4 

Rubinstein, U., 149 


Sallustius, 12 

Saussaye, Chantepie de la, 14 

Schaeder, H. H., 57, 380, 384, 
399, 410 

Schmekel, A., 262, 282 

Schiirer, E., 51, 53, 148 

Schweitzer, A., 205 

Scott, E. F., 180, 210, 214 ff. 

Scott, W., 41, 259, 323, 325, 330, 
334, 338, 340, 342 fL, 349 fi., 
361 

Seneca, 7, 10 f., 20, 30, 43, 51, 
65, 94, 99, 165, 274, 280 f., 300, 
302, 304 f., 308, 313, 315 

Servius, 259 

Sethe, K., 45 

Sextus Empiricus, 256, 258, 260 f., 
271, 300, 304 


442 


Showerman, G., 85 
Simboli, C. R., 415 
Simplicius, 9 
Socrates, 58 f. 
Steinleitner, Fr., 78 
Stewart, J. A., 73 
Stobaeus, 6, 89, 
336, 364 
Strabo, 334, 426, 431 
Strong, E., 90, 294 
Swain, J. W., 22 
Symmachus, 113 
Synesius, 114, 265 


102, 157, 259, 


Tacitus, 135 

Taille, de la, 177 

Tambornino, J., 37, 437 

Tatian, 21, III, 134, 278 

Taylor, A. E., 32, 62, 162 

Taylor, H. O., 289 

Taylor, T., 265, 277 

Tertullian, 6, 22, 40 f., 52, 109, 
I1I2, 115 f., 120, 158, 167, 170, 
179, 197 f., 210, 356, 425, 437 

Themistius, 197 

Theophilus, 50, 112 

Thiele, G., 274, 301 

Thorndike, L., 437 

Tibullus, 427 

Tierney, M., 86 

Traemer, 429 

Turchi, N., 76, 89, 91 


INDEX OF 


NAMES 


Underhill, E., 


234, 236 
Usener, H., 161, 174, 380 


223 fo (227, 220) 


Valerius Maximus, 27 

Vettius Valens, 271 f., 285, 313 f. 
Virgil, 16, 26, 306 

Volker, K., 176 


Walton, A., 427, 429 

Weicker, G., 297 

Weinel, H., 195, 202 

Weinrich, O., 426, 433 

Weiss, J., 16, 195 f. 

Wendland, P., 16, 18, 84, 94, 103, 
107, I09, I22, 205, 255, 268, 
383 

Weniger, L., 261, 428 

Wernle, P., 46, 55, 155, 195, 386, 
391 

Wessely, K., 136 

Westcott, B. F., 104, 116, 162 

Wetter, P., 195 

Whitehead, A. N., 244 

Whittaker, T., 289 

Wilamowitz-Mollendorf, 172 

Wilcken, U., 45, 207 

Winckler, H. A., 68, 384 

Windisch, H., 333 

Wotherspoon, H. J., 177, 220, 222 

Wrede, W., 195 


Zeller, E., 289, 291 


INDEX OF 


Aesculapius, 429 ff. 

Allegory, 29, 157, 397 

Aristotelianism, 122, 162 f. 

Ascent of the Soul, ch. XVII 

Asceticism, 21, 45 f., 159 f., 408, 
410 

Astralism, 7, 8, 28, chs. XV-XVII, 
324 f. 

Authority, I5, 17, 55, 98, 
II9 f., I5I 


116, 


Baptism, 129 ff., 140, 142, 148 ff., 
168, 179 f., 201 


Christian Apologists, ch. VIII, 
7 f., 39 £., 61, 110 ff., 156, 168, 
420 ff. 

Christianity, 3, 36, 45, 54, 66, 84, 
CDSA I VPE :27)., 205 ff:, 
255, 332, 399 f. 

Christology, 24 ff., 33, 36, 39 f., 
95, IOO, IIO, I20 Í., 124, 129, 
215, 254 Í., 328 ff., 386, 389 f., 
392, 402 

Cosmic Emotion, 
315, 366 f. 

Cosmic Religion, 30, 36 f., 41, 197, 
254 f., 256 f., 382, 395, 412 

Cosmopolitanism, 14, 65 ff., 103 


2608/1: 9281 $5 


Deification, 79, 110, 218, 319, 364 

Demonology, 20, 37 ff., 140 f., 
179, 326, 420, 435 

Dualism, 21, 31, 297, 303, 323 f., 
339, 393. 411 


Ecstasy, 35, 78, 83, 237, 313 f., 
66 ff. 


Element Mysticism, 258 ff. 
Eleusinia, 172 

Enthousiafmos, 88, 312 f. 

Eros, 70, 139, 237, 287 ft. 
Esotericism, 21, 154 ff., 334 f. 
Eucharist, 167, 188, 203, 213, 227 
Exorcism, 144, 417, 435 


Faith, 34 
Faith Healings, ch. XXII 


443 


SUBJECTS 
Fourth Gospel, 208 ff., 328 ff., 
389 ff., 410 f. 
Gnosticism, 22, 158, 170, chs. 


XX, XXI, 214, 341, 363 
Great Mother, 86 ff., 174 
Greek Philosophy, ch. IV, 41, 113, 
285 
Greek Religion, 160 


Hebraism, 3, 55 ff. 
Hellenism, 2, 61, 98, 108 f., r12,- 


404 
Hermeticism, chs. XVIII, XIX, 
313, 378 5 
History, 56, 384 f., 394 f., 401 f. 


Hymns, 25, 277, 406 f. 


Identification with Deity, 42, 71, 
81, 186 

Images, 222, 236, 244 Í., 344 f. 

Immortality, 30, 79, 81, 
279 f., 311, 323, 354, 364 

Imperial Cult, 22, 26 ff. 

Incubation, 427 ff. 

Individualism, 14, 20, 44, 415 

Inscriptions, 25 ff., 41, 48, 83, 85, 
87, 90 ff., 157, 172, 268, 286, 
307, 309, 31I, 420, 426, 429, 
432 ff. 

Intolerance, 106, rro, 114 f. 


90, 


Judaism, ch. III, rro, 146 ff. 
Katharsis, 43, 70, 76 
Logos, 110, 328 ff. 


Magic, 48 f., 133 ff., 169 f., 173, 
245, 268, 435 

Marcionites, 170 

Mass, 187, 232, 240 

Massa perditionis, 123 

Medicine, ch. XXII 

Microcosm, 266 

Miracle, 40, 83, 102, 132, I4r, 
144 f., 189, 418 f., 425, 430 ff. 

Mithraism, 105, 153, 296, 31r 

Monotheism, 34 


444 ^ INDEX OF 


Morality, 45, 55, 59, 67 

Mystery Religions, ch. V, 42, 
196 ff. 

Mysticism, 31 ff, 68 f., 81, 237, 
252 

Myth, 12 ff., 95, 138 


Name, 144, 436 

Neo-Platonism, 32 f., 62, 69 ff., 
108, 221, 250, 275, 290, 314 

Numinous, 182 


Orphism, r9, 21, 43, 82, 86, 153, 
277, 2907 Í. 


Papyri, 27, 38, 45, 86, 105, 136, 
144, 197, 207, 259 Í., 319, 328, 
428 

Pistis Sophia, 405, 409 t. 

Platonism, 32, 59ff., 62f., 115, 
287 f., 29% 

Prayers, 8 f., 408 

Pythagoreans, 43, 90, 294, 299, 
306 f. 


Realism, 139 ff., 189 f., 425 

Regeneration, 78, 197, 319, 333, 
369 

Reincarnation, 326 f. 

Roman Empire, 14 

Roman Religion, 160 


SUBJECTS 


Sacraments, 79, 83f., 91, chs. 
VIII-XIV, 340 ff. 

Saviour-gods, 16, 25, 44, 430 

Serapis, 45, 87; v.s. Mystery- 
Religions. 

Sidereal Mysticism, 270 

Sin, 41 ff., 78, 331 f. 

Solar cult, 272 f., 286 f., 301, 309, 
317 

Soteria, 16, 19 ff., 23, 36 ff., 82 f., 
254 Í., 362, 374, 414 f., 429 

Star-Deities, v. Astralism. 

Stoicism, 28 ff., 41, 65 ff., 262, 
274, 282 f., 300 f. 

Sun, v. Solar Cult. 

Symbolism, 137 ff., 173, 181, 224, 
229 Í., 244, 253, 343 

Sympatheia, 20, 81, 262 f., 415 

Synagogue, 50 ff., 79, 99 

Syncretism, 18, 20, 47, 5I f., 80, 
97, 321, 376, 380, 399 


Theocrasia, 14, 380 
Theophanies, 89, 421, 427 f., 430 ff. 


Vicarious operation, 169 ff. 
Virginity, 120 
Visions, 89, 318, 342, 365 f. 


Wise Man, 29 f., 95 


Printed in Great Britain by 
Hazell Watson & Viney, Ltd., London and Aylesbury. 


ncoln Christian College & Semi y 
90ANBR 001 
THE RELIGIOUS QUESTS OF THE GRAECO-ROMAN 


ICI 


3 4711 001260506
