The Annals of the Cakchiquels (Daniel G. Brinton (trans./ed.), 1885)
==========================================================
The Memorial de Solola — the Maya Cakchiquel chronicle of highland Guatemala, from mythic origins through the Spanish conquest — in Daniel G. Brinton's 1885 edition with the original Cakchiquel text, English translation, notes and introduction (Library of Aboriginal American Literature). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/annalscakchique01bringoog).

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


HARVARD

COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Sd 3?if;f


H^arfaart CoUege ILibrart.


THE PARKMAN COI.LKCTIOX.


Francis parkman.

[H.C. .844).


Receiveri January ij, iSg4.


LIBRARY


OF


Aboriginal American


Literature.


No. VI.


EDITED BY

D. G. BRINTON, M. D.


PHILADELPHIA.
1885.


Ha- V rd T ll?-s Lifcrrrr

■-C ' ■•*■*. O **« "^ '^ T


SA33S5.S


i.' J-^.... i3J4


In compliance with current
copyright law, LBS Archival

Products produced this

replacement volume on paper

that meets the ANSI Standard

Z39.48-I984 to replace the

irreparably deteriorated

original.

I99I

.*-^ TM

(00


o


. brinton's library of
aboriginal american literature

number vi.


THE ANNALS


OF THE


CAKCHIOUELS.


THE ORIGINAL TEXT, WITH A TRANSLATION, NOTES AND

INTRODUCTION.


DANIEL G. milNTON, A.M., M.D.,

Professor of Ethnology and Archceology at the Academy of Natural

Sciences, Philadelphia.

President of the Numismatic and Antiquarian Society of Philadelphia, Member of the
American Philosophical Society, The American Antiquarian Society, I'he His-
torical Societies of Pennsylvania and New York, etc. Membre de la
Soci6t6 Royale des Antiquaires du Nord, de la Soci6t6 Am6ricaine
de France, de la Soci6t6 d' Anthropologie de Paris, Delegue
G6n6ral de 1' Institution d' Ethnographic, Vice-Presi-
dent du Congres International des Am6ri-
canistes. Corresponding Member of
the Anthropological Society of
Washington, etc., etc.


PHILADELPHIA.
1885.


PREFACE.


Both for its historical and linguistic merits, the docu-
ment which is presented in this volume is one of
the most important in aboriginal American Literature.
Written by a native who had grown to adult years before
the whites penetrated to his ancestral home, himself a
member of the ruling family of one of the most civilized
nations of the continent and intimately acquainted with
its traditions, his work displays the language in its
pure original form, and also preserves the tribal history
and a part of the mythology, as they were current before
they were in the least affected by European influences.

The translation I offer is directly from the original
text, and I am responsible for its errors ; but I wish to
acknowledge my constant obligations to the manuscript
version of the late Abbe Brasseur (de Bourbourg), the
distinguished Americanist. Without the assistance ob-
tained from it, I should not have attempted the task ; and
though I differ frequently from his renderings, this is no
more than he himself would have done, as in his later
years he spoke of his version as in many passages faulty.

For the grammar of the language, I have depended
on the anonymous grammar which I edited for the
American Philosophical Society in 1884, copies of which,


VI PREFACE.

reprinted separately, can be obtained by any one who
wishes to study the tongue thoroughly. For the signifi-
cance of the words, my usual authorities are the lexicon
of Varea, an anonymous dictionary of the 17th century,
and the large and excellent Spanish-Cakchiquel work of
Coto, all of which are in the library of the American
Philosophical Society. They are all in MS., but the
vocabulary I add may be supplemented with that of
Ximenes, printed by the Abbe Brasseur, at Paris, in 1862,
and between them most of the radicals will be found.

As my object in all the volumes of this series is to
furnish materials for study, rather than to offer finished
studies themselves, I have steadily resisted the strong
temptation to expand the notes and introductory matter.
They have been limited to what seemed essentially
necessary to defining the nature of the work, discussing
its date and authorship, and introducing the people to
whom it refers.


CONTENTS.


PREFACE,
INTRODUCTION,


Ethnologic Position of the Cakchiquels,

Culture of the Cakchiquels,

The Capital City of the Cakchiquels,

COMt»UTATION OF TiME,

Personal and Family Names, .

Tribal Subdivisions, ....

Terms of Affinity and Salutation,

Titles and Social Castes,

Religious Notions, ....

The Cakchiquel Language,

The Annals of Xahila, .

Synopsis of the Annals, .

Remarks on the Printed Text,

The Annals of the Cakchiquels, by a Member of
Xahila Familv.

Notes,

Vocabulary,


Index of Proper Names,


PAGE
V

9

9

13
21

28
32
33
34
35

39
48

53
60

62

the
66-194

195-200

. 209

. 229


Vll


THE ANNALS


OF


THE CAKCHIQUELS.


INTRODUCTION.


Ethnologic Position of the Cakchiquels.

The Cakchiquels, whose traditions and early history are
given in the present work from the pen of one of their own
authors, were a nation of somewhat advanced culture, who
occupied a portion of the area of the present State of Guate-
mala. Their territory is a table land about six thousand feet
above the sea, seamed with numerous deep ravines, and sup-
porting lofty mountains and active volcanoes. Though but
fifteen degrees from the equator, its elevation assures it a
temperate climate, while its soil is usually fertile and well
watered.

They were one of a group of four closely related nations,
adjacent in territory and speaking dialects so nearly alike
as to be mutually intelligible. The remaining three were
the Quiches, the Tzutuhils and the Akahals, who dwelt
respectively to the west, the south and the east of the
Cakchiquels.

These dialects are well marked members of the Maya
linguistic stock, and differ from that language, as it is spoken
B 9


10 INTRODUCTION.

in its purity in Yucatan, more in phonetic modifications than
in grammatical structure or lexical roots. Such, however,
is the fixedness of this linguistic family in its peculiarities,
that a most competent student of the Cakchiquel has named
the period of two thousand years as the shortest required to
explain the difference between this tongue and the Maya.^

About the same length of time was that assigned since the
arrival of this nation in Guatemala, by the local historian,
Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzman, who wrote in the
seventeenth century, from an examination of their most
ancient traditions, written and verbal.' Indeed, none of
these af&ned tribes claimed to be autochthonous. All
pointed to some distant land as the home of their ancestors,
and religiously preserved the legends, more or less mythical, of
their early wanderings until they had reached their present
seats. How strong the mythical element in them is, becomes
evident when we find in them the story of the first four
brothers as their four primitive rulers and leaders,- a myth
which I have elsewhere shown prevailed extensively over the
American continent, and is distinctly traceable to the adora-
tion of the four cardinal points, and the winds from them.'^

1 Dr. Otto StoU, Zur Ethnographie der Republik Guatemala^ p. 157
(Zurich, 1884), on the phonetic laws which have controlled the divergence
of the two tongues, Cakchiquel and Maya. See the same writer in his
"Supplementary Remarks on a Grammar of the Cakchiquel Language,"
translated by Dr. D. G. Brinton, in Proceedings of the American PhilO'
sophical Society t for 1885.

2 Recordacion Florida^ Discurso Historialy Natural^ Material^ Militar y
Politico del Reino de Goathemala. Lib. II, Chap. I.

3 Myths of the New Worlds p. 181 ; American Hero-Myths^ pp. 44, 73,
80, 162, etc.


ETHNOLOGIC POSITION OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 11

These four brothers were noble youths, born of one mother,
who sallied forth from Tulan, the golden city of the sun, and
divided between them all the land from the Isthmus of
Tehuantepec to the confines of Nicaragua, in other words,
all the known world. ^

The occurrence of the Aztec name of the City of Light,
Tulan (properly, Tonatlan), in these accounts, as they were
rehearsed by the early converted natives, naturally misled
historians to adopt the notion that these divine culture
heroes were *' Toltecs,*' and even in the modern writings of
the Abb6 Brasseur (de Bourbourg), of M. Desir6 Charnay, and
others, this unreal people continue to be set forth as the
civilizers of Central America.

No supposition could have less support. The whole alleged
story of the Toltecs is merely an euhemerized myth, and they
are as pure creations of the fancy as the giants and fairies of
mediaeval romance. They have no business in the pages of
sober history.

The same blending of their most ancient legends with
those borrowed from the Aztecs, recurs in the records of the
pure Mayas of Yucatan. I have shown this, and explained
it at considerable length in the first volume of this series, to
which I will refer the reader who would examine the question
in detail.*

^ " Cuatro generosos mancebos, nobles hermanos/' says Fuentes
y Guzman, Recordacion Florida^ Lib. I, Cap. II. The story of the four
brothers who settled Guatemala is repeated by Torquemada, Mon-
archia Indiana^ Lib. XI, Cap. XVII, and other writers.

' The Maya Chronicles^ pp. 109-122 (Library of Aboriginal American
Literature, Vol. I). For the evidence of the wholly mythical character of


12 INTRODUCTION.

There is a slight admixture of Aztec words in Cakchiquel.
The names of one or two of their months, of certain objects
of barter, and of a few social institutions, are evidently loan-
words from that tongue. There are also some proper bames,
both personal and geographical, which are clearly of Nahuatl
derivation. But, putting all these together, they form but a very
small fraction of the language, not more than we can readily
understand they would necessarily have borrowed from a
nation with whom, as was the case with the Aztecs, they
were in constant commercial communication for centuries.*
The Pipils, their immediate neighbors to the South, culti-
vating the hot and fertile slope which descends from the
central plateau to the Pacific Ocean, were an Aztec race of
pure blood, speaking a dialect of Nahuatl, very little differ-
ent from that heard in the schools of classic Tezcuco.' But
the grammatical structure and stem-words of the Cakchiquel
remained absolutely uninfluenced by this association.

Later, when the Spanish occupation had brought with it

the Toltecs, and of their " King," Quetzalcoatl, see my American Hero-
Myths, Chapter III. (Philadelphia, 1882).

Sanchez y Leon, quoting apparently some ancient Cakchiquel refrain,
gives as the former name of their royal race, ru tzuiuh Tulan, the Flower
of Tulan, which wondrous city he would place in Western Asia. Apunta-
mientos de la Historia de Guatemala, p. 2.

^ Herrera observes of the natives of Guatemala, that the Nahuatl tongue
was understood among them, though not in use between themselves.
<* Corre entre ellos la lengua Mexicana, aunque la tienen particular."
Historia de las Indias Occidentales, Dec. IV, Lib. VIII, Cap. VIII.

2 I have in my possession the only grammar of this dialect probably
ever written: Arte de la Lengua Vulgar Mexicana de Guatemala, MS.,
in a handwriting of the eighteenth century, without name of author.


CULTURE OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 13

thousands of Nahuatl speaking followers, who supplied the
interpreters for the conquerers, Nahuatl names became much
more abundant, and were adopted by the natives in address-
ing the Spaniards. Thus the four nations, whom I have
mentioned as the original possessors of the land, are, in the
documents of the time, generally spoken of by such foreign
titles. The Cakchiquels were referred to as Tecpan Quauhte-
mallan, the Quiches as Tecpan Utlatlan^ the Tzutuhils as
Tecpan Atitlany and the Akahals as Tecpan Tezolotlan. In these
names, all of them pure Nahuatl, the word Tecpan means the
royal residence or capital; Quauhtemallan (Guatemala), **the
place of the wood-pile;'* Utlatlan^ "the place of the giant
cane;" Aiitlany **the place by the water;'* Tezoioilan, **the
place of the narrow stone,** or ** narrowed by stones.**^

These fanciful names, derived from some trivial local
characteristic, were not at all translations of the native tribal
names. For in their own dialects. Quiche, Aiche, means
"many trees;** Tuztuhil, Autuhil, "the flowery spot;*'
Akahal, "the honey-comb;** and Cakchiquel, a species of

tree.

Culture of the Cakchiquels,

These four nations were on the same plane of culture, and
this by no means a low one. They were agriculturists,
cultivating for food beans, peppers, and especially maize.
To the latter, indeed, they are charged with being fanatically

1 The four names are given in this form in the Requite de Plusieurs
Chefs Indiens d^ Atitlan d Philippe //, 157 1, in Temaux-Compan's,
Recueil des Piices relatives a la Conquite du Mexique^ p. 419. The
spelling of the last is there Tecocitlan, For their analysis, see Prof.
Buschmann, Ueber die Aztekischen Ortsnamen^ p. 719.


14 INTRODUCTION.

devoted. *'If one looks closely at these Indians," com-
plains an old author, ** he will find that everything they do
and say has something to do with maize. A little more, and
they would make a god of it. There is so much conjuring
and fussing about their corn fields, that for them they will
forget wives and children and any other pleasure, as if the
only end and aim of life was to secure a crop of com.*'*

In their days of heathenism, all the labors of the field
were directed by the observance of superstitious rites. For
instance, the men, who always did a large share of the field
work, refrained from approaching their wives for some days
before planting the seed. Before weeding the patch, incense
was burned at each of the four comers of the field, to the four
gods of the winds and rains ; and the first fruits were conse-
crated to holy uses.* Their fields were large and extremely
productive.'^ In this connection it is worth noting, in pass-
ing, that precisely Guatemala is the habitat of the Euchlana

^ "Si bien se advierte, todo cuanto hacian y decian, era en orden al
maiz, que poco falt6 para tenerlo por Dios, y era, y es, tanto el encanto y
embelezo que tienen con las milpas que por ellas olvidan hijos y muger y
otro cualquiera deleite, como si fuera la milpa su ultimo fin y bienaventu-
ranza." Chronica de la S, Provincia del Santissimo Nombre de Jesus
de Guattemalat Cap. VII. MS. of the seventeenth century, generally
known as the Cronica Franciscana.

2 See Francisco Ximenez, Las Historias del Origen de los Indies de
esta Provincia de Guatemala ^ p. 1 91. (£d. Scherzer, London and
Vienna, 1857).

3 Their first conqueror, the truculent Captain Pedro de Alvarado, speaks
of the muy grandes tierras de panes, the immense com fields he saw on all
sides. Relacion hecha per Pedro de Alvarado d Hernando Cortiz, in the
Biblioteca de Autores EspaftoleSf Tom. XXII, p. 459.


CULTURE OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 15

iuxurians, the wild grass from which, in the opinion of
botanists, the Zea Mais is a variety developed by cultivation.

Cotton was largely cultivated, and the early writers speak
with admiration of the skill with which the native women
spun and wove it into graceful garments.^ As in Yucatan,
bees were domesticated for their wax and honey, and a large
variety of dye-stuffs, resins for incense, and wild fruits, were
collected from the native forests.

Like the Mayas and Aztecs, they were a race of builders,
skillful masons and stone-cutters, erecting large edifices,
pyramids, temples, and defensive works, with solid walls of
stone laid in a firm mortar.* The sites of these cities were
generally the summits of almost inaccessible crags, or on
some narrow plain, protected on all sides by the steep and
deep ravines — barrancas^ as the Spaniards call them — ^which
intersect the plateau in all directions, often plunging
down to a depth of thousands of feet. So located and so
constructed, it is no wonder that Captain Alvarado speaks of
them as ** thoroughly built and marvelously strong."'

^ " Hay mucho algodon, 6 son las mugeres buenas hilanderas 6 hagen
gentiles telas dello." Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdds, Historia
General y Natural de las Indias, Par. Ill, Lib. Ill, Cap. IV. " De la
fertilidad de la tierra 6 gobernacion de Guatimala.*'

2 ** Son muy dados k edificar, y en lo que hoy vemos erigido de los
antiguos, reconocemos ser m&quinas soberbias." Fuentes y Guzman,
Recordacion Florida^ Lib. II, Cap. I.

^ '<£sta ciudad es bien obrada y fuerte k maravilla." Reladon de
Pedro de Alvarado^ in Bib, de Autores EspaHoles,, Tom. XXII, p. 459. So
Herrera wrote from his authorities: "En Utlatan («. ^., the city of
Gumarcaah, capital of the Quiches), havia muchos, i mui grandes templos
de sus dioses, de maravillosos edificios." Historia de las Indias
Occidentalesy Dec. Ill, Lib. IV, Cap. XIX.


16 INTRODUCTION.

In the construction of their buildings and the measurements
of their land, these nations had developed quite an accurate
series of lineal measures, taking as their unit certain average
lengths of the human body, especially the upper extremity.
In a study of this subject, published during the present year,
I have set forth their various terms employed in this branch
of knowledge, and compared their system with that in use
among the Mayas and the Aztecs.^ It would appear that the
Cakchiquels did not borrow from their neighbors, but de-
veloped independently the system of mensuration in vogue
among them. This bears out what is asserted in the Annals
of Xahila, that their ** day-breaking," or culture, was of
spontaneous growth.

The art of picture writing was familiar to all these peoples.
It was employed to preserve their national history, to arrange
their calendar, and, doubtless, in the ordinary affairs of life.''
But I am not aware that any example or description of it has
been preserved, which would enable us to decide the highly
important question, whether their system was derived from
that of the Mexicans or that of the Mayas, between which, as
the antiquary need not be informed, there existed an almost
radical difference.

The word for **to write,'* is Afbah^ which means, in its

* The Lineal Measures of the Semi- Civilized Nations of Mexico and
Central America^ by D. G. Brinton, in Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society^ and separately.

* " En la Provincia de Utlatan, junto k Guatemala, se averigud por las
PinturaSi que los Naturales tenian de sus antiguedades^ demas de ocho-
cientos afiosy etc." Herrera, Historia de las Indias Occidentales, Dec. Ill,
Lib. IV, Cap. XVIII.


CULTURE OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 17

primary sense, ** to paint/' ahAfb, is **the scribe," and
was employed to designate the class of literati in the
ancient dominion. Painted or written records were called
A^ibanic.

They had a literature beyond their history and calendars.
It consisted of chants or poems, called bix^ set orations and
dramas.* They were said or sung in connection with their
ceremonial dances. These performances were of the utmost
importance in their tribal life. They were associated with
the solemn mysteries of their religion, and were in memory
of some of the critical events in their real or mythical history.
Thb will be obvious from the references to them in the pages
of their Annals,

These chants and dances were accompanied by the monoto-
nous beating of the native drum, tun^ by the shrill sound of
reed flutes, xul^ by the tinkling of small metal bells, Aa/akan,
which they attached to their feet, and by rattles of small
gourds or jars containing pebbles, known as zoch. Other
musical instruments mentioned, are the chana/, the whistle
(///^, jDicc. Anon.), and fyuy, the marimba, or something
like it.

These nations were warlike, and were well provided with
offensive and defensive weapons. The Spankh writers speak
of them as skilled archers, rude antagonists^ but not poison-
ing their weapons. '^ Besides the bow and arrow, Aha, they

^ *<Son amigos de hacer coUoquios y decir coplas en sus bailes/*
Thomas Cot6, Vocabulario de la Lengua Cakchiquel, MS. sub voce,
Poesia,

2 " Son flecheros y no tienen hierba." Oviedo, Historia General de
Indias, Par. Ill, Lib. Ill, Cap. IV.


18 IXTRODUCnOX.

used a lance, achcapifilj^ and especially the blow-pipe, fub^ a
potent weapon in the hands of an expert, the knowledge of
which was widely extended over tropical America. Their
arrow points were of stone, especially obsidian, bone and
metal. Other weapons were the wooden war dab, Ahaibakhe;
the sling, ica^ ; the hand-axe, /£aA, etc

For defense, they carried a species of buckler, pocob^ and
a round shield called fete fie ehee^ ''the circular wood." Over
the body they wore a heavy, quilted cotton doublet, the
xakpotOj which was an efficient protection.

They may all be said to have been in the '' stone age," as
the weapons and utensils were mostly of stone. The obsidian,
which was easily obtained in that country, offered an admir-
able resource for the manufacture of knives, arrow heads,
awls, and the like. It was called ehay abah, and, as we shall
see on a later page, was surrounded with sacred associations.

The most esteemed precious stones were the ^Mai^ trans-
lated '^ diamond," and the xii, which was the impure jade or
green stone, so much the favorite with the nations of Mexico
and Central America. It is frequently mentioned in the
Annals of Xahila, among the articles of greatest value.

Engraving both on stone and wood, was a prized art. The
word to express it was Ao/oh, and engraved articles are
referred to as Aotonic.

Although stone and wood were the principal materials on
which they depended for their manufactures, they were well

^ This word is doubtful, as I do not find it in the dictionaries, and
judge of its meaning from its derivation and context. See the Vocabulary.
Sanchez y Leon speaks of the '* very long lances pointed with flint/' used
by these people. ApurUamientos de la Historia de Guatemala^ p. 27.


CULTURE OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 19

acquainted with several metals. Gold and silver were classed
under the general name puvak^ and distinguished as white
and yellow ; iron and copper were both known as ^hi^^ and
distinguished also by their color. The metals formed an
important element of their riches, and are constantly referred
to as part of the tribute paid to the rulers. They were
worked into ornaments, and employed in a variety of decora-
tive manners.

The form of government of the four nations of whom I
am speaking approached that of a limited monarchy. There
was a head chief, who may as well be called a king, deriving
his position and power through his birth, whose authority
was checked by a council of the most influential of his
subjects. The details of this general scheme were not the
same at all periods, nor in all the states ; but its outlines
differed little.

Among the Cakchiquels, who interest us at present, the
regal power was equally divided between two families, the
Zotzils and the Xahils ; not that there were two kings at the
same time, as some have supposed, but that the throne was
occupied by a member of these families alternately, the head
.of the other being meanwhile heir-apparent.^ These chiefs
were called the Ahpo-Zotzil and the Ahpo-Xahil ; and their
eldest sons were entitled Ahpop-^amahay and Galel Xahil,
respectively, terms which will shortly be explained.

* The statement of Gavarrete, in his notes to Sanchez y Leon, Historia
de Guatemala^ p. 3, that the Xahils and Zotzils were two branches of the
ruling family, the one residing at Iximche, the other at Solola, rests on a
misapprehension, as will be seen from the Annals published in this
volume.


20 INTRODUCTION.

The ceremonial distinction established between the ruler
and those nearest him in rank, was indicated by the number
of canopies under which they sat. The ruler himself was
shaded by three^ of graded sizes, the uppermost being the
largest. The heir-apparent was privileged to support two,
and the third from the king but one. These canopies were
elaborately worked in the beautiful feathers of the quetzal^
and other brilliant birds, and bore the name of tm^^ literally
"shade" or **shadow," but which metaphorically came to
mean royal dignity or state, and also protection, guar-
dianship.^

The seat or throne on which he sat was called teniy AhaciU,
and ^alibaly and these words are frequently employed to
designate the Supreme Power.

The ceremonies connected with the installation of a king
or head chief, are described in an interesting passage of the
Annals y Sec. 41 : " He was bathed by the attendants in a large
painted vessel ; he was clad in flowing robes ; a sacred girdle
or fillet was tied upon him ; he was painted with the holy
colors, was anointed, and jewels were placed upon his
person." Such considerable solemnities point to the fact that
these people were on a much higher plane of social life than

^ It is interesting in this connection to observe how widespread was

the s]rmbolic significance of the canopy, or sun shade, as a mark of

dignity. The student of Shakspeare will recall the lines in his 125th

sonnet —

" Were it aught to me I bore the canopy.

With my extern the oatward honouring ;"

while the ethnologist may consult Richard Andree*s suggestive essay,
Der Sckirm als Wurdezeichen, in his Etkno^aphische ParalUUn und
VergUiche, p. 250 (Stuttgart, 1878).


THE CAPITAL CITY OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 21

one where the possession of the leadership was merely an act
of grasping by the strongest arm.

Of the four nations, the Quiches were the most numerous
and powerful. At times they exercised a sovereignty over
the others, and levied tribute from them. But at the period
of Alvarado's conquest, all four were independent States,
engaged in constant hostilities against each other.

There is no means of forming an accurate estimate of their
number. All early accounts agree that their territory was
thickly populated, with numerous towns and cities.* The
contingent sent to Alvarado by the Cakchiquel king, to aid
in the destruction of Quiche, was four thousand warriors in
one body, according to Alvarado's own statement, though
Xahila puts it at four hundred. There are various reasons for
believing that the native population was denser at the Con-
quest than at present ; and now the total aboriginal popula-
tion of the State of Guatemala, of pure or nearly pure blood,
is about half a million souls.

The Capital City of the Cakchiquels,

The capital city of the Cakchiquels is referred to by Xahila
as ^'Iximche on the Ratzamut.'' It was situated on the lofty

1 Alvarado writes: " La tierra es muy poblada de pueblos muy recios."
Relacion^ etc., ubi suprd, p. 459. The following extract is quoted from Las
Casas, Historia Apologetica^ MS., by Mr. Squier,in his notes to Palacio : —

" En el Reyno de Guatemala, en la parte que va por la Sierra, estaban
ciudades de caba muy grandes, con maravillosos edificios de cal y canto,
de los cuales yo vi muchos; y otros pueblos sin numero de aquellas


sierras."


Sanchez y Leon states that there were, in all, thirty independent native
states in the former confines of Guatemala. Historia de Guatemala^ p. i.


22 INTRODUCTION.

plateau, almost on a line connecting Gumarcaah, the capital
of the Quiches, with the modern city of Guatemala, about
twelve leagues from the latter and eight from the former. Its
name, Iximche, is that of a kind of tree (j:he = tree) called by
the Spanish inhabitants ramotiy apparently a species of Bro-
simium. Ratzamuty literally ** the beak of the wild pigeon,**
was the name given to the small and almost inaccessible plain,
surrounded on all sides by deep ravines, on which Iximche
was situated. Doubtless, it was derived from some fancied re-
semblance of the outline of the plain to the beak of thb bird.

The capital was also called simply tinamit^ the city (not
Patinamit^ as writers usually give it, as /a is not an article
but a preposition, in or at) ; and by the Aztec allies of the
conqueror Alvarado, Quauhiemailany * * place of the wood-pile, * *
for some reason unknown to us.^ The latter designation was
afterwards extended to the province, and under the corrupt
form Guatemala is now the accepted name of the State and
its modern capital.

The famous captain, Pedro de Alvarado was the first
European to visit Iximche. He entered it on April 13th,
1524 (old style). In his letter describing the occurrence,
however, he says little or nothing about the size or appear-
ance of the buildings.'

^ On the derivation of Guatemala, see Buschmann, Ueber die Aztek-
ischen Ortsnamen^ p. 719. That this is probably a translation of the
Cakchiquel Molomic chee, which has the same meaning, and is a place-
name mentioned in the Annals, I shall show on a later page.

* See the Otra Relacion hecka por Pedro de Albarado d Hernando
Cortes, printed in the Bibliotheca de Autores Espaholes, Tom. XXII,
p. 460.


THE CAPITAL CITY OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 23

Scarcely more satisfactory are the few words devoted to it
by Captain Bemal Diaz del Castillo, who spent a night
there the same year. He observes that ** its buildings and
residences were fine and rich, as might be expected of chiefs
who ruled all the neighboring provinces.'*^

When the revolt of the Cakchiquels took place, soon after-
wards, Iximche was deserted, and was never again fully in-
habited. The Spaniards ordered the natives to settle in other
localities ; the fortifications of their capital were demolished,
and many of the stones carried away, to construct churches
and houses in other localities.

The next account we have of it dates from the year 1695,
when the historian and antiquary, Francisco Antonio de
Fuentes y Guzman, wrote a detailed description of its ruins
from personal inspection. The account of this enthusiastic
author is the only one which supplies any approximate notion
of what the city must have been in its flourishing period,
and I therefore translate it, almost entire, from the recently
published edition of his voluminous work, the Recordacion
Florida? His chapter will throw light on several otherwise
obscure passages in Xahila's narrative.

*' Tecpan goathemala was a city of the ancient inhabitants,
populous, wonderful and impregnable, from the character of
its position, situated in this valley (of Chimaltenango), on an
elevated and cool site. It lies eight leagues in a straight line

^ Bernal Diaz, Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva
Espaha, Cap. CXCIII.

2 Historia de Guatemalay d Recordacion Florida^ Lib. XV, Cap. V. The
Recordacion was first printed at Madrid, 1882-83, edited by Don Justo
Zaragoza, as one of the numbers of the Biblioteca de los Americanisias,


24 INTRODUCTION.

from New Guatemala. Around this ancient and dismantled
town, now falling into utmost decay, extends a deep ravine,
like a moat, plunging straight down to a depth of more than
a hundred fathoms. This ravine, or moat, is three squares in
width from one battlement or bank to the other, and they
say that a good part of it was a work of hands, for the
security and defense of the city. There is no other entrance
than a very narrow causeway, which cuts the ravine at a point
a little north of west. The whole area of the space where are
these ancient ruins measures three miles from north to
south and two from east to west, and its complete circum-
ference is nine miles. In the heart and centre of this area
was prominently erected that great city of Tecpan goathemala,
" The whole surface of the soil in this ancient city seems
to have been artificially prepared, by means of a cement or
mortar, laid by hand, to a depth of three-fourths of a yard.
Close to the brink of the ravine there are the sumptuous
ruins of a magnificent and stately edifice, in length a hundred
measured paces, and in width the same, thus forming a
perfect square, all of stone and mortar, the stone accurately
cut with great skill, polished and nicely adjusted. In front
of this building is a great square plaza, of much dignity and
beauty ; and on its northern side one can still recognize and
admire the ruins of a palace which, even in its broken
vestiges, reveals a real magnificence. This royal edifice also
has in front of it some squares as large and spacious in their
splendor as that which has already been mentioned. Sur-
rounding this remarkable structure, are a vast number of
foundations, which, according to tradition, and by what is
obvious by examination, were the houses and dwellings of


THE Capital city of the cakchiquels. 25

nobles and of the great number of ahaguaes, besides those
who gave their constant attention to the king. In this
quarter or ward of the nobility, there are several wide and
capacious streets, which, as the foundations indicate, ran
from east to west.

" Through the middle of the site of the city, from north
to south, runs a trench a fathom and a half in depth, and its
battlements of stones laid in mortar rise more than half a
fathom in height. This trench divided the city into two
parts, leaving the residences of the chiefs and nobles on the
eastern side ; those of the common people to the west. The
principal street runs from the entrance of the city to the
chief square of the Temple, which is near the Palace ; and
from this main street others run east and west, north and
south, branching off from the main street, having many dwell-
ings upon them well arranged and located, and displaying
the high cultivation of the ancient rulers.

"Another broad street runs close to the main street, from
the trench mentioned, toward the east, for about a quarter
of a league, ending at a small hill which overlooks the town,
on whose summit is a circular wall, not unlike the curb of a
well, about a full fathom in height. The floor within is paved
with cement, as the city streets. In the centre is placed a
socle or pedestal of a glittering substance, like glass, but of
what composition is not known.

'* This circular structure was the tribunal or consistory of
the Cakchiquel Indians, where not only was public hearing
given to causes, but also the sentences were carried out.
Seated around this wall, the judges heard the pleas and pro-
nounced sentences, in both civil and criminal causes. After
c


26 INTRODUCTION.

this public decision, however, there remained an appeal for
its revocation or confirmation. Three messengers were chosen
as deputies of the judges, and these went forth from the
tribunal to a deep ravine, north of the Palace, to a small but
neatly fitted up chapel or temple, where was located the
oracle of the demon. This was a black and semi-transparent
stone, of a finer grade than that called chay (obsidian). In
its transparency, the demon revealed to them what should be
their final decision. If it was that the sentence should be
confirmed, the accused was immediately executed on the
central pedestal mentioned, which also served as a place of
torture. If, on the other hand, nothing could be seen in the
transparency of the stone, the accused was forthwith dis-
charged. This oracle was also consulted in all their military
undertakings ; and war was declared or not, as it seemed to
dictate, as is stated both by Spaniards and the oldest natives.
But in the early days of our occupation, when these facts
came to the knowledge of the Reverend Bishop Don Fran-
cisco Marroquin, of glorious memory, he gave orders that
this stone should be artistically squared, and he consecrated
it and used it as an altar stone, and at this day it is so
employed on the grand altar of the convent of San Francisco
de Tecpan goathcmala, and it is considered a jewel of unusual
beauty and value. The size of the stone is a full half yard
in each direction.

** The principal gate of this stronghold or citadel was
upon the causeway mentioned ; and they say it was closed
with two doors set in the solid wall, the external one opening
outward, the internal one inward, and both were of the stone
called chay. Thus, one of these doors backed up against the


THE CAPITAL CITY OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 27

Other, as we sometimes see double doors in our prisons.
They were always guarded with double guards, one within,
the other without; and these guards were changed every
seven days. In the open country, on the other side of the
ravine, there were a number of mounds, about a quarter of a
league apart, extending for a considerable distance. On these,
lookouts were constantly stationed, to give notice of the
invasions of the Quiches or of the Sotojil king. * '

The site of Iximche was visited in 1840 by the eminent
American traveler, John L. Stephens. He states that its
position, the steep and profound barranca, and the plain,
"warrant the description given of it by Fuentes.'* A
century and a half had, however, almost erased the vestiges
of human life. "The ground was covered with mounds of
ruins. In one place we saw the foundations of two houses,
one of them about one hundred and fifty feet long by fifty
feet broad.'*

Mr. Stephens was also fortunate enough to see and examine
the mysterious divining stone, preserved in the church of
Tecpan Guatemala. But a great disappointment awaited
him. " This oracular slab is a piece of common slate, four-
teen inches by ten, and about as thick as those used by boys
at school, without characters of any kind upon it."^

A few years after Mr. Stephens* visit, the government of
Guatemala appointed a commission to survey and examine
these ruins. They completed their labors successfully ; but

^ Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan, Vol.
II, Chap. IX. I am inclined to believe that the original stone, evidently
supposed to be of great value, had been stolen, and this piece of slate
substituted. It was sewed up in a bag, which makes the supposition
probable, as it offered facility to conceal the theft.


28 INTRODUCTION.

I have been unable to learn that the results were published,
although they were written out and placed in the govern-
mental archives.^

Computation of Time.

I propose, in a future work, to discuss the methods of
reckoning time in use in Central America ; but a brief expla-
nation of that adopted by the Cakchiquels is essential to a
comprehension of their Annals.

The Cakchiquels were probably acquainted with the length
of the year as 365 days; there is even some evidence that
they allowed an intercalary day every four years, by begin-
ning the reckoning of the year one day earlier.

The beginning of their year is stated, by most authorities,
to have been on the day corresponding to our January 31st or
February ist, old style (February nth or 12th, new style).

The year was not divided into lunar months, as was the
case with the hunting tribes, but in a manner similar to the
highly artificial and complicated system that prevailed among
the Mayas and Mexicans. This allotted to the solar year
twenty months of eighteen days each, leaving a remainder of
five days, which the Mexicans called nemontemi^ insufficient ;
the Mayas nyail kin^ days of pain or of peril, and the Cak-
chiquels ^api ^ih, days of evil or days at fault; and which
were not included in the count of the months.'

* They are referred to by the Archbishop Garcia Pelaez, in these words :
" Los pianos y vistas tomadas por el comisionado y el informe que las
acompafia, muestran vestijios de adoratorios, fortificaciones y trazas de
edificios, calles y plazas ajustadas k dimensiones y con elecion de materias
en su estructura." — Memorias para la Historia del Antiguo Reyno de
Guatemala. Por Don Francisco de Paula Garcia Pelaez, Tom. I, p. 15,
(Guatemala, 185 1).

> The names applied to these intercalary days are analyzed differently


NAMES OF THE CAKCHIQUEL MONTHS. 29

Dates, however, were not assigned by a simple reference to
days of the month, but by days of the week ; these weeks
being of thirteen days each, and including every day of the
year. The week days were not named, but numbered only.

As will be noted in the Annals^ more importance was
attached to the day on which an occurrence took place than
to the year. This is common with untrained minds. Every
citizen of the United States knows that George Washington
was born on the 2 2d of February ; but it would puzzle a
large portion of them to be asked the year of his birth.

Names of the Cakchiquel Months,


Name.


Signification.


I.


Tacaxepual,


Com planting.


2.


Nabey tumuzuz,


First of winged ants.


3-


Rucan tumuzuz,


Second of winged ants


4.


^ibix,


Smoky, or clouds.


5.


Uchum,


Re-planting.


6.


Nabey mam,


First grandson.


7.


Rucab mam,


Second grandson.


8.


Liginga,


Soft to the hand.


9-


Nabey tog,


First cacao harvest.


10.


Rucab tof".


Second cacao harvest


II.


Nabey pach,


First incubation.


12.


Rucab pach.


Second incubation.


13.


Tziquin gih,


Bird days.


14.


Cakan,


Red clouds.


15.


Ibota,


Mat rolling.


16.


Katie,


Drying up.


17.


Itzcal gih,


Bad road days.


18.


Pariche,


In the woods.


by various authorities. For the et3nnology given of nemontemi^ I have
followed M. Remi Simeon, in his notes to Dr. Jourdanet's translation of
Sahagun's Historia de Nueva EspaHa; the Cakchiquel ^api is undoubt-
edly from ^apt fault, evil, crime.


30


INTRODUCTION.


To appreciate the bearing of these names, one must
remember that this is a rural calendar, in which the months
were designated with reference to farming and household
incidents. Thus, the ** winged ants'* referred to, are a species
that appear in March and April, shortly before the first of the
rainy season ; the fourth month is cloudy or misty, from the
frequent rains ; the first and second grandsons refer probably
to the "suckers," which must be plucked from the growing
corn ; in the eighth month the earth is moist, and must be
kept, by tillage, *'soft to the hand;*' the others have obvious
rural allusions, down to the last, when the natives went *' in
the woods " to gather fuel. The names appear to be all in the
Cakchiquel dialect, except the first, Tacaxepual^ the resem-
blance of which to the name of the second Mexican month,
Tlacaxipehualiztliy is too striking to be a coincidence, and
perhaps the seventeenth, Itzcai, which is very like the
eighteenth of the Mexican calendar, Izcalli ; but if borrowed
from the latter, two Cakchiquel words, of similar sound
but different meaning, have been substituted for the original
by the familiar linguistic principle of otosis or paronomasia.

Names of the Cakchiquel Days,


Name,


I.


Imox,


2.


IS'


3.


Agbal,


4.


Kat.


5.


Can,


6.


Camay,


7.


Queh,


8.


Kanel,


9-


Toh,


10.


Tzii,


Name.


II.


Batz,


12.


Ee,


13-


Ah,


14.


Yiz,


15-


Tziquin,


16.


Ahmac,


17.


Noh,


18.


Tihax,


19.


Caok,


20.


Hunahpu,


NAMES OF THE CAKCHIQUEL DAYS. 31

The calendars in use were of two different kinds, the one
called dJiol £/-A, literally "the valuer or appraiser of days,"
which was employed exclusively for astrological and divining
purposes, to decide on which were lucky and unlucky days ;
and may ^i/i, ** the revolution or recurrence of days,'* which
was for chronological purposes. ^

It will be noticed that in Xahila's Anna/s, every year ends
on a day Ah, and that each such closing day is numerically
three less than the day A/i terminating the preceding year.
There are also obvious inconsistencies in his identification
of native dates with the Christian calendar ; but these,
and the numerous difficult questions they suggest, would take
me too far afield to enter upon in the present introductory
paragraphs. The object of this volume is rather to furnish
material for study than to undertake the study itself.

The brief description of their reckoning of time, given by
Sanchez y Leon, may be quoted: ''They divided the year
into 1 8 months, and each month into 20 days; but they
counted only by nights, which they mentioned as dawns
(alboradas) ; the movements of the sun in the ecliptic gov-
erned their calendar ; they began their year forty days before
ours ; they celebrated annually three great feasts, like Easters,
at which periods both sexes assembled together at night, and
indulged in drunkenness and wantonness.'*^

I think in this extract the author should have said that they
began their year 40 days later than ours, as this would bring
his statement more into conformity with other writers.

^ A/ay is allied to the verb meAo, to go somewhere and return again.
Hence majf came to mean a cycle of years, months or days.
' ApuntamUntos de la Historia de Guatemala, p. 28.


32 INTRODUCTION.

Personal and Family Names,

Among the Cakchiquels, each person bore two names ; the
first his individual name, the second that of his family or
chinaviitL This word is pure Nahuatl, and means a place
enclosed by a fence/ and corresponds, therefore, to the Latin
herctum, and the Saxon ton. As adopted by the Cakchiquels,
it meant a household or family of one lineage and bearing
one name, all of whom were really or theoretically descended
from one ancestral household. To all such was applied the
term aca, related or affined ;' and marriage within the china-
mitl was not permitted. When a man of one chinamitl
married ^ into another, every male in the latter became his
brother-in-law, baluc^ or son-in-law, ht,^

Each chinamitl was presided over by a recognized leader,
the **head of the house,'* whose title was ahA.alam, "the
keeper of the tablets,*** probably the painted records on
which the genealogy of the family and the duties of its
members were inscribed.

The division of the early tribes into these numerous fami-
lies was not ancient, dating, according to tradition, from
about a century and a half before the Conquest.*

^ ** Chinamitl, seto o cerca de caiias/' from chinantiay to build a fence,
to enclose. — Molina, Vocabulario de la Lengua Mexicana,

2 Torresano, in his Arte de la Lengua Cakchiquels MS., gives this word
as ca, which indicates its probable derivation from the verb cae, to join
together, to unite, " those united by a common tie."

3 Coto, Vocabulario de la Lengua Cakchiquels MS., sub voce, CuHado.

* Coto, u. s., s. V. Alguafil. The word A.alam is now applied to the
canvas or tablets on which are painted the saints in the churches. It also
means a box or chest. — Dice. Cakchiquel Anon.

* See Brasseur, Hist, du Mexique et VAm. Cent. , Tom., II, pp. 489-90.


TRIBAL SUBDIVISIONS. 33

The family name was sometimes derived from a locality,
sometimes from a peculiarity, and at others from astrological
motives.^

The personal name was always that of the day of birth,
this being adopted for astrological reasons. There was a
fixed opinion that the temperament and fortunes of the indi-
vidual were controlled by the supposed character of his
birthday, and its name and number were therefore prefixed
to his family name. This explains the frequent occurrence
in the Cakchiquel Annals of such strange appellatives as
Belehe Queh, nine deer ; Cay Batz, two monkey, etc. ; these
being, in fact, the days of the year on which the bearers were
born. They should be read, "the 9th Queh," '*the 2d
Batz,'* etc.

Tribal Subdivisions,

The chinamitl appears to have been the sub-gens. Besides
it, there are other words frequently recurring in the Annals
referring to divisions of the community, hay, home or house-
hold ; ^ob, sept or division ; and ama^, tribe or city.

The first of these, hay, appears to be a general term ap-
plied to a community, without necessarily implying relation-
ship. An Indian, asked where he is from, will answer in ah-
hay vacy *'I am of this place,'* referring to his village. Yet
it is evident that in early times, all of one village were con-
sidered to be related. The word hay, moroever, does not
signify a house as an edifice. In that sense the proper term
is ochoch,

^ " Tienen tambien renombres de sus chinamitales 6 parcialidades que
tambien son de signos vel nombres senalados, como Xahila, etc." — Coto,
VocabulariOf MS., s. v. Renombre.


34 INTRODUCTION.

The frequent references by Xahila to the seven tribes, or
rather the seven cities, vuk ama^, and the thirteen divisions
or provinces, oxlahuh Ahob, are not explained in the course
of the narrative. These numbers retained sacred associations,
as they were adopted later to assign the days of worship of
their divinity (see Sec. 44). Brasseur is of opinion that the
thirteen divisions refer to the Pokoraams,^ but that such a
subdivision obtained among the Cakchiquels as well, is evi-
dent from many parts of their Annals. The same division
also prevailed, from remote times, among the Quiches,* and
hence was probably in use among all these tribes. It may
have had some superstitious connection with the thirteen
days of their week. The ^hob may be regarded as the
original gens of the tribe, and the similarity of this word to the
radical syllable of the Nahuatl calp-ulliy may not be accidental.
I have elsewhere spoken of the singular frequency with which
we hear of seven ancestors, cities, caves, etc., in the most
ancient legends of the American race.''

Terms of Affinity and Salutation,

In the Cakchiquel grammar which I edited, I have given a
tolerably full list of the terms of consanguinity and affinity
in the tongue (pp. 28, 29). But it is essential to the correct

^ Hist, du Mexique, Tom. II, p. 84.

2 Their names are given in the Titulos de la Casa de Ixcuin Nehaiby
p. 3. They are called " pueblos principales, cabezas de calpules.'* The
Nahuatl word, calpulH, here used, meant the kinsfolk actual and adopted,
settled together. They were the gentes of the tribe. See Ad. F. Bandeli^r,
On the Social Organization and Mode of Government of the Ancient
Mexicans, for a full explanation of their nature and powers.

3 The Lendpi and their Legends, p. 139.


TITLES AND SOCIAL CASTES. 35

understanding of the text in this volume, to recognize the
fact that many such terras in Cakchiquel are, in the majority
of cases, terms of salutation only, and do not express actual
relationship.

Examples of this are the words tata, father, used by women
to all adult males ; and tee, mother, employed by both sexes
in addressing adult women. In Xahila's writings, we con-
stantly find the words nimal, elder brother, and cha^y younger
brother, inserted merely as friendly epithets. The term
mama, grandfather, almost always means simply ** ancestor,"
or, indeed, any member of an anterior generation beyond
the first degree. This word must not be confounded with
mam (an error occurring repeatedly in Brasseur's writings),
as the latter means "grandchild ;*' and according to Father
Goto, it may be applied by a grandparent of either sex to a
grandchild of either sex.

Titles and Social Castes,

There are a number of terms of frequent recurrence in
Xahila's text, expressing the different offices in the govern-
ment, rank in social life and castes of the population, which
offer peculiar difficulty to the translator, because we have no
corresponding expressions in European tongues ; while to
retain them in the version, renders it less intelligible, and
even somewhat repulsive to the reader. I have thought it
best, generally, to give these terms an approximate English
rendering in my translation, while in the present section I
submit them to a critical examination.

The ordinary term for chief or ruler, in both the Cakchi-
quel and Maya dialects, is ahau. Probably this is a compound


36 INTRODUCTION.

of ah, a common prefix in these tongues, originally signifying
person^ and hence, when attached to a verb, conveying the
notion of one accustomed to exercise the action indicated ;
to a noun of place, a resident there ; and to a common noun,
a worker in or owner of the article; and «, a collar, especially
an ornamental collar, here intended as a badge of authority.
Ahau is, therefore, **the wearer of the collar;*' and by this
distinction equivalent to chief, ruler, captain, lord, king, or
emperor, by all which words it is rendered in the lexicons.
It is not a special title, but a general term.

Scarcely less frequent is the term ahpop. This is a com-
pound of the same prefix ah, with the word/^, which means
a mat. To sit upon such a mat was a privilege of nobility,
and of such dignitaries as were entitled to be present at the
national council ; ahpop^ therefore, may be considered as
equivalent to the German title Rath, counsellor, and appears
to have been used much in the same conventional manner.
In the Cakchiquel lexicons, popoh is *'to hold a council;*'
popoi, a council ; popoltzihy ** to speak in council,'* etc. All
these are derived from the word pop, mat ; from the mats on
which the councillors sat during their deliberations.

Personages of the highest rank, of the *' blood royal,"
combined these titles. They were ahau ahpop, ** lords of the
council." Uniting the latter title to the family names of the
ruling house, the chief ruler was known as Ahpd* Zotzil, and
the second in rank and heir-apparent, as Ahpd' XahiL The
oldest son of the former bore the title Ahpop-^mahay, which
is translated by the best authorities " messenger of the coun-
cil," and ordinarily was applied to an official who commu-
nicated the decisions of the councils of one village to that


TITLES AND SOCIAL CASTES. 37

of another.^ Another title, mentioned by Xahila, is ahpop-
achi; the last word means man, vir,

A third article, which distinguished the higher classes, was
the seat or stool on which they sat during solemn ceremonies.
This was called ^aalidal, an instrumental noun from the verb
£«/, to be visible or prominent; persons so seated being
elevated above, and thus distinguished from others ; from
this the verbal form, palely was derived, meaning '* he who
is prominent,*' etc., or, more freely, "illustrious,** "distin-
guished. **' The title ahpop-^alel meant, therefore, origi-
nally " he who is entitled to a mat and a stool,** that is, in
the council chamber of his town.

Another official connected with the council was the orator
appointed to bring before it the business of the day. His
title was ah uchan, from ucheex, to speak ; and it is translated
by Spanish writers, the "rhetorician, orator.**' A similar
personage, the ah tzih vinak^ "the man of words,*** was in

^ Father Goto, in his MS., Vocabulario Cakchiquel^ gives the rendering
" mandadero," and states that one was elected each year by the principals
of each chinamitly to convey messages. He adds : 'VUsan mucho de este
nombre en el Pueblo Atitlan."

2 Compare my edition of the Cakchiquel Grammar,^. 58. Brasseur
translates this title erroneously, " decorated with a bracelet." — Hist, des
Nations Civilisies, etc., Tome. II, p. 515.

' " El retorico, platico." Pantaleon de Guzman gives the fuller form,
naol ah uchafty 'whicYi means "he who knows, the master of speech."
— Compendio de Nombres en Lengua Cakchiquel y MS.

* Usually written by ellipsis, atzih vinak. Brasseur translates it
" distributor of presents," but it appears to be from tzih, word, speech.
The vocabularies are, as usual, very unsatisfactory. **Atztjh vinak. Prin-
cipal deste nombre." — Dice, Cakchiquel Anon.


38 INTRODUCTION.

attendance on the king, and, apparently, was the official
mouth-piece of the royal will. Still a third, known as the
lol-may^ which apparently means "silence-breaker/* was,
according to the dictionaries, "an envoy dispatched by the
rulers to transact business or to collect tributes.'*^

Very nearly or quite the same organization prevailed in the
courts of Quiche and Atitlan. The chiefs of the latter
province forwarded, in 15 71, a petition to Philip II, in which
they gave some interesting particulars of their former govern-
ment. They say : " The supreme ruler was called Atziquini-
haiy and the chiefs who shared the authority with him,
Amac TzutuhiL These latter were sovereigns, and acknowl-
edged no superiors The sovereign, or king,

did not recognize any authority above himself. The persons
or officers who attended at his court were called Lolmay,
Atzivinacy Galel, Ah-uchan, They were factors, auditors and
treasurers. Our titles correspond to yours. '''^

The name here applied to the ruler of the Tzutuhils,
Atziquinahay, recurs in Xahila's Annals, It was his family
name, and in its proper form, Ah AJquin-i-hayf means **he
who is a member of the bird family;*'* the bird being the
totemic symbol of the ruling house.

* Dice. Cakchiquel Anon^ MS., sub voce.

2 RequHe de Plusieurs Chefs Indiens d^ Atitlan A Philippe 11^ in
Ternaux-Compans, Reeueil de Pieces relatives d la ConquHe du Mexique^
p. 418.

8 Not " of the bird's nest," " ceux du nid de I'oiseau," as Brasseur
translates it {Hist, du Mexique, Tome. II, p. 89), nor " casa de la aguila,' '
house of the eagle, as it is rendered by Fuentes y Guzman, Recordacion
Florida i Tom. I, p. 21. Aiquin is the generic term for bird.


RELIGIOUS NOTIONS. 39

While the nobles were distinguished by titles such as these,
the mass of the people were divided into well defined classes
or castes. The warriors were called ah-labal, from labal, war ;
and they were distinguished from the general male popula-
tion, who were known as achiy men, viri. These were inde-
pendent freemen, engaged in peaceful avocations, but, of
course, ready to take up arms on occasion. They were
broadly distinguished from the tributaries, called ah-patan ;
the latter word meaning tax or tribute ; and still more sharply
from the slaves, known as vinakitz^ "mean men," or by the
still more significant word mun, hungry (Guzman, Compendio),
The less cultivated tribes speaking other tongues, adjoining
the Cakchiquels, were promiscuously stigmatized with the
name chicop, brutes or beasts.

A well developed system of tribute seems to have prevailed,
and it is often referred to by Xahila. The articles delivered
to the collectors were gold, silver, plain and worked, feathers,
cacao, engraved stones, and what appear as singular, gar-
lands (^udu/) and songs, painted apparently on skins or

paper.

Religious Notions.

The deities worshiped by these nations, the meaning and
origin of their titles, and .he myths connected with them,
have been the subject of an examination by me in an earlier
work.^ Here, therefore, it will be needless to repeat what I
have there said, further than to add a few remarks explanatory
of the Cakchiquel religion in particular.

According to the Popol Vuhy ** the chief god of the Cak-

* Tke Names of the Gods in the Kiche Myths of Central Ameriiay in
the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society ^ 1 88 1.


40 INTRODUCTION.

chiquels was Chamalcan^ and his image was a bat.'*^ Brasseur
endeavored to trace this to a Nahuatl etymology,' but there
is little doubt it refers, as do so many of the Cakchiquel
proper names, to their calendar. Can is the fifth day of their
week, and its sign was a serpent ;' chatnal is a slightly abbre-
viated form of chaomai, which the lexicons translate ''beauty ' '
and **fruitfulness,'* connected with chaomar, to yield abund-
antly. He was the serpent god of fruitfulness, and by this
type suggests relations to the lightning and the showers. The
bat, ZotZy was the totem of the Zotzils, the ruling family of
the Cakchiquels ; and from the extract quoted, they seem to
have set it up as the image of Chamalcan.

The generic term for their divinities, employed by Xahila,
and also frequently in the Popol Vuhj is Aabuyl, which I have
elsewhere derived from the Maya chab, to create, to form. It
is closely allied to the epithets applied in both works to the
Deity, Aakoi, the maker, especially he who makes something
from earth or clay ; bitol, the former, or fashioner ; ^aholoniy
the begetter of sons ; alom, the bearer of children ; these
latter words intimating the bi-sexual nature of the principal
divinity, as we also find in the Aztec mythology and else-
where. The name ^ax/o^, the liar, from the verb ^axto^o/i,
to lie, also frequently used by Xahila with reference to the

1 " Chamalcan u bi qui gabauil Cakchequeleb, xa Zotz u vachibal.*' —
Popo/ Vuk, p. 224.

* Hist, des Nations Civ. du Mexique^ Tom. II, p. 173.

^ " El quinto Cam^ esto es ; amarillo, pero su signiBcado es culebra." —
Ximenez, Las Historias del Origen de los Indios de Guatemala, p. 215.
There are two errors in this extract. The name is not Cam, but Can, and it
does not mean yellow, which is £)a«.


RELIGIOUS NOTIONS. 41

chief god of his nation in its heathendom, may possibly
have arisen after their conversion to Christianity ; but from
the coincidence that the Algonkin tribes constantly applied
such seemingly opprobrious terms to their principal deity, it
may have arisen from a similar cycle of myths as did theirs.^
There are references in Xahila's Annals to the Quiche
deities, Exbalanquen, Cabrakan, Hunahpu, and Tohil, but
they do not seem to have occupied any prominent place in
Cakchiquel mythology. Several minor gods are named, as
Belehe Toh, nine Toh, and Hun Tihax^ one Tihax; these
appellations are taken from the calendar.

Father Pantaleon de Guzman furnishes the names of various
inferior deities, which serve to throw light on the Cakchiquel
religion. Four of these appear to be gods of diseases,
Ahal puh, Ahal te^ob, Ahal xic, and Ahdi ^anya ; at least
three of these second words are also the designations of
maladies, and ahal is probably a mistake of the copyist for
ahau, lord. As the gods of the abode of the dead, he
names Tatan bak and Tatan holom, Father Bones and Father
Skull.

Another series of appellations which Guzman gives as of
Cakchiquel gods, show distinctly the influence of Nahuatl
doctrines. There are Mictan ahauh, lord of Mictlan, this
being the name of the abode of darkness, in Aztec mythology ;
Caueztan ahauh, probably Coatlan, lord of the abode of
serpents ; Tzitzimil, the tzitzimime of the Aztecs ; and CoUle^

^ I have su^ested an explanation of this strange term to apply to the
highest and most beneficent of their divinities, in a short article in the
American Antiquarian^ 1885, "The Chief God of the Algonkins in his
Character as a Cheat and a Liar."


42 INTRODUCTION.

probably colotl, the scorpion, or tecolotly the owl, which latter,
under the name tucur^ is also mentioned by Xahila.^

Father Goto refers to some of their deities of the woods
and streams. One of these, the Man of the Woods, is famous
throughout Yucatan and most of Central America. The
Spaniards call him Salonge^ the Mayas Che Vinic^ and the
Cakchiquels ru vinakil chee ; both these latter meaning " the
woods man.*' What gives this phantom especial interest in
this connection is, that Father Goto identifies the woodsman
with the ZakiApxoly the white fire maker, encountered by the
Cakchiquels in Xahila's narrative (Sec. 21)} I have nar-
rated the curious folk-lore about the woodsman in another
publication, and need not repeat it here.' His second name,
the White Fire Maker, perhaps refers to the '* light wood *'
or phosphorescence about damp and decaying trees.

To the water-sppites, the Undines of their native streams,
they gave the name xulu, water-flies, or ru vinakil ya^ the
water people.

As their household gods, they formed little idols of the
ashes from the funeral pyres of their great men, kneading
them with clay. To these they gave the name vinaky men or
beings (Goto).

* Pantaleon de Guzman, Compendio de Nombres en Lengua Cakchiquei^
MS. On the r6le of the Tzitzimime in Aztec mythology see my Ameri-
can Hero-Myths, p. 78.

2 " Al duende que anda en los montes Uaman ru vinakil chee vel
(akiAflxoiy — Goto, Vocabulario, MS., s. v. Monte. Zak, white ; Afix, to
make fire. Brasseur's translation, *< Le blanc abime de feu," is indefensible.

8 See a paper entitled " The Folk Lore of Yucatan," contributed by me
to the Folk- Lore Journal, Vol. I, 1883.


RELIGIOUS NOTIONS. 43

Representations of these divinities were carved in wood and
stone, and the words chee abahy ** wood and stone/* usually
mean, when they appear together in Xahila's narrative,
** idols or images in wood and stone."

The Stone God, indeed, is a prominent figure in their
mythology, as it was in their daily life. This was the sacred
Chay Abah, the Obsidian Stone, which was the oracle of
their nation, and which revealed the will of the gods on all
important civil and military questions. To this day, their
relatives, the Mayas of Yucatan, attach implicit faith to the
revelations of the zaztun, the divining stone kept by their
sorcerers ; and if it decrees the death of any one, they will
despatch him with their machetes, without the slightest
hesitation.^ The belief was cherished by the rulers and
priests, as they alone possessed the power to gaze on the
polished surface of the sacred block of obsidian, and read
thereupon the invisible decrees of divinity. (See above, p. 25).

As the stone came from the earth, it was said to have been
derived from the under world, from Xibalbay, literally the
unseen or invisible place, the populous realm in Quiche
myth, visited and conquered by their culture hero, Xbalan-
que. Hence in Cakchiquel tale, the Chay Abah represented
the principle of life, as well as the source of knowledge.*

The Cakchiquel Annals do not pretend to deal with

^ For an interesting note on the zaztutit see Apolinar Garcia y Garcia,
Historia de la Guerra de Castas en Yucatan^ p. XXIV (folio, Merida,
1865).

2 For the derivation of Xibalbay, and for the myths referred to in the
text, see my article, before referred to. The Names of the Gods in the
Kiche Myihsy pp. 27, 28.


44 INTRODUCTION.

mythology, but from various references and fragments in-
serted as history, it is plain that they shared the same sacred
legends as the Quiches, which were, in all probability, under
slightly different forms, the common property of the Maya
race. They all indicate loans from the Aztec mythology. In
the Cakchiquel Annals^ as in the Fopol Vuh and the Maya
Chronicles y we hear of the city of the sun god, Tulan or
Tonatian, as the place of their origin, of the land Zutva and
of the Nonoalcos, names belonging to the oldest cycles of
myths in the religion of the Aztecs. In the first volume of this
series I have discussed their appearance in the legends of Cen-
tral America,^ and need not refer to them here more than to
say that those who have founded on these names theories of
the derivation of the Maya tribes or their ruling families from
the Toltecs, a purely imaginary people, have perpetrated the
common error of mistaking myth for history. It is this error
that renders valueless much that the Abb6 Brasseur, M.
Charnay and others of the French school, have written on
this subject.

Xahila gives an interesting description of some of their
ancient rites (Sec. 44). Their sacred days were the 7th and
13th of each week. White resin was burned as incense, and
green branches with the bark of evergreen trees were brought
to the temple, and burned before the idol, together with a
small animal, which he calls a cat, ** as the image of night ;'*
but our domestic cat was unknown to them, and what animal
was originally meant by the word mez, I do not know.

He mentions that the priests and nobles drew blood with

1 The Maya Chronicles ^y^. no, in. Vol. I of the Library of Abo-
riginal American Literature,


RELIGIOUS NOTIONS. 45

the spines of the gourd tree and maguey, and elsewhere
(Sec. 37) refers to the sacrifice of infants at a certain festival.
The word for the sacrificial letting of blood was ^o/id^ which,
by some of the missionaries, was claimed as the root of the
word ^abuily deity.

Human sacrifice was undoubtedly frequent, although the
reverse has been asserted by various historians.^ Father
Varea gives some curious particulars. The victim was immo-
lated by fire, the proper word being Aatoh, to burn, and then
cut in pieces and eaten. When it was, as usual, a male cap-
tive, the genital organs were given to one of the old women
who were prophetesses, to be eaten by her, as a reward for her
supplications for their future success in battle.^ The cutting
in pieces of Tol^om, in the narrative of Xahila, has refer-
ence to such a festival.

Sanchez y Leon states that the most usual sacrifice was a
child. The heart was taken out, and the blood was sprinkled
toward the four cardinal points as an act of adoration to
the four winds, copal being burned at the same time, as an
incense.*

A leading feature in their ceremonial worship was the
sacred dance, or, as the Spanish writers call it, e/ baile. The
native name for it is xahoh, and it is repeatedly referred to in
the Annals, The legendary origin of some of these dances,

* Brasseur, Juarros, Fuentes y Guzman, etc.

2 Thomas Goto, Vocabulario de la Lenp^a Cakchiquel^ MS., 1 65 1.
Sub voce, Sacrijicar hombres^ quoting Varea.

8 " Sacandole el corazon y asperjando, con la sangre de la victima a los
cuatro vientos cardinales." — Apuntamientos de la Historia de Guatemala^
p. 26.


46 INTRODUCTION.

indeed, constitute a marked feature in its narratives. They
are mentioned by the missionaries as the favorite pastime of
the Indians ; and as it was impossible to do away with them
altogether, they contented themselves with suppressing their
most objectionable features, drunkenness and debauchery,
and changed them, at least in name, from ceremonies in
honor of some heathen god, to some saint in the Roman cal-
endar. In some of these, vast numbers of assistants took
part, as is mentioned by Xahila (Sec. 32).

Magic and divination held a very important place in Cak-
chiquel superstition, as the numerous words bearing upon
them testify. The form of belief common to them and their
neighbors, has received the name Nagualisniy from the Maya
root na^ meaning to use the senses. I have traced its deriva-
tion and extension elsewhere,* and in this connection will

•

only observe that the narrative of Xahila, in repeated pass-
ages, proves how deeply it was rooted in the Cakchiquel mind.
The expression ru piiz ru naval, should generally be rendered
"his magic power, his sorcery," though it has a number of
allied significations. Naval as a noun means magician, naval
chee, naval abah, the spirit of the tree, of the stone, or the
divinity embodied in the idols of these substances.

Another root from which a series of such words were de-
rived, was hal, to change. The power of changing or meta-
morphosing themselves into tigerS, serpents, birds, globes of
fire, etc., was claimed by the sorcerers, and is several times
mentioned in the following texts. Hence the sorcerer was
called hale by the power he possessed to effect such transforma-
tions halibal, the change effected haltbeh, etc.

* The Names of the Gods in the Kiche Myths, pp. 21, 22.


RELIGIOUS NOTIONS. 47

Their remarkable subjection to these superstitions is illus-
trated by the word lab^ which means both to divine the future
and to make war, because, says Ximenez, " they practiced
divination in order to decide whether they should make war
or not."*

These auguries were derived frequently from the flight and
call of birds (as in the Annals , Sees. 13, 14, etc.), but also
from other sources. The diviner who foretold by grains of
maize, bore the title malol txtm, the anointer or consecrator
of maize {Dice, Anon),

The priesthood was represented by two high priests,
elected for life by the ruler and council. The one who
had especial custody of religious affairs wore a flowing robe,
a circlet or diadem on his head ornamented with feathers,
and carried in his hand a rod, or wand. On solemn
occasions he publicly sacrificed blood from his ears, tongue,
and genital organ.

His associate was the custodian and interpreter of the
sacred books, their calendars and myths, and decided on
lucky and unlucky days, omens and prognostics.

In addition to these, there were certain old men, of austere
life, who dwelt in the temples, and wore their hair in plaited
strands around their heads (Jrenzado en circulo), who were
consulted on ordinary occasions as diviners.'

The funeral rites of the Cakchiquels have been related at
considerable length by Fuentes, from original documents in

1 **Labah, agorar y guerrear, porque agoraban si la hacian 6 no." —
Ximenez, Vocabiilario de las Tres Lenguas^ sub voce.

2 These particulars are from the work of Jose Sanchez y Leon, Apun-
tamientos de la Historia de Guatemalaj pp. 26, 27.


48 INTRODUCTION.

the Pokoman dialect.^ The body was laid in state for two days,
after which it was placed in a large jar and interred, a mound
being erected over the remains. On the mound a statue of
the deceased was placed, and the spot was regarded as sacred.
Father Goto gives somewhat the same account, adding that
these mounds were constructed either of stone or of the
adjacent soil, and were called cakhay or cubucak? He posi-
tively asserts that human sacrifices accompanied the inter-
ments of chiefs, which is denied by Fuentes, except among
the Quiches. These companions for the deceased chief on
his journey to the land of souls, were burned on his funeral
pyre. A large store of charcoal was buried with the corpse,
as that was supposed to be an article of which he would have
special use on his way. Sanchez y Leon mentions that the
high priest was buried in his house, clothed and seated upon
his chair. The funeral ceremonies, in his case, lasted fifteen

days.^

The Cakchiquel Language.

The Cakchiquel tongue was reduced to writing by the
Spanish missionaries, and therefore, in this work, as in all
the MSS, the following letters are used with their Spanish
values, — a, b, c, ch, g, e, i, 1, m, n, o, p, q, r, t, y.

The following are not employed : —

d, f, g, j, s, il, z.

The following are introduced, but with sounds differing
from the Spanish : —

h. This is always a decided rough breathing or forcible

1 Recordacion Florida^ Lib. IX, Cap. VII.

2 Vocabulario de la Lengua Cakchiquel^ MS. (165 1 ).

3 Apuntamientos de la Historia de Guatemala^ p. 27.


THE CAKCHIQUEL LANGUAGE. 49

expiration, like the Spanish j, or the strong English h ; except
when it follows c or ^, when it is pronounced as in the
Spanish, cha^ che, etc.

k. This has never the sound of c, but is a rough palatal,
the mouth being opened, and the tongue placed midway,
between the upper and lower walls of the oral cavity, while
the sound is forcibly expelled.

V. This letter, whether as a consonant (v) or a vowel («),
is pronounced separately, except when it is doubled, as in
tmh (uuh), book or paper, when the double vowel is very
closely akin to the English w,

X, In Cakchiquel and its associated dialects, this letter
represents the sound oi sh in the English words she, shove ^
etc.

Besides the above, there are five sounds occurring in the
Cakchiquel, Quiche and Tzutuhil, for which five special
characters were invented, or rather adopted, by the early
missionary Francisco de la Parra, who died in Guatemala, in
1560. They are the following : —

^ ^h ^ £ tj

The origin and phonetic value of these, as given by the
grammarian Torresano, are as follows *} —

£ This is called the tresilio, from its shape, it being an old
form of the figure three, reversed, thus, 2. It is the only true
guttural in the language, being pronounced forcibly from the
throat, with a trilling sound {castaneteandd),

^ From its shape this is called the cuatriiio, Parra having

1 Fr. Estevan Torresano, Arie de la Lengua Cakchiquely MS., in my
possession.


50 INTRODUCTION.

adopted for it an old form of the figure 4. It is a trilled
palatal, between a hard c and k.

^ The name applied to this is, the cuatrillo con coma, or the
4 with a comma. It is pronounced somewhat like the c with
the cedilla, g, only more quickly and with greater force —
ds or dz.

tj This resembles the "4 with a comma,** but is described
as softer, the tongue being brought into contact with the
teeth, exactly as tz in German.

^h A compound sound produced by combining the cuatrillo
with a forcible aspirate, is represented by this sign.

Naturally, no description in words can convey a correct
notion of these sounds. To learn them, one must hear them
spoken by those to the manner-bom.

Dr. Otto Stoll, who recently made a careful study of the
Cakchiquel when in Guatemala, says of«Parra's characters : —

" The four new signs added to the European alphabet, by
some of the old writers on Cakchiquel (Parra, Flores), viz :
£, ^, ^, ^h, are but phonetic modifications of four corres-
ponding signs of the common alphabet. So we get four pairs
of sounds, namely : —

c and ^ ;

k and g

ch and ^h

tz and A

forming two series of consonants, the former of which repre-
sents the common letters, and the latter their respective "cut
letters,* * which may be described as being pronounced with a
shorter and more explosive sound .than the corresponding


THE CAKCHIQUEL LANGUAGE. 51

common letter, and separated by a short pause from the
preceding or following vowel. *'^

The late Dr. Berendt illustrated the phonetic value of such
"cut " letters, by the example of two English words where
the same letter terminates one word and begins the next, and
each is clearly but rapidly pronounced, thus, the £ is pro-
nounced like two gutteral ks in ^' brea^ >^ettle ; *' the ^ like
the two cs in " magic candle,*' etc.

There would appear to have been other "cut" letters
in the old dialects of Cakchiquel, as in Guzman we find
the p/f and MM, as in the Maya, but later writers dropped
them.

I may dispense with a discussion of the literature of the
Cakchiquel language, having treated that subject so lately as
last year, in the introduction to the Grammar of the Cak-
chiquei, which I then translated and edited for the American
Philosophical Society. As will be seen by reference to that
work, it is quite extensive, and much of it has been preserved.
I have examined seven dictionaries of the tongue, all quite
comprehensive ; manuscript copies of all are in the United
States. None of these, however, has been published ; and
we must look forward to the dictionary now preparing by
Dr. Stoll, of Zurich, as probably the first to see the light.

The Maya race, in nearly all its branches, showed its intel-
lectual superiority by the eagerness with which it turned to
literary pursuits, as soon as some of its members had learned
the alphabet. I have brought forward some striking testimony

* Supplementary Remarks to the Grammar of the Cakchiquel Language,
edited by D, G. Brinton. — Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society f 1885.


52 INTRODUCTION.

to this in Yucatan,^ and there is even more in Central Amer-
ica. The old historians frequently refer to the histories of
their own nations, written out by members of the Quiche,
Cakchiquel, Pokomam and Tzendal tribes. Vasquez, Fuentes
and Juarros quote them frequently, and with respect. They
were composed in the aboriginal tongues, for the benefit of
their fellow townsmen, and as they were never printed, most
of them became lost, much to the regret of antiquaries.

Of those preserved, the Popol Vuh or National Book of the
Quiches, and the Annals of the Cakchiquels, the latter pub-
lished for the first time in this volume, are the most important
known.

The former, the ** Sacred Book** of the Quiches, a
document of the highest merits, and which will certainly
increase in importance as it is studied, was printed at Paris
in 1 86 1, with a translation into French by the Abbe Brasseur
(de Bourbourg). He made use only of the types of the
Latin alphabet ; and both in this respect and in the fidelity
of his translation, he has left much to be desired in the pre-
sentation of the work.

The recent publication of the Grammar also relieves me
from the necessity of saying much about the structure of the
Cakchiquel language. Those who wish to acquaint themselves
with it, and follow the translation given in this volume by
comparing the original text, will need to procure all the
information contained in the Grammar, It will be sufficient
to say here that the tongue is one built up with admirable
regularity on radicals of one or two syllables. The perfection
and logical sequence of its verbal forms have excited the

* See The Maya Chronicles, p. 67, and note.


THE ANNALS OF XAHILA. 63

wonder and applause of some of the most eminent linguists,
and are considered by them to testify to remarkable native
powers of mind.^

The Annals of Xahiia.

The MS. from which I print the Annals of the CakchiquelSy
is a folio of 48 leaves, closely written on both sides in a very
clear and regular hand, with indigo ink. It is incomplete,
the last page closing in the middle of a sentence.

What is known of the history of this manuscript, is told
us by Don Juan Gavarrete, who, for many years, was almost
the only native of Guatemala interested in the early history
of his country. He tells us in his introduction to his trans-
lation of it, soon to be mentioned, that in 1844 he was com-
missioned to arrange the archives of the Convent of San
Francisco of Guatemala, by order of the Archbishop Don
Francisco Garcia Pelaez. Among the MSS. of the archives
he found these sheets, written entirely in Cakchiquel, except
a few marginal glosses in Spanish, in a later hand, and in
ordinary ink. The document was submitted to several
persons acquainted with the Cakchiquel language, who gave

^ " Die bewundemswilrdige Feinheit und consequente Logik in der Aus-
bildung des Maya Zeitwortes setzt eine Kultur voraus, die sicherlich weit
ueber die Zeitr&ume hinaus zuriickreicht, welche man bis jetzt geneight
war, der Amerikanischen Civilization zuzuschreiben." — Otto StoU, Zur
Ethnographic der Republik Guatemala^ s. 148 (Zurich, 1884). Compare
the remarks of Wilhelm von Humboldt on the Maya conjugation, in his
essay on the American verb, as published in my Philosophic Grammar of
the American Languages^ as set forth by Wilhelm von Humboldt, pp.
35-39 (Philada., 1885).


64 INTRODUCTION.

a general statement of its contents, but not a literal and
complete translation.^

When, in 1855, the Abb6 Brasseur (de Bourbourg) visited
Guatemala, Seilor Gavarrete showed him this MS., and the
Abb6 borrowed it for the purpose of making a full version,
doubtless availing himself of the partial translations pre-
viously furnished. His version completed, he left a copy of
it with Seilor Gavarrete, and brought the original with him
to Europe.* It remained in his possession until his death at
Nice, when, along with the rest of the Abba's library, it
passed into the hands of M. Alphonse Pinart. This emi-
nent ethnologist learning my desire to include it in the present
series of publications, was obliging enough to offer me the
opportunity of studying it.

Previous to its discovery in Guatemala, in 1 844, we have no
record of it whatsoever, and must turn to the document itself
for information.

The title given it by Brasseur, and adopted by Gavarrete,
Memorial de Tecpan Atitlariy was purely factitious, and, more-
over, is misleading. It was, indeed, written at the town of
Tzolola or Atitlan, on the lake of that name, the chief city of

^ Gavarrete's words are, '< Pas6 por manos de muchos personas versadas
en los idiomas indigenes sin que pudiese obtenerse una traduccion integra
y exacta de su testo, habiendo sido bastante, sin embargo, lo que de su
sentido pudo percibirse, para venir en conocimiento de su grande impor-
tancia historical' — Boleiin de la Sociedad Economica,

2 The Abb6 says that Gavarrete gave him the original (Bibliothique
Mexico- Guatemalienne, p. 14). But that gentleman does not take to him-
self credit for such liberality. He writes <* £1 testo original quedd sin
embargo en su poder," etc. Ubi supr4.


THE ANNALS OF XAHILA. 65

the Tzutuhils; but its authors were Cakchiquels; its chief
theme is the history of their tribe, and it is only by the
accident of their removal to Atitlan, years after the Conquest,
that its composition occurred there. I have, therefore,
adopted for it, or at least that portion of it which I print, the
much more appropriate name, The Annals of the Cakchiquels,

I say "for that portion of it,** because I print but 48 out
of the 96 pages of the original. These contain, however,
all that is of general interest ; all that pertains to the ancient
history of the nation. The remainder is made up of an unin-
teresting record of village and family incidents, and of a
catalogue of births, baptisms and marriages. The beginning
of the text as printed in this volume, starts abruptly in the
MS. after seventeen pages of such trivialities, and has no
separate title or heading.

The caption of the first page of the MS. explains the
purpose of this miscellaneous collection of family docu-
ments. That caption is


Vae MEMORIA CHIRE ^HAOH.
this is the record for the process.

The word memoria is the Spanish for a record, memoir or
brief, and the Cakchiquel ^Jiaoh, originally contention,
revolt, was, after, the Conquest, the technical term for a legal
process or lawsuit. These papers, therefore, form part of the
record in one of those interminable legal cases in which the


56 INTRODUCTION.

Spanish law delighted. The plaintiffs in the case seem to
have been the Xahila family, who brought the action to re-
cover some of their ancient possessions or privileges, as one
of the two ruling families of the Cakchiquel nation ; and in
order to establish this point, they filed in their plea the full
history of their tribe and genealogy of their family, so far as
was known to them by tradition or written record. It belongs
to the class of legal instruments, called in Spanish law Titulos^
family titles. A number of such, setting forth the descent
and rights of the native princes in Central America, are in
existence, as the Titulo de Totonicapan, etc.

The date of the present rescript is not accurately fixed. As
it includes the years 1619-20, it must have been later than
those dates. From the character of the paper and writing, I
should place it somewhere between 1620 and 1650.

In his Advertencia to his translation of it, Sefior Gavarrete
asserts that the document is in the handwriting of one of the
native authors. This is not my opinion. It is in the small,
regular, perfectly legible hand of a professional scribe, a
notarial clerk, no doubt, thoroughly at home in the Cak-
chiquel language, and trained in the phonetic characters,
introduced with such success by Father Parra, as I have
already mentioned. The centre lines and catch-words are in
large, clear letters, so as to attract the eye of the barrister, as

Vae MEMORIA CHIRE VINAK CHIJ.

this is the statement of the torts.
or,

Vae MEMORIA gANAVINAKIL.

THIS IS A RECORD OF THE WITNESSES.


THE ANNALS OF XAHILA. 67

The document is made up of the depositions and state-
ments of a number of members of the Xahila family, but that
around which the chief interest centres, and that which alone
is printed in this volume, is the history of his nation as
written out by one of them who had already reached adult
years, at the epoch of the first arrival of the Spaniards, in
1524. Unfortunately, his simple-hearted modesty led him to
make few personal allusions, and we can glean little in-
formation about his own history. The writer first names
himself, in the year 1582, where he speaks of ''me, Francisco
Ernantez Arana.*'^ The greater part of the manuscript,
however, was composed many years before this. Its author
says that his grandfather, the king Hun Yg, and his father,
Balam, both died in 15 21, and his own marriage took place
in 1522. As it was the custom of his nation to marry young,
he was probably, at the time, not over 15 years of age.'

That Francisco Ernantez was not the author of the first
part of the document seems evident. Under the year 1560
occurs the following entry : —

" Twenty days before the Feast of the Nativity my mother
died ; soon after, my late father was carried off (xchaptah)
while they were burying my mother ; my father took medi-
cine but once before we buried him. The pest continued to
rage for seven days after Easter ; my mother, my father, my
brother and my sister died this year.**

^ As the slight aspirate, the Spanish h^ does not exist in the Cakchiquel
alphabet, nor yet the letter d, the baptismal name *< Hernandez/' takes the
form " Ernantez."

' ** Se casan muy nifios/' says Sanchez y Leon, speaking of the natives.
— Apuntamientos de la Historia de Guatemala^ p. 24.
£


68 INTRODUCTION.

It could not, of course, be the son of Balam, who died in
15 21, who wrote this.

Under 1563 the writer mentions: —

''At this time my second son Raphael was bom, at the
close of the fourth year of the fourth cycle after the revolt.*'

The last entry which contains the characteristic words
ixnu^ahol, "you my children,'* occurs in the year 1559,
and is the last given in my translation. My belief is that the
document I give was written by the father of Francisco
Emantez Xahila. The latter continued it from 1560 to
1583, when it was taken up by Francisco Diaz, and later by
other members of the Xahila family.

The Abb6 Brasseur was of the opinion that these Annals
carry the record of the nation back to the beginning of the
eleventh century, at least. A close examination of the
account shows that this is not the case. Gagavitz, the earliest
ruler of the nation, can easily be traced as the ancestor in
the eighth remove, of the author. The genealogy is as
follows: —

1. Gagavitz, "he who came from Tulan."

2. His son, Cay Noh, who succeeded him.

3. Citan Qatu, son of Cay Noh, who also ruled.

4. His son, Citan Tihax Cablah, who does not seem to
have enjoyed the leadership. It was regained by

5. His son, Vukubatz, by the aid of the Quiche king,
Quikab.

6. Oxlahuh Tzii, eldest son of Vukubatz, died A. D.,
1509.

7. Succeeded by his eldest son, Hun Yg, who died, together


THE ANNALS OF XAHILA. 59

with his eldest son Balam, the father of the author, in the
year 1521.

Allowing to these seven who outlived their parents an
average survival of twenty years, we are carried back to
about the year 1380, as that on which the migration, headed
by Gagavitz, began its wanderings, little more, therefore, than
the length of two lives as protracted as that of the author
himself. This result is that generally obtained by a careful
scrutiny of American traditions. They very rarely are so
far-reaching as has usually been supposed. Anything spoken
of as more than three or four generations distant, may safely
be assumed as belonging to myth, and not to history.

It was the expressed intention of the Abb6 Brasseur to
edit the original text with his translation, but this he did not
live to accomplish. He incorporated numerous extracts from
it in his Histoire des Nations Civilisies du Mexique et de
VAmerique Centrales and added a few paragraphs in the
original at the end of the first volume of that work ; but
these did not give much idea of the document as a whole.

When, with the aid of the previous partial translations and
the assistance of some intelligent natives, he had completed
a version into French, of that portion composed by the
first two writers he gave a copy of it to Don Juan Gav-
arrete. This antiquary translated it into Spanish, and pub-
lished it serially, in the Boletin de la Sociedad Economica de
Guatemala^ beginning with No. 29, September, 1873, ^^^
continuing to No. 43. Copies of this publication are,
however, so scarce that I have been unable to learn of a com-
plete file, even in Guatemala. The dissolution of the Soci-
edad Economica by order of the late President Barrios,
scattered the copies in its own archives.


60 INTRODUCTION.

Synopsis of the Annals of Xahila.

The work opens with a statement that the writer intends to
record the ancient traditions of his tribe, as handed down
from their early heroes, Gagavitz and Zactecauh. He begins
with a brief genealogical table of the four sub- tribes of the
Cakchiquels (Sees. 1-3), and then relates their notions of the
creation of man at one of the mythical cities of Tulan, in the
distant west (4, 5). Having been subjected to onerous
burdens in Tulan, they determine to leave it, and are advised
to go by their oracles (6-14).

They cross the sea, proceeding toward the east, and arrive
at a land inhabited by the Nonoualcats, an Aztec people
(15-17). Their first action is formally to choose Gagavitz and
Zactecauh as their joint rulers (18-19), and under their leader-
ship they proceed to attack the Nonoualcats. After a severe
conflict the Cakchiquels are defeated, and are obliged to seek
safety in further wanderings. At length they reach localities
in Guatemala (20). At this point an episode is introduced
of their encounter with the spirit of the forests, Zakiqoxol
(21, 22).

They meet with various nations, some speaking a totally
different language ; others, as the Mams and Pokomams,
dialects of their own. With the last 'mentioned they have
serious conflicts (23-29). During one of their journeys,
Zactecauh is killed by falling down a ravine (30). An
episode here relates the traditional origin of one of their
festivals, that in honor of Gagxanul, ''the uncoverer of the
fire*' (31, 32).

Their first arrival at Lake Atitlan is noted (33), and the
war that they waged with the Ikomags (34). Here an episode


SYNOPSIS OF THE ANNALS OF XAHILA. 61

describes the traditional origin of the festival of Tolgom
(35-37). A peaceful division of the lake with the Tzutuhils
is effected, and marriages take place between the tribes (38).

The Cakchiquels, Quiches and Akahals now settle perma-
nently in their towns, and develop their civilization (39, 40).
They meet with numerous hardships, as well as internal
dissensions, the chief Baqahol at one time obtaining the
leadership. They succeed in establishing, however, family
life and a fixed religious worship, though in almost constant
war with their neighbors (41-46).

Gagavitz, "he who came from Tulan," dies, and is fol-
lowed by Cay Noh and Cay Batz (47). These acknowledge
the supremacy of Tepeuh, the king of the Quiches, and are
sent out by him to collect tribute from the various tribes.
They are seduced and robbed by the Tzutuhils, and conceal
themselves i'^ a cave, out of fear of Tepeuh. He forgives
them, however, and they continue in power until their death

(49-59)-
After this, a period of strife follows, and the names of

four successive rulers are mentioned, but none of the occur-
rences of their reigns (60-66).

The narrative is resumed when Qikab, king of the Quiches,
orders the Cakchiquels tQ settle at the town of Chiavar. He
appoints, as their rulers, the warriors Huntoh and Vukubatz.
A revolt agains Qikab, headed by his two sons, results in his
defeat and death (67-81). During this revolt, a contest
between the Cakchiquels takes place, the close of which finds
the latter established in their final stronghold, the famous
fortress of ** Iximche on the Ratzamut " (82-85).

At the death of Huntoh and Vukubatz, they are succeeded


62 INTRODUCTION.

by Lahuh Ah and Oxlahuh Tzii, who carry on various wars,
and especially defeat the Quiches in a general engagement,
which is vividly described (86-93). They also conquer the
Akahals, killing their king Ichal, and the Tzutuhils, with
their king Caoke (94-98).

During their reign, a sanguinary insurrection occurred in
Iximche, of such importance that the author adopts its date
as the era from which to reckon all subsequent events
(99-104). This date corresponded to the year 1496, A. D.(?)

The following years are marked by a series of unimportant
wars, the outbreak of a destructive pestilence, and finally, in
1524, twenty-eight years after the Insurrection, by the arrival
of the Spanish forces under Alvarado (105-144).

The later pages are taken up with an account of the strug-
gles between the natives and the whites, until the latter had
finally established their supremacy.

Remarks on the Printed Text,

In printing the MS. of Xahila, I have encountered certain
difficulties which have been only partially surmounted. As the
Cakchiquel, though a written, is not a printed tongue, there
has no rule been established as to the separation of verbs and
their pronominal subjects, of nouns and their possessive pro-
nouns, of the elements of compound particles, of tense and
mode signs, etc. In the MSS. the utmost laxity prevails in
these respects, and they seem not to have been settled points
in the orthography of the tongue. The frequent elisions and
euphonic alterations observable in these compounds, prove
that to the native mind they bore the value of a single word,
as we are aware they did from a study of the structure of this


REMARKS ON THE PRINTED TEXT. 63

class of languages. I have, therefore, felt myself free to
exercise in the printed page nearly the same freedom which I
find in the MS. At first, this will prove somewhat puzzling
to the student of the original, but in a little while he will
come to recognize the radical from its augment without
difficulty.

Another trouble has been the punctuation. In the original
this consists principally of dashes and commas, often quite
capriciously distributed. Here also, I have been lax in
reducing the text to the requirements of modem standards,
and have left much latitude to the reader to arrange it for
himself.

Capital letters are not often used in the original to distin-
guish proper names, and as the text has been set up from a
close copy of the first text, some irregularities in this respect
also must be anticipated.

The paragraphs numbered in the text are distinctly marked
in the original, but are not numbered there. The numerals
have been added for convenience of reference.


THE ANNALS


OF


THE CAKCHIQUELS


BY


A MEMBER OF THE XAHILA FAMILY.


I. VAE XTINU^IBAH HALAL QUITZIH

HE NABEY

Ka tata ka mama, heri xebogo vinak oher mahaniok
ti lagabex vae huyu ta£ah ; ^ ruyon ok umul ^iquin
^oh, que cha, ha ok ki xquila£abeh huyu tagah he ^a
ka tata ka mama, yx nu^ahol, pa Tulan.

2. Xtinu^ibah ^a quitzih ri ki he nabey ka tata ka
mama £a£avitz rubi, ^actecauh ru hi hunchic, he ^oh
quitzih que cha ^a ^haka palouh xoh pevi, pa Tulan ru
bi huyu, xoh alax xoh ^aholax vi pe ruma ka tee, ka
tata, yxka^ahol, quecha ri oher tata mama, ga£avitz,
^actecauh qui bi, ri ki xepe pa Tulan he cay chi achij
heri xoh bo90, oh Xahila.

3. Va^a quibi ru hay ru chinamitee £eka^uch,
Ba^ahola, Cibakihay. i. ^tun ^hutiah qui bi xebogo
Ba^ahola. i. Tzanat £u£uchom quibi xebogo geka^u-
chij ; Daqui ahauh ^hahom ahauh xebogo Cibakihayi,
xaoh cahi chi chinamit ok xohpe pa Tulan, ri oh Cakchi-
quel vinak, yxka^ahol, quecha. — ^ x^amar ^a vave ri
Caveki Totomay Xurcah qui bi xebogo. — Xavi ^
x^mar vave ri Ahquehayi, Loch, Xet, quibi, xebogo ; —
xavi ^a x^am ri ahPak, Telom, ^oxahil, ^obakil quibi
xebo9o; quere navipe ri Ikomagi, xavi ^a x^amar;
he^a cah ^hob ri ^a xe^amar vave he amag.

66


I. Here I am going to write a few of the sayings of
our earliest fathers and ancestors, those who begot men
of old, before the hills and plains here were inhabited ;
then only rabbits and birds were here, they say, when
they took possession of the hills and plains, they, our
fathers and ancestors from Tulan, oh my children.


2. And I shall write the sayings of our earliest fathers
and ancestors, Gagavitz the name of one, Zactecauh the
name of the other ; and these are the sayings they spake
as we came from the other side of the sea, from the land
of Tulan, where we were brought forth and begotten by
our mothers and our fathers, oh my children, as said of
old the fathers, the ancestors, Gagavitz and Zactecauh
by name, the two heroes who came from Tulan and
begot us, the Xahila.

3. These are the names of the houses and clans of
Gekaquch, Bagahola and Cibakihay. i. Qatun and
Qhutiah by name, begat Bagahola. 2. Tzanat and
Guguchom by name, begat those of Gekaquch. 3. The
chief Daqui and the chief Ghahom begat those of Cibaki-
hay. Thus we were four clans when we came from
Tulan, we, the Cakchiquel people, as we are told, oh my
children. Those of Cavek, Totomay and Xurcah by
name, also married and begat ; also those of Quehay,
Loch and Xet by name, married and begat ; those of
Pak, Telom, Qoxahil and Qobakil by name, also married
and begat; angl also those of Ykomag married; and
these four divisions which thus married are the tribes
so-called.

67


68 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

4. He ^a ^oh quitzih ri gagavitz, ^actecauh xe re
^ki ru xe quitzih vae quecha ^ari gagavitz ^actecauh :
Cahi xpe vi yinak pa Tulan ; chi relebal gih, hun Tullan:
hun chi ^a chi Xibalbay, hun ^a chu kahibal gih chi ri
^ xoh pevi chukahibal gih, hun chi vi ^a chi ^abovil.
Querela cahi vi Tullan ri yxka^ahol, quecha ; chu
kahibal ^a gih xoh pa vi Tullan, ^ha^a palouh ; ^a^o
viri Tullan chiri^a xohalax vi ul xoh ^holax vipe ruma
ruma ka tee ka tata quecha.


5. Tan ^a talax ri chay abah, ruma raxa Xibalbay
gana Xibalbay, tan^ati ^ak vinak ruma ^akol bitol ;
tzukul richin ri chay abah ok x^ak ri vinak pan pokon
^a xutzin vinak, xtiho chee, xtiho ^a xaki ruyon uleuh
xrah oc ; mani ^a x^hao, mani xbiyin, mani ^a ru
quiquel ru tiohil xux, quecha e nabey ka tata ka mama,
yxnu^ahol ; mani ^a xcanay rixoc, ^arunah ^a xcanay
rixoc : xae chay chi chicop etamayon ^o vi ri echa pam
Paxil ru bi huyu ^ovi hari chicop Utiuh, Koch qui bi.
Xa^ pa rachak xcanay vi, tok xcami9ax ^a ri chicop
utiuh xpo^hel chupam ri yxim tan ^a tibe canox yogbal
richin ruma chicop tiuh tiuh rubi, ^a chupam palouh
xpe vi ruma tiuh tiuh ru quiquel tixli cumatz xoc
xyogbex richin ri yxim : x^akbex richin ru tiohil vinak
ruma ^akol bitol ^a ha ki etamayom ri ^akol bitol alom
^aholom he xe ^ako vinak ^ak que cha xutzin ^ vinak
^ak, oxlahuh achij, cahlahuh ^a ixok xux ; x^ohe ruvi,
^ate ^a ok xe^hao xebiyin, x^ohe qui quiquel qui
tiohil. Xe^ulu^u xin ^a he ^a cay ri xhayil hun xux.
Querela xlago vi vinak ri quecha oher vinak, yxka^ahol ;
xemealan xe^aholan ^a ri he nabey vinak. Querela
ru banic vinak rij, quere navipe rubanic chay abah ri


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 69

4. These are the sayings of Gagavitz and Zactecauh,
and these are the very words which Gagavitz and
Zactecauh spoke : " Four men came from Tulan ; at the
sunrise is one Tullan, and one is at Xibalbay, and one is
at the sunset ; and we came from this one at the sunset ;
and one is where is God. Therefore there are four Tulans,
they say, oh our sons ; from the sunsetting we came,
from Tullan, from beyond the sea ; and it was at Tullan
that arriving we were brought forth, coming we were
produced, by our mothers and our fathers, as they say.

5. "And now is brought forth the Obsidian Stone by
the precious Xibalbay, the glorious Xibalbay, and man
is made by the Maker, the Creator ; the Obsidian Stone
was his sustainer, when man was made in misery, and
when man was formed ; he was fed with wood, he was
fed with leaves ; he wished only the earth ; he could not
speak, he could not walk ; he had no blood, he had no
flesh; so say our fathers, our ancestors, oh you my sons.
Nothing was found to feed him ; at length something
was found to feed him. Two brutes knew that there
was food in the place called Paxil, where these brutes
were, the Coyote and the Crow by name. Even in the
refuse of maize it was found, when the brute Coyote was
killed as he was separating his maize, and was searching
for bread to knead, (killed) by the brute Tiuh Tiuh by
name ; and the blood of the serpent and the tapir was
brought from within the sea by means of Tiuh Tiuh, with
which the maize was to be kneaded ; the flesh of man
was formed of it by the Maker, the Creator ; and well
did they, the Maker and the Creator, know him who was
born, him who was begotten ; they made man as he was
made, they formed man as they made him, so they tell.
There were thirteen men, fourteen women ; they talked,
they walked, they had blood, they had flesh. They mar-
ried, and one had two wives. Therefore the race cop-
ulated, this race of old, as they tell, oh our sons. They
brought forth daugl iters, they brought forth sons, those
first men. Thus men were made, and thus the Obsidian
Stone was made, for the enclosure of Tullan ; thus we


70 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^apal ^a ruchi ri TuUan, xoh pe vi xahun chi 50^
^apibal ru chij ri TuUan xoh alax vi ul xoh ^holax
vipe, xya vipe ri kikan chi gekum chi aga, yx ka^hol ;
xecha can ri gagavitz, ^actecauh, yxnu^hol, xa^
mani xquimeztah ru tzihoxic. He ^iyaley chi e ka
mama ; ^oh quitzih oher takchibal ^ quichin vae.


6. Tok xoh pixabax ^ pe ruma ka tee ka tata oxlahu
^hob ^a vukamag oxlahu ^hob ^a ahlabal ok xohpe
pa Tullan chi gekum chi aga ok xya pe ri kikan, tok
xu^m rikan vuk ama£ ahlabal, xoh chole na chu xocou
^ Tullan x^ohe viri vuk amag : chirikiga ^ Tullan
x^ohe viri xcholevi ahlabal. Nabey na xu^^am rikan
vuk ama£, ^te ^a xu^m chic rikan ahlabal. Xa^
ruyon xit puak guguraxon ^ubul chactit ru^in ^
^ibanic ^otonic, qui yanic xul, bix, ^hol gih, may gih,
pek cacouh, xa ruyon ginomal xrikah pe pa Tullan a^
ri ahlabal xa ruyon ^ha pocob xa 5ete9ic chee xa £iom
ah rikan ok xpe pa TuUa.


7. Tok xpixa ^ ka tee ka tata xcha : ^ ohix ^,
yxnu^ahol, yxnumeal, ree yvikan ree ^a y tzukuh
y£ohee ; xucheex ^ri chay abah : ohix ^ ti vi la y
huyubal y tagahal ^a chila ^a ^haka palouh ^oh vi y
huyubal y tagahal, yxnu^hol, ^a chila ^ tiga vi ruvach.
Ree yvikan mixuyael, y £inomal y vahauarem, xeucheex
^ ri oxlahu ^hob vukamag, oxlahu ^hob ahlabal, ok
xyape ri mi^hbal quichin ri chee abah, xqui kahpe pa
Tullan Xibalbay ^ xyaope ri chee abah, chikichin que
cha ri he nabey ka tata ka mama, ri gagavitz ^actecauh:
he ki xe ykan pe, he navipe ki ^o quitzih.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 71

came to where the Zotzils were at the gates of TuUan ;
arriving we were born, coming we were produced, coming
we gave the tribute, in the darkness, in the night, oh our
sons.** Thus spoke Gagavitz and Zactecauh, oh my
sons, and what they said has not been forgotten. They
are our great ancestors ; these are the words with which
they encouraged us of old.

6. Then we were ordered to come by our mothers and
fathers, we the thirteen divisions and the seven tribes,
the thirteen divisions of warriors; and we came to Tulan
in the darkness and the night, and coming gave our
tribute ; they took tribute from the warriors of the seven
tribes ; they were drawn up in order on the left of Tulan
where were the people of the seven tribes; on the
right-hand of Tulan were arranged the warriors. First
the tribute was taken from the seven tribes, next the
tribute was taken from the warriors. But it was only
jade and silver, and green feathers worked and sewed
together, together with articles painted and articles
sculptured, and for gifts, flutes, songs, astrological calen-
dars and reckoning calendars, fine and common cacao ;
only such riches were paid in Tulan, and the only riches
the warriors bore from Tulan were their bows, their
bucklers and their rounded shields.

7. Then to our mothers and fathers it was commanded
and said : " You, my sons, you, my daughters, these are
your burdens which you shall sustain and maintain." So
spoke the Obsidian Stone. " There are your hills and
plains ; there, beyond the ocean, are your hills and plains,
oh you my sons, there it is that you shall lift up your
faces. These are the burdens which I shall give you,
your riches, your majesty;" thus it was said to the thir-
teen divisions, the seven tribes, to the thirteen divisions
of warriors, and then was given them the wood and stone
which deceive ; as they descended from Tulan and Xibal-
bay, were given to them the wood and stone (idols), as
related those our first fathers and ancestors Gagavitz
and Zactecauh. These, in truth, were their burdens, and
these were their very words.


72 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

8. Vuk ama£ ^a nabey xpeul pa Tullan. que cha, ^a
xambey xohpe oh ahlabal ru ^mom chi ^ rikan
ronohel vuk ama£ ahlabal tok xhak ^ ru chi Tullan.


9. Ha ^a ^utuhile ri nabey vuk ama£ ok xpe pa
Tulan xe^iz nape ri vuk ama£ ^te^ ok xoh pe oh
ahlabal, que cha. — Xcha ^a pe ri ka tee ka tata, ok xoh
pixabax pe : ohfx ^, yx numeal, yx nu^hol, xtinyael
y ginomal yvahauarem, xtinyael y £a£al, y tepeval,
yxmuh, yx^a£alibal ; harumari xti vikah ree, gete^ic
chee, giomah ^haa, pocob, ^u^um, 9ahcab. Vueta ^a
mixivikah xit, puak, gug raxom, vueta ^a xtivikah
^ibanic, ^otonic, ^hol gih, may gih, xul, bix, bix
yegetah rumal, xavi^a yvichin ree mixrikah vuk amag
chila ti ^am vi ; yx quixi chi nan, yx quix gao ruvach ;
mani cahauarem mix nuyael, ha^ri xtivikah ; kitzih nim
ru£ih; mani quix ye£etah vi ; ha^a quix nimar vi, ree
5ete9ic chee £iomah, mani quix var, quix ^hacatah vi,
yx numeal, yx nu^ahol, xtinyael yvahauarem, yx oxlahuh
chi ahpopo tihunamah ; ^ y^ha, ypocob, yvahauarem,
y £a£al, ytepeval, y muh, y £alibal, ree ^ y nabey ale ;
xucheex ri Qeche vinak ok xpeul oxlahu ^hob chi
ahlabal pa Tullan. Ha ^a nabey xpe Qeche vinak ;
xa^ ^hoUoh tacaxepeval rikan ^eche vinak : ok xpeul
rachbilam hetak ^ ru hay ru chinamit ru £arama£ ri
hutak ^hob chi ahlabal tok xpeul pa Tullan ok x^iz ^
pe ronohel.


ID. Xpe Rabinale,xpe ^o^il vinak — xpeTukuchee —
xpe Tuhalahay — Vuchabahay — Ah^humilahay — xpe
chic Lama£i — Cumatz — ^xpe chic Akahal vinak. — Ah


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 73

8. They say that the seven tribes arrived first at
Tulan, and we the warriors followed, having taken up the
tributes of all the seven tribes when the gate of Tulan
was opened.

9. The Tzutuhils were the first of the seven tribes
who finished coming to Tulan, and then we the warriors
came, as they say. Then it was said to our fathers and
mothers, then we were commanded ; " Oh. you, you my
daughters, you my sons, I shall give you your riches,
your majesty, I shall give you your distinction, your
sovereignty, your canopy, your royal throne ; because
you have carried the rounded shield as your riches, the
bow, the buckler, the feathers, the war paint. If you
have paid as tribute jade, silver, feather stuffs, if you
have paid articles painted, articles sculptured, astrological
calendars, reckoning calendars, flute songs, songs hated
of you because the seven tribes paid this tribute, yet
you shall in turn take it, you shall receive more than
others, you shall lift up your face. I shall not give you
their sovereignty, of which you have borne the burden ;
truly their fortune is great ; do not hate them ; also do
you be great, with wealth of rounded shields. Sleep not,
sit not, my daughters, my sons, I will give you the
power, to you the seven rulers, in equal shares, and your
bows, your bucklers, your majesty, your power, your sove-
reignty, your canopy, your royal seat; these are your first
treasures." Thus it was spoken to the Quiche men, when
the thirteen divisions of warriors arrived at Tulan. And
first came the Quiche men ; they acquitted themselves of
their tribute in the first month ; then arrived their com-
panions one after another, by their families, their clans,
their tribes, their divisions, in sequence, and the war-
riors, until the whole of them had finished arriving in
Tulan.

10. Those of Rabinal came, the Zotzil men came, the
Tukuchee came, the Tuhalahay, the Vuchabahay, the
Ahqhumilahay, the Lamagi came, the Cumatz, the men

F


74 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Tucuru xquiz, yape ronohel ri. Tok xpe chi ^ri
oxlahuh chi ahlabal ri oh Bacah Pokoh, Bacah Xahil :
hun xnabeyah, hun^ x xambeyah chikichin ri oh ru
nabey Bacah, Bacah Pok ^ nabey xpe, oh ^ xambey
xoh pe ri oh Bacah Xahil, que cha ri e ka tata, ka mama,
yxka^hol. Xmier ok ^a ti pe vuk ama£ xmier ok ^a
ti tiquer rupetic ahlabal. — Tok xohpe ^ oh Cakchequel
vinak, kitzih vi chi xambey chic xoh peul pa TuUan,
mani hunchic ^o can ok xoh pe, que cha ri £a£avitz,
f actecauh, xoh pixabax chi pe : He ree ahay a chinamit
he, que ucheex ^ari geka^uch, Ba^ahol. Cibakihay.
Ree ^a yvahpop he, hun ahpop, hun ^a ahpo^amahay,
chiquichin ree xeucheex ^a ri geka^uch, Ba^ahol,
Cibakihay. Yx ^a quixalan, quix^aholan, quichin yxqui-
x^ulu, yvahpop, xeucheex. Querela he tee, he nam vi
ri. Ha^a nabey, ha^a nabey xpe ri Cibakihay ok xpe
^ri Ba^hol, xpe chi ^a geka^uch nabey xepe
chinamit.

11. ^ate^a ok xoh pe oh ahpop tok xoh pixabax
chi^a pe ruma katee ka tata : ohix ^a, yxnumeal, yxnu-
^hol, mixebe a hay a chinamit. Maqui xaquere xcat
xambeyah, at^hipil al ; kitzih nim a gih tux re ^a a
tzuku hee xucheex pe ri chee abah Belehe Toh ru bi ; ri
abah Huntihax chi ^ ru bi hunchic, huhunti vikah xoh
ucheex pe, quecha.

12. Re ^di ti voquegah e ^ha, pocob, achcayupil,
^u^um, 9ahcab rach yaic ^peri gavonon, ga9ital, xo£ol,
gekal, hab, 9U^, moyeuh, ok xoh pixabax pe ree : kitzih
nim xtivikah ; mani quix var vi, quix ^hacatah vi, mani
quix yegetah vi, yxnu^hol, ha quix £agar quix tepevar
vi, hati ^ohe vi y vux la ree 9ete9ic chee £iomah, ^ha.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 75

of Akahal came, the Tucuru ended it ; and thus all are
given. After that came thirteen warriors, we the Bacah
Pokoh, and the Bacah Xahil ; one of us went first, and one
followed after; the first Bacah was Bacah Pok, who went
first, and we followed after, we the Bacah Xahil, as was
said by our first fathers, our ancestors, oh you our sons.
Already the seven villages had come, and some time
after began the coming of the warriors. — Then we came,
we the Cakchiquel men. Truly, we were the last, as we
arrived at Tulan, and there was not another remaining
when we came, as said Gagavitz and Zactecauh ; we were
ordered to come thus : " These are your houses, these
your clans;" they said to Gekaquch, Baqahol, and
Cibakihay : " These are your head chiefs, even one head
chief, and one official messenger;" thus they said to
Gekaquch, Baqahol, and Cibakihay. ** Bring forth daugh-
ters, bring forth sons, marry one another, ye rulers," said
they. Therefore those were mothers and ancestors. But
the first, the first came the Cibakihay, then came the
Baqahol, and then came the Gekaquch, the first clans.


11. Thus, therefore, came we, the rulers, and then we
were ordered by our mothers and fathers : " Go, my
daughters, go, my sons, your houses, your clans, have
departed. Not thus shalt thou always follow, thou, the
youngest son ; truly, great shall be thy fortune, and thou
shalt be maintained, as is said by the idols called, the
one, Belehe Toh, the other Hun Tihax, to whom we say
each pays tribute," as is related.

12. Then they put on their bows, their shields, their
lances, their feathers, and their paint, given (as a defence)
against the bugs, the dirt, the boding owls, the blackness,
the rain, the fogs, the clouds; then we were commanded :
" Great shall be your burden ; sleep not, sit not, be not
cast down, you, my sons ; you shall be rich, you shall be
powerful ; let your rounded shields be your riches, your
bows, your bucklers. If you have given as tribute jade,
silver, feather work, hated songs, on that account they


76 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

pocob. Vuetah mixi vikah ree xit, puak, guguraxom,
bix yegetah, ruma xavi ^ y vichin tux, yxquix i chi
nan, quix gao ru vach : ri xit, puak, guguraxom, ^ibanic,
^otonic, ronohel ri mix rikah vuk amag, ^ chila ^
xti9avi ru vach chi huyubal, ti vulaah ronohel, ti 9a ^
ru vach ri y ^ha, y pocob, hun nabeyal hun^ ^hipilal
chivichin, yx oxlahuh chi ahlabal, yx^a oxlahuh chi
ahaua, chi yx ahpop ti hunamah y ^ha y pocob mixnu-
yael. Cani ca tibe y 5a ru vach ree y vikan y ^ha y
pocob ; ^ohun labal chila chi relebal gih, f uyva rubi ;
chi ri ^ tibe y tihavi y ^ha y pocob ree mixnuyael,
vhix ^, yxnu^hol ; xohucheex ^pe okxoh pe pa
TuUan, xmier ok ^ tipe vuk amag ahlabal ; ok xohpe
ul pa Tullan, kitzih ^ ti xibin ok xoh pe kachpetic ^
ri gavonon gagital, ^u^, moyeuh, xogol, £ekal, hab, ok
xohpe ul pa Tullan.

13. Cani^a chiri xtiquer vipe ri labalinic ; xo£ pe hun
chicop chahalcivan ru bi chu chi Tullan, ok xohelpe pa
Tullan ; quix cam, quix 9ach, yn ylab, xcha ri chicop
chi kichin ; mani ^ xkoque9ah ? Xax avogebal vi ri
tux, xoh cha can chire ri chicop, quecha.

14. Ok xo£ chi ^ hun chicop Tucur ru bi chacal pe
chuvi caka chee, x^hao pe chi ri : Yn ylab ; xcha : Mani
at kalab, xa^oh tavaho, xucheex can tucur. Xavi ^
e ^oh qui gamahel ri xeyaope ri chee abah chikichin,
quecha ka tata, ka mama oher. Ok xo£ chi ^ pe hun
chicop chicah ^anixt ru bi, xavi cha chic : Yn ylab,
quixcam ; xoh cha chire ri chicop, mani tabijh xaat retal
5a£ih tux. Nabey cat o£ oktel 9a£ih, haok titan a hab,
cato£ ; xoh cha can chire.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 77

shall be given you ; you shall receive more than others ;
you shall lift up your face ; for jade, silver, painted
articles, engraved articles, all the seven nations have paid
as tribute ; but there, in those hills you shall lift up your
faces, there is a refuge for all of you, there you shall lift
up your faces, your bows, your bucklers. One shall be
your first chief, and one his junior, of you the thirteen
warriors, you the thirteen princes, you the thirteen equal
chiefs, to whom I shall give the bows and bucklers. Soon
you shall lift up your face and have your burden, your
bows and bucklers ; there is war there toward the east,
at the place called Zuyva ; there you shall go, there is
the place for your bucklers which I shall give you, you
indeed, you my sons." So it was spoken to us when we
came to Tullan, before the warriors of the seven villages ;
and when we arrived at Tullan, truly our coming was
terrifying, with our accompaniments against the bugs,
the dirt, the clouds, the fogs, the mud, the darkness, the
rain, when we entered Tulan.

13. And soon the divination began with them. A bird
called **the guard of the ravine," began to complain
within the gate of Tulan, as we were going forth from
Tulan. "You shall die, you shall be lost, I am your
portent," said this brute to us. " Do you not believe me ?
Truly your state shall be a sad one." Thus spake to us
this brute, as is related.

14. Then another bird called "the owl," seated on a
red tree, complained and said thus : " I am your portent,"
he said. " You are not our portent, although you would
like to be," we answered this owl. Such were the
messengers who gave them their idols, said our fathers,
our ancestors of old. Then another bird called the
parroquet complained in the sky, and said : " I am your
portent ; ye shall die." But we said to the brute, " Do
not speak thus ; you are but the sign of spring. You
wail first when it is spring ; when the rain ceases, you
wail." Thus we spoke to him.


78 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

15. Ok xoh ul ^ chu chi palouh. Xa^ e^oh chi ri
xa^ e mulan conohel amag ahlabal chi palouh; ok
xekil xatak ^iqinak qui^ux. Mani tan ti qui ^ovibeh pe,
mani tucheex y^ovem pe chuvi palouh, xecha ^ ri
conohel ahlabal vuk ama£ chikichin ; chinak koh u cheen,
chinak tiki^ovibeh, at laicha£, xa at chic at koyobem,
xecha conohel. Xoh cha ^ chique : Yx quixbe, chijl,
yx kanabeyal ; chinak tik i^vibeh, oh an vae, konohel
xoh cha, ^te^ xe cha chic conohel : ta hoyevah
kavach, atkachag, xa vipe kotege vave chu chiya palouh,
mahatikil ka huyubal ka tagahal. Xape cani xkovar, xko
^hacatah oh cay chial, oh ru vi oh ru holom oh runabey
ahlabal vuk amag, at nu chag, vneta xko y^o cani
tika^et ru vach kikan mix yape rumal ka tee ka tata, at
nucha£. Xcha ^ri. Xebo^o ^^chevinak, chikichin
quecha ri ^a mama £agavitz, f actecauh ; xoh cha ^
chique : katiha na, yx ka nimal ; maxa vi pe xko^ohe
xkotege vave chuchij palouh, maqui pe mahatikil ka
huyubal ^oh ^ tucheex xti^et, yxahlabal, yx vuk
ama£, xkahi^o vacami, xoh cha. Cani ^ xe quicot
conohel.

16. Xa^ hun chi caka chee ka ^hamey ok xoh pe
xi^o ka^-amape chu chi Tullan, quere^ ka binaam vi
Cakchiquel vinak ri, yxka^hol, quecha can ri gagavitz,
^actecauh. Xa^ ru xe ka ^hamey xutogbeh oc 9anayi
chupam palouh ; cani^ x^ok pi tah palouh ruma qanayi,
haxi ^tzin viri cakachee xka^mpe chu chii Tullan. Xa
chuvi cholo chic ^anayi xoh i^o vipe ; haok xgahar can
ru xe palouh ru vi palouh. Cani ^ xequicot conohel,
ok x^i^et qanayi chupam palouh, cani ^ xepixaban
quij, ^ chi la ko oyobem vi ki, chuvi nabey huyu, chiri
komolo viki, xe cha, xavi^ xere ka cholanem ok xohpe
pa Tullan.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 79

15. Then we arrived at the sea coast. There were
gathered together the warriors of all the seven villages
at the sea. A great number perished, devoured by sorrow.
** There is no means of passing, nor is it told of any one
who has passed the sea,'* said all the warriors of the
seven villages. " Who can, who will find means to pass
the sea ? In thee alone, my brother, in thee alone have
we hope," said they all. We said to them, " You may
go on ; you may be first. Who will find the means of
crossing, while we are here ? ** All of us spoke thus,
and then all of them said : " Have pity on us, our brother,
since we are all stretched on the shore of the ocean with-
out seeing our hills and plains. As soon as we were
asleep, we were conquered, we the two oldest sons, we
the chiefs and guides of the warriors of the seven villages,
oh my brother. Would that we had passed, and could
see the burdens given us by our mothers and fathers,
oh my brother ! " So they spoke. At that time the
Quiche nation had increased. Our ancestors, Gagavitz
and Zactecauh, said : " We said to them, * we suffer
also, our brother, we do not live stretched out on the
shore of the ocean, where we cannot see our mountains
where they are, as you say, oh you warriors, you people of
the seven villages. We shall pass over at once. Thus
we spoke ; and soon all of them rejoiced.* "

16. Now there was a red tree, our staff, which we had
taken in passing from the gate of Tulan, and therefore
we are called the Cakchiquel people, oh our sons, said
Gagavitz and Zactecauh. The root of this, our staff, was
pushed into the sand of the sea, and soon the sea was
separated from the sand, and for this the red tree served
which we brought from Tulan. Soon the sand was as a
line, and we passed out ; it became wide above the sea
and below the sea. Then all rejoiced, when they saw
sand in the sea, and many counseled together. " There
indeed is our hope, we must gather together on these
first lands,*' they said ; " here only can we arrange our-
selves since leaving Tulan.*'


80 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

17. Xebokotah ^ pe xey ^ope chuvi ganayi xavi^a
que re xambey xohpe chic chi palouh, xohel ^ape
chuchij ya. Xe ^ cani xu xibih ri vuk ama£ ronohel ;
quere xubijh ahlabal ronohel, ok xe cha ^ ri vuk amag :
Xere an kikan ree mixi^et ; mi^ xka garuvach yvukin,
yxahaua, yx ahlabal, maqui xkobe yvu^in relebal gih,
xati ka canoh can ka huyubal ka ta£ahal, xere kikan ree
mixi^et £ug, raxom, ^ubul, xe cha ri vuk ama£ xe
pixa: Utzan, xeucheex, ^ vuk amag xutzin ^ qui
poponic. Ok xepe ^ chuvi huyu Deo9acvancu ; xpe ^a
ronohel xeul chi^ chuvi hunchic huyu, Meahauh rubi.
Chiri xemolo chivri quij, xeel chi ^ chiri chu vi Meahauh,
xeapon Chic chuvi huyu Valval Xucxuc ru bi xeuxlan
chivi ; xemolo chi na quij xeel chi ri xe apbn chica chuvi
huyu Tapcu Oloman ru bi.

18. Xemolo chi^a qui conohel chi ri xoh popon chi
vi ^a chi ri, que cha ^a ri ka tata ka mama £a£avitz,
^actecauh, ^a chiri ^a xoh vi ko viel ki, chi ri navipe
xkaquir vi kikan. Xcha ^ ri ahlabal ronohel : Chinak
ti kaban xere kavach vae oh ah chay, oh ah ^m, oh
9aol ru vach kikan, at kachag kanimal, xecha ^ chiki-
chin. Xoh cha^ chique : Mian xnakahar kalabal xaka
vika kij, xaka cauh kij, ko ^u^umah, kaquira kikan. ^oh
na vipe kikan, xpage ruma ka tee, ka tata, ko ^u^umah,
yn yn etamayom. Xoh cha chique, ok xkaquir ^ kikan,
ohoh ^o kikan, ri ^u^um, 9ahcab, ^ha, pocob, ach-
cayupil.

19. Xka^ut ^ vi koh ri chiquivach conohel, oh nabey
xoh vikokij, chi ^ha, chi pocob, chi achcayupil, chi
^u^um, chi 9ahcab, xvikan ^a ronohel, xoh cha ^a
chiquichin : Coan chivichin, yx kacha£,yxkanimal, kitzih


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 81

17. They rushed forth and passed across the sand, and
following one another we came to the shore of the sea,
and we arrived at the edge of the water. Then all the
seven villages began to fear, and all the warriors spoke,
and then the seven tribes spoke : " Do you not see our
burdens? Yet it is not long since we lifted up our
faces with you, ye rulers, ye warriors ; did we not come
from the sun rising with you, that we might seek our hills
and valleys ? Have you not seen the burden, the green
feathers, the garlands ? " So spake the seven tribes, and
commanded and said, " It is well," and the seven tribes
took counsel what to do. Afterwards they went on to
the place Deogacvancu ; and then they all went on to
another place called Meahauh. There many gathered
together; having thus arrived at Meahauh, they thence
departed for the place called Valval Xucxuc, and there
they rested. There many gathered together, and depart-
ing they arrived at the place called Tapcu Oloman.

18. Then all gathered together there, and we took
counsel there, said our fathers and ancestors, Gagavitz
and Zactecauh ; and it was after we had arrived there
that we first unloosed our burdens. All the warriors said :
" Whom shall we make to be our head, we the masters
of arms, the masters of booty, the assigners of tribute,
oh thou, our younger brother, and thou, our older
brother ? " So said they to us. Then we said to them :
" It is but a little while that we looked to make war, and
already we are prepared, our standards are ready, our
burdens are loosed; they are the burdens which were
given us by our mothers and fathers ; here are our stand-
ards; I, I am the Sage." Thus we spoke when we
unloosed our burden, our loads of maize, our standards,
our paints, bows, shields, and double-headed lances.

19. Thus we showed ourselves before the face of all ;
first we adorned ourselves with our bows, our shields,
our two-headed lances, our feathers, our paints ; we put
them all on, and we said to them, " On with you, you
our younger brothers, you our elder brothers, truly this


82 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

vi chitan £al ahlabal xtikoquibeh, xtikatih vi ka ^haa,
ka pocob. Xahala chic xatakobe, ti ^ama kabey, xoh
cha chique. Maqui xcaho ^moh bey, xecha, ta ^ma
ka bey, at kachag, at etamayom, xecha chike. Oh ^
xoh ^amo bey xoh cha chi^ chique. Xavi vave komolo
chivikij, xoh be ^ ok xka^ul vachih ^ hu ^hob labal,
Ah Nonovalcat, Ah Xulpiti qui bi. He ^oh chuchi
palouh, pa hucu e ^oh vi.


20. Kitzih ti xibin que ^habin, quetzalo, hucumah ^
xepax kumari, xetzalo chipe ^hakap pahucu ; ok xe paxin
Ah Nonovalcat, Ah Xulpiti, xecha chi^a conohel ahlabal :
Chinak ti ki^ovibeh chuvi palouh, at kachag, xecha. Xoh
cha chi^ : chique hucu tiki^ovibeh mahatikil kalabal.
Xavi^a pa qui hucu Ah Nonovalcat xohoc vi, ok xohbe
relebal gih,ha^ok xohoc apon. Kitzih tixibinchitinamit,
chi hay ^ovi Ah ^uyva, chila relebal ^ih, xoh ocnaek ^a
apon tzamhay, quere bila xbe katogo, ok xohoc apon,
kitzih ti xibin ok xpeul chucohol hay, kitzih tibirbot, xpalah
poklah ok xpeul, xtzalo cochoch, xtzalo ^ qui^ij, ca^,
xtzalo conohel cavah, xahuye£, xacayek xkaban ohxoh
paxin ki ^oh xbe chicah, ^oh xkapan uleuh, ^oh x xule
xhote, chikichin konohel, haok xu^ut ru naval ru
halebal. Ronohel ahlabal, huhunal, chi^a xeul chuvi
huyu Tapcu Oloman, pam pokon chic xoh molokij, chiri
xoh ^u^umah viel, xoh vikon vicl, yx ka^ahol, que cha
ri gagavitz, ^actecauh. Tok xka ^utubeh ^ ki, ba xa
colovi avi, xoh cha chi re Qeche vinak : Xaqui tohoh
quihilil xibe chicah, xa chicah xbe nucolo vivi, xcha,
querela xubinaah vi Tohohil ri: xcha chi^a ^o^il vinak,
xaxi ^ohe can chiri, xaxi colovi pa ru chij cakix, xcha ;


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 83

war is certain, we must enter upon it, we must test our
bows, our shields. It makes little difference which way
we go ; choose ye the road," said we to them. " It is
not for us to choose the road," said they. " Choose thou
the road, thou our younger brother, thou our teacher,"
said they to us. Then we chose the road, and we told it
to them. All of us then gathered together, and soon we
met face to face a party of warriors, called those of
Nonovalcat and those of Xulpit. They were on the
border of the ocean ; they were there in their boats.

20. Truly it was fearful, the arrow-shooting and the
fighting ; but soon they were routed by us, and half the
fighting was in the boats. When those of Nonovalcat
and Xulpit had been routed, all the warriors spoke : " How
shall we cross over the sea, our younger brother ? " they
asked. And we said to them : " We shall cross in the
boats, while our battle is not yet known." Then we
entered into the boats of those of Nonovalcat ; when we
came from the east then we entered them. Truly, it was
fearful in the town and houses of those of Zuyva, there
in the east ; for when we entered at the furthest house,
they could not understand how we had entered. Truly,
it was fearful there among the houses ; truly, the noise
was great, the dust was oppressive ; fighting was going
on in the houses, fighting with the dogs, the wasps,
fighting with all. One attack, two attacks we made, and
we ourselves were routed, as truly they were in the air,
they were in the earth, they ascended and they descended,
everywhere against us, and thus they showed their magic
and their sorcery. All the warriors, each one by himself,
returned to the place, Tapcu Oloman ; we gathered
together in sadness, there where we had put on our
feathers, where we had adorned ourselves, oh you our
children, as was related by Gagavitz and Zactecauh.
When we asked each other where our salvation was, it
was said to us by the Quiche men : " As it thundered
and resounded in the sky, truly in the sky must our sal-
vation be ; " so they said, and therefore the name Toho-
hil was given to them. The Zotzil nation said that really


84 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

quere^ xubijnaah vi Cakix can ri. Xoh cha chi^ oh
Cakchiquel vinak : xa ni^h tagah xnucol vivi, xaxi
kapon uleuh ; quere^ xubinaah vi Chitagah ri, £ucu-
matz tucheex hunchic, xa paya xucol viri. Xcha chi^
Tukuchee vinak, xaxi colovi ahcic chupam hun amag,
xcha : quere^ xubinaah vi Ahcic amagri. Xcha chic
Akahal vinak : xaxincol vi chumpam akah, xcha ;
querela xubinaah vi Akalahayri. Querela xebinaah vi
conohel vi ^iy chi ; maqui xtivoque^ah xecolo vi quij ;
maqui naek xaka meztam, chirelebal gih xbe oc vipe
quibi conohel, ^xto^ ^ xoh paxin vi ul ki, que cha ri
gagavitz, f actecauh. Xoh cha^ oh ankatucu rupam
ka huyubal, ka tagabal : Mixbe ka tiha ka ^ha ka pocob,
vue bala ^o chivi kalabal, oh ^ kacanoh ka huyubal ka
tagahal, xoh cha ^. Ok xoh paxin kij chuvi huyu, ok
xoh pe ^ konohel hutak ^hob, chu bey xux, xa chi vi
ha qui bey. Ok xetzolih chipe chuvi huyu Valval
Xucxuc, xe y^o^pe chuvi huyu Memehuyu, Tacna
huyu ru bi, xeul chic chuvi ^akiteuh, f aki^uva, ru bi.
Xeel chipe chuvi Meahauh Cutam chah, ^ chila^
xebe tzolih chivipe chuvi huyu ^akihuyu Tepacuman ru
bi ; Tok xi^o qui ^eta qui huyubal, qui tagahal ; okxe
y^ope chuvi huyu Togohil xgaker vi Qeche vinak. Xe
i^o chipe Pantzic, Paraxon xoh gaker vi, yxka^ahol, que
cha^ ri henabey katata kamama gagavitz (Jactecauh.
Ha^ri huyu tagah xey^o vi xemeho vi, maqui xti^iz
kagaharti^ah xananoh xkabijh, maquina xakameztam,
kitzih vichi ^iya huyu xoh i^o vi, quecha ri oher katata
kamama.

21. Ree chi^a huyue xey ^ovi chuvi Popo abah, xeka
chuvi Qhopiytzel, pa nima ^oxom, xe nima chah, xeka
chila mukulic ya molomic chee. Ok xilitah ^a ri ^oxahil.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 85

there was salvation in the mouth of an ara, and so the
name Cakix was given to them. We, the Cakchiquels,
we said : " Truly, in the middle of the valley lies our
salvation, entering there into the earth." Therefore the
name was given, Chitagah. Another, who said salvation
was in the water, was called Gucumatz. The Tukuche
said salvation was in a town on high, so they were called
Ahcicamag. The Akahals said, " We may be saved in a
honeycomb," therefore they were called Akalahay. Thus
all received their names. Do not believe, however, that
many were saved. Do not forget that all tliese names
came from the east. But the Evil One scattered us
abroad, said Gagavitz and Zactecauh. Thus we spoke
when we turned about in our hills and valleys : " We
lately took up our bows and shields, if anywhere there
was war ; let us now seek our hills and valleys." Thus
we spoke. Then we were scattered about in many places ;
then we all went forth, each division its own way, each
family its own way. Then a return was made to the place
Valval Xucxuc, and they passed on to the places called
Meme and Tacna, and they arrived at the places called
Zakiteuh and Zakiquva. They went on to Meahauh and
Cutamchah, and there they turned about and came to the
places called Zakihuyu and Tepacuman. Then it was
they could see their own hills and vales ; and they came
to the place called Togohil, where the Quiche men made
a beginning. As they returned to Pantzic and Paraxon,
we made a beginning, oh you our children, as said
our first fathers and ancestors, Gagavitz and Zactecauh.
Such were the hills and vales through which we passed
and turned about. ** Let not the praise due us for these
our words cease, nor let it be forgotten that truly to you
we gave the places we passed over." Thus spoke of old
our fathers and our ancestors.

21. These are the places over which they passed to
Popoabah, whence they descended to Qhopiytzel, among
the broken rocks, among the great trees; then they
descended to Mukulicya(the hidden waters) and Molomic
Chee (the stacked-up wood). There they met the Qoxahil


86 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^obakil, rubij, Chiyol Chiabak ru hi huyu xilitah vi, xavi
Bacah, xahun chi lol, ru halebal. Ok xilitah x^utux
^: chinak catux, xucheex. Xcha ^ ri ^oxahil,
^obakil : At ahauh, maqui quina catnigah, xa yn acha£
animal, xa yn cachinak can ruma Bacah Pok, Bacah
Xahil, xaquin ikan a tern a ^hacat, at ahauh, xecha.
Xecha chi^a ri gagavitz ^actecauh : Maquian at nu hay
nu chinamit catux. Kitzih vi chi at nuchag, nunimal,
xucheex ^ ; xa^ cha ri e chinamital, xeucheex, he^ri
Telom Cahibak quibi. Ok xel chi^ chiri Chiyol
Chiabak, xe^olochic rucamul cakan xei^o chucohol huyu
boleh chigag chi Hunahpu, chiri^ xqui^ul vachih vi
ru^ux huyu, chigag Qaki^oxol rubi; kitzih ^iy ru
cami^am vi f aki^oxol, kitzih tixibin tivachin, xa elegom,
quecha.


22. Chiri ^ chucohol huyu, chi gag ruchahim vi
quibey, ok xeel apon, tok xuban ^ ri f aki^oxol :
Chinak ri mak alabon oh ^et, xecha ^. Ok xtak ^ri
^oxahil ^obakil, xbe ru ^etalol ru halebal, xcha ^ ok
xul kitzih ti xibin ti vachin, xa naek hun maqui e ^iy
xcha, ka^eta na, chinak tux bay xibih yviho, xecha
gagavitz ^actecauh. Xucheex ^ ok x^et : chinak
catux xcat ka cami9ah, nak rumal tachahih bey, xucheex,
xucheex ^a. Xcha ^: Maqui quina cami9ah, xavi
vave yn^ovi, xa yn ru ^ux huyu. Xcha ok x^utux
^ari roquegam; xataya chuvichin ri avoque^am. Ok
xuyape ri roque^am, halizm xahpota qui^, xahabi qui^,
ru camigabal ^aki^oxol. Xere xucolbeh pe ri, xel ^a
chiri xekah apon xehuyu. Tok xemi^h chi^ ruma
chee ruma ^iquin, quere ti^hao chee xca^axah, xxuban
chi^a pe ^iquin. Xecha ^, ok xca^xah : Chinak ri


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 87

and the Qobakil, as they were named, at the places called
Chiyol and Chiabak, there they met them, the only sur-
vivors of the Bacah, by their magic power. When they
met them, they asked and said, "Who art thou?"
Qoxahil and Qobakil answered : " O thou our lord, do
not kill us ; I am thy brother, thy elder brother. We
two alone remain from the Bacah Pok and the Bacah
Xahil. I am the servant of your throne, your sove-
reignty, O thou our lord." So spoke they. Then spoke
Gagavitz and Zactecauh : " Thou art not of our house ;
thou art not of our tribe." But later it was said by the
tribes : " Truly thou art our brother, our elder." They
are those called Telom and Cakibak. When they went
forth from Chiyol and Chiabak, twice they turned their
steps and passed between the mountain ranges to the fire,
to Hunahpu ; and they met face to face in the spirit of
the forest, the fire called Zakiqoxol. Truly, this Zaki-
qoxol kills many men. Truly, he is fearful, a robber,
they say.

22. Going on, they arrived in the middle of the woods
at a fire built by one guarding the road, and it was made
by Zakiqoxol. " Who are these boys whom we see ? "
said he. Then were sent forward the Qoxahil and the
Qobakil, with their mysterious vision and magical power;
they spoke when they arrived. One of them spoke, not
many [at once], as it was truly terrible to look upon, and
he said : " Let us see what kind of a hideous mole are
you?" So said Gagavitz and Zactecauh. Thus they
spoke when they saw him, and they said: "Who art
thou ? We shall kill thee. Why is it that thou guardest
the road here ? " So they said and spoke thus. Then
he said : " Do not kill me ; I, who am here, I am the
heart of the forest." Thus he spoke, and then asked that
he might clothe himself. "They shall give to thee
wherewith to clothe thyself" [said they]. Then they
gave him wherewith to clothe himself, a change of gar-
ment, his blood-red cuirass, his blood-red shoes, the dying
raiment of Zakiqoxol. By this means he saved himself,
descending into the forest. Then there was a disturbance


88 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ti ka^xah na, chinak tux, xecha. Xa^ hari chee
rutunum ri, hari ti ki ^i^, pa ^echelah, ha^ ri balam
^iquin xxuban, querela xo vi can ru bi huyu ri
^hitabal.


23. Xeel chi^a chiri, xahun xtika yukuba vi ru bixic
huyu vae, Beleh chi £ag, Beleh chi Hunahpu, Xe9uh,
Xetocoy Xeuh, Xeamatal chij, ^unun choy Xecucu
huyu ^unun huyu, Xiliviztan, f umpancu, Tecpalan,
Tepuztan, xekah ^a apon ^hol amag, f uquitan, kitzih
^a yeuh que ^hao, xa chicop etamayom qui ^habal ;
xachire chicop hen Loxpin, Qhupichin, qui bi, xkayot vi,
xoh cha ^a chique xoh apon : vaya vaya ela opa, Cani
xe macamo ok xka ^habeh ri qui^h bal chique ah^hol-
amag, xacani xqui xibih quij, xa utz quitzil xoh apon.


24. Xeapon chi^ chuvi huyu Memehuyu Tacnahuyu,
rucamul cakan ; maqui galah que^hao, quere xae mem.
Kitzih naek e utzilah vinak. Xaka ^hal xoh mi^ho, xoh
yaloh chiri xketamah qui^habal. Quecha^ chikichin:
At auh, mixatul, ku^in, xaoh achag animal, xata vave
cat ^ohe vi ku^in, quecha, xrah hameztah ri ka^habal,
xax kabah chic ka^ux, ok xpeul cu^in.

25. Ree chi^ ^hakap rubi huyue, xel chivi Qakiteuh
^akiqua, ni^ah ^ubinal, ni^ah Chacachil, ^ulahauh,
xba cah, ni^^ Nimxor, ni^ah Moinal, ni^h Carchah ;
xe i^o ^ pe ru^in valil ^ahol ^unun ^ahol : xeel chic
ru^in Mevac, Nacxit, kitzih chinima ahauh, ha ki ^a
rikan ri que chapbex ahaua ahpop, ahpop^mahay. ha


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 89

among the trees, among the birds ; one might hear the
trees speak and the birds call. They said, when one
listened : " What is this that we hear ? Who is this ? "
said they. And the branches of the trees in the forest
murmured, and the tigers and birds called one to another.
Therefore that spot is called ^itibal^ "The Place of
Disquiet."

23. They departed thence. Once for all we shall
mention the names of these various places : Belehchigag,
Belehchi Hunahpu, Xecuh, Xetocoy, Xeuh, Xeamatal
Chii, Tzunun Choy, Mount Xecucu, Mount Tzunun,
Xiliviztan, Zunpancu, Tecpalan, Tepuztan. They then
descended to Cholamag and Zuchitan. Truly, the lan-
guage there was difficult, and the barbarians alone knew
to speak their language. We inquired only of the bar-
barians, Loxpin and Chupichin, and we said to them
when we arrived : " Vaya^ vaya^ ela, opa!' They were
surprised when we spoke their language to those of
Cholamag, and many of them were frightened, but we
received only good words.

24. They went to the places, Meme and Tacna, for the
second time. They could not speak well, hence the name
Mem, Truly, they were good people. They spoke to
mock us, and we remained to learn their language. They
said to us : " Thou our lord, remain with us ; we are thy
elder and younger brother; abide with us," said they.
They wished us to forget our speech, but our heart was
as a stone when we arrived with them.

25. These were also a part of the names of the places:
they went to Zakiteuh and Zakiqua, the midst of Tubinal,
the midst of Chacachil, Tzulahauh which reaches to the
sky, the midst of Nuiixor, the midst of Moinal, the
midst of Carchah. They passed over with the sons of
Valil and the sons of Tzunun. They went forth from
Merac and Nacxit. Truly this one (Nacxit) was a great
lord, and the vassals who aided him to seize the sovereignty

G


90 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

roquegam ri Orbal tzam ri tiquiyo ru bi ha ^ ti Cinpual
Taxuch. Kitzih log chique ^iz y^ovinak pe ronohel
ahlabal chiri xe ucheex conohel ruma ahauh Nacxit :
Xati hotoba can ree vapal abah toe chuvi vochoch, tin ya
^a chivichin ree vahauarem, tiquiyo f inpuval Taxuch,
xe ucheex conohel ahlabal, xax mani vi ^a xquiho abah
chique, xavi ^a xe ucheex chic, ^te^a xehotobaan can
ri vapal abah, quere^ x^iz ruya vipe rahauarem vach
Nacxit vi xepoo chi^a chiri.


26. Ok xilitah chi^ri Ah Mimpokom Ah Rax^hi^h
pa f aktzuy rubi huyu, tantu gavi ruvach rikan ronohel
Pokoma ; tantiban xahoh, xman queh, xman ^iquin, raal
^akol queh, xu^ : tzara xaxere rikan Ah Rax^hi^h, Ah
Minpokom ri, xa vuk amag chinaht x^et vi. Ok xtak ^
el ri chicop f akbim, xbe ^eto quichin, xetak chi navipe
ri ^oxahil ^obakil lol, ru halebal. Ok xpe ru ^eta, xe
ucheex ^a xebe : Oh y^eto naktux ri quixapon nakah,
vue kalabal, xeucheex el. Xe ul ^a he Ah Mukchee,
mani xqui ^ut quij, maqui xquina xebe ^et. Xpe ^
retal ruma f akbin ru ^an Huntzuy tzara xul. Yn cheel
xbe y^eta, xeucheex, kitzih nima £agal, nima xahoh
tantiban, ^iy ^ chu ^ohlem, que cha xeul. Xe cha
^ari gagavitz factecauh, chiquichin rachbiyil; quix
vikon, vue kalabal, quecha. Xevi ko ^a quij, chi ^ha,
chi pocob, he cautal xe be xe^et ^ ruma Pokoma. Xa
cani ru xibih ri Pokoma, xeel cani^ x^am cokotaxic.


27. Ok xeilitah ^a ri e cay Loch rubi hun, Xet rubi
rucam, ^ chila xeilitah vi xe Cucuhuyu ^ununhuyu.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 91

were themselves rulers and chieftains. He invested Orbalt-
zam, and said that his name should be Cinpual Taxuch.
Truly he finished by making himself the most dear of
all men to all the warriors by the words spoken to all by
this lord Nacxit : " You have come to be the stone
framework, the support of my house ; I will give to you
sovereignty, and give you Cinpuval Taxuch." So said
he to all the warriors. " I have not placed the stones of
the others," so said he to them. And thus they came to
erect the stone framework. Therefore, Nacxit completed
the appointment of a companion in the sovereignty,
and they cried out aloud with joy.

26. Then they met those of Mimpokom and Raxchich,
at the place called Tzaktzuy. They met all the subjects
of the Pokomams. They dance their ballet, but it is
without deers, without birds, without pheasants,
without the trappers and their nets. The subjects
of Raxchich and Mimpokon gather together; but the
seven nations look on at a distance. They sent out the
brute Zakbim as a spy; and on our side were summoned
the Qoxahil and the Qobakil, magicians, enchanters. On
their departure, they were told : " Let us see who are
approaching, and if we are to fight.*' So it was said.
Those of Mukchee arrived, but they were in no great
number, nor had they come to spy out. The signal was
given by Zakbin, while Huntzuy came into line. " Now
I see them," they said. " This is really a wonderful
thing, a wonderful dance they are making ; there are
many under the trees." So spoke they on arriving. Thus
said Gagavitz and Zactecauh to their companions : " Let
us take up our arms if we are to fight." Immediately
all took up their bows and shields, and thus arrayed
showed themselves to the Pokomams. At once terror
struck the Pokomams, and ours rushed forth to seize
them in their disorder.

27. Then they encountered the two. Loch and Xet by
name ; they encountered them there at the foot of the
mountains Cucu and Tzunun. These said when they


92 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

que cha ^ ok xeilitah : Maqui koh acami9ah, at ahauh,
xa kohikan a tern a ^hacat; xecha, halal oc quikan,
xahuhun chi ^habitun cu^-aam; xe tzolih chipe, xquitzak
chi can hun ru tzuyil, qui tzara chiri xepax vi, quere^
xubinah vi huyu Tzaktzuy, ri retal x^mvi Ahquehay,
heri nabey qui tata qui mama xebo^o Ahquehayi.
Yncheel ru^mic vue, quixcha, ^ohe rubi huyu. Xe^m
vi ri ^hakap chinamit, yxka^hol, quere can kitzih he
nabey ka tata ka mama xoh boz vi xoh vinakir vi, oh
Cakchiquel vinak.


28. Ok xe^ulu chi ^ qui chuvi huyu Oronic Cakhay,
xul chic ronohel vuk amag ahlabal. Xcha ^ari £aga-
vitz, ^actecauh chirichin Qeche vinak: koh i^o pa
huyu konohel, ka ^haca ru £ih ronohel vuk amag
Tecpan, ka ^umah chiqui ^ux; at catahilan can
quivach, cat pa e can chuvi Cakay, yn ^a quinoc
chupam huyu Cakay, yn qui^haco quichin, ti ^umah
chi qui ^ux, chupam huyu ba ^o vi ti ^hacatah,
ba^ovi maqui ti ^hacatah ; xe cha ^a, ok xcam quitzih,
x^oh pa Cakhay, ok xtiquer ri^ovic ronohel, chiri ^a
chupam huyu x^umax vi chi qui ^ux. Ok xuna ^
ri ^ul ya, ^ul chahom, maqui xi^o chupam huyu.
Xcha : At ahau, xa tin ya queh cab chi vichin, yn
ahqueh, yn ahcab quinux, maqui quin i^o, xcha ri
yuquite chahom. Querela xrelahih vi queh cab, yuquite
chahom ri. Xeel chi ^a chiri xey^o chipe chuvi,
Tunaco^ih gahinak abah. Chiri^a xquitih vi qui
^habi tun Loch Xet, xaco^iham qui tun, querela
xubinaah vican huyu Tunaco^ih ri.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 93

were encountered, "Do not kill us, O thou our lord;
we will be the servants of your throne, of your power."
So they said, and entered at once as vassals, each one
carrying the bows and drums. Going on, a return was
made, and they were hindered by some calabash vines,
and were ensnared and scattered. Therefore, that place
was called Tzaktzuy, and the Ahquehay took it as their
sign, that is, those first fathers and ancestors who brought
forth the Ahquehay. This is why they took it, it is said,
and such is the name of the place. They chose a portion
of the tribe, oh you my children, and truly thus it was
that our first fathers and ancestors brought us forth and
gave us existence — us, the Cakchiquel people.

28. Then they went forth to meet those at the place
Oronic Cakhay , and all the warriors of the seven villages
arrived. Then spoke Gagavitz and Zactecauh to the
Quiche men : " Let us all go to the place. Let us con-
quer the glory of all the seven villages of Tecpan, let us
weaken their hearts ; do thou count their faces, do thou
stand here at the place Cakhay ; I shall enter the place
Cakhay ; I shall conquer them ; their heart shall be
weakened ; there, in the place, they shall be conquered,
where they never before were conquered." Thus they
spake when they ordered the slaughter, when they were
in Cakhay ; then it began with all of them in the place,
and their hearts were weakened. But on account of the
defence with water, and the defence with cinders, they
could not enter the place, and theirhearts were weakened.
Then it was said : " O thou lord, I will give thee the
venison and the honey. I am the lord of the venison,
the lord of the honey ; but I have not passed because of
the cinders," it was said. Thus the venison and the
honey were protected by means of the cinders. They
went from there to Tunacotzih, " the sounding stone."
There Loch and Xet made trial of the bows and drums,
and they beat their drums ; therefore the name of that
spot is Tunacotzih, " the Drum-beating."


94 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

29. Ok xilitah chi ^ ri Cavek chiri xenima chah,
Ximbal xu^ rubi huyu. Ok xa^axax ^a ro£ebal qak
corovach xe nima chah, ru halebal ri cavek. Que cha^a
ri £a£avitz f actecauh : chinak tux ri, chinak chi kucheeh,
quecha. Ok xcha ^a ri Loch, Xet : ^o vikan, at ahval,
ha ti koque^ah, xecha. Ox xquiz ^a quikan; xa ^a
xu^, gakquiy, xabanbal xahab quikan, mani quikan xae
ru ka xbachican quehay, ^umhay ; quere quibinaam vi
Ahquehayi ri. Ok xrip ^ari xu^ chuvi chee, x^ambex
richin ^akcorovach xe nima chah, ok xuya ^arij chupam
xu^ ri ^ak corovach, xcha ^a ok xuya ri : At ahauh,
maqui quin a cami^ah. Chinak na ^a catux, xucheex.
Xcha^a : Xa xoh ^achcan ruma ahauh Qechee, xa oh
acha£ animal, oh Cavek, xakoti^en atitil, a£ana abah,
xecha ^a ri ok xquiya quij, qui tata qui mama Caveki.
He cay chi achi Totunay ru bi hun, Xurcah ru bi hun
chic, ^oh quikan Cavek Paoh ru bi, xeucheex ^a ruma
£a£avitz, at rucah nu chinamit catux, £eka^uch, Ba^a-
hol, Cavek Cibakihay, qui xucheex, kitzih vi chi at nu
cha£ nu nimal. Xavi ^a xu cheex chic Ahquehay,
chirih nu chinamit cat ahilax vi, at rikan ka^ak kibah
catux, huruma ri mani rikan, xere vi ri xu^, x^ambex
Cavek, que ^a x^akat vi chinamit ri, que cha oher ka
tata ka mama, yxka^ahol, xa maqui hemezta ytzih ha e
ahaua vi.


Qtn ^hacbal ^ ka mania^ ok xcam.

30. Xeapon chi^a chuvi huyu ^hopi ytzel, xcha
£a£avitz chire Q^actecauh : ko£ax chuvi givan. — Utzan,
xcha. Ha ^a nabey x£ax ri £a£avitz, ok xrah ^a x£ax
chic ri ^actecauh ; maqui ^a x£ax, xtzak ka pa civan :


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 95

29. At this time they met the Cavek under the great
pines, at the place called Ximbalxug. They heard the
plaint of the doves beneath the great pines ; the en-
chantment of the Cavek. Gagavitz and Zactecauh said :
" Who art thou ? What is that we hear ? " Then said
Loch and Xet : " They are our vassals, oh our lord, they
obey us." They began to show their burdens ; bird nets,
maguey, tools for making shoes, were their burdens — no
other burdens, for their houses were of deer skins and
hides ; hence they were called Ahquehay. Then they
carried the nets to the woods ; they caught doves in them
beneath the great pines, and they brought many of these
doves caught in the nets, and said : " Oh our lord, do not
slay us." " Who art thou ? " was asked. They answered :
" We have been ruined by the Quiche men, we your
brother, your kinsman, we the Cavek ; they have dimin-
ished their regal dignity." So spoke they, and gave
many gifts, they the fathers and ancestors of the Cavek.
There were two heroes, Totunay the name of one, Xurcah
of the other, the vassals of Cavek Paoh ; they were
addressed by Gagavitz : " Thou art the fourth of our
tribes, Gekaquch, Baqahol, Cavek, and Cibakihay." Thus
he addressed them : " Truly thou art my brother, my
kinsman." Thus he spoke to those of Ahquehay : " Thou
art counted in my tribe, thy vassalage shows that thou art
of our ancient home, no longer art thou a vassal nor
earnest the net. The Caveks are received, and form part
of our tribe." So spoke of yore our fathers and ances-
tors, oh my children, and we must not forget the words
of these rulers.

The Victory of Our Forefathers^ After One

Had Died,

30. Having arrived at the place, Qhopiytzel, Gagavitz
said to Zactecauh : ** Let us cross this ravine." " Good,"
said he. Gagavitz first crossed, and then Zactecauh
wished to cross. But he did not cross, but fell into the
ravine. Thus died one of our ancestors, and their pos-


96 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

equre^a xcam vi can hun ka mama rij, xhachatah qui
vach, xahun chic xohbo^o, oh Xahila, ri £a£avitz.

31. Xeapon chi^a chuvi huyu, f akihuyu, Teyocuman,
ru camul cakan ; chiri ^a x^i ^et vi el ru £agal huyu,
gag xanul ru bi, kitzih ti xibin ru gagal tipe chupam
huyu ; togol rugagal chinaht Xmani vi tucheex
roquebexic, xa^a huna huyu gagxanul ^oh ru gagal ;
xmani vi tipe vi gag, xaporinak chi^ ronohel ahlabal
vuk amag xe huyu, mani tanti cucheex, kitzih tan ^ok
qui ^ux, mani tan tucheex ru ^mic ru gagal, xa xeho
chic ho oyobem, quecha ri ka mama ri gagavitz, xeapon
^a xe ' huyu, xecha ^a conohel ahlabal : At kachag,
mixatul xa at chic at koyoben, chinak tu cheex ru ^mic
kagag, mix katih tatiha ka gihil at kachag, xecha
conohel, xoh cha^ chique: Nak tahoon tin canah
nutihana, hari achih ru ^ux, maqui tu xibih rij, yn
quinabeyah, xcha gagavitz chiquichin, mani xahoon xa
canih xquixibih qui. Kitzih ti xibin ru gagal huyu ; ok
xraho ^ ri hun Qaki^unun rubi. Yn quibe avu^in,
xcha ri f aki^unun, xcha chire gagavitz. — Tok xvikon
^a xquicauh, xqui cha ^ qui quicabichal : Maquina chi
^ha, chi pocob. Xa xet tule xa ^imah vi, xa bolol,
raxah ru bi, hari ^agul tel chi ya ; xquivikbeh quij, xoc
pa qui vi, xoc chi qui kul, chi qui ^huc, chi qui ga, chi
cakan camigabal richin gag, quecha. Ha ^a xka chu-
pam gag ri gagavitz, ha ^a ^aki^unun, xyaan can ru
vi gag, xa rax yxim xpug ka pa ya xyabex ruvi gag :
kitzih ^a tixibin ok xkah chupam huyu, ok xpax ru
gagal huyu, xtoge rucibel chinaht, xoc gekum aga.
Xepax conohel ri e ^oh xe huyu, xqui xibih qui. Xbe
yaloh pa huyu ri gagavitz, xqui tzakah ru gih, xcam chi
qui ^ux. ^oh x^amo gag, ^oh mani x^amo chiquichin ;


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 97

sessions were divided ; but the other, that is, Gagavitz,
brought us forth — us, the Xahila.

31. They then arrived at the white hills called Teyo-
cuman, coming there for the second time. There they
saw the fire of the mountain called Gagxanul. Truly it
was frightful to see the fire coming from the mountain,
the fire shooting forth afar off No one could say how it
could be passed by, as the mountain Gagxanul was on
fire for a whole year, after which fire did not come forth.
When all the warriors of the seven villages had arrived
at the foot of the mountain, no one spoke ; truly, they
grieved at heart, nor could one say how the fire could be
captured. They could but go on hoping. When he
arrived at the mountain they spoke to our ancestor,
Gagavitz, and all the warriors said to him : " Thou our
brother, thou hast arrived, thou in whom is our hope.
Who will go down to the capture of this fire? Who will
descend for us, who are seeking our fortune, oh thou our
brother ? '* So said all ; and we replied : " Who of you
wishes that I shall try my fortune ? He has a heart of
a hero, that fears not. I will go first." Thus spoke
Gagavitz to them : " You must not fear so soon." Truly,
the fire of the mountain was terrible. Then there was
one named Zakitzunun, who wished to go with him. " I
will go with you," said Zakitzunun, speaking to Gagavitz.
Then they were armed and their ornaments put upon
them. But the two said together : " There is no use of
bows or shields." They laid them aside; they took
pointed instruments and dug a trench, and they placed
by the water those banana trees called raxah. When
these things were in order, they entered first with their
heads, then with their necks, then with their arms, with
their hands, with their feet, so as to destroy the fire, as
they said. Then Gagavitz descended into the fire, while
Zakitzunun conducted the water to the fire, and the green
grass and maize mixed with the water flowed upon the
fire. Truly, it was fearful when it descended into the
mountain, when it scattered the fire of the mountain,
when the smoke burst forth afar and darkness and night


98 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

halatak oc ru bix gag xkaul xe huyu ; ^oh xilon, ^oh
maqui xilon chique, ok xel ^ pe chupam huyu. Kitzih
ti xibin chic ru vach, ok xel pe pa huyu gagxanul, xecha
^a ronohel ahlabal vuk amag : Kitzih tixibin ru puz ru
naval, ru £agal ru tepeval, xcam xkana, quecha.


32. ^ate^aok x^hocobax chuvi ^hacat, ok xkaul,
kitzih xquininah, xe cha ^a conohel : At kachag, mix
aka^ah ru gagal huyu, mi xaya ka gag ; yx cay chi al,
hun nabey al, hun xambey al chivichin, yx ka vi, yxka
holom, xecha conohel ahlabal vuk amag, chirichin ri
gagavitz. Ok xcha ^ chiquichin: Xpeul ru ^ux
huyu nu teleche nu cana, yx nuchag, nunimal. Ok
xquir ^ ri ru ^ux huyu, xa^olo^ic gag chi abah, hari
abah 9akchog rubi, maqui raxa abah, oxlahuh ^a ^oh
^o ru ^in ri abah, ha^a rix^ul ru ^ux huyu gagxanul ;
xa ^a cha ri couh ru xahic rix^ul, ^i ya ^hob, tuban
maqui ahilam re^anibal.


33. Xepe chi^a chiri xei^o chipe (^eqic Ynup rubi,
xaceel chuvi choy ; ri ynup maqui na tiquil, mani ruxe
ri ynup, xatibilan chuvi ya. Querela ru binaam vi ^e^ic
Ynup ri xey ^o chipe chuvi huyu. ^lalapacay ru bi ; xax
^al he ru xak pacay xqui^hacatih. Querela xubinaah vi
^alalapacay ri, quecha ka mama.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 99

entered on the scene. All who were at the foot of the
mountain fled, as they were greatly frightened. Gagavitz
remained in the mountain. The day drew to a close,
and their courage died in their hearts. The fire was
captured, but it was not captured for them. A few sparks
of the fire descended from the mountain. It reached
some, but it did not reach them. Then he came from
within the mountain. Truly, his face was terrible when
he came from within the mountain Gagxanul. All the
warriors of the seven villages said : " Truly his power,
his knowledge, his glory and his majesty are terrible.
He died, and yet he has come down." So said they.

32. Therefore, when he had arrived they seated him on
the throne, and truly made much of him, and all said :
" Oh our brother, you have conquered the fire of the
mountain ; you have reduced for us the fire. Ye are
two heroes ; one is the first hero, and one follows him.
Ye are our heads, our chiefs." So said all the warriors
of the seven villages to Gagavitz. Then he said to
them : " The heart of the mountain has come as my
slave, my captive, oh you my brethren, my kinsmen."
When the heart of the mountain is opened, the fire sepa-
rates from the stone, even the stone called Gak Chog. It
is not a green stone, and there are thirteen others with it,
and hence comes the dance called " the heart of the
mountain Gagxanul." They say this dance is executed
violently, with many troops (of dancers), nor can one
count those who join the noise.

33. They went from there and passed over to Cecic
Ynup, as it is called, and they rowed on the lake. There
was no ceiba tree rooted in the soil, nor did they go
under a ceiba tree, but they went upon the water.
Therefore, they called that place Cecic Ynup, " the
buried Ceiba." And they passed on to the place called
Qalalapacay. There they twined the leaves of the anonas
for the royal seat. Therefore, they called that place
Qalalapacay, " anona garlands." So say our ancestors.


i


100 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^ambal richin Ykoma^ vae.

34. Ok xet chi^a chinaht ri Cakixahay ^ubulahay ru
bi, rikam Ykomagi, cani x^amar rokotaxic cuma, runah
^ xilitah Chigalibal rubi huyu ; xuya vi ri hoye vi
quivach, ok xilitah, xaxu £aba chic rij. Querela
xubinaah vi huyu, Chigalibal ri. Xcha ^a ok xu ya ri :
Xa yn achag animal, xa mixi^hacatah, xaquin ikan a
tern, a ^hacat, yn huvi chi vinak ^o vikan. Xcha ri
Ykoma£i, he ^a rikan ri Cakixahay, ^ubulahay ; que-
rela ru^mic Ykomag ri, xere ^a xcolotah. Chic ri
xebo^o chic fo^il vinak, qui tata qui mama ri Ahpo^o-
^il Qulavi ^ochoh, ^ula vi ^anti quibi ; xaqui vinakil
xeel chic mani chic quikan.


35. Ok xeapon chi^a chuvi huyu ^akba^ulu, ok
xilitah chi^a ri Tol^om rubi. Kitzih tixibin ^o vi,
tinicnot huyu ^o vi ri ^akba^ulu. Nabey ^a xe ^iz
apon ronohel ahlabal, tanti qui xibih quij, maqui tan
quetiquer chu camigaxic. Tok xeapon, xecha ^a ri
ahlabal conohel : Mian xatul at kacha£, bila tux ree, kitzih
ti xibin ^o vi, quecha. Xecha ^a vi he ka mama
gagavitz ; chinak na pe tux, yx ahlabal ? xti^a ^et an
ru vach. Maquian ka labal, maqui ^ha, pocob, tikoque-
9ah, yx ^oh yx ka nimal, xecha, xetak conohel chu
chapic Tol^om. Ok xe cha ^a : Nak na^a tucheex, at
kachag, mixkatih kitzih tixibin ^ovi, at cabe chiil, xecha
conohel. Tok xpe ^a ru^eta ri Tol^om, xapon kitzih
ti xibin ^o vi tinicnot huyu ^o vi. Xcha ^ chire
Tol^om : Chinak catux ? maat nuchag nu nimal. Chinak
catux? vacami xcat nucami^ah. Cani ^a xa xibih rij,
xcha ^a : Yn ral ^habak nicnic, xa vi vochoch vae yn


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 101

The Conquest of the Ikomagi,

34. Then they saw at a distance those called the Caki-
xahay and the Qubulahay, subjects of the Ikomagi.
They were captured after they had been routed by a
surprise, when they were not far from a place called
Chigalibal. They were pardoned when they arrived, and
our warriors extended their hands to them. Hence that
place was called Chigalibal. They said, in yielding:
" I am your brother, your elder. You are the conquer-
ors. We are the subjects of your throne and your power.
I swear it before these who are my subjects." Thus
spoke the Ikomagi, and thus their subjects, the Cakixa-
hay and the Qubulahay. Thus did Ikomag submit and
save his life. With them the Zotzils brought forth those
fathers and elders, the Ahpozotzils named Qulavi Zochoh
and Qulavi Qanti. But only their families, not their
vassals, proceeded therefrom.

35. After this they arrived at the place Qakbatzulu,
where they met the one named Tolgom. Truly, terror
was there, and the place Qakbatzulu trembled. At first
all the warriors began to arrive ; but fear was upon them
lest they should there meet death. When he (Gagavitz)
reached there, all the warriors said : ** Thou arrivest, our
brother. What is this? Truly it is fearful." So said
they ; and to them said our ancestor, Gagavitz : " Who
are ye, oh warriors ? Let us look at his face. Can we
not fight ? Have we not bows and shields to effect an
entrance, oh you who are my brethren ? " So he spoke,
and he sent all the warriors to seize Tolgom. Then they .
said : " What speech is this, oh brother ? Is it not
said that a great terror is there ? Go thou and
see." So said they all. Then he went forth to see
Tolgom, and truly he arrived at the place of the terror
and where the hill trembled. At once he cried to Tolgom :

" Who art thou ? Thou art neither my brother nor my
elder. Who art thou ? This very day I shall slay thee."
Instantly was Tolgom filled with fear, and he replied : " I
am the son of the Mud that Quivers. This is my house


102 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^o vi, at ahauh, xcha. Catoho, bat tiquic, xucheex ^a
ri Tol^om. Ok xu ya rii, xchapatah, xpe ^ ru chapon
chic xul cu^in, xeucheex ^ ri ahlabal vuk amag, ok
xuya ri Tol^om : xtikagahartigah can vae huyu, yx
quixgao ru vach nu telechee nu cana ; xtikaquiyah, xtika
^atohih ru vi nu telechee, xtike^abeh xtika^k, xtika-
^aharti^ah can rubi vae huyu ^akba^ulu tucheex ruma
vinak ^ak, yx ahaua, xeucheex ^a conohel ahlabal.


36. Querela xquibijh vae : At kagha^, hun nabey al,
hun ^a ^hipil al chikichin, xtiketah gih ^ak chi popol
vach oh oxlahuh chi ahlabal, xti ka ya a muh a galibal,
a tern, a ^hacat, avahavarem. He ree cay chi al ^o^il
Tukuche que ucheex, xcat kachi quicohol Ahpo^o^il
Ahpoxahil, qui xucheex xa chiri taban vi, at naek huvi
chi ahlabal, la naek achag animale, Bacah Pok, Bacah
Xahil; qui xucheex naek xa hunam £a£al tepeval, at
kachag, xucheex ^a ; tok xelahibex ru vach, ok ru yaic
ri Ahpogo^il Ahpoxahil, maqui naek oh fo^il Tukuche
la naek, kacha£ ka nimal lae Bacah Pok, oh ^a Bacah
Xahil, yxka^ahol. Quecha ri e oher katata kamama :
Oh huvi chi ahlabal xa ruma ri nim qui puz qui naval, he
navipe hei kayom, ri ^ha pocob. Quere^ xelahibex vi
quivach, a nabey ka mama ri, ruma ri ^iy xukagah ru
gih ralaxic.


37. Ok xtiquer ^a ru camigaxic ri Tol^om, xvikitah
na, xoc na ru cauh, ^ate ^aok xrip ruga chuvach chee
lama x^ak vi. Ok xtiquer ^a xahoh ruma ronohel
ahlabal, xavi Tol^om rubi bix. Xquixah ok xtiquer ^a


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 103

where I dwell, oh my lord." So he said. " Go forth
from here and live elsewhere," was it answered to Tolgom.
Then he submitted and was made prisoner, and his body
was taken with him. Gagavitz said to the warriors and
the seven towns when Tolgom gave himself up : ** We
have made this spot glorious. Show forth the face of my
prisoner, my captive. We will adorn and sacrifice my
captive. We will be friends with him and stand in front
of him, and thus celebrate the name of this spot, Qak-
batzulu, as it is called by a joking people, oh chieftains.'*
Such were the words addressed to all the warriors.

36. Therefore, they spoke thus : " Our brother, one
child is the first and another the second among us. Here-
after we shall make this appear before the council, we
the thirteen warriors. We will give to thee thy canopy,
thy royal seat, thy carpet, thy throne, with power. These
shall be called the two children of the Zotzil Tukuches,
but thou shalt be the first man among the Ahpozotzils
and the Ahpoxahils. They shall call thee forth to act ;
thou shalt be first among the warriors, thy brothers and
thy elders, the Bacah Pok and the Bacah Xahils. They
shall name thee equal to any in power and majesty, oh
my brother." Thus they said, and his head was lifted
above the others, and he was given the power by the
Ahpozotzils and the Ahpoxahils, but not by us, the
Zotzil Tukuches, nor by our brother and elder, the Bacah
Pok and the Bacah Xahil, my children. Our fathers and
ancestors said of old : *' We have been chosen by the
warriors in their great skill and wisdom; their bows and
shields have created us." It was thus that our ancestors
were first exalted by overcoming the greatness and the
birth of many.

37. Then began the execution of Tolgom. He arrayed
himself and entered suddenly. His arms were extended
in front of a tree, to be shot with arrows. A dance was
begun by all the warriors, while Tolgom began his song.
They still danced, when they commenced to shoot their
arrows. But not one of the arrows reached the cord ; for


104 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ru^kic ; maqui ^ hari ^haa tel pa ^am, xahari nahtik
9imah chee x^akbex chuvi huyu ^kba^ulu x^akvi xbe
na qui ^haa conohel. ^ate ok xbe ru ^ha ri kamama
ga£avitz, cani xi^o chupam huyu hari Chee ^ulu rubi,
xu^akbeh Tol^om : ^ha xcami^an he ^ri conohel
ahlabal, halatak oc qui ^ha, xoc chinaht xqui ^k vi.
Quere ri vinak ok xcam ^iy ru qui^el xel chirih che
lama: ok xpeh ^a x^iz gipax chuvach ronohel vuk
amag ahlabal, xquiyax, x^tohix rucamic haok xgahar
ri uchum, ti^o huhun huna, xati ban vaim u^aam, xa
que ^habin a^uala xa tunay chic ru ^exevach tiqui ^k,
bila ^a tux ri Tol^om, quecha ka mama oher, yxka^a-
hol. Querela xka^m viki ri ru^in f o^il Tukuche
ruma ^a ru puz ru naval, ru £agal, ru tepeval ; xelahibex
vi ru vach ka tata ka mama oh Cakchiquel vinak, mani
^hacat ahinak vi ru gih ralaxic e oher ka mama.


38. Ok xepe chi^ chiri chu vi huyu ^kba^ulu,
xutzak ka ^hakap Tol^om chupam choy : ok xgahar
can ri tzam tzakbal Tol^om. Ok xe cha ^ koy^o
chupam ree choy, xa^ ahilam xi^o xquixibih qui
conohel ok xquituc rupam ree choy. Chiri xetzako vi
quij pan pati payan chocol ru bi, quetabal quinaual ; chila
xe el vi beleh tulul, ha ri pa Chitulul. Ok xtiquer ^ ri
^ovic pa choy ronohel ahlabal, xavi xambey chic xbe ri
£agavitz, hun ^a rana Chetehauh ru bi. X^ohe can
chiri xetzako vi qui ha ri tzam ^bouil Abah ru bi.
Vacami tok xbe ^ari ga£avitz, kitzih tixibin ok xebe pa
ya fu^u cumatz xuhalibeh : cani^a xgekumar ru vi ya,
canix pa e ca£ik, cak^ut cum chuvi ya, x^iz ^a ru tuc


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 105

it was far to the tree where he was shot at, on the hill
Qakbatzulu, where they shot at him and where all the
arrows fell. At length the arrow of our ancestor Gaga-
vitz was discharged. It passed rapidly over the place
named Cheetzulu, and pierced Tolgom. All the warriors
then slew him, some arrows piercing him from near and
others from afar. The man being thus killed, a great
stream of blood came forth behind the tree. His body
was cut in pieces and divided among all the seven towns.
This gift and this sacrifice of his death were what founded
the festival of (the month) Uchum. At that festival all
were equal ; there was eating and drinking ; little children
were killed by being shot with arrows, their heads being
adorned with elder flowers, as his substitute, as if they
were Tolgom, as say our fathers of yore, oh my children.
In this manner we obtained power with the Zotzil Tuku-
ches, by knowledge and odcult science, by power and
majesty ; thus did our fathers and ancestors, we the Cak-
chiquels, lift our heads above others, nor our ancestors
lower their glory and their birth.

38. When they were on the hill Qakbatzulu, they
threw a part of the boc^ of Tolgom into the lake. Thus
began the festival of " throwing the nose of Tolgom."
Then, it is said, there was heard a noise in the waters,
and at its passage all were terrified when there were these
movements in the waters of the lake. Many on these
occasions assembled at the spot called " the common
baths " (Payanchocol). They practiced many magic arts.
Nine zapotes were found at the spot called Chitulul. At
that time the warriors began their passage over tlie lake.
Gagavitz followed them with his sister, named Chetehauh.
They established themselves, and settled on the point
called after the god Abah. A little while after the arrival
of Gagavitz, truly a fearful thing took place when he
entered the water, having changed himself into Zutzu-
cumatz. It suddenly darkened on the water, a wind rose,
and a white cloud rested on the surface, making a circuit
of the water in the lake. They desired to remain there ;
but it was first necessary to reduce the power of the

H


306 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ru pam choy. ^oh xraho, xukagah tah ru gih ^utuhile
xraho : xu ^et ^ ronohel vuk amag tok xel ^ apon
chi ya, e^o vi xcha ^ chire xebo^o Ah^iquinahayi :
Mian xkatuc rupam ka choy ka palouh, at ka nimal,
hu^m a choy, hu^aam ^ a guzgum, avokok, a tap, a
car, tux, xucheex ; xu^uluba ^a : Utzan, at nuchag,
^hakap a choy, ^hakap ^ a guzgum, a vokok, a tap,
a car, ^hakap ^a a ^hupup, a raxah tux, xa xere mixa-
gaba vinak ^oh ti camigan chupam chachux, xcha
Ah^iquinahay chire. Xepe chic, xepaxin chic qui,xavi
tzolih chipe, xrah y^o ru ^ama rana ; mani chi^
x^mom ruma ni^h coon, mani chic rana xelpe, mani
chic tuna. Xcha : ba xcha vi vana, nak mix ^mo ?
Kitzih ti be nu canoh ti vil na xchax be labal chic ru^ux.
Xe vikon, kitzih tixibin ok xebe canoy rana : cani^a
xuxibih ri amag ^utuhile, xcha ^ xapon : Nak mix^amo
pe vana xachi ^ulu labal chic nu ^ux ? Xcha chire
amag ^utuhile cooni ^ununaa. Cani^a ha x^hao ri
Ah^iquinahay chirichin : At ahauh, at nuchag, nu nimal,
xa vave tuban vi a vana, mixkahach ka choy, hu^aam a
choy, hu^aam ^ nu choy tux, xcha, he pokon xe runa
ri ahlabal, xa cha xelah ri Ah^iquinahay. Xcha chi ^
ri ka mama gagavitz : Nak ruma tiqui ^m pe vana utz
^ xti^ohe can ru^in ni^h coon ; xax ti va^axah atzih,
at nuchag, qui ru ^hac pe ri ni^h coon, ^oh ta xtinu-
ban chire. Xcha chi xa e Ah^iquinahayi. Querela
ruhachic choy ri quegha ka mama, quere navipe kachag
kanimal vi ki ri ru^in ^utuhile; ^oh chi^ maqui
xtikoquegah. Xey^o vi, xemeho vi e nabey ka tata ka
mama ri gagavitz, ^actecauh ^a chi gekum ^ chi aga
ok: ok xquiban ree, mehaok ti^aker, quecha, xa^


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 107

Tzutuhils. All the seven nations looked about and then
descended to the water. Those who were there then said
to the children of the Ahtziquinahay : " We have scarcely
made the circuit of this lake of ours, this sea, oh my
brother. But let one-half of the lake be yours, and one-
half of the fruits, of the wild geese, of the crabs, of the
fish." Thus he spoke, and the others took counsel : " It
is well my brother, that the half of the lake be ours, and
a half of thy fruits, of thy wild geese, of thy crabs, of
thy fish, a half of thy acorns, and a half of thy bananas
be ours, and of all living things you kill in or below
the waters." Thus did the Ahtziquinahay reply to them.
Then they separated and went away, but soon returned,
desiring to obtain wives, for none of them were married,
owing to the absence of women ; neither their mothers
nor sisters having accompanied them. They said:
" Where speaks my girl ? Whom shall I take as wife ?
Truly, let us go forth and seek where there is said to be
a war for hearts." They put on their armor, and were
really terrible when they went forth in search of women.
The Tzutuhils were frightened, and to them the Cakchi-
quels said: " Whom shall I take for my woman ? Who
has declared war against my heart ? '* So they spoke to
the Tzutuhil people, to the women of Tzununa. There-
upon the Ahtziquinahay spoke to them : " My lord, my
brother, my elder, here indeed is thy maiden. You have
divided with us the waters; half of the lake is thine,
half is ours." Thus he spoke, and his warriors were
afflicted at his words, when the Ahtziquinahay spoke
thus in conclusion. Then Gagavitz, our ancestor, said :
" Who of you comes to take wives ? It were well that
you remain with the organs of women. But I hear thy
words, oh my brother ; their victory is by the organs of
their women. Remaining, I shall do this." Thus he
spoke to the Ahtziquinahays. In this manner, say our
elders, the lake was divided, and in this manner our
brother and elder remained with the Tzutuhils. None
other of ours remained. Our first fathers and ancestors,
Gagavitz and Zactecauh, passed on, and went back to the


108 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

halachic matigaker chin. Xeapon chi^ chuvi huyu
Pul^hi^h, chiri ^ xetak viel.


Qui gakeribal vae.

39. Nabey, ^ xepe gekaquch, Ba^kol, Cibakihay,
Cavek xetak pe. Quixnabeyah, yxnuhay nu chinamit,
tibana apon, ka^ak kibah, xa hala chic ma ti^aker, vhix,
xeucheex, xepe ^ xeul chiri pa gakeribal, Pantzic,
Paraxone, ^inahihay, Pa^ibakul, Pacavek Quehil rubi
huyu ; xe^aker vi, xtiquer ^ rubanic ^ak cuma, ^ulbal
richin cahpop Nimahay rubi. Nabey qui^ak he ^
nabey xeul ri gekaqueh, Cibakihay, Cavek, xambey chic
xul ri Ba^ahol, xtiquerinak ^ak xul : xcha ^a ok xul ri
Ba^hol chire gekaquch : Yn yn ahpop, quin a ^ulu,
xcha chi re gekaquch. Ok xul xrah ru hi£uh, ah popol,
xucheex ^a cuma : Maqui atat kah pop, ma hatul kah
pop, xecha chire. Tok xrelahih ^ abah ^uval, xcha :
Tin ya chivichin ree ^uval cah ga rakan, tuvic rakan, yn
yvahpop, xcha. Maqui xahox chire. Tok xtiquer ^
chubanic ru ^ak, xutzin yantah ru^ak xraho ahpopol
tantu hi£uh chire. Ok xtak ^ape chuluc balam yohol
ru^ak ruma gagavitz, ytzel chic ru^ux gagavitz Ba^-
hol tan tiraho ahpopol. Querela xul yoh vi ru ^ak ri
ruma chicop chuluc balam, tok xpe ^a gagavitz chuvi
huyu Puhuhil, Paraxone xahun chi raxon ru halebal; tok
xpeul, ok xul Pantzic Paraxone, ^akerinak chic.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 109

darkness and the night. At that time their dawn had not
yet come ; but not long after they did this it began to
shine. They went upon the mountain Pulchich, and
thence they set out.

This Is Their Day-Breaking.

39. The first who went forth were Gekaquch, Baqa-
hol, Cibakihay and Cavek, who came together. You
were the first, oh my house, oh my tribe, to bring about
our day-breaking, our ancient nation, some time before
the dawn. " Go forth," was said to them. Then they
came to the place where their dawn was to be, to the
mountains named Pantzic, Paraxone, Cinahihay, Paci-
bakul, and Pa Cavek and Quehil. There their dawn
appeared, there they built houses, there took place the
marriage of their chief named Nimahay. The first who
built houses were those who came first, the Gekaquch,
the Cibakihay and the Cavek. The last who arrived was
Baqahol, and they had already commenced to build when
he arrived. After he had come, Baqahol said to Geka-
quch: "I, I am king, I received you.'* So said he to
Gekaquch. At his arrival he had ardently desired the
leadership. The others answered him : " Thou ! no,
thou art not our king ; we do not wish you to be our
king." So said they to him. Then he showed them a
precious stone and said : " I will give you this precious
stone carved with four feet, and hands and toes, if I am
your chief" So he said. But that suited them not
Then he began to build himself a stronghold, and in a
little while the labor was completed, for he ardently
desired power and coveted it. For this reason his con-
structions were destroyed by the Chuluc Balam sent by
Gagavitz, because Gagavitz liked it not that Baqahol
desired the leadership. Therefore the constructions were
destroyed by the animals Chuluc Balam when Gagavitz
came to the places called Puhuhil and Paraxone, each of
which was clothed with changing green. After that he
arrived on Pantzic and Paraxone, and on his arrival the
day-breaking took place.


110 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

40. Elenak chi pe £ih, quecha e oher tata mama, xul
^a chiri pa qakeribal, he ^ banoninak chic rutee runam
ri gekaquch, Cibakihay, Cavek, Ahquehay; maqui utz
tuna chiri Ba^hol, xu^hih chi oc ri chi tee, chi nam ok
xqui^ul cahpop; x£il^ el xucheex: maqui quina^ul,
at Ba^ahol, hari mixacha, yn ahpop cacha, mixavelahih
a^uval chiqui vach he tee e nam, ahpop Ba^qol ma xa
tucheex tava, maqui at nutee at nunam, xucheex, ^ xax
cha chic xu^uluba : Mani chic xubijh, Yn atee yn anam.
At vah pop, xa xcha chic, xa xu ^hih chic rij.


41. Cani ^ax quetah cahpop chi ahauarem, xcukubax
chuvi ru tem ru ^hacat, cani xatini^ax chupam atinibal
gel, cucu ; cani xya pa ^ul pan paz, pa cugul, pa ta^h vi,
xoc ^ ru titil, ru £aha abah, ru xak, ru caka uleuh, x^iz
oc rahauarem vach, cuma ruhay ru chinamit, quecha y
mama yxnu^ahol. Quere^ tee nam vi chinamit ri
huma ohoh ahpop; Xavi ^ quere tantuban ronohel
ahlabal chupam he ru ^akeribal, xavi tantetax rahauarem
ruma ru hay ru chinamit. Xamulumuxinak chic chupam
ru^akeribal ; ox^hob ^ chi amag xgaker chiri, ^o^il
vinak, Cakchiquel vinak, Tukuchee vinak ; Ahkahal
xahalatak ru cohol huyu, xe ^aker viri ox^hob chi amag.
Chuvi ^ huyu Tohohil X9aker vi ^eche vinak, chuvi ^
huyu ^amaneb x^aker vi Rabinale ; ahiri ^a xrah gaker
vi ^utuhile pa ^ala; xa maha tutzin ru ^k tok x^aker
cuma ruchinamit. Maqui ^ xmecho chic chiri pa ^ala,
xaxi^o chic chicah, chiri chuvi huyu chi ^eletat, ^akti-
haxic, xtzakovi el ri, cani xapon chila Xepoyom. Cani
xe rucanah rahlabal ruchinamit, maqui xbanatah xuban,


ANNALS OF THE CAKCIIIQUELS. Ill

40. The sun had already risen, said our fathers and
ancestors of old ; the dawn had appeared, when were
formed the families of Gekaquch, Cibakihay, Cavek and
Ahquehay. Baqahol had not been well received, as he
had forced the families to accept him as their ruler.
When he forced them to this, they said : " I shall not go
forth to meet you, Baqahol. Do you not come to say:
' I am the chief, I say it ? ' And do you not come to
show your precious stone to the eyes of the families ?
Have you not called youself the Counselor Baqahol ?
And have you not called yourself the head of our
house ? " Thus they spoke ; but those who were with
him answered : " No one has said, ' I am the head of
your house.'" " Be thou our ruler," they cried, and thus
he succeeded.

41. Immediately they gave him, as their chief, the
signs of royalty. They seated him on the seat and royal
throne. They washed him in the bath, the painted ves-
sel. They clothed him with the robe, the girdle and
green ornaments. He received the colors, the yellow
stone, the paint, the red earth, and thus he obtained the
signs of royalty from the other families and tribes, as
said our ancestors, oh my children. Thus was consti-
tuted the family by us the ahpop ; all the warriors did
likewise in the place of their dawn ; thus was established
the royalty by the families and tribes. They became
more numerous in the place where their dawn had
appeared. Three tribes of our nation had seen the dawn
appear, the Zotzils, the Cakchiquels and the Tukuches.
As to the Akahals they were but a little distance from
the place when the dawn appeared to the three nations.
At the spot called Tohohil the Quiches saw their dawn,
and those of Rabinal saw it shine at the spot Zamaneb,
and the Tzutuhils sought to see their dawn at Tzala.
But their labors had not been completed by this tribe
when the sun arose. They had not as yet finished draw-
ing their lines in Tzala when it rose in the sky, precisely
above the place Geletat. It continued to spread its light
along its course, and at last set at the place called


112 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

cani tah ^ula xulagabeh ru chi choy xraho ; cani xema-
camo ruchinamit ok xi^o chi cah £ugucot, ru halebal,
xati vi nin chic rogebal xi^o chi cah xe a^axah ru
chinamit. Quere^x^ohe vican cooni ^ununaa.Tzololaa,
Ahacheli, Vay9a; rixcote can chi ya ru chinamit ^hakap
^ xbe ru^in.


Va ^a ru pokonal quitzihe ok xe^ohe chiri.

42. Kitzih vi chi pokon ok ix ka lagabeh xohul chi
ka huyubal, quecha e oher ka mama, yx nu^ahol; xmani
vi tipe vi techaax ti ^ux ti vayx tu^aax, mani navipe
tipe vi ti guux ti chinax. Ronohel mani, xa ru hometal
chee xoh ^agevi, xa ^ ti ka 9ek ru xe ka ^hamey ti
cuker vi ka ^ux ruma. Ha ^a ri ok xtiquer avanuhic,
xahari gukutahinak vi chee ^tinak xya vika yhatz,
x^ohe vi halatak echa, ha navipe ri ka gu, xa rihlay, xa
9akquiy xka ^hay xkaguuh. Ha^ ri ok x^ohe halal
echa, ti^o na ri chicop queh chicah titzak nape ^hicuy,
^te tikatih halal vay, quecha oher vinak, mani navipe
quixhayil ok xeul chiri.


Qui ^mbal yxok vae.

43. Tukuchee xpe vi ri xhayil ri ka mama gagavitz,
^omakaa rubi nabey ka tit ri xoh bo^o, oh Xahila ; ^i
xe^ule ^a kitzih : ^ chi nim qui xahan chire ^ulubic ;
chi xatini ^ahar qui ni ^ahal toe, ba ^t ru xe ki hatz ;
xahan ri ti^iz oc ^i quecha, xahan navipe camul tiban,


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 113

Xepoyom. Immediately the warriors quit those places
without finishing their labors, and they all agreed to go
and dwell on the borders of the lake. At that time the
tribes were filled with terror when the eagle with
green plumage passed through the sky, Gucucot, the
enchanter, and sadness covered the tribes like a shadow
when they heard him pass in the sky. Thus he appeared
to the women of Tzununa, of Tzolola, of Ahachel and of
Vayza. He soared above the shore and half the people
went with him.

The Sufferings That They Endured During

Their Sojourn Here.

42. Truly it was a time of suffering when we came to
establish ourselves in our places, said our ancestors of
old, oh my children. There was nothing to eat and
there was no relish for what had been brought along,
nor was there material for clothing. All was lacking;
we lived on the bark of trees and we rested our hearts
under the shadow of our lances. At that time the people
began to prepare the soil for the planting of corn ; the
woods were cleared and the brush burned, to prepare for
the planting. Thus we came to have a little to eat, and
we worked in the bark of trees and the maguey. When
there was still some food the vultures passed in the air.
At first they took a bird ; then they ate some of our food,
say the people ; but none of them remained when they
came.

They Took Wives,

43. The Tukuches having arrived and settled, our
ancestor Gagavitz married Gomakaa, our first ancestress,
who brought us forth — us, the Xahila. Many others
also married ; for there had been a stringent prohibition
with regard to marriage ; so that when they went in to
bathe, their organs gave way and they spilled their seed.
Many were thus prohibited, it is said, and the prohibition
was made a second time, because they had carnal rela-


114 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

tixhaylax ha ^hac virih ruvach talqualax, quecha oher
vinak.

44. Ha^a ri tok xtiquer rutzukic ^xto^, xahu vuk
chi £ih, xa^a oxlahuh chi £ih ti tzukbex ri, xa navipe
rax £ol rax ru vachah, rax hox, rax hornet, xa ^a ral
chicop mez retal a£a ti^t chuvach, xa ^ hari chee
holom ocox tiqui ^izbeh qui xiquin ; maqui na nim ru
vach ti tzukbex richin ri chay abah oher, quecha xa^
xnimar ruvach tzukbal re ^axto^, xa xnimar na ruvach
9ak ama£. ^ate ok xoc ri nimak ru vach, quecha oher
tata mama, ri £^agavitz, ^a nakah ok ^a que ul chiri
Pantzic, Paraxone, ^imahihay, Pa^iba^^ul, Pacavek
quehil.


45. Tok x^utun ^ahun quilabal Ahcupilcat, Ah
Canalakam quibi, bala xpevi, ok xquiyal ^a ruvach
huyu, xoc vi balbaxin chee, x^haybex quichin Ah
Cupilcat, xeoc na apon chiri labal quitakom ^iy chu-
binem, tox xpe ^a ri balbaxin chee chuvach huyu, xeyaar
^a chi camic ri Ah Cupilcat, Ah Canalakam, ruma ka
mama. Chiri ^a xquiban vi pa ru ^akeribal Ba^hol ;
tok x£^ahar can ru bi huyu, Yalabey, (j^imahihay, Mot-
zoray tucheex ; xa ^a e cay xe^a^e, quecha ; hun ^a
xbe ^eche ri Ahcupilcat, ha ki xtihbex ^holoh chiri.

46. Xepe ^ chiri Pantzic, Paraxone, xqui toloba can
ri, xeul chic Pan che Chigohom ru bi, ^a chiri ^
xquitih vi halal qui pokob, ka chunah rupam ree chee ^i
quecha chirichin chee, xa orocom rupam chee xqui
chunah, xa^a rachak chicop cot balam, xqui chunabeh
rupam chee. Ok xla£^abex ^a, xya chupam ri ^axto^,


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 115

tions both naturally and unnaturally, as the old traditions
say.

44. Then also they began to adore the Demon. On
each seventh and thirteenth day an offering was made to
him of fresh resin, and freshly gathered green branches
and new bark ; and also of a cat, the image of night,
which were burned before him. To these were added
thorns of the gourd tree with which they drew blood
from their ears. They had not yet began the worship of
the great idol of the ancient Chay Abah. It is said that
the worship of the Demon increased with the face of our
prosperity. Afterwards the principal idols were set up,
as said of yore our father and ancestor Gagavitz, at the
time they approached Pantzic, Paraxone, Cinahihay,
Pacibaqul, Pacavek and Quehil.

45. At that time some of the natives of the places
called Cupilcat and Canalakam, offered combat when
they (the Cak.) had arrived before their city. With-
drawing from before the city (our men) entered a very
dense woods where those of Cupilcat were destroyed.
Others arrived at the spot to continue the battle, and
some calling to others, they entered the dense woods,
before their city, and then these men of Cupilcat and
Canalakam were destroyed by our ancestor. There the
family of Baqahol began its fame, and the name of the
place became celebrated. Cimahihay and Motzoray, the
only two said to have survived, abandoned the place ; and
another from Cupilcat came to Quiche and there met his
death.

46. Having abandoned Pantzic and Paraxone they
arrived at the forest called Chiqohom, and there suffered
some deprivations. But they made dwellings in the
trees, each choosing a tree and whitewashing its interior
with lime obtained from the excrements of eagles and
tigers. When they were settled there, they set up the
idols of the Demon and Chay Abah ; and in the house


116 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Chay Abah, xa^ chicop ^el, cuyu^h xulabalibeh
rochoch ri ^xto^ cuma : querela xubinaah vi pan che
Chi£^ohom ri xe yaloh ^ chiri, xa^ e cay xeru^aholah
ri £^a£^avitz, Caynoh rubi hun, Cayba^ rubi hunchic, e
cay chi achi.


47. Xcam ^a ri ahauh ga£^avitz, ri ki xpe pa Tulan, ki
^ e ^hutik ^hola ri ka mama Caynoh, Cayba^, ok
xcam qui tata, xavi chiri xemuke vi can, chupam qui
gakeribal Paraxone.


48. Bala ^ xeye vi e cay chiachi, xeul chiri quecha
^a ok xeul chiqui chin gekaquch, Ba^ahol, Cibakihay :
Mixoh ul, yxkatee, yxkanam, oh vae oh £alel Xahil,
ahuchan Xahil kohucheex, oh y £^alel, oh yvahpop. ^i
quecha ok xeul, mani ^a natal xepe vi vue pe he ret ri
f actecauh, ri xcam can chupam ^ivan ^hopiytzel ; ^i xe
cha chic e ka tata e ka mama, yxnu^ahol.


49. ^i nabey ^a x£a£ar Tepeuh, rahaual Cauke.
Cuztum ^hixnal ru bi huyu ; xban vi ti xibin ru naual ri
Tepeuh, tibirbot huyu ^o vi, xpatanih ^a ronohel ama£
chuvach Tepeuh.


50. He ^ ri £alel Xahil ahucham Xahil xtakex
quitzih ruma £^ekaquch Ba^ahol : ^i xecha ri £^alel
Xahil ahuchan Xahil ; Que be tah ru nabey ka patan ri
Caynoh, Cayba^, oh ^oh oh yvahpop, ^i xecha chique
chinamit, ^i xtakex ^ quitzih ruma chinamit.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 117

of the Demon were placed parroquets and parrots. There-
fore they called that place Chiqohom. After having
lived there awhile, Gagavitz begat two infants, the first
named Caynoh, the second Caybatz, both boys.


47. At that time the king Gagavitz died, the same
who came from Tulan ; his children, our ancestors, Cay-
noh and Caybatz, were still very young when their father
died. They buried him in the same place where their
dawn appeared, in Paraxone.


48. Thus were the two boys left. Then Gekaquch,
Baqahol and Cibakihay arriving, said to them : " We
have come ; we are your mothers and sisters ; we are
here, we the Galel Xahil and the Ahuchan Xahil, as we
are called ; we are your Galel ; we are your Ahpop."
Thus many of them came and spoke, not remembering
the sign of Zactecauh, who had died in the ravine of
Qhopiytzel. Thus spoke many of our fathers and ances-
tors, oh my children.


49. The first who ruled with glory was Tepeuh, the
king of Cauke. Cuztum and Chixnal were the names of
his strongholds. The magic power of Tepeuh inspired
terror, he caused the mountain to tremble where he
lived, and all the tribes paid tribute to Tepeuh.


50. Now these Galel Xahil and Ahuchan Xahil caused
these words to be carried by Gekaquch and Baquhol :
" The Galel Xahil and Ahuchan Xahil say thus, * Let
Caynoh and Caybatz go forth first as our tribute, for as
for us, we are the rulers.' " So said they to the clans.
And the boys were sent with the message for the clans.


118 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Qui benebcd vae ru^n Tepeuh,

51. Xebe ^a ri ka mama Caynoh, Cayba^ ru^in
Tepeuh, he hu^i^ic xebe, xax quiyonih chicam ri £alel
Xahil, Ahuchan Xahil; xeapon ^ ru^in Tepeuh. Chi-
nak qui xux, xeucheex ruma Tepeuh oh ru ^hol
£^agavitz, ^i xecha ^ri Caynoh, Cayba^ ; ^i xmacamo
^a Tepeuh, ok xra^axah quitzih, quere^ xe^a^e vi ri
ruma Tepeuh he ta camel ok xebe ru^in.


52. Tok xetak ^ chi ^amoh patan rumal Tepeuh, xe
be ^mo Tu patan ama£^. Mani ^ xe cam vi chuvi tak
amag chi ^amoh patan ; kitzih chi ronohel tixibin qui
puz qui naval ri Caynoh Cayba^ ; tihulhut que ^ohe vi
cha£^a quere ri £a£^, tibirbot ^ quere ri Cabrakan ; qui
quere^ tu xibih vi ri amag ri, ok que apon chuvi tak
ama£^, ronohel ^a xya chique rumal ama£^, qui ^mbal
patan. Chila ^a relebal £ih, xpuvakix vi pe qui xet,
puvak, ba^bal qui xet xux, rumal ama£^ qui ^ambal
patan ; xnimax quitzih, quere xae ru ^hol Tepeuh xux
ruma ri xbanatah xqiban, kitzih elog xeux ruma.

Ri yabcU quixkayl vae.

53. Xebe chi^ e ^mol patan chi Ah^iquinahay, ^i
xerihix ^a chi ^aholal kamama. Chila ^a chi Ah^i-
quinahay xbeya vipe quixhail, xa^ quixet xrayix, puak
ba^bem quixet. Ok xe apon ^i xcha^ Ah^iquinahay :
quekahiah ree ru ^amahal Tepeuh, kitzih tixibin qui
naval; kaya quixhayil, ka ^ma can qui xet; xecha,
maqui ^ xel qui chi ahaua chique Caynoh, Cayba^ ;
xquixibih qui ^oh cuxla xquina xa^ xbe ele£axel


I


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 119

Their Interview With Tepeuh.

51. Our ancestors Caynoh and Caybatz came to Te-
peuh. They entered alone while the Galel Xahil and
Ahucham Xahil remained alone without, When they
reached the presence of Tepeuh : " Who are you ? "
was said to them by Tepeuh. " We are the sons of
Gagavitz," replied Caynoh and Caybatz." Tepeuh mar-
veled greatly when he heard their words : therefore they
were strengthened by Tepeuh as they were humble
before him.

52. They were then sent by Tepeuh to collect the
tribute, and they went forth to take the tribute from the
tribes. No one of the many people died while they
were taking the tribute. Truly all feared the magic
power and wisdom of Caynoh and Caybatz. Where
they were at night it shone like fire, and there was
trembling as of an earthquake. Therefore all the people
were in fear when they came among them, and they were
given all things by the people when they came to take
tribute. Quite to the far East they were paid what
they demanded, precious metals and spun stuff as they
demanded, by the tribes from whom they took tribute.
Mighty were their words. Therefore by these actions
they became the sons of Tepeuh, and by them truly they
became illustrious.

They -Are Given Women.

53. At length they arrived to collect the tribute from
the Ahtziquinahay, who are also descended from our
ancestor. They came to where the Ahtziquinahay were
with their women, and designating what they desired,
they designated metals and spun stuff. When they
came, the Ahtziquinahay said (among themselves) : " Let
us make these messengers of Tepeuh our sons-in-law.
Truly their magic power is terrible. But we will give
them women, and we will take back what they have
designated." So they said, and none of the chiefs went


120 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

quixet chaga, cuma quimeal ahaua ; xa elegal xbe ^elel
quixet tan quevar ; ha ^ quimeal ahaua hun ^un^un-
ganel Mayahauh, Puci ahauh xequi^m ri Caynoh,
Cayba^ qui bi quixhail vae Buba^o ru bi hun, Ycxiuh
rubi hunchic. Mani chi ^ quixet xquina ri ka mama
xe macamo, ^i xe cha ^ : Mixoh y £^alaba, at Ah^i-
quinahay, xtoyevar Tepeuh ckikih ; Xecha : — Ba y xibih
yvij, xtika ya yvix hayil, xquixkahiah, maquina ytzel
xtikaban, quixbe bijx chire Tepeuh, xmaqui chivi xeu-
cheex. Tok xya ^ chiquichin ri quixhail, xebe ^ bijx
chire Tepeuh. Xax maqui chi vi xebe, xquixibih qui
chuvach Tepeuh, cani xquevah qui chupam pec, xeyaloh
chupam pec, chi e van ri xubinaah Pecparu pec, Caynoh
tucheex.


Canobal quickin vae,

54. Tok xe canox ^ ruma chinamit : Oh e ka canoh
kah pop, ba tan e ^o vi, xka£alabaki, xka^axah quitzih
ree xa maqui paal qui tee qui tata, ^i xechari £^ekaquch,
Ba^hol, ^Cavek, Cibakihay chique Caynoh, Cayba^.
Tok xe canay ^ pa pec, que cha ri canoy quichin xe
apon : Oh canoy yvichin, yxkahpop, kitzih vi tan hoye
ka vach, xecha. Cani^ xecha ri Caynoh, Cayba^;
Mani ko be maqui pe ^oh yvahaual £alel ahuchan, chinak
la ^ tiraho chike ? maqui pe oh camel xoh be ru^in
Tepeuh, mani ^ kobe quecam ; na ri xitakeh quitzih,
kobe na ^a hiquibax chi ree Tepeuh ; ^te kobe ; xecha,
xa^ cani xutakeh chinamit ; cani xbe ^amahel hiquibaay
quichin chire Tepeuh ; cani xquicot Tepeuh tok xra^^xah


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 121

forth to Caybatz and Caynoh. These were frightened,
lest some should come during the night and the treasures
they had collected be stolen by the daughters of the
chiefs. And indeed, these did come secretly and stole
the jar of treasures while (the brothers) slept. They
were the daughters of the chiefs Zun^unqun, Ganel,
Mayahauh and Puciahauh. Caynoh and Caybatz took
them as wives ; Bubatzo was the name of one, Icxiuh of
the other. Our ancestors not seeing their treasure were
filled with fear. They cried out : "You have indeed,
ruined us, oh ye Ahtziquinahay! Tepeuh will be angered
against us." They answered : " Be not frightened. We
shall give you wives ; you shall be our sons-in-law ; we
will do you no evil ; you will go speak to Tepeuh and
nothing will be said to you.*' Then wives were given to
them, and they went to speak with Tepeuh. But they
did not reach there, they feared to come before Tepeuh ;
so they hid themselves in a cavern, and they retired into
the cavern. The place where they hid was called by
Caynoh Pecparupec (a cave within a cave).

The Search For Them.

54. Then they were sought for by the tribe. " We
seek our rulers. Where are they? We are truly
afflicted; for we have heard their voices. Neither their
mothers nor their fathers wish to leave them ! " so spoke
Gekaquch, Baqahol, Cavek and Cibakihay concerning
Caynoh and Caybatz. At length they searched in the
cavern, and those who had spoken met them coming :
"We seek you, oh our rulers, and truly we are unhappy,"
said they. Caynoh and Caybatz answered : " We shall
not come if your rulers, the Galel and Ahucham, are not
there. Who would be with us ? Are we not humbled
if we return before Tepeuh ? We shall not come that
they may kill us. Let them take these words, that we
may go forth and be reconciled with Tepeuh. Then we
will come." So said they, and immediately it was carried
to the people. A messenger was sent to report to Tepeuh.


122 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

qui tzihol, xquicot navipe Cakchequele, fo^il Tukuchee,
xquicot ^ Ah^iquinahay ; tok xe canay ka mama.


Caponibal chic vae panche ChiZohom.

55. Xe apon ^ chiri cachbilam chic quixhayil, quere
bila x^et qui vach xquicot ronohel ama£^, tok xeapon
chic. Cani ^ xehi^ax xecam ri £alel Xahil Ah ucham
Xahil, ronohel tzih tok xecam.

56. Xeoc ^ chi ahauarem, Ahpop Xahil xux ri
Caynoh, Ahpop ^mahay xux ri Cayba^, e cay chi ahaua
xeux humah tzih ok xeoc chi ahauarem.

57. Xe ^holan xe mealan ^, ri Caynoh, Cayba^, e
cahi xe ru ^holah hun, e voo xe ru^aholah hunchic, e
belehe chi achi xe qui ^holah ri Caynoh, Cayba^, xe re
^a quitzih tixibin qui puz qui naval ri £agavitz, ^acte-
cauh, Caynoh, Cayba^.

5 8. Ok xecha ^ ri Caynoh, Cayba^ : ti ^akattah ri
kahauarem oh ru pixabam vi ka tata ; que oc tah cay ka
^hol chi ahauarem, xecha. Tok xoc ^ hun ru ^ahol
ahauh Caynoh ahuchan Xahil rahauarem xux, xoc chic
hun ru^hol ahauh Cayba^, galel Xahil, rahauarem
xux, quere^ cahi vi kahaual ri oh Xahila, x^akat
cahauarem ka mama chiqui vach.

Xecam ^ ri Caynoh Cayba^.

59. Xe ^ oquenak can galel Xahil, ahuchan Xahil,
tok xecam ahaua. Cani ^ xoc chic qui^exel ; he caca
qui ^hol xeoc chi ahauarem, ahpop Xahil, ahuchan


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 123

When Tepeuh heard the report he rejoiced, and the Cak-
chiquels rejoiced, and the Zotzil Tukuches and the Ahtzi-
quinahay rejoiced. Then they went forth to seek our
ancestors.

The Arrival Again at the Woods Chigohom,

55. Returning, they arrived together, where were their
wives. Therefore all the tribes rejoiced on seeing their
faces, when they returned. Immediately they caused to
be hanged and executed the Galel Xahil and Ahucham
Xahil, and all their fame perished with them.

56. Then they entered in possession of the royal power.
Caynoh was made Ahpop Xahil, and Caybatz was made
Ahpop Qamahay. Both were kings, and their words
were as one, when they assumed the royal power.

57. Caynoh and Caybatz begat sons and daughters.
The first had four sons and the second five sons, making
nine sons begotten by Caynoh and Caybatz. Terrifying
was the fame of the magic power and wisdom of Gaga-
vitz, Zactecauh, Caynoh and Caybatz.

58. Then Caynoh and Caybatz spoke thus: "Strong
is now our royal power ; we hold the rulership from our
fathers ; let our two sons partake of our power." So said
they. Then a son of Caynoh was placed in possession
of power and was made Ahuchan Xahil, and a son of
Caybatz was placed on the throne and was made Galel
Xahil. Thus we had four rulers, we the Xahila, and
our royal power was established in the presence of our
ancestors.

Death of Caynoh and Caybatz,

59. After the Galel Xahil and the Ahuchan Xahil had
taken possession, the kings died. Immediately their pos-
terity succeeded. Two by two they entered into power,
and the two sons of the sons of Caynoh received homage


124 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Xahil xquikaleh ri e cay ru ^ahol ru^hol ahauh
Cayba^, Caynoh: xeoc chi^ cay ru ^ahol ahauh
Ahpop ^amahay, Xahil £alel Xahil xquikaleh : x^akat
^ cahauarem chiqui vach he ru ^ahol Caynoh, Cayba^,
he nabey ka mama xebano can ri ahauarem, yx nu^hol,
xahun ka tee tata xahun xohbogo oh Xahila.


60. He ^ ki xe^utulakin, xeyamalakin ree; kitzih
chi^iy qui tinamit qui huyubal xux, tok xe^iyar ^ qui
meal qui ^hol, ri e belehe chi achi, ri xe qui ^aholah
ahauh Caynoh, Cayba^: xa ^ ki xcam ahauh Citan
^atu, tok xbiyin ahauarem chiqui vach he ka tata he
ka mama ; kitzih chie ^iy ahaua xux, xax 90I0 cahau-
arem.

61. He ^ ri qui ^hol ^oxahil ^obakil, quere navipe
ri qui ^hol ri £alel Xahil, Ahuchan Xahil, quere^ ri
ru ^hol Ah Cupilcat, rihun x^ce. Xe qui hach ka
mama chiqui vach ke chinamital, xeux chirih ru ^ahol
ahauh ahauh Caynoh, xeoc vi rie qui ^hol ^oxahil
^obakil, xavi^ chiri xeoc vi ru ^hol ri Ahuchan Xahil
ri xehi^ax chirih ahpop, Ahuchan xeoc vi.

62. Xeoc chi ^ chirih Ahpop ^amahay Xahil, £alel
Xahil, ri ru ^hol Ah Cupilcat, xavi ^ chiri xeoc vi e
ru ^hol ri £alel Xahil ri bala xepe vi, ri xeyaoel Ca)moh
Cayba^, xe be ru^in Tepeuh, xa^ xe^ohe chi popol ri
ykoma£^i e huvi chi vinak re ^ ru bi qui tinamite, ri
nabey qui tinamit.

63. Xqui toloba ^ ri ki xe^aker vi conohel xepe chiri
Pantzic, Paraxone; yalabey fimahihay, Panchee, Chi-
£ohom, Chiavar, ^upi ta£ahi, ni^ ya ^otox ul ; re chi^


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 125

as Ah^op Xahil and Ahuchan Xahil ; the two sons of
the chief Caybatz took possession and received the hom-
age of their subjects as Ahpop Qamahay and Galel Xahil.
Thus was the monarchy established during the time of
the children of Caynoh and Caybatz. They were our
first ancestors who established the royalty, O my children ;
but one mother only and one father only brought us forth,
us, the Xahila.

60. They received homage, they received presents ; for
the towns and places were beyond number which were
theirs. Then multiplied the daughters and sons of the
nine sons begotten by the kings Caynoh and Caybatz.
When, however, the king Citan Qatu died, the royal power
was split up among our fathers and ancestors; there
were then many chiefs and the power was divided.

61. There were the sons of Qoxahil and Qobakil, and
the children of the Galel Xahil and the Ahuchan Xahil,
and the sons of Ahcupilcat, of whom our ancestors had
spared life and granted a dwelling place. These made
an opposition to the sons of the king Caynoh. The
children of Qoxahil and Qobakil having begun to rule,
the sons of the Ahuchan Xahil, who had been hanged,
opposed the king, and began to rule as Ahuchan.

62. Against the Ahpop Qamahay Xahil was the Galel
Xahil, son of Ahcupilcat; also the sons of the Galel Xahil
who was with Caynoh and Caybatz and accompanied
them to Tepeuh. They had lived in the sovereignty of
the Ikomagi, a nation whose name is from their city, their
principal city.

63. At that time they abandoned the place where their
dawn had appeared and they all returned to Pantzic and
Paraxone ; they left Cimahihay, Panche, Chiqohom, Chi-
avar, and Tzupitagahi, following the valleys of the river.


126 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ru bi ki xe^utulakin chivie, ^ahcab tinamit, Pe^e, Utzupa
ginona, galaah, Puzbal, ^ali^ahol, Nimgakahpec, Yut
gum Calla, chuvi Xilom, Molinxot, Pa cbalic bak, ^huti
tinamit, ^itan ^ ti^il Akahal vinak chuvi tinamit
O^hal, ^bouil ^ivan, tan ti gagar ahauh Y^halcan
Chicumcuvat, rahaual Akahal vinak.


64. Tok xe apon chi^ e ka mama chiri chuvi tinamit
O^hal, xelogox ^ chiri ruma Akahal vinak, ^ chiri
xu^am viri cahi chi amag ; mahaok ti pax Akahal vinak :
^ ruqaam ok ri ronohel, xa ^ ki rupaxic Akahal vinak.
Ok xtole can ri tinamit O^hal, xa megenalah huyu,
xrokah tagah, ok xapon ral ru^hol ahauh Y^halcan
Xepakay ; chuvi vi te xe ynup, xa maloh yc, xa chom,
xa car xu raih. Xa naak ^a ruyon vinak xapon chiri
tagah, xa^xrah qui hi^ah qui ^ahol ahauh, xa ruma
cachihilal, xax rah y^o qui gagal chiqui vi qui tata,
quere ^a xerah cam vi cuma ahaua ri. Xa ^a hun aga
xeel qui ^ahol, xcokotah vinak chila Panah Chiholom,
Xepakay xe ynup : cani ^ xquicot Akahal vinak, tok
xeka apon ri qui ^hol ahaua tagah. Quere^ tok
xhacho ri Akahal vinak ri, tok xtole ^a can ri tinamit
O^hal, rachpetic ^ Akahal vinak ri ka mama, ok
xlagabex chic ri ^aki^ahol, Nim cakah pec.

Vae xtinu^bah

65. Quibi ri e ka mama xe ahauar oher, ri ki xe gutu-
lakin xe yamalakin, ri ^iy qui tinamit xux,xaki ru camic
ahauh Citan ^atu, tok xbiyin cahauarem ka mama chi
qui vach.

66. Xahauar ahauh Citan ^tu, ru ^hol ahauh Caynoh,
xa vi ^oh ru puz ru naval ri. Ok xahauar chi^a ahauh


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 127

The names of the places that they received homage from
in this journey are the towns Zahcah, Petze, Utzupa,
Ginona, Galaah, Puzbal, Zaliqahol, Nimzakahpec, Yut-
cum, Calla, Chuvi Xilom, Molinxot, Pachalicbak, Chu-
♦ti tinamit, where the Akahal nation had greatly increased,
and where, in the towns of Ochal or Qabouil Civan, the
king Ychalcan Chicumcuvat, chief of the Akahals, reigned
with majesty.

64. Our ancestors then arrived at the town Ochal.
They made themselves liked by the Akahals, and founded
there four towns. The Akahal nation had not previously
been divided ; but at that time they all made a choice and
chose to effect a division of the nation. It was at this time
that they abandoned the town of Ochal, which was in the
warm district, and sought the highland plain, when the
sons of Ychalcan came to Xepakay Seated on the roots,
under the shade of a ceiba tree, they ate chile, and had shell-
fish and fish, as they liked. Then the people of the place,
coming above the plain, sought to hang the sons of the
king for their temerity; for they aimed to surpass the
greatness of their father, and for that reason the chiefs
wished their death. But these princes, making a night
attack, routed the people at Panah, at Chiholom and at
Xepakay, under the ceiba tree. The Akahals rejoiced at
the arrival of the princes on the plain. In consequence
of this event, the Akahals separated, and they left the
town of Ochal, and accompanied our ancestors, and estab-
lished themselves at Zakiqahol and Nimcakahpec.

Here I shall write

65. The names of our ancestors who received the
homage and presents of a great number of towns after
the death of the king Citan Qatu when our ancestors
publicly took the government.

66. The chief Citan Qatu ruled, the son of the chief
Caynoh, to whom were mystic power and wisdom. Then


128 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^otbalcan. Xahauar ^ ahauh Alinam xahauar chi^
ahauh, Xttamer ^aquentol. Ok xoc chi^ ahauh ^hiyoc
Queh ahgug. Haok xmolobax el ahauh galel Xahil
Xulu ^tu chire ^chevinak, xax rah ru yac labal ahauh
chiree xban vi pa ginona ; xban tzaloh chuvach tinamit
ginona; quere^ xya vi el ahauh Xulu ^tu ri cuma
ahaua ^hiyoc Queh, Ttah ttah Akbal, he tan que ahauar,
xax mani chi vi qui covil ahaua kitzih hoye qui vack xux
hoye navipe ru vach vinak xux cuma.

67. Ok xcha ^ ahauh ^ikab chique ahaua: Tila-
gabeh chic y huyubal Chiavar, xeucheex ruma ahauh
^ikab.

Caponibal chic Chiavar vae.

68. Ru tzih ahauh ^ikab, tok xepon chic ka mama
chuvi tinamit Chiavar ^upita£ah, xavi ^a xla£abex can
ronohel huyu ruma vinak, quere navipe xbe cu^in ahaua
ok xquilagabeh tinamit Chiavar, ru chi ^ikab.

69. Xahauar chi^ ahauh Xitayul Hax. Xlagaben
ok tinamit Chiavar ok xahauar Xitayul Hax.

70. Ok xoc chi^ ahauh Xiquitzal chi ahauarem, tan
e ^oh chiri chuvi tinamit Chiavar ^upitagah ; tan ^a ti
gagar ahauh ^ikab chi ahauarem, chila chuvi tinamit
gumarcaah chi Yzmachij, tan ti patanih ronohel amag
chu vach.

71. Ruma ri tan tu cuch ri oxlahu ^hob chi ahlabal
chiri gumarcaah, ^a tahin ok tiqui hunamah ruvach qui
^ha, qui pocob, xqui kagax ^huti amag nima amag,


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 129

ruled the chief Qotbalcan. The chief Alinam ruled.
Next ruled the chief Xttamer Zaquentol. Then followed
in power Qhiyoc Queh Ahgug. In his reign the chief
and Galel Xahil Xulu Qatu gathered together the Quiche
nation, desiring that war should be declared against those
who were attacking Ginona, and were engaged against
the town Ginona. For this reason the chief Xuluqatu
was sent by the chiefs Chiyocqueh and Ttah ttah Akbal,
who then reigned, to say that no mercy should be shown
to the chiefs who commanded the forces of the enemy,
but that the people should be spared.

67. Then the king Qikab said to the chiefs : " Go back
again to your town at Chiavar." Thus spoke the king
Qikab.

Their return to Chiavar.

68. It was by command of the king Qikab that our
ancestors returned to the city of Chiavar and Tzupitagah.
All the towns were occupied by the nation, therefore
they came with the chiefs when these removed to Chia-
var by order of Qikab.

69. The chief Xitayul Hax was then reigning. The
town of Chiavar was peopled during the reign of Xitayul
Hax.

70. At that time also the chief Xiquitzal had power.
They dwelt in the towns of Chiavar and Tzupitagah.
The king Qikab ruled with majesty over all the kingdom
at the towns Gumarcaah and Izmachi, and all the people
paid him tribute.

71. For him the thirteen divisions of warriors assem-
bled at Gumarcaah, and they prepared their bows and
shields. The tribes, great and small, and all the dwellers
in the ravines were conquered, nor did it cost the Quiches


130 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ronohel givan tinamit, maquina xaruyon ^echevinak ;
xuban oxlahu ^hob chi ahlabal xkagan amag, quere
xgagar vi ahauh ^ikab ri.

72. Maqui ^ xe covin ree ^hakab ahaua he ka
mama, ri mix kabijh can, xax qui meztah tzih, quere ri
hoye vi ruvach ^o^il Tukuchee, ri xux, mani qui covil
xhoyevatah ruvach vinak cuma,xqui chup £agal tepeval.

73. He ^a tan que ahauar ri Rahamun, Xiquitzal ; he
^a tan queachihir ri ki e ka mamari Huntoh, Vukuba^,
quibi, tan he gagalah achiha, he kitan que bano labal
ru^in ahauh ^ikab : ^a ^oh ok ^a ka mama Vukuba^
chiri Bogoiya ; chiri ^a Xequiz chee tan ^oh vi Huntoh,
qui mama nima abahi chiri tan que chahin vi el labal,
tan ti tahin ga£alah labal chiri pan Ah Chiholom, tan ti
gagar ahauh Y^hal Amullac, rahaual Akahal vinak.

Haoc xeoc chi ahauar em vac,

74. ^ate^a ok xeahauar ri ka mama ri Huntoh Vuku-
ba^, ^a e ^a ki xe ^amo £a£al tepeual; xeoc na chi
ahauarem ^a tan ok ti ga£ar ahauh ^ikab, ^ hoye ok
ruvach f o^il Tukuchee.

75. Ha^a ri ahauh Vukuba^ ka mama, Citan Tihax
Cablah rubi ru tata ; rix^aholam e ru mam ahauh Citan
^atu, ri Tihax Cablah. Xa xbiyin cahauarem ka mama
chiquivach, xa vi e ru mam ahauh Caynoh, ahauh Citan
^atu, querela xoc vi chi ahauarem ; ka mama ri cumal
ahauh ^ikab, ru^in ronohel ahaua nimak vinak humah
chi ok xoc chi ahauarem ri ka mama Vukua^, Huntoh
quibi xae cay chi ahaua.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 131

anything. The thirteen divisions of warriors conquered
the towns, and thus was increased the glory of the king
Qikab.

72. But half of the chiefs would not listen to the words
of our ancestors which had been spoken to them ; they
forgot the order which had been given to spare the Zotzil
Tukuches, and not to show mercy to the chiefs, and thus
they dimmed the royal power.

73. Those who were then ruling were Rahamun and
Xiquitzal, and among the warriors were our ancestors
Huntoh and Vukubatz. They were famous warriors and
made war under the orders of the king Qikab. At that
time our ancestor Vukubatz was at Bogoiya and Huntoh
was at Xequizche. These men of old, mighty rocks, had
gone forth to war, to wage glorious war with those of
Chiholom, where reigned the chief Ychal Amullac, ruler
of the Akahals.


These Obtain The Royalty.

74. After these things our ancestors Huntoh and Vu-
kubatz reigned, seizing the power and majesty. When
they obtained the royalty, the king Qikab was still reign-
ing, and he had mercy on the Zotzil Tukuches.


75. This chief,^ our ancestor, Vukubatz, had as father
Citan Tihax Cablah, who was the son of the king Citan
Qatu and Tihax Cablah. The latter let the power pass
to our ancestor, and the king Caynoh and the king Citan
Qatu thus obtained the power. Our ancestor, summoned
by the king Qikab and by all the chiefs and leading men,
from all parts, was placed in the royal power, and thus
our ancestors Vukubatz and Huntoh were then the two
kings.


132


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.


76. Xeoc na chi ahauarem ka mama ^te^ ok xqui
lagabeh tinamit Chiavar ^upitagah. Kitzih ^ tan ti
gagar ahauh ^ikab, ok xe ahauar ri ka mama Huntoh
Vukuba^, kitzih vi tixibin que achihir, maqui qui meztam
tzih xavi xere qui ^uxlaam, quitzih he nabey ka tata ka
mama ri ga£avitz, ^actecauh, Caynoh, Caba^, Citan 4^tu.
Kitzih vi ^^oh chic qui puz qui naval ri ahauh Huntoh
Vukuba^, ri ki x^amo £agal tepeual ; kitzih chi ^i ya
amag tinamit, xqui hagah can ru^in ahauh ^ikab, ru^in
ronohel ahlabal ; tanti xibin ru £agal ahauh chuvach
ronohel vuk amag, tanti hunamax labal rumal ronohel
ahlabal ; quere ^a xgagar vi ahauh ^ikab ri. Ronohel
^ tinamit ree xqui ha9ah can, mahaok ti tiquer ^haoh
chirih ahauh ^ikab, ruma ^eche vinak ok xban can : —

Rubi tinamit vae ronohel.

77'


Halic


Ah^humilahay


Vitaum


Lamagi


Lahub


Cumatz


Beleh Cuihay


Rapak


Xubabal


Chichah


gagalyx


Vxa


Hultucur


Ahalquil


^amagekum


Molomic Abah


Chi^otuk


Nimpokom


Chicakyu£


Nacuxcux


Coha


Bulbuxiya


Ah^uruya


Panah


f utum


Chiholom


^hixnal


gekagivan


Molobak


gu£uhuyu


Tox^omine


^ax^an


Tuhallahay


Vukugivan


Vchabahay


Xerahapit.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 133

76. When our ancestors had taken possession of the
royalty, they settled the towns of Chiavar and Tzupitagah.
Truly the king Qikab ruled with great glory when our
ancestors Huntoh and Vukubatz reigned. Those warriors
inspired terror, nor were their histories forgotten, and
the feme was recalled of our first fathers and ancestors,
Gagavitz, Zactecauh, Caynoh, Caybatz, and Citan Qatu.
Truly there were magic power and wisdom in our an-
cestors Huntoh and Vukubatz ; they assumed glory and
majesty. Truly many were the cities and peoples who
submitted to them, and over whom they had triumphed
with the king Qikab and all the warriors. For this great
monarch inspired terror throughout the seven nations,
and his warriors carried war in all directions ; and there-
fore great was the glory of the king Qikab. These are
all the towns which they had conquered before the in-
surrection broke out which the Quiches made against
their king Qikab : —

The Names Of All The Towns.

jj, Halic Ah^humilahay

Vitaum Lama£i

Lahub Cumatz

Beleh Cuihay Rapak

Xubabal Chichah

gagalyx Vxa.

Hultucur Ahalquil

^magekum Molomic Abah

Chi^otuk Nimpokom

Chicakyu£ Nacuxcux

Coha Bulbuxiya

Ah^uruya Panah

^utum Chiholom

^hixnal gekacivan

Molobak c^S^'^^X^

Tox^omine ^ax^n

Tuhallahay Vukucivan

Vchabahay Xerahapit.


134 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

78. Ronohel ^ tinamit ri xquikagah can Huntoh,
Vukuba^ ; ru^in ahauh ^ikab, ^ la£abem ok tinamit
Chiavar ok xquiban can ka mama.

Ru tiqueric ^ ^Jiaoh chirih ^kab vae.

79. Tok xtiquer ^ ^haoh chirih ahauh ^ikab, ruma
^eche vinak ; xavi ru chinamital ahauh xyaco ^haoh, xa
xqiz ru chinamital ahauh chucohol nimak achij : tzukul
richin maqui chi tah xhito ri al^hol xraho ^eche
vinak ; xa xrah rambey akan ruma ^eche vinak, xax
maqui vi ^ xraho ahauh. He pokon re runa ahauh ri
nimak achij, maqui xe ruya ri hitol quij. Quere^ xbe
vi chiuh ahauh ri ruma ^eche vinak, xax qui chup qui
£a£al.

80. He ^a cay ru ^hol ahauh tan que gagar. Tata-
yac rubi hun, Ah Ytza rubi hunchic ; Chituy, Quehnay
qui bi cay chic, xavi e qui ^ahol ahaua : he ^a xe rach
qui chiih ^eche vinak ri, xtiho naek ^ chirichin ahauh
cuma ru ^ahol xax maqui chi vi ^a xeruya ri hitol qui ;
e pokon xeruna ri tzukul richin ; quere^ xbe vi chirih
ahauh ri cuma ru ^ahol. Xax ru^in vi ^ ticako vi
quivach chire qui tata, ri Tatayac Ah ytza, quibi, xax
quihiguh rahauarem ahauh, xquirayih ^a ru xit, ru
puvak, ralabil ru vinak qui tata ; tok xu popoh ^ ru tzih
^eche vinak chiquih nimak achij tzukul richin ahauh ;
xe^iz cam conohel ru nabey tzukul richin ahauh.

81. Va^a quibi cahaual nimak achije: Herech,Tagunun,
Xhu^uy, Eventec, Agacot, Camachal qui bi. Kitzih ^i
yatak cal qui ^ahol, ri hutok ^hob, chi ahpopo. Mani
chi^a x^uluben ahauh cuma ok xecam, tok xoquebex
^a cochoch ahpopo ruma achiha, xe^iz cam ahpopo cuma


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 135

78. All these towns were conquered by Huntoh and
Vukubatz, and by the king Qikab, when our ancestors
settled at Chiavar and made that town.


Beginning Of The Revolt Against Qikab,

79. Then began a revolt against the king Qikab by
the Quiche men ; the family of the king was the cause
of the contest. The family of the king perished with
many of the people. The Quiches would not promise
the homage as vassals which he asked of them. They
wished that the roads should be free to the Quiche
people, which the king would not grant. Therefore
many of the people disliked the king and they would not
pay him their dues. For this reason the Quiches turned
against the king and his glory diminished.

80. The two sons of the king were already distin-
guished. Tatayac was the name of the one, Ah Itza the
name of the other. Chituy and Quehnay were the two
sons of these princes. These took the part of the
Quiches, and the king was thus opposed to his own sons,
who incited the people not to pay their dues, already
irritated on account of their subjection; and thus it came
that the king was against his own sons. Thus Tatayac
and Ahitza were opposed to their father, for they coveted
the royal power, and desired the precious stones, the
metals, the slaves and people of their feither. At this
time there was a council of the Quiches against the war-
riors maintained by the king, and they began to put to
death all those of the first rank in the royal service.

81. These are the names of those of the royal service:
Herech, Tagunun, Xhutzuy, Eventec, Azacot, Camachal.
Then all the populace and the heads of the tribes assem-
bled together. His people did not assemble around the
king that they might not be killed, and the houses of the
rulers were entered by the people and the rulers were


136 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

achiha. maqui ruchi ahauh ; tan ^ ^oh ahauh chuvi
tinamit Panpetak; cani ^ rachcamic ahauh xrah ux
cuma achiha: ru^in navipe qui chij ru^ahol ahauh
xcoquebeh rochoch ahauh Panpetak; cani ^a xelahpe
ahauh ^ikab chique achiha. Querela xtzolih vi achiha
ri Xahil ah popo, xeyaar chi camic ; ^te^a ok xelah
ahauh chique achiha, xutzihobeh ru xit ru puvak ; xu
ya^ cahauarem cah popol achiha, xuyacan £agal tepe-
val chique achiha : ruyo£ ru ^ux ahauh ^ikab chique
ru^ahol ytzel xquiban ri Tatayac, Ah ytza quibi. Querela
x^am vi ahauarem gagal, cuma achiha ri humah chi
amag, tok xya ri oxlahuh chi ahpop chi varabal, chu
chij ama£, xa nimak achij ki ru xe ^haoh, ok xchup
ga£al ^iche ki vi ru chi can ahauh ^ikab. Tok x^m
ga£al chi amag oher, yx ka ^hol ; cani ^a x£il vinak
al^hol, chu nimaxic ahauh ruma achiha, kitzih hoye ru
vach ahauh xux, ^ hunam chivi naek ^a ru vach oxiahu
^hob chi ahlabal chiri, ok xvar ^haoh chirih ahauh
ruma ^eche vinak, ^a nakah ok ^ tutzin ^haoh, ok
xtiquer chic chiquih ka mama.

Ru xe chi^ ^aoh vae.

82. Ok xtiquer chic ^haoh chiquih ahaua Huntoh,
Vukuba^, Chuluc, Xitamal Queh, cahi chi ahaua vae.
Xa^a yxok xyaco chic ^haoh chivih f o^il Tukuche,
Nimapam Xcacauh rubi yxok, ki ru xe chic ^haoh. Xa
ah ^ay vay yxok xbe pa tinamit gumarcaah, xa^a xrah
kup ru vay yxok ruma hun achij qui ^^1 ahaua ^iche :
xa maqui xuya vay yxok chire ^^al, xax he^ ka achij
chi chee rumal yxok. Canih xrah hi^atah achi xrah
cam rumal yxok Nimapan Xcacauh. Querela xyacatah
vi ^haoh ri rumal ^eche vinak ; xata^ xcam ri yxok


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 137

slain by the people ; not by order of the king ; for the king
was then in the village of Panpetak. The populace there
wished also to kill the king. But the orders of his sons
prevailed in the royal house at Panpetak. The king
Qikab humbled himself before the people. Therefore
the people began again to kill those of the house of
Xahil. Again the king humbled himself before the
people, trying to appease them with his precious stones
and metals. He gave up the power of the rulers to the
people and divided with them his royal rights. The
heart of the king Qikab was bruised by his sons Tatayac
and Ah Itza, by that which they had done. Therefore
the royal glory perished at the hands of the people of
all the classes, and the thirteen divisions and the powers
they held were given up, and the glory of the Quiches
was extinguished in the revolt against the orders of the
king Qikab. Then perished the ancient glory of the
nation, O you my children ; for since then the people
acted, and the king is made such by the people. Truly
they had then pity for the king, for the thirteen tribes
having obtained the power, the contest of the Quiches
was ended ; but when it was near its end, it suddenly
broke out anew among our fathers.

Another Revolt Follows.

82. Then another revolt began against the four leaders
— Huntoh, Vukubatz, Chuluc and Xitamal Queh. It was
a woman who was the occasion of this revolt with the
Zotzils Tukuches, a woman named Nimapam Xcacauh,
and she caused the revolt. This woman had come to
sell bread in the town of Gumarcah, and one of the guards
of the Quiche prince had tried to take the bread from her
by force ; the woman had refused to give up the bread
to the guard, and the man was driven away with a stick
by the woman. Then they wished to take and kill the
man on account of this woman, Nimapan Xcacauh.
Therefore the contest was started by the Quiches ; the
Quiches wished that the woman should be killed. But
J


138 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

xraho ^eche vinak; xa^ maqui xya ri yxok chire
^eche vinak, chire ^ achiha cuma ka mama Huntoh
Vukuba^. Xe elahtah ahaua xraho ^eche vinak. Quere
ta ri xuban ahauh ^ikab xcaho achih : he gag chic cani
^a xupopoh rutzih ^eche vinak xcha : Xape xtan tu ^^m
gagal tepeval chi Ahpo90^il, chi Ahpoxahil, xa kami9ah,
xax tanti gagar chi Huntoh chi Vukuba^ ; xeucheex
^a ri ka mama ruma achiha: ^i xrah ^ rutih chic
ahauh ^ikab ru gilic ru camic ^o^il Tukuche. Mani
xa^axan chic rutzih ahauh ruma ^eche vinak : Kitzih
chi^oh ru ^ux ahauh chire Huntoh Vukuba^. Haruma
ri kitzih chi nim ru naobal ^ikab ^i naval ahauh.
Maquina xaquere x£agar ahauh, kitzih tfacibin retamabal,
ha ru ^uxlaam ri xepe vi pa Tullan. He ^ ri achiha, xa
mani quetamabal, xae chu gabom. Quere bila xquil
ga£al maqui xtakex chic rutzih ahauh cuma, quere^
qui yon tanti quiban labal tiquina.

Qui pixababal ^ qui ahaua vae.

83. Cani ^ xel pe ru gamahel ahauh takol ahaua, tok
xhique rucamic ?o^il Tukuche, ruma ^eche vinak. Tok
xepixabam quij ahaua chaga, xcha ^ ri ahauh ^ikab
chique ahauh Huntoh Vukuba^: Mani ru xe mani ru vi
kalabal yvuquin, yxnu^ahol ; mi^ xi^et mixban chu-
vichin : mixrayx valabil nu vinak nu xit nu pavak, quere
chi ^ xtiban chivichin. Co ^ chivichin, yxnu^hol,
yxnuchag nu nimal. Xere vi pixaban ri vae : Mixutzin
malo. Machuvak chipe tiban gagal tepeval vave, xere
viri mixkaban yvuquin, chi toloba can tinamit chiquivach
he ^haol cunum cachak ; maqui e a^xa ytzih, yxnu^a-
hol. ^o huyu tila£abeh pan Yximchee chuvi Ra^amut.
Hay, tinamit tux, xa chiri ti ban vi bay vi ^ovi^ah chi pe


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 139

the woman was not surrendered to the Quiches by our
ancestors Huntoh and Vucubatz. The Quiches, there-
fore, wished to humble these princes, and they wished to
make the king Qikab do this. In anger the Quiches
called a council and said: **Only the Ahpozotzils and
the Ahpoxahils have obtained the glory and the power ;
let us kill them, for only Huntoh and Vukubatz have
glory." Thus did the people speak to our ancestors.
They wished to tempt the king Qikab to harass and slay
the Zotzil Tukuches. But the king would not listen to
the words of the Quiches. Truly the heart of the ruler
was with Huntoh and Vukubatz. For truly great was
the knowledge of Qikab and marvelous the power of this
ruler. Not only was he a king in majesty, but also he
overawed by his learning and the depth of his spirit,
derived from Tullan. Therefore when the people saw
his wisdom, they sought not to instruct him ; they troubled
not his majesty nor accepted the words of the king, but
pursued alone the war which they had wished.


The Orders which were Given to the Rulers.

83. Then the king sent his messenger to announce to
the rulers that the Quiches had resolved on the death of
the Zotzil Tukuches. At the same time he sent to the
rulers that they should come during the night, and the
king Qikab spoke in these terms to the rulers Huntoh
and Vukubatz: "It is neither the beginning nor the end
of this war made against us, O my children. It has been
seen what they have done to me. They have robbed
me of my slaves, my family, my treasures, my precious
metals. * They wish to do the same with you. Go forth,
therefore, my children, my younger brothers, my elder
brothers." Then he gave his orders : " The lot is cast.
Cease at once from the exercise of a power which you
should share with me. Abandon this city to the revolted
populace. Let your words no more be heard, my chil-
dren. Go to where you can establish yourselves, to Ix-


140 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ronohel amag. Ti toloba can ri Chiavar. Yx naek, achih,
vuetah xti ^ulubacan, maqui utz nu tzih ti takeh, xcha
ahauh ^ikab chique ka mama. Tok xe pixaban quij
ahaua, quere^ xtakeh vi rutzih ahauh ri cuma ka mama.
Mani x^ulelaan can ^eche vinak.


Ha ^a ok xe pe Chiavar vae,

84. Ha chi oxlahuh yg, xtole can tinamit Chiavar, ok
xebokotah pe kamama Chiavar, ^upitagah. Ha^a chi
oxlahuh y£, xul xe^at baya quij, hun Akbal ^a xuxlan,
vinak xe^at baya quij, ha ^a chi cay ^at; xla£abex
tinamit chi Yximchee, chuvi Ra^amut. ^a pa ^elah
ok ^a ri pa tinamit chi Yximchee, ok xquilagabeh ka
mama Huntoh, Vukuba^, Chuluc, Xitamal Queh, he
cahi chi ahaua, re rahaual Cakchiquel vinak. Cani^
x^apitah xchapo ri labal ru^in ^eche vinak, cani navipe
xban ^alam ^oxtun cuma kamaa; cani ^a xquicot
ama£ ronohel, tok xla£abex tinamit, ha rumal ri kitzih
e ga£alah achih, ahauh Huntoh Vukuba^. Xae ki
xebano labal ru^in ahauh ^ikab; quere xquicot vi
ahlabal vuk amag rij. Mani chi^a xrucheeh ^eche
vinak, cani xu^m rucovel ronohel amag, cani ^ xul ru
camahel vuk amag ru^in Ahpo90^iI Ahpoxahil, xcha
ronohel ahlabal : Vtz mixpe, nucha£, nunimal Chiavar,
CO chirichin Ahpogo^il, Ahpoxahil, kitzih utz mixul
chiri chi Yximchee ; xa ruyon achih chu ^ux chi Cavek
chi ^eche vinak, xa ruyon £agal chu ^ux, ma xtuban
chi navi^ labal ruyon chi ^echevinak, xcha ru tzih
ronohel vuk amag, ok xul cu^in ahaua. Canix ximo ri
ru tzih ronohel ahlabal vuk ama£, tok lagabex tinamit
chi Yximchee, xa xuyonih chi can ^eche vinak, mani


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 141

imche, on the Ratzamut. Build there houses and a city,
and construct a road on which all the people may pass
and rest. Abandon Chiavar. As for you, people, if you
succeed, may my words come to you as a curse." Thus
spoke the king Qikab to our ancestors. Then the com-
mands were given to the rulers, and the words of the
king were sent to our ancestors. Nor did the Quiches
oppose them.

This is When they Went Forth from Chiavar.

84. It was on the 1 3th day of the month Yg that they
abandoned the town of Chiavar, when our ancestors were
forced to leave Chiavar and Tzupitagah. On the 13th
Yg they descended, burning many roads. On the ist
Akbal they halted, still burning the roads, which made
twice that they burned them, after which they established
the town of Iximche, on the Ratzamut; they founded
the town of Iximche; then settled there our ancestors
Huntoh, Vukubatz, Chuluc and Xitamal Queh, these four
rulers, the sovereigns of the Cakchiquel people. As soon
as they were settled, they placed themselves in readiness
for war with the Quiches, and our ancestors built a
stronghold. All the people rejoiced at the establishment
of the city by these illustrious heroes, the rulers Huntoh
and Vukubatz ; for they had fought on the side of the
king Qikab. Therefore all the warriors of the seven
nations rejoiced. The Quiches could do nothing more,
and soon all the cities recovered their power. Messen-
gers of the seven nations came to the Ahpozotzils and
the Ahpoxahils, and all the warriors said : " You have
done well to leave Chiavar, my brother, my elder ; well
done, Ahpozotzil and Ahpoxahil; you have done well
to come here to Iximche. There was but one brave man
with Cavek and the Quiches, there was but one royal
heart with them ; but hereafter he will not go to war with
the Quiches." Such was the speech of all the seven
nations when they came to visit the rulers. All the
warriors of the seven nations gave their words, when the


142 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

chic xrach^ulchijh. Quere^ tok xquilagabeh tinamit
chi Yximchee ka mama ri, yxnu^hol,mani chi ^a xutih
labal ^eche vinak chirih Cakchiquel vinak, xa xuya chi
pe ru vach ; he ka mama nabey xoc qui£a. Ok xtiho
labal chirih ^eche vinak cuma ka mama Huntoh Vuku-
ba^, ^a lagabem ok ronohel ree ^iz^b tinamit pa
Chakihya pa Xivanul ka vinakil ^ xpe chiri Xechibohoy
Xechituh, xavi ^ cani xulagabeh can ^echevinak ri,
cani ^ ca^hob xoquebex vi ^echevinak cuma ka mama;
ok xcam ri ^iz^b Xechituh cuma ahaua, ok xutoloba
can ^echevinak ri pa Chakihya pa Xivanul : cani xuxi-
bih ^echevinak ok xtiquer labal ok ixcam ri ^iz^ab
Xechituh cuma ahaua cani xeapon ^eche vinak chi la
yail Ah Xivanul ah Chakihya ri, ah San Gregorio ah
Santo Thomas rubi vacami.


85. Tok xqui hach ^a ahaua Huntoh Vukuba^ ri vuk
ama£ nimak achi xtzuku quichin heri Ah Popoya, Ah
Panca£, Ah Holom, Mixcu, Tamyac, ronohel Pokoma :
Querela tagah, Ah Y^iyule, Ah Xeabah, Ah f ak^ucha-
bah, xa e cay chi ahaua xe^mo ronohel xa Huntoh,
Vukuba^: xepatanih vi vuk ama£ nimak achij. He
naek cahi ahaua mani qui covil ri e cay ahaua Chuluc
Xitamal Queh quibi. Cani.navipe xtakex qui £agal ka
mama ruma ronohel vuk ama£, ok xlagabex tinamit chi
Yximchee ; querela ru chupic £a£al ^eche ri, quecha
can ka tata ka mama, yxnu^ahol.

Qui camibal ahaua vae.

86. Ha ^ nabey ahauh Huntoh xcam, ok xcam chic
ahauh Vukuba^. Ka mama ti^il chican tinamit ok
xecam ahaua.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 143

city of Iximche was founded, that they would separate
from the Quiches and would not form an alliance with
them. Therefore, my children, when our ancestors founded
the city of Iximche, the war of the Quiches against the
Cakchiquels had not begun. They had but gazed at each
other. Our ancestors first took the sword in hand. When
war was declared against the Quiches by our ancestors
Huntoh and Vukubatz,the people of Qizqab had inhabited
for a long time the towns of Chakihya and Xivanul, and
our people were settled at Xechibohoy and at Xechituh.
Soon after the Quiches were established, two of their
strongholds were seized by our ancestors ; Qizqab having
been killed by our ancestors at Xechituh, the Quiches
abandoned Chakihya and Xivanul. The Quiches were
frightened at seeing the war begin with the death of
Qizqab at Xechituh by the orders of the rulers. The
Quiches then went down to the streams of those of
Xivanul and of Chakihya, which are called at present
San Gregorio and Santo Thomas.

85. Then the rulers Huntoh and Vukubatz assigned
to the chiefs of the seven nations all their tributaries,
that is to say, the people of Popoya, Pancag, Holom,
Mixco and Tamyac, all of whom were Pokomams ; as for
those on the plains, the subjects of Itziyule, Xeabah and
Zakquchabah, the two rulers, Huntoh and Vukubatz,
reserved these for themselves. The seven nations and
the chiefs were subjected to a tribute. There were four
rulers, but the two named Chuluc and Xitamal Queh
were not important. Soon afterwards our ancestors were
called majesties by all those of the seven nations, at the
time that the city of Iximche was founded. Thus disap-
peared the glory of the Quiches, said our fathers and
ancestors, O my children.

How the Rulers Died.

86. The first who died was the ruler Huntoh; then
the ruler Vukubatz died. Our ancestors had enlarged
the city when they died.


144 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

87. Tok xahauar chi^ ahauh Lahuh Ah rubi, nabey
ru^hol ahauh Huntoh.

88. Tok xahauar chi^ ri ahauh Oxlahuh ^ij rubi,
nabey ru ^hol ahauh Vukuba^, he ^ belehe chi achij
xe ru ^holah ri ahauh ka mama Cibakihay ; Ximox ru
bi rixhayil ahauh Vukuba^. Oxlahuh ^ij ^ rubi ri
nabey ru ^hol, ahauh Cablahuh Ba^ ru bi rucam ;
Chopena Tohin ru bi, rox Chopena ^iquin u^ ru bi
rucah, xetzak ^a pa labal ri e cay ka mama ; Chopena
Tohin xbe tzak Tucuru Cakixala rubi huyu xtzakvi ;
Panatacat, ^a xtzak vi Chopena ^iquin u^a ; Chopena
Queh rubi roo ; Nima Ahin ru vakuk ; Xavi Ahin rubi
chic ruvak, Caok, ^atu quibi he cay chic, e ^a gagalah
achiha ree ronohel ka mama.

89. Ha ^a ri ahauh ka mama Oxlahuh ^ij, quere
navipe ri Lahuhah, kitzih tixibin que achihir, tixibin ^a
quetamabal xa maqui meztah rutzih qui tata qui mama.
Xavi xcuker chican ru^ux al^hol ok xeoc chi ahau-
arem ; xaui xere chican £agal tepeval xquiban chic
ahaua ; ^iy chi navipe nimak labal xquiban xcam chi^a
ahauh Lahuhah. Ok xoc chic ahauh Cablahuh Tihax
rubi, nabey ru ^hol ahauh Lahuhah, xavi ha ahauh
Oxlahuh ^ij tan tahauar ok xahauar chic Cablahuh
Tihax: xavi xere qui £a£al ahaua xux chican, xa^a ki
ru camic ^ikab, ri naual ahauh chila ^echee, ok xutih
chic labal ^eche vinak chirih Cakchequel vinak. Ha
^atan que ahauar ^iche ri Tepepul, Yztayul quibi, tok
xtzain chic ru ^ux ^eche vinak chiri tinamit chi
Yximchee. Ki ^a tan nima vayhal tok xban xax ka
nima teuh xcami^an avan pan Uchum, xyaar avan ruma
teuh, querela x^ach vi echa ri, que cha ri y mama.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 145

87. Then began to reign the ruler Lahuh Ah, first of
the sons of the ruler Huntoh.


88. At the same time reigned the fuler Oxlahuh Tzii,
oldest son of the king Vukubatz. These are the nine
rulers begotten by our ancestor, the chief Cibakihay : —
Ximox was the name of the wife of Vukubatz ; Oxla-
huh Tzii was her eldest son; the chief Cablahuh Batz was
the second; Chopena Tohin was the third; Chopena
Tziquin Uqa was the fourth. These last two ancestors
perished in battle. Chopena Tohin was slain at the place
called Tukuru Cakixala, and Panatacat was the spot where
fell Chopena Tziquin Uqa. Chopena Queh was the fifth ;
Nima Ahin was the sixth ; Xavi Ahin was the name of
the seventh, and Caok and Qatu were the two others.
All these ancestors of ours were equally illustrious.


89. These kings, our ancestors, Oxlahuh tzii, and
Lahuh ah, truly they frightened by their bravery, they
frightened by their knowledge, for they had not forgotten
the words of their fathers and ancestors. The hearts of
their subjects were calm when these princes assumed the
power, and they exerted authority and control. They
had made many and great wars when the king Lahuh ah
died. Then came the king named Cablahuh Tihax, oldest
son of the king Lahuh ah; but Oxlahuh tzii continued to
reign, Cablahuh Tihax ruling jointly with him. In truth,
the glory of these rulers was not fully established until
after the death of Qikab, when the magician-ruler of
Quiche and the Quiches recommenced the war with the
Cakchiquels. At that time there ruled at Quiche Tepepul
and Iztayul, and the Quiches regarded with jealousy the
city of Iximche. At that time there occurred a great
famine, brought about by great cold, which had destroyed
the harvests in the month Uchum, and the harvests were
lost through this cold. For this reason, say our ances-
tors, the food was all consumed. A fugitive Cakchiquel


146 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

yxnu^hol. Ok xu ^m lea ^.eche vinak, xa^ hun
achi, anom xel Cakxiquel xapon ^^che ha, xaponi^an ni
tzihol vayhal ^ichee, ^i xcha achij : kitzih tan nima vayh,
mani tu^hih chic vinak ruma vaihal, ^i xcha tok xapon
^ichee. ^i quere^ xhique vi ru camigaxic Cakchiquel
ri ruma ^che vinak camel chu ^ux.

Ru petebal vae.

90. Tok xpe ^ xubok pe ri pa tinamit £umarcaah,
x^iz pe ronohel ahaua ; xpe ^ qui ^bouil ri Tohohil ;
humah ^ ronohel achiha xpeul ; maqui ahilam chi
vinak, maqui xa hu chuvy, ca chuvy xpe, xul ^ chi
amag, chiri ^u^um ah vi ul xpopon vi ul chiri, ok
xvikon ^ chi ^ha, chi pocob, chi tooh, chi tunatiuh,
£u£, chi tunatiuh ^ubul, chi ^alvach puak abah,ca utal
ok xpeul chiri.


91. Ha ^a chi lahuh ^ij, rucam ka ^eche vinak chi
Yximchee, ^i mani ^ ru tzihol cu^in ka mama Oxla-
huh ^ij, ha Cablahuh Tihax, ok xpeul ^echevinak,
camicay richin (Jo^il Tukuchee. Xa^a anom achij
xka9an pe, rutzihol camic ru^in ahaua ; cabih tibin camic,
mix^izpe ronohel ^eche vinak, camicay richin vinak
tinamit, xtoquebex, kitzih tixibin mixpeul, maqui xa hu
chuvy ca chuvy achiha, xcha ri achi anom ok xul Cak-
chiquel. Cani ^ xepopon ahaua xecha : xaha rutaon,
utz mixpe xti katih ki ru^in ^iche vinak, xecha ahaua.
Cani ^a xel camol bey, xel ^ hu ^hob achiha ramonel
chirih ^eche vinak, xramatah vi xa^a ruyon ah tinamit
x^ulelaan, ri xkape pa nima bey chuvi huyu ^at beya
qui, xu^ulelaah ^a ru ^ulel Ah Tiba^oy, Ah Raxakan,


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 147

informed the Quiches of this, bringing to the Quiches
the news of this famine: and this man said: "Truly, it
is a great famine, and the people cannot suffer the pains
of this hunger." So he said on arriving among the
Quiches. Therefore the death of the Cakchiquels was
decided on by the Quiches, and destruction was in their
hearts.

What Took Place.

90. Then took place the defeat at the town of Gumar-
caah and the humiliation of all the princes. They brought
out their god Tohohil and the people came in crowds ;
the multitude was innumerable; it was not merely in
battalions of eight thousand and sixteen thousand men,
but they came by villages and districts. They came in
battle array, with their bows, their armor and their
weapons, their brilliant plumes, their shining circlets,
their head decorated with crowns of gold and precious
stones ; this was the manner of their coming.

91. It was on the day loth Tzy that occurred the
destruction of the Quiches at Iximche; but the news of
it had not yet reached our ancestors, Oxlahu tzii and
Cablahuh Tihax, when the Quiches came to destroy the
Zotzil Tukuches. A fugitive came bearing to the chiefs
the news that they were to be slain : " Day after to-morrow
they will slay you. All the Quiche nation will come to
slay and destroy the people of the city, which they will
enter by force ; truly their entry will be terrible, for they
are many more than eight thousand or sixteen thousand
men." Thus spoke this fugitive when he arrived among
the Cakchiquels. The chiefs immediately assembled in
council and said : " Listen ! It is a good thing that we
are to measure ourselves against the Quiches." Thus
spoke the chiefs. Immediately they sent forth messen-
gers. One division of the people formed and went forth
to meet the Quiches, and the inhabitants alone went forth
to battle. They went by the main road to the summit


148 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

xavi ^ xu ^apihel ru bey Ah galeah, Ah Pa^aki uleuh,
Ah ginoma.


92. Tok xucavuh ^a ri achiha chi ^haa, chi pocob,
chi tooh xa^elavachim chic ok xkaul.


Ru camibal ^ ^che vinak,

93. Ki ^a pacac ru xe cah xkah pe chuvi huyu, cani
^a xboz ci^ yuyub, cani navipe xpae ru lakam, xgahan
^a 9ubak, ^habi tun, xivac. Kitzih ti xibin ok xka pe
i|.eche vinak. hucumah xka pe chi ^otoh, xmukutah yan
ri ^otoh, xka chipe xe huyu, ki na ^ xul chu chi ya,
celahay ya, xavi ^a tzekel pe ahauh Tepepul Yztayul,
xavi rachbilam pe ru ^abouil. Tok xpe ^a ul ri ramonel
chirih, kitzih tixibin ok xpe ul, cani xgahan ci^ yuyuh,
9ubak, ^habitun, xivac, xu^ut ru puz, ru naval achiha :
cani ^ xu cahmah ^echevinak, mani chic x^ulelaan,
cani xpaxin rij xyaar chi camic ^echevinak, maqui
ahilam xcam. Quere^ x^ce xtelecheex xquiya quij,
ahaua Tepepul Yztayul xuya ri qui ^abouil. Quere^
ru £alel achij, rahpopachi ru mam ru ^hol ahauh ahxit
ahpuvak, ah^ib, ah^ot, ronohel achiha, kitzih xyaar
chicamic, mahilam maqui xahu chuvy, ca chuvy chi
^eche vinak xu cam ka Cakchiquel, oher, quecha ka
tata ka mama, yxnu^hol; ha^a ahauh Oxlahuh ^ij,
Cablahuh Tihax he navipe Vooymox, Rokelba^in xebano
maquina xaquere x£a£ar huyu chi Yximchee.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 149

of the mountain, burning everything on the way. They
met in conflict the battalions from Tibaqoy and Raxakan,
and closed the road to those of Galeah, of Pazaki uleuh
and Ginoma.

92. Then all the men took up their bows, their shields
and various weapons, awaiting the arrival of the enemies.

The Destruction of the Quiches.

93. When the dawn appeared, they (the Quiches) de-
scended from the hills, the cries and shouts of war broke
forth, the banners were displayed ; then were heard the
drums, the trumpets and the conches of the combatants.
Truly this descent of the Quiches was terrible. They
advanced rapidly in rank, and one might see afar off their
bands following one another, descending the mountain.
They soon reached the banks of the river, the houses by
the water. They were followed by the chiefs Tepepul
and Iztayul, accompanying the god. Then it was that
the battalions met. Truly the encounter was terrible.
The cries and the shouts, the noise of the drums, the
trumpets and the conches resounded, mingled with the
enchantments of the heroes. The Quiches were routed
in all directions, not one fought, they were put to flight
and delivered over to death, and no one could count their
slain. A great number of them were taken prisoners,
together with the kings Tepepul and Iztayul, who de-
livered up their god. Thus the Galel-achi, the Ahpop-
achi, the grandson and son of the chief jeweler, the
treasurer, the secretary and the chief engraver and all
the people were put to the sword. The Quiches who
were then killed by the Cakchiquels were not counted
by eight thousand or sixteen thousand ; so said our
fathers and ancestors, O my children. Such were the
deeds of the kings Oxlahuh Tzy and Cablahuh Tihax, as
also of Vooymox and Rokelbatzin. Thus, and not other-
wise, did they make glorious the city of Iximche.


150 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Ru camibal chic ahauh Y^hcd vae {Amolac, Lakuk

Noh, Chicumcuai) .

94. ^tan ru lagabem ok Akahal vinak ri chuvi tinamit
chi Holom £ugu huyu ^ax^an ha^ tan tahauar ri
Y^hal Amolac, xa^axbe boy chij xka ruma qui gamahel
ahaua Oxlahuh ^ij, Cablahuh Tihax, xucheex : Ti pe
tab rachihilal ahauh vican nu mama, ka hunamah chic ka
^ha, ka pocob ru^in, ha ri ^eche vinak mixrah nu tih
chic labal chirih nu civan nu tinamit, mi ^ xnuban
richin chi ^eche vinak ; ka tiha chi ^ labal ru^in, ti ^iz
pe ul rachihilal ahauh, xucheex tok xboy chiix Y^hal.
Cani ^ xhique ru ^ux ahauh : Utzan chirichin Ahpo-
90^il, Ahpoxahil, ti^il vachihilal ti^iz be ronohel vachi-
hilal, yn ^ nun quibe, tibe vetamahel huyu Cakchiquel,
tibe kabanael labal cu^in vica£ nu mam, cani xcha
ahauh Y^hal chique ^amahal.


95. Cani ^a xequicot ahaua tok xel pe ru tzihol ahauh
Y^hal, cani xquipopoh quitzih ahaua chirih Y^hal: Utz
mixpe cani ti ka chup ru vach maqui ti kele^ah chic kivi
^axto^ chi Y^hal, xecha ahaua cani xhique ru camic
cuma ka mama — Hunahpu ^ian, Nimagahay, Ahci^ahuh,
^hooc Tacatic, ^imahi Piaculcan, Xumak Cham, xcak
vachitah ruma ulamach puvaka, raponic xehuna cauh.


96. Tok xpe ^a ul ahauh Y^hal, tzatz rachihilal xpe
naual ahauh ^a ri Y^hal, xcha can ru pixa chi rochoch :
Vue quinul vue maqui chic quinul, vue yn camel ; vae
xquibe xcha can ahauh. Ok xpe ul cani xuna ahauh, ki
^a tel pe ^akli^ahol ri ahauh ; tok xuna, xcha : Ti^eta


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 151

The Death of the Chief Ychal {Amolac^ Lahuh

Nohy and Chicumcuat).

94. Meanwhile the Akahals occupied the towns Ho-
lom, Guguhuyu and Qaxqan, having for king Ychal
Amollac. Messengers were sent to him by the kings
Oxlahuh tzii and Cablahuh Tikax, with the order that he
should come down, and they said : " Let the bravery of
the king be made manifest to our ancients, let us measure
with him our bows and our shields. The Quiches wished
to try their arms against our ravine and our city, and
we have dealt with the Quiches. Let us now try this
one in war; let the king come and show his valor."
Thus did they say and sent this word to Ychal. The
heart of the king was soon resolved. " Let it be accord-
ing to the desire of the Ahpozotzils and Ahpoxahils. I
will increase my strength and I will go and show them
all my valor. I will go alone ; I will see what is the
place of the Cakchiquels ; I will go down to make war
with the descendants of my grandfather." Thus spoke
the king Ychal to the messengers.

95. The chiefs rejoiced when the words of Ychal
reached them, and the chiefs took counsel in words
against Ychal : *' It is well that he be hidden from the
light, that we disobey not the Demon on account of
Ychal." Thus spoke the princes. Then his death was
resolved upon by our ancestors — Hunahpu Tzian, Nima-
zahay, Ahciqahuh, Qhooc Tacatic, Tzimahi Piaculcan and
Xumak Cham, who were envious of his person on account
of the riches that he had, and the height to which he had
raised his courage.

96. Then the king Ychal went forth, and a great num-
ber of distinguished warriors went with the king. He
was profound in knowledge, and he left these words to
his house : " Whether I return^ or whether I do not re-
turn, my death is at hand." The king departed, saying
these words. When it was known that the king was on


152 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

na ^ak, chun gakcab quixbanon quix vikon baka ki
xbi^ah ki chuvach (Jo^il Tukuchee, xcha chique rachi-
hilal. Quere^ ok xtzolih ^hakap ru hay ru chinamit,
tok relic chic ahauh lahuh Noh.


97. Xa ^ ^elavachiym chic ok xul pa tinamit chi
Yximchee, hiquilibem chic ru camic, banoninak chic
achiha tok xul ; pan pop ^ xtakevi ok xul ; xaki
xrulibeh tok xcam ahauh ru^in ronohel rachihilal:
xchapol richin ri yacol cu^i ya, tok xoc apon, xe yaar
chicamic Akahal vinak. Quere^ rucamic Y^hal
Amolac ri chi Yximchee. Va^ quibi rachihilale, ri
xecam ru^in, he nimak achiha : ^oroch, Hukahic,
Tameltoh, Huvarahbix, Vail^hol, queucheex, he £aga-
lah tak achiha, ^iy ^a chubinem achiha xcam. Quere^
rukahic tinamit chi Holom, ri ^iy ^a ^ovi Akahal vinak
chuvi tinamit, ^ax^an, Ralabal Y^, guguhuyu, Vuku-
givan. Xavi ^ax ^iz cam chic ri ronohel tinamit cuma
ahaua Oxlahuh ^iy, CablahuhTihax, xrah ^a ru lagabeh
chic, Xerahapit, ru kaxba chi chic Akahal vinak, ^
chiri ^ xtoge vi ru camic.

Ru camibal chic Caoke vae.

98. Paraxtunya, Belehegih rubi ahauh. Xax rach^ul
chijh ahauh Voo Caok, Ah^iquinahay ; xa xu^olrih
labal Caoke, labal ru ^ux. Cani xuban ru ^oxtun ru
^otoh, £agal chic xraho ahauh Belehe gih : tok xecha
^a ahaua Oxlahuh ^ij, Cablahuh Tihax, ok xa^ xax
ru tzihol qui ^olbol labal : ki vi pe chi ytzel ru ^ux chi
Ah^iquinahay chi Belehe gih, tan qui ru 50I chuvih chi


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 153

the road, the people came to carry him on their shoulders.
When he heard them he said : " Look to your walls ;
look to your lime and your war paint ; be prepared and
your arms at hand, that you appear not cast down before
the Zotzil Tukuches." Thus he spoke to his warriors,
and they returned in midway to their houses and vil-
lages. The chief came on the day loth Noh.

97. His face was sorrowful as he entered the city of
Iximche, where they were consulting of his death. It
had been decided upon by the chiefs when he came. At
his arrival he was called to the council, but no sooner
was he entered than he was slain, and his brave com-
panions with him. His cup bearer was seized as soon
as he entered, and was slain, as of the Akahal nation.
Thus perished Ychal Amolac at Iximche. These are the
names of the warriors who perished with him, all distin-
guished men : Zoroch, Hukahic, Tameltoh, Huvurahbix,
Vailgahol ; thus they were called, these noble men, who
went forth to die with him. Thus it came that the city
of Holom was conquered, as also the towns of Qaxqan,
Ralabalyq, Guguhuyu and Vukucivan, where dwelt many
people of the Akahal nation. All the towns finished by
yielding to the arms of the kings Oxlahuh tzy and
Cablahuh Tihax. Desiring to repeople Xerahapit, the
Akahal nation were transferred there, and there they
bewailed their dead.

The Death of Caoke,

98. At Paraxtunya, Belehe gih by name was chief He
had made an alliance with the chief Voocaok, the Ahtzi-
quinahay. Caoke was inclined to war, and war was in
his heart. Having built a stronghold with ditches, Be-
lehe gih desired the supreme power. The kings Oxla-
huh tzy and Cablahuh Tihax learning these preparations
for war, said : " Truly there is an evil mind in the chiefs
Ahtziquinahay and Belehe gih. They have turned war
toward us, and the chief Caoke has already in his heart

K


154 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

nu vach, mi xu^m £a£al chu ^ux chi Caoke utz ka
bana labal ru^in, xecha ahaua. Cani ^ xhique ru
camic Caoke, xbe achiha cami^ay richin, kitzih ^ achih
Caoke, ru nah xcam, ^ roxlah xka ru tinamit, xutih ru
£ih Caoke oxlahuh chi£ih, xban tzaloh, ok xka tinamit
Paraxtunya cuma ka mama Oxlahuh ^ij, Cablahuh
Tihax, xcaminak ok ^ ronohel ri mixkabijh can.


Tok xban ^ yuhuh chi Yxinuhe.

99. Vae xa vuleuh ri ru xe ^haoh xtiquer Akahal
vinak qui ^ulel Tukuchee ; xax ^ot cavex Akahal vinak
cuma Tukuchee ; cani ^ xchapo ri xgagin ri vinak tok
x^ot avex, tzam Chi^ib xban vi oher ruma vinak.

100. Xa^ £ana vinakil quichin ahaua Cablahuh
Tihax, Oxlahuh ^ij ruma Tukuchee, ruma Akahal vinak,
ha^ tan cahaual Tukuchee ri Cay Hunahpu ru bi, atzih
vinak Cavek, he navipe ri ahaua ^iria Yyu, Tox^om
Noh qui bi ; xa^ xret vachih ru £a£al ri ahauh Cay
Hunahpu, xa ^iy ral ru^^ol, xa^ maqui xya Akahal
vinak chi camic chirichin ruma Ahpop^o^il Ahpopxahil,
camel tah Akahal vinak chu ^ux Cay Hunahpu ; quere^
xebe vi chirih ahauh Cablahuh Tihax, Oxlahuh ^ij
ruma Cay Hunahpu, xax ru^in vi ^a xcako ruvach chire
Ahpopqo^il Ahpopxahil, xata ruyon xahauar xraho
ahauh. Tok xnimatah ^a ^haoh cuma ahaua, ha ahauh
Cay Hunahpu ki xahoon ru banic yuhuh, ha ^ari ahauh
Cay Hunahpu kitzih labal ru^ux, xax maqui chivi xraho
ahauh xelahibex ruvach cuma ahaua, Oxlahuh ^ij, Cab-
lahuh Tihax, xa nima tahinak chic ahauh, tok xelahibex
ruvach, he maqui yuhuh cahoom ahaua al^hol, pokon


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 155

assumed the supreme power. Let us give them war."
So said the chieftains, and from that time the death of
Caoke was resolved upon. Warriors set out to slay him.
But Caoke was brave, and, far from yielding, thirteen
times he descended from his town and for thirteen days
endeavoreti to save his life. Finally the town of Parax-
tunya having been assaulted, it was captured by our an-
cestors Oxlahuh tzy and Cablahuh Tihax, who put to
death all whom we' have named.

Then the Revolt Took Place at Iximche.

99. A question of land was the real cause of the
struggle, when the Akahals strove with the Tukuches,
because the harvests of the Akahals had been destroyed
by the Tukuches. Those who beat the persons injuring
the harvests were seized at the point of Chiqib, the place
where this took place among those men of old.

ICX). The judges in this affair were the kings Cablahuh
Tihax and Oxlahuh tzy, for the Tukuches ; and for the
Akahals, the Tukuche chief called Cay Hunahpu, the
head chief Cavek, and the chiefs Qiriayu and Toxqom-
noh. One could see in Cay Hunahpu the demeanor of
supreme power, and he had many vassals ; but the Ah-
popzotzils and the Ahpopxahils refused to deliver up to
him the Akahals to be slain. For already in his heart
Cay Hunahpu had resolved to destroy the Akahals.
For this reason there was a revolt against Cablahuh Tihax
and Oxlahuh tzy, by the instigation of Cay Hunahpu;
for this chief disliked the Ahpopzotzil and the Ahpop-
xahil, and would have liked to rule alone. Thus the
revolt spread among the chiefs. The chief Cay Hunahpu
desired the revolt; for this chief Cay Hunahpu had
resolved in his heart the revolt, and he could not be
satisfied until he had forced the kings Oxlahuh tzy and
Cablahuh Tihax to humble themselves that he might
become great. Then these princes did humble themselves,
that there should not be a conflict between their people,


156 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

xquina ; quere^ kitzih xibin ri quichin ahaua xuna Cay
Hunahpu xax maqui chivi xraho x£il.


loi. Tok x^hique ^a £ih xbanvi yuhuh ruma ahauh
Cay Hunahpu, ha chi hulahuh Ah xban yuhuh : tok
xuhuruh ^a el rij Tukuchee pa tinamit ^haka ya xbe ti
^e vi el ronohel ^a rachihilal Tukuchee, xoquiben
tinamit; maqui ^a xcaho rachihilal ahauh Cablahuh
Tihax Oxlahuh ^ij ; xa hu ^hob achiha xchagobem
quitzih ahaua ah Xechipeken, rahpop achi Cinahitoh
ru bi achi tan tachihir chiri Xechipeken.


Ru camibal Tukuchee va kitzih xyaar chi camic.

102. Ki ^a ti pacatah ru xecah chi hulahuh Ah xboz
pe Tukuchee ^haka tinamit, cani x£ahan ru ^ubak, ru
^habi tun ahauh Cay Hunahpu, vikital chi tooh, chi
tunatiuh £ug, chi tunatiuh ^ubul, chi ^alvach puak
abah. Ok xboz pe ^haka ya, kitzih tixibin maqui
ahilam chi Tukuchee, mani xahu chuvy, ca chuvy. Tok
xtiquer ^ tzaloh chuvach tinamit tzam £am, x^ulu vi
ri labal ha^a Chucuyba^in ^amol yuhuh cuma Tuku-
chee ; xa^a e cahi chi yxoki xevik chi achcayupil qui
^ha xqui^exevachibeh labal, hunelic rucahichal ral ; qui
^ha xoc chuva ru pop Chucuyba^in ruma achiha : tixi-
bin chi nima yuhuh xquiban ahaua oher; ha ^amol
tzaloh ^ate xqui^ut chic qui tiohil yxoki chuvach pa
?o^il pa Xahil ^ak xeel vi yxoki ; kina xeel pe chiri
tok xboz chi^a hu ^hob pa nima bey chi nima ^otoh,
ruyon ^a achiha ri ah Tiba^oy, ah Raxakan hucumah


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 157

and they grieved deeply. Thus did Cay Hunahpu frighten
these two kings ; but he could not be satisfied without
using violence.

loi. The day of the revolt was appointed by this chief,
Cay Hunahpu, and on this day, i ith Ah, the revolt broke
out. Then the Tukuches were drawn out of the city, to
the other side of the river, and all the Tukuche warriors
went there also, that they might enter the city; but the
warriors of the kings Cablahuh Tihax and Oxlahuh tzy
opposed them. One division of warriors was enough to
drive them off, encouraged by the words of the kings, a
division from Xechipeken ; and these of Xechipeken, with
their ruler the counselor Cinahitoh, distinguished them-
selves by their bravery.

The Destruction of the Tukuches, who were, in

fact, Massacred.

I02. When the dawn appeared on the day nth Ah,
the Tukuches began on the opposite side from the city,
and the drums and trumpets of the chief Cay Hunahpu
were heard. Then the warriors armed, and displayed
their brilliant feathers and shining banners, and gold and
precious stones. Then it began on the other side of the
river, and truly it was terrible for the number of the
Tukuches, who could not be counted by eight thousands
nor by sixteen thousands. The battle began before the
city, at the end of the bridge where Chucuybatzin, placed
at the head of the struggle by the Tukuches, had brought
the fighting. There were four women who had armed
themselves with lances and bows, and taken part in the
battle, fully equal to four young men. The arrows
launched by these heroines struck the very mat of
Chucuybatzin. Truly it was a terrible revolt which the
chiefs made of old. The chiefs of the battle afterwards
set up the images of these women before the buildings
of the Zotzils and the Xahils, whence these women had
gone forth. As they departed, there suddenly appeared


158 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

^a xpaxel ri pa nima bey; xa cay xutzak can ri ok
xpaxel, ha^ ri xka ul ^haka tinamit xyaloh tzaloh,
ha^ xramon ri rahpop achi Cinahitoh ah Xechipeken.


103. Tok xpe ^ ramonel chirih Tukuchee, cani ^
xucahmah mani chic x^ulelaan canih xpaxin rij, xyaar
achiha, xyaar yxok aqual chi camic, xuyari ahauh Cay
Hunahpu, xuya ^ ri ahauh ^iriniyu, Tox^om Noh,
ronohel ^a ru mam ahauh ru ^hol ahauh. Cani^ xbe
^eche ri Ah Tiba^oy, Ah Raxakan, xbe ^ ^utuhil
^hakap, xhito ^ ri ronohel chucochol al^hol, xpaxin
ri ronohel. Quera^a tok xyaar Tukuchee ri oher,
yxnu^ahol, he^a ka maa Oxlahuh^ij, Cablahuh Tihax
xebano, chi hulahuh Ah, ^a xban xpax Tukuchee.

104. Ru hulahu vinak ok ^ tiban yuhuh, ok xrah
cam chic Ah Tiba^oy, ruma ^echevinak, haok xbe tiqeel
Tukuchee Chiavar, xyaar ^eche vinak chi camic chiri,
xtzak can Yaxon ^ui ru bi, chi belehe Caok.

105. Ru vaklahu vinak, ok tiban yuhuh, xcam chic
Cinahitoh, xax rah rumah ahauh atzih vinak Ahmoxnay,
xa ruyon chi Chinahitoh xax rah y^o ru £agal chi qui
vi ahaua, querela xyaar vi Cinahitoh ri ^iy chubinem
achiha xcam pa tinamit chi hulahuh Can xban.

106. XIauheh oktel huna yuhuh xhi^ax chic ahauh
atzih vinak Ahmoxnay, chi hulahuh Akbal, xa xuhaeK
coboyel ahaua, ha xcam ri ahauh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 159

a division in the high road near the deep trenches. It
rapidly scattered the warriors of Tibaqoy and Raxakan
on the high road. Only two of the men fell in this
encounter, and he who led them beyond the city to
prolong the combat was the same who had gained the
previous victory, the counselor Cinahitoh of Xechipeken.

103. Then began a general attack on theTukuches;
they were cut to pieces at once; no one resisted; the
rout was complete; men, women and children were given
up to slaughter. The chief Cay Hunahpu was slain;
the chiefs Tziriniyu and Toxqom Noh all perished, as
well as their fathers and children. Immediately those of
Tibaqoy and Raxakan retired, partly to Quiche, partly
among the Tzutuhils. They mingled with their subjects
and were thus dispersed. Such was the destruction of
the Tukuches, in old times, O my children. It was our
ancestors Oxlahuh tzy and Cablahuh Tihax who, on the
day nth Ah, undertook and accomplished the dispersion
of the Tukuches.

104. Thirty-one days after the revolt, as the Quiches
desired to destroy those of Tibaqoy, these Tukuches
removed to Chiavar and put to death the Quiches, who
yielded in a battle at a place named Yaxontzui, on the
day 9th Caok.

105. On the 36th day after the revolt Cinahitoh
perished, because he coveted the position of the orator
Ahmoxnay. Cinahitoh wished to exercise the power
alone, above the chieftains, therefore Cinahitoh was con-
demned by all the chiefs, and his death was carried into
effect in the city on the day nth Can.

106. One year less ten days after the revolt was hanged
the chief orator Ahmoxnay on the day nth Akbal. This
chief perished because he had stopped the messengers of
the ruler.


160 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Chi vahxaki Ah xel huna yuhuh.

107. Xa^a halachic matel ru caba ru camic Tukuchee,
ok xcam chic ^utuhile pa ^akcab, ha chi hun Ahmak ;
xyaar chic ^utuhile chi camic, xqui ya qui ahaua
Nahtihay, Ah^ibihay; xa ^a ha chic maqui xu ya ri
ahauh Vookaok Ah^iquinahay, ha chic xtzain ru ^ux
chirih Cakchiquel.

Chi voo Ah xel ru caba ru banic yuhuh.
Chi cay Ah xel oxi huna ru banic yuhuh.

108. Ha chi oxi Queh xban chic yuhuh ^eche, xbe ru
^ul vachih chi el Tukuchee yuhuh chiri ^iche.

Cablahuh Ah xel ru cah huna yuhuh.


109. Chupam voo huna xcam chic Ah Mixcu tzukul
richin ahauh Cablahuh Tihax xax rah ru £a£arigah ri ;
chi Vuku Camey, xka ru tinamit Ah Mixcu, xyaar chi
camic ruma achiha.


no. Ok xcam chi^a Yaqui Ah Xivicu, xax rach ^ul
chijh ahauh voo kaok rahaual Akahal vinak, haok xti^e
chic chuvach huyu, Akahal vinak, xrah £agar chic chiri.


III. Vagih ok ^atel Voo rubanic yuhuh ok xcam chic
Akahal vinak chuvach huyu, xaxrah £a£ar chic ahauh
chu vach huyu.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 161

The day 8 Ah was one year after the Revolt.

107. It was not much less than two years after the
defeat of the Tukuches, when the Tzutuhils were defeated
at Zakcab on the day 1st Ahmak. The Tzutuhils were
cut to pieces and their rulers Nahtihay and Ahqibihay
were slain. Only Vookaok, the Ahtziquinahay, could
not be conquered, and he tried his fortune against the
Cakchiquels.

The day 5 Ah was two years after the Revolt.
The day 2 Ah was three years after the Revolt.

108. On the day 3 Queh there was a revolt in Quiche.
The Tukuches went to take part, and joined in the revolt
in Quiche.

The day 12 Ah completed the fourth year after the
Revolt.

109. During the fifth year those of Mixco were put
to death ; being tributaries of the king Cablahuh Tihax,
they wished to make themselves independent. On the
day 7 Camay, the town of Mixco was taken and its
inhabitants slain by the chiefs.

no. At the same time were put to death the Yaquis
of Xivico, because they had taken part with the king
Vookaok, Chief of the Akahals, this nation of the Aka-
hals having begun to lift itself before the town, desiring
to obtain power.

III. Six days were wanting to complete five years from
the revolt when the Akahals were cut in pieces before the
town, with their king, because they wished to be inde-
pendent of the town.


162 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Chi belehe Ah, xel voo huna rubanic yuhuh.
Vakaki Ah, xel ruvakah yuhuh.
Chi oxi Ah, xel ruvuk huna yuhuh.

112. Chupam ruvahxak huna yuhuh xcam chic ^utu-
hile, ruma ah Xeynup, Xepalica, xe yaar vi chicamic,
xtzak can ^akbin Ahmak chi oxlahuh Ahmak.

Chi oxlahuh Ah, xel vahxaka yuhuh.

Chi lahuh Ah, xel ru beleh huna.

113. Cablauheh oktel lauha yuhuh ok xi^o pokob
Cakchiquel ruma ahauh kamama Oxlahuh ^ij, kitzih chi
nima £agal xban xul ronohel vuk amag chi Yximchee,
chi vahxaki Ymox xban.

Chi vuku Ah, ru lauha rubanic yuhuh.

Chi cahi Ah, xel ru hulauha.
Chi Hun ah, ru cablauha.

Chi hulahuh Ah ^axel roxlauha yuhuh (Ahpogo^il).

114. Oxlahuh ^iquin xcam xogohauh Vooqueh ri
xhaylah Lahuh Tihax ru ^ahol ^ikab. Xa^a hala chic
matel cahlauha yuhuh ok xcam ahauh Oxlahuh ^ij, ka
mama ; chi oxi Ahmak xcam ahauh, kitzih chi tixibin ru
gagal chia ahauh, manix ^hacatah vi ru gih ralaxic, ^i


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 163

The 9 Ah completed the fifth year after the "Revolt.
The 6 Ah completed the sixth year after the Revolt.
On the 3 Ah there were seven years from the Revolt.

112. In the eighth year after the revolt, the Tzutuhils
were defeated by those of Xeynup and Xepalica ; they
were slaughtered, Zakbin and Ahmak having perished in
the action on the day 13 Ahmak.

On the day 1 3 Ah there were eight years from the re-
volt.

On 10 Ah there were nine years from the revolt.

113. Twelve days were lacking to complete the tenth
year after the revolt when the Cakchiquels put on their
shields on account of the king our ancestor, Oxlahuh tzy ;
for truly he showed great power in making all the
seven nations come to Iximche, which he did on the day
8 Imox.

The day 7 Ah completed the tenth year after the Re-
volt.

On 4 Ah there were eleven years from the Revolt.

On I Ah there were twelve years.

On 1 1 Ah there were thirteen years from the revolt
(of the Ahpozotzils).

114. On the day 13 Tziquin died the princess Voo-
queh who had married Lahuh Tihax, son of Qikab.
Little was lacking to complete the fourteenth year after
the Revolt when the king our ancestor Oxlahuh tzy also
died. He died on the day 13 Ahmak. Truly this king had
made himself feared by his power ; never was his power


164 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

ya labal xuban, ^iya tinamit xukaqah tok xcam. He
chi ^a xeru ^aholah ahauh ree : —


115. Hunyg, rubi nabey ru^ahol, ha^ xoc chi ahau-
arem ok xcam ahauh Oxlahuh ^ij ru tata, ronohel tzih cahi
chi amag ok xahauar ahauh Hunyg. Vakaki Ahmak
ru bi ru cam al ; Noh ^a voxal ; Belehe^t ru cahal ;
Ymox voo al ; Noh ruvakakal. Maku Xguhay rubi
xogohauh xixhayl ahauh Oxlahuh ^ij ; xae oxi xeralah,
ha nabey ri ahauh Hunyg ; he ^ cay yxoc huhun ^a
qui te ri ^hakap ru ^hol ahauh, xa ri xnam ahauh xalan
ri Belehe^t.

Chi vahxaki Ah ^axel ru cahlauha yuhuh.

116. Ok xcam chi^ ahauh Cablahuh Tihax ; chi cahi
Ey xcam ahauh.

Voo Ah, ^a xel rolauha rubanic yuhuh.

1 17. Tok xahauar chi^a ahauh Lahuh Noh rubi, nabey
ru ^ahol ahauh Cablahuh Tihax. He ^ xeulaan Yaqui
Ah Culuvacan, ri ahauh Hunyg, Lahuh Noh ; chi hun
Toh xeul Yaqui ru gamahel ahauh Modecqumatzin
rahaual Ah Mexicu.


118. ^a ha ^a ki xka^et ri oki xeul ri Yaqui Ah
Culuvacan, he ^iya Yaqui xeul oher, yxnu^ahol, tanta-
hauar ka mama Hunyg Lahuh Noh.

Chi cay Ah, xel ru vaklauha ru banic yuhuh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 165

or his grandeur diminished ; he undertook many wars
and conquered many cities. These are the children he
begat : —

115. Hunyg was the name of his first son, and he ob-
tained the power when the king Oxlahuh tzy his father
died, and all four of the tribes gave their consent that
Hunyg should be chief Vakaki Ahmak was the name
of the second son ; Noh was the third ; Beleheqat the
fourth ; Imox the fifth , Maku Xguhay was the name of
the queen, wife of the king Oxlahuh tzy. She had three
children, oldest of whom was the king Hunyg. He had
also two other wives, each of whom was mother of part
of the children of the king ; and the mother of the king
(Hunyg) had also Beleheqat.

The day 8 Ah completed the 14th year after the Re-
volt.

116. Then died the king Cablahuh Tihax ; this king
died on the day 4 Ey.

The day 5 Ah completed the 15 th year after the re-
volt.

117. Then began also to reign the king Lahuh Noh,
eldest son of the king Cablahuh Tihax. At this time
the Yaquis of Culuacan were received by the kings
Hunyg and Lahuh Noh. The Yaquis arrived on the
day I Toh, sent by the king Modeczumatzin, king of
the Mexicans.

118. And we ourselves saw these Yaquis of Culuacan
when they arrived ; and they came in old times in great
number, these Yaquis, O my children, during the reign
of our ancestor Hunyg and Lahuh Noh.

The day 2 Ah completed the i6th year after the Re-
volt.


166 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

1 19. Chupam huna xoc chic labal chuvach ^ichevinak,
chi vahxaki ganel xoc ^am ^eche, tantahauar Hunyg
ka mama tan ^a nima rahpop achi ymama chiri ok xoc
labal ^echee, yxnu^ahol, he^ ki xebano chic labal
^iche ri y mama rahpop Achi Balam, rahpop achi
Ygich, ru galel achi ^atu, ^iya camic ^eche vinak
cuma ; maquina xaquere xegagar ka tata ka mama.

Chi cablahuh Ah, xel ru vuklauha ru banic yuhuh.

Chi belehe Ah, xel chic vahxaklauha yuhuh.

120. Chupam chi^a huna ok xey^o chicop, xche chel
ut, quere ri e ute chi oxi Caok xey^o oher pa tinamit
chi Yximchee, kitzih tixibin chi chicop.

121. ^a vo vinak ok ^a que y^o xche chel ut, ok
xei^o chi^a qa^ : chi cay Yg xey^o pa tinamit kitzih,
que xibin chi ga^ xey^o oher.

122. Xa ru beleh vinak chic ok x^at chi Yximchee,
chi cahi Camey xyaar tinamit chi £a£. Tan mani ahauh
Huny£ ka mama, tan ^o ka ^haka ya, tane mani ka
tata ka mama ok x^at tinamit xka ^et ronohel ri,
yxnu^ahol.

Chi vahxaki Ah xel beleh lauha yuhuh.

123. Chupam ^a huna ok xcam ^eche vinak pa ?o^il
ya cuma y mama ; ^iy nimak achiha xuyari, ok xquiban
labal chiri.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 167

119. During the year the war broke out afresh with
the Quiches. On the day 8 Ganel Quiche was entered
and taken when Hunyg our ancestor was ruling, a great
counselor and ancient man, when the war entered Quiche,
O my children. Those who began this war at Quiche were
the old men, the counselor Balam, the counselor Ygich, and
the noble Qatu ; and many Quiches perished through
them. But not thus did our fathers and ancestors ac-
quire their power.

The day 12 Ah completed the 17th year after the Re-
volt.

The day 9 Ah completed the i8th year after the Re-
volt.

120. During this year the beasts and doves came out
of the forests, and on the day 3 Caok the doves passed
over the city of Iximche, and truly it was terrifying to
see the beasts.

121. One hundred days after the doves had been seen
to come from the woods, the locusts came. It was on the
day 2 Yg that they passed over the city, and really it
was terrifying to see them pass.

122. About that time nine persons perished in a fire
at Iximche ; on the day 4 Camey the city was injured
by fire. The king Hunyg was at the time absent on
the other side of the river ; our fathers and ancestors were
also absent. But when the city burned, we saw it all,
we, my children.

The day 8 Ah completed the 19th year after the Re-
volt.

123. During the year the Quiche men were destroyed
near the river of the Tzotzils, by our ancestors ; a great
number of other principal men were conquered when
this war occurred.


168 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

124. Humul chi^a xe yaar ^eche vinak xiquin chi
pokoh, pa Mukche xeoc vi ^eche vinak cuma, ^iy nimak
rahpop achij, ru galel achi xuyari chiri, ^iy ^ ri ^hutik
camic xquiban tzatz teleche xoc pe cuma y mama.

Chi oxi Ah ^a xel humay ru camic Tukuchee ru banic
yuhuh.

Ha^ chi oxlahuh Ah xel chic huna.

125. Chupam huna xi^o chic pokob chuvi Cakhay
ruma ahauh Lahuh Noh, chi vahxaki ganel xla£abex
^ak, kitzih chi nima £a£al xquiban chic ahaua chiri, xul
ronohel vuk amag, Hunyg, Lahuh Noh xebano he^tan
quebano labal ri y mama, rahpop achi Balam rahpop achi
Ygich, ru galel achi ^atu.

Xel ^a ru caba chi lahuh Ah yuhuh.


126. Chupam chi ^a huna xecam chic ^eche vinak
cuma ka tata ka mama, chiree xquiban vi chi ^otoh, chi
go^ibal Cokolahay, xu^ul vachih ca^hob chi chay ru^in
^eche vinak, haok xuyari ya Yaxontik ru ^ahol ahauh
Ahpoptuh, ^iy ^a nimak achiha xuyari, querela
xegagar vi y mama ri yxnu^ahol, ^iy navipe teleche
xoc pe chucohol ri nimak labal mixkabijh can.

Chi vuku Ah xel roxa ru camay yuhuh.
Chi cahi Ah xel chic ru caha yuhuh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 169

124. The Quiches were again beaten and suffered loss
at Mukche, because they entered there. A great number
of their principal counselors and nobles were lost ; many
were put to death slowly, and many were taken pris-
oners by our ancestors.

The day 3 Ah completed one cycle after the death of
the revolted Tukuches.

With the day 1 3 Ah, another year was completed.

125. During this year they took up their shields on
the Cakhay on account of the king Lahuh Noh. On the
day 8 Ganel the fortress was occupied and truly the chiefs
made their great power felt. All those of the seven
nations came with Hunyg and Lahuh Noh, to make war,
and it was also made by the ancients, the Counselor
Balam and the Galel-achi Qatu.

A second year was completed on the day 10 Ah, after
the Revolt.

126. During this year the Quiches were again de-
feated by our fathers and ancestors. The battle was
gained by the arms and the bravery of those of Cokola-
hay, whose divisions met face to face the leader of the
Quiches and his warriors. There was slain Yaxonkik
son of the Prince Ahpoptuh. Many warriors were slain;
therefore great was the majesty of our ancestors, O my
children ; and they also made many prisoners in this
great war of which we speak.

On the day 7 Ah, was completed the third year of the
second cycle after the Revolt.

On the day 4 Ah was completed the fourth year after
the Revolt.


170 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

127. Chupam ^ voo huna, vae ok ixtiquer yauabil,
yxnu^hol, nabey xyabix ohb, ratzam xyavabix chi^
qui^, gana chuluh, kitzih tixibin chi camic xi^o oher.
Haok xcam ahauh Vakaki Ahmak, xe ^ hala chic ma
tipe nima gekum, nima aga pa qui vi ka tata ka mama
pa ka vi ^, yxnu^ahol, ok xyabix ^hac.


Chi hun Ah xel humay voo yuhuh, ok xyabix ^hac.


128. Vae chupam huna xyauabix vi ^hac, ha ok
xe^iz chi camic ka tata ka mama Diego Juan ; chi
voo Ah ^axoc chi vi labal Panatacat, cuma ka mama,
ha^a ok xtiquer yavabil ^hac. Kitzih tixibin chi
camic xpe pa ru vi vinak, mani yabim viri quere ri
x^hol vinak.

129. Xcavinak ok xtiquer yauabil, tok xecam ka tata
ka mama, chi cablahuh Camey xcam ahauh Hunyg
yxiquin mama.

1 30. Xa^a ru cabih xcam chic ka tata rahpop Achi
Balam ri y mama, yxnu^ahol ; xa ^a hunam xecam y
mama ru^in ru tata ki tan ti chuvin, ti ^ayin vinak chi
camic. Tok xecam ka tata ka mama, xax be tzak chi el
^hakap vinak chi civan, xa ^ij, xa ^uch, xtiochic
vinak ; tixibin chi camic xecamiqan ymama, herach
camic ru ^ahol ahauh ru^in ru cha£ ru nimal :
querela xoh canah vi can chi mebail ri yxnu^hol,
^aoh ok ^hutik ^ahola, ok xoh canah can konohel.
Rupoyibal alaxic.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 171

1 27. In the course of the fifth year the pestilence began,
O my children. First there was a cough, then the blood
was corrupted, and the urine became yellow. The number
of deaths at this time was truly terrible. The Chief
Vakaki Ahmak died, and we ourselves were plunged in
great darkness and great grief, our fathers and ancestors
having contracted the plague, O my children.


On the day i Ah there were one cycle and 5 years
from the Revolt, and the pestilence spread.


128. In this year the pestilence spread, and then died
our ancestor Diego Juan. On the day 5 Ah war was
carried to Panatacat by our ancestor, and then began the
spread of the pestilence. Truly the number of deaths
among the people was terrible, nor did the people escape
from the pestilence.


129. Forty were seized with the sickness; then died
our father and ancestor; on the day 14 Carney died the
king Hunyg, your grandfather.


130. But two days afterward died our father, the Coun-
selor Balam, one of the ancients, O my children. The
ancients and the fathers died alike, and the stench was
such that men died of it alone. Then perished our
fathers and ancestors. Half the people threw them-
selves into the ravines, and the dogs and foxes lived on
the bodies of the men. The fear of death destroyed
the old people, and the oldest son of the king died at
the same timej as his young brother. Thus did we
become poor, O my children, and thus did we survive,
being but a little child — and we were all that remained.
Hence the putting aside of our claims.


172 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Quibi y mama vae xeru^holah akauh.

131. Rahpop achi Balam, rubi, nabey ru^ahol ahauh
Hunyg, ha ki tanti £agar chi quivach ahaua, ok xpe
nima camic ^hac.

132. Ahmak rubi rucam al, ha ru^hol can ri Don
Pedro Solis. Tohin ^a rox al, mani retal ri he ^a xecam
ru^in ahauh ri e oxi ka tata.

133. Ha ^a ka tata Francisco rahpop achi ^ian rucah al.

1 34. Balam voo al, mani ^ retal ri.

135. Ah^alam Hunahpu ru vakak al, he ^a xecolotah
chic ri he oxi ka tata ruma ^hac ; ^oh ok, ok ^a ^hutik
konohel cu^in ok xoh canah, xka ^et ^a ronohel ri
yavabil, ix nu^ahol ; ha ^ ri rubi ka tit; nabey rixhayil
ahauh Hunyg, Chuvy^ut ru bi xogohauh, he oxi
xerelah, ha ri ka tata, he^a ri ru tata Don Pedro Solis,
mani ^a ru ^hol rij Tohin: xcam ^ari xogohauh
Chuvy ^ut, xoc chipe xogohauh X£eka^uch A^iquina-
hay, ha quite rahpop achi ^ian Balam, xa e cay ral.

136. ^ vo vinak ok ^a quecam ahaua Hunyg La-
huhnoh, ok xechap chic ahaua Cahi Ymox Belehe^at, chi
hun Can ; xa^a hun chioc ri Belehe^at xcolotah, xa^a
kayon chicoc a^uala mani hunchic ka tata xcolotah, ^a
e ok ^hutik ri ^ian Balam, ri ki ok retal ahauh Hunyg.
Quere^ xahauar vi Belehe^at rij, xa huna galel ^ma-
hay ; chioc x^hao rahauarem maqui ^a xrah raho ahauh
atzih vinak Ba^ahol : vo quic chi ahauarem ri Belehe^t;


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 173

Names of (our) Ancestors^ Sons of the King.

131. The counselor Balam, the oldest son of the king
Hunyg, was already distinguished before the face of
the chieftains 'sthen he died by the great plague.

132. Ahmak was the name of the second son. His
son is Don Pedro Solis. Tohin was the third. There is
no record of him, as he died with the king and our three
fathers.

133- Our father Francisco, the counselor Tzian, was
the fourth son.

1 34. Balam was the fifth son ; there is no record of
him.

135. Ahtzalam Hunahpu was the sixth son. He was
saved from the plague with our three other ancestors.
As for us, we were then little children, and we all escaped,
and we saw all the pestilence, O my children. These are
the names of our female ancestors : the first wife of king
Hunyg was the queen Chuvytzut ; she had three sons,
our father, the father of Don Pedro Solis, and Tohin,
who left no children. The queen Chuvytzut being dead,
the queen Xgekaqueh, the female Ahtziquinahay, took
.her place. She was the mother of the Counselor Tzian

Balam, and these were her two children.

136. A hundred days after the death of the kings
Hunyg and Lahuh Noh, there were elected as kings Cahi
Ymox and Belehe Qat, on the day i Can. For Belehe
Qat alone remained. As for us we were little boys and
our elders did not choose any of us. Tzian and Balam,
the only other descendants of Hunyg, were also young.
Belehe Qat was therefore chosen to rule but only as heir
apparent, the orator Baqahol declaring that it was not
proper that he should take the supreme rule. The honor


174 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

hatah xoc chi ahauarem ri ka tata rahpop achi ^ian
xraho ahauh atzih vinak Ba^hol, quere^ roquic chi
ahauarem ri.

Xavi ^ chupam ru vaka vae.

137. ^a huvinak ok ^a que chap ahaua, ok xban
yuhuh chi Ah^iquinahay ; chi lahuh Queh xban xeul
coloel qui ahaua Ah^iquinahay ^i^ihay chi Yximchee
ruma yuhuh, xul qui yaca el achiha.

138. Xa^a ru cablah xcam chic amag ^utuhile, ruma
f o^il Tukuchee chi hulahuh Ymox, xyaar ^utuhile chi
camic, xeyaar Ah^iquinahay, conohel tzatz chi teleche
chicana, quere^ xit puak tixibin chi camic xuban ^utu-
hile, xka tinamit xepoyom. Cani ^ xetzolih ka ahaua
Tepepul Ah^iquinahay ^i^ihay chi cochoch.

1 39. Tok xebokotah chi ^pe Ah Xecaka abah ronohel,
xul colo chi el rij Cakchiquel, tzatz chi^utuhile xel pe
oher pa tinamit, he chi ^rah xquiban labal chirih Ah
^iquinahay, Ah Pavacal, xrah cach^ul chijh chic cuma,
xa^ xboy chijx achiha ruma Ah Pavacal.

140. Chi belehe Ba^, ^a xban camic chuvi Lakanabah,
pa Chitulul, mani ^ nimak achiha xcanah. Xaki ruyon
vinak Belehe^t, Cahi Ymox xebano.

Chi hulahuh Ah, xel humay vaka yuhuh.

141. Mixka ^iz can vae huna xeyaar vi katata ka
mama ruma camic ^hac.

142. Chupam huna ok xoh ^ule ru^in xtee, yxnu^a-


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 175

of the royalty was decreed to Belehe Qat ; but the orator
Baqahol desired that the real chief should be our ances-
tor Tzian ; therefore he entered into power.

What Took Place in the Sixth Year,

137. Twenty days after the chiefs began to rule there
was an insurrection against the Ahtziquinahay. It oc-
curred on the day 10 Queh, and the chiefs Ahtziquina-
hay and Qicihay went to Iximche on account of the
revolt, coming to raise soldiers.

138. Twelve of the Tzutuhil villages were destroyed
by the Tzotzil Tukuches on the day 1 1 Ymox and the
Tzutuhils were slain. Very many were taken prisoners.
Therefore the Tzutuhils in fear of death were made to
give up their treasures and the town of Xepoyom was
taken. Then returned the chiefs Tepepul Ahtziquinahay
and Tzizihay to their homes.

139. At that time the people of Xecaka abah, all of
whom had been driven forth, were aided by the Cakchi-
quels. Many Tzutuhils also came to the villages to make
war against the Ahtziquinahay, and those of Pacaval, and
wished to join forces, their warriors having been pro-
voked by the people of Pacaval.

140. On the day 9 Batz there was slaughter at the
rock of Lakam at Chitulul. Not many warriors took
part. Only the men of Belehe qat and Cahi Ymox were
engaged.

On the day 1 1 Ah there were 26 years from the Revolt.

141. Then was completed one year since our fathers
and ancestors died of the plague.

142. In this year we married your mother, O my chil


176 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

hol, xhunabir ok quecam y mama ; chi cablahuh Toh :?toh
^mo yxok.

Chi vahxaki Ah xel ru vuka vuhuh.


143. Chupam huna xorotah vi labal ^echee, ^ nx
hulauha xorotah labal ^echee.

Chi voo Ah xel humay vahxaka.

CulibcU Castilan vinak Xetulul vae.

144. Va^ te chupam huna ok ki xeul Castilan vinak;
xcavinak ok rubeleha, ok xeul Castilan vinak Xepit
Xetulul; chi hun ganel xcam ^echevinak chiri ruma
Castilan vinak, Tunatiuh Avilantaro rubi, cahaual ri ki
xka^an ronohel amag ; mahaok tetamax vi quivach ^
tahinok ti gihalox chee, abah.

145. Xul chi^a Xelahub, xeyaar chic ^eche vinak chi
camic chiri, tok xbokotah chi^a el ^eche vinak, ronohel
^ulelaay richin Castilan vinak, okix yaar chic ^eche
vinak chuvach pe Xelahub.

146. Tok xul ^ ha tinamit gumarcaah, cani ^ x^ul
cuma ahaua ahpop ahpop ^mahay, cani xya patan ruma
^eche vinak; xa^a cani xeoc ahaua pa ^hi^h ruma
Tunatiuh.

147. Chi cahi ^at ^a xepe rox ahaua ahpop, ahpop
^amahay ruma Tunatiuh, maqui y^o vinak ru ^ux
Tunatiuh chi labal. Cani ^a xpe ru ^amahel Tunatiuh
cu^in ahaua, takol richin achiha: tipe ul rachihilal
Ahpo^o^il Ahpoxahil, tu cami^an ^eche vinak, xcha ru


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 177

dren, one year after the death of your grandfather. We
took her to wife on the day 12 Toh.

On the day 8 Ah was completed the 7th year from the
Revolt.

143. During this year the Quiche war ceased ; the
Quiche war ceased on the nth.

On the day 5 Ah was the eighth year of the first cycle.

The Arrival of the CastUians at XetuluL

144. It was during this year that the Castilians ar-
rived. Forty-nine years have passed since the Castilians
came to Xepit and XetuluL On the day i Ganel the
Quiches were destroyed by the Castilians. Tunatiuh
Avilantaro, as he was called, conquered all the towns.
Their countenances were previously unknown and the
people rendered homage to sticks and stones.

145. On their arrival at Xelahub, the Quiche nation
was routed and destroyed. All of them had hastened
there to oppose the Castilians ; and there the Quiche
nation was destroyed, in front of Xelahub.

146. He then went to the city Gumarcaah, and there
came before him the chiefs, the king and the next in rank,
and tribute was paid by the Quiches ; and the chiefs
suffered many torments from Tunatiuh.

147. On the day 4 Qat three chiefs, the king and the
next in rank were burned alive by Tunatiuh, nor was the
heart of Tunatiuh satisfied with war. Soon a messenger
from Tunatiuh came to the chiefs that they should send
him warriors: "Let the warriors of the Ahpozotzils
and Ahpoxahils come to the slaughter of the Quiches ! "


178 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

gamahel Tunatiuh chique ahaua. Cani ^ xtakex ni tzih
Tunatiuhy ok xbe ^ vomu^h achiha cami9ay richin
^echevinak, xa^ ruyon ahtinamit xbe maqui xcaho
achiha conohel chique ahaua, xa^ oxmul xbe achiha,
xoc patan ruma ^eche vinak, oh ^ xoh be ^amo richin
Tunatiuh, yxnu^ahol.


Hook ki xtU chi Yximche vae.

148. Ha ^ chi hun Hunahpu, toki xul Castilan vinak
pa tinamit chi Yximchee, Tunatiuh ru bi cahaval ; cani
^ xbe ^ulel Tunatiuh cuma ahaua Belehe^t, cahi
Ymox« Utz ^ ru ^ux Tunatiuh chique ahaua toki xul
pa tinamit, mani labal, xati quicot Tunatiuh ok ki xul
chi Yximchee. Quere^ tok xul Castilan vinak ri oher,
yxnu^hol, kitzih tixibin ok xeul, mani etaam vi quivach,
he ^bouil xe quina ahaua. Xka na ^ oh ytata, oh
kixoh ^eto culic chi Yximchee chupam Tzupam hay
xvar vi Tunatiuh ; chuca gih ^ xvachi^ ahauh, tixibin
chi achiha, xul ru^in pa ru varam xe ru tak ^ ahaua :
Nak ruma xtiban labal vu^in ^o pe tan tin ban chive,
xcha. Maquian, quere xa rumal ^iya achiha caminak,
vave he^a mixe a ^et vae pa hul ^o vi qui ni^ahal,
xecha ahaua, quere ^tok xoc pa rochoch ahauh ^hic-
bal ri.

149. Cani^ labal xu^utuh Tunatiuh chique ahaua,
xecha ^ ahaua : cay ^ovi nu labal ^utuhil, Panatacat,
at ^abouil, xucheex ^ cuma ahaua. Xa^ hunobix
xi^o rubana Tunatiuh pa tinamit ; tok xcam ^utuhile
ruma Castilan vinak, ha chi vuku Camey xcami9ax
^utuhile ruma Tunatiuh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 179

So spoke the messenger of Tunatiuh to the chiefs. Im-
mediately the words of Tunatiuh were published, and
400 men went forth to the slaughter of the Quiches ; but
they were only those of the city, the other warriors re-
fusing to obey the chiefs. Only three times did the war-
riors go forth to enforce the tribute on the Quiches;
then we also were taken by Tunatiuh, O my children.


How They Now Came to Iximche.

148. It was on the day i Hunahpu when the Castil-
ians arrived at Iximche with their chief, Tunatiuh. The
people went forth to meet Tunatiuh with the chiefs Belehe
Qat and Cahi Ymox. Good was the heart of Tunatiuh
when he entered the city with the chiefs. There was no
fighting and Tunatiuh rejoiced when he entered Iximche.
Thus did the Castilians enter of yore, O my children ;
but it was a fearful thing when they entered ; their faces
were strange, and the chiefs took them for gods. We,
even we, your father, saw them when they first set foot
in Iximche, at the palace of Tzupam, where Tunatiuh
slept. The chief came forth, and truly he frightened the
warriors; he came from his chamber and called the
rulers : " Why do you make war with me, when I also
can make it ? " said he. " Not at all. Why should so
many warriors find their death ? Do you see any pitfalls
among them ? " So replied the chiefs, and he went to
the house of the chief Chicbal.


149. Then Tunatiuh agreed to join the chiefs in their
wars, and the chiefs said to him : — " O thou God, we
have two wars, one with the Tzutuhils, one at Panatacat."
Thus spake the chiefs. Only five days after, Tunatiuh
went forth from the capital. Then the Tzutuhils were
conquered by the Castilians. It was the day 7 Camey
that the Tzutuhils were destroyed by the Castilians.


180 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

150. Xe^ huvinak voo chi gih xi^o rubana pa tina-
mit, ok xbe Tunatiuh Cuzcatan xi^o cam apon Atacat ;
ha chi cay Queh xcam Atacat ruma Castilan vinak
ronohel ^a achiha ; xebe ru^in Tunatiuh cami^ay richin
Yaqui.

151. Ha ^ chi lahuh Hunahpu, xul chic ok xpe
Cuzcatan, xa ru cavinak xbe ru bana Cuzcatan, ok xul
chic pa tinamit. Tok xu^utuh ^a Tunatiuh hun quimeal
ahaua, xya ^ chirichin Tunatiuh ri cumal ahaua.

Quiubal ^ puak vae.

152. Tok x^utux ^a qui puvak ahaua ruma Tunatiuh ;
xrah naek ^ yari xaki molom puvak xa tzimay, xa ^1
vach : maqui ^a xu^am xacani xcakar Tunatiuh chique
ahaua, xcha : Nak rumal maqui ti ya puvak chuvichin,
maquipe vave ulinak vi ru puak ronohel amag avu^in,
tauaho pe cat nu poroh, cat nu hi^ah, xeucheex ahaua.

153. Tok xugat ^ Tunatiuh oxogopeto chi gana
puvak, xquitih chi^ ahaua ru gipuxic, xeo£ ahaua
chuvach ; xax maqui vi xraho chic Tunatiuh, xa xcha : Ti
vechaah pe ri puak obix tiya. Vue ^ maqui ti ya chiri,
ti vetamah ^a nu ^ux, xeucheex ahaua. Cani x^ak can
xca retal, tok xquimol ^a ahaua qui puak ronohel ^a ru
mam ahauh ru ^ahel ahauh, xu ya ru puak, xutih ru gih
vinak ruma ahaua.

1 54. Ki ^ tini^ahar ru yaic puak chire Tunatiuh, tok
x^utun hun achi ^xto^ : Yn cakolahay, tincami^ah
Castilan vinak, xcha chique ahaua ; xa pa gag queyaar
vi, tin £o9ih tinamit que el ^a el ahau ^haka ya, ha ^a


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 181

150. Twenty-five days afterwards Tunatiuh went forth
from the capital to Cuzcatan going there to destroy
Atacat. On the day 2 Queh, Atacat was slain by the
Castilians, with all his warriors. There went with Tuna-
tiuh all his Mexicans to this battle.

151. On the day 10 Hunahpu he returned from Cuz-
catan. He had been absent only 40 days to make the
conquest at Cuzcatan when he returned to the capital.
Then Tunatiuh asked for a daughter of one of the chiefs,
and she was given to Tunatiuh by the chiefs.

A Demand for Money is made,

152. Then Tunatiuh began to ask the chiefs for money.
He wished that they should give him jars full of precious
metals, and even their drinking cups and crowns. Not
receiving anything, Tunatiuh became angry and said to
the chiefe : ** Why have you not given me the metal ?
If you do not bring me the precious metal in all your
towns, choose then, for I shall burn you alive and hang
you." Thus did he speak to the chiefs.

153. Then Tunatiuh cut from three of them the gold
ornaments they wore in their ears. The chiefs suffered
keenly from this violence, and wept before him. But
Tunatiuh was not troubled, and said : " I tell you that
I want the gold here within five days. Wo to you if
you do not give it. I know my heart." So said he to
the chiefs. The word was then given. The chiefs gath-
ered together all their metals, those of the parents and
children of the king, and all that the chiefs could get
from the people.

154. While they were gathering the gold for Tuna-
tiuh, a priest of the Demon showed himself: " I am the
lightning ; I will destroy the Castilians." So said he to
the chiefs. " I will destroy them by fire. When I beat
the drum let the chiefs come forth and go to the other


182 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

chi vuku ahmak tinban, xcha achi ri ^xto^ chique
ahaua. Kitzih ^ xqui na ahaua, xoque^ax ru tzih achij
cuma, ki ^a ti ni^ahar can ru yaic puvak ok xoh pax.


Hook ki xoh pax pa tinandt vae.

155. Chi vuku Ahmak ^ xban paxic. Haoki xtole
can tinamit chi Yximchee, xa^ ruma ri achi ^axto^, ok
xeel ahaua ; vue kitzih xticam Tunatiuh, quecha ; tan
mani labal chu ^ux Tunatiuh, tan ti qui cot ruma puvak
tan ti ya. Xa rumal achi ri ^xto^, tok xtole can ka
tinamit, chi vuku ahmak, yx nu^ahol.

156. Xe na chi vi naek ^ ahaua ruma Tunatiuh;
xlauheher ok kopax pa tinamit, oki xtiquer labal ruma
Tunatiuh ; chi cahi Camey xtiquer ka camic ruma Cas-
tilah vinak, haok xtiquer pokonal chikih ; xoh pax xe
chee, xe^m, yxnu^hol, ronohel ^ ama£, xoh cami^an
ru^in Tunatiuh; haok xti^e xeapon ri Castilan vinak,
xel ^ pa tinamit xu tolobacan. Tok xe^ulelax ^
Castilan vinak cuma Cakchiquel vinak, xban he ^otoh,
xban ^ hulqueh, ^imah xecami^abex, xa ki labal chic
xban ruma vinak. He ^ ^iy Castilan vinak xecam,
quere^ queh xcam pa hul queh, xyaar ^ ri ^eche-
vinak, ^utuhile, querela ronohel amag xyaar ruma
Cakchiquel vinak. Querela x^ohe vi ruxla ri ruma
Castilan vinak, x^ohe navipe ruxla ruma amag ronohel ;
xbeleh vinak ok ^a ko pax pa tinamit chi Iximchee, ok
xel ru beleha.

Chi cay Ah, xel humay beleha ru banic yuhuh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 183

bank of the river. This I shall do on the day 7 Ah-
mak." Thus did this priest of the Demon speak to the
chiefs. Truly the chiefs thought that they should trust
in the words of this man. It was when they were gath-
ering the gold that we went forth.

How We went forth from the City.

155. The day 7 Ahmak was that of the going forth.
They deserted the city of Iximche on account of the
priest of the Demon, and the chiefs left it. " Yes, truly,
Tunatiuh shall die," said they. " There is no more war
in the heart of Tunatiuh, as he now rejoices in the gold
given him." Thus it was that our city was abandoned
on the day 7 Ahmak on account of a priest of the De-
mon, O my children.


156. But what the chiefs did was soon known to Tuna-
tiuh. Ten days after we had left the city, war was begun
by Tunatiuh. On the day 4 Camey began our destruc-
tion. Then began our misery. We scattered in the
forests ; all our towns were taken, O my children ; we
were slaughtered by Tunatiuh. The Castilians entered
the city and they arrived as to a deserted spot. From
that time the Castilians were hated by the Cakchiquels.
They made trenches, they dug pitfalls, that the horses
might be killed, and war was waged by their men. Many
men of the Castilians were slain, and many horses killed
in the pitfalls. The Quiches and Tzutuhils were de-
stroyed and all their villages ruined by the Cakchiquels.
Only thus did the Castilians let them live, and only thus
were they let live by all the villagers. One hundred and
eighty days after the desertion of the city of Iximche
was completed the ninth year (of the second cycle).


On the day 2 Ah was completed the 29th year after
the Revolt.


184 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

157. Chupam ru lauha vae ki tan tiban labal ru^in
Castilan vinak, tanti ^ilibem Xepau ruma Castilan vinak
chiri chupam ru lauha, kitan ti yao ri labal xu^am ru
covil vinak.

158. Ok xbokotah ^a el Tunatiuh Xepau, xax C090 ok
xel mani xelah vinak chuvach ; xvakvinak ok ru caba
kopax pe pa tinamit ok xtolecan xbenam ^a richin ok
xi^o ru ^ta can tinamit Tunatiuh, chi cahi Carney
xuporoh can tinamit, vak vinak ru caba chi labal xbanok
xtzolih.

Chi cablahuh Ah xel humay lauha yuhuh.

159. Chupam huna vae xuxlan vican halal ka ^ux
xavi e ^oh ahaua conohel Cahi Ymox Belehe^at, mani
xtzak chuvach Castilan vinak, tan ^a oh ^oh chila
Holom Balam, yxnu^hol.

160. Xhunabir ok ^ ru^in huvinak, titole can ruma
Tunatiuh ok xul chic Castilan vinak Chij xot ; chi hun
Caok, xtiquer chic ka camic ruma Castilan vinak,
x^ulelaax chic ruma vinak, xyaloh chic labal xban. Xavi
x^hub chic chi camic, mani xyao patan ronohel huyu,
xa hala chic matel humay hulauha yuhuh ok xul chic
Chij xot.

Chi belehe Ah, ^a xel humay hulauha yuhuh.

161. Chupam huna chic vae, xavi tanti tahin labal ruma
Castilan vinak xutuloba chi can Chij xot, haok ki xlagabex
Bulbuxya ruma Castilan vinak, vave chupam huna ki
xyaloh vi labal xmani vi xyao patan ruma ronohel huyu.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 185

157. During the tenth year the war continued with
the Castilians. But the Castilians having received aid
in this tenth year at Xepau, carried on the war with
such vigor that they destroyed the forces of the nation.

158. Tunatiuh then went forth from Xepau, and so
harassed us that the people would not come before
him. There were lacking one hundred and twenty days
to complete two years since we had abandoned the capi-
tal, now deserted, when Tunatiuh came there on his
march in order to set fire to the city. On the day 4
Camey, two years less six months after the beginning of
the war, he set fire to the capital and returned.

On the day 12 Ah was completed the 30th year after
the Revolt.

159. In the course of this year we breathed for a little,
as did also the kings Cahi Ymox and Belehe Qat. They
had not lost all hope before the Castilians, and they
maintained themselves at Holombalam, O my children.

160. One year and twenty days had passed since the
places had been made desolate by Tunatiuh, when the
Castilians arrived at Chiixot. On the day i Caok our
slaughter by the Castilians began. They fought with
the nation and persisted in war. Death ravaged us
again, but the whole country continued to refuse tribute.
There was not much lacking of the 31st year after the
revolt when they came to Chiixot.

On the day 9 Ah was completed the 31st year after
the Revolt.

161. In the course of the following year, while the
Castilians were engaged in war, Chiixot was abandoned.
Then Bulbuxya was occupied by the Castilians. During
this year the war was continued, but the whole country
refused the tribute.

M


186 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Roquebal ^ patan vae.

162. Xvolahuvinak ok ti ^utun Chij xot, ok xoc patan
chuvach capitan cuma ^hinta Queh, vove chuvi Tzolola
chi vakaki ^i ^ xoc patan, haok xalax nu ^hol Diego
Pabo Cotanoh ^ovi, ok xatalax chi vakaki ^ij, at nu^a-
hol, haok xtiquer chic patanihic ; huley chivi chi pokon
xka^m chic, xkacolah can ri labal. Camul ki chi nimak
chi camic xkaban.


Chi vakaki Ah, xel humay cablauha yuhuh.


163. Xvahxak vinak ok ru caba, toe patan ok xcam
ahauh Ahtun Cue Tihax, chi vakaki Akbal xcam. Xavi
^a maha que ^utun ahaua Ahpop^o^il, Ahpopxahil
chiri.

Chi oxi Ah, xel humay oxlauha.

164. Chupam huna ok xe^utun chic ahaua, ahpop
f o^il ahpop Xahil, chuvach Tunatiuh, cahvinak ruvaka
xquiban ahaua xe chee xe^m, maqui ^ xax cutzih
ahaua xeba, ^hi^h tal qui^mic ruma Tunatiuh, xax
^tun qui tzihol ahaua chuvach Tunatiuh. Ha ^ chi
vuku Ahmak xebokotah el ahaua, xeapon Paruyaal Chay,
tzatz chi ahaua xcuchu ri ronohel ^a ru mam ahauh, ru
^hol ahauh, xbe tzatz chi vinak cachbiyil ahaua. Chi
vahxaki Noh ^ xeapon Panchoy, xa^a tiquicot Tuna-
tiuh chique ahaua, tok x^et chic quivach ruma Tunatiuh.

Chi oxlahuh Ah xel humay cahlauha yuhuh.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 187

The Beginning of the Tribute,

162. Three hundred days after Chiixot was taken, be-
gan the payment of tribute to the Captain by Chinta
Queh. It was here at Tzolola, on the day 6 Tzi, that
the tribute began. At that time was born my son.
Diego Pabo Cotanoh. Thou wert born, O my son, on
that day, 6 Tzi, on which the tribute began. Deep, in-
deed, were the sufferings we underwent to escape from
the wars, and twice we were on the point of losing our
life.

On the day 6 Ah was completed the 32d year after the
Revolt.

163. It was two years less one hundred and twenty
days after the beginning of the tribute when died the chief
Ahtun cue Tihax. He died on the day 6 Akbal. The
chiefs Ahpopzotzil and Ahpopxahil had not yet sub-
mitted.

On the day 3 Ah was completed the 33d year.

164. In the course of this year the chiefs Ahpopzotzil
and Ahpopxahil came before Tunatiuh. For eighty-six
days these chiefs had hid in the woods. Not only did
they wish to come forth, but their labors and sufferings
were known to Tunatiuh, and the memory of these chiefs
came to Tunatiuh. On the day 7 Ahmak the chiefs de-
cided to come forth. When they arrived at Paruyaal chay,
many chiefs, all the fathers of the chiefs and their sons,
and a multitude of people accompanied the chiefs. On
the day 8 Noh they reached PanChoy. Then Tunatiuh
rejoiced with the chiefs, when their faces were seen again
before Tunatiuh.

On the day 1 3 Ah was completed the 36th year after
the revolt.


188 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

\I append the translation of the remainder of what I believe to
be the original work (see Introduction, page ^8) ; but as its contents
are of little general interest , I omit the text.]

165. During this year frightful imposts were levied;
they paid gold and silver before the face of Tunatiuh,
and there were demanded as tribute five hundred men
and five hundred women to go to the gold washings ;
all the people were busy seeking gold. Five hundred
men and five hundred women were also demanded by
Tunatiuh to aid in building Pangan for his princely resi-
dence. All that, yes, all that, we ourselves witnessed,
O my children.

On the loth Ah was completed the 3Sth year after the
Revolt.

166. Forty days were lacking to complete three years
from the date of the submission of the kings when
Belehe Qat died. He died on the 7th Queh, when em-
ployed in washing for gold and silver. As soon as he
was dead Tunatiuh set to work to appoint his successor.
The prince Don Jorge was appointed by the sole com-
mand of Tunatiuh. There was no council held nor
assembly to confirm him. Tunatiuh gave his orders to
the princes and they obeyed him; for, truly, he made
himself feared.

On the 7th Ah was completed the 36th year after the
revolt.

167. Three hundred and forty days after the death of
Belehe Qat the princes were forced to place Don Jorge
in possession of the throne. His father was Don Juan
Xuares.

Oh the 4th Ah was completed the 37th year after the ^
revolt.

168. In the course of this year the king Cahi Ymox
Ahpozotzil withdrew and went to inhabit the capital. He
intended to separate from the others, because the tribute
had been imposed on all the chiefs, even on the king
himself.

On the 1st Ah was completed the 38th year after the
revolt.


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 189

169. During this year Tunatiuh departed for Castile,
making new conquests on his road. Thus he destroyed
those of Tzutzumpan and of Choloma ; and many other
towns were destroyed by Tunatiuh. There occurred an
unheard of event at Tzutzumpan. I saw Hunahpu
tremble a litle while before the prince Mantunalo arrived
here. Tunatiuh went to Castile, leaving Tzutzumpan.

On the nth Ah was completed the 39th year after the
revolt.

170. In the course of the year, on the nth Noh,
Prince Mantunalo arrived. The prince Mantunalo arrived
to relieve the nation from its sufferings ; the washing for
gold and silver promptly ceased, and the tribute of young
men and women ceased; the burnings alive and the
hangings ceased, and, indeed, all the various acts of
violence of the Castilians and the imposts which they
had forcibly laid upon us. The roads were once more
frequented by travelers when the Prince Mantunalo
arrived, as they had been eight years before, when the
imposts were first laid upon us, O my children.

On the 8th Ah was completed the 40th year after the
revolt.

On the 5 th Ah was completed the first year of the
third cycle.

171. Before the close of the second year of the third
cycle, the prince Tunatiuh arrived, landing at Porto
Cavayo. When Tunatiuh came back from Castile with
the position of commander, each of us went before him
to receive him, O my children. It was then that he
killed with his sword the Ah-tzib Caok on account of his
lineage ; it was on the day 1 1 Ahmak that he killed the
Ah-tzib.

On the day 2 Ah was completed the second year of
the third cycle.

172. One hundred and twenty days after the death of
Ahtzib and of the return of Tunatiuh to Panchoy, the
prince Mantunalo departed, leaving Tunatiuli in com-
mand. Two hundred and sixty days after his return,
Tunatiuh hanged the king Ahpozotzil Cahi Ymox, on


190 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

the day 13 Ganel. They hanged with him Quixavit
Caok, by order of Tunatiuh.

On the day 12 Ah was completed the third year of the
third cycle.

173. Two hundred and eighty days after the execution
of the king Ahpozotzil he hanged Chuvy Tziquinu,
prince of the city, who had angered him. They hanged
him on the day 4 Can at Paxaya. They seized him on
the road and executed him secretly. Seventeen other
chiefs were hanged at the same time. On the day 4 Ig
the chief Chicbal, who had caused the death of Chuvy
Tziquinu, was hanged in his turn, and with him Nima-
bah and Quehchun. Meanwhile, Tunatiuh had left for
Xuchipillan, appointing as his lieutenant and to see to
the hangings, Don Francisco, who attended to them.
One hundred days after* the prince Chicbal had been
hanged, came the news that Tunatiuh had met his death
at Xuchipillan.

On the day 9 Ah was completed the fourth year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

1 74. In the course of this year there was a great dis-
aster which destroyed the Castilians at Panchoy. On the
day 2 Tihax the waters burst from the mountain Hun-
ahpu, rushing out from the interior of the mountain,
and enveloped the Castilians in destruction. The wife
of Tunatiuh was then drowned.

WJien Our Instruction Began.

One hundred and sixty days after this disaster there
arrived at our house our fathers of St. Dominic,
Brother Pedro Anculo and Brother Juan de Torres.
They arrived from Mexico on the day 1 2 Batz, and we
began to receive instruction from our fathers of St.
Dominic. Then also appeared the Doctrina in our
language. Our fathers, Brother Pedro and Brother Juan
were the first who taught us the word of God. Until
that time the word and the commandments of God were
unknown to us ; we had lived in darkness, for no one had


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 191

spoken to us of the doctrine of God. There were also
the fathers of St. Francis, Father Alamicer and Father
Clerico, with those of St. Dominic, who spoke to us.
They translated the Doctrina into our language, and we
were soon instructed by them.

On the day 6 Ah was completed the fifth year of the
third cycle.

On the day 3 Ah was completed the sixth year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

On the day 13 Ah was completed the seventh year.

175. In the course of the year our fathers of St.
Dominic separated from those of St. Francis, on account
of ashes ; the latter went away. Ashes were not given
by our Fathers of St. Dominic ; therefore, those of St.
Francis went away.

On the day 10 Ah was completed the 8th year of the
third cycle.

On the day 7 Ah was completed the 9th year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

176. In the course of the year the licentiate Don Juan
Roxer arrived.

They Begin to Group the Houses.

One hundred and six days after they had really begun
to teach us the word of God, then they commenced to
gather together the houses in groups, by order of the
ruler, Juan Roser, and the people came forth from their
caves and ravines. On the day 7 Caok the capital was
repeopled, and we were there with all the tribes.

On the day 4 Ah was completed the loth year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

On the day i Ah was completed the i ith year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

177. In the course of the year the President Cerrado
arrived, while the licentiate Pedro Ramirez was still here.
When he arrived he condemned the Castilians ; he set
free the slaves and prisoners of the Castilians, dimin-
ished by one-half the imposts, put an end to forced


192 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

labor, and obliged the Castilians to pay all for their
work, little or great. This Prince Cerrado truly solaced
the afflictions of our nation; for I, myself, O my children,
was a witness of the many miseries which we endured.

On the day ii Ah was completed the I2th year of the
third cycle.

On tfie day 8 Ah was completed the 13th year of the
third cycle.

178. In the course of the year died the Ahtzib Juan
Perez ; he died on the day 12 Tihax. Eighty days after
the death of the Ahtzib, there was an eruption of the
mountain Chigag ; it was on the day 9 Ah that the fire
appeared in the mountain.

On the day 5 Ah was completed the 14th year of the
third cycle.

179. During this year arrived the iron bell; it came
from the emperor of Castile ; it reached us on the day
3 Hunahpu, which was on a Friday. Twenty days after
the arrival of the iron bell, the licentiate Ramirez tried
to kill the prince bishop at Pangan, the governor Cerrado
being present. The door of the church was forced by
Ramirez. This took place on a day 2 Can, on a Thurs-
day. One hundred and sixty days after these leaders
had come to blows at Pangan, all our fathers of St.
Francis and St. Dominic came to blows in their turn at
Xelahub, the former having tried to wrest Xelahub from
the Dominicans.

On the day 2 Ah was completed the 15 th year of the
third cycle.

180. In the course of this year the locusts (grass-
hoppers) reappeared. It was on the day 12 Tziquin, the
day after the Visitation, that the grasshoppers came.
They passed over all parts of the country, and we saw
them with you, my children.

On the day 12 Ah was completed the i6th year of the
third cycle.

181. During the course of this year arrived the Presi-
dent Doctor Quexata; it was on a day 2 Hunahpu that
that ruler arrived here, coming from Mexico. They


ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS. 193

were celebrating the feast of the circumcision. The
governor Cerrado was here when he arrived. When
9ie Doctor Quexata had almost arrived, the President
Cerrado died. There was but little between them.
Then the Doctor Quexata died. He did not condemn
any one, because he had no time. But the ruler Cerrado
condemned (the Castilians), for he did what was right.
About the same time died the chief Don Francisco
Ahpozotzil ; it was on the day i Can, a Monday, the 14th
day of the month October, that he died. It was in this
year that he died that the nativity of our Saviour Jesus
Christ came on the day i Batz.

On the day 9 Ah was completed the 17th year of the
third cycle.

182. Forty days after the death of the chief Don
Francisco, died our Father Fray Domingo de Vico in
Acalan. Truly, with great tortures was he put to death
by the tribe. Twenty days after the death of our father
in Acalan, Father Fray Francisco de la Para was exiled
by the bishop and the ruler Ramirez. This took place
on Easter day.

On the day 6 Ah was completed the i8th year of the
third cycle.

1 83. At this time died Alonzo de Pazon, the day 1 2 Ganel.
In the 13th month of the year, the day of Sanctiago

at Pangan occurred on the day i Tziquin. On that day
the Castilians at Pangan had great rejoicings, because
on that day was inaugurated as supreme monarch over
in Castile the Emperor Don Peliphe. There were then
three rulers, the Prince Ramirez, the Doctor Mercia and
Louaisa. They held court at Panchoy. In the 14th
month of the year, after this day of Sanctiago, there
came an order from Ramirez. He imposed a tribute on
members of the nobility among the people. He also
made provision for the surplusage of the tribute. There
had never been a surplus under the chiefs ; it was known
to be stolen, but no one knew by whom. The maize tax
was reduced and that of roast fowls, and none of the
chiefs could steal anything from the surplus. This order
of Ramirez was promulgated on the day of St. Francis,


194 ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

a Monday, the day 7 Carney. Twenty days after the
promulgation of the order of Ramirez, the Book of the
Doctrina was published, on the day of Saints, a Monday ;
but many would not accept the Doctrina, but refused it.

On the day 3 Ah was completed the 19th year of the
third cycle after the revolt.

184. The Alcaldes in the year 1557 were Don Juan
Juarez and Don Francisco Pez.

In the course of the year an incursion was made to
destroy the Lacantuns. It was on the day 5 Ey that the
ruler Ramirez sallied forth as general, and Don Martin
went also as general, twenty days before the close of the
third cycle.

Don Juan Juarez and Francisco Pez Martin were
chosen as Alcaldes, to issue orders. {Note by a later
writer: These were the first Alcaldes, and with them
began the elections.)

On the day 13 Ah was completed the third cycle since
the Revolt was made. The third cycle was completed
in the year 1558.

185. When we were in the eleventh month of the year,
a President Royal arrived, on the day 3 Qat. When he
arrived at Pangan on i Akbal, Don Diego Pez was
inaugurated as chief by the ruler Ramirez.

Six months after the arrival of the President at Pan-
gan, began here again the pestilence which had formerly
raged among the people. It came from a distance. It
was truly terrible when this death was sent among us by
the great God. Many families bowed their heads before
it. The people were seized with a chill and then a fever;
blood issued from the nose ; there was a cough, and the
throat and nose were swollen, both in the lesser and the
greater pestilence. All here were soon attacked. These
maladies began, O my children, on the day of the Circum-
cision, a Monday, and as I was writing, we also were
attacked with the disease.

Diego Ernandez Xahil and Francisco Ernandez Galel
Bagahol were Alcaldes in the year 1559.

The first year of the fourth cycle since the revolt was
completed on the day 10 Ah.


NOTES.


1. The author begins by stating his purpose in a few lines.
xHnuA^ibah^ future of Aibahy to write, originally to paint.
xebogOy past tense, third person, plural, of the absolute form of

bog^ here, as often, used actively. Compare Gram.^ p. 49.

la^abex^ passive of laPabeh^ to inhabit, to settle.

huyu taC^ah^ hills and plains, or, the interior and the coast ; an
expression meaning the whole country.

que chay they say, used as the French on dit^ indicating that the
writer is reporting the words of another.

ki^ an intensive or affirmative particle, thrown in to add
strength to the expression.

ka tata^ our fathers, ka mama, our grandfathers and ancestors
more remote than fathers. These terms are to be understood in
a general sense.

yx nu qaholy you my sons, or yx ka qahol, you our sons, inti-
mates that this account was prepared for the family of the writer.

pa Tulan. The prep, pa (before a vowel pan) means in, at, to,
and from. Torresano (MS. Gram,) renders it by the Latin
ady pro, absque, ab, de, e, ex. Brasseur translates these words
" being still in Tulan," which does not make sense.

2. ^a^avitz, Zactecauh, Both these names of the ancestral
heroes of the Cakchiquels appear to be partly Nahuatl. Tj^T,
is " fire," and Zak is ** white," both Cakchiquel words , but vttzlt,
thorn, and techatl, the stone of sacrifice, are Nahuatl.

Ahaka palouh, the other side of the sea. The word palouh
appears to be derived from the verb paloh, to lift onesself up, to
rise, referring to the waves.

pe m, and vi pe ; on the use of the particle vi, see Grammar ^
p. 63.

pa Tulan ru bi huyu, from the country or place called Tulan.
The word huyu usually means hill or mountain ; but it is fre-
quently used in the vague sense of " place," *' locality."

achij, men, viri, not homines, which latter is vinak.

Xahila, a plural form. The name may be derived from xahoh^
to dance in the sacred or ceremonial dances ; or from ahila, to
reckon or number.

195


196 NOTES.

3. chinamity the sub-gens. On this see the Introduction. The
our referred to include the Xahila, mentioned in the previous

paragraph. These four, the Xahila, the Gekaquch, the Baqa-
hol, and the Cibaki, formed the tribe ; the remaining four, the
Caveki, the Ah Queh, the Ah Pak, and the Ykomagi, were of the
same lineage, but not in the confederacy.

Daqui; the letter d does not occur either in Cakchiquel or
Nahuatl. The foreign aspect of some of these names seems to
point to an ancient influence of some allophyllic tongue.

4. He Aa Aoh^ etc. The writer here states that he gives the
exact words of the ancient tradition. He probably wrote the
text from some antique chant, which had been handed down from
his ancestors. The quotation begins at the words Cahi xpe^ and
continues to near the close of the next paragraph, where the
words xecha can ri Ca^amtZf the above spoke Gagavitz, etc.,
mark its termination. This is one of the most obscure passages
in the book. The original text is given by Brasseur among his
pieces jusHficativeSy in the appendix to the first volume of his
Hist du Mexique, A comparison with his translation will show
that in several important constructions I differ from him.

The mythological references to Tulan, 4-abouil, the Chay Abah,
Xibilbay, etc., have been discussed in the Introduction. The
passage corresponds to the first chapter of the third book of the
Popol Vuh.

Tutatiy Tullan ; these variations are in the original.

5. The particle tan, with which the paragraph opens, throws
the narrative into the " historical present," for the sake of greater
vividness. The verb A^o^^ as at present used, means to make
bricks, etc., out of earth.

xHho; translated by Brasseur, "the trial was made ; " but it is
the imperfect passive of tih^ which means " to give to another
something to eat or drink."

xakiy plural oi xak^ generic word for leaf.

uHuht koch ; besides these, two other animals are named in the
Popol Vuh.

a^hak is the general word for excrement, either of men or
brutes ; also, refuse, waste products in general.

Huh Huh is the name of a small variety of hawk. '*El gavilan
pegueno*' Guzman, Compendio de Nontbres en Lengua CaJtchi-
quel, MS.

mani Aa xAhao^ " and he talked not." The connective 4-^, like


NOTES. 197

navipe^ and pe, all three of which may usually be translated by
'^ and/' is not placed at the beginning of the clause. Aha is to
speak in the general sense ; hence, ^adal, a language. Syno-
nyms of this are tin cha^ I say ; Hn tzihoh^ I speak words, I har-
angue ; Hn biih, I name, I express myself; and quin ucheex, I tell
or say, especially used in repeating what others have said (Coto,
Vocabulario), These words are of frequent use in the text.

Rubanic chay abah ri A^apal^ etc. ; this obscure passage was, I
think, entirely misunderstood by Brasseur. The word Aapal is
derived from the neuter form Af(ipe of the active tin A^apthy I shut
up or enclose, and means " that which is shut up," lo cerrado^
and AflpibcUy the active form in the next line, means " that which
shuts up," i, e,y gates or doors. It will be remembered (see
ante, p. 26) that the gates of Iximche were constructed partly of,
or ornamented with, obsidian, and the same is supposed here of
the gates of the mythical city or place of Tulan.

ki'kan; our burden, our tribute. The passage seems to indicate
that they left their former country to escape subjection.

Aoh qui tzih ; the passage may be translated " theirs were the
words which incited us," i, ^., to revolt and to depart.

6. The articles mentioned as paid in the tribute, have been
described in the Introduction (see p. 39).

7. *'So spoke the Obsidian Stone," i, e,^ the sacred oracle,
referred to as the final arbiter. See ant^, p. 26.

"The wood and stone which deceive," that is, the idols of
wood and stone which they worshiped.

8. This paragraph is obscure, and the numerous erasures in
Brasseur's translation indicate the difficulty he found in discov-
ering its meaning.

9. AJiolloh tacaxepeval rikan ^eche ; Brasseur translates this :
" Malheureux etaient les fils et les vassaux des Quiches ^ I take
the word taccLxepeval to be the name of the first month in the
Cakchiquel calendar (see ant^, p. 29); and Aolloh means *'to
divest ourselves of, to get rid of."

13. This and the following section describes the efforts of
certain inimical powers, under the guise of birds, to obstruct
and deceive the Cakchiquels. The chahalfivan is a small bird
which builds in the rocky sides of the ravines, and is called by
the Spaniards by a literal translation, "El guar da barranca^^* the
gully-guard. The tucur is the owl ; this name being apparently
an abbreviation of the Nahuatl tecolotl. The bird called ^nixt


198 NOTES.

is the Spanish cotorra, a small species of parrot. (Guzman,
Compendio de Nombres^ MS.)

On the word labalinic^ see Introduction, p. 47.

14. The owl sat on the red tree, the caka chee^ whence, as we
learn later, the tribe derived its name, Cakchiquel — a doubtful
derivation.

Chee abah^ wood and stone ; understood to refer to the idols of
these substances.

(a^ih, for Cak^ih, the spring. Father Goto has the following
under the words : '^EsHo vel verano, (akf^tk ; pa gak ^ih^ en el
estio vel verano. Y nota que los que nosotros decimos en
saliendo el verano, o que quando para, estos lo entrinden al
contrario ; porque decin, mixel gak Pih^ mani chic ru CiA had,
ya sali6 el verano, no ay mas aguero.*'

16. The cak chee, red tree, is translated by Father Guzman,"arbol
de carreta." The legendary derivation of the name Cakchiquel
from this is doubtful. AJiamey may mean something more than
staff; it is applied to the staff of office, the bdton de commandetnent
carried by the alguacils, etc.

The whole paragraph is obscure, but seems to describe their
leaving the sandy shore of the sea, passing out of sight of land,
then coming in sight of it again, and going ashore.

17. The word ikan, burden, here as elsewhere, is usually trans-
lated by Brasseur, '* tribute."

18. Ah chay, literally, ** master of obsidian." As this stone
was largely used for arrow heads and other weapons, the expres-
sion in this connection seems to mean "master of arms." Ah
Aam, from ^m, to take, seize. Brasseur construes these words
as in apposition to va^h : " Whom shall we make our master of
arms," etc.

Etamayant, from the root et, mark, sign ; etamah, to know, to be
skilled in an art ; etantayam, he who knows (see Grammar, pp.
27, 56). Brasseur 's rendering, ** le Voyant'' is less accurate. See
his translation of this passage in the Hist du Mexique, Tome
II, p. 92.

Aokikan ; Brasseur gives to this the extraordinary rendering,
*'parfum^s d'ambre." But Goto states that it was the term
applied to the loads of roasted maize, which were the principal
sustenance of the natives on their journeys.

19. The narration continues in the words of the ancestral
heroes, who speak in the first person, plural.


NOTES. 199

Nonovalcatf Xulpit; the first of these names is decidedly
Nahuatl, and recurs in the Maya Chronicles, See Introduction,
p. 44. The second is clearly of Maya origin. These localities
are located by Brasseur on the Laguna de Terminos, near the
mouth of the Usumacinta.

20. Having defeated their enemies in the field, the Cakchiquels
seized their boats and ventured an attack on the town, in which
they were repulsed.

Zuyva; this famous name in Aztec mythology, was also
familiar to the Maya tribes. (See The Maya Chronicles^ p. no.)
The term ah zuyva seems here employed as a general term for
the Nahuatl-speaking nations. (See above, p. 44.)

CaA. ; I do not find this word in any dictionary ; perhaps it is
for caA^^ a variety of wasp.

" When we asked each other," etc. Here follow some frag-
ments of legends, explaining the origin of the names of the
tribes. They are quite imaginary.

Tohohily from tohoh^ to resound in the water and the sky
(sonar el rio y el ayre. Dice, Cak, Anon, ) ; not clangor armorum^
as Brasseur translates it, but sounds of nature. Tohil was the
name of the principal Quiche divinity, and was supposed by
Brasseur and Ximenez to be an abbreviated form of Tohohil.
But I have given reasons for supposing it to mean "justice,"
** equity," and this legend was devised to explain it, when its true
etymology had become lost. (See my Names of the Gods in the
Kiche Myths ^ p. 23.)

Cakix ; the bird so called, the Ara macao, of ornithologists,
was one of the totemic signs of the Zotzil families of the Cakchi-
quels. The author here intimates that the name Cakchiquel is
from cahix^ and chi^ month, forgetting that he has already derived
it from cah chee (Sec. 16).

Chita^ah; " in the valley."

f^uf^cumatz ; see notes on Sec. 38.

Ahcic amaf" ; " the town on high," built on some lofty eminence.

Akahal ; the derivation suggested is from akah^ a honey-comb
or wasp's nest.

^aker. This is an important word in Xahila's narrative. It is
derived from gak^ white ; hence, gakeVy to become white ; also, to
dawn, to become light ; metaphorically, of persons, to become
enlightened or civilized. The active form, gakericah^ means to
inform, to acquaint with, to instruct.


200 NOTES.

21. Nima A.o:vofn, nima chah, Brasseur translates, "great
ravines, enormous oaks;" chdh is oak, chdh, ashes; Ao^^ to
strike fire, to clash stones together, ^apiytzel^ " the bad place
where the flesh is torn from the body," referring probably to
sharp stones and thorns. Popo abah^ the Council Stone.

Molamic cheCy "wood gathered together or piled up." It is
noteworthy that this, which seems to be the name of a place,
means in Cakchiquel the same as Quauhtemallan^ Guatemala, in
Nahuatl. Perhaps the Aztec allies of Alvarado merely translated
the Cakchiquel name of the country. (See Introduction, p. 22,
note.)

XcJiun chi lol ; a diflicult phrase, translated by Brasseur, " le
dernier rejeton ; " lol is applied to a condition of desertion and
silence, as that of an abandoned mill or village. On halebal^ see
Introduction, p. 46.

On ZakiAoxol, and the conflict with him, see the Introduction,
p. 42.

22. Ru chahim ; Brasseur translates this phrase, " between the
fire and the ashes," taking chahim from chdh^ ashes. But I
take it to be from the verb chahih, to guard, as later in the para-
graph the question is asked : " Nak rumal tachahih bey f "
" Why guardest thou the road ? "

xcha Aa ok xul ; "apr^ qu'il eut parl^, il joua sur la flute."
Brasseur. The Abb6 here mistook the preterit of ul to arrive, for
the noun xul^ a flute.

ru Aux huyu. The ambiguity of the word huyu^ here, as often,
oflers difficulty in ascertaining the precise sense of the original.
It means mountain or hill, woods or forest, or simply place or
locality. While ^x^ means literally "heart," it also has the
sense, "soul, spirit." (Coto, Vocabulario^ MS. s. v. Corazon.)
Hence, the phrase may be translated "the Spirit of the Forest,"
or "of the Mountain." Brasseur prefers the latter, while I lean
to the former.

roquegam, from the root oc^ to enter ; applied to garments " that
which is entered," or put on. Compare our slang expression, " to
get into one's clothes."

xahpota^ see Introduction, p. 18.

23. Yukuba, to string out ; hence, to name seruUim, The last
four names given are clearly Nahuatl, as is also Zuchitan. This
indicates that the Cakchiquels, in their wanderings, had now
entered the territory of the Pipils, of the Pacific slope.


NOTES. 201

Cholama^ ; " the tribe of the Chols," or " of the com fields."
The Chols were a Maya tribe, who lived around Palenque (see
Stoll, Ethnographie der Rep. Guatemala^ pp. 89-93), but the refer-
ence in the text is not to them, nor yet to the Mams, as Brasseur
thought, but to a nation speaking a non-Maya tongue.

Vaya vaya ela opa, I have given several reasons for the opinion
that these words are in the Xinca language. See my essay
On the Xinca Indians of Guatemala^ in the Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society y 1885.

24. Meniy dumb, silent, incapable of speech. Tin tnemuh m, I
am dumb, I keep silence ; given in the text as the origin of the
nomen gentile, Mam. The Mams speak a dialect of the Maya,
probably scarcely intelligible to the Cakchiquels. They at
present dwell in the northwestern districts of the Republic of
Guatemala. See Stoll, Ethnographie der Rep, Guatemala, pp.
164-5.

25. Nacxit. On this passage Brasseur builds his theory of the
formation of a great Toltec empire in Central America, about the
close of the eleventh century {Hist, des Nations Civilisies du
Mexique, Tom. II, pp. 101-5). He explains Nacxit as the last
two syllables of Topiltzin Acxitl, a title of Quetzalcoatl. Cinpual
Taxuch is undoubtedly from the same tongue. Orbal tzam,
Bored Nose, the pendent from the nose being apparently a sign
of dignity, as the pierced ears of the Incas.

vapal abah, " the lintel stone," here used in the metaphorical
sense of " the comer stone."

26. The description of the dance of the Pokomams, leads us to
suppose that the author means it was a war dance. The Poko-
mams dwell at present in the southeastern part of the Republic
of Guatemala.

chicop QaJdnm ; the savage or barbarian Zakbim. See Intro-
duction, p. 39.

27. Tzaktzuy, Brasseur translates "Chateau des Citrouilles,"
mistaking tzak for Aflk, as he does throughout the passage ; tzuy
means also cup or gourd, and the name may be rendered either
" the ensnaring cup," or " vine." Possibly it refers to a scene of
dmnkenness.

ri retal; the sign or mark. Brasseur translates it " limit " or
" landmark " of the Ahquehays. These were one of the noble
families of the Quiche stock.

28. Oronic Cakhay, " the Red House of the Nobles," said by

N


202 NOTES.

Brasseur to be a hfll, one league west of the modem village of
Rabinal.

Tecpan^ " the royal house." See IntrodQCtkm, p. 13.

Aftmak cki qtd Amx ; Brassenr translates these words, ''col-
rass^ snr la pcxtrme,'* and says this was the name of the Poko-
mams (HisL Mex.^ II, p. 126). A/mm is leather (mt skin, and
Amx is heart ; but Afimah^ and later, xAfumax^ is a verb, signi-
lying to lower, to depress.

" The venison and honey." This sentence is apparently a gibe
or jeer, addressed by the defenders of Cakhay to Gagavitz after
his attack on their dty had been repulsed.

29. Ah quek kay^ "those of the deer (skin) houses."

xaJMiA m a UHla ^<ama mbaJL Brassenr translates, " n ne noos
est rest^ que les vieilles femmes et ks jnerres d^ hantes." This
illustrates how fau- he is finom the correct meanii^ at times. For
these words, see notes to Sec 41.

3a Xkackaiah qui vacJL Brassenr gives this literally, ** leurs
faces ensuite se divisdrent ; " but vack means also " fruit, results,
possessions," and so I render it.

31. fl^fl xommI^ "^the unc over er of fire." This is supposed by
Brasseur to be the name of a volcano, and the whole episode to
refer to a pretended mirade. See his lEsL Mexiqme^ VoL II, pp.
166-7. He calls the passage ** fort difficile," which it certainly is.


32. QUUkof', ** Brul^ k blanc," is Brassenr^ translation, but I
cannot verify it. No such stone is mentioned in Guzman^ list of
Cakchiquel names of stones. It would seem that there were
fourteen chief performers in the dance of ^^ xanul, and tiiat
they took the name of certain stones.

34. Cki ^oHbal^ *'at the seat;" but the author chooses to
daive it from go, hand, which is a doubtful etymology.

35. The episode of Tolgom, his capture and death, is explained
by Brasseur, suo more, as the destruction of the ruler of an inde-
pendent tribe on the shores of Lake Atitlan.

Akabak Nicmic, the quivering mud, perhaps the quidcsand.
This strange name adds to the obscurity of the l^;end.

A akhafruht. The punning explanation of this name refers to
its similarity to 4-ai, to place in front of another ; also to shoot
with arrows, or to stone. Its real derivation seems to be AaJtda,
frx>m AaAada, to reveal, disdose, and izmlm, to embrace, sle^
together. (Compare ckee izmlm, later <».)

37. His song, t. e^ his death song.


NOTES. 203

Chee tzulUt " the interlaced trees."

Uchum, the fifth month of the Cakchiquel calendar. See Intro-
duction, p. 29.

38. J^i tzam tzakbal ToiAom, "throwing the extremities of
Tolgom." The reference to this festival is too slight to enable
us to understand it.

CAi iululf ** at the zapote trees.'*

Qadouil Abah^ " the Stone God," possibly the Chay Abah before
referred to.

QiAft cumatz; the latter is the generic term for snake, but the
meanmg of the prefix is uncertain. Perhaps it should read
fuxfUy to move in spiral lines, as is described in the text. This
miraculous form was one of Gagavitz's metamorphoses.

Nak runta Hqui Aam, etc. These words of the hero Gagavitz
are not easy to translate. They seem to chide the Cakchiquels
for their weakness in seeking women, and to announce his
intention to remain among the Tzutuhils.

ru ^Jiacpe ri neAdh coon; perhaps this should be translated,
"the organs of the women have conquered."

39. (akeribaly civilization, their becoming civilized. On the
meaning of this word see note to Sec. 20.

abah Auval; the precious stone offered by BaAahol as the
price of royalty, indicates that such carved gems were in high
esteem, ^val is translated by Guzman and others, " diamond ; "
but it was probably native jade.

Chuluc balanii literally " tiger piss," the name of a common
medicinal plant, used in Guatemala as a diuretic (Guzman). In
this connection it either means the totem of a gens, or refers to
a magic rite. The former seems to be indicated by the term
chicop (see Introd. p. 39).

xahun chi raxon ru halebal, a punning allusion to the name of
the hill Paraxone. Brasseur translates it " qui poss^dent Tun et
Tautre ces oiseaux bleus enchanteurs."

40. The sun had risen, etc. All these expressions are to be
understood metaphorically, with reference to the growing civiliza-
tion of the tribes.

41. The description of the installation of Ba^hol as head
chief, is an interesting passage. Unfortunately, several of the
terms used are not found in the dictionaries, at least with any
appropriate meaning. Thus,/a^ is now applied to the swathing
bands of infants ; cufui is the cradle or bundle in which infants


204 NOTES.

are fastened ; while ia^ I have not found at all. Guzman gives
the expression, titil Pana abah^ caka uleuh xak^ with the expla-
nation, "Colores con que ungian los seilores/' and Ak HHl^ etc.,
'^Senores ungidos de estos colores quando eran puestos en
senorios." (Compendia de Nambres en Lengua Cakchiquel^ MS.,

170-4.)

Pu Pu cot; cotf eagle ; Pu g, the general term for various species
of quetzals, birds with brilliant g^een plumage. The reference
seems to be to one of the magical metamorphoses of ^agavitz.

42. The difficulties experienced in their first endeavors to
adopt a sedentary and agricultural life are described.

chicop Auch^ the " zopilote," or carrion vulture. Possibly this
refers to a gens so designated.

43. In this parag^raph the writer expresses himself with great
directness.

Aju chimin^ etc. As my translation differs considerably from
Brasseur*s, I add his : " En se mariant ils firent Teuvre de la chair
vraiment trop g^ande. Etant entr^ pour se baigner, ils y rom-
pirent leur nature et gaspill^rent leur semence. Beaucoup y
entr^rent dit-on, pour completer Teuvre chamelle, on la commit
une seconde fois, le jeu s'y ^tablit absolument, et Ton forniqua
par devant et par derri^re."

44. This section offers an important description of the ancient
methods of worship.

AxixtoA., See the Introduction, p. 40.

mez^ the house cat, but as this animal was not known to
the natives before the Conquest, some other animal must be
intended.

holam ocoXy " head fungus." I follow Brasseur in translating
this the maguey thorns, without being able to justify it.

Chay Adah, See Introduction, p. 43.

46. Whitewashing the interior of hollow trees with lime from
the excrements of birds and tigers, sounds so extraordinary that
we may suspect a mythical sense in the paragraph.

chi Aohom, from 4-oh, to dance the sacred dances in their
religious rites, ** the place of the sacred ceremonies.''

Cay Noh, Two Noh, Cay Batz, Two Batz, named after the days
of their birth. See Introduction, p. 33.

47. T/ie same who came from Tulan. Therefore, from the
beginning of the narrative to the present passage, • merely the
adult life of one man has elapsed.


NOTES. 205

48. On the positions of the Palel and ahuchan^ see Introduc-
tion, p. 37.

ret ri (actecauh, " the sign of Zactecauh." The precise mean-
ing of this expression escapes me.
Ahopiytzel, See Sec. 30 for the occurrence alluded to.

49. Tepeuh is identified by Brasseur with the king Itztayul^ of
the Quiches {Hist Mexique^ II, p. 485). He considers it a
Nahuatl word, but I have elsewhere maintained that it is from
the Maya-Cakchiquel root tep^ filled up, abundantly supplied.
See The Names of the Gods in the Ktche Myths^ pp. 11, 12. It is
a term often applied to their Supreme Being.

52. Cakbrakatiy the god of the earthquake. The myths con-
cerning him are given in the Popol Vuh,

Quite to the far East^ literally, " and even to the sunrise."

daAf^al, anything drawn out in threads, gold thread, cotton
thread, etc. If the word is to be construed adjectively, puah
baAfial would mean " worked metal."

56. Ahpop Xahily etc. ; on the meaning of these titles, see the
Introduction, p. 36-7.

63. Ya A.otox ul; Ajot^ to chisel, engrave, originally to cut into ;
hence, applied to the deep valleys or canons which the rivers cut
into the soil.

Ochal or Qahouil Qivan; the latter name means " the god of
the ravine." The location of this city is unknown, except that it
was near the Pacific. The general position of the Akahals was
to the east of the Cakchiquels. See Brasseur, Hist, Mexique^
Tom. II, pp. 502, 530.

64. MePenalah huyu^ a town in the warm district, the tierra
caliente, near the southern or Pacific coast.

chuvi vi te^ etc. The translation is doubtful. I follow Brasseur.

66. The names of the four rulers here inserted seem to be of
those who held the power after Citan Qatu. Why the author
does not relate any incidents of their lives is uncertain. Perhaps
they did not belong to his family, and as he was writing rather a
family than a national history, he omitted them for this reason.
Compare Sec. 75.

67. The Quiche king, Qikab, is frequently mentioned in the Popol
Vuh, His full name was ^aP-Ai-f^ady The Many Hands of Fire.

79. They wished that the roads should be free ; rambey akatiy
'^ la franchise des chemins." I do not find the expression in the
dictionaries.

83. Mixutzin malo^ " the augury is finished." The malol ixim


206 NOTES.

was the augur who divined the future by throwing up grains of
com, and forecasting from the relative positions they assumed on
falling. See Introd., p. 47.

cununt cachakf a term of contempt ; literally " their genitals,
their dung."

The Ratzamut, See Introd., p. 21.

84. Burning tnany roads; destroying the houses and crops
behind them.

90. hu chuvy^ ca chuvy ; in the numeral system of the Cakchi-
quels a chuvy is 8000, but the expression is frequently, as here,
to be taken figuratively, like our *' myriads."

93. ah'xit^ etc. On these titles see the Introduction, pp. 18, 19.

94. Vtcaf^ nu manty " the leaves or branches of my ancestor,"
referring to the fact that the Cakchiquels were of the same blood
as the Akahals.

96. QikliAaholy etc. This rendering, which is Brasseur's, I am
unable to verify.

iok relic chic ahauh lahuh noh ; perhaps this should read, " then
came the chief Lahuh Noh." So Brasseur translates it.

102. There were four womeriy etc. This curious passage is so
differently translated by Brasseur, that I add his rendering : —

'' Quatre femmes alors s'^tant r^vetues de cottes de mailles,
ensanglant^rent leurs arcs et prirent part ^ la bataille; elles
s'^taient accompagn^s de quatres jeunes gens et leurs filches
all^rent frapper au milieu du tapis de Chucuybatzin, lances qu'
elles ^taient par ces h^ros. . . Le capitaine de bataille exposa
ensuite les nudit^s de ces femmes devant les murailles des
Zotziles et des Xahiles d'ou ces femmes ^taient sorties."

The future student will decide between these very diverse
explanations of the text.

106. Stopped the messengers of the ruler. The translation is
doubtful.

109. The people of Mixco or Mixcu were Pokomams. (See
Sec. 85.)

no. The Yaquis of Xizdco ; Xh^ Ki^w were Aztecs. It is the
Nahuatl yaqui^ merchants, as it was in this capacity that they
first became known to the tribes of Guatemala.

117. This year, 151 1 of our era, appears to have been the first
of official relations between the Aztecs and the tribes of Gua-
temala.

118. The author speaks of himself for the first time. It may
be presumed that it was one of his earliest recollections.


NOTES. 207

1 20. The doves : possibly flights of wild pigeons.

124. Hu may ; on the reckoning of time see the Introduction,

p. 31-

127. ^haCy the pestilence. Brasseur translates this " la maladie

syphilitique." The vowel is long, ^aac. It is a word applied
to any eruptive disease, to the whole class of exanthemata.
From the symptoms, I am inclined to believe that it was an
epidemic of malignant measles, a disease very fatal to the natives
of Central America.

128. Diego Juan, Why this Spanish name is given, I cannot
explain. Brasseur gets over the difficulty by translating '' le p^re
de Diego Juan," but this is not the sense of the original. Of
course, tata and mama are here used in their vague sense, as
expressions of courtesy. See Introduction, p. 35.

144. Pedro de Alvarado, called the Adelantado, a Spanish title
formerly given to a governor of a province, and by his Mexican
allies, Tonatiuhy the Sun or Sun-God, reached the city of Gumar-
caah, or Utlatlan in the early spring of 1524.

147. Were burned alive, "As I knew their evil intentions,
and to keep the people quiet, I burned them, and ordered their
city razed to its foundation," writes Alvarado to Cortes. Re-
ladon^ etc.

400 men, Alvarado writes cuatro mil hombres, " four thousand
men."

148. The palace of Tzupam, Perhaps the palace described by
Fuentes. See Introduction, p. 24. Alvarado speaks of the
friendly reception he met with : " I could not have been more
warmly welcomed to the house of my father." Otra Reladon^ etc.
His first visit was for eight days, April 11-19, 1524.

Pa hul^ etc. This obscure passage is translated by Brasseur in
his MS. as follows : " Vous avez vu la-bas leur tombeau qui est
au milieu des autres ; " whereas, in his Hist, du Mexique^ Tom.
IV, p. 651, he translates the whole of this reply of the Cakchiquel
king by these words : " Eh quoi ! aurais-je envoys mes guerriers
et mes braves mourir pour vous et chercher un tombeau ^
Gumarcaah, si j 'avals eu des intentions si perfides ! "

This comparison will illustrate how differently he construed
the passage, and also what excessive license he took with his
authorities.

171. The order assigning the Oidor Alonso de Maldonado to
take charge of Guatemala, is dated Oct. 27, 1535, and he arrived
there in the following May.


208 NOTES.

On his return from Spain, Alvarado landed at Puerto de Cabal-
los, April 4, 1539, and reached the dty of Guatemala Sept. i6th
of the same year.

** On account of his lineage," Ruma ru ckimamUal; the ejq>res-
sion is not clear.

173. " Prince of the city/' Akauk pa iina$mit; see Sec 168.
Cahi Imox and others had returned to settle in bdmche, and their
actions had become suspicious.

173. Francisco de Alvarado was either the unde or cousin of
Don Pedro.

The Adelantado died July 5, 1541, from an ii^ury received
while attacking the stronghold of Nochistlan.

174. This disaster occurred on the night of Sept. lo-iith, 1541.
The mission referred to is mentioned by Torquemada, Mamtr-

qtda huHana^ Lib. XIX, Cap. XIV. Pedro de Angulo and his
companion reached Guatemala in 1539.

175. " On account of ashes," Ruma ckak ; Brassenr translates
this expression, " £ cause de billeves^es."

176. Juan Rogel was one of the *'oidores."

177. Alonso Lopez Cerrato entered upon his duties in Guate-
mala May 26, 1548.

179. Pedro Ramirez de Quinones. The actor in this attempt was
one of the oidores. Bancroft, who refers to the quarrel between
the Governor and Bishop Marroquin, does not satisfactorily
explain it. See his HisL of Central America^ VoL II, pp. 326-7.
On Ramirez, see Juarros, Hist. Gmaiemala^ Tom. I, pp. 235-6.

181. Antonio Rodriguez de Quezada took possession of the
Presidency of Guatemala Jan. 14, 1554, and retained it till his
death in November, 1558 ; he was succeeded by Pedro Ramirez.
(Comp. Juarros, I, p. 255, with Bancroft, HisL Ctmt Am^ II, p.
358, who says 1555.)

181. " There was but little between them,** Xa ^ kalal qui
cokol akauk ; this expression is not dear. There appears to be
considerable vagueness in the writer's chronology in this passage.

"He did not condenm any one, because he had no time,"
Mam xuban ru Patbaltzik^ mam xyalok; an ignorant statement,
since he held the Presidency about four years.

The reading of the last sentence is doubtfiiL

182. Vico was killed in the summer of 1555.

184. The expedition against the Lacandons took place early

in 1559-


VOCABULARY.


A, «. A year ; the thigh ; pron, thy.

Abah, n, A stone ; ajar ; the private parts.

Aca, part. Related, affined. See p. 32.

Ach. A prefix indicating companionship.

Achak, n. Excrement, ofTal, refuse, waste.

Achcajrupil, n. Quilted cotton defensive armor ; or perhaps a

two-pointed lance ; from ach^ united ; cay, two ; uopihf to

wound with a lance. See p. 18.
Achii, n, Man (vir).
Achpe, V. To accompany one.
Achpetic, n. That which accompanies one.
Achya, v. To receive (Brasseur) ; to give with.
Achyaic, n. That which is given along with something else ;

yaiCf passive verbal from ya, to give.
AcoAih, V, (For the more usual Pogih), To strike or beat,

especially a drum.
Ah, «. Name of a day. A prefix. Gram, p. 55.
Ahauh, n. Ruler, chief, lord. See p. 36.
Ahauarem, n. Majesty, power.
Ahcic, adv. Up, above, on top.
Ahilah, v. To count or reckon with grains of com or cacao,

after the Indian fashion.
Ahilan, v. To count, to number.
Ahlabal, n. Warrior, fighting man. See Labal,
Aho, V, To wish, to like.

Ahpop, n. The head chief. " El cacique mayor. See p. 36.
AhpopAamahay, n. An official messenger, especially an official

sent to collect tribute. See p. 36.
Ah-tzih, n. Speaker, orator. See p. 37.
Ah-Aib. n, A scribe.
Akah, n, A hornet.
Akan, n. Leg, foot.
Al, n. Son, child.

209


210 VOCABULARY.

Alabil, n. Slave, servant.

Alah, V, To bear, to carry ; hence, to bring forth, to give birth

to, as a woman a child.
Alan, V. To ridicule, depreciate.
Amag, n. Village, tribe, region or district. See p. 33.
An, pari. An emphatic particle, truly, really.
Aneh, v. To flee, escape.
Anom, n, A fugitive.
At, pron. Thou.
Atini9ah, v. To bathe.
Avan, n. Crops, plantings.
ACa, n. Night, darkness.
AAaxah, v. To hear, to listen to.

Bak, V. To bore. n. A bone.

Bala, adv. Where.

Balam, n, A tiger.

Balbaxin, adj. Twisted, interlaced, dense.

Ban, z/. I. To make, to do, or cause to do. 2. To ask. 3. To

dress, or arrange one's apparel.
Bay, n, A mole, a ground animal.
BaA, n. What is spun, as cotton, or drawn into fine threads

as gold, n, A monkey. ^

Be, V, To go.
Belehe, adv. Nine.
Bey, n. Path, road, route.
Bi, i». A name ; ru di, his or its name.
Bijh, V. To speak, to talk.
Bijn, V, To walk, to go on foot.
Birbot, V. To make a loud, rumbling noise. TV dirdot, H mcnot^

it roars and it rumbles, of the volcano (Varea).
Bitol, n. The creator. See p. 40.

Bix, n, I. Songs, chants, poems. 2. Sparks from a fire (p. 17).
Bok, V. To tear up; to pull down; to sell for another; to

translate : to defeat.
Bol, V, To make deep trenches in the soil (" as the Indians of

the Sierra." Varea).
Boleh, V, To go in a row, in a series, or in a procession.

Applied to mountains, when one rises upon another (Varea).
Bos, xm. To issue forth ; hence, of flowers, to open, to blow ;

of a butterfly, to come forth from the cocoon ; of chicks, to


VOCABULARY. 211

come from the egg ; of g^rains of maize, to burst ; of men, to
proceed from, to be born ; xehogo^ the absolute form.

Cabih, n. Day after to-morrow.

Cacouh, n. Cacao.

Cah, n. The sky, heaven, the atmospheric region.

Cah, or Cahi, cuLv, Four.

Cahlahuh, cLdv, Fourteen.

Cahmah, v. To meet a repulse, defeat.

Oak, adj. Red.

Cakix, n, A bird. See p. 199.

Gal, n. That which is united or joined.

Camel, n, A mortal. Adf, Humble.

Cami9ah, v. To kill, to slay, to destroy.

Can, adv» Remaining, aforesaid, already. See Gram,, p. 65.

Cana, n. A captive taken in war.

Canah, v. To remain, to leave ; it canay, neuter, it appears, it

is found.
Cani, CLdv, Soon, shortly.
Canoh, v. To seek, to search for.
Car, n. Fish, generic name.
Cauh, n. Ornaments, adornments.
Cavach, n. Likeness, resemblance.
Cavuh, Cauh, v. To place anew, to notify, to prepare; to

change, to put on again.
Cay, adv. Two.
Ca^, n. Cock (Br).
Cib, «. Smoke, vapor.
Civan, n, A ravine, barranca.
Ci^ V, To lift up the voice. ». Shoutings.
Co. A concessive particle. Good ! Bravo ! Courage ! On !
Col, V, To free, to liberate ; to redeem, to save ; xoh ru col J.

C, chuvach cruz, Christ redeemed us on the cross.
Coon, n. For cun, pudenda of a woman (Xim) ; hence, woman.
Cot, n. The eagle.

Cou, n. Something rough and violent.
Couiricah, v. To strengthen, to invigorate.
Covil, adj. Bold, courageous.
Coz, V, To rest.
Cucu, n. Large vase for water.
Cu9ul, n. Cradle.


212 VOCABULARY.

Cuke, V. To seat onesself.
Cuker, v. To be seated ; to be content.
Cumatz, «. A serpent (gen). An eel.
Cunum Cachak. See p. 206.
CujruAh, n, A species of parrot.

9a» V, To expose or show to the sun ; to dry. . Met ; gao ru

vacky to show one's face, to recover power.
9ach, V. To lose, to become lost.
9ak, adj. White ; bright ; light. «. A white or clear thing. A

clearing in the forest, cleared land (Varea).
9ahcab, n. p. 12, for
^akcab, n. Literally, white honey; white varnish (Brasseur).

Probably *' war paint."
9aker, v. To make white, light or clear. To clear a space in

the forest (Varea). See p. 199.
9akcorovach, n. The dove or quail.
9akquiy, n. The maguey, used in making rope, etc.
9agih for 9Al^Pih, n. Literally, white days, applied to the

spring of the year. See p. 198.
9amahel, n. Messengers.
9anay, n. Sand.

9agul, n. A plantain ; in gen. any kind of vegetable.
9aX, n. Locusts.
9e, V, To row.

9^1, n. A large painted vase for bathing (jlcara pintado. Anon).
9ete9ic, adj. Circular, rounded. See p. 18.
9ipah, V. To present, to offer.
90I, V, for Tzolih, q. v.
9ol» V. To upheave, to make a revolution.
(Jolo, V, To turn about ; to return ; to go back.
9o4-, n. A bat.
9ubak, n. A kind of flute.
9utulakin, v. To render homage.
9uq, n, A cloud, the clouds.

Cha, V. To say, to tell, to speak.

Chacan, v. To cover, enclose ; to be within or on.

Chactit ?, from Chag, something tied or sewed.

Ch&h, n. The pine tree, the ocote pine.

Chah, n. Ashes, cinders.


VOCABULARY. 213

Cbapaldvjm, ». See p. 197.

Ctulilb, V. To guard, to watch ; to protect ; to keep. Chahat

fivan, the guard of the ravine. See Gratn., p. 42.
Cbahir, v. To bum, to reduce to cinders. From ekah.
Chsomal, «. Beauty, fruilfuiness,
Chaomar, v. To yield abundantly.
Chap, V. To seize, to take, to take possession of.
Chay, n. A Stone. See p. 18.

Cha£abeh, v. To receive with pleasure, to take gladly.
Chee, n. Wood, stick, tree,
Chi,ff. Mouth; aperture, opening; gate; mouth of a river;

coast of the sea ; edge or border.
Chi. I. With, by, to. for against, a. In order to, that, and

3. While, during, being.
Chic. I. A verbal particle, denoting past time. i. Already,

more. Before vi, the r is dropped, as Aun cki vi, once more.
Chicab. Above, upOn, upwards.
Chicobol. Between yourselves.
Chicop. A brute, an animal as distinguished from man ; met. ; a

brutish man. See p. 39.
Chiih chi ill). Upon, on.
Chila. There, that way.
Chin. For, by, by means oft thus.
Chinak, interrog. Who, which, what f
Chinamit, ?j. Town, village. See p, 32.
Chique. To, for those.
Chiquichin. To, for those.
Cbiquib. Against those.
Chire. To, for him, that one.
Ctairib. Behind, against that one ; from, out of.
Chivach. Before yourselves.
Cbive. To, for, against yourselves.
Cbo. To, for, in, until, towards.
Chocola, adj. In common, communal.
Ctaolol, V. To place in order, to arrange.
Cbom, n. A lobster.
Choy, n. A lake.

Cbucohol, prep. Among, between.
Chuluc, n. Urine.
Chun, n. Lime.
Cbunah, v. To whitewash.


214 VOCABULARY.

Chupam,/r^. Within, in.

Chuvi, prep. Upon, over, on ; chuui huyu, on or upon the moun-
tain.

Echa, n. Edible fruits and vegetables. A generic word.

Elah, V, To humble, to submit to.

Elebal, n. The place whence something comes forth ; as relebal

gib, the exit of the smoke, i, ^., the chimney (Varea) ; hence,

relebal g«A, the sunrise.
EleCah, v. To steal, to rob.
EleCom, «. A thief, a robber.
Et, ft, A mark, sign, v. To mark, designate.
Btamah, v. To know, to understand ; from et^ a mark or sign.

Ha, pron. He, it, that one ; it is so ; ha ri, it is thus ; Aa ok^ at

that time, then, when.
Hab, n. Rain.

Hach, V, To divide, to separate.
Hak, V, To open (a door, the mouth, etc).
Hal, V, To change, to alter. See p. 46.
Halal, adv. A little, briefly.
Halebal, n. That by which one changes or transforms himself, a

magic power ; an instrumental form from hal^ to change one's

garments, etc. See p. 46.
Halizin, n, A change, an alteration ; a change of raiment ; the

hair of the head (Br).
Hay, «. House, home. See p. 33.
He, pron. Those, their.
Hetah, adv. See Tak.
He^, V. To drive or force away.
Hilil, V, To thunder, to rumble.
Hique, v. For 4-hique, q, v.
Hit, V, To promise, make vows ; to offer.
Higuh, V, To ardently desire, to covet.
HiA, V. To hang.

Hoi "i

„ ,1. >V' To concede, grant.
Holin, )

Holom, «. The head, a chief.

Hornet, n. Bark of trees.

Hote, V, To rise, to go up, to mount.

Hox, n. Branch of a tree.


VOCABULARY. 216

Hoz, V, To copulate, of men or beasts.

Hoye,/ar/. Expressing compassion.

Hoyevah, \v. To have compassion, to extend mercy» to

Hoye ru vach, / spare.

Hucu, n, A boat, canoe ; a large dish.

Hucumah, adv. Soon, promptly.

Hul, n, A hole, a pit, a grave, etc.

Huley, adj. Deep, profound.

Huluhut or Hulhut, n. Something burning, on fire.

Hun, adv. One ; a or an.

Hunamah, v» To make equal, to make ready, prepare.

Hunchic, adv. The other.

Hutak, adv. See TaJt,

Hu4.i9ic, €ulv. Only, alone, solely.

Hu3ru, n. Mountain, hill, mound ; a land or country, or place of

residence {nu huyubal^ mi pueblo, Varea). The interior as

opposed to the coast. See Ta^ah,

Ikan, n, A load, a burden, tribute, tax.

Iki£a, n. The right hand. £a hand.

II, V, a. To reach, to get, to see, to obtain ; n, to get to, to arrive

at.
II, n. Fault, blame.

In, pron, I.

Ixim, n. Maize.

Izok, n, A woman.

lAo, V, To pass on or beyond ; to exceed, surpass.

lAovibch, V. To go on, or beyond.

Ka, pron. Our.

Ka9ah, v. To put down, to conquer, to destroy.

Kah, V, To descend, descending. See Gram,, p, 64.

Kahibal, n. The place of descent; hence, kahibal f'th, the

sunset.
Kcl, V, To disobey.
Ki, part. An interrogative; also, denoting affirmation; often

used merely to give strength to an assertion. Gram,, p. 71.
Koch, n. The crow.
Kul, n. The neck.
Kup, V, To seize, take by force.
Kuruh, V, To draw or drag out or on.


216 VOCABULARY.

Lab, «. A portent, an augury. See pp. 39, 47.

Labal, n. An enemy, opponent.

Labalih, v. To make war, to fight. See p. 47.

Lehah, v. To fall sick ; to g^ow weak ; to be overcome or con-
quered.

Lakam, n. The war banner, " bandera de la guerra."

Lakeh, v. To bring, to carry, to give.

Lam, n. The hard part ; trunk of a tree, etc.

Lamaba. To detain one, to prevent him from going.

Lagabeh, v. To enter into a place, to dwell there ; to occupy as
a residence {enirar d morar en casa, Varea).

Lageh, v. To join or unite two things; especially to unite in the
sexual act.

Lob, n. Magical power.

Lol, n. The silence or state of desertion left by a pestilence, etc.
See p. 38.

Log, V. To prize, to hold dear, to esteem.

Macamo, v. To take alarm, to be frightened, to wonder at.

Maha, adv. Even not, not yet.

Mahanick, adv. Before that, previous to.

Malohic, n, A preparation of maize (?).

Mam, n. Grandchild.

Mama, n. An old man ; //. tnamaa, the old men ; nu matna^ my

ancestors ; also the rulers of a village ; applied to animals it

means the male of the species.
Manl, adv. No, not.
May, V, A cycle, especially of 20 years. May ^ih, a calendar

for calculating cycles. See p. 31.
Meal, n. A daughter.
Meba, adj. Poor.

Meh, n. A gable in a roof; an angle ; a fold in clothing, etc.
Meho, V. To make an angle or fold ; hence, to go to a place and

return from it.
Mem, n* A dumb man ; to be dumb.
Mez, n. A cat. See p. 44.
Meztah, v. To forget.
Megen, adj. Warm, hot.
Mi, adv. Particle, denoting recent past time, prefixed to form

the proximate preterit tense.
Mier, adv. Already, previously.


VOCABULARY. 217

Mi4.h, V. To tear up, to tear out or down.

MiAhoh, V, To lie to, to deceive; to ridicule, to laugh at, to

mock.
Mol, V. To gather together scattered things, to fill up, to collect.
Moyeuh, n, A fog, the mist.
Muh, n. Shade, shadow ; hence, fig. protection, guardianship.

See p. 20.
Muk, V, To hide, to conceal ; to bury.
Mun, adj. Hungry, n. A slave. See p. 39.

Na, adv. A particle denoting priority, from nadey, first ; hence,
navipCy and, also, next, until, presently. See Gram», p. 65.

Na, V, To know, to learn.

Nabey, adv. First.

Nabeyah, v. To be first.

Naek, adv. Although, but.

Nano, V, To receive more than another.

Nanoh, adj\ Known, said; hence, Jtra nanoh, already known,
aforesaid, etc. From na^ to know.

Naval, n. Knowledge, wisdom; especially occult knowledge,
mag^c, sorcery. See p. 46.

Nicnic, v. To quiver, to tremble.

Nima, adj. Great, n. A great thing.

Nimah, v. To make great, to adore.

Nimal, n. The elder brother ; the head of a home.

NiAah, n. The middle, the center.

NiAahal, n. The middle parts of anything ; the sexual parts, etc

Nu, pron. My, mine.

Oc, V. To enter.

Ochoch, n. House. See p. 33.

Ocox, n. Fungus, of the edible variety.

Oh, pron. We.

Oh, adv. Sign of the imperative. Oh a Ajimape lae queh. Bring

that horse (Varea).
Ohb, n. A cough.

Oher, adv. Formerly, in ancient times.
Ok, adv. When ; also the imperative particle.
Okok, n. Wild goose.

Oque9ah, v. To put something in something ; hence, to put on
O


218 VOCABULARY.

one's clothes, to dress onesself. From oc, to enter. Met, to

obey.
Oro, V. To bore, to pierce, to hollow out.
Oxlahuh, adv. Thirteen.
Oyevar, v. To become angry.
Oyobeh, v. To hope.
Og, V. To weep, to cry.
O^eh, n, A wail, a weeping, v. To bewail.

Pa, prep. In, to ; ^n qui be Pa huyu^ I am going to the mountain

pa hay^ in the house. Before a vowel, pan is used.
Pac or Pacay. The anona, the custard apple.
Pacac, V. To dawn.

Pae, V. To be on foot, to stand, to be at.
Palah, V. To annoy, to bother.
Palouh, n. The ocean, the sea ; called also nima ya^ the great

water. See p. 195.
Patan, v. Tribute, tax. See p. 39.
Pax, V, To break ; to put to flight, to scatter.
Paz, n. Swathing bands ; folding robes.
Pc, V. To come. Often used in a peculiar gerundive sense, as a

verbal particle. See Gram., p. 64.
Pck, n. The fruit tree called Pataxte (Guzman).
Pixa, n. Order, command, direction.
Pixabah, v. To order, to command.

Po, V. I. To cry out loudly. 2. To be angry with some one.
Pocob, n. A shield. See p. 18.
Poklah, n. Dust.
Pokon, n. Trouble, pain.
Pop, n. A mat ; popoh, a council. See p. 36.
Porch, V. To burn, to set on fire.
Poyc, V. To put one side, to neglect.
Po^h, V. To divide, to split.
Puak or Puvak, n. Silver ; money, coin. See p. 19.
Pub, n. The blow-gun. p. 18.
Puz, n. Power, magic. See p. 46.
Pug, V. To break up ground ; to soak in water ; to dissolve or

to make into dust. Hence, ». fire, dust.

Que, pron. They, used with absolute, passive and neuter verbs.
Gram,, p. 47.


VOCABULARY. 219

Queh, n. A deer.

Quere, adv. Thus, as, even so ; guereAa, therefore ; guerera^ as

this ; querelae^ as that.
Qui, pron. Those, their.
Quichin, pron. Of them.
Quicot, z/. To rejoice, to delight in.
Quir, t/. To unloose, untie.
QuiA, n. Blood.

Rah, V. To wish, tivaho^ I wish ; (absolute) xraho^ he wished.

Ramon, n, A piece, a bit.

Ramoneh, v. To reduce to pieces, to overcome.

Rax, adj. Green, blue ; precious, noble ; renowned, famous.

Raxah, ». A tree, a species of plantain.

Ri, pron. He, she it ; this, that ; often used in the sense of

definite article, ri huyu^ the hill.
Richin, pron. Of that one, of him, his, its.
Ruma, prep. By, for, with.

Tacaxepeval, n. Name of the first month of the native calendar.

Tak, V. To send, to call one, to despatch to one. Gram.y p. 42.

Tahin,/ar/. Of present time.

Tak, adv. A particle conveying the idea of recurrence or repeti-
tion, as hetaky hutak^ p. 12. See Gram., p. 72.

Takchibal, n. That which incites, or persuades. An instrumental
form from takchiih.

Takchiih, v. To incite, move, induce.

Takeh, v. To obey.

Tan, adv. Now, at present ; particle of present time.

Tap, n. Crab.

Tata, n. Father. Originally the reduplication of the particle of
courtesy, ta, which is now used by and to married people. It
also means lord, ruler. Cf. Gram.^ p. 72.

Tagah, n. A plain ; the sea coast as opposed to the interior.
See Huyu.

Ta^h, n.

Tecpan, n. See p. 13.

Tee, n. Mother. See p. 35.

Telep, V. To carry on the shoulders.

Telechuh, v. To wrestle ; to take captive ; to tie with cords.

Tem, n. A bench or seat. See p. 20.


220 VOCABULARY.

Tepeval, n. Sovereignty, power.

Teuh, adj\ Cold.

Ti, V, To eat, to bite.

Ti, pran. He, it, she ; you.

Tih, V. To give to eat, to feed ; to invite ; to try, to test ; to

' teach, to instruct.
Tih, n. The doctrine, the teaching.
Tihoh, z/. To teach another.
Tinamit, n. Town, city.
Tiohil, n. The body, the bulk of an animal.
Tiquer, v. To begin, to commence.
Titil, n, A color. See p. 204.
Tiuh tiuh, n. See p. 196.
TixU, «. The tapir.

TiAuil, V. To be rooted in the ground. See ^uil.
To, V, To aid, to succor.

Tohoh, V, To make a loud noise, to thunder. See p. 199.
Tol, V. To abandon.
Toloba, V, To desert, abandon, forsake.
Tooh, n. Weapons, of all kinds.
Tog, V, To shoot up, to burst forth.
Tog, V, To push in, to insert.
Toge, V. To arrive at a place.
Tuc, V. To turn, revolve, move about
Tucur, n. The owl.
Tulul, n. The zapote tree.

Tun, n. A native drum ; a branch, a sprout, a twig.
Tunay, «. The elder tree. Span. souu:o.
Tux, n, A kind of acorn.

Ucheez, v. To relate, to tell, to say, especially in reporting what
others have said. As a rule it follows the words quoted ( Coio).
Ue, conj. If.

Ul, V. To arrive, to come to.

Ulaah, V, To arrive at, as a home ; to seek as a refuge (Bras.).
Ulaam, v. To have at one's house, as a guest, etc.
Uleuh, n. Earth, soil, land, ground. •
Umul, n. The rabbit.

Unum, n. The male organ ; a worm, a snake.
Ut, n. Dove.
Utiuh, «. The coyote.


VOCABULARY. 221

Utxin, z/. To finish, to complete.

Ux, V, To be, to become. See Gram.y p. 33.

Uxla, n. The breath ; an odor ; steam.

Uxlan, V. To rest, to repose, to take breath (from uxla),

W9Ljpart. Here, now.

Va, V, To eat.

Vach, «. Face, visage, front; surface, superficies; brightness,

splendor ; fruit, products, profits ; power, dignity.
Vachih, v. To see with one's own eyes ; to have before one's face.
VsLCfparf, This, this is, here is.

Vapal, n. The lintel of a door, the frame of a window, etc.
Var, V, To sleep.
Vave, adv. Here.
Vay, n. Bread, of any kind.
Vayhal, n. Hunger.
Vi, n. The head.
Vi, part. A correlative and instrumental particle. See Gram.,

p. 63.
Vik, V. To increase or add something ; to ornament, to adorn ;

to arrange, to set in order by adding to.
Vinak, n. Man, the human species ; a people.
Vinak chij, n. Injury or misfortune; a legal term applied to

certain torts.
Vuk, adj. Seven.

Xa, part But, only, etc. An antithetical particle, used in many

connections, as xae, xa Aa, xa ri Aa, va xe re, xa Aa, xe re,

xa hay all signify but, next, etc.
Xah, V. To move actively and cheerfully ; hence, to dance ; of a

dog, to wag his tail.
Xahab, n. Sandals, shoes, moccasins.
Xahan, n» Prohibition, abstention.
Xahaneh, v. To abstain from, to refrain.
Xahpota Ahi^h, n. Body armor. (" Malla 6 peto," Varea;.
Xak, n. I. Leaf. 2. Dye, color, tint. See p. 204.
Xambcy, n. One who follows another.
Xambeyah, v. To do something later than another, to follow, to

come after.
Xane, v. To strip, to uncover.
Xaquere, adv. But thus ; see Xa.


222 VOCABULARY.

XaviAa. See Xa.

Xax. Particle of affirmation, an intensive.

Xha3dl, n, A married woman, a wife. From hay^ with the fem.

prefix — " the woman of the house."
Xim, V, To tie, to bind onesself ; to assume.
Xiquin, n. Ears.
Xit, n. The jade, the green stone {piedra verde conio targuesa,

Varea).
Xivae, n. A conch shell used as a horn.
Xmier, adv. Already, formerly ; xmierok, before, previously.
Xocon, «. The left hand ; chu xocon^ on the left.
Xoh, pron. We.

Xo£^, XoAoh, z/. To complain against one.
XoZh, «. The owl ; a malicious person.
Xul, «. A flute.

Xule, V, To descend, to go down.

Xu4., ». A net used by the Indians of the Sierra to catch birds.
X4.11I, n, A kind of dance. See p. 45.

Ya, V, To give, to present.

Yaar, v. To spoil, waste, goto ruin.

Yac, n. To build a house ; to contract for, ask for.

Yala, V. To surpass, become distinguished.

Yaloh, V. To delay, to remain.

Yamalakin, v. To give presents.

Yamanic, n. Precious stone.

Yanabil, n. Sickness, disease.

Ybah, n. The ancient site of a town ; the hereditary home ; the

cement of a house. From ybi/y to ripen, to mature.
Ycg, V. To tread under foot, to detest, to hate.
Ylon, V. To overtake one (alcanzar ^ otro que va adelante.

Varea),
Yncheel, adv. How, in what manner.
Ynup, «. The ceiba tree.
Yoh, V, To destroy, tear down.
Yon, adv. Only, alone; ruyon^ he or it alone or only. See

Gram.^ p. 32.
Yog, V. To knead dough. Met. to bruise.
Yuh, V. To mix, to mingle.
Yuhuh, n. A quarrel, a revolt.
Yuk, V. To string out, to stretch out, like a rope. Hence


VOCABULARY, 2'2S

Yuku, n. A rope or cord. Varea.

Yuyub, n. Shouts.

Yx, pron. You.

Yxim, n. Maize (the grains).

Y4.0, z/. To pass over ; to go from one place to another.

ga, n. The hand, the arm.

Caba, z/. To place supports ; to strengthen ; to extend the hands.

Pahan, v. To sound, to resound ; to snore, etc.

gahar, v. To expend, to expand.

Cahartizah, v. To praise, to commend.

galaba, v. To cause misfortune, to make miserable.

£^alah, adj, n. Something clear, apparent, manifest.

galel. See p. 37.

galibal, n. Seat, see, throne. "Asieiito del senor principal."

Coto. See p. 20.
gam, n. Bridge, stairs,
^ana abah, n. A color. See p. 204.
'an, adj. Yellow ; ripe ; rich.
Caramag, ». Nation, confederation.
gat, V, To cut, in general ; hence, to decide a question ; to ford

a river ; to die early, etc.
gavonon, n, A yellow bug ; from ga«, yellow, and Vonon, bug.

(Guzman).
gax, V, I. To pass, to pass over. 2. To bring forth, to give

birth to.
gag, «. Fire.

gagal, n. Distinction, greatness,
'ek, adj. Black ; dark,
'ekal, n. Blackness, darkness,
gekum, «. The darkness of the night.

gih, «. The sun ; a day ; a time or epoch ; an occasion or oppor-
tunity ; the sign or constellation under which one is born ;

hence, fate or fortune. Ak^th, the diviner; cholol ^ik^ to

cast the horoscope,
gihib, V. To divine, to predict, to tell fortunes,
gil, V, To prevent, impede, harass,
ginom, adj. Rich, n, riches,
giomah, n. This appears to be a form of Pinomakj riches.


224 VOCABULARY.

^p, V, To take up in the fingers; to pinch.

'o, V, To sustain, to maintain, to give to eat.

'ol, n. Resin from the pine.

'op, n. Ear rings.
guxCum, fi. Delicacy, something' delicious to eat.
^g, n, A species of bird. See p. 204.
gu^urazon, n. Green feathers ; the plumage of certain birds.

4.a, conj. And, also.

4.abovil, n. The deity, God, divinity.

Aa^e, V. To survive, to grow strong.

4.ahol, n. A son, sons ; also, generally, descendants of a com-
mon ancestor.

Aaholah, v. To beget, engender.

4.ak, V. To shoot with arrows ; to stone. 2. To place onesself
in front of another.

Aakaba, v. To show onesself.

Aal, V. To tie together, to arrange in order as by tying.

4.alakan, n. Small bells tied together. See p. 17.

4.am, V. To take, to bear away ; especially to take a woman in
marriage, to marry.

4.anixt, n, A bird. See p. 197.

Aarunah, adv. The same, again.

4.azto4., n. The Evil Spirit.

Aay, adj. Pungent, bitter, strong of smell or taste.

Aayh, v. To sell.

4.a4.alih, v. To guard.

4.eche, n, A forest, a woods.

4.el, n. A small species of parrot.

4.ezevach, ». Substitute, one who stands for another (Anon).

4.iyaley, adv. That which exceeds ; used in comparison. See
Gram,f p. 67.

4.iy, adv. Much, many.

4.iyar, v. To multiply, to increase.

Aiz, V. To finish, to conclude, to end.

4.oh, v. To be in a place, etc. Spanish, estar. See Gram., p. 33.

4.0k, 4-okoh, V. To complain (quejarse ^ Dios. Varea, p. 414).

4.0I, V, To cut down, to send out from, to diminish, to lessen.


VOCABULARY. 226

4.ot, V. To dig a hole. Met to examine verbally, to interrogate,

to cross-question.
4.otoh, V, I. To engrave, to sculpture. Aotonic^ that which is

sculptured. 2. To set in order, to arrange battalions, etc.
Aokikan, n. Loads of roasted maize, used as food on long jour-
neys ; from Ao^ ** mais cocido,'' and JUkan.
4.0X, V. To clash ; to strike hard things together, ia Aoxel <^a£

to strike fire with the flint (Varea).
4.0Z0I, ti. He who dashes together hard things, as stones. See

d.ox,
4.ozom, n. That which is dashed together, as stones. See ^ox.
4.oxtun, n. Fortress, stronghold.
4.Uf V. To put well in order, to arrange.
4.ual, ». Diamond, or other precious stone.
4.ubul, n. Garlands (Br.). From 4-^, to arrange in order, to put

in place.
4.uil, V. To throw down to the ground, to lie or roll upon the

ground ; to annoy, harass.
4.al, n. All kinds of clothing; vesture, etc.
4.UI, V. To receive ; to meet, to go out to meet one ; to visit

one ; to converse, to reply to, to be beaten.
4.ule, V, To marry.
Aulvachih, v. To meet face to face. From Aul, to receive, to

meet, and vack, face.
4.ut, V, To show, to make manifest.
Autuh, V, To ask, to inquire.
Aux, n. The heart ; the mind.
4.ha, «. The bow ; the arrow.
Aha, ^ V, To speak to talk, to say.
Ahabeh, /
4Jiabak, n. Mud.
Ahac, n. A pestilence.
Ahac, V. To conquer, to overpower.
Ahac, n. Flesh, meat.
Ahacatah, v. To sit down, to rest seated ; to reduce in value, to

depreciate.
Ahacbal, n. A victory, a conquest.
Ahacat, n. A seat, a throne. See p. 20.


226 VOCABULARY.

Ahaka, prep. From the other side ; Ahfika pcUouh, from beyond
the sea ; he ah A-^uiha ya^ those from the other side of the
water, a term applied to the Spaniards (Varea).

Ahakap, n, and adv. The half, partly.

4.hamey, n. Cane, staff; a badge of office; ah^Aamey, the
alguacil or constable.

AXuLoh, n. See p. 55.

4.hay, V, To injure, destroy. 2. To fasten, solder.

4-hi, V, To disquiet, to be noisy.

Ahih, V, To suffer, to bear.

4.hipil, n. The youngest son.

4.hique, v. To appoint, to resolve upon.

4.hi4.h, n. Iron, copper. See p. 19.

4.hob, n. Division, class, order, battalion.

4.hocoba, V, To seat a person.

^hol, V, To skin, to bark, to clean ; to acquit, to rid of.

Aholih, V. To value, to put a value upon ; hence, ^Jiolih ^th, to
value days, to decide which are lucky and which unlucky ;
^oi Pih, an astrological calendar. See p. 31.

4.hub, V, To ravage, as a pestilence.

^huc, n. The arm, or arms.

^utin, adj. Small, little, young.

Aak, V, To work in clay ; to make bricks or tiles ; to make, to

create. 2. To joke ; to make fun. 3. To lie, to deceive.
Aakol, n. The maker, the creator.
Aalam. See p. 32.
^anin, v. To sound loudly, to make a great noise, of people,

trumpets, dancing, etc.
Aapal, n. An enclosure ; that which is shut up or enclosed J

from Afipe^ neuter oitin Aapih, shut up or enclose.
Aapibal, «. The place where something is enclosed or shut up.

See A^apaly and p. 197.
Ai, n, A dog.

Aibah, v. To paint ; to write. See p. 16.
Aima, n. A sharp-pointed tool ; v. to dig with one (Ximenes).
Aiquin, n. A bird, the generic word.
AiZf V, To sew, to puncture.


VOCABULARY. 227

AiAot, V. To hiss (of a snake), to squeak (of a rat), to whistle

(of a bird), etc.
Aum. I. The breasts, the mammae. 2. A skin, a hide.
Aumah, v. To suck, to take the breast ; to reduce a swelling ;

to lessen, to diminish.
Autuh, n, A flower, especially of the maize.

Tsak, V, To throw, to fall ; to tangle, to trip ; to hinder ; to go
from the road ; to drop a subject, a lawsuit, etc. ; to pardon ;
to excuse onesself ; to cease, to die.

Tzal, V. To make war, to give battle.

Tzam, n. i. Nose, beak, snout, of man, bird or brute. 2. The
point or end of anything.

Tzap, n. Fault, evil, misdemeanor. See p. 28.

Tzara, ». A «nare to take birds, etc.

Tzayh, z/. To do an injury without cause.

Tzatz, adv. Much, many, thickly, densely.

Tzih, n. A word, a speech.

Tzihoxic, n. That which has been said ; a passive verbal from

Tzimay, «. A cup, or drinking vessel.

Tzolih, V. To turn ; to return ; to turn one's thoughts upon, etc.

Tzuy, n. A large calabash or gourd.

Tzuk, V. To sustain, to maintain.

Tzul, V. To intertwine, to embrace, to sleep together.


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


Acalan, 182.

A^acot, 81.

Ahachel, 41.

Akahal, 10, 20, 41, 63, 64, 73, 94,

97, 99, 100, no, III.
Ahalquil, 77.
Ah cic amag, 20.
AhciAahuh, 95.
Ah lua, 80.
Ah mak, 112. d, 132.
Ah max nay, 105, 106,
Ah pak, 3.

Ahquehay, 3, 27, 29, 40.
Ah tuncic Tihax, 163.
Ah tucuru, 10.
AhAibihay, 107.
AhAhumilahay, 10, 77.
Ah^iquinahay, 38, 53, 54, 137.
Ah Aalam Hunahpu, 135.
AhAuruya, 77.
Alinam, 66.
Atacat, see Panatacat.

Bacah Pokoh, 10, 21, 36.
Bacah Xahil, 10, 21, 36.

1. Balam, 119, 125. d. 130, 131.

2. Balam, 134, 135, 136.
Ba^jJiola, 3, 10, 29, 39, 40, 45,

48, 50» 136.
Beleh chi Hunahpu, 23.
Beleh chi gag, 23.
Beleh cuihay, 77.
Belehe Toh, 11.


{The numbers refer to the sections.)

Belehe gih, 98.


Belehe Aat, 115, 136, 140, 159, 166.
Bogoiya, 73.
Bubatzo, 53.
Bulbux ya, 77, i6i.

Cablahuh BaA, 88.

Cablahuh Tihax, 88, 91, 116.

Cahi bak, 21.

Cahi Imox, 136, 140, 159, 172.

Cakay, see Cakhay.

Cakchiquel, 3, 10, 16, 20, 27, 41,

54, 84, 89, etc.
Cakhay, 28, 125.
Cakix, 20.
Cakixahay, 34.
Cakolahay, 126.
Camachal, 81.
Canalakam, 45.
Caok, 88, 98, etc.
Carchah, 25.
Cata Noh, 162.
Cauke, 49. See Cavek.
Cavek, 3, 29, 39, 40, 84, 100.
Cavek Paoh, 29.

Cay bau, 46,47, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
Cay Hunahpu, 100, 103.

Cay Noh, 46, 47i 50» 5i, 52, 53. 54,

66.
Cibakihay, 3, 10, 29, 39, 40, 48, 88.
Cinahi toh, loi, 102, 105.
Cinpual Taxuch, 25.
Citan Tihax Cablah, 75.


229


230


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


Citan Aata, 60, 65, 66, 75.
Coha,77.
Council, 163.
Cacu hajm, 27.
Culhuacui, 117.


1.5."


.77-


Cupilcat, 45, 6t, 6z.
Catom cEuth, 30.
Cozcatan, 1 jo, ijl.
Cuztum chUnal, 49.

^ctecaub, a, etc. J. 30, 48.

(^iJi. bim, a6, 113.

^^cab, 63, 107.

(^ki hu}rn, 30.

^aki teah, 30, 35.

^:aki ^oxol, 31, S3. See p. 43.

^aki ^uDun, 31.

(;iki ^ova, 3<^ 35,

■<^aktiuy, 36.

gak^uchabah,8s.

";:ali4ahol, 63.

^amaneh, 41.

C<;^LcInup,33.

pmahi hay, 44,63.

^inaaiha;, 39.

^och, 97.

go^a, 10, 30, 34, 41.

^^il Tttkuche, 36, 54, 73, 74,8a,

91.
^nbiiuil, 35.
^unpancu, 33.
poqniUD, 33.
^ntum, 77,
fuyva, 12, ao. See note, p. 199.

Cbacachil, 25.
Chakiya, -.
Chaquihya,/**-
Chay Abah, j, 44, 46.
Chec Uulu, 37.


Chetecanh, 38.

Chiabak, zi.

Chiavar, 63, 67, 68, 71, 75, 83, 84,

104.
Chicakyag, 77.
Chicbal, 173.
Chichab, 77.
Chihci!oin,64,73, 77.
Chinta Queh, 162.
Chita £'Bb, 30.
Chilxot, 1 60-1.
Chitnlul, 38, 140.
Chitnr, 80.
ChiTol, 31.
Chigag, 17B.
Chigalibal, 34.
ChiS"ohom, 46, 63,
ChiAib. 99.
ChiAotuk, 77.
ChoToma, 169.
Chopeu Qaeh, 88.
Chopena Tahin, SE.
Chapena, Aiquin Q^Bi 88.
ChucuybaAin, 103,
Chuluc, 82, 84, 85.
Chnvy Aiqniau, 173.
Chnvy ^nt, 135.

Daqni.3-
Deofacvancn, 17,

Eveniec, 81.

Halic77.

Herech, Si.

Hokim, 85, 94, 97, 159.

Hukahic, 97.

Hnltaciu, 77.

Hun ah pu, 31, 174.

Hunahpn 4,u>Di 95'


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


231


Hun 9unAun Panel, 53.
Hun Tihax, 1 1.
Hun toh, 73-76, 82-86.
HunyA, 115. d, 129.
Hun tzuy, 26.
Huvarah bix, 97.

Yaqui, 1 10, 117, 1 1 8.

Yaxon tub, 126.

Yaxon 4-ul, 104.

Icxiuh, 53.

Ikomag, 3, 34, 62.

Imox, 115.

Yut gum CaJla, 63.

Iximche, 84, 85, 89, 93, 122, 137,

148.
Izmachi, 70.
Iztayul, 89, 93.
Igich, 119.

YAhal Amullac, 73, 94.
YAhal can chi cum cuvat, 63, 64.
Y^iyul. 85.

Lacantun, 194.
Lahub, 77.
Lahuh Ah, 87.
Lahuh Noh, 117.
Lahuh Tihax, 115.
Lamagi, 10, 77.
Loch, 3, 27, 28.
Loxpin, 23.
Lakan Abah, 140.

Maku XAuhay, 115.
Mayahauh, 53.
Meahauh, 17, 20.
Meme, 20, 24.
Mevac, 25.
Mexico, 117.
Mixcu, 85, 109.


Modec Qumatzin, X17.
Moina], 25.
Molinxot, 63.
Molobak, 77.
Molomic abah, 77.
Motzoray, 45.
Mukchee, 26, 124.

Nacuxcux, 77.
Nacxit, 25.
Nahtihay, 107.
Nimahay, 39.
Nima Ahin, 88.
Nimabah, 173.
Nima ^ahay, 95.
Nimapan Xeacauh, 82.
NimQakah pec, 63, 64.
Nimpokon, 26, 77.
Nimxor, 25.
Noh, 115.
Nonovalcat, 19, 20.

Orbal tzam, 25.
Oronic, 28.
Oxlahuh Aii, 88, 91.
04.1iali 63, 64.

Paanuyaal che, 164.

Pa gaki uleuh, 91.

Pacaval, 139.

Pacavek, 39, 44.

Pa chalic bak, 63.

Pa?ibakul, 39, 44.

Pampetak, 81.

Paneh, 64, 77.

Panatacat, 88, 128, 149, 150.

Pan cag, 85.

Pan chee, 63.

Pan choy, 164, 174.

Pangan, 165, 183, 185.

PanUic, 20, 39, 44, 46, 63.


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


Puuon, 30, 39, 44, 46, 47, 63.

FarucRm ya, 9S.

Fixnrul day, 164.

Pax»y^l73.

Paul, 5.

Pajpuichocol, 38,

Pec pa ni pec, 53.

PeAe.63.

Pokon, 26, 85.

Popo abab, ai.

Popoya,85.


Pn bn hit, 39.
Pnl4bi4h. 38.
Piubal,63.

Qaeh chnn, 173.
Qnehil, 39, 44.
Qnehnay, So.
Quizavit Caob, 173.

Ratunal, 10 41.
Bahamim, 73.
Kalabal Yg, 97-
Rapak, 77.
Ratzamnt, 33, 84, etc.
Kaxakan, 91, 103, 103.
Rax4bi4b, 36.
Kokel lia^iB. 93.

Tacna, 20, 24.
Tameltoh, 97.
Tamyac, 3$,
Ttab Itah Akbal, 66,
Tata yac, 80.

Tapeu Oloman, I7, 30.
Tagunan.Si.
Tecpalan, 33.
Tecpaa, 38.
Telom, 3, 31,


Te pac mnan, 30.
Te pe pal, 89, 93, 138.
Tep«iih,49,si,5a.53.6a-
Tepiutan, 23.
Tejiocnman, 31.
Tiba4-07> 9>> I03, 103.
Tibax cablab, 75.
Tohin, 135.
Tobohil, 30k 41, 90.
TolAom, 3S, 37.
Totomay, 3.
TotDnay, 39.
T(«^oiiiiDe,77.
TozAom Nob, too, 103.
TogobU, aa
Tucuni cakiiaia, 88.
Tub, 136.


Taknchee, 10, 20,41,43, 9

103.
Tnlan, a, 4, to, 16, 47, 83.
Tnitacotiik, 38.

Utznpa, 63.
Uxa.77.

Vail ^al>ol< 97-

Vakald Abnak, tij, 127.

Valval Xncxue, 17, 30.

Vay?a,4l.

Vilanin, 77.

Voo caok, 98, 107, ito.

Vooqaeh, 114.

Voojnuu, 93.

Vucbabahay, 10, 77,

Vukubati, 73-76, 8a,

Vukupvan, 77, 97.

XabUa, 3, 43, 61, 81.
Xavi Abin, 88.
Xeabab, 85.


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


XetmUal chii, 33.
XeCakaAbah, 139.
Xe^h, 23,
Xechiboboy, 84.
Xechip«ken, 101, los.
Xechituh, S4.
Xelahub, 145, 179-
Xepftka]r,64.
Xepalica, 112.
Xepan, 157, 158.
Xe pit, 144'
Xepoyom, 41,138.
Xerahspit, 77, 97.
Xet, 3, 27, 28.
Xelocoy, 23.
Xe tulul, 144.

Xey noh, 1I3.

XhuAujr, 8t.

Xib^ay, 4, 5.

Xiliviztan, 23.

Ximbal mA, 29.

Ximox, 88.

Xiquitzal, 70, 73.

Xit una) Queh, 8], 84, 85.

XlUyul Hue, 69.

Xivanul, 84.

XiTico, no.

XUamer ^qucDEol, 66.

Xubabal, 77.

XncbipilUn, 173.

Xulpit, 19, 30.
Xulu 4.atu, 66.
Xumak Cham, 95.
Xorcab, 3, 29.
Xgeki^uch, 135.


geka4.uch, 3, 10, 29, 39, 40, 48, SO.

Oinona, 63, 66,91.

J...„.u,.o,38.

Cumarcaah, 70, 71, 82, go, 146.

£.£.=«, 4..

Oupuchom, 3.

gu£u huyu, 77, 94, 97.

Aaboull civan, 63.

Aalalapacay, 33.

Aakbauulu, 35, 37,

A.a.ioaC'eit.nm, 77.

4.atu, 88, 119, 115.

^Hm..3,

^ax^an, 77, 94, 97.

^eche, 9, 15, 30, 28, 29, 41, 45,

66,76.
Aeletel, 41.
^ian, 133. 13s.
^idhay, 137.
^ikab, 67-72, 74-114,
^iriaVyu, loO, 103.
4i24.ab, 84, 85.
Aobakil, 3, J 1, 26, 61,
Aomakaa, 43.
Aot balcan, 66.

Aoxabil, 3, 21, 26, 61,

3 ubulahay, 34.
Aulavi CDChob, 34.
4_ulavi 4.at"i> 34.
Ahicbal, 112.
Ahitibal, 22.
ikixnal, 49, 77.
4.hiyoc Queh Ahgug, 66.
^holamag, 23.
Ahooc Taca.tic, 95.


234


INDEX OF NATIVE PROPER NAMES.


Ahopiytzel, 21, 30, 48.
Ahupichin, 23.
4.huti, 63.
Ahutiah, 3.

^ala, 41.

Aimaki Piaculcan, 95.
Aulahauh, 25.
Aununaa, 41.
Aunun choy, 23.


Aunun huyu, 23, 27.

^upi tagah, 63, 68, 70, 75, 84.

^utuhU, 9, 38, 103, 107, 112, 138,

Tzak tzuy, 27. For fak t%uy, q. v.
Tzanat, 3.
Tzololaa, 41, 162.
Tzupam, 148.
Tzutzumpan, 169.


LIBRARY

OP


ABORIGINAL AMERICAN LITERATURE

GENERAL EDITOR AND PUBLISHER,

D. G. BRINTON, M.D.,

No. 115 South Seventh Street, Philadelphia.


The aim of this series of publications is to put within the reach of scholars
authentic materials for the study of the languages and culture of the native
races of America. Each work is the production of the native mind, and is
printed in the original tongue, with a translation and notes, and only such
are selected as have some intrinsic historical or ethnological importance..
The volumes of the series are sold separately, at the prices named, v^

NOW READY.

No. I. THE CHRONICLES. OF THE MAYAS.

EdHed by DANIEL G. BRINTON, M.D. 279 pages. Cloth, uncut, $6.00. ($3.00 when a

complete set Is ordered.)

This volume containi five brief chronicles in the Maya language of Yucatan, written
shori^Iy after the Conquest, and carrying the history of that people back many centuries.
To these is added a history of the Conquest, written in his native tongue, by a Maya Chief,
in 1662. The texts are preceded by an introduction on the history of the Mayas ; their
language, calendar, numerical system, etc.; and a Tocabulary is added at the close.

No. II. THE IROQUOIS BOOK OF RITES.

Edited by HORATIO HALE. 222 pages. Cloth, uncut, $3.00.

This work contains, in the Mohawk and Onondaga languages, the speeches, songs and
rituals with which a deceased chief was lamented and his successor installed in office. It
may be said to throw a distinct light on the authentic history of Northern America to a
date fifty years earlier than the era of Columbus. The Introduction treats of the ethnol-
ogy and history of the Huron-Iroquois. A map, notes and a glossary complete the work.

No. III. THE COMEDY-BALLET OF GUEGUENCE.

Edited by DANIEL G. BRINTON, M.D. 146 pages. Cloth, uncut. $2.60.

A curious and unique specimen of the native comic dances, with dialogues, called baHes,
formerly common in Central America. It is in the mixed Nahuatl-Spanisb jargon of
Nicaragua, and shows distinctiye features of native authorship. The Introduction treats of
the ethnology of Nicaragua, and the local dialects, musical instruments, and dramatic
representations. A map and a number of illustrations are added.

No. IV. A MIGRATION LEGEND OF THE CREEK INDIANS.

By A. S. GATSCHET. 261 pages. Cloth, uncut, $3.00.

This learned work offers a complete survey of the ethnology of the native tribes of the
Gulf States. The strange myth or legend told to Gov. Oglethorpe, in 1732, by the Creeks, is
given in the original, with an Introduction and Commentary.

No. V. THE LENAPE AND THEIR LEGENDS.

By DANIEL G. BRINTON. M.D. 262 pages. Cloth, uncut, $3.00.

Contains the complete text and symbols, 184 in number, of the Walam Olum ob Red
Score of the Delaware Indians, with the full original text, and a new translation, notes
and vocabulary. A lengthy introduction treats of the Len&p4 or De)aware8, their history,
customs, myths, language, etc., with numerous references to other tribes of the great
Algonkin stock.

No. VI. THE ANNALS OF THE CAKCHIQUELS.

Edtted by DANIEL G. BRINTON, M.D. 200 pages. Cloth, uncut, $3.00.

The original text, written about 1562, by a member of the reigning family, with a transla-
tion, introduction, notes and vocabulary. This may be considered one of the most important
historical documents relating to the pre-Columbian period.

OTHJEJt WOBK8 IN BMBBAMATION,


•n>


SECEHT PUBLICATIONS

OH

AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY,


m 9


AMERICAN HERO-MYTHS. A Btudy in the Native Religions
of the Western Continent By Daioel 6. Brinton, a.m., m.d.,
etc. 1 vol., 8vo, pp. 251. (Philad'a, 1882.) Cloth, price $1.75.

ABORIGINAL AMERICAN AUTHORS, and Their Productions.
Especially those in the Native Languages. A Contribution to
the History of Literature. By Daniel 6. Brinton, a.m., m.d.,
etc. 1 vol., 8vo, pp. 63. Boards, price $1.00.

A GRAMMAR OF THE CAKCHIQUEL LANGUAGE of Guate-
mala. Translated, with an Litroduction and Additions, by
Daniel G. BunnoN, m.d. Map. pp. 72. Boards, price $1.00.

THE NAMES OF THE GODS IN THE QUICHE MYTHS, of

Central America. By D. G. BunnoN, m.d. 8vo, pp. 38.
Paper, price 50 cts.

THE LINEAL MEASURES OF THE SEMI-CIVIUZED NA-

tions of Mexico and Central America. By D. G. Brintok, m.d.
pp. 14. Paper, price 25 cts.

ON THE XINCA INDIANS OF GUATEMALA. By D. G.

Brintok, M.D. pp. 9. Paper, price 25 cts.

AMERICAN LANGUAGES AND WHY WE SHOULD STUDY

Them. An Address delivered before the Historial Societies of
Pennsylvania and New York. By D. G. Brintok, uj>.
pp. 23. Paper, price 25 cts.

THE PHILOSOPHIC GRAMMAR OF AMERICAN LANGUAGES,

as set forth by Wilhelm yon Humboldt; with the translation
of an unpublished Memoir, by him, on the American Verb. By
D. G. Brinton, uj>. pp. 51. Boards, price $1.00.

ON POLYSYNTHESIS AND INCORPORATION, AS CHARAC-

teristics of American Languages. By D. G. Brinton, ild.
pp. 41. Paper, price 50 da.


%


• 1


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK 18
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES.
